CORNELL    UNIVERSITY    LIBRARY


3   1924    101    104  994


I


iii


liiiiliir


052026


CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


'/^I


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  this  bool<  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104994


THE

PULPIT    COMMENTARY,

EDITED   BY  THE

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN   OF  GLOUCESTER  ;

AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY  THE


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E,

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TUI.LOCH.  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A.

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toronto,


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED   BY  THE


REV.  CANON  II.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,

VICAR   AND   RURAL   DEAN   OF   ST.    PANCRAS,    AND   EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  VO  THE   LORO
BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  AND   BRISTOL  ;


AND   BY  THE

liliV,  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A.


DEUTERONOMY.


(Exposition:
By  key.  W.  L.  ALEXANDER,  D.D.,

EDITOR  OF  KITTO'S  "  BIBLICAL  CYCLOPiEDIA."

l^omiktits :
By  rev.  C.  CLEMANCE,  B.A.,  D.D.

^omilics  bn  llatiotis  ^Anlljors:

REV.  J.  ORR,  M.A.,  B.D.  REV.  R.  M.  EDGAR,   ti  A

REV.  D.  DAVIES,  M.A.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toronto.


THE

BOOK    OF    DEUTEEONOMY.


INTRODUCTION.


i  1.  Title  aitd  General  Characteb.

Thh  tioolc,  which  ranks  aa  the  closing  book  of  the  Pentateuch,  the  Fifth  of
the  Fifths  of  the  Law  (npin  ♦if'pin  B'^h),  as  the  Jews  designate  it,  is  in
the  Hebrew  canon  named  from  its  two  initial  words,  'Mleh  Ead-debhdrim
W'ySjn  nVs).  or  simply  Debhdrim,  according  to  an  ancient  usage  with  the
Jews  (Origen  on  Ps.  i.  ap.  Huetii  '  Origeniana,'  torn.  i.  p.  47  ;  Jerome,  '  Prol.
Gal.*).  The  name  Deuteronomy  it  received  from  the  Greek  translators,
whom  the  Vulgate  follows  (Aevrepovo/tioi/,  Deuteronommm).  Probably  this
was  the  name  in  use  among  the  Hellenistic  Jews,  for  this  may  be  regarded
as  a  fair  rendering  of  the  phrase,  Mishnek  Hat-torah  (npiPin  D^tJ'p),  "  Iteration
of  the  Law,"  by  which  some  of  the  rabbins  designate  this  book — a  phrase
taken  from  ch.  xvi.  18,  though  there  having  a  different  sense  (see  note  on
the  passage).  The  name  "Deuteronomy"  is  thus  somewhat  misleading,
as  it  is  apt  to  suggest  that  there  is  in  this  book  either  a  second  code  of
laws  or  a  recapitulation  of  laws  already  delivered,  whereas  it  is  rather  a
summary,  in  a  hortatory  manner,  of  what  it  most  concerned  the  people  to
keep  in  mind,  both  of  the  Lord's  doings  on  their  behalf,  and  of  what
it  was  his  will  they  should  specially  observe  and  do  when  settled  in  the
promised  land.  Many  parts  of  the  Law,  as  already  promulgated,  are  not
so  much  as  alluded  to ;  very  few  new  laws  are  enunciuted ;  and  in  general
it  is  the  civil  and  social  rather  than  the  ceremonial  institute,  the  personal
and  ethical  rather  than  the  political  and  official  aspect  of  the  Law,  that  is
dwelt  upon.  This  character  of  the  book  some  of  the  rabbins  have  signalized
by  the  title  Sepher  TdMMth,  "Book  of  Admonitions  or  Eeproofs,"  with
special  reference  to  ch.  xxviii.  The  unsuitableness  of  such  a  title  to  the
book  as  "  Deuteronomy,"  was  long  ago  pointed  out  by  Theodoret,  who  asserts
('  Qusest.  L  in  Deut.')  that  it  is  not  a  tecond  Law  that  Moses  here  gives,  but
ihat  he  only  recalls  to  memory  what  had  been  already  given.

DEDTEBONOHT.  )


INTRODUCTION  TO


The  book  is  thus  neither  properly  historical  nor  properly  legislative,
thognh  in  a  measure  it  is  both.  It  is  historical,  inasmuch  as  it  records
certain  things  said  and  done  at  a  particular  time  in  the  history  of  Israel ;
and  it  is  legislative,  inasmuch  as  it  enunciates  certain  statutes,  ordinances,
and  rules  which  the  people  were  bound  to  observe.  But  properly  it  is
a  hortatory  book — a  book  of  orations  or  discourses  (D'^i^l),  in  which  the
subjeptivity  of  the  author  is  throughout  prominent.  In  this  respect  it
is  markedly  diflFerent  frcjm  the  earlier  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  in  which
the  objective  element  prevails.  "  In  Deuteronomy  it  is  the  parsenetio
element  that  is  especially  predominant ;  in  place  of  the  objective  rigorous
injunction,  there  is  here  the  most  impressive  exhortation ;  in  place  of  the
letter,  legally  imperative  and  averse  from  development,  which  linds  the
ground  of  its  highest  necessity  in  itself,  there  prevails  here  reflection  on
the  Law,  and  on  this  line  the  latter  is  brought  nearer  to  the  feelings.  The
book  has  thus  a  prophetic  colouring,  the  germ  of  which  we  have  already
seen  in  the  close  of  Leviticus,  but  which  has  here  a  wider  compass  and
authoritative  significance.  The  book  is  a  foretype  of  the  prophetic  dis-
course ;  and  from  this  peculiarity  may  be  explained  how,  for  instance,  a
later  prophetism  (Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel)  connects  itself  with  this  type  "
(Havemick, '  Einleit,'  i.  522;  of.  'Introd.  to  the  Pentateuch,'  translated  by
Thomson,  p.  338).

§  2.  Contents  of  tbe  Book.

The  book  consists  chiefly  of  three  lengthened  addresses,  delivered  by
Moses  to  the  people  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Jordan,  after  they  had
obtained  possession  by  conquest  of  the  region  stretching  northwards  from
the  borders  of  Moab  towards  those  of  Aram.  After  a  brief  notice  of  the
circumstances  of  time  and  place  when  the  addresses  were  uttered  (ch.  i.  1 — 6),
the  first  address  begins.  Moses  first  of  all  recalls  to  the  recollection  of  the
people  certain  important  particulars  in  their  past  history,  with  the  view
apparently  of  preparing  them  for  the  admonitions  and  injunctions  he  is
about  to  lay  upon  them  (eh.  i.  6^iii.  29).  This  recapitulation  is  followed
by  a  series  of  earnest  exhortations  to  obedience  to  the  Divine  ordinances,
and  warnings  against  idolatry  and  the  forsaking  of  Jehovah,  the  God  of
their  fathers,  and  the  only  true  God  (ch.  iv.  1 — 40).  To  this  addiess  is
appended  a  short  historical  notice  of  the  appointment  of  three  cities  of  refuge
on  the  east  side  of  the  Jordan  (vers.  41 — 43).

The  second  address,  which  is  also  introduced  by  a  brief  notice  of  the
circumstances  under  which  it  was  delivered  (ch.  iv.  44 — 49),  extends  over
twenty-one  chapters  (ch.  v. — xxvi.).  In  it  Moses  goes  over  the  leading
ethical  precepts  of  the  Law  which  he,  as  the  servant  of  God,  had  already
declared  to  the  people.  He  begins  by  reminding  them  how  God  had  made
a  covenant  with  them  in  Horeb,  and  then,  having  repeated  the  "ten  words"
of  the  covenant  —  the  ten  commandments  which   Jehovah   spake   to   the


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTBKONOiir.  Itt

assemHed  multitude — and  having  uttered  a  general  exhortation  to  obedience
(oh.  V.  1 — 33),  he  proceeds  to  admonish  the  people  to  love  Jehovah  the  one
God,  to  he  obedient  to  his  Law,  to  teach  it  diligently  to  their  children,  and
to  avoid  all  intercourse  with  the  idolatrous  nations  of  Canaan,  on  the  pos-
session of  which  they  were  about  to  enter.  This  admonition  is  enfoiceJ
by  threatening  of  judgments  on  idolaters ;  victory  over  the  Ganaanites  is
promised ;  the  gradual  but  utter  extinction  of  these  idolatrous  peoples  is
foretold;  and  a  command  is  given  to  destroy  all  objects  of  idolatroua
worship  to  be  found  in  the  land  (ch.  vi.  1 — vii.  26).  A  cursory  review  of
God's  dealings  with  Israel  in  guiding  them  through  the  wilderness  is  then
taken,  as  furnishing  ground  for  enforcing  obedience  to  the  Law;  the  danger
of  self-confidence  and  forgetfulness  of  God  is  pointed  out;  cautions  are
given  against  self-righteousness  and  spiritual  pride ;  and,  to  enforce  these,
the  people  are  reminded  of  their  sins  and  rebelliousness  in  the  wilderness,
of  Moses'  intercession  for  them,  and  of  God's  grace  and  goodness,  especially
as  shown  in  his  restoring  the  two  tables  after  they  had  been  broken,  and
writing  on  them  anew  the  law  of  the  ten  commandments  (ch.  viii.  1 — x.  5).

At  this  point  a  short  notice  of  the  journeyings  of  the  Israelites  in  the
region  of  Mount  Hor  is  introduced,  with  notices  of  the  death  of  Aaron,  nf
the  continuance  of  the  priesthood  in  his  family,  and  of  the  separation  ot
the  tribe  of  Levi  to  the  service  of  the  sanctuary  (ch.  x.  6 — 11).  The
address  is  then  resumed,  and  the  people  are  exhorted  to  fear,  obey,  and  love
the  Lord;  and  this  is  enforced  by  reference  to  God's  claims  upon  them,
the  blessings  that  would  ensue  if  they  yielded  to  these  claims,  and,  on  the
other  hand,  the  curse  that  disobedience  would  bring  upon  them.  In  con-
nection with  this  the  command  is  given  that,  when  they  should  be  come
into  the  promised  land,  the  blessing  should  be  put  upon  Mount  Gerizim
and  the  curse  upon  Mount  Ebal,  the  situation  of  which  is  indicated  (ch.
X.  12— xi.  32).

After  this  Moses  enters  on  a  more  minute  detail  of  the  laws  which  the
people  were  to  observe  when  settled  in  Canaan.  Directions  are  given  as
to  the  destruction  of  all  monuments  of  idolatry,  and  they  are  enjoined  to
preserve  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  to  present  the  appointed  offerings  to
him  in  the  place  which  he  should  choose,  where  also  the  sacrificial  meal
was  to  be  eaten  (ch.  xii.  1 — 28).  All  intercourse  with  idolaters  and  all
curious  inquiries  concerning  their  rites  are  to  be  avoided ;  all  who  would
seduce  to  idolatry  are  to  be  put  to  death,  even  though  they  pretended  to  be
prophets  and  to  speak  under  Divine  sanction ;  even  the  nearest  relations
who  act  this  part  are  not  to  be  spared ;  and  all  idolatrous  cities  are  to
be  destroyed  (ch.  xii.  29 — xiii.  18).  The  people  are  cautioned  against
joining  in  or  imitating  the  mourning  customs  of  the  heathen,  and  against
eating  the  flesh  of  unclean  animals  or  of  animals  that  had  died  of  them-
selves ;  they  are  directed  as  to  the  laying  aside  of  tithes  for  sacrificial  meals
and  for  the  poor ;  they  are  enjoined  to  observe  the  seventh  year  of  release
for  poor  debtors  and  of  emancipation  for  the  bondman;  they  are  ccuxuuanded


INTIIODUUTION    10


to  dedicate  to  the  Lord  the  first-hom  of  sheep  and  oxen ;  and  they  are
instructed  to  observe  the  three  great  feasts  of  Passover,  Pentecost,  and
Tahernacles  (ch.  xiv.  1 — ^xvi.  17).  From  these  religious  regulations  Moses
passes  on  to  others  more  of  a  civil  and  social  character,  giving  directions
as  to  the  appointment  of  judges  and  magistrates,  the  trial  of  idolaters  and
criminals  of  various  classes,  the  choice  and  duties  of  a  king,  and  the  rights
of  priests  and  Levites;  the  promise  of  a  G-reat  Prophet  like  unto  Moses,  -whom
they  are  to  hear  and  obey,  is  given ;  and  the  proper  test  by  which  any  one
pretending  to  be  a  prophet  is  to  be  tried,  is  prescribed  (ch.  xvi.  18 — ^zviiL
22).  Following  these  come  some  regulations  as  to  the  appointment  of  cities
of  refuge  for  the  manslayer,  the  maintenance  of  landmarks  and  boundaries,
the  number  of  witnesses  required  to  establish  a  charge  against  any  one,  the
punishment  of  false  witnesses,  the  conduct  of  war,  exemption  from  service
in  war,  the  treatment  of  enemies,  the  besieging  of  towns,  the  expiation  of
murder  where  the  murderer  is  unknown,  the  treatment  of  women  taken
in  war,  the  just  exercise  of  paternal  authority,  and  the  burial  of  maleFactorB
who  had  been  executed  (ch.  xix.  1 — xxi.  23).  The  address  is  concluded  by
a  series  of  miscellaneous  injunctions  relating  to  rights  of  property,  the
relation  of  the  sexes,  regard  for  animal  and  human  life,  the  avoidance  of
what  would  confoand  distinctions  made  by  God  in  the  natural  world,  the
preservation  of  the  sanctity  of  the  marriage  bond,  and  the  observation  of
integrity  and  purity  in  all  the  relations  of  life,  domestic  and  social.  After
appointing  the  eucharistic  services  on  the  presentation  of  the  firstfruits  and
tenths  of  the  products  of  the  field,  the  address  is  wound  up  with  a  sulemn
admonition  to  attend  to  and  observe  what  the  Lord  had  commanded  (ch.
xxii.  1 — xxvi.  19).

In  his  third  address,  after  directing  that  the  Law  should  be  inscribed  on
two  stone  pillars  to  be  set  up  on  Mount  Ebal,  when  the  people  should  have
obtained  possession  of  Canaan,  Moses  proceeds  to  charge  them  to  proclaim  in
the  most  solemn  manner,  after  offering  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices,  the
blessing  and  the  curse  by  which  the  Law  was  sanctioned,  the  former  on  Mount
Gerizim,  the  latter  on  Mount  Ebal  (ch.  xxvii.  1 — ^26).  He  then  more  fully  sets
forth  the  blessings  that  should  come  upon  the  people  if  they  hearkened  to
the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and  the  curses  that  would  befall  them  if  they  neglected
his  word  or  refused  to  obey  it  (ch.  xxviii.  1 — 68).  Moses  then  recapitulates
what  the  Lord  had  done  for  Israel,  and,  after  again  referring  to  the  blessings
and  curses  of  the  Law,  adjures  the  people  to  accept  the  covenant  which
God  was  graciously  pleased  to  make  with  them,  to  adhere  to  it  constantly,
and  so,  having  blessing  and  curse,  life  and  death,  set  before  them,  to  choose
the  former  for  themselves  and  their  posterity  (oh.  xxix.  1 — xxx.  20).

These  three  addresses  of  Moses  to  the  people  are  followed  by  an  account
of  the  closing  scenes  and  acts  of  his  life.  A  few  words  of  encouragement
addressed  to  the  people  introduce  the  appointment  of  Joshua  to  be  his
successor  as  the  leader  of  Israel ;  the  Law  written  out  by  Moses  is  handed
over  to  the  custody  of  the  priests,  with  a  command  that  it  shall  be  read


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


every  seventli  year  to  the  people  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles ;  Joshua  is
summoned  with  Moses  into  the  presence  of  Jehovah,  and  receives  from  him
his  commission  and  authority ;  and  Moses  is  commanded  to  write  »  song,
and  teach  it  to  the  people  (ch.  xxxi.  1 — 22).  The  active  life  of  Moses  was
now  drawing  to  its  close.  He  puts  the  last  hand  on  the  writing  of  the
Law ;  composes  the  song  which  God  had  commanded  him  to  write ;  utters
a  few  words  of  encouragement  to  Joshua ;  delivers  the  book  of  the  Law  to
the  priests  that  bore  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  with  the  injunction  to  them
to  put  it  in  the  side  of  the  ark  ;  and  summons  the  elders  of  the  tribes  and
their  ofiScers  to  hear  from  his  lips,  ere  he  left  them,  his  solemn  charge,  and
listen  to  the  words  of  the  song  he  had  composed  (vers.  23 — 29).  Then
fnllows  the  song  itself;  after  which  comes  a  short  exhortation  to  the  people
by  Moses,  followed  by  the  Divine  intimation  of  the  approaching  decease  of
their  great  leader  and  lawgiver  (ch.  xxxii.  1 — 52).  Next  is  inserted  the
blessing  which  Moses  pronounced  upon  Israel  in  its  separate  tribes  (ch.
xxxiii.  1 — 29) ;  and  to  this  is  appended  an  account  of  the  death  and  burial
of  Moses,  with  his  eulogium  (oh.  xxxiv.  1 — 12).  With  thia  the  book
terminates.

t  3.  Design  or  the  Book.

From  the  survey  of  the  contents  of  this  book,  it  is  apparent  that  it  is  not
intended  as  a  supplement  to  the  other  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  but  rather
is  to  be  viewed  as  a  closing  appeal,  on  the  part  of  the  great  leader  of  Israel,
to  those  whom  he  had  conducted  and  formed  into  a  nation,  directed  towards
inducing  them  to  keep  inviolate  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  that  it  might  be
well  -with  them  and  their  children.  With  this  in  view,  Moses  selects  those
facts  in  the  past  history  of  the  people  the  remembrance  of  which  was  most
fitted  to  preserve  them  in  their  dependence  upon  and  allegiance  to  Jehovah,
and  those  parts  of  the  legislation  already  enacted  as  bore  most  closely  on
the  covenant  relation  of  Jehovah  to  his  people.  It  is  in  accordance
with  this  design  that  laws  of  a  general  kind,  oi'  such  as  relate  to  official
functionaries  and  acts,  should  be  only  briefly  referred  to  or  altogether
passed  over;  and  also  that  instructions  as  to  the  proper  ordering  of  matteis
which  could  be  attended  to  only  after  the  settlement  of  the  nation  in
Canaan,  should  form  an  important  element  among  the  farewell  counsels  of
him  who  had  brought  them  to  the  confines  of  that  land,  but  was  not
himself  to  enter  it  with  them.

S  4,  Author  akd  Date  of  the  Book.
Thifl  book  presents  in  the  general  such  a  uniformity  of  representation
and  character,  such  sameness  of  style  and  method,  that  there  can  be  no
hesitation  in  accepting  it  as,  in  the  main,  the  work  of  one  author.  Was
that  author  Moses  ?  That  he  was  is  the  commonly  received  belief,  handed
down  from  a  remote  antiquity,  and  which  was  not  seriously  questioned  til]


IKTRODUCTION  TO


comparatively  recent  times.  Many  objections,  however,  have  heen  advanced
against  it  of  late ;  and  this  renders  it  necessary  that  tbe  evidence,  both  in
support  of  the  traditionary  belief  and  against  it,  should  be  carefully
collected  and  weighed.

I.  In  favour  of  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the  book  there  is —

1.  The  weight  of  traditional  authority.  In  the  Christian  and  in  the
Jewish  Church,  so  far  back  as  we  can  trace,  this  book  has  been  reputed
the  work  of  Moses.  As  to  this  there  can  be  no  legitimate  question ;  the
fact  is  indubitable.  The  stream  of  testimony  may  be  traced  from  the
Christian  Fathers  ol  the  second  century  after  Christ,  with  hardly  a  break,
up  to  the  time  of  David  (cf.  1  Kings  ii.  3 ;  viii.  53 ;  2  Kings  ziv.  5,  6 ;
xviii.  6,  12,  with  oh.  xxix.  9;  ix.  26 ;  xxiv.  16;  x.  20).  Muses  is  thus,  so
to  speak,  in  possession,  with  a  title  which  has  been  admitted  for  more  than
three  thousand  years.  On  those,  therefore,  who  would  dislodge  him  lies
the  burden  of  proving  that  this  title  is  false ;  and  this  can  be  done  only  by
showing  from  internal  evidence  that  the  book  cannot  be  the  writing  of
Moses.  It  will  be  incumbent  on  them  also  to  show  how  this  title  could
have  been  acquired,  if  purely  fictitious — how  this  universal  belief  could  have
arisen,  if  without  foundation  in  fact.

2.  The  testimony  of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles,  as  recorded  in  the  New
Testan.ent,  gives  special  weight  to  this  tradition.  Our  Lord  quotes  from
this  book  as  part  of  the  sacred  writings,  using  the  formula,  "  It  is  written,"
by  which  is  indicated  that  the  passages  quoted  are  from  the  sacred  canon
(comp.  Matt.  iv.  4;  ix.  7,  10,  vrith  ch.  viii.  8;  vi.  16;  vi.  13),  and  recog-
nizing it  as  the  "  Law"  given  by  God  to  Israel  (Matt.  xxii.  24  compared
with  ch.  vi.  5;  x.  12).  He  expressly  refers  to  and  cites  this  book  as  the
work  of  Moses  (comp.  Matt.  xix.  7,  8;  Mark  x.  3,  4;  John  v.  46,  47;
possibly  also  John  vii.  19) ;  and  he  implicitly  attests  this  by  assenting  to  the
assertion  of  it  by  others  (comp.  Mark  xii.  19  ;  Luke  xx.  28).  St.  Peter,  in
his  address  to  the  people  who  were  collected  together  after  the  healing  of
the  lame  man  at  the  gate  of  the  temple,  cites  a  passage  from  this  book  as
the  saying  of  Moses  (Acts  iii.  22);  St.  Stephen  does  the  same  in  his
apology  to  the  Sanhedrim  (Acts  vii.  37) ;  St.  Paul  quotes  from  this  book  as
from  Moses,  in  the  same  way  as  he  quotes  from  the  Book  of  Isaiah  as  from
Isaiah  (Bom.  x.  19,  20),  and  at  other  times  prefaces  his  citation  with  the
words,  "  It  is  written "  (Eom.  xii. '  19 ;  Gal.  iii.  10)  ;  and  the  apostles
generally  freely  refer  to  the  Law,  i.e.  the  Thorah,  or  Pentateuch,  includ-
ing, of  course,  the  fifth  book,  as  of  Moses.  Now,  the  testimony  of  our
Lord  and  his  apostles  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  mere  link  in  the  chain  of
tradition  on  this  point.  It  m  that,  but  it  is  more  than  that;  it  is  au
authoritative  declaration,  from  which  it  is  maintained  there  is  no  appeal.
Jesus,  "  the  faithful  and  true  Witness,"  and  himself  "  the  Truth,"  oonld
utter  only  what  is  true;  and  knowing  that  his  words,  even  the  most
minute  and  least  weighty,  were  to  endure  for  ever  (Matt.  xxiv.  35),  and  to
guide  the  judgments  and  opinions  of  men  to  the  latest  generations,  he


THE  BOOK  OS'  DEUTEKOKOMY.  vii

would  he  careful  to  order  his  speech  so  as  in  every  case  to  express  only
■what  was  in  accordance  with  truth  and  fact.  But  it  may  be  asked,  "  Might
not  our  Lord  have  cited  a  passage  from  one  of  the  Fentateuchal  books  as  a
saying  of  Moses,  merely  because  these  books  were  commonly  called  by  the
name  of  Moses,  without  meaning  to  aiErm  that  they  were  actually  written
by  him  ;  just  as  one  who  had  adopted  the  Wolfian  theory  of  the  composition
of  the '  Iliad '  and  '  Odyssey '  might  nevertheless  continue  to  cite  from  these
as  the  works  of  Homer,  though  he  doubted  if  Homer  ever  existed,  and  felt
sure  that  no  one  man  composed  these  poems  as  they  are  now  extant?"  But
to  this  it  may  be  replied  tliat  the  cases  are  not  parallel.  When  one  quotes
from  the  '  Iliad,'  or  the  '  Odyssey,'  or  from  any  classic  writing,  it  is  for
the  sake  of  the  sentiment  or  expression  that  the  quotation  is  made,  and
it  matters  not  how  the  source  of  the  quotation  is  designated,  provided
the  designation  be  such  as  shall  direct  the  reader  or  hearer  to  where  the
passage  quoted  is  to  be  found.  In  our  Lord's  citations  from  the  book  of  the
Law,  however,  the  important  thing  is  not  the  mere  words  of  the  passage  or
the  mere  sentiment  of  it,  but  the  authority  of  the  utterance,  and  a .,  that  was
derived  entirely  from  its  being  part  of  the  Law  given  by  Moses  in  whom
the  Jews  trusted  (John  i.  17;  v.  46;  vii.  10),  it  was  essential  to  the
validity  of  his  argument  that  it  should  be  from  Moses  and  nui-e  other  that
his  citation  was  made.  When,  therefore,  our  Lord  adduced  a  passage  as  a
saying  of  Moses,  he  must  have  meant  that  the  saying  adduced  was  actually
uttered  by  Moses — in  other  words,  that  it  was  found  in  a  book  wliioh  not  only
carried  on  it  the  name  of  Moses  as  a  popular  and  convenient  designation,
but  of  which  Moses  was  really  the  author.

3.  The  antiquity  of  the  book  favours  the  ascription  of  it  to  Moses  as  its
author.  That  the  book  is  of  early  date  is  shown  partly  by  the  allusions  to
it  in  books  that  come  after  it  in  the  canon,  partly  by  certain  peculiarities
of  language  by  which  it  is  marked,  and  partly  by  certain  statements  and
references  contained  in  it.

(1)  In  the  Book  of  Jeremiah  there  are  so  many  expressions,  phrases,
utterances,  coincident  with  such  in  Deuteronomy,  that  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  the  author  of  the  one  book  must  have  had  the  other  before  his  mind
whilst  composing  his  own.  The  only  question  that  can  be  raised  is  whether
Jeremiah  cited  from  Deuteronomy  or  the  author  of  Deuteronomy  cited  from
Jeremiah,  if  indeed  the  same  person  were  not  the  writer  of  both  books.
This  point  will  come  to  be  considered  subsequently ;  at  present  it  is  sufiB-
cient  to  note  that  these  coincidences  afford  certain  evidence  of  the  existence
of  the  Buck  of  Deuteronomy  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah.

That  it  was  known  to  Isaiah  and  used  by  him  may  be  inferred  from  a
comparison  of  the  following  passages : — Isa.  i.  2  with  ch.  xxxii.  1 ;  Isa.  i.
10  with  oh.  xxxii.  32;  Isa.  i.  17  with  ch.  xxviii.  27;  Isa.  xxvii.  11  with  ch.
xxxii.  28;  Isa.  xli.  8  with  ch.  vii.  6  and  xiv.  2;  Isa.  xli.  10  with  oh.  xxxi.  6;
Isa.  xlii.  2  with  ch.  xxxii.  15 ;  Isa.  xlvi.  8  with  ch.  xxxii.  7 ;  Isa.  I.  1  with
ch.  xxiv.  1 ;  Isa.  Iviii.  14  with  ch.  xxxii.  13  ;  Isa.  lix.  10  and  Ixv.  21  with
ch.  xxviii.  29;  Isa.  Ixii.  8,  etc.,  with  ch.  xxviii.  31.


tiu  introduction  to


In  Amos  and  Hosea  there  are  allusions  to  passages  in  this  book  whicb
prove  that  it  was  known  in  their  day.  Of  these  the  following  may  be
noted : —

Amos  iv.  6 — 10  and  v.  11  compared  with  oh.  xxviii.  15,  etc.  In  Deute-
ronomy certain  judgments  are  announced  as  to  come  on  Israel  if  apostate
and  impenitent;  in  Amos  certain  judgments  ave  declared  as  having  come  on
Israel  because  of  their  apostacy  and  impenitency;  and  the  two  are  so  closely
identical  that  the  prophet  must  be  regarded  as  describing  the  fulfilment  of
a  threatening  predicted  by  the  lawgiver.  Famine,  drought,  blasting,  and
mildew,  the  ravages  of  the  locust,  pestilence,  the  diseases  of  Egypt,  and
the  calamities  of  war  are  described  by  the  prophet  as  what  had  come  on
Israel ;  and  these  are  what  are  threatened  in  Deuteronomy  in  the  same
or  equivalent  words.  Compare  especially  Amos  iv.  6  with  ch.  xxviii.
17,  38 — 40;  Amos  iv,  7  with  ch.  xxviii.  23,  24;  Amos  iv.  9  with  ch.  xxviii.
22,  38,  42 ;  Amos  iv.  10  with  oh.  xxviii.  21,  27,  26 ;  Amos  v.  11  with  ch.
xxviii.  30,  39.

In  Amos  vi.  12  the  prophet  charges  the  people  with  having  "turned  judg-
ment into  gall  (rosh),  and  the  fruit  of  righteousness  into  hemlock  (la'anah)."
Compare  ch.  xxix.  18  [17],  where  the  people  are  warned  against  apostacy,
"  Lest  there  should  be  among  yon  a  root  that  beareth  gall  and  wormwood
(roah  we  la'anah)."

Amos  viii.  14,  "  They  that  swear  by  the  sin  of  Samaria,  and  say.  Thy
God,  0  Dan,  liveth"  (of.  2  Kings  xii.  28,  29).  Ch.  ix.  21,  "And  I  took  your
sin,  the  calf  which  ye  had  made,"  etc. ;  ch.  vi.  13,  "  Thou  shalt  fear  Jehovah
thy  God,  and  serve  him,  and  shalt  swear  by  his  Name."

Amos  ix.  14,  15,  "  And  I  will  turn  (weshahhti)  the  captivity  of  my
people  of  Israel,  and  they  shall  build  the  waste  cities,  and  inhabit  them ;
and  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  drink  the  wine  thei  eof ;  they  shall  also
make  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them.  And  I  will  plant  them  upon  thi  ir
land,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  pulled  up  out  of  their  land  which  I  have
given  them,  saith  Jehovah  thy  God."  Ch.  xxx.  3,  "  Then  Jehovah  thy  God
shall  turn  (toeshabli)  thy  captivity,  and  have  compassion  upon  thee,  and
will  return  and  gather  thee  from  all  the  nations,  whither  Jehovah  thy  God
hath  scattered  thee ; "  ver.  6,  "  And  Jehovah  thy  God  will  bring  thee
into  the  land  which  thy  fathers  possessed ;  "  ver.  9,  "  And  Jehovah  thy  God
will  make  thee  plenteous  in  every  work  of  thine  hand,  in  the  fruit  of  thy
body,  and  in  the  fruit  of  thy  cattle,  and  in  the  fruit  of  thy  ground,  for
good,"  eto.  *'  This  passage  forms  the  basis  of  all  the  passages  in  the
Old  Testament  in  which  the  very  peculiar  formula  nu^  35^  occurs "
(Hengstenberg).

Turning  now  to  Hosea,  the  following  correspondences  with  Deuteronomy
may  be  noted : —

Hos.  iv.  14,  "  They  sacrifice  with  the  hedSshoth  "  (women  consecrated  t«
prostitution  in  the  service  of  a  heathen  deity).  Ch.  xsiii.  17,  18,  "  Ther«
Hball  be  no  kedeshah  [consecrated  harlot]  of  the  daughters  of  Israel,  .  .  ,


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


thoQ  Bhalt  not  Ining  the  hire  of  a  hedSshaih  .  ,  .  into  the  honse  of  the  Lordi"
Only  in  these  paesages  and  in  Gen.  xxxviii.  21,  22,  is  this  word  found.

Hob.  ▼.  10,  "The  princes  of  Judah  were  like  them  that  remoye  th«
bounds  (maistgei  geMT)."  Oh.  xix.  14,  "  Thou  shalt  not  remove  thy  neigh-
bour's landmark  (lo  ttustg  geMl);"  oh.  xxvii.  17,  "Cursed  be  he  that
removeth  his  neighbour's  landmark  (mass(g  gebul)."  Hos.  v.  14,  "  I  will  take
away,  and  none  shall  rescue  {eyn  matzil)."  Gh.  xxxii.  39,  "  And  there  ie
none  that  resoueth  out  of  my  hand  {eyn  m'yddi  matzil)."  (Gf.  also  Eos.  iL  10
[Heb.  12].)

Hos.  tL  1,  "  Come,  and  let  ns  return  unto  the  Lord;  for  he  hath  torn,
[of.  Hob.  y.  14]  and  he  will  heal  ns ;  he  hath  smitten,  and  he  will  bind
us  up."    Ch.  xxxii.  39,  "  I  kill,  and  I  make  alive ;  I  wound,  and  I  heal."

Hob.  viii.  13,  "They  shall  return  {yashubhu)  to  Egypt."  Ch.  xxviii.  68,
"  The  Lord  shall  bring  thee  {heshibKka)  into  Egypt  again."

Hos.  xii.  13,  "  By  a  prophet  the  Lord  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  and
by  a  prophet  was  he  preserved."  Ch.  xviii.  18,  "  A  Prophet  .  .  .  like  unto
thee."    Only  here  is  Moses  described  as  a  prophet.

Hob.  xiii.  6,  "  According  to  their  pasture,  so  were  they  filled  ;  they  were
filled,  and  their  heart  was  lifted  up ;  therefore  have  they  forgotten  me."
Ch.  viiL  14,  "  Then  thine  heart  be  lifted  up,  and  thou  forget  the  Lord  thy
God,"  etc

Hos.  xiii.  9,  "  Thia  (ihihethka)  hath  corrupted  [destroyed]  thee,  0  Israel,
that  thou  art  against  me  [who  am]  in  thy  help."  Ch..xxxii.  5,  "  A  perverse
nation  hath  become  corrupt  towards  him  (thiheth  lei);"  oh.  xxxiii.  26,
"  Who  rideth  upon  the  heaven  in  thy  help."

The  coincidences  thus  noted  ore  not,  it  must  be  confessed,  all  of  equal
weight  and  evidential  value;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  none  of  them  can
be  certainly  declared  to  be  accidental,  and  some  are  of  such  a  character
as  almost  to  force  the  conclusion  that  the  prophets  Hosea  and  Amos  had
in  their  hands  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,  and  freely  cited  from  it.    Assum-
ing this,  something  more  is  proved  than  that  this  book  was  extant  in  the
days  of  these  prophets.    As  these  were  prophets,  not  of  Judah,  but  of  Israel,
their  references  to  Deuteronomy  may  indicate  the  reception  of  that  book  in
Israel  as  a  sacred  book ;  and  as  it  is  not  probable  that  any  book  would  be
so  received  in  the  kingdom  of  Samaria  which  had  not  been  carried  by  the
ten  tribes  with  them  when  they  broke  off  from  Judah,  it  would  follow  that
this  book  was  known  and  reverenced  at  the  time  of  the  separation.     But
if  it  was  thus  accredited  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Eehoboam,  the
probability  is  that  it  was  so  in  the  reigns  of  his  predecessors,  Solomon  and
David;    for  it  is  incredible  that  it   could   have  attained   to  universal
acceptance  at  the  moment  of  his  accession  to  the  throne,  if  it  had  not  been
by  long  usage  already  established.    It  may  indeed  be  said  that  the  better
part  of  Israel  was  never  wholly  alienated  from  Judah  religiously,  but
continued  to  regard  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  as  the  national  sanctuary.
But  that  this  would  have  led  to  the  acceptance  by  the  nation  generally  of  a


INTRODUCTION  TO


book  pretendmg  to  be  from  God,  which  was  unknown  to  their  fathers,  and
which  had  come  into  ezistence  in  Judah  after  the  separation  of  the  tribes,
cannot  be  believed ;  national  enmity  and  sectarian  jealousy,  to  say  nothing
of  pious  zeal  for  God,  would  have  effectually  prevented  that,  the  more
especially  in  respect  of  a  book  by  which  their  whole  religious  position  and
system  was  condemned.

The  conclusion  above  announced  is  corroborated  by  the  references  to
Deuteronomy  in  the  narrative  of  the  Books  of  Kings.

Beference  has  been  already  made  to  passages  in  these  books  in  which
the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  is  expressly  referred  to  as  the  Law  of  Moses,  and
as  written  by  Moses.  What  has  now  to  be  considered  are  allusions  to
things  contained  in  that  book,  and  apparent  quotations  from  it.

1  Kings  viii.  51,  "  For  they  are  thy  people  .  .  .  which  thou  broughtest
forth  out  of  Egypt,  from  the  midst  of  the  furnace  of  iron."  Ch.  iv.  20,
"And  the  Lord  hath  taken  you,  and  brought  you  forth  from  the  furnace
of  iron,  out  of  Egypt."

1  Kings  xvii.  1.  Here  Elijah  announces  to  Ahab  that  the  judgment
threatened  in  ch.  xi.  16,  17,  against  idolatry  in  Israel,  should  now  be
inflicted,  because  of  his  having  set  up  an  altar  to  Baal,  and  placed  beside  it
an  Asherah  for  idol-worship.

1  Kings  xviii.  40.  In  the  order  given  by  Elijah  as  to  the  treatment  of
the  priests  of  Baal,  the  prophet  follows  the  Divine  injunction  as  given
in  ch.  xiii.  15,  16,  and  xvii.  5;  without  which  it  is  inconceivable  that
he  should  have  ventured  to  enjoin  on  the  king  such  extreme  measures.

1  Kings  xxi.  10.  The  appointment  of  ttoo  witnesses  in  order  to  convict
Naboth  of  blasphemy  points  to  the  observance  in  Israel  of  the  law  recorded
in  ch.  xvii.  6,  7 ;  xix.  15.

1  Kings  xxii.  11.  "The  symbolical  act  of  the  false  prophet  Zedekiah,
here  described,  is  an  embodying  of  the  figure  in  oh.  xxxiii.  17.  This
illustrious  promise,  specially  applicable  to  the  posterity  of  Joseph,  was  the
basis  on  which  the  pseudo-prophets  built ;  only  they  overlooked  the  one  thing,
that  the  promise  was  conditional  and  the  condition  was  not  realized.  .  .  .
The  reference  t»  the  Pentateuch  here  is  the  more  important  since  Zedekiah
was  one  of  the  prophets  of  the  calves,  and  since  the  symbolical  act  could
have  been  undertaken  only  on  the  presumption  that  its  meaning,  resting  on
the  Pentateuch,  was  intelligible  to  those  present,  and  especially  to  the  kings  "
(Hengstenberg,  i.  132).

2  Kings  ii.  9.  Elisha,  as  the  firstborn  of  Elijah  in  a  spiritual  sense — his
yi/^o-tov  TiKvov,  according  to  their  common  office  as  prophets — asks  of  Elijah
that  the  portion  legally  due  to  the  firstborn  son  might  be  his,  that  a
double  portion  (p)iW  *?)  of  his  father's  possessions,  his  spirit,  might  be  given
to  him.  This  points  back  to  ch.  xxi.  17,  where  the  law  relating  to  the
right  of  the  firstborn  is  enunciated.  It  is  noticeable  that  in  both  passages
the  same  peculiar  phrase,  D^}^  ^9,  a  mouthfol  of  two,  occurs,  and  in  this
sense  only  in  these  two  passages.


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


2  Kings  Ti.  28 — 30.  The  extreme  horror  of  the  king  on  hearing  the
woman's  story,  and  his  peneteutial  observance  in  oonBeqnence,  are  best
acoonnted  for  by  a  reference  to  ch.  zxviii.  53,  57,  58.  The  king  recognized
in  what  the  woman  told  him  a  fulfilment  of  the  threatening  denonnced  in
this  passage ;  and  so,  while  the  lesser  calamities  that  had  befallen  his  people
in  ronsequenoe  of  the  siege  of  the  city  by  the  Syrians  had  failed  to  move
him,  this  most  terrible  tale  filled  him  with  horror  and  drove  him  to
penitence.

2  Kings  xiv.  6.  Here  is  an  express  quotation  of  •  law  which  is  found
only  in  ch.  xxiv.  16.

2  Kings  xviii.  6,  "  For  he  clave  to  the  Lord,  and  departed  not  from
following  him,"  etc.  Ch.  x.  20,  "  Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord  thy  God ;  him
shalt  thou  serve,  and  to  him  shalt  thou  cleave,"  etc.

Besides  these  references  to  Deuteronomy,  there  are  many  in  the  two  Books
of  Kings  to  other  parts  of  the  Pentateuch,  going  to  prove  that  that  book  in
its  entirenesB  was  known  and  accepted  in  the  kingdom  of  Israel  from  the
time  of  its  first  establishment.  "Indeed,"  as  has  been  remarked,  "the
entire  action  and  operation  of  the  prophets  in  the  kingdom  of  lerael  is  an
inexplicable  riddle  if  we  do  not  assume  the  public  recognition  of  the  Penta-
teuch in  this  kingdom  as  its  basis.  With  all  the  annoyances  which  the
prophets  occasioned  to  the  kings,  and  the  priests  who  were  in  close  alliance
with  them,  there  nevei*  came  to  be  a  systematic  and  thoroughgoing  perse-
cution of  them  so  as  to  extirpate  them.  This  suggests,  unless  we  set  aside
all  probability  and  all  historical  analogies,  the  possession  by  them  of  an
external  right  whereby  hatred  against  them  was  restrained,  and  the  follow-
ing out  of  extreme  measures  prevented.  But  on  what  could  such  an
outward  right  be  well  based  if  not  on  the  public  acknowledgment  of  the
Pentateuch,  on  which  they  grounded  their  censures,  with  which  they  con-
nected their  threatenings,  and  whose  prophet-law  they  maintained  against
their  opponents?"  (Hengstenberg,  i.  140).

Ascending  to  the  earlier  books,  the  following  oorrespondenoes  between
them  and  Deuteronomy  may  be  noted : —

2  Sam.  vii.  6,  "  During  all  [the  time]  that  I  walked  with  all  the  chil-
dren of  Israel,"  etc.  Ch.  xxiii.  14,  "  For  Jehovah  thy  God  walketh  in
the  midst  of  thy  camp  "  (cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  12,  "  And  I  will  walk  amongst
you  ").  Only  in  these  three  passages  does  this  peculiar  phraseology  occur.
2  Sam.  vii.  23,  "  And  what  one  nation  in  the  earth  is  like  thy  people,  even
like  Israel,  whom  God  went  to  redeem  for  a  people  to  himself  .  .  .  thy
people,  which  thou  redeemedst  to  thee  from  Egypt,  from  the  nations  and
their  gods?"  Ch.  vii.  8,  "  The  Lord  hath  redeemed  you  out  of  the  house
of  bondmen,  from  the  hand  of  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt "  (cf.  also  ch.  ix.
26 ;  ziii.  6;  xv.  15 ;  xxi.  8 ;  xxiv.  18).  This  expression  may  be  said  to  be
specially  Denteronomio.

1  Sam.  ii.  2,  "  There  ia  none  holy  as  the  Lord :  for  there  is  none  beside
thflo :  neither  i«  there  any  rook  like  our  God."    Ch.  iv.  85,  "  Know  that  the


adH  ENTKODUCTION  TO


Lord  he  is  God ;  there  is  none  else  heeide  him ; "  oL  xxxii.  4, 15, 18, 81,  **  He
is  the  Book,  his  work  is  perfect  .  .  .  the  Bock  of  his  salvation  .  .  .  the
Book  that  hegat  thee  .  .  .  For  their  rook  is  not  as  our  Book,"  eto.  lSam.ii.  6,
"  The  Lord  killeth,  and  maketh  alive :  he  bringeth  down  to  the  grave,  and
bringeth  up."  Ch.  xxxii.  39,  "  See  now  that  I,  even  I,  am  he,  and  there  is
no  god  with  me :  I  kill,  and  I  make  alive ;  I  wonnd,  and  I  heal,"  eto.
1  Sam.  ii.  29,  "  Wherefore  kick  ye  at  my  sacrifice  and  at  mine  offering,  which
I  have  commanded  ?  "  Oh.  xxxii  15,  "  Jeshnmn  waxed  fat,  and  kicked."
The  verb  t3$3,  to  kick,  occurs  only  in  these  two  places.

1  Sam.  viii.  1,  "  And  it  came  to  pass  that  Samuel  when  he  was  old  made
his  sons  judges  over  Israel."  Ch.  xvL  18,  "  Judges  and  o£ScerB  shalt  thou
make  thee  in  all  thy  gates."  In  making  his  sons  judges,  Samuel  was
carrying  into  effect  the  law  enunciated  in  Deuteronomy.  As  Samuel  thus
obeyed  the  Law,  so  his  sons  transgressed  it,  for  they  took  bribes  (shohad,
1  Sam.  viii.  3),  contrary  to  the  injunction,  "  Thou  shalt  not  respect  persons,
neither  take  a  gift  [bribe,  B}MkadL\,"  etc.  (ch.  xvL  19).  1  Sam.  viii.  5,
"  Now  make  us  a  king  to  judge  us  like  all  the  nations."  Ch.  xvii.  14,
"  And  shalt  say,  I  will  set  a  king  over  me^  like  as  all  the  nations  that  are
about  me."

1  Sam.  X.  1,  "The  Lord  hath  anointed  thee  to  be  captain  over  his
inheritance."  Ch.  xxxii.  9, "  The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people ;  Jacob  is  the
lot  of  his  inheritance."  1  Sam.  x.  25,  "  Then  Samuel  told  the  people  the
manner  of  the  kingdom,"  eto.  The  manner  (the  law,  the  legitimate  order,
mishpat)  of  the  kingdom  was  what  had  been  prescribed;  and  it  is  only
in  Deuteronomy  that  this  prescription  is  given  (cf.  ch.  xvii.  14,  etc.).

1  Sam.  XV.  2,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  I  remember  that  which
Amalek  did  to  Israel,  how  he  laid  wait  for  him  in  the  way,  when  he  came
up  from  Egypt."  Ch.  xxv.  17,  "  Bemember  what  Amalek  did  unto  thee
by  the  way,  when  ye  were  come  forth  out  of  Egypt."

1  Sam.  xxviii.  3,  "  Saul  had  put  away  those  that  had  familiar  spirits,  and
the  wizards,  out  of  the  land."  Ch.  xviii.  10,  11,  "  There  shall  not  be  found
in  thee  ...  a  oonsulter  with  familiar  spirits,  or  a  wizard."

Judg.  L  20,  "  And  they  gave  Hebron  unto  Caleb,  as  Moses  said."  Oh.
i.  36,  "  Save  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephunneh ;  he  shall  see  it,  and  to  him  will
I  give  the  land  that  he  hath  trodden  upon."

Judg.  ii.  2,  "I  said  .  .  .  And  ye  shall  make  no  league  (h  tikrethu
beriih)  with  the  inhabitants  of  this  land ;  ye  shall  throw  down  their  altars."
eto.  Oh.  viL  2,  "  Thou  shalt  .  .  .  utterly  destroy  them ;  thou  shtJt  make
no  covenant  with  them  (2o  tikroth  Idhem  heriih) ; "  oh.  xii.  3,  "  And  ye  shall
overthrow  [throw  down]  their  altars."  Judg.  ii.  3,  "  And  their  gods  shall
be  »  mare  unto  you."  Oh.  vii.  16,  "  Neither  shalt  thou  serve  their  gods ;
for  that  will  be  a  snare  unto  thee."  Judg.  ii.  15,  "  The  hand  of  the  Lord
was  against  them  for  evil,  as  the  Lord  had  said,  and  as  the  Lord  had  sworn
unto  them."  Ch.  xxviii.  15,  etc.  Judg.  ii.  18,  "  For  it  repented  the  Lord
because  of  their  groanings  by  reason  of  them  that  oppressed  them  and


THE  BOOK  OJ?  DEUTERONOMY.  xiii


vexed  them."     Ch.  xxxii.  36,  "  For  the  Lord  shall  judge  his  people,  and
repent  liimself  for  his  servants,  when  he  seeth  that  their  power  is  gone."

Judg.  iv.  14,  "  And  Deborah  said  unto  Barak,  Up ;  for  this  is  the  day
in  which  the  Lord  hath  delivered  Sisera  into  thine  hand  :  is  not  the  Lord
gone  out  before  thee  ? "  Ch.  ix.  3,  "  Understand  therefore  this  day,  that
the  Lord  thy  God  is  he  which  goeth  over  before  thee."

Judg.  V.  4,  5,  "  Lord,  when  thou  wentest  out  of  Seir,  when  thou
marchedst  out  of  the  field  of  Edom,  the  earth  trembled,  and  the  heavens
dropped,  the  clouds  also  dropped  water.  The  mountains  melted  before  the
Lord,  even  that  Sinai  from  before  the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  Ch.  xxxiii.  2,
"  The  Lord  came  from  Sinai,  and  rose  up  from  Seir  unto  them ;  he  shined
forth  from  mount  Paran,"  etc.  Judg.  v.  8,  "  They  chose  new  gods  (elohim
haddahim)."  Ch.  xxxii,  17,  "  They  sacrificed  ...  to  gods  whom  they  knew
not,  to  new  {haddahim)  gods  that  came  newly  up,"  etc.

Judg.  xi.  15,  "  Israel  took  not  away  the  land  of  Moab,  nor  the  land  of
the  children  of  Ammon,"  etc.  Ch.  ii.  9,  19,  "  And  the  Lord  said,  Distress
not  the  Moabites,  neither  contend  with  them  in  battle:  for  I  will  not  give
thee  of  their  land  for  a  possession  .  .  .  When  thou  comest  nigh  over  against
the  children  of  Ammon,  distress  them  not,  nor  meddle  with  them :  for  I  will
not  give  thee  of  the  land  of  the  chillren  of  Ammon  any  possession."

Judg.  xiv.  3.  The  parents  of  Samson  expi/stulate  with  him  as  to  his
jnt'mtion  to  take  a  wife  "  of  the  uncircumcised  Philistines."  But  there  was
no  reason  why  he  should  not  do  this,  if  it  so  pleased  him,  except  that  it  was
expressly  prohibited  by  the  law  of  God  as  recorded  in  ch.  vii.  3.  It  would
thus  appear  that  that  law  was  known  and  recognized  as  binding  on  the
people  of  God  in  the  days  of  the  judges.

Euth  iv.  2 — 12,  "And  he  took  ten  men  of  the  elders  of  the  city,"  etc.
The  entire  narrative  in  this  context  points  to  the  law  of  the  levirate  in  ch.
xxv.  6 — 10.  "  Tlie  real  relation  of  the  goel  [kinsman]  in  Buth  to  the
yaham  [husband's  brother]  in  the  law  is  unquestionable.  '  Each  was  bound
to  raise  offspring  to  the  dead  from  the  wife  of  the  dead.  The  reason  in
both  cases  was  the  same,  that  the  name  of  the  dead  might  not  perish  from
Israel,  nor  from  his  family.  In  fine,  in  both  cases,  if  the  party  refused  to
marry  the  wife  of  the  deceased,  this  was  attested  by  the  taking  off  of  the
shoe'  (Pcrizonius,  'Dissert.,'  vii.  p.  79).  No  less  undeniable  and  still  more
decisive  is  the  verbal  reference  to  the  law,  which  is  equivalent  to  an  actual
citation  of  it.  Compare  only  ch.  xxv.  6,  '  And  the  firstborn  which  she
beareth  nisn  1*0^5  DB'"^5?  WpJ.'  with  Euth  iv.  5,  'Of  Euth  the  Moabitess,
the  wife  of  the  dead,  to  raise  up  the  name  of  the  dead  upon  his  inherit-
ance (in^Or^y  n^O'DlS'  D*i?in^).'  The  name  of  the  dead  could  only  be  raised
up,  according  to  the  law,  by  a  son  being  ascribed  to  him.  This  kind
service  Boaz  was  piepared  to  render  to  him  ;  the  goel  must  either  do  what
Boaz  proffered,  or  he  must  transfer  to  him,  as  the  next  goel,  the  right  of
redemption.  Still  more  coniiilctu  is  the  reference  to  ch.  xxv.  6  in  Euth  iv.  10,
'  I  take  to  me  Euth  as  my  wife,  to  raise  up  the  name  of  the  dead  upon  his


xlT  INTRODUCTION  TO


inheritance,  and  that  the  name  of  the  dead  he  not  cut  off  from  among  hifl
brethren,  and  from  the  gate  of  his  place.'  According  to  ch.  xxv.  9,  the
transaction  between  the  brother-in-law  and  the  sister-in-law  must  take  place
in  the  presence  of  the  elders ;  in  Euth  iv.  2  it  is  paid,  '  He  took  ten  men  of
the  elders  of  the  city.'  In  ch.  xxv.  9  it  is  said,  '  So  shall  it  he  done  nnto
that  man  tulio  buildeth  not  «p  his  brother's  house  ; '  with  which  compare  Euth
iv.  11,  '  The  Lord  make  the  woman  that  is  come  into  thine  house  like  Eaohel
and  like  Leah,  which  two  did  build  the  house  of  Israel ; '  i.e.  since  thou,
according  to  the  prescription,  hast  builded  up  the  house  of  thy  brother,  may
the  Lord  make,  etc.  That  Deuteronomy  is  older  than  tlie  Book  of  Euth  is
seen  from  this,  tliat  the  author  of  the  latter  describes  the  symbolical  act  of
pulling  off  the  shoe  as  a  usage  that  had  descended  to  his  time  from  former
times,  whilst  in  Deuteronomy  it  appears  as  then  in  common  use,  and  of
itself  clear"  (Hengstenberg,  ii.  104).  It  may  he  added  that  it  is  hy
reference  to  the  usage  prescribed  in  Deuteronomy  that  the  words  of  Naomi
to  her  widowed  daughters-in-law  (Euth  i.  11)  are  to  be  understood.

It  does  not  seem  necessary  to  carry  this  investigation  further;  the
instances  adduced  are  sufBcient  to  show  that  when  the  Books  of  Samuel,
Judges,  and  Euth  were  written,  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  was  extant  and
commonly  known  ;  for  the  alternative  hypothesis,  that  the  author  of  Deute-
ronomy, writing  at  a  time  subsequent  to  the  appearance  of  these  books,
carefully  picked  out  of  them  a  number  of  small  particulars  and  adapted  the
statements  of  his  own  book  to  these,  so  as  to  give  the  appearance  of  an
undesigned  coincidence  between  his  book  and  the  others,  is  too  violent  to
be  entertained.  It  thus  appe  irs  that  all  through  the  history  of  Israel,  from
the  times  immediately  succeeding  those  of  Moses  and  Joshua,  this  Book  of
Deuteronomy  was  known  and  in  common  use  in  Israel.

(2)  The  antiquity  of  this  book  is  vouched  for  by  the  archaisms  with
which  it  abounds.  "  The  use  of  N-W  in  both  genders,  which  occurs  one
hundred  and  ninety-five  times  in  the  Pentateuch,  is  found  thirty-six  times
in  Deuteronomy  ;  while  of  the  eleven  places  in  which  {<*n  is  written  not  one
is  in  this  book.  In  Deuteronomy,  as  in  the  other  books,  a  maiden  is  called
lyj ;  only  in  one  passage  (ch.  xxii.  19)  is  riTUJ  used.  The  demonstrative  pro-
noun l?xn,  which  is  not  found  out  of  the  Pentateuch  except  in  1  Chron.  xx.  8
(cf.  Ezra  V.  15 ;  Aramaic),  is  not  only  to  fee  read  in  Gen.  xix.  8,  25 ;  xxvi.  3,  4 ;
Lev.xviii.  27;  but  runs  through  Deuteronomy  (of.  ch.iv.  42;  vii.22;  xix.  11).
So  also  the  He  locale,  so  rare  in  the  later  usage  of  the  language,  the  old  rare
writing  ^IX^on  (Jahn  in  Bengel's  *  Archiv.,'  ii.  582)  and  the  future  ending  j.^-
are  common.  The  last  of  these,  according  to  the  investigation  of  Konig
(Heft.  ii.  of  his  '  Alt-test.  Studien '),  is  more  frequent  in  the  Pentateuch  than
in  any  other  Old  Testament  book,  and  is  found  in  Deuteronomy  fifty-eight
times,  as  also  twice  in  the  Pret.  viii.  3, 16  J-ly^J,  of  which  the  Old  Testament
has  only  one  other  instance — Isa.  xxvi.  16.  Among  these  archaisms  common
to  Deuteronomy  with  the  other  Pentateuchal  books  may  be  reckoned  also
the  shortening  of  the  Hiph.  iPlfh  (ch.  xxvi.  12),  and  often  the  use  of  KTjj  equi-


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


▼alent  to  iTip,  to  meet;  the  constrnction  of  the  passive  with  the  ns  of  the  objoct
(e.g.  ch.  XX.  8);  the  changes  of  the  common  B'53  into  3'e.'5,  lamb  (ch.  xiv.  4);  the
use  of  "IDT  equivalent  to  ^DJ,  a  word  lost  to  the  post-Pentatcuchal  language
(Dietiich,  '  Abhandlungen,'  s.  89),  oh.  xvi.  16;  xx.  13;  and  many  old
words,  such  as  aUK  and  DUp',  and  among  these  such  as  are  found  only  in
Joshua,  as  nilt^S,  or  in  Ezekiel,  whose  language  is  framod  on  tliat  of  the
Pentateuch,  like  )*D.  Also  in  hapaxlegomena,  which  in  an  old  language
abound,  Deuteronomy  is  not  poor.  Examples  of  these  ai  e  K'0"in  (for  tlie  later
h^li);  the  old  Canaanitish  ]ti>in  nhFia'y,  increase  of  the  flock;  j-nB'.'  (as  a  name
of  Israel,  borrowed  by  Isaiah,  xliv.  2)  ;  D'SOPI,  to  be  silent ;  p^jVJl,  to  lay  upon
the  neik ;  isynn  to  take  possession  of,  to  lay  hands  on.  To  tlie  antique  anrl
genuinely  Mosaic  peculiarities  of  the  Deuteronomist  belongs  also  his  love  of
pictures':  a  root  of  hfuilock  and  wormwood  sprouts  (ch.  xxix.  18),  head  and
tail  (ch.  xxviii.  13,  44),  the  saturated  with  the  thirsty  (ch.  xxix.  19);  and  com-
parisons :  as  a  man  beaieth  his  son  (ch.  i.  31),  as  bees  do  (ch.  i.  44},  as  a  man
chasteneth  his  son  (oh.  viii.  5),  as  the  eagle  flulteroth  (ch.  xxviii.  49),  as  the
blind  gropeth  (ch.  xxviii.  29).  Of  such  comparisons  I  know  only  three  in
the  other  books :  '  As  the  ox  licks  up  the  grass  of  the  ficM  '  (Numb.  xxii.  4,
in  the  Balaam  section)  ;  '  As  a  flock  that  hath  no  shepherd  '  (Numb,  xxvii.  17)  ;
'  As  the  guardian  bears  the  suckling  '  (Numb.  xi.  12) ;  boih  in  the  mouth  of
Mcses"  (l)elitzsch,  'Die  Genesis,'  Einleit,  s.  27  f.).  To  these  may  be
added  certain  words  and  phrases  found  in  the  earlier  books,  but  which
would  seem  (o  have  become  obsolete  or  to  have  been  regaided  as  archaic  in
the  times  subsequent  to  that  of  Samuel : — As  for  instance,  D'TIJJB',  gates,  for
habitations  gemrally;  nineteen  times  in  Deutorunomy ;  elsewhere  once,  in
Exod.  XX.  10,  in  a  document  acknowledgedly  Mosaic;  and  occasionally  but
rarely  in  poetical  piecfs  (I's.  Ixxxvii.  2  [but  see  Ilengstouberg  in  he.'] ;
Isa.  iii.  26;  Ix.  18  (?);  Jcr.  xiv.  2).  Dnyb*,  officers;  seven  times  in  Deute-
ronomy; elsewhere  Exod.  v.  6,  10,  14,  15,  19;  Numb  xi.  16;  Josh.  i.  10;
iii.  2  ;  viii.  33 ;  xxiii.  2 ;  xxiv.  1 ;  Chron.  six  times.  Djjn,  empty,  in  the
sense  of  without  an  offering;  ch.  xvi.  16;  Exod,  xxiii.  15;  xxxiv.  20;
1  Sam.  vi.  3  ;  not  elsewhere.  riB'X  njy,  (o  humble  a  woman ;  cli.  xxi.  14  ;  xxii.
24,  29;  Gen.  xxxiv.  2;  Judg.  xx.  5;  2  Sam.  xiii.  12,  14;  Lam.  v.  11;
Ezek.  xxii.  10,  11.  ^KDtJ'l  pp;  TID,  to  turn  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left,  of
departures  from  God's  Law;  ch.  v.  32;  xvii.  28;  xxviii.  14;  Josh.  i.  7;
xxiii.  6.  D'P' TTiS^.  to  prolong  days,  to  live  long;  eleven  times  in  Deute-
ronomy; elsewhere  only  Exod.  xx.  12;  Josh.  xxiv.  31 ;  Judg.  ii.  7  ;  1  Kings
iii.  14;  Eoeles.  viii.  13  ;  Isa.  liii.  10.  n>1Dn,  likeness, similitude;  ch.  iv.  12,
15,  16,  23,  25;  v.  8;  Exod.  xx.  4;  Numb.  xii.  8 ;  Job  iv.  16  (image,  form,
shape) ;  Ps.  xvii.  15.  Jrfi  ;  this  term  is  in  Deuteronomy,  as  in  tlie  other  Penta-
teuchal  books,  used  only  of  persons  exercising  sacerdotal  functions  ;  in  later
times  it  came  to  be  used  also  of  civil  officers  and  counsellors  of  the  sovereign
(of.  2  Sam.  viii.  18;  xx.  26  ;  1  Kings  iv.  2,  6;  1  Chron.  xxvii.  6).    n\^H,  fii«


xvi  INTRODUCTION  TO


offering;  eh.  xviii.  1 ;  often  in  the  Pentateuch;  once  in  Josh.  xiii.  14;  and  once
in  1  Sam.  ii.  28.  D^K^a,  two  things  heterogeneous;  ch.  xxii.  9;  elsewhere  only
in  Lev.  xix.  19.  ^jij,  a  young  bird;  ch.  xxxii.  11 ;  Gen  xv.  9  ;  not  found
elsewhere.  "VOJ,  a  male;  oh.  xvi.  19;  xx.  13;  elsewhere  only  Exod.  xxiii.
17  ;  xxxiv.  23.  nap?,  female;  ch.  iv.  16  ;  often  in  the  Pentateuch;  once  in
Jer.  xxxi.  22.  3»5N,  the  month  Ahib ;  ch.  xvi.  1 ;  Exod.  ix.  31 ;  xiii.  4 ;  xxiii.
15;  xxxiv.  18;  Lev.  ii.  14;  nowhere  else.  njE*,  young  of  a  beast;  ch.  vii.  13,
28  ;  iv.  18,  51 ;. elsewhere  only  Exod.  xiii.  12.  D-1p;,  substance,  living  thing;
ch.  xi.  6;  Gen.  vii.  4,  23;  nowhere  else,  n^p,  bush;  ch.  xxxiii.  16;  else-
where only  in  Exod.  iii.  2,  3,  4.

(3)  The  antiquity  of  the  book  is  further  guaranteed  by  certain  state-
ments and  references  contained  in  it.

Ch.  vii.  1,  etc.  Intercourse  with  the  nations  of  Canaan  is  here  strenuously
forbidden  to  the  Israelites.  This  was  fitting  before  they  took  possession  ol
that  land ;  at  a  later  period  such  a  prohibition  would  have  been  superfluous,
if  not  ridiculous.

Ch.  XXV.  9.  Kefeience  is  here  made  to  the  taking  off  of  the  shoe  as  a
symbol  of  the  transference  of  an  inheritance,  in  a  way  which  shows,  as
already  observed,  that  the  usage  was  then  common.  In  the  time  of  the
judges  this  was  regarded  as  a  usage  of  "the  former  time"  (Euth  iv.  7)
The  time  of  Deuteronomy,  therefore,  must  have  preceded  that  of  the  judges

Ch.  XXV.  17,  etc.  The  Israelites  are  commanded  to  remember  what
Amalek  did  to  them  by  the  way,  as  they  came  out  of  Egypt,  etc.  Such  an
injunction  it  would  have  been  absurd  to  publish  in  writing  at  a  much  later
period  in  the  history  of  Israel,  long  after  the  Amalekites  had  ceased  to  exis!
as  a  nation.     So  also  of  the  Canaanites  (ch.  xx.  16 — 15).

Ch.  xvii.  14,  etc.  It  is  here  assiimed  that  at  some  future  time  the  people
of  Israel  would  propose  to  set  a  king  over  them,  like  all  the  nations  about
them,  and  directions- are  given  as  to  the  choice  of  a  king  in  this  case,  and  as
to  the  conduct  of  the  king  when  he  should  be  chosen.  The  fair  presumption
from  this  is  that  the  book  in  which  these  are  recorded  must  have  been
written  before  the  time  of  Samuel ;  for  it  is  not  credible  that  any  writer
would  have  introduced  into  his  nariative  any  such  statements  posterior  to
the  election  of  Saul  to  be  King  of  Israel.  Especially  is  it  to  be  noted  that
one  of  the  directions  given  is  that  the  i«ing  is  "not  to  multiply  hoises,  nor
cause  the  people  to  return  to  Egypt,  to  the  end  that  he  should  multiply
horses ;  forasmuch  as  the  Lord  hath  said  unto  you.  Ye  shall  henceforth
return  no  more  that  way."  Such  a  cautionary  injunction  was  fitting
at  a  time  when  there  was  some  danger  of  the  people  being  seduced  into
returning  to  Egypt ;  at  a  later  period,  long  after  they  had  been  settled  in
the  promised  land,  it  would  be  simply  preposterous.  It  has  indeed  been
said,  on  the  other  hand,  that,  had  this  book  been  then  extant,  Samuel
must  have  known  this  passage,  and  in  that  case  would  not  have  rebuked
rli-  people  as  he  did  for  their  sin  in  desiring  a  king.      There  would  be


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  i*ii

some  force  in  this  did  the  passage  in  Deuteronomy  contain  an  enactment
that  a  king  should  be  chosen  or  express  approval  of  such  an  act.  But  this
is  not  the  case ;  rather  is  the  contrary  implied,  for  it  is  plain,  fiom  the
manner  in  which  the  subject  is  introduced,  that  the  anticipated  act  was
not  regarded  by  the  speaker  with  approval,  but  was  rather  viewed  by
him  as  a  wilful  departure  from  an  order  instituted  by  God,  pi  ompted  by
a  desire  on  the  part  of  the  people  to  be  like  to  the  nations  around  them  ;  in
fact,  a  species  of  apostacy  from  Jehovah,  second  only  to  a  renunciation  of
him  for  other  gods.  When  Samuel,  therefore,  rebuited  the  people,  even
whilst  conceding  their  request,  he  spoke  in  the  very  spirit  of  this  passage,
and  not  improbably  with  this  very  passage  in  his  mind.

It  has  also  been  urged  that,  as  the  appointment  of  a  king  was  incompatible
with  the  Theocracy,  it  is  highly  improbable  that  any  such  thing  would  have
been  contemplated  and  legislated  for  by  Moses.  It  is  to  be  observed,  how-
ever, that  the  king  whom  it  was  supposed  the  people  were  to  be  allowed  to
set  up  was  not  to  be  an  autocrat  or  one  whose  rule  was  to  be  independent ;
he  was  to  be  one  whom  God  should  choose,  and  who  was  to  be  under  law  to
God,  and  so  was  really  to  be  the  vicegerent  of  Jehovah,  the  Great  King.
By  the  appointment  of  such  a  king,  therefore,  the  Theocracy  remained  intact.
The  administration  of  government  by  means  of  a  king  whom  God  should
choose  no  more  superseded  the  supreme  kingship  of  Jehovah,  than  the
administration  of  law  by  judges  interfered  with  his  supremacy  as  Lawgiver
and  Judge.

It  is  further  asked — Had  this  passage  .been  in  existence  and  known,
how  could  Solomon  have  dared  to  contravene  it  as  he  did  by  multiplying
wives  and  sending  to  Egypt  for  horses  ?  But  Solomon,  we  know,  dared  to
do  man^'  things  which  were  ccmtrary  to  law,  both  Divine  and  human.  His
having  many  wives  and  concubines  was  as  much  against  the  law  of  the
Decalogue  as  against  the  law  in  ch.  xvii.  14 — 17.

Ch.  xxvii.  11 — 26.  Directions  ara  here  given  concerning  blessing  and
cursing  on  Mount  Gerizim  and  Mount  Ebal.  Thesf,  however,  are  of  a
very  general  character,  details  evidently  being  left  to  the  discretion  of  the
parties  by  whom  the  injunction  was  to  be  carried  into  effect.  An  author
writing  after  the  event  would,  it  is  presumed,  have  been  more  precise,  and
would  have  so  framed  his  statement  as  to  present  to  his  readers  a  distinct
and  easily  apprehensible  representation  of  the  whole  transaction.

Ch.  xix.  1 — 10.  Here  it  is  enacted  that,  on  the  establishment  of  the  people
in  Canaan,  the  land  is  to  be  divided,  and  certain  cities  to  be  set  apart  as
places  of  refuge  for  the  manslayer.  This  is  a  law  which  could  be  obeyed
only  at  the  time  of  the  entrance  of  the  people  on  the  possession  of  the  land,
and  which,  therefore,  it  would  be  absurd  to  prescribe  in  a  book  written  long
after  that  took  place.

In  several  parts  of  the  book  allusion  is  made  to  the  condition  of  the
Israelites  as  then  in  the  wildtrness,  and  to  their  experiences  there  as
then  recent  (cf.  ch.  i. — iii. ;   iv.   3,   4,   44—49 ;   vii.  1 ;    viii.   1 ;   ix.  1  ;

CGUTEBONOUY.  C


rvia  INTEODUCTION  TO


xi.  8,  etc.,  30,  31  ;  xiii.  12 ;  xviii.  9 ;  xix.  1 ;  xxvii.  2).  Unless,  then,  th«
book  be  put  aside  as  a  pure  fiction,  it  must  be  accepted  as  of  an  ago  not
later  than  the  time  of  the  arrival  of  the  Israelites  on  the  eastern  side  of
the  Jordan.

From  these  considerations  the  high  antiquity  of  this  book  may  be  fairly
inferred.  This  not  only  falls  in  with  the  supposition  that  it  is  in  the  main
the  writing  of  Moses,  but  lends  support  to  that  supposition ;  for  Moses  is
the  only  person  of  whom  we  know  anything  who  at  that  early  period  can
be  supposed  to  have  composed  such  a  book,  and  as  the  book  professes  to  be
his,  the  presumption  is  very  strong  that  he  and  no  other  is  the  author  of  it.

4.  The  aspect  and  attitude  of  the  writer,  both  retrospective  and  prospec-
tive, are  those  of  one  in  the  position  of  Moses  at  the  time  immediately  before
the  entrance  of  the  Israelites  into  Canaan.  The  book  presents  itself  as
Mosaic,  and  with  this  the  entire  costume  and  colouring  of  the  book  is  in
keeping.  "  There  is  nowhere  even  a  single  expression  which  is  not  suited
to  the  position  of  Moses  at  that  time ;  the  standpoint  throughout  the  whole
book  is  the  same ;  the  situation  is  ever  that  of  one  on  the  borders  of  the
promised  land.  To  that  which  in  later  times  was  the  centre  of  the  popular
life — to  Jerusalem  and  its  temple,  to  the  kingdom  of  David — there  is  not  a
single  reference  such  as  would  transgress  historical  limits.  The  occupation
of  the  land  is  only  in  the  general  assumed  as  about  to  take  place ;  nothing  is
said  as  to  the  special  relations  of  Israel  in  the  land  when  conquered.  The
principal  foes  are  the  Canaanites,  who,  from  the  beginning  of  the  peiiod  of
the  judges,  retire  into  the  background,  and,  after  Judg.  v.,  nowhere  play  any
notable  part.  (For  exact  acquaintance  with  the  early  relations  of  the  peoples
in  the  Mosaic  times,  see  ch.  ii. ;  in  respect  of  the  geography  of  the  scene  of
the  last  wandering,  ch.  i.  1,  etc.)  Specially  noticeable  are  the  very  vivid
reminiscences  of  Egypt ;  the  motives  to  kindness  towards  servants  thence
taken  (ch.  v.  16 ;  xv.  15 ;  xvi.  12 ;  xxiv.  18) ;  the  references  to  diseases  peculiar
to  Egypt  in  the  threatening  of  punishments  (ch.  xxviii.  27,  35) ;  the  refer-
ences to  deliverance  from  thence  in  the  promises  (ch.  viL  15  ;  xxviii.  60) ;
the  exaltation  of  Canaan  by  comparison  with  Egypt  (oh.  xi.  10);  a  highly
graphic  representation  of  the  old  Egyptian  agriculture,  to  which  the  monu-
ments bear  witness."  Besides  these  references  to  Egyptian  usages,  etc.,  may
be  mentioned  the  command  to  bear  the  words  of  the  Law  as  an  amulet  on
the  hand  and  breast  (ch.  vi.  8,  etc.;  xi.  18;  cf.  Exod.  xiii.  16),  and  to
inscribe  them  on  the  door-posts  of  the  house  (ch.  xi.  20) ;  the  command  to
write  the  Law  on  stones  plastered  with  mortar  (ch.  xxvii.  18);  the  mode  of
punishment  by  the  stick,  the  Egyptian  bastinado  (ch.  xxv.  2,  3);  the  method
of  irrigation  (ch.  xi.  10);  the  function  of  the  scribe  in  the  military  arrange-
ments of  the  Egyptians  (ch.  xx.  5).  There  are  also  frequent  retrospective
glances  in  the  book  to  the  residence  of  the  Israelites  in  Egypt  as  of
recent  occurrence  (ch.  vi.  21,  etc. ;  vii.  8,  18 ;  xi.  3).  Such  a  statement
also  as  the  following  is  intelligible  only  on  the  supposition  that  it  is  the
utterance  of  one  addressing  those  who  were  contemporaneous  with  the


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEllONOMY.  jtii

event  referred  to : — '  Your  eyes  have  seen  what  the  Lord  did  because  of
Baal  peer:  for  all  the  men  that  followed  Baul-peor,  the  Lord  thy  God
hath  destroyed  them  from  auiong  you.  But  ye  that  did  cleave  unto  the
Lord  your  God  are  alive  every  one  of  you  this  day  "  (oh.  iv.  3,  4).  The
inference  is  irresistible :  either  these  words  were  uttered  at  the  time
indicated  by  "  this  day  "  or  the  statement  is  a  fiction.  These  allusions  are
so  numerous  and  pncise  that  it  may  with  justice  be  said,  "  If  Deuteronomy
is  not  the  work  of  Moses,  thei e  is  heie  the  most  exquisite  of  literary  frauds,
and  that  in  an  age  which  had  not  as  j  et  acquired  the  art  of  transporting
itself  into  foreign  individualities  and  situations"  (Hengstenberg).

5.  The  passage  just  quoted  suggests  a  weighty  consideration  in  favour
of  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  this  book.  If  the  book  is  not  by  him,  if  it  is
the  production  of  a  later  age,  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  forgery.  For  beyond
all  question,  the  book  not  only  contains  discourses  alleged  to  have  been
uttered  by  Moses,  but  also  claims  to  have  been  written  by  him  (of.  ch.  i.  1 ;
xxix.  1 ;  xxxi.  1,  9 — 11,  24).  Are  we,  then,  to  pronounce  this  book  a
forgery  ?  If  so,  the  book  cannot  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  Upa  ypdfifmTa,
the  sacred  writings — as  really  belonging  to  the  ypo-4>i]  ©eoTrvcDoros,  as  being
a  book  given  by  Divine  inspiration.  For  the  religious  consciousness  recoils
from  the  thought  that  God  would  either  originate  or  sanction  a  deliberate
untruth.  We  may  admire  tbe  genius  of  the  man  who  could  produce  so
consummately  skilful  a  fiction ;  but  we  can  never  believe  that  it  was  by
Divine  direction  and  with  help  from  above  that  he  composed  it,  or  that  it
was  sent  forth  with  the  authorization  of  him  "all  whose  words  are  true."
Nor  is  it  easy  to  cimceive  how  what  must  have  been  known  to  be  a  fraud
could  have  found  acceptance  and  been  reckoned  among  the  sacred  writings
of  the  Jews.  It  has,  indeed,  been  pleaded  that  theie  was  no  fraud  in  the
case ;  that,  as  all  knew  that  the  book  was  not  wiitten  by  Moses,  none  were
deceived  by  the  ascription  of  it  to  him,  any  more  than  those  who  heard
Herod(jtus  read  his  history  at  the  Olympic  games  were  deceived  by  the
ascription  to  his  heroes  of  the  speeches  which  he  had  himself  composed.
But  on  this  supposition,  how  are  we  to  account  for  the  author  of  the  book
ascribing  it  to  Moses  at  all  ?  Herodotus  made  speeches  for  his  characters
and  inserted  them  in  his  history,  merely  to  give  completeness  to  his  story
and  as  a  display  of  literary  skill.  But  no  such  motive  could  have  induced
the  author  of  Deuteronomy,  supposing  him  to  be  some  prophet  or  scribe  of
a  later  age,  to  have  ascribed  his  work  as  a  whole  to  Moses.  He  could  do
this  only  in  the  hope  of  thereby  investing  it  with  greater  authority,  and
procuring  for  it  a  more  ready  acceptance  and  deferential  regard.  But  loi
this  it  was  essential  that  the  book  should  be  believed  to  be  by  Moses ;  the
moment  it  was  known  not  to  be  by  him,  the  author's  design  would  be  wholly
frustrated.  The  author  must,  therefore,  have  intended  it  to  be  accepted  as
really  the  work  of  Moses ;  and  if  it  was  not  so  accepted,  it  must  have  been
repudiated  as  a  too  manifest  forgery  to  be  endured.  Its  acceptance  by  th«
Jews  and  its  place  in  the  canon   is  thus  utterly  unaccountable  on  the


INTKODUCTION  TO


Bupposition  that  it  is  the  production  of  a  writer  of  an  age  later  than  that
of  Moses.

TI.  These  considerations  give  strong  support  to  the  traditional  helief
that  this  hook  is  what  it  professes  to  be — the  work  of  Moses.  It  is  possible,
however,  that  other  considerations,  drawn  from  the  book  itself,  may  outweigh
these,  so  as  to  make  it  uncertain  whether  Moses  wrote  this  book  or  not,  if
they  do  not  render  it  highly  probable  that  it  must  be  ascribed  to  some  later
writer.  Such  considerations,  it  is  maintained,  are  to  be  found,  and  they
have  been  strenuously  urged  by  many  critics  of  note  as  fatal  to  the  claims
of  the  book  to  be  regarded  as  the  genuine  work  of  Moses.  To  these  attentoin
must  now  be  directed.

1.  It  is  alleged  that  not  only  is  this  book  in  style,  phraseology,  and
manner  of  thought  different  from  the  other  Pentateuchal  books,  but  that  its
Contents  present  so  many  discrepancies  to  the  other  books  that  it  cannot  be
regarded  as  the  product  of  the  same  author.

This  consideration,  it  is  obvious,  is  of  force  as  against  the  genuineness  of
Deuteronomy  only  on  the  assumption  that  the  other  books  of  the  Pentateuch
are  the  writing  of  Moses.  If  this  be  denied  or  questioned,  the  objection
becomes  invalid.  For  in  that  case  any  alleged  discrepancies  would  prove
nothing  more  than  that  this  book  is  not  from  the  same  hand  as  the  other
books;  they  would  leave  the  claims  of  this  book,  which  professes  to  be  the
work  of  Moses,  unaffected.

It  may  also  occur  to  the  inquirer  that,  even  on  the  assumption  just
referred  to,  the  force  of  an  argument  of  this  sort  is  not  great.  For  whilst
it  is  quite  conceivable  that  the  style  and  phraseology  and  manner  of  thought
of  an  author  may  differ  at  one  period  of  his  life  from  what  they  were  at
another,  or  may  acquire  a  different  character  as  they  are  used  on  different
subjects  or  with  a  different  purpose,  and  that  in  the  course  of  forty  years
such  changes  may  take  place  in  the  condition,  circumstances,  and  relations
of  a  community  that  an  author  writing  near  the  end  of  that  period  may
have  much  to  narrate  concerning  them  that  is  not  in  accordance  with  what
he  has  narrated  in  books  written  long  before ;  it  is  to  be  noted  that  such
discrepancies  are  the  very  things  a  forger  would  be  most  cari.  ful  to  avoid.
His  aim  would  be  to  imitate  the  style  and  manner  of  thought  of  his  author
as  closely  as  possible,  and  as  he  would  have  before  him  what  that  author
had  written,  he  would  be  careful  to  conform  all  his  own  statements  to  what
he  found  set  forth  by  him.  If  discrepancies,  then,  are  found  to  exist  between
Deuteronomy  and  the  other  Mosaic  writings,  this  would  rather  be  in  favour
of  the  genuineness  of  the  former  than  otherwise.

As  respects  style  and  method  and  manner  of  thought,  such  variations  as
maybe  detected  in  this  book  from  the  earlier  books  are  sufficiently  accounted
for  by  the  fact  that,  whilst  the  latter  are  purely  narrative  or  didactic,  this  is
hortatory  and  admonitory.  The  style  nnd  manner  of  a  legislative  code,  or
even  of  simple  narration,  must  needs  be  departed  from  in  a  popular  address,
unless  the  speaker  means  to  exhaust  the  patience  of  his  audience  and  thereby
frustrate  his  own  effort.


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


"  A  good  example  of  the  fundamental  difference  in  legal  stylo  between
tlie  Levitical  Law  and  the  Deuteronomic  code  is  found  in  Numb  xxxv.
compared  with  ch.  xix."  (Kobertson  Smith,  p.  43J).  That  differences  of
expression  and  phraseology  are  to  be  found  in  these  two  passages  is
manifest  at  a  glance ;  but  that  they  are  "  fundamental,"  or  such  as  would
disprove  identity  of  authorship  in  the  two  writings,  may  be  denied.  For
these  differences  are  only  such  as  may  be  found  in  tlie  writings  of  any
author  who  has  occasion  to  repeat  in  substance  what  he  had  put  forth  more
at  large  in  an  earlier  writing.  In  Numbers  the  cities  are  called  throughoi't
"  cities  of  refuge,"  in  Deuteronomy  they  are  described  as  cities  to  which  the
homicide  may  flee  (for  refuge,  of  course)  ;  in  Numbers  the  man  for  whom  a
place  of  refuge  was  to  be  provided  is  described  as  one  who  had  s'ain  another
"  at  unawares"  (bisAj/ar/a,  through  error  or  mistake),  in  Deuteronomy  he  is
described  as  one  who  killeth  his  neighbour  "  ignorantly "  (hibhli  da'ath,
without  knowledge,  uniutcutionally),  but  also  as  one  who  had  done  it
"  unawares  "  (ch.  iv.  42)  ;  in  Numbers  it  is  "  au^'  person  "  who  is  supposed  to
be  killed,  in  Deuteronomy  it  is  "  his  neighbour "  whom  the  homicide  is
said  to  slay ;  in  Numbers  the  murderer  is  described  as  one  who  "  thrust
him  [his  victim]  of  hatred  "  {Vsinah),  in  Deutenmomy  it  is  snid  "  if  any
man  hate"  (sonay) — in  the  one  place  the  noun  is  used,  in  the  other  the
cognate  verb.  Such  differences  surely  cannot  be  regarded  as  "  funda-
mental." Of  more  weight,  apparently,  is  the  difference  in  the  description
of  what  constitutes  murder  as  di.Ntiflgiii.'~hed  from  simple  homicide,  given  in
the  two  books  respectively  j  the  one  book  giving  a  detailed  description,
while  the  other  furnishes  only  one  exemplary  illustration  from  actual
experience  of  what  is  intended.  But  this  is  only  such  a  difference  as  might
be  expected  between  a  legal  document  and  a  popular  address  in  reference
to  the  same  subject.  Another  difference  alleged  is  that  "  the  judges  in  the
one  are  '  the  congregation,'  in  the  other  '  the  elders  of  the  city.' "  But
there  is  a  mistake  here.  In  Deuteronomy  nothing  is  said  about  "judges  ; "
the  function  assigned  to  the  elders  is  executive,  not  judicial ;  they  are
to  apprehend  the  criminal  and  bring  him  to  suffer  the  penalty  to  which  he,
had  been  adjudged.  "  In  addition,''  it  is  said,  "  there  is  a  substantial
difference  in  the  laws  themselves,  inasmuch  as  Deuteronomy  says  nothing
about  remaining  in  the  city  of  refuge  till  the  death  of  the  high  priest "
Had  Deuteronomy  said  that  the  refugee  was  to  remain  till  his  own  death
in  the  city  of  refuge,  or  till  the  death  of  some  other  person  than  the  high
priest,  there  would  have  been  a  substantial  difference  between  the  two
laws ;  as  it  is,  Deuteronomy  only  omits  what  it  was  not  needful  for  the
speaker  to  state.  "When  it  is  remembered  that  these  differences  are  alleged
as  "fundamental,"  it  will  be  seen  of  how  little  moment  are  the  other
diffeiences  in  style  and  phraseology  which  may  be  adduced  between
Deuteronomy  and  the  other  Pentateuchal  books.

Of  the  material  discrepancies  alleged,  the  following  aro  the  most
important :—


txil  INTRODUCTION  TO


Gh.  i.  22,  etc.  Here  the  sending  of  the  spies  is  said  to  have  been  at  the
suggestion  of  the  people,  whereas  in  Numb.  xiii.  1,  3  it  is  by  command
from  God  that  the  spies  are  said  to  be  sent.  There  is,  however,  no  real
discrepancy  here ;  the  passage  in  Deuteronomy  simply  contains  an  addition
to  the  narrative  in  Numbers.  The  proposal  originated  with  the  people,
but  it  was  not  until  authorized  by  God  that  Moses  carried  it  into  effect.
For  the  rest,  the  two  narratives  are  in  full  accordance.

Ch.  i.  37 ;  iii.  26  ;  iv.  21.  In  these  passages  Moses  appears  as  casting  the
blame  of  his  exclusion  from  the  promised  land  on  the  people,  whereas  in
Numb.  XX.  12  it  is  in  consequence  of  his  own  defective  faith,  and  in  Numb,
xxvii.  14  as  a  punishment  for  his  rebelliousness,  that  this  is  said  to  have
come  upon  him.  But  that  there  is  no  discrepancy  here  is  rendered  certain  by
the  fact  that  in  ch.  xxxii.  51  the  same  cause  is  assigned  for  his  exclusion
as  in  Numbers.  The  two  statements  are  easily  reconciled.  The  immediate
reason  of  the  exclusion  was  Moses'  own  sin ;  the  ultimate  reason  was  the
rebelliousness  of  the  people,  which  gave  occasion  to  that  sin  (of.  note  on
ch.  i.  37).

In  Deuteronomy  it  is  prescribed  that  sacrifices  shall  be  offered  only  in  one
place,  whereas  the  other  books  say  nothing  of  this,  and  in  one  passage
express  mention  is  made -of  many  places  of  worship  (Exod.  xx.  24).  But
(1)  it  is  not  true  that  no  mention  is  made  of  this  in  the  other  books,  for  in
Lev.  xvii.  8,  9  the  law  regarding  the  ^offering  of  sacrifice  only  in  ihe  one
place,  viz.  at  the  door  of  the  tent  of  meeting,  is  announced  even  under  more
stringent  conditions  than  in  Deuteronomy;  and  (2)  the  declaration  in
Exod.  XX.  24  was  uttered  shortly  after  the  giving  of  the  Law  on  Sinai,
when  the  people  had  the  prospect  of  moving  from  place  to  place,  and  of
the  sanctuary  moving  with  them,  and  was  intended  to  assure  them  that
wherever  that  sanctuary  was  pitched  there  worship  might  be  acceptably
offered.

When  Numb,  xviii.  20 — 32  is  compared  with  ch.  xiv.  22 — 29,  it  is
alleged  that  "  it  cannot  escape  any  one  who  makes  the  comparison  without
prejudice,  that  the  two  laws  diifer  from  each  other  in  respect  both  of  content
and  character."  In  Numbers  it  is  prescribed  that  the  Levites  shall  not
have  any  fixed  possession  among  the  sons  of  Israel,  but  shall  receive,  for  the
service  in  the  sanctuary  binding  on  them,  all  the  tithes  which  properly
belong  to  Jehovah,  and  from  these  they  shall  again  pay  a  tenth  part  to
Aaron  the  priest.  In  Deuteronomy,  on  the  contrary,  the  Israelites  are
enjoined  to  bring  before  the  sanctuary  the  tithe  of  all  the  produce  of  their
fields  and  their  cattle,  either  in  kind  or  in  money,  and  there,  in  honour  of
Jehovah,  to  eat  it  with  their  families  in  joy  and  festivity ;  only  along  with
this  it  is  enjoined  that  they  are  not  to  forsake  the  Levite  who  has  no
possession  of  his  own,  but  each  third  year  they  must  retain  all  the  tithes
of  their  income  and  bestow  them  as  a  beneficence  on  the  Levite,  the  stranger,
the  widow,  and  the  orphan  in  their  gatea  These  two  laws,  it  is  alleged
differ  so  both  in  content  and  in  character  that  it  cannot  be  supposed  that


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  xxlH

Moses  oould  have  enacted  both ;  and  as  the  enactment  in  Numbers  ia
undoubtedly  the  original,  that  in  Deuteronomy  must  belong  to  a  later  age
(Bleek).  That  these  two  laws  differ  from  each  other  is  indisputable,  and
the  difference  is  such  that,  supposing  them  to  relate  to  the  same  object,  there
is  no  possibility  of  harmonizing  them ;  the  one  must  exclude  the  other.
But  it  is  conceivable  that  Moses,  after  enacting  the  general  law  of  tithes  as
a  provision  for  the  Levites,  should,  in  the  prospect  of  the  people  settling  in
a  rich  and  fertile  land  where  the  produce  of  their  possessions  would  be
great,  prescribe  the  giving  of  an  additional  tithe,  to  be  devoted  to  sacred
festivity  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor  and  needy,  in  which  benefit  the
Levite  was  to  share.  That  such  an  additional  tithe  was  actually  made  and
rendered  by  the  Israelites  in  Palestine,  appears  certain  from  the  testimony
of  the  Talmudists  and  Josephus ;  by  the  former  of  whom  the  'J^  "ife'JlD,  or
second  tithe,  is  distinguished  from  the  f\&ir\  "iHVO,  the  first  tithe — ^that  for  the
Levites ;  and  the  latter  of  whom  expressly  says  that,  besides  the  two  tithea
which  were  to  be  levied  yearly,  one  for  the  Levites  and  another  for  feasting,
there  was  to  be  every  third  year  a  third  tithe  for  distribution  to  the  poor
and  needy  ('Antiq.,'  iv.  8,  22).  In  the  Book  of  Tobit  the  second  tithe  (Se/can;
Bevrepa)  is  mentioned  (i,  7),  and  the  LXX.  refer  to  the  Sevrepov  iiriSsKarov
(ch.  xxvi.  llj.  There  seems  no  doubt,  then,  as  to  the  existence  of  a  second
tithe  among  the  Jews.  What  is  called  the  "third  tithe"  (Josephus,  I.e.;  Tobit
i.  8),  was  only  "  this  second  tithe  converted  into  the  poor  tithe,  to  be  given
to  and  consumed  by  the  poor  at  home  "  (Ginsburg,  '  Kitto's  Cyclopasdia,'  iii.
1012).  This  being  the  case,  we  are  justified  in  regarding  the  law  in
Deuteronomy  as  not  exclusive  of  that  in  Numbers,  but  rather  as  supple-
mentary to  it,  as  an  additional  prescription  for  the  benefit  of  the  Levites,
who  as  a  tribe  were  without  possessions  in  the  land,  as  well  as  the  poor  and
destitute.  As  both  laws  were  apparently  in  operation  at  a  late  period,  the
one  obviously  does  not  abrogate  or  exclude  the  other,  and  therefore  there
is  no  reason  why  both  should  not  have  been  appointed  by  Moses.

Ch.  xii.  17,  18.  Here  the  people  are  enjoined  to  eat  the  firstlings  of
their  herds  before  the  Lord,  in  the  place  which  he  shall  choose.  But  in
Numb,  xviii.  15 — 18  the  flesh  of  the  firstlings  ia  said  to  belong  to  the  priest ;
"The  flesh  of  them  shall  be  thine,  as  the  wave  breast  and  as  the  right
shoulder  are  thine."  How,  then,  it  is  asked,  could  the  people  eat  the  first-
•  lings  if  they  were  to  be  given  to  the  priest  ?  There  is  here,  it  must  be  allowed,
an  apparent  contradiction.  -It  is,  however,  only  apparent.  The  qualifying
clause,  "  as  the  wave  breast  and  as  the  right  shoulder  are  thine,"  indicates
that  it  was  not  the  whole  animal  that  was  to  be  given  to  the  priest ;  the
distribution  was  to  be  according  to  the  norm  established  in  the  case  of  the
$helamim,  or  peace  offerings  (Lev.  vii.  28,  etc.),  that  is,  after  the  fat  had  been
burnt  on  the  altar,  the  wave  breast  and  the  right  shoulder  were  to  be  the
portions  of  the  priest.  The  rest  of  the  animal,  therefore,  remained  with  the
offerer,  and  miglit  be  eaten  by  him.  There  is  thus  between  the  two  lawa
no  real  contradiction  (see  note  in  Exposition).    "  It  is  not  said  in  Numbera


INTRODUCTION  TO


that  all  the  flesh  of  the  firstlings  belongs  to  the  priests,  nor  in  Deuteronomy
that  the  people  are  to  eat  all  of  it "  (Curtiss).

According  to  Exod.  xxix.  27,  28,  and  Lev.  vii.  28 — 34,  the  breast  and  the
right  shoulder  of  all  thank  offerings  belonged  to  the  priest ;  according  to
ch.  xviii.  3,  he  "as  to  receive  the  fore  leg,  fho  two  clieeks,  and  the  miw.
This  latter  ordinance  is  said  to  he  an  alteration  of  the  earlier  law,  which
cannot  be  supposed  to  have  proceeded  from  Moses.  But  what  is  presciibed
in  Deuteronomy  as  the  priest's  due  is  not  said  thcio  to  be  all  that  he  shall
receive  ;  it  appears  rather  as  an  addition  to  what  the  earlier  law  assigned
to  him.  This  is  "  evident  from  the  context,  since  the  heave  leg  and  the
wave  breast  behjnged  to  the  firings  of  Jehovah  mentioned  in  ver.  1,  which
the  priests  had  received  as  an  inheritance  from  the  Lord;  that  is  to  say,  to
the  tenuphoth  of  the  children  of  Israel,  which  the  priests  might  eat  with  their
sons  and  flaOj,hters,  though  only  with  such  members  of  their  house  as  were
Levitically  clean  (Numb,  xviii.  11) ;  and  also  from  the  words  of  the  present
command,  viz.  that  the  portions  mentioned  were  to  be  a  right  of  the  priests  on
the  part  of  the  people,  on  the  part  of  those  who  slaughtered  slain  offerings,  i.e.
to  be  paid  to  the  priest  as  a  right  that  was  due  to  him  on  the  part  of  the
people  "  (Keil).  Whether  it  was  from  animals  offered  in  sacrifice  alone
that  this  portion  was  to  be  given  to  the  priests,  or  whether  the  right  of  the
pritsts  extended  also  to  animals  slain  for  domestic  use,  lias  been  made  a
matter  of  question.  But  this  is  immaterial  as  regards  the  relation  of  the
law  in  Deuteronomy  to  the  law  in  Exodus  and  Leviticus ;  for  in  either
case  the  portions  assigned  to  the  priests  were  a  gift  from  the  people,  distinct
from  and  in  addition  to  what  the  piiest  claimed  as  part  of  his  inheritance
from  the  Lord.

"  In  the  other  books  the  Levites  appear  always  as  servants  of  the  sanctuar3',
in  sharp  distinction  from  the  priests  the  sons  of  Aaron.  In  Deuteronomy
the  Levites  appear  as  sustaining  priestly  functions,  and  the  priests  are
called  '  sons  of  Levi '  or  '  the  priests  tlie  Levites,'  as  elsewhere  only  in
the  later  books  "  (Bleek).  That  the  priests  should  be  described  as  "  the  sons
of  Aaron  "  is  only  what  might  be  expected,  inasmuch  as  the  priesthood  was
lestricted  to  the  Aaronic  family ;  and  that  they  should  bo  called  "  sons  of
Levi  "  and  "  Levites  "  is  equally  natural,  seeing  all  the  priests  were  descended
from  Levi,  and  belonged  to  that  tribe.  The  only  thing  to  be  accounted  for
is  that  in  the  earlier  books  they  should  be  described  as  "  sons  of  Aaron  "  and.
never  be  called  "  Levites  "  or  described  as  "  sons  of  Levi,"  and  that  in  Deute-
1  onomy  they  should*  never  be  described  as  "  sons  of  Aaron  "  but  always  as
"Levites"  or  "sons  of  Levi."  Is  this  a  mere  difference  of  phraseology,  or
does  it  imply  such  a  difference  in  the  actual  constitution  of  the  priestly  order
as  to  necessitate  the  conclusion  that  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  belongs  to  a
later  age  than  that  of  Moses  ?  In  regard  to  this  it  may  be  observed :
(1)  The  mere  fact  that  an  author  uses  expressions,  names,  or  titles  which  are
found  elsewhere  only  in  books  of  later  date,  affords,  no  proof  that  his  book
itself  ia  of  later  date  than  that  traditionally  assigned  to  it,  because  the


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY,


expressions,  names,  or  titles  may  have  originated  with  him  or  come  into  use
in  his  time.  (2)  The  mere  fact  that  certain  phrases  or  names  used  by  an
author  are  not  found  in  books  confessedly  written  by  him  but  older  than
the  date  assigned  to  this  particular  book,  affords  no  proof  that  his  book  was
written  at  a  much  later  date,  because  the  new  words,  names,  or  phrases  may
have  come  into  use  during  his  lifetime,  but  after  his  earlier  writings  were
issued.  (3)  As  a  considerable  time  elapsed  between  the  writing  of  Exodus
and  Leviticus  and  the  writing  of  Deuteronomy,  phraseology  which  was
fitting  at  the  earlier  period  may  have  become  less  fitting  at  the  later,  and
consequently  Moses  may  have  felt  it  necessary  to  depart  in  his  latest
writing  from  phraseology  which  he  used  freely  in  his  earlier  writings.
(4)  The  appointment  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  to  the  priesthood  preceded  the
consecration  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  the  service  of  the  sanctuary,  and  was  an
appointment  wholly  independent  of  that  tribe.  The  priesthood  was  at  first
that  of  a  family,  not  that  of  a  tribe ;  it  was  purely  Aaronic,  not  in  any  proper
sense  Levitical.  At  first,  then,  it  was  only  as  "  sons  of  Aaron  "  that  the
priests  could  be  designated  ;  but  after  the  consecration  of  the  tribe  to  which
that  family  belonged,  such  designations  as  "  sons  of  Levi,"  "  the  priests  the
Levites,"  became  fitting  designations  of  the  priests.  The  phrase  "  sons  of
Aaron  "  was  thus  the  earlier,  the  phrase  "  sons  of  Levi  "  the  later,  formula
of  designation.  It  is  not  improbable  that  gradually  the  earlier  designation
fell  into  desuetude,  and  the  later  came  to  be  that  alone  in  use ;  and  in  this
case  Moses,  writing  near  the  end  of  his  life,  would  naturally  use  the
designation  which  by  that  time  had  come  to  be  the  proper  designation  of
the  pi'iests.

As  respects  the  discharge  of  priestly  functions  by  the  Levites,  it  may  be
oL  orved  :  (1)  In  the  general  that,  as  the  tribe  of  Levi  included  the  priestly
order,  what  was  done  by  the  priests  may  be  popularly  desciibed  as  done  by
Levites ;  just  as  one  might  say  that  a  certain  act  was  the  act  of  the  Church,
though  properly  it  was  the  act  of  only  certain  ofBcials  in  the  Church  On
this  principle  wo  may  account  for  its  being  stated  that  the  tribe  of  Levi
was  separated  by  Jehovah  to  bless  in  his  Name  (ch.  x.  8),  though  this  was
the  special  function  of  the  priests ;  just  as  in  ch.  x.  8  and  xxxi.  25  it  is
said  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  tribe  of  Levi  to  bear  the  ark  of  the
covenant,  whereas  this  belonged  specially  to  the  Kohathites,  a  family  in
that  tribe.  (2)sAs  in  a  graduated  hieiarchy  the  higher  office  includes  the
Icwer,  so  the  duties  properly  belonging  to  the  lower  functionary  may,  on
OBcasions  of  special  solemnity,  be  undertaken  by  the  higher.  Thus  we  may
account  for  the  priests  on  special  occasions  bearing  the  ark,  -which
ordiKarily  it  was  the  part  of  the  Kohathites  to  do  (of.  ch.  xxxi.  9).  (3)
When  those  who  are  set  apart  as  ministers  to  a  superior  functionary
are  calleil  acjually  to  assist  him  in  his  service,  they  may  without  ofience
partake  of  the  privileges  which  belong  properly  to  the  superior.  On  this
ground  we  may  account  for  the  statement  in  ch.  xviii.  1,  8,  that  the  Levite
who  might  of  his  own  choice  attend  upon  the  service  of  the  sanctuary


xxtI  INTKODUCTION  TO


should  tave  tho  privilege  of  partaking  with  the  priest  of  the  sacrifices
ofifered  there,  though  this,  according  to  the  Law,  was  the  privilege  of  the
priest  only  (cf.  Lev.  vi.  18,  29;  vii.  6).  As  the  Law  allotted  these  to  the
priest,  but  did  not  prohibit  the  giving  of  a  portion  of  them  to  the  attendant
Levite,  the  prescription  that  the  Levite  was  to  have  a  share  with  the
priest  is  not  a  repeal  of  the  older  enactment,  but  only  an  addition  to  it.

"  According  to  Numb.  xxxv.  1 — 8,  the  Levites  were  to  have  cities  assigned
to  them  as  their  own,  in  all  forty-eight,  with  fields  attached  for  their  cattle,
and  these  were  by  lot  given  to  them  by  Joshua  (Josh.  xxi.).  Of  any  such
relations,  of  special  cities  of  the  Levites,  nothing  is  found  in  Deuteronomy ;
here  the  same  appear,  at  least  for  the  most  part,  as  homeless,  living
scattered  among  the  rest  of  the  Israelites  in  the  different  towns ;  this  is  pre-
sumed, and  legal  prescriptions  refer  to  it  (cf.  ch.  xii.  12, 1 8,  etc. ;  xiv.  27 — 29  ;
xvi.  11,  14;  xviii.  6;  xxvi.  12)"  (Bleek).  In  these  passages  the  Levite  is
represented  as  living  within  the  gates  of  the  people,  and  this  is  assumed  to
mean  that  he  was  there  as  a  stranger  who,  having  no  home  of  his  own,  had
to  be  dependent  on  the  hospitality  of  others  for  a  residence.  But  this  does
not  seem  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  phrase.  The  Levites  had,  in  accordance
with  the  law  in  Numbers,  fields  and  towns  assigned  to  them  ;  but  they  were
not  the  sole  occupants  of  these ;  they  were  only  a  portion,  in  most  cases
only  a  minor  portion,  of  the  in,habitants.  The  town  thus  properly  was  not
Levitical ;  it  was  a  town  of  Israel,  in  which  the  Levites  had  residences,  with
fields  appertaining.  Hence  the  description,  "  the  Levite  within  thy  gates  ;  "
not  that  the  Levite  was  homeless,  but  that  his  home  was  within  the
precincts  of  one  of  the  cities  of  Israel  (Keil,  '  Comment,  on  Joshua,'  p.  211  ;
Kitto, '  Cyclopaedia,'  ii.  826).  Even  if  the  town  had  been  occupied  wholly
by  the  Levites,  they  might  still  have  been  said  to  dwell  within  the  gates
of  the  people,  inasmuch  as  the  towns  allotted  to  them  were  not  in  a  region
of  their  own  as  a  tribe,  but  were  taken  from  the  portions  of  the  other  tribes
throughout  the  country.  It  is  further  assumed  in  this  objection  that
Deuteronomy  makes  the  only  source  of  maintenance  for  the  Levites  to  be
the  share  in  the  sacrificial  feasts  of  the  tithes  which  it  assigns  to  them ;
whereas  the  right  of  the  Levites  to  partake  of  the  tithes  received  from  the
nation  is  distinctly  recognized  in  Deuteronomy,  as  in  the  earlier  law  (cf.
ch.  X.  9  ;  xiv.  22;  xviii.  2  ;  xxvi.  12).

2.  It  is  alleged  that  there  are  statements  in  the  book  which  could
not  have  been  made  by  Moses,  but  betray  the  hand  of  a  writer  of  a  much
later  age.

Ch.  i.  1.  The  expression,  "beyond  the  Jordan  (pnjn  n^p),"  here  and  in
ver.  5,  is,  it  is  alleged,  plainly  the  writing  of  one  whose  position  was  on  the
west  of  that  liver,  and  therefore  must  have  been  written  after  the  death  of
Moses.  It  must  strike  one,  however,  that  it  is  very  improbable  that  any
one  writing  in  the  person  of  Moses,  and  wishing  to  be  taken  for  Moses
would  make  a  mistake  of  this  sort,  and  on  the  very  threshold  of  his  work
betray  himself  so  foolishly.     There  is,  however,  no  mistake  in  the  case.


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMY.  xxtU

The  phrase, "  beyond  the  Jordan,"  was  the  established  and  current  designa-
tion of  the  country  to  the  east  of  the  Jordan  where  Moses  then  was  ;  nor  is
there  any  reason  to  believe  that  this  came  into  vogue  only  after  the
Israelites  had  occnpied  Canaan.  Moses,  therefore,  dating  his  book  from
the  place  where  it  was  written,  indicates  that  place  by  its  proper  name,  the
name  by  which  alone  it  was  known.  So  also  in  referring  to  loualities
within  Pal  stine,  he  describes  them  by  the  names  given  to  them  by  the
inhabitants  of  the  country,  and  by  which  they  were  properly  known.  Thus
as  the  common  name  for  "  westward  "  was  jn  Hebrew  "  seaward,"  and  the
name  for  "  southward"  was  "towards  the  Negeb"  (the  usual  appellation  of
the  arid  district  to  the  south  of  Palestine),  Moses  uses  these  terms  even  when
writing  where  the  sea  was  not  to  the  west  or  the  Negeb  to  the  south  of  the
place  where  he  was.  This,  indeed,  has  been  urged  as  an  argument  against
the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the  Pentateuch.  But  without  reason  ;  for  when
designations  are  once  given  to  localities,  they  become  proper  names,  and  are
used  without  respect  to  their  original  or  etymological  signification.  It  is
simply  absurd  to  ask,  "  Would  Moses,  writing  at  Sinai,  have  .spoken  of  the
Negeb  as  to  the  south  of  him  when  it  was  really  to  the  north  ?  "  Moses  says
nothing  of  the  sort.  Writing  in  Hebrew,  and  for  Hebrews,  he  uses  the
expression,  "towards  the  Negeb,"  because  that  is  the  Hebrew  for  "south-
ward." Suppose  a  person,  writing  in  Edinburgh,  to  say  of  a  certain  event
that  it  took  place  in  Norfolk,  or  of  a  locality  that  it  is  in  Sutherland  ;  what
would  be  thought  of  a  critic  who  should  argue  that  neither  statement
could  have  been  written  in  Edinburgh,  because  in  relation  to  that  city
Norfolk  (North-folk)  lies  to  the  south,  and  Sutherland  (Southern-land)
lies  to  the  north  ?  Or,  buppose  Caesar,  when  on  the  north  of  the  Alps,  to
have  dated  one  of  his  Commentaries  from  Transalpine  Gaul,  would  any  one
have  held  this  to  prove  that  that  book  was  spurious,  and  must  have  been
written  by  some  one  south  of  the  Alps  ?

Ch.  ii.  12.  The  remark,  "  As  Israel  did  unto  the  land  of  his  possi  ssion,
which  the  Lord  gave  unto  them,"  presupposes  a  time  when  the  Isiaelites
were  already  in  possession  of  Canaan,  and  had  expelled  the  peoples  formeily
dwelling  tlierj — a  time,  therefore,  posterior  to  that  of  Moses.  Here  it  is
assumed  th«it  the  land  referred  to  is  Canaan,  and  on  this  assumption  it
appears  certain  that  the  passage  could  not  have  been  written  by  Moses.
But  is  it  Canaan  that  is  here  referred  to  ?  In  ch.  iii.  similar  pbrasuolcgy  is
used  of  the  district  east  of  the  Jordan,  already  captured  by  the  Israelites,
»nd  assigned  to  the  two  and  a  half  tribes ;  in  ver.  18  it  is  described  as  the
land  which  the  Lord  their  God  had  given  them  "  to  possess,"  and  in  ver.  20
as  their  "  possession  "  which  had  been  assigned  to  them  by  Muses.  As  these
tribes  were  part  of  Israel,  the  laud  of  their  possession  might  well  be  calkd
"  the  land  of  the  possession  of  Israel ;  "  and  it  is  to  this,  doubtless,  and  not
to  Canaan,  that  Moses  here  refers.  This  is  rendered  certain  by  the  fact  that
it  is  for  the  purpose  of  encouraging  the  people  to  go  on  to  the  conquest  of
Canaan,  that  the.  reference  to  what  had  already  beem  achieved  by  them  ia


ixvui  INTKODUCTION  TO


made.  A  later  writer  would  never  have  committed  the  gi'oss  absurdity  of
representing  Moses  as  encouraging  the  people  to  undeitake  the  conquest  of
Canaan,  by  telling  them  that  they  had  already  conquered  that  laud  and
were  in  possession  of  it.

Ch.  xix.  14  and  xx,  5,  6.  Ilere,  it  is  alleged,  certain  relations  which
imply  a  later  period  are  assiuied  as  present.  But  this  overlooks  the  ideal
standpoint  of  the  Deuteionoir.ic  legislation,  which  is  that  of  faith  in  the
Divine  promise  that  I.siael  should  certainly  possess  and  dwell  in  the  land  of
Canaan.  Hence  the  speaker  througlinut  speaks  as  if  the  people  were  already
settled  there,  and  legislates  accordingly.  In  the  passages  cited  he  simply
assumes  that  certain  relations,  which  were  sure  to  exist  after  the  people
were  settled  in  the  laud,  ahead}-  existed.

Ch.  xxiii.  12,  13.  This  is  adduced  as  in  itself  a  verj'  convincing  proof  of
the  unhistorical  character  of  the  whole  narrative,  because  it  involves  the
absurdity  of  enacting  what  was  obviously  impracticable  (Colenso).  But
this  assumes  that  the  enactment  has  refeieiice  to  the  conduct  of  the  people
win  Bt  encamped  in  the  wilderness,  whereas  the  precept  has  refeience  to  a
camp  such  as  soldii-rs  might  form  should  they  at  any  time  march  out
against  their  enemies.  It  is  to  the  preservation  of  the  purity  of  a  military
camp  in  the  time  of  war  that  the  injunction  has  respect,  and  not'  to  any-
thing connected  with  the  domestic  encampment  of  the  people,  either  in  the
wilderness  or  elsewhere.  It  would  have  been  absurd  had  Moses  given  such
an  instruction  as  this  to  the  whole  camp  of  the  Isiaelites  duiing  their
wanderings,  especially  had  he  reserved  it  till  the  very  cluse  of  their  wander-
ings, just  when  instructions  of  this  sort  became  unnecessary.

In  ch.  xxxii.  and  xxxiii.  are  passages  which  have  been  alleged  as  against
the  genuineness  of  the  book.  As  these  apply  specially  to  that  part  of  the
book,  and  do  not  directly  affect  the  book  as  a  whole,  the  consideration  of
them  may  be  deferred  till  the  question  of  the  integrity  of  the  book  comes
tinder  notice.    (See  §  6.)

3.  As  against  the  antiquity  of  the  book,  it  is  alleged  that  certain  things
forbidden  or  denounced  in  the  book  were  done  by  individuals  in  times
sub-equent  to  those  of  Moses;  snd  this,  it  is  alleged,  would  not  have  been
had  the  book  been  in  existence  at  the  time  in  which  these  persons  lived.
Thus  in  ch.  xvi.  22  it  is  enjoined,  "  Neither  shalt  thou  set  up  a  ma^gela  ;
which  the  Lord  thy  God  hatcth."  A  maggeba  was  a  pillar,  usually  of
rough,  unhewn  stone,  and  when  set  up  beside  an  altar  was  theie  for
idolatrous  purposes;  and  this  is  what  is  forbidden  here.  Notwithstandino-
this,  maggchas  it  is  alleged,  continued  to  be  set  up  for  worship  even  by  men
of  eminent  piety  among  the  Israeliies;  in  proof  of  which  the  following
passages  aie  referred  to  : — Josh.  xxiv.  26 ;  1  Sam.  vi.  14  ;  vii.  12  ;  2  Sam.  xx.
8  ;  1  Kings  i.  9  ;  vii.  21  ;  Hos.  iii.  4.  "  This  detail  is  one  of  the  clearest
proofs,''  it  is  said,  "  that  Deuteronomy  was  unknown  till  lung  after  the
days  of  Motes.  How  cunld  Joshua,  if  he  had  known  such  a  law,  have
erected  a  maggela,  or  sacred  pillar  of  unhewn  stone,  under  the  sacred  tree


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  XjiT

by  the  saaotnary  at  Shechera?"'  But  wliat  proof  is  tliere  that  it  teas  a
maggeba  which  Joshua  erected?  The  record  simply  says  it  was  "a  great
Btone,"  and  the  same  is  the  expression  used  in  the  majority  of  the  other
passages,  in  some  without  the  epithet  "great;"  in  none  but  the  last  does
the  term  maggeba  occur.  By  what  right,  then,  is  it  assumed  that  these
stones  were  of  the  kind  forbidden  in  Deuteronomy?  All  maggebas,  it  may
be  supposed,  were  stones,  but  all  monumental  stones  were  not  maggebas.
The  word  used  in  1  Kings  vii.  21  is  "pillar"  ('dmud),  and  this  certainly
was  not  a  maggeba ;  what  Solomon  set  up  by  Divine  direction  "  in  the
porch  of  the  temple  "  were  pillars,  monumental  as  well  as  ornamental,  but
not  in  any  way  Odunected  with  worship  except  as  they  stood  at  the  entrance
to  the  place  of  worship.*  As  for  the  Hosea  passage,  it  has  no  bearing  on
the  point  at  issue ;  in  declaring  that  Israel  should  be  without  worship  of
any  kind,  sacred  or  idolatrous,  it  only  declares  iiuplicitly  what  the  history
attests  explicitly,  that  idolatrous  usages  had  been  in  Israel,  not  that  these
were  ever  regarded  as  lawful,  or  were  practised  by  those  who  professed  to
be  worshippers  of  Jehovah.

But  "  this  law,"  it  is  added,  "  was  unknown  to  Isaiah,  who  attacks  idolatry,
but  recognizes  maggeba  and  altar  as  the  marks  of  the  sanctuary  of  Jehovah,"
and  in  proof  of  this  Isa.  xix.  19  is  adduced,  "  In  that  day  there  shall  be  an
altar  to  Jehovah  within  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  a  pillar  (maggeba)  at  the
bolder  thereof  to  Jehovah."  But  this  passage  asserts  something  very
different  from  what  it  is  adduced  to  prove;  it  asserts  that  the  pillar  was
erected,  not  at  the  sanctuary  of  Jehovah,  but  at  the  border  of  the  land
of  Egypt.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a  maggeba  of  the  kind  condemned  in
Deuteronomy  that  is  here  referred  to,  but  a  stone  set  up  as  a  landmark  or
terminal  index.  The  reference,  consequently,  is  irrelevant  to  the  present
discussion.

4.  Much  weight  is  attached  to  the  fact  that,  not  only  during  the
unsettled  times  of  the  judges,  when  "(here  was  no  king  in  Israel,  but
every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes,"  but  on  to  a  later
period,  even  to  the  time  of  David,  the  law  of  a  central  sanctuary  at  which
alone  sacrifice  was  to  be  offered  was  disregarded,  and  even  pious  men,
like  Samuel  and  David,  scrupled  not  to  offer  sacrifice  at  any  place  where
they  might  chance  to  be  at  the  time;  conduct  which,  it  is  maintained,
argues  on  their  part  a  total  ignorance  of  any  such  law  as  that  in  ch.  xii.  6,
1 1,  and  by  consequence  the  non-existence  of  that  law,  or  of  the  book  in
which  it  is  recorded,  in  their  day,  seeing,  had  the  book  existed,  they  could
not  have  been  ignorant  of  what  it  prescribes.  This  has  been  put  forth
as  conclutiive  against  the  pretensions  of  the  book  to  be  of  a  date  as

■  '  The  Old  TeBUment  iu  the  Jewish  Church,'  p.  854.

•  The  signiflcaow  of  the  pillars  appears  from  their  names.  "  They  were  the  monumental
witnesses  that  tht  God  of  the  covenunt  had  now  taken  for  ever  his  abode  in  this  8anctuar7
in  the  midst  of  his  people,  and  would  manifest  thence  hia  might  and  majesty  for  their
huljp"  (Rieum.  'Han-iworterb.  dei  Bibl.  Al'-rtums,'  s.  653).


nx  INTRODUCTION   TO


early  as  the  time  of  Moses.     On  examinaf  ion,  however,  it  will  be  found  not
to  be  by  any  means  so  conclusive  as  has  been  pretended.

(1)  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  mere  fact  of  the  non-observance  of  a  law,
even  by  good  men,  does  not  necessarily  involve  the  assumption  that  the  law
was  not  then  known  or  did  not  then  exist.  This  is  only  a  conjecture,  which  the
critic  puts  forth  as  accounting  for  the  fact,  and  which  can  be  accepted  only
as  it  appears  probable.  But  on  what  does  the  alleged  probability  of  this
conjecture  rest  ?  Only  on  the  ocjunter-improbability  of  good  men  acting  as
Samuel  and  others  did  had  the  law  been  then  in  existence.  That  is  to  say,
it  is  probable  they  did  not  know  the  law  because  it  is  not  probable  that,
had  they  knovm  it,  they  would  have  neglected  it.  To  one  accustomed  to
weigh  historical  evidence,  this  cannot  but  appear  anything  but  conclusive.
Good  men  often  do  very  unexpected  things ;  and  unless  we  know  all  the
circumstances,  it  is  impossible  to  determine  beforehand  what  they  will  do
or  will  not  do  in  any  particular  case.  Even  when  all  the  circumstances
are  known,  the  chances  of  any  given  course  being  followed  are  not  such
that  a  prudent  man  will  risk  much  on  the  anticipation.

(2)  So  far  as  the  circumstances  are  known  to  us,  they  suggest  another  and

different  reason  for  the  conduct  of  the  pious  men  of  Samuel's  time  in  the

matter  referred  to  than  that  adduced  by  the  objector ;  they  make  it  highly

prubable  that  the  law  of  the  central  sanctuary  was  neglected,  not  because

it  was  unknown,  but  because  the  means  of  observing  it  were  wanting.    The

central  sanctuary  was  where  God  chose  to  put  his  Name,  and  where'  was  his

habitation  (ch.  xii.  6,  21),  and  this  was  where  the  ark  of  the  covenant  was.

There  it  was  that  God  had  engaged  to  meet  his  people,  and  there  it  was

that  his  Name  was  put  (Exod.  xxv.  22 ;  2  Sam.  vi,  2).     Now,  during  the

whole  of  Samuel's  time  and  part  of  that  of  David,  the  ark  was  in  abeyance,

nor  was  there  any  sanctuary  in  which  it  was  placed.     After  the  destrucfion

of  the  sanctuary  at  Shiloh,  the  ark  was  for  a  season  a  captive  in  the  land  of

the  Philistines,  and  when  at  length  it  was  restored,  it  was  only  to  find

temporary  accommodation  in  private  houses  and  unconsecrated  courts,  until

it  was  brought  up  by  David  to  Jerusalem.     During  all  this  time,  therefore,

there  was  no  central  sanctuary  to  which  the  worshi[iper  could  bring  his

offering,  and  consequently  no  one  place  more  legitimately  appropriate  for

this  act  of  worship  than  another.     The  alternatire  before  the  men  of  that

time  was  thus,  either  to  omit  the  offering  of  sacrifice  altogether  or  to  offer

it  at  such  places  as  were  most  convenient  and  suitable  for  such  a  service.

They  chose  the  latter;  and  in  so  doing  they  obeyed  the  earlier  and  more

general  law  (Exod.   xx.   24),  while   they  neglected  the  later  and   more

special  one — not  because  they  were  ignorant  of  the  latter,  but  because  they

had  not  the  means  of  obeying  it  (comp.  1  Kings  iii.  2).

(3)  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  law  in  Deuteronomy  appointing  the  one
place  for  sacrificial  worship  is  not  absolute  and  unconditioned.  It  is
expressly  qualified  by  the  condition  of  the  Lord's  giying  them  rest  from  all
their  enemies  routd  about  (ch.  xii.  10).    Until  this  was  done,  then,  the  l»w


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  xjuj

was  in  abeyance ;  so  that,  if  circumstances  required,  otLer  metliods  than
that  which  it  prescribed  of  observing  the  primary  and  absolutely  im-
perative ordinance  of  sacrifice  might  be  followed.  We  find,  accordingly,
that  it  was  only  as  it  was  considered  that  the  Lord  had  given  them  rest
from  their  enemies  that  it  was  deemed  fitting  to  fix  upon  a  certain  place
to  which  the  people  might  repair  as  to  the  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah,  to
present  their  worship  and  offerings.  Thus,  after  the  occupation  of  the  land
by  the  Israelites,  it  was  not  until  the  land  was  subdued  before  them,  and
the  Lord  had  given  them  rest  round  about,  that  the  congregation  of  the
children  of  Israel  assembled  at  Shiloh,  and  set  up  the  tent  of  meeting  there
(Josh,  xviii.  1  ;  xxi.  44 ;  xxii.  4).  The  rest,  however,  which  was  then
given  to  them  was  not  destined  to  be  permanent.  Times  of  unsettlement
ensued,  and  at  length  the  sanctuary  at  Shiloh  was  everted  and  the  ark  of
the  covenant  carried  away  by  hostile  invaders ;  nor  was  it  till  the  time  of
David  that  it  could  be  said  definitively  that  the  Lord  had  given  rest  to  his
people  from  all  their  enemies,  as  he  had  promised.  Then  at  length  the
occasion  had  arrived  when  a  house  might  be  built  for  the  Lord  to  dwell  in ;
and  David,  recognizing  this,  determined,  seeing  "  the  Lord  had  given  him
rest  round  about  from  all  his  enemies,"  to  build  a  house  unto  the  Name
of  the  Lord  ;  and  though  he  was  not  permitted  to  carry  this  into  effect,
because  of  the  wars  in  which  he  had  been  engaged  in  the  earlier  part  of
his  reign,  his  purpose  was  approved  of  by  God  (2  Sam.  vii.  1 ;  1  Kings
viii.  18).  The  fact  that  in  the  usages  of  the  nation  there  was  this  con-
necting of  a  time  of  rest  from  all  enemies  with  the  setting  up  of  a  fixed
place  for  the  sanctuary,  is  surely  a  strong  indication  that  the  law  of
Deuteronomy  was  all  along  known  and  respected  by  them;  and,  at  the
same  time,  we  may  see  from  this  how  it  was  that,  pending  the  arrival
of  the  promised  rest,  good  men  were  found  offering  worship  and  sacrifices
elsewhere  than  at  a  central  sanctuary.

(4)  That  the  law  of  Deuteronomy  respecting  the  offering  of  sacrifice  only
at  the  place  which  the  Lord  should  appoint  was  known  and  reverenced
from  the  earliest  times,  is  placed  beyond  doubt,  not  only  by  the  constant
references,  in  the  early  historical  books,  to  the  "  house  of  the  Lord  "  as  the
place  where  worship  and  sacrifice  were  to  be  offered,  but  especially  by  what
is  recorded  in  Josh.  xxii.  The  indignation  of  the  people  against  their
brethren  who  had  erected  an  altar  on  the  border  of  Jordan  before  they  crossed
it  to  return  to  their  own  possession  on  the  eastern  side  of  that  river ;  the
earnestness  with  which  the  latter  hastened  to  assure  the  people  that  they
had  erected  the  altar,  not  to  establish  an  independent  worship,  but  rather
that  it  might  stand  as  a  permanent  witness  that  they  still  adhered  to  and
claimed  to  have  part  in  Jehovah  as  their  God;  and  the  solemnity  with
which  they  disclaimed  any  intention  to  rebel  against  the  Lord  by  building
an  altar  for  burnt  offerings,  for  meat  offerings,  or  for  sacrifices  besides  the
altar  of  the  Lord  that  was  before  the  tabernacle; — all  incontestably  show
that  this  law  was  known  and  recognized  as  impeiative  at  the  time  of  the


INTRODUCTION  TO


settling  of  the  people  in  the  promised  land.  It  wm  this  law  which  they
who  had  built  the  altar  so  earnestly  disclaimed  having  broken  ;  it  was  zeal
for  this  law  which  stirred  the  other  tribes  to  such  wrath  against  their
brethren  when  they  supposed  it  had  been  violated  by  them.

6.  Great  stress  has  also  been  laid  on  the  fact  that  non-priestly  men,  like
Samuel,  David,  and  Solomon,  offered  sacrifices,  contrary  to  the  express  law
which  enacts  that  this  shall  be  done  only  by  the  priest  This  law  appears
only  in  the  middle  books  of  the  Pentateuch  (Lev.  L  9,  etc. ;  T.  8,  etc.) ;  but  it
is  assumed  in  Deuteronomy  as  existing,  and  the  objection  may  therefore  be
considered  here.  In  regard  to  it,  it  might  be  observed  that,  though  the  law
constitutes  the  priest  as  the  proper  presenter  of  the  sacrifice,  it  does  not
enact  that  no  other  but  a  priest  shall  at  any  time  or  under  any  circumstances
present  sacrifice.  It  was  according  to  order  that  the  priest  should  present
the  sacrifice ;  but  order  is  not  so  imperatively  binding  that  it  may  never
under  any  circumstances  be  departed  from.  If  laymen,  then,  on  special
occasions,  assumed  to  themselves  this  priestly  function,  this  does  not  prove
that  the  law  was  unknown  to  them  and  did  not  exist  in  their  day ;  it  only
shows  that  on  such  occasions  the  law  might  be  suspended  and  neglected
without  offence.  Especially  was  this  allowable  when,  by  a  special  mani-
festation, God  came  to  his  servants,  and  bo  virtually  consecrated  the  place
where  he  appeared  and  authorized  his  servants,  though  not  priests,  to  offer
sacrifice  and  worship  him ;  as  in  the  case  of  the  people  at  Bochim  (Juilg.
ii.  1—6),  of  Gideon  (Judg.  vi.  20—22,  25),  and  Manoah  (Judg.  xiii.  16—23).
In  other  cases  it  may  be  asked — Did  these  non-priestly  men  really  themselves
make  sacrifices?  It  is  said,  "  They  sacrificed  to  the  Lord,"  or  "  They  offered
sacrifices ; "  but  does  this  mean  that  with  their  own  hands  they  slew  the
victims  and  offered  the  blood  upon  the  altar  ?  Are  not  such  statements  to
be  understood  according  to  the  old  juridical  brocard,  "  Qui  facit  per  alinm
facit  per  se  " — as  simply  intimating  that  the  persons  named  presented  sacri-
fice in  the  legal  way  by  means  of  the  priest  ?  In  the  case  of  Solomon  this
must  be  the  interpretation  put  upon  the  phrase ;  for  as  that  monarch,  at  the
dedication  of  the  temple,  "  offered  unto  the  Lord  two  and  twenty  thousand
oxen,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  sheep "  (1  Kings  viii.  63),  it
would  be  monstrous  to  suppose  that  he  killed  all  these  animals  himself  and
presented  them  with  his  own  hand  on  the  altar.  Besides,  be  it  observed
that  there  was  an  offeiing  and  an  offering;  the  man  who  brought  the
sacrificial  victims  o£fered,  and  the  priest  who  presented  to  the  Lord  offered.
This  is  evident  from  the  very  teims  of  the  law  in  question  (of.  Lev.  i.  3
etc. ;  ii.  1 ;  vi.  1,  4;  oh.  xii.  14  xviii. ;  3,  4,  etc.).  We  interpret  fairly,  then,
when  we  understand  the  assertion  that  Samuel,  David,  and  others  offered
sacrifice,  as  meaning  nothing  more  than  that  they  brought  the  victims
which  were  offered  in  sacrifice  according  to  the  law.

From  this  survey  it  appears  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  contents  of  this
book  or  in  the  conduct  of  notable  individuals  in  relation  to  its  enactments
that  effectually  militates  against  the  conclusion,  so  strongly  vouched  for  by


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  xxxiil

the  general  character  of  the  book  as  well  as  by  particular  statements  in  it,
fts  to  its  being  the  writing  of  Moses.

S  6.  Relation  to  Jeremiah.

It  must  strike  every  one  who  compares  Deuteronomy  with  the  writings
ascribed  to  the  prophet  Jeremiah  that  the  author  of  the  one  book  must
have  been  very  familiar  with  the  other.  The  resemblances  between  the
two  are  numerous  and  marked.  Words  are  used  in  both  which  are  found
nowhere  else ;  passages  in  the  one  are  identical  with,  or  closely  similar  to,
passages  in  the  other ;  sentiments  prominent  in  the  one  are  prominent  also
in  the  other  ;  and,  in  general  tone  and  form  of  thought,  the  two  remarkably
resemble  each  other.

To  account  for  these  points  of  resemblance,  it  seems  sufficient  to  suppose
that  the  prophet,  from  much  familiarity  with  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy,
had  so  transported  into  his  own  mind  ts  phraseology  and  sentiments  that
these  naturally  flowed  from  his  pen  when  be  himself  began  to  write.  That
Jeremiah  would  be  well  acquainted  with  Deuteronomy  can  be  readily
believed.  As  a  priest,  the  study  of  the  Law  i;i  all  its  parts  must  have  been
his  occupation  from  his  youth  upward ;  and  called  as  he  was  to  act  as  a
reprover  and  admonisher  of  the  people  in  dark  and  disastrous  times,
Deuteronomy  would  be  the  part  of  the  Pentateuch  to  which  he  would
most  frequently  turn,  both  that  he  might  feed  his  own  mind  with  thoughts
appropriate  to  his  position,  and  thut  he  might  have  suggested  to  him  what
it  would  be  fitting  to  address  to  the  people.  In  his  time  also  the  Book  of
the  Law  was  discovered  and  drawn  from  its  obscurity  into  prominent
notice,  and  a  fresh  impulse  given  to  the  study  of  it  both  among  the  rulers
and  teachers  of  the  nation  and  through  the  community  at  large.  That
book  was  probably  the  entire  Pentateuch,  possibly  the  original  copy  placed
in  charge  of  the  priests  by  Moses,  and  which  had  been  allowed  for  many
years  to  fall  out  of  sight;  but  the  part  which  seems  to  have  excited  most
interest  and  been  most  attended  to  was  undoubtedly  Deuteronomy  (cf.
2  Kings  xxii.  13, 16, 17  and  xxii.  2 — 25  with  ch.  xxviii.  and  xxix. ;  xii.  2,  3  ;
and  xvi.,  xviii.).  This  book,  therefore,  must  have  been  constantly  before
the  mind  of  Jeremiah  during  his  ministry  in  Judfea,  and  if  so,  it  is  no
wonder  that  its  words  and  phrases  and  sentiments  should  be  found  so
frequently  recurring  in  his  writings.

To  some  it  has  appeared  that  more  than  this  is  to  be  inferred  from  the
resemblanoes  which  the  writings  of  Jeremiah  bear  to  Deuteronomy ;  and
they  have  advanced  the  opinion  that  this  book  itself  is  from  the  pen  of  the
prophet  of  Anathoth.  For  this  opinion,  however,  the  support  is  of  the
slightest.  A  number  of  words  common  to  both  writings,  a  similarity  of
phraseology,  an  occasional  identity  of  sentiment  and  mode  of  thought,  can
never  be  held  to  furnish  adequate  proof  of  an  idtntity  of  authorship,  for  it
is  always  open  to  the  inquirer  to  account  for   these  coincidences  by  a

BBUTBEONOMT.  d


xxxiT  iNTRODtJCTION  TO


presumed  acquaintance  on  the  part  of  the  later  writer  with  the  writings  of
the  earlier.  It  would  be  otherwise  were  there  a  large  number  of  words,
phrases,  and  sentiments  peculiar  to  both  writings,  i.e.  found  in  both  of  thom
but  nowhere  else.  This,  however,  is  not  the  case  with  the  writings  of
Jeremiah  and  Deuteronomy.  On  the  contrary,  a  large  number  of  words
peculiar  to  the  one  are  not  found  in  the  other,  and  in  respect  of  sentiment
also  considerable  diversity  prevails.  The  discord  between  the  two  is  thus
greater  than  the  agreement ;  go  (hat  if  the  question  of  authorship  is  to  be
determined  by  such  consideratic  ms — and  by  these  alone  is  it  proposed  to
determine  it — the  only  conclusion  to  which  we  can  come  is  thut  the  Book
of  Deuteronomy  and  the  writings  of  Jeremiah  are  not  from  the  same  author
nor  are  even  of  contemporary  authorship.'

Before  passing  from  this  part  of  the  subject,  it  is  necessary  to  advert  to
the  reproach  which  is  cast  upon  the  prophet  by  the  supposition  that  he  was
the  author  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  Whether  he  wrote  this  book  of
his  own  accord,  or,  as  has  been  suggested,  conspired  with  his  relative  Hilkiah
to  produce  it  and  give  it  forth  as  the  Book  of  the  Law  found  in  the  temple,
the  prophet  must  be  regarded  as  having  deliberately  lent  himself  to  false-
hood, to  practise  an  imposition  in  the  name  of  God  upon  the  people.  Can
this  be  believed  of  one  like  Jeremiah,  or  indeed  of  any  one  who  was  a  true
prophet  of  Jehovah?  It  has  indeed  been  said  that,  in  thut  early  age,
"  when  notions  of  literary  property  were  yet  in  their  infancy,  an  action  of
this  kind  was  not  regarded  as  unlawful.  Men  u^ed  to  perpetrate  such
fictions  as  these  without  ary  qualms  of  conscience."  "  This  may  be  true
of  the  later  times  of  ancient  literature,  when  the  making  of  books  had
become  a  source  of  livelihood,  and  was  practised  by  many  who,  not  having
power  enough  to  write  what  would  command  attention  of  itself,  used  to
send  forth  their  productions  under  the  veil  of  some  great  and  venerable
name  ;  but  of  the  early  age  of  literature  it  is  not  true,  nor  was  the  practice
at  any  time  regarded  as  laudable,'  and  least  of  all  is  it  true  in  respect  of  the
sacred  literature  of  the  Hebrews.  There  is  not  the  shadow  of  evidence
that  such  practices  were  known  among  the  Hebrews  of  the  time  of  Jeremiah
or  any  earlier  time,  and  one  can  hardly  conceive  the  possibility  of  such  a
thing  being  tolerated  among  them.  Be  this,  however,  as  it  may,  the  fact
remains  that  if  Jeremiah  wrote  this  book  and  issued  it  as  a  writing  of

'  For  the  details  bearing  on  this  question,  see  Kouig,  '  Alt-test.  Studien,'  2  Heft. ;
'The  Mosaic  Origin  of  the  Pentateuch,  considered  by  a  Layman  of  theChurcli  of  Eagland,'
pp.  179—189  ;  'Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  i.  pt.  ii.  p.  795.

'  Kuonen,  '  Koligion  of  Israel,'  ii.  18,  19.

•  Gtelen,  a  very  competent  witness,  says  that  it  was  not  till  the  age  of  the  Ptolemies,
when  kings  were  rivalling  each  other  in  the  collecting  of  libraries,  that  the  roguery
QaSttjvpyta)  of  forging  writings  and  titles  began  ;  and  this  was  done  by  those  who  hoped
thereby  to  obtain  money  by  presenting  to  the  kings  books  pretending  to  be  written  by
illustrious  men  (Galen, '  Comment,  ii.  in  Hip.  de  Nat.  Horn.').  It  is  plain  from  this  that
even  when  this  practice  was  moat  commoa  it  was  not  regarded  as  lawful ;  but,  on  tha
contrary,  was  even  among  heathens  denounced  as  a  "  roguery."


tHE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


XXIT


Moses,  he  was  guilty  of  a  forgery  and  a  falsehood  ;  and  thus  not  only  is  a
shadow  oast  over  his  character  as  a  man,  hut  his  reputation  as  a  prophet  is
damaged.  For  if  he  could  publish  as  from  Moses  what  was  not  from
Moses  but  from  himself,  what  security  is  there  that  what  he  utters  as  a
message  from  the  Lord  is  not  merely  some  invention  of  his  own  ?  To
those  who  look  upon  the  ancient  Hebrew  prophets  as  mere  litterateurs,  whc
exercised  their  craft. as  they  best  could,  according  to  the  measure  of  their
own  powers,  this  may  seem  a  very  small  matter ;  but  those  who  believe
that  the  prophet  of  old  was  one  chosen  by  God  to  be  the  medium  of
communication  between  God  and  man,  one  who  was  moved  by  the  Holy
Ghost  to  speak  what  he  uttered,  and  who  was  bound  under  the  most  solemn
sanctions  to  speak  God's  word  faithfully  to  the  people,  will  not  so  regard
it.  To  them  it  will  appear  nothing  less  than  an  impeaching  of  the  claims
of  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  prophets  to  be  an  ambassador  from  God  and
interpreter  of  his  mind  to  men,  and  by  consequence  a  detracting  from  the
authorship  of  his  writings  as  Divine,  and  not  of  his  only,  but  by  implication
of  all  the  prophetic  Scriptures.

S  6.  Inteqkity  of  the  Book.

Whilst  accepting  the  book  as,  on  the  whole,  the  writing  of  Moses,  it  may
yet  be  fairly  inquired  whether  every  part  of  it  as  we  now  have  it  proceeded
from  his  pen,  or  whether  there  may  not  be  portions  of  it  which  are  additions
to  the  original  writing,  or  interpolations  introduced  by  some  later  writer.
That  there  are  such  has  been  confidently  affirmed.

The  parts  which  have  been  thus  stigmatized  are  chiefly  these :  the  title
and  introduction  (ch.  i.  1 — 5  ;  the  ethnological  notices  (ch.  ii.  10 — 12,  20 —
23);  the  account  of  the  cities  of  refuge  on  the  east  of  Jordan  (oh.iv.  41 — 43);
Moses'  song  (ch.  zxxii.  1 — 43);  the  bles-^ing  of  the  tribes  (ch.  xxxiii.  1 — 29) ;
the  account  of  Moses'  last  journey,  death,  and  burial  (ch.  xxxiv.  1 — 12).

Regarding  the  first  of  these,  it  may  suffice  to  say  that,  though  it  is  quite
possible  that  the  title  and  introduction  may  have  been  prefixed  to  the
original  work  by  a  later  hand,  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  this  is  really
the  case ;  and  whilst,  on  the  one  hand,  there  is  no  reas<jn  why  this  may  not
have  been  written  by  the  author  of  the  work  himself,  it  is,  on  the  other,
probable  that  it  was  placed  there  by  him,  since  without  it  his  work  com-
mences so  abruptly  that  it  is  inconceivable  that  any  skilled  writer  should
have  allowed  it  to  go  forth  in  such  condition.

The  passages  containing  the  ethnographical  notices  have,  it  must  be
confessed,  very  much  the  appearance  of  being  interpolations,  and  may
possibly  be  glosses  that  have  been  introduced  by  some  editor  of  the  work
into  the  text.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  not  incredible  that  Moses  may  have
inserted,  parenthetically,  the  notices  which  these  passages  contain.  The
mention  of  the  Moabites,  to  whom  God  had  given  a  possession  by  expelling
from  the  land  its  former  occupants,  not  unnaturally  leads  to  a  description


XiiTi  INTRODUCTION  TO


of  the  nations  bo  expelled  ;  and  this  it  was  of  use  for  Mose^  to  give,  because
it  showed  the  Isiaelites  that  the  right  of  the  children  of  Lot  to  the  undis-
turbed occupancy  of  their  territory  rested  on  the  same  grounds  as  rested
the  right  of  the  Israelites  to  the  lands  they  had  taken  from  the  Amoritea,
and  as  would  rest  their  right  to  the  •occupancy  of  the  land  the  Lord  was
about  to  give  them  in  Canaan  ;  and  further,  because  it  showed  that,  if  the
children  of  Lot  could  cast  out  nations  so  migh'^y  and  powerful  as  the  Emim,
and  the  children  of  Esau  could  dispossess  the  Horim,  there  was  no  reason
to  dread  that  Israel  would  be  baiHed  in  grappling  with  the  Anakim,  who
then  possessed  Canaan  and  were  of  the  same  lace  as  the  Emim.  There  was
thus  a  practical  end  to  be  gained  by  the  insertion  of  such  notices,  if  done
by  Moses;  whereas  if  done  by  a  later  editor  they  would  possess  only  a  slight
antiquarian  interest,  hardly  suflBcient  to  induce  any  one  to  take  the  trouble
of  writing  them,  certainly  not  sufBoient  to  induce  any  judicious  editor  to
incorporate  them  with  the  text.  The  presumption,  therefore,  is  in  favour
of  their  having  been  inserted  by  Moses  himself.  A  modern  writer  would
have  thrown  them  into  a  note ;  but  as  this  method  had  not  come  into  use
in  ancient  times,  it  was  only  by  way  of  parenthesis  that  Moses  could  intro-
duce them.  Whichever  hypothesis  be  adopted,  whether  these  passages
be  regarded  as  written  by  Moses  or  whether  they  be  pronounced  to  be
the  insertions  of  a  later  writer,  as  they  are  manifestly  excrescences,  their
excision  would  not  in  any  way  affect  the  integrity  of  the  book.

The  passage,  ch.  iv.  41 — 43,  has  been  supposed  to  be  an  interpolation  on
the  ground  that  it  has  no  relevance  either  to  what  goes  befjre  or  to  what
follows.  But  were  this  the  case,  why  should  the  passage  have  been  inserted
at  all  ?  It  could  not  drop  into  this  place  by  accident ;  and  he  must  be  a
bungling  editor  indeed  who  should  gratuitously  insert  in  the  body  of
another  man's  work  a  passage  which  has  no  relation  to  the  context  in  the
midst  of  which  it  is  thrust.  If,  however,  Moses  himself  inserted  this  pas-
sage, we  may  see  at  once  why  he  did  so.  He  had  just  finished  his  first
address,  and  was  about  to  enter  upon  his  second.  An  interval  between  the
two  thus  ensued,  and  during  this  Moses,  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  injunction
(Numb.  XXXV.  6,  14),  set  apart  cities  of  refuge  in  the  district  to  the  east  of
Jordan,  recently  conquered  by  the  Israelites.  Not  improbably  (as  has
been  suggested)  he  chose  this  time  for  doing  this,  "  not  only  to  give  the
land  on  that  side  its  full  consecration  and  thoroughly  confirm  the  possession
of  the  two  Amoritish  kingdoms  on  the  other  side  of  the  Jordan,  but  also
tc  give  the  people,  in  this  punctual  observance  of  the  duty  devolving  upon
it,  an  example  for  their  imitation  in  the  conscientious  observance  of  the
commandments  of  the  Lord,  which  he  was  now  about  to  lay  before  the
nation "  (Keil).  The  passage  is,  therefore,  not  only  in  its  proper  place  as
part  of  the  historical  narrative,  but  it  has  a  close,  intimate  relevancy  to  the
main  theme  of  Moses'  admonitions  in  his  addresses  to  the  people.

The  song  or  ode  contained  in  ch.  xxxii.,  though  expressly  declared  to  have
been  composed  by  Moses,  uttered  by  him  in  the  hearing  of  the  people,  and


THE  BOOK  OF   DEUTERONOMY.


written  by  him  to  be  preserved  in  Israel  as  a  witness  against  them  slioald
they  apostatize  from  Jehovah,  has  been  adjudged  by  many  critics  to  be  the
production  of  some  unknown  writer  of  a  much  later  age.  This  judgment
is  grounded  partly  on  the  language  and  style  of  the  ode,  partly  on  certain
statements  in  it  which  it  is  alleged  contain  allusions  to  events  and  oiroum-
stances  in  the  later  history  of  Israel.

1.  It  is  alleged  that  the  style  and  tone  of  this  composition  are  so  different
from  the  style  and  tone  of  the  preceding  part  of  this  book,  that  it  cannot
be  regarded  as  proceeding  from  the  same  author.  This,  however,  is  really
saying  nothing  more  than  that  tliis  is  a  poem,  whereas  the  preceding  part  of
the  book  is  in  prose.  For  in  a  poem  the  style  of  language  and  tone  of  thought
are  necessarily  different  from  what  characterizes  prose  compositions  ;  to  the
poet  belong  "  thoughts  that  breathe  and  words  that  bum,"  and  he  is  no
poet  whose  thoughts  and  words  are  not  of  this  sort.  When,  therefore,  an
author  passes  from  simple  narrative  or  expository  and  hortatory  discourse,
to  give  utterance  to  feeling  and  sentiment  in  song,  he  of  necessity  adopts
a  style  and  mode  of  thought  more  or  less  differing  from  those  of  his  otlier
compositions,  else  his  utterance  ceases  to  be  puetry.  Now,  this  ode  is  poetry
of  a  very  high  order ;  and  to  this  its  peculiarity  of  expression  and  senti-
ment is  due,  not  to  its  being  the  production  of  another  than  the'  author  of
the  other  parts  of  this  book.

It  is  further  to  be  observed  that,  whilst  this  ode  differs  in  diction  and
cast  of  sentiment  from  the  preceding  parts  of  this  book,  as  poetry  differs
from  prose,  there  is  nothing  in  it  alien  from  or  contradictory  of  the  senti-
ments and  utterances  of  Moses  in  his  addresses  to  the  people,  reported  in
the  preceding  parts  of  this  book.  On  the  contrary,  there  are  not  a  few
coincidences  both  in  thought  and  expression  which  may  well  be  regarded
■8  pro  tanto  proofs  of  an  identity  of  authorship  in  this  and  the  other  parts
of  this  book  (see  Keil, '  Biblical  Commentary,'  vol.  iii.  p.  466).

Worthy  of  notice  also  are  the  coincidences  between  this  ode  and  Ps.  xc,
a  composition  admittedly  of  great  antiquity,  and  which  is  with  much
probability  attributed  to  Moses  as  its  author  (see  Ewald,  '  Die  Dichter  des
Alt.  Bundes,'  Bd.  i.  Th.  ii.  s.  31  ;  Hengstenberg,  'Die  Psalmen,'  Bd.  iii.
8.  529 ;  Bleek,  'Einleit  in.  d.  A.  T.,'  s.  615,  English  translation,  ii.  p.  234).
Both  in  mode  of  expression  and  in  cast  of  sentiment  the  two  odes  resemble
each  other  (comp.  ch.  xxxii.  7,  18,  4, 36,  with  Ps.  xc.  1,  15, 13, 16),  and  thus
favour  the  supposition  that  both  have  proceeded  from  one  author.

2.  It  is  urged  that  this  ,8ong  is  so  constructed  that  the  Divine  guidance
of  Israel  (ver.  12,  etc.)  and  their  ingratitude  (ver.  15,  etc.)  are  referred  to  ai
things  already  past.  But  this  ignores  the  prophetic  character  of  the  song,
and  mistakes  the  style  of  prophetic  utterance.  Moses  was  a  prophet ;  and
the  prophets,  or  seers,  not  only  looked  to  the  future,  but  beheld  it  as  present;
and  the  energy  of  their  perception  of  it  stamped  itself  on  their  words  so
that  they  very  frequently  represent  as  actually  before  them  or  as  already
done  what  in  reality  was  yet  future.     So  familiar  is  thia  usage  that  gram-


ixiTiil  INTROtotCTIOif  f6


marians  have  recognized  "  the  prophetic  perfect "  as  an  idiom  of  the  Hebrew.
Nor  is  it  in  prophecy  alone  that  this  presentation  of  the  future  as  actual
is  to  be  found ;  the  poet  also  claims  liberty  to  do  the  same,  and  exorcises
it  freely.  Even  if  Moses,  then,  be  regarded  as  only  an  uninspired  poet,  the
use  of  the  preterite  in  the  passages  referred  to  may  be  accounted  for  without
supposing  that  the  song  is  the  production  of  a  later  writer.

3.  The  occurrence  of  Aramaic  words  and  forms  in  the  song  has  been
alleged  as  an  evidence  of  its  late  composition.  That  a  few  such  are  to
be  found  may  be  admitted,  though  there  are  fewer  than  has  sometimes  been
insinuated;  but  be  their  number  what  it  may,  their  presence  proves  nothing
as  to  the  lateness  of  composition,  or  it  proves  too  much;  for  as  the  presence
of  Aramaisms  in  a  book  is  a  sign  of  either  very  early  or  very  late  composi-
tion (cf.  Konig,  *  Alt-test.  Studien,'  ii.  8),  if  the  early  date  of  this  song  be
denied,  these  Aramaisms  would  go  to  show  that  it  must  have  been  written
in  the  latest  age  of  atjcient  Hebrew  literature.  Thi-*,  however,  no  one  will
accept ;  the  latest  date  supposed  for  it  by  any  of  those  who  refuse  to  regard
it  as  Mosaic  is  the  age  immediately  succeeding  the  revolt  of  Jeroboam.
These  Aiaraaisms,  then,  so  far  as  they  have  any  weight,  point  to  an  eaily
age  for  the  composition  of  this  song ;  and  so  fall  in  with  the  supposition
that  it  was  written  by  Moses.

4,  The  song,  it  is  alleged,  contains  allusions  to  a  state  of  things  which
did  not  arise  till  the  time  of  the  kings  after  the  revolt  of  Jeroboam  ;  it
dwells  upon  the  falling  away  of  Israel  from  allegiance  to  Jehovah,  upon
the  evils  of  this,  and  upon  the  hope  of  a  lestoration  to  forfeited  privileges
when  the  Lord  should  remember  his  covenant  with  Israel  and  be  "merciful
to  his  land  and  to  his  people ;  "  and  such  it  is  supposed  could  be  the  theme
of  a  poet  only  after  he  had  witnessed  a  state  of  religious  degeneracy  and
political  disorder  such  as  emerged  in  Israel  after  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes.
It  is  to  bo  observed,  however,  that  the  language  of  the  song  is  in  this  respect
quite  general ;  there  is  no  part  of  the  description  which  indicates  a  reference
to  the  condition  of  the  people  at  any  special  time  during  the  decline  of  the
Israelitish  kingdom ;  nor  is  the  apostacy  of  the  people,  with  its  melancholy
results,  more  pointedly  alluded  to  here  than  it  is  in  other  parts  of  Deute-
ronomy, as  for  instance  in  ch.  xxviii.  The  truth  is,  that  the  possibility  of
this  and  the  dioad  of  it  presf-ed  continually  on  the  mind  of  Moses  at  this
time,  and  breaks  forth  throughout  his  farewell  addiesses;  and  if  here  his
language  becomes  more  animated  and  his  delineation  more  vivid,  it  is  only
because  there  is  here  the  impassioned  utterance  of  the  poet,  whilst  in  his
addresses  he  restrains  himself  within  limits  befitting  hortatory  address.

But  even  supposing  it  could  be  shown  that  in  this  ode  there  are  references
to  things  which  actually  occurred  in  the  history  of  the  nation  at  a  later
period,  it  would  not  follow  that  the  song  could  not  have  been  written  by
Moses.  For  we  must  not  ignore  the  prophetic  character  of  the  song.
Moses  was  a  prophet — a  piophet  of  the  highest  order,  the  very  type  and
paradigm  of  a  prophet  (ch.  xviii.  18),  and  he  here  speaks  as  one  on  whom


THE  BOOK;  OV  DEUTBRONOMlf.  xxxlx

the  proplietic  afflatus  bad  fallen,  and  whose  mental  eye  had  been  opened  bo
that  he  saw  in  vision  scenes  and  events  yet  future  as  if  they  were  actually
piesent.  The  standpoint,  therefore,  of  the  poet  is  not  his  own  time,  but  a
time  into  which  he  is  transported ;  and  the  people  to  whom  he  speaks  are
not  his  own  contemporaries,  but  those  whom  he  sees  in  vision — Israel  in  the
after-time.  This  is  characteiistio  of  all  prophetic  utterances ;  the  prophet
speaks  of  what  is  yet  future  as  if  the  whole  were  before  his  eyes  at  the
time.  The  assertion,  therefore,  "  that  the  entire  ode  moves  within  the
epuch  of  the  kings  who  lived  many  centuries  after  the  time  of  Mose.s,  rests
upon  a  total  misapprehension  of  the  nature  of  prophecy,  and  a  mistaken
attempt  to  turn  figurative  language  into  prosaic  history  "  (Keil).

It  may,  indeed,  be  affirmed  that  such  a  thing  as  a  presentation  to  the
inner  sense  of  the  prophet  of  things  yet  future  is  an  impossibility  ;  but  this
is  a  more  dogmatic  assumption,  which  not  only  cannot  be  proved,  but  which
is  made  in  the  face  of  facts  that  are  incontestable.  Now,  if  it  was  possible
for  Moses  under  the  hand  of  the  Lord  to  see  the  future,  to  have  a  vision  of
the  nation  falling  away  from  the  Lord  and  suffering  under  calamities  which
their  apostacy  had  brought  upon  them,  what  more  natural,  what  more
fitting  than  that,  ere  he  finally  retired  from  the  post  he  had  so  long
occupied  as  their  leader,  teacher,  and  ruler,  he  should  sound  in  their  ears  a
loud  note  of  warning  such  as  this  ode  contains,  and  should  leave  the  ode
with  them  as  a  perpetual  protest  against  their  unfaithrulnesa,  and  an
enduring  witness  for  God  amongst  them?

The  genuineness  of  ch.  xxxiii.,  containing  the  blessing  of  the_  tribes,  has
been  called  in  question  on  very  much  the  same  grounds  as  those  on  which
the  song  of  Moses,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  has  been  assailed.  It  is  needless
to  repeat  what  has  been  already  advanced  in  reply  to  the  arguments  founded
on  peculiarity  of  style,  diction,  and  general  literary  character  in  this  com-
position as  compared  with  the  prosaic  parts  of  this  book.  But  this  chapter
has  more  the  appearance  of  a  mere  appendix  to  the  book  than  the  song  has ;
it  is  not  said  to  have  been  written  by  Moses,  as  the  song  is  said  to  have  been
written  by  him ;  and  it  appears  with  a  heading  which  must  be  ascribed  to
the  pen  of  another  than  Moses,  for,  by  describing  Moses  as  "  the  man  of
God,"  the  author  of  this  heading  clearly  distinguishes  himself  from  Moses,
and  applies  to  him  a  phrase  by  which,  apparently,  it  was  customary  at  a
later  period  to  designate  him  (comp.  Josh.  xiv.  6 ;  Ps.  xc.  1).  This  makes
it  necessary  that  we  should  see  whether  in  the  contents  of  this  poem  there
is,  as  alleged  by  many  modern  critics,  anything  incompatible  with  the  sup-
position that  it  was  composed  and  uttered  by  Moses.

1.  The  allusions  to  the  localities  of  some  of  the  tribes  in  Canaan  indicate,
it  is  said,  an  acquaintance  with  a  state  of  things  which  did  not  exist  till
after  the  division  of  the  land  by  Joshua,  and  a  knowledge  of  the  country
such  as  Moses  could  not  have  possessed.  Thus  it  is  said  of  Zebulun,  "  They
shall  suck  of  the  abundance  of  the  seas,  and  of  treasures  hid  in  the  sand  "
(ver.  19) ;  of  Naphtali,  that  they  should  "  possess  the  west  and  the  south  "


INTEODUCTION  TO


(ver.  23)  ;  and  of  Asher,  that  h.e  should  "  dip  his  foot  in  oil,"  and  that  hii
"  shoes  should  be  iron  and  brass "  (vers.  24,  25).  It  must  be  allowed,
however,  that  these  descriptions  are  far  from  precise,  and  indicate  nothing
bej'ond  a  very  general  acquaintance  with  the  form  of  the  country  as  a
whole,  and  the  character  of  the  district  assigned  to  each  of  these  tribes.
Now,  not  to  mention  that  Moses  might  have  visited  Canaan  while  a  shepherd
in  the  desert,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  he  would  be  so  long  on  the  confines
of  Canaan,  and  where  he  would  come  into  intercourse  with  many  who  had
explored  that  country  from  end  to  end,  without  making  himself  acquainted
with  it  so  far  at  least  as  the  general  topography  of  it  was  concerned,  along
with  the  natural  peculiarities  of  its  different  districts.  And  as  the  division
of  the  land  and  the  location  of  the  different  tribes  had  been  already  arranged
(Numb,  xxxiv.),  it  required  no  great  intelligence  on  the  part  of  Moses  to
foretell  to  Zebulun  that  he  should  draw  wealth  from  the  sea  on  the  borders
of  which  he  was  to  be  located,  or  to  assign  to  Naphtali  that  he  should
possess  a  district  fanned  by  the  sea-breeze  and  turned  to  the  genial  south,  or
to  announce  to  Ather  that  his  should  be  rich  and  fertile  soil  and  that  his
dwelling  should  be  strong  and  secure  (see  the  notes  on  these  passages  in  the
Exposition).  Even,  then,  if  we  look  on  Moses  as  simply  a  man  of  superior
intelligence,  and  take  no  account  of  him  as  a  prophet,  there  seems  no  reason
in  what  these  verses  contain  for  our  concluding  that  they  could  not  have
been  uttered  by  him.

2.  It  is  alleged  that  in  ver.  5  there  is  reference  to  a  monarchical  form  of
government  as  existing  when  this  poem  was  composed.  But  this  rests  on
an  entire  misconception  of  what  this  verse  states.  The  king  there  spoken
of  is  not  one  of  the  kings  of  Judah  or  Israel,  neither  is  he  Moses  himself,
but  Jehovah,  the  true  King  of  Israel  from  the  first  (see  note).

3.  Ver.  7  is  alleged  to  contain  a  reference  to  the  division  caused  by  the
secession  of  the  ten  tribes,  and  an  aspiration  for  a  reunion  of  the  whole
under  the  sceptre  of  Judah.  This,  however,  rests  on  what  is  a  misinterpre-
tation of  the  verse.  There  is  nothing  here  about  the  divisions  of  Israel,  or
about  the  sorrow  of  Judah  over  these  and  Judah's  desire  that  they  might
be  healed.  The  verse  simply  expresses  a  wish  that  Judah  may  ever  have  a
safe  and  jubilant  return  from  conflict,  that  he  may  always  have  strength  to
defend  himself,  and  may  obtain  help  from  Jehovah  against  all  his  enemies
whoever  they  might  be.  Such  a  wish  might  be  uttered  at  any  time;  it  is
in  fact,  correlative  to  what  Jacob  predicted  long  before  concerning  Judah's
leadership  of  his  brethren  and  successes  in  war  (Gen.  xlix.  8,  9),  and  no
more  refers  to  the  peculiar  state  of  things  in  Israel  at  any  subsequent
period  of  its  history  than  does  the  utterance  of  the  patriarch.  It  is,  besides
absurd  to  take  the  words, "  bring  him  unto  hia  people,"  as  equivalent  to
"  bring  his  people  back  to  him."

4.  "  The  contents  of  most  of  the  utterances,  and  especially  the  conclusion
ofthe  whole  ode  (vers.  26 — 29),  make  it  indubitable  that  it  was  composed  at
a  time  when  the  people  of  Israel,  including  the  ten  tribes,  were  on  the  whole


THE  BOOK   OF  DEUTERONOMY


in  a  happy  condition."  "  The  original  composition  of  this  ode  appears,  as
is  most  probable,  to  have  been  made  in  the  period  between  the  death  of
Solomon  and  the  beginning  of  the  Assyrian  Exile,  most  probably  in
800  B.C.,  when  both  kingdoms  were  governed  by  strong  and  powerful
kings,  Israel  by  Jeroboam  II.  and  Judah  by  Uzziah."  So  Bleek  ('  Einleit,'
B.  305),  following  here  the  leadership  of  Graf  against  his  own  earlier  opinion
that  this  ode  is  older  than  the  blessing  of  Jacob.  Ewald's  view  is  that  it
was  written  about  the  time  of  Josiah ;  whilst  Hoifmann  and  Maurer  bring  it
down  to  the  date  of  the  Exile.  It  may  suffice  here  to  cite,  in  opposition  to
the  view  of  these  critics,  the  words  of  Knobel,  who,  no  less  than  they,  main-
tains the  late  origin  of  this  poem :  "  There  is  no  trace  here  of  allusion  to
national  misfortunes  which  befell  the  Hebrews  in  the  Syrian,  Assyrian,  and
Chaldean  periods.  The  political  no  less  than  the  religious  condition  of  the
people  was  satisfactory ;  at  least,  the  author  does  not  even  remotely  refer
to  any  religious  indecencies  such  as  are  so  strongly  denounced  in  ch.  xxxiii. ;
rather  does  he  commend  Zebulun  and  Issachar  for  bringing  sacrifices  of
righteousness '  (ver.  19).  All  this  forbids  the  placing  of  this  ode  in  the  time
of  the  Exile  (Hoffmann ;  Gesenius,  '  De  Fentat.  Samar.,'  p.  7),  or  in  the  time
of  Josiah  (Ewald,  '  Gesch.  Isr.,'  i.  171),  or  in  that  of  the  second  Jeroboam
(Graf),  or  indefinitely  in  the  period  of  the  two  kingdoms  (Von  Lengerke,
'  Kenaau,'  i.  s.  cxix.  f.);  it  belongs  to  a  much  earlier  time,  though  it  did
not,  as  the  older  critics  thought,  originate  in  that  of  Moses ;  ...  it
declares  itself  to  be  of  the  time  when  David  was  a  fugitive  from  Saul"
('  Erklarung,'  s.  339).  This  opinion  of  Knobel  is  just  as  arbitrary  as  any
of  those  which  he  condemns ;  for  none  of  them  does  the  text  give  any  reiil
authority.  Knobel's  "  own  arguments,"  as  has  been  justly  observed,  "  ought
in  consistency  to  have  carried  him  further,  and  led  him  to  place  it  much
earlier.  Tor  it  is  impossible  to  explain  how  the  disasters,  apostacies,  and
confusion  of  the  latter  part  of  Saul's  reign,  and  still  more  those  of  the  times
of  the  judges,  could  have  happened  at  a  date  not  long  before  that,  in  which
the  song  was  penned"  ('Speaker's  Commentary,'  vol.  i.  pt.  ii.  p.  926).
It  may  be  added  that  the  differences  of  these  critics  as  to  the  probable  date
of  this  poem  suflSciently  show  the  insecurity  of  the  data  on  which  their  con-
clusions rest ;  for  unless  the  historical  events  and  actual  facts  supposed  to
be  alluded  to  in  a  poem  are  so  described  as  not  to  be  mistakable,  it  cannot
be  known  that  tbere  are  any.such  allusions  in  the  piece  at  all.

There  seems  no  substantial  reason,  then,  for  doubting  or  questioning  the
genuineness  of  this  sacred  poem.  Wbether  Moses  wrote  it  or  not,  he  must
be  accredited  with  the  authorship  of  it ;  and  if  he  was  the  author  of  it,  he
probably  also  committed  it  to  writing — else  how  could  it  have  been
preserved  ?

That  the  concluding  chapter  of  the  book  is  not  from  the  pen  of  Moses,  but
is  the  production  of  a  later  age,  is  so  evident  from  the  contents  of  the
chapter,  that  do  one  now  thinks  of  disputing  it.  I'hilo,  indeed  ('  De  Vita
Mosis '  iii.  S  29),  and  Josepbus  ('  Antiq.,'  iv.  8,  48)  do  not  hesitate  to  ascriba


xlii  INTKODUOTION   TO


it  to  Moses,  who  they  think  was  enahled  to  narrate  his  own  death  and  bnrial
by  Divine  inspiration ;  and  in  this  they  have  been  followed  by  not  a  few
of  a  former  age.  In  the  Talmud,  Joshua  is  said  to  be  the  author  of
this  chapter,  which  he  appended  to  the  writing  of  Moses  after  his  death
('  Baba  Bathra,'  fol.  14,  2)  ;  and  this  also  has  been  extensively  accepted.  The
whole  cliapter,  however,  cannot  have  been  written  by  Joshua,  for  the  state-
ment in  ver.  6,  "  No  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre  unto  this  day,"  and  the
declaration  in  ver.  10,  that  "  There  arose  not  a  prophet  since  in  Israel  like
unto  Moses,"  evidently  proceed  from  a  much  later  age  than  that  of  Joshua.
The  whole  chapter  may  have  been  written  and  appended  to  the  original
writing  of  Moses  by  Ezra,  who  was  "  a  ready  scribe  in  the  Law  of  Moses,
which  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  given"  (Ezra  vii.  6),  and  of  whom
Jewish  tradition  attests  that  "  the  Thorah  was  foigotten  by  the  Israelites
until  Ezra  went  up  from  Babylon  and  re-established  it"  ('Succa,'  20a),

As  a  whole,  then,  with  one  acknowledged  and  one  or  two  possible  but
slight  exceptions,  this  book  may  be  pronounced  the  genuine  production  of
the  great  leader  and  legislator  of  Israel.


{  7.  Analysis  of  the  Book.

Title  and  Intboduction.    Ch.  i.  1 — 5.

1.  First  ob  Introdtjctoey  Address.    Ch,  i,  6 — iv.  AO.

The  new  beginning  and  review  of  the  journeyings  of  Israel  from  Eadesh  to

the  river  Arnon,  the  frontier  of  the  Amorites.     Ch.  ii.  1 — -3.
First  war  of  conquest.    Ch.  ii.  24 — iii.  17.
Conclusion  of  historical  recapitulation.     Ch.  iii,  18 — 20.
Joshua  appointed  Moses'  successor.     Ch.  iii.  21 — 29.
Admonitions  and  exhortations.     Ch.  iv.  1 — 40.
Appointment  of  three  cities  of  refuge  beyond  Jordan.    Ch,  It,  41^43.

IL  Second  Address  of  Moses.    Ch.  iv.  44 — xxvi.  19,
Introduction.     Ch,  iv,  44 — 49.
The  Decalogue  the  basis  of  the  covenant,  the  essence  of  the  whole  Law,  and

the  condition  of  life  and  felicity.     Ch.  v.  1 — 33.
First  and  great  commandment,     Ch.  vi.  1 — 25.
Kntire  separation  from  idolatry.     Ch.  vii.  1 — 26,
Exhortations  to  obedience  enforced  by  a  review  of  God's  dealings  with  Israel

in  the  wilderness.     Ch.  viii.  1 — 20,
Dissuasives  from  self-righteousness.     Ch.  ix.  1 — 29,
Renewed  exhortations  to  obedience,     Ch.  x.  1 — xi.  33.
Announcement  of  particular  statutes  and  rights.     Ch.  iii.  1 — xxvi,  19.

in.  Third  Address  op  Moseb,    Ch,  xxvii,  1 — xxviii.  08,

The  Law  to  be  inscribed  on  stones,  an  altar  to  be  built,  and  the  blessing  and

curse  to  be  uttered  on  Gerizim  and  on  Ebal  when  Canaan  was  occupied  by

the  Israelites.     Ch,  xxvii,  1 — 13.
Curses  and  blessings  pronounced,  judgments  threatened  In  case  of  disobedience.

Ch.  xxvii.  14 — xxviii,  68,

IV,  Renewal  of  the  Covenant  in  the  Plains  of  Moab,  and  Exhobtation  to
KEEP  it,    Ch.  xxix.  1 — XXX.  20.

V.  Exhortation  to  the  People  and  to  Joshua  ;  Delivery  of  the  Law  to  thk
Priests ;  Moses  commanded  to  Compose  a  Bono;  Cbabob  to  Joshua,
Ch,  xxxi.  1—30,


'lUE   BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  xMli

VI  Bono  of  Moses.    Ch.  xxxii.  1 — 43.

Moses'  last  words.    Ch.  szxii.  44 — 62.

VIL  Benediction  of  Moses.    Ch.  xxxiii.  1 — 29.

VIII.  Dkath,  Burial,  and  ENCOMinM  of  Mosbs.    Ch.  xxxiv.  1    21.

5  8.  Literature.

Histoiuco-Cbitical.  Carpzov,  '  Introductio  ad  Libros  Canonicos,  V.  T.  Omnes '
(Lips.,  1741);  Eiohhorn,  'Eitileitung  in  das  A.  T.'  (5  Bde.,  Gottingen,  1820—24);
Jahn,  '  Einleit.  in  die  Gottlicher  Biicher  des  Alt.  Bundes '  (Wiesn,  1803) ;  Auijusti
•  Grundriss,  Eincr  Hist.-Krit.  Einleit.  ins  A.  T. '  (Leipzig,  1827) ;  De  Wette,  '  Lelirbuch
der  Hist.-Krit.  Einleit.  in  die  Kanon.  und  Apokryph.  Biicher  des  A.  B.'  (Leipzig,  1840) ;
Havernick,  'Handbuoh  der  Hist.-Krit.  Einleit.  in  das  A.  T.'  (Erlangen,  1836);  'Intro-
duction to  the  Pentateuch '  (translated  by  Thomson,  Edinburgh,  1850) ;  Hengsteiiberg,
'  Die  Authentic  (ies  Pentateuches  '  (Berlin,  1836 — 39) ;  '  Genuineness  of  the  Peuta-
teuch'  (translated  by  Ryland,  Edinburgh,  1847);  Keil,  'Lehrbuch  der  Hist.-Krit.
Einleit.  in  die  Kanon.  Schriften  des  A.  T.'  (Erlangen,  1853,  translated  by  Douglis,
2  vols.,  Edinburgh,  1869);  Bloek, '  fiinleit.  in  d.  A.  T.'  (Berlin,  1860;  translated  by
Venables, 2  vols.,  London,  1875) ;  Riehm, 'Die  Gesetzgebung  Mosis  im  Lando  Moab'
(1854);  Davidson,  'Introduction  to  the  Old  Testament'  (3  vols.,  London,  1862);
Colanso,  '  The  Pentateuch  and  Book  of  Joshua  critically  examined '  (1862) ;  '  The
M^taic  Origin  of  the  Pentateuch  considered'  (by  a  Layman,  London,  1864);  Kuenen,
'  Religion  of  Israel '  (2  vols.) ;  Vaihinger,  Art.  "  Pentateuch  "  (in  Herzog's  '  Encj  clo-
p»dia,'  Bde.  xi.);  Curtiss,  'The  Levitical  Priests :  A  Contribution  to  the  Criticism  of
the  Pentateuch '  (Edinburgh,  1877)  ;  Wellhausen,  '  Geschichte  Israels '  (Bde.  i.,  Berlin,
1878) ;  Robertson  Smith,  '  The  Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish  Church '  (Edinburgh,
(1881)  ;  •  Deuteronomy  the  People's  Book.'

Expository.  Besides  the  general  commentaries,  in  all  of  which  expositions'  of
Deuteronomy  are  to  be  found,  the  following  more  special  treatises  may  be  enume-
rated:— Calvin,  'Commentarii  in  Quatuor  Ileliq.  Mosis  Libros  in  Formam  Harmoi/ite
D-gest.'  ap.  Opp.  Omnia  (tom.  i.  edit.  Amsterdam,  1771);  Gerhard,  'Coram,  super
Beuteronom.'  (Jena,  1657);  Ainsworth,  'Annotations  on  the  Five.  Books  of  Moses,
the  Psalms,  and  the  Song  of  Solomon '.  (fol.,  London,  1639,  2  vols.  8vo,  Glasgow,
1843);  Bosenmiiller,  'Scholia  in  Pentateuchum  in  Compendium  Redacta'  (Lips.,
lo28) ;  Baumgarten, '  Theologischer  Commentar.  zum  Pentateuch '  (Kiel,  1843, 18  i4) ;
Schultz,  '  Das  Deuteronomium '  (Berlin,  1859) ;  Knobel,  '  Die  Biicher  Numeri,
Deutenonom.  und  Josua  erklart'  (Leipzig,  1861);  Vitringa, '  Commentarius  in  Carmen
Mosis  cum  Prolegomenis '  (Harlingen,  1734) ;  Dathe,  '  Dissertatio  in  Canticum  Mosis  in
Opuscc.  ad  Crisin.  et  Interpretationem  Vet.  Test.  Spectantia'  (p.  197,  Lips.,  1796);
Ewald,  'Das  Grosse  Lied'  (in  'Jahrb.  d.  Bibl.  Wissenschaft '),  1S57;  Kamphausen,
'Dm  Lied  Mosis'  (Leipzig,  1862);  Hoffmann,  'Comment,  in  Mosis  Benedictionem'
On  Kml's  •  A  n»l«kt«n '  iv,  2,  Jena,  1823) ;  Graf,  •  Der  Segen  Mosis '  (Leipzig,  1857).


THB


BOOK    OF  DEUTEROXOMT.


TITLE  AND  INTRODUCTION,
CHAPTER  L  1—6.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  I


Vew.  1 — 9. — In  these  verses  wehaTetheln-
sertption  and  general  introduction  to  the  book,
announcing  the  contents  of  the  book,  the
author  of  it,  the  parties  whom  he  addressed,
and  the  time  and  place  of  his  addresses.

Ver.  1. — ^Ihese  be  the  words.  Some  would
lender  here  "Snch  are  the  words,"  and
understand  the  expression  as  referring  to
the  preceding  books.  But  it  seems  more
natural  to  refer  it  to  what  follows — to  the
addresses  in  thi^t  book.  The  pronoun  these
(n^S)  may  be  used  with  a  prospective  refer-
ence, as  well  as  with  a  retrospective  (of.  e.g.
Gen.  il.  4;  vi.  9).  The  author  does  not  by
this  connect  this  book  with  the  preceding,
but  ratlier  distinguishes  it.  The  subscrip-
tion to  Numbers  (xzxvi.  13)  indicates  that
what  precedes  is  occupied  oliiefly  with  what
God  spake  to  Moses;  the  inscription  here
intimates  tliat  what  follows  is  what  Hoses
spake  to  the  people.  This  is  the  cha-
racteristic of  Deuteronomy.  TTnto  all  Israel.
It  cannot  be  supposed  that  Moses  spoke  to
the  whole  multitude  of  the  people  so  as  to
be  heard  by  them.  Hence  the  Jewish  inter-
preters say  that  he  spoke  to  the  elders  of  the
people,  who  carried  his  words  to  the  people
at  large.  This  is  just;  for  what  was  thus
medi.itely  communicated  to  the  people  might
be  fairly  described  as  spoken  to  them ;  and
we  find  from  other  passag'S  in  the  Pentateuch
that  the  phrase,  "  the  elders  of  Israel,"  in

DEUTERONOMY.


the  mind  of  the  writer,  was  equivalent  to
"the  congregation  of  Israel"  (com p.  e.g.
Exod.  xii.  3  with  ver.  21 ;  Lev.  ix.  1  with
ver.  5)._  But  through  whatever  medium  con-
veyed, it  was  to  the  people  that  these  words
were  addressed ;  this  is  emphatically  a  book
for  the  people.  On  this  side  Jordan.  This
ahould  be  On  the  other  side  or  heyond  Jordan,
and  so  also  in  ver.  5,  as  in  eh.  iii.  20,  25.
The  word  here  used  (nag)  means  properly
something  beyond,  over,  or  across,  and  in-
dicates that  which,  to  the  speaker,  lies  on
the  other  side  of  some  line  or  limit.  When
coupled  with  "the  Jordan,"  it  usually  iadi-
oates  the  region  to  the  east  of  that  river ;
only  in  one  or  two  instances,  where  the
speaker  takes  his  standpoint  on  the  east  of
the  river,  does  it  designate  the  regions  to
the  west  of  Jordan  (ch.  iii.  25 ;  xi.  30)  The
phrase  "beyond  Jordan"  seems  to  have
been  the  established  designation  of  the
region  east  of  the  Jordan  (cf.  Ezia  iv.  10,
and  Canon  Bawlinson'a  note  there).  It  is
this,  unquestionably,  which  is  here  so  de-
signated, as  what  follows  expressly  shows.
The  wilderness.  This  term  ia  used  of  any
extensive  district  not  occupied  by  inhabi-
tants or  anbjected  to  culture ;  hence  of  vast
prairies  or  pasture-lands,  as  well  as  of  places
properly  desert  and  desolate.  It  here  de-
notes the  grassy  plains  or  downs  on  the  east
and  south-east  of  the  Jordan,  in  the  land  of
Moab  (ver.  5).  In  the  plain ;  in  the  'Ar^bah.
This  is  properly  the  whole  of  that  remarkable
depression  which  stretchei  from  the  aouroe


TUK  BOOK  Oil'  DEUTERONOMY.


[OH.  1. 1—18,


of  the  Jorclan  on  to  Akftbab,  or  the  Allanitis
Gulf;  but  here  it  is  only  that  port  of  it
which  extends  from  the  south  end  of  the
Dead  Sea  to  Ailah  (oh.  ii.  8).  This  part
still  bears  the  name  of  the  'Ar&bah,  the
niirthem  part  being  known  as  the  Gh6r
(Smith's  'Dictionary,'  vol.  i  p.  87;  Kitto's
'  Cyolopsedia,'  vol.  i.  p.  178).  Over  against
the  Bed  sea.  The  name  by  which  the  Ked
Sea  is  elsewhere  designated  is  Tam-euph
(cjiD-DJ) ;  here  only  the  latter  word  occurs,
and  this  has  led  some  to  doubt  if  the  Bed
Sea  be  here  intended.  Patrick,  Bosen-
miiller,  and  others  suggest  that  8uph  de-
notes some  place  in  that  region,  probably
Suphah  (Numb.  xxL  14,  margin,  Authorized
Version),  so  called  because  lying  at  its  ex-
tremity, as  the  verb  suph,  from  which  it
comes,  means,  to  come  to  an  end ;  but
it  ii  not  certain  that  Suphah  designates  a
pikoe  in  Nnmb.  xxi.  11.  The  Hebrew  word
iiaiD  means  a  tempest  or  whiilwind ;  and  this
meaning  may  be  assumed  here,  as  it  is  by
Gesenius,  Keil,  and  others:  "  Waheb  [he  con-
quered] in  a  storm."  Knobel  suggests  that
probably  the  pass  now  called  Es  Suf&h,  on
the  north  side  of  the  Wady  Murreh — the
Maaleh-acrabbim  (Scorpion-ascent)  of  Josh.
XV.  3 — is  meant;  others  have  suggested
Zephath  (Judg.  i.  17;  comp.  Numb.  xiv.
4S),  and  others  Znph  (1  Sam.  ix.  5).  It  is
probable,  however,  that  Suph  is  here  merely
a  breviloquenoe  for  Tam-suph,  the  Bed  Sea ;
and  BO  all  the  ancient  versions  take  it.  The
iil<  ntification  of  the  Tam-euph  of  the  Old
Testament  with  the  ipvOpii  eiXaatra  of  the
Greeks,  the  mare  erylhraium,  or  rubrum,  of
the  Latins,  is  due  to  the  LXX.,  which  other
versions  have  followed.  The  identification
is  undoubtedly  correct  (cf.  Numb,  xxxiii.
10  and  1  King^  ix.  26).  Yam-euph,  indeed,
means  simply  sea  of  weeds,  and  might  be
the  name  of  any  sea  in  which  algse  are
found;  but  these  passages  clearly  prove
that  by  this  the  Hebrews  designated  the
Bed  Sea.  At  what  part  of  this  sea  the
Israelites  crossed,  and  the  hosts  of  Pharaoh
were  submerged,  is  and  must  remain  uncer-
tain, because  we  know  not  what  was  the
condition  of  the  Isthmus  of  Suez  at  the
time  of  the  Exodus.  It  is  probable  it  was
not  at  any  part  of  what  is  now  known  as
the  Bed  Sea  or  Gulf  of  Suez.  Brugsch  Bey
places  it  at  that —

"  Serbonian  bog
Betwixt  Damiata  and  mount  Casius  old,
Where  armies  whole  have  sunk."

(Milton,  'Pajadise  Lost,'  Bk.  ii.  592.)

But  this  has  not  been  accepted  by  scholars
generally  (see  Edinburgh  Review,  No.  307 ;
Bonder's  '  Handbook  to  the  Bible,'  p  247 ;
Quarterly  Statement  of  the  Palestine  Explo-
ration Fund,  July  and  October,  1880).    It


seems  probable  that  originally  only  a  marshy
district  lay  between  the  Gulf  of  Suez  and
the  Mediterranean ;  and  somewhere  in  this
probably  the  passage  of  the  Israelites  and
the  drowning  of  the  Egyptians   occurred.
Between  Faran,  and  Tophel,  etc.   This  serves
more  fully  and  particularly  to  indicate  the
locality  here  intended ;  but  the  details  pre-
sent considerable  difficulty.    Taken  in  con  ■
nection  with  the  words  "over  against  the  Bed
sea,"  the  names   here  given   can   only  be
regarded  as  intended  more  precisely  to  indi-
cate the  region  in  which  the  Israelites  had
been  during  the  forty  years  of  their  wander- '
ing.     Pdran:    this    is    the    name   of   the
wilderness  bordering  on  Idumea,  where  the
Israelites  encamped  (Numb.  x.  12;  xii.  16);
the  place  of  their  encampment  being  Kadesh,
in  the  wilderness  of  Zin  (Numb.  xiii.  21,
26),  which  was   the   eastern   part  of   the
wilderness  of  P^ran,  hod.  Wady  Murreh.
The   wilderness  of   P&ran   corresponds  in
general  outline  with  the  desert  of  Et-Tth.
This  is  a  vast  plateau  of  irregular  surface
stretching  from  the  Et-Tih  range  north-
wards to  the  boundaries  of  the  Holy  Land,
and   from  the  Gulf   of  Ak&bah  and  the
Wady  el  'Arfi.bah  on  the  east  to  the  Gulf  of
Suez  and  the  Mediterranean  on  the  west.
It  is  described  as  "  a  chalky  formation,  the
chalk    being  covered    with  coarse  gravel,
mixed  with  black  flints  and  drifting  sand ; "
not,  however,  wholly  sterile :  in  many  parts
vegetation   abounds,  considerable  portions
are  under  cultivation,  and  there  are  evi-
dences that  at  one  time  water  was  abundant
there  (Smith,  ii.  707;  Kitto,  iii.  1077;  Drew,  '
'  Scripture  Lands,'  p.  80).     It  is  not,  how-
ever, to  the  wilderness  of  Paran  that  the
reference  is  in  the  text,  but  to  some  definite
locality  or  spot  in  the  region  in  which  the
Israelites   then  were,  or  which  they  had
recently  passed  through.    It  has  been  sug-  •
gested  that  the  place  now  called  Feirfi.n,  and
where  there  are  the  ruins  of  a  town,  once  of
some  importance  in   the   early  history  of
Christianity,  is  the  P8,ran  of  this  passage,
as  it  apparently  is  the  Pftran  of  1  Kings  xi.
18.    But  this  locality  at  the  base  of  Jebel
Serbail  is  much  too  far  west  to  be  the  P&run
here  referred  to.    More  probable  is  the  sug-
gestion that  it  is  the  Faran  mentioned  by
Eusebius  and  Jerome  ('  Onomast.,'  s.v.  ^apdv),
a  city  to  the  east  (north-east)  of  Ailah  or
Elath,  about  three  days' journey  (Reland,
'  Palest.,'  p.  556 ;  Winer,  '  Bealworterbuoh,'
t.v.  Phiiran).  Tophel :  this  name  occurs  only
here;   it  is  supposed  to  be  the  place  now
called  Tufailah  or  Tafyleh,  a  large  village  of
six  hundred  inhabitants,  between  Bozrah  and
Kerak,  on  the  eastern  slope  of  the  mouutains
of  Edom  (Burckhardt, '  Syria,'  p.  402;  Eobiu-
ion,  'Bib.  Ees.,'  ii.  570).    As  this  is  a  place
where  the  Syrian  caravans  are  supplied  with


OH.  i.  1—18.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY


proTisionB,  it  has  been  oonjectuied  that  the
Israelites,  when  at  Obotb  (Numb.  zzi.  10,
II),  may  have  resorted  to  it  for  a  supply,
and  that  it  was  here  that  they  purchased
meat  and  drink  from  the  children  of  Esau
(ch.  ii.  29).  And  Laban.  Laban  is  gene-
rally identified  with  Libnah,  the  second
place  of  encampment  of  the  Israelites
OQ  their  return  from  Kadesh  (Numb,
xxxiii.  20,  21).  Knobel,  however,  thinks
it  is  the  place  called  by  Ptolemy  'Aifapo,
lying    between     Petra     and    Allah;    this

name,  from  the  Arabic  ,1^  (he  was  white),
having  the  same  meaning  as  the  Hebrew
[3^.     Hazeroth  is  supposed  to  be  the  place
mentioned  in  Numb.  xi.  35;   xii.  16,  from
which  the  Israelites  entered  the  wilderness
of   Paran;    but  as  the  other  places  here
mentioned  are  on  the  east  side  of  the  'Ar&-
bah,  it  is  not  probable  that  this  Hazeroth  is
the  same  as  that  of  Numbers,  which  must
have  been  not  far  from  Sinai,  in  a  northerly
or  north-westerly  direction  from  that  moun-
tain, probably  at  or  near  to  the  fountain  now
called  El  Hudherah  (Wilson, '  Lands  of  the
Bible,'  i.  235 ;  Kitto,  '  Oyolopiedia,'  ii.  243).
There  were  probably  several  places  bearing
the  name  of  Hazeroth,  i.e.  villages.    Dizataab.
This  is  generally  identified  with  Dhahab,  a
place  on  a  tongue  of  land  in  the  Gulf  of
Akabah.     But  it  is  extremely  improbable
tliat  the  Israelites  ever  were  at  this  place,
the  approach  to  which  is  exceedingly  diffi-
cult ;  and  the  mere  resemblance  of  the  names
Diz^b^b  and  Dhuhab  is  not   sufficient  to
prove  the  identity  of  the  places.    Tliere  were
probaMy  more  places  than  one  which  were
■tamed   from   zdhab  (gold)   in    the   region
traversed   by   the   Israelites.     There   is   a
Dhahab  on  the  east  of  the  ordan  near  the
Zerka  or  Jabbok,  a  double  mound,  which  is
•aid  to  derive  its  name  from  the  yellowish
colour  of   the  sandstcme  rouk  of  Which  it
consists,  and  which  is  metalliferous.    In  the
Arabic  of  the  Polyglot,  Dizahab  appears  as
Dhi-dhahab,  which  signifies  "  auro  pneditum
vel  ab  aurii  dictum;  nam  n  vel  n,  apud
Arabes  in    compositione    nominnm    propr.
idem  est  ac  Heb.  hyi"  (J.  H.  Micliaelis).
There  is  a  various  reading  here,  Di-waheb,
and  this  has  been  supposed  to  connect  this
place  with  the  Waheb  of  Numb.  xxi.  14.
But,   as  above  noted,  it  is  by  no  means
certain  that  Waheb  is  there  the  name  of
a,  place;  it  may,  as  Bishop  Patrick  sug-
gests,   be    that   of  a  man,   some    hero  or
chief,  who  was  conquered  in  Sufah  or  in
ft  storm.      Waheb  is  a  name  among  the
Arabs.     The  maternal  grandfather  of  Mo-
hammed had  this  name  (Abul-Pharaj, '  Hist.
Dynast.,'  p.  161,  edit.  Pococke,  Oxon.,  1663) ;
and    the  sect  of  the  Wahabees  take  their
name  from  Abdul  Wahab,  a  fanatic  who  ap-


peared about  the  beginning  of  last  century.
The  words  "between  Paran  and  Tophel"
have  been  taken  to  indicate  the  termini
of  the  wanderings;  at  the  commencement
of  these  the  people  were  at  Paran,  and
towards  the  close  of  them  they  were  at
Tophel.  "Looking  from  the  steppes  o(
Moabover  the  ground  that  the  Israelites  had
traversed,  Sfiph,  where  they  first  entered
the  desert  of  Arabia,  would  lie  between
PSlran  where  the  congregation  arrived  at
the  borders  of  Canaan  toward  the  west,  and
Tophel  where  they  first  ended  their  desert
wanderings  thirty-seven  years  later  on  the
east "  (Keil).  But  this  assumes  that  PAran
here  is  the  wilderness  of  Paran.

Ver.  2.— Horeb.  The  name  generally
given  to  Sinai  in  Deuteronomy  (see  intro-
duction, §  4).  Sinai,  however,  occurs  in
oh.  xxxiii.  2  of  this  book.  By  the  way  of
mount  Seir,  i.e.  by  the  way  that  leads  to
Mount  Seir;  just  as  in  ch.  ii.  1,  "the  way
of  the  Red  sea "  is  the  way  that  leads  to
that  sea  (see  also  Numb.  xiv.  25).  Mount  is
here,  as  often  elsewhere,  for  mountain  range.
The  mountain  range  here  referred  to  seems
to  have  been,  not  that  on  the  east  of  the
'Arabah,  but  what  is  in  vers.  6  and  19
called  "the  mountain  of  the  Amorites,"
"  the  Seir  by  Hormah  "  of  ver.  44,  i.e.  the
southern  part  of  what  was  afterwards  called
the  mountains  of  Judah.  According  to  ver.
19,  the  Israelites,  when  they  left  Horeb,
passed  through  the  wilderness  along  the
way  that  led  to  the  mountains  of  the
Amorites,  and  came  to  Kadesh-bamea.
Kadesh  must,  therefore,  be  looked  for,  not
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  'Arabah,  but
somewhere  in  the  wilderness  of  Zin.  It
has  been  identified  with  the  place  now
known  as  'Ain  Kfldes,  near  the  northern
extremity  of  Jebel  Halal,  and  to  the  east  of
that  hill ;  but  this  is  far  from  being  certain.
Moses  reminds  the  Israelites  that  the
distance  between  Horeb  and  Kadesh  is
eleven  days— i.e.  about  one  hundred  and
sixty-five  miles,  the  day's  journey  being
reckoned  at  fifteen  miles — not  to  give  them
a  piece  of  information,  but  rather  to  suggest
to_  them  how,  in  consequence  of  rebellion,
a  journey  which  might  have  been  so  easily
accomplished,  had  been  protracted  through
many  wearisome  years.

Vers.  3,  4. — Here  is  intimated  the  time
when  the  following  addresses  were  de-
livered to  the  people.  It  was  on  the  first
day  of  the  eleventh  month  in  the  fortieth
year;  therefore  near  the  end  of  their
wanderings,  and  towards  the  close  of  the
lawgiver's  own  career.  He  could  thus  speak
to  them  according  unto  all  that  the  Lord  had
given  him  in  commandment  unto  them,  i.e.
in  accordance  wilh  the  legislative  contents
of  the  preceding  books  (com p.  ch  iv.  5  94};


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[oh.  1. 1— 1&


T.  28 — 33;  VI.  1).  It  was  also  after  the
deatructioT)  of  Slhoa  and  'Og  (Numb.  xxi.
21 — 35).  This  also  is  significant.  By  the
destruction  of  these  kings,  who  sought  to
bar  the  access  of  the  Israelites  to  the
promised  land,  God  had  given  proof  that
he  would  indeed  fulfil  his  promise  to  his
people,  and  bad  at  once  laid  them  under
obligations  to  obedience,  and  given  them
encouragement  to  go  forward  on  the  course
to  which  he  had  called  them.  The  "he*
here  is  Moses,  who,  at  the  command  of  God,
had  led  the  Israelites  against  Slhon  and
'Og.  Edrei,  hod  Draa  (Numb.  xxi.  33)  was
the  second  capital  of  'Og ;  he  "  reigned  in
Aslitaroth  and  in  Edrei"  (Josh.  xiii.  12).
Here,  however,  it  denotes  the  place  where
he  was  slain  in  battle,  and  the  words  "in
Edrei"  are  to  be  referred  to  the  verb
" smote "  and  not  to  "dwelt"  (of.  oh.  iii.  1 :
Numb.  xxi.  33).

Ver.  5. — The  locality  is  again  described
as  beyond  Jordan  (see  on  ver.  1),  and  in  the
land  of  Moab.  This  designates  the  region
elsewhere  called  Arboth  Muab — the  Plains
of  Moab  (Numb.  xxii.-l ;  ch.  xxxiv.  1,  etc.),
the  region  on  the  east  of  the  Jordan,
opposite  to  Jericho,  now  known  as  the
region  of  Kerak  (Burokhardt,  'Syria,'  p.
877,  etc;  Bobinson,  'Bib.  Rea.,"  0.  369).


Began ;  rather  tet  himtelf  to.  The  Hebrew
word  signifies  to  undertake,  to  betake
one's  self  to,  and  so  to  begin.  It  iM
varionsly  rendered  in  the  Authorized  Ver-
sion (corap.  Gen.  zvlii.  27,  "taken  it  upon
me ; "  Exod.  ii.  21,  "  was  content,"  had  made
up  his  mind ;  1  Sam.  xii  22,  "  it  pleased ;  "
zvii.  39,  "assayed," etc.).  To  declare,  t.«.  make
clear,  explain,  expound  (Hab.  iL  2,  "  make
plain  ").  The  Hebrew  word  here  used  (nxa)
signifies  primarily  to  cut  or  dig,  then  to  out
into,  to  grave,  and  then  to  cut  or. dig  out  so
as  to  make  evident,  to  declare,  to  make  plain.
Wliat  Moses  set  himself  to  do,  then,  was  not
to  publish  a  new  law,  but  to  make  plain  to
the  people  the  Law  already  promulgated,  to
set  forth  clearly  and  pointedly  what  they  were
required  by  the  Law  to  be  and  to  do.  This
explains  more  fully  the  "spake"  (131)  of
ver.  3.  This  exposition  of  the  Law  was
designed  specially  for  the  sake  of  those  who,
at  the  time  the  Law  was  first  promulgated,
either  were  not  bom  or  were  incapable  of
understanding  it  (Grotius).  The  expression
used  by  Moses  plainly  indicates  that  this  book
was  not  intended  to  furnish  a  second  code
of  laws  different  from  the  former,  but  simply
to  explain  and  enforce  what  had  before  been
enjoined.


PAET   I.

INTRODUCTORY    ADDRESS.
CHAPTER  L  6— CHAPTER  IV.  40.


Ver.  C. — With  this  verse  begins  Moses'
first  address  to  tbe  people,  which  extends  to
the  end  of  ch.  iv.  It  is  of  an  introductory
character,  and  is  occupied  chiefly  with  a
retrospective  survey  of  the  events  that  had
occurred  during  the  forty  years  of  their
wanderings.  By  this  Moses  reminded  the
people  how  God  had  fulfilled  his  promises
to  them,  and  at  the  same  time,  how  they  had
by  their  rebellion  drawn  down  on  them  his
displeasure,  which  had  caused  tlieir  wan-
derings to  be  so  much  more  protracted  than
they  would  otherwise  have  been.

Vers.  6— 8.— The  Lord's  command  to
depart  from  Horeb,  and  his  promise  to  the
people.

Ver.  6.— The  lord  our  Boi—Jehovah  our
God.  The  use  of  this  epithet  implies  tbe
covenant  union  of  Israel  with  Jehovah,  and
presupposes  the  existence  of  that  covenant
which  was  entered  into  at  Sinai.    In  Horeb.


This  was  the  starting-point,  w  to  speak,  of
Israel's  being  as  the  special  people  of  God
—his  segullah  (n'?^p,  Exod.  xix.  5),  his
special  treasure.  There  he  made  himself
known  to  tliem  as  Jehovah,  the  Eternal  and
Unchangeable,  and  entered  into  covenant
with  them;  and  there  tliey  received  that
Law,  on  the  keeping  of  whicli  depended  tlieir
retention  of  the  privileges  to  which  they
had  been  elected.  At  Horeb  the  Israelites
had  remained  for  about  a  year  (comp.  Exod
XIX.  1  and  Numb.  x.  11,  12),  and  as  the
purpose  for  which  they  had  been  brought
thither  was  answered,  they  were  enjoined
to  move,  not  indeed  by  express  command
bnt  by  the  rising  of  the  cloud  from  over  the
tabernacle,  which  was  the  signal  of  their
march  (Numb.  ix.  15,  etc.;  x.  11-13),  pre-
ceded by  the  instructions  they  had  received
preparatory  to  their  removal  (Numb,  i  -iv  7)
Ts  have  dwelt  long  enough  in  this  mount'.
The  Israelites  remained  at  Sinai  from  the
third  month  of  the  first  year  to  the  twentieth
day  of  the  second  year  after  they  came


OH.  L  1— 18.J


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTfiEOA'OMY.


out  of  Egypt  (cf.  Exod.  xix.  1  and  Numb.
X.  11).

Ver.  7. — Go  to  the  mount  of  the  Amorites,
and  unto  all  that  dwell  thereon ;  literally,  its
dwellers  01  inhdbihmts  (VBK').  The  mountain
range  of  the  Amorites,  afterwards  called  the
hill  country  of  Judali  and  Ephraim,  was
the  object  which  would  first  strike  the  view
of  one  advancing  from  the  snutli;  and  so,
it  stands  here  for  the  whole  land  of  Canaan,
wiih  which  it  is  in  this  context  idenlifiud.
Those  "that  dwell  thereon"  are  the  in-
habitants of  the  whole  of  Canaan.     The
Amorites  (Hebrew  Emori,  so  called  from
Amor,  or  Emor)  oftener  tl  an  once  appear
as  standing  for  the  Cauaamtes  generally
(cf  Gen.  XV.  16;  Deut.  i.  20,  21,  etc.).  That
all  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan  are  intended
here  is  evident  from  the  specification  of  tlie
different  districts  of  ttie  land  of  Canaan
which  immediately  follows.     In  the  plain:
the  'Ardbuh  (see  ver.  1).  In  the  hills :  the  hill
country  of  Judah  (Numb.  xiii.  17).    In  the
vale :  the  shephelah,  or  lowland,  the  country
lying  between  the  mountain  range  of  Judah
and  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  stretching
northwards  from  the  parallel  of  Gaza  to  that
of  Caimel.     In  the  south:  the  negeb,  or
southland   (literally,  drynesii),  the   district
which  formed  the  transition  from  the  desert
to  the  cultivated  land,  extending  from  the
south  of  the  Dead  Sea  westwards  to  Gaza,
a  vast  steppe  or  jH'airie,  for  the  most  part
pasture  land.     The  seashore :    the    narrow
sirip  of  land  on  the  coast  of  the  Mediter-
ranean from  Joppa  to  Tyre  (in  the  New
Testament,  "  the  coast  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,"
Luke  vi.  17).    The  land  of  the  Canaanites:
the  whole  country  of  which  these  were  the
separate  parts.     And   unto  Lebanon:    the
White  Mountain,  so  called,  probably,  from
the  snow  which  rests  on  its  summit.    The
great  river,  the  river  Euphrates.  The  Phrath,
or  Euphrates,  which  has  its  sources  in  the
mountains  of  Armenia,  and  in  its  course
divides  Armenia  from  Cappadocia,  formed
the  eastern  limit  of  the  territory  promiocd
by  God  to  Abraham.    The  epithet  "  great "
seems  to  have  been  commonly  applied  to  it.
Callimachus    calls     it    'Atro-upioC     irora/ioia
ineyas  f6os  ('  In  ApoU.,'  107),  and  Lucan  has —
"  Quaque  caput  rapido  tollit  cum  Tigride
magnus
Euphrates."

(«Phar8.,'m.  256.)

Aa  by  much  the  most  considerable  river
of  western  Asia,  the  Euphrates  was  known
as  "  the  river  "  par  excellence  (cf.  Exod.  xxiii.
31 ;  Isa.  viii.  7 ;  Jer.  ii.  18 ;  Ps.  Ixxii.  8).
The  mention  of  Lebanon  and  the  Euphrates
is  not,  as  Keil  suggests,  "  to  be  attributed  to
the  rhetorical  fulness  of  the  style ; "  but  is
due  to  the  fact  that  these  were  included  in


what  God  promised  to  Abraham  and  his  seed
(Gen.  XV.  18  ;  Exod.  xxiii.  31;  Deut.  xi.  21).
Ver.  8.— Behold,  I  have  set  the  land  before
you:  literally,  have  given  the  land  hefore
you,  i.e.  have  made  it  over  to  you,  that  you
may  go  and  tal^e  possession  of  it.  The  Lord
had  placed  this  land  in  the  power  of  the
Israelites,  had  given  it  up  to  them  to  possess
and  use  it,  according  aa  he  had  sworn  to
their  fathers,  the  patriarchs,  to  give  it  to
them  and  their  seed  (comp.  Gen.  xii.  7;
xiii.  15 ;  xv.  18,  etc. ;  xxii.  16).  At  HoreK
therefore,  they  received  the  charter  of  their
inheritance,  and  might  have  gone  on  at  once
to  take  possession  of  the  land.  The  delay
that  had  occurred  had  ari.-en  solely  from  their
own  waywardness  and  perversity,  not  from
anything  on  the  part  of  God.

Vers.  9— 18.— Moses  reminds  them  that
he  had  done  all  that  was  required  on  his
part  to  conduct  the  people  to  the  enjoy-
ment of  what  God  had  freely  given  to  them.
'J'he  people  had  so  increased  in  number
that  Moses  found  himself  unable  to  attend
to  all  the  matters  that  concerned  them,  or
to  ailjndicate  in  all   the  differences   that
arose  among  them.    God  had  brought  to
pass  that  which  he  had  promised  to  Abra-
ham (Gen.  XV.  5),  that  his  seed  should  be
as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multitude;  in
this  Moses  rejoiced,  nay,  he  would  even
that  their  numbers  were,  with  the  Divine
blessing,  increased  a  thousandfold  beyond
what  they  were.    But  he  found  the  burden,
the    weight  of    care    and   trouble,   espe-
cially in  connection  with  their  strifes  and
suits  thereby  brought  on  him,  too  much  for
him;  and,  therefore,  whilst  they  were  still
at  Horeb,  he  had,  following  the  advice  of
Jethro,  his  father-in-law,  counselled  tbem
to  select  competent  men  from  among  tliem-
selves,  who  should  relieve  him  by  attending
to  those  duties  which  he  found  it  too  bur-
densome for  him  to  have  to  attend  to  (cf
Exod.  xviii.  13,  etc.).     This  appointment
of  captains  was  quite  distinct  from  that  ol
the  elders  whom   God  directed  Moses  to
select  that  they  might  assist  him  in  bear-
ing the  burden  of  the  people  (Numb.  xi.  10,
etc.).    The  occasion  of  the  appointment  was
the  same  in  both  cases,  viz.  the  complaint
of  Moses  that  the  task  was  too  onerous  for
him,  but  the  time,  the  place,  and  the  man-
ner of  the  two  transactions  were  different.

Ver.  9. — I  spake  unto  you  at  that  time.
The  somewhat  indefinite  phrase,  "at  that
time  "  (comp.  Gen.  zxxviiL  1),  does  not  lefei


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  1. 1—18,


to  the  time  after  the  people  departed  from
Horeb,  but  to  the  time  generally  when  they
were  in  that  region  (see  Exod.  xviii.  5, 13).
"  The  imperfect  (noVii,  I  spake),  with  caw
rel.  expresses  the  order  of  though  t  and  not
of  time"  (Keil).  It  is  not  mentioned  in
Exodus  that  Moses  spake  to  the  people,  as
here  stated,  but  what  Jethro  said  to  him
to  this  effect  is  recorded ;  and  as  Moses
proceeded  to  put  in  execution  what  his
father-in-law  advised,  it  is  probable  that
in  doing  so  he  told  the  people  what  he  pro-
posed to  do,  with  his  reasons  for  so  doing,
and  obtained  their  assent,  as  here  men-
tioned.

Ver.  10. — Notwithstanding  the  cruel  op-
pression to  which  they  were  subjected  in
Egypt,  the  Israelites  had  so  increased  in
numbers  that  they  went  out  of  the  liouse  of
their  bondage  a  mighty  host.  Ye  are  this
day  as  the  stars  of  heave  a  for  multitude  (of.
Gen.  XV.  5;  xxii.  17).  God  had  promised
to  Abraham  that  his  seed  should  be  as  the
stars  of  heaven  for  multitude;  and  Moses
here  reminds  the  people  that  this  promise
had  been  fulfilled.  This  is  hardly  to  be
regarded  as  the  utterance  of  hyperbole.
When  God  gave  the  promise  to  Abraham
it  was  to  the  stars  as  seen  by  the  patriarch,
not  as  actually  existing  in  the  Immensity
of  space,  that  reference  was  made ;  and  as
the  number  of  stars  which  can  be  taken  in
with  the  naked  eye  does  not  exceed  3000,
and  as  Israel  at  this  time  numbered  more
than  600,000,  coiyiting  only  the  adult  males
(Numb.  ii.  32),— it  might  be  literally  said  of
them  that  they  had  been  multiplied  as  the
stars  of  heaven.  The  comparison,  however,
imported  nothing  more  than  that  their  num-
bers were  very  great,

Ver.  11. — It  was  not  the  vast  increase  of
the  people  in  numbers  that  distressed  Moses,
rather  was  this  to  him  a  matter  of  rejoicing,
and  his  desire  was  that  their  increase  might
become  still  greater,  even  a  thousandfold.
But  he  felt  his  own  inability,  as  leader,
ruler,  and  judge,  alone  to  cope  with  so  vast
a  multitude.

Ver.  12.— Moses  appeals  to  the  good  sense
of. the  people  themselves:  How  can  I  my-
self alone  bear  your  oumbrance,  and  your
burden,  and  your  strife  I  Cunibrance:  this
is  a  just  rendering  of  the  Hebrew  word  rrp
from  niQ,  which,  though  it  occurs  onlyin
the  Hiphil  in  Hebrew,  in  the  sense  of  to
cast  down  (Job  xvii.  11),  probably  was  in
'lise  also  in  the  Kal,  in  the  sense  of  to  lay
upon,  to  encumber,  which  is  the  meaning  of

the  cognate  Arabic  ^j^  followed  by  \^,
burden  (t&o,  from  K'^:,  to  lift  np,  to  carry,
to  bear),  something  lifted  np  and  carried,
■  load  or  burden.    Btri/e :  (an)  liet*,  not


mere  contention,  but  litigation,  rait-at-Iaw
Some  understand  all  these  three,  of  troubles
and  burdens  laid  upon  Moses,  by  his  being
called  upon  to  compose  differences,  and
adjust  competing  claims  among  the  people.
But  other  burdens  besides  these  came  upon
him  as  the  leader  of  the  nation ;  and  it
seems  best,  therefore,  to  understand  the  first
two  of  troubles  and  burdens  generally.

Ver.  13. — Take  you;  literally,  give  to  you
01  for  you,  i.e.  yourselvei'  The  selection  was
to  be  made  by  the  people  themselves.  Jethro,
in  giving  Mcises  the  advice  on  which  he
thus  acted,  described  the  men  who  were  to
be  selected  as  "  such  as  fear  God,  men  of
truth,  hating  oovetousness "  (Exod.  xviii.
21).  Moses  here  describes  them  rather  by
qualities,  indicating  ability  and  fitness  for
such  a  post  as  th..t  to  which  they  were  to  be
called;  they  were  to  be  wise  (which,  indeed,
may  be  regarded  as  comprehending  all  good
moral  qualities);  understanding  men,  men  of
discernment  and  sagacity,  as  well  as  intel-
ligence; and  known  among  their  tribes,
men  of  good  repute  in  the  community
("quorum  conversatio  sit  probata,"  Vulgate;
comp.  Acts  vi.  3;  1  Tim.  iii.  7).  And  I  will
make  them  rulers  over  you;  literally,  viill
set  them  for  your  heads,  i.e.  will  appoint
them  to  act  as  superintendents,  managers,
and  judges  over  you.

Vera.  14,  15. — The  people  approved  of
the  proposal,  and  acted  upon  it ;  and  Moses
accordingly  appointed  the  persons  selected
to  be  chiefs  over  thousands,  and  over  hun-
dreds, and  over  fifties,  and  over  tens  (Exod.
xviii.  21);  he  appointed  men  also  to  be
officers,  that  is,  persons  who  should  preserve
order  in  the  tribes,  keeping  the  registers,
acting  as  scribes,  to  prescribe  and  to  take
account  of  work,  and  perhaps  also  attend-
ing to  fiscal  arrangements  (Dnok?,  ehoterim,
a  word  of  general  application ;'  of.  Exod.  v.
6,  10,  11;  Josh.  iii.  2;  2  Chfon.  xxvi.  11,
etc.  LXX.  ypafifiareTs  and  ypaixiuvro-eura-
yayeh).  In  Exodus,  Moses  is  said  to  have
chosen  these  functionaries  (xviii.  25);  but
what  many  do  under  the  direction  of  one
may  be  said  to  be  done  by  him.

Vers.  16,  17.— In  installing  the  judges
Moses  solemnly  charged  them  to  deal  im-
partially, fairly,  and  equitably  with  those
who  might  come  before  them.

Ver.  16.— Hear  between  your  brethren,
i.e.  hear  impartially  both  parties,  and  judge
righteously  between  man  and  man,  whether
both  par.ies  are  Israelites,  or  one  of  the
parties  a  stranger.

,.y^\\  17.— Ye  BhaU  not  respect  persons;
literally,  look  at  or  regard  faeet,  i.e.  ye
shall  not  deal  partially,  favouring  the  one
party  rather  than  the  other  (comp.  Exod
xxiii.  2,  3 :  Lev.  xU.  15);  the  small  as  well
M  the  great  wer*  to  be  heard,  and  neither


cii.  1.  i— 18.]


THE  BOOiL  OF  DEtTtlllOiJOMt.


tot  favour  nor  from  fear  were  they  to  per-
vert justice.  The  judgment  is  Ood'a;  i.e.
appointed  b^  God  and  administered  in  hia
name,  the  judge  acting  for  God  and  by
his  authority,  and  being  answerable  to  him
(comp.  2  Chron.  six.  6).  Hence  the  phrases,
■'  to  inquire  ot  God,"  "to  bring  before  God  "
(Exod.  xviii.lS,  19;  xxi.  6j  xxii.  8,  etc.) —
phrases  still  in  use  among  the  Arabs  for  a
suurmoning  to  judicial  trial.  In  the  case
of  a  matter  coming  before  the  judges  which
they  found  it  beyond  their  power  to  decide,
they  were  to  bring  it  before  Moses  aa  •


superior  authority  (see  Eiod.  xvHI.  26).
"  Some  think  there  were  certain  causes  re-
served to  the  cognizance  of  Moses ;  but  the
contrary  appears  by  these  words,  that  all
manner  of  causes  were  brought  before  the
judges ;  and  they,  not  the  people,  brought
such  causes  before  Moses  as  they  found  tuo
hard  for  them  to  determine.  So  that  they,
not  the  person  whose  cause  it  was,  judged
of  the  difficulty  of  the  cause.  See  Selden,
lib.  i.  'De  Synedriis,  cap.  xvi"  (Bishop
Patriok>


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  IS.— The  Word  of  Ood/idl  of  hidden  treasure.  We  cannot  get  TMjr  ftr  In
these  preliminary  verses  ere  we  are  struck  with  a  phrase  which  is  a  most  suggestiv*
one.  And  should  not  be  lightly  passed  over,  viz.  "  On  this  side  Jordan,  in  the  land  of
Moab,  began  Moses  to  declare  this  law,"  literally,  to  dig  it,  •'.«.  to  go  deeply  into  it,  and
to  turn  up  again  its  contents,  so  that,  to  all  the  advantage  of  a  generation  of  culture,
the  people  might  see  that  there  was  more  meaning,  and  also  more  glory  in  the  Law  of
God  than  they  were  able  to  discern  in  the  first  years  of  their,  national  existence.
Observe —

L  There  is  a  mine  of  wealth  or  the  Law  of  God.  This  is  the  case,  evam  if
we  thereby  intend  the  Mosaic  Law  alone.  Its  theology,  its  ethics,  its  directory  of
religious  faith  and  worship,  its  civil  and  political  code  for  the  Hebrew  commonwealth,
are  all  so  pure  and  elevated,  that  no  account  can  be  given  of  how  any  man  at  that  age
of  the  world  could  have  propounded  such  a  system,  save  that  he  was  taught  of  Goid
(cf.  2  Pet.  i.  21).  (See  Homiletics,  ch.  v.  7^22.)  ;  If,  moreover,  we  would  see
how  the  devout  Hebrews  estimated  the  Law,  let  us  turn  to  Ps.  xix. ;  cilL  7,  et  $eq.
Our  Saviour  honoured  the  Law,  and  maintained  it  in  all  ^ts  integrity  (of.  Matt.  v.  17, 18).
He  removed  the  glosses  by  which  it  had  in  his  time  become  disfigured,  but  he  never
depreciated  it.  We  are  by  no  means  to  confound  "  the  Law  "  with  the  abstract  idea  of
"  law."  See  how  sharply  the  Apostle  Paul  distinguishes  between  these  two  in  Rom.  iiL,
especially  in  ver.  21,  "  But  now  there  has  been  manifested  a  righteousness  of  God  apart
from  law,  being  witnessed  by  the  Law  and  the  prophets."  The  Law  given  by  Moses
is  based  on  the  gospel  (cf.  Gal.  iii. ;  see  also  Homiletics,  ch.  v.  6),  If,  however,  to  all
that  Moses  gave,  we  add  all  "  the  grace  and  the  truth  "  which  came  in  by  Jesus  Christ,
how  unsearchably  vast  is  the  wealth  stored  up  for  us  in  the  "  Word  of  everlasting
Truth ! "

II.  Tub  bffobt  of  digging  into  this  mine  will  be  well  ekpaid.  How  much
diCTerence  there  is  between  a  man  who  knows  only  what  men  say  about  the  Book,  and
one  who  knows  the  Book  for  himself!  The  one  may  be  easily  beguiled  into  the  belief
that  it  is  so  out  of  date  that  it  is  scarcely  worth  while  to  study  it  at  alL  The
other  will  find  it  so  far  ahead  of  the  actual  attainments  of  the  wisest  and  best  of  men,
that  he  will  pity  those  who  dismiss  it  with  but  a  glance  from  afar.  The  continuous,
careful,  thorough  student  of  the  Law  of  Moses,  wiU  be  ever  discovering  a  richness  in  it
which  will  at  once  astonish  and  enrapture  him.  Its  harmony  with,  its  historical  pre-
paration for,  the  gospel,  will  be  continually  disclosing  to  him  new  proofs  of  its  Divine
original,  that  will  be  worth  more  to  him  than  any  merely  "  external  evidence."  And
when  the  whole  Word  of  God  is  made  the  constant  study  of  one  whose  heart  is  open  to
the  truth  and  loyal  to  God,  such  a  one  will  find  fuller  and  richer  meaning  in  single
words,  such  as  goel,  "grace,"  "  rightecusness,"  etc.,  when  these  words  are  put  to  their
highest  use  in  Divine  revelation,  than  in  whole  tomes  of  merely  human  lore  I

III.  The  Word  should  be  duo  into,  that  we  mat  appropbiatk  its  oontbktb,
BT  enlightened  reason  and  lowlt  faith.  These  treasures  are  for  the  use  of  all,
not  merely  to  gratify  them  with  the  consciousness  of  ever  making  new  discoveries,  but
to  make  them  richer  in  the  accumulating  stores  of  holy  thoughts    And  if  we,  in  the


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEBONOMY.  [oh.  1. 1— id.


right  spirit,  explore  these  sacred  pages,  we  shall  ourselves  become  richer  in  knowledge,
in  gladness,  in  hope.  If  we  cultivate  a  willingness  to  do  God's  will,  and  seek  to  know
the  truth  for  the  purpose  of  doing  the  right,  we  shall  find  that  much  that  is  "  hidden
from  the  wise  and  prudent"  is,  by  means  of  the  Book,  "  revealed  unto  babes."

IV.  The  hobe  we  thus  dm  into  th»  Book  of  the  Law,  the  more  exhaust-
less  IT  WILL  SEEM.  No  one  is  there,  who  lovingly  and  prayerfully  studies  it,  who
will  not  come  to  say,  with  a  feeling  that  becomes  intenser  year  by  year,  "  There
remaineth  very  much  land  to  be  possessed."  "High  as  the  heaven  is  above  the  earth,
so  are "  God's  "  ways  higher  than  "  our  "  ways,  and "  God's  "  thoughts  than  "•  our
"thoughts"!

V.  The  accumulating  stobeb  op  holt  thought  should  be  transmutisd  by  us
INTO  the  vtealth  OF  HOLY  LIFE.  It  is  Dot  for  nought  that  ova  God  has  so  enriched
this  w«rld  with  thoughts  from  heaven.  It  is  not  merely  that  the  intellect  may  be
furnished  or  the  taste  for  research  gratified.  Oh  no ;  it  is  for  our  life.  Heaven  has
poured  forth  its  wealth  upon  earth,  that  earth  may  send  up  its  love  and  loyalty  to
heaven.  Precious  are  the  riches  of  truth.  The  riches  of  holiness  are  more  precious
still.  God  gives  us  the  first  that  we  may  yield  him  the  second.  God  would  win
Israel's  love  by  unveiling  his  own.  So  now,  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in
that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  How  great  will  be  our  guilt,  how
severe  our  condemnation,  if  we  let  such  priceless  disclosures  remain  unnoticed  and
unused !  It  were  better  for  us  not  to  have  known  the  way  of  righteousness  than,  after
we  have  known  it,  to  turn  from  the  holy  commandment  delivered  unto  us.  May  we,
through  the  Spirit,  so  use  the  truth  of  God  as  to  find  our  joy  and  salvation  in  the  God
of  the  truth !

Vers.  1 — 8,  together  with  Exod.  xxiii.  20 — 33. — I%e  Eebrew  right  to  Cwnaan.
Moses  is  reviewing  the  career  of  Israel,  and  is  endeavouring  to  set  before  the  people  the
patience  and  faithfulness  of  God,  as  well  as  their  own  waywardness.  In  the  part  of  his
review  which  is  before  us  just  now,  he  points  to  the  time  when  their  sojourn  in  Horeb
was  about  to  close.  Laws  and  ordinances  had  been  given.  The  nation  was  formed.
Preparations  for  departure  would  have  to  be  made.  To  this  they  are  incited  by  a
renewal  of  the  Divine  gift  to  them  of  the  land  of  Canaan.  The  bare  and  brief  recital
in  the  verses  referred  to  above  may  be  advantageously  compared  with  Exod.  xxiii.
20 — 33.  A  subject  is  here  brought  before  us  of  great  importance,  viz.  The  right  of  the
Hebrews  to  Canaan,  and  the  purpose  of  the  Divine  Being  in  granting  it  to  them.  We
have  here —

I.  The  Hebrew  right  to  Canaan  divinely  confirmed.  A  double  use  has  been
made  of  the  command  to  dispossess  the  Canaanites;  1.  By  sceptics,  to  impugn  the
morality  of  the  Old  Testament.  2.  By  professing  Chiistian  men,  to  justify  wars  of
aggression  now.  Now  we  might  meet  both  these  by  one  short  and  ready  reply,  viz.
"If  God  commanded  the  Hebrews  to  exterminate  the  Canaanites,  no  defence  is
required;  if  God  did  not  command  them,  no  defence  avails."  But  there  is  a  more
appropriate  way  of  meeting  the  two  cases.  As  to  the  first,  we  would  say,  "  Before  you
pronounce  it  immoral,  look  at  the  entire  bearings  of  the  case,  that  you  may  see  if  the
Israelites  had  an  adequate  warrant  for  the  course  they  took."  As  to  the  second,
"  Before  you  regard  this  as  a  pattern,  look  at  the  entire  bearingf:  of  the  case,  that  you
may  see  if  there  is  any  ground  for  adducing  the  wars  of  the  Hebrews  as  a  justification
or  palliation  of  aggressive  war  now."  If  men  go  to  the  Book  to  learn  what  the  Israelites
did,  they  must  in  all  fairness  go  to  the  Book  to  see  the  grounds  on  which  they  did  it.
And  the  same  teaching  that  will  answer  the  one  question.  Were  they  justified?  will
also  answer  the  other,  Should  we  be  justified  in  imitating  them?  Thirteen  points
present  themselves  for  distinct  and  cumulative  consideration.  We  can  but  name  them.
(1)  God  spake  to  Moses.  (2)  In  speaking  to  Moses,  God  but  confirmed  the  promise
made  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  (3)  God  defines  the  bounds  of  the  land  to  be
possessed.  (4)  God  makes  the  claim,  "  All  the  earth  is  mine ; "  consequently  he  has  a
right  to  give  the  land  to  whomsoever  he  will  (5)  In  choosing  Israel,  God  would  have
a  people  for  himself  who  should  be  his  witnesses.  (6)  God  foresaw  the  time  for
carrying  out  this  plan  (Gen.  xv.).  (7)  The  preparation  of  the  land  was  of  God  (Ex  d.
xxiii.  20).    (8)  The  ground  on  whi^'    the  Qinaanites  were  dispossessed  was  their


ou.  I.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  9

enonnous  wickedness  (ch.  ix.  4,  5).  (9)  Israel  was  consequently  only  the  means  in  the
Divine  hand  of  carrying  out  an  explicit  Divine  purpose.  (10)  To  spare  the  Ganaanitcs
would  have  been  to  infect  Israel  with  their  abominations.  (11)  Ood  would  deliver  the
nations  into  Israel's  hand.  (12)  On  a  land  and  among  a  people  recognized  as  God's,
the  Most  High  would  reassert  in  the  world  the  well-nigh  forgotten  truth,  "The  Lord
our  God  is  holy."  (13)  Even  JsraeVs  continuance  in  the  land  would  depend  on  their
maintenance  of  the  principles  which  had  been  entrusted  to  their  keeping,  and  on  their
loyalty  to  the  God  who  had  chosen  them  for  his  own  (ch.  xxviii.  49).  When  we  put
all  these  principles  together,  the  two  questions  suggested  at  the  outset  receive  a  direct
and  sufficient  reply.

II.  Access  to  Canaan  mvinblt  bkoubed.  "I  will  send  an  angel  before  thee"
(Exod.  xxiii.  14 ;  xxxii.  34 ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  9 ;  Mai.  iii.  1 ;  Acts  viL  38,  53 ;  John  L  51).
It  is  only  as  we  study  the  more  advanced  revelations  of  the  New  Testament  as  to  the
place  of  angels  in  the  Divine  administration,  and  the  lordship  of  Jesus  Christ  over
them,  that  all  these  texts  of  Scripture  are  seen  to  fit  in  together.  Note  the  specific
statements  in  Exod.^xiii.  as  to  God  clearing  Israel's  way.

III.  Duty  in  eeperbncb  to  Canaan  divinely  regulated.  Negatively:  they
were  neither  to  bow  down  to  false  gods  nor  to  mix  with  the  heathen.  Positively :  they
were  to  serve  and  fear  God  and  to  practise  the  right.

IV.  PnoMiSBS  conoebnino  prosperity  in  Canaan  rivmBLY  given  (Exod.  xxiii.  25).
Blessing  on  food,  health,  long  life  (cf.  Matt.  vi.  33 ;  Fs.  xci.  16).  A  separate  homily
might  well  be  devoted  to  the  temporal  benefits  naturally  resulting  from  obedience  to
God.

The  application  of  all  this  to  us  in  these  days  is  manifest.  1.  Wliat  Israel  was  once
In  the  world  God  expects  his  Church  to  be  now  (cf.  Exod.  xix.  5,  6  with  1  Pet.  ii.  9).
2.  In  Jesus  Christ  we  have  a  new  covenant,  a  better  ministry,  greater  promises  (Heb.
viii.  6).  3.  We  have  a  commission  for  the  world.  We  have  to  co-operate  with  God
in  bringing  about  new  heavens  and  a  new  earth,  by  working  in  accordao'ce  with  his
plan  of  redeeming  and  educating  our  race.  We  have  no  commission  to  destroy.  The
Lord  hath  given  us  a  power  for  edification  but  none  for  destruction.  Our  commissiun
runs,  "  Go,  baptize  and  teach."  We  have  not  to  supersede  the  occupation  of  territory
held  by  a  barbarous  nation,  through  its  enforced  occupation  by  a  civilized  one,  but  to
go  and  teach  all  nations  that  each  nation  may  siipers^ede  its  own  barbarism  by  a  civili-
zation that  is  equally  its  own.  4.  This  commission  is  to  be  fulfilled  by  the  Word  of
Truth,  by  the  power  of  God.  By  spiritual  wea[)ons  only  can  our  victories  be  won.  In
the  might  of  a  love  that  has  conquered  us,  and  in  that  might  alone,  we  are  to  go  forth
to  make  the  conquest  of  the  woj  M.

••  These  weapons  of  the  holy  war.
Of  what  almighty  force  they  are.
To  make  our  stubborn  passions  bow,
And  lay  the  proudest  rebel  low  I "

Vers.  6 — IS.—BuIet  to  be  observed  <n  choosing  mien.  This  paragraph  may  with
advantage  be  compared  with  Exod.  xviii.,  in  which  there  is  a  fuller  account  of  the
circumstances  under  which  the  choice  of  judges  and  magistrates  was  proposed  and
made ;  this  important  step  towards  the  order  and  consolidation  of  the  national  life  was
taken  at  the  suggestion  of  Jethro,  the  father-in-law  of  Moses.  Referring  to  the  exposi-
tion of  that  chapter  for  the  historic  detail,  we  note  here  simply :  1.  That  the  choice  of
rulers,  etc.,  is  put  into  the  people's  hands;  they  are  to  select,  Moses  is  to  ratify  the
selection.  2.  They  are  to  choose  men  of  righteousness,  who  will  fear  God  and  do
justice.  3.  When  the  judges  are  chosen,  Mo^es  seeks  solemnly  to  impress  on  them
the  high  and  holy  responsibilities  of  their  ofiice.,  4.  The  supreme  reason  for  this
care  in  judging  rigiitly  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the  cause  is  God's,  i.e.  that  they  are
rulers  under  God  and  for  him — representing  Divine  laws  in  the  earthly  sphere.  The
state  is  sacredly  to  be  governed  by  the  laws  of  righteousness,  and  by  such  laws  alone.
Hence  a  subject  is  opened  up  to  us  which  is  of  no  small  moment,  viz.  Principht  and
facts  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  choosing  rulers  of  the  people.    Observe —

I.  That  the  choosing  of  men  to  take  part  in  making  cb  aduinistebino  a
nation's  laws  is  a  solemn  and  momentous  concern.    It  nutters  comparatively  UtUt^


16  TflE  Book  of  DEOTEEoiioMY.  [oh.  I.  i— ia


so  far  as  our  present  topic  is  concerned,  what  may  be  the  peculiar  form  of  government
adopted,  or  what  may  be  the  mode  of  choosing  men  for  office  in  the  State.  For  1.
The  position  such  men  occupy  is  an  exalted  one.  It  is  self-evident  that  when  they
have  to  take  part  in  governing  or  carrying  out  the  laws  of  the  land,  it  is  of  the  utmost
moment  that  they  should  be  men  who  are  capable  of  perceiving  what  measures  will
lend  to  the  people's  good.  A  country  may  be  perishing  from  the  want  of  good  laws,
if  its  rulers  are  not  competent,  wise,  and  just.  2.  The  influence  such  men  wield  in
private  circles  is  largely  increased  from  the  fact  of  their  public  position.  3.  Their
representative  character  is  another  element  of  great  moment.  Great  men  and  good
will  elevate  common  questions  to  their  own  level ;  while  worthless  men  will  fail  to
appreciate  the  importance  of  the  greatest  questions  of  the  day.  4.  The  great  matters
which  may — nay,  must— come  before  the  rulers  of  a  nation,  are  such  as  may  involve  that
nation's  honour  or  discredit  among  the  nations  of  the  world ;  yea,  more,  they  are  such
as  will  do  much,  according  as  they  are  decided,  to  bring  upon  a  people  the  blessing  or
the  wrath  of  Almighty  God !  Hence —
n.  The  possession  of  a  poweb  to  put  men  in  such  an  office  ob  offices,  is  a

TRUST  FOR  THE   USB   OP  WHICH  THOSE   WHO   POSSESS  THAT   POWER   ABB   RESPONSIBLE  TO

THEIR  COUNTRY  AND  THEIR  GoD  1  The  decisions  of  earthly  judges  ought  to  be  the
earthly  expression  of  heavenly  law.  Hence  to  let  whim,  or  caprice,  or  passion,  or
partizanship  carry  us  away,  when  such  concerns  are  at  issue,  and  to  forget  the  ever-
lasting laws  of  righteousness,  is  to  tamper  with  the  public  interest,  and  to  betray  a
solemn  trust.    Therefore —

ni.   In  THE  DISCHARGE  OF  THIS   TRUST,  STRICT   REGARD   MUST   BE    PAID   TO  PERSONAL

CHARACTER.  (See  Exod.  xviii.  21.)  Even  a  pagan  felt  this.  It  was  the  priest  of
Midian  who  said,  "  Thou  shall  provide  out  of  all  the  people  able  men,  such  as  fear  God,
men  of  truth,  hating  covetousness  " — a  fourfold  qualification,  so  comprehensive  that,
where  it  is  possessed,  a  man  may  be  safely  entrusted  with  any  office.  Such  meu  will
undertake  their  work  as  those  who  are  responsible  to  God ;  they  will  ever  be  on  the
look  out  to  perceive  what  the  interests  of  their  country  may  require  at  their  hands ;
they  will  seek  to  qualify  themselves  to  take  part  in  the  public  questions  which  will
come  before  them ;  without  seeking  their  own  honour,  they  will  aim  at  judging  as  is
wisest  and  best;  and  their  supreme  aim  will  be  that  the  government  they  help  to
administer  should  be  ever  in  harmony  with  righteousness  and  truth.  If  all  its  public
men  answer  all  these  requirements,  a  country  cannot  go  far  wrong ;  but  if  a  nation's
leaders  are  themselves  lacking  in  virtue,  how  can  there  be  any  security  for  that
righteousness  and  truth  which  exalt  a  nation,  when  a  country  is  at  the  mercy  of  men
who  know  not  the  one  neither  regard  the  other  ?

IV.  A  CONSIDERATION  WHICH   GIVES  INFINITE  WEIGHT  TO  THE   ABOVE  PRINCIPLES  18
THAT  THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EARTHLY  RULERS  IS  INTENDED,   IN  ITS  WAY,  TO   BE   A  COPY  OF

THE  Divine.  "  The  judgment  is  God's,"  says  Moses.  It  is  God's  judgment,  expressed
through  his  own  appointed  officers  (see  Eom.  xiii.).  Secular  judgments  should  have
sacred  principles  underlying  them.  And  we  cannot  divorce  the  secular  from  the  sacred
without  great  mischief  accruinc;.  But,  finally  :  the  judgment  is  God's  in  another  sense.
He  is  the  Supreme  Judge ;  and  whether  men  use  their  judgment  well  or  ill,  God  will
exercise  his  own.  The  principles  of  the  Divine  government  of  nations  are  developed
by  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Hosea,  Amos,  and  others.  No  nation  can  escape  from  the  sway
of  the  Mighty  One;  if  God's  laws  are  set  at  nought,  his  judgments  will  follow,  that,
while  they  are  abroad  in  the  earth,  the  inhabitants  thereof  may  learn  righteousness.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.
Vers.  1 — 8. — Divine  covenant  and  human  conduct — the  two  hemitpheres  ofaeomplete

life.      I.   An   ELECT   MAN,   THE    BEST  OF  THE    AGE,  BECOMES  A  MEDIUM    OF   REVELATION

BETWEEN  God  and  men.  As  in  nature,  so  in  human  life,  there  are  numberless  grades
of  office  and  of  function.  At  Sinai,  we  have  God,  angels,  Moses,  priests.  The  trans-
parent candour  and  fidelity  of  Moses,  as  a  stibaltern  in  God's  great  host,  is  a  ii^ht  to  all
future  ages.     As  the  uncreated  light  left  an  abiding  impress  on  the  face  of  Mosei  so


tat  1. 1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEROXOMY.  1)

the  known  will  of  God  shone  out  lustrously  in  Moses'  life.    AU  that  Moses  heard,  ha
communicated  by  word,  and  temper,  and  influence,  and  deed.

II.  Material  penury  a  condition  for  heavenly  enrichmbnt.  The  scene  for  the
revelation  of  God,  is  the  wilderness.  Stript  of  earthly  luxuries,  the  mind  opens  its
portals  to  heavenly  visitation.  This  is  not  a  necessity  arising  out  of  the  nature  of
things,  but  it  is  a  necessity  for  man  in  his  present  state.  The  son  of  Zacharias,  though
a  priest,  turned  his  back  upon  the  temple,  and  chose  the  wilderness  as  the  theatre
most  suitable  for  his  ponderous  uadertakiu'^.  This  the  spirit  of  prophecy  had  foreseen.
It  was  in  the  desert,  Jesus  fed  the  thousands  by  a  creative  word.  In  the  desert,  Paul
was  equipped  for  shaking  the  foundations  of  paganism.  In  Patmos,  John  passed
through  the  portals  of  the  spirit-world.

III.  Human  power  is  formal — God's  power  beau  To  the  eye  of  mortal  sense,
the  Hebrews,  drilled  and  officered,  fought  victoriously  with  Amalek  and  Moab ;  never-
theless, a  clearer  vision  sees  that  it  was  God  that  slew  Sihon,  King  of  the  Amorites,
and  Og,  King  of  Bashan.  Let  us  be  sure  that  what  we  do,  Ood  does  by  us !  Be  we
1  he  agents;  God  the  principal!  In  righteous  warfare,  "fie  teacheth  our  fingers  to
fight."  In  us  hourly  let  God  be  immanent.  "God  willa  it,"  therefore  let  us  will  it
also.     "  He  worketh  in  ns."

IV.  Meditation  and  action  integral  parts  of  hbalthfui,  mkb.  "Te  have
dwelt  long  enough  in  this  mount."  The  body  may  be  wrecked  by  surfeit,  as  well  as  by
hunger.  Knowledge  is  not  entirely  ours,  until  it  is  reduced  to  practice.  Heavenly
wisdom  is  essentially  practical.  All  light  is  designed  for  service.  The  doctrines  of
religion  are  raw  materials,  which  are  to  be  put  into  the  warp  and  woof  of  our  daily
life.  Is  "  the  Lamb  the  light  of  the  heavenly  place  "  ?  The  saints  "  follow  the  Lamb
whithersoever  he  goeth."  Meditation  qualifies  for  action  ;  action  demands  new  medi-
tation. These  are  the  two  wings,  without  both  of  which  the  eagle  cannot  rise.  "  Come
ye  into  the  desert ; "  "  Go  and  preach ; " — these  are  the  twin  behests  of  Christ.

v.  God's  absolute  purposes  leave  full  scope  for  man's  obedience.  How  the
two  things  are  co-related,  we  cannot  ascertain.  The  point  of  iunction  is  among  the
incomprehensible — beneath  the  surface  of  things.  There  is  now  and  again  seeming
discord ;  but  as  we  listen  on  there  is  a  profounder  harmony.  The  Lord  sware  unto
the  patriarchs  to  give  them  the  land  of  Canaan.  Yet  the  spies  brought  back  an  ill
report;  and  the  people  debated  and  murmured,  vacillated  and  countermarched,  as  if
they  had  been  the  umpires  of  their  destiny.

VI.  God's  provision  is  always  more  ample  than  man's  desibb.  God's  plan  for
Israel's  territory  extended  from  Mount  Lebanon  to-  the  Euphrates ;  but  Israel  never
rose  to  the  full  height  of  God's  design.  "  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee "  is  still  the
message  from  heaven  to  every  man.  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it."  "  We
have  not  because  we  ask  not."  Tliere  is  abundance  of  sea-room  in  God's  plan  for
the  largest  human  endeavour ;  and  every  day  the  voice  of  the  Great  Proprietor  reminds
us,  "  There  is  yet  very  much  land  to  be  possessed."    "  All  things  are  yours." — ^D.

Vers.  9 — 18. — The  iletsing  of  good  government.  I.  A  wise  man  disavows  absolute
monarchy.  Legislation,  the  most  diflicult  department  of  government,  had  been
furnished  for  Israel  by  the  Supreme  Mind  of  the  universe  ;  yet  Moses  found  the  task
of  administration  too  much  for  a  single  arm.  The  aim  of-every  ruler  ought  to  be,  not
personal  power,  but  universal  service — the  greatest  good  of  the  greatest  number.  No
wise  man  will  expose  himself  to  the  tremendous  temptation  of  personal  aggrandisement.
Beside,  it  is  a  boon  to  others  to  exercise  the  faculties  of  discrimination  and  judgment.

II.  Popular  choice  op  rulers  to  be  determined  by  a  single  law,  viz.  personal
merit.  To  lift  the  voice  for  an  unqualified  ruler  is  a  crime  against  the  State — an
injury,  and  not  a  benefit,  to  the  person  elect.  To  allow  personal  qualification  to  domi-
nate the  choice,  is  to  make  God  the  umpire.  This  is,  in  civic  affairs,  "  to  do  his  will
on  earth  as  it  is  done  in  heaven."

III.  There  is  BiooM,  both  in  the  Church  and  in  the  State,  for  vaeious  offices.
If  a  man  cannot  rule  five  thousand,  he'may  be  able  to  rule  fifty.  Service  in  a  subordi-
nate station  may  qualify  for  higher  dignity.  Gradation  of  rank  best  conserves  tke
interests  of  the  nation.     "  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law."

IV.  All  HijMAN  authority  is  in  the  stead  of  God.    "  The  judgment  is  God's."


12  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  l  1—18

Magistrates  act  in  God's  stead.  Parents  likewise.  Every  man  is  bound  to  act  as  God
would  act.  He  represents  God  always  and  everywhere.  All  talent  is  a  trust.  We
are  the  stewards  of  God's  estate.

V.  HuMANiTT  IS  PAB  S0PBRIOB  "fo  NATIONALITY,  CLASS,  OB  SECT.  Every  man,  how-
ever poor  or  ignorant,  is  to  be  accounted  a  brother.  In  the  commonwealth  of  Israel
there  are  no  strangers.  Nationality  is  but  a  pasteboard  separation.  "  God  hath  made
of  one  blood  all  nations."  The  great  divider  is  sin.  A  heaven-kindled  eye  penetrates
through  every  crust  of  barbarisn)  and  vice,  and  sees  a  man  beneath.  Here  is  a  kingly
nature,  though  now  enslaved.

VI.  Growth  op  numbers  is  a  token  op  Divine  approbation.  In  the  ratio  of
material  almndance  and  contentment,  is  increase  of  population.  It  was  one  of  the
presages  of  Messiah's  kingdom,  "  they  of  the  city  shall  flourish  like  grass  of  the  earth."
In  heathen  lands  population  is  sparse.  War  and  pestilence  decimate  the  ranks.  In
proportion  as  sound  Christianity  prevails,  the  subjects  of  the  state  augment.  Every
additional  man  ought  to  be  an  increment  of  strength  and  usefulness.

VII.  Prayer  has  a  rbcoonized  place  in  God's  government.  Promise  always  waits
on  prayer,  as  harvest  waits  on  the  husbandman's  toil.  However  abundant  are  the
promises,  yet  for  the  fulfilment  God  will  be  inquired  of  to  do  it  for  us.  When  prayer
has  its  root  in  God's  specific  promise,  it  must  bear  fruit  in  proportion  as  faith  enlarges
her  boughs.     This  is  wise  building,  for  we  found  our  expectations  upon  eternal  rock.

VIII.  Good  men  greatly  desire  their  country's  good.  Patriotism  is  a  goodly
virtue,  though  not  the  noblest.  To  fence  ourselves  round  with  selfish  interests  is
despicable.  We  envy  not  that  man's  narrow  soul  who  has  no  sympathy  nor  energy
for  his  nation's  weal.  The  best  Christian  will  take  some  interest  in  everything — in
municipal  matters,  international  treaties,  literature,  science,  commerce,  art.  In  the
broadest  sense,  he  i?  a  citizen  of  the  world.  He  lives  to  bless  others.  This  is  Christ-
Uke.— D.

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  Deuteronomic  discourses.  I,  The  speaker.  "Moses."  Though
an  hundred  and  twenty  years  old,  "his  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force  abated  "
(oh.  xxxiv.  7) — a  statement  borne  out  by  the  sustained  eloquence  of  these  addresses.
He  speaks  with  the  authority  of  a  prophet,  the  affection  of  a  patriot,  and  the  earnest-
ness of  a  dying  man.

n.  The  hearers.  "All  Israel."  A  new  generation  had  sprung  up  from  that  which
had  received  the  Law  at  Sinai.  1.  All  are  concerned  in  hearing  God's  message.  "  It  ii
your  life  "  (ch.'xxxii.  47).    2.  New-comers  need  new  teaching.

m.  The  situation.  "In  the  wilderness" — still  there  at  the  end  of  forty  years.
The  places  named  (ver.  1),  suggestive  of  past  wanderings  and  rebellions.  Form
a  background  to  the  discourses  that  follow,  and  point  home  their  lessons.  We  learn  :
1.  The  value  of  association  as  an  aid  in  teaching.  2.  Our  past  cannot  be  got  rid  of,
but  it  may  be  utilized.  3.  God's  Word  is  to  be  pondered  in  the  light  of  bygone  ex-
periences. 4.  The  comparison  of  our  actual  situation  with  what  it  might  have  been
(ver.  2)  is  often  a  salutary  exercise  (of.  Luke  xv.  17).

IV.  The  subject.  "  All  that  the  Lord  had  given  him  in  commandment."  We  find
that  this  does  not  refer  to  a  new  commandment,  but  to  the  old  commandment  which
they  had  from  the  beginning  (cf.  1  John  ii.  8).  1.  Men  crave  for  novelty,  but  the
function  of  the  preacher  is  to  remind  them  of  the  truths  which  do  not  change,  and  to
give  "  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,"  until  loyal  and  hearty  obedience  is  rendered
to  the  same.  2.  Exhortation  is  most  effective  when  it  takes  as  its  basis  the  sure  Word
of  God.    3.  God's  Word  is  to  be  spoken  in  its  entirety.

V.  The  time.  "  In  the  fortieth  year,  in  the  eleventh  month" — when  the  attack  on
the  Canaanites  was  about  to  be  renewed,  and  after  signal  tokens  of  Divine  favour  had
already  been  granted  (ver.  4),  1.  God's  mercies  call  for  renewed  dedication  (Ps.  cxvi.
12 — 14).  2.  The  recollections  of  wasted  years  should  prove  an  incentive  to  obedience
in  the  future  (Rom.  xiii.  11,  12;  Eph.  v.  15,  16;  1  Pet.  iv.  3).  3.  We  need  God's
commandment  in  our  memories  and  hearts  when  entering  on  work  in  which  formidable
opposition  is  to  be  encountered,  and  which  will  put  our  fidelity  to  a  severe  test.

VL  The  motive.  1.  The  natural  solicitude  of  old  aye.  It  is  characteristic  of  old
i^e  to  fall  back  upon  and  reiterate  previous  counsels.    Compare  Peter  in  his  second


OH.  1. 1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEliONOMY.  18

Epistle  (i.  16) ;  the  traditional  stories  of  the  old  age  of  John ;  Paul  in  the  pastoral
Epistlesy  "urging  and  repeating  and  dilating  upon  truths  which  have  been  the  food  of
his  life"  (Alford).  2.  The  hwgiver's  knowledge  of  the  rebelliousness  of  the  people's  dis-
position (ch.  ix.  24).  3.  The  Divine  command  (ver.  3).  This  had  respect  to  the  altered
circumstances  of  the  new  generation,  and  to  the  prospect  of  their  entiring  the  land
promised  to  their  fathers,  continuance  in  which  was  conditional  on  obedience. — J.  0.

Ver.  2. — The  might-hnve-beens  of  life.  In  its  present  setting  this  brief  geographical
note  was,  doubtless,  meant  to  suggest  the  lessnn  of  the  evil  results  of  disobedience.
"  Eleven  days' journey,"  yet  the  fortieth  year  still  saw  them  in  the  wilderness.  We
learn:  1.  Sin  turns  short  ways  into  lung  ones.  2.  Sin  entails  on  the  transgressor  need-
less trouble  and  sorrow.  3.  Sin  fills  life  with  fruitless  regrets.  4.  Sin  delays  fulfilment
of  God's  proraises.

The  path  of  obedience  is  in  the  end  the  shortest,  easiest,  safest,  and  happiest. — J.  0.

Vers.  6 — 9. — A  smnmons  to  advance,  Moses  begins  by  reminding  the  Israelites  how
God  had  formerly  summoned  them  to  march  upon  Canaan.  The  summons  came  to
tliem  at  Horeb,  after  a  sojourn  of  eleven  months.  The  verses  may  be  applied  to
illustrate —

I.  The  Church's  danger — to  abide  at  the  mount,  to  settle  down  into  a  state  of
apathy  or  simple  receptivity.  This  is  met  by  the  call  to  action—''  Ye  have  dwelt  long
enough  in  this  mount:  turn  you,  and  take  your  jdurney"  (vers.  6,  7).  Notice:  1.
Israel's  stay  at  the  mount  was  good  while  it  laded.  There  the  nation  enjoyed  a  season
of  rest,  ratified  its  covenant  with  God,  received  the  Law,  constructed  a  sanctuary,  and
was  otherwise  equipped  and  orijanized.  There  must  be  times  of  getting,  of  learning,  of
consulting  for  one's  own  edification,  else  it  will  go  hard  with  us  in  the  work  and  battle
of  life.  But  2.  There  was  a  danger  that  Israel's  stay  at  the  mount  might  last  too  long.
So  is  it  with  the  Church,  when  she  concentrates  her  attention  too  exclusively  on  her  own
spiritual  improvement,  and  forgets  her  mission  to  the  world.  We  have  to  remember
that  we  get  and  learn  only  that  we  may  apply  and  act.  There  is  the  peril  of  religion
becoming  a  species  of  enjoyment.  We  luxuriate  in  retired  communion,  in  restful  fellow-
ship with  God,  in  converse  with  fellow-believers,  in  Church  ordinimces;  and  we  think
how  sweet  it  would  be  if  this  could  always  last.  But  we  are  wrong.  It  would  not  be
good  for  us  always  to  be  in  this  state  of  .'^imple  receiving.  Religion,  divorced  from
active  employment,  must  soon  lose  its  robustness,  and  degenerate  into  a  sickly  religiosity.
There  are  many,  many  Chrisiians  who  have  hi  en  long  enough,  and  far  too  long,  in  the
mount,  and  it  would  be  well  for  themselves  if  they  could  bear  this  voice  summoning
them  to  go  forward.

II.  The  Chukch's  destiny — to  possess  the  land.  The  type  was  the  land  of  Canaan ;
the  antitype,  so  far  as  it  lies  in  time,  is  the  world,  which  it  is  the  Church's  calling
to  conquer  tor  Christ,  and  for  her  own  possession.  St.  Paul  gives  this  interpretation  in
Rom.  iv.  13.  Taking  the  passage  in  this  lifiht,  and  reading  the  wider  truth  into  it,  we
get  the  idea  of  a  land  which  is:  1.  Known  to  Ood  (ver.  7).  Known  thoroughly,  in  all
its  parts,  peoples,  districts,  conformation,  accessibilities,  and  inaccessibilities.  In
advancing  to  take  possession  of  the  world  for  Christ,  we  have  the  encouragement  of
thinking  that  he  knows  piecisely  to  what  kind  of  work  he  is  sending  us,  and  yet
promises  success.  India,  China,  Africa,  etc., — he  knows  them  all,  yet  he  says,  "  Go  in
and  possess."  2.  Oifled  by  Qod  (yet.  8).  It  is  long  since  the  oracle  declared  that  God
had  given  Christ  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for
his  possession  (Ps.  ii.  8).  The  Church,  as  one  with  Christ,  shares  in-his  kingdom,  and
shall  yet  inherit  the  whole  earth.  3.  The  conquest  of  which  is  commanded  by  Ood.
Is'ot,  indeed,  by  carnal  weapons,  as  the  Israelites  were  commanded  to  conquer  Canaan,
nor  yet  by  the  destruction  of  those  against  whom  we  w  ar ;  but  by  the  nobler  weapons
of  the  truth,  and  by  seeking  men's  salvation.  This  is  a  benigner  metliod  of  conquest,
and  it  will  prove  successful  if  we  advance  with  faith  and  courage.  Those  who  persist
in  hardening  themselves  must  indeed  be  destroyed  ;  but  not  by  us.  The  Lord  puts  no
weapon  of  a  kind  to  injure  any  into  our  hands ;,  but  bids  us  leave  vengeance  with  him-
self. Our  means  are  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  prayer,  holy  living,  organized  and
beneficent  activity  to  reach  the  lost  sheep  of  our  great  communities,  and  multiplied
missionary  agencies  in  foreign  lands.


W  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEOKOMY.  [ca.  l  I-IR

ni.  The  Church's  duty — to  obey  her  Lord,  and  go  forward  at  once  to  this  great
work.  1.  He  gives  no  alternative.  2.  The  command  is  express.  3.  The  world  sorely
needs  our  work.  4.  Every  motive  of  gratitude  and  compassion  should  urge  us  to  it.
-J.  0.

Vers.  10, 11. — Israel's  increase.  These  verses  embody  the  expression  of  a  very
natural  state  of  feeling  in  contemplating  the  marvel  of  the  Church's  growth.

I.  The  Chdbch's  inceeabe  an  object  of  desibe.  "  The  Lord  God  of  your  fatheis
make  you,"  etc.  (ver.  11).   Such  increase  is:  1.  A  token  of  Divine  favour  (Acts  xi.  24).

2.  A   manifestation  of  IDivine  power  (1  Cor.  i.  18 — 30 ;   Bph.  i.  19 ;    1  Thess.  i.  5).

3.  A  source  of  blessing  to  the   world  (Ps.  Ixvii.).     4.  A  fulfilment  of  the  Divine
counsels  (Bph.  i.  10).    5.  Means  the  ascendancy  of  true  religion.

II.  The  Ghuech's  increase  an  object  op  wonder.  (Ver.  10.)  The  rapid  spread,
the  extraordinary  victories,  the  prolonged  empire,  and  the  undecajing  vitality  of  the
Christian  religion  are  the  most  wonderful  things  in  history,  and  a  proof  of  its  Divine
origin.  As  Israel  increased  by  the  Divine  blessing  at  an  unprecedented  rate,  and  in
spite  of  all  Pharaoh's  attempts  to  check  the  increase,  so  has  the  Church  flourished  and
spread,  proving  herself  in  her  unarmed  strength  more  than  a  match  for  the  deadliest
powers  which  can  be  arrayed  against  her.  The  present  century  has  witnessed  a  re-
markable revival  of  this  propagative  energy  of  Christianity  (comp.  Numb,  xxiii.  23).

III.  The. Church's  increase  a  matter  of  promise.  (Ver.  11.)  The  promise  to
Abraham  of  a  countless  seed  embraced  in  its  widest  import  the  spiritual,  not  less  than
the  natural,  Israel — his  seed  in  Christ  (Rom.  iv.  16  ;  Gal.  iii.  7 — 10,  14,  16,  26,  29).
(Cf.  the  promises  in  Isa.  liii.  10 — 12 ;  liv  1 — 3 ;  be  1 — 12,  with  Dan.  ii.  35,  44 ;  Matt.
viil  11 ;  Rev.  vii.  9).— J.  0.

Vera.  9 — 16. — Division  of  labour,    (Cf.  Exod.  xviii.  13 — 27.)     An  instance  of  a-'
good  idea  (1)  sucrgested,  (2)  readily  adopted,  (3)  generally  approved  of.     Reminds  us
that  division  of  labour  is  as  important  in  Church  work  as  in  the  arts.

I.  The  neglect  of  division  of  labour  leads  to  serious  evils.  1.  The  work  is
not  overtaken.  "  Not  able  "  (ver.  9).  2.  Those  who  have  to  do  it  are  greatly  over-
taxed. "Cumbrance,"  "burden"  (ver.  12).  3.  Energy  is  wasted  on  subordinate
tasks  which  might  be  applied  to  better  purpose.

II.  The  adoption  of  division  op  labour  secures  obvious  advantages.  1.  Re-
lieves the  responsible  heads.  2.  Expedites  business  and  promotes  order.  3.  Secures
that  the  work  is  better  done.  4.  Utilizes  varieties  of  talent.  But  parties  must  be  as
willing  to  co-operate  as  they  were  here.

III.  Rightly  to  sbcitke  the  advantages  of  division  op  labour  there  must  be
efficient  organization.  When  Moses  took  in  hand  the  appointment  of  assistants,
he  did  it  thoroughly  (ver.  15).  The  work  which  each  is  to  do  must  not  be  left
to  haphazard,  or  to  "understandings,"  or  to  the  tastes  and  inclinations  of  individuals,
but  should  be  definitely  marked  out.  There  must  be  organization  and  distribu-
tion of  tasks  on  a  general  plan,  which,  while  it  affords  room  for  all  grades  of  talent,
allots  work  with  a  view  to  the  aptitudes  which  each  is  known  to  possess.  It  is
characteristic  of  Moses'  scheme:  1.  That  it  took  aiivantage  of  existing  institutions.
2.  That  it  rested  on  a  broad,  popular  basis ;  elective  (ver.  13). — J.  0.

Vers.  16,  XT  .—Judging.  The  rules  here  laid  down,  while  primarily  applicable  in
the  administration  of  law,  are,  in  their  spirit  and  for  the  most  part  in  their  letter
equally  fitted  to  guide  our  privaite  judgments.  A  proneness  to  judge  is  condemned  by
Christ  (Matt.  vii.  1) ;  but  his  rebuke  of  the  censorious  spirit  is  not  to  be  read  as  for-
bidding the  framing  of  such  judgments  upon  the  character,  actions,  and  pretensions
cf  others  as  the  circumstances  of  our  position  may  render  necessary.  We  are  called
every  day  of  our  lives  to  form,  and  frequently  to  express,  judgments  upon  men
measures,  causes,  theories,  disputes,  proposals  ;  judgments  as  to  true  and  false  right
and  wrong,  wise  and  unwise,  expedient  and  inexpedient.  Matters  are  appealed  to  us
as  individuals,  pr  as  a  part  of  the  general  community,  on  which  judgment  is  expressly
asked.  We  must  judge  that  we  may  know  how  to  act.  All  this  involves  the  possi-
I'llity  of  judging  rashly;  o(  judging  with  bias  and  prejudice;  of  judging  so  as  to  do


OB.  1. 1—180  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEiiOXOMY.  U

wrong  to  individuals ;  of  judging  so  as  to  injure  truth  and  retard  progress  and  Ira-
provement.    The  text  teaches  us,  on  the  contrary —

L  That  causes,  before  being  judged,  aee  to  be  fairly  heard.  How  many
judgments  are  passed  daily  in  utter  ignorance  of  the  real  facts  of  the  case,  and  without
any  attempt  to  ascertain  them,  perhaps  without  the  means  of  ascertaining  them  !
Such  judgments  are  ipso  facto  unjust.  It  is  only  by  the  rarest  chance  they  can  be
right,  and  their  lightness  being  accidental  does  not  justify  them.  Let  judgments  be
reserved  for  cases  in  which  we  have  an  opportunity  of  full  investigation.  Hear  both
sides,  and  hear  them  (1)  fully,  (2)  candidly,  and  (3)  patiently.

II.  That  causes,  after  being  heakd,  abe  to  have  judgment  passed  upon  them
WITH  STRICTT  IMPABTIALITT.  "  Judge  uot  according  to  the  appearance,"  said  Jesus,
"  but  judge  righteous  judgment" — an  instance  illustrating  that  wider  view  <rf  judging
which  vfe  are  here  taking  (John  vii,  24).  Equal  measure  is  to  be  meted  out  to  all.
We  are  to  judge  impartially  as  between  brother  and  brother,  fellow-citizen  and  foreigner,
rich  and  poor,  applying  the  same  principles  and  standards  to  each  case,  and  keoiing  in
view  the  essential  merits  as  the  one  thing  to  be  regarded.  This  is  the  plain  rule  of
justice,  though  we  all  feel  how  difficult  it  is  to  act  up  to  it.

III.  That  JUDGMENT? upon  CAUSES  IS  TO  BE  GIVEN  FEABLEBSLT.  "  Ye  shall  not  be
afraid  of  the  face  of  man."  (Cf.  the  Regent  Moi  ton's  eulogy  on  Knox — "  There  lies  he
who  never  feared  the  face  of  man.")  Even  when  just  judgment  is  being  pronounced
internally,  the  fear  of  man,  or  the  desire  of  man's  favour,  or  the  dread  of  temporal
consequences,  often  leads  to  a  time-serving  tampering  with  conviction,  to  a  saying  and
doing  of  the  thing  we  do  not  at  heart  approve  of.     This  is  the  worst  kind  of  cowardice.

IV.  That  judgment  upon  causes  is  to  be  given  undbb  a  dub  sense  of  responsi-
bility TO  God.  "  The  judgment  is  God's."  Judges  are  his  vicegerents;  deriving  their
authority  from  him,  expressing  the  judgment  of  his  righteousness,  anticipating  his
own  final  judgment,  and  themselves  responsible  to  him  for  the  manner  in  which  they
exercise  their  functions.  Every  biassed,  untrue,  and  insincere  judgment  is  a  misrepre-
sentation of  that  truth  and  rectitude  which  have  their  ground  in  God's  own  being.

V.  That  in  causes  on  which  we  aee  incompetent  to  peonouncb,  judgment  is  not
TO  be  attempted.   (Ver.  17.) — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 18. — The  impartiality  of  God  to  be  reflected  in  the  judges  of  his  people.  In
the  following  Homilies  we  adhere  to  the  traditional  view  of  the  Mosaic  authorship  of
the  book,  believing  that  no  sufficient  evidence  has  yet  been  adduced  by  the  critics  for
departing  from  that  view.  Moses  enters  upon  his  addresses  in  the  land  of  Moab  by
recapitulating  the  salient  points  of  the  Exodus.  The  first  notable  reference  is  to  the
appointment  of  the  judges.  The  qualifications  and  directions  here  recorded  are  fitted
to  throw  precious  light  upon  the  Divine  character.    Here  let  us  notice —

I.  There  was  to  be  no  respect  of  persons  in  judgment.  And  here  we  may  quote
a  definition  which  will  materially  aid  us  in  this  subject :  "  By  the  word  person  the
Scripture  signifies  not  a  man,  but  those  things  in  a  man  which,  being  conspicuous  to  the
eyes,  usually  conciliate  favour,  honour,  and  dignity,  or  attract  hatred,  contempt,  and
disgrace.  Such  are  riches,  wealth,  power,  nobility,  magistiacy,  country,  elegance  of
form,  on  the  one  hand;  and  on  the  other,  poverty,  necessity,  ignoble  birth,  slovenli-
ness, contempt,  and  the  like."  These  Jewish  judges,  therefore,  were  directed  to  allow
none  of  these  personal  accidents  to  influence  their  judgments  in  the  cases  committed  to
them,  but  to  decide  as  matters  of  pure  equity.

II.  There  was  to  be  no  fear  of  man  in  their  judgments.  The  consequences  to
themselves  were  not  to  be  regarded.  They  were  to  be  fearless  officers,  representing  the
Most  High.

III.  We  see  here  that  with  God  there  can  be  no  respect  of  persons  and  no  fear
OF  MAN.  The  strict  impartiality  of  God  has  been  questioned,  if  representations  of  his
procedure  drawn  from  the  Divine  Word  are  accepted.  Now,  the  whole  plan  of  salvation
by  grace  appears  favouritism  and  partiality.  What  is  the  meaning  of  "  grace"?  Un-
doubtedly/ree,  unmerited  favour.  If,  then,  salvation  is  by  grace  (fclph.  ii.  8),  must  not
God  be  liable  to  the  charge  of  partiality  ?  Such,  at  least,  is  the  reasoning  of  some  in
the  interests  of  certain  systems.

But  when  the  matter  is  looked  into  more  closely,  we  find  that  salvation  by  free  grace


l«


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[OH.  1. 1»— 48


is  the  most  conclusive  evidence  of  God's  impartiality.  It  is  really  saying  to  all  men,
"  Unless  you  give  up  the  notion  of  recommending  yourselves  to  me  ;  unless  you  sur-
render the  idea  of  some  special  claim  in  your  heing  or  your  life  upon  me ;  unless,  in  ■
word,  you  lay  aside  the  fancy  that  you  must  be  partially  and  exceptionally  treated,
which  is  the  whole  meaning  of  self-righteousness,  I  cannot  save  you."  This  is  impar-
tiality par  excellence  ;  and  this  is  exactly  God's  position  in  offering  salvation  to  me«„

All  who  refuse  salvation  are  really  refusing  to  be  treated  impartially,  and  an
clamouring  for  exceptional  consideration  on  the  ground  of  some  fancied  merit.  The
rejected  at  the  last  will  be  found  to  be  those  who  wanted  favouritism,  but  put  away
free  grace.  The  line  of  thought  opened  up  here  may  be  profitably  carried  on.— R.  M.  £.


EXPOSITION.


Vers.  19 — ^28. — ^Here  Moses  passes  from
the  judges  to  the  people  at  large;   from
charging  officials  to  judge  righteously,  to
reminding  the  people  that  they  also  had
received   from  him  commandments  which
they  had  to  obey.  The  "  things"  referred  to
are  either  the  injunctions  specified  in  Exod.
xxi.,  etc.,  or  simply  the  instructions  men-
tioned in  the  preceding  verses.    God  had
called  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt  that  they
should  go  up  at  once  to  Canaan,  and  he  had
by  Moses  done  all  that  was  needed  for  this.
But  they  had  been  rebellious,  and  had  op-
posed God's  commands,  the  consequence  of
which  was  that  they  had  been  made  to  ex-
perience various  trials,  especially  to  wander
nearly  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  so  that
of  those  who  came  out  of  Eg>pt  only  two
were  privileged  to  see  the  promised  land.
The  words  of  Moses  in  this  section  supple-
ment and  complete  the  narrative  in  Numb,
xiii. ;  but  the  words  are  those,  not  of  a  com-
piler, but  of  one  who  had  been  himself  a
witness  of  all  he  narrates.

Vers.  19-26.— That  great  and  terriblewil-
derness:  the  desert  forming  the  western
side  of  the  Stony  Arabia.  It  bears  now  the
name  of  Et-TiJi,  i.e.  The  Wandering,  a  name
•'  doubtleirs  derived  from  tiie  wanderings  of
the  Israelites,  the  tradition  of  which  has
been  handed  down  through  a  period  of  three
thousand  years.  ...  It  is  a  pastoral  country ;
unfitted  as  a  whole  for  cultivation,  because
of  its  scanty  soil  and  scarcity  of  water  "  (Dr.
Porter,  in  Kitto's  'Biblical  Cyclopsedii,'
vol.  iii.  p.  1075).  In  the  northern  piirt
especially  the  country  is  rugged  and  bare,
with  vast  tracts  of  sand,  over  which  the
icorching  simoom  often  sweeps  (see  on
ver.  1).  This  wilderness  they  had  seen,
had  known,  and  had  experience  of,  and
their  experience  had  been  such  that  the
district  through  which  they  had  been
doomed  to  wander  appeared  to  them  dread-


ful.   Passing  by  the  way  of  the  Amoritee,

as  they  had  been  commanded  (ver.  7),  they
came  to  Kadesh-barnea  (see  Numb.  xii.  16).
Their  discontent  broke  out  oftener  than
once,  before  they  reached  this  place  (see
Numb,  xi.,  xii.);  but  Moses,  in  this  re-
capitulation, passes  over  these  earlier  in-
stances of  their  rebelliousness,  and  hastens
to  remind  them  of  the  rebellion  at  Kadesh
(Numb,  xiii.,  xiv.),  because  it  was  this
which  led  to  the  nation  being  doomed  to
wander  in  the  wilderness  until  the  genera-
tion that  came  out  of  Egypt  had  died.  It
was  through  faith  in  God  that  Canaan  was
to  be  gained  and  occupied  by  Israel;  but
this  faith  they  lacked,  and  so  they  came
short  of  what  God  had  summoned  them  to
attain  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  22;  cvi.  24;  Heb.  iii.
18,  19 ;  comp.  2  Chron.  xx.  20 ;  Isa.  vii.  9).
Hence,  when  they  had  come  to  the  very
borders  of  the  promised  land,  and  the  hills
of  Canaan  were  before  their  eyes,  and  Moses
said  to  them,  in  the  name  of  God,  Oo  up,
possess  ("asyndeton  emphaticum,"  Mi-
chaells),  they  hung  back,  and  proposed  that
men  should  be  sent  out  to  svurvey  the  land
and  bring  a  repcirt  concerning  it.  This  was
approved  of  by  Moses ;  but  when  the  spies
returned  and  gave  their  report,  the  people
were  discouraged,  and  refused  to  go  up.
They  were  thus  rebellious  against  the  com-
mandment (literally,  the  mouth,  the  express
will)  of  Jehovah  their  God ;  and  not  only
BO,  but  with  signal  ingrntitude  and  impiety
they  murmured  against  him,  and  attributed
their  deliverance  out  of  Egypt  to  God's
hatred  of  them,  that  he  might  destroy  them
(see  Numb.  xiii.  1 — 33,  to  which  the  nai-
nitive  here  corresponds).

Ver.  27. — ^Ye  murmured  in  your  tents ;  aa
allusion  to  what  is  recorded  in  Numb.  xiv.  1,
etc.  Moses  addresses  the  people  then  with
him  as  if  they  had  been  the  parties  who
so  rebelled  and  murmured  at  Kadesh,
though  all  that  generation,  except  himself,
Joshua,  and  Caleb,  had  perished.  This  lie
does,  not  merely  because  of  the  solidarity
of  the  nation,  but  also  that  he  might
suggest  to  them  the  possibility  that  the


OH.  1. 19—46.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUl^JiBONOMT.


U


e^me  evil  spirit  might  still  lurk  among
them,  and  consequently  the  need  of  being
on  their  guard  against  allowing  it  to  get
scope.

Ver.  28.— Our  brethren  have  discouraged
our  heart;  literally,  have  melted  or  made
to  flow  down  our  heart  (ispn,  Hiph.  of  odd,
to  flow  down  or  melt),  have  made  «8  faint'
hearted.  The  cities  are  great  and  walled
up  to  heaven;  literally,  are  great  and  fortified
in  the  heavens.  To  their  excited  imagina-
tion, the  walls  and  towers  of  the  cities
seemed  as  if  they  reached  the  very  sky ;  so
when  men  cease  to  have  faith  in  GoiJ,  diffi-
culties appear  insurmountable,  and  the
power  of  the  adversary  is  exaggerated  until
courage  is  paralyzed  and  despair  banishes
hope.  Sons  of  the  Anakims;  elsewhere
(Numb.  xiii.  22 ;  Josh.  xv.  14 ;  Judg.  i.  20)
children  or  sons  of  the  'AnaJc.  'Auak  may
originally  have  been  the  proper  name  of  an
individual,  but  it  appears  in  the  Bible  rather
as  the  designation  of  the  tribe.  It  Is  the
word  for  neck,  and  this  race,  which  were
strong  and  powerful  men,  or  their  pro-
genitor, may  have  been  remarkable  for
thickness  of  neck;  this,  at  least.  Is  more
probable  than  that  it  was  from  length  of
neck  (Gesenius)  that  they  got  the  name,  for
a  long  neck  is  usually  associated  with  weak-
ness rather  than  strength.  Some  have  sup-
posed the  Anakim  to  have  beep  originally
Gushites ;  but  the  origin  of  the  tribe  is  in-
volved in  obscurity.

Vers.  29 — i\J. — Moses  endeavoured  to
rouse  the  dr'^oping  courage  of  the  people,
and  persuade  them  to  go  up  by  reminding
them  that  God,  who  was  with  them,  would
go  before  them,  and  fight  for  them  as  he  had
often  done  before;  but  without  success,  so
that  God  was  angry  with  them,  and  forbade
tbeir  entrance  into  Cauaan.  This  is  not
mentioned  in  Numbers,  probably  because
Moses'  appeal  was  unsuccessful.  The  whole
of  that  generation  was  bound  to  fall  in  the
wilderness,  except  Oaltib  and  Joshua ;  only
their  children  should  enter  the  promised
land.

Vers.  29,  30. — Moses  exhorts  the  people
not  to  be  afraid,  as  if  they  had  to  encounter
these  terrible  enemies  solely  in  their  own
strength;  for  Jehovah  their  God  was  with
them  and  would  go  before  them,  as  he  had
gone  before  them  hitherto,  to  protect  them
and  strike  down  their  enemies.

Ver.  31.— Not  only  at  the  Bed  Sea  did
God  appear  for  the  defence  of  his  people
and  the  discomfiture  of  their  enemies,  but
also  in  the  wilderness,  which  they  had  seen
(as  in  ver.  19),  where  ("'?'>! ,  ellipticuUy  for
'13  ik'n  )  Jehovah  their  God  bore  them  as  a

DEUTBBONOMY.


man  beareth  his  son,  sustaining,  tending,
supporting,  and  carrying  them  over  diffi-
cutties  (comp.  Numb.  xi.  12,  where  a  similar
figure  occurs ;  see  also  Isa.  xlvi.  3, 1 ;  Uiii.  9,
etc. ;  Ps.  xxiii.).

Vers.  32, 83.— Yet  ia  this  thing  ye  did  not
believe  the  Lord  your  God;  literally.  With
this  thing  [or  With  this  word']  ye  were  not
believing  in  Jehovah  your  God.  The  Hebrew
-\2i,  like  the  Greek  pfjiiu,  signifies  either
thing  or  word.  If  the  former  rendering  be
adopted  here,  the  meaning  will  be.  Not-
withstanding this  fact  of  which  you  have
had  experience,  viz.  hoW  God  has  interposed
for  your  protection  and  deliverance,  ye  were
still  unbelieving  in  him.  If  the  latter
rendering  be  adopted,  the  meaning  will  be.
Notwithstanding  what  I  then  said  to  you,
ye  remained  unbelieving,  etc.  This  latter
seems  the  more  probable  meaning.  In  the
Hebrew  text  there  is  a  strong  stop  athnacK)
after  this  word,  as  if  a  pause  of  astonishment
followed  this  utterance — Notwithstanding
this  word,  strange  to  say  I  ye  were  not  be-
lieving, etc.  The  participle  ("believing")
is  intended  to  indicate  the  continuing  of
this  unbelief.  So  also  in  ver.  34,  the  par-
ticiple form  is  used — "who  was  going  in
the  way  before  you,"  to  indicate  that  not
once  and  again,  but  continually,  the  Lord
went  before  them;  and  this  made  the  sin
of  their  unbelief  all  the  more  marked  and
aggravated.  (For  the  fact  here  refeixed  to,
see  Exod.  xiii.  21,  etc. ;  Numb.  iz.  15,  etc. ;
X.  33—36.)

Ver.  34. — And  the  Lord  heard  the  voice  of
your  words,  and  he  was  wroth,  and  sware,
etc.  (comp.  Numb.  liv.  21 — ^24).

Vers.  35,  36. — They  were  all,  the  whole
generation  of  them,  evil,  and  therefore  not
a  man  of  them  should  see  the  good  land
which  God  had  promised  to  their  fathers,
with  the  exception  of  Caleb,  who  had
wholly  followed  the  Lord — had  remainid
steadfast  and  faithful  whilst  the  others  fell
away.  Joshua  also  was  exempted  from  this
doom;  but  before  mentioning  him,  Moses
refers  to  himself  as  having  also  come  under
the  Divine  displeasure.

Ver.  37. — The  Lord  was  angry  with  me
also  for  your  sakes,  saying.  Thou  also  jhalt
not  go  in  thither.  This  must  be  regarded
as  parenthetical,  for  what  he  here  refers
to  in  regard  to  himself  occurred,  not  at
the  time  of  the  rebellion  at  K&desh,  but
at  the  time  of  the  second  arrival  of  the
people  at  that  place,  many  years  later.  This
parenthetical  reference  to  himself  was  pro-
bably thrown  in  by  Moses  for  the  purpose
of  preparing  for  what  he  was  about  to  say
respecting  Joshua,  in  whom  the  people  were
to  find  a  leader  after  he  himself  was  gone.
It  may  be  noted  also  that  Moses  distinguishes
between  the  anger  of  the  Lord  against  him .


18


THE  BOOK.  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  1. 19— i6.


and  the  wrath  which  broke  forth  upon  the
people — a  distinction  which  is  aptly  pre-
gerved  in  the  Authorized  Version  by  the
words  "  was  wroth  "  (f\  Vfj)  and  "  was  angry  "
(C)3j<).  For  your  sakes;  ratlier,  because  of  you,
on  account  of  you.  The  Hebrew  word  (7^J)
oomes  from  a  root  meaning  to  roll,  and
iignifies  primarily  a  turn  in  events,  a  cir-
cumstance, an  occa&ion  or  reason.  Moses
reminds  the  Israelites  that  the  misconduct
of  the  people  was  what'  led  to  God's  being
angry  also  with  him  (see  Numb.  xx.  7,  etc. ;
comp.  Ps.  cvi.  32,  33),

Ver.  38. — Though  the  rebellious  genera-
tion were  to  perish,  and  Moses  was  not  to
be  permitted  to  enter  Canaan,  God  would
not  depart  from  his  promise,  but  would
by  another  leader  bring  the  people  to  the
inheritance  which  he  had  sworn  to  their
fathers  to  give  them.  (For  the  account  of
Joshua's  appointment  and  installs!  tion,  see
Numb,  xxvii.  15 — 23.)  Which  standeth  be-
fore thee;  i.e.  to  be  thy  minister  or  servant
(Exod.  xxiv.  13 ;  xxxiii.  1 1 ;  Numb.  xi.  28 ;
comp.  for  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  ch.
X.  8 ;  xviii.  7 ;  L)an.  i.  5).  Encourage  Mm ;
literally,  strengthen  him  (comp.  ch.  ill.  21,
22  ;  xxxi.  7,  8).  Inherit  it ;  the  "  it "  refers
back  to  ver.  35,  "  that  good  land."  In  vers.
8  and  21,  the  land  is  spoken  of  as  to  be
possessed  by  the  Israelites ;  here  it  is
spoken  of  as  to  be  inherited  by  them.  The
former  lias  reference  to  their  having  to
wrest  the  land  by  force  from  the  Canaanites
(BiT,  to  occupy  by  force,  to  dispossess;  of,
ch.  ii.  12,  21,  22,  where  the  verb  is,  in  the
Authorized  Version,  rendered  by  "  de-
stroy");  the  latter  has  reference  to  their
receiving  the  land  as  a  heritage  (hm)  from
God,  who,  when  he  diviiled  to  the  nations
their  inheritance,  assigned  Canaan  to  the
children  of  Israel  (ch.  xxxii.  8).  "  Joshua  the
executor  of  the  inheritance  "  (Schroeder).

Ver.  39.— Only  among  the  young  of
that  generation  should  the  inheritance  be
divided,  as  they  had  no  part  in  the  rebellion
of  their  seniors.  Your  little  ones ;  i.e.  chil-
dren beginning  to  walk  (f)p,  from  C]DB,  to
trip,  to  take  short  and  quick  steps).  And
your  children — boys  and  girls — which  in  that
day  had  no  knowledge  between  good  and
evil ;  rather,  of  whom  [ye  said]  they  know  not
to-day  good  and  evil.  The  Hebrews  were
wont  to  express  totality  or  universality  by
specifying  contradictory  opposites,  as,  e.g.
great  and  small  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  30),  master
and  scholar  (Mai.  ii.  20),  free  and  bond
(Bev.  xiii.  16;  xix.  18),  shut  up  and  left
(oh.  xxxii.  86,  where  see  note;  1  Kings  xiv.
10),  etc.  Accordingly,  when  good  and  evil
are  set  over  against  each  other,  the  notion
of  entirenesB  or  universality  is  expressed.
1'huB,  when  Laban  and  Bethuel  said  to


Abraham's  servant,  "  We  cannot  speak  unto
thee  bad  or  good"  (Gen.  xxiv.  50),  the
meaning  is.  We  can  say  nothing  at  all.
Absalom  spake  to  Amnon  "neither  good
nor  bad"  (2  Sam.  xiii.  22);  that  is,  he  did
not  say  anything  to  him.  The  woman  of
Tekoa  said  to  David,  "  As  an  angel  of  God,
so  is  my  lord  the  king  to  discerji  good  end
bad  "  (2  Sam.  xiv.  17) ;  i.e.  There  is  nothing
the  king  does  not  know — his  knowledge  is
universal.  Hence  to  know  good  and  evil
came  to  mean  to  be  intelligent,  and  not  to
know  good  and  evil  to  be  unintelligent,  as
is  a  babe.  The  children  here  referred  to
knew  nothing,  and  consequently  could  not
be  held  as  morally  responsible;  comp.
Isa.  vii  15 ;  Homer, '  Odyssey,'  xviii.  228—

"  otSa  iKcuTTa
i<rS\d  re  ksI  ret  x^/>^">'  '<'p^s  S*  en  viimot  iia."

Ver.  40. — The  command  to  go  to  the
mount  of  the  Araoiites  (ver.  7)  is  recalled,
and  they  are  ordered  to  turn  into  the  wilder-
ness and  go  by  the  way  leading  to  the  Bed
Sea  (comp.  Numb.  xiv.  25).

Vers.  41—46. — The  people,  appalled  at
the  prospect  of  another  sojourn  in  the  wilder-
ness, yet  still  rebellious  and  disobedient  to
Grod's  command,  though  professing  peni-
tence, determined,  in  spite  of  direct  pro-
hibition on  the  part  of  God  by  Moses,  to  go
up  and  force  their  way  into  Canaan ;  but
were  punished  fortheir  presumption  by  being
utterly  defeated  and  put  to  flight  by  the
Amorites  (comp.  Numb.  xiv.  40—45).

Ver.  41. — We  have  sinned;  in  Numbers
it  is  simply  said  that  "  the  people  mourned
greatly"  (bemoaned  themselves,  i^iasn');  but
this  is  not  incompatible  with  the  statement
here  that  they  confessed  their  sins  ;  the  one
would  naturally  accompany  the  other.
Their  confession,  however,  was  in  word
only ;  their  conduct  showed  that  it  was  not
sincere.  In  Numbers  (xiv.  44)  it  is  said,
"  They  presumed  to  go  up ; "  here  it  is  said
(ver.  41),  Ye  were  ready  to  go  up,  rather.
Ye  acted  heedlessly  with  levity,  or  frivo-
lously, to  go  up.  The  verb  here  (wnm)
occurs  only  in  this  place,  and  is  of  doubtful
signification.  The  Babbins  compare  it  with
the  lun,  lo  we  1  here  we  be  1  of  the  people
in  Numb.  xiv.  40.  It  is  the  Hiph.  of  pn
which  is  supposed  to  be  the  same  as  the
Arabic  ^^Ldi,  to  be  light,  easy;  and  from
this  the  meaning, !'  ye  went  up  heedlessly,"
is  deduced.  None  of  the  ancient  versions,
however,  give  this  meaning.  The  LXX.
has  aufaSpoiaBevTcs  oyc/SofveTe  us  rh  6pos ;
the  Vulgate,  instru^ti  armia  pergeretis  in
mmlem ;  Onk.,  pDc"?  jimafi  (and  ye  begaa  to


OH.  It  19 — 16.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBBOiSOMy.


1»


Moend);  Syriao,kQSQ^L


'VrW^^


(and  ye  incited  yourselves  to  go  up).

Ver.  42;— Moses,  by  the  command  of  God,
vamed  the  people  that,  if  they  presumed  to
go  up,  they  should  go  without  his  protection,
und  so  would  certainly  fall  before  their
enemies.

Ver.  43. — In  vain  were  they  thus  warned.
Moses  spoke  to  them  as  God  commanded,
but  they  would  not  be  persuaded.  Went
presumptuously ;  rather,  acted  insolently  and
went  up  ;  margin,  Authorized  Version,  "  Ye
were  presumptuous,  and  went  up."  The
verb  here  (Tin,  from  -m,  to  boil)  signifies
tropically,  to  act  proudly,  haughtily,  in-
solently (comp.  Neh.  zi.  29,  Authorized
Version,  "dealt  proudly  ").

Ver.  44. — The  Amorites,  for  the  Canaanites
generally;  in  Numbers,  the  Amalekites  are
specially  mentioned  as  joining  witli  the
Amorites  in  chastising  the  Israelites.  These
tribes  came  down  from  the  higher  mountain
range  to  the  lower  height  which  the  Israel-
ites hiid  gained,  and  diove  them  with  great
slaughter  as  far  as  Hormah,  in  Seir,  chasing
them  as  bees  do,  which  pursue  with  keen
ferocity  those  who  disturb  them.  Hormah
(Ban-place),  the  eurlier  name  of  which  was
Zephath  (Judg.  L  17),  was  a  royal  city  of
the  Canaanites,  taken  by  the  Israelites
towards  the  close  of  their  wanderings,  and
placed  by  them  under  a  ban  (Numb.  xxi.  1,
etc.),  which  ban  was  fully  executed  only  in
the  time  of  the  Judges.  It  is  here  and  else-
where called  Hormah  by  anticipation.  The
old  name  Zephath  seems  to  have  survived
that  given  to  it  by  the  Israelites  in  the


name  Sebaita  or  Sepata,  the  Arabic  fora
of  Zephath,  the  name  of  a  heap  of  ruins
on  the  western  slope  of  the  rocky  mountain-
plateau  Rakhmah,  about  two  hours  and  a
half  south-west  of  Khalasa  (Ritter,  '  Geo-
graphy of  Palestine,'  i.  431  ;  Palmer,
'  Desert  of  Et-Tth,'  p.  289,  etc.).  This  is  a
more  probable  identification  than  that  of
Robinson  ('Res.,'ii.  18),  who  finds  Hormah
in  the  rocky  defile  of  Es-Sufah,  an  unlikely
place  for  a  city  of  the  importance  of  Zephath
to  be  in.

Ver.  45.— Ye  returned;  i.e.  either  to
KaJesh,  where  Moses  had  remained,  or  from
their  rebellious  and  defiant  attitude  to  one
of  apparent  submission  and  contrition,  or
the  whole  phrase,  "  Ye  returned  and  wept,"
may  mean  merely  that  they  wept  again,  as
in  Numb.  xi.  4,  where  the  same  words  are
used.  And  wept.  They  mourned  their  mis-
fortune, and  compl  lined  on  account  of  it
(comp.  for  the  meaning  of  the  phrase.  Numb.
xl.  4,  18,  20)  Before'  Jehovah;  i.e.  before
the  tabernacle  or  sanctuary  (comp.  Judg.
XX.  23,  26).  Their  mourning  was  not  that
of  true  repentance,  and,  therefore,  the  Lord
would  not  listen  to  them  or  give  heed  to
their  wail  (comp.  Prov.  i.  24,  etc.).

Ver.  46. — It  was  unnecessary  that  Moses
should  tell  the  people  the  precise  length  of
time  they  abode  in  Kadesh  after  tills,  be-
cause that  was  well  known  to  them;  he,
therefore,  contents  himself  with  saying  that
they  remained  there  as  long  as  they  did
remain  (comp.  for  a  similar  expression,  ch.
ix.  25).  How  long  they  actually  remained
there  cannot  be  determined,  fur  the  expres-
sion, many  days,  is  wholly  indefinite,


H0MILETIC3.

Vers.  19 — 33. — Sending  the  spies.  This  paragraph  contains  a  brief  review  of
events  which  are  recorded  in  Numb,  xiii.,  xiv.  Israel  had  left  the  wilderness  of  Sinai  ;
the  cloud  now  rested  in  the  wilderness  of  Paran.  At  this  point  they  were  not  very
many  days'  journey  from  the  land  of  promise.  But  it  would  seem  that  they  did  not
like  to  go  in  and  take  possession  of  the  land  without  more  information  than  they  as  yet
possessed  as  to  its  accessibility  and  its  fitness  for  their  permanent  home.  So  they
proposed  that  spies  should  be  sent  ahead.  We  gather  that,  at  the  desire  of  the  people,
Moses  asked  advice  of  the  Lord,  and  in  consequence  he  was  bidden  to  accede  to  their
request.  Twelve  men  were  sent.  Ten  brought  an  evil  report  of  the  land ;  two  only
were  full  of  heart  and  hope,  strong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to  God.  Numbers  carried
more  weight  than  worth.  The  report  of  ten  bore  down  that  of  two.  The  people
would  not  believe  the  Lord.  They  said  in  their  unbelief,  "  Let  us  make  a  captain,
and  return  into  Egypt,"  and  even  (Neh.  ix.  17)  "appointed  a  captain  to  return  to
their  bondage."  And  a  sad  and  sorrowful  glance  does  Moses  cast  over  the  sin  of  that
time.  Let  us  glance  at  it  too.  We  will  endeavour  to  gather  a  true  estimate  of  the
course  which  Israel  took,  taking  care,  as  we  go  on,  to  see  how  far  the  incidents  recorded
here  convey  instruction  to  many  whose  feelings  are  analogous  to  theirs.  In  estimating
this  case,  let  us  look —

L  At  the  cotJESE  Israel  took  in  senddto  the  spies.  1.  It  was  unnecessary.  Fo»
they  had  been  redeemed  by  a  strong  hand  and  by  a  stretched-ont  arm  from  the  bondagi


2d  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  L™.  1. 19— 46

and  degradation  of  Egypt ;  their  deliverance  had  been  effected  for  them  by  the  free  love,
spontaneous  care,  and  watchful  providence  of  God.  Surely  it  should  not  have  been
hard  to  argue  on  this  wise :  "  He  who  has  shown  us  such  wondrous  mercy  will  not  be
wanting  to  us  to  the  end."  It  was  surely  needless  to  send  out  any  scouts  to  Canaan,
to  survey  the  land  before  them.  A  wiser  and  letter  care  than  theirs  had  done  this
for  them,  and  there  was  no  more  need  for  them  to  send  to  spy  out  the  land  than  to
have  sent  pioneers  to  clear  their  way  through  the  deep  !  But,  in  thus  chiding  Israel,
are  we  not  really  rebuking  ourselves  ?  We  have  to  bethink  us  of  a  rescue,  before  which
that  of  Israel  fades  into  nothingness.  And  how  has  our  rescue  in  Christ  been  effected  ?
By  oar  power  or  sljill?  Nay,  but  by  a  wisdom,  power,  and  love,  which  in  blessed
union  did  combine  in  the  cross  of  Christ  to  save  us.  Is  not,  then,  the  inference  more
than  warranted,  "  He  that  spared  not,"  etc.  But  if  so,  why  need  we  strain  our  eyes
to  pierce  the  gloom  that  hangs  over  our  future  course  ?  We  need  not  faithlessly  fore-
cast. 2.  It  was  undesirable,  and  that  on  several  grounds;  (1)  It  was  manifestly  hin-
dering their  march.  (2)  They  were  confronted  by  the  prospect  of  an  accumulation  of
difficulties  which  would  come  only  one  at  a  time.  (3)  Israel  therefore  darkened  the
preseut  by  prying  into  the  future.  So  it  is  now.  "  Sufficient  unto  the  day  is  the  evil
thereof."  Our  daily  course,  with  its  mingled  comforts  and  cares,  may  be  so  peaceful  if
we  will  calmly  leave  the  future  to  him  who  knows  and  plans  all ;  but  if  we,  with  our
short  foresight  and  our  little  strength,  will  foolishly  set  before  us  in  one  perplexing
combination  all  the  difficulties  which  will  come  only  one  by  one ;  if  we  think  and  speak
as  if  our  God  would  leave  us  alone  when  they  come, — we  shall  dishonour  him,  and  shade
the  present  by  anticipating  the  future.

II.  Let  us  look  at  the  conclusion  to  which  Israel  came  on  the  ebpokt  op  thb

SPIES.     They  resolved  to  go  back  and  to  return  to  Egypt,  and  appointed  a  captain  to

lead  them.     It  was  one-sided,  forgetful,  unarateful,  and  ruinous.    1.  Jt  was  one-sided.

True,  the  sons  of  Anak  were  in  the  way.    But  who  was  above  them  all  ?    See  Caleb's

putting  of  the  case,  in  Numb.  xiv.  6 — 9.     2.  If  was  forgetful.    For  was  not  the  fact

of  all  these  enemies  being  in  the  land  explicitly  named  in  one  of  the  earliest  promises

(Exod.  iii.  17);  and  had  not  God  promised  to  drive  them  out?    3.  It  was  ungrateful.

After  all  the  love  which  had  been  shown  them,  how  could  they  so  requite  it?    4.  It

was  ruinous  (see  Numb.  iv.  33 — 38;  ch.  i.  32 — 39).    But  are  there  not  some  now

who  start  fairly  in  the  Christian  race,  or  seem  to  do  so,  and  yet  who,  when  some  difficulty

meets  or"threatens  them,  turn  back  and  go  away  (of.  Matt.  xiii.  20,  21)?    Nor  can  we

safely  neglect  the  warning  consequent  on  this  incident  given  in  Heb.  iii.  4.    To  quit

the  leadership  of  Christ  because  of  present  or  impending  difficulties  will  be  much  more

grievously  sinful  than  it  was  for  Israel  to  propose  to  quit  the  leadership  of  Moses.

The  four  points  named  above  will  apply  also  here.     It  will  be:  1.  One-sided.    Fox

supposing,  as  we  try  to  peer  into  the  future,  possible  or  even  certain  difficulties  do

present  themselves,  ought  we  not  to  remember  that  with  the  demand  on  the  strength

there  will  be  given  strength  to  meet  the  demand  ?    Why  look  at  one  without  looking  at

the  other  ?    2.  It  uiill  he  forgetful.    For  what  are  the  words  of  Holy  Writ  ?    What  are

we  bidden  to  expect  ?    Have  we  ever  been  told  that  we  are  to  have  a  smooth  path

through  life  ?    Have  we  never  read  that  "  through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter  the

kingdom  "  ?    Have  we  not  read  that  we  must  expect  to  be  "  partakers  "  of  ChristV

sufferings  ?    3.  It  will  be  ungrateful.    Did  not  our  Saviour  tread  a  thorny  path  for

us ;  and  have  we  no  return  to  make  in  treading  a  thorny  path  for  him  ?    Do  we  thus

intend  to  repay  the  sorrow  and  blood  of  Calvary?    4.  It  will  be  ruinous  if  we  turn

back.     Difliculties  we  seek  to  shun  will  be  multiplied  a  hundred-fold.     The  ease  we

would  fain  secure  will  not  be  ours.     While,  instead  of  having  to  conquer  the  sons  of

Anak,  we  shall  have  to  encounter  the  condemnation  of  our  Saviour  and  Lord.     Let  us

press  onward  still  to  the  rest  which  remaineth.    On !  for  honour  demands  it.     On  I

for  gratitude  requires  it.    On !   for  love,  infinite  love,  expects  it.    On  I  only  a  step

at  a  time,  and  if  the  giant  Anakim  appear,  the  Lord  will  fight  for  us.     On  1  and  if  we

come  to  Jericho's  walls,  faith's  trumpet  blast  stall  bring  them  to  the  ground.     On  I

and  you  will  have  many  a  cluster  of  grapes  sent  to  you  by  the  Lord  of  the  laud,  to  show

you  its  richness,  and  that  you  may  taste  of  its  fruits  ere  you  enter  there  I    Trust

your  God,  ye  people,  follow  the  Lord  fully,  and  not  all  the  powers  of  earth  or  hell

shall  keep  you  Irom  the  promised  rest !


OH.  1. 19— 46.]  THE  BOOK  OJ?  DEUTEEONOMY.  21

Vers.  32 — 35. — The  grievous  consequences  o/wibeUef.  Moses  rehearses  in  the  hearing
of  Israel  the  strange  story  of  "  their  manners  in  the  wilderness,"  and  reminds  them  how
tlieir  unbelief  had  provoked  the  Lord  to  anger,  and  had  deprived  vast  numbers  of  them
of  tlie  rest  they  had  hoped  to  enjoy.  We  ought  to  be  at  no  loss  how  to  apply  this  to
'present  day  uses.  The  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  mouth  of  David,  renews  the  warning  voice.
The  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  both  by  argument  and  exhortation,  repeatedly
says.  Take  heed  lest  a  like  evil  befall  you  (Heb.  iii.  7 — 19;  iv.  1 — 11).  Whence
observe —

I.  Here  ib  a  bemabkablb  fact  to  be  noted:  via.  Divine  arrangements  apparently
failing  of  their  end  through  the  misconduct  of  man.  1.  God  had  made  provision  for
securing  the  entrance  of  Israel  into  their  land.  Early  had  the  promise  been  made.
Long  and  patiently  did  the  patriarchs  await  its  fulfilment  (Heb.  xi.  13).  God  had
watched  over  his  people's  wanderings.  He  beheld  them  in  Egypt.  When  the  time
for  liberating  them  was  come,  Moses  was  at  hand.  Israel  had  but  to  stand  still,  and
see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord,  again  and  again.  The  Law  was  given  from  Sinai.  Manna
descended  fiom  heaven.  Water  gushed  from  the  rock.  The  pillar  of  fire  and  of  cloud
was  their  guard,  light,  or  shade.  They  knew  what  God  intended  to  do  for  them.  The
promise  was  clear;  the  conditions  were  plain;  the  warnings  were  solemn;  the
threatenings  were  terrible.  No  excuse  of  ignorance  could  be  pleaded  by  the  people.
Yet:  2.  All  were  insufficient  to  prevent  their  defection  of  heart  from  God.  They  were
perpetually  doubting  God.  "  Ten  times  " '  (Numb.  xiv.  22).  Unbelief  led  to  the  break-
ing forth  of  lust.  They  forfeited  the  promise  ;  and  of  the  many  thousands  who  started
fur  Egypt  only  two  survived  to  enter  Canaan.  "  So  we  see  that  they  could  not  enter
in  because  of  vu\belief."

II.  There  is  great  danger  lest  the  parallel  between  ottrselves  and  Israisl,
already  seen  in  greater  mercy,  should  be  seen  again  in  a  greater  ruin.  thero
is  already  a  parallel  in  mercy.  1.  There  is  a  complete  arrangement  for  meeting  all
our  wants  on  the  way  to  a  nobler  rest.  2.  In  treading  the  way,  we  have  a  far  better
Leader  than  Moses.  3.  We  have  far  clearer  light  than  Israel  had.  4.  We  have  fuller
and  richer  promises.  5.  We  have  a  far  hi;iher  rest  in  view.  6.  Throughout  the
way  there  will  be  demands  on  our  faith.  7.  There  is  a  danger /rom  within,  lest  we
should  distrust  God.  Are  we  not  conscious  of  such  a  danger  ?  Our  hearts  are  sinful,
and  predisposed  to  doubt.  We  have  doubted  God  very  much,  and  thus  wronged  him
in  times  gone  by.  Such  unbelief  may  take  or  may  have  taken  the  form  of  presumption
or  of  despair.  For  an  illustration  of  the  former,  see  next  Homily.  The  latter  kind  of
unbelief  may  be  almost  indefinitely  varied.  Men  may  doubt  (1)  the  power  of  God  to
bring  them  to  the  rest ;  or  (2)  the  willingness  of  God  to  do  it ;  or  (3)  the  readiness  of
God  to  bring  them  to  the  rest,  without  questioning  his  care  for  others;  or  they  may
even  go  so  far  as  to  doubt  (4)  whether  the  promises  of  the  rest  be  Divine ;  (5)  whether
there  is  any  such  rest  as  the  one  promised ;  and  even  (6)  whether  there  is  any  God  of
promise.  Whichever  of  these  forms  a  despairing  unbelief  may  assume,  the  evil  of  it  is
sufficiently  manifest.  It  is  the  greatest  dishonour  which  we  can  cast  on  God,  to  allow
the  thought  to  gain  the  mastery,  that  we  are  flung  down  hither  without  any  sure
destiny  of  blessedness  being  disclosed,  or  without  any  certainty  of  reaching  it  being
rnade  known.  Besides,  doubt  prevents  work  ;  it  paralyzes.  Doubting  God  gives
the  rein  to  every  lust.  8.  And  unless  we  "  take  heed,"  if  we  suffer  doubt  to  get
the  mastery,  as  Israel  lost  their  rest,  we  .shall  lose  ours.  What  present  rest  can  we  have
while  unbelief  has  the  upper  hand  ?  Doubt  is  essentially  unrest.  How  can  we  enjoy
any  future  rest?  What  sympathy  with  God  can  we  have?  Besides,  God  declares,
"They  shall  not  enter  into  my  rest."  In  that  heavenly  rest  none  can  or  will
share  who  do  not  implicitly  believe  the  promise  and  loyally  obey  the  precept.  9.
And  how  much  more  serious  it  will  be  to  trifle  with  Christ,  than  to  slight  Moses
(Heb.  X.  28— 31)!  ,,,.„,

But  there  is  a  very  bright  side  to  this  subject.  While  unbelief  will  shut  us  ouj  of
heaven,  nothing  else  will !  Nothing  can  shut  us  out  of  heaven  but  doubting  God !
Poverty  cannot.    Persecution  cannot.    Beproach  cannot.    Obscurity  cannot.    No  one

1  Ten  limes:  Exod.  v.  20,  21;  xiv.  11,  12;  xv.  22-27;  xvi.  2.  S,  20,  27;  x»U.  1—7,
xxxii. ;  Numb.  xi.  1—^.  4—35 :  xiv.


22  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  1. 19—46


shall  ever  sink  who  trusts  his  God.  See  that  yoiing  and  weak  believer  who  has  turned
his  back  on  the  world,  and  set  his  face  heavenward.  A  thousand  di£Bculties  bristle  up
in  all  directions.  But  he  meets  them  all,  saying,  "  God  called  me,  God  will  help  me,
God  will  lead  me,  God  will  guard  me."

"  A  feeble  saint  shall  win  the  day,
Though  death  and  hell  obstruct  the  way!"

Yea,  eyen  so !  "  Them  that  honour  me,"  saith  God,  "  I  will  honour."  But,  must  we
not  look  to  him  who  awakened  our  faith,  to  sustain  it  ?  'Tis  even  so.  Ever  have  we
to  say,  "  Give  what  thou  commandest,  and  then  command  what  thou  wilt."  "  Lord,
we  believe ;  help  thou  our  unbelief."  And  is  there  not  enough  revealed  of  God
and  of  his  wondrous  love  in  Christ  to  put  every  doubt  to  flight,  when  all  that  God
is  to  us  is  laid  home  to  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost?  Here,  indeed,  is  a  quickening,
inspiring,  sustaining  force,  of  which  Israel  knew  little  or  nothing.  "  Greater  is  he  that  is
for  us  than  all  they  which  be  against  us."  "  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  gave
him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  "  Let  us
doubt  ourselves  as  much  as  we  will,  but  our  God  and  Saviour — never.  He  hath  said,
"  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  "  Hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do  it  ?
Hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not  make  it  good  ?  "

Vers.  41 — 46. — Forced  back  I  In  the  preceding  paragraph  we  had  an  illustration  of
unbelief  in  doubting  the  promise  of  God,  and  of  the  effect  of  that  unbelief  in  exclud-
ing from  the  promised  rest.  Here  we  have  an  illustration  of  a  like  unbelief  working
in  precisely-  the  opposite  direction ;  as  Israel  feared  to  go  up  notwithstanding  the
promise  of  God,  so  now  we  find  them  resolving  to  go  up  in  spite  of  the  prohibition
of  God,  "acting,"  as  an  expositor  remarks,  "in  contempt  of  the  threatening,  as  they
had  belbre  acted  in  contempt  of  the  promise,  as  if  governed  by  a  spirit  of  contradic-
tion." The  points  in  the  history  which  should  be  noted  are  these.  1.  As  the  men  of
that  generation  (two  only  excepted)  were  debarred  from  entering  Canaan,  they  have  to
wander  in  the  desert  for  forty  years.  2.  They  rebel  against  this  Divine  arrangement,
though  we,  who  at  this  distance  of  time  "  see  the  end  of  the  Lord,"  can  perceive  how
much  mercy  there  was  in  it.  3.  There  was  a  short  way  to  Canaan,  through  a  hill
country,  which  to  human  judgment  would  seem  preferable  to  a  "  march  far  wandering
round."  4.  In  this  route  enemies  would  surely  assail — Amorites,  Amalekites,  etc.
5.  Israel  made  light  of  these  difSculties.  6.  God  forbade  their  going  up.  Moses  forbade
them.  The  ark  was  not  moved  from  its  place  in  the  camp.  7.  The  people  were
resolved  to  go  np,  defiantly,  insolently  (Gesenius,  sub  verb.).  8.  They  paid  dearly  for
their  presumption.  They  were  forced  back.  9.  They  grieved  and  wept  over  their
disappointment.  10.  Such  weeping  God  does  not  regard.  "  Tears  of  discontent  must
be  wept  over  again."  As  they  had  before  found  out  the  folly  of  distrusting  God's
strength,  so  now  they  had  to  bewail  the  uselessness  of  presuming  on  their  own !  We
cannot  be  wrong  in  continuing  to  follow  the  apostolic  teaching  in  regarding  the  Canaan
of  Israel's  hope  as  a  type  of  the  higher  "  rest "  which  "  remaineth  for  the  people  of
Goi"(of.  Heb.  iv.  1).

I.  The  law  of  old  i3  in  foecb  still,  that  the  unbelieving  shall  not  enteh  into
BEST.  This  is  the  teaching,  under  varied  forms,  of  no  small  part  of  the  Old  Testament
and  of  the  New.  "We  may  inquire,  if  we  will,  into  the  philosophy  of  this ;  and  in
doing  so,  we  shall  find  but  little  difficulty  in  seeing  the  essential  impossibility  of  one
who  doubts  God  finding  rest  anywhere.  Doubt  is  unrest.  But  whether  or  no  one  can
discern  the  deep  reason  of  it,  there  stands  the  word,  with  its  awful  bar,  "  He  that
believeth  not  is  condemned  already."

II.  It  IS  A  DKEARY  OUTLOOK  FOB  THE  UNBBLIBVEB.  To  Wander  on,  and  to  be  moving
towards  some  destiny  or  other,  but  yet  to  have  no  piospect  of  rest  at  the  end  of  the
journey,  is  it  not  dreary?  We  do  not  deny  that  men  may,  as  they  say,  resign  them-
selves  to  the  inevitable.  And  we  even  admit  that  men  may  so  far  control  themselves,
as,  with  stoical  unfeelingness,  to  take  "a  leap  in  the  dark."  But  not  all  this  can  blind
us  to  the  misery  of  those  who  move  on  under  the  ban,  "  The  unbeliever  shall  not  see
rest."

III.  ThB   same  unbelief  which  doubts  the   PBOMIBE  also  UKBPIBEB  THH  THREATBH'


CH.  1. 19-46.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  ii

iNO.  Both  promise  and  tlireatening  come  from  one  and  the  §ame  God ;  hence  whoeyer
doubts  him  will  be  as  liliely  to  question  one  as  the  other.  And  it  is  very,  very  easy
for  unbelief  to  urge  plausible  arguments  or  questionings  concerning  the  threatenings ;
e.g.  " Has  Ood  said  that  f  "  " God  will  not  be  so  severe ; "  " God  cannot  mean  me;"
"  Who  can  tell  whether  the  judgment  day  will  ever  come?"  etc.

IV.  This  unbelief  mat  make  a  desperate  effort  to  prove  the  thkeatbnino
NULL  AND  VOID.  "  We  WILL  go  Up ! "  How  much  does  this  remind  us  of  what  our
Saviour  says  in  his  Sermon  on  the  Mount  (cf.  Matt.  vii.  22)  1  As  if  unbelief  would
carry  its  daring  up  to  the  very  judgment  seat  (see  also  Matt.  xxt.  10 — 12 ;  Luke  xiii.
24—26).

V.  An  attempt  to  enter  the  best  in  a  way  contrart  to  God's  word,  will  bk
FORCED  helplessly  BACK.  Israel  was  disastrously  repulsed,  and  found  it  "  hard  to  kick
against  the  pricks."  "Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker  1"  "Hath  any
hardened  himself  against  God,  and  prospered?"  (see  continuation  of  New  Testament.
passages  referred  to  above).  Man  can  do  many  wonderful  things,  but  there  are  five
things  he  never  can  do  :  He  cannot  evade  the  sentence  of  Gkid;  he  cxtmoi postpone  it;
he  cannot  nullify  it ;  he  cannot  modify  it ;  he  cannot  impeach  it.  "  We  are  sure  that
the  (SiKaiafw.)  sentence  of  God  is  according  to  truth."

VI.  The  weeping  of  disappointment  will  be  unayailino.  "Te  returned  and
wept  before  the  Lord ;  but  the  Lord  would  not  hearken  to  your  voice,  nor  give  ear  unto
you."  It  will  be  of  no  use  whatever  trying  to  entei'  Canaan  if  the  sentence  has  finally
gone  forth  against  us,  "  Ye  shall  not  see  my  rest ; "  nor  will  it  avail  to  try  to  enter  by
any  other  than  God's  own  appointed  way ;  nor  will  the  murmuring,  or  wailing,  or
gnashing  of  teeth  at  all  alter  the  matter.  There  may  be  as  much  unbelief  in  tears
as  in  trifling.  By  no  other  means  than  implicit  (aith  in  and  unswerving  loyalty  to  God
in  Christ,  can  we  find  rest  for  our  souls  either  here  or  hereafter.  Oh  that  sinful  men
would  "  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus  say,"  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy
Uden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest "  1  Apart  from  Christ,  our  souls  must  wander  in  dry
places,  seeking  rest  and  finding  none.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  19 — 46. — TrrecoveraUenest  of  wasted  opportunity.  I.  Thk  oulhinatioii  of
opportunity  often  finds  a  man  unprepared  to  occupy  it.  The  point  of  time
referred  to  here  was  the  supreme  moment  in  Israel's  history.  They  had  relinquished
Egypt,  endured  privation,  performed  a  toilsome  journey,  for  one  object,  viz.  to  possess
Canaan ;  yet,  when  they  touched  the  threshold  of  the  inheritance,  they  failed  to  rise  to
the  conception  of  their  privilege.  They  hesitated,  dawdled,  feared — and  failed.  Men  play
with  opportunity  as  a  toy,  and  when  their  eyes  open  to  see  its  value,  lo  I  it  has  vanished.
Possibly,  there  is  a  supreme  moment  in  every  man's  history;  yet  often  he  is  too  indo-
lent to  improve  it.  Every  morning  is  not  a  May-day.  Many  reach  the  margin  of  a
glorious  destiny,  and  then  turn  back  to  the  desert.  The  path  of  duty  is  yery  plain ;
but  self-indulgence  makes  us  blind  as  a  mole.

II.  The  dishonesty  of  prudential  pleas.  These  Hebrew  men  thought  themselves
very  sagacious  to  suggest  the  experiment  of  the  spies ;  and  God  endured  their  whim.
Yet  there  was  no  reason  for  this  precaution.  Witli  God  as  a  Pioneer  and  Protector,  they
might  have  known  that  it  was  safer  to  follow  the  fiery  pillar  than  to  remain  at  ease
in  their  tents.  The  command  was  plain — "  Go  up  and  possess."  Therefore  all  delay,
and  all  reconnoitring,  was  sin.  If  we  were  to  fleal  honestly  with  inclination,  if  every
whisper  ot  conscience  were  obeyed,  we  should  often  see  through  the  thin  guise  of  our
own  pretences;  we  should  strip  the  veneer  of  insincerity  from  our  deeds.  In  some
dark  cavern  of  our  hearts  we  may  find,  by  honest  search,  some  wish  that  we  are
ashamed  to  avow.  There  is  often  a  conspiracy  in  the  man  against  himsel£  We  hunt
for  excuses  to  cover  disobedience.

III.  Unbelief  develops,  through  many  stages,  into  bank  rebellion.  The
report  of  the  spies  confirmed  the  word  of  God.  This  always  accords  with  external  fact,
and  with  human  experience.  God  had  nvt  said  that  the  Canaanites  were  few  or  weak.
What  mattered  it  how  tall  and  brawny  they  were,  if  so  be  God  were  on  their  side,  and


a4  THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  1. 19— 46.

fought  for  them?  Old  Unbelief  is  a  fool,  and  ought  to  be  decorated  with  cap  and  bells.
Unbelief  is  poison,  and  saps  the  basis  of  our  strength,  enervates  our  courage,  and  melts
our  iron  into  flux.  Unbelief  develops  into  falsehood,  and  perverts  the  truth  of  God
into  lying.  Unbelief  maligns  and  tradnces  God — char-jes  him  with  the  basest  crime.
It  calls  evil  good ;  purest  love  it  styles  blackest  hate.  It  is  the  essence  of  blasphemy.
It  is  the  crime  of  crimes — the  seed  of  misery — the  germ  of  hell.

IV.  The  ebtbibutions  of  God  are  sevebb  and  equitable.  Much  that  human
judgment  deems  to  be  retribution  is  not  penalty.  Bodily  suffering  is  usually  corrective,
not  destructive.  The  retributions  of  God  are  co-related  to  the  sin.  Men  pamper  the
passion  for  drink :  inappeasable  thirst  shall  be  their  doom.  Men  say  to  God,  "  Depart
from  me!"  God  responds,  "  Depart  from  me!"  The  Hebrews  would  not  march  into
possession  of  Canaan :  therefore  they  shall  dwell  and  die  in  the  desert.  Retribution  is
related  to  sin  as  fruit  to  blossom — as  w.nges  to  work.  There  comes  a  point  where  return
is  impossible.  God  swears  that  it  shall  be  so.  The  oath  is  an  oath  of  righteousness.
Nevertheless,  out  of  the  crowds  of  the  nameless  ungodly,  individual  liegemen  shall  be
honoured,  even  Caleb  and  Joshua.  These  are  elect  spirits — choice  natures.  In  the  day
of  overwhelming  calamity,  God  does  not  overlook  the  solitary  righteous.  "  He  hideth
him  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand."  The  proofs  of  inviolable  equity  are  written  in  gigantic
capitals  on  the  heavens  and  on  the  earth.

V.  The  forecasts  of  fear  are  often  the  keverbb  of  reality.  Cowardly  and
disobedient  Hebrews  pretended  a  far-reaching  concern  for  their  children.  "  If  we  are
slain  in  this  invasion  of  Canaan,  what  will  become  of  our  little  ones?" — thus  argued
these  malcontents.  "  Can  we  endure  to  think  that  they  shall  become  a  prey  to  these
human  wolves  ?  "  They  were  frightened  at  a  mirage — terrified  at  the  shadow  of  their
own  folly.  Facts  were  the  very  reverse  of  their  fears.  These  " little  ones"  God  would
take  into  training — drill  them  by  the  hardy  discipline  of  the  wilderness,  and  qualify
them  for  warfare  and  for  conquest.

VI.  Repentance  hab  many  counterfeits.  There  is  often  confession  of  our  folly,
and  yet  no  repentance ;  proniis(iof  amendment,  yet  no  repentance.  There  may  be
poignant  regret  for  the  past,  bitter  shame,  sharp  remorse,  deep  compunction,  severe
self-judgment,  yet  ivo  repentance.  For  repentance  is  soul-submission  unto  God.  It
brings  our  feeling,  desire,  will,  into  harmony  with  God's  feeling  and  will.  Repentance
has  not  thoroughly  penetrated  the  soul  until  we  love  what  God  loves,  and  hate  what
God  hates.  True  repentance  works  for  righteousness.  Deceit  may  so  worm  itself  in
the  heart  as  to  intertwine  itself  round  every  fibre  of  our  being.  We  m.i_\-  ultimately
become  so  blind  as  not  to  discern  between  truth  and  falsehood.  The  repentance  of  these
Jews  was  a  carnal  sorrow  that  produced  fruits  of  death.

VII.  Presumption  is  as  criminal  as  pusillanimity.  We  dishonour  God  as  much
by  going  beyond  the  line  of  duty,  as  by  faUing  short  of  it.  Each  alike  is  an  ar.t  ot
disobedience.  We  cannot  atone  for  cowardice  yesterday  by  an  excess  of  rashness
to-day.  The  essence  of  obedience  is  promptitude.  It  is  not  the  same  whether  we
observe  the  command  to-day,  or  to-morrow.  Between  the  two  there  may  be  a  gulf  deep
as  hell  itself.  The  prohibitions  of  God  are  as  sacred  as  his  positive  commands.  Wliat
is  a  duty  to-day  may  be  a  sin  to-morrow,  because  the  precept  may  be  withdrawn.
Some  commands  are  eternally  permanent;  some  have  only  temporary  prevalence.

VIII._  Repentance  often  comes  too  late.  During  life-time,  repentance  has  moral
productiveness.  We  may  not  attain  the  precise  object,  which  by  repentance  we  hoped
to  gain ;  nevertheless,  real  repentance  brings  relief  and  gladness  to  the  soull  Esau  was
afterwards  a  better  man  for  his  repentnnce,  though  he  could  not  recover  his  birth-
right. To  these  Hebrews,  repentance  came  too  late  for  them  ever  to  possess  the  eartlily
Canaan :  let  us  hope  it  availed  to  gain  them  the  heavenly.  It  is  possible  for  repentance,
long-delayed,  to  be  unavailing.  "  Because,"  says  God,  "  I  have  called,  and  ye  refused
.  .  ._  I  also  will  laugh  at  your  calamity.  .  .  .  Then  shall  they  call  npun  me,  but
I  will  not  answer."  "He  sware  in  his  wrath,  Tliey  shall  not  enter  into  my  rest."
When  all  gracious  remedies  are  exhausted,  "  it  is  impossible  to  renew  men  unto  repent-
ance."   It  is  a  perilous  thing  to  tamper  with  conscience,  or  to  trifle  with  God. D.

Ver.  19. — "  That  great  and  terrible  wilderness."  An  emblem  of  the  rough  and  afflictiTi
way  by  which  God  leads  his  people  to  the  higher  rest.


on.  1.  19— 4G.]  Tni-:  BOOK  OP  DBUTBUONOMT.  25

I.  The  fact  ov  this  wilderness  discipline.  We  need  not  exaggerate.  We  admit
all  that  can  be  said  of  the  world  as  a  fair  and  delightful  residence,  in  which  we  have
much  to  make  us  happy.  But  it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  picture  has  a  darker  side.
The  man  who  has  drunk  deepest  of  the  world's  pleasures  is  he  who  can  tell  best  how
unsatisfying  it  is  as  a  portion  for  the  spirit.  There  are  more  sad  and  weary  hearts  in
this  same  world  than  a  glance  at  the  surface  of  society  would  lead  us  to  suspect.  There
are  numbers  to  whom  life  is  one  hard,  dreary,  terrible,  hopeless  straggle  with  adverse
conditions.  The  joy  of  a  life  is  often  blighted  by  a  solitary  stroke ;  and  in  how  many
cases  does  some  secret  grief  embitter  what  seems  from  the  outside  a  prosperous  exist-
ence !  The  believer  is  no  more  exempt  than  others  from  these  ordinary  griefs  of  life —
from  poverty,  trial,  pain,  bereavement.  But  he  has  thoughts  and  feelings  of  his  own,
which  add  to  the  pain  of  his  situation.  He  is  a  Christian,  and  contact  with  the  world's
evil  tries  and  grieves  him  as  it  will  not  do  a  worldly  man.  His  hope  is  beyond,  and  this
makes  earth,  with  its  imperfect  conditions,  its  broken  ideals,  its  unsatisfied  yearnings,
seem  drearier  to  hirn.  Like  his  Master,  his  ear  is  quicker  to  catch  the  slrain  of  human
woe — "  the  still  sad  music  of  humanity  " — than  the  strain  of  noisier  mirth.  All  this
compels  him  to  look  at  life  prevailingly  under  an  aspect  of  privation,  discipline,  and
trial,  and  it  is  in  no  unreal  sense  that  he  speaks  of  it  as  the  "  wilderness."  When
troubles  crowd  on  him,  it  is  literally,  as  to  others,  "  waste  and  howling,"  a  "  great  and
terrible  "  desert.

II.  The  ends  of  this  wilderness  DisoiPLnrB.  These  are  numerous.  I.  In  part
the  discipline  is  inevitable — bound  up  with  the  conditions  of  existence  in  a  world  "  made
subject  to  vanity."  But:  2.  The  (Jisciplirie  is  useful.  (1)  It  tries  and  proves  the  heart
(ch.  viii.  2').  (2)  It  inures  to  hardship.  (3)  It  develops  the  nobler  qualities  of  character
— faith,  patience,  resignation,  etc.  (Rom.  ▼.  3).  (4)  It  makes  the  rest  sweeter  when  it
comes  (llev.  vii.  14  ;  liv.  13). — J.  0.

Ver.  21. — Courage.    "  Pear  not,  neither  be  discouraged"  (cf.  Josh.  1.  7,  9).

I.  God's  work  needs  cotjbagb.  I.  The  enemies  are  many.  2.  The  enemies  are
strong.  3.  Humanly  speaking,  we  are  feeble  in  compirison  with  them.  Distinguishing
between  real  and  nominal  Christianity,  it  might  be  plausibly  held  that  there  is  to-day
greater  talent,  intellectual  power,  wealth,  rank,  and  social  influence  enlisted  on  the  side
of  unbelief  than  on  the  side  of  faith. .  But  the  true  citadel  of  unbelief  is  the  evil  heart;
and  what  powers  of  our  own  are  sufBcient  to  storm  that?

II.  In  God's  work  there  is  evert  reason  for  courage.  1.  God  is  with  us.
Our  cause  is  his  cause.  2.  He  has  promised  victory,  and  he  is  able  to  keep  his  promise.
3.  The  past  should  encourage  us.  The  Church  can  never  come  through  greater  conflicts
than  those  in  which  she  has  already  proved  herself  victorious. — J.  0.

Vers.  22 — 32. —  The  mission  of  thespies.  We  see  from  two  instances  in  this  chapter
how  God's  plans  leave  jvide  room  for  the  independent  action  of  the  human  mind.
Moses  got  the  susgestion  of  appointing  judges  from  Jethro ;  the  idea  of  sending  spies  to
reconnoitre  the  Holy  Land  originated  with  the  people.  The  source  from  which  it  came
made  the  motive  of  it  doubtful,  but  as  in  itself  a  measure  of  prudence,  Moses  was  well
pleased  with  it,  and,  with  God's  permission,  adopted  it.    We  have  here —

I.  A  POLICY  OF  CAUTION.  Cautiou  is  in  itself  a  virtue.  It  is  never  wise  to  rush  into
undertakings  without  well-planned  measures.  The  more  knowledge  we  have  to  guide
us  in  entering  upon  difficult  duty  the  better.  The  sending  out  of  these  spies  was  fitted
to  procure  for  the  Israelites  valuable  information  as  to  the  nature  of  the  land,  the  best
mode  of  attack,  the  state  of  feeling  among  the  inhabitants,  etc.  The  Church  would  do
well  to  improve  upon  the  hint  thus  given,  and  have  men  out  on  the  field,  to  keep  a  sharp
watch  on  the  fortifications  and  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  bring  back  intelligenco
which  may  encourage,  guide,  or  otherwise  help  those  whose  time  and  thought  are
devoted  to  the  actual  warfare.

II.  An  unexpected  result  of  that  policy.  The  spies,  with  two  exceptions,
brought  back  a  most  disheartening  and  ill-advised  report.  We  see  here  the  danger  of
a  policy  of  caution,  when  that  springs  from  over-fearfulness  or  an  original  indisposition
to  advance.  When  caution  is  divorced  from  courage,  and  gets  the  upper  hand,  its
natural  tendency  is  to  neutralize  enthusiasm,  to  concentrate  attention  on  difficulties,  to


26  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  i.  19—46


play  into  the  hands  of  those  who  don't  want  to  do  anything,  and  to  furnish  them  with
excuses  and  arguments  for  delay.  It  was  so  here.  The  real  secret  of  the  desire  of  the
people  to  have  spies  sent  out  was  their  lurking  disbelief  and  fear.  The  spies  themselves
shared  in  this  fear.  With  the  exception  of  Caleb  and  Joshua,  they  seem  to  have  had
an  eye  for  little  else  than  difficulties.  They  admitted  the  goodliness  of  the  land,  and
brought  with  them  a  splendid  sample  of  its  fruit  (ver.  25).  But  in  every  other  respect
their  report  was  calculated  to  disjiirit.  It  is  a  sad  thing  for  the  Church  when  those
who  ought  to  animate  and  encourage  her  begin  themselves  to  show  the  craven  spirit.
Yet  over-cautious  people  are  apt,  often  unwittingly,  to  do  the  very  work  of  these  spies,
by  magnifying  difficulties,  looking  only  to  discouragements,  and  standing  in  the  way  of
plans  and  efforts  which  would  do  great  good.

III.  A  REBELLION  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  That  rebellion  was  the  result  of  downright  un-
belief (ver.  32),  and  illustrates  its  work  (of.  Heb.  iii.  19).  We  see  in  it  how  unbelief:
1.  Looks  only  to  the  seen.  They  thought  only  of  the  size  of  the  people  and  the
strength  of  the  cities  (ver.  28).  The  help  of  their  invisible  King  was  to  them  as  if  it
were  not.  They  had  not  the  slightest  hold  upon  the  reality  of  it.  2.  jfe'ees  only  the
discouragements  of  duty.  There  was  a  bright  side  as  well  as  a  dark  one  to  the  report
brought  to  them,  but  nothing  would  make  them  look  at  the  bright  one.  The  same  two
sides — a  bright  and  hopeful  side,  and  a  side  of  difficulty — exist  in  every  situation,  and
it  is  a  test  of  character  which  we  are  most  given  to  dwell  upon.  3.  Misreads  the
providence  of  God.  What  greater  perversion  of  God's  kind  dealings  could  human
nature  be  guilty  of  than  that  in  ver.  27  ?  4.  7s  Mind  to  the  lessons  of  the  past.  They
had  just  been  delivered  from  Egypt,  had  seen  mighty  miracles,  had  been  brought
across  the  Red  Sea,  had  been  strengthened  to  conquer  the  Amalekites,  etc. ;  but  all  is
already  forjjotten.  6.  Issues  in  flat  r^usal  to  do  God's  will.  That  is  the  upshot  ol
unbelief,  wherever  it  exists.

The  report  of  the  spies,  confirmed  by  the  grapes  of  Eschoi,  suggests  that  there  is
very  much  in  the  world  which  makes  it  worth  conquering  for  Christ  (geniiUi  ut,
beautiful  natural  characteristics,  etc.). — J.  0.

Vers.  31 — 33. — Love  in  the  wilderneu.  A  beautiful  passage,  laden  with  God's
compassions.    We  have  in  itr—

L  Tbnbee  love.  The  love  is  likened  to  that  of  the  beat  of  fathers  to  a  son  (cf.  Pb.
ciii.  13).  The  New  Testament  goes  further.  It  not  only  likens  God  to  a  father,  but
tells  us  he  is  one.  He  is  "  our  Father  in  heaven,"  "  the  God  and  Father  of  Jesus
Christ  our  Lord."  This  full  revelation  of  Fatherhood  only  a  Son  could  have  given ;
and  as  given  in  the  gospel  it  is  the  believer's  daily  comfort  (Matt.  vi.  25 — 34).

II.  CoKBTANT  OABB.    TMs  arises  out  of  the  relation  and  the  love.    It  is  a  care :

1.  Unceasing.  "All  the  way."  2.  Provident.  "Who  went  in  the  way  before  youj
to  search  you  out  a  place  to  pitch  your  tents  in."  3.  Comprehensive;  embracing
every  want  of  our  lives.  God  "  bare  "  Israel,  i.e.  took  the  entire  charge  of  the  nation
upon  himself;  the  whole  responsibility  of  seeing  them  fed,  led,  clothed,  kept,  and
brought  safely  to  their  final  destination.  So  does  he  provide  for  his  children  in
Christ.  4.  Tenderly  sympathetic.  "  Ai  a  man  doth  bear  his  son."  And  God  has  to
bear  with,  as  well  as  bear  us.

III.  Special  omDANOB.  This  is  included  in  the  care,  but  is  more  prominent  as  a
peculiar  manifestation  of  it  (ver.  33).  Guidance  is  never  wanting  to  those  who  need
it.  It  is  from  day  to  day — ^just  sufficient  to  show  us  present  duty.  It  is  given  in  the
Bible,  in  the  indications  of  p^rovidence,  and  in  that  inward  illumination  which  enables
us  to  discern  the  Lord's  will  in  both.  It  was  furnished  to  the  Israelites  through  the
pillar  of  cloud  and  fire— the  symbol :  1.  Of  fiery  guardianship  with  grateful  shade.

2.  Of  guiding  light  with  attendant  mystery.    3.  Of  light  shining  to  us  in  the  midst

of  dark  providences.    4.  Of  the  adaptation  of  God's  guidance  to  our  needs by  dav

the  cloud,  by  night  the  fire. — J.  O.  '      /

Vers.  34 — 40. — The  excluded  and  the  admitted.  I.  The  excluded.  1.  That  whole
unbelieving  generation,  with  two  exceptions  (ver.  35).  Note:  (1)  Their  unbelief
and  disobedience  did  not  frustrate  God's  purpose  of  the  occupation  of  the  land.
Canaan  was  occupied  after  all.     So  heaven  will  be  peopled,  the  world  conquered


uH.  1. 19—46.)  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  27

and  God's  work  done,  though  we  in  our  folly  and  sin  rebel  and  stand  aloof  (Matt,
iii.  9).  "  It  remaineth  that  some  must  enter  in  "  (Heb.  iv.  6).  (2)  Their  Xinhelief
and  disobedience  eflfectually  excluded  tliemselves.  God  sware  it  in  his  wrath,
and  the  sentence  admitted  of  no  reversal.  A  foreshadowing  of  the  final  exclu-
sion from  heaven  of  those  who  persistently  disobey  (Matt.  vii.  21 — 24 ;  Luke  liii.
24—29;  Heb.  iv.  11 ;  Eev.  xxii.  11—16).  2.  The  holy  Moses  (ver.  37;  cf.  on  ch
iii.  26  ;  iv.  21 ;  xxxiv.  4).  The  exclusion  of  Moses  will  be  more  fully  considered  after-
wards, but  we  learn  from  it  here  that  Gnd's  apparent  severity  is  often  greatest  to  his
own  people  (Amos  iii.  2),  and  that  the  share  which  others  have  had  in  leading  us  into
sin  does  not  abate  our  own  responsibility  in  the  commission  of  it.  This  greater
apparent  severity  (1)  repels  the  charge  of  favouritism  ;  (2)  gives  a  peculiarly  impressive
demonstration  of  the  evil  of  sin ;  (3)  reminds  us  that  sin  in  God's  people  is  more  dis-
honouring to  him  than  it  is  in  others  ;  (4)  warns  the  wicked.  For  if  judgment  be^in
at  the  righteous,  "  what  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God  ?
And  if  the  righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?  "
(1  Pet.  iv.  17,  18).

II.  The  admitted.  These  were  to  be :  1.  The  faithful  two — Caleb  and  Joshua  (vers.
36,  38).  The  former  is  signalized  as  having  "  wholly  followed  the  Lord,"  and  Joshua
was  a  man  of  like  faith  and  staunchness  in  a  time  of  general  defection.  Such  persons
God  will  singularly  preserve  and  honour.  Their  place  in  heaven  will  be  a  high  one.
"  We  must,  in  a  course  of  obedience  to  God's  will  and  of  service  to  his  honour,  follow
him  universally,  without  dividing ;  uprightly,  without  dissembling ;  cheerfully,  without
disputing;  and  co«ston%,  without  declining  ;  and  this  is  following  the  Lord  fully  "
(Matthew  Henry,  on  Numb.  xiv.  24).  2.  The  younger  generation  (ver.  39).  Instead
of  the  fathers,  God  would  take  the  children.  What  a  rebuke  !-^(l)  of  their  groundless
fears.  "  Your  little  ones,  which  ye  said  should  he  a  prey."  (2)  Of  their  unmanly
cov:ardice.  Their  little  children,  types  of  all  that  was  humanly  feeble,  would  do  the
work  they  were  afraid  to  attempt.  (3)  Of  their  inconsiderate  selfishness.  They  were  not
ashamed  to  hand  down  to  these  children  their  own  abandoned  life-tasks,  with  all  the
work  and  peril,  if  also  with  all  the  reward  and  honour,  attending  their  accomplishment.
Was  not  this  to  make  themselves  objects  of  contempt  to  their  own  offspring?  "Let  no
man  take  thy  crown,"  least  of  all  thine  own  child. — ^J.  0.

Vers.  40 — 46. — Tardy  repentance.  In  the  conduct  of  these  Israelites  we  have  a
typical  exhibition  of  human  nature.  In  its  folly,  its  fickleness,  its  unreasonableness,
and  its  obstinacy.  Forbidden  to  enter  Canaan,  they  change  their  mood,  and  nothing
will  serve  them  but  to  "  go  up"  and  do  the  thing  they  had  formerly  said  they  would
not  do.  They  are  vociferous  in  their  professions  of  repentance,  and  will  not  be  reasoned
out  of  their  self-willed  purpos_e,  but  persist  in  following  it  up  to  their  own  after  discom-
fiture.    We  have  here  to  notice —

I.  How  UNCHANGED  OHABACTEB  MAT  COEXIST  WITH  A  CHANGED  FORM  OP  MANIFESTA-
TION. Underneath  these  loud  professions  of  repentance,  "  We  have  sinned  "  (ver.  41),
it  is  not  difScult  to  detect :  1.  The  old  unheliif.  Thty  disbelieve  God's  threatening,  as
before  they  refused  to  believe  his  promise.  2.  The  old  self-will.  It  is  not  what  God
wills,  but  what  they  will  themselves,  that  is  to  be  done.  They  do  not  ask,  "  Will  God
permit  us  to  do  this?"  but  they  take  the  law  into  their  own  hands,  and  ignore  God's
wishes  altogether.  3.  The  old  contumacy.  Their  wills  are  wholly  unsubmissive.  In
revolt  yesterday  against  their  duty,  and  to-day  against  their  punishment.  They  will
not  hear  warning  (ver.  43),  but  pursue  their  own  way.  All  this  stamps  their  repentance
as  not  only  tardy,  but  insincere.  Analogous  to  much  of  the  repentance  caused  by  fear
of  punishment,  fear  of  exposure,  fear  of  death ;  and  points  to  the  defects  in  superficial
repentance  generally.

II.  How  INSINCEBB  REPENTANCE  NATURALLY   PASSES   OVER   INTO   FEESUMFTUOUB   SIN.

It  does  this  inasmuch  as  there  was  never  in  it  the  element  of  real  submission.  The
undertaking  of  the  Israelites  was  typical  of  many  more.  It  was :  1,  Presumptuously
conceived.  2.  Presumptuously  prepared /or.  3.  Presumptuously  persevered  tn.  It  is,
therefore,  the  type  of  all  undertakings  set  on  foot  and  carried  out  (1)  in  defiance  of
God's  will ;  (2)  without  God's  assistance  ;  (3)  in  face  of  God's  expressed  displeasure.
It  is  a  case,  in  short,  of  flying  in  the  face  of  God ;  of  defying  him,  and  entering  into


as  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEKOXOMY.  ^ch.  1. 19— 16.


direct  contegt  wilh  him  ;  as  every  one  don  whose  schemes  are  in  opposition  even  to
natural  and  economical,  and  still  more  if  tliey  are  in  opposition  to  moral  and  spiritual,
laws;  or  in  any  way  contrary  to  what  we  know  to  be  God's  will.  Presumption  may
show  itself  in  refusal  to  be  saved,  except  in  ways  or  on  terms  of  our  own  dictation.

III.    How    GODLESS  ENDEAVOUR   RECOILS   IN   DISASTER   ON   THOSE   WHO   PKBSIST   IN    IT,

(Ver  44.)     So  must  it  be  with  all  scliemes  that  liave  God's  frown  upon  them.

Note — 1.  Repentance  may  come  too  late  (ver.  45 ;  Matt.  xxv.  11 ;  Luke  xiii.  25).
2.  Disobedience  may  cloak  itself  in  the  guise  of  obedience  (ver.  41).  3.  The  test  of
obedience  is  willingness  to  do  what  God  requires  at  the  time  he  requires  it,  and  not  at
some  time  of  our  own. — J.  O.

Vers.  19 — 33. — The  unhelief  in  sending  and  in  hearJsening  to  the  spies.  Moses
reminds  his  audience  of  the  conduct  of  their  fathers  at  Kadesh-barnea,  when  exhorted
to  go  up  and  possess  the  land.  Duty  was  clear.  They  had  been  brought  up  out  of
Egypt  for  the  very  purpose  of  entering  into  and  possessing  the  land  of  Canaan.  But
instead  of  courageously  following  the  path  of  duty,  they  resolved  to  send  over  spies.
The  result  was  an  evil  report  and  an  evil  resolution  on  the  people's  part  not  to
attempt  invasion.  The  hitter  end  was  death  in  the  wilderness  and  exclusion  from  the
land  of  promise.

I.  God  OFFERED  Canaan  to  his  people  as  a  suitable  inheritance.  It  was  the
promise  of  this  land  which  led  to  the  exodus.  The  sojourn  at  Horeb  was  to  organize
the  nation  and  give  it  laws.  All  was  ready  for  an  entrance  into  the  land.  Its  suit-
ability was  guaranteed  in  the  Divine  jiromise;  and  if  the  people  had  been  willing  t«
walk  by  faith,  then  the  invasion  would  have  been  immediate  and  successful.  (On.
tlie  suitability  of  the  land,  cf.  Moorhouse's  'Hulsean  Lectures,'  the  last  sermon  in  the
volume,  on  '  The  Land  and  the  People.'  In  Kinglake's  '  Invasion  of  the  Crimea,'  we
have  a  similar  instance  in  the  allies  not  taking  Sebastopol  by  assault  immediately  after
Alma.)

II.  The  suggestion  apout  spies  was  really  a  resolve  to  walk  by  sight  and
not  by  faith.  Moses  a;  first  approved  of  it,  although  it  never  came  from  him.  He
thought  that  anything  the  spies  saw  would  only  confirm  them  in  the  resolution  to
invade  the  land.  But  in  principle  it  was  unbilief  in  God.  It  was  virtually  resolving
not  to  follow  his  advice  unless  it  seemed  the  best.  It  was  putting  clear  duty  to  the
trial  of  prudence.     It  was  a  resolve  to  walk  by  appearances  and  not  by  faith.

And  this  is  the  universal  tendency  of  the  human  heart.  Prudence  often  conflicts
with  faith  and  hinders  wholesome  action.  Prudence  has  no  voice  in  the  matter
after  God  has  spoken.  He  may  lead  us  through  over-prudence,  in  absence  of  express
commandment ;  but  when  the  command  is  clear,  prudence  should  hide  its  head  and
allow /ujiA  to  obey.

III.  It  was  still  worse  to  hearken  to  the  spies  whose  counsel  conflicted
with  the  command  of  God.  Having  embarked  on  prudential  considerations,  they
must  needs  follow  them  out  to  their  unbelieving  end.  The  spies  returned,  and  could
not  but  acknowledge  that  the  land  was  good.  Prom  Eshcol  they  carried  on  a  staff  a
bunch  of  grapes  sufficient  of  itself  to  vindicate  the  Divine  choice  of  the  land.  "  But
the  inhabitants,"  said  ten  of  the  spies,  "  are  gigantic,  and  the  cities  walled  up  to
heaven ;  and  there  is  no  use  in  thinking  of  successfully  invading  it."  In  vain  did
Caleb  and  Joshua  counsel  courage  instead  of  cowardice,  faith  instead  of  fear.  The
people  resolved  to  take  counsel  of  their  fears  and  unbelief.  They  would  not  enter  the
land  of  promise.

So  is  it  often  in  the  lives  of  men.  God  offers  salvation  and  a  good  land  to  all  who
will  believe  upon  him.  But  men  fear  the  giants  and  their  castles.  They  imagine  that
the  difficulties  of  the  life  of  faith  are  beyond  their  powers,  and  so  shirk  them.

But  when  God  points  ont  a  path  of  difficulty,  it  is  not  that  we  may  encounter  its
perils  in  our  own  strength,  but  in  his.  Faith  will  carry  us  through,  while  sensa  and
Bight  are  sure  to  fail  us. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  34 — 46. —  The  heirs  of  promise.  We  have  in  this  passage  the  result  of  un-
belief. The  dread  of  the  people  was  lest  their  little  ones  should  become  a  prey  to
their  gigantic  foes  in  Canaan.     The  Lord  now  declares  that  these  little  ones  shall  be


OH.  II.  1 — 37.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


2f


the  possessors  of  the  land,  while  they  themselves  shall  be  denied  an  entrance,  since
they  refused  it  when  offered  to  them.  The  only  exceptions  are  to  be  Joshua  and  Caleb,
who  made  the  good  report  and  gave  the  good  counsel.  Even  Moses  is  included  in  tlie
doom  of  exclusion.  The  subsequent  attempt  and  the  subsequent  tears  had  no  effect
in  reversing  the  deserved  sentence.  We  learn  from  this  passage  such  practical  lessons
as  these : —

I.  God's  gkaciotjs  offers  are  not  to  be  trifled  with.  The  promised  land  hy
open  to  the  Israelites,  who  had  been  mercifully  guided  to  its  gates.  The  all-importaul
"  Now,"  the  time  for  decisive  action  had  come,  and  it  remained  with  them  to  determine
whether  they  would  go  in  and  receive  the  blessing,  or  remain  without.  They  preferred
to  delay,  to  trifle  with  the  offer,  and  so  the  time  went  past.

So  sinners  are  offered  pardon- and  acceptance  as  an  immediate  boon  (2  Cor.  vi.  2),  but
when  the  offer  is  despised  and  trifled  with,  it  may  be  withdrawn  (Prov.  i.  24 — 33),

II.  Presumption  is  a  poor  substitute  for  faith.  When  the  people  saw  the  mistake
they  had  made,  they  would  go  up  and  fight  in  a  spirit  of  presumptuous  chagrin.  They
now  fought  without  commissions.  The  result  was  disastrous  defeat,  and  a  hurling  of
them  back  from  the  gates  of  Palestine  to  the  great  and  terrible  wilderness.  God  was
not  with  them  in  their  presumption,  since  they  would  not  follow  him  in  humble  faith.

So  may  it  be  with  sinners.  Despised  mercy  may  be  succeeded  by  deserved  defeat.
The  wild  and  proud  efforts  of  presumption  are  in  stiiking  contrast  to  the  quiet  courage
of  faith.  Toil  and  tears  may  be  insufficient  to  retrieve  disaster  when  once  courted  hy
unbelief.

III.  Joshua  and  Caleb's  good  fortune  showed  what  was  possible  to  ■whole-
hearted FAITH.  These  two  spies,  in  wholly  followirg  the  Lord  and  in  counselling
courage,  showed  an  humble  faith.  They  stood  alone  faithful  in  face  of  an  unbelieving
majority,  and  God  gave  them  a  corresponding  assurance  that  they  should  enter  into
the  land.    They  were  greatly  honoured  in  being  allowed  to  do  so.

And  they  are  surely  encouragements  to  believing  souls  throughout  all  time.

IV.  I'HE  ASSURANCE  OF  THE  CHILDREN   THAT   THEY    SHOULD   BE   HEIRS  OF   THE   LAND

vindicated  God's  procedure  and  faithfulness.  The  little  ones,  for  whom  they
feared,  are  selected  as  the  heirs  of  promise.  But  they  are  to  get  the  land  after  disci-
pline and  sorrow  in  the  wilderness.  God's  ways  are  not  ours.  Yet  wisdom  regulates
tlicm  all.

And  the  Divine  grace  was  magnified  in  this  arrangement.  The  Israelites,  as  they
died  in  the  wilderness,  would  be  cheered  by  the  thought  that,  though  they  were  justly
excluded  from  the  land  because  of  their  unbelief,  their  children  would  receive  the
inheritance  in  the  exercise  of  faith.  The  judgment  on  the  fathers  would  be  sanctified,
like  the  sickness  of  Hymenseus  and  Alexander  (1  Tim.  i.  20),  and  their  spirits,  let  us
hope,  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (1  Cor.  v.  S). — B,,  M.  £!.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEE  n.


Vers.  1 — Z3. — The  new  BEOiNNmo  and

BEVIEW     OF     the     JOUBNEYINGS    OF     ISRAEL

FnoM  Kadesh  to  the  river  Abnon,  the
FnONTiBB  of  the  Amobites.  At  this  point
the  language  of  address  is  exchanged  for
that  of  narrative.  The  change  of  subject
from  ''ye  abode"  to  "we  turned,"  became
necessary  when  Moses  passed  from  exhorting
and  warning  the  people  to  narrating  what
happened  after  they  resumed  their  journey-
ings ;  and  gives  no  support  to  the  notion  of
some  recent  German  critics,  that  Moses  left
Kadesh  with  only  a  portion  of  the  people,


while  the  lest  remained  there,  bo  that  no
entire  departure  of  Israel  from  Kadesh  ever
took  place — a  notion  which  the  whole  tenor
of  the  subsequent  narrative  contradicts.  In
obedience  to  the  Divine  command  (ch.  i.  40),
the  people,  after  tarrying  for  a  while  at
Kadesh,  took  their  departure  and  marched
in  the  direction  of  the  Yam-suph  (Numb.
xiv.  25).

Ver.  1. — And  we  compassed  monnt  Seir
many  days.  These  "many  days"  are  the
thirty-eight  years  during  which  the  people
wand.ered  in  the  wilderness  before  they
camped  the  second  time  at  Kadesh ;  theil
going  round  Mount  Seir,  which  was  in  Eilom
(Gen  xjsvi.  8,  9,  20),  is  descriptive  of  their


30


THE  I300K  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[cH.  II.  1 — 37.


nomadic  wanderings  in  various  directions,
■west,  south,  and  soutli  ea^t  of  tliat  mountain
(Numb.  xxi.  4).  "  Crossing  the  long,  lofty
mountain  chain  to  the  eastward  of  Ezion-
geber  (Numb.  xxi.  4, 5),  the  Israelites  issued
into  the  great  and  elevated  plains  which
are  still  traversed  by  the  Syrian  pil,L?rim3
on  their  way  to  Mecca ;  and  appear  to  have
followed  norlMmrd  nearly  the  same  route
which  is  now  t>iken  by  the  Syrian  Hadgi
along  the  western  skirts  of  this  great  desert
near  the  mountains  of  Edora"  (Robinson,
'Bib.  Res.,' i.  2o3,  550).  Mount  Seir  is
now  Jebdl  and  esh-Sherah.  Tliis  mountain
range  is  a  continuation  of  that  ■whii'h  sur-
rounds the  ea  tern  side  of  tire  Doiid  Sea.
The  details  of  ihia  protracted  wandering  are
passed  over  by  Jloses  as  not  rtquired  by  his
purpose  here.

Vers.  2,  3.— When  Israel,  after  their  long
and  difhearfening  wandering,  were  at  the
south-eastern  end  of  the  'Arabali,  God  gave
them  the  word  to  turn  their  march  north-
ward towards  Canaan.  The  route  thuy
pursued  was  along  the  eastern  boundary  of
Edom  (oomp.  Numb.  xxi.  10,  etc.).

Ver.  4. — It  would  appear  that  the  Edom-
ites  made  preparations  to  resist  the  pas-
sage of  the  Israelites  through  their  territory
(Numb  XX.  18 — 20).  As  the  Israelites,  how-
ever, kept  on  the  outskirts  of  their  country,
and  did  not  attempt  to  penetrate  into  the
interior,  the  Edomites  did  not  attack  thi  m
or  seek  to  hinder  their  progress.  The
Israelites,  on  the  other  hand,  were  strictly
forbidden  to  invade  tliat  country  in  a  host.le
manner;  they  were  to  w^tch  over  them-
selves, so  as  not  to  be  tempted  to  make  war
on  the  Edomites,  wlio  were  their  brethren ;
as  God  would  not  give  them  any  part,  not
so  much  as  a  foot-breadth,  of  that  land,  for
he  had  given  Esau  (i.e.  the  race  descended
&om  E^au,  the  Edomites — LXX ,  tois  vloTs
"HcroC)  Mount  Seir  for  a  possession.  They
shall  he  afraid  of  you  (see  Bxod.  xv.  15).

Ver.  5. — Meddle  not  with  them ;  literally,
Kxctte  not  yourself  against  them,  i.e.  so  as  to
strive  in  battle  with  them;  comp.  the  use
of  the  verb  in  Jer.  1.  24,  "  hast  striven  "
(Authorized  Version);  Dan.  xi.  25  (where
nnn^D,  war,  is  added),  "  shall  be  stirred  up
to  battle  "  (Authorized  Version).  Accord-
ingly, they  were  enjoined  to  buy  from  them
for  money  food  and  water  as  they  required.
Two  different  words  in  tlie  Hebrew  are
rendered  here  by  "buy"  in  the  Authorized
Version;  the  former,  13^,  a  denominative
from  ■n?',  grain,  properly  means  to  deal  in
grain,  whether  as  buyer  or  seller,  and  so  to
buy  food ;  the  latter,  ma,  means  primarily
to  dig  (a  well,  e.g.  Gen.  xxvi.  25),  and,  as
used  here,  probably  convoys  the  idea  that
the  Isritelites  were  to  pay  for  permission  to


dig  wells  in  the  country  of  the  Edomites  to
supply  themselves  with  water  as  they  passed
along;  this,  however,  does  not  necessarily
follow  from  the  use  of  this  word,  for  it  has
also  the  meaning  to  buy  (comp.  Hos.  iii.
2,  and  the  corresponding  Arabic  verb,  hard,
which  in  certain  conjugations  has  the  mean-
ing to  borrow  or  hire).

Ver.  7. — They  were  enabled  to  buy  what
they  required— For  the  Lord  thy  God  hath
blessed  thee  in  all  the  works  of  thy  hand;
their  flocks  and  herds  had  increased  during
their  wanderings  (Numb,  xxxii.  1);  and  they
may  have  gained  wealth  by  cultivating  the
soil  at  pl.ices  wliere  they  had  m:ide  »
lengthened  sojourn,  or  by  tnifHo  with  the
tribes  of  the  desert  with  whom  they  came  in
contact.  Jehovah  their  God  had  known —
had  noted,  observed,  had  regaid  to,  had
cnred  for  (comp.  Gen.  xxxix.  6;  Ps.  i.  6;
Prov.  xxvli.  2:H)  -  their  walking— their  pere-
grinations— through  this  great  wilderness;
he  had  been  their  Leader,  had  chosen  for
tliem  places  to  rest  in,  had  provided  food
for  them,  and  had  been  their  Protector  and
G  uardian  all  through  the  forty  years  of  their
pilgrimage,  so  that  they  had  wanted  for
nothing  (ch.  i.  33;  viii.  2,  3,  15,  16;  comp.
Ps.  xxiii.  1 — 6).  "He  sufficiently  supplied
what  was  needful  for  thee  when  thou
wallcedst  through  this  great  wilderness;  for
these  forty  years  the  Word  of  Jah  thy  God
hath  sustained  thee;  noi  hath  anything
been  wairting  to  thee"  (Chaldee  Paia-
phrase).  Forty  years  (Numb.  xiv.  33).
"  Fmra  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  first  month
in  which  their  ftithers  came  out  of  Egypt
(Numb,  xxxiii.  3),  to  the  tenth  day  of  the
same  month  in  which  they  went  over  Jordan
into  Canaan  (Josh.  iv.  19),  there  were  but
fine  days  wanting  of  complete  forty  yeara  "
(Patrick).

Ver.  8. — And  when  we  passed  by  from  onr
brethren  the  children  of  Esau,  which  dwelt
in  Seir,  through  the  way  of  the  plain  frosn
Elath,  and  from  Ezion-gaber,  we,  etc.  Bather,
And  we  passed  by  from  (away  from)  out
hrethren  the  sons  of  Esau,  who  dtoelt  in  Seir,
from  (off  from,  i.e.  alongside,  but  at  some
distance  from)  the  way  of  the  'Ardbah,  from
(off  from)  liluth  and  from  Hzion-geber.  And
so,  in  obedience  to  the  Divine  command,  the
Israelites  passed  from  the  territory  of  the
Edomites  without  entering  it,  and  went  by
their  border  on  the  east  side  of  the  'Arabali,
and  from  beside  Elath  and  Ezion-geber,
both  ports  at  the  northern  extremity  of  the
Elauitic  Gulf  of  the  Red  Sea  (Numb,  xxxiii.
35).  Thus  they  came  to  where  they  were
tl;en  encamped,  in  the  steppes  of  Moab.
"  Probably  they  followed  the  still  used
caravan  route  to  Damascus,  between  the
east  side  of  the  cultivated  land,  and  the
west  side  of  Arabia  Deserta"  (SchioederV,


CH.  n.  1—37.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


81


Elath  or  Eloth  (nVs^  riiV'N,  palmgrove)  -the
AiAAS  of  Josephus,  'Antiq.,'  Ix.  12;  the
'E\oi'a  of  Ptolemy  (v.  17) — was  a  city  of  Idu-
mea,  situated  on  the  eastern  gulf  of  the  Red
Sea.  Its  ruins  are  still  traceable  near  the
modem  fortress  of  AkS-bah,  on  the  north-
west (Burokhardt,  p.  509;  Kobinson,  1.  241).
Ezion-geber  (laj  P'SJJ.,  backbone  of  a  mun,
so  called  probably  from  the  rugged  and
jagged  rocks  in  its  vicinity),  a  seaport  near
toElath  (cf.  1  Kings  ix. 26 ;  2  Chron.  xx.  36).

Ver.  9. — The  Moabites,  being  the  descend-
ants of  Lot,  and  so  allied  by  race  to  the
Israelites,  the  latter  were  commanded  to
pass  through  their  country  without  offering
t.em  any  injury  or  assault.  Ar,  a  border-
town  of  Moab  (Numb;  xxi.  15),  here  put  for
the  country  itself.  It  is  the  Areopolis  of  the
Greeks,  and  was,  as  Jerome  tells  us,  de-
stroyed in  a  single  night  by  an  earthquake.
A  hill,  with  ruins  a  short  distance  south-
webt  from  Ara'ir,  is  supposed  to  be  its  site.

"Vers.  10 — 12.— The  mention  of  the
Moabites  gives  occasion  to  the  author  to
introduce  some  notices  of  the  ancient  in-
habitants of  Edom  and  Moab.  In  M(jab
dwelt,  in  the  earlier  times,  the  Emim,  a
giant  race,  potent  and  numerous,  like  the
'An6,kim.  They  were  also,  like  the  'AnS,kim
reckoned  among  the  Eephaim,  but  were  by
the  Moabites  called  Emim.  The  word
Emim  means  frightful,  and  was  given  to
these  men  probably  becaiise  of  their  huge
stature  and  fierce  aspect.  Anakims  (see  ch.
i.  28).  Rephdim  seems  to  have  been  a
generic  name  of  these  gigantic  Canaanitish
tribes  (see  Gen.  xiv.  5 ;  xv.  20).  The  Horim
appear  from  the  name  (from  -itn,  a  cave)  to
have  been  a  Tioglodyte  race,  inhabiting  the
caves  which  abound  in  the  Bdomite  range,
and  with  whom,  perhaps,  originated  the
conception  which  was  at  a  later  period
carried  out  in  the  marvellous  rock  city  of
Petra.  Of  their  own  origin  nothing  ig
known.  As  Israel  did  [or  has  done]  unto  the
land  of  Mb  possession.  This  cannot  be  re-
garded as  uttered  proleptically ;  it  must
either  be  the  insertion  of  a  later  age,  or  it
must  refer  to  the  conquest  which  had
actually  been  made  before  this  by  the
Isriielites  of  the  land  to  the  east  of  the
Joi  clan,  and  which  is,  in  ch.  iii.  20,  described
as  the  possession  which  the  Lorrl  had  given
to  the  two  tribes  and  a  half  to  whom  it  hal
been  assigued.  The  latter  is  the  preferable
supposition.

Vers.  13 — 15. — Ver.  13  connects  with
ver.  9,  the  intermediate  verses  being  a
parenthesis,  introduced  for  the  purpose  of
reminding  the  Israelites  that  the  Edomites
and  Moabites  had  received  their  territory
by  gift  tiiva  God,  the  earlier  inhabitants


having  been  cast  out  by  him  that  thej
might  take  their  lands  (see  vera.  21 — 23),
There  is  no  need,  therefore,  for  the  insertion
"  I  said,"  in  ver.  13 ;  the  words  are  those  of
Jehovah,  not  of  Moses.

Ver.  13. — The  brook  Zered;  either  the
stream  of  the  Wady  el  Ahsy  (Kobinson,  ii.
157 ;  Eitter,  iii.  78),  or  that  of  the  Wady
Kerab  (Keil,  Kurz,  etc.) ;  see  Numb.  xxi.  11,
and  Smilh's  'Dictionary,'  iii.  1842.  This
brook  formed  the  boundary  line  between
Edom  and  Moab,  and  was  the  limit  of
Israel's  wanderings  in  the  wilderness.  They
crossed  it  thirty-eight  years  after  the  doom
had  been  pronounced  upon  them  at  K^desh,
and  during  that  period  the  entire  genera-
tion of  those  who  had  rebelled  had  died
out.

Ver.  14. — Men  of  war;  those  of  age
BufSoient  to  go  forth  to  war,  viz.  twenty
years  old  and  upwards  (Numb.  i.  3 ;  xiv.  29).
These,  as  the  responsible  transgressors,  all
perished ;  the  whole  generation  passed  away,
and  was  consumed  (oh ;  cf.  ch.  v.  15 ;  Ps.  Ixxiii.
19),  as  God  had  sworn  (Numb.  xiv.  28,  29).

Ver.  15. — For  indeed ;  rather.  And  also  ;
not  by  natural  causes  alone,  but  by  the  hand
of  God,  i.e.  by  special  penal  judgments
also,  were  they  troubled  and  destroyed
(cf.Numb.  xvi.31,etc;  xvii.l2, 13;  xxi.  6;
XXV.  1—9).

Vers.  16 — 19. — The  generation  that
sinned  having  quite  died  out,  the  people
were  now  to  cross  the  border  of  Moab  and
advance  to  the  conquest  of  the  promised
land.  To  the  east  of  Moab  was  the  country
of  the  Ammonites ;  these,  also,  the  [sraelites
were  to  leave  unassailed,  for  the  Lord  had
given  to  them  their  land  for  a  possession
(cf.  ver.  9).

Ver.  18. — Coast  of  Moab ;  the  boundary
of  Moab,  which  was  the  river  Arnon,  hod.
Mujeb  (Numb.  xxi.  13—15  ;  xxii.  36).

Ver.  19. — Over  against  the  children  of
Ammon,  As  the  Israelites  were  passing
eastward  of  Moab ;  when  they  crossed  the
Arnon,  the  Ammonites,  whose  dwelling  was
in  the  wilderness  east  of  the  Jordan,  would
be  almost  in  front  of  them.  The  Israelites
came  over  against  them  after  they  conquered
Si  I  ion  (cf.  Numb.  xxi.  24).

Vers.  20 — 23. — Another  parenthetical  in-
sertion, containing  some  ethnographical
notices,  intended,  probably,  to  confirm  the
assertion  that  to  the  children  of  Ammon
God  had  given  their  land  for  a  possession,
There  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  supposing
that  this  paragraph  is  an  interpolation,  or
gloss,  inserted  by  some  later  writer.    It  lay


32


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBKONOMY.


[CH.  U.1— 37,


aa  mooh  in  the  way  of  Moses  to  introdooe
■uoh  ethnographical  notices  as  in  that  of
any  writer  of  a  later  age.

Ver.  20. — Before  the  Ammonites,  the  land
was  occupied  by  a  gigantic  race,  called  by
them,  Zamzummim  (probably  noisy  ones,
fromoQT  to  hum,  mutter ;  or,  as  the  verb  also
signifies,  to  muse  or  meditate,  perhaps
moody  ones}  whether  the  same  as  the  Zu-
zim  of  Gen.  xiv.  5 — LXX.,  tByn  iirxupd,  as  it
from  11T,  to  overflow, to  abound-  -ia  uncertain).
The  colossal  stone  monuments,  resembling
what  in  Europe  are  known  by  the  Celtic
names  of  dolmen,  menhir,  and  cromlech,
still  to  be  found  in  the  land  of  Moab,  are
supposed  to  be  the  work  of  these  aboriginal
inhabitants  of  tlie  country,  the  gigantic
Emim  and  Zamzummim.  This  giaut  tribe
the  Lord  had  destroyed  before  the  Ammon-
ites, just  as  he  had  destroyed  the  Horim
before  the  children  of  Esau  in  Seir.

Ver.  23. — So  also  the  Caphtorim,  who
came  from  Caphtor  (Gen.  x.  H),  probably
the  island  of  Crete  (Bitter,  iii.  262),  drove
out  the  Avim,  a  Ganaanitish  race,  whc
dwelt  in  villages  (Sazerim,  nnin)  as  far  as
Gaza  (Azzah),  and  took  possession  of  theil
land ;  though  it  would  appear  some  of  tbem
^tUl  remained  among  the  Philistines  (who
were  Caphtorites,  Amos  ix.  7 ;  Jer.  xlvii.
4),  and  were  among  the  tribes  not  subdued
by  the  Israelites  under  Joshua  (Josh.  ziii.
3).  These  Caphtorim  were,  like  the
Israelites,  immigrants,  who  drove  out  the
original  occupants  of  the  country ;  and  on
this  account,  probably,  are  referred  to  by
Moses  here.  "  This  is  so  often  repeated,  to
possess  the  minds  of  the  Israelites  with  a
sense  of  God's  providence,  which  rules
everywhere;  displacing  one  people,  and
settling  another  in  their  stead,  and  fixing
their  bounds,  also,  which  they  shall  not
pass  without  leave  "  (Patrick).

Vera.  24 — 37. — Conqxiest  of  the  kino-
DOM  OF  SiHON.  Sihon  and  his  people  were
Amorites,  who  had  settled  on  the  east  of  the
Jordan  in  Gilead.  Buf  though  not  included
in  the  original  promise  to  Abraham,  God
had  assigned  this  territory  to  the  Israelites ;
and,  therefore,  he  commanded  the  people
under  Moses  to  cross  the  Arnon,  and  take
the  first  step  towards  possessing  the  promised
land,  by  assailing  Sihon,  King  of  Hoohbon,
assuring  them  that  from  that  day  he  would
"put  the  dread  and  fear  of  them  upon  all
nations  under  the  whole  heaven,"  that  is,
all  nations,  wherever  placed,  to  whom  the
fame  of  the  Israelites  should  come  (comp.
Exod.  xxiii.  27;  ch.  xi.  16),  so  that  on
hearing  thereof,  they  should   tremble  and


writhe  as  in  pain  Of^n),  comp.  laa.  xiu.  8).
Moses,  however,  in  the  first  instance,  sent  a
message  of  peace  to  Sihon,  proposing  to  pass
through  his  territory  on  the  same  terms  as
he  had  made  with  the  Moabites  and  Edom-
ites,  travelling  by  the  highway,  and
paying  for  such  provisions  as  his  followers
required.  But  this  Sihon  refused,  and
came  out  against  Israel,  with  all  his  people,
to  battle.  The  issue  was  that  he  was  utterly
discomfited;  all  his  towns  were  captured,
he  and  all  his  people  utterly  destroyed,  and
the  cattle  and  spoil  of  the  whole  country
taken  for  booty.  Israel  thus  became  pos-
sessed of  that  entire  territory,  thoagh  it  did
not  lie  within  the  bounds  of  the  land
promised  by  God  to  Abraham,  which  was
the  reason,  probably,  why  Moses  made  over-
tures of  peace  to  bihon,  and  would  have
passed  through  his  country  amicably,  had  he
been  permitted ;  but  comp.  ch.  xx.  10.

Ver.  26.— The  wilderness  of  Eedemoth
(comp.  Numb  xxi.  13);  so  named  from  the
town  of  Kedfemoth,  an  old  Amorite  town,  on
the  right  bank  of  the  Upper  Arnon ;  at  a
later  period,  a  Levitical  city  in  the  tribe  of
Eeuben  (Josh.  xiii.  18 ;  xxi.  37  ;  1  Chrou
vi.  79).  The  name  (from  Dip,  the  east',,
signifying  eastern  parts,  indicates  that  it
was  situated  on  the  eastern  boundary  of  the
Amorite  region,  so  that  the  desert  named
from  it  must  have  bordered  on  the  great
Arabian  desert ;  it  may  have  been  on  what
ia  now  the  Derb  el  Haj,  or  Pilgrims'  Boad,
probably,  at  Kal'at  Bal&a.

Ver.  27.— Along  by  the  high  way ;  literally,
by  the  way,  by  the  way,  i.e.  always,  con-
tinuously by  the  way,  the  public  road,  called
in  Nnmb.  xx.  17  and  xxi.  22,  "the  king's
way,"  probably  because  made  and  kept  up
by  the  king.

Ver.  29. — As  the.  .  .did  unto  me.  This  re-
fers expressly  to  the  fact  that  the  Edomites
and  Moabites  did  not  hinder  the  Israelites
from  passing  through  their  country,  though
they  were  far  from  friendly,  and  dealt  in  an
unbrotherly  way  with  them,  for  which  the
Moabites  were  afterwards  placed  under  a
ban  (Deut.  xxiii.  3).

Ver.  30.— Heshbon,  the  chief  city  of  the
Amorite  king,  Sihon.  Some  ruins  on  a  hill
east  of  the  upper  end  of  the  Dead  Sea.  and
bearing  the  name  Chesbftn,  mark  the  site  o.f
this  once  large  and  important  city.  Sihon
rejected  Moses'  overtures  of  peace,  because
God  had  hardened  his  spirit,  and  made  his
heart  obstinate;  liteTallj,  had  sharpened  Mi
heart,  had  made  his  determination  keen.
It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  any  influence
was  directly  exerted  on  him,  to  make  him


OH.  u.  1—37.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


33


obdurate  and  persistent  in  his  hostility  to
the  people  of  God ;  the  expression  "  he
would  not "  indicates  that  it  was  of  his  own
will  that  Sihon  acted ;  but  it  was  the  will
and  purpose  of  God  that  Sihon  should  be
destroyed,  and  his  country  taken  by  the
Israelites,  and  so  he  was  placed  in  circum-
stances by  which, "  given  over  to  a  reprobate
mind,"  he  was  confirmed  and  strengthened
in  his  determination  to  pursue  a  course
which  led  to  his  destruction ;  like  Pharaoh,
by  the  oinsnmstances  in  which  God  placed
him,  he  found  scope  for  the  display  and  for
the  oonfirmation  of  a  stubborn,  pertinacious
pride  of  spirit,  which  led  ultimately  to
his  ruin.  Nothing  so  hardens  the  heart
as  resistance  to  God's  overtures  of  peace.
As  appeareth  this  day;  t.e.  as  present  ex-
perience shows ;  in  Sihon's  refusing  to  let
them  pass,  tliere  was  already  an  actual
beginning  of  the  fulfilment  of  God's  pur-
pose to  deliver  him  into  the  hand  of  the
Israelites.

Vers.  31 — 37. — God  had  determined  to
give  Sihon  and  his  land  to  the  Israelites,
and  so  certainly  should  this  be  done,  that
Moses  is  exhorted  already  to  begin  to  seize,
in  order  to  possess  the  land.  Sihon  initiated
hostilities  by  coming  out  with  all  his  host
to  fight  against  Moses  and  the  Israelites.
The  battle  took  place  at  Jahaz  (or  Jahazah,
or  Jahza),  a  town  between  Medeba  and
Dibon  (Euseb. ;  of.  Numb,  xxxiii.  45),  after-
wards belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Beuben
(Josh.  xiii.  18),  and  assigned  to  the  Levites
of  the  line  of  Merari  (Josh.  xxi.  36 ;  1  Chron.
vi  78).  The  war  was  one  of  extermination,
in  which  all  the  people  of  Sihon  were  de-
stroyed, from  one  end  of  his  dominion  to  the
other ;  all  his  cities  were  devoted  irredeem-
ably (comp.  Lev.  xxvii.  29),  and  only  the
cattle  and  the  material  property  were  pre-
served as  booty  by  the  conquerors  (Numb,
xxi.  23—26).

Ver.  32  (of.  Numb.  xxi.  23).— Tahaz  ^i'"',
downtrodden),  elsewhere  Jahaiah  (p-lOl)i  a
city  of  Moab,  afterwards  assigned  to  the
tribe  of  Reuben,  and  allotted  to  the  priests
(Josh.  xiii.  18;  xxi.  36;  1  Chron.  vi.  63;
Isa.  XV.  4 ;  Jer.  xlviii.  34).

Vers.  33,34  (cf.  Numb.xxiL24,  25;  zxxii.
34,  35,  etc.). — And  utterly  destroyed  the  men,
and  the  women,  and  the  little  ones,  ...  we
left  none  to  remain.  As  the  Amorites  came
out  of  Canaan,  they  belonged  to  the  race
which  God  had  doomed  to  destruction.
The  Israelites,  therefore,  had  a  commission
to  extirpate  them.  Utterly  destroyed ;  liter-
ally, devoted  or  placed  under  a  baa,  which

DEnTBBONOMY.


of  oourae  implied  niter  dertmotion.  Th«
men,  and  the  women,  and  the  litUe  ones,  of
every  eity;  literally,  every  eity  of  men  and
women  and  little  children.  The  phrase
"city  of  men"  can  hardly  mean,  as  Eosen-
muller  affirms,  "men  of  a  city;"  the  hy-
pallage  here  would  be  too  violent.  It
rather  means  "a  peopled  city,"  "a  city  in-
habited by  men."  The  word  rendered
"men"  (°'r"?)  does  not  designate  males  as
opposed  to  females,  but  is  a  designation  of
human  beings  in  general  (cf.  Job  xi.  3;
xxiv.  12  [Heb.  xx.  48] ;  xxxi.  31 ;  Ps.  xxvi.
4,  "vain  persons,"  Authorized  Version,
literally,  men  of  emptiness  or  of  fals<hood,
etc.).  The  passage  might  be  rendered,
every  inhabited  city,  even  (he  women  and
the  little  children.

Ver.  36. — Aroer,  one  of  the  Amorite  cities,
on  the  right  bank  of  the  river  Arnon  (cf.
Josh.  xii.  2 ;  xiii  16).  On  the  Moabite
Stone,  King  Mesha  says,  "  I  built  Aroer ;  "
but  this  can  only  mean  that,  after  some
temporary  condition  of  decay  or  ruin,  he
rebuilt  it.  On  the  borders  of  the  northern
side  of  the  Wady  Mojeb,  there  are  heaps  of
ruins  bearing  the  name  of  Ara'ir,  which
probably  mark  the  site  of  this  ancient  town.
There  was  another  Aroer,  belonging  at  a
later  period  to  the  tribe  of  Gad,  and  opposite
to  Babba,  the  chief  city  of  the  Ammonites
(Josh.  xiii.  25 ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  5) ;  and  still
another  in  the  south  of  Judah  (1  Sam.  xxx.
28),  probably  in  what  is  now  known  as  the
Wady  A'rarah.  The  city  that  is  by  the  river ;
properly,  in  the  river  or  wady ;  i.e.  Ar,  the
capital  of  Moab,  which  was  in  the  valley  of
the  Arnon,  and  which  is  mentioned  here  as
marking  the  exclusive  limit  of  the  country
that  was  captured.  The  word  rendered
"  river  "  ( •'™)  is  used  of  the  valley  or  ravine
(Arabic,  wady)  through  which  a  stream  flows,
as  well  as  of  the  stream  itself  (cf.  Geo.  xxvi.
19 ;  Numb.  xxiv.  6,  etc.).  Ar  is  elsewhere
called  Ar  of  Moab  (Isa.  xv.  1).  Even  unto
Gilead,  i.e.  Mount  Gilead,  which  rises  to  the
north  of  the  Jabbok  (hod.  Zerka).

Ver.  37. — In  obedience  to  the  Divine
injunction,  the  Israelites  left  untouched  the
country  of  the  Ammonites,  situated  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  Upper  Jabbok.  Cities  in
the  mountains ;  the  towns  in  the  Ammonitish
highlands.  In  Josh.  xiii.  25,  half  of  the
land  afitte  Ammonites  is  said  to  be  assigned
to  the'Tfibe  of  Gad;  but  that  refers  to  the
part  of  the  land  between  the  Arnon  and
the  Jabbok,  which  had  been  taken  from  the
Ammonites  by  the  Amorites,  and  was  in
the  possession  of  the  latter  at  the  time  of  the
Israelitish  invasion  (Judg.  xi.  13,  etc.).
Whatsoever  the  Lord  onr  Ood  forbad  us;
literally,  all  that  Jehovah  our  God  emnmanded
u>,  80.  not  to  come  into.


34  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  n.  1—31


HOMILEtlCS.

Yen.  1 — 23  (specially  ver.  7). — God's  knowledge  of  our  pilgrimage.  (For  the
historical  and  geographical  details  connected  with  this  section,  see  the  Exposition.)
Moses  here  reviews  the  career  of  Israel  during  the  wanderings,  with  reference  to  their
treatment  of  the  nations  through  whose  territory  they  required  to  pass  on  their  way.
They,  though  the  favoured  people  of  Jehovah,  were  not  allowed  to  transgress  the
common  laws  of  righteousness,  hy  levying  any  demands  on  the  nations  through  whose
country  they  passed,  nor  to  "  distress  "  in  any  way  those  peoples  whom  the  Lord  had
not  delivered  into  their  hands.  They  were  to  labour  for  their  own  sustenance,  and
to  purchase,  at  a  fair  rate,  meat  or  drink.  And  so  far  as  this  precept  was  concerned,
they  seem  to  have  been  (notwithstanding  their  waywardness  iii  other  respects)  loyal
to  the  Lord  their  God.  These  directions  against  transgressing  the  rules  of  right  in
national  intercourse,  were  a  most  important  part  of  the  education  of  a  people,  where
God  was  forming  a  commonwealth  with  this  (then)  unique  feature,  that  its  corner-stone
vas  righteousness,  (For  an  admirable  survey  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  the
Hebrew  polity,  home  and  foreign,  see  Wines's  '  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  Moses.')
And  as  Moses  is  now  reviewing  the  stages  in  their  experience  when  they  passed  through
an  alien's  land,  he  reminds  them  how  faithful  God  had  been  to  them ;  that  they  had
had  no  need  to  depart  from  the  Divine  injunctions,  for  their  good  and  gracious  God
had  taken  all  their  need  into  account.  "  Ee  knoweth  thy  walking  through  this  great
wilderness."  This  clause  contains  a  world  of  meaning  in  itself,  and  opens  up  a  most
fruitful  theme  for  the  Christian's  meditation  and  for  pulpit  exposition,  viz.  Ood^s  know-
ledge (^  our  pilgrimage  in  life.     Three  inquiries  invite  our  notice —

\.  YffLi.1  IS  IT  THAT  God  is  heeb  said  to  know  ?  "  Thy  walking."  We  under-
stand Moses  as  here  referring  to  the  walking,  viewed  objectively,  not  subjectively.  The
sentence  would  be  true  in  both  respects  ;  but,  nevertheless,  tlie  reference  does  not  seem
to  be  to  the  manner  of  Israel's  walking,  but  to  the  pilgrimage  itself.  What  was  true  of
them  is  also  true  of  us.  He  knoweth  our  walking,  etc.  1.  The  meaning  of  our  pil-
grimage is  known  to  him — as  being  that  of  moral  and  responsible  beings,  made  in  the
image  of  God,  and  as  having  for  its  purpose  the  education  of  character  for  eternity.
2.  He  knows  the  difficulties  of  the  pilgrimage — the  obstructions  with  which  we  are  con-
tinually meeting,  thwarting,  perhaps,  our  fondest  plans  and  wishes.  3.  He  knows  the
tricds  of  the  way.  Not  only  the  trials  which  are  "  common  to  man  "  in  general,  but
also  those  indefinable, /eW  peculiarities,  which  are  ours  and  ours  only,  which  we  cannot
unfold  to  a  single  soul  on  earth.  4.  He  knows  the  enemies  which  beset  us:  their
strength,  number,  malice,  and  craft.  5.  He  knows  the  appointed  yooZ  at  the  end  of  the
pilgrimage,  and  all  the  glorious  possibilities  which  may  be  unfolded  in  the  realization  of
our  destiny.  6.  He  knows  the  wants  of  each  and  of  all,  temporal  and  spiritual ;  that
we  are  helpless  to  the  attainment  of  life's  end,  without  constant  supplies  from  liim.

IL  What  is  hebb  meant  by  God's  knowing  all  ?  1.  Obviously,  his  perfect,  full,
entire  cu:gtiaintance,  not  only  with  the  pilgrimage  in  general,  not  only  with  such  particulars
of  it  as  those  we  have  just  named,  but  also  with  every  detail  of  each  particular.  He
■eeth  the  whole  of  everything.  2.  But  it  is  not  a  hare  seeing ;  the  knowledge  is  attended
with  a  fatherly  interest  in  all  that  concerns  the  welfare  of  Ms  children.  He  "  taketh
pleasure  in  them  that  fear  him."  "  He  careth  for  "  us.  The  training  of  his  children  for
a  home  by  means  of  a  pilgrimage  thither,  is  one  of  the  most  kind  and  loving  designs  of
the  heart  of  infinite  love !  3.  HBpcnowing  includes  the  actually  taking  into  account
all  the  need  of  our  pilgrimage,  in  his  words,  works,  and  ways.  (I)  In  the  promises  he
makes,  all  things  are  taken  into  account.  These  promises  are  not  merely  applicable  in
part,  or  at  times,  but  wholly  and  always.  (2)  Wis  precepts  too  are  framed  according
to  the  same  perfect  knowledge.  (3)  His  providential  mercies,  general  and  special,  meel
the  wants  of  to-day  and  prepare  for  those  of  to-morrow.  He  works  for  our  future,  that
we  may  live  by  the  day.  (4)  In  his  great  redemptive  provision  for  our  spiritual  training,
there  is  the  same  forethoughtfulness.  (5)  In  his  distinctively  personal  and  individual
■■are  over  each  one,  the  whole  of  our  pilgrimage  is  taken  into  account.      No  one  is  con-


OH  n.  1— 37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  35

fused  with  any  one  else.    The  Great  Father's  family  is  not  so  large  as  to  tax  him.    Ha
can  care  as  lovingly  for  each  as  if  each  one  were  all!

III.  What  is  the  practical  value  to  us  op  such  knowledge  ?  The  value  of  it
is  infinite.  On  three  main  points,  however,  the  preacher  may  dwell,  and  revel  in  the
luxury  they  afford.  1.  If  life's  pilgrimage  is  just  beginning,  this  Divine  knowledge,  so
applied,  may  yield  us  guidance  in  treading  the  way.  For  if  God  has  so  mercifully  taken
all  things  into  account  in  promise  and  precept,  then  we  never  need  to  depart  a  hair's
breadth  from  the  right  path,  for  the  sake  of  st'curing;  any  apparent  advantage  whatever.
This  is  specially  suggested  by  the  way  in  which  Moses  uses  the  words.  2.  If  we  are
just  in  the  mid  part  of  the  pilgrimage,  we  may  find  immeasurable  comfort  under  the
difficulties  of  the  way.  All  our  responsibilities  are  accurately  estimated,  all  wants
perfectly  considered,  all  supplies  certainly  ensured.  What  more  could  we  desire  ?  3.  If
we  make  use  of  the  Divine  knowledge  in  the  ways  we  have  specified,  we  shall  find  that
it  will  also  give  us  a  song  of  thankfulness  when  near  tlie  end  of  the  way.  At  the  point
of  time  referred  to  in  the  text,  Israel  was  near  the  verge  of  Canaan.  And  the  words
are  retrospective.  They  are  a  testimony  to  Divine  faitlifulness  and  caro ;  "  These  forty
years  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  been  with  thee ;  thou  hast  lacked  nothing."  So  may  the
believer  say  and  sing  as  he  closes  stage  after  stage  of  life ;  so  will  he  sing  when  he
closes  the  last  stage  of  all : — "  Not  one  thinghath  failed  of  all  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken."
The  more  life  unfolds  to  him  of  his  own  weakness,  the  louder  and  sweeter  will  be  his
■ong  oveT  Divine  care ;  yea,  he  will  go  singing  to  the  heavenly  rest  I


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 23. — International  relationships.  The  wilderness  state  is  the  most  salutary
for  men.  Prematurely  to  enter  into  the  land  of  rest  would  prove  an  endless  calamity.
Theoretically,  it  is  possible  to  gain  heaven  too  soon.  Even  "  the  Captain  of  our  salva-
tion was  made  perfect  through  suffering."  That  heaven  may  be  to  us  a  perfect  paradise,
there  must  be  complete  harmony  between  the  soul  and  its  environment.

I.  God  brinqs  hations  into  contact  for  keciprocal  ministration.  So  long  as
the  conviction  prevails  that  distinct  nations  are  natural  foes,  it  is  best  for  them  to
remain  apart.  Mountains  and  seas  and  languages  are  God's  bulwarks  of  peace.  Yet
this  is  but  a  temporary  arrangement.  Nationality  has  its  use,  but  is  liable  to  great
abuse.  God  has  given  a  monopoly  of  blessing  to  no  one  nation,  that  all  may  feel
mutual  interdependence.  The  products  of  nature  are  the  property  of  all ;  yet  personal
interests  are  to  be  respected.  The  life-long  enjoyment  of  Divine  bounty  should  make
us  grateful,  modest,  and  benevolent.

II.  Commerce  with  others  an  occasion  fob  self-control;  We  are  often  ignorant
of  the  selfishness  and  arrogance  Of  our  own  hearts,  until  our  material  interests  come
into  seeming  conflict  with  the  interests  of  others.  In  tlie  presence  of  a  stalwart  foe,  our
courage  or  our  cowardice  is  made  manifest.  We  know  not  whether  good  seed  or  bad
lies  in  our  fields,  until  the  summer  sun  makes  them  spring.  On  the  wheel  of  the
lapidary  the  qualities  of  the  jewel  are  revealed.  Such  occasions  for  knowing  ourselves
—testing  ourselves— disciplining  and  controlling  ourselves,  must  be  highly  prized.  The
ruler  of  his  own  natiire,  especially  under  sore  provocation,  is  a  genuine  victor.

ni.  Our  superiob  strength  affords  no  warrant  for  violent  invasions.
Might  has  a  terrible  proneness  to  warp  our  sense  of  right.  Unless  might  is  penetrated
through  and  through  with  a  spirit  of  righteousness,  it  is  a  body  without  a  soul ;  it  soon
becomes  a  despicable  corpse.  Mere  strength  gives  to  no  man,  and  to  no  body  of  men,
warrantable  authority  to  rule.  It  is  base  and  self-degrading  for  strength  to  trample  on
weakness.  Real  strength  displays  its  latent  reserves  when  it  stoops  to  protect— when
it  endures  rather  than  contends.     Violence  is  essential  weakness,  the  scarecrow  of

IV '  OuB  natural  relationships  have  a  claim  upon  our  regards.  What  God
hath  constructed,  man  may  not  wantonly  destroy.  We  are  to  "  honour  all  men,  but
to  "love  the  brotherhood."  We  may  send  our  portions  of  sympathy  to  the  uttermost
circumference  of  the  human  circle,  but  we  are  to  reserve  a  double  portion  for  kmdred.


M  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  u.  1— 37.


Spiritual  ties  are  superior  to  all  the  bonds  of  nature,  but  they  need  not  be  separate  and
distinct.  The  natural  may,  yea  ought,  to  be  the  foundation  on  which  the  spiritval
relationship  is  built.  He  who  affirmed  that  "  all  who  did  the  will  of  his  Father  were
his  mother,  sisters,  brothers,"  said  also  as  he  commended  his  human  mother  to  his
disciple's  care,  "  Behold  thy  mother  1 "

V.  A  SENSE  OTt  God'b  PRESENCE  FOSTEBS  SELF-ABNEOATioir.  Becauss  We  havc  so
many  proofs  that  God  is  about  us,  safeguarding  our  interests,  we  shall  not  be  so  anxious
to  extort  our  fancied  rights.  "  He  is  at  my  right  hand  :  I  shall  not  be  moved."  "  Let
your  moderation  be  known  unto  all  men  :  the  Lord  is  at  hand."  We  have  an  all-wise,
all-mighty,  and  omnipresent  Defender ;  therefore  we  will  not  fear.  We  will  not  avenge
seeming  injuries :  the  Lord  doth  fight  for  us.     "  Vengeance  is  his."

VL  The  displacement  of  successive  human  races  is  an  ordinance  of  God.
Throughout  the  entire  plan  of  God's  providence  the  same  law  is  manifest.  In  the
formation  of  the  earth's  crust  we  see  tliat  one  order  of  life  passed  away — another  order
appeared.  This  phrase  of  God's  procedure  science  has  labelled  "  the  survival  of  the
fittest."  Is  man  the  final  link  in  this  magnificent  series  ?  All  oracles  are  dumb.  Yet
this  law  of  successive  development  is  apparent  everywhere.  History  and  ethnology
record  the  facts ;  the  Bible  ascribes  them  to  the  personal  God.  Whatever  were  the
motives  or  the  passions  which  prompted  Esau  to  evict  the  Horims,  or  Moab  to  displace
the  Emims,  or  the  Caphtorims  to  dislodge  the  Avims,  this  much  is  plain — that  the
hand  of  the  Lord  wrought  behind  the  human  machinery.  Bad  as  some  of  these  races
seem  to  have  been,  they  were,  without  doubt,  an  improvement  on  the  preceding.
"  First  that  which  is  natural ;  afterward  that  which  is  spiritual."  The  world's  amelio-
ration may  be  waiting  for  our  removal.

VII.  The  death  or  units  promotes  the  welfare  of  the  nation.  The  patience
of  Jehovah  is  conspicuous  in  that  he  did  not  destroy  the  murmurers  and  recusants
in  Israel  with  a  stroke.  He  used  them  still  as  the  natural  protectors  of  the  yi)un:^er
members,  and  whon  these  reached  maturity  of  courageous  faith,  the  older  portion  fell
away,  like  useless  husk  and  chaff.  As  in  the  human  body,  so  long  as  cellular  tissue
dies  and  is  replaced  by  fresh  development,  there  is  health ;  so  in  the  race,  the  removal
of  effete  elements  secures  the  advancement  of  the  whole.  Yet  it  is  not  inevitable  that
the  separate  units  of  mankind  should  absolutely  perish.  The  same  law  of  development
may  prevail  in  each  separate  person.  The  inferior  parts  of  our  being  may  minister  to
the  growth  of  the  higher.  The  outward  man,  like  the  husk,  may  perish,  while,  withal,
the  inner  man  may  be  renewed  daily,  and  be  fitted  for  a  higher  plane  of  existence.
Death  is  the  gate  of  life.

VIII.  God  extends  a  watchful  superintendence  over  all  the  nations  of  the
EARTH.  The  children  of  Ammon  rose  in  arms  against  the  Zamzumminis,  and  defeated
them,  yet  (though  they  knew  it  not)  it  was  Jehovah  who  destroyed  their  foes.  God
has  a  thousand  various  methods  for  ruling  a  nation's  career  and  destiny.  Because
Britain  has  come  into  a  larger  heritage  of  blessing  than  other  empires,  or  because  many
of  the  British  people  consciously  recognize  the  sceptre  of  Jehovah,  we  may  not  conclude
that  the  Zulus  or  Papuans  are  not  equally  overruled  by  him.  "  His  kingdom  ruleth
over  all."  Respecting  Cyrus,  King  of  the  Medes,  God  said,  "  I  girded  thee,  though
thou  hast  not  known  me."  There  is  an  unseen  and  an  unrecognized  sceptre  directing  all
the  movements  of  the  world,  controlling  and  restraining  even  wickedness  itself!  The
errors  of  the  heathen  are,  after  all,  partial  truths,  and  God  is  leading  their  minds  onward
from  obscurer  to  clearer  light.  Sometimes,  we  must  admit,  there  is  a  temporary  sub-
mergence— the  advancing  light  is  for  a  time  eclipsed  by  a  wave  of  darkness.  Never-
theless, through  long  periods  of  human  history,  we  can  for  the  most  paVt  discover
progress.    Eternity  is  God's  abode,  and  we  discern  but  fragreients  of  his  work. — D.

Vers.  24 — 37. — Warrantahle  warfare.  Sihon,  King  of  Heshbon,  opposed  with
physical  force  the  fulfilment  of  Israel's  destiny :  and,  having  provoked  war,  provokes  it
to  his  own  destruction.

I.  The  necessity  for  war.  The  question  whether  war  is  ever  just  and  legitimata
must  be  answered  in  the  affirmative.  Still,  this  does  not  justify  all  war.  The  majority
of  wars  are  indefensible.  War  is  a  barbarous  instrument ;  and,  as  intelligence  advances,
can  be  replaced  by  better  methods  of  conquest.    But  it  sometimes  becomes  the  last  and


OH.  u.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  37

desperate  alternative.  If  war  haa  been  tolerated  in  heaven,  it  may  be  tolerated  on
earth.  Even  a  war  of  extermination  may  be,  under  some  conceivable  circumstances,  a
necessity.  In  this  case  we  may  look  :  1.  At  the  human  aide  of  the  war.  (1)  There
was  an  arrogant  rejection  of  tquitalle  demands.  No  man,  and  no  State,  holds  an
absolute  and  irresponsible  right  to  the  surface  of  the  globe.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's."
We  may  acquire,  by  inheritance,  or  purchase,  or  culture,  personal  interests  in  the  land,
which  others  are  bound  to  respect.  Yet  personal'  interests  are  to  be  subservient  to  a
nation's  good.  The  lesser  must  yield  to  the  greater.  Israel  justly  demanded  a  right
of  way  to  his  own  possessions.  The  terms  proposed  by  the  Hebrews  were  fair  and
equitable,  and  the  onus  of  war  fell  on  him  who  rejected  them.  (2)  Israel  could  point  to
his  pacific  and  honourable  conduct  in  passing  through  the  territories  of  Ammon  and
Esau.  A  reputation  for  trustworthiness  in  observing  a  treaty  had  been  already  estab-
lished. (3)  The  rtjection  of  Israel's  proposal  involved  a  deprivation  of  Israel's  natural
rights.  The  patriarch  Jacob  had  acquired  by  purchase  and  by  culture  much  land  in
Canaan ;  and  now,  released  from  prolonged  captivity,  the  people  claim  their  ancestral
estates.  If  we  leave  out  of  view  the  commands  of  Jehovah,  there  was  ample  reason,
founded  in  common  justice,  why  the  Hebrews  should  demand  a  passage  into  Canaan.
2.  Let  us  contemplate  the  matter  on  the  Divine  side.  This  invasion  was  a  plain
intimation  of  Jehovah's  will.  (1)  It  is  not  man's  place  to  sit  in  j'tidgment  on  his  Ood.
We  are  largely  ignorant  of  all  the  factors  in  this  case.  There  are  vaster  considerations
than  we  can  reach — problems  which  we  cannot  solve.  Our  moral  judgments  are  often
warped  by  weak  and  morbid  sentiments.  Righteousness,  in  its  very  nature,  is  superior
to  pleasure.  "Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?"  (2)  We  are  assured
that  the  guilt  of  the  Amorites  was  great.  What  forms  this  guilt  assumed  we  are  not
fully  told,  but  certain  it  is  that  most  flagrant  corruptions  flourished  among  thenu  He
who  uses  elemental  forces  and  angelic  agents  to  execute  his  judicial  verdicts,  is  equally
at  liberty  to  employ  men  as  the  ofiiceis  of  his  vengeance.  (3)  Very  probably  this  was
a  signal  act  of  retributive  justice.  Possibly  they  had  acquired  the  territory  by  violence
and  bloodshed,  and  had  now  to  yield  it  again  to  the  arbiter  of  war.  "  They  that  take
the  sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword."  (4)  Certainly  this  calamity  was  in  the  line  of
the  world's  progress.  Mankind  has  been  benefited  by  the  overthrow  of  coiTupt  empires.
This  was  the  rough  pathway  along  which  Israel  fulfilled  its  beneficent  destiny.

II.  The  pbecise  occas«)ii  for  this  wab.  This  is  attributed  to  the  stolid  perverse-
ness  of  one  man — Sihon,  King  of  Heshbon.  Is  it  to  be  tolerated  that  the  march  of
a  nation's  destiny  is  to  be  ba£9ed  by  the  ignorance,  or  lust,  or  stupidity  of  one  man  ?
1.  This  obstinacy  of  the  royal  will  must  he  attributed  to  natural  causes.  God  never
compels  a  man  to  be  bad.  Human  nature  was  the  same  in  Sihon's  day  as  in  ours.
Insolent  arrogance  is  a  growth.  Sihon  had  for  many  years  repressed  nobler  instincts,
stifled  generous  feeling,  pampered  selfishness  and  pride ;  hence  blind  obstinacy  became
in  him  despotic.  Corrupt  principles  spring  from  tiny  seeds.  2.  There  are  stages  in  a
man's  career  when  his  choice  becomes  his  fate.  By  the  operation  of  God's  unseen
laws  and  mysterious  forces,  habits  become  as  fixed  as  granite.  1'he  hardening  process
becomes  irreversible,  and  truly  it  is  said  that  God  does  it.  We  can  choose  whether
or  not  to  prepare  our  artillery,  manufacture  our  explosives,  or  light  the  fusee,  but  at
that  point  human  control  ends ;  the  cannon-ball  wings  its  way  by  laws  imposed  by
God,  and  it  is  now  entirely  at  his  disposal.  So  in  the  moral  sphere,  there  is  a  point
at  which  human  choice  ends,  and  in  his  judicial  capacity  G^d  steps  in  and  fixes
irreversibly  the  matter.  "  He  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still."  We  slowly  and
imperceptibly  harden  our  sentient  natures ;  then  God  fixes  them  with  his  judicial
act,  and  we  are  held  in  the  iron  manacles  of  doom.

III.  The  sbcbet  of  success  in  war.  1,  Qod's  promise  of  success  does  not  exclude
human  exertion.  His  promise  always  presupposes  man's  wise  activity.  His  pledge
of  help  is  intended  to  stimulate,  not  supplant,  brave  endeavour.  We  can  only  move
successfully  in  the  line  of  God's  promise.  2.  Qod's  initial  processes  should  he  closely
followed  by  our  activity.  "  I  have  begun,"  said  God  (ver.  31),  therefore  "  begin  to
possess."  We  should  follow  hard  upon  God's  path,  then  his  right  hand  will  uphoLl
us.  It'  tardinessenchain  our  feet,  we  may  soon  lose  the  trace  of  his  footprints.  3.  One
Irave  deed  is  the  forerunner  of  many  successes.  The  report  of  Israel's  martial  prowess
flew  as  on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  and  the  widespread  fear  it  induced  made  further  oon-


88  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  ii.  1—37,


quests  easy.  The  fruits  of  good  or  evil  deeds  may  reproduce  themselves  through  all
time.  The  first  step  in  a  new  course  is  pregnant  with  importance.  4.  Strict  obedience
is  the  highway  to  large  success.  When  the  command  of  God  is  plain,  there  is  no  place
for  hesitation.  Bravery  grows  and  flourishes  in  an  atmosphere  of  loyalty.  During  the
last  thirty-eight  years  of  wilderness  life,  the  faith  and  love  of  the  young  Hebrews  had
immeasurably  grown,  and  their  prompt  obedience  was  the  early  firslfriiit.  They  were
wedded  in  faithful  love  to  God.  Speaking  of  this  period  at  a  later  date,  God  says  by
his  prophet,  "  I  remember  thee,  .  .  .  the  love  of  thine  espousals,  when  thou  wentest
after  me  in  the  wilderness."  In  keeping  all  the  "  commandments  "  of  God,  they  found
a  large  reward. — D.

Vers.  4 — 10,  17 — 20. — Edom,  Moah,  Amman.  The  Israelites  are  strictly  enjoined  not
to  molest  these  three  peoples,  or  to  attempt  to  rob  them  of  any  portion  of  their  territory.
The  ground  of  this  injunction  is  that  God  had  given  them  the  territory  they  possessed,
and  had  not  given  it  to  the  Israelites.  Additional  re;isons  why  Israel  was  not  to  molest
them  lay  in  the  facts  that  they  were  kinsmen  (ver.  4)  and  that  Israel  was  amply  pro-
vided for  already  (ver.  7).  God's  people  have  little  need  to  covet  the  possessions  of  the
woildly.  Apart  from  questions  of  their  rights,  kinsmen  are  entitled  to  be  treated  with
special  kindness  and  forbearance.     We  learn  from  this  passage —

I.  That  the  providence  of  God  is  minittely  concerned  in  the  bettlbment  op
NATIONS.  (Vers.  5,  9,  19.)  It  is  not  by  accident  that  they  are  where  they  are.  God
marks  out  for  them  the  bounds  of  their  habitation.  This  is  a  fundamental  idea  in
Scr'pture  (Gen.  x. ;  Deut.  xxxii.  8;  Acts  xvii.  26).  In  the  verses  before  us  the  terri-
tories of  Kdom,  of  Moab,  and  of  Ammon  are  spoken  of  as  being  a  gift  to  them  from
God,  as  directly  as  Canaan  was  a  gift  to  the  Israelites.  It  does  not  alter  this  fact,
though  it  renders  the  comprehension  of  it  more  difficult,  that  men's  own  violent  and
aggressive  dispositions  are  often  the  means  by  which  these  secret  purposes  of  God  are
fulliUed  (vers.  12,  22,  23).  The  barbarian  incursions  which 'overthrew  the  Koman
empire  were  prompted  by  mere  love  of  conquest,  with  the  hope  of  enrichment  by
slaughter  and  pillage;  but  we  may  trace  the  providence  of  God  working  through  them
for  the  formation  of  modern  Europe.  Our  own  acquisition  of  India  was  not  without
blame;  but  we  may  see  in  our  present  pnssession  of  it  a  gift  of  God  which,  with  our
other  territories  in  different  parts  of  the  globe,  we  are  bound  to  use  for  his  glory.  This
is  the  highest  view  we  can  take  of  the  possession  of  territory,  and  one  which,  so  far
from  justifying  unlawful  aggression,  leads  us  to  refrain  from  it.  It  is  to  be  remarked,
however,  that  the  possessions  which  God  gives  to  nations  are  not  irrevocable — not  for
ever.  Instances  of  dispossession  occur  in  these  verses,  and  Edom,  Moab,  and  Ammon
themselves  have  long  since  been  dispossessed.  "Be  not  highminded,  but  fear"
(Rom.  xi.  20).

II.  That  the  rights  of  nations  abe  to  be  sacredly  respected.  These  verses
teach  lessons  which  might  be  pondered  with  advantoge  by  the  most  advanced  modern
nations.  They  teach  :  1.  Scrupulous  respect  for  international  rights.  It  can  never  be
our  duty  wantonly  to  invade  the  territories  of  those  at  peace  with  us,  or,  from  motives
of  ambition,  to  seek  pretexts  of  war  with  them.  They  are  as  entitled  to  the  peaceable
possession  of  what  they  have,  as  we  are  to  the  peaceable  possession  of  the  lands  be-
longing to  us.  The  right  of  the  stronger  is  not  to  rule  our  policy.  2.  Scrupulous
justice  in  international  transactions.  The  Israelites  might  have  used  force,  but  they
were  to  deal  justly,  and  honestly  to  pay  for  everything  they  received  (vers.  6,  29).
3.  Scrupulous  self-restraint  under  circumstances  of  provocation.  The  Edomites  had
refused  the  Israelites  a  passage  through  their  mountains,  and  liad  entailed  on  them  a
long,  painful,  and  circuitous  journey;  Moab  had  employed  Balaam  to  curse  them,  and
had,  with  Midian,  done  them  yet  worse  evil  (Numb.  xxv.  1) ;  but  not  even  these  pro-
vocations were  to  tempt  them  to  retaliation.  How  many  modern  nations  would  have
made  a  casus  belli  of  far  less?  Forgiveness  of  injuries  should  have  a  place  in  our
international  as  in  our  private  dealings,  and  it  is  strange  if  we  have  to  be  sent  back  to
the  Jews  of  Canaan-conquering  notoriety  to  learn  it.     It  is  to  be  added —

III.  These  instructions  were  a  valuable  discipline  to  the  Jews  themselves.
1.  It  taught  them  to  recognize  the  Divine  gift  as  the  ground  of  their  own  tenure  of
Canaan,    if  the  Divine  providence  so  guarded  these  neighbouring  peoples,  and  would


CH.  ii.  i— 37.]  THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTilROilOMY.  89

not  allow  one  foot  of  their  land  to  be  taken  from  them  against  his  will,  how  muck
more  might  the  Jews,  if  obedient  to  the  covenant,  depend  on  being  preserved  in  theirs  I
If  God  gave,  who  could  take  away  ?  2.  It  taught  them  to  distinguish  their  commission
to  destroy  the  Oanaanites  from  one  of  rude  conquest.  It  teaches  us  also  to  take  a  just
estimate  of  those  acts  of  the  Israelites  in  destroying  the  Canaanitish  nations  on  which
so  much  indignation  has  been  expended.  Their  conduct  here  shows  how  far  they  were
from  being  actuated  by  the  motives  often  ascribed  to  them.  This  high  sense  of
honour,  this  scrupulous  justice,  this  exemplary  self-restraint  prove  that  it  was  in  no
bloodthirsty,  slaughter-loving  spirit  they  were  proceeding  to  their  work ;  and  show
how  at  every  step  they  wer*  guided  by  God's  will,  fell  in  with  the  lines  of  his  pro-
vidence, and  wrought  out  his  wishes  and  purposes.  They  help  us  to  conceive  of  the
destruction  of  the  Oanaanites,  not  as  a  barbarous  massacre,  but  as  the  execution
of  a  long-delayed,  deliberately  pronounced,  and  most  justly  deserved  sentence  of
Heaven.-— J.  0.

Vers.  10 — 13,  20 — 24. — The  Emims,  Eorims,  Zamzummins,  etc.  If  these  verses  are
part  of  the  context  of  the  original  speech,  and  not  a  later  insertion,  they  mui>t  be
viewed  as  scraps  of  history  introduced  to  encourage  the  Israelites  in  their  work  of
conquest,  and  to  dispel  their  apprehensions  by  showing  what  had  been  done  by  others.
They  suggest —

I.  That  the  fbesent  mat  leabn  fboh  the  past.  History,  sacred  and  secular,
is  a  powerful  influence  in  forming  the  characters  of  the  living  race.  The  brave  deeds,
the  conquests,  the  self-sacrificing  endurances  of  those  who  have  lived  before  us,  are  of
use  to  rouse  from  apathy,  and  to  inspire  with  courage  and  enthusiasm.  The  early
conquests  of  the  gospel  help  us  to  believe  in  its  power  to  overcome  existing  oppositions.

IL  That  the  Chuech  may  leabn  from  the  world.  The  holy  nation  is  here
incited  by  pointing  to  what  other  peoples  have  done  in  pursuit  of  their  secular  ambi-
tions. If  the  Moabites  could  drive  out  the  Emims,  "  a  people  great,  and  many,  and
tall,  as  the  Anakims  "  (ver.  10),  and  if  the  Edomites  and  Ammonites  could  do  the  like
in  their  respective  districts,  why  should  Israel  fear  the  enemies  to  be  encountered  in
his  ?  We  may  learn  much  from  men  of  the  world — from  the  boldness  of  their  plans,
their  ingenuity  in  surmounting  difficulties,  their  admirable  perseverance,  their  self-
denial  in  working  out  tlieir  ends,  etc.  Were  the  Church  half  as  diligent,  wise,  and
determined  in  the  prosecution  of  her  work,  as  they  are  in  making  the  schemes  which  they
adopt  succeed,  it  would  be  the  inauguration  of  a  day  of  splendid  spiritual  successes.

III.  That  the  DBspoNDisa  may  leabn  from  the  successful.  It  is  something
to  feel  that  we  are  not  the  first  who  have  had  to  face  giants.  What  has  been  done
once  can  be  done  again,  and  it  is  a  great  matter  to  be  able  to  point  to  cases  in
which  the  very  difficulties  we  are  contending  with  have  been  successfully  sor*
mounted. — J,  O.

Vers.  14, 15.^-Dying  out.  These  thirty-eight  years  form  a  melancholy  parenthesis
in  the  history  of  Israel.  A  death-silence  reigns  in  the  narrative  in  regard  to  them.
The  ninetieth  Psalm  is  apparently  a  memorial  of  them — the  dirge  of  Moses  over  the
fallen.  One  or  two  incidents,  and  a  few  laws  in  Numbers  may  belong  to  this  period ;
otherwise  we  have  only  these  brief  epitaph  verses.  As  here  described,  they  form  a
fitting  image  of  godless  existence  generally^

I.  In  its  want  of  history.  History  is  meant  to  preserve  that  which  is  of  per-
manent worth.  The  unessential,  the  evanescent,  are  not  held  deserving  of  its  record.
But  from  the  spiritual  standpoint  there  is  no  life  of  permanent  worth  but  that  which
is  lived  in  God  and  for  his  glory.  Relatively  to  this  world,  the  godless  man  may-
have  a  history ;  but  ielati;?ely  to  eternity,  he  has  lived  to  no  end  which  ensures  his
being  held  in  remembrance.  He  will  be  forgotten,  and  his  life  be  a  blank  in  the
records  which  alone  will  interest  a  heavenly  society.

II.  In  its  essential  unprofitableness.  1.  It  is  without  proper  purpose.  That
thirty-eight  years  was  one  of  purposeless  existence.  It  had  no  right  end.  Men  might
engage  in  various  pursuits,  but  their  existence  as  a  whole  had  lost  its  value.  They
were  there  but  to  draw  out  their  profitless  days  till  death  came  to  end  the  scene.  The
godless  man  is  in  the  same  position — ^his  existence  as  a  whole  has  no  proper  end,  and


40  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  n.  1— 37.

he  is  made  to  feel  this  the  more  keenly  the  longer  he  lives.  2.  It  is  without  proper
joy.  There  could  be  no  true  joy  in  men's  hearts  during  that  wretched  time  of  waiting
for  the  grave.  Is  there  any  in  the  life  of  the  worldling,  or  of  any  ungodly  man  ?  Ask
Byron,  Goethe,  Rousseau,  or  whoever  else  has  given  confessions  on  the  subject,  and
we  will  need  no  other  witness.     3.  It  is  without  hope.    For  what  is  there  to  give  it?

III.  In  its  being  spent  under  GtOd's  wbath.  The  feeling  that  it  is  so  darkens
life,  troubles  conscience,  makes  death  terrible,  and  awakens  fearful  and  well-founded
presentiments  of  future  evil. — J.  0.

Vers.  24,  25.  -The  effects  of  laraePi  eonquesta.  Would  induce  widespread  dread  anA
anguish.    Apply  to  the  Church.

I.  Great  vie  'obies  of  the  Chuboh  would  speedily  get  noised  abroad.  The
world  has  too  much  lurking  fear  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  not  to  be  sensitive  to  such
reports.  They  would  soon  spread.  They  would  find  their  way  into  circles  little
thought  of.

II.  Great  victories  of  the  Chukch  would  be  the  subest  token  that  God
WAS  with  her.  Were  there  a  return  of  Pentecostal  days,  and  conversions  by  thou-
sands at  a  time ;  or  were  there  such  revivals  as  the  Church  has  sometimes  seen  at
special  times  and  places ; — were  these  becoming  general,  and  multitudes  were  filled  with
the  power  of  God's  Spirit  as  the  result-^it  would  have  a  marvellous  effect  in  producing
widespread  conviction  that  the  religion  of  Christ  was  true,  and  tliat  God's  might  was
being  exerted  through  it.  It  would  be  the  best  "  evidence  "  of  Christianity.  Why
should  not  the  Church  work,  pray,  and  hope  for  Buch  glorious  successes  ?  They  are
possible ;  they  are  propiised ;  they  will  yet  come.

III.  Great  victobies  of  the  Church  would  inspire  widespread  feab.  Any-
thing does  that  which  brings  the  Divine  sensibly  near  to  human  beings  (Luke  v.  8).
But  sinners  in  particular  fean  any  near  manifestation  of  God.  They  know,  like  the
devils  who  besought  Christ  to  let  them  alone,  what  that  means  for  them.  One  result
of  the  conquests  of  the  early  Church  was  that  "  fear  "  fell  on  those  who  witnessed  them
(Acts  ii.  43).  The  Church  is  never  so  safe  as  when  she  is  bold,  aggressive,  and
successful. — J.  0.

Vers.  26 — 37. — The  conquent  of  Sihon.  Sihon,  though  an  Amorite,  was  not  to  be
unconditionally  destroyed.  He  had,^  like  Pharaoh,  an  opportunity  given  him  of  avert-
ing ruin  by  acceding  to  a  most  courteous  and  reasonable  request ;  but,  like  Pharaoh  in
this  respect  also,  he  hardened  his  heart,  and  took  the  course  which  made  his  destruc-
tion inevitable.     We  are  led  to  consider —

I.  Sihon's  opportunity.  (Vers.  26 — 30.)  It  was  not  ^ven  him  in  the  hope  that  he
would  avail  himself  of  it ;  for  it  was  foreseen  that  he  would  refuse  it  and  be  hardened
by  it.  But  the  sinner's  hardness  of  heart  is  not  a  reason  why  the  opportunity  of
securing  his  salvation  should  be  withheld  from  him,  or  why  every  gmcious  means
should  not  he  employed  to  overcome  his  hardness.  It  is,  indeed,  necessary  that  this
should  be  done,  in  order  that  the  responsibility  of  his  ruin  may  rest  entirely  on  him-
self. It  lay  in  the  counsel  of  God  that  this  king's  territory  should  be  given  to  the
Israelites,  but  only  on  condition  of  his  refusal  of  the  request  made  to  hiui.  It  w&s
otherwise  with  the  gift  of  Canaan,  which  was  absolute,  and  permitted  of  no  overtures  of
peace  being  made  to  the  inhabitants.  Their  day  of  grace  was  past :  to  Sihon  there  still
remained  this  last  momentous  and  decisive  opportunity.  The  last  opportunity  will
come  some  day  to  all  who  harden  themselves  in  sin  (cf.  Matt.  xxiv.  37,  38 ;  Luke  xix
42).  This  message  of  Moses  to  Sihon  was :  1.  Peaceable  (ver.  26),  Peaceful  means
should  be  exhausted  in  a  cause  before  resorting  to  force.  They  should  be  exhausted
even  with  those  who  are  not  likely  to  be  influenced  by  them.  This  is  due  to  the  cause,
due  to  ourselves,  and  due  to  the  person  approached.  Men  must  at  least  have  the  oppor-
tunity given  them  of  acting  reasonably  and  generously.  2.  Courteous  (vers.  27,  28).
No  message  could  have  been  couched  in  more  modest  or  conciliatory  terms.  A  courteous
tone  is  to  be  adopted  towards  men,  even  when  we  foresee  that  they  will  not  reciprocate
it.  3.  Peifectly  sincere.  This  was  proved  by  the  justness  of  Moses'  dealings  with
Edom  and  Moab,  to  which  he  makes  reference  (^ver.  29).  4.  Justified  hy  necessity.
Only  thus  oould  they  reach  the  land  which  God  had  given   hem  (viir.  29).


OH.  u.  1—37.]  THE  BOOK  OF   DEUTERONOMY.  41

tl.  Sihon'b  obstinacy.     "The  Lord  thy  God  hardened  his  spirit,  and  made  his
heart  obstinate"  (ver.  30);  not,  indeed,  by  any  evil  influence  exerted  on  his  soul,  but
by  giving  him  up  to  his  naturally  obdurate  disposition,  and  by  placing  him  in  circum-
stances which  he  knew  would  have  a  hardening  effect,  though  in  themselves  of  a
character  fitted  rather  to  soften.    1.  The  hardening  of  the  heart,  so  far  as  it  is  a  result
of  evil  courses,  is  o  work  of  Ood  operating  in  the  laws  of  our  mental  and  moral  nature.
Sin  naturally  operates  to  blind  the  mind,  sear  the  conscience,  destroy  the  generous
affections,  etc.  But  these  effects  are  as  truly  a  judicial  operation  of  God  in  the  soul,  of
a  punitive  nature,  as  was  the  Flood,  the  destruction  of  the  cities  of  the  plain,  or  any
other  outward  expression  of  his  wrath.     2.  The  hardening  of  the  heart,  so  far  as  it  is
the  result  of  acts  of  providence,  is  a  work  of  Ood  operating  in  the  moral  government  vf
the  world.    Both  mercies  and  judgments  have  a  hardening  effect  on  those  who  refuse
to  be  taught  by  them.    This  result,  foreseen  by  God,  may  be  also  willed,  as  a  just
punishment  for  voluntary  transgression  (Isa.  vi.  9, 10) ;  while,  as  a  foreseen  fact,  a
sinner's  hardness  of  heart  may  be  taken  up  as  a  link  in  the  further  development  of
God's  purposes.     3.  The  hardening  of  the  heart,  as  flowing  from  influences  which
ought  rather  to  have  melted  and  subdued  it,  is  a  result  for  which  the  sinner  himself  is
justly  held  responsible.    God  wills  not  the  death  of  any.    The  mingled  goodness  and
severity  of  his  deaUngs  with  men  are  meant  to  lead  them  to  repentance.    But  the  very
things  which  are  designed  to  produce  a  softening  and  converting  effect  on  souls,  are
those  which  frequently  harden  and  sear  them — the  discipline  of  sorrow,  the  preaching
of  the  gospel,  warnings  and  expostulations,  etc.     Hardness  induced  by  such  causes  is
the  most  invincible  of  all,  and  brands  the  obdurate  transgressor  as  ripe  for  God's  judg-
ments (Prov.  xxix.  1).

TTT,  Sihon's  dbstruotiom.  (Vers.  32 — 37.)  1.  It  was  self -sought.  "  Then  Sihon
came  out,"  etc.  (ver.  32).  The  sinner's  destruction  is  of  his  own  seeking.  2.  It  was
achieved  hy  Divine  aid.  "  The  Lord  our  God  delivered  him  before  us  "  (ver.  33).  So
are  all  spiritual  victories.  It  is  the  Church's  comfort  in  her  conflicts  to  know  that  she
has  this  power  to  depend  on.  3.  It  was  total.  "  Utterly  destroyed  "  (ver.  34).  A  type
of  the  utter  destruction  awaiting  all  who  resist  and  oppose  the  Divine  will ;  said  of  the
Church,  "  The  nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish  "  (Isa.  Ix.  12)  ;
of  Christ,  "Every  soul  which  will  not  hear  that  prophet  shall  be  destroyed  from
among  the  people  "  (Acts  iii.  23 ;  c£  2  Thess.  i.  9, 10).— J.  0.

Vers.  1 — ^23. — Ood's  faithfulness  in  dealing  with  nationi  outside  the  covenant.  We
have  here  strict  injunctions  given  to  the  pilgrims  not  to  disturb  the  children  of  Edom,
nor  the  Moabites,  nor  the  children  of  Ammon,  because  they  were  occupying  the  district
assigned  them.  These  tribes,  though  related  to  Israel,  were  not  in  the  covenant.  Still
God  had  guaranteed  to  them  certain  temporal  blessings,  and  he  shows  himself  faithful
in  his  dealings  with  them.

I.  God  is  a  eightbous  Qovebnob  ahono  the  nations.  It  is  in  equity  that  he
rules.  His  judgment  is  always  according  to  truth.  Having  written  the  law  of  con-
science upon  every  human  heart,  he  can  justly  judge  men  thereby.  They  are  laws
unto  themselves,  and  so  will  be  held  accountable  for  their  relation  to  their  law,  or,  as
we  might  call  it,  inward  light  (cf.  Bom.  ii.  14, 15).

II.  Tbmpobal  advantages  abb  gifts  of  God.  The  laws  which  regulate  nature
are,  we  believe,  the  ordinances  of  God.  Hence  the  benefits  irreligious  nations  receive
through  the  laws  of  nature  are  really  the  gifts  of  his  bounteous  hand.  Though  the
nations  may  not  so  regard  them,  the  people  of  God  can  form  no  other  notion  of  them.

As  gifts,  they  are  undeserved.  Hence  it  is  part  of  God's  scheme  of  mercy  so  gene-
rously to  treat  the  race  of  men.  We  must  look  to  Christ's  atonement  for  .in  explanation
on  the  ground  of  justice  of  this  merciful  treatment  of  mankind.  The  death  of  Jesus
purchased  temporal  as  well  as  spiritual  blessings,  and  its  vast  application  should  be
recognized  and  known.     In  this  sense  he  did  "  die  for  every  man."

III.  The  constancy  of  the  laws  op  natuke  is  to  be  traced  to  the  faithful-
ness OF  God.  No  other  hypothesis  can  he  offered  so  consistent  with  the  facts.  The
promises  treasured  up  in  nature  are  promises  of  God,  and  the  laws  which  secure  their
fulfilment  are  the  ministers  of  his  faithfulness.

IV.  The  faithfulness  of  God  in  the  oases  bbfeebbd  to  was  not  kecognizbd  by


il  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  u.  1—^7.


THE  TRIBES  PKOFITINQ  BY  IT.  In  Seizing  the  places  allotted  to  them  by  God,  th«
Edcimites,  Moabites,  and  Ammonites  fought  each  for  his  hand  and  in  no  religious  spirit.
They  overcame  and  exterminated  races  of  giants  who  formerly  possessed  the  land.
All  the  while,  God's  plan  and  faithfulness  were  receiving  illustration  and  fulfilment.
The  exercise  of  human  freedom  did  not  militate  against,  but  secured  the  Diyin«
pleasure.

V.  God's  bounty  to  nations  outside  the  covenant  is  intended  to  encoubaqe
HIS  OWN  PEOPLE.  The  Israelites  would  be  the  better  prepared  to  meet  and  master  the
giants  in  Canaan  after  seeing  the  Edomites,  Moabites,  and  Ammonites  snugly  dwelling
in  the  inheritances  of  gigantic  predecessors.  If  these  tribes,  without  any  sense  of  de-
pendence upon  the  Almighty,  overcame  the  giants  opposing  them,  what  will  not  be
possible  io  faith  t

And  the  whole  government  of  the  world  is  really  intended  to  foster  «onfidenoe  in
God's  covenant  faithfulness  and  to  forbid  all  despair. — E.  M.  E.

Vers.  14 — 18. —  The  wasting  of  the  warriors.  There  was  evidently  a  considerable
knowledge  of  "the  art  of  war"  in  the  Israel  itish  host  on  leaving  Egypt.  Moses  was
versed  in  it,  as  in  so  much  more,  and  the  mixed  multitude  which  accompanied  the
exodus  would  also  contain  men  skilled  in  arms.  And  experience  of  opposition  on  the
part  of  Amalek,  etc.,  would  elicit  a  martial  spirit  throughout  the  host.

Moreover,  the -presence  of  seasoned  men,  or  "  veterans,"  gives  confidence  to  young
troops  in  actual  conflict.  The  world  would  say, "  By  all  means  retain  the  veterans  for
the  purpose  of  invasion.''  Yet,  strange  to  say,  God  kept  the  host  wandering  till  the
warriors  were  all  weeded  out,  and  buried  in  the  wilderness.  The  invasion  is  to  be
made  by  the  rising  generation,  which  had  never  seen  the  military  art  or  reviews  in
Egypt.     From  this  we  loam —

L  That  God's  ways  aee  not  our  ways,  nor  his  thouqhts  our  thoughts.  In
fact,  his  plains  are  often  constructed  so  as  to  bafile  worldly  wisdom.  We  see  this  in  this
invasion  of  Canaan ;  we  see  it  in  his  way  of  salvation  by  Jesus  Christ;  we  see  it  in
his  providential  dealings.

II.  The  art  of  war  is  not  so  important  as  the  art  of  faith.  The  experience  of
the  veterans  was  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  courageous  faith  in  Gud.  This
made  heroes  of  the  children  who  would,  they  thought,  be  a  piey.  All  wisdom  of  man
becomes  vain  when  unsustained  by  confidence  in  God.

III.  Soldiers'  graves  have  oriENTiMES  been  the  melancholy  condition  of
SUCCESS.  It  was  really  after  sacrifice,  the  sacrifice  of  the  whole  fighting  army  of
Israel,  that  success  came.  There  grew  out  of  their  graves  warning  and  inspiration.
And  it  has  been  over  the  graves  of  soldiers  that  almost  every  progress  of  the  world  has
been  made.  Multitudes  had  to  be  buried  on  the  bal  tie-fields  before  the  promised  land
of  peace  could  be  entered.  The  buried  warriors  constituted  the  holocaust  which  was
presented  before  the  blessing  came.

IV.  The  destruction  or  false  trusts  is  often  the  preparation  fob  true  ones.
The  temptation  to  trust  in  the  veterans  and  their  military  ideas  is  taken  away  by  the
death  of  the  warriors.  So  is  it  that  God  removes  from  us  every  false  refuge.  Thus
we  learn  to  trust  in  the  living  God,  and  to  fight  his  battles  in  his  own  way.  "Provi-
dence is  oftentimes  just  the  removal  of  the  warriors  who  were  so  wise  in  their  own  eyes
and  so  able  to  take  the  best  course,  that  the  people  may  follow  the  Lord  only.

Happy  for  each  soul  it  is  to  be  deprived  of  every  false  support,  and  to  be  led  to  trust
Christ  alone  1  Into  real  rest  the  soul  enters  by  faith — the  promised  land  lies  open  to
the  trustful  soul,  while  its  gates  are  closed  against  the  self-confident  ones. B.  M.  E.

Vers.  24:— 57.— The  destruction  of  Sihon,  King  of  the  Amorites.  Moses  here  recalls
the  first  stage  in  the  conquest.  By  Divine  direction,  the  pilgrims  are  to  advance  upon
the  land  of  the  Amorites,  and  they  are  promised  an  important  victory  over  them.  And
here  we  have  to  notice —

I.  The  reasonable  proposal  made  to  Sihon  the  king.    (Vers.  26 29.)   This  was

for  permission  to  pass  through  his  land  to  Canaan,  undertaking  to  disturb  nothing  and
to  pay  for  all  supplies.  Nothing  could  be  more  reasonable.  The  onus  was  thus  thrown
on  Sihon  of  determining  whether  be  would  befriend  God's  people  or  oppose  them.


cif.  Qi.  1— 29.J


The  boos  01*  deuteSonomY.


And.  this  reminds  us  of  the  most  reasonable  offers  God,  in  his  gospel,  makes  to  men.
He  acts  the  friendly  part,  and  if  men  take  it  in  good  faith,  all  is  well.

II.  The  kefusai,  op  the  habd-heabted  kino.  (Ver.  30.)  Sihon  quite  needlessly
resolves  to  oppose  their  passage  to  Canaan.  He  likely  had  heard  of  or  remembered  the
former  unsuccessful  attempt  thirty-eight  years  before  at  Kadesh,  and  so  he  imagines
that  a  little  opposition  will  deter  them  and  turn  them  from  their  purpose.  The  hard-
ening of  heart,  here  attributed  to  God,  means  simply  that  the  providences,  instead  of
softening  Sihon's  nature,  had  through  his  own  self-will  an  entirely  opposite  effect.
The  heart  gets  hardened  through  the  corruption  of  the  will.

It  is  similarly  with  those  who  reject  the  offer  of  salvation.

III.  Battle  is  thus  foeced  upon  the  pilobims.  (Vers.  31,  32.)  This  battle  of
Jahaz  was  a  decisive  one.  The  pilgrims  were  bo  numerous  that  Sihon  had  to  bring
out  all  his  host.  Into  it  the  Israelites  entered  with  the  assurance  of  victory,  and  this
liirgely  secured  it.

It  is  so  in  the  spiritual  warfare.  The  enemies  of  God's  people  are  met  by  a  host
confident  in  success,  because  promised  by  God.     This  of  itself  is  half  the  battle.

IV.  The  penalty  of  opposition  to  God's  plans  is  bxtebmination.  (Vers.  33,  34.)
If  men  will  oppose  God,  they  must  take  the  consequences.  God  must  be  supreme.
He  can  allow  no  victorious  opposition.  His  enemies  must  lick  the  dust.  It  is  a  mortal
combat  into  which  they  must  enter  who  fight  against  him.

The  propriety  of  the  extermination  rests  in  the  Divine  command.  God  has  the
right  to  dispose  as  he  sees  fit  of  his  creatures.  If  they  oppose  his  will,  which  is  always
right,  they  may  justly  be  taken  away  with  a  stroke,  and  that  without  remedy.

V.  The  limitations  set  before  the  conquebobs.  (Vers.  35 — 37.)  They  took  the
cattle  and  a  certain  portion  of  the  land,  but  they  did  not  overrun  the  whole  country.
The  land  of  the  children  of  Ammon  was  exempt  from  the  invasion.  It  was  forbidden
ground.

So  is  it  always.  God  sets  limits  to  success.  It  is  well  he  does.  Ambition  must
abide  by  his  decree,  and  not  overstep  due  bounds.  When  his  will  is  thus  respected,
and  self-repression  and  self-discipline  rigidly  enforced,  all  is  well.  The  dangers  of
success  are  thus  avoided,  and  real  elevation  of  spirit  is  experienced. — B.  M.  E.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEE  III


Vers.  1 — 11. — Conquest  of  Oq,  King  of
Bashan.  The  Amorites  had  wrested  from
Moab  a  portion  of  the  territory  taken  by
the  Moabites  and  the  Edomites  from  the
giant  aborigines ;  and  Og,  who  was  of  the
same  giant  race,  ruled  over  the  northern
half  of  tlie  region  of  Gilead  and  over  all
Bashan.  This  district  also  God  purposed
Israel  to  possess;  and  therefore, before  cross-
ing the  Jordan,  a  diversion  was  made  north-
wards by  the  Israelites,  for  the  purpose  of
attacliing  this  powerful  chief.  Og  en-
counteied  them  with  all  his  liost,  but  was
signally  defeated,  and  he  and  all  his  people
wei«  exterminated.  Not  fewer  than  three
score  fortified  cities,  besides  villages,  were
captured  by  the  Israelites,  the  whole  country
was  subjugated,  and  all  the  cattle  and
material  property  taken  as  booty  (of.  Numb,
xxi.  aa— 35).
Ver.  1.— (Cf.  Numb.  xxi.  3S.)    We  turned


— I'.e.  took  a  new  route — and  went  up  pPJi,
and  we  ascended).  As  Bashan  was  an  up-
land region,  they  are  very  properly  said  to
have  gone  up.  Edrei,  hod.  Draa,  with  Bomau
and  Arabian  ruins,  nearly  three  mUes  in
circumference,  but  without  inhabitants ;  not
the  same  as  the  Edrei  of  ver.  10.
Ver.  2.— (Cf.  Numb.  xxi.  31,  etc.)
Ver.  4. — Threescore  cities;  probably  the
same  as  the  Bashan-havoth  jair,  afterwards
mentioned  (ver.  14).  The  region  of  Argob,
the  kingdom  of  Og  in  Bashan.  The  region
of  Argob  comprised  the  kingdom  of  Og,  and
Bashan  was  another  name  for  the  same
country;  extending  from  the  Jabbok  to
Eermon,  and  embracing  both  the  northern
part  of  Gilead,  and  what  was  afterwards
in  a  stricter  sense  Bashan,  viz.  the  land
north  of  the  Wady  Zerka  (hud.  Jebel  Ajiau)
to  Hermon.  The  name  Argob  is  sup-
posed by  some  to  be  given  to  the  district
from  a  town  of  that  name,  fifteen  Boman
miles  eastward  from  Gerasa,  a  city  of  Arabia
(Eusebius)  ;  but  more  probably  it  is  derived
from  the  character  of  the  district,  either  as
deep-soiled  (from  3Jn,  a  clod),  or  as  rugged
and  uneven  (3iJ~,  from  3:n  akin  to  D:n,  to


14


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.


[oh.  m.  1-


-29*


heap  up\just  as  the  neighbouring  district
to  the  east  aud  north-east  received  the  name
Trachonitis  (from  rpaxdji',  rough,  rug^'ed) ;
in  the  Targum,  indeed,  Trachona  (^<:1D^e^  is
the  name  given  here  for  Argob.  This  district
is  now  known  as  the  province  of  M-Lejdh
(The  Retreat).  It  is  described  as  oval  in
form,  about  twenty-two  miles  long  by  fourteen
wide;  a  plateau  elevated ■  abont  thirty  feet
above  the  surrounding  plain.  Its  features  are
most  remarkable.  It  is  composed  of  a  thick
stratum  of  black  basalt,  which  seems  to  have
been  emitted  in  a  liquid  state  from  pores  in
the  earth,  and  to  have  flowed  out  on  all
sides  till  the  whole  surface  was  covered.  It
is  rent  and  shattered  as  if  by  internal  con-
vulsion. The  cup-like  cavities  from  which
the  liquid  mass  was  projected  are  still  seen,
and  also  the  wavy  surface  such  as  a  thick
liquid  geuerally  assumes  wMoh  cools  as  it  is
flowing.  There  are  deep  fissures  and  yawn-
ing gulfs  with  rugged,  broken  edges;  and
there  are  jagged  mounds  that  seem  not  to
have  been  sufficiently  heated  to  flow,  but
which  were  forced  up  by  some  mighty
agency,  and  then  rent  and  shattered  to  their
centres.  The  rock  is  filled  with  air-bubbles,
and  is  almost  as  hard  as  iron.  (Dr.  Porter,
in  Kltto,  '  Biblical  Cyclopsedia,'  iii.  1032 ;
seo  also  tiie  same  author's  'Five  Years  in
Damascus,'  ii.  240, '  elc. ;  and  '  The  Giant
Cities  of  Bashau';  Burckhardt,  'Travels
in  Syria,'  p.  1 10,  etc. ;  Wetstein,  '  Eeise-
bericht  ub.  Hauran,'  p.  82,  etc.;  a  paper
by  Mr.  Cyrill  Graham  in  the-  Cambridge
Essays  for  1858  ;  and  Smith's  '  Dictionary,'
art.  'Trachonitis.')  The  entire  trans-Jor-
danic  region  was  thus  captured  by  the
Israelites.

Ver.  5. — All  these  cities  were  fenced  with
high  walls,  gates,  and  bars ;  literally,  double
gatei  and  a  bar.  These  cities,  with  their
marvellous  erections,  are  believed  to  be  still
existing  in  the  Hauran.  Over  that  district
are  strewn  a  multitude  of  towns  of  various
sizes,  all  constructed  after  the  same  remark-
able fashion.  "  The  streets  are  perfect,  the
walls  perfect,  and,  what  seems  more  astonish-
ing, the  stone  doors  are  still  hanging  on
their  hinges,  so  little  impression  has  been
made  during  these  many  centuries  on  the
hard  and  durable  stone  of  which  they  are
built "  (Graham,  Cambriilge  Essays,  p.  160).
These  doors  are  "  formed  of  slabs  of  stone,
opening  on  pivots  which  are  projecting
parts  of  the  stone  itself,  and  working  in
sockets  in  the  lintel  and  threshold."  Some
of  these  gates  are  large  enough  to  admit  of
a  camel  passing  through  them,  and  the
doors  are  of  proportionate  dimensions,  some
of  the  stones  of  whicli  they  are  formed  being
eighteen  inches  in  thickness.  The  roofs
also  are  formed  of  huge  stone  slabs  resting
on    the  massive  walls.      All  betoken   (he


workmanship  of  a  race  endowed  with  powem
far  exceeding  those  of  ordinary  men ;  and
give  credibility  to  the  supposition  that_  we
have  in  them  the  dwellings  of  the  giant
race  that  occupied  that  district  before  it
was  invaded  by  the  Israelites.  "  We  could
not  help,"  says  Mr.  Graham,  "being  im-
pressed with  the  belief  that  had  we  never
known  anything  of  the  early  portion  of  Scrip-
ture history  before  visiting  this  country,
we  should  have  been  forced  to  the  conclusion
that  its  original  inhabitants,  the  people  who
had  constructed  those  cities,  were  not  only
a  powerful  and  mighty  nation,  but  indi-
viduals of  greater  strength  than  ourselves."

Ver.  6.— (See  ch.  ii.  34.)

Ver.  8.— Hennon  (jwjn),  probably  fifom
mn,  to  be  high,  "the  lofty  peak,"  conspicuous
on  all  sides.  By  some  the  name  is  supposed
to  be  connected  with  Dnn,  a  devoted  thing,
because  this  mountain  marked  the  limit  of
the  country  devoted  or  placed  under  a  ban ;
and  it  is  certainly  remarkable  that,  at  the
extreme  north-east  and  the  extreme  south-
west of  the  land  conquered  by  the  Israelites,
names  derived  from  Herem,  viz.  Hervum
and  Hormah  (ch.  i.  44),  should  be  found;
as  if  to  indicate  that  all  between  was
devoted.  Hermon  is  the  southernmost  spur
of  the  Antilibanus  range.  It  is  "  the  second
mountain  in  Syria,  ranking  next  to  the
highest  peak  of  Lebanon  behind  the  cedars
The  elevation  of  Hermon  may  be  estimated
at  about  10,000  feet.  The  whole  body  of
the  mountain  is  limestone,  similar  to  that
which  composes  the  main  ridge  of  Lebanon,
the  central  peak  rises  up  an  obtuse  trun-
cated cone,  from  2000  to  3000  feet  above
the  ridges  that  radiate  from  it,  thus  giving
it  a  more  commanding  aspect  than  any
other  mountain  in  Syria.  This  cone  is
entirely  naked,  destitute  alike  of  trees  and
vegetation.  The  snow  never  disappears
from  its  summit"  (Porter,  'Handbook,  Syria
and  Palestine,' p.  431).  At  the  present  day.
it  is  known  as  Jebel  esh-Sheikh  (The  Chief
Mountain),  also  Jebel  eth  Thelj  (The  Snow
Mountain).  Anciently  also  it  had  various
names.  By  the  Hebrews  it  was  known  also
as  Si6n  (]i«''2',  the  high,  ch.  iv.  48) ;  by  the
Sidonians  it  was  called  Siridn  ()V"i'!»=)V'5B',  a
cuirass  or  coat  of  maU),  probably  from  its
shining  appearance,  especially  when  covered
with  snow ;  and  by  the  Amorites  it  was
called  Senir,  a  word  probably  of  the  same
meaning.  These  names  continued  in  use
to  a  late  period  (cf.  Ps.  xcix.  6 ;  Ezek.  xxvii.
4 ;  Cant.  iv.  8 ;  1  Chrou.  v.  23).

Ver.  10.— The  different  portions  of  the
conquered  territory  are  here  mentioned.
1.  The  plain  (iity'sn,  the  level  country) ;  the
table-land  south  of  Mount  Gilead,  as  far  aa
the  Arnon.    2..  The  whole  of  Oilead  j  the


OH.  III.  1 — 29.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUT15R0N0MY.


45


hilly  country  north  of  the  Jabbok,  between
Heshbon  and  Baahan,  between  the  northern
and  southern  table-land.  3.  All  Bashan,  as
far  eastward  as  Salchab,  the  modern  Szal-
khat  or  Szarkhad,  about  seven  hours  to  the
east  of  Busra,  and  northwards  to  Edrei,  hod.
Edra,  Ezra  or  Edhra',  an  extensive  ruin  to
the  west  of  Busra,  still  partially  inhabited.
Ver.  11. — Bashan  was  of  old  possessed  by
a  giant  race,  the  Keph&im  (Gen.  xiv.  S) ;  but
of  these  Og,  King  of  Bashan;  was,  at  the  time
of  the  Israelitish  invasion,  the  sole  remnant.
Hia  vast  size  is  indicated  by  the  aize  of  his
bedstead,  which  was  preserved  in  Eabbath-
Ammon,  perhaps  as  a  trophy  of  some  victory
obtained  by  the  Ammonites  over  their
gigantic  foe.  This  measured  nine  cubits  in
length,  and  four  in  breadth,  "  after  the  cubit
of  a  man,"  ».e.  according  to  the  cubit  in
common  use.  Taking  the  cubit  as  equal  to
eighteen  inches,  the  measure  of  the  bed-
stead would  be  thirteen  feet  and  a  half  by
six  feet.  That  Og  even  approximated  to
this  height  is  incredible ;  if  he  reached  nine
or  ten  feet  his  height  would  exceed  that  of
any  one  on  record.  It  is  probable,  however,
that  he  may  have  had  his  bed  made  vastly
larger  than  himself,  partly  from  ostentation,
partly  that  he  might  leave  a  memorial  that
should  impress  upon  posterity  a  sense  of  his
gigantic  size  and  resistless  might ;  just  as
Alexander  the  Great  is  said  (Diod.  Sic,
xvii.  95)  to  have,  on  his.  march  to  India,
caused  couches  to  be  made  for  his  soldiers
in  their  tents,  each  five  cubits  long,  in  order
to  impress  the  natives  with  an  overwhelm-
ing sense  of  the  greatness  of  his  host.  It
has  been  suggested  that  it  is  not  a  bed  that
is  here  referred  to,  but  a  sarcophagus  of
basalt  or  ironstone  in  which,  it  is  supposed,
the  corpse  of  Og  was  placed,  and  which  was
afterwards  carried  to  Eabbath,  and  there
deposited  (J.  D.  Miohaelis,  Winer,  Knobel,
etc.).  This  implies  that  the  passage  is  a
later  insertion,  and  not  part  of  the  original
narrative  as  given  by  Moses.  But  with
what  view  could  such  an  insertion  be  intro-
duced ?  Not  to  establish  the  credibility  of
the  story  of  the  victory  of  the  Israelites
over  Og,  for  the  existence  of  a  sarcophagus
in  which  a  corpse  had  been  placed  would
only  attest  the  fact  that  such  a  one  once
lived  and  died,  but  would  prove  nothing
as  to  how  or  when  or  where  he  came  by
his  death.    Not  to  show  the  vast  size  of


the  man,  for  a  isrcophagui  affords  nv.
measure  whatever  of  the  size  of  the  person
whose  remains  are  placed  in  it,  being  an
honorary  monument,  the  size  of  which  ia
proportioned'  to  the  real  or  supposed  dignity
of  the  person  for  whose  honour  it  is  made.
A  bed,  on  the  contrary,  which  a  man
had  used,  or  at  least  had  ^caused  to  be
made  for  himself,  would  afford  some  evi-
dence of  his  size ;  and  there  is  an  obvious
reason  for  Moses  referring  to  this  here,
inasmuch  as  thereby  he  recalled  to  the
Israelites  the  remembrance,  on  the  one  hand,
of  what  occasioned  the  fear  with  which  they
antiiipated  the  approach  of  this  terrible
foe,  and,  on  the  other,  of  the  grace  of  God  to
them  in  that  he  bad  delivered  Og  and  all
his  people  into  their  hand.  It  is  idle  to
inquire  how  Moses  could  know  of  the
existence  of  this  bed  at  Eabbath;  for  we
may  be  well  assured  that  from  all  the  peoples
through  whose  territories  he  had  passed
reports  of  the  strength  and  prowess  and
doings  of  this  giant  warrior  would  be  poured
into  his  ear.

Vers.  12 — 17. — DistribuHoti  of  the  con-
quered land.  The  countries  thus  conquered
by  the  Israelites  were  assigned  by  Moses
to  the  tribes  of  Eeuben  and  Gad  and  the
half  tribe  of  Manasseh.  The  southern
portion,  from  Aroer,  in  the  valley  of  the
Arnon,  to  the  Jabbok,  with  its  towns  (see
Josh.  xii.  15 — 20,  24 — 28),  was  assigned  to
the  Beubenites  and  the  Gadites ;  and  the
northern  portion,  from  the  Jabbok,  compre-
hending, with  Gilead,  the  whole  of  Bashan,
or  Argob,  to  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh.

Ver.  13. — The  last  part  of  this  verse  is
differently  construed  and  rendered  by
different  translators.  By  some  the  clause
all  the  region  of  Argob  ia  connected
with  what  precedes,  while  others  regard
this  clause  as  in  apposition  with  what
follows.  Targum:  "All  the  region  of  Tra-
chona,  and  all  that  province  was  called  the
land  of  giants ; "  LXX. :  "  And  all  the
region  of  Argob,  all  that  Bashan  :  the  land
of  the  Eephaim  it  was  reckoned ; "  Vulgate :
"The  whole  region  of  Argob,  and  all
Bashan  is  called  the  land  of  giants."  Modem
interpreters  for  the  most  part  adopt  the  order
of  the  Targum.  The  clause  may  be
rendered  thus :  The  whole  region  of  Argob
ae  respects  all  Bashan  [i.e.  in  so  far  as  it
formed  part  of  the  kingdom  of  Bashan  under
Og]  was'reputed  the  land  of  the  Bephaim

Ver.  14. — Jajr,  »  descendant  of  BTanajs'^i


M


THE   BOOK   OF   DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  m.  1-29,


by  the  motfiflr's  side  (his  father  was  of  the
tribe  of  Judah,  1  Chron.  ii.  22),  obtained
the  Argob  region  unto— «.e.  Inclusive  of  (see
Jobh.  xiii.  13y—t'b.e  territory  of  the  Geshuri
and  Maachathi.  These  were  small  Syrian
tribes  located  to  the  east  of  tiermon.  Ab
Geshur  slguifies  a  bridge,  it  has  been  con-
jectured that  the  Geshuritos  were  located
near  some  well-known  bridge  across  the
Jordan,  of  which,  perhaps,  they  were  the
keepers,  and  from  this  took  their  name.
Maachah  is  called  Aram-  (Syria-)  Maachah
in  1  Chron.  xix.  6.  According  to  the  '  Ono-
masticon,'  it  was  "  a  city  of  the  Amorites,  by
the  Jordan,  near  Mount  Hermon "  (s.v.
yiaxaei).  It  had  in  later  times  a  king,  who
allied  himself  with  the  Ammonites  against
David  (1  Chron.  xix.  7).  These  tribes  were
subdued,  but  not  destroyed,  by  the  Israelites ;
and  at  a  later  period  seem  to  have  regained
their  independence,  and  to  have  formed  one
kingdom  (comp.  2  Sam.  iii.  3 ;  x.  6 ;  xiii.  37 ;
XV.  8;  1  Chron.  iii.  2).  And  called  them
after  his  own  name,  Bashan-havoth-jair.
The  word  havoth  (properly  chavvoth,  riin)  is
the  plural  of  a  word  meaning  life,  and  Ohav-
voth-Jair  probably  signifies  Jair's  livings,
not  Jair's  villages,  for  these  were  apparently
fortified  cities  (vers.  4,  5;  Josh.  xiii.  30;
1  Kings  iv.  13).  These  were  recaptured
oy  the  Geshurites,  aided  by  the  Arameans
(1  Chron.  ii.  2.3,  "And  Geshur  and  Aram
took  Ohavvoth-Jair  from  them,"  etc.);  at
what  time  is  unknown.  From  Numb,  xxxii.
42,  it  appears  that  Nobah,  also  a  family
descended  from  Machir,  took  certain  towns,
viz.  "Kenath  and  her  daughters"  in  this
district ;  these,  with  the  twenty-three  Hav-
voth-Jair,  made  up  the  dxty  towns  which
"  belonged  to  the  sons  of  Machir  the  father
of  Gilead "  (1  Chron.  ii.  23).  Nobah  was
probably  in  some  way  subordinate  to  Jair,
and  so  in  (his  rhetorical  discourse,  where  it
is  not  the  purpose  of  the  author  to  enter  on
minute  details,  the  whole  of  these  cities  are
included  under  the  name  Havvoth-Jair.
Unto  this  day.  "  This  does  not  necessarily
imply  a  long  time ;  and  Moses  himself  may
have  used  this  expression,  though  only
shortly  after  the  event,  in  order  to  give
prominence  to  the  capture  of  the  fortifietl
cities  of  the  giant  king  Og,  by  the  Manas-
sites  for  the  encouragement  of  the  Isnielitea"
(Herzheimer).

Ver.  15.— (Of.  Numb,  xxxii.  40 ;  1  Chron.
ii.  22.)

Vers.  16,  17. — The  possession  of  the  tribes
of  Reuben  and  Gad  is  here  more  exactly
defined.  Its  southern  boundary  was  the
middle  of  the  valley  (the  wady)  of  the
Amon ;  half  the  valley,  and  the  border,  t.e.
the  middle  of  the  ravine  (or  wady)  and  its
edge ;  a  more  precise  definition  of  the  river
Amos ;  th»  brook  which  flowed  through


the  middle  of  the  ravine  was  to  be  their
boundary  line  to  the  south.  On  the  north-
east the  Upper  Jabbok  (Nahr  A  mmdri)  was
to  be  their  boundary;  this  separated  tliem
from  Ammonitis,  the  region  of  the  children
of  Ammon  (Numb.  xxi.  24).  On  the  west
the  'Ar&bah  (GWr),  and  the  Jordan  and  its
border  (its  east  bank),  from  Chinnereth
(Kinnereth),  a  fenced  city  by  the  sea  of
Galilee,  thence  called  "  the  sea  of  Chin-
nereth "  (Numb,  xxxiv.  1 1 ;  Josh.  xii.  3 ;
xix.  35),  to  the  sea  of  the  'Ar&bah,the  salt  sea,
under  Ashdoth-pisgah — the  slopes  (literally,
the  outpourings,  the  place  where  the  moun-
tain torrents  flow  out,  hence  the  base  of  the
hill)of  Pisgah  (Numb.  xxi.  15 ;  xxvii.  12) —
eastward;  i.e.  simply  the  east  side  of  the
'Ar^bah  and  the  Jordan.

Conclusion  or  Histobioal  Eeoapitdlation.
Vera.  18—29.

Vers.  18 — 20. — Moses  reminds  the  two
and  a  half  tribes  of  the<  conditions  on  which
they  had  received  the  possessions  they  had
desired  beyond  Jordan  (see  Numb,  xxxii.
20—32).  AH  that  are  meet  for  the  war;
literally,  all  the  sons  of  might  (h\n  Ma),  i.e.  not
all  who  were  men  of  war  or  of  age  to  go  to
war,  but  men  specially  powerful  and  fitted
for  warlike  enterprise.  XTntil  the  Lord  hath
given  rest  unto  your  brethren  (comp.  Exod.
xxxiii.  14).

Vers.  21,  22. — Joshua  appointed  a^  Moses'
successor  in  the  leadership.

Ver.  21. — At  that  time,  i.e.  after  the  con-
quest of  the  land  on  the  east  of  the  Jordan
(see  Numb,  xxvii.  12,  etc.).  Thine  eyes  have
seen.  etc.  Joshua  was  directed  to  what  he
had  himself  witnessed,  what  his  own  eyes
had  seen,  in  the  destruction  of  Sihon  and
Og  and  their  hosts,  that  he  might  be  en-
couraged to  go  forward  in  the  course  to
which  he  had  been  called ;  and  the  people
are  reminded  of  this,  that  they  may  keep  in
mind  what  God  had  done  for  Israel,  and
may  without  fear  follow  Joshua  as  their
leader  to  the  conquest  of  Canaan  (comp.
ch.  XX  xi.  23).

Ver.  22. — The  "he"  here  is  emphatic;
as  God  himself  would  fight  for  them,  why
should  they  be  afraid?

Vers.  23—29.  -Prayer  of  Moses.  Moses
knew  that  he  was  not  to  enter  the  promised
land  with  the  people;  but,  reluctant  to
relinquish  the  enterprise  which  he  had  so
far  conducted  until  he  should  see  it  suc-
cessfully finished,  he  besought  the  Lord
that  at  least  he  might  be  permitted  to  cross
the  Jordan,  and  see  the  goodly  land.  This
prayer  was  presented  probably  just  before
Mosps  asked  God  to  set  a  man  over  th«
congregation  to  be  their  leader  to  the  pro


OH.  m.  1—29.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


47


mUed  land  (Numb,  xxvii.  15 — 17) ;  for  the
command  to  give  a  charge  to  Joshua,  in
that  ofBce,  follows  immediately,  as  part  of
God's  answer  to  Moses'  request  (ver.  28),
and  the  expression  "  at  tliat  time  "  (ver.  23)
points  back  to  the  charge  of  Moses  to
Joshua,  as  contemporaneous  with  the  offer-
ing of  his  prayer.  In  this  prayer  Moses
appeals  to  what  he  had  already  experienced
of  God's  favour  to  him,  in  that  he  had
begun  to  show  him  his  greatness  and  his
mighty  power.  The  reference  is  to  the
victories  already  achieved  over  tlie  Amorites ;
these  were  tokens  of  the  Divine  power
graciously  manifested  to  Israel,  and  Moses
appeals  to  them  as  strengthening  his  plea
for  further  favours  (comp.  the  pleading,
Bxod.  xxxiii.  12,  etc.).

Ver.  24.— 0  Lord  God :  0  Lord  Jehovah.
For  what  God,  etc.  (comp.  Exod.  xv.  11;
Ps.  Ixxxvi.  8;  Ixxxix.  6;  cxiii.  5,  etc.).
"  The  contrast  drawn  between  Jehovah  and
other  gods  does  not  involve  the  reality  of
heathen  deities,  but  simply  presupposes  a
belief  in  the  existence  of  other  gods,  with-
out deciding  as  to  the  truth  of  that  belief"
(.Keil).

Ver.  25. — That  goodly  mountain ;  not  any
mountain  specially,  but  the  whole  mountain
elevation  of  Canaan,  culminating  in  the
distant  Lebanon,  as  it  appeared  to  the  eye
of  Moses  from  the  lower  level  of  the  '  Ar&bah.
This  was  "goodly,"  especially  in  contrast
with  the  arid  and  sunburnt  desert  through
which  the  Israelites  had  passed;  the  hills
gave  promise  of  streams  that  should  cool
the  air  and  refresh  and  fertilize  the  land
(see  ch.  viii.  7,  etc.).  Moses  longed  to  go  over
if  but  to  see  this  land,  and  to  plant  his  foot
on  it ;  but  bis  request  was  not  granted.


Ver.  26.— The  lord  was  wroth,  etc.  (of.  ch.
1.  37 ;  Numb.  xx.  12 ;  xxvii.  13,  14).  Let  it
suffice  thee  ;  literally.  Enough  for  thee !  i.e.
either  Thou  hast  said  enough;  say  no  more,  or
Be  content ;  let  what  I  have  done,  and  the
grace  I  have  given,  be  enough  for  thee  (comp.
the  use  of  this  formula  in  Gen.  xlv.  28;
Numb.  xvi.  3 ;  ch.  i.  6 ;  ii.  3).  Keil  and
others  refer  to  2  Cor.  xii.  8,  as  "  substantially
equivalent,"  but  the  expression  there  seems
to  have  quite  a  different  meaning  and
reference  from  that  used  here.

Ver.  27. — Comp.  Numb,  xxvii.  12,  of
which  this  is  a  rhutorical  amplification.
There  the  mountains  of  Abarim  are  men-
tioned ;  here  Pisgah,  the  northern  portion  of
that  range,  is  specified.  The  top  of  Pisgah ;
i.e.  Mount  Nebo  (ch.  xxxiv.  )).  West-
ward ;  literally,  seaward,  i.e.  towards  the
Mediterranean  ;  northward  (jiDi,  hidden  or
dark  place,  where  darkness  gatliers,  as  op-
posed to  the  bright  and  sunny  south)  ;  .south-
ward, towards  tlie  right-hand  quarter  (In<r)
from  pp',  the  right  hand ;  of.  Exod.  xxvi.  18,
"  to  the  south  towards  the  right  hand  ") ;
eastward,  towards  Ihe  dawn  or  sunrising;
of.  ch.  iv.  47  (p-m,  from  mt  to  shine  forth).
Ver.  28.- (Comp.  ch. i. 38;  liL  21 ;  xxxi. 7 ;
Numb,  xxvii.  23.)

Ver.  29. — In  the  valley  over  against  Beth-
peor ;  i.e.  in  the  plains  of  Moab  (Arboth
Moab,  Numb.  xxii.  1 ;  cf.  ch.  iv.  46 ;
xxxiv.  6).  .Beth-pe'or,  i.e.  the  house  or
temple  of  Pe'oi-,the  Moabitisli  Baal.  There
was  a  hill  Pe'or,  in  the  Abarim  range,  near
to  which  this  town  was ;  it  was  opposite  to
Jericho,  six  Roman  miles  north  of  Lihias
(Eusebius);  it  was  given  to  the  tribe  of
Reuben  (Josh.  xiii.  20).  In  passing  from
the  historical  recapitulation,  Moses  indi-
cates precisely  the  locality  in  which  they
were  when  this  address  was  delivered.
I


HOMILETrO=!.

Ch.  H.  24 — ill.  II. —  TJie  last  of  the  giants.  Though  Israel  was  not  allowed  to
plunder  or  in  any  way  to  behave  uncourteously  to  peoples  who  permitted  them  to  pass
through  their  territory  without  obstruction,  yet,  if  they  were  obstinately  opposed,  they
were  to  asaintain  their  ground,  and  to  force  a  passage  through.  There  are  recorded
heie  two  conflicts  of  this  kind,  which  were  memorable  in  after-days,  and  which  gave
a  colouring  to  the  sanctuaiy  songs  (cf.  Ps.  cxxxvi.).  Sihon,  King  of  the  Amorite.'!,  and
Og,  the  King  of  Bashan,  fought  against  the  people  of  God,  were  utterly  vanquished,
and  their  land  was  taken  possession  of  J)y  those  whose  course  they  obstructed.  We
may  find  in  this  apparently  unpromising  theme  a  topic  for  pulpit  teaching,  which  may
furnish  instruction  in  the  ways  of  God,  of  which  we  cannot  afford  to  lose  sight.  Either
of  the  two  cases  before  us  will  equally  avail  for  this  purpose.  We  propose  to  study  the
overthrow  of  Og,  and  the  passing  away  of  the  last  of  the  giants.     Observe —

I.   ThBBE   IB   SOMETHINQ   OP   MYSTERY   ABOUT   THIS   PASSAGE,    WHICH   WE   PBOPOSB    TO

oiiEAB  UP.    There  are  three  points  respecting  Og  which,  at  first  sight,  have  an  aspect


18  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  m.  1— 29

of  lomance  about  them :  1.  The  account  of  the  king  and  his  bedstead.  2.  The  race  of
giants.  3.  The  sixty  great  cities  and  unwalled  towns — a  great  many,  and  that  within
a  space  less  than  that  covered  by  some  of  our  English  counties.  We  can  quite  imagine
a  superficial  reader,  specially  if  he  be  one  who  has  a  keen  appreciation  of  the  liberty  of
doubting,  and  who  restlessly  chafes  against  the  Old  Book,  saying,  "  There,  it  is  absurd
upon  the  face  of  it,  just  like  the  legends  of  other  peoples — a  piece  of  mythology."
That  is  the  rough-and-ready  way  in  which  Moses  is  dealt  with  now  by  many  who
ought  to  know  better.  We  are  prepared  to  contest  these  sceptics  at  every  point,  and,
what  is  more,  to  affirm  that  a  careful  study  of  the  latest  researches  will  confirm  Moses'
statements,  and  not  overthrow  them  (see  the  Exposition  on  this  passive;  also  Dr.
Kitto's  '  Daily  Bible  Eeadings,'  in  loc ;  specially  Eev.  J.  L.  Porter's  '  Giant  Uities  of
Bashan').  When  we  sufficiently  avail  ourselves  of  the  light  which  modern  travel  and
research  have  thrown  upon  tiie  Bible,  we  find  that  what  seemed  romantic  and  almost
legendary  before,  appears  to  be  exact,  literal,  sober  truth.  This  is  an  age  of  scepticism
as  regards  the  old  Word,  and  of  resurrections  as  regards  the  old  world;  the  latter
at  every  step  are  putting  the  former  to  shame.  Every  word  of  God  is  pure,  and,
however  some  may  load  it  with  reproach,  it  shall  be  more  than  vindicated,  and  shall
abide  when  the  last  of  the  sceptics,  like  the  last  of  the  giants,  shall  have  passed  away !
II.  There  is  herb  vebt  much  instruction  bugoestbd  in  the  ways  of  God,  to
WHICH  it  behoves  US  TO  TAKE  HEED :  as  We  are  presented  with  this  topic  for  medita-
tion— The  passing  away  of  nations  and  the  incoming  of  others.  1.  What  a  retrospect
does  the  history  of  the  rise,  progress,  and  abandonment  of  these  giant  cities,  and  the
dwindling  away  of  a  stalwart  race,  call  up  be/ore  our  imagination  I  Sixty  strong
cities.  More  than  forty  unwalled  towns,  of  which  the  remains  may  even  now  he  seen  t
What  a  hum  of  busy  life  must  there  have  been  at  one  time !  and  what  a  degree  of
civilization  at  that  remote  period !  "  When  Israel  was  a  child,"  a  world  of  strong,
skilled  life  had  reached  its  prime  ;  of  some  arts  a  knowledge  was  then  possessed  which,
somehow  or  other,  we  have  lost  and  cannot  regain.  We  can  gather,  to  some  extent,
what  they  were,  from  silent,  monumental  speech ;  but  while  the  cities  remain,  the  nation
which  reared  and  owned  them  .has  quite  passed  away  1  Strange  spectacle  1  Huge
mystery  1  That  pillars  and  monuments  and  records  (even  on  -papyrus)  should  survive
the  wreck  of  ages,  while  the  m,en  who  originated  all  have  mouldered  long  in  dust  I
2.  How  humiliating  to  see  the  powerlessness  of  a  nation  to  guard  itself,  even  when  it
erects  huildings  which  for  ages  will  survive  itself  I  Those  stout  walls  of  Bashan  have
defied  the  tempests  of  three  thousand  years  1  But  of  the  men  whose  wit  devised  and
whose  hands  wrought  them  not  a  trace  is  left.  Is  it  so?  Can  a  nation  fashion  that
which  shall  resist  the  wear  and  tear  of  millenniums,  and  yet  do  nothing  to  airest  its
own  decay  ?  How  insignificant  does  this  make  a  nation  seem  (cf.  Isa.  xl.  17)  I  3.  How
unimportant  is  it  to  the  world  at  large  whether  one  nation  or  another  is  uppermost  I
Bashan's  people  are  gone,  and  not  for  thousands  of  years  has  there  been  a  lament  that
that  race  has  ceased  to  be !  We  ought  to  learn  this  lesson :  A  nation  that  seems  great
at  one  moment,  may  disappear  from  the  scene  of  busy  life,  and,  after  a  temporary  shock,
a  short  inconvenience,  perhaps,  the  world  would  soon  adjust  itself  to  the  change,  and
would  go  on  as  before !  4.  Nevertheless,  no  nation  passes  away  without  some  advance
in  the  unrolling  of  the  great  map  of  Ood^s  providence.  God  may  make  much  of  that
of  which  men  make  nothing.  It  was  not  for  nought  that  Og  and  his  people  were  dis-
possessed, Great  strength  was  combined  with  ghastly  wickedness.  This  is  the  reason
why  they  were  swept  away.  The  wheels  of  providence  are  "full  of  eyes."  Unless  c
nation  is  accomplishing  God's  purposes,  it  will  not  be  spared  to  fulfil  its  own  I  God
will  rid  the  world  of  plague-spots.  5.  By  sweeping  away  Og  and  his  people,  the  way
was  cleared  for  planting  in  their  territory  a  people  who  should  have  a  nobler  faith,  even
a  faith  in  the  One  living  and  true  Ood,  and  who  slundd  also  set  up  a  higher  standard
for  national  life  and  personal  character.  -The  corner-stone  of  Israel's  polity  was
righteousness.  Hence  we  should  be  prepared  to  sing  right  joyously  the  old  Hebrev
song  in  Ps.  cxixvi.,  and  to  see  in  the  dispossession  of  Og  a  proof  of  the  Divine  mfircy
to  the  world !  Hence :  6.  We  who  know  Ood's  Name  can  look  with  calm  serenity  on
national  catastrophes.  Nations  have  been,  and  may  yet  be,  swept  off;  but  in  all  the
transitions  of  power  from  one  people  to  another,  we  see  the  onward  march  of  One  who  ig
but  putting  down  that  which  is  ill,  that  he  may  ultimately  reset  the  world  in  goodness.


<^.  in.1— 29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  40

truth,  and  love.  We  can  join  anticipa*ively  in  the  song  in  Eev.  xv.  Note,  in  con-
clusion: (1)  Whether  a  nation  is  likely  to  oontinue  in  being  or  no  depends  on  the  degree
to  which  it  is  fulfilling  Ood's  designs,  and  not  at  all  on  the  measure  with  which  it  is  carry-
ing out  its  own.  (2)  Whether  it  is  hest  for  the  world  that  a  nation  should  continue  in
being  depends  on  the  virtue,  purity,  and  piety  of  the  people  who  compose  it.  (3)  If
virtue  be  a-wanting,  no  number  of  cities  and  towns,  nor  any  strength  and  hardness
in  the  race,  will  ever  shield  a  nation  from  absolute  extinction.  God  can  laise  up  bettor
peoples.  Ha  is  able  "of  tliese  stones  "  to  raise  up  children  to  Abraham.  (4)  Grod  deals
with  nations  in  this  life ;  with  individuals,  in  the  next  also.  "  Whatsoever  a  man
Roweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."

Vor«.  23—27. — (See  Homiletics,  oh.  iixii.  41 — 52,  and  ch.  xxxiv.)


HOMILIES  BY  VAUIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1—20. — Self-propagating  conquest.  There  is  solid  trulh  in  the  French  pro-
verb :  "  It  is  the  first  step  that  costs."  An  untried  course  makes  large  demands  on  a
man's  thought,  self-watchfulness,  and  energy ;  but  when  habit  is  acquired,  the  machinery
of  the  soul  works  with  smooth  facility.  Enterprises  which  are  most  arduous  at  the  first,
become  by  repetition  as  simple  as  a  natural  instinct.

L  Conquest  induces  new  energy.  The  joy  of  conquest  is  a  spur  to  fresh  endeavour.
The  appetite  for  adventure  and  exertion  is  whetted,  and  is  not  easily  controlled.
Herein  lies  the  secret  cause  of  Alexander's  tears,  that  there  were  no  further  worlds  to
be  conquered.  The  selfsame  law  of  inertia^  which  hinders  senseless  matter  from
originating  motion,  operates  to  keep  it  in  incessant  motion  when  it  has  once  begun.

II.  Conquest  generates  IiAbqer  and  more  courageous  faith.  The  man  who
(conscious  of  Divine  assistance)  has  gained  a  triumph,  listens  «ith  docility  to  every
fresh  whisper  from  the  lips  of  Jehovah.  So  David,  after  many  conquests  over  the
Philistines,  asks  again  with  child-like  simplicity,  "  Shall  I  go  up  against  them?  Wilt
thou  deliver  them  into  my  hands  ?  "  The  successful  efforts  of  robust  faith  will  lead  a
man  to  keep  very  close  to  God.  They  do  not  puff  up  with  pride ;  they  humble  us  by
a  sense  of  the  Divine  goodness.  In  the  spiritual  world  as  in  the  material,  there
operates  the  law  of  action  and  reaction.  Faith  promotes  success,  and  success  invigo-
rates faith.

IIL  One  tbiumph  makes  all  triumph  possible.  An  atom  is  a  type  of  the  world.
An  organic  cell  is  a  type  of  the  animal.  A  leaf  is  a  type  of  the  tree.  So  one  triumph
is  the  pattern  and  pledge  of  all  triumph.  We  become,  in  holy  warfare,  "  more  than
conquerors ; "  for  we  have  qualified  ourselves  for  further  warfare  and  for  easier  conquests.
Og,  King  of  Bashan,  may  have  been  a  more  formidable  foe  than  Sihon,  King  of  Heshbon;
the  walls  and  gates  of  Bashan  may  have  been  tenfold  more  impregnable  than  those  of
Heshbon ;  nevertheless,  the  Divine  succour  which  had  been  afforded  to  the  Hebrews
was  competent  for  every  exigency,  and  if  only  faith  could  rise  to  the  height  of  its
resources,  no  opposition  could  wiihstand  it.  What  though  Og  be  a  stalwart  giant — the
last  of  his  race^-the  God  that  made  him  can  destroy  him !  The  God  who  is  at  our
back  can  give  us  victory  over  every  foe.  Conscious  of  the  power  and  skill  of  our
heavenly  Ally,  we  can  say,  "  God  is  with  me,  therefore  I  must  prevail."

IV.  The  triumph  of  the  whole  Church  depends  on  the  brave  exertion  of
INDIVIDUALS.  In  every  community  we  shall  find  a  variety  of  temperaments — some
sluggish  and  some  sanguine.  The  faith  of  a  few  will  reproduce  itself  in  others.  The
glbWing  zeal  of  one  will  be  contagious.  Among  the  enormous  host  of  the  Hebrews
two  names  are  singled  out  for  honour — Jair  and  Maohir.  In  all  warfare,  much  depends
on  the  heroic  examples  of  a  few  leaders.  The  tone  of  feeling  and  courage  percolates
through  all  the  ranks  of  the  army,  and  braces  every  man  to  fulfil  his  part.  Every
member  of  the  Church  helps  or  hinders  the  Church's  conquests.  The  son  of  Jesse
infused  a  spirit  of  bravery  into  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  and  knit  them  into  organic  unity.

V.  Real  conquest  brings  abiding  results.  This  triumph  of  the  Israelites  put
them  into   permanent  possession  of   lands   anid    cities  and  palaces.     Better  still,   it

UEUTEKONOMY.  *


10  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEBONOMY.  [oh,  in.  1— 2a

developed  the  qaalities  of  faith  and  courage — brought  into  play  generous  and  self-
abnegating  sentiments.  Such  principles  as  these  made  secure  to  them  the  possessions
they  had  won.  As  a  few  seeds  will  bring  a  large  harvest,  so  a  complete  mastery  over
any  real  foe  bears  rich  and  remote  advantages.  We  do  well  to  discover  our  foes,  fasten
attention  on  them,  and  give  no  quarter  until  they  are  destroyed.  So  ingrained  was
idolatry  in  these  Amorites,  that  the  moral  pollution  could  only  be  removed  by  the
destruction  of  the  people.

VI.  The  effect  0pon  cttkselvbs  of  conquest  bhottld  be  to  develop  oub
BROTHERLY  SYMPATHY.  Those  who  have  fought  at  our  side,  and  been  mutually
helpful,  deserve  a  place  in  memory  and  affection.  If  by  their  co-operation  we  have
gained  a  conquest,  gratitude  impels  us  to  continue  the  alliance  until  they  obtain  their
possessious  also.  It  is  noble  to  sacrifice  ease  and  material  advantage  for  the  purpose  of
serving  our  brethren.  Self-conquest  will  prompt  us  to  empty  self,  if  only  we  can
«nrich  others.  This  is  to  follow  the  highest  example — to  be  as  God.  The  glory  and
excellence  of  spiritual  possessions  is  this — they  are  not  diminished  by  communication.
We  give,  and  still  have.

VEL  Conquest  should  deepen  oue  sense  of  oblioation  to  the  supreme  Qt)D.
There  is  a  strong  tendency  in  all  success  to  foster  pride  and  self-esteem.  Crowds  of
successful  men  bow  down  to  their  own  net,  and  burn  incense  to  their  drag.  They
recognize  the  visible  instrument,  ratlier  than  the  invisible  Cause.  Moses  had  to  with-
stand the  current  of  popular  feeling,  when,  in  the  flush  of  triumph,  he  reminds  them
emphatically,  "  The  Lord  your  God  hath  given  you  this  land."  Poverty  often  drives
us  to  God :  fulness  ofttimes  Icecps  us  from  him.  Yet  every  factor  in  the  achievement
of  victory  was  of  God,  and  to  him  was  all  praise  due.  "  His  right  hand,  and  his  holy
arm,  gain  for  us  the  victory." — D.

Vers.  21 — 29. — Prospect  of  death.  In  the  full  career  of  triumph,  Moses  has  inward
presentiment,  and  external  announcement,  that  his  end  was  near.  Nature  has  a  greater
repugnance  to  death  when  we  are  enveloped  in  the  bright  sunshine  of  prosperity.  The
contrast  is  more  marked.  Decay  and  disease  are  natural  forerunners  of  dissolution ;
but  in  Moses  these  were  wanting.  With  him,  the  gravamen  of  the  trial  was  that  his
life-work  was  incomplete.  The  closer  we  appronch  to  the  final  stroke  of  an  under-
taking, the  deeper  becomes  our  anxiety  for  a  successful  issue.  "  How  am  I  straitened
till  it  be  accomplished  I "

L  We  have  herb  saoaoious  provision  to  conbummatb  hb  work.  In  the
judgment  of  a  good  man,  the  perpetuation  of  his  work  by  others  is  vastly  more
important  than  the  continuance  of  his  own  life.  Individuals  pass  away,  but  the
progress  of  the  race  continues.  Up  to  this  point  in  Israel's  pilgrimage,  Moses  had  been
unequalled  as  a  leader;  no  one  among  the  tribes  could  have  filled  his  place.  But
now,  a  military  general,  rather  than  a  legislator,  is  needed,  and  Joshua  has  been
gradually  muuTdcd  by  a  Divine  hand  for  this  work.  We  may  safely  trust  human
interests  with  God.  1.  The  experience  of  age  conveys  its  lessons  to  youths  Joshua  was
scarcely  a  young  man,  as  we  reckon  years ;  yet,  compared  with  Moses,  he  was  juvenile
and  inexperienced  in  governing  men.  Age  is  a  relative  quality.  The  lesson  was  directly
to  the  point — straight  at  the  bull's-eye  of  the  target.  "  Fear  not."  Courage,  just  then,
was  the  "one  thing  needful."  2.  The  command  was  founded  on  the  most  solid
reasons,  viz.  the  irresistible  might  of  Jehovah,  and  the  unchangeableness  of  his
purposes.  What  he  had  done,  he  could  yet  do.  What  he  had  done  was  a  revelation
of  what  he  designed  to  do.  Observation  of  God's  deeds  and  methods  fosters  valurous
faith.  "  Whoso  is  mse,  and  will  observe  these  things,  even  he  shall  understand  the
loving-kindness  of  the  Lord."

11.  Prayer  that  life  may  yet  be  prolonged.  It  savours  of  submissive  meek-
ness to  the  Divine  will  that  Moses  first  provided  for  the  nation's  welfare,  in  view  of
the  continjiency  of  death,  and  then  prays  that  the  stroke  may  be  delayed.  The  latter
is  secondary.  1.  The  prayer  was  earnest.  "I  besought  the  Lord."  There  is  indica-
tion that  it  was  oft  repeated  and  long  continued.  2.  The  prayer  was  inspired  by  noble
motive.  An  unusual  display  of  God's  greatness  had  been  made  in  the  defeat  of  the
two  kings,  and  Moses  longed  to  see  further  unfoldings  of  God's  might.  Still,  his  prayer
"as,  "1  p'rny  thee  show  me  thy  calory!"     God  hnd  only  begun  to  act;  Moses  yearned


CH.  in.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DiiU  iJiKOiN  UMi.  ^l

to  see  the  final  consutnmatioD.  •  8.  Yet  this  prayer  wat  refused.  Unerring  wisdom
perceived  that  it  was  best  to  refuse — h^st,  perhaps,  for  Moses  himself — and  best  foi
Israel.  It  is  better  for  a  man  to  present  an  unsuccessful  prayer,  than  not  to  pray  at
all.  Some  blessing  is  the  fruit.  4.  The  denial  was  a  vicarious  chastisement.  We
have,  in  God's  kingdom,  vicarious  blessing  and  vicarious  suffering.  For  Joseph's  sake,
the  house  of  Potiphar.was  blessed.  For  David's  sake,  Soloniion  finished  his  reign  in
peace.  For  Paul's  sake,  the  crew  of  the  doomed  vessel  escaped.  On  the  other  side,
God  was  wroth  with  Moses  for  the  Hebrews'  sake.  Present  chastisement  better  far
than  final  banishment.  5.  Divine  tenderness  is  displayei  even  in  refused.  The  refusal
was  not  wholly  from  anger;  there  was  a  large  admixture  of  kindness.  Anger  for  the
sin;  kindness  for  the  man.  It  is  as  if  God  had  said,  "It  pains  me  sore  to  impose
this  chastisement;  nevertheless,  it  must  be  done,  and  you  will  add  to  my  pain  by
seeking  an  escape."  God  beseeches  him  to  urge  no  further.  Up  to  this  point,  prayer
was  fitting ;  heyond  this,  prayer  would  have  been  fresh  guilt.  6.  Tet  compensation
for  the  loss  is  granted.  Prayer  is  never  wholly  unsuccessful.  A  gracious  concession
is  made.  Moses  had  asked  to  see  the  land ;  he  shall  see  it,  although  his  foot  shall  not
tread  it.  The  eye  and  the  heart  of  the  man  of  God  shall  be  gladdened.  Without  doubt,
Moses'  natural  eyesight  had  been  preserved  for  this  selfsame  occasion,  and  special
]iower  of  vision  also  was  vouchsafed  in  that  eventful  hour,  when  Moses  Btood  on
Pisgah's  peak.  He  shall  see  it  without  the  toil  of  travel,  without  the  peril  of  the  conflict.
7.  A  crowning  kindness  is  shown  in  confirming  the  succession  to  Joshua.  Though  the
workman  is  to  be  removed,  the  work  shall  advance.  It  was  a  sweet  solace  to  the  mind
of  Moses  that  Joshua  should  have  been  accepted  in  his  stead.  His  cherished  puipose
shall  be  accomplished,  although  by  other  hands.  The  spirit  of  Moses  would  survive
in  Joshua.  "Being  dead,"  Moses  would  still  speak  and  act.  The  body  may  dissolve,
but  the  moral  courage  and  heroic  valour  are  transmitted  to  another.

Rest  is  the  reward  of  toil,  and  the  cradle  of  new  exertion.  "  So  we  abode  in  the
valley."  The  valley  of  Beth-peor  was  the  jirej^aratioa  foi  Fisgah'a  f  eak.  Humiliation
before  exaltation. — D,

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  conquest  of  Og.    Og,  King  of  Bashan,  was  a  yet  more  formidable

adversary  than  Sihon.  We  read  with  wonder  of  that  extraordinary  territory  over
which  he  ruled,  the  region  of  Arg  ib,  with  its  sixty  cities  built  of  Uack  stone,  hard  as
iron,  and  perched  amidst  the  masses  of  basaltic  rock,  which  are  the  characteristic
feature  of  the  district,  and  which  formed  an  apparently  impregnable  barrier  against
assault  The  suddenness,  completeness,  and  decisiveness  of  the  conquest  of  this
region,  naturally  so  strong,  so  thickly  peopled,  so  powerfully  defended,  and  ruled  by
a  king  of  the  race  of  giants,  is  in  any  view  of  it,  an  astonishing  fact,  and  would
naturally  raise  the  courage  of  the  Israelites  to  the  highest  pitch  of  confidence,  while
striking  dismay  into  surrounding  nations  (ch.  ii.  25).     We  consider —

I.  Og's  confident  attack.  Like  Sihon,  he  came  out  against  the  Israelites,  "he
and  all  his  people"  (ver.  1),  and  doubtless  with  great  hopes  of  success.  Had  he  been
less  confident,  he  would  probably  have  remained  within  his  fortifications.  Though  Joshua
speaks  (xxiv.  12)  of  him  being  driven  forth  by  the  hornet,  the  spirit  of  the  attack
reminds  us  of  Goliath's  boastful  advance  against  the  armies  of  Saul  (1  Sam.  xvii.
4 — 12).  His  assault  symbolizes  the  giant-power  of  the  world  in  its  hostile  relations
to  the  Church:  pagan — papal — infidel;  science — learning — philosophy;  powerful  in
itself,  strongly  entrenched,  boastful  in  spirit.  Voltaire  boasted  that  it  took  twelve
men  to  set  up  Christianity,  but  he  would  show  that  one  man  was  sufficient  to  over-
throw it.    Christianity  lasts  still,  but  Voltaire ?

IL  His  complete  rout  (vers.  3—8).  Moses  dwells  on  the  details  of  this  astonish-
iBg  victory  with  lively  gratitude  and  wonder.  The  victory  was,  as  in  Bihon's  case,
complete,  only  here  more  remarkable  from  the  strenj^th  of  the  cities  and  towns.  And
again  all  the  people  were  devoted  to  destruction  (ver.  6).  Somewhat  analogous  to
this  rout  have  been  many  of  the  victories  of  Christianity.  We  think  of  the  downfall
of  ancient  paganism,  so  stronf^ly  entrenched,  but  now  swept  so  entirely  from  the
earth ;  of  the  collapse  of  eighteenth-century  deism  ;  of  the  mighty  men  of  their  own
days,  boastful  of  their  power  to  destroy  the  Church's  faith,  who  are  now,  like  Og,  only
remembered  by  their  coffins.     The  tomes  of  Voltaire,  Bolingbroke,  Shaftesbury,  and  a


M  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  hi  1—29.

host  of  others  lie  unread  on  dusty  shelves,  while  the  Bible  is  multiplying  its  circnlation
every  year.  New,  and  it  may  be  even  mightier,  foes  are  springing  up  in  our  modern
agnostic  and  positivist  and  pantheistic  schools,  but  to  the  serious  student  of  history
there  can  be  no  real  doubt  as  to  the  issue  of  the  conflict.

III.  The  occupation  of  his  land  (vers.  9 — 1 1).  The  land  and  the  cities  thus
conquered  were  taken  possession  of  by  the  conquerors,  and  as-speedily  as  possible
occupied.  The  enemy  was  dispossessed  and  spoiled.  So  did  the  Church  in  the  early
centuries  first  conquer,  and  then  possess  the  ground  previously  held  by  paganism.
"  We  are  of  yesterilay,  and  yet  we  have  filled  every  place  belonging  to  you^cities,
islands,  castles,  towns,  assemblies,  your  very  camp,  companies,  palace,  senate,  forum.
We  leave  you  your  temples  only"  (TertuUian).  The  same  thing  takes  place  as  often
as  the  treasures  of  unbelieving  science,  Icai  ning,  and  philosophy,  in  their  varied  forms
and  applications  (inventions,  arts,  etc.),  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Church,  and  are
made  to  subserve  her  ends.  The  unbelieving  criticism  of  the  Bible,  e.g.,  has  furnished
a  vast  amount  of  material  available  for  the  purposes  of  faith.  So  the  discoveries  of
science,  which  were  dreaded  as  hostile,  prove  at  last  to  be  confirmatory  and  helpful,
and  are  appropriated  by  belief.  Every  victory  of  Christianity  in  the  outward  world,
or  in  the  regions  of  thought,  enlarges  its  possessions  and  extends  its  influence. — J.  0.

Ver.  6. — The  destruction  of  the  populations.  The  difficulty  is  often  urged  of  the
numerous  cases  of  the  destruction  of  entire  populations  recorded  in  Scripture,  and  said
to  be  commanded  by  Gud.  It  is  a  difficulty  which  all  have  felt,  and  which  deserves
remark.  It  is  not  questioned  that,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  it  was  wise  to  root  out  these
populations  from  the  lands  in  which  they  dwelt ;  but  the  justice  and  humanity  of  the
measure  are  thought  to  be  more  doubtful.  The  believer,  on  the  other  hand,  cannot
take  a  condemnatory  view  of  these  transactions  (so  far  as  covered  by  express  com-
mand); but  must  treat  them  as  he  would  treat  similar  difficulties  in  the  ordinary
providence  of  God,  as  matters  which  appear  to  conflict  with  the  Divine  goodness  and
justice,  while  doubtless  admitting  of  a  perfect  reconciliation  with  both.  But  it  may  be
suggested —

I.  That  the  finer  methods  of  modern  warfare  cannot  reasonably  be  looked
FOR  IN  RUDER  AGES.  War  in  any  case  is  an  evil  of  terrible  magnitude.  The  suffer-
ings it  inflicts,  even  when  conducted  most  humanely,  are  incalculable.  It  is  not  the
men  in  arms  alone  who  suffer,  but  the  populations  whose  villages  are  burned,  whose
fields  are  devastated,  whose  aged  and  sickly  are  driven  out  to  perish,  whose  wives  and
mothers  mourn  their  dead  thousands.  Modern  warfare  has,  however,  its  alleviations,
the  result  of  centuries  of  civilization  and  of  the  growth  of  Christian  feeling.  Thess
did  not,  and  could  not,  exist  at  the  time  of  the  conquest.  It  is  not  in  analogy  with
God's  method  of  operation  to  suppose  that  he  should  have  miraculously  anticipated
the  work  of  long  ages  of  development,  and  grafted  on  these  wars  the  military  science
of  the  nineteenth  century — a  science  equally  unsuited  to  the  intelligence  of  the  in-
vader and  to  the  tactics  of  the  enemy.  It  would  be  as  reasonable  to  allege  that  God
should  have  anticipated  the  discoveries  and  methods  of  modern  surgery,  or  armed  the
Israelites  with  nineteenth-century  weapons.  What  may  reasonably  be  expected  is
that,  adopting  as  a  basis  the  methods  of  warfare  then  customary,  the  evils  of  these
shoidd  as  far  as  possible  be  mitigated,  and  any  improvements  be  introduced  which
the  rudeness  of  the  times  admitted  of.     How  fir  this  was  accomplished  will  appear  to

.  any  one  who  studies  the  accounts  of  ancient  warfare,  with  their  shocking  barbarities,
mutilations,  tortures;  scarcely  a  trace  of  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  wars  of  the
Israelites,  and  none  in  the  Law.

II.  That  the  extermination  of  whole  populations  was  not  the  rule  of  Jewish

WABFABB,   BUT   WAS   INVARIABLY   A   PUNISHMENT  INFLICTED  FOR  SDf.      The  prOOf  of  the

former  of  these  propositions  will  be  found  in  ch.  xx.  10 — 16  ;  and  examination  of  the
special  cases  will  show  the  correctness  of  the  latter.  The  destruction  of  the  Canaan-
itish  nations,  in  particular,  is  put  expressly  on  the  ground  of  their  horrible  and  name-
less iniquities  (Lev.xviii.  24,  25).  It  was  the  execution  of  a  long-ddayed  and  richly
desei"ved  judicial  sentence.  The  Midiauites  and  Amalekites  incurred  this  doom  through
sins  against  Israel  (Numb,  xxxii.  16 ;  ICxoii.  xvii.  16);  as  also  to  some  extent  did  Sihon
and  Og.     But  while  we  cannot  speak  absolutely  as  to  the  moral  state  of  the  natioua


OH.  lu.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  59

under  these  kings,  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  cup  of  their  iniquity  had,  in  the  Divine
estimation,  become  full  like  the  others.  Do  we  condemn  the  sentence  as  too  severe  ?
Or  must  we  not  leave  the  judgment  on  a  point  like  that  to  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  ?
The  essential  difficulty  is  not  greater  than  in  the  judgments  of  the  Deluge  or  the
destruction  of  Sudom  and  Gomorrah,  in  which  God  claimed  a  like  right  to  dispose  of
human  life,  and  to  vindicate  his  justice  by  the  destruction  of  it.  We  ought  rather  to
read  in  the  severity  of  these  punishments  the  awful  lesson  oi  sin's  evil  and  enormity,
and  of  the  abhorrence  in  which  it  is  held  by  the  holy  Lawgiver.  The  emphasizing
of  guilt  and  its  deserts  was  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  introduction  of  the  gospel.

III.  That  God  ib  as  severe  in  his  dealings  with  sin  in  his  own  people  as  in  his
ENEMIES.  This  is  a  point  which  is  surely  of  great  moment.  If  severe  in  punishing
these  wicked  nations,  God  is  not  less  sparing  of  Israel  when  it  follows  in  their  ways,
and  does  what  is  wrong.  We  think  here  of  the  destruction  of  thousands  of  their
number  for  the  sin  of  the  golden  calf  (Exod.  xxxii.  28),  and  for  the  sin  of  Baal-peor
(Numb,  xxiii.  5) ;  of  the  plagues,  fiery  serpents,  etc.,  which  chastised  them  for  dis-
obedience ;  of  their  defeat  at  Ai  (Josh.  vii.  4),  and  of  the  threatenings  recorded
against  them  in  this  book  (ch.  xxviii.).  We  think  of  Moses  himself  excluded  from  the
land  of  promise.  Nor  is  sin  made  less  of  in  the  New  Testament  than  in  the  Old.  In
the  cross  of  Jesus,  where  the  Holy  One  is  made  a  curse  for  sinners,  a  far  more  affecting
demonstration  is  given  of  the  judicial  sternness  of  God,  than  in  the  destruction  of  the
nations  of  his  foes.  There  is  with  God  no  respect  of  persons  ;  and  if  one  can  believe
in  his  love  to  Israel  notwithstanding  these  inflictions,  he  may  believe  in  his  love  and
justice  notwithstanding  the  punishments  inflicted  on  the  sinful  nations  around.  As
regards  the  Canaanitish  nations,  their  rooting  out,  so  just  otherwise,  was  plainly
necessary  for  the  preservation  of  Israel's  purity  (ch.  vii.  1 — 6). — J.  0.

Vers.  12 — ^20. — Distribution  of  territory.  I.  Conquered  TERRiTonT  IB  not  to  bb
LEFT  UNOCCUPIED.  This  is  a  sound  principle.  Has  a  vice  been  conquered? — replace
it  by  a  contrary  virtue.  Has  a  soul  been  converted  ? — set  it  to  Christian  work.  Has
a  new  district  or  a  portion  of  heathenism  been  won  for  Christ  ? — plant  it  with  Chris-
tian agencies,  industries,  and  institutions.  Replace  bad  books  by  good  ones ;  sinful
amusements  by  such  as  are  healthful ;  pernicious  customs  by  pure  forms  of  social  life.
Unoccupied  territory  will  soon  fall  back  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.

n.  Conquered  territory  is  to  be  wisely  distributed.  The  distribution  of  the
conquered  districts  suggests  to  us  how,  in  the  occupation  of  the  fields  of  service  which
God  gives  her,  the  Church  should  study  order,  peace,  and  the  attainment  of  the  higher
ends  of  possession,  by  wise  arrangements.  There  should  be  no  clashing  or  confusion
of  spheres  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  We  have  illustrations  of  the  violation  of  this
rule  in  the  occupation  of  limited  districts  by  a  great  number  of  rival  Churches,  often-
working  in  antagonism  to  each  other;  in  the  appointment  of  individuals  to  posts  for
which  they  are  imsuited ;  in  the  confusion  arising  from  workers  not  knowing  their
own  departments  of  service,  or  not  keeping  to  it  whea  known.  Whereas  here :  1.  Bach
had  his  portion  carefully  defined.  2.'  Respect  was  had  to  the  talents  and  callings  of
those  who  were  to  occupy.  "  A  place  for  cattle,"  "  much  cattle  "  (Numb,  xxxii.  1 ;
cf.  ver.  19).  3.  Individuals  had  their  own  conquests  secured  to  them  (ver.  14).  A
man's  spiritual  conquests  are  always  secured  to  himself — his  conquests  over  himself;
and  they  are  his  greatest  possessions.  True  also  of  conquests  for  Christ  in  conversions
(1  Thess.  ii.  19).     Should  be  a  principle  recognized  in  the  work  of  the  Church.

III.  Conquered  territory  is  held  on  condition  or  assistance  to  others.  (Vers.
18 — 21.)  1.  Each  branch  of  the  Church  is  to  assist  the  others.  2.  It  holds  its
privileges  on  this  condition.  3.  The  rest  of  aU  is  needful  to  the  perfect  rest  of  any
(Heb.  xi.  40).— J.  0.

Vera.  21,  22. — Encouragement.  We  notice :  1.  Past  mercies  are  a  pledge  of  future
ones.  "  Thine  eyes  have  seen,"  etc.  2.  The  past  victories  of  the  Church  mirror  her
future  conquests.  "  So  shall  the  Lord  do,"  etc.  3.  The  conditions  of  success  in  spiritual
conflict  are  (1)  fearlessness,  (2)  dependence  on  Divine  aid.     "  Fear  not,"  etc. — J.  0.

Vers.  23 — 29. —  Ood?s  refusal  of  man's  wishes.  We  have  in  this  singularly  pathetic
passage  of  the  private  history  ol  JIuKes^


64  THE  BOOK  Of  DEDTERONOMY.  [ch.  m.  1— la.

L  Ah  affectino  bntrbatt.  "  I  pray  thee,  let  me  go  over,  and  see  the  good  land,"
etc.  (vers.  24,  25).  In  this  speaks  :  1.  The  man.  How  hard  to  flesh  and  blood  to  be
cot  off  just  then  1  To  see  the  goodly  land  (ver.  27),  but  not  to  enter  it.  Yet  not
an  uncommon  experience.  Few  things  are  more  painful  than  to  be  removed  when
just  on  the  verge  of  some  great  success ;  when  the  hopes  of  a  lifetime  seem  just  about
to  be  realized;  when  some  great  cause  with  which  we  are  identified  is  on  the  eve  of
final  victory.  2.  The  patriot.  There  never  beat  in  human  breast  a  more  patriotic
heart  than  that  of  Moses,  and  it  was  supremely  hard  to  step  aside  and  commit  the
leadership  into  other  hands,  when  all  his  wishes  for  liis  nation  were  so  nearly  ful-
filled. It  was  Israel's  triumph,  not  his  own,  he  wished  to  celebrate.  3.  The  saint.
For  Moses'  deepest  longing  in  the  matter  after  all  was  to  see  God  glorified — to  witness
his  greatness  and  his  mighty  hand  (ver.  24).  No  man  had  ever  seen  as  much  of
God's  greatness  and  glory  as  he  had,  but  what  he  had  seen  only  whetted  his  desire
to  see  more.  It  is  always  thus  with  saintly  natures.  The  thirst  for  the  manifestation
of  God  increases  with  the  gratification  of  it  (Ps.  Ixiii.  1 — 6 ;  ct  Exod.  xxziiL  18 — 20).
"  Father,  glorify  thy  name"  (John  xii.  28).

n.  A  DECISIVE  REFUSAL.    1.  The  cause  of  it.    "Wroth  with  me  for  your  sakes"

fver.  26).  How  painful  to  feel  that  misconduct  of  ours  has  involved  any  (1)  in  sin,
2)  in  penalty,  (3)  in  disappointment  I  2.  The  severity  of  it.  It  seems  a  great  punish-
ment for  m  not  very  great  oifence.  Yet  how  often  do  we  find  that  one  false  step,  "  one
pause  in  self-control,"  entails  on  the  individual  irretrievable  loss!  God  could  not
allow  the  sin  of  one  who  stood  in  so  close  and  personal  relation  to  him  to  pass  without
putting  on  it  the  stamp  of  his  severe  displeasure.  ,3.  The  irreversibility  of  it.  He
who  had  succeeded  so  often  in  saving  Israel  by  his  powerful  intercession,  fails  in  his
intercession  for  himself.  "  Let  it  suffice  thee ;  speak  no  more  unto  me  of  this  matter  "
(ver.  26).  Moses,  the  mediator  and  representative  of  the  Law,  must,  when  he  sins,
undergo  its  severity.  In  a  case  so  typical,  a  reversal  of  the  sentence  would  have  shaken
faith  in  all  God's  threatenings.  He  interceded  for  others,  but  there  was  no  second
Moses  to  intercede  for  him.  Those  who  live  nearest  to  God,  and  are  most  honoured
by  him,  must  expect  to  be  treated  with  exceptional  strictness  for  their  faults ;  as  a
father  is  more  particular  about  the  morals  of  his  own  son  than  about  those  of  servants
and  aliens.

IIL  A  PAETiAi.  COMPENSATION.  It  was  given  him ;  1.  To  see  the  goodly  land  (ver.
27).  Even  this  he  must  have  felt  to  be  a  great  boon,  and  how  his  eyes,  supernaturally
strengthened,  must  have  drunk  in  the  precious  vision!  How  many  toilers  have  to
leave  the  world  in  this  frame  of  mind — getting  glimpses  of  a  future  they  do  not  live
to  inherit  1  2.  To  know  that  his  successor  was  ready  (ver.  28).  There  are  few  sights
more  suggestive  of  magnanimity  than  Moses  meekly  surrendering  his  own  dearest
wishes,  and  helping  to  prepare  Joshua  for  the  work  which  he  coveted  so  much  to  do
himself.  It  may  be  felt  by  us  that  there  was  kindness  as  well  as  severity  in  the
arrangement  which  gave  Israel  a  new  leader.  "The  conquest  of  Canaan — ^a  most
colossal  work — demanded  fresh,  youthful  powers  "  (Oosterzee).  The  work  of  Moses
was  indeed  done  on  earth,  and  he  had  to  pass  away  to  make  room  for  instruments
better  fitted  to  do  the  work  of  the  new  age.

Conclusion.  In  this  refusal  see  (1)  God's  severity,  (2)  God's  kindness.  For  in
addition  to  the  point  just  mentioned,  w&  can  see  how,  from  his  temporal  loss,  Moses
reaped  a  great  spiritual  gain — the  perfecting  of  his  will  in  its  choice  of  God  as  its
exclusive  portion,  and  in  entire  acquiescence  in  Divine  arrangements.  This  great
renunciation  was  the  last  sacrifice  asked  of  him,  and  he  rose  to  the  huroio  height  of
mating  it— J.  0.

Vers.  1 — n,—The  destruction  of  Og,  King  ofSashcm.  We  have  here  an  account  of
another  conquest,  for  which  the  victory  over  Sihon,  King  of  the  Amorites,  prepared  the
people.  Bashan  was  "  called  the  land  of  the  giants  "  (ver.  13),  and  Og,  the  king,  was
manifestly  the  greatest  of  the  giants — hence  the  particulars  about  his  bedstead,  as  being
mne  cubits  long  and  four  broad  (ver.  11).  In  a  rude  age  and  country,/orce  was  the
recognized  ruler,  and  the  biggest  man  in  consequence  was  chosen  chief.  It  was  living
and  reigning  by  sense  and  si(/ht — the  world's  regular  way.  Here,  then,  let  us  observe
that—


uu.  m.  1— -UJ  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEliONOMY.  66

L  This  victory  over  Sihon,  Kino  of  the  Amoriteb,  was  a  needful  pbeparation

TOE  THE   MORE   SERIOUS   ENTERPRISE   OP   THE   CONQUEST  OP   BaSHAN.      The    Lord    leads

his  people,  even  in  war,  "  from  strength  to  strength."  They  try  their  swords  upon
the  Amorites  successfully  before  attempting  to  subdue  the  giants.  They  get  a  taste  oi
successful  war  before  they  are  asked  to  undertake  the  greatur  and  more  serious  task
of  exterminating  the  giants  of  Bashan.

And  so  it  is  in  fighting  the  good  fight  of  faith.  One  little  victory  over  an  easily
besetting  sin  gives  nerve  for  a  greater  task.  The  muscles  of  the  soul  grow  strong
through  exercise,  and  greater  victories  are  gained.  Faithfulness  in  the  little  conducts
to  faithfulness  in  that  which  is  much  (Luke  xvi.  10).

II.   The   giants   by   their   UNWALLBD  towns    proved    THBIR   intense   PEHUNfl    OF

SECURITY.  They  had  their  strongholds,  no  doubt,  as  "  the  giant  cities  of'  Bashan  "  still
attest.  But  they  had  "  unwalled  towns  a  great  many  "  (ver.  5).  It  is  evident  from
this  that  their  sense  of  personal  security  was  intense.  They  confided  in  their  size  and
powers.  They  imagined  no  one  would  have  the  temerity  to  attack  them.  It  was  the
contrast  to  "  assurance  of  faith  " — ^what  wo  might  call  "  the  assurance  of  sense."

And  this  characterizes  the  enemies  of  Qod's  people  more  or  less  always.  Self-
confidence  is  the  source  of  their  power  and  of  their  misfortune  in  the  end.  It  is  an
easy  victory  eventually  which  the  Lord's  people,  who  have  learned  to  have  "  no
confidence  in  the  flesh"  (Phil.  iii.  3),  obtain  over  their  self-confident  foes.

HI.  The  VICTORY  over  the  giants  was  complete,  amounting  TO  AN  EXTER-
MINATION. "  And  we  utterly  destroyed  them,  as  we  did  unto  Sihon,  King  of  Heshbon,
utterly  destroying  the  men,  women,  and  children,  of  every  city  "  (ver.  6).  This  was
absolutely  necessary,  as  well  as  by  the  giants  deserved.  Had  such  foes  been  spared  in
the  rear  of  the  invasion,  the  Israelites  would  have  had  no  sense  of  security.  It  was
impossible  to  "  mask  these  fortresses,"  as  great  armies  can  sometimes  afford  to  do  in
modern  warfare.  It  was  better  to  exterminate  these  iocs.  They  did  so  as  the  servants
of  God.  His  command  was  their  warrant,  and  made  their  act  defensible  on  moral  as
well  as  strategic  grounds.

And  the  victory  God  gives  his  people  over  their  sins  and  foes  is  at  last  complete.

IV.  The  ALLOTMENT  OF  BaSHAN  and  the  lands  on  THIS  SIDE  JoRDAN  GAVE
THE  INVADERS  OP   CaNAAN  AN    IMPORTANT    BASE  OF  OPERATIONS.      No    longer    WOuld

they  be,  like  Sherman  in  his  advance  through  Savannah,  marching  on  without  a  base.
God  gave  them  in  Bashan  the  leverage  they  needed.  Here  they  quartered  the  non-
combatants  till  the  land  over  Jordan  was  won.

And  so  is  it  in  the  spiritual  life.  Out  of  one  conquest  future  conquests  are  organized.
We  go  forward  in  God's  guidance  along  a  safe  path  to  perfect  victory. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  18 — 20. — The  pioneer*  of  the  invasion  of  Palestine.  Here  the  Eeubenites,
Gadites,  and  Manassites  are  directed  to  "intern  "  their  wives,  little  ones,  and  cattle  in
the  cities  of  Bashan,  which  were  now  literally  free  from  the  race  of  the  giants,  and
then  to  go  armed  across  the  Jordan  before  their  fellows,  the  van  of  the  invading  host.
These  pioneers  become  thus  the  least  encumbered  of  the  invaders.  Their  non-
combatants  are  safe  in  the  cities  of  Bashan,  their  cattle  are  in  good  pastures,  they  may
go  with  easy  minds  and  light  hearts  to  the  war.  Their  purpose  in  the  invasion  is  not
selfish,  but  perfectly  disinferested.  They  go  to  fight  for  their  brethren,  and  to  carve
out  homes  for  them  beyond  the  river.

We  have  here  a  Divine  law,  as  it  seems  to  us,  of  very  practical  application.  To
sketch  this  let  us  notice —

I.    God   GIVES  rest   and    inheritance  to    individuals    that  THEY  MAY   INTEREST

THEMSELVES  IN  SBCURINO  SIMILAR  BLESSINGS  FOR  OTHERS.  Beginning  with  the  lowest
inheritance,  we  would  observe  that,  when  God  gives  individuals  riches,  it  is  not  that
they  may  be  excused  from  public  work,  but  enabled  for  it.  A  servant  of  God  who
finds  himself  wealthy  is  not  superannuated,  but  supported  for  public  ends.  He  is  bound
to  do  all  he  can  with  and  by  his  means.

But  this  law  has  a  still  happier  spiritual  side.  When  God  blesses  us  with  assurance
of  salvation,  it  is  that  his  way  may  be  known  On  earth,  and  his  saving  health  among
all  nations  (Ps.  Ixvii.  1,  2).  He  makes  us  peaceful  and  happy  in  Christ  that  we  may,
with  unburdened  spirits,  seek  the  salvation  of  those  around  us.


56  I'HE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEl.OKOMX.  X™.  Ui.  1.— 2i>

n.   ABStJBANCB    OF    SALVATION   SHOULD   THEREFORE   BE    SOUGHT    BY    EACH    OP   US    ON

PUBLIC  GROUNDS.  It  IS  not  a  personal  matter  only,  but  a  public  interest  as  well.  The
world  will  be  less  benefited  by  us  if  we  are  constantly  in  doubt  about  personal  salvation.
We  are  in  such  a  case  marchino;  without  a  base.     It  is  a  risky  kind  of  warfare.

Let  us  seek  from  God,  on  puhlk  grounds,  the  priceless  blessing  of  assurance,  and  then
we  shall  be  able  to  lose  sight  of  self  in  seeking  the  common  weal.

m.  Disinterestedness  is  the  secret  of  successful  warfare.  The  Eeubenites
and  their  fellows  in  the  van  must  have  commanded  the  respect  not  only  of  those  behind
them,  but  of  the  Caiiaanites  with  whom  they  had  to  contend.  It  was  the  first  time,
■jince  Abraham's  rescue  of  Lot,  that  warriors  had  appeared  from  purely  disinterested
motives  in  the  field  of  battle.

And  in  matters  spiritual  it  is  the  same.  The  ministry  of  Christ  is,  speaking  generally,
an  ill-paid  profession.  There  is  the  less  chance,  then,  of  men  entering  this  service  for
a  piece  of  bread.  Disinterestedness  is  more  likely  to  be  the  rule.  With  other
Ohristinns  it  is  the  same.  When  people  are  compelled  to  recognize  disinterestedness,
the  chief  part  of  the  battle  is  won.

IV.  The  thodght  of  having  helped  others  to  rest  in  the  Lord  enhances
OUB  OWN  best  in  him.  The  Eeubenites,  etc.,  must  have  come  back  to  their  homes  in
Bashan  with  great  saiisfaction.  They  felt  that  they  had  done  a  good,  unselfish  work
in  the  campaign.  They  were  not  fighting  for  their  own  hand,  but  for  the  welfare  of
others.  So  in  the  spiritual  warfare,  when  we  become  instruments  in  GoJ's  hand  in
leading  others  to  rest  in  him,  we  find  our  rest  deepened  and  made  more  glorious.  May
it  be  the  jcy  of  many  ! — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  21 — 2Q.— Moses'  longing  to  enter  the  promised  land  refused.  The  two  conquests
over  Sihon  nnd  over  Og  had  filled  Moses  with  a  sense  of  God's  matchless  power.  With
a  warrior's  instinct — for  he  had  had  a  warrior's  training,  it  is  believed,  in  Egypt,  in  his
youth — he  saw  in  this  first  portion  of  the  fight  the  assurance  of  a  ghirious  invasion.
He  longed  to  be  at  its  head,  and  to  see  ihe  land  which  God  had  promised  actually  won.
Will  he  not  get  complete  the  work  he  has  been  instrumental  in  beginning?  He
pleaded  with  God  for  it,  but  all  he  gets  is  a  Pisgah-view ;  he  is  denied  an  entrance  into
■-.he  laid.

L  It  was  natural  for  Moses  to  long  for  the  completion  of  his  work.  The
Exodus  was  his  special  work.  All  else  in  his  life  was  preparatory  to  this.  But  the
Exodus  was  to  be  finished  in  the  invasion  of  Canaan  and  the  settlement  of  the  people
there.  Moses  is  now  so  interested  in  the  work  which  he  has  had  on  hand  for  forty
years  that  he  is  loth  to  leave  it.

Bo  with  God's  servants  often.  They  form  plans,  plans  manifestly  Divine,  and  they
iong  to  complete  them.  But  God  does  not  respond  always  to  these  very  natural  desires.
Public  work  is  attempted — literary  work — but  the  sowing  and  the  reaping  are  often
separated.     One  soweth,  another  reapeth.

n.  It  is  a  great  privilege  to  be  allowed  to  encourage  those  coming  aftbb
UB.  Moses  is  directed  to  encourage  Joshua.  This  is  something  done  towards  suc-
cessful invasion.  An  encouraged  Joshua  may  do  better  than  an  ever-present  Moses.
And  the  privilege  of  encouragement  is  j;reatly  prized.  Josliua  receives  all  from  Moses
that  son  could  receive  from  father,  that  a  leader  could  receive  from  his  superior  and
guide  (vers.  21,  22).

And  our  successors  should  be  encouraged  by  us  all  we  can,  as  one  of  life's  last  and
best  privileges.

III.  A  PiSOAII-VIEW  IB    FITTING   COMPENSATION,    BACKED   UP  AS  IT  WAS   BY   SPECIAL

CARE.  Moses  saw  the  land  at  last,  and  died  with  God,  reserved  by  the  All-wise  for  an
entrance  into  Canaan  at  the  transfiguration  of  Christ.  The  view  from  Pist^ah  was
grand,  but  the  view  on  Hermon  was  grander.  His  entrance  of  the  land  with  Elijah  in
glory  was  grander  than  an  entrance  at  the  head  of  the  hosts  of  Israel.

And  these  views  from  Pisgah  may  still  be  ours  if  we  seek  the  appointed  mountain-
top  of  God.  He  calls  us  to  mountain-tops  of  prayer  and  meditation,  and  shows  us
wondrous  glimpses  of  his  glory  and  his  promises.  To  be  with  him  there  is  compensa-
tion for  much  disappointment.

IV.  A     FAITHFUL    SON     WAY    BXPEniBNCE   A    FATHER'S    DESERVED    WRATH         Mo.s<!>-


la.  IV.  1—24.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOiMY.


67


admits  that  God  was  wroth  with  liim,  and  states  the  reason.  It  is  well  to  recognize
that  deserved  wrath  and  chastisement  may  coexist  with  profound  and  tender  love.
Moses  was  well  beloved,  even  though  excluded  from  the  land  of  promise.  God  gave
him  paradise  instead  of  Canaan. — B.  M.  E.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IV.

Vers.  1 — 40. — Admonitions  and  bxhob-
TATIONS.  Moses,  liaving  presented  to  the
people  certain  facts  in  their  recent  histoiy
which  had  in  them  a  specially  animating
and  encouraging  tendency,  proceeds  to  direct
his  discourse  to  the  inculcation  of  duties
and  exhortations  to  obedience  to  the  Divine
enactments.  This  portion  also  of  his
address  is  of  an  introductory  character  as
well  as  what  precedes.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Exhortation  to  the  observance
of  the  Law  generaUy.  The  Law  was  to  be
kept  as  n  complete  whole ;  nothing  was  to
be  taken  from  it  or  added  to  it ;  it  com-
prised the  commandments  of  Jehovah,  and
iherefore  they  wsre  noj  only  to,  do  it  as
nhat  Moses,  their  leader  and  lawgiver,  had
enjoined,  but  to  keep  it  as  a  sacred  deposit,
not  to  be  altered  or  tampered  with,  and  to
observe  it  as  whut  God  their  Sovereign  had
enacted  for  them.  The  dignity  and  worth
of  the  Law  are  here  asserted,  and  aUo  its
completeness  as  given  by  Moses.  Any
addition  to  it,  no  less  than  any  subtraction
from  it,  would  mar  its  integrity  and  affect
its  perfection.  Altered  circumstances  in
process  of  time  might,  indeed,  lead  to  the
desuetude  of  some  parts  of  the  Mosaic  en-
actments, and  new  institutions  or  laws
might  be  required  to  meet  a  new  condition
of  things,  or  even  in  that  new  condition  to
fence  and  sustain  the  primitive  code;  but
that  code  was  to  remain  intact  in  the
Statute-Book,  and  no  alterations  were  to  be
made  upon  it  that  should  affict  its  substance
or  nullify  any  of  its  principles.  New  laws
and  institutions  appomted  by  God  would,
of  course,  have  the  same  authority  as  tliose
originally  ordained  by  Moses;  and  sucli,
it  can  hardly  be  doubted,  were  in  point  of
fact  under  the  Hebrew  monarchy  introduced
by  the  prophets  speaking  in  the  name  of
God.  The  Law,  nevertheless,  was  kept
substantially  entire.     Even  nnder  the  new


dispensation,  the  Law  has  not  been  abolished.
Christ,  as  he  himself  declared,  came  not  to
destroy  the  Ijaw  and  the  prophets,  but  to
fullil  them  (Matt.  v.  17).  The  sin  of  the
Pharisees,  for  which  they  were  censured  by
our  Lord,  lay  in  this,  that  they  taught  for
doctrines  the  commandments  of  men  (Matt.
XV.  9),  and  had  "  made  the  commandments
of  God  of  none  effect  by  their  traditions  "
(Matt.  XV.  6).

Vers.  1,  2— Now  therefore;  rather  And
now.  With  this  Moses  passes  from  referring
to  what  God  had  done  for  Israel  to  admonish
Israel  as  to  what  they  had  to  do  as  the
subjects  of  God  and  the  recipients  of  his
favour.  They  were  to  give  heed  to  all  the
statutes  and  judgments  which  Moses,  as  the
servant  of  God,  had  taught  them,  in  order
that  they  might  do  thorn  ,  Statutes  csri),
the  things  prescribed  or  enacted  by  law,
whether  moral,  ritual,  or  civil;  judgments
(D'Ejiss^n),  rights,  whether  public  or  private,
all  that  each  could  claim  as  his  due,  and
all  he  was  bound  to  render  to  God  or  to  his
fellow-men  as  their  due.  These  two  com-
prehend the  whole  Law  as  binding  on
Isiael.  On  the  doing  of  these  by  the  people
depended  life;  these  had  been  made  known
to  them,  not  merely  for  their  information,
but  specifically  that  they  might  do  them,
and  thereby  have  life ;  not  long  life  in  the
promised  land  alone,  though  this  also  is  in-
cluded (ver.  40 ;  ch.  v.  33 ;  vi.  2,  etc.),  but  that
higher  life,  that  life  which  man  lives  "by
every  word  that  pi  oceedtth  out  of  the  mouth
of  the  Lord"  (cli.  viii.  3;  cf.  Lev.  xviii.  5;
Ezek.  XX.  11 ;  llatt.  iv.  4),  that  spiritual  life
which  is  in  God's  favour  (Ps.  xxx.  5).  En-
joying this  life  as  the  fruit  of  obedience,
they  should  also  possess  as  their  inheritance
the  land  promised  to  their  fathers.

Vers.  3,  4. — The  people  had  had  personal
experience  of  the  danger,  on  the  one  hand,
of  transgressing,  and  the  benefit,  on  th*'
other,  of  keeping  God's  Law ;  they  had  seen
how  those  who  sinned  in  worshipping  Baal'
peer  were  destroyed  (Numb.  xxv.  3, 9),  whilst
those  who  remained  faithful  to  the  Lord
were  kept  alive.  This  experience  the
people  had  had  only  lately  before,  so  that
a  reference  to  it  would  be  all  the  more
impressive.   Baal-peor,  the  idol  whose  culln.


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  IV.  1— ?i.


wa»  observed  at  Peor.  Baal  (Bal,  Be'el,
Bel,  Lord)  was  the  common  name  of  the
supreme  deity  among  the  northern  of  the
Semitic-speaking  people,  the  Canaanites,
the  Phoenicians,  the  Aramaeans,  and  the
Assyrians.  There  were  thus  many  Baals.
TsUowed :  walked  after  ;  a  common  Biblical
expression  for  religious  adherence  and  ser-
vice (of.  Jer.  viii.  2;  ix.  14;  and  with  a
different  formula,  Numb,  xxxii.  12 ;  Deut.  i.
36;  Josh.  xiv.  8;  Judg.  ii.  12,  etc.).  Ye
that  did  cleave  unto  Jehovah  your  God.  "  To
cleave  unto  one  "  is  expressive  of  the  closest,
most  intimate  attachment  and  communion
(of.  Gen.  ii.  24 ;  Isa.  xiv.  1).  The  phrase  is
frequently  used  of  devotion  to  the  service
and  worship  of  the  true  God  (cf.  Deut.  x.  20 ;
Josh.  xxii.  5;  xxiii.  8;  Acts  ii.  23,  etc.);
here  it  expresses  the  contrast  between  the
conduct  of  those  who  remained  faithful  to
Jehovah  imd  those  who  forsook  him  to  wor-
ship Baal.  Are  alive  every  one  of  yon  this
day.  "Thus  they  that  keep  themselves
pure  in  general  defections,  are  saved  from
the  common  destruction  (Ezek.  ii.  4 — 6;  2
Tim.  ii.  19;  Eev.  xi.  4)"  (Ainsworth).

Vers.  5,  6 The  institutes  of  Moses  were

the  comnjandments  of  Jehovah,  and  there-
fore obedience  to  them  was  imperative.  By
this  was  conditioned  the  enjoyment  by
Israel  of  the  promised  land ;  and  this  would
be  their  wisdom  and  understanding  in  the
sight  of  the  nations;  to  themselves  it  would
be  life,  and  to  the  nations  it  would  convey
an  impression  of  their  being  the  depositories
of  true  wisdom  and  knowledge,  so  that  they
should  be  constrained  to  say,  Surely  a
wise  and  understanding  people  is  this  great
nation.  "The  fruit  of  the  righteous  is  a
tree  of  life;  and  he  that  is  wise  winueth
■ouls  "  (Frov.  xi.  30).  God's  statutes  make
wise  the  simple  (Ps.  xix.  8 ;  cxix.  98,  99) ;
and  they  who  are  thus  made  wise  attract
the  attention  of  others  by  the  fame  of  their
wisdom.  Thus  the  Queen  of  Sheba  heard
in  her  distant  country  of  the  wisdom  of
Solomon,  and  came  to  him  to  commune  with
him  of  all  that  was  in  her  heart  (1  Kings  z.
1,  etc.);  and  many  throughout  the  ages  who
were  seeking  after  truth  among  the  heathen,
were  drawn  to  Israel  by  seeing  how  with
them  was  the  true  knowledge  of  God.
Israel  was  thus  exalted  becaube  God  was
nigh  to  them,  ready  to  hear  their  cry  and
to  give  them  what  they  neec  ed ;  which  none
of  the  gods  of  the  nations  were  or  could  be
to  their  votaries;  and  because,  in  the  Law
which  God  had  given  them,  they  had  such
instiniction  and  direction  as  no  heathen
nation  possessed.

Vers.  7,  8. — Translate,  For  tohat  great
nation  it  there  that  hath  gods  that  draw  near
to  it,  Of  Jehovah  our  God  whenever  we  call
•mnn  him  1    And  tchat  great  nation  is  there


that  hath  righteotit  ttatutet  and  ordinaneet
like  this  whole  Law  which  lam  givir^  before
you  this  dayl  (comp.  ch.  xxxiii.  29;  Pg.
xxxiv.  17—20;  oxlv.  18;  1  Sam.  xiv.  36;

I  Kings  xviii.  26—29,  37;  Jas.  iv.  8).
"  True  right  has  its  roots  in  God ;  and  with
the  obscuation  of  the  knowledge  of  God,
law  and  right,  with  their  divinely  estab-
lished foundations,  are  also  shaken  and
obscured  (of.  Eom.  i.  26—32)  "  (.Keil).

Vers.  9 — 14. — The  possession  of  the  oracles
of  God  by  Israel  was  a  benefit  to  them  only
as  these  were  kert  in  mind  and  reverently
obeyed.  Therefore  they  were  to  take  heed
and  diligently  beware  of  forgetting  the
circumstances  under  which  the  Law  had
been  received  at  Horeb.  God  had  then
commaTi  Jed  the  people  to  be  gathered  to-
gether, so  that  they  stood  before  the  Lord,
were  i\i  his  manifested  presence,  and  were
made  to  hear  his  voice  speaking  to  them
from  amidst  the  lire  and  the  clouds  that
covered  the  mount.  They  had  thus  actual
evidence  and  guarantee  that  the  Law  they
had  received  was  Divine;  and  this  they
were  to  keep  in  mind  as  long  as  they  lived,
and  to  communicate  to  their  children  in  all
coming  time,  that  so  they  might  fear  the
Lord;  for  on  this  rested  that  coveniint
which  God  had  made  with  Israel,  and  which
they  were  to  keep  as  the  condition  of  their
continuing  to  enjoy  privilege  and  life.

Ver.  9.— Keep  thy  soul  diligently;  t'.e.  Be
very  careful  to  preserve  thy  life  (cf.  Job  ii.  6 ;
Prov.  xiii.  3;  xvi.  17;  xix.  16;  in  all  which
passages  the  same  formula  is  used  as  here).
The  Hebrew  (t?p3)  means  primarily  breath,
then  vital  principle,  natural  life  (antma),
then  soul  life,  the  soul  or  mind  (^animui).
The  forgetting  of  the  wonders  they  had  seen
would  lead  to  their  forgetting  God,  and  so
to  their  departing  from  him,  and  this  would
mar  and  ultimately  destroy  their  life  (cf.
Josh,  xxiii.  11 — 16).  The  things  which  thine
eyes  have  seen  (set  Exod.  xix.  10,  etc.).

Ver.  10. — Specially  the  day.  The  word
"specially,"  introduced  by  the  translators
into  the  Authorized  Version,  is  a  needless
interpolation.  With  this  verse  begins  a
new  sentence,  which  is  continued  in  ver.

II  on  to  the  end  of  ver.  18.  Bender,  On
il'e  day  [i.e.  at  tUn  time,  the  DV  is  an  ad-
verbial accusativ  J  when  ye  ttood  before
Jehovah  your  Go?  in  Horeb,  .  .  .  when  ye
came  near  and  stood, .  .  .  then  Jehovah  apake
to  you,  eto.

Ver.  1 1 . — The  mountain  burned  with  fire
unto  the  midst  Tunto  the  heart]  of  heaven;
i.e.  up  to  the  Very  skies;  a  rhetorical  de-


CH.  IV.  1—24.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DKUTEKONOMY.


60


scripHon  of  the  mighty  pillar  of  Are  that
blazed  on  Sinai,  and  betokened  the  presence
of  him  whose  symbol  is  fire.  With  dark-
ness, clouds  [cloud],  and  thick  darkness;
underneath  the  fire  was  a  cloud  of  deep
darkness,  out  of  which  it  blazed,  the  "  thick
cloud"  of  Exod.  xix.  9, 16, and  the  "smoke"
out  of  which  the  lightnings  flashed,  and
over  which  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  like  de-
vouring fire,  rested  on  the  top  of  the  moun-
tain (Exod.  xix.  18 ;  xx.  18 ;  xxiv.  16,  17).

Ver.  12. — On  this  occasion  the  people
heard  the  voice  of  the  words,  hut  saw  no
similitude;  there  was  no  form  or  shape
apparent  to  the  eye.  No  man  can  see  God's
face  (Exod.  xxxiii.  20,  23);  "no  man  hath
seen  God  at  any  time"  (John  i.  18);  and
though  the  nobles  or  elders  of  Isre^l  who
went  up  with  Moses  into  the  mount  are
said  to  have  seen  God,  it  is  evident  that
what  they  saw  was  only  some  lumi:j^uiu
manifestation  of  bis  glory,  and  not  a  'orm
or  shape  of  which  a  similitude  could  be
made  (Exod.  xxiv.  9 — 17).  Even  Moses,
with  whom  God  said  that  he  would  speak
mouth  to  mouth,  and  who  should  behold  the
similitude  of  God  (Numb.  xii.  8 ),  was  told
that  he  coiild  not  set  nis  face,  his  essential
personality,  but  only  his  luck,  the  reflection
of  hifl  glory  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18—23).

Ver.  -13. — His  covenant;  God's  gracious
engagement  with  Israel  for  their  good,  and
by  which  they  were  bouud  to  observe  all  hia
commandments.  God  declared  this  at  Sinai
when  he  uttered  the  ten  commandments
(words,  onaf),  "  the  words  of  the  covenant,
the  ten  wor(is"  (Exod.  xxxiv.  28),  which  he
afterwards  gave  to  Moses  on  two  tables  of
stone,  written  with  the  finger  of  God  (Exod.
jtxiv.  12;  xxxi.  18).  Besides  these,  there
were  Other  statutes  and  ordinances  which
Moses  was  commanded  to  teach  the  people,
and  which,  with  them,  comprised  the  Law
given  at  Sinai  (see  Exod.  xxi.  and  following
chapters).

Vers.  15 — 20. — As  the  people  had  seen
no  form  or  figure  when  God  spake  to  them,
80  they  were  to  beware  for  their  very  lives
(cf.  ver.  9)  of  acting  corruptly  by  making  any
kind  of  image,  whether  of  man  or  of  beast,
for  the  purpose  of  worshipping  God  as  repre-
sented by  it;  they  were  also  to  beware  of
being  so  attracted  by  the  splendour  of  the
heavenly  bodies  as  to  be  forcibly  seduced  to
worship  them  and  offer  them  religious  ser-
vice. They  were  not  in  this  respect  to  imi-
tate the  heathen ;  for  God,  who  had  delivered
them  out  of  the  furnace  of  Egyptian
bondage,  had  taken  them  for  himself  to  be
bis  special  possession;  and  therefore  they
were  to  take  heed  not  to  forget  the  covenant


of  Jehovah  their  God,  nor  to  offend  him  by
maldng  any  image  or  representation  of  him
as  the  object  of  worship.  Among  the  hea-
then, and  especially  in  Egypt,  images  were
the  very  pillar  and  support  of  religion  i  but
in  Israel,  as  God  had  revealed  himself  to
them  without  form,  it  was  as  a  spirit  he  was
to  be  worshipped,  and  not  under  any  out-
ward representation.

Ver.  16.— Graven  image  (has),  carved
work  or  sculpture,  whether  oif  wood,  or
metal,  or  stone — ^the  similitude  of  any  figure
—  the  form  of  any  idol  (''OD,  form,  statue,
idol)— the  likeness— figure  (n'Mn,  a  build-
ing, a  model,  a  form,  or  figure)-^of  male  or
female — r^  apposition  to  graven  image,  and
illustrative  of  it.

Verc  17,  18.— The  likeness— the  figure—
of  anx  beast,  eto.  A  warning  against  the
animal-worship  of  Egypt.

Ver.  19. — Lest  thou  lift  up  tbiae  eyes  unto
heaven,  etc  The  worship  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  especially  star  worship,  prevailed
among  the  Canaanites  and  many  of  the
Semitic  tribes,  but  was  not  confined  to
them;  the  Egyptiaiis  also  reverenced  the
sun  as  Ba,  the  moon  as  Isis,  and  the  stars
as  the  symbols  of  deities.  The  Israelites
were  thus,  both  f^om  past  associations  and
from  what  they  might  encounter  in  Canaan,
exposed  to  the  danger  of  being  seduced  into
idolatry.  Shouldest  be  driven :  shouldest  be
urged  on,  drawn,  or  constrained  (of.  ch.  xiii.
13).  Which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  divided
unto  all  nations  under  the  whole  heaven.
God  had  allotted  (p^n)  to  all  mankind  the
heavenly  bodies  for  their  advantage  (Gen.  i.
14 — 18 ;  Ps.  civ.  19 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  35) ;  it  was,
therefore,  not  competent  for  any  one  nation  to
seek  to  appropriate  them  as  specially  theirs,
and  it  was  absurd  for  any  to  offer  religious
service  to  objects  intended  for  the  service  of
man.  Tftrgum :  Which  the  Lord  thy  God
prepared  for  all  peoples  under  heaven ;
Vulgate:  Quae  ereavit  Dominua  Veus  tuue  in
ministeritim  cunctis  gentibue.  This  seema
better  than  the  interpretation  that  God  had
"allotted  them  for  worship,  i.e.  had  per-
mitted them  [the  nations]  to  choose  them
as  the  objects  of  their  worship  "  (Keil,  etc.);
for:  1.  There  is  no  distinction  here  between
the  Hebrews  and  the  other  nations  of  the
earth ;  "  all  nations  "  includes  them  as  well
as  the  heathen.  2.  Though  God  permitted
the  heathen  to  worship  the  heavenly  bodies,
he  never  allotted  these  to  men  in  order  that
they  might  worship  them.  "  It  noteth  God's
bounty  in  giving  all  people  the  use  of  those
creatures,  and  the  base  mind  of  man  to
worship  such  things  as  are  given  for  ser-
vants  unto  men  "  (Ainsworth).


so


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[cH.  IV.  1 — 44.


Ver.  20. — Iron  furnace — furnace  for  Bmelt-
jng  iron :  "  figure  of  buining  torment  in
Egypt"  ( Ilcrxheimer).  This  reference  to
the  Bmelting  of  iron  shows  that,  though  the
implements  of  the  ancient  Egyptians  were
mostly  of  copper,  iron  must  also  have  been
in  extensive  use  among  them.  Other  refer-
euoes  to  the  use  of  iron  are  to  be  found  in
the  Pentateuch ;  see  Gen.  iv.  22 ;  Lev.  xxvi.
19;  Niimb.  xxxv.  16;  ch.  iii.  11;  viii.  9;
xix.  5 ;  xxvii.  5  (Goguet,  '  Origine  des
Lois,'  i.  172;  Wilkinson,  'Ancient  Egypt,'
i.  169;  ii.  15)).  To  be  unto  him  a  people,
etc.  (cf.  Exod.  xix.  4—6 ;  ch.  vii.  6).

Vers.  2L — 24. — Moses,  after  again  referring
to  his  being  not  permitted  to  enter  Canaan,
takes  occasion  anew  to  warn  the  people
against  forgetting  the  covenant  of  Jehovah
and  maldng  any  image  of  God,  seeing  he
ii  a  jealous  God,  and  a  consuming  fire.

Ver.  21. — The  Lord  was  angry  vrith  me  .  . .
and  sware,  etc.  Neither  in  Numb.  xx.  12,
nor  in  Numb,  xxvii.  12 — 14,  is  there  any
mention  of  God's  having  suiorn  that  ,Moses
should  not  enter  Canaan  with  the  people;
but  it  is  absurd  to  suppose,  as  some  nave
done,  that  the  writer  here  has  confounded
this  with  what  is  recorded  in  Numb.  xiv.
21,  28, — that  is  inconceivable;  and  it  cer-
tainly does  not  follow,  because  no  mention
is  made  in  Numbers  of  God's  having  sworn,
that  he  did  not  swear- on  this  occasion;  if
he  confirmed  with  an  oath  his  decree  that
the  generation  that  rebelled  at  K&desh
should  not  enter  Canaan,  the  probability


surely  is  that  he  would  do  the  same  when
he  announced  to  Moses  the  decree  that  he
sliould  not  conduct  Israel  into  the  promised
land.  "  It  is  perfectly  obvious,  from  ch.  iii.
23,.8gg.,  that  all  the  details  are  not  given  in
the  historical  account  of  the  event  referred
to"(Keil).

Ver.  2H. — A  graven  image,  or  the  likeness
of  any  thing,  etc. — literally,  a  graven  (soulp-
tuiei\)  image  nf  a  form  of  all  thai  Jehovah
thy  God  hath  commanded  thee ;  $.o.  not  to
make  (cf.  ch.  16—18  and  ii.  37).

Ver.  24. — A  oonsmning  fire.  When  God
spoke  to  Israel  at  Sinai,  his  glory  appeared
"  like  devouring  (consuming)  fire  on  the  top
of  the  mount"  (Exod.  xxiv.  17);  and  in
allusion  to  this  Moses  here  calls  God  "  a  con-
suming fire."  He  is  so  to  all  his  enemies,
and  to  all  who  disobey  him ;  by  severe
inflictions  he  will  punish,  and,  if  they  per-
sist in  their  hostility  and  rebellion,  will
ultimately  destroy  them  (comp.  ch.  ix.  3;
Isa.  X.  16—18;  Amos  v.  6;  Zeph.  i.  18;
Heb.  xii.  29).  A  jealous  God;  LX.X.,  0ehs
fijAaiT^s-  God  has  a  burning  zeal  for  his
own  glory ;  he  guards  it  with  jealous  care ;
and  he  will  not  spare  those  who  do  him
dishonour,  especially  those  who  are  guilty
of  idolatry,  whereby  they  "change  the  truth
of  God  into  a  lie  "  (Eom.  i  25;  cf.  Exod.  xx.
5;  ch.  vi.  14,  15;  xxxii.  16,  etc.;  Ps.-lxxviii.
68,  etc. ;  Nah.  i.  2).  He  is  jealous  also  over
his  people,  because  he  loves  them,  and  will
not  endure  any  rival  in  their  affectiou  and
devotion.


HOMILETICS.

Veri.  1—4.— Life  and  prosperity  dependent  on  obedience  to  Cfod.    In  tWs  paraeroph

Mopes  indicates,  by  the  word  "therefore,"  the  purpose  he  has  had  in  the  review  in
which  he  had  been  indulging.  It  was  not  for  the  mere  rehearsal's  sake  that  the  varied
incidents  in  Israels  career  were  thus  recalled  to  memory,  but  to  stimulate  the  people
anew  to  obedience,  by  reminding  them  how  strong  w.is  the  reason  for  it,  and  how  great
would  be  the  blessedness  of  it.  It  was  then,  as  it  is  now,  "  godliness  is  profitable  for
all  things;  and  though  that  would  be  a  low  standard  of  virtue  attained  by  a  man
who  served  God  merely  for  what  he  could  get  by  it,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  if  no
good  came  of  it,  the  reason  for  it  would  certainly  be  seriously  affected  in  the  influence
It  had  on  a  man.  There  is  a  mean  and  selfish  form  of  utilitarianism.  But  if,  when  a  man
contends  for  utility  as  the  foundation  of  virtue,  he  means  by  utility  "  a  tendency  to  pro-
mote the  highest  good,  on  the  largest  scale,  for  the  longest  period,"  there  is  nothine
selfish  or  mean  about  the  theory  then,  whether  we  accept  it  as  sound  philosophy  or  no.
And  It  18  certain  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  meant  considerations  of  profit  to  weigh
with  men  (see  Matt.  xvi.  2!=,,  26).     Observe—

I.  God's  btatutks  anb  jroaMBNTS  abb  the  best  moeai-  anb  bpibitual  fubnitxthr
WITH  WHICH  A  PEOPLE  CAN  BE  BNBioHBD.  The  word  "  statutes  "  includes  « the  moral
commandments  and  statutory  covenant  laws."  "  Judgments  "  are  precepts  enjoining
what  18  due  from  men  to  man  or  to  God.  Sometimes  we  get  the  word  "command-
ments, including  both  the  former;  at  other  times  we  have  the  word  "testimonies"
m  which  duty  is  looked  at  as  that  concerning  wliich  God  bears  testimony  to  man


UH.  IV.  i— 24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  61


Now,  men  will  rise  or  fall  according  as  the  moral  nature  is  cultured  or  neglected.
And  it  is  because  the  Divine  precepts  constitute  a  directory  for  our  highest  selves,
that  they  are  so  invaluable  to  us.  Doubtless,  to  some  extent,  the  Law  of  God  is  still
graven  in  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  men ;  and  if  men  were  perfect,  the  Law  written
on  the  heart  would  be  clear  enough.  But  as  men  neglect  God's  Law,  they  come  to  fail
in  discerning  it.  The  charaoterg  written  inwardly  are  more  and  more  faint,  and,  lest
it  should  cease  from  among  men,  our  God  has  had  his  will  graciously  recorded  in  a  Book,
our  constant  standard  of  appeal,  our  unvarying  directory  of  right !

II.  These  statutes  and  judgments  are  to  be  prbsebved  intact.  "Ye  shall
not  add  unto  the  word  which  1  command  you,  neither  shall  ye  diminish  ought  from  it."
The  manifestation  of  the  tendency  of  men  to  do  one  or  the  other,  yea  both,  is  one  of.
the  saddest  chapters  in  human  history  (see  Homily  on  ch.  xii.  32).  (Cf.  Jer.  xxvi.  2 ;
Prov.  XXX.  6 ;  Rev.  xxii.  18,  19 ;  Matt.  v.  19 ;  xv.  1 — 13.)  Scepticism  violates  God's
Law  by  subtracting  from  it ;  superstition,  by  adding  to  it.  Our  appeal  must  ever  be
"  to  tlie  Law  and  to  the  testimony,"  and  the  appeal  will  only  be  valid,  nay,  will  only  be
possible,  as  both  are  preserved  intact  and  kept  Iree  from  the  tampering  of  men.

III.  "They  are  to  be  pkeSebvbd  in  thbie  entiebtt,  in  order  that  they  mat  be
OBEYED  IN  THEIR  ENTIRETY.  Hearken,  for  to  do  them  (see  John  xiii.  17  ;  Jas.  i.  22).
A  mere  reverence  for  the  letter,  without  obedience  to  the  spirit,  is  displeasing  to  God.
Jesus  Christ  complained  of  this  among  the  Jews  (John  v.  38 — 10).  A  written  law,
honoured  as  to  its  [ 'reservation,  but  yet  neglected  in  life,  is  a  silent  witness  against  us
(John  V.  45).  Men  may  rest  in  having  the  oracles  of  God,  and  may  cherish  even  up
to  the  last,  vain  hopes  of  acceptance  on  the  ground  of  privilege,  but  they  will  be  unce-
ceived  (Matt.  vii.  21 — 27).  Obedience  to  the  Law  of  God  includes  the  two  great  duties
of  trust  in  a  great  salvation  and  loyalty  to  moral  precepts.  No  man  was  allowed  to
trifle  with  the  sacrificial  code  any  more  than  with  the  ethical :  both  formed  parts  of  the
Law;  both  were  to  be  observed  with  equal  exactitude.

iV.  Obedience  to  the  Law  would  be  for  Israel's  weal,  and  was  the  condition
OP  their  continuanob  in  the  land.  Ver.  1,  "  That  ye  may  live,"  etc.  The  word
" life "  is  very  far  from  being  a  mere  synonym  for  "existence."  It  is  equivalent  to
"  healthful  existence,"  a  state  of  being  in  which  all  his  powers  and  functions  are  in  har-
monious exercise,  and  directed  to  their  proper  objects  and  ends.  Nor  can  any  one  doubt
that  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God  has  a  tendency  to  promote  true  comfort  and  success
in  this  life,  while  it  is  certainly  the  truest,  yea,  the  only,  preparation  for  the  next.
Besides,  the'  blessing  of  God  is  promised  to  the  oljedient.  If  a  man's  life  accords  with
the  lavjrs  of  God,  he  will  find  out  how  conducive  obedience  is  to  good.  But  if  he
"strives  with  his  Maker,"  his  life-course  will  bristle  up  with  prickles  everywhere.

V.  As  WB  LOOK  ROUND,  WE  MAY  SEE  SAD  EXAMPLES  OF  THE  REVERSE,  FROM  WHOH  WE

MAY  TAKE  WAKNiNO.  (See  the  sad  history  of  Baal-peor,  referred  to  in  ver.  3.)  Surely
we  should  take  warning  from  that,  and  from  too  many  similar  instances.  The  pre-
valence of  lust  will  be  destructive  of  life's  beauty,  peace,  power,  and  hope.

VI.  The  experience  of  the  peace  and  jot,  attendant  upon  a  life  of  lotaltt
TO  God,  is  a  strong  argument  for  continuance  therein.  Ver.  4,  "  Ye  that  did
cleave  unto  the  Lord  your  (lod  are  alive  every  one  of  you  this  day."  What  would  the
victims  of  lust  and  greed  and  passion  give  if  they  could  but  have  the  calm  peacefulness
of  one  who  follows  the  Lord  fully  !  But  that  cannot  be.  The  test  of  a  life  for  God  is
God's  own  seal  to  its  worth  in  his  eye  (cf.  Ps.  xci.) ;  while  (ccet.  par.)  long  life  is  en-
sured by  the  healthy  state"  of  body  which  a  righteous  life  induces.  And  the  hope —
the  good  hope  throuyh  grace — which  gilds  the  outlook,  oh,  the  unutterable  joy
of  that !

In  conclusion.  1.  It  is  just  as  imperative,  in  a  Christian  point  of  view,  for  us  to
combine  obedience  to  the  sacrificial  and  ethical  law  of  the  gospel,  as  it  was  for  the
Hebrews  to  obey  both  parts  of  their  Law.  No  outside  virtues  performed  in  a  legal,
self-righteous  spirit  will  save  us.  Nor  will  any  trust  in  the  saciifice  of  Christ,  apart
irom  holiness,  be  accepted.  Both  faith  In  Christ  and  holy  living,  form  inseparable  pans
of  a  true  obedience  to  God.  2.  The  rich  fulness  of  peace  which  those  enjoy  who  trust,
love,  and  obey,  is  far  greater  under  the  gospel  than  it  could  have  been  under  the  Law
of  Moses,  because,  in  Christ,  the  revelation  of  Divine  love  is  so  much  clearer,  and  the
" blessed  hope"  is  so  much  brighter.     Christ  gives  us  a  rest  in  himself,  and  the  life  he


62  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBBONOMY.  [oh.  iv.  1— Li


quickens  and  sustains  in  believers  is  a  restful  life  (see  Rom.  v.  1 — ^11 ;  Phil.  iv.  4 — 7).
"  Though  now  we  see  him  not,  yet  believing,  we  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full
of  glory."     This  is  life  indeed  1

Vers.  5 — 9. — National  greatness  dependent  on  obedience  to  God.  In  these  Tenses  we
have  a  continuation  of  the  address  of  Moses  to  the  people.  He  had  previously
reminded  them  of  incidents  which  liad  occurred.  He  here  points  out  to  them  the
advantageous  position  they  are  privileged  to  occupy,  and  shows  them  how  to  maintain
and  perpetuate  it.  He  reminds  them  of  the  foUovviag  points : — 1.  That  theirs  was  the
very  special  privilege  of  having  God  nigli  unto  them  as  the  Lord  their  God  (see  also
vers.  32 — 34).  2.  That  they  would  occupy  a  prominent  place  among  the  nations
round  about  (cf.  Exod.  ix.  16;  xv.  14;  Numb.  xiv.  13 — 21;  oh.  xxviii.  10).  3.
That  the  corner-stone  of  their  national  lile  and  honour  was  the  worship  of  God  and
the  practice  of  righteousness.  Their  "  statutes  iind  judgments  "  were  characterized  by
this  special  mark — they  were  righteous  above  those  of  any  other  nation'  (ver.  8).  4.
That  the  carrying  out  into  action  of  these  precepts  was  their  only  wise  course  (ver.  6).
5.  That  such  wisdom  would  be  tlieir  true  greatness,  and*  such  greatness  would  win
them  regard  and  honour  from  surruiinding  peoples  (ver.  6).  [This  was  actually  the
case  to  a  very  large  extent.  Our  space  will  not  allow  us  even  to  touch  on  the  matter
here;  but  careful  research  will  show  the  student  how  Israel's  greatness  has  manifested
itself  in  the  influence  exerted  by  them  in  modifying  the  religion,  philosophy,  litera-
ture, politics,  institutions,  and  moral  judgments  of  the  world.  First,  among  the
Egyptians,  Canaanites,  and  Phoenicians;  and  then  among  the  Assyrians,  Persians,
Greeks,  and  Romans.  See  Wines,  Gale,  Stillingfleet,  and  others.]  6.  That  it  behoves
them  to  "keep  and  do"  these  precepts,  to  retain  them  in  their  heart,  to  hand  them
down  to  their  children,  and  to  take  constant  care  of  themselves.  lu  turning  all  this
to  pulpit  use  for  modern  times,  observe —

I.  There  ake  cebtain  principles,  the  application  of  which  will  sbcuke  the
TRUE  GREATNESS  OF  A  PEOPLE.  It  is  becoming  to  a  true  patriot  to  think  of  his  country
as  being  renowned  among  the  nalions  of  the  earth.  Jehovah  evidently  meant  the
people  to  be  moved  by  such  an  ambition.  It  is  far  more  healthful  to  direct  natural  desires
intd  a  right  channel  than  to  try  to  suppress  them.  Let  a  man  cherish  the  most  fervent
wish  to  see  his  country  unsurpassed  among  the  people.  God  promises  this  as  the  result
of  his  blessing.  Thou  shalt  be  "  the  head,  and  not  the  tail."  But  observe :  No  con-
spicuousness  is  so  much  to  be  desired  as  that  arising  from  wisdom  and  understanding.
Thie  prominence  which  arises  from  moral  influence  is  that  alone  which  is  worth
striving  after.  Any  influence  by  which  we  help  to  lift  up  other  nations  in  virtue  and
power,  is  worth  infinitely  more  than  that  which  comes  of  martial  valour,  or  diplomatic
tactics,  or  such  supremacy  over  a  people  as  shall  simply  make  tliem  stand  amazed  at
the  length  of  our  purse,  or  the  precision  and  deadly  fire  of  our  arms.  To  be  known
as  the  wisest  people,  so  that  ethers  seek  in  friendly  emulation  to  learn  from  us — this
is  an  eminence  any  patriot  well  may  desire  for  the  land  he  loves.  But  observe:  This
wilt  depend  on  the  amount  of  moral  culture  in  a  people,  i.e.  on  the  degree  of  clearness
with  which  a  people  see  what  is  right,  on  the  measure  of  force  they  put  forth  in  the
pursuit  of  it,  and  on  the  firmness  with  which  they  insist  on  the  right  being  paramount
to  any  considerations  of  power,  expediency,  or  gain.  "  The  throne  shall  be  established
in  righteousness."  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation ;  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any
people."  Not  only  in  the  individual,  the  family,  and  the  social  life  must  righteousness
be  the  chief  corner-stone  of  a  common  weal,  but  in  those  acts  in  which  a  man  has  to
jilay  the  part  of  a  citizen,  and  in  which  a  nation  has  to  do  with  other  nations.  Right-
eousness may  not  be  eliminated  from  politics,  nor  may  it  play  a  subordinate  part.
Universal,  eternal,  unchangeable,  are  the  laws  of  righteousness,  and  by  whomsoever
they  are  violated— by  individuals,  families.  Churches,  or  nations — such  violation  will
surely  be  followed  by  remorse  and  shame.  The  truest  form  of  moral  culture  is  loyalty
to  the  Divine  Being  and  his  commands.  No  nation  over  has  or  ever  can  thrive  without  the
recognition  of  a  Great  Supreme.     It  is  only  the  fool,  the  "  nabal,"  the  withered  one,  who

'  Should  the  diffloulty  here  suggest  itself,  whether  the  command  to  exterminate  the
Oanaanltee  was  right,  see  the  gUKgestions  in  Homily  on  oil.  1.  1 — 8,  by  way  of  reply


OH.  IT.  1—24.]  THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  61

iays  there  Is  no  God.  And  no  nation  which  ignores  the  duty  of  loyalty  to  God  will  ever  ba
great.  But  then  in  the  Book,  as  the  world's  grandest  moral  text-book,  there  are  statutes,
precepts,  testimonies,  judgments,  for  the  regulation  of  life,  both  individually  and
collectively.  The  appeal  of  ver.  8  is  still  valid,  "  What  nation  is  there  .  .  .  that  hath
statutes  and  judgments  so  righteous  as  all  this  Law,  which  I  set  before  you  this  day  ?  "
We  know  how  the  Law  may  be  summed  up :  "  All  the  Law  is  fulfilled  in  one  word,  even
in  this:  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyHslf.  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his
neighbour ;  therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law."  And  this  principlerof  love  to  all,
carried  out  in  loyaity  to  God,  will  ensure  that  greatness  which  is  most  worth  having.
The  Egyptians  were  at  one  time  renowned  for  learning,  the  Phoenicians  for  their  com-
merce ;  the  men  of  Bashan  for  their  giant  strength ;  Greece  for  its  philosophy ;  Rome
fur  her  "iraperium  et  libertas."  Their  sway  has  gone.  But  the  Hebrew  race,  by
whom  first  and  alone  this  law  of  love  was  proclaimed  as  the  one  guiding  principle  of  a
nation's  life,  is  living  in  its  literature  the  grandest  of  all  lives,  and  swaying,  with  the
sceptre  of  its  one  I'vrfect  Man,  men  of  different  nations,  tribes,  and  tongues  in  every
quarter  of  the  globe.  Yes,  this  one  law  of  love  has  given  to  the  Hebrew  race  a
greatness  it  will  never  lose.  The  brightest  streaks  of  light  on  the  globe  now  are  to  be
discerned  only  where  the  law  of  love  is  known  and  obeyed;  that  law  given  by  Moses,
brought  in  by  Jesus  Christ.  And  in  proportion  as  nations  follow  and  act  out  this  law,
will  they  attain  to  the  only  greatness  on  which  heaven  smiles.  "  The  world  passeth
away  and  the  lusts  thereof;  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  This
righteousness  is  in  itself  an  armour  of  light — a  nation's  best  defence.  For  on  "  the
righteous  nation  which  kcepeth  the  truth  "  wiU  Gud's  blessing  rest,  and,  next  to  the
Divine  blessing,  the  good  will  of  the  nations  is  our  surest  and  happiest  guard.

II.  Here  is  an  appeal  to  the  people  as  individuals  to  take  heed  to  these
PKINCIPLES.  The  appeal  is  fourfold  in  this  paragraph.  1.  "  Keep  there/ore  and  do  them."
There  is  as  much  obedience  to  God  in  the  nation  as  is  rendered  to  him  by  individual
souls,  and  no  more.  Hence  it  is  the  part  of  the  true  patriot  who  desires  his  nation's
greatness  to  see  that  he  is  living  the  life  which  will  help  to  make  the  nation  great.
2.  This  is  not  to  be  superficial  work,  but  the  Law  is  to  be  in  the  heart.  Not  an  acci-
dental, surface  life,  but  an  intelligent  and  designed  direction  of  the  inner  and  outer  life
according  to  God's  ways  and  Word.  3.  This  law  of  righteousness,  truth,  and  love  is
to  be  handed  down  from  sire  to  son,  and  so  on  to  generation  after  generation.  The
parent  is  to  be  the  true  depositor,  conservator,  teacher,  and  transmitter  of  God's  Law.
He  is  to  live  after  he  has  gone  in  the  truth  he  has  taught,  and,  when  he  is  dead,  his
speech  is  to  be  moulding  the  young  hearts  of  a  nation.  4.  Each  one  is  to  put  a  careful
guard  around  himself,  lest  any  of  the  baneful  influences  arouud  him  should  destroy  or
weaken  his  loyalty  to  God  and  the  right.  "Take  care  of  thyself;"— such  is  the
meaning  of  the  phrase  in  ver.  9  (cf.  Prov.  iv.  23,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence ;
for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life").  It  is  easy  to  gather  from  the  Book  of  Deutero-
nomy against  what  influences  the  ancient  Hebrews  would  have  to  guard.  These
influences,  hostile  to  unswerving  loyalty,  vary  with  each  land  and  race  and  age.  A
careful  observation  and  knowledge  of  the  times  will  show  us  against  what  foes  we  have
at  all  points  to  be  armed.  Let  us  take  the  whole  armour  of  God.  Let  us  save  our-
selves from  this  untoward  generation.  Let  us  play  the  man  and  the  citizen,  with
hearts  loyal  to  our  Saviour,  jealous  for  the  right  and  the  true,  fearing  God,  but  having
no  fear  beside !

Vers,  li — 20. — Israel's  peculiar  relation  to  Ood.  This  paragraph  sets  forth  in
earnest  appeal  the  peculiar  and  distinctive  relation  to  God  in  which  Israel  was  placed.
(For  the  precise  details  of  the  point  in  their  history  here  referred  to,  see  Exod.  xix. ;  and
for  the  application  of  several  of  the  expressions  used  both  here  and  there  to  believers
in  Christ  under  the  Christian  dispensation,  see  1  Tet.  ii.  9.)  Here  is  a  noble  theme  for
the  preacher — Israel's  special  relation  to  Ood,  typical  of  and  fulfilled  in  the  pretmt
relation  of  Christian  people  to  him.

I.  Let  us  study  the  peouliae  kelation  of  Israel  to  God.  "  The  Lord  hath  taken
you",  and  brought  you  forth  out  of  the  iron  furnace,  ...  to  be  unto  him  a  people  of
inheritance,"  i.e.  a  purchased  or  acquired  people.  So  in  Exod.  xix.  5,  6.  The  Lord  had
oallcd  Abfabaui,  ha4  W^d®  promises  to  him  and  to  his  seed.     These  promises  ran  down


64  THE  BOOK   OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [cm.  it.  1—24

through  Isaac  and  Jacob  aad  the  twelve  patriarchs.  Now  their  descendants  had
become  numerous  enough  to  form  a  nation  ;  as  such  they  had  been  duly  constituted,
with  this  peculiar  feature — they  were  to  be  God's  nation.  They  had  been  freed  by  him,
they  were  cons(  crated  to  him,  and  were  being  trained  by  and  for  him.  Hence,  as
Kahsch  remarks,  every  subject  is  as  it  were  a  priest,  and  every  civil  action  assumes
the  sanctity  of  a  religious  function :  idolatry  was  an  offence  against  his  sovereignty,
and  therefore  punisliable  with  lieath  ;  so  blaspbemy,  false  prophecy,  sabbath-breaking,
were  visited  with  the  like  punishment.  Disrespect  to  elders,  disobedience  to  parents
(they  being  the  representatives  of  God),  were  visited  with  sore  penalties.  Hence,  too,
the  whole  land  belonged  to  God.  The  people  were  but  tenants,  and  in  the  year  of  jubilee
land  reverted  to  its  former  owner  or  his  heirs.  The  Israelites  were  the  subjects  and
servants  of  God  alone.  Slavery,  therefore,  though  not  peremptorily  put  down,  was
so  regulated  that  the  slave  went  out  free  in  the  seventh  year ;  and  if  he  did  not  desire
the  freedom,  he  was  branded  with  an  ignominious  mark  because  he  refused  the  imme-
diate sovereignty  of  God.'  Now,  this  expression,  "  God's  nation,"  is  the  key  where-
with to  interpret  many  of  the  enactments  which  seem  to  us  unintelligible,  and  many
of  the  punishments  which  seem  unusually  severe.  This  truth,  that  Israel  is  the  Lord's
people,  runs  through  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  as  will  be  seen  if  we  note  the
varied  names  by  which  they  are  distinguished.  1.  God's  son,  his  firstborn  (Exod.  iv.
22,  23 ;  Jer.  iii.  4,  9  ;  Hos.  xi.  1).  2.  Firstfruits  (Jer.  ii.  3).  3.  The  people  of  God
(Ps.  Ixxxi.  8— 11 ;  2  Sam.  vii.  23,  24).  4.  God's  inhori  auce  (ch.  xxxii.  9).  5.  The
people  (ch.  xxxiii.  2'J).  6.  The  chosen  ones  (Ps.  xxxiii.  12 ;  ch.  vii.  6).  7.  His
flock  (Jer.  xiii.  17 ;  Ps.  c.  3).  8.  The  holy  people  (oh.  vii.  6 ;  Jer.  vii.  44).  9.  The
righteous  people  (Numb,  xxiii.  10 ;  Exod.  xix.  6).  10.  The  house  or  the  family  of
God  (Isa.  i.  2).  11.  A  kingdom  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  18).  Thus  all  Israelites  were  subjects  of
the  same  eternal,  perfect  King,  all  equal  in  dignity,  rights,  and  duties.  There  was
among  them  no  institution  resembling  caste.  All  were  equal  in  Heaven's  eye ;  all
enjoyed  scope  for  the  development  of  their  spiritual  natuie.  The  poorest  herdsman
might  become  a  prophet,  if  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  And  the  intended  difi'erential
feature  of  the  whole  nation  was  given  to  it  by  the  revealed  character  of  its  King,  "  Be
ye  holy  ;  for  I  am  holy."  It  is  no  wonder  that  a  people,  selected  thus  for  such  a  close
relationship  to  God,  should  be  called  in  the  text,  "  a  people  of  inheritance."  Not,
indeed,  in  Israel  alone,  was  there  a  theocratic  form  of  government.  The  kings  of  Egypt,
the  monarchs  of  Persia  and  Thibet,  pretended  to  rule  as  the  representatives  of  the
gods.  Minos  among  the  Cretans,  Lycurgus  the  Lacedaemonian,  Numa  of  Home,  and
Mohammed,  all  pretended  to  liave  in  some  sort  Divine  authority ;  but  these  were  only
the  mimicry  of  the  true,  and  were  all  lacking  in  the  supreme  point  to  and  for  which
Jehovah  was  educating  Israel,  even  for  "  righteousness  and  true  holiness."  It  is  easy
enough  to  win  converts  by  a  certain  mimicry  of  the  Divine.  The  early  history  of
many  a  nation  is  laden  with  mythology,  but  the  early  history  of  Israel  stands  out  in
clear  and  startling  distmction  from  that  of  other  peoples,  in  the  clearness  with  which
they  witness  for  the  one  living  and  true  God,  the  accordance  of  their  early  records
with  known  life  and  manners,  and  the  clear  and  striking  demand  in  their  precepts  for
love  and  goodness,  holiness  and  truth.  This  was  at  the  time,  and  ever  will  be  in  the
liistory  of  that  age,  the  one  brij^ht  spot  amid  th«  surrounding  gloom.  The  people  were
"  a  peculiar  treasure  to  God  aliove  all  people."

II.  What  Isbael  was  designed  to  bk  amono  the  nations.  Christian  PEopiiB  ake
TO  BE  WHEEEVEB  THET  ABE :  a  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  their  God.  The  Apostle
Peter  intimates  this  in  the  verse  to  which  we  referred  at  the  outset  (see  also  Titus
ii.  14 ;  Eph.  ii.  10;  1  Pet.  i.  15, 16).  There  are  many  more  passages  in  which  believers
are  spoken  of  not  only  individually  but  collectively,  as  making  up  a  family,  a  house-
hold, a  city,  a  commonwi alth  (Eph.  ii.  12, 19 ;  Phil.  iii.  20,  Greek),  And  theje  are
four  features  which  mark  this  new  commonwealth,  which  correspond  to  those  which
marked  that  of  the  Hebrews.  1.  The  members  of  this  Christian  commonwealth  are
redeemed  (cf  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19).  From  the  curse  nt  the  Law,  from  the  bondage  of  sin,
believers  have  been  redeemed  by  an  offering  of  unspeakable  value,  even  the  precious
blood  of  Christ.  2.  Thus  redeemed,  they  come  to  have  such  a  knowledge  of  Ood  as  their
God  as  the  morld  has  not  and  caniiot  hauc  (Rom,  viii.  15  ;  Gal.  iv.  5 — 7).  They  are
'  See  Kalisch,  in  he.,  to  whom  we  are  indebttid  for  much  light  on  this  theme.


CH.  nr.  1— 24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMY.  65

redeemed  out  of  a  state  of  servitude  into  a  state  of  sonship  (cf.  John  viiL  34 — 36).
3.  They  are  redeemed  to  a  life  of  close  fellowship  with  Qod  (cf.  ch.  iv.  7 ;  1  John  i.
1 — 3).  They  are  at  home  in  God.  4.  They  are  redeemed  to  this  close  fellowship  with
God,  that  therehy  they  may  become  pure ;  and  that  in  this  life  of  purity  they  may  "  show
forth  the  praises  of  him  who  hath  called  them  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvellous
lights"  Not  one  of  these  four  stages  must  be  lost  sight  of;  redeemed  out  of  sin  and
servitude,  into  sonship,  to  fellowship,  for  holiness.  Not  one  of  these  features  must
be  left  out ;  nor  can  the  order  in  which  we  have  put  them  be  reversed  or  even  trans-
posed. The  only  mark  by  which  the  world  can  know  God's  people  is — their  holiness
(Heb.  xii.  14).  It  is  not  for  nought  that  Scripture  speaks  of  a  great  redemption.
And  no  preacher  preaches  the  gospel  fully,  who  does  not  insist  on  its  side  of  ethics  as
well  as  on  its  side  of  grace.  And  no  professing  Christian  is  worthy  of  the  name  he
bears,  who  loses  sight  of  holiness  as  the  end  to  be  attained,  any  more  than  he  would  be
if  he  were  to  lose  sight  of  the  grace  of  God  as  that  by  which  alone  he  can  attain  the
end.  How  many  of  the  controversies  in  the  Church  of  God  have  arisen  from  an  un-
equal perception  of  the  varied  truths  of  God's  holy  gospel !  Out  of  an  inadequate  viow
of  the  evil  of  sin  and  of  its  affront  to  God's  honour  and  government,  many  have  felt
but  feebly  the  need  of  the  Great  Atoning  Sacrifice,  whereby  the  injured  honour  of  the
Law  was  vindicated  and  a  redemption  for  man  made  possible  1  And  then,  on  the  other
hand,  through  dwelling  all  but  exclusively  on  the  evil  from  which  man  is  rescued,
others  have  failed  to  insist  sufficiently  on  the  holiness  for  the  sake  of  enabling  him  to
attain  which  his  rescue  was  effected  at  such  a  cost.  Perhaps  few  preachers  present  in
perfection  an  exactly  balanced  gospel.  It  is  a  doctrine  according  to  godliness.  Some
decry  doctrine  because  they  see  around  them  such  a  lack  of  godliness.  But  if  we  would
hive  the  godliness  which  is  to  illustrate  the  doctrine,  we  shall  never  secure  the  end
by  weakening  the  exhibition  of  the  doctrine  which,  rightly  used,  will  certainly  lead  to
it.  And  not  only  do  preachers  need  to  take  heed  to  both  doctrine  and  practice,  but
private  professors  also.  If  we  want  the  world  to  understand  the  value  of  the  Christian
religion  as  an  object  of  revelation,  we  must  show  its  power  in  a  holy,  personal  life.  If
we  want  others  to  believe  its  doctrines  to  be  superior  to  any  other  doctrines,  we  must
show  that  the  life  it  secures  is  superior  to  any  other  life.  Thus  must  we  be,  like  Israel,
a  peculiar  people ;  showing  to  others  that  we  have  not  been  redeemed  in  vain.  Be  it
ours  to  let  our  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  our  good  works,  and  glorify
our  Father  which  is  in  heaven.     Thus  shall  we  show  we  are  his  people  indeed.

Vers.  21 — 24. — Qod  a  consuming  fire.  "  The  Lord  thy  God  is  a  consuming  fire,
even  a  jealous  God."  This  is  no  obsolete  sentence.  The  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews  quotes  it,  and  urges  the  truth  it  expresses  as  a  reason  for  serving  God  "  with
reverence  and  godly  fear :  for,"  he  adds,  even  "  oiw  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  Perhaps
the  first  impression  which  these  words  would  convey  to  the  earnest  and  thoughtful
mind  would  be  that  of  terror.  Perhaps,  too,  some  may  even  almost  shudder  at  such  a
representation  of  God,  and  may  at  once  declare  that  it  belongs  to  a  past  age,  and  to  a
decaying  order  of  ideas.  But  others  who  are  more  cautious  would  be  likely  to  say,
"  We  must  be  quite  sure  that  we  understand  the  phrase  before  we  say  that."  Doubt-
less we  say  with  pleasure,  "  God  is  light,"  "God  is  love,"  but  who  can  delight  in
saying,  "  Qod  is  fire  "  ?  Is  it  possible  that  any  one  can  go  even  further,  and  delight  in
saying,  "  Our  God — the  God  who  is  in  covenant  relation  to  us — is  a  consuming  fire  "  ?
Does  not  the  phrase  act  as  a  repellent  force",  and  inspire  one  with  dread  ?  No  doubt
it  may  have  that  effect  in  many  cases,  specially  if  men  have  carelessly  fastened  on
one  aspect  of  things,  or  where  they  have  been  misled  by  a  popular  misquotation,
"  God  out  of  Christ  is  a  consuming  fire."  For  whatever  the  phrase  means,  it  is  just
as  true  that  God  in  Christ  is  a  consuming  fire,  as  that  God  out  of  Christ  is  so.  The
phrase  is  one  which  should  be  thoughtfully  and  devoutly  studied  in  the  general  light
of  Scripture  teaching,  in  order  that  in  God's  light  we  may  see  light.  It  may  be,  if
thus  we  try  to  feel  our  way  to  its  meaning,  that  it  opens  up  views  of  God  with  which
we  would  not  willingly  part.

I.  What  is  the  meaning  op  the  phrase  in  the  text  ?  It  must  have  often  struck
an  attentive  reader  of  the  Bible  how  frequently  the  figure  of  "  fire"  is  found  therein,
both  in  rnnnectinn  with  man's  off'erings  to  God,  and  with  God's  manifestations  of  himself
BBTJTERONOMY.  I"


6b  THii  liOOK  OF  DEUTBEONOJiY.  [ch.  iv.  1—24

to  man  (cf.  Gen.  iii.  24 ;  viii.  20 ;  xv.  17 ;  Exod.  iii. ;  xix. ;  Isa.  iv. ;  xxxi.  9).  Now,
whatever  may  be  the  attribute  of  God  here  set  forth  under  the  figure  of  fire,  it,  like  all
God's  attributes,  must  be  twofold  in  its  action  in  a  sivfid  world.  The  action  of  fire
is  according  to  the  object  on  which  it  acts.  1.  There  is  a  terrific  action  of  fire.  It
tries  what  is  bad  (1  Cor.  iii.  13).  It  consumes  (Lev.  x.  2).  It  appals  (Numb.  xi.  1 — 3 ;
Isa.  xxxiii.  14).  It  destroys  (2  Kings  i.  12  ;  Luke  iii.  17  ;  John  xv.  6  ;  Ps.  xcviii.  3 ;
Heb.  vi.  8).  2.  There  is  a  kindly  action  of  flame.  It  enkindles  (Lev.  ix.  24).  It  tries
(1  Pet.  L  7 ;  Isa.  xlviii.  10).  It  purifies  (Ps.  xii.  6).  It  guards  (Zech.  ii.  5 ;  2  Kings
vi.  17 ;  ch.  iz.  3).  It  escorts  (2  Kings  ii.  11).  It  guides  (Exod.  xl.  38).  It  en-
lightens (Ps.  Ixxviii.  14).  It  is  as  a  pavilion  of  glory  (Exod.  iii.  2  ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  14 — 17).
Mow,  widely  different  as  is  the  action  or  the  meaning  of  flaming  fire  from  heaven  in
all  these  cases,  the  difference  is  not  in  the  flame,  but  in  the  material  on  which  it  acts.
The  same  fire  that  melts  the  wax  will  bake  the  clay.  So  the  very  same  attribute  of
God  in  which  the  righteous  may  glory  will  be  a  terror  to  his  enemies.  3.  Fire,  when
fpoken  of  in  reference  to  Ood,  is  an  emblem  of:  (1)  Purity.  In  Exod.  iii.  2 — 5,  God
would  signify  that  in  his  redeeming  love  he,  the  holy  God,  would  dwell  with  men,
and  that  men  might  dwell  in  the  midst  of  his  blazing  holiness,  and  yet  be  perfectly
at  home.  (2)  Power  (ch.  ix.  3;  vii.  8).  Power  exerting  itself  on  behalf  of  those
who  love  him.  (3)  Jealousy  (ch.  iv.  23,  24).  (4)  Anger  (oh.  vi.  15).  Thus  there
are  these  four  conceptions  to  be  attached  to  the  use  of  the  phrase  "a  consuming  fire,"
viz.  a  pavilion  of  purity  in  which  Israel  might  dwell  unharmed;  a  jealousy  which
could  brook  no  ri  'al ;  an  anger  which  would  go  forth  against  sin ;  a  power  which
would  guard  its  own  as  with  tongues,  yea,  with  walls  of  flame.  4.  But  wf  may  take,
another  step,  and  reduce  this  fourfold  conception  to  a  twofold  one.  There  is  anger
against  sin  because  of  spotless  purity.  There  is  jealousy  which  will  brook  no  rival,
and  a  power  that  will  guard  its  own  because  of  intensest  love.  Thus  the  consuming
fire  is  purity,  in  which  righteousness  may  dwell,  and  in  which  sin  is  consumed;  and
love,  which  is  mighty  in  its  active  care,  and  jealous  of  any  rival  in  the  human  heart.
5.  We  may  simplify  yet  again,  and  reduce  the  twofuld  conception  to  a  unity,  and  say
that  God  IS  a  consuming  fire,  inasmuch  as  he  is  perfect  love — pure  love,  active  love,
jealous  love ;  so  that  our  text  is  but  another  way  of  saying,  "  God  ia  light,"  "  God  is
love."    Let  us  now —

II.  Look  at  these  three  forms  of  the  expression  "perfect  love,"  and  see
WHAT  THEY  involve.  1.  Pure  love.  God  is  a  flaming  fire  of  infinite  purity,  and  yet
a  burning  flame  of  tenderest  love.  He  receives  the  sinner  on  a  basis  of  righteousness.
He  makes  men  who  are  in  covenant  relation  to  him  perfectly  pure.  They  are  to  be
tried  and  purified  and  made  white,  till  they  are  without  fault  before  the  throne  of
God.  Would  we  have  it  otherwise?  God's  love  without  its  purity  would  be  worth-
less to  us  1  2.  Active  love.  God  castles  his  saints  in  a  wall  of  fire  (Isa.  iv.  6),  while
he  also  destroys  their  foes  as  with  a  tongue  of  fire.  3.  Jealous  love.  There  is  a  hate-
ful jealousy.  There  is  a  rightful  one.  The  first  it  would  be  unworthy  of  a  man  to
possess;  the  second,  a  man  would  be  unworthy  of  himself  if  he  did  not.  A  father
would  be  worth  little  if  he  were  not  jealous  for  the  purity  of  his  child;  so  would  a
husband  if  not  jealous  for  the  honour  of  his  wife ;  or  an  Englishman,  if  not  jealous
for  the  honour  of  his  queen!  Even  so,  it  would  be  unworthy  of  God  if  he  were  not
jealous,  in  the  scriptural  sense.  Note:  (1)  God's  love  is  jealous  for  the  first  pkice  in
our  hearts.  (2)  God  is  jealous  for  his  own  purity,  holiness,  and  truth.  (3)  He  is
iealous  for  the  honour  of  his  Son.  He  will  not  let  one  be  lost  who  receives  him,  nor
will  he  let  one  be  saved  who  trifles  with  him.  To  go  against  Christ  is  to  rush  into
the  consuming  flame !

IIL  What  aee  the  practical  uses  to  be  made  of  this  sublime  attribute  of
God  ?  (See  the  use  made  of  it  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  oh.  xii.,  the  last  three
or  four  verses.)  1.  Is  God  thus  a  consuming  fire?  Then  let  us  never  attempt  to
draw  nigh  unto  him  without  a  recognition  both  of  his  purity  and  of  our  sinfulness.
No  service  is  accepted  before  God  which  does  not  take  account  of  sin,  and  in  connec-
tion with  which  there  is  not  "  reverence  and  godly  fear."  2.  Do  not  let  us  think
of  any  mode  of  recognition  of  sin  which  ignores  God's  own  way,  viz.  that  of  an
atoning  sacrifice.  God  will  jealously  guard  the  honour  of  his  dear  Son.  "If  they
escaped  not  who  refused  him  that  spake  on  earth,  much  more  shall  not  we  escape,


OH.  IV.  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEOJSOMl.  «7

If  we  turn  away  from  him  that  speaketh  from  heaven."  3.  If  thus  we  are  penitently
making  use  of  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Olirist  as  our  only  means  of  approach  to  and
ground  of  hope  in  God,  then  let  us  glory  in  this  holy,  jealous  love,  which  guards
us  as  with  a  wall  of  Are,  and  is  our  everlasting  guarantee  that  we  shall  not  be  put
to  shame.  4.  Let  us  remember  that  it  depends  on  ourselves  whether  the  "  constun-
ing  fire"  is  a  flame  at  which  we  tremble,  or  a  pavilion  in  which  we  can  hide.
God  cannot  deny  himself.  He  will  not  deal  with  the  sinner  on  any  principle  which
ignores  the  great  atonement  which  his  Son  has  efiected,  or  which  admits  of  his  accepting
the  service  of  a  divided  heart.  It  is  for  us  to  say  whether  the  great  redeeming
work  of  Jesus  shall  be  the  means  by  which  we  are  raised  to  fellowship  in  infinite
holiness,  or  whether  it  shall  be  to  us  the  savour  of  death  unto  death.  It  must  be
one  or  the  other.  If  we  receive  it,  it  will  bring  us  to  eternal  rest  in  God ;  if  we
reject  it,  it  will  deepen  our  condemnation  more  terribly  than  if  no  Saviour  had  been
provided!  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.  If,  in  Jesus,  we  draw  near  to  him,  that
burning,  blazing;  holiness  shall  be  the  secret  place  of  his  tabernacle  in  which  we
are  safely  hidden.  If  we  neglect  this  great  salvation,  as  men  unpardoned  and  un-
saved, we  shall  remain,  and  at  the  flame  of  Jehovah's  purity  we  shall  tremble  for
ever !  Sinner,  say,  oh  say,  shall  this  fire  of  God's  perfect  love  surround  you  ever  as
k  wall  of  protection,  or  shall  it  terrify  and  consume  you  as  devouring  flame?

HOMILIES  BY  VAEI0U8  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  sacredneu  of  ihs  Divine  Law,  Law,  being  the  utterance  of
righteousness,  is  unalterable  as  righteousness  itself,  pei-manent  amid  all  the  mutations
of  human  affairs.     Its  requirements  are  statutes,  stable  as  the  everlasting  hills.

I.  Law  is  the  vebitable  voice  of  God  ;  the  manifestation  of  his  thought ;  the
mirror  of  his  mind.  "  The  Loiispake  unto  you."  "Out  of  the  midst  of  the  fire" —
the  flame  of  holiness  and  ueal — iss\ies  every  command.  If  man's  moral  nature  has  an
open  ear,  it  may  often  detect  the  imperial  voice  of  Heaven.  'Tis  not  to  sight  God  reveals
himself,  but  to  the  ear.     His  messengers  are  emphatically  "a  voice."     "Faith  comes

by  hearing."  .•.,/-,  j

II.  Law,  in  its  bpheeb,  is  perfect.  Over  every  work  of  his  hands  God  pro-
nounces the, verdict  "Very  good;"  and  Law,  being  the  instrument  with  which  he
works,  is  "  holy,  just,  and  good."  For  unrighteous  man  there  may  be  something  more
precious  than  Law ;  but  when  restored  to  God,  Law  is  his  delight.  In  the  domain  of
belief  we  cannot  augment  or  diminish  God's  Law  without  self-injury._  Perfection
cannot  be  improved  upon.  In  the  sphere  of  practice,  to  halt  short  of  the  line  of  duty,
or  to  go  beyond  the  line,  is  alike  an  offence.     Self-mutilation,  or  blemish,  is  the  effect.

m.  The  veraoitt  of  Law  attested  bt  actual  expeeiencb.  _  Every  _  honest-
minded  man  may  discover  whether  or  not  the  written  Word  embodies  a  Divine  Law.
If  a  genuine  Law,  its  authority  is  ratified  by  an  honest  conscience ;  as  sanctions^
whether  of  commendation  or  curse,  are  witnessed  by  every  clear-sighted  eye.  Every
truthful  man  is  a  witness  that  God's  laws  (whether  written  in  external  nature,  in
man's  constitution,  or  in  Scripture)  bring  life  to  the  obedient,  death  to  the  transgressor.
Not  a  Law  is  revealed  in  the  Scriptures,  but  it  tends  to  righteousness,  happiness,  life  1

IV.  DnriHE  Law  asserts  its  authokitt  ovkb  the  whole  man.  1.  Over  _th
intellect,   for  it   demands  attention,  investigation,    comparison,  and    discriminatio

2.  Authority  over  the  affections,  for  it  demands  reverence,  esteem,  choice,  and  lov

3.  Authority  over  the  moral  faculty ;  for  it  demands  assent,  response,  and  loyalt
4'.  Over  the  active  powers,  for  it  requires  watchfulness,  self-restraint,  uninterrupt
deference,  and  uncompromising  service.

V.  Law  is  the  pathway  to  tkue  eminencsb.      Every  successful  application
science  to  practical  life  is  simply  a  treading  of  the  pathway  of  law.    So  long  as  ma


quintessence  of  wisdom— the  stepping-stone  to  eminence  !  What  men— what  nation—
haye  ever  reached  to  permanent  greatness,  save  they  who  have  trodden  the  path  of
Divine  Law  ?


jjjj  THE  BOOK  OF   DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  iv.  1—24.


VI.  LoTALTT  TO  God's  Law  bbings  us  near  to  god.  As  when  we  follow  up
the  footprints  of  a  man  rapidly  enough,  we  at  length  come  up  with  the  man  himself;
go,  as  we  pursue  the  pathway  of  Law,  we  come  soon  without  the  hallowed  precincts  of
God's  presence.  We  see  the  working  of  the  heavenly  machinery,  the  movements  of
God's  thought  and  purpose.  We  move  with  it,  and  ever,  come  nearer  to  the  central
light  and  love.    It  is  a  narrow  path,  and  few  they  are  who  find  it.  _

VIL  A  SPIRIT  or  OBEDIENCE  IS  SELF-PROPAGATING.  Like  plants  in  the  o-arden,  every
righteous  man  bears  seed  alter  his  own  kind.  Without  formal  teaching,  the  beauty  of
his  life  will  be  a  living  lesson— the  fragrance  of  his  deeds  will  be  contagious.  They
who  love  God's  Law  will  be  zealous  to  teach  God's  Law,  and  to  commend  it  to  others.
A  fine  trait  in  Abraham's  character  comes  into  view  when  God  said,  "I  know  Abraham,
that  he  will  command  his  children  and  his  household  after  him."  Every  man  bequeaths
to  posterity  a  large  legacy  of  blessing  or  of  bane.

VIIL  The  Law  of  God  is  destined  to  have  permanence  in  human  lifb.
There  was  high  significance  in  the  fact  that  the  Decalogue  was  written,  not  in  rays  of
light  upon  the  sapphire  firmament,  nor  in  legible  characters  upon  parchment,  but  on
stone.  The  stone  of  Sinai  is  said  to  belong  to  one  of  the  oldest  formations — the  granite
period.  The  forms  and  modes  of  law  may  undergo  change  to  meet  the  growing
necessities  of  men;  but  the  inner  sense — ^the  kernel — of  every  law  still  abides.
"  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,"  all  material  stricture  may  undergo  radical
change — but  the  words  of  God  can  undergo  no  change.  What  is  trtie  once  is  trvs
always  I  What  was  right  a  myriad  of  ages  since,  retains  all  its  authority  to-day,  and
will  be  obligatory  world  without  end.  The  sum  and  substance  of  moral  law  is  ?n:it
by  the  finger  of  God,  and  graven  on  the  solid  rook  1 — D.
«

Vers.  1 — 28. — The  curse  of  idolatry.  Idolatry  is  the  general  bias  of  fallen  humanity,
the  perversion  of  an  innate  principle,  the  misgrowth  of  the  religious  instinct.  Men
everywhere  "feel  after  God,  if  haply  they  may  find  him."  Absolute  atheism  cannot
long  endure  anywhere.  If  men  reject  a  personal  Deity,  they  invent  an  inferior  God,
and  practically  worship  that.  The  wildest  atheist  which  the  world  has  seen,  must
admit  that  there  is  some  power  or  force  in  the  world  superior  to  himself.  There  is  no
resting-place  for  reason,  short  of  a  spiritual  God.

L  Idolatry  was  the  prevalent  danger  of  the  patriarchal  age.  During
the  childhood  of  men,  they  are  under  the  domination  of  the  bodily  senses.  They
demand  a  god  whom  they  can  see  and  handle  and  hear.  The  kindred  of  Abraham
were  addicted  to  idolatry.  The  wife  of  Jacob  furtively  abstracted  the  teraphim  of  her
father,  and  held  them  in  a  measure  of  reverence.  Even  Moses  yearned  for  a  visible
Deity.  "  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  thy  glory !  "  The  absence  of  Moses  from  the  camp
for  forty  days  sufficed  for  the  people  to  relapse  into  idolatry.  Throughout  their  history,
every  decline  in  religious  feeling  showed  itself  in  a  fresh  lapse  towards  idolatry.

II.  Idolatry  grossly  corrupts  its  votaries.  The  object  which  is  at  first  selected
to  be  a  symhol  of  the  Deity,  soon  detains  on  itself  the  homage  of  the  worshipper,  and
becomes  his  Deity.  Matter  is  at  the  antipodes  from  spirit.  The  laws  and  forces
working  in  material  nature  may  help  us  to  understand  the  Divine  Being,  but  matter
itself  never.  Apart  from  a  written  revelation,  we  best  rise  to  the  knowledge  of  God
through  the  contemplation  of  our  own  minds  and  consciences.  The  object  of  our
worship  moulds  us  after  itself.  The  worshipper  of  beasts  becomes  bestial.  "  They  that
make  them  become  like  unto  them."    This  is  God's  law.

nL  Material  images  degrade  the  Godhead.  For  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  cannot
be  represented  by  material  images.  For  matter  can  convey  no  impressions  of  omni-
presence, or  of  eternity,  or  of  moral  qualities,  or  of  emotions,  affections,  or  joys  1  Bepre
sentation  by  material  images  strips  our  God  of  all  that  is  noblest  in  his  nature,  cf  all
that  is  distinctive  in  the  Godhead.     It  cloaks  his  perfections  and  eclipses  his  glory.

IV.  Idolatry  annulled  the  covenant  between  God  and  Israel.  That
gracious  compact  required  upon  the  part  of  the  Israelites  the  honest  recognition  and
worship  of  the  One  Jehovah.  Unfaithfulness  on  this  vital  point  invalidated  the  entire
covenant ;  God  had  pledged  himself  specially  to  be  their  God,  on  condition  that  they
were  his  loyal  people.  All  the  resources  of  God's  kingdom  were  pledged  to  Israel  in
that  covenant.     It  was  an  act  of  mercy  that  God  should  bind  himself  in  any  form  to


OH.  IV.  1—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  89

his  creatures,  and  this  superabundant  grace  ought  to  have  held  their  homage  by
closest  ami  tenderest  ties.  His  part  of  the  covenant,  God  had  conspicuously  observed
in  the  release  of  his  people  from  the  "  iron  furnace."  Was  not  every  sign  and  wonder
wrought  in  Egypt  a  fresh  seal  upon  the  heavenly  bond  ?  This  covenant,  between  a
gracious  God  and  undeserving  men,  idolatry  destroyed.

V.   OUB  KNOWLKDOE   OP   GOD    IS    DESIGNED     AS    A    EEGULATIVTS    FORCE.       There   On)

limitations  to  our  knowledge  of  God  imposed  by  our  constitution,  and  further  limita-
tions imposed  by  our  sin.  These  latter  can  be  removed  at  once  by  the  redemptive
power  of  Christ;  and  the  first  named  shall  gradually  be  relaxed  in  the  resurrection
state.  Fire  does  not  represent  God,  except  so  far  as  it  consumes,  and  this  illustration
is  meant  to  check  our  presumption ;  'tis  not  for  the  satisfaction  of  a  curious  intellect,
but  to  restrain  a  wayward  life.  Knowledge  of  God,  which  is  honestly  reduced  to
practice,  becomes  larger  and  clearer  knowledge.  "  Then  shall  we  know  if  we  follow  on
to  know  the  Lord."

VL  Iniquity  becomes  its  own  ptrNisHMENT.  Throughout  the  Scriptures  this
doctrine  is  taught,  that  sin  ripens  and  culminates  in  punishment.  The  penalty
threatened  upon  the  idolatry  of  the  Jews  was  this,  that  they  should  be  driven  into  a
heathen  land,  and  be  compelled  to  serve  the  senseless  blocks  of  wood  and  stone.  The
punishment  of  avarice  is  this,  that  the  sensibilities  become  as  hard  as  gold.  The
penalty  of  drunkenness  is  this,  that  the  morbid  appetite  grows  into  an  uncontrollable
passion  I    The  voice  of  doom  says,  "  He  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still."

VII.  PbEBBNT     punishments     are     THE     TYPE     OP      FUTURE      PUNISHMENTS.        The

penalty  to  be  imposed  on  the  Jews  for  disloyalty,  was  banishment  from  Canaan — defeat,
scattering,  death.  So  the  final  penalties  revealed  for  reprobate  men  are  eicliisicm
from  the  heavenly  Canaan ;  banishment  to  the  darkness  they  have  preferred ;  utter
destruction.     Each  man  "  goes  to  his  own  place."

VIII.  Suffering  for  others,  a  pathway  to  human  hearts.  In  connection  with
tliese  fatherly  counsels,  Moses  again  reminds  the  people  of  his  privation  on  account
of  their  sins.  The  blame  of  his  exclusion  from  Canaan  he  attributes  to  them.  He
who  aforetime  had  prayed  that,  for  the  sake  of  Israel,  his  own  name  might  be  blotted
out  of  God's  book,  now  submits  to  this  chastisement  for  the  people's  good.  But
Moses  would  not  throw  away  the  advantage  which  this  fact  might  bring.  In  his  desire
for  the  people's  good,  he  converts  it  into  a.persuasive  argument,  by  which  to  confirm
their  loyalty  to  God.  As  if,  should  every  other  appeal  fail,  this  appeal  to  their
sensibility  might  succeed.  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,  "  Kemeraber  what  I  am  called  to
endure  for  you  1  Let  your  requital  be  unswerving  obedience  to  my  God."  Here  he
serves  as  a  feeble  type  of  Jesus. — D.

Vera.  1,  2.— Acceptable  ohedience.  I.  Its  basis— the  Divine  command.  "Statutes
and  judgments."  Action  originating  in  self-will,  however  correct  in  moral  form,  is  not
obedience.  It  is  God's  command  which  is  the  rule  and  starting-point.  Recognition
of  his  authority  is  essential.  Kant  distinguishes  religion  from  morality  thus—
"  Religion  is  the  doing  of  all  duties  as  if  they  were  Divine  commandments.  The
objective  rule  is  found  in  the  inspired  Scriptures.

II  Its  CHARACTER.  It  must  be ;  1.  Entire,  not  partial.  Having  respect  to  all
that  God  reveals.  2.  Honest,  neither  altering,  mutilating,  adding  to,  nor  subtracting
from  (cf.  Matt.  v.  19 ;  xv.  6,  9).     3.  Persevering.  .  ,      ,  i„  ^    r

III.  Its  REWARD.  "Life,"  possession  of  blessings.  This  reward  not  legal,  but  ot
grace  through  Christ,  as  on  the  legal  basis  no  one  can  attain  to  it  (Rom.  m.  20).  But
though,  as  sinful,  we  cannot  have  life  through  obedience,  we  still  have  it  tn  obedience.
"Not  every  one  that  saith  unto  me.  Lord,  Lord,  shall  enter  into  the  kingdom  ot
heaven ;  but  he  that  doeth  the  will  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven  (Matt.  vii.  <il ;
Rom.  ii;  7).— J.  0.

Vers  6—10.—^  nation's  glory.  I.  A  nation  possessing  God's  Word  is  suprbmly
FAVOURED.  (Ver.  8.)  Even  to  have  such  a  Law  as  Israel  possessed  exalted  her  to  a
position  of  unique  greatness.  The  knowledge  of  the  true  God— light  on  the  great
principles  of  conduct— equitable  statutes— institutions  adapted  to  promote  material,
moral;  and  spiritual  well-being.    Our  own  nation  is  exceptionally  favoured  in  Uie


TO  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEfiONOMY.  [ch.  iv.  l—Z^


plentiful  enjoyment  of  religious  privileges— Bibles,  chnrches,  sabbath  schools,  evangel-
istic agencies.  Christian  literature,  etc.,  bringing  the  highest  knowledge  within  ths
reach  of  the  humblest ;  while  the  laws,  institutions,  etc.,  under  which  we  live,  as  the
fruit  of  a  Christian  civilization,  are  not  surpassed  by  any  on  the  earth.  God  has
indeed,  favoured  us  to  an  unexampled  degree  in  every  religious  respect,

II.  A  NATION   ENLIGHTENED  BT  God's  WoRD  18   SDPBBMELY  WISE.      To  haVe  IS  mUch,

but  to  be  truly  "a  wise  and  understanding  people,"  we  must  "keep  and  do"  (ver.  6).
It  is  not  in  knowing,  but  in  adopting,  the  wise  course  that  we  show  ourselves  truly
wise.  Wisdom  is  the  course  that  conduces  to  the  formation  of  a  brave,  noble,  resolute,
happy,  and  contented  people ;  and  the  nation  that  loves  God's  Word,  fears  God  himself,
and  applies  the  teaching  he  has  given  it  in  the  various  spheres  of  domestic,  social,  com-
mercial, and  political  existence,  is  indubitably  in  possession  of  that  wisdom.  It  is  to
be  regretted  that  the  nations  most  peculiarly  privileged  do  not  always  set  that  store
upon  their  privileges  which  they  should  do,  or  make  a  good  use  of  them.  The  amount
of  irreligion,  infidelity,  and  general  indifference  to  the  Word  of  God  in  our  own  land  is  a
startling  omen  for  the  future.  Britain's  greatness  will  soon  wane  if  she  abandons  her
respect  for  the  Bible,  the  sabbath,  and  the  guiding  principles  of  revelation.

III.  A  NATION  OBDEBINO  ITSELF   BT  God's  WoBD   IS  BUPBBMELT   EMINENT.     (Ver.  7.)

Its  prosperity :  1.  Bests  on  a  solid  foundation.  2.  Is  built  up  under  conditions  that
ensure  its  permanence.  3.  Is  secured  by  a  special  blessing  of  God.  And  this
is  a  matter  admitting  of  ample  historical  verification.  Compare:  1.  Pagan  nations
with  Christian.  2.  Unbelieving  nations  with  believing  (France :  Britain).  3.  Soman
Catholic  nations  with  Protestant  (see  Laveleye  on  '  Protestantism  and  Catholicism  in
their  bearing  upon  the  Liberty  and  Prosperity  of  Nations ').  4.  Sabbath-desecrating
nations  with  sabbath-keeping.  It  will  be  found  that  the  Bible-loving,  Bible-obeying,
sabbath-keeping  nations  exhibit:  (1)  an  intellectual  superiority;  (2)  an  ethical
superiority ;  (3)  a  superiority  in  political  institutions ;  (4)  a  superiority  in  material
respects  (trade,  commerce,  wealth,  etc.).

IV.  A    NATION    OBEYING  God's  WoED   WILL    HAVE    THE    80UECB    OF    ITS    OBEATNEBS

ACKNOWLEDGED  BT  OTHERS.  (Ver.  6.)  They  will  not  only  own  to  its  eminence,  but
they  will  discern  its  true  cause,  and  acknowledge  that  it  springs  from  its  religious
faithfulness.  Numerous  testimonies  of  this  kind  exist  to  the  source  of  the  national
greatness  of  our  own  country.

Lessons — 1.  Value  our  religious  privileges.  2.  Seek  the  furtherance  of  religion  in
the  community.  3.  Be  diligent  in  the  training  of  our  children  (ver.  9).  4.  Extend
our  blessings  to  others. — J.  O.

Ver.  9. — The  religious  education  of  children.  1.  God's  way~of  handing  down  th«
fruits  of  present  privilege.  2.  God's  way  of  maintaining  his  witness  in  the  world.  3.
God's  way  of  extending  his  Church.  The  natural  law  of  the  increase  of  population
leads,  where  parents  are  faithful,  to  a  constant  increase  in  the  number  of  the
godly. — J.  O.

Vers.  10 — 14. — 2%«  revelation  at  Horeb.    A  revelation—

I.  Of  THE  SPIRITUALITY  OF  God's  natuee.  "Ye  saw  no  similitude"  (ver.  12).
A  wonderful  truth  to  be  impressed  on  the  minds  of  a  people  fresh  from  contact  with
the  debasing  idolatries  of  Egypt.  A  truth :  1.  Difficult  to  grasp.  2.  Elevating  in
its  influence.  3.  The  apprehension  of  which  is  necessary  for  spiritual  worshin
(John  iv.  24).  ^

II.  Of  the  HOLINESS  OF  Goo'b  chabaotee.  The  lightnings  that  played  about  the
mountain,  the  fire  burning  in  the  midst  of  it  (ver.  11),  the  fiery  law  that  was  given, — all
bespoke  the  awful  and  terrible  holiness  of  him  whose  voice  was  uttering  words  of  dread-
ful import  to  transgressors.

IIL  Of  the  VERITIES  OF  God's  Law.  Then  were  spoken  the  ten  commandment*
(vers.  10, 12)— the  sum  and  substance  of  moral  duty — the  rule  of  life  to  believers—
the  Law  which  condemns  and  slays  transgressors.  Christ  is  "  the  end  of  the  Law  of
righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth,"  and  only  in  him  can  we  escape  from  itt
condemning  power  (Kom.  viii.  1 ;  i.  4).

IV.  Of  thi  tkbboes  of  God's  majestt.    God  surrounded  himself  with  these  signi


CH.1V.  1— 24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  71

of  his  greatness,  power,  wrath,  and  holiness :  1.  That  we  may  reverence  and  fear  him.
2.  That  we  may  be  kept  from  presumption  in  our  approaches  to  him.  3.  That  wa
may  feel  the  awfulness  of  his  Word.  Kecalling  this  scene,  the  Israelites  should  have
been  preserved  from  ever  trifling  with  it.  God's  Word  should  he  handled  and  read
with  a  deep_  feeling  of  reverence.  4.  These  terrors  suggested  that  the  Law,  in  itself
considered,  is  not  a  saving,  but  a  destroying  power.  The  whole  manifestation  was
overcast  with  threatening. — J.  O.

Vera.  IB — 20. — Warning  against  heathenish  idolatry.  I.  The  obioik  of  heathen
IDOLATBT.  The  result  of  a  "  corruption  "  (ver.  16).  Not  a  stage  in  the  advance  up-
wards from  fetichism,  etc. ;  but,  as  inquiries  are  tending  more  and  more  to  show,  the
consequence:  1.  Of  a  depravation  of  the  idea  of  God.  2.  Of  a  corruption  of  the
worship  of  God.  3.  Arising  in  turn  from  the  substitution  of  the  creature  for  God  in
the  affections  (cf.  Rom.  i.  20 — 26).

II.  The  fobms  op  heathen  idolatry.  1.  Hero-worship  (ver.  16).  2.  Animal-
worship  (vers.  17,  18).  3.  Nature-wovship  (ver.  19).  Greek  idolatry  furnishes  con-
spicuous instances  of  the  first;  Egypt  was  notorious  for  the  second,  so  Hinduism;
while  Parseeism,  and  the  early  Vedio  worship  illustrates  the  third  (cf.  Job  xxxi.  21).

III.  The  fruits  or  heathen  idolatry.  1.  A  degraded  intellect.  2.  Degraded
affections.  3.  Degraded  morals  (Rom.  L).  Therefore  Israel  must  not  "corrupt"
themselves. — J.  0.

Ver.  20. — The  iron  furnace.  God  had  passed  his  people  through  a  hot  furnace  in
the  terrible  sufiurings  they  endured  in  Egypt,  but  with  the  gracious  purpose  of
ultimately  delivering  them,  and  giving  them  an  inheritance  in  Canaan.     We  learn —

I.  That  God's  people  are  sometimes  subjected  to  sufferings  of  incredible
severity.  The  expression  an  '  iron  furnace,"  i.e.  a  furnace  for  smelting  iron,  conveys
no  weaker  an  idea.  We  know  that  in  fact  it  sometimes  is  so.  Bodily  anguish — •.
mental  anguish — stroke  after  stroke  of  heaviest  trial.  An  instance  in  the  history  of
Job.  Shakes  faith  to  its  foundations — seems  to  ar^ue  that  God  has  utterly  iorsaken
them.

II.  That  these  suPFBRiNas  are  appointed,  and  serve  disciplinary  ends.  The
use  of  the  figure  ol  a  furnace  implies  a  purpose  in  the  sufi'erings.  Iron  is  put  into  the
furnace  deliberately,  and  with  a  design.  Trials,  difficult  enough  to  bear  in  the  faith
that  God  sends  them,  would  ofttimes  be  absolutely  intolerable  without  that  faith.
The  furnace  acts  on  the  tough,  hard,  impure  iron  to  separate  it  from  dross,  and  make
it  soft  and  workable.  The  severe  sufferings  through  which  God  passes  believers :  1.
Purify  character.  2.  Make  the  nature  plastic  to  God's  will,  and  subdue  it  to  meekness.
3.  Fit  the  man  thus  sanctified  for  new  and  higher  uses.

HI.  God  has  an  inheritance  in  store  for  those  who  endure  the  furnace
successfully.  1.  Their  sufferings  fit  them  to  6e  God's  inheritance.  "To  be  unto  him
a  people  of  inheritance."  He  has  to  melt,  mould,  and  spiritually  prepare  for  his  own
indwelling  those  whom  he  chooses.  2.  Their  sulierings  fit  them  for  the  inheritance
which  God  gives  them  (1  Pet.  i.  3 — 10).  By  creating  a  pure,  chastened,  heavenly
disposition.  By  strengthening  faith,  brightening  hope',  and  increasing  love.  By
subduing  pride,  rebellion,  and  impatience;  and  making  the  will  absolutely  pliant  in
the  hands  of  the  Divine. —J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 14. —  Ohedience  the  secret  of  success.  Moses  here  reminds  Israel  of  the
privilege  it  possesses  as  a  nation  in  having  the  oracles  of  God  committed  unto  it
(Bom.  iii.  2).  He  urges  obedience  upon  them  as  the  one  purpose  for  which  they  are
to  be  introduced  into  the  promised  land.  National  prosperity  depends  upon  this.
And  here  we  have  to  notice —

L  Disobedience  has  already  proved  fatal.  He  recalls  the  terrible  experJerica
in  connection  with  Baal-peor — how  the  people  in  large  numbers  became  lewd  idolaters
with  the  Israelites  (Numb,  xxv.),  and  how  fierce  anger  from  the  Lord  visited  the
people.  In  Canaan  they  shall  he  exposed  to  similar  temptations,  but  the  chastisement
•t  Baal-peor  must  not  be  lost  upon  them.  Past  judgments  are  to  secure  more  complete
obedience.


72  I'HE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  iv.  1— 24,

II.  God's  neaekess  to  them  should  prove  a  hallowing  frivileoe.  Howgracipus
is  God  to  dwell  among  them,  always  near  at  hand  to  be  inquired  of,  a  most  serviceable
King !  He  dwelt  in  their  midst  as  a  Pilgrim  with  his  people.  Upon  his  accessibility
and  wisdom  they  could  always  calculate.  This  distinguished  Israel  from  the  other
nations.

Such  a  privilege  should  of  itself  hallow  them,  and  make  them  to  abide  under  his
shadow.     Equally  near  is  God  still  to  all  of  us  who  seek  liim.

III.  His  Law  is  wiseb  than  all  man's  devkloped  legislation.  The  surround-
ing nations  had  their  laws  and  customs,  but  the  superiority  of  the  Mosaic  code  was
admitted  by  all  acquainted  with  it.  It  was  an  immense  moral  advance  for  Israel,  as
great- an  advance  as  in  that  rude  age  they  could  take  in.

Similarly,  the  morality  of  the  gospel  is  ahead  of  all  jurisprudence.  Indeed,  en-
lightened legislation  and  reform  tend  towards  the  scriptural  ideal.  God  is  wiser  than
man,  and  the  Bibh  better  than  all  acts  of  parliament.

IV.  The  Law  was  given  as  a  rule  of  life  fob  a  covenant  people.  They
were  redeemed  from  bondage,  and  then  received  the  Law  at  Sinai  to  guide;  their
redeemed  lives.  Obedience  should  be  a  matter  of  gratitude  for  deliverance,  and  would
prove  the  secret  of  success.

It  is  so  still.  "  Christ  redeems  us  from  the  curse  of  the  Law,  being  made  a  curse  for
us."  But  as  grateful  and  saved  people,  we  feel  that  we  are  "  under  the  Law  to  Christ "
(1  Cor.  ix.  21).

And  this  grateful  obedience  proves  the  secret  of  comfort  and  success.  It  is  the  meat
of  life  to  do  the  will  of  him  who  hath  sent  us,  and  to  finish  his  work  (John  iv.  34).
Palestine  becomes  "  pai  adise  ,regained  "  to  the  grateful  and  obedient  souls.  We  find  a
promised  land  where  God's  precepts  are  gratefully  observed  by  redeemed  souls.  It  is
the  attitude  within,  rather  than  the  circumstances  without,  which  constitutes  life  a
blessed  country  and  an  antepast  of  heaven. — B.  M.  E.

■  Vers.  15 — 24. — The  Divine  jeahuny  of  graven  images.  The  great  temptation  of
Israel  was  to  idolatry.  Images  were  worshipped  by  all  those  nations  among  whom
they  came,  and  they  were  in  constant  danger  of  conforming  to  the  sinful  practice.
Hence  this  warning  and  statement  about  the  Divine  jealousy.    Let  us  observe—

I.  That  jealousy  presupposes  love.  Love  must  be  strong  as  death,  else
jealousy  will  not  be  crurl  as  the  grave;  nor  will  its  coals  prove  coals  of  fire,  having  a
most  vehement  flame  (Song  of  Solomon  viii.  6).  The  God  who  proves  so  jealous  is  he
whose  essence  is  love.  If  God  did  not  love  men  so  much,  he  would  not  be  so  jealous
when  they  turn  away  from  him.  He  knows  that,  as  a  wife  cannot  be  happy  separated
from  her  loving  husband,  no  more  can  the  human  spirit  be,  away  from  him.

Israel  then  and  we  now  have  to  deal  with  a  God  of  love.

II.  God  is  jealous  when  men  give  him  visibility.  Idolatry  is  trying  to  help
worship  through  the  aid  of  the  senses.  The  image  is  not  regarded  as  the  god,  but  his
likeness.     Man  embodies  his  ideas  of  God  in  outward  forms.

But  imagination  is  not  creative  ;  it  combines  in  new  relations  what  has  already  been
given  to  it.  Hence  idolatry  has  never  done  more  than  place  the  creatures,  whether
beast,  or  bird,  or  fish,  or  reptile,  or  the  heavenly  bodies,  in  new  relations  to  the  invisible
Divinity.

God  resents  this  visibility  as  degradation.  He  knows  that  man  becomes  degraded
by  such  associations.    Hence  his  deserved  wrath  against  idolatry.

III.  If  God  be  not  our  kindling  flame,  he  will  in  jealousy  be  oub  con-
suming FIRE.  It  is  at  the  torch  of  the  Divine  that  the  human  soul  becomes  enkindled.
The  flaming  fires  of  Pentecost  sublimate  the  soul  and  fit  it  for  primeval  powers.  It  is
this  warning,  elevating  influence  that  is  love's  natural  action.

But  when  rebellious  man  turns  the  grace  of  God  into  lasciviousness ;  when  love  ia
ignored  instead  of  returned,  and  the  soul  seeks  in  the  things  of  sense  what  God  only  cai
give, — then  love  begins  to  burn  as  jealousy  with  a  vehement,  consuming  flame.

IV.  It  becomes  us  consequently  to  worship  God  in  the  Spikit.  We  must
keep  upon  the  serene  heights  of  faith,  and  not  fall  into  the  degradation  of  superstition.
We  are  made  for  better  things  than  weakly  to  associate  in  our  minds  the  invisible  and
eternal  God  with  the  creatuies  of  sense.  Let  us  give  faith  proper  scope,  and  the
worship  of  God  will  prove  both  possible  and  delightful.


CH.  IV.  25 — 49.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY


73


But  the  worship  of  God  through  images  makes  stocks  and  stones  of  men.  "  They
that  mal;e  them  are  like  unto  them  ;  so  is  every  one  that  trusteth  in  them  "  (P«.  cxv.
8).  May  our  worship  raise  us  and  not  degrade  us !  Superstition  degrades,  but  worship
of  the  invisible  God  in  the  Spirit  elevates  and  ennobles  our  louls. — R.  M.  E.


EXPOSITION.


Vers.  25 — 31. — Moses  enforces  the  warn-
ing against  idolatry,  by  predicting  the  evil
that  should  come  upon  the  nation  through
the  apostacy  of  those  who  should  in  after
times  turn  from  Jehovah  to  strange  gods.
When  they  should  have  begotten  children
and  children's  children,  and  had  been  long
in  the  land,  i.e.  when  in  after  years  a  gene-
ration should  arise  that  had  not  known  the
things  they  had  seen,  or  had  forgotten  them
(ver.  9),  and  the  nation  should  then  becoine
wanton  and  corrupt,  and  fall  into  idolatry
(cf.  ch.  vi.  10,  etc. ;  viii.  7,  etc.  j  xxxi.  20,  21 ;
xxxii.  15,  etc. ;  Hos.  xiii.  6) ;  then  should
they  utterly  perish  from  off  the  land  of
which  they  were  now  about  to  take  pos-
session.

Ver.  25. — Have  remained  long  in  the  land ;
literally,  huve  become  old,  an  ancient  nation,
etc.  To  provoke  him  to  anger ;  i.e.  so  as  that
he  should  be  displeased  and  grieved,  and
roused  to  punish.

Ver.  26. — I  call  heaven  and  earth  to
witness.  Moses  speaks  in  the  name  of  the
Lord  of  all,  and  so  calls  to  witness  the
whole  created  universe  to  attest  his  words ;
the  heavens  and  earth  are  witnesses  for  God,
and  when  evil  comes  on  those  who  transgress
his  Law,  they  declare  his  righteousness  (Fs.
1.  4,  6),  in  that  what  has  befallen  the  sinner
is  only  what  was  announced  beforehand  as
the  penalty  of  transgression.  Soon ;  hastily
(ino),  without  delay  (cf.  ch.  vii.  4,  22  ["  at
once,"  Authorized  Vers.];  ix.  3  ["  quickly  "],
12,  1 6).  Prolong  days ;  usually  equal  to  have
a  long  life  (cf.  ch.  v.  16;  vi.  2 ;  xi.  9j
xvii.  20,  etc.) ;  here  it  means  "  continue  long
to  occupy."  Only  as  they  continued  faith-
ful to  Jehovah  could  they  continue  as  a
people  to  possess  the  land ;  levered  from
him,  they  lost  their  title  to  occupy  Canaan,
and  ceased  to  be  his  special  people;  as  a
nation  they  would  be  destroyed  by  being
scattered  among  other  nations.  From  Lev.
xxvi.  33,  etc.,  and  ch.  xxviii.  64,  it  is
evident  that  the  author  had  in  view  "all
the  dispersions  which  would  come  upon  the
rebellious  nation  in  future  times,  even  down
to  the  dispersion  under  the  Romans,  which
continues  still ;  so  that  Moses  contemplated
the  punishment  in  its  fullest  extent "  (Keil).
Ver.  27. — Few  in  number;  literally,  men


of  number,  i.e.  that  may  be  connted ;  few  as
compared  with  the  heathen  among  whom
they  should  be  dispersed  (Gen.  xxxiv.  30).
Shall  lead  you.  The  verb  here  (jn;,  Piel  of
:n])  is  frequently  used  in  the  sense  of  con-
ducting gently  and  kindly  (Isa.  xlix.  10;
Ixiii.  14;  Ps.  xl  iii.  14;  Ixxviii.  52);  but
it  also  means  to  a^'ve,  to  carry  off,  to  convey
forcibly  (Exod  xiv.  25 ;  Gen.  xxxi.  26 ;
Exod.  X.  13;  Pb.  Ixxviii.  26);  the  connec-
tion shows  that  it  is  in  the  latter  sense  it  is
to  be  taken  here.  Dispersed  among  the
heathen,  they,  who  had  dishonoured  God
by  making  an  image  to  represent  him,
should  be  compelled  to  do  service  to  mere
dead  idols,  the  work  of  men's  hands,  which
not  only  could  not  hear  or  see,  as  God  can,
but  also  could  not  perform  even  such  animal
functions  as  eating  and  smelling  (Ps.  cxv.
4—7  ;  Jei-.  x.  3  ~  9).  These  idols  are  called
"gods"  by  Moses,  because  they  were  so
counted  by  those  who  worshipped  them;
elsewhere  he  stigmatizes  them  as  "  abomi-
nations," things  to  be  loathed  and  abhorred
(D<]:ipi!>,  ch.  xxvii.  15 ;  xxix.  17).  As  had  been
their  sin,  so  should  be  their  punishment;
as  they  had  dishonoured  God,  so  should  they
be  themselves  dishonoured;  as  they  had
worshipped  by  an  image  him  who  is  spirit
and  without  form,  they  should  be  made  to
sink  down  to  an  utterly  materialized  worship,
that  of  mere  idols,  the  work  of  men's  hands;
as  they  had  apostatized  Irom  the  one  holy
and  true  God,  they  should  be  degraded  to
become  the  servants  of  abominations,  objects
of  loathing  and  abhorrence  (Jer.  xvi.  13;
Acts  vii.  42).  God,  however,  would  not
utterly  cast  them  off:  if,  in  their  misery  and
degradation,  they  should  repent  and  turn
again  to  him  and  seek  him  sincerely  and
'  ',  they  should  find  him ;    for  he


is  a  merciful  God,  and  mindful  of  the
covenant  which  he  sware  unto  their  fathers
(cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  39,  etc.).

Ver.  29.— With  aU  thy  heart  and  with  all
thy  soul.  As  true  religion  consists  in  loving
the  Lord  with  all  the  heart  and  soul,  the
whole  inner  nature  (ch.  vi.  5;  x.  12),  so  true
repentance  consists  in  a  turning  from  sin
and  all  ungodliness  to  God,  in  a  coming
from  a  state  of  enmity  to  him,  or  of  indiffer-
ence to  his  claims,  to  honour,  reverence,
and  serve  him  intelligently  and  sincerely,
thinking  of  him  aright,  adoring  his  per-
fections, delighting  in  him  a»  the  alona


74


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEliOiJOMY.


[CH.  iv.  25— li*.


good,  giving  to  him  tliat  honour  -which 'i»
his  due,  and  doing  his  will  from  the  heart
(pf.  2  Chion.  XV.  15).  When  men  have
apostatized  from  God,  it  is  often  by  means
of  "  tribulation"  that  they  are  brought  to  a
right  state  of  mind  towards  him,  and  to
a  true  repentance  '  not  to  be  repented  of ; "
and  to  effect  this  is  the  design  of  all  the
chastisements  which  God  sends  on  his  own
people  fHeb.  xii.  5 — 11;  cf  Jar.  xxiv.  7;
xxix.  10—13;  1.  4,  etc.;  Ezek.  vi.  11,  ete.).

Ver.  30. — In  the  latter  days ;  in'  the  after-
ward  of  days  (D'O'n  nnn«3 ;  "  end,"  oh.  xi.
12)— a  phrase  used  sometimes  to  designate
the  times  of  the  Me3siah(Isa.  ii.  2;  Hos.iii.  5;
comp.  Acts  ii.  17 ;  1  Pet.  i.  20 ;  Heb.  i.  1 ;
1  John  ii.  18);  but  here,  as  generally,  it
simply  indicates  futurity,  the  time  to  come
(cf.  Gen.  xlix.  1 ;  Numb.  xxiv.  14 ;  ch.  xxxi.
29,  etc).  This,  however,  may  include  the
far  distant  future,  and  so  points  to  the  time
when  Israel  shall  finally  return  to  the  Lord
and  be  saved,  -through  the  acknowledgment
of  him  whom  they^  despised  and  rejected
when  he  came  as  the  Messinh  promised
to  the  fathers.  As  St.  Paul  grounds  the
assuranre  of  the  final  redemption  of  Israel,
as  a  whole,  on  their  calling  of  God  (Rom.
xi.  26 — 29),  so  Moses  here  stes  in  God's
covenant  the  ground  of  the  ever-watchful
care  and  grace  of  God  to  Israel,  and  the
security  of  their  final  restoration  as  a  nation.

Ver.  81. — Will  not  forsake  thee ;  literally,
imllnot  let  thee  loose,  will  not  lose  hold  of  thee,
will  not  cast  thee  off  (cf.  Eom.  xi.  1,  etc.).
"  Israel  will  return  and  find  God,  because
he  loses  not  hold  of .  it "  (Herxheimer).
"  The  sinner  will  incline  to  seek  God  only
when  lie  apprehends  him  as  gracious  and
ready  to  hear  "  (Calvin).

Vers.  32 — 40. — Still  more  to  enforce  his
warning  against  apostacy,  and  urge  to
obedience  and  faithful  adherence  to  the
service  of  Jehovah,  Moses  appeals  to  what
they  had  already  experienced  of  God's  grace
in  the  choosing  of  them  to  be  his  people,  in
his  speaking  to  them  to  instruct  them,  and
in  the  miracles  which  he  had  wrought  for
their  deliverance  and  guidance ;  grace  such
as  had  never  been  sliowed  before  to  any
nation,  or  heard  of  since  the  creation  of  the
world,  and  by  which  those  who  had  ex-
perienced it  were  laid  under  the  deepest
obligations  of  gratitude  and  duty,  to  love
and  serve  him  by  whom  it  had  been  showed.
With  this  appeal  he  closes  his  first  address.

Ver.  32. — For.  This  connects  the  statement
that  follows  with  that  which  precedes  as  its
eause ;  it  is  because  Jehovah  is  a  merciful
God,  that  the  unparalleled  grace  showed  to
Israel  had  been  displuyed.    The  days  that


are  past,  etc.,  i.e.  inquire  from  the  earliest
time  of  man's  abode  on  the  earth.  From  the
one  side  of  heaven  unto  the  other ;  search  the
records  of  all  times  and  places,  whether  any
so  great  a  thing  has  ever  happened  or  been
heard  of.

Ver.  33.— (Cf.  ver.  12;  v.  22-26;  Gen
xvi.  13.)

Ver.  84. — Hath  God  assayed,  etc.;  hath
he  ever  made  the  attempt  to  come  on  the
earth  and  take  a  nation  from  the  midst  of  a
nation,  as  he  took  the  Hebrew  people  from
among  the  Egyptians  ?  By  temptations  (rtsp,
plu.  of  nsc,  a  testing,  a  trial)— i.e.  by  the
plagues  inflicted  on  Pharaoh  and  his  people,
whereby  they  were  tested  and  tried — by
signs  and  by  wonders.  "  The  wonder  (nsiD)
differs  from  the  sign  (n'lN)  in  this,  that  the
former  denotes  the  properly  marvellous,  the
.extraordinary,  the  uncommon,  consequently
the  subjective  apprehension  of  the  miracu-
lous event;  the  latter  the  significant  ele-
ment in  the  miracle,  the  reference  to  the
higher.  Divine  design,  the  purpose  of  God
in  it,  consequently  to  the  objective  side
of  the  miracle  (comp.  ch.  xiiL  2) ''  (HSver-
nick,  'Comment,  iib.  Ezech.,'  p.  161).  By
war(cf.  Exod.  xiv.  14;  xv.  8 — 10);  by  a
mighty  hand,  and  by  a  stretched  out  arm
(Exod.  vi.  6;  xiv  8;  ch.  v.  15);  and  by
great  terrors  (Exod.  xii.  30 — 36),  the  effect
on  the  Egyptians  of  the  Divine  Inflictions
(cf.  Ps.  cv.  27— 38;  cvi.  21,  22).

Ver.  35.  —All  this  Israel  was  made  to  see,
in  order  that  they  might  know  that  Jehovali
is  alone  God,  and  beside  him  is  no  other
God  (D'0'',^n,  the  God),  the  one  living  and
true  God.

Ver.  36.— (Cf.  Exod.  xx.  18—22.)  To
indicate  still  further  the  pre-eminence  of
Israel,  Moses  emphasizes  the  supernatural
character  of  the  revelation  God  had  given
to  them,  and  the  awful  manner  of  its  de-
livery; God  spake  to  them  with  audible
voice,  out  of  heaven,  amidst  fire,  and  they
heard  his  words  out  of  the  fire.  To  instruct
thee.  The  verb  here  used.(iD>)  means
primarily  to  bind  and  thence  to  correct,  to
chasten,  which  meaning  some  interpreters
would  give  here.  But  the  word  means  also
to  correct  by  instruction,  to  instruct  or
persuade  (cf.  Isa.  viii.  11;  xxviii.  26;  Ps.
xvi.  7) ;  and  the  connection,  both  with  what
precedes  and  with  what  follows,  requires
this  meaning  here.

Vers.  37.— And  beoanse  he  loved  thy
fathers  (of.  Gen.  xv.  5—7;  Exod.  xiiL
15—17,  etc.).  Inasmuch  as  God  had  loved
their  fathers,  the  patriarchs,  and  had  chosen
them  their  descendants  to  be  his  people,
and  had  delivered  them  out  of  Egypt,  tiat
he  might  establish  them  in  the  promised
land,  having  driven   out   thence   nations


CH.  IV.  25—49.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


75


mlghlier  than  they,  therefore  were  they  to
consider  in  their  heart  and  acknowledge
that  Jehovah  alone  is  God,  and  th:it  in  the
wide  universe  there  is  no  other.  The
apodosiB  in  this  sentence  begins  at  ver.  39,
and  not,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version,  at
"he  chose,"  in  ver.  37,  nor  at  "brought
thee,"  as  some  suggest.  Because  he  loved
thy  fathers,  and  chose  his  [i.e.  Abraham's]
seed  after  him,  and  brought  thee,  etc., — for
all  this  thou  shall  keep  his  statutes,  etc.  In
his  Bight;  literally,  in  his  faee,  i.e.  in  his
presence,  by  himself  present  with  them ;  with
special  reference  to  Exod.  xxxiii.  14,  where
the  same  word  is  used  as  here.  Onkelos
has  here  "by  his  Word,"  and  the  rabbins
explain  it  of  "  the  angel  of  his  presence,  as
it  is  said,  Isa.  Ixiii.  9  "  (Bechai,  fol.  194  b).

Ver.  38. — ^As  it  is  this  day;  as  this  day
has  shown,  or  as  it  has  come  to  pass  this
day,  in  the  overthrow,  namely,  of  Sihon
and  Og.

Ver.  39. — Know  therefore  this  day,  and
consider  it  in  thine  heart,  etc. ;  literally,  bring
back  into  thy  heart.  "Because  we  cannot
lay  hold  of  spiritual  things  in  thought
instantly  in  a  moment,  God  commands  to
make  them  to  revert,  i.e.  again  and  again  to
recall  them  to  the  mind"  (Bechai,  fol.
194  b).

Ver.  40. — TTpon  the  earth, — rather  upon
Ike  land  (noTNn) — which  the  lord  thy  God
giveth  thee  for  ever.  The  comma  after
"thee"  in  the  Authorizud  Version  should
be  deleted.  "The  sum  of  this  whole  ex-
hortation is  (1)  to  acknowledge  and  lay  to
heart  that  God  is  the  alone  God  of  the
universe,  in  heaven  and  on  earth ;  hence
(2)  to  be  obedient  to  his  laws ;  and  so  (3)  to
have,  as  a  recompense,  a  happy  continuance
in  the  beloved  land"  (Herxheimer).  The
conclusion  of  the  exhortation  reverts  to  its
beginning  (comp.  ch.  v.  40 ;  ver.  1).

Vers.   41 — 43. — Appointment  op  three

OTHES  OP  EEFTJ6E  BETOSD  JOKDAN.      A  short

historical  notice  is  here  inserted,  probably
because  it  was  during  the  interval  between
the  first  and  second  addresses  of  Moses
that  he  carried  into  effect  the  Divine  com-
mand to  appoint  cities  of  refuge  for  the
manslayer (Numb.  xxxv.  9,  etc.;  cf.  Exod.
xxi.  13).  This  notice,  therefore,  is  here  in
its  proper  place  in  the  order  of  the  narra-
tive. That  Moses  should,  just  at  this  stage,
have  made  this  appointment  was  fitting
and  proper,  seeing  he  had  been  urging,  on
the  people  obedience  to  the  Piyine  statutes


and  commandments,  and  had  represented
their  conquest  of  the  territory  of  Sihon  and
Og  as  an  earnest  of  their  ultimate  pot-
session  of  the  whole  land  of  the  Amorites.
By  appointing  these  cities,  Moses  gave  an
example  of  obedience  to  God's  injunction,
and,  at  the  same  time,  not  only  asserted  on
the  part  of  Israel  a  right  of  proprietorship
in  thjs  trans-Jordanic  territory,  but  assumed
as  certain  that,  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan
also,  the  same  right  of  proprietorship  sliould
be  possessed  and  exercised  by  Israel  in  the
fuliilling  of  the  whole  law  concerning  cities
of  refuge  (cf.  ch.  xix.  1,  etc.).  That  this
section  belongs  properly  to  Numb,  xxxv.,
xxxvL,  and  has  been  interpolated  here  by
some  later  hand,  is  a  pure  assumptioD,  for
which  there  is  no  ground.

Ver.  41. — On  this  side  Jordan;  beyond
Jordan,  more  expressly  defined  as  toward
the  sun  rising,  viz.  on  the  east  of  that  river.

Ver.  42. — Unawares;  literally,  in  lack  or
want  of  lenoioing  (nj;n-ib33),  i.e.  uncon-
sciously, unintentionally;  in  Numb.  xxxv.
31,  15,  another  word  (nJJf'3,  by  mistake)  is
used,  rendered  in  the  Authorized  Version
by  "unwittingly;"  in  Josh.  xx.  8,  both
words  are  used.  In  times  past;  literally,
yesterday,  three  days  since,  i.e.  formerly,
heretofore  (cf.  Gen.  xxxi.  2 ;  Exod.  v.  8).

Ver.  43. — Names  of  the  cities  set  apart.
Bezer ;  LXX.  0o(r6p ;  one  of  the  cities  of  the
plain  or  table-land  uf  the  Amorites,  on  the
east  of  Jordan  (ch.  iii.  10;  Josh.  xx.  8),
afterwards  a  Levitical  city  in  the  tribe  of
Beuben  (Josh.  xxi.  36).  It  is  probably  the
BoBor  of  1  Mace,  v.  36;  it  has  not  been
identified  with  any  existing  locality,  but
the  ruined  heaps  of  Burazin  to  the  east  of
HesbS,n,  or  those  of  Berza  in  the  same
district,  may  mark  its  site.  Bamoth  in
Gilead;  probably  the  same  as  Kamoth-
mizpeh  (Josh.  xiii.  26) ;  it  lay  to  the  north-
west of  Philadelphia  (Babba  or  Babbath-
Ammon,  hod.  Amm&n),  on  the  Jabbok
('Onom.,'  ».r. "  Eammoth  "  and  "  Bemmoth  ") ;
a  Levitioal  city  in  the  tribe  of  Gad  (Josh,
xxi.  38),  hod.  Es  Salt,  six  hours  from  Amm&n
(Von  Eaumer,  Porter).  Golan  in  Bashan.
Eusebius  identifies  this  with  Gaulon,  a  very
large  village  in  Batantea,  from  which  th«
surrounding  region  had  its  name,  viz.
Gaulonitis,  Itod.  Jolan  ('  Onom.,'  s.v.  "  Gau-
lon ") ;  it  was  a  Levitical  city  in  the  trib*
of  Manasseh  (Josh.  xxi.  27 ;  1  Ohron.  vi  71) :
it  has  not  been  identified.


T«  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY,  [oh.  iv.  25— 4»


PART  n.

SECOND  ADDRESS  OF  MOSES.

CHAPTEK  IV.  44— CHAPTER  XXVL  19.


This  address  is  introduced  by  a  general
notice  of  what  is  to  form  tlie  subject  of  it,
viz.  the  Law,  with  a  more  especial  descrip-
tion of  that  in  its  different  parts,  as  con-
sisting of  ordinances,  statutes,  and  rights ;
together  with  a  reference  to  the  place  and
time  when  this  address  was  delivered.

Ver.  44.— This  is  the  Law— the  Torah—
which  Moses  set  before  the  children  of
Israel.  "  He  meaneth  that  which  hereal'ter
foUoweth;  so  this  belongeth  to  the  next
chapte^  where  the  repetition  of  the  laws
begins''  (Ainsworthj ;  of.  oh.  ver.  1 ;  vi.  1 ;
Lev.  vi.  9 ;  vii.  1,  etc.

Ver.  45. — ^Testimonies ;  ordinances  attested


and  confirmed  by  God  ;  the  word  used  here
(pSlJJj  plu.  of  niy)  occurs  only  in  Deute-
ronomy (here  and  ch.  vi.  17,  20)  and  iu  the
Psalms.  Statutes  and  judgments  (cf.  ch.
iv.  1).  After  they  oame  forth  out  of  Egypt;
"  i.e.  not  immediately  after  their  exit,  but,
as  ver.  46  shows,  when  they  were  already
beyond  Jordan"  (Herxlieimer) ;  literally,
tn  their  coming  out ;  i.e.  during  the  process
of  their  passing  from  Egypt  to  Canaan;
more  exactly  defined  by  what  follows.

Ver.  46.— In  the  valley  (cf.  oh.  iii.  29).  In
the  land  of  Sihon ;  on  ground  already  cap-
tured and  possessed  by  Israel  (cf.  oh.  ii.  82 —
36 ;  UL  1—17 ;  ver.  48 ;  of,  oh.  iiL  9, 12-17).


HOMILETICS.

Vera.  25 — 28. — Penallies  of  disobedience  and  apostacy.    (See  Homiletios,  ch.  xxviii.)

Vera.  29 — 31, — Punishment  not  rejection.    (See  Homiletios,  ch.  xxx.  1 — 5,)

Vers,  32 — 36. — Israel's  peculiar  greatness.  (See  Homiletios,  ch.  iv.  11 — 20 ;  v.  6 ;
ixxiU.  29,)

Vera,  37,  38. — The  dispossession  of  the  Canaanitet.    (See  Homiletios,  oh.  i.  1 — 8.)

Vers.  39,  40. — Loyalty  to  Ood  the  basis  cf  national  prosperity  and  <if  family
happiness.    (See  Homiletios,  ch.  iv.  1 — 4  and  5 — 9,)

Vci    41 — 43. — The  cities  of  refiige.    (See  Homiletios,  ch.  zix.)

Vors.  44,  45. —  The  Law :  its  value.    (See  Homiletios,  ch.  v.  22 — 33.)

Vers.  44 — 49. — The  territory  of  Sihon  and  Og  occupied  hy  othera.  (See  Homiletios,
ch.  li.  24— iii.  1—11.)

HOMILIES  BT  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  23 — 32. — National  backsliding.  The  history  of  the  Jews  is  an  unanswera;hle
argument  in  favour  of  the  truth  of  prophecy  and  the  reality  of  Divine  revelation.  The
singularity  of  that  history  is  such  as  can  only  be  fully  accounted  for  on  the  idea  of  a  super-
natural Providence  interesting  itself  in  their  fortunes ;  hut  the  strangest  fact  is  in  that,
their  own  sacred  hooks,  this  wonderful  history  is  predicted  with  minute  precision.  The
Book  of  Deuteronomy  furnishes  a  series  of  these  predictions,  the  extraordinary  character
of  which  is  not  removed  hy  any  date  to  which  the  book  may  be  assigned.  We  may
read  this  passage  first  as  a  prophecy,  then  as  a  warning.


OH.  nr.  25— 49.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  77

I.  A  PEOPHECT.  It  does  not,  as  several  later  passages  do,  put  the  backsliding  of  the
Jews  hypothetioally,  but  states  the  fact  pLiinly  that  they  will  backslide — takes  it  for
granted  {ver.  26).  There  is  a  prediction :  1.  Of  national  apostacy.  The  whole  history
of  Israel,  beginning  with  the  time  of  the  judges  (Judg.  ii.  19),  is  a  commentary  on
this  statement.  2.  Of  national  rejection  (vers.  26 — 29).  How  remarkably  has  this
testimony  been  fulfilled  in  the  rooting  out  of  both  Judah  and  Israel  from  their  own
land ;  in  their  scattering  throughout  the  nations,  in  every  region  and  country  under
heaven  ;  in  their  preservation  amidst  all  vicissitudes  as  a  distinct  people ;  in  the  con-
formity to  alien  worships,  customs,  and  beliefs,  to  which  they  have  so  often  been
compelled ;  in  the  miseries  and  indignities  which  they  have  enduredjl  Surely  we  are
entitled  to  ask  from  the  unbeliever  that  he  should  give  us,  when  rejecting  revelatinn,
some  satisfactory  explanation  of  these  coincidences.  3.  Of  national  repentance  (vers.
29 — 32 ;  of.  ch.  xxx.).  Though  yet  unfulfilled,  there  can  be  little  doubt  in  the  minds  of
any  who  study  past  fulfilments,  that  this  prophecy  of  the  repentance  of  Israel  will  in
God's  good  time  receive  its  accomplishment  also  (Zech.  xii.  10 ;  Rom.  xi.  26).

II.  A  WABNINO.  We  learn  the  truths  :  1.  That  backsliding  is  possible  from  a  state
of  high  attainment.  2.  That  backsliding  is  commonly  of  gradual  development  (ver.  25).
3.  That  backsliding  may  assume  very  aggravated  forms.  4.  That  backsliding  exposes
to  severe  punishment  from  God.  But,  finally,  and  for  our  encouragement :  5.  That
backsliding,  if  repented  of,  will  be  graciously  forgiven. — J.  0.

Vers.  32 — 41. — The  wonderfulnesi  of  Israel's  history.  I.  The  woTfDEBPULMiSB  or
REVELATION  AT  ALL.  (Ver.  33.)  It  may  be  argued  with  great  propriety  that  man  needs
a  revelation ;  that  if  there  is  a  God,  it  is  probable  he  will  give  one ;  that  the  absence  of
all  special  revelation  would  be  a  greater  wonder  than  the  fact  of  a  revelation  being
given.  Yet,  when  the  mind  dwells  on  it,  the  sense  of  wonder  grows  at  the  thought  of
the  Eternal  thus  stooping  to  hold  converse  with  finite,  sinful,  dying  men  on  earth.
Whatever  enhances  our  conceptions  of  God's  greatness,  intensifies  in  the  same  measure
our  wonder  at  the  condescension,  grace,  and  love.implied  in  special  revelation  (Ps.  viii.).

II.  The  wondebfulness  op  God's  revelation  op  himself  in  Israel's  histoet.  (Vers.
34 — 39.)  God  revealed  himself  to  Israel ;  but,  inasmuch  as  the  calling,  deliverance,
and  whole  history  of  the  nation  was  full  of  the  supernatural,  he  was  revealed  also  in
Israel — in  its  history.  The  miraculous  element  in  the  history  of  Israel  is  urged  as  a
reason  for  rejecting  it.  But  remark  :  1.  It  claims  to  stand  out  as  something  absolutely
unique  in  time.  This  is  no  case  of  the  vulgar  supernatural,  begotten  of  a  childish,
miracle-loving  age.  Moses  is  as  conscious  of  the  marvel,  of  the  exceptional  character  of
the  occurrences  he  narrates,  as  any  of  his  critics ;  probably  more  so.  He  rises  to  the
grandeur  of  the  subject  he  speaks  of,  and  puts  it  on  the  express  ground  that  nothing
like  it  was  ever  known,  or  rumoured,  in  history.  2.  An  adequate  reason  existed  for  these
wonders.  The  interposition  of  God,  as  narrated  in  these  verses,  the  whole  revelation,
with  its  terrors,  its  signs  and  wonders,  its  fire,  its  lawgiving, — ^is  abundantly  worthy  of
the  Being  who  is  said  t-o  have  revealed  himself,  and  of  the  ends  for  which  that  discovery
of  himself  was  made.  On  the  other  hand,  it  rises  high  above  what  nan  would  natu-
rally have  imagined  God  to  do,  had  he  set  himself  to  invent  a  story  of  the  kind.  3.
The  wonders  are  well  attested.  Moses  appealed  to  a  generation,  the  older  part  of  which
had  witnessed  them.  Critics  dispute  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  the  address  ;  but  apart
from  this,  it  is  to  be  said  that  the  whole  after-history  of  the  nation  rests  on  their  reality.
There  is,  however,  an  inherent  sublimity,  fitness,  vividness,  sense  of  reality  in  the
narratives,  and  in  this  appeal  to  eye-witnesses,  which  speaks  of  itself  for  the  truthful-
ness of  the  Mstory.  When  narratives  of  the  same  kind,  presenting  the  same  marvellous
characterisi  cs,  can  be  produced  from  other  literatures,  and  laid  alongside  of  these,  we
will  be  able  to  believe  in  their  legendary  or  invented  character.  4. '  These  wonders
established  a  unique  daim  onlsraelfor  obedience  and  fidelity  (vers.  39,  40).

III.  The  wondebfulness  of  God's  revelation  op  himself  in  Israel  is  sdbpassed
BY  his  bevelation  OP  HIMSELF  IN  Chbist.  Thcse  wonders  in  Israel  were  but  the  earlier
acts  in  a  great  drama,  of  which  the  later  belong  to  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel.
While  Moses  appeals  to  the  limited  character  of  the  former  revelation  as  enhancing  its
wonder  (ver.  34),  it  is  the  greater  marvel  of  the  revelation  in  Christ,  that  it  is  univer>:al
in  its  scope,  and  brings  in  a  redemption  which  all  can  share.    We  think  here  of  the


re  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  iv.  25— 49.

incarnation,  the  miracles  of  Christ,  the  resuiTection,  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  the
miraculous  spread  of  the  gospel,  subsequent  reformations  and  revivals,  conversions,
the  supernatural  power  exhibited  in  the  renewal  and  sanctifioation  of  souls,  the  successes
of  missions,  etc.  (cf.  Heb.  ii.  1 — 5).  The  appeals  of  Moses,  and  his  exhortations  to
wonder  and  obey,  come  down  to  ourselves,  accordingly,  with  enormously  enhanced  force.
— J.O.

Ver.  37. — Beloved  for  the  fathers'  take.  We  learn,  taking  this  verse  with  the
context —

I.  That  the  piett  of  ancestobs  is  remembered  bt  God  in  his  dealings  with
THEIR  DESCENDANTS.  He  remembers :  1.  Their  piety.  2.  The  love  he  bore  them.  8.
His  promises.     4.  Their  prayers.

II.  That  the  piety  op  ancestors  is  a  frequent  grodnd  or  long-sufperino  and
FORBEARANCE.     It  was  SO  with  Israel  (ch.  ix.  5) ;  Solomon  (1  Kings  xii.  12),  etc.

ni.  Yet  that  the  piety  of  ancestors  will  not  of  itself  SECtrBE  salvation.
The  Jews  were  not  to  be  exempted  from  chastisement  for  personal  transgressions.  If
"  thoy  abide  still  in  unbelief"  (Kom.  xi.  23),  they  cannot  be  saved.  There  cannot  be
salvation  without  personal  faith  and  obedience. — J.  0.

Vers.  29 — 40. — The  mercy  of  God.  The  knowledge  of  his  own  deceitful  heart,  and
his  observation  of  others'  waywardness,  convinced  Moses  that,  in  spite  of  all  warning
and  appeal,  the  people  might  yet  wander  into  evil  ways.  But  Moses  had  also  such  a
comprehensive  vision  of  God's  mercy,  that  he  foresaw  that  there  would  be  room  for
repentance  even  in  the  land  of  exile,  and  that  Divine  mercy  would  be  available  in  every
extremity  of  distress.  Since  God  had  designed  to  show  mercy  unto  Israel,  Moses  felt
assured  that  he  would  not  allow  his  gracious  designs  to  be  frustrated.

I.  Affliction  often  reveals  to  our  minds  our  need  of  mercy.  Amid  the  joyous
excitements  induced  by  earthly  prosperity,  men  forget  the  deeper  needs' of  the  soul.
They  spend  life  as  if  they  had  no  soul,  as  if  this  earth  were  their  all.  But  the  deep
gashes,  which  suffering  makes,  become  mouths  through  which  the  imprisoned  soul
makes  herself  heard.  When  events  defeat  our  selfish  plans,  or  when  health  is  inter-
rupted, we  are  made  to  feel  that  there  is  a  higher  Power  than  ourselves,  who  reigns  upon
the  throne,  and  often,  in  sheer  despair  of  other  help,  we  appeal  to  him  for  mercy ;
like  Manasseh,  who  had  long  hardened  his  heart  against  God,  yet,  when  he  was  in  sore
affliction,  sought  Jehovah's  face.  When  brought  to  the  lowest  ebb,  the  prodigal  son
bent  his  steps  homeward.     Affliction  often  serves  as  the  shepherd's  crook.

IL  Earnest  appeal  for  God's  mercy  is  never  unsuccessful  on  earth.  From  the
furthest  limit  of  apostaoy  the  cry  for  help  is  heard.  There  is  no  spot  on  earth  from
which  lines  of  connection  with  heaven  will  not  be  found.  Our  God  is  not  wont  to  hide
himself  in  secret  places,  where  the  eye  of  faith  cannot  find  him.  If  only  the  bow  be
well  bent  by  the  arm  of  spiritual  earnestness,  and  the  arrow  be  feathered  with  faith,  and
aimed  by  heavenly  wisdom,  it  must  penetrate  the  skies.  Without  gracious  influences
from  above,  men  will  not  pray ;  but  whensoever  they  do  pray,  they  shall  be  heard.
The  prayer  of  the  rich  man  in  his  torments  was  unheard,  because  it  was  a  godless  and
a  selfish  prayer,  and  because  we  have  no  ground  for  expecting  mercy  when  life  haa
closed ;  in  his  case  there  was  no  appeal  for  mercy.

HI.  God's  mercy  is  the  most  attractive  revelation  op  himself  for  sinners.  So
far  as  we  know,  this  revelation  of  his  merciful  character  was  reserved  for  guilty  men.
In  the  construction  of  this  material  universe,  we  see  chiefly  a  forth-putting  of  amazing
power.  In  the  creation  of  sentient  beings,  capable  of  deriving  pleasure  from  the  pro-
cesses of  natural  law,  we  see  in  active  exercise  the  qualities  of  wisdom  and  benevolence.
In  the  Divine  treatment  of  aiiostate  angels,  we  discover  brilliant  coruscations  from  the
flames  of  justice.  In  the  provision  of  pardon  and  hope  for  human  transgressors,  we  see
in  God's  nature  the  fascinating  quality  of  mercy.  This  mercy  manifests  itself  in  a
thousand  ways,  and  is  a  prolific  parent  of  blessing.  It  restrains  from  flagrant  sin.  It
envelops  the  sinner  in  a  network  of  heavenly  influence.  It  holds  hack  the  hand  of
justice  from  summary  destruction  of  the  culprit.  Though  men  forsake  God,  he  does  not
forthwith  forsake  them.  Retaliation  finds  no  place  in  the  Eternal  Mind.  It  is  negative
and  positive  good.


OH.  IV.  25— 49.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEUONOMY.  79

IV.  This  meboy  is  secured  to  men  by  covenant.  A  covenant  is  a  compact  or  treaty
maile  between  two  persons,  and  which  is  intended  for  the  advantage  of  all  parties  in-
terests d.  But  it  is  a  pure  act  of  condescension,  when  God  undertakes  to  bind  himself
in  solemn  engagements  with  his  feeble  and  fallen  creatures.  This  giacious  procedure
is  taken  in  order  to  encourage  our  trust,  and  to  pierce  unbelief  through  and  through  with
a  two-edged  sword.  Now  that  God  has  made  a  covenant  with  men,  and  repeated  it  age
after  age,  his  truth  and  faithfulness  and  integrity  are  pledged  for  our  salvation.  He
made  a  covenant  with  Christ,  by  which  he  secured  to  him  an  ample  recompense  of
redeemed  men,  and  our  Lord  pleads  in  prayer  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  Father's  cove-
nant. So  gracious  is  the  covenant  that  God  makes  with  us — the  new  covenant — that  he
writes  it  on  the  tablet  of  our  minds,  yea,  deeply  engraves  it  upon  the  soft  affections  of
our  hearts.

V.  This  mekct  is  made  conspicuous  by  the  mighty  deeds  op  God.  Moses  reminds
the  Hebrews  of  the  splendid  tokens  of  God's  goodness  they  had  seen ;  for  every  one  of
these  was  a  pledge  of  unchanging  love.  God's  signal  emancipation  of  the  people  from
the  iron  bondage  of  Egypt ;  his  care  over  them  throughout  the  desert  pilgrimage ;  his
unprecedented  revelation  of  himself  on  Horeb,  in  fire  and  cloud  and  voice ; — all  these
things  were  tantamount  to  fresh  covenants — earnests  of  yet  larger  blessing.  In  deeds,
more  eloquent  than  words,  he  assured  them  that  all  his  resources  were  available  for
them.  And  we,  in  New  Testament  times,  can  make  this  argument  stronger  stilL
Calvary  serves  as  a  platform,  on  which  we  may  erect  a  magnificent  structure  of  ex-
pectation. If  God  had  meant  to  desert  us,  would  he  have  shown  to  us  such  kindnesses
as  these  ?

VI.  God  distbibutes  his  mbrot  in  various  measures.  He  did  for  the  Hebrews
what  he  did  not  do  for  other  nations  of  that  period.  In  the  way  of  providence,  and  in
the  way  of  revelation,  he  deals  differently  with  separate  natiuns,  and  with  individuals.
We  cannot  understand  all  the  rules  and  methods  by  which  he  is  pleased  to  work,  but
we  can  leave  it  to  himself  to  justify  his  ways.  Because  mercy  snatched  the  crucified
thief  from  the  jaws  of  perdition  at  the  last  moment  of  life,  it  is  criminal  presumption
for  any  other  man  to  expect  mercy  in  his  last  hour.

VII.  Mercy  flows  to  men  through  a  vicarious  channel.  Crod  assured  that
generation  of  the  Jews,  that  they  were  blessed  for  their  father^  sake.  Not  on  the
ground  of  personal  merit,,  nor  on  the  ground  of  personal  claim,  did  God  show  them  his
distinguishing  favour,  but  because  he  had  loved  Abraham  their  father,  and  for  his
sake. loved  his  seed.  Learn  here  how  greatly  God  loves  a  good  man  !  Abraham  was
not  destitute  of  fault ;  yet  so  conspicuous  was  his  practical  faith,  that  God  could  not
do  enough  for  him  during  an  earthly  life-time.  The  benediction  of  God  overflowed
(like  the  oil  on  Aaron's  head),  and  descended  to  the  skirts  of  his  posterity.  So,  and
much  more,  the  love  which  God  bears  his  only  Son  flows  to  us  for  his  Son's  sake.
The  same  rich  quality  of  love  God  cherishes  for  his  Son,  he  cherishes  for  us.  The  gift
of  salvation  can  flow  to  us  in  no  other  way  than  through  this  channel  of  vicarious
merit     "  God,  in  Christ,  reconciles  the  world  unto  himself."

VIII.  God's  mercy  a  potent  inducement  fob  loyal  obedience.  When  all  other
methods  have  failed  to  elicit  a  man's  loyalty,  the  unexpected  display  of  mercy  has
often  succeeded.  Justice,  and  honour,  and  all  sense  of  obligation  in  man  have  been
apjiealed  to  over  and  over  again,  and  always  in  vain.  No  appeal  moves  his  callous
nature,  except  the  plaintive  voice  of  love.  We  may  tell  him  of  the  measureless  power
of  Jehovah,  of  his  inflexible  justice,  of  his  inviolable  truth,  of  his  fixed  determination
to  root  out  sin  from  his  kingdom ;  he  hears  it  all  unmoved.  But  tell  him  of  Jehovah's
overflowing  mercy,  of  his  tender  love  for  the  chief  of  sinners,  of  the  costly  provision  of
salvation  ;  and  by  the  gracious  application  of  this  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  man's  nature
relents,  becomes  docile,  and  enshrines  the  Law  of  God  in  its  inmost  centre.  "  Man  1 "
aays  the  silvery  voice  of  mercy,  "  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  And  the  swift  re.«poiiM
ia,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  " — D.

Vers.  41—43. — The  cities  of  refuge.  Regard  for  human  life  is  more  important  than
rcard  for  private  property.  With  legislative  prescience,  Moses  secured  three  cities  on
the  east  of  Jordan  as  sanctuaries  for  fugitives,  before  the  land  was  allocated  to  their
several  families.  Still  further  security  for  the  unwary  manslayer  was  obtained  by  the
(ierrpe  that  these  cities  should  be  occupied  by  families  of  the  Levites.


80  THE   BOOK   OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  iv.  25— 49i

L  God's  high  reqabd  for  htjman  life.  This  Divine  thoughtfulness  for  men  ii
impressive.  Not  a  life  was  to  be  wantonly  wasted.  Human  life,  it  is  plain,  was
counted  inferior  in  value  to  the  interests  of  public  justice;  but  it  was  to  be  sacredly
protected  against  private  revenges.  This  humane  provision  was  all  the  more  required
at  that  time  when  Israel  had  been  commanded  to  slay  such  vast  numbers  of  Canaanites.
Inevitably,  human  sensibility  would  be  blunted,  and  a  grave  peril  arose  that  human
/ife  would  be  cheaply  rated.  The  entire  land,  purchased  at  such  great  cost,  was  a
temple — a  sacred  enclosure — which  Goii  had  chosen  for  his  abode,  and  the  shedding  of
innocent  blood  would  degrade  and  desecrate  the  hallowed  soil.  Human  life,  sustained
by  God  with  exqiusite  pains — capable  of  eminent  usefulness— is  appraised  by  God  as
of  great  value.

n.  The  juDicions  adjustment  of  eighteousness  and  pity.  Both  these  are  senti-
ments implanted  in  the  breast  by  a  Divine  hand ;  both  serve  the  interests  of  humanity ;
and  both  have  a  fitting  sphere  in  which  to  move.  For  the  nation's  good,  the  conscience
of  every  man  should  be  kept  in  healthful  activity.  It  needs  illumination,  discipline,
vigour.  The  moral  sense  is  as  liable  to  injury,  disease,  and  decay,  as  any  other  laculty
of  mind.  It  may  be  deficient  in  wisdom  ;  it  may  be  overburdened  with  sensitiveness ;
it  may  magnify  molehills  iuto  mountains ;  it  may  act  with  precipitate  haste.  Side  by
side  with  unrelenting  hostility  for  sin,  should  dwell  honest  pity  for  the  sinner.  This
provision  of "  sanctuaries "  in  Israel  was  in  no  wise  an  interference  with  the  proper
procedure  of  justice.  By  the  decision  of  competent  magistrates  the  fugitive  might  yet
be  handed  over  to  the  executioner.  It  gave  full  opportunity  for  investigation.  It  safe-
guarded a  suspected  man,  if  he  were  innocent  of  the  greater  crime.  It  taught  men  to
draw  a  deep  line  between  unintentional  injury  and  premeditated  murder.  It  shielded
from  needless  death  many  a  useful  life.

III.  Prompt  and  severe  exertion  was  the  condition  of  escape.  When  a  man
was  killed,  his  next  of  kin  was  expected  to  avenge  his  blood.  This  rough  ministry  of
justice  was  needful  in  those  early  days.  It  strengthened  family  ties.  It  fostered  a
spirit  of  brotherhood.  It  was  a  shifeld  for  the  weak  and  defenceless.  If  one  man  had
slain  another,  the  presumption  was  that  it  had  been  maliciously  done,  and  prompt
vengeance  was  preparing  for  him.  He  had  placed  himself  (inadvertently,  it  may  be)  in
a  serious  plight.  He  was  exposed  to  a  sudden  reprisal.  Belore  an  hour  his  own  life
might  be  forfeited.  If  his  conscience  told  him  that  he  was  innocent,  there  was  a  possi-
bility of  escape.  But  he  must  promptly  flee.  He  must  bid  a  hasty  adieu,  or  none  at
all,  to  wife  and  children,  and  run  at  highest  speed  for  the  refuge  city,  for  vengeance  is
swift-footed  as  an  anteloiie.  Every  muscle  must  be  strained  to  the  utmost ;  his  eye
must  be  on  every  bush  and  rock,  lest  the  foe  should  be  lurking  in  ambush ;  his  last
resource  of  strength  must  be  expended  upon  his  flight ;  he  must  go  direct  as  an  arrow
for  the  provided  sanctunry.  So  for  every  guilty  son  of  Adam  there  is  a  refuge  pro-
vided on  the  hill  called  "  Calvary ;  "  and  because  Death  rides  apace  upon  our  heels,  we
are  charged  to  flee — to  flee  for  very  life — to  this  capacious  Befuge.  So  run,  that  ye
may  be  safe  1 — D.

Vers.  -25 — 31. — Judgment  leading  to  merey.  After  stating  the  fact  of  God's  jealousy
in  the  matter  of  graven  images,  Moses  goes,  on  as  a  prophet  to  declare  that,  if  tliey
corrupt  themselves  in  this  way  in  Canaan,  the  result  will  be  their  destruction  and  dis-
persion. But  in  dispersion,  if  they  turn  with  all  their  hearts  to  God  (ver.  29),  tliey
shall  find  him  and  bo  restored.  God  is  merciful  as  well  as  jealous  (ver.  31).  The
following  thoughts  are  hereby  suggested : —

I.  Judgment  is  with  a  view  to  amendment.  Of  course,  the  incorrigible  stage  may
eventually  be  reached.  But  until  this  siarit  is  manifested,  judgment  is  remedial.  The
dealings  of  God  with  Israel,  as  we  know  from  the  history,  were  in  hope  of  national
amendment.  Defeat  at  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  exile  in  Babylon,  and  all  the  severe
dispensations  were  to  bring  them  to  their  senses  and  lead  them  to  return  to  God.
Judgment,  in  fact,  is  first  the  servant  uf  mercy.

II.  Tribulation  should  at  onoe  lead  ub  to  hbaht-bbabching.  It  is  not  an
Infallible  sign  of  special  sin,  as  the  case  of  Job  proves.  But  the  probabilities  are  in
favour  of  supposing  that  some  special  sin  has  called  for  special  sorrow.  Lot  self-ex-
amination, then,  be  the  rule  in  the  midst  of  all  our  tribulations.  God  is  cnllin  us  in
trumpet-tones  to  return  '^o  his  embrace


CH.  IV.  25—49.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  81

III.  Mercy  finds  in  trouble  a  splendid  sphere.  The  riches  of  God's  grace  and
mercy  can  be  displayed  only  in  the  permitted  extremities  of  human  experience.  Tribu-
lation, exile,  the  bitterne>s  which  no  earthly  intermeddling  can  relieve,  are  so  many
worlds  into  which  mercy  enters  to  assert  its  power  and  to  reign.

The  permission  of  evil  has  here  the  only  explanation  which  the  present  life  allows.
We  shall  learn  more  afterwards,  but  meanwhile  this  is  all  we  can  learn  here.

IV.  The  merciful  One  counsels  souls  to  return  at  once  to  covenant  relations.
A  lovina;  God  is  jealous  of  the  defections  of  his  people— hence  the  judgment  and  the
tribulation.  But  in  mercy  he  counsels  return,  and  promises  to  receive  them  into
covenant  relationship  again.  Here  alone  can  we  L&ve  pe&ce  and  satisfaction  of  a
permanent  character.

Outside  the  covenant  there  can  be  no  real  comfort  or  joy.  In  covenant  relations
with  God,  there  is  a  charmed  circle,  and  peace  passing  all  understanding.  As  Israel
returned  after  the  exile,  may  we  return  from  our  backslidings  to  the  consolations  of  the
covenant  again  ! — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  32 — 40. — The  deliverance  of  the  Lord^s  people  unparalleled.  Moses  would
have  the  Israelites  to  regard  God's  deliverance  of  them  from  Egypt  as  a  matter  for  the
most  grateful  admiration.  'J  here  had  been  nothing  like  it  since  the  beginning  of  the
world.  There  was  direct  and  immediate  communion  with  God ;  there  was  deliverance
of  the  people  from  Egypt  by  unexampled  judgments ;  and  all  was  to  show  his  character
as  a  sovereign  and  loving  God.  The  effect  of  such  a  discipline  should  he  filial  obedi-
ence.    It  suggests  the  following  lessons: —

I.  The  Lord's  people  should  gratefully  study  their  deliverance.  The  mar-
vellous Exodus  from  Egypt  and  communion  at  Sinai  were  deserving  of  the  most  faithful
study.     No  people  had  ever  been  so  favoured  before.

But  our  personal  deliverance  from  the  bondnge  of  sin,  our  march  through  the  wilder-
ness of  life,  our  fellowship  with  God  from  the  mountain-top  of  ordinances,  the  entire
experience  of  a  spiritual  soul,  combine  to  eclipse  even  the  discipline  of  Israel.  Each
one  is  prepared,  who  understands  his  state,  to  say,  "  Come  and  hear,  all  ye  that  fear
God,  and  I  will  declare  what  he  hath  done  for  my  soul "  (Ps.  Ixvi.  16).

II.  Unpaballbled  expembnce  from  God  argues  an  unparalleled  God.  For
it  is  a  revelation  of  his  powers  and  character  he  makes  in  these  matters,  and  we  are
expected  to  reason  from  our  experience  up  to  himself.  "  Unto  thee  it;  was  showed,"
said  Moses,  "  that  thou  mightest  know  that  the  Lord  he  is  God ;  there  is  none  else
beside  him."  He  moves  in  an  unparalleled  fashion,  that  we  may  recognize  in  him  the
unparalleled  One.

The  use  of  personal  experience  is,  therefore,  to  reach  the  Divine  side  of  it,  and  see
what  reflection  of  Deity  it  presents.

III.  It  was  God's  love  which  he  illustrated  in  bringing  Israel  from  Egypt  to
Canaan.  The  casting  out  of  the  Canaanites,  the  extermination  of  the  idolaters,  was
judgment  justly  exercised  upon  them  ;  but  it  was  love  towards  Israel.  Hence  one  of
the  psalmists  makes  these  conquests  a  proof  that  "  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever ''
(Ps.  cxxxvi.  17—22).

And  God's  dealings  with  his  people  always  are  to  illustrate  his  love.  They  find  how
all  things  work  together  for  good  unto  them  (Rom.  viii.  28).

IV.  It  is  filial  obedience  his  people  should  bender.  The  similarity  between
ver.  40  and  the  fifth  commandment  of  the  Decalogue  is  certainly  remarkable.  The  idea
of  God's  fatherhood  i«^  certainly  in  the  mind  of  Moses  and  of  the  filial  obedience  of
Israel.  Long  life  is  attached  to  their  filial  obedience  to  God,  as  it  is  attached  in  that
commandment  to  the  filial  obedience  we  render  to  man.

And  indeed  this  "  fatherhood  of  God,"  with  its  correlative  "  sonship  of  man,"  con-
stitutes the  crowning  relation  into  which  God  and  man  come.  How  glorious  it  is !
Earth  becomes  the  school  of  God's  children ;  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is  cheers
them  on,  and  heaven  contracts  the  kindly  light  of  home.

We  should  never  rest  contented  till  our  study  of  God's  dealings  leads  us  into  assur-
ances and  hopes  like  these.  The  Israelites  were  to  be  obedient,  and  in  consequence
successful  children ;  and  the  same  blessed  conditions  become  ours  by  faith  ! — R.  M.  E.

deuterosomy.  "


a:i  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  iv.  25— 4a


Vew.  41—  43. — The  cities  of  refuge  leyond  the  Jordan.  After  the  discourse  contained
in  the  preceding  portion  of  this  book,  Moses  seems  to  have  taken  a  breathing  time,  during
which  ne  designated  Bezer  in  the  wilderness,  Eamoth  in  Gilead,  and  Golan  in  Bashan,
as  cities  of  refuge.  To  these  the  menslayers  were  directed  to  flee,  when  they  had  been
guilty,  not  of  murder,  but  of  manslaughter.  In  this  way  a  distinction  was  introduced
in  the  Mosaic  code  between  manslaughter  and  murder,  which  did  not  obtain  in  the
code  of  revenge  among  the  other  nations.

And  here  let  us  obseiTe —

I.  Retaliation  constituted  the  rude  justice  of  this  eablt  aob.  Vengesace
seems  dreadful  to  many  because  we  live  under  an  organized  system  of  public  justice.
But  if  we  were  translated  to  some  uncivilized  country,  where  each  one  is  forced  to  flght
for  his  own  hand,  we  should  regard  it  less  painfully.  We  should  recognize  it,  in  fact,
AS  a  necessary  assertion  of  justice.

"  Vengeance  is  mine ;  I  will  n  pay,  saith  the  Lord,"  seems  dreadful  only  to  those  who
have  not  appreciated  the  need  of  a  perfect  public  justice.  The  Divine  vengeance  will
be  public  and  perfect,  from  which  there  will  and  can  be  no  appeal.

II.  Retaliation,  such  as  the  Mosaic  code  prescribed,  demanded  coubagb  akd
SELF-DENIAL.  The  kinsman  was  directed  to  pursue  the  manslayer,  and  to  seek  the
payment  of  life  for  life.  It  was  not  one  of  those  feats  which  would  be  lightly  under-
taken. In  fact,  it  was  one  of  those  dangerous  duties,  which  a  person  would  shirk  if  he
could.  The  command  reinforced  the  courage  and  sustained  the  self-denial  of  the  people
(cf.  Mozley's  '  Ruling  Ideas  in  Early  Ages,'  pp.  180—221).

And  in  the  Divine  vengeance — with  reverence  would  we  say  it — there  is  needed
oonrage  and  self-denial.     The  infliction  of  it  ia  forced  upon  him.

III.  The  cities  or  refuge  afforded  protection  to  the  manslateb  who  did  not
delibebately  take  away  life.  Ileie  the  manslayer  lived  in  lonely  exile  till  the
death  of  the  high  priest.  This  milder  sentence,  liowever,  was  preferable  to  a  violent
death.  The  opportunity  was  afforded  of  examining  himself  and  of  being  penitent  for
his  sins.

The  sojourn  in  the  city  of  refuge  corresponds  to  the  spiritual  experience  of  those
who  have  betaken  themselves  to  Jesus  under  a  sense  of  their  sin  and  bloodguiltiness,
to  find  undt-r  his  wings  freedom  from  condemnation  (Rom.  viii.  1),  and  the  necessity  of
great  watchfulness  and  circumspection.  If  the  manslayer  had  left  the  city  of  refuge,
he  would  still  have  been  liable  to  the  avenger.

IV.  But  when  the  high  priest  died  the  manslayer  regained  libebtt  as  well
AS  life.  "Life  in  Christ"  is  indicated  by  the  sojourn  in  the  city  of  refuge.  But
liberty  through  the  death  of  Christ  is  indicated  by  the  release  at  the  death  of  the  high
priest.

It  takes  many  relations  to  bring  out  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  He  is  our  Ooel,  or
Avenger,  as  we  have  seen  where  he  says, "  Vengeance  is  mine."  He  is  our  City  of  Refuge ;
he  is  our  High  Priest,  whose  death  secures  the  return  of  the  exile.  May  Jesus  be  all
in  all  to  us !— E.  M,  E.

Vers.  44 — i9.—The  circumstances  under  which  the  Law  was  reiterated.  These
verses  are  manifestly  introductory  to  the  discourse  of  the  succeeding  chapters.  Moses
is  about  to  declare  the  "testimonies  "  ('^'l??),  what  comes  forth  from  God  to  indic-ate
his  will;  and  the  "statutes"  (°'p.'^'^),  the  defined  duties  of  moral  obligation;  and  the
"  judgments  "  (°'9?'i'?'"3),  or  mutual  rights  of  men.  The  conditions  of  his  speech  are
here  detailed.

I.  The  Israelites  hai.  received  an  earnest  of  the  promised  inheritanob.  They
had  got,  as  we  have  seen,  the  land  of  the  Amorites.  The  kingdoms  of  Og  and  of  Sihon
were  already  in  the  hands  of  the  two  and  a  half  tribes.  Moses  had  a  vantage-ground,
therefore,  from  which  to  plead  the  claims  of  God.

And  so,  when  we  get  an  earnest  of  the  promised  inheritance  in  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,
we  are  more  likely  to  yield  ourselves  to  the  Divine  demands  (Eph.  i.  14).  We  have
an  inheritance  on  this  side  the  Jordan  of  death,  more  important  than  the  pastures  ol
Bashan,  and  God,  having  given  us  this,  may  well  make  demands  upon  us.

II.  The  experience  through  which  they  had  passed  was  also  most  important.
For  the  temporal  inheritance  in  Moab  and  Bashan  was  a  minor  part  of  their  gifts  from


ta.  v.  1—33.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


»3


God.  Their  fellowship  at  Sinai,  their  wanderings  through  the  wilderness,  the  chequered
experience  of  judgment  and  of  mercy,  all  combined  to  make  the  Israelites  in  Moab  •
^roured  people.    No  other  nation  had  had  such  an  experience  and  history.

III.  The  reiteration  op  the  Law  was  in  the  midst  of  happier  conditions.  At
Sinai  their  fathers  and  themselves  had  witnessed  awe-inspiring  wonders.  The  mount
was  the  centre  of  quaking  and  ftar.  Even  Moses  had  to  yield  to  the  panorama  of
terror,  and  to  say,  "  I  exceedingly  fear  and  quake."  But  now  in  Moab  all  around  them
is  bright  and  hopeful.  Mercy  encompassed  them,  and  so  they  were  more  likely  to
enter  into  the  spirit  of  the  Law,  which  Moses  makes  out  to  be  love  (ch.  vi.  1 — 5),

IV.  We  learn  from  this  that  God  first  gives  blessings  and  then  asks  obedi-
ence. It  is  here  that  we  see  plainly  the  essence  of  the  gospel.  The  glad  tidings
consist  of  the  oifer  of  a  full  and  free  salvation  to  the  sinner,  on  the  ground  that  he  is  a
sinner  and  cannot  save  himself.  The  salvation  is  saddled  with  no  condition.  This
is  the  trouble — it  is  too  good  news  to  be  true,  in  the  sinner's  sight.  He  can  hardly
credit  such  free  gift — he  would  rather  pay  something  for  it.  But  God  is  firm,  and  will
make  no  half  bargains.

But  when  the  sinner  has  been  redeemed  from  Egypt  and  brought  to  God,  he  is  ex-
pected in  gratitude  to  obey  God's  Law.  It  is  his  rule  of  life,  and  he  renders  obedience
to  it  willingly.

People  "  put  the  cart  before  the  horse,"  and  fancy  God  will  take  something  in  part
payment,  and  could  not  think  of  refusing  them  !  Nothing  is  w>  important  just  now
as  clear  views  about  th«  plan  of  salvation. — B.  M.  Eh


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  v.

Thb  Decaiogub  the  Basis  of  the  Ootb-
N ant,  THE  Essence  of  the  whole  Law,
AND  THE  Condition  of  Life  and
Feucitt.

Vers.  1—33.
Vers.  1 — 5. — Moses  reminds  them  of  the
making  of  the  covenant  at  Horeb,  and  of
the  revelation  of  the  fundamental  law  of
the  covenant  there.  As  he  was  about  to
lecapitulate  the  laws  which  God  their
King  had  enacted,  it  was  fitting  that  be
should  refer  at  the  outset  to  that  covenant
relation  between  Jehovah  and  Israel  on
which  all  the  injunctions  of  tlie  Law  rested.
Yer.  1. — And  Moses  called  all  Israel  [called
to  all  Israel],  and  said.  "  The  calling  refers
not  to  the  publicity  of  the  address,  but  to
(he  clear  voice  which,  breaking  forth  from
the  inmost  heart  of  Moses,  aimed  at  pene-
trating, as  far  as  possible,  to  all  (Gen.  xlix.
I ;  John  vii.  37) "  (Bchioeder).  (Of.  also
Prov.  viii.  4.)

Vers.  2,  3.— Not  with  our  fathers,  the
patriarchs  (cf.  ch.  iv.  37.)  The  covenant  to
which  Moses  refers  is  not  that  made  with
Abraham,  but  that  made  at  Sinai,  with
Israel  as  a  people;  and  though  the  in-
dividuals who  were  then  present  had  all
perished  with  the  exception  of  Muses,
Joshua,  and  Caleb,  the  nation  survived,  and
M  it  was  with  the  nation  as  an  organic  whole


that  the  covenant  had  been  made,  it  might
be  with  propriety  said  that  it  was  made  with
those  whom  Moses  addressed  at  this  time,
inasmuch  as  they  constituted  the  nation.

Vers.  4,  5. — The  Lord  talked  with  you
face  to  face.  God  spoke  to  them  immedi-
ately, in  their  presence  and  to  their  face,
from  the  mount,  as  one  person  might  to
another.  There  is  a  slight  difference  in
fo7m  between  the  phrase  here  and  that  in
Bxod.  xxxiii.  11  and  ch.  xxxiv.  10,  where  it
is  used  in  rtference  to  Moses,  but  it  is
80  slight  (D>]B3  instead  of  n'pe-'jN)  that  no
difference  of  meaning  can  be  elicited.  God
spake  directly  to  the  people,  as  he  did  to
Moses,  only  Moses  was  admitted  to  closer
communion  with  him  than  the  people  were.
This  difference  is  snffiiiently  indicated  in
ver.  5,  where  the  mediatory  function  of
Moses,  in  the  promulgation  of  the  Law  and
the  making  of  the  covenant,  is  described  as
necessitated  by  the  fear  of  the  people,  and
their  not  going  up  into  the  mount  (cf.  Exod.
xix.  19,  etc.).  This  is  referred  to  more  fully
afterwards  (ver.  23,  etc.).  I  stood  between  the
Lord  and  you ;  i.e.  acted  as  mediator;  LXX.
tlffT-fiKeiv  ay^L  fieiroy  (cf.  Gal.  iii.  19).

Ver.  6.— I  am  Jehovah  thy  God,  "The
■  Law,  the  establishing  rule  for  men,  can  pro-
ceed only  from  him  who  alone  and  over  all
stands  fast;  i.e.  from  God,  specially  as
Jehovah.  The  eternal,  unchangeable  One,
since  he  demands  the  obedience  of  faith  'is
not  merely  the  moral  imperative),  must  not
only  reveal  himself,  bat  in  revealing  hiniseIC


84


THE  BOOK  OF  DKUTEEONOMX.


[CH,  v.  1—33.


mnst  claim  Israel  as  loyal  and  faithful;   thy
God  "  (Schroeder).

Vers.  7 — 21.— Bepetition  of  the  ten  eom-
mandments.  On  these,  as  the  basis  of  the
covenant,  the  whole  legislation  rests,  and
therefore  a  rehearsal  of  them  is  a  fitting
introduction  to  a  repttition  and  enforcement
of  the  laws  of  the  theocracy.  Some  differences
appear  between  the  statement  of  the  "  ten
words,"  as  given  here  and  as  given  in  Exod.
XX.  It  is  chiefly  in  the  fourth  commandment
that  thcsu  are  to  be  found.  It  begins  here
with  "  remember  "  for  "  keep ; "  reference  is
made  to  the  command  of  God  as  sanction-
iug  the  sabbath  (ver.  12),  which  is  omitted  in
Exodus ;  a  fuller  description  of  the  auimals
to  oe  exempted  from  work  on  that  day  is
piven  (ver.  14) ;  the  words,  "  that  thy  man-
servant and  thy  maidservant  may  rest  as
well  as  thou,"  are  added  (ver,  14);  and  in
place  of  a  reference  to  the  resting  of  God
after  the  Creation  as  the  ground  of  the
sabbath  Institute,  as  in  Exodus,  there  is
here  a  reference  to  the  deliverance  of  the
Israelites  out  of  bondage  in  Egypt  as  a
reason  why  the  Lord  commandtd  them  to
keep  the  sabbath  day  (ver.  15).  In  the
fifth  commandment  there  are  two  additions
here — the  one  of  the  words, "  as  Jehovah  thy
God  hath  commanded  thee,"  and  the  other
of  the  words, "  that  it  may  go  well  with  thee  "
(ver.  16).  lu  thu  tenth  commandment,  the
first  two  clauses  are  transposed,  "desire"
appears  in  place  of  "covet"  in  relation  to
"  wife,"  and  "field"  is  added  to  the  specifi-
oation  of  objects  (ver.  21).  These  differ-
ences are  of  little  moment.  The  only  one
demanding  notice  is  that  in  the  fourth  com-
mandment, where  different  reasons  are  as-
signed for  the  ordinance  of  the  sabbath.
The  two  reasons  assigned,  however,  are
perfectly  compatibla;  the  one  is  funda-
mental and  univer.-ally  applicable,  the  other
is  subsidiary  and  special  in  its  application  ;
Ihe  one  is  a  reason  why  the  sabbath  was
originally  instituted  and  is  for  all  men,  the
other  is  a  renson  why  it  was  specially  and
formally  instituted  in  Israel  aud  was  espe-
cially memorable  to  that  people.  In  a
popular  address  to  them  it  seems  fitting  that
the  latter  rather  than  the  former  should  be
the  one  adduced.  As  a  memorial  of  their
deliverance  from  Egypt,  the  sabbath  was  all
'iiiportant  to  them,  for  by  it  thev  were  con-


stantly reminded  that  "they  were  thereby
freed  from  the  dominion  of  the  world  to  be
a  peculiar  possession  of  Jehovah,  and  m
amid  tlie  toil  and  trouble  of  the  world  had
part  in  the  holy  rest  of  their  God  "  (Baura-
garten).  It  was  also  fitting  in  a  recapitula-
tory address  that  special  emphasis  should  be
laid  on  the  fact  that  whattho  Law  enunciated
was  what "  the  Lord  had  commanded."  The
addition  of  "  field  "  in  the  tenth  command-
ment is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  now,
the  occupation  and  division  of  the  land
having  begun,  the  people  were  about  to  have,
what  they  Lad  not  before — each  his  own
property  in  land.  In  the  tenth  command-
ment, also,  there  is  a  difference  in  the  two
accounts  worthy  of  notice.  In  Deuteronomy,
"field"  is  added  to  the  enumeration  of
objects  not  to  be  coveted,  and  the  "wife"  is
put  first  aud  apart,  while  in  Exodus  the
"  house  "  precedes  the  "  wife  "  and  the  latter
ranks  with  the  rest.  In  Deuteronomy  also
this  separation  of  the  wife  is  emphasized  by
a  change  of  the  verb:  "Neither  shalt  thou
desire  (innn)  thy  neiglibour's  wife,  neither
ehalt  thou  covet  (i^'Nljn;  thy  neiyhuour »
house,"  etc.

Vera.  7—16. — Fibst  tablb  of  the  Law  •
prsecepta  pietatis.

Ver.  7.-  -In  this,  the  first  commandment,
the  great  principle  and  basis  of  all  true
religion  is  asserted— monotheism,  as  opposed
to  polytfteism  or  pantheism  There  is  but
one  (>od,  and  that  God  is  Jehovah,  the  self
existent  and  eternal,  who  yet  has  personal
relations  vrith  men.

Vers.  8 — 10. — Here  the  spirituality  of  God
is  asserted,  and,  in  the  prohibition  of  the  use
of  images  in  the  worship  of  the  Deity,  all
idolatry  is  denounced,  and  all  deification  of
the  powers  of  nature  in  any  sense  is  pro-
hibited. By  the  Jews,  this  commandment
was  not  always  regarded,  for  they  were  not
unfrequeutly  seduced  into  following  the
idolatrous  usages  of  tbe  nations  around
them.  It  does  not  appear,  however,  thai,
though  they  set  up  images  of  the  idol-gods
whom  they  were  thus  led  to  worship,  they
ever  attempted  to  represent  by  image  or
picture  the  great  God  whom  their  fathers
worshipped — Jehovah — by  whom  this  com-
mand was  given ;  and  at  a  later  period,  when
they  had  long  renounced  all  idolatry,  they
became  noted  as  the  one  nation  that  adored
the  Deity  as  a  spirit,  without  any  sensible
representation  of  him :  "  Judsei  mente  sola
unumque  Numen  intelligunt  .  .  ,  igltui
UTilln  siraulaora  nrbibng  suis,  nediun  teupli*


l:-r33.]


1  EK  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


8fi


Biniint"  (Tacit.,  'Hist.,'  v.  5).  It  appears
tliat,  by  many  of  them  at  least,  the  com-
mandment was  regarded  bb  prohibiting
absolutely  the  griiphio  and  plastic  arts
(I'hilo,  'Quis  Rer.  Div.  H»r.  sit.,'  p.  496,
edit.  Mangey;  'De  Ebriet.,'  p.  374;  '  De
Gigant.,'  p.  270).  This  may  account  for  the
low  state  of  these  arts  among  the  Jews,  and
for  the  fact  that  (hey  alone  of  the  civilized
nations  of  antiquity  have  left  no  monuments
of  art  for  the  instruction  or  admiration  of
posterity.  Thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thy-
self onto  them,  nor  serve  them ;  LXX.,  Ou
irpoffKvv^<rciS  ai/rois,  ovSl  fjii]  XaTpevarjs
airots.  Every  kind  of  worship  of  images  is
forbidden,  alike  th:it  of  proikunesis  and  that
of  latria.  And  shewing  mercy  unto  thou-
sands; i.e.  to  the  thousandth  generation
(cf.  ch.  vii.  9)

.  Yer.  11. — ^Thou  Bhalt  not  take  the  name  of
the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain;  literally,  Thou
ihalt  not  take  [or  lift}  vp  ihe  Name  of  Jehovah
thy  God  to  vanity.  This  commandment
forbids  not  only  all  false  swearing  by  the
Name  of  God,  but  all  profanation  of  that
Name  by  an  irreverent  or  light  use  of  it
(Lev.  xix.  12).

Vers.  12— 14.— Keap  the  sabbath  day  to
sanctify  it,  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  com-
manded thee.  This  phraseology  implies  that
the  sabliath  institute  was  already  well
known  tn  the  people  of  Israel ;  so  that  this
commandment  was  intended,  not  to  enact  a
new  observance,  but  to  enforce  the  continu-
ance of  an  observance  which  had  come  down
to  them  from  earlier  timus.  The  sabbath
was  to  be  kept  by  being  sanctified.  This
means  that  it  was  to  be  consecrated  to  God
to  be  used  as  he  had  appointed.  The  sanctifl-
cation  of  any  object  "  always  goes  back  to
an  act  of  the  Divine  will,  to  Divine  election
and  institution.  In  other  words,  it  is  always
a  state  in  which  the  creature  [or  institute]
is  bound  to  God  by  the  appointment  of  God
himself,  which  is  expressed  by  is'nij,  ts'ip,
vnm,  t>-ip  "  (Oehler, '  Theology  of  the  Old
Testament,'  vol.  i.  p.  155).  The  sanotifica-
tion  of  the  sabbath,  accordingly,  was  the
consecration  of  that  day  to  the  JLord,  to  be
observed  as  he  had  enjoined,  that  is,  as  a
day  of  rest  from  all  servile  work  and  ordin-
ary occupations.  Among  the  Jews,  those
who  were  careful  to  keep  this  law  "rested
the  sabbath  day  according  to  the  command-
ment" (Luke  xxiii.  56).  Not,  however,  in
mere  indolence  and  idle  vaf-anoy,  unworthy
of  a  man.  Not  thus  could  the  day  be
sanctified  to  the  I  .ord.  Man  had  to  "  release
his  soul  and  body  from  all  their  burdens,
with  all  the  professions  and  pursuits  of
ordinary  life,  only  in  order  to  gather  himself
together  again  in  God  with  greater  purity
and  fewer  disturbing  elements,  and  renew
in  him  the  might  of  his  own  better  powers  "


(Ewald,  '  Antiquities  of  Israel,'  p.  102).  In
the  sabbath  institute,  therefore,  lius  the  basis
of  spiritual  worship  and  pioua  service  in
Israel.

Ver.  13. — The  germ  of  society  it  the
family,  and  the  family  is  sustained  only  as
the  authority  and  rule  of  the  heads  of  the
house  are  upheld  and  respected.  The  com-
mand, then,  to  honour  parents  may  be  justly
regarded  as  asserting  the  foundation  of  all
social  ordinances  and  arrangements.  Where
parents  are  not  honoured,  a  flaw  lies  at  the
basis,  and  the  stability  of  the  entire  social
fabric  is  endangered.

Vers.  17 — 21. — Second  table  of  the
Law  :  prascepta  prohitatis.

In  the  enactments  of  the  second  table
there  is  a  progression  from  the  outward  to
the  inward.  First,  sins  of  deed  are  pro-
hibited, such  as  murder,  adultery,  and  theft ;
then  sins  of  word,  such  as  injury  of  a  neigh-
bour's good  name  by  false  testimony ;  and
finally,  sins  of  the  heart,  which  do  not
come  into  open  manifestation,  Buch  as  cove-
tousness  and  evil  desire.  The  "  command-
ment "  is  thus  seen  to  be  "  exceeding  broad  "
(Ps.  cxix.  96).  So  that  only  the  man  "who
hath  clean  hands  and  a  pure  heart,  and  who
hath  not  lifted  up  his  snul  to  vanity,  nor
sworn  deceitfully,"  shall  "ascend  into  the
hill  of  the  Lord,  or  stand  in  his  holy  place  "
(Ps.  xxiv.  3, 4).

Vers.  22— 27.— Here  is  an  expanded  cita-
tion of  Exod.  XI.  15 — 18,  addressed  by
Moses  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  solemn
admonition  to  observe  and  do  all  that  the
Lord  had  commanded  them,  with  which  he
passes  on  to  the  enunciation  of  the  various
statutes  and  ordinances  he  had  been  en-
joined by  God  to  lay  upon  them.

Ver.  22. — And  he  added  no  more.  *"  Only
these  ten  words  did  God  speak  immediately
to  you ;  all  the  rest  he  spokg  afterwards  by
me"  (Herxheirner);  cf.  Numb.  xi.  25,  where
the  same  formula  occurs,  "and  they  added
not,"  t.«.  they  prophesied  only  when  the
Spirit  of  God  came  on  them,  but  this  was
not  continuous.  And  he  wrote  them  in  two
tables  of  stone.  This  anticipates  what  is
recorded  in  its  proper  historical  connection
in  ch.  ix.  10, 11.

Vers.  23 — 27. — In  •  purely  historical
narrative  such  as  that  in  Exodus,  a  condensed
statement  of  what  took  place  on  this  oocasinii
was  sufficient;  but  in  an  address  to  the
people,  it  was  fitting  that  Moses  should  give
it  in  fuller  detail,  especially  in  view  of  what:
follows.

Vers.  28,  29.— The  words  of  God  in  reply
to  those  of  the  people  are  not  given  in
Exudus;  here  they  are  fittingly  inserted
God  approved  of  their  words  because  they


86


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[cH.  ▼.  1—33.


expressed  a  proper  revereTice  and  a  due  sense
on  their  part  of  the  unworthiness  of  sinful
men  to  come  into  the  presence  of  the  great
and  holy  God ;  hut  knowing  their  ficklenesB,
and  proneness  to  forget  and  depart  from
him,  he  added,  Oh  that  there  were  such  an
heart  in  them  that  they  would  fear  me  and
keep  all  my  commandments  always!  God
looks  upon  the  heaii,  and  will  accept  no
pervice  or  worship  that  is  not  rendeied  from
the  heart.  Only  they  who  do  his  will  from
the  heart  (Eph.  vi.  6)  really  fear  and  keep
his  commandiuents.  The  tongue  may  some-
times promise  what  the  hei.rt  does  not
guarantee ;  and  so  when  the  occasion  that
provoked  the  utterance  ha^  passed,  the  whole
may  be  forgotten,  and  the  promise  never  be
fulfilled.

Vers.  30,  31. — The  people  were  com-
manded to  return  to  their  tents,  and  Moses
was  appointed  to  act  as  mediator  between
God   and  them,  receiving  from  him   hia


commandments  and  communicating  them  to
the  people.

Vera.  32,  33. — Moaea  winda  up  this  part
of  his  discourse  by  exhorting  them  to  ob-
serve and  do  all  God'a  commandments,  not
in  my  way  departing  from  that  course  of
action  to  which  he  had  called  them,  that
they  might  live,  and  it  should  be  well  with
them  in  the  land  they  were  about  to  possess.

Ver.  32.— To  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.
"Thii  signifieth  an  exact  care  to  walk  in
God's  Law,  as  in  the  highway,  from  which
men  may  not  turn  aside,  as  in  Deut.  ii.  27  "
( Anisworth) ;  cf.  ch.  xvii.  11, 20 ;  xxviii.  14 ;
Josh.  i.  7 ;  Prov.  iv.  27 ;  Isa.  xxx.  21.  "  To
receive  what  God  enjoins  is'only  half  obedi-
ence; it  belongs  thereto  also  that  nothing
be  required  btiyond  this.  We  must  not  desire
to  be  more  righteous  than  M  we  are  taught
by  the  Law  "  (Calving


H0MILETIC3.

Ver.  6. — The  Divine  Law  lased  on  a  divinely  revealed  rdationsTiip.  •*!  am  the  Lord
thy  God,"  etc.  This  little  word  thy,  in  this  connection,  gives  us  the  basis  on  which  the  Law
was  set.  Of  the  event  called  "  the  giving  of  the  Law,"  we  feel  the  thrill  even  now.
That  Law  has  in  it  four  features,  corresponding  to  one  or' other  of  the  aspects  in  which
the  people  to  whom  it  was  first  given  may  be  regarded.  They  were  (1)  members  of
the  great  human  family,  moral,  responsible  beings,  amenable  to  the  government  of
God.  They  were  (2)  a  Church  in  the  wilderness,  with  their  own  institutions,  which
embodied  the  worship  appropriate  to  the  religion  enjoined  upon  them.  They  were  (3)
a  people  rescued  from  bondage,  about  to  have  a  commonwealth  of  their  own,  for  which
sundry  civil  and  political  regulations  had  to  be  provided.  They  were  (4)  a  nation
which  for  years  was  to  be  in  a  wandering  state,  yet  destined  in  the  long  run  to  find  a
home  in  Palestine.  Adapted  to  them  in  this  last-named  aspect,  they  had  sanitary
laws ;  for  them  in  the  third  aspect  there  were  civil  and  political  laws ;  for  them  in  the
second  aspect  there  were  religious  institutions ;  and  for  them  in  the  first  aspect  there
was  the  great  moral  law.  The  set  of  rules  having  reference  to  health  would  be  binding
only  so  far  as  the  laws  of  climate  and  modes  of  life  necessitated  their  continued  obser-
vance. The  civil  law  would  be  but  temporary  so  far  as  it  received  its  complexion  from
the  idolatrous  surroundings  of  the  people.  The  ceremonial  law  would  pass  away  in
form,  but  the  underlying  principles  of  it  are  permanent.  The  moral  law  is  unchanging
as  man's  nature,  and  enduring  as  his  relation  to  God.  It  is  given  in  the  ten  com-
mandments, of  which  the  first  enjoins  supreme  love  to  the  Divine  Being :  the
second,  recognition  of  the  spirituality  of  the  Divine  nature :  the  third,  reverence  fpi
the  Divine  Name :  the  fourth,  care  for  Divine  worship :  the  fifth  inculcates  religion
in  the  home :  the  sixth,  the  religion  of  the  temper :  the  seventh,  the  religion  of  the
body:  the  eighth,  the  religion  of  the  hand:  the  ninth,  the  religion  of  the  tongue:
the  tenth,  the  religion  of  the  heart.  But  antecedently  to  the  Law  in  any  of  its  aspects,
there  is  a  question  of  deep  interest  and  importance,  viz.  From  whom  came  it?  The
reasons  for  obedience  to  it  come  very  largely  out  of  the  answer  to  be  given  to  that
question.  Now,  the  words  in  ch.  v.  6,  which  precede  the  Law  itself,  are  not  merely  a
preface  to  it,  they  are  at  once  the  basis  of  it  and  the  reason  for  obedience  to  it.  And
these  words  should  be  opened  up  clearly  in  every  case  where  the  Decalogue  is  about
to  be  expounded.     T/ie  Law  is  not  set  on  law,  but  on  grace  1    For  observe —

I.  Herb  is  a  special  view  of  God  pkesbnted  to  the  people  to  dbaw  fobth
THEin  ATTENTION  AND  WIN  THEiB  ALLEGIANCE.  "  Thy  God."  The  Hebrews  were
never  expected  to  believe  in,  obey,  or  love  an  absolutely  unrelated  Being.    These  u


m.  T.  1—83.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  87

tro  SUCH  Bbino  !  God  is  related  to  all  the  creatures  he  has  made.  Hence  our  know-
ledge of  him  is  not  unreal,  because  it  is  relative ;  but  real,  because  in  knowing  God'i
relations  to  us,  we,  so  far,  know  him  as  he  is.  God  was  Israel's  Redeemer.  He  had
redeemed  them  that  they  might  be  his.  He  would  have  the  entire  life  of  his  redeemed
ones  spent  in  covenant  relationship  with  him.  Hence  he  sets  his  own  Law  on  the  basis
of  those  relations.  And  so  it  is  now.  We  are  not  expected  to  love  a  Being  whosa
relations  to  us  are  doubtful  or  obscure,  or  whose  mind  and  will  towards  us  are  unknown.
We  love  because  he  first  loved  us.

II.  The  varikd  aspects  of  Christian  truth  abe  set  upon  a  like  basis,  and  havk
IN  it  their  reason  and  power.  The  following  suggestions  may  be  developed  largely
with  great  advantage.  1.  The  conception  of  law  is  materially  changed  when  we  know
that  it  comes  from  One  who  loves  us  infinitely,  and  cares  for  us  with  a  tender  care.
This  gives  sweetness  to  the  command.  We  are  "  under  law  to  Christ."  2.  "The  Lord  tty
God;"  that  gives  the  worship  of  God  its  charm.  3.  This  is  the  truth  which  is  objec-
tively disclosed  by  the  Incarnation.  4.  It  is  the  truth  which  the  Holy  Ghost  graves
on  the  hearts  of  the  saints  (Rom.  viii.  15).  5.  This  truth  shows  us  that  real  religion  is
love  responding  to  love  (1  John  iv.  19).  6.  It  gives  a  manifest  ground  for  trust.  Wa
know  whom  we  have,  believed.  7.  It  gives  a  charm  to  every  precept.  8.  It  gives
meaning  to  every  trial  (ch.  viii.  5).  9.  It  is  in  the  light  of  this  truth  that  prayer
becomes  possible,  and  is  seen  to  be  reasonable.  10.  This  gives  a  solemn  aspect  to  our
responsibility  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  10 ;  Amos  iv.  12  ;  Heb.  iv.  13).  11.  The  fuller  understand-
ing of  the  words,  "  My  God,"  will  be  the  result  of  ripeness  in  grace  (Zech.  ziii.  9 ;
Isa.  xli.  10 — 20).  12.  This  is  pre  eminently  the  truth  which  gives  its  certainty  and
its  glow  to  the  hope  of  future  glory  (Mark  xii.  26;  Heb.  xi.  16;  l{ev.  xxi.  3,  7).

III.  Seeinq  the  wide  bbabino  and  vast  importance  of  the  truth  in  the
TEXT,  what  should  BE  WITH  US  ITS  PRACTICAL  OUTCOME?  1.  Seeing  the  fearful
havoc  agnosticism  would  mnke,  if  it  should  ever  come  to  govern  human  thinking,'  let
us  show  men :  (1)  That  a  God  out  of  relation  to  us  does  not  exist.  (2)  That  the  one
God  is  related  to  us  as  Creator,  etc.  (3)  That  his  varied  relations  are  explicitly
revealed,  specially  through  the  Son  and  through  the  Holy  Ghost.  (4)  That  these
relations  are  to  be  apprehended  by  our  moral  and  spiritual  nature,  and  not  by  the
intellect  alone.  It  should  never  make  us  stagger  that,  after  getting  to  the  very  outer
rim  of  natural  knowledge,  men  should  look  out  on  an  awful  blank,  and  call  it  "  the  great
unknown."  It  shows  us  only  that  they  cannot  find  God  in  that  way — not  that  there
is  no  way  of  finding  Gfod,  still  less  that  God  cannot  find  us  or  make  his  communica-
tions intelligible  to  us.  Do  not  let  us  suffer  men  to  think  that  God  cannot  be  found
because  no  one  can  find  him  out  to  perfection  !  He  is  our  God.  2.  Since  God  is  our
God,  let  us  cultivate  fellowsliip  with  him.  It  is  for  this  purpose  he  hath  revealed
himself,  that  we  may  come  to  him  (1  John  i.  1 — 3 ;  Heb.  x.  19 — 22).  3.  Let  us  seek  to
realize  the  blessedness  of  a  known  and  happy  relationship  to  God,  enjoyed  through
Christ,  by  the  Spirit,  in  a  life  of  penitence,  faith,  devotion,  and  love  (Isa.  Ixi.  10
1  Chron,  xii.  18 ;  Ps.  Ixviii.  28 ;  xlvi.  1 ;  xviii.  29 ;  cxlvi.  5).  4.  Let  faith  in  the
love  of  our  God  fill  up  our  duties  with  glorious  meaning,  and  make  the  discharge  of
them  a  delight  (ch.  vi.  5 ;  xxviii.  58 ;  Lev.  xxv.  38 ;  xi.  45  ;  Isa.  xli.  10 ;  Jer.  liL  13 ,
Micah  vi.  8 ;  Rom.  xii.  1).  5.  Let  the  fact  that  God  is  our  God  create,  confirm,  and
perpetuate  our  assurance  of  immortal  blessedness.  See  the  wonderful  words  in  Matt
x/ii.  31,  32  ;  Heb.  xi.  16.  As  if  God  would  be  ashamed  to  be  called  our  God,  if  he  did
not  mean  to  do  something  worthy  of  the  name !  Wondrous  grace  I  How  perfect  the
reconciliation  eflfected  by  Christ,  to  bring  together  the  holy  God  and  sinful  men  in
Lhst  accord  and  union  for  ever !

•  Ver.  7. — The  first  commandment.  Ood  the  sole  olfeet  of  worship.  "  Thou  shalt
have  none  other  gods  before  me."  So  runs  the  first  of  the  ten  commandments.  (For  tha
specific  direction  of  each,  see  enumeration  in  Homily  on  ver.  6;  for  the  completeness  of  the
whole,  see  Hornily  on  vers.  22 — 33.)  It  has  been  well  observed,  in  reference  to  the  delivery
of  the  ten  commandments,  that  "this  is  the  only  authentic  case  in  the  history  of  the

'  See  this  vividly  illustrated  in  a  poem  by  Mr.  Buchanan,  entitled,  'Justinian,'  Qm-
temporary  Review,  January,  1880.


88  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  y,  1—33.

world  uf  a  newly  formed  nation  receiving  at  once,  and  from  one  legislator,  a  complete  coda
of  laws  for  the  direction  of  their  whole  future  life."  They  are,  in  outline,  the  Old  Testa-
ment revelation  of  God's  will.  If  any  one  would  wish  a  clear  statement  of  Old
Testament  morality,  he  should  be  referred  to  these  sayings',  or  to  our  Saviour's  brief
epitome  of  them.  We  should  do  very  wrongly  if  we  expounded  the  Decalogue  merely
as  the  Hebrews  might  have  done  at  the  time  it  first  was  given.  Comparison  of  cor-
responding or  parallel  passages  in  the  New  Testament  will  help  us  in  the  exposition
and  enforcement  of  these  ten  words.  A  reference  to  Matt.  v.  17 — 20 ;  xv.  1 — 9  ;  xix.
16—19;  xxii.  36—40;  Luke  x.  25—28;  xvi.  31 ;  John  v.  46,  47,  will  help  to  show
what  regard  our  Lord  paid  to  the  Mosaic  Law.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  we  will  endeavour
now  to  sketch  in  outline  an  exposition  of  the  first  commandment,  using  the  clearer
teaching  of  the  gospel  to  give  us  any  additional  light  and  force  in  so  doing.  Thus
saith  the  Lord,  "  Thou  shalt  have  none  other  gods  before  me."

I.  This  command  at  once  sets  aside  the  claims  of  ant  other  supposed  gods.
(Of.  ch.  iv.  19;  Exod.  xxiii.  24,  25.)  "None  other  gods  before  me,"  i.e.  "over  against
me.  I  will  suffer  no  rival  deity;  you  must  worship  no  other  god,"  etc.  Does,  then,
the  command  permit  Israel  to  suppose  that  there  is  any  other  god  whom  they  could
possibly  worship?  Not  by  any  means.  It  recognizes  the  fact  of  the  existence  of
idolatry  round  about  them.  According  to  the  heathen  conception,  there  were  gods  many
and  lords  many.  Israel  was  not  to  regard  one  of  all  the  gods  adored  by  the  heathen.
This  is  the  very  gracious  way  in  which  our  Father  in  heaven  would  help  his  children
in  those  young  days  to  higher  thoughts  about  himself.  Is  it  not  always  the  case  with
young  children  now?  They  have  to  be  told  what  they  may  or  may  not  do,  and  as
they  get  older  they  will  discover  the  reason.  Indoctrinate  into  dogma  hy  means  of
precept.  This  was  the  way  Grod  taught  Israel  "  when  he  was  a  child,"  by  putting
this  precept  in  the  front.  Had  Moses  discoursed  to  the  people  on  the  philosophic
excellence  of  monotheism,  and  so  on,  he  would  have  been  virtually  speaking  in  an
unknown  tongue.  They  would  not  have  caught  a  glimpse  of  his  meaning ;  but  they
could  understand  this.  And  the  faithful  obedience  to  this  precept  would  be  for  them
the  very  surest  way  of  learning  the  doctrine  which  lay  beneath  it.  By  serving  only
one  God,  they  would  best  come  to  learn  that  there  was  no  god  but  the  One.  But
further.  This  commandment  is  much  more  than  a  mere  prohibition  of  what  we  usually
call  idolatry.  It  is  a  declaration  of  the  Divine  intolerance  of  any  rival  in  the  heart.
Though  we  acknowledge  that  there  is  but  one  God,  yet  that  is  practically  the  idol  of
our  hearts  which  engrosses  our  dearest  affections,  and  with  a  view  to  which  we  shape  our
lives.     God.  wants  the  innermost  sanctuary  of  our  hearts  to  be  sacredly  reserved  for  him.

II.  The  people  were  to  dsaw  off  thbib  begard  from  other  gods,  that  all  the

POWERS  of   THEIE   SOULS  MIGHT  BE  CONCENTRATED   ON  GOD.      (See    ch.    vi.    5.)      In    OUr

text,  the  form  is  negative ;  the  intent  is  positive.  They  are  to  know  none  hat  God,
that  they  may  concentrate  all  their  strength  on  God.  In  fact,  the  command  is  equiva-
lent to  this :  "  Let  all  your  personal,  family,  social,  national  life  be  regulaled  completely
by  the  commandments  of  your  God.  And  let  this  be  done  from  love."  Is  it  asked,
"  Is  this  practicable  ?  Can  a  man  put  forth  all  his  strength  for  God  when  his  energy  is
absorbed  in  trade  ?  "  We  answer,  "  Yes ;  by  regulating  his  business  rightly,  as  God
wills."  "  Can  a  mother  put  forth  all  her  strength  on  loving  God,  when  the  care  of  her
family  is  taxing  and  even  straining  all  her  powers?"  We  answer,  "  Yes ;  by  training
her  children  for  God."     And  so  on  in  each  one  of  life's  tasks.

III.  This  is  set  on  grounds  of  tender  appeal.  (See  the  preceding  Homily.)
God  does  not  say,  "  When  you  love  me  supremely  I  will  redeem  you  from  Egypt ;  "
but  " I  have  redeemed  you,  therefore  jield  me  your  all."  The  religions  of  man  go
out  to  an  un  revealed  Being,  if  perchance  he  may  be  propitiated.  Scriptural  religion  is
the  response  of  the  heart  of  man  to  the  revealed  love  of  the  Infinite  One.  Hence  the
gospel  claim  is,  in  substance,  like  the  Mosaic,  although  its  form  is  new,  and  the  view  we
getofDivineloveis  larger  (see  Rom.  xii.  1).  In  both,  duty  is  the  same:  the  whole  heart
of  man  is  demanded  for  God.  But  note  ihe  advance  in  light,  tenderness,  and  strength
in  (1)  the  mercies  of  God ;  (2)  the  "  beseeching "  tone ;  (3)  the  "  consecration  of  a
living  sacrifice"  asked;  (4)  the  reason  given,  "Your  reasonable  service."  Here  is  the
difference  in  the  method  of  the  gospel.

IV.  This  preoept  is  here  set  in  the  forbfeont  of  Israel's  national  laws.


BH.  V.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  89

It  was  the  law  for  each  ono'a  life.  It  was  the  rule  for  all.  In  their  legislation,  the
supreme  feature  was  to  be  the  national  recognition  of  God.  And  even  now,  yea,  ever,
so  far  as  the  legislation  of  any  people  is  based  on  righteousness,  so  far  as  that  legislation
recognizes  the  rights  of  the  Great  Supreme,  so  far  as  a  people  are  loyal  to  God,  to  that
extent  will  there  be  the  surest  guarantee  for  individual,  family,  social,  and  national
prosperity.  If  ever  a  nation  as  such  should  "  break  his  bands  asunder,"  and  iuaugurate
an  age  of  reason  versus  faith,  instead  of  a  reasonable  faith,  the  reign  of  terror  would
not  be  far  off.  And  it  is  owing  to  the  supreme  importance  of  thus  launching  into  the
world  a  nation  with  God  for  its  Lord,  and  righteousness  for  its  law,- that  the  open  trans-
gression of  this  first  commandment  was  so  severely  punished,  as  being  a  crime  against
the  State  as  well  as  a  sin  against  God  (ch.  xiii.  7 — 12,  13 — 18;  xvii.  2 — 7).  (The
frequent  phrase  "cut  off"  does  not  refer  to  punishment  in  another  life,  but  to  a  man's
being  "cut  off"  from  the  congregation.)  And  even  now  fidelity  to  God  is  the  supreme
condition  of  a  nation's  well-being ;  and  that  man  is  playing  foully  with  the  highest
interests  of  a  people,  who  is  seeking  to  undermine  its  allegiance  to  heaven.

V.  Is  THIS  THE  Law?  Then  let  us  make  three  uses  of  it.  1.  As  a  touchstone.
It  reveals  guilt.  The  need  of  any  such  command  is  a  very  humiliating  fact.  "  'I'he
law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man."  "  By  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin."  This  pre-
cept (1)  discloses  the  world's  sin.  (2)  It  shows  the  deep  root  that  sin  had  in  the
natures  even  of  the  freed  people,  that  they  should  need  such  legislation  to  grave  this
precept  on  their  hearts.  (3)  It  shows  ow  sin,  that  we  should  need  the  written  Law.
If  we  were  whnt  we  ought  to  be,  we  should  do  God's  will  spontaneously  without  need-
ing a  written  law  at  all !  2.  As  a  judge.  This  being  the  Law,  we  see  how  it  is  that  as  by
law  we  stand  convicted,  so  by  it  we  stand  condemned,  "  subject  to  the  sentence  of
God,"  for  failures  innumerable;  and  our  guilt  is  the  greater,  since  he  who  asks  our
heart  reveals  his  own  love  that  he  may  call  forth  ours.  This  Law  is  a  perpetual,  silent
accuser  (see  John  v.  45).  3.  As  a  child-guide  to  Christ  (see  Gal.  iii.  24,  Greek).
God  only  is  greater  than  law.  And  he  alone  can  restore  those  who,  having  broken
law,  must  needs,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things,  be  regarded  and  dealt  with  as  law-
breakers. For  restoration,  three  things  are  required :  (1)  Forgiveness ;  (2)  justification ;
(3)  re-creation.  Bare  Law  does  not  provide  for  either  of  these,  but  God  in  his  Law  has
witnessed  concernin.;  this  great  restorative  scheme.  So  says  Paul  in  Bom.  iii.  21,
"But  now  there  has  been  manifested  a  righteousness  of  God  apart  from  law,  being
witnessed  by  the  Law  and  the  prophets,"  etc.  So  in  Bom.  1  16,  17,  "  I  am  not
ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  .  .  .  for  therein  there  is  revealed  a  righteousness  of  God
by  faith,  with  a  view  to  [the  production  of]  faith."  By  believing  in  Christ,  forgiveness  is
sure  to  the  penitent,  and  grace  re-creates  the  man,  writing  ttie  Law  on  tlie  heart,  so
that  we  obey  and  love  God,  not  because  God  says  we  must,  but  because  we  are  remade
80  that  we  can  do  nothing  else.  And  what  we  need  is  to  have  our  whole  nature  so
reset  by  Divine  grace,  that  we  shall  instinctively  see  God's  will  and  do  it,  without
needing  any  precept  at  all.  As  by  the  regenerative  efficacy  of  the  Holy  Ghost  we
attain  to  this,  shall  we  understand  what  it  is  to  do  the  will  of  God  on  earth,  "  even  as
it  is  done  in  heaven."

Vers.  8 — ^10. — The  second  commandment.  The  spirituality  of  Divine  worship.  It  is
sometimes  said  that  there  is  a  reason  attached  to  this  second  commandment.  It
is  scarcely  accurate  to  affirm  that.  There  is  a  double  sanction  attached  to  it  to  enforce
it,  but  there  is  no  mention  made  here  of  a  reason,  strictly  so  called.  We  will,  however,
incorporate  in  this  Homily  the  true  reason  which  underlies  this  precept.  But  we  shall
have  to  go  to  the  New  Testament  for  the  clearest  statement  of  that.  Let  us  then,  in
connection  with  the  above,  ask  the  reader  to  turn  to  John  iv.  24,  in  which  he  will  find
a  deep  reason  for  the  second  commandment.  We  will  first  of  all,  as  briefly  as  we  can
consistently  with  clearness,  open  up  the  contents  of  this  command,  and  will  then
endeavour  to  unfold  the  double  sanction  by  which  it  is  guarded.

I.  Its  contents.  The  first  commandment  claims  for  Jehovah  alone  the  love  and
worship  of  the  people.  The  second  warns  off  from  any  mode  of  worship  which  would
bear  a  resemblance  to  or  which  would  be  a  compromise  with  idolatry.  While  Israel  was  in
Egypt,  there  had  been  a  general  worship  on  the  part  of  the  Egyptians,  of  bird,  beast,  and
reptile,  not  for  their  own  sake,  but  as  representing  some  attribute  of  the  invisible  God.


do  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.  [oh.  »•  1—33

The  forms  of  Egyptian  worship,  the  names  of  Pasht,  Osiris,  etc.,  must  be  done  away
with.     No  reprefientation  of  the  object  of  worship  was  to  be  allowed.    However  much
men  might  have  pleaded  that  sense  was  an  aid  to  faith,  the  stern  "  Thou  shalt  not "
)>eremptorily  barred  the  way.     We  know  the  reason  why,  as  they  in  their  childhood  did
not.    God  is  spirit.    Being  spirit,  it  is  only  by  spirit  that  he  can  be  approached.    No
merely  bodily  act  can  possibly  be  worship.     Further,  neither  God  nor  any  one  of  his
attributes  can  be  represented  by  any  physical  form.    Whatever  idea  of  Jehovah  may
be  gained  or  retained  through  impressions  derived  from  beholding  a  sensible  object  with
the  bodily  eye,  will  be  an  idea  representing  it,  not  hirn.    It  will  be  a  thought  of  God
formed  by  the  image  and  limited  by  it — not  the  true  thought  given  by  revelation.
Obviously,  however,  this  command  did  not  forbid  decorative  designs  in  the  tabernacle  or
the  temple  (cf.  Exod.  xxv.  18, 20, 34 ;  xxvi.  32 ;  Numb.  xxi.  8, 9 ;  1  Kings  vii.  25 ;  x.  20).
But  never  were  any  creature- forms  allowed,  either  as  objects  of  worship  or  as  aids  to  it.
Nor  can  we  read  through  Hebrew  history  without  seeing  how  much  need  there  was  of
such  a  command.  Ere  long,  the  people  were  dancing  round  the  golden  calf  I  And  in  the
days  of  Jeroboam  two  calves  were  set  up — one  in  Bethel,  another  in  Dan.    But  surely
the  history  of  Christendom  is  even  a  sadder  one  than  that  of  the  Hebrews.    Ere  four
centuries  of  the  Christian  era  had  passed  away,  how  did  the  Christian  Church  lapse  into
repeated  breaches  of  this  law!     "An  enormous  train  of  different  superstitions  was
gradually  substituted  in  the  place  of  true  religion  and  genuine  piety.  ...  Images  were
not  as  yet  very  common.  But  it  is  certain  that  the  worship  of  the  martyrs  was  modelled
by  degrees  according  to  the  religious  services  that  were  paid  to  the  gods  before  the
coming  of  Christ." '    It  is  true,  indeed,  that  in  726  a.d.  Leo  III.  issued  an  ordinance  for-
bidding the  use  of  images  in  churches,  as  heathenish  and  heretical,  and  a  Council  of
Constantinople,  in  754  a.d.  ,  sanctioned  that  condemnation.    Another  Council,  which  met
at  Nice  ia  789  a.d.,  declared  the  previous  Council  heretical,  and  ordained  the  worship  of
pictures  in  churches.     The  decisions  of  this  Council  were  rejected  at  a  Council   in
Frankfort,  in  794  a.d.    Also  at  another  in  Constantinople,  in  815  a.d.,  all  worshipping  of
pictures  and  images  was  forbidden.  In  869  a.d.  the  iconoclasts  were  condemneii.  Thomas
Aquinas,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  affirmed  a  threefold  use  of  images,  and  declared
that  like  homage  is  due  to  the  image  of  Christ  as  to  Christ  himself!     And  we  know
but  too  well  what  the  later  history  of  Rome  has  been,  how  pagan  rites  have  become  more
and  more  mingled  with  Christian  service.     The  Saviour  is  approached  through  the
crucifix,  and  fed  upon  through  the  bread ;  and,  as  if  blind  to  the  warnings  of  history,
ritualism  openly  proclaims  that  the  best  exposition  of  doctrine  is  that  which  meets  the
eye  rather  than  the  ear.     Perhaps  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that  in  Boman  Catholic
catechisms  the  second  commandment  is  lift  out ;  and  not  even  Luther  was  sufBcient
of  a  reformer  to  restore  the  missing  law  in  his  catechism — an  easy  way,  indeed,  of
blinding  the  people  to  the  evil  of  a  mistaken  ritual,  to  leave  out  the  authoritative  com-
mand, obedience  to  which  would  render  such  evil  impossible  1

II.  The  double  sanction  attached  to  this  law.  The  first  is  drawn  from  the
Divine  nature,  the  second  from  the  Divine  administration.  1.  From  the  Divine  nature.
"I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God."  "They  that  worship  him  must  worship
him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  God  is  jealous :  (1)  For  truth  in  his  worship.  He  would
have  us  think  of  him  as  glorious  in  power,  wisdom,  righteousness,  holiness,  and  love^
Our  thoughts  of  Gud  can  be  but  limited  at  the  best.  They  need  not  be  untrue.
But  untrue  and  dishonouring  to  him  they  certainly  will  be  if  we  come  at  them
through  the  means  of  any  graven  image.  We  do  not  even  except  the  crucifix.  It
represents  the  bodily  form  of  Christ.  It  may  represent  the  nails,  the  wounds,  the
spear,  the  crown  of  thorns,  the  pain-crushed  brow ;  and  we  confess  it  may  be  possible,
by  looking  at  these  physical  marks,  to  receive  so  vivid  an  impression  of  the  physical
suffering  that  we  may  be  wrought  up  to  agony  in  thinking  of  it  1  But  even  then  this
is  only  knowing  Christ  after  the  flesh ;  it  is  making  an  idol  of  his  humanity ;  and  in
sympathy  with  the  anguish  of  his  bodily  woes,  we  may  altogether  miss  the  acting
of  faith  in  that  atoning  saerifice  which  lay  among  the  things  unseen  and  eternal  I  (2)
For  spirit  in  his  worship.  The  worship  iiaid  to  a  spiritual  Being  ia  nothing  if  it  be  not
spiritual  worship.    But  in  the  endless  bowings  and  prostrations,  genuflexions,  cross-

■  Uoeheim,  vol.  i.  p.  866.


CH.  V.  1— 33.J  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEOKOM  Y.  t»,


markings,  and  waving  of  the  body  at  tlie  word  "  Jesus,"  tljere  is,  at  least  in  apijearance,
a  taking  for  granted  that  bodily  postures  are  spiritual  attitudes.  (3)  God  would  have
man  lifted  up  to  a  higher  level  by  the  worship  of  him.  But  the  sorry  record  in  history
of  the  breaches  of  the  second  law  shows  us  four  transitions :  (o)  An  object  which  at
first  represents  the  Being  who  is  worshipped,  comes  at  length  to  be  worshipped.*
(6)  Worship  paid  through  the  body  will  sink  to  merely  bodily  worship,  (c)  When  th«
lofty  platform  of  spiritual  worship  is  quitted,  religious  service  will  inevi.iibly  lose  its
meaning.  Sense  first  comes  as  "an  aid  to  faith,"  and  then  is  put  in  the  place  of  it!
{d)  When  this  is  the  case,  the  vitalizing  force  of  religion  is  gone,  and  man,  sinking  in
religious  vitality,  sinks  also  in  morality  (see  Jer.  vii.  for  an  illustration  of  this  in  the
Hebrew  people ;  see  Eom.  i.  for  illustrations  of  it  in  the  Gentile  world).  2.  From  the
Divine  administration.  "  Visiting  the  iniquil  ies,"  etc.  It  would  not  have  seemed  won-
derful to  have  found  this  second  sanction  appended  to  such  sins  as  murder,  adultery,
etc. ;  but  how  is  it  that  it  follows  on  so  apparently  slight  an  offence  as  the  use  of  graven
images?  Because  of  the  sure  and  inevitable  quadruple  transition  already  re/erred  to.
He  who  comes  to  lose  the  life  of  religion  will,  so  far,  be  undermining  the  foundations  of
morahty,  not  only  for  himself,  but  for  those  who  come  after  him.  (1)  What  a  man  is,
and  what  his  family  are  oi-  may  be,  are  regarded  as  bound  up  together  by  an  unalterable
law  of  God.  (2)  Evil  follows  on  from  generation  to  generation.  A  ghastly  inheritance
to  hand  down^formalism  and  idolatry  I  (3)  But  if  a  man  maintains  the  true  spiritual
worship  of  God  in  his  family,  that  too  will  be  handed  down  to  those  who  follow  him  as
a  priceless  heritage ;  not  only  to  those  who  come  in  the  physical  line :  our  Lord's  words
in  John  viii.  should  teach  us  to  look  beyond  that.  (4)  In  the  mercy  of  God  the
influence  of  a  man's  good  is  more  lasting  than  the  influence  of  his  evil.  Evil — to
third  or  fourth  generation.  Good — to  thousands  [of  generations].  The  influence  of
Paul,  e.g.  at  this  moment,  ii  prodigious ;  that  of  Nero  is  nil.  Learn,  in  conclusion :  1
We  receive  an  influence  from  the  generations  which  preceded  us ;  we  shall  transmit  one
to  the  generations  that  will  follow.  (We  do  not  think  this  latter  consideration  is  suf-
ficiently pressed  on  the  people,  either  on  its  physiological  or  on  its  spiritual  side.)  2
Whoever  wishes  to  ensure  a  prolonged  influence  that  shall  blessedly  afifect  generations
to  come,  let  him  bend  all  his  force  to  the  upholding  of  the  worship  of  God  in  purity,  in
spirit,  in  truth.  So  much  depends  on  this.  The  weal  of  the  land  in  which  we  dwel'
is  dependent  thereon.  Oh !  for  our  own  sakes,  for  our  country's  sake,  for  our  children's
sakes,  let  us  contend  earnestly  for  the  maintenance  of  the  worship  of  God  in  simiilLcitr
and  in  truth  I

Ver.  11. — T%e  third  commandment.  Reverent  regard  for  the  Divine  Name.  The
"  Name  "  of  God  is  the  form  of  speech  for  God  himself.  "  To  take  "  the  Name  of  God
means  "  to  take  it  up  " — to  use  it  in  any  way,  which  may  be  done  either  by  speakin"
to  him,  of  him,  for  him,  or  against  him.  "  To  take  up  this  Name  in  vain "
means  to  take  it  up  falsely  or  vainly.  And  inasmuch  as  it  has  been  so  grievously
common  to  use  the  Name  of  God  profanely  in  oaths,  this  third  commandment  has  come
to  be  regarded  chiefly  as  a  prohibition  against  swearing.  It  is  that,  but  it  is  a  great
deal  more.  This  commandment  is  "  exceeding  broad."  It  may  be  wronged,  not  only
by  an  undue  limitation  of  it,  but  also  by  a  too  slavish  adherence  to  the  letter  of  it ;  e.g.
according  to  the  teaching  of  the  rabbis,  certain  oaths  were  harmless  if  the  Name  of  God
was  not  specifically  mentioned  in  them  (cf.  Matt,  xxiii.  16—22).  Further,  the  ex-
pression "  in  vain  "  was  interpreted  as  meaning  "  if  you  take  an  oath  you  must  fulfil
it ;  "  take  as  many  oaths  as  you  please,  so  long  as  you  do  not  break  them,  and  thus  turn
them  into  falsehood.  The  effect  of  this  cold  and  superficial  teaching  of  the  rabbis  wa»
twofold.  It  created  artificial  distinctions  which  our  Saviour  did  not  recognize,  and  it
obliterated  such  as  were  of  great  importance  in  his  eye.  It  is  needful  for  us,  then,  to
be  guided  by  the  spirit  of  our  Lord's  teaching,  if  we  would  rightly  develop  this  third
law.  Since  our  Saviour  in  his  Sermon  on  the  Mount  removed  the  glosses  with  which
the  rabbis  had  overlain  the  Law  and  restored  it  to  its  pristine  clearness  and  purity.

I.  What  is  forbidden  by  this  third  commandment?  We  are  all  aware  that  some
have  regarded  our  Saviour's  words,  "  Swear  not  at  all,"  as  prohibitive  of  solemn  oatli-

'  See  Dr.  E.  W.  Dale's  book, '  The  Ten  Conwnandments,'  pp.  48,  49.


S'j  THE .  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY,  [oh.  v.  1—33.

taking  in  a  court  of  justice.  We  cherish  all  res]  act  for  those  who  so  regard  them,  but
we  cannot  view  them  in  this  light,  for  the  following  reasons :  (1)  The  occasion  on
which  our  Lord  uses  the  words  seems  to  refer  rather  to  habits  in  private  life.  (2)
Christ  and  his  apostles  solemnly  appealed  to  Heaven.  (3)  In  Heb.  vi.  the  oath  of  God
is  spoken  of  by  the  sacred  writer,  and  we  cannot  suppose  this  would  have  been  if  all
oath-taking  were  wrong.  We  cannot  think  that,  even  by  way  of  accommodation,  the
Most  High  would  represent  himself  as  doing  that  which  it  would  be  always  wrong
lor  his  creatures  to  do.  (4)  In  proijhetic  language  there  is  predicted  a  swearing  by
the  Name  of  God,  which  is  regarded  as  obviously  right  (Isa.  xlv.  23 ;  see  also  ch.
vi.  14).  These  reasons  seem  to  us  to  set  the  matter  entirely  at  rest.  And  tlie  view
that  Christ  was  referring  to  men's  ordinary  conversation  when  he  said,  "  Swear  not
at  all,"  is  confirmed  by  Matt.  v.  37  ;  the  meaning  of  which  evidently  is :  "  If  it  is
needful  for  you  to  interlard  your  conversation  with  sundry  adjurations,  you  are  the
victims  of  a  spirit  of  falsehood  which  has  'the  evil  one'  for  its  father  1"  Further,
this  precept  covers  a  far  wider  range  than  that  of  swearing.  It  forbids  any  "taking
up"  of  the  Divine  Name  which  is  not  true  as  to  loyalty  of  purpose,  actual  fact,
and  after-fulfilment.  This  precept  manifestly  prohibits:  1.  All  scoffing  at  sacred
things;  not  merely  at  the  word  "God,"  or  at  the  doctrine  of  the  Divine  existence,
but  ridiculing  the  Bible  as  the  Book  of  God,  the  sabbath  as  the  day  of  God,
Christians  as  the  people  of  (Jod,  and  religion  as  obedience  to  God.  The  mild  and
supercilious  scorn  of  modern  scepticism  is  equally  a  violation  of  this  precept — it
tramples  under  foot  the  Son  of  God.  2.  Perjury  is  another  form  of  violation  of  this
command.  The  idea  of  swearing  is  that  of  calling  God  to  witness ;  and  to  invoke  that
sreat  and  awful  Name  to  witness  a  lie  is  one  of  the  most  grievous  breaches  of  this  law.
3.  Profanity  also  is  here  forbidden,  i.e.  taking  the  Name  of  God  on  the  lips  on  every
trifling  occasion.  This  is  now  thought,  as  indeed  it  is,  ungentlemanly,  to  a  far  greater
extent  than  was  the  case  fifty  years  ago.  So  far  well.  Only  let  us  take  care  that  for
a  custom  to  be  out  of  fashion,  dues  not  act  with  us  more  powerfully  than  its  offensive-
tiess  to  God,  in  inducing  us  to  give  it  up!  Some  are  more  concerned  at  a  hole  in  their
manners  than  at  a  breach  of  morals.  These  things  ought  not  so  to  be.  4.  Frivolity  in
reference  to  Divine  things  is  a  transgression  of  this  command.  Tliis  is  by  no  means
to  be  confounded  either  with  scofilng  or  with  profanity.  It  may  be  found  where  there
is  great  reverence  for  God,  great  kindness  of  heart,  combined  with  an  excessive  fondness
for  raising  a  laugh.  And  where  this  is  the  case,  even  sacred  things  are  but  too  seldom
exempt  from  frivolous  treatment.  We  recall  some  acquaintance  whose  chief,  yea,  whose
only  apparent  fault,  was  the  extreme  tendency  to  turn  everything  into  a  joke,  even
things  most  sacred.  Many  were  ready  to  excuse  the  frivolity  for  the  sake  of  the  talent  it
revealed.  But  they  are  "nowliere"  now.  Their  levity  was  their  ruin.  Wit  and  humour
have  indeed  a  place  of  no  mean  value  in  social  life.  Social  evils  are  often  exposed  more
effectively  in  scoin  and  satire  than  in  graver  speeches.  But  there  is  no  tendency  of
any  man  which  needs  to  be  more  wisely  cultured,  more  carefully  and  prayerfully
guarded,  and  more  conscientiously  directed,  than  that  to  which  we  are  now  referring.
Apart  from  this,  there  is  exceedingly  great  danger  of  its  leading  to  the  "taking  the
Name  of  God  in  vain."  5.  There  may  be  a  breach  of  this  commandment  without
frivolity  (as  usually  understood),  even  where  there  is  no  sense  of  humour  and  no  talent
for  witticisms,  in  the  indulgence  of  a  vicious  habit,  much  more  easily  formed  than
broken  off,  of  interlarding  the  conversation  with  certain  well-known  epithets.  We  know
what  these  were  in  Christ's  time  (see  M^tt.  xxiii.  16 — 22 ;  v.  33 — 36).  This  is  conceited
talk,  and  it  is  sinful  talk.  6.  False  teaching  for  Ood  hreaks  this  law  (see  Jer.  xxiii.
L'l — 24,  31).  There  are  several  ways  by  which,  in  teaching  others,  the  Name  of  God
may  be  taken  falsely.  Either  (1)  by  declaring  as  God's  what  he  has  not  said;  or  by
(2)  denying  what  he  has  said;  or  (3)  by  calling  in  question  the  truth  of  what  he  has
spoken.  The  first  was  common  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah ;  the  second  and  third  are  at
once  more  ancient  and  more  modern.  Whenever  any  ambassador  for  Ood  gives  his  own
thoughts  as  if  they  were  Ood's  message,  he  is  taking  the  Name  of  God  in  vain.  Or  if  a
man,  while  professing  to  speak  for  God,  is  speaking  with  the  desire  to  exalt  himself,  he
is  guilty  of  the  same  sin.  7.  Eollowness  and  formality  in  the  professed  worship  of
odd  are  breaches  of  the  third  commandment.  We  take  God's  Name  in  vain  if  we  sing
"  Ihe  songs  of  Zion  "  with  a  vacant  heart,  or  outwardly  join  in  the  prayers  of  the  sanctuary


OH,  T.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  93


without  devotion  in  the  soul  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  30,  31 ;  Isa.  xxjx.  13).  Oh,  the  number  of
times  we  have  been  on  our  knees  and  have  used  the  Name  of  God  in  "indolent  vacuity
of  thought " !  "  Who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  holy  Lord  God  ?  "  8.  We  may  break
this  commandment  by  vowing  unto  Ood,  and  then  not  fulfilling  the  vow.  When  at  the
Lord's  table,  we  take  the  sacramental  oath  of  obedience  to  our  Great  Commander,  and  if
we  are  not  true  to  that,  we  add  sin  to  sin  by  "  taking  the  Name  of  God  in  vain."

IL  How  IS  THIS  PRECEPT  GUARDED?  "The  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless,''  etc.
God  mayor  may  not  mark  this  sin  by  visitations  of  temporal  judgment;  there  are
many  cases  in  which  levity  has  been  the  ruin  of  a  man,  even  temporally.  But  the
probability  is  that  the  more  occult  and  deceptive  forms  of  this  sin  will  leave  no  appre-
ciable mark  on  a  man's  earthly  career.  The  marking  of  the  guilt  will  be  between  God
and  a  man's  own  soul.  Hollow  prayers  bring  no  blessing ;  empty  worship  no  growth  in
grace.  Violated  vows  will  bring  down  the  displeasure  of  God.  If  God  were  to  visit
upon  us  all  the  sins  of  unreality  and  formalism,  of  mechanical  routine,  and  of  heartless
work  in  his  service,  we  should  be  lost  men !  "  God  often  sees  more  in  our  prayers  to
disgust  him  than  to  please  him,"  says  Charnock.  The  Lord  pardon  the  iniquity  of  our
holy  things !

III.  How  EHOUiiD  THIS  PRECEPT  BE  USED?  1.  As  a probe.  Possibly,  when  a  preacher
takes  this  text,  some  may  say,  "  We  don't  need  that.  We  never  break  God's  law  so  1 "
Possibly  not,  in  the  conventional  sense  in  which  tlie  text  is  often  used  now.  But  what
about  that  conversation  laden  with  frivolity?  What  about  that  lisson  which  had
more  of  self  than  of  God  in  it  ?  What  about  the  songs  of  the  sanctuary,  enjoyed  for
the  sake  of  the  music,  without  a  thought  of  the  words?  What  about  tlie  forgotten
vows?  Surely  we  can  all  recall  so  many  breaches  of  this  third  commandment  that,  if
we  had  not  a  pardoning  God,  we  should  be  shut  up  in  despair !  2.  To  quicken  to  peni-
tence. By  so  much  as  our  conviction  is  deep  that  we  have  broken  this  commandment
a  thousand  times,  by  so  much  should  our  penitence  be  deep  and  definite  before  God.  3.
To  lead  us  to  earnest  entreaties  for  forgiveness.  If  we  were  not  permitted  to  ask  this,  it
would  be  hll  over  with  us,  even  if  the  third  commandment  were  the  whole  of  the  Law.
4.  To  lead  to  fervent  prayer  for  daily  heart-renewal.  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the
heart  the  mouth  speaketh."  If  the  heart  is  right  the  tongue  will  be  right.  "  If  a  man
(iffeiid  not  in  word,  the  same  is  a  perfect  man."  Well  may  we  pray  that  every  word
we  spi  ak  may  be  conformed  to  truth  {for  in  each  of  the  eight  ways  named  above  there  is
a  violation  of  truth).  When  our  heart,  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds  are  in  harmony
with  God's  nature  and  will,  then  shall  we  be  true  to  the  duty  implied,  and  free  from
the  sin  forbidden,  in  the  third  commandment.

Vers.  12 — 15. — The  sabbath,  or  a  rest-day  for  man.  (For  a  notice  of  the  variations
between  tlie  wording  of  this  command  in  Exod.  xx.  and  in  this  chapter,  see  Exposition.)
No  Christian  preacher  could  wisely  deal  homiletically  with  the  question  of  the  Divine
intent  in  the  appointment  of  a  seventh-day  rest,  without  noting,  in  connection  with  our
text,  the  teaching  of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles  thereon.  In  developing  the  true  doctrine
and  use  of  our  rest  day,  let  us —

I.  Indicate  several  principles  from  which  our  conception  of  the  Hebrew
SABBATH  MUST  START.  The  Hebrew  sabbath  has  a  far- back  look.  "  The  seventh  day
is  the  sabbath  of  the  Lord  thy  God."  What  sp.aces  of  time  the  "  six  days  "  represent
we  may  perhaps  never  know  in  this  life.  One  thing  is  clear — a  "day"  of  Divine
action  must  be  indefinitely  longer  than  one  of  man's  days.  This  far-back  look,  more-
over, reveals  to  us  a  method  of  Divine  work,  after  which  ours  is  to  be  modelled.  As
man's  nature  is  made  in  God's  iman;e,  so  our  time  is  to  be  portioned  out  after  God's
order.  Further,  the  basis  of  the  right  observance  of  the  day  is  that  of  "  rest."  The
word  "  sabbath  "  means  that ;  whatever  else  may  have  been  connected  with  the  day,  the
notion  of  rest  lay  beneath  all.  While  the  Hebrews  were  to  regard  the  observance  of
the  day  as  a  part  of  their  covenanted  duty  as  a  nation,  yet  the  rest  was  not  for  them  as
Hebrews  only,  but  as  men.  The  sabbath  was  made  for  man.  Work  was  to  be  laid
aside,  that  man  might  give  himself  up  to  a  holy  and  happy  day  of  rest  and  worship.
With  a  view,  moreover,  to  securing  all  this,  the  work  of  the  six  other  days  was  to  be
arrangi'd.

II.  TH£   SUBSEQUENT   PRECEPTS   ARE   ALL   IN   THE   SAME   DIRECTION.      NeVer    Ib   then


ai  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  v.  1-SJ.

auything  out  of  harmony  with  this  benign  command  to  rest  (see  Exod.  xvi.  29 ;  xxi^i.
9 — 13 ;  xxxi.  13 ;  xxxiv.  21 ;  xxxv.  1 — 3  ;  Lev.  xix.  3,  30  ;  xxxiii.  3  ;  xxvi.  2 ;  Numb.
XV.  32 — 36).  Of  such  importance  to  the  good  of  the  people  was  their  rest  day,  that  if
a  man  attempted  to  turn  it  into  a  day  of  common  work,  he  was  to  be  stoned !  Severity
to  the  one  was  a  guard  of  mercy  round  all  1  If  the  people  could  not  or  would  not  guard
their  rest  day  for  themselves,  the  great  Lord  who  gave  it  would  shield  it  for  them  all!
In  course  of  time  these  precepts  were  grievously  disobeyed,  either  by  an  entire  neglect
of  the  day,  or  by  a  merely /ormaZ  obsei  vance  of  it  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21 ;  Neh.  ix.  14 ;
X.  31;  xiii.  15,16;  Isa.  i.  13;  Ivi.  2;  Iviii.  13;  Jer.  xvii.  19—27;  Ezik.  xx.  12,  13;
xxii.  8,  26).  Later  on,  when  Jesus  Christ  came,  many  had  lost  the  spirit  of  the  day  in
the  letter ;  so  that  the  day  which  was  given  to  man  as  a  boon  of  mercy  had  come  to  be
a  chafing  yoke  and  a  grievous  burden.  Consequently,  not  even  Jesus  Christ  wa$  a
sufficiently  strict  sahhath-keeper  for  the  Fharisees  (Matt.  xii.  1 — 8;  Mark  ii.  23 — 28;
iii.  ] — 5;  Luke  xiii.  10 — 17  ;  John  v.  1 — 16;  vii.  23,  24).  Hence,  Jesus  in  his  teach-
ing; respecting  the  sabbath,  did  not  divert  it  fivm,  but  restored  it  to,  its  original  intent.
The  sabbath  (is  God  made  it,  was  restful,  beautiful,  and /ree.  As  rabbinical  teaching
had  perverted  it,  it  was  rigid  and  burdensome.  Men  came  to  be  on  the  sabbath
under  a  hard  yoke ;  but  it  was  inan,'»  yoke,  not  God's  (see  in  Dr.  Geikie's  '  Life  of  Christ '
abundant  illustrations  of  this).

III.  New  Testament  indications  vary  in  form  but  accord  in  spirit.  We  find  in
the  New  Testament  some  passages  which  indicate  some  observance  of  the  first  day  of
the  week  (John  xx.  19 — ^26 ;  Acts  xx.  7 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  2 ;  Hev.  i.  10).  It  is  remarkable
how  few  there  are  of  such.  We  have  no  specific  precept  to  direct  us  with  regard  to  a
Christian  sabbath.  There  is  nothing  very  clear  on  the  matter,  either  in  the  Gospels  or
the  Epistles.  Judaism  is  waning; ;  what  is  peculiar  to  it  dies  away ;  what  is  world-
wide and  for  humanity,  lives.  We  seem  to  see  the  seventh  day  receding  from  our  gaze,
its  lustre  fades  and  is  lost  in  the  brightness  of  the  first  day.  There  is  a  dissolving  view.
Winter  is  succeeded  by  spring.  Here  is  something  which  has  Christ's  sanction  and
apostolic  warrant,  viz.  meeting  on  the  first  day.  It  is  the  day  of  religious  assembling,
the  day  of  "  breaking  bread."  The  God  of  Sinai  has  invested  the  Son  of  man  with  all
power  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  sabbatli.  Memories  of  the  great
deliverance  wrought  by  him  eclipse  those  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt.  Wherefore,
ever  after,  rest-day  becomes  "  tlie  Lord's  day."  Ignatius  says,  "  Let  every  friend  of
Christ  celebrate  the  Lord's  day."  Justin  Martyr,  "  On  the  Lord's  day,  all  Christians  in
the  city  and  in  the  country  assemble  together,  because  that  is  the  day  of  the  Lord's
resurrection."  Tertullian,  "  The  Lord's  day  is  the  holy  day  of  the  Christian  Church.
So  gradually,  however,  did  the  seventh-day  sabbath  change  into  the  first-day  rest,  that
we  find  for  a  while  hath  days  observed..  Accordingly  we  find,  in  '  The  Apostolic  Constitu-
tion,' both  days  named  as  days  fur  the  assembling  of  the  Church  ;  that  on  the  sabbath
and  on  the  Sunday  the  slaves  should  rest  from  their  labours,  and  attend  church  with  the
rest  to  hear  the  sermon.  But  as  the  new  skin  is  forming  under  the  surface,  the  old  is
getting  looser  and  looser.  Yet  for  a  time,  there  are  two  coverings.  Soon,  however,  the
old  is  shuffled  off,  and  only  the  new  is  seen.  The  sabbath  is  lobt,  but  rest-day  reappears
as  the  Lord's  day  I

IV.  How  STANDS  THE  REST-DAY  NOW  ?  The  fourth  Commandment  had  a  natural
basis  and  a  religious  one.  It  fjave  a  day  of  rest  for  man  as  man,  and,  as  such,  has  never
been  repealed.  God  has  never  taken  away  the  world's  rest-day.  It  is  ours  still — a
priceless  heritage.  The  religious  side  of  the  Hebrew  sabbath,  though  abolished  so  far
as  the  ohservance  of  Jfi  ish  rites  is  concerned,  was  at  once  taken  up  by  the  Christian
Church,  and  Christians  have,  as  we  well  know,  by  meeting  for  worship  on  the  first  day,
recognized  the  principle  of  a  world's  rest-day,  and  have  used  it  for  the  hi  :'ie.  purposes
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  And  now  to  us  the  Lord's  day  is  (1)  our  c.y  of  rest  from
earthly  toil;  (2)  thedayofha'lnwedcalm  ;  (3)  of  richest  memory ;  (4)  of  united  worship;
(5)  of  mutual  recognition  of  our  common  relationship  to  one  God  and  Saviour;  (6)
of  spiritual  training;  (7)  ol  holiest  service  for  the  Master;  (K)  of  noblest  outlook  (see
Dr.  R.  W.  Hamilton's  '  Horsa  Sabbaticaj ').

V.  What  is  our  duty  with  reqard  to  our  rest-day?  1.  As  men,  let  us  regard  it
as  an  inestimable  boon  for  the  righ ,  use  of  which  we  are  responsible  to  God.  We  are
■o  made,  as  to  our  physical  constitution,  that  we  require  one  day's  rest  in  seven.    Then


OH.  V.  1— 33.J  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  95

let  us  take  the  rest  gratefully.  2.  As  citizens,  we  have  a  trust  to  guard  for  our  fellow-
countrymen.  Legislation  can  never  direct  a  man  how  to  spend  his  lest-day,  but  it  may
do  something  to  guard  it  fur  him.  While  we  use  the  rest  wisely,  so  that  it  makes  us
not  only  brisker  animals,  but  holier  men,  let  us  also  give  others  the  rest.  3.  As
Christians,  we  have  a  sacred  day  for  sanctuary  worship,  and  for  home  and  school  in-
si ruction.  We  should  do  everything  to  show  the  young  that  the  Sunday  is  a  bright,
li^^lit,  cheery  day,  remembering  that  whatever  helps  best  to  health,  rest,  worship,  and
holiness  is,  and  always  has  heen,  lawful  on  the  sabbath  day.  4.  As  workers  for  God,  the
rest  day  is  our  glorious  day  of  special  service  for  Christ  and  for  souls,  in  the  very  fatigue
of  which  the  spirit  finds  refreshment.  Then  surely  we  enter  into  the  Master's  spirit.
Our  meat  is  to  do  the  v/ill  of  him  who  hath  sent  us,  and  to  finish  his  work.

Ver.  16. — The  fifth  commandment.  Uonour  due  to  parents;  or,  the  religion  of  home
life.  Many  are  the  passages  in  the  Word  of  Gud  which  speak  of  or  refer  to  the  duty
of  children  to  their  parents,  e.g.  Exod.  xxi.  15, 17  ;  Lev.  xix.  3 ;  xx.  9 ;  oh.  xxi.  18 — 21 ;
xxvii.  16 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  5 — 8  ;  Pruv.  x.  1 ;  xiii.  1 ;  xx.  20 ;  xxiii.  22  ;  xxx.  17 ;  Jer.  xxxv.
18 ;  Ezek.  xxii.  7 ;  Matt.  xv.  4 — 9 ;  Col.  iii.  20.  It  is  worthy  of  careful  noting,  that
when  God  would  launch  forth  into  the  world  a  new  national  life,  he  lays  great  stress
on  the  recognition  of  and  regard  io  family  sacredness.  At  the  outset  of  the  redemption
from  Egypt,  family  life  was  specially  hallowed  (cf.  Exod.  xii.  24 — 27 ;  xiii.  8,  9).  The
covenant  of  circumcision  handed  down  from  Abraham  was  to  be  observed.  Children
were  to  be  sealed  as  the  Lord's,  and  brought  up  in  his  fear.  That  is  here  assumed.
It  was  the  understood  law.  And  now,  when  a  moral  code  for  the  nation  and  for
the  world  for  all  time  is  to  be  laid  down,  the  very  next  precept  to  those  relating
immediately  to  the  honour  due  to  God  himself,  is  this — "  Honour  thy  father  and
thy  mother."  Not,  indeed,  that  they  were  to  render  them  a  blind  obedience,  for
■ee  Ezek.  xx.  18,  19,  If  the  parents  were  bad,  the  best  honour  the  children  can
render  them  is  to  become  better  than  they  were.  So  tliat  we  may  note,  occe  for
all,  in  passing,  that  the  commandment  recognizes  it  as  incumbent  on  parents
to  see  that  their  lives  and  rules  are  such  as  their  children  can  honour,  and  that
their  precepts  accord  with  those  of  the  Father  of  spirits.  Throughout  our  homi-
letic  application  of  this  fifth  commandment,  we  shall  assume  this  to  be  the  case.
It  is,  indeed,  understood  by  many,  that  this  command  is  to  be  regarded  not  only  as
requiring  obedience  in  the  family,  but  "  as  requiring  the  preserving  the  honour  and
performing  the  duties  belonging  to  every  one,  in  their  several  places  and  relations,  as
superiors,  inferiors,  or  equals ; "  and  as  forbidding  "  the  neglecting  of  or  doing  anything
against  the  honour  and  duty  which  belongeth  to  every  one,  in  their  several  places  and
relations."  Doubtless  this  is  so.  But  there  is  quite  as  much  as  we  can  compass  in  the
brief  space  afforded  us,  in  the  specific  duty  named  in  the  texi.    Let  us —

I.  iNQnmE  IK  WHAT  WATS  THIS  PKECBPT  MAT  BE  FULFILLED.  1,  During  the  earlier
stages  of  life,  while  needing  the  fostering  care  and  sheltering  love  of  the  home,  implicit
obMiience  is  a  child's  first  duty.  We  not  only  say  that  it  is  next  to  his  duty  to  God,
but  that  it  is  a  part  of  it.  The  parent's  precepts  may  be  distasteful,  even  rigid,
but  if  they  are  right,  it  is  the  child's  part  implicitly  to  obey.  2.  Honouring  parents
is  the  form  which  obedience  will  take  when  the  child  is  growing  up  towards  manhood.
No  wise  parent  would  think  of  directing  a  lad  of  sixteen  as  closely  as  he  would  a  child
of  six  years ;  at  the  same  time,  th  )ugh  the  father  may  give  him  more  liberty,  it  may
not  be  either  wise  or  right  on  the  son's  part  to  take  all  the  liberty  which  is  given.  At
that  age  his  own  sense  of  honour  and  right  ought  to  be  sufficiently  strong  to  guide
him ;  and  raipect  and  reverence  for  his  parents  will  create  a  loyal  regard  to  their  wishes
when  cnce  they  are  known,  and  will  lead  him  to  deny  himself  a  great  deal  that  might
he  gratifying  to  him,  rather  than  cause  pain  to  or  cross  the  wishes  of  those  to  whom
he  owes  his  life.  Rude  words  to  a  parent,  "  answering  again,"  disputing  his  rule  in  the
house,  will  be  utterly  out  of  the  question  where  a  youth  wishes  to  live  in  the  fear  of
God.  3.  Supporting  them  may  become  a  duty.  There  will  come  a  time,  if  the  parents
•re  spared  to  see  their  children  grow  up  in  life,  when  they  will  lean  on  the  children,
rather  than  the  children  on  them.  If  the  children  are  worthy,  they  will  let  their  parents
lean  on  them,  and  will  show  them  that  they  can  be  as  faithful  to  their  parents  in  their
weakness,  as  the  parents  when  in  their  strength  were  to  them.  4.  Becoming  an  honoui


96  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  v.  1—33.

to  them  is  another  way  of  honouring  them,  i.e.  by  living  so  that  they  can  feel  proud
of  what  their  children  ore,  quite  apart  from  wjiat  they  do.  If  a  father  can  say,  "  My
«on  never  gave  me  an  uneasy  thought  about  him,"  that  is  such  a  testimony  as  a  son
might  vfell  wish  him  to  be  able  to  bear.  5.  By  guarding  very  jealously  the  sacredness
and  purity  of  England's  family  life,  the  commandment  may  be  obeyed.  We  may  honour
our  parents  by  honouring  that  holy  marriage  tie  which  made  them  what  they  were
to  us.  6.  By  guarding  and  handing  down  to  others  the  holy  faith  in  which  they  have
trained  us  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  1 — 8 ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9).  We  may  well  desire  to  honour  them
by  taking  on  our  lips  that  dear  Name  which  gladdened  them  in  life  and  sustained  them
in  death.  7.  There  is  another  way  of  honouring  parents  which  we  would  there  were
no  occasion  to  name.  But  there  is  a  drift  clearly  to  be  discerned  in  some  directions
of  English  life,  which  makes  a  warning  imperative  (see  Matt.  xv.  1 — 9).  The  Jewish
rabbis  put  their  Church  and  their  rabbinical  rules  between  a  child  and  his  parents.
Modern  (so-called)  priests  are  doing  the  same  now.  Hence  this  rule  :  Honour  your
parents  by  refusing  to  let  any  priest  edge  his  way  In  between  you  and  them.  In  Divine
institutions,  the  priest  is  nowhere  compared  with  the  parent.  And  under  the  Christian
economy  he  has  no  right  to  be.  He  is  humanity's  pest  and  plague.  "  Honour  thy
father  and  thy  mother,"  and  never  allow  a  priest  to  tamper  with  the  sacredness  of  home !

II.   Bt  what  SFECIAIi  ABanUENTS  MAT  A  CHRISTIAN  TEACHER   ENFORCE  THIS  DUTY  ?

1.  Here  let  us  set  in  the  front  a  reason  given  by  Paul  in  Eph.  vi.  1, "  It  is  right  (SiKaioi/)."
There  is  another  word  which  is  usually  translated  "right,"  viz.  euflus,  which  is  the
equivalent  of  "  straightforward."  But  the  word  here  used  is  "  just."  Obediisnce  to
parents  is  simply  a  piece  of  bare  justice.  For,  consider  how  much  we  owe  them.  When
we  first  came  into  being  their  care  and  watchfulness  guarded  and  supplied  us  long
ere  we  knew  aught.  They  thought  us,  perhaps,  something  wonderful,  when  no  one
else  thought  anything  of  the  kind,  save  in  the  reverse  sense.  Ought  not  all  this  to
be  repaid?  2.  It  is  well-pleasing  to  the  Lord.  He  has  in  this  "  set  us  an  example,
that  we  should  follow  his  steps."  3.  There  is  a  specific  promise  made  to  the  obedient
and  loyal,  as  such,  "  That  it  may  go  well  with  thee,"  etc.  In  the  culture  of  home
obedience  will  be  found  a  strong  safeguard  of  charncter.  Vicious  excesses  will  not
exhaust.  Insubordination  anil  recklessness  will  not  blight  life's  prospects.  Hejice  ccet.
par.  such  a  life,  being  the  purest  and  happiest,  will  also  be  the  longest.  4.  Such  home
virtue  is  a  contribution  of  no  mean  value  to  the  stability  of  a  state.  The  reference  of
Moses  is  to  the  weal  of  the  nation  as  well  as  to  that  of  the  home.  The  downfall  of
Israel's  glory  is  attributed  to  two  evils:  neglect  of  sabbaths,  and  making  light  of
father  and  mother.  No  nation  can  prosper  without  purity  in  the  home.  5.  Such
virtue  brings  great  joy.  "A  wise  son  maketh  a  glad  father."  There  is  joyousness
on  both  sides.  This  is  the  beauty  with  which  God's  blessing  makes  the  plants  of
virtue  to  bloom.  It  is  like  the  fragrance  exhaling  from  a  bed  of  violets  quietly  blos-
soming in  a  shady  lanp.  6.  The  neglect  of  this  will  ensnre'many  unavailing  regrets
on  both  sides  in  after  j'fe.  "A  foolish  son  is  the  heaviness  of  his  mother."  Many
an  undutiful  son,  when  aying  his  parents'  remains  in  the  grave,  would  give  all  he  hag
if  he  could  but  call  them  .lack,  if  he  could  atone  for  his  sin,  or  could  cancel  the  past  !
Disobedience  treasures  up  sorrow.  God  may  and  will  forgive  the  sin,  when  repented
of,  but  the  penitent  will  never  forgive  himself;  he  will  often  moan  out,  "  Thou  makest
me  to  possess  the  iniquities  of  my  youth ! "  7.  The  curse  of  God  will  test  on  those  who
are  loose  and  disloyal  at  home.  Bichard  Enill  so  regarded  this  fifth  commandment,
that  he  would  not  even  go  out  as  a  missionary  without  his  mother's  consent.  lie  said,
"  I  know  that  Ood  never  smiles  on  a  boy  that  breaks  his  mother's  heart."  (See  Prov.
XXX.  17.)  And  who  does  not  know  'aow  often  it  is  proved  true,  "  With  what  measure
ye  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again  "  ?  Jacob  deceived  his  father,  and  his  sens
deceived  him.  Can  any  observant  man  reach  middle  life  without  having  had  oft  to
make  such  notes  as  these :  "  A  "  honoured  his  parents,  and  honour  has  attended  him,
"  B "  dwhonoured  his  parents,  and  his  lamp  has  gone  out  in  darkness  ?  Though  the
judgment  has  not  yet  come,  yet  there  is  a  judging  process  of  God's  providence  con-
tinually at  work.  8.  The  observance  of  this  rule  is  the  best  possible  preparation  for
serving  our  generation  according  to  the  will  of  God.  He  who  is  a  blessing  in  the  home
will  never  be  a  curse  out  of  it  1  The  habits  of  self-restraint,  of  courtesy,  of  respect  to
superiors,  well  learnt  and  practised  at  home,  will  not  be  thrown  off  when  outside  its


on.  V.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEBONOMY.  »T

walls.  Msn  learn  to  command  well  by  first  obfiying  well.  Eyen  Christ's  own  prepara-
tion for  active  service  was  found  in  filial  obedience  at  home ;  and  he  is  not  only  our
perfect  example,  who  shows  us  what  to  do,  he  is  also  our  omnipotent  Saviour,  who  will
give  us  strenp;th  to  do  it.  Be  it  ours  to  repent  not  only  of  sin  in  general,  but  of  the
sin  of  disobedience  to  parents.  Let  us  ask  his  forgiveness  as  well  as  theirs,  if  the  latter
is  yet  possible.  Let  us  implore  his  renewing  grace  that  we  may  henceforth  keep  this
and  every  command,  not  only  because  it  is  written  in  the  Book,  but  because  the  love
of  it  is  graven  on  our  hearts.  It  will  be  no  small  addition  to  the  joy  of  retrospect,  if,
as  we  afterwards  look  back  on  our  home  life,  we  can  think  of  it  m  one  of  filial  loyalty
on  one  side  and  of  parental  delight  on  the  other  1

Ver.  17. —  The  sixth  commandment.  The  religion  of  the  temper.  If'  a  preacher  were  to
announce  this  as  a  text  in  one  of  our  Christian  congregations,  some  of  his  hearers  might
be  disposed  to  say,  "  Such  a  text  might  be  appropriate  enough  if  the  preacher  were
expounding  the  Word  of  God  to  Zulus,  but  for  us  civilized,  not  to  say  Christianized,
people,  it  is  out  of  place ! "  Obviously  such  a  remark  would  he  based  on  an  acknow-
ledged fact,  that  murder  is  one  of  those  sins  against  God  which  are  also  a  crime  against
human  law,  and  that  no  one  in  a  congregation  of  ordinary  character  would  be  likely  to
dream  of  committing  it.  That  is  so.  But  we  are  apt  to  forget  that  even  among
Christian  congregations  it  was  not  always  so.  When  Peter  is  writing  to  believers,  he
deems  it  needful  to  say,  "  Let  none  of  you  suffer  as  a  murderer"  etc.  And  even  now,  in
heathen  lands,  in  many  an  audience  of  men  just  reclaimed  from  barbarism,  it  might  be
necessary  for  a  missionary  to  preach  from  this  text,  adhering  to  it  simply  in  the  negativfl
form,  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill."  In  endeavouring  now  to  "  open  it  up  "  for  pulpit  use,  wt
would  recall  to  the  reader  some  elementary  principles  concerning  the  law  already
named.  1.  That  the  Law  was  first  given  in  infantine  form.  God  laid  down  precepts
rather  than  assigned  reasons.  2.  That  the  form  in  which  the  Divine  Being  could  put
the  most  effective  guard  around  human  life  was  by  a  stern  and  strong  prohibition  like
this,  proclaimed  amid  thunder  and  lightning,  terror  and  flame.  3.  That  though  the
form  of  the  precept  is  negative,  yet  it  has  a  positive  significance,  of  such  depth  and
breadth  that,  even  though  we  may  shrink  with  horror  from  transgressing  the  former,  it
is  by  no  means  an  elementary  stage  of  Christian  character  which  any  one  has  reached
if  he  attains  to  the  latter.  So  far  were  the  Jewish  rabbis  from  catching  the  spirit  of
this  command,  that  they  dealt  with  it  as  if  the  negative  prohibitions  of  the  act  of
murder  were  the  whole  of  its  meaning.  Our  Lord,  in  his  Sermon  on  the  Mount,  shows
us  how  much  deeper  than  this  the  precept  goes  (see  Matt.  v.  21 — 26).  And  the
Apostle  Paul,  in  Eom.  xiii.  9,  10,  indicates  what  positive  virtue  must  be  cultivated,
the  maintenance  of  which  will  make  it  impossible  to  transgress  the  sixth  command-
ment. If  we  include  in  our  Homily  a  notice  of  these  later  teachings,  it  may  appear
that,  even  with  all  our  advances,  there  is  something  here  for  us  to  study,  some  holy
practice  for  us  yet  to  strive  after,  urged  upon  us  by  weighty  reasons,  which,  though
not  presented  in  the  world's  childhood,  are  set  in  full  force  in  "  these  last  days."  Let
us,  then —

i.  Look  at  the  mbanino  of  this  command.  It  is  sixfold.  1.  It  forbids  the
taking  of  human  life  from  passionate  vindictiveness.  The  Hebrews  had,  as  we  have,
two  verbs  with  the  distinctive  meanings  of  "to  kill"  and  "  to  murder."  We  sep  in
the  quotation  in  Matt.  xix.  18,  and  from  the  reference  in  Matt.  v.  21,  that  the  Saviour
regards  the  command  as  a  prohibition  of  passionate  lawlessness.  But  even  had  we  not
that  light  from  Christ's  teaching,  the  legislation  of  Moses  himself  would  shut  us  up  to
the  same  conclusion.  For  in  the  administration  of  justice  and  in  necessary  war,  the
taking  of  life  was  commanded  (see  Numb.  xv.  35 ;  xxxv.  31 ;  Exod.  xxi.  12 — 14-).  So
that,  unless  we  regard  the  lawgiver  as  setting  enactment  against  enactment,  there  is  in
this  commandment  a  prohibition  of  passionate  outbreaks,  but  neither  of  capital  punish-
ment nor  necessary  war.  2,  It  forbids  any  carelessness  by  which  the  life  or  weal  of  our
neighbour  would  be  risked  (Exod.  xxi.  28,  29).  Wherever  human  life  is  risked  by  insuf-
ficient precaution,  there  is  a  breach  of  the  sixth  commandment.  3.  It  forbids  that  anger
which  takes  the  form  of  a  revengeful  spirit.  So  Christ  teaches.  This  precept  strikes
at  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart.  Every  time  a  schoolboy  anjjrily  lifts  a  hand
to  hurt  his  school-fellow,  he  is  breaking  in  spirit  this  commandment.    4.  It  forbids

OEUTEBONOMT.  H


98  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  v.  1-33.

that  indifference  in  our  life  to  the  power  of  example  which  would  put  a  stumbling-block  or
an  occasion  to  fall  in  a  brother's  way  (see  Matt,  xviii.  1 — 3 ;  Bom.  xiv.  5).  If  by
careless  liying  we  " destroy  "  him  for  whom  Christ  died,  we  aie  breakers  of  this  law.
6.  It  forbids  dislike  and  hatred  to  our  brother,  and  also  a  selfish  isolation  and  neglect  of
him  (1  John  ii.  9 — 11 ;  iii.  14, 15).  If  we  are  merely  pursuing  our  own  ends  in  life,  and
are  not  caring  whether  our  brother  is  saved  or  lost,  this  law  condemns  us.  If  we  even
refrain  from  helping  our  brother  in  difficulty  or  trial,  we  are  guilty  (Prov.  xxiv.  11,  12  ;
Isa.  Iviii.  6,  7).  We  may  "  kill "  by  withholding  the  help  which  might  save  1  6.  It
requires,  therefore,  the  cultivation  of  that  kindly  spirit  of  genial  benevolence,  which
would  seek  in  every  way  to  promote  the  gladness  and  safety  of  the  society  in  which  we
more,  and  of  men  at  large.  Negative  in  form,  the  sixth  commandment  is  positive  in
intent.  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill  "  is  but  the  elementary  form  in  which  God  asserts  the
great  law  of  mutual  dependence  and  interdependence.  "  Love  worketh  no  ill  to  his
neighbour.  Therefore  love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law."  Would  we  keep  the  command-
ment, "  Thou  shalt  not  kill "  ?  Let  us  read  it  in  the  New  Testament  light,  "  Thou
shalt  help  thy  neighbour."    "  He  that  loveth  another  hath  fulfilled  the  Law."

II.  We  would  throw  out  a  few  hints  as  to  the  ground  on  which  this
PKECEPT  IS  OB  MAY  BE  ENFORCED.  1.  The  prcoiousncss  of  man  in  God's  sight.  He
who  killed  a  beast  had  to  make  it  good ;  but  no  satisfaction  might  be  taken  for  the
life  of  a  murderer  (see-Gen.  ix.  6).  2.  The  spiritual  nature  of  man.  3.  The  high  and
holy  destiny  designed  lor  man  forbids  any  tampering  on  our  part  with  him  or  with  it.

nL  We  have,  moreovbe,  in  the  New  Testament,  a  new  sfbino  of  action
DISCLOSED.  This  should  actuate  us  in  refraining  from  violating,  and  in  seeking  to
fulfil,  the  law  of  love.  1.  The  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  is  so  touching  a  revelation
of  the  greatness  of  man,  and  does  of  itself  so  elevate  him,  that  no  one  realizing  it  can
trifle  with  man.  2.  The  atoning  sacrifice  gives  new  views  of  man.  After  the  Apostle
Paul  has  been  referring  to  the  death  of  Christ,  he  says,  "  Wherefore  hencefortli  know
we  no  man  after  the  flesh."  Christ's  death  for  every  man  has  shown  Us  a  halo  of  glory
a  ound  every  man.  We  look  at  him  no  more  according  to  the  accidents  of  birth,
position,  colour,  clime ;  we  judge  all  men  thus :  "  Christ  died  fur  them."  Oh !  it  is
this  cross  which  teaches  us  that  reverence  for  human  nature,  which  else  we  had  lost
altogether.  3.  The  incarnation  and  the , atoning  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  God  not  only
give  us  the  moving  spring  whereby  to  rise  to  a  proper  view  of  the  greatness  of  man,
but  also  the  supreme  reason  for  devoted  love  to  him,  for  Christ's  sake  (I  John  iv.
11,  20;  see  Eph.  iv.  31 ;  v.  1,  2).  With  what  immeasurable  strength  does  the  gospel
bind  us  to  fulfil  "  the  royal  law,"  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself"  1

IV.  This  newly  illumed  principle  of  love  will  ensure  the  fulfilment  of

THE  SIXTH   COMMANDMENT,   AND   WILL   EVEN   MAKE   A   BREACH  OP   IT  IMPOSSIBLE.      God

would  have  us  lifted  up  by  his  love  to  so  high  a  level,  that  we  shall  learn  to  love  like
him,  even  with  a  love  (1)  of  good  will,  (2)  of  compassion,  (3)  of  forgiveness,  (4)  of
actual  service,  (5)  of  self-denying  sympathy  and  devotion.  This  is  the  love  which  "  is
born  of  God."  This  is  the  Divine  philosophy  of  obedience  to  law.  Learn,  in  con-
clusion :  1.  It  is  to  revelation  alone  that  we  owe  the  dearest  view  of  hitman  dignity.
It  is  not  from  philosophy,  nor  from  natural  science  that  we  learn  to  appreciate  man.
Whatever  science  may  have  to  say  as  to  his  physical  organism  (and  what  it  can  say
must  depend  on  its  own  appropriate  evidence),  it  is  the  "  image  of  God  "  which  ho
bears,  that  is  his  true  dignity,  and  around  it  is  the  Divine  guard  so  stringently  placed.
2.  From  Ood's  revelation  to  man  we  learn  respect  for  man  as  man.  Human  life  is  held
very  cheaply  in  lands  where  the  gospel  is  unknown,  and  even  in  lands  where  it  is
known  by  men  who  reject  it.  There  are  some,  indeed,  who  reject  gospel  light,  yet
borrow  gospel  morality,  and  call  it  theirs,  while  others  who  treat  it  as  "a  strange
thing"  are  already  darkly  suggesting  a  "morality"  gross  as  that  of  pagan  days.  3.
From  Ood's  revelation  we  gather  the  only  guarantte  for  human  security  and  peace.  It
is  by  the  cross  and  by  the  cross  alone  that  the  unity  of  man  in  a  world  wide  brother-
hood of  love  will  ever  be  secured.  4.  It  is  only  hy  the  new  life  bestowed  by  the  Spirit
of  Ood  that  we  come  to  possess  and  practise  this  love  to  which  the  cross  constrains.  We
may  all  of  us  have  refrained  from  an  open  breach  of  the  letter  of  the  sixth  command-
ment. Not  one  of  us  can  stand  its  searching  test  in  the  light  of  God's  pure  Word  I  Ah !
"  (AU  commandment  fit  for  Zulus  "  f    There  is  not  a  man  amongst   us   who  in  X\\6


OH.  T,  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEllOXOMY.  d'J

presence  of  its  all-searching  light,  is  not  utterly  condemned  I   (Jas.  ii.  10.)    "  Lord,
have  mercy  upon  us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep  this  law  1 "

Ver.  18. — The  seventh  commandment.  The  religion  of  the  body.  In  the  second  part
of  the  Decalogue  there  are  stern  prohihitions  against  sin,  without  any  positive
indication  of  the  opposite  virtue.  Nor  is  there  a  hint  of  how  to  attain  such  a  life
as  shall  make  an  offence  against  the  commandments  impossible,  so  that  unless  we
recognize  the  educatory  purpose  of  tlie  Law,  we  sliall  at  once  underrate  it  and  yet
overrate  it.  We  shall  underrate  it  if  we  forget  that  it  was  just  what  was  wanted,  and
•11  that  could  be  serviceable  at  the  time  of  its  promulgation  ;  we  shall  overrate  it  if  we
think  that  the  mere  prohibitory  letter  of  this  precept  expresses  the  whole  will  of  God
in  the  matter  to  which  it  refers.  We  will,  therefore,  set  side  by  side  therewith,  New
Testament  teachings.*  First,  let  us  look  at  Matt.  v.  27 — 29.  Just  as  in  referriug  to
rabbinical  teaching  on  the  sixth  commandment,  Jesus  Christ  tells  us  that  it  is  not
only  the  open  act  of  murder  which  is  forbidden,  but  even  the  spirit  of  anger  and  revenge
which  might  lead  to  it;  so  here,  it  is  not  merely  the  open  act  of  physical  degrada-
tion which  is  forbidden,  but  even  the  spirit  of  unhallowed  passion  which,  if  unbridled,
might  lead  to  it.  Nor  must  we  stop  here.  The  New  Testament  opens  up  to  ud  the
Divine  will  in  the  positive  direction  (1  Tbess.  iv.  3 — 5).  We  are  told  also  what  U  the
true  secret  of  attaining  a  life  which  conforms  to  that  will  (Gal.  v.  16).  If  we  cultivate
the  life  of  God  in  the  spirit,  the  lower  life  will  be  in  due  subjection.  Beasons,  more-
over, which  were  not  given  in  Israel's  childhood  are  given  now  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20) ;
while  the  issues  of  a  life  in  whiph  these  are  lost  sight  of,  are  put  before  us  in  diead
array  (1  Cor.  ix.  27).  Hence  a  homiletic  treatment  of  this  seventh  commandment  can
only  be  effective  as  it  deals  with  it  as  but  one  branch  of  a  subject,  wide,  deep,  and
high,  viz.  "  Ute  religion  of  the  body."    Observe —

L  QoD  CLAIMS  THE  GOVERNMENT  OF  OUR  WHOLE  NATURE.  We  regard  mau's  nature  as
triple— body,  soul,  and  spirit.  As  an  acute  and  learned  divine  remarks,  "  The  body  is  the
link  between  the  soul  and  the  wofld,  the  soul  is  the  link  between  the  body  and  tlie  spirit ;
the  spirit  is  the  link  between  the  soul  and  God."  It  is  in  reference  to  our  spirit-naturs
that  we  are  made  in  the  image  of  God.  He  is  "  the  Father  of  spirits."  The  same
Book  which  reveals  God  to  us,  reveals  us  to  ourselves.  Any  one  who  understands  the
structure  of  his  own  nature,  will  perceive  which  part  thereof  was  meant  to  rule  the
rest.  The  body  is  to  be  at  the  service  of  the  soul,  the  soul  is  to  be  regulated  by  the
spirit,  and  God  is  to  govern  all.  But  it  is  by  the  great  work  of  redemption  that
the  stamp  of  true  dignity  has  been  most  clearly  impressed  on  man.  The  Apostle  Paul
tells  us  that  it  was  through  the  cross  that  he  learned  truly  to  estimate  human  nature
(2  Cor.  v.  16).  And  elsewhere  he  argues,  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price ;  therefore
glorify  God  in  your  body."  Christ  is  "  the  Saviour  of  the  body."  If  we  are  the  Lord's,
our  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Ko  part  of  the  body  is  base  unless  basely
used.     All  its  functions  are  to  be  discharged  "  in  sanctification  and  honour."

II.  This  bacbedness  of  ottr  whole  nature,  as  redeemed  bt  Christ,  should  lbad

TO  A  "  religion  of  THE  BODY  "  ON  THE  PART  OF  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  NOT  ENTERED  ON  THE

MARRIED  STATE.  This  Seventh  command  is  far  broader  in  spirit  than  the  mere  lettet
would  indicate.  It  condemns  all  impurity  of  every  kind,  it  forbids  us  to  let  the  lower
self  run  off  with  the  higher,  and,  like  the  preceding  commands,  though  negative  in
form,  it  is  positive  in  substance.  It  bids  us :  1.  Let  our  own  nature  be  duly  honoured,
and  self-respect  be  diligently  cultivated.  2.  Observe  towards  others  that  self-same  respect
which  we-owe  to  ourselves,  on  the  same  ground,  and  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  sake.
The  art  of  "bridling  the  whole  body  "  is  one  of  tlie  most  important  in  a  life  of  godliness.

III.  A  DUB  REVERENCE  FOB  THE  SAOREBINESS  OF  HUMAN  NATURE  WILL  IMPART  SANCTITY

TO  THE  HARBIAOE  TIE.  Marriage  is  God's  holy  ordinance.  It  is  not  a  sacrament,  in
the  same  sense  in  which  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  are.  Neither  is  it  merely  a
civil  contract,  as  is  sometimes  shockingly  said.  It  is  a  union  of  two  in  the  closest  ties
of  nature,  based  on  an  a6Snity  of  spirit  which  leads  each  to  see  in  the  other  what  each
most  admires.  It  is  a  uniou  of  spirit  in  the  Lord  (if  it  be  all  that  it  should  be) ;
each  one  of  the  two  ceases  to  live  in  and  for  himself  or  herself,  and  begins  practically
to  unlearn  selfishness  by  living  for  the  other,  and  thus  the  reciprocal  outgoing  of  affec-
tion is  a  formative  action  of  spirit,  and  tends  to  the  very  noblest  culture  of  life.    And


100  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBBONOMY.  [on.  t.  1—33

where  the  Divine  idea  of  marriage  is  carried  out,  the  purely  natural  side  of  it  will  ba-
by no  means  the  only  one  or  even  the  highest  (see  Matthew  Henry's  touching  words
on  the  creation  of  woman,  and  also  Kalisch's  most  admirable  remarks  in  ms  com-
mentary on  Exod.  XX.  14,  on  the  position  of  woman  under  the  Hebrew  economy).
There  are  spheres  of  duty  which  are  most  appropriately  filled  by  men,  e.g.  those  in
professional  and  commercial  life ;  there  are  other  spheres  which  are  most  appropriately
filled  by  «7omen,  e.g.  those  in  the  quiet  of  the  home.  And  the  work  of  one  is  the  supple-
ment and  complement  of  the  work  of  the  other.  Hence  each  one  looks  to  the  other  for
the  discharge  of  special  service.  Thus  there  is  a  mutual  leaning  on  one  another.  And
if  the  crowning  joy  of  married  life  be  present  in  both  being  one  in  the  Lord, in  their
spiritual  fellowship  they  fan  each  other's  love  to  him  who  died  for  them.  Bach  will
supply  what  the  other  lacks.  Perhaps  the  strength  of  the  man  may  lie  chiefly  in  Intel-
lectual power.  That  of  the  woman  will  lie  in  tenderness,  and  also  in  far  keener  and  surer
perceptions  and  more  swiftly  acting  intuitions.  Thus,  through  one  being  the  fitting
complement  of  the  other,  they  become  mutual  helpers  in  all  that  is  right  and  Wise  and
true ;  and  as  even  before  they  were  made  one,  each  one  knew  how  to  possess  his  vessel
in  sanctification  and  honoitr,  so,  when  they  are  one,  each  honours  the  other,  by  making
the  sacred  union  subsei-vient  to  virtne  and  to  the  honour  of  God.  Thus  rolling  years
do  but  deepen  the  fondness  and  sweetness  of  their  love,  and  if  it  becomes  calmer  and
less  demonstrative,  it  is  because  it  has  become  fuller,  richer,  and  stronger.  When
youthful  ardour  dies  down,  the  holy  tie  is  holier  than  ever ;  their  very  souls  become
knit  together  in  one.  The  care  of  one  is  the  care  of  both ;  the  joy  of  one  is  the  joy  of
both ;  and  any  unkindness  that  stings  one  wounds  both.  As  two  trees  side  by  side  in
a  grove,  their  arms  interlace  and  inteilock,  yet  each  has  its  separate  root.  So  husband
and  wife,  as  trees  of  the  Lord's  own  light  hand  planting,  do  through  the  whole  of  this
earthly  life  become  inteilocked  with  growing  firmness,  wliile  their  one  Saviour  in  whom
they  live  is  the  common  joy  of  their  spirits,  their  one  hope  for  eternity  !  That  there
are  innumerable  cases  in  which  a  noble  type  of  Christian  excellence  is  reached  by  the
unmarried,  we  all  know.  While  marriage  opens  up  those  claims  in  the  discharge  of
which  the  most  symmetrical  character  is  usually  formed,  yet  Divine  grace  can  so  sway
the  spirit  as  to  ctilture  it  nobly  for  eternity,  irrespectively  of  these  sacred  ties.  There
are  fathers  and  mothers  in  Israel  who  are  so  by  spiritual  relationship.  Thus,  when  our
nature  is  duly  honoured  in  ourselves  and  others,  by  its  uppermost  part  being  kept  upper-
most, out  of  loyalty  to  Christ,  it  is  possible  for  both  the  married  and  unmarried  to
glorify  God  in  their  body  as  well  as  in  their  spirit.

IV.   It  is  obvious  that   if  through  the  EEDBBMINa  QBACB  OF  QoV  WE  HAVE  OCB
WHOLE  BBINQ  THUS  LIFTED   UP  INTO  A  HIGHER  EBQION,  THE   STERN   "  THOU   SHALT   NOT "

OF  Sinai  will  be  needed  no  more.  We  shall  have  risen  to  a  sphere  in  which  the
transgression  of  the  seventh  commandment  will  be  impossible  (see  1  John  iii.  9 ;  Gal.
V.  16,  24).  The  sure  guarantee  of  our  keeping  this  law,  in  the  spirit  as  well  as  in  the
letter,  is  for  us  to  be  so  re-created  by  God's  Spirit,  that  it  shall  be  impossible  for  us  to
break  it.    "  The  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man."

v.   We  SHOULD  NOT  FAIL  TO  NOTE  THE   IMPERATIVENESS  OF  THE  lAW.      If  thelB   are

those  who  are  not  in  the  region  of  a  higher  life,  as  indicated  above,  they  should  be
reminded  that  this  law,  in  its  wide  sweep  and  searching  depth,  condemns  all  impurity
of  every  kind;  it  discerns  "the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart."  Hence  the  words
in  Matt.  v.  28;  hence  the  warnings  in  Mark  iz.  43,  45,  47.  One  indulged  sin  will
drag  the  whole  man  after  it.  "Science,"  says  Dr.  Farrar,  "confirms  by  decisive
evidence  that  the  Lord  avenges  the  sins  of  the  flesh.  It  tells  us  that  men  must  possess
in  manhood  the  sins  of  their  youth ;  that  if  they  sow  to  the  flesh,  they  will  of  the  flesh
reap  corruption  ;  that  the  punishment  of  sensuality,  working  not  by  special  interven-
tions, but  by  general  laws,  bears  a  fearful  resemblance  to  the  sin  itself ;  that  the  Nemesis
of  a  desecrated  body  is  an  enfeebled  understanding,  a  tormented  and  darkened  soul ; "
and — the  writer  might  have  added — a  face  from  which  the  lustre  of  the  Divine  has
departed,  and  in  which  the  lines  of  a  true  manhood  are  manifestly  vitiated  and  defaced,
and  even  exchanged  fur  lines  of  sin  and  of  shameless  vice.  Let  all  take  heed  and
remember:  1.  That  where  each  one's  weak  point  is,  a  sentinel  should  be  kept  on
watch.  2.  We  are  not  safe  till  the  very  thoughts  a'-e  under  control.  3.  Only  the  Spirit
of  God  can  give  us  power  equal  to  this,  4,  Unless  we  keep  ourselves  in  subjection
we  shall  be  cast  away.


OH.  V.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  101

Ver.  19. — The  eighth,  commandment.  The  religion  of  the  hand.  There  is  mnch  to  lie
said  in  favour  of  the  proposition  that  utility  is  the  foundation  of  virtue ;  and  provided
that  the  sentence  he  well  cleared  up  and  guarded  from  ahuse,  and  provided  also  that
the  word  "  utility  "  be  lifted  up  to  its  highest,  and  spread  over  its  broadest  significance,
the  niaxim  is  less  objectionable  than  it  would  otherwise  appear.  While  it,  however,
has  been  and  will  he  discussed  in  the  philosopher's  class-room,  for  ages,  we  may  safely
go  so  far  as  to  say,  "  That  is  right  which  renders  the  highest  service  to  mankind,  and
by  its  having  this  tendency,  we  know  it  to  be  right."  Now,  among  serviceable  institu-
tions is  that  of  property,  which,  as  men  are  constituted,  is  a  necessity  of  social  weal.
If  rightness  consists  in  recognizing  the  rights  of  each,  the  necessity  of  property  comes
out  of  the  equality  of  natural  rights.  If  a  man  is  alone  in  the  world,  he  may  call  it
all  his  own.  If  there  is  a  brother  man  with  him,  they  must  divide  it  between  them.
Apart  from  the  institution  of  property,  one  incentive  to  labour  would  be  gone.  Who
would  be  likely  to  toil  day  by  d^^y  for  that  from  which  he  would  obtain  nought  when
the  work  was  over?  Now,  it  is  the  social  law  of  the  institution  of  property.  Divine  yet
natural,  yea,  natural  hecause  Divine,  the  existence  of  which  is  here  assumed,  and  the
recognition  of  which  is  here  enjoined:  in  the  barest  and  most  elementary  form,  it  is
true,  yet  in  the  very  form  best  according  with  the  circumstances  under  which  it  was
given ;  in  a  negative  form,  too,  like  the  other  commands,  but  yet  with  a  positive  intent.
Perhaps  there  is  no  one  of  the  commandments  which  is  more  extensively  commented
on,  and  repeated  in  so  many  forms  in  the  Old  Testament,  nor  one  the  violation  of  which
is  so  variously  prohibited.  Our  simplest  mode  of  treating  it  homiletically  seems  to  be
to  point  out  in  turn'  the  negative  prohibition,  and  the  positive  duty  which  is  to  be  set
over  against  it.

I.  Let  us  indicate  the  numerous  fobms  into  which  this  precept  is  thrown
IN  Scripture.  If  we  regard  the  spirit  of  it,  and  read  it  by  the  light  of  Old  Testament
teaching,  we  shall  find  it  set  in  great  variety  of  ways.  1.  It  forbids  our  depriving  any
man  of  any  right  whatever  (Lam.  iii.  35,  86).  2.  It  is  forbidden  to  gain  an  undue
advantage  at  another's  expense  (Exod.  xxiii.  3,  6,  8,  9;  Lev.  xix.  15;  ch.  xvi.  19,  20).
3.  It  is  forbidden  to  accumulate  wealth  by  unlawful  practices  (Prov.  x.  2;  it.  6).  4.
It  is  forbidden  to  take  long  credit  (Prov.  iii.  28 ;  Lev.  xix.  13).  5.  It  is  forbidden  to
oppress  a  poor  man  in  his  cause  (Exod.  xxii.  2fi,  27 ;  ch.  xv.  7,  10 — 13, 17,  18 ;  Prov.
xxii.  22,  23 ;  Micah  ii.  1 — 3 ;  iii.  1 — i).  6.  It  is  forbidden  to  pay  insufBcient  wages
(ch.  XXV.  4 ;  xxiv.  14,  15).  7.  To  lend  money  in  any  oppressive  or  exacting  form
(Exod.  xxii.  25;  Lev.  ixt.:.35 — 38;  ch.  xxiii.  19/  "The  name  'usurer'— 'J?es7iec —
which  is  derived  from  biting,  sounded  badly,  since  no  one  chose  to  be  likened  to  a
hungry  dog,  who  fed  himself  by  biting  others  "  (Calvin).  8.  To  take  advantage  of  the
stranger,  the  widow,  and  the  fatherless  (Exod.  xxii.  21 — 24 ;  ch.  x.  17 — 19 ;  Lev.  xix.
33,  34).  9.  Unfair  trading  (Lev.  xix.  35,  36  ;  ch.  xxv.  13—16;  Prov.  xi.  1 ;  xvi.  11  ;
XX.  10,  23 ;  Micah  vL  10—12).  10.  Imperilling  another's  property  (Exod.  xxi.
33—36).  11.  Life-long  slavery  (Exod.  xxi.  2;  ch.  xv.  12—18).  12.  Connivance  at
wrong  (Prov.  xxix.  24).  13.  Respect  of  persons  (Exod.  xxiii.  1 — 3).  14.  Revengeful
mischief  even  in  war-time  (ch.  xx.  19,  20).  15.  Removing  a  neighbour's  landmark
(ch.  xix.  14).  16.  Withholding  from  the  service  of  God  (Mai.  iii.  8,  9).  Whenever  we
withhold  what  is  due  to  God,  or  keep  back  what  we  owe  to  man, — if  the  masteris
unjust  to  his  servant,  or  the  servant  wastes  the  time  or  the  goods  of  his  master ;  if  a
man  is  guilty  of  trickery,  in  trade,  by  adulteration  of  goods,  or  scant  weight,  or  short
measure ;  if  a  man  is  in  any  way  deprived  of  his  own  right  or  freedom ;  if  we  take
undue  advantage  of  any  one  for  our  own  benefit,  we  are  guilty  of  breaking  the  com-
mand "  Thou  shalt  not  steal."

IL  Let  us  indicate  the  preceptive  words  which  are  set  over  aoainst
these  prohibitive  ones.  In  the  fuller  teaching  of  Moses  there  was  not  wanting  an
indication  of  an  opposite  duty,  the  cultivation  of  which  would  make  a  breach  of  the
eighth  commandment  altogether  out  of  the  question.  The  people  were  to  aim  at
cherishing  a  kindly  feeling  for  each  other,  and  instead  of  wishing  to  enrich  themselves
at  another's  expense,  they  were  to  seek  to  enrich  others,  and  to  find  their  joy  in  help-
ing the  needy  (Exod.  xxiii.  4 ;  Lev.  xxv.  35 ;  ch.  xv.  1 — 10 ;  xxii.  1 — 3 ;  xxiii.  19  ;
xxiv.  19).  While  in  Proverbs,  the  contrast  between  sloth  and  industry  in  said  to  b«
ono  mark  of  difference  between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked.


102  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  v.  1—33.

III.  The  teaching  of  the  New  Testament  is  still  more  explicit.  (See  Acts  xx.
35 ;  1  Cor.  x.  24 ;  Phil.  ii.  4,  5 ;  and  tpecially  Eph.  iv.  28.^  The  words  of  our  blessed
Lord  lingered  in  the  apostles'  ears  as  the  strains  of  a  lovely  song.  His  life  too  seemed
to  say,  "  Be  ever  ready  to  give  up  what  is  your  own,  if  thereby  you  can  help  another."
So  that  not  only  is  there  to  be  such  respect  for  the  rights  of  others,  that  we  do  not
infringe  on  them  by  abstracting  from  his  property ;  but  over  and  above  the  institu-
tion of  property,  which  is  recognized  and  guarded,  there  is  the  institution  of  laboui,
which  is  to  be  looked  at,  utilized,  sanctified,  so  as  to  subspi-ye  the  enrichment  of  otheis.
So  that  we  come  at  this  specific  rule :  Labour,  and  sanctify  your  labour  for  others  ;
then  you  will  be  in  no  danger  of  depriving  them  of  the  frails  of  their  labour  t  The
political  economist  says,  "  Regulate  labour  so  as  best  to  subserve  the  production  of
wealth."  So  far,  good.  But  Christian  maxims  go  higher,  and  say,  "  Pursue  and  regulate
labour  with  a  view  of  promoting  each  other's  well-being."  Now,  in  this  sanctification  of
labour  there  are  four  rules  to  be  observed.  1.  Labour  as  servants  of  Christ.  This  is  a
specific  direction  both  for  employer  and  employed.  Both  are  amenable  to  him  who  ii
the  Head  and  Lord  of  the  human  race.  In  his  eye  the  interests  of  the  human  family
are  the  supreme  concern  on  this  globe.  Material  wealth  is  to  him  as  nothing.  Men
are  his  purchased  possession ;  and  if  by  labour  we  increased  the  material  wealth  of  this
country  a  thousanii-folci,  if  thereby  one  soul  were  destroyed,  his  curse  would  rest  upon
such  labour.  2.  Labour  with  an  eye  to  the  glory  of  Ood :  not  only  as  his  servant»,
but  so  that  all  our  labour  may  promote  that  great  end  for  which  he  lived  and  died ;
and  just  in  proportion  as  this  is  the  case,  will  Christ  approve  our  toil.  3.  Labour  in
accordance  with  and  for  the  promotion  of  another's  good.  We  are  to  let  all  our  labours  be
in  harmony  with  another's  well-being.  We  may  not  make  ourselves  rich  at  the  ex-
I'ense  of  others ;  but  only  as  our  weal  accords  with  theirs.  All  this,  of  course,  applies
nationally  as  well  as  individually.  It  is  as  clearly  wrong  for  a  nation  to  steal  a  con-
tinent as  for  a  man  to  steal  a  shilling!  And  if  we  so  labour  as  to  ignore  the  good  of
another,  we  shall  find  that  "  there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth !  "  4.  But  it  is  not
enough  that  there  should  be  an  absence  of  spoliation  or  greed,  nor  that  labour  should
merely  accord  with  human  good ;  it  is  required  of  us  that  one  direct  object  and  aim  of
our  labour  should  be  the  increase  of  ou/r  wealth  that  we  may  have  the  wherewith  to  give.
As  between  man  and  man,  the  great  God  upholds  our  right  to  the  produce  of  our
labour.  As  between  ourselves  and  him,  he  says,  "  Use  for  your  brother's  good,  the
wealth  you  get.  You  are  but  a  steward.  Nothing  is  yours  absolutely.  What  hast
thou  that  thou  hast  not  received?  Work,  that  you  may  get.  Get,  that  you  may  have
to  give."  "  The  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land."  If,'  by  «ny  sudden  spurt,  wealth
could  be  equalized  to-day,  it  would  be  unequal  in  twenty-fours  hour,  and  in  twelve
months  scarcely  a  trace  would  be  left  of  the  readjustment.  Some  would  be  workers
and  some  idlers ;  some  spendthrifts  and  some  misnrs ;  and  any  rectification  of  property,
apart  from  the  right- setting  of  men,  would  be  of  no  avail.  And,  at  any  rate,  so  long
as  there  are  claims  upon  our  sympathy,  so  long  our  labour  is  to  have  this  stamp  upon
it :  La' our,  to  gain  the  power  of  giving ;  and  this  is  the  antidote  for  any  danger  of
breaking  the  eighth  commandment.  Yet,  strange  to  say,  there  are  not  wanting  those
who  object,  on  grounds  of  "  political  economy,"  to  the  withdrawal  of  a  man's  gains  for
the  purposes  of  benevolence  (see  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer,  Contemporary  Review,  xix.  556).
Now,  no  one  would  question  that  there  is  a  large  amount  of  unwise  charity ;  but  the
proportion  is  insignificant  between  that  and  the  vast  amoudt  of  ill-gotten  and  ill-
used  wealth  in  our  cities  and  towns.  The  former  is  not  worth  naming  by  the  side  of
the  latter.  And  the  hearts  of  men  are  not  so  over- generous  that  they  need  to  be  dis-
suaded from  giving,  by  arguments  which  could  hold  only  if  men  were  nought  else  but
wage-get  ting -animals!  But  whoever  fulfils  his  labour  in  a  spirit  of  loyalty  to  Christ
and  of  kindliness  to  his  brother,  will  find  in  labour  so  discharged,  a  holy  and  blessed
discipline  of  character.  Shall  we  live  under  the  low,  selfish  calculations  of  earth,  or
under  the  higher  regulations  of  heaven?  There  is  a  wealth — a  wealth  most  to  t*
coveted — which  comes  not  as  a  heritage  of  birth,  but  as  the  reward  of  giving  to  others
according  as  they  have  need.  Acting  on  worldly  maxims,  a  man  might  live  for  a
thousand  years  and  he  will  never  have  it.  Acting  on  Christ's  rule,  he  will  reap  it  as
sheaves  of  golden  grain.  It  is  this :  "  'J'he  blessing  of  him  that  was  ready  to  perish
came  upon  me :  and  I  caused  the  widow's  heart  to  sing  for  joy  1 "


cH.  V.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEHOA'OMY.  103

Ver.20. — The  ninth  commandment.  The  religion  of  the  tongue.  This  command  gives
us  a  precept  touching  our  words.  Inasmuch,  however,  as  it  is  here  given  to  us  in
harest,  briefest,  most  elementary  form,  it  would  not  be  well  if  in  the  homiletic  treat-
ment of  it  we  did  not  place  side  by  side  therewith  the  varied  Scriptures  which  set  before
us  the  duty  of  regulating  our  speech.  We  will  ask,  and  endeavour  to  answer,  five
questions  concerning  this  commandment.

I.  What  is  here  prohibited?  Just  as  the  sixth  commandment  throws  a  guard
around  human  life,  the  seventh  around  purity,  the  eighth  around  the  rights  of  property
and  labour,  so  this  ninth  throws  a  shield  over  every  man's  reputation.  A  stern  "  Thou
shalt  not  injure  thy  neighbour's  fair  hame  "  is  one  of  the  mandates  of  Sinai,  issued
amidst  thimder  and  fire !  The  immediate  reference  would  seem  to  be  to  bearing  testi-
mony in  a  court  of  justice.  A  part  of  the  judicial  code  of  Moses  had  reference  to  this
(ch.  xix.  16 — 19).  But  the  precept  goes  further  than  this  in  its  spirit.  We  read  in
Ezod.  xxiii.  1,  " Thou  shalt  not  raise  (or  receive)  a  fal.se  report; "  literally,  " Thou  shalt
not  bear  it ; "  t.e.  you  are  to  have  nothing  to  do,  either  in  making  or  taking  it.  Further
(Lev.  xix.  16),  we  are  not  to  give  way  to  gossip  and  scandal  (see  Ps.  xv.  3).  Nor  are
we  to  make  any  statement  that  is  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  another,  unless  we  are
sure  of  its  accuracy,  and  unless  also  the  good  of  society  requires  us  to  make  it.  Further
(Ps.  xxxiv.  13),  our  lips  are  to  speak  no  deceit  nor  guile  of  any  kind,  either  in  what  is
said  or  in  the  manner  of  saying  it.  If  we  needlessly  tell  of  another's  wrong  act,  instead
of  seeking  to  cover  it,  under  the  appearance  of  virtue  in  denouncing  it,  God  may  see  a
spirit  of  malice  or  revenge  in  naming  it ;  and  any  act  of  another's  mentioned  in  such  a
spirit  is  sure  not  to  be  construed  by  us  in  perfect  fairness,  and  therefore  it  will  certainly
become,  so  far  as  it  is  unfair,  a  false  report,  whatever  foundation  of  fact  there  may  be
in  it.  The  precept,  moreover,  forbids  sitting  in  judgment  on  individuals,  so  as  to
denounce  them  when  we  are  contending  against  wliat  we  consider  to  be  unsound  in  their
faith,  or  unright  in  their  practice.  But  further  still  does  the  precept  reach.  It  forbids
any  thoughtless  word  which  might  unwillingly  injure  another  (see  Matt.  xii.  33 — 37),
How  true  is  Heb.  iv.  12  1  Every  uncharitable  thought  of  another,  which  might  prompt
an  uncharitable  word  respecting  him,  is  condemned  by  the  holy  Law  of  Grodl

IL  What  is  the  positive  duty  to  be  observed?  We  have  only  to  look  at
gospel  law,  as  brought   out  by  the  Apostle  Paul  in  Eph.  iv.  25 — 32,  to  see  this.

1.  Truth  is  ever  to  mark  our  speech.  The  true  in  thought  is  to  be  aimed  at,  in  order
that  there  may  be  truth,  absolute  truth,  on  the  tongue.  No  "  pious  frauds  "  are  allow-
able. 2.  Love  is  to  rule.  While  a  supnme  regard  to  truth  will  guard  us  from  violating
it  conscioHsly,  a  due  cultivation  of  the  spirit  of  love  will  guard  us  from  forming  those
harsh  judgments  of  others  which  might  lead  us  to  violate  truth  unconsciously  by  mis-
judging their  actions.  3.  Where  truth  and  love  reign,  there  will  be  self-restraint.  A
check  will  be  put  on  unkind  feeling  of  every  sort.  "  Love  beareth  all  things,  believetb
all.  things,  hopeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things."  Note  further.  In  this  ninth  com-
mand the  relations  between  men  are  supposed  to  be  reciprocaL  "  Thy  neighbour."  If
any  ask.  Who  is  my  neighbour?  let  Christ  give  the  answer,  "  Tou  may  make  yourself
neighbour  to  any  man  by  cherishing  a  readiness  of  disposition  to  do  him,  a  kindness "
(see  Luke  x.  29 — 37).  Ko  distinction  6f  race,  colour,  or  clime  is  to  be.  allowed  to
stand  in  the  way  of  our  being  true  neighbours  to  men,  the  wide  world  over.

III.  By  what  bulb,  standard,  or  model,  should  we  be  guided?  1.  "Thou
shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  That,  applied  to  this  command,  would  mean,
"  Be  as  careful  of  another's  reputation  as  you  are  of  your  own."    There  is  another  rule.

2.  Be  imitators  of  Ood.  "  Let  all  evil-speaking  ...  be  put  away  from  you  .  .  .  and
be  kind  to  one  another  .  .  .  even  as  God  in  Christ  hath  forgiven  you."  The  world's
rule  is :  exalt  yourself  at  the  expense  of  others.  Christ's  rule  is :  exalt  others  at  the
sacrifice  of  yourself.

IV.  What  reasons  should  weigh  on  vs  in  leading  us  to  restrain  the  tongue
IN  the  interests  op  others  ?  1.  The  fact  urged  by  Paul,  that  "  we  are  members  one
of  another."  In  social  life  we  are  dependent  on  each  other  for  the  enjoyments  which
sweeten  it,  the  luxuries  which  enrich  it,  the  comforts  which  gladden  it,  and  for  the
necessaries  which  make  it  possible ;  and,  excepting  so  far  as  truth  governs  words  and
acts,  the  very  props  of  social  life  are  wanting,  and  its  cohesive  force  is  gone.  If  the
eye  refused  to  be  true  to  the  brain,  or  if  the  ear,  the  hand,  or  the  foot  resolved  to  be  at


104  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  v-  1—33.

variance  with  the  decisions  of  the  will,  life  would  soon  be  intolerable,  and  must  ere  long
come  to  an  end.  Even  so,  we  cannot  tamper  with  the  law  of  truth  in  speech  without
doing  our  part  towards  poisoning  the  currents  of  thought,  feeling,  and  action  which
flow  through  society,  and  so  far  as  we  bear  false  witness  of  any  kind  with  the  view  of
gaining  advantage  at  another's  cost,  we  are  aiding  the  infernal  work  of  setting  men  at
variance  with  each  other,  by  loosening  the  bonds  of  mutual  confidence  which  should
unite  them  all !  2.  If  the  tongue  is  duly  bridled,  the  whole  body  will  be  under  com-
mand. So  the  Apostle  James  declares  (Jas.  iii.  2).  Our  whole  being  is  to  be  in
subjection  to  God,  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  And  that  means  that  we  are  to  guard  our
lips.  If  we  are  successful  here,  that  indicates  so  far  a  mastery  over  ourselves.  We  can
bridle  the  whole  body  if  we  can  but  curb  the  tongue.  "  Let  every  man  be  swift  to
hear,  slow  to  speak."  A  man  may  do  very  much  to  make  or  mar  himself  according
as  he  has  learned  the  right  government  of  the  tongue.  3. 1/  the  tongue  is  not  bridled,
we  have  no  religion  at  all  1  So  the  same  apostle  (Jas.  i.  26).  Let  us  lay  that  word  to
heart.  Whatever  may  be  the  outside  profession,  if  we  do  not  govern  our  tongue  for
God,  if  we  use  it  for  gossip,  trifling,  scandal,  slander,  our  very  profession  of  Christ's
name  is  a  cheat  and  a  lie.  4.  The  thought  of  the  coming  judgment  sho\ild  lead  us  to
govern  our  tongue  (Matt.  xii.  37).  One  would  think  that  such  words  as  these  would
make  men  more  careful  how  they  use  the  tongue !  Are  we  so  governing  our  words
that  we  should  confront  without  shame  all  those  that  we  have  ever  spoken,  when  set
in  array  before  us  ?  "  We  must  all  stand  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ."  How
will  backbiters,  slanderers,  and  retailers  of  gossip  meet  the  eye  of  the  Great  Judge
of  aU?

V.   How    ABE   WK  TO   LEABN    OBEDIENCE   TO  THE    PRECEPT   OF   THE    TEXT?       1.   Let

us  awake  to  the  importance,  as  before  God,  of  remembering  his  perfect  knowledge  of
our  words  (Ps.  cxxxix.  4).  Let  us  cultivate  the  impression  such  a  thought  is  calculated
to  produce.  2.  Let  us  resolve  and  act  (see  Ps.  xxxix.  1).  So  said  David.  Let  such
a  resolution  be  formed  and  carried  out,  3.  Much  may  be  done  by  auxiliary  means,  in
the  way  of  lessening  the  temptation  to  offend  with  the  tongue.  Very  much  of  the  habit
of  idle  gossip  results  from  unintelligence.  Some  have  nothing  to  talk  about,  and  fur
want  of  a  well-stored  mind,  they  fall  a-slandering  their  neighbours.  Over  and  above
other  means  which  are  more  directly  religious  of  reducing  the  evil  of  an  unbridled
tongue,  there  is  this  serviceable  one :  furnish  the  mind  with  so  much  valuable  knowledge,
that  you  will  be  so  occupied  with  useful  talk  that  you  have  no  time  for  idle  words.
4.  Let  there  also  be  devout  attention  to  thu  more  spiritual  aspects  of  the  case.  Let  the
earnest  prayer  go  up  (Ps.  cxli.  3),  and,  remembering  the  Saviour's  words,  "  Out  of  tlie
abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speakcth,"  let  us  earnestly  plead  with  God  for  daily
renewal  in  the  spirit  of  our  mind,  since,  when  the  heart  is  right,  the  words  cannot  be
wrong.  Maybe  some  of  us  used  to  think  concerning  the  ten  commandments,  "  All
these  have  1  kept  from  my  youth  up."  But,  alas,  so  far  from  that,  unless  we  are  con-
verted and  renewed,  we  sliall  never  keep  even  this  one.  Under  its  severe  tests  we  have
broken  down  thousands  of  times,  and  have  abundant  reason  to  cry,  "  God  be  merciful
to  me  the  sinner!"  A  ti<ie  is  known  by  iis  fruit.  The  righteousness  of  the  Law
never  will  be  fulfilled  in  us  as  it  must  be  if  we  are  to  enter  heaven,  unless  our  hearts
are  so  sanctified,  and  so  imbued  with  the  spirit  of  love,  that  by  never  violating  charity
in  the  thoughts  we  think,  we  never  violate  it  in  the  words  we-speak.  May  God  thus
sanctify  U8.1    "  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  us,  and  incline  our  hearts  to  keep  this  law."

Ver.  21.—  The  tenth  commandment.  The  religion  of  the  heart.  This  commandment
it,  in  some  respects  the  most  manifestly  sweeping  and  searching  of  all.  It  even  more
fully  than  the  others  illustrates  Heb.  iv.  12.  If  any  reader  has  tiiought  that  in  making
such  heart-work  of  the  preceding,  we  have  gone  beyond  the  scope  of  the  Decalogue,
this  verse  should  serve  to  correct  such  an  impression,  for  it  deals  verbally  with  the
unexpressed  wishes  of  the  soul,  and  lays  a  restraint  upon  them.    We  will  first  of  all

I.  Inquire  into  the  geoxind  which  this  pkecept  covers.  Kecognizing  J,he
neighbourly  relation  between  man  and  man,  and  people  and  people,  and  implying  the  duty
of  each  individual  and  of  each  nation  cherishing  a  kindly  feeling  for  another,  it  not
only  forbids  the  violation  of  neighbourliness  by  any  outward  act  of  unkindness  and
wrong,  but  even  the  desire  out  of  which  such  unneighbourly  acts  might  arise.    "  Thou


CH.  V.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  106


shall  not  covet."  "  As  it  was  given,"  said  an  earnest  preacher,  in  the  winter  of  1870,
"  in  the  first  instance  to  a  nation,  it  is  natural  to  consider  some  of  the  ways  in  which  a
nation  may  violate  it.  The  history  of  the  world  is  stained  and  darkened  by  the  crimes
to  which  nations  have  been  driven  by  the  spirit  of  covetousneas.  A  great  and  pros-
perous people  cannot  endure  that  the  corn-fields  and  vineyards  and  the  noble  river
which  can  be  seen  from  its  frontiers  should  belong  to  a  neighbouring  power."  "  Sooner
or  later  it  is  almost  certain  that  this  national  covetousness  will  end  in  a  war  of  aggres-
sion or  conquest.  Some  pretext  will  be  found  for  a  quarrel  ...  by  some  means  or  other
there  will  be  a  justification  discovered,  or  created,  or  alleged,  for  seizing  by  force  of
arms  what  the  heart  of  the  nation  longed  for"  (R.  W.  Dale).  But  since  the  command
furbids  even  the  covetous  desire,  the  justification  alleged  may  be  as  wicked  as  the  war
itself ;  it  may  be  but  a  cloak  to  hide  from  the  undiscerning  that  covetousness  which
not  the  thickest  veil  of  night  can  hide  from  him  whose  eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire.  It
is,  however,  chiefly  with  the  application  of  this  command  to  the  individual  that  we
have  now  to  do.  It  forbids :  1.  Desire  after  lower  good  to  the  neglect  of  the  higher.  2.
Desire  after  improper  objects.  3.  Desire  after  lawful  objects  carried  to  an  improper
degree.  4.  Desire-  to  gain  any  object  in  an  improper  manner.  5.  Any  desire  after
what  belongs  to  another,  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  rule,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy
neighbour  as  thyself."  It  forbids  too :  6.  Discontent  with  the  allotments  of  Divine
providence.  A  discontented  spirit  is  but  one  form  of  covetousness,  albeit  it  is  a  very
unamiable  one.  We  are  not  to  be  envious  of  another's  possessions,  nor  for  a  moment  to
allow  the  wish,  if  our  neighbour  is  rich  and  we  are  poor,  that  his  wealth  and  our
poverty  should  change  hands.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  to  be  a  thankful  content
with  the  mercies  we  possess,  and  a  joy  in  our  neighbour's  joy  if  he  has  more  than  we
have.  So  far  from  wishing  to  gain  advantage  at  another's  cost,  we  are  to  rejoice  in
another's  good  as  really  as  if  it  were  our  own.  So  runs  the  precept  (Rom.  xii.  15).  It
is  much  easier  to  "  weep  with  them  that  weep,"  than  it  is  to  "  rejoice  with  them  that  do
rejoice."  When  we  do  the  former,  we  may  have  the  secret  thankfulness  that  we  are
spared  the  sorrow  of  others  ;  but  when  the  latter,  our  joy  is  apt  to  be  checked  by  the
secret  wish  that  we  were  possessors  of  their  cause  of  joy.  Our  obedience  to  this  precept
is  not  complete  till  we  can  "  weep  "  or  "  rejoice  "  with  others  with  equal  readiness.  In  a
word,  the  tenth  commandment  requires  entire  unselfishness.  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of
the  Law."

II.  This  command  makes  very  remarkable  revelations.  Sin  is  defined  by  the
Apostle  John  as  "the  transgression  of  Law."  Consequently,  wheresoever  the  Law  reaches,
there  would  the  transgression  of  it  come  under  that  term,  "  sin."  Hence,  by  the  Law
is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  We  find  accordingly  that  one  of  the  most  noted  characters  in
New  Testament  history  gained,  not  only  from  the  Decalogue,  but  from  this  particular
precept,  his  first  deep  convictions  of  sin  (see  Rom.  vii.).  Making  a  like  use  of  it,  we
see :  1.  That  this  law  reveals  that  to  be  sin  which  else  would  not  have  been  suspected
as  such.  If  we  were  asked  by  some  to  point  out  the  marks  of  sin  in  the  world,  they
would  refer  us  to  war,  oppression,  tyianny,  etc.  But  God's  Word  strikes  at  the  lusts
out  of  which  these  evils  come  (Jas.  iv.  1).  2.  This  law  reveals  to  us  how  deeply  sin
has  struck  its  roots  in  our  nature,  that  it  has  permeated  and  saturated  our  very  thoughts,
a,nd  made  them  selfish.  3.  We  see  too  by  the  same  light  that  many  an  apparently
good  act  before  men  has  been  rotten  by  reason  of  the  "  lust "  in  whieh  it  had  its  root.
4.  So  that  we  also  learn  that  a  man  may  lie  altogether  blameless  in  the  sight  of  his
fellows,  and  yet  be  condemned  in  the  sight  of  God.  God  judges  acts  by  motives.  Have
all  our  motives  been  pure '?  5.  Thus  we  see  that  there  is  quite  enough  in  heart  sins  to
shut  us  out  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  6.  Thus,  by  this  commandment,  and  a
fgrtiori  by  all  the  commandments  together,  there  is  revealed  to  us  the  impossibility  o'
any  one  who  starts  with  a  burden  of  accumulated  guilt,  attaining  to  the  righteousness
which  is  of  the  Law  (Rom.  vii.  9,  10).  Thus  the  Law  reveals  a  mischief  which  it  is
not  its  province  to  cure.

III.  While  Law  reveals  mischief,  the  Gospel  reveals  a  remedy  fob  it.  1.  It
shows  us  how  grace  would  cut  up  covetousness  by  the  root.  (1)  Our  Lord  shows  us  by
his  teaching  that  our  true  wealth  consists  in  what  we  are  rather  than  in  what  we  have
(Luie  xii.  13—20).  (2)  When  penitent,  he  forgives  the  past.  (3)  He  re-creates  the
soul,  and  lifts  us  up  by  promises  to  a  higher  level  (2  Pet.  i.  3,  4  ;  Matt.  vi.  33 ;  Luke


106  THE  BOOK  OS"  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  v.  1—33,

xir.  29 ;  Heb.  xiii.  5).  (4)  Nor  is  the  clement  of  holy  warning  wanting  (1  Cor.  x.
1 — 6, 12).  2.  It  shows  us  a  sphere  in  which  the  natural  ambition  may  have  legitimate
play  without  degenerating  into  lust.  For,  it  may  be  urged,  "  If  we  had  no  desire  after
the  improvement  of  our  condition,  we  should  do  away  with  enterprise?  Ought  not  a
young  man  to  be  anxious  to  rise  in  the  world  ?  "  Certainly.  £ut  not  at  the  expense  of
others.  In  a  right  direction  a  man  not  only  may,  but  should,  make  the  very  utmost  of
himself  for  which  his  power  capacitates  him  (1  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  Prov.  xix.  5 — 9).  Another
may  say,  "  I  have  the  organ  of  acquisitiveness  very  strongly  developed,  I  am  so  made
that  I  must  get,  so  that  if  I  am  anxious  to  have  more,  I  am  only  acting  out  that  which  is
imbedded  in  the  structure  of  my  physical  frame."  Aeguisitivenens  I  an  excellent  organ
to  have,  and  one  which  makes  it  specially  desirable  to  decide  of  what  its  possessor  shall
lie  acquisitive.  If  it  is  a  necessity  of  any  one's  nature  to  be  ever  getting,  the  greater
the  need  that  he  should  be  rightly  getting  the  right.  Now,  while  God's  Law  condemns
acquisitiveness  in  the  wrong  direction,  yet  God's  grace  and  gospel  open  up  the  grandest
possible  field  for  its  exercise.  By  all  means  let  any  one  develop  that  noble  capacity
(Prov.  iii.  16 ;  iv.  5 — 7  ;  1  Cor.  xii.  31).  The  surest  way  of  guarding  against  covetous-
ness  of  ill  will  be  so  to  develop  this  eagerness  after  good  that  the  other  cannot  coexist
(1  John  ii.  15).  There  is  no  faculty  of  our  nature  which  can  be  developed  to  finer  issues
than  this  desire  of  having,  if  it  be  reset  by  Divine  grace,  and  guided  by  the  Spirit  of
God.  No  function  of  the  soul  is  common  or  unclean,  unless  we  make  it  so.  Here  is
the  right  sort  of  covetousness  (Phil.  iii.  8),  "  That  I  may  win  Christ."  Let  all  our
power  of  coveting  go  out  after  him.  He  will  bring  with  him  durable  riches  and
righteousness.  The  wealth  we  have  in  him  will  be  vastly  more  than  aught  we  can
have  from  him,  and  by  "  the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection  "  he  will  wean  us  from
the  false  craving  for  earth,  and  ever  satisfy  us  with  himself  1

Vers.  22 — 33. — T!ie  Law  as  a  whole,  ane(  its  effect  upon  the  people.  In  the  account
of  the  reception  of  the  Law  which  we  have  in  the  Book  of  the  Exodus,  it  would  seem
probable  that  we  have  a  record  which  was  penned  at  or  near  the  time  of  the  occurrence.
The  one  before  us  is  declared  to  be  some  thirty-nine  years  after.  Moses  was  then
verging  towards  the  end  of  his  career.  He  indulges  in  a  retrospect  of  the  eventful
scenes,  and  rehearses  them  in  the  ears  of  the  people.  As  we  have  seen  in  the  first
Homily,  he  "  dug  "  into  the  Law,  and  dug  up  its  contents.  With  this  passage  as  our
guide,  as  we  have  looked  at  each  command  in  the  Decalogue  separately,  let  us  survey
it  in  its  entirety.

I.  The  La.w  is  to  be  beoaeded  as  a  iwitt.  It  is  not  made  up  of  isolated
precepts.  Our  Saviour  declares  that  it  is  summed  up  in  two  commandments.  And  the
apostle  reminds  us  that  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law : "  love  to  God  the  root,  and
love  to  man  the  fruit.  Taking  them  in  order,  the  first  four  requirie  of  us  a  love  that
shall  worship  God  alone,  honouring  his  nature,  revering  his  name,  and  guarding  his
rest  day  for  his  special  service.  The  six  later  ones  enjoin'  love  to  man,  requiring
loyalty  in  the  home,  restraint  in  the  temper,  purity  of  the  body,  fidelity  of  the  hand,
government  of  the  tongue,  unselfishness  in  the  heart.  What  a  space  of  ground  all  that
covers !  What  part  or  power  of  our  being  is  there  that  is  not  held  in  its  comprehensive
grasp?  And  how  deeply  it  strikes!  It  is  a  "critic"  of  the  thoughts  and  intents
of  the  heart.  No  superficial  obedience  can  meet  its  claims.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see
the  purpose  which  it  was  designed  to  serve.  It  was  the  basis  of  Israel's  national  life
and  legislation.  It  was  for  the  instruction  of  the  nations  round  about  (ch.  iv.  6).  And
though  it  was  set  on  a  basis  of  redeeming  mercy,  it  was  designed  to  awaken  the
conscience  to  a  sense  of  sin,  to  take  the  people  to  school,  and  thus  to  become  their
child-guide  unto  Christ.  As  compared  with  the  simpler  patriarchal  dispensation,  it  was
an  apparent  retrogression  for  the  purpose  of  a  spiritual  education.  It  was  a  form,
written,  of  that  high,  that  holy,  that  eternal  law  of  righteousness  which  is  the  same
for  all  times,  all  places,  and  all  peoples,  yea,  of  that  Law  of  perfect  love  which  the  Divine
Being  fulfils  in  absolute  perfection,  and  after  which  he  would  have  his  creattues
conformed.

II.  This  Law  contains  within  itself  the  evidence  of  its  Divine  obigin.
An  able  American  commentator  on  the  Laws  of  Moses  (Dr.  Wines),  tell  us  of  •
distinguished  lawyer  who  had  been  sceptical  on  the  subject  of  Divine  revelation,


ca.  V.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEROKOMY.  107

•nd  who  undertook  the  study  of  the  Old  Testament  with  a  view  of  satisfying  himself
as  to  the  validity  of  its  claims  to  be  an  inspired  writing.  When  he  came  to  the
Decalogue,  and  had  given  it  an  attentive  perusal,  lost  in  admiration  of  its  superhuman
perfection,  he  exclaimed,  "  Where  did  Moses  get  that  Law  t "  He  applied  himself  to
the  study  of  the  question,  and  the  result  was  the  removal  of  every  sceptical  doubt,  and
the  attainment  of  a  clear  and  earnest  conviction  of  the  Divine  original  of  the  Law.
Nor  is  it  surprising  that  a  legal  mind,  accustomed  to  weigh  evidence,  should  come
to  such  a  conclusion ;  for  when  we  know  how  early  in  the  world's  history  this  Law
was  promulgated,  it  is  very  marvellous  to  find  that  an  infant  nation  should,  at  starting,
have  a  code  of  moral  law  so  complete ;  yea,  so  elevated,  that  no  other  nation  at  that
time  presented  anything  like  it,  and  that  even  now,  8300  years  afterwards,  not  the
wisest  man  in  the  world  can  suggest  anything  loftier!  The  kingdoms  of  Babylon,
Assyria,  Egypt,  have  furnished  us  with  nought  like  this,  to  say  nothing  of  the  Eoman,
Grecian,  and  Persian  empires,  the  earliest  of  which  was  not  founded  for  centuries  after.
And  if,  leaving  the  merely  civil  and  political  side  of  legislation,  we  ask  for  an
embodiment  of  a  moral  and  religions  code  on  which  legislation  could  safely  be  based,
we  do  not  find  aught  to  be  compared  with  this.  Nor,  if  we  look  at  the  record  of  the
national  life  of  the  very  people  to  whom  this  Law  was  first  given,  do  we  find  that  even
they  approximated  to  conformity  to  it.  In  fact,  nothing  is  more  marked  in  their
subsequent  literature  than  their  grievous  departure  from  their  own  standards.  When
man  makes  any  code  of  laws,  those  laws  reflect  himself  and  his  own  standard  of
attainment.  But  here  is  a  code  far  beyond  the  attainment  of  any  yet  recorded  nation.
It  is  not  necessary,  however,  to  go  to  ancient  nations  to  show  that  this  Law  betokens
a  higher  than  human  origin.  Look  at  legislation  now.  Look  at  the  moral  sentiment
of  peoples  now.  What  is  the  cry  ?  Love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself?  Emphatically
no  1  But  "  take  care  of  your  own  interests,  and  let  your  neighbours  look  after  them-
selves I "  "  Remove  your  neighbour's  landmark  as  yo4  think  well  1 "  Why,  if  no
cation  in  the  world  is  good  enough  to  adopt  the  standard  of  the  Decalogue,  could
it  have  created  it,  without  ever  having  had  any  of  its  educating  influence?  And  if  no
nation  now  could  do  it,  how  could  they  who  were  just  liberated  from  centuries  of  slavery  ?
But  more  than  this.  This  Law  is  high  above  the  attainment  of  well-trained  Christian
congregations.  Let  a  minister  proclaim  the  mercy  of  God  in  forgiving  sin,  and  his
preaching  may  charm.  Let  him  insist  on  the  demands  of  God's  righteousness,  and
while  some  earnest  holy  souls  will  lay  it  to  heart,  and  humble  themselves  before  God,
many  will  be  offended  at  the  enforcement  of  righteousness ;  and  even  now  many
a  minister  is  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake.  This  Law  from  man  f  No  I  it  is
too  good  for  that.  When  man  is  brought  face  to  face  with  its  holy  heart-gearchingness
he  hates  it  1  But  again.  Take  the  most  advanced  and  holiest  Christian  you  can  find.
Let  him  stand  in  full  front  of  this  holy  Law — and  soon  he  will  be  crying  out,
in  agony,  "God  be  merciful  to  me  the  sinner!"  "  But,"  it  may  be  said,  "are  not
Christians  always  preaching  up  to  a  higher  level  than  that  of  their  attainments?"
Certainly ;  but  why  ?  Because  they  feel  and  know  that  here  is  a  Law  which  they
certainly  did  not  originate,  whicE  is  infinitely  above  them,  and  which,  by  being  so,
proclaims  its  intrinsic  authority,  and  proves  itself  Divine.  When  such  a  Law  is  given,
conscience  can  look  at  it  and  say,  "  That's  right."  But  to  create  a  code  above  itself,
is  what  no  nation  ever  was  able  to  do.  This  Law  shines  by  its  own  light,  and  is  "  a
lamp  unto  our  feet  and  a  light  to  our  path."

III.  When  perceived  in  all  its  grandeub,  this  holt  Law  fills  with  awe
AND  TEREOB.  The  thunder,  lightning,  flame,  etc.,  revealed  a  majesty  that  Israel  could
not  endure  (vers.  25, 26 ;  cf.  Heb.  xii.  18 — 21).  But  all  this  terror  was  nothing  compared
with  the  dread  that  comes  over  a  man  when  his  inmost  self  is  confronted  with  the  Law
in  its  deep  heart-searchingness  (cf.  Kom.  vii.  9).

IV.  God  tbeats  the  teeeob  vebt  gbacioifsly.  1.  Israel  was  called  near  to  the
mount  to  meet  with  God,  that  they  might  learn  a  solemn  awe,  and  then  sent  back
to  their  tents,  to  wonder  and  to  do.  2.  God  hearkens  to  their  voice,  and  appoints
a  mediator — even  Moses  (Gal.  iii.  19,  20).  We  are  come  to  Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the
new  covenant  (Heb.  xii.  24).  3.  Israel  is  reminded  that  what  is  ceeded  on  their  pait
is,  not  emotion,  but  devotion  (ver.  29).  God  wants  of  us  a  heart  to  love  and  obey.  Of
itself,  the  Law  does  but  shut  us  up  to  see  the  necessity  of  a  power  for  righteousness  which


108  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  v.  1—33.

it  cannot  give  (Gal.  Hi.  21).  God  has  made  with  us  a  new  covenant.  The  old  covenant
says,  "Do  this,  and  you  will  live."  The  new  one  says,  "Live,  and  you  will  do  this"
(of.  Jer.  XXX.  31 ;  Heb.  viii.  6 — 13).  4.  The  people  are  assured  that  faithful  obedience
to  the  Law  of  God  will  ensure  tlie  well-being  of  the  nation,  its  long  continuance  in  the
land,  and  the  comfort  and  peace  of  the  family  as  well  as  of  the  individual.  Even  so.
We  have  in  the  Law  of  God  a  rule  of  life  absolutely  perfect.  What  is  wanted  is  but
obedience  to  it.  This  is  the  one  thing  to  be  desired  (Jas.  i.  22).  It  is  bitterly  to  be
lamented  when  this  obedience  ip  not  given  (Ps.  Ixxx.  8 — 16).  When  this  is  the  case^
the  Law  becomes  a  silent  accuser  (see  John  v.  45).  It  is  this  unwillingness  to  keep
God's  Law  which  is  charged  against  men  as  sin.  It  is  of  this  sin  of  disloyalty  that
men  are  called  on  to  repent  (Horn.  ii.  1 — 16 ;  Ezek.  xviii.  30 ;  Matt.  iii.  2 ;  Luke  xiii.  3 ;
Acts  XX.  21).  God  in  his  great  love  offers  to  law-breakers,  when  penitent,  the  privilege
of  starting  afresh  (Acts  ii.  38).  God  forgives  the  penitent,  and  imparts  new  life  and
strength  thiough  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  re-set  and  restore  the  nature
disorganized  by  sin.  Then  the  righteousness  of  the  Law  is  fulfilled  as  men  walk  not
after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit.  Then  life  has  found  its  true  support,  is  tending  to
its  right  issue,  is  realizing  its  highest  ideal,  and  has  its  noblest  outlook.  Let  us  all,
then,  conscious  of  innumerable  failures  in  obedience,  penitently  throw  ourselves  on.
Divine  grace  and  love,  and  seek  for  energy  Divine  to  work  in  us,  cancelling  the
guilt  of  the  past,  creating  the  life  of  God  within ;  so  will  it  be  well  with  ua  for  aver
and  ever  1


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa

Vers,  1^ — 5, — The  Abrahamic  covenant  renewed.  So  solicitous  was  God  for  the  well-
being  of  Israel  that,  on  critical  epochs  in  their  history,  he  reminds  them  of  their
privileged  condition.     Three  main  thoughts  arrest  our  attention —

I.  Covenanted  blessikq  secured.  God  has  not  stood  out  for  the  maintenance  of
his  rights;  he  has  stooped  to  fetter  his  liberty — to  bind  himself  to  generous  deeds.
1.  He  alltiws  us  to  hold  proprietorship  in  Mm.  We  can  claim  him  to  be  "our  Ood."
The  Proprietor  of  all  worlds  permits  fallen  men  to  assert  proprietorship  in  him !  Herein
is  love  1  We  can  call  upon  him,  in  justice,  to  fulfil  his  self-imposed  obligations.  2.  A
covenant  implies  reciprocal  engagements.  It  is  a  deed  of  grace.  God  binds  himself  as
A  Friend  and  Defender  to  us,  on  condition  that  we  hind  ourselves  in  obedient  loyalty
to  him.  Failure  on  one  side  releases  the  other  party  from  his  pledge.  3.  A  covenant
includes  mutwd  consent.  No  covenant  is  really  valid,  is  not  complete,  until  both
parties  have  sworn  to  observe  it.  There  may  be  command,  law,  decree,  proceeding
from  God  to  man ;  but  no  covenant  is  really  in  force  until  we  personally  have  accepted
its  terms,  and  bound  ourselves  by  willing  act  to  observe  it.  T%en,  our  whole  being —
property,  talent,  blood,  life,  are  pledged.

II.  Mediation  provided.  This  is  a  further  mark  of  condescending  grace.  When
two  parties  are  alienated,  it  is  always  deemed  an  advantage  to  one  party  to  have  a
mediator  chosen  from  its  ranks.  God  allows  a  man  to  mediate  between  Israel  and  him-
self. "  I  stood  between  the  Lord  and  you."  1.  Such  mediation  was  needful,  because  of
mutual  disparity.  Man  is  finite;  Godinfinite.  Man  is  for  self ;  God  is  self-oblivious.
Man  is  earthly  minded ;  God  is  purely  spiritual.  That  the  two  may  coalesce  in  senti-
ment, purpose,  life,  mediation  of  some  sort  is  required.  2.  Mediation  is  needful,  because
of  man's  selfish  fear.  The  people  were  "  afraid,  by  reason  of  the  fire  " — ^afraid  for  their
own  interests  and  pleasures.  Were  men  impelled  by  wisdom,  they  would  count  it  the
highest  privilege  possible  to  approach  God.  What,  though  we  have  sinned ;— inas-
much as  God  has  revealed  himself  as  the  Source  of  mercy,  and  has  deigned  to  visit- us,
should  we  not  gladly  respond  to  his  proposal,  and  draw  nigh?  What,  though  he  is
iresied  in  garments  of  flame ; — if  we  are  penitent,  the  consuming  flame  will  consuiTie
only  our  sin ;  it  will  benefit  and  burnish  us.  This  is  our  honour  and  our  joy — to  come
very  near  to  God,  and  to  gain  larger  acquaintance  with  him.  If  renewed,  our  former
•version  is  turned  into  longing  desire.  3.  This  mediation  was  very  imperfect.  It
served  a  present  purpose,  viz.  a  mediation  for  communicating  truth,  a  mediation  for
obtaining  favour.    It  speaks  a  volume  for  the  character  and  faith  of  Moses,  that  h«


CH.  V.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  10«

was  not  afraid  to  draw  near.  Imperfect  though  he  was,  he  displayed  a  rare  spirit  of
self-sacrifice.  "  Pardon,  I  pray  thee,  this  people !  or  else,  blot  out  my  name  from  thy
book  1"    Here  was  a  vivid  type  of  Jesus.

III.  Human  obligation  inobeasbd.  In  the  very  nature  of  things,  kindness  on  the
one  side  begets  obligation  on  the  other.  1.  This  obligation  is  personal.  "  The  Lord
hath  not  made  this  covenant  with  our  fathers,  but  with  us."  God's  covenant  with
men  is  renewed  age  after  age.  It  is  a  covenant  with  us,  if  we  will  accept  the  terms.
Are  we  willing  to  be  Ms — whilly  his  f  Then  the  covenant  is  settled,  "  ordered  in  all
things  and  sure."  2.  This  obligation  is  all-embracing  and  complete.  It  includes  every
part  of  our  nature,  every  moment  in  our  history,  every  inteiest  we  have  in  life.  Atten-
tion is  demanded.  The  ear  must  be  reserved  for  God.  Intellect  is  pledged.  We  must
"  learn  the  statutes  and  judgments."  Active  and  dutiful  service  is  due.  Like  the  true
Son,  our  intention  must  be,  "  I  do  always  the  things  that  please"  the  Father  1—D.

Vers.  6—21. — The  Divine  plan  for  the  conduct  of  our  life  on  earth.  Had  we  been
left  in  ignorance  what  the  Divine  intention  in  human  life  was,  it  had  been  a  calamity
indeed.  Waste  and  failure  must  have  been  the  disastrous  result.  For  every  honest-
minded  man,  ample  direction  from  the  Supreme  Source  of  authority  is  supplied.  Tlje
most  cogent  argument  is  not  always  the  most  convincing.  Godmight  here  have  prefaced
his  ten  words  with  a  proper  assertion  of  his  indisputable  sovereignty.  But  he  prefers  to
appeal  to  his  recent  interposition — his  emancipation  of  the  penple  from  Egyptian
bondage.  As  if  he  hail  said,  "  /,  who  released  you  from  grinding  misery — /,  who  created
your  liberty,  and  founded  your  nation,  now  command  your  loyalty.  Let  the  lives
which  /  have  ransomed  be  spent  as  I  now  direct."

I.  How  HUMAN  TiiPB  IS  TO  BE  DIRECTED  GoD-WAKD.  1.  That  Ood  must  be  Supreme
in  our  regard  and  affection.  "  Thou  shalt  have  none  other  gods  before  me."  This  claim
is  founded  in  absolute  right.  The  Proprietor  has  complete  dominion  over  the  work  of
his  hands.  If  his  workmanship  does  not  please  him,  he  is  at  liberty  to  destroy  it.  His
claim  is  further  pressed  on  the  ground  of  his  transcendent  excellence.  Essential  and
unapproachable  goodness  is  he ;  hence  his  claims  on  worship  rest  upon  his  intrinsic
worth.  And  his  claim  to  reverent  regard  proceeds  likewise  on  human  benefit.  God's
glory  and  man's  advantage  are  only  different  aspects  of  the  same  eternal  truth.  To
give  him  all  is  to  enrich  ourselves.  2.  That  Ood  must  be  supreme  in  our  acts  of  wor-
ship. To  picture  him  forth  by  material  images  is  an  impossibility.  The  plausible  plea
of  human  nature  has  always  been  that  material  forms  serve  as  aids  to  worship  the
Unseen.  But  the  facts  of  human  experience  have  uniformly  disproved  this  hypothesis.
It  may  cost  us  severe  exertion  of  mind  to  lift  our  souls  up  to  the  worship  of  the  true
God ;  yet  this  very  exertion  is  an  unspeakable  advantage.  God  has  no  pleasure  in
imposing. on  us  hard  tasks  for  their  own  sake;  yet,  for  the  high  gain  to  his  servants,
he  doe6  impose  them.  Throughout  the  Scriptures,  idolatry  is  represented  as  spiritual
adultery ;  hence,  condescending  to  human  modes  of  speech,  the  displeasure  of  God  is
described  as  jealousy.  Jealousy  is  quick-sighted,  deep-seated,  swift-footed.  All  reve-
lation of  God  is  an  accommodation  to  human  ignorance  and  feebleness.  The  visitation
of  punishment  upon  the  children,  and  upon  the  children's  children,  is  not  to  be  con-
strued as  excessively  severe,  much  less  as  unrighteous.  The  thrice-holy  God  can  never
be  unjust.  The  idolatrous  spirit  would  be  entailed  to  children  by  natural  law ;  hence
punishment  would  culminate  in  final  disaster.  The  menace  was  gracious,  because,  if
[larents  will  not  abstain  from  sin  for  their  own  sakes,  they  sometimes  will  for  the  sake
of  their  children.  The  mercy  shall  be  far  more  ample  than  the  wrath.  The  anger
may  be  entailed  on  a  few,  and  that  in  proportion  always  to  the  sin;  the  mercy
shall  flow,  like  a  mighty  river,  to  "thousands."  True  worship  fosters  love,  and
stimulates  practical  obedience.  3,  Ood's  aiUhority  is  supreme  over  our  speech.
The  faculty  of  speech  is  a  noble  endowment,  and  differuntiates  man  from  the
inferior  races.  The  tongue  is  a  mighty  instrument,  either  for  evil  or  for  good.
(I)  We  take  God's  Name  in  vain  when  we  make  an  insincere  or  superficial  pro-
fession of  attachment.  We  wear  his  Name  lightly  and  frivolously  if  our  service  is
formal  and  nominal.  •  (2)  We  take  his  Name  in  vain  when  we  are  unfaithful  in  the
lerformance  of  our  vows.  Men  pledge  themselves  to  be  his  in  moments  of  peril,  and
forget  their  pledges  when  safety  comes.     (3)  We  take  God's  Name  in  vain  when  w«


110  THE  BOOK  OF  BEUTEllONOMY.  [ch.  v.  1—33.

use  it  to  give  force  and  emphasis  to  a  falsehood.  Whether  in  private  converse,  or  in  a
court  of  justice,  we  use  God's  Name  to  produce  a  stronger  persuasion  in  others'  minds,
we  contract  fearful  guilt  if  we  use  that  sacred  Name  to  bolster  up  a  lie.  (4)  We  take
God's  Name  in  vain  whenever  we  use  it  needlessly,  flippantly,  or  in  jest.  The  moral
eifect  upon  men  is  pernicious,  corrupting,  deadly,  'ihe  penalty  is  set  forth  in  negative
Linguage,  but  it  is  intended  to  convey  deep  impression.  Others  may  hold  it  as  a
venial  sin  j  not  so  God.  4.  OocCs  authority  over  the  employment  of  our  time.  All
time  belongs  to  God.  He  hath  created  it.  Every  successive  breath  we  inspire  is  by
his  sustaining  power.  Since  we  are  completely  his,  his  claim  mast  be  recognized
through  every  passing  minute.  But  just  as  he  allows  to  men  tlie  productions  of  the
soil,  but  requires  the  flrStfruits  to  be  presented  to  him — the  earnest  of  the  whole ;  so
also  the  firstfruits  of  our  time  he  claims  for  special  acts  of  worship.  One  day  in
seven  he  requires  to  be  thus  consecrated ;  but  whether  the  first  or  the  seventh  depends
wholly  on  the  mode  of  human  calculation.  The  grounds  on  which  the  institution  rests
are  many.  Even  God  felt  it  to  be  good  to  "rest"  from  his  acts  of  creation.  In  some
sense,  he  ceased  for  a  time  to  work.  Keview  and  contemplation  formed  his  sabbath.
His  claims  to  have  his  day  observed  are  myriad-fold.  If  sabbath  observance  was
beneficial  for  Jews,  is  it  not  for  Gentiles?  If  it  was  a  blessing  to  man  in  the  early
ages,  has  it  now  become  a  curse  ?  Even  the  inferior  creation  was  to  share  in  the  boon.
Strangers  and  foreigners  would  learn  to  admire  the  gracious  arrangement,  and  learn  the
considerate  kindness  of  the  Hebrews'  God.

II.  We  leabn  how  oub  life  is  to  be  conducted  man-ward.  1.  In  accordance
with  the  degree  of  kinship.  A  parent  has  claims  beyond  all  other  men  upon  our  love,
ubcclience,  and  service.  Parents  are  deserving  our  heartfelt  honour.  They  claim  this
on  the  gruund  of  position  and  relationship^  irrespective  of  personal  merit.  Parents
stand  towards  tlieir  children,  through  all  the  years  of  infancy,  in  the  stead  of  God.  For
years  the  human  babe  is  wholly  dependent  upon  its  parent;  and  this  serves  as  schooling
and  discipline,  whereby  it  learns  its  dependence  upon  a  higher  Parent  yet.  The  dispo-
sition and  conduct  required  in  us  towards  our  parents  is  the  same  in  kind  as  that
required  towards  God.  Filial  reverence  is  the  first  germ  of  true  religion.  Hence  the
I'loniises  of  reward  are  akin.  Tlie  family  institution  is  the  foundation  of  the  political
fabric.  The  healih  and  well-being  of  home  is  the  fount  of  national  prosperity.  If
parents  are  honoured,  "  it  shall  be  well  with  thee."  This,  a  law  for  individuals,  a  law
for  society,  and  a  law  for  nations.  2.  Our  duty  towards  all  men.  We  are  to  respect
their  p^sons.  Their  life  and  health  are  to  be  as  dear  to  us  as  our  own.  We  are  to
respect  their  virtue.  The  lower  passions  are  to  be  held  in  restraint.  Occasions  for  lust
must  be  avoided.  A  bridle  must  be  put  upon  the  glances  of  the  eye.  We  are  to
respect  their  property.  This  duty  has  extensive  scope.  It  means  that  we  should  deal
with  others  as  if  they  were  ourselves.  All  dishonest  dealing,  false  representations  in
commerce,  overreaching  in  bargains,  fraudulent  marks,  are  condemned.  We  are  to  have
respect  to  their  reputation.  It  ought  to  please  us  as  much  to  see  a  conspicuous  virtue,
a  generous  quality,  in  another,  as  if  it  shone  in  ourselves.  Idle  tale-bearing  is  for-
bidden, as  also  detiactiun,  slander,  unfavourable  interpretation  of  others'  deeds,  and
suspicion  of  their  motives.  We  are  charged,  as  the  servants  of  Goil,  to  "  love  our  neigh-
bours even  as  ourselves."  3.  This  Divine  Law  carries  itn  sanctions  into  our  interior
life.  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet."  Improper  and  irregular  desires  are  to  be  repressed.  Like
A  wise  Euler,  God  proceeds  to  the  very  root  of  sin — to  the  very  core  of  evil.  'Tis
uasiest  to  strangle  the  serpent  at  its  birth.  If  only  this  fountain  were  pure,  all  its
streams  would  be  likewise  pure.  Let  the  salt  of  purification  be  applied  here!  There
's  scope  for  coveting — a  direction  in  which  it  may  lawfully  run.  It  may  run  God  ward.
It  may  fix  its  eyes  and  its  hands  on  heavenly  treasures.  For  in  securing  these  we
de''raud  no  one  else.  Therefore,  we  may  with  advantage  all  round  "  covet  earnestly
ihe  best  gifts."  Desire  alter  heavenly  gifts  and  riches  is  never  untimely  or  excessive,
never  irregular  or  inordinate.  Hence,  as  an  antidote  to  a  covetous  disposition,  we  may
well  nourish  heavenly  hope.  "  Delight  in  God"  will  bring  a  most  satisfying  fruition
of  desire.  Sowing  in  this  fertile  field  yields  a  prolific  harvest.  The  Decalogue  if
complete.    God  "  added  no  more."    Authority  centres  here. — D.

Yen.  2X — 33. — Character  deiirmintt  environment.    I.  The  stormy  elements  or


OH.  T.  1  -33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  IIJ

NATCKB  8EBTE  AT  TIMES  AS  THE  TiTTiNQ  KOBRS  OF  Dbitt.  All  natural  objects  ar
the  projections  in  space  of  his  creative  voice.  He  spake  and  they  appeared,  lie  is  still
iMjhind  all  phenomena — the  only  real  substance.  Since  he  is  all-wise,  the  sole  fount  pi
knowledge,  the  true  Revealer  of  secrets,  he  is  properly  said  to  be  apparelled  with  light.
The  rainbow  is  his  diadem,  the  morning  sun  is  his  radiant  face,  the  thundercloud
his  chariot.  To  human  eyes,  he  can  only  be  visible  in  such  forms  as  these.  His  holi-
ness can  be  visibly  expressed  in  no  other  form  than  fire.  The  profound  inscrutable-
ness  of  his  will  is  best  made  manifest  by  the  "  thick  darkness."  His  insufferable  glory
is  attempered  by  a  cloud.  His  kingly  power  is  betokened  by  a  "  great  voice,"  Such
is  his  fitting  environment.

II.  The  near  approach  op  God  is  intolerable  to  sinful  men.  The  unrenewed
man  shrinks  from  contact  with  absolute  purity.  He  is  in  an  uncongenial  atmosphere
— like  a  fish  out  of  its  native  element.  What  tremendous  losses  foolish  man  submits
to  rather  than  abandon  sin — losses  of  privilege,  friendship,  joy !  So  Peter  prayed,
when  the  vision  of  Christ's  wondrous  power  dawned  on  him,  "  Depart  from  rae,  for  I
am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord."  But  the  renewed  man  yearns  and  pants  for  a  nearer,  and
yet  nearer,  approach  to  God.  "  I  pray  thee,  show  me  t  hy  glory  I  "  This  is  his  joy — to  be
near  God,  to  grow  like  him.  And  yet,  how  often  do  we  shrink  from  the  passage  of  death,
the  passage  by  which  we  penetrate  into  the  inner  palace  of  Deity  I  Whatever  brings
lu  into  nearer  fellowship  with  God  ought  to  be  welcomed.

III.  A  SIGHT  OF  God  kills  either  the  sin  or  the  sinner.  There  is  no  question
that  Ood  intends  the  former,  but  if  the  guilty  man  will  not  part  with  his  sin — iden-
tifies himself  with  it — then  be  too  dies.  To  know  God,  and  his  redeeming  Son,  is
tantamount  to  eternal  life.  But  to  know  God  only  in  his  judicial  character,  to  have
defective  acquaintance  with  him,  alarms  and  kills.  The  love  of  sin  perverts  the
judgment,  and  destroys  good  logic.  These  Hebrews  said,  "We  have  seen  this  day
that  God  doth  talk  with  man,  and  he  liveth ; "  and  then  they  inconsistently  add,
"Therefore  why  should  we  die?"  In  presence  of  that  mystic  flame,  they  promise
loyal  obedience.  If  only  life  may  be  sp  ircd,  and  God's  commands  be  conveyed  in  a
less  alarming  manner,  they  pledge  themselves  to  be  his  liege  servants.  Alas!  men
little  know  their  own  weaknesses  I  So  men  still  say  that  if  they  had  such  a  revelation
as  they  wished — such  in  degree,  and  such  in  kind — they  would  yield  compliance  1  Yet
the  real  difficulty  arises  not  from  defects  in  the  external  revelation,  but  from  the
internal  disposition.

IV.  God's  apportionment  of  honour  and  dishonour  approved  by  men.  How
different  his  language  to  different  persons !  To  some,  "  Go,  get  you  into  your  tents
again ; "  to  another,  "  Stand  thou  here  by  me."  To  dwell  near  to  God,  and  to  enjoy
his  revelations  of  light  and  love — this  is  really  man's  crowning  privilege,  this  his
heaven.  Yet  the  bulk  of  men  are  blind  to  their  own  good,  dead  to  noblest  joy.
To  possess  any  pleasure,  their  environment  must  be  suited  to  their  character;  the
external  must  correspond  with  the  internal.  "  Depart  from  me  I "  says  man  to  his
Maker.  "  Depart  from  me  I "  responds  our  God.  "  Out  of  our  own  mouths  we  are
judged."

V.  Observe  God's  intense  longino  for  man's  good.  How  pathetic  are  such
ejaculations  as  these,  "Oh  that  there  were  such  a  heart  in  them,  to  fear  me  always!"
1.  Religion  must  be  a  matter  of  the  heart.  2.  Religion  is  not  a  compulsory,  but
voluntary,  service.  3.  Religion  commands  the  allegiance  of  the  whole  man — his
reverence,  submission,  and  practical  service  ;  and  that  not  spasmodic,  but  continuous.
4.  Religion  brings  largest  benefit  to  ourselves  and  to  our  children.  Even  bad  men
have,  at  times,  desires  after  a  better  life — fitful  moods  of  regret  and  aspiration.  God,  in
his  wondrous  patience,  smiles  on  these — approves  a  passing  thought  or  a  transient  feel-
ing— and  says,  in  his  paternal  love,  "Would  that  this  frame  of  feeling  continued!"
These  are  the  openings  of  opportunity's  golden  door.

VI.  The  world's  obedience  is  dependent  on  human  ministries.  The  majority
of  men  will  not  listen  to  God  unless  he  speak  to  them  through  human  agencies.  Men
will  only  read  God's  Word  as  it  is  written,  in  large  capitals,  in  saintly  lives.  Thus
God  commanded  Moses:  "/will  speak  unto  thee :  . . .  thou  shalt  teach  them,  that  they
may  do."  The  pardoned  man  becomes  God's  interpreter  to  the  world.  "  Speak  thou
t()  us,"  they  My,  "  and  we  will  bear."   "  As  Christ  was,  so  we  are  to  be  in  the  world  "—


118  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  v.  1— 3&

light-bearers.    The  heathen  nations  leam  only  through  the  Church  the  redeeming
work  of  Qod. — P.

Vers.  1 — 33.—Beminiicenct$  of  Eoreb.  I.  The  covenant.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  1.  Pro-
posed by  God  (Exod.  xix.  3 — 7).  2.  Accepted  by  the  people  (Exod.  xxiv.  7).
3.  Entailed  obligations  on  subsequent  generations  (of.  ch.  vi.  2).  In  this  covenant,
formally  ratified  by  sacrifice  (Exod.  xxiv.  6,  7),  Israel  (1)  accepted  Jehovah  to  be  its
spiritual  and  temporal  Sovereign.  (2)  Pledged  itself  to  observe  his  Law.  (3)  Was
adopted  by  him  as  his  peculiar  people.  (4)  Had  every  blessing  secured  to  it  on  con-
dition of  obedience  (Exod.  xxiiL  22 — 27).  The  new  covenant  in  Christ,  while  in  many
respects  different  from,  and  superior  to,  that  of  Horeb,  yet  resembles  it  in  several  of
these  particulars.

II.  The  Law.  (Vers.  6 — ^22.)  1.  Holy  in  its  nature.  -  2.  Internally  complete  as
a  summary  of  duty.  "  He  added  no  more  "  (ver.  22).  3.  Explicative  of  the  character
of  God.  The  ahsoluteness  and  unity  of  God,  e.g.  taught  in  first  commandment ;  his
spirituality,  jealousy  of  his  honour,  sovereignty,  love,  and  mercy,  in  second  command-
ment ;  his  holiness,  in  third  commandment  ■  his  searching  of  hearts,  in  tenth  com-
mandment ;  while  in  all  he  appears  as  the  Source  of  moral  obligatiou,  and  the  Guardian
of  rights.  4.  To  be  kept  from  the  motive  of  love  (ver.  10).  This  Law  is  not  abolished,
but  fulfilled  in  Christ,  by  whose  Spirit  its  precepts  are  written  in  the  minds  and  hearts
of  believers  (2  Cor.  iiL  3 ;  Heb.  viii.  10).

III.  The  mediator.  (Vers.  5,  22 — 33.)  The  mediation  of  Moses  was ;  1.  Graved
by  the  people  (vers.  23 — 28).  The  manifestation  of  God's  holiness  overwhelms  sinful
men  (cf.  Jsa.  vi  3 — 6).  Moses  not  only  etidwred  this  manifestation,  but  went  up  alone
into  the  thick  darkness  where  God  was.  How  exceptionally  great  he  appears  in  this '.
2.  Acquiesced  in  by  Qod  (vers.  28 — 32).  This  transacting  through  a  mediator  was  in
harmony  with  the  principle  of  his  dealings  with  them  from  the  first.  A  figure  of  the
mediation  of  Christ.  3.  Suitable  in  itself.  As  tending  to  enhance  in  their  minds  the
impression  of  God's  holiness  and  the  feeling  of  their  own  sinfulness. — J.  0.

Vers.  2,  3. — The  covenant  at  Eoreb.  Here  spoken  of  as  distinct  from  the  older
covenant  made  with  the  patriarchs  (Gen  xv.,  xvii.).

L  Its  relations  to  the  covenant  made  with  the  FAtHfiM.  It  was  not  a  new
thing  absolutely.  It  rested  on  that  older  covenant,  and  on  the  series  of  revelations
which  sprang  out  of  it.  It  could  not  disannul  that  older  covenant  (Gal.  iii.  17).  It
could  not  run  counter  to  it  (Gal.  iii.  21).  It  must,  though  "  superadded,"  be  in  sub-
serviency to  it  (Gal.  iii.  15 — 26).  But  that  covenant  made  with  the  fathers  was :  1.  Of
promise  (Ghil.  iiL  18).  2.  Couched  in  absolute  terms.  God  pledged  his  perfections  that
the  promise  conveyed  in  it  would  be  ultimately  realized  (Rom.  iii.  S).  3.  In  which
an  interest  was  obtained  by  faith  (Gen.  xv.  6 ;  Eom.  iv.  3 — 23).  4.  While  yet  it
bound  the  person  received  into  covenant  to  a  holy  life  (Gen.  xvii.  1).  The  new
covenant  could  "make  void  "  the  older  one  in  none  of  these  particulars.

II.  Itb  distinction  from  the  covenant  hade  with  the  fathers.  1.  It  was
a  national  covenant,  having  reference  primarily  to  national  existence  and  prosperity.
2.  It  was  a  covenant  of  Law.  It  was  (1)  connected  with  a  promulgaiion  of  Law,  and
(2)  required  obedience  to  the  prescribed  Law  as  the  condition  of  acceptance.  Does
this  look  like  a  retrograde  step  in  the  Divine  procedure,  a  contradiction  of  the  covenant
with  Abraham?  Seemingly  it  was  so,  but  the  backward  step  was  really  a  forward  one,
bringing  to  light  demands  of  the  Divine  holiness  which  it  was  absolutely  essential  man
should  become  acquainted  with.  Two  points  have  to  be  noticed :  (a)  that  obedience  was
not  made  the  ground  of  admission  to  the  covenant,  or  aught  else  than  the  condition  of
continuance  in  privileges  freely  conferred ;  and  (6)  that  the  requirement  of  obedience  did
not  stand  alone,  but  was  connected  with  provisions  for  the  removal  of  the  guilt  contracted
by  transgression  and  shortcoming.  This  brings  into  view  the  peculiar  feature  in  the
covenant  of  Horeb — the  hidden  grace  of  it.  In  form  and  letter  it  was  a  strictly  legal
covenant.  Obedience  to  the  Law  in  all  its  parts,  and  without  failure,  was  the  technical
condition  of  the  fulfilment  of  promise,  and  of  continuance  in  covenant  privilege
(cf.  Matt.  xix.  17;  Rom.  x.  5;  Gal.  iii.  10).  The  fact  that  atonements  were  provided
to  remove  the  guilt  which  otherwise  would  have  broken  up  the  covenant,  is  proof  that


tu.  V.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  118

such  was  its  constitution.  The  same  fact  shows  that  in  the  structure  of  the  coTsnant  it
was  recognized  that  sin  and  shortcoming  would  mark  the  history  of  Israel ;  that,  on  the
strictly  legal  basis,  standing  in  the  state  of  acceptance  was  impossible,  A  theoretically
perfect  obedience  no  Jew  ever  rendered.  His  standing  in  no  case  was  in  virtue  of  a
perfectly  fulfilled  Law,  but  was  due  to  forgiving  mercy,  which  daily  pardoned  his  short-
comings, and  gave  him  an  acceptance  which  these  shortcomings  were  as  constantly
forfeiting.  It  was  faith,  not  works,  which  justified  him  ;  while  yet,  in  harmony  with
the  unalterable  law  of  moral  life,  it  was  his  duty  to  aim  at  the  realization  of  the  ideal
of  righteousness  which  the  Law  presented.  Just  as  with  Abraham,  the  faith  which
justified  him,  and  did  so  before  a  single  work  had  issued  from  it  (Gen.  zv.  6 ;  Jas.  ii.
23),  was  a  fai'h  which  "  wrought  with  works,"  and  "  by  works  was  faith  made  perfect "
(Jas.  ii.  22).  ii  fr^U^ws  from  these  peculiarities,  and  from  the  statements  of  Scrip-
ture, that  it  was :  3.  A  preparatory  and  temporary  covenant.  Its  leading  design  was
to  develop  the  consciousness  of  sin,  to  awaken  a  feeling  of  the  need  of  redemption,  to
evince  the  powerlessness  of  mere  Law  as  a  source  of  moral  strength,  to  drive  men  back
from  legal  efforts  to  faith,  and  so,  finally,  to  prepare  the  way  for  Christ  (Eom.  iii.  20 ;
Gal.  iii.  23,  24,  etc.).  In  this  we  discern  the  reason  of  the  severe  and  threatening  form
in  which  it  was  couched,  and  of  the  terrors  which  attended  its  promulgation.  It  was
a  coTenant  which  couW  not  of  itself  save  or  do  aught  but  kill  (2  Oor.  iii.  6 — 13). — J.  O.

Ver.  5. — Mediation.  I.  Mediation  in  qenebal.  Mediation  has  a  God-ward  side
and  a  man-ward  side.  The  requirements  of  God's  holiness — the  needs  of  man's  heart.
1.  On  God's  side,  communion  with  sinners  can  only  be  maintained  on  terms  which
uphold  righteousness  and  law,  and  do  not  derogate  from  the  sanctity  of  the  Divine
character.  2.  On  man's  side,  there  is  (1)  the  feeling  of  weakness  andfinitude,  awaken-
ing terror  in  presence  of  the  Infinite  (vers.  25 — 27).  (2)  The  feeling  of  sin,  giving  rise
to  the  craving  for  a  holier  one  to  stand  between  him  and  God.  (3)  The  feeling  of
need — the  soul's  longing  for  fellowship  with  God ;  giving  rise  to  the  desire  for  one  to
mediate  in  the  sense  of  making  peace,  of  bringing  about  reconciliation  (Job  xvi.  21).

II.  The  mediation  or  Moses  a  type  or  that  of  Christ.  We  trace  the  resem-
blance :  1.  In  his  mllingness  to  mediate.  So  did  Jesus  most  willingly  undertake  to
stand  between  God  and  sinners  (Heb.  x.  5^10).  2.  In  his  acceptance  as  mediator
(ver.  28).  So  was  Christ  called  to  this  office  by  the  Father,  invested  with  all  the  powers
necessary  for  the  right  discharge  of  its  duties,  and  accepted  in  the  discharge  of  them
(Isa.  xlix.  8  ;  Matt.  iii.  17 ;  xvii.  5 ;  Heb.  v.  4—11).  3.  In  the  work  lie  did.  (1)  Con-
veying God's  words  to  the  people  (cf.  John  xvii.  6 — 9).  (2)  Conveying  the  people's
words  to  God  (ver.  27).  Jesus  is  in  like  manner  the  medium  through  whom  prayer,
worship,  etc.,  ascend  to  the  Father  (Bph.  iii.  18 ;  Heb.  iv.  14 — 16).  (3)  Frequently
interceding  for  them,  and  obtaining  pardon  for  their  sins  (Exod.  xxxfi.  11 — 15 ;  Numb.
xiv.  13 — 21,  etc.).  So  does  Jesus  ever  live  to  intercede  for  us,  and  advocate  our  cause
(Rom.  viii.  34 ;  1  John  ii.  1).  (4)  Even,  on  one  notable  occasion,  offering  himself  as
a  sacrifice  for  their  sin  (Exod.  xxxii.  32).  What  Moses  would  have  done,  had  it  been
possible  so  to  save  the  people  from  destruction,  Christ  did  (Gal.  iii  13,  etc.). — J.  0.

Ver.  8. — The  inigmty  of  the  fathers  visited  on  the  children.  I.  A  fact  amply
attested.  Borne  out  1.  By  Scripture  instances  (Josh.  vii.  24 ;  2  Sam.  xii.  14 ;  1  Kings
xxi.  21,  29,  etc.).  2.  By  observation  and  experierwe.  The  case  of  children  suffering
in  mind,  body,  character,  and  fortune,  as  the  result  of  the  sins  of  parents,  is  one  of  the
commonest  and  saddest  things  in  life.  3.  Science.  The  law  of  heredity.  (For  illus-
trations, see  Rev.  Joseph  Cook's '  Lectures.*)  4,  Literature.  Especially  do  the  Greek
tragedies  give  expression  to,  and  strikingly  work  out,  this  thought.

II.    A  fact   mysterious,   yet  to   be  viewed   in  the   light  of  various  BELIEVIN9

considerations.  The  difficulty  is  one  of  natural,  quite  as  much  as  of  revealed,  reli-
gion. The  following  considerations  relieve  it  only  in  part :  1.  Every  original  disad-
vantage will  be  taken  into  account  by  the  Searcher  of  hearts  in  estimating  personal
responsibility  (Luke  xiii.  48).  2.  The  final  judgment  on  a  man's  character  will  turn,
not  on  inherited  tendencies,  but  on  what  he  has  made  himself  by  his  own  moral  deter-
minations (Ezek.  xviii.).  3.  The  less  favourable  conditions  in  which  the  sins  of  parents
have  placed  the  individual  cannot  turn  to  his  ultimate  disadvantage  if  he  struggle  well

DBUTEBON'OMV.  '


114  THE   BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  v.  1—33.

and  peneTere  to  the  end  (see  '  Speaker's  Commentary '  on  Exod.  xx.  5).  4.  It  is  open
to  the  evil-doer  to  cut  off  the  entail  of  punishment  by  choosing  for  himself  the  way  of
righteousness  (Ezek.  xviii.  15 — 18).  God  is  reluctant  to  contemplate  the  heritage  of
evil  descending  further  than  the  third  or  fourth  generation,  while  thousands  of  gene-
rations are  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the  blessing.  5.  Experience  of  the  effects  of
a  parent's  evil-duing  is  designed  to  act  as  a  deterrent  from  like  sins.  The  child  is  less
likely  to  imitate  the  parents'  vices,  suffering  these  results,  than  if  entirely  exempt.
H.  The  Law  is  the  consequence  of  a  constitution  of  society  originally  intended  for  the
conveyance,  not  of  evils,  but  of  blessings.  This  is  a  consideration  of  importance  as
throwing  light  on  the  equity,  as  well  as  on  the  goodness,  of  Divine  providence.  The
design  of  the  organic  constitution  of  society  is  obviously  to  hand  down  to  succeeding
generations  the  moral  gains  of  those  which  precede.  It  is  sin  which  has  wrought  the
mischief,  reversing  the  operation  of  a  constitution  in  itself  beneficent,  and  making  that
which  is  good  work  death  to  so  many.

Lesson — The  tremendous  responsibility  of  parents,  and  of  all  who  have  it  in  their
power  to  influence  the  destinies  of  posterity. — J.  0.

Vers.  12 — 15. — The  sahhath.  I.  What  ?  The  essential  point  in  the  institution  is
the  sanctification  to  God  of  a  seventh  part  of  our  time,  of  one  day  in  seven.  Which
day  of  the  seven  is  observed  is  indifferent,  not  in  the  sense  of  being  left  to  individual
choice,  but  in  respect  of  any  inherent  sanctity  in  one  day  above  another  (Eom.  xiv.  5).
The  day  is  made  holy  by  the, Divine  appointment,  and  by  the  uses  we  put  it  to.  We
sanctify  the  sabbath :  1.  By  observing  it  as  a  day  of  rest  from  secular  toil.  The  need
of  a  rest  day  in  the  week  is  universally  acknowledged.  Every  effort  should  be  made  to
extend  the  boon  as  widely  as  possible,  and  to  avoid  infraction  of  the  rights  of  others
in  connection  with  it.  Our  aim  should  be  to  lessen  Sunday  work,  not  to  increase  it.
Apply  to  railways,  steamboats,  post-ofBee  work,  museums,  etc.  2.  By  devoting  it
principally  to  religious  uses.  It  is  only  by  conserving  the  sabbath  as  a  day  sacred  to
religion  that  we  can  hope  to  preserve  it  as  a  day  free  &om  toiL  We  need,  for  spiritual
purposes,  all  the  opportunities  it  gives  us.

II.  Fob  whom  ?  The  answer  is — for  man.  This  is  shown :  1.  Prom  its  primeval
origin.  That  the  sabbath  dates  from  creation  is  implied  in  the  narrative  in  Genesis
(ii.  3),  in  the  terms  of  the  command  (Exod.  xx.  & — 11),  in  Christ's  words  (Mark
ii.  27),  in  the  argument  in  Hebrews  (iv.  3,  4),  and  in  the  recently  deciphered
Chaldean  traditions.  While  it  may  be  argued,  that  if  designed  to  commemorate  crea-
tion, this  is  a  matter  which  concerns  all  men  equally  with  the  Jews.  2.  Prom  »<s
place  in  the  moral  law.  It  is  certainly  remarkable,  if  the  sabbath  is  a  purely  Jewish
institution,  that  it  should  be  found  embodied  in  the  first  of  those  two  tables  which  by
their  contents,  as  well  as  by  the  manner  of  their  promulgation,  are  shown  to  be  of  a
distinctly  moral  nature.  3.  From  the  respect  pai'i  to  it  by  the  prophets  (see  Isa.  Iviii.
13, 14).  The  language  here  employed  is  very  different  from  that  which  prophets  were
accustomed  to  use  of  purely  ceremonial  institutions.  4.  Prom  Christ's  defence  of  it.
It  is  noticeable,  and  supports  our  view,  that  while  frequently  charged  with  breaking
the  sabbath  law,  the  Saviour  never  once  admits  the  chariio.  He  carefully  defends
himself  against  it.  He  unceremoniously  clears  away  the  rubbish  which  the  Pharisees
had  heaped  upon  the  institution  ;  but  the  sabbath  itself  he  never  speaks  of  as  a  thing
to  be  abolished.  He  sets  it  in  its  true  light,  and  shows  high  respect  for  it.  5.  Prom
its  reappearance  in  the  new  dispensation  in  a  form  adapted  to  (he  genius  and  wants  of
Christianity.  The  name  sabbath  is  not  found  in  the  New  Testament,  applied  to  the
first  day  of  the  week,  but  the  thing  appears  in  that  weekly  festival  of  the  Apostolic
Church — the  Lord's  day.  6.  Prom  the  proved  adaptation  of  the  sabbath  to  the  consti-
tution of  man's  nature.  The  seventh-day  rest  is  found  by  experience  to  be  essential
to  man's  welfare.  It  ministers  to  physical  health,  mental  vigour,  moral  purity,  and
religious  earnestness.  The  sabbath-keeping  nations  are  by  far  the  happiest,  most  moral,
Hnd  most  prosperous.  These  reasons  combine  to  show  that  this  institution  is  one
intended  and  adapted  for  the  whole  human  family.

III.  Why  ?  The  institution,  as  seen  above,  is  grounded  in  deep  necessities  of  man'»
nature.  It  is,  moreover,  a  suitable  recognition  of  ihe  Creator's  right  to  our  worvlji|.  and
bcrvice.     B'lt  further,  it  is;  1.  Commemorative  (1)  of  creation,  (2)  <>{  redemirtion— in


(U.  ,.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  115

the  on«t  of  Israel,  of  redemption  from  Egypt  (ver.  15) ;  in  the  case  of  the  Christian,  of
redemption  through  Christ.   2.  Frefigurative— of  the  rest  of  heaven  (Heb.  iv.  9).-^.  0.

Ver.  l6.Sonour  to  parents.  We  prefer  the  arrangement  which  regards  the  fifth
commandment  as  the  last  of  the  first  table — honour  to  parents  being  viewed  as  honour
to  God  ill  his  human  representatives.

I.  Pakbnts  stand  to  their  ohii.dken  in  the  relation  op  repbbsbntatives  of
THE  Divine.  They  represent  God  as  the  source  of  their  offspring's  life ;  they  have  a
share  of  God's  authority,  and  ought  to  exercise  it;  but  much  more  ought  they  to
represent  God  to  their  children  in  his  unwearied  beneficence,  his  tender  care,  his
exalted  rectitude,  his  forgiving  love.  With  what  intelligence  or  comfort  can  a  child
be  taught  to  think  of  a  Father  in  heaven,  if  its  earthly  parent  is  wanting  in  dignity,
kindness,  truthfulness,  or  integrity?  How  many  fathers  are  thus  spoiling  for  their
children  their  whole  conceptions  of  God !  And  with  what  anxiety  and  care  should
earthly  parents  study  to  leave  sucb  an  impression  on  their  children's  minds  as  will
make  the  idea  of  God  delightful  and  consolatory  to  them,  while  inspiring  them  towards
him  with  proper  feelings  of  reverence  1

II.  Parents  on  this  account  are  to  be  honoured  by  their  children.  They
are  to  be  regarded  with  affection,  treated  with  respect  and  deference,  promptly  and
cheerfully  obeyed,  and,  where  needful,  liberally  supported  (IMatt.  xv.  4^—7 ;  1  Tim.
V.  8).  Even  the  failure  of  parents  to  do  all  their  duty  to  their  children  does  not
exonerate  the  children  from  the  obligation  of  treating  them  with  respect.  Young
people  need  to  be  reminded  that  failure  in  this  duty  is  peculiarly  offensive  to  God.
We  are  told  that  when  Tiyo  Soga  visited  this  country,  a  particular  thing  which
astonished  him  was  the  deficiency  in  respect  for  parents  compared  with  the  obedience
which  prevailed  in  the  wilds  of  Kaffraria.

III.  The  honouring  of  parents  has  attached  to  it  a  peculiar  promise.
Length  of  days  and  prosperity.  The  promise  is  primarily  national,  but  it  has  fulfil-
ments in  individuals.  1.  A  special  blessing  rest.s  on  the  man  who  shows  his  parents
dne  respect.  That  has  often  been  remarked.  2.  There  is  also  a  natural  connection
between  the  virtue  and  the  promise.  Kespect  for  parents  is  the  root  at  once  of  reverence
for  God  and  of  respect  for  the  rights  of  others.  Hence  the  place  of  the  commandment
in  the  Decalogue.  It  engenders  self-respect,  and  forms  the  will  to  habits  of  obedience.
It  is  favourable  to  the  stability,  good  order,  and  general  morals  of  society.  It  therefore
conduces  to  health,  longevity,  and  a  diffusion  of  the  comforts  of  life,  furnishing  alike
the  outward  and  the  inward  conditions  necessary  for  success. — J.  0.

Ver.  22. — Moral  Law.  L  The  ten  commandments  a  distinct  part  of  God's
RRVELATION.  1.  They  were  spoken  by  God's  own  voice  from  the  midst  of  the  fire
(ver.  24).  2.  They  only  were  thus  promulgated ;  "  he  added  no  more."  8.  They  were
written  on  tables  of  stone.  4.  They  were  deposited  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant  (Exod.
XXV.  16).  These  facts  show  that  they  held  a  distinct  place  in  the  Law-giving  at  Sinai,
and  that  they  are  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  ceremonial  and  judicial  statutes,
subsequently  given.

IT.  Tub  grounds  op  this  distinction.  The  Decalogue  was:  1.  An  epitome  of
universal  moral  truth.  2.  Internally  complete  as  such — the  first  table  laying  down
our  duties  to  God,  as  respects  his  being,  his  woi'ship,  his  Name,  his  day,  his  human
representatives;  the  second  forbidding  all  injury  to  our  fellow-men  (injuries  to  life,
property,  chastity,  character),  while  requiring  by  implication  the  fulfilment  of  all
positive  duties,  and  the  regulation  even  of  our  secret  thoughts.  3.  The  basis  of  the
covenant  with  Israel.  The  foundation  on  which  all  subsequent  legislation  was
reared. — J.  0.

Vers.  23 — 28. — The  dement  of  terror  in  religion.  I.  The  pact  op  terror.  It  is
not  unnatural  that  man  should  tremble  in  presence  of  any  near  manifestation  of  the
Divine.  The  chief  cause  of  this  terror  is  the  consciousness  of  sin.  Guilty  man  fears
his  Judge.  The  text  is  an  instance  of  this  terror,  but  the  same  thing  has  often  been
witnessed.  1.  Inpresenceof  unusual  appearances  of  nature.  Comets,  eclipses,  unusual
darkness,  thunderstorms,  earthquakes,  etc.     ii.   Under  the  powerful  preaching  uf  judg-


116  THIS  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  v.  1—33.

ment.  Felix  under  the  preaching  of  Paul  (Acts  zxIt.  25).  Massillon  bringing  the
French  court  to  their  feet  in  terror,  as  he  described  the  Lord's  coming.  Whitfield's
oratory  and  its  effects.  3.  In  prospect  of  death.  There  are  few  in  whom  the  approach
of  death  does  not  awal^en  sierioiis  alarms.  The  effect  is  most  conspicuous  in  times  of
sudden  danger,  as  in  shipwrecks,  etc.

II.  The  influence  of  terror.  Usnally,  as  here :  1.  It  extorts  confession  of  the
truth.  The  Israelites  spoke  of  God  in  juster  terms  than  ever  they  had  done  before,  or
perhaps  ever  did  again.  Terror  draws  from  the  soul  strange  acknowledgments.  'The
white  face  of  the  scoffer  shows  how  little,  in  his  heart,  he  disbelieves  in  the  God  he
would  fain  have  disavowed.  The  self-righteous  man  is  made  suddenly  aware  of  his
sins.  The  blasphemer  stops  his  oaths,  and  begins  to  pray.  The  liar  for  once  finds
himself  speaking  the  truth.  2.  It  awakens  the  cry  for  a  mediator.  Thus  we  see  it
leading  men  to  send  for  ministers  or  lay  Christians  to  pray  for  them,  or  crying  for
mercy  to  the  Saviour  or  to  saints.  3.  It,  prompts  to  vows  and  promises.  In  their
terrified  moods,  men  are  willing  to  promise  anything — whatever  they  think  will
please  or  propitiate  God  (ver.  27).  They  will  repent,  will  pray,  will  go  to  church,  will
make  restitution  for  wrongs,  will  abandon  vices,  etc.

III.  The  nfTEFji'icACY  or  tbrroe  as  an  instrument  of  conversion.  Terror,  when
excited  by  just  views  of  sin,  has  its  uses.  It  breaks  up  the  hardened  crust  of  indifference,
ploughs  into  the  nature,  and  prepares  it  for  the  reception  of  better  teaching.  But
terror  of  itself  cannot  change  the  heart.  It  is  the  message  of  love  which  alone  can
exalt,  renovate,  and  truly  convert.  Not  the  Law,  but  the  cross.  The  Law  is  only  useful
when  employed  as  a  schoolmaster  to  bring  to  Christ.  These  Israelites  soon  forgot  their
terrore,  and  in  less  than  forty  days  had  made  for  themselves  a  golden  calf.  The  jailor's
terrors  (Acts  xvi.  27)  would  have  wrought  death,  but  the  words,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord
Jesus  Chritt,"  etc.  (ver.  31),  made  him  live  anew. — J.  0.

Vers.  28,  20. — God's  desires  for  man's  good.  A  gleam,  from  amidst  the  terrors,  of
the  Divine  loving-kindness  and  tenderness.

I.  God  welcomes  in  man  the  faintest  traces  of  a  disposition  to  bbtubn  to
HiK.  (Ver.  27.)  This  trait  in  the  Divine  character  is  scarcely  recognized  by  us  as  it
should  be.  We  are  apt  to  take  for  granted  that  till  conversion  is  absolutely  complete —
till  it  is  in  every  respect  sincere  and  thorough,  it  can  obtain  no  favour  in  the  eyes  of
Heaven.  Scripture  teaches,  on  the  contrary,  that  God  wills  to  recognize  in  man  any
signs  of  turning  towards  himself,  and  would  fain,  by  holding  out  encouragements,

ripen  tiiese  into  thorough  conversion  (1  £ings  xxi.  27 — 29 ;    Ps.  Ixxviii.  34 40 ;

Jonah  iii.  lO).

II.  God  18  nevbrthklbss  awabe  of  all  that  is  lacking  in  hearts  not  oom-
PLETELT  SURRENDERED  TO  HIM.  The  professions  of  the  Israelites  did  not  deceive  Wz.
He  knew  the  superficiality  of  their  states  of  feeling.  They  lacked  yet  "  one  thing"^
(Jviaik  xi.  21) — the  entire  surrender  of  their  hearts  to  him.  We  have  the  same  discern-
ment in  tie  New  Testament  (John  ii.  25 ;  Acts  viii.  21 ;  Bev.  iii.  1 ;  of.  1  Kings  xv.  3 ;
Matt.  xiii.  <SC,  ?  1 ).

III.  God  desireb  in  man  that  thorouohnbss  ok  conversion  which  alone  can
SECURE  OBEDIENCE,  HAPPINESS,  AND  PERSEVERANOB.  What  God  desires  in  man  is
heart-religion;  this  has:  1.  Its  seat  in  the  heart.  2.  Itsprinciplein  the  fearofGod.  3.
Its  outcome  in  obedience.  4.  Its  test  in  pereeverance.  5.  Its  reward  in  blessedness!
It  is  God's  love  which  here  speaks,  but  also  his  righteousness,  which  is  necessarily
averse  from  whatever  is  unreal,  and  desiies  to  see  goodness  triumphant. — J.  0.

Vers.  1—21. — T/ie  Decalogue.  Moses  here  recalls  the  Sinaitic  covenant,  and  wishes
the  Israelites  to  remember  that,  though  given  to  their  fathers  primarily,  it  was  also
applicable  to  them.  They  were  in  many  cases  present  as  children  then,  and  they  were
represented  by  their  parents.  Moses  speaks  with  authority  as  having  been  mediator
(ver.  5)  on  the  occasion.

There  are  the  following  lessons  to  be  learned  from  the  Decalogue  as  here  given :

L  The  covenant  is  based  upon  a  merciful  delivbbanob.  God  gives  his  Law
to  his  people  after  their  deliverance  from  Egyptian  bondage.  It  is  intended  to  be
a  rule  of  life  for  those  already  redeemed.     The  gospel  precedes  the  Law— Jloses  the


OH.  V.  1—33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  117

deliverer  precedes  Moses  the  lawgiver ;  the  Lord  was  first  known  as  the  fountain  of
freedom,  and  then  as  the  fountain  of  that  Law  within  whose  hounds  freedom  is  to  be
realized.

II.  This  Law  covers  oub  relations  both  to  God  and  man.  1.  The  Laws  re-
lating to  Ood.  These  embrace  the  four  which  come  first,  i.e.  (1)  the  law  against
polytheism  or  atheism.  This  law  is  broken  when  we  live  "  without  God  in  the  world,"
ascribing  to  luck,  chance,  or  fortune  what  is  due  to  God's  providence.  It  is  broken
when  we  worship  self,  or  fame,  or  ambition  (of. '  The  Life  and  Letters  of  J.  H.  Thorn-
well,  D.D.,  LL.D.,'  p.  142;  also  Dale's  'Ten  Commandments;'  Washburn's  'Social
Law  of  God  ;*  and  Crosby's  '  Thoughts  on  the  Decalogue ').  (2)  The  law  against  sensuotis
worship.  For  the  second  commandment  is  broken  in  so  far  as  our  worship  is  not  "  in
spirit  and  in  truth."  (3)  The  law  of  reverence.  Any  spirit  of  undue  familiarity  which
leads  to  the  least  trifling  before  God  is  a  breach  of  this  third  commandment.  (4)  The
law  of  consecrated  time.  This  fourth  commandment  is  an  acknowledgment  that  aU
time  is  God's  by  right,  and  the  seventh  portion  should  he  by  special  obligation.  In
Deuteronomy  the  sabbath  is  based,  not  on  creation,  as  in  Exodus,  but  on  the  deliverance
from  Egypt.  Each  great  providence  increases  our  obligation  thus  to  acknowledge  God.
Hence  the  Lord's  day  is  made  commemorative  of  our  Lord's  resurrection.

2.  The  laws  relating  to  man.  These  embrace  the  succeeding  six,  thus :  (1)  The
law  of  the  family.  Tliis  is  the  first  commandment  with  promise  (Eph.  vi.  2).  (2)
The  law  of  social  love.  For  we  are  to  avoid  not  only  murder,  but  the -unholy  anger  of
which  it  is  the  manifestation  (Matt.  v.  22).  (3)  The  law  of  social  purity.  We  must
be  pure  in  thought,  as  well  as  in  act,  as  our  Lord  has  shown  us  (Matt.  v.  28 ;  also
Mark  vii.  21 — 23).  (4)  'I'hel&w  pi  honesty.  This  must  be  in  God's  sight  and  in  man's
(2  Cor.  viii.  21).  (5)  The  law  of  veracity.  Restraining  the  turbulent  tongue  (Jas.
iii.  6,  9).  (6)  The  law  of  contentTnent.  The  curbing  of  covetousness,  which  is
idolatry  (Col.  iii.  5).— B.  M.  E.

Vers.  22 — 33. — Ebw  Moses  hecame  mediator.  The  ten  commandments  were  a  dwect
communication  from  God  to  Israel.  But  it  was  too  much  lor  their  sinful,  terrified
souls  to  stand,  and  so  Moses  is  entreated  to  stand  between  God  and  them,  and  be  the
medium  of  communication  between  them.  The  Lord  approved  of  the  arrangement,
and  installed  Moses  into  the  office  (cf.  Exod.  xx.  18 — 21).    This  suggests —

I.  The  CRT  FOB  a  mediator  arose  out  op  the  pears  op  men.  The  surpassing
gloty  of  God  makes  such  a  terrific  impression  on  the  hearts  of  sinners  that  they  cry
instinctively  for  mediation.  It  is  a  need  of  mankind  when  aroused  to  a  true  sense  of
the  majesty  and  purity  of  God.

Those  who  question  the  necessity  of  mediation  are  really  wanting  in  the  due  sense
of  God's  exceeding  majesty  and  glory.

II.  The  office  op  a  mediator  necessitated  much  personal  self-denial.  It  was
doubtless  a  great  honour  conferred  on  Moses  ;  but  it  was  also  a  great  burden.  Thus  he
declared  his  own  fears  in  the  circumstances.  "  I  exceedingly  fear  and  quake  "  was  his
testimony  about  the  experience  on  the  mount.  Besides,  the  forty  days'  seclusion  and
fast  and  all  the  attendant  anxieties  and  troubles  showed  that  it  was  most  assuredly  no
sinecure.

And  these  trials  of  Moses  only  faintly  typify  the  severe  strain  and  trial  borne  by
Christ,  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man.

III.  The  mediation  was  law-oivino.  Moses  was  to  convey  "  the  commandments,
and  the  statutes,  and  the  judgments  "  of  God  unto  the  people.  It  was  didactic — its
purpose  was  the  conveyance  of  truth.  It  was  a  prophetic  office,  consequently,  which
Moses  in  this  instance  received.  The  priestly  was  made  over  to  Aaron,  on  the  principle
of  a  "  division  of  labour."

And  so  Christ  is  the  great  mediating  Prophet.  He  came  forth  from  the  secret  place
of  God  to  convey  to  us  what  God  is.  He  came  down  from  heaven.  He  testified  about
heavenly  things  (John  iii.  11 — 13).  And  in  the  perfection  of  mediation,  he  embodied
the  truth,  and  was  able  to  say,  "  I  am  the  truth  "  (John  xiv.  6).  Jesus  was  a  living
Law.

IV.  Obedience  should  result  prom  the  mediation.  The  whole  Law  was  a
"commandment  with  promise."    This  is  shown  in  ver.  33.     The  children  of  Israel


ii8


lUE  BOOK   OP   DEUTERONOMY.


[oh.  tl  1— 25.-


were  to  conduct  themselves  obediently  as  the  children  of  God,  and  they  would  reiiliz;
in  all  its  lireadth  the  promise  of  the  fifth  commandment.  The  Law  was  a  Law  ol
well-heing  (ver.  29).  Obedience  was  the  condition  of  continued  prosperity  In  the  land.
And  the  same  arrangements  continue.  Obedience  to  God's  Law  still  secures  the
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come.  Not,  of  course,
that  the  saints  are  always  prosperous  in  this  world;  were  this  the  case,  saintship
would  be  a  very  mercenary  business.  But  other  things  being  equal,  the  tendency  of
obedience  is  to  present  as  well  as  future  well-being,  God  makes  no  promise,  but
thieateuing,  to  the  disobedient, — B,  M.  E.


KXPOSITIOIT.


CHAPTER  VI.


Vers.  1 — 3. — Some  connect  this  with  what
g'^es  before,  and  take  It  as  a  sort  of  epilogue
to  the  preceding  discourse;  bat  it  is  rather
to  be  regarded  as  introductory  to  what
follows.  Being  about  to  enjoin  upon  the
people  the  commandments  they  were  to  obey
in  the  land  on  which  they  were  about  to
enter,  Moses  prefaces  this  with  a  general  an-
nouncement of  what  he  was  about  to  deliver,
a^d  with  a  statement  of  the  reason  for  such
deliverance,  and  of  the  benefits  that  would
flow  from  the  observance  of  what  should  be
enjoined.

Yer.  1. — These  are  the  commandments.  In
the  Hebrew  it  is.  This  i»  the  commandment,
i.e.  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  Divine
enactment;  equivalent  to  "the  Law"  (ch.
Iv.  44).  "The  statutes  and  judgments"
(rights)  are  in  apposition  to  "the  com-
mandment," and  explain  it.

Ver.  2. — The  reason  for  this  announce-
ment of  the  Law  was  that  the  people  might
fear  the  liOrd,  so  as  to  keep  all  that  he  en-
joined, they  and  their  children,  from  gene-
ration to  generation,  and  that  they  might
thereby  continue  long  in  life,  and  in  the
enjoyment  of  the  advantages  accruing  from
the  land  of  which  they  were  about  to  take
possession.

Ver.  3. — God  had  promised  from  the  first
to  the  patriarchs  that  he  would  make  of
their  posterity  a  great  nation  (Gen.  xii.  1 ;
xvii.  6;  xviii.  18).  But  the  fulfilment  of
this  promise  was  conditioned  by  their  con-
tinuing as  a  people  in  the  fear  of  God,  and
in  obedience  to  his  Law.  Everything,  tlien,
depended  on  their  hearing  what  Moses  had
been  commanded  to  teach  them,  and  ob-
serving to  do  it  (cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  9,  etc.).  In
the  land,  etc.  This  is  to  be  connected  with
the  clause,  "  that  it  may  be  well  with  thee,
and  that  ye  may  increase  mightily;"  the
land  was  to  be  the  scene  and  sphere  of
their  prosperity  and  increase.  Some  would
render  thus:  "As  the  Lord  God  at  thy


fathers  bath  promised  thee  a  Iand,''ete.,  i.e.
a  place  in  which  thou  mayest  prosper  and
increase;  the  other,  however,  is  the  mors
natural  construction  and  rendering.  There
is,  indeed,  no  preposition  before  "the  land "
in  the  Hebrew ;  but  nothing  is  more  com-
mon in  that  language  than  for  the  accusa-
tive of  a  noun  to  be  used  adverbially  to
describe  the  place  where  anything  is  done.
Milk  and  honey;  emblem  of  fruitfulness
and  sweetness  (Song  of  Solomon  iv.  11);
proverbially  descriptive  of  Canaan,  as  rich
in  pasturage  for  flocks,  and  abounding  in
flowers  whence  the  bees  could  extract  honey
(cf.  Exod.  iii.  8,  17).

Vers.  4 — 25. — The  first  aot)  gbeat
COMMANDMENT.  "In  the  fear  of  Jehovali
all  true  obedience  is  rooted  (vers.  2,  3) ;  for
this  is  the  first  and  most  intimate  fact  in
the  relation  of  Israel  and  Jehovah  (ch.  v.  26).
But  where  the  supreme  fear  of  Jehovah
hinders  men  from  allowing  self  to  prepon-
derate in  opposition  to  God,  there  will  be
no  stopping  at  this  renunciation  of  self-will,
though  this  comes  first  as  the  negative
form  of  the  ten  commandments  also  shows,
but  there  will  come  to  be  a  coalescence  of
the  human  with  the  Bivine  will ;  and  this
is  love,  which  is  the  proper  condition  ol
obedience,  as  the  ten  commandments  also
indicate  (ch.  v.  10)"  (Banmgarten).

Ver.  4. — Hear, 0  Israel:  The  Lord  oni  God
is  one  Lord.  Tliis  is  an  affirmation  not  so
much  of  the  mnneity  as  of  the  unity  and
timplicity  of  Jeliovah,  the  alone  God.
Though  Kloliim  (plu.),  he  is  one.  The
speaker  does  not  say,  "Jehovah  is  alone
God,"  but  "Jehovah  our  Elohim  is  one
Jehovah  "  (comp.  for  the  force  of  nnN,  Exod.
xxvi.  6, 11 ;  Ezek.  xxxvil.  16—19).  Among
the  heathen  there  were  many  Baals  and
many  Jupiters;  and  it  was  believed  that
the  deity  might  be  divided  and  communi-
cated to  many.  But  the  God  of  Israel,
Jehovah,  is  one,  indivisible  and  incom-
municable.   He  is  the  Absolute  and  the


un.  VI.  1—26.]


THK  BOOli  Oi'  DEUTKlWXOiMi'.


US


InliDite  One,  who  alone  is  to  be  worshipped,
on  whom  all  depend,  and  to  whose  command
all  must  yield  obedience  (cf.  Zecli.  xiv.  9).
Not  only  to  polytheism,  but  to  pantheism,
and  to  the  conception  of  a  localized  or  na-
t  ional  deity,  is  tliis  declaration  of  the  unity
of  Jehovah  opposed.  With  these  words  the
JewB  begin  their  daily  liturgy,  morning  and
evening;  the  sentence  expresses  the  essence
nf  their  religious  belief ;  and  bo  familiar  is
It  to  their  thought  and  speech  that,  it  is
said,  they  were  often,  during  the  persecu-
tion in  Spain,  betrayed  to  their  enemies  by
tlie  involuntary  utterance  of  it.

Ver.  5. — To  the  one  indivisible  Jehovah
undivided  devotion  and  love  are  due.
Uince  the  injunction.  Thou  shalt  love  Je-
hovah thy  God  with  all  thine  heart,  and
with  all  tby  sonl,  and  with  all  thy  might.
The  "heart"  is  the  inner  nature  of  the
man,  including  his  intellectual,  emotional,
and  conative  faculties;  the  "soul"  is  the
personality,  the  entire  self-consciousness ;
and  the  "  might "  is  the  sum  of  the  energies,
bodily  and  mental.  Not  by  profession
merely  is  Jehovah  to  be  loved;  the  whole
man,  ISody,  soul,  and  spirit,  is  tn  be  yielded
to  him  in  holy  and  devout  affection  (cf.
Matt.  xxii.  37;  Mark  xii.  33;  Luke  x.  27;
Rom.  xii.  1).  The  last  letter  of  the  first
word,  and  the  last  letter  of  the  last  word
in  this  verse  are  larger  than  the  ordinary
size  (majusculd),  and  as  these  two  form  the
word  for  witness  (ny),  the  Jews  say  that
tliey  are  written  thus  "that  every  one  may
know,  when  he  professes  the  unity  of  God,
that  his  heart  ought  to  be  intent  and  devoid
of  every  other  thought,  because  God  is  a
witness,  and  knoweth  everything "  (R.
Bechai,  fol.  195,  quoted  by  Michaelis,  '  Bib.
Heb.,'  in  Zoo.).

Vers.  6,  7. — Where  true  love  to  God
exists  in  the  heart,  it  will  manifest  itself  in
a  regard  to  his  will,  and  in  the  liiligunt
keeping  of  his  commandments.  Henco  his
words  were  to  be  not  only  in  the  memory
of  the  people,  but  laid  upon  their  heart
(of.  ch.  xi.  18),  that  they  might  be  ever
present  to  the  thought  and  will.  They
were  also  to  be  inculcated  upon  their
children,  and  to  be  the  subject  of  conversa-
tion on  all  fitting  occasions  between  them,
the  members  of  their  household,  and  even
their  casnal  associates.  Thou  shalt  teash
them  diligently  unto  thy  ohildren;  literally.
Thou  tkalt  sharpen  them  to  thy  children,
•  impress  them  upon  them,  send  them  into
them  like  a  sharp  weapon.

Ver.  8. — The  words  of  God  were  to  be
bound  for  a  sign  [a  memorial  or  directory]
upon  thine  hand,  the  instrument  of  acting,
and  to  be  as  frontlets  [fillets  or  bauds]
between  thine  eyes,  the  organs  of  direction
in  walking  or  moving,  andf  bo  on  the  foi»-


heail,  the  chamber  of  thought  and  purpose ;
and  they  were  to  inscribe  them  on  the  posts
of  their  houses,  and  on  their  gates.  The
purport  of  this  is  that  they  were  constantly
and  everywhere  to  have  these  command-
ments of  the  Lord  in  view  and  in  mind,
BO  as  to  nndeviatingly  observe  them.  It
seems,  however,  to  have  been  a  custom
widely  prevalent  among  the  ancient  Eastern
peoples  to  carry  about  their  persons  slips  of
parchment  or  some  other  material,  on  which
were  vrritten  sentences  of  moral  or  religious
import ;  and  such  sentences  they  were  also
wont  to  inscribe  on  conspicuous  places  of
tlieir  dwellings;  usages  still  to  be  found
among  the  Moslems  (see  Wilkinson,*  Ancient
Egyptians,'  iii.  364 ;  Lane, '  Modem  Egypt,'
i.  3a8;  Eussell,  'Nat.  Hist,  of  Aleppo;'
Thomson,  *Land  ami  the  Hook,'  i.  216),  and
tlie  latter  of  which  was  not  altogether
unknown  among  Western  nations  (cf.  Virgil,
'Georg.'  iii.  26,  etc.),  of  which  traces  may
still  be  seen  in  Switzerland,  Germany,  and
on  old  houses  in  both  England  and  Scot-
land.  This  custom  originated,  probably,
in  a  desire  to  have  the  sentiments  inscribed
always  in  mind ;  but  for  the  most  part  these
inscriptions  came  to  be  regarded  as  amulets
or  charms,  the  presence  of  which  on  the
person  or  the  house  was  a  safeguard  against
evil  influences,  especially  such  as  were
supernatural.  By  the  Jews  this  custom  .
was  followed;  and  they  regarded  it  as
authorized  by  the  injunction  of  Moses  in
this  passage.  Taking  his  words  literally,
theyhad  their  i:dt3,photh  and  their  mezuzah,
the  former  of  which — the  phylacteries  of
the  New  Testament — were  strips  of  parch-
ment, on  which  passages  of  the  Law  (Exod.
xiiL2— 10,  11—17;  oh.  vi.  4—10,  13—22)
were  written,  and  these,  enclosed  in  a  box,
were  bound  on  the  forehead  and  left  wrist,
and  worn  at  prayers  by  the  worshippers ;  the
latter  a  slip  of  parchment,  on  which  were
written  certain  pas.sages  of  Scripture  (vers.
4 — 9;  oh.  xi.  13 — 21),  and  which,  enclosed
in  a  reed  or  cylinder,  was  fixed  on  the  right-
hand  doorpost  of  every  room  in  the  house
(see  arts.  'Mezuzah'  and  'Phylacteries'
in  Kitto's  '  Biblical  Cyclopaedia,'  3rd  edit.).

Vers.  10 — 12. — As  the  Israelites  were
about  to  enter  upon  the  possession  of  a  rich
and  fertile  land,  where  everything  for  their
accommodation  and  comfort  was  already  pro-
vided for  them,  there  was  a  danger  of  their
being  so  engrossed  with  their  new  posses-
sions as  to  forget  the  Lord  and  his  gracious
dealings  with  them.  They  are,  therefore,
here  warned  against  the  danger  to  which
they  would  be  thus  exposed.  Hoose  of
bondage  (Exod.  xiii.  3).

Vera.  13 — 18.— Thou  shalt  fear  the  Lord
thy  Bod.  The  fear  of  the  Lord— that
reverent  awe  which  is  akin  to  love — is  the


120


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[cn.  VI.  1—25.


beginning  of  wiBdom  and  tiie  foundation  of
piety;  where  it  is  in  the  iieart  it  will  lead
to  serving  of  the  Lord  in  holy  obedience;
and  they  in  whom  it  dwells  will  swear  by
his  Name,  recognizing  his  presence  and
omniscience,  and  not  daring  to  asseverate
anything  but  what  they  know  to  be  true.
Thus,  really  believing  in  God  and  reve-
rently worshipping  him,  the  Israelites  would
be  careful  not  to  go  after  other  gods,  or  to
give  to  any  object  that  homage  which  is
due  unto  Jehovah  alone,  knowing  that  this
he  will  not  endure  or  suffer  with  impunity;
for  he  is  a  jealous  God,  and  them  that  thus
dishonour  liim  he  will  destroy  (Exod.  xx.
5 ;  ch.  iv.  24,  etc.)-  Thus  also  they  should
be  kept  from  murmuring  against  God,  and
thereby  tempting  him — putting  him,  as  it
were,  to  the  proof,  and  calling  in  question
his  presence  and  his  power,  as  they  bad
done  at  Massah  (Exod.  xvii.  1 — 7).  Witli-
jut  this  ge mine  religious  principle  there
will  be  no  sincere  worship,  no  true  rever-
ence, no  real  obedience,  rendei  ed  unto  God.
But  where  this  dwells  in  the  heart  it  will
influence  the  whole  life,  so  that  the  com-
mandments of  God  siiall  be  diligently  kept,
and  that  which  is  good  and  light  in  his
sight  shall  be  done.


Ver.  19. — To  cast  out,  etc. ;  rather,  to  the
easting  out  of,  etc.  The  iufin.  here  expresses
the  carrying  out  of  the  action  intimated  in
the  words,  "  that  it  m:iy  be  well  with  thee"
(cf.  Exod.,  xxiii.  27,  etc. ;  xxxi^.  IIX

Vers.  20 — 25. — The  injunction  to  teach
the  words  of  the  Lord  to  the  children  (ver.
7)  is  here  more  largely  explained.  When
asked  by  their  sons  the  meaning  and  reason
of  the  commandments  and  institutes  which
they  observed,  they  were  to  show  them
wiiat  the  Lord  had  done  for  his  people  in
bringing  them  out  of  Egypt  and  establish-
ing them  in  Canaan,  and  how  he  had  en-
joined on  them  all  these  statutes  that  they
mif;ht  fear  Jehovali  their  God  for  their
good  always,  and  for  their  preservation  and
safety.

Ver.  22. — Signs  and  wonders  (cf.  oh.  iv.
34).

Ver.  25. — And  it  shall  be  onr  lighteons-
ness ;  literally,  And  righteousness  shall  be  to
«M,  i.e.  we  shall  be  held  righteous  by  God
if  we  observe  to  do  all  that  he  has  enjoined
(comp.  Rom.  x.  5;  vi.  16;  Phil.  i'ii.  6).
Before  the  Lord,  i.e.  not  only  in  his  sight,
but  according  to  his  judgment,  so  as  to  be
approved  of  him  (cf.  Ps.  Ivi.  13;  oxvi.  9).


H0MILETIC8.

Vera.  1—3. — Ohedience  to  Ood  conducive  to  the  highest  good.  The  Lord  God  had
launched  forth  into  the  world  a  new  nation,  the  basis  of  whose  constitution  was
specifically  religious.  '  The  worship,  fear,  and  service  of  the  one  living  and  true  God
were  the  prime  duties  enjoined  on  the  people,  without  which  no  bare  morality  as
between  man  and  man  was  accepted  before  him.  In  this  paragraph,  however,  we  get
no  indications  of  duty  which  have  not  previously  been  included  in  the  ten  command-
ments. How  can  we?  The  whole  ground  of  duty  was  covered  by  them.  Still,  the
same  truths  are  ever  being  thrown  into  forms  fresh  and  new.  The  primal  laws  of  duty
are  not  many ;  they  may  soon  be  recounted.  But  we  need  "  line  upon  line,  precept
upon  precept,"  that  the  very  precepts  which  perhaps  we  deem  commonplace  may  be
gravenon  our  hearts,  and  there  become  living  powers!  In  the  three  verses  before  us
the  enjoined  duties  are  summed  up  in  the  one  phrase,  "the  commandment"  (ver.  1 :
the  word  is  singular,  and  includes  in  its  meaning  both  statutes  and  judgments).  Four
expressions  show  how  "  the  commandment "  is  to  be  kept.  1.  There  is  to  be  a  fear  of
the  Lord  ;  a  fear  based  on  trust,  not  on  distrust.  2.  The  Divine  appointments  are  to  be
the  rule  of  life.  3.  The  nurture  and  training  of  the  family  are  to  be  in  entire  harmony
therewith.  4.  This  family  loyalty  to  God  is  to  be  continuous  and  unswerving — "  all  the
days  of  thy  life."  And  in  wealth  and  variety  of  diction  the  Legislator  points  out  that
in  this  loyalty  of  being  Israel  would  find  its  well-hemg.  Whence  we  get  the  topic  for  our
present  Homily :  That  our  highest  interests  are  ensured  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine
commands.     Observe —

I.    It  IB   SUPPOSED   THAT  MEN  WILL   NOT   BE   INSRNSIBLE  TO  THE  QUESTION "  WhAT

WILL  BE  MOST  PROFITABLE  TO  US? "  As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  do  regard  the  measure  of
profit  likely  to  accrue,  as  something  which  regulates  their  movements.  Nor  is  there
anywhere  in  the  Word  of  God  any  censure  passed  on  this.  In  fact,  even  our  Saviour
himself  appeals  to  considerations  of  profit  in  Matt,  xvi,  25,  26.  So  also  does  the
Apostle  Paul  in  1  Tim.  iv.  8.  The  working  of  self-love  is  recognized  without  rebuke  in
the  Law,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself;"  and  it  is  even  remotely  enjoined
•  in  the  words,  "  Do  thyself  no  harm."    The  distinction  between  self-love  and  selfishnosa


tiH.  VLl— 25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  I'll

is  very  decided,  yet  is  far  too  little  noticed.  Selfishness  is  having  regard  to  our  own
interests  in  dislinction  from  those  of  others;  self-love  has  regard  to  our  own  inteiwits  in
harmony  with  those  of  others.  The  first  is  sinful;  the  second  is  lawful;  yea,  more,
to  fight  against  our  highest  interests  would  be  wrong.  We  may  demur  to  the  maxim
that  "utility  is  the  foundation  of  virtue,"  and  rightly  so,  if  "utility"  be  taken  in  the
selfish  aspect  thereof.  But  if  by  "utility"  we  mean  "the  tendency  to  promote  the
liiahest  good  over  the  widest  sphere,  for  all  time,"  then  the  maxim  is  lifted  up  to  a
higher  level,  and  becomes  at  least  practically  wholesome,  even  if  it  may  be  objected  to
on  philosophical  grounds.  If,  then,  we  do  but  entertain  a  right  and  scriptural  view  of  what
our  highest  interests  are,  it  is  lawful  for  us,  and  even  binding  on  us,  to  have  a  regard
to  them ;  and  it  is  to  the  desire  in  that  direction  that  the  passage  before  U8  makes
■  its  appeal.

II.  It  18  SHOWN  HEBE  THAT  THEBB  IS  A  COnRSB  OF  LDfE  WHICH  IS  APPOINTED  FOB  US

BY  God.  The  appointments  of  God  for  us  are  specified  here.  We  are  to  "  fear  the
Lord."  Evidently  tliis  is  to  be  a  fear,  not  of  dread,  but  of  love;  for  see  ver.  5.  In
Ps.  cxxx.  4  we  read,  "  But  there  is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that  thou  mayest  be  feared."
God  forgives,  and  so  takes  away  the  fear  of  the  offender,  that  the  fear  of  offending  may
take  its  place.  There  is  to  be  dread  of  sin,  but  not  of  God.  The  fear  is  to  be  suffused
with  tenderness  and  brightened  with  joy  (Ps.  xxxiii.  1).  See  the  phrases  in  this
section,  even  touching  in  their  pathos — "  God,"  "  thy  God,"  "  the  God  of  thy  fathers."
Yea,  it  is  our  own  God  who  lays  down  our  life-rules,  and  by  all  the  force  of  his  tender
love  would  he  win  us  to  obedience.

III.  In  FOLLOwmo  God's  appointed  wat  we  ensure  oob  own  highest  good.  (Vers.
2,  3.)  'I  he  elements  of  good  which  obedience  ensures  are :  1.  Peace.  We  remarked  above
that  the  fear  of  God,  which  we  are  called  on  to  cherish,  is  one  based  on  trust.  The  Christian
form  of  this  is  reliance  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  all  the  aspects  in  which  he  is
revealed  to  us  as  ours.  The  effect  of  this  is  named  in  Bom.  v.  1.  Then  there  will  be
peace  of  conscience  (see  Isa.  xxxii.  17 ;  Phil.  iv.  6, 7 ;  Matt.  xi.  29).  2.  Harmony.  Our
nature  will  be  in  self-accord  when  what  we  are  and  do  corresponds  to  what  we  ought  to
be  and  do.  There  will  be  no  schism  between  the  judgment  and  the  affections.  3.
Health.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  man  who  is  most  obedient  to  God's  laws  will
have  the.  soundest  health  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  The  gladsomeness  and  ease  of  a
sound  and  well-balanced  constitution  will  be  his.  Hence:  4.  Continuance  will  be
a  part  of  the  reward — ''that  thy  days  may  be  prolonged"  (see  Ps.  xci.  16;  of.  Eph.
vi.  3;  Ps.  xxxvi.  9,  28,  34).  The/<w7»g  in  which  the  rewards  of  loyalty  to  God  will
show  themselves  are  very  varied.  The  individual  will  find  that  godliness  has  "  promise
of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  The  family  will  find  that  "  he
blesseth  the  habitation  of  the  just."  The  city  will  find  that  the  keeping  of  God's  com-
mandments is  among  the  things  "  which  belong  unto  its  peace."  And  "  the  righteous
nation  which  keepeth  the  truth  "  will  find  that  "  salvation  doth  God  appoint  for  walls
and  bulwarks "  (see  Isa.  xxvi.  1,  2 ;  xlviii.  17).  It  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  the
Divine  condescension  to  our  ways  of  thinking,  feeling,  and  acting,  that  our  God  should
stoop  to  teach  us  what  is  profitable  to  ourselves,  and  that  he  should  deign  in  mercy  to
reward  with  honour  and  peace  those  who  fear  him  (Ps.  Ixii.  12).  Mercifully  meeting
us  on  the  low  ground  on  which  we  too  frequentiv  stand  in  looking  out  for  profit,  God
would  raise  us  up  to  the  higher  platform  of  a  .rare,  self-abandoning  self-forgetfulness
and  love,  in  which  we  are  content  to  be  nothing,  that  God  may  be  all  in  all.  For
observe —

IV.  ApPAEENT   exceptions   to   this    ETOE    ABE    EXCEPTIONS  ONLY  IK  APPBABANCB.

Sometimes  obedience  to  God  may  be  attended  with  a  most  unusual  amount  of  afBiction
or  of  persecution.  Take,  e.g.  the  roll  of  worthies  referred  to  in  Heb.  xi.  32 — 39.  Can
we  say  it  was  for  their  "profit"  to  serve  God?  Most  certainly  we  can.  For:  1.  By
their  endurance  they  became  witnesses  for  God,  and  served  their  generation  in  the  very
way  they  would  most  have  desired  could  they  have  seen  as  God  sees.  2.  Their  afflic-
tions were  the  means  of  purifying  their  characters,  strengthening  their  principles,  and
ripening  their  virtues.  3.  In  the  midst  of  all,  God  was  himself  to  them  "  their  exceeding
joy ; "  and  what  they  had  in  him  was,  even  on  earth,  an  ample  recompense  for  all  that
Jthey  had  suffered /or  him.  4.  They  had  respect  to  the  recompense  of  reward  (Heb.  xi..
iO,  16,  26).     6   Their  sufferings  are  long  ago  forgotten  in  the  rest  of  the  unseen  state


12«  '  ME  BOOK  OP  DEtJTEROJCOMY.  [oh.  vi- 1—25.

where  they  are  "  inheriting  the  promises "  (Heb.  vi.  12).  They  had  faith  to  believe
them  and  [.atience  to  wait  for  them,  and  now  they  have  entered  iuto  "  the  rest."  Who
need  wish  to  change  their  lot  for  the  smoothest  and  most  prosperous  career  of  a  man
"  without  God  in  the  world  "  ?  Virtue  may  for  a  while  seem  "  to  have  the  worst  of  it,"
but  "  they  that  are  losers  for  God  shall  never  be  losers  by  him  in  the  end."

V.  Obedience  is  expected  to  be  the  result  op  an  intelligent  and  cdltdred
FAITH,  AND  NOT  OF  A  BLIND  ONE.  Ver.  1,  "  The  Lord  your  God  commanded  to  teach
you."  Nowhere  has  the  adage,  "  Ignorance  is  the  mother  of  devotion,"  less  warrant
than  in  the  Word  of  God.  The  priests  of  a  spurious  or  alien  faith  may  inculcate  blind
submission.  Not  so  any  of  the  inspired  writers,  whether  legislators,  prophets,  or
apostles.  Men  ,were  to  be  taught  not  only  what  God  required,  but  why  he  required
it,  that  they  might  render  him  the  homage  of  a  heart  quickened  to  love  through  the
truth  which  reached  the  understanding  and  "commended  itself  to  every  man's  con-
science."   OtoA  appeals  to  reason  (Isa,  L  18).

Vers.  4—9. — Truth  and  godliness  to  he  perpetuated  by  means  of  home  training.  In
this  paragraph,  the  aged  lawgiver  rehearses  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  Law  be  had
delivered,  and  is  showing  what  provision  God  had  made  in  the  structure  of  society  for
the  maintenance  and  peipetuation  of  truth  and  godliness.  It  is  easy  to  see  how  very
incomplete  his  work  would  have  been,  had  he  not  been  guided  to  make  provision  for
its  perpetuation  after  his  death.  Doubtless  God  desigQS  to  use  various  kinds  of  workers
in  his  field.  Some  may,  like  Whitefield,  make  a  great  impression  while  their  oratory
is  swaying  its  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands.  Others  may  be  like  Wesley,  who
not  only  moved  the  people  for  a  generation  by  his  pulpit  power,  but  also  prepared  the
way  by  his  organizing  skill  for  a  great  institution  which  should  last  for  ages.  Now,
it  is  not  for  us  to  disparage  one  man  because  he  does  not  do  the  work  of  another,  but
certain  it  is  that,  other  things  being  equal,  there  is  no  comparison  between  the  power
of  a  man  whose  felt  influence  passes  away  with  his  life,  and  that  of  one  whose  works
follow  him,  in  the  productions  of  his  pen  or  the  creations  of  hia  up-building  skill.
Now,  it  was  not  by  one  like  Aaron,  eloquent  though  he  was,  that  the  continuance  of
the  Hebrew  faith  and  life  was  to  be  secured.  He  gives  us  no  proof  of  stability  or  of
that  kind  of  power  which  ensures  its  own  reproduction.  That  was  found  in  Moses,  a
man  naturally  slow  of  speech,  who,  in  spite  of  his  occasional  outbreaks  of  vahemence,
was  yet  a  patient,  wise,  fwthful  leader,  by  whose  practical  genius  provision  was  made
for  the  ]iermanence  of  Israel's  religious  ordinances  and  life.  Moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,
he  called  into  existence  those  great  institutions  of  worship  and  teaching,  by  means
of  which  even  we  down  to  this  day  are  feeling  the  impulses  which  started  from  Mount
Sinai.  In  the  six  verses  before  us,  we  have  what  may  be  called  a  threefold  appointment
of  God,  which  in  all  its  essential  features  is  as  much  in  force  now  as  ever.  We  propose
to  study  it,  not  so  much  in  its  historical  and  local  aspect,  as  in  its  bearing  on  us  and
on  all  men  for  all  time.

I.  Herb,  at  the  back  op  national  life,  is  set  the  expression  op  a  condensed
THEOLOQT.  "  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord."  Time  was  when  this  verse  was  quoted
in  the  Socinian  controversy  in  proof  of  the  unity  of  God,  as  against  the  Trinitarians,
though  it  has  in  fact  no  bearing  on  the  matter  at  all.  It  refers,  not  to  the  nature  of
the  Divine  Being  in  himself,  but  is  rather  set  over  against  the  faiths  with  which  Israel
had  been  surrounded,  of  "  lords  many  and  gods  many."  In  contrast  from  polytjieism,
it  declares  that  there  is  but  one  Great  Supreme,  who  is  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.
And  this  is  not  the  basis  of  Israel's  faith  alone,  but  of  ours  likewise.  We  know  more
of  God  than  the  Hebrews  did,  but  what  they  knew  we  retain.  In  atheism,  the  highest
intellectual  natures  never  can  rest.  Deism  chills.  Pantheism  ignores  personality.
The  God  of  the  Bible,  as  revealed  to  us,  satisfies  the  cravings  of  intellect  and  heart.
In  Jesus  Christ,  God  is  "  manifest "  as  nowhere  else.  Nor  should  we  leave  out  the
touching  word,  "  the  Lord  our  God."  We  have  one  God  and  Father  of  all,  to  whom
the  vast  and  the  minute  are  equally  distinct,  and  by  whose  hand  both  are  moved  with
equal  ease  ;  who,  while  he  rolls  the  stars  along,  can  take  under  his  special  shelttring
love  the  widow  and  the  fatherless;  who  hears  the  orphan's  moan  and  dries  the  falling
tear.  It  is  our  inestimable  privilege  to  know  that  infinitely  above  us,  combined  with
an  arm  of  mighty  power,  there  is  a  heart  of  tenderest  love,  whose  great  concern  it  is


c«.  VI.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEHONOMY.  1^

to  Leal  the  wounds,  to  dry  the  tears,  and  obliterate  the  sins  of  a  bleeding,  weeping,
guilt-stained  world !  What  a  revelation  is  this  to  our  race!  Well  might  Moses  bid
.Israel  "  hearken  " !  For  surely  this  one  message  to  man,  that  there  is  a  redeeming  God
whom  he  may  call  his  own,  is  our  gospel,  our  life,  our  joy,  our  crown  !

II.  Front  of  the  condensed  THEOLoaT,  wb  have  here  condensed  religion.  (Ver.
6.)  The  fundamental  truth  of  theology  is  to  be  fruitful  in  practical  godliness.  God's
revelation  of  himself  to  man  is  meant  to  be  a  redemptive  power  in  man.  Man  has
heart,  soul,  strength,  understanding,  emotion,  will,  energy.  God  would  have  no  schism
in  our  being.  Our  varied  parts  and  powers  are  to  be  in  tune.  There  is  no  need  for  us
to  present  the  sad  spectacle  of  the  heart  going  one  way,  while  duty  and  conscience  point
another.  Apart  from  the  dissipation  of  force  which  that  involves,  what  reproach  and
self-loathing  such  inward  discord  must  ensure !  Now,  we  have  one  inner  faculty,  even
that  of  love,  which  is  meant  to  rule,  and  does  in  fact  rule,  the  man.  According  to  the
love,  so  intellect  thinks,  emotion  feels,  will  decides,  life  moves.  Our  text  says,  let  love
be  all  concentrated  on  one  grand  object — God !  Let  him  have  all  (see  chs.  x.  12 ;  xi.
1,  13,  22 ;  xix.  9 ;  xxx.  16).  Not  even  in  the  New  Testament  have  we  a  greater
commandment  than  this  (Matt.  xxii.  37 — 40).  "  The  love  of  God  which  the  gospel
demands  is  more  intensive  and  cordial  than  that  which  the  Law  of  Moses  demands  of
the  Israelites,  according  to  the  gradual  unfolding  of  the  love  of  God  himself,  which  was
displayed  in  a  much  grander  and  more  glorious  form  in  the  gift  of  his  only  begotten
Son  for  our  redemption  than  in  the  redemption  of  Israel  out  of  the  bondage  in  Egj-pt "
(Keil).  Thus  elosely  related  are  theology  and  religion — God  as  revealed  to  us  in  Christ
— that  IS  theology ;  our  love  responding  to  God's — that  is  religion.  Without  the  first,
in  what  could  the  religious  faculty  find  a  proper  object?  Without  the  second,  infinite
love  is  defrauded  of  its  rights !  Btill,  a  third  question  naturally  follows :  granted  that
in  this  interlacing  of  theology  and  religion  we  have  both  interpreted  in  meaning  and
both  realizing  their  aims,  what  means  can  be  devised  to  ensure  the  preservation  of  both
tlirough  generation  after  generation?

III.  Here  is  a  special  arrangement  divinely  appointed,  to  conserve  and  per-
petuate BOTH,  1.  The  home  is  here  supposed  to  be  a  centre  in  which  the  conserving
forces  of  truth  and  godliness  are  to  be  themselves  conserved.  What  a  profound  principle
Moses  here  indicates,  viz.  that  a  nation  will  be  good  or  bad  according  to  its  home  life!
Wonderful  1  that  an  infant  nation  should,  at  starting,  have  this  truth  deep  graven  in
its  statutes ; — our  land  will  be  as  our  homes  are !  2.  In  the  home,  our  God  looks  to
the  parent  to  give  it  its  character,  tone,  and  influence.  A  child's  religious  faith  is,  in
a  high  and  holy  sense,  to  be  chosen  for  him  by  anticipation,  by  those  who  were  "in
Christ  before  "  him.  3.  The  truths  mentioned  in  sections  1  and  2  are  to  be  in  the
parents'  heart,  that  they  may  be  poured  out  anew  from  thence  as  rivers  of  living  water.
Hence  the  word  in  ver.  7, "  Thou  shalt  sharpen  them ; "  coming  fresh  out  of  the  sanctuary
of  a  living  soul,  they  are  to  be  pointed,  quick,  and  breathing  truths.  4.  By  a  variety
of  ways,  the  parent  is  to  see  his  child's  spirit  early  saturated  with  the  truths  of  God.
(1)  By  talking  of  them,  in  the  house  and  out  of  it  (ver.  7).  (2)  By  exhibiting  them,
not  only  in  the  literal  sense  (see  art.  'Phylacteries''),  but  in  a  higher  spiritual  one.
(8)  By  writing  them  (ver.  9 ;  see  art.  '  Mezuzah  ").  Thus  the  child  is  from  the  first
to  be  regarded  as  God's  child,  to  be  trained  for  him.  He  Is  to  receive  God's  Word
through  the  avenues  of  eye,  ear,  intellect,  heart.  Divine  truth  is  to  be  ever  before
him,  night  and  day,  indoors  and  out.  Those  who  gave  him  birth  and  who  love  him
best,  are  to  mould  his  young  life  for  God ;  he  is  to  grow  up  as  the  Lord's  rightful
possession,  with  the  view  of  his  afterwards  saying,  in  the  spirit  of  devout  surrender,
« I  am  the  Lord's ! "  (Isa.  xliv.  5).

Note— Whatever  was  essential  in  the  days  of  Moses,  in  the  training  of  children  for
God  as  the  means  of  guarding  a  nation,  is  not  less  needful  now  (Bph.  vi.  4).  The  wider
the  range  of  human  learning  becomes,  the  more  needful  it  should  be  rightly  directed;
otherwise  the  greater  the  attainment,  the  greater  the  peril  I

Vers.  10 — 19. — "  Dangers  ahead  t  Beware  1 "  The  forecast  of  Moses  is  here  directed
to  •  period  when  Israel  would  have  taken  possession  of  the  promised  land  (ver.  10^

'  In  Dr.  Alexander's  edition  of  .Eitto's  '  Biblical  Cyolopndia.'  *  Ibid,


124  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  Tt  1— 35.

There,  their  deliverance  would  be  entire  and  cnmplete.  No  longer  would  they  he
wandoreis  hither  and  thilher,  hut  would  be  occupants  of  a  land  that  ttiey  would  call
their  own.  2SIeither  from  the  nation  to  which  they  were  once  in  bondage,  nor  from,
those  which  they  were  called  on  to  supplant,  would  they  fear  aught  any  longer !  And  yet
there  is  throughout  this  paragraph  a  voice  of  warning,  as  if  danger  would  attend  them
still !  It  would  be  so.  But  the  danger  would  be  from  within  rather  than  from  with-
out :  "  When  thou  shalt  have  eaten  and  be  full ;  then  beware  lest  thou  forget  the  Lord,"
etc.    Whence,  observe —

I.  No   AMOUNT   OP   OUTWARD   PROSPERITY  CAN   DELIVER  A   MAN   FROM   HmBELVt      By

the  time  the  state  of  calm  was  attained,  which  is  here  indicated,  there  would  cease  to
be  danger  from  hostile  foes,  at  least  for  a  while ;  but  there  would  be  perils  of  another
kind,  which  would  attend  them  even  in  the  promised  land.  If  Israel  could  have  left
themselves  behind,  it  had  been  otherwise ;  but  alas  I  go  where  they  might,  they  must
perforce  take  themselves  with  them,  with  all  their  liability  to  err,  all  the  proueness  to
sin,  and  all  the  temptation  to  doubt  or  to  pride.  And  not  all  the  spears  and  slings  of
warriors  could  put  the  people  in  such  peril  as  the  corruptions  of  their  own  hearts !
And  so  it  is  with  us  now  and  ever.  We  carry  ourselves  about  with  us  everywhere ;
we  cannot  escape.  There  is  within  each  one's  heart  a  "root  of  bitterness,"  "a  root
that  beareth  gaU  and  wormwood;"  and  let  earthly  circumstances  be  as  fair,  as  easy,
and  as  pleasant  as  they  may,  yet,  unless  we  heed  the  danger  within,  they  can  do  but
very  little  to  ensure  our  peace.  And  herein  lies  the  great  mistake  of  monasticism,  as
even  Augustine  reminded  "his  hearers.  He  told  them  that  it  was  vain  for  them  to
attempt  to  flee  out  of  the  world  in  order  to  escape  corruption,  for  wherever  they  might
be  they  would  carry  the  evil  within  them.  Never  let  us  look  to  outer  circumstances
alone  to  ensure  our  entire  rest.  Not  even  a  perfect  world  could  bring  us  that,  imless
we  were  first  made  perfect.

II.  There  "are  three  perils  specified  here  to  which  prosperity  may  expose  ub.
1.  The  first  is  that  of  "  forgetting  the  Lord  "  (ver.  12).  When  fields  and  vineyards
and  oliveyards  increase,  and  our  cup  is  overflowing,  then  we  are  apt  to  lose  sight  of
him  to  whom  we  owe  all ;  and  this  not  only  in  the  receiving  but  in  the  using  thereof
(of.  Hos.  X.  1).  Too  apt  are  we  to  say  in  our  pride,  "  My  river  is  my  own ;  I  have
made  it  for  myself."  So  also  are  we  apt  to  let  our  enjoyments  conceal  our  God  from
view,  and  to  think  only  of  the  mercies,  while  we  forget  to  glorify  God  in  the  use  of
them.  Nor  is  it  any  uncommon  evil  for  men  to  be  so  set  upon  the  enjoyment  of  this
world's  comforts,  as  to  forget  almost  or  altogether  that  higher  world  for  which  they  are
bound  to  live,  and  that  future  life  on  which  all  soon  must  enter.  2.  Another  danger
indicated  is  that  of  undue  tolerance  of  the  idolatries  which  were  round  about  them
(ver.  14).  One  effect  of  prosperity  is  easy-goin<znes8 ;  and  that,  unless  checked  and
guarded,  will  degenerate  into  a  looseness  of  principle,  whereby,  under  cover  of  suavity
and  amiability,  respect  for  the  convictions  of  others  may  come  to  be  substituted  by  our
having  no  very  strong  ones  of  our  own.  Nothing  is  more  common  than  to  see  worldly
aggrandizement  attended  by  deterioration  of  moral  sensibility.  3.  A  third  danger
specified  is  that  of  "  tempting  the  Lord  "  when  prosperity  meets  with  a  check.  This
seems  to  be  the  danger  indicated  in  ver.  16,  by  a  reference  to  "  Massah  "  (see  Exod.
xvii.  2 — 7).  At  this  place  of  sojourn  there  was  a  lack  of  water.  The  people  murmured.
They  tempted  the  Lord  and  said,  "  Is  the  Lord  among  us  or  not?  "  As  if  they  ceased
to  believe  in  God's  presence  with  them,  the  moment  he  made  them  thus  feel  their
dependence  upon  him  !  Strange  perversity !  Yet  how  like  ourselves  1  The  course  of
worldly  prosperity  scarcely  ever  runs  with  absolute  smoothness  for  many  years  together.
And  the  self-will  engendered  and  strengthened  in  times  of  ease  leads  men  to  repine
and  complain  bitterly  the  moment  that  ease  receives  a  check.  In  times  of  prosperity
men  forget  God,  and  then  when  adversity  comes  they  often  complain  as  if  God  had
forgotten  them.  How  much  does  God  see,  even  in  the  people  he  takes  for  his  own
special  care,  to  tax  his  patience,  and  to  try  his  long-suffering  love  1

III.  By  way  of  GUARDIN8  THEM  BEFOREHAND   AOAINST   THESE  PEEILB,  MOSEB  SHOWS

Israel  the  duties  which  they  abb  diligently  to  observe.  1.  They  are  to  fear
the  Lord  only  (ver.  13).  2.  They  are  to  swear  by  him  only  (see  LXX.  and  Matt.  iv.  10),
t.e.  to  cherish  a  profound  reverence  for  him  as  the  Author  of  all  mercies,  and  as  the  SOM
Hegulator  of  their  lives.    The  honour  of  his  Name.is  to  be  supreme.    3.  They  are  to  ^t«


OH.  VI.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBKONOMY.  IZb

the  supreme  afTection  of  the  heart  to  God,  so  that  they  may  not  proToke  his  jealousy
(ver.  15).  4.  They  are  to  serve  him  by  constant  obedience  (ver.  18).  By  the  constant
recognition  of  these  four  duties,  they  will  do  much  to  guard  themselves  from  yielding
to  the  perils  attendant  on  their  growing  wealth  and  ease.  (This  may  be  compared
with  the  apostolic  maxim, "  Walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  ye  shall  not  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the
flesh.")  Evil  is  most  successfully  counteracted  by  the  positive  and  earnest  pursuit  of
the  opposite  good.

IV.  If    these     duties    were     LOTALLT     DISOHARnBD,    EAETHLY     PROSPERITY     AND

SPIRITUAL  WEAL  WOULD  GO  TOGETHER.  Vor.  18,  "  That  it  may  bo  well  with  thee,"
etc.  Whether  our  earthly  circumstances  are  helps  or  hindrances  to  us  Godward,  will
depend  much  more  on  what  we  bring  to  them  than  on  what  they  bring  to  us.  And
however,  on  the  side  of  this  life,  things  may  favour  us  and  circumstances  befriend,  it
is  only  as  they  help  us  to  serve  God  better  that  they  are  really  blessings  to  us :  it  is
"well"  with  us  only  when  God  is  well  pleased  with  us.  So  much  stress  did  Moses
attach  to  the  maintenance  of  unswerving  loyalty  to  God,  that  he  intimates  that  the
possession  of  the  land  is  secured  to  them  only  so  far  as  they  are  true  to  their  Great
Deliverer  (vers.  18,  19).

V.  Since  the  time  of  Moses,  this  paragraph  has  become  far  more  sacred  to  us,

BY  the  use  which   OUB  SAVIOUE  made   op   it   in  ^   TIME   OF   SORB   TEMPTATION.      It  is

never  to  be  forgotten,  that  our  Lord  repelled  the  tempter  by  the  words,  "  It  is  written,"
etc.  Of  the  three  passages  used  as  weapons  for  the  discomfiture  of  the  evil  one,  two
are  taken  from  this  very  paragraph  (see  Matt.  iv.  7,  10).  So  that  we  are  warranted
in  using  it  as  our  armoury  from  whence  we  may  fetch  the  darts  which  shall  make  the
tempter  flee.  These  precepts  cannot  be  needed  by  us  less  than  they  were  by  the  Son
of  man.  Prom  him  let  us  learn  a  use  of  the  Divine  Word  that  may  serve  us  in  a
thousand  assaults  of  the  destroyer.  For  not  until  we  do  this  can  we  discover  the  varied
uses  to  which  we  may  put  the  Word  of  God  in  the  actual  struggle  of  life.  We,  like
our  Master,  have  to  be  made  perfect  through  suffering.  Now  we  may  suffer  from
want,  hunger,  and  privation;  and  at  another  time  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  in  a
moment  of  time,  may  be  set  before  usj  to  dazzle  by  their  glare.  We  need  to  take  to
us  the  whole  armour  of  God,  that  we  may  be  able  to  stand  in  the  evil  day,  and  having
done  all,  to  stand.  Go  wheresoever  we  may,  let  our  surroundings  be  easy  and  prosperous
as  they  may,  dangers  will  attend  us  everywhere,  till  we  cross  the  pearly  gate  across
whose  threshold  sin  never  comes.  At  one  time  it  may  be  that  adversity  makes  us
fretful  and  apt  to  tempt  the  Lord,  and  then  at  another  prosperity  may  make  us  sloth-
ful, and  a  sinful  indifference  may  lull  us  to  sleep.  Our  chief  dangers  are  from  within.
But  here  in  this  holy  Book  are  promises  to  cheer  us  when  drooping,  and  warnings  to
quicken  us  when  sluggish.  Here  is  an  arsenal  from  whence  we  may  fetch  our  weapons,
and  a  storehouse  whence  we  may  draw  our  supplies.  Yea,  in  this  wondrous  quiver
there  are  arrows  which  will  be  sharp  in  the  hearts  of  the  King's  enemies,  which  shall
pierce  them  to  their  fall !

Vers.  20 — 25. — The  valvM  of  history  in  parental  teaching.  The  Bible  is  pre-
eminently a  family  Book.  Israel's  national  life  was  supposed  to  find  its  centres  of
strength  and  permanence  in  godly  homes.  It  would  not  be  easy  to  find  words  which
should  overrate  the  importance  of  such  a  principle  as  this.  That  a  young  nation
should  at  the  outset  of  its  existence  have  this  laid  down  as  a  first  law  of  its  life :'  "  The
land  will  be  as  its  homes  are ; "  is  an  indication  of  the  Divine  guidance  which  was
vouchsafed  to  him  on  whom,  under  God,  the  foundation  of  its  national  life  depended.
In  the  paragraph  before  us  there  are  seven  lines  of  thought  suggested.

I.   As   YOUNG   LIFE    COMBS    NEWLY    INTO    BEING,   IT   FINDS   ARRANGEMENTS    IN    LAW

AND  PRECEPT  READY  TO  HAND.  Parental  life  holds  a  great  trust  in  charge,  to  be
committed  to  those  who  shall  come  after ;  that  though  one  generation  passcth  away
and  another  cometh,  there  may  be  no  break  in  the  c<intinuity  of  holy  thinking  and
living,  from  age  to  age.  The  Hebrews  had  their  Law,  which,  as  a  revelation  from  God,
was  m  advance  of  aught  possessed  by  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  in  which  was  couched
the  germ  of  larger  truth  that  was  to  follow.  There  might  be  more  light  thrown
upon  it ;  there  was  never  to  be  a  forfeiture  of  it.  Hence  there  were  special  reason*
why  parents  should  guard  it  intact  for  all  the  ages  that  were  to  follow.


12ft  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [en.  vi.  1—25,

n.  YoDNO  LIFE  18  SUPPOSED  TO  BE  AN  iNQtTiRiNG  LIFE.  (Ver.  20.)  It  IS  not  Sup-
posed that  the  children  will  lend  themselves  to  either  of  two  extremes:  they  will
neither  wildly  tear  up  and  obliterate  "  the  old  paths,"  nor  will  they  walk  in  them
heedlessly  and  without  inquiry.  The  course  here  indicated  is  that  which  any  sensible,
well-disposed  youth  would  naturally  follow.  He  would  ask, "  What  mean,"  etc.  How-
ever a  spurious  priesthood  may  demand  a  blind  and  uninquiring  faith,  the  Word  of
God  never  does  anything  of  the  kind.  Reason  is  made  for  reverent  inquiry,  but  it
may  be  neither  deified  nor  stultified.  And  what  can  be  more  charming  than  the
honest,  eager  inqiiisitiveness  of  the  young,  asking  for  the  reasons  which  govern  the
faith  and  worship  that  they  find  at  work  before  their  eyes?  Specially  delightful  is  such
inquiry,  when  the  parent  is  well  able  to  give  his  answer.

III.  There  is  awaiting  the  youko  inquirer  the  btoby  of  a  great  deliver-
AKCE.  (Vers.  21, 22.)  The  rescue  from  Egypt  always  formed  the  grand  historic  back-
ground of  Israel's  life  (see  Ps.  Ixxviii.;  xcix. ;  cv. ;  cvi. ;  ciii.  7).  Here  was  a  dis-
closure of  Divine  love  and  care,  the  like  of  which  had  never  been  known.  The  great
institution  of  sacrifice  revealed  provision  for  pardoning  love.  The  precepts  for  the
individual,  the  family,  the  nation,  told  what  sort  of  a  peo)ile  God  would  have  them  be ;
while  the  oft-recurring  strains,  "  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,"  "  I  brought  thee  up
out  of  the  land  of  bondage,"  would  ev9ke  all  their  national  ardour,  and  create  and  foster
an  historic  pride.  The  life-histories,  too,  of  their  fathers,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,
would  tell  of  the  blessedness  of  having  God  as  their  God :  and  these,  instilled'  into  the
heart  with  all  the  sweetness  of  fond  parental  love,  would  lead  the  young  Israelite,
when  the  teaching  was  sanctified  by  God's  grace,  to  say  right  joyously,  "This  God
shall  be  my  God  for  ever  and  ever  1 "  Yes !  the  young  life  ever  coming  on  earth  is
not  to  be  left  to  grope  its  way.  The  light  from  the  past  is  to  be  handed  down  for  the
ages  to  come,  that  sire  and  son  and  son's  son  may  rejoice  in  the  same  God,  and  ensure
a  blessed  continuity  of  holy  faith  and  consecrated  life.

IV.  The  great  deliverance  was  effected  that  the  rescued  people  might
be  a  new  nation  worthy  of  God.  Ver.  23,  "  That  he  might  bring  us  in,  to  give
us  the  land  which  he  sware  unto  our  fathers."  And  in  this  new  relation  they  were  to
be  witnesses  for  Giid  (Isa.  xliii.  10).  They  were  to  be  a  distinct,  compact  people,  with
faith,  laws,  and  polity,  higher  than  the  rest  of  the  world,  holdini;  in  trust  for  mankind,
till  the  fulness  of  times,  much  precious  truth  which  was  to  find  its  outcunie  in  a  great,
world-wide  deliveiance  which  should  overshadow  all ;  while  the  Israel  of  God  was  to
merge  into  a  spiritual  Israel,  made  up  of-  all  who  are  Christ's,  known  as  a  "  peculiar
people,  zealous  of  good  works."

V.  In  this  continued  life,  worthy  of  God,  would  the  justification  ov  Ibbael's
faith  and  observances  be  found.  "  It  shall  be  our  righteousness,"  etc.  (ver.  25).
It  is  scarcely  possible  to  regard  these  words  as  having  reference  to  any  doctrine  of
justification  by  faith ;  for  though,  even  as  far  back  as  Abraham's  days,  that  was  a
doctrine,  yet  it  was  not  formulated  till  the  times  of  the  gospel,  by  Paul.  The  meaning
of  the  phrase  seems  to  be :  "  This  will  be  our  justification  of  our  position  and  claims  ;
we  claim  to  be  a  people  of  God,  above  all  the  natipns  that  are  on  the  face  of  the  earth,
and  we  shall  vindicate  that  claim,  not  by  words  only,  but  by  being  what  we  profess  to
be."  Thus  would  the  parent  quicken  his  child,  and  stimulate  and  inspire  him  to  be
all  that  his  glorious  faith  bade  him  be — "holy  unto  the  Lord  his  God! "

VI.  In  this  arrangement,  the  Divine  benevolence  was  as  manifest  as  God's
REGARD  FOB  HIS  OWN  HONOUR.  Vcr.  24,-"  To  fear  the  Lord  our  God,  for  our  good
always."  The  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  man  are  in  harmony.  So  has  God  con-
structed the  universe,  so  doth  he  carry  on  his  government,  as  to  ensure  that "  they  that
honour  him,  he  will  honour."  "All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love
God."  "  Great  peace  have  they  which  love  God's  Law ;  and  nothing  shall  offend  them."
"  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things."  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his
righteousness ;  and  all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."

VII.  Not  only  would  Israel,  by  obbdibnoe,  ensure  its  own  good,  but  also
its  continuance  in  the  land.  Ver.  24,  "That  he  might  preserve  us  alive."
Repeatedly  do  we  read  that  the  prolongation  of  Israel's  days  in  the  land  depended  on
their  loyalty  to  God.  The  land  was  giren  them,  not  for  their  own  sakes  merely,  but
for  God's.    If  they  continued  there,  laithfuUy  witnessing  for  him,  the  land  would  be


CH.  vi.l-?^.T  THE  Book  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  12?

continued  toibem  ;  if  not,  they  would  have  to  quit,  and  give  up  the  possession  thereof
to  strangers.  This  is  precisely  the  principle  on  which  God  governs  the  nations  now.
No  nation  can  preserve  itself  in  being  by  any  other  policy  than  that  of  obedience  to
God.  Disloyalty  to  God  and  the  right  is  the  surest  possible  policy  of  decomposition.
Even  attempts  at  self-preservation  which  violate  God's  laws  will  fail  of  their  end.
And  is  it  not  of  vast  significance  that  these  are  the  principles  by  which  the  young  life
of  a  nation  is  to  be  moulded  ?  Whatever  allowance  must  be  made  for  changing  circum-
stances, however  true  it  may  be  that  no  nation  nuw  holds  exactly  the  same  place  in
the  world  that  Israel  did,  yet  it  is  also  true  that  all  the  more  substantial  part  of  the
seven  lines  of  thought  here  indicated  is  unchaii>;ed  and  unchangeable.  Christian
parents  are  inheritors  of  the  truth  of  God :  they  hold  it  in  trust  for  their  children :
they,  as  they  grow  up,  will  inquire  concerning  it :  its  historic  basis  is  the  great
deliverance  effected  by  the  Lord  Jesus :  Christians  aie  now  God's  peculiar  people :
they  are  redeemed  that  they  may  be  holy,  and  that  in  holiness  they  may  train
succeeding  generations :  and  just  in  proportion  as  through  them  loyalty  to  the
truth  and  to  God  is  leavening  their  posterity,  are  they  bringing  honour  to  the
cause  they  espouse.  Hebrews  were  to  be  conservative.  Christians  are  to  be  also
aggressive.  We  are  to  be  "  the  light  of  the  world,"  and  "  the  salt  of  the  earth."
By  the  light  of  God's  love  we  are  to  scatter  men's  darkness,  and  by  the  salt  of  God's
truth  are  we  to  stay  its  corruption.  And  just  so  far  as  our  nation  is  imbued  with
righteousness  and  truth,  will  it  have  within  it  the  guarantee  of  its  own  perpetuation.
The  best  defence  is  the  armour  of  light.  Without  righteousness  and  the  fear  of  God,
not  all  the  pretence  and  brag — not  all  the  fleets  or  armies  at  command,  can  ever  guard
a  nation  from  decay.  "  If  the  salt  have  lost  his  savour,  ...  it  is  thenceforth  good  for
nothing  but  to  be  cast  out,  and  to  be  trodden  under  foot  of  men."

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1—3.—"  Obedience  the  end  of  Law.^'  All  the  machinery  of  law  is  abortive,
unless  obedience  be  the  result.  As  a  mother  teaches  her  children,  giving  them  "  line
upon  line,"  frequent  repetition  and  variation,  so  Moses  patiently  taught  Israel.  He  was
"  faithful  in  all  his  house."

I.  Sbb  the  internal  excellence  of  God's  Law.  It  has  so  many  qualities  of
meiit,  that  no  one  word  in  human  language  can  express  them  all.  They  are  "command-
ments," which  word  indicates  the  just  authority  from  which  they  emanate.  They  are
"statutes,"  implying  their  fixed  and  permanent  character.  They  are  "judgments,"  a
description  which  denotes  thoughtful  deliberation,  patient  forethought,  and  sagacious
decision.  No  greater  benefactor  can  men  have  than  a  wise  legislator.  These  Laws,  if
reverently  observed,  would  have  been  "  health  to  the  marrow,"  and  life  to  the  nation.

II.  The  design  of  God's  covenant  was  heaety  and  complete  obedience.  It
was  unorofitable  for  God  to  command,  or  for  Moses  to  teach,  unless  the  people  obeyed;
just  a6  it  is  futile  for  the  husbandman  to  plough  his  land,  pulverize  the  clods,  sow  the
seed,  water  his  crops,  if  no  harvest  ensue.  The  end  which  God  had  clearly  in  view —
the  only  end  worthy  of  him,  was  not  Israel's  possession  of  Canaan,  nor  prosperity
there;  Xhefirud  end  was  obedience.  The  land  was  selected  to  be  a  theatre  for  practical
righteousness.  The  land  would  be  forfeited  if  righteous  obedience  did  not  abound.
And  obedience,  to  be  acceptable,  must  be  real.  External  conformity  to  law  would  not
suffice.  The  whole  soul  must  yield  compliance.  There  must  be  harmony  between
man's  will  and  God's.  Obedience  would  foster  reverence,  and  reverence  would
strengthen  love.     There  is  action  and  reaction  amid  the  forces  of  the  soul.

IlL  Pious  obedience  is  entailed.  It  is  a  moral  inheritance  passing  from  father
to  son.  Formal  and  superficial  obedience  will  not  reproduce  itself  in  others,  will  not
bear  seed  of  the  true  kind.  But  genuine,  vital  piety  is  contagious.  If  bad  qualities
are  communicated,  surely  good  qualities  are  also.  Else  truth  would  be  feebler  than
error,  virtue  feebler  than  vice.  Thorough,  straightforwrd,  transparent,  cheerful  piety
is  the  greatest  power  in  the  world.  For  our  children's  sake,  and  for  our  children's
ciiiM  uii,  let  reverent  obedience  brighten  and  beautify  our  life!

IV  .  r'lcu?  ouedience  pboduceb  riiESKNT  fbuits.    Its  rewards  are  not  wholly  reserved


128  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  vi.  1—25.


for  the  future.  On  earth  some  advantages  are  reaped.  1.  Length  of  days  is  a  result.
"  Thy  days  may  be  prolonged."  A  green  old  age  is  a  beautiful  thing.  "  The  wicked
shall  not  live  out  half  their  days."  2.  Numerous  progeny  is  a  result.  "Ye  may
'ncrease  mightily."  A  growing  population  is  universally  regarded  as  a  token  of
aaterial  prosperity.  "They  of  the  city  shall  flourish  as  grass  of  the  earth."
Success  in  all  enterprise  is  announced  as  an  effect.  "It  shall  be  well  with  thee."
i.  Robust  health,  domestic  comfort,  national  peace,  prolific  harvests,  security,  content-
neut,  honour, — these  are  among  the  fruits  to  be  anticipated.  Obedience  ia  an  invest-
ment of  moral  capital,  which  brings  largest  and  safest  results.— D.

y  ers,  4 — 9, — Love,  the  root-principle  of  obedience.  Attention  is  summoned  for  the
reception  of  central  truth,  viz.  the  unity  of  the  Godhead.  At  that  period,  this  doctrice
was  in  great  peril.  All  the  Orientals  believed  .in  "  lords  many  and  gods  many."
Science  here  confirms  Scripture.  The  unity  of  design,  running  through  all  natural
law  and  force,  indicates  clearly  unity  of  the  Creator.  To  know  the  true  God  is,  for
nonest  minds,  to  love  him.  But  rebellion  of  heart  has  engendered  repugnance  towards
God— dislike,  hatred,  enmity.

I.  The  Soukcb  of  all  authoeitt  is  a  Beins  or  essential  goodness.  1.  Ee  it
sole  Monarch,' incomparable  and  unapproachable.  He  dwells  alone,  higher  than  the
highest  creature.  The  disparity  between  him  and  an  archangel  is  immeasurable.
2.  He  is  absolutely  perfect.  Every  attribute  and  quality  that  is  essential  to  perfection  is
found  in  him.  "  He  is  light,"  having  no  dark  shade  anywhere.  3.  Ee  is  the  Source  of
life :  Jehovah — the  Living — the  Life-gi»ing.  All  we  have,  and  are,  and  hope  to  be,
is  derived  from  him.  4.  Ee  has  deigned  to  come  into  intimate  relation  with  us.  He
has  made  a  voluntary  compact  with  us.  He  calls  us  his  people.  He  allows  us  to  call
liim  our  Ood.     We  have  a  proprietorship  in  him.

II.  This  God  deserves  the  central  place  in  odk  heabts.  Because  of  the  moral
beauty  and  essential  goodness  of  our  God,  he  is  incomparably  most  worthy  of  human
love.  To  give  to  any  other  a  higher  place  in  our  affection  than  we  give  to  God,  would
be  an  outrage  against  righteousness,  fitness,  and  self-interest.  For  all  these  faculties
and  susceptibilities  of  the  human  heart  have  been  fashioned  by  God  himself,  and  have
been  fashioned  for  this  very  purpose,  viz.  that  we  should  bestow  our  worthiest  love  on
him.  If  this  eternal  design  be'  frustrated,  there  is  violence,  disharmony,  misery  within.
Such  love  is  commanded.  It  is  a  duty  as  well  as  a  privilege.  Though  we  cannot
instantly  and  summarily  command  our  love,  we  can  indirectly.  We  can  fix  our
thought  on  the  worthiest  object  of  love.  We  can  contemplate  his  charms.  We  can
appreciate  his  goodness.  We  can  assure  ourselves  of  his  love.  It  ia  to  be  an  intelli-
gent, reasonable,  practical  love.

III.  The  love  of  the  Lawgiver  produces  love  to  his  Law.  Law  is  a  pro-
jection of  God's  thought,  a  mirror  of  his  mind,  an  overt  act  of  love.  The  true  child
will  highly  esteem  every  known  wish  of  its  father.  To  have  practical  direction  from
an  unseen  father  will  be  treasured  as  a  choice  token  of  that  father's  regard.  If  children,
we  shall  hide  every  word  of  our  father  in  our  memory  and  in  our  love.  Every  wish  of
his  heart  will  be  a  visible  feature  in  our  life.  It  may  be  painful  to  the  flesh,  but  it
will  be  pleasant  to  the  soul.  To  the  dutiful  child,  obedience  is  a  luxury,  a  banquet  of
joy.  "  Oh  I  how  1  love  thy  Law ! "  exclaims  the  pious  Psalmist.  "  Thy  Law  is  within
ray  heart."    Thy  Word  is  to  me  as  honey,  as  the  droppings  of  the  honeycomb.

IV.  Love  is  the  motive-power  of  speech.  The  tongue  is  the  servant  of  the
heart.  We  speak  freely  and  fluently  of  that  which  is  dear  to  our  hearts.  The  child
will  speak  freely  of  its  toys  and  games,  the  farmer  of  his  crops,  the  artist  of  his  works.
If  men  esteemed  and  valued  God's  Word,  they  would  spontaneously  converse  of  it,
morning,  noon,  and  night.  It  would  be  a  painful  restraint  upon  our  desire  if  we  with-
held our  speech.  This  precept  of  Moses  need  not  be  an  external  law  imposed  upon  us
from  without ;  it  may  become  the  living  law  within,  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life."

V.  Love  conbtructs  its  whole  life  on  the  model  of  God's  Law.  The  hand
will  become  the  instrument  of  righteousness.  On  it  will  be  written  God's  Word,  viz.
industry,  honesty,  restraint,  generous  kindness,  helpfulness.  God's  Word  will  be  our
ornament  Instead  of  gold  and  jewels  upon  the  forehead,  "our  adornment  will  be"
modesty,  chastity,  cheerfulness,  moral  beauty.     God's  iS'ame  will  be  indelibly  inscribed


CH.  VI.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  129


upon  our  foreheads.  Our  domestic  affairs  will  be  ordered  by  the  Divine  will.  We
shall  write  his  Word  on  the  posts  of  our  houses.  Every  home  in  which  love  dwells
will  be  a  temple.  Order,  active  piety,  frugality,  peace,  mutual  service,  will  be  the
principles  conspicuous  in  godly  homes.  And  our  municipal  and  political  life  will  be
conducted  on  the  same  line  of  obedience.  Legislation,  justice,  taxation,  commerce,
literature,  art,  will  all  be  consecrated  to  God's  glory.  As  the  flowers  of  earth  send
their  fragrance  heavenward,  so  from  every  act  of  ours  a  fragrance  of  homage  should
ascend  to  God. — D.

Vers.  10 — 19. — The  peril  of  prosperity.  Secular  prosperity  is  hazardous.  Unless  the
ship  have  ample  ballast  in  the  hold,  a  strong  gale,  however  favourable,  will  be  likely
to  capsize  the  ship  and  bury  her  in  the  caverns  of  the  sea.  The  greater  our  earthly
abundance,  the  greater  our  need  of  religious  principle.

I.  Wise  men  inherit  the  fkuit  of  others'  labours.  Under  the  leadership  of
God,  the  Hebrews  inherited  cities  which  the  Oauaanites  had  built,  and  vineyards  which
the  Amorites  had  planted.  If  we  knew  all  the  facts  of  the  case,  we  should  admire  this
as  an  act  of  righteous  wisdom.  We  do  know  that  the  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  was  a
cup  full  to  the  brim.  The  Hebrews,  with  all  their  faults,  were  a ,  superior  race.
Similar  displacements  have  gone  on  in  all  the  lands  of  the  world.  It  is  an  instance
of  the  "  survival  of  the  fittest."  Eedeemed  men  are  destined  to  be  the  lords  of  the
earth.  The  Ch\irch  shall  possess  and  rule  the  world.  "  AU  things  are  ours."  This
inheritance  of  Canaan,  with  its  cities  and  cattle  and  wealth,  ought  to  have  produced
a  deep  sense  of  gratitude;  All  the  Hebrews  enjoyed  they  owed  to  the  bountiful  hand
of  God.

II.  Sudden  prosperitt  is  a  severe  strain  on  ptett.  The  sense  of  daily  and
hourly  dependence  upon  God  for  material  food  is  an  advantage ;  it  is  a  constant  incen-
tive to  gratitude  and  faith.  Poor  human  nature  cannot  bear  much  indulgence.
Poverty  is  more  conducive  to  piety  than  wealth  has  ever  been.  Hence  our  Lord  chose
a  state  of  poverty  as  most  suited  to  his  mission.  "  How  hardly  shall  they  that  have
riches  enter  iiito  the  kingdom  of  heaven ! "  So  long  as  men  continue  in  the  flesh,  they
prefer  a  visible  God  to  an  invisible.  So  they  say  to  gold,  "  Thou  art  my  god."  To  be
singular  in  religious  belief  and  practice  is  always  an  arduous  effort.  The  example  of
others  has  always  been  a  sore  temptation.  Unless  we  can  persuade  them  by  the  force
of  our  superior  faith,  they  are  sure  to  bias  us  injuriously.  Our  safety  lies  in  a  stalwart
and  fearless  piety.

III.  To   FALL    FROM    THE    FAVOUR    TO    THE    FROWN    OF    GoD    IS    IMMEASURABLE   AND

COMPLETE.  It  would  have  been  better  for  their  peace  and  their  reputation  not  to  have
inherited  the  land,  than  to  be  ejected  from  it  again.  It  is  a  tremendous  calamity,  having
been  lifted  high,  to  be  thrown  down.  The  effect  of  disloyalty  among  the  Hebrews
would  not  simply  be  a  replacement  in  their  former  state ;  it  would  be  destruction  from
tlje  face  of  the  earth.  In  the  reahn  of  morals,  we  cannot  descend  to  a  station  we  h^d
occupied  aforetime.  If  there  is  declension,  retrogression,  fall,  it  must  be  to  a  lower  level
than  that  we  formerly  held.  The  penalties  imposed  by  righteousness  are  complete  and
remediless.  We  may  well  "  stand  in  awe  and  sin  not."  It  is  perilous  in  the  extreme
to  "  try  "  God's  patience — ^to  make  experiments  on  the  long-suffering  of  God.  Suddenly,
he  "  whets  his  glitteriiig  sword,  and  his  hand  takes  hold  on  judgment."

IV.  Hope  is  an  inspiration  op  strength.  Although  Moses  has  addressed  to  them
these  cautions,  and  pointed  out  tliese  perils,  he  will  not  think  so  meanly  of  them  as  to
torecast  their  fall.  He  will  cherish  in  his  own  breast  the  bright  hope  of  their  loyalty.  He
will  call  into  exercise  their  own  best  principles  and  aspirations.  He  confidently  pre-
dicts their  wise  and  upward  course,  and  sketehes  before  their  eyes  their  future  great-
ness and  security.  Herein  is  wise  generalship.  K  hope  kindles  her  lamp  in  the  humiin
breast,  all  is  not  lost.    This  is  Heaven's  cordial  for  a  fainting  soul. — D.

Vers.  20 — 25. — The  parental  office.  In  the  Mosaic  economy,  the  parental  ofSca  is
made  prominent,  and  parental  influence  is  pressed  into  service.  All  God's  arrangements
for  training  mankind  dovetail  into  one  another.

I.  The  duty  of  a  parent  to  provoke  BELiaions  inquiry.  No  greater  folly  can
be  perpetrated  than  the  attempt  to  repress  inquiry.     Inquiry  is  the  king's  highway  to

DEUTERONOMY.  I<


180  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.  [ch.  vi.  1— 2&


wisdom,  and  who  dare  block  it  up?  God  loves  to  hear  honest  inquiry.  To  afford
instruction  is  the  delight  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  but  what  instruction  will  be  valued  if  no
spirit  of  inquiry  is  awake  ?  Some  questions  which  we  ask  can  never  he  solved ;  they
are  beyond  the  range  of  the  human  mind.  Some  questions  God  will  not  answer,
because  they  are  vain  and  useless.  But  honest  questions,  with  a  view  to  practical  obedi-
ence, God  delights  to  hear.  Yoii  can  do  the  young  no  better  service  than  encourage
their  minds  to  inquire  after  religious  facts.     "  What  mean  these  things  ?  "

IT.  The  duty  of  a  parent  to  answer  fully  childbbn's  questions.  It  is  childish
folly  to  attempt  to  conceal  our  lowly  origin.  There  is  no  real  disgrace  in  an  obscure
parentage.  To  have  been  formerly  enslaved,  or  imprisoned,  or  oppressed,  through
man's  injustice,  is  an  honour,  not  a  stigma  of  reproach.  There  is  no  real  shame,  except
such  as  proceeds  from  wrong-doing.  It  will  do  us  good,  it  will  do  our  children  good,  to
see  the  "rock  whence  we  were  hewn,  the  hole  of  the  pit  from  which  we  were  digged."
It  will  foster  humility,  gratitude,  contentment,  trust.  It  will  lead  us  afresh  to  adore
the  Divine  goodness,  and  to  count  ourselves  and  our  children  the  servants  of  this
mighty  God.  Never  let  true  Israelites  forget  that  all  they  have  they  owe  to  God  I
Unto  this  state  of  happy  privilege  a  Divine  hand  has  brought  us.

III.  The  duty  op  a  parent  to  open  up  God's  beneficent  intention.  If  any  man
is  too  indolent  to  investigate  truth  for  his  own  sake,  he  may  be  provoked  to  do  it  for
his  children's  sake.  We  should  have  such  a  firm  conviction  that  every  arrangement
and  command  of  God  was  "  for  our  good  always,"  that  we  can  demonstrate  it  to  our
children.  Our  knowledge  of  God  and  of  his  practical  dealings  should  be  so  broad  and
clear  that  we  might  see  and  feel  that  his  care  for  our  good  was  paramount.  This  is
the  first  and  loftiest  end  he  seeks — not  our  enjoyment,  but  our  good.  Not  to  demon-
Itrate  his  powor,  or  his  consistency,  or  his  determination  to  conquer, — these  are  not  his
foremost  aims,  but  "  our  good  always."  His  costliest  deed  of  condescension  was  the
yielding  of  his  Son  to  death.  And  where  shall  we  seek  the  moving  principle  ?  In  his
own  future  glory  merely  ?  No !  In  his  love  for  the  world !  Yet  his  glory,  and  man's
real  good,  are  but  the  separate  threads  that  make  one  cord.

IV.  The  duty  of  a  parent  to  pkomote  his  children's  righteousness.  "  It  shall
be  our  righteousness,  if  we  observe  to  do  all  these  commandments."  No  more  conclusive
argument  can  parents  use ;  no  loftier  end  can  they  contemplate.  To  hecomf  righteous —
this  is  to  be  the  lofty  ideal  we  set  before  our  children.  But  commensurate  with  the
grand  acquisition  must  be  the  care  that  we  promote  it  by  proper  and  practicable
methods.  ■  It  is  impossible  for  guilty  men  to  regain  righteousness  by  their  own  efforts
or  merits.  But  real  righteousness  is  provided  for  us  by  the  bounty  of  Ghjd,  and  is
offered  to  us  in  Christ  as  a  free  gift.  "  He  hath  brought  in  everlasting  righteousness,
which  is  for  all  and  upon  all  that  believe."  Our  ambition  for  our  children  must  be
the  highest — ^not  that  they  be  richly  dowered,  or  learned,  or  placed  in  earthly  rank,  but
that  they  may  be  internally  and  thoroughly  righteous. — D.

.  Ver.  2.— Descending  obligations.  I.  Children  with  their  parents  abb  xnoludiid
IN  THE  COVENANT.  This  has  been  a  general  principle  in  God's  dealings  with  his
servants.  We  have  it  affirmed,  both  in  the  covenant  with  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  7 — 15)
and  in  the  later  covenant  with  Israel  (ch.  xxix.  10 — 12).  It  was  signified  -in  the  rite  of
circumcision.  The  Israelitish  child  was  regarded  as  within  the  covenant,  a  genui  e
member  of  the  theocracy,  till  by  a  personal  act  of  apostaoy — if  unfortunately  it  should
be  so — he  severed  himself  from  its  blessings.  Similar  language  is  used  of  the  children
of  Christian  believers  (Acts  ii.  39;.l  Cor.  viii.  14).  Received  into  the  Church  bj
baptism,  they  are  recognized  with  their  parents  as  interested  in  the  promise  ;  they  »rt
expected,  on  coming  to  years  of  discretion,  freely  to  appropriate  the  obligations  of  tht
Christian  life ;  and  they  are,  in  case  of  lefusal,  justly  regarded  as  apostates  from  Chi  jt,
II.  The  STANDING  OF  children  IN  the  covenant  entails  serious  obligations  on
the  parents.  1.  Religious  instruction  (vers.  6,  7,  20 ;  Exod.  xiii.  8,  14,  etc.).  T  e
children  had  not  been  personally  at  Horeb.  They  had  not  seen  the  mighty  works  {
God  in  Egypt  and  the  desert.  It  was  the  duty  of  parents  to  acquaint  them  with  the
liistoiy,  and  to  instruct  them  in  their  duties.  2.  Religious  training,  which  is  educa-
tion in  act,  as  instruction  is  education  in  word  (Gen.  xviii.  19  ;  ch.  xxi.  18 ;  Prov.
xxix.  15,  etc.).     '■'.  religious  examjih.     The  parent  is  to  be  one  who  loves  the  Lord


OH.  vu  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  131

for  himself  (ver.  5).  The  Word  is  to  be  in  his  own  heart  (ver.  6).  Only  thus  will  ha
teach  with  effect.  All  this  has  its  counterpart  in  the  duties  of  Christian  parents  (Bph
iv.  4  i  1  Tim.  iii.  4 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  15,  etc.).

III.    The   STA.NDINO  OF  CHILDREN  IN  THE  COVENANT  ENTAILS  SEBIOUS  OBLIGATIONS   ON

THE  CHILDREN.  Where  parental  duties  had  been  fulfilled,  the  Israelitish  child  was
under  the  most  sacred  obligations  to  choose  and  adhere  to  the  God  of  his  fathers,  and
to  serve  him  in  the  way  prescribed.  There  was  in  this  no  interference  with  freedom,
for  when  God  proposes  covenant  relations  to  a  human  being,  while  it  is  his  privilege,  it
can  never  be  aught  else  than  his  duty  to  accept  them.  In  the  Christian  Church,  a  like
obligation  rests  on  the  children  of  believers.  The  baptized  child  is  bound  to  serve
God,  and,  if  properly  instructed  (Matt,  xxviii.  19),  it  cannot  evade  the  responsibilities
thus  laid  upon  it.  Great  is  the  guilt  of  a  child  brought  up  in  a  Christian  home.
if  wantonly  it  apostatizes. — J.  O.

Vers.  4,  5. — The  great  commandment.  I.  The  ground  of  it.  A  just  view  of  God.
The  view  given  in  ver.  4  is  as  comprehensive  as  it  is  sublime.  It  embraces  two  parts
mutually  complementary.  1.  Ood's  absoluteness  and  unity — ■"  Jehovah  one."  2.  Ood's
versonai  relation  to  Israel — "Your  God."  The  two  are  combined :  3.  In  the  covenant
name — "Jehovah."  This,  on  the  one  hand,  denotes  God  as  the  Eternal — the  ever-
living,  the  selt-existent,  and  therefore  se\i-consistent  One.  On  the  other,  it  gathers  into
its  rich  significance  the  love,  and  truth,  and  faithfulness  of  centuries  of  gracious  revet
latlon.  It  will  not  awaken  love  to  God  to  think  of  him  merely  as  absolute  Deity.  It
is  the  discovery  of  what  else  is  contained  in  the  Divine  essence ;  above  all,  the  reve-
lation of  his  love,  grace,  and  covenant-keeping  faithfulness,  which  attracts  affection.
While,  without  the  revelation  of  God  as  one  and  absolute — exclusive,  self-subsistiig
Deity — it  would  be  impossible  to  raise  the  demand  for  love  to  the  requisite  moral
height.  In  Jesus  Christ  the  revelation  of  God  reaches  its  highest  point.  Only  the
Son  could  reveal  him  in  the  fulness  of  his  glorj'  and  love.

II.  The  height  or  rr.  It  requires  not  merely  that  God  should  be  loved,  but  loved
with  all  the  powers  of  our  being,  and  with  all  the  energy  of  these  powers.  1.  With
clear  intelligence-^" mind"  (Matt.  xxu.  37 ;  Mark  xii.  33).  2.  With  undivided  affec-
tion— "  heart."  3.  With  entire  sel/smrrender — "  soul."  4.  With  strenuous  energy —
"  might."  The  right  view  of  God  is  obviously  presupposed  in  the  command  to  love
him.  The  command  would  be  unmeaning  as  addressed  to  a  polytheist,  a  pantheist,
an  agnostic,  or  even  to  a  deist  disbelieving  in  revelation.  But  this  view  of  God  beini;;
given,  the  demand,  as  obviously,  could  not  be  placed  lower.  God  as  Creator  and
Saviour  cannot  accept  a  place  in  our  affections  lower  than  the  supreme  one.  He  will
have  this  or  none.  It  is  due  to  our  moraily  perverted  state  that  this  demand  should
ever  be  felt  by  us  to  be  unreasonable.  Pure  beings  would  not  feel  it  to  be  so.  They
would  delight  in  the  exercise  of  love  to  God,  and  find  it  natural  and  easy.  The  angels,
Christ,  the  just  made  perfect,  love  the  Father  thus.  Nor  ought  the  height  of  this
demand  unduly  to  discourage  us.  Love  to  God  is  truly  begotten,  thougli  not  yet
perfected,  in  every  heart  which  has  made  choice  of  God  as  its  supreme  Portion,  and
cleaves  to  him  with  constancy.  God  has  the  ruling  place  in  such  a  heart,  and  it  needs
but  growth  to  raise  our  love  to  its  required  purity  and  vigour.  What  is  left  unat-
tained  on  earth  will  be  attained  in  heaven. — J.  0.

Vers.  6 — 9,  20 — 25. — 77ie  religious  educatimi  of  children.  A  matter  much  insisted
on  in  these  addresses  (cf.  ch.  xi.  18 — 22).     We  learn—

I.  That  the  religious  education  of  children  is  God's  way  of  perpetuaiing
VITAL  religion.  Without  this,  religion  would  soon  die  out;  with  it,  a  holy  seed  will
be  kept  up  in  times  of  greatest  declension.

IL  That  the  religious  education  of  children  devolves  primarily  on  the
PARENT.  The  Church,  Sunday  schools,  etc.,  may  assist,  but  nothing  can  relieve  the
parent  from  this  duty,  or  compensate  for  his  neglect  of  it  (Eph.  vi.  4 ;  2  Tim.  i.  5).

III.  That  the  religious  education  of  children  is  to  be  conducted  with  great
OAEK  and  faithfulness.  1.  Very  diligently  (ver.  7).  It  is  to  be  gone  about  most
painstakingly  and  systematically.  "  In  thine  house,  and  when  thou  walkest  by  the
way,  and   when  thou   liest  down,   and  when  thou  rise«t  up."    There   is   need  fcir


132  THE  BOOK   OF   DEUTEROJ^OMY.  [ch.  vi.  1— i!5,

specific  teaching  at  regular  times,  but  the  text  indicates  a  broader  view  of  this  part
of  parental  duty.  An  element  pervading  the  whole  life,  blending  with  all  occupa-
tion, insinuating  its  pleasant  influence  in  all  our  intercourse  with  our  children.
2.  Very  partictUarly  (vers.  21 — 25).  A  specimen  is  given  of  the  careful  instruction
parents  are  to  study  to  impart.  3.  Taking  aduantaye  of  a  child's  natural  curiosity
(ver.  21).  The  principle  of  curiosity  is  strong  in  children.  It  early  manifests  itself
in  reference  to  religion.  The  Bible,  with  its  delightful  variety  of  story,  parable,
proverb,  etc.,  is  peculiarly  adapted  for  the  instruction  of  the  young. — J.  0.

Vera.  8,  9. — God's  words  to  be  valued.  The  usages  to  which  allusion  is  made
suggest —

I.  The  duty  of  a  high  valuation  of  GIod's  commands.  Only  precepts  highly
valued  would  be  treated  as  described.

II.  The  necessity  of  taking  means  to  beouee  the  keeping  of  God's  command-
ments IN  remembeance.  We  may  keep  the  injunction  in  spirit :  1.  I5y  frequent  read-
ing of  Scripture  (Ps.  i.  2 ;  cxix.  11 — 16).  2.  By  frequent  converse  with  others  (Mai.  ill.
16).  3.  By  frequent  recalling  of  God's  words  to  our  thoughts  (Heb.  ii.  3).  4.  By  the
use  of  such  expedients  as  experience  suggests — a  privately  marked  Bible,  etc.

IIL  The  importance  of  caeeyinq  God's  commandments  into  eveby  detail  of
LIFE.    Hands,  eyes,  doorposts,  etc. — our  working,  seeing,  home  occupations,  etc. — J.  0.

Vers.  10 — 16. — The  creature  displacing  the  Creator.  I.  The  peoneness  of  the
heart  to  admit  the  world  into  God's  place.  (Ver.  12.)  The  tendency  is  uni-
versal. A  result  of  the  Fall,  in  subverting  the  original  constitution  of  man's  nature.
That  result  twofold:  1.  In  giving  to  the  worldly  and  sensuous  principles  in  the  soul
an  undue  predominance ;  while :  2.  Destroying  that  love  of  God,  and  sense  of  dependence
on  him,  which  would  counteract  their  operation.  There  may  be  no  "going  after  other
gods  "  in  the  sense  of  ver.  14,  yet  the  first  commandment  may  be  broken  by  making  the
world  itself  our  gud — giving  it  the  place  of  the  true  God  in  our  affecticns.  The
principle  of  worldliness  usually  operates  secretly.  The  heart  is  "secretly  enticed,"
does  not  perceive  the  progress  of  its  declensions  (Hos.  viL  9),  fights  against  the  admission
ofit(Rev.  iii.  17).

II.  The  pbcoliar  connection  of  this  temptation  with  peospbeity.  (Vers.  10,
11.)  Not,  indeed,  so  peculiarly  connected  with  it,  but  that  the  poor  man  may  fall  into
the  same  snare.  But  riches  unquestionably  constitute  a  temptation  which  few  succeed
in  resisting  (of.  ch.  viii.  11 — 19 ;  Prov.  xxx.  8,  9 ;  Matt.  xix.  22 — 27 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  9, 10,
17,  etc.).  The  temptation  is  the  greater :  1.  If  worldly  possessions  are  very  abundant
(ver.  11).  2.  If  the  prosperity  is  sudden  (vers.  10,  11).  3.  If  it  isfredy  enjoyed  (ver.
11) — "  hast  eaten,  and  art  full "  (ch.  viii.  10).

III.  The  safeouards  against  this  temptation.  There  are  safeguards.  Bible  ex-
amples show  that  riches  may  be  used  with  glory  to  God,  happiness  to  self,  and  good  to
mankind  (Abraham,  Joseph,  Job,  Daniel,  etc.).  Among  the  foremo.st  we  would  place  the
cultivation  of  a  thankful  spirit  (cf.  oh.  viii.  10) — the  remembrance  of  God  as  the  Giver
of  what  we  have ;  also  the  remembrance  of  God's  past  mercies  to  us  (vers.  12,  13).
Other  safeguards  are :  1.  Serving  Ood  with  our  possessions  (ver.  13).  The  serving  will
include  serving  with  our  wealth,  using  what  he  has  given  for  his  glory,  as  good

stewards,  and  not  luxuriously  and  wastefuUy  spending  all  on  self  (Luke  xii.  15 21).

2.  Making  public  acknowledgment  of  God  (ver.  13).  The  spirit  of  this  command  is
kept  by  being  willing,  on  all  proper  occasions,  boldly  and  without  shame  to  avow  God
to  be  our  God.  The  man  of  wealth  who  will  do  this  is  carried  at  one  stroke  aliove  half
the  dangers  of  his  position.  3.  Non-conformity  to  the  world's  ways  (ver.  14).  It  is
not  easy  to  avoid  being  led  away  by  fashion,  love  of  appearance,  social  custom,  etc
The  good  man  will  beware  of  the  snare,  and  keep  aloof  (Rom.  xiL  2).

IV.  The  penalty  op  yielding  to  the  temptation.  (Ver.  15.)  God's  wrath  is
kindled  and  destroys  the  transgressor.  1.  He  is  destroyed  spiritually.  2.  He  may  be
temporally  (Ps.  xxxvii.  35  ;  Ixxiii.  18, 19).     3.  He  will  be  eternally.— -3.  0.

Ver.  \%.— Tempting  Got^.— Wealth  has  its  temptations;  so  has  poverty.  It  mcite*
to  unbelieving  murmurs,  and  to  a  spirit  called  here  "tempting  the  Lord."


oM.  VI.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  133

T.  Thb  nature  of  this  sin.  The  peculiarity  of  it  deserves  to  be  carefully  studied.
It  is  apt  to  be  taken  for  granted  that  "  tempting  God  "  means  simply  provosing  him
to  anger.  This,  however,  is  a  sense  of  tempting  scarcely  applicable  to  the  Divine.
God  can  be  provoked  to  wrath,  but  he  is  not  "  tempted  "  thereby  (Jas.  i.  13).  "  Tempt-
ing," in  the  sense  of  the  text,  means  "  putting  to  the  proof,"  "  imposing  tests."
Professor  Tyndall's  famous  proposal  of  a  prayer  test  would  have  fallen  under  this
description.  That  this  is  the  right  view  of  the  sin  is  plain  from  the  narrative,  and
from  allusions  in  the  Psalms.  "  They  tempted  the  Lord,  saying.  Is  the  Lord  among  us
or  not  ?  "  (Exod.  xvii.  7).  "  They  tempted  God  in  their  hearts  .  .  .  they  said.  Can  God
furnish  a  table  in  the  wilderness  ?  "  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  18 — 20).  In  this  view  .of  it  the
appositeness  of  the  Saviour's  quotation  of  the  passage  becomes  more  obvious  (Matt.  iv.  7).

II.  The  occasion  of  the  sin.  A  result  of  the  want  of  food  and  water.  Poverty
suggests  this  class  of  doubts,  and  inspires  the  thought  of  putting  God  to  some  test  of
his  faithfulness.  But  the  temptation  may  originate  in  other  causes — in  intellectual
doubt,  in  a  sign-seeking  spirit  (Matt.  xvi.  1),  in  downright  presumptuousness,

III.  The  Bvn,  or  this  sin.  1.  Its  root  of  unbelief.  It  is  a  "  limiting  of  the  Holy
One  of  Israel"  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  41).  2.  Its  querulous  impatience.  Instead  of  trusting
God,  waiting  upon  him,  and  seeking  light  and  help  in  a  proper  spirit,  it  flies  in  Qod's
face,  accuses  him  of  unkindness,  and  complains  of  his  injustice.  3.  Its  daring  pre-
sumption in  presuming  to  lay  down  rules  to  the  Almighty,  to  which  ho  is  required
to  conform.  Qod  brings  us  into  situations  of  trial,  not  that  we  may  apply  tests  to
him,  but  that  he  may  test  us — test  our  faith,  our  patience,  our  humility.  For  those  who
come  successfully  through  the  trial  there  is  the  great  reward  of  having  dark  things  at
length  cleared  up,  and  of  being  purified  and  strengthened  by  the  struggle.  Failure,  on
the  other  hand,  exposes  to  severe  chastisements.-— J.  O.

Ver.  25. — Our  righteousness.  As  contrasted  with  Pauline  sayings,  the  text  is  an
illustration  of  the  maxim,  "On  the  outside  of  things  look  for  differences,  on  the
inside  for  likenesses  "  (Hare).  The  form  is  that  of  the  Law,  the  spirit  is  that  of  Christ,
whose  gospel  is  the  key  to  the  Law's  utterances.

I.  A  requirement  which  One  only,  viz.  Christ,  has  perfeotlt  ruLFiLLED.
"  This  is  the  name  whereby  he  shall  be  called,  the  Lord  our  Righteousness  "  (Jer.  ixiii.
6).  He  "  is  the  end  of  the  Law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth  "  (Rom.
X.  4).  How  ?  In  the  strictly  legal,  as  in  the  strict  ideal  sense,  righteousness  requires
an  absolutely  perfect  fulfilment  of  every  one  of  God's  commandments.  The  Jewish
covenant  required  no  less.  The  Jews  were  to  live  in  their  righteousness,  t.e.  in  perfect
keeping  of  the  whole  Law.  But  in  point  of  fact,  no  Jew  ever  rendered  perfect  obedience.
In  many  things,  like  others,  he  offended,  and  the  covenant  footing  was  only  maintained
through  daily  pardon  of  daily  offences.  Christ  is  our  Redeemer  from  the  curse  thus
entailed  by  transgression  (Oral.  iii.  13).  As  the  Lord's  righteous  Servant,  and  Fulfiller
of  the  Law,  he  has  implemented  the  condition  of  acceptance  in  such  a  way  that  his
obedience  carries  with  it  results  to  others  as  well  as  to  himself  (Bom.  y.  17 — 21).  In
him  the  believer  is  justified.  He  claims  him  as  the  Lord  his  Righteousness.  Christ
has  for  him  at  once  fulfilled  the  Law's  precept,  and  abolished  its  penalty.  Sinfiil  in
himself,  in  Christ  his  sins  are  covered,  and  justification  is  obtained  (Bom.  iiL  22 — 27  ;
viii.  1—4 ;  1  Cor.  i.  30 ;  2  Cor.  v,  21).

II.  A  rbquibembnt-  which  believers  in  Christ  are  enabled  to  fulfil,  thodgh
IMPBRPECTLT,  YET  ACCEPTABLY.  The  utmost  that  the  Jew  could  render  was  that
imperfect  but  sincere  obedience  which  is  still  the  mark  of  the  true  believer.  The
believer's  duti/  is  to  render  a  perfect  obedience ;  his  privilege  is  that,  falling  short  of
this,  his  sincere  though  faulty  obedience  will  be  graciously  accepted  for  the  sake
of  Christ.  In  harmony  with  his  calling,  it  was  to  be  the  Jew's  aim  to  realize. the
righteousness  which  the  Law  set  before  him.  But  in  his  inability  to  do  this  the  weak-
ness of  the  Law  revealed  itself,  and  in  contrast  with  this  weakness  (Rom.  viii.  3)  is  the
power  of  the  gospel,  enabling  the  believer  to  triumph,  and  to  bring  forth  fruit  unto
holiness,  the  end  of  which  is  everlasting  life  (Rom.  vi.  22).  This  also  is  a  "right-
eousness of  faith,"  as  springing  from  faith,  and  rendered  possible  through  it.  It  is  his
righteousness,  yet  in  a  deeper  sense  not  his,  but  Christ's,  for  it  is  the  work  of  Christ
living  in  him  (Gal.  !i.  20).    It  is  not  the  ground  of  acceptance,  but  a  result  of  it  {


134  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  Xca.  vl  1—25.

not  a  title  to  heaven,  but  meetness  for  it.  It  is  itself  a  gift  of  grace,  part  of  Christ's
salvation  (Matt.  v.  6 ;  Eph.  v.  9,  10 ;  Phil.  ii.  12,  13  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24 ;  1  John  iii.  7—10 ;
with  Eom.  vi.,  vii.,  viii.). — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 5. —  The  essence  of  the  Decalogue  is  love.  Moses  hero  applies  the  Deca-
logue to  their  present  circumstances.  He  wishes  them  to  enter  Canaan  in  an  obedient
spirit.  He  knows  that  the  well-being  of  the  commonwealth  depends  upon  it.  To
assist  them  in  the  understanding  of  the  Law,  he  sums  it  up  in  one  all-embracing
principle  of  love.  God  as  the  supreme  object  is  to  receive  the  homage  of  the  entire
nature  of  man.

I.  Moses  insists  on  the  uottt  and  absolute  character  of  God.  This  would  dis-
tinguish Israel  from  the  polytheists  around  them.  "  Jehovah  our  Mighty  One  is  one
Jehovah  " — the  uncaused,  self-existent  One  in  his  absolute  unity  and  strength.  All
perfection  is  thus  briefly  attributed  to  him.

II.  God  can  be  the  object  op  love.  His  unity  is  not  an  unsocial  thing.  Within
his  being  there  are  social  qualities  demanding,  and  from  all  eternity  receiving,  satisfac-
tion. Hence  we  believe  in  what  Jon.  Edwards  called  a  "  social  Trinity."  Our  social
nature  is  the  reflection  of  God,  since  we  were  made  in  his  image.  His  unity  does  riot
imply  that  in  the  by-past  eternity,  before  anything  was  made,  he  was  alone.  It  was
the  fellowship  of  "  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit " — three  Persons  in  the  one  Godhead.

The  Trinity  makes  God  lovable,  for  it  is  the  condition  of  the  satisfaction  from  all
eternity  of  his  social  qualities.

in.  God  deserves  the  love  of  cub  whole  BEnia.  Heart,  soul,  and  might  are  tci
be  enlisted  in  this  service.  Our  love  to  him  should  be  intellectual  and  also  emotional ;
it  should  be  passionate  and  strong ;  an  all-embracing  energy  of  tour  nature.

All  our  faculties  are  appealed  to  by  the  Divine  nature.  1.  Our  understanding  is
enlisted  by  God  as  the  Infinite  Mind.  All  our  intellectuality  finds  its  counterpart  and
culmination  ill  the  infinite  intellectual  powers  which  God  possesses  and  exercises.  We
rest  upon  his  superior  intellectual  power.  2.  Our  affections  are  enlisted  by  God  as  the
Fountain  of  affection.  God  is  a  Heart  of  unspeakable  tenderness  as  well  as  a  Mind  of
infinite  grasp.  And  so  he  elicits  the  love  of  the  heart  as  well  as  of  the  mind.  3.  Our
will  is  swayed  into  passionate  devotion  by  God  as  the  Infinite  Will,  If  the  spectacle
of  will  in  resistless  benevolence  commands  the  homage  of  our  powers,  then  God
entrances  our  whole  will-power  into  passionate  devotion.  4.  Our  strength  is  enlisted
by  God  as  the  embodiment  of  vital  energies  and  powers  in  their  highest  form.  So  that
as  a  matter  of  fact,  God  fits  into  every  fold  of  human  nature  and  elicits  its  loving  and
adoring  homage.

IV.  Love  makes  lawkbepinq  delightful.  The  Law  is  not  a  pain  to  any  who
love  the  Lawgiver.  Love  is  the  essence  of  true  loyalty.  It  makes  service  freedom.
It  is  this  which  we  must  cultivate  daily,  and  then  life  becomes  delightful. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  6 — 25. — FamUy  training  is  to  propagate  the  Law.  The  Law  has  as  its  essence
love.  In  the  family,  love's  home  and  circle,  this  Law  is  to  be  propagated.  And  here
we  are  to  notice —

I.  Parents  ark  to  identify  themselves  with  God's  cause.  The  Jews  were
directed  to  wear  portions  of  the  Law  upon  their  persons.  This  is  the  sign  of  identifi-
cation with  it  in  a  rude  age.  The  idea  is  parental  profession,  a  glad  identification  of
themselves  with  the  Lord's  cause.

II.  The  home  is  also  to  be  consecrated  as  a  godly  home.  Qtjd's  Law  was  to  be
written  on  the  posts  of  the  house  and  on  their  gates.  This,  like  the  last,  meant  the
identification  of  the  house  with  God's  cause.

New,  there  is  as  much  difference  between  an  ungodly  home  and  a  godly  one  as
between  an  unconverted  person  and  a  converted  one  (cf.  Pressens6's  '  La  Pamilla
Chr^tienne,'  a  most  admirable  course  of  sermons).

ni.  The  children  are  manifestly  meant  to  be  the  companions  op  the  parents.
The  little  ones  are  to  have  their  parents'  society  at  home  and  abroad,  at  morning  and
at  night  (ver.  7).

The  mistake  made  by  many  parents  is  not  making  themselves  sufficiently  com-
panionable.   It  is  companionship  that  after  all  determines  the  bent  of  children.


cH.  VII. :


-26.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


lis


IV.  The  home  tbainino  is  to  be  bbugious.  God's  Law  is  to  be  brought  in,  morn-
ing, noon,  and  night,  as  the  great  interest.  Of  course,  if  parents  are  to  do  this  as  God
intends,  his  Law  must  be  a  great  personal  interest  to  themselves.  Tliey  must  delight
in  it  and  love  it,  and  make  it  a  matter  of  study  continually.

V.  Amid  the  sboulabitibs  of  bduoation  the  home  must  be  the  mainstay  of
BELiaiOK.  With  the  parent  the  responsibility  of  training  and  interesting  the  children
in  religion  eventually  rests.  To  the  well-ordering  of  Christian  homes,  Church  and  State
must  alike  look  as  the  last  refuge.

The  adjustment  of  rival  interests  in  education  is  well-nigh  impossible,  and  so  it
becomes  all  the  more  needful  that  the  home  should  be  made  to  supply  the  religious
element,  whatever  course  educational  arrangements  and  legislation  may  take.

VI.  Pkospebitt  most  not  enoendgb  atheism.  This  is  the  warning  here  given  to
Israel.  God  might  be  forgotten  amid  the  success  and  prosperity  of  Canaan.  For  it  is
prosperity,  not  adversity,  which  as  a  rule  engenders  atheism.  The  prosperity  of  the
prodigal  led  him  away  to  the  far-off  land  of  forgetfnluess  of  Gbd,  while  his  adversity
brought  him  back  (Luke  xv,  11— 32).— R.  M.  E.


EXPOSITION,


CHAPTEE  VII

Ehtibx  Sepabation  fkom  iDOLATROtrs  Na-
tions   ENJOINED.

Vera.  1 — 4. — The  Israelites  were  about  to
enter  on  a  country  occupied  by  idolaters,
and  they  are  commanded  not  to  spare  them  or
to  allow  them  to  continue  in  their  proximity,
or  to  have  any  friendly  relations  with  them
(of.  Lev.  xxvii.  28).  The  Lord  would  cast  out
these  nations,  and  deliver  them,  though
greater  and  mightier  than  they,  into  their
hands ;  and  they  were  to  smite  them  and
place  them  untler  the  ban;  they  were  to
make  no  covenant  with  them  nor  form  any
alliances  with  them  (cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  32;
xxxiv.  12—16),  lest  they  should  thus  be
drawn  into  idolatry,  and  so  the  anger  of  the
Lord  be  kindled  against  them,  and  his
vengeance  brought  upon  them.

Ver.  1.— (Of.  Gen.  xv.  19—21.)  Of  the  ten
nations  named  by  God  in  his  promise  to
Abraham,  only  -six  are  mentioned  here,
those  omitted  being  the  Kenites,  the  Ken-
nizites,  the  Kadmouites,  and  the  Eephaim.
The  Rephaim  were  by  this  time  extinct  as
a  tribe,  Og,  "  the  last  of  the  Eephaim,"
having  been  conquered,  and  he  and  his
people  destroyed  by  the  Israelites.  The  tliree
other  tribes  lay  probably  beyond  the  confines
of  Canaan,  in  that  region  promised  to  Abra-
ham, but  which  was  not  included  in  the
territory  conquered  by  the  people  under
Joshua.  This  may  account  for  their  not
being  mentioned  here.  One  nation,  the
,  Hivites,  appears  here  which  is  not  in  tlie
•numeration  in  Genesis.  This  name  seems
to  have  been  borne  by  more  tribes  than  one,
ir  by  •  tribe  existing  in  divisions  widely


scattered,  ~^for  we  find  th«   Hivite  in  th«

centre  of,  Palestine  (Gen.  xxxiv.  2),  in  the
Shephelah  (Josh.  ix.  7 ;  xi.  19),  in  the  land
of  Mizpeh  under  Hcrmon  (Josh.  xi.  3),  "  in
Lebanon,  from  mount  Baal-liermon  to  the
entering  in  of  "Hamath  "  (Judg.  iii.  3),  and
among  tribes  in  the  north  of  Canaan  (Geu.
X.  17 ;  1  Chron.  i.  15).  Tlieir  principal  settle-
ment was  probably  in  that  part  of  tlie
country  where  the  Antilibanus  range  termi-
nates in  Mount  Hermon.

Ver.  S. — Neither  shalt  thou  make  marriages
with  them.  Brought  into  intimate  relations
with  idolaters,  they  mij^ht  be  seduced  into
idolatry ;  and  where  marriage  was  contracted
with  an  idolater,  the  children  might  be
brought  up  in  idolatry.  Such  unions  were
forbidden.

Ver.4.—rrom  following  me;  literaUy,/rom
after  me,  i,e.  from  being  my  servant  and
worshipper.  Suddenly;  rather,  speedily  (prp^
infin.  of  -\no,  Us  be  quick,  to  hasten,  used
as  an  adverb).

Vers.  5 — 8. — They  were  not  only  to  have
no  fellowship  with  the  idolaters,  but  they
were  to  root  out  their  idolatry,  everting  their
altars  and  destroying  their  idols ;  and  this
because  they  were  a  holy  people,  graciously
chosen  of  God  to  be  his  special  possession
— a  high  privilege  and  honour  ^Yhich  they
were  to  be  careful  not  to  oast  away.

Ver.  5.— Cut  down  their  groves;  rather,
cut  or  hew  in  pieces  their  asherdhs.  These
were,  apparently,  wooden  pillars  of  con-
siderable height,  which  were  firmly  planted
in  the  ground  (oomp.  Judg.  vi.  25 — 27  ;
oh.  xvi.  21),  and  were  consecrated  to  the
worship  of  a  female  deity,  the  companion
of  Baal ;  probably  the  same  as  that  after-
wards known  as  Astarte,  the  Venus  of  the
Syrians  (see  note  on  oh.  xvi,  21)


136


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTBEONOMT.


[oh.  vn.  1—26.


Ver. 6. — An  holy  people;  a  people  conse-
crated to  God,  to  be  holy  as  he  is  holy
(cf.  Lev.  xi.  43  —45 ;  xix.  2 ;  xx.  26 ;  xxi.  6 ;
ch.  xxlii.  14).  A  special  people  unto  him-
self ;  literally,  io  be  to  him  for  a  people  of
property  (nV:p),  a  people  his  own,  his  pe-
culiar property  (of.  Exod.  xix.  5  ;  ch.  xiv.  2 ;
ixvi.  18 ;  and,  for  the  meaning  of  the  word.
1  Ohron.  xxix.  3,  "  mine  own  proper  good ;''
Eccles.  ii.  8,  "  peculiar  treasure  of  kings  ")  ;
LXX.,  \ahs  Trepiovfftos,  applied  by  St.  Paul
to  Christians  as  the  chosen  and  special
property  of  Christ  (Titus  ii.  14).  Above  all
people ;  rather,  ont  of  or  from  among  all  the
peoples,

Ver.  7. — Set  his  love  upon  you.  The
Hebrew  verb  meaning  primarily  to  cleave
to,  to  be  attached  to,  is  used  to  express
ardent  and  loving  affection  (cf.  Gen.  xxxiv.
8  ;  ch.  X.  15 ;  Isa.  xxxviii  17).  The  fewest
of  all  people.  Tt  might  have  been  supposed
that,  in  clioosing  a  people  to  be  his  special
t]'easure,  the  Almighty  would  have  select^ed
some  one  of  the  great  nations  of  the  world ;
but,  instead  of  that,  he  had  chosen  one  of
the  smallest.  They  had,  indeed,  grown
till  now  they  were  as  the  stars  for  multi-
tude ;  but  it  was  not  in  prospect  of  this  that
they  were  chosen.  The  election  of  Israel
was  purely  of  grace.

Ver.  8. — Because  the  Lord  loved  yon,
Targura  Onkelos,  "Becaaise  he  had  com-
placency in  you;"  Vulgate,  quiavobisjunatus
est.  "  Instead  of  saying,  Ue  hath  chosen
you  out  of  love  to  your  fathers,  as  in  ch.  iv.
37,  Moses  brings  out  in  this  place  love  to
the  people  of  Israel  as  the  Divine  motive,
not  for  choosing  Israel,  but  for  leading  it
out  and  delivering  it  from  the  slave-house  of
Egypt,  by  which  God  had  practically  carried
out  the  election  of  the  people,  that  be  might
thereby  allure  the  Israelites  to  a  reciprocity
oflove"(KeU).

Ver.  9. — To  a  thousand  generations  ;
rather,  to  the  thousandth  generation.  As
God  is  faithful  to  his  covenant,  and
will  show  mercy  and  do  good  to  those
that  love  him,  whilst  on  those  who  hate
him  he  will  bring  terrible  retribution,
the  people  are  warned  by  this  to  take  heed
against  rebellion  and  apostaoy  from  him
(comp.  Exod.  XX.  5).

Ver.  10. — And  repayeth  them  that  hate
him  to  their  face.  The  phrase,  "  to  their
face  "  (v:b  h^^  to  their  faces),  has  been  va-
onsly_  explained.  It  has  been  taken  as
meaning,  instantly,  ttatim,  fuiud  cunctanter
(Vulgate,  Gesenius);  openly,  manifestly,
pffliom  (Grotius,  Calvin,  Michaelis) ;  during
life,  in  hao  vita  (Targum,  Vatab.) ;  in  their
presence,  in  their  own  sight  (LXX.,  kotA
TTp6tra>TTov :  Bosenmiiller).  The  last  seems
the  best     n]|  signifies  properly,  front,  and


D']B  h»^  to  the  front,  before,  in  presenoa
(cf.'  Lev.  ix.  5 ;  Exod.  xxiii.  17).  The  hater
of  God  should  be  repaid,  so  that  the  man
should  himself  see  and  feel  that  he  had  been
smitten  of  God  (cf.  Isa.  Ixv.  6 ;  ,Tob  xxxiv.
11 ;  Ps.  Ixii.  13).  And  this  retribution
should  come  speedily :  He  will  not  he  slack
to  him  that  hateth  him;  t.e.  he  will  not
deLiy  to  repay  him.

Ver.  11. — As  God  would  thus  summarily
avenge  himself  of  his  adversaries,  the
people  are  exhorted  to  keep  all  his  com-
mandments, statutes,  and  rights.

Ver.  12. — On  the  other  hand,  obedience
would  bring  blessing.  Wherefore  it  shall
come  to  pass,  if  ye  hearken.  The  Hebrew
conveys  the  idea  of  a  reward  as  consequent
on  their  hearkening ;  as  there  would  be
retribution  for  transgression,  so  would  there
be  recompense  for  obedience.  The  Hebrew
word  represented  by  "wherefore"  in  the
Authorized  Version  (3pv,  from  spy^the  heel)
denotes  that  which  comes  after,  the  end  oi
last  of  anything  (Ps.  cxix.  33, 1 1 2),  hence  re-
compense, reward,wage8,  as  the  end  or  result
of  acting  (Ps.  xix.  11;  xl.  15;  Isa.  v.  23,
etc.).  The  clause  might,  therefore,  be  trans-
lated, As  a  consequence  or  recompanse  of
hearkening, ...  it  shall  be  that,  fco.  Judg-
ments, i.e.  rights,  rightful  claims  (ffpsiy'D).
God,  as  the  Great  King,  has  his  rights,
and  these  are  to  be  rendered  to  him  by  his
subjects  and  servants.  The  mercy,  i.e.  the
kindness,  the  favour  (ion),  showed  in  the
promises  which  God  gave  to  their  fathers,
and  engaged  by  covenant  to  fulfil.

Ver.  13. — This  favour  woidd  take  effect
in  a  blessing  on  the  fruit  of  the  womb,  the
produce  of  the  field,  and  the  increase  of  their
flocks  and  herds  (comp.  Exod.  xxiii.  2& — ^27).
Thy  com,  and  thy  vine,  and  thine  oil.
These  comprise  the  fruitful  products  of  the
soil,  and  in  their  combination  express  general
fertility  and  abundance.  By  com  flri)
is  undoubtedly  to  be  understood  the  cereal '
products  generally  used  for  food.  It  may
be  doubted  if  tirosh  (t^'lin)  properly  means
wine.  The  word  is  often  rendered  in  the
Authorized  Version  by  new  wine,  and  this  is
the  meaning  generally  given  in  the  lexicons.
As,  however,  it  is  almost  constantly  joined
with  corn  and  oil,  the  immediate  products  of
the  soil — at  least  as  unchanged  by  any  process
or  manufacture — ^it  is  rather  to  be  regarded
as  designating  ripe  grapes  than  wine.  That,
moreover,  which  was  to  be  gathered  (oh.  xi.
14),  which  might  be  tithed  (oh.  xii.  17 ;  xiv.
23),  which  might  be  described  as  fruit
(2  Chron.  xxxi.  5),  as  being  in  the  cluster
(Isa.  Ixv.  8),  and  as  capable  of  being
dried  up  or  miched  (Joel  i.  10),  and
trodden  (Mican  vii.  15),  could  not  be  a
fluid  like  fermented  wine,    Aa  the  grape


CM.  VII.  1—26.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


137


juice,  however,  was  that  from  wliich  wine
was  elicited,  tirosh  1b  sometimes  used  tropi-
cally lor  wine  (Isa.  Ixii.  8;  Hos.  iv.  11),
juat  as  corn  is  used  tor  bread  (Lain.  ii.  12;
Hos.   vli.   14).      The   oil  here   mentioned,
ami  elsewhere  joined  with  dagan  and  tirosh,
is  ilie  pure  fresh  iiliveoil  (nni;,  from  nnx,  lo
shine),  obtained  by  pressure- from  the  berries
ol  the  olive,  and  used  fur  food  as  well  as  for
other  purposes  by  the  Jews  (see  notes  on
ch.   viii.  8).     Flocks    of  thy  sheep.    The
Hebrew  is  very  peculiar  hire ;  the  same  ex-
pressiim  occurs  only  in  this  book  i^ch.  xxviii,
4,    18,  ."il).      Literally  rendered,  it  is   the
Astartes  (Ashtarotb)  of  thy  shenp.      Kiraehi
says  it  means  "  the  iemales  of  the  sheep "
(iNxn  niapj,  and  this  Gesenius  adopts,  ren-
dering the  phrase  by  "  ewes."   Astarte  ('Ash-
toreth,  plu.  'Ashtaroth)  was  the  Phoenician
Venus,  and  it  is  supposed  that  the  females
of  the  flock  were  called  Astartes  orVenuses,
as  propagating  the  flock.     There  is,  how-
ever, another  way  of  explaining  the  word  as
here  used,  by  referring  it  to  a  root  'ashar.
nwy  1  signifying  to  be  multiplied,  to  be  rich ;
whence  the  name  given  to  the  females  as  the
multipliers  of  the  flock,  without  any  refer-
ence to  Astarte.

Ver.  15, — The  mercy  of  God  should  be
showed  to  tliem  also  in  preserving  then.
from  sickness,  especially  of  a  virulent  and
dangerous  kind,  such  as  they  had  seen  in
Egypt,  where  disease  has  in  all  ages  readily
assumed  a  malignant  ohaiacter  ('Encyo.
lirit.,'  art.  '  ligypt'),  and  where  especially
cutaneous  diseases  nf  the  worst  kind  pre-
vail (oomp.  ch.  xxxviii.  27).  Suoli  diseases
the  Lord  would  rather  cause  to  fall  on  their
enemies.

Vera.  16 — 26. — The  heathen  they  were
utterly  to  extirpate  from  the  land  which
God  was  about  to  give  them ;  mighty  as
*hese  nations  were,  they  were  not  to  be
afraid  of  them,  for  God  would  be  with  his
people,  and  would  deliver  these  nations,  with
their  kings,  into  their  hands.  Not  all  at
once,  however,  should  the  former  occupants
of  the  country  be  driven  out ;  this  should  be
done  by  degrees,  lest,  the  land  being  sud-
denly depopulated,  the  wild  animals  would
Increase  too  much,  so  as  to  be  a  source  of


danger  and  trouble  to  the  settlers ;  bnt
ultimately  they  should  be  utterly  destroyed,
and  with  them  all  the  objects  and  imple-
ments of  their  idolatrous  worship.

Ver.  16. — And  thou  shalt  consume;  literally,
eat,  devour  (n'jDXj).  Unless  they  coi  isumed
them  as  one  consumes  food,  they  would
be  a  snare  to  them,  by  tempting  them  to
join  in  their  idolatry.

Vers.  17,  18. — If  thou  shalt  say  in  thine
heart.  The  thought  might  rise  in  their
minds,  How  can  we  ever  compete  with
nations  so  much  more  powerful  than  we?
But  such  thoughts  they  must  repress,  re-
membering what  God  had  done  for  them  to
Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians,  and  resting
assured  tliat  the  same  would  he  do  to  the
Canaanites.

Ver.  19. — Temptations,  etc.  (of.  ch.  iv.  34 ;
Yi.  22).

Ver.  20.— Hornet  (cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  28).
Instances  are  on  record  of  armies  being
obliged  to  give  way  before  swarms  of  insecto
by  which  they  were  attacked  (as  in  the
case  of  Julian,  who  was  compelled  by  a  host
of  flies  and  gnats  to  change  his  route  iu
retreating  from  Parthia ;  Amm.  MarcelL,
24,  8);  but  it  may  be  doubted  if  the  state-
ment here  is  to  be  understood  liteiaUy,  and
not  rather  figuratively,  as  expressi've  of  many
and  varied  evils  with  which  the  fugitive
Canaanites  were  to  be  visited  until  they
were  extirpated  (cf.  Josh.  xxiv.  12,  com-
pared with  X.  22—27).

Ver.  22.— (Cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  30.)
Ver.  24. — The  kings  also  of  tliese  nations
should  they  utterly  destroy,  so  that  their
memory  should  perish  from  the  earth.

Vers.  25,  26. — The  idols  of  the  Canaauites
they  were  utterly  to  destroy  by  fire,  not
saving  even  the  silver  or  gold  with  which
the  images  were  overlaid,  lest,  if  that  were
coveted  and  retained,  it  might  bring  them
under  the  ban  which  fell  on  all  things
connected  with  idolatry;  as  happened  in
the  case  of  Achan  (Josh.  vii.).

Ver.  26. — Cursed  thing;  a  thing  devoted
(Dnn),  either,  as  in  this  case,  to  destruction
(comp.  also  1  Kings  xx.  42;  Zech.  xiv.  11 ;
Mai.  iii.  24;  [iv.  6])  or,  as  elsewhere,  to
God  (Lev.  xxvii  21 ;  Numb,  xviii  M).


EOMILBTICS.

Verg.  1 — 11. — A  holy  people's  policy  of  self-preservation.  We  have  in  this  para-
graph a  glance  onward  to  the  time  when  Israel's  march  through  the  wilderness  would
be  completed,  and  when  the  people  to  whom  God  had  given  the  land  should  be  con-
fronted with  those  who  had  it  previously  in  possession.  In  our  Homily  on  it  let  us
observe —

I.  Wb  have  here  pointed  out  the  go^jpiTioss  undeb  which  Israel  would  tau


138  THE  BOOK  Of  DEUl'EEONOMY.  [ch.  vii.  1— 2C.


POSSESSION  OF  THE  LAND.  1.  There  was  a  great  covenant  promise  which  had  hccn
handed  down  to  them  liom  preceding  generations,  and  which  involved  results  which
would  be  far-reaching  both  as  to  time  and  place,  touching  every  family  of  man,  through
every  age  of  time.  In  a  word,  it  was  nothing  less  than  the  Divine  covenant  of  human
redemption,  in  the  fulfilling  of  which  a  Great  Mediator  should  come,  while  in  Israel  the
purity  of  the  line  of  his  descent  was  to  be  guarded,  and  by  and  for  it  there  was  to  be
held  in  possession  a  tract  of  land  on  which  the  great  work  of  the  Mediator  should  have
its  earthly  basis  and  historic  ground.  2.  With  this  far  outlook  in  view,  Israel  was  ta
be  a  people  "  unto  the  Lord  their  God."  It  was  to  hold  a  place  among  the  nationu
which  was  unique.  One  of  the  smallest  as  to  territory  and  numbers,  it  was  to  strike
the  deepest  as  to  its  worth  and  power !  3.  Hence  Israel  was  to  be  a  lioly  people
(ver.  6).  It  was  to  bear  a  specific  character  religiously,  as  it  was  to  take  a
peculiar  place  historically.  Hence  its  moral  and  spiritual  elevation  is  the  first  thing  to
be  secured.  The  revelation  of  God  which  the  people  possessed  had  no  mean  uplifting
power.  The  eternal  God  was  Israel's  refuge,  and  underneath  were  the  everlasting
arms.  The  institutions  of  mediation,  priesthood,  sacrifice,  were  deep  and  solemn
lessons  in  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  righteousness  of  God.  And  the  moral  law  which
Israel  possessed  was  so  pure,  so  complete,  even  in  the  infancy  of  the  people,  that  to  this
day  not  the  wisest  men  of  the  world  can  find  a  defect  therein,  nor  can  they  suggest
aught  to  supplement  it.  4.  Israel  would,  nevertheless,  be  in  great  danger  (ver.  4).
The  land  of  Canaan,  though  beautiful,  fruitful,  and  gay,  was  a  nest  of  impurity.  The
foulest  pollutions  were  debasing  the  people,  and,  apart  from  some  special  guard,  they
were  far  more  likely  to  infect  Israel  with  the  virus  of  their  idolatry  than  Israel  was  to
cleanse  them  by  the  strength  of  counteracting  virtue:  And  when  we  come  to  think
of  what  vast  importance  to  the  world  was  the  choice  of  one  people  who  should  serve  as
leverage  for  the  rest,  we  discern  the  reason  for  the  imperative  injunctions  which  follow
as  to  tlie  policy  which  Israel  was  to  pursue  with  reference  to  the  peoples  of  Canaan.

IL  Here  is  a  threefold  line  op  policy  enjoined.     1.  A  policy  of  separation
(ver.  3, "  Neither  shalt  thou  make  marriages  with  them  ").  Thus  does  the  Mast  High,  in
the  early  training  of  a  people  for  himself,  let  them  see  how  completely  they  are  to  be
the  Lord's ;  and  that  marriage,  which  from  the  worldling's  point  of  view  is  so  apt  to  sink
into  a  mere  union  of  bodies,  is,  from  the  point  of  view  of  one  who  would  be  holy  to  the
Lord,  to  be  at  once  regulated  by  God  and  elevated  for  him.     Who  cannot  see  the
impossibility  of  married  life  being  as  blessed  as  it  may  be  if  husband  and  wife  are  dis-
severed on  the  very  matter  on  which  joint  sympathies  should  be  fondest  and  strongest  ?
The  principle  here  enjoined  is  carried  over  into  the  New  Testament,  in  such  words  as
these :  "  Be  not  unequally  yoked  together  with  unbelievers."    In  this  stern  interdiction
of  mixed  marriages  under  the  Law,  our  God  would  teach  us  for  all  time  that  life's
dearest  bond  is  to  be  formed  only  in  subjection  to  his  will  whose  we  are,  and  whom  we
should  serve.     2.  A  policy  of  religious  intolerance  (ver.  5).    As  Israel  was  to  possess
the  land  for  God,  so  it  was  to  suffer  his  worship  alone  to  be  observed.     Whatever  was
contrary  thereto  was  to  be  taken  out  of  the  way.    An  external  religion  is  virtually
destroyed  when  its  external  observance  is  made  impossible.     3.  A  policy  of  extermina-
tion in  war.    The  Canaanites  had  had  their  day  of  grace  (Gen.  xv.  16).     And  now,  lest
they  continue  to  pollute  the  land,  they  are  to  be  swept  away  "with  the  besom  of
destruction"  (see  Homily  on  ch.  i.  1 — 8).    If  Israel  had  no  Divine  command  to  this
effect,  no  one  would  pretend  to  justify  this  part  of  their  policy.    If  they  had,  it  needed
no  justification.     God  may  sentence  a  people  to  ruin  in  any  way  he  pleases.   And  when
a  nation  has  given  way  to  such  nameless  and  shameless  wickedness  that  its  land  groans
beneath  the  burden  of  its  crimes,  it  is  mercy  to  the  world  when  the  evil  is  "stamped
out."     And  though  such  exterminative  policy  on  the  part  of  any  nation  can  be
justified  only  on  the  ground  of  a  Divine  warrant,  yet  the  warrant  having  been  given
in  this  case,  that  policy  does  but  illustrate  a  truth  which  the  Most  High  has  again  and
again  declared,  that  no  nation  has  any  absolute  right  in  itself  or  its  land.     It  holds  its
existence  subject  to  God's  will,  and  to  that  will  alone ;  and  if  it  is  good  for  the  world
that  it  should  give  place  to  others,  he  will  cause  it  to  pass  away,  and  will  bring  another
people  on  the  soil.

III.  Israel's  position  and  foliot,  bo  reoakded,  furnish  us  with  principlkb  of
KTBENAL  AND  ITNITBRSAL  APPLICATION.    They  are  these :  1.  The  actual  value  of  any


ctJ.  vii.  1^26.1  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  if?!)


nation  or  people  in  the  world  depends  on  the  degree  to  which  they  gubierve  God's
purpose,  and  not  on  the  extent  to  which  they  fulfil  their  own.  ^Nations  have  but  a
passing  loan  of  power  from  the  Great  Supreme,  held  in  trust  for  his  honour  and  the
world's  good ;  and  when  they  lose  sight  of  that,  they  are  grievously  forgetting  the  things
which  belong  unto  their  peace.  2.  If  a  nation  is  to  preserve  itself  for  God,  corrupting
influences  are  to  be  put  away.  We  have  seen  (Homily  on  ch.  ii.  24)  how  much
importance  is  attached  by  God  to  the  training  of  the  family.  We  see  in  this  paragraph
how  much  importance  is  also  attached  to  those  influences  which  go  beforehand  to  make
the  family.  How  does  the  Most  High  set  himself  against  all  those  corruptions  that
poison  the  social  fabric  and  break  up  the  saoredness  of  the  home  1  And  how  jealously
does  he  guard  his  own  worship  from  the  defiling  additions  and  'commandments  of  men  !

3.  When  a  nation  is  loyal  to  its  God,  by  putting  away  sin  and  nurturing  righteousness,  it
will  ensure  the  Divine  blessing  and  its  own  permanence  (ver.  9).  God  reserves  the
entry  through  the  gates  of  honour  to  "  the  righteous  nation  which  keepeth  the  truth."

4.  The  elevation  ensured  and  given  to  nations  which  promote  righteousness  is  the  one
which,  if  we  see  as  God  sees,  we  shall  value  most.  Godless  men  may  covet  an
ascendency  backed  by  guns  and  swords,  armies  and  fleets.  The  believer  in  God  covets
only  an  uplifting  that  comes  of  the  Divine  blessing  on  "a  wise  and  understanding
people."  5.  If  loyalty  to  God  and  truth  is  wanting,  a  nation  ensures  its  own  downfall
(ver.  10;  see  Ezek.  ivii. ;  xxvii.  3;  xxviii.  2—10;  Amos  ii.  9;  Obad.  3,  4).  6.  What
Israel  was  designed  to  be  among  the  nations,  regenerated  men  are  in  their  own  nation —
"  a  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  their  God."  They  are  "  the  light  of  the  world,"  "  the
salt  of  the  earth."  The  earth  is  full  of  corruption,  and  is  and  must  be  rapidly  decom-
posing unless  some  salt  be  thrown  into  it  to  check  the  decomposition.  Christians  are
the  "  salt "  of  the  earth.  Their  value  is  in  their  "  savour,"  not  in  their  name.  And  if
they  let  the  "  savour  "  die  out,  no  name  of  discipleship  will  be  of  any  use  to  them.  (On
savourless  salt,  see  Thomson's  '  Land  and  the  Book,'  p.  382.)  Christians  may  not
separate  their  Chiistianity  from  their  citizenship.  They  are  to  be  Christian  citizens ;
and  do  we  not  learn  by  abundant  teachings  in  the  Old  and  New  Testament  that  God
spares  many  a  guilty  city  for  the  sake  of  the  righteous  that  are  therein  ?  (See  the
history  of  Abraham's  intercession  for  Sodom.)  And  can  we  forget  the  teaching  of  the
prophet  Ezekiel,  that  nations  may  become  so  corrupt  that  even  the  righteous  element
therein  avails  not  to  stay  the  ruin  (Ezek.  xiv.  12 — 21)?  7.  Hence  the  principles
involved  in  this  paragraph  should  convey,  and  should  be  made  the  basis  of,  an  earnest
warning  and  appeal  to  men  to  remember  that  the  day  of  grace  for  the  nation,  as  well
as  for  themselves,  has  its  limit.  God  is  long-suffering.  He  bears  long,  but  he  vrill  not
hear  always  (of.  Isa.  v.  3—7;  i.  5—24;  Luke  xix.  41 — 44;  xiii.  6^-9;  Matt.  xxi.
33 — 44 ;  Eev.  ii.  21 — 23).  Oh,  how  earnestly  should  men  turn  to  God  while  yet  there
is  hope  1  For  their  own  sakes,  that  they  may  be  saved,  and  for  the  sake  of  others  too,
that  they  may  become  co-operators  with  God  in  purifying  and  saving  men  I

Vers.  12 — 15. — Temporal  prosperity  a  result  of  obedience  to  Divine  Law.  The  aged
lawgiver  in  this  paragraph  shows  the  people  how  largely  their  well-being  depends  on
obedience  to  God,  and  also  to  what  an  extent  that  well-being  would  be  manifest  even
in  temporal  matters;  in  the  healthfulness  of  body  which  would  be  enjoyed  by  them,
and  in  the  success  with  which  they  should  tend  their  flocks  and  herds.  They  should
be  free  from  the  sicknesses  and  diseases  with  which  Egypt  abounded ;  and  should,  in
the  enjoyment  of  such  immunity,  have  the  sign  and  token  of  the  blessing  of  Heaven
on  ah  obedient  people.  Now,  it  has  long  been  regarded  as  one  mark  of  the  old  covenant,
that,  in  condescension  to  the  people,  God  spake  so  much  of  temporal  blessings  as  the
reward  of  obedience  in  the  early  messages  which  were  delivered  to  our  fathers.  It  is  also
looked  on  as  one  specific  mark  of  New  Testament  teaching,  that  the  promises  of  God
now  lie  mainly  in  the  direction  of  spiritual  good ;  and  so  much  has  this  aspect  of  things
come  in  our  days  to  be  looked  at,  that  it  is  by  no  means  unlikely  that  we  may  he  in
danger  of  carrying  our  views  thereon  to  such  an  extreme  as  to  regard  temporal  comforts
as  no  mark  at  all  of  Divine  approval.  It  is  well  worth  our  while,  therefore,  to  look
into  this  matter,  to  see  if  we  can  so  formulate  the  teaching  of  God's  Word  thiereon  as  to
show  the  harmony  between  it  and  the  actual  facts  of  life  on  this  question:  How  far
may  abundance  of  temporal  good  and  freedom  from  sickness  b«  looked  at  as  a  proof  of


140  THE  BOOK  OP  DEtJTEEONOMY.  [ch.  vn.  t— 26,


Divine  fa\our?    We  shall  regard  the  actual  history  before  our  eye  as  at  once  a  basis  fu'-,
and  an  illustration  of,  our  remarks.

I.  God  had   in  great  mercy  removed  Israel  from  Egyft,  which  wab  not

ONLY   THE   SEAT    OP    POLITICAL    OPPKESSION,    AND    A    REGION    OF    FOUL    IDOLATRY,   BUT

ALSO  A  LOCUS  AND  FOCUS  OF  MANY  PESTILENTIAL  DISEASES.  (See  Mr.  Lane's  '  Modem
Egyptians ; '  the  art. '  Egypt '  in  '  Biicyc.  Brit. ; '  and  in  Smith  and  Kitto's  Dictionaries
of  the  Bible.)  Probably  the  land  of  Goshen  might  be  a  healthier  district  than  the
legion  of  the  city  itself;  still  it  is  extremely  questionable  whether  such  a  race  as  Israel
was  designed  to  be,  could,  even  physically,  have  been  with  any  certainty  developed  in
Kgypt  itself.  It  is  no  mpan  mercy  to  have  our  earthly  lot  cast  in  a  healthy  locality.
It  is  not  possible,  indeed,  to  escape  temptations  from  without  or  from  within,  go  where
we  may,  but  it  is  certain  that  (ccet.  par.)  it  is  much  easier  to  resist  evil  and  to  cultivate  .
virtue  where  climate  and  atmosphere  tend  to  promote  bodily  vigour.  The  history  of
the  world  affords  proof  enough  that  climatic  influences  will  not  do  everything  for  man  ;
hut  that  is  no  reason  for  underrating  their  value,  nor  for  losing  sight  of  the  mercy
where  "  the  lines  are  fallen  to  us  in  "  healthful  and  health-giving  places.

II.  Though  free  from  liability  to  Egyptian  disease,  Israel's  healthfulness
AND  weal  would  DEPEND  ON  OBEDIENCE  TO  God's  Law.  No  land  cau  give  us  any
immunity  from  the  consequences  of  breaking  law,  however  life-giving  its  breezes.
God's  physical  and  moral  laws  are  interlaced  and  intertwined.  Obedience  or  dis-
obedience to  either  may  have  its  full  effect  in  its  own  direction.  Obedience  or  dis-
obedience to  both  will  have  its  complicated  effects  in  both  directions.  Many  speak  of
law  as  if  it  acted  without  God ;  and,  maybe,  some  think  of  God  as  if  he  acted  without
law.  We  need  not  commit  either  mistake.  Let  us  carefully  avoid  both.  Let  us
reverence  every  law  of  God,  physical  or  moral,  because  it  is  his ;  and  let  it  be  our  study
to  understand  them  in  every  department  in  which  they  are  presented  to  us.  Mr.
Binuey  once  made  the  startling  statement,  that,  "  barring  accidents,  a  man  can  live
pretty  much  as  long  as  he  pleases ! "  By  which  he  meant,  of  course,  that  there  are
certain  Divine  laws  and  rules,  obedience  to  which  tends  to  the  preservation  of  health,
and  consequently  to  the  prolongation  of  life.  And,  if  these  laws  are  neglected,  we  may
create  disease,  affliction,  and  trouble  for  ourselves,  and  breed  even  death,  however
healthful  the  locality  in  which  we  dwell.  Hence  it  is  not  surprising  to  find  in  this
paragraph  another  principle  indicated.

III.  Supposing  the  people  to  be  obedient  to  God's  Law,  health  and  weal
would  follow  by  way  of  NAT  oral  CONSEQUENCE.  The  Original  (ver.  12),  by  a
peculiar  Hebrew  idiom,  shows  this.  "  And  (it)  shall  be  (the)  heel,"  i.e.  the  end,  and
so  the  consequence.  Whatever  may  be  the  kind  of  weal  desired,  the  laws  of  Ghsd  in
that  direction  should  be  studied,  understood,  and  followed.  Whether  in  the  regula-
tion of  the  production  or  sustentation  of  life ;  in  agricultural  pursuits ;  in  the  spheres
of  capital  and  labour,  and  their  mutual  relations ;  in  the  creation,  distribution,  increase,
and  expenditure  of  wealth ;  in  the  higher  region  of  the  cultivation  of  the  national  and
social  virtues  of  truth  and  goodness ;  in  the  still  higher  region  of  family  piety ;  or  in
the  highest  region  of  all,  even  that  of  personal  love  and  devotion  to  God,  the  old  words
will  be  proved  true,  "  Them  that  honour  me,  I  will  honour."  No  doubt  we  are  often
meeting  with  cases  which  seem  anomalous;  they  accord  with  no  known  rule  whatever.
But  we  shall  find  that  we  do  not  know  the  whole  of  such  cases,  nor  even  enough  of
them  to  enable  us  to  judge  concerning  them.  Till  we  know  more  we  must  suspend
judgment.  No  perplexities  of  this  sort  give  any  warrant  for  disturbing  first  principles.
In  any  region  in  which  God  has  laws  we  may  have  duties ;  and  it  is  a  very  partial  and
unhealthy  piety  which  would  underrate  intelligent  action  in  any  department.  In
whatever  department  there  is  neglect,  in  such  we  may  expect  failure.  And  where
there  is  obedience,  there  will  be  the  reward.

IV.  Though  the  rewabd  may  come  in  the  way  op  natuSal  consequence,  yet
NONE  THE  LESS  IS  IT  God's  BLESSING.  The  result  is  from  him,  because  the  Law  i»
from  him.  Nor  is  it  one  whit  the  less  from  God,  if  we  are  able  to  trace  every  step  ot
the  coming  of  a  blessing.  A  man's  work  is  not  less  his  because  he  does  it  somehow.
Nor  is  it  attributed  the  less  to  him  because  it  is  known  how  he  did  it.  Why  should
men  be  less  reasonable  in  recognizing  God's  work,  when  the  laws  of  the  working  are
manifest  to  us  ?    "  The  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich,"  is  one  truth ;  "  the  blessing


CH.  vn.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMT.  141

of  the  Lord,  it  maketh  rich,"  is  another.   We  may  ignore  neither,  but  should  revArently
admit  and  act  on  both.

V.  On  what  a  fbail  condition,  howevbb,  was  Isbabl's  national  weal  bus-
fended!  "If  ye  hearken  to  these  judgments,"  etc.  The  laws  were  right,  kind,
benevolent.  The  land  was  beautiful,  fertile,  healthful.  All  that  was  wanted  was
obedient  people.  Israel  needed  as  much  to  be  delivered  from  themselves  as  to  be
rescued  from  the  Egyptians.  And,  in  fact,  there  was  among  them  a  redeeming  ami
sanctifying  work,  carried  on  through  God's  Spirit,  though  it  is  not  named  in  this
paragraph ;  nor  was  it  as  fully  revealed  as  now,  how,  in  his  infinite  grace,  our  God
created  in  his  people  the  obedience  which,  in  his  Law,  he  commands.  "  The  righteous-
ness of  the  Law  is  fulfilled  in  those  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit."
The  Law  given  to  Israel  was  a  child-guide  with  a  view  to  Christ.  The  first  covenant
proved  brittle  in  their  hands,  and  so  they  learned  the  need  of  another,  which  should  l.e
for  ever  safe  in  God's  hands.  The  first  says,  "  Do  this,  and  live."  The  second,  "  Live,
and  you  will  do  this."  And  even  now,  putting  the  matter  generally,  we  may  say  Gud
governs  nations,  as  nations,  _ by  the  first  covenant.  He  governs  his  own  believinz
people  by  the  second.  Hence,  in  dealing  with  men  and  nations,  the  Christian  preacher
has  ever  to  expound  and  enforce  the  everlasting  laws  of  righteousness,  and  by  revealing
men's  failure  therein  to  convict  of  sin ;  while  in  building  up  the  Church  he  has  to  show
the  glory  of  the  Holy  Ghost  as  the  Creator  and  Sustainer  of  spiritual  power.

Vers.  17 — 25. — An  anxious  question,  or  dreading  difficulties.  In  this  paragraph
there  are  some  verses  which  are  in  the  main  a  repetition  of  the  enforcement  of  the
policy  of  separation  and  extrusion  which  Israel  was  to  adopt  towards  the  Oanaanites.
But  there  is  one  distinctive  feature  in  it  which  presents  several  points  altogether  new,
the  historical  side  of  which  we  may  first  look  at,  that  we  may  there  see  how  peculiarly
full  this  passage  is  of  bright  and  gladsome  teaching  for  us.

Here  is  a  question  (ver.  18)  which  Israel  would  not  be  unlikely  to  ask,  at  least
occasionally.  Doubtless,  just  at  the  time  when  they  were  in  the  flush  of  joy  at  the
destruction  of  Pharaoh  and  his  hosts,  or  when  they  had  experienced  some  great  deliver-
ance from  pressing  want,  their  hearts  would  be  brave  and  strong.  But,  like  some
others  since  have  been,  they  were  largely  the  creatures  of  circumstance.  Now  up,  now
down.  Now  so  elated  that  they  think  they  can  get  through  anything,  now  so  de-
pressed that  they  dread  everything.  The  time  would  come  when  in  view  of  the
possible  struggles  which  the  possession  of  Canaan  might  involve,  many  an  Israelite
would  say,  "  These  nations  are  mightier  than  I ;  how  can  I  dispossess  them  ?  "  and  they
must  have  been  more  than  human  if  the  heart  did  not  now  and  then  give  way.  For
there  were  seven  nations  to  supplant;  and  over  and  above  the  numerical  force  against
which  Israel  would  have  to  contend,  there  would  be  the  fact  that  they  were  strange  rs
to  the  land ;  they  had  been  kept  in  serfdom ;  they  were  unskilled  in  the  art  and
practice  of  war ;  so  that,  on  the  human  side,  the  advantage  was  very  greatly  with  the
Canaanites,  while  Israel  incurred  a  very  serious  risk.  Now,  though  Jehovah  was  very
wroth  with  the  people  when  in  their  guilty  unbelief  they  proposed  to  turn  back  at  the
evil  report  of  the  spies,  he  sees  a  great  difference  between  a  deeply  rooted  distrust,
and  an  occasional  cloud  that  may  shade  the  spirit ;  and  while  in  his  holy  wrath  he
condemns  the  first,  in  his  tender  compassion  he  anticipates  and  guards  against  the
second.  Hence,  from  vers.  18  to  24,  we  have  the  cheering  voice  of  the  great  lawgiver,
grandly  uttering,  in  his  hundred  and  twentieth  yrar,  words  to  empower  the  heart,  and
showing  Israel,  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  how  much  more  there  is  to  animate
them  than  there  can  possibly  be  to  discourage  and  depress.  He  (1)  reminds  them  no
fewer  than  eight  times  of  the  Name  of  the  Lord  their  God ;  (2)  bids  them  look  back
to  past  miracles  and  wonders,  and  to  see  in  them  pledges  of  future  help ;  (3)  shows
them  how  the  providential  action  of  God,  which  was  for  them,  would  be  against  their
foes ;  (4)  assures  them  that  God  would  be  among  them  as  an  ever-present  Helper  and
Friend ;  and  (5)  points  out  that,  though  the  process  of  driving  out  the  Canaanites  might
be  slow,  yet  if  it  were  done  more  rapidly,  it  would  be  attended  with  great  peril  from
other  and  unexpected  quarters ;  that  bo^  tribes  of  men  and  herds  of  beasts  would  be
kept  in  abeyance  for  their  sakes ;  so  that  though  they  were  led  by  a  tedious  route,  it
would  be  the  safest  way !     Now,  surely  we  ought  not  to  pass  over  a  passage  so  full  of


141  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTBEONOMY.  [ch.  vn.  1—26,

interest  and  instruction  for  our  everyday  life  as  this,  presenting  to  us,  as  it  does,  two
distinct  lines  of  tliouglit.

I.  The  difficulties  op  life  as  anxiously  dreaded  by  us.  "  These  natioiis
are  more  than  I ;  how  can  I  dispossess  them  ? "  These  Israelites  were  not  the
only  people  who  have  cast  glances  ahead,  and  who,  foreseeing,  as  they  thought,  diffi-
culties in  the  distance,  have  exclaimed,  "  How  shall  we  get  through  them  ?"  We  do
not  refer  now  to  such  as  have  no  living,  faith  in  God,  and  who  are  perpetually  giving
way  to  dark  and  sinful  unbelief;  nor  have  we  mainly  in  view  those  who  have  never
yet  been  led  out  of  "  the  house  of  bondage."  But,  keeping  as  closely  as  we  can  to  the
cases  suggested  by  the  paragraph,  we  refer  to  those  who,  through  mercy,  know  what
a  great  deliverance  has  been  wrought  for  man  in  Christ ;  to  whom  that  redemption  has
become  a  living  power  through  the  energy  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  who  yet,  notwith-
standing all,  have  their  moments  of  despondency,  when  looking  or  trying  to  look  far
ahead, — they  see  innumerable  obstructions  confronting  them,  and  ask  in  anxious  sad-
ness, "How  can  we  meet  them  all?"  This  main  inquiry  may  take  one  or  more  of  the
following  forms  :  1.  The  special  ends  and  aims  even  of  my  earthly  life ;  how  can  I
accomplish  them?  2.  The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  my  much-loved  work  for  Christ;
how  can  I  overcome  them  ?  3.  The  hardships  to  be  met  in  running  the  Christian  race ;
how  can  I  encounter  them  ?  4.  The  many  hindrances  which  oppose  themselves  to  the
advance  of  the  cause  of  God ;  how  can  the  Church  overcome  them  ?  5.  All  the  foes,
without  and  within,  which  threaten  the  possession  of  Canaan  ;  how  can  we  vanquish
them  ?  Say,  is  there  to  be  found  any  believer  in  whose  spirit  such  questions  as  these
do  not  now  and  then  arise,  and  who  does  not  occasionally  shiver  from  the  chill  of  a
doubting  forecast  ?    Therefore  let  us  see  in  this  passage —

n.  The  difficulties  of  life  graciously  anticipated  and  providbd  fob  ft
GtOD.  The  following  points  will  be  found,  explicitly  or  implicitly,  in  the  paragraph :,
1.  "  The  Lord  thy  God."  That  Name  is  a  guarantee  of  all  you  want  by  the  way.
"  Greater  is  he  that  is  for  you  than  all  they  which  can  be  against  you."  There  is
more  meaning  in  tliat  one  Name  than  in  all  other  names  besides.  "  If  God  be  for  us,
who  can  be  against  us?"  2.  God  will  go  before  you  to  clear  the  way  (vsr.  20).  All  nature
waits  on  him.  Fire,  thunder,  lightning,  hail ;  flies,  worms,  locusts,  hornets;  ay,  men,
devils,  angels,  must  do  his  work  when  he  calls.  3.  God  will  be  with  you,  to  empower
you  in  the  way  (ver.  21).  If  God  is  not  on  our  side,  there  is  but  weakness,  whatever
the  seeming  power.  If  God  is  on  our  side,  there  is  power,  whatever  the  seeming  weak-
ness. 4.  God  will  choose  his  own  best  methods  of  helping  you  in  the  way  (ver.  22).
"  Little  by  little."  A  more  rapid  clearance  would  have-  brought  other  dangers.  God
"  gently  clears  our  way."  5.  God's  past  deliverances  are  pledges  that  he  will  not  for-
sake you  by  the  way  (vers.  18,  19 ;  see  Fs.  Ixiii.  7 ;  Bom.  viii.  32 ;  v.  10).  6.  It  is
one  of  "  the  secrets  of  the  Lord,"  to  cause  us  to  meet  and  grapple  with  things  and
beings  mightier  than  we  are,  that  we  may  cease  to  rely  on  ourselves,  and  be  flung
upon  him,  the  Almighty  One,  for  strength.  The  tendency  to  self-trust  and  self-lauda-
tion is  very  strong  (see  ch.  viii.  17, 18).  Study  the  history  of  Gideon,  and  his  band  of
three  hundred  men.  This  education  in  trust  is  also  an  education  in  holiness.  We
have,  by  meeting  difficulties  which  are  beyond  us,  to  learn  bow  much  we  want  God.
And  yet  God  will  not  be  with  us  except  as  we  are  loyal  to  him  (see  Josh.  vii.).  Ah !
it  is  by  these  difficulties  in  life,  by  our  manner  of  meeting  them,  and  by  God's  dealing
with  us  under  them,  that  we  are  to  be  educated  for  eternity  I  Oh  !  if  all  were  smooth,
if  we  bad  no  complications  to  meet,  no  trials  to  bear,  how  might  we  go  on  drifting
down  the  stream,  slumberously  calm,  dangerously  secure,  till  we  awoke,  perhaps,  too
late,  to  find  ourselves  a  wreck  and  a  ruin!  It  is  by  these  breaks  in  our  peace,  by  these
cares  and  hard  struggles,  which  fling  us  on  our  God,  that  we  are  taught  how  much  we
want  him,  and  how  ill  we  could  do  without  him  !  On  the  journey  of  life  we  have
all  entered,  and  the  supreme  question  for  us  is  not,  "  Will  it  be  smooth  or  rough  ? "
but  "  How  will  it  end  ?  "

HOMILIES  BT  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1—11. — IsraePs  iconodastie  mission.    Material  idolatry  is  the  great  peril  of
humanity.     To  what  corruption  and  misery  such  idolatry  leads,  we  in  Christianized


CH.  vu.  1— 26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMY.  148

England  can  scarcely  conceive.  What  the  history  of  our  world  would  have  been  if
that  hotbed  of  Canaanite  corruption  had  continued,  it  would  be  difficult  to  imagine.
Many  methods  were  open  to  God  by  which  he  might  arrest  that  plague  of  vice ;  out  of
them  all,  his  wiiidom  selected  this,  viz.  to  employ  the  Hebrews  ag  his  ministers  of
destruction.

I.  Consider  men  as  elected  by  God  to  office  and  to  service.  We  may  safely
suppose  that  every  nation  fulfils  some  purpose  foreseen  by  God — perhaps  appointed
thereto  by  him.  Possibly  every  man,  though  he  may  not  rise  to  the  realization  of
God's  highest  ideal,  yet  may  fulfil  some  inferior  purpose  of  God.  The  Hebrews  had  a
very  special  honour  conferred  on  them.  They  were  chosen  unto  holiness,  chosen  to  be
the  ministers  of  God's  righteousness.  The  glory  was  eminent,  and  the  Jews  failed
to  reach  it.  The  Most  High  God  condescended  to  enter  into  closest  alliance  with  Israel,
deigned  to  be  called  their  God,  and  took  their  interests  into  his  care.  So  long  as  they
kept  his  commandments,  he  kept  his  covenant.  His  faithfulness  was  an  infinite
quantity,  but  it  was  conditioned  by  Israel's  obedience.  No  evidence  was  lacking  to
Israel  touching  the  friendly  protection  and  help  of  Jehovah.  Their  loyalty  as  tuhjecti
was  met  cordially  by  his  favour  as  Sovereign.  Their  admitted  weakness  was  met  by
the  Divine  strength.  Their  poor,  shallow  love  was  met  and  recompensed  by  his  rich
affection.

II.  The  grounds  of  God's  choice.  1.  This  is  declared  negatively.  It  was  not  on
the  ground  of  their  numbers  or  their  strength.  That  strength  and  magnitude  of  the
nation  were  the  effect  of  God's  choice,  not  its  cause.  They  were  not  chosen  because  of
superior  holiness,  bjit  with  a  view  to  make  them  holy.  Some  reason  there  is  for  God's
choice,  but  that  reason  is  not  often  revealed.  Possibly  it  is  too  recondite  for  man's
understanding,  or  the  further  pursuit  of  the  inquiry  might  divert  him  from  practical
obedience.  2.  It  is  stated  positively  that  this  choice  was  the  outcome  of  love.  There
must  have  been  the  potency,  perhaps  the  promise,  of  good  in  the  Hebrews,  in  oider  to
attract  the  love  of  God.  If  there  was  no  positive  wickedness,  God  would  delight  in
them  as  the  product  of  his  own  skill.  His  gracious  dealings  hitherto  had  been  in
respect  of  the  oath  made  to  their  fathers.  God's  great  love  to  Abraham  had  perpetuated
itself  in  his  seed.  Who  can  measure  what  a  life  of  blessing  each  one  of  us  may  com-
municate to  generations  yet  unborn  ?    Divine  grace  in  us  is  not  terminal

III.  The  design  of  God's  ohoice^kjeneral  and  spbciai..  The  general  design  was
holy  character.  Choice  to  ofiice  and  to  honour  depended  on  attainment  of  character.
EMness  is  the  highest  perfection  of  man,  therefore  the  highest  design  of  God.  Holiness
is  a  far  higher  acquisition  than  wisdom  or  strength.  The  seven  nations  of  Canaan  were
greater  and  mightier  than  Israel,  yet  those  nations  fell  before  the  holy  people.  Purity
shall  eventually  displace  power.  Bight  is  genuine  might.  Holiness  has,  by  Divine
appointment,  an  everlasting  tenure.  2'he  design  of  God^s  choice  of  Israel  was  also
special,  viz.  to  overturn  idolatry.  The  general  vocation  included  the  special.  To  be
holy  would  necessitate  conflict  with  sin.  Light  must  contend  with  darkness.  Oppo-
site principles  must  contend  for  the  mastery.  The  holiej'  we  become,  the  more  resolute
will  be  our  battle  with  idolatry.  We  shall  feel  towards  it,  and  act  towards  it,  as  God
does.  For  us  to  live  (if  we  be  Qoi's  consecrated  sons),  and  for  us  to  oppose  idolatry,
is  identical.     "  No  peace  with  sin  "  is  our  loyal  motto.

IV.  The  realized  results  of  the  Divine  choice.  Already  the  Hebrews  had
obtained  a  signalt  riumph  over  the  Egyptians,  as  the  proof  of  God's  gracious  intentions
towards  them.  That  triumph  was  singular,  surprising,  and  eomi>lete.  Be,  who  could
secure  such  a  triumph  for  Israel,  could  give  them  easy  conquest  over  any  adversary.
They  knew  how  to  touch  the  secret  springs  of  success.  The  pathway  to  renown  was
open.  There  was  scarcely  room  for  a  doubtful  issue,  for  from  a  greater  foe  God  had
already  delivered  them.

V.  The  honour  conveyed  in  this  choice,  viz.  to  be  co-workers  with  God.  God
would  cast  out  the  seven  nations  of  Canaanites,  therefore  the  Hebrews  must  smite
them.  God  would  deliver  them  up,  therefore  Israel  was  to  destroy  them.  In  every
step  they  were  to  be  coadjutors  with  God.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  the  Canaanites
were  passively  slaughtered.  In  every  case  they  provoked  severity  of  treatment  So
completely  had  the  idolaters  identified  themselves  with  idolatry,  that,  to  destroy  the
letter,  Isj-^el  had  to  destroy  the  former.     When  God,  the  Great  Proprietor  of  all,


144  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  vo.  1—26,

imposes  a  command  upon  us,  however  repulsive  to  our  own  feeling,  it  would  be  flagrant
disloyalty  on  our  part,  yea,  gross  sin,  to  disobey.  Punishment  by  the  sword  cannot  be
a  more  unrighteous  act  than  punishment  by  cholera  or  by  plague ;  and  if  men  admit
the  justice  of  the  one,  they  should  also  of  the  other.  Human  pity  must  sometimes  be
kept  in  abeyance.

VI.  God's  designs,  if  not  followed,  visit  men  with  destruction.  The  alterna-
tive of  not  executing  God's  high  commission  was  appalling.  If  any  false  sentimentf
of  pity  diverted  them  from  the  plain  path  of  duty,  the  Helirews  would  have  become
partakers  of  idolaters'  sins.  Any  concession  or  compromise  with  the  Canaanites  would
be  (and  in  fact  tvas)  fatal  to  themselves.  Can  one  touch  pitch  and  not  be  defiled  ?
The  slightest  connivance  with  the  abomination  would  be  a  moral  poison.  They  too
would  be  accursed.  For  God  will  not  endure  to  be  trifled  with.  To  his  friends  he  is
infinitely  gracious,  and  blesses,  for  their  sakes,  their  posterity ;  but  his  foes  he  repayetb
to  their  face.  We  have  to  make  our  choice  between  complete  devotement  to  God'i
cause  and  complete  destruction. — D.

Vers.  12 — 26. — Seward  in  proportion  to  arduous  terviee.  The  enterprise  upon  whici
the  Jews  were  entering  was  one  of  prodigious  difficulty.  They  had  to  contend  at  the
same  time  with  stalwart  human  foes,  and  with  the  internal  foes  of  evil  lust.  Here  wa^
it  splendid  field  for  eternal  renown.  In  proportion  to  the  difficulty  of  the  enterpris*
would  be  the  glory  of  success.

I.  Observe  the  DiscouBAaiNa  aspects  of  the  undertakino.  1.  Their  advertariet
were  more  numerous  than  they.  The  adhesion  of  numbers  to  a  particular  side  naturally
excites  enthusiasm.  Yet,  in  war,  unless  order  and  discipline  be  maintained,  mere
numbers  have  contributed  to  defeat.  2.  The  Canaanites  were  actually  in  possession.
They  could,  therefore,  chodse  their  military  positions,  and  felt  that  they  were  fighting
for  their  altars  and  their  homes.  3.  The  Hebrews  were  the  subjects  of  internal  fears.
Their  fathers  had  actually  refused  to  fls;ht  with  the  giant  races  of  Canaan,  and  had
turned  back  again  into  the  desert.  The  habit  of  fearless  courage  was  not  suddenly
engendered :  it  was  a  growth.  4.  The  Hebrews  had  also  a  lingering  lust  for  the  costly
things  devoted  to  idolatry.  To  suppress  their  own  concupiscence  was  as  arduous  as  to
withstand  the  Amorites.  Hence,  on  many  occasions,  their  hearts  counselled  compro-
mise and  alliance.  5.  T?iey  could  anticipate  only  tardy  results.  If  there  had  been
the  pros]iect  of  swift  progress  of  triumph — the  rapid  march  from  victory  to  victory—
they  could  have  braced  themselves  up  for  a  brief  campaign.  But  they  knew  that  slow
processes  of  siege,  with  its  privations  and  exposures,  were  essential.  God  had  fore-
warned them  that  he  would  not  drive  out  the  heathen  suddenly,  lest  other  evils  should
ensue.  They  had  to  contend  with  their  own  impatience.  6.  The  necessity  for  extermi-
nation added  to  the  difficulty  of  the  war.  If,  when  the  Canaanites  had  suffered  defeat
in  two  or  three  pitched  battles,  the  Hebrews  had  been  permitted  to  accept  a  surrender
and  make  tliem  tributaries,  their  task  had  been  comparatively  easy.  But  the  command  -
of  Jehovah  was  unmistakable :  Israel  was  bound  to  destroy  their  foes,  "  with  a
mighty  destruction,"  till  they  were  consumed.  So  neither  can  we  have  peace  until
every  sin  within  us  is  completely  annihilated.

II.  Observe  the  encoueaotno  aspects  of  their  work.  1.  God's  immeasurabU
might.  The  visible  features  of  the  undertaking  were  depressing  enough;  but  faith
could  discover  an  invisible  Ally,  who  was  more  than  a  match  for  all  opposition.  If  we
can  only  realize  that  God  is  on  our  side,  we  shall  be  confident  of  victory.  2.  (Jod's
past  deliverances  should  assure  us  for  the  future.  What  an  unchanging  God  has  done
for  us,  he  can  and  will  do  again.  Omnipotence  is  never  exhausted.  It  is  impossible
for  God  to  be  inconsistent  with  himself.  3.  OocCs  plain  promises  of  help.  If  we  can
only  be  absolutely  sure  of  a  promise  from  God,  we  may  set  at  defiance  every  fear,  and
calmly  face  every  foe.  "  He  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie."  4.  Proofs  that  Ood  is
even  now  present.  "  The  Lord  thy  God  is  among  you."  If  we  would  only  rub  ofl
from  our  eyes  the  drowsiness  of  unbelief,  we  might  see  the  tokens  of  God's  presence  on
every  side — the  footprints  of  his  feet,  as  he  leads  our  way.  The  Good  Shepherd  always
goes  before  his  sheep.  5.  In  God^s  service  the  meaner  fwms  of  life  often  become
efficient  ailies.  The  locusts  have  been  commissioned  to  do  service  for  God.  In  Egypt,
flies  and  lice  formed  a  brigade  in  his  army.     So  now  also  wasps  and  hornets  were  sent


CM.  vn.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY,  i.46

out  as  sappers  and  miners  to  proparo  Jehovah's  way.    Let  no  insignificant  helper  be


III.  Thk  laboe  bewabds  of  paithpui.  sbkviob.  1.  The  rewards  were  hosed  on
Divine^  equity.  If  we  keep  his  precepts,  he  will  keep  his  covenant.  A  singular  thread
of  equity  runs  through  all  God's  dealings.  History  supplies  a  thousand  examples.
We  may  find  fresh  ones  daily  in  our  own  observation.  2.  The  rewards  are  various  and
an,.ple.  They  embrace  the  present  and  the  future.  To  be  the  conscious  object  of  God's
loie  is  a  rich  reward ;  and  the  smile  of  God  will  make  all  our  ways  to  prosper.  Largo
and  rapid  increase  haa  been,  from  the  Creation,  a  mark  of  Jehovah's  favour.  "  Be
&uitful,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth."  3.  The  rewards  are  distinctive.  Not
only  do  they  impart  a  large  measure  of  personal  enjoyment,  but  they  are  known  and
recognized  by  others  as  the  rewards  conferred  by  God.  They  make  men  conspicuous
among  their  fellows.  "  A  thousand  shall  fall  at  thy  side,  and  ten  thousand  at  thy  right
hand ;  but  it  shall  not  come  nigh  thee."  As  our  work  and.  warfare  are  spiritual,  so  are
our  rewards  spiritual  also.  Our  reward,  as  conquerors  over  sin,  is  manifold,  generous,
enduring,  satisfying.  Gtod  will  surely  distinguish  between  the  righteous  and  tho
vt-icked — between  him  that  serveth  him  well,  and  him  that  serveth  him  not.  In
honour,  they  shall  be  as  the  antipodes  asunder. — D.

Vers.  1—6. — Judgment  without  merey.    This  decree  Is  to  be  viewed —

I.  AB  ▲  JUST  JDDaMBNT  ON  PEOPLES  WHOSE  INIQUITIES   OBIED  FOE  VENGBANOB.      The

doomed  nations  had  been  long  borne  with  (Gen.  xv.  16).  Their  iniquities  were  of  a
kind  and  degree  of  enormity  which  imperatively  called  for  a  Divine  interposition  (Lev.
xviii.  27,  28;  ch.  ix.  4).  This  was  the  true  ground  of  God's  dealings  with  them,  and
furnishes  a  sufficient  answer  to  all  cavils.  The  destruction  of  the  comparatively
innocent  with  tlie  guilty  may  be  explained  in  part  by  the  existence  in  the  offspring  of
the  hereditary  evil  of  their  race.  How  often,  under  the  Divine  gcivernment,  do  we  see
illustrations  of  the  same  principle — the  temporal  consequences  of  transgression  over-
flowing on  those  related  to  the  transgressor]  The  lesson  taught  is  God's  inflexible
detennination  to  punish  eviL  There  can  be  no  ultimate  toleration  of  sin  in  God's
universe.  It  must  be  judged,  routed  out,  and  the  sinner  who  identifies  himself  with  it
destroyed.

II.  As   A  CLBAKINO   FROM  IDOLATRY   OF  THE  LAND  OF  God'S  ABODE.      Not  Only  COuld

the  practice  of  idolatry  not  be  endured,  but  even  its  unhallowed  monuments  must  not
he  permitted  to  remain,  polluting  with  their  presence  the  land  of  God's  habitation — the
peculiar  seat  of  his  majesty,  the  place  of  biS  holiness.  Every  trace  of  these  impure
worships  must  be  swept  away  (ver.  5).  The  lesson  taught  is  God's  haired  of  idolatry.
It  is  a  secondary  matter  that  the  gods  are  of  wood  and  stone,  and  the  worship  one  of
altars,  groves,  and  pillars.  There  is  the  formal  idolatry  of  heathenism,  and  there  is  the
less-avowed,  but  not  less  real,  idolatry  of  hearts  which  have  set  up  rival  objects  to
Crod  in  their  secret  places— which  have  substituted  the  creature,  in  some  form  of  it,
for  the  Creator.  The  forms  are  as  numerous  as  ever  were  the  idols  of  heathen  temples.
A  man  may  be  an  idolater  of  reason ;  he  may  worship  art ;  he  may  how  at  the  shrine
of  mammon  (Matt.  vi.  24 ;  Eph.  v.  5) ;  his  god  may  be  the  praise  of  men ;  he  may
fling  himself  to  be  crushed  before  the  worse  than  Juggernaut  car  of  fashion;  he
may  be  a  votary  of  lewdness.  The  worship  may  be  avowed,  or  hidden  away  in  secret
desires  and  imaginings.  It  may  be  rendered  in  the  most  diverse  places — in  the  labora-
tory, at  the  desk,  in  the  art  studio,  in  home  circles,  on  the  broad  stage  of  public  affairs,
in  the  saloons  of  gay  society.  The  real  point  of  importance  is  that  it  is  of  the
nature  of  idolatry,  and  that  God  abhors  it  and  declares  it  to  be  incompatible  with  his
residence  in  the  heart.     "  The  idols  he  shall  utterly  abolish  "  (Isa.  ii.  18).

III.  As  A  PROTECTION  TO  THE  ISRAELITES  THEMSELVES.  The  tolerated  presence  of
Idolatry  in  Canaan  would  have  been  to  the  Israelites  an  irresistible  temptation  (ver.  4).
We  are  taught :  1.  To  seek  our  friendships  and  alliances  elsewhere  than  among  the
ungodly.  2.  That  it  is  our  duty,  not  only  to  avoid  occasions  of  sin,  and  to  keep  as  far
out  of  harm's  way  as  possible,  but  to  labour  for  the  entire  removal  from  our  midst
of  what  experience  shows  to  be  a  deadly  snare  (Isa.  Ivii.  14).

Finally,  severe  as  these  commands  are,  we  see  reflected  in  them  the  three  principles
which,  under  widely  different  forms  of  manifestation,  are  to  this  hour  to  regulate  the

DEnTERONOMT.  I.


146  THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  vii.  1— 26,


relation  of  God's  servants  to  the  evil  of  the  world.  1.  No  toleration  of  it  (Matt.  v.
29,  30).  2.  No  communion  with  it  (2  Cor.  vi.  14 — 18).  3.  Unceasing  war  against  it
(2  Cot.  x.  4 ;  CoL  iii.  5).-^.  0.

Vers.  3,  4. — Marriage  in  the  Lord.  This  law,  forbidding  marriages  with  the  un-
godly, is  one  for  all  time.  The  apostle  revives  it  in  1  Cor.  vii.  39.  That  marriage
should  be  only  in  the  Lord  is  evident —

I.  Peom  the  true  idea  op  marriage.  Two  individuals  unite  their  lives,  and
enter  into  a  fellowship  the  most  intimate  possible — to  what  end  ?  Surely  that  their
uiitures  may  be  raised  to  greater  perfection,  and  that  they  may  be  better  enabled  to  attain
the  ends  of  their  existence.  This  implies  a  certain  harmony  of  disposition,  an  essential
accordance  in  the  views  taken  of  life  and  its  duties.  It  is  a  union,  as  one  has  said,  not
merely  between  two  creatures,  but  also  between  two  spirits.  But  what  communion,
it  may  be  asked,  can  exist  in  spiritual  respects  between  two  persons  severed  from  each
other  in  the  deepest  principles  of  their  lives  ?

II.  From  a  regard  to  the  Divinb  blessino.  Where  one  partner  is  irreligious,  the
blessing  cannot  rest  upon  the  home  in  the  same  degree  as  where  both  are  "heirs
together  of  the  grace  of  life  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  Believers  are  to  "  agree  "  as  touching  what
tilings  they  shall  ask  (Matt,  xviii.  19).  Variances  even  in  godly  households  result  in
prayers  beii^  "  hindered  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7).  How  much  sadder  the  case  of  a  home,  so-
called,  where  husband  and  wife  stand  so  far  apart  that  they  cannot  unite  in  prayer
at  alll  And  who  that  Values  God's  blessing  would  willingly  enter  into  a  relation
which  inevitably  stints  and  limits  it  ?

in.  From  the  danger  accruing  to  sptRiruAii  lite.  The  danger  is  not  imaginary
(I  Kings  xi.  3).  Where  spiritual  life  is  not  destroyed,  as  we  may  hope  that  often  it  is
not,  yet  nothing  but  harm  can  come  from  an  association  in  every  respect  adverse  to
it.  How  intolerable  to  a  spiritual  mind  to  endure  "  the  blight  of  all  sympathy,  to  be
dragged  down  to  earth,  and  forced  to  become  frivolous  and  commonplace ;  to  lose  all
zest  and  earnestness  in  life ;  to  have  heart  and  life  degraded  by  mean  and  perpetually
recurring  sources  of  disagreement "  (F.  W.  Robertson)  1  This  is  the  species  of  living  death
to  which  unequal  yoking  not  un&equently  leads.  The  effects  on  offspring  are  also  to
be  consic^ered.  Yet  such  marriages  are  rushed  into,  and,  in  the  prevalent  anxiety  to
make  marriage  the  stepping-stone  to  wealth  and  social  position,  seem  likely  to  become
increasingly  numerous.  Would  that  men  were  wise,  that  they  understood  these
things!— J.  0.

Vers.  6 — 9. — Beasons  for  nonHxmformity  to  the  world,  and  for  affgression  on  its  evil.
I.  The  holiness  or  our  calling.  (Ver.  6.)  The  believer  stands  to  God  in  the  rela-
tion described  in  this  verse.  He  is  one  chosen  from  the  unholy  mass  to  be  peculiarly
God's  property.  He  belongs  to  God  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit.  He  is  a  vessel  for  the
Master's  use.  His  every  power  is  to  be  consecrated.  What  higher  dignity  could  a
human  being  sustain  than  that  ?  But  the  obligations  are  coextensive  with  the  honour.
This  man  is,  in  virtue  of  his  holiness,  summoned  to  take  up  an  attitude  of  non-con-
formity to  the  world  (Rom.  xii.  2).  In  virtue  of  the  same  holiness,  he  is  bound  to
unite  with  others  in  a  sacred  crusade  against  its  evil.

II.  The  grace  op  our  election.  (Ver.  7.)  This  puts  another  powerful  weight  into
the  scale.  Standing  in  so  close  and  honourable  a  relation  to  God,  the  believer  is  bid
look  to  the  rock  whence  he  is  hewn,  and  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  he  is  digged.
Who  made  him  to  differ  ?  AVhence  this  mercy  shown  peculiarly  to  him  ?  We  need
not  press  texts  on  election  in  favour  of  any  special  theory.  Sufficient  that  every
believer  is  willing  to  confess,  as  regards  his  own  salvation,  that  "  it  is  not  of  him  tiuit
willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy  "  (Rom.  ix.  16).  An
elective  purpose  comes  to  light  in  his  spiritual  history  (Eph.  i.  4,  5).  When  tracing  his
salvation  to  its  source,  he  is  constrained  to  say,  "  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy,  for  his
great  love  wherewith  he  loved  us,  even  when  we  were  dead  in  sins,  hath  quickened  us
together  with  Christ"  (Eph.  ii.  4,  5).  All  this  implies  special  obligation  to  God's
service.

III.  The  might  op  ouk  redemption.  (Ver.  8.)  The  redemption  from  Egypt,  with
its  tragir  accompaniments  and  mighty  signs  and  wonders,  was  but  a  faint  type  of  the


CH.  vn.  1— 26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEBUNOMSf.  147

greater  deliverance  which  God  has  now  wrought  for  his  Israel  in  Christ.  We  are
entitled  to  put  the  greater  for  the  less,  and  to  plead  the  stronger  claims  which  the
redemption  from  sin  and  wrath  estahlishes  on  the  redeemed  soul.  The  cost  of  our
salvation  is  Christ's  blood.  What  return  can  we  conceivably  make  exhaustive  of  our
obligations  to  Father  and  Son  for  so  great  a  sacrifice  ? — J.  0.

Vers.  9, 10.— Lessons  from  history.  I.  A  lesson  in  God's  ooodnbss.  In  putting
Israel  into  possession  of  the  land  of  promise  after  so  long  a  period  of  waiting,  and  at
the  cost  of  so  much  miracle,  God  gave  the  nation  an  irrefragable  proof  of  his  covenant-
keeping  faithfulness.  How  many  difficulties,  to  the  human  eye,  stood  in  the  way  of
the  fulfilment  of  that  promise!  And  by  what  nica  adjustments  of  providence,  and
what  a  subtly  linked  succession  of  events,  was  the  fulfilment  at  length  brought  about !
Israel  had  to  be  taken  down  to  Biypt,  there  preserverl  till  it  grew  and  multiplied,
passed  through  the  iron  furnace  of  affliction,  brought  up  again  with  a  mighty  hand  and
a  stretched-out  arm,  conducted  and  provided  for  in  the  wilderness,  legislated  for  and
organized,  strengthened  to  overcome  its  enemies.  At  what  an  expenditure  of  wisdom
and  power  was  all  this  accomplished !  And  how  much  forbearance  and  tenderness  had
to  be  shown  to  the  people  themselves  in  the  course  of  their  rebellious  history  1  Faith-
fulness was  thus  emblazoned  on  every  part  of  God's  dealings  with  them  Another  and
greater  promise,  which  hung  still  longer  in  suspension,  has  been  fulfilled  in  the  coming
of  that  "  Seed  "  in  whom  already  all  families  of  the  earth  are  beginning  to  be  blessed
(Gen.  xxii.  18;  Gal.  iil.  16).  This  fulfilment,  above  all,  demonstrates  tl^t  Jehovah,  he
is  Ch)d,  the  faithful  G«d,  keeping  covenant  with  them  that  love  him.

II.  A  LESSON  IN  God's  SEVERITY.  (Ver.  10.)  That  had  been  taught  to  Israel  by
many  passages  in  their  own  history.  They  had  seen  God's  judgments  upon  Pharaoh.
They  Lad  experienced  his  severity  in  the  plagues,  ete.,  which  had  swept  their  own
camp  in  punishment  of  disobedience.  They  had  witnessed  a  whole  generation  turned
back  to  perish  in  the  wilderness.  The  lesson  was  now  to  be  taught  them  by  the
destruction  of  these  wicked  nations.  And  as  if  to  burn  it  more  deeply,  and  for  ever,
into  their  minds  and  consciences,  the  sword  of  execution  was  put  into  their  own  hands.
The  two  lessons  need  to  be  read  together.  God's  severity,  divorced  from  the  discoveries
of  his  grace,  might  appear  to  the  on-looker  harsh  aiid  cruel,  whereas,  as  Bible  history
shows,  judgment  is  "his  strange  work"  (Isa.  xxviii.  21).  On  the  other  hand,  the
remembrance  of  his  severity  is  needed  to  prevent  the  abuse  of  his  goodness  (Bom.
xi.  22).— J.  0.

Vers.  12 — 16. — The  rewards  of  ohedienee.  If  Israel  fulfilled  Its  vocation,  in  keeping
itself  separate  from  the  idolatries  of  the  heathen,  and  in  destroying  them  from  the  land ;
if  further,  in  possession  of  the  land,  it  adhered  to  God's  commands,  God  would  make
his  blessing  rest  on  it  in  every  sphere  and  department  of  existence.

L  Tempobal  prosperity  is  a  legitimate  object  of  DEsntB.  Otherwise  it  could  not
be  named  as  part  of  the  blessing,  nor  could  the  hope  of  it  be  held  out  as  an  encourage-
ment to  the  obedient.  We  naturally  desire  to  see  our  affairs  prospering.  We  justly
rejoice  in  the  prosperity  of  our  nation.  We  are  glad  when  trade  is  brisk,  wages  good,
the  comforts  of  life  diffused  through  the  different  orders  of  society.  But :  1.  Prosperity
is  to  be  desired  only  in  subordination  to  higher  ends  (Matt.  v.  33).  2.  Only  in  so  far
as  it  is  good  for  us  (3  John  2).  3.  Not  in  excess  (Prov.  xxx.  8,  9).  If  God,  in  the
exercise  of  his  higher  wisdom,  withhold  prosperity  from  us,  the  loss  will  be  compensated
by  better  blessings  (Mark  x.  29,  30).

n.  Temporal  peospbritt,  in  buoh  modes  and  deqebes  as  God  sees  best,  is  an
EFFECT  OP  THE  DiviNE  BLBSSINO,  Godllness  has  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is  and  of
that  which  is  to  come  (1  Tim.  iv.  10).  It  naturally  tends  to  prosperity.  Eeligion
teaches  men  to  be  sober,  righteous,  and  godly  (Titus  ii.  12).  It  condemns  idleness,
waste,  dishonesty,  and  the  whole  series  of  vices  which  wreck  health,  squander  property,
and  destroy  confidence.  Where  religion  prevails,  men  will  be  industrious,  conscientious,
orderly,  and  reliable.  But,  in  addition  to  this  natural  tendency  of  religion  to  prosperity,
there  rests  on  the  good  man's  lot  what  is  distinctively  spoken  of  as  the  Divine  blessing.
This  will  mingle  itself  with  all  he  has  and  with  all  he  does.  It  gives  biro  favour  in
the  eyes  of  men  (Gen.  xxxix.  21).     It  opens  up  his  way  for  him  (.Ps.  xxxvii.  5),     It


148  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  vn.  1— 26.


protects  him  from  injury  (Vs.  xxxvii.  33,  39).  It  ovemiles  all  events  and  influences,
10  that  they  work  for  his  good.  This  is  forcibly  illustrated  in  the  text,  where  blessing
is  represented  as  descending  on  the  home,  on  the  products  of  the  land,  on  ilocks  and
herds,  on  the  bodily  life,  etc.  The  counterpart  of  the  blessing  is  the  curse  (ver.  15).
The  wicked  often  prosper,  but  it  is  prosperity  unblessed  and  unenduring. — J.  0.

Vera.  17 — 25. — Ood  for  us.  The  numbers,  strength,  and  fortified  security  of  the
seven  nations  made  the  conquest  of  Palestine  a  task  of  difficulty,  and  might  naturally
produce  a  disheartening  effect  on  the  invaders.

I.  A  NATUKAL  FEAB.  (Ver.  17.)  Like  disheartening  feelings  may  assnil  ourselves  in
presence  of  the  strong  spiritual  opposition  to  be  encountered  in  seeking  to  win  the  world
for  Christ.  Our  enemies  are  neither  weak  nor  few ;  we  will  do  well  not  to  underrate
them.  The  larger  part  of  the  globe  is  yet  unoccupied  by  Christianity.  Heathen
systems  are  in  possession,  supported  by  the  combined  influences  of  tradition,  custom,
prejudice,  and  superstition,  and  presenting  an  apparently  impregnable  front  to  the
thin  ranks  of  their  assailants.  At  home,  how  much  of  the  Christianity  is  merely
nominal !  and  how  much  of  it  is  corrupted  1  We  live  in  days  of  intense  worldliness.
The  sceptical  spirit,  likewise,  is  pronounced  and  active.  Brain  and  pen  power  of  the
highest  order  is  enlisted  in  its  service.  Unbelieving  science,  infidel  philosophy,
rationalism  in  the  Church.  The  press  is  a  tower  of  strength  to  anti-Chiistian  views  of
life  and  duty.  While,  at  the  other  end  of  the  social  scale,  the  multitudes  are  sunk
in  indifference  and  vice.  How  are  all  these  enemies  to  be  overcome  ?  May  we  not  fear
that,  work  as  we  will,  we  cannot  succeed?  The  fears  are  groundless;  but  they  are  not
without  their  use,  if  they  make  us  feel  that  the  conquest  of  the  world  is  not  to  be
achieved  without  much  hard  fighting.

II.  A  GEOUND  OF  ENCOURAGEMENT.  (Vers.  18 — 22.)  This  encouragement  resolves
itself  into  the  simple  truth  that  God  is  for  us.  He  is  mightier  than  our  enemies,  and  will
work  on  our  behalf  to  secure  their  overthrow.  1.  With  supernatural  power.  In  the
past  he  had  shown  "signs  and  wonder.s,"  and  had  brought  forth  his  people  with  a
mighty  hand  (vers.  18,  19).  The  same  power  would  help  them  still.  It  is  encouraging
to  recall  the  supernatural  strength  for  conquest  which  the  gospel  has  already  displayed.
Think  of  our  own  land  penetrated  by  a  faith  which  sprang  up  1800  years  ago  in
remote,  despised  Judaea,  with  churches  for  Christ's  worship  dotting  almost  every  street
of  every  city,  town,  village,  hamlet,  throughout  its  length  and  breadth  I  How  Utopian
would  such  a  work  of  conquest  have  seemed  at  the  beginning — a  dream  of  insanity.)
And  this  Divine  energy  for  conquest  inheres  in  the  gospel  to-day  as  truly  as  it  did  of
old.  2.  With  providential  aids  (veT.  20).  "Hornets" — types  of  secret,  providential  allies
working  under  God's  direction.  The  forces  of  providence  are  on  the  side  of  those  who
are  working  for  the  advancement  of  his  kingdom.  There  are  such  secret  allies  in  men's
own  hearts.  We  may  compnre  to  the  hornets  the  seovet  thoughts  and  feelings — the
stings  of  conscience,  guilty  fears,  feelings  of  dissatisfaction,  etc. — which,  operating
within,  drive  men  out  to  join  issue  with  the  Spirit  in  his  truth.  God  has  his  "  hornets  "
also  for  arousing  his  own  children  out  of  their  sloth  and  self-indulgence  and  forgetfulness
of  duty — sharp  trials,  vexations,  griefs,  etc.

III.  A  siETHOD  OF  CONQUEST.  "  Little  by  little  "  (ver.  22).  A  law  of  providence  and
grace.  Little  by  little  God  gives  a  man  conquest  over  the  evil  in  self,  and  his  nature
is  sanctified.  Little  by  little  tl)e  world  is  conquered  for  Christ.  The  reason  of  the  law
is  obvious.  There  is  no  advantage  in  having  more  than  can  be  rightly  used;  e.g.  a
man  who  has  more  money  than  he  can  turn  to  good  account,  who  has  a  larger  estate
than  he  can  manage,  who  reads  more  bonks  than  he  can  mentally  digest.  The  best
method  is  "little  by  little" — mastering,  consolidating,  using  what  we  have,  before
hasting  to  get  more.— -J.  0.

Vers.  25,  26. — TTie  cursed  thing.  The  Israelites  were  not  to  desire  the  silver  and  gold
on  the  graven  images.  They  were  not  to  take  it.  They  were  not  to  bring  it  into  God's
house.  They  were  to  detest  and  abhor  it,  to  count  it  an  abomination,  a  cursed  thing,
and  to  beware  lest,  by  lusting  after  it,  they  became  accursed  like  unto  it.  We  are
taught  a  lesson —

I.  Of  disinterestedness  in  God's  service.     No  motive  of  gain  was  to  be  allowed  to


OH.  vn.  1—26.]  THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  14«


mingle  with  tVieir  work.     Their  service  was  to  he  disinterested.    Under  the  cloak  of
religious  zeal  theie  was  to  he  no  gratification  of  covetousness.

II.  Of  AToiDiNa  OCCASIONS  OP  SIN.  The  gold  and  silver  of  the  idols  tended  to
ensnare.  There  would  he  a  temptation  to  a  superstitious  and  idolatrous  use  of  it
(Judg.  viii.  27).

III.  Op  rbpusino  gain  derived  fkom  immoral  sources.  The  Church  is  not
profited  hy  an  influx  of  the  money  of  the  worldling.  Still  less  are  the  gains  of  sin  tc
he  coveted  by  her:  money  derived  from  gambling,  immoral  speculation,  bubble
companies,  gin-palaces,  sale  of  irreligious  and  immoral  books,  etc.

IV.  Op  heabtt  detestation  op  evil.  The  gildings  of  vice  have  an  attraction  for
many  who  dislike  the  thing  itself.  But  vice  is  to  be  abhorred  in  its  gilded  forms,  aa
in  every  other.    "  Looking  begets  liking." — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Extermination  with  a  moral  purpote.  When  the  Israelites  were
to  cross  into  Canaan,  they  were  directed  to  determinate  the  seven  nations  they  would
find  there.  This  is  their  commission.  The  invasion  is  to  be  conducted  upon  this
principle.     And  here  let  us  notice —

I.  Nations,  like  iNDivmnALB,  mat  become  incorriqible.  There  can  be  no  doubt
that  sin  tends  to  a  final  and  incorrigible  condition  if  the  Divine  mercy  is  not  accepted
and  a:llowed  to  exercise  its  undermining  power.  These  nations  of  Canaan  were  mani-
festly in  this  hopeless,  utterly  ruined  state.  God  regarded  them  as  beyond  redemption,
and  their  continuance  would  only  prove  pestilential.

It  is  well  for  individuals,  as  well  as  nations,  to  realize  this  sad  possibility.

II.  God  has  evert  eight  to  remove  incorkiqibles  from  the  earth.  As  Creator,
he  has  given  them  every  advantage  and  chance.  But  the  deceitful  heart  has  spurned
admonition  and  mercy.  The  result  is  that  there  is  nothing  left  for  them  but  to  be  cut
off  righteously,  and  that  without  remedy.

But  the  propriety  of  extermination  should  ..be  determined  by  the  Lord  himself
(cf.  Dr.  Mozley's  ' Old  Testament  Lectures,'  No.  IV.,  on  '  Exterminating  Wars').

III.  The  Israelites  were  sent  into  Canaan  to  establish  the  true  worship  op
Gk)D.  They  were  not  to  be  ashamed  of  their  religion,  but  to  establish  it,  and  to  allow
nothing  to  interfere  with  it.  As  Abraham  had  entered  Canaan  centuries  before  as  the
promulgator  of  a  new  religion,  so  his  descendauts  were  to  enter  into  the  promised  land
with  the  view  of  establishing  the  religion  of  Abraham  in  spite  of  all  possible  opposition.
They  were  not  ordinary  but  religious  emigrants.

IV.  The  sparing  of  the  Canaanites  would  onlt  endanger  their  religious
faith.  Some  people  think  they  may  associate  with  irreligious  people,  and  even  marry
them,  in  the  hope  of  bringing  them  to  a  better  way  of  thinking.  The  plea  is  generally
one  got  up  in  the  interests  of  self-pleasing  instead  of  duty.  But  such  hopes  are  gene-
rally disappointed ;  and  the  Apostle  Paul  warns  us  distinctly  against  the  temptation
(2  Cor.  vi.  14).

Now,  the  Israelites  were  warned  against  making  any  covenant  with  the  Canaanites
or  showing  any  mercy  towards  them.  Association  would  only  lead  to  apostacy  on  the
part  of  Israel.  It  would  be  allowing  the  pestilence  to  propagate  itself.  The  alternative
for  Israel  was  "  Exterminate  these  incorrigible  sinners,  or  by  their  seductions  they  will
lead  you  on  to  your  destruction  at  the  hands  of  a  just  God  "  (ver.  4).

V.  Extermination  mat  consequentlt,  in  some  oases,  be  the  onlt  course  con-
sistent with  the  Divine  honour  and  the  interests  of  his  kingdom.  If  people  have
a  right  to  preserve  themselves  from  a  physical  pestilence,  have  they  not  an  equal  right
in  the  case  of  moral  pollutions?  Besides,  the  clear  direction  of  God  vindicates  the
whole  procedure  as  right  as  well  as  wise  (cf.  Jellett's  '  Moral  Difficulties  of  the  Old
Testament,'  p.  38 ;  also  Dr.  Arnold's  '  Sermons  on  Interpretation  of  Scripture,'  p.  31).
— R.  M.  E.

Vers.  6 — 8.— On  ihe  election  of  nations.  We  are  here  introduced  to  remarkable  words
touching  the  election  of,  or  we  might  say,  selection  of  the  Jews.  The  leading  principles
of  the  Divine  administration  are  here  set  before  us.  The  following  points  may  be
noticed : —

L  The  Jews  were  selected  not  on  account  of  ant  national  superioeitt.


150  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  LoH-'"i«  1-^26.

Hoses  telli  them  that,  numerically,  they  were  the  fewest  of  all  people.  It  wai  not
numerical  strength,  nor  national  advantages  of  any  kind,  which  induced  God  to  select
th«m.

II.  They  webe  SBiiEOTED  because  God  ohosb  to  set  his  lovb  tiPON  them.  ''  The
Lord  did  not  set  his  love  upon  you,  nor  choose  yoii,  because  ye  were  more  in  number
than  any  peopld ; . . .  but  because  the  Lord  loved  you."  It  was  sovereign  love  which  is  its
own  reason.  And,  in  the  last  resort,  it  is  to  this  we  must  come.  We  can  give  no
better  account  of  the  matter  than  that  God  chose  to  do  it.

III.  The  dblivebanob  fkom  Egypt  was  the  peoof  of  his  sovereign  love.  Hereby
he  kept  his  promise  made  to  their  fathers,  and  fulfilled  his  own  gracious  purpose.  The
series  of  judgments,  the  outcome  of  his  mighty  hand,  which  proved  how  infinitely
stronger  it  was  than  the  hand  of  Pharaoh,  while  severe  to  Egypt,  were  love-tokens
to  Israel.

IV.  The  choice  of  Israel  was  with  a  view  to  their  being  a  holt  people  anb  a
SPECIAL  people  UNTO  THE  LoRD.  Electing  love  extended  to  a  nation  or  a  people  is
really  a  Divine  investment.  The  result  is  the  holiness  and  consecration  of  the  people.
It  is  this  holiness,  this  sense  of  consecration,  which  proves  the  electing  love  of  Cfod.
And  this  is  all  the  more  intense  when  it  is  seen  clearly  that  God's  love  is  manifested,
not  on  the  ground  of  national  or  personal  merit,  but  as  a  matter  of  free  grace.

And,  doubtless,  the  Jews  proved  themselves  a  special  people,  although  far  from  %
perfect  people.  They  were  the  custodians  of  the  holy  oracles  for  ages.  They  showed,
and  they  still  show,  wonderful  linguistic  and  other  qualifications.  All  this,  let  ug
believe,  is  due  to  that  grace  and  Livine  development  through  which,  as  a  nation,  they
were  permitted  to  pass.

The  practical  application  of  this  subject  is  surely  this :  1.  To  receive  God's  mercy
under  an  abiding  sense  that  it  is  undeserved.  2.  To  cultivate  the  sense  of  obligation
to  God  for  his  undeserved  mercy,  which  it  is  intended  to  foster.  3.  And  to  realize  the
consecration  of  spirit  through  which  all  that  is  noble  in  human  life  comes.  God  saves
us  that  we  may  serve  him.  He  shows  us  his  loving-kindness  that  w»  may  become
through  it  "  a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works." — ^K.  M.  E,

Vers.  9 — 16. — The  Divine  vercusity.  Moses  here  speaks  of  the  Divine  faithfulness  to
those  that  love  him,  and  also  to  those  that  hate  him.  Those  who  love  him  will  have
his  mercy  unto  a  thousand  generations ;  those  who  hate  him  will  have  their  hatred
returned.    He  will  repay  such  to  their  face.

Let  us  look  at  the  Divine  veracity  in  the  two  aspects  of  blessing  and  of  judgment.

I.  God's  gratitude  fob  man's  love.  God  has  a  love  of  sovereignty,  as  we  have  just
seen,  which  has  no  reason  but  itself;  and  he  has  also  a  love  oi  gratitvide  for  love  shown
to  him.  It  is  of  this  Moses  here  speaks.  It  is  thus  expressed  elsewhere :  "  I  love  them
that  love  me."    And  here  notice —

1.  When  we  love  Qod  we  try  to  heep  his  commandments.  This  is  exactly  what  Christ
incarnate  Love,  claimed.  "  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments."  Love  is  the
spirit  in  which  Law  should  be  kept,  and  through  which  Law  becomes  blessedness.

2.  Obedience  secures  hlesning.  God  promised  Israel  certain  temporal  blessings;
increase  of  the  nation  and  fertility  of  soil  and  increase  of  then:  flocks  and  herds.  And,
in  the  rude  age  in  which  they  lived,  it  was  needful  to  encourage  them  by  such  very
sensible  signs.

This  is  not  so  needful  now.  The  blessing  comes  now  in  more  spiritual  ways,  but
still  it  comes  in  the  wake  of  obedience.  Answers  to  prayer  are  still  doubted  by  men
who  doubt  God's  existence  and  reign,  but  they  are  most  thoroughly  believed  in  by
believers.    The  blessing  conies  to  those  who  look  for  it.

3.  It  is  expected  to  characterize  generations.  For  this  is  the  greatest  blessing  of  all
when  the  succeeding  generation  grows  up  true  to  God.  It  is  this  form  of  the  Divine
faithfulness  which  is  most  sought— that  even  to  «  "thousand  generations"  they  may
remain  true  to  him.

II.  God's  righteous  wrath  at  man's  hatred.  Under  a  righteous  government,
hatred  should  have  its  retribution  just  as  well  as  love  its  reward.  So  is  it  with  God.
Men  may  hate  him,  and  when  he  repays  them  to  their  face  they  are  getting  only
their  due.


CH.  vin.  1—20.]


THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


151


,God  is  as  faithful  in  his  threateaings  as  in  his  promises.  Why  should  he  not  be  so  ?
And  his  hatred  can  have  but  one  issue — destruction!  How  needful,  then,  to  lay
down  the  arms  of  our  rebellion  I  If  our  hard  hearts  cherish  any  hatred  towards  him,
the  sooner  we  repent  of  this  the  better,  and  take  refuge  in  his  love.  He  waits  to  be
gracious;  but,  should  we  despise  his  mercy  and  still  do  him  the  injustice  to  hata  him,
we  must  prepare  for  encountering  his  righteous  wrath. — E.  M.  E.

Vers.  17 — 26. — Canaan  gradually  won.  The  winning  of  the  whole  land  seemed  a
great  task — too  great  for  sense  and  sight.  But  the  Divine  programmes,  though  com-
prehensive, are  taken  in  detail.  The  Israelites  are  to  win  the  country  little  by  little,
and  remove  the  people  gradually.  In  this  patient  work  they  may  expect  the  co-operation
of  God.

I.  The  work  bbfobe  us  beeus  of  OYERPOWERiNa  DIMENSIONS.  Must  we  win  a
victory  over  all  the  evil  within  us?  and  then  contemplate  a  vicstory  over  all  the  evil
around  us?  Both  problems  are  vast.  The  more  we  know  our  own  hearts,  the  greater
seems  the  extent  to  be  won.  The  more  wo  know  of  the  world  around  us,  the  more
appalling  seems  the  proposal  of  God.     It  is  a  great  work  we  are  asked  to  do  certainly.

II.  But  by-past  deliverances  op  God  abe  dttended  to  beinfobob  cub  faith.
Just  as  the  mighty  deliverance  from  Egypt  was  set  before  the  Israelites  to  encourage
them  in  their  invasion,  so  our  individual  conversion  should  reinforce  our  faith  in  the
power  of  QkA.  The  God  who  can  conquer  such  hearts  as  ours  can  surely  help  us  in
further  conquests.     We  hope  for  victory  because  of  victory  already  won.

III.  Victory  m  detail  is  better  than  victory  wholesale.  We  ima^ne  that
victory  at  once  over  all  internal  and  external  enemies  would  be  better  than  victory
covering  long  years  and  entering  into  vast  details.  But,  if  Israel  had  been  able  to
smite  ail  the  Canaanites  dead  at  a  blow,  the  beasts  of  the  field  would  have  so  overrun
the  land  that  it  would  have  been  reduced  to  wilderness,  instead  of  beiag  a  land  of
promise.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  overcome  the  Canaanites  gradually.  They  will
protect  the  inheritance  from  the  wild  beasts  till  the  heirs  arrive.

In  like  manner,  it  is  better —

1.  To  heat  our  sins  in  detail.  We  are  better  acquainted  with  our  own  nature  and
Gk)d's  grace  when  we  have  to  deal  with  our  sins  in  detail.  We  get  gradually  better
and  purer  and  more  humble.     This  is  better  than  a  leap  into  perfection  out  of  sin.

2.  It  is  better  to  win  the  world  in  detail.  God  is  not  going  to  give  the  earth  to  his
people  some  fine  morning,  and  save  us  the  trouble  of  winning  it.  It  is  better  for  xu  to
plod  on,  winning  country  after  country,  and  individual  after  individual,  and  the  whole
world  at  last.

3.  The  promised  land  is  to  be  made  a  holy  land.  The  Israelites  were  to  remove  the
Canaanites  and  their  abominable  modes  of  life  and  worship,  to  make  of  Palestine  a  holy
land.    Jerusalem — Elkoods — the  holy  city,  is  to  be  the  expression  of  the  Divine  idea.

Let  us  conform  our  hopes  to  God's  magnificent  designs,  believing  that  the  gradual  is
generally  the  best,  the  microscopic  work  the  most  beautiful  in  the  end. — B.  M.  E.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTBE  Vin.


PcBTHEB  Exhortation  to  Obedibnob,  bn-

FOBOBD  BY  A  EeVIEW  OP  GoD'S  DEALINGS

WITH  Israel  in  the  Wilderness.

Vers.  1 — 6. — That  they  might  be  induced
the  more  faithfully  to  observe  all  the  com-
mandments which  had  been  enjoined  upon
them  so  as  to  go  on  and  prosper,  they  are
called  to  remember  the  experiences  of  the
forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  when  God
guide!  them  anil  discipUned  them  for  their


good.  He  humbled  them  that  he  might
test  the  state  of  their  heart  and  affections
towards  him,  using  the  distress  and  priva-
tions to  which  they  were  subjeeted  as  means
of  bringing  out  what  was  in  them,  and  o(
leading  them  to  feel  their  entire  dependence
on  him  for  help,  sustenance,  and  guidance.
Not  only  by  commands  difficult  to  be  obeyed
laid  on  men,  and  by  mighty  works  done  in
their  view,  does  God  prove  men  (of.  Gen.
xxii.  1,  etc. ;  Exod.  xv.  25 ;  xx.  20) ;  but  also
by  afflictions  an  1  calamities  (Judg.  ii.  22 ;


162


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[oh.  Tin.  1—20.


HI.  4 ;  Fa.  xvii.  3 ;  Ixxxi.  7,  eto.},  aa  well  as  by
benefits  (Exod.  xvi.  4).  Humbled  so  as  to
see  his  own  weakness,  chastised  out  of  all
■elf-coQceit  by  affliction,  man  is  brought  to
■nbmit  to  Ood,  to  hear  and  obey  him ;  and
■long  with  this  the  exporienoe  of  God's
goodness  tends  to  draw  men,  in  grateful
aoknowlodgment  of  his  mercy  and  bounty,
to  yield  themselves  to  him  and  sincerely
and  lovingly  to  serve  him  (cf.  Bom.  ii  4).

Vers.  1,  2. — God's  dealings  with  the
Isiaelites  were  disciplinary.  Both  by  the
t  suctions  and  privations  to  which  they
vere  si'bjected,  and  by  the  provision  they
received  and  the  protection  afforded  to
them,  God  sought  to  bring  them  into  and
keep  them  in  a  right  state  of  mind  towards
him — a  state  of  humble  dependence,  sub-
missive obedience,  and  hopeful  trust.  But
that  this  effect  should  be  produced,  it  was
needful  that  they  should  mark  and  re-
member all  his  ways  towards  them.

Ver.  3. — God  humbled  the  Israelites  by
leaving  them  to  suffer  hunger  from  tlie  want
of  food,  and   then    supplying  them  with
food  in  a  miraculous  manner.    They  were
thna  taught  that  their  life  depended  wholly
on  God,   who   could,  by  his  own  creative
power,  without  any  of  the  ordinary  means,
provide  for  the    sustaining  of  their   life.
And  fed  thee  with  manna  (cf.  Exod.  xvi.  15).
It  is  in  vain  to  seek  to  identify  this  vnth
any  natural  product.     It  was   something
entirely    new    to    the    Israelites — ^a   thing
which  neither  they  nor  their  fathers  knew ;
truly  bread   from   heaven,. and  which   got
&om  them  the   name  of   manna  or  man,
because,  in  their  wondering  ignorance,  they
knew  not  what  to  call  it,  and  so.  they  said
one  to  another,  Man  hoo  t  (Nin  JD),  What  it
it  t    and    thenceforward     called    it    man.
That  he  might  make  thee  know,  etc.  "  Bipad,"
which  the  Jews  regarded  as  "the  staff  of
life,"   stands  here,  as  in  other  places,  for
food  generally;  and  the  lesson  tought  the
Israelites  was  that  not  in  one  way  or  by
one  kind  of  means  alone  could  life  be  sus-
tained, but   in  the   absence  of  these  God
could,   by   his    own    fiat,   provide  for  the
sustenance  of  his  children.     Every  word —
literally,    all,    everything    whatever — ^that
proceedeth  out  of  the  month  of  the  Lord,  i.e.
all  means  which  God  has  by  his  word  pro-
vided, or  by  his  word  can  provide,  for  the
■ustenance  of  life     So  our  Lord  cites  this
passage  in  replying  to  the  tempter,  who  had
snggested  that  if  he  was  the  Son  of  God  he
might  relieve  himself  from  the  pangs  of
hunger  by  commanding  the  stones  which
lay  ar  urad  to  become  bread.     Our  Lord's
reply  to  this  is  virtually, "  I  have  this  power,
•nd  could  use  it,  but  I  wiU  not ;  for  this


would  imply  impatience  and  distrust  of
God,  who  has  engaged  to  sustain  the  life
of  his  servants,  and  who  can,  by  the  mere
word  of  his  mouth,  by  his  creative  will,
provide  in  an  extraordinary  way  for  the
sustenance  of  life  when  the  ordinary  means
of  life  are  wanting."  "  Jesus  means  to  say,
'  I  leave  it  with  God  to  care  for  the  sustain-
ing of  my  life,  and  I  will  not  arbitrarily
and  for  selfish  ends  help  myself  by  a
miracle ' "  (De  Wetto,  note  on  Matt.  ir.  4 ;
see  also  Meyer  on  the  place).

Ver.  4. — As   the   manna   furnished   by
Good's   creative   power   saved    them   from
hunger,  so  by  God's  providence  and  care
their  raiment  was  marvellously  kept  from
decay,  and  they  had  not  to  go  barefoot  ftom
their  sandals  being  worn  out.    Waxed  not
old  upon  thee;  literally,  did  not  fall  away,
waste  away  from  upon  fhee.    This  cannot
mean  that  such  was  the  abundant  supply  of
raiment  to  the  Israelites   in  the  Arabian
desert,  that  there  was  no  need  for  them  to
wear  garments  rent  and  tattered  from  long
use,  as  they  had  large  flocks   and  herds
whence  a  sufficient   supply  of  wool  and
leather  could  be  obtained,  and  there  were
among   them   skilled  artiScers,  by  whom
these  could  be  made  into  articles  of  clothing
(Boseumiiller,  J.  D.  Michaelis,  etc.).    For,
as  Knobel  obserrei, "  This  were  something
too    insignificant    beside    the    miracnlous
manna;   and  besides,  this  does  not  lie  in
the  expression,  which  rather  intimates  that
the  clothes  upon  them  were  not  worn  out
nor  fell  from  them  in  rags,  because  God
gave  tbem  a  marvellous  durability."     At
the  same  time,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose
that  the  Israelites  did  not  make  use  of  such
supplies  as  were  within   their   reach  for
purposes  of  clothing,  any  more  than  that
they  lived  only  on  manna  during  the  forty
years  of  their  wandering.    Still  less  need
we  resort  to  such  fanciful  suppositions  as
that  the  garments  of  the  Israelitisb  children
expanded  as  they  grew  up,  like  the  shells
of  snails — which  is  the  notion  of  some  of
the  Jewish  rabbins,  and  adopted  by  some  of
the  Christian  Fathers  (see  Deyling, '  Obss.
SacR.,'  II.  xvii.  p.  247).    Neither  did  thy  foot
swell.    The  verb  here  is  found  in  only  one
other  passage  (Neh.  iz.  21),  where  this  pas-
sage is  repeated ;  and  the  meaning  is  doubt-
ful.    The  LXX.  render  here  by  iTvX^Briirav,
became  eall/mt;  but  in  Neh.  the  rendering
they  give  is  Sief^dyriirai>,  were  torn,  the  object
torn  being,  according  to  the  Cod.  Vat.,  v6S(s
auTuc,  tAei'r/ee(,  according  to  the  Cod.  Alex.,
T(k   iTroS^ftara  atrav,  (heir  tandaU.    In  ch.
xxix.  5,  the  shoe  or  eandal  is  specially  men-
tioned in  the  same  connection  as  here.    The
verb,  however,  cannot  mean  tear  or  torn,
neither  does  it  mean  swell ;  the  idea  in-
volved is  rather  thati>f  softening,  or  melt-


CH.  vni.  1 — 20.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


1S8


ing,  or  flowing;  and  the  meaning  here
seems  to  be, "  Thy  foot  did  not  get  into  a
bruised  and  wounded  state  " — which  would
have  been  the  case  had  their  sandals  not
been  preserved  from  breaking  or  being  worn
out.  .

Ver.  5. — ^ThuB  God  educated,  disciplined,
and  trained  his  people  as  a  father  does  his
child.  Chasteneth.  The  idea  is  not  so  much
that  of  punishment  or  ehasHsement,  properly
so  called,  as  that  of  severe  discipline  and
training.  God  made  tliera  feel  his  hand
upon  them,  but  ever  for  their  good;  the
end  of  the  discipline  to  which  they  were
subjected  was  tliat  they  might  keep  his
commandments  and  walk  in  his  ways,  so  as
to  enjoy  his  favour  (of.  Heb.  xii.  5,  etc.).

Vers.  7—20. — The  land  on  which  they
were  about  to  enter  is  described  as  a  good
land,  fertile  and  well  watered,  and  yielding
abundant  produce  to  its  cultivators;  and
they  are  cautioned  against  forgetting,  in
their  enjoyment  of  the  gift,  the  bounty  of
the  Giver,  or  congratulating  themselves  on
having  achieved  the  conquest  of  such  a
land,  instead  of  gratefully  ackuowledging
the  grace  which  had  sustained  them  during
their  protracted  wandering  in  the  wilder-
ness, and  by  which  alone  they  had  been
enabled  to  take  possession  of  that  favoured
land.

Vers.  7,  8. — ^Brooks  of  water,  running
streams,  mountain  torrents,  and  water-
courses in  the  narrow  valleys  or  wadys;
fountains,  perennial  springs;  depths,  "the
fathomless  pools  from  which  such  streams  as
the  Abana  (now  Barada),  near  Damascus,
spring  up  full-grown  rivers,  almost  as  broad
at  their  sources  as  at  their  mouths"  (Cunder,
'Handbook  to  the  Bible,'  p.  211),  or  this
may  include  also  the  inland  seas  or  lakes,
such  as  the  sea  of  Galilee  and  Lake
Hflleh.  Palestine  is  in  the  present  day,
on  the  whole,  well  supplied  with  water,
though  the  distribution  is  very  unequal,
many  parts  being  almost  wholly  destitute
of  supply,  except  from  what  may  be  col-
lected from  rain  in  tanks  or  cisterns ;  and
thure  is  no  reason  to  suppose  it  was  different
in  the  ancient  times.  As  compared,  how-
ever, with  the  desert  to  which  the  Israelites
had  been  so  long  accustomeil,  and  even  with
Egypt  from  which  they  had  escaped,  the
country  on  which  ttkey  were  about  to  enter
was  well  watered.

Ver.  8. — "  Palestine  has  been  celebrated
in  all  ages  for  three  products :  corn,  wine,
and  oil,  which  still  continue  to  be  its  most
valuable  crops  "  (Ibid.,  p.  189).  The  prin-
cipal com  crops  were  wheat  and  barley.
The  vine  was  largely  and  carefully  culti-


vated; the  olive  required  little  cnltivation,
being  almost  a  spontaneous  growth,  and
forming  one  of  the  most  valuable  produc-
tions of  the  country;  the  flg  was  also
indigenous  in  Palestine,  and  still  grows
there,  both  wild  and  cultivated,  in  abun-
dance; that  the  pomegranate  (nmmon)  also
was  very  abundant  may  be  inferred  from
the  number  of  places  named  from  this
(of.  Josh.  XV.  32;  xix.  7,  13;  Judg.  xx.  45,
47 ;  xxi.  13 ;  1  Chrou.  iv.  32,  etc.).  Honey.
The  word  so  rendered  (d'bash)  is  used  both
of  the  honey  of  bees  (Lev.  ii.  11 ;  ch.  xxxii.
11;  1  Sam.  xiv.  26,  etc.;  Ps.  IxxxL  17;
Prov.  xvi.  24,  etc.),  and  of  the  honey  of
grapes,  a  syrup  obtained  by  boiling  down
the  newly  expressed  juice  of  the  grape  to
a  half  or  third  part  of  its  bulk,  and  still
known  among  the  Arabs  by  the  name  of
dibs  (Bobinson,  *Bib.  Bes.,'  ii.  p.  442;
Smitli, '  Bib.  Diet.,'  s.i;. '  Honey ').  In  the
wilderness,  the  people  had  murmured  that
they  had  been  brought  into  an  evil  place,
no  place  of  figs,  or  of  vines,  or  of  pome-
granates; and  where  there  was  no  water
to  drink  (Numb.  xx.  5).  Moses  here  tells
them  that  the  land  they  were  about  to
occupy  was  not  such  a  place,  but  one
abounding  in  all  those  things  of  which
they  bad  found  the  wilderness  so  destitute.

Ver.  9.— A  laud  whose  stones  are  iroiL
Minerals  do  not  abound  in  PaL;stipe;  the
bills  are  for  the  most  part  calcareous ;  but
by  the  side  of  the  limestone  in  the  north  of
Canaan  ferruginous  basalt  appears  in  large
masses,  and  on  Lebanon  ironstone  abonncb.
Near  Tiberias  are  springs  largely  impreg-
nated with  iron,  as  are  ateo  those  at  Has-
beija,  on  the  Hermon  range,  as  well  as  the
soil  around  that  place.  Traces  of  extinct
copper  works  are  also  to  be  found  on  Leba-
non (cf.  art.  '  Metals,'  in  Kitto  and  Smith ;
Bitter,  '  Geography  of  Palestine,'  i.  248).
The  Israelites,  however,  do  not  seem  to
have  carried  on  mining  operations  them-
selves, but  to  have  been  content  to  obtain
supplies  of  the  useful  metals  fitom  their
neighbours  (2  Sam.  viii.  8 ;  1  Ohion.  zviii.
8;  xxii.  3,  14).

Ver.  10.— When  then  hast  eaten  and  art
full,  then  thou  shalt  bless  the  Lord  thy  Ood.
"  From  this  place  the  Jews  have  made  it  a
general  rule,  or,  as  they  call  it,  an  affirm-
ative precept,  that  every  one  blesa  God  at
their  meals,  that  is,  give  him  thanks  for
his  benefits;  for  he  blesses  as  when  he
bestows  good  things  on  as,  and  we  bless
him  when  we  thankfully  acknowledge  his
goodness  therein  "  (Patrick).

Vers.  11 — 14. — Wealth  is  apt  to  engender
in  the  possessor  xif  it  a  spirit  of  self-gratu-
lation  and  pride,  and  abundance  of  good
things  to  induce  men  to  be  luxurious,  "to
trust  in  uncertain  riches,"  and  to  be  for-


164


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[cH.  vm.  1 — 20.


getful  of  the  bounteous  hand  from  whteh
all  that  they  enjoy  has  come.  Against
this  the  people  are  here  cautioned  aud
warned.

Ver.  15. — ^Who  led  thee  thioujgh  that  great
and  terrible  wilderness,  wherein  were  fiery
serpents,  et».  "The  fiery  serpent"  and
"  the  scorpion  "  (sing.)  are  in  apposition  to
the  "  wilderness,"  and  illustrate  its  terrible-
nesi.  Fiery  lerpents — S(l>€is  robs  Bai/aToSv-
ras,  LXX.— or  burning  serpents,  so  called
from  the  burning  pain  caused  by  their  bite ;
probably  the  cerastes,  or  one  of  the  naja
species  (cf.  Numb.  xxi.  6).

Ver.  16.— IBie  grand  end  of  all  God'*
dealings  with  the  Israelites  in  the  desert,
both  the  trials  to  which  they  were  subjected
and  the  benefits  they  received,  was  that  he
might  do  them  good  ultimately.  Thy  latter
end;  not  the  end  of  life,  as  in  Numb,  xsiii.
10,  but  the  state  ensuing  on  the  termination
of  their  period  of  discipline  and  probation
in  the  desert  (of.  Job  viii.  7 ;  xlii.  12 ;  2  Pet.
ii.  20).  God  thus  dealt  with  the  Israelites
as  he  still  deals  with  his  people;  he  afflicts
them  not  for  his  pleasure  but  for  their
profit  (Heb.  xi.  12);  he  subjects  them  to
trial  and  raried  discipline  that  be  may  fit


them  for  the  rest  and  joy  that  in  the  end
are  to  be  theirs.

Vers.  17,  18. — The  blessing  in  store  for
them  was  God's  free  gift  to  them;  and
when  they  came  to  enjoy  it  they  were  not  to
allow  themselves  to  say  in  their  heart,  i.t.
to  think  or  imagine,  that  the  prosperous
condition  in  which  they  were  placed  was
the  result  of  their  own  exertions;  they
were  to  ascribe  all  to  God's  gracious  bounty,
for  from  him  had  come  the  power  by  which
prosperity  had  been  gained,  and  this  he
had  given,  not  on  account  of  any  merit  in
them,  but  that  he  might  fulfil  his  covenant
engagements  to  their  fathers.  Get  wealth
vn  rwv,  to  make -strength,  to  gather  sub-
stance (Gen.  xii.  5),  to  procure  wealth
(Buth  iv.  11,  margin ;  Ezek.  xxviii.  4).  As
it  is  this  day.  "As  was  quite  evident  then,
when  the  establishment  of  the  covenant
had  already  commenced,  and  Israel  had
come  through  the  desert  to  the  border  of
Canaan  (see  ch.  iv.  20)  "  (Keil).

Vers.  19,  20. — Moses  enforces  his  counsel
by  reminding  them  again  that  only  destruc-
tion awaited  them  should  they  forget  the
Lord  their  God  and  apostatize  fhmi  him
(of.  oh.  iv.  25,  eto. ;  vi  14).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Lif^s  meaning  discerned  hy  the  retrospect  of  it.  The  remark  has  not
unfrequeutly  been  made  that  incidents  closely  connected  cannot  be  rightly  understood
till  the  time  has  come  for  them  to  be  reviewed  in  their  entirety  as  matters  of  history.
What  is  true  of  events  generally,  applies  in  all  its  force  to  the  wonders  included  in  the
rescue  and  wanderings  of  the  people  of  IsraeL  And  that  which  may  be  said  of  them,
holds  good,  in  this  respect,  of  the  life-story  of  God's  children  now.  Two  words  would
sum  up  the  pith  of  their  experience — "  redemption,"  "  training."  Bedeemed  first,
tr^ned  afterwards.  Bedeemed,  that  they  might  be  trained ;  trained,  that  they  might
become  worthy  of  the  redemption.  Both  the  redemption  and  the  training  had  in
Israel's  case  a  depth  of  meaning  of  which  the  people  knew  little  at  the  time,  but  which
Israel's  God  intended  from  the  first.  Afterwards,  their  varied  experiences,  when  re-
viewed as  a  piece  of  history,  became  matter  for  grateful  record  and  adoring  pruse.
The  paragraph  before  us  now  is  "  the  aged  lawgiver  reviewing  the  experiences  of  brael
in  their  wanderings."    Four  lines  of  meditation  open  up —

L  Thbeb  abb  many  lessons  vraiOH  God's  ohildben  need  to  leabn.  1.  "  To
humble  thee"  (ver.  2),  i.e.  to  bring  them  to  feel  their  dependence  on  God.  This,
indeed,  seems  such  an  obvious  truth,  that  men  ought  not  to  need  to  be  taught  it.  But
we  must  remember  that,  before  we  are  redeemed,  our  training  for  eternity  has  never
begun  at  all,  and  that  when  redemption  is  with  us  a  realized  fact,  we  then  present
ourselves  to  God  only  in  the  rough,  relying  on  his  love  to  make  us  what  we  should
be.  And  one  of  the  lessons  we  have  thoroughly  to  learn  is  that  "  without  Christ  we
can  do  nothing."  2.  "  To  prove  thee  "  (ver.  2).  A  double  proof  is  indicated.  (1)  What
they  were :  "  To  know  what  was  in  thine  heart."  (2)  What  they  would  do :  "  Whether
thou  wouldest  keep  his  commandments,  or  no."  There  is  no  subject  on  which  the
young  convert  is  so  ignorant  as — himself ;  and  he  never  can  become  what  a  Christian
should  be  till  he  sees  his  own  conceit.  He  must  become  »  sadder  man  ere  he  can  be
a  wiser  one  3.  "  That  he  might  make  thee  know  that  man  doth  not  live  by  bread
alone."    It  has  been  remarked  that,  as  Moses  in  this  clause  refers  to  the  manna,  the


OH.  vm,  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  155

meaning  is :  (1)  That  it  is  not  from  nature  but  from  nature's  God  that  supplies  come.
(2)  That  God  is  free  to  adopt  any  course  he  pleases  in  providing  food.  Doubtless  this
is  true.  But  it  is  not  the  whole  truth,  nor  do  we  deem  it  tlie  truth  here  intended.  We
know  that  with  these  words  our  Saviour  repelled  one  assault  of  the  tempter.  This
being  so,  we  are  set  somewhat  on  a  different  track  for  their  interpretation  (cf.  Matt
iv.  3,  4).  Our  Saviour's  reply  is,  in  effect,  "  Man  has  a  double  life,  not  only  that  of
the  body,  but  also  that  of  the  spirit ;  you  ask  me  to  nourish  the  lower  at  the  expense
of  the  higher — to  get  food  for  the  body  by  a  negation  of  the  self-sacrifice  for  which  I
came.  It  is  not  bread  alone  which  sustains  the  man.  He  has  a  higher  self,  which
lives  on  higher  food,  and  I  cannot  pamper  the  lower  at  the  cost  of  the  prostration  of
the  higher."  Now,  with  such  light  thrown  on  the  passage  by  our  Lord,  we  are  led  to
regard  the  words  of  Moses  as  referring  not  only  to  the  supply  of  food,  but  rather  to  the
entire  discipline  in  the  wilderness,  as  intended  by  God  to  bring  out  to  the  people
the  reality  and  worth  of  the  nobler  part  of  man.  Our  God  cares  more  for  growth  of  soul
than  for  comfort  of  body.  His  aim  is  not  only  to  find  us  food,  but  to  train  us  for  him-
self. Nor  was  it  that  they  only  might  learn  these  lessons,  but  that  others  in  after
time  might  see  on  what  rough  and  raw  material  the  Great  Educator  will  condescend  to
work,  and  with  what  care  he  will  work  upon  it.

11.   GlOD  ADOPTS  YABIED  METHODS  OF  TEAOHQia  THESE  NEEDED  LESSONS.      The  claUSCS

in  the  paragraph  indicate  these.  1.  There  was  "  the  way "  by  which  they  were  led.
It  was  not  given  to  Israel  to  choose  it.  It  was  not  the  shortest  way.  It  was  "  the
right"  way,  appointed  by  God.  2.  The  method  of  sending  supplies:  "Day  by  day
th«  manna  fell."  They  were  thus  taught  to  live  by  the  day.  3.  The  disappointments
they  met :  "  These  forty  years."  If  they  had  been  told,  when  they  set  out  from
Egypt,  that  so  long  a  period  intervened  between  them  and  Canaan,  they  would  scarcely
have  set  out.  And  if  God  were  to  unveil  to  us  the  incidents  of  coming  years,  we  could
not  bear  the  sight.  4.  The  wants  they  felt :  "  He  suffered  thee  to  hunger."  God  some-
times lets  his  people  feel  how  completely  they  are  shut  up  to  him.  6.  Yet  there  were
constant  proofs  of  thoughtful  care  (ver.  4).  We  do  not  understand  any  miracle  in-
Yolved  here,  still  less  so  odd  a  one  as  the  rabbis  suggested,  that  the  children's  clothes
grew  upon  their  backs.  The  meaning  of  Moses  surely  is,  "  God  so  provided  for  their
wants  that  they  needed  not  to  wear  tattered  garments,  nor  to  injure  their  feet  by
walking  without  shoes  or  sandals."  6.  There  was  also  chastening  (ver.  5).  This  word
Includes  not  only  correction  but  all  that  belongs  to  the  training  of  a  child  (of.  Hnb,  xii.
7 ;  2  Sam.  vii.  14 ;  Ps.  lixxii.  32 ;  Job  vii.  17, 18 ;  Prov.  iii.  11,  12  ;  Rev.  iii.  19).

m.  These  is  a  reason  indicated  here  why  God  takes  so  kuoh  fains  to  teaob
THESE  lessons.  Ycr.  6,  "  As  a  man  chasteneth  his  son."  We  might  well  ask.  Why
should  the  Great  Supreme  do  so  much  to  educate  into  shape  such  raw  and  rough  natures
as  ours  ?  That  he  should  do  so  at  all  is,  per  se,  far.  harder  to  believe  thfin  any  apparent
variation  of  the  ordinary  course  of  physical  nature.  The  reason  is  found  in  the  words,
"  Ye  are  sons."  Israel  was  God's  son,  even  his  firstborn.  Believers  are  the  adopted
children  of  God;  hence  the  gieatness  of  their  destiny,  and  the  earnestness  of  their
Leader  in  training  them  for  it.  It  may  be  said,  indeed,  by  an  unbeliever,  "  I  have  all
these  changes  in  lyfe,  but  they  are  not  training  me,"  etc.  No,  because  the  one  condition
is  wanting  under  which  all  these  come  to  be  a  training — sonship.  This  order  is  never
reversed — rescued,  then  educated.  If  men  have  not  known  the  first,  they  cannot  under-
stand the  second.

IV.  If  God  oabes  so  much  to  train,  we  should  oabefully  conbidbe  what  hib
TBAININO  MEANS.  (Yers.  2,  5.)  Let  us  understand  what  a  high  moral  ^d  spiritual  aim
God  has  in  the  culture  of  this  life  of  ours !  The  life  of  a  man  is  not  a  mere  material
something,  on  a  physical  basis ;  it  is  the  expression  of  a  plan  of  God.  Then  let  us  be  as
anxious  to  be  rightly  educated  for  eternity,  as  God  is  so  to  educate  us.  Never  let  us  allow
the  lower  ends  of  life  to  master  the  higher  (ver.  6).  Ever  let  us  keep  the  end  of  life
in  view.  For  eternity  we  are  meant,  and  for  eternity  we  should  live.  Some  have  life
largdy  in  retrospect,  even  now.  Do  they  not  see  that  the  past  is  explained  by  the
present  ?  Even  so  the  present  will  be  explained  by  the  future  (John  xiii.  7).  Let
them  rejoice  that  they  have  a  Father  who  guides  by  the  way  which  he  sees  to  be
right,  and  not  "  according  to  their  mind."  Some  have  life  hefore  them.  1.  Let  it  be
the  supreme  desire  to  let  life  become  what  God  wants  it  to  be — a  continuous  advance


156  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  viii.  1— 20.

in  I iiepaiation  for  heaven.  This  is  of  more  consequence  than  all  the  ease  and  comfort
in  tlie  world.  2.  Recognize  and  praise  the  kindness  of  God  in  giving  men  these
chequered  experiences  of  life,  if  they  do  but  educate  for  higher  service.  Don't  let  us
wonder  if  we  cannot  understand  God's  ways  at  the  time.  We  shall  in  the  end.  3.  If
we  want  God  to  train  us  for  glory — first,  we  must  come  out  of  Egypt.  The  education
cannot  begin  in  the  land  of  bondage, — we  must  first  be  the  Lord's  free  men ;  then,  let
us  leave  the  way  and  metliod  of  the  culture  entirely  to  God.  If  he  were  to  let  us
jhoose  the  way,  what  mistakes  we  should  make !  Our  faith  in  God  even  in  youth
should  be  such  as  to  lead  us  to  say,  "  Father,  my  supreme  desire  is  to  grow  like  thee,
and  to  live  with  thee.  I  know  not  by  what  paths  I  need  to  be  led,  nor  through  what
discipline  I  need  to  be  brought,  to  bring  about  this  end.  I  leave  all  in  thy  gracious
hands,  desiring  that  thine  infinite  wisdom  and  love  should  order  all  thin°;s  for  me.
Here  I  am.  Take  me  as  I  am,  all  guilty  and  defiled.  Make  me  what  I  should  be ;
and  if  by  thy  grace  I  am  ripened  for  and  led  to  Canaan,  then  will  I  sing,  *  Blessing,
and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power,  to  him  which  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  to  the
Lamb,  for  ever  and  ever  I ' "

Vera.  7 — 10. — The  duty  of  thankfulness  for  the  hownty  of  Qod  in  nature.  The
people  of  Israel  were  being  led  by  the  Lord  their  God  to  a  land  beautiful,  luxuriant,
fruitful.  (For  an  account  of  the  productions  of  Palestine,  of  the  fertility  of  its  soil,
and  of  the  treasures  bidden  in  its  hills,  see  works  by  Kitto,  Stanley,  Wilson,  Thomson,
and  others ;  as  well  as  Bible  dictionaries  and  cyclopaedias,  under  the  several  headings.)
Evidently,  at  the  time  Moses  uttered  the  words  before  us,  the  people  had  not  reached
that  land ;  though  they  were  expecting  shortly  to  do  so.  In  view  thereof,  Moses  bids
them  (ver.  10)  bless  the  Lord  their  God  for  the  good  land  be  had  given  them.  Hence
our  subject :  "  the  duty  of  recognizing  the  hand  of  God  in  the  bounties  of  nature,  and  of
thankfulnesii  for  the  use  of  them."

L  There  is  a  marvellous  adaptation  ih  external  nature  to  the  constitution
AND  WANTS  OF  MAN.  (Each  of  the  varied  terms  used  in  vers.  7 — 9  will  afford  vast
scope  for  the  expansion  of  this  thought.  And  the  wider  the  range  of  knowledge,  the
greater  delight  will  such  expansion  afford  to  one  who  longs  to  make  others  see  the
variety  of  the  Divine  goodness.)  What  a  vast  and  prolonged  preparation  must  there
have  been  to  fit  this  world  for  the  use  of  those  who  should  hereafter  dwell  upon
it !  And  then,  when  all  is  ready,  man,  the  crown  of  God's  earthly  creation,  comes
lust  upon  the  scene,  with  "  all  things  put  under  his  feet."

II.  All  the  wealth  of  earth  is  a  gift  to  man.  "  The  good  land  which  he
hath  given  thee "  (ver.  10).  It  is  but  reasonable  that  we  look  at  the  profusion  of
riches  upon  and  within  the  earth  as  a  "gift."  "What  have  we  that  we  have  not
received?"  Where  were  we  when  "the  foundations  of  the  earth"  were  laid?  Yet
some  would  have  us  adopt  a  "  religion  of  humanity,"  as  if  humanity  were  to  be  praised
for  the  physical  basis  of  its  own  uxisti  nee !  A  Power  not  in  man  nor  of  man  hath
given  us  all.

III.  The  gift  cometh  from  a  I'ersonal  Being.  "  The  Lord  thy  Qod  for  the  good
land  which  he  hath  given  thee."  The  Power  from  which  nature's  wealth  cometh,  is  not
a  blind  non-intelligent  force.  For  man's  own  intelligence  has  to  be  accounted  lor ;  and
even  if  impersonal  forces  could  have  wrought  out  matter,  it  is  axiomatically  certain
that  impersonality  could  not  produce  personality.  So  far  natural  religion  can  go.  But
our  text  takes  us  further.

IV.  Nature's  wealth  cometh  from  the  Lord  cub  God.  "  Our  God."  He  ig  not  an
"  Unknown."  We  may  not  set  up  an  altar,  'Kyviartf  ©e^!.  We  know  him  as  a  redeeming
God,  as  Onti  who  delights  to  exercise  loving-kindness,  lighteousness,  and  judgment  in
the  earth.  And  since  God  is  revealed  to  us  in  Christ,  we  learn  thereby  that  the  long
preparations  of  earth  have  been  going  on  with  a  view  of  setting  up  on  it  the  new
creations  of  redeeming  grace.  This  is  "  the  hidden  wisdom,  which  God  ordained  before
the  world,  unto  our  glory."  Oh,  the  boundless  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  The  Lamb
slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world  "!

V.  All  this  should  call  forth  special  thankfulness  from  our  hearts  akd
LIPS.  "  Thou  shalt  bless,"  etc.  We  may  go  very  far  beyond  the  merely  personal  con-
sideration which  Moses  suggests  here.     We  know  more  clcnrly,  therefore  we  should


2H.  vm.  1^20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEBONOMI.  167

praise  more  intelligently,  devoutly,  and  warmly.  Israel  might  include  some,  we
should  take  in  all,,  the  following  considerations,  to  stimulate  to  intense  thankfulness.

1.  We  were  nothing,  had  nothing,  and  yet  we  have  all  given  to  us  "  richly  to  enjoy."

2.  We  are  siuful,  and  have  forfeited  thereby  even  our  natural  claim.  Yet  ul  is
continued  to  us,  in  unwearying  kindness  and  unabated  faithfulness.  3.  We  have  not
only  the  actual  possessions  of  earth's  wealth,  but  are  put  in  possession  of  the  mind  and
purpose  of  the  Great  Pramer  of  all,  that  ours  may  be  the  praise  of  understanding  hearts.
4.  We  read  that  God  wills  to  have  on  this  globe  a  ransomed  people,  ours,  therefore,  may
well  be  the  jubilant  praise  of  redeemed  men.  5.  We  are  not  here  merely  to  enjoy  this
world  and  then  to  know  no  other,  but  to  enjoy  this  world  as  a  stepping-stone  to  another.
Hence  ours  should  be  the  triumphant  shout  of  men  with  a  glorious  destiny  ahead,  and
of  those  who  use  this  world  so  as  to  help  them  to  a  better.  Finally :  6.  The  present
form  of  cartli  is  destined  to  fall  away.  God  will "  make  all  things  new  "  (Ps.  cii.  26  ;  Heb.
i.  12 ;  2  Fet.  iii.  13).  We  for  whom  this  world  was  made,  will  then  be  rejoicing  in
God,  and  will  be  enraptured  to  see  what  ever-advancing  forms  of  beauty  "  he  hath
prepared  for  them  that  love  him."  Thus  ours  should  be  the  praise  of  men  on  whom
even  the  too  oft-repeated  dirge,  "  passing  away,"  leaves  no  trace  of  gloom  or  of  regret,
if  we  are  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  our  life  may  be  a  song  of  thanksgiving,  uid  our
death  a  shout  of  victory  1  *

Vers.  11— 18.— (See  Homiletios :  ch.  vi.  10—19.)

Ver.  16. — (See  Homiletics :  ch.  viii,  1 — 6.)

Vers.  17, 18. — Danger  of  self-glorifleation.  The  enjoyment  of  God's  mercies,  which
should  be  so  provocative  of  thankfulness,  may  become  a  snare,  if  we  are  not  careful  to
guard  against  their  misuse.  Several  of  the  dangers  to  which  prosperity  makes  us  liable
are  dealt  with  in  the  Homily  referred  to  above.  Here,  there  is  one  specially  named,
which  is  perhaps  the  most  common  of  all,  viz.  that  of  attributing  success  in  life
to  one's  own  skill,  or  wisdom,  or  might :  "  And  thou  say  in  thine  heart.  My  power  and
the  might  of  mine  hand  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth  "  (see  Ezek.  xxviii.  4,  5 ;  xxix.  3 ;
Ps.  xii.  3;  Jiidg.  viL  2).  So  strong  is  the  tendency  to  accredit  ourselves  with  any
gains  which  may  be  ours,  in  a  vain,  self-glorifying  spirit,  that  we  cannot  be  too
anxious  to  guard  against  it,  by  exposing  the  sin  and  evil  of  it.

I.  It  is  untbue.  However  much  care  we  may  have  taken  to  ensure  snccess,
whether  we  gain  our  end  or  no,  has  been  dependent  at  every  moment  on  a  conjunction
of  circumstances,  which  we  were  as  powerless  to  bring  about  or  to  avoid,  as  to  create
the  tides  or  arrest  the  moon.  And  even  the  ability  to  take  care,  and  to  put  forth
effort,  has  been  a  gift.  We  are  violating  the  first  rudiments  of  most  certain  truth,
when  we  take  the  credit  of  success  in  life  to  ourselves.

IL  It  IS  DiSLOTAL.  For  it  is  God  who  gives  us  the  power  to  get  wealth.  We  owe
all  we  have  to  his  bounty,  and  even  the  very  breath  we  draw,  to  his  unceasing  care.
The  laws  on  which  we  have  relied  to  bring  prosperity  have  been  of  God's  creation.
And  for  a  creature  to  plume  himself  on  the  ^ts  of  the  Creator,  who  can  adequately
set  forth  such  injustice  to  high  Heaven  ?

III.  It  is  hnobateful.  For,  as  if  it  were  not  enough  that  the  Most  High  should
have  all  our  faidts  to  bear  with  unceasingly — ^is  it  not  marvellously  ungrateful  that
creatures  who  would  have  long  ago  been  cut  down  except  for  the  long-suffering  of  God,
should  pride  themselves  on  the  abilities  which  have  beou  in  such  forbearance  continued
to  them  ?

rV.  It  is  most  mischievous  in  its  effects.  For  it  nurses  pride,  instead  of
fostering  thankfulness.  It  genders  selfishness,  it  freezes  benevolence,  and  will  surely
breed  a  covetous,  tyrannous,  haughty  disposition,  if  not  fought  against  and  overcome.

V.  It  is  offensive  in  God's  bight.  (Prov.  vi.  16,  17;  Jas.  iv.  6;  1  Pet.  v.  5.)
God  sets  himself  in  array  against  pride  of  heart.  How  can  it  be  otherwise?  "What
communion  hath  light  with  darkness?"  God  will  dwell  with  the  contrite  and  humble
ipirit,  but  "  the  proud  he  knoweth  afar  oOf."

VI.  It  is  the  eevbrse  of  that  which  Gods  designs.  (Ver.  16.)  For  the  varied
experiences  of  life  are  an  appeal  of  God  to  men  as  moral  beings,  "  to  humble  them  and ,


158  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMT.  [ch.  viii.  1— 20.

prove  them  ; "  and  if,  in  spite  of  all,  any  take  the  credit  to  themselves  of  their  own
prosperity,  God's  own  intent  iu  their  life-history  is  being  reversed.

VII.  It  will  soonbb  ob  later  bring  humiliation  and  buffebino.  (Prov.  xxix.
23.)  Again  and  again  does  our  Saviour  also  lay  down  this  principle,  that  pi ide  ex-
poses to  much  shame  (Matt  xxiii.  12 ;  Luke  xiv.  11 ;  xviii.  14).  It  is  not  for  us  to  say
in  any  inciividual  case,  in  what  form  the  debasement  or  disappointment  will  come.
But  come  it  will.  It  maybe  in  one  or  more  of  the  following  ways:  1.  By  the  removal  of
the  wealth  which  was  gained,  and  a  sudden  plunge  from  prosperity  to  adversity.  It  is
sad  when  men  have  to  part  with  all  before  they  will  learn  that  God  gave  all!  2.  By
depriving  men  of  any  further  power  to  attend  to  worldly  concerns,  they  may  have  to
see  their  utter  helplessness  without  Grod.  3.  By  a  searching  dealing  with  the  spirit  in
the  furnace  of  tribulation,  God  may  graciously  bum  up  the  pride,  and  purge  away
corruption.  But  the  process  is  a  terrific  one,  even  here.  It  is  being  saved,  "yet  so  as  by
fire."  Still,  it  is  better  to  be  saved,  even  thus,  cost  what  it  may  (1  Cor  iii.  18).  It  is
only  when  God  succeeds  in  "  humbling  "  us,  that  he  can  do  us  good  "  at  the  latter  end."
4.  If,  after  all  warnings,  teachings,  and  strivings,  God's  voice  is  still  unheard,  and  pride
still  rears  itself  up  against  him,  he  will  reckon  the  proud  one  as  "  the  chaff  which  the
wind  driveth  away."  And  oh,  how  will  this  self-elation  shrivel  up  then  (see  Isa.  ii.
10—22)!  God  will  not  give  his  glory  to  another  (1  Sam.  ii.  30;  Mai.  iv.  1).  What
reversals  of  position  will  that  day  witness !  That  which  the  world  reckoned  as  "  great
wealth"  will  come  to  nought,  and  the  "wealthy"  one  will  be  bankrupt  for  eternity  ;
while  those  who  in  lowliness  of  spirit  have  received  thankfully  the  least  of  God's  gifts,
shall  have  him  as  their  "exceeding  great  Eeward."  To  lucb  he  will  say,  "Friend,
come  up  higher!"

Vers.  19,  20.— {See  Homiletics :  ch.  xxviiL)


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOESL

Vers.  1 — 6. — Ui-e  moral  uses  of  memory.  The  memory  of  man  exerts  a  mighty
influence  over  his  history  and  his  destiny.  Minus  memory,  man  wonld  be  altogether
another  being.    Eemembrance  of  the  past  is  a  guide-post,  or  a  beacon,  for  the  future.

The  key- word  of  this  passage  is  "  all : "  "  all  the  way  ; "  "  every  word ; "  "  all  the
com  mandments."

I.  The  scope  of  memory.  "All  the  way  which  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  led  thee."
1.  Remember  thy  needs — how  many,  how  various,  how  urgent.  Our  hourly  dependence
upon  material  substance  for  food,  and  upon  a  Power  beyond  and  above  ourselves,  ought
to  make  us  profoundly  humble.  Is  there  an  occupant  of  this  globe  so  full  of  need  of
many  sorts  as  man  ?  2.  Bememher  thy  special  perils.  Every  man  has  his  particular
dangers,  as  the  Hebrews  had  in  the  desert — perils  arising  from  outward  circumstance,
moral  temptations,  evil  powers,  personal  defects  and  Infirmities,  distinctive  vocation,
3.  Bemember  Ood's  suitahle  supplies.  Their  needs  in  the  desert  were  uniqtie  and
unprecedented;  yet  God  was  prepared  for  every  emergency.  It  was  open  to  him  either
to  diminish  the  need,  or  else  to  institute  new  methods  of  supply.  What  if  the  sandy
soil  refused  to  yield  a  harvest  1  Ee  can  distil  a  harvest  from  the  dewy  air.  What  if
flax  be  wanting  as  a  material  from  which  to  fabricate  raiment!  He  can  stay,  by  a
volition,  the  progress  of  decay  and  wear.  What  though  the  journeys  tend  to  injure
and  blister  the  feet  1  Ee  can  make  the  skin  durable  as  iron  and  brass.  There  shall  be
special  blessing  for  special  need.  Every  man's  history  is  more  or  less  special.  Every
point  of  our  past  history  teems  with  footprints  of  God.  Placed  under  the  microscope
of  pious  memory,  every  atom  yields  surprising  lessons,  sparkling  truths.

II.  The  moral  uses  of  memory.  They  may  be  summed  up  under  one  head,  vl«.
to  perceive  that  God  was  in  every  event — that  every  word  of  God  is  a  force  for  giving
life.  1.  A  cairn  review  of  the  past  discovers  the  moral  purpose  Qod  has  kept  in  view.
As  when  a  man  stands  in  the  midst  of  complicated  machinery,  he  is  deafened  by  the
roar,  and  bewildered  by  the  manifold  movements,  that  he  cannot  detect  the  definite
eijd  which  that  machine  serves.    To  gain  that  knowledge,  he  must  move  away,  and


CH.  vm.  1_20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  159

take  in  by  one  glance  the  effect  of  the  whole.  So,  amid  the  whirl  and  excitement  of
passing  events,  we  do  not  discern  the  definite  purpose  God  has  in  view.  We  must  get
a  bird's-eye  view  from  a  new  elevation.  To  reduce  the  pride  of  man's  heart,  to  persuade
him  that  God  rules,  are  laudable  purposes  of  Divine  leadings.  2.  The  remembrance
of  the  past  exhibits  the  fatherly  disciplines  of  &od.  Mingled  tenderness  and  severity  is
conspicuous  in  God's  dealings.  We  can  see  now  that  we  had  the  sunshine  of  his
favour  when  we  kept  the  pathway  of  obedience,  and  that  as  often  as  we  became  way-
ward, the  rod  of  his  indignation  fell.  We  can  see  now  the  likeness  between  God's
treatment  of  us,  and  our  fatherly  treatment  of  our  children.  Faithful  disciplin*  is
better  every  way  than  foolish  fondness.  3.  Memory  revealed  to  them  the  fact  that  Ood
was  making  in  their  life  a  great  eaperiment.  The  vicissitudes  and  hardships  and
surprising  deliverances  in  the  wilderness  were  now  seen  to  be  tests,  by  which  God
would  discover  whether  the  people  were  worthy  of  Canaan,  competent  to  be  the  de-
pository of  his  truth.  The  object  was  to  prove  them,  whether  they  could  be  entrusted
with  this  Divine  mission,  So,  every  man's  life  is  God's  experiment.  The  question  to
be  solved  in  each  of  our  lives  is  this, "  Are  we  worthy  a  place  in  God's  eternal  kingdom  ?  "
Every  effort  is  made  by  God  to  make  this  experiment  successful.  4.  A  review  of  the
past  serves  to  show  that  man  has  a  nobler  life  than  that  of  the  body.  The  mam  purpose
why  the  Hebrews  had  been  fed  for  forty  years  on  manna  was  this,  viz.  to  demonstrate
that  our  well-being  is  not  dependent  on  material  things.  Man  lives  not  by  bread,  but
by  the  Divine  word.  Even  bread  itself  is  a  product  of  God's  word.  All  the  processes
of  mastication,  digestion,  assimilation,  are  the  effects  of  Divine  command.  Our  entire
life  is  nourished  by  the  word  of  God.  Practical  obedience  is  to  the  soul's  life  what
digestion  is  to  the  life  of  the  body.  "  My  meat  and  drink  is  to  do  the  will  of  my
Father  in  heaven."

Ill,  The  benefiobnt  effects  of  a  memoey  devoutly  exercised.  If  we  re-
member "  all  the  way  " — ^its  subtle  and  intricate  windings,  and  the  faithful  leadership  of
our  Guide;  if  we  appreciate  the  vital  value  of  "every  word"  of  Jehovah;  we  shall
resolve  henceforth  to  keep  "  all  his  commandments."  1.  Remembrance  viill  excite
gratitude.  Our  gratitude  is  largely  deficient,  because  we  do  not  consider  and  reflect.
If  memory  will  fulfil  her  office  well  in  supplying  fuel  for  the  altar  of  the  heart,  the
flame  of  love  will  bum  with  a  more  constant  glow.  2.  Remembrance  of  Divine  favours
will  convince  us  that  God's  interests  and  ours  are  identical.  It  is  the  natural  effect  of
sin  to  persuade  us  that  God  is  our  enemy.  We  say,  "  Depart  from  us."  But,  when
with  ^unbiased  mind  we  ponder  the-  proofs  of  God's  kindness,  we  yield  to  the
evidence  that  he  is  a  true  Friend.     Experience  teaches  us  that  it  is  our  interest  to  obey.

3.  Remembrance  of  past  favours  aids  the  operations  of  conscience.  The  conscience
becomes  hard  before  it  becomes  blind.  Whatever  keeps  alive  feeling  in  the  conscience
benefits  the  whole  man.  If  there  be  light  and  life  in  a  man's  conscience,  he  will
resolutely  say,  "I  must  not  sin.    I  will  fear  God   and  keep  his  commandments."

4.  Vivid  remembrance  of  Ood's  past  goodness  is  a  vigorous  incentive  to  obedience.  A
sense  of  obligation  for  the  past  cannot  fully  express  itself,  except  in  acts  of  hearty
obedience.  When  we  realize  fully  that  our  every  step  has  been  under  God's  guidance,
that  every  good  thing  has  come  from  our  Father's  hand,  and  that  every  word  of  his  is
empowered  to  give  us  joyous  life, — then  are  we  constrained  to  say,  "All  that  the  Lord
commandeth  us  will  we  do." — D.

Vers.  7 — 20. — Wealth  perilous  to  piety.  God's  policy  in  the  government  of  men  is
to  win  by  prodigal  kindness.  A  churlish  parsimony  has  never  been  found  with  him  ; —
the  very  opposite.  An  open  eye  discovers  widespread  munificence — a  royal  banquet.
The  present  is  only  a  sample  of  the  future.  The  full  inheritance  is  always  the  object
of  hope.     The  children  of  a  king  have  large  expectations.     This  passage  contains —

I.  A  notable  instance  of  Divine  mttnipicencb.  1.  The  heritage  of  Israel  was  a
"good  land."  Both  climate  and  soil  were  suited  to  every  variety  of  natural  producilon.
The  fruits  of  the  North,  and  the  fruits  of  the  Tropics,  might  alike  find  a  home  there.
Untold  ages  had  passed,  during  which  God  had  been  slowly  preparing  that  land  for
Israel,  and  storing  it  with  elements  of  fertility,  and  wealth  of  minerals.  2.  Others  had
'  teen  employed  to  bring  the  virgin  soil  under  culture.  The  harder  and  more  unprofitable
tpjl  had  beep  opppnaplished.     The  house  of  Israel  was  already  well  furnished,  as  when


1«0  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBEONOMY.  [ch.  viii.  1— L'O.

a  bridegroom  brings  home  his  bride.  3.  There  was  every  variety  of  provision.  This
betokened  thoughtful  foresight  and  tender  affection.  No  needed  good  had  been
overlooked.  The  beneficent  Creator  had  furnished,  not  only  the  necessaries  of  life,
but  erery  luxury.  Whatever  could  please  the  palate,  or  gratify  a  taste,  or  invigorate
the  health,  was  there.  These  were  pictures  of  heavenly  good ;  for  as  yet  the  people
could  not  appreciate  the  imperishable  treasures  of  the  spirit-land.  4.  This  inheritance
was  unpurchased  and  unreserved.  It  made  them,  body  and  soul,  debtors  to  God.  Had
they  preferred  to  purchase  it  with  money,  they  had  nought  of  their  own ;  they  could
not  create  the  medium  uf  barter.  They  had  not  obtained  it  by  the  merit  of  obedieflce.
They  were  the  recipients  of  distinguished  favour — pensioners  on  the  Divine  bounty.
If  it  be  said  that  they  obtained  the  land  by  right  of  conquest,  it  must  be  counter-said
that  the  Lord  had  given  them  victory.  The  battle  was  the  Lord's.  Herein  God  de-
signed to  conquer  their  proud  spirits  by  the  generosity  of  his  love.  5.  This  inheritance
ivas  not  the  final  end.  God  had  ulterior  purposes  of  good  yet  beyond,  towards  the
realization  of  which  this  was  a  stepping-stone.  His  next  design  was  to  "  establish  his
covenant  with  them."  At  present,  they  were  reaping  the  fruit  of  their  fathers'  faith.
This  was  a  reward  for  Abraham's  piety.  If  they  should  prove  faithful,  they  too  should
be  promoted  to  higher  things.    Canaan  was  not  a  home,  but  a  school-house.

II.  The  passage  contains  yaluablb  counsel.  The  counsels  of  clear-eyed,
venerable  wisdom  are  more  precious  than  pearls.  1.  The  counsel  prescribes  grateful
recollection.  Having  received  such  measureless  kindness,  it  would  be  the  rankest
villany  to  forget  the  Giver.  Over  the  simken  rock  of  ingratitude  a  triple  beacon  stands :
"  Beware ! "  Give  this  murderous  reef  ample  sea-room.  Sere  many  a  gallant  ship  has
gone  to  pieces,  2.  The  counsel  directs  suitable  requital.  "  Thou  shalt  bless  the  Lord
thy  God!"  But  can  man  confer  any  blessing  on  his  Maker?  Can  we  add  to  God's
wealth  or  eiijoyment  ?  In  a  sense  we  can.  Dispositions  are  accepted  as  deeds.  H  we
are  not  willing  to  give  to  God  <M  we  have,  our  hearts  are  base.  We  can  bring  him  the
wealth  of  our  love.  We  can  bring  him  the  music  of  our  praise.  We  can  bring  him
the  devotion  of  our  lives.  Does  his  voice  whisper  to  us  from  heaven,  "It  is  weU  that
it  is  in  thine  heart "  ?  Does  he  smell  the  sweet  savour  of  our  sacrifice  ?  3.  The  counsel
includes  practical  obedience.  Obedience,  if  genuine,  will  be  complete.  It  will  embrace
every  known  command.  If  we  observe  some  commandments,  and  consciously  neglect
others,  this  i*  not  obedience ;  we  are  merely  doing  our  own  will.  Whether  we  perceive
the  reason  of  the  command  or  not,  we  shall  honour  it  as  our  Lord's  will — as  our  Lord
himself.  No  matter  what  compliance  costs,  we  will  give  it.  Ours  not  to  reason  why.
True  obedience  is  hearty,  complete,  perpetual.

III.  This  passage  nmioATES  imminent  pebiu.  1.  Wealth  often  leads  to  fleshly
indulgence.  With  abundance  in  our  possession,  it  is  easier  to  indulge  the  appetites  than
to  deny  them.  Yet  the  higher  life  can  only  be  developed  at  the  expense  of  the  lower.
"  Flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom."  2.  Wealth  breeds  self-sufficient  pride.
It  serves  to  weaken  our  sense  of  dependence  upon  Gksd.  When  from  our  visible  stores
every  felt  need  can  be  supplied,  we  are  prone  to  forget  the  unseen  Giver.  Most  men
may  well  thank  God  that  the  temptations  of  wealth  dwell  not  under  their  roofs.
"How  hardly  shall  they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God!"  In
the  hot-bed  of  riches,  the  flower  of  sweet  humility  does  not  thrive.  3.  Wealth  loses
sight  of  its  own  origin.  It  has  a  short  memory  for  obligations.  The  millionaire  soon
forgets  the  days  of  poverty  and  struggle — forgets  the  Friend  who  succoured  him  in  his
extremity — kicks  away  the  ladder  by  which  he  rose.  Riches  naturally  encumber  and
stifle  the  flame  of  religious  feeling.  4.  Riches  beget  in  us  false  confidence.  Like
Nebuchadnezzar,  we  say,  "Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  /have  built?"  We  find
a  delicious  pleasure  in  hearing  ■ou^•owB  skill  and  sagacity  praised.  The  tide  of  natural
feeling  sets  strongly  towards  self-trust.  5.  Siches  tend  towards  idolatry.  In  the  days
of  poverty  we  did  not  object  to  be  accounted  singular ;  but  in  the  lime  of  wealth  we
aspire  to  do  as  others  do.  It  is  arduous  to  have  to  think  for  one's  self,  to  rely  upon
one's  own  judgmejits,  to  pursue  a  course  which  men  will  ridicule.  If  others  bow  down
to  their  own  net,  or  rear  a  popular  idol,  we  too  must  bow  down  and  worship  it.  Wealth
has  given  us  prominence,  set  us  on  high,  and  we  must  not  risk  our  new  reputation.
It  is  easier  to  drift  with  the  stream  than  to  stem  it.  6.  Justice,  vtith  her  balances  and
iword  is  din-ays  nigh.     No  man  can  defraud  God.     If  the  Amoritus  were  thrust  out


CH.  Tm.  1— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  Itii

from  the  land  becaum  fhey  had  become  flagrant  idolaters,  so  also  shall  the  Israelites
if  they  become  votaries  of  idols.  As  the  Hebrews  conquered  th^  Canaanites,  so  did
the  Assyrians  vanqvush  the  Hebrews.  One  law  shall  prevail  for  all.  If  we  have  not
been  overwhelmed  in  one  disaster,  we  may  be  overtaken  suddenly  by  another  minister
of  justice.  Sin  shall  bear  its  own  proper  fruit.  Every  nation  and  every  individual
shall  "  go  to  his  own  place."  Prom  the  summit  of  earthly  magnificence  to  the  lowest
pit  of  misery,  there  is  often  a  single  step.  "  I  saw,"  says  Bunyan,  "  that  there  was  a
way  to  hell,  even  from  the  gate  of  the  celestial  city."  "  Be  not  hig^minded,  but  fear."
Kiches  make  a  slippery  descent  to  ruin. — D.

Vers.  2 — 6. — The  uses  of  advtnity.  It  is  a  great  matter  when  in  any  experience  of
life  we  can  read  the  Divine  purpose  in  bringing  us  through  it.  The  speaker  in  these
verses  unfolds  the  design  and  lessons  of  the  wilderness  discipline.  Our  Lord,  in  the
temptation,  found  an  application  to  himself  (Matt.  iv.  4^  Every  believer  will  find
the  same  in  seasons  of  adversity.

L  Adversity  a  Divinb  obdinaitoe.  (Ver.  2.)  1.  Divinely  sent.  "The  Lord
thy  God  led  thee"  (cf.  Matt.  iv.  1).  Jesus  led  of  the  Spirit, into  the  wilderness.
Adversity  may  come  through  natural  laws,  as  the  necessary  result  of  sin  or  folly ;
even  so  it  is  of  Gkid'a  ordinance — the  punitive  expression  of  his  will.  But  adversity
is  not  necessarily  punitive.  The  best  man  living  may  be  led  into  straits  of  afSiction,
of  which  his  own  actions  are  not  in  the  least  the  causes  (Job  i.,  ii.).  It  is  God  who  has
"  led  "  him  thither  for  some  purpose  of  his  own.  2.  The  duration  of  which  is  divinely
determined :  "  these  forty  years."  God  marks  for  us  the  term  of  our  probations.  Jesus
was  "  forty  days  "  without  bread  (Matt.  iv.  2).

II.  The  gkacious  uses  of  advbbsity.  That  of  the  Israelites  was  designed :  1.  To
humble  them.  It  aimed  at  destroying  the  spirit  of  self-dependence,  out  of  which  comes
pride  and  haughtiness  (vers.  17,  18).  It  made  them  feel  how  absolutely  they  depended
for  everything  upon  God — taught  them  how  at  every  step  they  hung  upon  his  will.
2.  To  teach  them  reliance.  Faith  is  reliance  on  a,  Divine  Power  working  for  us  and  in  us.
"  What  shall  we  eat  ?  What  shall  we  drink  ?  Wherewithal  shall  we  be  clothed  ?  "
Faith  cannot  tell,  but  it  waits  God's  time  and  God's  way  of  providing,  confident  that
in  his  own  way  he  will  provide.  This  was  Christ's  attitude  in  the  wilderness  (Matt.  iv.
4).  3.  To  test  obedience.  Adversity  acts  as  a  test  of  the  disposition.  The  end  of
God's  discipline  is  to  bring  to  light  hidden  lines  of  character,  and  to  advance  life  to  a
crisis.  It  forces  us  to  moral  determination.  Will  we  obey  God  or  will  we  not  ?  The
younger  generation  of  Israel,  whatever  their  faults,  showed  by  their  conduct  then  and
thereafter  (Josh.  xziv.  31)  that  the  discipline  of  the  wilderness  had  not  been  with^t
good  results.

TTT.  God  is  with  us  in  adversity.  Though  bread  failed,  God  fed  them  with
manna  (ver.  3).  Their  every  want  was  supplied.  Jesus  teaches  us  to  trust  the
Father  for  the  supply  of  all  our  needs  (Matt.  iii.  25,  34).  His  own  trust,  vindicated  in
the  refusal  to  make  stones  into  bread,  was  rewarded  by  angels  ministering  unto  him
(Matt.  iv.  11).  He  "  ate  angels'  food  "  (I's.  Ixxviii.  25).  Our  wants  are  not  supplied
by  miracle,  but  by  providence,  which  is  all-sufficient  to  provide  for  us  in  every  ordinary
case. — J.  0.

Ver.  3. — Not  hreeui,  lut  OocTs  Word.  The  lesson  of  the  manna  gathered  up  into  one
concise  sentence.    It  teaches  us —

L  To  SEE  God  in  seoondaby  causes.  The  Word  of  God  is  as  truly  the  creative  and
nourishing  principle  in  ordinary  bread  as  it  was  in  the  extraordinary  supply  of  manna.
It  is  not  bread,  as  something  subsisting  independently,  but  bread  as  the  product  ol
Divine  power,  and  as  possessing  properties  which  the  Word  of  God  imparts  to  it  and
upholds  in  it,  which  is  the  staff  of  life  and  the  object  of  our  prayers  (Matt.  vi.  11).

XL  To  believe  in  God  aotdto  above  nature  as  well  as  in  it.  If  God  wills  life
to  be  sustained,  he  can  sustain  it  in  other  ways  than  by  bread.  He  is  not  tied  up  to
one  set  of  means.  He  can  act,  if  it  pleases  him,  independently  of  means  altogether,
the  creative  word  being  sufficient  to  sustain.  This  is  the  direct  meaning  of  the  text,
cuid  a  part  of  the  significance  of  Christ's  answer  to  the  tempter  (Matt.  iv.  4).

HI.    To  recognize  in  man  the  existence  of  a  UIGHliK  LIFE  THAN  THE  PHYSICAL.
DEUTEBONOIIY.  U


162  THE  BOOK.  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  vm.  1—20.

The  physical  is  not  the  highest  in  us.  We  do  not  live  by  bread  alone.  A  higher  life
is  found  in  depending  on  God's  Word,  in  obeying  it,  and  in  abiding  by  it,  whatever
the  immediate  consequences.  The  lower  life  may  need  to  be  given  up  that  the  higher
may  be  saved  (Matt,  xvi  26).— J.  O.

Yer.  6. — God  the  Chastener.  L  Chabtibekent  ib  a  nECESsirr  of  oub  mobal
NATUEE.  He  is  no  wise  parent  who  spares  the  rod  when  the  good  of  the  child  requires
that  chastisement  be  administered.  Gentler  methods  failing,  the  undutiful  son  might
to  be  chastised.  He  deserves  it.  He  needs  the  discipline.  It  acts  wholesomely  upon
him,  awakening  conscience,  begetting  respect  for  paternal  authority,  deterring  from
evil,  leading  probably  to  penitence  and  submission.

II.  Chastisement  is  an  essential  part  of  God's  treatment  of  his  ohildkeit.
His  chastisements  proceed  from  love  (Heb.  xii.  6).  They  are  wisely  meted  out^  and  aro
always  for  our  profit  (Heb.  xii.  10).  God  can  bear  to  punish.  He  will  not  allow  our
faults  to  slip.  He  will  make  us  feel  when  we  do  wrong,  hedging  vup  our  way,  and
laying  stripes  upon  us.  God's  children  have  the  comfort  of  knowing  that  they  are
thus  in  a  Father's  hand,  and  that  in  all  they  suffer  they  are  being  chastened  by
unerring  love  and  wisdom.

nL  Chastisement  is  a  past  of  God's  DisciPLniE  of  us  fob  which  we  should  bb
GBATEFUL.  Not  murmuring,  but  submitting  to  it.  Without  this  chastisement :  1.  How
forgetful  of  God  would  we  soon  become  1  2.  How  haughty  and  self-willed  1  3.  How
dilatory  in  duty  I — J.  0.

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  good  land.  L  A  iand  of  obeat  hatubal  advantages — a
wetdthy  possession.  Wood,  water,  metals,  a  fertile  soil,  good  pasturage,  honey  in  the
clefts  of  the  rooks,  etc.  (ch.  xi.  11, 12 ;  xxxiiL  13 — 16, 19,  25).  Dr.  Dykes  remarks  on
it  as  uniting,  as  no  other  does,  the  two  indispensable  conditions  of  central  position  and
yet  of  isolation,  and  points  out  that  few  regions  offer  so  few  temptations  to  corrupt  the
simplicity  of  their  inhabitants,  or  better  facilities  for  the  defence  of  their  liberties
('  Abraham,'  ch.  iii.).  A  yet  richer  inheritance  awaits  the  Christian,  who  is  brought
through-  the  fire  and  water  of  tribulation  to  "  a  wealthy  place  "  (Ps.  IxvL  12 ;  2.  Cor.
iv.  17, 18 ;  Heb.  xi.  16 ;  1  Pet.  i.  4).

n.  A  LAND  OF  OBEAT  OUTWARD  PLEASANTNESS — o  heautiftA  possession.  The
speaker  dwells  in  captivating  detail  on  the  features  of  its  beauty — its  hills  and  valleys,
gushing  with  springs  and  cleft  with  innumerable  water-courses;  picturesque  in  its
scenery,  richly  cultivated,  diversified  in  its  natural  productions ;  blending  with  its  agri-
c^nral  and  pastoral  beauties  the  graces  of  the  vine-clad  slope,  of  the  olive  garden,  of
orchards  of  luscious  firuits.  A  type  of  the  fairer  land  beyond — the  Canaan  of  the
skies.

in.  A  LAND  OF  BiHAUSTLBSS  PLENTY — a  satisfying  possession.  "  Eat  bread  without
scarceness,"  etc  (ver.  9).  God  was  not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God,  having  provided
for  them  so  rich  a  possession.  Yet  how  poor  were  its  satisfactions  as  compared  with
those  which  await  believers  (Rev.  xxi.  4) !

The  land  was  given  them  in  fulfilment  of  promise ;  for  the  possession  of  it  God  had
been  preparing  them  in  the  wilderness ;  and  the  sharpness  of  the  desert  experience
made  the  rest  and  delights  of  it  sweeter  when  they  came.  "Trials  make  the  promise
sweet,"  etc — J.  O.

Vers.  10 — 19. — The  dangers  of  wenlth.  I.  Wealth  is  dangbboub  without  the
previous  teaining  of  adversity.  Those  who,  cradled  in  the  lap  of  luxury,  have
rjever  known  struggle  and  difficulty  are  rarely  persons  of  meek,  humble,  chastened  dis-
positions. As  rarely  are  those  whose  schemes  have  been  so  uniformly  prosperous  as
to  give  colour  to  the  thought,  "  My  power  and  the  might  of  mine  hand  hath  gotten  me
this  wealth."  The  former  class  lack  moral  fibre,  are  seldom  competent  to  grapple  with
the  proDlems  of  earnest  life,  shrink  from  action,  and  consequently  fall  an  easy  prey  to
the  temptations  of  their  wealth.  The  others  are  bold,  daring,  self-sufficient,  and  superior
to  religious  considerations.  They  waive  God  aside  from  their  plans  and  schemes — "  I
do  not  need  that  hypothesis" — and  refuse  to  worship,  honour,  pray  to,  or  serve  him.
Adveisity,  to  a  certain  extent,  tends  to  correct  these  faults.    It  teaches  humilUy  and


CH.  vm.  1— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBROJiJOMY.  163

dependence,  proves  the  heart,  and  forms  it  to  habits  which  enable  it  to  use  wealth
rightly.

II.  Wealth  is  dangerous,  even  with  the  tbainino  of  advbrsitt,  unless  thb
LESSONS  OF  adversity  HAVE  BEEN  IMPROVED.  Advsrsit^,  unhappily,  does  not  always
produce  in  men's  hearts  the  salutary  effects  which  philosophy  assigns  to  it.  It  may
harden  instead  of  softening  and  subduing.  Multitudes  pass  through  it  and  are  none  the
better.  They  are  unyielding,  unsubmissive,  impenitent.  They  grow  bitter  in  spirit,
and  accuse  the  God  of  heaven.  In  such  a  case  the  return  of  prosperity,  or  the  gift  of
it,  is  no  blessing.  The  heart  gets  haughtier  than  ever,  and  God  is  defied  (Gbad.  3,  4).
It  is  a  serious  question  for  a  nation  to  put  to  itself,  after  passing  through  a  period  of
adversity,  Is  it  morally  the  better  for  its  sufferings?  For,  if  not,  the  revival  of  pros-
perity will  mean  but  the  revival  of  the  old  follies,  extravagances,  and  inflations — the
very  things  which  formerly  led  God  to  turn  his  frown  upon  it.

ni.  There  is  a  danger,  when  wealth  comes,  of  the  lessons  learned  in  adversity
BEING  AGAIN  FORGOTTEN.  This  is  the  peculiar  danger  apprehended  in  the  text.
Wealth  has  so  subtle  and  ensnaring  an  influence,  it  draws  the  affections  so  stealthily
away  from  God,  that  no"  temptation  is  to  be  compared  with  it  in  point  of  insidiousness.
A  threefold  danger :  1,  Undue  elation  of  heart.  2.  Forgetfulness  of  God.  3.  A  spirit
of  self-sufficiency  and  self-glorification.  The  preventive  lies  in  the  cultivation  of  a
thankful  spirit  (ver.  10),  and  in  the  recollection  that  the  power  to  get  wealth  is  not  of
ourselves,  but  from  God  (ver.  18).  This  is  the  root-error  in  the  matter — stopping
at  second  causes,  putting  nature  and  nature's  laws,  or  our  own  wisdom,  energy,  and
forethought,  in  place  of  him  without  whom  we  could  not  think  a  thought,  move  a
muscle,  or  carry  through  to  completion  one  of  our  purposes.  Best  preventive  of  all  is
the  laying  up  of  treasure  in  heaven ;  for,  "  where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your  heart
be  also"  (Matt.  vL  19— 22).- J.  O.

Ver.  10. — The  blessing  of  a  thankful  spirit.  I.  A  thankful  BPntrr  conserves  the
BLBSSINOS  OF  THE  PAST.  It  goes  back  on  God's  dealings  with  it.  It  keeps  alive  the
memory  of  his  goodness.  It  delights  in  counting  over  the  blessings  it  has  received
(Ps.  xl.  5).  In  it  the  fountain  of  gratitude  can  never  get  frozen  up,  for  the  springs  are
daily  flowing  from  a  warm  heart  (Ps.  ciii.  1 — 4).

IL   A  THANKFUL  SPIRIT  ENABLES  US  TO  USE  ARIGHT  THE  BLESSINGS  OF  THE  PRESENT.

It  guards  against  sinful  elation,  against  proud  self-sufficiency.  It  keeps  us  from
forgetting  whence  our  blessings  flow.  By  a  sense  of  Gk)d's  goodness  daily  renewing
itself,  it  makes  the  heart  kind  and  sympathetic,  sensitive  to  the  wants  and  woes  of
others.  The  spirit  is  softened  and  sweetened.  Under  adversity,  it  conduces  to  ranig-
nation  and  cheerfulness.

III.  A  THANKFUL  SPIRIT  HELPS  US  TO  PRAT  FOB  BLESSINGS  IN  THE   FUTURE.      Hence

the  nile  that  prayer  is  to  be  accompanied  with  thanksgivings  (Eph.  v.  20;  Col.  iii.  15 ;
Pldl.  iv.  6).  Thanksgiving  strengthens  faith,  gives  encouragement,  enables  us  to  pray
with  due  submission  to  God's  will,  prepares  us  for  the  reception  of  the  blessings  that
we  seek.  Without  thankfulness  for  past  mercies,  it  is  impossible  to  pray  aright  for
future  ones. — J.  O.

Ver.  16. — Good  at  the  latter  end.  I.  Ood's  discipline  of  us  is  not  without  its
END.  Ko  man  even,  whose  action  has  any  meaning  in  it,  but  has  an  end  in  what  he
does.  It  may  be  alleged  that  God's  action  has  regard  to  men  only  in  the  mass ;  that
in  that  view  of  it  his  action  has  an  end;  but  that  a  special  purpose  is  not  traceable  in
his  dealings  with  individuals.  The  truer  philosophy  sees  purpose  everywhere.  The
individual  soul  is  of  interest  to  God.  He  deems  it  worthy  of  being  an  end  in  itself.
Though  subordinately  to  the  general  good,  he  shapes  his  providence  with  a  view  to  its
individual  well-being  (Matt.  x.  29—31).    For—

II.  God's  discipline  of  ds  is  meant  to  turn  to  our  ultimate  advantage.  "  To
do  thee  good  at  thy  latter  end."  The  immediate  object  of  God's  discipline  is  to  form
character ;  to  create  and  develop  love,  trust,  and  obedience ;  to  uproot  evil  dispositions ;
to  break  down  self-will  and  self-dependence.  The  ultimate  end  of  it  is  the  servica  and
blessedness  of  heaven.  There  may  be  some  service  which  God  is  preparing  us  for  on
"arth,  some  possession  he  wishes  to  ^ve  us,  some  trust  he  is  about  to  repose  in  us.


164  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  vm,  1—20

But  heaven  is  the  goal  of  all  (2  Cor.  iv.  17;  1  Pet.  i.  7;  Bev.  in.   10—13;  rii

13—17).

III.  The  b>t)  of  God'b  DisciPLniB  op  us  will  not  be  fully  been  till  the  goal
IS  REAOHXD.  j.'ill  then  our  duty  is  to  do  present  work,  and  improre  by  present
training. — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  lessons  of  the  wilderness.  Moses  here  recalls  the  leadings  of  God
in  the  wilderness,  for  the  warning  and  instruction  of  the  Israelites.  And  we  are  taught,
surely,  such  lessons  as  these —

L  The  wat  of  salvation  is  one  also  of  humiliation.  This  is,  indeed,  God's
plan,  "  to  hide  pride  from  us."  The  way  of  salvation  through  Christ  is  humiliating
We  are  proved  by  it  and  made  to  see  what  is  in  our  heart.

n.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  a  way  of  marvellous  mbbot.  For  God  supplies  onr
wants  and  sustains  us  in  a  truly  marvellous  way,  like  the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness.
Thus—

1.  The  mariTM  was  to  tiach  them  dependence  on  his  word.  It  was  given  when  they
were  hungry  and  despairing ;  it  was  given  daily ;  its  only  guarantee  of  continuance
was  God's  promise ; — all  was,  therefore,  to  keep  them  depending  upon  his  sure  word.

And  life's  discipline  brings  us  to  the  same  persuasion  that  man  must  live  upon  the
promise  proceeding  out  of  the  mouth  of  God  (cf.  Matt.  iv.  4).  Our  Saviour  vanquished
Satan's  insinuation  that  he  must  use  his  miraculous  power  or  perish,  by  resolving  to
continue  trusting  in  God.

2.  27)6  raiment  did  not  toax  old,  to  strengthen  still  further  their  trust.  It  was  a
wonderful  arrangement  which  allowed  them  forty  years'  wear  in  the  wilderness  out  of
the  same  garments.  It  must  have  been  good  clothing  from  Egyptian  looms.  But  after
starting  there  it  remained,  resisting  the  tooth  of  time.  Each  Israelite  had  evidence  on
his  person  of  a  particular  providence.

3.  Neither  did  the  pilgrims  hecome  footsore.  Their  feet  did  not  swell.  They  were
made  equal  to  their  journey.  The  wilderness  was  not  too  rough  for  them.  Their
freedom  from  bodily  inconvenience  must  have  been  a  great  source  of  satisfaction  and
comfort  to  them.

In  a  similar  way  does  God  supply  all  our  need  and  fit  us  for  our  pilgrimage.

III.  God's  chastisements  are  paternal.  So  was  it  with  Israel  in  the  wilderness.
They  suffered  at  the  hands  of  God,  but  it  was  what  wayward  children  might  expect
from  a  faithful  parent.

So  is  it  with  ourselves  (c£  Ps.  ciii.  13 ;  Heb.  xiL  1—14).  Pain  becomes  blessed
when  we  know  that  love  sent  it  for  a  gracious  purpose.  We  are  all  in  the  hands  of  a
Father  in  heaven.  He  deals  with  us  according  to  his  infinite  wisdom  and  love.  Let  ns
make  more  of  the  lessons  of  this  wilderness  journey  than  ever,  and  go  on  in  the  strength
of  God  towards  the  everlasting  home,  profiting  by  liis  chastisements  on  the  way. — ^B.  M.  E.

Vers.  7 — 20. — Ood  forgotten  amid  second  causes.  The,  support  of  the  wilderness
was  manifestly  miraculous.  They  could  not  doubt  their  dependence  there  upon  God.
They  might  murmur  even  amid  daily  miracle,  but  they  could  not  doubt  it.  It  would
be  different  in  Canaan,  and  it  is  in  view  of  this  Moses  warns  them.  There  they  would
get  sustenance  in  ordinary  ways ;  and  they  might  say  that  their  own  power,  and  not
God's  blessing,  made  them  wealthy.

I.  There  is  a  very  great  tendency  to  forget  God  amid  the  order  op  natdbe.
It  is  supposed  God  has  notliing  to  do,  because  we  get  our  supplies  through  steady
"  second  causes."  But  God  claims  recognition  when  he  blesses  us  through  ordinary
channels  as  well  as  when  he  blesses  us  through  extraordinary.  The  natural  order  is
either  due  to  CM  or  arranged  itself.  We  have  not  credulity  sufficient  for  the  latter
hypothesis,  and  must  accept  the  former.

II.  When  God  asks  us  to  be  fellow-workers  with  him,  it  is  not  to  be  enobobbbI)
WTTH  ouB  WORK  AND  TO  IGNORE  HIS.  In  the  wildemess  God  fed  them  out  of  his  own
hand, "SO  to  speak.  But  in  Canaan  he  directed  them  to  work  for  their  daily  bread.
They  were  raised  from  being  "  spoon-fed  "  to  be  "  fellow-workers."  The  temptation  in
Cnnaan  was  to  think  that  their  own  hand  and  power  had  produced  the  wealth.

it  is  the  same  stiU.     From  being  fellow-workers  with  God,  men,  by  mere  forget^


CH.  IX.  1—29.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DBUTEBONOMY


16o


fulness,  pass  into  the  delusion  of  being  sole  workers.  Life  ii  workable,  they  think,
without  God.    Atheism  is  the  principle  underlying  such  a  life.

in.  This  unholy  independence  op  spieit  is  the  sure  prelude  of  national
DECAY.  It  is  not  national  "  self-reliance "  which  serves  a  state,  but  national  reliance
upon  God  in  the  use  of  the  means  he  has  appointed.  Nations  that  think  they  can  get
on  alone  are  left  at  length  to  do  so,  and  God-deserted  they  perish.

The  Canaanites  were  illustrating  this  in  their  own  case.  They  should  be  a  warning
to  Israel.  Living  without  God  in  the  world,  depending  on  themselves,  they  were  about
to  be  removed  violently  from  their  ancestral  seats.  It  was  so  afterwarcis  with  Israel.
They  were  as  a  nation  effaced  from  the  land  where  they  had  been  placed  in  probation.
The  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes  was  terrible,  and  so  was  that  of  Judah  and  Benjamin.

It  is  this  which  nations  must  still  guard  against.  God  will  not  be  ignored.  If
nations  attempt  it,  they  only  eiface  themselves.  Dying  dynasties  and  scattered  nations
proclaim  the  existence  and  retribution  of  God.

rV.    How   KBEDPUL,  THEN,  TO   EECOGNIZB  God's  HAND  IN  ALL   THINGS !      The  prOCeS-

sion  of  nature — all  that  is  beautiful  in  second  causes,  has  come  from  him.  The  "  First
Cause  "  may  surely  be  allowed  to  work  through  "  second  causes  "  without  forfeiting  his
right  to  recognition  and  thanksgiving.  Our  times  are  largely  atheistic,  because  our
little  knowledge  of  second  causes  affords  such  fussy  occupation  to  us,  that  we  have  not
taste  or  time  to  see  the  Fiist  Cause  behind  all  and  using  all  for  his  glory. — B.  M.  K


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IX.

DiSSUASIVES  FROM    SeLF-RIGHTEOTTSNBSS.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Israel  might  acknowledge
that  it  was  of  God's  free  gift  that  they  pos-
sessed the  land  of  Canaan,  and  yet  might
Hatter  themselves  by  thinking  it  was  because
of  their  righteousness  and  goodness  that  the
gift  was  bestowed.  To  guard  against  this,
Moses  tells  them  that  not  because  of  their
righteousness  would  God  go  before  them
and  drive  out  tlie  mighty  peoples  that  then
occupied  the  land,  but  because  of  the  wicked-
ness of  these  peoples  themselves  were  they
to  be  extirpated  (vers.  1 — 6).  He  further
reminds  them  of  their  transgressions  in  the
past,  and  how  they  thereby  came  under  the
Divine  displeasure,  and  were  saved  from
lestiuction  only  through  his  earnest  inter-
■ession  (vers.  7 — 24).

Ver.  1.— This  day ;  at  this  time,  very  soon.
^.Tations,  etc.  (cf.  ch  vii  1).  Cities  (cf.  ch.  i.
28).

Ver.  2. — ^Anakim  (cf.  ch.  i.  28).  It  was  a
common  saying.  Who  can  stand  hefore  the
sons  of  Anak !  But  even  these  gigantic  foes
should  be  unable  to  stand  before  Israel  (cf.
ch.  vii.  24).

Ver.  3. — ^Understand  therefore  this  day;
rather.  And  thou  knoweet  to-day  or  now.
The  expression  corresponds  to  ver.  1, "  Thou
ait  to  pass  . . .  and  thou  knowest."  In  the
victory  they  had  obtained  over  Sihon  and
r)„',  they  had  already  had  experience  of  the
Lord's  going  before  them,  and  leading  them


on  in  triumph.  The  repetition  of  the  Ke  in
this  verse  is  very  emphatic.  Consuming  fire
(cf.  ch.  iv.  24).  Quickly,  or  suddenly.  There
is  no  contradiction  here  of  what  is  said  in  ch.
vii.  22;  for  there  the  reference  is  to  the
possession  of  the  land  by  Israel,  here  it  is
to  the  destruction  which  was  to  come  on  the
Canaanites — the  former  was  to  be  by  degrees,
the  latter  was  to  come  suddenly  and  over-
whelmingly. As  Jehovah  hath  said  unto
thee  (cf.  XCxod.  xxiii.  23,  27,  etc. ;  ch.  ii.  24,
etc.).

Vers.  4,5.— Speaknotthoninthineheart(cf.
viii.  17).  The  distinction  betwec  n  righteous-
ness and  uprightness  (straightiiess)  of  heart,
is  that  the  former  ("|^s)  has  reference  to  recti-
tude of  conduct,  the  latter  (n»'0  to  rectitude  of
motive  and  purpose.  "By  naming  justice
[righteousness],  he  excludeth  all  merit  of
works,  and  by  righteousness  [uprightness]
of  heart,  all  inward  aflfections  and  purposes,
which  men  might  plead,  notwithstanding
that  they  fail  in  acti^  m.  Yet  these  two  are
the  chief  things  which  God  respecteth  in
men  (Ps.  xv.  1,  2;  1  Chron.  xxix.  17)"
(Ainsworth).

Ver.  6. — Stiffneoked,  hard  of  neck ;  stub
born,  obstinate,  rebellious.

Vers.  7 — 25. — Moses  reminds  them  of  many
instances  of  their  rebelliousness  by  which
they  had  provoked  the  Lord,  from  the  time
of  their  escape  out  of  Egypt  until  their
arrival  in  the  plains  of  Moab.  Their  re-
bellion began  even  before  they  had  wholly
escaped  from  their  oppressors,  before  they
had  passed  through  the  Bed  Sea  (£xud.


166


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTBEONOMT.


[oh.  a.  1— S9.


xiv.  11).  Even  at  Horeb,  where,  amid
the  most  affecting  manifestations  alike  of
the  Divine  majesty  and  the  Divine  grace,
just  after  the  Lord  had  spoken  to  them
directly  out  of  th«  Are,  and  whilst  Moses
had  gone  up  to  receive  the  tables  of
the  Law,  on  whioh  the  covenant  of  God
with  Israel  was  baserl,  and  whilst  that
covenant  was  being  struck,  they  had  sinned
so  grievously  as  to  make  to  themselves  a
molten  image,  which  they  worshipped  with
idolatrous  rites  (Exod.  zxzi  18 — zxzii ,  6 ;  ot
ch.  xxiv.  12,  etc.).

Ver.  9. — The  clause,  Then  I  abode  .  .  .
water,  is  a  parenthesis ;  the  sentence  rung
on  from  When  I  was  gone,  etc.,  to  Then
[not  Aitd]  the  Lord  delivered  unto  me,  etc.

Ver.  10.— The  day  of  the  assembly ;  the  day
when  the  people,  called  out  by  Moses,  were
gathered  together  in  the  plain  at  the  foot  of
Mount  Sinai  (Exod.  ziz.  17).

Vers.  12— 14.— (Of.  Eiod.  xiiii.  7—10.)
Let  me  alone ;  literally,  Desist  from  me.  i.e.
Do  not  by  pleadings  and  entreaties  attempt
to  prevent  me;  in  Exod.  xxxii.  10  the  ex-
pression used  is,  "  Let  me  rest ;  leave  me  in
quiet  {"h  rri'in) ;  cease  to  urge  me."

Ver.  17. — Moses  oast  from  him  the  two
tables  of  stone  on  which  God  had  inscribed
the  words  of  the  Law,  and  broke  Ihem  in
pieces  in  the  view  of  the  people,  when  he
came  down  from  the  mount  and  saw  how
they  had  turned  aside  from  the  right  way,
and  were  become  idolaters.  This  was  not
the  effect  of  a  burst  of  indignation  on  his
part ;  it  was  a  solemn  declaration  that  the
covenant  of  God  with  his  people  had  been
nullified  and  broken  by  their  sinful  apostacy.

Vers.  18 — 20. — Moses  interceded  with  God
for  the  people  before  he  came  down  from  the
mount  (Exod.  xiii.  11,  etc.);  but  this  he
passes  over  here,  merely  referring  to  it  in
the  words,  "as  at  the  first,"  and  makes
special  mention  only  of  a  subsequent  inter-
cession, that  mentioned  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  28.
In  the  account  in  Exodus  nothing  is  said
of  Closes  interceding  for  Aaron  specially,  as
well  as  for  the  people  generally ;  but  pro-
minence is  given  to  this  here,  "not  only
that  he  might  make  the  people  thoroughly
aware  that  at  that  time  Israel  could  not
boast  even  of  the  righteousness  of  its  emi-
nent men  (cf.  Isa.  xliii.  27),  but  also  to
bi-ing  out  the  fact,  which  is  described  still
more  fully  in  ch.  x.  6,  sqq.,  that  Aaron's
investiture  with  the  priesthood  and  the
maintenance  of  this  institution  was  purely
a  work  of  Divine  grace"  (Keil).  That
Aaron,  however,  was  regarded  as  especially
to  ba  blamed  in  this  matter  is  clearly  inti-
mated in  End.  zxxii.  21,  22.


Vers.  22—24. — ^Not  only  at  Horeb,  bnt  at
other  places  and  on  other  occasions,  had
Israel  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath  by  their
contumacy.  At  Taberah,  by  their  com-
plaining and  discontent  (Numb.  li.  1 — 3).
at  Massah,  by  their  murmuring  because  of
the  want  of  water  (Exod.  ivii.  1,  eto.);  at
Eibroth-hattaavah,  by  despising  the  manna,
and  lusting  for  flesh  to  eat  (Numb,  xi  4,  etc.);
and  at  Eadesh-bamea,  when  on  the  confines
of  the  promised  land,  they  distrusted  God,
reproached  him  for  having  brought  them
there  to  be  destroyed,  and  sought  to  return
to  Egypt  (Numb.  xiv.  1,  etc.;  oh.  i  26).
"The  list  is  not  arranged  chronologically,
but  advances  from  the  smaller  to  the  more
serious  forms  of  g^ilt.  For  Moses  was
seeking  to  sharpen  the  consciences  of  the
people,  and  to  impress  upon  them  the  fact
that  they  had  been  rebellious  against  the-
Lord  (see  at  ver.  7)  from  the  very  beginning,
'from  the  day  that  I  knew  you'"  (Eeil).

Ver.  25 — 29. — ^Having  enumerated  these
instances  of  the  rebelliousness  of  the  people,
Moses  reverts  to  the  apostacy  at  Sinai,  in
order  still  more  to  impress  on  the  minds
of  the  people  the  conviction  that  not  for  any
righteousness  or  merit  of  theirs,  bnt  solely
of  his  own  grace,  was  God  fulfilling  to  them
his  covenant  with  tlieii  fathers.

Ver.  25. — Thus  I  fell  down  before  the
lord  forty  days  and  forty  nights,  as  I  fell
down  at  the  first ;  rather,  the  forty  dayi  and
forty  nights  in  which  I  fell  dmnn.  The
reference  is  to  the  intercession  before  Moses
came  down  from  the  mount,  described  in
Exod.  xxxii.  11—13.  (For  the  form  of  the
expression,  cf.  ch.  i.  46.)

Vers.  26 — 29. — In  these  verses  the  sub-
stance of  Moses'  intercession  is  given,  and
it  ia  substantially  in  agreement  with  the
account  in  Exodus.  Moses  pleaded  with
God  not  to  destroy  that  people  which  was
his  own,  which  he  had  redeemed  for  himself
and  brought  out  of  Egypt ;  besought  him  to
remember  their  pious  ancestors,  and  not
to  look  on  the  stubbomneas  and  sin  of  the
people;  and  urged  that  the  Divine  honour
was  concerned  in  their  being  conducted  to
Canaan,  and  not  let  perish  in  the  wilderness,

Ver.  28. — The  land,  that  is,  the  people  oi
the  land,  as  in  Gen.  xli.  36 — the  Egyptians ;
the  verb,  accordingly,  is  in  the  plural.
Were  the  Israelites  to  perish  in  the  wilder-
ness, the  Egyptians  might  say  that  Grod
had  destroyed  them,  either  beoanse  he  waa
unable  to  obtain  for  them  the  land  he  had
promised  them,  or  because  he  had  ceased  to
regard  them  with  favour,  and  had  become
their  enemy.  Neither  of  these  could  be,
for  were  they  not  the  people  of  his  in-
heritance, and   had   he   sot   showed   hii


CH.  IX.  1—29.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


167


power  already  in  deliTerlng  them  out  of
Egypt?

"  As  Moses  in  this  chapter  recalls  to  the
lemembranoe  of  Israel  this  and  that  place,
Umt,  and  occcuton  of  their  sinning,  so  should


each  one  often  seriously  reflect  on  hia  past
life.  This  conduces  to  humility,  to  watch-
fulness, and  to  effort  at  improremeut "
(Herxhdmer).


EOMILETIOa


Yen.  1— 8.->(See  Homily  on  ch.  iv.  23,  24.)

Yen.  4,  5. — (See  Homilies  on  ch.  iii.  11 ;  vii.  1 — ^11.)

Vers.  8—12. — A  tix-weehs'  religion ;  or,  emotional  religioumegg  not  vital  goilineu.
The  homiletic  treatment  of  the  incidents  referred  to  in  ch.  ix.  1 — x.  5,  will  require  a
careful  comparison  of  these  chapters  with  the  fuller  account  in  Bxorl.  xxxii. — xxxiv.
The  special  object,  however,  which  Moses  has  here  in  view,  is  to  show  how  entirely
Orod's  mercy  to  Israel  was  a  self-moved  one,  and  that  it  was  not  due  to  any  virtue  on
the  part  of  the  people.  So  far  from  that,  they  had  been  wayward  from  the  first.  Even
in  Horeb  (for  such  is  rather  the  force  of  the  particle  rendered  "  also  "  in  ver.  8),  "  Even
In  Horeb,  ye  provoked  the  Lord  to  wrath."  Here  is  suggested  our  first  study  of  this
sad  incident  in  Israel's  history.    Its  occurrence  was  on  this  wise —

About  fifty  days  after  leaving  Egypt,  they  were  gathered  beneath  Mount  Sinai,  to
receive  the  Law  from  the  Great  Supreme.  They  reverently  watched  when  Moses  went
np ;  they  saw  the  bounds  put,  beyond  which  they  must  not  pass ;  they  trembled  at
the  majesty  which  was  before  and  above  them,  and  awaited  the  words  which  should  be
spoken.  The  words  of  the  vow  went  up  from  their  lips,  "AH  that  the  Lord  hath
spoken  we  will  do."  Having  received  the  Law,  Moses  went  down  and  rehearsed  it  to
them.  A  second  time  they  responded,  "  All  that,"  etc.  This  was  not  enough.  The  Law
was  to  be  written,  and  read  over  to  them,  that  their  vow  might  be  neither  blind  nor
rash.  And  a  third  time  the  same  response  was  returned.  Whereupon  the  covenant
was  ratified  with  blood,  which  was  sprinliled  on  the  book  and  all  the  people,  saying,
"  This  is  the  blood  of  the  covenant,"  etc.  (see  Exod.  xxiv.  3 — 8).  It  seemed  as  if  a  fair
start  had  been  made.  Egypt  had  been  conquered,  the  people  had  thanlifuUy  accepted
the  new  state  of  things  on  which  they  had  entered,  and  nothing  was  wanting  but  the
carrying  out  of  that  allegiance  they  had  so  repeatedly  vowed.  Moses,  however,  has
yet  to  be  a  while  in  solitude  with  God,  to  receive  further  instructions ;  hence,  having
made  arrangements  for  the  conduct  of  affairs  in  his  absence,  he  again  ascends  the
mount,  and  is  there  for  forty  days.  Unable  to  understand  the  reasons  for  so  long  a  delay,
the  people  think  that  Moses  has  disappointed  them,  or  that  he  is  lost  on  the  mountain,
or  has  perished  in  the  flame  i  The  thought,  once  conceived,  gathers  strength,  and  the
very  people  who  a  few  weeks  before  had  seemed  so  impressible  for  good,  are  now  as
inflammable  for  evil  1  They  rush  upon  Aaron,  saying,  "  Up,"  etc.  They  wish  for
something  to  strike  the  senses.  The  pure  conception  of  an  unseen  God  they  were  not
cultured  enough  to  retain.  Aaron  was  far  too  easily  wrought  upon  by  them.  If  it
be  thought  that  he  expected  the  people's  love  of  finery  to  be  stronger  than  their
idolatrous  propensity,  and  that  they  would  withdraw  t/ieir  demand  when  he  made  his
for  their  ear-rings,  etc.,  we  save  Aaron's  principle,  but  at  the  expense  of  his  judgment.
Anyway,  the  calf  is  made.  It  is  not  the  calf,  however,  that  they  worship,  for  thoy
proclaim  a  feast  to  Jehovah ;  it  is  the  second  commandment  they  are  breaking,  not  the
first.  Alas!  alas!  their  triple"  vow,  ratified  with  blood,  they  break,  and  in  less  than
six  weeks  they  are  openly  and  riotously  setting  at  nought  the  very  Law  they  had  sworn
to  obey!  How  can  such  a  fearfully  rapid  retrogression  be  accounted  for?  If  we
regard  it  as  a  mere  piece  of  history,  with  which  we  have  no  concern,  we  shall  miss  the
intent  of  the  writer  (for  see  1  Cor.  x.  1 — 12).  Here  are  men  who  at  one  moment  bid  so
fair,  yet  so  shortly  after  upsetting  all !  The  theme  thus  opened  up  to  the  preacher
is  surely  this — "Emotional  religiousness  not  vital  godliness"  No  one  with  much
knowledge  of  human  nature,  and  certainly  few  pastors  of  any  lengthened  experience.
can  have  failed  to  ob^erv  cjiscs  far  too  nearly  resembling  that  before  us,  of  •  mereU


168  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  n.  1—29.

transient  emotion  in  religion,  raising  the  hopes  of  anxious  observers  one  day,-  only
to  disappoint  them  ere  many  days  are  over,  and  compelling  the  plaintive  words,
"  Tour  goodness  is  like  the  morniug  cloud  and  the  early  dew,  it  goeth  away  I"  And,
maybe,  the  change  is  as  inexplioaiile  to  thcmstlves  as  it  is  disheartening  to  others.
It  may  he  helpful  if  we  try  to  remove  th6  perplexity  by  a  study  of  several  inquiries
which  such  cases  suggest.

I.  How  PAE  DOES  THIS  EMOTIONAL  EELIGI0U8NES8  GO  ?  There  may  be  •  "  receiving  the
Word  with  joy ; "  giving  to  it,  not  only  a  respectful  attention,  but  even  mental  credence,
gladsome  admiration,  and  a  profound  conviction  that  the  gospel  message  exactly  meets
the  need  of  guilty,  sinful  man.  .And  when  the  beauty,  purity,  and  triumphant  issue
of  a  genuine  Christian  life  are  set  forth,  there  may  be  an  eager  desire  awakened  to
know  its  blessedness,  and  an  inward  resolution  formed  to  serve  the  Lord.  The  young
inquirer  seems,  perhaps,  at  such  a  stage  to  have  been  wafted,  as  by  a  Divine  breath,  to  a
region  of  halcyon  calm,  and  with  the  sincerity  and  dash  of  a  Peter  says,  "  Now  I  am
saved ;  though  all  men  should  dpny  Christ,  yet  I  never  will  I "  And  such  a  case  is
looked  at  with  tender,  glad,  yet  anxious  hopefulnessy  by  some  that  are  watching  for
souls  more  than  they  that  watch  for  the  morning.  And  yet,  notwithstanding  all,
there  is  a  grievous  defect,  not  yet  apparent  to  human  eye,  but  destined  ere  long  to
reveal  itself  to  the  bitter  disappointment  of  many  a  thoughtful  friend !

II.  Whai  IS  THERE  DBPECTrvB  IN  THIS  CASE?  There  is :  1.  Defective  knowledge
of  self.  2.  Defective  knowledge  of  what  the  Christian  life  is,  as  one  of  "  patient  con-
tinuance in  well-doing."  3.  Defective  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  4.  A
non-apprehension  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  tlie  sole  Source  of  life,  energy,  and  power.
5.  Emotion  is  mistaken  for  principle,  and  feelings  about  religion  for  a  real  surrender  of
heart  and  life  to  God.

III.  Severe  tests  await  such  a  onk.  (Cf.  Matt,  xiii,  20,  21 ;  Luke  xiv.  27,  28.)
Days  in  which  all  things  run  smoothly  are  not  those  which  test  of  what  stuff  men  are
made.  '  No  one's  life,  however,  is  made  up  of  smooth  days  only.  There  are  occasions
which  put  every  part  of  a  man  on  the  rack.  And  there  are  testing  times  in  store  for
the  yotng  emotionalist.  1.  Affliction  for  the  Word's  sake  will  come.  2.  Persecution
may  come.  3.  Scepticism,  or  cross-currents  of  public  sentiment  may  disturb.  4.  Or
abounding  worldliness  may  bring  a  chill  or  even  a  blight.  Some  trial  or  other  will
surely  come  to  test  each  and  all.  It  may  come  suddenly  as  a  storm  of  wind  on  a  lake,
or  may  act  slowly  yet  surely  as  the  waters  wear  away  the  stones.  Somehow  or  other,
come  it  will;  and  where  there  is  profession  without  possession,  sad  will  be  the
end,  for —

IV.  Such  tests  will  be  patal.  Only  forty  days  after  their  vow,  Israel  broke  down.
The  terrors  of  Sinai  could  not  maintain  Israel's  loyalty.  Nor  will  even  the  pathos  of
Calvary,  of  itself,  avail  now.  'i'he  following  results  will  follow,  sooner  or  later,  if  beneath
the  outward  vow  there  has  been  no  surrender  of  heart  and  life  to  God.  1.  Emotion
will  die  out.  Men  oaunot  live  at  fever  heat ;  it  is  not  desirable  that  they  should.  If
beneath  the  emotion  there  is  living  principle,  though  the  emotion  lessen,  that  will
strengthen.  But  if  there  is  no  such  living,  principle,  the  emotion  will  leave  nought
behind  it  but  sadder  lack  of  it  than  ever.  2.  External  membership  will  come  to  be
rested  in,  as  if  it  "  covered  a  multitude  of  sins."  3.  There  will  be  a  growing  indifference
to  the  higher  and  more  spiritual  work  of  the  Christian  life — both  in  private,  social,  and
Church  duties.  4.  There  may  even  be  a  collapse  into  a  state  of  more  thorough  worldli-
ness than  before  any  profession  whatever  was  made ;  and  "  the  last  state  of  that  man
is  worse  than  the  first."  Of  all  the  members  of  Christian  congregations,  those  are  the
hardest  to  move  who  made  a  profession  in  a  swell  of  emotion,  without  quickening  of
conscience  or  the  renewal  of  the  heart  1

V.  What  is  needed  in  such  oases?  1.  Deep  and  genuine  conviction  of  sin  and
repentance  before  God ;  a  quickening  unto  righteousness,  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit.
2.  Heart-surrender  to  God ;  this  cannot  be  brought  about  through  being  borne  along
in  a  crowd  as  on  a  wave  of  religious  ecstasy,  any  more  than  the  patients  in  a  hospital
can  be  cured  en  masse.  3.  New  life  towards  God,  created,  sustained,  perpetually
increased  by  the  supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ,  renewed  by  faith,  and  aided  by
communion  with  God,

In  ookolvsion.  Let  all  beware  of  trusting  to  "iianieB  and  feelings."    Emotion  ia


OH.  n.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEKONOMY.  16S

not  devotion.  And  on  the  other  hand,  let  ns  take  care  not  to  fall  into  the  opposite
error.  "  Ah,"  say  some,  "  see  what  comes  of  religious  excitement.  It  is  time  there
was  a  protest  against  itl"  But  we  make  no  protest  whatever  against  excitement,  but
against  mere  excitement,  which  is  a  very  different  thing.  Because  a  blaze  cannot  be
kept  up  without  fuel,  that  is  no  reason  why,  with  plenty  of  fuel  constantly  supplied,
a  fire  should  not  be  kept  ablaze  1  It  is  true  that  if  there  is  nought  but  emotion,  it
must  die  out  and  be  followed  by  a  collapse ;  but  that  is  no  reason  for  letting  re&i  life
be  attended  with  so  little  emotion,  that  others  see  scarcely  any  signs  of  the  life  at  a'u.
Ah !  what  we  all  want,  and  always  want  (and,  thank  God,  what  we  may  always  have),
is  a  fulness  of  life,  direct  from  him,  which  only  lie  can  give,  and  which,  through
the  cross,  and  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  can  alone  be  maintained,  perfected,  and
glorified  1

Vers.  13 — 21,  25 — 29. — True  greatnes$  manifested  in  a  great  emergency,  ty  tdf-
totcrifice  and  intercession.  As  were  marked  in  the  previous  Humily,  these  incidents  can
only  be  rightly  arranged  by  a  preacher,  for  the  purpose  of  preaching  thereon,  so  far  as
the  entire  narrative  is  before  his  view.  Hence  a  junction  of  this  paragraph  with  Exod.
xxxii.  is  imperative,  and  will  here  be  taken  for  granted.  There  would  seem  to  have
been  a  compilation  of  several  documents.  It  is  not  easy  to  gather  therefrom,  with  exact
precision,  the  order  of  events,  though  there  is  no  difficulty  in  setting  the  whole  with
sufficient  consecutiveness  for  all  the  purposes  of  practical  teaching.     Note—

I.  HsBi!  IS  A  GBEAT  CRISIS.  Israel  was  making  a  feast  unto  Jehovah,  letting  the
calf  represent  to  them  the  God  who  had  brought  them  out  of  Egypt.  The  people  were
observing  the  customs  of  the  very  nation  from  which  they  had  been  redeemed—dancing
before  the  idol,  polluting  themselves  with  unclean  and  unhallowed  rites,  and  making  the
hills  to  re-echo  with  their  boisterous  revelry  and  song !  And  all  this  beneath  that  very
mount  where  they  had  sworn,  "  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  we  will  do  1 "  1.  In
the  first  instance,  the  lamentable  defection  of  the  people  was  made  known  to  Moses,
either  by  a  silent  suggestion  from  the  Great  Invisible,  with  whom  he  was  in  adoring
felbwship,  or  by  one  of  the  angel  bands  with  whom  he  was  surrounded  (Exod.  xxxii.  7,
8).  2.  God  bids  Moses  "  go  down  " — not  merely,  as  might  at  first  seem,  "  go  down
and  see,"  but  "  Continue  the  fellowship  no  more ;  leave  me  alone ;  I  will  make  of  thee
a  great  nation.  Let  my  wrath  wax  hot  against  them,  that  I  may  consume  them  I  "
Awful  words  (vers.  13,  14)!  'Tis  a  terrible  crisis  in  the  great  leader's  experience.
With  agonizing  heart,  he  comes  down  to  see — not  without  pleading  with  God  for  Israel
(see  below) — and  he  reaches  Joshua,  where,  though  even  yet  too  far  off  to  see,  he  is  near
enough  to  hear  the  shouts  wildly  ringing  through  the  air.  3  At  length  Moses  gets
near  enough  to  see  (ver.  16).  There  they  arel — the  calf,  the  dancing,  the  impure
orgies  as  of  a  heathen  feast  1  Oh,  how  bitter  must  have  been  the  anguish  of  Moses
at  such  a  sight  1  4.  And  what  an  alarming  possibility  he  had  to  face — even  that  of  the
entire  rupture  of  the  whole  covenant  between  the  people  and  Jehovah  I  Hear  how  the
Voice  on  the  mount  spake,  "  Thy  people  have  broken  the  covenant ;  let  me  alone,"  etc.
In  what  stronger  way,  ah  1  in  what  other  way,  could  the  people  at  such  a  time  have
been  taught  that,  as  they  were  now  actually  breaking  the  very  covenant  God  was
confirming  with  Moses  for  them,  if  God  now  dealt  with  them  after  their  sins,  he
would  have  cast  them  off  completely?  They  were  not  necessary  to  the  fulfilment
of  the  covenant  made  with  their  fathers.  Moses  was  of  Abraham's  seed,  and
God  might  have  bpgun  afresh  with  him,  and  have  made  of  him  a  nation  greater,
mightier,  more  loyal  than  they }  Was  there  ever  such  a  crisis  ?  With  all  the  respon-
sibility Moses  had  resting  on  him,  he  must  have  been  crushed  had  he  not  been  divinely
sustained.  But  great  crises  bring  out  the  greatness  of  great  men.  Moses  was  a  man
"  slow  of  speech,"  and  probably  slow  to  act,  but  he  had  strong  convictions  of  truth  and
duty,  and  when  wrought  up  to  a  white  heat,  he  would  show  the  true  nobility  of  his
character.

II.  The  greatness  of  the  crisis  occasions  a  remarkable  series  of  acts  on
THE  FART  OF  MosES.  1.  He  is  angry  (Exod.  xxxii.  19).  This  was  a  holy  anger ;  the
sight  roused  the  meekest  of  men,  and  well  it  might.  It  would  have  been  wicked  in
Moses  if  he  had  not  been  angry  1  There  is  a  wide  difference  between  a  passionate
feeling  of  personal  resentment,  and  indignation  at  witnessing  an  outrage  on  light.    Tha


no  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  ix.  1— 29.

holier  a  man  is,  the  more  will  he  suppress  the  one,  the  more  will  he  develop  the  ottier  I
2.  He  breaks  the  tables  (ver.  18).  This  is  a  symbolic  act,  reminding  the  people  that
by  their  apostacy  they  had  violated  their  covenant  vows.  3.  He  grinds  the  calf  to
powder,  etc  (ver.  21).  Another  symbolic  act,  meaning,  "This  sin  will  come  back  to
them  again ;  it.will  mar  their  joy  for  long  to  come."  4.  He  calls  Aaron  to  account
(Exod.  zxzii.  21 — 24).  "  There  came  out  this  calf."  Aaron  !  you,  the  eloquent  man,
making  a  silly  speech  like  that!  Oh,  the  wonderful  touches  of  nature  in  the  Old
Book  1  Moses,  the  truly  brave  man,  though  slow  of  speech,  can  speak  to  purpose  at
such  a  time  as  this ;  but  Aaron,  eloquent  as  he  is,  when  his  conscience  is  ill  at  ease,
makes  the  lamest  and  tamest  excuse.  5.  He  ascertains  how  far  the  contagion  has
spread  (Exod.  xxxii.  25 — 29).  Was  it  a  revolt  of  all  the  people,  or  had  many  been
drawn  away  at  suggestion  of  the  few  ?  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  "  'Tis  not  enough
for  people  to  he  on  the  Lord's  side,  specially  in  days  of  abounding  iniquity ;  they  must
say  on  which  side  they  are.  The  sons  of  Levi  come  forward,  and  are  entrusted  with
the  awful  task  of  stamping  out  the  evlL  Better  for  3000  to  die  than  for  2,000,000  to
be  infected  with  a  mortal  poison !  That  was  a  holy  defensive  war.  And  it  speaks
volumes  for  the  grandeur  of  the  moral  power  of  Moses,  that  he  could  so  inspire  the  men
of  his  own  tribe  to  chastise  the  revolt  and  save  the  people.  6.  But  the  most  striking
feature  of  the  spiritual  heroism  of  Israel's  leader  is,  that  he  pleads  with  God.  In
this  he  reveals  a  force  of  character  and  an  unselfishness  of  spirit  which  are  far  too  rare
even  in  these  "  advanced  "  times.  Let  us  watch  this  pleader.  (1)  He  acknowledges
the  greatness  of  the  sin.  At  first,  before  he  was  near  enough  to  see,  he  asks, "  Lord,  why
doth  thy  wrath  ?  "  etc.  But  afterwards,  he  puts  no  such  question.  "  Oh  1  this  people
have  sinned  a  great  sin."  He  cannot  palliate  it.  (2)  He  entreats  the  Lord  not  to  con-
sume them,  but  to  turn  from  his  fierce  wrath,  and  to  bring  them  yet  into  the  promised
land.  (3)  He  uses  arguments  in  prayer,  (a)  The  honour  of  God's  Name  among  the
nations.  Joshua,  David,  Jeremiah,  did  the  same,  (b)  He  pleads  the  Divine  acts
already  put  forth  on  behalf  of  the  people,  as  if  he  would  say,  "  Didst  thou  not  know
from  the  first  what  they  were?"  (c)  He  pleads  the  Divine  promises;  "rememher
Abraham,"  etc.  (4)  Moses  prays  for  Aaron  (ver.  20)  1  Aaron  "  can  speak  well,"  but  he
acted  ill.  He  broke  down  when  put  in  charge.  Though  appointed  by  God  as  special
helper  to  Moses,  he  proved  himself  unreliable.  Yet  not  a  word  of  complaint  appears  to
have  been  uttered  to  him,  only  a  prayer  offered  for  him  by  the  very  brother  who  had
relied  on  him  in  vain  I  (5)  There  is  a  more  wonderful  feature  still  in  his  prayer,  viz.
this:  a  conception  which  to  self-seekers  would  have  been  most  captivating,  has  for
him  no  charm  whatever — "  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation  ; "  "  let  me  alone,  that  I
may  destroy  them,"  and  I  will  begin  afresh  with  you,  and  make  you  the  head  of  a
less  unworthy  race  1  Would  not  that  have  fired  his  ambition,  if  he  had  had  any  ?
But  no  1  see  the  lot  which  he  preferred  (Exod.  xxxii.  32,  33) :  "  No !  I  cannot  accept
any  position,  however  elevated,  if  they  perish  !  Oh,  forgive  them  1  If  not,  let  us  all
perish  together."  Noble  captain  he !  if  the  ship  sinks,  he  will  go  down  with  it.  He  would
rather  not  live  if  vessel  and  passengers  are  beneath  the  waves  1  (Cf.  Eom.  ix.  2,  3,  with
which  passionate  fervour  the  prayer  of  Moses  may  well  be  compared.)  (6)  This  inter-
cession was  long  continued  (ver.  25) :  "  forty  days  and  forty  nights  I "  All  this  while
the  cry  was  ever  and  anon  going  up  from  his  heart,'"  Forgive  them !  forgive  I  forgive !  "
Have  we  not  here,  in  Moses,  a  model  of  intercessory  prayer?  Men  who  can  thus
plead  with  God  are  the  greatest  heroes  of  the  Church.  We  can  imagine  that  some  may
objecty  and  may  seek  to  turn  the  edge  of  the  truth,  so  that  it  makes  no  impression,  by
saying,  "  Ah !  but  see  what  a  great  occasion  that  was  I  give  us  an  occasion  like  that,
and  maybe  we  should  pray  like  that !  It  is  folly  to  bring  the  acts  of  a  man  at  a
period  of  such  intense  excitement,  and  tell  us  that  we  ought  to  pray  like  that.  We
are  told  that  we  cannot  live  at  boiling  point ;  then,  why  adduce  Moses,  on  such  an
occasion,  as  a  sample  of  what  we  should  do  on  ordinary  occasions?"  No,  we  do  not
aliaayt  want  boiling  water,  but  what  sort  of  water  would  that  be  which  no  amount  of
heat  ever  could  get  to  boil  ?  We  do  not  and  cannot  expect  to  be  always  in  the  midst
of  violent  crises.  But  who  are  the  men  who  are  to  be  relied  on  when  the  crises  come  ?
Where  was  Anron  now  ?  What  of  him?  There  is  no  indication  that  he  ever  caught
a  glimpie  of  the  tremendous  crisis  he  had  helped  to  bring  about  1  "  There  came  <mt
t'h  cat/l"    How  Muses  could  restrain  himself  at  ^uch  words,  we  cannot  imagines


UH.IX.1— 29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  171

But  even  if  Aaron  had  not  shown  such  utter  inability  to  perceive  the  seriousness  of  the
moment,  how  could  he  now  take  any  active  part  in  vindicating  the  injured  rights  of
God  before  the  people,  or  in  craving  mercy  for  the  people  from  God?  Complicity
with  evil  means  paralysis  of  power  in  speeding  the  right.  If  Aaron  had  not  had  a
brother  to  plead  for  him  with  God,  he  would  have  been  swept  away  with  the  besom  of
destruction!  He  can  talk  well  rather  than  stand  firm.  There  is  a  similar  contrast
here  between  Moses  and  Aaron,  to  that  between  Abraham  and  Lot.  Abraham  pleaded
for  the  doomed  city.  Lot's  aims  in  life  had  been  too  selfish  for  him  to  be  a  pleader.
And  we  fear  there  are  some  who,  if  their  own  dear  land  were  brought  to  a  mighty
crisis,  would  just  read  the  daily  papers  to  gratify  curiosity,  or  to  give  them  something
to  talk  about,  but  as  for  taking  the  case  of  a  nation  on  their  hearts  before  God,  they
could  do  nothing  of  the  kind  !  If  they  are  succumbing  to  the  evils  of  the  day,  they
can  have  no  strength  in  intercessory  prayer,  nor  can  they  be  of  any  use  in  national
struggles.  The  Moses  of  Bxod.  xxxii.  is  the  same  self-forgetful  Moses  of  Biod.  ii.  If
men  want  to  be  the  heroes  of  their  age,  let  them  try  the  power  of  intercessory  prayer.
Such  heroism  is  of  a  kind  the  world  cannot  appreciate,  but  is  recorded  in  God's  book
of  remembrance ;  "And  they  shall  be  mine,  saiththe  Lord  of  hosts,  in  that  day  when
[  make  up  my  jewels."

Vers.  22,  23. — ^Taberah  (see  Homily  on  Numb.  xi.).  Massah  (see  Homily  on  Exod.
xvii.).  Eibroth-hattaavah  (see  Homily  on  Numb.  xi.).  Kadesh-bamea  (8«e  Homily
on  du  L  19—40).

HOMILIES  BY  VAEI0U8  AUTH0E8.

Vers,  4—7. — Self-nghieousness.  Strange  capacity  of  human  nature  for  self-delusion!
It  was  an  extraordinary  error  to  fall  into,  when  the  Jew  began  to  fancy  that  by  his  own
power  and  might  he  had  conquered  Palestine  (ch.  viii.  17).  Yet  more  extraordinary
was  the  delusion  that  he  had  been  brought  into  the  land  on  account  of  righteousness.
The  two  errors  sprang  from  the  same  root.  The  worldly  mind,  which  spurns  at  the  ac-
knowledgment of  God's  bestowal  of  what  it  has,  has  its  counterpart  in  the  self-righteous
mind,  which  attributes  God's  dealings  with  it  to  its  superior  sanctity.  Self- exaltation,
pride,  in  both.    In  the  one  case,  "  my  power,"  etc.,  in  the  other,  "  my  righteousness."

L  The  natuee  of  the  error.  A  magnified  opinion  of  one's  righteousness.  The
idea  that  it  is  our  righteousness  which  is  the  meritorious  ground  of  the  bestowal
of  blessing.  The  Jews  might  not  suppose  that  they  were  absolutely  righteous — though
some  of  the  later  Pharisees  seem  almost  to  have  got  this  length  (Luke  xviii.  11).  But
they  thought  that  they  were  so  far  righteous  as  to  have  established  a  claim  on  God's
justice  for  what  they  had.  This  is  a  state  of  mind  into  which  men  glide  half  uncon-
.sciously.  We  often  say  it  "  in  our  hearts,"  when  we  would  be  ashamed  to  avow  it  with
our  lips.  The  self-complacency,  e.q.  which  accepts  prosperity  as  the  reward  of  superior
virtue;  the  self-satisfaction  which  esteems  such  reward  due  to  it;  the  complaint  of
injustice  which  is  raised  when  blessings  are  removed, — betray  its  presence.  In  the
spiritual  sphere,  the  tendency  is  evidenced  in  the  denial  of  the  need  of  salvation ;  in
the  self-justifying  spirit  which  refuses  to  accept  the  position  of  one  condemned,  and
justly  exposed  to  wrath  ;  in  the  reassertion  in  subtler  or  coarser  forms  of  the  principle
of  salvation  by  works.  In  whatever  degree  a  man  thinks  himself  entitled  to  acceptance
w  th  God,  and  to  spiritual  blessings,  whether  on  the  ground  of  obedience  to  prescribed
ruies,  or  on  the  ground  of  internal  characteristics  (faith,  holiness,  etc.),  he  is  permitting
himself  to  fall  into  this  error.

IL  The  boubcb  op  the  ekkob.  The  Israelites  might  fall  into  it:  1.  By  emphasizing
their  acta  of  obedience  and  forgetting  their  rebdlions.  This,  as  Moses  shows,  is
practically  what  they  did.  It  is  not  an  uncommon  fault.  We  forget  our  sins,  and,
thinking  only  of  obediences,  slide  by  easy  stages  into  a  self-satisfied  and  pleased
view  of  ourselves.  2.  By  comparing  themselves  tuith  the  former  generation.  They  had
not  been,  as  their  fathers  were,  absolutely  disobedient  and  recalcitrant.  They  were
going  up  to  possess  the  land.  This  comparing  of  ourselves  with  others  is  not  wise.  If  a
little  in  advance  of  our  neighbours,  it  is  extremely  apt  tu  jjitlate  our  consciousness  of


17i  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  ix.  1—29.

integrity  (2  Cor.  x.  12).  3.  By  arguing  from  the.  fufllmtnt  of  promite.  God  had
promised  victory  and  possession  on  condition  of  obedience.  Having  got  the  blessings,
they  might  argue  that,  in  God's  judgment,  they  must  have  been  obedient.  We,  in  like
manner,  may  argue  from  God's  kindness  to  us  that  we  must  have  been  peculiarly  pleasing
to  him.  Hence  that  we  are  deserving  of  what  we  have  received.  The  spring  of  all  is
the  natural  egoism  of  the  heart.  It  is  its  own  centre.  It  wishes  to  exalt  and  glorify
itself.  It  has  no  idea  of  glorying  only  in  God.  It  is  self-ezalting,  not  God-exalting
(1  Cor.  i.  29—31 ;  Gal.  vi.  14 ;  Phil.  iii.  7—10).

III.  The  refotation  or  the  bkbor.  Even  perfect  righteousness  would  not  justify
self-righteousness.  The  very  indulgence  of  the  self-glorying  spirit  refutes  the  con-
tention of  righteousness.  Whoever  is  the  righteous  man,  it  is  not  he  who  boasts
of  righteousness  1

*  For  merit  lives  from  man  to  man,
And  not  from  man,  O  Lord,  to  thee."

iiiit :  1.  We  are  not  righteous.  The  only  justifying  righteousness  is  a  perfect  one,  and
that  no  man  can  plead.  The  legal  ground  is  destroyed  when  we  admit  failure  in  even
une  point  (Jas.  ii.  10).  2.  We  are,  in  many  ways,  disobedient  and  rebellious.  Past
acts  testify  against  us.  Our  daily  life  testifies  against  us.  He  knows  little  of  self  who
do?s  not  read,  in  his  disinclinations  to  duty,  in  his  reluctant  performances,  in  his
reb  Uions  at  difficulties,  in  his  secret  impatience,  in  his  frequent  inclining  to  things
forbidden,  the  signs  of  a  wayward  and  rebellious  disposition.

The  true  ground  on  which  blessing  is  bestowed  is  wrapped  up  in  that  old  oath  sworn
to  the  fathers  (ver,  5),  in  the  seed  of  Christ,  in  whom  only  we  have  acceptance. — J.  0.

Vers.  8 — 22. — The  sin  at  Horeb.  Moses  dwells  on  this  sin,  alike  as  memorable  in
itself,  and  as  illustrating  the  proposition  that  the  people  had  again  and  again  forfeited
their  covenant  standing  by  their  acts  of  disobedience.

I.  The  enormity  of  this  sin.  1.  It  was  a  sin  committed  immediately  after  solemn
covenant  with  Ood  (ver.  9).  The  transactions  recorded  in  Bxod.  xxiv.  3 — 9  were  not
yet  forty  days  old.  The  people  had  literally  heard  God  speaking  to  them.  They  had
acknowledged  the  solemnity  of  the  situation  by  entreating  Moses  to  act  as  mediator.
They  had  formally,  and  under  awful  impressions  of  God's  majesty,  pledged  themselves
to  life-long  obedience.  Yet  within  that  brief  space  of  time  they  broke  through  all
restraints,  and  violated  the  main  stijiulation  of  their  agreement,  by  setting  up  and
worshipping  the  golden  calf.  A  transgression  showing  greater  levity,  temerity,  deadness
to  spiritual  feeling,  and  perversity  of  disposition,  it  would  be  difficult  to  conceive.
Perhaiis  the  case  is  not  a  solitary  one.  Can  none  remember  instances  of  solemn  vows,
of  sacred  engagements,  of  deep  impressions,  almost  as  soon  forgotten,  almost  as
recklesly  followed  up  by  acts  of  tiagrant  transgression  ?  2.  It  was  a  sin  committed  while
Moses  was  in  the  mount,  transacting  for  tfmn  (vers.  9 — 12).  Moses,  for  an  obvious
reason,  rehearses  the  circumstances  of  his  stay  in  the  mount,  and  of  his  interview  with
God.  He  had  gone  to  receive  the  tables  of  the  Law.  He  recalls,  as  in  striking  contrast
with  the  levity  of  the  multitudes  below,  his  rapt  communion  of  forty  days  and  nights.
ISia  needs  a  background  to  bring  it  out  in  its  full  enormity.  Tliat  background  is
furnished  in  these  details.  The  people  are  pointed  to  the  tables  as  the  rule  of  the
obedience  they  had  pledged  themselves  to  render.  They  are  reminded  that  their  sin
was  perpetrated  at  a  time  when  God  was  yet  transacting  with  them,  and  when  their
minds  ought  to  have  been  filled  with  very  different  thoughts.  Do  we  reflect  on  the
aggravation  given  to  our  own  sin.s  by  the  presence  of  our  Mediator  in  the  heavenly
mount,  and  by  the  ceaseless  and  holy  work  he  is  there  conducting  on  our  behalf?
3.  It  was  a  sin  of  daring  enormity  in  itself.  The  making  of  the  golden  calf,  after  what
had  happened,  can  only  be  characterized  as  an  act  of  shocking  impiety.  The  worship
was  doubtless  accompanied  by  profone  and  lewd  reTellingg.  This  under  tha  eya  of
their  God  and  King.

II.  The  consequences  of  the  bin.  1.  It  involved  tht  forfiitwre  of  covenant
privilege,  signified  by  the  bjeaking  of  the  tables  of  the  Law  (ver.  17),  This  was  the
first  light  in  which  the  Israelites  had  to  view  it.  It  refuted  their  idea  that  they  got
the  land  in  virtu?  of  their  righteousness.    True,  the  sin  had  been  committed  by  tha


OH.  DC  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  ITS

preceding  generation,  but  the  covenant  being  national,  and  laying  obligation*  on  all,
involved  them  as  well  as  their  parents  in  the  consequences  of  disobedience.  If  they  stood
still  in  covenant  relation,  it  was  of  God's  mercy  which  had  restored  them.  For  a  time
that  covenant  was  actually  broken.  Nor,  if  that  argument  was  necessary,  had  they
failed  in  their  own  persons  to  renew  the  deed  of  apostaoy  (ver.  22).  Every  believer
feels  that  his  standing'  before  God  is  likewise  of  pure  grace.  Were  sins  imputed  to  him
to  his  condemnation,  he  could  not  stand  a  single  hour.  2.  It  provoked  Ood  to  hot
displeasure  (vers.  19,  20).  As  all  daring  and  presumptuous  sin  does.  3.  But  for
Moses'  intercession,  it  would  have  involved  them  in  destruction  (vers.  14,  1 9,  20).  This
was  no  mere  drama  acted  between  God  and  Moses,  but  a  most  real  wrath,  averted  by
the  real  and  earnest  intercession  of  a  godly  man.  Had  Moses  not  interceded,  the  people
would  have  been  destroyed.  Not  that  we  are  to  conceive  God  as  swayed  by  human
passions,  or  as  requiring  to  be  soothed  down  by  human  entreaty.  But  sin  does  awaken
his  displeasure.  There  burns  iu  his  nature  a  holy  wrath  against  it,  which,  when  he
decrees  to  consume  his  adversaries,  is  not  to  be  laid  aside  save  on  such  ground  as
we  have  here.  It  is  the  existence  of  wrath  in  God  which  gives  reality  to  piopitiatiou
and  meaning  to  his  mercy.  Learn :  (1)  How  evil  sin  is  in  the  sight  of  God.  (2)  How
fearful  in  its  results  to  the  transgressor.  (3)  How  mighty  intercession  is  iu  procuring
pardon.— J.  0.

Vers.  24 — 29. — Moses'  intercession.  I.  In  the  spirit  op  rr;  1.  How  absolutely
disinterested  (ver.  14)1  He  sets  aside,  without  even  taking  notice  of  it,  the  most
glorious  offer  ever  made  to  mortal  man — "  I  will  make  of  tliee  a  nation,"  etc.  'I.  How
intensely  earnest  (ver.  18)!  Moses  feared  greatly.  He  had  a  most  overwhelming
sense  of  the  reality  of  the  wrath  he  sought  to  avert.  But  his  heart  was  agonizing
to  save  his  nation,  and  he  seemed  to  clasp  the  feet  of  Chad  in  the  spirit  of  one  who
would  not,  could  not  leave,  till  he  obtained  what  he  sought.  A  lesson  in  prayer.
3.  How  perseveringly  prolonged  (ver.  25)  1  He  prayed  by  his  silence  as  well  as  by
his  speech.  The  whole  scene  is  a  striking  illustration  of  the  intercession  of  the
Saviour.

II.  In  the  mattbb  of  it.  It  is  not  much,  as  M.  Henry  remarks,  that  he  can  say  for
them.  He  appeals,  however,  to  three  principles  in  the  Divine  character  which  really  govern
the  Divine  action.  1.  To  God's  regard  for  his  own  work  (ver.  26).  The  finishing
of  work  he  had  begun  (Phil.  i.  6).  2.  To  God's  regard  for  his  own  servants  (ver.  27).
The  love  he  bears  to  the  fathers  (ch.  iv.  31 ;  x.  15).  3.  To  God's  regard  for  his  own
honour  (ver.  28).  He  cannot  beiar  to  think  of  God's  action  being  misconstrued — of
God's  honour  being  compromised.  Points  in  God's  heart  on  which  all  intercession  may
lay  hold.— J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Against  sdf-righteoua  conceit.  Sanguine  expectation  of  success  in  war
is  a  potential  force  of  immeasurable  value.  If  the  expectation  be  ill-founded,  it  is
worse  than  none.  It  will  not  stand  as  substitute  for  other  equipment,  but  it  serves  as  a
final  edge  upon  the  well-tempered  blade.  Like  the  figure  "  nought,"  which  increases
the  sign  of  value  only  when  added  to  other  figures,  so  sanguine  anticipation  of  triumph
is  only  forceful  when  based  on  solid  qualities.

I.  Observe  the  formidable  contest.  God  has  never  encon  raged  his  servants  to
underrate  difSculties.  Jesus  Christ  did  not  overcolour  the  advantages  of  his  service.
1.  The  Amorites  were  superior  in  stature.  This  might,  in  itself,  become  an  instrument
of  strength  ;  it  might  prove  a  source  of  weakness.  The  larger  the  machinery,  the
greater  motive  power  is  demanded.  2.  The  Amorites  excelled  in  martial  cowrage.
"  They  were  mightier."  The  land  had  become  divided  into  petty  kingdoms,  and  it  is
evident  that  deadly  wars  between  the  tribes  were  fi-equent.  Such  practice  hail
developed  warlike  skill.  3,  Th^  fought  behind  well-built  ramparts.  Their  cities  were
fortresses,  while  the  Hebrews,  unskilled  in  war,  had  to  fight  in  the  open  field.
Defenders  of  bastioned  homes  have  great  advantage  over  foreign  assailants.  4.  The
Amorites  possessed  a  wide  reputation.  This  would  serve  to  brace  to  the  highest  pitch
the  courage  of  the  inhabitants,  while  it  would  serve  to  dismay  the  besieging  army.
Every  visible  and  material  advantage  was  on  the  side  of  the  Canaanites.

II.  Leabn  the  sboset  of  Israel's  triuufh.    1.  Qod's  alliance  outmatclies  all  martial


171  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY,  [oh.  es.  1—29,

ipposition.  The  unseen  power  is  always  greater  th»n  the  seen.  Qoi's  arrows  find  their
way  through  the  hest-jointed  harness.  The  simple  breath  of  Omnipotence  withers  all
opposition.  Whatever  we  omit  to  take  to  the  battle-field,  let  us  not  omit  to  take  Qoi.
2.  Occult  forces  often  lead  the  van.  In  advance,  even  of  their  vanguard,  unseen  pioneers
would  sap  the  foeman's  strength.  As  fire  devours  the  stubble,  so  would  the  Canaanites'
strength  become  as  rottenness.  Hornets,  pestilence,  lightning,  hail — a  thousand  agencies
Glod  employs  as  the  real  army  in  advance  of  the  human  host.  3.  Qod's  work  and  man's
reciprocally  interlace :  God  will  never  do  our  part ;  we  can  never  do  God's  part.  There
is  scope  everywhere  for  human  agency,  but  it  must  never  invade  the  Divine  province.
We  are  to  work  because  God  works  with  us — in  us.  God  promised  that  he  "  would
bring  down  the  enemy  ;"  Israel  was  "  to  drive  them  out."

III.  Mabe  tee  obouuds  of  God's  awabd.  He  fought  on  the  side  of  Israel,  and
against  the  Canaanites, /or  specific  reasons.  Some  of  these  are  mentioned  for  the
instruction  of  men.  Strong  inducements  disposed  the  Hebrews  to  regard  themselves
as  the  favourites  of  Heaven,  on  the  ground  of  their  superior  goodness.  This  was
corrupt  fruit  from  an  evil  tree.  These  were  false  flatteries,  forged  by  Satan.  Against
these  fortresses  of  self-righteousness  Moses  was  directed  to  hurl  the  battering-ram  of
reproof.  1.  Human  righteousness  not  meritorious.  It  is  not  meritorious,  because  it  is
deficient.  All  true  righteousness  has  some  merit;  but  if  the  unrighteousness  in  a
man's  life  exceed  the  righteousness,  then  blame  must  exceed  approval.  The  Canaanites
were  evicted  because  of  moral  rottenness,  the-fruit  of  gross  idolatry.  Loyalty  to  God
alone  could  entitle  the  Hebrews  to  replace  them.  In  this  they  had  been  signally
wanting.  2.  Material  possessions  have  often  a  vicarious  origin.  They  are  given  to  one
for  the  sake  of  another.  The  faith  of  Abraham  had  borne  a  long  succession  of  fruits.
There  is  a  principle  of  moral  solidarity  in  the  human  race.  We  are  not  distinct  units,
but  component  parts — members  one  of  another.  3.  We  see  the  inviolability  of  Qod's
promise.  To  our  purblind  eyes  that  promise  often  seems  to  fail;  yet  failure  is  abso-
lutely impossible.  Bis  time  and  man's  time  do  not  always  correspond.  Gtod's  words
innst  be  taken  as  expressive  of  God's  conception*.  Sis  words  are  expansive  enough  to
certain  an  infinitude  of  meaning. — D.

Vers.  7 — 17. — Suman  memory  a  repository  of  guHt.  Hie  memory  of  man  Is  a
book  of  God :  and,  though  the  entries  may  be  temporarily  obscured,  yet  the  light
of  eternity  will  make  them  all  legible.  The  present  tendency  of  sin  is  to  weaken
memory ;  its  effect,  to  obliterate  recollectioiu  Our  profoundest  gratitude  is  due  to
the  man  that  reminds  us  of  om:  falls.

I.  Bembmbee  SDJ  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  ITS  OBJECT,  VIZ.  OF  GoD.  Discourtcsy  to  a  king  is
a  graver  offence  than  discourtesy  to  an  equal.  Sacrilege  is  worse  than  common  theft.
1.  This  was  sin  against  a  known  Ood.  The  evidence  of  his  existence  had  been  made
as  clear  to  them  as  noonday.  The  main  attributes  of  his  character  had  been  plainly
revealed,  especially  power  and  justice  and  goodness.  They  could  not  wear  a  mask  of
pretended  ignorance.  2.  Se  had  leen  to  ihem  a  most  generous  Ood.  For  their  release
signal  power  had  been  displayed.  The  course  of  nature  had  apparently  been  inter-
rupted. To  deliver  them  hosts  had  been  destroyed,  and  the  majestic  hand  of  Qoi  had
supplied  their  daily  meal.  3.  Me  had  been  a  much-suffering  God.  They  had  been  like
petulant,  discontented  children;  and  he  had  been  to  them  a  pitiful  and  indulgent
Father.  In  the  midst  of  needful  supply  they  had  been  basely  unthankful.  They  had
wounded  him  in  the  tenderest  parts  of  his  nature,  insulted  his  majesty,  spumeid  his
lawSj  and  covered  him  with  contempt.  Yet  he  had  spared  them.  He  had  imposed  on
himself  strong  restraints,  so  that  righteous  anger  should  not  break  forth.  The  noblest
features  of  human  love  are  but  feeble  reflections  of  his  patient  compassion ;  and  against
such  a  God  their  an  was  hurled.  4.  Be  had  been  a  Ood  in  covenant  with  them — their
Ood.

IL  Rbmbmbeb  sin  in  the  light  of  BIQHTB0USNBS8.  Wo  porceive  things  best  when
placed  in  absulute  contrast.  1.  There  was  the  sin  of  inattention.  God  had  deigned  to
speak,  but  they  "  would  not  hear."  The  ear  had  been  fashioned  for  this  special  end  that
they  might  hear  OtcA't  voice ;  they  had  abused  and  injured  the  delicate  faculty.  Tliey
that  wiU  not  hear  shall  not  hear.  2.  7%ere  was  the  sin  of  ingratitude.  We  can  con-
ceive of  no  baser  sin  than  this.   "lis  a  double  crime— a  violation  of  heart  and  conscience.


OH.  IX 1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEllONOMY.  175


3.  There  was  the  sin  of  disbelief.  The  God  of  truth  had  promised,  but  they  had
treated  his  word  as  a  lie.  They  had  enjoyed  ocular  demonstration  of  his  faithfulness,
yet  they  trusted  their  own  fears  and  fancies  rather  than  their  GoJ.  4.  There  was
the  tin  of  overt  rebellion.  They  professed  to  regard  God  as  their  Leader  and  King ;  yet,
as  soon  as  service  was  irksome  to  flesh  and  blood,  they  resented  his  authority.  Once
and  again  they  chose  humau  leaders  in  opposition  to  the  Supreme  King.  5.  There
was  the  sin  of  self -will.  Their  characteristic  sin  was  "  stiff-neckedness."  "Our  wills
are  our  own,"  said  they  in  substance ;  "  who  is  Lord  over  us  ?  "

m.  Rbmembek  sin  di  the  liqht  or  special  privileob.  1.  Theirs  was  sin  against
the  light.  While  others  had  only  the  light  that  comes  through  nature,  they  had  possessed
the  light  of  special  revelation.  They  had  not  appreciated  the  light.  In  various
measures  they  had  preferred  the  darkness.  2.  It  was  sin  against  the  inner  light  of
conscience — sin  against  personal  convictions  of  duty.  'J'hey  had  trifled  with  the
regal  voice  of  conscience,  and  bribed  it  to  be  silent.  They  had  encouraged  appetite
and  passion  to  speak,  and  their  clamorous  voices  had  prevailed.  3.  Theirs  was  sin
against  faithful  warning.  The  penalties  of  contumacy  had  been  prominently  set
before  them.  The  hints  of  nature  and  the  dark  presages  of  conscience  had  been  sup-
plemented by  the  clear  announcements  of  Divine  warning.  For  the  fascinating  fruit
of  present  pleasure  they  risked  expulsion  from  the  garden — loss  of  the  great  inherit-
ance, 4.  It  was  tin  against  covenant  engagements.  They  had  made  an  overt  treaty
with  God  to  serve  him.  When  the  Voice  from  heaven  had  spoken  at  Sinai,  they  had
quaked  and  said,  "  All  that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  speak  unto  us  will  we  do."  Every
step  in  their  deliverance  had  been  taken  on  the  understanding  that  they  would  be
loyal  servants  of  the  heavenly  King.  Thus  every  element  of  wickedness  was  mingled
in  their  conduct.  And  is  it  not  in  ours  also  ?  6.  It  was  sin  in  the  very  presence  of
Ood — sin  at  Sinai.

IV.  Eemembbb  sin  in  the  lisht  op  EXPfiEiBNCE.  1.  Tliey  had  seen  the  direful
effects  of  disobedience  in  others.  Their  eyes  had  beheld  what  God  did  to  the  Egyptians
for  their  impious  arrogance.  They  had  seen  their  own  comrades  die  for  their  petulant
murmurings.  They  had  seen  a  host  of  people  slain  for  idolatry.  Poisonous  serpents
had  slain  a  myriad.  The  earth  had  opened  and  swallowed  the  sons  of  Korah.  Their
own  memories  contained  abundant  records  that  the  fruit  of  transgression  was  death.
Yet  they  sinned  still.  2.  They  had  seen  the  rewards  of  obedience  among  themselves.
So  long  as  they  had  followed  the  precepts  of  Jehovah  they  had  prospered.  They
had  sprinkled  their  doorposts  with  the  Paschal  blood,  and  the  angel  of  destruction
had  spared  their  firstborn.  They  had  crossed  the  Bed  Sea  by  a  perilous  path,  and  had
gained  a  mighty  triumph.  They  had  followed  Moses  into  the  wilderness,  and  had
been  daily  fed  by  a  miraculous  hand.  It  was  obvious  that  obedience  secured  blessing.
They  had  seen  Moses  exalted  to  regal  power  by  virtue  of  his  unwavering  faith  in  Gbd.
3.  They  had  felt  the  scourge  of  Divine  anger  for  their  own  follies.  For  eight  and
thirty  years  they  had  sojourned  in  the  wilderness  beyond  what  was  needful,  because
they  would  not  believe  God's  promise.  A  thousand  ills  had  afiSicted  them,  every  one
of  which  was  a  chastisement  for  sin.  Yet  they  dallied  and  coquetted  with  the  accursod
thing,  as  if  it  were  a  pleasant  toy.  And  are  we  any  better  than  they  ?  If  unpardoned,
memory  is  preparing  »  scourge  of  scorpions  with  which  to  chastise  us,  "Son,
remember  1 "— D.

Vers.  18 — 29. — The  place  of  human  mediation.  The  best  men  hare  always  desired
to  intercede  for  the  bad.    True  holiness  is  benevolent.

I.  Mediation  concerns  itsblp  with  the  interests  of  both  parties.  Moses  had
at  heart  the  honour  of  God — the  maintenance  of  his  just  rule,  while  he  also  identified
himself  with  the  well-being  of  the  Hebrews.  If  there  be,  on  the  part 'of  the  mediator,
a  leaning  to  the  interests  of  the  one  party  rather  than  the  other,  his  ofiice  will  fail.
One  party  or  both  wiU  reject  him.  His  mission  proceeds  on  the  ground  that  there  is
an  advantage  common  to  both  to  be  obtained  by  reconciliation.  There  is  a  point  where
God's  interests  and  man's  touch  and  blend.  The  business  is  to  find  that  point,  and  to
persuade  both  parties  there  to  meet.

II.  Mediation  is  itsklp  a  fruit  of  Divine  mbrot.  The  disposition  in  the  heart  of
Moses  to  intercede  was  a  disposition  implanted  by  God,  and  all  the  energy  with  which


176  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMY.  [oh.  ix.  1—29.

he  pursued  thii  mission  was  energy  sustained  from  heaven.  Further,  the  willingnesi,
on  the  part  of  God,  to  allow  any  suit  on  behalf  of  rebels,  was  an  act  of  pure  mercy.
It  is  no  less  absurd  than  profane  to  speak  of  man,  the  mediator,  as  showing  more
beneTolence  than  G-od.  The  whole  arrangement  18  one  of  purest  kindness,  and  Moses
was  richly  blest  in  his  generous  undertaking.

III.  Mediation  requires  the  most  complete  bblf-bacrificb.  For  forty  days  and
forty  nights  Moses  was  prostrate  before  the  Lord.  Personal  needs,  personal  interests,
personal  honour,  were  all  forgotten.  Here  was  the  completest  devotion  of  himself  to
this  cause.  There  is  a  profound  mystery  in  this  number  of  forty.  It  is  not  a  natural
cycle.  Like  the  number  seven,  it  is  sacred  to  religion.  For  forty  days  and  nights
Mosei  waited  before  God,  undergoing  spiritual  receptiveness  for  the  revelation  of  his
will.  For  forty  years  the  Hebrews  dwelt  in  the  wilderness.  For  forty  days  Elijah
tarried  in  Horeb.  For  forty  days  Jesus  endured  the  temptations  of  the  deseit.  For
forty  days  he  abode  with  men  subsequent  to  his  resurrection.  All  that  human  natuie
could  endure,  Moses  endured  to  obtain  pardon  for  Israel.  For  if  pardon  be  too  cheaply
bought,  it  is  not  valued.  Only  in  the  lurid  light  of  sin's  curse  do  we  see  the  glory  of
forgiveness.

IV.  Mediation  acknowledges  sin  to  the  full.  There  is  no  extenuation  of  the
deed,  no  paring  down  its  dimensions,  no  cloaking  any  part  of  its  baseness,  no  endea-
vours to  put  other  colours  on  it  than  its  own.  It  is  because  sin  is  so  malignant  and  so
ruinous  that  it  is  so  desirable  to  rescue  the  sinner  from  its  awful  spell.  It  is  because
it  is  so  dishonouring  to  God  that  it  is  worth  while,  at  any  price,  to  remove  it  from  his
universe.  The  anger  of  Jehovah  is  no  mere  passing  or  capricious  feeling.  It  is  senti-
ment arisin;j;  out  of  the  most  righteous  principle.  Such  anger  against  sin  is  essential
to  the  Godhead.  We  need  not  be  afraid  of  the  introdHction  of  anthropomorphic  con-
ceptions. The  longer  Moses  remained  prostrate  before  God,  the  clearer  came  into  view
Israel's  sin  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  purity.

V.  Mediation  includes  the  largest  reparation.  The  mission  of  Moses  as
mediator  had  a  part  manward  as  well  as  Godward.  The  whole  work  was  not  done
upon  his  knees.  With  both  his  hands  he  brake  and  burnt  the  graven  image,  dis-
honoured the  deity  they  had  fashioned,  reduced  it  to  jiowdered  dust.  This  would
expose  the  impotence  of  the  idol,  the  vanity  of  the  idol  system,  and  the  insane  folly
of  presenting  to  such  a  molten  image  Divine  honours.  Nor  was  this  all.  The  fine
dust  that  remained  after  the  burning  was  cast  into  the  brook,  so  that  they  were  com-
pelled to  drink  it  in  the  exigency  of  their  thirst.  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  the  rock  from
which  this  stream  flowed  symbolized  Christ;  hence  we  see,  in  a  figure,  how  the  living
stream  from  him,  the  Fount,  bears  away  our  sin  into  oblivion.  Repentance  upon  our
part  is  not  thorough,  nor  sincere,  unless  we  make  wiiatever  reparation  is  within  oui
reach.

VI.  Mediation  embraces  verbal  intercession.  The  final  outcome  of  mediation
is  prayer.  "  Father,  forgive  them  I "  said  the  dying  Saviour.  "  He  ever  liveth  to
intercede."  1.  Moses  pUads  God's  proprietorship  in  this  recreant  people.  "  They  are
thine  inheritance."  "  The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people."  From  them  he  shall  obtain
more  satisfaction  than  from  pianists  and  stars  and  suns.  2.  God's  self-consistency  is  an
argument  in  prayer.  He  had  already  redeemed  them  from  Egyptian  bondage.  He  had
taken  great  pains  with  them  hitherto,  and  had  expended  great  power  on  their  behalf.
And  he  had  not  done  this  in  ignorance.  The  latent  evil  in  their  hearts  he  had  per-
ceived. The  future  of  their  lives  he  had  foreseen.  Hence  it  would  be  consistent  with
his  past  favours  to  dispense  fresh  mercy.  3.  Ood's  covenant  and  promises  are  proper
arguments  in  prayer.  He  loves  to  be  reminded  of  his  engagements,  because  this
remembrance  deepens  our  sense  of  his  faithfulness.  He  had  engaged  to  bring  this
people  to  the  land  of  promise,  not  for  their  sakes,  however  obedient  they  might  1»,  but
for  their  fathers'  sakes.  Hence  their  rebelliousness  did  not  vitiate  the  original  engage-
ment ;  and  although  individuals  might  justly  be  destroyed — yea,  that  whole  generation
— still  the  posterity  of  Abraham  must  eventually  enter  the  land.  4.  The  reputation
and  credit  of  Oodform  also  staple  arguments  in  prayer  for  others.  The  natural  effect
produced  on  men's  minds  by  God's  dealings  must  be  taken  into  account.  Our  God  is
not  indifferent  to  the  homage  and  praise  of  men.  It  is  to  him  a  great  ,deli<jht  to  receive
the  incense  of  heartfelt  love.     His  reputation  in  his  universe  is  a  very  precious  thing.


cH.  IX.  1— 29.i  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  177

and  it  becomes  us  on  all  occasions  to  guard  it  well.    He  has  formed  na  into  a  people  fof
this  very  purpose,  "  that  we  should  show  forth  his  praise."

VII.  Human  mediation,  if  baknest  and  pbrsbverino,  sucobbds.  "  The  Lor.l
hearkened  unto  me  at  that  time  also."  Here  is  great  encouragement  for  our  interces-
sion now  1  Abraham  did  not  cease  to  gain  successes  for  Sodom  until  he  ceased  to  pray  •
and  had  he  continued,  possibly  the  city  might  have  been  spared.  What  genuine  and
honest  intercession  has  ever  failed  ?  "  The  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth
much."  Every  instance  of  successful  intercession  recorded  in  history  is  a  cordial  to
revive  our  drooping  faith.  Is  not  God  even  now  waiting  to  hear  human  intercession
that  he  may  do  great  things  for  his  Church?  "Give  him  no  rest,  till  he  make
Jerusalem  a  praise  in  the  earth." — D.

Vers.  1 — 6. — TTie  policy  of  reprohaiion.  Moses  here  indicates  very  clearly  what  lay
at  the  foundation  of  the  invasion.  It  is  to  be  carried  on  successfully  as  a  judgment  upon
Canaanitish  sin.  It  is  no  merit  in  the  victors,  but  the  demerit  of  the  vanquished,
which  determines  the  Divine  dealings.  In  one  word,  it  is  a  policy  of  reprobation.  And
here  let  us  observe—

L  That  hepkobatios  is  the  opposite  of  approbation.  Great  confusion  of  thought
exists  upon  this  subject  through  losing  sight  of  this.  The  conduct  of  the  Oanaanites
had  been  going  on  from  bad  to  worse,  and  it  was  impossible  for  God  to  approve  of  it.
He  had  no  alternative  but  to  loathe  them  for  their  iniquities,  and  to  arrange  their  fate
accordingly.  Reprobation  in  the  last  resort,  in  the  case  of  those  finally  impenitent,  is
a  necessity  with  God ;  he  cannot  but  loathe  those  guilty  of  such  conduct  (of.  Eobert
Hall's  '  Help  to  Zion's  Travellers,'  p.  45).

II.  A  VICTOKT  IS  AT  ALL  EVENTS   A   JUDGMENT  ON  THE  VANQmSHBD.      It  haS  indeed

been  said  that  the  next  worst  thing  to  a  defeat  is  a  victory,  by  which  it  is  indicated
that  both  sides  sufier,  but  the  vanquished  more  than  the  victors.  In  the  invasion  of
Palestine,  the  Oanaanites  were  to  be  vanquished  because  of  their  disobedience.  It  was
judgment  to  them — God's  judgment,  and  thoroughly  deserved.

III.  It   MATTERS    NOT  TO  GOD,  AND   SHOULD   NOT  TO  HIS   SERVANTS,  HOW   GREAT   HIS

ENEMIES  MAY  BE.  The  Canaanitcs  were  men  of  gigantic  size,  with  great  cities,  fenced
up  to  heaven.  They  were  outwardly  much  more  than  a  match  for  Israel.  And  this
was  doubtless  to  try  the  faith  of  Israel,  and  to  see  if  they  would  live  by  sight  in  this
matter,  or  trust  in  their  Almighty  King.  It  is  for  the  Lord's  people  to  remember
that  "  greater  is  he  that  is  for  them  than  all  that  be  against  them,"  and  that  with  God
they  are  sure  of  ultimate  victory.

IV.  Success  is  intended  to  test  the  people  of  thb  Lord.  Israel  is  told  expressly
that  they  are  a  stiffneclied  people.  The  conquest  is  not  to  be  on  account  of  any  merit
of  theirs.  But  it  will  test  their  loyalty  to  God.  It  has  been  observed  that  conquest  has
generally  exercised  a  retributive  influence  upon  the  conquerors  (Goldwin  Smith,  in
Fortnightly  Review  for  July,  1877).  It  was  for  Israel  to  determine  whether  their  stifif-
neckedness  would  conlinue  or  would  succumb.  If  they  interpreted  their  triumph
properly,  as  the  gift  of  free  grace,  they  v/ould  settle  down  after  it  to  grateful  obedience.

V.  The  invasion  is  a  ttpb  of  Divike  grace  manifested  still.  Sinners  are  like
the  Israelites,  with  nothing  in  the  way  of  merit  to  recommend  them.  But  God  comes
in  his  gospel  and  offers  them  a  complete  victory  over  sin,  Satan,  and  the  world,  as  a
free  gift.

These  enemies  seem  gigantic  like  the  Oanaanites.  We  could  not  overcome  them  in
our  own  strength ;  but  greater  is  he  that  is  for  us  than  all  that  be  against  us.  We  find
ourselves  coming  off  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us.

And  every  spiritual  victory  is  meant  to  test  and  strengthen  us.  It  should  increase
our  gratitude  and  ensure  increased  obedience.

It  is  well,  moreover,  to  remember  that  the  triumphs  now  are  granted  as  free  gifts,  not
as  rewards  of  merit.  After  we  have  as  disciples  done  our  very  best,  we  should  be
ready  to  acknowledge  that  we  are  only  unprofitable  servants,  we  have  only  done  what
it  was  our  duty  to  do.

God  is  able  to  give  us  the  victory  over  our  greatest  enemies,  but  he  will  do  so  in  such
a  way  as  to  secure  the  heartfelt  gratitude  and  homage  of  his  believing  people.  He  is  a
faithful  Prcmiser;  having  made  the  promise  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  h«  wiU
deuteronomt.  y


178  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  x.  1—22.

not  forsake  their  seed,  but  give  the  victory  in  his  own  time  and  way  to  all  who  truit
him.— B.  M.  E.

Vers.  7 — 29. — Humiliating  memories.  Following  up  the  idea  of  their  waywardness,
Moses  proceeds  to  recall  instances  of  it.  The  remembrance  of  sin  is  salutary,  if  it
induces  humiliation ;  but  detrimental,  if  it  induces  a  repetition  of  the  sin.  When
assured  of  its  forgiveness,  we  should  forget  it,  so  far  as  the  remembrance  would  provoke
repetition.    Moses  here  recalls  sin,  that  it  may  be  salutary  in  the  remembrance.

L  Theib  kedellion  had  been  continual.  (Vers.  7,  24.)  It  would  seem  that  the
pilgrimage  of  the  people  had  been  one  long  rebellion — God  manifesting  his  mercy,  man
manifesting  his  ingratitude.  And  may  this  not  be  said  of  all  the  Lord's  people  ?  They
have  been  rebellious  in  the  midst  of  manifold  mercy.

IL  The  bin  at  Hobeb  was  a  special  pbovooation.  (Vers.  8 — 12.)  So  grievous  had
it  been  that  God  threatened  them  with  destruction.  It  took  place  while  the  media-
tor was,  through  fasting  and  prayer,  receiving  the  Law.  The  circumstances  made  it
more  aggravated.

And  it  is  well  to  remember  our  special  provocations  of  God,  if  wo  are  thereby
strengthened  against  a  repetition  of  them.

III.  The  danger  inciteeed  by  Isbabl  was  veet  obeat.  (Vers.  13, 14.)  God  pro-
posed to  consume  them  in  a  moment,  and  to  make  of  Moses  a  nation  greater  and
mightier  than  they.  It  was  at  once  a  testimony  to  the  enormity  of  their  sin  and  a
test  of  the  magnanimity  of  Moses.  Instead  of  accepting  the  great  opportunity,  he  set
himself  to  intercede  for  the  pardon  of  their  sin.

IV.  It  involved  the  beeakinq  off  of  covenant  relations.  (Vers.  15 — 17.)  The
two  stone  tables  were  the  sian  of  the  covenant  existing  between  God  and  them.
Moses  had  just  been  negotiating  the  settlement.  But  now  one  party  had  proved
unfaithful,  and  so  he  had  them  broken  before  their  eyes.  Their  idolatry  had  broken
the  commandments,  and  so  the  relations  between  God  and  them  were  meanwhile  at
an  end.

V.  The  inteecession  was  PSOLONaED  and  successful.  (Vers.  18—21,  25—29.)
The  intercession  of  Moses  was  even  more  severe  than  the  previous  mediation.  The
second  period  of  forty  days  and  nights  was  a  most  severe  ordeal  through  which  to  pass.
It  shows  that  intercession  is  most  laborious  duty,  if  adequately  discharged.  It  shows,
moreover,  that  the  intercession  of  Christ,  of  which  that  of  Moses  was  typical,  is  a  most
serious  and  severe  service.  It  has  been  very  properly  called  the  prolongation  of  the
atonement;  just  as  the  atonement  is  a  most  magnificent  intercession  (cf.  Dr.  Hugh
Martin  on  'The  Atonement,'  pp.  104 — 168).  The  two  are  complementary.  The
agony  of  Moses  on  the  mount  must  have  been  most  severe  and  trying — death  under
ordinaiy  conditions  is  nothing  to  it.

VI.  OtHEB    BEBELLIONS   op  a   MnfOB    OHAEACTEB   MUST  ALSO    BE    KOTICED.       (Vers.

22,  23.)  Taherah,  Massah,  Kibroth-hattaavah,  and  Kadesh  were  all  scenes  of  rebellion
against  the  Lord.  The  history  was  a  sad  one,  but  the  rernembrance  of  it  would  humble
them,  and  fit  them  for  that  complete  reliance  upon  the  Lord  on  which  their  triumph
must  rest.

"  Humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,  and  he  will  exalt  you  in  due
time."  "He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  This  is  the  law  for  nations
as  well  as  for  indiiiduals.  Salvation  and  victory  are  through  paths  of  humiliation,
which  make  all  the  sweeter  the  blessing  when  it  comes.  Sin  is  thus  sanctified  in  the
remembrance  when  it  leads  to  humiliation  and  victory  beyond  it. E.  M.  £,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  X.
BENEWEi)  Exhortations  to  Obedienob.
Vers.  1 — 11. — lioaeB'  intercession  and  it*
retulU,
Ver,  1. — At  that  time.    When  Moees  thus


interceded,  God  commanded  him  to  prepare
two  new  tables  of  stone,  and  to  construct  an
ark  in  which  to  keep  them  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiv.
1,  etc.).  Directions  had  been  given  for  the
construction  of  the  ark  before  the  apostacy
of  the  people,  and  it  was  not  made  tUl  after


OH.  X.  1—22.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


179


the  tabernacle  had  been  erected,  noi  were
the  tables  placed  in  it  till  the  tabernacle
had  been  consecrated  (of.  Exod.  xxv.  10,
etc. ;  xl.  20).  But  as  the  things  themselres
were  olnsely  connected,  Moses  mentions
them  here  together,  without  regard  to  chro-
nological order.

Vers.  6,  7.— Not  only  did  God,  of  his
grace  and  in  respon^se  to  tlie  intercession
of  Moses,  give  to  the  people,  notwithstanding
their  apustacy,  the  ark  of  thu  covenant  with
the  new  tables  of  the  Law,  but  he  followed
this  up  by  instituting  the  hiRh  priesthood;
and,  when  Aaron  died,  caused  it  to  be  con-
tinued to  his  son  EUazar.  I'his  Moses
reminds  the  people  of  by  referring  to  a  fact
in  their  past  history,  viz.  their  arrival  at
Moscra,  where  Aaron  died,  and  EUazar
eucceedtd  him  in  his  office.  Beeroth  of  the
children  of  Jaakan  (tce/Ja  o/  the  tons  of
Jaakan);  the  same  place  as  Bene-jaakan
(Numb,  xxfiii.  31),  probably  the  Horite
tribe,  called  'Akan  (Gen.  zxxvi.  27),  for
which,  apparently,  should  be  read  Jakan,
as  in  1  Chron.  i.  42.  Kosera;  Moseroth,
plu.  of  Mosera  (Numb,  xxxiii.  30).  As
Aaron  died  there,  Mosera  must  have  been
in  the  vicinity  of  Mount  Hor.  Gndgodah,
Hor-hagidgad  (Numb,  xxxiii.  32) ;  cave  of
Gidgad,  a  place  of  caves.  Jotbath,  Jotbathah
(Numb,  xxxiii.  33),  a  district  abounding  in
streams,  whence  probably  its  name,  Jot-
bathah, pleasantness,  from  an;,  to  be  good,  to
please.  None  of  these  places  have  been
identified.  Eobinson  mentions  a  Wady  el
Ohadaghidh,  a  broad  sandy  valley  diverging
from  the  Wa  ly  es  Jerftfeh,  in  the  desert  of
Kt-TSh,  and  this  has  been  supposed  to  indi-
cate the  site  of  Gudgodah ;  but  the  differ-
ence of  the  consonants  in  the  two  words  is
such  as  to  render  this  identification  more
than  doubtful.   In  the  Arabic  of  the  London

Polyglott,  mm  is  represented  by  J^3^
(Judjuda\  which  Is  totally  different  from
Ohadaghidh.  All  the  places,  however,  must
have  been  in  the  'Ar&b&h,  and  in  the  region
of  Mount  Hor,  or  not  far  distant.  That
the  places  mentioned  here  are  the  same  as
those  in  Numberd  cannot  be  doubted.  The
two  passages,  however,  relate  to  different
journeys ;  that  in  Numbers  to  the  journey-
ing of  the  Israelites  from  the  wilderness  of
Sinai  to  Kadcsh,  that  in  Deuteronomy  to
the  march  in  the  fortieth  year,  when  they
went  from  E&desh  to  Mount  Hor.

Vers.  8,  9. — Mosos,  here  resuming  the
form  of  address,  refers  to  the  separation  of
the  tribe  of  Levi  to  the  holy  service.

Yer.  8. — At  that  time;  the  time  when  the
covenant  was  restored  at  Sinai,  not  the
time  when  Aaron  died.  The  appointment
of  the  tribe  of  Levi  for  service  took  place
in  connection  with  that  of  Aaron  and  his


sons  to  the  priesthood  (Numb.  iii.  4).  The
service  to  which  the  tribe  of  Levi  was
chosen  appeitained  to  the  tribe  as  such,
including  the  priests  as  well  as  the  non-
priestly  Levites,  though  parts  of  it  specially
belonged  to  the  one  class  lather  than  the
other.  Thus  the  bearing  of  the  ark  was
the  special  duty  of  non-priestly  Levites,  the
Kohathites  (Numb.  iv.  4,  etc. ;  1  Chron.  xv.
I.'));  but  was  also,  on  peculiarly  solemn
occasions,  discharged  by  the  priests  (Josh,
iii.  6,  etc, ;  vi.  6 ;  viii,  33 ;  1  Kings  viii.  3,
6,  etc.).  To  stand  before  the  lord  to  minister
unto  liim  was  the  special  function  of  the
priests  (oh.  xvii,  12;  xxi.  5 ;  Ezra  xl,  40 ;
xliv.  15,  16);  but  as  the  service  of  the
Levites  was  also  a  sacred  service,  they  too
are  said  to  stand  to  minister  before  the
Lord  (ch.  xviii.  7 ;  1  Oliron,  xv.  2;  2  Chron.
xxiii.  6;  xxix.  4,  5,  11, 12).  To  bless  in
his  name  does  not  mean,  as  some  pro-
pose, to  invoke  the  Name  of  God,  or  to
praise  his  Name,  but  to  pronounce  a  bene-
diction or  invoke  a  blessing  on  the  people
in  his  Name  (cf.  2  Sam,  vi,  18;  1  Chron.
xvi.  2).  This  was  the  special  duty  of  the
priests  (cf.  Numb.  vi.  22 — 27;  ch,  xxi,  5;
1  Chron.  xxiii.  13),  but  might  also  be  done
by  others  (as  by  David),  and  in  this  bene-
diction the  Levites  might  join  (2  Chron,
XXV.  27).

Ver.  9.— (Cf.  Numb,  xviii.  20-24.)
Vers,  10,  11. — Moses  here  sums  up  the
general  result  of  his  intercession.  As  at
the  first,  he  was  on  the  muunt  the  second
time  forty  days  and  forty  nights;  and  in
response  to  his  pleading,  tlie  Lord  wille<l  not
to  destroy  Israel,  and  commanded  him  to
resume  his  place  as  leader  of  the  people,
and  conduct  them  to  the  promised  land
"This  commandment  and  promise  was  a
testimony  that  God  now  was  reconciled  unto
them  by  the  intercession  of  Moses"  (Aiub-
worth).

Vers.  12,  13. — God  had  showed  great
favour  to  Israel;  what  return  did  he  re-
quire? Only  what,  witliout  any  prescription,
they  were  bound  to  render— fear,  love,  and
obedience  (cump.  Micah  vi.  8).  To  fear  the
Lord  thy  God  (cf.  ch.  vi.  2,  13).  To  walk  in
all  his  ways ;  to  receive  his  truth,  accept  his
law,  and  follow  the  course  of  conduct  which
he  prescribes  (cf.  Gen.  xviii.  19;  Ps.  xxv.
4,  6;  Ixvii.  2;  Acts  xviii.  25,  26).  To  love
him  (cf.  Exod.  xx.  6).  "Fear  with  love!
Love  without  fear  relaxes;  fear  withont
love  enslaves,  and  leads  to  despair"  (J.
Gerhard).  There  is  a  fear  with  which  love
cannot  coexist — a  fear  which  hath  torment,
and  which  love  casts  out  as  its  antagonist
(1  Jolin  iv.  18);  but  the  fear  of  God  which
he  requires  is  that  pious  reverence^  which
not  only  can  coexist  with  love  to  him,  but
is  not  where  love  is  not.    And  to  serve  the


180


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  X.  1—22.


Laid  thy  Qod  with  all  thy  heart  and  with  all
thy  sonl.  Love  prompts  to  aervlce.  Where-
pver  love  fills  the  heart,  it  seeks  expression
in  acts  of  service  to  its  object :  and  where
no  such  expression  comes  forth,  the  evidence
is  wanting  of  the  existence  of  the  emotion
in  the  bosom  (cf  John  xiv.  15,  23 ;  Gal.  v.
13 ;  1  John  iii.  18).  For  thy  good  (of.  cli.  v.
29;  vi.  24).  "In  serving  the  Lord  the
glory  redoundeth  unto  him,  tlie  benefit  to
ourselves;  for  them  that  honour  him  he
■will  honour  (1  Sam.  ii.  30),  and  'godliness
halli  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and
of  tliat  which  is  to  come'  (1  Tim.  iv.  8)"
(Ainsnorth).

\eiB.  14, 15. — To  love  and  serve  the  Lord,
Israel  was  specially  ound,  bbecause  of  God's
love  to  them  and  choice  of  them  to  be  hia
people.  He,  the  Lord  and  Proprietor  of
the  universe,- was  free  to  choose  any  of  the
nations  he  pleased,  and  needed  not  the
service  of  any,  but  of  his  free  grace  he  chose
Israel,  in  whose  fathers  he  had  delight,  to
love  them  (cf.  Exod.  xix.  5).  The  heaven
and  the  heaven  of  heavens;  the  highest
heavens,  all  that  may  be  called  heaven,
with  all  that  it  contains.  Delight  ("  set  his
love  upon,"  eh.  vii.  7) ;  literally,  cleaved  to,
was  attached  to.  "Affection,  love,  choice,
the  three  momenta  prompting  from  the
innermost  impulses  to  the  historical  act"
(Lange).

Ver.  16. — They  were,  therefore,  to  lay
aside  all  insensibility  of  heart  and  all  ob-
duracy, to  acknowledge  God's  supremacy,
to  imitate  his  beneficence,  and  to  fear  and
worship  him.  Ciroumjise  therefore  the  fore-
skin of  your  heart.  As  circumcision  was
the  symbol  of  purification  and  sign  of  con-
secration to  God,  EC  the  Israelites  are  en-
joined to  realize  in  fact  what  that  rite
symbolized,  viz.  purity  of  heart  and  recep-
tivity for  the  things  of  God.  This  is  en-
forced by  the  consideration  that  Jehovah
the  alone  God,  the  Almighty,  is  mighty  and
terrible  without  respect  to  persons,  and  at
tlie  same  time  is  a  righteous  Judge,  and  the
Protector  of  the  helpless  and  destitute.

Ver.  17.— God  of  gods  (Ps.  oxxxvi.  2).
Not  only  supreme  over  all  that  are  called
god,  but  the  complex  and  sum  of  all  that  is
Divine;  the  Great  Reality,  of  which  the
"gods  many"  of  the  nations  were  at  the
best  but  the' symbols  of  paitioular  attributes


or  qualities.  Which  regardeth  not  persons;
is  not  partial,  as  a  judge  who  has  respect  to
the  condition  and  circumstances  of  parties
rather  than  to  the  merits  of  the  case  (cf.
Lev.  xix.  IS ;  Acts  x.  34 ;  Eph.  vi.  9 ;  Jude
16).  Nor  taketh  reward;  doth  nbt  accept
presents  as  bribes  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  19;  2  Chron.
xix.  7;  Job  xxxiv.  19;  Micah  iii.  11).

Vers.  18,  19. — As  the  impartial  and  in-
corruptible Judge,  God  executes  the  judg-
ment of  the  fatherless  and  widow,  vindicates
the  right  of  the  defenceless  (Ps.  Ixvi  ii.  6 ;
cxlvi.  9);  and  as  the  God  of  tke  whole
earth,  he  loveth  the  stranger,  helpless,  and
it  may  be  oppressed,  and  giveth  him  food
and  raiment.  Following  him,  Israel,  as  his
people,  were  to  be  benevolent  to  the  singer,
inasmuch  as  they  themselves  bad  been
strangers  in  Egypt,  and  knew  by  experience
whdt  it  was  to  be  a  stranger  (cf.  Exod.  xxii.
20 ;  Lev.  xix.  83,  34).  They  were  to  love
tlie  stranger  as  God  loves  him, .by  relieving
his  necessities  (cf.  Jas.  ii.  15,  16).

Ver.  20. — Beverting  to  his  main  theme.
Hoses  anew  exhorts  Israel  to  fear  Jehovah
their  God,  and  to  show  true  reverence  to
him  by  serving  him,  by  cleaving  to  him,
and  by  swearing  in  his  Name  (cf.  ch.  iv.  4 ;
vi.  13;  Acts  xi.  23).  Such  reverence  was
due  from  Israel  to  God,  because  of  the
great  things  he  had  done  for  them,  and
those  terrible  acts  by  which  his  mighty
power  had  been  displayed  on  their  behalf.

Ver.  21.— He  is  thy  praise,  i.e.  the  Object
of  thy  praise ;  the  Being  who  bad  given  them
abundant  cause  to  praise  him,  and  whom
they  were  bound  continually  to  praise  (cf.
Ps.  xxii.  3;  oix.  1;  Jer.  xvii.  14).  Terrible
things ;  acts  which  by  their  greatness  and
awful  effects  inspired  fear  and  dread  into
those  by  whom  they  were  witnessed.  For
thee;  literally,  with  thee,  i.e.  either  in  thy
view  or  towards  thee,  for  tliy  behoof  (comp.
ch.  i.  80;  1  Sam.  xii.  7;  Zech.  vii.  9;  and
such  an  expression  as  "deal  kindly  [lite-
rally, do  Mndnets]  with,"  Gen.  xxiv.  49,  etc.).
Ver.  22. — Among  other  marvellous  acts
toward  Israel,  was  one  done  in  Israel  itself;
they,  whose  fathers  went  down  to  Egypt
only  seventy  in  number  (Gen.  xlvi.  26,  27),
had,  notwithstanding  the  cruel  oppression
to  which  they  were  subjected  there,  grown
to  a  nation  numberless  as  the  stars  (of.  Qen.
xxiL  17:  oh.  L  10;  Neh.  ix.  23>


HOMILETIC81

Vers.  1 — 5,  10, 11. — The  resulU  of  the  intercessort/  prayer  of  Motet.  In  these  Tenet
we  have  a  very  brief  statement  of  the  results  of  the  pleading  of  Moses  for  Israel  with
God,  which  can  only  be  duly  appreciated  when  set  side  by  side  with  the  fuller  account
in  Exod.  xxxiii.,  xxxiv.  It  is  clear,  even  from  the  few  words  here  given  us,  that
the  Lord's  wrath  was  turned  away,  that  the  covenant  and  the  covenant  promise  were


CH.  X.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  Ml


again  renevred.    But  we  must  at  least  indicate  the  points  of  detail  ere  we  can  gather
up  the  sublime  teachings  of  the  whole.

I.  The  results  op  the  iktbecbssion  of  Moses.  1.  Generally.  "The  Lord  re-
pented," etc.  (IDxod.  xxxii.  14).  The  passage  in  Numb,  xxiii.  19  is  by  no  means  contrary
to  this.  It  means  that  there  is  no  fickleness  nor  falseness  in  the  Divine  promises.and  that
the  fulfilment  of  them  is  not  subject  to  human  caprice ;  which  is  gloriously  true,  and
in  perfect  harmony  with  the  before-named  words.  These  do  not  denote  a  change  in
the  mind  of  God,  but  rather  a  change  in  the  Divine  acts.  God's  promises  are,  in  an
important  sense,  conditional,  and  his  threatenings-  too.  If  we  reject  the  promise  and
fail  to  rely  upon  it,  it  will  not  be  fulfilled  in  our  case ;  so,  if  we  repent  and  turn  from
sin,  the  threatenings  will  cease  to  apply  to  us.  The  virtual  withdrawal  of  promise  or
threatening  is  called  "  repenting,"  not  because  God  changes  his  will,  but  because  he
varies  his  action.  God  may  plan  and  effect  a  change  without  ever  changing  a  plan.
2.  In  detail.  (1)  There  were  two  manifest  tokens  of  the  Divine  displeasure,  (a)  Exod.
xxxiii.  7 ;  the  tabernacle  of  Moses,  where  he  would  hear  the  causes  of  the  people,  and
maintain  the  mediatorship,  was  removed  from  within  the  camp  to  the  outside  of  it.
Still,  mercy  and  judgment  were  blended,  for  the  pillar  of  cloud  did  not  forsake  them.
(6)  Exod.  xxxii.  34,  35 ;  this  is  very  obscure ;  but  it  at  least  means  that,  though  they
were  forgiven,  yet  they  were  chastised.  In  after  times,  the  Jews  were  wont  to  say
that  never  any  trouble  came  upon  them  without  an  ounce  of  the  dust  of  the  golden
calf  in  it.  The  intercession  of  Moses,  though  it  secured  inestimable  blessings,  yet  did
not  avail  to  remove  all  reminders  of  their  sin,  or  to  make  things  as  though  it  had  not
been.  (2)  Dire  threatenings  were  removed  one  by  one.  (a)  They  should  not  be  con-
sumed, still,  only  an  angel  should  go  with  them  (Exod.  xxxiii.  2,  3).  (6)  The  Divine
presence  should  go  with  them  (vers.  12 — 14).  (3)  Abounding  mercy  is  vouchsafed.
The  mercy  is  giadually  brought  out  more  and  more  fully,  as  Moses  pleads  more  and
more  persistently,  (a)  Though  the  tabernacle  is  out  of  the  camp,  yet  communication
with  Jehovah  is  still  maintained  (Exod.  xxxiii.  9).  (6)  The  old  promise  is  renewed
(Exod.  xxxiii.  12 — 14).  "  Best  I  "  Rest  in  God.  What  less,  what  more,  could  they
desire  ?  (c)  There  was  a  formal  renewal  of  the  covenant  (ch.  x.  1 — 5).  (d)  Jehovah
grants  a  new  disclosure  of  his  glory.  The  recent  exhibition  of  the  frailty  of  man  might
well  have  crushed  Moses  if  he  had  not  been  sustained  by  a  new  vision  of  God.  And
what  a  vision  !  What  a  declaration !  Nowhere  else  on  earth  had  a  Name  so  glorious
then  been  proclaimed  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6 — 9).  (e)  The  long-continued  communion  with
God  illumed  the  face  of  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiv.  29 — 35)i  Was  this  supernatural  or
miraculous?  Supernatural?  Yes.  Miraculous?  No.  We  believe  intensely  in  the
religion  of  the  /ace  (see  Acts  vi.  15 ;  vide  a  lecture  by  Joseph  Cook,  of  Boston,  on

'  The  Solar  Light ').  Moses  was  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  lustre  without  was  but
the  index  of  the  light  within.  He  had  gone  in.  unto  God  to  plead  for  others,  and  he
was  rewarded  openly,-  by  bringing  down  from  the  mount  a  radiance  that  told  with
whom  he  had  been !  If  our  faces  were  oftener  directed  towards  God  in  intercessory
prayer,  they  would  certainly  beam  with  new  light,  and  men  would  take  knowledge  of
us  that  we  had  been  with  Jesus.  (We  have  passed  very  rapidly  over  these  details,  as
they  have  been  dealt  with  separately  in  the  Book  of  the  Exodus,  for  the  purpose  of
devoting  somewhat  more  space  to  gathering  up  the  lessons  taught  us  thereby.)

II.  The  lessons  taught  by  this  naeeativb.  1.  We  see  here  the  abounding  mercy
of  God — ^how  slow  he  is  to  anger,  how  ready  to  forgive.  We  can  imagine,  indeed,  an
objector  interposing  here,  and  saying,  "  Precisely  the  reverse.  The  fact  of  the  severity  of
OtoA'a  judgments  being  abated,  removed,  and  even  exchanged  for  mercy,  just  in  response
to  the  intercession  of  Moses,  seems  to  make  Moses  appear  more  merciful  than  God."
Perhaps  it  seems  so  at  first,  but  it  only  seems.  And  even  the  seeming  ceases  when
we  look  all  round.  For  was  it  not  the  same  God  whom  Israel  had  offended,  who  had
given  them  Moses,  who  taught  him  to  pray,  and  who  sustained] his  pleading  power?
So  that  the  lines  of  judgment'  and  of  mercy  have  a  common  meeting-point  in  the
same  hand.  Besides,  we  must  never  forget  that  the  Great  Father  adapts  himself  in
the  methods  of  Ms  teaching  to  the  capacities  of  the  child  in  learning.  And  even  the
severity  of  the  judicial  sentence  comes  out  of  mercy.  When  will  men  learn  the  pro-
found truth  in  Ps.  Ixii.  12  ?  The  greatest  mercy  which  can  be  shown  to  a  people  is  to
educate  them  in  righteousness.     How  constantly  are  men  making  the  mistake  of


182  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  laa.  x.  1—22.


regarding  suffering  as  the  grievance  rather  than  sin !  as  if  it  were  not  the  sin  which  il
the  people's  bane,  and  the  suffering  consequent  on  it  which  is  really  their  guard,  that
they  may  learn  to  dread  the  sin  which  brings  such  sorrow  with  it.  And  if  the  Great
Lord,  over  and  above  the  merciful  threatenings  which  show  the  evil  of  sin  in  his  sight,
provides  Israel  with  such  an  intercessor  as  Moses,  and  if  by  virtue  of  his  pleas  will
withhold  the  dreaded  stroke,  and  for  the  uplifted  arm  of  justice  will  show  the  directing
and  sheltering  hand, — both  the  one  act  and  the  otlier  are  joint  illustrations  of  that
glorious  Name,  the  Lord  thy  God !  There  is  no  schism  in  the  manifestation  of  that
Name.  The  terror  and  the  kindness  perfectly  accord,  and  it  is  only  our  defective  sight
which  makes  them  appear  inharmonious  in  hue.  The  very  God  who  guards  Law  by
the  holiest  sanctions,  has  provided  also  in  his  government  for  the  efficacy  of  interced-
ing prayer  I  "  He  retaineth  not  his  anger  for  ever,  because  he  delighteth  in  mercy."
2.  This  mediatorship  of  Moses  is  but  one  illustration  of  the  working  of  a  permanent
law,  that  God  wills  to  be  approached  by  his  saints  in  prayer  on  behalf  of  others.  It
were  well  if  some  were  to  collate  the  intercessory  prayers  in  the  Bible,  and  the  passages
which  bear  on  the  theme  of  pleading  for  others.  The  Apostle  Paul  understood  the
blessedness  of  intercessory  prayer.  He  himself  rose  to  a  glorious  height  in  this  sublime
act,  and  yet  he  declares  his  own  dependence  on  and  appreciation  of  the  prayers  of  the
saints.  Nor  do  we  at  all  understand  the  priesthood  of  believert,  till  we  regard  this  as
one  of  its  special  privileges,  functions,  and  duties.  Let  those  who  "  profess  and  call
themselves  Christians  "  see  to  this.  Let  them  rise  to  this  high  and  holy  service.  Let
them  enter  into  their  closets,  fall  on  their  knees,  and  pour  out  before  God  petitions
for  all.  We  sometimes  ask  whether  the  yearning  spirit  of  intercession  is  dying  out
amongst  us  (Joel  ii.  16 — 18).  3.  This  Divine  law,  of  the  power  of  intercession,  has
its  supretae  illustration  in  a  greater  than  Moses  (Hfeb.  vii.  25),  even  in  him,  of  whom
in  so  many  respects  Moses  was  a  type.  Human  mediation  may  achieve  much,  but
ah !  even  the  men  who  plead  most  with  God  for  others  do  feel  most  their  need  of  One
to  plead  for  them!  There,  there,  at  the  Father's  throne,  is  One  who,  having  given
himself  a  ransom  for  many,  does  present  his  own  work  as  the  ground  on  which  the
coming  sinner  may  be  forgiven,  accepted,  and  saved.  4.  There  are  three  things  which
no  intercession,  either  of  saints  on  earth  or  of  a  Saviour  in  heaven,  can  secure.  Why  ?
Because  in  the  nature  of  things  they  are  impossible,  and  therefore  for  them  no  holy
one  can  intercede.  (1)  No  intercession  can  secure  men  against  either  the  inward
smart  or  physical  consequence  of  committed  sin,  even  though  it  may  have  been  re-
pented of  and  forgiven.  There  is  nothing  in  the  freeness  of  Divine  grace  to  afford  the
slightest  encouragement  to  men  in  playing  or  parleying  with  sin.  "  In  the  day  when
I  visit,  I  will  visit  their  sin  upon  them,"  is  as  irrevocable  a  law  as  any  other.  It  is
quite  true  that  if  the  worldling,  or  the  drunkard,  or  the  fornicator,  repents,  he  will
obtain  mercy ;  quite  true  that  he  will  be  a  child  of  God,  and  will  be  trained  for  the
Father's  house.  But — the  enfeebled  will,  the  sapped  strength,  the  deteriorated  judg-
ment, the  haunted  and  haunting  memory  of  evil,  will  abide  with  him,  and  will  cast
their  shade  over  all  his  remaining  days.  The  bitter  taste  of  cdmmitted  sin  will  come
up  into  the  soul  a  thousand  times ;  and  though  it  is  true  that  even  that  will  be  sanc-
tified, and  will  prompt  new  prayers  for  restraining  and  renewing  grace,  yet,  oh,  how
far  more  peaceful  would  life  be,  if  such  nausea  had  not  been  made  an  enforced  part  of
its  experience  I  While  no  penitent  need  despair  of  mercy,  yet,  for  all  that,  he  may
well  dread  the  sins  which,  even  after  forgiveness,  will  "  bite  like  a  serpent,  and  sting
like  an  adder  "  1  (2)  No  intercession  can  secure  pardon  for  sin  which  is  not  repented
of  and  forsaken.  Hence,  whoever  there  may  be  who  is  valuing  the  prayers  of  others
on  his  own  behalf  (and  few,  surely,  would  be  so  indifferent  as  to  set  no  value  on  a
father's,  mother's,  brother's,  sister's  prayers),  let  us  remind  such  a  one  that,  unless  he
repents  of  sin,  those  petitions  will  avert  no  sorrow,  no  judgment,  no  ruin.  No ;  not
even  the  atonement  of  Christ  was  ever  intended  to  save  people  in  sin,  but  from  it.
•'  God  commandeth  all  men  everywhere  to  repent."  (3)  If  repentance  be  delayed,
there  may  come  a  point  beyond  which  no  intercession  will  avail,  because  the
"  day  of  visitation  "  is  past  (see  Jer.  vii.  16).  There  is  a  limit  beyond  which  not
even  the  vine-dresser  dares  to  ask  for  further  postponement  of  the  sentence  (Luke  xiii.
9  ;  see  Luke  xix.  41 — 14 ;  Bev,  ii.  21).  "Now  is  the  accepted  time ;  now  is  the  day  of
salvation"  (cf.  Isa.  v.  3—6).    And  if  after  all  the  blended  judgment  and  mercy  in  the


CH.X.1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  183


way  of  providence ;  if  after  all  tne  teachings,  prayers,  and  intercessions  as  means  of
grace ;  if  after  all  the  striving  of  Qo^'s  Spirit  with  men,  there  is  a  steady,  stout,
obstinate  resistance  to  all, — then,  such  is  the  view  of  the  holy  ones  on  earth  and  in
heaven,  such  the  view  of  our  Great  Intercessor,  of  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  honour  of
God,  that  not  from  one  pleader,  however  powerful  or  however  tender,  can  there  come
even  one  more  request  for  any  further  arrest  or  delay  of  the  judgments  of  God.  '  In  the
treatment  of  every  sinner,  love,  jusiice,  mercy,  forbearance,  will  all  have  played  their
part,  and  if,  after  all  the  patience  of  a  God  and  the  entreaties  of  man,  impenitent  he
still  remains,  all  heaven  will  acquiesce  in  the  justice  of  the  verdict — his  blood  shall  be
upon  his  own  head  1

Vers.  1 2 — 16. — IsraeV»  duty  summed  «p  and  touchingly  enforced.  The  rehearsal  and
review  of  Israel's  waywardness,  in  which  the  great  lawgiver  had  been  reminding  the
people  how  much"  God  had  had  to  hear  with  from  them,  must  have  been  extremely
painful  to  him,  as  it  was  reproachful  for  them.  That  part  of  the  review  closes  with  the
eleventh  verse.  And  then  follows  thereon  one  of  the  most  tender  and  touching  appeals
to  which  the  old  man  could  give  vent.  The  two  first  words  of  the  twelfth  verse, "  And
now,"  convey  a  world  of  meaning.  We  think  we  see  the  lips  of  Moses  quiver,  we  hear
his  voice  falter,  we  note  the  tear  standing  in  his  eye,  as,  with  intensely  deep  pathos
and  loving  solicitude,  he  shows  Israel  how  past  waywardness  on  their  part,  and  forbear-
ance and  forgiveness  on  God's  part,  gave  them  an  urgent  reason  why  they  should  seek
henceforth  to  love,  not  in  word  only,  but  in  deed  and  of  a  truth.  There  are  two  lines
of  thought  suggested  by  this  paragraph.

I.  Herb  is  the  sum  of  Israel's  life-duty  newly  enjoikbd.  This  may  be  set  under
six  heads,  which  will  be  but  enumerated  here.  1.  They  must  cease  their  rebellious
spirit :  "  be  no  more  stiffnecked."  2.  They  must  fear  the  Lord  their  God.  3.  With
fear  they  must  blend  love.  4.  To  love  and  fear  they  must  add  loyalty  of  action,  by
walking  in  God's  ways.  5.  They  must  observe  alike  the  commandments  or  moral
precepts,  and  the  statutes  or  several  appointments.  6.  And  finally,  they  must  guard
against  all  merely  surface  work :  "  Circumcise  the  foreskin  of  your  heart."  Though
there  were  many  more  rites  in  Judaism  than  there  are  under  Christianity,  yet  a  merely
ritual  service  was  no  more  acceptable  then  than  now.  This  summing  up  of  life's  duty
should  be  compared  with  that  in  Micah  vi.  8.

II.  Herb  is  a  great  reason  for  disohaboino  that  duty  enforobd  bt  tender
APPEAL.  In  this  appeal,  as  we  venture  to  call  it,  there  are  but  few  worSs.  But  how
full  of  meaning  they  are !  The  word  "  now  " — nunc,  at  this  time ;  and  as  put  here  it
may  suggest  six  queries,  each  of  which  contains  a  most  tender  reason  for  future  loyalty,
which  the  preacher  may  well  urge  with  all  possible  force.  We  will  name  the  queries
one  by  one.  1.  And  now,  Israel,  have  you  not  been  thus  wayward  long  enough  ?  Is
it  not  time  that  you  reconsidered  the  position  in  which  you  stand  with  reference  to
Jehovah  ?  Look !  See  where  you  are  I  Think  how  long  you  have  been  trying  God'i.
patience  and  long-suffering!  2.  And  now,  Israel,  since  God  has  continued  to  spare  you,
since  he  has  forgiven  you  and  not  cast  you  off,  since  he  has  oorisented  to  bear  with  you
still, — will  you  not  renew  your  vows,  with  less,  indeed,  of  self-coniidenoe,  but  with  more
of  penitential  loyalty?  3.  And  now,  Israel,  think  again,  "  what  doth  the  Lord  thy  God
require  of  thee?"  Is  it  more  than  what  fs  reasonable  and  right?  Could  he  ask  less
consistently  with  his  righteousness  and  honour  ?  Are  not  all  his  commands  wise  and
right?  Is  it  not  an  easy  yoke  to  love  a  God  so  kind,  to  fear  a  God  so  holy,  to  obey  a
God  so  faithful  and  true  ?  4.  And  now,  Israel,  look  at  the  fact  that  all  God's  com-
mands are  for  your  good  (ver.  13) !  A  perfect  obedience  would  ensure  perfect  content.
All  the  while  you  have  been  rebellious  against  the  Lord,  you  have  been  fighting  against

our  own  highest  interests.     God's  honour  and  your  happiness  require  precisely  the

jie  course  of  life.    5.  And  now,  Israel,  do  remember  this,  for  consider  how  great  is

jB  Divine  condescension  in  caring  for  you  at  all  (ver.  14):  "Lo!  the  heaven  and  the

ven  of  heavens  is  the  Lord's  thy  God,  the  earth  also,  with  all  that  therein  is."   And

■hat,  what  but  infinite  love  should  lead  him  thus  to  stoop  from  his  high  throne  to  care

r  you  ?    It  is  not  for  your  righteousness,  for  you  are  a  stiffnecked  people.    No  account

can  be  given  of  why  God  should  care  for  you  so,  save  that  he  loves  to  do  it.     Then

surely  the  reason  is  overwhelmingly  strong  for  your  gratitude,  loyalty,  and  love.  6.  Amm


184  TUB  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  x.  1-22.

now,  Israel,  seeing  these  things  are  io,  could  you  do  less  for  such  a  God  than  he  asks
of  you,  even  if  he  did  not  ask  it?  So  rich  should  be  your  joy  in  him,  sojeverent  your
fear,  so  devout  your  love,  that  you  would  with  ready  mind  give  God  all,  even  if  he  did
not  require  all.  What  he  is  to  you  should  lead  you  to  he  to  him  all  that  he  would  have
you  be.  Such  seems  to  us  to  be  a  true  expansion  of  the  pathetic  plea  which  this
passage  contains,  which  the  connection  in  which  it  stands  necessarily  suggests.  How
much  stronger  every  one  of  the  six  points  may  be  made  from  the  evangelic  standpoint,
the  Christian  preacher  will  in  a  njoment  see.  By  as  much  as  the  love  of  God  in  the
great  redemption  in  Christ  Jesus  is  a  grander  disclosure  than  his  love  as  revealed  in  the
deliverance  from  Egypt,  by  so  much  should  each  argument  be  the  more  tender  and
strong.  When  we  read,  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were
yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us,"  what  can  the  proper  response  for  our  hearts  be  but  this,
"We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us"?  Such  love  should  constrain  us  to  obey,
even  if  we  had  no  written  Law  by  which  obedience  was  required.

Ver.  17 — A  1. — God  no  respecter  of  persons.  Having  reminded  the  people  of  their
duty  towards  God,  the  aged  lawgiver  next  shows  the  people  what  their  God  is  to  theiu,
and  draws  from  thence  a  new  argument  for  obedience  and  love  towards  him.  In  doin^
this,  however,  while  there  is  much  which  we  treat  of  in  other  Homilies,  there  is  one
special  sentence,  peculiar  to  this  passage,  which  is  yet  made  so  much  use  of  in  the
teachings  of  other  parts  of  the  Word  of  God,  that  we  feel  called  on  to  note  it  as  the
centre  point  of  this  paragraph,  to  show  what  the  truth  is  which  is  indicated  therein,
and  the  bearing  of  that  truth  on  the  various  phases  of  life  and  duty.  We  have  in  the
Word  of  God  no  fewer  than  ten  or  twelve  quotations  or  uses  of  this  texf,  each  one
setting  it  in  some  special  aspect  as  a  point  of  doctrine,  or  drawing  therefrom  some  special
inference  on  a  matter  of  duty.  These  several  allusions,  direct  or  indirect,  will  suggest
the  plan  of  this  Homily.  The  verse  thus  frequently  referred  to  is  the  seventeenth.
"  For  the  Lord  your  God  .  .  .  regardeth  not  persons,  nor  taketh  reward."

I.  What  do  such  wobds  mean,  as  a  statement  of  tkuth?  We  might  not
have  seen  much  in  them,  if  the  Holy  Ghost  had  not  inspired  the  sacred  writers  to
quote  them  so  frequently  in  new  and  varied  lights.  Being  thus  quoted,  however,  we
ought  to  show  by  reference  to  the  several  quotations,  the  varied  phases  of  their  meaning.
1.  Ood  knows  no  distinctions  in  his  moral  government  of  the  nations.  This  is  suggested
by  the  words  in  this  passage.  Moses  says,  in  effect,  to  Israel,  "  You  have  been  chosen,
out  of  all  the' nations,  to  receive  a  special  revelation,  and  to  be  made  the  bearers  of  a
special  mission  to  the  world ;  but  do  not  think  that  because  of  that  you  are  at  liberty  to
trifle  with  the  rules  of  the  Divine  Law :  God  will  not  tolerate  sin  in  you  any  more  than
he  will  in  other  nations.  Think  not  that  he  frowns  on  iniquity  on  Canaan  and
regards  it  more  mildly  with  you.  '  He  regardeth  not  persons.'  And  only  as  you  are
loyal  to  him,  and  faithful  in  doing  the  right,  will  he  smile  upon  you."  2.  Ood  makes
no  distinction  in  the  basis  on  which  men  are  accepted  in  his  sight.  The  Apostle  Peter
throws  quite  an  unexpected  (and  we  fear  to  a  large  extent  aa  unperceived)  light  on
these  words  in  Acts  x.  34.  He  is  preaching  to  Cornelius;  he  is  opening  the  kingdom  of
heaven  to  the  Gentile.  To  induce  him  to  do  this,  he  needed  the  vision  of  the  great
sheet  let  down  from  heaven.  That  gave  him  a  new  revelation.  God's  grace  was
larger  than  he  had  thought  for.  He  had  never  seen  till  then  the  deep  meaning  of  the
words  in  his  old  legislator's  code.  He  saw  them  then,  and  they  shone  with  glory —
"  Of  a  truth  .  .  .  but  in  every  nation."  As  if  he  had  said,  "  I  used  to  think  that
because  our  nation  was  favoured  with  more  light,  therefore  it  stood  on  another  basis
for  acceptance  and  safety.  And  now  I  find  that  the  great  ilan  of  God's  grace  so  covers
the  globe,  that  in  every  nation,  he  who  fears  God  and  follows  the  light  is  accepted
with  him  I "  Men  are  saved,  not  according  to  the  measure  of  light  they  have  received,
but  according  to  the  use  they  have  made  of  the  light  which  God  has  given  them.
3.  Ood  is  exercising  over  evsry  man  a  presen  t  judgment  according  to  perfect  impartiality.
The  truth  just  now  referred  to  made  so  deep  an  impression  upon  the  Apostle  Peter,
that  he  refers  to  it  again  in  1  Pet.  i.  17,  and  would  have  the  thought  of  the  absolute
impartiality  of  Ood  act  as  a  perpetual  influence  on  believers,  generating  and
maintaining  a  holy  fear.  There  is  no  favouritism  with  God.  He  regards  not
tiw  person,  but  the  deed;  "judging  according  to  every  man's  work."    4.  God  revealed


uii.  X.  1-22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  1«5

this  attribute  of  his  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  For  this  side-light  on  the  truth,
we  are  indebted  to  a  scribe,  an  uninspired  man,  who,  possibly  indeed  in  flattery,
but  we  rather  think  otherwise,  intimates  that  this  attribute  of  impartial  equity,
which  his  lawgiver  attributed  to  the  Divine  Being,  was  manifest  conspicuously
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (see  Mark  xii.  14).  However  he  may  have  meant  it,  he
certainly  uttered  a  profound  and  glorious  truth.  For  who,  on  earth,  ever  so  clearly
showed  himself  no  respecter  of  persons,  as  our  Divine  Lord  and  Master  ?  5.  Precisely  the
tame  feature  <f  Oud's  government  will  mark  the  final  judgment  (Rom.  ii.  11,  16).
There  will  be  one  rule  of  righteousness,  which  will  be  inflexibly  adhered  to  then,  and
which  not  even  the  glorious  grace  manifested  in  the  gospel  will  deflect  or  obscure.
Not  from  the  most  hidden  souls,  nor  from  the  most  prominent,  will  any  impeachment
of  the  Divine  righteojjgness  ever  rise  up.  The  great  system  of  mediatorial  adminis-
tration may  then  reveal  a  plan  of  larger  grace  than  ever  entered  into  the  heart  of
man  to  conceive,  but  most  assuredly  there  will  be  no  flaw  in  its  equitable  impar-
tiality, for  "  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God."  That  very  impartiality  will
bring  about  many  startling  changes,  for  "  many  that  are  first  shall  be'last,  and  the  last
first."

IL   To  WHOM  ABE  THESE  WOBDS  AFFLIED  IN  SCRIPTURE,  AS  A  DIRECTORT  OF  DUTY  ?

1.  They  are  applied  to  the  guerulaus.  This  absolute  righteousness  being  revealed  as  an
attribute  of  God,  should  teach  men  to  be  cautious,  who  are  too  ready  to  pass  judgment
on  the  ways  of  God  when  they  are  past  finding  out.  Such  is  the  use  to  which  Blibu
applies  the  doctrine.  He  did  not  understand  Job's  case,  perhaps,  any  better  than
Rliphaz,  Bildad,  or  Zophar ;  but  in  this  point  he  is  undoubtedly  correct.  We  know
God  is  righteous,  therefore  we  must  not  impeach  what  he  does.  2.  They  are  applied  to
magistrates  andjudgs  (see  2  Chron.  xix.  6,  7).  The  like  equity  to  that  which  marks
the  Supreme  Judge  should  characterize  all  who  have  to  administer  justice  in  any
naiion.  3.  They  are  applied  ly  Paul  as  a  guide  in  religious  ci.ntroversy  (Gal.  ii.  6).
"  God  accepteth  no  man's  person,  therefore,"  says  Paul,  "  neither  might  L  Truth
with  me  must  be  supreme,  md  even  if  James,  Cephas,  or  John,  who  seemed  to  be
pillars,  were  to  utter  aught  nconsistent  with  the  gospel  or  grace  of  God,  whosoever
they  are,  it  matters  not."  '.'he  truth,  not  the  person,  commands  our  homage.  Wei]
w<>uld  it  have  been  if  in  ftli  pges  this  had  been  a  guiding  principle  in  the  controversies
of  the  Church.  Well  would  it  be,  if  it  were  men's  guide  now.  4.  The  words  are
applied  to  individvxd  treatment  and  judgment  of  others  in  the-varied  relations  of  private
life  (Col.  iii.  25).  A  man,  however  lordly,  or  however  lowly,  will  receive  from  God  a
reward  or  penalty  according  to  what  he  hath  done,  and  not  according  to  his  station  in
life.  And  we,  like  God,  must  apply  like  moral  rules  all  round,  and  never  justify  a  bad
act  because  done  by  a  rich  man,  nor  depreciate  a  good  act  because  done  by  a  poor  one.
6.  They  are  applied  to  masters  with  regard  to  their  treatment  of  servants  (Eph.  vi.  9).
We  must  not  forget  that  the  "  servants  "  here  referred  to  were  "  slaves."  Neither  Jesus
Christ  nor  his  apostles,  any  more  than  Moses  had  done,  made  any  open  attack  on
slavery.  But  by  teaching  this  principle  of  the  equality  of  men  in  God's  sight,  they
dropped  a  truth  which,  when  it  h^d  time  to  grow,  would  cause  slavery  to  fall,  by
uplifting  the  people  to  so  high  a  standard  of  moral  virtue  that  it  would  no  longer  be
tolerated  by  them.  And  even  now  there  is  need  for  the  continued  reiteration  of  the  same
truth,  that  masters  on  the  one  hand  may  feel  their  responsibility  to  God  for  dealing  justly
with  their  servants,  and  that  servants  may  feel  tlieir  responsibility  for  doing  justice
to  their  masters.  6.  They  are  applied  to  Church  members,  in  reference  to  their  treatment
of  the  poorer  members  (see  Jas.  ii.  1 — 9).  Church  life  is  social  \\h  gathered  round  the
cross.  "  Life's  poor  distinctions  vanish  here."  "  Ihe  rich  and  the  poor  meet  together,
and  the  Lord  is  the  Maker  of  them  all."  Each  one  is  at  liberty  to  form  his  own  private
circle  of  friendship,  according  to  taste,  culture,  etc.  But  in  Church  life,  work,  and
worship,  all  ranks  meet  on  one  common  platform,  acknowledging  "  one  Lord,  one  faith,
one  baptism,"  and  recounting  in  song  one  common  salvation.  The  artificial  distinctions
set  up  by  men  are  nothing  in  the  eye  of  God.  To  reproduce  them  in  the  Church  is  an
offence  in  his  sight.  If  here  we  have  respect  of  persons,  we  commit  sin,  and  are  coA-
yicted  of  the  Law  as  transgressors.  7.  The  principle  implied  in  the  words  is  taught  by
the  eviingelist  in  its  most  impressive  form  in  the  cross  of  Christ.  Such,  surely,  is  the
conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the  weighty  words  of   the  Apostle  Paul,  "Wherefore,


186  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  x.  1—22

henceforth  know  we  no  man  after  the  flesh  "  (2  Cor.  t.  16).  "  Wherefore ; "  because
Christ  died  for  all.  "  Henceforth ;  "  from  the  time  that  we  understand  the  world-
embracing  purpose  of  his  death,  do  we  know  no  man  after  the  flesh.  The  little  distinc-
tions men  make  so  much  of  here,  all  vanish  in  the  light  of  the  cross.  We  ask  not
whether  men  are  rich  or  poor ;  we  ask  not  their  name,  nationality,  or  rank.  "  Christ
died  for  all."  That  stamps  on  every  man's  brow  the  inscription,  "  Dear  to  Christ."
Wherefore  he  will  be  dear  to  us  for  Christ's  sake,  the  wide  world  over,  whatever  his
caste,  country,  colour,  or  clime.  If  Christ  died  for  all,  we  preach  to  all.  So  that
the  very  principle  which  under  the  old  covenant  is  enforced  by  Law,  is  under  the  new
created  by  love.  That  selfsame  impartiality  disclosed  from  Horeb  in  the  methods  of
Law,  is  again  revealed  from  Calvary  in  the  methorls  of  God's  grace.  And  thus,  through
Old  and  New  Testaments  the  appeal  is  the  same,  though  made  jfirst  through  thunder,
and  afterwards  through  tears.  "  Be  ye  imitators  of  God."  Plant  your  feet  flrraly  on  the
revealed  doctrine  of  the  impartial  equity  of  God.  Accepting  that,  acquiesce  with  loving
submission  in  the  mysteries  of  his  ways,  even  when  they  are  in  the  deep  waters,  and
when  his  footsteps  are  not  known.  Then  seek  in  your  sphere  to  follow  God  in  his.
Let  the  judge  and  magistrate  in  his  decisions,  the  disputant  in  his  arguments,  the
private  individual  in  his  home  sphere,  the  master  in  ruling,  the  servant  in  obeying,  tbo
Church  member  in  bis  worship  and  fellowship  with  his  brethren,  the  evangelist  in
evangelizing, — all  remember  that  as  tliere  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God,  there  must
be  none  with  them.  And  lit  all  strive  to  be  like  God,  who  in  his  Law  encircles  all  men
with  one  bond  of  duty,  while  in  his  gospel  he  holds  them  all  under  one  dispensation  of
grace  I

HOMILIES,  BY    VARIOUS   AUTHOKa

Vers.  1 — 12. — Tokens  of  mercy.  Various  pledges  of  his  forgiveness  were  given  by
God  to  the  people.

I.  The  renewal  of  the  tables.  (Vers.  1 — 5.)  1.  Reconciliation  to  Ood  is  only
possible  through  return  to  obedience.  God  cannot  but  require  that  we  accept  his  com-
mands, and  make  them  the  rule  of  our  life  (Matt.  v.  19,  20;  Rom.  vi.  13 — 23).  Such
return  to  obedience  is  involved  in  gospel  faith  (Rom.  vii.  4).  "Repent  ye"  (Mark  i.
1.5).  2.  The  Law  is  one  and  unalterable  (ver.  4).  We  must  change;  God  cannot.
3.  The  Law  underlies  the  mercy-seat  (ver.  2).  A  testimony  against  sins,  yet  the  founda-
tion of  the  covenant.  In  redemption,  tlie  covenant  obligation  is  not  annulled,  but
fulfilled  representatively  in  the  sjiiiitual  Head — Christ.  In  receiving  Christ,  the  Law's
Fulfiller,  we  bind  ourselves  to  be  fulfiUers  of  it  also,  as  no  longer  servants  of  sin,
but  of  righteousness  (Rom.  vi.).  Oar  justification  is  in  him  ;  his  Spirit  of  life  is  in  ua
(Rom.  viii.  1,  2;  Heb.  i.  16).

II.  The  settlement  of  the  ministry  of  religion.  (Vers.  6 — 10.)  The  renewal
I  if  the  high  priest-hood  in  the  person  of  Eleazar  (ver.  6);  the  separation  of  the  tribe  of
Levi  for  the  service  of  the  sanctuary  (Vers.  8,  9).  The  existence  of  ordinances  is  a
proof  of  continued  mercy.  God  punishes  unfaithfulness  by  removing  the  candlestick
out  of  its  place  (Rev.  ii.  5).  The  gospel  ministry  is  Christ's  gift  to  his  Church  (Kph.
iv.  11).  Means  of  grace  end  with  the  close  of  the  day  of  grace  (Matt,  xxviii.  20 ;  2
Cor.  vi.  1,  2),  and  the  removal  of  the  individual  from  their  midst  ends  the  day  of  grace
to  liim  (Ilob.  ix.  27).

III.  The  commandment  to  go  forward.  (Vers.  7,  11.)  We  also  are  commanded
to  go  forward — to  advance  to  the  conque.st  of  the  world— to  press  to  heaven.  So  long
as  that  command  stands  unrepealed,  so  long  may  sinners  be  assured  that  the  day
of  grace  lasts,  and  that  they  are  warranted  in  believing  in  the  mercy  of  God
towards  them. — J.  0.

,  Vers.  12, 13. — The  supreme  requirement.  With  this  Moses  began  (oh.  vi.  4),  and
with  this  he  ends.  The  sum  of  the  Law,  and  the  sum  of  all  his  exhortations.  It  all
and  always  comes  back  to  this(Eccles.  xii.  13):  "What  doth  the  Lordrequireof  thee?"
etc.  We  have  here :  1.  The  central  requirement.  2.  The  all-embracing  requirement.
3.  The  indispensable  requirement ;  that  for  which  nothing  else  can  be  accepted  as  a


OH,  X.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEBONOMY.  181


substitute.  4.  The  requirement  of  kindness — "  for  thy  good."  S.  A  reMonabU
requirement.  This  love  and  obedience  were  due  from  Israel  for  Qod's  mercies  to
them.  As  in  the  gospel,  grace  precedes,  obedience  foUaws.  Saved  by  grace,  we  are  to
make  such  return  as  is  possible  by  loving  and  fearing  God,  and  diligently  keeping  his
commands  (Luke  vii.  47  ;  Rom.  vi.  13 ;  viL  6 ;  Eph.  ii.  8 — 11). — J.  0.

Vers.  14 — 22. — I%e  supreme  persuasive.  The  reTelation  of  God'a  character  in  its
diiuble  aspect  of  exalted  might  and  of  condescending  grace.

I.  God  EXALTED,  YET  STOOPING.  (Vers.  14 — 16.)  The  wonder  of  revelation  :  1.  Thai
One  so  exalted  should  stoop  at  all.  The  wonder  is  not  abated  by  reflecting  that
infinite  perfection  must  include  infinite  mercy  with  every  other  attribute.  It  fills  us
with  amazement  to  think  of  the  Possessor  of  heaven  and  earth  stooping  to  hold
friendly  converse  with  his  creature,  man.  The  Bible  dwells  on  the  thought  with
astonishment  (1  Kings  viii.  27 ;  Ps.  viii.  3,  4 ;  cxlvii.  3 — 6  ;  Isa.  IviL  15).  Modern
science  indirectly  testifies  to  the  wonder  •  in  objecting  that,  with  our  enlarged
conceptions  of  the  universe,  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that  God  should  feel  the  special
interest  in  man  which  the  Bible  says  he  does.  2.  That  One  so  exalted  should  stoop  so
far.  God's  depth  of  condescension  seen  peculiarly  in  the  gospel,  (1)  In  sending  the
Son.  (2)  In  siirrenrleringhim  todeath.-  (3)  Tliis  for  enemies.  (4)  In  dwelling  by  the
Spirit  in  imperfectly  sanctified  hearts  (John  iii.  16  ;  Rom.  v.  6 — 10  ;  viii.  32  ;  2  Cor.  vi.
16 — 18 ;  Gal.  V.  17).  The  persuasiveness  of  the  revelation  liei  in  its  blending  of
majesty  with  grace.

II.  GK)D    MIGHTY    AND    EQUITABLE,   YET  TENDERLY   SYMPATHETIC.      (VcrS.    17 20.)

Another  aspect  of  the  Divine  greatness,  blending  with  lowliness,  which  attracts  the
heart.  The  combination  of  great  strength  with  great  gentleness  ;  of  judicial
sternness  with  humane  consideration  of  those  in  distress,  are  sufilciently  rare  to  bo
always  striking.  We  marvel  when,  in  the  hero  of  a  hundred  battles,  we  discover
a  heart  of  woman's  tenderness ;  when  in  the  judge  whose  stric^tness  on  the  bench
every  one  remarks,  we  light  oh  a  spring  of  deep  and  genuine  cotapassionateness.  It
is  this  combination  we  see  in  God.  A  God  of  gods,  a  Lord  of  lords  ;  great,  mighty,
terrible,  sternly  just ;  yet,  what  might  seem  incompatible  with  this,  tenderly
and  touchingly  compassionate.  His  might  and  equity,  so  terrible  to  evil-doers,
he  throws  as  a  shield  around  the  fatherless,  the  widow,  and  the  stranger.  He
executes  their  judgment.  They  are  his  peculiar  care.  Them,  above  all  others,  will  he
not  allow  to  be  wronged  (Ps.  Ixviii.  5).

ni.  God  OMNIPOTENT,  yet  his  omnipotence  exebted  nr  defendino  and
BLESSiNO  BIS  Chubch.  (Vcrs.  21,  22.)  Power  in  itself  awakens  fear;  power  known  to
be  engaged  in  our  protection  and  for  our  good  inspires  the  highest  confidence.  Moses
recalls  to  the  Israelites,  as  a  reason  for  fearing  and  loving  God,  his  acts  of  power
on  their  behalf,  especially  his  power  as  exerted  in  their  extraordinary  increase.  God's
power  may  be  viewed  as  displayed :  1.  In  the  Church's  redemption  (Col.  L  13).  2.
In  the  Church's  increase  (Acts  v.  38,  39).  3.  In  the  Church's  protection  from  har/oes
(Matt.  xvi.  18  ;  Acts  iv.  24,  31).  The  individual  Christian  will  have  reason  to  rejoice
in  the  same  power  as  exerted  in  his  conversion  (Eph.  L  19),  in  his  upholding  (Jude  24),
in  his  protection  (Bom.  viii  85 — 39),  in  his  ultimate  salvation  (1  Pet.  i.  5).— -J.  0.

Ver.  16. — Heart  eircumeision,  I.  Heabt  ciRcnMcisioN  nt  its  import.  1,  Betokens
Ihe  existence  of  natural  impurity.  The  rite  of  circumcision,  as  the  initiatory  rite  of  the
covenant,  taught  that  man,  in  his  natural,  unpurified  state,  is  unfit  for  fellowship  with
God.  "  In  us,  that  is,  in  our  flesh,  dwells  no  good  thing  "  (John  iii.  6 ;  Rom.  vii.  18).  It
was  a  symbol  of  the  putting  away  of  "  the  filth  of  the  flesh  " — a  truth  now  signified  in
baptism  (Col.  ii.  11 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  21).  2.  Illustrates  the  painful  nature  of  the  renuncia-
tion of  fleshly  lusts.  The  operation  was  sharp,  painful,  blcx)dy.  It  vividly  set  forth  at
once  the  necessity  of  renouncing  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  and  the  pain  attendant  on  the
act.  We  are  called  on  to  mortify  our  members  which  are  upon  the  earth  (Col.  iii.  5).
The  process  is  described  as  a  crucifying  of  the  flesh,  with  its  affections  and  lusts  (Gal.
V.  24).  The  deepest  form  which  this  renunciation  can  assume  is  the  renunciation  ol
the  principle  of  self-will  in  its  entirety,  the  sharp  excision  of  evil  in  its  root.  3.  Implies
the  grace  of  the  covenant.    The  reception  of  God's  grace  as  exhibited  in  the  covenant


188  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOM^.  [ch.  x.  1—22

is  the  condition  of  the  possibility  of  this  renunciation.  We  achieve  it,  not  in  our  own
strength,  but  through  the  impartation  of  a  new  principle  of  life.  Paul  makes  it  a
cesult  of  faith  in  the  risen  Clirist  (Col.  ii.  12).  The  circumcised  heart  marks  the
accepted  and  restored  recipient  of  tlie  grace  of  God — a  child  of  the  spiritual  covenant,
one  bom  again.

II.  Heabt  cntouMCisiON  in  its  kecessitt.  1.  As  distinguished  from  outward
circumcision.  The  latter  was  valueless  without  the  former.  Being  but  a  symbol,  its
sole  worth  lay  in  that  which  it  represented.  The  true  Jew  was  he  who  was  one
inwardly,  whose  circumcision  was  "  that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter  "
(Rom.  ii.  28,  29).  The  remark  applies  to  baptism.  It  also  is  but  a  symbol,  and  with-
out the  grace  which  it  exhibits,  and  the  inward  renewal  which  it  betokens,  it  is  a  dead
work,  a  valueless  rite,  leaving  its  subject  as  little  a  Christian  as  at  first.  So  with  all
ceremonies.  2.  As  a  positive  qualification  for  Qod's  service.  Pure  obedience  can  flow
only  from  a  pure  heart,  a  renewed  will.  It  is  not  a  fruit  of  the  flesh.  The  flesh  must
be  renounced,  and  a  new  and  spiritual  i^ature  begotten  in  us  before  we  can  render  it.
What  is  needed  is  not  reformation,  but  regeneration — a  new  birth,  a  new  creation,  a
new  heart  (John  iii.  3 ;  Rom.  vii.  18—25 ;  viii.  7 ;  2  Cpr.  v.  17  ;  Gal.  v.  16— 25).— J.  0.

Ver.  19. — Love  the  stranger.    The  precept  has  numerous  applications—

I.  To  LITERAL  STRANGERS.  Pcrsous  from  foreign  countries,  or  from  distant  parts  of
our  own  country,  settling  in  our  midst.  Why  should  these  be  treated  so  often  as
intruders,  "incomers,"  persons  to  be  jealously  watched  and  suspected,  instead  of  being
taUen  by  the  hand  and  welcomed?

II.  To  THE  DNFRiEKDED  AND  HELPLESS.  To  all  whose  hearts  are  lonely,  and  their
lives  destitute  of  the  cheer  given  by  the  love  and  sympathy  of  friends.  To  the  father-
less and  the  widow — strangers  in  a  very  true  sense  in  a  world  where  selfish  interests
so  hugely  predominate.

III.  To  TOUNO  MEN  IN  GREAT  CITIES.  Often  lost  for  lack  of  some  one  to  take  a
kindly  interest  in  them.

IV.  To  BTRANGEBS  TURNING  UP  IN  CHURCHES.  Colduess  here  repels  many  who
Hiiglit  otherwise  be  won  to  interest  in  religion,  and  secured  for  Christ.  Brotherly  and
friendly  attention,  a  kind  word,  the  warm  shake  of  a  hand,  the  courteous  offer  of  a
pew, — how  far  will  they  often  go  ?  They  are,  like  "  good  words,"  worth  much,  and  cost
little.

Show  kindness  to  strangers :  1.  Because  they  peculiarly  need  it.  "  The  heart  of  a
stranger."  2.  Because  Qod  loves  them.  He  will  avenge  their  wrongs.  He  will  reward
kindness  shown  to  them  (Matt.  xxv.  35).  3.  We  may  he  placed  in  similar  eireum-
stances.    Changes  in  fortune  (Ruth  L  19 — 22). — J.  0.

Ver.  20. — Beligion  in  brief.  A  text  made  illustrious  by  our  Saviour's  use  of  it.
Like  ver.  12,  a  summary  of  duty,  but  in  a  form  giving  prominence  to  the  truth  that
fear  of  God  works  from  within  outwards.  This  central  religious  principle  particularizes
itself  into^

I.  Serving  him— or  religion  in  deed.  In  resistance  of  all  seductions  to  a  counter-
service  (Matt.  iv.  10).     In  the  faithful  and  diligent  discharge  of  all  duties.

II.  Cleaving  to  him — or  religion  in  heart.  Fear  and  love,  rooted  in  faith,  here
reveal  themselves  as  an  energy  of  trust  and  adherence.  They  dread  separation  from
God  as  the  worst  evil.  They  hold  by  him  for  support,  for  keeping,  for  strength,  for
direction.

III.  Swearing  bt  his  Name— or  religion  in  word.  This  Incfludes  religious  oaths
but  denotes  also  willingness  at  any  time  to  make  public  confession  of  God.

IV.  Rejoicing  in  him.    "  He  is  thy  praise  "  (of.  Phil.  iv.  4). — J.  0.

Vers.  X—5.—The  Law  deposited  in  the  ark.  The  first  attempt  to  convey  God'i
Law  to  man  in  a  written  form  had  proved  a  failure.  The  human  links  in  the  system
had  snapped.  Moses  had  overrated  the  people's  loyalty.  The  people  had  overrated
their  own  strength  of  purpose.  So  far,  the  Law  had  been  to  them  a  ministration  ol
death.    But  knowledge  grew  out  of  experience.

I.  Wb  see  the  human  factor  in  Divine  revelation.    The  conceptions  that


CH.  X.  1-22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  18«

dwell  in  God's  mind  are  incomprehensible  until  they  are  put  into  human  mould.
This  introduction  of  a  human  element  implies  limitation,  but  does  not  imply  error.  The
prophet  becomes  the  channel  through  which  Divine  communications  flow ;  but  the
prophet  needs  great  subjective  preparation  to  receive  the  message.  He  must  leave  the
throng  and  bustle  of  men,  ascend  above  the  low  cares  of  earth,  and  spend  forty  days
in  communion  with  heavenly  realities,  before  he  is  competent  to  receive  the  gift  of
Divine  Law.  Such  absorption  of  mind  in  Divine  fellowship  will  make  us  also  sus-
ceptible of  larger  revelation.  Obedience  likewise  to  Divine  command  fits  us  for  this
fellowship.

II.  We  see  the  permasenct  of  God's  Law.  1.  The  words  that  were  written  on
these  second  tablets  were  the  same  as  were  written  on  the  first — were  the  same  as  were
spoken  in  the  flame.  Though  man  may  violate  and  break  his  Law,  God  does  not
modify  nor  reduce  his  claims.  2.  They  were  rerorded  on  stone,  on  the  granite  stone  of
Sinai.  There  is  significance  to  be  lound  in  the  material  chosen.  In  many  respects
stone  tablets  would  involve  inconvenience,  but  the  impression  to  be  made  on  men's
minds  was  of  the  first  importance,  and  God  dc^s  notliing  without  reason.  3.  They  were
to  ie  preserved  in  a  chtst.  Tlius  they  would  be  handed  down  from  age  to  age  as  the
unchanging  will  of  God.

III.  We  see  the  succinctness  of  God's  commands.  These  cardinal  precepts
were  but  ten,  which  might  easily  be  laid  up  in  memory,  and  recited  by  aid  of  the
fingers.  In  the  absence  of  writings,  this  natural  aid  to  memory  would  be  in  common
use.  Yet,  though  few  in  number,  these  ten  words  were  pregnant  with  meaning — were
living  seeds  of  truth,  which,  planted  in  the  soul,  would  yield  a  copious  harvest.  The
two  stone  tablets  may  have  been  ordered  to  correspond  with  the  two  hands,  or  to
embrace  man's  twofold  relationsliip— God  ward  and  man  ward.

IV.  The  conservation  of  the  Law  in  the  ark  is  hwhly  suggestive.  1.  It
is  suggestive  of  mystery.  Since  tiie  human  mind  cannot  measure  the  universe,  mystery
is  necessary — ^mystery  is  wholesome  discipline.  2.  It  is  suggestive  of  protection.
The  stony  tablets  needed  protection  against  the  ebullitions  of  Moses'  anger.  Tliey
needed  to  be  hid  to  prevent  their  becoming  an  object  of  idolatry.  3.  It  is  suggestive  oj
value.  They  had  both  an  extrinsic  and  an  intrinsic  worth.  They  would  be  valuid  a*
rare  and  unique.  They  ought  to  have  been  valued  more  highly  still  as  the  records  of
God's  will.  4.  It  is  suggestive  of  the  use  men  should  make  of  them.  This  hidden
deposit  is  symbolical.  As  the  material  temple  is  the  symbol  of  the  human  soul,  in
wliich  God  most  of  all  prefers  to  reside,  so  the  word  of  God  is  required  to  be  enshrined
within.  "  Thy  word  have  I  hid  in  mine  htart."  The  word  is  the  true  forerunner,
which  prepares  the  way  for  the  entrance  of  the  Living  God. — ^D.

Vers.  6 — 11.^ — Progress.  Progress  is  the  law  of  human  life.  Perfection  is  reached
only  by  steady  advancement.

I.  Progress  is  marked  by  distinct  stages.  There  are  times  for  action,  and  times
for  rest.  Neither  body  nor  mind  can,  in  ovu:  present  state,  bear  the  strain  of  continuous
exertion.  There  is  an  advantage  in  an  occasional  halt,  by  which  we  can  review  the
past,  measure  our  progress,  examine  our  resources,  and  leconnoitre  the  future.  The
soul  is  many-sided,  and  advance  in  knowledge,  devout  feeling,  practical  exeriion,  self-
denial,  cannot  be  made  at  one  and  the  same  time.  To-day  we  gain  clearer  perception
of  heavenly  truths ;  to-morrow  we  exercise  our  best  affections  on  abject  sufferers ;  the
day  following  we  fight  with  the  enemy  with  sword  and  buckler.

"  Each  morning  sees  some  task  begun.
Each  evening  sees  its  close."

II.  Progress  is  accompanied  by  changeful  incident,  painful  and  pleasant.  At
one  halting-place  Aaron  died,  and  the  camp  was  plunged  into  bitter  mourning;  at
another  halt  they  came  upon  streams  of  refreshing  water.  Yet  all  events  may  minister
to  the  soul's  progress.  There  are  no  absolute  impediments  to  the  highest  progress.
"  Out  of  the  eater  comes  forth  meat."  "  All  things  work  together  for  good."  The
order  of  experience  usually  happens,  as  in  this  case,  viz.  first  the  bitter,  then  the
sweet ;  first  loss,  then  gain.  The  evening  and  the  morning  make  one  d»y.  "  Blessed
are  they  that  mourn ;  for  they  shall  be  comforted."


190  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  x.  1—22.

in.  There  is  progress  too  tn  the  development  op  God's  plans.  At  another
stage  of  their  pilgrimage,  God  chose  the  trihe  of  Levi  to  minister  unto  him  in  sacred
things.  Heretofore,  the  firsthorn  in  each  family  was  claimed  by  God  as  his  special
minister ;  now  a  particular  tribe  is  selected  on  the  ground  of  its  zealous  exertions  in
God's  cause.  Character,  not  the  accident  of  birth,  is  the  basis  of  God's  approval.  In
Grod's  kingdom,  he  bears  the  palm  who  merits  it.  Higher  service  is  to  be  accounted
the  most  honourable  reward.  Promotion  to  a  nearer  fellowship  with  God — this  ought
to  be  our  richest  joy.

IV.  There  is  progress  shown  also  in  the  natttrb  of  Divine  awards.  It  had
been  considered  hitherto  that  the  supreme  mark  of  Jehovah's  favour  was  the  gift  of
Canaan.  Now  the  people  are  gradually  led  to  perceive  that  there  is  something  better
than  that.  One  tribe,  and  that  the  most  signally  separated  by  God  for  favour,'  is
deprived  of  participation  in  the  promised  land.  The  Levites,  like  Abraham,  though  .
dwelling  in  the  land,  shall  possess  no  personal  property  in  fields  or  vineyards.  Their
advantage  it  shall  be,  to  be  exempt  from  the  cares  and  ambitions  and  jealousies  per-
taining to  landed  estate.  An  inheritance  shall  be  theirs,  boundless  in  extent ;  satisfying
in  its  nature;  inalienable  in  its  tenure;  uncorrupting,  yea,  ennobling,  in  its  effect  upon
the  possessor ;  uncreated,  and  therefore  undecaying.  Their  inheritance  was  Ood  him-
tdf.    He  who  has  God,  has  all  things.     The  universe  is  his.

V.  TEtlB  PEOQBBSS  IS  THE  RESULT  OF  COMBINED  CONTEMPLATION  AND  ACTION.      In   the

busy  life  of  our  Lord,  communion  with  God  and  intense  activity  sweetly  blended.  To
be  always  on  the  mount  would  make  us  pietists  and  recluses  and  mystics — hot-house
plants.  To  l)e  always  on  the  field  of  action  will  make  us  narrow,  hard,  arrogant,  self-
reliant.  Both  sides  of  our  nature  must  grow  in  ratio,  if  we  are  to  be  full-orbed,
attractive  Christians.  The  ferry-boat  of  the  gospel,  which  is  to  carry  men  to  the  other
side,  must  be  rowed  with  two  oars — prayer  and  labour.

VI.  The  proobbbs  of  one  is  the  progress  of  many.  A  useful  principle  of  emula-
tion appears  in  human  nature.  It  is  painful  to  be  left  behind  in  the  race.  If  we
cannot  be  in  the  front,  we  wish  to  be  near  it.  Every  man  has  a  following.  We  can-
not go  to  heaven  or  to  hell  alone.  With  more  or  less  of  persuasiveness,  every  man
is  saying,  "  Come  with  me  1 "    Is  my  influence  beneficial  or  baneful  ? — D.

Vers.  12 — 22. — Knowledge  of  God  the  parent  of  obedient  faith.  Every  honest  view
we  take  of  God's  service  brings  to  light  fresh  features  of  attractiveness.  It  is  the  only
right  course.  It  satisfies  conscience,  reason,  affection,  desire.  Having  right  disposi-
tions and  purposes  in  life,  all  larger  knowledge  of  God  makes  service  pleasant ;  yea,
true  service  ministers  to  our  best  life.

I.  The  reasonableness  of  God's  service  mat  be  deduced  from  the  perfection
OF  his  charaotbb.  1.  His  supremacy.  He  is  "  God  of  gods."  He  stands  alone,  the
sole  Creator,  but  himself  uncreated.  His  claims  upon  his  creatures  are  absolute,
unlimited,  'and;  unconditioned.  2.  His  equity.  If,  at  any  time,  men  suspect  any
unrighteousness  in  God,  it  is  because  of  some  obliqueness  of  vipjon,  or  some  defect  in
their  mental  instrument,  or  some  deficiency  of  knowledge.  No  shadow  of  partiality
has  ever  once  been  found  in  him.  The  favourites  of  God  have  been  the  most  chastised.
3.  His  immense  power.  He  is  "  mighty  and  terrible."  A  breath  of  God  can  create;  a
breath  can  destroy.  "  With  the  breath  of  his  mouth  he  will  slay  the  wicked."  4.  His
goodness  and  pity.  His  goodness  is  profuse,  is  distributed  with  royal  generosity,  with-
out stint.  But  his  special  care  is  reserved  for  the  helpless.  Widows  and  orphans  have
exceptional  protection  and  defence.  He  makes  tlieir  case  his  own,  and  becomes  their
unseen  Patron.  Human  monarchs  lavish  their  favours  upon  those  who  can  do  them
most  service ;  God  lavishes  his  kindness  upon  the  most  needy.  Want  is  the  passport
to  his  storehouse.    Infinite  worth  belongs  to  him.

II.  This  beabonablenebs  of  beryino  God  ib  seen  in  his  gracious  treatment  ot
MEN.  1.  There  was  no  need,  so  far  as  we  can  discover,  that  God  should  be  served  by
men.  The  heaven  was  his,  and  all  previous  orders  of  intelligent  beings.  The  earth  also
was  his,  and  all  its  various  contents.  Here  was  large  scope  for  the  display  of  his  perfec-
tions. If  men  were  rebellious,  he  could  readily  crush  the  race,  and  sweep  it  from  the  faca
of  the  earth.  And  no  other  motive  for  his  kindness  to  men  can  we  discover,  than  that
of  generous  and  irrepressible  love.     2.  He  has  made  covenant  enga{/emtnts  with  them.


aH.  X.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  19i

Moses  never  fails  to  remind  Israel  that  the  God  of  heaven  was  their  God.  With  con-
descending grace,  that  excites  oar  perpetual  surprise,  God  had  chosen  them  to  be
recipients  of  special  blessing.  He  had  found  "delight  in  their  fathers;"  and  for  the
fathers'  sakes  had  loved  the  children.  We,  too,  who  believe  in  Christ,  "  are  Abra-
ham's seed,  and  heirs  according  to  the  promise."  God  regards  renewed  men  as  his
treasure,  his  portion,  his  jewels.  They  are  dear  to  him  as  "the  apple  of  his  eye."
There  is  no  service  he  will  not  render  for  them,  "  no  gift  will  he  withhold."  He  has
redeemed  them  with  life-blood,  and  esteems  them  as  unspeakably  precious.  They  are
destined  to  share  his  society,  his  possessions,  his  throne,  his  image.  God  has  bound
himself  to  us  by  most  solemn  compacts,  and  all  his  vast  resources  are  pledged  to  us.
It  is  a  covenant  made  in  heaven,  and  "  is  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure."

III.  This  beasonableness  is  seen  in  the  self- advantage  of  seeving  God.  1.  It
is  "for  our  good."  Every  command  may  not  be  pleasant  to  flesh  and  blood,  nor  always
to  appetite  and  inclination ;  but  obedience  is  salutary  to  all  the  better  parts  of  man's
nature.  "  In  keeping  his  commandments  we  have  great  reward,"  There  is  large
present  benefit,  and  there  is  larger  prospective  good.  2.  It  is  a  credit  to  us  to  serve
i}uch  a  Ood.  "  He  is  our  praise."  The  statesmen  and  ambassadors  and  generals  of
England  count  it  high  honour  to  serve  Britain's  queen.  How  vastly  greater  the
hunour  to  serve  the  King  of  kings!  We  may  suffer  passing  reproach  from  our  attach-
ment to  Christ,  but  reproach  is  like  the  early  hoar-frost,  which  the  ascending  sun  will
scatter.  If  men  do  not  perceive  the  honour,  it  is  because  they  are  blind.  "  My  soul
shall  make  her  boast  in  the  Lord."  3.  Ood's  past  goodness  excites  our  largest  hope.
Qoi  had  already  done  great  things  for  Israel.  He  had  multiplied  them  in. Egypt  a
thousandfold.  Nor  had  he  reached  the  end  of  his  power  nor  the  end  of  his  intentions.
What  he  had  done  was  only  a  sample  of  what  he  yet  meant  to  do.  A  world  of  good
is  yet  in  store  for  each  believer.  We  shall  never  touch  the  furthest  limits  of  God's
beneficence.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen  it."  To  his  faithful  servants  the  invitation  is
repeated  a  thousand  times  over,  "  Come  up  higher.''

IV.  This  reasonableness  is  seen  in  the  kind  of  service  ebquirbd.  Nothing
more  is  demanded  than  our  thoughtful  reason  and  enlightened  conscience  approve.
1.  Reverence.  We  have  only  to  know  God  in  order  to  yield  him  the  reverence  of  our
souls.  If  we  could  perceive  his  inherent  majesty,  his  real  excellence,  and  his  unsullied
puiity,  TO  should  (if  feeling  were  right)  instinctively  yield  to  him  the  profoundest
reverence  of  our  hearts.  Were  it  not  for  the  corrupting  effects  of  sin,  this  would  be
natural.  2.  Submission  to  his  superior  will.  By  virtue  of  his  wisdom,  he  has  a  right
to  counsel.  By  virtue  of  his  relation  as  Monarch,  he  has  a  right  to  command.  By
virtue  of  his  supremacy  as  Creator,  he  has  claims  on  every  part  of  our  nature  and  on
every  moment  of  our  time.  His  will  is  excellent,  benevolent,  unerring.  To  take  his
will,  not  ours,  for  chart  and  compass  is  simplest  duty,  ay,  is  largest  privilege.  "Be  no
more  stiffuecked."  A  pliable  will  alone  makes  a  dutiful  child.  3.  Hearty  love.  That
we  can  love  at  all  is  due  to  him.  The  power  to  cherish  love,  to  receive  love,  is  his
gift.  Hence,  if  we  love  at  all,  our  love  belongs  to  him.  If  we  love  in  proportion
to  benefits  received,  or  in  proportion  to  the  worth  of  the  object,  or  in  proportion  to  the
love  expended  on  us,  then  all  our  love  will  centre  in  God.  4.  Practiced  lervice.
Genuine  love  will  always  seek  some  channel  for  its  outflow,  and  service  for  love's  object
is  a  delight,  and  is  only  love  in  active  exercise.  It  would  be  a  restraint  and  a  pain  for
love  to  be  silent.  She  would  justly  count  it  bondage  to  be  caged  up  within  the  heart.
Having  feet,  it  would  be  a  restraint  not  to  walk;  how  great  the  honour  to  be  able
to  walk  in  God's  paths,  in  the  highways  he  himself  doth  take  1  True  service  for  God
is  freedom,  life,  joy,  heaven.  If  we  love  we  must  obey.  6.  Such  service  makes  us
Oodlike.  God  counts  it  a  joy  to  serve  us,  though  he  is  under  no  obligation  of  law  or
right  so  to  do.  To  serve  him  means  that  we  grow  like  him.  We  imitate  him  first
in  actions,  then  in  disposition,  then  in  purposes,  then  in  character.  Said  Moses  signifi-
cantly to  Israel,  "God  loveth  the  stranger.  .  .  .  Love  ye  therefore  the  stranger."'
Through  every  hour  of  every  day  we  may  be  climbing  heavenwards,  becoming  God-
like. Every  duty  may  become  to  us  an  instrument  actively  moulding  us  into  the
image  of  perfection.  The  obedience  that  springs  from  love  is  a  pathway  of  flowery
pleasantness,  ascending  gradually  to  the  hills  of  frankincense,  and  to  the  preseuce  ol
God.— D.


192  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMI.  [ch.  X.  1—24

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  covenant  renewed.  The  severe  intercession  of  Moses  succeeds  at
Isst,  and  he  is  directed  to  get  two  tables  like  unto  the  first,  and  to  bring  them  up  to
God  for  his  inscription  upon  tliem.  He  was  also  directed  to  make  an  ark  for  their
reception.  There  was  thus  provided  the  tables  of  the  testimony,  and  a  place  in  which
to  keep  them.

And  hero  we  have  to  notice—

I.  Man  is  asked  to  provide  the  tables.  God  loves  the  co-operation  of  Ms  people
M  far  as  possible.  "  Fellow- workers  with  God  "  is  our  highest  honour.  Juat  as  when
Christ  was  raising  Lazarus  he  allowed  men  to  roll  away  the  stone  (John  xi.  39 — 4  L),
so  when  he  would  write  the  Decalogue  anew,  he  directs  Moses  to  provide  the  tables,
'i'his  is  better  than  to  encourage  man's  indolence  by  God  doing  all.

In  the  very  same  way  it  is  upon  "  the  fleshy  tables  of  the  heart "  God  writes  his  Law
(2  Cor.  iii.  3).  Man,  so  to  speak,  provides  the  material,  offers  his  heart  for  the  sacred
inscription,  and  thus  becomes  a  living  epistle,  known  and  read  of  all  men.

II.  God's  will  is  unchanging.  The  two  new  tables  received  the  same  words  as  the
first  which  were  broken.  The  second  edition  of  the  Decalogue  was  identical  with  the
first.     God's  will  may  be  stereotyped,  it  is  so  perfect  and  changeless.

Man  may  be  wayward ;  but  God  will  not  alter  his  standard  to  suit  man's  low  ideal.
The  Divine  plan  is  to  keep  before  man  the  unchanging  Law,  and  bring  him  by  easy
stages  up  to  it.     There  is  no  depreciation  of  the  Divine  requirements.

III.  The  ark  was  primarily  intended  as  a  depository  of  the  Law,  This  chest
of  shittim  wood,  made  strong  and  beautiful,  was  evidently  meant  as  a  "  safe,"  where
this  precious  deposit,  this  oracle  of  God,  should  be  placed.  There  was  nothing  so
precious  in  the  keeping  of  Israel.  It  was  their  great  riches.  What  advantage  had  the
Jew  ?  "  Much  every  way :  chiefly,  because  that  unto  them  were  committed  the
oracles  of  God."

And  this  ark  not  only  typified  the  care  taken  of  the  canon,  but  also  it  would  seem
Christ  himself,  who,  as  the  Ark,  kept  the  Law  in  its  entirety ;  it  was  the  expression  of
his  own  will,  and  it  was  the  deposit  within  him.  "  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to
destroy  the  Law,  or  the  propliets :  I  am  not  come  to  destroy,  but  to  fulfil "  (Matt.  v.  17).

IV.  Sanctified  men  are  similarly  to  be  depositories  of  God's  holy  will.
Those  who  are  regenerated  hide  God's  Law  in  their  hearts,  as  Christ  says  prophetically
he  did  (Ps.  xl.  8).  The  preservation  of  the  sacred  books  has  been  wonderful — but
better  is  it  to  have  truth  settled  in  the  soul  and  manifested  through  the  life.  The
blessedness  of  him  who  makes  God's  Law  his  meditation  day  and  night  is  great  indeed
(Ps.  i.  2).  "  This  is  the  covenant  that  I  will  make  with  them  after  those  days,  saith
the  Lord,  I  will  put  my  laws  into  their  hearts,  and  in  their  minds  will  I  wnte  them ,
and  their  sins  and  iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more  "  (Heb.  x.  16, 17),

\\  hen  God's  word  and  will  are  so  deposited ;  when  human  hearts  receive,  like  Lydia's,
the  truth, — then  is  it  carried  not  only  through  the  wilderness  of  life,  but  out  into  "  the
undiscovered  lands."  The  ark  of  shittim  wood,  so  strong  and  prwious,  only  faintly
images  the  more  precious  receiitacle  of  the  human  heart,  rendered  by  Divine  grace
strong  and  true,  which  accepts  of  God's  word  of  promise,  tnd  becomes  thereby  partaker
of  the  Divine  nature  and  escapes  the  corruption  of  tLe  »«/ld  (2  Pet,  i.  4). — K,  M,  E,

Vers.  6 — 9. —  The  separation  of  the  sons  of  Levi,  The  tables  of  stone  in  the  ark  had
to  be  committed  to  special  officers.  These  were  the  sons  of  Levi,  God  called  them  to
this,  a  high  and  glorious  honour  surely.  They  were  also  to  minister  unto  him  and
to  bless  in  his  Nam?,  To  this  order  of  men  no  mere  temporal  inheritance  was  given  ;
God  was  their  inheritance,

I.  It  is  surely  dbbirablb  that  a  ensciAii  order  of  men  should  be  set  apart
FOR  the  custody  OF  THE  DiviNB  WcuD.  This  was  the  primary  ofEce  of  the  sons
of  Levi,  custodians  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  In  this  respect  they  resemble  the
Christian  ministry,  whose  great  offio*  is  to  keep  and  to  propagate  the  Divine  Word.  In
the  "  division  of  labour  "  to  which  human  wisdom  brings  us,  it  is  surely  important  that
*  special  class  should  be  charged  with  the  sacred  deposit  of  the  Divine  Word.  Men
secularized  by  business  cannot  be  expected  to  handle  the  Word  of  God  with  the  wisdom
•nd  power  of  those  who  are  set  apart  for  this  special  purpose.

TT.  The  soim  of  Levi  were  aiso  to  be  ministers  unto  God,    They  were  directed


OH.  X.  1—22.]  THE   BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  193

to  stand  and  officiate.  They  were  the  ministers  of  Ood.  They  were  Am  servants,  not
man's.  We  do  not  now  refer  to  the  priestly  rites,  through  which  they  passed  according
to  the  Mosaic  Law.  These  were  special  and  temporary.  They  typified  the  priestly
office  fulfilled  by  Christ,  and,  when  fulfilled,  no  longer  needed.  But  the  general  idea  of
ministration  in  God's  presence  and  for  the  Lord  is  surely  the  very  essence  of  the
ministerial  office.

III.  The  sons  op  Levi  webb  also  to  bless  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  They
were  charged  to  pronounce  certain  benedictions  in  God's  Name.  And  this  right  is
manifestly  continued  in  the  Christian  Church.  The  pronouncing  of  the  benediction
is  surely  something  more  than  a  mere  prayer  breathed  to  heaven  for  the  blessings
specialized.  Is  it  not  the  assurance  on  the  part  of  God's  officer  that  the  blessings  are
conveyed  to  those  waiting  to  receive  them  (cf.  Numb.  vi.  24  and  2  Cor.  xiii.  14)  ?

IV.  It  was  abeanged  that  the  Lbvites  should  not  be  seculaeizbd,  but
SHOULD  LIVE  AT  THE  ALTAB  OF  GoD.  "  Wherefore  Levi  hath  no  part  nor  inheritance
with  his  brethren ;  the  Lord  is  his  inheritance,  according  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath
promised  him."  This  means  that  this  tribe  was  not  to  be  secularized  by  worldly
anxieties  and  common  cares.  The  Lord  guaranteed  their  support  by  arrangements  at
his  altar.

And  "  ministerial  support "  should  mean  no  more  1  It  is  a  Divine  expedient  to
secure  a  class  of  men  for  his  service,  emancipated  from  secular  cares  and  troubles.  The
privilege  of  studying  and  enforcing  God's  Word  is  great  and  glorious.  We  only  ask
such  support  as  ministers  as  will  preserve  us  from  corroding  cares,  and  enable  us  with
free  spirits  to  give  oirselves  to  this  high  business.

It  is  this  only  we  ask  for,  the  freedom  from  the  secularity  which  the  world  demands
even  when  one  is  most  watchful,  in  business  struggles,  against  it.  It  is  when  a
believing  Church  gives  the  ministry  of  Christ  such  emancipation  all  round  that  they
may  expect  the  ministerial  office  to  be  fulfilled  with  superior  power  and  to  command
the  ablest  men. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  10 — 22. — New  obedience.  Moses,  having  detailed  the  success  of  his  interces-
sion in  Horeb,  and  that  the  threatened  doom  was  averted  and  the  pilgrimage  proceeded
with,  goes  on  in  this  passage  to  analyze  the  obedience  to  be  rendered.  It  is  all  summed
up  in  fearing  the  Loid,  walking  in  his  ways,  loving  hira,  serving  him  with  heart  and  soul,
and  keeping  his  commandments.  Let  us  try  to  grasp  the  description  of  new  obedience
here  presented.

I.  IsBAEL  WAS  TO  BE  A  GoD-FBAEiNO  PEOPLE.  A  fine  word  this,  "  the  fear  of  God  " —
not  indicative  of  slavish  consternation,  but  of  reverential  awe.  It  is  the  fear  which
springs  from  a  fitting  sense  of  God's  greatness  and  majesty.  He  is  too  great  and  too
glorious  (ver.  17)  for  any  of  his  people  to  trifle  with  or  to  presume  upon  him,  as  in  the
familiarities  of  ordinary  intercourse.

II.  And  coNSEftUBNTLT  Israel  will  sebvb  God  with  heabt  and  soul.  For  when
in  faith  we  fear  God,  we  find  that  "  faith  worketh  by  love,"  and  so  we  throw  ourselves
"  heart  and  soul "  into  his  service.  We  adore  his  excellencies,  and  then  are  "  proud  to
serve  him."  His  commandments  become  our  songs  in  the  house  of  our  pilgrimage,  and
we  find  in  keeping  them  a  great  reward  (Ps.  cxix.  54 ;  xix.  11).

III.  The  need  of  spiritual  oirouucision  will  then  be  felt.  "  The  circumcision
of  the  foreskin  of  the  heart "  can  only  mean  the  use  of  all  lawful  means  to  restrain  the
wilfulness  and  waywardness  of  the  heart.  The  lusts  must  be  subdued,  of  which  self
is  the  centre  and  selfishness  the  essence.  God  has  become  central  and  supreme,  and  so
all  that  interferes  in  any  way  with  his  rights  must  be  "cut  off,"  no  matter  how  painful
the  process  be.    This  is  the  cure  for  "  stiffneckedness."

IV.  The  cabb  op  the  fatherless,  widow,  and  stbangbr,  is  felt  to  be  divinest
DUTT.  God  is  impartial,  he  respects  not  persons.  He  is  just  in  all  his  reign.  But  he
is  also  compassionate,  and  makes  the  defenceless  and  the  helpless  his  special  care
(vers.  17, 18).

And  in  this  we  feel  it  our  privilege  as  well  as  duty  to  follow  him.  This  is  mani-
fested in —

1.  Orphan  societies.  Where  the  widow  is  considered  with  the  fatherless,  and  as
much  of  the  wrecked  home  as  can  be  kept  together  is  tried  by  loving  care  to  be  pre-

DEUTBBONOMY.  0


194


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBEONOMY.


[CH.  XI.  1—32,


served.  We  are  finding  more  considerate  ways  every  day  of  ministering  to  the  lonely
and  the  desolate.

2.  riospitality.  This  means  fore  manifested  to  a  stranger  because  he  is  a  stranger.
There  is  a  speculative  hospitality  that  is  poor  and  mean ;  and  there  is  a  Divine  hos-
pitality that  asks  those  who  cannot  repay  the  attention,  and  asks  them  for  the  good
lord's  sake.

For  if  we  are  redeemed  of  God,  like  Israel,  we  must  feel  that  it  is  due  to  God's  kind-
ness to  strangers.  We  were  naturally  "aliens,"  but  his  love  made  us  friends,  and  we
have  entered  into  his  fellowship  and  joy.  It  is  this  felt  obligation  which  sustains  the
attention  to  "  strangers  "  which  the  Lord  enjoined.

It  is  evident  that  the  Jewish  religion  was  intended  to  be  a  lovely  thing  because
a  thing  of  love ;  a  matter  of  broad  and  genial  sympathies  and  of  noble  efforts  after
divinest  dutiea. — B.  M.  £.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XI.


here  renews  his  cxhnrtation  to
obedience,  enforced  by  reg;ird  to  their  ex-
perience of  God's  dealings  with  them  in
Kgypt  and  in  the  wilderness,  and  by  con-
sideration of  God's  promises  and  threaten-
ings.  The  blessing  and  the  curse  are  set
before  them  consequent  on  the  keeping  or
the  transgressing  of  the  Law.

Vers.  1  — 12. — Israel  was  to  love  the  Lord,
and  manifest  this  by  the  steadfast  observance
of  all  that  he  had  enjoined  upon  them.

Yer.  1. — His  charge ;  what  he  has
appointed  to  be  observed  and  done  (cf.  Lev.
viii.  35 ;  Numb.  i.  53) ;  more  fully  explained
by  his  statutes,  and  his  judgments,  and  his
commandments.

Ver.  2. — Enow  ye ;  take  note  of,  ponder,
lay  to  heart.  The  words  that  follow,
for  .  .  .  seen,  are  a  parenthesis  throvm
in  by  the  speaker  to  attract  the  attention
especially  of  the  older  generation,  who  had
witnessed  the  acts  of  the  Lord.  The  words,
the  chastisement,  etc.,  are  to  be  connected
with  know  ye,  as  the  object  of  the  knowing.
And  know  ye  this  day  the  chastisement,  etc.
Which  have  not  known,  and  which  have
not  seen;  eupp.  "what  ye  have  known  and
seen."  Your  children;  those  bom  during
the  wandering  in  the  wilderness.  Chastise-
ment ;  not  punishment,  bat  discipline,  edu-
cation, tiainiiig  (LXX.,  iraiSe(a),  including
both  correction  and  instruction  (cf.  the  use
of  the  Hebrew  word  ipiD  in  Prov.  i.  2 ;  v.  12 ;
vi.  23,  etc.).  His  greatness  .  .  .  stretched
out  arm  (cf.  oh.  iii.  24 ;  iv.  81).

Vers.  3,  4.— (0£  oh.  iv.  34 ;  vi  22;  Exod.
xiv.)

Ver.  5. — What  he  did  unto  you  in  the
wilderness.  The  doings  of  God  to  the
people  in  the  wilderness  comprehend  the
manifestations  of  his  omnipoteuce,  both  in


their  guidance  and  protection,  and  in  the
punishment  of  those  who  transgressed.  One
instanca  of  the  latter  is  expressly  r.  ferred
to — the  destruction  of  those  who  joined  in
the  insurrection  of  Korah  (cf.  Numb.  xvi.
31 — 33).  Moses  does  not  mention  Korah
himself  here,  but  only  his  accomplices
Dathan  and  Abiram,  probably,  as  Keil
suggests,  "from  regard  to  his  sons,  who
were  not  swallowed  up  by  the  earth  along
with  their  father,  but  had  lived  to  perpetu-
ate the  family  of  Korah ; "  perhaps  also
because,  though  Korah  was  at  the  head  oi
the  insurrection ,  Datb  an  and  Abiram  were  the
more  determined,  audacious,  and  obdurate  io
their  rebellion  (cf.  Numb.  xvi.  12 — 15,  25,
26),  so  that  it  came  to  be  named  from  them.

Ver.  6. — All  the  substance  that  was  in  their
possession ;  literally,  every  living  thing  (Gen.
vii.  4,  23)  that  was  at  their  feet,  i.e.  all  their
followers  (cf.  "all  the  people  that  follow
thee,"  Exod.  xi.  8 ;  "  all  the  men  that  appei
tained  unto  Korah,"  Numb.  xvi.  32).

Vers.  7 — 9. — Thus  from  what  they  them
selves  had  witnessed  does  Moses  admonish
the  elder  members  of  the  congregation,
summoning  them  to  recognize  in  that  the
purpose  of  God  to  discipline  and  train  them,
that  so  they  might  keep  his  commandments
and  be  strengthened  in  soul  and  purpose  to
go  in  and  possess  the  land,  and  to  live  long
therein  (ch.  i.  38 ;  iv,  26 ;  vi.  3).

Ver.  7.— For  hut,  read  yea :  Tea,  your  eyes
have  seen,  etc.

Vers.  10,  11. — An  additional  motive  to
fidelity  and  obedience  is  here  adduced,
drawn  from  the  peculiar  excellence  and
advantages  of  the  land.  Canaan  was  not '
like  Egypt,  a  country  that  depended  for  its
fertility  on  being  irrigated  by  man's  labour
or  by  artificial  processes,  but  was  a  land
where  the  supply  and  distribution  of  water
was  provided  for  in  natural  reservoirs  ami
channels,  by  means  of  which  the  rain  which
God,  who  cared  for  the  land,  sent  pltntifullj


OH.  XL  1—32.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


196


OB  U,  wBt  made  arailable  for  tueful  pur*
poses.    In  Egypt  there  is  little  or  no  rain,
and  the  people  aie  dependent  on  the  annual
overflowing  of  the  Nile  for  the  proper  irriga-
tion of  their  fields ;  and  as  this  lasts  only
for  a  short  period,  the  water  has  to  he  stored
and  redistributed  by  artificial  means,  often
of  a  very  laborious  kind.    Vateredst  it  vrith
thy  foot.  "  The  reference,  perhaps,  is  to  the
manner  of  conducting  the  water  about  from
plant  to  plant  and  from  furrow  to  furrow.
I  liave  often  watched  the'  gardener  at  this
fatiguing  and  unhealthy  work.    When  one
jdtice  is  sufiic'iently   siiturated,  he  pushes
aside  the  sandy  soil  between  it  and   the
next  furrow  with  his  foot,  and  thus  con-
tinues to  do  until  all  are  watered.    He  is
tliDS  knee-deep  in  mud,  and  many  are  the
diseases  generated  by   this   slavish  work.
Or  the  reference  may  be  to  certain  kinds  of
hydraulic  machines  which  were  turned  by
the  feet.   I  have  seen  small  water-wheels,  on
the  pluin  of  Acre  and  elsewhere,  which  were
thus  worked ;  and  it  speared  to  me  to  be
very  tedious  and  toilsome,  and,  if  the  wliole
country   had  to  be   irrigated    by  such    a
process,  it  would  require  a  nation  of  slaves
like  the  Hebrews,  and  taskmasters  like  the
Egyptians,  to  make  it  succeed.    Whatever
may  have  been  the  meaning  of  Moses,  the
Hebrews  no  doubt  had  learned  by  bitter
experience  what  it  was  to  teater  with  the
foot;  and  this  would  add  great  force  to  the
allusion,  and  render  doubly  precious  the
goodly  land  which  drank  of   the  rain  of
heaven,  and  required  no  such  drudgery  to
make  it  fruitful    (Thomson, '  The  Laud  and
the  Book,'  ii.  279;  edit.  Loud.  1859).   Fhilo
describes  a  machine  of  this  sort  as  in  use  in
Egypt  ('  De  CJonfus.  Linguar.,'  0pp.  i.  410,
edit.  Mangey) ;  and  in  that  count^,  "  a  gar-
den of  herbs  "  is  still  generally  watered  by
means  of  a  machine  of  simple  construction,
consisting  of  a  wheel,  round  which  revolves
an  endless  rope  to  which  buckets  are  attached;
this  is  worked  by  the  feet  of  a  man  seated
on  a  piece  of  wood  fastened  by  the  side  of
the  machine,  labour  .c  once  monotoiious  and
severe  (Niebuhr, ' '  oyage  en  Arabic,'  i.  121,
4to,  Amst.  1776 ;  '  Jesoription  de  I'Arabie,'  i.
219,  4to,  Paris.  ]  <  79;  Bobinson,    Jib.  Bea.,'
L542;ii.  21).

Ver.  12.— Careth  for ;  literally,  learelieth  or
inqtdreth  after,  i.e.  thinks  about  and  cares
for  (LXX.,  iirurKoire!Tat,merieee I  cf.  Job  iii,
4 ;  Fs.  czlii.  4 ;  Jer.  zxx.  17 ;  Ezek.  zzxiv.
8 ;  Isa.  Ixii.  12).  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  thy  God ;
i.e.  his  special  watchful  providence  (of.
Fs.  xxxiii  18  ;  xxxiv.  15 ;  Ezek.  iv.  5).  It
was  a  land  on  wliioh  Jehovah's  regard  was
continually  fixed,  over  which  he  watched
with  unceasing  care,  and  which  was  sus-
tained by  his  bounty;  a  land,  therefore,
vboUy  dependent  on  him,  and  so  a  fitting


place  for  a  people  also  wholly  dependent  on
him,  who  owed  to  his  grace  all  that  they
were  and  had.

Ver.  13. — Being  thus  wholly  dependent
on  God,  it  behoved  them  to  be  careful  to
attend  to  his  commandments  and  to  obey
them,  that  so  his  blessing  might  be  con-
tinued to  them  anil  to  the  land.  If  they
would  love  and  serve  the  Lord  as  they  were
bound  to  do,  lie  would  give  tbem  the  rain
of  their  land,  i.e.  rain  for  their  land,  such
as  it  required  (of.  "  rain  of  thy  seed,"  Ps.
XXX.  2,  3),  in  the  proper  season,  the  early
and  the  latter  rain,  so  that  they  should
fully  enjoy  the  benefits  of  the  land.

Ver.  14. — The  first  rain;  the  rain  which
falls  from  the  middle  of  October  to  the  end
of  December,  wliich  prepares  the  soil  for  the
seed,  and  keeps  it  moist  after  the  seed  is
sown.  The  latter  rain;  that  which  falls  in
March  and  April,  about  the  time  when  the
grain  is  ripening  for  harvest;  during  the
time  of  harvest  no  rain  falls  in  Palestine.
But  if  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  de-
ceived and  misled,  so  as  to  apostatize  from
the  Lord  and  serve  other  gods  and  worship
them,  the  Divine  displeasure  would  be  shown
in  the  withholding  from  them  of  the  bless-
ing, BO  that  they  should  miserably  perish.

Ver.  16. — That  your  heart  be  not  deceived ;
literally,  lest  your  heart  he  enticed  or  leditced
(nns;).  The  verb  means  primarily  to  be  open,
and  as  a  mind  open  to  impressions  from
without  is  easily  persuaded,  moved  either
to  good  or  evil,  the  word  came  to  signify  to
induce  in  a  good  sense,  or  to  seduce  in  a  bad
sense.  Here  the  people  are  cautionoil
against  allowing  themselves  to  be  enticed
so  as  to  be  led  astray  by  seductive  represen-
tations (cf.  Job  xxxi.  27;  Frov.  xx.  19
["fiattereth"];  Job  t.  %  ["sUly  01*4 "];
Hos.  vii.  11).

Ver.  17. — He  shut  up  flie  heaven.  «  The
heaven  conceived  as  a  womb "  (Schulz) ;
of.  Gen.  xvi.  2.  The  want  of  rain  was  re-
garded as  a  sign  of  the  Divine  displeasure
and  as  a  curse  (1  Kings  viii.  35;  Zech.
xiv.  17 ;  Kev.  xi.  6).

Vers.  18— 20.— (Cf.  ch.  tL  7—9.)

Ver.  21 — (Cf.  ch.  iv.  40 ;  vi.  2.)  As  the
days  of  heaven  npon  the  earth ;  as  long  as  the
heavens  continue  stretched  over  the  earth,
i.e.  to  the  end  of  time,  for  ever  (of.  Job
xiv.  12;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  29 ;  Oen.  viiL  22).

Vers.  22 — 25.  —If  they  were  sedulous  to
keep  God's  commandments,  and  faithfully
adhered  to  him,  loving  him  and  walking
in  all  his  ways,  he  would  drive  out  before
them  the  nations  of  the  Canaanites,  and
cause  them  to  possess  the  territory  of  nations
greater  and  mightier  than  themselves.
Every  place  on  which  the  soles  of  their  feet
should  tread  should  be  theirs,  t.<.  they  bad
but  to  enter  th«  land  to  become  possessors


196


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  XL  1—32.


of  it.  This  is  more  exactly  defined  as  re-
stricted to  the  land  the  boundaries  of  which
are  given — from  the  Arabian  desert  on  the
south  to  Lebanon  on  the  ncirth,  and  from
the  river  Euphrates  on  the  east  to  the  Medi-
teri  anean  on  the  west  (ch.  i.  7).  From  the
wilderness  anil  Lebanon;  read,  even  unto
Lebanon;  p^f}  is  for  I'm^n— ip  (of.  D^n  np
in  the  end  of  the  verse).  The  uttermost  sea ;
rather,  the  hinder  sea  (Numb  xxxiv.  6),  the
sea  that  lay  behind  one  looking  to  the  east
(ver.  26;  of.  oh.  vii.  24;  ii.  25;  Exod.
xxiii.  27).

Vers.  26 — 32. — Moses,  in  conclusion,  refers
to  the  blessing  and  the  curse  consequent  on
the  observance  or  the  transgression  of  the
Law,  and  prescribes  that  when  they  had
entered  on  possession  of  the  land  the  bless-
ing should  be  proclaimed  from  Mount
Gerizim,  and  the  curse  from  Mount  Ebal.

Ver.  26. — Behold,  I  set  before  you;  place
for  your  consideration  (ch.  iv.  8;  xxx.  15),
BO  that  you  may  see  whither  tends  obedience
nn  the  one  hand,  and  disobedience  on  the
other.

Ver.  28. — Other  gods,  which  ye  have  not
known ;  in  contradistinction  to  Jehovah,  the
revealed  God,  made  kuown  to  them  by  word
and  <Ieed.

Vers.  29,  30.— (Of.  oh.  xxvii.  11.)  Thou
shalt  put  the  blessing;  thou  shalt  give
(nnro),  i.e.  give  forth,  utter,  announce,
proclaim  (cf.  Gen.  xlix.  21;  Job  i.  22
[gave,  i.e.  uttered  impiety  to  God] ;  Ps.
1.  20  [gavest,  didst  utter,  slander]).  The
two  mountains  named  stand  opposite  to
each  other,  with  a  valley  between,  about  two
hundred  yards  broad  at  the  widest  part,  in
wliich  stood  the  town  of  Shechem,  now
Nablfts.  They  were  selected  for  the  purpose
mentioned,  doubtless,  because  of  their  rela-
tive position,  and  probably  also  because  they
stand  in  the  centre  of  the  land  both  from
north  to  south,  and  from  east  to  west.  It
has  been  su^'gestoil  that  Ebal  was  appointed
for  the  uttering  of  the  curse,  and  Gerizim
for  the  utieiing  of  the  blessing,  because  the


former  was  barren  and  rugged,  the  latter
fertile  and  smooth;  but  this  is  not  borne
out  by  the  actual  appearance  of  the  two
bills,  both  being  equally  barren-looking,
though  neither  is  wholly  destitute  of  culture
and  vegetation.  That  Gerizim  was  selected
for  the  blessing  because  of  its  position  on
the  south  side  of  the  valley  "towards  the
region  of  light,"  while  Ebal  was  appointed
for  the  curse  becaus6  it  was  on  the  nortli
side,  can  be  regarded  only  as  an  ingenious
fancy.  In  ver.  30,  the  position  of  the  two
mountains  is  defined  as  on  the  other  side  ol
Jordan,  i.e.  on  the  side  opposite  to  where
the  Israelites  then  were,  the  western  side ;
and  as  by  the  way — rather,  behind  the  way —
where  the  sun  goeth  down ;  i.e.  the  road  of
the  west,  the  great  road  which  passed
through  the  west-Jordan  country,  and  which
IB  still  the  main  route  from  south  to  north
in  Palestine  (Bitter,  iv.  293,  etc. ;  Bobinson,
iii.  127),  passing  Nablfts  and  the  two  moun-
tains on  the  east,  so  that  they  are  behind  it.
Which  dwell  in  the-  champaign;  in  the
'Arabah  (see  ch.  i.  1),  "  mentioned  here  as
that  poition  of  the  land  on  the  west  of  the
Jordan  which  lay  stretched  out  before  the
eyes  of  the  Israelites,  who  were  encamped  in
the  steppes  of  Moab"  (Keil).  Over  against
Gilgal;  i.e.  not  the  Gilgal  mentioned  in  Josh.
iv.  19,  which  was  east  of  Jericho  (hud.
Jilj&lia),  nor  the  Gilgal  of  Josh.  xii.  23
(probably  the  modem  Jiljulieh,  in  the  plain
of  Sharon),  but  the  Gilgal  of  Josli.  ix.  6 ;
X.  6 ;  and  2  Kings  ii.  1  (Iwd.  Jiljilia),  to  the
north  of  Bethel,  from  which  there  is  "a
very  extensive  prospect  over  the  gje;it  lower
plain,  and  also  over  the  sea"  (Bobinson,
'B.b.  Bes,'  iii.  13S);  so  that  the  mountains
by  Nablfis  may  be  very  well  described  as
"over  against  it."  Beside  the  plains  of
Moreh;  for  "plains"  read  oaks  (of.  Osn.
xii.  6 ;  XXXV.  4).

Vers.  31,  32. — The  assurane  that  they
should  pass  over  Jordan  and  possess  the
land  of  Canaan,  is  assio^ned  as  a  reason  and
motive  why  they  should  obaerre  to  do  all,
that  God  had  commanded  them.


H0MILETIC8

Vers.  2 — 9. — The  voice  of  Ood  in  passing  events  to  he  heeded,  interpreted,  and
obeyed.  As  in  former  paragraphs,  we  have  here  much  repetition  cf  the  same  teachings
which  had  been  already  given.  We  therefore  select  for  homiletic  treatment  the  one  dis-
tinctive feature  which  marks  it.  The  people  of  God  are  now  on  the  verge  of  Cananrv.
Multitudes  of  them  had  been  born  since  the  march  through  the  wilderness  had  begun
forty  years  before.  They  could  not  have  seen  the  wonders  in  Egypt,  nor  could  they
know,  except  by  report,  of  the  manifestations  of  the  Divine  displeasure  at  the  rebellious
spirit  manifested  by  the  people  during  tiie  first  years  of  their  course.  But  there  are
still  some  seniors  left  who  had  seen  all.  To  these  Moses  makes  his  appeal,  ere  the
di«ooitfw  in  which  be  exhorts  to  obedience  is  brought  to  a  close.    And  he  urges  theni


CH.  XI.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  191

anew,  from  a  consideration  of  the  deep  meaning  of  the  events  which  their  own  eyes
have  seen,  to  learn  to  he  faithful  and  obedient.  We  by  no  means  understand  Moses  as
intending  to  say  that  the  children  are  not  before  him  to  hear  his  words,  but  rather  that
the  argument  he  is  now  using  is  specially  for  the  sires  rather  than  the  sons.  It  is  in
effect  this :  "  You,  the  seniors  among  the  people  now,  have  seen  all  these  things.
God  has  spoken  in  them  directly  to  you ;  therefore,  it  is  incumbent  upon  you  to  assign
to  these  events  their  true  meaning,  and  to  give  them  their  rightful  power  over,  you."
Whence  we  get  the  tojjic  named  above  for  our  Homily :  "  Tlie  voice  of  Q-od  in  passing
events  to  he  heeded,  understood,  and  obeyed."

I.  Hbeb)  are  stieeino  events  which  had  occurred  under  Israel's  own  etes.
Three  of  them  are  specially  named.  1.  The  pla<)!ues  brought  on  Pharaoh  and  the
land  of  Egypt.  2.  The  overthrow  of  the  Egyptians  in  the  Red  Sea.  3.  The  over-
throw of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram.  (For  remarks  on  these,  see  Exposition,  and
Homilies  in  loc.     For  much  light  on  the  second,  see  Brugsch's  '  Egypt.')

II.  Herb  is  a  specific  meaning  given  to  these  events.  They  are  all  called
'^chastisement"  (yet.  2).  They  are  not  only  referred  to  as  works  of  greatness,  deeds  of
power  and  of  terror,  but  their  moral  meaning  (which  is  infinitely  more  important)  is
given  in  the  word  "chastisement."  It  is  of  very  much  more  consequence  to  understand
the  meaning  of  an  event,  than  to  merely  have  the  event  stored  np  in  memory  as  a  piece
of  history.  In  fact,  it  may  fairly  be  questioned  whether  the  latter  is  of  any  value  at
all.  Of  what  value  is  it  to  a  student  to  know  that  King  John  signed  Magna  Charta,
unless  he  knows  the  meaning  thereof,  as  related  to  the  rise  and  growth  of  the  British
Constitution  ?  Even  so  it  is  not  of  the  slightest  service  to  know  of  Red  Sea  wonders,  nor
of  the  plagues  in  Egypt,  unless  their  place  and  meaning  in  history  are  known.  This
is  the  case  likewise  with  events  of  much  greater  moment.  Not  even  the  wonders  of
Gcthsemane  and  Calvary  are  exempted.  If  regarded  only  as  incidents  in  history,  apart
from  their  spiritual,  redemjjtive  meaning,  they  will  serve  us  nothing.  "As  the  body
without  the  spirit  is  dtad,"  so  facts  without  their  significance  are  dead  also.  Hence  it  is
that  the  attention  of  Israel  is  recalled  to  these  olden  wonders  as  "chastisements  "from
ihe  Lord  their  God.

III.  These  events  mat  be  raviDEn  into  two  classes  ;  in  each  class  a  like  principle
is  illustrated,  though  in  a  difleruut  form.  1.  The  first  two  were  the  chastisement  of
Egypt  on  behalf  of  God's  oppressed  people,  showing  them  the  strength  of  his  arm  and
the  value  of  his  covenant  love.  2.  The  third  was  the  chastisement  of  the  chosen
people  themselves,  when  they  rebelled  against  the  divinely  appointed  order  with  reference
to  the  priesthood.  In  the  former  cases,  God's  jealous  love  on  behalf  of  his  people  was
proven ;  in  the  latter  case,  God's  jealousy  for  his  own  honour,  in  maintaining  his
appointed  order  and  ordinances  unimpaired.  In  the  former,  that  jealousy  chastised ^gypt
for  Israel's  sake ;  in  the  latter,  Israel  for  Jehovah's  sake.  'Thus  Israel  would  have
before  them  the  lesson  that,  as  God  in  his  love  would  snap  the  fetters  that  bound  them,
so  in  his  purity  he  would  remove  the  stains  that  disfigured  them;  that  as  they
rejoiced  in  the  love  of  God  which  was  round  them  as  a  mi^ihty  guard,  so  they  might  also
cherish  a  holy  fear  of  that  purity  which  would  mark  its  displeasure  at  their  wayward-
ness and  sins.

IV.  Such  events,  so  full  op  MEANnia,   should  have  a  constant  BrFEOT  in

IMPELLING   TO  OBEDIENCE,    AND     IN    QUIOKESINQ    AND    SUSTAINING     A    REVERENT  FEAR

AND  LOVE.  God  meant  much  in  bringing  them  to  pass,  and  they  should  mean  much
in  the  use  they  made  of  them  (vers.  8,  9).  If  they  laid  them  to  heart,  and  acted  out
the  lessons  they  were  designed  to  teach,  they  would  continue  in  the  land  which  God  had
assigned  to  them.  The  reference  in  the  phrase,  "that  ye  may  prolong  your  days
in  the  land,"  is  rather  to  Israel's  continuance  as  a  nation,  than  to  the  long*  life  of
the  individual.  National  continuance  dependent  on  national  obedience,  is  the  one
truth  most  frequently  named  in  the  exhortations  of  Israel's  lawgiver.

V.  All  this  has  a  present-day  application  to  the  people  of  God  now.  Forms
change ;  but  principles  never.  There  are  few  passages,  even  in  the  grand  old  Book,
that  open  up  a  wider  scope  or  a  suhlimer  field  for  the  preacher's  efforts  than  the  one
before  us.  The  following  enumeration  of  the  successive  links  of  thought  may  be  helpful.
Our  pages  give  no  space  for  more.  1.  At  the  background  of  the  Christian  dispensa-
tion there  are  solid  and  substantial  historical  facts  on  which  we  can  ever  fall  back.


198  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xl  1—32.

2.  Thouglitlieracfs,  comprised  in  the  birth,  cross-bearing,  resnrreqtion,  and  ascension  of
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  did  not  occur  in  our  times,  yet  the  evidence  thereof  has  come  down
to  us  in  unbroken  line,  and  with  unimpaired  force.  3.  The  meaning  of  these  facts  is
even  better  known  now  than  it  was  at  the  moment  of  their  occurrence ;  for  their  sig-
nificance has  been  recorded  for  us  in  books  which  have  survived  fire  and  flood,  and  have
reached  us  in  all  their  integrity.  4.  There  are  other  sets  of  facts  connected  therewith
of  which  we  are  witnesses,  viz.  that  the  gospel  of  Christ  has  been  the  power  of  God
unto  salvation  to  those  who  believe  it,  and  that  believers  therein  are  the  guardians  of  it,
holding  it  in  trust  for  others.  5.  Those  thus  guarding  the  faith  of  Christ  are  the  present
"  commonwealth  of  Israel ; "  taking  the  place  in  this  economy  of  the  Israel  of  old.
They  are  not  indeed  visibly  one  now  as  in  ancient  days.  But  they  form  a  host  a
hundredfold  more  numerous,  ranged  under  differing  names,  yet  guarding  the  ancient
faith.  6.  Those  Churches  which  are  faithful  to  their  acknowledged  mission,  prolong
their  days  in  the  land;  while  those  which,  either  in  faith  or  life,  are  less  loyal  and
true  to  their  God,  die  out,  and  "  the  candlestick  is  removed  out  of  its  place."  7,  This
law  of  Church  life  is  a  perpetual  declaration  of  God's  jealousy  for  his  honour.  "  In
])roportion  to  their  faithfiilness  or  unfaithfulness,"  says  a  modem  writer,  "particular
Churches  overcome  the  world,  or  are  overcome  by  the  world."  Thus  God  shows  his
care  for  these  supreme  facts  of  our  faith,  by  sayiug  to  Churches,  "  If  you  guard  them,
you  live  ;  if  you  guard  them  not,  you  die."  In  the  great  redemption  which  is  in  Christ
Jfsus,  God  hns  broken  the  fetters  which  bound  man.  In  his  watchful  jealousy,  he
will  bring  honour  to  the  Church  which  holds  forth  and  acts  out  his  redemption,  and
will  bring  shame  to  one  which  represses  it,  weakens  it,  or  turns  the  grace  of  Gk>d  into
lasciviousness.  Just  as  our  God  cared  not  for  Israel  to  remain  a  nation  unless  they
preserved  his  honour  unimpaired,  so  he  cares  not  for  the  continued  existence  of  any
Church,  unless  it  is  "  earnestly  contending  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints."
8.  While,  however,  the  claim  and  demand  of  God  upon  the  fidelity  of  his  Israel  now  is  as
strong  as  ever,  yea  stronger,  the  mode  in  which  that  claim  is  presented  is  vastly  more
tender  than  in  ancient  days.  In  the  Epistles  to  the  seven  Churches  we  have  a  kind  of
appeal  to  the  Christian  Is.ael,  analogous  to  this  of  Moses  to  the  Hebrew  Israel.  But,  in
lieu  of  the  thimder,  trembling,  and  flame  of  Sinai,  we  have  the  pathos  and  love  of  Geth-
semane  and  Calvary.  Can  we  resist  such  appeals  as  those  which  Christ  presents?  Can
we  consent  to  keep  back  from  man  the  cross,  with  all  its  fulness  of  meaning ;  or  fail
to  respond  to  it  by  intensest  love  and  closest  obedience?  May  our  once  suffering
and  now  glorified  Lord  make  us  faithful,  and  keep  us  so  till  death!

Vers.  10 — 17. — ITie  order  of  nature  subiervient  to  moral  purposes,  (For  information
concerning  methods  of  irrigation  in  Egypt,  see  the  Exposition,  and  works  on  the  subject.)
Moses  here  reminds  the  people :  1.  That  the  land  of  Canaan  would  not  require  artificial
irrigation,  as  that  of  Egypt  had  done ;  that  it  was  a  land  specially  cared  for  by  God,
who  gave  it  the  early  rain  after  the  sowing,  and  the  latter  rain  before  the  harvest ;  so  that
there  would  be  no  occasion  for  them  to  put  forth  the.  same  kind  of  labour  that  had
been  performed  in  the  land  of  their  bondage.  2.  That  if  they  were  obedient  and  true
to  their  vows,  the  fruitfuluess  of  Canaan  would  be  ensured  through  the  continuance  of
the  early  and  the  latter  rain.  3.  But  tliat  if  they  allo'wcd  themselves  to  be  seduced  to
the  service  of  other  gods,  the  Lord's  wrath  would  be  kindled,  the  heaven  would  be
shut  up,  the  rain  would  be  withheld,  and  so  from  want  of  sustenance  the  people  would
perish.  Now,  it  is  evident  that  this  is  one  of  those  passages  with  which  what  is  called
"  modern  thought "  ventures  specially  to  come  in  conflict.  We  do  not  now  concern
ourselves  with  any  physical  theory  of  the  working  of  nature  which  the  Hebrews  may
have  had.  Moses  did  not  give  them  any.  It  was  not  his  province,  which  was  simply
to  teach  them  the  moral  and  spiritual  laws  under  which  they  were  placed ;  to  show
them  that  these  were  such  as  to  subserve  their  training  in  righteousness,  and  that
nature  itself  was  so  regulated  by  Jehovah,  as  to  be  a  most  important  factor  in  the
educational  forces  which  were  at  work  on  their  behalf.  The  series  of  thoughts  here
given  opens  up  a  most  important  theme  for  pulpit  teaching ;  viz.  The  order  <^  nature
subservient  to  moral  purposes.

I.  L«T  VS  INDICATE  THB  MAIN  THOUOHTS  WHICH  ABB  OONTAINED  IN  THIS  FA88AOE.

1.  Th«  sending  of  rain  from  heaven  is  an  act  of  God  (Jer.  xiv.  22).    This  is  •  truth


6k.  XL  i— 32.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEHONOMTf.  1^9

taught  by  natural  religion,  and  recognized  in  the  whole  of  Scripture.  2.  The  sending
of  the  rain  from  heaven  is  an  act  of,  and  to  us  a  proof  of,  the  Divine  benevolence  (Matt.
V.  45).  3.  There  was  manifest  kindness  to  Israel,  in  leading  them  to  a  land  so  spon-
taneously  and  richly  fruitful  as  Palestine.  In  Egypt,  where  rain  falls  so  seldom,  God
had  taught  man  to  water  it  by  artificial  means,  and  compensated  for  the  want  of  rain
by  the  periodical  rise  of  the  Nile.  But  whereas  in  Palestine  there  was  no  such
phenomenon,  and  as  the  people  would  have  perished  therein  from  want,  had  artificial
means  of  watering  it  been  required  ere  these  irrigating  measures  could  have  been
carried  out,  it  was  no  mean  mercy  that  they  were  led  to  a  land  which  did  not  need
them.  They  lose  very  much  who  do  not  see  proofs  of  Divine  care  in  these  natural
counterpoises  and  compensations.  Moreover,  had  the  fruitfulness  of  Cataan  been
dependtnt  on  Israel's  "  watering  it  with  the  foot "  they  might,  in  their  ignorance,  have
attributed  its  fertility  to  their  own  wit  or  wisdom ;  but  no  such  self-laudation  could
well  arise  where  all  had  been  secured  for  them  by  a  Power  not  their  own.  4.  Never-
theless, however  richly  Canaan  might  be  blessed  with  the  rain  of  heaven,  that  gift  of
God  was  by  no  means  absolute  or  irrevocable,  but  would  be  so  bestowed  as  to  serve  the
purpose  of  a  moral  training.  In  '  Footnotes  from  the  Page  of  Nature,'  Dr.  Macmillan
clearly  shows  that  there  is  a  law  of  nature,  by  virtue  of  which  each  order  of  life  exists
for  the  sake  of  that  which  is  above  it.  We  have  but  to  widen  and  generalize  this
principle,  and  we  get  exactly  the  same  truth  in  the  Word  which  is  revealed  in  the
world,  viz.  that  the  physical  exists  for  the  moral,  and  is  so  regulated  as  to  be  subservient
thereto.  All  things  are  for  man.  "He  giveth  us  rain  from  heaven,  and  fruitful
seasons,  filling  our  hearts  with  food  and  gladness."  And  if  thus  God  cares  for  the
bodily  wants,  how  should  he  but  care  the  more  for  the  moral  growth  of  the  creature —
man?  5.  Prom  this  general  principle,  two  details  naturally  follow.  (1)  That  rain  will
be  continued  if  the  people  are  obedient.  (2)  That  if  they  disobey,  and  serve  otlher
gods,  rainlessness  and  dearth  will  be  the  sad  reminders  of  their  siu(see  ch.  xxviii.  23,
-24;  1  Kings  viii.  35;  xvii.  1;  2  Chron.  vi.  26,  27;  vii.  12—14;  Jer.  xiv.  1—7,  17—
22;  Amos  Iv.  6 — 8;  Hag.  i.  7 — 11;  Hos.  i.  8,  9).  It  is  no  valid  objection  to  say
that  there  is  no  nextia  between  the  obedience  or  disobedience  of  a  man,  and  the  fall  of
rain.  Por,  first  of  all,  in  such  a  statement  there  is  a  gross  petitio  principii.  The  whole
thing  in  question  is  assumed ;  and  secondly,  according  to  the  fourth  principle  named
above,  the  Scripture  theory  is,  not  only  that  there  is  a  nexus,  but  that  it  is  a  known
and  intelligible  and  a  reasonable  one  :  viz.  God  gives  or  withholds  rain.  He  values  his
people's  comfort,  but  their  virtue  more.  _  Se  varies  the  course  of  nature  so  as  to  subserve
the  latter  end.  Hence  there  is  a  connection  between  human  obedience  to  God,  and  a
shower  of  rain.     The  obedience  is  to  God,  the  rain  is  from  him.    But  let  us  now  pass  on —

II.    To  SHOW   HOW   THESE  THINKINGS    SHOULD    GUIDE   US  IN  BEFEBBNCE   TO   SOME   OF

THE  PRESENT  PEHPLEXITIES  OF  HUMAN  THOUGHT.  And  perhaps  We  may  meet  these,
and  clear  up  the  passage  before  us,  most  effectually,  by  at  once  putting  the  question,
"  Is  it  right  to  pray /or  rain  ?  "  We  must  again  divide  this  question  into  two ;  and  must
first  ask,  "  What  do  we  mean  by  praying  for  rain?"  or  "What  is  that  praying  for  rain
for  which  alone  any  devout  and  intelligent  believer  would  argue?"  1.  It  is  not  meant
that  those  who  never  pray  at  all  .should  pray  but  for  rain,  and  selfishly  beg  a  gift  from
A  Being  to  whom,  except  when  they  are  in  trouble,  they  do  not  care  to  speak.  2.  It
is  not  meant  that  men  should  ask  distrustfully,  as  if  they  thought  their  words  would
move  the  Most  High  to  pity.  3.  It.  is  not  meant  that  any  request  for  rain  should  be
absolute,  or  sent  up  in  a  spirit  of  querulousness  or  dictation.  4.  It, is  not  thought  that
any  law  of  nature  needs  to  be  interfered  with,  or  altered,  or  modified,  in  order  to  bring
an  answer  to  such  a  request. .  But :  (1)  It  is  known  and  believed  that  all  nature  is
perfectly  plastic  in  the  Creator's  hands.  (2)  It  is  contended  that  God  can  modify  the
course  of  nature  without  varying  a  law.  Why,  even  man  can  do  this :  ho  can  drain
a  morass,  or  carry  off  a  lake,  and  change  the  climate  and  vegetation  of  a  district  for  ever
afterwards  ;  and  if  man  can  do  this  in  part,  surely  God  can  do  it  infinitely.  (3)  It  is
urged  that  those  who  in  every  thing  by  prayer  and  supplication  make  their  requests  known
unto  God,  need  not  alter  their  course  because  the  present  trouble  is  a  want  of  rain ;  but
that  they  may  lay  this,  in  common  with  all  other  things,  before  God  in  prayer:
reverently  acknowledging  his  greatness,  humbly  acknowledging  that  their  sins  deserve
his  rebuke,  and  submitting  thereto  with  lowliness  and  contrition  of  heart.     (4)  It  is


200  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xl  1—32.


asserted  that  any  inch  devout  souls,  in  any  distress  whatever,  can,  may,  otight  to
entreat  the  Lord  their  Grod  that  he  would  have  mercy  upon  them,  remove  his  stroke,
and  grant  them  their  request.  This  is  that  for  which  alone  we  contend.  Now,  there
are  reasons  for  taking  up  such  a  position,  which  cannot  be  set  aside,  and  when  put
together  in  cumulative  force,  they  seem  to  us  to  leave  no  special  difficulty  on  this
point  remaining.  (1)  There  is  a  God  and  Father  of  all.  (2)  He  loves  to  be  approached  in
prayer  (Ps.  1..15),  (3)  Whatever  is  a  care  on  his  children's  heart  is  a  care  on  his  (Isa.
Ixiii.  9  ;  1  Pet.  v.  7).  (4)  God's  great  concern  for  the  people  is  their  moral  training
(ch.  viii.  2 — 5).  Ho  so  distributes  physical  good  that  the  higher  end  may  be
subserved.  (5)  We  are  taught  by  our  Lord  himself  to  pray,  "Give  us  day  by  day
our  daily  bread;"  and  if  so,  it  follows  that  we  may  pray  for  the  continuance  of  the
means  on  which  the  supply  of  daily  bread  depends.  As  rain  is  one  of  the  very  chief
of  these  means,  it  follows  that  the  children  of  God  may  pray  for  rain.  But  it  may  be
objected,  1:  The  laws  of  nature  are  fixed.  Be  it  so.  The  course  of  nature  is  not
(see  remarks  above).  God  may  modify  an  order  without  altering  a  law.  What  man
can  do  in  limited  measure,  God  can  do  in  unlimited  degree.  Objection  2 :  Prayer
cannot  change  the  mind  of  God.  True.  We  neither  seek  nor  desire  to  do  this.  We
do  not  know  what  ts  the  mind  of  God  until  he  tells  us.  He  has  said,  "  Ask,  and  ye
shall  receive."  If  then  it  is  the  mind  of  God  that  his  creatures  should  ask  before
receiving,  it  is  of  no  use  to  think  that  the  mind  of  God  will  change,  and  that  they  will
receive  without  asking.  Objection  3 :  If,  as  is  afSrmed,  sin  is  the  reason  for  drought,
then  the  only  thing  which  meets  such  a  case  is  putting  away  the  sin,  and  not
prayer  1  We  reply,  the  Scriptural  teachina;  is  that  there  must  be  confession,  repent-
ance, and  prayer  (see  1  Kings  viii.  35).  Not  one  alone,  but  all  combined.  Thus  all
the  objections  fail.  Finally,  we  would  conclude  with  one  earnest  inquiry,  the  work-
ing out  of  which  would  demand  a  long  discourse.  We  can  but  put  it,  and  let  it  drop
as  a  seed  into  some  hearts.  Given,  man  as  a  moral  beiug,  with  indefinite  possibilities
of  development  for  holiness  or  sin,  which  theory  of  the  constitution  of  nature  most
accords  with  the  constitution  of  man?  That  which  represents  physical  force  as
controlled  for  the  purposes  of  his  moral  culture,  or  that  which  represents  the  nobler
aspirations  as  hopelessly  baffled  by  a  non-moral,  bare  physical  force?  Header,
"  Consider  what  we  say ;  and  the  Lord  give  thee  understanding  in  all  things."

Vers.  18—21. — (See  Homily  on  ch.  vi.  4r— 9.)

Vers.  22 — 25. — The  moral  power  of  national  rigTifeouituts.  There  was  a  definite
territory  assigned  by  God  to  Israel.  They  were  promised  it,  but  the  prohibition
against  going  beyond  what  God  had  allotted  them,  was  as  remarkable  and  strong  as
the  assurance  of  their  possessing  such  allotment.  The  bounds  here  specified  are  stated
afresh  in  Josh,  i.  3,  4.  In  the  days  of  Solomon  these  boundaries  were  actually  theirs.
But,  as  is  well  known,  they  were  a  people  untrained  for  war ;  in  regard  to  military
skill  and  warlike  appliances,  other  nations  were  vastly  more  than  a  match  for  them,
leaving  out  of  the  question  Israel's  paucity  in  numbers.  But  (and  it  is  not  the  lejst
striking  feature  in  the  Mosaic  legislation)  they  were  to  have  power  of  another  kind,
even  that  which  was  moral,  a  power  arising  from  their  righteousness,  'and  also
dependent  upon  it.  And  in  this  passage :  1.  Moses  afresh  reminds  the  people  of  their
duty — to  keep  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  their  God.  2.  He  points  out  that  their
loyalty  to  God  and  assurance  of  his  protection  would  give  them  irresistible  stiength.
3.  The  knowledge  of  this  higher  order  of  moral  life,  and  of  the  promised  guard  of  their
covenant  God,  would  so  influence  the  other  nations  that  they  would  be  inspired  with
dread  (see  Josh.  ii.  9, 10, 11).  4.  This  dread  of  Israel  which  the  nations  round  about
would  feel  would  clear  their  way,  would  ensure  their  conquest,  and  would  be  a  security
for  them  in  retaining  their  possessions.  From  all  this  we  get  one  of  the  most  important
lessons  suggested  which  can  possibly  be  taught  on  national  affairs,  viz.  That  the  kind
of  power  over  other  nations,  which  a  people  may  well  desire  the  most,  is  that  whidi  comes
from  the  influence  of  its  own  righteousness.

1,  National  power  is  dniversali.t  coveted.  Nor,  provided  sundry  conditions
are  fulfilled  which  will  be  presently  named,  is  this  wrong.  No  nation  ought  to  consent
to  be  A  cipher  among  nations.    Just  as  really  as  a  man  may  well  wish  to  bo  something


CH.  XL  I— 32.J  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEROXOMY.  20J


amongst  'his   fellows,  so  should  a  people  wish  to  be  something  in  the  regard  of
neighbouring  states.

n.  It  is  most  impoktant  that  the  poweb  of  a  nation  Over  others  SHonu)  be
TEAT  OF  THE  HIGHEST  KIND.  One  nation  may  be  chiefly  great  in  its  commercial
enterprise,  another  in  its  culture  of  art,  a  third  in  the  renown  of  its  orators  or  poets,
a  fourth  in  its  philosophic  wisdom,  a  fifth  in  its  military  or  naval  fame ;  but  there
is  a  power,  unlike  all  these,  after  which  Israel  was  bidden  to  aspire.

III.  That  is  the  powbb  most  to  be  desired  which  would  make  it  worth

WHILE   to   PEHrETnATB   THE  NATION    FOSSBSSINa    IT,   FOB    THE    SAKE   OF   THE   WORLD'S

GOOD.    Moses,  imder  Divine  direction,  is  continually  recognizing  this,  by  putting  Israel's
continuance  in  the  land  as  conditioned  on  their  loyalty  to  Jehovah  and  his  laws.

IV.  The  only  power  which  is  absolutelt  neoessabt  to  the  wobld's  good  is
THAT  OF  biqhteousness.  This  unites  a  people.  This  gives  clear  heads,  strong  frames,
valiant  hearts.  A  nation  whose  heart  is  soundly  righteous  will  not  fight  unless  it
must;  but  if  it  must,  it  will  fight  grandly  and  for  a  righteons  aim.

V.  This  power  of  bighteousness  will  have  a  manifold  effect  with  regard
to  otheb  nations.  1.  As  a  rule,  it  will  ensure  their  good-will.  2.  Appealing  as  it
does  to  man's  sense  of  justice,  it  will  help  to  ward  off  attacks  from  without.  3.  Where
it  fails  to  do  this,  and  where  an  attack  has  to  be  resisted,  if  in  the  hour  of  their  need
they  cry  unto  God,  they  will  find  that  he  shields  them  in  the  day  of  battle  (see
2  Chron.  xx.  1—29). ,

¥1.  This  poweb  may  even  bb  dkveloped  and  btbbnothened  by  repeated  and
arduous  conflict.  (See  2  Chron.  xx.  29.)  When  a  people  are  with  one  heart  loyal
to  God,  and  do  with  one  voice  cry  unto  him,  they  will  find  out  that  Jehovah  hears,  and
that  God  speeds  the  right.  And  may  we  not  appeal  fearlessly  to  every  one  of  our
readers,  and  say.  Is  not  this  power  of  righteousness  pre-eminently  that  which  the  world
wants  ?    This  being  so,  we  may  bring  this  series  of  remarks  to  a  close  by  observing —

VII.  That  the  great  God  op  nations  will  set  his  seal  of  approval  on

peoples  that  80   CLEAVE   TO   THE  RIGHT,   BY  GIVING   AGAIN   AND   AGAIN   THE   VICTORY
TO  THAT   WHICH,   HUMANLY  SPEAKING,   IS  THE  WEAKER   SIDE.      ScriptUrC   CaseS   of  this

abound :  Israel  and  Pharaoh  ;  Gideon  and  the  Midianites ;  Hezekiah  and  Sennacherib ;
Jehoshaphat  and  the  Ammonites ;  and  (in  another  sense)  Elijah  and  the  priests  and
prophets  of  Baal.  The  Word  of  God  is  continually  showing  us  that  power  is  not  always
where  it  seems  to  be,  but  very  often  where  it  seems  not  to  be :  Joseph,  Daniel,  Peter,  etc.
From  all  these  considerations,  there  may  be  drawn  out  an  earnest  appeal  to  men,  even  if
they  aim  at  nought  higher  than  to  be  the  true  lovers  and  guardians  of  their  country  and
nation,  to  seek  for  the  sake  of  their  own  dear  land,  to  love  and  to  practise  righteousness.
Nor  let  it  be  supposed  that  this  statement  is  at  all  affected  by  the  fact  that  we  are  "  no;
under  the  Law  but  under  grace."  Grace  reigns  through  righteousness,  and  only
through  righteousness.  Infinite  grace  has  offered  a  Sacrifice  which  has  done  away
with  the  need  of  continuing  the  sacrifices  of  the  ceremonial  law.  But  grace  never
has  and  never  will  abate  one  jot  or  tittle  of  the  demands  for  righteousness  which
mark  the  moral  law.  Never !  And  if  we  are  rescued  from  condemnation,  if  we  are
made  sons  of  God,  it  is  not  that  we  may  be  absolved  from  the  obligation  to  right-
eousness ;  but  that  "  the  righteousness  of  the  Law  may  be  fulfilled  in  us "  from  the
spontaneity  of  personal  choice,  without  the  need  of  any  command  to  enforce  or
pressure  to  constrain.  And  inasniuch  as  only  in  a  perfectly  righteous  people  can
there  be  an  absolute  guarantee  of  permanence,  it  follows  that  only  the  people  in
the  commonwealth  of  Israel  will  constitute  "  the  eternal  city."  For  there  "  the
people  slwll  be  all  righteous,"  and  then  "they  shall  inherit  the  land  for  ever."  Right-
eousness and  permanence  are  thus  linked  together  in  the  proplielic  utlook  of
Isaiah,  as  really  as  in  the  legislation  of  Moses  (see  Isa.  Ixi.  21).  In  this  new  and
nobler  world,  righteousness  will  come  into  being,  not  as  a  response  to  a  Divine
command,  but  as  the  product  of  a  Divine  creation.  And  then  around  it  there  shall  be
an  eternal  guard.  No  enemy  from  without  shall  dare  to  attack ;  no  foe  from  within
shall  weaken.    "  Salvation  will  God  appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks."

Vers.  26 — ^28. — The  dread  alternative  he/ore  every  man.    Perhaps,  strictly  speak-
iBg,  the  final  paragraph  of  this  chapter  includes  vers.  26 — 32.    The  reader  thei-oof  will,


THE  BOOK:  OP  DEUtBEOirOMY.  {as.  xL  1—3


howeTer,  oliserve  that,  while  in  its  entirety  it  deals  with  the  blessing  and  curse,  yet  the
first  three  verses  deal  with  them  as  resting  on  the  people,  the  remaining  verses  regard
them  as  pronounced  hy  the  people.  The  theme  indicated  by  the  latter  half  ia
treated  on  at  ch.  xxvii.  We  therefore  confine  our  remarks  to  the  former  section
of  these  words.  They  present  to  us  the  dread  alternative  which  is  before  every  man,
as  our  theme  for  consideration.  Lest  any  should  seek  to  blunt  the  eiige  of  our
words  by  saying,  "  We  don't  like  the  word  '  curse ; '  it  belongs  to  an  older  dispensation,"
we  would  observe  at  the  outset  that  the  same  alternative  is  presented  to  us,  though
it  may  be  in  other  words,  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  John  iii.  18 — 21.  We  do  not
say  that  there  is  no  difference  in  meaning  beyond  the  varied  phraseology,  but  simply
point  ont  just  now,  that,  under  Christ,  as  under  Moses,  there  is  set  forth  the  sharp
contrast,  in  one  case  of  blessing  and  curse,  in  the  other  case  of  acceptance  and  condem-
nation. One  or  other  of  these  belongs  to  every  man.  Here  is  a  mighty  theme,  in
which  the  preacher  has  "  by  manifestation  of  the  truth  to  commend  himself  to  every
man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God."

I.  Man  has  a  moral  NArnRE.  The  denial  of  this  by  some,  and  the  baseness  of  the
lives  of  others,  no  more  interfere  with  the  general  truth  of  this,  than  cases  which  are
abnormal  in  the  physical  world  do  with  well-ascertained  truth  in  the  physical  depart-
ments. Man  has  a  trweiSntris,  a  power  of  discerning  moral  distinctions.  If  he  fiuls  to
give  proof  of  that,  he  is  a  perishing  man.

II.  This  possession  of  a  moral  nature  indicates  the  existence  of  moral  law.
This  is,  in  fact,  the  objectivity  wliich  is  before  the  moral  sense,  and  perceived  by  it.

JII.  The  existence  of  a  law  implies  that  of  a  lawgiver;  the  existence  of  a
moral  law,  that  of  a  moral  Lawgiver,  who  is  himself  the  Lord  of  right,  the  God,  "  with
whom  is  our  account."  The  moral  sense  of  man  postulates  this ;  the  all  but  universal
conviction  of  mankind  affirms  it ;  the  sense  of  sin  is  its  constant  demonstration.  The
experience  of  men  like  Enoch,  who  in  the  olden  time  "  walked  with  God,"  is  proof  that
at  any  rate  some  human  spirits  lean  on  the  Eternal  One,  as  really  as  the  body  depends
on  air  and  food.

IV.  The  moral  Lawqivbr  reveals  himself.  Not  only  do  previously  mentioned
facts  show  that  he  is,  but  we  know  also  what  he  is.  The  Law  given  by  Moses,  and  the
proclamation  of  Jehovah's  Name  to  him,  disclose  the  greatness  of  the  Divine  being ;
the  fuller  word  of  prophet  and  psalmist  likewise.  The  Incarnate  Son  revealed  him.
The  Holy  Ghost  unveils  him  to  the  watchful  eye  and  yearning  heart.  "  The  Lord
your  God."

V.  The  Great  Lawgtveb  has  given  definite  commands.  Chiefly,  as  Lawgiver,  in
the  Law.  Chiefly,  as  also  a  great  Benefactor,  in  the  gospel.  In  the  one  aspect  his  Law
is  "  do ; "  in  the  other  his  Law  is  "  receive."  In  the  former  a  course  of  life  is  marked
out  in  detail ;  in  the  latter,  a  redemption  by  infinite  grace  is  made  known  for  "  the
obedience  of  faith."  So  that,  as  it  speaks  to  us.  Law  says  (for  we  are  under  Law  to
Christ),  "  Receive  in  loving  faith  the  redemption,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  and  then,  by
the  renewed  energies  of  a  God-inspired  life,  walk  not  after  the  flesh  but  after  thespirit."

TI.  The  Divine  Lawgiver  regards  men  according  to  theib  measure  of  lotaltt
to  the  right  and  the  true,  i.e.  as  far  as  they  have  the  opportunity  of  knowing  what
.is  right  and  true ;  for  some  nations  may  even  as  yet  not  have  any  written  law.  In
such  case  Peter's  words  ai^ply  (Acts  x.  34,  35).  We  can  suppose  others  who  have  the
Law  only.  We  have  the  revelation  of  God  both  in  Law  and  in  gospel ;  to  us  is  the  word
of  salvation  sent  (cf.  John  vi.  29).  According  as  we  receive  it  or  no,  God  approves  or
disapproves,  accepts  or  disowns.  Is  it  possible  to  suppose  it  otherwise  ?  Can  any  one
think  that  a  holy  Lawgiver  should  give  forth  a  perfect  Law,  and  then  be  unconcerned  as
to  whether  men  obey  it  ?  Can  it  be  imagined  that  he  should  send  his  only  begotten
Son  into  the  world,  and  then  leave  it  optional  with  men  as  to  how  they  should  treat
him  to  whom  is  given  all  power  in  heaven  and  on  earth  ?  There  is  indeed  (see  Homily
on  ch.  X.  17 — xi.  1)  no  respect  of  persons  as  to  rank,  or  caste,  or  colour,  or  clime.  The
wide  world  over,  right  and  equity  are  the  Divine  delight ;  but  since  right  is  right,  and
God  is  God,  there  must  eternally  remain  the  great  gulf  fixed  between  the  loyalty  of
heart  which  he  approves,  and  the  disloyalty  of  soul  which  the  Most  High  cannot  but
condemn.     The  throne  of  the  Eternal  is  established  in  righteousness.

VII,  This  appboval  or  disapproval  of  God  is  the  blessing  orcurse.  (Cf.  Ps.  i.  6.)


oa.  xi  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEtJTEEONOMt.  203

And  it  would  Tie  well  could  it  be  impressed  on  every  conscience  that,  even  if  there  were
no  certainty  of  any  visitation  or  punishment  from  God  in  token  of  his  displeasure,  yet
that  displeasure  itself  is  so  awful  a  curse,  that  to  be  conscious  of  it  is  the  germ  of  bell ;
while,  quite  apart  from  aught  that  he  may  send  to  us,  the  consciousness  of  having  his
approval  is  a  sufficient,  a  heavenly,  an  "  exceeding  great "  reward  1  The  light  in  which
God  views  us  is  of  infinitely  more  moment  than  the  gifts  he  sends  or  the  chastisemenl's
he  inflicts.  Take  an  illustration  from  a  lower  sphere.  Let  it  be  supposed  that  a  man
whose  life  and  writings  are  corrupting  the  morals  and  helping  to  blight  the  faith  of  his
countrymen,  is  admitted,  in  course  of  events,  to  the  assembly  of  British  senators.  He  is
there  as  one  of  its  members.  But  he  knows  that  the  grandest,  purest,  most  philanthropic
and  self-sacrificing  of  human-kind  regard  him  and  his  views  with  unutterable  loathing,  not
because  of  any  vindictive  feeling  against  him,  but  because  of  the  solemn  interests  which
in  his  bauds  are  imperilled  and  shamed.  Nothing  is  done  to  him ;  but  he  knows  that
this  is  how  he  and  his  views  are  regarded  by  those  whose  esteem  is  most  worth  having.
Would  not  such  a  state  of  things  be  intolerable  torture  to  him  ?  Or  supposing  him  "  past
feeling,"  would  his  case  be  the  less  pitiable  ?  Or  supposing  him  so  puffed  up  with  pride
and  conceit  as  to  regard  the  rest  of  his  fellows  as  kept  virtuous  by  a  superstition  whose
elevating  power  he  does  not  desire  to  know,  would  not  the  disapproval  of  the  mass
of  the  people— too  deep  for  any  words  to  express — ^be  as  a  blighting  curse  upon  him,  ev«n
though  no  other  penalty  were  imposed ;  and  would  not  that  disownment  be  a  heavier
penalty  than  any  outward  punishment  could  be?  But  ohl  what,  what  U  the  dis-
approval of  man,  or  of  men,  compared  with  the  frown  of  God  1

VIII.  This  approval  ob  disapproval  will,  sooner  or  later,  be  manifest.  It  is
true,  in  more  senses  than  one,  "  Thou  art  a  (Jod  that  hidest  thyself"  (cf.  Ps.  1.  21).  But
"  though  hand  join  iu  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished."  llie  curse  will  show
itself  in  nations,  by  their  humiliation  and  destruction.  So  Egypt,  Tyre,  Chaldea,
Jerusalein,  etc.  It  will  reveal  itself  in  families  by  a  "  sword  in  the  house  "  for  many
a  long  year  (1  Sam.  iii.  13, 14 ;  2  Sam.  vii.  14).  It  will  be  manifest  in  the  individual.
This  Kpl/xa — yea,  KaraxpliM — of  God  has  three  stages^  1.  A  present,  though  it  may  be  a
comparatively  silent  one,  either  in  a  stinging  conscience,  or  one  "  seared  as  with  a  hot
iron."    2.  A  further  one,  on  the  exchange  of  worlds,  when  earth  ami  sense  are  thrown

off,  and  the  Great  Invisible  is  near.     "  Now,  Mr.  T ,"  said  a  departing  sinner  to  the

missionary  who  was  by  his  bedside,  "  my  judgment  has  just  begun  1"  3.  A  future  one,
at  the  day  of  judgment,  when  God  shall  judge  the  secrets  of  men  (cf.  Matt.  xxv.  31 —
46).  Disobedient  hearts  are  but  treasuring  up  to  theniselves  wrath  against  the  day
of  wrath  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  to  be  disapproved,  finally,
by  him  from  whose  sentence  there  can  be  no  appeal.  Is  not  a  heavy  curse,  indeed,
involved  in  all  that  ?

IX.  Here  is  ground  enough  for  boleun  appeal  to  men.  "I  set  before  you  this
day  a  blessing  and  a  curse."  Oh  1  if  men  would  but  take  the  pains  to  quit  a  while  in
thought  this  busy  scene  in  which  they  live  and  move  almost  in  perpetual  whirl ;  if  they
would  but  anticipate  by  earnest  reflection  that  usherment  into  the  presence  of  God
which  their  departure  hence  must  bring;  if  they  would  but  set  the  judgment  scene,  as
sketched  by  Christ,  before  their  view,  methinks  they  would  see  the  deep  and  solemn
reason  why  the  preacher  now — even  now — siiys,  "  Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come."  For
the  wrath  will  come,  %.e.  it  will  manifest  itself.  It  exists  now.  The  eternal  antagonism
of  a  holy  God  to  ill  of  every  kind  necessitates  it.  And  as  surely  as  God  is  ever  on  the
side  of  right,  so  surely  will  he  have  it  shown,  ere  long,  that  such  is  the  case.  Then  let
the  sinner,  condemned  even  now  by  his  own  conscience — how  much  more  by  God ! — flee
for  refuge  from  the  coming  storm.  There  is  a" refuge  ;  it  is  ours  the  m(jment  that  we
flee  to  it.  But  if  when  the  storm  comes  we  are  not  found  there,  we  must  perish —
perish  with  the  double  disapproval  of  Heaven  oa  our  heads :  disapproved  as  breakers
of  law ;  ilisapproved  as  neglccters  of  grace.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers,  it— 10,  18 — 22. — Ohligations  writing  from  personal  experitnee.    "Chastise-
ment "  (ver.  2)  in  its  wide  sense  of  discipline.    The  educative  process  by  which  Q  <!


204  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  to.  1— 3a

coQTerted,  or  aimed  at  converting,  ttie  liordes  who  left  Egypt  into  a  nation  of  trave,
free,  God-fearing,  self-respecting,  obedient  men  and  women.  Tliis  education  blended
deliverance  with  judgment  on  their  enemies ;  loving-kindness  in  the  bestowal  of  mercies,
with  severe  chastisements  in  cases  of  rebellion ;  attention  to  their  necessities,  with
frequent  exposure  to  adversity,  and  consequent  trial  of  their  faith  and  patience.  They
had  been  put  to  school  with  the  Almighty  as  their  Teacher ;  their  lesson-book  was  the
whole  extraordinary  series  of  occurrences  in  Egypt  and  the  desert ;  the  end  of  the  train-
ing was  to  form  them  to  obedience.

I.  Thkee  phases  of  God's  iNSTRUcnosor  his  Cbubch.  1.  TTie  shattering  of  worldly
power  hostile  to  the  Church  (vers.  3, 4).  Pharaoh,  in  his  pride  and  obstinacy,  is  a  type
of  world-power  universally,  in  its  opposition  to  God's  kingdom  (Bom.  ix.  17).  But
though  again  and  again  the  waves  have  thus  roared,  and  the  floods  have  lifted  up  their
voice  (Ps.  xciii.  3,  4),  the  Lord  on  high  has  shown  himself  mightier  than  the  noise  of
many  waters,  yea,  than  the  mighty  waves  of  the  sea  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxxiii. ;  Isa.  xxxvii. ;
1  Mace.  iv. ;  Acts  iv.  23 — 34 ';  Rev.  xix.  19 ;  xx.  8,  9).  2.  T/ie  preservation  and
guidance  of  the  Church  itself  (ver.  5).  In  securing  the  perpetuation  of  a  godly  remnant
in  times  of  greatest  apostacy  (1  Kings  xix.  18  ;  Rom.  xi.  5 ;  Eev.  iii.  5  ;  xi.  3  ;  xii.  17) ;
in  providing  her  with  a  succession  of  godly  teachers  (Matt,  xxviii.  20 ;  Eph.  iv.  11 — 14)  ;
in  supplying  her  necessities,  spiritnal  (John  vi.  32,  33 ;  1  Cor.  x.  4 ;  xii.  13 ;  Eph.
iii.  16 ;  Phil.  iv.  19)  and  temporal  (Matt.  x.  9, 10;  Acts  iv.  34 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  14 ;  Phil,
iv.  15,  16) ;  in  opening  up  the  path  of  duty  (Acts  xvi.  10 ;  Bom.  xv.  30,  31 ;  2  Cor.  x.
13 — 17),  in  conducting  her  from  one  stage  of  attainment  to  another  (Eph.  iv.  12, 13).
3.  TTie  overthrow  of  antichrist ian  rebellion  within  the  Church  (ver.  6).  The  insur-
rection of  Korah  and  his  comiiany  may  be  taken  as  representative  of  antichristian
movements  generally.  These  are  bound  to  arise,  but  will  infallibly  be  crushed  (2  Thess.
ii.  3—13 ;  1  John  ii.  18 ;  Rev.  xvii.).

II.  Oblmatioks  aeisino  from  bxpebibnce  of  God's  wonderful  wobks.  The  oldei
portion  of  that  generation  had  personally  witnessed  the  wonderful  works  referred  to.
This  gave  them  a  certain  advantage,  and  made  disobedience  doubly  culpable.  These
works  of  God  had  been :  (1)  in  origin,  supernatural ;  (2)  in  kind,  of  stupendous  magni-
tude ;  and  (3)  had  extended  over  a  long  period  of  time.  Those  who  have  lived  through
any  period  signalized  by  remarkable  workings  of  God  on  behalf  of  his  Church,  oj-  whose
individual  experieijcfis  have  been  remarkable,  may  learn  a  lesson.  Apply  to  reforma-
tion times,  times  of  religious  revival,  of  deliverance  from  persecutions,  of  the  forth-putting
of  God's  power  in  missions,  etc.  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  25,  26 ;  Ezra  iii.  10 — 13 ;  vi.  22 ;
Esth.  ix.  27 ;  Ps.  xl.  10 ;  cxvi.  6—9 ;  Acts  xv.  12).  Such  experiences :  1.  Furnish
peculiar  evidences  of  Ood's  grace  and  power,  of  the  reality  of  his  working  in  salvation
and  judgment.  These  evidences,  while  not  losing  their  value  to  later  generations,  are
necessarily  of  greatest  force  to  those  who  witness  the  events.  2.  Create  impressions  of
Qod's  character  cmd  attributes  not  so  readily  created  by  report.  It  is  much  to  hear  of  the
wonderful  works  Of  God  from  credible  witnesses,  but  hearing  with  the  ear  cannot  equal,
in  impressiveness  and  force,  seeing  with  the  eye  (Job  xlii.  5).  3.  Imply  a  personal
discipline  which  others  have  not  had  the  benefit  of.  The  lessons  of  our  experiences  may
be  conveyed  to  posterity,  but  the  results  of  them  in  personal  character  remain  with  our-
selves. All  this  lays  on  those  who  have  had  such  experiences  very  special  responsi-
bilities. These  relate  (1)  to  personal  obedience  (ver.  8) ;  and  (2)  to  the  education  of
children  (vers.  18 — 21).  How  are  our  children  to  know  of  God's  mighty  works  in
former  days,  or  get  the  benefit  of  our  own  experiences ;  how  are  they  to  be  convinced,
moved,  or  instructed  by  these  things,  save  as  the  result  of  diligent  parental  teaching?
— J.O.

Vers.  10—18. — Canaan  and  Egypt.  I.  Its  contbabt  with  Egypt.  (Vers.  10,  H.)
Not,  like  Egypt,  a  lap<1  rainless^nd  artificially  watered.  It  had  no  Nile.  It  drank  in
water  from  the  rains  of  heaven.  It  was  thus  in  a  peculiar  way  a  land  dependent  upon
God.  Egypt's  fertility  depended  on  God  also,  but  less  directly.  Its  contrivances  for
irrigation  gave  it,  or  might  seem  to  give  it,  a  semi-independence.  Palestine  was  a  land,
on  the  contrary,  whose  peculiar  conditions  made  it  dependent  for  fruitfulness  on  the
direct  gift  to  it  of  rains  from  heaven.  It  was  a  land  requiring  a  providential  adjust-
ment of  conditions — a  daily  care — to  make  it  yield  tbe  utmost  it  was  capable  of  (ver.  12),


OH.  XI.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  805

The  truth  here  figured  is  that  God  wills  the  believer  to  put  his  life  day  by  day  under
his  immediate  care.  Th&  worldly  man  may  desire,  and  in  a  measure  may  be  allowed  to
attain,  a  position  of  relative  independence  of  God :  he  may  get  (within  limits)  the  order-
ing of  his  own  plans  and  ways,  and  by  ingenious  contrivances  and  manipulations  of
laws  of  nature,  he  may  think  to  put  himself  beyond  the  power  of  God's  interference
with  him.  But  the  godly  man  will  neither  desire  this  nor  be  content  with  it.  He
wishes  God's  eyes  to  be  upon  his  lot  day  by  day,  "  from  the  beginning  of  the  year  even
unto  the  end  of  the  year."  There  is,  within  the  ordinary  providence  of  God,  a  special
providence  to  be  recognized  over  God's  people,  over  Christ's  Church,  and  over  nations
that  adhere  to  God's  ways.

II.  The  results  of  this  contbast  to  the  inhabitants.  (Vers.  13 — 18.)  The
directness  of  the  dependence  of  Canaan  on  God's  care  made  it,  to  a  greater  degree  than
Egypt  could  have  been,  suitable  for  the  operation  of  a  system  so  intimately  bound  up
with  temporal  rewards  and  punishments.  Should  the  people  prove  obedient,  God
engages  to  bless  them  with  rains,  and  make  the  land  fruitful  (vers.  13 — 16).  But
should  they  disobey,  the  peculiar  conditions  of  the  land  put  it  in  his  power  to  scourge
them,  as  he  so  often  did,  with  drought  and  famine  (1  Kings  xvii.  1 ;  Joel  i. ;  Hag.  i.
10, 11).  So  he  threatens  (vers.  16,  17).  It  is  a  blessed  but  a  perilous  position  which
God's  people  are  called  to  occupy.  It  secures  to  them  unwonted  favours,  but  it  exposes
them  also,  if  disobedient,  to  chastisements  and  punishments  of  a  peculiarly  direct  and
severe  kind.  The  higher  the  position  of  nearness  to  God,  the  greater  the  responsibility
which  that  position  entails  upon  who  enjoy  it. — J.  0.

Vers.  26 — 29. — The  great  alternative.     I.  God  summons  ub  to  decision.    1.  His

revelations  lay  the  ground  for  it.  "Light  is  come  into  the  world"  (John  iii.  19).
2.  They  demand  it.  Men  would  trifle,. but  God  says,  "Now"  (2  Cor.  vi.  2).  Men
would  put  off,  but  God  urges  to  decision  (Josh.  xxiv.  15).  3.  They  shut  men  up  to  it.
When  light  comes,  dtoision  is  inevitable.  We  must  settle  what  our  attitude  towards  it
will  be.    In  decreeing  net  to  choose,  we  ia  reality  do  choose.

II.  The  decision  to  which  God  summons  us  tuens  on  a  single  point.  The  point
is  obedience.  Will  we  obey  or  will  we  not  (ver.  27)  ?  It  was  so  under  the  Law,  and  it  is
so  under  the  gospel.  What  the  gospel  asks  frum  us  is  "  the  obedience  of  faith  "  (Bom.
xvi.  26).  This  tests  our  disposition  thoroughly.  True  faith  carries  with  it  the
surrender  of  the  will  to  God  and  Christ.  It  is  the  root  and  principle  of  all  holy
obedience.  Men  will  not  come  to  Christ ;  why  ?  The  reason  is  that  they  cannot  bring
themselves  to  yield  up  their  wills  to  him  as  he  requires.  They  "love  the  darkness
rather  than  the  light"  (John  iii.  19 — 22).  Refusal  to  decide  for  Christ  is  equivalent,
for  the  time  being,  to  deciding  against  him  (Matt.  xii.  30).

in.  The  decision  to  which  God  summons  us  involves  the  alternative  of  a
BLESSING  AND  A  OUBSE.  That  was  what  it  came  to  then,  and  it  is  the  same  still.
Blessing  or  curse ;  life  or  death.  Whether  God  is  to  be  our  God,  blessing  us,  renew-
ing our  inward  life,  enriching  us  with  his  Spirit,  bestowing  on  us  grace  here  and  glory
hereafter ;  or  whether  we  are  to  live  beneath  his  frown,  withering  up  under  it  in  body
and  soul,  and  vanishing  at  last  into  outer  darkness.  It  is  an  old  question  whether  a.
man  can  voluntarily  choose  what  is  for  his  hurt.  Possibly  he  cannot  without  first
listening  to  the  tempter  who  bids  him  believe  that  the  course  he  pursues  will  not  b-:
for  his  hurt.  But  none  the  less  is  every  sinner  taking  the  path  which  ends  in  destruc-
tion (Matt.  vii.  13).  His  interest,  did  he  but  see  it,  or  would  he  but  believe  it,  is
entirely  in  the  line  which  God  wishes  him  to  follow.  The  terminus  uf  the  one  road  is
death  (Bom.  vL  21),  of  the  other  life  everlastiug  (Rom.  xi.  22), — J.  0.

Vers.  22 — 26. — Vastness  of  promise.  An  inspiring  statement  of  what  QoA  would  do
for  the  obedient  nation.  Shining  through  it  we  see  the  promise  to  the  Church.  God
promises —

L  ViOTOBY  OVEB  ALL  ENEMIES.  (Ver.  23.)  The  strongest  spiritual  foes  will
go  down  if  we  cleave  to  God.  Though  greater  and  mightier  than  we,  they  shall
be  overthrown.

II.  Enlaboement  of  bounds.  (Ver.  23.)  They  would  grow  numerous,  fill  the  land,
and  spread  beyond  it.    A  wiuer  prospect  is  held  out  to  the  Church.    Her  possessiou


206  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMT.  [ch.  xi.  1—32.

is  the  earth.  If  faithrul,  she  has  the  means  within  herself  to  spread  abroad  ker
conquests,  and  occupy  from  sea  to  sea.

III.  MoRAi,  8UPEEMA0T.  (Ver.  2n.)  Israel's  power  would  be  acknowledged— her
influence  felt.  Men  would  dread  her  hostility.  The  felt  presence  of  G.  id  in  a  man,  or
in  a  Church,  has  a  power  to  inspire  fear.  Its  awing  efi'ect  is  felt  often  where  it  is
not  acknowledged.— J.  O.

Vers.  29,  SO.^Oerizim  and  Ehal  (cf.  ch.  xxyfi.).  This  putting  of  the  blessing  and
the  curse  on  Gerizira  and  Ebal  had  significance —

I.  As  A   SOLEMN   TRANSFEBENCE   OP   THE   BLESSINO   AND    THB    CURSE    TO    THE    LAND

OP  POSSESSION.  Blessing  and  curse,  representing  the  award  of  eternal  righteousness,
must  follow  us  so  long  as  disobedience  is  possible.  "  If  ye  live  after  the  flesh,  ye
shall  die "  (Rom.  viii.  13).  "That  which  beareth  thorns  and  briers  is  rejected,  and
is  nigh  unto  cursing ;  whose  end  is  to  be  burned  "  (Heb.  vi  8).  In  heaven  there  is
"no  more  curse"  (Eev.  xxii.  3),  but  only  because,  confirmed  in  holiness,  God's
servants  can  no  more  fall  away.

II.  As  A   SOLEMN  REMINDER  OP  THE  TENURE   ON   WHICH  THB  LAND  WAS  HELD.     We

cannot  render  perfect  obedience,  but  our  duty  is  to  aim  at  it.  1'he  condition  of
inheritance  is  that  we  are  doers  of  the  Father's  will  (Matt.  vii.  21).

III.  As  CONNECTED   WITH   A   SOLEMN   RENEWAL   OP  VOWS.      Fitting  OU  SUch  OCCasioiM

that  both  blessing  and  curse  should  be  remembered. — J.  0.

Vers.  1—7. — Ocular  demonstrations  of  OocFs  nearness  inereate  human  respojisibiltfy.
Men  disposed  to  scepticism  often  ask  for  clearer  proof  of  the  existence  of  God.  But
they  deceive  themfelves.  If  they  used  well  such  evidence  as  they  have,  they  would
find  it  ample.  We  should  not  oveilook  the  fact  that  the  Hebrews,  under  Moses,
and  that  the  Jews  in  the  days  of  Christ,  had  clearest  demonstrations  of  God's
presence.    Yet  they  believed  not ;  they  were  conspicuous  examples  of  unbelief.

I.  External  evidences  of  religion  have  been  supplied  to  some  persons
ABUNDANTLY.  1.  The  Hebrews  had  every  possible  demonstration  of  God's  existence.
The  Most  High  deigned  to  reveal  himself  to  the  eye  and  to  the  ear,  in  forms
adapted  to  produce  complete  conviction,  and  to  overthrow  all  doubt.  The  people
were  more  than  content.  They  asked  that  such  overpowering  displays  of  the  God-
head might  be  withdrawn.  2.  They  were  convinced  of  the  regal  power  of  Jehovah.
To  resist  him  they  plainly  saw  was  an  impossibility.  Pharaoh  was  the  personation
of  worldly  power ;  yet  Pharaoh  and  his  captains  and  astrologers  and  host  had  been
completely  swept  away  by  th^  breath  of  Jehovah's  power.  The  irresistible  might
of  ."ehovah  was  as  evident  as  their  own  existence.  3.  They  saw  that  the  Omni-
potent Ood  was  the  Friend  of  men.  That  all  the  resources  of  Jehovah  were  employed
on  behalf  of  his  friends,  not  one  in  the  Hebrew  camp  could  question.  God  had
used  every  plan  to  persuade  Pharaoh  to  yield  compliance,  and  it  was  only  after
long  waiting  and  repeated  warning  that  vengeance  was  decreed.  4.  They  had
plainest  proof  of  the  judicivd  faithfulness  of  God.  For  they  had  themselves  suffered
his  chastisements.  Resistance  of  Divine  authority  had  been  followed  by  judgment
among  the  Hebrews,  as  among  the  Egyptians.  Favouritism,  exceptional  treatment,
escape  from  magisterial  detection, — these  things  were  out  of  question.  The  inviolable
rectitude  of  God's  administration  was  clear  as  noon-day.

II.  External  evidences  serve  as  a  measure  op  besponbibility,  1.  They
satiify  all  the  requirements  of  intellect.  Eesponsibility  depends  on  two  things,  viz.
^1)  sufficient  information ;  (2)  ability  to  obey.  If  between  opposing  probabilities
there  is  the  smallest  preponderance  in  favour  of  belief  in  Gud,  such  balance  of  pro-
bability must  determine  our  conduct.  Hereafter,  hesitation  is  criminal.  Every
piece  of  additional  evidence  is  additional  responsibility.  It  relieves  us,  firom  the
weakness  of  recurring  doubt.  God  makes  due  allowance  for  deficient  knowledge.
"  The  times  of  human  ignorance  God  winked  at,"  i.e.  overlooked.  2.  External
demonstration  does  n^ot  ensure  spiritual  impression.  The  diligent  inquirer  will  find
a  thousand  evidences  of  duty  where  an  indolent  man  will  see  none.  So  where  within
a  man  feeling  is  susceptible,  a  tithe  of  existing  knnwlerlge  will  suffice  to  produce  glad
obedieuce.    It  is  iocumbent  on  meo  to  weigh  well  all  the  evidence  of  religion  they


CH.  XI.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMY,  20:

possess,  and  to  respond,  in  feeling  and  affection  and  active  effort,  to  every  claim  whicli
conscience  recognizes.  3.  It  is  a  duty  to  ascertain  our  personal  nspunsibility.
We  may  find  benefit  in  comparing  our  privileged  positiun  with  tlie  position  of  others.
If,  with  the  measure  of  knowledge  we  possess,  we  are  still  rubjllious,  what  \a  likely  to
be  the  conduct  of  those  less  privileged  ?  If  we,  to  wliom  special  revelation  has  been
made,  waste  the  possession,  will  not  our  own  children  pronounce  our  condemnation,
because  we  have  denied  to  them  the  help  of  our  testimony  ?

III.  External  evidences  mat  only  injure  our  souls.  1.  Misuse  of  superior
knowledge  is  a  crime.  If  God  has  condescended  to  give  us  instruction  respecting  him-
self and  his  purposes  of  mercy,  it  is  sheer  ingratitude  on  our  part  to  neglect  it.  Blindness
has  deprived  us  of  the  highest  good.  2.  Besistance  of  conscience  dues  permanent  injury
to  the  soul.  The  abuse  of  any  material  iostrument  is  an  injury.  The  conscience  is  an
instrument  of  the  soul's  life.  To  neglect  its  magisterial  voice  is  to  make  ourselves
deaf.  To  resist  its  instincts  is  to  strangle  them.  Not  to  act  according  to  our  enlight-
ened reason,  is  to  injure  reason  as  an  instrument.  If  vre  recklessly  nip  the  first  buds
of  affection,  we  necessarily  destroy  its  proper  fruit.  In  thoughtless  resistance  of  truth,
men  are  preparing  the  elements  of  a  direful  doom.  While  obedience  to  God  makes  a
man  strong,  rebellion  effeminates  all  the  nobler  powers  of  the  soul.  It  enervates,
corrupts,  destroys.  3.  Unfaithfulness  to  convictions  will  necessitate  severest  retribution.
It  is  an  ascertained  fact  that  punishment  will  be  in  proportion  to  desert.  The  servant
ignorant  of  his.  Lord's  special  requirements  is  counted  worthy  of  some  stripes;  but  he
who  knew  his  Lord's  will,  and  flagrantly  neglected  it,  is  awarded  "many  stripes."

The  mere  possibility  of  Israel's  unfaithfulness  kindled  the  earnest  anxiety  of
Moses. — ^D.

Vers.  8,  9. — Obedience  leads  to  prolonged  possession.    We  may  learn  here—

I.  That  commands  mat  caret  a  supreme  obligation,  though  spoken  bt  hah.

II.  That  obedience  is  vain,  unless  it  covers  the  whole  area  op  duty.

III.  That  complete  obedience  imparts  strength  to  the  whole  man.

IV.  That  such  strength  presses  into  the  possession  of  new  kingdoms.

V.  That  the  oath  of  God,  and  the  devout  activity  of  han,  co-operate  fob  the
highest  acquisitions. — D.

Vers.  10 — 17. —  ValuMe  possessions  reserved  for  the  righteous.  The  land  of  Palestine
has  always  been  a  coveted  prize  by  the  surround  in^^  nations.  Compared  with  the  terri-
tory south  and  east,  it  possesses  qualities  of  excellence  and  beauty.  But  its  fertility
depends  upon  the  rain  supply,  and  rain  supply  was  suspended  on.  righteous  loyalty.

I.  A  MORAL  PURPOSE  UNDERLIES  THE  GEOLOGICAL  CONFIGURATION  OF  OUB  GLOBE.     God

can  never  experience  surprise  in  the  beneficial  coincidences  of  events.  "  Known  unto
God  are  all  his  works  from  the  beginning  of  the  world."  If  heaven  has  been  undergoing
a  process  of  preparation  from  a  period  anterior  to  the  formation  of  our  globe,  we  need
feel  no  surprise  that,  in  arranging  the  strata  of  the  earth,  God  should  have  been  animated
with  motives  of  righteous  benevolence  towards  men.  And  if  the  structure  of  hill  and
valley  is  the  visible  projection  of  a  generous  moral  purpose— ra  part  of  the  plan  for  the
religious  education  of  men — we  may  conclude  that  all  the  forces  and  phenomena  of
nature  have  vital  connection  with  the  religious  development  of  our  race.  Israel  was
sent  into  Canaan  because  amongst  its  hills  and  valleys  its  history  and  fortunes  could
best  be  unfolded.

II.  God's  patebnal  care  of  men  extends  to  the  whole  of  thbib  environment.
nis  sagacious  love  of  God  condescends  to  every  minutiae  of  human  life.  .  Our  God  has
infinite  leisure  for  everything.  His  eyes  are  daily  upon  our  farms  and  shops.  He  is
our  Bulwark  and  defends  our  coasts.     He  knoweth  what  we  have  need  of.

III.  The  richest  earthly  possession  leaves  men  wholly  dependent  on  Qod.
Instead  of  our  possessions  liberating  us  from  dependence  on  God,  they  increase  our
dependence ;  for  now  we  need  his  protection  for  our  property  as  well  as  for  ourselves.
Possessions  (so  called)  are  only  channeld  through  which  true  blessing  flows,  and  our
great  business  is  to  keep  the  channel  clear.  Tue  hills  of  Canaan  obtamed  their  irriga-
tion from' the  springs  of  heaven,  and  only  obedient  faith  can  unlock- these  springs.

lY.  Filial  obedience  secures  material  fbosfebity.      buch   prosperity  is  the


206  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xi.  1— 3a


picture  and  nymbol  of  spiritual  good.  But  material  benefits  were  the  only  rewardi
which  these  Hebrews  could  appreciate.  "  Godliness  is  "  still  "  profitable  for  ail  thinge."
The  source  of  all  real  prosperity  is  in  heaven.

V,  Even  secret  sin  sets  in  motion  a  series  of  gigantic  evilb.  The  heart  ii
easily  taken  by  semblances  and  promises  of  good.  The  falsehoods  of  Satan  are  very
plausible.  A  sentinel  needs  to  be  placed  at  every  portal  of  the  soul.  Self-deception
ends  in  total  destruction.    We  do  not  sin  alone,  nor  buffer  alone. — D.

Vers.  18 — 21. — Ood^s  Word,  potent  to  dominate  the  whole  life.  The  Word  of  God,  like
light,  is  diffusive.  It  propagates  itself.  So  long  as  its  proper  field  of  activity  is  un-
occupied, it  must  spread.     It  radiates  its  magnetic  influence  on  every  side.

I.  Truth,  possessing  the  heart,  becomes  the  fount  of  all  righteous  pbinoiple.
As  the  pulverized  soil  is  the  proper  home  of  seed ;  as  the  housewife's  dough  is  the  proper
home  of  leaven  ;  so  the  heart  of  man  is  the  proper  abode  of  truth.  On  stony  tablets,
in  books,  or  in  speech,  it  is  only  in  transit  towards  its  proper  destination.  Beceived
aad  welcomed  into  the  soul,  it  begins  a  process  of  blessed  activity ;  it  vitalizes,  ennobles,
beautifies  every  part  of  human  nature.  It  is  the  seed  of  all  virtue  and  goodness — the
root  of  immortal  blessedness.

II.  Righteous  principle  dominates  all  oub  acttvb  powers.  The  hand  is  the
servant  of  the  heart.  What  the  mind  plans,  the  hand  executes.  To  bind  God's  pre-
cepts upon  OUT  hands  is  to  remind  ourselves  that  the  hand,  as  the  representative  of
active  faculty,  belongs  to  God.  Embargo  is  laid  upon  it  to  do  no  violence  to  others'
persons  or  to  others'  property.  It  must  not  strike  nor  steal,  fi>r  it  has  become  an
instrument  sacred  to  God.  Kor  must  it  be  defiled  with  idleness,  for  it  is  the  propeity
of  him  who  incessantly  works,  nor  may  the  eye  wantonly  wander  after  forbidden
objects.  The  eye  led  Eve  into  transgression.  "  Let  thine  eye  look  straight  before  thee."
"  Look  not  upon  the  wine  when  it  sparkles  in  the  cup."  The  eye  is  a  potent  instru-
ment for  evil  or  for  good.

III.  Righteous  principle,  springing  out  of  love  of  truth,  makes  us  witnesses  for
God.  As  on  the  high  priest's  forehead  there  was  inscribed  the  motto,  "  Holiness  unto
the  Lord ; "  so,  in  substance,  the  same  truth  is  written  on  every  servant  of  God.  He  is
a  consecrated  man.  His  finely  arched  brow  is  his  glory,  and  his  glory  is  devoted  to
God.  In  every  circumstance  be  desires  to  magnify  his  God.  liis  house  is  God's  house;
Vience  on  gate  and  lintel  the  precepts  of  God  are  conspicuous.  Hospitality  and  content-
ment, peace  and  kindness,  dwell  there,  for  it  is  the  home  of  God.

IV.  HiOHTEOUS  PRINCIPLE  MOULDS  POSTERITY.  What  We  are,  in  great  measure  our
children  will  be.  Moral  qualities  are  entailed.  In  their  tender  years,  their  young
nature  is  plastic  and  impressible.  If  our  hearts  are  full  of  God's  truth,  it  will  rise  and
overflow  our  lips  as  water  from  a  well.  Far  from  being  an  irksome  task  to  speak  God's
truth,  it  will  be  a  pleasurable  instinct.  All  time,  from  early  morn  till  evening  repose,  will
be  too  short  to  utter  all  God's  truth.   "  Living  epistles  "  describe  t  he  office  of  the  godly.

V.  Righteous  principle  secures  permanent  enjoyment.  Truth  in  the  heart  is
translated  into  righteousness  in  the  life,  and  righteousness  makes  heaven.  No  enjoy-
ment can  be  perfect  in  which  our  children  do  not  share ;  and  in  sharing  our  joys  with
our  children,  we  multiply  our  joys  beyond  all  arithmetical  measure.  Such  days  of
consecrated  service  will  be  "  days  of  heaven  upon  earth." — D.

Vers.  22 — 25. — He  who  best  serves  is  most  fit  tf  rule.  Gulden  links  of  life  unite  our
pious  love  with  universal  conquest.     "  All  things  become  ours,  if  we  are  Christ's."

I.  LoTAL  obedience  GENERATES  LOVE.  It  is  quite  true  that  love  is  the  mother  of
obedience  ;  it  is  also  true  that  obedience  fosters  and  intensifies  love.  The  earth  receives
he.it  from  the  sun,  but  it  gives  out  heat  likewise.  The  "Sentiment  of  love  in  the  breast
will  dwindle  and  die  unless  it  have  practical  exercise.  Diligent  and  thoughtful  service
will  bring  us  nearer  God,  make  God  more  precious  to  us,  and  bind  us  to  him  in
tenderer  bonds.  There  is  an  interlacement  of  affection.  Our  desires  send  deep  their
roots  in  God,  and  an  indissoluble  alliance  is  the  result.

II.  Union  with  God  secures  his  practical  aid.  We  are  required  "  to  cleave  to
him."  The  efifect  is  that  he  will  cleave  to  us,  and  prove  a  real  Ally,  an  almighty  Helper.
He  will  drive  out  all  our  foes  for  us,  however  great  and  mighty  they  be.    Our  foes


OT.  XI.  1—32,]  THE  BOOR  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  209

become  his  foes.    He  identifies  himself  with  our  cause ;  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  we
identify  ourselves  with  hi»,

III.  Dimns  ASSISTANCE  makes  us  ALL-cONQUEBixa.  "  No  man  shall  be  able  to  stand
before  us."  Good  men  will  be  drawn  to  us  in  sacred  friendship;  bad  men  will  be  held
•fast  in  the  mysterious  spell  of  awe.  We  shall  be  known  as  the  friends  and  allies  of
God ;  and,  iu  proportion  as  we  are  like  him,  meu  will  feel  for  us  the  dread  they  feel
for  God.

IV.  Such  valiant  btbenoth  will  introduce  us  to  universal  inhebitanck.
"  Every  place  whereon  the  soles  of  our  feet  shall  tread  shall  be  ours."  In  such  covenant
alliance  with  Qod,  we  shall  walk  through  his  universe  as  "hisjieirs."  Every  element
of  material  substance,  every  event  in  time,  every  circumstance  and  experience,  shall
conduce  to  our  profit.  The  world  shall  be  laid  under  tribute  to  our  best  life.  We  shall
extract  advantage  and  joy  from  adversity  itselt— D.

Vers.  26 — 32. — Startling  alternatives.  Our  life  is  hourly  •  choice  of  alternatives.
We  can  go  to  the  right  or  to  the  left.  Choice  is  incessantly  demanded,  and  the  issues
of  our  choice  are  momentous.

I.  The  revelation  of  Gh>D'B  will  mat  be  a  soubck  or  absolute  blessino.  Such
revelation  is  the  disclosure  of  man's  true  paradise.  It  is  the  opening  of  the  door  of
God's  own  palace;  and,  unworthy  though  we  are,  we  may  enter  and  find  rest.  To  do
God's  will  is  to  be  Christ-like — is  to  be  a  true  son,  and  to  possess  a  son's  joy.  Every
step  we  take  along  that  way  of  obedience  is  a  step  nearer  God,  from  whose  smile  we
obtain  exquisite  pleasure,  and  in  whose  society  we  find  our  heaven.

II.  We  cannot  remain  the  same,  after  obtaining  the  enowledoe  of  Gou's  will
AS  WE  were  before.  Necessity  requires  that  we  should  be  either  better  or  worse.  You
cannot  dwell  for  an  hour  in  the  society  of  a  good  man,  and  continue  in  the  former  state
of  feeling.  The  fire  that  does  not  melt,  hardens.  To  know  God's  will,  and  not  to  do
it,  inflicts  unspeakable  mischief  upon  the  souh  Besistance  of  inward  convictions
begets  callosity  of  heart,  and  blasts  the  budding  life  of  conscience.  Wanton  treason
against  God  is  incipient  hell.  It  is  the  darkening  of  the  understanding,  and  the  en-
slavement of  the  will.     No  blacker  curse  can  enwiap  a  man  than  this.

III.  Material  nature  forecasts  the  alternatives  of  blessino  ob  woe.  The
visible  universe  is  a  projection  of  God's  thought,  and  all  the  forces  of  nature  are  tlie
agents  of  God.  We  find  upon  this  globe  elements  that  minister  to  our  development  and
strength  and  joy.  We  find  also  elements  that  are  repulsive,  menacing,  and  destructive.
The  cloud-capped  peaks  may  draw  around  us  the  lightnings  of  vengeance,  or  may
melt  the  laden  cloud  and  distil  showers  of  blessing.  The  twin  mountains  of  Ebal  and
Gerizim  were  baptized  as  perpetual  preachers  of  life  and  death.  We  may  find
"  sermons  in  stones,"  lessons  in  leaves,  counsels  in  running  brooks.

IV.  Material  possessions  are  kot  absolute  blessings.  God  here  distinctly  assures
the  Hebrews  that  they  shall  enter  Canaan ;  but  whether  they  should  dwell  under  the
frowning  peaks  of  Ebal,  or  on  the  sunny  slopes  of  Gerizim,  was  suspended  on  their  loyal
obedience.  Even  to  the  possessors  of  the  promised  land,  there  stood  the  dark  possibility
of  the  curse.    Neither  money  nor  learning  makes  a  man ;  it  is  the  power  to  use  it,— D.

Vers.  1 — 9. — Divine  judgments  upon  others,  to  ensure  obedience  in  us,  Moses  wishes
to  bring  'all  possible  motive  to  bear  upon  the  people  to  secure  their  obedience  in  Canaan.
He  has  just  been  speaking  of  their  national  development  from  a  family  of  seventy  to  a
multitude  as  numerous  as  the  stars.  Such  a  blessing  should  encourage  them  to  love
the  Lord  their  God,  and  to  "  keep  his  charge,  and  his  statutes,  and  his  judgments,  and
his  commandments,  al way."  Obedience  is  thus  founded  upon  gratitude,  which  is  God's
invariable  p'an.

But  in  these  verses  before  us,  Moses  takes  what  we  may  call  the  converse  method.
He  calls  up  in  succession  the  judgments  with  which  God  visited  both  the  Egyptians
and  their  own  forefathers  on  account  of  disobedience.  He  calls  iipon  them  to  recognize
(oriBT})  the  "chastisement"  (IDIb)  with  which  God  had  signalized  the  disobedience
of  the  Egyptians  and  of  the  Israelites,    The  following  lessons  are  in  these  verses


I.  Gratitude  is  the  foundation  of  new  obedience.    This  is  God's  plan.    He

DEnTEP'ONOMT.  P


210  THE  BOOK  OF  DBUTBEONOMY.  [oh.  xi.  1—32


does  not  say,  "  Oliey,  and  I  will  save  you  for  your  obedience,"  but  "  Take  salvation  as  a
free  gift,  and  then  obey  me  as  a  matter  of  gratitude."  "If  ye  love  me,  keep  my
commandmentB."  He  secures  the  love  by  sovereign  mercy,  and  receives  obedience
as  his  return  upon  his  investment.  Obedience  is  God's  dividend  upon  his  investment
of  lovo.  «

Those  who  would  make  "good  works  "the  root  of  salvation  instead  of  the  fruit
of  salvation,  are  reversing  the  whole  procedure  of  God.

II.  Gratitude  mat  be  beinforced  by  a  study  op  the  consequences  »t
INGRATITUDE  IN  OTHERS.  For  what  God  strikes  at  is  ingratitude.  The  Egyptians
were  ungrateful.  They  should  have  recognized  God's  mercy  in  their  fertile  land,  in
their  civilization  and  advancement,  in  the  mission  of  Moses,  and  in  the  character  of  the
earlier  plagues.  God  had  visited  Egypt  with  his  love — love  which  was  undeserved,
love  which  remained  unrequited.  When  he  revealed  "his  greatness,  his  mighty  hand,
and  his  stretched  out  arm,"  it  was  against  Egypt's  ingratitude  and  consequent  dis-
obedience. The  dSneuement  at  the  Bed  Sea  was  judgment  upon  ingratitude  and
persevering  impiety.

Now,  the  study  of  all  this,  here  recommended  by  Moses,  was  well  fitted  to  foster
gratitude  in  the  hearts  of  the  Israelites.  Here  was  unrequited  love  receiving  its
vindication  in  the  series  of  disasters  which  culminated  in  the  Ked  Sea.  "  We  must  be
thankful,"  they  might  well  say,  "  that  our  ingratitude  in  past  years  has  not  been
similarly  treated,  and  for  the  coming  time  we  must  cultivate  gratitude  and  the
obedience  it  secures."

III.  Gratitude  mat  also  be  reinfokcbd  by  a  study  of  the  coNSEQuENrEg
OF  self-confidence.  For  this  seems  to  be  the  idea  of  Moses  in  bringing  forward  the
case  of  Dathan  and  Abiram.  As  descendants  of  Eeuben,  the  firstborn  of  Jacob,  they
imagined  that  they  had  the  right  to  the  primacy  in  Israel.  Hence  they  disputed  tlie
rights  of  Moses  and  of  the  priestly  line  of  Aaron.  They  insisted  on  their  right  of
•primogeniture  as  valid  in  the  government  of  God.

But  God  recognizes  no  such  personal  claims,  and  he  visited  the  presumption  with
swift  destruction.  The  study  of  this  "chastisement"  would  deliver  Israel  from  all
confidence  in  themselves.  They  would  recognize  that  personal  claims  are  not  accepted
by  a  sovereign  God ;  that  in  consequence  they  must  in  humility  approach  him,
thankful  for  spared  lives  and  continued  mercy,  and  anxious  to  testify  by  obedience
to  their  genuine  thankfulness.

IV.  Obedience  will  be  found  to  be  the  secret  op  strength  and  success  in
the  invasion.  For  while  ob  dienoe  rests  on  gratitude,  it  elicits  gratitude  from  God.
If  God  expects  us  to  be  grateful  for  his  love,  he  shows  us  the  example  in  being  grateful
for  ours.  "I  love  them  that  love  me,"  he  says  (Prov.  viii.  17)  ;  and  again,  "He  that
bath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me:  and  he  that
loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of  my  Father,  and  I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself
to  him  "  (John  xiv.  21 ;  see  also  ver.  23).  Now,  this  is  what  we  do  not  hesitate  to  call
Divine  gratitude.

Hence  Israel  found  that  obedience  rendered  thankfully  to  God  received  a  grateful
reward  from  him  in  strength  to  invade  and  conquer  the  land  of  Canaan,  and,  secondly,
in  strength  to  prolong  their  days  in  it.  A  similar  experience  is  realized  by  God's
servants  still.  Obedience  is  rewarded  graciously  and  gratefully.  Strength  is  found
equal  to  our  day,  as  we  make  our  pilgrimage  to  God.  How  important,  then,  to  obey
from  a  proper  motive,  and  at  the  same  time  to  receive  with  proper  delight  the  gracious
return  which  a  grateful  God  bestows  1 — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  10 — 17. —  The  land  of  promise.  Moses  now  proceeds  to  indicate  the  charao-
teristics  of  Canaan,  and  to  contrast  it  with  Egypt,  which  thriy  had  left.  Egypt  is  not
dependent  upon  the  rains  of  heaven  as  Canaan  is.  The  overflowing  Nile  has  only  to  be
guided  along  the  water-courses  in  the  proper  season,  and  the  feiility  of  the  Nile  valley
is  secured.  The  work  of  irrigation,  the  watering  with  the  foot  (ver.  10),  is  the  one
thing  needful  in  Egypt.  But  Canaan  depends  upon  the  continual  care  of  God,  his
eyes  being  on  it  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  year,  dispensing  "  the  first  rain
and  the  latter  rain,"  in  order  to  the  harvest.  In  EJgypt,  the  blessing  is  given  "  whole-
sale " — the  Nile  brings  down  from  the  interior  the  water  the  valley  needs.    la  Canaan,


OH.  XI.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  211

the  mountain  ridge  between  the  Nile  valley  and  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates,  there  is
constant  dependence  experienced  upon  the  bounties  of  heaven.    This  suggests —

I.  That  Canaan  was  a  splendid  land  in  which  to  teain  up  a  spibitual  people.  It
was  not  naturally  so  fertile  as  either  the  valley  of  the  Nile  or  the  valley  of  the  Euphrates.
Hence  famine  touched  it  more  quickly  than  either  Egypt  or  Assyria.  But  it  was  fittod
to  foster  dependence  upon  God  and  hope  in  him.  If  the  inhabitants  were  obedient,  then
tlie  land  might  flow  with  milk  and  honey ;  if  disobedient,  it  might  become  brown  and
bare  through  the  withholding  of  the  rain.

■  Hence  we  find,  in  Egypt  and  in  Assyria,  a  turning  of  the  people  to  the  worship  of  the
inorganic  and  the  organic  forces  of  nature  respectively.  The  valleys,  being  in  some
measure  more  independent  of  the  changing  seasons,  seem  to  have  nurtured  inde-
pendence of  God;  while  the  hills  of  Syria,  like  the  Hiiihlands  of  Scotland  and
of  Switzerland,  fostered  more  faith  in  the  Supreme.  "Those  Syrian  hills,"  says
a  living  writer,  "are  the  Spirit's  throne,  where,  lilted  above  the  deserts  of  earth,
it  sits  nearest  to  heaven,  while  spread  beneath  it  on  either  hand,  resting  on  the
desert's  level  as  their  home,  are  nature's  twin  provinces  of  matter  and  life,  rich
and  green  with  the  beauty  and  greenness  of  time,  always  imposing  and  often
victorious  in  the  region  of  sense;  but  doomed,  like  all  things  visible  and  temporal,
to  fall  before  the  power  which  shall  yet  clothe  itself  with  their  glory,  and  which  is
itself  unseen  and  eternal."

II.  The  blessings  webe  gdabantebd  on  condition  of  man  loyally  oo-opbbatinq
WITH  Goo.    Canaan  was  no  land  for  indolent  lotus-eaters ;  it  was  not—

"A  land  where  all  things  always  seem'd  the  samel "

It  was  a  land  where  man  must  co-operate  with  God  in  order  to  the  blessing — a  land
where  man  realized  the  dignity  of  being  a  "  fellow-worker  with  God."  It  would  be  a
land  of  promise  and  of  real  bUssing  on  no  other  condition.

If  man  were  asked  for  no  effori,  if  everything  grew  to  please  his  taste  and  palate
spontaneously,  if  daily  bread  dime  without  even  the  trouble  of  asking,  it  would  be  a
land  of  danger  and  of  moral  death.  Better  was  it  for  Israel  to  have  themselves  bound
by  a  wholesome  destiny  to  dependence  on  God  and  co-operation  with  him,  than  if  the
land  bore  spontaneously  all  man's  needs.

III.  We  need  look  for  no  othbb  land  of  peomise  in  this  woeld  or  the
NEXT.  The  idea  of  "independence"  is  the  great  danger  of  the  human  heart.  We
would  be  indebted  to  nobody,  not  even  God,  if  we  could.  Alas,  for  our  pride!  Now,
it  so  happens  that  we  cannot  become  independent  of  God's  bounty,  no  matter  how  hard
we  try.  And  it  is  best  so.  The  land  of  promise  is  the  land  where  we  depend  humhly
upon  God,  and  are  thus  most  independent  of  persons  and  things  around  us.'  The  land
of  promise  is  where  we  do  our  honest  share  of  public  work,  and  get  our  share  of  the
fruits  of  industry.

And  in  the  life  beyond  death  we  need  not  desire  an  inglorious  idleness,  which  is
some  folk's  notion  of  "  everlasting  rest,"  but  we  shall  have  there  the  privilege  of  serving
God  "  day  and  night  in  his  temple."  A  life  of  consecration  is  the  true  "  land  of  promise."
It  is  the  only  deep  enjoyment,  it  is  the  only  worthy  inheritance.

Let  us  then  resolve  (1)  to  trust  God  so  lovingly  as  never  to  harbour  even  in  thought
the  hope  of  independence  of  him ;  and  (2)  to  co-operate  with  him  as  life's  highest
privilege  and  honour.  We  have  entered  "  the  land  of  promise  "  when  we  have  learned
to  trust  God ;  and  we  are  enjoying  it  when  we  have  learned  to  be  "  fellow- workers  with
him."— R.  M.  E.

Vers.  18 — 25. — Family  training  an  element  of  ttiecess.  As  in  ch.  vi.  6 — 25,  Moses
again  insists  on  the  words  of  God  being  preserved  among  the  people  by  faithful  family
instruction.  The  "home  school"  is,  in  fact,  the  great  factor  in  national  success.
Education  must  give  due  prominence  to  the  family  institution,  as  the  providential  unii
of  mankind.     And  here  let  us  notice —

I.  God's  woeds  abe  to  be  received  fiest  of  all  into  the  heart.  It  is  when
individuals,  and  especially  parents,  receive  God's  testimony  into  the  heart,  as  Lydia  did

'  0£  Sir  Henry  Taylor's  'Notes  from  Life,'  Essay  il.,  'Humility  and  Independence.'


212  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xl  1—32.

(Acts  ivi.  14),  that  it  is  likely  to  bloom  out  in  a  fitting  public  profession.  It  is  "  with
the  heart  man  believeth  unto  righteousness,"  and  then  "  with  the  mouth  confession  is
made  unto  salvation  "  (Rom.  x.  10).  As  the  ark  received  the  tables  of  the  Law,  lo  th«
heart  of  man  is  to  be  the  depository  of  the  Divine  commandments.

II.  God's  words  are  to  be  kept  before  our  own  eyes  and  the  byes  of  others.
This  seems  to  be  the  idea  about  the  frontlets  between  the  eyes — in  this  way  others  had
the  words  displayed  for  their  benefit ;  whereas  the  placing  them  upon  the  hand  was  for
the  individual's  own  memorial  (cf.  Isa.  xlix.  16).  So  the  person  heartily  interested  in
Gtod's  Word  will  make  arrangements  to  remind  himself  continually  of  it,  and  also  to
keep  it  before  the  minds  of  others.  Religion  thus  becomes  not  only  a  constant  personal
experience,  but  a  constant  public  profession.

III.  God's  words  are  to  be  the  staple  of  home  tbainino.  The  children  are
to  be  taught  them  at  home,  when  the  "home  school"  is  gathered  together.  God's
words  are  also  to  be  the  staple  of  conversation  when  parents  and  children  are  enjoying
their  saanters  togetlier.  And  the  first  thought  of  the  morning  and  the  last  at  night
should  be  of  God's  commandments.  lu  this  way  the  indoctrination  of  the  rising
generation  is  to  be  secured.  Well  would  it  be  for  us  still  if  these  old  Jewish  rules
were  practised.

IV.  The  household  is  to  make  public  peofkbsion  of  religion  as  well  as  the
individual.  Some  individuals  content  themselves  with  a  personal  cimcern  in  religion,
and  are  willing  to  be  members  of  a  household  which  does  not  collectively  identify
itself  with  God.  But  the  Jew  was  to  write  God's  commandments  on  the  doorposts
and  on  the  gates  of  his  house.  The  hnusehiJd  was  thus  to  be  God's,  The  fact  is  that
households  need  conversion  just  as  individuals  do.  There  is  as  much  difference  between
a  religious  household  and  a  worldly  one  as  there  is  between  a  converted  and  an  un-
converted individual.  The  direction  given  consequently  to  the  Jews  covered  the
household  as  well  as  the  person,  and  was  thus  perfect.

V.  The  result  of  such  faithfulness  will  be  complete  success.  The  Lord
engages  to  drive  out  the  nations  from  before  them,  even  though  thty  be  greater  and
mightier  than  Israel.  He  will  make  the  obedient  ones  resistless.  He  will  make  the
fear  of  them  to  fall  like  a  nightmare  on  their  enemies,  and  not  one  of  them  will  be  able
to  stand  before  them.

And  surely  all  this  is  but  a  type  of  the  success  which  still  waits  upon  God's  obedient
people.  Not,  of  course,  that  temporal  success  is  the  form  of  success  desiicd  or  granted
now.  Many  of  God's  people  continue  poor,  but  they  succeed  in  life  nevertheless.
When  they,  have  grace  to  show  a  contented  spirit  amid  their  limited  resources,  they
succeed  in  demonstrating  that  Ood  is  all-sufficient,  and  are  the  best  testimony  to  the
reality  of  religion  before  men.  When  the  saints  can  sing  with  Habakkuk,  "  Although
,the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom,"  etc.,  "  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  God
of  my  salvation  "  (Hab.  iii.  17,  18),  they  have  really  prospered  in  all  life's  essentials.
It  is  thus  in  various  ways  the  Lord  fulfils  his  covenant  engagements,  and  makes  all
that  his  people  do  to  prosper  (Ps.  i.  3).

Obedience  is  consequently  the  charter  of  success.  But  we  leave  to  our  loving
Father  to  determine  what  our  success  will  be.  We  do  not  insist  on  its  assuming  the
form  of  gold  and  silver,  venison  and  champagne.  The  success  of  self-conquest,  the
success  of  being  public  benefactors,  the  success  of  serving  our  generation  by  the  will  of
God  ere  we  fall  on  sleep, — this  is  better  far  than  the  success  of  invading  hosts  with.th*
laurels  dipped  in  gore.

"  Not  fruitless  is  thy  toll

If  thnu  my  cross  wouldst  bew{
I  do  but  ask  thy  willing  heart.
To  grave  my  imago  theie.

"  For  each  net  vamly  cast,

Stronger  thine  arm  will  provt}
The  trial  of  thy  patient  hope
Is  witness  of  tliy  love.


OH.  XI.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  218

"The  time,  the  place,  the  way.
Are  open  to  mine  eye ;
I  sent  tliem— not  to  gather  spoU—
To  labour  patiently." '

E.  M.  Fj.

Vers.  26 — 32. — Z^e's  solemn  alternative.  Moses  here  sums  up  his  exhortation  with
the  alternative  of  a  blessing  or  a  curse.  Obedience  'secures  the  blessing  ;  disobedience
the  curse.  He  also  directs  them  to  go  through  a  solemn  service  when  they  reach
Mounts  Gerizim  and  Ebal,  by  pronouncing  the  blessings  and  the  curses  from  these
mountains  respectively.  By  the  law  of  association,  the  very  landscape  was  to  witness
to  the  truth  of  God.     We  are  here  reminded  of  such  lessons  as  these —

I.  God's  ministers,  like  Moses,  are  constantly  to  bet  before  the  people  the
SOLEMN  alternative  OF  A  BLESSING  OR  A  CURSE.  The  gospel  is  the  offer  of  a
blessing  to  those  who  are  willing  to  trust  God  as  he  asks  them  to  do;  while,  on  the
other  hand,  it  is  of  necessity  backed  up  by  a  threatened  curse,  if  men  refuse  to  trust
him,  and  will  not  humble  themselves  before  him.  Each  one  chooses  for  himself  either
the  blessing  or  the  curse,  and  there  is  no  use  in  laying  the  blame  on  others.

II.  The  rejection  of  tee  gospel  is  after  all  a  preference  of  other  gods
TO  THE  ONLY  LIVING  AND  TRUE  GoD.  The  idolatry  which  was  the  danger  and
temptation  of  Israel  is  reproduced  in  all  who  reject  tlic  mercy  manifested  in  Christ.
Some  other  object  of  worship  has  really  been  selected ;  (he  "world,  or  wealth,  or  self,
or  power  is  expected  to  do  for  the  unbelieving  soal  what  God  alone  can.  His
attributes  are  made  over  to  these  creatures,  and  a  false  confidence  takes  the  place
which  tl}e  true  should  occupy.     Unbelief  is  really  idolatry  at  bottom.

III.  The  social  study  of  God's  promises  and  threatenings  is  most  important.
Moses,  to  impress  the  people  more,  directs  them  to  assemble  at  Gerizim  and  Ebal,  and
there,  dividing  into  two  congregations,  to  go  through  the  blessings  and  tlie  curses
publicly.  The  solemnities  of  that  occasion  vvonld  doubtless  be  greatly  sanctifieil.  In
the  very  same  way,  the  private  study  of  God's  Word  is  not  sufficient.  "  The  Lord  loveth
the  gates  of  Zion  more  than  all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob"  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  2).  The  solemn
and  leisurely  study  of  God's  Word  in  public  is  owned  more  than  any  private  study  of
the  Word  can  be.  Both  are  needful,  but  our  expectation  should  be  highest  in  connec-
tion with  the  public  preaching  of  God's  Word.  When  a  minister  takes  the  people  in
an  interesting  manner  through  the  truth  contained  in  a  paragraph,  or  even  in  a  verse,
there  is  much  more  realized  than  in  the  more  hurried  private  reading.  The  sanctions
of  social  worship  are  most'  important,  and  he  is  not  in  a  safe  way  who  despises
them.

IV.  NatubaIi  associations  may  often  be  helpful  to  the  cause  op  truth.
Scenes  of  great  historic  deeds  become  in  a  measure  sanctified.  They  are  "  holy  places  "
to  the  human  race.  Battle-fields,  birthplaces,  senates,  forums,  as  well  as  churches,
become  hallowed  to  the  historic  mind.  The  laws  of  association  secure  a  perennial
influence.     The  soul  must  be  dead  indeed  who  can  visit  such  scenes  unmoveil.

It  was  this  law  of  association  which  Moses  brought  into  play  in  connection  with
Gerizim  and  Ebal.  Never  afterwards  would  they  be  visited  by  the  descendants  of  these
Israelites  without  a  solemn  feeling,  and  a  recall  of  some  at  least  of  the  blessings  and
the  curses  uttered  there.  Without  any  sympathy,  therefore,  with  the  "consecration"
of  places  as  generally  understood,  which  may  savour  largely  of  superstition,  we  cannot
but  ailmit  that  natural  associations  should  not  be  disregarded.  Indeed,  it  is  in  this
way  the  world  is  becoming  richer  wil;h  the  years.  Places  are  becoming  every  year
associated  with  noble  deeds — Oerizims  are  being  multiplied  as  scenes  of  blessing ;  on
the  other  hand,  Ebtds  are  also  increasing,  like  beacons,  on  the  dangerous  places  of
human  experience  ;  but  both  undoubtedly  meant  by  Providence  to  influence  for  good,
and,  through  the  law  of  association,  our  race.  And  some  souls  have  "  the  place  oi
mercy  "  marked  clearly  in  their  experience,  and  can  sing —

**  Oh,  sacred  hour  I  oh,  hallowed  spot,
Where  love  Divine  first  found  me  I

'  '  The  Shadow  of  the  Bock,  and  other  Beligioug  Poems,'  p.  133.


m


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEKONOMt.


Wherever  falls  my  distant  lot,
My  heart  will  linger  round  thee.

And  when  from  eartli  I  tise  to  soar
Up  to  my  home  in  heaven,

Down  will  I  cast  my  eyes  once  mom
Where  I  was  first  forgiven." '


[ca.  xiL  1—32


RM.  B.


EXPOSITION.


ixVNOUNCEMENT  OF  PARTICULAR
LAWS.

CHAPTER  XII.— CHAPTER  XXVL

Moses,  having  in  his  first  address  cast  a
glance  at  the  events  which  had  transpired
between  Sinai  and  the  plains  of  Moab,
ttud  in  his  second  recapitulated  what  had
happened  at  Sinai,  repeated  the  Decalogue,
and  urgently  counselled  the  people  to  be
obedient  to  the  Divine  commandment,  and
steadfast  in  their  adherence  to  Jehovah  as
their  God  and  King ;  proceeds  now  to  set
forth  certain  laws  which  it  specially  be-
hoved them  to  observe.  These  are  for  the
most  part  the  same  as  those  already  re-'
corded  in  the  previous  books ;  but  a  few  are
new,  and  are  to  be  found  only  here.  No
special  order  or  plan  of  exposition  is  here
observed ;  the  speaker  uses  thatTreedom  of
discourse  which  was  fitting  in  a  popular
address.  One  t)r  two  historical  narratives
are  interpolated ;  but  the  address  as  a  whole
is  hortatory,  and  is  designed  to  direct  to
the  proper  regulation  of  the  ecclesiastical,
social,  and  domestic  life  of  the  Israelites
when  they  should  be  settled  in  Canaan.

CHAPTER  Xlt
Places  and  Monuments  op  Idolatbt  to

BE     DESTROYED  J     JeHOVAH     TO    BE     WOE-
SHIPPED   IN  THE  ONE   Place  which    he

SHALL  choose;    INSTRUCTIONS  AS  TO    THE

USB  OF  Flesh  for  Food;  and  Cautions

AGAINST  BEING     ENSNARED    INTO    POLLOW-

mo  THE  Heathen  in  tbeib  Maknbb  of

Service.

Ver.  1. — ^These  are  the  statutes  and  judg-
ments (cf.  ch.  iv,  1 ;  vi.  1).  Moses,  as  the
servant  of  God,  had  taught  Israel  statutes
and  rights,  as  God  had  commanded  him
(ch.  iv.  5);  and  now  he  recapitulates  the
principal  of  these  for  their  guidance  in  the


way  of  obedience.  These  they  were  to
observe  all  the  days  of  their  life  upon  the
land  that  was  to  be  given  them ;  the  land
was  the  Lord's,  and  there,  as  long  as  they
possessed  it,  the  Law  of  the  Lord  was  to  be
paramount.

Vers.  2,  3. — In  order  to  this,  Israel  was,
as  soon  as  the  land  was  possessed,  to  destroy
all  the  objects  and  m(  ans  of  idolatrous
worship  in  the  land.  Upon  the  high  moun-
tains, and  upon  the  hills,  and  under  every
green  tree  (cf.  Isa.  Ivii.  7;  Jer.  ii.  20;  iii.
6;  xvii.  2;  Hos.  iv.  13;  2  Kings  xvi.  4;
xvii.  10).  The  heathen  had  their  places  of
worship  on  lofty  elevations,  probably  be-
cause they  imagined  they  were  thus  nearer
to  the  obJecTt  of  their  worship;  and  they
songht  also  the  shade  of  woods  or  thick-
foliaged  trees  (Ezek.  vi.  13),  under  which
to  perform  their  rites,  as  tending  to  inspire
awe,  and  as  in  keeping  with  the  mysterious
character  of  their  rites.  These  places  of
heathen  worship  in  Canaan  the  Israelites
were  utterly  to  destroy,  along  with  the
images  of  their  deities  and  other  objects  of
idolatrous  worsi  lip.  Bum  their  groves ;  their
asherdhs,  idol-pillars  of  wood  (of.  oh.  vii.  5).

Vers.  4 — 6. — The  heathen  placed  their
altars  and  offered  their  worship  wherever
they  thought  fit,  according  to  their  notions
of  the  deity  and  his  service ;  but  Israel  was
not  to  do  so  unto  Jehovali  their  God:  he
himself  would  choose  the  places  where  he
was  to  be  worshipped,  and  there  alone
might  they  come  with  offering  and  servica
As  the  revealed  God— the  God  whose  being
and  perfections  had  been  made  known,  not
by  a  vague  revelation  of  him  in  nature
merely,  but  expressly  by  his  putting  or
recording  his  Name  historically  and  locally
among  men  (cf.  Exod.  xx.  24) — so  should
there  be  a  definite  place  chosen  and  ap-
pointed by  him  where  he  would  come  to
receive  the  worship  of  his  people,  where  he
would  record  his  Name,  and  where  he  would
be  known  for  a  Refuge  and  a  Helper  to  all
who  put  their  trust  in  him  (Ps.  xlviii.  3;
Ixxvi.  1,  etc. ;  Dan.  ix.  18).  The  Name  of
God  is  God  himself  as  revealed;  and  he
puts  his  Name  on  any  place  where  h<
specially  manifests  himself  as  present  (of


'  From  Randolph's  selections,  entitled  'Unto  the  Desired  Haven,'  p.  119l


cu.  XII.  1—32.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


215


1  Kinga  viH.  29),  and  which  is  consequently
to  be  regarded  as  his  habitution  or  dwelling-
place.  Hence  the  temple  at  .Jerusalem  was
in  later  times  known  as  the  place  of  the
Name  of  Jehovah  (Isa.  xviii.  7),  the  dwell-
ing-place of  his  glory  (Ps.  xxvi.  8).  But
he  is  the  God  of  the  whole  earth,  and  there-
fore, wherever  he  is  pleased  to  reveal  him-
self, in  whatever  place  he  makes  his  Name
to  be  known^  there  he  is  to  be  worshipped.
There  is  no  reference  in  this  passage  to  the
temple  at  Jerusalem  specially,  as  some  have
supposed;  what  is  heie  enjoined  is  only  a
practical  application  of  the  Divine  promise,
that  in  all  places  where  God  would  record
his  Name,  there  he  would  come  to  bless  his
people  (Exod.  xx.  24).  The  refeience  here,
therefore,  is  quite  general,  and  applies  to
any  place  where,  by  the  Divine  appointment,
the  tabernacle  might  be  set  up  and  the
worship  of  Jehovah  instituted.  Unto  his
habitation  shall  ye  seek.  To  seek  to  any
place  means,  primarily,  to  resort  to  it,  to
frequent  it  (cf.  2  Chron.  i.  5),  but  with  the
implied  purpose  of  inquiring  there  for  some-
thing, as  for  responses  or  oracles,  when  the
place  resorted  to  was  that  in  which  God
had  put  his  Name.

Ver.  6. — To  the  appointed  place  all  their
sacrificial  gifts  and  offerings  were  to  he
brought,  and  there  tljey  were  to  keep  their
holy  feasts.  The  gifts  are  classified  in
groups.  1.  Burnt  offerings  and  saoriflles,
the  two  principal  kinds  of  altar  oflerings,
with  which  meal  oiferings  and  drink  offer-
ings were  united  (Numb.  xv.  4,  etc.).  2.
Tithes  and  heave  offerings  (of.  I^ev.  xxvii.
30—33;  Numb,  xviii.  21—24).  The  heave
offerings  are  described  as  of  your  hand,
I  ither  because  offered  by  the  offerer's  own
liand,  or  to  indicate  such  gifts  as  were  made
off-hand  (so  to  speak),  voluntary  offerings
made  in  addition  to  the  legal  offerings  from
an  immediate  impulse  of  grateful  emotion.  3.
Vows  and  freewill  offerings,  sacrifices  which
were  offered  in  consequence  of  vows  or  of
spontaneous  impulse  (cf.  Lev.  vii.  16  ;  xxii.
21  ;  Yxiii.  38;  Numb.  xv.  3;  xxlx.  39).  4.
Firstlings  of  their  herds  and  of  their  flocks
(of.  Exod.  xiii.  2,  12,  etc. ;  Numb,  xviii.  15,
etc.).

Ver.  7.— And  there  ye  sL  .!1  eat  before  the
Lord.  The  injunction  here  and  in  ver.  17,
respecting  the  eating  by  the  offerer  of  the
firstlings  of  his  flocks  and  herds,  appears
lo  be  inconsistent  with  the  injunction  in
Numb,  xviii.  18.  There  it  seems  as  if  the
whole  of  the  flesh  was  to  be  given  to  the
priest.  "And  the  flesh  of  them  shall  be
thine  [the  priest's],  as  the  wave  breast  and
as  the  right  shoulder  are  thine."  'I'his  may
be  taken  to  mean  that  just  as  the  wave
breast  and  the  right  shoulder  are  the  per-
quisite* of  the  priests  in  the  case  of  other


offerings,  as  e.g.  the  peace  offering,  lo  in
the  case  of  the  firstling  offering  the  whole
flesh  shall  be  the  priest'i ;  and  thus  taken,
the  passage  presents  an  unquestionable
discrepancy  to  that  in  Deuteronomy.  But
probably  the  passage  is  not  to  be  so  taken.
The  particle  translated  "as"  (a)  not  un-
frequently  occurs  in  the  sense  of  "  according
to,  after  the  manner  of,"  implying  conformity
to  some  rule  or  model  (Gen.  xliv.  2 ;  Exud.
xxi.  9;  xxxix.  8;  Lev.  T.  10;  Numb.  viii.
4;  ix.  3;  xxix.  18;  Ps.  vii.  18;  Zeeh.  ii.  10
[6],  etc.).  The  passage,  therefore,  may  be
rendered  thus :  And  the  flesh  of  them  ihalt
thou  take  after  the  manner  (or  according  to
the  rule),  of  the  wave  breast,  etc.,  t.e.  not  the
whole  of  it,  but  only  these  parts.  So  the
LXX.  seem  to  have  taken  the  passage :  Kal
Ta  Kpea  eiTTai  <roi,  fcada  Kal  rh  (miQvviOv  tov
itriOefiaros*  Koui  Karck  rip  &paxiova  rhv  Se^ihv
a-oi  iarai.  Of  some  of  the  offerings  the
whole  was  received  by  the  priest,  as  in  the
cise  of  the  sin  offering  and  tiespass  offering
(Lev.  vL  25,  etc.;  vii.  1,  etc.);  while  of
others  only  certain  portions,  viz.  the  wave
breast  and  the  heave  shoulder,  were  given
to  him,  as  in  the  case  of  the  peace  offering
(Lev.  vii.  28,  etc.).  The  purport  of  the  law
in  Numb,  xviii.  18  is  that,  in  respect  of  the
firstling  offering,  the  allotment  to  the  priest
shall  be  after  the  same  manner  as  in  the
peace  offering.  There  is  thus  no  discrepancy
between  the  two  passages.  The  animal
belonged  originally  to  the  offerer;  when  he
brought  it  befoje  the  Lord  pai-t  of  it  was
consumed  on  the  altar,  part  of  it  was  as-
signed to  the  priest,  and  the  rest,  as  a
matter  of  course,  remained  with  himself.
The  law  in  Numbers,  addressed  to  the
priest,  intimates  what  he  might  claim  as  his
portion;  the  law  in  Deuteronomy,  where
the  pLOple  are  addressed,  directs  them  how
to  use  the  portion  that  remained  with  them.
It  may  be  added  that,  even  supposing  that
all  the  fiesh  was  given  to  the  priest,  yet,  as
it  had  to  be  consumed  on  the  day  in  which
the  sacrifice  was  offered,  and  as  every  clean
person  in  the  house  might  partake  of  it,  it
is  almost  certain  that  the  otl'erer  would,  as
a  matter  of  course,  share  in  the  meal,  as
was  usual  in  the  case  of  sacrificial  meals.
BEJoice  in  all  that  ye  pat  your  hand  unto ;
enjoy  whatever  your  hand  may  gain,  what-
ever you  may  earn,  all  the  good  which  the
Lord  may  give,  you  (cf,  ver.  18;  xv.  10;
xxiii.  20;  xxviJl.  8,  20).  The  phrase  is
peculiar  to  Deuteronomy;  but  comp.  Gen.
iii.  22 ;  Isa.  xi.  14.

Vers.  8 — 10. — In  the  wilderness,  while
leading  a  nomadic  life,  no  certain  place
could  be  appointed  to  them  for  the  obser-
vance of  sacred  rites;  each  man  did  in  that
matter  as  suited  his  own  convenience.  But
after  they  were  settled  in  Canaan  it  ahonid


218


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[en.  XII.  1 — 32.


no  longer  be  bo;  a  certain  order  and  fixed
locality  should  be  determined  for  their
-worship  and  service;  when  they  had  passed
over  Jordan  the  Lord  would  give  them  rest
from  all  their  enemies,  and  then  all  irrregu-
lai'ity  and  arbitrariness  in  the  matter  of
worship  must  cease,  and  all  their  gifts  and
offerings  must  be  brought  to  the  place  which
Jeliovah  their  God  should  choose.  Te  dwell
in  safety;  rather,  dwell  tecurely,  not  only
safe  from  assault,  but  without  fear  or
anxiety  (cf.  Judg.  vi.i.  11 ;  xviii.  7).

Ver.  11.— All  your  ohoioe  vows;  i.e.  all
the  vows  of  your  choice,  all  that  ye  clioose
to  make ;  the  vow  was  purely  voluntary ;
it  became  obligatory  only  after  it  was  made.

Ver.  12. — Of  their  offerings  they  'should
make  a  festive  meal  for  themselves  and
their  household ;  and  of  this  the  Levite  who
might  happen  at  the  time  to  be  resident
among  them  was  to  partake.  Bejoioe  before
the  Lord.  This  phrase  occurs  frequently  in
this  book  (ch.  xiv.  26;  xvi.  U,  11;  xxvi.
H;  xxvii.  7);  elsewhere  it  appears  only
once — Lev.  xxiii.  40,  where  it  is  used  with
reference  to  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  Moses
now  enjoins  this  festivity  to  be  observed  in
connection  with  all  the  sacrificial  meals.
The  Levite  that  is  -witliin  your  gates.  The
Levites  had  no  share  in  the  land  as  the
property  of  their  tribe ;  but  they  had  towns
allotted  to  them  among  the  different  tribes
(Numb.  XXXV.),  so  that  in  this  way  they  were
dispersed  through  the  nation.  Hence,
perhaps,  they  are  described  as  "  within  the
gates  "  of  the  rest  of  the  people.  Or,  as  the
Levites  seem  to  have  itinerated  in  the  dis-
charge of  varioni  offices  among  the  people,
the  phrase  may  designate  them  as  on  this
account  occasionally  resident  among  others
in  their  community ;  just  as  "  the  stranger
that  is  within  thy  gates  "  means  the  person
of  some  other  nation  who  for  the  time  being
was  resident  in  any  of  the  towns  of  Israel.

Vers.  13 — 16. — ^They  were  to  beware  of
offering  sacrifice  in  any  place  that  might
seem  to  them  best;  their  offerings  were  to
be  presented  only  in  that  place  which  God
should  choose.  But  this  did  not  imply
that  they  were  not  to  kill  and  eat  in  their
own  abodes  whatever  they  desired  for  food,
according  to  the  blessing  of  Jehovah  their
God.  Only  they  were  to  abstain  from
eating  of  blood  (cf.  Gen.  ix.  4;  Lev.  vii.
26) ;  that  they  were  to  pour  on  the  earth  as
if  it  were  water.  Burnt  offering;  this  is
named  initar  omnium,  as  the  principal
offering.  'Whatsoever  thy  soul  lusteth  after.
To  "lust,"  in  old  English,  means  simply  to
will,  choose,  desire;  it  is  the  same  word  as
"  list,"  or,  as  it  is  sometimes  spelt,  "  lest,"
and  does  not,  as  now,  imply  anything  evU.
As  of  the  roebuck,  and  as  of  the  hart ;  pro-
bably  the  gazelle  and  fallow  deer.  As  these


were  animals  that  could  not  be  offered  in
sacrifice,  the  distinction  between  clean  and
unclean,  on  the  pnrt  of  the  eaters,  did  not
come  into  consideration.

Vers.  17— 19.— (Of.  vers.  6,  7, 12.)  Thou
mayest  not  eat ;  literally,  thou  art  not  able
to  eat ;  i.e.  there  is  a  legal  inability  to  this.
So  the  verb  to  be  able  ^b^)  is  frequently
need  (of.  Gen.  xliii. ;  Numb.  ix.  6 ;  ch.
xvi.  5 ;  xvii.  15,  etc.).

Ver.  20.— When  the  Lord  thy  Cod  shall
enlarge  thy  border.  These  laws  were  to
continue  in  force  even  when  God  should,
according  to  his  promise  (Gen.  xv.  lH;
Exod.  xxiii.  27 — 31),  extend  the  boundaries
of  their  land.

Vers.  21— 23.— If  the  place  ...  he  too  far
from  thee ;  this  supplies  the  reason  for  the
alteration  of  the  law  in  Lev.  xvii.  3.  Only
be  sure ;  literally,  only  be  strong  ;  i.e.  be  firm
and  resolute,  steadfastly  resisting  the
temptation  to  eat  it.  The  blood  is  l£e  life
(cf.  Gen.  ix.  4;  Lev.  xi.  1;  xvii.  11).  The
word  used  is  nephesh  (,lt>si).  By  this  word
the  Hebrews  designated  the  Minimal  life-
principle  in  men  and  in  beasts;  and  as
without  this  the  body  was  a  mere  inert
mass,  the  word  came  to  be  used  for  "  life  "
generally.  Of  this  life  the  blood  was
believed  to  be  the  seat,  and  \yas  regarded  as
the  symbol,  so  that  to  shed  blood  was
tantamount  to  the  taking  away  of  life.
As  the  blood,  moreover,  was  the  life,  in  it
was  supposed  to  lie  the  propitiatory  power —
the  power,  when  shed,  of  atoning  for  sin,  as
the  giving  of  life  for  life.  The  pruhibition
of  eating  it  doubtless  bad  respect  to  this.  It
was  not  merely  to  prevent  ferocity  in  men
towards  the  lower  animals  (as  Rosenmiiller
suggests)  that  the  eating  of  blood  was
interdicted,  but  specially  because  there  was
in  this  a  sort  of  profanation,  a  putting  to  a
common  use  of  what  appertained  to  a  sacred
rite.

Vers.  26,  27.— The  holy  things;  i.e.  the
offerings  prescribed  by  the  Law ;  "  hallowed
things "  (Numb,  xviii.  8 ;  cf.  Lev.  xxi.  22).
Which  thou  hast ;  literally,  which  are  to  thee ;
i.e.  which  are  binding  on  thee.  Thy  burnt
offerings,  the  flesh  and  the  blood;  t'.e.  the
fiesh  and  the  blood  of  the  burnt  offerings
which  were  to  be  laid  upon  the  altar  (Lev.
i.  5 — 9).  The  blood  of  thy  sacrifices
(^zebachiTn)  shall  be  poured  out  upon  the
altar.  This  refers  to  the  ritual  of  the
thelamim,  or  peace  offering  (Lev.  iii.  2,  8,
13).  The  word  zebach  (nai)  is  never  used
in  the  Pentateuch  of  an  atoning  sacrifice
(Oehleri '  Theology  of  the  Old  Testament,'
ii.  2);  it  is  used  only  of  such  offerings  as
furnished  a  sacrificial  meal;  hence  it  is
added  here,  and  thou  shalt  eat  the  flesh.

Vers.  29,  30. — Here  the  speaker  reverts


OH.  XIL  1—32.]


THE  EOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.


217


to  the  admonition  with  which  he  began  this
patt  of  his  address  (ver.  2) ;  and  warns  the
people  against  having  any  intercourse  with
the  Ganaanites  in  their  idolatrous  practices.
That  thou  enquire  not  after  their  gods.  It
was  a  general  belief  among  the  heathen
that  to  ignore  or  neglect  the  deities  of  a
oonntry  was  sure  to  bring  calamity  (cf.
2  Kings  xvii.  26);  hence  the  need  of
cautioning  the  Israelites  against  inquiring
after  the  gods  of  the  Ganaanites  when  they
should  be  settled  in  their  land.

Ver.  31. — For  even  theii  sons  and  their
daughters  have  they  burnt  in  the  fire  to
their  gods.  Elsewhere  the  phrase  used  is
"  make  to  pass  through  the  fire  "  (ch.  xviii.
10),  or  simply  ''  make  to  pass  through  to
Holeoh"  (Lot.  xviii.  21;  Jei.  zzxii.  35).


This  has  led  some  to  maintain  that  the
ceremony  described  was  merely  a  februation,
a  lustration  by  fire,  and  not  an  actual  burning
alive  of  these  victims ;  but  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  both  among  the  Ammonites  and
the  Phcenicians,  and  indeed  wherever  the
worship  of  Baal  or  Molech  was  followed,  the
offering  of  children  in  sacrifice  by  burning
prevailed  (Miinter,  <  Beligion  der  Karthager,'
p.  18,  2nd  edit. ;  Selden,  '  De  Diis  Syris
Syntag,'  i.  c.  6,  pp.  93,  257,  edit.  Beyer,
Amst.,  1680).

Ver.  32. — The  admonition  in  this  verse  is
best  regarded  as  forming  an  intermediate
link  between  this  chapter  and  the  following,
"  closing  what  goes  before  and  introductory
to  what  foUow*  "  cKeU>


HOMILETICS.


Vers.  1 — 32. — Begulations  for  Divine  worship :  specific  rules  embodying  permanent
principles.  With  this  twelfth  chapter  an  entirely  new  set  of  instructions  begins.  Up
to  this  point  the  exhortations  have  been  for  the  most  part  moral :  now  they  are  positive.
Hitherto  the  precepts  have  been,  speaking  generally,  concerning  duties  which  God
commanded  because  they  were  right ;  but  from  this  point  they  concern  duties  which
became  right  becauiie  God  had  commanded  them.  Of  all  specific  directions  which  Moses
gave  to  Israel,  none  could  possibly  be  more  important  than  those  which  had  to  do  with
the  Divine  worship.  A  true,  wise,  spiritual  worship,  established  and  maintained,  would
do  very  much  to  ensure  Israel's  weal  in  every  other  respect;  while  if  corruption  was
admitted  and  tolerated  here,  its  ill  effects  would  soon  be  seen  through  the  length  and
breadth  of  their  land.  In  dealing  homiletically  with  this  chapter,  we  must  take  it  as
a  whole.  To  sever  it  into  paragraphs  would  be  to  conceal  its  unity  ;  taking  it,  however,
as  one,  we  shall  see  how  very  far  more  than  is  generally  supposed,  the  observance  of
God's  worship  among  the  Hebrews  was  based  on  everlasting  principles  both  as  to  its
matter  and  its  manner ;  and  that  while  there  was  much  ritual  in  external  forms,  yet
Judaism  was  not  ritualistic  in  any  sense  which  would  imply  the  efficacy  of  ritual  by  itself
to  bring  about  spiritual  results.  Let  us  enumerate  the  principles  which  here  are  em-
bodied in  the  directions  for  the  worship  of  God.  The  forms  in  which  the  principles  are
expressed  may  change;  the  principles  themselves,  never  1

I.  Hebhbw  worship  was  to  be  in  all  respects  a  protest  against  surrounding
IDOLATBT.  (Vers.  2,  3,  29 — 31.)  They  were  not  only  to  carjy  out  a  policy  of  destruc-
tion, in  sweeping  from  the  land  every  vestige  of  ancient  heathen  worship  (see  Homily
on  ch.  vii.  1 — 11),  but  were  to  avoid  everything  like  imitation  of  it.  Theirs  was  a
new  nationality,  a  new  deliverance,  a  new  faith,  an4  it  must  be  a  new  kind  of  worship,
corresponding  in  its  purity  to  the  holiness  of  Jehovah,  and  in  its  intelligence  to  that
knowledge  of  him  which  they  were  expected  to  cultivate  in  themselves  and  hand  down
to  others.  And  so  now,  if  there  are  corrupt  forms  of  worship,  such  as  Home's  pagan
ceremonies  baptized  with  the  Christian  name,  the  worship  of  God's  true  Church  mu.-t
needs  be  a  protest  against  it,  and  a  contention  for  "  the  simplicity  which  is  in  Chr'.»t."

II.  It  was  TO  BE  ACCORDING  TO  DiviNE  DIRECTION.  They  might  not  consult  their
own  religious  sentiments,  as  the  heathen  did,  in  choosing  e.g.  the  tops  of  the  hilU
for  worship,  because  they  thought  so  to  get  nearer  God.  Israel  must  consult  revelation,
and  follow  it.  So  with  the  Church  of  God  now.  True,  we  have  not  such  minute  rites
enjoined  as  Israel  had,  fur  we  need  them  not  now.  But  in  our  New  Testament  writings
all  needful  instructions  are  giveu  lor  those  who  would  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and
in  truth,

III.  The  Divine  bulbs  were  to  be  precisely  adhered  to.  They  mig'.'t  not  be
swerved  from,  either  by  addition  or  diminution  (ver.  32).    This  is  indeed  but  an


218  THE   BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xii.  1— 32

extension  of  principle  No.  2 ;  but  it  requires  in  our  day  to  be  noticed  separately ;  since
many  will  admit,  generally,  that  worship  must  be  according  to  Scripture,  who  never-
theless also  maintain  that  the  Church  may  direct  as  to  forms  of  worship.  But  we
cannot  forget  two  facts ;  one,  that  at  the  close  of  the  New  Testament  there  is  s  like
caution  and  prohibition  to  that  given  here;  another,  that  the  entire  course  of  Chucch
history  shows  us  that  men  know  not  where  to  stop  when  they  once  diverge  from  "  the
Book,"  and  that  departures  therefrom  little  by  little,  even  under  Church  authority,  do
ultimately  land  men  in  the  complicated  and  superstitious  ceremonial  of  the  Church  of
Rome.

IV.  There  was  to  be  (after  they  were  settled  in  Palestine)  one  place  which  God
CHOOSE  TO  PUT  HIS  Name  THESE).  And  tMs  place  where  God  would  meet  with  his .
people  is  called,  in  the  beautiful  Hebrew  phrase,  God's  rest  (ver.  5),  "  his  habitation  "
(cf.  Ps.  cxxxii.  13, 14).  Thus  would  God,  in  his  condescending  love,  launch  a  new
thought  into  the  world,  in  a  form  in  which  the  people  could  understand  it ;  viz.  that
God's  home  is  with  his  believing  worshippers.  It  was  necessary,  for  a  while,  to
associate  that  truth  with  one  special  place,  until  "  the  fulness  of  times "  should  come,
when  One  should  say — John  iv.  20 — 24;  Matt,  xviii.  20;  and  when  Christians  should
learn  that  they  are  the  home  of  God  (1  Cor.  iii.  16 ;  Eph.  ii.  22).

V.  To    THIS    place    the   TEIBES   WBKE    to    comb     and    worship    TOGETHER.      ThuS

the  unity  of  God's  redeemed  people  in  him,  would  be  continually  before  their  eyes.
Though  the  times  in  the  year  were  not  many  when  the  people  were  thus  to  meet  as
one  nation  and  commonwealth,  yet  they  were  frequent  enough  to  ensure  their  thoughts
turning  thereto,  either  by  retrospection  or  anticipation,  from  one  year's  end  to  another.
Here  is  the  germ  seed  of  the  doctrine  of  the  unity  of  God's  Church.  Many  tribes,  one
redeemed  people.  And  is  it  not  precisely  this  principle  which  is  brought  out  in  the  New
Testament,  only  in  far  grander  form  ?  Csoe  Rev.  vii. ;  Eph.  ii. ;  John  xvii. ;  Rom.  xii.).
Is  not  the  Christian  unity  a  union  of  many  tribes  and  tongues  in  one  deliverance,  and
one  Deliverer  ?

VI.  The  roRMS  op  Israel's  worship  were  to  be  supfioientlt  varied  to  rejxbct
THE  CHANGINQ  ASPECTS  AND  CIRCUMSTANCES  OP  LIFE.  These  forms  ate  Sevenfold.  In
each  case,  liowever,  an  offering  was  brought  to  God.  It  might  be  typical,  symbolic,
eucharistic,  dedicatory,  or  votive.  (For  specific  treatment  of  each  kind,  see  Kurtz,  and
Kalisoh,  in  he.)  There  were :  1.  Burnt  offering.  2.  Sacrifices.  3.  Tithes  (ch.  xxvi.
12).  4.  Heave  offerings.  "  Quae  sponte  dabatur  Deo  "  (Buxtorf).  5.  Vows  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  11).
6.  Free-will  offerings  (1  Chron.  xxix.  17 ;  ch.  ivi.  10).  7.  Firstlings  of  herds  and
flocks  (Exod.  xiii.  12 ;  Neh.  x.  35—37 ;  Prov.  iii.  9 ;  Ps.  Ixvi.  13—16).  How  varied !
There  were  sacrifices  of  atonement  and  of  consecration ;  offerings  of  consecration  and
thanksgiving.     Each  changing  scene  of  life  was  to  caU  forth  its  act  of  devotion  to  Gk)d.

VII.  It  was  TO  BE  A  FAMILY  AND  HOUSEHOLD  WORSHIP.  (Ver.  18.)  Not  the  head
of  the  house  only,  hut  the  children,  yea,  even  the  little  ones  had  their  recognized  place
in  tlie  house  of  God  (ver.  12).  And  the  slaves  tool  The  stranger  and  the  sojourner
might  also  come.  The  religion  of  the  family  was  a  keystone  of  Israel's  national  life;
and  it  will  be  a  very  serious  thing  for  any  nation,  if  family  religion  comes  to  be  slighted
or  ignored.  Never  let  us  rob  the  children  of  their  rightful  place  in  Christian  ordinances
and  in  the  house  of  God.

VIII.  It  was  to  be  a  joyful  worship.  Ver.  12,  "Ye  shall  rejoice  before  the
Lord  your  God."  The  pagan  worship  never  was  or  could  be  a  glad  one.  The  heathens
feared  their  gods,  dreaded  them,  sought  to  propitiate  them,  but  as  for  being  glad  in
them  because  of  any  loving  care  on  the  part  of  their  gods  towards  them,  they  knew
nothing  at  all  about  any  such  blessing.  But  Israel  did.  They  worshipped  Jehovah,
a  redeeming  God,  who  had  manifested  his  Name  to  them.  Hence  such  psalms  as  the
twenty-third  and  the  one  hundred  and  third,  could  be  prepared  for  their  gladsome
worship  and  song.    Much  more  may  we  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord."

IX.  Israel's  worship  was  to  be  supported  by  the  contributions  of  the  peopls,
(Ver.  19 ;  and  see  ch.  xviii.  1 — 8.)  Thus  were  the  people  at  large  from  the  first  to  be
educated  "  in  giving  to  God,"  and  in  maintaining,  at  their  own  cost,  the  worship  and
ordinances  of  God,  so  as  to  hand  them  down  intact  and  untainted  to  their  children  and
their  children's  children.  How  clearly  is  this  principle  reproduced  in  the  New  Testa-
ment !  (see  1  Cor.  ix.  9 — 14).   Though  there  is  far  less  detail,  yet  it  is  not  supposed  that


v-h.  XII.  1— 32,j  THE  BOOK  Of  DECTEROKOMY,  219

less  will  be  done,  but  rather  more ;  such  verses  as  2  Cor.  viii.  7 — 9,  how  much  they
imply  and  suppose  1  Surely  it  would  be  well  if  our  Cliurches  everywhere  recognized  the
nine  principles  of  Divine  worship  which  we  find  laid  down  by  Moses.  It  may  fairly  be
made  a  question  whether  even  the  purest  Church  is  found  recognizing  them  all ;  and
yet,  which  one  of  the  nine  is  repealed  or  even  modified  under  the  gospel  ?  Of  necessity,
.  forms  have  changed.  But  so  long  as  we  need  the  ordinances  of  Christian  worship  at
all,  so  long  must  we  assert  and  maintain  all  that  we  find  inculcated  here:  simplicity
versus  false  ceremonialism ;  exact  loyalty  to  Divine  direction  ;  recognizing  the  Church
as  "  the  rest "  of  God,  where  the  tribes  are  many,  but  the  commonwealth  one ;  letting
the  worship  reflect  life's  varied  moods ;  letting  it  be  a  joyous  family  worship,  main-
tained and  supported  by  our  contributions  and  our  prayers.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Destruction  of  mnnuments  of  idolatry.  Israel's  entrance  into  Canaan
was  the  entrance  of  true  knowledge,  of  pure  forms  of  religion,  of  cleansed  morals.  'J'he
worship  of  Jehovah  was  the  very  antithesis  of  that  of  which  these  altars,  pillars,  and
graven  images,  were  the  polluted  memorials.  "  What  did  the  grove  conceal  ?  Lust —
blood — imposture.  What  sounds  shook  the  fane ?  Alternate  screams  of  anguish  and
the  laughter  of  mad  votaries.  What  was  the  priest  ?  The  teacher  of  every  vice  of
which  his  god  was  the  patron  and  example.  What  were  the  worshippers  ?  The  victims
of  every  woe  which  superstition  and  sensuality  can  gender,  and  which  cruelty  can
cherish  "  (Isaac  Taylor).  Why  should  the  last  trace  of  these  hateful  worships  not  be
removed  from  the  land  of  God's  abode  ?  (see  on  ch.  vii.  1 — 6).   These  commands  had —

I.  A  GBOUND  IN  RELisiorrs  FEELING.  Even  the  dumb  memorials  of  iniquity  will
excite  in  pure  minds  feelings  of  horror  and  revulsion.  It  is  positive  pain  to  look  upon
them.  The  only  sentiments  which  these  monuments  of  a  dark  polytheism — suggestive
of  every  species  of  wickedness,  and  steeped  in  foulness  through  the  cruel  and  lustful
rites  once  associated  witli  them — could  awaken  in  the  minds  of  devout  worshippers  ol
Jehovah  were  those  of  inexpressible  abhorrence.  The  sooner  they  were  swept  away  the
blotter.  Healthy  moral  instincts  will  lead  us  to  hate  "  even  the  garment  spotted  by  the
flesh  "  (Jude  23).

II.  A  GEonND  IN  PKUDENCB.  It  removcd  from  Israel's  midst  what  would  obviously
have  proved  a  snare.  Prone  of  their  o«n  motion  to  idolatry,  how  certainly  would  the
people  have  been  drawn  into  it  had  idol  sanctuaries,  idol  altars,  idol  groves  stood  to
tempt  them  at  every  corner,  met  their  gaze  on  every  hill-summit.  A  wise  legislation  will
aim  at  the  removal  of  temptations.  The  business  of  legislation,  as  has  been  well  said,
is  to  make  it  as  easy  as  possible  for  the  people  to  choose  virtue,  and  as  difficult  as
possible  to  choose  vice.

III.  A  GROUND  IN  POLIOT.  The  design  of  Moses,  to  gather  the  life  and  religion  of  the
jieople  round  a  central  sanctuary,  would  plainly  have  been  frustrated  had  innumer-
able sacred  places  of  repute,  associated  with  the  old  idolatry,  been  allowed  to  remain
unshorn  of  their  honours.  On  the  same  principle,  missionaries,  in  order  to  prevent
relapses  into  idolatry,  have  often  found  it  needful  to  get  their  converts  to  collect  their
idols,  and  unitedly  to  destroy  them— burning  them,  it  may  be,  or  flinging  them  into
some  river. — J.  0.

Vers.  6 — 29. — The  central  sanctuary.  There  are  difficulties  connected  with  this  law
from  which  conclusions  have  been  drawn  adverse  to  the  Mosaic  authorship  of  Deu-
teronomy. These  arise  :  1.  Prom  the  lack  of  evidence  that  the  law  was  in  force  in  the
days  of  the  judges  and  earlier  kings.  2.  From  the  practice  of  judges,  kings,  prophets,
and  other  good  men  in  offering  sacrifices  elsewhere  than  at  the  prescribed  centre.
3.  Prom  the  mention  of  other  sanctuaries'  in  the  history  (e.^.  Josh.  xxiv.  26 ;  1  Sam.
vii.  26,.LXX.).  But :  1.'  Ver.  10  shows  that  it  was  not  contemplated  that  the  law  should
come  into  perfect  operation  till  the  land  was  settled,  and  till  a  place  for  a  fixed  centre
had  been  definitely  chosen.  In  point  of  fact,  the  unsettled  state  of  matters  lasted  till
the  reign  of  David  (2  Sam.  vii.  1).    Accordingly,  in  1  Kings  iii.  2,  it  is  not  urged  that


220  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [cu.  xii.  1— 32,

the  law  did  not  exist,  or  that  it  was  not  known,  but  the  excuse  is  advanced  for  irregu-
larities that  "  there  was  no  house  built  unto  the  Name  of  the  Lord  until  those  days  "
(cf.  1  Kings  viii.  29 ;  ix.  9 ;  2  Chron.  vi.  5,  6).  2.  While  the  law  lays  down  the
general  rule,  it  is  not  denied  that  circumstances  might  arise,  in  which  under  proper
Divine  authority,  exceptional  sacrifices  might  be  offered.  This  fully  explains  the  cases
of  Gideon  (Judg.  vi.  18,  26),  of  Manoah  (Judg.  xiii.  16),  of  David  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  18),  of.
Solomon  (1  Kings  iii.  4,  5),  of  Elijah  (1  Kings  xviii.  31).  3.  Even  while  the  taber-
nacle was  at  Shiloh,  the  ark,  for  reasons  unknown  to  us,  was  moved  from  place  to
place — a  circumstance  which  accounts  for  sacrifices  being  offered  at  the  spots  where,  for
the  time  being,  it  was  located  (Judg.  xxi.  2).  We  may  infer  the  presence  of  the  ark  in
Judg.  XX.  26  and  on  various  other  occasions.  4.  It  is  not  fair  to  plead,  as  contradictory
of  the  law,  the  falling  back  on  local  sanctuaries  in  periods  of  great  national  and
religious  disorganization,  as  when  the  land  was  possessed  by  enemies  (Judg.  vi.  1 — 7),  or
when  the  ark  was  in  captivity  (1  Sam.  vi.  1)  or  separated  from  the  tabernacle  (2  Sam.
vi.  11) ;  much  less  the  prevailing  neglect  of  this  law  in  times  of  acknowledged  back-
sliding and  declension.  In  particular,  the  period  following  the  rejection  of  Eli  and  his
sons  (1  Sam.  ii.  SO — 85)  was  one  of  unusual  complications,  during  which,  indeed,
Samuel's  own  person  would  seem  to  have  been  the  cliief  religious  centre  of  the  nation.
5.  it  may  further  be  remarked  that  the  worship  at  local  sanctuaries,  having  once  taken
root,  justified  perhaps  by  the  exigencies  of  the  time,  it  would  be  no  easy  matter  to
uproot  it  again,  and  a  modified  toleration  would  have  to  be  accorded.  Whatever
difficulties  inhere  in  the  view  of  the  early  existence  of  this  law,  it  will  be  found,  we
believe,  that  equal  or  greater  difficulties  emerge  on  any  other  reading  of  the  history.
This  law  was —

L  An  assertion  or  the  pkinciplb  that  God's  wobsiiip  must  be  associated  with
HIS  PBESENOB.  (Vers.  5 — 11.)  The  sanctuary  was  constituted  by  God  having  "  put  his
Name"  there.  Under  the  New  Testament  the  worship  of  the  Father  "in  spirit  and  in
truth"  is  liberated  from  special  sacred  places  (Johniv.  24),  but  the  principle  holds  good
that  his  being  "in  the  midst"  of  his  people  is  essential  to  worship  being  acceptable
(Matt,  xviii.  20).

II.  An  important  means  of  keeping  alive  the  sense  op  national  unitt.  The
union  of  the  tribes  was  far  from  being  close.  Tribe  feeling  was  often  stronger  than
national  feeling.  A  powerful  counteractive  to  the  local  interests,  and  to  the  jealousies,
rivalries,  and  feuds  which  tended  to  divide  the  nation,  was  found  in  the  central  sanctuary,
and  in  the  festivals  therewith  connected.  Like  the  Olympic  games  in  Greece,  the
sanctuary  festivals  formed  a  bond  of  unity  for  the  entire  people,  helped  them  to  realize
their  national  distinctness,  and  awakened  in  them  lofty  and  patriotic  aspirations.  In
the  Christian  Church,  everything  is  valuable  which  helps  to  develop  the  sense  of
catholicity.

III.  A     KEAira,  rUKTHER,    OF    INFUSINO    WAKMTH     AND    VITALmT    INTO    BELIQIOUH

SERTIOES.  In  religion,  as  in  other  matters,  we  need  to  avail  ourselves  of  social
influences.  We  need  public  as  well  as  private  worship.  The  self-wrapt  man  grows
cold.  There  is  a  time  for  outward  demonstration,  not  less  than  for  internal  meditation.
Sharing  our  gladness  with  others,  it  is  multiplied  to  ourselves  a  hundred-fold.  The
importance,  in  this  view  of  them,  of  the  sanctuary  festivals,  was  very  great.  They  were,
fioni  the  nature  of  the  case,  "  events,"  matters  to  be  looked  forward  to  with  interest,
and  long  to  be  remembered  after  they  had  taken  place.  They  involved  preparations,
and  often  long  journeys.  Everything  about  them — the  journey  in  company  with
neighbours,  the  season  of  the  year,  the  friendly  greetings,  the  exhilaration  of  the  scene
as  they  neared  the  sanctuary,  tiie  varied  and  solemn  services  at  the  sanctuary  itself —
was  fitted  in  a  singular  degree  to  exalt,  awe,  quicken,  and  impress  their  minds.  Such
influences,  even  in  gospel  times,  are  not  to  be  despised.

IV.  A  COUNTERACTIVE  TO  IDOLATRY.  It  put  Something  in  place  of  that  which  was
taken  away.  It  provided  counter-attractions.  Negation  is  not  an  effective  instrument
of  reform.  If  we  remove  with  one  hand,  we  must  give  with  the  other.  Our  methods
must  be  positive. — J.  0.

Vers.  5 — 9. — Public  worship.  A  necessity  of  our  spiritual  life.  Prompted  by  •
community  of  privileges,  interests,  feelings,  hopes,  duties,  temptations,  aspirations;
**  One  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism  "  (Eph.  iv.  3 — 7).     It  is  required  in  it—


BK.  xii.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  221

I.  That  God  be  present  with  his  peoplb.  We  meet  in  his  Name.  His  presence
is  promised  (Matt,  xviii.  20).  Without  that  presence  sought  and  obtained,  worship
is  in  vain.

XL  That  it  be  pure  and  soBiPTURAt,.  Not  "will-worship"  (Col.  ii.  23);  not
corrupted  by  the  ingrafting  upon  it  of  heathen  superstitions.  Christianity  has  often
been  thus  corrupted.  The  papal  mariolatry  and  worship  of  images,  with  the  whole-
sale importation  into  Christianity  of  lites  and  ceremonies  drawn  from  paganism,  is  a
glaring  instance.  God  forbids  any  mixture  of  the  old  Worship  with  the  new.  The
very  names  of  the  gods  of  the  Canaanites  were  to  be  destroyed  (ver.  3).  Worldliness,
not  less  than  supeistition,  may  intrude  itself  into  worship,  and  destroy  its  purity
(John  ii.  13—17;  Jas.  ii.  2,  3).

III.  That  rr  be  okdeelt.  (Ver.  8.)  Paul  pleads  for  order  in  the  Christian  Church
(1  Cor,  xi.,  xii.).

IV.  That  it  givb  expression  to  the  varied  wants  of  the  religious  nature,
(Vers.  6, 7.)  The  prescribed  sacrifices  constituted  a  complex  medium  for  the  expression
of  the  complex  life  and  aspirations  of  the  nation.  It  is  to  be  noted  that,  save  on  days
specially  devoted  to  the  remembrance  of  sins,  a  predominatingly  joyful  tone  pervaded
the  services.  This  tone  of  joy  should  characterize  yet  moie  decidedly  the  services
of  Christians,  coming  before  the  Lord,  as  they  are  commanded  to  do,  "  to  offer  up
spiritual  sacrifices  "  (Phil.  iv.  4 ;  Col.  iii.  16 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5).

V.  That  it  be  associated  with  remembrance  of  the  poor.  (Vers.  7,  12,  18;
ch.  xvi.  11,  14.)  One  of  the  first  effects  of  Christ's  love  in  a  heart  should  be  to  open  it
up  in  sympathy  and  kindness  to  all  in  need  (Acts  ii.  45 ;  iv.  34,  35 ;  Bom.  XT.  25 ;
1  Cor.  xii.  26;  2  Cor.  viii.,  ix.).— J.  O.

Vers.  15,  16,  20 — 26. — The  Divine  regulation  of  food.  All  animals  for  food  had
formerly  to  be  killed  at  the  door  of  the  tabernacle  (Lev.  xvi.  1 — 8).  Probably  the  rule
was  not  strictly  observed  (ver.  8),  but  in  view  of  the  occupation  of  the  land,  the
prohibition  is  relaxed.     Note —

I.  OuE  rights  in  the  use  of  food  take  their  origin  from  God.  This  is  taught
in  the  account  of  creation  (Gen.  i.  29,  30),  in  the  grant  of  flesh  to  Noah  (Gen.  ix.  3,  4),
in  the  Levitical  restrictions  on  animal  food  (Lev.  xi.),  and  in  passages  lilie  the  present.

II.  Our  manner  or  the  use  of  food  ought  to  be  glorifying  to  God.  "Eating
and  drinking  "  is  to  be  to  God's  glory  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  1.  God's  gift  to  be  recognized  in
food.  A  motive  for  thankfulness.  2.  God's  blessing  to  be  sought  upon  it.  The
example  of  Christ  in  this  respect  is  noteworthy  (Matt.  xiv.  19,  etc.).  3.  Self-
restraint  is  to  be  exercised  in  the  partaking  of  it.  The  blood  was  not  to  be
eaten.^r.  0.

Ver.  19. — 77ie  Levite.  The  dues  of  the  Levites  consisted  mainly  of  the  tithes.  The
value  of  this  legal  provision  has  been  frequently  exaggerated.  The  mistake  has  lain  in
comparing  it  with  the  average  of  income  over  the  whole  nation,  instead  of  with  the
incomes  of  the  wealthier  and  middle  classes.  Comparing  it  with  these,  it  will  be  found
to  have  been  liberal,  but  not  excessive,  even  supposing  it  to  have  been  couacientiously
paid.  This,  however,  it  would  seldom  be.  No  tribunal  existed  to  enforce  payment.
All  depended  on  the  conscientiousness  of  the  individual  tithe-payer.  It  is  easy  to  see
that  an  income  of  this  sort  was  in  the  hif;liest  degree  precarious,  and  that  in  times  of
religious  declension,  the  body  of  the  Levites  would  be  reduced  to  great  straits.  These
facts  suiBciently  account  for  the  reiterated  injunctions  not  to  forsake  the  Levite,  but  to
include  him  in  every  festive  gathering.  Three  reasons  for  his  liberal  support:  1.  His
calling  deprived  him  of  the  usual  means  of  livelihood.  2.  His  office  was  one  of  service
tor  the  people.  3.  His  relation  to  the  altar  made  neglect  shown  to  him  a  dishonour
done  to  God,    Paul  applies,  in  1  Cor.  ix.  13, 14,  to  the  gospel  ministry. — J,  0.

Vers.  29 — 32. — Unworthy  inquiries.    We  have  here —

L  Baleful  superstition.  The  ground  of  these  inquiries  about  the  gods  of  the
place  was  a  lurking  belief  in  their  reality.  There  was  a  superstitious  feeling  that  the
woods,  hills,  streams,  etc.,  must  have  their  deities,  whom  it  would  be  well  to  propitiate
and  worship.    The  country  as  a  whole,  and  special  districts  of  it,  had  gods,  and,  Jehovah


222  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBEONOMY.  [oh.  in.  1—32.

notwithstanding,  the  superstitious  part  of  the  community  stood  in  dread  of  them.
Superstitions  are  hard  to  eradicate.  We  have  examples  in  the  survival  of  the  belief
in  witches,  fairies,  charms,  omens,  lucky  and  unlnclcy  days,  etc.,  among  ourselves.
Till  a  recent  period,  it  was  the  custom  in  parts  of  the  Scottish  Highlands  to  sacrifice
bulls  to  local  saints.  And  the  practice  of  burying  a  live  cock  for  the  cure  of  epilepsy
is  said  to  survive  till  the  present  hour.  Born  of  ignorance,  and  acting  as  a  check  on  all
enlightenment  and  progress,  superstition  is  the  parent  of  innumerable  evils,  besides
debasing  and  enslaving  mind  and  conscience.  Its  influence  should  be  combated  by
every  legitimate  means.

n.  Pkukibnt  cubiositt.  The  superstitious  motive  did  not  act  alone.  This  itching
desire  to  hear  about  the  gods  of  the  place,  and  how  the  nations  served  them,  was
symptomatic  of  a  prurient  disposition.  There  was,  unfortunately,  too  much  in  the  way
in  which  these  nations  had  "  served  their  gods  "  to  excite  and  interest  the  passions  of
the  dissolute.  It  is  a  dangerous  token  when  those  who  ought  to  know  better  begin  to
manifest  a  prurient  curiosity  about  what  is  evil.  It  leaHs  to  prying  into  matters  which
had  better  remain  hidden,  to  inquiries  at  persons  whose  very  society  is  dangerous,
to  the  reading  of  obscene  books,  the  visiting  of  bad  places,  the  keeping  of  immoral
company,  etc.  At  the  bottom  of  such  inquiries  there  is  invariably  a  secret  sympathy,
which  is  bound,  as  time  advances,  to  yield  fruit  in  evil  practices.

III.  Sebtile  imitation.  The  idolatry  of  the  Israelites  was  signalized  by  a  strange
want  of  originality.  They  invented  no  gods  of  their  own.  They  were  content  to  be
imitators.  The  nations  before  them  had  gods.  The  nations  around  them  had  gods.
They  wanted  to  be  like  the  rest,  and  have  gods  tgo — hence  their  inquiries.  A  curious
illustration  of  the  force  of  the  principle  of  imitation.  It  is  one  of  the  ruling  principles
in  human  nature.  Imitation  is  easier  than  invention.  The  tendency  invariably  is  to
"  follow  the  crowd."  It  matters  nothing  that  it  is  "  to  do  evil."  The  fashion  of  the  time
and  place  must  be  observed.  There  are  people  who  would  almost  rather  die  than  be
out  of  the  fashion.  Yet  what  a  weakness  is  this,  and  how  opposed  to  all  true  and
right  manhood  1     *•  Be  not  conformed  to  the  world  "  (Bom.  xii.  2). — J.  0.

Vers.  1—3. — The  invasion  a  religious  one.  The  Israelites  were  instructed  to  exter-
minate the  Canaanites  in  consequence  of  their  sins,  as  we  have  already  seen ;  but  in  this
passage  we  have  strict  injunctions  given  to  destroy  the  places  of  worship  which  the
Canaanites  had  used,  "  upon  the  high  mountains,  and  ui»n  the  hills,  and  under  every
green  tree,"  etc.  They  were,  in  fact,  to  be  iconoclasts,  and  they  were  to  leave  no  vestige
remaining  of  the  Canaanitish  worship.

L  It  was  thus  made  bvtdbnt  that  the  invasion  was  religious  in  its  chabacter.
Palestine,  as  we  have  already  seen,  was  not  a  country  of  exceptional  natwal  advan-
tages. It  was  a  good  training  school  for  a  spiritual  people.  When  the  Lord,  then,  sent
his  emancipated  people  in  to  carry  out  such  a  programme  ta  the  destruction  of  the
Canaanitish  worship,  it  was  evident  to  all  tliat  religion  lay  at  the  basis  of  the  invasion.
It  was  no  tribal  feud,  but  a  contest  for  religious  supremacy.  As  Abraham,  their
forefather,  came  to  Canaan  to  be  the  exponent  and  founder  of  a  new  religion,  so  the
descendants  are  required  to  expound  the  religion  still  more  forcibly  by  putting  down  all
traces  of  the  heathen  worship.

n.  The  MUiiTiPLioiTT  OP  Oanaanitish  places  op  worship  really  expressed
THE  polytheism  OP  THE  PEOPLE.  The  Canaanites  believed  in  the  "gods  of  the  hills,''
and  "  gods  of  the  valleys,"  and  "  gods  of  the  grove."  Hence  they  erected  altars  with
melancholy  frequency  over  the  land.  It  was  not  a  sense  of  the  omnipresence  of  a
Supreme  Being,  but  a  belief  in  a  multiplicity  of  gods,  which  led  to  such  multiplicity
uf  places  of  worship.  The  land  was  polluted  with  idols.  Every  green  tree  was  sup-
posed to  overshadow  a  god.  Altars,  pillars,  and  groves  sheltered  and  surrounded  graven
images.     The  desecration  was  all-prevailing.

III.  The  poweb  op  association  necessitated  the  complete  destruction  op
these  siqnb  op  idolatry.  If  pol3rtheism  expressed  itself  so  universally,  then
association  would  assert  in  the  Israelitish  mind  a  corresponding  power,  and  lead  weak
minds  to  the  idea  that  an  idol  was  surely  something  in  the  world,  when  it  secured  such
recognition.  No  wise  leader  could  allow  such  temptations  to  remain  before  his  people.
Hence  the  Israelites  are  instructed  to  spare  no  trace  of  the  old  worship.  Intolerance
may  be  a  duty  in  pure  self-defence.    It  was  a  duty  in  this  case  divinely  ordained.


OH.  XII.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  223

rV.  Cdriositt  IB  NOT  TO  BB  LEFT  ANTTHiNO  TO  FEED  UPON.  For  there  is  a
prurient  curiosity  which  only  leads  to  sin.  All  humouring  of  this  is  evil.  When  a
soul  insists  on  tasting  the  fruit  of  forbidden  trees,  as  a  matter  of  curiosity,  he  only
repeats  the  act  of  our  first  parents  in  Eden.  No  possible  good  can  come  of  it.  Much
curiosity  is  indulged  only  to  the  deterioration  of  soul  and  body.  Now,  this  would  have
been  a  danger  with  the  Israelites.  The  worship  of  the  Oanaanites  was  so  sensual  and
horrible,  that  the  less  known  about  it  the  bettejr.  Hence  the  command  to  destroy  every
vestige  of  it.  It  would  be  well  for  Christians  more  frequently  to  restrain  their
curiosity  than  they  do.  In  many  cases  it  would  be  well  if  every  vestige  of  sinful
practices  were  destroyed,  instead  of  being  preserved  to  satisfy  an  "  idle  curiosity."

V.  The  wholesale  destruction  of  the  paraphbknalia  of  idolatry  would  be

THB  BEST  OF  ALL  DEMONSTRATIONS'  OF  THE  NOTHINGNESS  OF   THE   IDOLS.      Por  if  these

gods  of  Canaan  had  any  power,  they  might  be  expected  to  vindicate  their  majesty
against  these  spoilers.  But  Israel  never  suffered  anything  from  the  destruction  of  the
idolatry.  The  only  danger  arose  from  the  destruction  not  being  as  complete  in  some
cases  as  God  intended  it  should  be.  And  it  is  important  to  have  the  impotence  of
God's  fues  made  matter  of  demonstration.    Sooner  or  later  this  is  the  case.

VI.  The  gospel  of  Jbbub  Cueist  has  also  its  intolerant,  as  well  ab  its
TOLERANT,  BIDE.  In  a  sermou  on  Matt.  xii.  30,  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against
me,"  Vinet,  the  greatest  of  the  moral  analysts,  has  expounded  L'intolerance  de  VEvangile,
just  as  in  a  companion  sermon  on  Luke'ix.  50,  "  He  that  is  not  against  us  is  for  us,"
he  expounds  La  tolerance}  It  is  well  to  realize  that  religion  is  not  an  easy-going
matter,  making  things  pleasant  all  round,  but  something  requiring  stern  and  un-
compromisino;  conduct  oftentimes.  We  may  suffer  as  much  by  an  unenlightened
latitudinarianism  as  by  an  unenlightened  attachment  to  non-essentials  in  use  and
wont.— B.  M.  E.

Vers.  4 — 14. — Centralization  in  worship.  It  is  quite  unnecessary  that  we  Bhould
hure  enter  upon  the  criticism  which  has  been  raging  upon  this  important  passage,  as
indicating  something  post-Mosaic.  The  directions  in  Exodus  do  not  necessarily  imply
a  multiplicity  of  altars  at  the  same  time,  but  rather  successive  alterations  of  locality  in
conformity  with  the  requirements  of  the  pilgrimage.  Besides,  the  genius  of  the  Jewish
worship  impUed  the  centralization  of  it  in  contrast  to  the  multiplicity  of  places  arising
out  of  polytheism.  The  idea  of  a  central  altar  is  implied  in  the  erection  of  the  taber-
nacle at  Sinai,  and  all  the  legislation  which  gathers  round  it.  We  believe,  therefore,
that  Moses,  in  here  formulating  the  centralization  in  worship,  was  merely  making
plainer  what  had  already  been  implied.

L  Centralization  in  worship  seems  a  convenient  stepmnq-btone  from  the

DANGERS   of   POLYTHEISM  TO   UNIVER8AL   SPKITUAL   WORSHIP.      Abraham,  in  Setting  Up

the  new  worship  in  Canaan,  had  erected  altars  at  the  different  places  where  God  ap-
peared unto  him.  His  fine  intellect  realized  that  it  was  the  One  God  he  worshipped
at  the  different  places.  His  descendants  also,  in  their  pilgrimage  to  Palestine,  realized
that  it  was  the  One  God  who  called  upon  them  out  of  the  cloudy  pillar  to  halt  from
time  to  time,  and  to  erect  his  altar,  and  whom  they  there  worshipped ;  and  they  would
also  feel  that  this  direction  about  a  single  central  altar  was  but  the  necessary  corollary
to  the  entire  legislation.  The  ideal  of  worship,  to  which  the  Old  Testament  dispensa-
tion pointed,  was,  "  when  the  tme  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and
in  truth ;  for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship  him  "  (John  iv.  23) ;  meanwhile  it
was  most  important  to  have  the  Divine  unity  publicly  recognized  and  expressed  by  a
central  altar.  At  this  they  were  to  aim  when  settled  beyond  the  Jordan.
.  II.  The  central  altar  is  to  gather  round  rr  joyful  worshippers.  (Vers.  6^
7.)  Burnt  offering,  sacrifice,  heave  offering,  etc.,  were  to  reach  their  climax  in  the
eating  before  the  Lord  the  peace  offering,  and  in  the  joy  which  springs  from  fellowship.
This  is  the  purpose  of  all  worship.  M  joy  bo  not  reached,  then  the  worshippers  are
living  below  their  privileges.

in.  Allowance  k  made  fob  the  exigencies  of  the  march  and  of  war.
MeaoB  of  grace  have  to  be  extemporized  often  in  times  of  battle  and  marches,  and  men

>  •piBcouTS  BUT  Quelques  gujets  Beligieox,'  pp.  211 — 237.


224  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xn.  1—32

must  do  what  is  right  in  their  own  eyes,  in  a  way  that  would  not  be  lawful  in  times
of  settled  avocations  and  of  peace.  Moses  is  instructed,  therefore,  to  remind  them  ol
the  freedom  they  necessarily  practise  in  the  unsettled  condition,  which  must  be
relinquished  when  they  settle  down  beyond  the  Jordan  (vers.  8,  9).

IV.  God  reserves  the  right  op  choosino  the  central  place  or  worship.
(Vers.  10 — 14.)  This  prevents  all  licence  in  such  an  important  matter.  It  is  not
what  they  think  advisable,  but  what  God  directs,  that  they  are  in  the  locality  of
worship  to  follow.  This  reservation  is  surely  most  significant.  It  indicates  that  in
worship,  which  is  the  payment  of  due  homa'j;e  unto  God,  his  will  abd  wisdom  are  to
be  regarded  as  supreme.  The  right  God  holds  in  hia  hand  of  indicating  whether  he  is
to  be  worshipped  in  one  place  or  everywhere.

V.  God  revealed  the  central  place  m  due  season.  A  good  deal  of  the
current  criticism  seems  to  overlook  the  distinction  between  the  principle  of  centraliza»
tion  in  worship  and  the  place  where  it  was  to  be  observed.  The  principle  was  stated
long  before  the  place  was  indicated.  It  was  centuries  before  Jerusalem  became  the
recognized  centre  of  the  Jewish  religion.  Had  the  name  been  indicated  earlier,  it  would
have  prevented  the  natural  development  of  the  ritual  in  Canaan.  It  is  not  necessary
to  suppose  that  Moses  had  any  definite  idea  of  the  central  place  when  he  uttered  on  the
banks  of  the  Jordan  the  will  of  God.  God  can  express  his  will  through  historical
developments,  just  as  he  can  through  natural  developments.  "The  nature  of  things"
may  he  justly  regarded  as  the  expression  of  tHe  Divine  mind ;  and  so  may  a  historical
procession.

Meanwhile,  it  is  well  for  us  to  rejoice  in  the  freedom  and  universality  of  spiritual
worship  to  which  we  have  come.  Now  the  true  worshippers,  emancipated  from  the
cumbrous  ritual  through  its  fulfilment  in  Christ,  can  "worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and
in  truth  "  in  every  place. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  15 — 19.— Private  toorship  not  the  substitute  for  ptiblie.  While  the  central
altar  was  ordained  for  the  reception  of  the  sacrifices  and  the  place  for  the  love-feasts  of
God's  people,  they  were  also  allowed  to  slay  and  eat  flesh  meat  at  home.  It  must,
of  course,  consist  of  the  flesh  of  clean  animals,  and  the  blood  must  be  carefully  fioured
out  unto  the  Lord ;  but,  after  these  precautions,  it  was  perfectly  possible  for  the  Jew  to
live  luxuriously  at  home.  In  these  circumstances  he  might  say  that  the  flesh  killed
carefully  at  home  tasted  as  sweet  as  any  peace  offering  enjoyed  at  the  tabernacle,  and
that  he  would  not  trouble  himself  about  the  journey  to  the  central  altar.  Such  a  con-
clusion the  Lord  expressly  forbids.  How,  in  such  circumstances,  will  the  Levites  be
sustained  ?  Such  private  luxury  must  not  be  substituted  for  the  public  peace  offering
and  the  Levitical  support  connected  with  the  ritual.

I.  There  ib  a  great  temptation  with  lukewarm  people  to  make  pritatb
WORSHIP  DO  DUTT  FOR  PUBLIC.  It  is  insinuated  that  the  Bible  can  be  as  well  studied,
and  prayer  as  faithfully  observed,  and  praise  as  joyfully  rendered,  amid  the  sanctities  o(
home  as  in  any  congregation.  But  the  fact  is  that  the  private  worship  is  a  sorry  sub-
stitute for  the  public.  Not  to  speak  of  the  promise, "  The  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion
better  than  all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob,"  there  is  in  the  public  conaregation  a  power  of
sympathj',  solemnity,  and  attention  which  is  missed  elsewhere.  The  private  services,
when  separated  from  the  public,  fail  to  reach  the  professed  ideal,  and  religious  feebleness
is  the  usual  result,

II.  Private  celebrations  of  public  solemnities  are  most  properly  forbiddeii.
The  Jew  might  have  excused  himself  from  journeying  to  the  central  altar  by  resolving
on  the  solemnities  at  home.  "  I  can  share  the  tithes,  and  firstlings,  and  vows,  and  free-
will offerings,  and  heave  offerings  with  my  neighbours,  and  not  bother  taking  them  to
the  tabernacle."  And  so  men  can  still  abstain  from  membership  in  Church  organiza-
tions under  the  plea  of  private  baptisms  and  private  "  tables ; "  but  all  this  presumption
is  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord.

III.  It  denies  to  the  public  ministers  of  God  their  due  rights.  For  Levitical
support,  so  carefully  guarded  in  the  commandment  here,  is  surely  equivalent  to  "  minis-
terial support "  still.  The  ministry  of  the  "Word  means  an  order  of  men  set  apart  from
the  secularities  of  life  to  give  themselves  unto  prayer  and  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word
(Acts  vi.  4).    If  it  is  highly  expedient,  as  well  as  divinely  ordained,  that  such  an  order


CH.  xn.  1— 33.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  226


■hould  exist,  then  it  is  a  serious  responsibility  on  the  part  of  any  private  person  to
refuse  to  aclmowledge  this  Divine  ordinance  and  its  attendant  rights.  The  pitifulness
of  the  excuse,  moreover,  in  refusing  ministerial  support  because  of  private  scruples,  must
strike  the  most  superficial  judge.

IV.   ThB   liOBD   LEAVES  THE   LeVITB   A8   A   OHAROE   UPON  THE   QENEBOSITT  OF  THE

PEOPLE.  The  Levite  was  to  be  as  a  guest  within  ihe  gates  of  the  Jew  (ver.  18).  All
the  rights  of  hospitality,  so  to  speak,  were  to  be  his.  Moreover,  it  was  to  be  an
unending  charge.  "  Take  heed  to  thyself  that  thou  forsake  not  the  Levite  as  long  as
thou  livest  upon  the  earth."  Thus,  an  order  of  men  are  left  upon  the  generosity  of  the
people,  to  have  their  share  as  long  as  the  world  lasts.  Ho  is  it  with  the  Christian
ministry.  Public  services,  the  public  organizations  of  the  Church,  are  all  to  be  con-
tinued till  the  end  of  time,  and  hence  the  ministry  will  continue.  Nor  will  its  support
severely  tax  the  loyal  Christian  people.

We  see  how  intimately  the  interests  of  God's  servants  are  bound  up  with  proper
views  about  private  and  public  worship.  If  these  are  judiciously  disseminateil,  there  is
no  fear  of  the  Lord's  servants  being  neglected.  God's  rights  in  the  ordering  of  his
worship  must  be  first  vindicated  and  recognized,  and  then  his  servants'  rights  will
foUow.-R.  M.  B.

Vers.  20 — 28. — TTie  Mmdity  of  blood.  The  central  altar  was  for  the  reception  of  the
blood.  And  while  the  Jews  remained  in  pilgrimage,  every  time  they  killed  an  animal
out  of  their  flocks  or  herds  for  family  use  they  carried  the  blood  to  the  tabernacle,  that
it  might  be  duly  disposed  of  by  the  priest.  In  case  of  the  roebucks  and  harts,  their
blood  was  not  sacrificial ;  it  was  therefore  ordained  that  it  should  be  poured  out  on  the
earth,  and  carefully  and  solemnly  covered  up.  When  they  were  settled  in  the  land  ot
Canaan,  they  were  too  far  from  the  central  altar  to  carry  the  blood  of  every  animal  out
of  the  herd  or  flock  which  was  slain  to  the  appointed  place.  Hence  they  were  allowed
to  deal  with  the  domestic  animals  as  with  the  products  of  the  chase  (ver.  22).  It  is  to
this  fact  of  the  sanctity  of  blood  that  we  would  now  direct  attention.

•L  The  heathen  nations  were  accustomed  to  make  deink  OFrEEiNoa  of  blood.
David  refers  to  the  fact  when  he  says,  "  Their  sorrows  shall  be  multiplied  that  hasten
after  another  god :  their  drink  offerings  of  blood  will  I  not  offer,  nor  take  up  their
names  into  my  lips  "  (Ps.  xvi.  4).  These  drink  .offerings  of  blood  arose,  doubtless,  out
of  the  bloodthirstiness  of  the  heathen  themselves.  Men  of  blood  thought  their  god
delighted  in  bloodshedding  as  they  did.  It  was  human  passion  projected  into  the
religious  domain.

II.  God  bo  directed  his  worshippebb  about  the  disposal  of  the  blood  that
they  could  not  regard  it  in  any  othbb  light  than  as  a  most  sacred  thing.  It
was  to  be  carefully  cairied  to  his  altar  and  disposed  of  by  the  officiating  priests,  or,  if
this  was  not  possible,  it  was  solemnly  poured  into  the  earth,  and  covered  carefully  from
all  profane  uses.    On  no  account  was  it  to  be  eaten :  this  would  have  profaned  it.

III.  The  reason  assigned  was  that  the  life  was  in  the  blood.  "  Life  "  is  the
gift  of  God,  the  mysterious  something  which  escapes  our  observation  in  analysis,  which
baffles  our  productive  powers,  and  which  works  such  wonders  in  the  world  of  nature.
As  God's  gift.  It  Is  to  be  holy  in  our  eyes,  and  disposed  of  as  he  sees  best.

IV.  The  vioabiousness  of  suffebino  gave  it  additional  sanctity.  For  sheil
blood  ineant  life  sacrificed  to  sustain  other  life.  Our  bodies  depend  upon  vicarious
suffering  for  their  sustenance.  Sacrifice  underlies  the  constitution  of  the  world.  It
was  meet,  then,  that  this  principle  should  be  recognized  and  sanctified  in  the  sight
of  men.

V  Blood  had  its  beligioub  function,  not  a  physical  function,  to  dischabqe  in
the  Mosaic  economy.  The  God  of  Israel  did  not  delight  in  blood,  as  the  gods  of  the
heathen  were  supposed  to  do.  He  singled  it  out  for  a  religious  use.  It  was  to  be  the
material  of  a  holy  act,  wherever  shed.  This  was  undoubtedly  to  keep  it  so  out  ot
the  sphere  of  physical  elements  that  it  could  symbolize  fully  "  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ,"  by  which  the  world  is  to  be  saved. — K.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 4. — The  doom  of  idolatry.  The  reverse  siJe  of  blessing  is  a  curse.  The
abuse  of  the  best  things  is  the  worst.   In  the  ratio  in  which  any  institution  has  cap«city

DEUTEBONOMY.  Q


226  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xil  1— Sa

to  tenefit,  has  it  capacity  to  injure.  The  sun  can  quicken  life  or  kill.  The  temple  ii
a  stepping-stone  to  heaven  or  a  snare  of  hell.

I.  Both  nature  and  art  have  been  peostitoted  to  basest  uses.  If  men  cannot
find  God  in  themselves,  they  cannot  find  him  in  material  nature.  Some  "look  through
niiture  up  to  nature's  God."  Some  look  through  nature  to  darkness,  lensoality,  and
despair.

n.  The  beautiful  must  be  bacbifiobd  to  mobai.  nzcessitibb.  Esthetics  muist
yield  to  ethics.  Our  moral  exigencies  are  paramount.  The  voice  of  taste  is  the  voice
of  a  charmer.  The  voice  of  conscience  is  the  yoice  of  a  king.  If  the  creations  of  art
are  inimical  to  the  interests  of  righteousness,  they  must  he  destroyed.  Eternal  life  i«
beyond  all  price.     Whatever  keeps  man  from  the  living  God  is  doomed.

III.  Tbite  i.ite  has  a  destructive  bide.  The  growth  of  a  plant  involves  the  death
of  the  seed.  The  life  of  the  body  is  sustained  by  manifold  death.  Eternal  life  comes
by  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  inner  life  of  piety  is  quickened  by  the  death  of
self.  Ti-ue  love  to  God  is  the  hatred  of  his  foes.  Jesus  Christ  "  came  to  destroy  the
works  of  the  devil" — D.

Vers.  5 — 28. — CJiaracteristie  signs  of  Jehovah's  worship.  All  the  religious  institutions
of  Moses  were  bvdwarks  against  the  idolatry  of  the  period,  and  were  admirably  suited
to  the  intellectual  and  moral  condition  of  the  people.  The  worship  of  the  true  God  was
characterized  by —

I.  A  SINGLE,  GoD-SELECTED  SHBINE.  As  the  heathen  had  gods  many,  they  had
plurality  of  temples,  altars,  and  shrines.  The  single,  central  temple  of  Jehovah
promoted  at  least  two  worthy  objects.  1.  It  kept  alive  in  the  people's  memory  the  unity
of  Ood.  In  that  age,  so  addicted  to  idolatry,  this  was  of  the  first  importance.  Intel-
lectual belief  in  the  one  God  would  not,  in  itself,  go  for  much ;  yet  it  would  be  the
foundation  for  reverence,  love,  and  loyalty.  2.  It  promoted  most  vitally  the  unity  of
the  nation.  In  the  absence  of  representative  institutions  and  periodic  literature,  the
common  worship  of  the  people  at  a  central  shrine  was  the  most  active  factor  in  national
unity.  On  this  largely,  as  an  instrument,  the  strength  and  safety  of  the  nation
dejiended..  In  the  absence  of  this  cementing  element,  the  tribes  would  speedily  have
become  factions — distinct  entities — lilse  the  Canaanites  who  had  preceded  them.

II.  God's  wokship  was  ohabactekized  bt  peofusb  and  various  orFEBiNos.  Evory
event  in  the  life  of  the  Hebrews  to  be  connected  with  God,  and  to  be  associated  with
religion.  Earth  was  to  be  joined  to  heaven  by  vital  arteries  of  intercommunication.
Thus  the  favour  and  benediction  of  God  would  be  enjoyed  in  every  circumstance  ol
daily  existence,  and  a  joyous  sense  of  God's  fatherhood  be  kept  alive.  The  arrangement
would  check  avarice  and  earthly-mindedness.  It  would  make  conscience  tenderly  alive
tv  sin,  and  promote  in  a  thousand  ways  practical  righteousness.

III.  God's  worship  was  a  dbliohtful  occupation.  "  Ye  shall  eat  before  the  Lord
.  .  .  and  shall  rejoice."  In  observing  the  rites  of  idolatry,  the  Canaanites  practised
wanton  self-mutilations.  They  stained  the  altars  with  their  own  blood.  They  made
their  children  to  pass  through  the  fire.  This  was  the  invention  of  the  diabolic  spirit.
But  in  God's  temple  is  the  sunshine  of  joy,  the  light  of  his  face.  For  man's  hunger  he
prepares  a  "  feast  of  fat  things,"  fat  things  "fuU  of  marrow,"  "  wines  on  the  lees  well
refined."  At  prodigious  cost  to  himself,  he  has  supplied  the  "  bread  of  life,"  and  living
water  from  deep  wells  of  salvation.  And  his  gracious  voice  greets  every  comer  thus,
"  Eat,  0  friends ;  .  .  .  yea,  drink  abundantly."

IV.  God's  worship  hallows  all  relationships  and  brightens  all  pdebuits.
In  the  temple,  men  became  conscious  of  a  Divine  presence,  and  felt  within  the  stirrings
of  a  new  life.  Religion  developed  their  belter  nature.  It  made  them  acquainted  with
jew  relationships,  and  opened  their  eyes  to  the  value  of  old  ones.  It  creaied  new  and
more  generous  emotions.  Fountains  of  kindly  feeling  were  unsealed  within  them,  and
Ewiet  waters  of  practical  kindness  flowed  out  to  the  poor  and  the  stranger.  A  new  light
beautified  all  toil,  and  they  rejoiced  in  all  they  put  their  hand  unto.  1'hose  who  had
been  the  ministrants  of  this  fresh  life  and  joy — the  Levites — were  to  have  a  special
place  in  their  sympathy  and  regard.  Sacred  ties  of  generous  affection  were  to  knit
them  in  one  brotherhood.

V.  The  wobsujp  of  God  banctifibs  the  common  meal.    The  recognition  of  God  wwj


ou.  xii  I- -32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  227

Ms  claims  allows  ug  to  enjoy  all  the  provision  of  God  with  thankfulness  and  content.
Every  meal  reminds  us  of  God,  and  leads  to  fellowship  with  him.  Each  meal  becomes
a  minor  sacrament,  &nd  all  food  is  consecrated  to  highest  use.  In  this  state  of  mind,
excess  of  every  kind  becomes  impossible,  and  the  amplest  enjoyment  is  not  incompatible
with  vigorous  piety.

VI.  The  worship  op  God  teaches  the  superior  worth  op  hitman  life.  All  the
requirements  of  the  Levitical  Law  set  forth  the  sacredness  of  life.  Highest  sanctions
surrounded  all  life.  The  lives  of  inferior  animals  were  generously  cared  for.  But  when
the  life  of  men  was  to  be  sustained,  and  sustained  in  richest  vigour,  the  lives  of  animals
were  to  be  sacrificed.  Yet  even  while  this  was  done,  the  minds  of  men  were  to  be
impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  value  of  life ;  hence  the  blood  of  victims  was  to  be  poured
upon  the  earth.  As  in  redemption,  so  in  daily  sustentation,  we  are  taught  the  costly
price  at  which  our  life  is  procured.  So  high  a  value  has  God  set  upon  njan,  that  large
sacrifices  of  herds  and  flocks  are  daily  mai'fe  for  his  behoof.

VII.  Ceremonial  laws  possesskd  an  elasticity  to  suit  men's  actual  needs.
Every  moral  law  had  an  innate  power  and  value,  which,  never  allowed  a  concession.
To  infringe  a  moral  law,  even  the  least,  became  a  personal  loss.  But  ritual  law
possessed  a  value  only  as  the  type  and  memorial  of  better  things.  Righteousuess  is  of
higher  value  than  human  convenience,  but  ritual  is  the  servant  of  expediency.  The
shewbread  was  for  the  priests ;  yet  David,  in  his  hunger,  might  eat  thereof  and  not  sin.
During  the  exigencies  of  desert  life,  circumcision  was  often  deferred,  the  Passovers  were
irregularly  observed,  and  to  a  large  extent  the  Hebrews  became  "  a  law  unto  them-
selves." "  If  the  Law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  "  be  within  us,  we  shall  discern  when  ritual
may  be  profitably  used  and  when  it  may  be  suspended.

VIII.  The  worship  of  God  was  fruitful  ih  blessino.  The  design  of  God  in  every
particular  was  solely  the  good  of  families,  that  "  it  may  be  well  with  thee,  and  with  thy
children."  We  do  well  to  write  this  with  a  diamond  pen  on  memory  and  heart,  that
God's  claims  and  man's  advantage  are  identical.  The  plan  of  human  life  is  laid  on  the
lines  of  rishteousness,  and  along  these  lines  alone  is  the  road  to  immortal  bliss.  We
cannot  add  to  or  take  from  the  commands  of  God,  without  injury  to  ourselyes  and
dishonour  to  him. — D.

Vers.  29 — 32. — The  subtle  ensnarements  of  idolatry.  A  spirit  of  vain  curiosity  is  to
be  repressed  at  its  beginning.  So  weak  is  human  nature,  and  so  subtle  is  the  working  of
sin,  that  prying  curiosity  into  evil  customs  works  practical  misuhief.  Human  life,  to
be  a  success,  must  be  a  perpetual  battle  with  moral  evil.  We  cannot  afford  to  parley
with  the  enemy  nor  give  him  a  single  advantage.     Incessant  watchfulness  is  oui


I.  Idolatry  has  great  fascinations  for  man's  sensuous  nature.  There  is  in  all
men  a  yiearning  for  visible  signs  of  God.  "  Show  us  some  sign  1 "  is  the  natural  demand
of  the  human  mind.  Even  Moses  had  passionately  asked,  "  I  beseech  thee,  show  me
thy  glory."  Satan  employs  a  thousand  wily  artifices  to  corrupt  the  spiritual  impulses
of  the  heart.  Speciously,  idolatry  asks  to  be  tolerated  as  a  symbol,  and  then  detains
our  faith  as  if  it  were  the  substantial  object.

II.  Idolatry  is  the  fruitful  parent  of  vice  and  cruelty.  We  can  never  deal
with  forms  of  idolatry  as  if  they  were  mere  intellectual  vagaries.  The  worship  of
material  images  has  always  been  associated  with  sensuality,  obscenity,  and  vice.  It
deteriorates  human  nature,  hardens  sensibility,  and  clips  the  wing  of  aspiration.  When
the  seed  has  grown  to  the  mature  tree,  human  victims  are  demanded  as  oblations.
"  The  children  were  compelled  to  pass  through  the  fire."  Atrocious  cruelty  is  the  last
effect.

IIL  Idolatby  is  hateful  in  God's  esteem.  It  is  impossible  for  us  to  err  if  we
make  the  supreme  God  our  model.  To  the  extent  that  we  know  God,  we  must
endeavour  to  assimilate  our  tastes  to  his,  to  love  what  he  loves  and  to  hate  what  he  hates.
Idolatry,  in  any  form  (whether  of  graven  image,  or  material  wealth,  or  human  friend)  is
overt  treason  against  God.  If  we  cannot  see  the  inherent  wickedness  of  idolatry,  it
should  be  enough  for  us  to  know  that  it  is  an  abomination  before  God,  "  a  smoke  in  his
eyes ;  a  stench  in  his  nostrils."

IV.  Idolatry  is  a  source  of  national  and  individual  buin.    In  that  early  perio


228


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  XUI.  1 — 18.


of  human  history,  the  spirit  of  idolatry  must  have  be^n  rampant.  It  was  the  curw  ol
the  age.  Although  the  Hebrews  had  seen  the  practical  effects  of  idolatry  in  Egypt ;
although  they  had  themselves  been  the  executors  of  God's  vengeance  against  idolatry
in  Canaan  ;  nevertheless  the  tendencies  to  idolatry  were,  humanly  speaking,  irresistible.
It  had  been  the  source  of  Pharaoh's  oveithrow.  It  had  been  the  occasion  of  a  great
slaughter  among  the  Hebrews  under  the  peaks  of  Sinai.  It  was  the  parent  of  the  vices
and  crimes  that  prevailed  among  the  Amorites.  Idolatry  is  doomed  by  an  eternal
decree,  and  if  men  persist  in  identifying  them-selves  with  it,  ihey  are  doomed  also,  L«l
us  be  well  guarded  against  so  insidious  an  evil ! — D.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  Xin.


Idolaters  and  Entioebs  to  Idolatry  to
BE  PUT  TO  Death.

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  case  supposed  here  ia
that  of  one  professing  to  have  supernatural
intelligence,  who  should,  by  giving  a  sign
or  a  wonder,  endeavour  to  draw  away  the
people  to  idolatry.  Such  a  one  was  to  be
put  to  death.

Ver.  1. — ^A  prophet  (ndbhi,  tipi);  one  who
speaks  from  God,  an  interpreter  to  men  of
what  God  reveals  or  suggests  to  him  (of.
for  the  meaning  of  the  word,  Exod.  vii.  1
with  iv.  16 ;  also  Jer.  xv.  19).  Dreamer  of
dreams.  Not  by  visions  or  immediate  sug-
gestion only,  but  also  by  means  of  dreams,
did  God  communicate  with  men  (of.  Numb,
xii.  6).  The  case  supposed  here,  then,  is
that  of  one  pretending  to  have  had  revela-
tions from  God  thrviugh  those  media  by
which  God  was  pleased  to  convey  his  will
to  men  (cf.  Hom.,  'Iliad,'  i.  62 —

"  'AA.\'  S.ye  S^  two.  /uii/TiK  ipeloniv,  ...
t)  Kci  ompmriKor,  Kol  yif  r'  Svap  tK  Atis

Sign  or  a  wonder.  A  tign  was  some  event
foretold  by  the  prophet,  and  the  occurrence
of  which  was  a  token  that  something  else
which  he  announced  would  happen  or
should  be  done  (cf.  1  Sam.  ii.  34 ;  x.  7 — 9 ;
2  Kings  xix.  29;  Isa.  vii.  11 — 14;  xxxviii.
7 ;  Mark  xiii.  4,  etc.).  A  wonder  was  a
miracle,  the  performance  of  which  gave
proof  of  a  Divine  commission  (of.  ch.  iv.
24).  These  signs,  it  is  assumed,  should
come  to  pass ;  nevertheless,  the  people  were
not  to  listen  to  the  man  who  gave  them
to  go  after  other  gods.  The  mere  fact
that  he  sought  to  persuade  them  to  fursake
the  worship  of  Jehovah  was  sufficient  to
prove  him  an  impostor ;  for  how  could  one
who  sought  to  seduce  the  people  from  God
be  sent  by  God  ?  The  sign  which  was  given
to  authenticate  such  a  message  could  only  be
me  of  tlioae  "lying  signs  and  wonders  after
th$  working  of  Satan,"  by  which  bit  emis-


saries try  to  deceive  and  mislead;  and  was
permitted  by  God  only  that  their  fidelity  to
him  might  be  test  d  and  proved.  They  had
already  received  God's  message;  they  had
his  word ;  and  no  teaching  which  contravened
that,  however  apparently  authentioaterj,
could  be  from  hiin,  or  was  to  be  accepted
by  them  (of  Jer.  xxix.  8;  Gal.  i.  8,  9;
1  John  ill.  1,  etc.).  Come  what  might,  they
were  to  walk  after  Jehovah  their  God,  and
keep  his  commandments,  and  obey  his  voice,
and  serve  him,  and  cleave  unto  him.  The
false  prophet,  as  a  public  enemy  and  a
suborner  of  treason  against  the  King  of
Israel,  was  to  be  put  to  death ;  and  so  the
evil  would  be  put  away  from  among  them.

Vers.  6 — 11. — A  second  case  supposed  is
that  of  temptation  to  apostacy  proceeding
from  some  near  relative  or  intimate  friend.
Not  only  was  this  to  be  resisted,  but  no
consideration  of  affection  or  bond  of  friend-
ship was  to  be  allowed  to  interfere  with  the
stern  sentence  which  doomed  tlie  tempter
to  death ;  on  the  C(mtrary,  th«  person
tempted  was  to  be  the  first  to  lay  hands
on  the  tempter  and  put  him  to  death.  This
was  to  be  done  by  stoning,  and  the  person
he  had  tried  to  seduce  waa  to  oast  the  first
stone.

Ver.  6 — Thy  brother,  the  son  of  thy
mother;  thy  full  brother,  allied  to  thee
by  the  closest  fraternal  tie.  The  wife  of  thy
bosom;  the  object  of  thy  tenderest  affec-
tion, whom  it  is  thine  to  protect  and  cherish
(cf  ch.  xxviii.  54,  56 ;  Micah  vii.  5).  Thy
friend,  which  is  as  thine  own  soul ;  i.e.  whom
thou  lovest  as  thyself.  The  word  translated
"  friend  "  (pn,  for  nv^..)  is  from  a  verb  which
signifies  to  delight  in,  and  conveys  primarily
the  idea  not  merely  of  a  companion,  but  ot
a  friend  in  whom  one  delights;  and  the
definition  of  true  friendship  is  the  loving
another  as  one's  self  (Aristot.,  '  Etli.  Nic.,'
ix.  5;.  As  commonly  used,  howfever,.  the
word  designates  any  one  with  whom  one
lias  any  dealing  or  intercourse ;  and  so  our
Lord  expounds  it  (^Luke  x.  29,  eto.).  Seoretly


OH.  XIII.  1 — 18.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


22&


If  the  temptation  was  in  private,  and  so
known  only  to  thyself.

Ver.  8.— Pity,  spare,  oonoeal.  The  aoeu-
mulation  of  terms  serves  to  make  the  injunc-
tion more  solemn  and  impressive.

Ver.  11. — The  penalty  publicly  inflicted,
»nd  therefore  generally  known,  would  have
a  deterrent  effect  on  the  community,  so  us
to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  such  evil.

Vers.  12 — 18. — A  third  case  supposed  is
that  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  city  beiug
seduced  by  wicked  mea  into  idolatry.  In
this  case  inquiry  was  to  be  made  as  to  the
fact;  and  if  it  was  found  to  be  so,  the
inhabitants  of  that  city  were  to  be  put  to
the  sword,  all  their  property  was  to  be
burnt,  and  the  city  itself  reduced  to  a  heap ;
so  should  the  anger  of  the  Lord  be  averted
from  Israel,  and  he  would  do  them  good.

Ver.  12. — Hear  in  one  of  thy  cities.  The
Hebrew  phrase,  "  to  hear  in  "  (:?  pOK')  has
sometimes  the  meaning  of  to  overhear,  as  in
Gen.  xxvii.  5 ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  28 ;  Job.  xv.  8 ;
sometimes  it  means  simply  to  hear,  as  in
2  Sam.  xix.  36  [35] ;  in  Job  xxvi.  14,  it  has
the  force  of  to  hear  of  or  concerning,  though
some  think  this  questionable.  This  latter
ii  iipparently  the  meaning  here :  If  thou
hear  concerning  any  of  thy  cities,  etc.
Saying,    This 'introduces  what  is  heard.

Ver.  13.— Hen,  the  children  of  Belial;  the
tout  of  worthlessness,  utterly  worthless  per-
sons. Beli  ya'al  (a  compound  of  'h?,  not,
and  by ,  to  ascend,  to  have  worth,  to  profit)
means  primarily  that  which  is  low,  hence
worthlessness,  naughtiness,  wiojkedness.  In
ch.  XV.  9,  Btilial  is  rendered  in  the  Author-
ized Version  as  an  adjective,  "  wicked,"  and
also  in  Neh.  i.  11.    in  Ps.  xviii.  1,  it  is


rendered  by  "ungodly  men."  Most  com-
monly it  is  treated  as  a  proper  name.  But
in  all  places  the  proper  meaning  of  the
word  might  be  retained.  The  Hebrews
described  an  object,  of  which  any  quality  was
predominantly  characteristic,  as  the  sou  of
that  quality.  Are  gone  out  from  among
you;  have  gone  forth  from  the  midst  of
you,  i.e.  Iiave  risen  up  among  yourselves.
Withdraw.  The  verb  here  is  the  same  as
that  rendered  by  "  tlirust,"  in  vers.  5  and
10.  It  conveys  the  idea  of  dr,<iwing  away
with  some  degree  of  foice,  not  mere  easy
seduction,  but  impulsion  by  strong  persua-
sion.

Vers.  14,  15. — After  due  inquiry,  if  it
was  found  that  such  a  thing  had  really
been  done  in  any  of  their  cities,  the  ex-
treme penalty  was  to  be  inflicted  on  th»
city  and  all  its  inhabitants — all  were  to  be
destroyed.  Smite  .  .  .  with  the  edge  of  the
sword;  liter.dly,  with  the  mouth  of  the  sword,
as  biting  and  devouring  like  a  ravenous
beast — a  phrase  for  utter  destruction.

Ver.  1 6. — All  the  spoil  thereof  every  whit,  for
the  Lord  thy  God ;  rather,  all  the  spoil  [booty]
the,reof  as  a  whole  offering  unto  Jehovah  thy
God;  it  was  to  be  wholly  devoted  to  God,
and  as  such  to  be  consumed  by  fire.  "It
was  a  destruction, and  not  properly  an  oflei-
ing.  Hence  the  autlior  selects  neither  n^ij)
nor  n^<a^^  but  hhs,  whole,  whole  offering
(ch.  xxxiii.  10;  Lev.  vi.  15  [22]),  which
word,  in  the  law  concerning  offering;,  is  no
technical  designation  of  any  particular  kind
of  offering.  The  rendering  omnino  is  un-
tenalile"  (Knobel).  The  city  was  to  be
made  a  ruin,  never  to  be  rebuilt ;  and  thus
was  to  be  treatnd  the  same  as  a  heathen,
idolatrous  city  mi^ht  be  (of.  Numb.  xxi.  3).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 18. — Tempt"tion$  to  depart  from  Ood  to  he  resisted  at  all  costs.  In  the
preceding  cliapter  we  had  directinns  with  regard  to  the  worship  of  the  true  God.  Heie
Israel  is  told  what  to  do  in  case  of  temptation  arising  to  worship  false  gods.  Tlie
cha[iter  in  its  entirety  deals  with  this  one  topic.  From  it  we  might  open  up  two  main
homilctic  themes:  (1)  the  treatment  of  error;  (2)  the  test  of  truth.  The  second,  how-
ever, we  reserve  till  we  come  to  ch.  xviii.  21.  The  first,  therefore,  only,  we  deal  with
now.  In  doing  this  we  must  remember  that  Moses  is  not  only  the  expounder  of
wligious  duty,  but  also  of  a  judicial  polity.  He  is  not  only  the  prophet,  but  the
Isgislator.  Israel's  constitution  as  a  nation  was  that  of  a  Theocratic  Church- State.  It
is  supposed,  in  this  chapter,  that  temptations  to  depart  from  God  may  come  (1)  from
a  professed  prophet  or  wonder-worker,  or  (2)  they  may  arise  from  the  nearest  relative
or  bosom  friend,  or  (3)  they  may  come  from  a  town  or  city.  In  either  case,  the  infection
is  to  be  "  stamped  out"  at  once.  Any  enticement  to  idolatry,  come  whence  it  may,  is
not  to  be  tolerated  for  a  moment.  The  wonder-worker  is  to  be  put  to  death  ;  the  friend
is  to  be  slain ;  the  city  is  to  be  destroyed.  All  this  may  seem  harsh.  Perhaps  it  ia
not  so  harsh  as  it  seems.  There  may  be  occasions  when  severity  is  the  greatest  kind-
ness, and  when  toleratce  would  be  the  greatest  unkindneas.     In  the  early  OhristiaD


230  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY-  [ch.  xm.  1—18.

Church,  the  sudden  death  of  Ananias  and  Sapphira  seemed  severe.  But  the  instan-
taneous cutting  out  of  the  canker  of  hypocrisy  was,  as  it  were,  the  surgical  operation
which  only  would  save  the  Church.  So  here.  There  are  three  principles  which  were
at  stake  in  such  cases  as  those  here  supposed.  1.  The  supremacy  of  Jehovah  was  the
key-stone  of  their  national  constitution.  Consequently,  the  attempt  to  draw  Israel
away  after  other  gods  was  treason  to  the  State,  and  must  he  dealt  with  accordingly.
3.  The  aim  of  Jehovah  in  choosing  Israel  was  to  separate  to  himself  a  people  for  his
Name.  Hence  if  they  did  not  forcibly  repress  idolatrous  worship,  the  very  reason  of
their  separate  existence  as  a  people  would  cease.  3.  Since  the  very  continuance  of
Israel  depended  on  the  continuance  of  their  raison  d'eiire,  for  them  not  to  stamp  out
idolatry  would  be  to  blot  out  themselves.  It  is  a  commonplace  saying  with  reference
to  legislation,  that  it  is  to  be  tested — not  by  the  query,  "  What  is  abstractly  the  best?"
but  by  another,  "  What  will  be  the  best  for  such  and  such  a  people?"  Now,  looking
at  all  the  circumstances  of  Israel,  it  would  be  very  hard  to  say  that  any  better,  or  even
any  other  mode  of  securing  the  desired  end  could  have  been  adopted.  Here,  as  through-
out the  legislation,  the  people  are  supposed  to  be  in  full  sympathy  with  Jehovah,  and
are  themselves  to  co-operate  in  carrying  out  his  Law  (see  Homily  on  ch.  xxvii.).  We
have  no  warrant  to  apply  the  rules  here  given  in  detail,  anywhere,  because  we  have
nowhere  existing  any  people  that,  on  the  earthly  side  of  its  life,  occupies  a  like  position
to  Israel.  Therefore  no  argument  for  a  like  extirpation  of  heresy  can  now  be  rightly
maintained,  because  no  parallel  can  now  be  shown  of  a  nation  with  like  constitution.
But  nevertheless,  as  in  the  preceding  chapter  we  had  permanent  principles  embodied
under  specific  rules,  so  it  is  in  this.

I.  We  have  tbttths  of  supreme  moment  indicated  hbee,  which  ake  capable

OP  APPLICATION  TO  THE   GO VEBNMENT '  OP  THE  ChDBCH  OP  GOD.'      It  is  nOt  pOSSiblC

to  do  more  than  briefly  indicate  the  line  of  thought  which  such  an  application  of  the
principles  here  laid  down  would  Involve.  1.  Israel's  place  in  the  world  is  now  filled  by
the  Church  of  God,  which  is  "the  commonwealth  of  Israel,"  into  which  all  enter  who
believe  through  grace.  3.  The  Church  is  set  for  the  maintenance  and  defence  in  the
world  of  the  great  truths  of  our  most  holy  faith,  and  she  is  "  earnestly  to  contend  for  the
faith  once  (for  all)  delivered  to  the  saints."  3.  This  Church  is  to  be  a  self-governing
body,  having  within  itself  all  the  powers  and  authorities  for  self-regulation  and
discipline.  The  Epistles  to  the  seven  Churches  show  this  abundantly.  4.  The  Church
is  to  be  very  jealous  in  guarding  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God.  Amid  all
changes  of  public  sentiment  and  opinion  on  minor  points,  she  is  to  hold  fast  the
cardinal  truth,  that  no  advance  of  public  thought  can  warrant  her  in  surrendering  the
one  vital  truth  on  which  her  existence  depends,  without  which  she  would  have  had  no
existence,  nor  could  show  any  reason  why  she  should  continue  to  exist.  5.  This  one
truth,  which  she  is  to  conserve  intact  age  after  age,  is  analogous  to  the  one  which  Israel
was  so  sacredly  to  guard.  Israel  was  to  keep  watch  over  the  truth — Jehovah,  he  is  the
Lord.  The  Church  has  now  to  guard  the  doctrine  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  the  Son  of
the  living  God  (see  1  Johniv.  1 — 4).  The  Church  might  as  well  cease  to  be  as  let
that  truth  go.  It  is  "  the  doctrine  which  is  according  to  godliness."  She  is  to  guard
the  doctrine  which  tends  to  godliness,  and  to  maintain  the  godliness  which  is  to  illus-
trate the  doctrine.  6.  She  has  within  herself  means  and  powers  for  the  defence  of  the
faith,  and  for  visiting  with  monition,  censure,  suspension,  or  excommunication,  those
who  deny  it  or  disgrace  it  (1  Cor.  v.;  Matt,  xviii.  17 — 30;  Titus  iii.  10,  11,  etc.).
7.  Her  weapons  are  not  carnal.  She  has  no  power  to  use  the  sword  (Matt.  xxvi.  53  ;
3  Cor.  X.  3 — 8).  8.  Nor  has  the  Church  any  power  towards  those  that  are  not  within
her  pale  (1  Cor.  v.  13,  13),  i.e.  she  has  no  power  of  judging.  She  has  to  be  a  witness
for  God  to  the  outljring  world,  and  that  she  may  be  this  she  is  to  keep  herself  pure.

II.  The  pbinciples  op  the  chaptee  have  a  constant  application  to  thje

■  '  Bishop  Wordsworth  has  a  very  long  and  elaborate  note  on  this  chapter,  which  is  well
worthy  of  perusal,  in  spite  of  the  fallacy  which — doubtless  from  oversight — ^runs  through
it.  The  author  says  that  it  was  on  the  principles  here  laid  down  that  the  Jews  condemned
our  Lord  to  death.  Surely  not.  True,  our  Lord  wrought  miracles.  But  he  never  wrougbt
them  to  conflrm  any  message  about  going  and  serving  other  gods.  The  most  perfect  loyalty
to  the  great  Invisible  Father  marked  the  "  only  begotten  Son."  This  chapter  does  not  seem
to  apply  to  him  in  any  such  way.


dfa.  ±m.  i— ISJ  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMi.  ^Sl

INDIVIDUAL  LlFB.  "Ye  shall  walk  after  the  Lord"  emhodies  New  Testament  teachinL;
as  well  as  Old.  On  the  basis  of  the  chapter  before  us,  the  following  outline  of  thought
may  well  be  filled  up.  1.  Absolute  loyalty  to  Christ  should  be  the  governing  principle
of  life.  The  Jehovah  of  the  Old  Testament  is  the  Christ  of  the  New.  He  is  the
Mediator  of  the  new  covenant.  He  is  a  Legislator  of  more  glory  than  Moses  (Heb.  ill.).
He  appeals  to  us  by  righteousness,  love,  hope,  fear.  2.  Temptations  to  desert  Christ's
standard  may  pour  in  upon  us  from  various  quarters.  The  chapter  suggests  three.
(1)  A  prophet.  There  may  arise  some  new  claimant  for  man's  homage,  or  gome
philosopher  who  thinks  to  disprove  the  claims  of  Jesus  by  showing  his  own  wondrous
intellectual  stature,  etc.  (2)  The  family.  Seductions  either  to  the  false  in  faith  or
the  corrupt  in  practice  may  come  from  those  near  and  dear  to  us.  (3)  The  city.  A
strong  current  of  public  sentiment,  adverse  to  "  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus/'  may  set  in,
and  may  threaten  to  carry  us  away.  3.  These  temptations  are  to  be  withstood  at  all
costs.  No  "sign,"  no  "wonder,"  is  ever  to  be  allowed  to  dazzle  us  for  a  moment.
Christ's  claims  are  so  convincing  to  the  conscience  and  heart,  they  are  sustained  by  such
overwhelming  evidence,  that  nothing  in  any  age  can  set  them  aside.  The  sovereignty
of  Christ  is  the  fundamental  law  of  our  life.  He  will  allow  no  rival  whatsoever.  Even
if  men  should  work  miracles  to  lead  us  away  from  Christ,  we  are  to  follow  Christ,  and
let  miracles  go  for  nought.  Even  under  the  Mosaic  Law,  miracles  were  not  a  sufficient
test  of  truth.  The  doctrine  they  were  intended  to  confirm  must  be  put  alongside
therewith,  and  if  this  doctrine  contravened  the  supreme  canon  of  moral  life,  "  Loyalty
to  Gk)d,"  it  was  to  be  set  aside.  So  now.  No  physical  wonder  can  ever  justify  us  in
ignoring  supreme  moral  law.  The  Lordship  of  Jesus  is  our  highest  moral  law.  He  is  to  us
the  embodiment  of  righteousness,  truth,  and  love;  yea,  he  is  our  incarnate  God.  4.  Though
we  may  not  visit  our  enticers  with  pains  and  penalties,  yet,  even  now,  the  most  sacred
claims  and  relationships  of  our  earthly  life  are  to  be  renounced-  if  they  come  into
collision  with  our  loyalty  to  Jesus  (see  Luke  xlv.  26 — 33).  Even  though  the  tempta-
tions should  come  from  all  quarters  at  once,  our  loyalty  to  our  Saviour  is  tc  remain
unmoved.  We  may  not  halt,  nor  waver,  nor  seek  a  feigned  neutrality  (Matt.  xii.  30).
It  will  be  a  very  far  more  serious  thing  for  us  if  we  let  ourselves  be  seduced  frum
loyalty  to  Gk)d  as  revealed  in  Christ,  than  it  would  havg  been  for  Israel  if  they  proved
fickle  under  the  legislation  of  Mosis  (Heb.  ii.  1 — 4;  x.  28 — 31).  How  earnestly  should
we  pray  that  we  may  be  kept  faithful  to  our  dear/" Lord  in  heaven!  How  lovingly
should  we  warn  others,  lest  they  swerve  from  their  fealty  to  him  (2  Pet.  iii.  17, 18 ;
Jude  17—25;  Rev.  ii.  10,  11 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  11—13)1


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 6. — FcUse  prophets.  In  viewing;  the  bearings  of  this  passage  on  the
credentials  of  revelatiun,  two  points  should  be  observed.  1.  The  case  supposed  is  one
in  which  the  prophet  contradicts  a  revelation  already  received.  2.  The  prophet  does
not  dispute  the  evidence  of  that  earlier  revelation.  On  the  contrary,  he  admits  it.  He
stands  within  the  lines  of  it.  He  professes  to  speak  under  its  authority.  Tet  he  asks
the  people  to  violate  its  fundamental  laws.  This  of  itself  was  sufficient  to  convict  him.
His  pretensions  are  disposed  of  by  the  simple  fact  that,  professing  to  speak  in  the  Name
of  Grod,  he  gives  the  people  a  message  contradictory  of  what  he  admits  God  to  have
previously  revealed.  No  sign  and  wonder  can  accredit  contradictions.  The  prophet
is  inconsistent  with  himself,  and  is  not  to  be  listened  to.  Nay,  his  message  had
been  anticipated,  and  the  thing  be  bids  the  people  do,  expressly  forbidden.  Notice,
then —

I.  External  miracles  do  NbT  of  themselves  accredit  a  bevblation  ab  raoM
GK)D.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  This  prophet  gives  a  sign  or  wonder — presumably  a  predictive
word — and  it  actually  comes  to  pass.  The  failure  of  his  sign,  according  to  ch.  xviii.
21,  22,  would  have. been  a  proof  of  falsity.  The  converse  of  this,  however,  that  he
speaks  God's  word  because  his  sign  has  not  failed,  is  not  immediately  to  be  admitted.
There  are  other  tests  to  be  applied.  In  this  case,  the  prophet'i  message  is  condemned
becauie  contradictory  of  what  he  himself  allows  to  have  been  a  true  revelation.    Thia


232  THE  BOOK  OF  DRUTEROKOMT.  [ch.  xm.  1— 18,

xaises  the  qiicsfion  of  the  value  of  miracles  as  credentials  of  revelation.  That  they
have  a  value  is  not  disputed,  but  not  as  mere  signs  and  wonders.  This  will  be  best
seen  by  contrasting  the  sign  or  wonder  given  by  this  prophet  with  the  evidence  of  the
earlier  revelation.  If  we  take  the  Scripture  account  of  the  founding  of  the  Mosaic
dispensation,  it  is  impossible  to  question  the  magnificence  and  convincingness  of  the
displays  of  Divine  power  and  holiness  therein  contained.  In  founding  liis  dispensations
(Mosaic  and  Christian),  God  has  not  only  given  evidence,  but  an  amount  and  kind
of  evidence  which  put  the  source  of  the  revelation — admitting  the  facts  to  be  as  stated —
beyond  all  cavil.  For  here,  it  is  not  merely  the  fact  of  miracle  which  is  to  be  regarded,
but  the  number,  nature,  magnitude,  variety,  spiritual  quality  of  the  supernatural
events,  in  connection  with  the  self-evidencing  divineness  of  the  revelation  itself.  The
difficulty  as  to  whether  the  miracle  proves  the  doctrine,  or  the  doctrine  the  miracle,  or
in  what  proportions  the  two  lactors  combine,  has  little  place  in  the  actual  evidences
of  revelation.  The  two  cannot  be  separated,  either  in  thought  or  in  fact.  Grant  the
authenticity  of  the  miracles  of  the  Gospels  or  of  the  Pentateuch,  and  it  will  not  be
disputed  that  they  originated  with  God,  not  with  Beelzebub.  To  this  mass  of  evidence,
overwhelming  in  its  sublimity  and  convincingness — evidence  embracing  the  wonders
of  Egypt,  the  displays  of  God's  power,  love,  and  grace  in  the  events  of  the  Exodus,  the
miracles  of  the  desert,  the  stupendous  revelations  of  Sinai,  etc. — the  prophet  opposes
a  few  stray  signs  and  wonders.  Which  were  the  people  to  believe?  Plainly,  no  sign
or  wonder  would  have  justified  an'  Israelite  in  believing  a  prophet  whose  teaching
contradic'ed  the  first  principles  of  Ms  revelation ;  as  no  sign  or  wonder  would  justify  us
in  believing  teachings  contradictory  of  the  first  principles  of  ours.

II.  The  rise  of  false  prophets  is  to  be  anticipated.  (Ver.  1.)  The  passage  takes
it  for  granted  that  they  will  arise.  They  did  arise  in  Old  Testament  times,  and  they
will  do  so  again.  Their  appearance  is  predicted  in  connection  with  "the  last  days"
(Matt.  xxiv.  11;  1  Tim.iv.  1 ;  2  Pet. ii.  1).  "Signs  and  wonders"  will  not  be  wantintr
(Matt.  xxiv.  24 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  9,  10).  False  teachers  are  included  under  the  category  of
false  prophets  (Matt.  vii.  15;  2  Pet.  ii.  1).  They  assert  as  the  truth  of  God  principles
and  doctrines  subversive  of  the  revelation  God  has  given.  The  readiness  of  people  to
believe  them  arises  from  want  of  knovcledge  (Eph.  iv.  14) ;  from  the  itch  for  novelties
(2  Tim.  iv.  3);  from  a  diseased  craving  for  the  marvellous — witness  the  credulity
displayed  in  connection  with  spiritualism  (2  Thess.  ii.  9 — 13) ;  above  all,  from  the
adaptation  of  their  teachings  to  the  inclinations  of  depraved  hearts  (2  Tim.  iii.  1 — 8).

III.  The  rise  op  false  pkophets  is  permitted  for  the  sifting  of  the  Church.
(Ver.  3.)  God  has  thus  much  to  do  with  their  appearance  that  he  permits  it  as  a
means  of  proving  and  sifting  the  Church.  The  trial  is  a  searching  and  real  one.  The
plausibility  of  their  errors  may  occasion,  even  to  believers,  much  mental  conflict.  But
out  of  this  conflict  they  come  forth  strengthened  and  purified,  with  firmer  hold  upon
the  truth,  and  clearer  insight  into  Scripture.  Ttiose  willing  to  be  deceived  are,  on  the
other  hand,' led  by  the  spirit  of  delusion.  False  prophets  shake  all  but  "the  very
elect "  (Matt.  xxiv.  24).  The  heresies,  schisms,  controversies,  etc.,  which  have  agitated
the  Church,  with  the  teachings  of  antichristian  philosophy  and  science  outside  of  it,
have  always  had  this  effect  of  sifting,  while  in  the  end  they  have  subserved  the  progress
of  the  truth.

IV.  The  teachino  of  false  prophets  is  to  be  rejected.  1.  Their  doctrine  is
to  be  tried  by  its  conformity  with  the  rule  of  faith  (Isa.  viii.  20).  John  bids  us  "try
the  spirits,"  giving  as  the  reason  that  "  many  false  prophets  are  gone  out  into  the
world  "  (1  Juhn  iv.  1).  2.  Their  doclrine,  if  found  contradictory  of  Scripture,  is  to  be
unhesitatingly  rejected.  3.  Of  old,  the  prophet  whose  teachings  struck  at  the
foundations  of  the  theocracy  was  to  be  put  to  death  (ver.  5).  This  rule  no  longer
api'lies.  But  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Church,  in  the  exercise  of  her  judicial  functions,  to
deprive  such  a  teacher  of  office  and  status  in  her  ministry  (see  also  2  John  10,
11).— J.  0.

Vers.  6 — 12,— G'orf  or  our  Irother.  Terribly  stem  is  the  duty  here  laid  on  the
person  enticed  to  idolatry.  The  law  is  adapted  to  an  age  of  stern  deedr,  and  to  a
p;  ople  living  under  a  stern  dispensation.  Yet,  reflecting  on  the  nature  of  the  crime,  on
the  constitution  of  the  Jewish  state,  and  on  the  issues  to  mankind  which  hung  on  th«


cH.  xm.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  233

slender  thread  of  this  one  nation's  fidelity,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  it  could  well  have
been  less  stern  than  it  is.  Its  severity  was  perhaps  its  mercy.  Note,  too,  that  the
criminal  could  he  executed  only  after  formal  impeachment,  fair  trial,  and  conolusirely
estahlished  guilt  (cf.  ver.  14;  ch.  xvii.  2 — 8;  xix.  15 — 21).

I.  God  allows  no  claim  of  natural  affection  to  intebfebe  with  HiaHBR
DUTT  to  himself.  It  is  the  same  stern  voice  wliich  we  hear  even  in  the  Gospels
(Matt.  viii.  21,  22 ;  x.  37  ;  Lijke  xiv.  26j.  The  demands  of  God  on  his  people's  supreme
and  undivided  allegiance  are  not  now  a  whit  less  rigorous  than  they  were  of  old.

II.  God  would  have  us  begard  those  who  deliberately  attempt  to  seducS
us  from  him  as  oue  worst  fobs.  They  really  are  so,  whether  they  think  it  or  not.
No  language  is  strong  enough  to  paint  the  crime  of  seeking  to  seduce  a  soul  from  its
allegiance  to  its  God.  The  guilt  of  the  man  who  deliberately  sets  himself  to  counter-
work a  child's  affection  for  its  parent,  and  to  produce  alienation  of  heart  between  them,
is  trivial  in  comparison  with  it.  The  crime  is  that  of  soul-murder.  For  in  fidelity  to
God  lies  the  happiness  of  life  here,  and  salvation  in  the  world  to  come.  We  are  not,
therefore,  to  allow  any  private  affection  to  blind  us  to  the  enormity  of  this  crime.
Those  whom  we  cherish  as  dearest  are  only  the  more  guilty  if  they  take  advantage  of
our  affection  to  betray  us  into  deadly  sin.

III.  God  requires  that  we  do  not  spare  those  who  are  guilty  of  this
CRIME.  We  are  no  longer  called  upon — and  we  may  be  thankful  for  it — ^to  impeach
our  seducers,  and  lead  them  out  to  death.  Our  religiun  requires  that  we  return  good
for  evil,  that  we  pray  for  those  who  4njure  us,  that  we  seek  their  conversion  and
salvation.  But  it  does  not  require  of  us  that  we  do  not  abhor  their  conduct,  and
severely  reprobate  and  denounce  it.  We  fail  in  duty  if  there  is  not  placed  on  all
attempts  at  spiritual  seduction  the  immediate  brand  of  our  strongest  condemna-
tion.—J.  0.

Vers.  12 — 18.—^  city  under  Ian.  The  case  here  supposed  is  even  more  appalling
than  the  former  one,  for  it  is  the  inhabitants  of  a  whole  city  who,  with  all  that  they
have,  are  to  be  destroyed.  Yet,  as  it  is  certain  that  godly  persons,  dreading  the  execu-
tion of  this  sentence,  would  leave  this  city  as  soon  as  they  found  out  what  was  going
on — being  very  possibly  the  bearers  of  the  tidings  to  others — the  curse  would  practi-
cally take  effect  only  on  those  who  were  in  league  with  the  idolaters.  Searching  in-
vestigation was  to  precede  the  infliction  of  dodm  (ver.  14).

I.  Evil-disposed  persons  can  do  much  harm.  A  few  men — "  children  of  Belial "
— perhaps,  at  first,  but  one  or  two,  suorfeed  in  seducing,  and  ultimately  in  destroying,
a  whole  city.  Their  cancerous  influence  speedily  inrected  the  mass.  Like  fire  break-
ing out  in  a  little  comer  of  a  building,  it  soon  involved  the  whole  place  in  ruin.
"  One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good"  (Eccles.  ix.  18).  "  Evil  communications  corrupt
goqi  manners  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  33).  Evil  is  not  to  be  thought  lightly  of,  because  at  first
confined  to  a  few  individuals,  and  circumscribed  in  its  range  of  operations.  It  will
spread  faster  than  good.

II.  The  spiritual  condition  op  each  city  is  of  interest  to  the  whole  com-
UUNITT.  Disease  in  one  part  of  the  social  organism  wiU  speedily  communicate  itself
to  the  other  parts.

III.  Immediate  action  should  be  taken  to  retiucb  evil  in  its  chosen  seats.
No  longer,  indeed,  with  carnal  weapons.  We  have  no  wanant  to  proceed  by  flre  and
sword.  A  better  way  is  open  to  us  of  reducing  evil  than  by  judicial  slaughter.  The
wickedness  of  a  city  is  doubtless  a  token  of  God's  wrath  resting  upon  it.  If  it  repent
not,  his  judgments  will  fall  upon  it  with  all  the  old  severity.  But  it  does  not  lie
with  us  to  give  effect  to  these  judgments ;  God  keeps  them  in  his  own  hand.  Our  work,
meanwhile,  is  the  happier  one  of  seeking  the  reduction  of  evil  by  spiritual  means —
by  reasoning,  by  persuasion,  by  preaching  of  the  truth,  by  substituting  good  influences
for  bad  ones.  These  weapons  are  adequate  to  the  work  for  which  they  are  given,  and
ought  to  be  plied  to  the  utmost.  Places  differ  in  spiritual  character.  There  are  those
of  which  it  may  be  said — as  of  Pergamos,  "  where  Satan's  seat  is  "  (Rev.  ii.  13) — that
in  them  evil  has  a  kind  of  stronghold.  Against  these,  by  preference,  the  assaults  of
God's  servants  should  be  directed.  The  apostles  chose  for  their  attacks  the  leading
centres  of  pagan  influence.    One  stronghold  gained  is  worth  a  dozen  outposts. — J.  0, '


S34  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xin.  1—18.

Vers.  1 — 18. — Idolatry  to  be  treated  as  a  capital  crime.  This  chapter  relates  to  the
Israelites  themselves.  As  the  government  was  a  theocracy,  idolatry  in  any  form  was
treason  against  the  Divine  King,  and  justly  punishable  with  death.  The  previous
chapter  (vers.  39 — 32)  affords  timely  warning  against  sinful  curiosity  about  heathen
practices ;  and  in  this  chapter  the  people  are  warned  against  all  who  would  tempt
them  towards  idolatry.     The  three  cases  mentioned  are  worthy  of  separate  study.

I.  The  false  pkophbt,  with  his  signs  and  wondebs.  Moses  admits  the  pos-
sibility of  signs  and  wonders  in  the  interests  of  idolatry.  This  raises  the  whole
question  of  miracles.  These  may  be  "helps  to  faith,"  or  they  may  be  "a  trial  of
faith." '  It  is  evidently  in  the  latter  light  that  they  are  to  be  regarded  when  the
wonder-worker  wishes  to  lead-them  to  idolatry.  The  horror  of  idolatry  is  really  to
fortify  them  against  the  miracle,  so  that,  though  it  may  try  their  faith,  it  will  not
overcome  it.  A  miracle  in  itself,  consequently,  is  not  decisive,  but  must  be  taken
along  with  the  doctrine  it  proposes  to  support;  God  allows  the  miracle  to  be  wrought
by  the  false  prophet  to  prove  his  people,  "  to  know  whether  they  love  the  Lord  their
God  with  all  their  heart  and  with  all  their  soul "  (ver.  3).

The  false  prophet  is  to  be  taken,  as  a  criminal  convicted  of  a  capital  offence,  and
put  to  death.  He  has  acted  a  traitor's  part  among  God's  subjects,  and  must  suffer
a  traitor's  doom.  By  this  terrible  judgment  does  God  stamp  out  all  tendency  to
idolatry.

II.  'The  neab  BBLATrvB  as  a  sedttcee  to  rooLATBT.  The  false  prophet  might
fail,  and  a  near  relative  succeed.  The  public  miracle,  with  its  meretricious  ostenta-
tion, might  be  withstood,  while  the  unostentatious  and  secret  insinuation  of  a  near
relative  might  prevail.  Hence  the  instruction  in  these  verses,  6 — 11,  as  to  how  the
idol-loving  relative  is  to  be  treated.  Not  only  is  the  insinuation  to  be  put  away,  but
the  person  making  it,  no  matter  how  nearly  related,  is  to  be  treated  as  a  public
criminal,  and  put  to  death.  All  the  sympathy  which  blood  relationship  ensures
is  to  be  set  aside  before  this  crime  of  appalling  magnitude,  and  the  relative  is  to
cast  the  first  stone  at  the  apostate,  the  execution  being  completed  by  "  the  hand  of  all
the  people."

III.  'The  apostact  op  a  city.  In  this  collective  case,  after  a  careful  investigation,
the  utter  destruction  of  the  city  is  to  be  carried  out,  the  idolatrous  inhabitants  are  to
be  put  to  death,  with  all  their  cattle,  their  property  burnt  with  fire,  and  the  city  to  be
never  afterwards  rebuilt  (vers.  IS^iS).  The  idolatry,  in  propagating  itself,  must  be
stamped  out  even  more  carefully  than  in  the  individual  cases  of  apostacy  already
mentioned.     The  sin  must  not  be  tolerated  in  the  theocracy.

IV.  Wb  bhodIjD  surely  lbaen  from  this  how  heinous  evebt  kind  of  idolatry
IS  to  the  Most  High.  We  may  be  idolsrters  through  covetousness  (CoL  liL  5),
through  ambition,  through  any  disposition  to  look  for  succour  to  things  or  persons
instead  of  to  God.  It  may  be  as  needful  for  us  to  be  exhorted  against  this  sin,  as  it
was  for  those  to  whom  John  in  his  Epistle  wrote,  "  Little  children,  keep  yourselves
from  idols  "  (1  John  v.  21).  The  temptation  is  strong  to  live  by  sense  and  sight  instead
of  by  faith.

It  will  help  us  in  withstanding  temptation  to  remember  how  heinous  the  nn  is  I  It
is  not  less  a  sin  because  now  idolaters  are  not  taken  out  to  a  public  place  and  executed.
We  deserve  execution,  though  we  do  not  receive  it.  For  idolatry  is  high  treason
against  God.  When  we  trust,  e.g.  in  money  or  in  men,  so  as  to  attribute  to  them  the
powers  belonging  really  to  God,  we  rob  him  of  his  rights  and  bestow  them  upon  others.
If  this  was  a  capital  offence  in  the  Mosaic  times,  it  is  no  less  offensive  to  the  Lord  now.
He  is  changeless  in  his  judgments,  and  so  must  regard  the  iniquity  as  in  the  same
serious  light  as  ever.    In  such  circumstances  it  surely  becomes  us^

1.  To  humWe  ourselve$  most  penitently  hefwe  Ood  hecaute  of  otw  idolatries.  Wt
have  been  guilty  of  greater  crimes  than  we  suspected,  and  consequently  should  enter-
tain the  deepest  possible  penitence.

2.  We  should  carefully  abstain  from  all  tendencies  to  an  idolatrous  spirit,  "  Keep
yourselves  from  idols,"  says  John.  It  shows  how  muoli  is  in  our  own  power.  We  can
abstain  from  much  idolatry,  if  we  are  only  watchful.  In  loyalty  to  OtoA,  out  of  lespect
for  his  honour  and  glory,  we  ought  to  keep  ourselves  in  a  trustful,  bumble  attitude

>  Cf.  Oknon  Hoiley,  'On  Miracles,'  2nd  edit.,  p.  26;  also  Taylor's  "The  Mlnolee

Helps  (o  Faith,  not  Hindrances.'


CH.   XIII.  1—18.]         THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  235

towards  him,  and  reject  every  temptation  to  transfer  our  allegiance.  We  shall  thus
find  ourselves  going  forward  steadily  in  the  exercise  of  spiritual  purity  and  power.—
R.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 18. — God's  executioners  upmi  idolaters.  No  respecter  of  persons  is  God.
The  sin  of  all  sins  is  idolatry,  and  such  overt  rebels  against  the  supreme  God  shall  be
summarily  punished,  whether  they  be  Amorites  or  Hebrews.  As  a  rule,  ccmplete
retribution  is  reserved  for  the  future  state ;  the  full  effect  of  evil  ways  is  not  seen  in
this  life.  Yet  there  are  sins  so  flagrant — so  mischievous  in  their  present  influence,  that
God  employs  his  agents,  personal  or  ipipersonal,  to  execute  his  verdicts  pron  ptly  and
manifestly.  It  is  not  that  infinite  justice  is  not  content  to  wait;  it  is  that  God  is  so
solicitous  for  the  good  of  the  human  race,  that  he  puts  forth  his  hand  to  arrest  the
moral  pestilence.     In  this  chapter  we  learn —

I.  THA.T  God  had  assured  Iskael  of  his  unity,  supeemacv,  akd  goodkess.
In  that  early  age  men  had  not  indulged  in  intellectual  speculation  touching  the  exist-
ence of  a  God.  Mind  has  not  yet  formulated  its  proofs,  nor  its  disproofs.  The
tendency  of  depraved  tastes  and  instincts  was  practically  to  ignore  a  spiritual  Deity,
and  to  put  a  rasti  coafldence  in  inferior  beings  or  in  intermediate  agents.  The  demon-
strations which  God  gave  of  his  supremacy,  to  Israel  in  Egypt,  were  demonstrations
addressed  to  their  practical  experience.  They  had  been  bondmen.  They  had  long
endured  a  crushing  oppression.  They  were  reduced  to  a  condition  of  abject  and
dependent  weakness.  By  whomhai  they  been  rescued  from  Pharaoh's  giant  grasp?
By  whom?  Not  by  any  angelic  champion,  nor  by  any  of  the  idols  of  the  earth !
Obviously,  and  without  question,  they  had  been  recovered  to  freedom  and  to
national  life  by  the  arm  of  Jehovah  and  by  none  other !  Their  new  condition  was
the  manifest  proof  that  &od  reigned,  and  that  he  had  gloriously  triumphed.  The
unity  and  supremacy  of  the  true  God  was  established  upon  a  solid  basis.  This
cardinal  truth  shone  upon  the  nation  with  the  clear  radiance  of  noon  day.  If  any-
thing was  known  this  was  known,  that  Jehovah  was  absolute  Monarch — God  of
gods  and  Lord  of  lords.  Of  this  grand  truth  Israel  was  a  witness  to  all  the  nations
of  the  earth.

II.  That  Israel's  faith  in  God  was  sometimes  put  to  sbvbbb  tests  by  the
PRETEXTS  OF  DIVINERS.  The  dream  of  fanatics  would  at  times  be  verified.  The  arts
of  necromancers  would  sometimes  succeed.  Base  motives  of  gain  and  renown  would
keep  these  pursuits  alive.  The  specious  successes  may  have  been  fortunate  coinci-
dences. They  may  have  been  specially  permitted  by  God  for  wise  and  practical  pur-
poses. They  served  as  a  test  for  the  faith  of  Israel.  Faith  never  put  to  the  proof
would  soon  lose  its  tone  and  fibre.  Granted  that  the  prediction  of  a  soothsayer  found
fulfilment,  was  this  sufficient  ground  for  sundering  their  loyalty  to  Jehovah? — any
ground  for  recognizing  the  power  of  an  idol-god?  Granted  that  Ecrrefhing  iright  be
said  on  behalf  of  intermediate  intelligencies — agents  and  servants  of  the  Most  High —
did  this  warrant  their  offering  to  such,  honours  which  were  the  prerogative  of  Jehovah
alone?  Had  not  Jehovah  alone  redeemed  them  from  Egyptian  misery,  and  led  them
through  the  wilderness?  And  did  not  every  impulse  of  gratitude,  and  every  principle
of  reason,  require  that  Jehovah  alone  should  be  worshipped?  These  artifices  of  sooth-
sayers would  serve  to  test  their  faith,  and  (if  faith  was  sound)  to  brace  and  strengthen
it.  For  this  they  should  have  rejoiced  greatly,  that  the  "  trial  of  their  faith,  more
precious  far  than  gold,  though  it  were  tried  by  fire,  might  appear  unto  praise  and
honour  and  glory. "

III.  That  God  had  appointed  Israel  to  be  his  executioner  of  all  idolatebb.
The  only  reasonable  ground  on  which  the  Hebrews  could  vindicate  their  posses-
sion of  Canaan  was,  that  the  foul  idolatries  of  the  Canaanites  had  made  them
a  pest  and  a  curse  upon  the  globe.  And  if  now  the  conquerors  should  yield
to  the  habits  and  vices  of-the  conquered,  reason  and  right  would  require  that  they
likewise  should  be  displaced.  The  Nemesis  of  extermination  had  fallen  upon  the
dwellers  in  Canaan,  not  because  they  were  Canaanites,  but  because  they  were
idolaters.  Abraham  had  been  called  out  of  Charran,  and  received  the  promise
of  Canaan,  that  he  might  be  a  living  and  loyal  witness  for  God.  And  the  special
mission  of  Abraham's  posterity  was  to  stamp  out  Idolatry,  and  to  lift  high  the
banner  of  Jehovah.     To  do  this  effectually,  no  connivance  witli   the  cursed


236  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xiii.  1—18.

thing  must  be  tolerated.  If  the  luminous  agent  employed  to  slied  light  makes  allianc*
with  the  element  of  darkness,  its  mission  is  terminated :  it  is  good  for  nothing.  Hence,
in  order  that  the  Hebrews  might  keep  alive  the  lamp  of  heavenly  truth,  they  must
burn  pure  oil.  The  evil  growth  must  be  nipped  in  the  bud.  The  dread  disease  must  be
checked  at  its  very  first  symptom.  If  they  are  to  continue  "the  sacramental  host  of
God's  elect,"  no  secret  foe  must  be  concealed  in  the  camp.  The  decree  had  gone  forth,
"  Idolatry  shall  cease ! "  and  Israel  had  been  commissioned  to  execute  that  decree.

IV.  That  Israel's  loyalty  to  God  requibed  the  subordination  op  all  other
TIES  AND  claims.  The  ligaments  of  blood  relationship  are  strong — dear  as  very  life.
The  ties  of  friendship  and  of  conjugal  love  are, tender  and  sacred.  No  language  can
adequately  set  them  forth.  Yet  God  has  a  prior  claim.  His  will  forestalls  every
other  obligation.  The  love  which  is  due  to  him  overleaps  every  boundary — absorbs
every  other  affection.  "  With  all  the  heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength,"  that
love  to  him,  if  adequate,  must  be.  And  this  superior  and  incomparable  obligation  of
love  will  sometimes  necessitate  most  painful  self-denial — the  amputation  of  a  right
hand,  the  sacrifice  of  a  right  eye.  The  demand  made  upon  the  Jews,  to  slay  a  wife  or
child,  if  addicted  to  idolatry,  was  a  demand  replete  with  awful  severity ;  yet  no  one  can
question  its  righteousness.  And  if  so  be  the  will  of  God  is  clearly  understood,  natural
inclination  must  yield  to  dutiful  obedience.  Said  the  immaculate  Son,  "  I  do  always
the  things  that  plrase  him."

V.  That  the  habit  op  idolatry  must  be  booted  out,  though  it  may  bequir*  the
MOST  drastic  measures.  1.  Searching  investigation  was  first  required  (ver.  14).
They  were  to  inquire — to  inquire  "diligently" — to  search  into  the  very  heart  of  the
matter.  It  would  be  a  crime — yea,  a  murder — if  they  should  act  judicially  on  mere
rumour  or  through  any  evil  bias.  The  very  utmost  endeavours  to  reach  the  facts  were
required  in  the  interests  of  truth  and  humanity.  Certainty  of  the  fact  must  precede
any  sentence  of  destruction.  2.  The  perilous  effects  of  evU  influence  (yer.  13).  Certain
men  of  Belial  can  draw  away  into  rebellion  the  inhabitants  of  a  whole  city.  Soijie  men
of  strong  will  and  clever  ingenuity  are  well  adapted  to  lead  their  fellows  ;  and  men  of
weak  judgment  readily  follow.  Both  classes  err.  Men  of  superior  parts  are  highly
responsible  to  use  their  powers  as  God-entrusted  talents ;  and  those  possessing  lesser
capacity  are  bound  to  examine  for  themselves,  and  to  suspend  action  until  judgment  is
convinced.  3.  Where  idolatry  was  clearly  proved,  the  most  complete  punishment  was
exacted.  The  whole  Hebrew  nation  were  at  once  converted  into  soldiers,  and  were
summoned  to  assail  that  miscreant  city.  The  body  politic  was  to  gather  up  into  a
point  all  its  righteous  strength,  and  expel  that  foreign  evil  from  its  midst.  No  mercy
was  to  be  shown ;  no  life  was  to  be  spared.  Not  a  lamb  in  the  flock  was  to  escape ;
not  an  ounce  of  spoil  was  to  be  gathered.  The  executors  of  God's  vengeance  must  be
above  all  suspicion  of  selfish  and  sordid  interest.  No  material  gain  must  accrue  to  them.
The  charred  and  blackened  ruins  of  that  city  were  to  be  a  monument  for  ever  of  the
righteous  severity  of  Jehovah.

VL  That  the  desion  of  punishment  is  the  moral  good  op  survivoes.  (Vers.  6, 11,
17.)  The  effect  anticipated  was  this,  "  All  Israel  shall  hear,  and  fear,  and  do  no
more  any  such  wickedness."  On  God's  side  the  result  would  be  that  he  would  "  turn
and  show  them  mercy,  and  multiply  "  their  numbers.  Very  clearly  was  it  announced
that  this  judicial  action  was  the  action  of  God — that  righteous  and  obedient  Hebrews
were  the  officers  of  Jehovah. ,  In  view  of  the  ma;j;nificent  results  upon  the  whole  nation,
yea,  upon  the  world,  this  grave  disaster  might  be  patiently  endured.  To  spare  the
lives  of  these  rebels,  and  yet  to  retain  the"  favour  of  Jehovah,  was  a  sheer  impossibility.
A  severe  choice  was  demanded.  The  remedy  was  painful,  but  the  effect  anticipated
was  precious.  The  smile  of  God,  and  the  moral  elevation  of  the  nation,  were  the
practical  fruits.  In  these  benign  results,  the  survivors  would  have  great  occasion  foi
gratefal  joy.  1'he  destruction  of  sinaeis  is  a  beacon-light,  to  which  we  abo  should
take  hctd. — D,


OH.  XIV.  1—29.]


TUE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


287


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  Xiy.
HBATHiai   Customs  of   Moubnino  to  ■■

AVOIDED.      No    ABOMINABLE    THING  TO  BE

EATEN.     Meats  Clean   and   Unclean.

Tithes.

.  Vers.  1 — 21. — Israel,  as  the  people  of  God,
ehosen  by  him  to  be  his  children  by  adoption,
must  not  only  abstain  from  idolatry,  but  also
avoid  all  heathenish  usages  and  practices,
such  as  those  connected  with  mourning  for
the  dead,  and  those  pertaining  to  the  use  of
food.

Ver.  1. — Ye  are  the  children  of  Jehovah
your  God  (of.  Exod.  iv.  22,  etc.).  As  his
children,  it  behoved  them  to  avoid  all  that
would  be  offensive  to  him  or  indicate  dis-
trust in  him.  Ye  shaU  not  cut  yourselves,
etc.  (cf.  Lev.  xix.  28 ;  xxi.  5 ;  Jer.  xvi.  6 ;
xlviii.  36,  37 ;  Ezek.  vii.  18 ;  xxvii.  31).  ("  'Es.
hao  opinione  sunt  ilia  varia  et  detestabilia
genera  lugendi,  psedores,  muliebres  laceia-
tiones  genarum,  pectoris,  femitmm,  capitis
peroussiones."  Cicero,  'Tusc.  Qusast.,'  iii.
26;  see  also  '  De  Legibus,'  ii.  25.)

Ver.  2. — (Cf.  ch.  vii.  6.)  The  reason  as-
signed here  is  an  emphatic  expansion  of
the  statement  in  ver.  1.

Ver.  3. — Any  abominable  thing.  Any
abumination,  i.e.  anything  which  is  an  abomi-
nation to  the  Lord,  having  been  by  him  pro-
nounced unclean  and  forbidden ;  "  anything
which  I  have  put  far  away  from  you  (i.e.
made  to  be  abominable  to  you) "  (Targum
Jonath.).  "  Every  creature  of  God  is  good,"
and  "  there  is  nothing  unclean  of  itself"
(1  Tim.  iv.  4;  Eom.  xiv.  14);  "but  by  the
ordin&nce  of  God,  certain  creatures,  meats,
and  drinks  were  made  unclean  to  the  Jews,
.  .  .  and  this  taught  them  holiness  in  ab-
staining from  the  impure  communion  with
the  wicked"  (Ainswoith).

Vers.  4— 20.— TI.e  regulations  here  con-
cerning food,  and  the  animals  the  use  of
which  is  forbidden,  are  substantially  the
same  as  in  Lev.  ii.  There  are,  however,  some
diffeiences  between  the  two  accounts  which
may  be  noticed.  1.  In  Deuteronomy,  the
mammals  which  may  be  used  for  food  are
severally  specified  as  well  as  described  by
the  general  characteristic  of  the  class;  in
Leviticus,  only  the  latter  descriptiun  is
given.  3.  In  the  list  of  fowls  which  may
not  be  e«ten,  the  ra'ah  (glede)  is  mentioned
in  Deuteronomy,  but  not  in  Leviticus ;  and
the  bird  which  in  the  one  is  called  da'ah,  is
in  the  other  called  dayyah(yultrae).  3.  The
•laM  of  reptiles  which  is  carefully  deeoribed


in  Leviticus  is  wholly  omitted  in  Deute-
ronomy. 4.  Winged  insects  are  forbidden
without  exception  in  Deuteronomy;  in
Leviticus,  the  locust  and  certain  other  in-
sects of  the  same  kind  are  excepted.  5.  Some
slight  differences  in  the  order  of  enumera-
tion appear.

Ver.  5.— The  hart;  ayydl  (■?;(«),  probably
the  fallow  deer,  or  deer  generally.  The
roebuck;  tsebi  C^S),  <A«  gazelle  (fiazella
AraMca).  The  fallow  deer ;  yachmur  (liarr),
the  roetmek.  The  wild  goat ;  aklco  (■lp^s),  the
ibex.  The  pygarg ;  dish&n  (jiain),  some  kind
of  antelope,  probably  the  Gazella  Dorcas.
The  wild  ox ;  the'o  (isn),  probably  the
bubale,  or  mid  cow  of  the  Arabs  (Alcephalus
hubalis),  a  species  of  antelope.  The  chamois ;
zarmr  (nai)>  probably  the  wild  sheep  (flvis
Tragelaphus.

Ver.  13.— The  glede;  ra'ah  (ni«l).  This
word  occurs  only  here,  and  it  is  supposed
by  some  that,  by  an  error  of  the  copyist,
substituting  i  for  i,  it  has  come  instead  of
nKl.  as  used  in  Lev.  xi.  14.  But  it  is
more  probable,  as  above  suggested,  thiit  the
da'ah  of  Leviticus  is  represented  by  the
dayyah  of  Deuteronomy,  and  that  conse-
quently the  reading  ra'ah  should  be  re-
tained. This  word,  derived  from  njn,  to  see,
to  look,  would  appropriately  designate  a  bird
of  keen  sight,  one  of  the  hawk  species.  The
bird  intended  may  be  a  buzzard,  of  which
there  are  now  several  kinds  in  Palestine.

Ver.  21 .— (Cf.  Lev.  xvii.  15;  Exod.  xxiii.  19;
xxxiv.  26.)  The  stranger  that  is  in  thy  gates.
"  The  uncircumcised  stranger  that  is  in  thy
cities  "  (Targum),  i.e. "  a  heathen  who  takes
upon  him  that  he  will  serve  no  idol,  with
the  residue  of  the  commandments  which
were  commanded  to  the  sons  of  Noah,  but
is  not  circumcised  nor  baptized  (Maimonides,
'Issure  Biah,'  ch.  xiv.  §  7)"  (Ainsworth).
Alien ;  a  foreigner,  one  not  resident  in  the
land  of  Israel.

Vers.  22 — 29. — A  tithing  of  each  year's
produce  of  the  cultivated  ground  was  to  be
made ;  and  this  tithe  was  to  be  brought  to
the  place  which  the  Lord  should  choose,
as  also  the  firstling  of  tlio  herds  and  flocks;
and  there  a  sacrificial  moal  was  to  be  par-
taken of,  that  Israel  might  learn  to  fear
Jehovah  tlieir  God  always,  reverencing  him
as  their  Buler,  and  rejoicing  in  him  as  the
Giver  of  all  good.

Ver.  22. — Thy  seed.    "  Seed  "  here  refers


238


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  XIT.  1—92.


to  plnnti  aa  well  m  what  is  raised  from
seed  (cf.  Jer.  ii.  21 ;  Ezek.  xvii.  5,  6).  The
refeience  is  to  the  second  or  festival  tithe
which  was  exclusively  of  vegetables.

Ver.  24. — In  the  land  of  Canaan,  as  the
people  would  be  dispersed  over  a  wide  tract,
it  might  happen  that  the  place  which  the
r>ord  should  choose  was  at  such  a  distance
from  the  usual  residence  of  many  that  to
observe  this  injunction  would  be  to  them
very  difSoult,  if  not  impossible.  To  meet
this,  therefore,  it  was  enacted  tliat  the
tithe  might  be  commuted  into  money,  and
with  this  the  things  required  for  the  sacri-
ficial meals  at  the  sanctuary  might  be
purchased.

Ver.  26.  —  Strong  drink ;  ehScar  ("OtiO-
"Any  drink  which  can  inebriate,  whether
that  is  made  from  grain,  or  the  juice  of  apples,
or  when  honey  is  boiled  into  a  sweet  and


barbaroxu  potion,  or  the  fruit  of  the  palm
[dates],  is  expressed  into  liquor,  and  the
duller  water  is  coloured  by  the  prepared
fruits  "  (Jerome, '  De  Vit.  Cler.').

Vers.  28,  29. — Every  third  year  the  whole
tithe  of  the  year's  produce  was  to  be  set
apart,  not  to  be  brought  to  the  sauctuary  to
be  eaten  before  the  Lord,  but  as  a  portion
in  their  towns  for  the  Levite,  the  stranger,
the  widow,  and  the  fatherless.  The  end  ol
three  years ;  i.e.  as  the  third  year  expired,
consequently,  in  the  last  year  of  the  trien-
nium  (ch.  xxvi.  12 1 ;  just  as  "  the  end  of  seven
years  "  means  each  seventh  year  (ch.  xv.  1 ;'
xxxi.  10 ;  Jer.  xxxiv.  14).  This  was  not  an
additional  tithe,  but  the  former  differently
applied ;  the  tithe  of  the  first  and  second
years  was  to  be  eaten  before  the  Lord  at  the
sanctuary ;  the  tithe  of  the  third  year  was
for  the  poor  and  needy.


EOMILETICa

Ver«.  1,  2.— Tft*  people  of  God  when  death  is  in  the  home.  If  God  chose  out  a  people
for  himself,  with  the  view  of  planting  in  the  world  a  new  and  nobler  faith,  it  is  no
wonder  if  he  would  have  the  people  superadd  to  that  a  new  and  higher  life.  But  if  the
life  is  to  be  higher  in  any  sense  which  could  be  acceptable  to  Jehovah,  it  must  be  one
based  on  the  new  faith  and  manifesting  itself  to  others  in  a  new  deportment,  ije.  it
must  be  both  an  outer  and  inner  life.  But  if  the  people  are  just  emerging  fi-om  a  semi-
barbaric  condition,  it  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  they  may  need  to  be  dealt  with  as
we  deal  with  children.  We  give  them  technical  rules  first,  and  they  have  to  learn
reasons  afterwards.  Possibly,  as  the  child  grows  up  and  gets  beyond  the  rules  which
bound  him  once,  he  may  smile  at  them,  or  rather  at  the  childishness  which  needed
them  in  earlier  years ;  while  at  the  same  time  he  would,  or  at  any  rate  he  should,  feel
thankful  to  those  who  stooped  to  teach  him  so  that  he  could  understand  them.

In  this  chapter,  we  have  several  illustrations  of  God's  thus  dealing  with  Israel.
We  now  take  the  one  in  the  first  two  verses.  It  is  well  known  that  heathen  nations
were  very  violent  in  their  shows  of  grief  over  their  dead,  tearing  the  hair,  cutting  tho
face,  beating  the  breast,  etc.,  while  the  cutting  of  the  flesh  was  likewise  submitted  to
in  honour  of  their  gods  (see  Exposition,  i/n  Zoc).  Now,  it  was  of  vast  importance  to  give
Israel  to  understand  how  entirely  they  were  to  be  the  Lord's,  how  fully  he  was  theirs,
and  how  the  blest  mutual  relation  changed  the  very  aspect  of  that  frequent  and
certain  family  sorrow — death.  We  have  not  here  any  full  opening  up  of  that,  but  there
is  scarcely  any  room  to  doubt  that  it  formed  a  very  important  part  of  Hebrew  teaohin?;
for  the  fact  that  all  these  heathen  rites  and  orgies  over  the  dead  were  entirely  forbidden
would  be  sure  to  lead  many,  especially  of  the  young,  to  ask  for  the  reason  of  such  pro-
hibition. And  when  we  remember  how  careful  was  the  preparation  for  meeting  the
inquisitiveness  of  childhood  in  other  matters,  we  cannot  imagine  that  this  was  an
exception  to  the  general  rule.  The  prohibition  of  old  customs  would  clear  the  way
for  teaching  a  new  doctrine.  And,  as  applied  to  Israel  of  old,  the  following  six  posi-
tions may  be  asserted  and  maintained.  1.  They  were  to  be  a  separate  people  to  the
Lord  their  God,  not  only  in  all  the  varied  relations  of  life,  but  also  in  the  presence  of
death.  2.  Old  customs  of  surrounding  nations,  at  the  death  of  their  friends,  were  to  be
done  away,  as  a  sign  of  the  different  meaning  and  aspect  of  death,  to  the  people  of  the
Lord.  3.  This  changed  aspect  of  death  followed  from  their  blessed  relationship  to  God,
and  from  God's  blessed  relationship  to  them.  4.  This  relationship  involved  and  assured
Israel  of  the  continued  life  of  their  holy  dead  in  God.  Surely  it  was  scarcely  possible
for  them  to  think  of  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  as  extinct.  True,  the  light  on  the  unseen
life  in  the  grave  was  dim,  and  the  gloom  of  the  grave  was  deep.    But  still,  it  was  very


OH.  XIV.  1— 2K.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.  239

far  from  having  about  it  the  hopelessness  which  marked  the  heathen  world.  6.  For,
stretching  far  away  in  the  future,  there  was  the  hope  of  a  resurrection  at  the  last
day.  This  was  involved  in  God's  words  to  Moses,  "  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,"  etc.
Many,  perhaps  the  mass,  of  the  people  might  not  see  that.  But  our  Lord  assures  us
that  the  doctrine  is  wrapped  up  there.  6.  Consequently,  there  was  no  reason  to
justify  a  hapless,  hopeless  wail  in  the  presence  of  death.  Whence  our  subject  foi
meditation  is  suggested  to  us —

There  ought  to  be  a  great  diffebbnob  between  God's  people  and  others  in
THK  PRESENCE  OF  DEATH.  In  one  sense,  indeed,  there  is  none ;  or,  at  least,  none  which
can  be  discerned.  One  event  cometh  alike  to  all,  even  to  the  righteous  and  the  wicked,
and  the  h6use  of  the  good  man  may  be  as  frequently  darkened  by  "  the  shadow  of  death  "
as  that  of  another  who  fears  not  God.  But  still,  when  death  does  come,  there  may  well
be  a  very  wide  difference  between  those  who  are  the  children  of  God  and  those  who  are
not,  especially  when  the  departed  one  is  a  member  of"  the  whole  family  in  lieaven  and
on  earth"  (and  such  cases  only  do  we  note  in  this  Homily).  When  the  Christian
expositor  is  opening  up  the  principle  contained  in  these  verses,  he  can  do  so  from
much  higher  vantage-ground  than  one  who  confines  himself  to  the  Old  Testament
teaching.  Some  such  main  lines  of  thought  as  the  following  will  be  the  Christian
unfolding  of  the  principles  so  long  ago  laid  down.  1.  There  is  a  blessed  relationship
between  God  and  his  people.  It  is  initiated  in  the  new  birth  by  the  Holy  Ghost.
Those  thus  born  anew  are  children  of  God — not  meiely  under  a  national  covenant,  as
sharing  a  common  privilege,  but  as  brought  into  a  personal  covenant  through  the
impartation  of  a  new  life.  The  mark  of  this  new  birth  is  the  saving  reception  of
Christ  by  faith,  and  the  effect  of  it  is  to  transfer  men  from  the  region  of  darkness  to
that  of  light, "  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God,"  and  from  being  subjects  of  a  kingdom,
to  their  being  citizens  in  God's  city  and  sons  in  God's  family — "  fellow-citizens  of  the
saints  and  of  the  household  of  God."  2.  This  blessed  relationship  is  sealed  and  made
sure  by  "  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant."  They  are  redeemed  with  the  '•'  precious
blood  of  Christ."  3.  It  is  ratified  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  First-
born out  of  the  dead,  and  has  "opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers."
4.  This  blessed  relation  continues  undisturbed  by  the  accident  of  death.  "Christ  died
for  us,  that  whether  we  wake  or  sleep  we  should  live  together  with  him ; "  "  whether
we  live  or  die,  we  are  the  Lord's ; "  "  Christ  both  died,  and  rose,  and  revived,  that  he
misht  be  Lord  of  the  dead  and  of  the  living."  5.  The  resurrection  of  Christ's  own
will  as  surely  follow  his  as  the  harvest  follows  the  firstfruits.  "  Now  is  Christ  risen  from
the  dead,  and  become  the  Firstfruits  of  them  that  slept."  6.  The  distinctive  features  of
the  resurrection  of  the  body  are  laid  down  for  Us  by  the  Apostle  Paul  in  1  Cor.  xv.  Of
these  there  are  four.  (1)  That  the  body,  as  the  seed,  must  be  buried  before  it  can  rise
again.  (2)  That  the  body  sown  is  not  the  body  that  shall  be.  (3)  That  to  every  seed
there  is  its  own  body.  (4)  That  the  precise  relation  or  connection  between  the  body
that  is  sown  and  the  body  that  will  be  raised  is  a  secret  in  the  mind  of  God.  "  God
giveth  it  a  body  as  it  hath  pleased  him."  These  things  we  know :  we  know  no  more.
If  we  let  our  affirmations  go  beyond  the  statements  of  Scripture,  we  shall  plunge  our-
selves into  inextricable  difficulties,  and  we  shall  be  even  risking  the  credit  of  Scripture,
since  many  will  think  that,  in  disposing  of  our  afiirmations,  they  demolish  the  teaching
of  the  Book,  In  confining  ourselves  to  the  four  points  named  by  Paul  in  his  great
argument,  we  shall  be  remaining  on  ground  that  will  ever  be  firm,  and  that  can  never
be  invaded.  No  physical  science  can  affirm  or  deny  either  one  or  the  other.  There
never  lived,  there  never  will  live,  the  man  who  on  scientific  grounds  can  weaken  either
of  them.  Our  holy  and  glorious  faith  is  beyond  such  reach.  7.  Therefore  the  reason
for  avoiding  the  hopeless  sorrow  of  the  pagan  world  is  even  vastly  deeper  and  stronger
than  it  was  under  Moses.  If  Israel  might  not  sorrow  as  those  without  hope  when  they
had  the  assurance, "  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob,"
how  much  less  should  we,  when  earth  has  seen  the  Firstfruits  of  the  great  resurrection
from  the  dead  1  How  much  light  is  thrown  by  Christ's  grace  and  love  into  the  portals
of  the  grave,  and  what  a  hallowed  and  hallowing  calm  may  pervade  the  chamber  of
death  if  our  Lord  is  with  us  there !  Yea,  there  is  no  real  death  to  the  believer.  "  Our
Saviour  Jesus  Christ  hath  abolished,  death."  He  hath  said, "  If  a  man  keep  my  sayings,
he  shall  never  taste  of  death."  Then  we  may  well  bless  our  God  that,  amid  the  changing


240  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xiv.  1—29

scenes  of  earth,  we  stand  on  giound  which  can  never  be  shaken.    There  wisetit  light  ia
the  darkneu.

"  With  joy  we  tell  the  eoofflng  age,

He  that  waB  dead  has  left  his  tomb;
He  lives  above  their  utmost  rage,
And  we  are  waiting  till  he  come."

Vers.  3— 20.-— 1%«  veople  of  Ood  at  their  own  table.  However  far  these  minutu
regulations  may  seem  at  first  from  being  appropriate  themes  for  homiletic  teaching,  a
closer  study  of  them  may  show  that  they  contain  an  amount  of  instruction  which  we
could  ill  afford  to  lose.  There  are  two  principles,  not  unfrequently  noted,  that  should
be  brought  to  bear  on  this  and  other  chapters  which  contain  regulations  that  may  ba
entirely  unneeded  now.  One  is,  that  associations  of  evil  may  make  a  custom  prejudicial
which  is  in  itself  harmless ;  another,  that  great  reasons  underlying  small  actions  may
lift  up  action  to  the  height  of  the  reason  which  prompted  it.  If,  indeed,  there  should
be  some  -of  these  minute  instructions  for  which  we  now  see  no  reason,  it  would  be  no
great  tax  on  one's  understanding,  were  we  asked  to  give  credit  to  so  great  a  legislator
as  Moses  for  having  had  a  good  reason  for  them,  although  it  may  not  be  in  force  at  the
present  time.  Still,  we  are  not  altogether  in  the  dark  as  to  some  reasons  which
might  then  be  of  great  weight  for  the  observance  of  the  distinction  between  clean  and
unclean  meats.  Trapp  suggests  as  reasons :  (1)  that  they  might  recognize  Grod's  hand
in  the  supply,  and  God's  law  in  the  use,  of  their  meats ;  (2)  that  there  might  be  a  dis-
tinction between  them  and  other  peoples :  (3)  that  they  might  be  taught  to  study
purity.  Dr.  Jameson  suggests  also  sanitary  reasons.  We  would  venture  to  include
these,  with  others,  under  seven  heads.  1.  The  Israelites  were  the  children  of  the  Lord
their  God,  and  that  special  relationship  was  to  show  itself  in  the  sober,  pure,  and
devout  regulation  of  the  several  customs  at  the  family  table.  2.  There  was  to  be
a  separation  between  them  and  other  nations;  and  a  more  effective  barrier  to  inter-
course could  scarcely  be  found  than  one  which  made  association  at  the  same  table
all  but  impossible.  3.  They  were  to  learn  that  even  the  common  business  of  eating
was  to  be  governed  by  holy  laws.  4.  Thus,  by  minute  obedience  to  precept,  they
were  to  be  indoctrinated  into  the  principles  of  holiness.  5.  Their  social  board  was
to  be  a  standing  protest  against  idolatrous  customs;  and  also,  6.  A  perpetual  rebuke
of  impurity  and  of  any  infringement  of  sanitary  law.  Let  no  one,  then,  think  of
this  distinction  between  clean  and  unclean  meats  as  a  trifling  one.  Nothing  i»
tiijiing  which  helps  on  the  edrtcation  of  souls  for  Ood.  7.  When,  moreover,  we  glance
at  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  we  cannot  but  regard  these  regula-
tions as  also  symbolic.  This  distinction  in  the  lower  orders  of  creation  between  clean
and  unclean,  symbolized  the  difference  between  Israel  and  the  nations  from  whom  they
were  to  dissociate  themselves.  The  mass  of  the  people  may  not  have  comprehended
this.    They  were  gradually  led  to  understand  doctrine  by  way  of  obedience  to  precept.

But,  it  may  be  asked,  "  What  has  all  this  to  do  with  Christians  now?"  We  reply,
"  Little  or  nothing,  so  far  as  these  special  details  are  concerned,  but  much  every  way,
so  far  as  we  have  to  do  with  the  principles  which  underlie  these  details."  That  so
far  as  details  go,  the  Law  is  done  away,  is  understood.  The  symbolic  meaning  is  no
longer  in  force,  hence  the  symbol  is  needed  no  longer.  From  the  yoke  of  these  forms
we  are  emancipated  (cf.  Acts  x. ;  1  Cor.  x.  24 — 31 ;  Bom.  xiv. ;  1  Tim.  iv.  3 — 5).  But
still,  there  is  an  analogy,  of  which  it  would  ill  become  us  to  lose  sight,  between  the
position  of  Israel  then,  and  the  duty  of  God's  Israel  now.  Supposing  now  we  were
asked,  "  In  what  way  does  the  gospel  teach  us  the  duty  of  God's  people  at  their  own
family  table  ?  "  we  might  suggest  six  or  seven  consecutive  lines  of  thought.

I.  The  Christian  is  to  be,  in  spirit,  as  distinct  from  the  world  as  Israel  was  from  the
nations  round  about.  It  is  not  intended  by  this  that,  in  the  ordinary  walks  of  life,
a  Christian  may  not  act  with  ungodly  men  ;  for  in  such  a  case,  as  Paul  teaches,  he  must
needs  go  out  of  the  world  to  be  free  from  them  (cf.  1  Cor.  v.).  But  in  his  own  voluntary
association,  he  is  not  to  be  "  unequally  yoked  together  with  unbelievers ; "  the  gospel
mandate  is,  "  Come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  tba
unclean  thing."


en.  XIV.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  211

IL  The  Christian,  being  a  redeemed  man,  by  the  fact  of  that  redemption  is
claimed  for  Christ  alone.  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  ..price ;  therefore  glorify  God  in
your  body  and  your  spirit,  which  are  God's."  "  We  are  the  Lord's."  Our  body,
soul,  and  spirit  are  entirely  his.  The  claim  of  Jesus  Christ  over  us  ia  that  he  shall
govern  the  whole  of  us,  always  and  everywhere.

■  III.  Hence,  loyalty  to  Christ,  and  the  conservation  of  our  whole  life  for  him,  is
to  regulate  every  detail  of  our  life,  work,  walk,  and  conversation.  So  the  apostle
bhows  in  Bom.  xiv.  that,  e.g.  in  the  tiny  matter  of  "eating  herbs,"  the  Lordship
of  Christ  is  to  be  the  supreme  regulator  of  religious  conviction.

IV.  Nowhere  is  this  scrupulousness  in  loyalty  to  be  more  exact  than  in  the
regulation  of  our  own  table.  It  is  at  their  own  board  that  some  strive  to  make  the
greatest  display,  or  to  pamper  their  bodies  with  a  superabundance  of  luxuries.
But  both  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh  "  and  "  the  pride  of  life "  are  declared  to  be  "  not  of
the  Father,  but  of  the  world."  Hence  they  can  have  no  place  in  a  consistent  believer's
home  life.

v.  A  Christian  man  is  bound,  not  only  for  Christ's  sake,  but  for  his  family's  sake,
to  cultivate  only  such  associations  as  will  help  to  make  or  maintain  the  purity,  piety,
and  Christian  elevation  of  his  home.  If  he  seeks  the  associations  of  the  wealthy  or
great,  regardless  of  their  religious  views  or  habits,  he  is  exposing  his  own  consistency
and  his  children's  weal  to  very  serious  risk.

VI.  The  entile  concern  of  eating  and  drinking  is  to  be  regulated  by  Christian
•  principle.  No  doubt  wiih  many,  without  thinking  on  the  matter,  sound  feeling  and
common  sense  keep  them  from  going  very  far  wrong,  and  perhaps  even  from  going
wrong  at  all.  Still,  the  surest  way  of  keeping  right  in  little  things  is  to  recognize  fully
and  clearly  the  true  and  proper  motive  which  should  impel,  even  in  the  trivialities
of  life.

Vn.  So  also  it  may  be  that  high  and  holy  principle  may  lead  a  believer,  without
laying  down  a  hard-and-fast  line  for  all,  to  practise  abstinence  from  this  or  that,  out
of  regard  to  the  well-being  of  others,  or  to  practise  seasons  of  occasional  fasting  when
preparing  for  special  service  (cf.  Matt.  xvii.  21 ;  Rom.  xiv.  21 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  13).

VIII.  There  is  one  grand  rule  given  by  the  Apostle  Paul,  covering  the  whole  ground,
appropriate  to  all  occasions  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  On  referring  to  that  verse,  its  force  will  be
seen  to  be  this :  "  You  will  find  many  occasions  in  your  walks  through  life  in  which  it
may  not  at  first  be  clearly  manifest  to  you  what  course  you  should  adopt.  I  cannot
lay  down  separate  rules  for  every  possible  case.  Take  this  as  a  comprehensive,  sufS-
cient  rule,  at  all  times,  and  everywhere, '  Whatever  ye  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.' "
And  if  we  resolve  to  do  only  that  which  will  most  honour  God,  and  seek  grace  from  above
to  carry  out  our  resolve,  we  cannot  go  far  wrong.  We  shall  not  be  unwise,  but  shall
"  prove  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is."  We  shall  be  "  sincere  and  without  offence  till
the  day  of  Christ,"  to  the  glory  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour.

Vers.  22 — 29. — A  threefold  cord;  or,  the  triple  use  of  property.  These  details
which  so  frequently  occur  respecting  the  use  of  property,  specially  of  that  which  is
possessed  or  gained  in  the  form  of  produce,  may  seem  burdensome.  Probably,  to  us,
they  would  be  so,  but  it  is  nevertheless  a  topic  of  perpetual  interest  for  our  day,  to  see
how  tenderly  and  lovingly  the  Great  Father  trained  his  people,  by  such  minute  regula-
tions as  were  needful  for  them,  to  the  practice  and  perception  of  principles  which  were
to  be  ultimately  the  possession  of  the  world — principles  which  would  be  a  perpetual
spring  of  holy  and  benevolent  gladness.  We  say,  advisedly,  "  practice  and  perception
of  principles,"  rather  than  "  perception  and  practice."  For  though  it  may  seem  as  if
perception  must  come  first,  yea,  though  indeed  it  is  logically  prior  to  practice,  yet  when
a  race  tainted  with  heathen  customs  and  -tendencies  has  to  be  educated  out  of  them,
the  sure  mode  of  effecting  this  is  by  giving  them  rules  to  be  put  into  practice,  as  a
leverage  to  raise  them  to  value  the  principles  which  were  the  basis  of  those  rules.
Now  in  the  paragraph  before  us  we  have  "  a  threefold  cord  "  of  duty  with  regard  to  the
religious  use  of  the  produce  of  the  field.  The  question  (with  which  the  Exposition  has
dealt)  whether  the  third-named  tithe  was  actually  such,  or  simply  a  special  application
of  the  second,  does  not  affect  the  homiletic  treatment  of  the  paragraph  before  us.
There  is  here  indicated  to  us  a  triple  use  which  was  to  be  made  of  the  produce  of  the

DEUTEBONOMT.  B


242  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xiv.  1-29,

land.  The  enactment,  however,  is  so  franned  as  to  he  an  appeal  to  the  religion  and
devotion  of  the  people ;  it  is  not  a  mere  civil  statute,  enjoining  that,  if  such  devotement
is  not  made,  it  is  to  he  recoverable  under  pains  and  penalties.  If  a  man  failed  in  his
duty  in  these  respects,  there  was  no  compulsory  enforcement  thereof.  It  was  a  sin
before  the  Lord.

I.  The  fikst  application  of  peoduce  was  foe  God's  behvicb.  It  is  taken  for
granted  here  that  this  was  well  understood  (of.  Lev.  xxvii.  30).  Hence  we  find  the
general  precept  in  Prov.  iii.,  "  Honour  the  Lord  with  thy  substance,  and  with  the  first-
fruits  of  all  thine  increase."  There  was  to  be  a  thankful  recognition  of  God  as  the
Author  of  all  their  mercies,  without  whose  care  and  bounty  no  land  would  yield  its
supply ;  while  there  was  also  to  be  a  recognition  of  themselves  as  devoted  to  the
Lord,  and  that  so  completely  and  entirely,  that  the  maintenance  of  his  Name,  honour,
worship,  and  ordinances  among  them,  was  to  be  their  first  and  chief  concern.  This  two-
fold recognition  was  to  find  corresponding  practice  in  the  offering  of  the  first  tenth  of  their
produce  for  God.  Now  we  have,  under  the  New  Testament,  no  such  detailed  precepts.
The  appeal  of  apostles  there  is  rather  to  honour,  gratitude,  love ;  while  for  the  most
part  they  take  for  granted  that  these  emotions  will  prompt  to  a  worthy  course.  Take,
e.g.  such  an  exhortation  as  this,  "  See  that  ye  abound  in  this  grace  also,  ...  for  ye
know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  etc.  If  love  to  Christ  is  maintained  in  due
fervour,  it  will  prompt  to  corresponding  devotion  ;  and  if  by  such  constraining  devotion,
offerings  to  and  for  God  are  regulated,  there  will  be  no  need,  as  indeed  no  one  now  has
the  right,  to  tell  any  man  how  much  he  ought  to  give  to  God.  Wl)en  a  man  carries'
out  in  all  respects  the  precept, "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,"
that  will  certainly  include  and  ensure  his  honouring  the  Lord  with  his  substance.  The
faith  was  "  once  delivered  to  the  saints,"  i.e.  once  ior  all,  that  they  might  guard  and
honour  it,  and  also  diffuse  it  throush  tlie  world,  and,  without  much  detailed  injanc-
tion,  it  is  assumed  that  believers  will  be  ready  to  devote  themselves,  heart  and  soul,  to
ihe  spread  of  their  Master's  honour.

II.  A  SECOND  RELIGIOUS  APPLICATION  THEREOF   WAS  TO  FAMILF   AND   HOUSEHOLD  USE.

(Vers.  22 — 27.)  When  Israel  should  go  up  to  the  place  the  Lord  their  God  should
choose,  they  would  go  up  to  religious  sacrifice  and  service.  Hence  all  their  family
meals,  then  and  there,  would  be  baptized  with  the  religious  spirit.  So  all-pervading
would  be  the  presence  of,  and  so  sure  the  fellowship  with,  the  Lord  their  God,  that  their
family  feasts  on  such  occasions  would  be  regarded  as  "  eating  before  the  Lord  their
God."  And  by  thus  eating  before  the  Lord  on  these  special  occasions,  they  would  learn
to  hallow  home  joys  on  every  occasion.  So  ver.  23  intimates :  "  that  thou  mayest  learn
to  fear  the  Lord  thy  God  always."  Considerable  latitude  was  allowed  them  according  to
their  distance  from  the  place  of  meeting,  etc. ;  they  might  first  turn  the  produce  into
money,  and  then  the,  money  into  provision,  and  so  on.  And  they  might  purchase  what
they  desired.  For  they  were  not  slaves,  but  free  men.  They  were  the  loved  and
happy  people  of  the  Lord,  and  as  such  were  to  rejoice  before  him  in  their  family  feasts,
at  their  •sacred  festivals,  that  from  the  impulses  of  joy  and  gladness  so  sanctified  then,
they  might  come  to  realize  how  near  God  was  to  tliem,  and  how  he  would  have  them
glory  in  him  as  theirs  all  the  year  round.  It  is  not  possible  to  overrate  the  valueofthis,  even
now.  By  a  truly  religious  and  devout  man  all  the  minor  affairs  of  life  are  lifted  up
into  the  religious  region.  And  he  is  not  only  at  liberty  to  enjoy  his  possessions,  when
he  has  sanctified  the  firstfruits  for  God,  but  he  ought  so  to  enjoy  them.  God  "  hath  given
us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy."  And  when  a  godly  man  gathers  his  family  around  him
at  his  table,  with  the  table  abounding  in  ample  provision,  he  may  then  joyfully  "eat
before  the  Lord  his  God,"  in  the  full  assurance  that  such  enjoyment  is  a  part  of  the
Divine  intent,  and  that  the  love  and  care  of  God  may  and  do  put  their  own  seal  of
hallowed  and  hallowing  mirth  upon  the  use  of  common  things.

HI.    A  THIRD  BELiaiOUB  APPLICATION  OF  PRODUCE  WAS  FOR  THE  USE   AND   ENJOYMENT

OF  OTHERS.  (Vers.  28,  29.)  Whether  this  special  use  which  was  enjoined  for  every
third  year  involved  the  setting  apart  a  third  tithe,  or  whether  it  was  a  triennial  appli-
cation of  the  second,  is  a  point  the  discussion  of  which  belongs  to  others.  But  either
way,  the  principle,  we  conceive,  is  the  same,  which  we  understand  to  be  this,  "  Let  a
man  be  a  man  all  round."  God  first,  then  home,  tlien  his  neighbours.  Such  \a  to
be  the  order  of  his  action.    A  special  care  was  to  be  taken  of  the  Levite  (who,  by  the


OH.  HV.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  243

way,  was  to  be  thought  of  every  year),  as  having  charge  of  religious  arrangements,
but,  besides  these,  how  wide  a  scope  is  here  opened  up  to  a  man's  kindness  and  generosity!
"  The  stranger,  and  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow, ,  . .  shall  come,  and  shall  eat  and  be
satisfied."  Is  thjs  an  instance  of  the  hardness  of  Judaism  f  They  do  not  understand
it  who  speak  thus  of  it.  Its  spirit  was  kindness  itself ;  for  here  the  showing  of  good-
ness and  benevolence  to  the  poor  and  the  needy  is  made  a  part  of  their  religion.  Need
we  ask  the  question  whether  Christianity  has  dropped  this  out  ?  Details  may  change  ;
principles,  never !  The  Apostle  James  tells  that  the  New  Testament  ritual  is,  "  To  visit
the  fatherless  and  widows  in  their  affliction,  and  to  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the
world."  Let  us  ask,  in  conclusion,  Which  part  of  this  three/old  cord  could  bt  broken
without  serious  injury  t  For  we  see  here  that  Judaism,  in  this  triple  direction  of  duty,
does  but  recognize  the  triple  relations  of  human  life.  We  aro  related  first  and  fore-
most to  our  God,  to  whom  our  supreme  allegiance  is  due.  We  are  related  next  to  our
home,  to  our  families  and  households,  whose  interests  and  happiness  it  is  our  first
earthly  business  to  promote ;  and  then  to  our  fellow-citizens,  to  whom  we  are  bound  to
do  good,  where  we  can  and  when  we  can.  Finally,  by  way  of  ensuring  the  right  dis-
charge of  other  duties,  special  care  is  taken  to  guide  Israel  in  regard  to  the  right  use  of
property.  There  is  singular,  yea,  superhuman  wisdom  in  this.  Where  a  man's  getting
and  giving  are  right,  he  is  not  likely  to  be  far  wrong  in  anything.  Wisdom  in  adding
to,  and  giving  from,  the  contents  of  the  purse,  is  a  fair  guarantee  of  wisdom  in  other
directions.  "  The  love  of  money  is  a  root  of  all  evil,"  and  by  so  much  as  love  of  money
tends  to  deteriorate  character,  by  so  much  will  its  right  use  tend  to  elevate  it.  And
the  lifting  up  of  character  is  the  surest  siga  of  the  blessing  promised  (ver.  29).


HOMILIES  BT  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Self-respect  in  mourning.  Mourning  customs  have  significance,  as
testifying  to  the  ideas  of  God,  of  human  worth,  and  of  immortality,  held  by  those  who
practise  them.  Those  here  forbidden  were  degrading  in  their  own  nature,  and  em-
bodied the  false  idea  that  God  is  pleased  with  the  self-inflicted  miseries  of  his  creatures
They  are  condemned^-

I.  As  DisHONOURiNO  TO  THB  Creatob.  God,  the  Creator  of  the  body,  cannot  take
delight  in  seeing  it  abused.  This  proposition  seems  self-evident.  The  idea  above
referred  to,  and  which  lies  at  the  root  of  so  many  false  religions,  viz.  that  it  is  pleasing
to  the  Deity  to  see  his  creatures  torturing  and  defacing  themselves,  is  a  libel  on  the
Divine  character.  The  body  is  rather  to  be  reverenced  as  one  of  the  noblest  of  God's
works.  It  is  to  be  studiously  preserved  and  cared  for.  Religion,  with  reason,  enjoins,
"  Do  thyself  no  harm  "  (Acts  xvi.  28).

II.  As  INCONSISTENT  WITH  SELF-RESPECT.  There  Is  a  propriety  and  decorum  becoming
in  beings  who  possess  reason.  Wild  and  excessive  grief,  indicating  the  absence  of  power
of  self-control,  lowers  us  beneath  the  dignity  of  rational  existences.  Neglect  of  the
person,  and,  still  more,  wanton  self-injury,  in  grief,  betokens  a  like  absence  of  proper
self-respect.  Least  of  all  is  such  conduct  excusable  in  those  who  claim  the  dignity
of  being  God's  children.  They,  of  all  others,  ought  to  set  an  example  of  propriety  and
seemliness  in  behaviour.  They  are  "an  holy  people,"  and  must  study  to  deport
themselves  worthily  of  their  high  calling.  The  priests  of  Baal  (1  Kings  xviii.  28)
behaved  like  maniacs.  David  and  Job  behaved  like  religious  men  (2  Sam.  xii.  20 ;
Job  i.  20,  21).

III.  As  IMPLYINO  THB  ABSENCE  OF  BELXGious  CONSOLATIONS.  '  The  early  Jews  were
not  without  these  (Heb.  xi.  13, 14).  We  in  the  Christian  age  have  them  still  more
abundantly.  Therefore  must  we  not  sorrow  "as  those  which  have  no  hope"  (1  Thess.
iv.l3).— J.O.

Vera.  3— 21.— 'Gleam  and  unclean.  The  distinction  of  clean  and  unclean  appears  to
have  rested —

I.  On  natubal  obounos.  It  is  based  to  some  extent  on  natural  preferences  and
repugnances — au  index,  often,  to  deeper  correlations.     We  instinctively  recognize


244  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xiv.  1— 2a


certain  creatures  to  be  unfit  for  food.  The  Law  of  Moses  drew  the  line  practically  where
men's  unguided  instincts  have  always  drawn  it.  A  lesson  of  respect  for  natural  order.
In  diet,  as  in  higher  matters,  we  do  well  to  follow  Nature's  guidance,  avoiding  violations
of  her  laws,  and  refraining  from  obliterating  her  distinctions.

II.  On  ceremonial  grounds.  The  prohibition  against  eating  of  blood  had  conse-
quences in  the  region  of  cleanness  and  uncleanness  of  food.  All  flesh-eating  and
blood-eating  animals — all  beasts  and  birds  of  prey  —  were  of  necessity  excluded.
Ceremonially  unclean  themselves,  they  could  not  be  clean  to  those  eating  them.

III.  On  symbolic  okounds.  The  symbolic  traits  observable  in  certain  animals  may
have  had  to  do  with  their  rejection.  We  can  see  reason  in  the  exclusion  of  creatures  of
cruel  and  rapaoioua  habits,  of  those  also  in  whose  dispositions  we  trace  a  reflection
of  the  human  vices.  It  may  be  pushing  the  principle  too  far  to  seek  recondite
meanings  in  the  chewing  of  the  cud  (meditation)  and  the  dividing  of  the  hoof
(separation  of  walk),  or  in  the  possession  of  fins  and  scales  in  fishes  (organs  of  advance
and  resistance).  But  a  Law  impregnated  with  symbolism  could  scarcely  reckon  as  clean
a  filthy  and  repulsive  creature  like  the  sow.  The  accursed  serpent,  the  treacherous
fox,  the  ravenous  jackal,  even  had  they  been  suitable  for  food  in  other  respects,  could
•scarcely  on  this  principle  have  been  admitted.  Tlie  reptile  tribes  generally,  and  all
'ribss  of  vermin,  were  similarly  unclean  by  a  kind  of  natural  brand.  A  lesson  of
'■mmg  in  the  natural  a  symbol  of  the  moral.  Nature  is  a  symbolic  lesson-book,  daily
'pen  to  our  inspection.

The  distinction  once  ordained,  and  invested  with  religious  significance,  observance
>f  it  became  to  the  Jews  a  sign  and  test  of  holiness.  The  general  lesson  taught  is  that
jf  sanctijkation  in  the  use  of  food.-  Holiness,  indeed,  is  to  be  carried  into  every  sphere
ind  act  of  life.  Eating,  however,  is  an  act  which,  though  on  its  animal  side  related  to
the  grossest  part  of  us,  is  yet,  on  its  spiritual  side,  of  serious  religious  import.  It  is  the
net  by  which  we  supply  oil  to  the  flame  of  life.  It  has  to  do  with  the  maintenance
of  those  vital  functions  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  glorify  Gud  in  the  body.  Ther*-
is  thus  a  natural  sacredness  about  food,  and  it  is  to  be  received  and  used  in  a  sacre(v
fashion.  That  it  i  iiy  be  "  clean  "  to  us,  it  is  to  be  "  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  Goo
and  prayer,"  being  "  received  with  thanksgiving  of  thorn  which  believe  and  know
■  the  trnth  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  3 — 5).  It  is  to  be  remembered,  too,  that  in  the  sphere  of  the
higher  life,  if  not  in  the  lower,  clean  and  unclean  are  distinctions  of  abiding  validity.
hitoUcct,  heart,  spirit,  etc. — the  books  we  read,  the  company  we  keep,  the  principles  we
imbibe. — J.  0.

Ver.  21. — Seething  •  hid  in  ilt  mother's  milk.  This  precept,  several  times  repeated
in  the  Law  (Exod.  xxiii.  16;  xxxiv.  25),  may  be  connected  with  magical  superstitions,
but  it  is  equally  probable  that  the  a43t  was  condemned  as  an  outrage  on  the  connection
naturally  subsisting  between  parent  and  offspring.  It  is  tLus  related  to  the  commands
forbidding  the  killing  of  a  cow  and  a  calf  on  the  same  day  (Lev.  xxii.  28),  or  the
taking  a  bird  with  its  young  (ch.  xxii.  6),  and  to  the  precepts  enjoining  a  scrupulous
regard  for  natural  distinctions — not  sowing  a  field  with  mingled  seed,  etc.  (Lev.  xix.
19).     It  suggests —

I.  The  ddtt  of  oherishino  the  finer  inbtinots  of  cub  nature.  The  act  here
forbic'.din  could  hardly  be  called  cruelty,  the  kid  being  dead,  but  it  was  unnatural.  It
argued  a  blunted  state  of  the  sympathies.  A  finer  instinct,  alive  to  the  tenderness  of
the  relation  between  parent  and  offspring,  would  have  disallowed  it.  It  is  beautiful  to
see  the  ancient  Law  inculcating  tliis  rare  and  delicate  fineness  of  feeling — this  con-
sideratcness  and  sympathy  even  for  dtad  animals.  The  lesson  is  that  everything  is  to  be
avoided  which  would'tend  to  blunt  our  moral  sensibilities.  The  act  has  its  analogue  in
higher  relations.  Not  unfrequently  has  the  affection  cf  a  parent  befen  used  by  the
ingenuity  of  cruelty  to  inflict  keener  tortures  on  a  child ;  or,  conversely,  a  child  has
been  betrayed  into  disclosures  afterwards  used  to  injure  the  parent.

II.  The  duty  of  consideration  in  dealing  with  ibbational  creatures.  1.  It
is  right  that  irrational  creatures  should  be  treated  kindly.  And  if  the  Law  required
that  this  delicate  consideration  should  be  shown  towards  dead  animals,  how  much  more
does  it  require  of  us  kindly  treatment  of  them  while  living  1  2.  Our  behaviour  towards
irrational  creatures,  as  seen  above,  reacts  upon  ourselves.    In  certain  cases,  this  i«


CH.  XIV.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  245


readily  perceived.  Most  people  would  shrink  from  the  wanton  mutilation  of  a  dead
animal,  even  in  sport,  and  would  admit  the  react;ve  effect  of  such  an  action  in  deaden-
ing humane  instincts  in  him  who  did  it.  But  it  is  the  same  with  all  cruelty  and
unfeelingness.  Any  action  which,  in  human  relationships,  would  be  condemned  as
unsympathetic,  will  be  found,  if  performed  to  animals,  to  have  a  blunting  effect  on  the
sensibilities  of  the  agent.  A  man's  dog  is  more  to  him  than  a  brute.  He  ii  a  friend.
We  can  carry  into  our  behaviour  towards  the  irrational  creatures  many  of  the  feelings
which  actuate  us  in  our  personal  relations,  and  the  more  we  do  it,  the  better  for
ourselves. — J.  0.  •

Vers.  22 — 29. — The  second  titJie,  We  adopt,  the  usual  view,  that  the  lawgiver  is
here  regulating  the  disposal  of  what,  in  later  times,  was  called  "  the  second  tithe."  The
hypothesis  that  the  book  was  written  at  a  late  date,  when  the  gift  of  tithes  to  the
Levites,  prescribed  in  Numb,  xviii.,  had  fallen  into  disuse,  is  unsuppirted  by  evidence.
The  provision  in  Deuteronomy  would  have  furnished  no  support  worth  speaking  of  to
the  enormous  Levitical  establishments  of  the  post-Davidic  period  (1  Chron.  xxiii. —
xxvii. ;  2  Chron.  xxix.) ;  nor  are  we  prepared  to  concede,  what  is  often  so  conveniently
assumed,  the  non-authenticity  of  these  sections  of  the  chroiiicler.    We  learn —

I.  That  piety  and  ohaeity  aeb  to  be  liberally  provided  for  in  the  appor-
tionment OF  INCOME.  The  tithes  were  to  be  faithfully  and  punctually  set  apart  as  a
first  charge  upon  the  Jew's  income.  The  second  or  vegetable  tithe  was  appointed  to  be
consumed  in  feasts  at  the  sanctuary,  or,  in  the  third  year,  at  home.  A  lesson  is  taught
here  as  to  the  duty  of  liberal,  systematic,  and  conscientious  giving  for  religious  and
charitable  purposes.  Christians,  it  is  true,  are  not  under  Law,  but  under  grace.  But
it  will  scarcely  be  pleaded  that  on  this  account  they  are  less  bound  to  liberality  than
Jews  were.  The  argument  is  all  the  other  way ;  if  this  was  done  under  Law,  how
much  more  ought  to  be  done  under  the  impulse  of  love  to  Christ  1  Unfortunately,  the
duty  of  systematic  and  proportionate  giving  is  but  little  recognized.  It  would  put
many  a  Christian  to  the  blush  if  he  would  sit  down  at  the  year's  end,  and  (1)  reckon
up  the  sum  of  his  year's  givings  to  Christ,  and  (2)  calculate  its  proportion  to  what  he
has  thought  himself  at  liberty  to  expend  upon  hia|  own  comforts  and  pleasures.  Nor
will  there  be  improvement  in  this  matter  till  giving  for  religious  and  charitable  objects
is  made  a  point  in  conscience,  and  till  a  suitable  proportion  of  income  is  set  apart  for
this  purpose  in  advance.  That  proportion  is  to  be  determined  by  the  degree  to  which
God  has  prospered  us  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2).  The  ever-widening  operations  of  the  Church  at
home  and  abroad,  the  constantly  multiplying  claims  of  a  wise  Christian  philanthropy,
render  liberal  givings  increasingly  necessary.

II.  That  obedience  to  the  spirit  of  a  law  is  of  greater  impobtanok  than  •
OBEDIENCE  TO  ITS  LETTER.  (Vcrs.  24 — 26.)  God  is  not  a  hard  master — reaping  where
he  has  not  sown,  and  gathering  where  he  has  not  strawed  (Matt.  xxv.  4).  He  is
tenderly  considerate  of  the  circumstances  of  his  people.  He  asks  no  more  from  them
than  they  are  able  to  render.  Where  laws  could  not  be  kept  in  the  letter,  modifications
were  introduced  which  made  obedience  practicable.  This  is  seen  in  the  accommodation
of  the  laws  of  sacrifice  to  the  circumstances  of  the  poor  (Lev.  t.  7,  etc.),  in  the  rules
for  commutation  (Lev.  xxvii.),  in  the  relaxation  of  the  law  about  eating  flesh  (ch.  xii.
21),  iu  this  law  of  tithes.  Gleaming  through  these  changes,  it  is  easy  to  detect  the
principle  that  the  letter  of  an  ordinance  is  in  all  cases  subordinate  to  the  spirit  of
obedience  which  manifests  itself  through  it;  and  that,  'vhile  obedience  to  the  letter  is
required  where  possible,  the  will,  in  circumstances  where  it  cannot  be  observed,  will
readily  be  accepted  by  Jehovah  for  the  deed.

III.  That  provided  religious  motives  pbbdominate,  and  otheb  duties  abe  not

NEGLECTED,  THE  ENJOYMENT  OF  WHAT  WB  HAVE  IS  PLEASING  TO  GoD.      (Vers.  25,  26.)

True  religion  is  not  ascetic.  It  does  not  frown  our  joy.  It  regulates,  but  does  not  seek
CO  banish,  the  pleasures  of  the  festive  board,  and  the  flow  uf  the  soul  connected  there-
with (John  ii.  1 — 12 ;  1  Cor.  x.  27 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  18).  The  sanctuary  services  were
associated  with  feasts,  in  which,  of  course,  religious  motives  were  expected  to  predomi-
nate. The  eating  was  "  before  the  Lord,"  mA  the  guests  were  invariably  to  includr
the  Levite,  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow.  This  would  give  a  high-toned
character  to  the  feast,  and  would  preclude  coarse  debauchery.   Festivities  should  be  m


24«  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xiv.  1—29

conducted  that  God's  presence  can  be  invoked,  and  his  blessing  asked  on  all  that  is  said
and  done.

IV.  That  the  enjoyment  of  what  we  have  is  enhanced  by  sharino  it  with
OTHERS.  (Ver.  29.)  This  is  a  truth  recognized  in  all  festivity.  But  the  Law  gave  the
truth  a  peculiar  turn  when  it  bade  the  Jew  seek  his  guests  among  the  classes  who  were
most  in  need.  The  Saviour  would  have  us  recall  our  feasting  to  the  like  pattern  (Luke
xiv  12 — 14).  Each  feast  of  the  kind  prescribed  would  be  an  invaluable  education  of
the  aisinterested  affections  in  their  purest  exercise.  How  far  we  have  departed  from
this  idea  may  be  seen  in  the«etiff,  exclusive,  and  ceremonious,  if  often  superb  and  stately,
dinner-parties  and  public  feasts  of  modern  society.  Which  type  of  feast  contributes
most  to  happiness  ?  And  is  it  not  in  fulfilling  the  duties  of  a  warm-hearted  love  that
we  are  most  entitled  to  expect  blessing  from  our  Maker  (ver.  29)  ?  When  Jesus  made
his  great  supper,  he  acted  on  his  own  principle,  and  invited  the  "  poor,  and  the  maimed,
and  the  halt,  and  the  blind,"  to  come  and  sit  down  at  it  (Luke  xiv.  21). — J.  0.

Vers.  1,  2. — Sorrow  is  to  he  in  holy  hopefulness.  After  guarding  them  so  carefully
from  all  idolatry,  Moses  next  charges  the  Israelites  not  to  imitate  the  heathen  nations
by  mutilating  themselves  or  making  themselves  bald  for  the  dead.  The  reason
assigned  is  their  consecration  unto  the  Lord.  There  must  have  been,  therefore,  in
these  heathen  practices  sometliing  unholy  expressed.  Let  us  fii-st  consider  what  this
was,  and  then  proceed  to  the  lessons  in  the  prohibition.

I.  What  was  meant  by  cotting  one's  self  and  making  one's  self  bald  fob  the
DEAD  ?  It  implied  manifestly  &0VC1&  post-mortem  merit  and  service.  It  was  akin  to  the
sacrifices  which  often  have  been  presented  in  connection  with  death.  It  was  the  sacrifice
of  something  short  of  life,  but  yet  valuable.  It  was  the  sacrifice  of  sightliness,  if  not
of  beauty,  in  the  interests  of  the  dead.  It  implied  that  something  could  be  done  for
the  departed  by  those  who  remained,  and  which  self-denying  love  gladly  undertook.

Hence  these  practices  brought  out  the  hopelessness  of  sorrow  as  it  exists  in  the
heathen  woild,  and  the  desire  to  propitiate  offended  Deity  by  sympathetic  suffering
and  sacrifice.

II.  The  pbohibition  summoned  the  Jews  to  hopeful  sobbow.  The  dead  were  to
be  regarded  as  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  he  was  to  be  trusted  with  them  absolutely.
No  post-mortem  sacrifices  were  to  be  attempted,  but  the  cases  left  with  implicit  con-
fidence to  the  ever-living  and  gracious  Father.  "  Prayers  for  the  dead  "  and  "  Masses
for  the  dead  "  but  express  the  pitifulness  of  human  hope,  and  the  dread  and  doubt  with
which  the  dead  are  left  in  the  hands  of  God.  Israel  was  prohibited  from  any  such
infirmity.

III.  They  were  even  to  begabd  themselves  as  consecrated  to  the  ltvino  God,

AND  consequently  NOT  TO  BE  DESECBATED  THBOUQH  MUTILATION  FOB  THE  DEAD.      The

danger  sometimes  is  for  people  to  forget  their  dedication  to  God  amid  all  the  loneliness
of  their  sorrow.  The  dead  absorb  attention.  God  has  been  removing  "  idols,"  but  the
idols  have  become,  through  death,  more  and  more  to  them.  Too  much  cannot  be  made
of  the  dead,  they  think,  and  so  they  would  make  a  perpetual  dedication  of  themselves
to  the  dead,  forgetful  of  their  relations  to  the  living  God  above.  Now,  it  is  this  ever-
lasting relation  which  God  insists  upon.  Nothing  can  be  better,  surely,  than  in  sorrow
to  be  reminded,  "  Thou  art  an  holy  people  unto  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  the  Lord  thy
God  hath  chosen  thee  to  be  a  peculiar  people  unto  himself,  above  all  the  nations  that
are  upon  the  earth."  It  is  just  this  which  bereavement  is  intended  to  make  emphatic.
God  claims  us  as  his  own :  let  not  the  dead  make  perpetual  marks  upon  your  persons
as  if  they  had  the  right  to  your  life-long  service.  This  is  desecration  instead  of  ccmsecrw-
Hon.  Unreasonable  attachment  to  the  dead  may  be  the  denial  of  due  consecration  to
the  living  God.

iV.  Uncommon  conseobation  to  God  should  bb  oub  ideaIi.  Israel  was  to  be  a
peculiar  people  unto  God  "  above  all  the  nations  that  are  upon  the  earth."  All  nations
glorify  God  in  some  degree,  even  in  spite  of  themselves.  But  his  own  people  are  wise
in  aiming  at  special  consecration.  There  is  nothing  so  important  as  the  highest  possible
ideaL  Devoted  to  this,  we  attain  to  tfDmething  higher  and  nobler  than  it  po8abl«
otherwise.


m.  xir.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEtJTEROi^OMY.  HI

"Lord,  we  can  trust  thee  for  our  holy  dead.
They,  underneath  the  shadow  of  thy  tomh,
Have  entered  into  peace ;  with  bended  head
We  thank  thee  for  their  rest,  and  for  our  lightened  gloom."

R.  M.  E.

Vers.  3—11.—^  holy  people  will  eat  sanctified  things.  The  regulation  of  the  diet  of
the  children  of  Israel  was  most  important  in  view  of  their  remaining;  a  "peculiar
people"  unto  God.  In  no  way  half  so  effectual  could  they,  as  a  nation,  be  kept  distinct
from  other  nations,  with  whom  it  was  undesirable  on  religious  grounds  that  they  should
associate.  By  interdicting  some  of  the  animals  used  by  surrounding  and  heathen
nations,  the  Lord,  as  far  as  possible,  prevented  Israel's  association  with  them.  To  this
they  had  been  accustomed  in  Egypt ;  for  some  of  the  animals  they,  as  Israelites,  would
eat  were  regarded  as  sacred  by  the  Egyptians,  and  on  no  account  would  be  slain  or  eaten
by  them.  Hence  the  slaves  had  never  commingled  with  their  taskmasters.  The  two
rivers  would  not  coalesce.  The  Canaanites  and  Phoenicians,  again,  ate  freely  of  flesh
that  the  Hebrew  dare  not  touch ;  and  even  the  Arab  would  eat  such  animals  as  the
camel,  the  hare,  and  thejerloa,  all  of  which — the  latter  translated  "  mouse  " — were  for-
bidden to  the  children  of  Israel.

I.  The  begulation  of  meats  is  the  most  impobtaiiit  way  of  bepabatinq  one
NATION  FROM  ALL  OTHER  NATIONS.  For  if  association  at  table  is  an  impossibility,  all
other  association  will  be  very  superficial  and  comparatively  ■  harmless.  "  Nothing
more  eifeotual,"  says  Dr.  Kitto,  "  could  be  devised  to  keep  one  people  distinct  from
another.  It  causes  the  difference  between  them  to  be  ever  present  to  the  mind,
touching,  as  it  does,  upon  so  many  points  of  social  and  everyday  contact ;  and  it  is
therefore  far  more  efficient  in  its  results,  as  a  rule  of  distinction,  than  any  difference  in
doctrine,  worship,  or  morals  which  men  could  entertain.  ...  It  is  a  mutual  repulsion
continually  operating ;  and  its  effect  may  be  estimated  from  the  fact  that  no  nation  in
which  a  distinction  of  meats  was  I'igidly  enforced  as  a  part  of  a  religious  system,  has
ever  changed  its  religion."'  And  we  are  surely  taught  the  wisdom  of  expedients  to
keep  up  the  desirable  separation  between  the  Church  and  the  world.  If  every  religious
custom  were  abandoned,  and  the  conduct  of  religious  people  were  conformed  in  all  par-
ticulars to  that  of  their  worldly  neighbours,  religion  would  soon  become  a  name,  and
nothing  more.  "Be  not  contbrmed  to  this  world,  but  be  ye  transformed  by  the
renewing  of  your  mind  "  (Rom.  xii.  2).

II.  The   DISTINCTION   BETWEEN   THE   ANIMALS   SYMBOLIZED    THE    DISTINCTION    WHICH

SHOULD  EXIST  BETWEEN  Gon's  PEOPLE  AND  THE  WORLD.  An  excellent  Writer  has  sug-
gested that  in  individual  development  we  pass  through  the  stages  attributed  to  the
organic  world  "ks  a  whole ;  children,  for  example,  passing  through  the  "  parrot "  or
the  "  monkey  "  stage.'  "  Animated  nature "  seems  designed  to  mirror  "  human  nature,"
whether  in  its  evil  or  in  its  good  propensities.  Man  finds  himself  in  the  image  of  the
lower  animals  as  well  as,  on  his  higher  side,  in  the  image  of  God.  In  conformity  with
this  arrangement,  then,  the  Jew  was  trained  to  regard  certain  animals  as  clean  and
edible,  while  others  were  unclean  and  forbidden.  Towards  the  one  class  he  was  drawn,
from  the  other  he  was  repelled.  Now,  in  the  clean  animals  may  be  discovered  certain
good  qualities,  which  make  them  fit  illustrations  of  the  moralities  expected  from  an
Israelite.  For  examijle,  the  characteristic  of  rumination,  which  belonged  to  the  clean
animals,  was  a  fit  type  of  that  thougnt/ulness  and  quiet  meditation  which  should  cha-
racterize the  people  of  God.  Again,  sure-footedness  characterizes  the  animals  with  the
cloven  hoof,  which  symbolizes  the  stea'ifasiness  of  religious  character.  Speed  and
clsanliness  also  characterize  the  fishes  that  were  accounted  clean.

On  the  other  hand,  the  unclean  beasts,  birds,  and  fish  illustrate  most  powerfully  the
lustful,  selfish,  and  impure  spirit  which  characterizes  unregenerate  man.  Not  only,
therefore,  did  the  distinction  among  the  animals  secure  the  desired  national  separation,
but  also  that  poetic  outlook  upon  nature  which  discovers  in  it  a  great  parable  for  the
soul.*    Thus  Emerson  says,  "  Every  rational  creature  has  all  nature  for  his  dowry  and

*  « The  Pictorial  Bible,'  on  Lev.  xl.  '  Of.  Secretan's  '  Discours  Laiques,'  p.  74.

•  Of.  Kurtz's  'Sacrificial  Worship,'  pp.  22,  23;  also  Pmcipal  Shairp's  'Poetio  Inter-
pretation of  Nature ; '  Emerson's  '  Miscellanies,'  eto.


248  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xiv.  1—29


estate.  It  is  his,  if  he  will.  He  may  divest  himself  of  it ;  he  may  creep  into  a  comer
and  abdicate  his  kingdom,  as  most  men  do,  but  he  is  entitled  to  the  wot  id  by  his  con<
stitution.  In  proportion  to  the  energy  of  his  thought  and  will,  he  takes  up  the  world
unto  himself."    What  a  richness  of  thought  is  thus  afforded  to  the  thoughtful  soul !

III.  That  which  died  of  itself  was  also  excluded  from  the  diet  of  Israel.
In  such  a  case  there  was  no  guarantee  that  the  blood  had  been  properly  drained  from
the  carcase,  and  that  the  atoning  element  had  been  solemnly  eliminated  from  it.  In
fact,  in  such  cases  there  is  not  the  sacrifice  of  life  which  we  have  seen  to  obtain  in  the
normal  sustenance  of  the  world.  God's  people  consequently  must  avoid  all  contact
with  death,  and  keep  themselves  pure  unto  him.  And  this  arrangement  surely  symbo-
lized that  watchfulness  over  our  contact  with  the  world,  which  should  characterize  all
professors  of  religion.  We  must  "  keep  our  garments  unspotted  from  the  world,"  we
must  even  in  certain  critical  times  "  let  the  dead  bury  their  dead,"  and  deny  ourselves
that  intercourse  with  the  spiritually  dead  which  otherwise  might  be  most  proper.

IV.  A  KID  WAS  NOT  TO  BE  SEETHED  IN  HIS  MOTHER'S  MILK.  A  quotation  fiom  an  old
writer  will  best  improve  this  commandment.  "  This  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  com-
mand. Content  yoxirselves  to  eat  the  kid,  but  take  heeil  that  ye  eat  not  the  dam  also ;
neither  is  this  the  meaning  of  it,  Ye  shall  not  eat  flesh  with  milk,  as  the  Chaldee
paraphrast  paraphraseth  it ;  neither  is  this  the  meaning  of  it,  Take  heed  that  ye  seethe
not  the  kid  in  the  mother's  milk,  as  the  superstitious  Jews  expound  it  at  this  day ;
they  will  not  seethe  flesh  and  milk  in  one  pot,  neither  will  they  cut  both  flesh  and
cheese  with  one  knife;  and  amongst  the  precepts  which  they  have  written  of  things
lawful  to  be  eaten,  they  forbid  the  eating  of  flesh  and  milk  together;  but  tlie  meaning
of  the  place  seemeth  to  be  this.  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  a  kid  as  of  a  lamb  (for  so  the  LXX.
translate  it)  so  long  as  it  sucketh  the  dam,  for  all  this  time  it  is  as  it  were  but  milk  ;
they  might  sacrifice  it  when  it  was  but  eight  days  old,  but  not  to  eat  of  it  so  long  as  it
was  sucking  (1  Sam.  vii.  9).  'Samuel  took  a  sucking  lamb  and  offered.""  This
would  consequently  form  a  ceremonial  appendix  to  the  sixth  commandment,  and  would
teach  that  abstinence  from  the  semblance  of  cruelty  which  should  characterize  the
people  of  the  Lord.  In  accepting  of  God's  bounty  in  the  matter  of  flesh,  care  should  be
taken  that  no  unnatural  cruelty  should  be  practised  or  encouraged.

The  sanctified  ones  are  thus  taught  to  keep  themselves  separate  from  the  world,  to
regard  nature  as  a  great  parable  for  the  soul,  and  to  conduct  themselves  in  that  con-
siderate spirit  which  should  characterize  the  disciples  of  Jesus. — K.  M,  E.

Vers.  22 — 29. — Syslematic  provision  for  fellowship  with  Ood.  From  the  arrange-
ments about  ordinary  diet,  we  pass  now  to  the  minute  directions  about  "  eating  before
God."  A  tithe  of  the  corn,  the  wine,  and  the  oil,  together  with  the  firstlings  of  their
flocks  and  herds,  must  be  devoted  to  the  purposes  of  fellowship.  It  is  clear  from  this,
then,  that  God  designed  a  systematic  storing  of  the  tenth  part  of  the  Jewish  income
for  the  purposes  of  religion.  If  the  Jew  resided  far  from  the  tabernacle,  then  he  was
to  sell  the  tithe,  and  turning  it  into  money,  he  was  to  go  up  with  this  to  the  central
altar,  and  there  invest  in  whatever  his  soul  desired,  and  partake  of  it  all  before  God.  In
this  the  Levite  was  to  have  his  share.  Over  and  above  all  this,  every  third  year  there
was  to  he  a  second  tithe  devoted  to  the  delectation  of  the  poor.  Now,  we  learn  from
these  arrangements —

I.  That  fellowship  with  God  ib  the  crown  of  true  religion.  A  feast  with  God,
he  taking  the  best  portions,  his  priests  the  next  best,  and  the  offerer  joyful  over  the
remainder  of  the  sacrifice,  constituted  the  glory  of  the  Jewish  ritual.  All  the  sin  offer-
ings, burnt  offerings,  and  meat  offerings  were  valueless  if  not  crowned  by  the  peace
ofi'ering  and  its  feast  of  fellowship.  No  wonder  our  Lord  makes  out  fellowship  to  be
the  substance  of  eternal  life,  when  in  his'prayer  he  says,  "  And  this  is  life  eternal,  to
know  thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast  sent"  (John  xvii.  ?).
If  we  are  not  led  up  into  this  acquaintanceship,  our  religion  is  a  name  and  not  a
reality.

II.  The  fellowship  b  well  worth  ant  expense  it  hat  intoltb.  While  it  Is,  of
course,  true  that^God's  blessings  are  gratuitous,  "-without  money  and  without  price,"  it

•  Weemse  on  '  The  Ceremonial  Law,'  p.  137.


cH  XIV.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  249

is  also  true  that  a  niggardly  soul  will  fall  out  of  fellowship.  In  fact,  fellowship  with
God  will  seem  so  precious  as  to  be  worth  infinitely  more  than  all  our  possessions,  and
»ny  proportion  of  these  required  by  God  for  the  maintenance  of  fellowshii)  will  seem  a
small  price.  Our  conviction  will  be  that  of  the  psalmist,  "  The  Law  of  thy  mouth  is
better  unto  me  ibsa.  thousaiLds  of  gold  and  silver."

Now,  while  God's  favour  is  given  fruely,  there  must  evidently  be  something  about
which  he  and  we  can  have  fellowship.  In  other  words,  fellowship  requires  a  medium.
Fellowship  means  having  something  in  common.  When  we  analyze  all  we  have,  we
find  that  it  is  all  "the  gift  of  God."  Jesus  is  his  gift;  the  Holy  Spirit  is  his  gift;
money  is  his  gift;  every  good  thing  is  his  gift  (Jas.  i.  17).  He  has  surely  every  right,
then,  to  say  to  his  people,  "You  must  dedicate  a  proportion  of  my  pifis  to  you,  for
the  purposes  of  fellowship;  let  us  have  a  tithe  in  common  ;  let  us  rcjoire  mutually
over  it  as  ours."  This  was  the  principle  underlying  Jewish  tithing— it  is  the  principle
underlying  all  genuine  beneficence.  \Ve  are  only  returning  to  God  such  a  proportion
of  what  he  gives  as  shall  be  the  medium  of  fellowship.

A  peace  offering  at  the  tabernacle  was  a  most  precious  commodity.  It  was  an  animal
regarding  which  the  worshipper  and  God  agreed  to  say,  "  It  is  ours,"  ami  each  to  feast
upon  it.  It  was  the  o  gan  and  mians  of  fellowship.  It  was  a  delight  to  God  and  to
man.  Who  would  not  pay  anything  required  for  such  a  privilege  ?  Man  is  honoured
most  highly  in  being  allowed  such  a  partnership  with  God.

III.  The  sense  of  fellowship  with  God  in  the  feast  is  the  real  pkesebvation
OP  MAN  PROM  UNDUE  INDULGENCE.  It  is  notici able  that  "  wine"  and  "strong  drink"
(i3?f)  might  be  included  in  the  feast  before  God.  The  safety  of  the  partaker  lay  in  the
sense  of  fellowship  and  its  consequent  consecration.  Just  as  Paul  afterwards  maintained
that  "every  creature  of  God  is  good,  and  nothing  to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received  with
thanksgiving;  for  it  is  sanctified  by  the  Word  of  God  and  piayor"  (1  Tim.  iv.  4,  5).
It  is  the  urhallowed  use  of  God's  gifts  which  is  the  danger.  The  temperance  reforma-
tion will  dj  well  to  keep  in  view  this  Divine  side  of  the  question,  where  in  the  last
resort  the  stress  must  be  laid.

IV.  I'he  fellowship  with  God  implies  the  invitation  of  others  to  shark  the
BLESSING  with  US.  Our  households  and  the  Levite  are  to  be  partakers  with  us  of  our
sacred  feasts.  For  God  does  not  encourage  lonely  satisfactions ;  but  as  he  calls  us  into
his  fellowship,  it  is  on  the  understanding  that  we  .^hall  invite  others,  and  make  the
fellowship  a  family  thing.  Now,  the  support  of  tl  e  Levilcs  was  to  be  a  matter  of  cheer-
fulness and  religious  privilege.  It  was  to  be  a  juy  embraced  I'ather  than  a  mere  debl
moodily  discharged.  It  is  surely  here  that  "  ministerial  sup|  ort  "  must  be  pleaded  and
advanced.  It  is  not  to  be  something  doled  out,  but  a  least  of  fellowship,  the  call  of
God's  minister  fo  share  in  our  good  fortune  and  success.

v.  The  caeb  of  the  poor  must  also  be  put  upon  the  basis  op  fellowship.  It
has  been  made  a  matter  of  law.  And  doubtless  theie  is  a  noble  element  in  the  fact
that  a  nation,  passing  beyond  what  old  moralists  called  duties  of  debt,  has  entered  upon
duties  of  merit.  Still,  the  national  obligation  embodied  in  the  "  poor  rates  "  is  apt  to
sap  a  certain  amount  of  individual  sympathy.  The  care  of  the  poor  is  not  the  feast
of  joy  and  fellowship  God  meant  it  to  be.'  The  three  yenrs'  system  brought  under  our
notice  in  this  passage  was  an  effort,  apparently,  to  bring  the  lonely  and  needy  classes
up  to  the  standard  of  fellowship  and  of  joj'  that  the  religious  Jew  himself  had  attained.
It  was  the  systematic  effort  to  make  the  needy  ones  glad  before  Ood.  And  it  is  here
that  we  find  the  goal  of  our  exertions,  whether  to  support  a  minister,  to  comfort  a
stranger,  or  a  fatherless  child,  or  a  widow.  Let  all  be  guests  of  our  love,  and  lifted,
if  possible,  into  our  light  and  fellowship  with  God,  For  this  we  should  strive
evermore.

VI.  Those  who  thus  honour  God  will  be  blessed  and  honoured  by  him.  Not,
of  course,  that  systematic  beneficence  should  be  in  any  sense  a  speculation.  It  is  nut
beneficence  if  it  is  a  selfish  investment.  But  at  the  same  time,  Gnd  blesses  the  system
which  recognizes  obligation  to  him  and  tries  to  discharge  it.  The  accurate  survey  o(
circumstances  which  systematic  giving  implies  tends  to  financial  success.  There  is  no
reason  why  religious  men  should  not  be  "successful  merchants."     Were  systematic

'  0£  'The  Philosophy  of  the  Poor  Laws,'  in  Miss  Cobbe's  '  Studies  Ethical  and  SodaL'


250  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.  [ch.  xiv.  1-  ^liO,

beneficence  more  general,  there  would  be  less  failure  and  heart-burning  in  ibe  walks  of
business. — E.  M.  E.

Vers.  1,  2. — Against  conformity  with  heathen  customs.  Israel  had  been  called  lu
honourable  privilege;  therefore  it  was  fitting  there  should  be  seemly  conduct.  Eoyal
children  should  be  royal  in  all  their  acts.

I.  Israel's  special  privilege.  They  enjoyed  a  position  superior  to  all  the  nations
of  the  earth.  1.  They  were  the  ohjects  of  Ood's  choice.  Out  of  all  the  peoples  and
tribes  which  dwelt  on  this  round  globe,  Israel  had  been  selected  for  a  noble  purpose.
We  may  not  be  able  to  divine  the  reason,  for  our  knowledge  is  exceedingly  small.  Yet
God,  who  does  notliing  unwisely,  did  in  this  matter  the  wisest  tliina;.  2.  JTiey  had
been  chosen  to  sonship.  God  had  revealed  himself  to  these  Hebrews  in  a  special  and
endearing  character.  Had  he  not  informed  them  of  his  dispositions  towards  them  and
his  loving  interest  in  them,  they  would  not  have  dared  to  call  him  Father.  In  special
condescension  he  informed  them  that  he  would  treat  them,  in  all  substantial  respects,
as  a  father  doth  his  children.  3.  They  had  been  chosen  to  righteous  character.  By
virtue  of  this  choice,  they  were  on  the  high  road  to  perfection.  Their  destiny  was  not
secured  irrespective  of  their  own  will  and  choice.  They  were  now  consecrated  to  the
Divine  service  of  Jehovali,  and  must  perform  holy  actions,  foster  holy  habits,  so  as  to
acquire  a  holy  character.    This  is  man's  highest  reward — a  heaven  within.

II.  A  sPBCiFio  PROHIBITION.  A  prohibition  against  self-mutilation.  There  were
natural  outlets  for  abundant  grief — tears,  sighs,  and  moans;  these  self-mutilations
were  unnatural  and  irrational.  .1.  Betause  inordinate  sorrow  for  the  aeath  of  friends
is  sinful.  Moderate  grief  iS  allowable  i  it  is  the  necessary  concomitant  of  strong  affec-
tion. But  as  we  should  enjoy  every  friend  as  a  gift  of  God,  so  our  sorrow  at  sejjaration
should  be  accompanied  by  filial  submission.  2.  Because  such  symhols  of  mourning  wme
iften  pretences.  Frequently,  if  not  usually,  this  manifest  sorrow  was  assumed.  'Twas
mere  trickery  and  falsehood.  Such  actions  injured  and  deteriorated  character.  3.  Because
even  the  body  is  the  property  of  Ood.  There  is  no  part  of  his  nature  which  the  true
Israelite  does  not  recognize  as  belonging  to  God.  Throtighout,  he  is  Jehovah's  temple.
Every  faculty  of  body,  every  organ  and  member,  is  to  be  utilized  for  God,  is  to  be
preserved  in  health  and  vigour  to  do  credit  to  Jehovah.  "  His  Name  is  to  be  upon  tui
foreheads."  4.  Because  this  self -mutilation  would  he  conformity  with  heathen  customs.
The  practices  connected  with  idol-worship  were  dictated  by  a  spirit  of  cruelty — by  the
genius  of  Satan.  Par  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  or  north  pole  from  the  south,  were
the  followers  of  God  to  withdraw  from  heathen  practices.  As.  sane  men  flee  from
pestilence,  so  should  pious  men  avoid  the  neighbourhood  of  sin. — D.

Vers.  3 — ^21. — Discrimination  in  meats.  The  prohibition  of  some  kinds  of  food
proceeds  upon  the  principle  that  it  is  not  wise  to  gratify  every  appetite.  There  must
be  denial  somewhere.  If  every  desire  and  lust  of  the  body  be  indulged,  injury  will
ensue  to  the  nobler  capacities  of  the  soul.  Pruning  of  the  wild  growths  of  carnal
desire  is  essential  to  real  fruitfulness.  Divine  restraints  are  acts  of  genuine  kindness.
Discrimination  in  animal  food  was  based  on  true  wisdom.

I.  Because  it  was  a  sanitary  benefit.  In  that  early  age,  the  sciences  of  physio-
logy and  health  were  unknown,  and  even  now  they  are  in  their  earliest  infancy.  We
are,  however,  now  aware  of  the  fact  that  some  (at  least)  of  the  flesh  prohibited  to  the
Hebrews  is  more  or  less  unwholesome.  Nor  is  it  improbable  that  in  that  Eastern
climate  some  flesh  is  more  unwholesome  for  food  than  in  our  own  land.  As  a  father
cares  for  the  health  of  his  child,  so  God  cared  for  every  part  of  Israel's  well-being.
Nothing  escapes  God's  attention.  "  The  Lord  is  for  the  body."  With  infinite  tender-
aess,  God  legislated  {<x  the  meals  of  the  Hebrews,  and  gave  them  the  advantage
rf  his  unerring  judgment.

TL  Beoaubb  partial  abstinence  was  saltttabt  fob  the  soul.  1.  It  taught  them
thai  Aeshly  appetite  was  not  to  be  gratified  for  its  own  sake — not  for  mere  pleasure.
To  *tr  ngthen  and  broaden  the  desires  of  the  mind  is  an  advantage  in  itself;  but,
exceaAwe  strength  of  bodily  appetite  is  an  evil,  an  injury  to  the  real  man.  The  lesson
requires  to  be  early  learnt,  that  our  nature  requires  government,  that  our  highest  good
caj)  be  r  ached    only   by  self-restraint    and   seif-uiortification.     Bodily  desires  and


DH.  XIV.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  261

inclinations  are  designed  to  be  servants,  not  masters.  2.  It  exercised  them  in  praetkai
telf-denial.  The  noblest  qualities  of  human  character  are  acquired  only  by  personal
discipline.  Some  parts  of  our  nature  have  to  be  repressed ;  some  have  to  be  stimulated.
The  fleshly  propensities  have  always  been  unfriendly  to  the  spirit's  life.  It  is  a  lesson
hard  to  be  learnt,  to  forego  lesser  enjoyments  for  remote  advantages.  The  favour  and
society  of  God  amply  recompense  for  all  minor  pains.  3.  The  general  rule  of  action
was  typical  of  higher  truths.  All  such  animals  might  be  eaten  as  "  parted  ihe  houf,
and  chewed  the  cud."  There  was,  doubtless,  a  reason  for'this  permission  arising  out  of
the  constituent  nature  of  the  flesh.  But  spiritual  lessons  also  were  suggested,  viz.  that
to  be  acceptable  for  God's  service  there  must  be  with  us  mental  digestion  of  his  truth,
and  there  must  also  be  practical  circumspection — in  our  daily  walk  a  separation  from
worldly  contamination.

III.  Because  this  discrimination  in  heats  would  constitute  a  tibiblb  par-
tition FROM  THE  HEATHEN.  To  bring  to  a  successful  issue  the  Divine  purposes  in
the  Hebrew  race,  it  was  incumbent  to  maintain  broad  distinctions  between  them  and
tlie  heathen  round  about.  They  lived  a  coarser  and  more  animal  life.  Animal  passions
were  fostered  by  the  glutting  of  the  appetites.  Some  of  the  animals  denied  as  food  to
the  Jews  were  used  by  the  heathen  for  divination  ;  therefore  it  was  safest  to  label  such
animals  and  birds  as  an  abomination.  A  wise  captain  will  give  to  a  sunken  reef  a  wide
b(  rth.  Further,  these  differences  in  social  customs  and  domestic  habits  would  serve
aij  perpetual  barriers  against  intermarriages  with  neighbouring  tribes.  This  might
appear  unsocial  and  exclusive.  But  lesser  good  has  to  be  sacriflced  for  loftier  and
eternal  blessing.  To  every  quibble  of  human  reason  it  is  surely  enough  to  reply,  "  God
knows  best."  This  proscription  of  some  kinds  of  food  applied  to  the  Jews  only.  They
might  supply  to  strangers  among  them  food  which  they  were  forbidden  to  eat  them-
selves. Thus  a  practical  lesson  was  taught  them  that  they  were  to  be  pre-eminently
holy.  The  moral  attainments  of  others  were  not  to  be  the  standards  by  which  they
shuuld  measure  conduct.  More  plainly  than  speech  did  such  prohibition  say,  "  Be  not
>'nformed  to  the  world."  What  it  is  allowable  for  others  to  do,  may  be  sin  for  me  to
practise.

IV.  Because  this  arranobment  served  for  the  daily  discipline  of  faith.
Of  the  first  importance  was  it  that  the  faith  of  the  Hebrews  should  be  maintained,  and
tliat  their  faith  should  be  practically  displayed.  Very  clearly  God  had  assured  them
that  this  was  his  will  concerning  them ;  and,  whether  any  reason  appeared  for  the
demand  or  not,  as  his  acknowledged  servants  they  were  bound  to  obey.  Such  a  require-
ment had  some  correspondence  with '  the  test  imposed  on  our  first  parents.  *The  act
forbidden  might  be  in  itself  indifferent — having  no  moral  character.  Apart  from  the
command,  they  might  have  eaten,  or  abstained  from  eating,  without  any  violation  of
conscience.  This  would  make  the  matter  a  better  test  of  obedience.  In  abstaining
from  such  and  such  meat,  they  did  no  one  wrong ;  they  violated  no  law  of  nature,  no
law  of  God :  they  did  themselves  no  injury.    They  still  had  enough  to  meet  all  the

'  necessities  of  hunger.  Here,  then,  was  a  true  test  whether  men  would  simply  obey
God's  word,  even  though  obedience  should  mean  privation.  This  was  the  discipline  of
faith,— D.

Vers.  22 — 29. — Cixf »  claim  upon  ow  money  gains.  In  every  province  of  human
life  God  requires  his  proprietorship  to  be  recognized.  The  seventh  part  of  our  time  is
hallowed  for  his  service.  The  firstfruits  of  com  were  to  be  devoted  to  religious  uses.
The  firstborn  in  the  household  belonged  to  God,  and  was  to  be  redeemed  by  substitu-
tion.   And  now,  of  all  their  yearly  gains,  one-tenth  was  claimed  by  God.

I.  The  ground  of  God's  claim.  His  claim  proceeds  from  his  proprietorship.
Towards  the  Hebrews  he  was  obviously  and  directly  landlord.  He  had  put  them  into
possession  of  their  estates,  and  rightfully  could  exact  from  them  a  rent.  And  with
respect  to  all  national  substance,  God  is  absolute  Proprietor.  He  has  an  original  and
indefeasible  right  as  Creator ;  and  it  is  his  supreme  power  that  maintains  in  existence
the  treasures  of  the  earth.  Even  the  power  we  have  to  accumulate  wealth  is  desirved
from  the  same  beneficent  Source.  It  is  his  gift,  not  that  he  has  conveyed  to  us  the
irresponsible  right  in  it,  but  simi^ly  in  the  sense  that  we  had  nothing  with  which  t<'
purchase  it.    "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof


252  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xiv.  1  -29.

II.  A  DEFINITE  PROPORTION  DEMAKDED.  It  was  Competent  for  God  to  make  such
terms  as  he  pleased  with  men.  He  might  justly  have  permitted  for  our  0¥m  use  a  bare
existence,  and  required  us  to  devote  to  him  the  residue  of  our  gains.  Or  he  might  very
properly  have  exacted  as  his  tribute  one-half.  Whatever  had  been  his  will  in  the
matter,  it  would  become  us  meekly  to  acquiesce.  He  did  make  known  h»a  will  very
clearly  to  the  Jews,  and  his  terms  were  very  generous.  So  small  a  portion  as  one-tenth
he  condescended  to  take,  and  even  this  was  expended  in  advantage  for  the  nation.
Many  significant  hints  have  we  that,  ia  unwritten  form,  this  part  of  his  will  was  made
known  to  other  nations.  Among  heathen  tribes  we  find  the  custom  prevails  of  con-
secrating one-tenth  of  their  harvests  unto  idol  gods ;  and  when  Abraham  returned  from
the  conquest  of  the  invaders,  he  gave  to  Melchizedek  the  tithe  of  all  his  spoils.  Hence
we  may  regard  the  law,  not  as  exclusively  Jewish,  but  as  intended  for  all  peoples.

III.  The  method  of  assessment.  No  official  assessor  was  appointed.  The  cost  of
collection  was  nil.  Each  man  was  to  act  as  his  own  assessor,  and  to  separate,  at  harvest-
time,  God's  share  of  corn  and  wine  and  oil.  It  was  a  transaction  between  each  man
and  his  God.  It  was -Israel's  privilege  to  live  under  the  shield  of  Jehovah's  arm,  and
therefore  "ever  in  his  Great  Taskmaster's  eye."  The  penalty  for  dishonesty  was  not
immediate,  nor  visible  Every  plan  was  devised  to  suit  the  convenience  of  the  debtor.
He  might  bring  )]is  tithe  to  the  temple,  either  in  kind  or  in  coin.  Jehovah  was  no  hard
Taskmaster,  but  a  considerate  and  generous  King.  Giving  to  him  was  only  another
form  of  receiving.  The  absence  of  intermediary  officers  was  a  spiritual  advantage.  It
brought  each  man  into  direct  contact  with  God,  and  taught  him  to  act  with  integrity
towards  the  "  Searcher  of  hearts."

IV.  The  employment  of  God's  tithe.  The  tithe  here  spoken  of  is  not  the  tithe
of  all  profits,  which  was  due  to  the  Levite,  but  a  second  tithe.  The  first  tithe  was
regarded  as  an  equivalent  to  the  tribe  of  Levi,  for  Levi's  share  in  the  allotted  posses-
sions. Each  man  in  the  twelve  tribes  received,  in  the  original  distribution  of  land,  one-
twelfth  more  than  his  due,  from  the  fact  that  Levi  did  not  participate.  In  return  for  this
increment  of  property,  each  proprietor  paid  to  the  tribe  of  Levi  yearly  one-tenth  of  the
produce  of  the  land.  This  was  due  as  a  legal  right,  and  as  a  just  equivalent  for  non-
participation  in  the  territory.  But  this  second  tithe  was  peculiarly  the  Lord's.  Never-
theless, it  was  returned,  with  added  blessing,  into  their  own  bosoms.  Its  first  use  was
to  afford  a  banquet  for  the  offeiers  themselves.  The  temple  was  to  be  the  scene  of
■acred  feasting.  The  guests  might  select  such  viands  as  pleased  their  taste.  The  over-
shadowing presence  ol  Jehovah  would  serve  as  a  sufficient  check  against  excess.  To  this
banquet,  in  which  the  entire  household  shared,  they  were  to  invite  the  Levite,  the
stranger,  the  widow,  and  the  orphan.  The  essential  idea  thus  embodied  was  philan-
thropy. The  institution  was  intended  to  foster  a  spirit  of  benevolence  and  charity.
The  presence  of  the  poor  in  their  midst  was  to  be  accounted  a  benefit.  It  offered  scope
for  the  exercise  of  noblest  dispositions.  There  was  to  be  no  niggardly  stint  in  this
provision,  for  it  was  at  Jehovah's  cost,  and  the  occasion  was  to  be  characterized  by
unrestrained  joy.

V.  The  ihobal  advantages  which  ensdbd.  1.  It  served  as  a  practiced  reminder  of
Qod's  proprietorship  in  them  and  in  their  possessions.  Nothing  is  more  easy  than  to
forget  our  obligations  ;  and  such  forgetfulness  is  an  immeasurable  loss.  Not  an  item
was  there  in  their  persons,  property,  or  enjoyments,  but  came  from  the  hand  of  a
generous  God.  2.  It  was  a  potent  check  upon  their  worldly.mindeilness.  The  propen-
sity for  selfish  avarice  is  indigenous  in  human  nature.  Every  wise  man  will  welcome
any  breakwater  that  will  withstand  this  mischievous  tide  of  cupidity.  Thus  God,  with
wondrous  forethought,  provided  a  safeguard  a2;ainst  the  abuse  of  prosperity.  He
ilesigns  to  make  even  worldly  gain  serve  as  a  stepping-stone  to  piety.  Money  is  nothing
more  than  means  to  an  end.  Reconciliation  with  God,  and  personal  holiness, — these  are
to  be  the  aims  of  human  life.  3.  It  fostered  Jcindly  dispositions  among  all  classes  of
the  people.  Though,  as  the  children  of  Abraham,  they  enjoyed  great  external  privileges,
they  were  not  to  despise  the  stranger.  Yea,  he  too  might  be  admitted  to  a  full  share
in  their  blessings.  Brotherly  love  is  a  reciprocal  boon :  both  parties  are  blessed.  The
fuuntain  of  love  is  replenished  in  the  very  act  of  giving.  The  helped  to-day  mAy
liiiooma  the  htiper  to-morrow.    We  are  only  stewards  of  God's  posseBBions.— D.


CH.  XV.  1—23.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


268


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEE  XV.


The  Teab  of  Belease  for  the  Benefit
OF  Debtobs  and  the  Emancipation  of
Hebrew  Slaves.  The  Sanotipioation
or  the  Firstborn  of  Cattle.
Vera.  1 — 6. — ^To  the  prescription  of  a
tithe  for  the  needy  there  is  added  a  regu-
lation for  the  behoof  of  debtors.  The
Israelitea  were  not  only  to  help  the  poor,
but  they  were  to  refrain  from  what  would  be
a  hardship  and  oppression  to  them.  Debtors,
consequently,  were  not  to  be  deprived  of
the  benefit  of  the  sabbatical  year,  for  at  the
close  of  each  seventh  year  there  was  to  be  a
release.  This  does  not  imply  that  the  debt
was  to  he  remitted,  but  only  that  the  debtor
was  not  then  to  be  pressed  for  payment.
As  during  the  sabbatical  year  the  land  lay
uncultivated,  and  the  debtor  consequently
would  earn  nothing,  it  was  reasonable  that
he  should  not  then  be  pressed  for  payment.
A  law  that  every  seventh  year  debts  should
be  remitted,  would  have  frustrated  itself,
for  on  such  conditions  no  one  would  lend,
and  BO  there  would  be  no  debtors.  This
is  an  addition  to  the  law  of  the  sabbath-
year  (Exod.  xxiii.  10,  etc. ;  Lev.  xxv.  2 — 7).
Ver.  1. — Belease.  The  word  thus  rendered
(nisDE?,  from  DDK',  to  leave,  toilet  lie  fallow)
occurs  only  here  and  in  ver.  2;  in  Exod.
xxxiii.  11  the  cognate  verb  is  used,  and
from  this  the  word  is  best  explained.  The
debt  was  to  be  left  in  the  hands  of  the
debtor,  as  the  land  was  to  he  let  lie  or  left
untilled  for  that  year.

Ver.  2. — Creditor;  literally,  mo«<er  of  the
loan  of  his  hand,  equivalent  to  owner  of  what
his  hand  has  lent  to  another.  Comp.  the
expression,  "what  was  laid  in  his  haml"
(Lev.  V.  21 ;  Authorized  Version,  "in  fellow-
ship," Lev.  vi.  2);  and  Neh.  x.  32,  "the
debt  of  every  hand "  (Authorized  Version,
"  the  exaction  of  every  debt").  Neighbour ;
here,  felUne-Israelite.  Exact  it  of  his  neigh-
bour ;  literally,  prem  or  urge  his  neighbour,
i.e.  to  pay.  It  is  called  the  Lord's
release;  rather,  a  release  for  Jehovah  is
proclaimed;  the  sabbatical  year,  like  the
year  of  jubilee,  was  proclaimed,  and  it  was
for  Jehovah,  in  his  honour,  and  in  accord-
ance with  his  ordinance.

Ver.  3. — A  foreigner ;  a  stranger  of  another
nation,  having  no  internal  social  relation
to  Israel  ('??})i  ^  distinguished  from  the


stranger  who  lived  among  them  and  had
claims  on  their  benevolence  (na).  Of  such
they  might  exact  a  debt,  without  regard  to
the  year  of  release.  "This  rule  breathes
no  hatred  of  foreigners,  but  simply  allows
the  Israelites  the  right  of  every  creditor  to
demand  his  debts  and  enforce  the  demand
U|ion  foreigners,  even  in  the  sabbatical  year.
There  was  no  severity  in  this,  because
foreigners  could  get  their  ordinary  income
in  the  seventh  year  as  well  as  in  any  other  "
(Keil).

Ver.  4. — Save  when  there  shall  be  no  poor
among  yon;  ratlier,  only  that  there  shall
be  no  poor  among  you  ;  q.d.,  this  ordinance
is  not  intended  to  prevent  creditors  seeking
the  payment  of  their  just  debts,  but  only
to  prevent  there  being  poor  in  the  land.
The  reason  assigned  is  that  the  Lord  would
greatly  bless  them  in  the  land  which  he
had  given  them,  so  that  the  creditor  would
be  no  loser  by  refraining  from  exacting  his
debt  from  his  brother  in  the  seventh  year.

Vers.  5, 6. — This  blessing,  though  promised
and  certified,  should  come  only  if  they  were
careful  to  observe  and  do  all  that  God  com-
manded them.  The  for  at  the  beginning
of  ver.  6  connects  this  with  ver.  4.  Thou
Shalt  lend.  The  verb  in  Kal  signifies  to
borrow  on  a  pledge ;  in  Hiph.  to  lend  on  a
pledge,  as  here ;  it  is  a  denominative  from
the  Hebrew  noim  signifying  pledge.

Vers.  7 — 11. — ^The  reference  to  the  release
leads  to  a  prescription  regarding  readiness
to  lend  to  the  poor.  They  were  not  to
harden  their  hearts  against  their  poorer
brethren,  nor  were  they,  in  the  prospect
of  the  year  of  release,  to  refuse  to  lend  them
what  was  necessary  for  their  uses,  but,  on
the  contrary,  were  to  open  their  heart  and
their  hand  to  them  according  to  their  need,
lest  the  poor  should  appeal  against  them  to
God,  and  sin  should  lie  upon  them.

Ver.  7. — Harden  thine  heart;  literally,
malce  strong,  so  as  to  suppress  natural  com-
passion and  sympathy.

Ver.  8. — Sufficient  for  his  need,  in  that
which  he  wanteth ;  literally,  the  sujieiency
of  his  need  which  he  needelh,  i.e.  whatevei
he  might  need  to  meet  his  requirements.
_  Ver.  9. — A  thought  in  thy  wicked  heart ,
literally,  a  thing  in  thy  heart  worthlessness,
i.e.  a  thing  which  is  worthless  and  un-
worthy. The  word  used  is  lelial  (^y;^?),
which  does  not  denote  that  which  is  wicked
so  much  as  that  which  is  worthless.  Thus,
"a  mu,n  of  Belial"  is  a  worthless  fellow —


254


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  XV.  1—23.


not  necessarily  a  wicked  man  (cf.  ch.  xiii.
13).  And  it  be  sin  nnto  thee;  t.e.  entail
guilt  npon  thee,  and  so  expose  thee  to  the
Divine  displeasxire.

Ver.  10. — Shall  not  be  grieved  j  literally,
shall  not  become  evil,  i.e.  shall  not  entertain
a  grudge.  They  were  to  give,  not  grudgingly
or  of  necessity,  merely  through  dread  of
God's  displeasure,  but  cheerfully  and  spon-
taneously (cf.  2  Oor.  ix.  7).  For  this  God
would  bless  them  in  all  their  works,  so  that
they  should  not  only  be  no  losers,  but  should
be  gainers,  by  their  generosity.

Ver.  11. — ^They  were  to  open  their  hand
wide  to  their  poorer  brethren,  for  there
should  always  be  such  in  the  land.  This
statement  is  not  inconsistent  with  that  in
ver.  4,  for  there  it  is  the  prevention  of
poverty  by  not  dealing  harshly  with  the
poor  that  is  spoken  of;  here  it  is  the  con-
tinuance of  occasion  for  the  relief  of  the
poor  that  is  referred  to.

Vers.  12 — 18. — ^From  injunctions  regard-
ing the  treatment  of  the  poor  and  of  debtors
the  transition  is  easy  to  the  law  concerning
slaves,  inasmuch  as  it  was  through  the
stress  of  poverty  that  any  became  such  from
among  their  bretiiren.  The  law,  as  here
laid  down,  is  the  same  as  that  in  Exod.
xxi.  2 — 6,  somewhat  expanded;  the  most
important  addition  being  that  the  slave  is
not  only  to  go  free  after  six  years  of  service,
but  is  to  be  furnished  by  his  master  with
the  means  of  setting  up  a  home  for  himself.
The  six  years  here  specified  are  not  to  be
confounded  with  the  years  ending  at  the
sabbatical  year;  they  are  any  six  years
during  which  the  individual  has  been  in
bondage.

Ver.  14. — ^Thon  shalt  furnish  him  liber-
ally; literally,  thalt  lay  on  his  neck,  ie.  thou
shalt  load  him.  The  meaning  is  well  ex-
pressed in  the  Authorized  Ytrsion.  This
is  the  new  prescription  added  to  the  earlier
law.

Ver.  15. — Compliance  is  enforced  by  the
consideration  that  the  Israelites  had  been
themselves  bondmen  in  Egypt,  and  had
been  redeemed  out  of  that  bondage  by  God
(ct  oh.  T.  15:  z- 10:  xvL  12:  xxiv.  18,  22;


Exod.  xxii.  20 ;  xxiii.  9 ;  Lev.  xix.  34).  As
God  had  dealt  by  them,  so  it  behoved  them
to  deal  by  others  in  like  condition  and
need.

Vers.  16, 17. — It  might  happen,  however,
that  the  slave  chose  rather  to  remain  with
his  master  than  to  be  manumitted,  and  in
that  case  he  was  not  to  be  forced  to  go  free,
which  would  be  a  hardship  to  him,  but  was
to  be,  by  a  formal  process  of  nailing  bis  ear
to  the  door  of  his  master's  house,  constituted
his  slave  for  life  (cf.  Exod.  xxi.  5).  This
was  not  a  painful  operation,  especially  as
the  servant's  ear  was  probably  already
pierced  for  a  ring;  nor  does  any  infamy
appear  to  have  been  attached  to  the  bearing
of  this  baiige  of  perpetual  servitude.  There
is  no  mention  here,  as  in  Exodus,  of  the
matter  being  referred  to  the  judges;  and
this  has  led  some  to  suppose  that,  by  the
time  this  later  prescription  was  given,  the
earlier  usage  had  passed  away;  but  it  is
more  natural  to  suppose  that  this  usage
was  so  regular  and  well  known  that  it  was
needless  formally  to  announce  it.

Ver.  18. — Where  a  slave  determined  to
have  his  freedom,  the  master  was  to  set  him
free  without  grudge ;  for  he  hath  been  worth
a  double  hired  servant  to  thee,  in  serving
thee  six  years ;  literally,  double  the  hire  of  a
hireling  Tie  hath  semed  thee  six  years,,  i.e.  he
hath  saved  to  thee  as  much  again  as  it
would  have  cost  thee  to  pay  a  hired  labourer
to  do  the  same  amouut  of  work.

Vers.  19— 23.— In  ch.  xii.  6,  17  and  in
ch.  xiv.  23,  reference  is  made  to  sacrificial
meals,  and  to  the  appropriation  of  the
firstlings  of  the  herds  and  flocks  thereto;
Moses  here  reverts  to  this,  and  gives  a
fuller  exposition  of  it.  It  is  enjoined  that,
as  all  the  firstborn  were  to  be  sanctified  to
the  Lord  (Exod.  xiii.  2 — 13),  they  were  not
to  work  with  the  firstborn  of  their  cattle,
either  by  yoking  the  bullock  to  the  plough
or  waggon  or  by  shearing  the  sheep :  these
belonged  to  God,  and  were  not  to  bo  put  to
any  vulgar  uses  of  men ;  year  by  year  they
were  to  be  brought  to  the  sanctuary,  offered
as  sacrifices,  and  eaten  before  the  Lord,  It
any  of  the  firstborn  animals  were  blind,  or
lame,  or  in  any  way  blemished,  such  was
not  to  be  offered  to  the  Lord,  but  might
be  used  as  food  in  their  ordinary  places  of
nsidence  (cf.  Lev.  xxiL  19,  eto.).


HOMILETICS.


Yen.  1 — ^.■^DMne  elieekt  on  human  greed.  In  this  paragraph  the  institution  of
the  sabbatical  year  is  presupposed  (cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  9 — 13  ;  Lev.  xxv.  2 — 7).  During
this  year  the  land  was  to  rest,  and  it  would  doubtless  be  conducive  to  after-fruitfuluesa
to  give  the  soil  this  respite,  by  letting  it  lie  fallow  every  seventh  year,  for  at  this  time


OH.  XV.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  856

the  effect  of  the  rotation  of  crops  was  unknown.'  We  by  no  means  affirm  that  such
was  the  only  reason  for  the  appuintmetit ;  yet  nothing  hinders  us  from  regarding  it  as
a  reason.  In  that  year  there  was  to  be  a  general  remission  of  debts.  To  all  appear-
ance, there  would,  however,  be  one  social  danger  arising  from  so  peculiar  an  arrange-
ment. Human  nature,  as  regards  capacity,  aptitude,  tact,  kindness,  hardness,  etc.,
would  differ  as  greatly  among  Hebrews  as  among  any  other  peoples.  There  would  be
the  wise  manager,  and  the  man  who  knew  not  how  to  manage  at  all.  There  would
be  some  easily  "  taken  in,"  and  others  watcliing  for  an  opportunity  of  enriching  them-
selves at  aauther's  expense.  And  among  the  harder  men,  the  thought  would  naturally
arise,  "  Well,  if  I  must  not  work  to  increase  my  gains  that  year,  I  will  at  least  secure
all  that  I  ought  to  have,  by  "collecting  all  debts  due  to  me,  and  this  I  will  do  with
rigour."  Now,  here  comes  in  this  law  mercifully  guarding  the  weak  against  the
rapacity  of  the  strong,  compelling  men,  at  least  outwardly,  to  show  some  regard  for
those  who  are  somewhat  behindhand  in  the  ra6e  for  life,  and  preventing  the  more
successful  ones  from  so  exacting  from  poorer  men  as  to  reduce  them  to  helpless  depen-
dence upon  others.  The  following  points  may  be  noted.  1.  The  sabbatical  year  is
here  assumed,  ut  supra.  2.  This  year  debts  were  to  be  remitted, — not  cancelled,  but
pressure  for  payment  was  to  be  postponed.  3.  Thus  there  was  to  be  an  enforced
pause  in  the  accumulation  of  wealtli.  4.  The  sentiment  of  kindliness  and  forbearance
as  well  as  of  justice  in  business  life,  was  thus  taught.  5.  At  the  same  time,  there  is
a  safeguard  against  the  Hebrews  being  trifled  with  by  foreigners  by  a  misuse  of  this
law.  A  foreigner  (one  who  was  so  in  all  respects)  might  incur  a  debt  in  the  sixth
year,  thinking  that,  as  a  Hebrew  could  not  press  for  it  the  next  year,  lie  should  have
a  long  respite ;  while,  as  he  was  not  bound  by  the  Hebrews'  Law,  he  could  press  for
debts  due  to  him !  This  would  have  been  unequal.  Hence  God  guards  Israel  against
such  inequality,  and  says,  as  a  foreigner  is  not  under  this  law  so  far  as  debts  due  to
him  are  concerned,  so  neither  is  he  included  in  it  with  regard  to  debts  incurred  by
£im ;  and  the  release  is  not  intended  to  operate  where  its  operation  cannot  be  equal
all  round.  6.  Moreover,  there  is  in  this  law  no  encouragement  to  mendicancy,  but
rather  such  a  check  on  pressure  by  the  rich,  and  such  an  inculcation  of  regard  for  the
poor,  that  beggary  may  be  a  thing  unknown  among  them.  The  word  "beggar"  does
not  occur  once  in  the  Mosaic  institutes  (cf.  Miohaelis's  'Commentary  on  the  Laws  of
Moses,'  art.  142).  Surely  in  all  this  there  is  abundance  of  material  for  homiletic
teaching  from  a  Christian  point  of  view.  The  formal  institution  here  referred  tp  has
passed  away.  But,  if  we  follow  out  the  formula  already  laid  down,  that  forms  change,
hut  principles  never, — we  cannot  be  at  a  loss  for  an  exposition  of  the  ethical  teaching
which  this  paragraph  suggests  for  all  time.  For,  as  is  well  remarked  by  Mr.  Garden,
"  The  spirit  of  tliis  law  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  weekly  sabbath.  Both  have  a  bene-
ficent tendency,  limiting  the  rights  and  checking  the  sense  of  property ;  the  one  puts
in  God's  claims  on  time,  the  other  on  the  land.  The  land  shall  keep  a  sabbath  unto
the  Lord."  "  The  land  is  mine."  Let  us,  then,  study  the  Divine  checks  on  human
greed,  as  they  are  shown  to  us  in  the  teaching  of  the  New  Testament,

I.  We  have  the  distinct  declaration,  "  Ye  abb  not  youb  own."  This  is  far
wider  and  deeper 'than  any  analogous  statement  of  Moses.  For  while  Israel  had  been
redeemed  out  of  Egypt,  so  that  God  said,  "  I  gave  Egypt  for  thy  ransom,  Ethiopia
and  Seba  for  thee,"  we  must  all  feel  how  infinitely  short  that  comes  of  the  tender
pathos  in  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19.  The  phrase,  "  Te  are  not  your  own,''
must  needs  cover  the  whole  ground  of  all  that  we  are  and  have.  As  "  redemption  "
was  the  appeal  at  the  basis  of  Israel's  life,  so  is  it  in  the  case  of  God's  people  now.

II.  We  aee  kedeembd  that  we  might  live  for  God  by  living  fob  others.
We  are  expected  to  have  "  the  same  mind  "  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus  (Phil.  ii.
1 — 8).  Note  the  argument  involved  in  2  Cor.  viii.  7,  9 ;  also  that  in  Bom.  xiv.  7,
et  seq.  See  the  purpose  of  Christ's  redeeming  work,  as  stated  in  Titus  ii.  14 ;  and  also
the  law  of  the  Christian  life  in  Gal.  vi.  1 — 10.  In  these  passages  there  is  so  much  of
duty  indicated  with  regard  to  others,  that  though  little  of  minute  detail  is  now
specified,  yet  Christian  men  cannot  go  far  wrong  if  their  lives  are  regulated  thsiebv
(1  Cor.  X.  24).

•  See  art.  '  Sabbatical  Year,'  in  Smith's  '  Bibl.  Diet'


256  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xv.  1—23.

IIL  The  PBomBirioN  of  our  Lord  aoainst  oovetousnbss  is  very  stern  and
STRONG.  (See  Luke  xii.  13 — 2L)  At  every  stage  of  that  paragraph  there  is  some  new
and  startling  light  in  which  the  evil  of  covetousness  is  seen.  1.  It  cherishes  s  totally
mistaken  view  of  life  (Luke  xii.  15).  2.  It  is  perilous  (Luke  xii.  20).  Hence:  3.  It  is
foolish  (Luke  xji.  20,  21).     Strong  checks  these!     Far  stronger  than  Israel's.

IV.  There  is  a  Divine  stigma  upon  covetousness.  (See  Eph.  v.  5;  Col.  iii.  5.)
It  is  idolatry.  It  is  giving  to  creature  objects  the  regard  which  is  due  only  to  God.
He  would  have  us  "  in  his  light  see  light,"  and  regard  the  greed  of  gain  as  an  abomi-
nable thing.

V.  There  is  a  Divine  rule  fob  labour.  It  is  given  us  in  Eph.  iv.  28.  The
observance  of  this  precept  would  prevent  the  social  evil  arising  from  covetousness  on
the  one  hand,  and  would  create  the  good  accruing  from  benevolence  on  the  other.
"Let  him  labour  in  order  that  he  may  have  the  wherewith  to  givel"  How  truly
sublime !     It  is  like  the  benevolence  of  God.

VI.  The  Christian  teacher  has  special  injunctions  fob  the  rich,  with  the
giving  of  which  he  is  charged.  (1  Tim.  vi.  17 — 19.)  Thus  the  Christian  code  is  by
no  means  less  comprehensive  than  the  Mosaic.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  far  more  so.
It  is  equally  stringent  iii  allowing  cc"  one  to  think  of  his  property  as  his  own.

VII.  Our  God  would  win  as  well  as  warn.  See  Heb.  xiii.  5,  "  Let  your  turn
of  mind  be  free  from  the  love  of  money  (ii<t>t\dpyvpos)."  Why  ?  "  Because  himself
hath  said,  1  will  in  no  wise  fail  thee,  neither  will  I  in  any  wise  forsake  thee  "  (see  also
2  Pet.  L  4).  We  are  permitted,  in  Christ,  to  call  God  "  ours,"  to  find  in  his  love  our
joy,  in  his  wisdom  and  strength  our  stay,  in  his  wealth  our  supply.  Hence  we  ought  to
he  lifted  up  above  any  consuming  racking  care,  and  to  be  loyally  obedient  to  God's  will
in  the  sanctified  use  of  all  that  we  have  (Matt.  vi.  33).

Let  any  one  set  side  by  side  the  Mosaic  regulations  in  the  paragraph  we  have  just
been  considering,  with  the  seven  considerations  adduced  from  New  1'estament  teiicb-
ing.  Let  him  compare  them  with  one  another.  And,  if  we  mistake  not,  he  will  find
more  than  ample  material  for  other  Homilies  on  the  height,  the  breadth,  the  depth,
and  the  length  of  Christian  ethics,  as  covering  the  entire  ground  of  the  relations  of
man  to  man  and  of  man  to  God,  and  as  requiring  no  less  exactitude  in  detail  through
less  detail  being  specified.  It  is  said  (and  we  fear  it  is  said  truly)  that  the  great
hindrance  to  God's  work  in  the  world  is  that  the  Cliristian  name  does  not  carry  with
it  Christian  morality.  Ah !  if  it  did,  how  luminous  would  such  morality  appear!  Let
but  the  above  considerations  be  universally  acted  out,  on  all  sides,  and  no  more
strifes  between  capital  and  labour  would  ever  be  known.  The  rich  would  neither  oppress,
nor  despise,  nor  neglect  the  poor ;  the  poor  would  no  longer  be  jealous  of  the  rich.  Both
would  recognize  their  mutual  relation  to  and  need  of  each  other.  While,  with  universal
righteousness  and  kindness,  mendicancy  would  be  a  thing  unknown.  And  never,
never,  till  there  is  a  new  principle  of  love  infused  through  the  various  classes  of  society,
will  such  a  consummation  be  attained !  Still,  however  sad  our  hearts  may  be  as  we
consider  how  far  we  are  off  from  the  mutual  regard  between  owner  and  labourer  which
even  Moses  enjoined,  let  each  of  us  feel  his  personal  responsibility  for  fidelity  to  the
Divine  Law.  Only  as  this  is  felt  and  discharged  by  each,  can  it  be  felt  and  discharged
by  all.  The  Lord  make  us  and  all  men  to  abound  in  good  will,  and  may  the  supreme
benevolence  which  has  its  source  in  heaven  flow  o'er  the  world  as  a  pure  river  of  water
of  life  1

Vers.  7—11. — The  duty  of  Mndness  to  the  poor.  There  seems  to  be  at  first  sight  a
discrepancy  between  the  phrase  in  ver.  4  and  that  in  ver.  11.  The  former  is,  "  Save
when  there  shall  be  no  poor  among  you  ; "  the  latter,  "  The  poor-shall  never  cease  out  of
the  land."  The  first  phrase  is,  however,  a  reason  assigned  for  the  injunction  which
had  been  given  :  it  is  equivalent  to,  "  Simply,  that  there  be  no  poor  among  you,*
i.e.  this  or  that  was  an  appointment  in  Israel,  in  order  that  the  number  of  the  poor  mighi
be  reduced  to  a  minimum,  and  that  those  who  were  poor  might  not  become  abjectly  so.
But  no  such  external  law  could  ever  prevent  some  from  falling  back  in  the  race.  As
long  as  men's  constitutions,  capacities,  and  characters  were  widely  different,  so  would
their  measure  of  success  be.  A  levelling  of  circumstances  could  be  brought  about  only
through  a  levelling  of  men,  after  all  had  been  brought  to  a  uniform  starting-point.


OH.  XV.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  257

Such  genial  enactments  as  the  one  in  vers.  1 — 6  might  prevent  beggary,  but  would  not
do  away  with  poverty.  "  The  poor  shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land."  This  phrase  is
not  to  be  regarded  as  indicating  a  Divine  appointment  that  it  should  be  so,  but  as  a
Divine  declaration  that  it  would  be  so.  As  long  as  men  are  what  they  are,  and  the
varied  features  of  temperament  and  ability  continue  as  they  are,  so  long  will  there  be
abundant  scope  for  the  exercise  of  sympathy  and  of  kindly  help.  The  points  noticeable
in  this  paragraph  are  five.  1.  Year  after  year  fresh  claims  on  the  kindly  help  of  the
prosperous  would  be  presented  by  their  poorer  brethren  (ver.  11).  2.  These  claims
were  to  be  generously  and  even  gladly  met,  as  if  it  were  a  delight.  We  need  not
charge  the  writer  with  ministering  to  idleness  and  beggary  (see  reference  to  Michaelis,
in  previous  Homily).  The  word  for,  yea,  even  the  conception  of,  a  beggar,  as  we  now
understand  it,  is  entirely  absent  from  the  Mosaic  statutes.  Honest  and  diligent  work
is  supposed  to  be  universal ;  though  it  might  not  be  uniformly  skilful  or  successful.
3.  The  desir«  to  evade  any  obligation  thus  presented,  was  a  wicked  violation  of  the  spirit
of  the  Law  (ver.  9).  4.  The  cry  of  the  neglected  or  oppressed  poor  would  rise  up  to
God,  and  be  heard.  5.  The  Lord  would  remember  the  sin  of  cruel  neglect  and  unkind-
ness,  or  of  haughty  coldness.

Now,  this  chapter  generally,  and  therefore  this  paragraph  as  a  part  of  it,  may  be
viewed  in  one  of  two  aspects:  either  as  a  section  of  the  Mosaic  code  of  jurisprudence,
or  aj  an  inculcation  of  social  duty.  It  would  be  obviously  beyond  or  beside  our
province  to  deal  with  it  in  the  former  aspect ;  we  are  concerned  solely  with  the  latter.
We  need  not  ask  whether,  in  our  New  Testament  standard,  kindness  to  the  poor  is
erjoined  ?    That  is  understood.    Our  one  query  is  this —

Now  THAT   WE   ARE   UNDEB  CHRIST,  AS  OUR   LEADER,  HOW  IS  THE  DUTY  OF  KINDNESS

TO  THE  POOR  PUT  AND  ENFORCED  ?  1.  That  duty  wMch  Moses  enjoined  as  the  leader
and  legislator  of  Jehovah's  people,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  set  on  the  ground  of  his  own
sovereign  right,  and  enforced  by  his  own  example.  In  that  wondrous  chapter  of  John's
Gospel,  the  thirteenth,  we  are  told  that,  when  our  Saviour  had  washed  his  disciples'
feet,  he  told  them  that  he  had  given  them  an  example  that  they  should  do  as  he  had
done  to  them,  and  also  said,  "Ye  call  me  Master  and  Lord:  and  ye  say  well;  for  so
1-  am.  If  I  then,  your  Lord  and  Master,"  etc.  We  cannot  suppose  that  this  one  act
of  kindness  and  condescension  was  merely  meant  to  be  literally  followed.  It  must  have
been  a  kind  of  representative  deed,  in  which  our  Lord  virtually  said,  "  In  whatever  way
you  may  comfort  or  soothe  a  worn  and  weary  brother  by  ministering  to  his  wants,  do
not  shrink  from  doing  it,  even  though  it  may  involve  many  a  lowly,  self-sacrificing  act."
Surely  this  covers  the  ground  indicated  in  this  paragraph,  and  includes  the  duty
of  giving  to  the  poor  and  helping  the  needy,  whatsoever  their  need  may  be.  2.  Our  Lord
regards  the  poor  and  needy  as  his  poor:  all,  generally,  because  he  died /or  them;  some,
especially,  because  he  lives  in  them.  Hence,  whoever  would  act  towards  them  so  as  to
show  them  the  power  and  glory  of  a  living  Saviour's  sympathy,  must  let  the  poor  feel
thvsTigh  him  the  warm  touch  of  a  tender  Saviour's  love.  Our  Lord  said  in  his  intercessory
prayer,  "  As  thou  hast  sent  me  into  the  world,  even  so  have  I  also  sent  them  into  the
\r7orld."  Thus  believers  are  to  act  in  the  world  in  the  name  and  on  the  behalf  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  friends  and  benefactors  of  men.  3.  Our  Lord  reckons  a  kindness
shown  to  men  for  his  sake,  as  if  it  were  done  to  him.  Even  in  the  Old  Testament  we  get
a  thought  akin  to  this  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9).  But  in  the  New  Testament  the  truth  is  more  clearly
defined  (cf.  Acts  ix.  4,  where  it  is  presented  to  us  in  connection  with  the  reverse  of  kind-
ness). In  Matt.  XXV.  31 — 46  it  is  shown  us  more  strikingly  still.  Christ  and  his  people
are  one ;  and  a  kiniiness  done  to  men,  out  of  love  to  him,  is  done  to  him.  Is  there  not
a  wondrous  touch  of  nature  here  ?  Would  not  a  mother  feel  a  kindness  shown  to  her
gon,  for  her  sake,  as  if  it  were  shown  to  her?  If  the  mother  were  in  England  and  the
son  in  New  Zealand,  she  would  feel  the  same.  And  if  the  son  were  even  base  and
'inworthy,  and  love  did  cling  to  him  for  the  mother's  sake,  she  could  not  feel  the
kindness  the  less.  And  we  are  permitted  to  take  this  thought  up  into  the  heavenly
region,  and  to  read  the  amazing  words,  "  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  done  it  unto  one  of  the
least  of  these, ...  ye  have  done  it  unto  me."  4.  Of  so  much  importance  is  this  kindness
to  the  poor  for  Christ's  sake  to  be  reckoned  by  us,  that  we  are  to  watch  for  and  seize
opportunities  of  doins;  "good  unto  all  men,  spncially  to  them  that  are  of  the  household
of  faith  ;"  yea,  so  labouring,  we  are  even  to  suppurt  the  weak,  recalling  those  priceleBS

BBUTBBONOMY.  S


258  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xv.  1-23.

words  which  an  apostle  was  mercifully  led  to  save  from  the  peril  of  unrecorded  sayings,
"  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  Whenever  and  wherever  there  is  presented
to  us  a  case  of  genuine  need,  there  is  an  opportunity  for  honouring  cur  Saviour  which
we  must  not  suffer  to  pass  by  unimproved.  5.  There  are  New  Testament  warnings
against  the  neglect  of  the  poor,  which  are  not  only  not  less  severe  than  any  in  the
Old  Testament — they  are  even  more  so.  We  may  arrange  them  in  three  classes,  giving
one  specimen  under  each.  (1)  1  John  iii.  17 :  If  a  man  can  knowingly  neglect  the
poor,  God's  love  is  not  in  his  heart.  Where  love  dwells  in  the  heart,  there  will  he
coiresponding  words  on  the  tongue,  and  corresponding  blessings  in  the  hand.
(2)  Jas.  ii.  5 — 9 ;  v.  1 — i :  The  Apostle  James  declares  that  to  neglect  or  despise  the
poor  is  sin  against  God;  and  that  the  cries  of  oppressed  poverty  will  be  heard  in
heaven.  (3)  Matt.  xxv.  31 — 46 :  Our  Lord  has  explicitly  told  us  that  in  the  day  of
judgment,  the  one  test  which  will  be  applied  to  men,  and  by  which  their  destiny  will
be  decided,  will  be  that  of  kindness  to  the  poor  for  his  sake  1  Where  that  has  been,
penitence  and  faith  have  wrought  out  in  love.  Where  that  has  not  been,  there  has
been  no  love,  and,  consequently,  neither  faith  nor  penitent  obedience.  It  is  not  neces-
sary to  be  openly  wicked  and  profane,  in  order  to  incur  rejection  by  the  Great  Judge
,  at  last.  Theie  may  have  been  not  a  single  vice  which  shocked  society  or  violated
outward  propriety.  Be  it  so.  Even  then  the  absence  of  the  activities  of  love  will  be
a  man's  ruin.  He  who  has  not  lived  to  save  his  brother  will  not  himself  be  saved.  A
piety  that  is  known  only  by  negatives  will  be  disowned  by  our  sovereign  Lord;
while  genuine,  active,  unselfish  love,  though  it  may  have  had  but  a  limited  sphere
for  service,  oft  shedding  a  tear  that  it  could  do  no  more,  will  meet  with  the  holy
Master's  loving  recognition,  and  will  receive  his  gracious  reward  1

Vers.  12 — 18. — TJie  rights  of  the  slavet.  By  some  who  are  but  slightly  acquainted
with  the  subject,  and  who  have  too  strong  an  animus  against  the  Old  Book  to  deal
fairly  with  it,  it  has  been  made  a  matter  of  complaint  against  our  Lord  and  his  apostles
that  they  did  not  put  down  slavery  with  a  strong  hand.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Moses.
If,  however,  without  prejudging  the  case,  we  reverently  ask,  Why  was  it  that  he,  as  a
divinely  commissioned  legislator,  tolerated  the  institution  of  slavery?  we  are  but
proposing  a  question  which  opens  up  a  field  for  thoughtful  study,  and  we  shall  not  he
left  without  a  satisfactory  answer.  And  in  the  answer  which  the  facts  will  supply
there  will  be  contained  a  world  of  instructive  teaching  to  the  devout  and  thoughtful
mind.  (The  student  would  do  well  to  examine  the  articles  of  Michaelis  on  this  subject.)
Putting  the  case  generally,  so  as  to  prepare  the  reader  for  the  details  which  follow,  we
would  say — Moses  found  slavery  existing ;  he  permitted  its  continuance,  but  he  placed
the  slave-holder  under  such  restrictions  that  the  slaves  would  become  conscious  of
their  rights  as  men  and  as  brethren ;  he  so  limited  slavery  itself,  that  no  Hebrew
could  be  a  slave  for  life,  except  of  his  own  voluntary  will ;  and  in  his  elevated
ethical  code,  he  repeatedly  insisted  on  the  equality  of  men  before  God;  thus  droppiag
in  men's  minds  such  seeds  of  truth  that,  when  they  germinated  and  brought  fruit,  vhe
instituti(jn  of  slavery  would  cease,  because  the  peoples  would  come  to  be  educated
out  of  it  1

If  now  we  briefly  enumerate  the  several  provisions  connected  with  slaves  and  slave-
holding,  we  shall  see,  in  detail,  the  proof  of  the  above  general  remark.  1.  The  Hebrew
slave  might  be  held  for  six  years  only  ;  in  the  seventh  he  was  to  be  permitted  his
freedom :  excepting  as  provided  in  the  eleventh  detail.  2.  There  were  other  pro-
visions, e.g.  those  connected  with  the  year  of  jubilee,  for  ensuring  the  freedom  of  tlie
slave,  given  in  Lev.  xxv.  3.  Rigorous  exaction  and  harshness  were  distinctly  and
sternly  forbidden  (Lev.  xxv.  39 — 43).  If  these  injunctions  and  the  reasons  for  them
are  considered,  it  will  be  seen  that  Hebrew  slavery  was  unlike  any  other  that  the  world
has  known.  4.  If  a  master  by  revengeful  treatment  inflicted  serious  bodily  injury  on
the  slave,  such  slave  was  to  have  his  freedom  (Exod.  xxi.  26).  5.  Undue  punishment
was  avenged  by  the  judges  (Exod.  xxi.  20,  21).  6.  The  slave  might  acquire  property
of  his  own,  and  might  even  amass  enough  to  buy  his  own  freedom  (Lev.  xxv.).
7.  There  were  special  decrees  for  the  benefit  of  the  slave.  They  were  to  be  free  from
all  manner  .of  work  on  the  sabbath  day.  They  had  a  right  to  fruit  which  grew
spontaneously  during  the  sabbatical  year.      They   were  to  have  their   share  of  the


CH.  XV.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  269

feasts  at  the  great  national  festivals.  8.  If  they  accepted  freedom  at  the  end  of  the
sixth  year,  they  were  not  to  be  sent  away  empty,  but  were  to  be  furnished  by  their
master,  liberally  and  gladly,  with  a  sufficiency  wherewith  to  "  start  on  their  own
account."  9.  The  idea  of  freedom  was  ever  kept  before  them.  They  might  not  sell
themselves  for  life  to  any  one.  They  were  the  Lord's  freemen,  and  they  were  not  to
pervert  the  Divine  thought  by  becoming  life-long  bondmen  (Lev.  xxv,  42).  10.  As
the  nation  rose  in  intelligence,  their  laws  became  more  and  more  liberal.  Provi-
sions which  were  intended  at  first  only  for  the  menservants,  were  extended,  even  in  the
lifetime  of  Moses,  to  the  maidservants  likewise  (cf.  Exod.  xxi.  7  and  ch.  xv.  17).

11.  If  a  slave  did  not  accept  his  freedom  when  he  might  have  it,  he  was  to  have  his
ears  bored,  that  so  he  'might  bear  about  with  him  the  brand  that  he  had  chosen
servitude  for  life  (vers.  16,  17).  Surely  the  object  of  this  apparently  strange  enactment
was  to  create  among  the  people  a  disrespect  for  self-chosen  servitude,  and  so,  silently
yet  powerfully,  to  lift  them  above  it.    And  yet  one  more  feature  should  be  noted,  viz. :

12.  When  a  foreign  slave  escaped  from  his  master,  the  moment  he  touched  the  Hebrews'
soil  he  was  a  free  man  1  (ch.  xxiii.  16).  Surely  no  one  can  study  all  these  details  with-
out seeing  that  the  entire  tendency  of  the  Mosaic  Law  was  to  lift  up  the  people,  to
advance  their  happiness,  their  freedom,  their  intelligence,  and  their  mutual  regard  1

If  now  for  a  little  we  pass  to  the  New  Testament,  to  see  how  the  apostles  of  Jesus
Christ  regarded  and  dealt  with  slaves  and  slavery,  and  what  their  teachings  were  on
this  subject,  we  find  that  very  little  is  said.  There  is  no  denunciation  of  the  institu-
tion, notwithstanding  the  very  wide  difference  between  slavery  under  the  Hebrews  and
under  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  But  we  find :  1.  Rules  for  masters,  demanding  that
they  render  unto  their  slaves  that  which  is  just  and  equal,  since  even  they,  with  all
their  power,  are  not  irresponsible,  but  have  themselves  a  Master  in  heaven,  to  whom
the  slave  is  as  precious  as  his  owner.  2.  They  taught  at  the  same  time  loyalty  and
obedience  on  the  part  of  the  slave,  and  urged  on  him  the  duty  of  so  serving  an  earthly
master  that,  in  the  very  act  thereof,  he  should  serve  a  heavenly  one.  3.  That  both
master  and  slave  would  receive  from  their  common  Lord  a  reward  according  to  their
measure  of  fidelity;  "knowing  that  whatsoever  good  thing  any  man  doeth,  the  same
shall  he  receive  of  the  Lord,  whether  he  be  hand  or  free."  4.  They  laid  down  afresh,  in
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  old  Mosaic  law,  that  "  there  is  no  respect  of  persons
with  God ; "  thus  teaching  the  equality  of  all  men  in  the  eye  of  him  "  who  judgeth
according  to  every  man's  work."

Now,  comparing  the  Old  and  New  Testament  treatment  of  slavery,  what  do  we
see?  In  the  Old  Testament  a  number  of  details  which  would  work  in  the  direction
of  fieedom,  and  thoughts  dropped  which  would  bring  slavery  to  an  end.  In  the  New
Testament  the  details  are  not  repeated.  1.  Because,  having  been  given  once,  repetition
would  have  been  of  little  service.  •  2.  Because  the  apostles  were  not  laying  down  laws
for  a  commonwealth  in  the  same  sense  that  Moses  was.  But,  though  we  have  no  repe-
tition of  details,  we  have  (1)  such  an  inculcation  of  kindness  on  one  side  and  of  loyaltj
on  the  other,  as,  when  mutually  heeded,  would  make  slavery  cease  to  be  slavery  in  all
save  the  name ;  and  (2)  such  a  clear  enunciation  of  the  truth,  that  in  Christ  there  is
neither  bond  nor  free,  that,  when  the  power  of  this  Divine  impartiality  was  felt,
slavery  would  ultimately  cease  both  in  fact  and  in  name  the  wide  world  over  I

Thus  we  see  that  the  Divine  Being  in  his  infinite  wisdom  has  seen  fit  to  adopt  a
similar  process  under  both  the  Jewish  and  Christian  dispensations,  viz.  that  of
educating  men  by  the  power  of  truth  and  goodness  up  to  such  a  level,  that  they  volun-
tarily put  down  this  or  that  social  wrong,  instead  of  thrusting  it  out  at  once  by  a
violent  hand.  Had  e.g.  this  wrong  of  slavery  been  forcibly  put  down,  the  spirit  of
enslaving  would  have  still  existed  on  one  side,  and  an  opening  for  unbridled  lawlessness
might  have  been  created  on  the  other.  But  bv  the  Divine  process,  slower  though  it  be,
the  master  is  lifted  up  above  the  level  of  the  tyrant,  the  slave  comes  to  be  regarded  as
a  man  and  a  brother,  and  ultimately  the  last  ietter  shall  be  snapped,  and  men  brought
unto  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  I

Nor  can  we  do  justice  to  our  theme  unless  we  point  out,  for  practical  use  and  fervent
exhortation,  the  spiritual  significance  of  the  whole.

L  The  equalitt  of  hen  befoue  God.  The  Divine  love  and  regard  embrace  all.
The  overshadowing  wing  of  mercy  covers  all,  and  the  free  offers  of  mercy  are  made  tu
aU  (Isa.  Iv.  1-7).


260  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xt.  1—23

II.  Bboausk  op  the  value  God  sets  on  every  man,  he  forbids  ant  man  to  take

ANOTHER  CAPTIVE,  AND   FORBIDS   MAN   SELLINO  HIMSELF  INTO   OAPTIVITI  OF   ANT  KIND.

•'  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price;  be  ye  not  the  slaves  of  men."

III.  We  abb  free  from  human  fetters  that  we  mat  be  absolutelt  free  TO
SERVE  God.  "  As  free,  but  not  using  your  liberty  for  a  cloak  of  maliciousness ;  but  as
1  he  servants  of  God."

IV.  Absolute  lotalty  to  God  is  the  surest  and  best  guarantee  or  fidelity
TOWARDS  MEN.  Nothing  would  be  wanting  between  master  and  servant  now,  if  both
were  purely  loyal  to  the  Great  Supreme.  He  who  is  bound  by  the  vow  of  a  holy  con-
secration to  serve  a  holy  God,  may  be  trusted  with  any  department  of  human  service.

V.  To  THIS  OUR  God  would  win  and  lead  us,  BT  patient  TEACHINQ  and  OBACI0U8

TRAiNiNQ.    It  takes  long  to  perfect  a  world  or  even  a  class.

Ver.  21. — Sacrifices  to  he  without  hlemish.  A  reference  to  passages  in  the  Books  of
Exodus,  Leviticus,  and  Numbers,  will  show  the  frequency  with  which  the  injunction
here  contained  was  insisted  upon,  and  the  importance  attached  to  it.  Sacrifices  offered
to  God  must  be  without  blemish.  The  entire  Mosaic  system  of  sacrifice  was  symbolic
in  relation  to  the  Church  that  then  was,  and  typical  in  relation  to  the  Church  of  the
future.  We  can  scarcely  miss  the  teaching  of  the  enactment  before  us,  if  only  we
seek  to  interpret  it  with  reverent  and  loyal  hearts.  Surely  it  taught  two  things  in  the
legion  of  law,  and  also  two  things  in  the  sphere  of  grace.  The  former  were :  1.  That
in  the  eye  of  the  All-pure  One,  every  moral  flaw  or  defect  was  an  offence,  and
therefore  could  not  be  accepted  by  him.  2.  That  as  man  was  guilty  before  God,  he
could  not,  on  the  reckoning  of  bare  law,  be  well-pleasing  in  the  eyes  of  a  righteous
lieing,  to  whom  all  evil  was  an  abomination.  The  latter  were:  1.  That  a  flawless
sacrifice  was  to  be  selected  and  offered  to  God  by,  and  in  the  name,  and  on  the  behalf
of,  the  guilty  one.  2.  That  such  flawless  sacrifice,  if  o£fered  in  sincerity  and  penitence
(if  spirit,  would  be  accepted  on  his  behalf.  Now,  we  are  not  left  to  interpret  the  type
as  best  we  may,  nor  are  we  called  on  to  offer  the  symbolic  sacrifice.  The  antitype
lias  come.  The  reality  is  ours.  And  an  inspired  interpretation  of  ancient  rites  is
s;iven  us  by  apostles  and  prophets  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  (cf.  Heb.  ix.  14 ;  1  Pet.
i.  19;  Eph.  V.  27;  2  Pet.  iii.  14;  Jude  24;  Bev.  xiv.  6>  With  such  teaching
before  us,  we  can  see  a  sixfold  significance  in  our  text.

I.  Hebe  is  a  Divine  appeal  to  the  conscience.  It  says,  in  language  which  ought
never  to  be  mistaken,  "  the  least  speck  of  sin  is  an  offence  to  God  ; "  and  guilty  man
cannot,  on  the  ground  of  his  own  right,  have  any  standing-ground  for  an  instant  before
hira.  It  is  said  that  in  the  later  days  of  the  Jewish  economy,  when  the  offerer  brought
his  sacrifice,  the  slaughterer  (who  was  other  than  the  priest)  took  a  two-edged  knife
and  ran  it  from  the  nape  of  the  neck  down  the  spine,  laying  it  hare.  Not  unfre-
quently  this  would  disclose  a  dark  spot :  this  was  a  blemish  ;  the  animal  was  imfit  for
sacrifice,  and  had  to  be  cast  away.  Hence  the  allusion  in  Heb.  iv.  12,  which,  so  under-
stood, has  in  it  marvellous  power.  For  this  blemish  did  not  appear  on  the  surface,  it
came  not  out  to  the  light  till  the  spinal  marrow  was  exposed  to  view.  Hence,  see
Heb.  iv.  13,  specially  the  marvellous  phrase,  "tcJkto  8J  yvuvh  «col  rer/iaxJiAiffjiicVa,"  k.t.A.
Every  creature  is  "  opened  "  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  is  our  account.  And
though  exterior  conduct  may  he  such  as  to  commend  itself  to  the  eye  of  man,  yet  in
the  "  marrow  "  of  one's  being  there  may  be  a  sin  which  is  an  offence  to  God.  May  be  ?
There  it.  There  are  sins  upon  sins,  and  there  is  sinfulness,  which  is  the  root  and  ground
of  all.  And  hence  it  must  be  the  case  that  sinfvX  man  has  no  right,  on  the  ground  oj
his  own  merits,  to  expect  acceptance  before  Ood.  This  is  the  very  ground-work
of  evangelical  theology.  It  is  said,  "  Pectus  facit  theologum,"  but  we  would  say  rather
(as  has  been  remarked  to  us),  "  Conscientia  facit  theologum ; "  for  only  as  this  appeal  to
the  conscience  is  felt,  will  the  after-appeals  properly  tell.

II.  Hebe  is  a  Divine  invitation  to  faith.  There  was  to  bo  a  sacrifice  chosen,
without  blemish,  which  was  to  be  presented  by  and  on  behalf  of  the  offerer  (John  i.
29).  God  has  provided  a  Lamb  for  a  burnt  offering,  and  for  a  sin  offering  too  (Isa.  liii.
6  ;  2  Cor.  v.  21),  (For  a  discussion  of  the  grounds  on  which  the  offering  of  the  Body  of
Jesus  Christ  once  for  all  could  be  valid  for  the  race,  see  Dale  on  the  Atonement,
sect.  X.)    Suffice  it  here  to  say  that  this  offering  had  the  dignity  of  a  Divine  Sacrifice,


raxv.  1— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  2«1

the  appropriateness  of  a  human  one,  and  the  "  sweet-smelling  savour  "  of  a  perfectly
pure  one.  Besides  which  it  had  all  the  spontaneity  of  a  voluntary  offering,  and  all  the
generosity  of  a  noble  self-surrender  for  the  sake  of  others;  in  making  which  the
Bedeemer  was  satisfied.  And  this  offering  which  infinite  love  has  made,  loving  faith
may  take  and  call  its  own ;  and  abandoning  all  pretence  to  a  standing-ground  in  native
right,  it  may  find  an  everlastingly  firm  one  in  sovereign  grace  1

III.  HsBE  IS  A  Divine  call  to  penitence.  The  saciifice  was  to  be  offered  with
confession  of  sin  (see  Lev.  xvi.  21).  All  the  several  ordinances  which  were  sprcail
over  different  sacrificial  services  in  Israel,  find  their  varied  significances  grouped  in  one,
in  the  attitude  of  the  sinner  before  the  cross  of  his  Saviour.  Well  might  Watts  write,
"My  faith  would  lay  her  hand,"  etc.  While  we  accept  the  Divine  Sacrifice  for  sin,
penitential  confession  over  sin  should  ever  mark  us  (see  Fs.  li.).

IV.  Here  is  a  Divine  demand  for  rectitude  op  heart.  When  we  bring  out
offerings  to  the  Lord,  no  defect  should  be  knowingly  tolerated  by  us.  Grace  gives  w,
warrant  to  laxity,  and  true  penitence  will  be  scrupulously  intolerant  of  it  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18).
The  freeness  of  pardon  to  the  penitent  involves  no  modification  of  ethical  stringency,
for  the  fiust  is,  wherever  there  is  any  known  tolerance  of  ill,  to  that  extent  penitence
doea  not  exist,  God  puts  away  sin  by  forgiving  it,  only  as  we  put  it  away  by  repenting
of  it  and  casting  it  off.

V.  Here  is  a  Divine  summons  to  devotion.  Jesus  died,  the  just  for  the  unjust,
that  he  might  bring  us  to  God.  And  where  a  man,  sorry  for  sin,  intolerant  of  the  evil
in  his  nature,  struggling  against  it,  and  pleading  with  God  to  uproot  it,  casts  himself
before  God  in  this  genuine  uprightness  of  soul,  none  of  the  imperfections  over  which  he
mourns  shall  prevent  the  Divine  acceptance  of  such  an  offering,  presented,  as  it  will
be,  in  the  name  of  the  spotless  Son  of  God.  The  virtue  ot  his  spotless  sacrifice
ensures  the  acceptance  of  ours.  Every  true  and  sincere  penitent  is,  on  this  ground  of
free  grace  and  dying  love,  as  well-pkasing  to  God  and  as  near  to  his  heart  as  the  purest
angel  before  the  eternal  throne.  The  offering  to  God  of  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart
is  one  which  he  cannot  and  will  not  despise  (see  also  Heb.  xiii.  15,  16).

VI.  Hebe  is  a  Divine  prophecy,  to  inspire  hope.  These  sacrifices  of  ours,  offered
in  penitence,  faith,  and  love,  are  still  but  imperfect.  And  the  holiest  souls  are  most
alive  to  such  imperfection,  and  most  sorrowful  over  it.  Hence  it  should  be  no  small
joy  to  find  in  the  Word  of  God  precisely  the  same  expressions  used  to  express  the
future  purity  of  believers  that  are  employed  to  indicate  the  perfection  of  the  Redeemer's
sacrifice.  As  the  one  Great  Sacrifice  was  "without  blemish  and  without  spot,"  so  all
those  who  are  themselves  living  sacrifices  to  God,  shall  be  "  without  spot  or  wrinkle,
or  any  such  thing."  He  who  received  them  at  first  on  the  ground  of  his  own  purity,
shall  create  in  them  a  spotlessness  like  his  own.  They  shall  be  "  without  fault "
t>e£|re  the  throne  of  God.  And  he  who  died  for  them  shall  then  present  them  as  his
ownl

Have  we  not  here  (in  conclusion)  a  remarkable  illustration  of  what  the  Apostle  Paul
so  often  speaks  of  as  "  the  righteousness  of  God  "  ?  Each  one  of  these  six  steps  is  a
fresh  aspect  of  it.  The  first  shows  the  righteousness  of  God  in  taking  cognizance
of  sin ;  the  second,  the  righteousness  of  God  in  offering  a  spotless  sacrifice  for  sin ;  the
third,  the  righteousness  of  God  in  requiring  penitential  acknowledgment  of  sin;
the  fourth,  the  righteousness  of  God  in  demanding  intolerance  of  sin ;  the  fifth,  the
righteousness  of  God  in  accepting  our  consecration  in  the  name  of  a  Sinless  One,  only
when  we  penitently  put  away  sin ;  the  sixth,  the  righteousness  of  God  in  ensuring
that  those  who  are  living  sacrifices  to  him  shall  ultimately  be  perfectly  freed  &om  all
sin!  Thus  from  beginning  to  end  "grace  reigns  through  righteousness,  unto  eternal
life,  by  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord."  "  Now  unto  him  that  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling,
and  to  present  us  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory  with  exceeding  joy,  to
the  only  wise  God  our  Saviour,  be  glory  and  majesty,  dominion  and  power,  both  now
and  OTer.    Amen."

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

VerB.  1—12,—"  The  Lord's  release,"  The  sabbatic  year  was  in  many  respecta  a  year  of
meroy  to  the  poor.  The  beautiful  name  given  to  it  here — "  the  Lord's  release  "—suggests


262  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  i».  1—23

gospel  ideas.  It  finds  its  higher  counterpart  in  that  "  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  "
(Luke  iv.  19),  which  is  the  true  "  Lord's  release."  Christ  came  "  to  preach  the  gospel
to  the  poor,"  and  "  to  preach  deliverance  to  the  captives  "  (Luke  iv.  18).  This  "  accepted
time  "  is  the  period  of  God's  forbearance  with  our  sins  (2  Cor.  v.  19 ;  vi.  2).  It  is
the  time  also  of  forgiveness  of  sins  to  those  who  believe — a  "  Lord's  release  "  indeed,  not
from  money  debts,  but  from  spiritual  ones  (Matt.  vi.  12),  not  temporary,  but  eternal.
It  is  the  time  of  the  setting  free  of  bondsmen — Satan's  captives — those  held  in  thrall  by
evil  (Eom.  vi.  18 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  26).     We  are  taught  by  this  law—

L  That  the  poor  have  a  claim  on  the  foebbarance  of  the  bioh.  (Vers.
1 — 5.)  Such  a  claim  will  willingly  be  recognized  by  the  loving  heart.  It  will  shrink
from  pushing  hard  on  any  one.  It  will  put  itself  in  the  debtor's  place,  and  bear  with
him  as  long  as  possible.  This  was  the  lesson  enforced  by  the  law  of ."  the  release."
It  secured  for  the  poor  debtor  a  whole  year  of  grace.'.  It  interposed  a  check  upon  the
creditor's  selfishness,  and  rebuked  him  if  disposed  to  press  hard  upon  his  brother.  It
did  more,  testifying  by  its  very  existence  to  God's  sympathy  with  the  poor,  and  to  his
desire  that  they  should  be  mercifully  treated.  The  harshly  exacting  spirit,  however
common,  is  not  God's  or  Christ's  (Matt,  xviii.  23 — 35).  It  is  assumed,  of  course,  that
the  case  of  poverty  is  genuine.  There  is  no  evidence  that,  even  during  the  sabbatic
year,  the  creditor  was  not  entitled  to  recover  his  debt  from  a  man  well  able  to  pay  it.

II.  That  the  poob  have  a  olaiu  on  the  assistance  of  the  bich.  (Vers.  7 — 12.)
Assistance  goes  beyond  forbearance.  The  Law  requires,  not  simply  that  lenders  o/
money  should  not  be  harsh  and  unforbearing  in  exacting  its  repayment,  but  that,  where
need  exists,  they  should  be  willing,  nay  forward,  to  render  such  assistance  as  is  in  their
power.  Honest  poverty — for  such  only  is  in  contemplation — creates  a  claim  which
those  "  having  this  world's  good"  (1  John  iii.  17)  are  not  at  liberty  to  disregard.
Heart  and  hand  are  to  be  alike  open  to  the  cry  of  distress.  The  giving  is  to  be  :  (1)
liberal;  (2)  ungrudging;  (3)  disinterested  (cf.  Matt.  v.  42).  Note:  1.  Liberal  assist-
ance in  a  time  of  need  is  worth  many  doles  spread  over  a  longer  period.  2.  Assistance,
%vhere  practicable,  should  be  given  in  the  formof  loangi.  This  is  the  idea  of  the  law,  and
it  is  in  harmony  with  the  best  modern  opinion.  Loans  are  preferable  to  simpld  charity ;
they  do  not  pauperize ;  they  develop  the  principtS  of  self-help,  encourage  diligence
and  thi'ift,  and  foster  the  spirit  of  honest  independence.  Those  who  cannot  be  helped
save  by  gratuities  must,  of  course,  be  helped  cheerfully.

III.  That  liberality  to  those  in  need  tends  to  oub  own  enbichuent.  (Vera.
4 — 7, 10.)  No  truly  liberal  man  will  make  this  the  motive  of  his  liberality.  But  as
a  secondary  encouragement  to  liberal  giving,  and  as  removing  fears  of  the  possible
results  to  one's  own  fortunes,  it  deserves  to  be  considered.  The  liberal  soul  is  usually
not  the  loser,  but  the  gainer,  by  its  liberality.  Selfishness  defeats  itself.  Subtle
spiritual  laws  operate  to  produce  this  result.  1.  Liberality  reacts  upon  the  soul  itaelf
to  ennoble  and  expand  its  powers.  This  tends  in  the  direction  of  enrichment.  2.  The
liberal  man  is  loved  and  trusted.  He  gets  kindness  shown  him  for  his  kindness  to
others  (Luke  vi.  30 — 39).  He  is  one  whom  neighbours  mnd  friends  are  always  willing
to  serve,  and  to  speak  a  good  word  for.  3.  God.'s  blessiilg  is  upon  him  (vers.  4,  10).
Through  that  blessing  he  is  prospered.  He  divides  and  conquers.  By  opening  his
hand  liberally,  he  gets  more  than  he  parts  with.  "  There  is  that  scatteretb  and  yet
increaseth,"  etc.  (Prov.  xi.  24,  25).— J.  0.

Ver.  11. — The  poor  in  tJie  land.  The  meaning  is  that  there  will  always  be  greater  or
less  scope  for  the  exercise  of  the  virtues  of  kindness  and  liberality, — that  it  is  vain  to
hope  for  a  Utopian  condition  of  society  in  which  there  shall  be  absolutely  no  poor.

I.  This  dobs  not  imply  :  1.  That  many  existing  causes  of  poverty  cannot  be  per-
manently removed.  2.  That  every  attempt  ought  not  to  be  made  to  reduce  poverty
within  its  narrowest  limits.  The  saying,  "  Ye  have  the  poor  always  with  you"  (Matt,
xxvi.  11),  is  no  utterance  of  fatalism.  Much  can  be  done  to  reduce  poverty.  With  the
growth  of  society,  still  more  as  a  result  of  the  spread  of  Christian  principles,  numbers
of  the  causes  of  poverty  now  existing  may  be  expected  to  disappear  (idleness,  intem-
perance, bad  laws,  merciless  competition,  class  antagonisms,  unfavourable  sanatory
conditions,  etc.).

II.  I7  OOKS  lUPLY :  1.  That  under  the  most  favourable  conditions  of  existence  on


cii.  XT.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEBONOMY.  2«i

earth  a  residuum  of  poverty  is  still  to  be  looked  for.  (1)  There  are  diversities  of  talents.
There  will  always  be  those  whose  abilities  only  fit  them  for  the  humblest  positions  in
society.  And  these  may  be  left  friendless,  or  health  may  fail  them,  or  they  may  liva
to  old  age,  and  become  dependent.  (2)  There  are  vicissitudes  of  fortune.  These  come
to  the  most  fortunate  of  men,  reducing  them  oftentimes  to  great  straits.  And  it  is
toomfloh  to  expect  that,  even  under  millennial  conditions,"the  causes  of  such  vicissitudes
will  altogether  cease  to  operate.  2.  That  while  poverty  lasts,  it  is  our  duty  to  help  to
bear  its  burden.  Poverty,  in  a  state  of  society  such  as  we  anticipate  as  the  goal  of
history,  need  never  be  the  painful  thing  it  is  now.  With  loving  hearts,  and  hands
ready  to  help,  its  sting  will  be  taken  away. — J.  0.

Vers.  12 — 19. — Bondmen.  No  argument  in  favour  of  modem  slave-holding  can  be
drawn  from  Hebrew  bond-service.  The  Hebrew  bondmen,  unlike  modern  slaves,  were
incorporated  as  part  of  the  nation ;  had  legal  rights ;  took  part  in  the  religious  feasts ;
if  mutilated  or  injured,  thereby  obtained  their  freedom.  On  the  sabbatic  year  the
Hebrew  bondman  regained  his  fi:eedom,  going  out,  not  simply  free,  but  loaded  with
presents.     We  learn —

I.  The  natubal  right  of  man  to  his  fkebdom.  (Vers.  12, 13.)  Freedom  is  man's
birthright.  It  cannot  be  bartered.  He  must  not  be  robbed  of  it  by  violence.  If  from
temporary  causes  the  use  of  it  is  lost,  the  right  itself  is  not  destroyed.  So  the  Jews
were  taught  by  the  return  of  every  Hebrew  to  his  freedom  in  the  seventh  year*  It  is  a
primary  and  unalienable  right  of  man,  which  here,  like  underlying  rock,  juts  to  the
surface.

II.  The  eight  or  bebvants  to  equitable  and  generous  treatment,  ^ers.
13 — 16.)  Bondmen  were  not  to  be  regarded  as  mere  "  hands,"  still  less  as  chattels.
They  were  to  be  kindly  treated,  and  dismissed  with  presents.  It  is  a  principle  of  eqjiity
which  cornea  to  light  in  ver.  18.  We  may  apply  it  to  modern  times  by  saying  that  if
servants  are  worth  more  to  us  than  their  wages,  it  is  but  fair  that  they  should  partici-
pate in  profits.  The  principle  is  already  being  recognized,  and  has  in  it  the  germ  of  the
solution  of  many  difficult  problems  in  political  economy.

III.  That  love  is  the  true  reconciler  of  service  and  freedom,  (Vers.  17,
18.)  It  made  the  service  no  service — no  real  bond-service.  Compare  Jacob's  service
for  Rachel  (Gen.  xxix.  20).  Were  the  law  of  love  to  rule  more  than  it  does  in  the
relations  of  servants  and  masters,  of  employers  and  employed,  it  would  greatly
iweeten  trade,  commerce,  manufactures,  and  domestic  life.  There  are  doubtless  faults
on  the  side  of  servants  as  well  as  of  masters — but  how  seldom  is  any  earnest  attempt
made  to  break  down  feelings  of  antagonism,  and  to  bring  in  healthier  relations  1  The
law  of  Christ  is  the  true  cure  for  strikes,  lock-outs,  combinations,  etc.  Apply  to  the
service  of  God  in  Christ.  Law  here,  but  also  love,  and  through  the  love  freedom  in
obedience.    The  highest  freedom  is  in  obedience  to  the  law  of  holiness.— J.  0.

Vers.  19 — 23. — The  firstlings.  The  solution  of  the  apparent  discrepancy  between
this  passage  and  Numb,  xviii.  18  seems  to  lie  in  the  custom  of  inviting  the  worship-
pers to  share  in  the  feasts  provided  by  their  offerings.  View  the  sanctification  of  the
firstlings  as  symbolical.  1.  Of  Ood's  claim  on  the  first  and  choicest  of  what  we  have  for
his  own  service.  (1)  Of  our  property.  (2)  Of  our  affections.  (3)  Of  our  powers  of
body  and  mind.  2.  Of  Ood's  right  to  redeemed  life.  The  firstlings  were  redeemed  by
God  for  himself  on  the  memorable  night  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  (Exod.  xiii.  12).
God  claims  redeemed  life  as  peculiarly  his  own  (Isa.  xliii.  1 — 4 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  20).  3.  Of
Ood's  right  to  young  life.  A  symbol  of  early  consecration.  4.  Of  happy  fellowship
with  Ood.    The  fellowship  was  a  fruit  of  the  dedication  of  the  best— J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 6. — 7%e  year  of  forgiveness.  We  have  here  what  we  may  call  the  "poor
law "  of  Palestine.  The  poor  were  to  be  regarded  as  "  brethren,"  they  were  to  be
treated  as  neighbours,  as  members  of  the  one  society.  Money  was  to  be  lent  them  to
give  them  a  start  in  life  (vers.  7 — 11),  and  if  they  were  unable  to  repay  it  by  the
seventh  or  sabbatic  year,  they  were  to  be  forgiven  the  debt,  "  to  the  end  that  there  be
no  poor  among  you  "  (ver.  4,  margin).  Usury  was  thus  discouraged  between  brethren.
Loans  were  to  be  acts  of  generosity,  and  the  idea  was  distinctly  to  be  kept  in  view  that


264  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xv.  1—23

a  person  should  sometimes  lend,  "  expocting  nothing  again."  With  foreigners,  that  is,
those  not  of  "the  household  of  faith,"  it  might  he  difterent;  the  deht  need  not  in  this
case  be  cancelled ;  the  year  of  release  was  a  Divine  institution  for  the  people  of  Grod.
The  Jews  were  intended,  if  ohedient,  to  be  creditors  of  the  world,  and  debtors  to  none ;
and  the  poor  brother  was  to  have  the  joy  in  the  sabbatic  year  of  being  forgiven.

L  The  ddtt  of  forgiveness  was  pbbsokibbd  to  all  the  brethren.  In  fagt,  this
poor  law  was  the  proclamation  of  the  "  brotherhood "  of  believers  in  the  one  God.
Upon  this  forgiveness  of  debt  was  based.  The  creditor  was  to  realize  how  much  more
blessed  it  is  to  give  than  to  receive  (Acts  xx.  35);  how  blessed  it  is  to  be  able  to  help
a  brother  I  Had  the  Jews  been  faithful,  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan  would  not
have  been  such  a  wonder.  It  was  just  the  spirit  fostered  by  this  institution  of  tha  year
of  release.

Now,  this  duty  of  forgiveness  of  the  debts  of  brethren  arises  out  of  the  forgiving
character  of  God.  As  the  common  Father  of  these  brethren  in  the  faith,  he  inculcates
forgiveness  because  he  practises  it.  The  experience  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  was  of
a  series  of  Divine  forgivenesses,  even  though  in  forgiving  them  he  took  vengeance  on
their  inventions  (Ps.  xcix.  8).  And  the  beautiful  parable  about  the  two  debtors  (Matt,
xviii.  23 — 35)  is  really  meant  to  bring  out  the  truth  that  unforgivingneu  is  a  violation
of  the  family  spirit  encouraged  by  the  king,  and  is  the  unpardonable  sin.

II.  The  ideal  set  before  them  was  to  be  the  extirpation  of  poverty  in
THE  FAMILY  OF  GoD.  It  would  most  probably  never  be  reached,  but  it  is  well  to  be
aiming  at  the  high  and  the  noble,  even  though  it  may  not  be  all  attained.  The
marginal  reading  in  ver.  4,  which  has  received  the  imprimatur  of  Jonathan  Edwards
('  Works,'  Tegg's  edition  of  1860,  vol.  ii.  p.  164),  brings  out  the  beautiful  aim  thus
set  before  Israel.  The  effort  was  to  be  to  make  Jewish  poverty  impossible.  The  same
idea  seized  on  the  mind  of  the  Church  after  Pentecost,  leading  to  the  trial  of  a  Christian
commune,  wherein  for  a  time  it  could  be  said,  "  Neither  was  there  any  among  them
that  lacked  "  (Acts  iv.  34).  Poverty  was  for  a  time  at  least  banished  from  the  Christian
Cliurch.  These  strivings  after  an  ideal  shall  be  crowned  at  last  with  success  when
under  the  new  regime,  "  They  shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more ;  neither
shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nnr  any  heat "  (Rev.  vii.  16).

III.  The   OBEDIENT   ARE   INTENDED   TO   MAKE   ALL   MEN   THEIR   DEBTORS.       The   Lord

promises  his  people,  if  they  are  only  obedient,  that  they  shall  lend  to  many  nations,
but  shall  not  borrow  (ver.  6).  It  is  sometimes  thought  to  be  a  special  benefit  when  a
person  can  contract  debt  from  all  and  sundry,  his  credit  being  so  good.  But  it  surely
is  a  higher  benefit  to  be  in  a  position  to  oblige  everyhody.  This  is  what  God  meant  his
people  to  be.  Surrounding  nations  were  to  borrow  from  them,  and  own  their  indebted-
ness. And  has  not  this  a  moral  and  spiritual  side?  The  religious  spirit  is  the  obliging
spirit,  the  spirit  which  hails  with  delight  the  opportunity  of  "  doing  good  unto  all  men,
especially  unto  such  as  are  of  the  household  of  faith."

IV.  It  IS  THE   SECRET  OF   SOVEREIGNTY  TO   BE   ABLE   TO  OBLIGE  OTHERS.       For   it   is

significant  surely  that  the  Israelites  are  told,  immediately  after  the  promise  of  beiag
able  to  lend  unto  many  nations,  "  and  thou  shalt  reign  over  many  nations,  but  they
shall  not  reign  over  thee  "  (ver.  6).  Rule  arises  out  of  obligation.  Influence  is  acquired
when  we  are  able  to  befriend  others.  Doubtless  many  of  the  conquests  of  Israel  were
by  force  rather  than  by  finance ;  but  it  is  the  peaceful  acquisition  of  power  that  a
Divine  promise  contemplates,  and  we  begin  to  rule  as  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God  "
when  we  become  thoroughly  obliging.  It  is  thus  love  and  loyalty  are  secured  among
men.

Thus  we  have  in  this  arrangement  of  the  year  of  release  principles  laid  down  that
God  hasf  illustrated  himself  in  his  considerate  and  forgiving  conduct  towards  us,  and  in
which  we  are  to  try  to  follow  him. — E.  M.  B.

Vers.  7 — 11. — Open-handedness.  Having  inculcated  the  forgiveness  of  a  brother's
debts  during  the  sabbatic  year,  Moses  now  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  open-handednesn
which  should  precede  that  year.  It  might  be  made  a  pretext  for  refusing  a  poor  brother
a  helping  hand  that  the  year  was  almost  on  when  the  debt  would  be  cancelled  legally ,
but  to  make  this  a  pretext  for  niggardliness  would  only  betray  wickedness  of  heart.
The  most  beautiful  consideration  is  thus  inculcated  for  the  poor;  and  as  "the  poor


0H.X7. 1— 23.]  THR  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  265

shall  never  cease  out  of  the  land,"  there  will  be  the  call  evermore  for  this  open-handed-
ness.  Now  this  poor-law  regulation  is  a  most  beautiful  illustration  of  what  Qod  does
for  us ;  and  something  like  it  will  yet  supersede  the  hard-heartedness  of  our  natioiutl
systems.

I.  Gknerositt  bhodld  not  bb  too  oaloulatdto  in  its  turn.  Doubtless,  often-
times it  receives  a  noble  return,  but  this  should  not  be  too  much  regarded,  lest  the
speculative  spirit  mar  the  motive  altogether.  Nor  again  should  we  harden  our  hearts
under  the  persuasion  that  our  generosity  is  misspent,  and  that  we  shall  never  be  repaid
in  any  way.  God  has. himself  shown  us  true  generosity  in  making  his  sua  to  shine  on
tho  evil  as  well  as  on  the  good,  and  in  sending  his  raiu  upon  the  unjust  as  well  as  the
just.  And  hence  we  are  exhorted  to  "  lend,  hoping  for  nothing  again ;  and  your  reward
shall  be  great,  and  ye  shall  be  the  children  of  the  Highest :  for  he  is  kind  unto  the
unthankful  and  to  the  evil "  (Luke  vi.  35).  There  is  something  noble  in  an  unoalcu-
lating  generosity.

II.  It    18    THE    NEED    OF    THE    POOB    BROTHER    WHICH   WE  ABE    BOUND    TO    SUPPLY.

That  is,  we  are  asked  to  supply  him  not  with  the  luxuries  or  comforts  of  life,  as  if  to
these  he  had  a  right ;  but  with  his  needs.  The  open-handedness  will  be  considerate
so  far  as  not  to  encourage  unworthy  dependence.  The  brother  will  be  helped  in  a
brotherly  way — enabled  to  help  himself,  and  having  his  needs  only  supplied.  This  prin-
ciple has  been  urged  in  connection  with  our  national  poor-law  system.  If  it  is  lost  sight
of,  then  a  premium  is  paid  to  idleness,  and  the  "  ne'er-do-wells  "  become  the  favourites  of
fortune.'  Onr  Father  in  heaven  acts  in  the  same  wholesome  fashion.  "  He  supplies  all
}ur  need  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  He  supplies  us  with  salva-
tion because  we  cannot  save  ourselves;  he  supplies  us  with  what  enables  us  to  help
ourselves.  He  could  keep  the  whole  world  in  idleness,  "  ladies  and  gentlemen  at
large,"  but  he  prefers  to  keep  the  whole  world  in  work.  Our  reliance  on  God  is  for  our
ne«i.

III.  Open- HANDEDNESS  FOB  God's  sake  is  sure  of  its  bewabd.  "Tho  liberal
soul  shall  be  made  fat."  "  He  that  watereth  others  shall  be  watered  also  himself."
"  There  is  that  scattereth  and  yet  increaseth."  In  this  way  the  Lord  showeth  in
both  dispensations  how  "  he  loveth  a  cheerful  giver."  When  a  religious  man,  acting
on  ]  rinciple,  lives  an  open-handed  life,  he  has  the  finest  business  stimulus.  He  works
that  he  may  have  the  more  to  give,  and  thus  be  the  more  God-like.  There  is  nothing
so  billows  business  in  all  its  ramifications  as  this  desire  to  be  able  to  help  those  in
need.

IV.  It  IS  A  SOLEMN  thought  that  the  poor  are  never  to  cease  out  of  the
LAND  IN  THE  PRESENT  DISPENSATION.  The  Unequal  distribution  of  wealth,  the  im-
provident habits  of  many,  and  the  pressure  of  population  upon  subsistence  seem
destined  to  keep  the  poor  always  with  us.  And  in  consequence  our  Saviour  stepped
out  of  his  rich  condition  in  the  bosom  and  home  of  the  Father  and  became  poor,  that
he  might  call  every  poor  man  a  brother,  and  leave  the  poor  his  legatees  after  his
departure.  We  need  the  spectacle  of  poverty  to  move  our  hard  hearts  to  the  generosity
required.  Were  abundance  the  rule,  and  no  human  being  wanted  bread,  the  selfishness
of  the  race  would  know  no  bounds.  But  the  poor  ones  call  for  the  sympathy  which
Jesus  so  abundantly  deserves,  and  we  can  now  sell  our  spikenard  and  give  to  them
with  all  the  careful  calculation  which  a  Judas  once  desired  (John  xii.  1 — 8).

Let  our  help  to  others  be  systematic,  because  conscientious,  and  then  shall  it  prove  a,
perennial  rill,  benefiting  the  Uves  of  many  as  it  wends  its  way  down  the  vale  of  years
to  the  ocean  that  engulfs  us  all.— B.  M.  E.

Vers.  12 — 18. — The  freedom  of  the  slave.  The  seventh  year  was  the  year  of  perscnal
release  as  well  as  release  from  debt.  Slavery  among  the  Jews  was  utterly  unlike  the
slavery  of  modern  times.  It  arose  when  a  Jew  became  bankrupt ;  he  might  then  sell
his  services  to  his  creditor,  and  pay  off  his  debt  by  honest  work.  But  beyond  six
y(>ars  his  service  need  not  continue.  As  soon  as  the  sabbatic  year  came  round  he  could
claim  his  liberty.    In  such  a  case,  his  master  is  counselled  to  be  generous  when  he  goes,

■  Cf.  J.  S.  Mill's  'Political  Economy,'  bk.  V.  ch.  zi.  §  13;  also  'The  Letters  and  other
Writing*  of  the  Late  Edward  Denison,  M.P.,'  p.  63,  eto.


26d  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  lm.vr.1—2.^


that  he  may  have  something  with  which  to  h-'gin  the  world  again.  "Thoa  i'''''''
furnish  him  liberally  out  of  thy  flock,  and  out  of  thy  floor,  and  out  of  thy  winepi.-j:
of  that  wherewith  the  Lord  thy  God  ha'h  blessed  thee  thou  shalt  give  unto  nim.*'
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  service  was  so  delightful  to  him  that  he  would  rather  no(
leave,  it  was  allowable  to  bore  his  ear  through  with  an  awl,  that  he  might  be  cognised
as  a  servant  for  ever.

I.  LiBBETT  IS  EBCOQNiZBD  IN  God's  Law  AS  EACH  man's  biqht.  It  may  be  con-
ditioned upon  certain  services,  just  as  the  liberty  of  Israel  was  conditioned  upon  Gbd'i
redemption  of  them  from  Egypt ;  but  come  at  last  it  will.  No  property  in  persons
is  retwgnized,  mtrely  in  services  for  a  certain  definite  pe.ioil.  Man-stealing,  as  we
know  from  Exod.  xxi.  16,  was  a  capital  crime,  punishable  with  death,  so  that  there  is
really  no  warrant  in  the  Jewish  institution  for  modern  slavery.'  Under  Jewish  law  no
involuntary  servitude  was  allowed ;  and  there  was  always  the  right  to  freedom  in  the
sabbatic  year.

And  is  there  not  underlying  this  arrangement  for  each  man's  liberty  an  under-tone  of
gospel  truth?  What  is  the  gospel  but  a  great  provision  for  conferring  spiritual  liberty
upon  those  who  have  sold  themselves  to  sin,  and  are  in  bondage?  The  present
dispensation  is,  in  fact,  the  sabbatic  year,  wherein  liberty  is  preached  to  the  captives
(Isa.  Ixi.  1,  2;  Luke  iv.  17,  18).

II.  Peeedom  was  to  be  confebeed  in  a  spibit  of  GBNEBoirs  JOT.  The  ransomed
one  was  not  to  be  sent  out  empty-handed,  but  furnished  liberally.  Emancipation  was
not  to  be  given  with  a  grudge,  but  to  be  granted  with  joy  and  love-tokens  besides.  It
was  not  to  be  something  in  which  the  master  reluctantly  acquiesced,  but  in  wliich  ho
gladly  co-operated.  In  fact,  God's  joy  in  emancipating  Israel  from  Egypt  was  to  be
the  type  of  the  joy  of  the  Jewish  master  in  liberating  the  slave.

And  here  again  we  have  the  type  of  the  spiritual  joy  which  the  emancipntion  of
souls  should  ensure  in  all  who  help  therein.  "  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the
angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  When  he  "drew  nigh  to  the  house,  lie
heard  music  and  dancing "  (Luke  xv.  10 — 25).  No  joy  should  be  so  deep  as  this
of  helping  the  slaves  of  sin  to  spiritual  freedom.

III.  Love  alonb  could  make  beevicb  pebpetuaIi.  For  it  is  supposable  that
sometimes  a  slave  found  himself  so  happy  with  his  master,  especially  if  the  master  had
made  him  his  son-in-law  (Exod.  xxi.  4,  5),  that  he  preferred  slavery  with  love  to  liberty
with  separation.  In  such  a  case  it  was  allowed  him  to  have  his  ear  bored  and  to
become  a  perpetual  slave,  because  a  son.  Such  a  service  was  indeed  perfect  freedom,
because  its  spirit  and  motive  were  devotedness  and  love.

And  it  is  this  which  is  taken  in  Ps.  xl.  6  as  the  prophetic  type  of  the  relation
of  Jesus  Christ  to  his  Father.  He  became  by  voluntary  and  loving  contract  the
Father's  Servant  or  Slave  for  ever.  He  found  his  service  such  a  delight  that  liberty
and  independence  could  not  be  thought  of.

And  in  this  we  surely  follow  in  his  steps.  We  are  the  Lord's  slaves  after  having
become  the  Lord's  freemen.  He  delivers  us  from  the  slavery  of  sin,  and  then  he
introduces  us  to  his  service ;  and  lo,  we  find  it  so  blessed  that  we  insist  on  our  ears
being  bored,  and  our  being  made  his  slaves  for  ever.  New  obedience  is  the  slavery
of  love.  When  Law  is  delighted  in,  it  is  a  "  law  of  liberty,"  and  the  soul  feels  freedom
perfect  "under  Law."

"Anywhere  with  Jesus,  says  the  Christian  heart;
Let  him  take  me  ^here  he  will,  so  we  do  not  part ;
Always  sittino;  at  his  feet,  there's  no  cause  for  fears f—
Anywhere  with  Jesus  in  this  vale  of  tears.

"  Anywhere  with  Jesus,  though  he  leadeth  me
Wliere  the  path  is  rough  and  long,  where  the  dangers  bet
Though  he  taketh  from  me  all  I  love  below.
Anywhere  with  Jesus  will  I  gladly  go.
•  •  •  «  •

•  For  a  specious  defence  of  slavery,  cf.  Thornwell's  '  Collected  Writings,'  vol.  Iv.  pp.  379—
436;  for  the  other  side  of  the  question,  see  Cheevei's  'God  Against  Slavery,' espeoiallj
oh.  xiv.,  XV.,  xvi.,  xvii.


ott  xf.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.  Mi

"  Anywhere  with  Jesus,  for  it  cannot  be
Dreary,  dark,  or  desolate  where  he  is  with  ma;
He  will  love  me  always,  every  need  supply  ;—
Anywhere  with  Jesua,  should  I  live  or  die."

R.  M.  B.

Vers.  19 — ^23. — J%e  JirstUngs/or  God.  The  firstlings  which  were  males  were  not  to
be  reared  for  work,  but  kept  for  communion.  They  were  to  constitute,  if  perfect,  a
peace  offering  before  God;  if  imperfect,  they  were  to  be  eaten  at  home,  imperfect
fellowship  between  imperfect  persons.  Just  as  in  the  firstfruits  God  claimed  the
first  share ;  so  in  the  case  of  the  firstlings  of  the  herd  or  flock,  and  the  firstborn
among  men.

I.  The  beoinninss  oir  life  should  be  BECoainzBD  ab  gifts  of  God,  and  dedicated
ORATEFULLT  TO  Hiu.  He  IS  the  Source  of  life ;  hence  the  firstlings  should  be  the  cause
of  quiet  meditation  and  acknowledgment.  Such  increase  should  be  the  occasion
of  special  fellowship  with  God,  enlarging  gratitude  and  dictating  devotion.

II.  Imperfections  in  God's  gifts  should  be  accepted  by  men  as  mobb  than
THEY  deserve.  The  imperfect  firstling,  in  being  made  a  feast  for  men  only,  and  not  a
saci'ifice  for  God  as  well,  seemed  to  say  that,  however  imperfect  God's  gift  may  be
sometimes,  it  should  be  gratefully  accepted  as  beyond  our  desert.  The  blemished,  the
lame,  the  blind,  when  God  sends  them  in  his  providence,  we  should  not  despise,  but
rather  hail  them  as  beyond  our  desert.

And  if  this  was  to  be  the  case  in  the  use  of  beasts,  does  it  not  throw  clear  light  upon
our  conduct  in  the  case  of  imperfect  men?  When  children  come  into  this  world  with
any  defect,  let  us  not  rebel  against  his  will,  but  cherish  the  defective  gift  as  reminding
lis  how  little  we  deserve,  and  by  our  love  give  such  children  compensation.

III.  The  dedication  of  the  perfect  firstling  pointed  to  the  consbcbated
Firstborn,  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  indeed  the  Firstborn  of  every  creature.  To  him  the
firstlings  and  firstborn  pointed.  He  was  dedicated  in  life  and  death  to  the  Father.
He  became  the  great  Peace  Offering  which  makes  God  and  man  one.  And  this
suggests —

1.  The  Father's  delight  in  Jesiu.  How  it  burst  forth  from  time  to  time  in  "  This  is
my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased"!  What  delight  in  our  Lord's  lifel
what  satisfaction  in  his  obedience  unto  death  1     God  well  pleased  1

2.  Our  delight  in  Jesus.  Jesus  becomes  the  medium  of  communion.  We  have  him
in  common  with  God.  "  Our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus
Christ "  (1  John  i.  3).  The  more  we  meditato  upon  him,  the  deeper  must  be  our
delight.— E.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 11.— .4  bulwark  against  cupidity.  Material  prosperity  was  the  only  form
of  blessing  that  had  attractive  charm  for  the  Hebrews.  Neither  mind  nor  conscience
was  yet  sufficiently  developed  to  value  higher  good.  God  had  to  raise  them  by  slow
and  successive  steps.  Material  prosperity  had  its  dangerous  side.  It  might  foster
pride,  sell  -aufiSciency,  a  sense  of  overweening  superiority,  and  might  lead  to  tyrannous
treatment  of  others.  Or,  used  in  devout  recognition  of  God,  it  might  give  scope  for
generous  impulses,  furnish  leisure  for  intellectual  pursuits,  aid  the  culture  of  the
aesthetic  arts,  diffuse  religious  knowledge,  and  practically  relieve  human  distress.
The  institution  of  the  year  of  release  was  designed  to  serve  as  a  flood-gate,  by  which
the  tide  of  material  wealth  might  be  turned  into  the  fittest  channel.

I.  Material  wealth,  with  its  concukeent  poweb,  was  a  fbutt  of  beligicus
OBEDIENCE.  (Yers.  4,  5.}  The  acquisition  of  wealth  is  the  effect  of  law. .  It  does  not
follow  an  erratic  course.  If  we  can  see  the  operation  of  fixed  law  in  nature  and  in
human  life,  we  are  constrained  to  believe  that  law  (whether  discovered  or  undiscovered)
operates  in  getting  wealth.  In  the  case  of  the  Hebrews,  the  law  of  earthly  success  was
clearly  revealed.  In  return  for  loyal  obedience  to  Divine  command,  the  soil  should  be
fertile;  early  and  latter  rain  should  descend;  a  salutary  awe  should  restrain  the
neighbouring  tribes  from  predatory  raids;  the  seasons  should  be  auspicious;  there
should  be  plenty  for  man  and  for  cattle.  Still  it  is  true  that  the  "  hand  of  the  diligent
maketh   rich;"   "them  that  honour  me  I  will   honour;"   "godliness  ia  profitebU


2C8  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xv.  1—23,

Tinto  all  tilings."  Yet  earthly  prosperity  is  not  the  badge  of  piety.  Many  of  God's
saints  are  in  the  ranks  of  the  pnor.  Imprudent  courses,  though  pursued  by  th«
righteous,  end  in  disaster.  Prudent  courses  in  business,  assiduously  pursued,  even  by
the  profane,  terminate  in  worldly  success.

II.  Mateeial  wealth  is  vert  unevenly  DiSTRiBaTED  AMONO  MEN.  Some  men
are  creditors ;  some  are  debtors.  Some  begin  life  in  afBuence;  some  begin  in  poverty.
Such  varieties  of  human  circumstance  are  best.  They  teach  that  the  same  hand  that
has  fashioned  materiiil  nature  has  moulded  the  externals  of  human  life.  Such  a  plan
affords  variety  of  occupation  and  pursuit.  The  poor  are  benefited  by  the  "learned
leisure  "  of  the  rich  ;  the  rich  are  benefited  by  the  industry  of  the  poor.  Men  require
quiet  freedom  from  bodily  toil  to  investigate  and  to  invent ;  men  require  the  stimulus
of  hunger  to  perform  arduous  labour.  It  is  a  mutual  benefit;  the  rich  are  as  much
indebted  to  the  poor,  as  the  podr  to  the  rich.  We  learn  also  that  material  wealth  is
not  the  highest  good  that  God  has  to  bestow,  or  he  would  put  it  within  every  man's
reach.     It  is  but  a  visible  symbol  of  invisible  treasure.

III.  Material  wealth  is  intended  for  mutual  helpfulness.  It  was  never
intended  to  be  hoarded  in  caves  or  coffers.  The  possession  of  wealth  carries  an  obligation
to  render  high  service  to  humanity.  This  very  obligation  to  do  good  prevents  an
indiscriminate  scaitering  of  wealth.  Simple  communism  would  be  an  immeasurable
curse.  The  industry  and  self-restraint  which  enable  one  nation  to  lend  to  another
nation,  give  to  the  former  immense  influence  and  wholesome  power.  We  are  to
distinguish  between  the  objects  of  our  help.  We  are  not  to  treat  brothers  and  fellow-
citizens  as  we  may  aliens  and  strangers.  We  may  exact  from  foreigners  what,  for  a
time,  we  have  lent;  but  towards  a  fellow-citizen  we  should  be  lenient  and  indulgent,
remembering  that  all  wealth  belongs  absolutely  to  God.  There  is  a  volume  of  instruc-
tion in  the  fact  that  the  Hebrews  were  restrained  from  parsimony  by  a  Divine  Law.
Thus  were  they  taught  that  "  it  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  Generosity
■trengthens  the  sense  of  brotherhood.

IV.  The  wealth  that  closes  the  heart  against  charity  becomes  an  activb
CURSE.  (Ver.  9.)  ■  It  is  possible  to  abuse  the  most  beneficent  law  of  God  or  man.
This  very  provision  of  God  that,  at  the  end  of  the  septennial  period,  release  should  be
afforded  to  all  debtors,  might  become  very  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  the  poor.  The
approach  of  the  sabbatic  year  might  make  the  Hebrew  capitalists  parsimonious  and
close-fisted.  "  Beware  of  this  I "  saith  God.  "  Such  an  act  will.be  an  act  of  unfaithful-
ness to  me."  Jehovah  has  constituted  himself  the  Guardian  of  the  poor.  His,  eye  is
upon  their  straits ;  his  ear  is  open  to  their  cry.  And  if  his  stewards  fail  to  fulfil  their
mission,  to  them  it  will  be  accounted  sin.  Thus  we  are  taught  to  take  large  and
extended  views  of  human  life.  We  are  integral  parts  of  a  great  system.  Our  concep-
tions of  life  must  stretch  beyond  the  narrow  confines  of  time.  We  should  aspire  to
think  and  feel  and  act  as  God^does.  This  is  God's  great  ambition,  and  for  this  he  is
now  training  ua. — D.

Vers.  12 — 18. — Slaves  to  be  regarded  as  hretltren.  Quiet  revolutions  are  the  most
permanent  and  the  most  successful.  Sudden  and  violent  assuults  upon  social  institu-
tions are  sure  to  provoke  reaction.  All  great  changes  must  commence  in  the  thought
and  feeling  of  the  people.

I.  Social  usages,  though  evil,  must  be  temporarily  tolerated.  It  is  difficult
to  realize  the  conditions  of  human  life  in  the  earlier  ages  of  the  world.  Many  found
a  livelihood,  by  the  use  of  the  sword  and  by  violent  plunder.  The  honest  poor  found
very  precarious  opportunities  for  labour.  Coin  was  almost  unknown,  and  therefore
wages  must  be  paid  in  the  form  of  food  and  raiment.  Amid  these  circumstances,
personal  servitude  became  almost  a  necessity.  It  was  a  social  usage  liable  to  great
abuse,  and  gradually  degenerated  into  a  system  of  evil  oppression.  Yet,  as  Goid
patiently  tolerates  on  his  earth  so  many  forms  of  evil,  and  quietly  provides  his  remedy,
so  we  should  learn,  not  to  connive  at  evil,  but  patiently  to  endure  it,  until  a  reui
remedy  can  be  set  in  motion.

IL  Jewish  slavery  was  curtailed  by  limits  of  time.  In  this  way  the  back
of  the  burden  was  broken.  The  bondage,  which  must  terminate  within  a  fixed  period,
was  endurabla.    It  inspired  the  oppressed  with  hope.    It  checked  the  violence  of  the


CH.XT.  1— 23.J  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  209

oppressor.  The  slave-holder,  if  severely  exacting,  would  earn  an  unenviable  reputation,
and  every  device  would  be  resorted  to  by  the  emancipated  to  avoid  that  man's  service.
His  lands  might  remain  untillel,  Ids  flocks  neglected,  his  vineyards  unprune(i,  because
of  his  oppressive  treatment  of  former  slaves.  Divine  wisdom  had  fixed  this  short  term
of  service  as  a  barrier  a.!;ainst  human  cruelty.

III.  Jewish  slaveby  was  further  relieved  by  a  spirit  op  generosity.  It  is
possible  to  show  a  spirit  of  kindness  everywhere.  If  we  have  an  unpleasant  duty  to  per-
form, firmness  may  be  always  tempered  with  kindness.  God  would  not  allow  the  Hebrews
to  deal  with  their  bondmen  on  terms  of  mere  justice.  They  were  not  permitted  to
extort  all  that  was  in  the  bond.  To  make  the  largest  possible  gain  out  of  human  flesh
and  blood  was  strictly  prohibited.  They  might  continue  the  usage  of  slavery  for  a
lime,  but  the  system  should  be  relieved  and  penetrated  and  embellished  by  acts  of
kindness.  The  day  of  release  was  not  to  be  a  day  of  mourning  for  the  masters.  They
were  to  share  in  the  gladness  of  the  emancipated,  to  send  them  away  laden  with  flocks
and  with  fruit.  In  proportion  as  had  been  the  industry  and  fidelity  of  the  bondman,
would  be  (unless  his  master  were  a  brute)  the  bountiful  reward.  This  new  spirit  of
fraternal  benevolence  would  speedily^undermine  and  overthrow  the  old  usage  of  slavery.
Such  is  God's  process  of  change.

IV.  Generous  kindness  might  beoubb  the  lifelong  servicb  of  thk  blayb
There  was  no  necessity  that  the  condition  of  the  bondman  should  be  one  of  hardship.
Love  might  surmount  all  custom,  rise  above  law,  and  transcend  all  considerations  of
gain.  The  spirit  of  religion  can  find  its  way  down  to  the  root  of  all  wrong,  eradicate
all  the  evils  that  curse  society,  and  make  human  life  beautiful  as  heaven.  In  the  very
midst  of  slavery,  it  is  possible  for  love  to  operate,  to  soften  asperities,  and  lighten
burdens.  To  this  practical  affection  the  hearts  of  slaves  would  soon  respond.  Their
service  would  rise  in  quality,  and  would  increase  in  indefinite  measure.  Kindness  is  a
most  remunerative  investment.  And  at  the  close  of  the  term  of  service,  many  a  bond-
man would  decline  his  freedom,  and  prefer  the  service  of  such  a  master  for  the  possible
drawbacks  and  risks  of  liberty.

V.  Rembmbbanob  of  our  own  obligation  should  make  us  indulgent  to
orHERB.  (Ver.  15.)  If  adversity  has  not  made  us  tender-hearted,  it  has  been  wasted
upon  us.  God  has  redeemed  us  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  and  redeemed  us  at  costly
price,  and  it  is  plain  that  we  do  not  prize  our  redemption  if  we  oppress  others.  The
love  of  our  heart,  which  God  rightly  claims  for  himself,  he  commands  us  to  express  in
the  form  of  practical  kindness.  God  has  identified  his  interests  with  the  interests  of
humanity,  so  that  we  either  promote  both  or  neither. — D.

Vers.  19 — 23. — The  first  for  Ood.  As  God  is  supreme,  so  his  claim  to  recognition
and  obedience  must  have  consideration  prior  to  all  other  claims.  Such  priority  is  his
indefeasible  right ;  such  priority  best  subserves  the  interests  of  men.  The  first  day  of
the  week  he  claims  and  hallows  ;  the  fiistfruits  of  the  soil  he  claims  for  religious
ofl'ering ;  the  first  place  in  our  affections  he  asks  as  his  due ;  the  firstborn,  both  of  man
and  of  beast,  he  marks  as  his  own.     This  is  his  royalty.

I.  The  reproductions  of  life  a  continuous  creation  of  God.  It  is  acknow-
ledged on  every  side  that  life  can  only  spring  Irom  life.  No  arrangements  of  material
atoms — no  processes  of  chemical  change  with  which  men  are  acquainted — can  produce
life.  It  is  a  force  unique  in  itself,  and  can  only  rationally  be  traced  to  the  creative
power  of  a  personal  God.  The  potency  to  reproduce  life,  which  God  has  placed  in  all
the  species,  is  as  clearly  a  demonstration  of  his  creative  energy  as  if  he  manifestly  and
alone  created  each  individual  being.  We  cannot  escape  from  the  conclusion  that  he
is  sole  Life-giver.    "  I  kill,"  saith  God,  "  and  I  make  alive."

II.  The  claim  on  the  firstborn  alone  is  a  concession  of  the  fullest
RIGHTS  OF  God.  He  has  a  rightful  proprietorship  in  all  life.  But  he  allows  to  man,
as  his  liege  vassal,  dominion  over  the  inferior  races  of  his  creatures.  Acknowledgment
of  man's  subjection  must,  however,  be  made ;  tribute  must  be  paid  to  the  Heavenly
King.  This  arrangement  is  an  act  of  combined  justice  and  kindness.  For  man's
highest  good,  he  must  be  kept  in  perpetual  remembrance  of  his  dependence  and  his
obligation.  If  the  springs  of  gratitude  in  man's  nature  should  dry  up,  his  loss  would
be  jjnmeasurable.     Every  memorial  we  have  of  God  is  a  gospel.


270


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[oh.  XVI.  1—22


III.  God's  claim  and  man's  enjoyment  abe  identical.  This  devotement  of  the
firstlings  to  God  was  no  real  loss :  it  was  every  way  a  blessing.  It  cherished  in  them
a  feeling  of  filial  dependence.  It  took  them  up  to  the  temple,  year  by  year,  and  so
brought  them  into  close  contact  with  eternal  things.  It  served  to  link  religion  with
the  commonest  affairs  of  daily  life.  It  taught  them  that  God  found  a  pleasure  in  their
enjoyments,  and  that  his  commandments  were  promotive  of  real  delight.  Thus  tha
acts  of  Jeliovah's  worship  were  not  identified  with  fasting  and  austerity,  but  with
fating  and  drinking  in  the  sacred  temple.  The  pleasure  was  all  the  greater  because  it
was  social.     In  the  banquet  and  festivity  the  whole  household  partook.

IV.  Imperfect  sacrifices  prohibited.  Very  evident  is  it  that  this  demand  of  the
firstborn  was  designed  for  spiritual  instruction.  However  great  God's  care  for  our
bodily  life  appears,  his  desire  for  our  souls'  well-being  is  imniensurahly  greater.  By
siich  visible  and  impressive  methods  God  sought  to  teach  the  Jews  that  perfection  of
nature  was  God's  design,  and  that  such  perfection  would  alone  find  a  place  in  his
heavenly  temple.  The  best  feelings  and  aspirations  of  our  nature  yearn  after  perfection.
Nothing  less  will  satisfy  the  mind  of  God ;  nothing  less  will  satisfy  us.  "  Then  shall
I  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake  with  thy  likeness."

V.  Yet  blemished  life  is  better  than  barrenness.  A  lame  or  a  blemished
lamb — a  firstborn — was  not  utterly  useless.  It  served  as  food  for  man,  it  sustained
human  life.  But  it  was  deprived  of  the  honour  of  being  devoted  to  God.  Imperfect
service  is  not  altogether  useless  in  the  world.  If  we  do  a  kindness  to  a  neighbour,
tliough  no  love  to  God  prompt  the  deed,  some  good  will  result.  Continuance  in  good
deeds  will  gradually  lead  to  better  feelings  and  to  nobler  purposes.  He  who  serves  well
his  fellow-men  now,  will  ere  long  learn  to  serve  God.  Let  us  ever  follow  the  best
sentiments  which  arise  within,  though  yet  very  imperfect. — D.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVI.


Celebration  op  the  Passoveb  Festival,
the  Feast  op  Pentecost  and  of  Taber-
nacles.    Appointment  op  Oppioebs  fob
THE  Administration  op  Jostioe  and  Pre-
vention OP  Idolatbt.
Vers.  1— 17.— (Comp.  Bxod.  xxili.  14—19;
xxxiv.  18, 22—26 ;  Lev.  xxiii.    Onthe  Pass-
over,  see  Exod.   xii. ;    xiii.  3 — 10.)     The
other  great  festivals  of  the  Israelites,  the
Feast  of  Trumpets  and  the  Day  of  Atone-
ment, are  not  here  referred  to,  because  on
these  no  assembling  of  the  whole  people
at  the  sanctuary  was  required,  and  such
assembling  is  the  point  of  view  under  which
the  feasts  are  mainly  regarded  heie.
Vers.  1-7. — The  Feast  of  the  Paesover.
Vers.  1, 2.-1116  month  of  Abib  (cf.  Exod.
xii.  2 ;  xxiii.  15).    The  time  is  referred  to
as  a  date  well  known  to  the  people.    Keep
the  pasBoverj   make  (n'toj?)  or  prepare  the
pagsorer.    This  injunction  refers  primarily
to  the  preparation  of  the  Paschal  lamb  for
a  festal  meal  (Numb.  iz.  5);  but  here  it  is
used  in  a  wider  sense  as  referring  to  the
whole  Paschal  observance,  which  lasted  for
seven  days.     Hence  the  mention  of  sheep
(|to)  M»a  oxen  (npa)  in  ver.  2,  and  the


reference  to  the  eating  of  unleavened  bread
for  seven  days  "therewith,"  i.e.  with  the
Passover.  The  animal  for  the  Paschal  supper
was  expiessly  prescribed  to  be  a  yearling  of
the  sheep  or  of  the  goats  (nv),  and  this  was
to  be  consumed  at  one  meal;  but  on  the
other  days  of  the  festival  the  flesh  of  other
animals  offered  in  sacrifice  might  be  eaten.
The  term  "Passover"  here,  accordingly,
embraces  the  whole  of  the  festive  meal's
connected  with  the  Passover  proper — what
the  rabbins  call  chagigah  (Maimou.,  in '  Kor-
ban  Pesachj'c.  x.  §  12;  cf.  2  Cliron.  xxxv.  7,
etc.).

Ver.  3. — Bread  of  affliction ;  bread  such  as
is  prepared  in  circumstances  of  trial  aud  pres-
sure, when  there  is  no  time  or  opportunity
for  the  application  of  all  the  means  req  aired
for  the  preparation  of  bread  of  the  bettir
sort.  The  Israelites  had  in  haste  and  amid
anxiety  to  prepare  the  Passover  meal  on  the
evening  of  their  flight  from  Egypt,  and  so
had  to  omit  the  leavening  of  their  bread ;
and  this  usage  they  had  to  observe  during
the  seven  days  of  the  festival  in  subsequent
times,  to  remind  them  of  the  oppression  the
nation  had  suffered  in  Egypt,  and  the  cir-
cumstanees  of  difficulty  and  peril  amidst
which  their  deliverance  had  been  effected.

Ver.  4. — No  leavened  bread;  properly,  no
leaven  (nkta:)  (cf.  Exod.  xii.  Id).  Not  only
was  no  leavened   bread  (nxB)   or  dough


XVI.  1—22.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


271


(yon)  to  be  used  by  them,  leaven  itself  was
not  to  be  in  the  house  (of.  1  Cor.  v.  7 ;  see
Kitto's  'Cyclop,  of  Bibl.  Lit.,'  vol.  iii  p.
42'.)).

Vers.  5,  6. — ^Not  in  their  own  houses  or
places  of  abode  might  the  Paschal  lamb  be
slain  and  eaten,  but  only  at  the  place  which
the  Lord  should  choose  to  place  liis  Name
there.  On  the  first  occasion,  while  the
people  were  still  in  Egypt  and  had  no
sanctuary  or  specially  holy  place  where
Jehovah's  Name  was  sot,  the  Passover  was
eaten  in  their  own  houses;  but  when  God
should  choose  a  place  as  his  sanctuary,  only
there  could  the  ordinance  be  observed.

Ver.  7. — Thou  shalt  roast.  The  verb  here
primarily  signifies  to  be  matured  by  heat
for  eatiug ;  hence  to  be  ripened  as  by  the
sun's  heat  (Gen.  zl.  10 ;  Joel  iii.  13 ;  Heb.
iv.  13) ;  and  to  be  cooked,  whether  by  boil-
ing, seething,  or  roasting.  Here  it  is  properly
rendered  by  roast,  as  it  was  thus  only  that
the  Paschal  lamb  could  be  cooked.  And  go
unto  thy  tents;  return  to  thy  place  of
abode;  not  necessarily  to  thy  proper  home
(which  might  be  far  distant),  but  to  the
place  where  for  the  time  thou  hast  thy
lodging.  The  phrase,  "thy  tents,"  which
originally  came  into  use  while  as  yet  Israel
had  no  settled  abodes  in  Canaan,  came  after-
wards to  be  used  as  a  general  designation
of  a  man's  home  or  usual  place  of  abode  (cf.
1  Sam.  xiii.  2 ;  2  Sam,  xx.  1 ;  1  Kings  viii.
66,  etc.).

Ver.  8. — On  the  seventh  day  shall  be  a
solemn  assembly.  This  is  not  placed  in
antithesis  to  the  injunction,  six  days  thou
Shalt  eat  unleavened  bread,  as  if  the  Feast
of  Unleavened  Bread  (mazzoth)  lasted  onlj
for  six  days  and  the  seventh  was  to  be
devoted  to  a  service  of  a  diiferent  kind;  it
simply  prescribes  that  the  seventh  day  of
the  festival  was  to  be  celebrated  by  an
assembling  of  the  whole  of  those  who  had
come  to  the  feast;  the  festival  was  to  be
wound  up  with  a  day  of  holy  convocation,
in  which  no  work  was  to  be  done  (Lev.  xxiii.
36).  On  all  the  days  unleavened  bread  was
to  be  eattin,  and  on  the  seventh  there  was
besides  to  be  a  solemn  assembly  to  the  Lord
myvh  n."i3!j).),  called  in  Lev.  xxiii.  36,  "a
holy  conv(X!ation  "  (aJip  vnpn).

Vers.  9—12.-2^  Feast  of  Weeks  (cf.
lilxod.  xxiii.  16).

Ver.  9. — From  such  time  as  thonbeginnest
to  put  the  sickle  to  the  oom;  i.e.  from  the
commencement  of  the  corn  harvest.  The
seven  weeks  were  to  be  counted  from  this
tei minus;  and  as  the  corn  harvest  began  by
the  presentation  of  the  sheaf  of  the  fiist-
fiuits  on  the  second  day  of  the  Passover,
this  regulation  as  to  time  coiuuidea  with
that  in  Lev.  zsliL  IS.


Ver.  10. — This  feast  was  to  be  kept  with
sacrificial  gifts  according  to  the  measure  of
the  free-will  offerings  of  their  hand,  i.e.
voluntary  offerings  wliich  they  gave  as  the
Lord  had  blessed  them;  nothing  was  spe-
cially prescribed,  each  was  to  give  of  his
own  free-will  as  the  Lord  had  prospered
him.  The  word  translated  "  tribute  "  in  the
Authorized  Version  (nen)  occurs  only  here,
and  is  of  doubtful  signification.  The  LXX.
render  it  by  KaSbs,  as,  according  to;  it  is

identical   with   the  Aramaic  noa,   h'XSC

sufficiency,  enough,  and  may  be  understood
here  of  the  full  measure  according  to  which
their  offerings  were  to  be  presented.  The
freewill  offering  of  thine  hand,  here  re-
ferred, to  belonged  to  the  gifts  of  burnt
offerings,  meat  offerings,  drink  offerings,
and  thank  offerings  which  might  be  offered
at  every  feast  along  with  the  sacrifices  pre-
scribed (cf.  Lev.  xxiii.  38 ;  Numb.  xxix.  39).
Of  the  latter  no  mention  is  made  here,  as
the  law  regarding  tliem  was  already  suffi-
ciently proplaimed  (Numb,  xxviii.  and  xxix.) ;
and  in  a  popular  address  it  was  rather  to
what  depended  on  the  will  of  the  people
than  to  what  was  imperative  by  law,  that
attention  had  to  be  directed.

Ver.  11.— Bejoice  before  the  Lord.  "  The
expression,  to  rejoice  before  the  Lord,  denotes
here  nothing  else  than  to  honour  him  by
sacred  songs ;  comp.  Spencer,  '  De  Legg.
Heb.  Ritual.,'  p.  8ol,  edit.  3  "  (Havernick,
'  Introd.,'  [).  157).  In  the  place  which  the
Lord  thy  God  hath  chosen  to  place  his  name
there;  rather,  shall  choose,  as  in  ver.  15.

Veri.  13 — 15. — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,
properly,  Booths  (of.  Lev.  xxiii.  33 — 44;
Numb.  xxix.  12 — 38).  This  feast  was  to  be
observed  at  the  end  of  harvest,  after  the
corn  had  been  gathered  into  granaries,  and
the  produce  of  the  vineyard  had  been  put
through  the  press.  Nothing  is  added  here
to  the  instructions  already  given  respecting
this  festival ;  only  the  observance  of  it  at
the  appointed  sanctuary  is  enforced,  and
stress  IS  laid  on  their  making  not  only  their
sous  and  daughters  and  domestics,  but  also
the  Levite.  the  fatherless,  the  widow,  and
the  stranger  participators  in  their  rejoicing.s.
Thou  Shalt  surely  rejoice;  rather,  thou  shalt
be  wholly  joyous ;  literally,  rejoicing  only  ;
Bosenm., "  admodum  lastus."

Vers.  16,  17.— (Cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  17;  xxxiv.
23.)  The  law  is  repeated  here  with  the
additional  clause,  "at  the  place  which  the
Lord  shall  choose ; "  and  the  words,  "  not
empty,"  are  explained  to  mean  with  gifts
accor.  ling  to  the  gift  of  their  hands,  accord-
ing to  the  blessing  of  Jehovah  their  God,
which  he  had  given  them.

Vers.  18 — 20. — Moses  had  at  an  earlior


272


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.


[en.  xvL  1—22


period  appointed  judges  to  settle  disputei
among  the  people,  and  had  given  instruc-
tions to  them  for  the  disi;harge  of  their  duty
(Exod.  xviii.;  Deut.  1.  12—18).  Whilst
the  people  were  in  the  wilderness,  united
as  one  body  and  under  the  leadership  of
Moses,  this  arrangement  was  sufficient ;  but
a  more  extended  arrangement  would  be
required  when  they  came  to  be  settled  in
Canaan  and  dispersed  in  towns  and  villages
over  the  whole  land.  In  prospect  of  this,
Moses  here  enacts  that  judges  and  officers
were  to  be  appointed  by  the  people  in  all
their  gates,  in  all  their  places  of  residence,
which  the  Lord  should  give  them.

Ver.  18. — Judges  and  officers.  The
"c.fficers"  (eJivterim,  writers)  associated
with  the  judges  both  in  the  earlier  ar-
rangements and  in  that  which  was  to
succeed  were  secretaries  and  clerks  of
court,  and  acted  also  as  assessors  and
advisers  of  the  judges.  No  instruction  is
given  as  to  the  number  of  judges  and
officers,  or  as  to  the  mode  of  appointing
them ;  nor  was  this  necessary.  The  former
would  be  determined  by  tiie  size  and  popu-
lation of  the  place  wheie  they  were  ap-
pointed, and  the  latter  would,  as  a  matter
of  course,  follow  the  method  instituted  by
Moses  in  the  earlier  arrangement  (see  ch.
i.  13—15;  Exod.  xviii.  21—26).

Ver.  19.— (Of.  Exod.  xxiii.  6,  8.)  Respect
persons  (cf.  ch.  i.  17).  Pervert  the  words
[margin,  matters]  of  the  righteous;  rather,
the  case  or  the  cause  of  the  righteous.

Ver.  20. — That  which  is  altogether  just ;
literally,  justice,  Justice.  The  repetition  of
the  word  is  for  tlie  sake  of  emphasis,  as  in
Gen.  liv.  10,  "pits,  pits,"  equal  to  full  of
pits.

Vers.  21,  22. — In  all  states,  the  highest
crime  of  which  the  judge  has  to  take  note  is
that  of  treason  against  the  supreme  power  ;
and,  under  the  theocracy,  the   act   most


distinctly  treasonable  was  idolatry.  In
proceeding,  therefore,  to  give  some  practical
admonitions  as  to  the  things  to  be  observed
in  the  administration  of  justice,  Moses  begins
by  denouncing  and  forbidding  this  most
flagrant  form  of  iniquity.

Ver.  21. — Thou  shalt  not  plant  thee  a
grove  of  any  trees ;  thou  shalt  not  plant,  i.e.
place  or  set  up,  an  asherah  of  any  wood.
The  asherah  was  an  idol  of  wood  in  the
form  of  a  pillar,  usually  placed  by  the  side
of  the  altars  of  Baal.  It  was  the  symbol  of
Astarte,  th&  great  Canaanitish  goddess,  the
companion  and  revealer  of  Baal.  The  two
are  usually  associated  in  the  Old  Testament
(of.  Judg.  ii.  13;  vi.  28;  1  Kings  xviii.  19;
2  Kings  xxiiL  4).  The  rendering  "grove"
has  been  taken  from  the  LXX.  and  the
Vulgiite ;  but  that  it  is  an  error  is  evident
from  1  Kings  xiv.  23 ;  2  Kings  xvii.  10;  and
Jer.  xvii.  2;  where  the  asherah  is  said  to
be  under  a  green  tree ;  and  from  the  use  of
such  words  as  make,  set  up,  cause  to  stand,
build,  to  denote  the  action  of  producing  an
asherah  (cf.  1  Kings  xiv.  15;  xvi.  33;  2
Kings  xvii.  16;  xviL  10;  2  Chron.  xxxiii.
19 ;  1  Kings  xiv.  23),  none  of  which  are
appropriate  to  the  planting  of  a  grove.
Here,  indeed,  the  word  "  plant "  is  used,
but  this  is  only  because,  as  the  asherab
was  sunk  in  the  earth  that  it  might  stand
firm,  it  might  be  figuratively  said  to  be
planted,  just  as  nails  driven  in  are  said  to
be  pliinted  (Eccles.  zii.  11,  where  the  same
verb  is  used ;  comp.  also  Isa.  li.  16 ;  Amos
ix.  15 ;  Dan.  xi.  25).

Ver.  22. — Any  image;  any pilhr,  etc.  The
Hebrew  word  (njsp,  mazzebuh)  denotes
generally  any  pillar  or  stone  that  is  set  up,
whether  as  a  memorial  (Gen.  xxviii.  18),  or
as  a  sign  (Exod.  xxiv.  4 ;  Isa.  xix.  19),  or
for  purposes  of  utility  or  ornament  (Jer.
xliiii  13).  Here,  as  in  other  passages,  it  is
a  pillar  or  statue  set  up  as  an  object  of
worship  (cf.  2  Kings  iii.  2 ;  z.  26 ;  Hos.  x.  1 ;
Micab  V.  12>


HOMILETICa.

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  Feast  of  the  Passover.  (For  a  reference  to  the  minute  points  of
difference,  necessitated  by  different  circumstances,  between  the  first  passover  and  subse-
quent ones,  see  art. '  Passover,'  in  Smith's  '  Bibl.  Diet. ;'  see  also  the  Exposition  for  its
historical  significance.)  We  now  take  for  granted  that  all  this  is  well  understood  by,
and  perfectly  familiar  to,^the  reader.  Our  purpose  now  is  to  "  open  up,"  not  its  his-
torical meaning,  nor  even  its  symbolism  for  Israel,  but  its  typical  intent  as  foreshadow-
ing gospel  truths,  showing  how  in  Christ  our  Passover,  and  in  the  ordinance  of  the
Lord's  Supper  as  our  IVssover  feast,  the  far-reaching  significance  of  the  offering  of
the  Paschal  lamb  is  most  clearly  seen.

I.  Isbabl'b  Passover  has  its  antitype  in  Christ.  So  argues  the  apostle,  in  1  Cor.
Y,  V,  "  Christ  our  Passover  is  sacrificed  for  us."    We  cannot  but  feel  here  the  wondrous


OH.  xn.  1—22.1  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBRONOMT.  273

condescension  of  our  God  in  permitting  us  to  look  at  aught  so  sublime  as  the  sacrifice
of  his  dear  Son,  through  the  means  of  aught  so  humble  as  the  Paschal  lamb.  Yet  it
is  an  infinite  mercy  that,  whatever  might  so  help  the  conceptions  of  his  children  then,
and  whatever  may  so  aid  them  now,  the  Great  Father  does  not  disdain  to  use.  1.  The
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Sacrificial  Lamb ;  so  John  i.  29 ;  1  Pet.  i.  18,  19.  He  is
«poken  of  as  "  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  and  is  beheld,  in  the
Apocalypse,  "  a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain."  He,  too,  is  "  without  blemish."  He  was
"  without  sin."  In  him  alone  is  the  ideal  of  a  perfect  sacrifice  found.  2.  The  Pass-
over was  to  he  killed  without  breaking  a  bone  thereof.  This  was  fulfilled  in  Christ,
that,  men  might  be  aided  in  seeing  the  fulfilment  of  the  type,  through  the  close  analogy
of  the  treatment ;  and  because  "  God  would  permit  no  dishonour  to  be  done  to  the
body  of  Christ,  after  the  atoning  act  was  complete "  (Halley).  3.  The  blood  of  the
first  Paschal  lamb  was  to  be  sprinkled  on  the  posts  of  the  doors,  signifying  that  there
must  be  the  actual  acceptance  and  application  of  the  atoning  blood,  and  that  through
the  atoning  blood  so  applied  we  are  saved.  4.  In  the  first  instance,  the  lamb  was
offered  without  the  intervention  of  a  priest.  So  that,  though  priesthood  was  afterwards
instituted  for  a  time  for  educational  purposes  (Gal.  iii.),  yet  the  priest  was  in  no  wise
necessary  to  ensure  men's  acceptance  with  God.  5.  The  flesh  was  to  be  eaten,  in
token  of  fellowship.  It  was  thus  "  the  most  perfect  of  peace  offerings,"  symbolizing
and  typifying  communion  with  God  on  the  ground  of  the  atoning  blood.  In  all  these
respects,  how  very  far  does  the  Christian  Antitype  surpass  the  Jewish  type  ?  Devout
hearts  may  and  do  love  to  linger  long  in  meditation  on  a  theme  so  touching  and
Divine  1

II.  Christians  hats  theib  Passovbb  feast.  1.  Where?  Here  we  may  be  per-
mitted to  point  out  a  distinction,  which,  though  obvious  enough  at  first  mention
thereof,  yet  is  so  far  lost  sight  of  in  some  directions,  as  to  lead  to  serious  error.  In  later
times,  though  the  lamb  was  slain  at  an  altar,  yet  the  feast  thereon  was  at  a  table.  So
in  heathen  sacrifices  too,  the  victim  was  slain  at  an  altar,  the  sacrificial  feast  was  at  a
table.  Hence,,  analogy  suggests  that  the  spot  where  the  Victim  is  slain  should  he
called  the  altar,  but  that  the  sacrificial  feast  should  be  at  a  table.  The  writer  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  says,  "  We  have  an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no  right  to  eat
which  serve  the  tabernacle."  The  altar  here  meant  is  the  cross  on  which  the  Saviour
died.  Besides,  it  is  only  on  the  theory  that  the  sacrifice  is  actually  Treated  at
Holy  Communion,  that  there  can  be  any  possible  warrant  for  calling  the  Lord's
table  aa  altar.  But  this  theory  is  absolutely  negatived  by  the  statements  in  Heb.
X.  10 — 14.  The  Victim  was  offered  once  for  all  on  an  altar,  even  the  cross;  but
we  partake  at  the  Lord's  table,  of  the  sacrificial  feast.  2.  WJiat  is  the  meaning  of
the  feast  f  (1)  It  is  a  standing  historical  declaration  of  the  offering  of  God's  one
Great  Sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  "Ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death."
It  is  declaration  of  the  historic  fact  on  the  part  of  those  to  whom  that  fact  is
full  of  richest  and  most  wondrous  meaning.  For  it  is  the  divinest  expression  of
righteousness  and  of  love  that  the  world  has  ever  known.  (2)  This  sacrificial  feast
is  the  expression  also  of  a  sublime  fact  on  the  earthward  side,  viz.  that  by  virtue  of
the  redeeming  efficacy  thus  continuously  proclaimed,  there  has  been  formed  a  now
commonwealth  of  Israel,  to  which  belongs  the  freedom,  immunity,  and  honour  of  a
kingdom  of  God  (see  Bph.  ii.).  (3)  It  also  seals  a  fellowship — a  fellowship  of  redeemed
souls,  who  have  been  bought  with  a  price,  and  transferred  from  the  kingdom  of  Satan
to  that  of  God's  dear  Son;  in  which  they  are  raised  up  together  and  made  to  sit
together  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus,  having  here  below  a  union  of  hearts  which
will  be  perfected  in  an  unseen  state.  This  fellowship  is  openly  sealed  by  their  taking
of  one  bread  and  drinking  one  cup.  (4)  It  is  a  joint  pledge  of  loyalty  to  the  Church's
Head  and  Lord ;  in  renewing  their  remembrance  of  his  love  to  them,  they  seal  afresh
their  pledge  of  love  and  allegiance  to  him.  Hence  the  Lord's  Supper  came  to  be  called
sacramenttim,  the  Church's  military  oath  of  obedience  to  her  Great  Commander.  (5)  It
is  a  service  of  thanks^ving.  Hence  it  came  to  be  called  the  Eucharist.  The  Passover
feast  was  a  grateful  recall  of  a  mighty  deliverance.  So  is  the  Christian  feast.  (6)  It
is  a  declaration  of  hope  and  expectancy.  "  Ye  do  show  the  Lord's  death  tiU  he  come."
Believers  in  Israel  were  expecting  Canaan.  We  are  waiting  for  the  Son  of  God  from
heaven  to  bring  us  to  our  heavenly  rest  (Heb.  iv.).     3.  How  should  the  Christian  /':as(

DEnTERONOKT.  T


274  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  ivi.  1—22

he  Iceptt  i.e.  in  what  spirit?  (cf.  1  Cor.  t.  7,  8).  Three  or  four  suggestions  will  embody
the  chief  hints  hereon  thrown  out  in  the  written  Word.  (1)  The  Passover  was  to  be
eaten  with  unleavened  bread.  All  leaven  was  to  be  put  away.  So  are  believers  to
keep  the  feast  with  the  unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  of  truth.  They  are
"  to  examine  themselves,"  and  so  to  eat  of  that  bread  and  drink  of  that  cup.  "  A»  the
scrupulous  Israelites  searched  with  lighted  candles  every  hidden  comer  and  dark  recess
of  their  houses  for  any  latent  particle  of  leaven,  so  let  our  language  be, '  Search  me,
0  Ctod,  and  know  my  heart,'  etc."  (Bush).  (2)  It  was  to  be  eaten  with  bitter  herbs,
partly  as  in  remembrance  of  the  hard  bondage  and  bitter  sorrows  of  Egypt,  and  partly
as  shadowing  forth  the  need  of  penitence  for  sin.  We  should  mingle  with  our  thanks-
giving "  penitential  tears  " —

**  And  with  onr  joy  for  pardoned  guilt,
Mourn  that  we  pierced  the  Lord."

(3)  It  was  to  be  eaten  in  a  standing  posture,  as  if  ready  to  depart  at  a  moment's  warn-
ing. Even  BO  we,  as  we  gather  round  the  sacramental  board,  are  but  on  pilgrimage.  We
Jialt  awhile  to  refresh  us  by  the  way,  but  we  have,  soon  as  our  celebration-day  is  over,
to  renew  our  march  in  the  desert,  and  to  resume  the  toil  and  fight.  We  have  not  yet
come  to  the  rest  and  inheritance  the  Lord  hath  promised  to  give  us.  (4)  The  Apostle
I'aul  says,  "  Let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  the  leaven  of  mali<x,"  etc.,  t.e.  not  with  any
ill  feeling  harboured  in  the  soul,  nor  with  ill  actions  practised  in  the  life.  For  it  is  not
unly  as  so  much  evil  in  the  individual  that  Paul  there  regards  the  xaxla  and  rovripla,
but  as  so  much  pervasive  leaven  in  the  Church,  that,  if  not  cast  out,  will  be  its  bane,
yea,  even  its  niin  (see  1  Cor.  x.  16, 17).  We  should  therefore  cultivate  always,  and
specially  bring  to  the  table  of  the  Lord,  a  spirit  of  loving  fellowship.  So  strongly  did
the  early  Christians  feel  this,  that  they  were  wont  to  ask  of  each  other  the  mutual  for-
giveness of  injuries  before  observing  the  sacred  feast.  And  that  same  spirit  of  love,  so
specially  incumbent  then,  should  be  the  prevailing  habit  of  soul  with  believers  towards
each  other.  For  are  not  all  redeemed  by  the  same  precious  blood?  Are  not  all  mem-
bers of  one  family  ?  If  our  God  loves  us  so  much,  in  spite  of  our  sins,  as  to  own  us  as
his,  should  not  that  shame  ms  into  a  loving  regard  for  each  other  in  spite  of  our  faults  ?
With  one  Saviour,  one  salvation,  one  faith,  one  baptism,  one  hope,  one  home,  well  may
we  strive  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the>  bond  of  peace,  and  to  cultivate,  in  the
fellowship  of  believers  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  the  same  spirit  which  alone  will
pervade  the  higher  fellowship  of  heaven.

Vers.  9 — 12. — 3%e  Feast  of  Weeks,  or  of  Earmst.  (For  the  varied  names  given  to  this
Feast  of  Weeks,  see  Kurtz, '  Sacrificial  Worship  of  the  Old  Testament,'  pp.  376,  etseg.  For
an  interesting  statement  as  to  the  value  to  Israel  of  these  national  gatherings,  see  Wine's
'  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  Moses,'  bk.  ii.  ch.  i.)  This  Feast  of  Weeks  was  not  com-
memorative in  the  same  sense  as  that  of  the  Passover ;  it  was  connected,  not  with  a
great  national  epoch,  but  with  the  seasons  of  the  year  and  the  times  of  harvest.  The
method  in  which  it  was  to  be  observed  is  stated  in  Lev.  xxiii.  10,  et  seq.  We  find  there,
and  in  the  various  Scripture  rtferences  to  this  festival,  the  following  principles  in-
dicated. 1.  That  the  Hebrews  were  to  regard  the  produce  of  the  soil  as  given  to  them
by  the  bounty  of  God.  2.  That  they  were  to  honour  Jehovah  by  a  public  thanksgiving
for  his  goodnesfc  3.  That  they  were  to  yield  the  firstfruits  to  him.  4.  That  they  were
to  rejoice  and  be  glad  before  him,  for  what  he  was  and  for  what  he  gave.  5.  That  they
were  to  rtcognize  the  equality  before  God  of  master  and  servant.  National  festivals  were
holidays  for  the  labourer,  and  times  when  good  will  and  kindliness  towards  the  "  stranger,
the  fatherless,  and  widow"  were  to  be  specially  manifested.  6.  They  were  thus  to
recognize  their  national  unity  by  showing  their  joint  thankfulness  for  a  common  mercy.
These  festivals  would  strengthen  Israel's  feeling  of  kinship,  and  these  united  gatherings
before  the  Lord  their  God  would  proclaim,  as  often  as  they  were  held,  their  separation
unto  him.  7.  Though  this  was  a  harvest  festival,  and  as  such  chieily  expressive  of
thankfulness  for  the  bounty  of  God  as  seen  in  nature,  yet  it  was  not  to  be  observed

without  the  sin  offering,  the  burnt  offering,  and  the  meat  offering  (cf.  Lev.  xxiii.  18

20).    Other  offerings  were  to  be  presented  along  with  the  offering  for  sin.     Natural


CH.  XVI.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  275

bleBsings  are  given  to  sinful  men  only  under  a  dispensation  of  mercy  which  comes
through  a  bleeding  sacrifice.

Now  all  these  forms  have  passed  away.  But  the  principles  which  underlay  them  are
of  eternal  obligation.  We  trust  we  can  see,  by  means  of  these  signs,  the  everlasting
tiuthi  signified  by  them.  In  each  of  the  particulars  named  above  some  permanent
principle  is  enclosed.

I.  The  fkuits  of  the  eakth  are  to  be  received  by  us  as  gbantbd  to  ub  bt  the
BOUNTT  OF  A  GRACIOUS  GoD.  So  commonplacc,  or  rather  so  well-known,  a  truth  is  this,
that  it  is  not  easy  for  us  to  picture  to  ourselves  a  time  when  a  nation  needed  to  have  it
engraven  on  its  heart  and  conscience  by  such  means  as  these  divinely  appointed  festivals.
Still,  we  cannot  be  unconscious  of  forces  around  us  being  at  work  which,  if  we  suc-
cumbed to  them,  would  lead  us  to  think  of  the  ordinary  products  of  the  harvest-field  as
coining  simply  in  due  course  of  law,  and  to  regard  the  Supreme  Being  as  so  remotely
concerned  in  earth's  fruitfulness,  that  it  would  be  but  a  slight  step  to  take  to  think  of
him  as  not  concerned  therein  at  all !  But  in  no  part  of  (he  sacred  records  is  any  such
thinking  warranted.  Eeason  itself  would  lead  us  to  suppose  that,  if  one  order  of  creation
is  higher  than  another,  the  lower  was  made  to  serve  it ;  and  consequently,  that  if  man  be
the  highest  of  all,  that  the  rest  is  ordered  to  serve  him.  The  Psalmist  expressed  this
when  he  sang,"  Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet."  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  points
us  to_  the  most  common  blessings,  even  to  the  sun  and  the  rain,  in  proof  of  the  good  will
of  a  heavenly  Father.  And  this  is  at  once  the  philosophy  and  the  faith  of  a  Christian.
It  is  the  conclusion  of  sober  sense ;  it  is  the  dictum  of  devontness,  piety,  and  love.
"  Whoso  is  wise  and  will  observe  these  things,  even  they  shall  understand  the  loving-
kindness  of  the  Lord."

II.  The  fruits  of  the  earth  should  thbrbfoee  be  keobived  with  thanksgiving.
The  doctrine  that  God  is  the  benevolent  Author  of  all  our  mercies  is  not  to  be  a  barren
and  unfruitful  dogma.  It  is  meant  to  call  forth  thankfulness.  It  is  said  of  the  heathen,
"  neither  were  they  thankful."  They  did  not  know  enough  of  God  to  understand  what
true  thankfulness  meant.  But  we  do.  He  is  revealed  in  Scripture  as  having  such
watchful  concern  for  our  good,  that  we  may  well  feel  an  exuberance  of  thankful
delight  that  our  daily  joys  come  to  us  from  a  fountain  of  love.  And  it  behoves  us  to
pay  our  God  the  homage  of  grateful  hearts.

III.  This  thankfulness  should  be  expressed  practically.  The  truly  loyal  heart
will  need  no  reminder  of  this.  Gela  va  sans  dire.  Jacob  needed  no  precept  to  lead  him
to  say,  "  Of  all  that  thou  givest  me,  I  will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto  thee."  Nor,  if
our  hearts  are  as  sensitive  as  they  should  be  to  our  own  unworthiness  and  to  God's
loving-kindness,  shall  we  fail  to  "  honour  the  Lord  with  our  substance,  and  with  the  first-
fruits  of  all  our  increase."

IV.  Our  gratitude  to  God  should  take  the  form  of  united  worshif  and  song.
We  may  set  apart  special  seasons  for  harvest  festivals,  or  no,  as  circumstances  dictate ;
but  certainly  the  Divine  provision  for  the  temporal  wants  of  man  should  find  gladsome
acknowledgment  in  the  social  worshjp  of  a  thankful  people.

V.  A  united  acknowledgment  of  God's  kindness  to  us  all  should  have  the

EFFECT  OF  PROMOTING   KINDLINESS  AMONG  EACH  OTHEB.      If  God  makes  US  glad  with  his

loving  goodness,  we  should  make  others  glad  with  our  radiant  kindness  (1  John  iii.  17;
iv.  11).  The  love  streaming  from  heaven  is  revealed  for  the  purpose  of  creating  bene-
volence upon  earth.  The  blessings  that  come  to  us,  unworthy  as  we  are,  from  the  pure
benevolence  of  God,  should  make  us  eager,  as  much  as  in  us  is,  to  emulate  the  goodness
of  heaven  1

VI.  For,  lastly,  not  even  in  thankfulness  to  God  for  common  mercies  mat  wk

FORGET   their    RELATION   TO   THAT   DxVINE   REi:/BMPTIVE    PLAN    WROUGHT   OUT    BY   THE

GREAT  Son  OF  God.  Israel's  rejoicing  was  to  be  sanctified  by  a  sin  offering ;  by  which  we
see  (1)  that  it  is  only  because  of  God's  mighty  redeeming  work  that  even  the  natural
blessings  of  this  earthly  life  are  ensured  to  us.  And  (2)  that  it  is  only  through  the  sin
offering  that  our  thank  offerings  are  accepted  before  God.  All  our  thanksgiving  services
must  take  the  form  and  hue  thrown  on  them  by  the  fact  that  we  are  guilty  men,  living
on  the  mercy  of  a  forgiving  and  redeeming  God.  God  expects  the  acknowledgment  of
this  on  our  part.  It  would  be  unrighteous  of  him  not  to  ask  it,  and  unjust  and  ungrate-
ful of  us  not  to  give  it.    Sin  is  in  the  world ;  and  our  sin  has  helped  to  make  the  world


276  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xvl  1— 2-.

what  it  is,  as  to  the  infusion  of  bitterness  into  it ;  it  is  only  through  the  Divine  redeem-
ing energy  of  love  which  through  and  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  being  put  forth,  that
the  world  still  yields  its  treasures  to  the  rebellious  and  ungrateful  sons  of  men.  So  that
with  the  praises  for  mercies  so  undeserved  there  should  be  a  confession  of  sin.  a  turning
anew  unto  the  Lord,  and  a  reconsecration  of  heart  and  life  to  him.  For  when  we  think
how  soon  a  slightly  adverse  action  of  God  towards  us  might  crush  us ;  yea,  that  even  the
bare  withholding  of  mercy  would  consume  us ;  and  when  we  add  to  that  the  thought
of  our  innumerable  provocations  of  One  who  cannot  bear  that  which  is  evil,  surely  we
must  needs  confess  that  there  are  no  greater  wonders  than  the  patience,  the  love,  the
bounty  of  God  I

Vers.  13 — 17. — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  or  of  Ingathering.  "  The  festival  of  taber-
nacles, as  originally  instituted,  presents  but  little  symbolism.  Its  primary  design  was
to  give  expression  to  joy  and  gratitude  in  view  of  the  products  of  the  earth,  every  kind
of  which  had  now  been  gathered ;  and  it  was  therefore  also  called  the  Festival  of
Ingathering."  As  the  Passover  commemorated  the  first  deliverance,  so  the  Feast  of
Booths  would  recall  the  wilderness  life.  And  "nothing  was  more  natural  than  to
associate  in  thought  the  richness  of  their  inheritance  with  the  probationary  trials  by
means  of  which  the  nation  had  been  prepared  to  possess  it "  (Atwater's  '  History  and
Significance  of  the  Sacred  Tabernacle  of  the  Hebrews,'  Dodd  and  Co.,  New  York,  1877).
It  is  scarcely  necessary  here  to  do  more  than  suggest  the  underlying  principles  which
are  presented  here.  They  must  needs  have  some  similarity  with  those  in  the  preceding
Homily.  Israel  is  taught  the  following  truths:  1.  After  the  corn  and  wine  have
been  gathered  in,  and  the  anxieties  of  the  year  are  so  far  over,  they  are  then  expected
to  look  up  gratefully  to  God  as  the  Author  of  all.  2.  God's  mercies  are  to  be  enjoyed,
in  grateful  and  delightful  repose.  3.  With  the  gladsome  rest  there  is  to  be  associated
a  thankful  memory  of  past  guidance  and  help  in  the  wilderness  life.  4.  In  this
rejoicing  and  thankfulness,  master  and  servant  are  alike  to  share,  as  both  equal  in  the
sight  of  God.  5.  By  Israel's  gladness,  the  sorrows  of  the  poor,  the  sad,  the  lonely,  are
to  be  relieved,  and  the  solitary  ones  are  to  be  made  conscious  of  a  kindly  care  en-
compassing them.  6.  The  recognition  of  a  reception  of  mercy  is  to  be  accompanied
with  a  loving  offering  to  God  in  return  (vers.  16,  17).  According  to  the  blessing,  so
is  to  be  the  tribute.  7.  Thus  Israel's  nationality  is  to  be  thrice  sealed  every  year,
as  a  specifically  religious  one,  in  holy  and  joyful  covenant  with  the  Lord  their  Ck)d.
Manifestly  on  each  of  these  points,  Israel's  temporary  and  local  forms  illustrated
permanent  and  worldwide  principles,  in  the  exposition  of  which  the  Christian  teacher
may  well  delight.

Vers.  18—20. — (See  Homily,  ch.  x.  17— xi.  1,  "  Gfld  no  respecter  of  persont^

Vers.  21,  22. — (See  Homily,  ch.  v.  8 — 10,  on  "  The  second  commandment,"  and  abo
Homily,  chi.  xiiL,  on  "  Temptations  to  idolatry  to  be  resisted.")


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  Passover.  The  Passover  was  a  sacrifice  (Bxod.  xii.  2),  and  was
connected  with  sacrifices  (Lev.  xxiii.  5 — 8 ;  Numb,  xxviii.  15 — 26)  ;  hence  "  flock  and
herd  "  (ver.  2)  covering  the  sacrifices  of  the  seven  days'  feast.  It  was  the  sacrifice
which  mediated  the  new  relationship  established  between  Jehovah  and  the  people  on
the  night  of  the  Exodus.  There  was  a  fitness,  at  so  solemn  a  crisis  in  the  history  of
the  chosen  nation,  in  the  line  of  demarcation  between  them  and  the  Egyptians  being
drawn  so  strongly  in  atoning  blood.  Not  for  any  righteousness  of  theirs,  but  through
God's  mercy,  under  cover  of  blood  of  atonement,  was  Israel — collectively  a  part  of
Egypt,  and  individually  partakers  of  its  guilt  and  corruptions — spared  the  stroke  of
judgment.  The  sacrifice  then  offered  was :  1.  Pacificatory.  In  their  blood-sheltered
dwellings,  the  Israelites  enjoyed  the  presence  of  God,  communion  with  God,  peace  with
God.      A  feast  of  peace  was  held  upon  the  flesh,  as  in  the  later  peace   offerings


CH.  XTL 1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  277

2.  Ptirifieatory.  It  sanctified  the  people  in  view  of  their  departure  from  Egypt;
and  separation  as  a  peculiar  people  to  Jehovah — in  view  also  of  his  peculiarly  near
approach  to  them  in  their  deliverance.  3.  Protective.  As  warding  off  the  stroke  of
the  destroying  angel.  Later  Passovers,  as  the  yearly  presentation  of  the  blood  implied,
were  not  only  commemorations,  but  in  some  sense  also  perpetuations  of  the  original
one.     The  Passover,  as  observed  from  year  to  year,  was —

I.  A  MBMOHIAL.  It  stood  as  an  historical  monument,  testifying  to  the  reality  of
the  events  of  the  Exodus.  In  this  view  of  it,  it  is  of  great  value.  No  criticism  of
documents  can  impair  its  witness.  It  is  a  Bible  outside  of  the  Bible,  confirmatory
of  the  Bible  narratives.  No  one  has  yet  succeeded  in  showing  how  a  festival  like  the
Passover  could  have  been  introduced  at  any  period  later  than  that  to  which  it  histori-
ciUy  refers.  It  has,  so  far  as  we  can  make  out  anything  in  history,  been  observed
by  the  Jews  from  the  very  beginning  of  their  national  existence.  Note  to  what  it
testifies — 1.  To  the  fact  of  the  Exodus.  2.  That  the  Exodus  was  accomplished  without
warlike  resistance  from  the  Egyptians.  3.  That  it  was  looked  forward  to,  prepared
for,  sacrifice  offered,  and  a  sacrificial  meal  eaten,  in  anticipation  of  it.  4.  That  the
preparations  for  departure  were  hurried,  yet  orderly.  5.  That  on  the  night  in  question
a  judgment  fell  on  Egypt,  from  which  the  Israelites  were  exempted — a  circumstance
which  gives  to  the  feast  its  name,  the  Passover.  The  festival  has  thus  all  the  value  of
a  contemporary  witness,  and  fully  corroborates  the  Scripture  history.  The  Lord's
Supper,  in  like  manner,  is  an  historical  witness,  not  to  be  got  rid  of,  testifying  to  acts
and  words  of  our  Lord  on  the  night  of  his  betrayal,  and  furnishing  clear  evidence  as
to  the  light  in  which  his  death  was  regarded  by  himself.

II.  A  TYPE.  The  typological  features  have  often  been  dwelt  on.  1.  The  lamh —
select,  unblemished,  of  fall  age,  subjected  to  fire,  unmutilated  (John  xix.  36),  fitness  of
the  victim  to  represent  Christ  (Isa.  liii.  7).  2.  The  Uood — atoning,  need  of  personal
application,  sole  shelter  from  death,  under  its  shelter  inviolable  security  (Rom.  viii.  1).

3.  The/easi — the  slain  lamb  the  food  of  a  new  life  (John  vi.  51 — 57) ;  a  feast  of  recon-
ciliation and  peace,  with  fellow-believers,  with  bitter  herbs  (affliction,  repentance),  and
without  leaven — memorial  of  haste  (ver.  3),  but  also  emblematic  of  spiritual  incomip-
tion,  of  the  purity  which  is  to  characterize  the  new  life  (1  Cor.  v.  7 — 9) ;  no  part  of
the  flesh  to  remain  till  morning  (ver.  4),  for  same  reason,  to  avoid  corruption ;  the
feast  to  last  seven  days — a  week,  an  entire  circle  of  time,  symbolical  of  life-long  con-
secration to  holiness  of  walk.  4.  The  redemption — great,  once  for  all,  a  redemption
by  blood  and  by  power,  from  wrath,  from  bondage.  AU  these  types  are  conspicuously
fulfilled  in  Christ.

III.  An  ordinance.  1.  The  first  and  chief  of  the  feasts  (ver.  1).  2.  To  be  observed
regularly  (ver.  1).  So  now  the  Lord's  Supper  (1  Cor.  xi.  25).  3.  At  the  central
sanctuary  (vers.  2,  5, 6).  Christians  should  seek  to  realize  their  unity  with  all  saints
at  the  Lord's  table.    4.  With  due  seriousness  and  solemnity  (vers.  2,  6). — J.  0.

Vers.  9 — 13. — Pentecost.  I.  A  sacred  reckoning.  "Seven  weeks  shalt  thou
number,''  etc.  (ver.  9).  A  week  of  weeks,  seven  times  seven,  hence  the  name,  "  Feast
of  Weeks  "  (ver.  10).  The  count  began  with  the  offering  of  the  sheaf  of  firstfruits  on
Nisan  16,  the  second  day  of  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  (Lev.  xxiii.  11).  Till  that
sheaf  was  offered,  no  Israelite  was  permitted  to  eat  of  the  new  corn  (ver.  14).  With
the  arrival  of  the  fiftieth  day,  inclusive  of  the  second  of  Unleavened  Bread,  the  labours
of  the  harvest  were  presumed  to  be  ended,  and  this  festival  ensued,  at  which  baken
loaves  were  presented  to  Jehovah  (Lev.  xxiii.  17),  in  token  of  consecration  to  him  of
the  fruits  of  the  harvest,  and  of  dedication  of  the  life  which  bread  sustained.  There
is,  intended  or  unintended,  a  beautiful  symbolism  in  this  sacred  count,  the  divinely
allotted  period  for  the  labours  of  the  harvest,  its  days  reckoned  by  heaven's  calendar,
the  end,  an  "  appearing  before  God "  in  the  sanctuary.  The  harvest  began  with  con-
secration (in  the  Passover  sheaf),  it  ended  with  it  (in  the  presentation  of  the  wave
loaves).  So  has  the  Christian  his  allotted  work-time  in  the  world,  a  sacred  cycle  of
weeks,  rounded  off  in  God's  wisdom  for  the  work  he  means  to  be  accomplished
(John  ix.  4) ;  work  in  the  Christian  harvest-field,  a  work  beginning  in  consecration,
carried  on  in  the  spirit  of  consecration,  and  the  termination  of  which  is  "  entrance  intu
the  joy  of  the  Lord."


278  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xvi.  1— 22.

II.  A  HAEVE8T  THANKSQiviNO.  This  was  distinctly  the  idea  of  the  Pentecostal
festival.  It  was  characterized :  1.  By  a  devout  recognition  of  the  Divine  bounty  in  the
fruits  of  the  earth.  2.  By  a  voluntary  dedication  to  Giod  of  part  of  what  he  had  given.
There  was  the  public  ceremony  of  the  two  wave  loaves.  But  the  Israelite  was  required
in  addition  to  keep  the  feast  with  "  a  tribute  of  a  fiee-will  offering  of  his  hand  "  (ver.  10).
The  offering  was  to  be  voluntary,  yet  not  without  rule,  but  "  according  as  the  Lord
thy  God  hath  blessed  thee."  3.  By  a  willing  sharing  of  God%  bounty  with  the  needy
(ver.  11).  The  stranger,  the  fatherless,  the  widow,  were,  as  usual,  not  to  be  neglected.
The  remembrance  of  former  bondage  in  Egypt  was  to  furnish  the  "  touch  of  nature  "
which  would  make  this  duty  easy  (ver.  12).  Note :  (1)  Our  gifts  to  God  are  worth-
less, save  as  they  are  the  expression  of  a  willing  mind  (2  Cor.  viii.  7 — 16 ;  ix.  6 — 14).
(2)  Our  gifts  to  God  ought  to  be  proportionate  to  our  prosperity  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2).  (3)
God's  goodness  to  us  (in  harvests,  in  trade,  in  business  generally)  ought  to  be  acknow-
ledged by  liberal  gifts  for  his  service.  (4)  God's  goodness  to  us  (in  deliverances,  etc.)
should  open  our  hearts  in  sympathy  for  others.

III.  A  GOSPEL  TYPE.  The  figure  of  the  firstfruits  finds  an  abundance  of  applications
in  the  New  Testament.  It  is  employed  of  the  Jews  (Rom.  xi.  16),  sanctified  in  their
covenant  heads ;  of  Christ,  the  "  Firstfruits  "  of  them  that  sleep  (1  Cor.  xv.  20 — 23) ;
of  first  converts  in  a  particular  district  (1  Cor.  xvi.  15);  of  believers  generally,  as
"a  kind  of  firstfruits"  of  the  redeemed  creation  (Jas.  i.  18);  of  the  144,000  of  the
Apocalypse  (Rev.  xiv.  4),  possibly  "  all  the  Church  of  Christ  at  any  time  on  the  earth ;
a  limited  company  at  any  one  time,  capable  of  being  numbered  "  (Rev.  vii.  1 — 9).  A
more  direct  relation  must  be  traced  between  the  presentation  of  the  firstfruits  at
Pentecost  and  the  events  consequent  upon  the  Pentecostal  effusion  of  the  Spirit
(Acts  IL).  It  is  surely  not  to  be  ascribed  to  accident  that,  as  our  Lord  died  on  the
Friday  of  the  Passover — probably  on  the  14th  of  Nisan — so  the  disciples  were  kept
waiting  for  the  promised  effusion  of  the  Spirit  till  "  the  day  of  Pentecost  was  fully
come;"  and  that  on  this  day  the  great  ingathering  of  three  thousand  took  place,
embracing  representatives  from  "every  nation  under  heaven" — a  truly  glorious oifering
of  "  firstfruits."  May  we  pursue  the  coincidence  further,  and  see  in  Christ,  the  solitary
sheaf,  raised  from  the  dead  on  the  same  day  that  the  first-cut  sheaf  was  presented  in
the  sanctuary  (Nisan  16),  the  firstfruits  of  the  harvest  in  prospect ;  while  in  the  Church
constituted  and  consecrated  at  Pentecost,  the  day  of  the  offering  of  the  wave  loaves,
we  have  the  firstfruits  of  the  harvest  as  realized.  The  wave  loaves  correspond  in
significance  to  the  meat  offering,  and  still  more  nearly  to  the  shewbread.  Bread,  as
the  staff  of  life,  the  nourishing  principle,  stands  for  the  presentation  to  God  of  the  life
so  nourished,  involving  the  recognition  of  him  as  the  Nourisher  of  it.  In  the  possession
of  the  believing  heart  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  as  the  indwelling  and  abiding  principle  of
spiritual  life,  we  have  the  full  realization  of  this  thought,  the  fulfilment  of  the  types
of  meat  offering.  The  passage,  Jas.  i.  18,  suggests  the  deeper  idea  that  the  Church
constituted  at  Pentecost  is  itself  only  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of  redemption.  It  is  so  in
relation :  1.  To  the  latter-day  effusion  of  the  Spirit  (Acts  ii.  17 — 20).  2.  To  creation
as  a  whole  (Bom.  viii.  19 — 24).  Other  two  points  may  be  noted :  1.  If  our  dates  be
correct,  Pentecost,  like  the  Resurrection,  fell  on  the  first  day  of  the  week — the  Spirit
was  given  on  the  Lord's  day.  2.  As  Pentecost  was  held  by  the  Jews  in  commemoration
of  the  giving  of  the  Law,  so  God  signalized  it  as  the  day  of  the  giving  of  the  Spirit,
thus  superseding  the  old  dispensation  by  the  new. — J.  O.

Vers,  13 — 16. — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  L  A  Feast  of  the  Ingathbrino
(Ver.  13.)  Held  in  the  seventh  month,  when  all  the  fruits  of  the  earth  had  been
gathered  in.  Thus :  1.  Every  stage  of  labour  was  sanctified  by  the  recognition  of  God.
At  the  Passover,  when  the  sickle  was  thrust  into  the  virgin  grain ;  at  Pentecost,  when
the  cereal  crops  were  harvested;  and  now,  at  the  close  of  the  agricultural  year,  when
the  season's  labours  had  yielded  to  the  husbandman  their  full  results.  2.  The  ffuits
of  labour  were  sanctified  by  dedication  to  God.  The  usual  feasts  were  held,  and  shared
with  the  needy  (ver.  14),  and  free-will  offerings  (vers.  16,  17)  were  presented  to  God-
Bountiful  giving  is  the  appropriate  return  for  bountiful  receiving.

II.  A  MEMORIAL  OF  PAST  WANDERIN8S.  (Lev.  xxiii.  43.)  During  the  seven  days
of  the  festival,  the  Israelites  were  to  live  in  booths.     This  symbolized,  and  served  to


OH.  xvul— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMl.  278

remind  them  of,  the  wandering,  unsettled  life  of  the  desert.  Booths  were  erections
of  simpler  construction,  and  morei  n  keeping  with  an  agricultural  festival,  especially
after  the  settlement  in  Canaan,  than  tents  would  have  heen.  But  there  may  have  been
an  allusion  also  to  actual  circumstances  of  the  journeyings,  e.g.  the  first  halt  at  Succoth,
t.e.  booths  (Exod.  xii.  3 ;  see  Stanley).  This  memorial  was  instituted :  1.  That  in
the  midst  of  their  prosperity  they  might  not  forget  the  days  of  their  adversity  (ch.  viii.
12 — 18).  2.  That  they  might  be  reminded  of  God's  gracious  care  of  them.  Booths
or  huts  may,  as  Eeil  thinks,  have  heen  used  instead  of  tents  with  reference  to  this
idea.  The  booth  was  a  shelter,  a  protection.  So  God  promises  to  be  to  his  Church,  as
he  had  been  in  the  past,  "  a  booth  for  a  shadow  in  the  daytime  from  the  heat,  and  for
a  place  of  refuge,  and  for  a  covert  from  the  storm  and  rain  "  (Isa.  iv.  6).  3.  That  their
enjoyment  of  the  goodness  of  the  land  might  be  enhanced  by  feelings  of  warm  grati-
tude, awakened  by  the  sense  of  contrast.

III.  An  image  of  present  pilobimaqe.  Though  settled  in  Canaan,  the  Israelites
were  not  to  regard  themselves  as  in  possession  of  the  final  rest  (Heb.  iv.  7,  8).  The
pilgrim  state  continued  (Ps.  zzxix.  12).  It  does  so  still.  We  still  inhabit  tabernacles
(2  Cor.  V.  1).  Spiritual  rest,  the  inward  side  of  the  Canaan  type,  is  attained  in  Christ ;
but  the  full  realization  of  the  rest  of  God  lies  in  eternity.  Till  heaven  is  reached,  our
state  is  that  of  pilgrims — wilderness  wanderers.  "  The  admission  of  this  festival  into
Zechariah's  prophecy  of  Messianic  times  (Zech.  xiv.  18)  is  undoubtedly  founded  on
the  thought  that  the  keeping  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  an  expression  on  the  part
of  the  nations  of  their  thankfulness  for  the  termination  of  their  wanderings  by  their
reception  into  the  peaceful  kingdom  of  Messiah  "  (Oehler). — -3.  0.

Vers.  18 — 21. — Model  judges.  I.  Judges  occupy  a  high  and  besponsible  position.
1.  They  are  necessary.  They  require  to  be  set  up  "  in  all  thy  gates  .  .  .  throughout
thy  tribes."  2.  They  represent  God  (ch.  i.  17).  They  are  called  "gods"  (Ps.  Ixxxii.
1).  They  are  clothed  with  a  portion  of  God's  authority  (Rom.  xiii.  1).  3.  They  are
set  to  uphold  the  sacred  interests  of  justice.  4.  They  may,  by  wresting  judgment,  or
by  hasty  and  wrong  decisions,  inflict  irremediable  injury  on  the  innocent.  6.  The
right  discharge  of  their  functions  conduces  in  the  highest  degree  to  the  stability,
happiness,  and  material  prosperity  of  society.

II.  Judges  are  EECjarBBD  to  execute  just  judgment.  1.  They  are  not  to  be
swayed  by  private  partialities — political,  social,  ecclesiastical.  2.  They  are  not  to
make  distinctions  between  rich  and  poor,  t.e.  "  respect  persons."  3.  They  are  not  to
accept  bribes.  4.  They  are,  as  administrators  of  a  justice  which  is  impersonal,  to  judge
in  every  case  according  to  absolute  right. — J.  0.

Ve«.  1 — 8. — The  Patsover,  a  memoritd  of  deliverance.  The  institution  of  the  Passover
(Exod.  xii.)  was  preliminary  to  their  deliverance  from  Egypt,  just  as  the  Lord's  Supper
was  preliminary  to  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  it  was  designed  subsequently  to  com-
memorate. On  the  first  occasion  it  was  a  sacrifice  presented  at  home,  as  was  most
proper.  But  when  the  central  altar  was  set  up  in  Palestine,  it  became  the  centre  of  the
Passover  festival,  and  to  it  the  Jews  in  their  multitudes  repaired.  This  secured  a
national  assembly  under  very  solemn  circumstances,  and  was  an  important  element  in
sustaining  the  national  spirit.

I.  The  delivebanob  of  the  soul  fbom  the  bondage  of  bin  should  be  held
M  PEBFETUAL  BEMEMBBANCE.    The  Passovor  was  the  yearly  celebration  of  national

■lemption.  By  it  the  Jews  were  annually  reminded  that  they  were  a  redeemed
^ple.  Gratitude  to  God  would  be  elicited,  and  that  self-denial  and  abstinence  from
tU  which  the  unleavened  bread  typified.  And  it  is  evident  that  a  similar  memorial
B  contemplated  in  the  New  Testament  dispensation.  The  Lord's  Supper  coming
regularly  round  is  intended  to  recall  the  deliverance  from  sin  and  •guilt  which  we
believe  God  has  wrought  for  us,  and  to  foster  that  holiness  of  walk  which  should
characterize  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord.

II.  The  deliverance  of  the  soul  has  been  through  saobifice.  The  Passover
taught  this,  if  it  taught  anything.  Egypt  had  to  part  with  her  firstborn  before  God's
firstborn,  Israel,  could  be  redeemed  (Exod.  xiii.  15).  This  was  evidently  the  idea — the
firstborn  of  Egypt  must  die  to  ensure  the  liberty  of  the 'firstborn  of  God  (Exod.  if.  22,


280  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xw.  1—22.

23).  This  was  the  spirit  of  the  Mosaic  commission,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Israel  is
my  son,  even  my  firstborn :  and  I  say  unto  thee.  Let  my  son  go,  that  he  may  serve
me :  and  if  thou  refuse  to  let  him  go,  behold,  I  will  slay  thy  son,  even  thy  firstborn."

But  if  the  involuntary  sacrifice  of  the  Egyptian  firstborn  be  primarily  referred  to  in
the  Passover,  it  unquestionably  refers  secondarily  and  typically  to  the  great  voluntary
sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ,  through  which  our  souls  are  redeemed.  Hence  Paul  speaks
of  "  Christ  our  Passover  being  sacrificed  for  us  "  (1  Cor.  v.  7).  Just  as  the  blood  was
sprinkled  on  the  doorposts  and  lintel  that  the  destroying  angel  might  spare  the
inmates,  so  the  blood  of  Christ  is  sprinkled  on  our  hearts  and  consciences,  and  our
safety  from  condemnation  becomes  assured.

III.  The  unity  of  the  baobipiob  that  redeems  us  was  stbtkinolt  illus-
trated AT  the  Passovbb.  Nouo  of  the  flesh  was  to  remain  until  the  morning,  all
was  to  be  eaten  or  burnt  with  fire.  The  sacrifice  was  to  be  a  finished  unity,  not  a  pro-
tracted feast,  which  might  through  delay  become  corrupt.  So  with  the  sacrifice  o(
which  it  is  the  type.  Jesus  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many  (Heb.  ix.  28).
He  was  not  allowed  to  see  any  corruption  (Acts  xiii.  37).  The  unity  of  the  sacrifice
— the  once  for  all — was  thus  strikingly  brought  out.

Upon  this  our  assurance  of  acceptance  rests.  We  have  now  no  doubt  that  the
satisfaction  is  complete.  "  It  is  finished,"  said  Jesus  triumphantly  on  the  tree.  It  is
surely  a  matter  of  great  moment  and  thankfulness  to  have  our  case  disposed  of  at  once,
without  uncertain  delays,  without  any  possible  appeals.  God  ia  satisfied,  and  we  are
justified  and  free.

IV.  Salvation  bt  baoeificb  is  with  a  view  to  holt  ltveno.  The  Feast  of
Unleavened  Bread  followed  the  Passover.  Leaven  was  the  type  of  self-indulgence  and
sin.  The  unleavened  bread  indicated  how  hastily  they  had  to  flee  out  of  Egypt,  and
how  little  consideration  for  self  there  could  be  in  their  flight.  Paul  interprets  the
reference  for  us  when  he  says,  "  Therefore  let  us  keep  the  feast,  not  with  old  leaven,
neither  with  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness;  but  with  the  unleavened  bread
of  sincerity  and  truth"  (1  Cor.  v.  8).  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread  symbolized,
therefore,  the  life  of  holy  living  which  succeeds  our  salvation.  Self-righteousness
reverses  this  Divine  order.  It  insists  on  the  holy  living  meriting  the  salvation;  but
God  gives  the  salvation  gratuitously,  and  respects  the  holy  living  as  a  matter  of
gratitude.     We  should  not  make  the  way  more  difBoult  than  God  has  done. — ^E.  M.  B.

Vers.  9 — 12. — Pentecost,  the  Feast  of  Firstfruits.  Fifty  days  after  the  Passover,  or
a  week  of  weeks,  came  the  second  great  national  festival,  when  offerings  were  presented
unto  God  of  the  firstfruits  of  the  harvest,  and  a  people  already  blessed  recorded  their
thankfulness.  It  was  also  made  a  celebration  of  the  giving  of  the  Law  from  Sinai,
which  took  place,  according  to  calculation,  exactly  fifty  days  after  the  Passover.  In
consequence  of  this  twofold  reference  to  the  harvest  and  to  the  giving  of  the  Law,  this
Pentecostal  festival  acquired  more  popularity  than  was  to  be  expected.  In  fact,  from
Acts  ii.,  it  seems  to  have  drawn  Jews  and  proselytes  from  all  lands.  These  two
references  suggest  a  moral  and  a  typical  lesson  respectively  from  the  feast.

I.  It  was  the  bxpbession  or  harvest  thanksoivinq.  Here  we  have  its  moral
meaning.  It  was  an  acknowledgment  that  God  is  the  Author  of  the  harvest,  and
should  have  the  firstfruits.  We  never  shall  prosper  unless  we  are  grateful  to  the
bountiful  Giver.  And  the  joy  of  harvest  will  be  all  the  deeper  when  it  is  entertained
before  God.  In  harvest  homes  there  should  be  the  religious  element  continually.  If
God  be  forgotten,  it  is  sheer  and  base  ingratitude.

II.  It  was  typical  of  the  Pentecost  of  the  Christian  Church.  The  Jews
celebrated  on  this  festival  the  giving  of  the  Law,  and  the  blessings  attending  it.  An
interesting  parallel  may  be  traced  between  the  Pentecost  at  Sinai  and  the  Pentecost  at
Jerusalem.

1.  The  Jews  celebrated  the  giving  of  the  Law,  while  we  celebrate  the  proclamation
at  Pentecost  of  the  gospel.  We  have  here  a  parallel  and  also  a  contrast.  The  gospel
is  the  Law  magnified  and  delivered  as  love.

2.  The  Jews  received  the  Law  as  the  rule  of  life  after  their  deliverance  through  tht
Paschal  sacrifice,  as  we  receive  the  message  of  love  on  the  foundation  of  Christ  <mr
Pasuver  sacrificed  fifty  days  before.


OH.  XTi.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  281

,  3.  There  were  wonderful  works  attending  both  the  Pentecosts :  the  fearful  thunder-
ings  and  lightnings  at  Sinai,  and  the  rushing  mighty  wind  and  fire  in  the  upper  room
at  Jerusalem ;  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  at  Sioai,  the  sound  of  the  gospel  in  many
languages  at  Jerusalem.

4  There  were  important  effects  following  both  Pentecosts :  thus  the  fear  of  the
Israelites  at  Sinai,  and  the  conviction  of  sin  at  Jerusalem ;  the  separation  and  cere-
monial at  Sinai,  Moses  being  constituted  mediator,  and  tiie  fellowship  resulting  at
Jerusalem,  when  the  three  thousand  were  added  unto  the  Church.

III.  Systematic  bbnbficence  was  fostered  bt  the  festival.  In  giving  to  Gbd
"  according  as  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  blessed  thee,"  servants,  Levites,  strangers,  and
the  widow  and  fatherless  are  sure  to  be  considered.  This  was  the  case  too  after
Pentecost.  The  Christian  commune  was  tried,  which  was  a  mighty  though  unsuc-
cessful effort  of  beneficence.  This  law  of  beneficence  must  be  obeyed  by  all  Christian
men. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  13 — 17. — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles — life  a  tented  state.  This  was  the  third
great  festival,  and  it  was  after  all  the  harvest  and  vintage  had  been  gathered  home.
It  was  celebrated  in  the  seventh'  month,  from  the  fifteenth  day  to  the  twenty-second.
It  is  also  noticeable  that  it  began  five  days  after  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  which
was  on  the  tenth  day  of  this  same  seventh  month.  Sin  pardoned,  and  the  harvest
saved,  these  were  surely  twin  blessings  at  which  poor  sinners  might  well  rejoice.

I.  The  festival  was  to  behind  the  Isbablites  of  the  pilgrimage  in  the
WILDERNESS.  Their  settling  in  Canaan  was  not  to  blot  out  the  memory  of  their
previous  pilgrimage,  and  how  they  dwelt  with  God  in  tents.  The  same  danger
threatens  God's  children  still.  This  world  gets  so  settled  and  home-like  that  we  forget
the  pilgrimage  which  life  is  meant  by  God  to  be.  We  need  the  exhoitation  of  Peter,
"  Dearly  beloved,  I  beseech  you  as  strangers  and  pilgrims,  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts,
which  war  against  the  soul "  (1  Pet.  ii.  11).

II.  The  FESTIVAL  WAS  TO  BE  A  JOYOUS  ONE.  It  would  be  joyous  on  three  accounts :
(1)  because  of  the  iiigathered  harvest ;  (2)  because  of  the  complete  atonement  so
recently  past;  (3)  because  of  the  time  of  year,  the  glorious  October  of  Palestine.
Hence  the  festival  would  be  virtually  a  tenting  out  in  the  pleasantest  time  of  the  year,
with  minds  delivered  from  all  anxiety  and  fear.

And  this  is  to  indicate  the  high-water  mark  of  Christian  experience.  We  are  living
below  our  privileges  if  we  are  not  rejoicing  in  God's  providential  goodness,  and  in  his
atoning  grace,  and  in  his  beautiful  world.  "  Eejoice  in  the  Lord  alway :  and  again  I
say,  Eejoice  "  (Phil.  iv.  4).

III.  The  FESTIVAL  FOSTERED  HOPE.  Por  if  life  as  it  now  is  should  be  regarded  as  a
pilgrimage,  an  unsettled  state,  then  each  time  we  are  reminded  of  this  we  learn  to  look
for  a  better  condition  and  more  permanent  abode.  If  I  am  reminded  that  I  dwell  in
a  tent  of  flesh,  easily  taken  down,  I  learn  to  hope  for  the  building  of  God,  the  "house
not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens  "  (2  Cor.  v.  1).

"  A  while  on  earth  we  roam
In  these  frail  houses  which  are  not  our  home^
Journeying  towards  a  refuge  that  is  sure,—

A  rest  Becure.
•  *  *  »  •

"  For  in  our  Father's  house
A  mansion  fair  he  has  prepared  for  us ;
And  nnly  till  bis  voice  shall  call  us  henoe
We  dwell  in  tents."

TV.  The  festival  fostered  forethoitght  and  thrift.  It  had  all  the  wholesome
effect  on  them  which  an  annual  picnic  has  upon  working  people.  They  look  forward
to  it  and  make  preparation  for  it.  Now,  these  festivals  at  the  centre  of  the  national
worship  were  to  be  joyful  and  liberal  times.  They  were  not  to  appear  empty-handed
before  the  Lord.  They  were  to  be  able  to  give  at  his  altar  and  be  hospitable  as  they
had  opportunity.  Hence  the  festival  cultivated  thrifty  habits  in  order  to  be  opei*
handed  when  the  glad  day  came.    So  should  religion  make  us  all ! — B.  M.  E.


282  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xvi.  1—22

Vers.  18 — 20. — Impartial  judges.  We  have  here  the  election  of  judges  or  magi^
trates  laid  down  as  a  duty.  In  the  election  they  are  to  secure  impartial  and  incoriuptibla
men.  A  bribe  is  not  to  be  thought  of  by  the  judges — nor  are  they  to  respect  persons.
And  here  let  us  notice —

I.  That  all  judgment  among  men  ib  the  forbshadowinq  of  a  Divine  judoment
AT  THE  LAST.  We  live_  Under  a  moral  Governor  who  has  not  yet  delivered  final
judgment  upon  his  creatures.  That  final  review  of  life  is  naturally  expected  from  the
imperfect  justice  of  the  world.  Men  in  their  judgments  can  at  best  only  approximate
to  what  will  be  the  Divine  decision.

II.  God  DEMANDS  impartial  judges  prom  his  people  BECAUSE  HB  IS  THE  IMPARTIAL

Judge  himself.  The  impartiality  of  God's  administration  will  be  vindicated  at  last.
All  seeming  violations  of  the  principle  will  be  exhibited  in  their  true  light.  For  instance,
God's  plan  of  salvation  is  the  very  essence  of  impartiality,  since  it  proposes  to  save
men  without  regard  to  any  personal  consideration,  as  a  matter  of  free  grace  alone.
Whosoever  takes  exception  to  this  is  taking  exception  to  the  Divine  impartiality.

Again,  in  providence  we  shall  doubtless  find  that,  by  a  series  of  compensations  and
of  drawbacks,  each  person's  lot  in  life  is  impartially  and  graciously  ordered.  The
"  favourites  of  fortune  "  find  some  drop  of  bitterness  in  their  cup,  and  the  sweetness  is
more  apparent  than  real.

III.  Men  need  not  try  to  bribe  God,  however  they  may  succeed  with  mbn.
For  although  this  may  seem  a  strong  way  of  putting  it,  it  is  neverthelass  the  attempt
that  sinners  thoughtlessly  make.  For  instance,  when  an  anxious  soul  thinks  that  a
certain  amount  of  conviction  of  sin,  a  certain  amount  of  penitence,  a  certain  amount
of  frames  and  feelings,  will  secure  acceptance  and  peace,  he  is  proposing  to  bribe  God.
It  is  as  if  an  insane  person  tried  to  corrupt  a  judge  on  the  bench  by  the  present  of  a
bundle  of  rags — "all  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy  rags."  God  will  take  no  bribe.
He  will  accept  no  man's  person.  Unless  we  give  up  the  idea  of  personal  claim  and
personal  fitness  for  his  reception  of  us,  we  cannot  be  accepted.

IV.  We  may  expect  an  impartial  judgment  at  the  last.  It  is  Jesus  who  is  to
sit  on  the  throne  when  the  appeal  cases  from  the  injustice  of  earth  to  the  justice  of
heaven  are  heard.  He  knows  our  cases  so  thoroughly  that  he  cannot,  as  he  would  not,
err.  All  wrongs  shall  then  be  righted;  all  unfair  advantage  taken  shall  then  be  con-
demned. "  Behold,  the  judge  standeth  at  the  door."  Let  us  see  to  it  that  we  learn
of  him  impartiality,  and  men  shall  regard  us  as  truly  Godlike  in  our  dealings  with
them  1— B.  M.  B.

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  Passover  a  memorial  and  a  prophecy.  In  a  singular  and  a  miraculous
manner,  the  national  existence  of  the  Hebrews  had  commenced.  God  had  signally
interposed  as  their  Champion,  in  a  way  altogether  unparalleled.  Without  question,  it
w  as  an  event  pregnant  with  vast  issues  to  the  history  of  mankind.  Every  opportunity
was  aiforded  Pharaoh  to  escape  from  destruction.  The  host  of  God,  composed  of
natural  forces  and  invisible  powers,  enclosed  him  gradually  within  narrower  and
narrower  bounds,  until  the  king  himself  was  captured  and  destroyed.  This  was  a
conspicuous  step  in  the  development  of  the  redemptive  scheme.  In  that  night  of
destruction  the  elect  nation  was  born.

T.  Emancipation  of  national  life  from  bondage  is  a  fit  subject  fob  yearly
commemoration.  It  is  God's  will  that  such  commemoration  should  be  observed,  and
be  observed  in  a  most  religious  spirit.  The  effect  of  such  commemoration  upon  the
minds  of  the  people  would  be  most  beneficial.  The  nation  is  but  a  collection  of  units ;
and  as  every  unit  had  shared  in  the  boon,  so  every  unit  should  partake  in  the  acknow-
ledgment. It  is  a  sin  when  we  forget  our  participation  in  national  blessings.  Our
pious  example  will  be  a  benign  stimulus  to  others.

II.  Grateful  commemoration  ^h'-CLD  perpetuate  all  the  methods  and  moi-
DENTS  of  the  Divine  DELIVER  A  NOi  '>  Li/o  had  to  be  sacrificed  in  order  to  obtain
that  redemption.  It  was,  in  the  mosi  pi  'per  sense,  a  redemption.  They  had  belonged
to  God ;  a  usurper  had  despoiled  Q^jd  of  his  right ;  hence, .  the  people  had  to  be
"  bought  back."  Natural  agencies  had  een  employed  to  soften  Pharaoh's  heart;  but
in  vain.  Nothing  short  of  the  death  oi  the  firstborn  su£Sced  to  procure  deliverance.
Therefore  the  commemoration  of  the  event  fitly  included  the  sacrifice  of  the  lamb


CH.  XTL 1— 22.J  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEROKOMY.  283

2.  Th«  release  had  been  with  haste.  This  incident  was  deserving  of  commemoration.
So  urgent  was  Pharaoh's  desire  that  they  should  depart,  that  they  had  not  time  to  bake
their  daily  ration  of  bread ;  hence  the  yearly  commemoration  was  to  be  with  "  bread
unleavened."  Bodily  appetites  must  be  forgotten  when  the  golden  moment  of  emanci-
pation dawns.  3.  The  sense  of  obligation  should  he  deep  and  abiding.  On  this  account,
.the  commemoration  was  appointed  to  extend  over  seven  days.  Gladness  was  to  be
tempered  with  self-denial  and  pain,

IIL  Grateful  commemoration  takes  thb  form  of  deeds  and  self-sacrifices.
The  gratitude  that  contents  itself  with  words  is  cheap  and  shallow.  God  delights  to
hear  the  language  of  deeds.  This  is  the  real  language  of  the  heart.  It  feels  the  pain
of  restraint  and  disappointment,  if  it  may  not  bring  some  visible  expression  of  its  love
or  perform  some  service  for  its  friend.  In  the  case  of  the  Hebrews,  long  journeys  had
to  be  undertaken,  lambs  had  to  be  slain,  much  time  had  to  be  devoted  to  the  sacred
festival.     Yet  all  this  was  performed  with  radiant  gladness.

IV.  The  commemoration  of  the  Passover  was  to  be  observed  under  the  solemn
SANCTIONS  OF  RELIGION.  Under  the  theocratic  government,  every  public  act  was
baptized  at  the  fountain  of  religion.  Religion  was  not  simply  a  particular  department
of  the  State :  it  was  a  spirit  of  heaven  that  ennobled  and  beautified  every  public  deed.
The  Paschal  lamb  might  not  be  slain  anywhere,  it  must  be  slain  at  the  temple  gate.
It  was  an  offering  made  to  God,  and  God  at  once  returned  it,  with  added  blessing  to  the
offerer.  Thus,  year  by  year,  they  professed  that  their  emancipation  was  a  gift  from
God,  that  national  life  and  earthly  home  and  prospective  hope  came  from  the  goodness
of  God.   '

V.  National  emancipation  was  a  prophecy  of  the  world's  redemption.  A  man
is  a  type  of  a  nation;  a  nation  is  a  type  of  the  world.  What  God  has  done  for  a
nation,  he  is  prepared  to  do  (if  need  be)  for  the  race.  We  too  are  under  bondage,  in
the  grasp  of  a  mightier  tyrant  than  Pharaoh.  "  Christ  our  Passover  is  for  us  slain."
From  all  on  whom  is  the  effectual  mark  of  Messiah's  blood,  doom  is  removed.  "  They
shall  never  perish."  Their  destiny  is  the  heavenly  Canaan — the  new  Jerusalem.  We
too  have  our  Paschal  feast— the  Eucharist.  As  the  deliverance  of  the  earthly  Israel
was  complete,  "  not  a  hoof  was  left  behind,"  so  Christ  Jesus  shall  eventually  be  Victor
over  all  his  foes.     Redemption  of  the  true  Israel  is  in  progress. — D.

Vers.  9 — 17. — The  Feasts  of  Weeks  and  of  Tabernacles.  For  the  moral  Improvement
of  the  Hebrews,  it  was  desirable  to  keep  alive  among  them  the  recollection  of  their  early
history.  Prior  to  the  invention  of  printing,  and  when  written  records  would  be  scarce,
memory  and  affection  and  conscience  were  impressed  by  the  annual  festivals.  The
Passover  commemorated  the  national  birth ;  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  commemorated
the  tent  life  of  the  desert.  The  joys  of  harvest  and  of  vintage  were  things  unknown  in
the  wilderness.

L  Material  blessinos  afford  preqnant  bkasons  fob  beliqious  jot.  A  frequent
effect  upon  the  mind  of  some  large  influx  of  wealth  is  to  produce  a  sense  of  independence
and  self-sufficiency.  The  very  event  which  ought,  most  of  all,  to  lead  men's  thoughts
up  to  God,  leads  to  self-gratulation  and  self-trust.  Now  present  need  is  met.  We  have
stores  of  abundance.  We  can  say  to  ourselves,  "  Soul,  thou  hast  luuch  goods  laid  up
for  many  years."  Therefore  we  must  counteract  this  tendency.  In  very  kindness  to
men's  souls,  God  ordained  this  festival.  He  would  have  us  to  look  from  the  gift  to  the
Giver.  It  is  his  will  that  we  should  rejoice  abundantly,  but  that  our  joy  should  be
religious  joy — a  joy  consecrated  at  the  temple  gate.

II,  The  festive  seasons  abb  fixed  AoooRDiNa  to  a  eeligious  measurement.
(Ver.  9.)  The  year  is  a  measurement  of  time  fixed  by  a  natural  cycle.  So  also  is  the
month,  so  also  the  day.  .But  there  is  nothing  in  nature  that  marks  the  commencement
and  the  close  of  the  week.  This  is  a  measurement  specially  ordained  of  God.  The
visible  universe  is  not  the  whole  of  existence.  Another  voice  breaks  upon  the  ear,
softer  than  the  music  of  nature,  and  more  full  of  authority  than  the  voice  of  Caesar —
a  voice  which  makes  a  new  boundary  in  time,  and  bids  us  to  count  our  days  by
sevens.

m.  RBOETVINa  SHOULD  PROMPT  US  TO  A  PROPORTIONATB  QiviNa.  (Ver.  10.)  The
gift  to  be  brought  to  the  temple  is  not  specified.    It  might  be  a  gift  of  corn,  or  ol


284  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xvl  1—22.

fruit,  or  of  wine,  or  of  money.  The  form  of  the  gift  was  left  to  the  option  of  the
hushandman ;  but  some  tribute  was  required,  and  the  amount  must  be  proportionate  to
the  abundance  of  his  crops.  If  plain  and  imperative  law  could  make  the  Jews  generous-
hearted,  God  did  his  utmost  to  cultivate  in  them  this  excellence.  Avarice  was  scouted
by  Divine  Law.

IV.  Religiods  jot  should  be  DiFFUsrvK.  This  giving  to  God  was  to  be  an  act  of
gladness.  It  was  not  allowed  to  be  with  grudging  or  with  gloom  (ver.  11).  God  had
no  personal  need  for  these  material  presents.  They  were  expended  at  once  in  new
blessing  and  joy.  Not  only  was  the  household  to  share  in  the  festive  gladness,  in  the
banquet  and  the  song  ;  but  the  servant,  the  stranger,  the  poor  Levite,  the  widow,  and
the  orphan  also.  God's  copious  goodness  in  the  harvest  was  designed  to  enlarge  all
narrow  affections,  and  to  thaw,  in  streams  of  kindness,  all  frozen  sympathies.  -At  such
a  season,  they  were  reminded  that  they  were  not  proprietors  of  anything,  but  put  in
ofBces  of  trust  as  the  stewards  of  God.

V.  A   SENSE   OF   OBLIGATION   SHOULD   INSPIRE    OBEDIENCE.      (Ver.    12.)      The   hour   ot

prosperity  is  the  hour  of  reflection.  By  the  law  of  associated  ideas,  the  contrast  is
suggested.  The  mind,  free  from  the  pressure  of  care,  retraces  the  past.  We  think  of
the  "  rock  whence  we  were  hewn,  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  we  were  digged."  The
recollection  of  our  lowly  origin — the  dust  of  the  ground — ought  to  affect  us  tenderly ;
and  our  sense  of  devout  obligation  should  stimulate  new  and  larger  obedience.  If  I
■  owe  so  much  to  God,  what  can  I  otherwise  do  than  keep  his  commandments  with  mind
and  heart  and  soul  ?     Complete  obedience  is  a  dictate  of  earliest  intelligence. — D.

Vers.  18 — 22. — The  administration  of  justice.  True  religion  is  related  to  true
morality  as  the  parent  is  related  to  the  child.  God  cares  as  much  that  right  disposi-
tions should  prevail  between  man  and  man  as  between  man  and  God.  By  an  eternal
decree,  religion  and  morality  have  been  cojoined,  and  no  man  can  put  them  asunder.
He  that  loves  God  will  love  his  brother  also.

I.  ThE-ADMINISTRATION  of  SOCIAL  JUSTICE  IS   ENTRUSTED  TO  IMPERFECT   MEN.      The

laws  of  the  Jews  were  framed  in  heaven,  and  were  conveyed  to  men  by  the  mediation
of  angels,  but  the  administration  and  execution  of  these  laws  were  imposed  on  men
selected  from  among  themselves.  What  men  cannot  do,  God  will  do  for  them ;  what
men  can  do  for  themselves,  God  requires  them  to  accomplish.  This  administration  of
Divine  Law  by  men  was  a  magnificent  training  for  higher  office.  In  the  best  sense,
God  desires  that  men  "  should  be  as  gods."  By  handling  the  affairs  of  justice,  they
would  best  grow  in  the  understanding  of  the  Divine  government.

II.  Evert  town  was  a  ttpe  of  the  whole  kingdom.  Magistrates  were  to  be
appointed  in  every  community,  who  should  be  kings  in  their  sphere  of  jurisdiction.
Such  magistrates  were  the  people's  choice,  and  thus  they  were  initiated  into  the  art  of
self-government.  Justice  well  administered  in  every  town  would  secure  the  order  and
well-being  of  the  nation.  The  burden  of  governing  the  whole  nation  would  thus  be
reduced  to  a  thousand  infinitesimal  burdens — each  one  easily  to  be  borne.  Duty  well
done  in  every  individual  sphere  would  make  the  world  happy  and  prosperous.

III.  The  SACRED  interests  of  justice  outweigh  all  personal  considerations.
Gifts  from  friends  are  not  to  be  despised ;  but  if  they  have  the  feeblest  tendency  to
weaken  our  sense  of  right  or  to  bring  discredit  on  public  justice,  they  must  be  declined.
If  a  man  accepts  the  office  of  a  ruler,  he  must  be  prepared  to  forego  many  private
advantages  and  pleasures.  He  is  the  steward  of  public  interests — the  servant  of
justice.  He  is  no  longer  his  own  master.  Personal  friendships  must  be  forgotten  in
the  judicial  court.  No  regard  must  be  had  to  any  other  interest  save  the  interest  of
righteousness.  One  thing  the  magistrate  must  do,  and  one  only;  he  must  be  the
mouthpiece  of  eternal  righteousness.  He  may  err,  but  he  must  he  honest.  Simple  in-
tegrity of  purpose  is  the  chief  qualification  to  rule.  He  who  candidly  uesires  to  do  right
will  be  guided  by  an  unerring  hand.

IV.  The  cause  of  public  justice  is  served  bt  publicitt.  The  administration  of
justice  was  to  be  in  the  gate — in  the  place  of  public  coacourse.  From  the  free  conflict
of  public  opinion  sparks  of  truth  will  be  elicited,  tfo  weak  and  vacillating  is  ofttimes
human  purpose,  that  the  blaze  of  mortal  eyes  is  neeued  to  keep  that  purpose  steadfast.
This  mode  of  adminir'  '"  -  'nsiice  had  also  a  deterrent  influence  on  the  immature  and
the  vile ;  it  educated  the  puui  .  ^ience.


a.  XVII.  1—20.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMY.


285


V.   JUSTICB    H0NE8TLT    ADMINI8TBKED   8ECTTRE8    NATIONAI,    PROSPEMTT.        It    IS    th«

lesson  of  universal  history  that  official  injustice  loosens  all  the  honds  of  society,  and
brings  a  kingdom  into  utter  ruin.  Men  will  patiently  tolerate  many  ahuses  of  power,
but  the  public  abuse  of  justice  quickly  brings  deadly  retribution.  On  the  other  hand,  an
honest  and  prompt  administration  of  righteous  law  is  the  seed  of  order,  content,  and
mutual  confidence.  It  gives  a  sense  of  security ;  it  fosters  patriotism ;  it  develops
courage ;  it  brings  the  smile  and  benediction  of  God. — D.

Vers.  21,  22. — Th«  pathways  to  temptation  to  he  shunned.  A  rash  and  hare-brained
pilot  may  venture  as  near  as  he  can  to  a  sunken  reef,  but  a  wise  captain  will  prefer
plenty  of  sea-room.  It  is  no  proof  of  wisdom  to  tamper  with  temptation.  One  cannot
handle  pitch  without  being  defiled.

I.  G-OD  WISHES  TO  IMPART  TO  MEN  HIS  OWN  FEELINa  TOWARDS  IBOLATRT.      (Ver.   22.)

To  be  like  God  is  the  summit  of  every  good  man's  ambition.  This  is  God's  intention
also.  But  the  attainment  can  only  gradually  be  made.  We  must  have  God's  thoughts
rooted  in  us ;  we  must  cultivate  similar  feelings  ;  we  must  cherish  similar  purposes  or
we  cannot  be  like  him  in  character.  Idolatry  corrupts  the  soul  and  generates  death.
To  know  and  worship  €rod  leads  up  to  richest  life.

II.  External  aids  to  idolatry  must  be  CAEEruLLT  avoided.  A  stone  which  is
a  stumbling-block  to  a  child  has  no  peril  for  a  strong  man  ;  for  the  sake  of  the  young
and  the  weak,  the  stone  should  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  It  is  wise  and  noble  to
abstain  from  self-indulgences  which  will  imperil  the  piety  of  others.  A  shady  grove
would  be  pleasant  enough  for  worshippers  in  the  scorching  climate  of  the  East ;  never-
theless, if  it  shall  tend  in  the  least  measure  to  lure  the  ignorant  into  idolatry,  we  will
forego  the  pleasure.  This  is  Godlike,  to  deny  self  in  order  to  bless  others.  If
umbrageous  groves  make  my  weak  brother  to  offend,  I  will  endure  the  noontide  heat
so  long  as  life  shall  last.  Our  mental  tastes,  our  love  of  the  beautiful,  our  desire  for
pleasure, — all  must  give  way  to  honest  endeavour  for  the  moral  elevation  of  the  race.

III.  God's  fatherly  kindness  is  expressed  in  these  plain  precepts.  We  might
reach  these  wise  maxims  as  reasonable  deductions  from  moral  principles;  yet  they
come  to  us  clothed  with  irresistible  authority,  when  they  appear  as  the  revealed  will  of
God,  A  twofold  light  blends  to  point  out  the  path  of  human  conduct,  viz.  the  light  of
conscience  and  the  light  of  Scripture  ;  yet  these  twin  rays  emanate  from  the  selfsame
gun.  -D.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XVIL


Saorifioeb  to  be  op  Animals  Unblemtshed.
Idolateeb  to  be  sought  out,  convicted,
AND  put  to  Death.  The  Higher  Judicial
Court  at  the  Sanotuaet.  Election
AND  Duty  op  a  Kino.

Ver.  1. — Not  only  was  the  setting  up  of
idols  an  offence  to  be  punished  by  the  judge,
but  also  all  profanation  of  the  service  of
Jehovah,  such  as  the  offering  in  sacrifice
of  any  animal,  bullock  or  sheep,  that  had
any  blemish  or  defect  (cf.  Lev.  xxii.  19 — 24).
E^favonredness ;  literally,  any  evil  thing,
Le.  any  vice  or  maim  (cf.  Lev.  xxii.  22,  etc.).

Ver.  2. — In  oh.  xiii.,  Moses  enacts  what  is
to  be  done  to  those  who  seduce  into  idolatry.
Here  he  declares  what  is  to  be  done  to  those
who  are  so  seduced.  Done  wickedness;
li  terally,  done  the  evil.  The  definite  article  is
prefixed ;  it  is  not  any  kind  of  wickedness
that  is  here  denounced,  but  the  special  sin


of  Idolatry,  the  wickedness  kot'  tlixt'-  All
idolatry  was  to  be  strictly  suppressed —
those  convicted  of  it  to  be  pnt  to  death  by
stoning.

Ver  3.— (Of  .  ch.  iv.  19.)  Whioli  I  have  not
commanded;  i.e.  have  forbidden,  a  meiosis,
as  in  Jer.  vii.  31.

Ver.  5. — Unto  thy  gates ;  judicial  proceed-
ings were  conducted  at  the  gates  of  the
city,  and  in  some  place  outside  the  walls
the  sentence  was  executed  on  the  con-
demned criminal  (Neh.  viii.  1,  3 ;  Job.  xxix.
7;  ch.  xxii.  24;  Acts  vii.  58;  Heb.  xiii.  12),
just  as,  during  the  journey  through  the
wilderness,  it  had  been  outside  the  camp
that  transgressors  were  punished  (Lev^xlv.
14;Numb.  XV.  36).  "*

Vers.  6,  7. — Only  on  the  testins^^y  of
more  than  one  witness  could  the  accused
be  condemned  (cf.  Numb.  xxxv.  30  ;  and
the  hand  of  the  witnesses  was  to  be  first
agH  inst  him  to  put  him  to  death — anile  which
would  tend  to  prevent  aoonsations  being


286


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMf.


[CH.  xvn.  1—20


lightly  adduced,  as  none  would  venture  to
witness  against  any  one  unless  so  deeply
convinced  of  his  guilt  that  tliey  were
willing  to  assume  the  responsibility  of  in-
flicting on  him  the  last  penalty  with  their
own  hands.  Worthy  of  death  be  put  to
death ;  i.e.  adjudged  or  appointed  to  death ;
literally,  the  dead  man  sJiall  die.  np,  the
part,  of  niD,  to  die,  is  here  equivalent  to
nin  ja,  son  of  death  (1  Sam.  xx.  31),  or
nip  V)"if,  a  man  of  death  (1  Kings  ii.  26),  i.e.
one  assigned  to  death,  already  the  property
of  deatli,  and  so  as  good  as  dead.  Put  the
evil  away ;  literally,  consume  or  sweep  away
Ike  eviL  The  verb  1^2  means  primarily  to
consume  by  burning.

Vers.  8 — 13.— 'So  long  as  Moses  was  with
the  people,  they  had  in  him  one  to  whom,  in
the  last  resort,  cases  might  be  brought  for
decision  which  were  found  too  difficult  for  the
ordinary  judges  (Exod.  xviii.  19 — 26).  But,
as  he  was  not  to  be  always  with  them,  it  was
needful  to  provide  a  supreme  court,  to  which
such  cases  might  be  carried  when  they  could
no  longer  be  decided  by  him;  and  such  a
court  is  here  appointed  to  be  held  at  the
Mnctnary.

Ver.  8. — A  matter  too  hard  for  thee ;
literally,  too  marvellous;  something  extra-
ordinary, and  which  could  not  be  decided
by  the  ordinary  rules  of  the  judicature.
Between  blood  and  blood,  between  plea  and
plea,  and  between  stroke  and  stroke ;  i.e.  in
cases  where  blood  had  been  shed  and  death
had  ensued,  either  accidentally  or  from
murderous  intent  (cf.  Exod.  xxi.  13,  etc. ;
Numb.  XXXV.  9,  etc.);  in  oases  of  disputed
rights  and  claims  (cf.  2  Chron  xix.  10);  and
in  oases  where  corporeal  injury  had  been
suffered,  whether  in  strife  or  from  assault
(Exod.  xxL  18,  etc.);  and,  in  general,
wherever  matters  of  controversy — disputes
as  to  what  was  lawful  and  right,  might
arise  in  their  towns  and  villages.  In  all
such  cases  recourse  was  to  be  had  to  the
court  at  the  sanctuary — "  to  tlie  priests  the
Levites,"  t.e.  the  priests  who  were  of  the
tribe  of  Levi,  and  to  the  judge  presiding
there — the  lay  judge  associated  with  the
high  priest  as  president  (see  Oehler,  in
Herzog's  'Encyclop.,'  vol.  v.  p.  58).  It  is
not  intended  by  this  that  an  appeal  was
to  lie  from  the  lower  court  to  the  higher,
or  that  the  parties  in  a  suit  might  carry  it
at  once  to  tlie  supreme  judge;  the  meahing
rather  is  that,  when  the  ordinary  judges
found  a  case  too  difficult  for  them  to  deal
with,  tliey  were  themselves  to  transmit  it
to  the  supreme  court  for  decision.

Ver  9.— Enquire ;  what,  namely,  is  "  the
sentence  of  judgment ; "  and  this  the  judge


should  deolnre.  Sentence  of  judgment;
literally,  word  of  right,  verhum  juris,  de-
claration of  what  was  legally  right.

Vers.  10  — 12.  —  This  sentence,  being
founded  on  the  Law,  the  suitors  were  to  accept
and  implicitly  obey.  If  any  through  pride  or
arrogance  should  refuse  to  accept  the  inter-
pretation of  the  Law  given  by  the  priests,  or
to  submit  to  the  sentence  pronounced  by  the
judge,  he  was  to  be  regarded  as  a  rebel
against  God,  and  to  be  put  to  death,  that
others  might  be  deterred  from  the  like
presumption  (ch.  xiii.  11).  The  sentence,
which  they  of  that  place  which  the  lord
shall  choose  shall  shew  thee;  lathei,  which
they  shall  declare  to  thee  from  that  place
which  the  Ijord  shall  choose.  According  to
the  sentence  of  the  law ;  literally,  accorditig
to  the  month  of  the  Law;  i.e.  according  as
the  Law  prescribes,  according  to  the  purport
of  the  statute.

Vers.  14 — 20. — Israel,  oeing  under  a
theocracy,  did  not  need  an  earthly  king ;  but
neither  was  this  thereby  precluded,  pro-
vided the  king  chosen  by  the  people  were  one
whom  Jehovah  would  approve  as  his  vice-
gerent. In  case,  tlien,  of  their  coming  to
desire  to  have  a  king  over  them  like  the
nations  around  them,  Moses  gives  instruc-
tions here  as  to  the  choice  of  a  king,  and  as
to  the  duties  and  obligations  resting  upon
those  who  might  be  elevated  to  that  ofBce.
The  form  in  which  these  are  conveyed  clearly
indicates  that,  at  the  time  this  was  uttered,
the  existence  of  a  king  in  Israel  was  con-
templated as  only  a  distant  possibility.

Ver.  14. — When  thou  art  come  unto  the
land,  etc.  This  phraseology,  which  is
common  to  the  laws  which  respect  the  affairs
of  the  Hebrews  after  they  should  be  settled
in  Canaan,  implies  that  this  law  was  given
whilst  they  were  yet  outside  the  promised
land.  It  is  plain  also,  from  the  tenor  of  the
whole  statement  in  this  verse,  that  the  legis-
lator in  this  case  is  providing  for  what
he  supposes  may  happen,  is  likely  to  happen,
but  which  he  by  no  means  desires  should
happen.  Moses  foresaw  that  the  people
would  wish  to  be  as  the  nations  aroimd
them — go  vern  ed  by  a  king— and  he  legislates
accordingly,  without  approving  of  that  wish.
Ver.  15.— The  prohibition  to  choose  a
foreigner  indicates  that  the  people  had  the
right  of  election.  In  what  way  this  was
to  be  exercised,  and  how  it  was  subject
to  the  Divine  choice,  is  not  declared.
Judging  from  what  actually  happened  in
subsequent  history,  it  would  appear  that
only  on  special  occasions,  suah  as  the
election  of  the  first  king  or  a  chauge  oj
dynasty,  did  God  take  the  initiative,  and


OH.  XVII.  1 — 20.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


287


through  a  prophet  direct  the  choice  of  the
people;  ultimately  the  monarchy  became
hereditary,  and  it  was  understood  that  the
prince  who  succeeded  to  the  throne  did
10  with  the  Divine  approval,  unless  the
opposite  was  expressly  intimated  by  a
message  from  God.

Vers.  16,17.  -Certain  rules  are  prescribed
for  the  king.  It  is  forbidden  to  him  to
multiply  horses,  to  multiply  wives,  and  to
amass  large  treasures  of  silver  and  gold,
and  he  must  have  a  copy  of  the  Law
written  out  for  him  from  thiit  kept  by  the
priests,  that  he  miglit  have  it  by  him,  and
read  it  all  the  days  of  his  life.  The
multiplying  of  horses  is  prohibited,  because
this  would  bring  Israel  into  intercourse
and  friendly  relations  witli  Egypt,  and
might  tend  to  their  going  back  to  that
country  from  which  they  had  been  so
marvellously  delivered  ;  a  prohibition  which
could  only  have  been  given  at  an  early
stage  in  the  history  of  the  people,  for  at
B  later  period,  after  they  had  been  well
established  in  Canaan,  such  a  prohibition
for  such  a  reason  would  have  been  simply
ridiculous.  The  prohibition  to  multiply
wives  and  to  amass  large  treasures  has
respect  to  the  usage  common  from  the
earliest  period  with  Oriental  monarchs  to
have  vast  harems  and  huge  accumulations
of  the  precious  metals,  as  much  for  osten-
tation as  for  either  luxury  or  use ;  and  as
there  was  no  small  danger  of  the  King  of
Israel  being  seduced  to  follow  this  usage,
and  80  to  have  his  heart  turned  away  from
the  Lord,  it  was  fitting  that  such  a  prohi-
bition should  be  prospectively  enacted  lor
his  guidance.  Both  these  prohibitions  were
neglected  by  Solomon,  and  probably  by
otbian  of  tiie  Jewiuh  kings ;  but  tbia  only  iu<


dicates  that  the  law  was  so  ancient  that  it
had  come  in  their  time  to  be  regarded  as
obsolete.  The  rule  that  the  king  was  to
write  him  a  copy  of  the  Law  for  his  own
constant  use  does  not  necessarily  imply
that  he  was  to  write  this  with  his  own
hand ;  he  might  cause  it  to  be  written  by
some  qualified  scribe  for  him.

Ver.  18.— A  copy  of  this  law;  literally,
a  double  of  (his  Law,  i.e.  not,  as  the  LXX.
have  it,  "This  reiteration  of  the  Law"
(t6  SevTepopifiiov  tovto),  but  a  duplicate  or
copy  of  the  Pentateuchal  Law.  The  Jews
understand  by  "double"  tliat  two  copies
of  the  Law  were  to  be  made  by  the  king
(Maimon., '  De  Eegibus,'  c.  iii.  §  1) ;  but  this
is  unnecessary :  every  copy  of  a  law  is  a
doable  of  it.  Out  of  that  which  is  before
the  priests.  The  priests  were  the  custo  Jians
of  the  written  Law  (ch.  xxxi.  26) ;  and  from
the  text  of  their  codex  was  the  king's  copy
to  be  written.

Ver.  19. — And  it  shall  be  with  him,  etc.
It  was  to  be  carefully  kept  by  him,  but
not  as  a  mere  sacred  deposit  or  palladium  ;
it  was  to  be  constantly  with  him  wherever
he  was,  was  to  be  the  object  of  his  continual
study,  and  was  to  be  the  directory  and  guide
of  his  daily  life  (of.  Josh.  i.  8;  Ps.  i.  2;
oxix.  15,  16,  21,  97—99,  etc.).

Ver.  20. — That  his  heart  be  not  lifted  up
above  his  brethren.  "  Not  imagining  him-
self to  be  above  all  laws,  nor  slighting  his
subjects,  as  unworthy  of  his  notice,  but
taking  a  due  care  to  promote  their  happi-
ness" (Patrick).  He,  and  his  children;
properly,  his  sons  (vn).  The  legislator
anticipated  not  an  elective  monarchy,  but
one  hereditary  in  tlie  same  family  (of.
Michaelia, '  Laws  of  Moses,'  pt  i.  §  51).


HOMILETICS.
Ver.  1. — (See  Homny,  ch.  rv.  21,  on  "Sacrifices  to  be  without  blemish.'^

Vers.  2—7. — The  sacredness  of  personal  reputation,  seen  in  the  regulations  concerning
human  testimony.  So  far  as  this  passage  presents  to  us  the  doctrine  that  idolatry,
being  apostacy  from  God,  was  treason  to  the  Hebrew  commonwealth,  and  was  to  be
punished  with  death,  the  matter  is  dealt  with  in  the  Homily  on  the  thirteenth  chapter.
An  inquiiy  of  great  importance  would  sooner  or  later  arise,  and  would,  therefore,  need
to  be  provided  for  in  the  Mosaic  institutes,  viz. :  "  On  what  evidence  shall  any  one  be
adjudged  guilty  of  such  a  crime  ?  "  It  will  be  seen  here  that,  while  God  so  guarded  his
own  honour  that  it  might  not  be  sullied  with  impunity,  so  he  guarded  the  reputation
of  the  people  that  it  might  not  be  assailed  or  impeached  on  any  frivolous  pretext  or  any
unproven  report.  The  exactitude  in  the  order  of  expression  in  the  fourth  verse  is  very
noticeable :  If  it  be  so— and  it  be  told  thee — and  thou  hast  inquired — diligently — and,
behold,  it  is  true — and  the  thing  certain — then,  and  not  till  then,  may  the  penalty  be
inflicted.  Observe:  1.  Every  one  was  held  to  be  innocent  till  lie  was  proved  other-
wiae.    2.  No  one's  charaot^r  was  put  »t  tlia  mercy  uf  any  one  unattested  witness,    &.  H«


238  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBEONOMY.  [oh.  xvn.  1— 20,

who  reported  with  his  tongue  shoiild  he  the  one  to  smite  with  his  hand  I  (ver.  7).'  A
mighty  stroke  of  policy  this,  to  guard  personal  honour  from  assailraent  1  It  might
sometimes  make  crime  more  difficult  of  proof,  hut  it  gave  the  innocent  a  wondrous
"uard  against  unjust  accusation.  Many  would  he  ready  to  hackhite  who  would  shrink
from  stoning  another.  Men  hy  thousands  may  he  found  who  would  not  break  hones,
but  who  think  nothing  of  breaking  hearts.  4.  The  people  were  to  co-operate  in
putting  away  the  evil  when  once  it  was  proved  to  exist.  "  Slow  to  suspect,  but  quick
to  put  down  evil,"  was  to  be  the  moral  rule  of  their  conduct  in  such  cases.  Now,
of  course,  it  is  not  our  province  to  deal  with  all  this  from  the  purely  legal  point
of  view,  as  a  matter  of  jurisprudence;  but  we  cannot  fail  to  indicate  the  moral
principles  which  are  here  involved ;  and  which  a  Christian  teacher  would  do  well  to  set
in  the  light  of  Matt.  vii.  1,  2.     Observe —

L  OuB  God  would  enlist  the  btmpathibs  op  his  people  in  puTTiNa  down  evil.
We  are  to  be  workers  together  with  him-  He  has  redeemed  us  that  we  may  be  zealous
of  good  works.

n.  He  would  have  us  veet  bensttivb  to  the  honour  of  Ms  Name,  but  also  very
sensitive  to  the  spotlessness  of  each  other's  name  and  fame.  This  passage  is  quite
as  remarkable  for  the  guard  it  throws  around  man,  as  it  is  for  the  concern  it  would
evoke  for  the  honour  of  God  (see  Pa.  xy.  1 — 3 ;  Lev.  in.  16 ;  Fs.  xxxiv.  13 ;  1  Pet.
iiLlO).

III.  Wl    MAT    NOT     BEOARD     ANOTHEB     AB     OUILTT    ON    THE    BAEE    EYIDENOB    OF

RUMOUB.  Each  one's  reputation  is  too  sacred  in  God's  eye  and  ought  to  be  too  precious
in  ouis  for  this.  It  is  humiliating  to  think  such  precepts  as  these  should  be  needed.
"  The  Law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man,"  and  it  is  a  sad  proof  of  how  much  un-
righteousness there  is  in  the  world  that  such  a  law  should  be  needed  still.  Every  one
is  to  be  regarded  as  innocent  till  he  is  proved  guilty.

IV.  If  the  public  good  requieeb  it,  ill  reports  should  be  examined.  It  may  be
painful  work,  but  it  has  to  be  done  sometimes.  But  we  are  tempted  to  think  it  would
be  a  mighty  safeguard  against  ill  reports  being  raised  on  any  light  or  frivolous  pretext,
if  he  who  first  moved  secretly  with  his  tongue  were  always  required  to  be  the  first  to
smite  openly  with  the  hand !

v.  Such  reports  are  to  bk  proven  true  bee  action  is  taken  thereon.  No
man's  repute  is  to  be  smitten  at  a  venture.  To  all  men  it  is  precious  as  life.  The  best
men  value  it  more  than  life.  They  would  rather  give  up  their  breath  than  part  with
their  honour.    And  the  legislation  of  high  heaven  upholds  theml

Vl.  Proven  evil  is  to  be  put  away.  We  are  to  be  very  slow  to  believe  ill  of
another ;  "  slow  to  speak."  But  when  such  ill  is  proved  beyond  doubt,  then  it  behoves  ub
to  censure,  to  expose,  to  condemn  it,  and  to  put  it  away.  We  are  to  stand  by  a  brother
till  he  is  shown  to  be  guilty,  but  that  once  done,  regard  both  for  God  and  man  requires
us  to  disavow  all  sympathy  with  wrong,  and  to  co-operate  with  the  Great  Supreme  in
the  extirpation  of  ilL

Vers.  8 — 13. — Bdigion  the  guard  ofjuttiee.  Li  the  preceding  chapter,  vers.  18 — ^20,
judges  and  officers  are  specified  as  appointed  by  God  to  be  the  guardians  of  justice
and  right.  The  Hebrew  is  very  emphatic  in  ver.  20,  "Justice,  justice,  shalt  thou
follow,"  etc.  Manifold  oomplications,  however,  would  be  sure  to  arise  as  the  nation
advanced,  and  as  the  primitive  simplicity  of  their  first  settlement  passed  into  more  fixed
arrangements  as  to  property,  etc.  In  such  difficult  cases,  it  might  not  he  easy,  and
perhaps  it  would  not  always  he  possible,  for  the  judges  and  shoterim  to  determine  what  was
just.  The  legislator  is  here  bidden,  therefore,  to  make  provision  in  case  such  perplexities
should  arise.  When  the  people  should  come  to  the  land  which  the  Lord  their  Gh>d
gave  them,  there  would  be  one  place  which  the  Lord  would  choose  to  put  his  Naaaa
there.  There  should  "  thrones  of  judgment "  sit.  The  priests,  who  would  have  to
offer  sacrifices  and  to  intercede  for  the  people  before  Go<^  would  also  be  expected  to
be  so  versed  in  the  Law  of  God,  that  they  could  appropriately  be  regarded  as  th«
highest  court  of  appeal,  by  whose  decision  the  highest  sanctions  of  religion  would  be
brought  to  declare  and  enforce  "justice,  justice."    Their  decision  was  held  to  be  givev

•  Sue  in  Ketl  on  'Pentateuch,'  voL  iii  p.  881  (footnote),  quotation  ftom  0«dvi^


OH.  xvn.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  2b8

them  by  light  from  on  high.*  And  when  such  decision  was  in  accordance  with  the
Divine  will,  the  people  were  bound  by  it.  To  resist  it  was  "  a  presumptuous  sin ; "
and,  withal,  it  was  one  of  so  deep  a  dye,  that  it  was  not  safe  for  Israel  that  any  man
should  continue  among  them,  who  spurned  the  highest  decisions  which  could  possibly
be  given.  At  the  same  time,  there  were  sundry  checks  and  counter-checks  against  the
abuse  of  this  law.  The  authority  of  this  highest  court  was  relative  or  conditional,  not
absolute.  If  priests  became  unfaithful,  and  their  judgments  unjust,  then  the  sin
of  presumption  was  chargeable  upon  them  (cf.  ch.  xviii.  20;  see  also  Jeremiah's,
Ezekiel's,  and  Malachi's  charges  against  such  unfaithful  expounders).  Note,  further,
that  as  early  as  the  time  of  the  Judges,  when  the  priests  profaned  their  ofiSce,  God  set
them  aside,  and  wrought  and  taught  by  means  of  the  prophet  Samuel.  So  that  the
supreme  court  bound  the  people  only  so  far  as  it  was  what  it  was  designed  to  be,  even
God's  appointment  for  securing  justice,  by  investing  it  with  the  sublime  sanctions  of
religion.  But  when  it  was  that,  and  so  far  as  it  answered  its  end,  its  utterances  were
to  the  people  as  the  voice  of  God.

Now,  we  all  know  that,  as  a  formal  institution,  this  court  of  appeal  has  long  since
passed  away.  But  we  greatly  mistake  if  there  are  not  couched  here  sundry  momentous
principles,  of  which  no  age,  country,  or  race  can  afford  to  lose  sight.     These  principles


L  That  ebligion  is  the  tbub  guarantee  op  justice  between  man  and  man.
That  in  the  course  of  time  the  essence  of  religion  may  have  so  evaporated,  and  its  place
be  so  taken  up  by  forms  and  ceremonies,  that  the  connection  between  religion  and  justice
may  seem  to  be  lost,  must  be  admitted  to  be  a  possibility,  but  it  does  not  alter  the
principle  here  enunciated.  The  guarantee  of  justice  between  man  and  man  is  found
in  a  power  of  appeal  on  both  sides  to  a  law  of  immutable  right  mutually  acknowledged.
To  such  a  law  conscience,  the  regulative  faculty,  points  with  steady  finger.  SucTi  law
obeyed,  she  approves  the  obedience,  and  when  disobeyed,  she  condemns  the  disobedi-
ence. Both  the  approval  and  the  condemnation  of  the  voice  within  are  witnesses  to
the  existence  and  government  of  a  Great  Judge  of  all,  who,  seated  on  the  throne  of
universal  empire,  issues  his  mandates  to  the  world !  And  in  the  appeal  from  human
acts  to  the  judgment  of  the  Great  Supreme,  lies  the  safeguard  of  justice  between  man
and  man.'  In  a  word,  religion  is  the  sole  adequate  guarantee  of  morality.  Both  are
comprehended  under  the  one  word,  "righteousness."  Keligion  is  righteousness  towards
God;  morality  is  righteousness  towards  man.  If  man  ever  comes  to  i^^ard  himself
as  the  supreme  existence,  empowered  to  Tnake  right  right,  and  wrong  wrong,  instead  of
regarding  himself  as  subject  to  the  everlasting  laws  of  right,  the  best  and  dearest
privileges  of  the  human  family  will  be  in  imminent  peril,  aud  at  best  can  endure  but
for  a  while  I

IL  Religious  sanctions  find  theib  expression  in  the  Law  of  God.  See  Ps.
xix.,  in  which  the  Psalmist  extols  the  pure  and  holy  Law  of  Jehovah,  as  being
the  written  expression  of  perfect  right.  In  the  ten  commandments  the  various  phases
of  the  right  in  act  or  thought  are  set  forth.  And  according  to  the  ordinance  alluded
to  in  this  paragraph,  when  a  case  arose  which  was  too  difficult  to  be  solved  by  the
lower  authorities,  it  might  be  taken  up  to  a  higher  court,  that  the  will  of  the  Lord  miglit
thereby  be  discovered  by  the  most  trustworthy  exposition  of  the  bearings  of  God's
Law  on  each  particular  case.

III.  God's  house  is  to  be  the  seat  and  centre  where  righteousness  is  en-
thboned,  expounded,  and  enforced.  If  in  Israel  a  poor  man  could  not  get  justice
elsewhere,  he  was  to  be  sure  of  it  in  God's  house.  It  was  a  pious  Hebrew's  delight  to
ipquire  in  God's  temple.  And  we  do  not  think  adequately  of  the  temple  service  if  we
merely  regard  it  as  consisting  of  sacrifice  and  mediation ;  the  holy  house  was  also  a
place  where  men  could  learn  the  mind  and  will  of  God  in  their  bearing  on  the  life  of
man  both  in  general  and  in  specific  cases.    And  one  of  the  delights  of  the  Psalmist's

'  See  Biblical  Dictionaries  on  '  Urim  and  Thummim ; '  and  also  a  suggestive  chapter  on
the  same  topic  in  Hengstenberg's  '  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,'  p.  149,  et  seq.

'  See  a  sermon  entitled, '  The  House  of  Commons  and  Atheism,"  by  E  W.  Dale;  and
»lso  an  article,  'Religion  and  Mo.u,lity,'  by  Rev.  Stanley  Leatheg,  in  British  Qitarterly
Review,  July,  1880.

deutbronomt.  u


290  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xvn.  1— 2a

heart  wa8  this :  "  there  are  get'  thrones  of  judgment."  And  so  now,  in  Qod's  house,
not  only  are  we  bidden  to  "  behold  the  Lamb  of  Grod,"  but  "  to  live  soberly,  righteoutljr,
and  godly  in  this  present  world."

IV.  God's  ministebs  aeb  to  be  the  expounders  op  biqhtegusnbss.  There  are
no  priests  now,  as  of  yore.  But  the  Church  of  God  has  a  ministry,  and  by  this  ministry
the  truth  of  God  is  to  be  "opened  up"  and  "commended  to  every  man's  conscience
as  in  the  sight  of  God."

V.  Whbk  God's  holt  and  EiaHTEOus  Law  is  expounded  to  the  people,  they

ABB  loyally   to  ACCEPT  IT,   SUBMIT   TO   IT,   AND   OBEY   IT.      And   this,  UOt   because  oi

him  whose  voice  speaks,  but  because  of  liim  in  whose  behalf  the  preacher  speaks.
Men  are  to  receive  the  truth,  not  as  the  word  of  man,  but  as  the  Word  of  God
(cf.  2  Cor.  X.  5).

VI.  Refusal  to  obey  the  will  of  God,  when  clearly  expounded,  is  a  pre-
sumptuous sm.  (See  passages  where  same  Hebrew  word  is  used  which  is  here  rendered
"  presumptuous,"  specially  Vs.  xix.  13.)  The  epithet  indicates  the  greatness  of  the  sin.
It  is  one  which  Jehovah  specially  hates,  severely  rebukes,  and  utterly  condemns.  He
"  resisteth  the  proud."  He  hides  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent.  He  scorneth  the
scomers.  He  taketh  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness.  First  pride,  then  shame._
"  What  shall  the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God  ?  "

Vers.  14—20. — Kings  subject  to  the  King  of  kings.  In  this  paragraph  we  have
directions  to  be  attended  to  in  case  Israel  should,  in  the  course  of  time,  desire  a  king.
As  things  were,  the  Lord  God  was  their  King ;  and  it  would  be  a  sinful  discontent  with
the  Divine  arrangements  if  they  wished  any  change  in  that  respect  in  their  national
constitution.  It  would  show  an  envious  desire  to  be  like  unto  the  nations  round
about,  and  a  craving  after  the  pomp  and  display  of  the  heathen  world.  Still,  if  such  a
wish  should  spring  up,  they  are  not  to  be  violently  coerced  into  the  maintenance  oi
the  theocracy.  They  are  to  have  their  way.  A  dangerous  permission  this,  but  maybe
it  is  a  necessary  one,  to  educate  the  people  out  of  their  perversity.  The  permission,
however,  is  not  left  without  its  restrictions.  Here  are  rules  for  the  people,  and  also
rules  for  their  king  whenever  they  should  have  one.  The  people  are  told  that  they
must  defer  to  the  will  of  the  Lord  their  God  as  to  who  should  be  their  iking ;  and  also
that  they  might  not  set  one  over  them  of  an  alien  nation  (ver.  15). .  And  as  for  the
king  who  should  be  chosen,  for  him  there  are  four  prohibitions  and  four  commands.
The  prohibitions  are  these :  (1)  the  king  is  not  to  take  them  back  to  Egypt ;  (2)  nor  to
multiply  cavalry  ;  (3)  nor  to  amass  wealth ;  (4)  nor  to  multiply  wives  to  himself.  The
commands  are  these :  (1)  The  Law  of  God  is  to  be  written,  (2)  retained,  (3)  read,
(4)  obeyed  by  him ;  and  only  as  this  is  the  case  is  there  any  promise  of  the  stability  oi
his  throne.  (For  a  grand  commentary  on  all  this,  read  1  Sam.  xii.)  The  history  of
the  Hebrew  nation  continuously  discloses  the  folly  and  danger  of  people  and  kings
departing  from  the  Law  of  God.  Hence  we  have  a  fine  homiletic  theme  for  the
preacher,  when  called  on  to  preach  a  sermon  on  national  affairs.*  It  is  this :  Obedience
to  the  Law  of  Ood  the  only  stahility  of  thrones.

L  It  is  by  eighteousness  that  thrones  are  fiem.  Righteousness — according  to
the  root  of  the  word — is  acting  according  to  relation.  Such  is  the  si>;nificRnce  of  SiitV
It  is  acting  in  harmony  with  the  relations  between  man  and  man,  and  between  man
and  God.  When  a  sceptre  is  swayed  rightly,  the  throne  is  established.  1.  God  has
created  man  with  power  to  perceive  a  distinction  between  right  and  wrong,  and  with  a
faculty  which  approves  one  and  condemns  the  other.  2.  When  the  right  is  manifestly
done,  the  people  are  content.  3.  Content  of  the  people  gives  cohesion  to  the  nation  and
support  to  the  throne.  4.  God's  blessing  is  promised  to  the  righteous.  The  signs  of
that  blessing  are  seen  in  continuance  and  prosperity.

II.  The  only  authoritative  exposition  of  right  for  the  world  is  in  the  weittxn
Law  of  God.  (See  preceding  Homily,  Div.  II.)  Dr.  Matthew  Arnold  speaks  of  the
force  pervading  the  Old  Testament  as  "  a  power,  not  ourselves,  that  makes  for  righteous-
ness." This  is  the  peculiarity  of  Hebrew  literature.  Their  kings  are  always  estimated
according  to  whether  they  did  right  "  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."

'  Dr.  Jameson's  '  Commentary '  has  several  helpful  illustrative  references.  The  student
nay  also,  with  advantage,  consult  Wine's '  Commentaries  on  the  Xjaws  of  Mosea.'


en.  xvn.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  291

IIL  CONSBQUBNTLT,  ITIS  BY  OBEDIENCE  TO  God's  WRITTEN  LaW  THAT  THB0NE8  AEB

HADE  SEGUBE.  This  grand  old  Book  is  the  charter  of  the  people's  liberties,  because  it
demands,  that  kings  rule  righteously.  It  is  the  monarch's  best  safeguard,  because  it
insists  on  a  method  of  government  which  will  ensure  the  loyalty  of  a  grateful  people,
and  the  blessing  of  the  monarch's  God  I  With  regard  to  kings  and  nations,  it  is  true,
"  Great  peace  have  they  which  love  thy  Law,  and  nothing  shall  offend  them."  Earthly
kings  will  ever  find  it  true,  "  Them  that  honour  me,  I  will  honour."

Ver.  16. — '■  No  retreat  I"  or  "  The  gate  behind  us  closed."  "  Ye  shall  henceforth
return  no  more  that  way."  In  these  words,  Moses  reminds  the  people  that  Egypt  once
quitted  was  quitted  for  ever.  If  they  should  come  in  the  course  of  time  to  desire  and  to
choose  a  king,  he  must  by  no  means  take  them  back  to  Egypt ;  their  dark  experience
of  Egyptian  bondage  was  never  to  be  repeated.  They  should  return  that  way  uo  more.
The  only  course  open  to  them  was  to  go  onward  to  the  realization  of  their  destiny  as  a
free  people,  for  the  gate  behind  them  was  closed,  never  to  be  opened  again.  The  text
may  naturally  be  regarded  as  God's  voice  to  his  emancipated  host,  saying,  "  No  retreat  I  "
We  shall  apply  this  to  the  life  of  believers.    It  is  true  in  two  spheres.

I.  It  is  TK0B  IN  THE  SPHERE  OF  BEiNCt.  With  regard  to  the  old  state  of  sin,  out  of
which  the  children  of  God  have  been  brought  by  the  redemption  which  is  in  Christ
Jesus  and  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  is  true,  "  ye  shall  henceforth  return  no
more  that  way."  1.  They  may  not  if  they  would.  They  have  quitted  the  broad  road  which
leadeth  to  destruction,  and,  through  the  gateway  of  repentance,  hav?  entered  on  "  the
King's  highway  of  holiness."  Having  once  come  over  from  Satan  to  Christ,  it  is  alto-
gether forbidden  them  to  dream  of  a  return.  Whosoever  he  be  who  has  avowedly  quitted
the  service  of  sin  for  that  of  the  living  God,  never  must  he  think  of  returning  to  the  world
he  has  left.  Back  to  his  old  life  of  sin  ?  Never !  He  is  to  reckon  himself  henceforth
as  "  dead  indeed  unto  sin,  but  alive  unto  God,"  and,  whether  living  or  dying,  he  is  to  be
the  Lord's.  2.  They  would  not  if  they  might.  Not  only  is  it  the  Law  of  God  that
they  must  not  retreat,  but  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  leads  them  to  say,
"  We  will  not,  by  the  help  of  God."  And  herein  is  the  blessed  freedom  of  the  new
creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  What  God  wills,  he  wills.  He  has  voluntarily  left  the
world,  and  voluntarily  he  remains  out  of  its  camp.  The  very  thought  of  "  returning
any  more  that  way  "  is  anguish  to  him.  He  has  said  to  earth,  once  for  all,  farewell ;
to  sinful  pleasures,  farewell ;  to  the  pride  of  life,  farewell.  He  has  cast  in  his  lot
with  Christ,  and  he  esteems  reproach  for  him  greater  riches  than  the  treasures  in
Egypt.  He  would  not  move  a  step  that  is  not  towards  God  and  heaven.  He  has  done
with  the  vanities  of  earth,  and  can  return  no  more  that  way  I

II.  It  is  true  in  the  sphere  of  time.  We  can  neither  retrace  the  steps  we  have
already  trodden,  nor  recall  nor  reproduce  the  circumstances  of  bygone  days  or  years.
1.  We  cannot  recall,  or  change,  or  oblit^ate  the  past,  eveni/we  would.  The  trials  and  cares
of  bygone  years  are  gone,  never  to  be  repeated.  "The  actions  of  past  years  are  done,  and
however  we  may  desire  it,  they  cannot  be  undone.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  recalling
a  single  moment,  to  correct  what  has  Ipeen  amiss,  nor  erasing  a  single  word  or  deed  so
as  to  prevent  its  issues  travelling  on  to  eternity  I  We  may  do  something  now  to  shape
future  years,  but — to  alter  past  years — nothing.  For  good  or  ill  they  have  left
their  mark.  We  can  alter  nothing.  We  can  "  return  no  more  that  way."  2.  The
pilgrim,  Zionward,  would  not  retreat  if  he  could.  The  child  of  God  who  has  been,
however  imperfectly,  endeavouring  in  Divine  strength  to  serve  and  please  his  Father
in  heaven,  reviewing  his  years  with  their  trials,  afBiotions,  and  cares,  feels  it  to  be  a  great
joy  to  him  that  he  can  return  no  more  that  way.  He  would  not  linger  here.  He  wants
to  speed  him  onward.  He  ofttimes  sings  at  eventide,  with  thankful  heart,  "  a  day's
march  nearer  home."  The  goal  of  his  being  is  ahead.  To  serve  God  here  is  blissful.
But  he  longs,  not  to  repeat  past  imperfections,  but  to  "  go  on  unto  perfection,"  to  press
forward  towards  the  higher  service  of  the  heavenly  world.  He  feels  and  knows  that  all
the  Divine  arrangements  for  him  are  mercy  and  truth.  He  would  not  change  them.
Mercy  iihuto  off  the  past  beyond  recall.    Mercy  opens  the  future.

"Then,  welcome,  each  declining  day,
Wekmme,  eaoh  closing  year  I"


292  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xvn.  1-


HOMTLIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — The  Uemished.  I.  The  peincipIiE  involved.  God  is  to  be  served  with
our  best.  He  rejects  the  blemished  for  his  service.  1.  He  is  entitled  to  our  best.  2.  He
requires  it  of  lis.  3.  Withholding  it  argues  unworthy  views  of  God  and  of  what  is
due  to  him.  It  usually  implies  contempt  of  God  and  hypocrisy  in  his  service
(Mai.  i.  12,  13).

IL  Applications  of  the  principle.  God  is  to  receive  from  us :  1.  The  best  of
our  time — when  the  head  is  clearest,  the  energies  most  vigorous,  the  capacity  for
service  greatest,  and  when  there  is  least  distraction.  We  offer  the  blemished  when
we  engross  these  portions  of  our  time  for  self,  and  give  to  God  only  our  late  hours,  or
hurried  snatches  of  a  day  crowded  with  unspiritual  and  exhausting  occupations.  2.  The
best  of  our  age — youth,  the  prime  of  manhood  and  womanhood,  with  all  the  service
these  can  render.  We  offer  the  blemished  when  we  conceive  the  purpose  of  dedicating
to  God,  in  old  age,  powers  already  worn  out  in  the  service  of  the  world.  3.  The
heartiest  of  our  service.  Service  performed  half-heartedly  and  grudgingly  falls  under
the  category  of  blemished  sacrifices.  Work  done  in  this  spirit  will  never  be  well  done.
Services  of  devotion  will  be  huddled  through,  sermons  will  be  ill  prepared,  the  class  in
the  Sunday  school  will  be  badly  taught,  visitation  duties  will  be  inefficiently  and
unpunctually  performed.  It  is  the  presentation  to  God  of  the  torn,  lame,  and  halt.
4.  The  first  of  our  givings.  Givings  should  be  hearty,  liberal,  of  our  first  and  best,
and  in  a  spirit  of  consecration.  To  give  what  "  will  never  be  missed "  is  a  poor  form
of  service.  It  is  little  to  give  to  God  what  costs  us  nothing.  Still  more  conspicuously
do  we  offer  the  blemished  when  we  devote  to  God  but  the  parings  of  a  lavish  worldly
expenditure,  or  give  for  his  service  far  below  our  ability. — J.  O.

Vers.  2,  3. — Salceism.  The  crime  here  ordained  to  be  punished  by  death  was
sabieism,  or  the  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  Though  this  was  in  some  respects
the  noblest,  as  it  seems  to  have  been  the  most  ancient,  form  of  idolatry — the  purest
in  its  ritual,  the  most  elevating  in  its  influence,  the  least  associated  with  vice,  it  was
not  to  be  tolerated  in  Israel.  Its  apparent  sublimity  made  it  only  the  more  seductive
and  dangerous.  It  was  a  departure,  though  at  first  a  very  subtle  and  scarcely  recog-
nizable one,  from  pure  monotheism — the  beginning  of  a  course  of  declension  which
speedily  led  in  Egypt,  Phcenicia,  Babylonia,  India,  and  most  other  nations  to  the
grossest  abominations.  That  the  seductive  influence  of  sun  and  star  worship  was
powerfully  felt  by  the  ancients  appears  from  Job  xxxi.  26,  27.  In  Egypt,  according
to  M.  de  Rouge  (quoted  by  Eenouf,  'Hibbert  Lecture'),  "the  pure  monotheistic
religion  passed  through  thie  phase  of  sabaeism;  the  sun,  instead  of  being  considered  as
the  symbol  of  life,  was  taken  as  the  manifestation  of  God  himself."  Max  Miiller  tells
us  ('Hibbert  Lecture,'  p.  13)  that  the  "oldest  prayer  in  the  world "(?)  is  one  in  the
Rig- Veda,  addressed  to  the  sun.  The  term  for  God,  which  is  common  to  the  Indo-
Qermanio  races  (deva,  d^va,  theos,  deus,  etc.),  proves  that  the  conception  of  the
Divine  among  them  was  formed  from  that  of  light,  and  that  the  objects  of  their
religious  worship  were  the  effects  and  appearances  of  light.  All  ancient  mythologies
turn,  as  their  principal  subject,  on  the  sunrise  and  sunset,  the  battle  between  light  and
darkness,  etc.

We  learn:  1.  It  is  the  beginnings  of  evil  which  need  most  jealously  to  be  guarded
against.  2.  Evil  is  not  the  less,  but  the  more  to  be  feared,  that  its  first  forms  are
usually  pleasing  and  seductive.  3.  It  does  not  excuse  evil  that  in  its  earlier  forms  it
is  still  able  to  associate  itself  with  worthy  and  noble  ideas.  4.  The  workings  of  evil,
however  deceptive  its  first  appearances,  invariably  end  by  revealing  its  true  iniquity
and  hidaousness.  How  astonishing  the  descent  from  the  first  enticing  of  the  heart  to
worship  sun  or  moon,  and  so  to  deny  the  God  that  is  above,  to  the  abominations  and
cruelties  of  Baal  and  Moloch  worship !  Yet  the  later  excesses  were  present  in  germ  fi-om
the  beginning,  and  the  descent  was  as  natural  and  logical  as  history  shows  it  to  have
been  inevitable. — J.  0.


CH.  xvn.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  29S

Vera.  4 — 8. — Criminal  procedwre.  I.  The  eight  of  the  criminal  to  a  faib  anb
FULL  TRIAL.  The  right  is  asserted  in  the  Law  of  Moses  as  strenuously  as  it  could  be
anywhere.  However  abhorrent  his  crime,  the  criminal  had  every  protection  against
unjust  treatment  which  the  Law  could  afford  him.  He  must  be  formally  impeached,
tried  before  judges,  and  legally  convicted  under  stringent  conditions  of  proof.  The
evidence  of  one  witness,  however  apparently  conclusive,  was  not  to  be  accepted  as
sufficient.  A  second  must  confirm  it.  The  principle  is  a  plain  dictate  of  justice.
Suspicion,  rumour,  dislike  of  the  individual,  or  even  moral  certainty  of  his  guilt,  form
no  sufficient  ground  for  condemnation.  He  is  entitled  to  demand  that  his  crime  be
proved  under  legal  forms.  A  person  really  guilty  may  thus  occasionally  escape,  but
better  this  should  happen  than  that  the  innocent  should  suffer.  Lessons :  1.  The  rule
of  criminal  jurisprudence  should  be  the  rule  of  our  private  thoughts,  and  of  our
expressed  opinions  about  others.  We  are  entitled  to  hold  no  man  guilty  of  deeds  for
which  we  have  not  explicit  proof.  2.  While  moral  certainty  of  guilt  may  be  created
by  proof  which  would  not  warrant  judicial  condemnation,  we  should  beware  of  admit-
ting as  proof  that  which  at  the  most  only  seems  to  tell  against  the  person  under
suspicion.  3.  Where  no  better  ground  exists  for  unfavourable  judgment  than  vague,
unsifted  rumour,  or  the  dislikes  and  prejudices  with  which  a  person  is  regarded,  it  is
the  grossest  unfairness,  and  often  great  cruelty  to  the  person  concerned,  to  entertain  evil
reports,  or  even  to  allow  them  in  the  slightest  degree  to  influence  us.  4.  Wheire  oppor-
tunity for  investigating  reports  to  the  discredit  of  another  does  not  exist,  or  where  we
have  no  call  to  undertake  such  investigation,  our  duty  is  not  to  judge  at  all  (Matt.  vii.
1).     The  utmost  we  should  do  is  to  exercise  caution.

IL  The  grave  responsibility  which  rests  on  witnesses.  This  was  well  brought
out  by  requiring  that  the  hands  of  the  witnesses  should  be  first  upon  the  condemned
person  to  put  him  to  death.  We  may  note :  1.  That  those  who  prefer  serious  accusa-
tions against  others,  ought  to  be  prepared  publicly  to  substantiate  them.  Were  this  more
insisted  on  than  it  is,  it  would  quash  in  the  birth  not  a  few  malicious  accusations.
2.  That  blood-guiltiness  rests  on  those  who,  by  false  testimony,  whether  borne  publicly
or  in  private,  effect  another's  ruin. — J.  0.

Vers.  8 — 13. — TTie  priest  and  the  judge.  The  priests,  in  association  with  a  judge
or  judges  (ch.  xix.  17),  constituted  a  supreme  tribunal  to  which  difficult  causes  were
carried,  and  whose  judgment  was  to  be  final.  The  priest  had  naturally  a  place  in
this  supreme  court:  1.  As  representing  God  in  the  theocracy.  2.  As  a  member  of
the  distinctively  learned  class  of  the  nation.  3.  As  one  whbse  special  office  it  was  to
teach  and  interpret  the  Law  of  God  (Lev.  x.  11 ;  ch.  xxxiii.  10 ;  Ezek.  xliv.  24  j  Mai.  ii.
7).  The  differentiation  of  functions  in  society  has  long  since  taken  learning  in  the
law  out  of  the  hands  of  the  clergy,  but  we  may  remark —

L  That  spiritual  and  civil  functionaries  may  render  each  other  impor-
tant ASSISTANCE.  The  spheres  of  civil  and  spiritual  jurisdiction  are  indeed  distinct.
Yet  as  the  lawyer  and  judge,  with  their  legal  expertness,  their  knowledge  of  forms,  and
their  experience  in  sifting  evidence,  are  often  of  the  greatest  service  in  processes  purely
ecclesiastical,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  best  of  them  stand  in  need  of  that  higher
direction  and  enlightenment  of  the  conscience  from  God's  Word,  which  it  is  the  busi-
ness of  a  body  of  spiritual  teachers  to  supply.  The  ministers  of  relrgion  have  a  function :
1.  In  upholding  the  Law  of  God  as  the  supreme  standard  of  right.  2.  In  furnishing
general  enlightenment  to  the  conscience.  3.  In  reminding  judges,  the  highest  of
them,  of  their  duties  and  responsibilities  before  God  as  set  "  for  the  punishment  of
evildoers,  and  for  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well "  (1  Pet.  ii.  14).

II.  That  laws  based  on  God's  Word  have  attaching  to  them  a  Dwinb
AS  WELL  AS  A  HUMAN  AUTHORITY.  The  duty  of  the  pricst  was  not  to  invent  laws,
but  to  interpret  the  existing  Law  of  God.  To  it  all  cases  of  right  had  ultimately  to
be  appealed.  God's  Law,  as  exhibiting  the  unalterable  principles  of  right,  underlies
human  law  and  gives  to  it  authority.  Whatever  may  happen  in  courts  on  earth,  no
decision  will  stand  in  the  court  of  heaven  which  that  Law  is  found  to  condemn.  Laws
e.g.  which  invade  rights  of  conscience,  which  (as  in  slave-holding  countries)  place  the
life  of  one  man  at  the  mercy  of  another,  which  are  favourable  to  illicit  relations  of
the  mes,  which  make  light  of  divorce,  which  bear  unequally  on  different  classes  of  the


294  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xvii.  1—20

community,  which  prop  up  abuses,  etc.,  may  be  submitted  to,  but  cannot  be  justified.
Where,  on  the  contrary,  the  law  of  a  land  is  in  essential  harmony  with  the  principles
of  righteousness,  obedience  to  it  becomes  a  duty  of  religion.  He  who  sets  it  at
nought  strives  with  God  not  less  than  with  man,  is  "  as  they  which  strive  with  the
priest,"  and  does  "  presumptuously  "  (cf.  Hos.  iv.  4). — J.  0.

Vers.  14 — 20. — The  king  in  Israd.    We  have  here —

I.  The  desire  of  a  kino  anticipated.  (Ver.  14.)  Moses  anticipates  that,  when
settled  in  the  land,  the  people  would  desire  a  king,  that  they  might  be  like  other
nations.  This  was :  1.  A  desire  springing  from  a  wrong  motive.  (\)  As  involving
a  low  e.stimate  of  their  privilege  in  being  ruled  directly  by  Jehovah.  It  was  the  glory
and  distinction  of  their  nation  that  they  had  God  bo  nigh  them,  and  were  under  his
immediate  care  and  sovereignty.  But  they  could  not  rise  to  the  sublimity  of  this
thought.  They  deemed  it  a  grander  thing  to  have  a  mortal  as  their  king,  to  be  like
other  nations,  and  be  led,  judged,  and  ruled  by  a  visible  monarch.  Their  demand  was
a  substantial  rejection  of  Gtod,  that  he  should  not  reign  over  them  (1  Sam.  viii.  7).
(2)  As  involving  the  idea  of  a  king  modelled  on  the  pattern  of  the  kings  around  them.
The  king  they  wished  for  was  one  who  would  embody  for  them  their  own  ideas  of
splendour  and  prowess,  and  these  were  of  a  purely  carnal  type.  Saul,  their  first  king,
lid  many  of  the  qualities  which  answered  to  thuir  notion  of  a  king,  while  David,
ruling  in  humble  subordination  to  the  will  and  authority  of  Heaven,  answered  to  the
Divine  idea.  Piety  and  submission  at  every  point  to  the  will  of  God  are  not  elements
that  bulk  largely  in  the  common  conception  of  a  monarch.  (3)  As  involving  self-
willedness.  The  people  did  not  humbly  present  their  case  to  God,  and  entreat  him  for
a  king.  They  took  the  law  into  their  own  hands,  and  demanded  one,  or  rather  they
declared  their  intention  of  setting  one  over  them,  irrespective  of  whether  God  wished
it  or  not.  2.  A  desire  in  some  respects  natural.  The  spiritual  goveinment  of  an
invisible  Ruler  was  an  idea  difficult  to  grasp.  The  mind  craved  for  some  concrete  and
visible  embodiment  of  that  authority  under  which  they  lived.  It  probably  lay  in  God's
purpose  ultimately  to  give  them  a  king,  but  it  was  necessary  that  they  should  be  made
first  distinctly  to  feel  their  need  of  it.  The  need  in  human  nature  to  which  this  points
is  adequately  supplied  in  the  Messianic  King,  Christ  Jesus.  The  central  idea  of  the
Kingship  of  Christ  is  the  personal  indwelling  of  the  Divine  in  the  human.  In  Christ,
moreover,  is  realized  the  three  things  which  ancient  nations  sought  for  in  their  kings.
(1)  An  ideal  of  personal  excellence.  "  Heroic  kingship  depended  partly  on  divinely
given  prerogative,  and  partly  on  the  possession  of  supereminent  strength,  courage,  and
wisdom  "  (Maine).  (2)  A  leader  inspiring  them  with  personal  devotion.  (3)  A  bond
u'tmity  in  the  State,  the  monarch  representing,  as  he  does  still,  the  whole  system  of
1.  V  and  authority  which  is  centralized  and  embodied  in  his  person.  "  The  king  is  the
du.  on  the  i"  (Hegel).     The  kingship  in  Israel  typified  that  of  Christ.

li.  The  election  or  a  king  provided  fob.  (Ver.  15.)  The  position  of  king  in
-srael  ...  "  essentially  difierent  from  that  of  the  monarch  of  any  other  nation.  While
discharging  the  same  general  functions  as  other  kings  (ruling,  judging,  leading  in
battle),  his  authority  was  checked  and  limited  in  ways  that  theirs  was  not.  He  was
no  irresponsible  despot,  whose  will  was  law  and  who  governed  as  he  listed.  He  filled
the  throne,  not  as  absolute  and  independent  sovereign,  but  only  as  the  deputy  of
Jehovah,  and  ruled  simply  in  the  name  and  in  subordination  to  the  will  of  God — ^in
this  respect  affording  another  marked  type  of  God's  true  king,  whom  he  has  set  on  his
holy  hill  of  Zion  (Ps.  ii.).  This  fact  gave  rise  to  a  second  peculiarity,  that  he  had  no
authority  to  make  laws,  but  only  to  administer  the  Law  already  given.  The  manner
of  his  election  corresponded  to  these  peculiarities  of  his  position.  1.  He  was  chosen
under  Divine  guidance  (cf.  1  Sam.  x.  20,  21).  2.  The  Divine  choice  was  ratified  by
the  free  election  of  the  people  (1  Sam.  x.  24).  From  which  we  learn  (1)  that  the
throne  is  strong  only  when  it  rests  on  the  free  choice,  and  on  the  loya^  affection  of
the  body  of  the  people.  (2)  That  kingly,  like  all  other  authority,  is  derived  from  God.
This  is  a  truth  of  general  application,  though  it  was  in  a  peculiar  sense  true  of  Israel.
The  Scripture  gives  no  sanction  to  the  "  right  Divine  of  kings  to  govern  wrong."  But
popular  sentiment  has  always  recognized  that  a  certain  "  divinity  doth  hedge  a  king."
^cient  nations  (Egypt,  etc.)  held  him  to  be  the  representative  of  God  on  earth.    The


an.  Xfu.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  295

state  and  style  with  which  a  monarch  is  surrounded,  and  the  homage  paid  to  him,  are
expressions  of  the  same  idea.  He  embodies  the  functions  of  government,  and  has
hono»ir,  majesty,  and  high-sounding  titles  hestowed  on  him  on  that  ground.  But  this
is  simply  to  say  that  in  certain  respects  he  represents  Deity.  To  constitute  perfect
"  Divine  right,"  it  would  be  necessary :  (o)  That  a  monarch  should  occupy  the  throne
with  perfect  Divine  sanction.  Most  rulers,  on  ascending  the  throne,  try  to  make  out,
however  weakly,  some  shadow  of  right)  to  it.  (6)  That  he  should  govern  in  perfect
accordance  with  the  Divine  will.  The  only  perfect  case  of  ruling  by  Divine  right  is  the
reign  of  Christ.

III.  The  character  op  the  kino  delineated.  (Vers.  15 — 20.)  He  was  to  be
an  Israelite — one  of  themselves.  Then :  1.  He  was  not  to  multiply  horses  to  himself  y
that  is:  (1)  He  was  not  to  be  ambitious  of  military  distinction.  (2)  He  was  not  to
place  his  main  reliance  for  the  defence  of  the  nation  on  extravagant  military  prepara-
tions. (3)  He  was  not,  for  the  sake  of  supposed  material  advantage,  to  lead  the  people
into  ensnaring  alliances.  2.  He  was  not  to  multiply  wives  to  himself.  That  is :
(1)  He  was  to  avoid  enervating  luxury.  (2)  His  court  was  to  be  chaste  and  pure.
Cf.  Tennyson,  'To  the  Queen:'  "Her  court  was  pure;  her  life  serene,"  etc;  voA
.  '  Dedication '  to  the  Idyls —


"Who  reverenced  his  conscience  as  his  king;
Whose  glory  was,  redressing  human  wrong;
Who  spake  no  slander,  no,  nor  listened  to  it ;
WTu)  loved  one  only,  and  who  clave  to  her,"  et&

3.  Ha  Tvas  not  to  multiply  to  himself  silver  and  gold ;  that  is,  he  was  not  to  affeat  tJie
dazzle  of  imperial  splendour,  but  to  be  simple  and  unostentatious  in  his  manner  of  life.
But :  4.  He  was  to  be  a  diligent  student  of  the  Word  of  Ood.  (1)  He  was  to  write
out  with  his  own  hand  a  copy  of  the  Law.  (2)  He  was  to  read  in  it  diligently  all  the
days  of  his  life ;  the  result  of  which  would  be :  (a)  That  he  would  be  kept  in  the  way
of  obedience ;  (b)  that  his  heart  would  be  preserved  humble  towards  God  and  his
brethren  ;  and  (c)  he  and  his  seed  would  enjoy  prosperity  on  the  throne.  What  a
noble  sketch  of  the  model  king,  yet  how  contrary  to  current  ideas  of  royal  greatness !
We  have  happily  been  taught  in  our  own  country  to  appreciate  the  advantages  of  a
pure  court,  and  to  feel  its  wholesome  influence -on  the  general  tone  uf  morals,  and  we
are  able  to  Understand,  also,  the  beneficial  effect  of  uprightness  and  piety  in  a
sovereign  in  adding  to  the  love,  esteem,  and  reverence  with  which  the  sovereign  is
regarded ;  but  how  far  are  we  from  dissociating  the  greatness  of  a  reign  from  its
external  splendour,  its  military  conquests,  the  wealth  and  luxury  of  its  aristocracy,  the
figure  it  displays  in  the  eyes  of  other  nations,  and  the  terror  with  which  it  can  inspire
them  I  Nor  do  we  look  in  sovereigns  generally  for  all  the  virtues  which  we  find  in  our
>vn,  but  are  apt  to  condone  want  of  piety,  and  even  acts  of  great  iniquity,  if  they  but
prove  themselves  to  be  bold,  energetic,  and  enterprising  rulers.  The  character  of  the
sovereign  is  in  some  respects  of  less  moment  than  it  once  was,  but  its  influence  for
good  or  evil  is  still  very  great,  and  the  evil  fruits  reaped  from  the  court  life,  say  of  a
Charles  IL  or  a  George  IV.,  are  not  exhausted  in  one  or  a  few  generations.  Piety  upon
the  throne  will  lead  to  piety  in  the  court  and  thioughout  the  nation,  and  will  give  an
impulse  to  everything  else  that  is  good.  Whereas  an  evil  and  corrupting  example  sows
seeds  of  mischief,  which  may  involve  the  nation  in  the  greatest  losses  and  disasters
(see  Massillon's  sermon,  'Des  Exemples  des  Grands'). — J.  O.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Idolatry  a  eapitai  crime.  The  closing  verses  of  last  chapter  prohibit-
ing groves  neai  God's  altar  may  be  takfen  in  connection  with  the  verses  now  before  us
as  constituting  the  solemn  prohibition  of  idolatry.  God  will  not  have  any  rival,  either
sun,  moon,  or  any  of  the  host  of  heaven,  not  to  speak  of  the  more  miserable  idolatries
of  things  on  earth ;  he  makes  idolatry  a  capital  crime,  and  decrees  death  as  its  penalty.
This  brings  out  the  eiiormity  of  the  sin  in  the  eyes  of  God ;  and  it  does  not  follow,
because  idolatry  is  not  still  visited  with  death,  that  it  has  become  a  lighter  matter  in
ihe  eyes  of  "  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth."

4.  Tbk  tkmftation  to  NATUBK-woBSHir.   When  men  are  not  watchful,  they  live  by


296  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xvn.  1— 2t


sight  and  forget  the  life  of  faith.  Others  make  the  senses  the  only  organs  of  know-
ledge, and  base  their  so-called  philosophy  upon  sensation.  It  is  not  to  he  wondered  at,
in  such  circumstances,  that  nature-worship  prevailed  in  olden  times  and  prevails  stiii.
A  great  deal  of  the  antitheistio  science  of  the  present  time  is,  when  analyzed,  just
nature-worship.  When  men  in  their  headstrong  self-confidence  attribute  independent
powers  to  nature ;  when  they  maintain— on  what  grounds  they  do  not  tell  us,  for  it  is  a
matter  ci  faith,  not  of  sight — that  the  "  reign  of  law  "  is  workable  without  Grod,  then
they  are  really  idolizing  nature.  It  seems  a  light  thing  to  men  to  eliminate  Gk)d  from
his  works,  but  the  sin  will  have  to  be  answered  for  before  the  Judge.

Besides,  it  was  more  excusable  in  the  old  Israelite  than  in  the  modem  philosopher.
The  heavenly  bodies  in  these  Eastern  countries  are  so  magnificent  that  the  impression
produced  upon  the  gazer  is  akin  to  worship.  It  was  little  wonder  if  in  an  unwatchful
moment  he  "  beheld  the  sun  when  it  shined,  or  the  moon  walking  in  brightness ;  and
the  heart  was  secretly  enticed,  or  his  mouth  kissed  his  hand  "  (Job  xxxi.  26,  27).  The
temptation  to  worship  the  heavenly  bodies  was  strong  and  natural.

IL  In  God's  sight  the  wobship  op  natueb  is  a  capital  oeimb.  It  is  worthy  of  a
violent  death.  Directions  are  given  for  the  solemn  execution.  The  witnesses,  of  whom
there  must  be  a  plurality  at  least,  are  first  to  lay  their  hands  upon  the  head  of  the
idolater,  then  the  whole  people,  doubtless  through  their  representative  elders,  showing
tlieir  acquiescence  in  the  severe  sentence;  and  then  he  is  to  be  stoned  to  death.  The
idea  is  manifestly  that  he  is  unworthy  of  liviDg  longer  when  he  has  so  far  forgotten
and  ignored  the  claims  of  God.

And  assuredly  our  scientific  nature-worshippers  are  equally  guilty,  nay,  more  guilty,
in  God's  sight.  If  they  are  not  put  to  death  by  public  law,  it  is  not  because  their  sin
is  changed  in  its  heinousness,  but  because  God  has  made  their  case  a  reserved  one  for
himself.    "  Vengeance  is  mine ;  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."

m.  In  these  circumstances  we  abb  left  one  way  of  obtting  kid  of  rex  bvil,
AND  that  is  by  GOOD.  God  having  withdrawn  the  prerogative  of  vengeance  from  men
for  sins  against  himself,  and  reserved  the  case  for  his  own  dealing  with  it,  he  has  given
us  our  direction  in  the  words,  "  Be  not  overcome  of  evil,  but  overcome  evil  with  good  "
(Rom.  xii.  21).  The  Israelites  in  their  rude  time  were  directed  to  remove  the  idolater
by  force ;  we  are  to  get  rid  of  him  by  loving  persuasion.  The  former  was  the  easier
remedy.  To  heap  coals  of  fire  on  the  head  of  our  opponent  and  enemy  is  not  so  easy
an  operation.  But  it  can  be  done.  God  shows  us  the  example  himself.  While  reserv-
ing the  prerogative  of  vengeance,  he  meanwhile  manifests  himself  in  Jesus  Christ  as
the  God  of  love.  Though  provoked  by  man's  idolatries,  he  subjects  him  to  the  treat*
ment  of  his  love,  and  goes  forth  in  converting  power  to  meet  his  enemies.  Of  course.-
the  love  is  sometimes  lost  upon  them,  as  we  are  accustomed  to  say.  The  appeal  is
rejected,  but  they  have  got  the  opportunity,  and  must  account  at  last  for  despising  it.

In  his  loving  footsteps  let  us  follow.  The  nature-wo<ship  and  manifold  idolatries
are  amenable  to  the  treatment  of  enlightened  love.  Let  us  study  candidly  and  care-
fully the  case,  and  administer  with  all  tenderness  the  remedy.  It  may  be  that  in  some
cases  the  old  picture  may  be  reversed.  Instead  of  the  imposition  of  hands  in  order  to
destruction,  it  may  be  an  imposition  of  hands  in  orddining  to  Divine  work  those  who
formerly  ignored  God  altogether.  However  this  may  be,  our  duty  is  clear  to  try  to
overcome  this  particular  evil  by  good. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  8 — 13. — The  ruling  power  of  the  priests  in  the  Jewish  Church.  The  govern-
ment among  the  Israelites  was  first  by  an  eldership  elected  on  the  representative
principle.  Thus  in  Gen.  1.  7  we  find  at  the  funeral  of  Jacob  "  all  the  elders  of  the
land  of  Egypt."  Again,  when  Moses  came  from  Midian  to  emancipate  his  brethren,
he  was  directed  to  consult  "  the  elders  of  Israel,"  who  were  to  go  in  with  him  before
Pharaoh  (Exod.  iii.  16,  18).  After  the  Exodus,  the  priests  were  appointed  as  the
ministers  of  religion ;  and  with  these  were  associated  the  elders  selected  to  the  number
of  seventy  from  those  already  in  office,  and  to  whom  God  gave  his  Spirit  (Numb.  xi.
16,  etc.).  When  the  people  settled  in  Canaan,  they  were  directed  to  elect  judges  fot
judgment.  This  was  the  distribution  and  development  of  the  eldership.  And  in  case
of  any  special  difficulty,  the  aggrieved  parties  were  to  repair  to  the  place  of  the  central
altar,  and  there  lay  the  matter  before  the  priests  and  the  judge.    It  follows  that  ihe


OH.  XVH.  1— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


397


priests  had  co-ordinate  ruling  power  with  the  elders  or  judges,  that  they  were  ruhn
and  officiating  ministers  besides.     And  here  we  have  to  notice —

I.  These  Chukch  officeks  exercised  theib  authokitt  under  God  as  Kino.  The
Church  was  a  theocracy,  and  God  was  regarded  as  ever  present  with  his  officers  and
people.  The  same  is  true  in  the  Church  still.  It  is  a  theociaoy ;  an  ever-present  Jesus
still  presides  even  where  two  or  three  are  met  together  for  the  purposes  of  Church
gOTernment  (Matt.  xvHi.  20).

II.  The  priests  and  the  judge  are  to  show  the  parties  the  Divine  Law  on  the
SUBJECT.  The  decision  is  to  be  expository  of  existing  law,  not  a  decision  on  the  ground
of  expediency.  Now  this  necessarily  follows  from  the  Kingship  of  God.  His  will
mast  be  paramoinit.  His  officers  simply  try  to  find  out  his  will.  A  national  parlia-
ment may  manufacture  laws ;  but  Church  officers  take  their  laws  from  the  inspired
Statute-book.  It  is  exposition  of  Divine  Law  that  the  ruler  in  God's  Church  is  really
concerned  with.

III.  The  Church  orncERS  required  implicit  obedience  from  the  people  to  their
interpretation  of  God's  will.  In  a  rude  age  this  was  needful,  implicit  obedience
such  as  we  require  from  children.  But  when  we  reach  the  corresponding  part  of  the
New  Testament  economy,  the  exhortation  is,  "  Prove  all  things,  hold  fast  that  which  is
good  "  (1  Thess.  v.  21).  The  right  of  private  ju^ment  is  admitted,  and  regulates  the
obedience.  Just  as  when  children  grow  to  manhood,  the  implicit  obedience  demanded
gives  place  to  persuasion  and  the  appeal  to  conscience.

IV.  Presumptuous  diseeoard  of  God's  vni.L  expressed  bt  the  priest  and  judge
WAS  PUNISHED  WITH  DEATH.  This  was  disobedience  in  its  generic  form,  and  came  under
the  penalty  of  death,  ju»t  as  in  Eden.  The  aggrieved  parties  had  appealed  for  light  to
God's  officer ;  he  was  to  be  their  Arbitrator,  and  they  contracted  to  abide  by  his  deci-
sion. Disobedience  under  such  circumstances  would  overthrow  the  order  both  of  Church
aud  State.     Hence  the  death  penalty.

Presumptuous  disregard  of  Divine  commandments  is  not  now  less  heinous  than  it
waa  then,  though  it  may  escape  for  the  time  being  such  a  terrible  penalty.  The
judgment  of  God  is  only  postponed.  Should  the  presumption  continue,  the  penalty
will  come  at  last  with  compound  interest.

V.  The  PATIENT  STUDY  OF  God's  Word  is  surelt  a  duty  when  presumptuous  dis-
BEOARD  OF  God's  will  is  so  heinous  a  sin.  It  should  be  our  supreme  desire  to  know
what  God  would  have  us  to  do.  This  can  only  be  known  through  systematic  and  patient
study  of  the  holy  oracles.  The  priest  with  the  Urim  and  Thummim  is  not  now
available.  We  must  content  ourselves  with  a  quieter  way.  The  Book  is  given  instead
of  the  oracle,  and  we  are  directed  to  consult  it  for  ourselves.  Approaching  it  in  a
patient,  obedient  spirit,  we  shall  find  it  unlocking  many  a  mystery  to  tu,  and  affording
118  the  light  we  need. — B.  M.  E.

Vers,  14 — 20. — 7%e  limitations  of  monarchy.  We  have  here  provision  made  for  the
probable  demand  of  the  people  for  a  visible  king  like  the  other  nations.  The  unseen
King  did  not  make  the  same  sensation  in  their  view,  and  hence  Moses  is  inspired  to
anticipate  the  unbelieving  demand.    And  here  notice —

I.  The  unseen  Kino  must  hate  the  selection  of  the  visible  one.  It  is  in
this  way  that  the  monarchy,  when  it  came,  was  kept  under  the  control  of  God.  The
theocracy  was  still  the  fountain  head  of  power.  The  people  were  not  to  choose  their
king.    He  was  to  have  Divine  right.

It  is  noticeable  that,  in  giving  them  SanI,  the  Lord  made  emphatic  the  sensatimialism
that  lay  under  the  demand,  for  the  visible  king  was  head  and  shoulders  above  his
brethren.  David  was  also  a  big  man,  else  Saul  would  never  have  offered  him  his
armour,  when  proposing  to  fight  the  giant.  And  it  is  noticeable  how  the  sensationalism
is  rebuked  in  the  enemies  of  Israel  producing  Goliath  as  a  champion,  before  whom  it  is
evident  that  the  big  Saul  feared  and  quaked.

II.  ThET     ABE    not    to    EXPECT    OB    TO    THINK    OF    A    BTBANOEB    KINO.      ThuS    the

patriotism  of  the  people  is  fostered.  It  is  one  of  themselves  that  is  to  have  the  king-
ship when  it  comes.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  this  deliverance  after  the  reservation
already  noticed.  God's  choice  is  thus  guaranteed  to  Israel.  He  will  stand  to  the
Vttioii,  if  the  nation  wiU  be  faithful  to  him.


298  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xth.  1—2*.

III.  The  Eisa  is  not  to  belt  upon  the  cavalry  abm.  Palestine,  being  moun-
tainous, did  not  require  cavalry.  Infantry  would  be  more  effective.  Cavalry,  if  raised
»nd  relied  on,  would  necessitate  an  alliance  with  a  cattle-breeding  country  like
Egypt,  and  would  be  the  precursor  of  a  "spirited  foreign  policy,"  such  as  proves
ruinous  to  a  pastoral  people  such  as  Israel  was  meant  to  he.  There  was  thus  a  wise
restraint  laid  upon  the  foreign  policy  of  the  nation ;  as  God  desired  their  separation
from  surrounding  nations,  and  their  religious  stability  upon  the  mountain  ridges  of
Palestine,  he  warns  them  against  this  danger.  Besides,  the  cavalry  arm  until  recently
was  the  most  powerful  in  the  service,  and  the  charge  of  cavalry  is  something  to  bo
proud  of  or  to  fear.  Now,  of  course,  artillery  has  put  cavalry  out  of  its  vaunted
position.  The  temptation  was  to  "  trust  in  horses  and  in  chariots,"  and  not  in  the
Lord.     Hence  the  warning.

IV.  The  king  is  not  to  have  a  bebaolio.  For  through  the  wives  he  will  surely
be  unmanned  and  have  his  heart  turned  away  from  God.  It  is  the  spiritual  disasters
of  polygamy  which  are  here  insisted  upon.  A  divided  heart  socially  must  entail  a
divided  heart  spiritually.  No  wonder  the  Psalmist  prayed,  "  Unite  my  heart  to  fear
thy  Name."

Y.  Nob  is  thk  kino  to  aim  at  obeat  biches.  For  wealth  is  a  great  snare,  and
it  competes  with  God  for  the  heart.  Money,  like  cavalry,  is  a  most  natural  foundation
of  trust.     A  too  wealthy  monarch  is  likely  to  be  worldly  minded  and  unspirituaL

VI.  The  kino  is  to  make  a  special  study  op  the  Divinb  Law.  He  is  to  get
a  copy  for  himself — he  is  to  have  it  daily  read  to  him — and  he  is  to  allow  its
humiliating  influence  to  be  exercised  over  him  so  as  to  be  obedient  always.  And  if
obedient,  he  is  promised  an  hereditary  intei:cst  in  the  throne.  He  was  thus  to  be  kept
in  subjection  to  the  unseen' King.

And  though  we  may  not  aspire  to  kingships,  we  can  profit  by  the  warnings  here
prophetically  addressed  to  the  coming  kings  of  Israel.  For  it  is  surely  for  us  to  allow
nothing  seen  and  temporal  to  threaten  our  faith  in  Ood.  It  may  not  be  horses  and
chariots ;  it  may  not  be  money ;  it  may  be  men  in  whom  we  are  tempted  to  trust.  What-
ever it  be,  whether  persons  or  things,  that  tempts  us  from  our  trust  in  God,  it  must  be
avoided.  Better  is  it  to  be  friendless,  to  be  poor,  to  be  solitary,  than  to  be  sceptical.
Wordly  success  is  where  scepticism  is  bom.  The  idols  multiply  as  wealth  and  luxuries
increase.     There  is  something,  we  think,  to  hold  by  in  the  strain  of  life.

And  whatever  our  position  in  this  world,  let  us  feel  always  not  only  our  trust  in
God,  hut  our  subordination  in  all  things  to  him.  If  he  is  King  of  kings,  he  is  certainly
Lord  ovsr  us.  Let  us  live  imder  the  theocracy,  and  serve  him  with  our  whole  hearts. —
B.  M.  E.

Ver.  1. — 7%e  prevention  of  religious  fraud.  Men  who  pride  themselves  on  honesty
towards  their  fellows  are  often  dishonest  in  dealing  with  God.  They  are  punctual
in  observing  appointments  with  men ;  they  are  unpunctual  in  reaching  the  house  of
God.  When  tlie  principle  of  piety  in  a  man  is  weakened,  he  will  stoop  to  many
artifices  to  deprive  God  of  his  due.

I.  An  ikpeefbct  saceifice  sPRiNas  fbom  bund  paesimony.  When  piety  declines,
a  man  becomes  the  slave  of  his  senses.  He  is  moved  or  terrified  only  by  what  is
visible.  He  is  afraid  of  a  human  frown ;  he  is  impervious  to  the  Divine  displeasure.
The  lamb  which  is  unfit  for  barter,  and  which  is  scarce  fit  for  food,  will  be  deemed
good  enough  for  sacrifice.  Yet  how  mentally  blind  is  the  man  I  What  thick  scales
he  has  manufactured  for  his  eyes  I  Yet,  "  he  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see  ?  "
And  cannot  God,  with  a  breath,  blast  that  man's  prosperity,  and  cage  his  soul  in
bondage  ?     He  had  thought  to  snatch  from  God  a  dollar,  and  lo !  he  loses  everything  I

II.  An  imperfect  saceifick  vitiates  its  symbolic  efficacy.  These  animal
sacrifices  had  many  moral  uses.  They  developed  the  sentiment  of  gratitude  for  gifts
bestowed.  They  expressed  the  penitence  of  the  ofierer,  who  thereby  confessed  that  foi
his  sins  he  had  deseived  to  die.  And  inasmuch  as  a  lamb  or  a  heifer  was  immeasurably
inferior  to  man,  the  sacrifice  betokened  the  ofi«ring  of  a  better  Sacrifice,  which  should
be  a  real  atonement.  Now,  if  men  were  permitted  to  bring  a  blemished  victim,  t
would  no  longer  prefigure  him  who  is  the  "Lamb  without  blemish  and  T^ithout  spot."
In  Mch  »  case,  the  &itb  of  the  offerer  was  dead.


OH.  XTIL  1  -20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  299

IIL  Such  kbligious  fkaud  was  incipient  atheism.  Here  was  the  budding  of
blackest  sin—the  first  step  on  a  slippery  decline,  which  would  land  one  in  death.  If
I  can  set  aside  God's  plain  commands,  as  my  selfishness  desires ;  if  I  can  treat  God  as
my  equal  or  my  inferior,  and  devote  to  him  only  what  is  useless  for  myself; — I  am  on
the  very  borders  of  utter  atheism,  and  to-morrow  shall  be  ready  to  say,  "  There  is  no  God."
Rankest  unbelief  often  springs  fh>m  practical  disobedience.  There  is  no  neglect  of  God
withttut  self-injury. — D.

Ters.  2 — 7. — Idolatry  a  crime  against  society.  Whether  the  fact  be  obvious  to  all
men  or  not,  it  is  fact  that  sin  against  God  is  also  sin  against  human  society.  The  relation
of  the  Hebrew  nation  to  God,  is  a  type  of  the  relation  which  God  sustains  to  every  nation.
He  is  the  Creator  of  individual  life  and  of  individual  endowments.  He  is  the  Source
of  all  the  moral  forces  which  bind  men  together  in  civil  society.  He  has  appointed  to
each  nation  its  habitation,  and  has  enriched  it  With  more  or  less  of  material  good.
Hence  every  nation  is  under  obligation  to  acknowledge  and  honour  the  one  creating
and  reigning  God.

I.  The  obime.  The  crime  consisted  in  esteeming  the  creature  above  the  Creator.
This  was  a  direct  breach  of  treaty  between  God  and  the  nation.  On  God's  side  the
engagement  was  to  bring  them  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  secure  them  against  foes.
On  Israel's  side  the  engagement  was  to  worship  no  other  Deity  but  Jehovah.
Hence  the  violation  of  a  covenant  so  openly  made  and  frequently  ratified  was  a
flagrant  sin.  Yet  with  every  nation  such  a  covenant  is  made  hy  implication.  If  life
is  obtaiisd  from  the  invisible  God,  it  is  held  on  conditions  imposed  by  him,  and  every
item  of  conduct  which  is  contrary  to  his  known  will  is  an  act  of  rebellion.  If
rebellion  against  an  earthly  king  is  counted  highest  crime,  incomparably  greater  is  a
deed  of  open  rebellion  against  the  King  of  kings.  Idolatry  is  the  root-stem  of  grossest
immorality.

II.  THJt  DETECTION  AND  PBOOF  OP  THIS  CRIME.  In  proportion  to  the  greatness  of
the  crime  must  be  the  carefulness  of  investigation.  No  punishment  is  to  be  inflicted  on
the  ground  of  suspicion  or  prejudice.  Human  life  is  to  be  accounted  precious,  but  the
interests  of  righteousness  are  more  precious  still.  On  both  these  grounds,  the  scrutiny
must  be  thorough.  To  prevent  any  injury  to  the  sacred  cause  of  justice,  through  error,
or  incompetence,  or  malice,  one  witness  must  be  incompetent  to  obtain  a  verdict.
Security  against  injustice  comes  from  corroborated  testimony  and  from  independent
witne«ies.  While  every  man  is  bound,  in  his  sphere,  to  think  and  act  righteously
tow&rds  his  neighbours,  he  must  safeguard  himself  against  hasty  judgments  and
against  the  whispers  of  slanderers.  In  many  positions  in  life  we  are  called  to  act  in
the  place  of  God.

nL  The  punishment  deobeed.  It  was  death  by  stoning.  In  that  early  age,  and
especially  in  the  desert,  there  were  no  mechanical  contrivances  for  suddenly  extinguish-
ing life.  They  were  largely  the  children  of  nature,  and  possessed  but  few  inventions  of
civilized  life.  The  sagacity  of  Supreme  Wisdom  had  placed  frail  man  among  natural
forces,  which  might  easily  be  employed  in  terminating  bodily  life.  This  arrangement
impresses  men  with  a  sense  of  dependence.  His  bodily  life  succumbs  to  a  stone.  The
unit  must  ba  sacrificed  to  the  well-brang  of  the  community.  "  No  man  lives  for
himself."

IV.  The  instkumentb  op  the  bxecd  hon.  The  chief  witness  against  an  offender,
became,  by  God's  appointment,  executor  of  the  judicial  sentence.  This  secured  economy
in  the  administration  of  law.  It  secured,  to  a  large  extent,  veracity  among  witnesses,
and  moral  certainty  of  the  rightness  of  the  verdict.  Yet,  that  obloquy  might  not  attach
itself  to  one  man  alone,  the  whole  community  were  charged  to  take  part  in  the  execu-
tion of  the  sentence.  The  deed  would  thus  be  the  common  deed  of  alL  This  practice
would  foster  oneness  of  sentiment,  oneness  of  purpose,  and  would  promote  harmonious
national  life. — D.

Vers.  8— 13.— High  court  of  appeal.  We  can  imagine  a  condition  of  human  society
in  which  wrong-doing  would  at  once  declare  itself  by  some  visible  pain  or  sign.  We
can  imagine  a  condition  of  society  in  which  God  would  himself  step  forth  and  punish
every  offence  against  truth  or  virtue.    But  then,  men  would  lose  the  benefits  of  mora'


300  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ca  xvii.  1—20

training  which  the  present  system  ensures.     This  necessity  for  men  to  take  part  in  thfl
administration  of  justice  brings  large  advantage.

L  Human  interests  often  become  vert  complicated.  The  interests  men  have  in
property,  liberty,  reputation,  often  become  very  involved.  This  arises  largely  from  the
operation  of  selfishness.  Every  item  which  will  add  to  a  man's  self-importance  he  will
sue  for  by  every  process  of  law.  This  comes  from  the  neglect  of  the  comprehensive
precept,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  Another  great  difficulty  in  the
administration  of  justice  arises  from  men's  untrutnfuluess.  The  day  will  dawn  when
a  stigma  of  shame  will  brand  the  man  who  withholds  or  violates  the  truth.  If  now,  in
every  judicial  inquiry,  the  whole  truth,  pure  and  simple,  were  forthcoming,  decision  and
verdict  would  be  a  simple  result.

II.  The  most  holt  will  be,  c^iteris  paribus,  the  most  sagacious.  The  man  who
lives  nearest  to  God  will  obtain  the  most  of  God's  wisdom.  He  will  be  free  from  base
and  selfish  motive.  He  will  be  the  -most  trusted  by  his  fellows.  He  will  have  fullest
access  to  God  when  intricate  questions  have  to  be  solved.  "  If  any  man  lack  wisdom,
let  him  ask  of  God."  "  Unto  the  upright  there  ariseth  light  in  the  darkness."  But
pretended  piety  will  serve  no  practical  good.

III.  Evert  judge  among  men  acts  spbciallt  in  the  stead  op  God.  To  be
the  administrator  of  justice,  to  adjudicate  between  right  and  wrong,  is  the  highest
office  which  men  can  fill.  No  position  is  more  responsible  ;  none  more  honourable.
For  all  practical  purposes,  his  decision  must  be  regarded  as  the  decision  of  God.  Other-
wise, there  will  be  no  termination  to  litigation  and  strife.  From  the  verdict  of  the
highest  human  judge,  there  is  but  one  court  of  appeal,  viz.  the  court  of  heaven.
Without  doubt,  many  judicial  decisions  on  earth  will  be  reversed  by  the  Great  Judge
of  all.  This  is  sweet  solace  to  the  injured  now.  Yet  it  is  nobler  to  suffer  wrong  at
the  hands  of  men  than  to  resist  by  violence.  For  the  present,  we  are  to  accept  the
sentence  of  the  judge  as  absolute  and  obligatory.  Our  feet  must  diverge  neither  to
the  right  hand  nor  to  the  left.

IV.  CoNTUMAOT  IS  CRIME,  PUNISHABLE  BY  DEATH.  To  despise  the  verdict  of  the
judge  is  to  weaken  the  authority  of  the  State — is  to  sow  the  seeds  of  anarchy  and
ruin.  Defective  administration  of  law  is  better  than  none.  "  Rebellion  is  as  the  sin
of  witchcraft,  and  stubbornness  is  as  idolatry."  Yet,  if  contempt  of  human  authority
be  accounted  a  capital  crime,  how  much  more  criminal  must  be  contumacy  against
Godl

V.  Capital  punishment  has  for  its  end  the  good  or  the  communitt.  It  is
an  advantage  to  remove  from  the  circ.'^  of  human  society  a  pest — a  firebrand.  The
authority  of  law,  the  sacredness  of  justice,  are  set  on  high  in  flaming  characters;  and
on  all  classes  of  the  community  the  impression  is  salutary.  Reverence  for  constituted
authority  is  strengthened,  and  unbiased  minds  learn  the  heinous  wickedness  of  dis-
obedience.    The  effect  is  virtue,  order,  peace. — D.

Vers.  14 — 20. — Limitations  round-about  a  king.  A  king  is  the  creation  of  a
nation's  will.  The  nation  does  not  exist  for  the  king,  but  the  king  exists  for  the
nation.     His  proper  aim  is  not  personal  glory,  but  the  widest  public  good.

I.  Kings  are  the  product  op  a  degenerate  age.  Since  the  King  of  heaven
is  willing  to  give  his  counsel  and  aid  to  men,  it  is  for  our  honour  and  advantage  to  live
under  the  direct  administration  of  God ;  and  it  is  only  when  piety  and  faith  decline
that  men  clamour  for  a  human  king.  The  conquests  of  Canaan  by  Israel  had  been
most  complete  when  Israel  most  carefully  followed  the  commands  of  God.  To
sensitive  minds,  it  would  have  been  a  dagger-thrust  to  imitate  the  practices  of  the
degenerate  heathen.

II.  Divine  limitations  about  the  choice  op  a  king.  In  condescension  to
human  infirmity,  God  will  allow  the  elevation  of  a  man  to  the  throne.  Through  our
own  caprices,  God  ofttimes  punishes  us.  Yet  God  kindly  sets  barriers  about  our
capricious  wills.  For  martial  purposes,  foolish  men  would  often  choose  n  stalwart
giant,  some  Goliath,  to  be  their  king,  though  he  be  of  foreign  birth ;  or  some  successful
warrior  to  lead  them  forth  to  battle.  This  is  prohibited.  The  nation  is  to  be  self-
contained.  All  the  elements  of  prosperity  may  be  found  within  its  own  borders.  The
will  of  Qod  must  be  respected.    God  himself  will  select  the  man,  point  him  out  by


OH.  xvm.  1—22.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


801


unmistakable  methods,  and  the  nation  can  do  no  more  than  gratefully  accept  God's
wise  decision.     He  will  choose  ;  they  must  anoint.

III.  Divine  limitations  about  the  conduct  of  a  king.  To  him  does  not  belong
the  privilege  to  gratify  every  taste  and  temper.  The  very  contrary.  He  is  under  greater
obligations  than  any  other  man  to  restrain  himself.  Temptation  will  surround  him  on
every  side  ;  but  he  must  meet  temptation  with  vigilance,  patience,  firmness.  To  be  a
true  king,  he  must  first  conquer  himself.  He  must  restrain  carnal  ambition.  He
liiust  restrain  love  of  display.  He  must  restrain  the  passion  for  conquest.  He  must
restrain  sensual  pleasure.  He  must  restrain  his  avarice.  His  real  distinction  is  not  to
have  many  horses,  many  wives,  or  great  riches.  His  distinction  is  to  be  wise  adminis-
trator of  righteousness,  the  protector  of  public  liberty  and  peace.  To  fulfil  faithfully
the  functions  of  a  king,  he  must  walk  circumspectly  in  the  narrow  way — be  a  loyal
lubject  to  the  King  of  heaven.

IV.  Limitations  about  the  pefvatb  life  of  a  kino.  His  first  concern  must
be  respecting  his  personal  fitness  for  such  responsible  ofSce.  No  pains  must  he  spare
'to  obtain  complete  equipment.    He  must  count  no  labour  severe  or  menial  by  which

he  may  qualify  himself  for  kingly  duties.  His  first  duty  is  to  obtain  completest
acquaintance  with  the  will  of  God.  To  this  end  he  must  possess  a  copy  of  God's
written  Law,  and  in  this  Law  he  must  meditate  day  and  night.  The  spirit  of  this  Law
must  animate  his  being  and  breathe  in  all  his  speech.  God's  Word  must  be  his  vade
mecum,  his  daily  compass  and  chart.  He  must  move  among  his  courtiers  and
governors  as  a  visible  embodiment  of  truth  and  purity,  a  living  transcript  of  the  Divine
will.  This  is  a  true  pattern  of  a  king — a  man  who  excels  in  wisdom,  having  learnt  of
God  ;  a  man  who  is  eminent  for  pipus  obedience,  and  writes  in  largest  characters  the
model  of  a  noble  life.  Such  a  man  shall  live.  "  Though  he  die,  his  influence  and
rule  shall  live." — ^D,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  xvm


Rights  of  the  Priests  and  the  Levites.

The    Arts    op    Divination     of     the

Heathen    to    be    avoided.      Prophets

promised    whom     Israel     must    hear.

The  False  and  Presumptuous  Prophet

"O  BB  PUT  TO  Death.

Vew.  1 — 8. — After  the  ruling  powers,
the  judges  and  the  king,  come  the  priests
and  the  Levites.  In  regard  to  them  Moses
repeats  here  the  law  as  before  laid  down
(of.  Numb.  xviu.  20,  23,  24).

Ver.  1. — The  priests  the  Levites,  the  whole
tribe  of  Levi ;  i.e.  the  whole  tribe  of  Levi,
including  both  the  priests  and  the  general
body  of  the  Levites.  They  shall  eat  the
offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  flre.  "  The
offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire"  (literally,
the  fires  oi  firings  of  Jehovah),  here  referred
to,  were  the  meal  offering,  the  sin  offering,
and  the  trespEiss  offering  (cf.  Numb,  xviii.
9).  And  his  inheritance ;  i.e.  of  Jehovah,
what  was  appropriated  to  him,  and  from
him  to  the  tribe  of  Levi,  such  as  tithes,
firstlings,  and  firstfruits.

Vers.  2,  3.— As  he  hath  said  onto  them
(cf.  Numb,  xviii.  20).  The  shoulder,  and  the
two  cheeks,  and  the  maw ;  «'.«.  the  &ont  leg,


the  two  jaw-bones,  and  the  rongh  stomach
of  ruminants,  in  which  the  digestion  is
completed.  These  were  regarded  as  the
choice  parts  of  the  animal,  and  were  to  be
given  to  the  priests  in  addition  to  the  wave
breast  and  heave  leg  of  the  peace  offerings
(Lev.  vii.  32,  etc. ;  Numb,  xviii.  11),  which
belonged  to  the  firings  of  Jehovah,  mentioned
in  ver.  1.  To  these  the  priest  had  a  rightful
claim;  they  were  his  due  (pp^O,  mithpat,
right).  "  This  right  was  probably  accorded
to  the  priests  as  a  compensation  for  the  falling
off  which  would  take  place  in  their  incomes
in  consequence  of  the  repeal  of  the  law  that
every  animal  was  to  be  slaughtered  at  the
sanctuary  as  a  sacrifice  (Lev.  xvii. ;  vide  ch.
lii.  15,  sqq.y  (Keil).  According  to  Josephua
('Antiq,'  iv.  4,  4),  Philo  ('De  Prssmiis.
Sacerdot.,'  p.  832,  0pp.,  torn.  ii.  p.  235,  edit.
Iffiaiigey),  the  Talmud,  etc.,  this  injunc-
tion relates  to  tlie  slaying  of  animals  at
home  for  private  use,  and  not  such  as  were
killed  for  sacrifice.  But  the  use  here
of  the  sacrificial  pluaseology,  who  offer  a
sacrifice  (nsTn  \n3),  who  slay  victims  for
sacrifice — a  phrase  nowhere  found  except  in
connection  with  sacrificial  rites)  is  adverse
to  this;  and  besides,  how  could  such  an
enactment  be  carried  out?  how  could
people,  residing  at  a  distance,  convey  to
'  the  priests  the  portions  due  to  them  every


302


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[cH.  xvm.  1 — 22,


time  they  slaughtered  an  animal  for
domestic  nse?  At  the  same  time,  the
sacrifices  here  referred  to  do  not  seem  to
be  included  in  the  offerings  by  Are  above
mentioned ;  and  these  gifts  to  the  priest
seem  to  have  beea  something  over  and
above  his  ordinary  dues.  There  is  proba-
bility, therefore,  in  the  suggestion  that  "  the
reference  is  to  the  slaughtering  of  oxen,
sheep,  or  goats,  which  were  not  intended
for  $helamim  in  the  more  limited  sense,  t.e.
for  one  of  the  three  species  of  peace  offer-
ings (Lev.  vii.  15,  16),  but  for  festal  mealB
in  the  broader  sense,  which  were  held  in
connection  with  the  sacrificial  meals  pre-
pared from  the  ehelamim  "  (Koil).

Ver.  4. — In  addition  to  the  firstfruits
already  prescribed  by  the  Law  to  be  given
to  the  priests  (Numb,  xviii.  12,  13),  Moses
here  enacts  that  the  first  fleece  of  the  sheep
shall  be  given.  All  these,  though  legally
prescribed,  were  free  gifts  on  the  part  of
the  people ;  the  neglect  of  the  prescription
incurred  only  moral  blame,  not  judicial
penalty.

Ver.  5. — The  reason  assigned  for  the
enactment  is  that  God  had  chosen  the
priest  to  stand  and  minister  in  the  Name  of
Jehovah,  i.e.  not  only  by  his  appointment
and  authority,  but  with  full  power  to  act
as  mediator  between  the  people  and  God.
Him  and  his  sous  for  ever ;  referring  to  the
establishment  of  the  priesthood  in  the
family  of  Aaron.

Vers.  6 — 8. — Only  a  portion  of  the  Levites
were  engaged  in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary ;
the  rest  lived  in  their  towns  througliout  the
country.  It  might  happen,  however,  that
a  Levite,  moved  by  pious  feeling,  would
come  to  the  place  of  the  sanctuary  to  worship
there ;  and  it  is  prescribed  that  such  a  one
should  fare  as  his  brethren  the  Levites
engaged  in  tlie  service  of  the  sanctuary
fared ;  he  should  minister  along  witli  them,
and  share  with  them  in  the  gifts  of  the
worshippers;  and  this  in  addition  to  any
private  means  he  might  have  from  the  sale
of  his  patrimony.  Where  he  sojourned.
The  Levite,  though  not  homeless,  was  re-
garded as  only  a  sojourner  in  the  land,
inasmuch  as  the  tribe  had  no  inheritance
(nbn:)  there.  They  shall  have  like  portions
to  eat;  literally,  they  ehatt  eat  portion  as
portion,  i.e.  share  and  share  alike.  That
which  Cometh  of  the  sale  of  his  patrimony ;
literally,  his  price  upon  [the  house]  of  [his]
fathers,  i.e.  the  produce  of  the  sale  effected
on  the  house  he  inherited  from  his  ancestry
(of.  Lev.  XXV.  33).

Vers.  9 — 22. — Moses  was  not  only  the
leader  and  ruler  of  the  people,  he  was  also
the  medinm  through  which  Or-d  commnni-
cated  with  the  people,  gave  thrtm  his  laws,-


and  conveyed  to  them  his  word  and  will.
In  this  respect  his  place  could  be  supplied
neither  by  priest  nor  by  king.  In  the
prospect  of  his  demise,  therefore,  there  re-
quired to  be  instituted  another  ofSce,  that
of  a  prophet,  one  who  should  be  between
God  and  the  people,  as  the  channel  through
which  Divine  communications  might  pass  to
them.  This  ofBce  Moses  here  announces
that  God  would  establish  among  them  when
they  had  entered  the  promised  land.

Ver.  9. — The  abominations  of  those  nations ;
i.e.  certain  forms  of  superstitious  usage  by
which  the  heathen  sought  to  procure  the
favour  of  their  deities,  to  obtain  from  them
direction  and  counsel,  and  to  penetrate  into
the  hidden  future  of  events.  Moses  charges
the  people  to  avoid  all  such  usages,  and  not
even  to  leam  to  do  after  such  abominations
(cf.  Lev.  xviii.  21;  Numb,  xxiii.  23;  Lev.
xix.  26,  31).

Vers.  10, 11. — Maketh  his  son  or  daughter
to  pass  through  the  file  (see  note  on  ch.  xii.
31).  That  nseth  divination  (cf.  Ezek.  xxi.  21,
where  the  different  methods  of  divination
are  enumerated).  An  observer  of  times.
This  is  according  to  the  Targum,  dbservans
horas;  the  LXX.  have  K\-r\Sovi^6ij.ivos,  "one
who  augurs  what  is  to  happen ;  "  Vulgate,
qui  observat  somnia  atque  oliguria.  The
word  (Jjipp)  is  part  of  a  verb  which  signifies
to  cover,  to  use  covert  arts,  to  practise
sorcery ;  though  some  derive  it  from  the
noun  i^y,  a  thick  cloud,  and  explain  it  as
"  interpreter  of  clouds ; "  while  others  trace
it  to  ]y_,  the  eye,  and  explain  it  as  "  one
who  cheats  by  optical  fascinations "  (so  the
Syriac,  fascinans  oeuUs),  or  "  one  who  divines
by  inspection — an  augur."  An  enchanter;
one  who  practises  magic,  or  divines  by  signs
(cf.  Gen.  xliv.  5;  Numb,  xxi  v.  1).  It  is
sometimes  said  that  the  verb  of  which  this
word  is  a  part  (^nj)  is  a  denominative  from
Einj,  a  serpent ;  whence  it  is  inferred  that
the  species  of  divination  indicated  by  this
word  is  ophiomarusy,  or  divination  by  serpents,
but  this  is  not  generally  accepted  by
scholars.  A  witch  (c]^'3!p ;  LXX.,  <papiuix6s :
Vulgate,  malefictis) ;  probably  one  "who  pre-
tended to  cure  diseases,  or  procure  some
desired  result,  by  means  of  nostrums  and
philtres.  In  the  enumeration  of  the  wise  men
of  Babylon  (Dan.  ii.  2),  the  Mecashephim
have  a  place  beside  the  Hartummim,  and  in
Gen.  xli.  8  and  Exod.  vii.  11,  they  are  joined
with  the  Haohamim  or  Magi  of  Egypt;  and
this  favours  the  conclusion  that  their  sorcery
had  a  quasi-scientific  basis.  The  English
word  "witoh"  is  now  restricted  to  the
female  praetiser  of  unlawful  arts ;  formerly
it  was  applied  to  male*  as  well,   if  not


CH.  xvm.  1 — 22.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


803


chiefly  (Tienoh, '  Select  Olossary,'  p.  306).
A.  oharmer  (isri  inn) ;  a  dealer  in  spelU,
one  who  by  means  of  spells  or  charms
pretends  to  achieve  some  desired  result.
The  verb  here  used  primarily  means  to
bind,  and  the  species  of  magicJndicated  is
probably  that  practised  by  binding  certain
knots,  whereby  it  was  suppoijed  that  the
curse  or  blessing,  as  the  case  might  be,  was
bound  on  its  object ;  this  was  accompanied
apparently  with  incantation  (Ps.  Iviii.  5).
Comp.  English  spell-bound,  and  the  phrase,
"to  rivet  charms"  (Jonson,  'Sad  Shep-
herd,' ii.  2).  A  species  of  incantation
known  to  the  Bomans  consisted  in  tying
knots  with  threads  of  different  colours,  three
in  number,  which  were  supposed  to  become
a  hand  to  secure  an  object  (cf.  Virg., '  Eclog.'
viii.  76,  77).  A  consulter  with  familiar
spirits.  This  phrase  conveys  something
different  from  what  is  expressed,  in  the
Hebrew.  Sis  hm  is  one  who  asks  or  in-
quires of  an  Ob,  that  is,  a  Python,  or
divining  spirit.  This  spirit  was  supposed
to  be  in  the  person  of  the  conjurer,  and  to
be  able  to  reveal  to  Mm  what  was  secret
or  hidden  in  the  future  (Lev.  xx.  27 ;  1  Sam.
xxviii.  7,  8 ;  Acta  xvi.  16).  The  notion  of
"a  familiar  spirit,"  i.e.  a  spirit  not  dwell-
ing in  the  person,  but  with  which  he  is
intimate — generally  the  spirit  of  one  who
formerly  lived  on  earth — is  a  modem  notion
not  known  to  Scripture.  The  persons  here
referred  to  were  probably  ventriloquists
(LXX.,  iyyaaTpi/jLvOoi),  and  used  their  faculty
in  this  respect  lor  purposes  of  magic,
pretending  that  they  had  within  them  a
spirit  which  they  could  consult,  and  by
which  they  could  predict  what  would
happen  or  reveal  what  was  hid.  Wizard.
The  English  word  "wizard"  did  not
originally  convey  the  idea  of  anything
evil  .in  the  person  of  whom  it  was  used;
Milton  applies  it  to  the  Magi  who  came
to  worship  at  •  Bethlehem  ('  Ode  on  the
Nativity,'  iv.) ;  it  meant  merely  "  the  wise
one,"  or  "  the  knowing  one ; "  and  thus  is
an  exact  equivalent  for  the  Hebrew  word
here  used  C:j;i],  knowing,  wise,  from'PT,
to  know).  A  neoromanoer;  one  vrho  pro-
fessed to  call  np  the  dead,  and  from  them
to  leam  the  secrets  of  futurity  (cf  1  Sam.
xxviii.  7)t  (See  on  all  these  names  the
learned  and  copious  dissertation  of  Dr.
Holmes,  art.  'Divination,'  in  Kitto'a  'BibL
Cyclop.,'  3rd.  edit.,  i  682.)

Ver.  12. — All  who  practised  such  arts
were  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord,  and  his
people  are  forbidden  to  have  anything  to
do  with  them.  They  are  connected  here
with  the  Holoch-worship,  because  of  the
intimate  relation  between  idolatry  and  the
ue  of  magical  arts;  and  Moloch-worship  is


specially  mentioned,  probably  because  it
was  the  form  of  idolatry  with  which  the
Israelites  were  most  likely  to  come  in  con-
tact, both  where  th^  then  were  and  also
in  Canaan;  not,  as  KeU  suggests,  because
that  form  "  was  more  intimately  connected
with  soothsaying  and  magic  than  any  other
description  of  idolatry" — an  assertion  for
which  there  is  no  evidence.

Ver.  13. — ^Thou  shalt  be  perfect  with  the
lord  thy  God.  The  word  translated  "  per-
fect "  properly  means  entire,  whole,  answer-
ing to  the  Latin  integer ;  it  is  used  only  in
a  moral  sense,  and  is  best  rendered  by  "  up-
right;" the  Israelites  were  to  be  upright
and  sincere  with,  i.e.  in  relation  with,
Jehovah  their  God.

Ver.  14. — Though  the  heathen  whose
land  tbey  were  to  possess  sought  to  diviners
and  enchanters,  Israel  was  not  to  do  so ;  as
for  them  (the  nn^  at  the  beginning  of  the
clause  is  an  emphatic  nominative),  Jehovah
their  God  had  not  suffered  (\n},  given,
granted,  allowed)  them  to  do  such  things.

Vers.  15—22. — There  should  be  no  need
for  Israel  to  turn  to  heathen  soothsayers,  or
diviners,  or  such  like,  because  from  amongst
themselves,  of  their  own  brethren,  would
God  raise  up  prophets  like  unto  Moses,  who,
as  occasion  required,  would  reveal  to  them
what  God  willed  them  to  know.

Ver.  15.— A  Prophet.  The  Hebrew  word
80  rendered  (!«'?:)  is  a  derivative  from  a
verb  (N55),  which  signifies  to  tell,  to  an-
nounce ;  hence  the  primary  concept  of  the
word  is  that  of  announcer,  or  forth-speaker  •
and  to  this  the  word  "  prophet "  (Greek
irpo^TTis,  from  irpdiprifu,  I  speak  before  or
in  place  of)  closely  corresponds ;  the
prophet  is  one  who  speaks  in  the  place
of  God,  who  conveys  God's  word  to  men,
who  is  an  interpreter  of  God  to  men.
(As  illustrative  of  the  meaning  of  the
word,  cf.  Exod.  viL  1 ;  iv.  16.)  Hence
Abraham  is  called  a  prophet  (Gen.  xx.  7),
and  the  term  is  applied  to  the  patriarchs
generally  (Ps.  cv.  16);  God  conveyed  his
mind  to  them,  and  they  spoke  it  forth  to
others  (cf.  Amos  ili.  7).  Like  unto  me.
When  the  people  heard  the  voice  of  God
speaking  to  them  at  Sinai,  and  from  the
midst  of  the  fire  uttering  to  them  the  Ten
Words,  they  were  struck  with  terror,  and
besought  that  they  might  not  again  hear
that  awful  voice,  but  that  Moses  might  act
88  mediator  between  God  and  them — might
hear  what  God  should  say,  and  speak  it
untothem(ch.T.22 — 27).  Moses  thus  became
God's  prophet  to  the  people ;  and  of  this  he
reminds  them  here,  as  well  as  of  the  circum-
Btances  amid  which  he  entered  specially  on
this  office  (cf.  vers.  16,  17).  The  phrase,
"  like  unto  me,"  does  not  necessarily  imply


304


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[oh.  xvni.  1 — ^255,


that  the  prophet  who  ^ras  to  come  after
Moses  was  to  be  in  every  respect  the  same
as  he ;  all  that  is  indicated  is  that  he  would
act  as  Moses  had  acted  as  a  mediator  be-
tween God  and  the  people  in  the  way  of
conveying  his  will  to  them.

Ver.  16. — In  the  day  of  the  assembly  (cf.
ch.  ix.  14;  i.  4).

Ver.  18. — ^And  will  put  my  words  in  his
mouth ;  will  so  reveal  to  him  my  mind,  and
so  inspire  him  to  utter  it,  that  the  words  he
speaks  shall  be  rt^lly  my  words.  The  ques-
tion has  been  raised  whether,  by  the  Prophet
lite  unto  Moses,  here  promised  to  the  people
of  Israel,  is  to  be  understood  some  eminent
individual,  or  whether  this  refers  to  the  pro-
phetic SiaSox^l,  or  succession,  that  was  to  con-
tinue under  the  theocracy.  For  the  latter  the
context  strongly  speaks,  for  [1)  the  con-
trast between  what  God  here  forbids  the
Israelites  to  do,  viz.  to  resort  to  divineri
and  soothsayers,  and  the  provision  he
would  make  for  them  so  as  to  render  this
needless,  point  to  a,  succession  of  prophets
rather  than  to  one  individual ;  (2)  the  re-
ference in  what  follows  to  the  discrimination
of  false  prophets  from  true  prophets,  shows
that  a  multiplicity  and  a  succession  of
prophets  was  in  the  view  of  the  speaker,  not
a  single  individual ;  and  (3)  as  a  succession
of  priests,  of  judges,  and  of  kings  was  con-
templated in  this  part  of  the  Mosaic  legis-
lation, the  presumption  is  tliat  a  suaoei^'"^
also  of  prophets  was  contemplated.  -  .  <^e
same  time,  the  use  of  the  singular  here  is
remarkable,  for  nowhere  else  is  the  singular,
nabhi,  employed  tn  <iesignate  more  than  one
individusi;  and  this  suggests  that  the  re-
ference here  may  be  to  some  individual  in
whom  not  only  was  the  succession  to  culmi-
nate as  in  its  crowu  and  eminence,  but
whose  spirit  was  to  pervade  the  whole
succession, — that  each  member  of  it  should
exercise  his  functions  only  as  that  Spirit
which  was  in  them  did  signify  (1  Pet.  i.  11).
It  is  possible  also,  as  O.  von  Gerlach  has
suggested,  that  "Prophet"  here  may  be
used  as  "  seed  "  is  in  Gen.  iii.  15,  and  that
this  is  a  prediction  of  Christ  as  the  True
Prophet,  just  as  the  assurance  to  Eve  was
a  prediction  of  the  Messiah,  who,  as  the
Head  and  Crown  of  the  "  godly  seed,"  should
end  the  conflict  with  the  serpent  and  his
seed  by  a  crushing  victory.  It  is  to  be
considered  also  that,  whilst  the  words  "  like
unto  me  "  do  not  necessarily  imply  a  resem-
blance in  oil  respects  between  Moses  and
the  Prophet  here  promised,  and  whilst  they
may  be  well  applied  to  One  superior  in
many  leipsots  to  lloiea,  it  would  b«  taking


them  at  mnch  below  their  real  worth  wera
we  to  understand  them  of  one  greatly  in-
ferior to  Moses,  as  all  the  prophets  who
succeeded  him  in  Israel  were  until  the
Chief  came  (ch.  xxxiv.  10 ;  Heb.  iii.  1 — 6).
Finally,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
Jews  expected  that  the  Messiah  would
appear  as  the  Prophet  by  pre-eminence,  and
that  they  founded  that  expectation  on  the
promise  here  recorded  (cf.  John  i.  21 ;  Tu
14;  Acts  iii.  22—26;  vii.  37).  It  may  be
added  that  our  Lord  seems  to  apply  this
to  himself,  when  he  says  to  the  Jews,
"  There  is  one  that  accuseth  you,  even
Moses,  in  whom  ye  trust.  For  had  ye  be-
lieved Moses,  ye  would  have  believra  me ;
for  he  wrote  of  me"  (John  v.  45,  46;  cf.
also  xi.  48 — 50).  How  early  and  how  wide-
spread was  the  expectation  that  the  Messiah
would  come  as  a  prophet,  may  be  inferred
&om  the  existence  of  this  among  the  Sama-
ritans (John  iv.  25).  It  is  to  be  concluded,
then,  that  this  promise  has  reference  ulti-
mately to  the  Messiah,  the  Great  Bevealer  of
God,  between  whom  and  Moses  there  should
be  a  long  succession  of  prophets,  so  that
there  should  always  be  a  medium  of  Divine
communication  between  Jehovah  and  his
people.

Vers.  19— 22.— To  the  Prophet  who  should
thus  speak  to  the  people  all  that  God  should
command  him,  they  were  to  pay  the  utmost
deference,  and  to  his  words  they  were  to
render  implicit  obedience.

Ver.  19. — I  will  require  it  of  him ;  I  will
judge  him  and  punish  his  disobedience
(cf.  Gen.  xlii.  22;  2  Sam.  iv.  11;  Ps.  x.
13,  etc.).

Ver.  20. — If,  however,  a  prophet  should
presume  to  speak  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord
what  the  Lord  had  not  commanded  him  to
speak,  or  if  he  should  speak  in  the  name  of
other  gods,  not  only  was  no  regard  to  be
paid  to  his  words,  but  he  was  himself  to  be
treated  as  a  blasphemer,  aud  to  be  put  to
death.

Vers.  21,  22.— The  test  by  which  it  was
to  be  discovered  which  was  the  true  prophet
and  which  the  false,  was  the  fulfilment  or
non-fulfilment  of  his  prediction.  The  re-
ference here  is  to  the  prediction  of  proxi-
mate events — events  that  were  to  happen
within  a  limited  period,  but  which  were  not
such  as  one  nut  divinely  instructed  could
foresee.  When  such  came  to  pass,  the  pre-
tensions of  the  prophet  ware  thereby  sub-
stantiated, and  his  authority  established  (of.
1  Sam.  iii.  19 ;  John  ii.  18,  etc.).  This  was  a
more  certain  test  than  such  as  was  offered
by  signs  aud  wonders  (oh.  xiii.  2,  etc).


rp  tvuL  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  305


HOMILETICa

Verg.  1 — 8. — The  support  of  the  ministry  the  duty  of  Oofs  people.  In  •  note  on  a
corresponding  passage  in  Numb,  xviii.  21,  22,  Dr.  Jameson  remarks,  "  Neither  the
priests  nor  the  Levites  were  to  possess  any  allotments  of  land,  but  to  depend  entirely
upon  him  who  liberally  provided  for  them-  out  of  his  own  portion ;  and  this  law  was
subservient  to  many  important  purposes,  such  as  that,  being  exempted  froiu  the  cares
and  laboTirs  of  worldly  business,  they  might  be  exclusively  devoted  to  his  service ;
that  a  bond  of  mutual  love  and  attachment  might  be  formed  between  the  people  and
ths  Levites,  who,  as  performing  religious  services  for  the  people,  derived  their  sub-
sistence from  them ;  and  further,  that,  being  the  more  easily  dispersed  among  the
different  tribes,  they  might  be  more  useful  in  instructing  and  directing  the  people."
This  suggestive  note  seems  to  us  to  contain  the  pith  of  the  Mosaic  instructions  con-
cerning the  maintenance  of  the  Levites.  (For  the  several  details,  see  Exposition.)  We
can  scarcely  fail  to  see  in  this  passage  principles  far  wider  in  their  application  than  to
the  Jewish  people  alone,  and  reaching  much  further  onward  than  the  times  of  the  old
covenant.  And  though,  as  it  falls  to  the  lot  of  the  preacher  to  expound  these  prin-
ciples, it  may  not  quite  fall  within  his  preference  to  do  so,  if  he  is,  like  the  Levites,
supported  by  the  contributions  of  the  people,  yet,  when  he  is  continuously  expounding
the  Word  of  God,  he  may  not  omit  to  teach  the  people  that  "  he  that  is  taught  in  the
Word  should  communicate  unto  him  that  teacheth  in  all  good  things."  This  is  part  of
the  "  counsel  of  God,"  and  should  not  be  withheld,  since  it  is  not  for  his  own  sake,
but  for  the  sake  of  the  entire  ministry  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  for  which,  if  he  is  faithful,  he
will  plead.  The  principles  which  may  be  expounded  by  the  ministers  of  the  New
Testament  are  these —

I.  A  GODLY,  ABLE  MINI8TBT  IS  THE  WANT  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  True,  there  are  now
no  sacrifices  to  be  offered,  nor  is  there  any  comphcated  ritual  of  service  to  be  performed;
but  there  is  a  mighty  work  to  be  done  in  heralding  the  gospel  "  to  every  creature,"  and
in  "  building  up  the  body  of  Christ."  And  so  long  as  sin  and  ignorance  prevail,  so
long  will  the  people  need  those  who  will  lead  the  way  in  seeking  their  expulsion  and
extinction.  For  this  end  our  Lord  has  instituted  a  New  Testament  ministry.  The
work  now  to  be  fulfilled  is  that  of  teaching  and  preaching  Jesus  Christ  (Bph.  iv.  1 — 16 ;
1  Cor.  ix.).  "  Faithful  men,  able  to  teach,"  are  to  be  appointed.  These  are  the  quali-
fications. The  Church  needs  no  priesthood  in  it.  It  is  itself  the  priesthood  for  the
world.  Ministers  do  not  come  now  in  a  family,  a  tribe,  or  line.  The  figment  of
apostolical  succession  is  "  less  than  nothing,  and  vanity."  It  is  not  by  the  law  of  "  a
carnal  commandment "  that  any  ministry  is  valid  now.  But  wherever  God's  Spirit
fills  a  man  with  holy  yearning  for  this  work,  where  the  needful  gifts  are  imparted,
where  God's  providence  leads  and  clears  the  way,  and  the  divinely  inspired  voice  of  a
firee  Christian  people  says  to  him,  "  Come  and  be  our  teacher  and  guide  in  the  ways  of
the  Lord,"  there  are  calls  to  a  ministry  such  as  cannot  be  mistaken,  and  such  as  ought
not  to  be  ignored.  And  when,  on  such  a  ministry,  the  seals  of  Divine  approval  are  set,
when  the  minister  can  see  the  law  of  Christ  which  is  promulgated  by  bis  lips,  repro-
duced in  men's  hearts  and  lives,  when  he  can  see  many  a  wanderer  reclaimed  through
his  pleading  and  prayers, — then  can  his  ministry  show  a  like  validity  even  with  that  of

•  Paul,  for  he,  like  him,  can  point  to  one  and  another  and  aay,  "  If  I  be  not  an  apostle
unto  others,  yet  doubtless  I  am  to  you,  for  the  seal  of  mine  apostleship  are  ye  in  the
Lord."

II.  The  ministet  op  the  Word  demands  the  devotion  of  the  entibb  life.
We  by  no  means  intend  here  that  none  should  teach  or  preach  but  those  who  can  give
their  whole  time  thereto.  But  that,  as  a  part  of  the  application  of  the  "  division  of
labour  "  in  the  Church,  the  demands  on  those  who  make  the  ministry  of  the  Word  their
care  are  such,  that  only  the  entire  consecration  of  their  life  to  it  will  enable  them  fittingly
to  meet  them.  To  take  the  oversight  of  the  flock  of  God :  to  give  unto  each  one  their
portion  of  meat  in  due  season:  to  visit  the  fatherless  and  widow,  the  poor  and  the  rick :
to  observe  the  signs  of  the  times :  to  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do,  and  to  direct  them
ir  loing  it :  to  keep  abreast  of  the  thinking  of  the  day,  whether  helpful  or  adTerse :  and

nEDTEBONOMV.  X


306  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xvni.  1— 22.

so  to  declare  the  wliole  counsel  of  God,  as  by  manifestation  of  the  truth  to  commend
himself  to  every  conscience; — all  these  things  go  tu  make  up  a  worli  so  varied,  so
momentous,  so  exhausting,  that  nothing  less  than  "  giviug  himself  wholly  "  to  it  can
enable  any  man  even  approximately  to  discharge  it.

III.  This  being  the  case,  it  is  imi-ekativb  that  the  minister  should  not  ir
ENTANGLED  IN  IMPEDING  CARES.  The  Levites  Were  not  to  have  great  estates  that
might  draw  off  their  interest  from  the  duties  of  their  office,  nor  were  they  to  be  left  at
an  uncertainty  respecting  the  supply  of  their  temporal  neid.  Even  so  now.  It  will
greatly  fettir  and  hamper  a  minister  if  he  is  entangled  with  the  affairs  of  his  life,
whether  by  having  so  much  on  his  hands  that  his  time  is  absorbed  in  secular,  which
ought  to  be  devoted  to  sacred,  things ;  or  by  having  so  little  on  which  he  can  rely,  that
the  anxiety  about  feeding  the  peojile  with  living  bread,  is  diverted  from  its  proper
channel,  by  anxiety  about  having  the  "  bread  that  perisheth  "  for  himself  and  his.

IV.  Consequently  it  is  an  ordinance  or  God  that  the  ministry,  which  is  for
THE  PEOPLE,  should  BE  THE  CARE  OP  THE  PEOPLE.  This  may  be  set  on  seveial
grounds.  1.  It  is  manifestly  right.  If  a  man  gives  up  all  ways  of  securing  temporal
comforts  for  the  sake  of  serving  the  people,  they  are  bound  to  secure  him  the  temporal
comforts  in  some  other  way.  2.  The  Apostle  Paul  distinctly  lays  it  down  as  an
appointment  by  the  Lord  Jesus  (1  Oor.  ix.  14).  (Paul  waived  this  right,  rather  than
hinder  the  gospel  by  pressing  it,  as  is  now  done  under  like  circumstances ;  but  it  was
a  right,  nevertheless,  and  a  Divine  appointment.)  3.  Wherever  a  people  cause  a
minister  to  be  embarrassed  in  temporalities,  they  will  suffer  for  it.  The  minister's
work,  teaching,  and  preaching  will  all  bear  the  traces  of  such  embarrassment,  and
will  be  the  weaker  for  it.  4.  This  Divine  ordinance  helps  to  promote  the  mutual
care  of  miuister  and  people  for  each  other.  They  reap  his  spiritual  things;  he  reaps
their  carnal  things.  5.  There  is  also  thus  a  hi£;h  and  holy  spijitual  education  of  tiie
people,  in  calling  out  their  own  kindly  and  just  activities  to  uphold  that  ministry  by
which  they  themselves  are  upheld.  The  mini-try  is  not  to  be  found  for  them,  but  to
be  maintained  by  them.  Thus  there  is  seen  to  be  a  guard  against  abuse  of  position
on  either  side.

V.  Israel  was  to  guard  its  own  priesthood  as  being  itself  a  priesthood
FOR  the  world.  So  Churches  are  to  guard  the  honour  of  their  own  ministry,  because
they  have  a  ministry  for  the  world.  It  is  not  for  the  ministers'  own  sakes  that  they
are  to  be  thus  cared  for,  but  on  account  of  the  high  and  holy  cause  which  they  represent,
and  which  they  seek,  however  imperfectly,  to  maintain.  They  are  to  be  esteemed  very
highly  in  love /or  their  work's  sake ;  for  the  work  which  they  fulfil  is  that  which  is  purify-
ing and  saving  the  world.  It  is,  in  fact,  by  thus  supporting  a  ministry  that  the  Church
is  fulfilling  its  commission,  "to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature."  Of  course,  it  follows
from  all  this,  that  a  ministry  can  claim  such  and  such  support,  only  so  far  as  it  is
carrying  out  the  Divine  intent,  or  seeking  in  all  fidelity  to  do  so.  It  is  not  that  God
has  put  clergy  as  a  kind  of  official  police  over  the  people;  but  that  those  who  love
righteousness  are  to  show  it  by  upholding  the  preaching  of  righteousness,  and  that
those  who  love  their  Saviour'B  Name  are  to  sustain  the  heralds  of  that  Name,  both  at
home  and  abroad.

Vera.  9—14.—"  SpiriinaUsm  "  condemned.  In  the  verses  forming  this  paragraph,
there  are  nine  terms  or  phrases,  each  with  its  own  special  meaning,'  pointing  to  some
pagan  superstition,  against  which  Moses  is  warning  the  people.  The  variety  and
number  of  such  terms  show  us  how  great  a  hold  a  spurious  "  spiritualism"  had  upon
tiie  people.  The  phenomena  connected  therewith,  however,  present  to  us  an  aspect  of
history  that  is  worthy  of  careful  study.  In  some  sort,  the  pagan  customs  of  olden  timi  s
connected  with  divination  may  seem  so  completely  out  of  date,  that  it  may  be  thought
useless  for  the  preacher  to  allude  to  them  now.  But  though  some  details  connecied
therewith  may  vary,  yet  the  two  purposes  for  which  men  "divined"  of  old,  are  still

'  The  student  may  with  advantage  consult  Gesenius  for  the  elucidation  of  each  term ;
pp.  603,  736,  644,544,  418,  258,  18,  335,  209  (Bagster'a  edit.),  contain  the  explanation
required.  The  following  works  may  be  consulted : — Wallace  on  '  Miracles  and  Spiritualism;'
Crook  on  '  The  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism ; '  Asa  Mahan  on  '  Spirituidism.'


OH.  ivm.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  Of  DEUTERONOMY.  dOI

sought  to  be  accomplished,  viz. :  (1)  the  ascertainment  of  destiny ;  and  (2)  a  peep
into  the  invisible  realm  of  the  departed.  And  not  only  so ;  but  the  methods  of  a
modem  so-called  "  spiritualism  "  are  so  nearly  analogous  to  those  of  ancient  times,  that
it  is  as  needful  for  the  preacher  now  to  warn  the  peojile  against  them,  as  it  was  for
Moses  to  warn  the  Hebrews.  Even  among  them,  the  roothold  of  this  superstition  was
so  strong,  that  Isaiah  had  to  caution  the  men  of  his  time  against  it,  and  to  remind  them
of  the  more  excellent  way  (see  Isa.  viii.  19,  20).  But  it  is  very  remarkable  that  neither
Moses  nor  Isaiah  cloises  up  the  matter  at  once  by  saying,  "  You  may  as  well  give  up  all
that,  for  you  cannot  possibly  hold  any  communication  with  the  departed."  Neither  of
them  suggests  that  the  invisible  world  is  absolutely  closed  against  all  possible  access.
Various  reasons  for  this  may  be  surmised.  It  may  be  that  the  question  of  the  abstract
possibility  or  otherwise  of  communications  with  the  de|)arted,  formed  no  part  of  God's
revelation  to  Moses ;  or  that  God  has  not  seen  fit  at  any  time  to  inform  us  thereon,
deeming  an  education  on  the  moral  bi'arings  of  the  question,  of  far  greater  moment  than
intelligence  on  its  physical  or  metaphysical  aspects.  Any  way,  certain  it  is,  that  we
are  not  called  on  to  ask.  Can  we  converse  with  the  dead  ?  But  we  are  rather  forbidden
to  attempt  it.  Five  reasons  are  suggested  as  we  compare  and  unite  the  teachings  of
Isaiah  and  Muses.

I.  It  18  UNREASONABLE.  "  Should  Dot  8  people  seek  unto  their  God  ?  "  If  they  wish
to  commune  with  spirit,  there  is  one  Great  Infinite  Spirit  with  whom  they  can  hold
fellowship,  who  has  said,  "  Call  on  me  in  the  day  of  trouble."  Prom  him  we  may  get
at  any  time  all  needful  light  on  the  daily  path,  and  all  needful  intercourse  with  the
spiritual  world.  We  may  hear  a  voice  behind  us,  saying,  "  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in
it."  And  if  we  may  consult  the  Great  Supreme,  why  leave  the  highest  authority,  for
the  sake  of  consulting  any  others  ?

II.  It  IS  UNNECESSARY.  Por  what  Is  that  We  really  need  ?  Light /or  the  future,  but
not  light  on  it ;  and  light  concerning  the  invisible  world,  but  not  ligi^t  into  it.  And  these
are  given  to  us  in  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  Word  (see  next  Homily).  The  connec-
tion between  this  paragraph  and  the  next  should  not  be  lost  sight  of.  Moses  says,
"  The  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  Prophet,"  etc.  (ver.  15),  i.e.  not  only  one
Prophet  in  the  fulness  of  time,  but  also  from  time  to  time  as  may  be  needed,  prophet  after
prophet  shall  be  sent  you  t6  direct  you  in  the  truth,  so  that  you  will  have  no  excuse
whatever  for  seeking  light  elsewhere,  or  in  any  forbidden  ways.  If  that  was  true  of
Israel,  how  far  more  is  it  true  of  us  1  What  a  fulness  of  light  and  truth  have  we  in
Christ  I  And  now  that  we  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One  to  teach  us  the  deep
things  of  God,  it  is  a  wildly  foolish  and  needless  step  to  go  knocking  at  the  gates  of
the  invisible  world  1

III.  It  is  useless.  It  might  very  fairly  be  asked,  "If  you  get  an  answer,  how  are
you  to  verify  its  worth?  "  But  Isaiah  practically  impales  the  "  spiritualists  "  on  the
horns  of  a  dilemma.  "  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony  :  if  they  speak  not  according
to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them ; "  i.e.  supposing  you  consult  the
dead,  and  get  an  answer  from  them,  that  answer  will  either  accord  with  "  the  Law
and  the  testimony,"  or  it  will  not.  If  it  does,  you  are  no  better  off  than  you  were
before,  for  you  had  it  in  the  Book  before  yon  inquired.  If  it  does  not,  still  you  are  no
better  off,  for  "  it  is  because  there  is  no  light  in  them,"  and  if  they  have  no  light,  they
certainly  cannot  give  any  to  you  1  So  that  either  way  the  inquiry  after  the  dead  is
utterly  useless.  And  besides,  who  ever  heard  of  anything  alleged  to  be  communicated
by  "the  spirits"  which  contained  aught  that  was  not  previously  known?  We  have
an  infinitely  more  sure  "  word  of  prophecy,"  and  we  shall  be  guilty  of  the  veriest  folly  if
we  forsake  it  for  tha  random  guessings  of  "  spiritualism."    Hence—

IV.  It  is  sinful.  The  preacher  may  press  this  on  the  following  grounds.  1.  It  is
a  wayward  effort  to  force  an  opening  into  a  region  which  God  as  yet  sees  fit  to  conceal
from  view.  2.  It  comes  of  a  wish  to  get  light  on  future  issues  rather  than  on  present
duty.  Duty  is  ours,  events  are  God's.  3.  It  involves  the  neglect  of  a  rule  wliich  God
has  given,  and  a  search  after  one  which  he  has  not.  4.  It  is  a  waste  of  times.  5.  It
puts  a  prying  curiosity  in  the  place  of  a  lowly,  loyal  obedience.  6.  It  springs
out  of  a  guilty  unbelief  or  from  dissatisfaction  with  the  ways  of  God.  Why,  even
among  the  heathen  who  knew  not  God,  it  was  regarded  by  him  as  an  "  abomina-
tion i "  how  murh  more  must  he  so  regard  it  among  a  people  to  whom  he  has  revealed


308  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  ["h.  xvin.  1— 22.

himself  in  deepest,  tenderest  love  ?  Have  men  not  yet  learnt  that  it  is  mercy  which
hides  the  future,  and  shrouds  in  veil  the  realm  of  the  dead  ?  Who  of  us  could  bear  to
have  either  curtain  drawn  aside  ?  Oh !  it  is  no  wonder  that  this  spirit  of  false  inquiry
should  he  forbidden  by  God.  We  should  frown  on  it  in  others,  sternly  and  constantly,
and  it  should  not  be  so  much  as  named  among  us  as  becometh  saints.

V.  Thebk  is  another  and  a  better  way  or  getting  ail  the  light  wb  need.  "  TTie
Law  and  the  testimony."  Here  are  the  words  of  God  which  are  to  direct  us.  Here  we
may  "  inquire  of  God,"  and  to  the  lowly,  childlike  heart  the  Book  will  be  full  of  divinest,
holiest  teaching.  It  will  give  us  light  on  the  daily  path,  and  guide  us  to  a  course  which
has  "  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."  It  abounds  with
promises  that  will  cheer  life's  gloom,  and  chase  away  the  darkness  even  from  the  grave.
It  opens  up  immortality  and  life.  By  its  light  we  know  that  our  departed  ones  in
Christ,  though  absent  from  the  body,  are  present  with  the  Lord.  Cheered  by  its  words
of  hope,  we  can  sing,  "  Thou  slialt  guide  me  with  thy  counsel,  and  afterwardf!  receive  me
to  glory  1 "  We  are  not  treading  uncertainly.  We  walk  not  at  random.  We  are  not
belplcssly  drifting  down  a  current.  We  are  "  firm  on  the  rock."  We  are  surrounded
with  liglit  from  him  who  is  "  the  Light  of  the  world  ; "  and  with  all  this,  cannot  we
wait  a  while,  and  let  him  who  is  redeeming  us  reveal  the  mysteries  of  the  spirit  world
to  us  in  his  own  good  time  rather  than  our  own  ?  Hush  !  these  longings  to  know
buforehand.  Let  us  keep  to  the  written  Word.  It  tells  us  quite  as  much  as  we  can
bear  to  know  while  in  tiiese  tabernacles  of  clay.  Be  it  ours  to  study  the  Book  of
God  :  to  take  it  not  only  as  a  guide,  but  as  ths  guide ;  not  simply  as  the  only  guide,  but
as  the  all-sufficient  one,  "  until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away."

Vers.  15 — 22. — Ood  speaking  to  man  fhrough,  man.  The  Exposition,  as  well  as  the
Commentaries  of  Jameson  and  Keil,  may,  with  great  advantage,  be  consulted  on  this
passage,  and  also  Hengstenberg's  '  Christology,' vol.  i.  pp.  96 — 107.  Our  brief  homi-
letic  sketches  assume  that  the  student  has  already  mastered  the  exegesis,  and  compre-
hended the  intent  of  the  passnge.  Its  connection  with  the  preceding  paragraph  is
obvious.  The  people  had  been  warned  against  having  recourse  to  familiar  spirits,  etc.,
on  the  ground  that  such  practices  were  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord  their  God.  But
Moses  would  not  only  warn  the  people  off  the  wrong  ground,  he  would  direct  them  to
the  right,  by  showing  them  the  completeness  of  the  Divine  arrangements  for  supply-
ing them  from  time  to  time  with  all  the  religious  teaching  they  would  require,  in
a  way  far  more  adapted  to  their  condition  and  circumstances  than  by  any  unveiling
of  the  secrets  of  the  invisible  world.  They  are  reminded  that  when  God  came  in
grandeur  to  speak  to  them  at  Mount  Sinai,  they  could  not  bear  the  sight  nor  the  sound.
I'hey  begged  that  Moses  would  speak  to  them,  and  not  Jehovah ; "  lest  wo  die,"  were
their  own  words.  So  that  it  was  clear  they  would  be  entirely  unable  to  bear  anything
approximating  to  a  full  disclosure. of  the  Divine.  It  must  be  toned  and  tempered  within
the  limits  of  their  capacities  of  reception  and  of  their  powers  of  endurance.  Otherwise,  it
would  fail  of  its  end,  by  crushing  those  whom  it  was  meant  to  train.  Hence  he  who
"  knoweth  our  frame  "  graciously  promises  to  speak  hereafter  to  the  people  in  their  own
dialect,  as  it  were,  and  on  their  own  level,  by  "  raising  them  up  a  Prophet,  from  the
midst  of  them,  of  their  brethren,  like  unto  Moses ; "  and  thus  would  the  needful  messages
from  God  be  kept  up,  making  it  quite  uimecessary  for  them  to  make  use  of  unau-
thorized means  of  getting  supernatural  lifjht.  There  would  be,  from  time  to  time,  one
prophet  laised  up  after  another,  culminating  in  Mm  to  whom  they  all  gave  witness.
Thus  our  theme  is,  "  Qod  speaking  to  man  through  man."

I.  Unless  a  Divine  revelation  were  attempered  to  cub  weakness,  wb  could
not  bear  it.  The  cry  of  Israel  at  Sinai,  "  Let  not  God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die,"
is  a  "  touch  of  nature."  No  man  could  bear  the  full  blaze  of  God's  glory.  Unless
there  were  a  "  hiding  of  God's  power,"  we  should  be  crushed  by  the  revelation  of  it.
We  could  no  more  endure  the  full  disclosure  of  the  Divine  than  our  eyes  could  bear  to
gaze  on  the  splendours  of  a  noonday  sun.  Hence  God,  "  who  knows  our  frame,"  and
who,  therelore,  knows  what  we  can  bear,  meets  our  weakness  by  bis  tender  mercy.

II.  In   order   that   the   revelation   may   be   buck   as  we   can   receive,   GrOD   HAI

SPOKEN  TO  MEN  THROUGH  MAN.  As  Sinai's  terror,  with  the  voice  of  Jehovah,  was  too
much  for  Israel,  Moses  says,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a  Prophet  from


cH.  xviiL  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEROKOMf.  809

the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy  brethren,  like  unto  me."  Each  of  these  phrases  is  emphatic,
and  is  intended  as  the  antithesis  to  the  notion  of  overwhelming  force.  The  meaning  of
looses  is  twofold.  1.  There  shall  be  from  time  to  time  a  prophet  sent  to  you,
through  whom  you  may  hear  the  voice  of  God.  2.  There  shall  be  hereafter  a  great
Prophet,  who  shall  be  to  you  as  the  living  Voice  of  God;  but  he  shall  be  also  "of
your  brethren,  like  unto  me."  We  know  how  true  both  are.  There  was  from  time  to
time  a  line  of  prophets  who  spake  for  God.  There  has  come  to  earth  a  Prophet  greater
than  all  beside.  They  always  pointed  onward  to  another ;  he,  never,  save  as  a
heavenly  gift  from  him  was  by  him  Held  in  reserve,  even  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
Thus  God  has  come  into  communion  with  our  race,  to  reveal  his  mind  and  will.

III.  New  messages,  coming  in  a  way  so  suited  to  us,  from  so  condescending
A  God,  bring  their  own  authority  with  them.  (Ver.  19.)  The  message  is  not  to  be
sot  at  nought  because  the  voice  which  speaks  it  is  but  human.  If  a  prophet  speaks  only
what  the  Lord  hath  spoken,  though  he  may  be  a  weak  and  frail  instrument,  though  the
burden  of  his  message  may  be  almost  more  than  he  can  bear,  yet,  being  borne  along  by
the  Holy  Ghost  to  utter  such  words,  thiey  come  with  Divine  authority.  "  The  treasure
is  put  into  earthen  vessels  ; "  but  though  the  vessel  is  earthy,  the  treasure  is  Divine.

rV.  This  authority  beaches  its  climax  in  the  mikistby  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  Such,  surely,  is  the  import  of  the  scene  known  as  "the  Transfiguration  "  (Matt.
xvii.).  Moses  and  Elias  are  there — the  representatives  of  the  Law  and  the  prophets.
They  speak  of  the  decease  which  Christ  should  accompli.'ih  at  Jerusalem.  Presently  they
vanish  from  the  spot,  and  no  one  is  left  with  the  disciples  save  "  Jesus  only."  Then  a
voice  out  of  the  cloud  said,  " Hear  him"  In  Acts  iii.  20 — 26,  we  have  the  Apostle
Peter's  application  of  the  very  passage  before  us  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Prophet
to  whom  all  the  rest  did  point.  (See  also  Heb.  i.  1 — 31;  and  for  New  Testament
teaching  as  to  the  authority  of  Christ,  and  the  iniporlance  of  hearing  and  obeying  him,
see  Heb.  ii.,  ix.,  x.)  So  full  is  the  revelation  of  God  by  Christ,  that  it  is  not  only  a
revelation  through  him,  but  in  him  (John  i.  1 — 18).

From  these  four  principles  involved  in  the  para^^raph,  there  are  four  inferences  which
may  be  safely  and  profitably  drawn.  1.  If  the  voice  of  God  speaks  to  us  suitably  and
adequately  through  the  medium  of  human  voices,  then  it  is  utteily  needless  for  us  to
seek  information  and  light  by  any  forced  attempts  at  gaining  messages  from  the
invisible  world  (see  preceding  Homily).  2.  We  are  here  furnished  with  a  test  as  to
what  is  truly  a  Divine  message  or  no.  There  is,  in  fact,  a  twofold  test.  It  is  partly
moral  and  partly  physical.  (1)  Partly  moral  (ver.  22, "  When,"  etc.).  It  is  as  if  Moses
said,  "  You  only  require  a  guide  in  case  a  '  propiiet  speaketh  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord,'
for  if  he  does  not,  you  know  what  to  do  (cf.  ch.  xiii.).  If  he  speaks  in  the  name  of
other  gods,  you  must  reject  him  at  once."  Note :  Any  supposed  message  from  God
which  violates  the  dictates  of  enlightened  reason  and  conscience,  must  be  set  aside.
(2)  Partly  physical.  If  a  prophet  speaks  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord,  they  are  then  to
watch  and  see  if  the  thing  comes  to  pass ;  and  if  not,  then  they  may  be  sure  that  the
prophet  is  a  mere  pretender;  "he  hath  spoken  presumptuously."  3.  Here  is  an  antidote
to  fear.  "  Thou  shalt  not  be  afraid  of  him."  What  is  the  connection  between  this
and  the  preceding  ?  Is  it  not  this  ?  Suppose  that  the  "  prophet "  declares  that  this  or
that  is  about  to  happen,  do  not  give  way  to  excitement  and  alarm.  Follow  the  voice  iif
God,  of  which  you  are  sure,  and  obey  that,  and  come  what  will,  all  is  well  with  yon.
You  can  afibrd  to  do  this ;  "  Study  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  your  own  business,"  and
whether  what  the  prophet  declares  come  to  pass  or  no,  you  are  sure  to  be  safe,  if
you  have  maintained  unswerving  loyalty  to  God.  Nothing  can  harm  you.  So
with  us  under  the  New  Testament  dispensation.  Many  affix  dates  to  this  or  that.
We  heed  them  not.  We  have  but  to  "  wait  for  the  Son  of  Gbd  from  heaven."  4.  The
reception  of  the  Divine  message  is  a  part  of  that  obedience  which  every  man  owes  to
high  Heaven.  Its  acceptance  is  not  merely  the  adoption  of  a  number  of  opinions.
Oh  no  I  Opinions  are  one  thing,  convictions  are  another.  A  man  "  holds  "  opinions,
but  convictions  "hold"  a  man.  His  conscience  is  held  fast  in  their  grip.  Even  so  it
is  with  those  who  receive  the  words  of  the  living  God  as  their  guide  through  life  to
immortality.  Their  whole  being  is  held  firmly  in  their  strong  yet  loving  and  tender
hold.  A  sceptic  once  said  to  the  writer,  "  I  tell  you  candidly,  that  if  I  wanted  to  poinl
out  the  b«'8t  specimens  of  humanity,  I  should  point  to  some  of  youar  way  oj  Ounking."


310  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xvm.  1— 22.

So  he  put  it,  "  of  your  way  of  thinking."  How  little  does  the  outsider  or  unbeliever
dream  of  the  hold  the  Father's  words  have  on  us  1  Our  whole  being  takes  shape  and
outlook  from  them.  Our  fealty  to  him  whom  we  know  and  love  supremely,  makM  "  the
law  of  his  mouth  to  be  better  to  us  than  thousands  of  gold  and  Bilver."


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 8. —  GocTs  provision  for  the  priests  and  Levites.  From  the  imitations  A
the  monarchy,  Moses  next  turns  to  the  provision  for  the  "priests  the  Levites,  and  &!!
the  tribe  of  Levi."  They  were  not  to  receive  any  estate  in  Canaan  beyond  the  suburbs
of  certain  cities.  They  were  to  take  "  the  Lord  as  their  inheritance."  We  have
already  seen  that  Palestine  was  a  good  land  for  training  up  a  spiritual  people ;  it  was
a  land  where  dependence  upon  God  was  constantly  enforced.  But  among  this  people,
thus  invited  to  depend  upon  God,  there  was  a  tribe  whose  dependence  upon  Gud  was
to  be  further  stimulated  by  the  absence  of  any  tangible  inheritance.  Their  life  was
thus  to  be  a  life  of  trust  in  God's  continual  care,  in  these  circumstances  the  Lord
made  certain  laws  about  the  priests'  due.  He  took  good  care  of  the  tribe  that  trusted
him.  It  has  been  supposed  that  the  animals,  of  which  the  priests  were  to  have  a
definite  part,  weie  not  merely  sacrifices,  but  also  those  privately  slaughtered,  and  the
words  (najii  'nai)  translated  "  them  that  offer  a  sacrifice  "  will  bear  the  rendering  "  those
who  slaughter  animals."  Still,  it  seems  more  probable  that  it  was  by  the  central  altar
that  the  priests  ard  Levites  were  to  live.  Assuming  this,  then,  the  following  lessons
are  here  taught.

I.  Those  who  trust  God  shall  never  be  disappointed  in  their  allotted
PORTION.  For  as  a  matter  of  fact,  "  the  shoulder,  the  two  cheeks,  and  the  maw  "  were
deemed  dainty  portions  of  the  animal.  The  best  portions  ascended  to  God  in  the  altar
fire,  and  then  the  second  best  were  assigned  to  the  priests  and  Levites,  while  the
offerer  was  content  with  what  was  left.  God  and  his  ministers  were  regarded  as  the
guests  of  the  Jewish  worshippers,  and,  as  the  guests  enjoy  the  best  which  we  can  offer
in  the  exercise  of  our  hospitality,  the  support  of  the  priests  and  Levites  was  amply
secured.  These  dues  of  the  priests  and  Levites  seem  to  have  been  regularly  paid  while
the  people  remained  true  to  Gt>d ;  of  course,  their  support  would  suffer  in  sinful  and
idolatrous  times,  yet,  even  when  they  suffered  with  the  neglect  of  God's  altar,  it  was
Buffering  with  God.

And  as  a  rule  those  who  trust  God  are  not  disappointed  with  his  provision.  Even
when  it  is  limited  in  amount,  he  is  sure  to  give  sublime  compensations.  Though
ministerial  support  is  not  what  it  ought  to  be,  there  is  no  class  of  men  who  enjoy  lUe
so  much  as  God's  servants.

II.  Those  who  are  the  Lord's  chosen  servants  are  called  pbe-eminentlt  to
THE  LIFE  OF  TRUST.  There  is  a  great  temptation  to  encircle  ourselves  with  so  much
worldly  possession  as  that  tiust  in  Gud  will  be  difficult  and  seem  superfluous.  In  other
words,  there  is  an  effort  to  be  able  to  live  by  sight  rather  than  by  faith.  But  the
Master  whom  we  serve  is  realized  by  faith,  and  his  kingdom  must  be  propagated  by
faith.  Heijce  he  so  airanges  the  lot  of  his  servants  that  a  loud  call  for  faith  is  always
ringing  in  their  ears,  and  they  should  never  neglect  that  call.  The  priests  and  Levites
were  at  liberty  to  purchase  land  and  leave  it  to  their  children,  and  doubtless  many  of
them  so  far  "  made  assurance  doubly  sure,  and  took  a  bond  of  fate."  Yet  the  life  of
faith,  the  dependence  upon  God's  altar,  was  better  and  wholesomer  than  the  life
of  sight.

III.  The  people  had  no  right  to  withhold  the  priests'  and  Levites'  duk

BECAUSE   OF   ANY   PRIVATE   PATRIMONT   INDIVIDUALS   MIGHT   POSSESS.      A    gOOd   deal    of

deficient  ministerial  support  is  due  to  the  people  very  unfairly  discounting  private
incomes  and  often  exaggerating  them,  so  as  to  save  themselves.  Ministers  may  inherit
means  through  the  kindly  consideration  of  parents  and  friends ;  but  this  is  no  reason
why  people  should  hold  their  hand  in  the  matter  of  ministerial  support.  The  Lord
specially  provided  that  the  Levite  (ver.  8)  should  have  like  portions  to  eat,  beside  that
which  Cometh  of  the  sale  of  his  patrimony.    The  troth  is  that  private  means  invariably


OH.  xvm.  1— 22,]  THE  BOOK   OF   DEUTERONOMY.  311


go  to  make  a  public  ministry  more  effective,  if  the  ministry  is  true  at  all.  They  are
not  selfishly  utilized,  but  used  as  a  matter  of  stewardship.  In  such  circumstances,
instead  of  being  a  hindrance  to  liberality,  these  private  possessions  should  be  a  stimulus,
as  they  are  so  much  more  In  the  line  of  things  devoted  to  the  Lord.

IV.  Dub  respect  should  be  shown  to  a  devoted  spirit.  The  case  of  the
Levite  here  referred  to  corresponds  to  a  minister  who  has  responded  to  a  Divine  call,
agjlnst  what  one  might  call  the  dictates  of  worldly  prudence.  He  has  followed  the
inward  impulse  (ver.  6),  and  come  to  aid  the  priests  at  the  central  altar  from  his  snug
patrimony  at  home.  Such  devotion  is  to  be  considered  and  rewarded.  The  Levite,
who  was  so  interested  as  to  relinquish  his  country  life  and  patrimony,  deserved  the
payment  of  the  dues  at  the  altar.  So  with  the  generous  devotion  of  the  ministers  of
God.  When  men  relinquish  good  worldly  prospects  for  the  Church,  their  doing  so
should  be  considered. — E.  M.  B.

Vers.  9 — 14. — Divination  forbidden.  (The  process  of  divination,  in  its  different
forms  here  referred  to — "divination,"'  "  observing  the  heavenly  bodies,"  "enchantment,"
"  witchcraft,"  "  charming,"  "  consultation  of  spirits,"  "  sorcery,"  and  "  necromancy  " —
was  an  effort  to  discover  secrets  by  unwarrantable  methods.  It  was  man's  longing  for
revelation  undergoing  degradation  through  the  imaginations  of  men.  It  had  been
practised  by  the  predecessors  in  Canaan,  and  in  consequence  they  were  being  cast  out.
The  Israelites  were  to  deem  it  abomination,  and  unworthy  of  the  people  of  God.  From
the  succeeding  verses,  it  is  evident  that  it  is  to  be  contrasted  with  the  Divine  order  of
prophetical  inspiration,  and  in  consequence  rejected  with  detestation.

I.  OUB  IDEAS  OF   REVELATION   SHOULD    BE     WORTHY   OF   GoD.       We    haVC    HO    right

to  expect  God  to  degrade  himself  in  the  methods  of  revelation.  Our  own  instincts
should  lead  us  to  abhor  such  processes  as  have  been  adopted  to  secure  the  secrets  of
the  Most  High.  All  the  mean  and  abominable  ways  which  are  here  enumerated  ought
to  have  been  renounced  by  thinking  men  instead  of  adopted.  They  are  all  unworthy
channels  for  God's  messages.  Astrology,  enchantment,  necroaianoy, — all  are  miserable
makeshifts  for  a  decent  mode  of  revelation.

God  has  in  "divers  manners "  certainly  made  known  his  will  to  men  (Heb.  i.  1).
He  has  used  dreams  (Gen.  xxxvii.  8;  Job  xxxiii.  15),  levealing  to  the  soul,  whose
avenues  of  sensation  are  temporarily  closed,  the  information  it  needed.  The  dream
was  the  condition  of  the  communication  (Gen.  xxviii.  12 — 22).  God  spoke  when  he  had
got  man's  earshut  to  otlier  things.  And  we  can  see  this  to  be  a  most  worthy  way  !  Then
hy  angelic  visits  he  oftentimes  revealed  his  will,  instances  of  which  are  many  in  the
Bible.  This  also  was  worthy.  Last  of  all,  by  inspiring  men,  that  is,  through  human
nature,  which  is  also  eminently  worthy  of  God.  But  the  divination  process  is  and
.should  have  been  regarded  as  mean  and  contemptible.

II.  It   is   EVIDENCE     OF    THE     GREAT    CREDULITY     OF    MEN     THAT     DIVINATION     HAS

IMPOSED  UPON  THEM.  In  Connection  with  "  spiritualism,"  for  example,  we  have
examples  of  credulity  now  corresponding  exactly  to  the  divination  of  the  earlier  times.
As  if  such  mean  methods  would  be  adopted  by  the  Infinite  Majesty,  who  has  spoken
in  these  last  days  by  his  Son !  The  power  of  belief  is  incalculable.  Credulity  is  the
believing  power  exercised  on  false  objects  and  on  insufficient  evidence.  We  have  ample
faith  in  the  world,  if  we  could  only  get  it  rightly  directed.  And  sometimes  we  find
men  who  are  most  sceptical  about  religious  matters,  most  credulous  about  the  novelties
of  spiritualism.  They  yield  to  phenomena  a  credence  that  they  deny  to  the  well-
authenticated  Word.

III.  God's  presence  is  to  determine  our  conduct.  When  Moses  says,  "  Thou
shalt  be  perfect  with  (op.)  the  Lord  thy  God"  (ver.  13),  the  idea  seems  to  be  that  the
overshadowing  Presence  is  to  determine  our  conduct  before  him.  We  will  strive  to  be
perfect  as  he  is,  and  not  look  for  mean  methods  from  him. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  15 — 22. — The  promised  Prophet.  Prom  speaking  of  the  paltry  expectations
about  divination,  Moses  goes  t)n  to  speak  of  the  general  plan  of  Divine  revelation.  The
people  had  had  the  splendid  chance  uidirect  communion  with  God,  without  any  mediation.
God  spoke  to  them  from  heaven  at  Sinai ;  but  so  afraid  were  they  of  immediate  revelation
that  they  implored  Moses  to  mediate  the  message  for  them.     He  boiame  consequently.


312  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xvm.  1— 22.

with  God's  full  approval,  the  human  medium  through  which  the  Divine  will  was
conveyed,  which  means  God's  prophet,  Tliey  had  had  no  difiSculty  in  accepting  the
IKviue  messages  through  him.  Now,  Moses  assures  them  that  this  method  of  mediation
through  human  beings  will  continue.  He  puts  the  promise  in  comprehensive  form,  and
■ays  that  through  a  Prophet  like  to  himself  will  God  continue  to  speak  to  them  after  he
has  gone,  and  his  message  they  will  reject  at  their  peril.

I.  Let  us  obsebye  the  affbopriateness  of  God  beyealinq  himself  thbouqe
A  HUMAN  BEIKO.  For  man  is  in  the  Divine  image ;  if  this  be  not  the  case,  we  can
have  no  knowledge  whatever  of  God.  Man  is  the  image  of  God ;  and  hence  God  reveals
himself  to  men  through  a  man.  The  ofBce  ol  prophet  is  the  most  a|>propriate  way  of
revealing  G-od's  wilL  And  when  we  carry  on  this  line  of  thought,  we  are  landed  in
the  idea  that  an  incarnation  of  God  alone  could  adeq^uately  convey  to  man  the  mind
and  nature  of  God.  If  any  one  wishes  to  follow  out  this  line,  he  will  get  splendid  help
in  Mr.  B.  H.  Hutton's  admirable  essay  on  '  The  Incarnation  and  Princi  i  >les  of  Evidence.' '

II.  It  seems  olbab'  fbom  the  promise  that  a  sinole  Pkophet  after  the
SIMILITUDE  OF  MosES  18  TO  BE  THE  Mediatob  FOB  THE  AGES.  Now,  Only  One  Person
answers  this  description,  and  this  is  Jesus  Christ.  He  was  and  is  incarnate  God.
His  Spirit  he  alone  could  take,  and  through  its  gift  to  men  in  the  different  ages  make
them  the  channel  of  God's  revelation.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  "  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is
the  spirit  of  prophecy ;  "  and  the  prophets  were  his  instruments  in  the  history  of  the
Church.  God  has  spoken  in  the  last  days  by  his  Son ;  and  the  prophets  between
Moses  and  Christ  were  really  the  inspired  messengers  of  the  one  Great  Prophet  of  God.
This  is  the  idea  of  Peter  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ  spoke  in  the  prophets.'  We  thus  see
one  Person  embracing  the  mediating  work  of  the  different  ages,  and  accomplishing  it
through  holy  men.

III.  The  life  and  death  op  Jesus,  therefore,  become  the  climax  of  Divinb
REVELATION.  The  previous  revelations  were  but  foreshadowings  of  this  perfect  mani-
festation of  God.  A  human  history  became  the  embodiment  of  Divine  thoughts,
mercies,  self-denials,  and  self-sacrifice.  The  blaze  of  divinity  that  was  intolerable  at
Sinai  becomes  not  only  bearable  but  entrancing  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.  The
blinding  brilliance  has  been  so  toned  down  that  man  can  rejoice  in  Jesus  as  "  God
manifest  in  the  flesh."  "  We  beheld  his  glory  " — it  did  not  blind  or  scare  men  as  at
the  holy  mount.

IV.  The  disbeqabd  of  the  words  of  Jesds  is  punishable  by  death.  This  is
the  penalty  pronounced.  We  see  it  in  another  form  in  the  Kpistle  of  Paul  to  the
Corinthians,  "  If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  Anathema
Maran-atha."  If  disobedience  to  Moses  was  visited  in  many  cases  by  death,  how  much
more  disobedience  and  disloyalty  to  Christ  1  (of.  Heb.  x.  28 — 31).  The  gospel  has
penalties  of  the  severest  kind  for  its  rejection,  as  well  as  bliss  beyond  compare  for  its
reception.    The  alternative  is  thus  clearly  set  before  us.

V.  The  prophets  sent   or  Uod  submit  to   the    test  of   fulfilment,  while

FALSE   PBOPHBTS  ABE   TO  BE     DETECTED  BT  THEIB     FAILUBE.        God's    method    being    a

human  mediation,  is  liable  to  be  iiuitated,  and  men  from  time  to  time  will  profess  to  be
prophets,  when  they  have  no  real  commission.  Now,  God  has  such  a  control  of  the
future  that  no  unassisted,  uninspired  man  can  forecast  it  successfully.  Sooner  or  later
he  is  found  out.  Happy  guesses  soon  run  out,  and  the  person  is  discredited.  Hence
it  was  the  duty  of  Israel  to  weigh  well  the  communication  of  the  professed  prophets,  and
to  see  wherein  they  were  confirmed  by  subsequent  events.  The  true  prophets  had  their
word  fulfilled,  and  were  Christ's  messengers ;  the  false  prophets  had  their  word  dis-
credited, and  were  acting  presumptuously.

Let  us  hear  the  Great  Prophet,  and  give  him  credit  for  all  the  predictions  of  the  minor
and  but  human  prophets. — K.  M.  E.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  Lord  our  inheritance.  True  of  the  priests  and  Levites,  It  is  true
also  of  each  believer,  that  "  the  Lord  is  his  inheritance  "  (Pa.  xvi.  6,  6).  He  ia  in  this
respect  a  "  priest  unto  God  "  (1  Pet.  iL  9 ;  Bev.  L  6).

'  'EssayB,'  ToL  L  pp.  227-284."

•  1  Pet" i.  11 ;  also  Hengeteuberg's  '  Christology  of  the  Old  Testament,'  vol.  L  pp.  104—  Hi


OH.  xviu,  1— 22.J  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY,  313

I.  The  meaning  of  the  expression.  Inheritance — equal  to  lot,  part,  share.  In-
heritance in  families — the  share  which  each  receives  of  the  patrimony.  In  the  partition
of  Canaan,  each  tribe  bad  its  lot,  its  portion,  its  share.  God's  portion  or  inheritance
was  the  tithes,  with  the  presoiibed  parts  of  the  sacrifices,  the  flrstfruits,  etc.  Levi  had
as  his  portion  God  himself,  involving  a  share  of  the  provision  from  God's  table  (ver.  1).

II.  The  gbandeue  of  t^e  truth.  1.  The  believer  possesses  Qod.  God  is  a  better
possession  for  the  soul  than  any  of  his  gifts.  "  It  is  a  thought  which  lies  at  the  founda-
tion of  all  true  religion,  that  God  himself  is  the  Supreme  Good,  the  true  and  real  portion
of  the  soul.  .  ,  .  More  intimately  than  light  becomes  the  possession  of  the  eye  on  whjch
it  streams,  or  air  of  the  organs  of  breathing  which  inhale  it,  or  the  food  we  eat,  assimi-
lated and  diffused  through  the  physical  system,  incorporates  itself  with  the  nature  of
him  who  partakes  of  it,  does  he,  that  Infinite  One,  the  Light  of  all  our  seeing,  the  Bread
of  Life,  the  nutriment  of  our  highest  being,  become  the  deep  inward  portion  of  each
soul  that  loves  him  "  (Caird,  sermon  on  '  The  Christian's  Heritage ').  2.  In  possessing
Ood,  the  believer  possesses  all  things.  And  this,  though  in  an  outward  sense  he  has
nothing  (2  Cor.  vi.  10;  cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  21 — 23).  (1)  God  provides  for  him  out  of  the
fulness  at  his  command.  Possessing  God,  the  Possessor  of  all,  he  knows  that  he  will
want  "no  good  thing"  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11).  Temporally  and  spiritually,  he  will  be
provided  for,  kept^  saved,  delivered  (Ps,  xxxvii.  3,  9,  11,  25,  34  ;  cxxi. ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  16 ;
Matt.  vL  33 ;  Eph.  i.  3).  (2)  All  things  work  together  for  his  good  (Rom.  viii.  28).
(3)  He  perceives  and  enjoys  God  in  all  things,  as  none  else  can  (Ps.  civ.).  (4)  He  is  one
of  the  "  heirs  of  God  "  in  "  the  times  of  the  restitution  of  all  things  "  (Acts  iii.  24),  when
the  redeemed  enter  on  their  glory  (Matt.  xxv.  34).  Let  the  saint  reflect  on  his  in-
heritance in  God.  (1)  How  surpassingly  rich  it  is !  (2)  How  delightsome  it  is !  (Ps.  xvi.
6).  (3)  How  enduring  it  is — eternal  I  (2  Cor.  iv.  17, 18).  (4)  How  all-satisfying  it  is  I
(Ps.  Ixxiii.  26).— J.  O.

Ver.  5. — The  priesthood.  Israel,  as  a  holy  nation,  consecrated  to  God's  service,  was
"a  kingdom  of  priests"  (Exod.  xix.  6).  This  priestly  character  of  the  nation  was
represented  formally  in  the  tribe  of  Levi.  The  distinctive  duties  of  the  priesthood  were
discharged  by  the  sons  of  Aaron,  who  were  thus  the  priests  strictly  so  called.

I.  The  pbiesthood  in  itself.  1.  Chosen  and  set  apart  by  God.  "  Chosen  him  out
of  all  thy  tribes."  2.  Holy,  indicated  by  bodily  perfection  (Lev.  xxi.  16 — 24),  holy
garments  (Exod.  xxxix.),  rites  of  dedication  (Lev.  viii.),  ceremonial  regulations  and
restrictions  (Lev.  xxi.,  etc.).  3.  Represented  the  people  before  God  (Exod.  xxviii.  12).
4.  Made  propitiation  for  sins  (Heb.  v.  1),  5.  Gave  forth  oracles  (Numb,  xxvii.  21).
6.  Had  for  these  purposes  the  right  of  approach  to  God.

II.  The  priesthood  as  typical.  1.  Of  Christ.  The  hi^h  priest,  in  particular,  was
typical  of  Christ  as  (1)  the  One  Medium  of  approach  to  God  (John  xiv.  6  ;  1  Tim.  ii.  5).

(2)  Inherently  holy,  absolutely  without  sin  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  (3)  Representing  the  Church
before  God  in  his  person,  work,  and  iutercession  (Heb.  iv.  14).  (4)  In  his  having  made
reconciliation  for  the  sins  of  the  people — himself  both  Priest  and  Sacrifice  (Heb.  ii.  17  ;
X.  12).  (5)  In  being  the  organ  of  J)ivine  revelations  (Matt.  xi.  27).  (6)  For  this  priestly
work — to  which  he  was  divinely  ordained  (Heb.  v.  5) — Christ  has  free  and  immevliate
access  to  the  holiest  of  all,  and  has  gained  admission  to  the  same  for  his  people  (Heb.
ix.  12 ;  X.  19).     2.  01  believers.    (1)  Chosen  (Ps.  Ixv.  4).     (2)  Consecrated  (1  Cor.  i.  2).

(3)  Having  freedom  of  approach  to  God  (Heb.  x.  19).  (4)  Offering  spiritual  sacrifices
(1  Pet.  iL  5).    (5)  Interceding  for  the  world. — J.  0.

Vers.  6 — 8. — Looe  to  the  aanctiiary,    Gk)d  loves  those  who  love  the  sanctuary.

I.  Love  to  the  sanctuaet  seen.  1.  In  desire  for  it  (ver.  6).  2.  In  pain  at  being
deprived  of  its  ordinances  (Ps.  xlii.  1 — 7;  Ixiii.;  Ixxxiv.).  3.  In  overstepping  the
bounds  of  bare  duty  in  attendance  on  it  (ver.  6).

IL  Love  to  the  sanctuaby  rewarded.  1.  By  acceptance  of  those  repairing  to  it.
2.  By  provision  made  for  them  (Pa.  btiii.  5). — J.  0.

Vers.  9 — 14. — Magic.  I.  A  stern  prohibition  of  Canaanitish  feactices.  The
practice  of  magic  is  known  to  have  been  extensively  developed  in  ancient  Egypt
and  Chaldea.      Numerous  indications  occur  of  its  existence  among  the  Cauaanites


314  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ptL  svui.  1--22.

(e.g.  1  Sam.  xxviii.  7 — 10).  Tlie  lower  kinds  of  magic  are  of  rank  growth  in  all
barbarous  and  semi-civilized  communities.  The  priests  combine  the  functions
of  diviners,  prophets,  exorcists,  thaumaturgists,  physicians,  and  makers  of  idols
and  amulets.  The  magic  of  the  ancients  was  distinguished  as  good  or  bad,  accord-
ing as  it  was  exercised  to  conjure  diseases  and  to  combat  demoniacal  influences,
or  was  abused  to  work  harm.  This  last,  which  was  avowedly  diabolical  in  its  character,
was  what  was  properly  called  "  sorcery,"  and  was  universally  regarded  with  horror.
The  noteworthy  fact,  however,  is  tliat  the  books  of  Moses  make  no  distinction  as  to
kind,  but  forbid  absolutely  the  practice  of  every  species  of  magical  art.  Moses  recog-
nizes no  magic  that  is  good ;  he  classes  all  under  the  same  category  of  "  abominations."
The  text  is  in  principle  a  pruhibition  of  the  use  of  all  such  arts,  whether  the  pretender
to  magical  power  believes  in  its  efiBcacy  or  not.  It  prohibits,  fuither,  resort  to  such  as
profess  these  arts.  The  "  spiritualistic  "  delusions  of  our  time  in  all  their  varieties
(spirit  mediums,  rappings,  planchettes,  etc.),  with  "  fortune-telling,"  and  superstitious
practices  supposed  to  bring  good  or  to  avert  evil  "  luck,"  are  condemned  by  the  passage.
II.  A  BEASON  FOB  THIS  PROHIBITION.  1.  The  nature  of  the  practices  as  "  abomina-
tions." They  were:  (1)  Irrational.  (2)  Evil.  Moses,  as  noticed  above,  recognizes  no
"  good  "  magic.  It  is  viewed  either  as  imposture  or,  assuming  its  reality,  as  demonish
(Satanic).  It  was  connected  with  foolish  and  wicked  rites.  2.  The  character  of  the
people  as  "  perfect "  (ver.  13).  There  could  not  be  perfect  love  to  God  and  communion
with  him,  and  trafficking  with  the  devil  at  the  same  time.  Love  to  God,  faith  in  him,
and  entirety  of  devotion  to  him  should  preclude  these  superstitions.  What  he  wills
his  people  to  know  he  will  teach  them  by  proper  means ;  what  he  conceals  they  have
no  right  to  seek  by  means  that  are  improper  (Isa.  viii.  19). — J.  0.

Vers.  15 — 20. — Prophecy.  The  term  "  Prophet "  covers  the  whole  series  of  Old
Testament  prophets,  culminating  in  Christ,  the  Prophet  like  unto  Moses  par  excellence
(see  infra).

I.  Pbophectin  genbbal.  The  prophet — what?  Etymologically,  one  "boiling  or
bubbling  over"  with  tlie  Divine  inspiration.  No  mere  religious  genius,  but  one  truly
and  supernaturally  inspired.  A  revealer  «nd  declarer  of  the  will  of  God.  Future  events
were  foretold :  1.  As  si^ns.  2.  In  warnings  and  appeals.  3.  In  denoum  ing  God's
judgments.  4.  In  administering  comf  )rt.  5.  In  unfolding  the  Messianic  hope.  6.  In
unfolding  the  Divine  purpose  underlying  providential  developments.  Prediction  is  thus
a  true  and  vital  element  in  prophecy,  but  it  is  far  from  being  of  the  essence  of  it.  It  is
the  function  of  the  prophet  either  to  declare  new  truth — truth  gained  by  direct  revela-
lation,  and  given  forth  with  the  autliority  of  Heaven  as  a  "  word  of  the  Lord,"  or,
taking  up  truth  already  revealed,  to  revive  and  enforce  it  with  supernatural  power  and
fervour,  applying  it  to  the  circumstances,  exigencies,  and  evils  of  his  particular  time.
"  The  jwophets  were  men  who,  when  facing  the  people,  stood  as  it  were  before  Ood,  and
thus  spoke /ore  and /or  him  "  (Morison).

II.  Pbopheot  and  Mosaism.  It  is  noteworthy  that  Mosaism  contemplated  the  rise
of  prophecy  from  the  first,  and  left  room  for  it  in  th0  arrangements  of  the  economy.  It
even  required  it  for  the  carrying  forward  of  its  objects  to  completion.  The  dispensation
was  not  a  final  one.  The  kingdom  of  God  had  a  future  which  it  was  the  task  of
prophecy  gradually  to  disclose.  The  Law  enclosed  innumerable  s|)iritual  germs,  which
it  was  the  function  of  prophecy  to  expand  and  develop.  It  had,  moreover,  underlying
its  ceremonialism,  a  spiritual  basis,  which  it  was  the  business  of  the  prophets  to  bring
to  light,  and  to  recall  to  people's  minds  when  they  appeared  in  danger  of  forgetting  it.
Prophecy  was  thus  a  standing  witness  to  the  life,  freshness,  and  power  which  lay  in  ihe
heart  of  a  religion  largely  wrapped  up  in  legal  forms.  Then  there  was  the  necessity  for
new  light  and  guidance  under  the  conditions  of  advancing  national  life,  and  in  times  of
national  emergency.  The  Law  left  not  a  little  scope  for  extended  applications  of  its
fundamental  principles,  and  it  lay  with  the  prophets  to  furnish  the  direction  required.
All  this,  in  addition  to  their  more  general  function  of  rebuking,  warning,  and  testifying,
in  times  of  declension,  which,  with  the  carrying  forward  the  development  of  revelation  in
its  relation  to  Christ  and  his  kingdom,  may  be  regarded  as  the  chief  part  of  their  work.

III.  Pbopheot  and  heathen  manticism.  The  connection  shows  that  prophecy  is
given  in  lieu  of  the  heathenish  practices  that  are  forbidden.     If  Qod  forbids  divination


on.  xvm.  1— 22.]  tUE  BOOK  OJ"  DEUTERONOMY.  3lfi

necromancy,  consultation  of  familiar  spirits,  etc.,  he  gives  something  better — some-
thing that  will  lawfully  supply  the  craving  which  these  superstitions  unlawfully  sought
to  gratify.  The  soul :  1.  Craves  for  a  knowledge  of  God's  will.  2.  Desires  guidance
in  critical  times  of  life.  3.  Ponders  anxiously  its  relations  to  the  invisible  world  and
to  the  future.  4.  Feels  its  personal  unfitness  for  intercourse  with  God.  These  cravings
were  the  strength  of  heathen  sorcery,  etc.,  and  they  were  provided  for  in  prophecy.
This,  it  may  be  noticed,  is  throughout  a  characteristic  pf  revelation — it  does  not  simply
remove  the  bad,  but  provides  for  the  supply  of  the  cravings  to  which  the  bad  appeals.
—J.  0.

Vers.  15 — 19. — 7%e  Prophet  like  unto  Moses.  These  chapters  bring  before  us  prophet,
priest,  and  king — ofiSces  pointing  forward  to  and  culminating  in  Christ.  Christ  is
distinctively,  and  in  the  complete  sense,  the  Prophet  like  unto  Moses  (Acts  iii.  22),
Christ  and  Moses  were  alike —

I.  As  FOUNDERS  OP  DISPENSATIONS.  It  was  the  greatness  of  Moses  that  be  was
employed  by  God  in  inaugurating  a  new  era  in  the  history  of  his  kingdom — in  intro-
ducing a  new  order  of  things — in  settling  the  foundations  of  a  new  economy.  In  this
respect  he  stood^at  the  head  of  the  Old  Testament  line  of  prophets,  and  in  a  sense
stood  apart  from  them.  "  The  Law  was  given  by  Moses  "  (John  i.  17).  He  had  the
ordering  and  settling  of  the  "  house ''  of  God  in  the  form  in  which  it  was  to  last  till
Christ  came,  who,  "  as  a  Son  over  his  own  house,"  would  revise  its  arrangements  and
reconstitute  it  on  a  new  and  better  basis  (Heb.  iii.  2 — 7).     Prophets  subsequent  to

■  Moses  stood  within  the  lines  of  the  economy  already  established.  They  could  enforce
and  maintain,  but  while  predicting  the  advent  of  a  new  age  in  which  great  changes
would  be  wrought,  they  had  no  authority  of  themselves  to  introduce  such  changes.
It  was  reserved  for  Christ  to  "  change  times  and  seasons,"  and  so  to  alter  and  remodel
Mosaic  institutions,  or  supersede  them  by  new  ones,  or  abolish  them  by  giving  the
substance  for  the  shadow,  as  to  place  the  Church  upon  a  permanent  and  moveless  basis,
and  adapt  it  for  the  reception  of  the  Gentile  nations.

II.  In  the  fbeedom  op  inteecouese  which  they  enjoyed  with  God.  Mosee
enjoyed,  as  was  necessary,  the  freest  intercourse  with  heaven.  God  spake  with  him,
not  in  a  vision,  or  dream,  or  in  dark  speeches,  but  "  mouth  to  mouth  "  (Numb.  xii.  6 — t)),
"  face  to  face  "  (ch.  xxxiv.  10).  This  is  made,  in  the  passage  last  quoted,  a  feature  of
distinction  between  Moses  and  later  prophets  in  Israel.  In  Christ,  this  peculiarity
of  the  relation  of  Moaes  to  God  reappears  in  higher  form.  Intercourse  with  the  Father
reaches  the  highest  degree  of  closeness  and  intimacy,  the  Son  being  in  the  Father,  and
the  Father  in  the  Son  (John  xiv.  10).  Christ's  insight  into  his  Father's  will  was
perfect  (John  v.  20, 21).  His  communion  with  the  Father  was  habitual  and  uninterrupted.
The  New  Testament  apostles,  in  an  inferior  degree,  shared  in  this  higher  footing,  were
habitually  possessed  by  the  Spirit,  and  spoke  and  wrote  under  his  calm  and  abiding
influence.

III.  As  mediating  between  the  people  and  God.  (Vers.  16 — 18.)  It  was  when
the  people  were  deeply  conscious  of  their  need  of  a  mediator  that  this  promise  was
vouchsafed.  It  had  only,  as  regards  mediation,  a  very  inferior  application  to  the  Old
Testament  prophets.    The  fulness  of  its  meaning  comes  to  view  in  Christ.

These  points  involve  others,  as  e.g.  the  resemblance  between  Christ  and  Moses :  1.  In
the  degree  of  authority  with  which  they  were  clothed,  and  in  the  mighty  signs  and
wonders  which  authenticated  their  mission  (ch.  xxxiv.  11).  2.  In  the  fulness  and
grandeur  of  the  revelations  made  through  them.  3.  In  the  severe  penalties  attaching
to  disobedience  to  their  words  (ver.  19 ;  Acts  iii.  23 ;  Heb.  ii.  1 — 5 ;  x,  28,  29). — J.  0.

Vers.  20 — 22. — The  false  prophet.  The  failure  of  the  word  of  a  prophet  was  decisive
pniof  that  he  had  not  spoken  by  Divine  inspiration.  Had  his  word  not  failed,  it
would  not  have  followed  that  he  was  a  true  prophet,  but  it  showed  conclusively  that
he  was  a  false  one  when  his  word  did  fail.

I.  Certainty  of  fulfilment  is  a  characteristic  op  God's  words.  If  «.g.  the
prophecies  of  the  Scriptures  could  be  shown  to  have  been  falsified  by  events,  it  would,
by  the  rule  laid  down  in  this  fundamental  prophetic  charter,  conclusively  disprove
their  claims  to  inipiration.    It  is  vain  to  think  of  defending  the  inspiration  of  the


316  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xvm.  1— 22

prophets,  while  conceding,  with  rationalistic  writers,  occasional  failures  in  their  predic-
tions. The  prophets  themselves  do  not  shrink  from  this  test,  but  confidently  appeal
to  it  (Isa.  xxxiv.  16).  This  shows  how  different  their  inspiration  was  from  the  ordinary
inspiration  of  genius,  both  in  their  estimation  of  it  and  in  fact.  No  man  of  genius,  how-
ever wide  his  range  of  vision,  be  he  a  Bacon,  a  Shakespeare,  a  Goethe,  or  a  Carl}  le,
would  like  to  rest  his  reputation  on  the  absolute  unfailingness  of  his  words.  While
prophecy  affords  conspicuous  instances  of  the  certainty  of  fulfilment  characteristic  of
God's  words,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  this  certainty  inheres  in  all  God's  words  alike.
No  word  of  God  or  of  Christ  will  fall  to  the  ground  unfulfilled  (Matt.  xxiv.  35).  The
thought  should  comfort  God's  people,  and  make  his  enemies  tremble.  Applies  to  pro-
mises and  threatenings  equally  with  predictions  and  doctrines.

II.  The  pbedictions  op  Scriptuee  abide  this  test  of  teue  prophecy.  The  force
of  the  evidence  from  prophecy  can  only  be  properly  felt  by  those  who  have  been  at
pains  to  examine  the  Bible  predictions  in  detail.  But  it  does  not  need  more  than  aa
examination  of  the  principal  instances  to  convince  us  that  here  we  have.no  chance
guess-worli,  no  mere  forecasting  of  natural  sagacity.  We  might  point  to  the  pre-
dictions in  Deuteronomy  respecting  the  future  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  the  punish-
ment which  would  overtake  ihem  for  their  sins  (ch.  iv.  25 — 29;  xxviii.  45 — 68);  or  to
the  Messianic  pro|  ihecies  (e.g.  Isa;  liii.) ;  or  to  particular  predictions  delivered  long  before
the  events  predicted  occurred,  or  could  have  been  foreseen,  as  when  Amos  (b.c.  787)
predicts  of  Israel  at  a  time  when  the  king  and  nobles  were  lying  on  beds  of  ivory,  and
indulging  in  every  species  of  dissipation  and  amusement — "  Therefore  will  I  cause  you
to  go  into  captivity  beyond  Damascus,  saith  the  Lord,  whose  Name  is  Tlie  God  of
hosts"  (Amos  v.  27),  or  when  Micah  (b.c.  710^,  a  hundred  years  before  the  Captivity,
foretells  of  Judah,  "  Zion  for  ,\oiir  sake  shall  be  plowed  as  a  field,  and  .Jerusalem  shall
become  heaps"  (Micah  iii.  12);  "Be  in  pain,  and  labour  to  bring  forth,  O  daughter  of
Zion,  like  a  woman  in  travail:  for  now  shalt  thou  go  forth  out  of  the  city,  and  thou
shalt  dwell  in  the  field,  and  thou  shalt  so  even  to  Babylon ;  there  shalt  thou  be
delivered ;  there  shall  the  Lord  redeem  thee  from  the  hand  of  thine  enemies  "  (Micah  iv.
10).  Discovery  has  not  tended  to  discredit,  but  in  several  striking  instances  has  con-
firmed the  truth  of  prophecy,  as  in  regard  to  Ezekiel's  prediction  of  the  conquest  ol
Egypt  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (ch.  xxix.  8 — 16),  a  prediction  pronounced  by  Kueuen
and  sceptical  critics  to  be  a  mere  guess,  falsified  by  the  event,  but  now  strikingly
confirmed  from  a  contemporary  hieroglyphic  inscription  (see  Expositor,  vol.  x.).  And
while  it  is  true  that  an  isolated  sign  and  wonder  is  not  proof  sufficient  of  Divine
inspiration  (ch.  xiii.),  it  is  certain  that,  taking  into  account  the  character  of  the
prophets,  the  kind  and  number  of  their  predictions,  the  holiness  of  their  message,  and
the  coherence  of  what  they  taught  with  earlier  revelations,  the  evidence  of  their
Divine  commission  is  as  strong  as  could  be  wished — is,  in  &ct,  decisive. — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  irut  priest  is  the  highest  type  of  man.  God  here  lays  down  the
lines  along  which  men  may  rise  to  the  dignity  of  the  true  priesthood.  The  ordinance
did  not  secure  the  ideal  reality.  "The  Law  was  weak  through  the  flesh."  Human
choice  and  endeavour  were  requisite  to  attain  to  God's  ideal  priest.  It  is  his  p^vilege
to  receive  from  God,  and  to  reveal  to  men.

I.  Divine  choice  and  human  desire  must  coMniNB  to  make  a  real  priest.  The
man,  though  born  a  Levite,  must  "  come  with  all  the  desire  of  his  mind  unto  the  place
which  the  Lord  shall  choose  "  (ver.  6).  The  human  will  must  co-operate  with  God's
will.  This  is  the  product  of  the  second  birth.  In  this  ancient  arrangement,  we  see
the  forecast  of  the  Christian  life — the  true  priesthood.

II.  The  priest's  office  is,  not  for  honour,  but  for  service.  "  He  shall  minister
in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  his  God."  In  other  words,  he  shall  serve  in  the  stead  of  God,
and  by  his  authority.  This  is  the  hardest  work,  yet  the  most  honourable.  No  toil
or  self-sacrifice  can  he  decline  while  appearing  in  the  stead  of  God,  for  he  serves  the
noblest  part  of  man.  In  Gnd's  kingdom, there  is  no  honour  apart  from  character;  and
character  is  attained  by  service.

III.  The  priest's  earthly  needs  shall  be  met  without  anxiety  ok  bub  part.
"  They  that  minister  at  the  altar  shall  partake  of  the  altar  "  (vers.  3,  4,  8).  While  wa
are  employed  on  the  King's  errands,  the  King  will  provide  our  rations.    We  have  a


CH.  xvra.  1— 22.J  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.  317

Divine  guarantee  that  bodily  wants  shall  be  supplied,  for  God  himself  is  our  inheritance.
It  is  surely  better  to  trust  the  Fount  rather  than  the  stream,  the  First  Cause  rather
than  the  intermediate  channel,  the  Creator  rather  than  the  creature.  The  priest  shall
be  supplied  before  other  men,  for  the  firstfruits  of  corn  and  wine  and  oil  are  his
They  that  serve  God  without  stint  shall  never  be  forgotten.

IV.  The  true  priest  occupies  the  apex  of  the  social  pyramid.  The  true  priest
really  rules.  For  him  all  other  orders  of  men  toil.  For  the  priest  to  possess  any
earthly  inheritance  would  be  a  burden,  a  care,  an  injury.  Others  till  the  ground  fur
him,  thresh  his  corn,  and  winnow  his  giain.  As  a  god,  he  receives.  For  other  men
the  inferior  creation  toils  and  groans.  The  unreasoning  animals  bear  his  burdens  and
do  his  will.  Yet  these  men,  served  well  by  the  subordinate  orders  of  life,  wait  upon  the
priest,  and  minister  to  his  human  wants.  And  in  return,  the  real  priest  ministers  to
the  hunger  of  the  soul.'and  supplies  light  and  guidance  and  hope.  The  real  priest  is
the  greatest  benefactor  to  the  human  race  ;  the  counterfeit  priest  is  a  pest. — D.

Vers.  9 — 14. — Oross  superstition  the  alternative  of  true  religion.  The  popular
superstitions  of  every  age  are  very  seductive.  Our  only  safeguard  against  them  is
complete  loyalty  to  the  living  God.     The  indwelling  Spirit  is  a  Guide  and  a  Defence.

I.  Mak  genbricallt  craves  to  unkavel  the  future.  In  every  sane  mind  the
inqiury  arises,  "  What  is  beyond  phenomena  ?  What  is  to  happen  to-morrow  ? "
The  present  enjoyment  may  satisfy  animals ;  it  dues  not  satisfy  man.  He  has  a
faculty  that  lives  in  the  future.  He  is  ever  forecasting  life.  This  inquisitiveness,  if
repressed,  becomes  a  passion — an  insatiable  fire.  If  there  is  no  true  oracle  that  will
give  reply  to  his  queries,  he  will  betake  himself  to  false  ones.  If  no  reply  is  forth-
coming, he  is  driven  hither  and  thither  by  the  demon  of  unrest.

II.  This  obavino  for  revelation  leads  to  childish  superstitions.  This  con-
scious want  of  the  soul  clearly  indicates  that  some  provision  has  been  made  by  God;
but,  lacking  this,  men  betake  themselves  to  a  thousand  subterfuges.  The  more  shrewd
and  avaricious  anjong  them  trade  upon  this  prying  curiosity,  and  invent  a  thousand
frauds  for  self-enrichment.  In  olden  times,  every  village  had  its  seK-anointed  oracle ;
every  nation  has  had  its  modes  of  divination.  No  price  has  been  too  great  to  pay  for
this  envied  knowledge.  Parental  feeling  has  been  freely  sacrificed  at  this  blood-stained
altar.  Fathers  have  made  their  loved  ones  to  pass  through  the  fire,  in  order  to  avert
supposed  disaster.  Without  doubt,  the  devil  has  been  the  moving  genius  in  these
systems  of  enchantment.

III.  Cruel  superstitions  have  led  to  heaviest  disasters.  So  deeply  rooted
had  these  systems  of  diabolic  divinations  become  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  that  to
extirpate  them  it  was  necessary  to  extirpate  the  people  also.  We  are  not  at  liberty  to
suppose  that  the  Amorites  were  destroyed  because  of  aberrations  in  intellectual  belief.
But  the  fruit  of  superstitious  belief  is  soon  experienced  in  sensuality,  bestial  excess,
witchcraft,  murder,  war.  Under  such  influences  society  is  rent  in  pieces;  every  man's
hand  is  red  with  rapine  and  bluod.  At  length  it  becomes  an  act  of  necessity  to  remove
such  a  people  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  The  deeds  of  the  Canaanites  had  become
a  stench  in  Jehovah's  nostrils — a  detestation  that  could  no  longer  be  endured.  Hence
their  extermination.

IV.  Our  only  safety  is  in  loyal  obedience  to  God.  No  resting-place  can  be
found  for  intellect  or  heart  of  man  between  degrading  superstition  and  religious  faith.
Who  can  solve  mysteries  but  God  alone?  If  God  reveal  to  us  our  line  of  duty  just
to  the  extent  that  we  really  need  it ;  and  if,  in  addition,  he  give  us  the  assurance
that  the  soul's  need  shall  be  met  as  fast  as  that  need  arises; — this  will  satisfy  every
reasonable  request.-  Men  can  and  mut^t  trust  the  true  God.  As  a  child  walks  along
the  darkest  road  quite  contentedly  so  long  as  its  hand  is  in  its  father's  hand,  so  with
equal  confidence  may  we  confide  in  the  safe  and  unerring  guidance  of  our  Almighty
Parent.  We  have  in  God  a  perfect  Friend ;  all  that  is  needed  for  well-being  is  com-
plete submission.  "  Thou  shalt  be  perfect  with  the  Lord  thy  God."  To  have  recourse
to  witchcraft  or  divination  is  practical  treason! — ^D.

Vers.  15^-22. — Presages  of  the  true  Prophet.  Captious  men  of  the  present  day
complain  that  they  cannot  see  God — cannot  hear  his  voice.    In  their  heart  the^  do


818  THE  LOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xvm.  1— 2i

not  wish  to  see  him.  He  will  not  reveal  himself,  as  an  object  of  curiosity,  to  the  eye
of  speculation.  He  reveals  himself  to  the  conscience  and  to  the  loyal  heart.  But  men
do  not  wish  to  see  him  as  the  embodiment  of  righteousness.  They  shudder  and  flee
away.  Tet  in  no  other  way  can  they  see  him  than  as  he  truly  is.  In  this  circum-
stance of  mutual  estrangement  there  is  need  of  a  mediator — prophet.

I.   GniLTT   MEN   DEBAR  THEMSELVES  FROM  PERSONAL  FELLOWSHIP  WITH   GoD.      There

is  nothing  in  common  between  unrighteous  men  and  a  righteous  God.  They  are
mutually  repellent.  The  heart-language  of  such  men  is  this,  "Let  us  not  hear  again
the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God ;  neither  let  us  see  this  great  fire  any  more."  To  ihem,
his  voice  is  the  thunder  of  war;  to  them,  his  presence  is  a  consuming  fire.  They
have  no  eye  except  to  see  his  burning  anger.  Hence  they  flee  to  hide  themselves.
Their  wish  projects  itself  into  reality ;  he  removes  himself.

XL  Men's  desire  to  hold  communication  with  God  through  a  mediator  con-
ceded. The  gracious  disposition  of  God  towards  men  yields  to  his  creatures'  necessity.
Ask  what  they  will,  if  righteousness  be  not  dishonoureil,  it  shall  be  dune.  The  all-
wise  God  candidly  admits  that  the  Jews  had,  in  this  matter,  spoken  well.  But  the
mediator  must  be  a  prophet.  Ue  must  convey  the  thoughts  and  dispositions  and  will
of  God  to  men.  Human  obedience,  to  have  any  worth,  must  be  intelligent — the  fruit
of  choice  and  purpose.

IIL  The  pebfect  PsoFHEt  is  introduced  bt  successive  btaqeb.  Our  moral
instincts  often  outrun  our  clear  intelligence.  The  Jews  desired  an  intermediate  agent,
who  should  convey  God's  will  to  them ;  but  they  scarcely  knew  what  it  was  they
asked  for.  Gould  any  mortal  man  clearly  reveal  the  mind  of  the  Eternal  ?  Would  not
the  pure  stream  be  defiled  by  the  impure  channel  ?  Nevertheless,  God  will  do  the  best
for  them  in  their  present  condition.  As  yet  the  perfect  Piophet  will  not  be  under-
stood nor  appreciated.  Knowledge  of  God's  character  and  purpose  sufficient  for  the
present  shall  be  revealed  by  imperfect  men — types  of  the  coming  perfect  Mediator.  By
easy  gradations,  the  human  family  must  be  divinely  educated.

IV.  The  true  Peophet  is  a  perfect  vehicle  of  God's  thoughts.  "  I  will  put
my  words  in  his  mouth."  Unless  the  prophet  be  a  mere  mechanical  automaton,  his
words  must  be  the  result  of  his  thoughts.  If  God  shall  use  a  human  person  to  reveal
himself  to  men,  he  must  use  his  mind,  heart,  and  will :  yea,  bis  entire  being.  This
has  been  realized  only  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Hence  he  could  say,
"  The  words  that  I  speak,  I  speak  not  of  myself :  but  that  Father  that  dwelletb  in  me,
he  doeth  the  works."  Hence,  again,  "He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Fatliet
also."  For  the  advent  of  this  real  Prophet,  humanity  stood  for  centuries  on  the
outlook,  on  the  watch-tower  of  hope,

V.  COHTUHACT   OF  THE  TRUE   PrOPHET   18   CONTUMACY   AGAINST  GoD.      Such  18  the

value  of  this  Divine  gift,  that  to  treat  it  with  indifference  is  heinous  crime.  No  human
penalty  may  be  annexed,  but  God  himself  undertook  to  punish  the  deed.  Hunger  is
God's  voice  within  the  body,  and  he  who  disregards  that  voice  shall  surely  die.  Pain
is  God's  voice  in  human  nerves,  and  he  who  neglects  that  summons  shall  die.  Truth
is  everywhere  the  voice  of  God,  and  to  turn  deaf  ears  tu  truth  is  to  deprive  one's  self
of  life.  And,  by  parity  of  reasoning,  the  voice  of  God  is  heard  more  clearly  and  more
authoritatively  yet,  in  the  person  of  his  dear  Son :  it  is  his  prerogative  to  give  to  men
eternal  life.  Hence,  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  him  is  folly,  contumacy,  despair,  ruin.  God
will  exact  a  most  fitting  retribution.

VI.  God  supplies  a  test  between  the  false  prophet  and  thf.  true.  The
eagerness  of  men  to  discover  the  Prophet  of  Jehovah,  led  many  to  impersonate  him
fur  the  purpose  of  personal  reputation  and  gain.  Every  true  prophet  of  Clod  came  with
sufficient  credential,  so  that  no  candid  mind  need  have  been  deceived.  They  had  the
power  to  read  the  near  future :  this  was  a  token  of  their  heavenly  commission.  But
better  still,  their  message  commended  itself  to  the  conscience  of  the  bearers;  and  thu%
might  every  hearer  find  in  an  honest  conscience  that  the  herald  was  from  (}od.  If  the
prophet  summoned  men  to  repentance  and  assured  them  of  a  share  in  the  mercy
of  God,  they  could  readily  ascertain  for  themselves  whether  relief  came  to  their  burdened
consciences — whether  better  feelings  arose  in  the  heart.  The  truth  is  never  very  fu
distant  if  we  really  wish  to  find  it. — D.


m.  XIX.  1—21.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMY.


319


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEK  XIX.


liAWS  CONCEBNINQ  CiTIES  OP  ReFT'OE.
I.ASDMABKS  NOT  TO  BE  BEUOVJiD.  LaW8
OOXCERNING   WITNESSES.

Vers.  1 — 13. — Moses  had  before  this
enunciated  the  law  concerning  cities  of
refuge  for  mauslayers,  and  had  already
pointed  out  the  cities  on  the  oast  of  the
Jordan  that  were  to  be  set  apart  for  this
(Numb.  XXXV.  11,  etc. ;  ch.  iv.  41,  etc.).  He
here  repeats  tlie  law  with  special  reference
to  the  appointment  uf  such  cities  "  in  the
midst  of  the  land,"  on  the  west  of  the
Jordan,  in  Canaan  itself;  and  he  supple-
ments the  instructions  formerly  given  with
directions  as  to  the  maintenance  of  ruails
to  the  cities  of  refuge,  and  as  to  the  division
of  the  land,  so  that  there  should  be  a  city
of  refuge  in  every  third  of  the  land.

Ver.  3. — ^Thou  shalt  prepare  thee  a  way.
In  the  East,  the  roads  were  for  the  most
part  mere  tracks  made  by  the  feet  of
animals  used  as  beasts  of  burden  or  for
travelling;  and  this  continues  to  be  the
case  in  Palestine  and  many  other  parts  of
the  East  even  at  the  present  day.  That
roads,  however,  properly  so  called,  were  not
unknown  to  the  Hebrews,  even  in  early
times,  is  evident,  not  only  from  this  passa<>;e,
bnt  also  from  Lev.  xxvL  22 ;  Numb.  xx.  17 ;
xxl.  22;  ch.  ii.  27;  1  Sam.  vi.  12.  The
design  of  the  injunction  here  was  that  every
facility  should  be  aflForded  to  the  fugitive  to
escape  to  the  place  of  refuge.  In  later
times,  it  was  enacted  that  the  roads  leading
to  these  cities  should  be  repaired  every  year
in  the  month  Adar,  and  every  obstruction
removed.

Vers.  4— 7.— (Cf.  Numb.  xxxv.  11,  etc.)

Vers.  8,  9. — In  case  their  land  should  be
extended,  in  case  they  should  come  to  pos-
less  the  whole  territory  promised  by  God
to  the  patriarchs,  so  that  their  domain
should  reach  from  the  Nile  to  the  Euphrates
(Gen.  XV.  18) — an  event  which  should  be
realized  only  if  they  should  continue  stead-
fast in  their  obedience  to  all  that  God  had
enjoined  upon  them,  and  an  event  which  in
point  of  fact  never  was  realized,  for  even
under  David  and  Solomon  there  were  ex-
tensive territories  within  these  limits  which
were  not  incorporated  with  the  kingdom  of
Israel — in  that  case  thiy  were  to  add  other
three  cities  of  refuge  to  those  already  ap-
pointed.

Ver.  10. — The  design  of  appointing  these


cities  was  to  prevent  the  shedding  ot
inuooent  blood,  wliich  would  be  the  case
were  the  unintentional  manslayer  killed  in
revenge  by  one  of  the  relatives  of  the  man
he  had  slain  ;  in  this  case  the  guilt  of  blood-
shed would  rest  upon  the  nation  if  they
neglected  to  provide  for  the  escape  of  the
manslayer.

Vers.  11 — 13. — These  cities,  however,
were  not  to  be  places  of  refuge  for  murderejs,
for  tliose  who  from  hatred  and  with  wicked
intent  had  slain  others;  if  such  fled  to  one
of  these  cities,  they  were  not  to  be  suffered
to  remain  theie;  tlie  ciders  of  their  uwn
city  were  to  require  them  to  be  delivered
up,  that  .the  avenger  might  put  them  to
death  (Numb.  xxxv.  16—33,  etc.).  In  the
earlier  legislation,  it  is  enacted  tliat  the
congregation  shall  judge  in  such  matters,
and  that  by  their  decision  it  should  be
determined  in  any  case  whether  the  person
who  hud  slain  another  was  to  be  allowed  to
remain  in  a  city  of  refuge  or  be  delivered
over  to  the  avenger  of  blood.  With  this  the
ordinance  here  is  not  inconsistent;  the
elders  were  not  to  act  as  judges,  but  merely
as  magistrates,  to  apprehend  the  man  and
bring  him  to  trial.

Ver.  14. — To  the  ordiuiinoe  concerning
cities  of  refuge  Moses  appends  one  proliibit-
ing  the  removing  of  landmarks;  if  these
had  been  placed  by  a  man's  ancestors  to
mark  the  boundaries  of  possessions,  they
were  not  to  be  surreptitiously  altered.
Landmarks  were  held  sacred,  and  a  curse
is  pronounced  against  those  who  remove
them  (ch.  xxvii.  7 ;  cf.  Job  xxiv,  2 ;  Prov.
xxii.  28;  xxiii.  10;  Hos.  v.  10).  Among
other  nations  also  landmarks  were  regarded
as  sacred  (cf.  Plato,  '  De  Leglbus,'  viii.  p.
842;  Dionys.  Halic  ii.  17;  Plutarch,
'Numa,'  16;  Ovid, '  Past.,'  iL  639).

Ver.  14.— They  of  old  time ;  i.e.  those  of  a
former  age  (d<:s!'ni,  earlier  ones,  ancestors,
predecessors).  The  word  does  not  necessarily
imply  that  the  age  described  as  "  former  "
was  removed  at  a  great  distance  in  the
past;  it  might  designate  men  of  the  im-
mediately preceding  age.  The  LXX.  have
here  ■!  irarepej,  and  the  Vulgate  priores.
That  the  law  here  given  was  uttered  whilst
Israel  was  yet  outside  of  Canaan,  is  evident
from  what  follows  in  this  verse.

Vers.  15 — 21. — To  secure  against  injury
to  life  or  pro|)erty  through  inadequate  or
false  attestation,  it  is  enacted  that  more
than  one  witness  must  appear  before  any-


320


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  XIX.  1 — 21.


thing  can  be  established ;  and  that,  should
a  witness  be  found  on  trial  to  have  testified
falsely  against  his  neighbour,  he  was  to  be
pniiished  by  having  done  to  him  what  he
thought  to  have  done  to  bis  neighbour
(cf.  ob.  ivii.  6;  Numb.  xxxv.  30).

Ver.  15.  —The  rule  in  oh.  xvii.  6,  regard-
ing accusations  of  idolatry,  is  here  extended
to  accusations  of  every  kind  before  a  court
of  justice;  a  single  witness  was  not  to  be
admitted  as  sufficient  to  convict  a  man  of
any  offence,  either  civil  or  criminal.

Ver  16. — To  testify  against  him  that
which  is  wrong;  literally,  to  testi''y  against
him  defection,  i.e.  from  the  Law  of  God.
The  speaker  has  apparently  in  view  here
all  such  defections  from  the  Law  as
would  entail  punishment  on  the  convicted
.  offender.  In  oh.  xiii.  5  [6],  indeed,  the  crime
described  here  as  "  that  which  is  wrong "
(margin,  "falling  away")  is  specially  the
crime  of  apostaoy  to  idolatry ;  but  the  word
(nno),  though  usually  expressing  apostaoy


from  Jehovah,  has  properly  the  general
sense  of  a  deflection  from  a  prescribea
course  (from  iid,  to  go  off,  to  go  aside),  and
DO  may  describe  any  departure  from  what
is  coniitituted  right.

Yer.  17. — Both  the  men,  i.e.  both  parties
at  the  bar,  shall  stand  before  the  Lord;  i.e.
shall  come  to  the  sanctuary  where  Jehovah
had  his  dwelling-place  in  the  miJst  of  his
people,  and  where  the  supreme  judges,  who
were  his  delegates  and  representatives^
held  their  court  (ch.  xvii.  9).

Ver.  19. — Thought.  The  verb  here  useJ
(DD1)  means  generally  to  meditate,  to  have
in  mind,  to  purpose ;  but  it  frequently  has
the  subaudition  of  meditating  evil  (cf.
Ps.  xxxi.  37;  xxxvii.  12;  Prov.  xxx.  32,
etc.).

Ver.  20.— (Cf  ch.  xi'.i.  12.)

Ver.  21. — The  lex  talionis  was  in  this
case  to  be  observed  (cf.  Excid.  xxi.  23 ;  Lev.
xxiv.  20;.  Practically,  however,  a  pecuniary
compensation  might  be  accepted  for  the
ofience  (cf.  Josephus, '  Antiq.,'  if.  8,  35).


HOMILBTICS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — ITie  cities  of  refuge.  The  appointment  of  cities  of  refuge  by  Moses  is
of  great  interest,  as  yielding  a  study  in  Jehovah's  ways  of  educating  his  people,  and
ol"  giving  light  and  truth  to  men.     We  will  see —

I.  The  place  this  institution  occupies  in  history.'  So  far  as  we  are  aware,  there
is  nothing  just  now  existing  among  civilized  nations  with  which  it  is  altogether
analogous.  The  most  recent  regulations  which  seem  to  be  a  kind  of  reiiuction  of  it
from  afar,  are  those  in  the  mediaeval  Church,  called  "  the  right  of  sanctuary."  Eccle-
siastical historians  inform  us  that  the  right  of  refuge  in  churches  began  as  early  as  the
days  of  Constantine ;  that  at  first  only  the  altar  and  the  interior  of  the  Church  was  the
place  of  refuge,  but  that  afterwards  any  portion  of  the  sacred  precincts  availed.  This
privilege  was  "  not  intended  to  patronize  wickedness,  but  to  give  a  place  of  shelter  for
the  innocent,  or,  in  doubtful  cases,  to  give  men  protection  till  they  could  have  a  hearing,
and  to  give  bishops  an  opportunity  of  pleading  for  criminals."  These  refuges  allowed
thirty  days'  respite,  though  under  the  Anglo-Saxon  law  of  King  Alfred  but  three  days
were  granted.  It  speaks  but  little  for  the  advance  of  opinion  then  that  the  right  of
refuge  was  denied,  not  only  to  the  openly  wicked,  but  to  heretics,  apostates,  and
runaway  slaves.  In  after  times  this  right  of  sanctuary  was  granted  even  to  notorious
criminals,  not  excepting  such  as  were  guilty  of  treason.  In  early  ages  there  were  asyla
among  the  Germans.  Before  that,  among  the  Eomans.  In  founding  Rome,  Romulus
made  it  a  place  of  refuge  for  criminals  from  other  states,  for  the  purpose  of  peopling  the
city.  Further  back,  in  the  Greek  states,  the  temples,  altars,  sacred  groves,  and  statues
of  the  gods  possessed  the  privilege  of  protecting  slaves,  debtors,  and  criminals.  And,  if
we  go  back  further  still,  we  find  among  Oriental  peoples  a  custom  known  by  the
nncouth  term,  "  blood-revenge,"  according  to  which,  if  a  murder  had  been  committed,
the  nearest  of  kin  to  the  murdered  man  had  a  right  to  pursue  the  murderer  and  take

'  Scriptnre  passages :  Exod.  xxi. ;  Numb.  xxv. ;  Josh.  xx.    The  student  will  find  much


of  Moses;'  Langhome's  'Plutarch,'  i.  52;  Wilkinson's  'Ancient  Egyptians;'    Lane's
dern  Eg>|  t.ians,'  i.  145,  270—272;  Gesenius  and  others,  mh  verb,  ^gi  (OSelX


cu.  XIX.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DBUTBEONOMY.  321

vengeance  on  him.  It  is  said  that  among  the  Arabs  this  right  exists  to  the  preseal
day.  In  what  form  it  existed  anjong  the  ancient  Egyptians  we  are  able  to  infer  from
Mr.  Lane's  statement  that  it  exists  in  almost  savage  wildness  among  the  moderns.  And
we  might  gather,  from  the  way  in  which  Moses  uses  the  term  "  avenger  of  blood,"  that
the  Hebrews  may  have  been  familiar  with  it,  as  having  seen  it  practised  in  Egypt,  or
as  having  received  the  custom  from  the  nations  among  whom  their  fathers  dwelt  prior
to  going  down  into  Egypt.  This  right  of  the  nearest  of  kin  to  avenge  a  murder  in  a
family  is  called  godism,  from  the  word  "  goel,"  which  has  the  two  apparently  incom-
patible meanings  of  "  next  of  kin  "  and  "  avenger  of  blood."  So  that  there  are  actually
two  institutions  known  of,  in  the  light  of  which  we  have  to  look  at  these  cities  of
refuge.  One,  goelism;  the  other,  the  right  of  sanctuary.  Each  of  them  was  open  to
abuse.  If  the  former  had  unrestricted  sway,  private  revenge  might  bear  very  hardly
on  one  who  had  accidentally  killed  another.  Supposing  the  second  to  be  left  without
guard,  it  might  become  the  means  of  screening  from  justice  criminals  of  the  worst  type.
The  first  abuse  was  common  among  Oriental  nations;  the  second,  amongst  Greeks,
Romans,  Anglo-Saxons,  and  the  mediseval  sanctuaries  of  Europe.  And  it  is  only  as  we
set  the  Mosaic  institution  in  the  double  light  of  the  earlier  ones  out  of  which  it  came,
and  of  the  later  ones  which  came  out  of  it,  that  its  real  value  can  be  seen.  Hence
we  see  —

II.  The  purpose  it  served  in  the  Mobaio  legislation.  There  is  one  fundamental
principle  on  which  the  Mosaic  civil  code  is  based,  i.e.  the  value  of  patient  culture.
Moses  found  certain  abuses  existing.  He  did  not  sweep  them  away  at  once,  but  aimed
at  educating  the  people  out  of  them.  With  regard  to  this  right  of  revenge,  he  estab-
lished such  a  remarkable  system  of  checks  and  counter-checks  as  surely  only  a
superhuman  wisdom  could,  in  that  age,  have  devised.  Our  space  will  only  allow  us  to
indicate  these  very  briefly.  1.  Moses  recognizes  the  sacredness  of  human  life,  both  to
God  and  to  man.  2.  He  provides  that,  when  a  wrong  is  done  to  society,  it  shouLi
be  in  some  way  recognized,  and  that  society  should  have  its  own  safeguard  against  the
rejietition  thereof.  3.  A  great  step  would  be  gained  if  such  reparation  for  the  wrong
as  is  needed  for  the  sake  of  security  could  be  gained  without  any  peril  of  the  wild  play
of  private  revenge  (ch.  xix.  6 ;  Numb.  xxxv.  24).  4.  A  broad  distinction  is  to  be
made  between  wrongs  (Numb.  xxxv.  25).  5.  The  examination  of  the  case  and  the
desision  upon  it  were  put  into  the  hands  of  the  people  through  their  elders  and  judges.
6.  The  cities  of  refuge  were  selected  where  justice  was  most  likely  to  be  done ;  even
frcm  the  cities  of  the  Levites.  7.  All  this  was  doubly  fenced  from  abuse.  For
( 1 )  No  murderer  was  to  be  screened  (Numb.  xxxv.  31).  (2)  No  one  was  to  be  reckoned
as  a  murderer  on  the  unsupported  testimony  of  one  man.  So  that  the  goel  had  no
power  except  there  were  corroborative  evidence  of  guilt.  8.  The  reason  is  given  in
Mumb.  xxxv.  33,  34.  Now,  when  we  know  that  all  legislation  has  to  be  tested,  not
by  the  question,  "  What  is  absolutely  the  test  ?  "  but  by  "  What  is  the  best  the  people
can  bear  ?  " — surely  these  laws  give  indications  of  a  guidance  and  wisdom  not  less  than
Divine.

III.  The  typical  forbshadowikqs  in  this  institution  are  noteworthy.  They
are  many.  The  preacher  may  well  luxuriate  in  working  them  out.  1.  Outraged  right
requires  vindication.  2.  In  vindicating  the  right  and  avenging  the  wrong,  equity  and
kindness  are  to  be  studiously  guarded.  Grace  is  to  reign  through  righteousness.
3.  God,  in  his  kindness,  provides  a  refuge  from  the  haste  or  excesses  of  private
revenge.  4.  God  gives  special  directions  concerning  them.  There  was  to  be  one  in
each  district,  so  that  the  fleeing  one  might  not  have  too  far  to  go.  The  place  was  to  be
accessible ;  good  roads  thither  were  to  be  made.  The  Jews  caught  the  spirit  of  the
directions,  and  had  direction-posts  put  at  the  corners  of  roads,  with  the  words  "  Refuge !
refuge!"  plainly  put  thereon.  The  same  rule  for  a  Hebrew  apiilied  to  the  stranger  and
foreigner.  The  refuge  did  not  avail  if  a  man  did  not  flee  thither.  And  there  were  sins
for  which  it  did  not  avail  at  all  (see  vers.  11, 12,  and  Numb.  xxxv.  29 — 34) ;  and  where
the  refuge  did  avail  it  was  only  the  death  of  the  high  priest  which  set  a  homicide
entirely  Tree  from  the  consequences  of  his  blood-shedding.

IV.  There  are  some  related  truths  in  the  goveehment  op  God  which  are  not
iroREBHADCWED  IN  THESE  CITIES  OF  REFUGE.  Two  of  these  there  are,  and  those  so
remarkable,  that  it  is  not  surprising  if  some  do  not  regard  the  cities  of  refuge  as  bein"

DBUTEBONOMY.  X


322  THE  BOOK  OF  L'EUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xix.  1— 2i,

typical  at  all.  1.  Though  the  manslayer  was  to  flee  to  the  city,  yet  he  was  to  ice/rom  the
goel.  The  opposite  is  the  case  under  the  gospel.  We  said  that  the  word  "  goel "  had  twc
meanings,  viz.  that  of  "  nearest  of  kin  "  and  "avenger  of  blood,"  because  the  nearest  of
kin  was  the  avenger  of  blood.  But  as  the  student  traces  the  Bible  use  of  this  word,  lo,  it
has  a  third  meaning,  even  that  of  redeemer  (Isa.  xli.  14 ;  xliii.  14 ;  iliv.  24  ;  xlviii.  17 ;
liv.  5,  8 ;  Ix.  16).  Jehovah  is  the  Goel.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  our  next  of  kin,  the
avenger  of  wrong,  the  Redeemer.  He  has  vindicated  the  majesty  of  Law  by  bearing
the  stroke,  that  it  may  not  be  inflicted  on  the  penitent.  He  is  at  once  onr  City  of
Refuge  and  our  GSel.  We  flee  to  him,  not  from  him.  2.  The  refuge  was  provided  for
the  delay  of  judgment  till  the  case  was  examined»  Here,  refuge  is  for  the  penitent,
that  h«  may  never  come  into  judgment  at  all.    He  may  say  and  sing —

"  Should  storms  of  sevenfold  thunder  roll.
And  shake  the  globe  from  pole  to  pole.
No  flaming  bolt  shall  dannt  my  face,
For  Jesus  ia  my  Hiding-place."


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS

Vers.  1 — 13. — Cities  of  refuge.  The  institution  of  cities  of  refuge  (cf.  ch.  It.  41 —
43)  seems  to  have  been  peculiar  to  the  legislation  of  Moses.  It  is  an  institution
reflecting  strong  light  on  the  wisdom,  justice,  and  humanity  of  the  Mosaic  code.  The
system  of  blood  revenging,  while  securing  a  rude  kind  of  justice  in  communities  where
no  proper  means  existed  of  bringing  criminals  to  public  trial,  was  liable  to  great  abuses
(ver.  6).  The  usage  was,  however,  too  deeply  rooted  to  be  at  once  abolished,  and  Moses,
by  this  ordinance,  did  not  seek  prematurely  to  abolish  it.  The  worst  evils  of  the
system  were  checked,  and  principles  were  asserted  which  were  certain  in  course  of  time
to  lead  to  its  abandonment.  In  particular  the  two  principles  were  asserted:  1.  The
distinction  between  accidental  homicide  (vers.  4,  5)  and  intentional  murder  (ver.  11).
2.  The  right  of  every  criminal  to  a  legal  trial.  It  is  a  proof  of  the  wisdom  of  the
institution  that,  under  its  operation,  blood  avenging  seems  very  early  to  have  died  out
in  Israel.

These  old  cities  of  refuge,  though  their  grey  walls  have  long,since  crumbled  to  decay,
have  still  much  about  them  to  interest  us.  We  can  scarcely  regard  them  as  ordained
types  of  gospel  realities,  but  ihey  certainly  furnish  valuable  illustrations  of  important
gospel  truths.  To  a  reader  of  the  New  Testament,  Christ  is  suggested  by  them,  and
shines  through  them,  and  the  best  use  we  can  make  of  them  is  to  learn  from  them  the
need  of  seeking  a  like  security  in  Christ  to  that  which  the  manslayer  found  in  his
strong  city  (see  infra). — J.  O.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  cities  of  refuge  as  types.  Using  the  word  in  a  popular  and  not  in
a  theological  sense,  we  may  speak  of  them  in  this  way.  We  have  in  the  law  ordaining
them —

I.  A  VIVID  PiCTUKE  OF  THE  DANGEK  OF  THE  SINNER.  In  Certain  points  the  contrast
is  stronger  than  the  resemblance.  1.  The  manslayer  might  be  guiltless  of  the  crime
imputed  to  him.  His  act  may  have  been  unintentional.  He  had  in  that  case  done
nothing  worthy  of  death  (ver.  6).  To  slay  him  would  have  been  to  shed  "innocent
blood."  The  sinner  who  seeks  refuge  in  Christ  cannot  enter  this  plea.  His  sins  are
only  too  real  and  inexcusable.  2.  The  avenger  of  blood  may  have  pursued  the  man-
slayer unjustly.  He  may  have  sought  his  death  in  blind  fury  and  passion.  His  hot
heart  would  make  no  distinctions.  The  Avenger  whom  we  have  to  fear  is  holy  and  just.
His  breast  harbours  no  vindictiveness,  nor  does  he  pursue  without  just  cause.  Yet  he
does  pursue,  for  sin  is  the  one  thing  which  God  cannot  tolerate  in  his  universe,  and  he
will  not  allow  it  to  pass  unjudged  and  unavenged.  These  are  points  of  difference,  but
in  the  one  point  of  awfnl  and  immediate  danger,  the  parallel  is  exact.  Outside  the
walls  of  the  city  of  refuge  the  manslayer  knew  that  there  was  no  safety  for  him.  A
sword  was  unsheathed  which  would  certainly  drink  his  blood,  if  the  pursuer  could  but
overtake  him.     Delay  meant  death,  and  he  would  not  tempt  it  by  pausing  one  iustauj


CH.  XIX.  1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  323

InWs  flight.  Is  tlie  lituation  of  the  sinner  out  of  Christ  any  less  perilous?  "The
wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him  "  (John  iii.  36).  The  sword  of  justice  is  unsheathed
•gainst  him.  Whither  shall  he  flee  to  escape  his  danger  ?  Concealment  may  have  been
possible  from  the  avenger  of  blood,  but  it  is  not  possible  from  God.  Nor  will  any  other
refuge  than  Christ  avail.  The  man  in  shipwreck,  who  scorns  to  avail  himself  of  the
lifeboat,  but  prefers  to  cling  to  the  solitary  hulk,  filling  with  water,  and  doomed  soon  to
go  to  the  bottom,  is  not  more  certain  of  his  fate  than  is  the  transgressor  of  God's  Law,
rejecting  Christ,  letting  his  day  of  grace  slip  past,  and  clinging  vainly  to  his  own
righteousness  or  to  any  other  mocking  hope.  "Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any
other,"  etc.  (Acts  iv.  12).

II.   A  VIVID  PICTUBB   OF   THE   SEOUMTY   OF   THE    REFUGE    PROVIDED   IN  ChRIST.      In

Christ,  our  Saviour,  God  has  provided  a  secure  and  accessible  refuge  for  the  sinner.
Here  again  there  is  a  point  of  contrast  as  strongly  marked  as  is  the  feature  of  resem-
blance. 1'he  refuge  city  was,  after  all,  only  a  refuge  for  the  innocent.  The  manslayer
may  have  been  rash  and  careless,  and  in  that  sense  blameworthy,  but  he  was  not  a
wilful  murderer.  Fur  the  deliberate  murderer  there  was  no  asylum  (vers.  11 — 14).
He  was  to  be  taken  even  from  God's  altar,  and  put  to  death  (Exoil.  xxi.  14).  In  this
respect  the  gospel  presents  features  different  from  the  refuge  of  the  Law.  It  is  true
that  even  in  Christ  there  is  no  rpfuge  for  sinners  wedded  to  their  sins.  If  murderers
may  come  to  him,  it  is  no  longer  with  murderous,  impenitent,  unbelieving  hearts.  But,
on  the  other  hand,  of  those  who  turn  to  him  in  penitence,  there  is  none  whose  sins  are
so  black  that  the  Saviour  will  not  take  him  in.  The  guiltiest  and  most  red-handed  may
wash  in  his  blood,  and  be  cleansed  from  their  stains  (1  John  i.  7).  This  is  the
peculiarity  of  the  gospel  that  as,  on  the  one  hand,  it  proclaims  the  absolute  need  of
salvation  to  those  who  may  think  themselves  too  good  for  it ;  so,  on  the  other,  it  holds
out  welcome  to  those'who  might  be  tempted  to  think  themselves  too  bad  for  it.  There
is  none  beyond  the  pale  of  God's  mercy  save  he  who  puts  himself  beyond  it  by  his  own
unbelief.  Christ  is  a  Befuge  for  sinners  :  1.  In  virtue  of  the  offices  he  sustains.  2.  In
virtue  of  the  work  he  has  accomplished;  3.  In  virtue  of  the  position  he  occupies —
appearing  in  heaven  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us.  In  him  believers  are  safe.  They
are  freed  from  condemnation  (Hom.  viii.  1).  They  are  justified— saved  from  guilt  and
wrath — under  Divine  protection,  and  certain  of  acquittal  in  the  judgment  (Kom.  v.  1,
9, 10;  viii.  31 — 39).  They  "  have  a  strong  eity ;  salvation  will  God  appoint  for  walls
and  bulwarks  "  (Isa.  xxvi.  1).

III.  A  VIVID  PICTURE  OF  THE  8IMPLICITY  OF  THE  WAT  OF  SALVATION.      The  Way  tO

the  city  of  refuge  was  direct  and  plain.  The  roads  were  kept  in  good  repair.  A  suffi-
cient number  of  cities  was  provided  to  make  the  refuge  readily  accessible  from  every
part  of  the  land."  It  was  God's  desire  that  men  should  reach  the  refuge,  and  every
facility  was  afforded  them  for  doing  so  which  the  case  admiited  of.  How  fit  an  image
of  the  simplicity  and  directness  of  the  gospel  method  of  salvation  through /ai<A  in
Christ!  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved"  (Acts  xvi.  31).
"  It  is  of  faith,  that  it  might  bt  by  grace ;  to  the  end  the  promise  might  be  sure  to
all  the  seed"  (Rom.  iv.  16).  Faith  includes  the  three  ideas  of  believing  in,  accepting
of,  and  resting  in  Christ.  Doubtless,  to  some,  faith  seems  anything  but  easy.  Carrying
with  it  the  surrender  of  the  heart  to  Christ,  it  is,  in  one  view  of  it,  the  hardest  of  all
conditions.  But  it  is  hard  only  to  those  who  love  sin  more  than  they  desire  salvation.
The  soul  that  sees  the  evil  of  its  sin,  and  baa  a  deep  desire  to  escape  from  it  and  to  be
reconciled  to  God,  will  never  cea^e  to  wonder  at  the  simplicity  of  the  way  by  which  iti
salvation  is  secured.

IV.  An  ILLUSTRATION  OP  THE  NECESSITY  OF  ABIDINO  IN  ChRIST  FOR  SALVATION,      The

manslayer  had  to  abide  in  the  city  till  the  high  priest's  death.  If  he  went  beyond  it  he
was  liable  to  be  slain  (Numb.  xxxv.  25 — 29).  Our  High  Priest  never  dies,  and  we
must  abide  in  our  city  if  we  wou'd  be  safe  (John  xv.  4 ;  Col.  i.  23  ;  Heb.  iii.  14 ;  x.  38,
39).  The  conclusion  of  the  whole  is,  the  duty  of  availing  ourselves  at  once  of  this
Befuge  "  aet  before  us  "  (Heb.  vL  18).— J.  0.

Ver.  14. — Removing  the  landmark.  1.  A  dishonest  act.  2.  A  deceitful  act.  3.  A
covetous  act.  4.  An  injurious  act.  Nothing  would  as  a  rule  be  more  keenly  resented
than  this  mean  attempt  to  rob  the  owner  of  land  of  a  bit  of  his  ancient  possesBiou.
— J.O.


324  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [en.  iix.  1— 2t

Vers.  16 — 21. — False  witness.  Gud's  brand  is  here  placed  upon  the  crime  of  false
witness.  It  was  to  be  severely  punished.  Every  one  is  interested  in  the  suppression  of
such  a  crime — the  parties  whoso  interests  are  involved,'society  at  large,  the  Church,  the
magistracy,  God  himself,  of  one  of  whose  commandments  (the  ninth)  it  is  the  daring
violation.  The  rules  here  apply  primarily  to  false  witness  given  in  courts  of  justice,  but
the  principles  involved  may  be  extended  to  all  forms  of  the  sin.

I.  False  witness  is  in  God's  sight  a  great  evil.  1.  It  indicates  great  malevolence.
2.  It  is  grievously  unjust  and  injurious  to  the  person  wrongfully  accused.  3.  It  is
certain  to  be  taken  up  and  industriously  propagated.  A  calumny  is  never  wholly  wiped
out.  There  are  always  found  Borne  evil-speaking  persons  disposed  to  believe  and  repeat
it.     It  affixes  a  mark  on  the  injured  party  which  remains  on  him  through  life.

II.  False  witness  assumes  many  forms.  It  is  not  confined  to  law  courts,  but
pervades  private  life,  and  a|ipears  in  the  way  in  which  partizuns  deal  with  public  men
and  public  events.  Persons  of  a  malicious  and  envious  disposition,  given  to  detraction,
can  scarcely  avoid  it — indeed,  live  in  the  element  of  it.  Forms  of  this  vice :  1.  Deliberate
invention  and  circulation  of  falsehoods.  2.  Innuendo,  or  srtggestio  falsi.  3.  Suppression
of  essential  circumstances — suppressio  veri.  4.  The  distortion  or  deceitful  colouring  of
actual  facts.    A  lie  is  never  so  successful  as  when  it  can  attach  itself  to  a  grain  of  truth—

"  A  lie  that  is  all  a  lie  may  be  met  and  fought  with  outright ;
But  a  lie  that  is  part  of  a  truth  is  a  harder  matter  to  fight."

III.  The  false  witness  borne  by  one  against  another  will  be  exposed  at  God's
JUDGMENT  SEAT.  The  two  parties — he  who  was  accused  of  bearing  false  witness  and
he  who  alleged  himself  to  be  injured  by  it — were  required  to  appear  before  the  Lord,
and  to  submit  their  cause  to  the  priests  and  judges,  who  acted  as  his  deputies  (ver.  17).
It  was  (heir  part  to  make  diligent  inquisition,  and,  if  the  crime  was  proved,  to  award
punishment  (vers.  18,  19).  The  punishment  was  to  be  on  the  principle  of  the  lex
talionis  (vers.  19 — 21).  So,  at  Christ's  judgment  seat,  the  person  who  has  long  lain
under  an  undeserved  stigma  through  the  false  witness  of  another  may  depend  on  being
cleared  from  wrong,  and  the  wrong-doer  will  be  punished  (Col.  iii.  25).  Meanwhile,  it
is  the  duty  of  every  one  to  see  to  the  punishment  of  this  crime,  not  only  in  cases  of  actual
perjury,  but  in  every  form  of  it,  and  not  only  by  legal  penalties,  but — which  is  the  only
means  that  can  reach  every  case — by  the  emphatic  reprobation  of  society,  and,  where  that
is  possible,  by  Church  censures. — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 13. —  Tht  dties  of  refuge.  The  blood-feud,  as  we  know,  was  carried  out
remorselessly  among  nomadic  nations,  the  manslayer  having  to  be  slain,  even  though
his  manslaying  were  purely  accidental.  In  other  words,  there  was  no  distinction  made
hetween  manslaughter  and  murder  by  the  nomadic  nations  in  the  rude  early  ages.  But,
by  the  Lord  creating  the  cities  of  refuge,  three  on  each  side  of  the  Jordan,  to  which
the  manslayer  could  repair,  and  where,  if  it  was  manslaughter  only,  he  could  remain
without  molestation  till  the  death  of  the  high  priest,  a  distinction  between  these  two
crimes  was  carefully  made.'  The  city  of  refuge  was  a  divinely  ordained  place  of  peace
for  the  person  who  had  only  slain  his  neighbour  accidentally.  In  case  of  premeditated
murder,  the  person  was  to  be  taken  even  from  God's  altar  and  executed.

I.  The  children  or  Israel  were  hereby  taught  that  all  bins  are  not
EQUALLY  HEINOUS  IN  God's  SIGHT.  Morality  must  differentiate  and  distinguish,  not
treat  sin  in  the  lump.  Morality  is  undermined  where  revenge  treats  manslaughter  and
murder  alike.  The  Old  Testament  morality  was  thus  a  great  advance  on  the  Morality
of  the  time.

II.  This  abbangemekt  about  the  cities  op  refuge  showed  that  thtob  was

A   WAT   OF   PARDON    PROVIDED    FOR   AT    LEAST    SOME    SINNERS    UNDER    THE    LaT.      The

Law  is  sometimes  regarded  as  merciless  rigour,  whereas  its  sacrificial  ceremoi  lies  and
such  an  arrangement  as  this  before  us  proclaimed  pardon  and  escape  for  some  sinners.
An  undertone  of  mercy  was  heard  underneath  the  thunder  of  its  wrath.

Now,  the  way  of  pardon  is  instructive.  It  was  to  be  prepared.  Towards  t)  e  citiei
of  refuge  the  best  roads  of  the  country  converged.     Directions  were  given  to  kokv  them

'  QL  Mozley's  '  Ruling  Ideas  in  Early  Ages,"  pp.  200—281.


OB.  XIX.  1—21.]  THE  BOOS  OF  DEUTEEOXOMY.  326

clear,  that  the  man  who  was  fleeing  for  his  life  might  have  his  fair  chance  of


And  what  agony  must  have  been  experienced  along  that  way !  The  possibility  of
being  overtaken,  and  having  the  life  taken  away,  must  have  made  the  race  to  the  city
a  desperate  ordeal.

And  then  the  imprisonment  there  till  the  death  of  the  high  priest  must  have  made
the  manslayer  walk  very  softly  all  those  days.  When  at  last  the  high  priest  died,
he  was  free !

Now  all  this,  we  believe,  is  typical  of  the  gospel.  The  soul  is,  like  the  manslayer,
guilty  of  shedding  innocent  blood.  Doubtless  not  intentionally,  but  much  evil  is
wrought  by  want  of  thought,  as  well  as  by  want  of  heart.  We  are  all  guilty.  But  a
way  has  been  provided  for  ou/ safety.  It  is  a  way  of  an.xiety,  of  solemn  thought,  and
eventually  of  peace  through  the  death  of  him  who  is  our  High  Priest.  Safety  in  tlie
city  of  refuge  is  the  symbol  of  safety  in  Jesus  Christ;  while  he  is  also  the  High  Priest
whose  death  delivers  and  restores  the  exile.  It  takes  the  two  things,  the  city  of  refuge
and  the  death  of  the  high  priest,  to  bring  out  all  that  Jesus  is  to  sinful  men.

III.  There  was  unpardonable  sin  under  the  Law,  as  there  is  undeb  the
oosFEL.  The  murderer  was  not  protected  in  a  city  of  refuge,  but  delivered  up  to
execution.  Murder  was  one  of  the  sins  which  the  fjaw  deemed  unpardonable.  We
mean,  of  course,  unpardonable  so  far  as  this  life  and  world  ara  conceined.

Now  what  we  have  to  notice  is  that,  under  the  gos|  el,  there  is  an  unpardonable  sin
(Matt,  xii,  31 ;  Mark  iii.  28,  29).  And  about  this  sin  our  Lord  is  very  explicit.  It  is
unforgivingiitss,  the  perpetuation  of  the  murderous  spirit  in  impenitent  mood.  We  do
not  hold  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  insufficient  to  cleanse  away  all  sin  (1  John  i.
6,  7) — the  very  opposite.  But  so  long  as  a  soul  regards  others  with  an  unforgiving
temper,  it  is  manifest  that  the  Divine  grace  has  been  kept  at  bay.  God  will  not  for-
give those  who  aie  not  forgiving.  Forgivingness  and  forgiveness  are  twin  sisters,  and
they  visit  the  soul  together.  If  Gud  has  really  forgiven  us,  we  shall  find  ourselves  in  a
forgiving  moud,  the  least  we  cou'ld  do  in  the  circumstances;  but  conversely,  if  we
continue  in  hard,  unforgiving  mood,  it  is  proof  positive  that  we  have  not  yet  ex-
perienced God's  forgiveness.  How  deeply  the  gospel  probes  our  carnal  nature,  and
conquers  it!

IV.  Vengeance  cannot  be  dispensed  *iTH  in  God'b  government,  and  we  need
NOT  calculate  UPON  SUCH  A  DISPENSATION.  The  avenger  of  blood  was  the  officer
for  the  time  being  of  public  justice.  It  was  a  public  duty  he  was  called  to  discharge.
And  public  justice  still  has  its  revenges,  and  will,  as  long  as  criminals  continue.  It  is
the  same  with  God.  "  Vengeance  is  mine ;  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."  The  weapon
is  a  dangerous  one  for  us  to  handle,  but  God  will  take  charge  of  It,  and  will  use  it  as
the  interests  of  good  and  all-wise  government  require. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  14 — 21. — The  law  of  retaliation.  When  we  consider  "  retaliation,"  we  find
that  it  is  the  converse  of  the  "golden  rule."  In  fact,  it  is  giving  back  to  a  person  his
breach  of  that  rule  to  see  how  he  likes  it.  It  is  just  a  rough  method  of  teaching  rude,
selfish  souls  that,  there  is  retribution  in  all  selfish  practices ;  the  gun  may  be  fired
maliciously,  but  it  sooner  or  later  lays  the  sportsman  in  the  dust.  Now,  it  is  morally
right  that  those  who  do  to  others  as  they  do  not  wish  others  to  do  to  tliem  should  have
precisely  their  own  paid  back  to  them.     It  is  simple  justice.

I.    PUBIJC  JUSTICE   MAKES  PROVISION   FOR  THIS  IN  EVERT  CIVILIZED  COUNTRY.      When

Jesus  directed  his  disciples  not  to  retaliate,  but  to  cultivate  the  spirit  of  non-
resistance  to  evil  (Matt.  v.  38 — 42),  he  did  not  wish  them  to  take  the  law  into  their
own  hands,  but  to  leave  to  public  Justice  what  in  the  olden  time  had  to  be  settled
privately.  He  certainly  did  not  mean  that  his  disciples  should  screen  men  from  the
processes  of  public  law,  when  they  had  made  themselves  amenable  thereto.  His
advice  regarded  the  edifice  of  public  justice  as  raised  by  advancing  civilization,  and
taking  up  consequently  many  matters  which  private  parties  in  a  ruder  age  had  to
deal  with.'
IL  Rktaliation  was  in  the  early  time  a  duty  which  individuam  ovtcd  to

'  Cf.  MozleyV  Euliug  Ideas  in  Early  Ages,'  p.  184,  eto.


326  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  ml  1—21.

THE  PUBLIC.  It  is  too  oftsn  supposed  that  revenge  is  such  a  gratification  that  men
need  no  exhortation  to  take  it.  But  we  find  men  that  are  too  cowardly  to  retaliate,
men  who  would  rather  let  the  greatest  rufiBans  escape  than  risk  anything  in  giving
them  their  desert.'  Before  the  erection  of  public  justice,  therefore,  as  a  recognized  and
well-wrought  institution,  it  was  necessary  to  sustain  the  courage  of  the  people  against
lawlessness  by  making  retaliation  a  public  duty.  The  avenger  was  not  a  man  thirsting
for  blood,  but  one  who  would  very  likely  have  remained  snugly  at  home  instead  of
risking  his  life  in  retaliation.  Men  have  to  be  "whipped  up"  oftentimes  to  the
requisite  courage  for  public  duty.

III.  RBTAIilATION,  WHEN  FAITHFULLY  OARBIED  OUT,  WAS  A  CHECK  ON  SELFISH  CON-
DUCT AND  A  HELP  TO  A  HiOHEB  MORALITY.  The  goldcu  rule  of  doiug  uuto  Others  as
we  would  that  they  should  do  to  us  was  the  goal  at  which  the  morality  of  the  Old
Testament  was  aiming.  One  way  of  leading  up  to  it  is  by  carrying  out  its  opposite,
Evnd  giving  to  the  wrong-duer  an  idea  of  what  it  is  to  receive  what  we  do  not  desire.
We  have  to  prai,lise  this  in  the  correction  of  children.  When  they  act  a  cruel  part  by
others,  they  get  a  taste  of  suffering  themselves,  just  to  let  them  know  what  it  is  like.

IV.  At    THE    BACK    OF    ALL    God's    MERCY    THERE    IS    THE    ALTERNATIVE    OF    STRICT

jcDQMENT  IN  CASE  HIS  MERCY  IS  REFUSED.  The  gospcl  IS  the  golden  Fule  in  its
highest  exemplification.  It  is  God  doing  unto  man  as  he  would  have  man  do  unto
him  were  he  in  such  circumstances.  But  if  men  reject  the  Divine  mercy,  and  will  not
receive  God's  love,  then  there  is  no  other  alternative  but  strict  justice.  And  strict
justice  means  retaliation.  It  is  giving  back  to  man  what  he  dares  to  give  to  God.  It
man  refuses  God's  love,  and,  instead  of  accepting  and  returning  it,  gives  to  God  hate ;
then  it  is  only  right,  eternally  right,  that  he  should  receive  what  he  gives.  God  can-
not but  hate  as  utterly  abominable  the  soul  that  hates;  him  who  is  essential  Love.
Wrath  is  the  "  love-pain  of  God "  CLiebes-schmeriz  Gbttes),  as  Schoberlein  has  called
it.  It  is  forced  on  him  by  the  action  of  his  creatures.  They  have  had  the  opportunity
of  love,  but,  since  they  refuse  it,  they  must  be  visited  by  wrath.

Hence  there  is  nothing  weak  about  the  Divine  administration.  Its  back-
bone is  justice;  but  special  arrangements  were  made  in  the  atonement  of  Jesus  to
allow  of  God  being  "justly  merciful ; "  when,  however,  this  just  mercy  is  rejected,  God
must  return  to  the  stricter  lines,  and  deal  with  the  ungrateful  as  they  deserve.  In  the
retaliation  of  God  there  is,  of  course,  nothing  mean  and  nothing  selfish.  His  vengeance
is  in  the  interests  of  public  morals,  and  a  necessary  part  of  a  wise  administration.
There  should  be  no  trifling,  then,  with  the  Divine  offer;  for,  if  it  be  not  accepted,  men
nmst  prepare  for  wrath. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  1—10. — The  cities  of  refuge.  The  territory  of  Canaan  was  allotted  to  <he
Jews  for  this  special  end,  that  the  principles  of  the  heavenly  kingdom  might  be
practically  unfolded  on  earth.  In  the  Divine  treatment  of  men,  as  members  of  the
body  politic,  justice  and  mercy  were  to  be  harmoniously  blended.  Human  life  was
uniformly  treated  as  precious,  but  righteousness  was  reveled  as  more  precious  still.

I.  Severe  injury  to  men  may  be  wrought  simply  by  thoughtless  inad-
vertence. The  physical  laws  of  nature  are  stupendous  forces,  whiph  man  must  well
investigate  and  comprehend,  if  he  would  wisely  control.  They  are  evidently  intended
for  the  welfare  of  mankind,  and  prove  very  useful  servants,  but  very  dangerous
masters.  In  the  infancy  of  science  and  technical  skill,  great  peril  arises  to  human
life  from  gigantic  forces  which  we  have  not  learnt  to  command.  The  fall  of  an  axe
the  course  of  a  projectile,  is  according  to  the  operation  of  fixed  law.  Careliil  observance
of  this  law  is  life;  heedlessness  is  death.  "Evil  is  wrought  by  want  of  thought  as
well  as  want  of  heart."

IL  The  duty  of  the  state  politic  to  provide  fob  the  necessities  of  tub
unfortunate.  Before  the  Jews  entered  into  possession  of  the  promised  land,  God
gave  them  instruction  how  to  fulfil  responsible  duties.  If  it  was  a  claim  of  justice
that  refuge  cities  should  be  provided  for  unwary  manslayers,  then  justice  would  equally
require  that  provision  should  be  made  for  all  sorts  of  unfortunates  and  af9icted  ones.
To  stay  the  hand  of  private  revenge — to  prevent  the  effusion  of  innocent

■  Cf.  Mozley,  ut  $upra,  p.  185b


cti.  XIX,  1—^1.]  TtlE  BOOii  01"  DEUTtoONOMT.  *27

private  vigilance  does  not  suffice ;  it  must  be  the  business  of  the  State.  The  whole
community  is  addressed  by  God,  as  if  it  were  a  single  person.  In  some  respects,  each
man  and  each  woman  has  to  act  separately  and  alone ;  in  some  respects,  they  have  to
merge  self  into  the  family,  and  the  family  into  the  nation.  Man  must  learn  to  act  as
part  of  a  greater  whole.

III.  The  family  tie  is  always  btkonqeb  than  the  national  tie.  It  is  obvious
that  this  is  the  natural  order.  If  a  man  was  inadvertently  killed,  srsQe  blood  relation
would,  in  all  likelihood,  espouse  the  cause  of  the  injured,  and  thirst  to  i»Tenge  the  injury.
Men  feel  bound  to  protect  each  the  other  against  the  assaults  of  violence.  There  is  an
understood  compact  for  inutual  protection.  But,  in  proportion  as  affection  becomes
diffused  and  spreads  over  a  larger  area,  so  it  becomes  attenuated.  What  it  gains  in
extension  it  loses  in  intensity.  Therefore  checks  and  restraints  are  needed  for  im-
moderate family  feeling.

IV.  Human  fbblino  is  more  rapid  in  its  movements  than  the  judombnts  op
REASON.  On  the  whole  it  is  best  that  it  should  be  so.  Self-preservation  often  depends
on  the  spontaneous  movement  of  instinct.  But  whenever  human  life  is  not  in  immi-
nent peril,  it  is  becoming  that  sane  men  should  reflect  and  ponder  before  they  yield  to
vindictive  feeling.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  man  killed  was  the  more  blameworthy ;
perhaps  the  only  blameworthy  of  the  two ;  yet  the  vengeful  blood  of  neighbour  or
friend  of  the  dead  waits  for  no  inquiry,  but  rushes  off  to  add  another  to  the  tenants  of
Hades.  This  also  is  the  work  of  the  devil,  and  must  be  resisted.  We  must  learn  to
bring  all  instincts  and  feelings  under  the  sceptre  of  reason  and  love.  Haste  usually  is
a  mark  of  weakness  or  of  madness.

v.   EeVBNGE     is     INVirjORATINO :   SORROW    AND     FEAR    ARE     ENEBVATINQ.      If,   Under

ordinary  circumstances,  two  men  were  well  matched  in  strength  and  courage,  the  one
who  has  unwarily  killed  a  neighbour  is  so  enfeebled  by  sorrow  or  by  fear  (or  by  both),
that  he  is  no  longer  a  match  for  the  other.  On'  the  other  hand,  the  man  who  under-
takes to  champion  the  cause  of  the  dead  is  lifted  into  almost  superhuman  stature  and
strength.  For  the  moment  he  feels  as  if  girded  with  omnipotence,  and  acquires  fleet-
ness,  courage,  and  strength  over  the  quailing  person  of  the  manslayer.  Therefore,
every  possible  facility  must  the  state  politic  afford  for  the  relief  of  the  manslayer
against  the  avenger.

VI.  Territorial  property  carries  with  it  responsible  duties.  Material  pro-
perty has  its  dark  side  as  well  as  its  bright.  It  brings  burdens  as  well  as  enjoyments.
With  every  increase  of  territory,.  God  required  that  there  should  be  increase  of  refuge
cities,  and  that  roads  should  be  prepared  along  which  the  unsinning  manslayer  should
flee.  All  earthly  blessings  have  their  drawbacks,  but  heavenly  possessions  are  un-
alloyed. They  are  pure  gold  without  admixture,  sun  without  shade,  summer  without
winter.

VII.  Religion  ennobles  and  beautifies  every  earthly  lot.  The  land  which
we  inherit,  or  which  furnishes  for  us  a  temporary  home,  is  a  gift  from  Qod.  He  has
not  parted  with  the  freehold.  It  is  his  absolutely,  and  in  the  use  of  it  his  will  is  ever
to  be  consulted.  We  have  but  a  life  enjoyment  in  it.  As  it  is  a  free  gift  from  him,
we  are  bound  to  respect  all  the  clauses  he  embodies  in  the  trust.  He  is  to  be  recog-
nized and  revered  perpetually.  The  refuge  cities  were  the  residences  of  the  priests ;  the
elders  of  these  cities  were  priests  of  Jehovah,  therefore  they  were  representatives  of
■Tehovah's  mercy.  These  cities  were  emphatically'  "  cities  of  salvation."  Their  walls
were  deliverance ;  their  gates,  praise.  They  were  symbols  of  Calvary — types  of  the
great  redemption. — ^D.

Vers.  11 — 13. — Lex  taJionis.  The  refuge  provided  by  mercy  i8  open  to  abuse.  The
perversity  of  man  will  poison  the  streams  from  the  heavenly  fountain.  But  in  this
city  of  peace  none  shall  abide  except  those  who  have  clean  hands.  False  hopes  are
doomed  to  crushing  disappointment:  Even  from  the  gate  of  heaven  there  is  a  back
way  to  the  prison-house  of  hell.     The  man  of  blood  eventually  destroys  himsel£

I.  Hatred  is  ingenious  in  accomplishing  its  nefarious  ends.  Hatred  has  an
insatiable  appetite.  It  drives  a  man  in  whom  it  dwells,  as  with  a  slave-master'g  whip,
to  do  its  base  behests.  It  robs  him  of  his  sleep  at  night,  that  he  may  lie  in  ambush
for  some  innocent  victim.    All  day  long  be  is  driven  to  most  odious  tasks  by  this  spiiit


328  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xii.  1— 21.

of  mischief.  Without  interruption,  hatred  holds  iti<  busy  conclave  in  the  dark
caverns  of  tlie  soul,  and  presses  into  service  every  faculty  of  the  man,  tmtil  it  has
clutched  its  prey.

II.  The  mubderous  uak  flatters  hihself  that  hb  shall  be  safe.  He  is
conscious  that  vengeance  is  in  store  for  him.  No  sooner  is  the  deed  done  than
cowardly  fear  seizes  him.  The  righteousness  of  God  has  fleet-footed  detectives  in  its
service.  Nevertheless,  cunning  falsehood  comes  to  him  as  the  devil's  comforter,
'i'hough  his  hands  be  stained  through  and  through  with  blood,  he  will  wear  gloves  of
innocence,  a  mask  of  pretence.  It  were  a  nobler  thing  to  brave  the  matter  out,  and
defy  all  opposition.  But  this  the  sinner  cannot  do.  He  quails  before  the  omniscient
eye;  and,  however  insecure  the  hiding-place,  he  cheats  himself  with  the  hope  of
escape.  Guilty  as  his  conscience  affirms  him  to  be,  he  seeks  a  place  among  the
innocent.    For  the  sinner  no  refuge  can  be  found.    The  earth  shall  cast  him  out.

III.  The  I'OWER  of  death  is  a  sovereign  function  of  the  State.  "The
el'iers  of  his  city  shall  send  and  fetch  him  thence."  Human  life  is  too  precious  to  he
placed  at  the  disposal  of  private  revenge ;  therefore  the  chief  province  of  the  state
politic  is  to  protect  life  against  violence.  Unbiased  natures  are  the  only  proper  judges
(if  right  and  wrong.  '  Justice  will  speak  only  in  the  calm  atmosphere  of  sincerity  and
truth.  The  representative  power  of  the  whole  community  is  the  only  power  which
fully  sufBces  to  vindicate  the  claims  of  righteousness.  Tliis  is  God's  vicegerent  upon
the  earth.     Hence  magistrates  are  described  as  "  gods."

IV.  Biohteousness  is  nobler  than  PITT.  There  are  circumstances  in  which  Pity
must  not  speak — a  time  for  her  to  be  silent.  "  Thine  eye  shall  not  pity."  There  are
some  situations  in  which  her  presence  would  be  out  of  place,  her  action  injurious.
But  Righteousness  must  never  be  absent.  The  very  atmosphere  in  God's  kingdom  is
penetrated  with  her  vital  breath.  Her  sceptre  is  the  sceptre  of  God,  and  exerts  a
potent  influence  over  every  department  of  human  life.  Righteousness  is  the  soul's  ,
proper  robe,  and  without  it  she  can  nowhere  fitly  appear.  All  true  prosperity  is  the
fruit  of  righteousness.  It  cannot  go  well  with  any  nation,  nor  with  any  man,  until
guilt  is  put  away.     Even  compassion  for  others  must  be  a  righteous  compassion. — D.

Ver.  14. — Caution  against  fraud.  Nothing  that  concerns  man's  welfare  and  joy  L
beneath  God's  care.  The  vast  extent  of  his  kingdom  hinders  not  his  guardianshij
over  every  minute  interest  of  his  creatures.  Even  landmarks,  boundary  stones,  ar.  ■
under  his  protection.

I.  God  IS  TO  be  recognized  as  the  absolute  Proprietor  of  all  things.  Ah
the  Creator  andTJpholder  of  the  universe,  he  has  supreme  claim  to  this  sc»lid  globe.
"  The  earth  is  the  Lord's."  Nor  has  he  ever  parted  with  his  rightful  claim,  foi-  he  keeps
the  globe  hourly  in  existence,  and  so  continually  proclaims  his  control  over  it.  It  is
his  gift  to  men,  not  in  the  sense  that  he  has  transferred  all  his  rights  to  others,  but
only  in  the  sense  that  we  were  unable  ta  purchase  from  him.  We  hold  every  possession
from  him  in  trust,  and  are  bound  by  such  ternis  and  conditions  as  his  will  may  impose.

II.  It  18  Gk>D's  WILL  that  land  should  be  distributed  as  personal  estate.
Although  evils  result  from  the  division  of  the  land  info  personal  property,  greater
evils  would  result  from  communal  or  indiscriminate  pos.session.  The  fields  would  not
be  well  cultured.  The  land  would  not  yield  her  prolific  plenty.  Dispute  and  strife
would  be  the  chronic  state  of  society.  Personal  property  is  essential  to  healthy  life  in
the  State.     Yet  men  are  stewards,  and  not  absolute  proprietors.

III.  Boundary  lines  between  our  own  and  other's  possessions  are  to  be
SCRUPULOUSLY  RESPECTED.  The  arrangements  of  personal  property  offer  a  fine  field
for  self-restraint,  as  well  as  for  neighbourly  kindness.  If  we  had  been  destitute  of  all
possessions,  we  should  be  denied  the  enjoyment  of  helping  others.  A  man  who  has
regard  for  the  health  of  his  own  soul,  will  not  remove  his  neighbour's  landmarks  by  so
much  as  a  single  inch.  He  will  rather  lose  a  pound  than  take  by  fraud  a  penny.  This
Divine  command  is  but  a  tiny  branch  springing  out  of  the  root  principle,  "  Thou  shalt
love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself," — D.

Vers.  15—21. — Bulwark  against  perjury.  "  The  tongue  is  an  unruly  member,  and
cannot  oaaily  be  restrained."    Private  slander  is  base  enough,  but  its  basest  utteranc*


CH.  XX.  1—20.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


32ii


U  when,  in  the  sacred  halls  of  justice,  it  swears  away  a  man's  reputation  or  his  life.  Ii
is  doubtful  if  a  deed  so  black  is  done  in  hell.

I.   PbRJTJKT   is     so    COMMON    AS     TO    NECESSITATE   A    PUBLIC    STIOMA  ON   HUMANlT-y,

"  One  witness  shall  not  rise  up  against  a  man."  If  every  man  had  been  known  at,
truthful,  the  testimony  of  one  witness  on  any  accusation  would  be  ample.  The  nar-
ration of  (me  eye-witness  or  ear-witness  ought  to  be  enough.  For  a  truthful  man
would  always  speak  within  the  limits  of  truth,  and  would  pronjptly  express  his  doubt,
if  certainty  could  not  be  reached.  But  the  common  experience  of  humanity  has  been
that  the  bulk  of  men  will  prevaricate  and  conceal  the  truth,  even  under  the  solemn
sanction  of  an  oath.  Hence  it  has  been  found  wise  to  condemn  no  man  judicially,
unless  more  than  one  witness  can  be  found.  Cumulative  evidence  is  required  to
obtain  a  valid  sentence.  This  can  be  interpreted  in  no  other  way  than  a  public  testi-
mony to  the  depravity  of  man.    The  prisoner  obtains  the  benefit.

IL   PbBJUBT   is   a   CBIMA>    to    be    TBIBD     IN    THE    HIGHEST    CODBT    OP   THE   BEALM.

The  accused  and  the  accuser  in  such  a  case  shall  "stand  before  the  Lord."  This  is  not
80  much  a  sin  against  man  as  a  sin  against  God.  The  sacred  person  of  Truth  has  been
publicly  violated,  and  the  wisest  and  holiest  in  the  land  are  commissioned  by  God  to  be
the  judges.  As  often  as  we  violate  the  truth,  we  insult  the  God  of  truth,  and  stand
before  God  for  judgment.  Hence  it  is  of  the  first  importance  that  we  cultivate  truth-
fulness in  OUT  thoughts  and  in  our  speech.

III.  In  pbopobtion  to  the  gbavitt  of  the  chabqe  should  be  the  thobouoh-
NBS8  OF  THE  SCBUTINT.  Although  WO  may  expect  to  know  the  will  of  God  in  any
particular  case  by  laying  our  own  minds  open  to  the  action  of  God's  Spirit,  we  are  still
bound  to  pursue  the  most  diligent  and  thorough  inquiry.  God  rewards,  not  the
indolent,  but  the  patient  searcher  after  truth.  He  that  does  the  truth  will  discover
the  truth.     "  God  helps  those  who  help  themselves."

IV.  Intended  mischief  is  tbeated  as  actual  cbime.  The  character  and  quality
of  a  deed  depend  upon  the  moral  intention.  Whether  the  intention  becomes  an
overt  act  will  often  depend  upon  outward  opportunity  and  circumstance.  But  God
sees  the  incipient  motive  and  purpose  ;  in  his  court,  judgment  passes  upon  the  offender.
Human  courts  are  to  be,  as  far  as  possible,  copies  of  the  court  of  heaven.  Hence
the  perjured  witness,  who  seeks  to  visit  judicial  penalties  upon  the  head  of  the
innocent,  is  himself  as  guilty  as  if  his  base  project  had  succeeded.  "  Into  the  pit
which  he  had  digged  for  another  he  shall  fall  himself."  The  gallows  which  Haman
prepared  for  Mordecai,  served  for  his  own  doom.     This  is  God's  law  of  retribution.

v.  The  end  sought  in  this  judicial  execution  is  the  public  good.  The
sacrifice  of  one  life  is  intended  to  bring  advantage  to  the  many.  The  moral  effect  is
most  precious,  viz.  regard  for  righteousness — public  abstinence  from  crime.  Every
man  should  be  filled  with  this  patriotic  sentiment — the  higher  virtue  of  the  nation.
We  may  do  good  in  our  circle,  either  intensively  on  the  minds  of  a  few,  or  exten-
sively on  the  minds  of  the  many.  In  doing  good  to  others  we  do  good  to  ourselves.
"  We  are  members  one  of  another." — D.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  XX.


OiBEonONS  ooncebning  Wabfabe  is  gene-
ral, AND  FOB  THE  BESIEGING  OF  OlTIES
TH  PABTICDLAB.

Vers.  1 — 20. — The  instructions  in  this
chapter  are  peculiar  to  Deuteronomy.  As
the  people  of  God,  Israel  was  not  a  warlike
nation ;  they  were  rather  to  abstain  from
warfare,  and  as  a  general  rule  to  cultivate
the  arts  of  peace.  But  they  bad  before
them  at  tbia  time  the  prospect  of  a  serious


and  protracted  conflict  before  they  could
occnpy  the  land  which  God  had  assigned
to  them;  and  they  might  in  future  years
have  to  go  to  war  to  maintain  their  inde-
pendence and  repel  aggression.  In  view
of  this,  instructions  are  here  given  regarding
the  conducting  of  military  service.

Ver.  1. — When  they  found  themselves
opposed  by  an  army  more  numeroas  than
their  own,  and  better  furnished  with  the
material  of  warfare,  they  were  not  to  be
afraid  or  discouraged,  for  Jehovah  their
God,  who  had  brought  them  out  of  Egypt


330


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[oh.  xi.  1—26.


would  be  with  them  to  protect  and  help
thi  m  (of.  Ps.  XX.  7).  Horses  and  chariots.
In  these,  which  con.tituted  the  main
strength  of  the  nations  with  which  they
would  have  to  contend,  the  Israelites  were
deficient;  and  to  them  these  were  always
objects  of  terror  in  war  (Josh.  xi.  4 ;  xvii.
16;  Judg.  i.  19  ;  iv.  3  ;_1  Sam.  xiii.  5).

Ver.  2. — The  priest.  "Nut  the  high  priest
or  any  one  of  the  priests,  but  the  military
piiest,  the  priest  appointed  to  accompany
the  army,  "  the  anointed  for  the  war ; "
non^nn  n'ra,  as  the  rabbins  designate
him  (of.  Numb.  xxxi.  6;  1  Sam.  iv.  4,
2  Cliron.  xiii.  12).  His  business  was  to
exhort  tlie  people,  and  to  encourage  tliem
by  reminding  them  tliat  the  Lord  was  their
Leader,  and  would  help  them  iti  the  conflict.
The  formula  of  his  exhortation  is  given  in
vers.  3,  4.

Vers.  5 — 7. — The  officers ;  the  thoterim,
the  keepers  of  the  genealogical  tables  (ch.
xvi.  18).  It  belonged  to  them  to  appoint  the
men  wlio  were  to  serve,  and  to  release  those
who  had  been  summoned  to  the  war,  but
whoso  domestic  relations  were  such  as  to
entitle  them  to  exemjition.  If  there  was
one  who  hiid  built  a  house,  but  had  not
dedicated  it,  i.e.  by  taking  possession  of  it
and  dwelling  in  it ;  or  if  there  was  one  who
had  planted  a  vineyard  and  had  not  eaten
of  the  fruit  thereof;  or  if  there  was  one
who  had  betrothed  a  wife,  but  had  not  yet
married  her; — such  were  to  be  allowed  to
return  home,  lest  they  should  die  in  battle,
and  it  be  left  to  others  to  consummate  what
they  had  begun.  According  to  Josephus,
this  exemption  was  for  a  year,  according  to
the  analogy  of  oh.  xxiv.  5.  Dedicated ;  pro-
bably formal  possession  was  taken  of  the
house  by  some  solemn  ceremony,  followed
by  a  festive  entertainment.  Vineyard.  The
Hebrew  word  (ons)  here  used  designates
"  a  field  or  park  of  the  nobler  plants  and
trees  cultivated  in  the  manner  of  a  garden
or  orchard"  (Ges.);  so  that  not  vineyards
alone,  but  also  oliioyards  and  plots  of  the
more  valuable  fruit  trees  may  be  intended.
Hath  not  eaten  of  it;  literally,  hath  nut
laid  it  open,  made  it  common,  i.e.  begun  to
use  it,  to  gather  its  produce  for  common
use  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  30  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  5).  Trees
planted  for  food  were  not  to  be  used  before
tiie  fifth  year  of  their  growth  (Lev.  xix.  23,
etc. ;  cf.  ch.  xxiv.  5).

Ver.  8. — The  shoterim  were  also  to  allow
any  that  were  naturally  timid  and  faint-
hearted to  return  to  their  homes,  lest,  if
they  remained  with  the  host,  others,  in-
fected by  them,  should  lose  courage  and
become  unfit  for  service.  His  brethren's
heart  faint;  literally, /oto  down  oi  melt  (cf.
Josh.  vii.  5).  In  ch.  i.  28,  this  verb  ia  ren-
dered by  "  digoouraged."


Ver.  9. — The  next  thing  the  thoterim
had  to  do  was  to  appoint  captains  to  head
the  people  who  were  going  to  war.  The
army  was  divided  into  bands  or  companies,
and  over  each  of  these  a  captain  was  placed,
whose  it  was  to  command  and  lead  (cf.
Numb.  xxxL  14,  48 ;  1  Sam.  viii  12 ;
xxii.  7 ;  2  Sam.  xviii.  1).  Captains  of  the
armies.  _  The  phrase,  "  captain  of  a  host "
(Nasna?),  usually  designates  the  general  or
oommander-in-oliief  of  the  entire  army  (Gen.
xxi.  22 ;  2  Sam.  ii.  8 ;  1  Kings  xvL  16,  etc.) ;
but  here  the  phrase  is  used  in  the  plural
of  the  chiefs  of  the  companies  or  detach-
ments of  which  the  whole  was  composed.

Vers.  10 — 20. — Directioni  concerning  (he
besieging  of  towns.  In  the  case  of  a  town
at  a  distance,  not  belonging  to  any  of  the
Canaanitish  tribes,  on  advancing  against  it
they  were  first  of  all  to  summon  the  in-
habitants to  a  peaceable  surrender  and
mbmisslon  (cf.  Judg.  xxi.  13).  If  this  was
complied  with,  the  inhabitants  were  to
become  tributary  to  the  Israelites  and  serve
them ;  but  if  this  was  refused,  the  town
was  to  be  besieged,  and,  when  taken,  all  the
males  were  to  be  slain,  and  the  women  and
children,  as  well  as  all  the  booty  that  was
in  the  place,  were  to  be  taken  as  the  prey
of  the  conquerors,  who  were  to  appropriate
the  spoil  to  their  own  use.

Yer.  10. — Then  proclaim  peace  unto  it;
i.e.  invite  it  peaceably  to  surrender.

Ver.  11.— Shall  be  tribntariea  unto  thee,
and  they  shall  serve  thee;  literally,  shall
be  to  thee  for  tribute  and  service.  The  word
rendered  by  "  tribute  "  (do)  denotes  properly
tribute  service,  service  rendered  as  a  tribute,
whether  for  a  season  or  in  perpetuity  (cf.
Gen.  xlix.  15 ;  Judg.  i.  30,  33,  35 ;  1  Kings
V.  13;  ix.  21 ;  Isa.  xxxi.  8  [Authorized
Version,  "  discomfited  "]).

Ver.  14. — Shalt  eat  the  spoil;  consume
it  for  thine  own  maintenance.

Vers.  16 — 20. — This  was  for  cities  at  a  dis-
tance ;  it  was  to  be  otherwise  with  the  cities  of
the  Ganaanites.  To  them  no  ofier  of  peace-
ful submission  was  to  be  made,  and  when  the
city  was  taken,  all  the  inhabitants  without
reserve  were  to  be  destroyed.  This  was  in
accordance  with  God's  command  to  Israel
(Exod.  xxiii.  31—33 ;  xxxiv.  11  - 16 ;  ch.  vii.
1 — 3),  and  as  a  precaution  against  the  risk
of  the  people  being  seduced  into  idolatry
by  the  heathen  should  they  be  allowed  to
remain  in  the  land.  But  whilst  engaged
in  besieging  a  town,  they  were  not  to  destroy
the  fruit  trees  that  were  outside  the  walls;


«a.  XX.  1—20.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


331


but  trees  that  were  not  for  food  they  might
cut  down  and  use  in  their  operations  against
the  city.

Ver.  19.— To  employ  them  in  the  siege;
literally,  to  eome,  i.e.  that  they  should  eome
into  the  tiege  before  thee,  i.e.  either  as  thine
adversary  or  to  be  used  by  theo  for  the
siege.  For  the  tree  of  the  field  is  man's  life.
This  may  mean  that  the  tree  supplies  food
for  the  sustenance  of  man's  life.  But  as
the  woids  stand  in  the  text,  they  can  only
be  rendered  thus :  "  For  the  man  is  a  tree
of  the  field."  This  gives  no  good  sense,
or  indeed,  any  sense  at  all ;  and  hence  it  is
proposed  to  alter  the  reading  of  the  text
BO  as  to  produce  a  meaning  that  shall  be
acceptable.  From  an  early  period  the  ex-
pedient has  been  resorted  to  of  reading  the
clause  interrogatively,  and,  instead  of  re-
garding it  as  parenthetical,  connecting  it
with  the  following  words,  thus :  "  Is  the
tree  of  the  field  a  man  to  come  into  siege
before  thee?"  So  tlie  LXX.,  Bashi,  etc.
It  has  been  thought  that  only  a  very  slight
change  in  the  punctuation  is  required  to
justify  this  rendering  (Dnijn  instead  of
Dn«n) ;  but  more  than  this  is  acquired :  the
subject  and  object  are  hereby  reversed,  and
this  is  more  than  can  be  allowed.  From  an
aerly  period  also  it  has  been  proposed  to
read  the  clause  as  a  negation,  "For  the
tree  of  the  field  is  not  a  man  to  come  into
siege  before  tliee."  So  the  Targum  of
Onkelns,  Abarbanel,  Vulgate,  etc.  Tlie
sense  here  is  substantially  the  same  as  in
the  preceding,  and  the  same  general  objec-


tion applies  to  both.  To  both  also  it  may
be  objected  that  by  this  way  of  taking  tlie
passage  Moses  is  made  to  utter  a  sentiment
at  once  puerile  and  irrelevant;  for  what
need  to  declare  formally,  or  in  effect,  that
a  tree  is  not  a  man  ?  and  what  reason  is
there  in  this  for  not  cutting  down  fruit
trees  any  more  than  other  trees?  In  th(
margin  of  the  Authorized  Version  an  alter-
native rendering  is  proposed,  "  0  man,  the
tree  of  the  field  is  to  be  employed  in  the
siege."  But  admitting  this  as  a  possible
rendering,  it  is  exposed  to  the  objection,  on
tlie  one  hand,  that  it  is  improbable  that  in
a  prosaic  address  like  this  an  explanatory
appeal  would  be  introduced ;  and  on  the-
other,  that  it  is  inconceivable  that  Hoses
would  in  this  casual  and  startling  way  an-
ticipate what  he  goes  on  in  the  next  sentence
to  express  deliberately  and  clearly.  The
passage  has  probably  suffered  at  the  hands
of  a  transcriber,  and  the  text  as  we  have  it
is  corrupt.  The  sense  put  upon  it  in  the
Authorized  Version  is  that  suggested  by
Ibn  Ezra,  and  in  the  absence  of  anything
better  this  may  be  accepted.  The  fruit
tree  is  man's  life,  as  it  furnishes  that  by
which  life  is  sustained,  just  as,  in  ch.  xxiv.
6,  the  mdlstone  is  called  a  man's  life,  in-
asmuch as  it  supplies  the  means  of  life.

Ver.  20. — And  thou  shalt  build  bulwarks
against  the  city  .  .  .  until  it  be  subdued;
literally.  That  thou  mayest  build  a  tiege —
i.e.  an  instrument  for  besieging,  a  rampart,
or  bulwark — against  the  cUy,  tiU  it  eome
down  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  52).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 20. — Wars  to  he  regulated  hy  Divine  precepts.  The  directions  giren  by
Moses  in  this  chapter  may  serve  to  show  the  spirit  in  which  wars  should,  if  undertaken
at  all,  be  entered  on  and  prosecuted.  We  are  not  called  upon  here  to  moot  the
question  whether  war  is  under  any  circumstances  justifiable;  since  the  principle
on  which  the  Hebrew  lawgiver  proceeds  is  that  of  tolerating  for  a  while  certain  socially
accepted  customs,  mitigating  whatever  in  them  is  evil,  and  gradually  educating  people
out  of,them  altogether.  In  order  to  estimate  the  value  of  this  chapter,  it  should  be
compared  with  the  war  customs  of  the  nations  round  about.  Dr.  Jameson's  "  Comment-
ary "  has  some  valuable  references  thereon.  Here  are  directions :  First,  as  to  the  men
who  are  to  serve.  They  are  to  be  silted.  In  each  of  the  four  cases  of  exemption  there
is  an  obvious  significance.  Having  been  chosen,  they  are  then  to  be  organized.  And
their  attitude  and  courage  in  the  war  were  to  be  those  of  men  who  knew  that  the  Lord
their  God  was  with  them.  Note :  No  war  should  be  entered  on  in  which  the  presence
and  help  of  Ood  cannot  be  expected  and  implored.  Secondly,  as  to  the  mode  of
carrying  on  or  entering  on  war.  The  nations  of  Canaan  are  to  be  "stamped  out,"  that
A  great  pollution  may  be  driven  from  the  world.  With  this  exception  the  Hebrews  are
to  avoid  war,  if  possible  (ver.  10),  and  are  only  to  engage  in  it  if  forced  thereto  by  the
people  by  whom  they  were  opposed.  When  in  war,  no  wanton  destruction  was  to  be
allowed.  They  were  to  build  bulwarks  against  invaders,  but  were  not  to  destroy  the
subsistence  of  a  people  by  cutting  down  fruit  trees,  etc.  How  wonderfully  humane  and
even  tender  are  these  regulations  compared  with  the  customs  of  other  nations  at  that  time !


832  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  fcH.  xx.  1— 20

By  them,  in  fact,  thj  old  pagan  war  spirit  is  repressed,  and  a  war  policy  discouraged.
The  main  pursuits  ol"  their  life  are  to  be  found  in  the  tillage  of  the  soil.  A  standing
army  was  unknown  among  them.  War  was  not  to  be  encouraged  by  an  indis-
criminate levy  of  men,  nor  was  it  to  be  pursued  at  the  cost  either  of  the  industrial
pursuits  or  of  the  domesticities  and  sanctities  of  life.  If  even  in  those  days  the  war
spirit  was  to  be  kept  in  subjection,  much  more  should  it  be  so  now !  The  preacher
may  at  appropriate  times  and  seasons  develop  herefrom  Bible  principles  respecting  war.
1.  War  itself,  in  any  form,  is  regarded  in  the  Word  of  God  as  but  an  accom|ianiment  of
a  transition  state  of  things.  1 1  is  not  to  last  always  (I's.  xlvi. ;  Isa.  ii. ;  Luke  ii.).  Hence
all  should  desire  and  pray  that  it  may  speedily  come  to  an  end.  2.  Aggressive  and
unprovoked  war  for  the  mere  purposes  of  conquest,  finds  no  sanction  whatever  in
the  Word  of  God.  Israel's  wars  of  conquest  were  to  be  limited  within  assigned  bounds.
3.  War  should  never  be  resorted  to  except  in  a  case  of  stern  necessity.  Israel  was
to  make  the  effort  to  avoid  war,  if  possible.  4.  Supremacy  in  war  should  never  be  the
chief  care  of  a  people.  It  should  at  all  times  regard  war  as  but  an  occasional  and
awful  necessity,  and  should  see  more  glory  in  avoiding  it  than  in  conquest.
5.  When  war  is  engaged  in  simply  from  sheer  necessity,  its  horrors  should  be  mitigated
by  a  humane  regard  for  the  enemy's  welfare.  There,  is  more  lionour  in  kindly  con-
sideration for  an  enemy  than  tliere  is  in  crushing  him.  To  deprive  him  of  the  means
of  livelihood  is  a  barbarity  infinitely  to  be  condemned.  6.  When  war  bi comes  a  stern
necessity,  so  that  it  cannot  righteously  be  avoided,  it  may  then  be  invested  with
religious  sanctions,  and  the  blessing  and  help  of  God  may  be  expected,  asked  for,
and  relied  upon ;  then  a  people  may  say,  "  In  the  Name  of  our  God  we  will  set  up
our  banners  "  (Ps.  xx.)  For  success  in  such  a  war,  a  united  people  may  look  up
to  their  God,  and  they  will  find  thit  Jehovah  hears.  There  can  be  no  finer  instance
of  this  than  the  one  recorded  in  2  Cliron.  xx.  The  prayer  of  Jehoshaphat  is  sublime.
The  answer  came.  7.  When  thus  a  people  can  confidingly  look  up  to  the  Most  High,
and  in  the  full  assurance  of  being  right  can  ask  his  blessing,  there  should  be  no
faint-heanedncs?  known  among  thi  m.  They  may  be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage.
The  Lord  God  goeth  with  their  armies,  and  he  will  give  them  success.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.! — 5. —  War.  The  wars  of  the  world  form  a  large  part  of  its  history.  Savage
nations  delight  in  war,  revel  in  its  bloodshed  and  barbarities.  Their  heaven  is  a
Valhalla.  Civilized  communities,  wliile  averse  from  having  wars  waged  on  them,  are
not  always  so  averse  from  waging  war  on  others.  Military  ambition,  lust  of  conquest,
hope  of  enrichment  by  pillage,  the  wiping  out  of  old  grudges,  may  instigate  them
to  this  course.  Wherever  or  however  waged,  wnrs  are  a  source  of  incalculable  misery.
It  may  be  said  of  them,  "  It  must  needs  be  that  wars  come,  but  woe  to  that  man
by  whom  the  war  cometh  1 "  War  is  not  to  be  souglit,  it  is  to  be  by  every  legitimate
means  avoided,  but  it  may  become  a  necessity.  In  this  case  it  must  be  bravely
undertaken,  and  our  trust  jilaced  in  God  for  his  help.

I.  Religious  coueaoe  needed  in  wab.  It  is  a  not  uncommon  idea  that  the
influence  of  ri  ligion  is  adverse  to  the  hardier  elements  in  character.  The  Christian
faith  in  particular  is  thought  to  inculcate  a  meek  passivity  of  disposition,  which,  if  not
absolutely  inconsistent  with  patriotism,  courage,  and  other  soldierly  virtues,  is  at  least
unfavourable  to  their  development.  The  man  of  spirit  and  the  devout  man  are
supposed  to  represent  two  opposite  and  incompatible  types  of  character.  This  idea
is  strange,  when  we  remember  how  largely  the  iuiages  and  illustrations  of  the  Christian
life  in  Scripture  are  dravm  from  warfare.  But  it  is  sufficiently  refuted  by  reference
to  facts.  The  meekness  and  unwearied  forgivingness  which  is  to  characterize  the
Christian  in  his  private  relations  is  perfectly  compatible  with  the  most  unflinchin<'
heroism  in  the  discharge  of  public  duty,  and  in  the  service  of  his  country  in  her  appeal
to  the  God  of  battles.  Christian  meekness  is  nut  softness  or  effeminacy.  On  the
contrary,  it  is  an  aspect  of  the  highest  courage,  and  develops  moral  qualities  which
make  it  easier  to  act  courageously  in  any  circumstances  in  which  the  individual  may
be  placed.    Civil  liberty  has  seldom  fared  better  than  in  the  hands  of  God-fearing


OH.  XX.  1—20.]  TKE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEliONOMY.  338

men.  Instead  of  being  tlie"worst,  they  make  the  heat  soldiers.  An  army  of  soldiers,
God-fearing  and  thoroughly  disciplined,  has  usually  proved  more  than  a  match  for
vastly  superior  forces  of  the  enemy :  Cromwell's  Ironsides,  the  Scotch  Covenanters,
the  Cameronians.  As  fine  examples  of  the  soldierly  character,  we  may  name  Colonel
Gardiner,  Sir  Henry  Havelock,  Captain  Hedley  Vicars.  It  would  be  the  life  and
strength  of  our  armies  were  they  composed  of  such  men  from  the  top  to  the  bottom  of
the  scale.

II.  Warlike  courage  needed  in  rblioion.  We  may  apply  the  exhortations  of
tliese  verses  to  the  spiritual  warfare.  The  gospel  summons  us  to  warfare.  1.  With
evil  within  us.  2.  With  the  spiritual  forces  of  evil  around  us.  3.  With  the  hydra-
headed  incarnations  of  that  evil  in  the  institutions  and  customs,  sins  and  follies
of  society.  It  would  be  well  if,  in  this  campaign  against  evil,  we  could  command  in  our
ranks  the  same  union,  the  same  strict  discipline,  the  same  steadiness  of  action,  above
all,  the  same  heroic  bravery  and  endurance  and  preparedness  to  fuce  the  worst,  which
are  often  seen  in  earthly  armies.  Courage  and  readiness  to  sacrifice  for  Christ  all  that
his  cause  demands,  is  a  first  condition  of  success  in  the  spiritual  warfare.  There  must  be
faith  in  the  cause,  devotion  to  the  Leader,  enthusiasm  in  his  service,  and  the  spirit  of  those
who  "  love  not  their  lives  unto  the  death  "  (Rev.  xii.  1 1).  Instead  of  this,  how  often,
when  the  battle  approaches,  do  our  hearts  faint,  fear,  tremble,  and  are  terrified  because
of  our  enemies !  Victories  are  not  thus  to  be  gained.  We  forget  that  he  who  is  with
us  is  more  than  they  who  are  against  us.  The  Lord  is  more  to  those  in  whose  midst
he  is  than  all  the  horsea  and  chariots  and  multitudes  of  people  that  can  be  brought
against  them. — J.  0.

Vers.  5 — 10. — Exemptions  Three  classes  were  exempted  from  service  in  war,  and
one  class  was  forbidden  to  take  part  in  it.  The  exempted  classes  were :  1.  He  who  had
built  a  house,  but  had  not  dedicated  it.  2.  He  who  had  planted  a  vineyard,  but
had  not  eaten  of  its  frait.  3.  He  who  had  betrothed  a  wife,  but  had  not  married
her.  The  class  forbidden  to  engage  in  the  war  was  the  class  of  cowards  (ver.  8)
These  regulations —

I.  Had  an  important  bearing  on  the  stability  of  society.  War  has  naturally
a  disturbing  effect  on  industry  and  commerce.  It  unsettles  the  public  mind.  It
creates  a  feeling  of  insecurity.  It  prevents  enterprise.  These  evils  would  be  intensified
in  a  state  of  society  where,  besides  the  danger  of  the  country  being  overrun  by  hostile
armies,  each  adult  malQ  was  liable  for  service  in  the  field.  In  such  a  condition  of
society  there  would  obviously  be  a  disinclination,  when  war  was  imminent,  to  acquire
property,  to  institute  improvements,  or  to  enter  into  any  new  engagements.  The  man
who  built  a  house  would  not  be  sure  that  he  would  live  to  dedicate  it ;  the  man  who
planted  a  vineyard,  that  he  would  live  to  eat  of  it ;  the  man  who  betrothed  a  wile,  that
he  would  be  spared  to  take  her.  This  provision  of  the  Law  was  there  Tore  calculated
to  have  a  reassuring  and  tranquillizing  effect,  and  would  so  far  counteract  the  tendency
of  warlike  rumours  to  paralyze  industry  and  the  arrangements  of  domestic  life.

II.  Were  an  important  alleviation  of  the  evils  of  war.  They  aimed  at
exempting  those  who,  from  their  circumstances  and  prospects,  would  feel  most  keenly
the  hardship  of  a  call  to  service.  Ver.  7  connects  itself  with  the  importance  attached
in  ancient  nations  to  the  perpetuation  of  the  house.  "According  to  modern  notions,
a  forlorn  hope  would  naturally  be  composed  of  men  who  had  not  given  hostages  to
fortune.  Such,  however,  was  not  the  light  in  which  the  matter  presented  itself  to  the
Greek  mind.  The  human  plant  had  -flowered.  The  continuance  of  the  house  was
secure.  It  was  therefore  comparatively  of  little  moment  what  befell  the  man  whose
duty  to  his  ancestors  had  been  fulfilled  "  (Renuuf),  The  sentiment  here  expressed  was
that  of  ancient  nations  generally.

III.  Were  of  great  importance  in  securing  efficiency  in  the" army.  The  army
was  plainly  better  without  the  cowards  than  with  them.  One  coward  may  do  harm  to
a  whole  company.  But,  besides  these,  it  was  likely  that  persons  serving  by  com-
pulsion, in  a  spirit  of  discontent  at  disappointed  prospects,  and  for  the  sake  of  their
prospects  unwilling  to  part  with  their  lives,  would  prove  but  inferior  soldiers.  At  any
rate,  there  was  policy  in  recruiting  the  army  only  from  those  who  had  a  fixed  stake  in
the  welfare  of  the  nation.    The  man  with  house,  wife^  and  vineyard  was  more  likely  t«


834  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xx.  1— 2a

be  ready  to  shed  the  last  drop  of  his  blood  in  defence  of  his  treasures  than  one  wholly
unattached,  or  attached  only  in  hope.

Lessons.  1.  Those  entering  the  Christian  warfare  need  to  count  the  cost  (Luke
xiv.  25 — 34).  2.  In  Christ's  oervice  thrre  are  no  exemptions.  3.  Nevertheless,  con-
sideration should  be  shown  in  the  wurk  of  the  Church  for  those  who  are  peculiarly
situated.  4.  The  danger  of  being  entangled  in  spirit  in  Christ's  service  (2  Tim.  ii.  4).
5.  The  faint-hearted  are  no  strength  to  a  cause  (Judg.  vii.  3).  6.  Numbers  are  not  the
Duly  thing  to  be  considered  in  reckoning  the  efficiency  of  a  Church  or  of  any  tody  of
spiritual  warriors.^-J.  0.

Vers.  10—20. — Forbearance  and  severity.  If  these  niles  embody  a  severity  happily
rare  in  modern  warfare,  they  also  exhibit  a  forbearance  which  many  modern  nations
might  well  learn  from.     We  have  here —

I.  War's  hohroks  mitigatep.  1.  Peace  was  invariably  to  be  offered  before  attack  to
u,  foreign  city  (vers.  10,  11).  It  is  presumed  that  the  war  was  just,  and  undertaken
with  the  sanction  of  Jehovah.  If  peace  was  accepted,  no  one  was  to  be  injured,  but
only  tribute  imposed.  The  peacemaking  spirit  is  pleasing  to  God  (Matt.  v.  9;
Rom.  xii.  18).  2.  In  the  case  of  a  city  taken  by  storm,  no  women,  children.,  or  cattle  were
to  be  destroyed  (ver.  14).  The  amount  of  self-restraint  which  this  implies  can  only  be
appreciated  after  reading  the  accounts  of  warfare  as  anciently  conducted.  But  we  may
get  some  light  upon  it  by  studying  the  horrors  of  the  sack  of  a  city,  even  in  modern
times,  and  under  European,  or  even  British,  generalship  (see  histories  of  the  Peninsular
wars).  3.  In  the  'Sparing  of  trees  iiseful  for  food  (ver.  19).  War  conducted  on  these
principles,  however  severe  in  certain  of  its  aspects,  cannot  be  described  as  barbarous.

II.  War's  severities  exemplified.  1.  The  resisting  city,  if  foreign,  was  to  be
punished  by  the  slaughter  of  its  adult  males  (ver.  13).  This,  which  sounds  so  harsh,
was  perhaps  a  necessity  from  the  circumstances  of  the  nation.  It  certainly  typifies  the
"  utter  destruction  "  wliich  shall  fall  on  all  resisting  God's  will,  and  placing  themselves
in  an  attitude  of  hostilit)'  to  his  kingdom  on  the  earth.  2.  The  Canaanites  were  to  be
comjjletely  exterminated  (vers.  16 — 18).  This  case  differs  from  the  other  in  being  the
execution  of  a  judicial  sentence,  as  well  as  an  indispensable  means  to  their  own  pre-
servation against  corruption  (ver.  18).  A  general  type  of  the  fate  which  shall  overtake
the  ungodly. — J.  O.

Vers.  1 — ^20. — Eeligious  wan.  We  have  in  this  chapter  an  Instructive  direction
about  the  prosecution  of  a  religious  war.  For,  after  all,  war  may  be  the  only  way  of
advancing  the  interests  of  nations.  Disputes  become  so  entangled,  and  ureat  principles
become  so  staked  in  the  disputes,  that  war  is  welcomed  as  the  one  way  to  peace  and
progress.  It  is  en  awful  expedient,  but  there  are  worse  things  than  war.  "  Cowardice,"
said  Rev.  F.  W.  Robertson,  of  Brighton,  "  is  worse.  And  the  decay  of  enthusiasm  and
manliness  is  worse.  And  it  is  worse  than  death,  ay,  worse  than  a  hundred  thousand
deaths,  when  a  people  has  gravitated  down  into  the  creed  that '  the  wealth  of  nations-
consists,  not  in  generous  hearts — '  Fire  in  each  breast,  and  freedom  on  each  brow ' — in
national  virtues,  and  primitive  simplicity,  and  heroic  endurance,  and  preference  of  duty
to  life; — not  in  men,  but  in  silk  and  cotton  and  something  that  they  call ' capital.'
Peace  is  blessed.  Peace  arising  out  of  charity.  But  peace  springing  out  of  the  calcu-
lations of  selfishness,  is  not  blessed.  If  the  price  to  be  paid  for  peace  is  this,  that '  wealth
accumulate  and  men  decay,'  better  far  that  every  street  in  every  town  of  our  once  noble
country  should  run  blood  1 "  From  the  directions  in  the  chapter  before  us,  we  learn  such
lessons  as  these —

I.  The  righteousness  op  the  cause,  and  not  the  numbers  in  the  field,  n  to  be
THE  foundation  OP  TRUST.  The  Jews  were  going  into  Palestine  as  the  Lord's  nost,
and,  even  though  a  minority  sometimes,  they  were  sure  to  win.  "  If  God  be  for  us,
who  can  be  against  us?"  was  to  be  their  ground  of  confidence.  And  our  Lord  con-
templated the  victory  of  a  minority  in  his  illustration  about  calculating  the  cost.  "  Or
what  king,  going  to  make  war  against  another  king,  sitteth  not  down  first,  and
cunsiilteth  whether  he  be  able  with  ten  thousand  to  meet  him  that  cometh  against  hira
with  twenty  thousand  ?  "  (Luke  xiv.  31).  A  good  cause,  like  a  good  king,  is  worth  ten
thousand  soMiers  (2  Sam.  xviii.  3).  David's  great  sin  was  trusting  in  numbers  and  not
in  Ood  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  2,  etc.).


OH.  XX.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  336

n.  A  BIOHTEOUS  CAUSE  ADMITS  OP  THE  WAR  BEINO  ENTERED  UPON  Ki;LI0I0U8tT.      The

priest  was  to  give  them  an  oration  before  the  battle,  showing  that  they  were  going  to
fii;ht  the  Lord's  battles,  and  that  he  would  be  with  them  (vers.  2 — 4).  Of  course,  this
has  been  imitated  often  by  those  who  had  not  right  on  their  side.  Yet  the  hypocrisy
of  a  party  or  people  is  in  itself  a  testimony  to  the  need  for  a  religious  spirit  characteriz-
iag  combatants.  The  most  depraved  feel  somehow  in  the  tremendous  game  of  war  that
they  are  appealing  to  the  God  of  battles,  and  should  at  least  acknowledge  him  in  .
entering  the  contest.

III.  The  abuy  should  be  weeded  op  the  oabepul  and  the  cowardly.  Provision
is  here  made  for  the  dismissal  home  of  those  who  are  careworn  about  an  undedicated
habitation  fver.  5),  or  about  a  newly  acquired  vineyard  (ver.  6),  or  about  a  betrothed
wife  (ver.  7),  and  also  for  the  dismissal  of  those  who  are  faint-hearted  (ver.  8).  The
combatants  should  be  as  free  as  possible  from  care,  and  from  the  infection  of  cowardice.
They  might  have  sung,  with  the  modern  minstrels —

*  We  want  no  cowards  in  our  band.
That  from  their  colours  fly ;
We  call  for  valiant-liearted  men,
Who're  not  afraid  to  die."

IV.  In  ordinabt  conquests,  peaceful  pboposals  are  first  to  be  tried.  (Vers.
10 — 15.)  If  these  are  entertained,  well  and  good ;  if  not,  then  the  conquest  will  be
all  the  surer  of  having  shown  the  preliminary  consideration.  This  was  to  regulate  any
foreign  conquest  into  which  they  might  be  forced.  When  the  victory  was  won,  the
male  adult  population  were.to  be  put  to  the  sword,  because  they  had  forfeited  their  lives
by  rejecting  the  peaceful  proposals ;  but  the  women  and  children  and  property  were  to
be  the  prey  of  the  invaders.  We  have  here  the  suggestion  of  arbitration,  from  which
much  is  properly  hoped  in  mitigation  of  war,

.V.  But  in  the  conquest  op  the  idolatrous  nations  or  Canaan,  extermination
WAS  the  onlt  safety  for  the  invading  host.  By  their  abominable  idolatries  they
bad  forfeited  all  right  to  life,  and  their  continued  existence  would  only  i}ave  been  a
snare  to  Israel.  Children  and  women  as  well  as  adult  males  were  to  be  included  in  the
desolation.  This  apparently  harsh -decree  has  its  counterpart  still  in  the  government
of  the  world.  A  storm  or  pestilence  does  not  respect  children  any  more  thau  men.  It
shows  that  the  Great  Huler  does  not  intend  the  present  state  of  things  to  be  /incU.  A
judgment  to  come  is  surely  the  logical  lesson  of  such  a  feature  of  war  and  of  providence.
The  innocent  who  suffer  with  the  guilty  shall  get  their  compensation  in  the  other  life.

VL  The  ravages  of  war  are  to  be  kept  within  as  narrow  limits  as  possible.
This  seems  to  be  the  lesson  in  this  arrangement  about  the  protection  of  fruit  trees
in  the  siege  (vers.  19,  20'j.  The  future  peaceful  and  prosperous  state  of  thirjgs  is
to  be  considered,  and  no  more  harm  done  by  the  stress  of  war  than  is  absolutely
unavoidable.

We  have  thus  great  principles  applicable  to  all  the  warring  period  of  human  progress.
Wars  are  still  desperate  remedies.  A  time  is  coming  when  "  the  war-drum  shall  throb
no  longer ; "  but  meanwhile,  let  wars  be  prosecuted  in  a  religious  spirit  and  with  all
religious  precautions,  when  they  must  be  engaged  in.  A  noble  illustration  of  what
may  be  done  in  war-time  by  Christian  men  is  afforded  by  the  "  Ghristiaa  Commission  "
in  the  United  States.  Its  '  Annals,'  written  by  Rev.  Lemuel  Moss,  Home  Secretary
of  the  Commission,  Philadelphia,  1868,  form  a  handsome  volume  of  752  pages,  which
»mply  repay  perusal.  We  mxxst  fight  for  piinciple,  if  we  cannot  secure  its  triumph  by
iiiore  peaceful  means ;  but  one  day  all  will  submit  to  it,  and  war  be  needed  no  longer.
May  God  hasten  the  happy  day  I — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 9. — Military  service  to  be  voluntary.  In  war,  forced  service  is  worse  than
useless ;  it  Is  a  source  of  weakness — a  cause  of  defeat.  For  successful  warfare,  all  the
skill  and  energy  of  every  soldier  is  demanded ;  and  unless  the  hearts  of  the  warriors
are  in  the  conflict,  no  triumph  can  be  anticipated.

L    To   BE   LOYAL  PBIENDB  OP  CK)D,  WE  MUST   SOMETIMES  TREAT  MEN   AS   FOES.      If  We

are  truly  (Jod's  children,  we  must  count  God's  friends  to  be  our  friends,  God's  foes  to  be
our  foes.    We  are  not  our  own.     We  cannot  expend  life  according  to  our  personal  will.


33fi  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xx- 1— 2Q

We  are  tho  property  of  another — the  Supreme  King.  Therefore  we  must  do  his  work
dnd  tight  his  battles.  Our  notion  of  what  is  rifjht  and  just  must  be  made  subordinate
to  his.  Our  minds  are  often  too  much  biased  with  selfish  feeling  to  judge  what  is
right,  if  left  to  ourselves ;  but  we  shall  not  err  if  we  closely  follow  the  precepts  of  our
God.  The  interests  of  God's  kingdom  are  to  be  held  by  us  as  paramount  over  the
interests  of  man's  kingdom.

II.  God's  pbesence  in  battle  otJTMATCHES  ALL  HTTKAN  FOLCBS.  The  source  ol
conquest  is  not  in  the  visible  material  of  war.  Victory  is  not  on  the  side  of  the  largest
battalions.  This  is  the  creed  of  the  infidel.  If  there  were  no  God,  it  might  be  true.
Mere  numbers  of  combatants  have  as  often  hindered  triumph  as  helped  it.  If  God  be
ranged  on  the  one  side,  it  is  a  most  unequal  contest.  The  issue  is  a  foregone  event
Multiply  human  weapons  or  develop  human  skill  as  much  as  you  please ;  let  all  the
powers  of  arithmetic  be  exhausted  in  the  computation ;  and  still  the  finite  is  confront/  d
by  the  Infinite.  "  Before  him  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  are  as  grasshoppers."  "  If
God  be  for  us,"  vain  is  all  opposition.     Simple  faith  is  the  best  equipment.

III.  God's  peiest  is  the  insfibeb  of  te0E  oodbaoe.  The  sanctions  and  the  inspirjk-
tions  of  religion  may  be  obtained  for  the  business  of  war.  The  true  priest  will  not
heedlessly  lend  his  sanction  to  any  emprise  of  war,  nor  will  he  withhold  his  benediction
from  a  righteous  contest.  By  virtue  of  his  office,  he  is  the  messenger  from  God  to  the
royal  court,  as  well  as  to  the  people.  If  ever  the  oracle  of  the  sanctuary  should  be
consulted,  it  is  when  war  is  imminent.  It  is  not  the  business  of  the  priest  to  initiate
war ;  but  if  war  becomes  a  duty,  it  is  the  business  of  the  priest  to  encourage  and
inspire  the  host  of  God's  elect.  The  true  priest  is  in  close  accord  with  God.  God's
heart  bcitts  within  his  heart ;  God's  will  finds  prompt  response  in  him.  Hence  the
priest's  voice  is  the  human  exponent  of  God's  thought.  God's  strength  is  through  him
conveyed  to  the  mailed  warriors,  for  he  speaks  with  just  authority.

IV.  God  will  achieve  victory  only  thrguoh  the  bight-hearted.  Unless  the
soldier's  mind  and  heart  and  soul  be  in  the  conflict,  he  had  better  tarry  by  his  fireside.
A  few  earnest,  ardent  warriors  are  preferred  to  mere  array  of  numbers.  If  any  soldier
found  more  delight  in  his  habitation  or  in  his  vineyard  than  in  the  success  of  battle,
he  might  forthwith  return.  With  the  double-minded  and  the  half-hearted  God  does
not  work.  The  channel  must  be  emptied  of  self  if  Divine  energy  is  to  pass  through
it.  We  are  not  to  conclude  that  God  prefers  the  few  to  the  many.  But  he  will  have
the  right  kind  of  agents,  or  he  will  not  work  through  them,  'ihe  thirsty  man  doi s
not  prefer  one  drop  of  water  to  ten ;  but  he  does  prefer  one  drop  of  wholesome  water
to  a  gallon  of  poisonous  beverage.  God  works  according  to  wise  methods,  and  sends
help  through  fitting  channels.  The  best  media  through  which  he  conveys  military
conquest  is  uuselfisii  devotion  to  his  cause.  The  consecrated  soldier  is  the  predestined
conqueror.

V.  Leaders  in  great  enterprises  are  to  be  selected  from  the  coubageocs  few.
Men  will  most  faithfully  follow  those  leaders  whom  they  have  themselves  chosen.  As
the  faint-hearted  were  unfit  to  go  to  the  battle,  so  were  they  unfit  to  choose  captains
over  the  host.  The  courageous  are  also  the  most  judicious.  Accurately  measuring  the
work  that  has  to  be  done,  they  can  the  better  judge  who  are  the  most  competent  to
do  it.  The  brave  heart  and  the  clear  eye  go  together.  These  captains,  so  appointed,
would  be  strong  in  the  consciousness  that  they  enjoyed  the  esteem  and  support  of  the
troops.  Such  an  arrangement  gives  the  best  guarantee  for  efficient  leaders.  On  the
same  ground,  the  rulers  of  the  Church  should  be  chosen  on  the  ground  of  spiritual
fitness — solely  on  the  ground  of  moral  qualification. — D.

Vers.  10 — 20. — The  terrible  side  of  human  duty.  Sin  has  made  Buch  fatal  havoc  in
our  world,  that  the  most  severe  remedies  have  to  be  applied.  In  the  administration
of  these  remedies  God  has  chosen  to  employ  men.  Thus  he  allies  himself  with  us  antl
makes  us  partners  with  him  in  the  administration  of  his  kingdom,  "  Such  honour  have
all  his  saints."

I.  The  aims  of  the  Divine  government  mcbt  bk  accomplished.  Every  aim
which  is  formed  in  God's  mind  is  a  seed  of  righteousness.  Therefore  it  must  grow  and
come  to  perfection.  Necessity  enters  into  its  very  essence.  No  power  on  earth  or  in
hell  i»  Me  to  hinder  its  accomplishment.    Who  shall  withstand  the  will  of  Omni-


CII.   XXI.   1—33.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


337


potenoe?  EigTiteousness  shall,  sooner  or  later,  be  triumphant.  All  opposition  to
Jehovah's  will  shall  eventually  bo  crushed  out.  He  who  created  is  able  also  to  destroy
For  the  present  his  patient  love  provides  other  remedies ;  and  if  remedial  measures  fail,
then  fell  destruction  shall  sweep  into  eternal  darkness  all  opposition  to  his  supreme
mil.

II.  The  ends  of  bighteousness  mat  be  attained  bt  peaceable  means  it  men
WlUi  SUBMIT  TO  GK>d'b  TERMS.  (Ver.  10.)  Terms  of  peace  were  to  be  offered  by  the
Hebrews  in  their  wars  with  outlying  nations.  The  main  condition  of  peace  and  friend-
ship was  the  relinquishment  of  idolatry.  If  njen  will  fear  and  serve  God,  they  shall
live.  To  know  God  as  our  Ood  is  life  eternal.  If  men  will  turn  their  backs  upon
the  sun,  they  must  dwell  in  shadow ;  so  if  men  will  sever  themselves  from  the  Source
of  life,  they  inevitably  die.  Not  once,  but  often,  does  God  offer  to  us  reconciliation,
blessing,  peace.  By  every  method  of  persuasion  and  entreaty  the  Father  of  our  spirits
has  endeavoured  to  win  us  to  paths  of  ri°;hteous  obedience.  His  will  is  our  sanctifica-
tion ;  purity  or  perdition — here  is  the  alternative !

III.  The  executors  of  Jehovah's  will  shall  be  amply  rewarded.  "All  the
spoil  thereof  shalt  thou  take  unto  thyself"  (ver.  14).  The  harder  the  work,  the  more
abundant  shall  He  the  reward.  God's  remuneration  is  ever  ample  and  munificent.
Most  carefully  does  he  wei$;h  every  hardship  we  endure  for  him.  Our  every  tear  lie
puts  into  his  bottle.  Blind  unbelief  may  count  him  an  "  austere  Master,"  who  requires
irksome  and  painful  work ;  but  the  man  of  filial  temper  will  run  on  most  difficult
errands,  and  his  language  is  uniformly  this,  "  I  do  always  the  Things  that  please  him ; "
"  They  who  suffer  with  their  Lord  now  shall  be  glorified  by-and-by  together."

IV.  Excessive  wickedness  involves  men  in  complete  destruction.  Terms  of
peace  were  offered  to  less  guilty  nations  lying  in  Israel's  vicinity,  but  for  the  inhabit-
ants of  Canaan — such  was  their  moral  rottenness — there  was  no  alternative  but  destruc-
tion. "  Thou  shalt  save  alive  nothing  that  breatheth  "  (ver.  16).  It  is  well  for  us  to
learn  that  there  is  a  stage  in  our  moral  disease  when  the  remedy  of  mercy  ceases
to  take  effect.  It  becomes  "  a  savour  of  death  unto  death."  "  With  the  breath  of  his
mouth  shall  he  slay  the  wicked."  When  the  heart  has  become  identified  with  rebel-
lion, when  (M  feeling  is  averse  from  God,  whin  total  depravity  has  set  in, — then  God
abandons  the  man  to  his  inevitable  doom.  "  Israel  would  have  none  of  him,  ...  so
he  gave  them  up  to  their  own  hearts'  lust."  This  is  man's  blackest  doom.  Yet  this  is
mercy  for  others.

V.  The  work  of  destruction  should  be  blended  with  prudent  kindness.  In
laying  siege  against  a  city,  not  an  axe  was  to  be  laid  upon  any  fruit  tree.  Here  we
have  a  sample  of  God's  thoughtful  and  generous  love  for  men !  Whatever  can  minister
to  the  need  and  comfort  of  his  servants  shall  be  secured  to  them.  Though  engaged  in
the  awful  work  of  destruction,  he  does  not  forget  mercy ;  he  is  planning  all  the  while
for  his  servants'  good.  Though  a  frown  is  upon  his  face,  tenderest  love  is  active  within
his  heart.  More  careful  is  he  tor  us  thau  we  are  for  ourselves.  Not  a  want,  however
minute,  is  by  him  overlooked.  The  desolating  flood  is  upon  the  earth,  but  an  ark
is  provided  for  Noah.  The  rain  of  fire  is  consuming  Sodom,  but  Lot  is  safe  in  Zoar.
"  Kven  the  hairs  of  your  heal  are  all  numbered." — D.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXL

Expiation  or  Uncertain  Murder.  Treaiv
ment  of  a  Capttve  taken  to  Wife.
Bisbts  of  the  Firstborn.  A  Bebelliohs,

BEFBACn'ORT  SON  TO  BE  JUDOED  AND  PUN-

isam.     A  Malefactor  who  has  been

BANOKD  to  be  BCBIED  ERE  NiOHTFALL.

One  general  idea,  viz.  the  sacrednesa  of
huHwn  life  and  of  personal  rights,  connecta

SKUTEBONOMY.


the  laws  in  this  ohapter  together,  aa  well  a«
connects  them  with  the  laws  in  the  two
preceding  chapters.

Vers.  1—9.— If  a  body  was  fonnd  lying
dead  from  a  woond,  and  it  was  not  known
by  whom  the  wound  had  been  inflicted,  the
whole  land  would  be  involved  in  the  guilt
Of  the  murder,  unless  it  was  duly  expiated
as  here  directed.  First,  the  elders  and  judges
(presumably  of  the  Beighbonring  towns;


338


THE  BOOK  OF-DEUTEROiJOMY.


[cu.  XXI.  1—23,


cf.  Joeephnt,  'Antiq.,'  iy.  8,  16)  were  to
meet,  thefonner  as  magistrateB  representing
the  communitiea,  the  latter  as  administrators
of  the  law,  and  were  to  measure  the  distance
from  the  body  of  the  slain  man  to  each  of
the  surrounding  towns,  in  order  to  ascertain
which  was  the  nearest.  This  ascertained,
upon  that  town  was  to  be  laid  the  duty  of
expiating  the  crime.

Ver.  3. — An  heifer,  which  hath  not  been
wrought  with,  and  which  hath  not  drawn
in  the  yoke;  a  young  cow  which  had  not
been  rendered  unfit  for  consecration,  nor  had
its  vital  force  impaired,  by  being  subjected
to  forced  labour  (cf.  Numb.  xiz.  2).

Ver.  4. — ^A  rough  valley;  literally,  a
ttream  of  perpetuity,  a  perennial  stream  (cf.
Fg.  Ixxiv.  15,  Authorized  Version,  "  mighty
rivers ; "  Amoa  ▼.  24) ;  but  here  rather  the
valley  or  wady  through  which  a  stream
flowed,  88  is  evident  from  its  being  described
as  neither  eared — that  is,  ploughed  (literally,
terought,  tilled) — nor  sown;  a  place  which
had  not  been  profaned  by  the  hand  of
man,  but  was  in  a  state  of  nature.  "  This
regulation  as  to  the  locality  in  which  the
act  of  expiation  was  to  be  performed  was
probably  founded  on  the  idea  that  the  water
of  the  biook-valley  would  suck  in  the  blood
and  clean  it  away,  and  that  the  blood  sucked
in  by  the  earth  would  not  be  brought  to
light  again  by  the  ploughing  and  working
of  the  soil"  (Keil).  Strike  off  the  heifer's
neck  there  in  the  valley;  rather,  break  the
heifef'i  neeh.  As  this  was  not  an  act  of
sacrifice,  for  which  the  shedding  of  blood
would  have  been  required,  but  simply  a
symbolical  representation  of  the  infliction  of
death  on  the  undiscovered  murderer,  the
animal  was  to  be  killed  by  breaking  its  neck
(cf.  Exod.  xiu.  13).

Ver.  5. — And  the  priests  the  sons  of  Levi
shall  oome  near.  The  presence  of  the  priests
at  this  ceremony  was  due  to  their  position
as  the  servants  of  Jehovah  the  King  of
Israel,  on  whom  it  devolved  to  see  that  all
was  done  in  any  matter  as  his  Law  prescribed.
The  priests  present  were  probably  those
from  the  nearest  Levltical  town.  And  by
their  word  shall  every  controversy  and
every  stroke  he  tried ;  literally.  And  upon
their  mouth  thall  he  every  strife  and  every
itrohe,  i.e.  by  their  judgment  the  character
of  the  act  shall  be  determined,  and  as  they
decide  so  shall  the  matter  stand  (of.  ch.  x.
8 ;  xvii.  8).  In  the  present  case  the  presence
of  the  priests  at  the  transaction  gave  it
sanction  as  valid.

Yer.  6.— The  eldeit  »f  that  d^.  The
elders,  by  the  sigrnifloant  act  of  washing  their
bands,  indicated  that  they  threw  off  from
them,  utterly  repudiated,  the  charge  of
blood-guiltinest  on  the  part  of  the  town


which  they  represented  (cf.  Pa.  zxvi.  6;
Ixxiii.  13;  Matt.  xxviL  24).

Vers.  7,  8. — This  act  they  were  to  ac-
company with  a  solemn  declaration  of  their
innocence  of  this  crime,  and  of  their  entire
ignorance  of  the  perpetrator  of  it ;  and  with
an  earnest  cry  to  God  that  the  sin  which
had  been  done  might  be  forgiven.  Be  merci-
fal . . .  unto;  be  propitiated  towards  (literally,
eoter,  "^oVj!  l?.3 ;  for  the  phrase,  h  "iss,  see
Lev.  L  4).  And  lay  not  innocent  blood;  the
blood  of  the  innocent  man  who  has  been
slain.

Ver.  9. — In  this  way  they  were  to  deliver
themselves  as  a  nation  from  blood-guiltiness.
"  Expiation  wm  made  by  the  killing  of  the
transgressor  when  he  could  be  found  (ch.
xix.  13 ;  Numb.  xxxv.  33) ;  when  he  was  not
known,  by  the  process  here  described.  Of
course,  if  afterwards  he  were  apprehended,
he  would  suffer  the  penalty  he  had  incurred  "
(Knobelj;  so  also  Eeil,  Uerxheimer,  etc.,
after  the  Talmud  ('  Sota,'  ix.  7).

Vers.  10 — 14. — If  an  Israelite  saw  among
captives  taken  in  war  a  woman  fair  of  aspect,
and  loved  her,  and  took  her  to  be  his  wife,
he  was  to  allow  her  a  full  month  to  mourn
her  lost  kindred,  and  become  accustomed  to
her  new  condition,  before  he  consummated
his  union  with  lier.  This  refers  to  captives
from  other  nations  than  those  of  Canaan,
with  whom  the  Israelites  were  to  form  no
alliance,  and  whom  they  were  not  to  take
captive,  but  either  wholly  destroy  or  render
tributary  (cf.  ch.  viL  3 ;  Numb.  xxi.  1,  eto. ;
Josh.  xi.  19).

Ver.  12. — She  shall  shave  her  head,  and
pare  her  nails.  The  shaving  of  the  head
and  the  paring  of  the  nails,  as  well  as  the
putting  off  of  the  garments  worn  when  taken
captive,  were  signs  of  purification,  of  separa-
tion from  former  heathenism,  preparatory  to
reception  among  the  covenant  people  of
Jehovah  (ef.  Lev.  xiv.  8;  Numb.  viii.  7).
Pare  her  naiU ;  literally,  make  or  prepare
her  naile,  i,e.  by  cutting  them  down  to  a
proper  size  and'  form  (cf.  2  Sam.  xix.  25,
where  the  same  word  is  used  of  dressing  the
feet  and  trimming  the  beard).  The  Targum
of  Onkelos  takes  this  in  quite  an  opposite
sense,  rendering,  as  in  the  margin  of  the
Authorized  Version,  "suffer  to  grow,"  and
the  rabbins  who  adopt  this  meaning  suppose
that  the  design  of  the  prescription  was  that
the  woman,  being  rendered  unlovely,  the
man  might  be  deterred  from  taking  her  to
be  his  wife.  But  this  is  altogether  alien
from  the  spirit  and  soope  of  the  passage.

Ver.  13. — The  raiment  of  her  captivity;
i.e.  the  raiment  she  had  on  when  taken
oajptlvu ;  this  she  was  to  biy  aside,  that  she


CH.  XZL  1 — ^23.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


339


miglit  put  on  garmentg  of  mourning.  A  full
month;  literally,  a  month  of  days;  the
period  of  mourning  was  forty  days  (of.  Gen.
1.  3).

Ver.  14. — Should  the  man  afterwards  come
no  longer  to  have  pleasure  in  her,  he  was  to  let
her  go  whither  she  would,  but  he  was  not  to
Bell  her  for  money  or  use  any  violence  to  her.
Ihon  Shalt  not  make  merchandise  of  her.
The  verb  in  the  form  here  used  occurs  only
here  and  in  oh.  xxiv.  7;  derived  from  a
root  which  signifies  to  gather  or  press,  it
properly  means  to  press  for  one's  self,  to  lay
hands  on  one,  to  use  violence  to  one.

Vers.  15—17. — If  a  man  have  two  wives,
one  of  wliom  is  a  favourite  and  the  other
disliked,  and  if  his  firstborn  son  be  the  child
of  the  latter,  he  is  not  to  allow  his  love  for
the  other  to  prejudice  the  right  of  the  son,
but  must  allow  liim,  both  in  his  own  lifetime
and  in  the  disposition  of  his  property  after
death,  the  full  privilege  and  right  of  •
firstborn  son.

Ver.  16, — ^He  may  not  make ;  literally,  i$
not  abU,  to  make  ;  i.e.  is  legally  incapable  of
making.

Ver.  17. — ^A  double  portion;  literally,  a
mouth  of  two ;  i.e.  a  portion  (so  "  mouth  "  is
used  in  2  Kings  ii.  9 ;  Zech.  xiii.  8)  equal  to
that  of  two ;  consequently,  the  firstborn  in-
herited twice  as  much  as  any  of  the  other
sons.  Amongst  all  nations  and  &om  the
earliest  times,  the  right  of  the  eldest  son  to
pre-eminence  among  liis  brethren  has  been
reoognized;  and  in  legislating  for  Israel,
Moses  so  far  simply  sanctioned  a  usage  he
found  already  existing;  the  assignment,
however,  of  a  double  share  in  the  inheritance
to  the  eldest  son  is  a  new  and  special  pro-
vision, mentioned  only  here.  Beginning  of
his  strength  (of.  Gen.  zlix.  3).

Vers.  18 — ^21. — If  a  son  was  refractory  and
unmanageable  by  his  parents,  if,  given  to
sensual  indulgence,  he  would  yield  neither
to  reproof  nor  to  chastisement,— the  parents
were  to  lay  hold  on  him,  and  lead  him  to
the  elders  of  the  town,  sitting  as  magistrates
at  its  gates,  and  there  accuse  hitn  of  his
evil  ways  and  rebelliousness.  The  testimony
of  the  parents  was  apparently  held  sufScient
to  substantiate  the  charge,  and  this  being
received  by  the  elders,  the  culprit  was  to
be  put  to  death  by  stoning.

Ver.  20. — He  will  not  obey  our  voice ;  he
is  a  glutton,  and  a  drunkard.  Gluttony  and
drunkenness  were  regarded  by  the  Hebrews
•8  highly  crimiaal.    Tbe  wora  rendered  by


"glutton,"  however  (^^it,  from  "j^t,  to  shake,
to  shake  out,  to  squander),  includes  uther
kinds  of  excess  besides  eating.  It  designates
one  who  is  prodigal,  who  wastes  his  means
or  wastes  his  person  by  indulgence.  In
Prov.  xxiii.  30,  the  whole  phrase  (i^a  ^h^w)
is  given — squanderers  of  flesh,  i.e.  wasters  of
their  own  body,  debauchees.  In  Prov.  xx viii,
7,  the  word  is  translated  "  riotous  men  "  in
the  Authorized  Version.  Disobedience  to
parents  was  deemed  an  offence  which  struck
at  the  roots  of  the  whole  social  institute.

Ver.  21. — The  penalty  of  such  crimes  was
death ;  but  the  power  of  inflicting  this  was
not  among  the  Hebrews— as  among  some
other  ancient  peoples,  the  Greeks  and
Eomans,  for  instance — left  with  the  father ;
the  punishment  could  be  inflicted  only  by
the  community,  with  the  sanction  of  the
magistrate.  A  Hebrew  parent  might  chastis*
his  child  with  severity,  but  not  so  as  to
affect  his  life  (Prov.  xix.  18,  "  Chasten  thy
son  while  there  is  hope,  but  raise  not  thy
soul  [let  not  thy  passion  rise  so  high  as]  to
slay  him  ").  While  parental  authority  was
sacredly  preserved,  a  check  was  by  the  Law
imposed  on  hasty  passion.

Vers.  22,  23. — When  a  criminal  was  put
to  death  and  was  hanged  upon  a  tree,  his
body  was  not  to  remain  there  over-night,
but  was  to  be  buried  the  same  day  on  which
he  was  executed.

Ver.  22. — If  a  man  have  committed  a  sin
worthy  of  death;  literally,  If  there  be  on  a
man  a  judgment  of  death;  if  he  lie  under
sentence  of  death.  Hang  him  on  a  tree.
This  refers  not  to  putting  to  death  by
strangling,  but  to  the  impaling  of  tlie  body
after  death  (cf.  C.  B.  Miohaelis, '  De  Judiciis
Poenisque  (Dapitalibus  in  Sac.  Script.  Com-
memoratis,'iu'SyllogeCommentt.Theolog.,'
edita  &  D.  J.  Pott,  vol.  iv.  p.  209).  This
was  an  aggravation  of  the  punishment,-  as
the  body  so  impaled  was  exposed  to  insult
and  assault  (cf.  Numb.  xxv.  4 ;  Gen.  xl.  19).

Ver.  28. — He  that  is  hanged  is  aocursed
of  God ;  literally,  a  curse  of  God.  Some  take
this  as  meaning  an  insult  to  God,  a  con-
temning of  him,  "  since  man  his  image  is
thus  given  up  to  scorn  and  insult "  (Bashi).
But  the  more  probable  meaning  is  "  a  curse
inflicted  by  God,"  which  the  transgressor
is  made  to  endure  (of.  Gal.  iii.  18).  That
thy  land  be  not  defiled.  The  land  was  de-
filed, not  only  by  sins  committed  by  its
inhabitants,  but  also  by  tlie  public  exposure
of  criminals  who  had  been  put  to  death  for
their  sins  (cf.  Lev.  xviii.  24,  25;  Numb,
zxxv.  83,  34).  On  this  law  Joshua  acted
(ot  Josh.  viii.  29:  X.  26, 27>


340  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxi.  1—23.


HOMILETIC&

Vers.  1— ©. — The  preeioumeu  of  one  human  life  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  ralue  of
tliis  paragraph  can  be  duly  appreciated  only  as  the  indi£ftTonce  with  which  pagan
nations  of  old  regarded  liuman  life  is  studied  and  understood.  As  a  piece  of  civil
legislation,  it  is  far  superior  to  anything  in  the  code  of  the  nations  around  at  that  time.
Dr.  Jameson  remarks  that  in  it  we  have  undoubtedly  the  origin  or  the  germ  of  modern
coroners'  inquests.  The  following  points  in  it  are  worthy  of  note.  1.  It  is  a  rule
to  be  observed  when  they  should  be  settled  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  2.  It  indicates  that
from  the  first,  each  human  life  should  be  regarded  as  an  object  of  common  interest  to
the  whole  people,  and  that  it  was  to  be  one  of  their  prime  points  of  honour,  that  no
human  life  could  be  tampered  with  without  arousing  national  indignation  and  concern.
3.  God  would  teach  them,  that  if  it  should  be  found  that  any  one's  life  had  been  trifled
with,  it  was  a  sin  against  Heaven  as  well  as  a  crime  against  earth.  4.  That  this  sin
would  be  laid  at  the  door  of  all  the  people  if  they  were  indifferent  to  the  fact  of  its
commission,  and  if  they  did  not  make  full  inquiry  respecting  it,  and  solemnly  put
it  away  from  among  them.  At  the  back  of  this  piece  of  civil  legislation,  yea,  as  the
fount  from  which  it  sprang,  we  get  this  beautiful,  sublime,  and  comforting  truth —
"  Each  human  life  an  dject  of  Divine  concern."

I.  In  what  WAT  HAS  God  manifested  his  care  fob  thb  individual?  1.  Thi»
passage  is  pregnant  with  blessed  teaching  thereon.  We  have :  (1)  The  fact  of  man's
ill-treatment  of  men  recognized.  (2)  Rebuked.  (3)  Marked  out  as  a  brand  of  shame
on  any  community  which  tolerates  it.  (4)  In  demanding  an  account  thereof,  God
foreshadows  his  own  coming  judgment.  2.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  taught  it  in  terms
more  beautiful,  more  clear  (Luke  xii. ;  Matt,  xviii. ;  Luke  xv.).  How  often  does  Christ
lay  stress  on  "  one "  I  3.  The  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  every  man,  is  a
standing  proof  of  every  man's  worth  before  God ;  so  the  apostle  argues  (2  Cor.  v.  16).
4.  The  Spirit  of  God  stirreth  in  every  man  to  move  his  sluggish  nature  that  it  may
rise  toward  heaven.  Materialism  merges  the  man  in  his  acciiients.  Pantheism  drowns
him  in  the  All.  Deism  hides  him  in  vastness.  Ultrainontanism  smothers  him  in  the
Church.  Caisarism  makes  the  State  all,  the  individual  nothing.  Christ  rescues  the
one  from  being  lost  in  the  many,  and  cries  aloud,  "  It  is  not  the  will  of  your  Eather  in
heaven  that  one  of  these  little  ones  should  perish."

II,  What  should  be  the  effect  on   us  of  God's  care   fob  the  individual  f
1.  It  should  fill  us  with  intense  thankfulness  that  we  are  not  lost  in  the  crowd  (see
Isa.  xL  27).    We  are  so  apt  to  say,  "  God  has  too  much  to  do  to  think  of  us,"  that  we
need  to  meditate  often  on  the  words,  "  He  careth  for  you."    2.  It  should  impress  us
with  the  dignity  of  man.    When  God  fences  every  man  round  with  such  a  guard
ao^ainst  ill  treatment  from  others,  it  may  well  lead  us  to  "  honour  all  men."    3.  It
should  teach  us  the  solidarity  of  the  race.    The  weal  of  one  is  a  concern  to  all.    4.  It
should  teach  us  to  cultivate  the  spirit  of  a  universal  brotherhood.     "  Have  we  not  all
one  Father  ?  "    5.  It  should  lead  us  to  aim  at  saving  man.    If  God  cares  for  all,  well
may  we.     6.  It  should  make  us  very  indignant  at  any  doctrines  concerning  the  consti^
tution  and  destiny  of  man,  that  would  put  him,  or  even  seem  to  put  him,  on  a  level
with  the  brute  creation.     7.  We  should  take  every  opportunity  of  warning  men  that,
if  ever  they  trifle  with  the  interests  and  destinies  of  their  brother  man,  God  will  call
them  to  account  at  his  bar.    The  voice  of  Abel's  blood  cried  unto  God  from  the  ground.
If  a  neslected,  mutilated,  slain  body  of  any  one,  however  obscure,  was  found  in  Israel's
fields,  they  were  responsible  to  the  God  of  nations  for  inquiry  and  for  expiation.    No
one  is  at  liberty  to  cry,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper?"    When  he  maketh  inquisition
for  blood,  he  forgetteth  not  the  cry  of  the  humble  (see  Ps.  xciv.).     And  terrible  beyond
all  power  of  expression,  will  be  the  shame  and  dismay,  at  the  bar  of  God,  of  those  who
have  trifled  with  humui  interests,  and  who  go  into  eternity  laden  with  the  guilt  of
their  brothers'  blood  1

Vers.  10 — 14.— 2%e  fimaU  captive ;   or,  Divine  regard  for  womcm'e  eafety  and
honour.    Any  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  fearful  licence  practised  among  many


DH.  XXI.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  841

nations  towards  female  captives  taken  in  war,  can  surely  appreciate  the  humanizing
influence  which  the  injunction  in  this  paragraph  was  intended  to  exert.  The  law  here
laid  down  may  or  may  not  be  abstractly  the  best ;  but  if  it  was  the  beit  that  the
people  could  bear:  if  it  would  certainly  lift  up  the  people  a  step  higher  in  their
regard  for  womanly  honour :  if,  moreover,  it  would  have  the  effect  of  enforci  ng  a  restraint
upon  the  passions  of  men  at  that  most  perilous  of  all  times,  even  that  of  war, — then  the
hallowed  influence  which  was  shaping  Hebrew  legislation  becomes  clearly  manifest.
A  woman  taken  captive  as  a  prisoner  of  war  was  not  to  be  a  plaything  of  passion,  but  was
to  be  dealt  with  honourably  ;  to  feel  that  she  might  part  with  the  symbols  of  slavery,
enter  into  relation  with  the  covenant  people,  become  invested  with  the  rights  of  a
daughter  of  Israel,  and  learn  to  worship,  love,  and  glorify  Israel's  God  1  (For  details,
see  the  Exposition,  and  also  valuable  remarks  in  Eeil  and  Jameson.)  And  if,  in  the
issue,  there  was  no  true  and  proper  home  for  her,  she  was  to  have  that  most  precious
of  blessings — liberty !  In  opening  up  the  theme  suggested  here — Divine  care  for
woman's  safety  and  honour — some  seven  or  eight  lines  of  thought  may  be  taken  up
and  worked  .out  by  the  preacher.  1.  Here  is  a  Divine  protest  ao;ainst  the  tendency  of
men  to  make  woman  a  mere  tool  of  passion.  This  book  is  the  charter  of  woman's
honour  and  happiness.  2.  Our  God  would  aim  at  bringing  about  the  true  nobility  of
woman,  by  means  of  educating  the  people  up  to  the  standard  at  which  it  shall  be  a
point  of  honour  with  them  to  insist  upon  it.  3.  To  secure  this  end.  State  laws  should
be  stringently  framed.  4,  Not  even  in  war-time,  nor  in  connection  with  our  soldiery,
is  it  ever  to  be  tolerated  that  woman  should  be  at  the  mercy  of  the  stronger  sex.
5.  The  right  place  of  woman  is  in  the  love  and  protection  of  one  to  whom  she  is  dearer
than  his  own  soul ;  and  no  more  honourable  place  need  she  desire  than  that  assigned
her  by  Solomon  in  his  description  of "  a  virtuous  woman."  Many  of  the  holy  women  of
Scripture  illustrate  this.  6.  Under  the  gospel,  woman's  position  is  yet  more  strikingly
asserted.  "  In  Christ  Jesus  there  is . . .  neither  male  nor  female."  In  religious  relationship
man  and  woman  are,  cxteris  paribus,  on  an  equal  footing.  7.  While,  in  the  home,  the
wives  are  to  be  in  subjection  to  their  own  husbands,  yet  the  sway  of  the  husband  is
to  be  with  a  love  pure  and  tender,  like  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  it  is  only
where  the  purifying  and  love-creating  power  of  the  gospel  is  known,  that  woman  rises
to  her  right  position  in  the  home,  the  family,  the  social  circle,  and  the  nation.  The
legislation  on  her  behalf,  which  Moses  besjan,  has  been  goiug  on  under  Judaism  and
Christianity  for  long  ages,  with  what  results  we  know  in  our  happy  homes.  But  how
much  we  are  indebted  for  these  happy  homes  to  the  influence  of  Jewish  and  Christian
law,  can  best  be  told  by  those  who  know  the  dark  places  of  the  earth,  still  "full  of  the
habitations  of  cruelty."

Vers.  15—17. — Eomf  partialities  never  to  warp  home  Justice.  This  paragraph
indicates  deep  insight  into  human  nature,  and  a  far-seeing  wisdom  which  surely
indicates  its  superhuman  origin.  It  is  designed  to  restrict  the  action  of  the  father  with
reference  to  the  inheritance  of  the  children,  in  cases  where  there  were  two  families,
not,  apparently,  by  two  wives  living  at  the  same  time  (as  if  the  passage  favoured
polygamy),  but  rather  by  two  of  whom  the  second  became  the  wife  after  the  death
of  the 'first  (comp.  Jameson  and  Keil).  It  would  probably,  nay,  almost  certainly,
occur,  that  one  of  the  two  would  be  thought  more  of  than  the  other ;  the  influence
of  the  second  wife,  being  later  and  withal  continuous,  might  be  exerted  with  the
husband  in  favour  of  her  own  children,  to  the  detriment  of  his  by  the  former  wife.
And  thus  a  son  who  was  the  father's  firstborn  might  be  put  at  a  disadvantage
through  later  preferences  coming  athwart  his  proper  claims.  Moses  here  teaches  that
he  may  not  be  disix>ssessed  of  the  right  of  the  firstborn,  even  though  another  should
come  on  the  scene  who  should  be  the  firstborn  in  a  second  family.  The  principle  on
which  this  is  based  is  indicated  in  the  title  of  this  Homily — "  Home  partialities  never
to  warp  home  justice."  The  following  lines  of  thought  may  serve  as  a  plan  on  which
to  enforce  this  principle.

L  It  is  an  acknowledged  duty  of  parents  to  care  for  the  temporal  weal  of  their
children  (see  2  Cor.  xii.  14).  There  is  indeed,  on  the  part  of  some,  a  consuming  desire  to
leave  large  fortunes  to  their  families — a  desire  so  great  as  to  be  inconsistent  with  faith
in  God's  care.  This  is  to  be  avoided  on  the  one  hand,  while  at  the  same  time  the
opposite  extreme  is  to  be  shunned  on  the  other.


342  THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTEEOJJOMY.  [ch.  xxi.  1— 23.

II.  There  are  certain  riglits  whicli  belong  to  the  children,  supposing  their  father  is
possessed  of  an  inheiitance  which  he  can  leave  them.  Of  course,  if  hu  has  none,  this
paragraph  in  detail  does  not  apply.  Even  in  such  a  case,  however,  a  parent  owes  it  to
his  family  to  leave  them  the  best  of  all  heritages — a  holy  example,  God's  blessing,  acd
a  father's  prayers  i     If  he  leaves  them  this,  they  will  not  want.

III.  It  is  not  impossible,  nor  even  improbable,  that  circumstances  may  occur  giving
risn  to  partialities  in  a  parent,  which  may  lead  him  to  consult  the  interest  of  seme
of  his  children  to  the  detriment  of  that  of  others.  Cases  like  that  named  in  this
paragraph  are  notoriously  fraught  with  peril  in  this  respect.  And  where  such  is  the
case  there  should  he  a  special  guard.

IV.  These  partialities  are  dangerous..  They  are  so  even  during  the  father's  life-time,
but  the  results  thereof  after  his  deatli  are  likely  to  be  serious  and  even  disastrous.  It
is  not  possible  to  calculate  the  mischief  wrought  upon  children,  when  the  earthly  name
which  should  ever  stand  to  them  dearest  in  affection  and  highest  in  honour,  is
associated  with  an  inequality  by  which  some  are  advantaged  and  others  wronged.
No  bitterness  of  feeling  can  surpass  that  which  is  thus  engendered.  It  will  wrap  in
shade  an  otherwise  most  venerated  name.

V.  God  would  teach  us  that  he  is  ever  watchful  cffet  the  right  in  families,  in  every
respect.  The  same  Being  who  says  to  the  children,  "  Honour  your  parents,"  says  also
to  the  parents, "  Honour  your  children."  As  he  would  guard  the  heads  of  the  house  from
being  trifled  with  by  the  sons,  so  would  he  guard  the  sons  from  any  injustice  on  the
part  of  their  parents.  A  wrong  on  either  side  towards  the  other  is  a  sin  against  God.
And  so  largely  does  the  observance  of  the  right  in  the  family  concerning  money  and
property,  affect  the  well-being  of  the  State,  that  it  is  here  made  a  part  of  the  civil  cod?
of  the  "  commonwealth  of  Israel,"  that  no  parent  shall  be  at  liberty,  whatever  his
preferences,  to  ignore  the  standing  claims  of  his  children.

Vers.  18 — 21. — A  had  son  a  State  peril.  This  is  a  very  remarkable  provision.  It  is
based  on  the  well-known  fact  that  there  are  some  who  need  a  strong  deterrent  to  keep
them  from  being  a  plague  and  peril  to  a  State,  and  also  on  the  all-imporlant  principle,
that  whoever  is  a  pest  and  nuisance  in  the  home,  is  the  bane  of  the  commonwealth  to
which  he  belongs.  Moses  had  just  laid  down  the  duty  of  the  parent  to  deal  justly
with  his  sons,  whatever  his  personal  partialities  might  be.  He  now  lays  down  the
extent  and  limits  of  parental  authority  over  the  son.  He  does  not  give  the  father
the  absolute  power  of  life  and  death  in  reference  to  the  child,  as  some  ancient  codes  did,
but,  without  abolishing  that  power  altogether,  he  places  such  checks  upon  it  that  while,
on  the  one  hand,  if  a  bad  son  became  so  outrageous  that  his  life  was  putting  others
in  peril  through  its  poisonous  influence,  he  would  have  before  him  the  possibility  of
capital  punishment;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  this  penalty  could  only  be  inflicted
with  the  sanction  of  the  elders  of  the  city ;  the  consent  of  both  parents  was  re-
quired ere  he  could  be  brought  before  them ;  and  they  (the  parents)  were  expected
to  be  able  to  say  that  they  had  exhausted  every  known  means  of  reclaiming  him
before  they  brought  him  to  that  tribunal.  It  is  evident  that  the  law  is  enacted
with  the  intention  of  being  so  deterrent  that  it  may  never  need  to  be  put  into
execution.  And  thus  indeed  it  seems  to  have  proved.  For  there  is  no  known  instance
in  Jewish  history  of  its  ha^^^ing  been  carried  out.'  Forming  part,  as  it  did,  of  an
ancient  civil  code  for  the  Hebrew  nation  only,  it  is  not  in  force  with  us  now,  and  we
are  not  called  upon  to  appreciate  its  real  worth  as  a  guard  to  the  stability  of  the  Hebrew
nation.  But  here,  as  elsewhere,^  even  in  obsolete  statutes,  we  discover  permaneut
principles,  which  it  behoves  preachers  to  develop  and  enforce,  if  they  would  not  "shun
to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God."  The  truth  here  taught  is  this — A  bad  son  is  a
State  peril.  Five  lines  of  thought  may  with  advantage  be  followed  out  here,  with
the  view  of  impressing  this  truth  upon  the  hearts  of  the  people.

L  A  State  is  what  its  homes  make  it.  It  cannot  be  otherwise.  It  is  made
up  of  its  own  cities,  towns,  villages,  and  hamlets.  Each  one  of  these  is  made  up
of  its  homes.    If  they  are  all  good,  little  legislation  will  be  required;  if  they  ar«

'  Josephus  ('Ant.,'  zvi.  oh.  xi  §  2)  gives  an  instanee  in  which  Herod  the  Great  availed
himself  of  it.    (See  Jameson,  in  loc.)


UH.  XXL  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  S48

all  bad,  no  legislation  will  avail,  even  if  it  could  be  secured.    And  according  aa
the  good  or  bad  element  preponderates,  will  a  State  be  secure  and  prosperous  or

otherwise.

II.  An  iHCORKioiBLB  SON  IB  THE  BANB  OF  ANT  HOME.  It  is  not  within  our  present
provicM  to  illustrate  or  even  take  up  the  truth  that  it  is  extremely  unlikely  any  son
will  become  incorrigible,  unless  there  is  some  grievous  failure  in  duty  on  the  part
of  the  parents  in  not  correcting  him  betimes,  and  in  not  keeping  the  refcs  in  their  own
hands.  It  is,  unhappily,  too  often  true — "  his  sons  made  themselves  vile,  and  he  restrained
them  not,"  But,  however  it  may  come  about,  the  truth  is  the  same,  that  where  a  son
hearkens  not  to  the  voice  of  his  father,  and  despises  to  obey  his  mother,  there  will  be
ID  any  home  in  which  such  is  the  case,  a  source  of  deep  sorrow  and  indescribable
misery;  there  will  be  an  example  frauglit  with  evil  influence  to  the  other  members
of  the  family.    "  One  sickly  sheep  infects  the  flock."

III.  Such  a  home,  so  poisoned,  mat  become  a  oekteb  op  unspeakable  mischief.
For  the  sons  who  act  so  mischievously  in  the  house  are,  as  a  rule,  those  who  wander
far  and  wide  in  pursuit  of  forbidden  pleasure,  giving  way  to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,
and  to  sins  of  the  tongue,  polluting  others  wherever  they  go.  Thus  a  moral  miasma,
pestilential  and  even  deadly,  may  be  carried  from  street  to  street,  and  irom  town
to  town.

IV.  Those  thus  polluted  will  take  the  poison  to  otheb  homes.  One  home
will  infect  others.  Each  infected  home  will  spread  the  contagion.  And  so  the  evil
will  spread  far  and  wide,  not  only  in  an  arithmetical,  but  in  a  geometrical  progression,
till  ev«n  in  the  course  of  one  or  two  generations,  it  will  assume  a  proportion  which
baiSe  all  powers  of  calculation  to  formulate  it,  and  a  virulence  which  may  defy  the
most  powerful  legislation  to  arrest  it.

V.  Hence  the  very  hxistence  op  such  a  centre  op  evil  out  op  which  buch

COlirLIOATBD  AND  WIDESPREAD   MISCHIEF   MAT  ARISE,   IS   A   SOURCE  OP  GRAVE   FEBIL  TO

ANT  COMMONWEALTH  IN  THE  WORLD !  It  may  not  be  seen  nor  even  suspected  when
in  germ.  But  germs  of  evil  are  fraught  with  all  the  evil  of  which  they  are  the  germs.
1.  Learn  how  far-seeing  are  the  provisions  of  this  Mosaic  law !  What  seems  severity
to  the  individual  is  really  mercy  to  the  nation.  Preventive  measures,  though  severe,  may
be  most  genuinely  philanthropic.  2.  Learn  how  great  is  the  importance  of  wisdom  and
firmne.ss  in  maintaining  parental  authority.  3.  Learn  the  need  of  early  habits  of
obedience  to  parents.  An  obedient  son  is  a  joy  and  honour  to  his  parents,  a  credit  to
the  home,  an  element  of  safety  in  a  State.  But  "  God  never  smiles  on  a  boy  that
breaks  his  mother's  heart."  So  said  Richard  Knill.  Finally :  What  we  have  said  thus
far  is  valid,  even  if  this  life  were  all.  But  if  to  this  life  we  add  on  the  next,  and
bethink  us  of  the  amazing  issues  projecting  themselves  from  time  into  eternity,  who
can  adequately  set  forth  the  importance  of  taking  heed  to  those  early  steps  on  which
depend  the  direction  of  this  earthly  life,  when  on  it  depends  the  weal  or  woe  of  the  life
which  is  to  come  ?

Vers.  22,  23. — Upon  the  tree  I  These  words  form  part  of  the  criminal  code  of  the
Hebrews,  and  though  as  such  they  may  be  regarded  as  practically  obsolete,  yet  they
contain  principles  which  will  never  wax  old,  and  are,  moreover,  so  frequently  alluded
to  in  the  New  Testament,  that  they  furnish  us  with  a  starting-point  of  no  mean
interest  for  a  devout  Christian  meditation.  The  case  supposed  in  the  text  is  not  that
of  a  man  being  put  to  death  by  crucifixion,  but  of  his  having  suffered  capital  punish-
ment, and  of  hin  body  being  afterwards  hung  upon  a  stake  and  put  to  an  open  shame
by  the  exposure,  as  having  been  one  of  the  vilest  of  criminals.  Such  an  exposure  after
death  was  to  be,  so  to  speak,  the  expression  of  the  execration  of  the  people.  It  would
be  their  public  brand  upon  detestable  guilt.  And,  when  thus  the  public  detestation  and
horror  01  wickedness  had  been  expressed,  that  accursed  thing  was  to  be  taken  down
that  night  and  buried  out  of  sight  for  ever,  as  a  sign  that  the  curse  had  spent  itself.
This  vox  populi  was  vox  Dei.     "  He  that  is  hanged  is  accursed  of  God."

Now,  it  may  be  asked,  "  Why  take  up  the  time  of  a  congregation  by  recalling  an
obsolete  enactment  like  this?"  Our  reply  is.  Let  us  now  turn  to  Acts  v.  30.  Peter
knew  how  the  Jews  would  regard  these  words — "  whom  ye  sleiy  and  hanged  on  a  tree."
They  would  understand  their  significance  to.  be,  "  You  put  him  to  an  open  shame,  as


3U  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxi.  1—23

though  he,  the  best  of  men,  were  one  of  the  vilest  malefactors,"  Shall  we  call  this  the
"  irony  of  history  "  ?  How  was  it  that  God  let  the  treatment  of  the  basest  of  criminals
be  accorded  to  the  holiest  of  our  race  ?  We  often  speak  of  it  as  a  "  mystery  of  Pro-
vidence "  when  some  great  trouble  befalls  a  good  man.  But  of  all  such  mysteries  there
is  none  so  great  as  this. .  As  a  bare  piece  of  history  unexplained,  there  is  no  fact  which
in  all  its  surroundings  is  so  inexplicable  as  this,  that  Jesus  Christ  of  Nazaieth  should
have  died  amid  such  deep  disgrace  and  shame.  "  Hanged  on  a  tree  1 "  Let  us  go
further  on.  Bead  1  Pet.  ii.  24.  Note  the  emphasis,  "  who  his  own  self  bare  our  sins  in
his  own  body  on  the  tree"  Here  is  an  explanation  of  the  strange  fact.  He  was  pressed
down  with  others'  woes,  and  burdened  with  the  guilt  of  others'  sins.  And  why?  What
was  the  effect  of  all?  Read  again.  In  Gal.  iii.  13,  14,  the  apostle,  quoting  these  words
of  Moses,  shows  us  that  in  the  fact  of  the  ignominious  death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ
upon  the  tree,  we  are  to  see  at  once  (1)  the  Divine  execration  of  sin,  and  (2)  the  Divine
redemption  of  the  sinner.

L  Under  a  moral  government,  a  righteous  governor  will,  yea,  must  append  blessing
to  good,  and  afifix  a  curse  to  evil.  If  any  one  asks  Why  1  we  do  not  know  that  any  one
can  answer  further  than  to  say  that  suffering  is  the  desert  of  ill,  and  gladness  the
appropriate  consequence  of  well-doing.  No  other  theory  would  be  workable  in  any
well-ordered  family,  or  nation,  or  city.  In  the  family,  paternal  punishment  expresses
the  father's  sense  of  wrong  done.  In  the  State,  punishment  marks  the  nation's  sense
of  wrong  done.  And  these  are  but  echoes  of  that  Divine  disapproval  of  sin  to  which
the  conscience  of  man  with  certainty  points.  And  it  is  well  known  and  understood
that  the  disapproval  and  condemnation  of  wrong  on  the  part  of  any  government  is  never
to  be  confounded  with,  but  is  very  far  removed  from,  personal  vindictiveness.  No
government,  indeed,  would  command  the  confidence  of  the  people  under  which  crime
could  be  carried  on  with  impunity.  Without  branding  crime  against  a  State,  no
government  could  long  exi.st.    That  brand  is  "  the  curse  of  the  law."

II.  There  is  a  law  above  all  human  laws.  The  latter  are  partial  and  defective,  and
may  become  obsolete.  The  everlasting  law  of  righteousness  is  co-eternal  with  the
Great  Supreme.  He  judges  the  world  in  righteousness.  Every  child  of  man  is
answerable  to  his  tribunal.  Every  deed,  word,  and  thought  are  scanned  by  his  all-seeing
eye,  and  are  estimated  rightly  by  his  unerring  judgment.  And  he,  the  Great  Judge,
brings  against  each  and  all  the  charge  of  b^ing  law-breakers  (see  Rom.  i.,  ii.).  The  Jew
is  so  because  he  has  broken  a  written  Law ;  the  Gentile,  because  he  has  broken  an
unwritteix  one.  All  the  world  is  guilty  before  God.  Under  such  circumstances,  what
is  a  righteous  Being  to  do  to  secure  the  stability  of  bis  throne?  To  connive  at  sin?
To  pass  it  by,  and  take  no  notice  of  it  ?  To  let  the  sinner  have  the  same  grace  as  if
he  had  never  sinned?  No;  there  must  be  a  declaration,  a  demonstration,  of  his
righteousness,  as  Paul  calls  it.  And  the  demonstration  of  righteousness  certainly
involves  the  condemnation  of  sin.

III.  If  we  are  sinners,  as  we  are,  the  Divine  condemnation  of  sin  places  ns  under  a
curse.  We  must  be  careful  to  understand  that  in  the  Divine  curse  there  is  nothing
vindictive,  excessive,  defective,  or  ineflfective ;  there  is  nothing  in  it  out  of  harmony  with
the  everlasting  love  of  righteousness  which  is  the  bulwark  and  safeguard  of  the  Divine
government  of  souls.  As  many  as  are  of  the  works  of  the  Law  are — continue  to  be
— under  the  curse.  As  long  as  a  man's  life  is  unright,  by  God's  law  he  abides  under
condemnation.

IV.  Guilty  men  are  under  the  curse ;  a  Guiltless  One  eomei  under  it.  So  QaL  iii.  13,
"  being  made  a  curse  for  us,"  rather,  "  having  become  a  curse."  (Let  the  student  note
here,  as  in  John  i.,  the  careful  use  of,  and  the  distinction  between,  the  words  for  "  being  "
and  "  becoming.")  The  Son  of  God,  the  Law-maker,  comes  and  dwells  with  the  law-
breakers, and  becomes  as  one  of  them.  Joyfully  taking  their  place,  he  bears  their
burdens  and  accepts  their  liabilities  as  if  they  were  his  own  I  He  is  pressed  down  ■■
with  a  great  weight.  His  sweat  is  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood.  He  goes  to  the  tret.
The  deepest  indignity  the  Law  knows  is  his.  He  is  numbered  with  the  transgressors.
He  is  put  to  "an  open  shame."  He  dies  as  the  worst  of  malefactors  died— on  the  tree  I
The  One  who  stands  pre-eminent  among  men  for  the  purity  of  his  life  stands  out  also
conspicuously  among  men  for  the  humiliation  which  attends  on  his  death  I  He  hangi
on  a  tree,  as  if  accursed  of  God  I


OH.  jua.-!— 23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  345

T.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  then  represented  our  race,  and  for  tliem  had  become  a
curse.  A  stupendous  transaction  was  then  and  there  effected,  to  which  we  know  of  no
parallel  in  heaven  or  on  earth  (of.  Matt.  xx.  28 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24 ;  2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  John  L  29).
Note:  1.  He  was  of  such  (iisnity  that  he  could  represent  the  race.  2.  His  act  was
entirely  spontaneous;  he  willed  to  do  it.  3.  It  was  the  Father's  appointment  that  he
should  do  it.  4.  Foreseeing  the  result  of  his  work,  he  rejoiced  to  do  it  (Isa.  liij.  11
(Hebrew) ;  Heb.  xii.  1,  2).  Amid  the  external  humiliation,  the  thought  of  saving  men
thereby,  bore  him  on  and  bore  him  through.

VI.  By  bearing  the  curse  on  himself  upon  the  tree  he  bore  it  off  from  us.  He  has
redeemed  us  therefrom.  He  has  bought  us  up  out  of  it.  He  who  deserved  it  not,  was
piessed  down  by  it,  that  we  who  deserved  it  might  be  lifted  up  out  of  it.  Sin  havinn-
been,  in  him,  condemned — once,  complotuly,  righteously,  eternally — the  riiihteousness
of  the  Lawgiver  was  demonstrated.  Then  was  his  love  free  to  act  towards  us  apart
from  Law,  on  the  principle  of  grace.

VII.  The  curse  being  thus  rolled  away,  the  way  is  prepared  for  the  coming  in  of  the
blessing.  However  fully  and  freely  infinite  love  now  heaps  blessing  on  blessing  on  the
vilest  sinner,  not  from  one  quarter  of  the  universe  can  the  murmur  rise  up  that  God
thinks  lightly  of  sin,  when,  in  order  to  lift  its  weight  off  the  guilty  sinner,  the  Infinite
Son  of  God  has  taken  the  whole  load  upon  himself,  and  atoned  for  sin  by  his  own
sacrifice  I

VIIL  The  blessing  comes  to  men  when  they  repent  and  believe.  So  argues  Paul  in
both  his  Epistles  to  the  Romans  and  Galatians.  See  especially  Rom.  iv.  16,  and  the
wonderful  parallel  between  the  first  and  the  second  Adam  in  Rom.  v.

In  cokclusion.  1.  Let  us  adore  and  magnify  the  grace  and  righteousness  of  God  in
the  atoning  work  of  Christ  on  the  tree.  The  manifold  perfections  of  the  Divine  nature
shine  forth  here  in  combined  lustre.  Thousands  have  objected  to  the  doctrine  of  the
atonement.  No  one  ever  objected  to  it  who  did  not  first  misapprehend  it.  2.  Let  us
cultivate  deep,  serious,  and  earnest  thinkings  as  to  the  evil  of  sin,  thus  branded  with
the  curse  of  God.  Only  low  moral  conceptions  can  consist  with  the  denial  of  the
necessity  for  an  atonement.  3.  Let  us  see  that  we  rely  entirely  and  penitently  on  the
work  of  the  Son  of  God  on  our  behalf.  4.  Let  us  defend  the  manifold  glories  of
the  cross  against  all  deniers  and  opponents.  5.  Let  us,  before  whom  this  Divine  act  of
self-surrender  stands  as  the  warrant  of  our  hope,  have  it  ever  before  us  also  as  the
model  and  standard  of  our  life.  And,  in  studying  ever  more  and  more  fully  the
meaning  of  Christ's  self-surrender  to  God  ioi  us,  shall  we  Cud  the  inspiration  «f  ow
MiJf-<uiiender  to  God  for  others  1


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBa

Vew.  1 — ^.^Atonement/or  unknown  sin.  We  have  here  a  ritual  applicable  to  cases
where  murder  has  not  been  expiated  by  the  apprehension  and  execution  of  the  mur-
derer. The  mystery  has  remained  unravelled.  The  elders  and  judges,  in  such  a  case,
are  to  come  and  measure  which  city  is  nearest  the  slain  man,  and  the  elders  of  tha^
city  are  then  required  to  take  the  heifer  prescribed  and  make  atonement,  that  the  '
country  may  be  delivered  from  the  guilt  of  innocent  blood.  The  heifer  is  to  be  one  in
the  full  vigour  of  life,  which  has  not  been  wrought  with,  and  consequently  expressed
in  the  fullest  form  the  life-producing  power  to  which  the  violent  death  stood  as  a  con-
trast.* She  is  to  be  taken  down  into  a  "rough  valley,"  or,  as  the  words  Qrw;  hn^
more  accurately  mean,  "a  perennial  stream,"  and  there  is  her  neck  to  be  struck  off,  and
the  blood  thus  violently  shed  is  to  pass  away  in  the  never-failing  stream.  While  this
is  taking  place,  the  elders  of  the  city  are  to  wash  their  hands  over  her,  in  protestation
of  their  innocence,  and  to  pray  for  deliverance  from  the  guilt,  and  it  shall  be  forgiven
them.

L  Ah  ohdiscovbbed  hdbdbb  is  peopeklt  imputed  to  the  distbiot  whbbk  thb
Ticnx  HAS  BBEK  FOUND.     In  a  well-ordered  society  life  should  be  safe.    When  it  ii

>  Cf.  Eortz'i '  Saoriflcial  Worship  of  the  Old  Testament,'  p.  127.


;U6  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxi.  1— 2a

proved  nnaafe,  society  cannot  plead  "  Not  f^uilty."  Locally,  it  must  be  allocated,  and
so  the  city  nearest  the  victim  has  the  crime  impaled  to  it.  The  sense  of  guilt  is
distributed  territorially,  and  the  elders,  or  representatives  of  the  people,  are  required  to
clear  themselves  by  the  special  rite  here  desciibed.

Sin  has  thus  wider  relations  than  to  the  individual  who  has  committed  it.  It  may
lie  at  the  door  of  a  city,  or  of  a  neighbourhood,  and  in  their  coUective  capacity  they  may
be  required  to  deal  with  it.

II.  The  district  thus  guilty  throuoh  imputation  is  most  properly  sukhoned
TO  A  religious  SERVICE.  It  is  surely  a  matter  for  general  humiliation  that  such  a
crime  could  be  secretly  committed,  and  the  murderer  escape.  It  should  lead  to  special
religious  exercises.  It  would  be  a  very  seemly  thing  if  neighbourhoods  where  great
crimes  have  gone  nndiscovered  were  to  unite  in  supplicating  God's  mercy,  in  view  of
the  guilt  thus  contracted.

III.  A   WAY   OP   DELIVERANCE   FROM   THE   IMPUTED  GUILT   IS  OBACIOUBLT   PEOVIDED.

It  consisted  of  the  following  elements.

1.  The  violent  death  of  an  innocent  and  faU-hlooded  animal.  The  cruel  killing  of
the  heifer  was  a  repetition  of  the  tragedy,  and  was  well  fitted  to  bring  its  guilt  before
them.    Thus  was  a  sense  of  sin  deepened.

2.  Its  shed  Hood  was  carried  away  in  the  surface  of  the  never-failing  stream.  In
this  beautiful,  poetic  way,  the  providential  removal  of  innocent  blood,  did  God  convey
the  idea  of  removing  the  guilt  from  the  district  concernerl.

3.  Over  the  hdfer  so  slain  the  elders  vjere  to  wash  their  hands  and  protest  their
innoceney.  In  this  way  the  most  solemn  sanctions  were  associated  with  their  plea  of
"  Not  guilty."

4.  And  they  were  further  to  intercede  for  the  removal  of  the  imputation  against
Israel.  Only  after  thi.s  minute  ritual  had  been  gone  through  was  the  assurance  of
forgiveness  pronovmced  by  the  priest.

IV.  In   THIS    WAY   WE    DISCOVER    A     TYPIPIOATION    OP    THE     PABDOK    PROVIDED    BY

Christ.    And  here  we  do  well  to  notice,  as  facts  incapable  of  dispute —

1.  That  people  who  are  innocent  have  often  to  incur  imputation  along  with  the  guilty.
The  children  of  evil-doers  incur  an  evil  repute,  although  they  may  be  perfectly  inno-
cent. It  is  a  law  of  society  as  at  present  constituted — the  innocent  are  grouped  with
the  guilty.

2.  Jesus  Christ  is  One  who  has  voluntarily  accepted  of  the  imputation  of  sin,  though
innocent,  and  suffered  in  consequence.  Just  as  the  innocent  heifer  was  paraded  with
the  guilty  district,  and  alone  suffered  because  of  the  committed  and  undiscovered  sin,
so  Jesus  takes  up  his  position  in  the  sad  procession,  and  is  the  selected,  yet  voluntary,
Victim.

3.  The  Holy  Spirit,  as  a  perennial  stream,  carries  the  sense  and  light  of  blood-
guiltiness  away.  For,  without  the  Spirit's  help,  the  shed  blood  of  Jesus  might  only
increase  human  guilt ;  with  his  help  it  takes  all  the  guilt  away.

4.  Those  who  wish  pardon  must  not  be  too  proud  to  ash  for  it.  "  If  we  confess  our
sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrigh-
teousness."   So  have  we  the  gospel  vividly  presented  to  us, — E.  M.  E.

Vers.  10 — 14. — Through  love  to  liberty.  We  have  here  a  regulation  or  law  of  war.
Captives  might  be  sold  as  slaves,  but  through  love  they  might  reach  the  position  of  a
wife  in  a  Jewish  household,  and  if  she  did  not  please  her  conqueror,  then  she  was  to  be
made  free  again.  So  that  the  possible  fate  of  the  captive  was  "through  love  to
liberty."

I.  Love  is  the  best  cure  for  the  ills  of  wab.  The  men  were  to  be  slain  :
women  might  be  kept  as  a  prey  (ch.  xx.  14).  It  was  a  blessed  issue  when  the  conqueror
was  himself  conquered  by  his  captive.  Then  slavery  was  over,  and  love  brought  liberty.
The  passion  of  hate  hud  given  place  to  the  passion  of  love.    The  better  time  had  come.

II.  But  the  passion  must  be  subject  to  wise  restraint.  A  month's  mourning
is  allowed  the  beautiful  captive,  during  which  her  person  is  sacred  in  the  house  of  her
captor.  She  bids  farewell  to  her  relations,  whether  living  or  dead,  for  she  is  going  to
be  the  wife  of  a  Jew ;  and  her  intended  husband  has  time  to  think  quietly  over  hii
passion  of  love,  and  to  see  whether  it  is  lasting  or  no.


BH,  XXI.  1—23.]  TliE  BOOlv  Oi'  D]StJTERO>;OJlY.  347

III.  Her  privilege  was  to  become  the  free  wife  of  heb  Jewish  lokd.  If  a
happily  ordered  maniage,  it  must  have  been  a  jnyful  issue  of  the  war.  The  terrible
ordeal  had  proved  to  her  the  path  to  honour  and  social  blessedness  and  peace.  AH  the
a;j;ony  liad  given  jilace  to  enlarging  love.

IV.  At  the  very  worst,  she  regained  her  liberty.  The  love  had  in  this  case
proved  transient — she  had  not  pUased  him — they  would  not  be  happy  together.  Jn
such  a  case  she  was  given  a  legal  title  to  liberty.  If  not  loved,  she  had  the  next  betit
privilege  of  being  free.

In  tl  lis  arran;iement,  consequently,  we  have  love  and  liberty  in  the  house  of  a  hus-
band ;  or  liberty,  if  the  love  proves  fickle  and  the  match  ill  arranged.  This  was  a
beneficent  arrangement  compared  with  the  licentiousness  which  usually  accompanied
war.

V.  We  may  contrast  this  with  the  love  and  liberty  guaranteed  tJB  BY
Christ  Jesus.  Our  Lord,  in  fact,  offers  us  his  love,  oh,  how  strong  and  how  true !
And  in  his  love  there  is  liberty,  the  liberty  wherewith  he  makes  his  people  free.  No
uncertainty  hangs  over  his  offer  to  us ;  no  slavery  is  possible  in  his  house.  We  shall,
in  fact,  have  reason  to  bless  him  for  conquering  us  for  loving  purposes,  and  any
anguish  his  conquest  may  have  cost  us,  will  be  amply  compensated  in  his  royal  and
limitless  love.

Conquest,  love,  and  liberty  for  ever  is  the  experience  through  which  we  pass  in  the
hands  of  Jesus,  the  Conquering  Hero,  and  no  one  ever  regrets  entering  upon  it,  for  it
is  enjoyment  indeed!— R.  M.  E.

Vers.  15 — 17. — The  rights  of  the  firsthom  in  the  house  of  a  bigamist.  Bigamy  was
not  encouraged  by  the  Mosaic  Law.  Where  it  took  place  in  man's  passion,  the  Law-
stepped  in  to  regulate  the  relations  in  the  househuld  impartially.  The  house  of  a
bigamist  inay  be  the  scene  of  sudden  jealousies  and  displace,  but  God  steps  in  to  forbid
it  bi.'ing  the  scene  of  injustice.  The  discomfort  is  providentially  inseparable  from  tlie
bigamy — it  would  have  been  a  pity  had  it  been  otherwise!  But  the  Lord  steps  in
to  prevent  flagrant'  injustice  being  done  to  the  children  solely  through  the  father's
caprice.  Caprice  may  be  permitted  up  to  a  certain  point,  with  all  its  painful  checks,
but  it  will  not  be  suffered  to  perpetuate  undeserved  wrong.

I.  The  rights  of  the  firstborn  consisted  in  a  double  share  of  the  family
PROPERTY — TWICE  AS  MUCH  AS  THE  OTHER  CHILDREN.  This  vvas  that  he,  as  the
beginning  of  his  father's  strength,  and  as  acknowledged  head  of  the  family,  might  be
able  to  sustain  its  honour  properly..  It  was  for  this  portion  Elisha  prayed  when  he
desired  a  double  portion  of  Elijah's  spirit;  not  twice  a»  much,  but  twice  as  much  as
the  other  sons  of  the  prophets  (2  Kings  ii.  9).  And  this  is  what  Jesus  gets  from  the
Father,  according  to  the  promise,  "  I  will  make  him  my  Firstborn,  higher  than  the
kings  of  the  earth"  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  27).  There  was  another  right  of  the  firstborn,  in
having  a  seed  raised  up  for  him  in  case  of  his  premature  decease.  This  also  has  its
impori  in  the  case  of  Jesus.

II.  Because  a  firstborn's  mother  was  hated  was  no  reason  why  he  should
BE  DENIED  HIS  RIGHTS,  'i  he  dark  cloud  of  hate  was  not  to  envelop  him,  and  keep
him  out  of  his  double  portion,  or  liis  right  to  a  seed,  if  he  prematurely  died.  And  yet
this  was  what  Jesus  received  in  the  way  of  treatment.  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his
own  received  him  not."  As  the  Firstborn  of  humanity,  he  deserved  the  double  portion,
yet  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head.     He  was  denied  his  rights  among  men.

HI.  Prom  the  caprice  of  men  we  may  always  look  up  to  the  impartial
JUSTICE  OF  God.  This  was  the  protection  of  the  firstborn  in  the  house  of  a  bigamist.
God  was  on  his  side.  This  was  the  protection  of  Jesus  amid  the  injustice  of  men — the
Father  was  along  with  him.  He  always  did  what  pleased  him.  And  whenever  we
feel  aggrieved  through  the  capricious  conduct  of  our  fellows,  let  us  always  look  up
confidingly  to  our  Father  above.

The  Lord  is  just,  at  all  events.  We  may  rely  on  his  vindication  of  our  case  in  the
great  day,  if  not  before. — K.  M.  E.

Vers.  18—23. — Parental  authority  enforced.  It  is  plain  that  parents  are  to  deal
with  their  children  to  the  best  df  their  ability :  but  in  case  a  stubborn  and  rebellious


148  THE  BUOK   OP  DEUTEEOKOMY.  [oh.  xxi.  1—23

son  would  not  hearken  to  father  or  mother,  would  not  appreciate  ohaslisement,  »nd  had
become  a  drunkard  and  glutton,  then  the  parents  were  directed  to  bring  the  case  before
the  elders  of  the  city,  and  the  impenitent,  licentious  son  was  to  be  taken  away  from
the  earth  by  public  stoning.  The  public  law  was  thus,  in  the  last  resort,  to  back  up
parental  authority  and  to  remove  the  "  scapegrace."

I.  Parental  adthority  is  to  be  exercised  to  the  utmost.  Father  and  mother
are  both  to  do  their  best  to  save  their  son  from  being  a  public  disgrace.  They  are  to
use  the  rod,  to  chasten  him,  if  nothing  milder  will  do.  Only  after  they  have  prose-
cuted their  parental  authority  to  the  last  degree  are  they  to  seek  the  public  officers.

II.  Gluttony  and  drunkenness  are  treated  as  capital  offences  undeb  the
theocracy.  They  are  incompatible  with  membersliip  In  God's  kingdom.  Hence  they
are  deemed  worthy  of  death.  Because  they  are  not  now  so  severely  visited  by  public
law  does  not  imply  that  they  are  less  lieinous  in  God's  sight  than  they  were  then.

III.  It  must  have  been  the  last  resort  when  parents  would  brino  forth
THBIB  SON  FOE  PUBLIC  EXECUTION.  What  a  Wearying  of  love  and  patience  tliere
must  have  been  before  such  a  commandment  as  this  would  be  carried  out !  The  father
and  mother  would  bear  long  before  they  would  bring  themselves  to  make  of  their  child
a  public  infamy.

IV.  The  execution  op  the  scapegrace  was  a  solemn  dedication  or  him,  bf
imposition  of  hands,  to  death  by  stoning.  Such  a  public  disgrace  must  have  had
a  very  wholesome  effect  in  deterring  reckless  children  from  self-abandonment.  We  do
not  hear  of  any  instance  of  such  an  execution.  Drunkenness  and  gluttony  were  not
common  crimes  in  Israel.

V.  It  would  seem  that  gibbeting  was  added  to  the  stoning,  to  emphasize
still  more  the  disgrace  in  such  cases.  When  this  was  carried  out,  it  was  under-
stood that  the  gibbeted  person  was  taken  down  at  sundown,  so  as  not  to  defile  the
land,  and  was  buried  without  delay.  As  accursed  of  God,  the  corpse  was  as  soon  as
possible  put  out  of  sight  into  the  tomb.

VI.  It  is  instructive  to  think  op  Jesus  Christ  being  exposed  to  just  such
A  PUBLIC  INFAMY.  He  was  made  a  curse  for  us.  He  was  hanged  on  a  tree,  gibbeted
as  a  malefactor.  What  love-  led  him  to  place  himself  in  such  a  position !  The
authorities  took  him.  and  in  his  Father's  and  mother's  presence  they  did  him  to  death,
as  if  he  had  been  a  disobedient  and  disgraceful  Son.  Thus  did  he  deliver  us  from  the
curse  of  the  Law.  We  receive  honour  because  he  accepted  shame.  The  "  holy  Child
Jesus  "  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  was  suspended  on  a  tree,  as  if  he  were  accursed  of  God.
May  we  all  profit  by  his  voluntary  humiliation,  and  imitate  him  as  the  holy,  conse-
crated Child  1— K.  M.  E.

Vers.  1—9. — Purification  from  guilt  of  on  tmeeiiain  •mwder.  The  explanation
commonly  given  of  this  peculiar  ceremony  seems  unsatisfactory.  Eeil's  view,  that  "  it
was  a  symbolical  infliction  of  the  punishment  that  should  have  been  borne  by  the
murderer,  upon  the  animal  which  was  substituted  for  him,"  is  contradicted  by  the  fact
that,  for  deliberate  murder,  the  Law,  as  he  admits,  provided  no  e.xpiation,  while  the
object  of  this  ceremony  was  plainly  in  some  way  to  remove  blood-guiltiness.  Pairbairn's
explanation  (in  his  '  Typology ')  is  even  more  far-fetched,  that  the  heifer  was  "  a
palpable  represcniative  of  the  person  whose  life  had  been  wantonly  and  murderously
taken  away."  The  key  to  the  ceremony  is,  we  think,  to  be  sought  for  in  another
direction.  The  central  idea  is  that  a  responsibility  attaches  to  a  whole  community  for
crimes  committed  in  its  midst.  The  members  of  the  community  are  implicated  in  the
guilt  of  the  murder  till  they  absolve  themselves  by  bringing  the  murderer  to  justice
(vers.  8,  9).  In  the  case  here  treated  of,  the  murderer  is  unknown,  and  a  rite  is
appointed  by  which  the  share  of  the  community  in  his  blood-guiltiness,  which  cannot
be  removed  in  the  ordinary  way,  by  executing  justice  on  the  criminal,  is  otherwise
abolished.  The  heifer,  in  this  view,  represents  neither  the  murdered  man  nor  his
murderer,  but  the  people  of  the  city,  who  seek  to  purge  themselves  from  guilt  by
putting  it  to  death.  It  is  their  own  guilt  they  seek  to  get  rid  of,  not  the  criminal's.
Expiation  was  not  admitted  for  the  actual  murderer,  but  the  responsibility  for  the
crime,  which,  failing  the  visitation  of  justice  on  the  criminal,  devolved  on  the  community
— for  that,  expiation  was  admitted.     The  animal,  suffering  vicariously,  in  full  posses-


iH.  XXI.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  349


sioB  of  its  vital  powers,  vhile  the  elders  of  the  dty  washed  their  hands  over  It>  and
declared  their  innocence  of  all  knowledge  of  the  murder,  sufficed  to  secure  that  "  the
hlood  should  be  forgiven  them" — forgiveness  implying  previous  imputation.  The
valley,  "  neither  eared  nor  sown,"  was,  in  its  desolation  and  sterility,  a  fit  place  for
such  a  transaction,  which,  wljile  it  cleansed  the  city,  left  the  curse  upon,  the  mur-
derer, and  indeed  made  the  spot  a  sort  of  witness  of  his  yet  unexpiated  guilt.  We
learn:  1.  That  responsibility  attaches  to  each  and  all  in  a  community  for  crimes
committed  in  its  midst.  2.  That  the  community  is  not  absolved  till  every  effort  has
been  made  to  discover  the  perpetrators  of  crime  and  to  bring  them  to  justice.  3.  That
the  punishment  of  murder  is  lieath.  4.  That  to  ignore,  connive  at,  or.  encourage  crime
in  a  community,  involves  the  authorities  in  the  criminality  of  the  deeds  connived  at.
5.  That  all  parties,  the  people  (represented  by  the  elders),  the  magistrates  (judges),
the  Church  (priests),  are  alike  interested  in  bringing  criminals  to  justice.— J.  O.

Vers.  10 — 15. — The  captive  wife.  The  kindness,  thoughtfulness,  and  strict  justice  of
the  Mosaic  laws  is  very  striking.     The  Law  here  interposes  to  secure —

I.  CONSIDBEATB   TREATMENT  OF  ONE   BEREAVED.      (Vers.   10 — 14.)       The    CaSe   SUp-

posed  comes  imder  the  law  of  ch.  xx.  14.  The  woman  was  a  captive  in  war  and  a,
heathen,  yet  the  Israelite  is  required  to  respect  her  chastity,  and,  if  he  conceive  a
passion  for  her,  must  not  only  make  her  his  wife  in  a  proper  manner,  but  must  allow
her  a  full  month  to  bewail  her  dead  relatives.  The  question  of  religion  is  a  difScult
one  in  such  cases,  but  we  may  suppose  that  no  force  was  applied  to  captives  and
strangers  further  than  forbidding  to  them  the  outward  practice  of  idolatry.  The  laying
aside  of  the  symbols  of  captivity,  and  the  purificatory  rites  of  cutting  the  hair  and
nails,  could  only  imply  reception  into  the  fellowship  of  the  covenant  nation  in  the
event  of  the  woman  freely  accepting  Jehovah  as  her  God  (cf.  Buth  i.  15,  16).  Learn  :
1.  That  the  tumult  and  disorder  of  war  is  no  excuse  for  immoral  licence.  2.  We  are
to  consider  the  situation  and  feelings  of  those  whose  circumstances  place  them  at  our
mercy.  3.  Natural  affections  are  to  be  respected  underneath  all  difiereuces  of  creed
and  race.

II.  Protection  fob  one  unfriended.  (Ver.  14.)  The  captive  stranger  wedded
to  an  Israelite  was  not  left  to  be  treated  by  him  as  he  listed.  Her  unfriended  position
exposed  her  to  the  risk  of  suffering  from  her  husband's  caprice  and  unfeelingness.
While,  therefore,  he  is  permitted,  if  he  lose  delight  in  her,  to  divorce  her — for  the
"letting  her  go"  must  be  construed  in  the  light  of  oh.  xxiv.  3 — he  must  on  no  account
sell  her  or  detain  her  as  a  captive.  Another  instance  of  God's  care  for  "  the  stranger."
Hasty  marriages,  founded  on  passion  inspired  by  mere  external  attractions,  seldom
result  in  lasting  happiness. — J.  0.

Vera.  15 — 18. — The  firstborn  of  the  hated  wife.  The  firstborn,  in  patriarchal  and
tribal  societies,  had  recognized  rights  and  honours,  correlative  with  the  duties  and
responsibilities  which  his  position  as  prospective  head  of  the  household  entailed  on  him.
The  principle  is  here  asserted  that  individual  preferences  and  partialities  are  not  to  be
allowed  to  set  aside  the  rights  of  the  son  who  is  lawfully  the  firstborn.  Men  would
fain,  sometimes,  bend  justice  to  their  lilungs.  Where  an  Israelite  had  two  wives,
either  together  or  in  succession,  the  one  loved  and  the  other  hated,  he  might  be
tempted  to  pass  by  the  son  of  the  hated,  and  confer  the  rights  of  the  fii'stborn  on  the
son  of  the  wife  whom  he  loved,  though  it  was  the  son  of  the  hated  wife  who  was
entitled  to  that  honour.  With  strict  impartiality,  the  Law  steps  in  and  forbids  this  act
of  injustice.  It  demands  that  the  son  of  the  hated  wife  have  all  his  rights.  It  will
tolerate  no  tampering  with  them.  Lessons :  1.  The  evils  of  polygamy.  2.  The  sin  of
allowing  likes  and  dislikes  to  influence  us  to  acts  of  injustice.  3.  The  danger  of
natural  preferences  degenerating  into  blameworthy  partialities.  4.  The  duty  of  doing
always  what  is  right,  whatever  the  bent  of  our  private  inclinations, — J,  0.

Vera.  18—21. — The  rebellious  son,  A  law  of  this  kind,  which  left  it  to  the  parents
themselves  to  impeach  their  disobedient  son,  while  ordaining  that,  when  the  charge  was
proved  against  him,  and  it  could  be  shown  that  the  parents  had  duly  corrected  him,
th*  offender  should  be  put  to  death,  would,  we  may  believe,  very  rarely  be  enforced.


350  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxi.  1— 23

In  cases  so  aggravated  that  its  enforcement  was  necessary,  the  penalty,  judged  by  tha
usages  and  state  of  feeling  of  the  time,  would  be  thought  anything  but  severe.  Tha
law,  whether  enforced  or  not,  was  a  staniling  testimony  to  the  enormity  attaching  in
the  eyes  of  G-od  to  the  sin  of  filial  disobedience.     We  learn —

I.  Ihsdboedination  to  parents  is  a  qravk  offence  against  society.  It  is
treated  here,  not  simply  as  a  private  wrong,  but  as  a  crime.  Hebrew  society  rested  so
largely  on  the  patriarchal  basis  that  the  due  maintenance  of  parental  authority  was  a
necessity  of  its  existence.  The  theocratic  principle,  according  to  which  parents  were
invested  with  a  peculiar  sacredness  as  representatives  of  God,  likewise  called  for  the
repression  of  incorrigible  disobedience.  But,  whatever  the  form  of  social  order,  a
spread  of  the  spirit  of  insubordination  to  parents  is  the  invariable  prelude  to  a  universal
loosening  of  the  ties  and  obligations  of  corporate  existence.  "  It  has  been  found,"  says
Dr.  Fleming,  in  his  '  Moral  Philosophy,'  "  in  the  history  of  all  nations  that  the  best
security  for  the  public  welfare  is  a  wise  and  happy  exercise  of  parental  authority  ;  and
one  of  the  surest  forerunners  of  nntional  degradation  and  public  anarchy  and  disorder  is
neglect  or  contempt  of  domestic  happiness  or  rule."

II.  Paeekts  arb  not  entitled  to  complain  of  the  disobedience  of  children,

SAVE  WHERE  THEIB  OWN  DUTIES  TO  THEIR  CHILDREN  HAVE  BEEN  FAITHFULLY  DIS-
CHARGED. To  secure  a  conviction,  the  parents  had  to  show,  not  only  that  they  had
done  their  best  to  bring  the  son  up  in  right  ways,  but  that  they  had  corrected  him,  and
otherwise  endeavoured  to  reclaim  him  from  hii  vices.  Before  parents  are  entitled  to
complain  of  the  disobedience  of  children,  they  must  have  done  their  utmost  (1)  by
instruction,  (2)  by  admonition,  (3)  by  correction,  (4)  by  example,  (5)  by  a  firm
assertion  of  parental  authority  generally,  to  keep  them  from  error.  Parents  who
neglect  these  duties  have  little  cause  to  wonder  at  a  son  turning  out  ill ;  the  wonder
would  be  if  he  should  turn  out  well.  It  is  they,  as  much  as  the  son,  who  deserve
blame.  Lesson  :  Compare  with  the  behaviour  of  this  rebellious  son  our  own  treatment
of  our  heavenly  Father. — J.  0.

Vers.  22,  23. — Accursed  of  Ood.  The  criminal  who  had  committed  a  sin  worthy  of
death,  and  was  put  to  death  under  the  law,  was  viewed  as  dying  under  the  ban  or  curse
of  God.  When  the  crime  was  very  execrable,  and  the  criminal  might  be  regarded  as
perishing  under  God's  most  awful  curse,  the  fact  was  intimated  by  exposing  the  body
on  a  tree.  Compare  the  old  custom  of  hanging  a  notorious  criminal  in  chains.  The
placing  of  the  body  on  a  tree  was  not  that  which  made  the  person  accursed,  but  was
an  external  sign  or  token  of  his  being  an  accursed  one.  It  was,  therefore,  a  singular
and  striking  feature  in  God's  providential  arrangements,  not  only  that  the  death  oi
Christ  should  be  brouglit  about  as  a  result  of  judgment  passed  on  him  by  the  consti-
tuted authorities  of  his  nation,  pronouncing  him  guilty  of  the  worst  of  all  crimes  under
the  theocracy,  that  of  blasphemy,  but  that  in  the  manner  of  his  death  even  this
external  token  of  ignominy  should  not  be  wanting.  In  this  act,  the  placing  of  Jesus
on  the  cross,  the  sin  and  madness  of  the  world  were  overruled,  as  in  several  other
instances  (Matt,  xxvii.  25,  29,  42  ;  Mark  xv.  27,  28 ;  John  xi.  50),  to  give  unwitting
expression  to  the  highest  truth.  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  I^aw,
being  made  a  curse  for  us ;  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  that  hangeth  on  a
tree  "  (Gal.  iii.  13).  The  crucifixion  of  Jesus  signifies  to  us  :  1.  The  world's  judgment,
upon  Christ.  It  put  him  to  death  as  one  accursed  of  God.  It  treated  him  as  the
worst  of  malefactors,  and  interpreted  his  death  upon  the  cross  as  a  sure  token  of  God
having  forsaken  him  (Matt,  xxvii.  43).  To  mary  it  may  have  appeared  as  if  the
inference  were  just.  The  Sanhedrim  had  convicted  him  of  blasphemy,  and  their  verdict
seemed  confirmed  by  the  failure  of  Christ  to  deliver  himself  out  of  their  hands.  A
true  Christ  would  not  thus  have  succumbed  beiure  his  enemies.  The  cross  was  the
refutation  of  his  claims,  and  the  proof  of  his  being  an  impostor,  justly  doomed  to  die.
"  We  did  esteem  him  stricken,  smitten  of  God,  and  afflicted  "  (Isa.  liii.  4).  The  world
was  wrong,  for  Jesus  was  never  dearer  to  his  Father  than  in  that  hour  when  he  hung
upon  the  tree ;  but,  in  a  sense  unknown  to  itself,  it  gave  utterance  to  a  truth.  2.  Chrisft
submission  to  a  cursed  death/or  the  world.  The  subjection  of  the  sinless  Christ  to  tlio
death  of  the  cross  is  a  fact  which  requires  explanation.  If  the  world  put  him  to  death
as  one  accuned,  it  is  none  the  less  true  that  he  voluntarily  submitted  to  this  suffering


OH.  XI.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  »51

and  ignominy,  and  that  the  Father  permitied  him  so  to  be  "made  a  curse."  A  yet
more  mysterious  feature  in  the  death  of  Christ  is  tLat,  in  the  direst  hour  of  his  agony,
the  Father  seemed  to  side  with  the  world,  by  withdrawing  from  him  the  light  and
comfort  of  his  presence  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  Christ  was  dealt  with  by  Heaven,  not  less
than  by  men,  as  One  under  a  curse  ;  if  not  a  sinner,  he  was  treated  as  if  he  were  one.
The  apostolic  writings  lay  stress  on  this  as  a  fact  of  essential  importance  in  the  work
of  Christ  for  man's  salvation  (2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  Gal.  iii.  18).  Subjection  to  the  curse  of
the  Law  in  the  name  of  the  world  of  sinners  with  whose  lot  he  had  identified  himself,  was
not  all  that  was  necessary  lor  their  redemption  from  that  curse,  but  it  was  involved  in
what  was  necessary.  Any  theory  of  atonement  which  leaves  out  the  recognition  of
Christ  "made  sin"  for  us  by  voluntary  endurance  of  sin's  doom,  must,  on  »oriptuial
grounds,  be  pronounced  at  least  incomplete. — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — ^9. — The  creation  of  righteous,  puhlic  sentiment.  The  influence  of  man  upon
man  is  omnific;  it  touches  him  at  every  point.  The  potency  of  influence  depends  on
character,  rank,  age,  station.  The  character  of  kings  is  soon  reflected  on  their  courtiers.
From  this  principle  is  bom  the  adage,  "Like  priest,  like  people."  Crimes  proceed
from  depraved  sentiment,  and  sentiment  can  be  puriflud  by  righteous  influence.

I.  Crime  courts  concealment.  All  crime  is  cowardly,  base,  mean.  It  fears  the
light.  This  may  furnish  a  test  for  acts  that  lie  near  the  boundary  lines  of  morality,
and  admit  of  question.  If  the  fierce  light  of  righteous  opinion  is  dieaded,  the  thing  is
already  condemned.  So  lacking  in  fortitude  and  courage  is  the  murderer,  that  he  will
seldom  confess  the  truth  unless  conscience  scourges  him  with  intolerable  remorse.  Yet
it  is,  in  well-organized  society,  an  exceptional  thing  if  the  murderer  escapes.  The
movements  of  Divine  providence  usually  furnish  some  clue  to  the  red-handed  man.
Still,  if  amid  the  infirmities  of  hum.in  government  the  culprit  should  escape,  he  is
amenable  to  another  jurisdiction  where  concealment  is  impossible.  Every  crime  shall
eventually  be  seen  in  a  blaze  of  noontide  light.

II.  Maqistebial  RBsroNSiBiLiTY  IB  INDICATED.  Crime  is  not  merely  injury  against
an  individual,  it  is  an  assault  upon  society.  If  murder  pass  with  impunity,  no  life
will  soon  be  safe.  In  the  human  race  there  is  a  solidarity  of  interest.  Men  constitute
a  family.  Cities  have  a  character  as  well  as  persons.  The  real  leaders  in  society  are
laden  with  heavy  responsibility.  It  is  their  paramount  duly  to  foster  healthy  public
sentiment;  and  ijf  this  sentiment  does  not  penetrate  far  enough  to  prevent  crime,  it
should  penetrate  far  enough  to  detect  crime.  Every  man  can  contribute  something  to
influence  public  morals,  and  magistrates  should  lead  the  way.

III.  Public  abhorrence  or  crime  is  impressively  shown.  The  minds  of  men  are
more  impressed  by  deeds  than  by  words,  especially  by  symbolic  acts  surrounded  by  the
sanctions  of  religion.  It  was  of  the  first  importance  that  the  city  elders  should  be
beyond  any  suspicion  of  connivance  with  the  deed.  Therefore  they  must  publicly
purge  themselves  by  solemn  attestation.  A  valuable  heifer  was  to  be  selected,  and  the
elders  were  required  to  decapitate  the  victim — a  public  protest  that  this  would  be  their
own  desert  if  in  any  degree  they  had  been  accessories  to  the  crime.  The  natural  scene
selected  for  this  rite  was  significant.  It  was  to  be  done  in  a  rugged  valley  given  over
to  barrenness  or  natural  desolr.tion;  being  an  impressive  picture  of  sin's  effect.  Accom-
panying this  solemn  immolation — this  appeal  of  innocence  to  Heaven — there  was  the
most  explicit  utterance  of  words ;  so  that  the  honour  of  the  rulers  might  shine  out
clear  and  bright.  Magisterial  authority  is  founded  on  public  regard.  It  was,  moreover,
a  representative  act.     Every  citizen  spoke  through  these  elders.

IV.  Mediation  is  here  fobbshadowed.  It  is  possible  by  our  thoughtlessness  to
"  become  partaker  of  other  men's  sins."  We  all  share,  in  greater  or  lesser  measures,  in
the  guilt  of  the  race.  There  are  sins  of  ignorance,  and  to  these  a  measure  of  culpa-
bility belongs.  Evils  might  have  been  prevented  if  we  had  been  more  faithful.  But,
by  God's  appointment,  substitution  is  permitted.  Other  blood  may  be  shed,  by  virtue
of  which  we  may  be  redeemed.  "  The  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  can  never  take  away
un ; "  nor  can  the  blood  of  man.  No  material  compensation  can  be  made  for  moral
wrong.  But  moral  effects  may  be  produced  by  substitution,  which  shall  be  equally
just  and  more  beneficent.  As  the  priests  of  olden  time  were  mediators  between  God
and  the  Jews,  so  we  have  a  Great  High  Pile  t,  who  is  a  real  Mediator,  having  royal
interest  for  \u  with  God.


352  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxi.  1—23.

V.  Penitence  and  pumtt  abb  twin  sisters.  (See  Ter.  9.)  There  is  an  appeal  fjr
mercy :  "  Be  merciful,  0  Lord,  unto  thy  people  Israel."  Some  measure  of  culpability
must  be  felt  in  every  solicitatiun  of  mercy.  For  mercy  is  that  principle  in  God  which
conveys  blessing  when  no  merit  exists.  And  if  true  penitence  moves  in  the  breast,  it
is  the  parent  of  reformation ;  its  purpose  is  amendment.  It  seeks  not  only  removal  of
burdens,  but  the  destruction  of  the  evil  thing.  In  the  hour  of  penitence,  new  love  and
new  hate  are  born.  Unless  fruits  of  righteousness  appear,  penitence  is  only  pretence.
The  sincere  cry  for  mercy  is  always  followed  by  "  doing  that  whicb  is  right  ia  the  sight
uf  the  Lord."— D.

Vers.  10 — 14. — The  captor  captured.  Gk>d'8  laws  are  accommodations  to  human
infirmities.  To  require  from  men  summarily,  and  as  the  result  of  law,  perfect  conduct
of  life  is  impracticable.  Henoe  legislation,  to  be  successful,  must  be  adapted  to  the
case,  and  must  lead  by  gradations  to  a  nobler  life.  This  law,  though  tolerant  of
lesser  evil,  is  a  marked  amelioration  of  earlier  custom — a  step  towards  order  and
purity.

I.  Female  beauty  wins  the  hearts  even  of  wabbiors.  There  are  other  con-
quests, and  nobler,  than  military  conquests.  Beauty  snatches  the  palm  from  strength.
In  the  very  hour  of  victory  the  conqueror  has  laid  all  his  spoils  at  the  feet  of  a  gentle
woman.  Love  rules  the  camp.  External  beauty  has  its  uses.  Real  beauty  isthe
exponent  of  some  hidden  worth.  It  eloquently  says,  "  There  is  some  goodness  here :
search  and  find  it  out."  And  beauty  has  its  perils  too — it  may  excite  sexual  passion
which  cannot  be  controlled.

II.  Conjugal  union  is  to  result,  not  from  sudden  passion,  but  fboii  well-tried
LOVE.  This  sudden  desire  to  have  his  captive  as  his  wife  was  required  to  be  tested
by  time.  Calm  reflection  is  to  precede  a  union  so  full  of  possible  results.  Beauty
may  fling  her  robe  of  colour  about  the  haze  of  dawn,  but  the  gay  haze  of  dawn  does  not
constitute  the  day.  Mere  bloom  on  summer  fruit  will  not  meet;  the  hunger  of  the  man.
Marriage  is  a  temple  of  God,  and  must  not  be  built  on  an  imaginary  foundation.  The
charm  of  the  fair  captive's  locks  was  to  be  temporarily  removed,  so  that  the  lover's
desire  might  rest,  not  on  fleeting  accessories,  but  on  personal  worth.  Ill-assorted
marriages  are  a  fertile  curse.  Sympathy  in  religion  is  essential  to  a  prosperous
marriage  union.

III.  The    natural    feelings    of    woman,    as    woman,    are    to    be    SCRUPaLOUSLY

RESPECTED.  We  may  not  understand  all  the  purposes  this  Jewish  law  was  designed  to
serve ;  but  certain  it  is  that,  though  a  captive,  the  natural  feeling  of  fihal  sorrow  was
to  be  allowed,  yea,  expected.  To  repress  or  root  out  the  affectionate  feeling  of  a
daughter  would  be  mutilation  of  the  soul.  A  forgetful  daughter  will  never  be  a  worthy
wife.  Nothing  in  our  external  fortunes — not  even  success  in  war — warrants  our  playing
the  tyrant.  It  is  for  the  benefit  of  the  human  race  that  woman  should  be  treated  on
equal  terms.  Her  fine  endowments  have  a  noble  part  to  play  in  the  culture  of
humanity.

IV.  MaBBIAOE  has  ITS  DUTIES  AS  WELL  AS  ITS  ENJOYMENTS.      By  the  CUStom  of  that

barbarous  age,  the  captive,  whether  male  or  female,  became  the  absolute  property  of
the  captor.  He  could  reduce  her  to  slavery.  But  if  he  chose  to  make  her  his  wife,
he  conveyed  to  her  rights  which  could  not  be  alienated.  It  became  henceforth  his  duty
to  protect  her  and  all  her  interests.  She  was  secure  against  the  lust  of  avarice.  God
threw  around  her  the  shield  of  liis  sacred  Law.  But  the  very  necessity  for  this  com-
mandment disclosed  the  rampant  greed  for  gain  which  rules  in  some  men.  Thankful
ought  we  to  be  that  God  removes  such  a  possible  temptation  out  of  our  way.  Not
by  God's  consent  is  marriage  ever  contracted  or  terminated  for  the  sake  of  money
gain. — ^D.

Vera.  16—17. — Monogamy  essential  to  domestic  peace.  Every  indication  of  God's
will  is  a  finger-post  to  felicity.  A  wise  man  will  not  wait  for  peremptory  law.  The
faintest  whisper  of  Jehovah's  will  is  lav.'  to  him.  Without  doubt,  that  each  man  should
be  the  husband  of  one  wife  was  the  ordination  of  God.

L  The  nRSTBOur  son  is  placed  ih  a  position  of  special  privilkok  and  poweb.
All  bumaa  government  is  built  upon  the  model  of  the  family.    Within  the  compass  of


cti.  XXI.  1—23.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.  353


the  family  the  firstborn  was  a  sovereign,  had  sovereign  rule  and  responsibility.  In
families  Uke  Jacob's,  where  there  were  many  children  and  dependents,  this  was  a
position  of  eminence  and  power.  In  every  case,  special  duties  devolve  upon  the  first-
bom.  He  has  often  to  act  as  the  representative  of  the  family,  and  to  defend  family
rights.  He  becomes  the  natural  arbitrator  in  family  disputes.  His  influence,  for  good
or  for  evil,  is  great.  Therefore,  to  sustain  his  position  and  power,  •  double  portion  of
the  ancestral  estate  was  his.

II.  Thb  FBrvrLEGE  OF  THE  FiBSTBOBN  18  INALIENABLE.  For  a  time  the  firstborn  son
IS  sole  heir  to  his  father's  rank  and  riches ;  hence,  for  reasons  external  to  him,  it  would
be  unjust  to  depose  him.  And  injustice  always  leads  to  strife,  disorder,  and  mischief.
Filial  reverence  would  be  undermined.  Seeds  of  hatred  would  be  .sown.  The  removal
of  the  father's  authority  by  death  would  be  the  sign  for  feud,  litigation,  and  waste.
What  God  has  ordained  let  not  man  disturb.  Our  earthly  possessions  are  entrusted  to
us  temporarily  by  God,  and  the  entailment  has  been  determined  by  the  Divine  Pro-
prietor. For  the  just  management  of  our  secular  estates  and  of  our  family  concerns,
we  are  accountable  at  the  great  assize.     Favouritism  among  children  is  a  prolific  evil.

III.  TraS  PKOSPECTIVE  MISCHIEF  ISSUES  FROM  A  PLURALITY  OF  WIVES.     God  haS  often

tolerated  among  men  what  he  has  not  approved.  He  does  this,  in  some  respect,  every
day.  If  he  had  imposed  capital  punishment  upon  the  violation  of  monogamy,  the
effect,  in  many  cases,  would  have  been  unchastity.  Law,  in  order  to  be  effectual,  can
never  transcend  the  highest  level  of  moral  sentiment  prevalent  in  the  age.  Otherwise
judges  themselves  would  be  culprits,  and  no  one  could  be  found  to  administer  the  law.
But  the  family  intrigues,  quarrels,  and  miseries  which  spriug  from  a  plurality  of  wives
are  God's  visible  brands  and  scourges  on  disobedience.  What  works  best  for  society,
for  the  human  race,  is  (in  the  absence  of  other  instruction)  the  revealed  will  of  God.
Wiierever  there  is  more  than  one  wife  there  must  be  divided  afiection,  divided  interests,
divided  authority.    The  house  is  divided  against  itself. — D.

Vers.  18 — ^21. — A  slippery  path  to  ruin.  It  is  of  the  first  importance  that  •  child
should  begin  life  well.  A  twist  in  the  young  stem  will  develop  into  a  gnarled  and
crooked  tree.  A  slight  divergence  at  the  outset  of  a  voyage  may  end  in  a  complete
reversal  of  the  ship's  course.  Early  obedience  is  the  pathway  to  a  prosperous  life;  dis-
obedience leads  to  death.  T1.3  tongue  that  curseth  its  father  shall  be  scorched  with
devouring  flame.

I.  Selfish  indulgence  destroys  filial  reverence.  The  human  body  is  to  be  the
servant  of  the  mind.  If  the  appetites  and  lusts  of  the  body  are  allowed  to  rule,  the
mind  becomes  a  slave,  and  aU  the  better  principles  are  manacled  and  enfeebled.  We
begin  life  as  dependent  children,  and  the  fresh  sense  of  loving  obligation  should  be  an
antidote  for  selfishness.  But  if  we  set  out  in  life  with  a  resolve  to  please  self,  we  are
already  on  the  way  to  ruin.  Reverence  for  the  parental  character,  and  regard  for
parental  authority,  are  the  only  solid  foundations  for  a  noble  life.  To  feed  unduly  the
body,  and  for  gratification  alone,  is  to  starve  the  soul.    Sensuality  fosters  self-wilL

II.  Bebellion  in  the  child  destroys  sonship.  Disregard  of  authority  soon  chokes
and  strangles  filial  feeling.  The  tie  of  sonship  is  snapped.  The  qualities  and  attributes
of  a  son  are  wanting.  There  is  a  relationship  of  body,  but  no  true  relationship  of  soul.
Alienation  has  sprung  up  instead  of  vital  union.  The  lad  may  dwell  under  the  old
roof-tree,  but  in  reality  there  is  a  great  gulf  between  him  and  his  parents :  he  is
descendant,  but  not  a  son.  To  be  the  children  of  G«d  there  must  be  resemblance  of
sharacter.

IIL  IlNFBniTFnL  CHASTISEMENT  IB  A  TBEHENSOUS  0UB8E.  The  medicine  that  does
not  do  good,  does  harm.  The  flame  that  does  not  melt,  hardens.  Parental  chastise-
ment, when  needed,  is  an  imperative  duty,  but  should  be  administered  with  wisdom,
seif-restraint,  and  pity.  The<obatinacy  of  the  son  is  not  unfrequently  due  to  the  foolish
leniency  or  unrestrained  severity  of  the  parent.  Chastisement  is  a  serious  experiment,
and  always  produces  some  effect,  either  favourable  or  unfavourable.  We  are  not  the
same  men  after  trial  or  pain  that  we  were  before.

IV.  The  State  must  support  parental  authobitt.  So  valuable  is  human  life
that  the  State  wisely  claims  the  sole  power  of  capital  punishment.  If  the  disciplines
and  chastisements  of  home  have  &iled  to  produce  a  virtuous  citizen,  the  whole  com-

deutebonomt.  2  A


354


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[cH.  xxn.  1 — 30.


munity  must  deal  with  the  incorrigible  reprobate.  The  State  cannot  afford,  for  its
safety's  sake,  to  allow  a  firebrand  to  be  let  loose  in  its  midst.  The  example  and
influence  of  such  a  mi.screant  would  be  fatally  mischievous.  The  whole  State  has
vital  interests  to  serve,  and  it  would  be  sheerest  folly  to  sacrifice  them  to  a  drunken
madman.

V.  Persistent  rebellion  leads  to  an  ignominious  end.  It  must  be  a  duty,  the
most  painl'ul  for  human  nature  to  perform,  to  surrender  a  son  to  public  execution.  Yet
it  sometimes  is  a  duty.  The  hope  of  amendment  has  been  quenched.  To  continue  such
a  one  in  life  has  become  a  bane  to  himself  and  to  others.  If  all  remedies  have  failed,
destruction  must  ensue.  All  the  men  of  the  city  shall  put  their  hand  to  the  deed.
This  may  be  done  by  personal  service  or  by  representation.  The  mad  career  of  the
culprit  ends  in  pain,  loss,  and  perpetual  disgrace.  It  i«  a  symbol  of  the  great  judgment
doom.— D.

Vers-  22,  23. — T!ie  doom  of  law  the  embodiment  of  Divine  curse.  The  suspension  of
a  human  body  on  the  gallows-tree  is  the  utmost  climax  of  ruin  and  disgrace.  It  is  the
fullest  exponent  of  the  public  detestation  and  horror  for  the  deed.  In  this  case  the
curse  of  men  is  the  curse  of  God.  But  this  "curse  was  not  to  continue.  Blessing  was
to  be  perpetual,  abiding,  uninterrupted ;  but  the  curse  was  to  endure  for  a  moment.
The  body  so  accursed  was  to  be  buried  before  sunset.  Many  reasons  have  been  assigned
for  this.

I.  Because  vindictive  anger  should  be  kept  within  due  bounds.  Anger  against
monstrous  crime  is  a  great  assistance  in  the  pi  rforraance  of  painful  duty.  We  are
braced  to  do  under  stress  of  anger  what  we  could  scarcely  do  in  calmer  moods  of
feeling.  Anger  has  its  use,  but  shoiiM  not  be  prolonged.  When  the  painful  deed  is
done,  vengeful  passion  should  cease.  To  this  end  let  the  lifeless  body  be  buried  out  of
sight.

II.  Because  the  human  form  is  SACREn  as  God's  temple.  The  temple  may  be  in
ruins,  yet  sentiments  of  ventration  hover  round  the  ruined  shrines.  \Ve  know  that
yonder  executed  man  was  the  workmanship  uf  the  living  God.  Every  vein,  and  artery,
and  muscle,  and  nerve  in  that  mutilated  body  was  the  handiwork  of  God.  With  that
man's  history  God  had  taken  pains ;  and  over  his  mistaken  course  God  had  grieved.
We  think  of  what  that  man  might  have  been,  how  fruitful  in  goodness  ai^d  virtue!
how  meet  for  Divine  service  and  honour  I  And  the  spectacle  of  that  man's  doom
should  arouse  our  fear.  We  may  well  stand  in  awe  of  sin.  To  commit  such  a  corpse
with  gentle  pity  to  the  grave  will  do  us  gond.

in.  Because  moral  defilement  would  otherwise  ri;sult.  The  exposure  of  a
dead  body  in  that  climate  beyond  a  single  day  would  taint  the  atmosphere  and  daniHge
health.  But  to  accustom  the  minds  ol  men  to  such  a  ghastly  spectacle  would  tend  to
moral  defilement.  It  would  serve  to  harden  their  better  feelings,  and  make  too  familiar
the  exhibition  of  Jehovah's  curse.  In  our  present  condition  sacred  things  may  become
too  common.  Here  especially  "  faniilinrity  breeds  contempt."  No  greater  evil  can
befall  the  soul  than  when  it  becomes  heedless  of  Diviue  judgments. — D.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEK  XXII.

Regulations  regarding  Cattle  strayed
OR  Things  lost,  the  Apparel  of  the
Sexes,  the  Taking  of  Birds,  and  the
Constbcction  of  Houses.  Confusions
to  be  avoided.  Fringes  to  be  made
ON  Vestments.  Punishment  of  Wife-
slander,  Adultery,  Bape,  Fornication,
Incest.
Vers.  I — 4. — Moses  repeats  here  the  law


formerly  given  (Exod.  xxiiL  4,  5),  with

additional  details.  Not  only  the  ox  oi
the  ass  tliat  had  strayed  was  to  be  taken
and  restored  to  its  owner,  but  articles  of
raiment,  and,  in  short,  anything  that  Lad
been  lost  wa's,  when  found  by  another,  to
be  carefully  kept  until  it  could  be  restoroJ
to  the  person  to  whom  it  belonged.

Ver.  1. — Go  astray;  wandering  at  large.
The  Hebrew  verb  means  primarily  to  Bedun«,
draw  aside,  or  entice  (of.  ch  tjii.  6);  ami  'q


on.  xxn.  1—30.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


365


the  passive  conveys  the  idea  of  wanilering
through  being  drawn  away  by  some  entice-
ment Hide  thyself  from  them ;  i.e.  withdraw
thyself  from  them,  avoid  noticing  them  or
having  to  do  with  them.  In  any  case;
certainly,  without  fail.

Ver.  4. — An  animal  that  had  fallen  was
•Iso  to  be  lifted  up,  and  the  owner  was  to
be  assisted  to  do  this.  In  Bxodus,  it  is
specially  declared  that  both  these  services
are  to  be  rendered,  even  though  the  parties
are  at  eumity  with  each  other,  and  the  one
is  the  object  of  hatred  to  the  other.

Ver.  5. — The  divinely  instituted  distinc-
tion between  the  sexes  was  to  be  sacredly
observed,  and,  in  order  to  this,  the  dress
and  other  things  appropriate  to  the  one
were  not  to  be  used  by  the  otlier.  That
which  pertaineth  unto  a  man;  literally,  the
apparatus  ('^3)  of  a  man,  including,  not
dress  merely,  but  implements,  tools,
weapons,  and  utensils.  This  is  an  ethical
regulation  in  the  interests  of  morality.
There  is  no  reference,  as  some  have  sup-
posed, to  the  wearing  of  masks  for  the
purpose  of  disguioe,  or  to  the  practice  of
the  priests  at  heathen  festivals  of  wearing
masks  of  their  gods.  Whatever  tends  to
obliterate  the  dititinetion  between  the  sexes
tends  to  licentiousness;  and  that  the  one
sex  should  assume  the  dress  of  the  other
has  always  been  regarded  as  unnaturtil
and  indecent  (comp.  Seneca,  'Epist.,'  122,
"Ncnne  videntur  contra  naturam  vivere  qui
commutant  cum  feminis  vestem;"  and
Juvenal, '  Sat.,'  vi.  252—
"  Quera  prffistare  potest  mulier  galeata  pa-

dorem
QusB  fugit  a  sexu  f  ")

Such  a  change  of  vesture  is  here  declared
to  be  an  abomination  to  the  Lord,  because
of  its  tendency  to  immorality.

Vers.  6,  7.— (Of.  Lev.  xxii.  28;  Exod.
xziii.  19.)  These  precepts  are  designed  to
foster  humane  feeling  towards  the  lower
animals,  and  not  le.-s  to  preserve  regard  to
that  affectionate  relation  between  parents
and  tlieir  young  which  God  has  established
as  a  law  in  the  auimal  world.  That  thou
mayest  prolong  thy  days  (cf.  ch.  v.  16;
Exod.  II.  12).

Ver.  8. — Still  less  was  human  life  to  be
exposed  to  danger  through  neglect  of  proper
precautions.  The  houses  in  Palestine,  as
in  other  parts  of  the  East,  had  flat  roofs,
and,  as  these  were  much  frequented  by
the  inhabitants  fur  various  purposes  (cf.
Josh.  ii.  6 ;  2  Sam.  xi.  2 ;  iviii.  24 ;  Neh.  viii.
16 ;  Matt.  I.  27 ;  Acts  x.  9),  it  was  necessary
that  a  battlement  or  balustrade  should
lurround  the  roof,  in  order  to  prevent
persona  falling  over.  Hence  the  direction
here  given.


Vera.  9— 11.— (Cf.  Lev.  xix.  19.)  God  has
made  distinctions  in  nature,  and  these  are
not  to  be  confounded  by  the  mixing  oi
things  distinct.  The  ox  and  the  ass  were
chiefly  used  in  husbandry;  but,  as  they
were  of  diflerent  size  and  strength,  it  was
not  only  fitting  that  they  should  not  be
yoked  to  the  same  plough,  but  it  might  be
cruel  so  to  yoke  them.

Ver.  11. — ^A  garment  of  divers  sorts;
iha'atnez,  a  kind  of  cloth  in  which  threads
of  linen  and  threads  of  woollen  were  inter-
woven. The  meaning  of  the  word  is
uncertain.  Tlie  LXX.  render  by  «i;8Sj)\os,
"  spurious,  bad ; "  Aquila,  by  avTiSiaKfl^Levov,
"  variously  disposed,  diverse."  No  Semitic
etymology  can  be  found  for  the  word,  and
as  the  Hebrews  derived  the  textile  art  from
Egypt,  the  home  of  that  art,  the  word  ii
probably  of  Egyptian  origin.

Ver.  12.— (Cf.  Numb.  xv.  38.)  Fringes;
properly,  tasselt.  The  tunic  of  the  Hebrews
appears  to  have  been  divided  at  the  bottom
in  front,  and  back,  so  that  four  corners  or
wings  (n'lBjs)  were  made,  to  each  of  which  a
tassel  was  appended  (Greek,  K/xio'TreSov,  Matt
tx.  20 ;  xxiii.  5,  etc.  J.

Vers.  13 — 29. — The  laws  in  this  section
have  the  design  of  fostering  purity  and
fidelity  in  the  relation  of  tlie  sexes,  and
also  of  protecting  the  female  against  the
malice  of  sated  lust  and  the  violence  of
brutal  lust.  (For  the  case  supposed  in  ver.
13,  cf.  2  Sam.  xiii.  15.  On  the  whole  section
see  Michaelis,  '  Laws  of  Motes,'  pt.  ii.  §  92 ;
Niebuhr, '  Description  de  I'Arabie,'  ch.  viii. ;
Burckhardt,  'Bedwius,'  p.  214.)

Vers.  22 — 29, — Four  cases  are  here  dis-
tinguished. 1.  That  of  a  married  woman
who  has  been  unfaithful ;  in  this  case  both
the  womau  and  her  parnniour  are,  when  de-
tected, to  be  put  to  death  (ver.  22).  2.  That  of
a  virgin  betrotlied  who  is  assailed  in  a  town,
where  she  might  have  cried  for  protection,  but
did  not ;  in  this  case  also  both  were  to  bo
punished  with  death  as  adulterers  (vers.  23,
24).  3.  That  of  a  virgin  hctrothed  who  has
been  forcibly  violated  in  the  field,  where,
if  she  cried  for  help,  her  cry  was  in  vain ;
in  this  case  only  the  man  should  be  liable
to  be  put  to  death,  whilst  the  woman  was
to  be  held  innocent  (vers.  25 — 27).  4.
That  of  a  virgin  not  betrothud  with  whom
a  man  has  had  carnal  intercourse;  in  this
case  the  man  should  be  required  to  pay  a
fine  of  fifty  shekels  of  silver  to  the  damsel's
father,  and  to  take  her  to  be  his  wife,  from
whom  he  could  not  be  separated  during  life
(vers.  28,  29).

Ver.  30. — To  these  is  appended  a  general
prohibition  of  incestuous  connections,  the
first  provision  in  the  earlier  law  being
cited  as  a  sort  of.  index  to  the  wa>..le  (Lev,
iviii.  7,  etc.).


36«  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTBBONOMI.  [ch.  xxn.  1— 3a


H0MILETIC3.

Vers.  1 — I. — The  duty  of  cultivating  neighbourly  kindnem.  It  will  be  a  vahiaWi
study  in  Divine  ethics  if  we  first  of  all  show  what  it  is  which  is  here  requinsd  of  the
Hebrews,  and  then,  with  the  Mosaic  teaching  for  a  starting-point,  advance  further  ind
see  how  far  in  Christian  ethics  there  is  incorporated  all  that  was  valuable  in  the
Mosaic,  while  there  is  added  thereto  that  which  belongs  peculiarly  to  th6  law  of
the  gospel.

Moses,  in  this  paragraph,  enjoins  acts  of  neighbourly  kindness.  To  whom  is  this
kindness  to  be  shown?  To  "  thy  brother."  He  maybe  (I)  a  brother  by  kinship,
(2)  an  unknown  individual  (ver.  2),  or  (3)  an  enemy  (cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  4).  In  either
case  a  like  kindness  is  to  be  shown.  There  is  contained  in  Lev.  xix.  18  the  general
precept  out  of  which  these  details  of  kindness  would  come.  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy
neighbour  as  thyself."  This  was  to  be  the  human  aspect,  the  social  side  of  a
godly  life.  The  basis  of  love  to  man  would  be  found  in  loving  God  with  all  the
heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength.  And  as  God  had  redeemed  the  people  from
Egypt,  that  they  might  be  to  himself  a  peculiar  people  to  show  forth  his  praise,  they
were  to  regard  this  redemption  as  uniting  them  in  one  bond  of  brotherhood,  with
interests  and  aims  in  common ;  hence  each  was  to  regard  another's  good  as  being  as
dear  to  him  as  his  own.  From  this  point  let  us  now  proceed  to  develop  in  outliue
the  Christian  law  of  kindness  to  others.

I.  The  Lobd  Jesus  Christ  enforces  the  law  ot  kindness  on  his  own  aothobitt.
(Cf.  Matt.  V.  43.)  He  not  only  reproduces  the  old  law,  but  clears  it  frcm  the  am-
biguities and  disfigurements  with  which  rabbinical  teaching  had  obscured  it.  "  Ye
have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour,  and  hate  Ihine
enemy."  Moses  had  said  the  first,  the  rabbis  had  addi  d  the  second.  Christ  tears  ofl
this  addition.  Again,  when  the  lawyer  said,  "And  who  is  my  neighbour?"  Christ
gave  him  the  parable  of  the  good  Samaritan,  in  which  he  virtually  said,  "  That  depends
upon  yourself;  whoever  cherishes  a  kindly  spirit  to  all,  he  is  the  neighbour,  however
far  off  in  place  or  nation."  The  Christian  law  is,  "  As  we  have  opportunity,  let  us  do
good  unto  all  men."  We  are  to  know  no  barriers  in  race,  colour,  or  clime;  no,
nor  is  even  hatred  or  ill  will  on  the  part  of  others  to  prevent  our  seekiijg  their  good.

II.  This  kindness  to  others  is  not  the  whole  op  religion,  but  only  that
PART  OF  IT  WHICH  HAS  TO  DO  WITH  MAN.  Love  to  God  IS  the  first  Command.  This
is  the  second.  Benevolence  without  religion  is  incomplete ;  religion  without  bene-
volence is  Tun.    Both  must  abound  in  the  truly  Christian  life.

III.  The  beason  of  both  is  to  be  found  i»  the  Divine  lovino-kindness  to  ns.
See  Matt.  vii.  12:  note  the  force  of  the  word,  "therefore,"  in  the  latter  verse.
Because  God  is  so  ready  to  bless  you,  be  you  ready  to  bless  others.  Tliis  great
redeeming  love  of  God  for  our  race  should  lead  us  to  see  in  all  men  members  of
one  vast  brotherhood,  which  God  would  encircle  in  his  girdle  of  love,  and  draw
together  by  the  thought  that,  as  he  cares  for  all,  each  should  care  for  the  other  1  "  Let
no  man  seek  his  own,  but  every  one  another's  wealth  "  (1  Cor.  x.  24).

IV.  The  inspiration  to  both  is  to  be  found  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  Here,  here  are  we  to  find  the  love  that  must  kindle  ours.  "  When  we  were
enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son."  If  we  owe  so  much
to  redeeming  love,  ought  we  not  to  show  a  corresponding  love  for  others?  What  said
Paul  ?  "  If  we  be  beside  ourselves,  it  is  to  God ;  if  we  be  sober,  it  is  for  your  cause,
for  the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  lu."  "  If  God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  lov»
one  another."

Vers.  6, 13—21,  22—24,  25—27,  27—29,  ZO.— Divine  care  for  sexual  honour.  In
these,  as  in  so  many  of  the  precepts  of  this  book,  we  find  civil  precepts  invested  with
religious  sanctions'.  Kothing  is  more  important  for  the  honourable  maintenance  of
social  life,  than  that  both  men  and  women  should  honour  each  other's  sex  as  well  as
their  own.  Those  that  do  othei-wise  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord  their  God.  There
are  five  or  six  different  cases  supposed  in  the  verses  referred  to  at  the  heading  of  this


OH.  xxn,  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  351

Homily:  (1)  clothing  (ver.  5J;  (2)  impeached  or  impaired  reputation  (veri.  13 — 21);
(3)  adultery  (vera.  22 — 24) ;  (i)  rape  or  seduction  ("vers.  25 — 29) — two  cases  ;  (5)  un-
lawful marriages  (ver.  30).  Such  sins  would  have  been  thought  nothing  of  among  the
Ganaanites.  God  would  hare  his  people  lifted  up  above  them.  Hence  it  is  needful
that  they  should  be  specifically  named,  and  that  the  people  should  be  solemnly  told  of  the
odiousness  of  these  sins  in  God's  sight,  that  thu^  they  might  become  odious  also  in
their  eyes.  While  all  will  feel  that  such  subjects  need  great  wisdom  in  handling  them,
yet  undue  reticence  thereon  may  work  direful  harm.  Many  need  to  be  told  with  great
plainness  of  speech,  "  He  that  breaketh  a  hedge,  a  serpent  shall  bite  him."  Our  theme
is — "  Sexiud  dishonour  odious  in  the  sight  of  Ood."  The  following  lines  of  thought
suggest  themselves.

I.  God  has  made  our  nature,  in  every  part  thereof,  for  himself.

II.  In  making  man,  male  and  female,  God  has  opened  up  to  each  wondroua
possibilities  of  love,  of  holiness,  of  usefulness,  by  each  rendering  to  the  other  due  honour
in  accordance  with  Divine  Law.

III.  By  as  much  as  the  joy  and  culture  are  great  when  Gtod's  sexual  laws  ato  obeyed,
by  so  much  are  the  misery  and  debasement  great  when  they  are  disobeyed.

IV.  He  who  trifles  with  himself  or  with  others  in  regard  to  the  holiest  of  all  human
relations,  will  Qnd  that  sins  of  impurity  nip  his  nature  in  the  bud,  embitter  life  beyond
all  power  of  expression,  and  render  true  greatness  altogether  impossible.  One  sin  will
drag  the  whole  man  after  it.  Hence  our  Lord's  solemn  warnings  in  Matt.  t.  29,  30 ;
Mark  ix.  43,  45,  47.     Hence —

v.  We  should  look  upon  God's  order  in  nature  with  devout  and  reverent  regard.

Vers.  6,  7. — Kindness  to  animals  a  religious  duty.  There  Is  a  most  valuable  note  in
Dr.  Jameson's '  Commentary '  on  this  passage.  "  The  Hebrews,"  says  Trapp,  "  reckoned
this  commandment  the  least  of  all  in  the  Mosaic  Law,  yet  is  there  such  a  promise
attached  thereto."  "  This  law,"  says  another  annotator,  "  teaches  a  spirit  of  mercy ;  it
would  also  tend  to  prevent  the  extirpation  of  any  species  of  birds  which  in  a  country
producing  many  snakes  and  insects  might  cause  serious  injury.''  And,  on  the  other
hand,  the  permission  here  given  might  also  tend  to  prevent  too  rapid  increase.  And
manifestly,  here  is  a  check  put  on  the  destructive  and  plundering  tendencies  of  man,  and
a  quiet  lesson  taught  them  that  they  are  to  regard  as  sacred  the  affectionate  relation
between  parents  and  their  young,  which  God  has  established  in  the  animal  world.  It
is  not  a  little  remarkable  that  we  find  a  like  promise  attached  to  this  precept  as  to  the
fifth  commandment.  How  is  this  ?  May  not  the  reason  be  thus  stated?  It  is  a  duty
to  cultivate  kindness  of  disposition  in  all  respects  and  towards  all  beings.  The  culti-
vation of  uniform  kindliness,  whether  to  man  or  beast,  will  have  a  marked  effect  in  the
elevation  of  personal  character,  and  in  sweetening  the  surroundings  of  life.  And  he
who  out  of  pure  love  and  obedience  to  God  shows  mercy  everywhere,  will  be  himself
a  partaker  of  mercy.  The  following  may  serve  as  starting-points  of  thought.  1.  The
lower  creatures  are  put  at  the  service  of  man.  He  is  permitted  to  have  service  from
them  and  enjoyment  in  them.  2.  This  enjoyment  and  service  which  man  desires  in
and  from  them  are  to  be  had  only  in  harmony  with  due  regard  to  them  as  the  creatures
of  God.  3.  The  cultivation  of  kindness  to  all  creatures  is,  therefore,  a  religious  duty.
And  the  duty  of  so  cultivating  it  is  not  only  a  part  of  the  morality  of  the  Law,  but  a
part  of  the  morality  of  that  gospel  which  is  for  every  creature.  4.  Where  such  benevo-
lei.ce  is  universally  cultivated,  the  seal  and  sign  of  God's  approval  thereof  will  be  enjoyed.

[Note  the  command  in  ver.  10,  "Thou  shalt  not  plow  with  an  ox  and  an  ass
together."  This  prohibition  prevented  great  inhumanity  (see  Jameson,  in  loe.).  See
also  marginal  reference  for  another  possible  intent  thereof.]

Ver.  8. — Eisks  to  human  life  to  he  minimized.  It  is  well  known  thai  '  the  roofs  ol
the  Israelitish  houses  were  flat,  as  they  mostly  are  in  the  East ; "  the  inhabitants  often
walked  upon  them.  Hence  it  is  easy  to  see  that  a  danger  might  exist  of  one  falling  ofl
a  house,  if  there  were  no  battlement,  parapet,  or  guard  of  some  kind  around  it.  And
against  this  Moses  is  taught  of  God  to  warn  the  people.  In  the  structure  of  their
habitations  the  safety  of  the  indwellers  is  to  be  rigidly  consulted ;  and  any  trifling
with  human  life,  by  the  erection  of  insecure  buildings,  would  expose  the  builder  to
blood-guiltiness  in  the  eye  of  God.


358  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEROHOMt.  [oh.  xxil  1—30  .

I.  There  is  in  the  social  world  a  mutual" interdependence  of  man  upon  man.  "We
are  members  one  of  another."

II.  This  fact  renders  it  possible  for  each  man  in  his  own  department  greatly  to  help
or  seriously  to  injure  others.  In  no  sphere  is  this  more  manifest  than  in  house-build-
ing; in  attention  to  the  detail's,  the  health  and  comfort  of  multitudes  are  concerned.

III.  Gkid  charges  upon  each  one  a  due  regard  to  the  well-being  of  others,  in  distinction
from  a  selfish  absorption  in  his  own  imaginary  interests.

IV.  Wherever,  through  neglect  in  his  own  department,  of  another's  good,  the  health,
comfort,  or  life  of  men  are  threatened  or  injured,  God  holds  the  man  accountable  for
any  mischief  which  may  accrue.  Other  men  may  or  may  not  be  able  to  bring  the  sin
home  to  the  defaulter.  But  "  God  shall  bring  every  work  into  judgment ;  with  every
secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good,  or  whether  it  be  eviL"

Vers.  9, 11. — Evil  associations  to  Be  avoided.  "  The  essence  of  the  crime  (Zeph.  i.  8)
consisted,  not  in  wearing  a  woollen  and  linen  robe,  but  in  having  it  in  a  particular
form  according  to  a  favourite  superstition  of  ancient  idolatries  "  (Lev.  xix.  19).  So  also
as  to  sowing  with  divers  seeds ;  it  was  a  superstitious  custom  of  the  idolaters,  and  hence
it  is  to  be  avoided.  Note :  Evil  associations  may  maJce  it  wrong  to  follow  or  observe
that  which  is  in  itself  harmless.  With  the  principle  which  underlies  this  passage
thus  stated,  compare  1  Cor.  x.  23  to  end.

I.  God,  having  called  his  people  out  of  the  world,  would  have  them  distinct  from  the
world.

II.  In  carrying  out  this  distinction  in  practice.  Christians  are  bound  to  regard  the
influence  which  their  practice  will  have  upon  others,  as  well  as  the  practice  itself.

III.  It  is  quite  possible  that  (as  in  the  case  of  eating  meats  offered  to  idols)  there  may
lie  rites,  customs,  habits,  in  which  this  or  that  Christian  could  indulge  without  injury
to  himself,  and  yet  which,  owing  to  the  force  of  public  sentiment  and  opinion,  would
tell  prejudicially  upon  him,  and  lower  his  influence  for  good.

IV.  When  such  is  the  case,  he  is  to  take  the  hii^her  ground,  not  shrinking  from  being
deemed  puritanic — and  to  abstain  not  only  from  that  which  is  wrong  in  itself,  but  from
much  which,  owing  to  evil  associations,  has  about  it  a  suspicious  look  of  worldliness
and  self-indulgence.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Love  unfeigned.  The  precepts  in  these  verses  fairly  anticipate  the
gospel  love  of  one's  neighbour,  and  even  its  inculcation  of  love  to  enemies  (cf.  Exod.
xxiii.  4,  5).  Whatever  authority  the  scribes  in  Christ's  time  imagined  themselves  to
have  for  their  saying,  "  Thou  shalt  hate  thine  enemy"  (Matt.  v.  43),  they  did  not  find
it  in  the  Law.  Even  towards  the  heathen — save  in  the  sense  in  which  each  nation
desires  the  destruction  of  its  enemies  in  war — they  were  not  taught  to  cherish  feelings
of  bitterness  and  hostility.  Ch.  xxiii.  6  f  irbids  seeking  the  welfare  of  Moab  and
Ammon,  but  this  does  not  amount  to  hatred  of  these  peoples  (cf.  ch.  ii.  9,  19),  while
the  command  to  "  blot  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalek  from  under  heaven  "  (ch.  xxv.
19)  is,  like  the  command  to  exterminate  the  Canaanites,  grounded  in  special  circum-
stances, and  is  to  he  regarded  as  exceptional.  Those  who  express  horror  of  the
sanguinary  spirit  of  the  Mosaic  code  should  study  the  precepts  before  us,  and  reflect
how  far  the  race  is  from  having  yet  risen  to  the  height  of  them.    They  forbid —

I.  Secret  KEjoiciNa  in  another's  misfortune.  Such  rejoicing  may  have  its
source  in :  1.  Enmity.  The  statute  in  Exodus  particularly  specifies  the  ox  and  ass  ol
an  "  enemy  "  (Exod.  xxiii.  4).  The  enemy  is  further  defined,  not  as  one  whom  we
hate,  but  as  one  who  hates  us  (ver.  5).  Yet  if  his  ox,  or  sheep,  or  ass  is  seen  going
astray,  we  are  not  to  hide  ourselves  or  forbear  help,  but  are  to  bring  it  back  to  him.
So  with  all  his  lost  property — we  are  to  take  it  home  and  keep  it  for  him.  Or,  if  his
ass  fall  under  a  burden,  we  are  to  help  him  to  lift  it  up.  How  natural  the  disposition
to  act  otherwise !  No  one  knows  that  we  have  seen  the  stray  beast.  We  may  reason
that  we  are  not  bound  to  interfere.  A  secret  joy,  even,  may  steal  into  our  minds  at
the  thought  of  an  enemy's  misfortune.    The  Law  taught  the  Israelite  to  think  and  Mt


:1.  kiU.  1— 30.J  5HE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKOXOMY.  thjo


rery  differently.  It  gave  him  the  lessgn  of  forgiving  injuries,  of  loving  pnemien,  of
returning  good  for  evil.  2.  Envy.  The  piecept  in  this  passage  speaks  merely  of  a
"brother."  Through  envy  or  some  other  wicked  feeling,  even  whwe  there  is  no
enmity,  we  may  be  tempted  to  rejoice  in  the  lessening  of  another's  prosperity.  But
neither  is  this  hateful  principle  to  be  allowed  to  sway  us.  3.  Malice.  This  is  the  dis-
position which  delights  in  what  injures  another  for  its  own  sake.  So  diabolical  a  state
of  feeling  might  be  deemed  impossible  did  not  experience  of  the  world  afford  too  many
proofs  of  its  existence.  There  are  nnquestionably  malicious  and  spiteful  natures  who,
irrespective  of  any  personal  interest  in  the  matter,  derive  an  absolute  gratification  from
seeing  misfortune  overtake  those  around  them.  The  faintest  beginning  of  such  a  spirit
ought  surely  to  be  most  jealously  guarded  against.

II.  Secret  retention  of  another's  property.  What  is  found  is  not  to  be  ap-
propriated or  concealed.  If  the  owner  is  unknown,  the  beast  or  lost  article  is  to  be
taken  home,  and  kept  till  he  can  be  discovered.  "Though  he  is  an  enemy,  his  goods
are  to  be  faithfully  restored  to  him.  This,  again,  is  a  form  of  virtue  which  only  strength
of  moral  principle  will  enable  one  always  to  practise. — J.  0.

Ver.  5. — Man  and  woman.  Woman  has  her  rightful  place  and  function  in  society.
So  has  man  his.  Their  places,  while  complementary,  are  distinct.  In  modern  society,  a
variety  of  influences — competition  in  business,  difficulty  of  finding  suitable  employment,
the  levelling  tendency  of  the  age,  which  is  impatient  even  of  distinctions  that  have
their  ground  in  nature — combine  to  thrust  women  into  spheres  and  work  not  in  keep-
ing with  womanly  character.  The  distinction  of  the  sexes  is  to  be  preserved:  1.  In
dress.  2.  In  manners.  Unwomanly  boldness  and  assertiveness  in  company  or  before
the  public  is  as  unpleasant  as  foppish  effeminacy  is  in  men.  3.  In  occupations.
Few  would  like  to  see  women  jostling  men  in  the  Exchange,  pleading  at  the  bar,  or
sitting  in  i  arliament.  The  feeling  is  not  one  of  mere  sentiment,  but  rests  on  inherent
differences  in  the  calling  of  the  sexes.  It  deserves  to  be  considered  whether  the  line  is
not  unduly  crossed  as  it  is  in  many  forms  of  female  occupation.  It  is  certainly  so
crossed  in  some:  barmaids;  occupations  involving  an  excessive  tax  on  the  female
strength;  manufactory  work,  where  the  system  allows  of  the  mingling  of  the  sexes
under  conditions  certain  to  demoralize,  etc.  (see  Lecture  on  '  Sex  in  Industry,'  by  Joseph
Cook — '  Monday  Lectures '), — J.  0.

Vers.  6 — 12. — Hie  minutice  of  conduct.  The  Law  descends  to  very  slight  points  of
conduct.  It  keeps  in  view  that  character  is  made  up  of  the  result  of  our  actions  in  the
million  trivial  details  of  life.  "  Trifles,"  said  Michael  Angelo,  when  a  friend  thus
characterized  the  .slight  finishing  touches  he  was  giving  to  a  statue — "trifles  make
perfection."  Matters  which  in  themselves  are  of  little  moment  acquire  importance  from
the  associations  they  awaken,  the  ideas  they  suggest,  the  consequences  they  lead  up  to.
Little  traits  of  humane  behaviour  (vers.  6,  7),  the  habit  of  considering  the  bearings  of
what  we  do  on  others  (ver.  8),  respect  for  the  ordinary  and  obvious  distinctions  of
creation  (ver.  9),  etc.,  have  all  their  influence  on  character,  their  effect  in  making  us
what  we  ultimately  become.  We  may  suggest,  as  lessons  from  these  verses,  that  our
conduct  is  to  be  marked:  1.  By  humanity.  (1)  To  animals.  (2)  To  our  fellow-men.
In  vers.  6,  7,  the  act  forbidden  is  one  akin  to  killing  a  cow  and  calf  on  the  same  day,
or  to  seething  a  kid  in  its  mother's  milk  (cf.  on  ch.  xiv.  21) — an  unfeeling  violation
of  the  sacredness  of  the  relation  between  parent  and  offspring.  Or  the  parent  bird  may
be  presumed  to  be  taken  only  in  wantonness,  the  young  ones  being  really  of  service.
This  would  be  an  act  of  cruelty.  Humanity  may  be  a  motive  in  the  precept  of  ver.  10
— "  ox  "  and  "  ass  "  being  obviously  "  unequally  yoked  together  "  (of.  Paul's  allusion
with  application  to  marriage  with  unbelievers,  in  2  Cor.  vi.  14).  2.  By  caution.  This
is  strikingly  inculcated  in  ver.  8.  How  many  accidents  might  be  avoided  if  greater
conscientiousness  and  caution  prevailed  in  the  different  departments  of  labour !  A  ship-
builder puts  in  the  side  of  a  ship  one  wormy  plank,  and  years  after  this  costs  the  whole
ship's  crew  their  lives.  3.  By  simplicity.  This  is  a  lesson  which  may  be  learned  from
the  precepts  against  mixing  kinds  (vers.  9,  11).  4.  By  mindfulness.  The  law  of
fringes  in  Numb.  xv.  38 — if  this  refers  to  the  same  thing — was  intended  to  aid  memory.
In  another  view  of  the  precept,  it  inculcates  decency  and  propriety. — J.  0.


360  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxil  1—30.

Vers.  13 — 30. — Uhastity.  The  Mosaic  Law  is  strict  and  stem  in  its  requirement  of
purity  in  all  that  pertains  to  the  marriage  relation.  Its  strictness,  however,  is  united
with  a  fine  sense  of  justice,  and  its  shield  is,  as  usual,  extended  for  the  protection  ot
the  innocent.

I.  The  defamed  wms.  (Vers.  13 — 19.)  No  act  can  be  conceived  more  cruel  or
dastardly  than  that  of  a  man  who  groundlessly  assails  his  wife's  character,  accusing  her
of  ante-nuptial  unchastity.  As  the  matter  was  one  proof  of  which  was  not  directly
possible,  and  the  man's  word  was  all  that  could  be  adduced  on  his  side,  the  Law  threw
the  onus  of  clearing  herself  upon  the  woman  through  her  parents,  and  indicated  the
mode  of  doing  so.  The  "  forty  stripes  save  one  "  was  a  punishment  not  too  heavy  for
this  sort  of  false  accusation.

IL  The  UNCHASTE  WIFE.  (Vers.  20 — 24.)  Three  cases  are  distinguished,  each  punish-
able with  death.  1.  A  woman  found  to  be  unchaste  at  time  of  marriage  (vers.  20,  21).
2.  Adultery  after  marriage  (ver.  22).-  3.  A  betrothed  woman  ravished  with  her  implied
consent  (vers.  23,  24).  In  the  last  two  cases,  the  partner  in  guilt  dies  also.  In  the
first,  he  only  escapes,  because  he  is  unknown.  Yet  that  unknown  seducer,  the  cause  of
the  woman's  fall — a  fall  which  shame  subsequently  tempted  her  to  conceal — was  not
lost  to  the  eye  of  him  who  sees  secret  crime,  and  will  repay  it.  Little  do  such  seducers
think  of  the  life-long  shame  and  sin  and  misery  to  which  they  may  be  dooming  the
unfortunate  victims  of  their  wiles.  God  knows  it,  and  will  bring  them  to  account.
The  severe  penalties  attached  to  conjugal  unfaithfulness  place  in  a  startling  light  the
gravity  of  the  offence  in  the  Divine  esteem,  and  form  a  striking  contrast  to  the  light
tone  adopted  about  such  matters  in  society.

III.  The  woMAir  bavished.  (Vers.  25 — 29.)  The  cases  specified  are  those  of  rape.
1.  If  the  woman  was  betrothed,  and  could  not  save  herself,  she  was  to  be  held  innocent,
but  her  violator  was  to  be  punished  with  death.  2.  If  she  was  not  betrothed,  the  man
who  had  injured  her  was  lieavily  fined,  and  was  compelled  to  take  her  to  wife,  with
no  right  of  subsequent  divorce.  Possibly  our  own  law  might  fitly  imitate  that  of
vor.  29.— J,  0.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Contideration  for  man  and  least.  We  have  here  such  express  direc-
tions given  as  should  have  made  of  the  Israelites  a  most  neighbourly  people.  The
finding  of  lost  oxen,  or  sheep,  or  asses,  or  raiment,  is  here  made  to  carry  with  it  the
obligation  of  brotherly  kindness ;  the  animals  or  lost  property  must  be  restored  to
the  owner,  if  he  be  known,  or  kept  until  he  makes  himself  known.  It  is  the  law  of
love  in  practice.

I.  There  is  a  itatttbal  nrcLiNATioN  to  shirk  all  possible  trouble.  There  is
a  drop  of  laziness  in  all  of  us,  and,  if  indulged,  it  will  lead  to  many  an  unbrotherly  act.
In  the  case  supposed  there  is  no  witness  present;  the  lost  property  is  unexpectedly
found;  how  much  trouble  it  will  save  to  pass  on  and  leave  it  to  its  chances  in  the  hands
of  others  I  And  so  we  are  tempted  to  array  ourselves  in  the  cloak  of  selfishness,  and  to
spare  ourselves  all  possible  trouble.'

II.  The  casual  discoveries  of  daily  lite  constitutb  duties  laid  bt  the
Omniscient  One  to  our  hands.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  chance  so  far  as  God  is
concerned.  Much  has  the  appearance  of  chance  to  us,  but,  when  reconsidered,  it  is
the  all-wise  arrangement  of  God.  "  For  what  is  this  chance  ?  "  says  a  very  able  writer.
"  It  either  has  a  real  existence  or  not.     If  it  has  no  existence,  then  when  you  say

,  that  a  lot  is  determined  by  chance,  you  say  that  it  is  determined  by  nothing ;  that  is,
you  say.  Here  is  a  sensible  effect  produced  by  no  cause  at  all.  Thi-s  is  pure  nonsense.
If  your  chance  is  a  real  being,  what  sort  of  being  ?  Either  it  has  life,  intelligence,  and
power,  or  not.  If  not,  then  you  say  that  millions  of  effects  (for  there  are  millions  of
lots  in  the  world)  are  produced  by  a  cause  which  has  neither  power,  nor  inteUigence,
nor  life ;  that  is,  you  say  that  millions  of  actions  are  performed  by  an  agency  which  is
essentiiJly  incapable  of  any  action  whatever.  And  this  is  as  pure  absurdity  as  the
former.  If  you  say  that  your  chancels  a  living,  intelligent,  and  active  being,  I  ask  who
it  is  ?  and  how  you  get  your  knowledge  of  it  ?  You  certainly  imagine  it  to  possess
omnipresence  and  omnipotence ;  for  you  suppose  it  capable  of  producing,  at  the  same
moment,  millions  of  effects  in  millions  of  places  ;  and  thus  you  have  found  out  a  being
that  displays  perfections  of  God,  and  yet  is  not  God.     This  conclusion  is  as  blasphemoui


an.  xxn.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKOXOMY.  361

as  the  others  are  insane.  There  Is  no  retreat.  Survey  the  suhject  in  any  possible
light,  and  you  are  driven  to  this  issue,  that  the  lot  is,  by  the  very  nature  of  the  case,
a  direct  appeal  to  the  livifig  God,  as  Governor  of  the  world  "  (Dr.  J.  M.  Mason's  '  Con-
siderations on  Lots ').  Hence  discoveries,  however  casual,  which  throw  us  into  new
relations  to  persons,  animals,  or  things,  should  be  accepted  as  Divine  duties  laid  to
nur  hands.    God's  call  is  in  them  to  be  faithful  and  brotherly.

III.  The  BHiBsmo  of  responsibility  and  tkocble  is  beallt  bebellino  against
AN  OBDINANOE  OF  GoD.  If  wc  have  found  the  missing  property,  we  have  really  been
sent  of  God  to  be  its  stewards.  To  hide  ourselves  in  our  self-care  is  to  rebel  against
his  ordinance,  and  do  despite  to  his  gracions  arrangements.  It  is  to  make  self-pleasing
the  rule  of  life,  instead  of  the  pleasing  of  God.  And. as  a  rule  it  will  be  found  that  the
person  who  thus  caudles  himself  and  passes  on  trouble  to  others  becomes  heir  of
unexpected  vexations  himself.

IV.  A  THOEOUGHLY  OBLIGINO  AND  HELPFUL  BPIEIT  HAS  A  WORLD  OF  COMPENSA-
TION  IN    THE     APPROVAL    OF     HIS     OWN    CONSOIENCB,     IF    NOT     IN     THE   GBATITITDE     OF

MANKIND.  Benevolence  is  its  own  reward.  The  kindness  lavished  on  man  and  beast
carries  its  own  compensation  with  it.  The  sense  of  being  brought  to  the  opportunity
of  brotherly  kindness  by  a  gracious  God,  and  of  being  his  servant  in  showing  his  spirit,
is  surely  worth  all  the  trouble  our  kindness  costs.  So  that,  even  supposing  the  re-
cipients of  our  kindness  were  ungrateful,  the  kindness  would  still  be  well  worth  doing
for  its  own  sake.

But  then  gratitude  is  not  so  rare  a  thing  as  people  would  suppose.  It  is  entertained
often  when  not  very  eloquently  expressed.  It  is  sometimes  too  deep  for  utterance.
And  to  think  that  we  have  become  creditors  of  our  fellows,  to  as  to  deserve  their
gratitude,  ia  satisfaction  indeed.

*  For  merit  livei  from  man  to  man,
And  not  from  man,  O  Lord,  to  thee."

If  we  have  any  wisdom,  therefore,  we  shall  gladly  cultivate  the  brotherly  kindness  here
inculcated,  for  life  becomes  by  it  more  blessed  and  more  noble. — B.  M.  E.

Ver,  5. — The  philosophy  of  clothes.  We  have  here  particular  directions  as  to  the
maintenance  of  the  distinction  of  dress  between  the  8ex;es.  On  the  termination  of  what
Carlyle  calls  "  Adamitism,"  in-  his  '  Sartor  Eesartus,'  when  through  the  fall  of  man
fig  leaves  were  first  resorted  to,  it  is  evident  that  the  Lord  was  not  content  therewith
as  the  device  of  self-conscious  modesty,  but  gave  them  "coats  of  skins."  These
"coats,"  we  can  well  believe,  were  differentiated,  so  that  Eve's  was  in  some  particulars
distinct  from  Adam's.  This  distinction  in  dress  between  the  sexes,  begun,  let  us
suppose,  immediately  after  the  Fall,  is  designed  by  God  to  continue ;  and  we  have  here
the  law  prohibiting  any  exchanges  of  apparel,  so  as  to  conceal  one's  sex.  It  is,  in  fact,
an  earlier  "  philosophy  of  clothes  "  than  Carlyle  has  given  us.

I.  The  PROMisciJous  inteeminoling  of  the  sexes  is  most  undesieable.  Of
course,  this  is  quite  another  thing  from  the  entire  separation  of  the  sexes  as  it  prevails
among  Orientals.  The  latter  custom  proceeds  on  the  supposition  that  there  can  be  no
social  intercourse  between  them  except  licentious  intercourse;  and  is  the  poor  pre-
caution of  deep  depravity.  But  suppose  that  men  and  women  were  wont  to  dress  alike,
there  could  be  no  enforcement  of  decorum  such  as  difference  in  diess  renders  possible.
The  sexes  are  intended  to  be  distinct,  and  cannot  profitably  be  intermingled.

II.  It  is  a  deep  injetey  to  both  sexes  to  oblitebate  the  distinctions  Provi-
dence HAS  MADE.  Whatever  tends  to  render  the  male  sex  effeminate  and  the  female
sex  masculine,  is  an  injury  to  both.  The  tendency  of  the  times  is  in  this  direction ;
women  are  being  introduced  to  fierce  competitions  with  men :  we  have  had  women,
forgetful  of  their  sex,  even  entering  the  prize-ring,  to  afford  amusement  to  brutal
onlookers;  we  have  women  persistently  knocking  at  the  door  of  professions  fit  for  men
only ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  a  number  of  occupations,  which  will  readily
occur  to  every  one,  where  men  are  made  effeminate,  and  which  could  be  most  fitly
discharged  by  women ;  and  those  reformers  are  not  friends  of  either  sex  who  tiy  to
break  down  the  barriers  between  them.


362  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  ^ch.  xxii.  i— 36.

If  Providence  has  made  llie  one  sex  different  from  the  other,  then  it  is  idle  by  any
manipulation  of  ours  to  ulili'erate  the  disiinciion.

III.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  a  deep  wrono  to  exaggerate  the  defects
WHICH  Providence  has  allotted  to  bach  by  enlightened  systems  op  educa-
tion. We  thoroughly  sympathize  with  the  effort  to  do  away  with  tlie  exaggerated
"  subjection  of  women,"  upon  which  Mr.  Mill  in  his  book  has  so  ably  insisted.  The
education  of  each  sex  should  be  as  broad  and  liberal  as  possible.  IJut  no  education
can  ever  remove  the  inequality  which  naturally  obtains  between  the  sexes.'  Let
education  consider  the  providential  purpose  of  sexual  distinctions,  and  work  on  these
lines,  and  then,  and  then  only,  need  we  expect  permanent  amelioration  lor  oppressed
sisters.

IV.  Modesty  is  one  of  those  social  graces  which  should  be  fostered  and
not  restrained.  We  have  heard  of  men  whose  command  of  their  emotions  was  so
jjerfect  as  never  to  allow  their  modesty  to  appear  by  any  chance.  It  may  Lie  harmless
or  ludicrous  in  men  ;  but  it  is  ruin  to  women,  and  whatever  tends  to  make  them
"  Amazons"  or  "  Trojans "  is  to  be  reprobatel  most  earnestly.

V.  It  takes  the  two  sexes  combined  to  give  a  complete  image  of  the
Divine  nature.  When  God  said,  "  Let  us  make  man  (07**)  in  our  image,  after  our
likeness,"  he  used  the  generic  term,  ami  hence  immediately  resorts  to  the  plural  verb,
"and  let  them  have  dominion  ("T-V'etc.  (Gen.  i.  26).  The  idea  is  that  it  takes  the
female  with  the  male  to  complete  the  Divine  image.  Tlioie  is  a  maternal  element  as
well  as  a  paternal  a,ni  a.  filial  in  the  Divine  nature  (cf.  Isa.  xlix.  15  with  I's.  ciii.  13
and  John  viii.  29).  And  it  is  interesting  to  notice  among  tlie  theological  vagaries  and
conceits  of  such  a  man  as  Theodore  Parker,  that  he  was  forced  to  call  his  God  "  Infinite
Fiither  and  Infinite  Mother,"  a  set-off  to  his  dreary  unitarianism.'  If  then  we  find  the
sexual  distinctions  to  be  but  the  reflection  of  elements  in  the  Divine  nature,  then  a
halo  of  true  glory  is  thrown  around  each.  In  their  respective  spheres  the  seses  are
exhibiting  traits  of  divinity,  and  all  effort  at  obliterating  the  distinctions  through
artificial  means,  will  be  found  only  to  obliterate  the  Divine.  Father,  Son,  and  Holy
Ghost  have  their  counterparts  in  the  development  of  humanity,  and  it  is  well  clearly
to  see  this.  May  the  sexes  carry  on  their  respective  missions  so  faithfully  that  earth
may  soon  reflect  in  undimmed  lustre  the  various  qualities  of  God  1 — B.  M,  E.

Vers.  6,  7. — Birds'  nests.  The  command  to  spare  the  mother  bird  while  the  young
might  be  taken,  comes  in  significantly  after  the  law  distinguishing  the  sexes.  The
female  sex  is  intended  for  motherhood ;  it  "  binds  the  generations  each  to  each,"  as
our  Laureate  says.  On  the  exercise  of  this  function  the  continuance  of  the  species
depends.  Hence  the  command  here  is  at  once  humane  and  intended  to  ensure  the
continuance  of  the  species.  Birds  are  very  needful  to  keep  down  grubs  and  insects,
and  give  the  land  a  chance  of  due  fertility.  Hence  the  sportsman's  enthusiasm  was
thus  kept  in  proper  check.

I.  While  God  gives  the  animals  to  man  for  food,  he  would  have  the
sacrifice  of  life  thoughtfully  made.  There  must  be  thought  and  deliberation
about  the  selection  of  the  young  birds,  about  the  pouring  out  of  the  blood,  etc.  All
this  introduced  a  humane  element  into  the  act.

II.  The   freedom   of  the   dam    was   ENi^URED   BY   THE   SACRIFICE   OP   THE   TOUKO

A  PERPETUAL  LESSON  ABOUT  SUBSTITUTION  AND  SACRIFICE.  As  the  mother  received
liberty,  the  Jewish  sportsman  would  be  led  to  think  of  the  law  of  substitution  and
of  sacrifice  upon  which  all  his  religious  hopes  were  built.

ni.  Motherhood  was  thus  rendered  sacred  in  the  eyes  of  the  Jews.  The
idea,  sacred  in  the  woods  among  the  wild  birds,  would  become  sacred  elsewhere.
"  The  mothers  in  Israel,"  instead  of  being  sacrificed  to  their  children,  would  be  honoiircd
by  thom.  which  is  the  Divine  order.  The  young  generation  should  bear  the  burden
rather  than  the  old.  To  such  a  line  of  thought  the  law  about  birds'  nests  would
naturally  give  rise.— R.  M.  E.

■  Of.  Huxley's  article  on  ■  Emancipation,  Black  and  White,'  in  Ua '  Lmv  Seimona.'  dil
23—30.  -^  yv

2  Cf.  Franaingham's  '  Life  of  Theodore  Parker,'  pp.  283,  S29


1—30.]  THE  BOOi  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  363


Vers.  8 — 12. — Linsey-woolseys.  The  different  directions  here  given  may  be  reduced
to  one  idea,  that  of  genuineitess.  The  houses  were  to  be  substantial  edifices,  not  endan-
gering the  hves  of  others  by  defective  buildings  or  deficient  battlements.  The
vineyards  were  to  be  sown  with  pure  seed,  that  the  plants  might  have  a  fair  chance  ol
growing  luxuriantly.  'I  he  plougliing  was  not  to  be  done  by  an  ox  and  ass  together,
for  though  the  oxen  are  so  small  in  Palestine  as  to  be  yokable  with  an  ass,  the  con-
trariety in  temper  and  inequality  in  power  would  prevent  good  work.  Linsey-woolsey
was  to  be  avoided  as  poor  stuff  compared  with  either  woollen  or  linen  alone.  And
finally,  the  fringes  were  to  be  made  upon  their  garments,  to  be  at  once  a  finishing  anil
a  distinction  in  the  clothes  of  the  chosen  people.  God  gave  them  thus  a  uinform.  The
great  idea  here,  consequently,  is  that  God's  people  should  be  distinguished  by  the
genuineness  and  honesty  of  their  life-work.

Carlyle's  preaching  against  shams  is  here  forestalled,  and  wo  may  surely  learn  from
the  directions  here  such  lessons  as  these —

I.  To  BE  THOROUGH  IN  ALL  CUB  WORK.  This  IS  God's  great  lesson  for  ns  in  his
own  government  of  the  world.  The  beauty  of  the  flower  of  the  grass,  which  is  to
perish  and  be  cast  into  the  oven  so  soon,  tells  us  to  be  microscopically  minute  and
thorough  in  the  most  transient  work.  There  are  no  short  cuts  through  "  shoddy  "  to
real  worth  and  real  usefulness ;  but  all  should  be  genuine  if  we  would  serve  our
generation  by  the  will  of  God.

II.  Let  us  not  be  ashamed  to  be  called  God's  people  amid  life's  hard
woBK.  The  Israelites  were  to  wear  their  fringes,  to  go  in  uniform,  and  be  pious
peasants.  The  linking  of  genuine  work  with  professed  piety  is  altogether  admirable.
"Sublimer,"  says  Carlyle,  "in  this  world  know  I  nothing  than  a  peasant  saint, could
such  now  anjv/here  be  met  with.  Such  a  one  will  take  thee  back  to  Nazareth  itself:
thou  wilt  see  the  splendour  of  heaven  spring  foith  from  the  humblest  depths  of  earth,
like  a  light  shining  in  great  darkness."  '  What  we  need  is  genuine  piety  to  secure  con-
scientious work.  We  shall  not  have  better  work  till  we  have  better  men.  ii^aintly
workmen  would  discover  for  us  the  way  back  to  Eden.

III.  Let  us  follow  the  example  of  the  Peasant  of  Nazareth.  For  our
Lord  became  poor,  and  wrought  as  an  artisan,  and  lived  with  the  common  people,  to
make  a  life  of  labour  for  ever  glorious.  Nowhere  do  pride  and  vanity  receive  such
reproof  as  in  the  life  of  him  who  wrought  so  nobly  in  Nazareth.  And  when  he
exchal  ged  the  carpenter's  bench  for  the  work  of  the  ministry,  it  was  only  to  work
harder  than  before.  "  He  went  about  doing  good."  "  He  had  no  leisure  so  much  as
to  eat."  Bo  busy  was  h&  that  he  had  frequently  to  steal  from  sleep  the  time  for
prayer.  In  his  example  we  have  the  ideal  of  genuine,  hearty  labour,  and  so  far  aa  we
follow  him  shall  we  be  safe  and  happy. — B.  M,  E.

Vers.  13 — 30. — Expedients  to  secure  purity.  We  have  here  various  wise  expedients
to  control  the  liceniioiisness  of  the  people,  and  secure,  so  far  as  possible,  social  purity.

I.  Defamation  of  chakaotbb  was  sevf.rely  punished.  A  husband  could  not,
with  impunity,  defame  a  newly  married  wife;  for  should  there  be  proof  forthcoming
that  his  charge  was  false,  he  was  to  be  publicly  chastised,  to  pay  a  fine  of  one
hundred  shekels  of  silver  to  his  father-in-law,  whose  good  name  and  peace  he  had
threatened,  and  to  be  bound  to  his  wife  all  his  days.

II.  Whobedom  was  made  a  capitat,  crime.  If  the  charge  made  against  his
wife  prove  true,  then  she  is  to  be  stoned  to  death  for  her  sin.  Immorality  was  really
tieasou  towards  the  Divine  King,  it  was  incompatible  with  his  kingdom,  and  so  was
put  iLto  the  category  of  capital  crimes.  The  morale  of  the  theocracy  was  really  higher
in  idea  than  that  of  any  other  kingdom  then  or  now  existing.

III.  Adultery  was  also  a  crime  fob  which  both  offendebs  must  suffer
DEATH.  Here  the  two  parties  are  criminals  against  the  theocracy,  and  such  a  flagrant
crime  cannot  be  tolerated  within  it.     The  morality  is  severe  and  wholesome.

IV.  Adultery  committed  with  a  betrothed  damsel  is  treated,  just  as  adul-
tery  WITH     A    MABBIED   WOMAN,   FOB    SHE    IS     AS    GOOD    AS     MABRIED.      Both   parties

'  *  Bartor  Eesartus,'  Library  Edition,  p.  221.  These  words  were  written,  it  is  now  believed,
with  the  ideal  of  his  father  before  him.


36i  TUB  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxii.  1—30

in  this  cas«  also  must  pay  the  penalty  of  death.    Such  severe  measures  were  the  wisest
expedients  in  the  end.

V.  In  case  op  advantage  beino  taken  of  a  betrothed  damsbt,,  the  euftiak  is  to
PAT  THE  penaltt  OF  DEATH.  If  the  taking  away  of  life  is  justly  punished  with  death,
80  should  the  murder  of  virtue.  As  a  rule,  our  laws  are  too  lenient  towards  ruflSans
that  ruin  women.  Were  a  few  of  them  sent  to  the  gallows  it  would  be  no  more  than
they  deserve.

VI.  In  case  of  a  VTIGIK  that  is  not  betrothed,  the  man  who  takes  ADVAN-
TAGE OF  heb  is  compelled  to  marrt  her,  and  to  pat  to  heb  father  a
SUBSTANTIAL  FINE.  The  case  thus  dealt  with  is  different  from  the  preceding.  It
proceeds  upon  inquiry.  The  man  is  not  carried  by  his  passion  into  an  act  of  great
wrong  towards  one  whom  he  can  never  hope  to  have  as  his  wife,  which  was  the
last  case ;  but  he  takes  the  case  into  his  own  hand,  where  no  previous  betrothal  bars
the  way.  He  can  make  reparation,  and  he  is  compelled  to  do  so.  A^ain  we  say  that
our  laws  would  be  greatly  improved  if  a  spice  of  the  severity  of  the  Jewish  law  went
to  make  the  cowardly  ruffians  who  disgrace  society  suffer  more  severely  for  their
deeds.

VII.  Incest  was  forbidden.  There  is  no  mincing  of  matters,  since  all  these
abominations  abounded  among  the  Canaanites,  and  must  be  checked  in  Israel.

Viri.  PoRiTT  IS  THUS  SEEN  TO  BE  God's  AIM.  "  Be  ye  holy ;  for  I  am  holy,"  ia
God's  direction.  We  must  be  as  "  chaste  virgins  "  presented  unto  Christ.  The  social
purity  of  Israel  was  only  to  reflect  their  spiritual  purity  as  towards  God.  Our  own
lesson  in  these  regulations  is  clear.  We  must  not  even  in  the  slightest  thought  prove
unfaithTul  to  our  Saviour  and  Lord.  He  is  the  H.usband  of  the  Church,  and  requires
a,  faithful  wife.— E.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — i.—^Brot7ierly  service  in  daily  life.  In  a  healthy  state,  our  souls  should  so
overflow  with  love,  that  every  neighbour  should  be  regarded  as  a  brother.  If  the
esteem  should  not  at  first  be  reciprocated,  our  kindness  would  soften  his  asperity  and
make  him  a  better  man.     In  the  long  run,  kin  Iness  will  produce  kindness.

I.  Property  has  its  cares  as  well  as  its  advantages.  Our  earthly  possessions
have  many  drawbacks,  and  are  always  subject  to  injury  and  loss.  Hence  it  is  wisdom
to  hold  them  lightly,  and  to  grieve  little  over  their  diminution.  This  insecurity  is  an
indication  of  their  inferiority.  But  the  possessions  of  the  soul,  viz.  wisdom,  righteous-
ness, faith,  love,  patience,  are  inalienable.     The  "things  unseen  are  eternal."

II.  Earthly  life  is  a  fine  field  for  kindlt  service.  "The  ills  and  trials  which
are  incident  to  the  present  life  provide  full  sco]ie  for  active  sympathy  and  help.  We
can  scarcely  imagine  a  condition  of  life  in  which  could  be  afforded  such  room  for  the
culture  and  discipline  of  the  best  affections.  Every  station  in  life  gives  opportunity  for
doing  service  to  others.  Every  day  we  hear  some  new  call  to  duty.  We  thus  train
ourselves  for  higher  service.  We  become  more  qualified  to  do  good  on  a  large  scale,  are
qualified  to  rule.

IIL  Neglect  to  show  kindness  is  a  sin.  1.  It  is  sin,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  plain
violation  of  God's  command.  As  Creator  and  King,  he  has  a  right  to  make  law  and  to
enforce  it.  2.  It  is  sin,  inasmuch  as  it  is  disloyalty  to  our  best  feelings.  The  instinct
to  show  kindness  is  a  part  of  our  constitutional  nature.  3.  It  is  sin,  inasmuch  as  it
consciously  allows  injury  to  be  done.  The  ox  or  ass  that  has  wandered  to-day,  will
have  wandered  further  (if  not  recovered)  to-morrow ;  may  be  irrecoverable  then.  The
gold  that  is  not  occupied  rusts.     To  hide  our  ligla  under  a  bushel  is  sin.

IV.  Generous  kindness  is  more  remunerative  than  selfishness.  Generous  and
self-forgetful  kindness  brings  returns  of  blessing  to  the  soul.  The  treasury  of  the  heart
is  enriched.  We  gain  wealth  that  is  imperishable.  We  obtain  a  good  name  among
men,  and  live  in  their  affectionate  memory.  We  secure,  in  some  measure,  the  lisivour
of  our  God.  We  are  in  truth,  by  kindly  service,  laying  up  large  store  of  good  for
coming  days.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the  poor ;  the  Lord  will  deliver  bim  in
the  time  of  trouble.    The  Lord  will  preserve  him,  and  keep  him  alive."— D.

Ver.  6. — Against  deceptions  in  dress.  Truthfulness  in  act  is  as  needful  as  truthful-
ness in  speech     Our  very  dress  is  a  manifesto  of  truth  or  of  falsehood.    Qod  has


rn.  XXII.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  865

■

stamped  a  visible  distinction  in  the  appearance  of  the  human  sexes,  and  it  is  fraudulent
to  obliterate  them.

I.  Sm  OFTEN  BOBEs  ITSELF  IN  A  FOREIGN  OABB.  If  sin  always  appeared  in  her  true
habits,  but  few  would  court  her  society.  It  is  her  plan  to  put  on  a  false  appearance.
Vice  usually  succeeds  because  she  wears  the  semblance  of  virtue.  It  is  the  policy  of
the  devil  to  hide  the  real  nature  of  sin.  Her  native  blackness  would  alarm  many,  if  it
were  seen.  The  felon  flatters  himself  that  it  is  all  fair  game.  Murder  is  palliated  as
just  revenge.  Profligacy  is  defended  as  the  impulse  of  nature.  Unchastity  paints  her
face,  and  robes  in  others'  dress.

II.  The  slightest  appkoach  to  sin  should  be  shunned.  The  Bible  nowhere  frowns
on  innocent  merriment.  But  frolics,  that  lead  to  sin,  are  to  be  branded  as  detestable.
A  wise  captain  will  give  a  wide  berth  to  perilous  quicksands.  We  cannot  keep  the
sparks  too  far  away  from  a  cask  of  gunpowder.  It  is  wise  to  close  both  ears  to  the
bland  voice  of  the  guilty  enchantress.     Avoid  the  first  step  of  temptation.

III.  Deceit  in  ant  form  is  detestable  before  God.  We  cannot  too  highly  value
a  true  standard  in  moral  conduct.  'Tis  more  precious  farthan  a  standard  for  purity  nf
gold  or  for  correctness  in  speech.  Such  a  standard  God  has  furnished  us  in  his  own
feelings  and  judgments.  Pretence  of  any  kind  is  as  smoke  in  his  eyes.  He  is  light,
faithfulness,  and  truth.   To  be  transparent,  candid,  straightforward,  is  to  be  Godlike.—  D.

Vers.  6,  7. — GotPs  care/or  birds.  God's  tender  care  extends  to  microscopical  insects.
Nothing  is  too  minute  to  escape  the  notice  of  his  eye.  "  Not  a  sparrow  falls  to  the
ground  "  without  attracting  his  regard.  In  proportion  as  we  become  conformed  to  God's
image,  we  shall  cherish  tender  feeling  for  every  living  thing.

I.  Fob  man's  good  birds  live  and  breed.  They  please  the  eye  with  their  gay
plumage.  They  regale  our  ears  with -pleasant  song.  They  furnish  our  tables  with  food.
They  teach  us  lessons  of  cheerful  trust.  Devoid  of  anxious  care,  they  daily  feast  upon
the  Divine  bounty  ;  and  a  ray  of  sunshine  is  repaid  with  melodious  song.  They  fulfil  a
mission  as  the  teachers  of  mankind.  To  birds  we  are  indebted  for  considerable  pleasure.
For  us  they  live :  be  ours  no  wanton  cruelty.

II.  In  theie  maternal  oares  they  appeal  for  gentle  considebation.  We  may
wisely  learn  a  lesson  from  their  maternal  affection,  from  the  exposure  of  their  own  lives
to  defend  their  young.  It  will  foster  tender  fueling  in  us  to  observe  this  self-forgetful-
ness  in  mother  birds.  But  to  take  advantage  of  this  self-exposure — this  noble  defence
of  their  offspring — for  the  purpose  of  capturing  the  parent,  will  deaden  and  demoralize
our  own  sensibilities.  We  may  furnish  a  meal  for  our  bodily  appetite;  but  we  shall
at  the  same  time  injure  our  nobler  parts,  strangle  our  nobler  feelings.

IIL  Future  prospects  are  to  be  preferred  to  present  fleasube.  It  is  a  short-
sighted policy  to  use  for  present  need  everything  within  our  reach.  It  is  wholesome
discfpline  to  deny  one's  self  now,  in  the  hope  of  greater  future  good.  The  farmer  fore^oi  s
the  sale  or  the  use  of  bis  grain,  that  he  may  have  wherewith  to  sow  his  fields  in  the
coming  season.  So  to  spare  the  life  of  the  parent  bird  is  to  secure  in  return  many
other  lives  A  source  of  future  profit  should  not  thoughtlessly  be  destroyed.  Self-
rMtraiut  is  an  exemplary  virtue. — D.

Ver.  8.-^The perils  of  inadvertence.  Thoughtlessness  is  the  parent  of  much  mischief.
To  reach  a  state  of  security  and  bliss,  there  must  be  life  in  our  every  part — in  intellect,
foresight*,  prudence.

I.  Man  is  exposed  to  many  natural  evils.  Although  lord  and  interpreter  of
nature,  nature  afflicts  him  in  many  ways.  She  scorches  him  with  heat,  freezes  him
with  cold,  pierces  him  with  pain.  Man  has  skill  and  power  to  bring  nature  under  his
dominion,  if  he  will  duly  exert  himself  for  this  purpose.  Nature  is  willing  to  be  ruled,
and  to  become  the  servant  of  man ;  but  consents  to  be  ruled  only  in  accordance  with
Divine  law.  Our  duty  is  to  examine  these  laws,  and  to  bring  her  into  subservience  to
onr  true  interests.  Herein  lies  scope  for  the  training  of  mind,  heart,  conscience^  will —
training  for  a  higher  sphere.

II.  Natural  law  is  nevee  suspended  to  suit  man's  imprudence.  Be  a  man  ever
so  pious,  or  be  he  engaged  in  work  ever  so  benevolent,  a  moment's  imprudence  may  cut
short  his  life.    He  may  mistake  poison  for  medicine ;  he  may  leave  open  a  gas-tap  j


366  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTKRONOMY.  [oh.  xxii.  1—30.

ho  may  imprudently  trifle  with  some  natural  force ;  and  pain  or  death  will  result.  I(
he  build  a  house,  in  order  to  protect  himself  and  family  from  the  rigours  of  the  climate,
any  imprudence  in  the  erection  may  bring  on  him  heavier  evils  than,  those  he  thought
to  avert.  The  want  of  a  parapet  on  the  roof  may  expose  his  children  to  a  sudden  and
painful  death.  We  cannot  too  much  admire  God's  thoughtful  care  in  prescribing  such
regulations  as  these.

III.  Inadvertence  mat  PRODncE  gioantio  misery.  It  is  not  enough  to  have
good  intentions  or  gracious  dispositions;  mind,  as  well  as  heart,  must  be  in  active
exercise.  A  foolish  man  is  a  curse  to  society  Wisdom  is  greatly  needed  to  produce  a
prosperous  life,  and  to  mal<e  a  man  useful  to  others.  Eli  was  a  good  man,  but  exhibited
great  folly  in  the  management  of  his  sons,  and  disaster  came  thereby  upon  Israel.
Reason  is  entrusted  to  every  man  to  be  used,  and  if  the  powers  of  intelligence  are
allowed  to  rust,  the  result  is  loss  to  ourselves  and  calamity  to  others. — D.

Vers.  9 — 12. — Directions  in  minor  matters.  What  was,  in  primitive  days,  matter
for  direct  revelation  from  God,  is  now  ascertained  by  scientific  observation.  Herein
we  learn  that  revelation  and  science  spring  from  one  origin  and  subserve  one  end — the
good  of  men.  And  herein  we  may  learn  God's  fatherly  care  for  his  children  in  the  days
of  their  infancy.

I.  Greatest  fertility  in  nature  is  to  be  sought.  It  is  man's  province  to  bring
out  the  greatest  productiveness  in  fields  and  fruit  trees.  Pinning,  manuring,  and
grafting  are  essential.  The  vine  needs  especial  care,  and  is  susceptible  of  great  increase
of  fiuitfulness.  So  delicate  is  the  blossom  of  the  vine  tliat  the  pollen  of  other  plants
in  the  vicinity,  coming  into  contact,  injures  the  formation  of  the  fruit.  It  is  a  joy  to
God  to  see  the  trees  of  the  field  fruitful ;  how  much  more  to  see  abundant  fruitfulness
in  us !  "  Herein  is  our  Father  glorified."  The  least  of  God's  commandments  is  profit-
able to  observe.

II.  Needless  burdens  on  animals  forbidden.  Every  beast  is  appointed  to  be  the
servant  of  man ;  but  man  is  required  to  act  towards  the  inferior  ere  ition  in  God's
Btead.  The  burden  of  service  laid  upon  oxen  and  asses  is  heavy  enough ;  let  it  not  be
wantonly  increased.  Both  the  ox  and  the  ass  suffered  from  an  unequal  yoking  in  the
plough.  God  saw  the  paiuful  effect,  and  felt  grieved.  Animal  feeling  is  a  gift  from
God,  and  is  intended  to  be  for  enjoyment.  We  may  act  in  harmony  with  God,  and
increase  that  enjoyment ;  or  we  may,  in  part,  frustrate  his  plan.  In  every  act  of  man
God  takes  lively  interest.    All  day  long  he  is  approving  or  censuring.

III.  OuB  PIETY  18  TO  BE  SEEN  IN  OUR  RAIMENT.  It  is  Very  probable  that  this  pro-
hibition about  dress  was  to  counteract  a  custom  among  idolaters — a  custom  which  led
to  superstitious  feeling.  Some  solid  reason  was  at  the  root  of  the  counsel,  wliether  we
can  discover  that  reason  or  not.  Our  raiment  is  in  some  measure  the  exponent  of  our
religion.  If  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  is  predicted  as  the  motto  to  be  found  on  the  bells
of  the  horses,  so,  and  much  more,  should  consecration  to  God  be  conspicuous  on  our
dress  and  demeanour.  Our  raiment  often  serves  as  an  ensign,  and  denotes  to  what
party  we  belong — the  Church  or  the  world.  If  simplicity,  modesty,  beauty,  sterling
quality,  be  in  our  dress,  these  are  ornaments  of  our  holy  faith.  Whatever  we  do,  or
however  we  dress,  be  this  our  aim,  to  please  God,  A  child  will  never  be  ashamed  to
acknowledge  its  father. — D.

Vers.  13 — 21. — Slander,  unehastity,  and  fraud.  No  blame  can  lie  against  the
Scriptures  because  they  legislate  on  such  detestable  matters.  The  blame  must  lie  at
the  door  of  depraved  humanity,  which  perpetrates  such  deeds  and  makes  Divine
legislation  necessary.  The  obscenity  appertains  to  the  vices,  only  praise  belongs  to  the
lemedy.

I.  A  woman's  CHASTITY  IS  HER  MAIN  DOWRY  FOB  LIFE.  If  she  possess  not  this  virtue,
she  is  worse  than  worthless ;  she  is  a  plague  and  a  pest — a  moral  dunghill.  Apart
from  chastity,  she  can  fill  no  proper  place  in  society.  Her  true  function  is  ended.  She
is  only  a  discredit  to  the  human  name.  Her  light  is  dense  darkness.  The  streams  of
life  are  polluted.  The  fountain  of  bliss  is  corrupted  at  its  source.  Rottenness  is  at  the
core  of  society.     No  language  can  exaggerate  the  evil.

II.  Slander  against  a  wife's  chastity  is  the  blackest  of  sins.    In  proportion  to


CH.  xxu.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEBOifOMY.  36?

the  vileness  of  the  sin  and  the  severity  of  the  penalty,  is  the  baseness  and  guilt  of  the
man  who  makes  the  accusation  falsely.  This  is  a  climax  of  sins  of  speech,  which  nothing
can  surpass.  Slander  of  any  sort  is  heinous  sin,  aud  slander  against  an  intimate
friend  is  more  heinous  yet ;  but  slander  against  one's  wife — and  against  her  chastity —
is  most  heinous  of  all.  Fines  and  scourging  are  lenient  punishment  for  such  a
•  monster.

III.  The  penalties  or  sin  are  in  propobtion  to  injury  done.  On  the  principle
laid  down  in  a  previous  law,  the  penalty  for  false  accusation  was  fixed  according  to  the
nature  of  the  deed  falsely  alleged  to  be  done.  In  this  case,  the  slanderer  well  deserved
such  a  result.  But  then  the  injured  wife  would  be  injured  all  the  more.  In  the  dread
penalty  imposed  on  him,  she  would  have  to  share.  Hence,  for  her  sake,  the  husband's
life  is  spared.  To  calculate  all  the  effects  produced  by  one  act  of  sin  is  impossible  to
the  finite  mind  of  man ;  yet  (unless  pardon,  full  and  complete,  be  enjoyed)  in  proportion
to  these  perpetuated  effects  will  be  the  penalty  meted  out  to  the  sinner.  We  may  well
"  stand  in  awe." — D.

Vers.  22 — 30. — Various  penalties  for  unchastity.  Purity  in  domestic  life  b  at  the
root  of  national  prosperity.

I.  The  neglect  of  virtue's  safeguards  is  guilt.  (Ver.  24.)  If  a  sentinel  reck-
lessly leave  open  a  portal  in  the  beleaguered  city,  it  is  treason  ;  it  is  as  if  he  had  betrayed
his  king.  To  see  a  house  on  flame,  and  to  give  no  warning,  is  to  become  accountable
for  the  destruction  of  a  city.  To  neglect  the  physician's  counsel  in  time  of  disease  is
to  he  guilty  of  death.  So  to  make  no  resistance  to  the  tempter  is  to  court  his  approach.
To  go  to  the  battle  without  sword,  or  spear,  or  shield  is  to  invite  defeat.  Idle  women
may  be  said  to  tempt  the  devil.

II.  Neglect  of  due  precautions  often  leads  to  a  terrible  surprise.  Oftentimes
we  underrate  what  strength  the  tempter  has  until  we  are  in  his  clutches.  So  long  as
wo  knew  temptation  only  by  hearsay,  we  imagined  it  eagy  to  escape  or  to  overcome ;
but  when  brought  suddenly  under  its  subtle,  wily  influence,  we  are  surprised  how  easily
ive  are  overcome.

III.  The  consent  of  the  will  is  needed  to  constitute  a  sin.  Whatever  we  are
compelled  to  do  by  an  external  power,  and  against  all  the  opposing  force  of  our  own
will,  this  is  not  sin.  Injury  and  loss  may  follow,  but  unless  the  will  consents  there
is  no  moral  culpability.  The  essence  of  sin  lies  in  the  inclination.  A  man  may  violate
all  the  precepts  of  the  Decalogue  by  a  glance  of  his  eye — ay,  by  a  volition  of  his  will.
Whether  the  overt  act  follow  or  not  may  depend  on  favourable  or  unfavourable  outward
circumstance.  The  same  mischievous  effects  will  not  follow,  but  the  sin  is  there.
Therefore,  "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligence."

IV.  Generous  minds  will  put  the  best  possible  construction  on  human  conduct.
(Ver.  27.)  How  generously  minded  a  man  may  be,  he  is  bound  to  lie  true.  He  cannot
dissemble  facts.  He  is  under  obligation  to  condemn  the  slightest  sin.  With  the  evil
thing  there  must  be  no  connivance.  But  if  it  be  possible,  with  due  regard  to  virtue,  to
give  two  interpretations  on  a  deed,  fairness  to  the  doer  requires  that  we  give  the  inter-
pretation the  most  favourable  and  generous.  To  a  prisoner  at  the  bar,  the  judge  gives
the  full  beneflt  of  any  doubt ;  and  equal  justice  should  be  dealt  to  men  in  all  our
judgments  upon  them.  If  there  be  bright  spots  in  their  character  and  deeds,  let  ns
fasten  our  eyes  upon  these.  It  will  do  us  good.  To  search  out  the  diseased  parts  of
humanity,  and  to  find  secret  pleasure  in  contemplating  these  moral  sores, — this  will  do
us  harm.  As  we  measure  our  sentiments  and  judgments  out  to  men,  they  will  measure
to  us  again.  We  may  be  blind  to  our  own  blemishes — we  usually  are ;  but  others  will
readily  find  them  out ;  and  if  we  aio  harsh  and  ungenerous  in  our  estimate  of  men,
they  will  return  the  treatment,  perhaps  with  compound  interest.  It  is  wise,  every  day,
to  fo-'fei'  in  our  breast  the  charitj  "  that  believetb  all  things,  hopeth  all  things,  enduietb

•11  tiiiiiek"~o.


308


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


OH.  XXIIL  1 — 2S.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXm
Crm,  Bights.    Who  may  and  who  mat  not

KHTER     INTO     THE     CONGBEOATION.       UN-
OLEAKNESS  IN  THE  CauP  TO  BE  AVOIDED.

Kecbption  op  Fugitive  Slaves.  Licen-
tious Persons  to  be  removed,  and  Gifts
THE  Price  of  Impurity  to  be  refused.
Laws  regarding  Usury,  Vows,  and  Cbb-
TAiN  Duties  of  Citizenship.
Vers.  1 — 8. — Five  classes  of  persons  are
nere  excluded  from  the  congregation  of  the
Lord.

Ver.  1. — Mutilation  was  performed  by  the
two  methods  here  specified — crushing  and
excision.  The  exclusion  of  persons  who  had
suffered  this  from  the  congregation,  t.e.
from  the  covenant  fellowship  of  Israel,  the
■no\iTela  toG  'l(rpa^\  (Eph,  ii.  12),  was  due
to  the  priestly  character  of  the  nation.
Israel  was  a  kingdom  of  priests  (Exod.  xix.
6),  and  the  admission  into  it  of  one  in  whom
the  nature  of  man,  as  made  by  God,  had
been  degraded  and  marred,  would  have  been
unfitting;  just  as  all  bodily  blemish  un-
fitted a  man  for  being  a  priest,  though  other-
wise qualified  (Lev.  xxi.  16 — 24).  This
law,  however,  was  one  of  the  ordinances
intended  for  the  period  of  nonage ;  it  had
reference  to  the  outward  typical  aspect  of
the  Israelitish  constitution;  and  it  ceased
to  have  any  significance  when  the  spiritual
kingdom  of  God  came  to  be  established.
]  ven  under  the  theocracy,  eunuchs  were  not
excluded  from  religious  privileges;  they
could  keep  God's  sabbaths,  and  take  hold
of  his  covenant,  and  choose  the  things
pleasing  to  him,  and  so  be  part  of  the
spiritual  Israel,  though  shut  out  from  the
fellowship  of  that  which  was  outward  and
national  (of.  Isa.  Ivi.  4).

Ver.  2. — A  bastard ;  one  bom  of  a  harlot ;
so  the  Hebrew  word  Omn),  which  occurs
only  here  and  in  Zech.  ix.  6,  is  said  to  mean ;
LXX.,  ix  T-ipvris ;  Vulgate,  de  tcorto  natut ;
the  Talmud  and  the  rabbins  represent  the
word  as  denuting  one  begotten  in  adultery
or  incest  (Maimon.,  'Issure  Biah.,'  c.  xv.
§§  1,  2,  7,  9);  so  also  the  Syriae  har  gamo,
"  son  of  adultery."  To  his  tenth  generation ;
i.e.  for  ever,  ten  being  the  number  of  inde-
finiteness  (cf.  Gen  xxxi.  7 ;  Numb.  ziv.  22 ;
Job  xix.  3 ;  Ps.  iii.  6,  etc.).

Ver.  3. — As  Ammon  and  Moab  had  met
the  Israelites  with  hostility,  and  had  brought
Balaam  to  curse  them,  a  curse  had  thereby
been  brought  upon  themselves,  and  tliey  also
were  to  be  for  ever  excluded  from  the  con-
^'lYgatiou  of  Israel.


Ver.  6. — ^Israel  was  net  to  nek,  f.«.  care
for  and  use  means  to  promote,  the  welfare
of  these  nations.  Individuals,  however,  of
the.°e  nations  might  be  naturalized  in  Israel,  '
and  as  proselytes  enter  the  congregation,  as
the  case  of  Buth  proves.  It  was  against  the
nations,  as  such,  that  this  ban  was  directed,
and  this  they  had  brought  on  themselves  by
choosing  to  be  enemies  of  Israel  when  they
might  have  been  friends  and  allies.

Ver.  7. — It  was  to  be  otherwise  with  the
Edomite  and  the  Egyptian ;  though  the
former  bad  refused  permission  to  the  Israel-
ites to  pass  through  their  land,  and  the  latter
had  oppressed  and  wronged  the  nation,  yet
as  the  foimer  were  connected  with  Israel
by  a  bond  of  kindred — for  he  is  thy  brother
— and  the  latter  had  received  Israel  to  so-
journ in  their  land,  where,  notwithstanding
the  oppression  which  clouded  the  later  times
of  their  sojourn,  they  had  reaped  many
benefits,  they  were  not  to  abhor  these  nations
or  place  them  under  a  ban  of  perpetual  ex-
clusion; descendants  in  the  third  genera-
tion of  an  Edomite  or  Egyptian  might  be
naturalized  in  IsraeL

Vers.  9 — 1 1. — When  the  people  went  forth
to  war,  all  impurity  and  defilement  was  to
be  kept  out  of  their  camp.  When  the  host
goeth  forth;  literally,  when  thou  goest  forth
at  a  camp  or  hoet.  As  in  the  wilderness  the
camp  was  to  be  kept  pure  (Numb.  v.  2,  etc.),
so  also  in  the  future,  when  they  went  out  to
war,  all  defilement  was  to  be  removed  from
their  host.  Every  wicked  thing;  rather,
every  evil  thing,  evil  in  the  sense  of  blemish
or  uncleanness  (of.  ch.  xvii.  1).

Ver.  13. — A  paddle  upoa  thy  weapon;
rather,  a  <ntaZ2  tpade  (the  word  properly
means  a  pin  or  nail)  among  (hy  furniture,
or,  according  to  another  reading  among  thy
implements  or  accoutrements ;  they  were  to
carry  with  them  along  with  their  imple-
ments of  war  a  tool  for  digging  in  the  earth.

Ver.  14. — The  camp  was  to  be  kept  holy,
because  God  went  forth  with  their  armies,
=ind  in  his  presence  there  must  be  nothing
'.hat  defileth  or  is  unclean.  That  he  see  no
unclean  thing  in  thee;  literally,  nal;e(27>e«t,
ihamefulness  of  a  thing,  i.e.  anything  that
one  would  be  ashamed  of.

Vers.  15,  16. — A  slave  that  had  escaped
from  bis  master  was  not  to  be  given  up,  .but
allowed  to  dwell  in  the  land,  in  whatever
part  he  might  choose.  The  reference  is  to
a  foreign  slave  who  had  fled  from  the  harsh
treatment  of  his  master  to  seek  lefoge  in
Israel,  as  is  evident  from  the  expieuion,
■i]n]P»'  nni*3,  "  in  one  of  thy  gates,*'  ia.  in
any  part  of  thy  land.  Onkelos,  j'pppnay.,
"  a  slave  of  the  Gentiles."   His  master;  the


en.  xxm.  I — 25.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERON'OMY.


3C9


word  used  is  the  plural  adonim,  masters.
The  use  of  this  for  a  human  master  or  lonl
Is  peculiar  to  the  Pentateuch  (of.  Gen.  xxiv.
9,  51 ;  ixxix.  2;  xl.  1 ;  Exod.  xxi.  4,  6,  32,
etc.).  In  this  use  of  the  term  there  is  no
reference  to  severity  of  rule,  as  if  this  were
t  plural  intensive.

Vera.  17, 18. — Amongst  idolatrons  nations
prostitution  was  in  certain  cases  regarded
as  an  act  of  religious  service  (cf.  Herod,,  i.
199),  and  both  males  and  females  prostituted
themselves  especially  in  the  worship  of
Astarte.  All  such  abominations  were  to  be
unknown  in  Israel  (cf.  Micah  i.  7).  Whore ;
kedeshah  (rwipj,  a  female  who  prostituted
herself  in  Qie  worship  of  an  idol.  The
price  of  a  dog ;  not  money  obtained  from  the
sale  of  a  dog,  but  the  gains  of  the  kadesh,
or  male  prostitute,  here  called  a  dog,  as  the
type  of  all  uncleanness  (cf.  Bev.  xxii.  15).

Vers.  19—25. — Certain  civil  rights  and
duties  are  here  prescribed.

Vers.  19,  20. — An  Israelite  might  lend  on
interest  money,  or  victuals,  or  other  property,
to  a  foreigner,  but  of  one  of  his  own  people
he  was  not  to  lake  interest  for  a  loan  (cf.  |
Exod.  zzii.  21 ;  Lev.  xxv.  36, 37).  |


Vers.  21— 23. — A  vow  to  the  Lord,  once
made,  was  to  be  religiously  kept ;  the  Lord
would  require  it,  and  to  refuse  or  neglect  to
pay  it  would  be  held  a  sin.  No  one,  how-
ever, was  under  any  obligation  to  vow —
that  was  to  be  a  purely  voluntary  act.
That  which  is  gone  out  of  thy  lips  thou
Shalt  keep  and  perform;  .  .  .  aooording  as
thou  hast  vowed  onto  the  Lord  thy  Ood  of
free-will  (nanj,  spontaneously).  (For  the
law  concerning  vows  in  general,  see  Lev.
xxvii.  and  Numb,  xxx.)

Vers.  24,  25. — In  the  vineyard  oi  corn-
field of  a  neighbour  they  miglit  eat  to
appease  hunger,  but  no  store  of  grapes  or
of  grain  might  be  carried  away.  At  thine
own  pleasure ;  literally,  according  to  tHy$oul,
i.e.  desire  or  appetite  (cf.  ch.  xiv.  26).
Fluok  the  ears  with  thine  hand  (cf  Matt.
xii.  1 ;  Luke  vi.  1).  Among  the  Arabs  of
the  present  day  the  right  of  a  hungry  per-
son to  pluck  ears  of  corn  in  a  field  and  eat
the  grains  is  still  recognized  (Bobinson,
'Bib.  Bes.,'  ii.  192;  Thomson,  *Laud  and
the  Book,'  u.  510).


HOMILETICS.

Ver».  1 — 8. — Stern  safeguards  sometimes  needed.  It  was  no  small  part  of  the  ednca-
Kon  of  the  Hebrew  people  at  once  to  stamp  as  disreputable  the  practices  of  bodily
mutilation  which  were  common  enough  among  heathen  nations.  The  honour  of  the
congregation  of  the  Lord  was  bound  up  in  its  freedom  from  complicity  therewith.
Eunuchs  and  illegitimate  offspring  were  excluded  from  the  congregation  of  the  Lord,
lest  the  moral  virus  connected  with  the  associations  of  their  life  should  be  as  poison  in
tlie  camp.  Hence  this  shield  against  its  poisonous  influence  is  tu  be  preserved  down
"  to  the  tenth  generation,"  both  as  a  brand  on  former  sin  and  as  a  guard  against  future
evil.  Sentence  of  exclusion  is  also  passed  on  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites  (see  Gen.
xix.  36 — 38).  The  stain  on  the  origin  of  these  races  is  grievous.  And  the  new
generations  had,  by  their  hostility  to  the  people  of  God,  and  because  of  their  super-
stitious arts,  shown  that  nought  but  peril  could  attend  their  admission,  for  a  long  time
to  come.  To  seek  "their  peace  and  prosperity"  would  liave  been  an  increase  of  peril,
as  well  as  a  connivance  at  wrong.  Hence  it  was  forbidden  (rer.  6).  That  this,  and
not  the  cultivation  of  needless  hostility  or  revenge,  was  intended  by  these  prohibitions
is  clear  from  vers.  7,  8.  Two  extremes  are  to  be  avoided.  No  rancour  or  grudge  is  to
be  cherished  over  past  ills  infiicted,  and  yet  kindliness  of  feeling  is  not  to  be  allowed
to  degenerate  into  even  apparent  friendship  with  ungodliness  and  sin.  In  these  facts
and  precepts  the  following  teachings  are  included  or  suggested.

L  The  perfection  of  social  life  can  osly  be  secured  when  the  several  members  of  any
society  are  holy  unto  the  Lord.

II.  The  outside  world  presents  very  much  that  is  the  reverse  of  this,  even  all  kinds
cf  spiritual  and  sensual  wickedness.

III.  While  it  behoves  us  to  cherish  a  spirit  of  true  benevolence  towards  all,  yet  we
may  never  wink  at  sin.

IV.  It  may  be  necessary  for  us  to  adopt  stem  measures  towards  others,  even  that  of
).aniBhmeDt  (I  Cor.  v.  6,  13),  in  order  to  avoid  contamination.

V.  Wo  may  well  cherish,  and  teach  others  to  cherish,  a  special  hatred  of  sins  of  tli<
flesh,  since  it  may  not  be  for  many,  many  generations  that  blood-poisoning  therebi

SKUTKBONOMY.  2  B


170  THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTBUONOMr.  foH.  xim.  1— 26


I  to  comipt  or  taint  the  life.  Surely  men  would  more  frequently  check  themselvei
in  rin  if  they  would  remember  for  how  long  they  may  enfeeble  the  constitutiona  and
emUtter  the  liTes  of  those  who  may  hereafter  owe  their  existence  to  thein.

Vers.  9 — 14.— (TTeanZtnesa  a  religious  duty.  The  Law  of  Moses  may  be  regarded  at
fourfold — ^moral,  ritual,  civil,  and  sanitary.  The  precepts  in  this  paragraph  are  an
example  of  the  last-named  part  thereof.  They  refer  to  the  inculcation  of  cleauliness,
both  m  camp  and  in  person.  And  not  only  so,  but  to  the  observance  thereof  in  tius
of  war.  While,  perhaps,  at  such  times  special  evils  would  result  from  the  neglect  of
such  regulations,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  it  would  be  precisely  when  movements  were
irregular,  uncertain,  and  attended  with  much  excitement,  that  there  would  be  the
strongest  tendency  to  fail  in  their  observance.  But  no  amount  of  war-pressure  would
be  any  excuse  for  uncleanliness.  We  get  here,  moreover,  an  illustration  of  that  which
so  often  occurs  in  the  Law  of  Moses,  viz.  that  duties  of  the  lowest,  humblest,  and  most
common  order  are  urged  on  the  people  by  the  highest  and  noblest  sanctions ;  and  many,
a  teacher  may  find  reason  for  urging  to  cleanliness  of  habit  from  such  a  text  as  ver.  14,
"  The  Lord  thy  God  walketh  in  the  midst  of  thy  camp ;  .  .  .  therefore  shall  thy  camp
be  holy."  The  precise  application  of  the  text  must,  of  course,  vary  with  locality  and
circumstance ;  but  the  principle  of  it  includes  the  following.

1.  The  presence  of  the  Lord  God  is  everywhere.  2.  He  is  in  the  "camp"  of  hio
people  as  a  special  light  and  guard.  3.  Hence  every  such  home  may  be  regarded  as  a
temple  of  God,  the  palace  of  the  Great  King.  4.  In  such  homes  the  most  menial  acts
may  be  acts  of  service  done  for  God :  common  work  may  be  dignified  by  great  motives.
6.  It  will  be  regarded  by  a  wise  Christian  man  as  a  part  of  his  duty  which  is  by  no
means  to  be  neglected,  to  maintain  order  and  imsullied  cleanliness  in  person  and  home.
This  will  be  part  of  his  life-worship — the  living  translation  of  "  laborare  est  orare."
This  duty  needs  special  enforcement  in  some  quarters.  Many  a  humble  Christian
cottager  elevates  his  home  and  all  therein,  by  having  it  so  beautifully  clean  that,  on
every  piece  of  furniture,  on  every  wall,  on  every  floor,  it  seems  as  if  the  words  were
graven,  "  Holineu  to  the  Lord."

Vers.  15, 16. — IsraeVs  land  a  refuge  for  the  oppressed.  (For  "  the  Mosaic  treatmefit
of  slavery,"  see  Homily  on  ch.  xv.  12 — 18.)  To  the  features  of  his  legislation  thereon
this  must  be  added  that,  as  soon  as  ever  a  foreign  slave  set  foot  on  Hebrew  soil,  he  was
free.    Israel's  land  was  for  him  the  land  of  liberty!

Ver*.  17, 18. — Unholy  wealth  may  not  he  put  to  Divine  uses.  (See  Homilies  on  ch.
XV.  1—6 ;  xlv.  22 — 29.)  The  same  law  which  regulates  the  appropriation  of  wealth
rightfiilly  gained  forbids  the  dedication  to  any  holy  use  of  wealth  sinfully  gained.

Vers.  19,  20. — The  opposite  working  of  like  principles.  The  difference  here  per-
mitted between  lending  to  brethren  and  to  strangers  resembles  that  allowed  in  ch.  xv.
1 — 6  (see  Homily  thereon).

Veri.  21 — 2i.—Tows  to  Ood  to  be  performed.  The  vow  here  made  is  supposed  to  be
entirely  roluntary.  It  was  "  a  free-will  offering."  In  Numb.  xxx.  3 — 8,  abuse  is  guarded
against.  Vows  made  without  the  knowledge  or  consent  of  the  father  or  husband  were
to  be  of  no  force.  No  priest  had  any  warrant  from  the  Mosaic  institutes  to  come
between  a  young  woman  and  her  father,  or  between  husband  and  wife.  Vows  to  God
were  to  be  completely  spontaneous,  as  between  the  soul  and  God.  They  were  not  to
be  extorted  by  others,  nor  yet  to  involve  the  entanglement  of  others.

Ven.  24,  25.— Kindliness  to  neighbours  a  duty  of  the  holders  of  property.  This  is  a
very  instructive  precept.  "  In  vine-growing  countries  grapes  are  amazingly  cheap;  and
we  need  not  wonder,  therefore,  that  all  within  the  reach  of  a  passenger's  arm  were  free.
The  quantity  plucked  was  a  loss  never  felt  by  the  proprietor,  and  it  was  a  kindly
privilege  kfTorded  to  the  poor  and  wayfaring  man  "  (Jameson).  "  Thou  mayost  take  toi
aeceidty,  not  for  superfluity  "  (Trapp).


CH.  xxiu.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  871


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ven.  1 — 8. — The  excluded  from  the  congregation.  Certain  principles  underlie  these
exclusions  which  it  is  worth  our  while  to  note.  It  will  he  seen  that,  though  bars  of
this  kind  are  done  away  in  Christ,  there  was  a  fitness,  under  the  theocracy,  in  the
exclusion  of  the  classes  specified  from  full  participation  in  covenant  privilege,  such
exclusion  being  in  harmony  with  Ihe  idea  of  "  a  holy  nation  " — type  in  earthly  mould
of  the  ideal  kingdom  of  God.

L  The  exclusion  of  the  mutilated.  (Ver.  1.)  The  idea  here  is  that  the  preserva-
tion of  the  body  in  its  vigour,  and  in  the  entirety  of  its  fimctions,  is  a  duty  which  we
owe  to  God ;  that  mutilation  of  it  or  dishonour  done  to  it  is  dishonour  done  to  him —
a  species  of  iirofanity.  Those  in  whom  this  work  of  dishonour  had  been  wrought,  un-
fitting them  for  the  discharge  of  the  distinctive  functinns  of  their  manhood,  were  barred
from  entrance  to  the  congregation.  The  ban  is  removed  under  the  gospel  (Isa.  IvL
3—5).

II.  The  exclusion  of  the  childben  of  incest.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  "  To  the  tenth
generation  "  seems  to  be  a  periphrasis  for  "  for  ever"  (Neh.  xiii.  1).  The  rabbins  take
the  term  "  bastard  "  to  refer  to  children  born  of  incest  or  adultery.  These  were  to  be
excluded  through  all  their  generations.  This  principle,  irrespective  of  the  ground  stated
in  ver.  4,  would  have  sufficed  to  exclude  Moab  and  Ammon.  The  truth  conveyed  is
that  the  impure  are  unalterably  debarred  from  membership  in  God's  kingdom.  God's
kingdom  is  a  kingdom  of  purity.  In  its  final  form  nothing  of  an  impure  nature  will  be
found  in  it.  Impurity  of  heart  and  life  exclude  from  inward  membership  in  it  now,
and  will  do  so  for  ever.  Known  impurity  should  exclude  from  Church  fellowship  on
earth  (1  Cor.  v.  1,  2).  •  The  outward  bar  no  longer  exists,  and  the  offspring  of  impure
connection,  if  children  of  faith,  are  welcomed  to  the  spiritual  fold.  But  the  tendency
of  sins  of  parents  still  is,  as  of  old,  to  exclude  children  from  the  fellowship  of  believers.
The  unchurched  little  ones  grow  up  outside  the  pale  of  ordinances,  and  tend,  in  course
of  generations,  to  become  increasingly  estranged  from  the  means  of  grace.  Parents
who  sin  themselves  out  of  Church  fellowship  thus  do  their  childrun,  as  well  as  their  own
souls,  an  irreparable  injury.

III.  The  exclusion  of  the  unmerciful  and  of  those  who  showed  hatked  to
God's  PEOPLE.  (Vers.  4 — 6.)  Tke  principle  here  is  obvious.  Christ  expressly  excludes
the  unmerciful  from  all  participation  in  his  kingdom  (Matt.  xxv.  41 — 46).  And  there
can  be  no  "  peace  "  and  no  "  prosperity  "  to  those  who  are  actuated  by  hostility  to
God's  kingdom.  So  long  as  they  retain  this  character,  we  cannot  wish  it  for  them.
Hostility  to  Christ's  people  is  hostility  to  Christ  himself  (Acts  ix.  4,  5),  and  reacts
fatally  on  the  soul  (Matt.  xxL  44).  It  draws  upon  it  God's  indignation,  and  ends  in
final  exclusion  from  heaven.

IV.  The  admission  of  those  who  show  kindness  to  God's  people.  (Vers.  7, 8.)
The  Edomite  and  the  Egyptian  were  not  to  be  abhorred ;  their  children  might  be
admitted  in  the  third  generation.  The  Edomites  had  not  been  as  friendly  as  they  might
have  been,  but  they  had  at  least  furnished  the  Israelites  with  victuals  in  their  march,
while  the  Egyptians  had  for  a  long  time  shown  them  kindness  and  hospitality.  For
these  things  they  "  had  their  reward."  Acts  of  kindness  to  God's  people  do  not  entitle
to  admission  into  God's  kingdom,  but  they  show  a  "  nighness  "  of  spirit  to  it,  and  are
remembered  in  God's  dealings  with  the  doers  of  them,  and  may  issue  in  their  final
salvation  (Matt.  z.  42).  Note :  Past  kindnesses  are  not  to  be  forgotten  because  of  a
late  change  of  disposition.  The  Egyptians  were  kindly  remembered,  though  their
treatment  of  the  Israelites  had  latterly  been  very  cruel.  It  is  to  be  remarked  also  that
the  tone  in  which  Edom  is  uniformly  referred  to  in  this  book  does  not  in  the  least
harmonize  with  the  late  date  assigned  to  it  by  many  critics.  Edom,  in  the  time  of  the
prophets,  had  become  Israel's  implacable  foe. — J.  O.

Ver.  6.— The  eurte  turned  into  a  blessing.  No  enchantment,  no  curse  of  evil  men,
can  prevail  against  the  people  of  God.  Contrariwise,  God  will  turn  the  curse  into  a
blessing.    In  Malachi,  on  the  other  hand,  he  threatens  to  "  curse  the  blessings  "  of  the


372  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY,  [oh.  xxm.  1—25

wicked  (Mai.  li.  2).  How  does  God  turn  the  curse  into  a  blessing  ?  1.  Directly,  fty
substituting  a  blessing/or  a  curse.  The  curse  is  not  merely  not  allowed  to  take  effect
for  harm,  but  God  puts  a  blessing  in  its  stead.  A  Divine  law  of  compensation  comes
into  operation.  The  wicked  is  punished,  and  the  object  of  his  unrighteoui  hatred
consoled  and  rewarded,  by  the  curse  being  read  backward,  and  made  a  reason  for  con-
ferring blessing.  The  very  curses  of  the  wicked  are  thus  a  means  of  enrichment  to  the
good.  Balaam's  curses  were  thus  changed  into  blessings  (Numb,  xxiii.,  xiiv.).  2.  Pro-
videntially, by  overruling  the  designs  of  evil  men  for  their  own  confusion,  and  for  hit
people's  good.  We  have  examples  in  the  histories  of  Joseph  (Gen.  1.  20),  of  Mordecai
and  the  Jews  (Esth.  vi. — x.),  of  Daniel  (Dan.  vi.).  The  persecutions  of  the  Church
have  thus  been  overruled  for  the  extension  of  the  gospel  (Acts  xi.  19).  The  highest
example  is  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  (Acts  iii.  13 — 19).  3.  Spiritually,  by  turning  out-
ward afflictions  into  means  of  spiritual  good,  (1)  Afflictions  humble,  chasten,  purify
(Job  ilii.  4,  5  ;  Ps.  cxix.  71).  (2)  God  can  turn  afflictions  into  sources  of  comfort  and
joy,  into  occasions  of  higher  glory  to  himself,  into  means  of  salvation  and  glory  to  the
saint  (Acts  xvi.  25 ;  Bom.  v.  3 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10;  iv.  17  ;  Phil.  i.  19).  (3)  (Jod  can
overrule  even  pimishiuent  of  sin  for  our  ultimate  good.    Levi  (Gen.  xlix.  7). — J.  0.

Vers.  O"— 14. — Purity  in  the  camp.  The  camp  was  to  be  free  from :  1.  Moral
pollution  (ver.  9).  2.  Ceremonial  pollution  (vers.  10,  11).  3.  Natural  pollution  (vers.
12,  13) — M.  Henry.  This,  because  God  was  in  its  midst.  Ue  was  there  to  work  for
iheir  deliverance  and  for  the  confusion  of  their  enemies.     We  are  taught^^

I.  That  military  life  is  no  excuse  fob  laxity  in  morals,  ob  fob  a  lowered
STANDARD  OF  PROPRIETY  IN  CONDUCT.  The  oppositc  Opinion  too  commonly  prevails.
Immoralities  are  winked  at  in  soldiers  and  sailors  which  would  not  be  tolerated  in
ordinary  society ;  nay,  are  sometimes  half  justified  as  a  necessity  of  their  situation.
When  public  opinion  is  in  this  easy  state,  we  cannot  wonder  that  the  individuals  them-
selves are  not  very  strict  about  their  behaviour.  They  find  Acts  passed,  e.g.  to  protect
them  in  their  evil  courses,  and  tney  naturally  suppose  that  they  have  a  kind  of  sanction
lor  their  immorality.  Officers  do  not  always  set  the  men  the  best  example.  This  is  in
every  sense  to  be  deplored.  Immorality  does  not  change  its  nature  in  the  barrack-room
or  on  the  march.  Bather,  when  "  the  host  goes  forth  "  we  should  try  to  put  away  from
us  "  every  wicked  thing."  Only  then  can  we  confidently  expect  God's  presence  to  go
with  us,  or  look  to  him  for  aid  in  battle.  Compare  Carlyle's  account  of  Cromwell's
army  ('  Cromwell,'  vol.  ii.,  at  end),  and  the  "  prayer-meeting  "  of  the  leaders.  See
also  BailUe's  account  of  the  encampment  of  the  Scotch  Covenanters  at  Dunse  Law
(' Letters,' L  211).

U.  That  purity  is  required  in  tub  oahf  op  the  Church,  if  her  warfare  la
TO  BE  BUCOE88FULLT  ACCOMPLISHED.  In  Spiritual  Conflicts,  above  all,  we  must  look  to
spiritual  conditions.  The  Church  is  an  army  of  Chiist.  She  is  organized  for  aggressive
and  defensive  warfare.  Her  only  hope  of  success  lies  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  with
her.  But  can  she  hope  for  this  presence  if  she  is  not  careful  to  maintain  her  internal
purity  ?  True,  she  has  no  commission  to  search  the  heart,  and  must  be  content  to
allow  tares  to  mingle  with  the  wheat  (Matt.  xiii.  24 — 31).  But  it  is  within  her
province,  in  the  exercise  of  discipline,  to  remove  obvious  scandals,  and  by  rebuke  and
censure,  as  well  as  by  positive  teaching  and  persuasion,  to  keep  down  worldliness,
irreligion,  and  sensuality,  when  these  make  their  appearance  in  her  midst.  She
ought  to  pray,  labour,  and  use  her  authority  for  the  maintenance  of  her  purity.
The  purer  she  is  internally  the  more  resistless  will  she  be  in  her  assaults  on  evil  with-
out.-—J.  O.

Vers.  15 — 23. — Variotu  precepts.  No  yery  close  connection  exists  between  the  pre-
cepts in  these  verses,  yet  they  are  variously  related,  and  suggest  by  their  juxtaposition
lessons  of  importance.    We  have—

L  A  woBD  SPOKEN  IN  THE  INTERESTS  OF  LiBBBTT.  (Vers.  15, 16.)  1.  The  fugitive
slave  is  not  to  be  given  back  to  his  master.  The  case  is  that  of  a  slave  escaping  from  •
heathen  master.  The  spirit  of  the  Mosaic  Law  is  wholly  opposed  to  slavery.  This
precept  anticipates  our  own  law,  that  a  slave  setting  foot  on  British  territory  is  free.
2.  Every  encouragement  is  to  be  given  him  to  settle  in  the  land.    He  is  not  to  fa«


cH.  xxm.  1— 26.J  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  873

oppressed  or  treated  with  nnlcindness,  but  is  to  be  allowed  to  settle  where  he  pleases.
The  holy  land  was  thus  a  true  asylum  for  the  oppressed.

II.  A  BLOW  STRUCK  AT  LEWDNESS.  (Vers.  17, 18.)  The  lawgiver  alone,  so  far  aswe
know,  among  ancient  nations,  lays  his  axe  at  the  root  of  this  great  evil.  He  refuses  to
it  the  least  toleration.  He  is  right.  The  prevalence  of  lewdness  in  a  land  blights  and
withers  everything  good.  It  saps  the  manhood  of  the  nation,  destroys  its  love  of
liberty  (2  Pet.  ii.  19),  turns  religion  to  hypocrisy  (Matt,  xxiii.  25 — 29),  kills  humane
feeling,  dissolves  domestic  ties,  and  degrades  the  wretched  victim  of  it  to  the  lowest
poi^t  of  brutishnesa—

"  It  hardens  a*  within,
And  petrifies  the  feeling  I  "

BUBKS.

The  contrast  between  the  noble  severity  of  the  Bible  teachins;  on  this  subject,  and  the
wretchedly  low  tone  of  the  teaching  of  such  writers  as  Bolingbroke,  or  even  of  Hume,
is  very  noteworthy.

ni.  Checks  imposed  on  covetousness.  1.  The  lender  is  not  permitted  to  exact
usury  from  his  brother  (vers.  19,  20).  That  the  taking  of  interest  was  not  regarded  as  in
itself  sinful  is  plain  Irom  the  permission  to  take  usury  from  a  stranger.  But  in  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  lime,  and  in  view  of  the  design  of  the  lawgiver  to  check  rattier  than
to  encourage  extensive  commercial  operations  on  the  part  of  the  Jews,  the  law  was  a
wise  one,  and  tended  to  repress  covetousness  in  a  form  which  would  very  readily  have
developed  itself.  Lending  was  to  be  free  and  cordial,  and  God's  blessing,  the  best
usury,  was  promised  in  return.  2.  Vows  were  to  be  faithfully  performed  (vers.  21 — 23).
This  checked  covetousness,  so  far  as  that  might  jirompt  the  person  vowing  to  grud<,'e
payment  when  the  time  for  p:^ying  his  vow  arrived.  The  vow  was  in  his  own  choice,
but,  if  made,  it  was  to  be  religiously  [lerformcd  (Eccles.  v.  4,  5).  It  is  easier  to  vow
than  at  the  proper  time  to  make  the  sacrifices  which  the  vow  demands. — J.  0.

Vers.  24,  25. — The  vineyard  and  corn-fldd.  This  law  may  be  regarded :  1.  As
another  check  on  covetousness.  It  restricted  the  operation  of  covetousness  in  the
owner,  and  taught  him  to  be  generous  and  charitable.  2.  As  part  of  the  Jewish  pro-
vision for  the  poor  (cf.  ch.  xxiv.  19,  20).  3.  As  a  lesson  in  honsety.  It  taught  those
who  used  the  privilege  to  restrain  themselves  to  their  immediate  wants,  and  to  respect
on  principle  the  rest  of  their  neighbour's  property.  It  taught  them  to  be  honest  by
trusting  them.  4.  As  givin;j;  every  one  an  interest  in  the  fruitfulness  of  the  land.
Custom  and  the  force  of  public  opinion  would  guard  the  law  from  abuse. — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  congregation  of  the  Lord  Jealously  guarded.  There  has  been  con-
siderable controversy  about  what  the  term  "  entering  into  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  "
signifies.  It  cannot  be  the  Old  Testament  equivalent  for  our  "  communicants,"  or
"  Church  members ; "  for  it  would  seem  from  Exod.  xii.  48,  49,  that  Jewish  privileges
were  open  to  strangers  on  condition  of  their  circumcision.  Nor  need  we  interpret  it  as
merely  indicating  the  marriage  connections  which  Israelites  were  to  avoid.  We  are
satisfied  with  the  interpretation,  received  by  many,  that  the  congregation  (^Dp^)  does
not  always  signify  the  sum  total  of  the  people,  but  the  great  assembly  of  elders.  The
prohibitions  in  this  passage  would,  therefore,  mean  prohibitions  from  holding  office  in
the  theocracy ;  in  fact,  they  show'  those  who  were  ineligible  to  the  Jewish  eldership.
1  he  ineligible  parties  are —

1.  Eunuchs.  For  physical  perfection  was  indispensable  in  a  kingdom  typically  and
ideally  to  1>e  perfect.  Besides,  it  has  bfen  said  that  this  excluded  class  are  deficient  in
courage,  which  the  elders  required.'

2.  Those  whose  family  had  the  "  bar  sinister  "  within  ten  generations.  This  was  a
great  penalty  against  concubinage,  and  mast  have  made  the  Jews  most  particular
about  the  legality  of  their  marriages.

3.  Amoritei  and  Moabites.    '1  hey  are  treated  like  those  with  the  "  bar  ainiater,"  as

'  Of-  Jennings's  '  Jewish  Antiquities,'  p.  97,


374  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxm.  1— 25.

a  judgment  on  their  inhuman  treatment  of  Israel.    So  that  there  was  caution  to  be
exercised  in  the  admission  of  outsiders  to  the  honours  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth.

4.  Edomites  and  Egyptians.  They  could  not  enter  themselves,  but  their  grand-
children were  eligible.  They  were  not  kept  waiting  so  long  at  the  door  aa  those
previously  mentioned.     This  jealous  guarding  of  the  gate  is  surely  instructive.

I.  It  shows  us  the  duty  or  latino  hands  suddenly  upon  ho  man.  This  was
Paul's  direction  to  Timothy  regarding  the  ordination  of  elders  (1  Tim.  v.  22).  Their
selection  was  so  important,  that  it  should  not  be  hastily  or  carelessly  done.  They
should  get  time  to  prove  themselves  as  worthy.  And  our  ideal  of  Church  ofSeers
should  be  so  high  as  to  allow  of  the  introduction  of  no  ill-qualified  person  through  our
haste  or  careless  selection.

II.  A  Chukch  should  hainlt  fboduce  its  own  officebs.  Just  as  breeding  is  so
important  physically,  so  is  Church  training  spiritually.  It  is  the  children  in  the  tenth
generation  of  the  bastard  who  are,  so  to  speak,  by  their  ecclesiastical  development
through  nine  previous  generations  in  ecclesiastical  connection,  to  wipe  out  the  ill
effects  of  the  "  bar  sinister."  The  grandchildren  of  the  Edomite  and  Egyptian  are  to
be  eligible,  because  for  three  generations  connected  with  the  Church.  That  Church
will  be  strong  who  can  train  up  from  among  her  own  children  the  ofiBcers  she  needs.

III.  Office  in  God's  Chuboh  should  be  the  highest  ambition.  For  people
are  not  in  a  wholesome  state  when  they  place  offices  in  the  world  before  those  in  the
Church.  God's  service  is  highest  service,  whatever  current  opinion  may  be.  Let  the
thought  of  holding  office  in  the  Church  of  Gud  be  held  before  Church  members  as
the  very  noblest  ambition  for  themselves  or  their  children,  and  then  shall  the  Church
be  placed  upon  the  pinnacle  it  deserves. — It  M.  E.

Vers.  9 — 14. — A  purv  tamp  for  a  pure  King.  After  insisting  on  purity  giving  power
in  war  (ver.  9),  and  giving  direction  to  men  about  putting  away  uncleanness  which
may  be  due  to  natural  causes,  Moses  urges  the  precaution,  because  the  All-seeing  One
walketh  through  the  camp,  Inspector  of  all  their  ways  (ver.  14).  The  directions  here
given  might  have  been  urged  on  sanitary  grounds,  but  Moses  puts  them  deliberately
upon  religious.  For  the  experience  among  Orientals  and  Occidentals  is  that  something
more  than  sanitary  reasons  is  needed  to  overcome  man's  indolence  and  keep  him  clean.

L  Cleanliness  mat  be  baised  into  a  phase  of  godliness.  In  the  proverb  is
is  said  to  be  next  to  godliness ;  but  here  Moses  makes  it  a  part  of  godliness.  Religion
comes  to  the  aid  of  science,  and  helps  by  its  sanctions  the  wise  regulations  suggested
by  science.  Witness  how  painfully  slow  remedial  and  sanitary  measures  are  in  getting
adopted.  It  would  be  welt  if  religion  could  aid  the  civil  power  in  making  sanitation  a
sacred  thing  in  the  eyes  of  the  people.

The  reason  why  cleanliness  is  not  more  sacred  than  it  is  is  a  latent  Manichgeanism,
which  seems  to  lurk  in  human  nature ;  as  if  matter  were  essentially  unholy,  and
could  not  be  made  sacred.  But  the  religion  of  Christ  lays  hold  of  body  as  well  as
soul,  and  urges  a  mens  sana  in  corpore  sano,  and  promises  the  perfection  of  its  idea  in
a  bodily  resurrection.  There  is,  consequently,  a  physical  side  to  our  religion,  which
should  find  expression  in  the  consecration  of  cleanliness,  and  divers  washings,  and
foud  and  drink ;  all  that  religion  may  be  a  more  manly  and  efficient  thing.  We  believe
thoroughly  in  the  religious  duty  of  denouncing  dirt.

II.  Religion  is  life  spent  in  the  bealized  pbesenoe  of  GrOD.^  "  Thou  God
seest  me  "  is  the  watchword  of  religion.  When  all  our  life  is  brought  under  his  eye,
when  we  believe  that  the  commonest  and  most  trivial  things  are  not  beneath  his
notice,  when  we  desire  to  hide  nothing  from  him  by  night  or  by  day, — then  the  light  of
his  pure  being  illumines  and  regulates  all,  and  the  highest  purity  is  reached.  "Mus-
cular Christianity  "  is  a  good  idea,  if  by  it  we  mean  that  Christianity  has  a  physical  as
well  as  spiritual  sphere.  No  efforts  of  our  own,  muscular  or  otherwise,  will  ever  save
us ;  but,  being  saved  by  Divine  grace,  our  whole  being,  muscles  and  all,  is  at  Ood's
service.  Religion  in  everything  is  the  sense  of  God  all  through,  and  this  should  be
our  aim.

IlL  GoD  IS  THE  Captain  only  of  the  pubb.  A  holy  camp  is  the  preliminary  to
God  leading  Israel  successfully  against  the  enemy  (ver.  14).  The  pure  in  heart  see
God  and  follow  him  to  victory.    It  is  the  state  of  the  camp  of  Israel,  not  the  state  oi


OH.  xxni.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  376

•their  enemies,  that  is  all  important.  If  Israel  is  impure,  it  will  soon  proye  impotent.
The  pure  are,  in  the  long  run,  the  powerful.  Crod  is  on  the  side,  not  of  the  heavieBt,
but  of  the  purest  battalions.  Beally  religious  men  are  ultimately,  under  God,
victorious. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  15, 16. — Tkt  Hebrew  fugitive  law.  We  have  here  a  most  remarkable  law,
entirely  in  the  interests  of  the  slave,  and  showing  conclusively  that  no  such  thing  as
property  in  manliiDd  was  recognized  in  the  theocracy.  When  a  slave  ran  away,  the
person  to  whom  he  repaired  is  directed  to  harbour  him  and  give  him  a  place  with  his
servants,  but  not  to  restore  him  to  his  former  master.  Here,  then,  is  a  fugitive  law
such  as  permitted  no  such  monster  as  a  slave-hunter  to  defile  the  land  of  Palestine.

I.  The  Bible  recognizes  no  fbopebty  in  uan.  We  cannot  do  better  than  quote
from  Dr.  Cheever's  '  God  against  Slavery.'  He  says,  "  The  Jewish  Law  strictly  for-
bade any  one  from  ever  returning  unto  his  master  that  servant  that  bad  fled  from  his
master  to  him.  If  an  ox  or  an  ass  had  strayed  from  its  owner,  any  one  finding  the
beast  was  commanded  to  restore  it  to  its  owner  as  his  property ;  but  if  a  man's  servant
had  fled  away,  every  one  was  in  like  manner  forbidden  to  restore  him,  demonstrating
in  the  strongest  manner  that  a  servant  was  never  regarded  as  property,  and  could  not
be  treated  as  such.  A  man's  ox  belonged  to  him,  and  must  be  restored  to  him  as  his
property;  but  a  man's  servant  did  not  belong  to  him,  and  could  not  be  his  property,
and,  if  he  chose  to  take  himself  away,  was  not  considered  as  taking  away  anything
that  belonged  to  bis  master  or  could  be  claimed  and  taken  back  by  him.  It  is  not
possible -for  an  incidental  demonstration  to  be  stronger  than  this."

II.-  EUHAWAT   SLAVES   ARE  ENTITLED  TO  AN  OPPOBTUNITT  OF  EABNINa  A  LITKUHOOD.

Not  only  is  he  not  to  be  restored,  but  he  is  also  to  be  allowed  a  place  in  the  establish-
ment to  which  he  has  escaped.  Doubtless  he  had  a  good  idea  of  a  vacancy  being  there,
and  the  need  for  an  extra  servant.  In  such  a  case  he  is  to  get  his  chance,  and  be
allowed  without  oppression  to  earn  his  livelihood.  We  do  not  assert  that  every  human
being,  no  matter  how  "  heart-lazy,"  has  a  right  to  a  living ;  but  every  one  has  surely
a  right  to  a  livelihood.  It  is  the  organization  of  labour  and  livelihoods,  rather  than
poor-laws,  that  should  engross  the  attention  of  philanthropists.

III.  While  men  have  no  eight  to  oue  pbesons,  God  has — wk  abk  his.  We
are  God's  slaves.  "  We  are  bought  with  a  price,"  and  therefore  bound  to  glorify  him
with  our  bodies  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  He  has  a  title  to  us  by  virtue  of  creation;  but  for
"him  we  should  not  have  existed.  He  has  &  title  to  us  by  virtue  of  his  providence  ;  for  in
him  we  not  only  live,  but  move  and  have  our  being.  He  has  a  title  to  us  by  virtue  of
redemption ;  for  he  has  redeemed  us  at  no  less  a  cost  than  the  blood  of  his  Son.  He
has  a  title  to  us  by  virtue  of  his  inspirations ;  for  any  good  and  holy  desires  and
aspirations  we  entertain  are  through  the  indwelling  of  his  Spirit.  If  we  intelli-
gently recognize  our  position,  we  shall  own  our  obligations  to  him,  and  acknowledge
we  are  slaves  of  God.  But  his~  slavery  is  "  perfect  freedom."  Better  to  be  the  Lord's
slave  than  the  world's  freeman.  His  Law  is  "  the  perfect  Law  of  liberty,"  and  when
under  it  we  are  realizing  that  broadest  phase  of  freedom  which  has  made  his  slaves
the  mightiest  of  men. — B.  M.  E,

Vers.  17 — 25. — Money-making  must  be  above  tuspicion.  We  have  in  these  verses  an
excellent  lesson  upon  mercantile  morality.  There  are  too  many  people  in  this  world
who  are  not  at  ail  particular  how  money  is  made,  if  only  it  be  made.  "  The  wages  of
iniquity  "  are  as  welcome  to  them  as  to  Balaam.  But  it  is  plain  from  these  verses  that
the  Lord  does  regard  the  way  money  is  won,  and  will  not  handle  what  has  come
licer.tiously  himself,  nor  give  any  countenance  to  his  people  in  doing  so.

I.  Money  made  bt  wickedness  is  abhobbed  of  God.  The  wretched  woman  who
lives  by  her  own  dishonour,  the  wretched  man  who  leads  himself  to  licentiousness,  are
both  intolerable  to  the  Divine  King.  The  idols  of  the  heathen  may  receive  the  wages
of  licentiousness,  and  be  served  by  lewd  women,  as  the  history  of  heathenism  shows,
but  God  will  have  no  such  dedications  polluting  his  house.  As  the  Holy  Oue,  he  will
not  be  served  by  the  deliberately  unholy  and  profane.

II.  Monet  made  out  of  the  needs  of  the  poob  satnts  is  also  an  abohikation
TO  God.    It  was  a  noble  law  that  Jew  was  not  to  phky  the  money-lender  to  Jew.    To


;i78  THE   BOOK   OF    DEUTEnONOMY.  [ch.  xxiii.  1—25.

extort  from  a  brother  what  his  needs  can  ill  afford  to  pay,  is  forbidden.  The  Jews  were
to  be  brothers  indeed,  in  readiness  to  lend  without  hope  of  recompense.  And  although
this  arrangement  may  not  be  literally  binding  under  this  dis|  ensaiion,  there  is  a
general  idea  abroad  of  the  undesirableness  of  making  money  out  of  God's  poor  people.
There  is  to  be  special  consideration  shown  surely  to  those  who  are  of  the  household  of
faith  (Gal.  vi.  10).  We  should  suspect  a  man  of  worldliness  who  extorted  big  interest
from  a  struggling  Church,  when  well  able  to  advance  the  desi-erately  needed  loan.

III.  A  SPHERE  FOK  USURY  IS  RECOQNIZBD  BY  THE  LoRD.  The  Stranger  may  borrow
under  an  engagement  to  pay  interest.  This  is  only  right.  If  usury  were  universally
forbidden,  the  world  of  commerce  would  come  to  a  standstill.  Capital  would  not
accumulate  if  it  had  no  reward  awaiting  it.  The  stranger,  consequently,  comes  and
asks  the  favour  of  a  loan.  He  has  no  clairn  on  you  for  it,  but  he  is  willing  to  pay  a
fair  price  for  the  obligation.  The  whole  edifice  of  commerce  rests  upon  the  legality  of
such  a  transaction.    It  is  a  mutual  benefit.

At  the  same  time,  there  may  be  extortion  and  speculation  in  usury,  just  as  in  other
lines  of  business ;  and  God  shows  that  "  extortioners "  (1  Cor.  vi.  10)  have  no  part
in  his  kingdom.  It  is  selfishness  pure  and  simple,  and  in  its  most  tyrannical  and
despicable  form.

IV.  All  vows  hboistered  in  connection  with  oue  money-makino  must  be
FAITHFULLY  PERFORMED.  It  is  almost  3,  natural  instinct  that  vows  should  be  made
unto  the  Lord  in  connection  with  our  prosperity.  Often  a  person  struggling  to  realize
an  "honest  profit,"  while  the  transaction  is  only  in  progress,  and  the  issue  is  still
uncertain,  dedicates  a  proportion,  if  the  Lord  send  him  success ;  or  a  proportion  of  a
new  crop,  if  it  be  a  good  one.  Such  vows  must  never  be  recalled,  but  always  honour-
ably met.  "  Better  is  it  that  thou  shouldest  not  tow,  than  that  thou  shouldest
vow  and  not  pay  "  (Eccles.  v.  5).

V.  The  rights  of  the  hungry  should  also  be  respected  ip  a  land  is  to
ENJOY  success.  The  vines  are  so  productive  in  Palestine,  when  properly  cultivated,
and  the  vineyards  so  unprotected,  that  a  hungry  passenger  may  fill  himself  and  no
one  be  a  bit  the  poorer.  Or  he  may  enter  the  field  of  standing  corn  and  make  what
use  he  can  of  his  hands.  In  other  words,  the  hungry  was  regarded  as  having  a  riglit
to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  nature  and  to  pass  on.

And  when  it  was  placed  on  the  statute-book  as  a  right,  it  saved  the  poor  man's
self-respect  and  never  interfered  with  his  personal  freedom.  This  "  poor-law "  gives
man  his  need  without  asking  him  to  surrender  his  liberty.  This  is  its  beauty.  It
meets  the  pressing  necessity  without  destroying  the  person's  legitimate  self-respect.
Liberty  is  more  precious  to  any  upright  soul  than  bread;  and  it  is  a  wholesome  instinct
which,  as  far  as  possible,  should  be  respected  iu  any  beneficent  national  arrange-
ment.— R.  M.  E.

Vera.  1 — 6. — Lois  vf  sacred  privilege  a  grievous  penalty.  In  such  passages  as  this,
very  much  more  is  intended  than  is  expressed.  We  have  to  read  between  the  lines,  for
only  they  who  lived  in  tlio^e  days  of  Jewish  life  could  comprehend  the  shadowy  hints,
the  pregnant  suggestions,  which  are  here  reduced  to  words.

L  The  abuse  op  reproductive  vitalism  is  a  gigantic  sin.  The  law  of  the
natural  kingdom,  with  regard  to  every  species  of  life,  that  its  "  seed  should  be  in  itself,"
obtains  in  man  its  highest  form.  But  here  human  inclination,  passion,  will  come  into
play.  It  is  an  honour  which  God  has  conferred  upon  us,  in  that  he  has  made  us
agents  co-operating  with  him  in  the  perpetuation  of  the  human  race.  And  the  abuse
of  this  function  is  followed  forthwith  by  the  Divine  censure.  In  many  cases,  judgment
swiftly  follows  upon  the  heels  of  the  sin.  As  at  Bethpeor,  sudden  and  overwhelming
penalty  fell  upon  the  Jewish  culprits  who  yielded  to  the  seductive  snares  of  the
Meabitt  women,  so  that  there  fell  of  the  Hebrews  four  and  twenty  thousand  men ;  sc
summary  vengeance  falls  upon  such  transgressors  still.  Adultery  and  incest  are
stamped  with  the  red  brand  of  God's  hottest  wrath.  Oue  feels  in  reading  the  shameful
narrative  of  Lot's  incest  at  Zoar,  as  if  the  historian  had  not  left  on  it  the  burning
stigma  of  indignation ;  but  we  may  draw  no  such  conclusion  from  his  silence.  In  this
chapter  we  perceive  how  the  blank  is  filled.  The  issue  of  that  incestuous  intercourM
are  branded  with  perpetual  shame.


OH.  XXIII.  1—25.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  377

II.  This  gigantic  sin  begets  a  series  of  gigantic  evils.  1.  It  begets  callous
si^shness  in  posterity.  God  did  not  forget  that  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites  refused
the  common  necessaries  of  life  to  the  Hebrews,  who  sought  nothing  more  than  a  friendly
passage  through  their  territory.  Although  this  sin  was  a  branch  and  offspring  from
the  first,  it  was  something  new,  and  demanded  fresh  chastisement.  For  every  offence
in  God's  kingdom  there  is  prepared  a  just  measure  of  retribution.  2.  It  begets  malicious
opposition.  They  .hired,  in  their  blindness,  the  services  of  Balaam,  the  sorcerer,  in  the
hope  that  he  would  blast  and  ruin  them  with  his  witchery  and  curse.  The  end  was
frustrated.  The  purchased  curse  was  changed  into  blessing.  Nevertheless,  the  intention
wvts  criminal.  The  hearts  of  the  Moabites  burned  with  hate  for  their  kinsmen ;  and
base  intentions  shall  be  scourged.     3.  It  begets  idolatry  and  blind  fanaticism.

III.  Such  evils  C0LMINate  in  jdstbst  punishments.  Suitable  penalties  begin  to
appear  in  this  life.  1.  There  is  the  loss  of  external  privilege.  Such  "shall  not  enter
into  the  congregation  of  the  Lord."  What !  not  when  the  present  generation  has  passed
away  ?  No;  not  to  the  tenth  generation!  No;  not  for  ever.  Possibly  the  culprits
despised  the  privilege,  mocked  at  the  loss.  But  none  the  less  was  it  an  immeasurable
loss,  a  terrible  privation.  It  is  not  said  that  a  penitent  Moabite  should  not  be  forgiven
— should  not  obtain  eternal  life.  Yet  the  loss  of  external  instruction  and  help  lessened
the  probability  that  penitence  would  visit  the  soul.  We  do  ourselves  wrong  when  we
contemn  religious  privilege.  2.  There  is  the  loss  of  friendly  intercession.  "  Thou  shalt
not  seek  their  peace  nor  their  prosperity  ...  for  ever."  Prayer  for  such  is  interdicted.
Brotherly  sympathy  is  denied.  The  Hebrews  were  ordained  to  be  a  nation  of  prie.sts.
The  intention  was  that,  by  virtue  of  their  growing  piety,  they  should  bo,  as  an  entire
nation,  the  priests  of  the  Lord,  while  foreigners  shbuld  immigrate  to  be  their  husband-
men and  vine-dressers.  By  reason  of  the  Jew's  superior  knowledp;e  of  God,  they  might
be  successful  intercessors  for  other  nations.  But  from  this  gracious  privilege  the
Moabites  and  Ammonites  were  permanently  excluded.  Despise  not  the  prayers  of  the
devout. — D.

Vers.  7,  8. — Terminable  chastisemenU.  The  sting  in  God's  curse  is  its  irreversible-
ness.  The  bitter  draught  is  dashed  with  mercy  when  we  have  prospect  that  it  shall
cease.

I.  The  conduct  of  some  men  is  a  Ibtrange  admixture  of  good  and  bad.
There  were  some  fine  traits  in  Esau's  character  commingled  with  coarse  and  selfish
obstinacy.  Light  was  interfused  with  darkness.  The  treatment  of  Israel  by  the
Edomites  was  not  the  most  friendly,  nor  was  it  decidedly  hostile.  It  was  marked  by
haughty  reserve  rather  than  by  malignant  hostility.  So  also  the  Egyptians  were  not
wholly  antagonistic  to  Israel.  For  more  than  four  hundred  years  the  Hebrews  had
found  sustenance  and  shelter  in  Goshen.  If  the  last  Pharaoh  had  oppressed  them  with
bitter  bondage,  a  former  Pharaoh  had  blest  them  with  unusual  kindness.  From
desolating  famine,  Egypt  had  shielded  them.  This  shall  not  be  forgotten ;  it  shall
temper  chastisement.  The  remoter  peoples  shall  be  admitted  to  God's  kingdom,  while
those  nearer  at  hand  shall  be  excluded.

n.  Such  conduct  beceites  due  ubasube  of  chastibehent.  It  is  impossible  to
entertain  the  best  feelings  of  affection  towards  such  persons.  Yet  we  are  to  be  just  in
our  estimate  of  them.  We  are  not  to  fasten  our  eyes  only  on  the  dark  side  of  their
characters.  As  far  as  it  is  possible  we  should  be  generous  in  feeling.  "  Thou  shalt
not  abhor  them."  The  present  generation  of  such,  and  their  children,  shall  be  ex-
cluded horn  the  privileges  of  the  righteous.  But  there  the  ban  shall  terminate.  If
children  of  wisdom,  we  shall  endure  such  chastisement  with  patient  resignation—

"For  patient  suffering  is  the  link
That  binds  ug  to  a  glorious  morrow."

IIL  The  niHEitiTANCK  of  blessing  is  in  reversion.  "Weeping  may  endure  for
a  night:  joy  cometh  in  the  morning."  The  night  is  temporary;  the  day  will  be
eternal.  However  dark  be  their  present  lot  under  the  frown  of  Jehovah,  the  light  of
hope  shines  beyond — lights  up  the  future.  We  live  in  our  children.  It  alleviates  our
1}resent  burden  wben  we  are  assured  that  our  children  shall  be  exempt.    More  often


378  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch,  xxin.  1—25

should  we  stand  in  awe  of  sin,  if  we  did  but  perceive  the  miseries  we  were  entailing  on
posterity.     The  revelations  of  the  future  are  a  valuable  guide  for  the  present. — ^D.

Vers.  15, 16. — Sympathy  for  the  oppressed. '  It  is  supposed  that  oppressive  fonss  of
slavery  existed  among  the  neighbouring  nations ;  and  it  might  be  anticipated  that  the
oppressed  would  seek  asylum  among  the  people  of  Ood.  The  social  atmosphere  was  to
be  that  of  healthful  freedom,  which  is  fatal  to  inhuman  thraldom.

I.  We  see  social  kblationship  in  its  bxtrbmb  limits.  One  is  a  master;  one
is  a  slave.  One  has  risen  to  power ;  one  has  sunk  into  weakness.  Humanity  has
immense  capacity  for  rising  and  falling.  Such  abject  dependence  may  be  the  result
of  external  calamity,  or  it  may  be  the  effect  of  culpable  folly.

II.  This  pbopeietoeship  in  man  is  capable  op  obbat  abuse.  A  elave-master
must  have  great  self-restraint  if  he  does  not  abuse  his  purchased  power.  To  no  man
ought  irresponsible  control  over  his  fellows  be  entrusted.  The  temptation  to  encroach
on  human  rights  is  too  great  to  be  put  within  any  man's  reach.  Good  men  will  use
every  position  they  occupy  so  as  to  do  good  to  others ;  and  even  a  slave-holder  may  be
a  source  of  large  blessing.  On  the  other  hand,  coarse  and  cruel  men  can  turn  the
institution  into  a  nest  of  villainy.

UI.  Abuse  op  slavery  mat  become  selp-cubativb.  A  reflecting  master  will
calculate  that,  if  he  injure  his  slave,  he  injures  his  property — he  injures  himself.  But
in  moments  when  passion  is  dominant,  a  reckless  slave-holder  will  think  nothing  about
consequences.  Yet  his  slave  may  flee.  The  conimon  instincts  of  humanity  will  impel
disinterested  persons  to  aid  the  fugitive.  And  the  successful  flight  of  one  will
encourage  others  to  make  the  attempt.

IV.  The  oppressed  have  a  claim  upon  oub  fraotioal  sympathy.  The  Hebrews
could  not  easily  discover  the  real  merits  of  quarrel  between  a  foreign  slave  and  his
master.  But  they  would  know  that  a  slave  would  not  leave  his  master  and  his  home
without  sufBcient  cause.  It  was  a  precarious  chance  how  an  alien  slave  would  find  a
livelihood.  Therefore  the  refugee  had  a  claim  upoi.  the  Hebrews'  sympathy.  The
oppressed  of  every  land  have  a  large  place  in  the  heart  of  God,  and  every  friend  of  God
will  strive  to  imitate  his  deeds.  Emmanuel's  land  is  to  be  the  land  of  liberty.  Liberty
may  not  suddenly  be  given  to  every  man,  in  any  condition  of  mind ;  yet  liberty  is
man's  birthright — his  true  inheritance ;  for  this  he  is  to  prepare.  A  man  is  dwarfed,
stunted,  deformed,  if  he  be  not  free. — D.

Ver.  18. —  Unacceptable  offerings.'  The  value  of  religious  offerings  in  God's  sight  is
not  measured  by  their  magnitude,  nor  by  splendour,  but  by  the  spiritual  motive  that
originates  them.

I.  God  has  no  need  op  human  oppebings.  He  is  absolutely  independent  of  his
creatures.  "  The  gold  and  silver  "  are  already  his.  If  he  had  need  of  these  things,
he  would  create  them.  The  advantage  of  religious  offerings  belongs  to  man.  'tko
offerer  is  the  party  blest.  Spiritual  benefits  (not  to  be  measured  or  weighed  in  earthly
balances)  are  obtained  in  exchange.

IL  Ill-ootten  sains  abe  by  hdi  bbjbotbd.  To  accept  such  would  be  to  connive
at  wickedness.  It  is  often  for  this  profane  end  that  men  bring  them.  They  hope
thereby  to  make  the  residue  the  more  safe,  and  a  base  calling  the  more  respectable.  In
a  word,  they  desire  to  take  God  into  unhallowed  partnership  with  themselves.  To
him  this  can  be  only  abomination — a  stench  in  his  nostrils.

lilt  Relisious  offbbinos  abb  measured  by  theib  hobal  wobth.  The  mite  of
the  widow  was  estimated  by  the  genuine  love  that  inspired  it.  It  was  a  solid  nugget
of  spiritual  affection.  Seldom  has  the  love  of  the  human  heart  been  so-  completely
converted  into  a  material  gift.  It  was  but  one  remove  from  creation.  That  widow
would  have  poured  out  her  very  soul  in  creating  gifts  for  God  if  she  might.  It  is  this
sterling  and  practical  love  which  God  values.  Offerings  that  are  not  the  exponents  of
grateful  feeling  are  nothing  worth.  God  has  a  scale  of  moral  aritbmetifl,  and  all
religious  offerings  are  placed  in  the  balances  of  the  sanctuary, — D.

Vers.  19,  20. — Usury  lawful  and  unlawful.  From  all  conduct  the  element
of  selfishness  is  to  be  eliminated.    All  forms  of  honourable  commerce  are  permitted,


CB.  XZUL  1—25.] .         THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  379

because,  while  the  end  is  gain,  it  is  not  solely  gain ;  seller  and  buyer  both  obtain
advantage.

I.  OuB  CONDUCT  IS  TO  BE  BEQULATED  BY  RELATIONSHIP.  Kindly  feeling  is  due  unto
all  men.  We  should  honour  man  as  man.  Yet  the  conduct  which  is  commendaWe  to
a  stranger  is  not  commendable  to  a  father.  According  to  the  degree  of  propinquity
should  be  the  degree  of  affection.  A  brother  has  claims  upon  us  which  a  stranger
has  not.  Our  stock  of  affection  is  limited;  we  are  to  bestow  it  on  most  suitable
objects.    Our  capacity  for  doing  good  is  measurable;  we  must  expend  it  with  care.

II.  Monet  gain  is  not  the  business  of  life.  Ttiere  are  occupations  nobler  than
money-getting.  Contentment  is  better  than  gold.  The  culture  of  the  mind  is  better.
The  discipline  of  the  moral  powers  is  better.  Brotherly  kindness  is  better.  Tlie
diffusion  of  knowledge  is  better.  Earthly  prosperity  is  to  be  hailed  especially  as  a
condition  for  doing  good.  To  have,  and  yet  to  refuse  to  help,  is  a  sin.  That  man's
guld  is  a  curse.

III.  Yet  MONET  GAIN,  within  proper  limits,  is  wise  and  honourable.  Properly
viewed,  moderate  usury  is  but  a  species  of  commerce.  If  with  my  loan  of  a  thousand
pounds  a  shrewd  merchant  makes  a  gain  of  a  hundred  pounds  in  addition,  it  is  just
that  I  should  receive  a  part  thereof,  as  the  earning  of  my  loan.  If  one  has  money
capital  and  another  has  skill  and  a  third  has  time,  it  is  simply  equitable  that  the
temporal  earnings  of  the  partnership  should  be  divided,  in  some  proportion,  among  all.
If  I  obtain  fnir  usury  for  the  use  of  my  money  from  honest  traders,  I  have  power  to
help  impoverished  brethren  to  an  extent  I  could  not  otherwise.  God  had  not  intended
that  the  Hebrews  should  be  a  commercial  nation.  Their  business  was  to  be  witneis-
bearers  to  ths  world  of  heavenly  truth. — D.

Vers.  21 — 23. — The  place  of  vows.  It  is  not  obligatory  to  make  vows ;  it  is  obligatory
to  fulfil  them.  We  are  often  free  to  contract  an  obligation  ;  we  are  not  free  to  violate
it.     A  man  is  not  bound  to  marry  ;  having  married,  he  is  bound  to  cherish  his  wife.

I.  Vows  IMPLT  SPECIAL  ACTS  OF  KINDNESS  ON  THE  PAKT  OP  GoD.  The  Ordinary
course  of  God's  bounty  baflSes  verbal  description.  The  forethought,  the  active  energy,
the  well-laid  plans,  the  unslumbering  attention,  the  changeless  affection,  which  are
required  for  the  preservation  of  human  life,  no  language  can  express.  But  this  is  not
all  that  God  does  for  us.  Tn  times  of  unusual  perplexity,  special  guidance  is  often
vouchsafed  to  us.  When  surrounding  events  seemed  most  adverse  to  our  interests,  in
answer  to  prayer,  sudden  deliverance  has  come.  A  precious  life  was  in  jeopardy :
human  help  was  unavailing ;  but  God  graciously  interposed,  and  midnight  suddenly
became  a  summer  noon.

II.  Vows  iMPLT,  ON  OUR  PART,  DEFECTIVE  piETT.  Vows  are  made  under  the
influence  of  excessive  fear  or  from  an  influx  of  sudden  joy.  In  a  time  of  sharp  distress,
a  man  will  put  himself  under  special  obligation,  if  God  will  grant  his  request.  Or,
when  some  expected  good  has  fallen  to  one's  lot,  in  the  impulse  of  sudden  gladness  we
vow  to  devote  some  special  offering  unto  God.  Now,  this  is  not  wrong.  Still  there  is
something  better.  It  is  better  to  be  always  in  a  frame  of  trustful  feeling,  so  that  we
may  welcome  whatever  God  ordains,  and  realize  that  what  God  does  is  best.  It  is
better  to  rely  upon  his  promise  that  help  shall  come  in  times  of  need  I  It  is  better  to
cultivate  the  habit  of  frequent  offerings  to  God's  cause,  so  that  no  vow  is  needed  to
prick  us  up  to  the  full  discharge  of  duty.  The  vow  implies  that  we  cannot  trust  our-
selves at  all  times  to  give  to  God  his  due.  Therefore  our  endeavour  should  be  to
cultivate  a  childlike  and  a  steadfast  faith.  It  is  good  that  the  "heart  be  established
with  grace."

III.  Vows  CREATE  FOB  UB  A  NEW  OBLioATioif.  Having  made  a  debt,  we  are  bound
to  pay  it ;  but  it  is  better  not  to  accumulate  a  debt.  Men  lay  a  trap  to  catch  them-
selves. Conscious  of  deficient  trust  and  love  towards  God,  they  take  advantage  of  some
favourable  state  of  feeling  to  make  new  obligations  from  which  it  shall  be  diflScult  to
escape.  In  their  better  moods  of  mind  tliey  create  new  motives  and  new  sanctions  for
religioM  conduct,  which  they  cannot  remove  when  the  better  feeling  has  vanished.
'Ihey  use  the  rising  tide  to  bear  their  barque  away.  They  utilize  summer  piety  to
provide  for  winter  coldness.  But  having  framed  a  religious  vow,  truth  requires  that  it
should  be  scrupulously  kept.    To  violate  a  vow  would  injure  our  own  soul's  life —


380  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEROXOMY,  [en-  xxiv.  1—22.

would  deaden  and  stupefy  conscience,  would  justly  provoke  our  God.  No  common  rin
is  this, — D.

Vers.  24,  25. — Possession  of  earthly  things  only  partial.  The  mode  and  condition  of
human  life  in  this  world  serve  a  moral  purpose.  A  material  body  requires  material
fdod ;  material  food  implies  material  possessions.  The  use  of  these  affords  fine  scope
for  the  development  of  many  virtues.  Without  material  possessions,  selfishness  would
scarcely  he  possible ;  nor  could  some  moral  qualities,  as  generosity,  find  a  field  for
exercise.

I.  Babthlt  estate  admits  only  ot  a  partiai.  possession.  We  cannot  retain
for  our  exclusive  use  the  beauty  of  the  hills,  or  the  fragrance  of  the  flowers  within
territory  called  "  our  own."  It  is  not  possible  for  us  to  appropriate  to  our  personal  use
all  theproduots  of  our  fields.  Restrict  the  enjoyment  as  we  may,  we  can  succeed  only
to  a  limited  extent.  And  why  should  we  make  the  attempt?  It  adds  immensely  to
our  real  pleasure  to  share  the  products  with  others.  Indiscriminate  appropriation  of
harvests  would  do  good  to  no  one.  It  would  diminish  productiveness.  It  would  create
waste;  it  would  promote  idleness.  But  profuse  generosity  is  not  only  pleasurable:
it  is  profitable.  We  gain  the  esteem  of  men.  The  whole  community  bands  together
to  protect  our  crops.     God  smiles  on  our  fields  and  our  toil.

II.  HUNOEB  HAS   DNQUESTIONABLK    CLAIM  ON  NATUBE'S  PB0DUCT8.        Be  OUr   skilful

labour  to  secure  a  harvest  what  it  may,  the  largest  possible,  yet  we  cannot  forget  that
God  too  has  contributed  largely  to  make  our  fields  productive.  In  God's  contribution  to
the  result,  his  poor  ones  ought  to  share.  Lest  the  ordinary  philanthropy  of  men  might
not  suffice  for  this  need  of  poverty,  God  himself  has  taken  the  poor  under  his  sheltering
wing ;  he  has  become  their  Champion,  he  has  proclaimed  a  law  for  the  protection  of  the
needy.  Inasmuch  as  God  retains  absolute  proprietorship  over  all  created  things,  and
counts  the  richest  men  as  h'.s  chief  stewards,  he  has  fullest  right  to  determine  on  what
conditions  his  bounty  shall  be  enjoyed.  When  man  has  added  his  labour  to  the  result,
when  he  has  garnered  his  crops,  the  condition  is  changed ;  but  so  long  as  it  ia  standing
in  the  field,  hunger  may  find  a  meal.

III.  Though  hunger  has  a  claim,  covetousness  has  none.  The  labourer  or
the  weary  traveller  had  a  statutory  right  to  relieve  his  existing  hunger ;  he  had  no
right  to  carry  any  fruit  or  corn  away.  This  would  be  to  abuse  a  precious  privilege.
"  Thus  far  might  tliey  go,  and  no  farther."  The  path  of  obedience  always  has  been
narrow.  Here  was  a  test  of  trust  in  God.  He  who  has  provided  a  meal  for  the
hungry  man  to-day  can  also  provide  another  meal  to-morrow.  Or,  if  one  door  is  closed,
cannot  God  open  another  ?  Covetousness  is  suicidal.  In  the  long  run  it  defeats  its
own  ends.  Careful  obedience  is  a  firstfruit  of  genuine  trust.  Give  a  bad  man  an  inch,
and  he  will  take  an  ell.  By  this  he  may  be  known.  But  a  good  man  is  as  careful  of
another  man's  possessions  as  of  his  own.  This  is  but  another  outcome  of  the  command,
"  Thoa  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  u  thyself,"— D.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXrV.
Laws  bespeoting  Divorce,  against  Man-
stealing  AND  Injustice.
Vers.  1 — i. — Of  divorce.  If  a  man  pnt
away  his  wife  because  she  did  not  any
longer  please  him,  and  she  became  the  wife
of  another  man,  by  whom  also  she  was  put
away,  or  from  whom  she  was  severed  by  his
death,  the  first  husband  might  not  remarry
her,  for  that  would  be  an  abomination  in
the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  would  bring  sin  on
the  land.     This  is  not  a  law  sanctioning  or


regulating  divorce;  that  is  simply  aisnmed
as  what  might  occur,  and  what  is  here
regulated  is  the  treatment  by  the  first
husband  of  a  woman  who  has  been  divorced
a  second  time.

Vers.  1 — i. — These  verses  should  be  read
as  one  continuous  sentence,  of  which  the
protasis  is  in  vers.  1 — 3,  and  the  apodosis  ia
ver.  4,  thus :  "  If  a  man  hath  taken  a  wife,
and  married  her,  and  it  come  to  pass  that
she  doth  not  find  favour  in  his  eyes,  because
of  some  uncleanness  in  her,  and  he  hath
written  her  a  bill  of  divorcement,  and  given
it  in  her  hand,  and  sent  her  out  of  his  houae ;


OH.  rxiv.  1—22.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


38\


and  if  8he  hath  departed  out  of  his  house,  and
hath  gone  and  become  another  man's ;  and
if  the  latter  husband  hate  her,  and  write  her
a  bill  of>  divorcement,  and  give  it  in  her
hand,  and  send  her  out  of  his  house;  or  if
the  latter  husband  who  took  her  to  be  his
wife,  die :  her  former  husband,  who  sent  her
away,  may  not  take  her  again  to  be  his
wife,"  etc.

Yer.  1. — Beoause  he  hath  found  some  nn-
eleanness  in  her  j  literally,  a  thing  or  matter
of  nakedness,  i.e.  some  shameful  thing,  some-
tuing  disgraceful;  LXX.,  So'XW"'  ^pSy/ta:
Vulgate,  "  aliquam  foeditatem."  In  the  Tar-
gum  of  Onkelos,  the  expression  is  explained
by  Djna  nT3j;j  "aliquid  foailitatis"  (London
Polyglot);  "  iniquitas  rei  aliouju8"(Buxtorf );
"  the  transgression  of  a  [Divine]  word "
(Levi).  On  this  the  school  of  Hillel  among
the  rabbini  put  the  interpretation  that  a  man
might  divorce  his  wife  for  auy  unbecoming-
ness  (Mishna, '  Gittin,'  ix.  10),  or  indeed  for
any  cause,  as  the  Pharisees  in  our  Lord's
day  taught  (Matt.  xix.  3).  .  The  school  of
Ehammai,  on  the  other  hand,  taught  that
only  for  something  disgraceful,  such  as
adultery,  could  a  wife  be  divorced  (Lightfoot,
•  Hor.  Heb.  et  Talm.,'  on  Matt.  v.  31,  0pp.,
torn,  ii  290).  Adultery,  however,  cannot
be  supposed  here  because  that  was  punish-
able with  death.  A  bill  of  divorcement;
literally,  a  writing  of  excision ;  the  man  and
woman  having  by  marriage  become  one  flesh,
the  divorce  of  tlie  woman  was  a  cutting  of
hei  off  from  the  one  whole.  Lightfoot  has
given  (loc.  eit.)  different  forms  of  letters  of
divorce  in  use  among  the  Jews  (see  also
Maimouides, '  De  Divortiis,'  ch.  iv.  §  12).

Ver.  4. — The  woman  was  held  to  bo
defiled  by  her  second  marriage,  and  thus  by
implication,  the  marrying  of  a  woman  who
had  been  divorced  was  pronounced  immoral,
as  is  by  our  Lord  explicitly  asserted  (Matt.
V.  32).  The  prohibition  of  a  return  of  the
wife  to  her  fir^t  husband,  as  well  as  the
necessity  of  a  formal  bill  of  divorcement
being  given  to  the  woman  before  she  could
be  sent  away,  could  not  fail  to  be  checks  on
the  licence  of  divorce,  as  doubtless  they
were  intended  to  be.

Ver.  5. — A  man  newly  married  was  to  be
exempt  from  going  to  war,  and  was  not  to
have  any  public  burdens  imposed  on  him  for
a  year  after  his  marriage.  Charged  with  auy
business ;  literally,  there  shall  not  pass  upon
him  for  any  matter  ;  te.  there  shall  not  be
lidd  on  him  anything  in  respect  of  any
biisinesi.  This  is  explained  by  what  follows.
Free  shall  he  be  for  his  house  for  one  year;
t.».  no  public  burden  shall  be  laid  on  him,
that  he  may  be  free  to  devote  himself  entirely
to  his  household  relations,  and  oe  aDie  to
cheer  and  gladden  his  wife  (comp.  ch.  xx.  7).
"  By  this  IftW  Uod  showed  how  he  approved


of  holy  wedlock  (as  by  the  former  he  showed
his  hatred  of  unjust  divorces)  when,  to  en-
courage the  newly  married  against  the
cumbrances  which  that  estate  bringetb  with
it,  and  to  settle  their  love  each  to  other,  he
exempted  those  men  from  all  wars,  cares,
and  expenses,  that  they  might  the  more
comfortably  provide  for  their  owu  estate"
(Ainsworth).

Vers.  6 — 14. — Various  prohibitions.

Ver.  6. — ITo  man  shall  take  the  nether  or
the  upper  millstone  to  pledge;  rather,  the
handmiU  and  the  upper  millstone  (literally,
tlie  rider)  shall  not  be  taken  (literally,  one
shall  not  take)  in  pledge.  Neither  the  mill
itself  nor  the  upper  millstone,  the  removal
of  which  would  render  the  mill  useless,  was
to  be  taken.  The  upper  millstone  is  still
called  the  rider  by  the  Arabs  (Hebrew
rechebh,  Arabic  rekkab).  For  he  taketh  a
man's  life  to  pledge ;  oi for  (thereby)  life  itself
is  pledged;  if  a  man  were  deprived  of  that  by
which  food  for  the  sustaining  of  life  could  bo
prepared,  his  life  itself  would  be  imperilled
(cF.  Job.  xxii.  6 ;  Prov.  xxii.  27 ;  Amos  ii.  8).

Ver.  7. — Against  man-stealing:  repetition,
with  expansion,  of  the  law  in  Exod.  xxi.  Iti.

Vers.  8,  9. — The  law  concerning  the
leprosy  is  in  Lev.  xlii.,  xiv.  By  this  law
the  priests  are  directed  how  to  proceed  with
those  afflicted  with  leprosy ;  and  here  the
people  are  counselled  by  Moses  to  follow
the  directions  of  the  priests  in  this  case,
however  painful  it  might  be  for  them  to
submit  to  the  restrictions  that  would  be
thereby  imposed  upon  them,  remembering
what  the  Lord  did  to  Miriam  the  sister  of
Moses,  how  even  she  was  separated  from  the
vamp  by  the  express  command  of  God  until
she  was  healed  (Numb.  xii.  14).  Michaelis,
Keil,  and  others,  following  the  Vulgate
("Observa  diligenter  ne  incurras  plagam
leprae  sed  facies  qusecunque  docuerint  te
sacerdotes "),  understand  this  passage  as
inculcating  obedience  to  the  priests,  lest
leprosy  should  be  incurred  as  a  punishment
for  disobedience.  But  it  is  improbable  that
a  g(neral  counsel  to  submit  to  the  priests
should  be  introduced  among  the  special
counsels  here  given;  and  besides,  the
formula  ?  ipz'r)  means,  "  Take  heed  to  your-
self in  respect  of"  (cf.  2  Sam.  xx.  10 ;  Jer.
xvii.  21),  rather  than  "  Beware  of,"  or  "  Be
on  your  guard  against."

Vers.  10 — 13. — ^If  one  had  to  take  a  pledge
from  another,  he  was  not  to  go  into  the
house  of  the  latter  and  take  what  he  thought
fit ;  he  must  stand  without,  aud  al^ow  tho
debtor  to  bring  to  him  what  he  saw  u:ieet  to
offer.  He  might  stand  outside  and  summon
this  debtor  to  produce  his  pledge,  but  be
was  not  insolently  to  enter  the  house  and
lay  hands  on  any  part  of  the  owner's  pre-
pay.   To  stand  outside  and  call  it  still


382


THE  BOOK   OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  XXIT.  1—22.


a  common  mode  of  seeking  access  to  a
person  in  his  own  house  or  apartment
among  the  Arabs,  and  is  regarded  as  the
only  respectful  mode.  There  would  be  thus
a  mitigation  of  the  severity  of  the  exaction,
the  tendency  of  which  would  be  to  preserve
good  feeling  between  the  parties.  If  the
debtor  was  needy,  and  being  such  could  give
in  pledge  only  some  necessary  article,  such
as  his  upper  garment  in  which  he  slept  at
night,  the  pledge  was  to  ho  returned  ere
nightfall,  that  the  man  might  sleep  in  his
own  raiment,  and  have  a  grateful  feeling
towards  his  creditor.  In  many  parts  of  the
East,  with  the  Arabs  notably,  it  is  customary
for  the  poor  to  sleep  in  their  outer  garment.
"  During  the  day  the  poor  while  at  work
can  and  do  dispense  with  this  outside
raiment,  but  at  night  it  is  greatly  needed,
even  In  summer.  This  furnishes  a  good
reason  why  this  lort  of  pledge  should  be
restored  before  night "  (Thomson,  '  Land
and  the  Boob,' i  192,  500).  The  earlier
legislation  (Ezod.  zxii.  25,  26)  is  evidently
assumed  here  as  well  known  by  the  people.
It  shall  be  righteousness  onto  tii6e  (see  on
ch.  vi.  25).

Vers.  14, 15. — The  wage  of  the  labourer
was  to  be  punctually  paid,  whether  he  were
an  Israelite  or  a  foreigner  (cf.  Lev.  xix.  13 ;
the  law  there  is  repeated  here,  with  a  special
reference  to  the  distress  which  the  with-
holding of  the  hire  from  a  poor  man  even
for  a  day  might  occasion).

Yer.  16. — Among  heathen  nations  it  was
common  for  a  whole  family  to  be  involved
in  the  penalty  inOorred  bythe  head  of  the


family,  and  to  be  put  to  death  along  with
him  (cf.  Esth.  ix.  13,  14;  Herod.,  iii.  118,
119  ;  Ammian.  Marcell.,  xxiii.  6 ;  Ourtius,
vi.  11,  20;  Olaudian, '  In  Eutrop.,' iL  478 ;
Cicero,  'Bpist.  ad  Brut,'  12,  15).  Such
severity  of  retribution  is  here  prohibited  in
the  penal  code  of  the  Israelites.  Though
God,  in  the  exercise  of  his  absolute  sove-
reignty, might  visit  the  sins  of  the  parent
upon  the  children  (Exod.  xx.  5),  earthly
judges  were  not  to  assume  this  power.  Only
the  transgressor  himself  was  to  bear  the
penalty  of  his  sin  (of.  2  Kings  xiv.  6).

Vers.  17,  18. — The  law  against  perverting
the  right  of  strangers,  widows,  and  orphans  U
here  repeated  from  Exod.  xxii.  20,  21 ;  xxiii.
9,  with  the  addition  that  the  raiment  of  the
widow  was  not  to  be  taken  in  pledge.  To
enforce  this,  the  people  are  reminded  that
they  themselves  as  a  nation  had  been  in  the
condition  of  strangers  and  bondmen  in
Egypt  (cf:  Lev.  xix.  83,  Si).

Vers.  19— 22.— (Cf.  Lev.  xix.  9, 10 ;  xxiii.
23.)  Not  only  was  no  injustice  to  be  done
to  the  poor,  but,  out  of  the  abundance  of
those  in  better  estate,  were  they  to  be  helped.

Ver.  21. — Thou  shalt  not  glean  it  after-
ward; literally.  Thou  shalt  rwt  glean  after
thee,  i.e.  after  thou  hast  reaped  and  gathered
for  thyself.  It  is  still  the  custom  among
the  Arabs  for  the  poor  to  be  allowed  to  gather
the  berries  that  may  be  left  on  the  olive
trees  after  tliey  have  been  beaten  and  the
main  produce  carried  off  by  the  owner.  All
the  injunctions  in  this  section  are  adapted
to  preserve  relations  of  brotherlineu  and
love  among  the  people  of  the  Lord.


HOMILETIOa

Vers.  l—9.—P»rmhs{ve  legislation.  No  treatment  of  this  pansa^  ean  he  sppropriate
which  does  not  set  it  in  the  light  throvyn  upon  it  by  Matt.  xii.  1 — 12.  The  heading
we  have  given  to  this  outline  indicates  a  point  on  which  special  stress  should  be  laid
whenever  an  expositor  has  occasion  to  refer  to  it.  In  the  course  of  time,  men  had  come
to  regard  this  passage  in  the  light  of  a  command.  Hence  the  wording  of  the  question  in
Matt,  xix,  7.  But  our  Lord  informs  us  that  it  was  simply  permtssjVe.  Divorce,  under
the  circumstances  here  named,  was  tolerated  a  while  by  Moses  owing  to  "  the  hardness
of  men's  hearts,"  but  that  the  original  Divine  arrangement  contemplated  the  indis-
solubility of  marriage.  The  entire  principle  of  the  Mosaic  Law  was  that  of  educating  the
people  out  of  a  semi-degraded  state  into  something  higher.  Its  method  of  doing  this
was  by  giving  the  people  the  best  legislation  they  could  bear ;  tolerating  some  ill  for  a
while  rather  than  forcing  on  the  people  revolutionary  methods.  The  more  gentle  and
gracious,  though  the  slower  process,  was  to  sow  the  seed  of  higher  good,  and  to  let  it
have  time  to  grow.  The  following  Divine  teaching  on  marriage  may  well  be  brought
forward  with  this  passage  as  a  basis.

L  That  the  marriage  bond  is  holy  in  the  eye  of  God,  and  ought  ever  to  be  recognized
as  very  sacred  by  man.

n.  That  by  God's  own  declared  appointment  tlus  most  sacred  of  all  nature's  tie*  is
indissoluble.

IIL  That  howerer,  owing  to  the  degeneracjr  of  national  habit  and  thought,  civil


OH.  XXIV.  1—22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY..  383

Ipgislation  may  suffer  the  legal  cessation  of  the  marria:;e  bond,  yot  it  can  in  no  case  be
levered,  save  by  death,  without  heinous  sin  on  one  side  or  on  both.

IV.  That  the  claims  of  married  life  are  such  that,  with  them,  not  even  the  exigencies
of  military  service  are  unduly  to  interfere  (ver.  5).

v.  That  the  highest  and  purest  enjoyments  of  wedded  life  come  to  perfection  only
when  it  is  entered  on  and  spent  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  law  was  but  a
wcuSayayis  els  Xpttrrhy  (see  1  Cor.  vii.  39).

Vers.  6 — 22. — Neighbourly  love  and  good  will  to  he  cultivated  in  detail.  One  golden
thread  runs  through  all  the  varied  precepts  of  this  chapter.  They  are  most  interesting
illustrations,  one  and  all,  of  the  spirit  of  humanity  and  of  far-reaching  wisdom  which
pervades  the  Mosaic  Law.  The  following  headings  include  the  gist  of  the  several
iujunctions  hero  given,  and  show  also  their  relation  to  each  other.  1.  Man's  "in-
humanity to  man  "  is  sternly  restrained.  No  Israelite,  however  jioor,  is  to  be  kidnapped
and  sold  into  foreign  slavery  (ver.  7).  2.  No  one  might  be  deiirived  of  the  machinery,
tools,  or  implements  on  the  use  of  which  his  daily  bread  depended,  for  a  pledge
(ver.  6).  It  is  doubtless  to  this  humane  regulation  that  we  owe  the  ancient  common
law  of  this  realm,  that  no  man  shall  be  distrained  of  the  necessaries  of  his  trade  or
profession  as  long  as  there  are  other  things  on  which  the  distraint  can  be  made.  3.  A
man's  house  is  to  be  his  castle.  No  one  may  enter  it,  even  to  fetch  a  pledge  (vers.
10,  11).  The  exception  to  this  is  in  the  case  of  leprosy,  in  which  instance  the  priest
had  a  right  to  enter  a  man's  hoiise  to  see  into  the  state  of  things,  i.e.  home  is  to  be
inviolable  save  where  the  public  security  demands  it  otherwise.  Hence  a  special
caution  is  given  to  avoid  anything  which  might  bring  such  a  plague  upon  them.  The
case  of  Miriam  should  be  before  their  eyes  (vers.  8, 9).  4.  If  the  poor  man  has  pledged
that  in  which  he  needs  to  sleep,  it  is  to  be  restored  to  him  before  sundown  (ver.  13).
5.  Hired  servants  were  not  to  be  oppiessed,  but  were  to  have  fair  and  even  generous
treatment  (vers.  14, 15).  6.  The  spirit  of  the  checks  upon  blood-revenge,  which  are
found  in  connection  with  the  cities  of  refuge  (see  Homily  thereon),  is  never  to  be
v:olated,  and  no  one  is  to  suffer  any  civil  penalty  on  account  of  another's  sin.  Justice
is  to  operate  always  (ver.  16).  7.  No  advantage  is  ever  to  be  taken  of  the  stranger,
the  fatherless,  and  the  widow.  They  who  are  de|irived  of  earthly  helpers  on  whom  they
might  lean  are  to  find  their  safeguard  in  the  sentiments  of  honour  and  benevolence
which  pervade  the  people  (vers.  17,  18).  8.  Not  only  is  no  wrong  to  be  done  to  them,
but  their  aid  and  comfort  are  to  be  specially  studied,  in  the  time  of  harvest,  and  in  the
gathering  in  of  the  olive  and  the  grape  (vers.  19 — 22).  9.  The  reason  for  such  cultiva-
tion of  kindness  to  others  is  that  God  had  been  kind  to  them  (vers.  18,  22).

I.  The  requirements  of  God  in  the  social  relations  of  life  are  righteousness,  justice,
mercy,  love,  and  good  will  to  all.

'11.  Qoi  has  fenced  round  the  poor,  the  weak,  the  widow,  and  the  fatherleia  with  a
special  guard.

III.  A  wrong  done  by  man  to  man  is  sin  against  God.

IV.  The  inspiring  motive  for  our  showing  love  to  others  is  the  love  of  Gi>d  to  us
(c£  Micah  tL  4  9>


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1—4. — Divorce.  The  Hebrew  Law,  "  for  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts,"  found
it  necessary  to  "  suffer  "  many  things  not  approved  of  absolutely  (Matt.  xix.  8).  Divorce
was  one  of  these.  It  was  permitted  on  grounds  of  strong  personal  dislike  (ver.  3).  The
Law  was  inapplicable  to  adultery,  that  being  judged  a  capital  offence.  While  per-
mitting divorce,  Moses  obviously  aims  at  restricting  it,  and  shows,  by  his  modes  of
expression,  how  alien  this  rupture  of  the  marriage  bond  is  to  the  original  institution.
We  may  learn —

L  That  the  eight  of  divorce  is  okb  to  be  strictly  quakdkd.  Divorce,  even
where  most  justified,  is  a  great  evil.  It  is  the  rupture  of  a  tic  intended  by  the  Creator
to  he  indissoluble.  Adultery  wairants  it,  but  it  must  be  deemed  not  the  least  part  ol
the  evil  that  so  unhappy  a  cause  for  the  dissolutiou  of  marriage  should  exist.    The


884  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch  xxiv.  1—22.

revelations  of  the  divorce  courts  are  most  injurious  to  public  morality.  Facilities  foi
divorce,  such  as  some  advocate,  would  lead  to  serious  mischiefs.  Besides  being  wrong
in  principle,  ihey  would  create  inconstancy,  lead  to  domestic  unhappiness,  inflict
hardship  on  children,  prevent  efforts  being  made  to  mend  matters  by  forbearance  and
compliance.  Frequent  divorces  blunt  the  sense  of  the  sacredness  of  the  marriage
union,  and  so  lead  to  licentiousness.  "  At  the  time  when  divorces  were  most  frequent
among  the  Romans  marria;^es  were  most  rare;  and  Augustus  was  obliged,  by  penal
laws,  to  force  men  of  fashion  into  the  married  state  "  (Hume).  Moses  restrains  divorce
thus  far  that  he  requires  it  to  take  place :  1.  By  means  of  a  legal  document.  2.  Fo?
reason  given.  3.  He  debars  the  man  divorcing  from  remarrying  the  woman  divorced
if,  in  the  interval,  she  has  been  married  to  another.  The  Christian  law  recognizes  nc
legitimate  ground  of  divurce  save  adultery  (Matt.  v.  32).

II.  That  bight  views  on  divorce  abb  connected  with  a  sense  op  the  inhebent
SACREDNESS  OF  THE  MARRIAGE  RELATION.  TMs  IS  Suggested  by  the  terms  employed  in
ver.  4.  A  husband  is  prohibited  from  remarrying  his  divorced  wife  if  in  the  interval
she  has  been  the  wife  of  another,  and  the  ground  given  for  the  prohibition  is  that  "  she
is  defiled."  But  why  "defiled"?  The  expression  could  not  have  been  used  had  the
first  marriage  been  regarded  as  perfectly  nullified  by  the  legal  divorce.  The  statement
that  a  divorced  woman,  remarrying,  is  "  defiled,"  implies  that  deep  view  of  the  marriage
relation  given  in  Genesis  (ii.  24),  and  reiterated  by  Christ  (Matt.  xix.  3 — 10).  And
it  will  be  found,  in  practice,  that  light  views  of  the  sacredness  of  the  marriage  relation
invariably  work  in  the  diiection  of  increasing  facilities  for  divorce.  "The  sceptical
party  in  France  not  long  ago  proposed  to  make  marriage  dissoluble  at  the  pleasure  of
the  parties  whenever  the  woman  had  passed  the  age  at  which  child-bearing  was  no
longer  to  be  expected"  (R.  H.  Button,  in  Expositor,  January,  1881).  The  writer  just
quoted  ably  argues  that  strict  views  on  marriage,  and  divorce,  are  not  possible,  save
under  the  sanction  of  a  siipersensual  morality. — J.  0.

Ver.  5. — The  man  newly  married.  The  precept  is  in  addition  to  those  in  ch.  xx.
5 — 8.  It  provides  that  the  newly  married  man  shall  be  Kit  free  to  enjoy  the  relation
into  which  he  has  entered  for  a  whole  year,  not  being  retiuued  to  serve  in  war,  and  not
being  liable  to  be  called  from  home  on  public  business.  It  may  be  inserted  here  as
tending  to  prevent  divorces.  We  learn :  1.  That  it  is  the  duty  of  the  husband  to  love
and  cherish  the  wife  (Eph.  v.  29).  2.  That  it  is  the  interest  of  the  State  to  do  what  it
can  to  endear  the  marriage  i  elation.  3.  That  laws  should  be  framed  in  a  spirit  of
kindness,  and  with  consideration  for  the  happiness  of  the  subjects.  This  law  shows
kindly  consideration  for  the  wife,  (1)  in  not  depriving  her  of  the  husband  of  her  youth
in  the  mouths  of  their  early  love ;  (2)  in  allowing  time  for  the  husband's  affections  to
become  securely  fixed,  so  preventing  inconstancy. — J.  0.

Ver.  8. — Leprosy.  I.  A  judgment  to  be  dreaded.  Leprosy  is  viewed  here,  as
usually  in  Scripture :  \.  As  a  stroke  of  Divine  jwigment.  It  was  not  always  such
(Job  ii.).  Nor  did  the  stroke  of  Divine  judgment  always  take  this  form  (Uzzah,
Jeroboam,  Ananias,  etc.).  But  it  was  a  frequent  form  of  punishment  for  sins  of  a
theocratic  nature  (Uzziah,  Gehazi,  etc.).  It  is  seldom  safe  to  interpret  judgments
(Luke  xiii.  1 — 6),  but  we  may  expect  God's  stroke  in  some  way  to  fall  upon  ourselves
if  we  persistently  despise  his  laws.  2.  As  a  symbol  of  spiritual  corruption.  The  worst
penalty  with  which  God  can  visit  any  one  is  to  smite  him  with  soul  leprosy,  to  leave
sin  to  have  its  natural  dominion  over  him,  to  allow  its  corruption  to  work  and  spread
through  his  inner  man.

II.  A  WARNING  TO  BE  FONOERED.  They  are  bid  remember  the  case  of  Miriam.  We
do  well  to  lay  to  heart  the  instances  we  have  known  of  sin  working  out  punishment
and  death.  Miriam's  case  suggests  the  additional  thought  of  pardon  on  repentance,
and  of  the  prevalence  of  intercession  in  obtaining  forgiTeness  for  offences  (Numb.  xiL
9— 16).— J.  O.

Vers.  6 — IS. — TTie  treatment  of  the  poor.  The  helplessness  and  dependence  of  the
poor  expose  them  to  much  harsh  treatment.  The  poor  man  has,  however,  his  Friend
and  Judge  in  God,  whose  Law  here  steps  in  for  his  protection.    It  ordains —


CH.  xxiT.  1— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OJP   DEUTEEONOMY.  385

I.  That  the  necessaries  of  life  are  not  to  bb  takkm  from  hik.  The  millstone
(ver.  6)."  His  raiment,  whicli  if  talcen  in  pledge  is  to  be  restored  by  oightfall  (rera.
12,  13).  These  are  considerate  provisions.  It  is  the  excess  of  cruelty  to  press  law
against  a  man  to  the  extent  of  depriving  him  of  the  necessaries  of  life.  This  would
apply  to  needful  clothing,  to  a  bed,  to  cooking  utensils,  to  the  tools  by  which  he  earns
his  bread.  It  is  nearly  as  bad  to  receive  and  keep  these  things  in  pledge  or  pawn.
Help,  free  and  ungrudging,  should  be  forthcoming  to  all  honest  persons  in  need,  without
driving  them  to  such  straits.  If  men  will  not  work,  neither  should  they  eat  (2  Th'ess.
iii.  10),  but  while  this  rray  be  a  reason  for  refusing  to  support  them  in  their  indolence,
it  can  be  no  reason  for  helping  them  to  strip  themselves  of  the  necessaries  of  their
existence.  Instead  of  takiag  a  man's  tools  from  him,  he  should  rather  be  encouraged  to
retain  and  ply  them,  "  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  that  is  good,"  that  he  may
both  support  himself  and  "  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth  "  (Eph.  iv.  28).

II.  That  his  personal  freedom  is  to  be  respected.  (Ver.  7.)  No  strong  or  rich
neighbour  was  to  be  allowed  to  steal,  enslave,  or  sell  him.  The  stealing  of  a  man  was
punishable  with  death.  And  the  spirit  of  the  Law  carries  us  beyond  its  letter.  It
requires  that  we  respect  the  poor  man's  freedom  in  all  the  relations  of  his  life.  What-
ever the  degree  of  his  dependence,  it  does  not  entitle  another  to  force  his  convictions,  or
do  aught  that  would  interfere  with  the  exercise  of  his  rights  as  man  or  citizen.  Yet
how  often  is  compulsion  and  intimidation  applied  to  those  in  dependent  situations  to
compel  them  to  act,  not  as  their  consciences  approve,  but  as  their  superiors  desire  1  He
who  takes  advantage  of  a  man's  weakness  to  do  anything  of  the  kind  is  a, "  man-stealer  "
in  principle  and  at  heart.

III.  That  his  dwelling  is  not  to  bb  invadbd.  (Vers.  10,  11.)  The  fine  sense  of
justice,  the  delicacy  of  feeling,  in  these  precepts,  is  certainly  remarkable.  The  poor
man's  house  is  to  be  as  sacred  from  invasion  as  the  house  of  the  wealthy.  Even  bis
creditor  is  to  wait  outside,  and  let  the  man  fetch  as  his  pledge  what  he  can  best  spare.
We  are  taught  a  lesson  of  respect  for  the  dotniciliary  and  proprietary  rights  of  the  poor.
Many  act  as  if  the  homes  of  the  poor  were  not  entitled  to  have  their  privacy  respected
in  the  same  way  as  the  homes  of  the  rich.  The  Law  of  God  teaches  otherwise.  We
owe  it  to  God,  and  we  owe  it  to  the  humanity  which  is  in  our  poorer  brethren  as  weH
as  in  us,  that  we  treat  them  and  their  belongings  with  precisely  the  same  amount  of
respect  that  we  would  show  to  persons  in  a  better  social  position.  -

IV.  That  his  wages  are  to  bb  paid  with  eegdlaritt.  (Vers.  14, 15.)  Every
day,  the  text  says,  and  in  the  East  this  was  necessary.  During  the  Indian  famines  it
was  found  that  the  persuns  engaged  on  the  relief  works  had  to  be  paid  in  this  manner.
Great  suffering  was  .sometimes  experienced  from  the  neglect  of  the  rule.  The  law
extends  to  hired  service  of  all  kinds,  and  enjoins  in  principle  regularity  in  payment  of
wages.  A  like  principle  applies  to  the  payment  of  tradesmen's  accounts.  We  have
heard  tradesmen  complain  bitterly  of  the  inconvenience  to  which  they  were  subjected
from  the  singular  want  of  consideration  displayed  by  wealthy  families  in  this  particular.
Accounts  are  allowed  to  run  on,  and  payment  is  withheld,  not  from  want  of  ability  to
pay,  but  from  sheer  indolence  and  carelessness  in  attending  to  such  matters.  While  to
crave  payment  would,  on  the  tradesman's  part,  mean  the  forfeiture  of  custom. — J.  O.

Vera.  16 — 22. — Doing  justice  and  loving  merey.  I.  Bach  eaxn,  is  to  bear  rre  ows
BIN.  (Ver.  16.)  This  verse  lays  down  the  rule  of  human  jurisprudence.  Loss  and
suffering  to  the  innocent,  as  a  result  of  the  courseof  justice  inflicting  punishment  on  the
guilty,  cannot  nlways  be  avoidedi  But  this  is  an  incidental,  not  a  designed  result.
With  those  wider  movements  of  Divine  justice,  which  seem  to  turn  on  the  federal
constitution  of  the  race,  and  involve  different  principles,  human  justice  has  nothing  to
do.  The  rule  for  us  is  that  the  punishment  of  crime,  with  loss  and  suffering  resulting
therefrom,  is  to  be  confined  as  much  as  possible  to  the  gtiilty  person.

IT.  Justice  is  to  be  done  to  thb  weakest.  (Vers.  17,  18.)  The  stranger  and
fatherless  and  widow  are  again  taken  under  the  Law's  protection.  Their  right  is  not  to
be  perverted.  The  widow's  raiment  is  not  to  be  taken  in  pledge.  There  should  need
no  inducement  to  do  what  is  right,  but  Moses  reminds  the  Israelites  of  their  own
past  condition  as  bondmen.  Oppression  is  doubly  disgraceful  when  those  guilty  of  it
are  persons  who  have  themselves  tasted  its  bitterness,  or  who  have  themselves  been

DEUTERONOMY.  2  0


386  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMY.  [oh.  xxiv.  1— 22.

mercifully  dealt  with  (Matt,  xviii.  23 — 35).     We  cannot  sufficiently  admire  the  com-
bined justice  and  tenderness  of  these  Mosaic  precepts.

III.  Pbovision  is  to  be  lest  for  the  needy.  (Vers.  19 — 22.)  These  are  beautiful
rules.  The  Jews  were  under  the  Law,  but  it  was  a  Law  the  fulfilling  of  which  wag
"  love.''  The  variety  of  ways  in  which  the  Law  seeks  to  instil  love  into  the  hearts  of
the  chosen  people  would  form  a  study  eminently  suitable  for  the  pulpit.  The  poor  we
have  always  with  us,  and  they  should  be  often  in  our  thoughts.  (Southey's  poem,
'  The  Complaints  of  the  Poor.')  In  the  corn-field,  among  the  olives,  in  the  vineyard,
they  were  to  be  remembered.  When  the  wealthy  are  gathering  in  their  abundance,
thou  is  the  time  for  remembering  the  needy.  Thus  will  the  heart  be  kept  warm,
covetousness  checked,  our  own  happiness  best  secured,  the  wants  of  the  poor  supplied,
their  blessing  ubiaiued,  a  treasure  laid  up  in  heaven.  "  There  ia  that  scattereth,  and
yet  increaseth  "  (Prov.  xi.  24). — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 6. —  Tlie  rights  of  women.  The  tendency  of  the  true  religion  has  been  to
secure  and  respect  the  rights  of  women.  Now,  we  have  here  women's  rights  brought  under
notice  in  two  cases — in  a  case  of  separation,  and  in  a  case  of  war.  Moses,  "  because  of
the  hardness  of  their  hearts,"  allowed  divorce,  because  it  prevailed  to  a  lamentable
extent  in  society  in  his  time.  He  suffered  them  to  divorce  their  wives,  but  insisted  on
a  vfritten  divorce.  Among  other  nations  an  oral  divorce  was  sufficient,  and  so  a  divorce
might  be  from  the  fiimsiest  caprice.  Again,  Moses  forbade  any  coming  together  as  man
and  wife  again,  a  custom  which  prevails  among  the  Arabs  when  the  oral  divorce  is  so
lightly  undertaken.     Hence  we  notice  in  this  law  given  by  Moses —

I.  The  DivoECE  of  the  woman  must  be  deliberate  and  final.  Woman  was  not
to  be  the  toy  of  man's  caprice ;  she  was  not  to  be  lightly  sent  away,  and,  when  sent  away
by  the  husband  after  deliberately  writing  her  divorce,  she  was  never  to  be  taken  back
again.  In  this  way  Moses  really  consulted  the  ri.;hts  of  women.  They  had  a  right  to
a  deliberate  statement  of  the  grounds  of  their  divorce ;  they  had  also  a  right  to  be
protected  from  further  interference  on  the  part  of  their  former  husbands.  It  was  a  v\ise
expedient  considering  the  degeneracy  of  the  time.  It  is  an  improvement  assuredly  on
the  arrangements  of  Mahobiet.

Our  Lord  still  further  secured  the  rights  of  women  in  ordaining  that  nothing  but
infidelity  on  the  part  of  the  wife  should  dissolve  the  marriage  union  (Matt.  v.  32).

II.  Wab  must  not  bob  a  newly  married  wife  of  her  husband  ;  she  has  a  eight
TO  his  society  for  a  year  without  molestation.  This  was  placing  the  interests  of
a  single  woman  above  the  interests  of  the  State.  This  was  exalting  the  bride  to  a
throne  of  highest  honour  surely.  Other  systems  and  the  world  as  well  may  degrade
woman,  but  Grod's  Law  elevates  her  and  enthrones  her.

III.  Nob  is  she  through  her  husband's  difficulties  to  lose  eitheb  of  her  mill-
stones FOR  THE  GKiNDiNG  OF  THE  CORN.  Here  was  another  right  of  the  housewife.  No
legal  distraint  could  reach  the  little  mill  which  ground  the  corn  at  home  and  kept  the
wolf  from  the  door.

Thus  in  her  sorrows  and  in  her  joys  God  stood  her  Friend,  and  insisted  on  her  rights.
A  similar  shield  should  be  thrown  over  her  still.  It  is  by  securing  her  in  her  rights  at
home  that  woman's  cause  shall  be  advanced.  She  is  intended  to  be  a  queen  in  the
household.  Everything  that  makes  her  position  there  more  secure,  everything  that
makes  the  home  sacred  even  from  the  intiusion  of  a  national  war  at  certain  times,
everything  that  makes  her  feel  the  foundation  firm  below  her, — is  in  the  interests  of
public  weal.  But  if  she  is  carelessly  thrown  into  the  competition  with  the  stronger  sex,
she  will  get  deteriorated.  The  rights  of  women  constitute  a  much  longer  subject  than
even  Mr.  Mill  has  made  it.*    May  the  interpreter  in  due  season  appear  I — B.  M.  E.

Ver.  7. — Man-stecAing  a  capital  crime.  We  have  already  noticed  the  merciful
fugitive  law  which  forbade  any  one  to  restore  a  runaway  to  his  master.  That  was
the  cure  of  existing  evil.  Here  we  have  the  prevention,'  which  is  better  still.  For
man-stealing  and  man-selling  are  the  origin  of  slavery,  and  the  Lord  attaches  to  this
the  penalty  of  death.  As  Cheever  said  of  it,  "  God  be  praised  for  this  law  1  ft
strikes  through  and  through  the  vitals  of  this  sin."  ^

•  Qf.  his  '  Subjection  of  Women.'  '  '  God  against  Slavery,'  p.  110.


en.  TXfr.  1— 22.J  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  387

I.  LiBBBTT  HUST  BE  MAIMTAINliD  UITOEB'  THE   PEKAL    SANCTION  OF  DEATH  TO   HIM

WHO  INVADES  IT.  The  ruffian  who  would  steal  and  sell  a  brother  deserves  to  die.  Hii
treason  against  the  liberty  of  his  fellow  is  an  unpardonable  sin  against  society,  and  he
should  get  no  quarter.  No  wonder  men  have  fought  and  died  for  liberty  when  God
surrounds  it  with  such  tremendous  sanctions.

II.  How   MtlCH   SREATER     THE    CRIME   OF   BBINOINO  MEN   INTO   SPIRITUAL    BONDAQE 1

And  this  is  done  dailyi  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  power  exercised  by  superstitious
priesthoods  over  their  devotees?  Is  it  not  "spiritual  despotism"?.  And  should  not
the  crime  of  man-stealing  awake  a  suspicion  in  such  hearts  that  their  procedure  is  the
exact  analogue  in  the.  spiritual  sphere  ?  It  should  be  combated  and  resisted  unto  the
death,  as  destroying  that  heritage  of  liberty  with  which  the  Lord  has  endowed  all  men.
— R.  M.  E.

Vers.  10—22. — Gimtideration  for  the  poor  and  needy.  After  giving  a  cursory
reference  to  leprosy  as  a  Divine  judgment  to  be  divinely  removed  and  ceremonially
purged  away  (vers.  8,  9),  Moses  enters  in  these  verses  into  the  consideration  which
should  be  shown  to  the  poor  and  needy.  The  debtor  is  not  to  be  pressed  for  his  pledge,
and,  if  raiment,  it  must  be  restored  in  time  for  him  to  sleep  with  due  clothing.  The
hired  servant,  engaged  for  the  day,  is  to  get  his  pay  punctually  at  sundown.  The
widow,  fatherless,  and  strangers  are  to  have  justice  dealt  to  them,  and  in  harvest
generous  gleanings  are  to  be  left  for  them.  The  Law  inculcates  consideration  and
mercy.

I.  The   0ENER08ITT   IN0T7L0ATED  BT  THE    LaW  HADE     IT   A   MESSAGE   OF  MERCY   TO

ALL  MEN.  For  even  suppose  no  sacrificial  system  preached,  typically,  the  Divine  pardon
and  love,  the  mercy  enjoined  upon  others  argued  mercy  in  the  Lawgiver  himself.  He
could  not  have  commanded  so  much  mercy,  and  manifested  none.

II.  The  poor  were  saved  from  utter  mendicancy  by  the  liberality  op  the
Law.  They  got  their  need  supplied  by  working  for  it.  It  was  better  to  glean  than  to
have  it  laid  without  any  cost  or  trouble  to  them  at  their  feet.  They  were  free,  and  had
to  bestir  themselves ;  thus  self-.respect  was  fostered,  and  real,  wholesome  work  pre-
scribed. No  wonder  that  mendicancy  was  unknown.  But  nowadays  things  are
made  too  easy  for  the  "  ne'er-do-wells,"  and  a  laziness  that  sacrifices  self-respect  and
liberty  on  its  altar  is  the  blessed.resaltt — B.  M.  E.

Ver.  \Q.— Responsibility  not  to  he  transferred  according  to  human  caprice.  We
desire  to  notice  this  interesting  direction.  It  is  a  contrast  to  the  second  commandment.
There  God  represents  himself  as  "  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children."
We  see  it  also  in  the  law  of  heredity  operating  in  nature.  But  it  is  a  weapon  which
God  retains  in  his  own  hand.  We  may  for  wise  purposes  treat  men  in  the  lump,  and
blend  in  common  consequences  the  innocent  and  guilty.  But  man  in  his  judgments
must  be  particular  to  execute  only  the  guilty.

I.  Human  judgments  must  Se  final  in  this  world  bo  far  as  the  junaiNO  is
OONOEBNED.  Men  do  not  get  the  chance  of  setting  matters  right  in  another  world.
They  judge  once  for  all,  and  if  they  execute  the  innocent,  they  have  no  reparation  in
their  power.

IL  God's  impebfect  justice  in  the  present  world  is  the  clearest  indica-
tion TO  conscience  that  there  will  be  a  judgment  in  the  other  world.
Were  his  justice  here  perfect,  or  were  there  no  judgment  at  all,  men  would  say  there
is  nothing  to  arrange  in  another  world.  But  now  there  is  enough  to  show  God  reigns,
and  enough  left  over  to  indicate  a  judgment  to  come.*

III.  God's  prerogative  of  TBANSFERBiNa  responsibility  is  the  secret  of  oub
saltation.  For  he  has  laid  on  Jesus,  the  Innocent  One,  the  iniquity  of  us  all.  He
has  visited  the  iniquity  of  the  children  upon  him  who  is  called  our  "  Everlasting
Father."  The  consequence  is  we  are  saved,  and  in  salvation  there  is  ample  compensa~
tion  for  all  who  have  to  all  appearance  suffered  unjustly  here. — B.  M.  E.

Yer.  ^—Nvj^ial  joy.    Joy  has  its  special  seasons.    The  year  has  but  one  spring.
>  C&  •  WoIf(^s  Bemaina,'  6th  edit,  pp.  325—327.


388  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxit.  1— 2a

Human  life  has  but  one  nuptial  feast.     The  freshness  and  charm  of  a  first  marriaga
can  never  be  repeated.    Around  this  special  joy  God  has  thrown  a  wall  of  defence.

I.  Nuptial  joy  is  a  caeb  of  God.  In  every  act  of  Jesus  Christ's  earthly  life,  he
could  have  said,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Thus,  vphen  he  became
a  guest  at  the  marriage  feast  at  Cana,  he  appeared  and  .spake  and  acted  as  his  Fatlier's
Representative.  His  miraculous  deed  was  the  expression  of  his  Father's  pleasurn.
On  every  honourable  marriage  the  sunshine  of  Jehovah  rests.  In  all  the  beginnings
of  human  life  God's  fatherly  interest  centres.  That  human  life  may  be  full  of  joy  ic
his  main  concern.

II.  Nuptial  jot  is  superior  even  to  oabes  of  the  State.  The  marriage  union  is
the  spring-time  of  a  man's  life ;  let  no  rough  wind  of  war  blast  it!  To  spoil  the  nuptial  joy
Is  to  spoil  a  man's  life.  Other  things  can  wait ;  this  fleeting  season  of  a  man's  history
cannot  be  recalled.  Others  can  fight  the  battles  of  his  country  better  than  can  he ;  for
at  such  a  time  his  heart  will  be  elsewhere  than  the  battle-fi<  Id.  To  send  such  as  he
is  to  invite  defeat.  It  is  not  simply  a  permissive  law ;  it  is  obligatory :  he  shall  not
go.  To  be  pressed  into  military  service  on  his  marriage  day  might  sour  his  temper,
exasperate  his  feelings,  dissipate  his  young  love,  ruin  his  earthly  home,  and  blast  his
domestic  prospects.     Pious  homes  are  the  nursery  grounds  for  God's  kingdom.

in.  Nuptial  jot  has  its  limitations.  Such  exemption  prevailed  for  a  year:
then  it  ceased.  The  fresh  and  fragrant  spring  must  give  way  to  fruit-bearing  autumn.
Joy  is  a  preparation  for  arduous  service.  It  is  worse  than  xiseless,  if  it  begets  only
indolence.  It  is  the  parent  of  new  exertion.  It  recreates  the  mind.  It  braces  and
vitalizes  all  the  active  energies.  As  sleep  prepares  for  labour,  so  pleasure  equips  us  for
higher  attainments.     We  need  the  spirit  of  wisdom  to  use  our  joys  to  advantage. — D.

Vers.  6, 10 — 13. — Prohibited  pledges.  Wealth  is  power;  in  every  nation  we  need
the  safeguards  of  law  to  prevent  such  power  from  becoming  tyranny.  The  poor  are
ever  liable  to  become  the  prey  of  voracious  avarice.

I.  A  seasonable  loan  is  a  priceless  service.  Men  can  render  service  one  to
another  in  a  thousand  different  forms.  Redundance  of  possession  on  the  part  of  one
may  serviceably  supply  the  deficiencies  of  another.  One  man  has  riches  which  he
cannot  profitably  employ,  another  has  trade  for  which  his  money  capital  is  insufficient.
One  man  has  accumulated  experience,  another  has  penetrative  wisdom,  another  has
technical  knowledge.  All  this  is  equipment  for  useful  service.  So,  in  the  spiiitual
kingdom,  one  has  tender  feeling,  another  has  gift  of  prayer  or  gift  of  speech,  anothei
lias  extended  influence.  All  human  endowments  are  a  common  fund  to  be  distributed
for  the  benefit  of  all.  There  are  occasions  in  human  life  when  a  loan  is  more  useful
than  a  gift.  Temporaiy  exigencies  sometimes  arise,  for  which  loan,  on  fitting  security,
is  the  wisest  alleviation.

II.  Fob  loans  suitable  pledqes  should  be  taken.  1.  This  serves  as  a  check
upon  facile  borrowing.  If  loans  are  granted  on  too  easy  terms,  we  may  encourage  a
man  in  reckless  commercial  speculation,  or  destroy  the  natural  checks  on  personal
extravagance.  2.  This  serves  to  prevent  strife.  Borrowers  have  ofttimes.a  short  memory
for  liabilities.  While  human  nature  has  its  imperfections  and  society  its  scoundrels,
it  is  wiser  to  have  solid  guarantee  for  the  redemption  of  loans,  and  honest  borrowers
will  not  object  to  give  suitable  pledges  for  honesty.  3.  Pledges  are  needed  on  the
ground  of  uncertain  mortality.    "  We  know  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth."

III.  Pledges  which  touch  a  man's  life  are  prohibited.  Money-getting  is
never  to  be  so  pressed  as  to  impinge  on  the  domain  of  life.  Human  life  is  a  sacred
thing,  and  must  not  be  trifled  with.  It  has  latent  capabilities,  and  may  yet  become
a  source  of  blessing  to  myriads.  Gain  becomes  as  the  small  dust,  an  inappreciable
thing,  when  placed  in  the  balance  against  a  human  life.  The  gold  of  a  continent  is  a
bubble  in  comparison  with  a  man's  soul.

IV.  Generous  surrender  of  povertt's  pledges  an  act  of  piety.  Pledges  are
telltales  of  common  dishonesty.  If  truthfulness  and  honour  were  as  prevalent  as  they
ought  to  be,  no  pledge  would  be  needed.  A  man's  word  ought  to  be  as  good  as  his
pledge.  It  often  does  a  man  good  if  we  make  his  honour  the  only  pledge.  He  is
ennobled  by  our  confidence.  He  rises  in  self-respect.  Debts  of  honour  are  often  paid
prior  to  those  which  have  material  security.  If  we  form  a  high  estimate  of  men,  they
will  often  strive  to  reach  the  ideal.


OH.  XXIV.  1— 22._  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  389

Generous  treatment  of  tjie  poor  secures  their  warmest  interest  on  our  behalf.  Tlie
poorest  of  the  poor  has  still  access  to  the  audience-chamber  of  the  heavenly  palace.
Their  simple  suit  on  our  behalf  will  sometimes  secure  blessings  which  no  arithmetic
can  measure.  Deeds  of  kindness  done  to  the  indigent  are  done  to  God,  for  God
identifies  himself  with  them.  "  He  that  giveth  to  the  poor  lendeth  to  the  Lord."
If  the  concession  be  an  act  of  sterling  love,  pure  from  the  alloy  of  selfishness,  it  is  an
act  of  righteousness — the  fruit  of  the  Divine  Spirit's  grace.  This  is  not  self-righteous-
ness, for  genuine  love  to  men  is  a  gracious  affection.  It  does  not  begin  with  self;  it
does  not  terminate  in  self.  God  is  its  object ;  hence  it  shall  be  counted  for  righteous-
ness.   As  Abraham's  faith  counted  for  righteousness,  so  does  also  genuine  love. — D.

Ver.  7. — Slave-traffic  a  capital  offence.  Slavery,  in  modified  form,  has  always
prevailed  in  Eastern  lands ;  and,  with  prudent  limitations,  was  tolerated  among  the
Hebrews.  To  promulgate  laws  for  men,  which  transcended  their  moral  sense,  would
defeat  the  ends  of  law.  God  has  continually  to  lead  men  from  lower  levels  to  higher.
A  man  may  voluntarily  sell  his  liberty  for  a  time.  But  to  deprive  a  man  of  liberty
by  violence  is  a  scarlet  sin;  and  man-stealing  is  rightly  branded  with  the  deepest
indignation  of  God.

I.  LiBEKTT  18  ESSENTIAL  TO  man's  mLLBST  LIFE.  Any  form  of  bondage  is  •  cur-
tailment of  life,  a  mutilation  of  the  man.  His  outward  condition  may  be  bettered.
He  may  have  more  food  and  warmer  clothing  and  a  healthier  home,  but  the  real
man  is  injured.  He  is  not  fully  susceptible  of  self-development.  The  springs  of  life
are  poisoned.  He  learns  to  despise  himself,  and  Jto  despise  oneself  is  a  step  on  the
slippery  road  to  ruin.  Yet  liberty  is  a  human  right  not  well  understood.  It  must
be  distinguished  from  licence.  True  liberty  has  its  limits  and  its  checks.  A  man  is  at
liberty  to  part  with  his  liberty  for  a  time.  Every  man  who  toils  for  his  bread  is  com-
pelled to  do  this.     Yet  even  this  temporary  cessation  of  his  liberty  must  be  voluntary.

IL   To   DEPRIVE  A  MAN   FORCIBLY   OF  HIS   LIBERTY   IB   TO   DEPEIVB    HIM  OP  HIS   LIFE.

The  life  of  the  body  is  not  the  whole  of  a  man's  life.  The  intellect,  affections,  choice,
will,  have  a  life  mure  precious  than  the  life  of  the  body.  To  steal  a  man  or  to  kidnap
a  child  is  to  interfere,  wantonly  and  injuriously,  with  the  proper  life  of  the  person.
The  outward  conditions  of  training  and  probation  are  not  such  as  God  ordained.
The  man's  eternal  prospects,  as  well  as  his  earthly  possibilities,  are  blighted.  And  all
this  moral  damage  is  done,  for  paltry  gain.  The  man  who  can  lend  himself  to  such
a  business  as  slave-mongerins  is  lost  to  all  goodness,  lost  to  shame.  He  is  a  disgrace
to  the  human  species — a  tooTof  Satan.

III.  Fob  such  a  crime  the  God-appointed  penalty  is  death.  No  heavier
penalty  is  imposed  by  the  ^jivil  magistrate,  because  no  heavier  penalty  is  possible.
Such  a  monster  must  be  removed  from  the  scenes  of  human  society,  because  his
presence  is  pestilential,  demoralizing,  deadly.  Where  human  judgment  ends,  God's
judgment  begins.  Such  a  one  is  hurried  before  the  higher  court  of  heaven,  is
arraigned  before  the  great  white  throne  of  the  Eternal,  and  fullest  justice  will  here
be  meted  out.     My  soul,  be  thou  free  from  such  taint  as  this  1 — ^D.

Vers.  8,  9. — Leprosy  symbolie.  God  has  intended  the  material  world  to  be  a  school-
house,  and  every  event  a  vehicle  of  moral  instruction.  The  sick-chamber  may  become
an  audience-room,  where  lessons  of  heavenly  wisdom  are  conveyed  by  the  Spirit  of
truth.  Leprosy  was  singled  out  by  God  to  be  a  visible  picture  of  sin ;  so  that  "  out
of  the  eater  there  might  come  forth  meat."    Out  of  seeming  evil,  good  can  be  distilled.

I.  Leprosy  had  a  keliqiotts  character.  More  was  meant  by  the  infliction  than
was  seen  by  the  bodily  eye.  It  was  mysterious  in  its  origin,  and  irresistible  in  its
progress.  It  gradually  spread  and  covered  the  whole  man.  It  touched  and  injured
every  faculty.  The  intention  was  salutary,  viz.  to  lead  the  sufferer's  thoughts  to  the
discovery  of  a  deeper  malady,  and  to  awaken  desire  for  a  more  enduring  cure.  The
outward  is  an  index  of  the  inward.     Leprosy  is  a  type  and  picture  of  sin.

II.  Leprosy  required  SELiaions  treatment.  It  was  vain  to  seek  the  offices  of  an
ordinary  physician.  Earthly  remedy  was  and  still  is  unknown.  The  sufferer  was
required  to  visit  the  priest.  Direct  application  to  God  was  to  be  made.  Meanwhile,
the  leper  was  to  be  completely  isolated.    He  might  not  consort  with  his  fellows.


390  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEBONOMY.  [oh.  xxit.  1—22.

Hereby  he  might  learn  the  disastrous  effects  of  sin,  viz.-  in  disintegrating  society ;
and  hereby  he  might  in  solitude  mourn  over  sin,  and  seek  its  cure.  The  only
possibility  of  the  removal  of  leprosy  vfas  in  religious  obedience.  Every  part  of  the
prescription  was  furnished  by  God,  and  was  to  be  applied  by  God's  ministers.  Com-
pletest  submission  was  a  condition  of  cure.

HI.  Lepbost,  in  its  cause  and  cube,  had  an  histobic  type.  This  type  was
furnished  by  Miriam.  Her  specific  sin  was  known  ;  it  was  insubordination  to  anithority.
Her  chastisement  was  sudden.  It  came  direct  from  God  in  the  form  of  leprosy
The  injured  man  became  her  intercessor.  God  graciously  responded  to  the  suit  of
Moses.  Temporary  separation  and  strict  seclusion  were  the  method  of  cure.  Golden
lessons  lie  here.  Every  leper  may  confidently  follow  this  indication  of  God's  will.  If
he  healed  Miriam,  can  he  not  also  heal  me  ?

IV.  Lepbost  healed  was  chabged  with  belioious  oblioatigns.  As  a  healed
man  will  cheerfully  recompense  the  physician  for  his  pains,  so  God  required  the
restced  leper  to  express  his  gratitude  in  the  form  of  animal  sacrifice.  His  gratitude
couM  not  be  expressed  in  empty  words.  He  was  not  perinitted  to  bring  that  "  which
cost  him  nothing."  In  the  slaughter  of  the  devoted  victim,  the  grateful  man  would
confiss  that  he  himself  had  deserved  to  die,  and  that  God  had  permitted  a  substitute.
If  the  man  were  fully  penitent,  the  sight  of  the  dying  substitute  would  vividly
impress  his  heart  with  a  sense  of  God's  mercy.  In  every  arrangement  which  God
made,  the  good  of  man  was  sought.  The  method  will  often  seem  strange  to  our  dim
vision,  but  respecting  the  beneficent  end  there  can  be  no  question. — ^D.

Vers.  14,  15. — Omitted  duty  ripens  into  curse.  Thoughtlessness  is  a  flimsy  excuse
for  neglected  duty.  It  is  a  sin  to  be  thoughtless.  One  falent  is  buried  in  the  earth.
In  proportion  to  the  mischief  produced  is  the  punishment  thereof.

I.  We  have  here  a  case  of  obligation  fully  matubed.  1.  The  rich  is  debtor
to  the  poor.  Obligation  between  the  several  ranks  of  society  is  equal.  The  rich  rely
for  many  services  upon  the  poor.  The  king  depends  upon  the  cook.  The  labourer
gives  his  strength,  the  employer  contributes  his  money.  There  is  as  much  obligation
on  the  one  side  as  on  the  other.  2.  At  a  fixed  point  of  time  the  obligation  is  matured.
Henceforth  the  neglect  of  the  obligation  becomes  sin.  My  obligations  to-day  differ
from  those  of  yesterday.  The  element  of  time  plays  an  wnportant  part.  Obligations
grow.  3.  Obligations  are  implied  as  well  as  expressed.  Custom  is  unwritten  law.
Siches  carry  with  them  no  warrant  for  arrogance.  Kicheg  have  cursed  the  man  if  they
have  made  him  churlish.

II.  Neglected  obligation  entails  unknown  insEBT.  We  cannot  follow  the
effects  of  thoughtlessness  into  all  their  intricate  ramifications  and  t'  iheir  utmost
issues.  What  would  be  regarded  as  a  trivial  disappointment  on  the  ,vjt  of  one  man
may  be  an  agony  of  pain  to  another.  Wages  expected  and  deferre  may  mean  to  a
needy  labourer  pinching  hunger,  not  only  to  himself,  but  to  feeble  wife  and  to  helpless
babes.  A  gloomy  and  sleepless  night  may  follow.  Bitter  and  angry  feelings  may  be
engendered.  Faith  in  human  integrity  may  be  lost.  Self-restraint  may  vanish.  For
want  of  a  nail  a  shoe  was  lost,  a  battle  was  lost,  ay,  an  empire  fell !

III.  Neglected  obligation  mat  bbino  heavt  cdbse  upon  the  culpbit.  It  is
not  safe  to  treat  any  human  being  with  contempt,  especially  the  poor.  God  is  the
avowed  Champion  of  such.  The  command,  "  Honour  all  men,"  is  as  binding  as  "  Thou
shalt  not  steal."  The  cry  of  the  injured  man  in  his  distress  is  sure  to  pierce  the
skies.  The  ear  of  God  is  specially  attent  to  his  children's  suffering  cry,  even  as  a
mother  catches  the  plaintive  wail  of  her  firstborn  infant.  Swiftly  God  attaches  him-
self to  the  side  of  the  oppressed,  and  takes  upon  himself  the  burden.  The  injustice
done  to  the  man  becomes  an  insult  done  to  God.  The  deed  alters  in  its  character,
intensifies  in  its  immoraliiy,  becomes  heinous  sin.  Vials  of  wrath  are  preparing  for
the  head  of  the  unthinking  transgressor.  It  will  be  as  the  sin  of  blasphemy  or  of
murder  unto  them. — ^D.

Vers.  16 — 18. — Public  Justice  to  he  pure.  Unseen  principles  of  justice  lie  at  the
foundation  of  human  society,  and  if  rottenness  and  decay  appear  in  these  foundations,
the  social  structure  will  soon  topple  and  fall.    Visible  prosperity  is  built  upon  invinblc


Cii.  ixiv.  i— 22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DBUTEEONOMY.  881

justice.  In  tlie  absence  of  justice,  property  becomes  untenable,  commerce  vanisbes,
peace  spreads  her  wings  for  flight.  "  If  the  foundations  be  destroyed,  what  can  the
righteous  do  ?  "

I.  The  magistkatb'b  temptation.  Human  nature,  at  its  best,  is  accessible  by
temptation ;  and  it  is  well  that  from  the  eyes  of  the  nation  a  fierce  light  beats  upon
the  judicial  bench.  If  only  the  ear  of  the  judge  be  open  to  the  fascinating  voice  of
self-advantage,  if  his  hand  be  open  to  a  bribe,  wickedness  will  put  on  the  most
ravishing  charms  to  deflect  him  from  his  duty.  Because  he  occupies  a  seat  so
conspicuous,  temptation  selects  him  as  a  special  target  for  her  poisoned  arrows.  Yet
even  for  temptation  he  may  rejoice,  for  according  to  his  ti^als  should  be  his  moral
triumphs.  Avarice  may  tempt  him.  Love  of  ease  may  tempt  him.  His  own  tastes
and  predilections  may  tempt.  The  praise  of  the  powerful  may  tempt.  He  will
become  either  the  stronger  or  the  weaker  for  the  discipline,  will  grow  in  moral
courage  or  in  cowardice.

II.  The  magibtbatb's  qualification,  The  qualification  for  the  judicial  throne  is
ardent  love  of  justice.  As  only  a  wise  man  can  be  a  teacher,  so  only  a  just  man  can
be  a  true  judge.  No  matter  what  may  be  the  nationality  of  the  litigants,  no  matter
what  their  colour,  social  rank,  or  sex,  every  one  has  an  inherent  claim  on  public  justice.
To  pervert  judgment  is  to  arouse  all  the  elements  of  wrath  in  heaven  and  earth.
The  judge  is  the  visible  exponent  of  justice ;  he  wears  the  garb  of  justice,  and  if  in
him  there  dwells  not  the  soul  of  justice,  he  is  a  sham  and  a  pretence.  Heart
devotion  to  public  justice  is  the  only  anchor  that  can  hold  him  fast  amid  those
currents  and  whirlpools  of  evil  influences  which  ever  surge  around  him.  Things
unseen  are  the  most  potent,

HI,  The  magistrate's  rule  of  action.  This  is  clearly  made  known  to  him  by
God,  viz.  that  punishment  is  to  be  personal,  not  corporate.  The  child  is  not  to  die  for
the  father.  Where  there  is  corporate  guilt  there  must  be  corporate  punishment.  But
this  is  no  contravention  of  the  rule.  The  inducement  is  often  great  to  release  oneself
from  the  pains  of  unravelling  a  complicated  suit ;  or,  if  relatives  of  the  accused  seem
to  be  accessories  to  an  evil  deed,  a  judge  is  often  tempted  to  embrace  all  the  suspected
family  in  one  punishment.  The  light  of  truth  is  to  be  his  only  guide ;  love  of  justice
his  compass ;  the  revealed  will  of  God  his  chart.  To  him  human  life  is  to  be  held  a
sacred  thing ;  not  one  life  is  to  be  needlessly  sacrificed.  It  is  a  sad  fact  that  judgts
have  been  amongst  the  greatest  criminals ;  they  have  slain  many  innocent  men.

IV.  The  magistrate's  inspiring  motive.  Many  motives  may  wisely  influence
him.  He,  too,  must  appear  before  a  higher  tribunal,  and  submit  his  whole  life  to
judicial  light.  But  the  motive  here  pressed  upon  him  is  gratitude  derived  from  past
experience.  The  history  of  his  nation  is  to  mould  his  character  and  to  teach  him  the
value  of  human  justice.  He  is  expected  to  sympathize  with  the  oppressed,  to  enter
into  their  griefs,  because  he  is  a  part  of  a  nation  that  has  felt  the  sharp  scourge  of
oppression.  He  has  learnt  by  national  experience  that,  when  justice  by  man  is  denied,
God  appears  in  court  and  champions  the  cause  of  the  oppressed.  He  is  the  repre-
sentative of  a  nation  that  has  been  redeemed.  He  himself  is  a  ransomed  one,  and  is
under  peculiar  obligation  to  serve  his  Deliverer.  His  time,  his  capacity,  his  legal
knowledge,  his  influence  are  not  his  own;  he  is  redeemed,  and  belongs  to  another.
I'ast  deliverances  are  not  to  be  lost  upon  us,  or  we  are  lost.  To  forget  the  lessons  of
the  past  is  self-injury,  yea,  is  heinous  sin.  In  every  station  and  office  fidelity  is
demanded. — D.

?ers.  19 — ^22. — Autumn  generosity.  If  a  man  is  not  generous  towards  his  poorer
neighbours  in  time  of  harvest,  he  will  never  be  generous.  If  the  profuse  generosity  of
God  be  lavished  upon  him  in  vain,  his  moral  nature  must  be  hard  indeed.  As  men
"  make  hay  while  the  sim  shines,"  so  should  we  yield  to  benevolent  impulses  while
God  surrounds  us  with  sunshine  of  kindness.  As  we  are  undeserving  recipients,  we
should  share  our  unpurchased  bounty  with  others.

I.  We  have  here  a  fitting  occasion  for  genehositt.  God  supplies  us  with  fltting
seasons  for  getting  good  and  for  doing  good.  It  is  not  always  autumn.  We  cannot
gather  corn  and  olives  when  we  please.  We  have  to  wait  the  arrival  of  the  season,
and  this  season  is  God's  provision.     We  must  gather  then  or  never.    Opportunity  can


392


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  XX¥.  1—19.


never  be  trifled  with.  If  abundance  has  been  put  into  our  hands,  let  us  forthwith  use
it  well,  or  it  may  be  suddenly  taken  from  us.  If  an  unusual  generous  impulse  be
upon  us,  it  is  wisest  to  respond  to  it  freely,  to  give  it  largest  scope,  for  this  is  a  lisit  of
God  to  us  for  good.

II.  FiTTiNQ  OBJECTS  FOE  OEKEROSITT  ABB  PROVIDED.  Were  it  not  for  the  existence
of  the  poor,  there  would  be  no  outlet  for  generosity  in  a  practical  and  material  form.
There  would  be  no  discipline  for  the  best  part  of  our  nature.  It  would  be  a  pain
and  a  loss  to  us  if  the  instinct  of  benevolence  within  us  found  no  field  for  its  exercise.
Thankful  ought  we  to  be  that  the  poor  shall  not  cease  out  of  the  land.  The  fatherless
and  the  widow  come  to  us  as  the  sent  of  God,  to  loosen  the  sluices  of  our  generosity,
and  to  do  us  good.    We  are  almoners  of  God's  royal  bounty.

III.  Delicate  flans  fob  convbyino  oenbbositt.  The  finer  forces  of  our  bodily
nature  lie  conveyed  to  every  part  by  most  delicate,  almost  invisible,  ducts.  Nerve-
]jower  is  distributed  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  by  minutest  channels.  So,
too,  should  we  employ  the  most  refined  delicacy  in  relieving  the  necessities  of  the
poor.  Let  not  our  gift  be  spoilt  by  any  assumption  of  superiority,  nor  by  any  arrogant
rudeness.  It  is  a  noble  thing  to  respect  the  manly  feelings  of  the  poor,  and  to  touch
with  fairy  finger  the  sensibilities  of  the  suffering.  We  are  to  study,  not  only  how
much  we  can  give,  but  especially  how  best  to  give  it.  From  the  harvest-field  and  the
olive-grove  we  may  learn  this  delicacy  of  kindness.  Both  the  quantity  and  the  quality
of  our  service  are  important  in  God's  esteem.

IV.  The  potent  motive  to  generosity.  Remembrance  of  their  own  redemption  was
the  mighty  motive  for  all  good  deeds.  This  is  the  constant  refrain  of  God's  message.
As  God  is  not  wearied  in  reiterating  the  lesson,  neither  should  we  be  wearied  in  hearing
it.  We  are  the  objects  of  God's  tenderest  love.  He  has  set  in  motion  his  most
prodigious  energies  to  rescue  us  from  misery.  He  has  emptied  his  treasury  of  blessings
so  as  to  enrich  us,  and  the  end  for  which  he  has  enriched  us  is  that  we  may  enrich
others.    Ye  have  been  ineffably  blessed,  do  you  bless  in  return. — ^D.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXV.


Laws  belatinq  to  Cobpobai,  Pdnishment,
Levis  ATE  Mabbiages,  and  Weights  and

Measures.

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  first  and  second  verses
should  be  read  as  one  sentence,  of  which  the
protasis  is  in  ver.  1  and  the  apodosis  in
ver.  2,  thus :  If  there  be  a  strife  between
men,  and  they  come  to  judgment,  and  they
(i.e.  the  judges)  give  judgment  on  them,
and  justify  the  righteous,  and  condemn  the
wicked,  then  it  ^lall  be,  if  the  wicked  de-
serve to  be  beaten  (literally,  be  the  ion  of
hlowg),  that  the  judge,  etc.  It  is  assumed
that  the  judges  shall  pronounce  just  judg-
ment, and  apportion  to  the  guilty  party  his
due  punishment ;  and  then  it  is  prescribed
how  that  is  to  be  inflicted.  In  the  presence
of  the  judge  the  man  was  to  be  cast  down,
and  the  adjudged  number  of  blows  were  to
be  given  him,  not,  however,  exceeding  forty,
lest  the  man  sliould  be  rendered  contempti-
ble in  the  eyes  of  the  people,  as  if  he  were
K  mere  slave  or  brute.  This  puniBhment
was  usually  inflicted  with  a  stick  (Exod.
xxi.  10;  2  Sam.  vii.  14,  etc.),  as  is  still  the
Mtae  among  the  Arabs  and  Egyptians ;  some-


times also  with  thorns  (Judg.  vW.  7,  18);
sometimes  with  whips  and  scorpinns,  i.e.
scourges  of  cord  or  leather  armed  with  sharp
points  or  hard  knots  (1  Kings  xii.  1 1,  11).
Though  the  culprit  was  laid  on  the  ground,
it  does  not  appear  that  the  bastinado  was
usckl  among  the  Jtws  as  it  is  now  among
the  Arabs;  the  back  and  shoulders  were  the
parts  of  the  body  on  which  the  blows  fell
(Prov.  X.  13;  six.  29;  xxvi.  3;  Isa.  1.  6).
According  to  his  fault,  by  a  certain  nnmher ;
literally,  according  to  the  requirement  of  his
crime  in  number;  i.e.  according  as  his
crime  deserved.  The  number  was  fixed  at
forty,  probably  because  of  the  symbolical
significance  of  that  number  as  a  measure
of  completeness.  The  rabbins  fixed  the
number  at  thirty-nine,  apparently  in  order
that  the  danger  of  exceeding  the  number
prescribed  by  the  Law  should  be  diminished
(cf.  2  Cor.  xi.  24) ;  but  another  reason  is
assigned  by  Maimonides,  vis.  that,  as  the
instrument  of  punishment  was  a  scourge
with  three  tails,  each  stroke  counted  for
three,  and  thus  they  could  not  give  forty,  but
only  thirty-nine,  unless  they  exceeded  the
forty  (Maimon., '  In  Sanbedrin,'  xvii.  2).

Ver.  4. — The  leaving  the  ox  unmuzzled
when  treading  out  the  corn  was  in  oidei


OH.  XXV.  1— ]9.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMY.


393


that  the  animal  might  be  free  to  eat  of  the
grains  which  its  labour  severed  from  the
nusks.  This  prohibition,  therefore,  was
dictated  by  a  regard  to  the  rights  and  claims
of  animals  employed  in  labour;  but  there
is  involved  in  it  the  general  principle  that
all  labour  is  to  be  duly  requited,  and  hence
it  seems  to  have  passed  into  a  proverb,  and
was  applied  to  men  as  well  as  the  lower
animals  (cf.  1  Cor.  ix.  9 ;  1  Tim.  v.  18).  The
use  of  oxen  to  tread  out  the  corn  and  the
rule  of  leaving  the  animals  so  employed
nnmuzzled  still  prevail  among  the  Arabs
and  other  Eastern  peoples  (Bubinson, '  Bib.
Ees.,'  ii  206,  207:  iU.  6;  Kltto,  ;Bib.  Cyol.,'
i.  86).

Vers.  8 — 10. — Levirate  marriaget.  If  •
man  who  was  married  died  without  issue,
his  surviving  brother  was  required  to  marry
the  widow,  so  as  to  raise  up  a  successor  to
the  deceased,  who  should  be  his  heir.  The
brother  who  refused  this  duty  must  be
publicly  disgraced.  The  design  of  this
institutioik — which  was  not  originated  by
Moses,  but  came  down  from  early  times  (Gen.
xxsviii.  8),  and  is  to  be  found  amongst
other  nations  than  the  Jews,  and  that  even
in  the  present  day — was  to  preserve  a  family
from  becoming  extinct  and  to  secure  the
property  of  a  family  from  passing  into  the
hands  of  a  stranger.  The  notion  that
the  usage  "had  its  natural  roots  in  the
desire  inherent  in  man  who  is  born  for  im-
mortality, and  connected  with  the  hitherto
undeveloped  belief  in  an  eternal  life,  to
•eonre  a  continued  personal  existence  for
himself  and  immortality  for  his  name
through  the  perpetuation  of  his  family,  and
in  the  life  of  the  son  who  took  his  place"
(Keil),  seems  wholly  fanciful.

Ver.  5. — Dwell  together;  t.e.not  necessarily
in  the  same  house,  but  in  the  same  com-
munity or  place  (cf.  Gen.  xiii.  6 ;  xxvi.  7).
And  have  no  child ;  literally,  Imvb  no  enn  ;
but  this  is  rightly  interpreted  as  meaning
child  (so  the  LXX.;  Vulgate:  Josephus,
»  Antiq.,'  iv.  8,  23;  Matt.  xxii.  25;  Maimon.,
•In  Jibbum.,*  ii.  6 — 9);  for,  if  the  deceased
left  a  daughter,  the  perpetuation  of  the
family  and  the  retention  of  the  property
might  be  secured  through  her  (of.  Numb.
xxvii.  4,  etc.).

Ver.  6.— Shall  succeed  in  the  name  of  his
brother  which  is  dead;  literally,  thall  rite
up  on  the  name  of  his  deceated  irolher  ;  i.e.
shall  be  enrolled  in  the  family  register  as
heir  of  the  deceased,  and  shall  perpetuate
his  name.

Vers.  7 — 10. — If  the  man  refused  to  marry
the  widow  of  his  deceased  brother,  he  was


free  to  do  go;  but  the  woman  had  her
redress.  She  was  to  bring  the  m.itter  before
the  elders  uf  the  town,  sitting  as  magistrates
at  the  gate,  and  they  were  to  summon  the
man  and  speak  to  him,  and  if  he  persisted
in  his  refusal,  the  woman  was  to  take  his
shoe  from  off  his  foot,  and  spit  before  his
face,  and  say,  So  shall  it  he  done  unto  that
man  that  will  not  build  up  his  brother's
house.  The  taking  off  of  the  shoe  of  the
man  by  the  woman  was  an  act  of  indignity
to  him ;  it  amounted  to  a  declaration  that
he  was  not  worthy  to  stand  in  his  brother's
place,  and  was  scornfully  rejected  by  the
woman  herself.  As  the  planting  of  the  shod
foot  on  a  piece  of  property,  or  the  casting  of
the  shoe  over  a  field,  was  emblematical  of
taking  possession  of  it  with  satisfaction
(Ps.  Ix.  8;  cvlii.  9);  and  as  the  voluntary
handing  of  one's  shoe  to  another  betokened
the  giving  up  to  that  other  of  some  property
or  right;  so,  contrariwise,  the  forcible  re-
moval Irom  one  of  his  shoe  and  the  casting
of  it  aside  indicated  contemptuous  rejection
of  the  owner,  and  repudialion  of  all  his
rights  and  claims  in  the  matter.  To  walk
barefooted  was  regarded  by  the  Jews  as
ignominious  and  miserable  (cf.  Isa.  xx.
2,  4;  2  Sam.  xv.  30).  The  spitting  before
the  face  of  the  man  (1'3S3,  in  front  of  him)
is  by  the  Jewish  interpreters  understood  of
spitting  on  the  ground  in  his  presence
(Talmud,  'Jebam.,'  106;  Maimon.,  'In
JibbuuL,'  iv.  6 — 8).  This  seems  to  be  what
the  words  express  (of.  oh.  iv.  37;  viL  24;
XL  25 ;  Josh.  x.  8 ;  Ezek.  x.  8,  for  the  render-
ing of  ':S3) ;  and  this,  according  to  Oriental
notions,  would  be  insult  enough  (of.  Numb.
xii.  14;  Isa.  1.  6;  Kiebuhr,  'Description  de
1' Arable,'  i.  49).

Vers.  11,  12. — But  though  the  childless
widow  might  thus  approach  and  lay  hold
on  the  man,  no  licence  was  thus  granted  to
women  to  pass  beyond  the  bounds  of  decency
in  their  npproaches  to  the  other  sex.  Hence
the  prohibition  in  these  verses.  The  severe
sentence  here  prescribed  was  by  the  rabbins
commuted  into  a  fine  of  the  value  of  the
band.

Vers.  13 — 16.^Beotitude  and  integrity
in  trade  are  here  anew  inculcated  (cf.  Lev.
xix.  35,  etc.).

Ver.  13. — ^Divers  weights;  literally,  a
ttone  and  a  stone — a  large  one  for  buyiu;;,
and  a  small  one  for  selling  (cf.  Amos  viii.
5).  Both  weights  and  measures  were  to  be
"  perfect,"  i.e.  exactly  correct,  and  so  just.
(On  the  promise  in  ver.  15,  see  oh.  iv.  26  -
v.  16.)

Ver.  16.— (Cf.  oh.  xxii.  5;  xxiil.  12.)  AU
that  do  unrighteously ;  equivalent  to  all  that
transgress  any  law.

Vers.  17 — 19. — Whilst  in  theii  intercoune


3^4


tHE  BOOfe  0^  DEUTERONOMY.


[en.  XXV.  i— 1^


with  each  other  the  law  of  love  and  brotherly
kindness  was  to  predominate,  it  was  to  be
otherwise  in  regard  to  the  enemies  of  God
and  Jiis  people.  Them  they  were  to  over-
come by  force;  wickedness  was  to  be
removed  by  the  extinction  of  the  wicked.
Hoses  has  already  repeatedly  reminded  the
Israelites  that  they  had  utterly  to  destroy
tlie  wicked  nations  of  Canaan ;  and  he  here
closes  this  discourse  by  reminding  them
that  there  was  a  nation  outside  of  Canaan
which  was  also  doomed,  and  which  they
were  to  root  out.  This  was  Amalek,  which
had  attacked  the  Israelites  in  their  journey
at  Bephidim,  and  had  taken  advantage  of
their  exhausted  condition  to  harass  their
rear  and  destroy  those  who,  faint  and  weary,
had  lagged  behind.    For  this  they  had  been


already  punished  by  the  Israelites,  who,  led
on  by  Joshua,  had  turned  upon  them  and
discomfited  them  with  the  edge  of  the
sword.  This,  however,  was  not  enough ;
Amalek  was  to  be  utterly  destroyed,  and
this  the  Israelites  were  to  effect  as  soon  as
the  Lord  had  given  them  rest  in  the  pro-
mised land.  It  was  not,  however,  till  th«
time  of  David  that  this  was  done.

Ver.  18. — And  smote  the  hindmost  of  thee ;
literally,  and  tailed  thee  ;  i.e.  ont  off  thy  tail,
or  rear.  The  verb  (33;)  occu^.^  only  here
and  in  Josh.  x.  19.  It  is  a  denominative
from  33),  a  tail,  and,  like  many  denomi-
natives, both  in  the  Hebrew  and  in  other
languages,  it  has  the  sense  of  taking  away
or  cutting  off  the  thing  expressed  by  tha
noun  from,  which  it  is  formed,  lika  the
English  verb  to  thin,  foi  example.


HOMILETICS.


Vera.  1 — 3. — TTumanity  to  he  respected  in  judicial  ivflir-tions.  This  passa<;e  Is  an
interesting  illustration  of  ihe  restraints  which  the  Law  01  Muses  puts  on  the  Hebrews,
as  to  the  semi-barbarous  customs  of  other  nations.  It  is  well  known  that  punishment
by  bastinado  was  common  among  the  ancient  Egyptians.  It  would  be  not  unnaturally
adopted  by  the  Hebrews.  There  are  here  three  matters  to  be  noticed.  1.  Here  is  a
principle  to  be  recognized  (ver.  1).  2.  The  punishment  (1)  is  to  be  inflicted  in  the  presence
of  the  judge,  and  (2)  is  not  to  exceed  forty  stripes.  3.  Tlie  reason  given  is  very  im-
pressive, "lest  thy  brother  should  seem  vile  unto  thee,"  i.e.  lest  he  should  be  so
excessively  punished  as  to  be  afterwards  unfit  for  service,  and  lest  he  should  be  the
common  butt  of  any  one  who  chose  to  dishonour  him.  Human  nature  is  to  he  respected,
even  in  carrying  out  legal  sentences  on  crime.  Trapp  says,  "  The  Turks,  when  cruelly
lashed,  are  compelled  to  return  to  the  judge  that  commanded  it,  to  kiss  his  hand,  to
give  him  thanks,  and  to  pny  the  officer  that  whipped  them ! "

I.  The  sight  of  a  human  being  coming  under  the  sentence  of  criminal  law  is  matti  r
for  intense  sadness.

IL  The  punishment  to  be  inflicted  on  him  should  be  such  in  matter  and  degree  as  to
assert  right  principle,  but  not  such  as  needlessly  to  dishonour  him.    For —

III.  Humanity,  in  spite  of  crime,  has  dignity  about  it  still.  Sin  and  the  sinner  aie
not  inseparable.     God  can  kill  one  and  save  the  other !

IV.  With  a  view  to  a  criminal's  salvation,  whatever  of  honour  remains  in  his  nature
should  be  carefully  guarded  and  tenderly  appealed  to.

Ver.  4. — Labourers  to  live  hy  their  lahour.  The  use  of  this  verse  by  the  apostle  has
brought  it  out  of  an  obscurity  to  which  it  might  have  been  relegated.  It  is  quoted  by
I'aul  in  1  Cor.  ix.  10,  and  is  there  applied  by  him  as  an  illustration  in  the  ancient  Law  <^(
Moses  of  the  same  principle  which  our  Lord  affirmed  when  he  appointed  that  "  they  that
preach  the  gospel  .'ihould  live  of  the  gospel "  (see  Matt.  x.  9,  10).  We  can  scarcely  go
so  far  as  John  Calvin  in  reference  to  Paul's  allusion  to  it.  He  says  that  Paul  here  says,
Ood  does  not  care  for  oxen  I  'Surely  his  meaning  is  simply  that  it  was  not  merely  from
his  care  for  oxen  that  God  commanded  Moses  to  pen  such  a  precept,  but  that  there
was  a  common  care  of  God  for  all  his  creatures,  and  that  if  he  cared  thus  for  the  less,
it  was  very  certain  he  would  care  even  more  for  the  greater.  Labour,  moreover,  is  to
be  like  all  native  growths — it  is  to  have  "  its  seed  within  itself."  AH  who  employ
labourers  are  to  see  that  their  workmen  are  sufficiently  well  paid  to  enable  them  tc
'live  by  their  labour.    Any  one  desiring  to  develop  this  truth  in  relation  to  spiritual


CH.  XXV.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMt.  396

toil  would  naturally  rather  take  the  New  Testament  texts  referred  to  above.  Keep-
ing, therefore,  simply  to  the  earthly  sphere,  we  remark :  1.  No  precept  in  this  book
which  is  connected  with  duty  or  character  is  too  trivial  to  be  "  worthy  of  God."  2.  An
apparently  small  command  may  wrap  up  in  it  a  great  principle.  3.  True  benevolence
will  be  kind  and  thoughtful  to  the  humblest  labourer  even  in  minute  detail.  4.  Qoi  does
not  allow  any  one  selfishly  to  monopolize  the  fruits  of  another's  labour  without  givin;;
the  toiler  adequate  compensation  for  his  toil.  5.  The  Great  Defender  of  the  rights  of  the
working  classes  is — God  1  6.  It  is  a  divinely  appointed  ordinance  for  ever  that  the  power
of  toil  is  to  be  a  means  of  self-support ;  that  labour  shall  bring  wealth  to  the  labourer.
Here  is  a  blow  struck  at  slavery.

Vers.  5 — 10. — Family  honour  to  he  maintained.  This  law  supposes  a  state  of
society  and  a  kind  of  public  opinion  which  does  not  now  exist,  and  in  detail  it  is  there-
fore obsolete.  But  the  principle  it  involves  is  clear,  viz.  that  in  married  life  the
honour  of  the  family  on  both  sides  is  an  object  of  mutual  interest  and  concern,  not  only
during  the  events  of  life,  but  also  in  case  of  arrangements  at  and  after  death.   '

Vers.  11,  12. — An  offending  hand.  This  maybe  compared  with  Matt.  v.  30.  L  Any
member  of  the  body  may  become  an  instrument  of  sin.  2.  Where  there  is  in  any  case
special  danger  there  should  a  special  watch  be  kept.  3.  Favourite,  yet  sinful  lusts
must  be  crucified,  whatever  the  cost  may  be.

Vers.  13 — 16. — Mighteousneu  in  trade  imperative.  This  paragraph  reqiures  no
preparatory  elucidation.  The  topic  for  a  Homily  which  it  gives  is  one  of  the  most
important  in  the  range  of  human  ethics.  It  furnishes  six  lines  of  thought.  1.  In  the
providence  of  God  men  are  thrown  together  for  the  purposes  of  trade.  2.  Opportunity
is  thus  furnished  for  the  exercise  of  right  principles  of  mutual  justice  and  equity.
3.  There  is  often  given  an  opportunity  also  of  taking  advantage  of  others  by  unequal
weights  and  measures.  4.  God  rtquires  of  us  absolute  justice  to  others,  always  and
everywhere.  5.  No  false  maxims  of  men,  such  as  "business  is  business,"  can  ever
exonerate  us  from  obligations  to  justice.  6.  Our  duty  to  man  in  this  respect  is
enforced  by  a  double  argument.  (1)  The  neglect  of  it  is  an  abomination  to  God  (ver.
16).    (2)  The  observance  of  it  will  tend  to  long  life,  prosperity,  and  peace  (ver.  15).

Vers.  17 — 19. — Kindness  to  enemies  is  not  to  degenerate  info  sympathy  with  or  indiffer-
ence to  ungodliness.  God  is  kind.  God  is  terrible.  When  he  riseth  up  against  sin  to
punish  it  openly,  who — who  can  stand?  The  repeated  injunctions  in  this  book,  of  kind-
ness to  enemies,  the  prohibitions  against  private  revenge,  etc.,  should  effectually  guard
any  against  attributing  to  Moses  any  incitement  of  the  people  to  revengeful  retaliation.
He  utters  a  prophecy,  as  a  prophet.  In  Exod.  xvii.  16,  the  LXX.  read,  iy  x"p^  Kpvipalif,
ji.T.^.,  "  by  an  unseen  hand  the  Lord  will  war  against  Amalek."  In  Numb.  xxiv.  20,
Balaam  foretells  Amalck's  doom.  In  1  Sam.  xv.,  the  execution  of  judgment  on  Amalek
is  recorded ;  and  thus  is  the  meaning  of  our  present  paragraph  explained.  Note :  1.  It
is  a  very  dangerous  thing  for  a  nation  to  harass  or  injure  the  people  of  God.  2.  Such  a
nation  may  seem  to  prosper  a  while,  but  judgment  is  "  laid  up  in  store."  3.  The  retri-
butioa  will  come  sooner  or  later  in  God's  wonder-working  providence.  "Their  feet
shall  slide  in  due  time."  4.  Whatever  sympathy  we  may  rightly  feel  for  individual
sufferers,  the  fact  that  God  will  ultimately  avenge  his  people's  wrongs  may  fill  us  with
grateful  joy.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1—8. — 2%«  lastinado.  Professor  W.  R.  Smith  ('  Old  Testament,'  p.  876)  regards
this  law  of  stripes  as  indicating  a  late  date  for  Deuteronomy.  He  argues  from  the
customs  of  the  free  Bedouins.  But  it  is  perilous  to  reason  from  the  customs  of  the
Bedouins  to  the  punishments  in  vogue  among  a  people  who  had  lived  some  centuries  in
Kgypt,  where,  as  is  well-known,  the  bastinado  was  in  constant  use.  The  sculptures  at
Beni-Hassan  represent  the  very  scene  here  described.    We  leam—


3%  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY,  [ch.  xxv.  1—19

I.  That  it  is  thb  rrmcTioN  of  oiviii  maqistratbb  to  punish  crime.  (Vers.  1,  2.)
They  bear  the  sword  for  this  purpose  (Rom.  xiv.  4;  1  Pet.  ii.  14).  The  modern
humanitarian  spirit  tends  to  exalt  the  reformalory  and  preventive  ends  of  punishment,
at  the  expense  of  the  retributive.  That  every  effort  should  be  put  forth  for  the
reformation  of  the  criminal  which  the  case  admits  of,  we  cordially  allow.  But  the
danger  is,  in  these  matters,  that  sentiment  degenerate  into  sentimentalism.  Crime
deserves  punishment,  and  on  that  ground  alone,  were  there  no  other,  ought  to  receive
it.  No  theory  can  be  satisfactory  which  loses  sight  of  retribution,  and  makes  reforma-
tion and  prevention  the  all  in  all.

II.  That  penalties  ought  to  be  sufpicibntlt  bkvebe.  (Ver.  2.)  To  be  effective
in  early  stages  of  civilization,  penalties  must  be  severe,  prompt,  and  specific  enough  to  be
vividly  conceived  (cf.  H.  Spencer's  '  Essays : ' '  Prison  Ethics ').  The  progress  of  society
admits  of  the  substitution  of  punishments  appealing  to  a  higher  class  of  sensibilities.
But  even  these  ought  adequately  to  express  the  measure  of  the  criminal's  desert.
If  Mr.  Spencer  were  right,  the  slightest  restraint  compatible  with  the  safety  of  the
community,  combined  with  compuisory  self-support,  would  be  punishment  sufficient
for  the  greatest  crimes.  The  sense  of  justice  in  mankind  rejects  such  ideas.  Carlyle't
teaching  in  '  Model  Prisons '  is  healthier  than  this.

III.  That  penalties  ought  to  be  measured.  (Ver.  3.)  It  is  difficult  to  believe
that  in  our  own  country,  at  the  beginning  of  this  century,  the  theft  of  five  shillings
from  the  person  was  a  crime  punishable  by  death.  Yet  the  statute-book  bristled  with
enactments,  of  which,  unhappily,  this  was  not  the  worst.  Such  outrageous  dispropor-
tion between  crime  and  punishment  must  have  rubbed  the  law's  sentences  of  most  o^
their  moral  effect.  Anomalies  exist  still,  which  it  would  be  to  any  statesman's  credit
to  endeavour  to  remove.

IV.  That  penalties  should  not  be  unduly  DEORADiNa.  (Ver.  3.)  Lest  "thy
brother  should  seem  vile  unto  thee."  The  effect  of  excessive  severity  is  to  harden,
degrade,  dehumanize.  It  often  drives  the  criminal  to  desperation.  As  a  victim  of  the
older  criminal  code  expressed  it,  "  A  man's  heart  is  taken  from  him,  and  there  is  giver
to  him  the  heart  of  a  beast."  The  tendency  in  modern  feeling  is  toward  the  abolition
of  corporal  punishments  entirely,  as  degrading  alike  to  him  who  administers  them,
and  to  those  by  whom  they  are  endured.  Observe :  1.  The  profound  idea  on  which  the
law  rested.  The  body,  part  of  human  nature,  and  sharins;  its  dignity  as  made  in  God's
image.  2.  The  best  laws  may  be  unjustly  and  cruelly  administered  (2  Cor.  zi
24,25).— J.  0.

Ver.  4. — !Z%e  oxen.  The  apostle  draws  from  this  passage  the  general  principle  that
the  labourer  is  entitled  to  eat  [of  the  fruits  of  his  labour  (1  Cor.  ix.  9,  10).  His
application  teaches  us  to  look  for  similar  general  principles  wrapped  up  in  other
precepts  of  the  Law.    We  learn —

I.  Animals  are  entitled  to  generous  treatment.  The  ox  that  trod  out  the
com  was  not  to  be  muzzled.  He  was  to  be  permitted  to  eat  of  the  fruits  of  his  work.
Kindness  to  animals  is  a  duty :  1.  Which  man  owes  to  the  creatures.  Severe  moralists,
arguing  that  animals,  being  destitute  of  reason,  are  also  destitute  of  rights,  would  bring
all  man's  duties  towards  them  under  the  head  of  duties  to  himself  (e.g.  Kant).
Alford  thinks  this  to  be  implied  in  Paul's  language.  But  Paul's  argument,  fi  it  is  to
be  pressed  in  this  connection,  rather  implies  the  contrary.  It  recognizes  in  the  ox,  on
the  ground  of  its  being  a  labourer,  a  kind  of  right  to  be  provided  for.  All  that  the
apostle  affirms  is  that  the  precept  had  an  end  beyond  the  reference  to  oxen,  that  the
"  care  for  oxen  "  was  subordinate  to  the  inculcation  of  a  principle  of  general  application.
Our  duty  to  the  creatures  rests  on  the  ground  that  they  are  sentient  beings,  capable
of  pain  and  pleasure,  and  on  the  law  of  love,  which  requires  us  to  diffuse  happiness,  and
avoid  inflicting  needless  suffering.  2.  Which  man  owes  to  himself.  For  this  view,
while  not  the  whole  of  the  truth,  is  an  important  part  of  it.  Leibnitz,  in  a  small  treatise
written  for  the  education  of  a  prince,  advised  that,  during  youth,  he  should  not  be
permitted  to  torment  cr  give  pain  to  any  living  thing,  lest,  by  indulging  the  spirit
of  cruelty,  he  should  contract  a  want  of  feeling  for  his  fellow-men.  Alford  says,  "  Th«
good  done  to  a  man's  immortal  spirit  by  acts  of  humanity  and  justice  infinitely  out-
weighs the  mere  physical  comfort  of  a  brute  which  perishes."


CH.  XXV.  1— 19.J  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  397

II.  The  human  laboubeb  is  entitled  to  shabk  in  the  pkopits  of  his  labours.
Theoretically,  he  does  so  every  time  he  is  paid  wages.  In  the  distribution  of  the  fruits
of  production,  the  part  which  the  labourer  gets,  we  are  told,  is  wages,  the  share  of  the
landowner  is  rent,  that  of  the  capitalist  is  interest,  and  the  Government  takes  taxes.
Practically,  however,  wages  are  settled,  not  by  abstract  rules  of  fairness,  but  by
competition,  which  may  press  so  hard  ujion  the  labourer  as  (till  things  right  themsel  vesj
to  deprive  him  of  his  fair  proportion  of  industrial  profits.  The  wage  system  is  far
from  working  satisfactorily.  As  society  advances,  it  af^pears  to  be  leading  to  au
increasing  amount  of  bitterness  and  friction.  Masters  and  men  represent  opposing
interests,  and  stand,  as  it  were,  at  daggers  drawn.  It  is  easier  to  see  the  evil  than  to
devise  a  cure.  Economists  (Mill,  Jevons,  etc.)  seem  to  look  mainly  in  the  direction
of  some  form  of  co-operation.  Their  schemes  are  principally  two:  1.  Industrial
cooperation.  2.  Industrial  partnerships — the  system  acconiing  to  which  a  fixed
proportion  of  profits  is  assigned  for  division  amongst  the  workmen  engaged  in  pro-
duction.

III.  Ministers  of  the  gospel  are  entitled  to  be  supported  by  their  flocks.
This  is  the  application  made  by  Paul  (1  Cor.  ix. ;  cf.  Matt.  x.  10 — 12 ;  Gal.  vi.  6).
Christian  ministers,  labouring  in  spiritual  things,  and  by  that  work  withdrawn  from
ordinary  avocations,  are  to  be  cheerfully  supported.  The  text  applies  to  this  case  more
strictly  than  to  the  case  of  workmen  claiming  to  participate  in  profits.  The  workman
claims  but  his  own.  The  right  of  the  minister  to  support  is  of  a  different  kind.  He
labours  in  things  spiritual,  but,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  with  a  higher  end  than  the  mere
obtaining  of  a  livelihood.  While,  therefore,  his  support  is  a  duty,  it  is,  like  duties  of
benevolence  generally,  not  one  that  can  be  enforced  by  positive  law.  The  right  to
support  is  a  moral,  not  a  legal  one.  It  creates  an  obligation,  but,  as  moralists  say,
an  indeterminate  obligation.  It  is  an  obligation  to  be  freely  accepted,  and  as  freely
discharged. — J.  O.

Vers.  6 — 10. — The  levirate  law.  At  the  root  of  this  law,  which  obtained  widely  in
the  East,  we  find  ideas  and  feelings  such  as  these —

I.  Respect  fob  the  honour  of  the  family.  In  the  Bast,  as  is  well  known,
childlessness  is  reckoned  a  calamity,  almost  a  disgrace.  Hence,  as  well  as  for  other
reasons,  the  severity  of  the  law  in  ver.  11.  Hence  also  this  custom  of  marrying  a
brother's  widow,  in  order  to  raise  up  seed  to  the  brother.  The  motive  is  plainly
to  avert  disgrace  from  a  brother's  house,  to  wipe  out  his  reproach,  to  hand  down  his
name  in  honour.  We  may  respect  the  feeling  while  repudiating  the  form  in  which
it  embodied  itself.  What  touches  the  credit  of  our  families  ought  to  be  felt  to  concern
ourselves.  Not  in  the  sense,  certainly,  of  leading  us  to  uphold  that  credit  at  thu
expense  of  truth  and  of  justice  to  others ;  but  in  the  sense  of  doing  everything  we  cau
with  a  good  conscience  to  maintain  or  redeem  it.

II.  Desibe  fob  a  perpetuated  name.  The  men  of  the  old  dispensation,  as  Matthew
Heiuy  says,  not  having  so  clear  and  certain  a  prospect  of  living  themselves  on  the
other  side  death  as  we  have  now,  were  the  more  anxious  to  live  in  their  posterity.  The
principle  is  the  same  at  bottom  as  that  which  leads  us  to  wish  for  personal  immortality.
What  man  desires  is  perpetuated  existence,  of  which  existence  in  one's  posterity  is
a  kind  of  shadow,  affording,  in  contemplation,  a  like  "shadow  of  satisfaction"  to  tie
mind.  Positivism,  in  falling  back  from  a  personal  to  a  corporate  immortality,  is  thus  a
movement  in  the  wrong  direction.  The  exchange  it  proposes  is  the  substance  for  the
shadow.  The  desire  to  exist  in  the  remembrance  of  posterity,  and  to  be  well  thought
fif  by  them,  is,  however,  a  legitimate  principle  of  action.  It  should  operate  in  leading  us
to  live  good  and  useful  lives,  which  is  the  secret  of  the  only  lasting  honour.

"  Only  the  actions  of  the  just
Smell  sweet  and  blossom  in  the  dait."

IIL  Thb  dibobace  attaching  to  refusal  of  the  duties  imposed  on  m  by
relationship  to  the  dead.  The  disgrace  in  this  case  was  emphatically  marked
(vers.  9,  10).  The  wishes  of  the  dead  should  be  very  sacred  to  us.  The  duties  which
spring  from  the  l)ond  of  relationship,  or  from  express  request,  should,  if  possible,  be


398  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxv.  1—19.

faithfully  discharged.    Aiding  in  the  settlement  of  affairs,  seeing  provision  made  for  a
widow  and  children,  accepting  and  fulfilling  trusts,  etc. — J.  0.

Vers.  13 — 16. — Morality  in  trade.  The  Hebrew  lawgiver  lays  just  stress  on  honestj
in  weights  and  measures.  The  general  principle  is  that  of  honesty  in  trade.  Weights
and  measures  connect  themselves  intimately  with  the  ideas  of  justice,  rectitude,  im-
partiality. Justice  is  represented  by  a  figure  with  scales  and  weights.  Falsification  of
weights  and  measures  is  thus  a  representative  sin,  one  which  corrupts  integrity  in  man
with  peculiar  and  fatal  rapidity.

I.  An  DutracTioN  mcch  needed.  Trade  morality  is  at  present  at  a  low  ebb
Mixed  up  with  the  thousands  of  honest  transactions  which  no  doubt  take  place  everj
day,  there  must  be  admitted  to  be  an  enormous  number  which  are  more  or  les!
Iraudulent.  "  On  the  average,"  says  Mr.  Spencer,  "  men  who  deal  in  bales  and  tons
differ  but  little  in  morality  from  men  who  deal  in  yards  and  pounds.  Illicit  practices
of  every  form  and  shade,  from  venial  deception  up  to  all  but  direct  theft,  may  be
brought  home  to  the  higher  grades  of  the  commercial  world.  Tricks  innumerable,  lies
acted  or  uttered,  elaborately  devised  frauds,  are  prevalent — many  of  them  established
as  '  customs  of  the  trade ; '  nay,  not  only  established,  but  defended  "  ('  Essays,'  vol.  ii.,
'  Morals  of  Trade ; '  cf.  Smiles  on  '  Duty,'  ch,  iii.).  The  saddest  feature  in  the  out-
look is  the  apparent  prevalence  of  the  feeling  that  trickery  of  this  kind  is  absolutely
essential  to  success — that  a  man  can't  get  on  without  it.

II.  An  injunction  which  ought  to  be  enforced.  But  how?  By  a  fearless  ex-
posure of  dishonesties;  and  by  a  loud  and  firm  demand  on  the  part  of  every  upright  member
of  society  for  honest  and  truthful  dealing.  Only  if  the  dishonest  are  a  majority  in
society — a  majority  of  overwhelming  numbers — can  they  ultimately  prevail  against  the
honest.  A  determined  combination  on  the  part  of  persons  of  integrity  would  suffice  to
put  them  down.  The  man  known  to  be  honest  should  be  supported,  even  at  some
pjcuniary  sacrifice.  Custom  should  be  unflinchingly  withdrawn  from  men  detected  in
tricks,  and  the' stamp  of  public  reprobation  placed  on  such  men  and  their  doings.  Means
should  be  taken  to  diffuse  information  as  to  the  arts  and  frauds  by  which  dishonesty
sustains  itself.  The  causes  of  these  dishonesties  need  also  to  be  looked  into— chiefly,
according  to  Spencer,  the  indiscriminate  respect  paid  to  wealth.  Love  of  the  honour
and  position  which  wealth  gives — the  certainty  of  being  looked  up  to,  courted  in
society,  applauded  for  success,  with  few  questions  asked,— this  is  the  tap-root  of  the
evil,  and  it  is  to  be  cured  by  distinguishing  between  wealth  and  character,  and  by  honoui-
ing  the  former  only  when  in  alliance  with  the  latter.

III.  An  injunction  which  it  is  every  one's  interest  to  enfokoe.  Trade  dis-
honesty should,  if  possible,  be  checked:  1.  In  view  of  its  inherent  immorality.
Nothing  can  be  more  despicable,  more  mean  and  disgraceful,  than  the  lies,  frauds,
briberies,  malpractices,  adulterations,  which,  if  the  witnesses  are  to  be  trusted,  abound
in  all  branches  of  trade.  These  things  are  a  blot  on  our  country,  the  shame  of  whieh
touches  all.  2.  In  view  of  its  corrupting  effect  on  morals  generally.  Its  influence
spreads  beyond  itself.  It  saps  principle,  eats  out  faith  in  virtue,  unfits  the  individual
for  every  moral  task.  3.  In  view  of  its  effects  on  national  prosperity.  These  are
ruinous.  God's  displeasure  rests  on  the  nation,  and  he  is  certain  to  chastise  it.  But
the  sorest  whip  he  uses  to  chastise  it  is  the  scourge  of  its  own  follies.  Our  dishonesties
lose  us  (are  actually  losing  us)  our  markets ;  lower  us  in  the  eyes  of  foreign  nations ;
destroy  credit ;  engender  a  spirit  of  general  distrust ;  still  worse,  by  undermining
principle,  they  destroy  the  power  of  steady  application  to  work,  and  increasingly
substitute  the  motives  of  the  gambler  for  those  of  the  merchant  content  with  lawful,
gains.  The  inevitable  end  is  impoverishment  and  disgrace.  4.  As  a  measure  of  self-
protection.  Each  individual  suffers  as  part  of  the  whole.  He  is  frequently  cheated,
sometimes  incurs  serious  losses.  Hard-earned  money  finds  its  way  into  the  pockets
of  clever  but  unscrupulous  scoundrels,  who  as  rapidly  squander  it  in  reckless  living.

Vers.  17 — 19. — Amdleh.  Moses,  in  calling  the  sin  of  Amalek  to  remembrance,  and
enjoining  destruction  of  that  people,  was  not  speaking  "  of  himself."  He  but  declared
the  will  of  God,  long  before  announced,  and  solemnly  recorded  in  a  book  (Exod.  xvii.  14)*


OR.  xiT.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMT.  899

It  was  not  "  after  the  spirit  or  mission  o;f  the  Law,"  as  has  been  well  remarked,  "  to
aim  at  overcoming  inveterate  opposition  by  love  and -by  attempts  at  conversion.  The
Law  taught  God's  hatred  of  sin  and  of  rebellion  against  him  by  enjoining  the  extinction
of  the  obstinate  sinner  "  ('  Speaker's  Commentary ').  The  lessons  from  the  command
are  vhese —

1.  God  keeps  in  bgmembbanoe  injubibs  done  to  his  Chuboh  and  feoplb.
(Ver.  17.)

IL  God  bpeoiallt  bbmbmbers  injithibs  to  the  feeble  and  afflicted.  (Ver.
18.)  The  "fear  of  God,"  if  nothing  else,  ought  to  restrain  inhumanities.  "Saul,
Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  f  "  (Acts  ix.  4).

III.  Wbonqb  to  the  Chubch  of  God  will  not  pass  truAVENOBD.  (Ver.  19.)
Itepentance,  as  in  Paul's  case,  may  reverse  the  sentence.  If  the  sinner  is  obstinate,  the
doom  will  fall  as  certainly  as  in  the  case  of  Amalek  (2  Thess.  i.  9). — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Earthly  magistra&y  an  argument  for  the  heavenly.  It  is  not  con-
ceivable that  God  should  have  taken  such  pains,  through  Kloses,  to  secure  pure
administration  of  justice  in  earthly  courts,  unless  he  had  established  a  like  court  of
judicature  in  heaven.  So  far  as  the  will  of  God  is  embodied  iu  the  judicial  procedure
on  earth,  it  is  copied  from  the  pattern  of  heavenly  things.

L  A  judicial  coubt  is  cbeateD  fob  the  discbimination  of  human  ohabaotbb.
The  purpose  of  all  examination  and  testimony  is  to  separate  the  evil  irom  tlie  good —
to  bring  to  light  the  righteousness  and  the  wickedness  of  men.  Justice  delights  more
in  vindicating  and  commending  the  righteous  than  in  censuring  and  condemning  the
wicked.  Justice  found  a  nobler  occupation  in  marshalling  Mordecai  through  the  city,
and  proclaiming  his  innocence,  than  in  erecting  the  gallows  for  the  execution  of  Hamau.
Human  judges,  however,  can  discern  only  what  is  palpable  and  conspicuous.  They  have
not  an  organ  of  insight  delicate  enough  to  detect  the  lesser  excellences  and  blemishes ;
nor  can  they  penetrate  into  the  interior  nature  of  man.  These  institutions  are  only  the
ihadmvi  of  heavenly  things.  But  every  man  stands  before  the  tribunal  of  a  higher
Judge,  where  not  only  actions,  but  motives,  intentions,  and  feelings,  are  examined  and
weighed.  Here,  without  the  possibility  of  mistake,  the  righteous  are  justified,  the
wicked  are  condemned.    Discrimination  is  perfect :  separation  will  be  complete.

IL  A  judicial  coubt  is  ordained  fob  the  punishment  of  evil  deeds.  1.  The
true  punishment  is  measured  by  the  scale  (^  demerit.  It  is  enjoined  to  be  "  according
to  his  fault."  In  God's  sagacious  judgment,  every  degree  of  blameworthiness  is  noted.
Nothing  appertaining  to  moral  conduct  is  beneath  the  notice  of  God's  eye.  We  value
far  too  little  moral  qualities.  As  we  grow  like  God,  we  shall  gain  in  that  penetrative
power  which  discerns  the  beauty  of  goodness  and  the  blackness  of  iniquity.  2.  Punish-
ment it  a  loss  of  manliness.  "  Tlie  judge  shall  cause  him  to  lie  down."  His  dignity
shall  be  prostrate.  Sin  robs  us  of  manliness,  but  the  loss  does  not  come  into  public
view  until  punishment  follows.  To  be  righteous  throughout  is  to  be  a  man.  3.  i'unish-
ment  it  to  be  public.  The  culprit  is  "  to  be  beaten  before  the  judge's  face."  This
publicity  is  part  of  the  penalty.  It  is  summary — to  be  inflicted  at  unce.  And  publicity
is  also  a  safeguard  against  cruelty  and  against  excess.  So  God  invites  public  recognition
and  public  approval  of  his  doings.  The  ransomed  universe  shall  unite  iu  the  testimony,
"Just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints."

III.  A  JUDICIAL  coubt  reveals  THE  VALUE  OF  A  HUMAN  LIFE.  The  penalties
were  to  be  moderate,  "  lest  thy  brother  should  seem  vile  unto  thee."  The  first  ends  of
punishment  are  the  reformation  and  improvement  of  the  offender.  If  it  is  possible  to
teach  the  culprit  the  value  of  himself,  and  inspire  him  with  a  hatred  of  sin,  we  have
done  him  unspeakable  good.  We  do  not  spend  so  much  in  cutting  and  polishing  a
common  stone  as  we  do  a  ruby  or  a  sapphire.  Let  our  treatment  of  men  be  as  if  we
esteemed  them  the  jewels  of  God. — D.

Vor.  4. — Doing  good  inseparable  from  getting  good.  Active  exercise  of  our  powers
b  •  primary  condition  of  getting  good.  Real  service  for  others  is  destined  to  gain
reward.

I.  Sbbviob  can  bs  bendbbed  to  man  bt  yert  infebiob  natures.  The  whole
lipinute  creation  w^itsupon  mm-    Every  livii^g  thing  upon  the  earth  is  a  servant  nui


400  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBROtTOMT.  [oh.  xxv.  1—19

a  lackey  for  men.  He  is  a  king  here ;  and,  if  he  have  sufficient  wisdom,  he  can  rule
all  for  his  own  advantage.  Yet,  in  a  hi j;her  sphere,  man  is  only  a  servant.  He  who
is  served  hy  all  inferior  heings  is  called  to  serve  the  Highest  Being.  The  disparity
between  God  and  man  is  a  disparity  immeasurable ;  and  yet  God  permits,  yea,  en-
courages, our  intelligent  and  willing  service.  Inferior  as  we  are  to  him,  we  can  rendei
efficient  service  to  his  kingdom  and  glory.    This  is  man's  truest  honour.

II.  Service  contributes  to  pkovide  an  abundant  banquet.  The  labour  of  the
oxen  prtpared  the  com  for  men.  So  gross  is  our  ignorance  of  the  lower  creation,  that
we  do  not  perceive  our  indebtedness  to  the  birds  and  insects,  which  play  so  useful  a
part  in  the  preparation  of  our  food.  All  well-directed  service  contributes  something  to
the  substantial  advantage  of  man.  There  is  a  banquet  of  intellectual  food,  or  a  banquet
for  the  aesthetic  taste,  or  a  banquet  for  the  soul,  resulting.  Active  labour  serves  both
to  create  an  appetite  and  to  furnish  a  table.

[II.  Service  has  claims  upon  oub  generous  becomfense.  It  would  be  nothing
else  than  selfish  cruelty  to  deny  to  the  oxen  a  share  in  the  result  of  their  labour.  Thus
God  cares  lor  the  oxen.  Thus  he  cares  for  all  the  works  of  his  hands.  And  does  his
kindly  care  for  the  inferior  beasts  diminish  his  tender  regard  for  men?  It  im-
measurably enhances  it!  Whoever  or  whatever  does  us  useful  service  brings  us  under
obligation.  To  the  extent  of  our  power  we  are  bound  to  recompense  such.  This  sense
of  indebtedness  is  a  channel  of  blessing  to  the  soul.  The  richest  man  is  he  who  ifl  the
most  generous.    A  muzzle  is  a  shackle  forged  by  wanton  selfishness. — D.

Vers.  13 — 16. — Religion  inspires  commercial  life.  It  is  certain  that  God  displays
the  liveliest  interest  in  every  department'of  human  life.  He  is  not  only  the  God  of
the  hills ;  he  is  God  of  the  valleys  also.  He  takes  cognizance,  not  only  ol'  great  things,
but  also  of  small.  Can  any  man  tell  us  what  are  small  things?  Not  only  on  the
portal  of  every  church,  but  on  the  forefront  of  every  shop — ay,  on  the  beam  of  everj
balance,  we  ought  to  see  the  inscription,  "  To  the  glory  of  God  alone ! "

I.  Religion  claims  a  throne  in  evert  shop.  True  religion  is  the  sunny  smile
from  God's  eye, -and,  as  the  common  liglit  of  day  penetrates  into  every  nook  and
cranny  of  nature,  so  the  light  of  God's  love  pierces  into  every  interest  of  human  life.
It  is  not  a  rumantic  something  which  has  merely  to  do  with  the  region  of  existence
beyond  the  grave;  it  is  the  life  of  our  present  life — the  secret  spring  of  every  duty.
Ordinary  trade  is  a  splendid  field  for  the  practical  exercise  of  religious  virtues,  because
the  commercial  activities  of  the  age  afford  large  facilities  either  for  fidelity  or  for  fraud.
In  every  office  and  warehouse  religion  claims  to  set  up  her  throne.  In  the  smallest  act
of  buying  and  selling  she  insists  on  having  a  voice.

II.  Religion  goes  to  the  root  of  things — determines  the  standards  of  human
action.  If  the  weight  or  measure  be  false,  then  every  transaction  will  be  false.
Ingenious  wickedness  had  invented  two  sets  of  standards — an  over-large  one  for  the
man  as  buyer,  an  under-size  for  the  same  man  as  seller.  This  course  of  vile  procedure
curried  the  villainy  into  every  item  of  the  man's  mercantile  life.  It  is  of  the  first
importance  that  we  set  up  right  standards.  The  Pharisee  in  the  temple  was  a  perfect
man,  according  to  his  standard.  The  rich  young  man  who  came  to  Jesus  Christ  for
counsel  was  blameless,  according  to  his  standard.  Men  are  prone  to  set  up  conventional
i.tandards,  and  measure  themselves  and  every  one  one  else  according  to  their  rule.
'lake  heed  that  your  standard  is  GocCa  standard,  "a  perfect  and  just  measure."

III.  Religion  is  both  destructive  and  constructive.  "  Thou  shalt  not  have  this ;
thou  shalt  have  that."  It  first  pulls  down,  then  builds  up.  It  first  uproots,  then
plants,  "  Mortify  your  members,  then  add  to  your  virtues."  The  old  must  be  destroyed ;
the  new  must  be  sown  and  nursed.  In  our  self-culture  and  in  our  training  of  others,
it  is  not  enough  that  we  are  repressive  and  prohibitive ;  the  new  growths  will  often
cast  off  effete  and  injurious  matter.  Prune  away  barren  boughs;  encourage  the
development  of  the  fruitful  wood.

IV.  Religion  BBmos  collateral  oainb  in  this  life.  Her  msun  reward  is  in  the
future,  viz.  possession  of  the  Divine  image ;  nevertheless,  she  confers  many  solid  favours
here  and  now.  Real  pleasure  is  her  daily  gift,  and  "  length  of  days "  is  her  special
prize.  "  The  wicked  shall  not  live  out  half  their  days  '' — they  die  prematurely.  Nor  it
long  life  on  earth  to  be  despised.    There  are,  doubtless,  moral  advantages  and  gains


«n.  IXT.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  4Ul

obtainable  in  tbis  life,  which  are  not  obtainable  in  the  life  to  come.  Many  of  the
means  of  discipline  and  pruning  and  reformation  will  end  with  this  life.  We  are  placed
here  for  probation ;  and  (if  well-used)  long  school-life  is  an  advantage  unspeakable.
To  be  esteemed  by  God  as  "  the  apple  of  his  eye  "  is  better  than  an  earthly  coronet.
To  be  regarded  by  him  as  "  abomination  "  is  "  concentrated  curse." — D.

Vers.  17 — 19. — Cowardice  and  crvAty  avenged.  The  feeling  of  resentment  must  be
classed  "low"  among  the  moral  sentiments.  But  this  command  to  remember  and  to
avenge  the  conduct  .of  Amalek  is  not  resentment.  Abundant  time  was  allowed  the
Amalekites  to  abandon  evil  ways  and  to  cultivate  friendly  relations  with  Israel.  But
they  continued,  century  after  century,  godless  and  hostile :  lience  their  extinction.

I.  Atheism  bbbeds  in  men  both  cruelty  and  cowardice.  Against  Aranlek  the
gravest  charge  is,  "he  feared  not  Omi."  This  is  the  root  if  all  his  wickedness — the
source  of  his  base  hostility  to  Israel.  Practical  atheism  is  the  prolific  parent  of  hateful
vices.  There  was  not  a  trait  of  nobleness  in  Amalek's  conduct.  It  was  cowardly  and
cruel.  He  attacked  Israel  in  the  rear — "smote  the  hindmost"  stragglers — fell  upon
those  already  half-dead  from  fatigue.  For  a  moment  he  gloried  in  the  inglorious
massacre,  but  only  for  a  moment.  The  prayer  of  one  man  was  more  than  a  match  for
Amalek.  In  every  age  it  is  found  that  he  "  who  fears  not  Grod  "  has  no  "  regard  for
man."  The  influence  of  a  bad  man  is  perilously  contagious.  The  whole  tribe  is
embraced  under  the  character  of  one  man.

II.  Cruel  tbeatment  leaves  an  indelible  impression  upon  the  mind.  Human
nature  is  so  constituted  that  a  wrong  done  to  us  or  to  our  fathers  is  held  tenaciously
in  the  memory,  and  provokes  all  the  feelings  to  avenge  the  deed.  Herein  the  Word  of
God  is  in  accord  with  our  mental  nature.  Human  nature  says,  "  Remembpr!"  The
Scripture  says,  "  Bemember  1 "  "  Thou  shalt  not  forget  it."  Incidentally,  we  have
here  a  proof  that  the  Creator  of  the  human  mind  is  also  the  Author  of  Scripture.
Injustice  rouses  up  all  the  moral  forces  in  the  universe  to  inflict  a  fitting  retribution;
and  very  often  God  employs  as  his  ministers  of  vengeance  the  victims  of  former  oppres-
sion. The  increase,  the  strength,  the  organization  of  Israel  were  to  be  employed  early
upon  this  end,  viz.  to  extinguish  Amalek.

III.  Inheritance  from  God  carries  with  it  an  obligation  to  do  his  will.  Best
is  given  to  prepare  for  more  difiScult  service.  "  When  the  Lord  thy  God  hath  given
thee  rest,  .  .  .  thou  shalt  blot  out  Amalek."  God  never  gives  to  men  any  inheritance
for  exclusive  selfish  enjoyment.  If  we  ■  are  not  disposed  for  service,  and  even  for
warfare,  the  only  consistent  course  is  to  decline  God's  gifts.  He  has  plainly  made
known  to  men  the  conditions  of  his  bequests.  Before  Israel  possessed  the  promised
land  it  was  clearly  revealed  what  was  expected  from  the  occupants  of  that  inheritance.
Nor  is  the  )nk»ntaace  of  heaven  a  state  of  indolent  repose.  The  voice  that  says,
"  Enter  into  joy,*  ss.ys  also,  "  Be  thou  ruler."  We  read  of  disputes  between  Michael
and  the  adversary.  Who  shall  say  that  God  will  not  employ  his  ransomed  ones  to  put
down  rebellion  in  some  outlying  province? — D.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Corporal  punishment.  We  have  here  directions  given  for  the  punish-
ment of  criminals.  As  the  Hebrews  had  no  gaol  system,  a  properly  graduated  corporal
punishment  supplied  most  effectively  its  place.  Moses  here  directs  the  judges  to  look
carefully  into  (he  case,  and  to  assign  a  certain  number  of  stripes,  which  are  never  to
exceed  forty,  the  chastisement  being  given  in  the  presence  of  the  judge.  Thus  the
largest  measure  of  equity  was  introduced  into  their  penal  system.

I.  Retribution  of  some  kind  is  consonant  with  our  ideas  op  righteousness.  To
be  allowed  to  sin  with  impunity  would  be,  we  all  feel,  an  immoral  regulation  under  any
government,  and  especially  immoral  under  a  theocracy.  Punishment  for  sin  is  demanded
by  the  human  consdence.  All  quarrel  with  retribution  as  such  argues  a  want  of
conscientiousness.

II.  But  retribution  should  be  pbofortional  to  bin.  This  is  what  the  law  before  us
secured.  The  stripes  were  to  be  few  or  many,  accordinc;  to  the  crime,  but  never  to
exceed  forty.     The  judgment  was  to  be  righteous  and  equitable  all  through.

III.  We  look  instinctively  fob  the  same  equttt  under  the  government  of
God.    And  this  is  exactly  what  we  have.    And  here  let  us  observe —

DEUTERONOMY.  2  O


402  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY,  [oh.  xxv.  I— J9

1.  Sin  h  not  allowed  to  go  unpvnished  uniJer  God's  government.  It  has  been  Tory
confidently  asserted  that,  if  people  are  penitent,  no  atonement  is  needed  to  seciirs
pardon.  But,  supposing  penitence  a  possible  experience  apart  from  the  spectacle  of  .»
pierced  and  atoning  Saviour  (Zeoh.  xii.  10),  should  we  not  have  "sin  with  impunity"
under  the  reputedly  just  government  of  God?  Those  who  glibly  talk  of  penitence
being  all  that  is  required,  have  formed  no  broad  or  consistent  notion  of  the  necessities
of  government.'  Now,  the  Divine  arrangement  has  been  to  lay  the  "  stripes "  we
deserve  upon  his  willing  Son.  "  With  his  stripes  we  are  healed  "  (Isa.  liii.  5).  The
sin  is  punished  in  the  person  of  a  sinless  and  most  willing  Substitute,  and  the  demands
of  justice  met.  We  may  be  sure  that,  as  the  Father  presided  at  the  punishment,  no
more  was  laid  on  Jesus  than  the  demands  of  simple  justice  and  the  exigencies  of  the
government  required.     And —

2.  Unpardoned  because  impenitent  sinners  shall  have  their  punishment  graduated
according  to  the  strictest  justice.  It  has  been  asserted  that  punishment  without  end
would  be  excessive  for  the  sins  of  a  short  life  on  earth.  But  it  is  forgotten  that  "  ever-
lasting punishment"  is  the  shadow  simply  of  "everlasting  sin."  The  latter,  alas !  is
possible  through  the  freedt)m  of  the  creature ;  and  as  sin  continues,  so  must  punish-
ment. At  the  same  time,  the  graduation  of  punishment  in  the  other  world  will  be  as
accurate  and  as  careful  as  the  corporal  punishment  under  the  Law  of  Moses.  In  fact,
it  is  this  idea  of  stripes  our  Lord  employs  to  express  the  truth.  "And  that  servant
which  knew  his  lord's  will,  and  made  cot  ready,  nor  did  according  to  his  will,  shall  be
beaten  with  many  stripes ;  but  he  that  knew  not,  and  did  things  worthy  of  stripes,
shall  be  beaten  with  few  stripes.  And  to  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall
much  be  required ;  and  to  whom  they  commit  much,  of  him  will  they  ask  the  more  "
(Luke  xii.  47,  48,  Revised  Version).  It  is  thus  clearly  seen  that  the  utmost  care  will
be  taken  to  graduate  the  penalties  in  the  hereafter,  so  that  no  one  shall  have  the  least
ground  of  complaint.  The  vulgar  revolt  against  the  everlasting  punishment  revealed
in  Scripture  is  due  to  the  idea  that  the  criminals  are  thrown  pell-mell  together  and
])unished  in  the  lump.  With  far  greater  care,  however,  shall  each  impenitent  one  have
his  penalties  meted  out  to  him  than  prisoners  have  under  the  most  conscientious
judges.

IV.  Instead  of  bandying  about  arguments  in  favoub  op  belief  undeb  punish-
ment, IT  would  be  kindbb  for  controversialists  to  induce  men  through  faith  in
Jesus  Cheist  to  accept  of  pardon  and  so  escape  penalty.  The  spectacle  at  present
is  a  sad  one.  Writers  are  pursuing  the  phantom  of  remission  of  sins  and  of  punish-
ment in  the  other  life,  as  a  new  gospel  for  sinncTS,  instead  of  urging  their  fellows  to  flee
at  once  to  Jesus,  the  only  Refuge.  This  much  is  certain,  "  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,"
says  Christ,  "  1  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."  Upon  such  a  promise  any  soul  may  repose.
But  the  uncertainty  of  speculation  is  proverbial,  and  can  never  be  the  sheet-anchor  of
any  sane  soul.  Let  men  come  to  Jesus,  and  the  question  of  punishment,  so  far  as  they
are  concerned,  is  settled  for  ever.  Punishment  gives  way  to  pardon;  while  at  the  same
time,  it  is  felt  that  the  sin  has  not  gone  unpunished. — R.  M.  B.

Yer.  4. — The  ric/hts  of  labour.  The  threshing  in  the  East  is  done  by  oxen  in  many
cases  still,  though  horses,  where  procurable,  are  found  more  serviceable.  While  the
animals  were  engaged  in  their  weary  round,  they  were  never  muzzled,  but  allowed  to
eat  of  the  corn  they  were  treading  out.'  It  would  appear,  indeed,  that  it  was  the  straw
simply  that  they  were  to  receive,  and  the  corn  was  to  be  reserved  for  the  men,  their
masters.'  But  the  idea  manifestly  was  the  right  of  the  patient  animal  to  a  share  of
the  corn  he  was  helping  to  thresh.  It  suggests  the  large  subject  of  the  rights  of  labour.
Into  this,  of  course,  we  cannot  enter  at  any  length.     But  we  may  observe —

I.  That  co-opebation  in  wobk  has  a  bight  to  a  share  in  its  wages.  This  va
recognized  in  the  Mosaic  Law  regarding  the  lower  animals,  and  the  argument  is  cuma-
lative  with  regard  to  man.  "  The  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire,"  said  our  Lord.  "  TLo
workman  is  worthy  of  his  meat"  (Luke  x.  7  ;  Matt.  x.  10).

'  Cf.  Hutton's  '  Essays,'  vol.  1.  p.  372 ;  and  '  Retribution  in  Relation  to  the  Justioe,  Qof»S"
nesB,  and  Purpose  of  God,'  by  the  Rev.  F.  L.  Patton,  D.D.
•  Cf.  A'an  Lennep's  '  Bible  Lands,'  p.  81.
»  Hengstenberg's  '  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,'  pp.  223.  224.


<M.  XXV.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  403

II.  The  bhabe  should  be  sufficient  to  sustain  life.  The  ox  was  expected  to
pick  up  on  his  roun<ls  as  much  as  would  keep  up  his  strength  for  labour.  And  in  the
same  way,  the  wages  of  a  labourer  should  be  sufficient  to  sustain  him  in  the  position  he
ocf 'ipios  in  society.  The  oconomic  laws  about  the  "  wages'  fund  "  are  not  so  inexorahla
as  to  prevent  such  a  plain  principle  being  evermore  kept  in  view.  Tliere  is  a  heartloss-
ness  attributed  to  the  laws  of  wealth  that  belongs  to  the  capitalists  themselves.

III.  There  should  be  stmpatht  between  employee  ^nd  employed.  The  very
oxen  occupy  a  position  where  sympathy  must  obtain  between  them  and  their  keepers,
if  the  wurk  is  to  be  properly  performed.  How  much  more  must  this  obtain  when  the
workers  are  our  fellow-men !  The  late  Sir  Artliur  Helps,  in  one  of  his  early  and  anony-
mous volumes  entitled, '  The  Claims  of  Labour,'  refers  frequently  to  this.  "  You  must
not  be  surprised,"  he  says  to  the  employer,  "  at  the  ingratitude  of  those  to  whom  you
have  given  nothing  but  money."  "  Fortunately,"  he  says  in  another  place,  "  the
proneness  of  men  to  regard  with  favour  tliose  put  in  authority  over  them  is  very  strong ;
and  I  have  little  fear  of  finding  any  large  body  ot  thoughtful  and  kind  masters  suffering
from  permanent  indifference  (ir  ingratitude  on  the  part  of  tlieir  dependents."  Sympathy
between  masters  and  men  is  more  important  even  than  adequate  wages.

IV.  Both  Jesus  and  Paul  apply  the  pkinciple  to  ministerial  sdppobt.  In  the
passage  already  noticed  our  Lord  does  so  (Matt.  x.  9 — 11;  Luke  x.  7).  Paul  also,
in  1  Tim.  v.  17,  18,  makes  use  of  it,  referring  both  to  the  passage  before  us  in
Deuteronomy  and  also  to  our  Lord's  deliverance.  In  placing  the  ministry  upon  the
same  ground  as  other  workers,  it  is  clear  that  it  is  to  be  no  exception  to  the  rule  of
proportional  reward.  Of  course,  it  is  not  supported  as  other  and  meaner  occupations
are.  Every  other  occupation  is  beneath  it  in  dignity,  but  every  other  almost  is  above
it  in  reward.  Its  rights  must  be  advocated ;  its  claims  are  valid,  and  men  deny  them
at  their  peril.— R.  M.  E.

Vers.  6 — 10. —  T/ie  rights  of  the  firsthom.  We  have  already  observed  that  the  first-
born had  a  right  to  a  double  share  of  the  family  inheritance  (ch.  xxi.  17).  We  have
befora  us  another  of  his  rights — a  seed  was  to  be  raised  up  unto  him  by  his  younger
brothers,  that  his  name  should  uot  be  put  out  in  Israel.  In  a  peasant  proprietary  such
as  existed  in  Palestine,  we  can  easily  understai  d  the  importance  of  such  a  regulation.
It  was,  moreover,  esteemed  a  most  disgraceful  act  to  refuse  to  raise  up  seed  unto  a  dead
brother,  and  the  man  guilty  of  it  had  to  suffer  the  indignity  of  being  spat  upon,  and  of
having  his  shoe  contemptuously  loosed.

Now,  there  can  be  no  question  that  Jesus  Christ  occupies  the  position  of  Eldest  Brother
in  the  family  of  God.  Not  only  was  it  declared  prophetically,  "  I  will  make  him  my
Firstborn,  higher  than  the  kings  of  the  earth  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  27),  but  he  is  expressly
called  "  the  Firstborn  from  the  dead,"  "  the  Firstborn  among  many  brethren,"  and  "the
Firstborn  of  every  creature  "  (Col.  i.  18  ;  Eom.  viii.  29 ;  Col.  i.  15).  Undoubtedly,  then,
the  rights  guaranteed  by  Jewish  Law  to  the  firstborn  were  intended  to  illustrate  the
rights  of  Jesus  Christ.

I.  Jesus  Chbibt,  like  the  dead  fiestboen,  has  to  depend  on  othees  foe  a
spiritual  seed.  For  in  the  naiure  oi  things  it  would  have  been  incongruous  fot
Incarnate  God  to  have  entered  into  mari-iage  with  any  daughter  of  Adam,  and  to  have
become  physically  a  father.  His  condescension  was  surely  great  enough  in  becoming
man  at  all,  and  it  could  not  be  expected  that  he  would  enter  into  still  closer  relations
to  the  race.  None  ever  stood  in  the  relation  to  physical  children  of  Jesus  Christ.  It
would  have  made  a  confusion  in  the  contemplated  spiritual  relationship.  Hence  our
Lord  had  to  look  to  others  to  raise  him  up  a  seed.

II.  It  lifts  the  family  relation  into  the  holiest  light  to  think  that  wb  may
BE  BAISINO  UP  A  SPIRITUAL  SEED  FOE  Jesus.  How  holy  all  marriage  relations  become
when  it  is  felt  to  be  possible  to  be  providing  the  Great  Elder  Brother  with  a  spiritual
Meed !  The  children  sent  of  God  are  then  regarded  as  Christ's ;  we  dedicate  them  to
him  in  prayer,  and  perhaps  also  in  baptism ;  we  handle  them  and  rear  them  as  c<)nse-
crat«d  things ;  we  train  them  up  in  his  nurture  and  admonition,  and  we  feel  honoured
ia  having  any  part  in  the  formation  of  "the  mighty  family."

III.  It  LIFTS  THE   PASTOEAL   AS   WELL  AS  PAEENTAL    RELATION   INTO    THE   HOLIEST

UOHT.    In  Weemse's  book  on  the  '  Ceremonial  Laws  of  Moses,'  where  "  the  privilegei


404  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxv.  1— 19.

of  the  firstborn  "  ore  so  fully  discussed,  the  application  is  made  to  preachers  rather  than
to  parents.  But  we  think  that  parents  should  feel  the  elevation  of  spirit  and  life
which  the  idea  of  raising  up  a  seed  for  Jesus  is  fitted  to  impart.  And  if  parents  should
feel  it,  much  more  should  pastors.  We  are  meant  to  be  the  "  spiritual  fathers  "  of  men.
We  have  exceptional  advantages  in  prosecuting  the  holy  work.  Oh,  how  glorious  it  is
to  think  of  adding  by  our  faithful  labours  to  the  great  family  of  God !  It  is  the  Name
and  honour  of  Jesus  which  we  should  seek  to  perpetuate  by  our  pastoral  labours.  And
so  our  aim  is  to  have  men  bom  again  through  the  incorruptible  seed,  the  Word  of  God,
which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever  (1  Pet.  i.  23).

IV.  Ant  refusal  to  raise  up  a  seed  for  Jesus  will  be  visited  bt  God  in  due
SEASON  WITH  DiBE  DISGRACE.  For  the  Spitting  in  the  face  and  the  unloosing  of  the  shoe
»ie  but  symbols  of  the  dire  disgrace  which  shall  overtake  all  who  will  not  engage  in  this
holy  work.  It  is  a  work  for  Church  members  as  well  as  for  ministers.  Itlies  as  a
responsibility  upon  every  one  that  names  the  Name  of  Jesus,  and  is  a  younger  brother
or  sister  in  the  family  of  God.     Woe  be  to  the  person  who  is  indifferent  to  this  1

And  surely  it  should  stimulate  us  to  remember  that  the  great  ambition  of  Jesus  is
to  have  "  many  brethren."  The  mightier  the  multitude  of  redeemed  ones  the  better.
The  glory  and  honour  of  Immanuel  shall  thus  be  the  more  thoroughly  secured.  He  has  no
desire  to  be  the  solitary  and  selfish  heir ;  but  the  whole  plan  of  redemption  is  to  have
as  many  as  possible  "joint-heirs"  with  him.  As  families  and  as  Churches  grow  in
numbers  and  in  loyalty  to  Jesus,  his  rights  a«  Firstborn  are  being  regarded  and  secured
(Rom.  viii.  17).

We  cannot  picture  the  dire  disgrace  which  the  refusal  to  secure  the  rights  of  Jesus
Christ  will  entaiL  But  the  selfish  souls  will  be  the  offscouring  of  all  things ;  angels  will
despise  them  as  having  highest  honour  within  reach,  and  not  having  the  heart  to  accept
it.  Oh,  let  every  one  that  has  a  word  to  speak  and  a  kindness  to  perform  in  the  Name
of  Jesus,  do  it  in  the  holy  hope  of  increasing  the  spiritual  seed  of  the  great  and  loving
Elder  Brother  I— B.  M.  E.

Vers.  11 — 16. — Bonesty  tht  test  policy.  We  have  first  a  law  of  purity,  which  needs
no  exposition,  but  in  its  holy  severity  (vers.  11,  12)  was  fitted  to  check  all  tendency  to
lewd  practices  among  the  women  of  Israel.  Then  Moses  passes  on  to  speak  of  the
crime  of  having  divers  weights  and  measures,  and  the  effort  to  make  money  by  dis-
honest practices.  No  blessing  from  God  can  rest  upon  such  wilfully  dishonest  ones ;  if
bis  blessing  is  to  be  experienced,  it  must  be  by  a  policy  of  honesty  all  round.

L  It  IS  APPARENTLY  EASY  TO'  MAKE  MONEY  BY  LIGHT  WEIGHTS  AND  SHORT  MEASURES.

It  is  not  only  securing  the  ordinary  profits,  but  gaining  by  the  deficiency  palmed  off
for  the  perfect  measure.  It  is  a  gain  by  quantity  as  well  as  by  price.  And  plenty  of
people  who  look  only  at  the  svurface  imagine  that  they  can  easily  enrich  themselves  by
1  little  dishonesty,  which  vrill  never  be  detected.  Inspectors  of  weights  and  measures
are  the  embodiment  of  the  suspicions  of  society.

II.   It  IS  A  SYSTEM  OF  BUSINESS  UPON  WHICH  NO  DiVINB  BLESSING  CAN  BE  ASKED.      No

better  test  of  the  propriety  of  our  procedure  can  be  found  than  this.  Will  it  stand
the  test  of  prayer?  Can  Gtod,  the  All-holy  One,  be  expected  to  bless  it  ?  Now,  his
whole  Word  shows  that  such  practices  are  abominations  to  him.  The  stars  of  heaven
will  at  length  fight  against  such  a  policy.

ni.  No  TEMPORARY  SUCCESS  CAN  COMPENSATE  FOB  AH  UNEASY  CONSCIENCE.       SuppOSS

that  success  waited  on  dishonesty  invariably  and  proved  lasting,  life  would  be  maile
miserable  by  the  uneasy  conscience.  Stifled  for  a  time,  it  rises  like  the  furies  at  last,
and  makes  life  a  lasting  misery.  No  man  ever  trifled  with  conscience  and  did  not  suffer
for  it.  Success  becomes  in  such  a  case  but  a  whited  sepulchre;  the  experience  within
is  but  the  rottenness  of  the  tomb.

rV.  Honesty  is  the  best  policy  fob  personal  peace  and  for  Divine  blessing.
We  say  that  no  man  should  so  far  outrage  his  conscience  as  to  be  dishonest.  Honesty
is  a  policy  to  be  pursued  for  its  own  sake,  as  the  only  condition  of  personal  peace.
Were  there  no  Divine  blessing  in  question  at  all,  conscientious  men  would  be  as  honest
as  they  are  now.

At  the  same  time,  it  makes  the  honesty  all  the  happier  that  it  lies  in  the  sunshine  of
the  Infiuit*  Presence,  and  that  his  radiant  smile  is  on  it.    There  is  no  danger  of  a


OH.  3CXVI.  1 — 19,]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


405


mercenary  spirit  entering  into  such  a  relation  with  God.  He  so  wraps  U3  round  that
in  his  circle  of  love  it  would  be  most  ungrateful  and  most  dissonant  to  practise
dishonesty.

With  people  under  a  theocracy,  or  reign'of  God,  we  should  expect  to  find  just  weights
and  full  measures.  The  visits  of  the  inspectors  should  prove  superfluous  with  all  those
whose  life  lies  open  as  the  day  to  the  inspection  of  their  King. — E.  M.  B.

Vers.  17 — 19. — I%e  extermination  of  the  merciless.  The  crime  of  the  Amalekites
was  falling  upon  the  hindmost,  who  were  faint  and  weary.  It  was  an  act  of  judgment
untempered  by  any  mercy ;  and  the  decree  of  God  is  their  extermination  because  they
were  merciless.  Just  as  we  see  in  another  place  that  God  won't  forgive  the  unforgiving,
so  here  we  see  that  he  will  blot  out  the  merciless  from  under  his  merciful  heaven.
"  For  he  shall  havo  judgment  without  mercy,  that  hath  showed  no  mercy  "  (Jas.  ii.  13).

I.  The  merciless  deserve  no  mercy.  In  the  case  before  us  there  was  everything
calculated  to  stir  up  mercy.  The  rearguard  was  feeble  and  faint  and  weary.  Surely
these  Amalekites  will  pity  the  poor  pilgrims,  and  show  them  some  mercy.  But  no,  they
think  they  are  all  the  better  prey,  and  so  they  smite  the  people  of  God  most  mercilessly.
In  their  heartless  act  they  put  themselves  beyond  the  pale  of  God's  compassion.  He
consigns  them  to  extermination  under  the  swords  of  Israel.  Our  conscience  says,
"  Amen  "  to  this  decree.     The  Amalekites  deserve  destruction  for  their  heartlessness.

What  a  word  of  warning  to  heartless  people  still !  Let  it  be  carried  to  a  certain
point,  and  God  will  hand  them  over  to  deserved  destruction.

II.  The  rearguard  is  always  avbnobd.  The  tribe  of  Dan  was  directed  to  go
"  hindmost  with  their  standards  "  (Numb,  ii  31).  And  it  must  have  seemed  a  trial  to
be  always  in  the  rear  and  never  in  the  van.  But  tliey  were  here  taught  that  they
had  in  God  a  special  Avenger.  He  espouses  their  cause,  and  will  bring  forth  their
righteousness  as  the  light,  and  their  judgment  as  the  noonday  (Ps.  xxxvii.  6).

III.  Let  us  contekiedly  take  the  hindmost  place  if  God  oiveb  it  to  us.  All
cannot  be  in  the  van,  and  the  faith  fulness  of  the  rearguard  is  as  much  a  matter  of
Divine  observation  as  is  the  dash  and  courage  which  characterize  the  van. — B.  M.  E.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXVt


TBANKSGITINO    AMD    FbAYEB    AT  TBB  FBE-

SBKTATIOV  OP  PiRSTPEUITB  AND  TiTHES.

As  Moses  began  his  exposition  of  the
laws  and  rights  instituted  for  Israel  by  a
reference  to  the  sanctuary  as  the  plaee
which  the  Lord  should  choose,  and  the
place  where  religious  service  was  to  be
rendered  (ch.  xii.),  so  here  he  follows  up
his  address  by  a  reference  to  the  same.  Of
the  gifts  which  had  to  be  presented  at  the
sanctuary  there  were  two  specially  con-
nected with  the  social  and  domestic  life  of
the  people,  viz.  the  firstfruits  and  the
seconi  tithe.  To  these,  by  a  natural  tran-
sition from  the  preceding  discourse — occu-
pied as  that  is  with  injunctions  regarding
their  social  and  domestic  relations — Moses
here  refers  for  the  purpose  of  prescribing
certain  liturgical  forms  with  which  the
presentation  of  the  gift  was  to  be  aooom-
panied  by  the  offieier.


Vers.  1—11.— Of  the  flrstfhiits  the  Is-
raelite was  to  take  a  portion,  and  placing  it
in  a  basket,  to  bring  it  to  the  place  of  the
sanctuary,  where  it  was  to  be  received  by
the  attendant  priest.  The  offerer  was  to
accompany  his  presentation  with  the  decla-
ration, "  I  profess  this  day  unto  the  Lord
thy  God,  that  I  am  come  unto  the  country
which  the  Lord  sware  unto  our  fathers  for
to  give  us ; "  and  the  priest  having  set  the
basket  down  before  the  altar,  the  offerer
was  to  make  confession  and  prayer,  grate-
fully acknowledging  the  Divine  favour
sliowed  to  Israel  in  choosing  them  to  be  a
great  nation,  in  delivering  them  out  of
Egypt,  and  bringing  them  into  a  rich  and
fertile  land ;  and  along  with  this  his  bounty
to  the  individual  who  now  presented  the
firstfruits  of  his  land  unto  the  Lord.

Ver.  2.— The  first  of  all  the  fruit  of  *e
earth.  (On  the  law  of  the  firstfruits,  aee
Numb,  xviii.  12;  ch.  xviii.  4.)  A  twiftcet;
K3D,  a  basket  of  wickerwork.


406


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[cH.  xxn.  1— 19.


Ye;.  3.  —The  priest  that  shall  be  in  those
days ;  not  the  high  priest,  but  the  priests
collectively,  or  the  Individual  piiest  whose
function  it  was  to  officiate  on  Ihe  opcasion.
The  fruit  presented  was  the  sensible  proof
that  the  laud  was  now  in  their  possession,
and  the  confession  made  along  with  the
presentation  was  an  acknowledgment  of
ILeir  uu worthiness,  and  of  the  Divine  favour
as  that  to  wliicli  alone  they  were  indulited
for  the  privileged  position  in  which  thoy
were  placed.

Ver.  5. — A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  was  my
father.  The  reference  is  to  Jacob,  the  stem-
father  of  the  twelve  tribes.  He  is  here
called  a  Syrian,  or  Aramaean,  because  of
his  long  residence  in  Mesopotamia  (Gen.
xxix. — xxxi.),  whence  Abraham  had  origin-
ally come  (Gen.  xi.  31),  and  because  there
the  family  of  which  he  was  tlie  head  was
founded.  The  translation  "ready  to  perish  '
fairly  represents  the  Hebrew ;  the  verb
13«  means  not  merely  to  stray  or  wand'  r,
but  also  to  lose  one's  self,  to  perish,  to  be
in  danger  of  perishing  (cf.  oh.  iv.  26 ;  Job
xxix.  13;  Prov.  xxxi.  6,  etc.).  Different
renderings  of  this  clause  have  been  given.
The  Targum,  Vulgate,  Luther,  etc.,  have,
"  The  Aramajan  (i.e.  Labnn)  oppressed  my
father ; "  Tlie  LXX.,  :ivpiav  aviXttrfv  i
irar-lip  fiov  ("  My  father  left  Syria  ") ;  others,
"  To  the  Aramaean  my  father  wandered."
But  these  either  follow  another  reading
than  that  of  the  received  text,  or  they  are
expedients  to  soften  down  the  apparent
iKnominy  of  the  description.  The  probable
allusion  to  the  wandering,  nomadic  life  of
the  patriarch,  liowever,  is  not  to  be  lost
sight  of.  With  a  few ;  literally,  in  men  of
few ;  i.e.  consisting  of  few  men,  as  a  small
company ;  the  father  and  head  of  the  tribe
is  named  for  those  belonging  to  him  (cf.
Gen.  xxxiv.  30;  xlvi.  27).  A  great  nation,
etc.  (cf.  Exod.  i.  7,  9).

Yer.  6. — The  Egyptians  eyil  entreated  ns
(cf.  Exod.  i.  11—22;  ii.  23,  etc).

Ver.  8.— (Cf.  ch.  iv.  34.)

Yer.  10. — Thou  shalt  set  it,  eto. ;  either  a
general  concluding  remark,  taking  up  the
statement  of  ver.  4,  or  the  offerer  may  have
resumed  hold  of  the  basket,  and  after  hold-
ing it  in  his  hand  while  offering  prayer,
would  solemnly  deposit  it  before  the  altar.

Ver.  11. — And  thou  shalt  rejoice  in  every
good  thing,  eto. ;  t.e.  with  these  bounties  of
God's  providence  make  a  feast  for  yourself
and  your  household,  and  omit  not  to  invite
ihe  Levite  and  the  stranger  to  partake  of  it
with  you.  As  with  the  yearly  tithe  (ch.
xiv.  23)  and  the  firstlings  (ch.  xv.  20),  so
with  this  portion  of  the  firstl'ruits,  a  festive
meal  was  to  consummate  the  serv'co.  Ac-
cording to  the  Law,  the  firstfruits  were  the
perijuisite  of  the  piicst  (ch.  xviii.  4  ;  Numb.


xviii.  12,  etc.);  but  of  these  a  portion  wai
to  be  taken  tor  this  special  service,  and  ol
that  a  feast  was  to  be  made.

Yers.  12 — 15. — On  the  ocoasion  of  pre-
senting the  tithes,  a  special  service  was  also
to  be  made.  The  tithe  here  referred  to  ia
the  vegetable  or  predial  tithe,  which,  at  the
end  of  each  third  year,  as  here  prescribed
was  to  be  converted  into  a  gift  to  the  poor
and  needy.  This,  properly  the  second  tithe
(LXX.,  rh  Seirepov  iirtSeKaTov),  but  usually
called  the  third  tithe  (Tobit  i.  7,  8;  Jo-
sephus, '  Antiq.,'  iv.  8,  22),  is  quite  distinct
from  the  Levitioal  tithe  prescribed  iu  Lev.
xxvii.  30—33  and  Numb,  xviii.  21—32;
and  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  law
here  was  designed  to  contravene  or  super-
sede that  in  the  earlier  books  (see  Kitto,
'Bibl.  Cycl.,'  ui.  1010).  As  this  tithe
completed  the  triennial  series  of  tithes
which  the  Israelites  had  to  offer,  it  was  fit-
ting that  in  presenting  it  a  solemn  decla-
ration should  be  made  by  the  offerer  to  the
effect  that  he  had  honourably  and  conscien-
tiously discharged  all  the  obligations  in
this  respect  which  the  Law  laid  upon  him.

Yer.  12  —The  third  year,  which  is  the
year  of  tithing.  As  each  week  ended  with
a  sabbath,  so  a  sabbatical  year  ended  each
cycle  or  week  of  years;  and  as  on  it  no
tithes  were  levied,  "  the  year  of  tithing "
here  specified  would  be  the  third  and  the
sixth  years  in  each  septennial  period.

Yer.  13. — Say  before  the  Lord;  i.e.  ad-
dress him  as  present  and  ready  to  hear.
The  expression,  "before the  Lord,"  does  not
necessarily  imply  that  it  was  in  the  sanc-
tuary that  the  prayer  was  to  be  offered.
Isaac  proposed  to  bless  his  son  "  before  the
Lord,"  i.e.  within  his  own  house  or  tent
(Gen.  xxvii.  7);  and  so  the  Israelite  here
might  in  his  own  home  make  his  prayer  to
the  Omnipresent  Jehovah.  I  have  not  trans-
gressed thy  commandments,  etc.  This  is
not  a  self-righteous  boast;  it  is  ratlier  a
solemn  profession  of  attention  to  duties
which  might  have  been  neglected,  and
refers,  not  to  the  keeping  of  every  com-
mandment, but  to  the  having  faithfully
done  all  that  the  Law  required  in  lespeot  ol
tithes.

Ver.  14. — In  my  monrning;  t.e.  while
ceremonially  unclean  (cf.  Lev.  vil.  20 ;  xii.
1,  etc.).  Neither  have  I  taken  away  ought
thereof  for  any  unclean  use ;  rather,  Neither
have  I  removed  ought  of  it  being  unclean;
i.e.  he  had  not  only  not  eaten  of  it,  but  he
had  not  removed  any  part  of  it  from  hia
house  (ver.  13)  while  he  was  ceremonially
uno'ean,  in  which  state  it  was  unlawful  ta


ofl.  XXVI.  1 — 19.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEtTfctiu:S'OUV


4ot


touch  what  was  hallowed  (Lev.  xxii.  23).
Nor  given  ought  thereof  for  the  dead;  i.e.
on  account  of  the  dead;  he  liad  not  sent
any  part  of  it  to  where  there  was  one  dead,
according  to  the  custom  for  friends  and
lelatioua  to  send  to  a  house  of  mourning

S revisions  for  the  mourners  (2  Sam.  iii.  35  ;
er.  xvi.  7 ;  Hoa.  ix.  4 ;  Tobit  iv.  17).  Or
the  reference  may  be  here  to  the  expenses
incurred  by  the  death  of  one  for  whose
funeral  the  individual  had  to  provide.  This
view  is  adopted  by  Dr.  Thomson,  who,  re-
marking on  this  passage,  says,  "  This  was
tile  strongest  possible  protestation  that  he
had  dealt  faithfully  in  the  matter  of  tithing
and  consecrated  tilings  and  in  charities  to
the  poor.  He  had  not  allowed  himself  to
divert  anything  to  otlier  uses,  not  even  by
the  most  pressing  and  unforeseen  emergen-
cies. It  is  here  assumed,  or  rather  implied,
that  times  of  mourning  for  the  dead  were
expensive,  and  also  that  the  stern  law  of
custom  obliged  the  bereaved  to  defray
those  expenses,  however  omrous.  .  .  .  The
temptation,  therefore,  to  devote  a  part  of
the  tithes,  hallowed  things,  and  charities
to  defray  these  enormous,  unforeseen,  and
providential  expenses  would  be  very  urgent,
and  ho  who  stood  faithful  at  such  times
might  safely  be  trusted  on  all  other  occa-
sions "  ('  Land  and  the  Book,'  i.  14U).  The
LXX.  rendering,  t^  reBvljKOTt, "  to  the  dead,"
has  led  some  to  suppose  that  the  reference
here  is  to  the  placing  of  articles  of  food  in
the  tomb  along  with  the  corpse ;  but  though
this  custom  prevailed  among  the  Jews  in  later
times,  as  well  as  among  other  peoples,  there
is  no  ground  for  supposing  it  to  be  referred
to  here.  Ab  all  connected  with  a  dead  body
was  held  to  be  unclean,  as  well  as  the  body
itself,  a  house  of  mourning  with  its  inhabit-
ants was  held  to  be  unclean,  and  into  it,
therefore,  nothing  that  liad  been  hallowed
might  be  lawfully  carried.


Ver.  15.— (Of.  lea.  Ixiii.  1.5;  IxvL  1.)
Vers.  10 — 19. — Moses  winds  up  his  address
by  a  solemn  admonition  to  the  people  t9
keep  and  observe  the  laws  and  command-
ments which  the  Lord  by  him  had  laid
upon  them,  reminding  them  that  they  had
entered  into  covenant  with  God,  and  had
thereby  pledged  themselves  to  obedience  to
all  that  he  had  enjoined,  aa  he  on  his  part
had  pledged  himself  to  be  their  Benefactor,
who  would  fulfil  to  them  all  his  gracious
promises,  and  would  exalt  them  above  all
the  nations  of  the  earth.

Ver.  16.— This  day.  This  refers  gene-
rally to  the  time  when  this  discourse  was
delivered.

Ver.  17. — Thou  hast  avouched,  etc. ;  lite-
rally, Thou  hast  caused  Jehovah  this  day  to
say  to  be  a  God  unto  thee ;  i.e.  thou  hast
given  occasion  to  him  to  declare  himself  to
be  thy  God,  and  (as  «  consequence  of  this)
that  thou  shouldest  walk  in  his  ways  and
keep  his  commamlraents.  In  declaring
that  he  was  their  God,  he  virtually  declared
also  that  they  were  to  be  wholly  obedient
to  him.

Ver.  18.— So,  on  the  other  hand,  God
had  given  Israel  occasion  to  pay  that  they
were  his  special  ponple,  his  treasured  pos-
session (of.  Exod.  xix.  5,  6),  whose  it  was,
as  such,  to  keep  all  his  commnndments,
and  to  whom  he  would  be  faithful  to  fulfil
all  that  he  had  promised.

Ver.  19.— (Of.  Jer.  xiii.  11;  xxxiii.  9;
Zeph.  iii.  19,  20.)  An  holy  people  (of.  Exod.
xix.  5,  6).  "  The  sanctifioation  of  Israel
was  the  design  and  end  of  its  election  of
God,  and  would  be  accomplished  in  the
glory  to  which  the  people  of  God  were  to
be  exalted  "  (Keil).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — ll.—Joy  in  the  use  of  temporal  mercies ;  or,  sanetification  of  our  possessions
to  Qod  warrants  a  holy  joy  in  the  use  of  them.  The  order  of  thought  is  this:  1.  In
due  time  IsrE^el  would  be  in  possession  of  the  land  which  the  Lord  promised  to  give
them.  2.  Of  this  comfortable  possession  the  gathering  of  the  fruits  thereof  would  be  the
proof  and  sign.  3.  In  accordance  with  a  well-understood  law,  the  firstfruits  were
to  be  offered  to  God  (see  reference).  4.  In  thus  offering  the  firstfruits,  the  offerers  were
to  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  present  them  to  the  priest,  who  was  to  lay  them
before  the  altar  as  offerings  to  the  Lord.  5.  This  being  done,  there  was  to  be  an
oral  avowal  of  Divine  mercy  in  pitying  "  the  perishing  ArarasBan"  from  whom  they  were
descended,  in  watching  over  the  growth  of  their  nation,  in  delivering  them  from
Egypt,  in  giving  them  the  good  land,  and  in  permitting  it  to  yield  them  its  fruit.
6.  This  being  done,  they  could  then  rejoice  before  the  Lord  their  God  in  the  sacrificial
meal  which  followed,  in  the  companionship  of  friends  invited  to  share  with  them  the
joy  of  harvest,  and  in  the  after  use  of  the  bounties  of  God's  providence.     For  they


108  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEHONOMX.  [ch.  xxvl  1— 19

would  be  doubly  blessed,  as,  over  and  above  the  temporal  mercies  themselves,  they
would  share  the  benediction  of  him  who  gave  them  all  things  rlchl/  to  enjoy.  Good
Bishop  Wordsworth  remarks  that  this  passage  exhorts  to  harvest  thanksgivings  in  the
Christian  Church.  Such  services  are  undoubtedly  fully  in  harmony  with  the  spirit
of  the  chapter.  But  it  seems  to  us  to  contain  principles  of  far  widur  scope,  and
of  everyday  application.     They  are  four  in  number.

I.  OnB  God  would  hate  us  becgonize  him  as  thb  Auteob  of  all  oub  uerciks.
For  such  he  is.  Without  him  no  land  would  yield  its  increase,  nor  would  man  have
power  or  skill  to  cultivate  the  soil.  Without  him  no  sun  would  shine  nor  rain  descend.
It  is  easy  to  say  thai  such  and  such  a  harvest  came  in  the  ordinary  course  of  law.  We
at  ouce  press  the  questions.  Who  ordained  these  laws?  Who  causes  forces  to  act
according  to  them  ?  For  no  law  ever  did  or  could  make  itself.  "  Law  "  is  a  purely
mental  conception.  It  is  not  an  entity,  save  as  mind  ordains  it,  and  it  only  operates
as  energy  works  by  it.  It  is  unsound  in  philosophy,  as  well  as  rotten  in  piety,  if  we
full  to  acknowledge  God  in  all.  Nor  is  it  bare  power  that  we  have  to  recognize ;
but  goodness,  mercy,  loving-kindness.  And  all  these  kindnesses  of  God  he  would
have  us  acknowledge :  1.  By  a  confession  of  our  entire  dependence  upon  him.  2.  By
grateful  retrospect  of  the  past;  remembering  and  recalling  through  what  scenes
God  has  brought  us  year  by  year.  3.  By  grateful  survey  of  the  blessings  which
are  around  us  now.  Nor  should  we  ever  leave  out  of  account  that  which  is  the
substratum  of  this  chapter  (and  indeed  of  all  the  chapters  in  this  book),  though  not
here  specified  in  words,  viz.  that,  as  sinful  beings,  our  natural  claims  on  the  Great
Being  as  his  dependent  creatures  have  been  forfeited  by  sin,  and  that  the  continuance
to  sinful  beings  of  such  heaps  of  mercy  is  due  only  to,  and  is  indeed  a  part  of,  that
redemptive  grace  which  to  Israel  was  disclosed  in  germ,  but  to  us  in  its  fulness  through
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Such  thanksgivings  as  we  owe  may  well  even  now  be  offered
in  the  house  of  the  Lord  ;  but  they  should  daily  be  the  promptings  of  grateful  and
devoted  hearts.  In  private  and  iu  the  family  circle  our  song  should  be,  "  What  shall
we  render  to  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  toward  us?"

IL  The  thank  offering  should  not  only  be  vebbal  but  practical.  There
was  to  be  the  offering  of  the  firstfriiits  to  the  Lord  (see  Homily,  ch.  xiv.  22 — 29).  When
God  gave  all,  what  precept  could  be  more  appropriate  ?  What  can  be  more  becoming  than
to  let  God  have  the  first  of  everything  ?  This  is  the  principle  which  ran  through  these
\  aried  regulations  as  to  firstfruits  and  tithe.  Jacob  spontaneously  said,  "  Of  all  that
thou  givest  me,  I  will  surely  give  the  tenth  unto  thee."  Solomon  urges,  "  Honour  the
Lord  with  thy  substance,  and  with  the  firstfruits  of  all  thine  increase.''  We  have
no  distinctive  proportion  laid  down  in  the  New  Testament  as  to  our  offerings  to  God
Yet  the  conscientious  Christian  should  require  no  further  hints  than  such  as  are  found
in  2  Cor.  viii.  7 — 9;  1  Cor.  xvi.  2.  Circumsiances  have  changed.  Details  will  vary.
Yet  the  great  and  mighty  cause  of  God,  even  that  of  righteousness,  truth,  and  love,  has
to  be  maintained  and  spread  in  the  world  by  the  efforts  and  offerings  of  those  "  put  in
trust  with  the  gospel."  And  it  will  not  be  possible  to  be  faithful  to  the  claims  of  God
and  the  demands  of  the  times  without  a  conscientious,  systematic,  proportionate  giving
of  our  gains  to  the  Lord.  Chiistians  should  never  suffer  the  absence  of  detail  in  New
Testament  precepts  on  the  subject  of  giving  to  the  Lord,  to  be  taken  advantage  of  to  the
weakening  of  his  cause  who  trusts  our  spontaneity.  Let  us  not  abuse  God's  confidence.
Let  the  love  of  Christ  constrain  us.

IIL  The  giving  of  the  fiestfruits  to  God  is  a  token  op  the  sanctifioation
OF  ALL  WE  HAVE  TO  EIGHT  AND  HOLY  USES.  There  is  no  better  guarantee  of  a  wise
and  right  use  of  our  substance  than  the  conscientious  dedication  of  firstfruits  to  our
God.  He  who  is  conscientious  enough  in  this  respect  may  be  safely  relied  on  to  spend
rightly  the  rest  of  his  gains,  because  ihe  same  conscientiousness  which  marks  his  first
tpendings'  will  mark  all  the  others.

IV.  When  cue  gains  aee  thus  received  in  a  right  spirit,  and  spent  in  a

V.K3B.T  WAT,  WE   MAY   REJOICE   THEREIN   BEFORE   THE   LOED.      God   hath   given   US  "  all

things  richly  to  enjoy."  And  men  who  know  nothing  of  the  Christian  consecration
ef  all  things  to  God  do  not  know  how  to  enjoy  what  they  possess.  If  men  rejoice  in
earthly  good  for  its  own  sake,  it  will  soon  cease  to  yield  delight.  "  The  world  passeth
away,  and  the  lust  thereof,"    But  when  regarded,  received,  and  spent  in  the  way  wa


OH.  ixvL  1— 19.J  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMI,  40!)

have  already  pointed  out,  it  may  yield  a  pure  delight.  For :  1.  It  will  be  enjoyed,  as
the  gift  of  One  who  is  our  redeemiag  God,  in  covenant  relation  to  ua,  and  with  whom
we  are  at  peace.  2.  It  will  be  enjoyed  with  a  sense  of  rectitude  which  cnly  those  can
have  who  have  been  severely  right  in  the  regulation  of  their  gettings  and  givings.
3.  It  will  be  enjoyed,  because  gains  so  acquired  and  spent  will  be  a  means  of  grace  to  a
man.  Biches  in  such  a  case  will  expand  the  heart.  4,  It  will  be  enjoyed,  because
such  a  man  will  bear  about  with  him  the  holy  and  blessed  consciousness  that  he  is
fulfilling  God's  will  and  spreading  God's  cause  in  the  right  use  of  his  gifts.  5.  It  will  be
enjoyed,  because  such  a  one  knows  that  God's  blessing  is  resting  on  him  and  on  all  he
has,  that,  rich  as  may  be  his  earthly  good,  though  he  enjoys  it  while  it  lasts,  yet  he  can
afford  to  hold  it  with  a  loose  hand,  for  it  is  not  his  all,  and  that  when  he  is  caUed  to
part  with  it,  he  will  find  richer  treasure  still  laid  up  for  him  in  heaven,  for  when
"  flesh  and  heart  fail,  God  will  be  the  strength  of  his  heart,  and  his  portion  for  ever."

Thus  and  thus  alone  is  it  possible  to  extract  from  earthly  good  the  full  delight  it  is
calculated  and  inUmded  to  yield.  If  we  make  worldly  possessions  the  food  of  our
souls,  they  will  turn  to  ashes  in  the  mouth.  They  bring  no  blessing  with  them.  They
will  disnppoint,  'and  if  they  take  their  flight,  as  they  so  often  do,  we  shall  be  left
miserably  poor.  But  if  through  the  grace  and  Spirit  of  our  God  we  are  led  first
to  choose  God  as  our  all,  and  then  to  use  our  all  for  God,  we  shall  enjoy  the  life  that
now  is,  and  enter  on  a  fulness  of  joy  in  that  which  is  to  come.

Vers.  12 — 15. — Integrity  in  the  will  a  condition  of  acceptable  and  tuecessful  prayer.
We  do  not  recall  any  passage  in  this  book,  on  which  we  have  as  yet  touched,  that
conveys  a  more  strikmg  impression  than  this  of  the  purity  and  heart-searchingness  of
the  Law  of  God.  For  elucidation  of  the  several  points  of  detail,  the  reader  may  con-
sult the  expository  section.  For  our  purpose  now  it  is  enough  to  say  that  it  is  assumed
that  the  people  will  faithfully  carry  out  the  precepts  and  ordinances  of  God  with  regard
to  the  tithes,  to  the  offerings,  to  the  poor,  the  fatherless,  and  widow,  and  the  specific
injunctions  with  respect  to  ceremonial  purity.  When  this  is  done,  so  that  they  can
declare  it  be/ore  the  Lord,^  then  they  may  also  plead  with  God  for  a  blessing.  They,
having,  with  a  clear  conscience  and  an  upright  will,  fulfilled  to  the  extent  of  their
knowledge  the  requirements  of  their  holy  religion,  may  then  come  and  entreat  their
God  for  his  benediction  and  smile,  according  to  his  ijvomise.  Hence  we  have  presented
to  us  for  homiletic  teacTiing  the  all-important  topic — Integrity  in  the  fulfilment  of
Divine  commands  a  condition  of  acceptable  prayer.  We  propose  to  show  how  con-
stantly this  principle  is  recognized  in  the  Word  of  God,  by  a  comparison  of  Scripture
with  Scripture.

Prayer  is  an  Inestimable  privilege.  That  weak  and  sinful  man  should  be  permitted
to  unburden  his  spirit  to  the  Father  of  spirits  is  a  mercy  so  great,  that  no  words  can
adequately  express  it.  It  is  only  on  the  ground  of  the  One  Sacrifice  of  Christ,  of
which  the  Hebrew  sacrifices  were  but  foreshadowings,  that  such  fellowship  between
God  and  sinful  man  is  vouchsafed.  We  may  pray,  because  we  "are  not  undi^r
Law,  but  under  grace."  But  though  through  the  aboundings  of  mercy  sinful  men  aie
permitted  to  pray,  yet  it  is  on  the  understanding  that  they  repent  of  their  sin.  And
true  though  it  be  that  we  are  under  grace  and  not  under  Law,  yet  grace  brings  with  it
its  own  law ;  it  is  no  licence  to  lawlessness.  Throughout  the  Word  of  God  this  precious
privilege  is  guarded  from  abuse.  Prayer  is  not  thrown  open  promiscuously.  The  shriek
of  a  terrified  man  or  the  query  of  an  inquisitive  man  is  not  prayer.  "  The  fear  of  the
wicked,  it  shall  come  upon  him ;  but  the  desire  of  the  righteous  shall  be  granted."
"  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord ;  but  the  prayer  of  the
upright  is  his  delight."    Let  us  trace  the  recognition  of  this  chronologically.

L  Job  knew  of  it.  He  asks  in  xxviL  9,  concerning  a  hypocrite,  "  Will  God  hear
•his  cry  when  trouble  cometh  upon  him?"

IL  David  teaches  it  likewise.  In  Ps.  IxvL  18,  "  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my
heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear  me."  He  expects  no  answer  to  his  prayer  if  in  hia  inmost
soul  there  is  any  tolerance  of  sin.

IIL  SoLOKON  IKDIOATES  THIS  TBUTB.    In  the  prayer  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple,

'  See  Eeil  on  this  phrase  in  ver.  IS.


410  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMY.  [ch.  xxti.  1—19.

1  Kings  viii.  35,  36,  "  If  they  pray  towards  this  place,  and  confess  thy  Name,  and  turn
from  their  tin  .  .  .  then  hear  thou,"  etc.  In  the  Book  of  Proverbs  the  same  truth  is
repeatedly  taught  (xi.  20 ;  xv.  8,  29 ;  xxi.  13,  27).  True  penitence  and  integrity  of
will  are  necessary  conditions  of  appropriate  prayer.

IV.  Isaiah  is  bidden  to  proclaim  it.  In  i.  18,  there  are  words  of  priceless  worth,
wliich  may  well  be  a  comfort  to  every  penitent;  but  they  are  often  quoted  without
euOBcient  prominence  being  given  to  the  words  which  precede:  "  Wash  you,  make  you
clean ;  put  away  the  evil  of  your  doings  from  before  mine  eyes ;  cease  to  do  evil ;  Uarn
to  do  well,"  etc. ;  then  follow  the  words,  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,"  etc.
Past  sin  is  forgiven  when  it  is  forsaken,  and  only  then.

V.  EzEKiEL  DECLARES  THE  SAME.  There  Came  to  him  certain  of  the  elders  o/
Israel,  and  stood  before  him  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  (see  xiv.  1 — 11).  Ezekiel  is  bidden
to  tell  them  that  it  is  useless  to  inquire  of  God  if  they  were  cherishing  any  hidden  siu  ;
it  would  be  a  stumbling-block  of  iniquity,  that  would  prevent  any  answer  coming
from  Qod.    How  grievously  the  disheartened  Saul  found  this  out  I  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  6.)

VI.  Malaohi  dbclabes  the  like  law.  He  tells  the  people  that  they  have  with-
holden  the  tithes  from  God,  and  that  consequently  God  is  withholding  the  blessing
from  them  (iii.  1 — 12).  Thus  in  the  varied  ages  of  the  Jewish  Church  this  truth  is
uniformly  taught,  that  cherished  sin  will  block  up  the  way  of  an  answer  to  prayer,

VIL  Nob  is  this  pbdjciplb  bepbaled  undbe  the  new  economy.  Our  Lord
taught  it.  See  Matt.  v.  23,  24,  in  which  we  are  forbidden  to  present  any  offering  to
God  while  anger  towards  a  brother  is  cherished  in  the  heart.  In  Matt.  vi.  15,  we  are
assured  that  he  who  forgives  not  is  not  forgiven.  In  John  xv.  7,  16,  our  Lord  shows
his  disciples  that  the  condition  of  their  freedom  and  success  in  prayer  is  fruitful
obedience.  The  Apostle  James  also  warns  those  to  whom  he  is  writing  that  the  non-
success  of  their  prayer  is  owing  to  impurity  in  the  will,  and  if  they  would  that  God
should  draw  nigh  to  them,  they  must  return  unto  him  ( Jas.  iv.  3 — 8).

Possibly  at  this  stage,  or  earlier,  a  difficulty  may  have  suggested  itself.  It  njay  be
said  (of.  Luke  xviii.  11,  12)  in  that  passage  the  Pharisee,  who  had  been  most  pi-nc-
tilious  in  his  discharge  of  sundry  obligations,  and  most  austerely  proper  in  his  outward
conduct,  is  yet  rejected.  How  is  this?  The  reply  is  threefold.  1.  lie  did  not  pray
at  all.  Not  one  petition  did  he  offer.  2.  He  thanked  God  he  was  so  good !  As  if  there
were  any  merit  in  simply  doing  one's  duty,  or  any  cause  for  self-gratulation.  3.  He
looked  down  with  scorn  on  others.  He  "  exalted  himself."  His  spirit  was  wrong,
though  his  observances  might  be  right.  Conscious  rectitude  of  puriose,  and  self -com-
placency over  performances,  need  never  he  confounded,  and  only  where  they  are  so  can
this  difficulty  arise.    In  conclusion —

1.  While  we  thank  God  for  permission  to  pray,  let  us  ever  guard  the  dignity  of
prayer.  2.  The  mournful  thought  'is  suggested.  How  many  there  are  who  seem  to  be
doing  what  they  can  to  make  it  useless  for  them  to  pray  1  A  man  who  tells  lies  over
the  counter  cannot  pray.  A  man  who  bribes  or  who  accepts  a  bribe  cannot  pray.  A
man  who  forgives  not,  asks  uselessly  for  forgiveness.  The  only  advice  to  be  given  to
such  is  to  repeat  the  apostolic  demand,  "  Eepent,  therefore,  of  this  thy  wickedness,  and
pray."  3.  How  diligently  should  we,  at  times,  search  into  our  own  hearts,  to  see  if
we  are  zealously  putting  away  "  the  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness "  I  The  possibility
that  any  secret  sin  may  be  shutting  off  any  answer  to  our  prajers  should  make  us  cry
fervently,  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart ;  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts ;
and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  everlasting."  4.
Let  none  rush  to  the  opposite  extreme.  Let  none  be  disheartened  at  the  stringency  of
the  demands  of  God's  grace ;  rather  let  the  heart  be  unreservedly  opened  to  God  in
gratitude  for  his  holiness,  and  for  his  desire  for  the  absolute  purity  of  his  people  ;
rather  let  us  be  supremely  solicitous  to  he  "  upright  in  heart."  It  is  not  where  there  is
a  distressing  consciousness  of  falling  in  execution  below  our  desires  and  yearnings  that
prayer  is  blocked  out.  Far  from  this.  But  the  desire  to  cherish  sin,  or  the  refusal
to  do  the  whole  will  of  God,  makes  prayer  itself  useless  and  sinful,  because  the  heart
does  not  submit  entirely  to  God.

Vers.  16 — 19. — The  golden  chain.  The  end  of  the  career  of  Moses  was  drawing  nigh,
Nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  that  he  should  gather  up  all  his  powers  to  remind


m.  xxvL  1-19.J  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  411

the  people  of  their  solemn  vows,  and  to  repeat  in  their  hearing  the  sum  and  substance
of  that  code  which  was  to  regulate  their  personal  life,  their  religious  service,  and  their
judicial  procedure.  Having  done  this,  he  closes  with  a  brief  but  very  earnest  appeal
to  the  people's  heart  and  conscience.  In  it  there  is  much  that  has,  primarily,  an  his-
torical and  local  bearing,  hut  the  principles  included  therein  have  a  far-reaching,  a
worldwide,  a  permanent  significance.  The  phrases  used  here  are  reproduced  by  the
Apostle  Peter  (1  Pet.  ii.),  and  are  applied  by  him  to  Christians.  What  Israel  then  was,
locally  and  theoretically,  believers  are  now  spiritually.  The  words  here  uttered  by
Moses  form  a  golden  chain,  which  we  will  examine  link  by  link.  We  may  thus  come
to  see  that,  notwithstanding  the  lapse  of  ages  and  the  advance  of  the  world,  this  golden
chain  is  as  real  and  as  complete  as  ever.  With  God  the  first  link  begins ;  with  God  is
the  last.  The  chain  is  on  this  wise:  God  sends  a  Law;  this  Law  is  accepted  by  the
people ;  so  accepting  the  Law  they  are  received  in  covenant ;  people  loyal  to  God  are
elevated  among  men ;  they  are  thus  for  a  praise  and  honour  and  glory ; — and  all  this  is
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  "  as  he  hath  spoken."  Thus  that  which  goeth  forth
from  his  lips  as  a  declaration  cometh  back  to  him  as  a  fulfilment.

First  link :  Herb  abb  commandments,  statutes,  and  judgments  appointed  by
God.  From  beginning  to  end  this  is  the  distinct  declaration  of  Moses  and  the  postulate
of  the  Hebrew  faith.  That  the  Law  was  received  from  Sinai  is,  historically,  as  indis-
putable as  that  the  battle  of  Waterloo  was  fought.  That  this  Law  was  of  God  was  the
proclamation  from  the  first ;  while  our  homiletio  studies  in  this  book  have,  we  trust,
deepened  our  conviction  that  from  none  but  God  could  aught  so  holy  with  such  a  claim
have  proceeded,  and  that  this  commandment,  which  is  holy  and  just  and  good,  does
disclose  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin  in  a  way  which  could  only  have  been  done
thrjugh  one  taught  of  him  who  is  the  Lord  of  consciences  and  souls.  This  effort  to
educate  the  people  in  righteousness  was  the  most  startling  stride  in  morals  which  the
world  had  ever  known.  It  was  then,  and  remains  still,  the  only  attempt  ever  made  to
start  into  being  a  new  nation  with  God  alone  for  its  acknowledged  King,  righteousness
alone  for  the  corner-stone  of  its  polity,  and  a  free  and  holy  brotherhood  alone  for  its
citizenship.  In  reference  to  worship,  there  was  the  revealed  law  of  sacrifice  as  the
ground  of  acceptance.  In  regard  to  life,  the  rule  was,  "  Love  to  God  and  love  to  man."
It  is  precisely  so  now.  Just  as  beneath  the  Law  there  lay  unrepealed  the  Divine
Abrahamic  promise,  so  along  with  the  gospel  there  is  the  rule  unrepealed, "  Be  ye  holy,
for  I  am  holy."    There  was  a  gospel  with  the  Law ;  there  is  a  law  with  the' gospel.

Second  link :  The  people  had  vowed  unto  God  that  they  would  obey  his
VOICE.  (Ver.  17.)  It  is  not  noted,  perhaps,  with  sufficient  frequency  and  force  how
often,  even  amid  the  terror,  thunder,  and  smoke  of  Sinai,  the  Lord  threw  the  decision
of  this  question  upon  the  people's  free  consent.  Not  even  their  response  in  the  moment
of  glad  freedom  and  terrible  awe  was  sufficient.  God  would  not  take  the  people  by
surprise  nor  fasten  them  unawares  to  an  engagement  they  did  not  understand.  They
gave  their  Sssent,  first  to  an  oral  inquiry,  then  to  the  Law  when  written  in  a  book  and
road  in  their  hearing,  then  to  the  covenant  sealed  with  blood.  So  now.  While,  in  one
sense,  God  is  Sovereign  over  us  by  a  right  none  may  dispute,  yet  there  is  another
soveitignty  to  which  he  asks  our  willing,  loving  consent  (Rom.  xii.  1).  He  itoops  to
ask  of  us  the  love  of  our  hearts.

Third  link  ;  The  covenant  thus  entered  into  by  lovino  consent  to  Divinb  swat
IS  divinely  eecipkooated.  (Ver.  18.)  "  And  the  Lord  hath  avouched  thee,"  etc.  We
must  be  careful,  however,  how  we  set  this,  or  we  shall  obscure  the  gospel  in  the  act  of
endeavouring  to  set  forth  its  most  priceless  relations.  We  must  not  put  the  matter
thus :  "  God  loves  us  because  we  love  him ; " — that  would  be  an  entire  reversal  of  the
revealed  order  of  things.  But  rather  thus :  "  God  loves  first."  When  we  respond  to  his
love  and  are  saved  by  it,  he  rejoices  over  us.  The  love  of  compassion  becomes  a  love  ol
complacency,  and  the  Lord  avouches  us  to  be  his  "  peculiar  people."  The  Apostle  Peter
applies  precisely  this  phrase  to  all  believers  (1  Pet.  ii.).  But,  to  an  ordinary  reader,
the  English  phrase  would  not  yield  an  approximation  to  its  true  meaning,  which  may
be  shown  thus  :  the  word ^ecMS,  cattle;  pecuUum,  property  in  cattle,  private  property,
that  which  has  been  bought  for  one's  self;  and  thus  the  phrase,  "  peculiar  people,"
means  a  people  whom  God  has  secured  as  his  own  by  purchase.  Hence  the  New
Testament  phrases,  "  Ye  are  bought  with  a  price,"  etc.  God's  satisfaction  in  man  ii
complete  only  when  man  finds  his  home  in  OuJ.


il.2  TUB  BOOK  r«F  DEUTERONOMY.  [oa.  xxvi.  1—19.


Fourth  link :  When  a  man  is  found  op  God,  he  ib  destined  fob  honoub  among
MAN.  (Vers.  18,  19.)  "  Then,"  says  David,  "  shall  I  not  be  ashamed  when  I  have
respect  unto  all  thy  commandments."  And  whenever  the  citizens  of  a  state  are  loyal
and  obedient  to  God,  the  state  which  is  leavened  by  them  will  certainly  rise  to  honour
and  renown.

Fifth  link :  SncH  a  life  will  be  fob  a  pbaisb  and  a  name  and  an  honour.  For
whose?  Certainly  God's  (cf.  Isa.  xliii.  1,  21).  A  holy  man  is  the  noblest  work  of  God
on  earth.  The  life  he  lives  among  men  is,  in  its  way,  a  revelation  of  God,  and  refleete
honour  on  him.

Sixth  link  :  This  glory,  being  thus  brought  to  God  through  the  power  of  holy  lives,
will  be  best  confirmation  of  the  origin,  meaning,  and  power  of  the  written  Word.  "  As
he  hath  spoken  "  (ver.  10).     The  Word  regulates  the  life ;  the  life  confii  ms  the  Word.

Note — Christian  people  have  the  vindication  of  the  faith  in  their  own  hands.
Argument  may  do  much,  but  holiness  will  do  very  far  more.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBa

Veri.  1 — 11. — The  presentation  of  {he  firstfruits.  This  interesting  ceremony !  1.  He-
minded  the  individual  that  the  land  and  its  fruits  were  God's.  2.  Required  from  him
a  devout  acknowledgment  of  the  fact,  with  a  gift  in  which  the  acknowledgment  was
suitably  embodied.  3.  Threw  him  back  on  the  recollection  of  God's  former  mercies  to
his  nation.  4.  Secured  a  confession  and  rehearsal  of  these  from  his  own  lips.  It  served:.
1.  To  create  and  deepen  religious'feeling.  2.  To  quicken  gratitude.  3.  To  encourage
free-will  offerings.     'I'wo  main  points —

I.  God's  mercies  are  to  be  gratefully  bemembehed.  These  mercies  are  many
and  wonderful  (Ps.  xl.  5).  The  points  dwelt  on  in  this  declaration  are  God's  fulfilments
of  his  promises  in  the  increase  of  the  nation  (ver.  5),  the  deliverance  from  Egypt
(vers.  6 — 8),  and  the  bringing  of  the  people  into  the  land  of  Canaan  (ver.  9),  part  of  the
firstfruits  of  which  the  worshipper  now  presented  (ver.  10).  We  have  here :  1.  National
mercies.  Since  in  Israel  Church  and  nation  were  one :  2.  Church  mercies.  3.  Personal
mercies.  A  similar  review  befits  every  Christian.  What  causes  of  thankfulness  has
he,  not  only  in  the  remembrance  of  God's  loving-kindness  to  him  personally  (Ps.  xl.
1 — 4 ;  cxvi.  1 — 19),  but  in  the  review  of  God's  dealings  with  his  nation,  and  still  more
in  the  consideration  of  his  mercies  to  the  Church !  On  the  one  side,  our  noble  con
Btitution,  our  just  laws,  our  civil  and  religious  liberties,  our  immunity  from  war — ^the
fruits  of  long  centuries  of  struggle  and  progress.  On  the  other  side,  the  facts  on  which
the  Church's  existence  is  foiinded — the  Incarnation ;  Christ's  life,  death,  resurrection,
and  ascension ;  the  gift  of  the  Spirit :  and  the  events  of  her  extraordinary  history —
the  progress  she  has  made,  God's  goodness  in  preserving  and  protecting  her,  in  raising
up  teachers  and  leaders,  in  purifying  her  by  persecutions,  in  granting  revivals,  times
of  reformation,  etc. ;  with  the  consideration  of  how  in  all  promises  have  been  fulfilled,
prayers  answered,  deliverances  vouchsafed,  blessings  bestowed,  increase  made.

II.  God's  mercies  are  to  be  suitably  acknowledged.  1.  By  recital  of  them
he/ore  Ood  himself.  Acknowledgment  of  mercies  is  as  much  a  part  of  devotion  as  praise,
confession,  petition,  or  even  adoration.  The  value  of  liturgical  forms  (within  due
limits)  for  purposes  of  prayer  and  acknowledgment,  is  not  to  be  disputed.  They  (1)  aid
memory,  (2)  secure  comprehensiveness,  (3)  guide  devotion,  (4)  prevent  irrelevancy,
(5)  create  a  bond  of  unity.  Like  hymns,  they  testify  to  the  Church's  catholicity
Bmidst  diversities  of  creed  and  polity.  Their  disadvantage,  if  preponderant  in  worship,
is  that  they  check  too  much  the  element  of  spontaneity.  They  discourage  freedom
and  naturalness  in  the  expression  of  the  heart's  feelings.  The  best  form  of  Church
order  would  proVably  be  a  combination  of  the  liturgical  with  the  free  and  spon-
taneous elements  in  worship — the  latter  decidedly  predominating.  2.  By  free-will
offerings.  These  are  needed  more  than  ever.  The  sphere  of  the  Church's  operations
is  yearly  widening.  3.  By  hospitality  and  charity  (yet.  11).  Underlying  all  there
is,  of  course,  to  be  personal  consecration  in  heart  and  life.  It  is  self  God  wants— the
love,  reverence,  service,  devotion  of  self;  not  a  mere  share  in  selfs  possessions.    Con-


8H.  xxvL  1— 19.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMY.  413

fession  (ver.  3),  gifts  (ver.  10),  worship  (ver.  10),  joy  (ver.  11),  have  their  rightful
place  after  that,  and  as  the  outcome  of  it. — J.  0.

Ver.  12. — TAe  year  «f  tithing.  Why  so  called  ?  A  double  tithe  was  taken  each
year — the  ordinary  Levitical  tithe  (Numb,  xviii.  21 — 28),  which  Deuteronomy,  without
mention,  takes  for  granted;  and  the  festal  tithe,  ordained  as  a  provision  for  the
sanctuary  feasts  (ch.  xiv.  21 — 27).  On  the  third  year  a  tithe  was  to  be  devoted  to
lestivities  at  home  (ch,  xiv.  28,  29).  It  is  usually,  but  too  hastily,  assumed  that
this  third  tithe  was  but  the  second  diversely  applied.  That  ia  itself  is  unlikely,  as  tlie
feasts  at  the  sanctuary  required  to  be  held  on  the  third  and  sixth  years,  as  well  as  on
the  others,  and  the  provision  for  these  could  not  well  be  dispensed  with.  Neither  does  it
explain  the  expression,  "  year  of  tithing ; "  for  while,  on  this  supposition,  the  tithe
was  differently  applied,  there  was  nothing  unusual  in  the  manner  of  taking  it.  Each
year  was  a  year  of  tithing  (sabbatical  years  excepted),  and  this  no  more  than  the  rest.
The  ordinary  view,  besides,  is  directly  in  the  teeth  of  the  testimony  of  Josephiis,  who
may  be  supposed  to  have  known  the  practice  of  his  time.  His  statement  distinctly
is  that  one-tenth  was  to  be  given  to  the  priests  and  Levites ;  one-tenth  was  to  be
applied  to  feasts  at  the  sanctuary ;  and  a  tenth  besides  was,  every  third  year,  to  be
given  to  the  poor.  If  this  was  so,  we  have  a  natural  explanation  of  the  phrase,  "  the
year  of  tithing,"  and  self-consistency  is  introduced  into  the  laws.  The  tithe-laws  in
Deuteronomy  are  often  represented  as  if  in  conflict  with  those  in  Leviticus  and
Numbers.  Part  of  the  plausibility  of  the  objection  lies  in  the  use  of  the  definite  article
in  the  English  version — "  all  the  tithe  "  (ch.  xiv.  28 ;  xxvi.  12) — which  gives  an
impression  of  allusion  to  the  ordinary,  the  well-known  tithe.  That  impression  is  not
created  if  we  take  the  plain  Hebrew — "  a  whole  tithe  " — which  by  its  very  nakedness
suggests  a  new  regulation.  Deuteronomy  legislates  for  its  own  purposes  in  connection
with  the  centralizing  of  the  worship  at  the  sanctuary.  The  newer  criticism  seems  to
have  abandoned  the  old  ground,  which  made  the  Levitical  laws  the  earliest.  It
assumes  that  the  distinction  of  priests  and  Levites,  with  the  body  of  legislation  based
on  that  distinction,  took  shape  not  earlier  than  the  exile — a  view  hopelessly  in  conflict
with  the  histories  of  the  return.  Indeed,  so  great  was  the  disproportion  in  the  numbers
of  pritsts  and  Levites  returning  with  Zerubbabel — twelve  or  thirteen  priests  for  every
Levite — that  the  Levitical  laws  could  only  have  been  put  in  force  with  material  altera-
tions and  modifications.  They  are  in  some  respects  singularly  inapplicable  to  the  very
times  in  which  they  are  supposed  to  have  originated. — ^J.  0.

Vers.  12 — 15. — "  A  good  conscience  toward  God."  This  solemn  avowal,  ordained  to  be
made  at  the  completion  of  the  round  of  tithe  obligations,  was  a  wise  safeguard  against
unpunctuality  and  nenlect.  The  subject  suggested  is — The  importance  of  sdf-examina-
tion  in  respect  of  the  fulfilment  of  duties  of  religion.

I.  Self-examihation  a  duty.  The  text  sugsrests  that  we  examine  ourselves  :
1.  As  to  religious  givings.  2.  As  to  our  fulfilment  of  the  duties  of  hospitality  and
charity.  3.  As  to  the  condition  in  which  these  duties  have  been  performed — whether
from  the  right  motive  (regard  to  God's  commandment),  and  in  a  right  state  (the  state
of  sanctifioation).  Extend  the  piinciile  to  all  duties  of  religion.  Selt-examination,
to  be  of  service,  should  be:  1.  Compnhensive.  2.  Oonscientious — as  " before  the  Lord
thy  God"  (ver.  13),  who  cannot  bo  deceived.  3.  Peiiodical,  as:  (1)  At  the  end  of  a
year.  (2)  The  close  of  a  financial  year.  (3)  Binhdays.  (4)  Even  the  end  of  a
week.     A  review  of  this  kind  not  an  unsuitable  sabbath  day's  employment,

II.  Self-examination  a  bafeguabd.  1.  Prevents  neglect.  Things  which  we
ought  to  do — which,  at  bottom,  we  are  willing  to  do — get  frequently  overlooked  :
fl)  From  inadvertency.  (2)  From  unpunctuality.  (3)  Prom  habits  of  procrastina-
tion. A  review  of  the  kind  iiroposed  would  bring  many  of  these  forgotten  duties  to
recollection,  and  would  act  as  a  check  on  the  causes  of  forgetfulness.  2.  Brings
practice  into  comparison  with  the  standard  of  obligation.  When  duty  is  known,  it
does  not  follow  that  it  is  always  done,  or  that  we  are  always  aware  of  the  extent  of  our
shortcomings.  We  may  be  greatly  deceiving  ourselves  in  this  very  particular.  There
may  grow  upon  us  the  vicious  habit  of  comparing  ourselves  with  others  rather  than
with  the  standard  of  the  Divine  Law.    And  nowhere  is  self-deception  more  common  than


414  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xivi.  1-   19.

in  the  matter  of  religious  and  charitable  givingS.  People  will  be  heard  expatiating  on
the  vexationsness  of  the  calls  of  this  kind  made  on  them,  who,  were  they  to  put  their
givings  all  together,  would  find  that  they  did  not  amount  to  so  much  as  they  have
often  spent  on  the  gratification  of  some  whim,  perhaps  on  a  single  dinner-party.
Self-examination  would  counteract  the  tendency  to  take  our  performances  of  duty  so
readily  for  granted.  It  would  e.g.  require  the  rich  man  to  measure  his  givings  directly
with  his  income,  and  with  the  proportion  of  that  income  which  he  feit  to  be  due  to
God.  3.  Reminds  us  of  the  obligations  themselves.  For,  besides  the  shortcomings  in
practice  referred  to,  there  is  often  no  little  danger  that  the  standard  of  duty  itself  may  gst
to  be  lost  sight  of.  4.  Makes  hypocrisy  more  difficult.  The  withholder  of  the  tithes
would  scarcely  venture  to  stand  before  God  and  make  this  solemn  declarntion.  His
tongue  might  well  cleave  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth  if  he  attempted  it.  He  would  feel  that
he  must  either  go  and  do  what  he  ought  or  hold  his  peace.  The  hypocritical  professor
shuns  self-examination.  Two  thoughts  in  closing:  1.  We  cannot  expect  blessing,  save
as  duties  are  honourably  fulfilled  (ver.  15).  2.  Reflecting  on  fulfilled  duties,  we  need  to
beware  of  Pharisaic  pride  (Luke  xviii.  11,  12). — J.  O.

Vers.  16 — 19. — Avouching  extraordinary.  A  wonderful  sight !  Israel  and  God  ex-
changing pledges,  plighting  troth,  "  avouching  "  fidelity  each  to  the  other.  The  people,
by  the  heed  they  had  given  to  Moses'  exposition  of  the  Law,  perhaps  by  signs  made  as
he  proceeded,  had  avouched  their  wdlingness  to  abide  in  the  covenant.  God,  in  turn,
had  renewed  his  promises  and  pledges  towards  them.  The  covenant  thus  renewed  was
the  same  in  essentials  as  that  made  with  believers.

L   COVBNAKT   WITH   GoD   INVOLVES  ENGAGEMENT   TO   OBEDIENCE.      (Ver.  17.)      It  did

SO  under  the  Law.  It  does  so  under  the  gospel.  The  gospel  exhibits  grace,  and  involves
at  the  outset  the  reception  of  that  grace.  Nevertheless,  obedience  is  required  of  us.
It  is  the  end  of  our  redemption.  We  die  with  Christ  that  we  may  rise  with  him  to
newness  of  life  (Rom.  vi.  4).  "  New  obedience "  is  the  proof  of  true  disoipleship.
Every  real  believer  will  seek  to  render  it.  It  is  a  condition  of  ultimate  salvation
(Rom.  ii.  6—12).

II.  Covenant  with  God  involves  a  relation  of  peculiar  nearness.  (Ver.  18.)
This  is  borne  out  by  all  Scripture.  God  chooses  us,  in  Christ,  to  a  relation  of  nearness
so  remarkable  that  it  has  no  counterpart,  save  in  the  Son's  relation  to  the  Father
(John  xvii.  21).  The  saints  are  his  peculiar  treasure  (1  Pet.  ii.  9, 10).  He  is  their
"  Shield,"'  and  their  "  exceeding  Great  Reward  "  (Gen.  xt.  1).  They  are  nearer  to  him
than  the  angel*^

"  Near,  near,  so  near,

I  cannot  nearer  be ;
For  in  the  person  of  his  Son

I  am  as  near  as  he."

III.  COVBNAST    WITH    GOD    SECURES   HIGH    HON'OUR    AND    BLESSEDNESS.      (Vsr.    19.)

Great  distinction  was  in  store  for  Israel,  should  it  prove  obedient.  God  says  he  will
make  it  high  above  all  nations,  "  in  praise,  and  in  name,  and  in  honour."  Its  honour
would  consist:  1.  In  the  proud  distinction  of  being  God's  people  (ch.  iv.  7).  2.  In
its  high  moral  repute  (ch.  iv.  6).  3.  In  the  material  pre-eminence  to  which  obedi-
ence would  be  certain  to  raise  it  (ch.  vii.  12 — 16).  Obedience,  honour,  blessedness,  arc
ihree  ideas  ultimately  inseparable.  The  "glory,  honour,  immortality"  of  heaven
:ire  for  those  who  persevere  in  well-doing  (Hom.  ii.  7),  for  "an  holy  people."  The
iionoursin  store  for  obedient  Israel,  great  as  they  were,  are  not  to  be  compared  with  the
"  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  "  now  revealed  as  the  inheritance  of  believers
(2  Cor.  iv.  17).— J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 11. — Commemorationt  of  national  deliverance.  An  instinct  in  man  impeU
him  to  dwell  with  pleasure  on  his  national  beginnings  and  growth ;  and,  in  cases  where
that  beginning  sprang  out  from  a  specific  event,  that  event  has  been  the  subject  ql
])ublic  commemoration  year  by  year.  Of  this  Rome  is  a  conspicuous  instance.  But
the  Jews  were  designed  to  be  eminently  a  religious  people;  hence  this  commemoratioo
was  to  be  •  simple  act  of  piety — the  presentation  of  firstfruits.


OH.  XXVI.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  415

I.  Man  is  tub  object  of  God's  lavish  obnehositt.  Everything  round  the  Hebrew
in  his  home  reminded  him  of  the  exubeiant  Isindiiess  of  his  God.  The  land  which  he
possessed  was  land  which  Jehovah  had  given  him.  The  temple  was  the  place  which
Jehovah  had  chosen  "  to  place  his  Name  there."  The  priest  was  God's  gift.  The  corn
and  fruit  of  the  land  were  produce  "  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee."  Each  man
was  taught  to  look  on  himself  as  belonging  unto  God.  Of  everything  the  absolute
Proprietor  was  God.  Their  history,  their  deliverance,  their  security,  their  renown,  wcie
all  due  to  God.    Behind  every  visiljle  object,  behind  every  visible  event,  they  discerned

II.  Eemembranoe  of  God's  deliverances  was  to  be  PBnPETUATED.  It  is  vital  to
the  interests  of  a  man  that  he  should  know  the  "rock  whtnce  he  was  hewn,  and  the
hole  of  the  pit  whence  he  was  digged."  Are  we  from  above,  or  from  btneath  ?  Are  we
the  creatures  of  fortuitous  circumstance,  or  has  our  life  been  planned  by  a  Divine
Artificer?  Are  all  the  forces  and  energies  of  life  within  ourselves,  or  are  we  dependent
upon  the  will  and  the  resources  of  another?  1.  It  is  salutary  to  remember  our  orij;inal.
"A  Syrian  ready  to  perish  was  my  father.''  It  will  serve  to  beget  in  us  humility.
It  will  make  us  hopeful ;  for  if  wo  have  risen  so  much,  may  we  not  rise  higher  yet  ?

2.  It  is  salutary  to  remember  the  oppressions  of  men.  "  The  Egyptians  evil  entreated
us."  Poor,  selfish,  changelul  man  can  never  be  relied  upon.  Friendly  to-day,  they  turn
to  be  bitterly  hostile  to-morrow.    "Cease  from  man,  whose  breath  is  in  his  nostrils."

3.  It  is  salutary  to  remember  the  efficacy  of  prayer.  "  We  cried  unto  the  Lord."  His
ear  is  always  open  to  human  solicitations.  The  affairs  of  this  universe  do  not  unfit
him  to  attend  to  our  need.  True  prayer  is  never  in  vain.  4.  It  is  salutary  to  remember
God's  interpositions,  "He  looked.  He  brought  us  forth.  He  hath  given  us  this  land."
The  affliction  was  essential  to  fitness  for  Canaan.  Winter  is  essential  to  the  fruitfulness
of  spring.  When  God  begins  to  bless  us,  what  limit  shall  there  be  ?  What  ?  Only
that  which  our  incapacity  to  receive  may  impose  1  Being  redeemed,  our  expectations
•re  infinite.

III.  Gratitude  fob  God's  gifts  must  be  practical.  Words  of  thankfulness  are
cheap,  unless  accompanied  by  deeds.  Songs  of  praise  are  sweet  minstrelsy  in  the  ear  of
God,  but  they  must  spring  from  the  heart ;  and  if  the  heart  is  grateful,  the  hands  will
be  full  of  offerings.  The  firstfruits  of  all  our  increase  belong  to  God  as  a  matter
of  right.  But  duty  is  delight.  This  requirement  is  representative.  We  may  not  he
husbandmen ;  still  our  firstfruits  are  due.  The  firstfruits  of  our  time  belong  to  God —
the  fresh  dewy  hours  of  every  day.  The  first  of  our  gains  belong  to  God.  Say  not,
"  They  are  mine."  Nay  1  they  are  his.  The  firstfruits  of  mental  strength— our  youth ;
the  best  of  all  we  have  belong  to  him.     To  secularize  these  is  sacrilege.

IV.  Through  all  God's  gifts  his  intention  is  human  gladness.  This  gladness  is
fostered  and  fed  by  proportionate  offerings.  For  this  habit  of  religious  offering  will
serve  to  draw  away  our  confidence  from  our  material  possessions,  and  place  it  in  the
living  God.  This  will  strengthen  and  establish  joy.  It  is  surely  better  to  trust  the
Fount  than  the  channel — the  Sonrce  than  the  stream.  If  every  man  on  earth  is  not
brimful  of  joy,  it  is  not  God's  fault.  To  rejoice  In  God  is  our  duty  and  our  privilege.
And  this  joy  is  contagious.  "  Thou  shalt  rejoice,  .  .  .  thou,  and  the  Levite,  and  the
stranger  that  is  among  you."  Joy  makes  men  generous,  and  the  recipients  of  our
generosity  will  share  our  joy.  There  will  bo  joyous  action  and  reaction.  We  are  to
be  the  channels  through  which  God  will  pour  his  joy  into  others'  hearts.  In  return
they  will  give  us  their  prayers. — D.

Vers.  12 — 15. — Complete  consecration  a  condition  of  continued  blessing.  The  system
of  social  dependence  is  ordained  of  God.  By  a  deliberate  act  of  wisdom,  God  devoted
the  Levites  to  poverty,  or  rather  to  an  equitable  interest  in  the  whole  land.  The
necessities  of  some  are  created  as  the  most  fitting  outlets  for  the  charity  of  others.

I.  Men  ark  appointed  to  be  God's  almoners.  Not  more  really  does  the  sovereign
of  an  empire  employ  persons  of  rank  to  be  his  stewards  and  almoners  than  God  employs
oa.  To  expend  upon  ourselves  the  whole  of  our  earthly  possessions  is  sin — is  the  worst
of  sins — ^is  sacrilege.  We  hold  in  our  keeping  God's  property.  We  are  not  at  libertj
to  use  it  as  we  please.  Nor  is  the  amount  which  appertains  to  God  determined  by
the  caprice  of  human  inclination.    A  definite  portion  is  God's,  and  becomes  in  the


416  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxti.  1—19.

highest  sense  trust  property.  One-tenth  of  all  our  gains  is  the  fixed  proportion  cltumed
by  Qod.  God  identifies  himself  with  the  Levite,  the  widow,  the  fatherless.  The
Levites  are  his  messengers.  The  poor  are  his  friends.  To  deny  them  is  to  wrong  him ;
and  he  will  surely  avenge  the  insult.  On  stated  occasions,  viz.  tiiennially,  each  pro-
prietor was  required  to  render  an  account  of  his  stewardship,  and  to  make'a  solemn
declaration  that  he  had  faithfully  discliarged  his  momentous  trust.  As  often  as  we
supplicate  new  favours  we  virtually  protest  our  faithfulness.

II.  Surrender  to  God  a  condition  op  successful  pbateb.  In  this  passage  tho
Hebrews  were  taught  not  to  ask  for  God's  blessing  upon  their  land  until  they  had  con-
fessed their  complete  surrender  to  God's  revealed  will.  Pride  bars  the  door  which  keeps
out  Divine  favours.  Pride  chokes  the  channels  so  that  the  stream  of  God's  bounty
cannot  flow.  In  like  manner  God  acts  in  our  earthly  life.  He  will  not  give  health
except  through  the  channel  of  food.  He  will  not  give  strength  except  through  the
channel  of  exercise.  He  will  not  allow  us  to  use  st<ara  or  electricity  except  by  surrender
to  his  material  laws.  We  do  not  really  pray  so  long  as  any  part  of  our  nature  is  rebel-
lious against  his  vrill.  Lip-prayer  is  counterfeit.  Genuine  prayer  is  the  up-going  of
the  whole  man.

III.  God's  solemn  pledges  are  conditionbd  bt  earnest  prater.  God  had  sworn
to  the  patriarclis  to  give  this  goodly  land  to  their  seed,  yet  his  oath  implied  trust,
surrender,  prayer,  upon  their  part.  Indeed,  if  these  things  had  been  wanting  in  the
Hebrews,  no  external  possession  would  have  been  a  blessing :  Canaan  would  have  been
a  curse.  Material  light  is  no  boon  unless  there  be  an  organ  of  human  vision  to  enjoy
it — unless  the  eye  be  open.  Nothing  really  benefits  a  man  until  it  actually  enters  his
nature  and  becomes  a  part  of  himself.  This  is  God's  efficient  act.  "Ask,  and  ye  shall
receive."  For  all  things  promised  of  God,  "  he  will  yet  be  inquired  ot"  Prayer  gives
the  final  fitness  to  receive. — D.

Vers.  16 — 19. — The  spiritual  creation.  In  the  creation  of  the  material  world,  "  God
spake,  and  it  was  done."  But  in  dealing  with  rebellious  men,  obedience  does  not
spontaneously  follow  on  command.  God  has  called  into  existence  a  substance  that
cannot  arbitrarily  be  controlled — a  human  will.  Therefore,  to  gain  loyal  response  from
human  nature,  God  makes  known  himself  as  infinitely  worthy  of  man's  regard,  indi-
cates his  authority,  and  sets  forth  the  high  advantages  of  his  friendship.  The  largest
obedience  is  man's  real  interest.     It  is  the  only  path  to  promotion.

I.  Wk  hate  here  GtOd's  revelation  of  his  kingly  authority.  It  is  his  part  to
command — man's  to  obey.  We  cannot  reverse  or  disturb  this  order  without  introducing
anarchy  and  sorrow.  1.  This  revelation  of  God  is  always  new.  "  This  day  "  thy  God
hath  commanded  thee  afresh.  New  discoveries  of  the  extent,  the  wisdom,  the  gracious-
ness,  of  God's  sovereignty  may  be  made  to  us  every  day.  Every  morning  the  voice  of
lieavenly  authority  speaks  to  us  afresh.  2.  The  spirit  of  wise  authority  is  very  im-
perative. "  Thou  shalt  keep  and  do."  It  would  not  be  safe  for  God  to  abandon  any
part  of  his  prerogative.  It  would  not  be  safe  to  allow  men  to  diminish  his  sovereignty.
We  are  creatures :  he  is  Creator ;  hence  it  is  supremely  fitting  that  he  alone  should
rule.  3.  His  commands  are  irrevocable.  They  are  well  designated  "statutes,"  t.e.
things  well  established.  In  the  material  world  men  are  discovering  how  fixed  and
uniform  are  all  God's  laws.  No  deviation  is  allowed.  Nor  is  it  tolerated  in  the  spiritual
realm,  and  every  new-born  man  says,  "  I  will  keep  thy  statutes  with  my  whole  heart."
4.  Obedience  embraces  the  whole  man.  Outward  and  ostensible  service  does  not  satisfy
God,  because  they  will  bring  no  blessing  to  his  creature  man.  These  commands  are  for
man  as  a  spiritual  being ;  and  mere  external  service  is  hypocrisy.  No  fragrance  is  in
our  obedience  unless  heart  and  soul  go  out  in  our  deeds.  Obedience,  to  have  any  worth
with  God,  mast  be  the  efSorescence  of  our  love.

IL  We  have  herb  man's  willing  acceptance  or  the  covenant.  The  Jews,  as
one  man,  chose  God  to  be  their  King,  and  swore  to  be  loyal  subjects.  "  Thou  hast
avouched  the  Lord  to  be  thy  God."  1.  It  must  be  an  act  of  personal  choice.  Whether
we  perceive  it  or  not,  our  course  in  life  is  our  own  choice.  We  may  never  consciously
have  faced  the  question,  nor  put  into  words  our  decision;  yet  our  life  plainly  shows
that  some  decision  has  been  made.  Happy  the  man  who,  after  due  reflection,  can
talmly  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  God  1 "    2.  The  language  indicatcjB  progressive  obedieLce,


e^  XXVI.  1—19.]  THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  417

The  Joyal  servant  "walks  in  God's  ways."  He  is  not  content  with  standing  still.
in  proportion  as  he  obeys,  he  sees  more  clearly  the  wisdom  of  the  command — he  finds
more  pleasure  in  loyal  service.  At  first  he  obeyed  because  it  was  a  plain  duty ;  now
ho  responds  because  it  is  a  delight.  "  He  loves  the  Law."  3.  And  hearty  obedience
brings  clearer  knowledge  of  our  Master's  will.  Having  learnt  the  wisdom  and  the
pleasure  of  obedience,  he  is  more  eager  to  hearken  to  the  Divine  voice.  His  ears  have
been  opened.  He  can  hear  the  soft  whispers  of  a  voice  which  is  unheard  by  others.
He  loves  to  hearken.    "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him."

in.  Wb  have  hekb  God's  genbrous  pledge  of  laroeh  ooo'^.  1.  Here  is  adoption.
He  solemnly  avers  them  to  be  "  his  peculiar  people."  He  gives  them  a  special  place  in
his  regards.  Before  the  intelligent  universe  he  espouses  them  as  his  own.  "  He  is  not
ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."  All  his  power  is  pledpred  for  their  protection.  All  his
possessions  become  theirs,  2.  He  gives  them  an  obedient  disposition.  His  blessing
can  reach  the  interior  wiU.  If  we  have  made  a  general  surrender  of  our?elves  to  him,
he  imparts  gracious  strength  to  every  energy  of  our  souls.  In  response  to  our  desire
he  makes  us  willing.  "  I  will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  them,  and  cause  them  to  walk
in  my  statutes,  and  they  shall  keep  my  judgments,  and  ao  them."  When  men  have
enibraced  his  external  and  written  covenant,  then  "  he  makes  a  new  covenant,  and
writes  it  upon  their  hearts."  First  there  is  what  is  natural,  afterward  that  which  is  ^
spiritual.  3.  Here  are  eminence  and  honour  secured.  "  To  make  thee  high  aboye  all
nations."  Real  glory  is  God's  gift  to  his  chosen.  False  honour  and  glitter  Satan
scatters  abundantly  among  his  votaries;  but  these  are  superficial  and  ephemeral.
Satan  cannot  give  what  he  does  not  possess.  All  honour  belongs  to  God ;  and  tile
dignities  and  eminence  and  glory  which  are  God's,  he  has  chosen  to  share  with  his
saints.  "  Where  I  am,  there  ye  shall  be  also."  4.  Man's  crown  of  beauty  is  promised  ;
"  that  thou  mayest  be  holy."  Purity  is  the  perfection  of  humanity.  For  this  oar
spirits  thirst.  No  external  honour  or  greatness  will  satisfy  us  if  we  are  not  internally
holy.  And  the  purpose  of  God  in  our  redemption  is  "  that  we  may  be  conformed  unto
the  image  of  his  Son."    "  Then  shall  I  be  satisfied,  when  I  awake  in  thy  likeness." — D

Vers.  1 — 11.— The  dedication  of  the  firstfrwits.  A  beautiful  religious  service  is  here
associated  with  the  dedication  of  the  flrstfruits.  It  was  to  be  an  act  of  worship.  There/
was  to  be  the  appearance  before  the  priest,  the  acknowledgment  of  God's  great  bounty
to  the  forefathers  as  well  as  to  the  worshipper  himself,  the  presentation  of  the  flrstfruits
as  a  return  of  God's  gifts  to  him,  the  setting  of  the  basket  before  God,  and  the  rejoicing
in  the  Divine  presence.     All  this  is  surely  typical.

L  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Phiest  to  whom  wb  should  bbino  the  FnisTFBcrrM  of  all
orm  INCBBASB.  In  other  words,  we  should  bring  our  systematic  beneficence  before
Christ,  and  prayerfully  deal  with  it  before  him.  He  is  the  Mediator  for  our  liberality,
as  well  as  for  eveiy  other  blessing.

IL  We  need  Christ's  uebits  to  render  cub  libeb.^litt,  as  well  as  bvbbt  other
GRACE,  FBAGRANT  BBFOBB  GoD.  For  WO  should  ucver  forget  that  no  single  grace  is
really  fit  in  its  naked  imperfection  to  he  presented  to  God.  It  requires  to  be  performed
with  the  merits  of  our  adorable  High  Priest.  There  should  be  no  boasting  about  it,  as
if  it  could  stand  alone.

III.  OUB   LIBEEALITY    should    be    THE    OUTCOME  OF  OUB   GBATITUDB   FOB   FAVOUR

SHOWN  TO  THE  FATHERS  AS  WELL  A8  TO  OURSELVES.  The  Jew  reviewed  gratefully  the
national  history,  the  Syrian  origin,  the  Egyptian  bondage,  the  Exodus,  the  entrance
into  Canaan,  and  the  fruitfulness  of  the  land  of  promise.  All  this  history  of  God's
goodness  made  the  flrstfruits  simply  the  expression  of  giatitude.

It  is  on  this  grace  that  systematic  beneficence  is  to  be  built.  Nowhere  else  can  a
fitting  foundation  be  found.

IV.  Our  libeealitt  should  be  associated  with  a»  act  of  joyful  wobship.  In
no  other  way  can  liberality  be  sustained.  "  On  tie  first  day  of  the  week  let  every  one
of  you  lay  by  him  in  store,  as  God  hath  prosiiered  him  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  2).  Why  on  the
first  day  of  the  week  ?  Manifestly  to  associate  the  grace  with  the  religious  services  of
the  resurrection  day.  No  week-day  liberality  will  last  long — it  requires  a  Lord's  day,
with  all  its  holy  associations  and  sanctions,  to  s/istain  the  liberality  of  the  people.

And  this  saves  the  sp'rit  of  liberality  from  the  grudging  that  is  so  vexatious  and  ga

PECTEBONOMT  2  X


118  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xx  ni.  1— 2o

worldly.  "  The  Lord  loveth  a  cheerful  giver,"  and  so  he  draws  the  giver  into  his  own
presence,  and  makes  him  joyful  there,  that  he  may  offer  in  his  liberality  a  "  sacrifice  of
joyfulness."

V.  The  jot  beached  through  libbhalitt  k  to  be  oarribd  into  the  socia'  oiBCiiB,
TO  MAKE  HOME  TROLT  HAPPY.  The  Jew,  after  presenting  his  firstfruits,  was  lo  rejtice
in  every  good  gift  of  God,  along  with  the  Levite  and  stranger  who  formed  part  of  his
household.  A  cheerful  giver  is  the  secret  of  a  happy  home.  His  relaticas  with  his
Lord  being  bright  and  beautiful,  he  brmgs  the  fragrance  home. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  12 — 19. — Looking  up  for  the  blessing.  The  interests  of  the  dependent  classes,
"  the  Levite,  the  .stranger,  tlie  fatherless,  and  the  widow,"  being  considered  and  secured
by  the  tithing  of  the  third  year,  the  Jew  was  directed  then  to  look  up  for  the  Divine
blessing  on  the  land.     The  tithe  was  first  paid,  and  tljen  the  blessing  sought.

I.  Systematic  beneficence  should  be  the  preliminary  or  supplication  for
BLESSING,  AND  NOT  CONDITIONED  UPON  IT.  There  is  a  temptation  to  make
liberality  a  matter  of  speculation,  to  vow  a  certain  portion  if  a  certain  blessing  is
conferred.  Now,  this  may  be  all  very  well  regarding  what  is  beyond  a  tithe,  but  the
tithe  is  a  settled  proportion  to  be  promptly  and  gratefully  paid,  and  the  blessing  can

•then  be  honestly  asked  when  the  debt  to  God  has  been  discliarged.

II.  The  truly  i,ibbral  will  look  fob  spiritual  blessing  foe  his  country,
AND  NOT  BE  CONTENT  WITH  TEMPORAL.  In  fact,  it  was  revival,  as  we  should  now
call  it,  that  the  Jew  after  his  tithing  sought.  And  systematic  beneficence  should
be  regarded  as  the  indispinsable  prelimmary  of  revival,  if  Mai.  iii.  10  has  any  meaning.
It  is  manifest  that  illiberality  may  hinder  spiiitual  blessing,  and  consequently  liberality
should  be  fostered  as  the  manifest  test  of  sincerity  regarding  blessing.  If  one  is  not
willing  to  pay  his  share  that  every  hindrance  of  blessing  may  be  removed,  he  cannot  bo
in  earnest  about  it.

III.  Moses,  as  the  mediator,  guarantees  the  covenant  blessings  to  titb  cotk-
NANT-KEBPING  PEOPLE.  God  had  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt,  and  was  about  to  intro-
duce them  to  the  land  of  promise,  that  they  might  prove  his  "  peculiar  people,"  and  be
"  high  above  all  nations  which  he  hatli  made,  in  praise,  and  in  name,  and  in  honour,"  and
above  all,  be  "  an  holy  people."  This  was  his  covenant  engagement.  Hence  Moses
urges  them  to  keep  the  commandments  God  has  given  them  with  all  their  heart  and
soul,  and  they  shall  find  how  faithful  God  is.

Obedience  is  consequently  to  be  the  manifestation  of  their  faith  in  God  as  "  Faithful
Promiser."  If  he  gave  the  blessings  in  all  their  fulness  first,  faith  would  have  no  room
to  grow,  and  his  people  would  be  able  to  live  well  enough  by  sight.  But  when  they
are  asked  to  obey  and  be  blessed  in  and  through  their  obedience,  Mtb  has  its  beautiful
sphere.— B.  M.  £.


PAET  m.

THIRD  DISCOURSE  OF  MOSES.    THE  COVENANT  RENEWED.

CHAPTER  XXVIL— CHAPTER  XXX.

EXPOSITION.

ment  of  the  people  in  Canaan,  Moiee  pro-
ceeds to  dwell  more  particularly  on  the
sanctions  by  which  obedience  to  the  Divine
institute  was  ob  forced.  Before  entering
on  these,  however,  he  gives  some  inetruo-
tione  regarding  the  setting  up  and  ntoe^a


CHAPTER  XXVn.

iNSTBCOnONS  AS  TO  THE  PuBLISIlINa  OF  THE

Law  IN  Canaan.

IlAvino  set  forth  the  laws  and  rights  of
Israel  with  special  reference  to  the  settle-


CH.  XXVII.  1 — 26.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


419


mation  of  the  Law  when  they  should
have  entered  Canaan.  These  instructions
Moses  gives  in  conjunction  with  the  elders
of  Israel,  who  are  associated  with'  him  here,
because'  on  them  would  devolve  the  obliga-
tion to  see  to  the  fulfilment  of  what  the  Law
enjoined  after  Mosed  had  ceased  to  be  the
ruler  and  leader  of  the  people.

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  first  instruction  respects
the  setting  up  of  pillars  on  which  the  Law
was  to  be  inscribed.  Such  a  mode  of  pub-
lishing laws  or  edicts  was  common  in
ancient  times.  Pillars  of  iitone  or  metal,
on  whicli  laws  were  inscribed,  are  frequently
mentioned  by  the  classical  writers.  Lysias
quotes  a  law  from  such  a  pillar  in  the
Areopagus  at  Athens  ('Eratosth.,'  31,  12);
at  Eleusis  there  were  pillars  on  which
laws  were  inscribed  (Pollux,  10,  97);  Flato
speaks  of  pillars  set  up  in  the  market-place,
on  which  were  laws  for  the  regulation  of
traffic  (•  De  Legg.,'  xt  p.  916  E) ;  and  Poly-
bius  even  uses  the  word  "  pillar  "  ((rT^A.n)
as  synonymous  with  "  law "  or  "  condi-
tions of  treaty  "  ('  Hist.,'  xxiv.  4,  12;  xxvi.
1,4,  etc.  Comp.  also  Flato,  'Crit.,'p.  119
0,  E;  120  A;  Ps.-Demosth.,  p.  1370,  25;
1381,10;  Cicero,' Cat.,' iii.  8;  '  Phil.,' xiii.  3 ;
' Fam  Epp.,'  xii.  1 ;  Ovid,  'Met.,'  i.  3).

Ver.  l.—All  the  commandments,  etc.;
all  that  up  to  this  time  I  have  enjoined
upon  you.  The  reference  is  to  the  entire
Law  as  given  by  Moses.

Ver.  2. — On  the  day  when  ye  shall  pass
over  Jordan ;  i.e.  at  the  time ;  "  day  "  is  here
used  in  a  wide  sense  (cf  Gen.  ii.  4 ;  Numb,
iii.  1  ;  2  Sam.  xxii.  1 ;  Eccles.  xii.  3 ;  Isa.  xi.
10,  etc.).  Thou  shalt  set  thee  up  great  stones,
and  plaister  them  with  plaister.  The  stones,
tliO  number  of  which  is  not  specified,  were
to  be  large,  because  much  was  to  be  in-
scribed upon  them,  and  they  were  to  be
covered  with  a  coating  of  liuie  or  gypsum
("'»),  in  order  to  secure  a  smooth  white
surface  on  which  the  inscription  might  be
cl.  arly  depicted.  Tliat  the  words  Were  not,
»a  Michaelis,  Rosenmiiller,  and  others  sup-
pose, cut  in  the  stone,  and  afterwards
covered  with  plaster  in  order  to  preserve
them,  is  plain  Irom  its  being  enjoined  that

they  were  to  be  written  upon  (^j))  the  stones
so  prepared;  and  besides,  as  this  was
intended  to  be  a  proclamation  of  the  Law,
the  main  purpose  of  the  erection  would
have  been  firustrated  had  the  inscription
been  concealed  by  such  a  covering  as  that
8ui^)0sed.  Among  the  ancient  Egyptians
the  practice  of  depicting  records  on  walls
or  monuments  covered  with  a  coating  of
plaster  was  common  (see  Hengstenberg,
'Authentie  dea  Pent.,'  i.  464,  English
translation,  i.  433) ;  from  them,  doubtless,


it  was  borrowed  by  the  Hebrews.  It  has
been  suggested  by  Eennicott  that  the
writing  was  to  be  in  relievo,  and  that  the
spaces  between  the  letters  were  filled  up  by
the  mortar  or  cement.  This  is  possible,
but  it  is  not  such  a  process  as  this  that  the
words  of  the  text  suggest.  "  A  careful  ex-
amination of  ch.  xxvii.  4,  8,  and  Josh.  viii.
30—22,  will  lead  to  the  opinion  that  the
Law  was  written  upon  or  in  the  plaster  with
which  these  pillars  were  coated.  This
could  easily  be  done,  and  such  writing
was  common  in  ancient  times.  I  have  seen
specimens  of  it  certainly  more  than  two
thousand  years  old,  and  still  as  distinct  as
when  they  were  first  inscribed  on  the
plaster "  (Thomson,  '  Land  and  the  Book,'
ii.  p.  204).

Ver.  3. — All  the  words  of  this  law ;  i.e.
all  the  purely  legislative  parts  of  the  Mosaic
institute.  By  thfe  "Law"  here  cannot  be
intended  merely  the  blessings  and  the  curses
afterwards  mentioned  (vers.  14 — 26) ;  nor  is
there  any  reason  why  this  term  should  be
restricted  to  the  precepts  of  this  Book  of
Deuteronomy,  as  if  they  only  were  to  be  in-
scribed on  the  stones:  the  term  must  be
extended  so  as  to  cover  all  that  Moses  had
at  any  time  delivered  to  Israel  as  a  law
from  God.  It  is  not  necessary,  however,
to  suppose  that  all  the  reasons  and  exhorta-
tions with  which  the  delivery  of  these,  as
recorded  in  the  Pentateuch,  was  accom-
panied were  to  be  inaoribed  along  with  tlie
Law;  still  less  that  the  historical  details
amidst  which  the  record  of  these  laws  is
embedded  should  be  given.  It  may  be
questioned  even  whether  each  and  aU  of
the  legislative  enactments  of  the  Torah,
reckoned  by  the  Jews  to  be  613,  were  to  be
recorded ;  for  it  might  be  deemed  enough
that  the  substance  and  essence  of  the  Law
should  be  thus  presented.  But  even  if  the
whole  was  to  be  inscribed,  there  would  be
no  serious  diflSoulty  in  the  way  of  carrying
this  into  etfect,  seeing  there  is  no  limita-
tion as  to  the  number  of  the  stones  to  be
set  up.

Ver.  4. — The  stones  were  to  be  set  up  on
Mount  Ebal  (cf.  ch.  xi.  29).  The  Samaritan
Codex  and  Version  have  Gerizim  liere,  in
place  of  Ebal;  but  though  some  critics
have  accepted  this,  it  is  generally  regarded
as  an  arbitrary  alteration  introduced  tn
favour  Samaritan  pretensions  (see  the  ex-
haustive and  conclusive  Dissertation  ol'
Gesenius, '  De  Pentat.  S.imarit.').  All  thi'
ancient  versions,  as  well  as  all  the  Hebrew
manuscripts,  support  tlie  received  text.

Vers.  5 — 7. — Besides  the  monumental
stones,  an  altar  of  whole  stones,  on  which  no
tool  had  passed  (cf  Exod.  xx.  22)  was  to  be
erected,  and  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offer-
ings  were  to  be  presented  as  at  the  estab-


420


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMY.         [oh.  xxvii.  1— 26.


lishmetit  of  the  covenant  at  Sinai,  followed
by  the  statutory  ftetive  entertainment  (of.
Exod.  xxiv.  S).

Ver.  8. — The  injunction  to  write  the  Law
on  the  stones  is  repeated,  with  the  addition
that  it  was  to  bo  done  very  plainly  (LXX.,
ra<j)as  a<j)6Spa:  Vulgate,  p7ane  et  lucide%  which
shows  that  the  main  purpose  of  setting  up
the  stones  was  that  the  Law  inight  be  easily
known  by  the  people  (cf.  Hab.  ii.  2).  The
stones  and  the  altar  were  fittingly  placed
on  Ebal,  the  mount  of  cursing.  For  the
setting  up  of  the  stones  on  which  the  Law
was  inscribed,  and  the  building  beside  them
of  the  altar,  was  the  symbolical  renewal  of
the  covenant  of  God  with  Israel,  and  the
establishment  in  Canaan  of  that  dispensation
which  was  "the  ministration  of  condemnation
and  of  death  "  {2  Cor.  iii.  7,  9),  and  of  that
Law  which,  though  in  itself  "  holy,  just,  and
good,"  can  only,  because  of  man's  pei  versity
and  sinfulness,  bring  on  those  who  are  under
it  a  curse  (Gal.  iii.  10).

Vers.  9,  10. — When  Israel  renewed  the
covenant  with  the  Lord,  by  solemnly  setting
up  the  Law  in  Canaan,  it  became  thereby
the  nation  of  God,  and  bound  itself  at  the
same  time  to  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the
Lord,  and  keep  his  commandments,  as  it  had
already  done  (cf.  ch.  zxvi.  17,  18;  Micah
iv.  5).

Ver.  9. — Take,  heed ;  literally,  Be  tilent ;
LXX.,  ffidJiro,  with  silent  attention  listen
(cf.  Zeoh.  ii.  13).

Vers.  11 — 14. — Having  set  up  the  Law  and
renewed  the  covenant  in  Canaan,  Israel  was
t)  proclaim  upon  the  land  the  blessing  and
the  curse  of  the  Law,  as  already  commanded
(see  ch.  xi.  29).  For  this  purpose  six  tribes
were  to  station  themselves  on  Mount
Gerizim,  and  six  ou  Mount  Fbal,  the  former
to  pronounce  the  blessing,  the  latter  the
curse.  (On  the  situation  of  tliese  two  moun-
tains, see  at  ch.  xi.  29.)  The  six  tribes  by
whom  the  blessing  was  to  be  pronounced
were  Simeon,  Levi,  Judah,  Issachar,  Joseph,
and  Benjamin,  all  descended  from  the  two
wives  of  Jacob — Leah  and  Bachel.  The
tribes  by  whom  the  curse  was  to  be  uttered
were  those  descended  from  Zilpah,  Leah's
maid,  viz.  Gad  and  Ashcr ;  those  descended
from  Bilhah,  Rachel's  maid,  viz.  Dan  and
Naphtali ;  with  Zebulun  and  Reuben,  both
descended  from  Leah.  As,  in  order  to  ob-
tain a  division  of  the  tribes  into  two  equal
portions,  two  of  the  sons  of  Leah  must  be
assigned  to  the  second  half,  Zebulun  and
Reuben  wore  chosen,  probably  because  the
fonner  was  the  youngest  of  Leah'»  bou,  and


the  latter  had  by  his  sin  forfeited  hit  birth-
right (Gen.  xlix.  4).

Ver.  13.— These  shall  stand  npon  mount
Ebal  to  curse;  literally.  These  shall  stand
upon  the  curse  on  Mount  Ebal ;  i.e.  it  shall
belong  to  them  to  utter  the  curse.

Ver.  14. — ^The  Levites — standing  probably
In  some  convenient  spot  midway  betweeii
the  two  mountains  (of.  Josh.  viii.  33) — were
to  pronounce  with  a  loud  voice  the  blessing
and  the  curse,  so  that  all  might  hear ;  and
tire  people  were  to  give  their  assent,  and  take
to  themselves,  as  it  were,  the  blessing  or
the  curse  as  uttered,  by  a  solemn  Amen.
By  the  Levites  here  are  intended,  not  the
sons  of  Levi  generally,  but  that  portion  of
them  which  belonged  to  the  priesthood,
and  bare  the  "ark  of  the  covenant  (cf.  Josh,
viii.  33).

Vers.  15— 26.— The  curses  to  be  pro-
nounced were  twelve  in  number,  probably
to  correspond  with  the  number  of  the  tribes.
The  blessings  are  not  here  recorded;  but
when  the  injunction  here  given  was  fulfilled
by  Joshua,  the  blessing  as  well  as  the  curse
was  pronounced  (Josh.  viii.  34).  And
probably,  as  the  Jews  report,  each,  the
blessing  and  the  curse,  was  pronounced
alternately  (Talmud  Bab.,  'Sotah,'  c.  7-
Targum  Hieros.,  in  loe. ;  Surenhus., '  Mishns,
iii.  262).  It  has  sometimes  been  doubted
whether  any  human  voice  could  be  audible
over  so  wide  a  stretch  as  that  between  these
two  mountains  ;  but  this  need  be  no  longer
matter  of  doubt,  for  the  experiment  has
been  repeatedly  tried  in  recent  times  with
success  (Tristram,  '  Land  of  Israel,'  p.  150  ;
Bonar,  p.  371;  Stanley,  'Syr.  and  Pal.,'
p.  13).  In  the  clear  atmosphere  of  the  East
sounds  travel  far.  It  is  to  be  borne  in  mind
also  that  it  was  not  a  single  voice  that  had
to  make  itself  heard  across  the  valley  on
this  occasion,  but  a  chorus  of  voices  pro-
ceeding from  a  body  of  priest*  stationed
apparently  in  the  midst  between  the  two
companies  (cf.  Josh.  viii.  33),  and  chanting
in  unison  the  words  of  each  blessing  or
curse.

Vers.  15— 26.— Each  of  the  fint  eleven
curves  is  directed  against  some  particular
sin  already  denounced  in  the  Law.  The
twelfth  curse  is  directed  generally  agaiust
all  breaches  of  the  Law,  against  those  who
fail  or  refuse  to  set  up  the  whole  Law  and
follow  it  as  the  rule  of  life  and  conduct.
Tliis  shows  that  the  sins  specially  denounced
are  selected  by  way  of  specimen,  and  also
perhaps,  because  they  are  anoh  m  could


en.  xxvu.  1— 26.J  THE   COOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


42  i


for  the  most  port  be  easily  concealed  from
jiulioial  iDspection.

Ver.  15.— (Of.  Exod.  xx.  4;  Ley.  xxtL  1.)

V.r.  16  — (Cf.  Exod.  xxi.  17.)

Ver.  17.— (Cf.  ch.  xix.  14.)

Ver.  18.— (Cf.  Lev,  xix  14.)

Ver.  19.-(Cf.  oh.  xxiv.  17.)

Ver.  20.— (Cf.  Lot.  xviii.  8;  oh.  xxii.  30.)


Ver.  21.— (Of.  Lev.  xviii.  23 ;  xx.  15.)
Vers.  22,  23.— (Cf.  Lev.  xviii.  9,  17.)
Ver.  24.— (Cf.  Exod.  xx.13;  Numb.ixxv,

16,  etc.)
Ver.  25.— (Cf.  Exod.  xxiii.  7,  8.)
Ver.   26.— (Cf.  oh.  xxviii.  15;  im.   xi.

3,4.)


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 10. — "  Very  plainly."    These  words,  "  very  plainly,"  suggest  thiee  lines  of

thought.

I.  They  show  something  that  was  obdebed  to  be,  viz.  that  the  Law  of  God  was
to  be  written  very  plainly,  as  the  permanent,  standard  expression  of  right,  to  which  the
jieople  might  appeal.  Jt  was  not  to  be  left  to  a  floating  tradition.  To  no  such  risks  would
God  expose  his  teaching.  There  was  no  priesthood  in  Israel  which  had  any  monopoly
of  knowledge.  The  words  were  to  be  so  clearly  and  accurately  recorded  that,  upon  all
that  pertained  to  life  and  godliness,  the  people  might  see  for  themselves  what  the  Lord
had  spoken,  and  not  be  dependent  on  any  sacerdotal  inter|iretation  whatever.  How
clearly  does  this  fact  indicate  the  mind  and  will  of  Jehovah  concerning  our  race  I  God
would  not  have  us  walk  uncertainly.  He  would  have  the  way  of  life  so  plain,  that  the
"  wayfaring  men,  though  fools,"  need  not  err  therein.

II.  They  show  something  which  has  been.  The  injunction  has  been  carried  out,
not  only  in  the  malter  here  specially  referred  to,  but  in  God's  later  disclosures  also.
1.  In  the  books  which  Moses  left  behind  him  there  was  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  mind
and  will  so  clear  and  distinct,  that  no  one  reading  even  the  Pentateuch  with  a  loyal
faith  need  ever  have  been  at  a  loss  to  know  that  the  ground  of  his  trust  was  the  for-
giving love  of  God,  and  that  the  duty  of  life  was  summed  up  in  love  to  God  andlove  to
man.  2.  Later  teachings  are  given  with  equal,  yea,  with  increasing  clearness.  (1)  Those
of  the  i^ophets.  (2)  Of  our  Lord.  (3)  Vl  the  apostles.  In  all,  the  main  teachings
are  given  "  very  plainly."  Note  :  The  plainness  of  Scripture  is  not  of  that  kind  which
men  outgrow  as  they  get  older.  Those  very  passages  which  charm  childhood  with
their  simplicity,  do  come  to  Jiave  a  fuller  and  deeper  meaning  for  the  "old  disciple."

III.  They  suggest  something  which  should  be.  1.  Let  us  ever  regard  the  Bible
as  a  Btiok  for  the  people,  and  let  us  insist  on  its  being  made  the  ultimate  standard  of
appeal.  2.  Let  us  use  it  as  God  meant  us  to  use  it,  not  as  a  book,  but  as  the  Book  ;
not  as  man's,  but  as  God's.  3.  With  such  a  Book  before  us,  let  us  walk  (1)  intelligently,
as  if  we  understood  the  meaning  of  life ;  (2)  thankfully,  as  if  we  apprehended  the  glory
of  life ;  (3)  earnestly,  as  if  we  knew  the  solemnity  of  life ;  (4)  hopefully,  as  those  who
are  advancing  towards  the  goal  of  life.

Vers.  11 — 26.— .4  grand  "  Amen  i"  It  is  more  than  possible  that,  with  the  strong
dis|'Osition  there  is  nowadays  to  look  on  Jmlaism  as  obsolete,  the  chapter  before  ua
may  be  very  frci  nen'ly  passed  over  as  if  full  of  curses  that  no  longer  have  any  effect ;
especially  as  I'aui.inGal.  iii.,  says,  "Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  Law."
But  we  are  apt,  perhaps,  in  dealing  with  the  doctiinal  aspect  of  these  curses  of  the  Law,
in  reference  to  the  Atonement,  to  lose  sight  of  their  primary  historical  aspect  in
reference  to  Israel.  But  the  significance  of  both  altar  and  pillar,  pillar  and  altar,  should
be  taken  into  account.  Here,  in  the  valley  between  Gerizim  and  Ebal,  the  grandest
assembly  met  that  was  ever  convened.  The  Law  was  read  in  the  people's  hearing,  and
the  people  were  to  declare  themselves  leady  to  brand  sin  with  their  curse,  as  God
branded  it  with  his.  In  a  word,  they  were  in  a  glorious  league  with  the  Great  King  of
heaven  and  earth,  that,  whatever  he  disapproved,  they  would  combine  to  brand  with  the
infamy  of  eternal  shame.  As  Israel  was  expected  then  to  be  in  league  with  God  in
denouncing  wrong,  so  are  Christians  expected  by  the  holy  cross  to  swear  eternal  war
i  sin.    This  may  be  worked  out  in  seven  consecutive  lines  of  thought.


422  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxvii.  1— 26

I.  God's  people  now  are  a  divinely  chosen  commonwealth.

n.  In  subjection  to  God  alone,  this  commonwealth  is  a  self-governing  body.

III.  The  oaly  law  for  life  which  they  accept  is  that  of  righteousness — righteousnets,
of  course,  all  round,  both  as  regards  God  and  man.

ly.  It  was  for  this  very  purpose  Israel  had  been  chosen  out  of  the  peoples  that,
for  the  world's  sake,  there  might  be  one  nation  in  which  righteousness  was  the  supreme
law.

v.  Side  by  side  with  tha  records  of  a  Law  which  demands  perfect  righteousness,
there  is  the  altar  and  its  sacrifice  thereon,  speaking  to  the  people  of  a  Divine  provision
for  forgiving  the  ])enitent.

VI.  The  penitent  is  set  free  from  the  curse  of  Law,  that  he  may  ever  after  co-operate
with  God  in  honouring  the  Law  from  whose  curse  he  has  been  redeemed.

TII.  The  passionate  concern  for  holiness,  and  the  delight  in  a  holy  Law,  which  are
begotten  in  them  who  are  of  "  the  commonwealth  of  Israel;"  ensure  their  entire
sympathy  with  God  in  the  everlasting  curse  pronounced  against  all  unrighteousness.

VIII.  Thus  the  pure  and  just  Law  of  God  may  serve  believers  as  an  educatory  force
throu,<;hout  their  whole  life.  And  in  their  incessant  hatred  and  condemnation  of  evil
is  the  saying  true  in  the  highest  sense.  Vox  popuU,  vox  Dei,


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORi

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  stones  on  Ebcd.  This  chapter  is  significant,  as  letting  in  light  on
the  design  of  the  Law,  and  on  the  nature  of  the  Jewish  covenant.  We  see  from  it :
1.  That  the  Law  could  not  give  life.  2.  That  it  was  not  designed  to  give  life.  3.  That
its  real  aim  was  to  convince  of  sin,  and  so  to  shut  men  up  to  the  faith  that  would
afterwards  be  revealed  (Gal.  iii.  23).     Three  tepics  in  these  verses —

I.  The  erection  of  the  stones.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  Stones  were  to  be  set  up,  coated
with  plaster  (a  custom  :f  Egyft),  on  which  were  to  be  written,  "very  plainly,"  "all
the  words  of  this  Law  "  (ver.  8) — either  the  Law  in  Deuteronomy,  or  the  Pentateuchal
laws  generally.  The  stones  were :  1.  Significant  reminders  of  the  tenure  on  which  the
land  was  held.  2.  Witnesses  against  the  people  in  case  of  disobedience.  3.  A  testi-
mony to  the  plainness  with  which  the  Law  had  been  made  known  to  them.  The  last
point  reminds  us  of  our  own  privilege  in  possessing  a  clear  and  full  revelation  of  the
will  of  God  in  the  Bible.  Copies  of  the  Bible  are  like  these  stones,  witnesses  against  us
if  we  disobey  the  gospel.  "  Light  has  come  into  th^  world  "  (John  iii.  19).  We  are
not  left  to  the  natural  conscience,  sufficient  though  that  be  to  convict  men  of  sin  (Rom.
ii.  14,  15).  We  are  servants  who  know  our  Lord's  will  (Luke  xii.  47).  We  have  the
light  both  of  Law  and  gospel.  Supremely  great  are  our  privileges,  and  equally  great  are
our  responsibilities.

II.  The  stones  ebeotbd  cm  Ebal.  (Ver.  4.)  But  why  on  Ebal  ?  Why  on  the
mount  of  cursing  ?  Had  there  been  a  Law  which  could  have  given  life,  "  verily,"  Paul
says,  "  righteousness  should  have  been  by  the  Law  "  (Gal.  iii.  21).  In  that  case,  the
appropriate  place  for  the  erection  of  the  stones  would  have  been  Gerizim — the  mount
of  blessing.  But  the  Law  could  not  give  life.  In  itself  considered,  as  requiring  perfect
obedience,  it  could  only  condemn.  Its  principal  function — its  economic  scope  and
purpose — was  not  to  bless,  but  to  give  "  knowledge  of  sin  "  (Rom.  iii.  19, 20 ;  vii.  9 — 14 ;
Gal.  iii.).  Hence  the  appropriate  place  for  the  stones  being  planted  was  on  the  mount
of  cursing.

III.  The  acxmmpantino  saokifickb.  (Vers.  5 — 7.)  1.  As  the  Law  testified  to  sin,
so  the  sacrifices  testified  to  grace — to  the  provision  in  mercy  which  lay  within  the
covenant  for  the  removal  of  guilt.  Burnt  ofierinss  and  peace  offerings,  as  well  as  the
sin  offerings,  included  the  idea  of  propitiation.  This  was  shown  at  the  first  forming  of
the  covenant  by  the  action  of  sprinkling  the  blood  (Exod.  xxii.  6 — 8 ;  cf.  Heb.  ix.
19 — 23).  Without  sacrifice,  without  the  means  of  removing,  or  at  least  covering  guilt,
Israel's  position  under  the  Law  would  have  been  a  mockery.  2.  The  altar  of  unhewn
Btones  testifies  to  the  subordinate  place  which  art  ought  to  have  in  the  worship  of  Go^,
There  was  a  special  suitableness  in  the  altar  of  propitiation  being  built  of  undesecrated


OH.  xxviL  1— 26.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTJiUONOMY.  423

materials.  Himself  sinful,  man's  art  would  have  polluted  it.  Only  when  propitiation
had  been  made  was  art  permitted  to  resume  its  function  of  ministering  to  the  beaut}
of  Divine  service.  But  art,  in  religion,  needs  to  be  carefully  guarded.  It  is  false  art
when  it  drowns  other  thoughts  iu  admiration  of  the  finish,  injuring  worship  by  that
which  draws  away  the  mind  from  worship.  3.  The  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings
testified — the  one  to  the  entire  consecration  of  heart  and  life  which  is  the  condition  of
acceptable  service ;  the  other,  to  the  peace  and  fellowship  with  God  which,  on  the
ground  of  sacrifice,  are  attained  through  consecration  and  obedience.—^.  0.

Vers.  9, 10. — A  people  of  Ood.    I.  A  people  bound  to  God  by  many  tibb.    Both

by  what  God  had  done  for  them,  and  by  the  vows  which,  on  different  occasions,  they
had  taken  on  themselves.  They  were  his  by  covenant  with  the  fathers.  He  had  made
tlieiii  his  by  redemption  from  Egypt.  He  had  covenanted  with  them  at  Sinai.  The
covenant  being  broken,  he  had,  at  Moses'  intercession,  graciously  renewed  it.  He  had
kept  covenant  with  the  children,  even  when  rejecting  the  fathers.  Thirty-eight  years
he  had  led  them  in  the  wilderness,  and  once  more  had  gathered  them  together,  to  hear
them  renew  their  vows  of  obedience.  Which  things  are  a  figure.  They  remind  us  of
the  many  bonds  by  which  numbers  of  Christ's  people  are  bound  to  his  covenant.  By
redemption,  by  dedication  of  parents,  by  personal  choice  of  the  Saviour,  by  public
profession,  by  repeati-d  visits  to  his  table,  by  special  vows,  etc.

II.  A  PEOPLE  KEAFFIBMED  TO  BE   God's  BY  RENEWAL  OP  COVENANT.      Wc  "beCOme"

the  Lord's  by  revival  and  renewal  of  profession,  as  well  as  by  original  entrance  into
grace.  As  Christ's  Sonship  is  from  eternity,  yet  is  dated  from  successive  epochs — hii
birth  (Luke  i.  32,  35),  his  resurrection  (Acts  xiv.  33 ;  Bom.  i.  4) — so  each  new  act  of
self- dedication,  each  new  approach  of  God  to  the  soul,  each  renewal  of  covenant,  may
be  taken  by  the  Christian  as  a  new  date  from  which  to  reckon  his  acceptance.

III.  A  PEOPLE  UNDER  WEIGHTY  RESPONSIBILITIES.  The  belicver's  relation  to  God
entails  a  solemn  obligation  to  obedience.  The  very  name,  "  people  of  God,"  reminds  us
of  our  "  holy  calling  "—of  the  obligation  resting  on  us  to  be  holy  as  God  is  holy
(1  Pet.  ii.  15,  16) ;  exhibiting  to  the  world  a  p<tttt'rn  of  good  works,  and  proving  our
discipleship  by  likeness  of  character  to  him  whose  Name  we  bear. — J.  0.

Vers.  11 — 26. — Ebal  and  Oerizim.  This  ceremony  turns  on  the  idea  of  the  Law  as
primarily  entailing  a  curse.  Blessings  and  curses  were  both  to  be  recited  (vers.  12,
13).  But  the  curse  seems  to  have  been  first  pronounced,  and  it  only  is  given  in  the
record.  It  has  the  lead  in  the  transaction.  The  explanation  is  obvious.  Ver.  26
shows  that,  in  strictness,  none  can  escape  the  curse  (Ps.  cxxx.  3 ;  Gal.  iii.  10).  A  bless-
ing is  pronounced  from  Gerizim,  but  it  is  abortive,  as  depending  on  a  condition  which  no
sinner  can  fulfil.  Hence :  1.  The  stones  are  all  placed  on  Ebal.  2.  All  the  sons  of  the
bondwomen  are  placed  on  that  mount  (cf.  Gal.  iv.  21 — 31).  This  is  preferable  to
supposing  that  prominence  is  given  to  the  curse,  inasmuch  as,  under  law,  fear  rather
than  love  is  the  motive  relied  on  to  secure  obedience.  The  appeal  to  fear  is  itself  an
evidence  that  "  the  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man  "  (1  Tim.  i.  9).  It  brings
strikingly  to  light  the  inherent  weakness  of  the  economy  (Rom.  viii.  3).  When  a
Law,  the  essence  of  which  is  love,  requires  to  lean  on  curses  to  enforce  it,  the  un-
likelihood of  getting  it  obeyed  is  tolerably  manifest.  As  an  actually  working  system,
the  Mosaic  economy,  while  availing  itself  of  the  Law  to  awaken  consciousness  of  sin
and  to  keep  men  in  the  path  of  virtue,  drew  its  strength  for  holiness,  not  from  the
Law,  but  from  the  revelations  of  love  and  grace  which  lay  within  and  behind  it.  We
luarn—

I.  That  the  Law  is  comprehensive  op  every  part  op  dub  duty.  A  variety
of  sins  are  mentioned  as  examples.  They  relate  to  all  departments  of  duty — duty  to
God  and  duty  to  man.  The  list  is  avowedly  representative  (ver.  26).  Note :  1.  That
it  covers  a  large  part  of  the  Decalogue.  The  &rst  table  is  fairly  represented  by  the
second  commandment,  and  a  curse  is  pronounced  on  the  making  and  worshipping  of
images  (ver.  15).  The  precepts  of  the  second  table  are  involved  in  the  other  verses —
the  fifth  commandment  in  the  curse  on  filial  disrespect  (ver.  16),  the  sixth  in  the  curse
on  murder  (ver.  24),  the  seventh  in  the  curses  on  the  grosser  forms  of  uncleanness  (vers.
20 — ^23) ;  the  eighth  in  the  curse  on  removing  the  landmark  (ver.  17) ;  the  ninth  in


424  THE   BOOK  OF   DEUTERONOMY.  [cH.  xxvn.  1— 2a

the  curse  on  slaying  another  for  reward,  which  may  include  perjury  (ver.  25) ;  while
vers.  18,  19  may  be  viewed  as  forbidding  breaches  of  the  law  of  love  generally.  2.  That
the  sins  against  which  the  curses  are  directed  are  mostly  secret  sins.  The  Law  searches
the  heart.  3.  Thut  the  usual  carets  shown  for  the  interests  of  the  defenceless  (vers.  18,
19).  It  is  touching,  in  the  heart  of  so  awful  a  malediction,  to  find  this  tender  love  for
the  blind,  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  the  widow.  Wrath  and  love  in  God  are  close
of  kin..

IL  That  a  ctrsb  waits  on  evbbt  violation  of  the  Law's  precepts.  The
position  of  Scripture  is  that  every  sin,  great  and  small,  subjects  the  sinner  to  God's
.  wrath  and  curse.  It  derives  this  truth,  not,  as  some  have  sought  to  derive  it,  from  the
metaphysical  notion  of  sin's  infinite  demerit,  as  committed  against  an  infinite  God ;  but
from  its  own  deep  view  of  sin,  as  involving  a -change,  a  deflection,  an  alteration,  in
its  effects  of  infinite  moment,  in  the  very  centre  of  man's  being.  There  is  no  sin  of
slight  turpitude.  A  holy  being,  to  become  capable  of  sin,  must  admit  a  principle  into
his  heart  totally  foreign  to  the  holy  condition,  and  subversive  of  it.  In  this  sense,  he
that  offends  in  one  point  'w  guilty  of  all  (Jas.  ii.  10,  11).  Sin  is  in  him,  and  on  a
being  with  sin  in  him  the  Law  can  pronounce  but  one  sentence.  His  life  is  polluted,
and,  being  polluted,  is  forfeited.  The  curse  involves  the  cutting  of  the  sinner  off  from
life  and  favour,  with  subjection  to  the  temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal  penalties  of  trans-
gression. The  denial  of  this  article  leaves  no  single  important  doctrine  of  the  gospel
unaffected  ;  the  admission  of  it  carries  with  it  all  the  rest.  It  gives  its  comple:£ion  to  a
whole  theology.

III.  That  the  sinner  must  AOKNowLEDaB  the  justice  op  the  Law's  claims
against  him.  The  people  were  required  to  say,  "  Amen."  This  "  Amen  "  was :  (1)  An
assent  to  the  conditions  of  life  proposed.  (2)  A  recognition  of  the  righteousness  of
tliem.  The  Law  declares  God's  judgment  against  sin.  And  this :  1.  Is  echoed  hy  tie
conscience,  Fitfully,  reluctantly,  intermittently,  yet  truly,  even  by  the  natural
conscience.  The  "  Amen  "  is  implied  in  every  pang  of  remorse,  in  every  feeling  of  self-
condemnation.  Every  time  we  do  that  we  would  not,  we  consent  unto  the  Law  that
it  is  good  (Rom.  iii.  16).  The  very  heathen  know  the  "judgment  of  God,  that  they
which  commit  such  things  "  as  are  here  specified  "  are  worthy  of  death  "  (Rom.  i.  32).
But  it  needs  the  spiritually  convinced  heart  to  render  this  "Amen"  hearty  and
sincere.  The  true  penitent  justifies  God  and  condemns  himself  (Ps.  li.).  2.  Was
acknowledged  hy  Christ  as  our  Sin-beaver.  In  Christ's  atonement,  it  has  been  truly
remarked,  there  "  must  have  been  a  'perfect '  Amen '  in  humanity  to  thejudgment  of  Ood
on  the  sin  of  man.  Such  an  '  Amen '  was  due  to  the  truth  of  things.  He  who  was  the
Truth  could  not  be  in  humanity  and  not  utter  it — and  it  was  necessarily  a  first  step  in
dealing  with  the  Father  on  our  behalf  "  (J.  McLeod  Campbell).  3.  Will  yet  be  joined
in  by  the  whole  universe  (Rev.  xv.  2 ;  xvii.  1,  2).

Conclusion.  "  Christ  hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  Law,  being  made  a
curse  for  us  "  (Gal.  iii.  13).    In  him  no  condemnation  (Rom.  viii.  1), — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 10. — f^afeguards  for  obedience.  The  enthusiasm  of  Moses  for  God's  Law  is
admirable,  and  no  less  admirable  is  his  earnest  desire  for  Israel's  prosperity.  That  self-
forgetful  zeal  for  others'  good  was  one  main  qualification  in  Moses  to  be  the  vehicle  of
God's  revealed  will.  With  singular  sagacity,  Moses  presses  into  the  earliest  service,  for
the  promulgation  of  Divine  Law,  the  people  themselves.  The  very  stones  of  Canaan
were  to  be  written  over  with  the  substance  of  the  Law,  and  in  this  way  were  to  become
monuments  of  the  covenant  between  God  and  Israel.  The  people  who  had  taken  an
active  part  in  publishing  that  Law  would  feel  bound  in  self-consistency  to  maintain  it.
Their  title-deeds  to  Canaan  they  set  up  in  sight  of  heaven  and  earth ;  and  if  afterward
they  should  be  disobedient,  the  very  stones  of  the  land  would  cry  out  against  them.

I.  An  obedibnt  spirit  deliohts  to  exalt  and  perpetuate  God's  Law.  Moses,
instructed  by  God,  was  a  wise  observer  of  human  nature ;  hence  he  engages  the  co-
operation of  the  people  in  proclaiming  the  Law  in  the  first  flush  of  conquest.  The  first
stones  they  touched  with  their  feet  on  the  other  side  Jordan  were  to  be  consecrated  ta
the  service  of  God's  Law.  Deficient  in  tools,  they  were  not  expected  to  grave  them  in
stone,  but  to  write  them  on  plaster.  This  could  be  expeditiously  done,  and  miglit
serve  to  remind  them  how  easily  were  the  Divine  commands  effaced  from  human


CH.  XXVII.  1—26.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  426

hearts.  As  soon  as  God  had  begun  to  fulfil  his  part  of  the  covenant,  man  must  fulfil
his.  The  people  were  to  write  "  all "  the  precepts ;  for  not  one  of  them,  however
minute,  was  needless.  What  was  sufficiently  important  for  God  to  reveal,  we  may  be
sure  was  important  enough  for  man  to  preserve.  These  stones,  when  inscribed  with
Divine  legislation,  were  to  be  set  up  on  a  mount  central  in  the  land,  to  indicate  the
universal  honour  to  which  they  were  entitled.  And  probably  Ebal  was  selected  that
the  people  might  be  awed  by  the  curses  which  sprang  from  disobedience.  To  magnify
the  Law  of  the  King  is  the  loy^l  subject's  delight.    "  Oh,  how  I  love  thy  Law  1 "

IL  As  OBEDIENT    SPmri  is  QUALIFItCD    TO    ENTER  UFO^    A    LABOEB    INHEBITAirOE.

(Yer.  3.)  The  language  is  significant.  Having  passed  over  Jordan,  they  were  to  select
and  prepare  these  monumental  stones,  to  the  end  "  thou  mayest  go  in  unto  the  land."
Various  measures  of  success  were  possible.  They  might  destroy  the  Canaanites,  and
yet  find  little'  advantage  or  comfort  from  the  inheritance.  God  could  give  with  one
hand  and  blast  with  the  other.  Though  in  the  land,  it  might  not  yet  open  out  its
resources  to  them  as  a  "  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey."  Every  day  they  tarried  in
the  land,  they  might  pass  into  an  inner  ciicls  of  blessing.  New  waves  of  sunshine  and
blessing  might  sweep  over  them,  so  that  every  morning  the  inheritance  might  be  to
them  new.  Nature,  in  its  beauties,  its  wonders,  its  products,  is  inexhaustible.
With  God  as  our  Friend  and  Teacher,  we  may  find  accessions  of  good  and  gladness
perpetually.  Obeying  his  voice,  we  enter  in ;  and  still,  as  obedience  grows,  we  enter
into  fuller  possession  increasingly.

IIL  Ak  obedient  bpibit  obtains  quickenino  and  strength  at  Qod's  altab.  It
was  forbidden  the  Hebrews  to  erect  an  altar  for  burnt  offering  anywhere  except  the
place  which  God  should  choose  for  his  abode.  So  vital,  however,  to  the  interests  of
the  nation  was  this  act  of  proclaiming  the  Law,  that  an  exception  was  made  in  its
favour.  In  the  presence  of  the  Law,  men  would  feel  their  deficiencies  and  offences ;
hence  provision  was  specially  made  for  the  confession  of  sin,  for  the  presentation  of
sacrifice,  and  for  the  assurance  of  mercy.  At  the  altar  of  burnt  offering  God  and  guilty
man  could  meet ;  here  reconciliation  could  be  effected,  and  here  new  grace  could  be
obtained.  In  the  sombre  light  of  the  burnt  offering,  men  would  read  the  august  mean-
ing of  the  Law,  and  learn  to  cover  that  Law  with  honour.

But  why  must  the  altar  be  built  of  unhewn  stones  ?  We  can  only  conjecture.  Was
it  to  symbolize  the  fact  that  God  can  allow  no  human  interference  or  co-operation  in
the  work  of  atonement  ?  Was  it  to  indicate  that  every  part  of  God's  will  and  Law
must  be  kept  perfectly  intact,  if  man  would  be  the  friend  of  God?  Was  it  to  prevent
any  kind  of  graven  work,  the  craft  of  human  imagination,  from  adorning  the  altar  of
God;  by  which  the  minds  of  worshippers  might  be  diverted  from  the  one  solemn  act  to
be  performed  ?    There  may  be  an  element  of  truth  in  all  these  surmises.

IV.  An  obedient  spirit  einds  unexpbctedlt  a  banquet  of  jot.  "  Thou  shalt
eat,  and  shalt  rejoice  before  the  Lord  thy  GK>d."  On  all  sides  God  has  provided  the
materials  for  a  splendid  repast,  where  every  desire  of  the  soul  may  be  satisfied ;  but
the  pathway  to  that  sumptuous  feast  is  the  pathway  of  hearty  obedience.  We  can
secure  the  annual  harvest  only  by  acting  along  the  line  of  God's  law  in  nature ;  and
active  co-operation  with  the  Divine  will  is  essential  to  our  soul's  satisfaction.  The  joy
that  thrills  the  heart  of  God  he  desires  to  share  with  us,  but  self-will  too  often  robs  us
of  the  boon.     "  The  meek  shall  eat  and  be  satisfied."

V.  An  obedient  spirit  receives  inspiration  from  the  highest  source.  "  Thou
art  the  people  of  the  Lord  thy  God ;  therefore  thou  shalt  obey  "  his  voice.  Service
which  is  done  from  motives  of  advantage — to  gain  favour  or  promotion  from  God — is
mercenary.  A  selfish  end  is  in  view.  The  favour  of  the  Most  High  is  not  merely  the
end  we  seek ;  it  is  the  source  whence  all  right  desire  and  exertion  spring.  Thou  art
the  Lord's :  this  is  the  chief  inspiration  of  effort.  Thou  art  the  Lord's ;  therefore  live
as  becometh  such  royal  rank.  Thou  art  the  Lord's ;  therefore  all  his  stores  of  help  are
at  thy  command."    "  Greater  is  he  that  is  for  us  than  all  who  can  be  against  us." — ^D.

Vers.  11 — 26. — The  Decalogue  nationally  reciprocated.  It  is  obvious  that  the  same
God  who  prescribed  its  Jewish  Law  is  the  Creator  also  of  the  human  conscience ;  for,
just  as  the  sword  fits  its  scabbard,  or  as  cog  corresponds  with  cog  in  the  mechanical
wheel,  so  accord  Mosaic  Law  and  human  conscience.    They  are  natural  counterparts.


126  tHE  BOOK  OJ"  DEUTERONOMY.         IcB.  xxvu.  1— 2g.

T.  Men  are  ruled  bt  a  system  of  rewards  and  punishments.  Notwithstanding
the  development  of  the  human  mind,  and  the  progress  of  civilization  since  Moses'  day,
human  nature  is  still  in  its  minority,  still  in  a  state  of  childhood.  We  do  not  yet  see
into  the  interior  nature  of  spiritual  realities.  We  do  not  see  the  inherent  excellence  of
righteousness.  We  do  not  see  tlie  native  beauty  of  obedience.  Hence  we  need  to  be
attracted  by  rewards  and  awed  by  punishments.  We  perceive  the  glory  or  the  shame
of  moral  conduct  chiefly  by  its  fruits.  As  we  grow  in  piety,  we  shall  value  virtue
and  holiness  for  their  own  sakes,  and  think  less  about  remote  effects  and  consequences.  ~
At  present  we  need  the  attendant  pleasure  and  pain,  the  promises  and  threatenings.

II.  Final  separations  of  mankind  are  here  prefigured.  As  the  twelve  tribes
were  here  divided  into  two  distinct  groups,  divided  by  the  vale  of  Shechem ;  so  all  the
tribes  of  men  shall  eventually  be  separated,  and  that  by  an  impassable  gulf.  The
principle  of  classification  on  Ebal  and  Gerizim  was  not  personal  merit  or  demerit  (as  it
will  be  at  the  final  assize),  yet  even  this  ultimate  principle  of  separation  seems  to
have  been  foreshadowed  there.  Only  children  of  Jacob's  married  wives  were  placed  on
the  mount  of  blessing;  but  Reuben,  the  firstborn,  had  forfeited  this  privilege  by  reason
of  his  sin.  As  yet,  the  evil  could  be  averted — the  positions  might  be  reversed;  these
dramatic  proceedings  were  omens  both  of  good  and  of  evil,  and  were  intended  to  arouse
a  torpid  conscience.    To  heaven  or  to  hell  each  man  hourly  gravitates.

III.  God's  blessinq  or  curse  takes  effect  from  centre  to  oiecumferenoe.
These  mountains  were  situated  almost  central  in  the  land.  Soon  this  vast  congregation
would  be  scattered  to  their  allotted  homes,  and  thus  the  influence  of  this  scene  would
be  transmitted  all  over  Canaan.  Even  this  external  transmission  was  typical.  The
blessing  and  the  curse  touched  every  interest  and  relationsliip  of  Jewish  life— religion,
homo,  society,  government.  The  curse  was  invoked  upon  idolatry,  undutifulness,
avarice,  oppression,  unchastity,  insubordination.  It  began  in  ihe  inner  chamber  of  the
heart,  and  extended  to  the  outermost  circle  of  the  social  system.  It  begins  at  once,
follows  the  crime  as  the  shadow  does  the  object,  until  it  reaches  into  the  most  distant
cycles  of  eternity.

IV.  The  human  conscience  is  the  reciprocal  op  the  moral  law,  the  echo  of
ITS  sanctions  and  its  penalties.  Every  healthy  conscience  utters  its  sincere
"  Amen  "  to  every  dictate  of  God's  Law.  When  free  from  the  mists  and  storms  of  guilty
passion,  it  reflects,  with  the  fidelity  of  a  minor,  the  decisions  of  God's  royal  will.
Even  when  a  man  is  the  victim  of  judicial  sentence,  his  conscience  admits  the  justice
of  the  doom.  The  culprit,  in  his  calmer  moods,  is  self-convicted  and  self-condemned.
When  God,  by  the  lips  of  Moses,  required  all  the  tribes  to  aflSrm  thus  solemnly  the
curses  due  to  disobedience,  he  knew  that  every  man  would  heartily  take  his  part  in  that
august  deed.

V.  Men  become  the  administrators  op  God's  Law.  We  cannot  doubt  that  one
reason  why  God  required  this  public  assent  to  the  sanctions  of  his  Law,  was  that  each
man  might  feel  moie  deeply  his  responsibility  toward  himself  and  toward  his'  neigh-
bours. In  proportion  to  our  reverential  regard  for  God  becomes  our  concern  for  others'
obedience.  The  Levites  more  than  once  had  girded  on  their  swords,  and,  fired  with
zeal  for  their  God,  had  slain  their  own  countrymen.  No  resistance  was  attempted,  for
conscience  had  made  cowards  of  the  culprits.  To  the  same  end,  David  prays,  "  Let
the  righteous  smite  me ;  it  shall  be  a  kindness."  Moved  by  this  impulse,  men  would
seek  "  to  please  their  neighbours  for  their  good  unto  edification."  Possessed  with  a
pious  disposition,  they  endeavour  to  make  known  on  every  side  God's  will,  to  preserve
its  remembrance  among  those  disposed  to  grow  oblivious,  and  to  exalt  its  authority  on
every  hand.  Self-consistency  required  that  those  who  had  publicly  pronounced  the
curses  of  the  Law  should  jealously  watch  their  own  conduct— should  tenderly  caution
others ! — D.

Veri.  1 — 10. — Law-abiding  people.  Wo  have  here  a  direction  about  writing,  npon

great  stones  in  Mount  Kbal,  the  words  of  the  Divine  Law.  Whether  this  meant  only  the
blessings  and  curses,  as  Josephus  thinks,  or  an  abstract  of  Deuteronomy,  or  only  the
ken  commandments,  we  cannot  tell.  But  the  idea  implied  is  similar  to  the  writing  of
the  Decalogue  in  stone ;  it  was  to  render  fxed  the  Law  on  which  the  national  policy
was  to  rest.     In  other  words,  it  was  a  symbolic  way  of  declaring  that  Israel  will  be


»H.  xxvn.  1— 26.]  THE  BOOK  01*  DEUTEBONOilY  42)

1  Law-abiding  people.  In  connection  witli  this  display  of  the  Law,  there  was  to  be  an
altar  erected,  on  which  burnt  oiferings  and  peace  oiTerings  were  to  be  presented,  and  the
people  were  to  realize,  as  they  had  never  before  done,  that  they  have  "  become  the  people
of  the  Lord  their  Grod."    The  following  ideas  are,  among  others,  suggested : —

I.  The  Lord's  people  will  grkatly  honour  his  Law.  All  disrespect  shown  tc
the  Divine  Law  argues  superficiality  both  in  thought  and  in  feeling.  Even  suppose
it  were  not  most  practical  and  just  and  good,  it  ought  to  be  held  in  high  honour  an
proceeding  from  the  Lord.  How  much  more  when  it  is  so  wise  and  so  thorough
ID  dealing  with  human  and  national  life!  The  great  business,  therefore,  of  getting  the
Law  written  on  the  rocks  of  Mount  Ebal  must  have  impressed  its  sacredness  upon
the  people,  and  have  constituted  a  standing  witness  of  their  undertaking  to  obey  it.  It
was  the  acceptance  and  the  publication  of  Divine  Law  as  that  by  which,  as  a  nation,
they  would  abide.

II.  The  buknt  offerings  indicated  their  personal  consecration  to  God.  A
reference  to  this  sacrifice  •  will  show  that  the  idea  emphasized  in  the  burnt  offering;
is  consecration.  The  fire  is  emblematic  of  the  sublimating  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirii,
by  which  the  whole  being,  the  entire  personality,  is  lifted  heavenward.  When,  then,
the  Israelites  gathered  round  the  altar  between  Mount  Ebal  and  Mount  G-erizim,  and
had  plentiful  burnt  offerings  presented  by  their  priests,  it  was  surely  dedicating  their
persons  unto  God,  vowing  to  be  a  holy  people  unto  him.  Just  as  the  burnt  offering
comes  first  in  Leviticus  to  indicate  the  consecrated  attitude  of  a  people  redeemed  from
Egyptian  bondage,  so  it  comes  first  on  their  entrance  into  the  land  of  promise.  It  was
Israel  asserting  that  they  were  not  their  own,  but  "  bought  with  a  price,"  and  therefore
bound  to  glorify  God  with  their  bodies,  and  their  spirits,  which  are  God's  (1  Cor.
vi.  20).

III.  The  peace  offerings  indicated  fellowship  before  God.  After  the  burnt
offerings  came  the  peace  offerings,  part  of  which  was  laid  on  the  altar,  part  appro-
priated by  the  priests,  and  the  remainder  the  portion  of  the  ptople.  It  was  a  feast
of  fellowship  between  God  and  his  people.  It  was  the  sacrament  of  the  land  of  promise.
It  indicated  peace  and  unity  between  God  and  man.  What  a  precious  and  interesting
service  it  must  have  been !  The  most  magnificent  congregation  the  world  ever  saw,
and  the  most  impressive  service  !  Communion  is  based  upon  unity  of  mind  and  of  will
on  the  part  of  the  covenant-keeping  God  and  his  Law-abiding  people.— B.  M.  E.

Vers.  11 — 26. — Eesponses.  After  the  writing  of  the  Law,  and  the  sacrifices,  there
was  to  be  a  great  congregation,  and  half  of  the  people  were  to  assemble  on  Mount
Gerizim  to  bless,  viz.  Simeon,  Levi,  Judah,  Issachar,  Ephraim,  Manasseh,  and
Benjamin  ;  while  the  other  half  were  to  assemble  on  Mount  Ebal  to  curse,  viz.  Reuben,
Gad,  Asher,  Zebulun,  Dan,  and  Naphtali.  Now,  we  know  from  Numbers  that  the
order  of  march  was  this :  Judah,  Issachar,  Zebulun,  Gershon  and  Merari  with  the
tabernacle,  Reuben,  Simeon,  Gad,  Kohath  with  the  sanctuary,  Ephraim,  Manasseh,
Benjamin,  Dan,  Asher,  and  Naphtali.  The  order  for  the  arrangement,  therefore,  was
that  the  van,  consisting  of  Judah  and  Issachar,  marched  to  Gerizim ;  then  Zebulun,  the
next  tribe,  marched  to  Ebal ;  then  the  Gershonites  and  Merarites  marched  to  Gerizim ;
(hen  Reuben  to  Ebal ;  Simeon  to  Gerizim ;  Gad  to  Ebal ;  the  Kohathites  to  Gerizim ;
followed  by  Ephraim,  Manas.'!eh,  and  Benjamin,  who  were  the  followers  of  the  ark ;  and
lastly  the  rearguard,  Dan,  Aslier,  and  Naphtali,  to  Ebal.  No  commander-in-chief
ever  disposed  of  his  men  more  impartially  than  did  Moses  in  this  address  beyond  the
Jordan.     Now,  we  have  one  or  two  remarks  arising  out  of  this  arrangement.

I.  The  tribe  of  Levi,  with  all  the  appointments  for  sacrifice,  passed  to
Gerizim  to  bless.  In  the  march  Levi  was  divided  into  two  parts — ^the  Gershonites
and  Merarites  going  fourth  with  the  tabernacle  furniture,  wliile  the  Kohathites  went
eighth  with  the  ark  and  sanctuary.  But  they  unite  at  Mount  Gerizim.  Nothing  could
more  clearly  indicate  the  mercy  and  blessing  embodied  in  the  whole  ceremonial  law
which  the  Levites  represented.  The  Law  in  its  judicial  aspect  might  have  its  penalties
and  judgments,  but  it  had  its  ceremonies  of  mercy  to  counterbalance  these.
IL  The  weight  of  the  nation  stood  on  Mount  Gerizim.    When  we  consider

'  *  Pulpit  Commentary,'  on  Lev.  i..  Homily  by  the  present  writer.


128


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEROXOMY.


[oh.  XXVIII.  1-


the  tribes  that  defiled  upon  the  mount  of  blessing,  we  see  that  they  absorb  the  heroic
in  Israel.  Eeuhen,  Gad,  Asher,  Pan,  Zebulun,  and  Naphtali  were  nobodies,  so  far  aa
national  heroism  is  concerned ;  whereas  the  other  tribes  became  famous  in  the  history
of  Palestine.  It  is  suerly  significant  that  the  weight  of  the  nation  is  assigned  to  the
mount  of  blessing.

III.  The  people  had  to  sat  "  amen  "  to  the  cuksbs  as  well  as  to  the  blessings
PBONOTJNOBD  IN  THE  Namb  OF  GoD.  Some  are  ready  with  their  responses  to  the
blessings ;  they  cannot  get  too  much  of  them.  But  they  demur  to  any  curses  issuing
from  God.  They  think  they  are  unworthy  of  him.  It  so  happens,  however,  that,  in
the  great  congregation  betwren  the  mountains,  the  curses  of  Ebal  had  precedence  of  the
blessings  of  Gerizim.  The  emphasis  chronologically  was  given  to  the  curses.  And
our  consciences  must  acknowledge  that  the  Law  of  God  must  carry  out  its  penalties
punctually,  or  it  will  forfeit  all  respect.

rV.    A   BEVIEW   OF   THE   CURSES   HERE   UTTERED   SHOWS    THAT    THET   ALL   BEST  UPON

EIGHT.  No  one  dare  take  up  one  of  these  curses  and  suggest  its  omission  or  alteration.
It  is  absolute  morality  which  assigns  a  malediction  to  such  crimes  as  these.  They
have  the  hearty  "  Amen  "  of  every  unbiassed  conscience. — B.  M.  E.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEE  XXVIII.

The  Blessing  and  the  Curse.

Having  enjoined  the  proclamations  of  the
blessing  and  the  curse  on  their  entering
into  possession  of  Canaan,  Moses,  for  the
Bake  of  impressing  on  the  minds  of  the
people  both  the  blessing  and  the  curse,
proceeds  here  to  dilate  upon  both,  dwelli'ig
especially  upon  tlie  latter  as  thatiwhich  the
people  the  more  needed  to  have  brought
home  to  them.  As  he  proceeds,  the  language
of  terrible  denunciation  passes  into  that  of
no  less  terrible  prediction,  in  which  the
calamities  that  should  come  upon  the  nation
because  of  their  apostacy  and  rebellion  are
clearly  and  pointedly  foretold.

Ver.  1. — The  hlessing.  The  condition  sine
qnd  non  of  all  enjoyment  of  the  Divine
liourty  was  obedience  on  the  part  of  tho
pi'ople  to  the  word  and  Law  of  JiliMvnh
their  God.  This  rendered,  the  blessing
would  come  on  them  rich  and  full,  and
abide  with  them  (of.  vers.  2,  !),  13,  14).

Ver.  2. — The  blessings  about  to  be  speci-
iied  are  represented  as  personified,  as  actual
agencies  coming  upon  their  objects  and
lollowing  them  along  tbeir  path.

Vers.  3 — 7. — The  fulntss  of  the  blessing
in  all  the  relations  of  life,  external  and
internal,  is  prestnted  in  six  paiticulars,  each
introduced  by  the  word  "  blessed."  Israel
should  be  blessed  in  the  house  and  in  the
field,  in  the  fruit  of  the  body,  in  the  pro-
ductions of  the  soil  and  the  increase  of  herd
and  flock,  in  the  store  and  in  the  use  of
what  nature  provided, — in  all  their  under-


takings, whether  in  peace  or  in  war,  at
home  or  abroad.  Basket  and  thy  store  ;
raiher,  hasltet  and  kneading-trough  (see
Exod.  viii.  3;  xii.  34);  "the  basket"  repre-
senting the  store  in  which  the  fruits  of
the  earth  were  laid  up,  the  "  kneading-
trough"  the  use  of  these  for  the  supply
of  daily  needs  (ver.  6;  of.  Numb,  xxvii.  17;
Ps.  cxxi.  «).

Ver.  8. — The  eflFect  of  the  blessing  should
be  seen,  not  only  in  the  supremacy  of  Israel
over  all  opposition,  but  in  the  abundance
of  their  possessions,  in  the  success  of  their
undertakings,  and  in  the  respect  in  which
they  should  be  held  by  all  nations.
Storehouses.  The  Hebrew  word  (n<ppN)^
which  occurs  only  here  and  in  Prov.  iii.  10,
is  properly  thus  rendered.  It  comes  from
a  root  which  signifies  to  lay  up.

Ver.  9. — The  Lord  would  establish  them
to  be  a  people  holy  unto  himself,  in  whose
blessed  condition  all  would  see  that  they
were  indeed  his  people,  favoured  by  him.

Ver.  10.— Thou  art  oaUed  by  the  name  of
the  Lord;  rather,  the  Name  of  Jehovah  i»
called  upon  thee.  The  Name  of  Gtod  is  God
himself  as  revealed ;  and  this  Name  is  called
or  named  upon  men  when  they  are  adopted
by  him,  made  wholly  his,  and  tiansformed
into  his  likeness.  This  blessing  Israel  en-
joyed as  a  nation — "  Theirs  was  the  adop-
tion and  the  glory"  (Bom.  ix.  4) — but  it
was  theirs  only  in  symbol  and  in  shadow
(Heb.  X.  1) ;  the  reality  belongs  only  to  the
spiritual  Israel,  and  this  came  to  men  in
all  its  fulness  when  he  who  is  "the  image
of  the  invisible  God"  appeared  and  set  up
his  tent  among  men,  full  of  grace  and  truth
(John  i.  12, 14).
Yer.  11. — The  lord  shall  make  thee  plen-


OH.  ixviu- 1— 68.]        THE  BOOK  OP  DBUTBEONOMI.


429


teong  in  goods ;  literally,  shall  mnJce  thee  to
dl>oundf(yr  good ;  i.e.  shall  not  only  give  thee
abundance,  but  cause  it  to  redound  to  thy
felicity.

Ver.  12. — His  good  treasure;  equivalent  to
his  treasure-house,  i.e.  heaven,  whence  bless-
ing should  be  poured  out  upon  tliera  (of.  ch.
xi.  14 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  4, 5).  He  would  so  fructify
their  ground,  and  so  bless  their, toil  iu  cul-
tivating it,  that  they  should  become  rich,
and  be  able  to  lend  to  other  nations,  and
not  need  tp  borrow.

Ver.  13. — Thoy  should  be  manifestly
superior  to  other  nations,  heading  them
and  being  above  them,  their  leader  and
not  their  subject  or  follower  (cf.  Isa.  ix.  13).
Note  the  contrast  in  vers.  43,  44.

Ver.  14.— (Cf.  ch.  v.  29;  xi.  28.)  Moses
ends  as  he  began,  by  reminding  them  that
the  condition  of  enjoying  the  Lilessiiig  was
obedience  to  the  Divine  Law,  and  steadfast
adherence  to  the  course  in  which  they  were
callud  to  walk.

Vers.  15— 6S. — The  eurte.  In  case  of
disobedience  and  apostacy,  not  only  would
the  blessing  bo.  withheld,  but  a  curse  would
descend,  blighting,  destructive,  and  ruinous.
As  the  blessing  was  set  forth  in  six  an-
nouncements (vers.  3  —6),  the  curso  is  pro-
claimed in  form  and  number  corresponding
(vers.  16 — 19).  The  curse  thus  appears  as
the  exact  counterpart  of  the  blessing.  The
different  forms  in  which  the  threatened
curse  should  break  forth  are  then  detailed
in  five  groups.

Vers.  20— 26.— First  group.  The  curse
should  come  upon  them  in  various  forms
of  evil,  filling  them  with  terror  and  dismay,
and  tbieatening  them  with  utter  ruin  (cf.
Mai.  ii.  2).

Ver.  20. — Vexation ;  rather,  consternation  ;
the  deadly  confusion  with  which  God  con-
founds his  enemies.  The  same  word  is  used
in  ch.  vii.  23;  1  Sam.  ziv.  20.  Bebuke ;
rather,  threatening.

Vers.  21,  22. — The  afflictive  visitations
here  named  are  such  as  destroy  life;  but
the  distinctive  character  of  each  it  is  not
easy  exactly  to  define.  The  pestilence  ia
probably  a  generic  term  for  any  fatal  epi-
demic. In  the  LXX.  it  is  usually  repre-
sented by  the  general  word  Bdvaros,  death.
Consumption ;  literally,  wu«f2n^  ;  the  desig-
nation of  any  species  of  tabes  or  marasmus.
Fever  (Pp^/^,  from  p^i,  to  be  parched,  to
glow);  inflammation  (innn,  troxa  inn,  to
bum);  burning  fever  (pnip,  from  nip,  to
kindle) :  different  species  of  pyrexia,  the  dis-
tinction between  which  lias  not  been  deter-
mined. The  sword.  Insteadofann,  sword,  the
Vulgate,  Arabic,  and  Samaritan  adopt  the
reading  3;in,  heat,  drought  (Gen.  xxxi.  40) ;
but  all  tbe  other  versions  support  the  reading


of  the  received  text,  and  there  is  no  reaaon
why  it  should  be  departed  from,  more
especially  as  drought  is  threatened  in  the
verse  that  follows.  Blasting  and  with  mil-
dew ;  diseases  that  attack  the  grain  (Amos
iv.  9) ;  the  former  (ps'iB',  from  ^ii^,  to  scorch,
to  blast)  a  withering  or  scorching  of  the
cars  caused  by  the  east  wind  (Gen.  xli.  23) ;
the  lutter  (jipi;,  from  py,  to  be  yellowish)
the  effect  produced  by  a  hot  wind,  which
turns  the  ears  yellow,  so  that  they  are  ren-
dered unproductive.

Vers.  23,  24. — Terrible  drought  ia  here
threatened;  no  rain  should  fall  (of.  Lev.
xxvi.  19) ;  but  instead  thereof  dust,  both
light  as  powder  and  heavy  as  sand,  should
fall  upon  them.  The  allusion  is  probably
to  those  clouds  of  dust  and  sand  which
often  fill  the  air  in  Palestine,  when  the  heat
ia  intense  and  there  has  been  no  rain  for
a  season ;  the  wind  then  becomes  a  vehe-
ment sirocco,  and  the  air  is  filled  with  sand
and  dust,  and  is  like  the  glowing  heat  at
the  mouth  of  a  furnace  (Bobinson,  '  Bib.
Res.,'  ii.  123;  Thomson,  'Land  and  the
Book,'  ii.  311).

Vers.  25,  26.— Utter  defeat  in  battle
(the  opposite  of  the  blessing  promised,  ver.
7)  and  dispersion  among  the  nations  are
threatened,  with  the  utmost  indignity  to
those  who  were  slain,  in  their  bodies  being
left  unburied  to  be  devoured  by  birds  of
prey  and  wild  beasts  (of.  1  Kings  xiv.  11;
Ps.  Ixxix.  2;  Jer.  vii.  33;  xvi.  4,  etc.).
Shalt  be  removed  into  all  the  kingdoms  of
the  earth;  liternUy,  shalt  be  a  tossing  to
and  fro  to  all  the  kingdoms,  etc. ;  "  a  ball  for
all  the  kingdoms  to  play  with  "  (Schultz ;
cf.  2  Chron.  xxix.  8 ;  Jer.  xv.  4 ;  xxiv.  9 ;
xxix.  18,  etc.).

Vers.  ii7 — 34. — Second  group.  The  Lord
should  afflict  them  with  various  loathsome
diseases,  vex  them  with  humiliating  and
mortifying  calamities,  and  give  them  over
to  be  plundered  and.  oppressed  by  their
enemies.

Ver.  27.— Botoh  of  Egypt;  the  form  of
leprosy  peculiar  to  Egypt  (Exod.  ix.  9,  etc.),
elephantiasis,  ".ffigypti  peculiare  malum"
(Pliny, '  Nat.  Hist.,'  xxvi  1—5).  Emerods ;
tumours,  probably  piles  (cf.  1  Sam.  v.).
Scab;  probably  some  kind  of  malignant
scurvy.  Itch ;  of  this  there  are  various
kinds  common  in  Egypt  and  Syria.

Vera.  28,  29. — Besides  bodily  ailments,
mental  diseases  should  come  upon  them —
insanity,  incapacity,  confusion  of  mind,  so
that  even  at  midday  they  should  grope  as
a  blind  man  gropes,  i.e.  under  the  most
favourable  circumstances  they  should  be
unable  to  fijid  the  right  path,  to  hit  on  the
right  and  safe  course.  It  ia  of  mentai
bUndness  that  the  word  is  here  used  (cf.
Isa.  xlii.  19;  Lam.   iv.  14;  Zeph.  i    17;


430


THE   BOOK  OF   DEUTERONOMY


[oh.  xxviii.  1 — 68


Rom.  xi.  25;  2  Cor.  iv.  i).  Thou  shalt
grope  (cf.  Isa.  lix.  10).  Thus  afflicted  in
bodr  and  mind,  their  state  should  be  one
onlj  of  oppression  and  calamity,  with  no
ho])e  of  deliverance.

Vera.  30— 34.— The  spoliation  of  them
should  be  utter.  All  most  dear  and  pre-
cious to  them  should  be  the  prey  of  their
enemies.  Wife,  house,  vineyard,  herd,  and
flock  should  be  ruthlessly  taken  from  them ;
sons  and  daughters  should  be  carried  into
captivity,  and  their  eyes  should  look  for
them  in  vain,  with  constant  and  wasting
longing  (cf.  Jer.  viii  20 ;  Amos  v.  11 ;  Micah
vi.  15;  Zeph.  i.  13;  2  Ohron.  xxix.9;  Neh.
xi.  36 ;  Jer.  v.  15).

Ver.  30. — And  shalt  not  gather  the  grapes
thereof;  margin,  "  Hebrew,  profane."  This
is  the  literal  rendering  of  the  verb;  the
meaning  is  that  given  in  the  te.\t,  A  vine-
yard was,  for  the  first  three  years  after  it  was
planted,  held  sacred  (Lev.  xix.  23);  after
that,  its  consecration  ceased,  and  the  fruit
might  be  gathered  for  common  use  (of.  ch.
XX.  6),  and  it  was  said  to  be  profaned.

Ver.  32. — And  there  shall  be  no  might  in
thine  hand.  Keil  proposes  to  render  here,
"  Thy  hand  shall  not  be  to  thee  towards
God ; "  and  others,  "  Thy  hand  shall  not  be
tu  thee  for  God,"  i.e.  instead  of  God.  But
h^  here  is  not  "the  Mighty  One,  God;  but
simply  "  might,  strength,  power,"  as  in  Gen.
xxxi.  29;  Prov.  iii.  27;  Micah  ii.  1.  Literally
rendered,  the  words  are.  And  not  for  might
is  thy  hand,  the  meaning  of  which  is  well
expressed  in  the  Authorized  Version.

Vers.  35 — 46. — Third  group.  Moses  re-
verts to  the  calamities  already  threatened
(ver.  27),  for  the  purpose  of  leading  on  the
thought  that,  as  such  diseases  separated  the
sufferer  from  the  society  of  his  fellows,  so
Israel  should  be  separated  from  God  and
brought  under  the  dominion  of  strangers  as
a  punishment  for  rebellion  and  apostacy.

Ver.  35. — A  sore  botch;  an  incurable
leprosy,  affecting  not  merely  the  joints  and
extremities,  but  the  whole  body.  Such  an
affliction  would  exclude  a  man  from  all
fellowship  and  from  all  covenant  privi-
leges of  the  nation.  So  Israel,  rendered
unclean  by  their  sin,  should  be  out  off  from
covenant  union  with  God.

Vers.  36, 37. — As  a  consequence,  God  would
bring  them  under  subjection  to  a  foreign
power,  and  they  should  be  made  to  serve
other  gods,  wood  and  stone  (ch.  iv.  28),  and
would  become  an  object  of  horror,  a  pro-
verb, and  »  byword  among  the  nations  (cf.
1  Kings  ix.  7  ;  Jer.  xxiv.  9).

Ver.  38. — Even  in  their  own  land  the
curse  would  overtake  them  and  rest  upon
tlicm  in  all  Iheir  inturests  and  relations.

Ver.  39.— Worms;  probably  the  vine
weevil,  tUe  convolvulus  or  in  volvulus  of  the


Latin  writers  (Pliny,  'Nat.  Hist.,'  xvii.  47;
Cato,  '  DeEeEust.,'c.  95;  Plant.,  '  Cistell.,'
iv.  2),  the  U  or  lif/  of  the  Greeks  (Bochart,
'  Hieroz.,'  pt.  ii.  bk.  iv.  c.  27).

Ver.  40. — Thine  olive  shall  cast  his  fruit.
Some  would  render  here  "  shall  be  plun-
dered or  rooted  out,"  taking  the  verb  Se"
as  the  Niph.  of  ^Sb";  but  the  majority
regard  it  as  part  of  the  verb  h^:,  and  render
"shall  drop  off,"  or  as  in  the  Authorized
Version.  There  is  some  doubt,  however,
whether  the  verb  ht^i  can  be  used  intransi-
tively.

Ver.  42. — Consume ;  literally,  take  poeses-
eion  of.  The  name  given  here  to  the  ravag-
ing insect  is  not  the  same  as  in  ver.  38 ;
but  there  can  be  no  doubt  it  is  the  locust
that  is  intended.

Vers.  43,  44.— (Cf.  vers.  12,  13.)

Ver.  46. — These  curses  would  be  for  a
sign  and  for  a  wonder,  exciting  astonish-
ment and  dismay  in  the  beholder,  and
showing  that  it  was  indeed  the  hand  of
God  that  was  upon  the  rebellious  nation.
For  ever.  This,  though  it  may  imply  the
final  and  utter  rejection  of  Israel  as  a
nation,  does  ntit  preclude  the  hope  of  re-
storation of  a  part  of  Israel  as  individuals,
or  as  a  remnant  remaining  in  or  returning
to  faith  and  obedience  (of.  Isa.  x.  22;  vi.
13;  Kom.  ix.  27;  xi.  5).

Vers.  47 — 57. — Fourth  group.  In  order
still  more  to  impress  on  the  minds  of  the
people  the  evil  anil  danger  of  rebellion  and
apostacy,  Moses  enlarges  on  the  calamities
that  would  ensue  on  their  being  given  up
to  the  power  of  the  heathen.  Because  they
would  not  serve  Jehovah  their  God,  they
should  be  delivered  to  be  servants  to  their
enemies.

Vers.  49,  50. — The  description  here  given
of  the  enemy  to  whom  Israel  was  to  be  sub-
jected, applies  more  or  less  closely  to  all
the  nations  whom  God  raised  up  from  time
to  time,  to  invade  Israel  and  chastise  the
people  for  their  rebellion — the  Clialdeans
(cf.  Jer.  xlviii.  40 ;  xlix.  22 ;  Ezek.  xvii.
6 — 7;  Hab.  i.  6,  etc.),  the  Assyrians  (cf.
Isa.  V.  26 ;  xxxviii.  11 ;  xxiil.  19),  the  Medes
(Isa.  xiii.  17,  18);  but  there  are  features
in  the  description  which  apply  especially  to
the  Romans ;  and  the  horrors  delineated  in
the  latter  part  of  the  section  (vers.  52 — 57)
carry  one's  thoughts  immediately  to  the
terrible  scenes  which  transpired  during
the  wars  of  Vespasian  and  Titus  with  the
Jews  as  narrated  by  Josephus  ('  De  Bell.
Jud.,'  vi. ;  see  Milman,  '  Hist,  of  the  Jews,'
bk.  xvi.).

Ver.  49. — As  the  eagle  flieth.  The  eagle
was  the  common  ensign  of  the  legion  in  the
Roman  army;   and  by  the  Latin  writers


BH.  xxvm.  1— 68.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


431


aquila  (oRglo)  is  snmef  imes  used  for  a  legion
(CtBS., '  Hisp.,'  30 ;  cf.  Matt.  xxiy.  28).

Yer.  50. — A  nation  of  fierce  countenance ;
literally,  firm  or  hard  of  face  ;  i.e.  obdurate
and  determined  (cf.  Frov.  zxi.  29;  Dan.
viii.  23).

Vers.  52— 57.— (Cf.  Lev.  xxvi.  29 ;  2  Kings
vi.  24—30 ;  Jer.  six.  9 ;  Lara.  ii.  20 ;  iv.  10.)

Ver.  56.—  So  intense  should  be  the  hunger,
that  the  delicate  and  Sensitive  woman,
brought  up  in  luxury,  and  who  would  not
set  her  foot  on  the  ground  lest  she  should
be  fatigued  by  the  exertion  or  offended  by
coming,  in  contact  with  the  base  soil,  but
when  she  went  abroad  must  be  carried  in  »
litter  or  borne  by  a  camel  or  an  ass, — even
she  should  break  through  all  restraints  of
delicacy  and  affection,  and  would  secretly
devour  the  very  infant  she  liad  borne  during
the  siege.

Ver.  57. — Her  young  one;  literally,  her
after-birth.  The  Hebrew  sugijests  an  ex-
treme of  horror  beyon.l  what  tlie  Authorized
Version  indicates.

Vers.  58 — 68. — Pifth  group.  Even  these
fearful  calamities  would  not  be  tho  con-
summation of  their  punishment.  If  they
should  be  obstinate  in  their  rebellion ;  if
they  would  not  observe  to  do  all  that  the
Law  delivered  by  Moses  enjoined  on  them  ;
if  they  ceased  to  reverence  and  obey  Je-
hovah, their  God ; — then  should  come  upon
them  the  curse  in  full  measure,  and  long-
continued  chastisement  should  show  how
grievous  had  been  their  sin.

Ver.  58.— This  book.  Not  the  Book  of
Deuteronomy,  which  was  not  then  written,
but  the  Book  of  the  Law,  the  Torah,  de-
livered by  Moses  to  Israel  from  God ;  and
of  which  he  had  been,  in  his  addresses  to  the
people,  recapitulating  some  of  the  principal
points  (of.  vers.  60,  61).  That  thou  may  est
fear,  etc.  It  was  not  mere  outward  ob-
servance of  the  Law,  not  the  m(re  "doing"
of  what  was  enjoim  d  that  was  required,  but
the  doing  of  it  heartily  and  sincerely  in  the
fear  of  the  Lord,  in  the  fear  of  him  who  had
revealed  himself  to  them  by  the  glorious
and  awful  Name,  Jehovah,  their  God  (cf.
Lev.  xxiv.  11).

Vers.  60,  61. — The  diseases  of  Egypt  are
the  plagues  sent  on  I'haraoh  and  his  people,
as  recorded  iu  Exod.  vii. — xi.  Besides  tliese,
other  plagues,  not  recorded  in  the  Book  of  the
Law,  should  come  on  rebelliou  s  Israel,  so  that
they  ihoold  be  aimoat  utterly  destroyed.


Ver.  62.-(Cf.  ph.  iv.  27;  x.  22;  Neh.
ix.  2.S.)

Ver.  (j3.— (Cf.  oh.  xxx.  9 ;  Jer.  xxxii  41.)
He,  whose  Joy  it  liad  been  to  do  them  good,
should  rejoice  over  their  destruction  (of.
Prov.  i.  26).

Ver.  61. — Those  of  them  that  survived
the  plagues  that  should  come  upon  them,
and  the  linrrors  of  the  siege,  should  be
scattered  amongst  all  nations  to  the  ends  of
the  lartli,  and  there  subjugated  to  the  ut-
mo.st  indignities  and  sufferings.

Ver.  66. — Thy  life  sliall  hang  in  doubt  be-
fore thee ;  literally,  Thii  life  Khali  be  hung
up  be/ore  thee  ;  i.e.  sliall  be  like  an  object
suspended  by  a  thread  wliioh  hangs  dang-
ling bel'ore  the  view,  ready  to  fall  or  to  be
cut  down  at  any  moment.     Comp. —

"Omnia sunt  hominum  tenui  peudentia  filo
Et  subito  casu  quiB  valuere  ruunt."

(Ovid,  '  Kpp.  ex  Ponto,'  iv.  3,  35.)

Ver.  6S.— AVorst  of  all,  they  should  be
again  reduced  to  bondage,  carried  back  to
Egypt,  put  up  for  sale  as  slaves,  and  be
so  utterly  despichble  that  no  one  would
purchase  them.  Bring  thee  into  Egypt
again.  "  If  the  Exodus  was  the  birth  of  the
nation  of  God  as  such,  the  return  would  be
its  death"  (Schultz;  cf.  Hos.  viii.  18;  ix.  31.
With  ships.  They  camo  out  of  Egypt  by
land,  as  free  men  ;  they  should  be  carried
back  imprisoned  and  cooped  up  in  slave-
ships.  By  the  way  whereof  I  spake  unto
thee,  Thou  shalt  see  it  no  more  again.  This
does  not  refer  to  their  being  carried  to
Egypt  in  ships  as  different  from  the  way  by
which  they  had  come  out  from  it,  but  simply
to  the  fact  that  they  should  be  carried  back
thither,  contrary  to  what  was  expected  when
they  so  triumphantly  came  forth  from  it.
There  ye  shall  be  sold ;  literally,  shall  sell
yourselves  ;  i.e.  give  yourselves  up  to  be  sold
as  slaves.  Egypt  may  be  here,  as  Hengsten-
berg  suggests,  "the  type  of  future  op-
pressors ;  "  but  there  seems  no  reason  why
the  passage  should  not  be  taken  literally.
It  is  a  fact  that,  after  the  capture  of  Jeru-
salem by  Titus,  the  Jews  were  in  large
numbers  carried  into  Egypt,  and  there  sub-
jected to  most  ignominious  bondage ;  and  iu
the  tiiue  of  Uadriun,  multitudes  of  Jews
were  sold  into  slavery  (Josephus, '  De  Bell.
Jud.,'  vi.  9, 2 ;  cf.  Plulo, '  Flaco.'  and  '  Leg.
ad  Caium.').


HOMTLETICS.

Vers.  1—14. — Ood't  blessing  promised  to  the  obedient.    The  aged  lawgiver  was

finishing  his  course.     Ere  the  end  come.s  he  would  open  up  to  the  people  once  more  the
[Iread  alternative  of  blessing  and  cursing,  and  would  show  them  that  they  must  accept


432  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxviii.  1— 68

either  one  or  the  other.  And  so,  before  the  Holy  Land  is  taken  possession  of,  they  ara
reminded  how  very  much  the  realization  of  the  promises  of  temporal  good  depends  on
what  they  are.  We  cannot  be  too  frequently  reminded  of  the  fact,  however,  that,
though  primd  facie  this  chapter  looks  as  if  people  were  then  under  Law ;  yet  it  was  not
so  In  reality.  They  were  beino;  educated  by  the  Law ;  but  under  it  the  Abrahamic
promise  lay  as  firm  as  granite  (Gal.  iii.  17).  This  is  seen  by  the  fact  that  God  speaks
to  them  as  their  God.  This  was  of  his  free  grace.  But,  though  this  educatory  law  is
based  on  grace,  grace  must  bring  with  it  its  own  law.  Grace  never  gives  the  reins  to
lawlessness.  But  it  teaches  us  that  one  of  the  motive  forces  by  which  God  would
quicken  men  to  righteousness  and  educate  them  in  it,  is  found  in  showing  them  that  hia>
providential  arrangements  are  such  that  the  shaping  of  their  earthly  destiny  is,  in  somt
sort,  in  their  own  hands.  "  Of  their  earthly  destiny,"  we  say.  For  it  is  a  well-known
fact  that  Moses  seldom,  if  ever,  refers  to  the  next  state  of  being.  The  rewards  and
punishments  known  to  the  Pentateuch  are  almost  entirely  connected  with  this  earthly
state.  Of  course,  there  is  nothing  like  a  denial  of  a  life  beyond  the  grave.  But  it  did
not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  revelation  given  through  Moses  that  anothei*  world
should  be  brought  clearly  into  view.  We  doubt  not  that  there  was  mercy  as  well  as
wisdom  in  this  arrangement ;  the  people  had  as  much  revealed  to  them  as  they  could
bear,  and  more  than  they  knew  how  to  improve.  There  is  a  world  of  deep  meaning  in
the  disclosure  of  the  laws  of  God's  providence  which  are  unfolded  to  them  here.  One
would  think  that  such  promises  as  are  made  to  the  obedient  would  have  been  enough
to  win  them  to  follow  the  will  of  God ;  and  that  the  long-continued,  terrific,  appalling
statement  of  what  would  follow  on  their  disobedience  would  have  been  enough  to
dissuade  them  by  "  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  "  from  venturing  on  the  highway  of  evil.  It
would  be  easy  to  write  a  separate  Homily  on  each  verse  in  this  paragraph,  but,  with
such  expansion,  our  work  would  extend  to  a  most  inordinate  length.  We  will  but
suggest,  and  leave  the  expansion  to  others.  We  have  but  one  more  proviso  to  make
before  coming  to  our  main  divisions ;  that  is  this :  Barring  the  special  complexion  here
given  .to  the  chapter,  owing  to  the  peculiar  feature  of  Israel's  national  constitution,
the  main  laws  of  providential  administration  which  were  disclosed  by  Moses  are  still
in  force.  Even  now  it  is  true,  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things :  having
promise  of  the  life  that  now  is."  And  this  ia  the  truth  which,  in  varied  forms,  is
set  forth  here.    Let  us  observe—

I.  A  man's  baethlt  DESTnrr  IB,  in  bomb  bobt,  in  his  own  handb.  (Vers.  1,  2.)
"  If  thou  shalt  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord  thy  Qod,"  such  and  such  blessings  shall
"  come  upon  thee,  and  overtake  thee."  If  Israel  sought  success  for  its  own  sake,  irre-
spectively of  the  rightness  or  wrongness  of  any  methods  adopted  to  secure  it,  there
would  be  no.  guarantee  whatever  of  their  securing  the  end  at  which  they  aimed ;  and
even  if  they  should,  the  results  would  be  fraught  with  evil ;  for  "  the  prosperity  ol
fools  would  destroy  them."  But  if  their  supreme,  their  sole  aim,  was  to  do  right,  to
ferve  and  please  the  Lord,  then  the  Divine  blessing  would  be  sure  to  follow  them.
"  'Tis  ours  to  obey,  'tis  his  to  provide."  If  we  do  right,  and  leave  the  issues  with  GJod,
we  shall  not  be  left  without  tokens  of  his  approving  smile  (Matt.  vL  33).  There  may
be  large  temporal  gains,  or  there  may  not ;  but,  with  the  much  or  with  the  little,  that
blessinc;  will  come  which  maketh  rich ;  and  he  addeth  no  sorrow  therewith.

II.  The  blessino  enjoyed  by  the  obedient  man  will  rest  on  everything  which
HE  HAS,  AND  WILL  FOLLOW  HIM  EVERYWHERE.  Let  every  clausB  in  the  paragraph  be
separately  weighed.  Would  we  set  this  in  gospel  light,  if  any  one  were  to  ask  the
question,  "  What  are  the  signs  of  God's  blessing  which  God's  faithful  ones  enjoy,  even
in  this  life  ?  "  we  would  enumerate  six  of  them.  1.  They  have  peace  with  God  through
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  2.  They  have  a  clear  conscience ;  they  know  that  the  aim  of
pleasing  God  is  right,  what-ever  difficulties  it  may  involve.  3.  They  enjoy  what  they
have  as  from  God,  and  as  the  loving  gifts  of  a  Father's  hand.  4.  If  much  be  given,
they  delight  to  use  it  for  God.  5.  If  little  be  theirs,  they  know  that  a  little  that  •
righteous  man  hath  is  better  than  the  riches  of  many  wicked.  6.  And,  above  all,
the  supreme  proof  of  God's  blessing  is  that  gains  and  losses,  joys  and  cares,  health
and  sickness,  do  "  all  work  together  for  good  "  to  them  ;  they  minister  to  the  growth
of  character,  and  help  to  make  them  better,  wiser,  and  holier  men.

III.  There  is  a  special  law  of  God's  providential  government  which  ensures


en.  xxvuL  1—68.]       THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  433

THIS  BLKSsnro  TO  THE  OBEDIENT.  (Ver.  12.)  It  may,  at  first  sight,  seem  to  be  an
antiquated  setting  of  things  which  we  find  ia  this  verse,  in  which  it  is  said,  virtually,
that  the  amount  of  rain  will  depend  oh  the  amount  of  virtue,  and  that  the  accumulation
of  men's  possessions  will  depend  on  their  fidelity  to  God  I  The  second  sentence  we  can
understand,  since  fidelity  to  God  implies,  among  other  things,  fidelity  in  the  use  of  God's
appointed  means  of  success;  so  that  this  is  only  saying,  Use  the  right  means  rightly,
and  you  will  gain  your  end.  But  as  to  the  former,  who  can  understand  it?  The
amount  of  rain  dependent  on  the  measure  of  virtue — how  can  such  a  thing  be?  We
ask,  first  of  all,  Halli  the  rain  a  father  i  The  reply  is,  Yes,  beyond  all  question — God.
But  then  God  is  the  Father  of  spirits  also.  That  is  to  say,  there  are  two  spheres :
that  of  matter  and  force,  and  that  of  spirit ;  the  one  governed  by  physical  lawS;  the
other  by  laws  which  are  spiritual ;  but  all  laws,  whether  physical  or  spiritual,  are
ordained  and  regulated  by  one  Supreme  Being,  and  in  his  bands  there  is  unity  of
action  therein.  So  that,  concerning  these  two  as  governed  by  one  God,  we  ask.  Is
there  any  relation  at  all  between  them?  Does  the  fact  of  both  sets  of  laws  originating
with  the  same  Being  give  them  a  point  of  contact,  or  does  it  not?  In  a  word.  Is  the
world  of  physical  forces  governed  without  the  slightest  reference  to  the  government
of  souls?  or  is  it  so  governed  as  to  help  on  the  training  of  souls? — which  ?  If  the  first
alternative  is  true,  the  doctrine  of  ver.  12  is  shut  out.  But  who  can  believe  that  the
Great  Father,  in  governing  the  less,  ignores  tlie  greater?  We,  at  any  rate,  recoil  in
horror  from  a  view  so  unworthy  of  God.  We  fall  back,  therefore,  on  the  second
alternative,  which  alone  is  reasonable,  that  the  Icks  is  governed  in  the  interest  and  on
the  behalf  of  the  greater ;  that  things  are  for  spirits.  But  this  principle  allows  room
for  the  point  of  detail  in  ver.  12,  and  for  ten  thousand  more  details  in  the  physical
sphere.  God  would  make  the  natural  world  a  theatre  for,  and  a  means  of,  the
evolution  of  principles  and  the  growth  of  souls  (cf.  Amos  iv.  6—13 ;  Ps.  cvii.  33 — 43).
(See  Homily  on  ch.  xi.  10—17.)

IV.   LOTALTT  TO   GOD  TENDS,  NOT  ONLY  TO  TEMPORAL  SUCCESS,  BUT  ALSO  TO  HONOUR.

(See  end  of  ver.  12  and  ver.  13.)  1.  Individually  ;  men,  in  the  long  run,  go  pretty  much
for  what  they  are  worlh.  Faithful  fulfilment  of  duty  to  God  and  man  must  tell,  and  will.
"  Seest  thou  a  man  diligent  in  his  business;  he  shall  stand  before  kings,  he  shall  not
stand  before  mean  men."  2.  And  collectively ;  if  a  nation  has  in  it  a  preponderance
(if  wise,  true-hearted,  upright  men,  such  as  fear  God,  love  righteousness,  and  hate
iniquity,  nothing  c«n  prevent  such  a  nation  rising  in  the  scale.  Its  prosperity  will  be
manifest  in  its  inward  peace,  in  the  readiness  of  other  nations  to  deal  with  it  by  opening
up  commercial  relations,  and  in  the  good  will  of  other  nations  which' it  will  certainly
share.  It  will  have  the  armuur  of  light.  Its  virtue  will  bs  »  wall  of  defence.  ".Its
land  will  yield  her  increase ;  and  God,  even  its  own  God,  will  bless  it."  "  Happy  is  the
nation  that  is  in  such  a  case ;  yea,  happy  is  that  people  whose  God  is  the  Lord."  To
such  a  nation  it  may  well  be  said,  "  Blessed  is  he  that  blesseth  thee,  and  cursed  is  he
that  curseth  thee  "  (Numb.  xxiv.  5 — 9).

Vers.  15 — 68.— ioi^e  veiled  in  frown.  Probably  many  may  think  that  this  is  one  of
the  most  awful  chapters  in  the  Word  of  God.  Certainly  we  are  not  aware  of  any  other
in  which  there  is  such  a  long  succession  of  warnings,  increasing  in  terror  as  they
advance.  In  fact,  Matthew  Henry  tells  us  of  a  wicked  man  who  was  so  enraged  at
reading  this  chapter  that  he  tore  the  leaf  out  of  his  Bible!  Impotent  rage  1  Impotent
as  if,  when  a  man  dreaded  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  he  were  to  tear  up  the  announcements
thereof.  It  fiould  come  for  all  that  I  So  here;  there  are  two  historical  &cts,  viz.  that
the  children  iA  Israel  did  depart  from  their  God,  and,  that  all  these  curses  did  befall
them.  Some  are  unspent  even  yet.  Hence  this  chapter  is  a  standing  proof  of  the
accuracy  of  the  foresight  which  dictated  its  prophecies.  But  while  we  thus  get,  on
the  one  hand,  a  verification  of  the  words,  and  so  a  proof  of  their  Divine  origin,,  another
question  is  raided,  viz.  How  are  all  these  terrible  realities  consistent  with  tHe  love
of  God  ?  New,  far  be  it  from  us  to  attempt  any  vindication  of  the  ways  of  God.
He  is  infiniteJy  beyond  any  need  of  that.  What  he  does  is  right,  whether  we  can  see
it  to  be  so  or  no.  One  thing  only  do  we  aim  at  now :  that  is,  to  guard  men  against  any
misinterpretation  of  those  ways,  and  to  point  them  to  such  teachings  concerning  them

DEUTEBONOUT.  3  F


484  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxvui.  1— 6a

•9  God  has  given  to  us.    Our  theme  is — Love  veiled  in  frown ;  or,  the  terror*  of  the
Lord  a  neceuity  of  Ms  infinite  love.

I.  There  are  some  in  every  nation  whom  it  is  ahsolutely  necessary  to  sway  by
deterrents,  and  in  the  infancy  of  a  nation  fear  is  more  potent  than  faith.

II.  God  has  a  curse  as  well  as  a  blessing.  His  love  is  not  a  mere  desire  to  make  men
as  easy  as  possible.  It  is,  first  of  all,  a  righteous  love.  When  love  has  to  deal  only
with  righteousness,  its  benevolent  aspect  only  will  be  seen  ;  but  when  sin  has  to  ba
dealt  with,  the  case  is  very  different.

III.  It  should  be  deeply  graven  in  our  souls  that  the  black-looking  and  lowering
storm-cloud  of  Divine  wrath,  though  we  call  it  "  the  curse  of  God,"  must  never  be
thought  of  in  any  way  which  would  be  inconsistent  with  his  pure  and  perfect  love.
The  wrath  of  God  is  holy  love  frowning  on  wrong.

IV.  When  once  the  wrath  of  God  is  incurred,  the  sinner  cannot  elude  it,  any  more
than  he  can  retreat  from  his  own  shadow.

V.  Given  the  actuality  of  sin,  and  a  far-seeing  eye  can  with  certainty  descry  some
of  the  consequences  thereof;  an  infinite  eye  can  discern  them  all.  (The  list  of  pre-
dicted evils  in  this  chapter  may  with  great  advantage  be  arranged  and  classified.  All
have  l>een  realized.  See  also  the  Times,  November  18,  1880,  for  an  account  of  the
present  anti-Semitic  agitation  in  Germany.)

VI.  We  know  that  God  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked,  but  his  vindi-
cation of  hi^  own  laws  is  essential  to  guard  righteousness  as  with  a  wall  of  fire  I
Henc»^

VII.  The  truest  kindness  is  seen  in  the  enunciation  of  the  most  alarming  warnings
which  can  be  given.  The  truest  love  is  that  which  is  most  faithful.  Hence  it  will
often  seem  the  most  stern.

VIII.  A  like  holy  guard  to  that  which  is  here  thrown  around  the  Law  of  God
is  also  thrown  around  the  gospel.  Just  as,  on  the  one  hand,  this  Law  did  not  and
could  not  annul  the  promise  which  had  been  made  to  Abraham  and  his  seed,  even  so,
on  the  other  hand,  not  even  the  richness  and  glory  of  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ  can  ever  annul  the  action  of  these  stern,  retributive  laws  of  God's  providence
on  those  who  continue  in  sin,  and  who  reject  the  redemption  brought  in  by  the  Son  of
God  (see  Heb.  ix.,  x.).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1— 14.— 77<e  blessing.  Blessing  and  curse,  as  Kcil  says,  are  viewed  in  these
verses  "  as  actual  powers,  which  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  the  nation,  and  overtake
it "  (vers,  2, 15,  22 ;  Zcjch.  i.  6).  The  blessing  of  God  is  a  vera  causa  in  human  lite.
It  is  not  to  be  resolved  entirely  into  natural  tendencies.  A  cheerful  mind  conduces
to  health ;  virtuous  habits  tend  to  prosperity,  etc.  But  this  is  not  the  whole.  Con-
spiring with  natural  tendencies,  we  must  recognize  a  special  providence,  a  designed
direction  of  the  l)eneficent  powers  of  nature  and  life,  so  as  to  pour  treasures  of  good-
ness on  the  favoured  individual.  Virtiae  has  its  natural  reward  in  the  approval  of
conscience ;  but  it  would  not  of  itself  suffice  to  bring  about  the  exceptionally  for-
tunate condition  in  the  outward  lot  which  these  verses  represent.  So  strongly  was
this  felt  by  the  philosopher  Eant,  that,  as  is  well  known,  he  postulates  the  existence
of  God,  for  the  express  purpose  of  bringing  about  an  ultimate  harmony  between
virtue  and  felicity.

I.  The  sphere  of  the  blessing.  The  covenant  rested  largely  on  temporal  premises.
Jehovah  was  doubtless  felt  by  the  believing  soul  to  be  a  better  portion  than  any  of  his
gifts  (Ps.  xvi. ;  Ixxiii.),  and  the  relation  which  he  sustained  to  his  worshipper  could  not
but  m  thought  of  as  subsisting  beyond  death,  and  yielding  its  appropriate  fruit  in  a
future  life  (Ps.  xvi.  11 ;  xvii.  15;  xlviii.  14;  xlix.  14,  15;  Heb.  xi.  9 — 17),  Yet,
inasmuch  as  "  life  and  immortality  "  had  not  been  clearly  brought  to  light  (2  Tim.
i,  10),  his  favour  was  specially  exhibited  in  the  abundant  communication  of  earthly
blessings,  A  higher  order  has  supervened,  and  the  temporal  promises  of  these  verses
are  swallowed  up  in  better  and  more  enduring  ones  (Heb.  viii.  6).    The  gospel  does


OH.  xxTiii.  1—68.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  435


(tot  sever  the  connection  between  godliness  and  prosperity.  It  give«  it  a  new  sanction
(1  Tim.  iv.  8).  Were  the  obedience  of  God's  children  more  uniform  and  perfect,  and
piety  more  widely  diffused  in  communities,  the  connection  would  be  more  manifest
than  it  is.  But  on  the  whole,  temporal  prosperity  occupies  a  lower  relative  place  in
the  New  Testament  than  in  the  Old.  1.  The  spiritual  man,  serving  Christ,  and
witnessing  for  him  amidst  the  evil  of  the  world,  is  more  frequently  exposed  to  per
■ecutiou  (Matt  v.  11;  x.  24,  25 ;  John  xv.  15 — 21).  He  has  more  occasion  to  take
up  the  cross  (Matt.  xvi.  24).  He  may  require  to  sacrifice  all  he  has,  with  life  itself,  for
Christ's  sake  and  the  gospel's  (Mark  x.  29,  80).  2.  Temporal  prosperity  is  in  every
case  subordinated  to  spiritual  good  (2  Cor.  xii.  7 — 10 ;  3  John  2).  Bacon's  saying  has,
therefore,  truth  in  it,  "  Prosperity  is  the  blessing  of  the  Old  Testament ;  adversity  is
the  blessing  of  the  New,  which  carrieth  the  greater  benediction,  and  the  clearer
revelation  of  God's  favour."  Adversity,  however,  even  in  the  New  Testament,  is  but
a  step  to  something  higher.  Spiritual  compensations  now ;  hereafter,  "  a  far  more
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  "  (Mark  x.  30 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17).

n.  The  operation  of  the  blessino.  It  is  viewed  as  pervading  every  department
of  the  earthly  life.  It  mingles  itself  with  all  the  good  man  is,  with  all  he  does,
with  the  circumstances  of  his  lot,  with  the  powers  of  the  natural  world  which  con-
stitute his  environment.  It  rests  on  his  person,  on  his  household,  on  his  possessions.
It  helps  him  against  his  enemies,  making  him  wealthy  and  powerful  (Abraham,  Job),
and  exalting  him  to  a  position  in  which  others  are  dependent  on  him.  It  attends  him
in  city  and  field,  in  his  coming  in  and  going  out,  so  that  whatever  he  does  prospers
(Ps.  i.  3).  These  promises  demonstrate :  1.  '1  hat  the  providence  of  God,  in  the
sphere  of  th»  outward  life,  is  free,  sovereign,  all-embracing.  2.  That  there  is  under
this  providence  a  connection  between  outward  events  and  circumstances  and  spiritual
conditions.  3.  That,  subordinately  to  higher  ends,  piety  and  virtue,  under  this
providence,  will  be  rewarded  by  prosperity.  (See  a  valuable  treatment  of  this  subject
in  M'Cosh's  '  Method  of  the  Divine  Government,'  bk.  ii.  ch.  2.)  Yet  glorious  as
these  promises  are,  they  "have  no  glory  in  this  respect,  by  reason  of  the  glory  that
excelleth  "  of  the  promises  of  the  New  Testament.  Promises :  1.  Of  salvation  (Rom.  v.
9, 10).  2.  Of  spiritual  blessings  (Bph.  i.  3).  3.  Of  a  heavenly  inheritance  (1  Pet.  i.  3,  4).
4.  Of  "riches"  of  goodness  which  will  remain  unexhausted  through  eternal  ages  (Eph.
ii.  6,  7).  5.  Of  perfected  transformation  into  the  moral  image  of  God  (Ps.  xvii.  15 ;
1  Cor.  XV.  49 ;  Col.  i.  22 ;  1  John  iii.  2).

III.  The  condition  op  the  blessing.  Obedience  (vers.  1,  2,  9, 13, 14).  1.  Legally,
perfect  obedience.  2.  Evangelically,  obedience  habitual  and  sincere,  albeit  imperfect.
The  Tneritorious  ground  of  a  believer's  acceptance,  and  of  the  blessings  he  receives,  is
the  obedience  unto  death  of  Christ  (Rom.  v.  19 — 21).  Christ  expiates  his  sins,  and
fulfils  de  novo  the  condition  of  the  covenant.  It  is  well  to  remember,  as  explaining
anomalies  in  the  histuries  of  righteous  men  under  the  old  covenant,  that  the  promises  in
these  verses  were  primarily  national.  They  could  be  realized  to  the  individual  Only  in
connection  with  the  obedience  of  the  nation  as  a  whole.  When  apostacy  provoked  God's
judgments,  pious  individuals  suffered  in  the  general  calamities.  They  suffered,  too,  as
drawing  upon  themselves  the  hatred  of  the  wiclted.  Hence  the  development  in  the
Psalms  and  Prophets  of  the  idea  of  the  "  Righteous  Sufferer  " — One  whose  afflictions
are  entailed  on  him  by  the  hatred  and  injustice  of  the  wicked,  or  who,  innocent  him-
self, suffers  as  a  member  of  the  body  politic.  This  idea,  which  has  throughout  a
Messianic  reference,  culminates  in  the  prophecy  of  the  "  Servant  of  Jehovah"  (Is.  lii.,  liii.),
who,  by  the  holy  endurance  of  sufferings  for  others,  makes  their  sin  hu  own,  and
vicariously  atones  for  it. — J.  0.

Ver.  8. — The  blessing  that  TnaJceth  rich,  I.  Full  btobehoubes,  wtthodt  Gob's
BLESSlNa,  ABB  NOT  BICHE8.  God  dofes  uot  count  a  man  rich  further  than  the  good
things  he  has  are  of  real  and  lasting  benefit  to  him.  Wealth  unblessed  of  God  is  not
to  be  desired.  1.  Unblessed  good  is  ill  (Eccles.  v.  10 — 15).  2.  It  turns  to  ill — is  not
enduring  (Fror.  xiii.  22),  takes  wings  and  leaves,  is  a  curse  to  offspring  (Eccles.  v.  14,
15;  Vi.  2;  Jas.  v.  1,  2).

n.  God's  blessino,  without  full  stoeehouses,  makes  bich.  1.  It  enriches  the
li'.tle  we  have.    A  man  with  a  moderate  competence,  and  peace  and  comfort  in  the  uss


43«  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.         [ch.  xxvm.  1— 6a

of  it,  may  be  riclior  than  the  man  whose  means  are  tenfold  greater  (Ps.  xxxvii.  16).
2.  It  makes  adversity  a  means  of  spiritual  enrichment.  3.  It  is  itself  the  best  of  all
riche*  (Hab.  iii.  17— 19).— J.  0.

Ver.  9. — Established.  Probation,  in  the  case  of  the  faithful,  ends  in  establishment.
If  Israel  would  keep  the  commandments,  God  would  "  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,
settle  "  them  as  "an  holy  people  "  to  himself,  and  so  confirm  the  promises  made  to  the
fathers.  A  like  promise  to  the  Church  and  to  Christians  (Acts  xvi.  5  ;  Rom.  i.  11 ;
Col.  ii.  7 ;  Heb.  xiii.  9 ;  1  Pet.  v.  10 ;  2  Pet.  i.  12).  Establishment  is  :  1.  Unto  holi-
ness. 2.  A  result  of  God  naming  his  Name  upon  his  people  (ver.  12,  Hebrew),  i.r;
dwelling  with  them,  and  revealing  his  attributes  in  saving,  sanctifying,  blessing,  and
exalting  them.  3.  The  reward  of  fidelity.  4.  A  ]/roof  of  God's  fidelity.  God  "  hath
sworn"  to  ftxlfil  his  word  (Heb.  vi.  17,  18  ;  cf.  1  Cor.  i.  9 ;  Phil.  i.  6).— J.  0.

Ver.  10. — The  world  a/raid  of  the  godly.  I.  God's  people  called  bt  his  Name.
God  calls  or  names  his  Name  upon  them,  i.e.  distinguishes,  owns,  chooses,  recognizes
them  as  his,  by  dwelling  among  them  (2  Cor.  iii.  16),  by  causing  his  blessir^  to  rest
upon  them,  by  answering  their  prayers,  by  favouring  their  cause,  by  establishing
their  work  (Ps.  xc.  13 — 17).  "  God  is  love  "  (1  John  iv.  8).  His  "  Name  "  expresses
pre-eminently  that  attribute  of  his  character  (Exod.  xxxiy.  6,  7).  It  can,  therefore,  be
revealed  only  upon  or  in  relation  to  his  own  people.

II.  Nominal  and  real  calliko.  "They  are  not  all  Israel  which  are  of  Israel"
(Rom.  ix.  6).  Real,  as  distinguished  from  nominal,  saints  are  marked:.  1.  By
obedience  to  the  Divine  commands  (ver.  9 ;  Matt.  vii.  22).  2.  By  separation  from  the
world  (2  Cor.  vii.  17,  18).  3.  By  the  power  of  holiness  dwelling  in  them.  4.  By
manifold  tokens  of  the  Divine  favour.  Thus  the  world  "  sees  "  them  to  be  what  they
are  (Acts  iv.  13).

III.  Those  known  to  be  called  by  God's  Name  are  fbaked.  "Worldly  men
fear  them.  They  fear  the  holiness  that  resides  in  them.  They  fear  their  prayers.
They  fear  their  power  with  God.  They  feel  that  there  dwells  in  them  a  Presence  whom
they  have  every  reason  to  dre.-id  (Acts  ii.  43). — J.  O.

Ver.  13. — Moral  gravitation.  In  studying  the  histories  of  the  good  men  of  the
Bible,  we  notice  how,  notwithstanding  the  numerous  causes  which  act  adversely
to  their  fortunes,  the  constant  tendency  of  their  piety  is  to  lift  them  upwards.
A  law  is  none  the  less  a  law  because  other  laws  come  in  to  interfere  with,  modify,
suspend,  or  counteract  its  operation.  A  cork  or  other  light  body  may  be  pushed
under  water,  but  the  law  of  its  nature  is  to  rise  to  the  top.  Violence  may  abnormally
depress  the  righteous  man's  fortunes,  but  the  "  law "  of  piety  is .  to  elevate  them.
Mingle  lighter  and  heavier  bodies  in  water,  and  the  heavier  gradually  sink,  while  the
lighter  mount  surfacewards.  So  piety,  both  from  its  own  nature  and  by  the  blessing  of
God  upon  it,  tends  to  raise  a  man  in  favour  and  influence,  and  gradually  to  improve  his
fortunes;  while  ungodliness  as  invariably  drags  him  down.  The  good  man  gains
ground ;  his  enemies  lose  it.  He  mounts  to  be  the  head,  and  they  sink  to  be  the  tail.
He  is  uppermost ;  they  are  undermost.  Illustrate  from  the  histories  of  Joseph,  David,
Uaniel.  It  is  the  same  to-day.  As  years  advance,  the  good  man  grows  in  influence ;
?lowly  hut  surely  overcomes  his  first  difficulties ;  is  trusted,  sought  after,  looked  up  to ;
rises  in  social  iiosition;  ultimately  occupies  the  seats  of  honour;  while  those  who
started  life  with  him,  but  took  a  different  course,  gradually  lose  their  advantages,  fall
one  by  onp  out  of  rank,  and  are  driven  to  the  wall  (cf.  Prov.  iv.  8 ;  xiii.  22,  etc.). — J.  0.

Ver«.  18—48. — The  curse.  Like  the  blessing,  the  curse  is  a  reality.  It  cleaves  to
the  sinner,  pursues  him,  hunts  him  down,  ruins  arid  slays  him  (ver.  45).  Does  some  one
say,  "An  exploded  superstition"?  If  so,  it  is  a  superstition  in  the  belief  of  which
mankind  has  shown  itself  singularly  unanimous.  View  its  reality  as  attested :  1.  By
amscience.  The  criminal  cannot  divest  himself  of  the  belief  that  avenging  powers  are
following  on  his  track.  2.  By  eapeiience.  "  Rarely,"  says  Horace,  " has  Punishment,
though  lame,  failed  to  overtake  the  criminal  fleeing  before  her."  Greek  tragedy  rests
on  an  induction  from  the  facts  of  life.     3.  By  mythology.    It  was  a  conviction,  trug


iJH.  xxvm.  1— 68.]  THE  BOOK   OF  DEUTERONOMY.  437


alike  to  conscience  and  the  facts  of  life,  which  the  Greeks  sought  to  personify  in  the
Erinyes,  in  Nemesis,  and  in  Atfi,  who  clung  to  a  man  or  to  a  family  in  punishment  for
some  half-forgotten  crime.  4.  By  literature,  which  is  full  of  the  recognition  of
avenging  powers.  The  Bible  confirms  the  substance  of  this  varied  teaching,  but  lifts
the  subject  out  of  the  region  of  mythology.  Jehovah  alone  has  power  to  bless  and
curse.  The  blessings  and  curses  of  men  have  no  efficacy  save  as  he  gives  it  to
them.  His  blessings  and  curses  are  part  of  the  moral  government  of  the  world,  and
turn  exclusively  on  moral  conditions.  This  is  the  contrast  between  the  Bible  and  the
heathen  idea  of  a  curse.  The  curse  was  a  prominent  part  of  heathen  sorcery,  but  was
wrought  with  charms  and  incantations.  Irotection  against  it  was  sought,  not  in  a  life
of  virtue,  but  in  counter-charms  and  amulets — in  conjurations  more  powerful  than  those
of  the  enemy.  The  Bible  countenances  no  such  superstitions,  Incaatations  are  value-
less. A  curse  is  futile  against  those  whom  God  has  blessed  (Numb,  xxiii.  20 — 23).
The  Bible  doctrine  is :  1.  Simple.  2.  Bational.  3.  Ethical.  That  of  heathenism  (with
its  modern  survivals,  the  evil  eye,  charms,  witches,  etc.)  is  conspicuously  the  reverse.

I.  The  cnKSB  nr  its  katcbe.  1.  A  natural  fruit  of  ain.  Natural  process  is  not
the  whole.  But  a  larger  place  may  be  allowed  it  than  it  had  in  the  blessing.  The
blessing  is  "  gift ; "  sin's  fruit  is  of  "  debt " — "  wages  "  (Rom.  vi.  23).  Conceivably,  yet
without  miracle,  God  might  have  withheld  from  virtue  its  appropriate  outward  reward.
But  no  power,  even  that  of  God,  could  prevent  the  sinner  from  reaping  wretchedness
and  woe  as  a  result  of  sin.  "  The  righteous  shall  be  recompensed  in  the  earth ;  much
■more  the  wicked  and  the  sinner "  (Prov.  xi.  31).  The  wiser  course  is  not  to  oppose
God  to  the  laws  of  our  moral  nature,  but  to  recognize  him  in  them,  and  to  draw  from
them  a  knowledge  of  his  character  and  wilL  These,  like  all  punitive  laws,  are  the
executors  of  his  judgments.  The  sinner,  having  placed  himself  in  conflict  with  the
laws  of  life,  of  society,  and  of  the  outward  universe,  necessarily  suffers  in  mind,  body,
and  estate.  Sin  introduces  discord,  disorder,  lawlessness,  into  the  soul.  It  bliads  and
infatuates  (vers.  28,  29).  It  makes  wretched.  This  wretchedness  is  aggravated :
(1)  By  remorse  and  self-reproach.  (2)  By  sense  of  Divine  anger,  (3)  By  opprobrium  of
society.  (4)  By  imaginative  terrors.  Sin  poisons  the  fountains  of  health,  and  induces  .
diseases  (vers.  22,  27,  35).  The  internal  anarchy  spreads  outwards.  The  bonds  of
society  are  loosened  ;  wealth  accumulates  in  the  hands  of  the  few;  the  unhappy  toilers,
oppressed  and  spoiled,  sink  deeper  and  deeper  in  debt  and  wretchedness.  At  this  stage
the  nation  becomes  an  easy  prey  to  the  first  strong  power  that  cares  to  pounce  upon  it
(vers.  29 — 38).  2.  An  effect  of  hostile  action  on  the  part  of  Ood.  We  fail  of  a  complete
view  if  we  look  only  at  the  hostile  relation  of  the  sinner  to  God,  and  leave  out  of
account  the  hostile  relation  which  Otod  assumes  to  the  sinner.  It  is  not  merely  that
the  sinner  gets  into  conflict  with  himself  and  with  the  world  around  him,  but  nature
and  providence,  under  the  direction  of  a  hostile  will,  take  up  an  antagonistic  relation  to
him.  Their  movements  are  no  longer  for  his  good,  but  hostile  and  retributive  (vers.
20 — 24).  So  the  mental  maladies  of  Ter.  28  are  more  than  the  merely  natural  effects
of  sin  (cf.  1  Kings  xxii.  22).  "  The  inquiring  mind,"  says  Dr.  M'Cosh,  "  will  discover
designed  combinations,  many  and  wonderful,  between  the  various  events  of  Divine
providence.  What  singular  unions  of  two  streams  at  the  proper  place  to  help  on  the
exertions  of  the  great  and  good  I  What  curious  intersections  of  cords  to  catch  the
wicked,  as  in  a  net,  when  they  are  prowling  as  wild  beasts  I  By  strange  but  most
apposite  correspondences,  human  strength,  when  set  against  the  will  of  God,  is  made
to  waste  away  under  his  indignation,  burning  against  it,  as,  in  heathen  story,  Meleager
wasted  away  as  the  stick  burned  which  his  mother  held  in  the  flre."  Laws  of  nature
are  the  warp.  Divine  providence  the  woof,  of  this  awful  garment  of  the  curse  with
which  the  sinner  clothes  himself.

II.  The  0CB8E  in  its  ofebation.  Pictured  in  these  verses  in  ample  and  vivid
detail.  The  counterpart  of  the  blessing  (vers.  15 — 26).  Takes  effect  in  misfortune
(ver.  20),  sore  diseases  (vers.  21,  22),  scourging  by  natural  agencies  (vers.  23,  24),  in-
vasions by  enemies  (vers.  25,  26).  Action  and  reaction  lead  to  the  reproduction  of
these  evils  in- aggravated  forms.  To  worse  bodily  plagues  (ver.  27)  are  superadded
mental  maladies  (vers.  28,  29),  issuing  in  renewed  panic  and  defeat  in  war  (ver.  29),
with  innumerable  resultant  calamities  (vers,  30 — 33).  Confusion  and  anarchy  unite
with  oppression  to  produce  madness  of  heart  (ver.  34),  disease  pursues  its  ravage*  in


438  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.         [oh.  xxvui.  1—68.


forms  of  increasing  malignity  (ver.  35),  and  the  nation  ultimately  sinks  in  total  ruin
(vers.  36,  37).  Meanwhile,  co-operating  with  these  causes  to  reduce  it  to  subjection,
the  curse  has  been  Working  in  all  labour  and  enterprise,  thwarting,  blasting,  destroying
(vers.  43,  44 ;  cf.  Amos  iv.  6—12  ;  Hag.  i.  5—12 ;  Mai.  ii.  2).  The  full  terribleness
of  the  Divine  curse,  however,  is  only  brought  out  in  the  New  Testament.  As  the  re-
lation of  God  to  the  soul  goes  deeper  than  life  in  the  world,  so  it  extends  beyond  it.
The  worse  part  of  the  curse  is  the  sinking  of  the  soul  in  its  own  corruptions,  with  the
drying  up  of  its  possibilities  of  life,  peace,  and  joy,  under  the  weight  of  the  Divine  dis-
pleasure— an  experience  of  "  indignation  and  wrath,  tribulation  and  anguish,  upon
every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil,  of  the  Jew  first,  and  also  of  the  Gentile  "  (Rom.  ii.
8,  9).  Happily,  no  man  in  this  life  knows  what  the  full  extent  of  that  curse  is
(Isa.  Ivii.  16).  A  remedial  system  is  in  operation,  in  virtue  of  which  no  soul  is  utterly
deserted  of  grace,  and  even  the  natural  workings  of  sin  are  manifoldly  checked,  limited,
and  counteracted.  Space  is  thus  given  for  repentance,  and  salvation  is  possible.  The
end,  however,  if  the  riches  of  this  goodness  and  forbearance  are  despised,  will  only  be
the  more  terrible  (Rom.  ii.  3 — 10).

III.  The  curse  in  its  causes.  Sin,  disobedience  (vers.  45,  46).  The  curses
written  in  this  book  were  liteially  fulfilled.  Israel  would  not  serve  the  Lord  with
joyfulness  and  gladness  of  heart,  therefore — sad  retribution ! — she  had  to  serve  her
enemies  "in  liunger,  and  in  thirst,  and  in  nakedness,  and  in  want  of  all  things"  (ver.
48  ;  cf.  the  prodigal  son,  Luke  xv.  14 — 17).  All  sin  ends  in  bondage.  Nations  that
imitate  Israel  in  her  sins  may  expect  to  be  made  like  her  in  her  punishment. — J.  O.

Vers.  37 — 42. — Ood,  Ruhr  in  nature.  I.  Natural  objects  are  of  his  cebation.
The  Psalmist  bids  us  lift  up  our  eyes  to  the  hills,  and  seek  help  from  God,  "  who  made
heaven  and  earth  "  (Ps.  cxxi.  2).  It  is  this  which  enables  him  to  help  us,  and  makes
it  rcasonal)le  in  us  to  implore  and  trust  in  his  assistance;  as  well  as  leads  us  to  fear  his
displeasure.  Seed,  vineyards,  olive  trees,  are  his  creatures,  and  subserve  his  purposes.
He  who  made  can  destroy.

II.  NatuBai.  agencies  are  under  his  control.  The  greater  agencies  of  nature —
rain  (vers.  23,  24),  pestilence  (ver.  21),  diseases  (vers.  27,  35).  The  lesser  agencies —
locusts  (vers.  38,  42),  worms  (ver.  39),  "  powder  and  dust "  (ver.  24).  He  marshals
these  agencies  at  will,  appoints  them  their  work,  superintends  them  in  the  doing  of  it.
He  brings  strength  out  of  weakness,  making  the  feeblest  creatures  the  instruments  of
bis  most  terrible  strokes  of  vengeance.

III.  The  fruitfulness  of  the  earth  is  dependent  on  his  blessino.  He  gives,
and  he  can  at  will  withhold.  It  is  a  false  science  which  sees  only  "laws"  in  tiie
productiveness  of  nature,  and  ignores  the  hand  and  blessing  of  a  living  God. — J.  O.

Vers.  49 — 59. — The  extremity  of  the  curse.  A  truly  appalling  description  of  the
evils  which  would  overtake  apostate  Israel;  one,  too,  not  more  remarkable  for  the
sustained  vehemence  and  energy  of  its  thought  and  diction,  than  for  the  minuteness
and  literality  with  which  its  prt dictions  have  been  fulfilled.

I.  The  prophecy  in  the  light  of  its  FULriLiiENT.  The  wonderfulness  of  these
predictions  is  not  removed  by  any  date  we  may  assign  to  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.
For :  1.  It  is  certain  that  the  Assyrian  and  Chaldean  invasions — to  which  a  reference  is
no  doubt  included  (Jer.  iv.  13;'  v.  15) — fell  far  short  of  what  was  necessary  for  their
complete  fulfilment.  (1)  The  Babylonian  Captivity  was  only  of  seventy  years'  duration.
(2)  The  Jews  returned  and  remained  long  afterwards  in  possession  of  their  land.  2.  It
is  equally  certain  that,  in  the  subsequent  conquest  of  the  nation  by  the  Romans,  with  the
dispersion  that  followed,  and  which  lasts  to  our  own  day,  every  feature  in  the  prophecy
has  been  exhaustively  fulfilled.  (1)  The  Romans  agree  better  than  either  Assyrians  or
Chaldeans  with  the  description  of  the  foreign  foes  in  vers.  49,  50.  (2)  The  sufferings
of  the  siege  (vers.  52 — 57)  had  their  literal  fulfilment  in  the  Roman  wars,  and  espe-
cially in  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  under  Titus  (of.  Josephus,  '  Wars  of  the  Jews,'  bk.  t.
10,  3 ;  vi.  3,  3,  4 ;  vi.  8,  2).  (3)  "  Hundreds  of  thousands  were  sold  as  slaves"  (cf.  ver.
68) ;  "  and  the  whole  people  were  cast  forth  as  wanderers  among  the  Gentiles ;  and  they
have  ever  since  remained  a  nation  of  exiles,  unsettled,  harassed,  and  oppressed,  in
many  instances  most  cruelly,  not  only  by  pagans  and  Mohammedans,  but  also  (to  out


OH.  xxvm.  1— 68.]       THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  439

fihame  be  it  spoken)  by  Christian  nations ;  and  still  remaining  a  distinct  people,  though
witliout  a  home  "  (Whately, '  Evidences  *).  (4)  "  To  serve  other  gods  "  may  mean  n«
more  than  to  be  banished  from  the  territory  of  Jehovah,  and  to  dwell  in  and  be  com-
pelled to  conform  to  the  laws  of  a  country  where  other  gods  are  recognized  (cf.  1  Sam.
xxvi.  17).  It  is  also  true  that,  to  shield  themselves  from  persecution,  the  Jews  have  too
often  been  willing  to  dissemble  and  conform  to  worships  which  their  hearts  abhorred
(saint  and  image  worship :  adoration  of  the  host,  etc.)  ;  while  in  idolatrous  countries
their  religion  is  frequently  so  corrupted  as  to  be  scarcely  recognizable.  The  Beni-
Israel,  near  Bombay,  e.g.  remain  a  distinct  people,  but,  together  with  Jehovah,  worship
the  gods  of  the  Hindus.  Predictions  (1)  so  minute,  (2)  so  extensive  in  their  range,  yet
(3)  so  exhaustively  verified  by  events,  cannot  be  ascribed  to  accident,  but  constitute  an
irrefragable  proof  of  the  inspiration  that  dictated  them.  Their  fulfilment  converts  the
very  unbelief  and  rejection  of  the  Jews  into  a  powerful  argument  for  Christianity.

II.  Lessons  from  the  prophecy.  1.  The  severity  of  Ood.  If  the  fulfilment  of
these  predictions  teaches  anything,  it  is  that  God  will  not  shrink  from  the  punishment
of  sin.  We  shudder  as  we  read  the  details  of  these  curses — "  plagues  wonderful,  .  .  .
great  plagues,  and  of  long  continuance,  and  sore  sicknesses,  and  of  long  continuance  "
(ver.  59),  and  ask  ourselves.  Can  God  really  tolerate  the  sight  of,  not  to  say  inflict,
such  incredible  sufferings  ?  Yet  we  find  that  not  one  of  these  curses  failed  of  its
accomplishment.  So  solemn  a  fact  bids  the  sinner  pause  and  ponder  his  chance  of
escaping  in  the  great  "  day  of  wrath,  and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  "
(Rom.  ii.  5).  2.  The  self-ruinous  character  of  sin.  The  fulfilment  of  these  threaten-
ings  was  largely,  though  not  wholly,  brought  about  by  simply  giving  sin  scope  to  work
out  its  own  evil  results.  The  bitterest  element  in  retribution  must  be  the  feeling  which
the  sinner  has  of  self-wrought  ruin.  "  He  that  soweth  to  the  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh
reap  corruption  "  (Gal.  vi.  8).  Like  water,  which,  left  to  itself,  will  not  cease  running
till  it  has  tound  its  level ;  like  a  clock,  which,  left  to  itself,  will  not  cease  going  till  it
has  run  itself  completely  down ;  like  a  tree,  which,  left  to  grow,  cannot  but  bring  forth
its  appropriate  fruit ; — so  sin  has  a  level  to  seek,  a  course  to  run,  a  fruit  to  mature,  and
"  the  end  of  those  things  is  death  "  (Rom.  vi.  21). — J.  0.

Ver.  52. — The  high  and  fenced  walls.  God's  enemies  will  ultimately  be  driven  from
all  their  defences.  Cities  "great  and  fenced  up  to  heaven  "  will  be  no  defence  to  them,
any  more  than  they  were  to  the  Canaanites  (ch.  ix.  1).  Horses  and  chariots  (Ps.  xx.  7),
numbers,  prowess,  wealth  (Prov.  x.  15),  arts  of  policy,  leagues  with  foreign  powers
(Isa.  XXX.),  afford  no  protection  when  God  is  the  besieger.  Spiritually,  the  sinner  will
ultimately  be  driven  out  of  every  "  refuge  of  lies."  1.  Self-righteousness ;  every
mouth  shall  be  stopped  (Rom.  iii.  19).  ■  2.  False  trusts  (Matt.  iii.  9;  viL  22).
iJ.  Evasions  and  excuses  (Matt.  xxv.  26 ;  Luke  xiv.  18). — J.  0.

Vers.  56,  57. —  The  delicate  lady.  (Cf.  Isa.  iii.  16 — 26.)  The  queens  of  select  society
have  little  reason  to  be  vain  of  their  excessive  and  artificial  delicacy.  They  need  not
pride  themselves  in  it,  or  think  that  it  entitles  them  to  look  haughtily  on  others.    For —

I.  Dblicact  is  not  character.  It  is  consistent  with  a  vain,  light,  scornful,  wicked
disposition.  The  tender  and  delicate  lady  in  this  verse  is  one  of  the  enemies  of  God.
I'he  purest  types  of  female  character  avoid  those  extravagances  of  delicacy  which,
indulged  in,  become  second  nature.  Character  alone  entitles  to  respect.  To  be  vain
of  beauty  or  breeding,  when  the  heart  is  false  and  the  life  untrue  to  God,  is  to  be
vain  of  an  ornamented  husk  within  which  lies  rottenness.  "  'Tis  only  noble  to  be
good."

.  II.  Delioaot  IB  AN  ACCIDENT  OF  FORTUNE.  It  is  adveutitious — an  accident  of  posi-
tion. Bom  in  another  sphere,  she  who  boasts  of  it  would  not  have  had  it.  It  is  the
product  of  artificial  conditions,  of  which  she  reaps  the  benefit,  but  which  she  bad  nc
part  in  creating.  It  is  not  gained  by  her  own  exertions,  or  attributable  to  her  worth
or  merit.  If  she  values  it,  let  her  at  least  not  despise  others.  She  might  have  been
the  cottager,  the  cottager  the  lady.

III.  Delicacy  is  valueless  when  fortune  ceases  to  smile  on  its  possessob,  N*
change  of  circumstances  can  rob  of  its  value  the  possession  of  knowledge,  talents,
virtue,  good  breeding,  or  refinement.     These  will  grace  the  humblest  home,  will


110  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.         [oh.  xxvm.  1— 68.

prove  a  passport  to  respect  in  any  society.  It  is  different  with  the  fastidious  and
excessive  delicacy  of  the  helle.  So  entirely  is  this  an  appendage  of  a  certain  social
position  that,  when  that  is  gone,  it  perishes  like  a  crushed  flower.  The  admirers
of  the  delicate  lady  have  deserted  her.  She  is  treated  with  coldness,  even  rudeness.
No  one  so  helpless,  so  dependent,  as  she.  She  shone,  like  the  moon,  in  a  reflected
brightness,  and,  foolishly  inconsiderate,  gloried  in  it  as  something  of  her  own.

IV.  Delicacy  mat  be  compelled  to  btoop  to  the  bitterest  dbqeadations.  This
is  the  lesson  of  the  verses  before  us,  and  we  need  not  dwell  upon  it.  But  the  thought
of  such  possibilities  should  quell  pride  and  awaken  awe.  1'he  depths  of  want  and
woe  to  which  the  most  delicately  nurtuied  may  sink,  are  only  paralleled  by  the  possi-
bilities of  joy  that  lie  hidden  in  the  most  wretched  souls,  if  they  will  but  forsake  sin
and  give  themselves  up  to  Jesus  and  the  guidance  of  his  Spirit. — J.  0.

Ver.  63. — Ood  rejoicing  in  judgment.  The  language  in  this  verse  is  boid,  almost
beyond  example.  It  jars  with  our  conceptions  of  the  Divine  Being  to  think  of  him  as
"  rejoicing  "  in  the  destruction  of  even  the  most  obdurate  of  sinners.  He  declares  that
he  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth  (Ezek.  xviii.  32).  Christ  predicted
Jerusalem's  fall,  but  "wept  over  it"(Luke  xix.  11).  The  language  is  best  inter-
preted, not  of  actual  joy  felt  by  God  in  the  execution  of  his  judgments,  but  anthropo-
pathically  of  the  certainty,  rapidity,  and  unsparingness  with  which,  like  waves
chasing  each  other  to  the  shore,  strokes  of  judgment  would  descend,  as  if  God  took
pleasure  in  inflicting  them.  The  figure  is  derived  from  God's  joy  in  the  communication
of  blessings.  As  God's  joy — in  this  case  a  real  joy — was  shown  in  the  number  and
accumulation  of  the  blessings,  so  would  it  be  with  ihe  judgments — he  would  appear  to
rejoice  in  the  sending  of  these  also.  We  do  not,  however,  ignore  tbe  fact  that  God
must  approve  of,  yea,  rest  with  satisfaction  in,  every  exercise  of  his  perfections,  even
in  the  infliction  of  judgment.  The  verse,  in  any  view  of  it,  is  a  very  terrible  one  ia  its
bearings  on  the  prospects  of  the  wicked.— J.  0.

Vers.  65 — 68. — Mental  torture  as  a  result  of  sin.  The  picture  here  drawn  is  true  in
an  especial  sense  of  the  Jews  in  their  state  of  exile,  maddened,  affrighted,  and  kept
in  continual  torture  and  suspense  by  the  persecutions  and  miseries  they  have  been
made  to  endure.  We  ap|ily  it  to  the  state  of  the  ungodly  generally — a  state  of
internal  misery  resulting  from  transgression.

I.  Unappeasable  restlessness.  (Ver.  65.)  The  sinner  is  destitute  of  peace  (Isa.
Ivii.  21).  1.  There  is  nothing  to  give  it.  No  inward  source  of  comfort.  No  perennial
spring  of  satisfaction.  2.  There  is  everything  to  tike  it  away.  (1)  An  evil  con-
Ecience.  (2)  Sense  of  God's  displeasure.  (3)  Inward  disunion  and  anarchy.  The
consequence  is  that  the  sinner  cannot  settle.  He  does  not  feel  at  rest.  He  cannot  be
happy  or  contented  in  any  place  or  occupation.  Like  a  patient  tossing  under  fever,  he
thinks  that  his  uneasiness  arises  from  his  position,  whereas  it  is  his  disorder.  (Of.
'Childe  Harold,'  i.  4,  5;  or  words  of  Tiheiius  to  his  senate — "What  to  write  to  you,
conscript  fathers,  or  how  to  write, 'or  what  not  to  write,  may  all  the  gods  and  goddessei
destroy  me  worse  than  I  feel  that  they  are  daily  destroying  me,  if  I  know.")

II.  Peab  and  teemblino  of  heart.  (Vers.  65,  66.)  "  The  wicked  flee  when  no
man  pursueth"  (Piov.  xxviii.  1).  The  guilty  conscience  is  full  of  terrors.  It  "does
make  cowards  of  us  all."  Gives  rise  to  groundless  fears  (Joseph's  brethren.  Gen.  xlv.
3 ;  L  16).  Morbid  working  of  imagination — starting  in  sleep  (Richard  III.),  fancying
sounds  and  movements  (Macbeth).  Works  despair  (Saul,  1  Sam.  xxviii.).  It  un-
nerves and  unmans.

III.  LoATHiNO  AND  WEARINESS  OF  LIFE.  (Ver.  67.)  A  satcd  despairing  feeling,  iij-
capable  of  removal  or  alleviation.  Ennui.  Unbearable  dragging  on  of  time.  "  I  may
say  that  in  all  my  seventy-five  years  I  have  never  had  a  month  of  genuine  comfort.
It  has  been  the  perpetual  rolling  of  a  stone,  which  I  have  always  bad  to  raise  anew  "
(Goethe>    Cf. '  Childe  Harold,'  as  above—

"  He  felt  the  fulness  of  satiety,
Then  loathed  he  in  his  native  land  to  Iwell;"


cH.  xxviu.  1— 68.]        THE  BOOK  OF   DEUTERONOMY.  441

or  Matthew  Arnold's  lines —

"  On  that  hard  pagan  world  disgntt
And  sated  loathing  fell ;
Deep  weariness  and  sated  lust
Made  human  life  a  hell,"  ete.

J.O.

Vers.  1—14. — The  purpose  of  temporal  Messing.  After  the  "  Amens  "  from  Mount
Ebal  had  been  faithfully  given,  the  Levites  turned  to  Gerizim  with  the  detail  of  blessimjs,
and  received  from  the  assembled  thousands  the  grand  "  Amen."  We  have  in  these  versos
before  us  the  purpose  of  the  blessing.  The  children  of  Israel  had  been  brought  out  of
Egypt  by  a  Divine  deliverance,  they  were  about  to  settle  in  Canaan  as  the  people  of  the
Lord.  They  were  a  specracle,  therefore,  to  the  rest  of  the  world  of  how  a  people  lareJ
at  the  hands  of  the  Lord  in  obedience  or  in  disobedience.  We  must  regard  Israel  as  a
visible  experiment,  so  to  speak,  for  the  instruction  of  the  rest  of  mankind.  Now,  the
rest  of  mankind  at  this  early  stage  could  only  appreciate  such  a  reward  as  temporal
blessing.  Spiritual  blessing  would  have  been  no  demonstration  to  them,  and  have
made  no  impression  upon  them.  Hence  it  was  temporal  blessing  which  God  in  the
main  gave  them.  Of  course,  we  do  not  at  all  accept  the  special  pleading  of  Warburton,
in  his  '  Divine  Legation  of  Moses,'  in  favour  of  temporal  rewards  and  punishments
being  all  that  the  Law  of  Moses  contemplates.  There  are  significant  references  to  a
future  life  in  the  Mosaic  books,  but  for  the  reason  now  stated,  God  was  mainly  work-
ing in  the  temporal  sphere.  Let  us  notice  some  of  the  particulars  in  which  an
obedient  people  were  to  experience  blessing.

L  City  life  was  to  be  blessed.  It  has  been  said  that  "  God  made  the  country,  but
man  the  town."  And  doubtless  the  concentration  of  population  in  cities  is  fraught
with  peculiar  temptation  and  danp;er.  Yet  God's  Law  is  sufBciently  "  broad"  to  secure
right  order  and  government  in  cities  as  well  as  in  country  districts.  If  men  would
only  carry  out  the  law  of  love,  if  they  would  live  by  the  golden  rule,  then  cities  would
soon  put  on  an  air  of  holiness,  and  wickedness  within  them  would  hide  its  head.  It  is
through  the  conscience  and  heart  God's  Law  works,  and  city  life  can  alone  be  elevated
and  regenerated  thereby.  If  we  had  pious  mayors,  aldermen,  and  councillors,  pious,
high  sheriffs  and  oflScials,  then  corruption,  rapacity,  and  self-seeking  would  disajipear
through  a  general  and  conscientious  desire  for  the  "public  good.

II.  Agbicultuee  was  to  be  prosperous.  Palestine  was  intended  to  be  occupied  bv
a  pastoral  people,  and  peasant  proprietors  were  to  fill  the  land.  It  was  to  flow  with
milk  and  honey  if  man  co-operated  with  God,  and  did  his  share  honestly.  The  con-
ditions of  the  country,  as  already  remarked  (cf.  Homily  on  ch.  xi.  10—17),  fostered
faith  in  God,  and  success  was  the  outcome  of  constant  dependence  upon  him.  A
dependent  people  wrought  diligently  and  received  the  blessings  of  nature  as  the  gifts
of  a  faithful  God.  There  was  to  be  increase  of  cattle,  of  kine,  of  sheep,  of  the  fruit  of
the  field,  and  of  all  that  is  implied  by  "  basket  and  store."  In  the  basket,  as  Van
Lennep  somewhere  observes,  grapes,  olives,  and  the  like  are  collected,  and  so  the
blessing  on  the  basket  means  general  agricultural  prosperity.

Now,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  piety  is  an  excellent  handmaid  to  agriculture.  All
the  cant  now  talked  in  the  name  of  science  about  God's  practical  exclusion  from  the
"  reign  of  law,"  is  insufficient  to  overturn  the  plain  truth  that  those  who  try  to  keep
his  commandments  and  live  in  bis  fellowship  are  more  likely  than  others  to  fulfil  the
conditions  of  agricultural  prosperity.

III.  Population  will  increase.  The  fruit  of  their  body  was  also  to  be  blessed.  We
can  understand  how  important  numbers  are  to  national  power.  When  the  population
advances  in  the  sunshine  of  advancing  prosperity,  the  elements  of  national  greatness
are  secured.  The  Mdlthusian  scare  introduced  into  political  economy  was  an  ex-
aggerated lesson  upon  prudence.  Population  progresses  with  sufficient  check  upon  it
in  the  ordinary  struggles  of  life,  without  requiring  such  prophets  of  evil  as  the  Malthu-
sians  have  been.  The  prudence  fostered,  being  of  a  worldly  character,  has  degenerated,
it  is  feared,  in  many  cases,  into  licentiousness  as  legitimate,  when  marriage,  except  in
most  t'lvourable  circumstances,  is  deemed  imprudent.


442  THE  BOOK  OF  DELiTEEONOMY.         [oh.  xivni.  1— 68

Now,  it  is  well  known  that  Palestine  must  have  been  very  populous,  containing
about  as  many  human  beings  to  the  square  mile  as  the  most  densely  populated  countriea
at  the  present  time,'  and  in  its  densely  filled  country  districts  testified  to  the  general
security  which  then  existed.

IV.  They  will  be  valiant  in  RErELLiNQ  invasion.  It  is  noticeable  that  foreign
conquest  is  not  contemplated  when  tbc;  are  settled  in  the  land.  It  is  when  the
enemies  rise  up  against  them  that  the  Lord  will  give  them,  as  obedient  people,  the
power  to  disperse  them.  The  invasion  may  take  place  in  one  way,  but  their  rout  will
be  complete,  they  shall  flee  before  Israel  seven  ways  (ver.  7) — the  perfect  number  in-
dicating perfect  defeat.  The  Lord  will  not  encourage  them  in  a  "spirited  foreign
policy,"  but  will  make  them  invincible  defenders  of  their  hearths  and  homes.

V.  They  shall  be  in  a  position  to  lend  unto  sdbboundinq  nations.  Not  only
would  they  repel  successfully  all  invasion,  but  be  able  to  lay  other  nations  under
obligation.  Now,  we  see  that,  in  being  able  to  serve  others  in  this  way,  lies  the  secret
of  sovereignty  and  influence.  The  thrifty  nations  that  can  lend  to  others,  so  far  get
these  others  into  their  power.  In  the  lending  power  God  promises  to  Israel,  if  obedient,
we  see  the  germ  of  undoubted  ascendancy.

No  wonder,  then,  that  other  nations  are  to  fear  and  to  honour  them,  if  this  is  to  be
their  career.  No  wonder  they  are  to  be  the  head,  and  not  the  tail ;  to  be  above  only,
and  not  beneath.     Obedience  will  prove  the  one  condition  of  ascendancy.

Now,  it  is  true  that  the  world  can  think  better  in  these  latter  days  than  it  did  in
the  days  of  Moses.  Beligion  does  not  now  need  a  demonstration  of  temporal  prosperity
nor  a  favoured  nation.  Beligion  now  demonstrates  its  reality  and  sustaining  power
in  making  poor  saints  bright  and  joyful ;  in  making  suffering  saints  patient  and  hope-
ful ;  and  in  making  the  sorrowing  ones  resigned  and  confident  of  reunion.  These  are
the  "  martyrs  "  now,  and  the  seed  of  the  Church.  At  the  same  time,  it  may  be  seen
written  clearly  on  the  order  of  providence  that  "righteousness  exalteth  a  nation;"  that
the  religious  nations,  other  things  being  equal,  are  the  more  prosperous.  It  cannot  but
be  so.  As  nations  get  no  resurrection  as  nations,  only  as  individuals,  it  then  comes
to  pass  that  as  nations  they  must  be  judged  in  this  world,  and  get  their  reward  or
]}uuishraent,  as  the  case  may  be,  while  the  individuals  composing  the  nations  may  be
asked  in  many  cases  to  wait  for  their  compensation  and  reward  in  the  world  to  come.
— E.  M.  B.

Vers.  15 — 68. — A  nation  becoming  a  beacon.  If  Mount  Gerizim  had  the  weight  of
the  people  on  the  side  of  the  blessing.  Mount  Ebal  had  certainly  the  weight  of  the
deliverance.  No  wonder  the  Law  was  to  he  written  on  its  rocky  tablets,  since  the  major
part  of  the  Law  consists  in  such  denuuciation  of  possible  disobedience  as  might  serve  to
render  it  improbable.  As  Dr.  Arnold  has  said,  "  As  if,  too,  warning  were  far  more
required  than  encouragement,  we  find  that  the  blessings  promised  for  obedience  bear  a
small  proportion  in  point  of  length  to  the  curses  denounced  against  disobedience."  •  We
shall  try  to  sum  up  the  evils  here  threatened  against  Israel  in  case  of  their  disobedience,
and  then  point  out  their  practical  and  present  application.

L  Deobadation  of  city  life.  If  the  massing  of  people  gives  advantages  to
religious  efi'urt,  it  gives  corresponding  advantages  to  sin.  Temptation  becomes  intensi-
fied. The  leaven  of  corruption  gets  speedily  through  the  compactor  mass.  The  very
mention  of  the  city  and  its  sins  and  sorrows  brings  a  frightful  panorama  before  us.
Ignorance,  drunkenness,  irreligion,  licentiousness, — ^all  these  are  found  in  their  most
fearful  forms  in  cities.  No  wonder  that  such  a  man  as  Dr.  Guthrie  delivered  a  series
of  special  sermons  on  the  subject.*  Now,  the  Jews  are  threatened  with  a  curse  upon
their  city  life  in  case  of  their  disobedience.  Ohorazin,  Bethsaida,  and  Capernaum  are
but  samples  of  doomed  cities  through  the  disobedience  of  the  people  (Matt.  xi.  20 — 24).

II.  Aqcicultdbe  will  be  cursed  because  of  their  disobedience.    The  Und  of  promise

'  Of.  Geikie's  'Life  and  Words  of  Christ,'  vol.  i.  p.  22.

•  Cf. '  Sermons  on  the  Interpretation  of  Scripture,'  pp.  44—50.

"  Cf. '  The  City :  its  Sins  and  Sorrows,'  by  Thomas  Gutlme,  D.D.  Bee  also  a  moie  for-
midable book, '  The  Age  of  Great  Cities,'  by  liobert  Vaugban,  D.D.,  where  the  bearings  ol
•ntVlorn  civilization  are  carefully  sketched.


dH.  xxvia.  1— 68.]       THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEROKOMY.  i4$

will  become,  through  drought  and  carelessness,  a  barren  waste,  like  the  worn-out  lands
of  slave-holding  people,  which  once  were  glorious  virgin  soil.  Aud  travellers  have  no
difficulty  in  believing  that  Palestine  is  under  the  curse  of  God.*  The  threat  ol
Deuteronomy  has  become  a  sad  reality,  and  the  land  stands  as  a  witness  to  the  faith-
fulness of  God  to  his  threatenings.

III.  A  curse  was  to  rest  upon  their  children.  No  more  terrible  form  of  judgment
can  be  supposed  than  this.  Parents  are  touched  deepest  in  their  children.  Hence  it
must  have  been  a  great  trial  for  the  wayward  Jews  to  find  their  children  deteriorating
through  their  sin,  and  carrying  in  their  persons  the  curse  of  God.  Population  dwindle',
and  instead  of  being  the  countless  people  ihey  once  were,  they  have  become  so  small
that  it  is  one  of  the  wonders  of  the  world  tliat  they  maintain  their  separate  existence.

IV.  Diseases  of  the  most  frightful  kind  were  to  come  upon  them.  Now,  it  would
seem  that  certain  diseases  were  peculiar  to  Egypt,  and  of  these  the  Israelites  were
jjarticularly  afraid.  Now,  the  Lord  threatens  them  with  all  the  diseases  of  Egypt,  of
which  tliey  were  so  afraid  (vers.  27,  35,  60).  The  diseases  with  which  the  human
frame  is  visitrd  are  certainly  manifold  and  terrible.  To  attach  them  to  sin  in  a  way  of
natural  law  only  makes  the  judgment  the  more  teirible.  Of  course  we  cannot  say
special  sickness  is  proof  positive  of  special  sin ;  but  we  can  say  that  but  for  sin  there
would  have  been  no  suffering  and  no  sickness;  and  that  sin  deserves  all  that  is  sent.
The  frightful  character  of  the  sickness  and  sorrows  God  sends  is  the  expression  of  his
detestation  of  man's  sin.

V.  Famine  was  a  still  worse  curse.  To  perish  with  hunger  because  of  the  scarcity  of
food  is  terrible.  To  waste  away  for  want  of  due  nourishment  is  terrible.  Yet  this  the
Lord  threatened,  and  ultimately  scut  as  the  history  tells  us.

VI.  War  and  siege.  The  worst  enemy  of  mankind  is  man.  Of  all  judgments  war
is  worst.  And  the  siege  endured  in  Jerusalem  twice  over  transcends  all  others  recorded
in  history.  Of  minor  sieges  at  Samaria  and  elsewhere  we  need  not  speak.  According
to  Josephus,  eleven  hundred  thousand  Jews  perished  in  the  course  of  the  siege  of
Jerusalem  under  Titus  by  sword,  pestilenop,  or  famine.  "  Besides  these  eleven  h\mdred
thousand,  ninety-seven  thousand  were  taken  prisoners ;  and  these  were  reserved,  not
for  the  light  sufferings  commpnly  undergone  by  prisoners  of  war  in  our  days,  but  for
the  horrors  of  the  slave-market,  and  for  a  life  of  perpetual  bondage.""  It  is  believed
that  direct  reference  is  made  to  the  Uoman  eagles  in  vers.  49,  50,  etc.,  and  it  is  known
that  women  ate  their  children  in  the  terrible  siege.

VII.  Dispersion  and  bondage.  To  those  with  national  spirit  dispersion  must  have
been  terrible.  Emigration  is  now  deemed  bad  enough,  even  though  it  may  be  to  a
better  inheritance.  But  the  Jewish  dispersioii  threatened  was  captivity  which  wo  know
came  upon  them  at  different  times.  The  Babylonish  Captivity  was  acknowledged  by
them  to  be  in  consequence  of  their  sins,  the  recognized  curse  of  God.  Aud  even  after
their  return  in  part  to  Palestine,  they  came  in  for  bondage  to  the  yoke  of  Rome,  and
felt  the  yoke  of  iron  on  them.

A^lll.  The  OFFSCOUKING  OF  ALL  THINGS  uuto  this  day.  The  Jews  were  threatened
with  such  a  scattering  among  the  nations  as  would  make  them  universally  despised.
And  they  have  become  so.  Even  \  et,  notwithstanding  toleration  and  Jewish  money-
grubbing,  the  nation  has  not  secured  the  respect  of  mankind.    As  Byron  wrote^

"  Tribes  of  the  wandering  foot  and  weary  breast,
How  shall  ye  flee  away  and  be  at  rest  I
The  wild  dove  liath  her  nest,  the  fox  his  cave,
Mankind  their  country — Israel  but  the  grave  I "

Such  in  brief  are  the  judgments  threatened,  and,  as  history  shows  us,  faithfully
executed.  The  nation  constitutes  the  beacon  of  history — the  most  terrible  evidence
of  the  perils  of  disobedience  I  The  following  lessons  of  a  practical  character  are  surely
taught : —

1.  0/  those  to  whom,  much  is  given  shall  much  he  required.    No  nation  was  so  favoured  ,•

'  Cf. '  The  Land  and  the  Book,'  by  Dr.  W.  M.  Thomson,  edit,  of  I860,  p.  341 ;  Stanley*!
'  Sinai  "and  Palestine,'  pp.  117—123 ;  Kitto's  ■  Pliysical  History  of  Palestine,'  p.  cxx.,  etc.
'  Dt.  Arnold,  ut  supra,  p.  47.


144  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  iolvui.  1— C8.

but,  neglecting  its  opportunities,  no  nation  has  been  so  cursed.     It  has  been  more
tolerable  for  Tyre  and  Sidon,  and  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrha,  than  for  the  Jews.

2.  It  it  terrible  when  judgment  has  to  begin  at  the  house  of  Ood.  This  is  the
meaning  of  the  melancholy  history.  It  is  a  tragedy  at  the  house  of  God  (1  Pet.  iv.  17).
"  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed,  lest  he  fall."

3.  The  prophetic  threatening  did  not  prevent  their  apostasy.  Though  as  we  believe,
having  their  possible  career  through  disobedience  to  direct  judgment  so  carefully
sketched,  the  prophecy  lay  for  ages  as  a  sealed,  if  not  a  neglected  book.'  We  think,  with
the  rich  man  in  Hades,  that  categorical  warning  would  reform  any  of  our  brethren,  no
matter  how  abandoned,  but  find  it  a  mistake  (Luke  xvi.  27 — 31).  He  who  knows  the
end  from  the  beginning  has  by  his  prophecy  demonstrated  that  warning  is  often
despised  just  in  proportion  to  its  particularity  and  faithfulness.

4.  The  judgment  on  earth  is  an  image  of  a  more  terrible  judgment  beyond.  "For  us,
each  of  us,"  said  Dr.  Arnold,  "  if  we  do  fail  of  the  grace  of  God,  .  .  .  there  is  reserved  a
misery  of  which  indeed  the  words  of  the  text  are  no  more  than  a  feeble  picture.
There  is  a  state  in  which  they  who  are  condemned  to  it  shall  for  ever  say  in  the
morning.  Would  God  it  were  even  !  and  at  even.  Would  God  it  were  njoraing  1  for  the
fear  of  their  heart  wherewith  they  shall  fear,  and  the  sii;ht  of  their  eyes  which  they
shall  see."  In  forecasting  what  the  doom  of  the  impenitent  shall  be,  we  would  do  well
to  remember  what  God  has  done  to  sinners  in  the  present  life.  Imagination  may
picture  post-mortem  pardons  and  insist  on  sentiment  determining  the  doom  of
disobedience,  even  when  perpetuated;  but  the  history  of  judgment  here  on  earth
should  make  every  sane  man  fear  to  speak  lightly  of  the  judgment  beyond.  May  God
preserve  us  all  from  such  an  experience,  through  the  blood  and  merits  of  Jesus  I —
if.  M.  K.

Vers.  1 — 14. — TTie  present  portion,  of  a  good  man.  The  natural  world  may  be  fitly
regarded  as  the  visible  symbol  of  the  spiritual  world,  the  earthly  state  a  lower  copy  of
the  heavenly.  The  order  of  cause  and  effect  is  as  uniform  in  the  spiritual  sphere  as  in
the  material.  Fire  in  contact  with  gunpowder  will  result  in  explosion.  True  seed  in
fitting  soil  will  bear  fruit.    "  Whatsoever  a  man  sows  that  shall  he  also  reap."

I.  Wb  have  hkrb  a  description  op  a  good  man.  1.  He  is  described  by  his
teachableness.  He  "  hearkens  diligently  unto  the  voice  of  the  Lord."  1'his  is  a  trait
of  a  true  child.  He  has  a  sense  of  need,  a  sense  of  dependence  upon  another.  He
admits  God's  right  to  instruct  and  to  command.  He  inquires  after  God,  and  reverently
listens  to  his  voice.  It  is  his  delight  to  hear  the  wise  precepts  of  the  unerring  God.
2.  He  is  described  by  his  circumspection.  He  is  observant  of  God's  ways,  discovers
manifold  and  hidden  indications  of  his  will.  Not  only  is  his  ear  intent  to  the  whispers
of  his  Father,  but  his  eye  is  open  too.  Blindness  of  mind  has  gone.  3.  He  is
described  by  his  completeness  of  obedience.  He  practically  "does  all  the  command-
ments of  God,"  These  came  of  old  by  the  agency  of  Moses ;  but  a  good  man  detects
within  the  human  voice  the  Divine  message — the  authority  of  Heaven,  And  his  entire
conduct  is  determined  by  the  known  will  of  God,

II.  Goodness  is  allied  to  greatness  as  sdrelt  as  cause  to  effect.  "The
Lord  thy  God  will  set  thee  on  high  above  all  nations  of  the  earth."  As  in  nature  it  is
certain  that  all  botanical  life  shoots  upward,  or  that  gases,  as  they  expand,  also  ascend ;
so  in  the  spiritual  kingdom  it  is  cerlaiu  that  goodness  will  grow  into  eminence.  'Tis
not  merely  an  arbitrary  decree  of  God  ;  'tis  the  outcome  of  the  very  constitution  of  the
universe.  The  character  of  Jehovah  is  a  guarantee  that  the  constitutional  principles
of  his  empire  do  not  change.  Hostile  influences  and  powers  may  for  a  time  prevent
goodness  from  receiving  its  due  reward — just  as  superincumbent  clay  may  prevent  the
young  plant  from  shooting  upward,  but  the  final  issue  b  certain.  Faithful  service
shall  be  crowned  with  honour.

III.  The  reward  of  goodness  is  its  own  permanence.  "  The  Lord  shall  establish
thee  an  holy  people  "  (ver.  9).  "  And  thou  shalt  not  go  aside  from  any  of  the  words
which  I  command  thee."  In  the  life  of  obedience  "  God  helps  those  who  help  them-
selves."   Separate  acts  become  easier  by  repetition.    They  evolve  into  habits.    Habits

>  Ot  W.  Bobertson'B  Smith's  'Old  Testament  in  the  Jewish  Church,'  p.  36%  eta


OH.  xxvin.  1—68.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMY.  446

tend  to  permanence  and  constitute  character  and  foreshadow  destiny.  All  proceeds  h^
virtue  of  an  eternal  law :  "  God  helps  those  who  help  themselves."  It  is  easier  for
a  good  man  to  resist  temptation  now  than  it  was  in  the  first  stages  of  his  Christian
life.  Devotion  has  become  the  natural  outflow  of  his  soul,  the  fruitage  of  bia  new
life.

IV.  Behind  all  forms  of  blessino  a  personal  God  mat  be  seen.  The
material  food  does  not  sustain  bodily  life ;  it  is  God  acting  through  the  food.  Neither
fertile  land,  nor  good  husbandry,  nor  auspicious  weather,  nor  all  combined,  will  in
themselves  secure  a  copious  harvest;  it  is  God  acting  through  natural  forces.  "The
Lord  shall  command  the  blessing."  However  riches  may  increase,  if  God  smile  not,
there  will  be  no  joy.  The  house  may  be  full  of  children ;  yet  instead  of  ruddy  health
there  may  be  wasting  sickness — instead  of  intellectual  vigour,  imbecility — instead  of
laughter,  weeping :  the  blessing  of  God  is  wanting.  We  may  possess  substantial  homes,
yet  no  security  ;  marauders  and  incendiaries  may  infest  the  land.  True  prosperity,  is
a  Divine  Father's  benediction.

V.  A  OOOD  MAN  DELIGHTS  IN  DiSTRiBUTiNQ  GOOD.  He  himself  becomes  an  inferior
God,  a  lesser  source  of  blessing.  "  Thou  shall  lend,  and  shalt  not  borrow."  The  Name
of  God  is  put  upon  him.  He  acts  in  God's  stead,  and  imitates  God  in  all  things.  The
result  of  the  Divine  favour  will  be  conspicuous.  All  people  shall  see  the  gracious  dis-
tinction which  marks  and  signalizes  the  firiend  of  QoA.  All  his  beneficent  deeds
will  be  covered  with  a  glory  not  bom  of  earth.  His  mysterious  influence  will  spread
far  and  wide.  He  becomes  a  "burning  and  a  shining  light;  many  will  rejoice  in  his
light."— D.

Vers.  15 — 44. — The  Nemesis  of  disloyalty.  It  is  instructive  that  Moses  dilates  with
far  greater  fulness  on  the  curses  attached  to  disloyalty  than  on  the  rewards  of  dis-
obedience. In  the  childhood  of  the  world  people  were  more  under  the  influence  of  fear
than  of  hope,  more  deterred  by  threatening  than  drawn  by  promise.  The  message  of
Moses  was  admirably  adapted  to  the  people's  need.

I.  The  EQtnTY  of  these  curses.  1.  Disobedience  under  such  circumstances  of
privilege  was  eminently  lase  and  blameworthy.  Disloyalty  had  no  excuse.  To  refuse
to  hearken  to  the  Creator's  voice  was  sheer  obstinacy,  which  could  plead  no  extenua-
tion. 2.  It  was  perjury.  They  had,  sworn  to  be  loyal  subjects.  They  had  acknow-
ledged the  just  terms  of  the  covenant,  and  had  entered  Canaan  on  the  terms  of  pledged
obedience.  3.  It  was  rehellien  against  their  accepted  King.  If  such  flagrant  rebellion
escaped  with  impunity,  God  would  be  dishonoured  in  the  eyes  of  the  universe.  4.  The
curses  were  their  own  choice.  They  knew  clearly  what  the  fruits  of  disobedience  were.
They  had  seen  the  fruits  in  others'  fate — in  the  Egyptians,  in  their  brethren,  in  the
Canaanites.  If  they  should  choose  other  gods,  they  should  be  led  into  captivity,  and
there  they  should  "  serve  other  gods,  wood  and  stone."  5.  The  curses  were  the  natural
evolution  of  their  crimes.  Sin  is  the  seed  of  which  penalty  is  the  fruit.  If  they  forsook
God;  God  would  forsake  them.  What  could  be  more  equitable?  Men  say,  "Depart
from  me;  I  desire  not  the  knowledge  of  thy  ways."  God  says,  "Depart  from  me;  I
never  knew  you."

II.  The  extent  of  the  curse.  1.  It  is  a  complete  reversal  (f  the  purpose  of  God.
His  purpose  had  been  to  bless — to  bless  abundantly.  But  sin  changes  the  light  into
gloom,  sweetness  into  bitterness,  summer  into  winter,  food  into  poison.  At  every
point  and  through  every  moment  the  sinner  is  in  direct  and  absolute  antagonism  with
God.  2.  Every  earthly  possession  becomes  an  instrument  of  pain.  The  body,  which  is
the  organic  instrument  by  which  the  soul  has  intercourse  with  the  material  world,
furnishes  a  thousand  avenues  for  pain.  Our  children  are  intended  as  channels  of  joy  ;
they  become  channels  of  sorrow.  Every  possession  becomes  a  source  of  anxiety  and
care.  Every  occupation  bears  a  harvest  of  disappointment.  Blight  is  upon  all  the
summer  fruit.  Black  portents  fill  every  quarter  of  the  sky.  3.  The  natural  elements
become  agents  of  woe.  The  sun  becomes  as  a  fiery  oven,  while  no  cloud  tempers  the
scorching  heat.  Fierce  winds  fill  the  heated  air  with  fine  dust,  which  a£3icts  the  eye
with  disease  and  blindness.  Inflammation  of  the  blood  and  fever  follow.  The  air
is  charged  with  pestilence,  and  men  breathe  it  with  every  inspiration.  Material
nature  fights  for  God.     4.    The  curse   includes   disordered  reason.     Nor  cut   Wf


44«  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.         [ch.  xxvm.  1—68,

wonder.  The  delicate  organs  of  the  mind  are  sustained  in  vigour  by  God,  and  if  ha
withdraw  his  hand,  madness  swiftly  follows.  5.  In  proportion  to  the  previous  exalta-
tion hecomes  the  degradation.  It  is  better  not  to  be  raised  to  eminence  than  to  be
lifted  np  and  then  cast  down.  This  would  be  a  stigma  of  reproach  in  the  eyes  ot  all
the  nations.

III.  The  cbetaintt  of  the  cubsb.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass."  1.  It  is  fixed  hy
an  inherent  necessity.  The  law  of  Nemesis  is  embedded  in  the  constitution  of  the
universe.  As  surely  as  night  succeeds  to  day,  as  surely  as  fire  melts  wax,  so  su:ely
does  penalty  follow  sin.  Every  dynamic  force  in  nature  is  in  league  with  righteous-
ness against  sin.  2.  It  is  made  certain  hy  Jehovah's  word.  His  word  is  a  part  cf
himself;  and  as  his  nature  is  unchangeable,  so  no  word  of  his  can  ever  be  revoked.
This  is  his  prerogative :  "  I  am  Jehovah  ;  I  change  not."  3.  It  is  made  sure  hy  the
holiness  of  Ood.  For  God  to  treat  sin  with  levity  or  wiih  impunity  would  be  to  do
viplence  to  his  own  nature — would  be  to  act  against  himself.  In  the  light  of  holiness
sin  must  be  consumed;  and  if  it  inhere  ineradicably  in  the  sinner,  then  must  the
sinner  be  consumed  likewise.  So  long  as  Grod  is  holy  he  must,  by  the  essential  quality
of  his  nature,  pursue  sin  unto  the  death, — D.

Vers.  45 — 68. — JTie  remoter  consequences  of  rebellion.  The  evilif  uncured  aggravate!
itself — develops  new  symptoms ;  and  as  the  evil  grows,  so  misery  increases  likewise.
The  man  of  God  forsees  a  yet  further  stage  of  misery  in  the  distant  future.  His
predictions  of  woe  plainly  point  to  the  domination  of  the  Roman  eagles,  and  to  the
miseries  consequent  \ipon  the  final  dispersion  of  the  Jews.  To  the  eye  of  God's  prophet
the  long  procession  of  coming  woes  is  clearly  revealed — a  series  of  miseries  stretching
away  through  milleniums  of  years.

L   It   IS   A   NECESSITY   THAT   God's   BULE   SHALL   BE  MAINTAINED.      So    long    aS    the

nniverse  continues,  the  Creator  must  be  King.  Our  only  choice  is  whether  we  will
have  him  as  our  Friend  or  as  our  Foe.  "  For  he  must  reign."  We  must  serve  (ver.  47).
To  forsake  God  is  not  to  gain  liberty ;  it  is  only  the  exchange  of  a  noble  Master  for
a  thousand  petty  tyrants.  ' "  Because  thou  servedst  not  the  Lord  thy  God  with  joyful-
ness,  .■ .  .  thou  shalt  serve  thine  enemies  in  hunger,  and  in  nakedness."  This  is  the
only  alternative.  We  oscillate  like  a  pendulum  between  these  two  points — serving
God  and  serving  our  enemies.

n.  In  pbopoktion  to  the  goomtebs  abused  is  the  curse  that  follows.  The
language  in  the  earlier  part  of  these  comminations  clearly  points  to  the  overthrow  of
the  people  by  the  Assyrians.  That  calamity  and  the  consequent  captivity  were  the
chastisements  of  wisdom — were  part  of  the  costly  training  by  which  Israel  might  have
been  recovered  to  the  Divine  favour.  But  even  that  severe  correction  soon  lost  its
purifying  effect.  Another  overthrow,  more  complete  and  galling  yet,  was  therefore
approaching.  A  yoke  of  iron  was  preparing  for  their  neck,  which  should  destroy  their
national  life.  More  ruthless  treatment  should  be  endured  under  the  Romans  than
under  the  Chaldeans.  The  sufferings  in  the  siege  were  to  be  unparalleled.  Mutual
hate  and  rage  would  prevail.  All  the  love  of  human  nature  would  be  turned  into
hateful  selfishness.     It  would  be  the  reign  of  hell  upon  the  earth.

III.  The  fatheblt  kindness  of  God  is  displayed  in  this  forecast  of  bin's
effects.  It  must  have  been  a  pain  to  the  heart  of  Moses  (and  greater  pain  still  to  the
heart  of  God)  to  dwell  on  the  terrific  consequences  of  possible  disobedience.  It  would
have  been  more  pleasant  employment  to  have  sketched  out  the  prospects  a,nd  rewards
of  righteousness.  Yet  in  proportion  to  the  pain  felt  in  anticipating  tlie  desolation  and
misery  of  Israel,  was  the  ardent  love  for  Israel's  good.  If  affection  could  erect  before-
hand any  barrier  which  could  withstand  the  torrent  of  evil,  that  barrier  shall  be
erected.  If  love  can  abolish  hell,  it  will.  What  language  can  measure  the  Divine  love
which  thus  pleads  with  men  to  eschew  sin?  Even  a  present  sight  of  coming  war  does
not  deter  men  from  sin,

rV.  The  fulfilment  of  God's  thrbateninos  are  a  sign  fob  future  genera-
tions. A  thousand  years  elapsed  before  the  woes  foreshadowed  were  inflicted.  With  the
Lord,  "  a  thousand  years  are  as  one  day."  Nevertheless,  every  word  spoken  by  Mosei
became  a  fact.  The  f)rophecy  has  been  turned  into  history.  In  part,  those  prophecies
are  fulfilled  to-day  before  our  eyes :  "  Ye  shall  be  plucked  from  off  the  land  whithei


CH.  xxiz.  1 — 29.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


447


thou  goest  to  possess  it ; "  "  the  Lord  sliall  scatter  thee  among  all  people,  from  the  one
end  of  the  earth  even  unto  the  other  ; "  "  among  these  nations  shalt  thou  find  no  ease,
neither  shall  the  sole  of  thy  foot  have  any  rest."  The  present  condition  of  the  Jews  is
a  signal  proof  of  the  divinity  of  Scripture,  an  impressive  symbol  of  the  crushing
judgments  of  God.  Who  can  trifle  with  such  a  Being  ?  Wisdom  says,  "  Stand  in
awe,  Mid  sin  notl" — D.


EXPOSITION.


Renewal  o»  the  CtovBNAirr  nr  the  Plains

OF  MOAB.

(Ch.  xxviii.  69— Ch.  xxx.)
CHAPTER  XXIX.

The  first  verse  of  this  chapter  is  placed
In  the  Hebrew  text  at  the  end  of  oh.
xxviii.,  but  in  the  LXX.  and  Vulgate  the
arrangement  is  as  in  the  Authorized  Version,
where  it  appears  as  the  title  of  the  section
that  follows.  In  that  section  is  contained
an  add  less  to  the  people  by  Moses,  in  which
he  appeals  to  them  to  enter  anew  into  the
covenant  with  the  Lord,  which  hnd  been
before  concluded  at  Horeb ;  denounces
apostacy  as  what  would  lead  certainly  to
their  being  rejected  of  God;  assures 'them
at  the  same  time  of  God's  readiness  to
restore  them  should  they  sii^cerely  repent
and  return  to  him ;  and  once  more  sets
before  them  the  blessing  and  the  curse,  and
adjures  them  to  choose  the  blessing.

Ver.  1. — Beside  the  covenant  which  he
made  with  them  in  Horeb.  This  was  not
a  new  covenant  fn  addition  to  that  made  at
Sinai,  but  simply  a  renewal  and  reaffirma-
tion of  that  covenant.  At  Sinai  the  cove-
nant was,  properly  speaking,  made;  sacrifices
were  then  offered,  and  the  people  were
sprinkled  with  the  sacrificial  blood,  whereby
the  covenant  was  ratified  (Rxod.  xxiv. ;  cf.
Ps.  1.  5);  but  on  the  occasion  here  referred
to,  no  sacrifices  were  offeied,  for  this  was
merely  the  recognition  of  the  covenant
formerly  made  as  still  subsisting.

Ver.  2. — Moses  addresses  the  nation  as
such,  and  reminds  them  of  their  dulness  to
apprehend  the  manifej-tations  of  God's  grace
which  had  been  so  abundantly  afforded  in
their  past  history,  in  order  that  he  may
arouse  them  to  a  better  state  of  mind,  and
stimulate  them  to  hearken  to  the  voice  of
God  in  the  future.

Ver.  4. — The  Lord  hath  not  given  yon  an
heart  to  perceive,  etc.  Moses  says  this  "  not
to  excuse  their  wickedness,  but  partly  to
direct  them  what  course  to  take,  and  to
whom  they  must  have  recourse  for  the
amending  of  their  former  errors,  and  Jbr  a


good  nnderstanding  and  Improvement  of
God's  works ;  and  partly  to  aggravate  their
sin,  and  to  intimate  that,  although  the  hear-
ing ear  and  the  seeing  eye  and  the  under-
standing heart  are  the  workmanship  of  God
(Prov.  XX.  12),  and  the  eifects  of  his  special
grace  (ch.  xxx.  6 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  33 ;  xxxii.
39,  etc.),  yet  their  want  of  this  grace  was
tlieir  own  fault  and  the  just  punishment  of
their  former  sins  "  (Poole).  As  they  would
not  attend  to  God's  word,  as  they  had  shut
their  eyes  and  their  ears,  that  they  might
not  see  nr  hear,  or  learn  what  God  was
tenching  tliem  by  his  conduct  towards  them,
they  liad  been  left  to  themselves;  and,  as
a  necessary  consequence,  thiy  had  become
as  persons  who  had  no  eyes  to  see,  or  ears
to  hear,  or  heart  to  perceive  what  was  set
before  them  for  their  learning.

Ver.  5. — Having  referred  to  the  gracious
dealing  of  God  with  them  in  the  wilderness,
Moses  introduces  Jehovah  himself  as  speak-
ing to  tliem  (cf.  ch.  xi.  14).  (On  vers.  5  and
6,  see  ch.  viii.  3,  4 ;  and  on  vers.  7  and  8,
see  eh.  ii.  26,  etc. ;  iii.  1,  e:c.)

Ver,  9. — That  ye  may  prosper  in  all  that
ye  do.  The  verb  here  used  (^'3»n)  means
primarily  to  look  at,  to  consider  or  attend  to,
hence  to  become  intelligent,  to  be  prudent
to  act  wisely,  and  so  to  have  success,  tc
prosper.  It  is  the  prosperity  which  comei
from  wise  and  prudent  action  that  Got
commends  to  his  people  (cf.  Josh.  i.  7,  8).

Vers.  10 — 1.5. — Summons  to  enter  into  th
covenant  of  the  Lord  with  fresh  ardour  ant.
eordiality.

\eT.  10. — Translate:  Te  stand  this  da
all  of  yon  before  Jehovah  your  Ood,  yon
chiefs,  youi  tribes,  your  elders,  and  yon
officers,  every  man  of  Israel.  The  tw
members  are  parallel:  the  heads  or  chiel.
are  the  elders  and  officers,  the  tribes  are  a!i
Israel.  The  Authorized  Version  follows  th
LXX.,  but  against  the  idiom  of  the  Hebrev
Ibn  Ezra  says  □3<&'ii'i  is  instead  of  'KiKi  bv
this  can  hardly  be.

Vers.  11— 14,— The  covenant  was  .
national  engagement,  and  as  such  includf  1
not  only  the  adults  and  existing  generation,
but  the  little  ones,  the  strangers  resident  in
Israel,  the  lowest  menial  servants,  that  is,  all
the  elements  of  which  the  nation  was  com-
posed, as  well  as  their  posterity  in  coming


443


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxix.  1— 29


generations.  That  thou  shonldest  enter  into
covenant.  The  expression  in  the  Hebrew
is  a  strong  one,  indicating  not  a  mere  formal
engagement,  but  a  going  thoroughly  into
the  covenant;  the  phrase  is  used  of  the
sword  going  through  the  land  (Lev.  xxvi.
6),  and  of  one  going  into  the  pit  (Job  xxxiii.
28).  Into  his  oath.  Covenants  were  con-
firmed by  oath  (Gen.  rsvi.  28;  Heb.  vi.
17) ;  hence  in  Scripture  the  covenant  of
CJod  is  sometimes  called  his  oath  (ver.  14;
1  Chron.xvi.  16;  Heb.  vii.  28).  (On  ver.  13,
cf.  ch.  xxviii.  9 ;  xxvii.  9 ;  Exod.  xix.  5,  6.)
Vers.  16 — 29. — The  summons  to  renew
Ihe  covenant  is  enforced  by  a  fresh  exposi-
tion of  the  evil  and  danger  of  apostacy
from  the  Lord.  This  is  introduced  by  a
lefer^nce  to  the  experience  which  the  people
already  had  of  idolatry  in  Egypt,  and  among
the  nations  with  whom  they  had  come  in
contact  during  their  march  througL  the
wilderness, '  from  which  they  must  have
learned  the  utter  worthlessness  of  all  idols,
that  they  were  no  gods,  but  only  wood  and
stone.

Vers.  16,  17.— These  verses  are  not  a
parenthesis,  as  in  the  Authorized  Version.
Vtr.  18  is  connected,  not  with  ver.  15,  but
witli  ver.  17 ;  there  should  be  a  full  stop
at  the  end  of  ver.  15.  Their  idols ;  literally,
Iheir  blocks  or  logs  (n'^Aj,  from  hh},  to  roll
something  too  heavy  to  be  carried),  a  term
of  contempt  used  frequently  in  Scripture  of
id'  Is.

Ver.  18. — lest  there  should  be  among  you;
rather,  See  that  there  be  not  among  you,  etc.
The  part.  )s,  lest,  at  the  beginning  of  a
sentence,  sometimes  implies  a  prohibition
or  dissuasion,  as  Job  xxxii.  13,  "say  not;"
Isa.xxxvi.  18,"beware  of  saying"  (Gesenius,
Noldius  in  voe  ).  Gall.  The  Hebrew  word
so  rendered  (sysil)  is  supposed  by  Gesenius
to  be  the  poppy  plant,  by  Celsius  to  be  the
hemlock  (it  is  so  rendered,  Hos.  x.  4 ;  Amos
vi.  12>,  and  by  CEdman  to  be  colooynth.
It  is  probably  a  general  name  for  what  is
poisonous  and  bilter;  for  it  is  used  of
poison  generally  (ch.  xxxii.  32)  and  of  the
venom  of  asps  (ch.  xxxii.  33;  Job  xx.  16),
ta  well  as  of  poisonous  roots  and  bitter
iiuits  (see  Kitto,  '  Bibl.  Cycl.,'  iii.  701).
Coupled  here  with  wormwood,  it  must  be  a
plant  that  is  refei-red  to ;  and  the  union  of
the  two  affords  "a  striking  image  of  the
destructive  fruit  borne  by  idolatry  "  (Keil).
Ver.  19. — That  he  bless  himself  in  Ms
heart; — congratulatehimself— saying.Ishall
have  peace— I.e.  all  shall  be  well  with  me —
though— rather,/or — I  walk  in  the  imagina-
tion of  mine  heart;  literally,  in  the  firmness  or
hardneu  of  my  heart,  (nnnB*,  from  "i"!^,  to


twist  together,  to  be  tough  or  firm);   the
word  is  always  used  in  a  bad  sense  in
Hebrew,  though  not  in  Aramaic  (cf.  Ts
Ixxxi.  13  [12] ;  Jer.  iii.  17;  vii.  24;  ix.  13
[14] ;  xi.  8).    To  add  drunkenness  to  thirst ;
a  proverbial  expression,  of  which  very  dif-
ferent explanations  hive  been   given.    It
is  now  generally  aiuitted  that  the  verb
(nisp)  cannot  be  taken  here  in  the  sense  of
"  add,"  but  has  its  proper  sense  of  pouring
out,  pouring  away,  destroying.     The  worJ
rendered    "drunkenness"   (nn,   from   nn
to  be  sated  with  moisture,  to  be  drenched)
means    rather    "  sated,    drenched,      well-
watered  ; "  and  the  word  rendered  "  thirst "
(nxDv,   from   sds,    to   thirst)    is   properly
thirsty,  and  is  used  of  dry  land  (Isa.  xliv.
3);  both  are  adjectives,  and  a  substantive
is  to  be  supplied.     Some  supply  csj,  soul
or  person;  others,  ps,  land.     The  former
render,  «  The  full  [soul]  with  the  thirsty  "
(Gesenius);  or,  "Them  that  are  sated  with
them  that  are  thirsty,"  i.e.  as  well  those  who
have  imbibed  the  poison  as  those  who  thirst
for  it  (Knobel) ;  or  "  That  the  sated  [soul]
may  destroy  the  thirsty,"  i.e.  that  tbeimpious
one,  restrained  by  no  law  and,  as  it  were,
drunk  with  crime,  may  corrupt  others,  also
prone  to  evil,  and  bring  on  them  destruc-
tion (Maurer).     Those  who  supply  "  land,"
render  "To  destroy  the  well- watered  [land]
with  the  dj7."     This  last  seems  the  prefer-
able rendering ;  but  the  general  meaning  is
the  same  in  either  case,  viz.  that  the  eifeot
of  such  hardness  of  heart  would  be  to  de-
stroy one  and  all.    «  The  Orientals  are  fond
of  such  bipartite  forms  of  expressing  the
whole  (of.    Gesenius,    'Thes.,'    p.   1008)"
(Knobel ;  cf.  ch.  xxxii.  36).

Vers,  20,  21.-  Though  the  sinner  fancies
all  is  well  with  him,  and  is  hardened  in  his
iniquity,  and  is  leading  others  astray  by  his
example,  the  Lord  will  not  suflFer  him  to
rest  in  impuiiity,  but  will  send  on  him
terrible  punishments.  The  anger  of  the  lord
and  his  jealousy  shall  smoke,  i.e.  shall  break
forth  in  destructive  fire  (of.  Ps.  Ixxiv.  1:
Isa.  Ixv.  5;  Ps.  xviii.  8).  The  Lord  shaU
blot  out  his  name  from  under  heaven  (cf.
ch.  XXV.  19 ;  Ex«l.  xvii.  14).  The  lord  shall
separate  him  unto  evil  out  of  all  the  trihei
of  Israel,— so  that,  excluded  from  the  cove-
nant nation,  and  placed  beyond  the  sphere
over  which  rests  the  salvation  of  the  Lord,
they  will  be  exposed  to  destruction — accord-
ing to  all  the  oorses  of  the  covenant  that  are
written  in  this  book  of  the  law ;  rather,  as  in
the  margin,  is  written  ;  the  participle  agrees
with  "  covenant."

Vers.  22— 24.— Future  generations  and
foreign  visitants,  seeing  the  calamities  with
which  the  rebels  had  been  visited,  nay,  all
nations,  should  ask,  in  astonishment  and


en.  XXIX.  1—29.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


449


horror,  Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  done  thm
tinto  this  land  ?  what  meaneth  the  heat  of
this  great  anger  1  It  is  evident  from  this
that  Moses  contemplates,  and  in  fact  here
predicts,  a  defection,  not  of  individuals  or
families  merely,  but  of  the  nation  as  a  whole
from  the  Lord,  and  the  punishment  which
came  iu  consequence  upon  the  nation.  The
words  from  "  when  they  see "  (ver.  22)  to
"  wrath  "  (ver.  23)  are  a  parenthesis,  in  which
a  reason  for  the  main  thought  is  given  in  a
circumstantial  clause ;  and  the  "  say  "  of
ver.  22  is  resumed  by  the  "  say  "  of  ver.  24.

Ver.  23.— And  that  the  whole  land  thereof
is  brimstone,  and  salt,  and  burning,  etc.;
rather,  sulphur  and  salt,  a  burning  the  whole
land  thereof,  it  shall  not  be  town,  etc.  The
words  "  sulphur,"  etc.,  are  in  apposition  to
the  "plagues  and  sicknesses"  of  ver.  22,
and  thus  so  far  depend  on  the  "  see."
The  description  here  is  taken  from  the
country  around  the  Dead  Sea,  to  which
there  is  an  express  allusion  in  the  close  of
the  verse  (cf.  Gen.  ziz.  23,  etc.).  As  this
country,  which  before  had  been  as  the  gar-
den of  the  Lord,  became,  when  the  wrath  of
God  was  poured  upon  it,  utterly  desolate
and  waste ;  so  should  it  be  with  the  land  of
Israel  when  the  plagues  and  sicknesses
threatened  were  laid  on  it  by  the  Lord.

Ver.  24. — What  meaneth  the  heat  of  this
great  anger  t  The  reply  to  this  question
comes  in  what  follows  (vers.  25 — 28).

Ver.  26. — Gods  •  .  .  whom  he  had  not
given  nnto  them  (cf.  ch.  iv.  19).

Ver.  27. — All  the  curses;  literally,  every
curse,  or  the  whole  curse  (cf.  Dan.  ix.  11,  etc.).

Ver.  28.— And  cast  them.  In  the  Hebrew
the  word  cost   them  (p^^^H  has   one  of


its  letters,  the  h,  larger  than  the  rest,  and
another  letter, «,  which  should  be  after  the
S  is  omitted ;  on  which  "  Baal  Hatturim
noteth.  There  is  a  great  lamed  and  a  want
of  yod,  to  teach  that  there  is  no  casting  away
like  that  of  the  ten  tribes"  (Ainsworth;.
According  to  Buxtorf,  the  large  lamed
represents  the  first  letter  of  I'olam,  for  ever,
and  the  yod,  the  numeral  10,  represents  the
ten  tribes,  whose  perpetual  omission  from
the  nation  of  Israel  is  thus  indicated
('Tiberias,'  L  c.  14,  p.  157).

Ver.  29. — By  secret  things,  here,  some
understand  "  Mdden  sins,"  which  are  known
only  to  God,  and  which  he  will  punish
(Targnm  Jon.);  but  the  meaning  rather  is,
things  in  God's  purpose  known  only  to
himself:  these  things,  it  is  affirmed,  belong
to  him,  are  his  aflFair,  and  may  be  left  with
him.  On  the  other  hand,  the  things  re-
vealed are  the  things  made  known  by  God
to  man  in  his  Word,  viz.  his  injunctions,
threatenings,  and  promises ;  and  with  thi:se
men  have  to  do.  This  verse  is  by  some
regarded  as  part  of  the  answer  given  to  the
question  of  ver.  24 ;  bnt  others  regard  it  &»
a  general  reflection  added  by  Moses  by  way
of  admonition  to  his  previous  discourse.
This  latter  view  is  the  more  probable,  and
the  scribes  may  have  had  this  in  their  mind
when  they  distinguished  the  words,  unto  us
and  to  our  children,  by  placing  over  them  ex-
traordinary points  (ng  mi  A  V  )\  in  order
to  emphasize  them,  though  by  many  this  is
regarded  as  a  mere  critical  notation,  indicat-
ing a  various  reading  (Buxtorf, 'Tiberias,'
I.  o.  17,  p.  179;  Haver'nick,  'lutrod.,'  p.
281 :  Bleek,  'Einleit,'  p.  799>


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1-^j— 'Witnessing  without  seeing.  There  is  an  instmctlTe  note  on  thw  ptssage
in  Dr.  Jameson's  '  Commentary.'  For  nearly  forty  years  the  people  had  been  wit-
nesses of  the  extraordinary  care  of  God  in  watching  over  them,  in  supplying  their
wants,  and  in  conducting  them  through  the  wilderness;  and  yet  the  constant  succession
(if  mercies  had  had  no  proper  effect  on  them.  They  did  not  read  the  loving-kindness  of
God  in  all  as  they  should  have  done.  Having  eyes,  they  saw  not ;  having  ears,  they  heard
not.  The  form,  however,  in  which  Moses  here  throws  this  is  remarkable.  If  his  words  are
not  understood,  he  may  seem  even  to  cast  a  reflection  on  Grod,  for  having  given  them
such  great  mercies,  while  at  the  same  time  he  withheld  the  one  mercy  which  would
make  blessings  of  all  the  rest.  Yet  we  cannot  for  a  moment  think  that  Moses  intended
anything  of  the  kind.  He  evidently  reproaches  the  people  for  their  dulness.  If  there
had  been  an  earnest  desire  to  understand  the  deep  meaning  of  God's  dealings  with
them,  certainly  the  needful  light  and  wisdom  would  not  have  been  withheld.  Our
subject  of  thought  arising  hence  is — Spiritiml  stolidity ;  or,  witnessing  without  seeing.
The  following  passages  of  Scripture  should  be  studied  in  regard  to  this  theme : — Isa.  vi.
9, 10 ;  Ixiii.  9, 10, 17  ;  Jer.  v.  21 ;  Ezek.  xii.  2 ;  xiv. ;  Matt.  xi.  25 ;  xii.  24 ;  xiii.  14, 15  ;
XV,  16  ;  xvi.  9  ;  xii.  27;  Mark  iii.  5  (Greek);  v.  23 ;  vi.  52;  viii.  10—13,  21 ;  Luke
vii.  29—35 ;  xii.  56,  57 ;  xix.  42  ;  John  iv.  33 ;  vii.  17  ;  viii.  31,  32,  47 ;  ix.  39—41 ;
7.ir.  9,  22  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  14 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  14, 15  ;  Ps.  xxv.  14.    Observe—

pjseTEBONOMY.  2  a


450  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxix.  1—20

I.  There  is  a  meaning,  eich  anb  fuu,,  in  the  incidbnts  of  life.  Each  one'»
life  is  full  of  incident,  from  morninj;  till  evening,  from  the  beginning  of  the  year  unto
the  end  of  it.  There  may  not  have  been  the  succession  of  what  is  startling  and
striking,  as  there  was  in  the  case  of  Israel,  but  simply  common  mercies  coming  speedily
and  without  pause,  just  as  thsy  were  needed ;  the  mercies  one  by  one,  fitting  exactly
into  place,  as  if  a  gracious  care  had  provided  alL  At  if — do  we  say  ?  That  is  it.  A
gracious  care  has  provided  all.  That  is  precisely  our  present  postulate.  We  should  aa
soon  think  that  the  letters  in  a  printing  ofBce  would  spontaneously  arrange  themselves
into  order  for  a  printed  book,  as  that  the  constant  succession  of  our  comforts  in  life
should  come  as  they  do  without  any  prearrangement.  1.  Life's  comforts  and  supplies
are  a  constant  disclosure  of  Divine  loving-kindness.    They  reveal  God  (Ps.  cvii.  43).

2.  They  are  intended  to  help  on  the  culture  and  growth  of  character.  Even  supplies
which  come  in  the  physical  region,  when  granted  to  moral  beings,  have  a  moral  signi-
ficance in  them.  3.  By  winning  us  to  God,  his  mercies  are  intended  to  lead  us  to
repentance,  and  thus  to  open  up  to  us  a  glorious  goal  in  character  and  destiny.

II.  This  DivmB  meanino  in  the  mercies  of  life  is  often  missed  by  those  oh
WHOM  THOSE  MERCIES  ARE  BESTOWED.  Of  how  many  it  may  still  he  said,  "  Having
eyes,  they  see  not;  and  having  ears,  they  hear  not"!  This  may  arise  from  one  or
more  of  several  causes.  1.  There  may  be  some  preconceived  assumption  or  foregone
conclusion  which,  if  indulged  in,  will  shut  out  all  acceptance  of  any  thought  of  God's
loving-kindness  in  common  life,  or  anywhere  else.  Some  "  high  thought "  may  exalt
itself  against  the  knowledge  of  God.  2.  There  may  be  the  lack  of  a  spirit  of  loyalty,
so  that  the  individual  is  indisposed  to  read  aright  the  messages  of  his  Father's  goodness.

3.  There  may  be  a  misuse  or  non-use  of  the  organs  and  faculties  by  which  spiritual
knowledge  may  be  acquired.  See  'Candid  Examination  of  Theism,'  by  Fhysicus,
which  is  a  striking  example  of  total  failure  in  this  respect. ,  4.  There  may  be  distraction
of  heart  and  soul  by  the  whirl  and  rush  of  life,  so  that  the  spirit  has  no  leisure  there-
from to  learn  of  God  in  "  secret  silence  of  the  mind."  5.  There  may  be  entire  indifference
concerning  the  higher  meaning  of  common  things.  Any  one  of  these  five  causes  will
amply  account  for  a  man  failing  to  learn  of  God  through  the  experiences  of  life.

III.  There  is  no  adequate  reason  which  can  justify  such  a  failure  to
LEARN  life's  LESSONS.  Por :  1.  We  have  a  revelation  of  God  given  to  us  in  the  Book,
whereby  we  may  come  at  the  true  interpretation  of  life.  Israel  had  their  Law,  by
which  they  might  read  their  life.  We  have  both  the  Law  and  the  gospel.  And  the
preciousness  of  human  life  in  the  eye  of  God  is  taught  us  in  Luke  xv.,  and  in  the  light  of
such  a  chapter  should  the  mystery  of  human  life  and  Divine  care  be  studied.  2,  We
have  a  distinct  disclosure  to  us  of  the  one  condition  on  which  religious  knowledge  and
certitude  can  be  acquired  (John  vli.  17 ;  Fs.  xxv.  8,  9,  14).  3.  There  is  a  direct
and  clear  promise  of  wisdom  to  those  who  lack  it  and  seek  it  (Jas.  i.  5 — 7).  The
promises  given  by  our  Lord  are  also  abundant.  4.  There  is  the  testimony  of  the
experience  of  such  as  are  taught  of  God.  They  can  tell  of  his  mercies,  and  sins;  aloud
of  his  righteousness  (Fs.  xxxiv.  6 ;  Ixvi.  16).  And  such  experience  is  or  should  be  an
invaluable  help  to  those  who  have  yet  to  learn  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord."  Now,  with
this  fourfold  clue,  it  is  altogether  needless  for  any  to  misunderstand  life's  mystery  and
meaning.    So  that  it  follows —

IV.  That  to  be  and  to  remain  without  spiritual  perception  is  hatter
for  serious  reproach  and  rebuke.  It  is  not  against  God  that  the  words  of  ver.  4
are  spoken.  He  would  have  given  them  eyes  to  see,  had  they  desired  and  sought  that
blessing.  And  so  he  will  now.  Hence  there  is  a  fivefold  injustice  done  by  us  if  we
remain  without  the  true  knowledge  of  the  rich  meaning  in  our  mercies.  1.  There  is
injustice  to  the  Word  of  God.  2.  There  is  injustice  to  the  God  of  the  Word.  3.  There
is  injustice  to  ourselves.  4.  There  is  injustice  to  the  mystery  of  life.  6.  There  is
in''iry  to  our  future  and  eternal  destiny.

Well  may  we  adopt  for  ourselves,  on  our  own  behalf,  as  well  as  on  that  of  others,  the
prayers  of  the  apostle  for  spiritual  enlightenment  (Phil.  i.  9 — 11 ;  Col.  i.  9, 10 ;  Eph.  L
15 — 18).  For  as  we  understand  the  mystery  of  God  in  Christ  will  all  minor  onea  have
the  light  of  heaven  poured  upon  them.

Yen.    10— 21j^Apostacy  in  heart  a  root  of  hitterne»».     In  the  midst  of  tL^


OH.  XXIX.  1—29.]  THK  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMY.  451

paragraph  there  is  an  expression  of  which  the  writer  to  the  Hebrews  makes  use  as  a
warning.  It  is  found  in  the  eighteenth  verse  :  "  Lest  there  should  be  among  you  a
root  that  beareth  gall  and  wormwood."  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  xii.  10,  the
sacred  writer  says,  "  Looking  diligently  .  .  .  lest  any  root  of  bitterness  springing  up
trouble  you,  and  thereby  many  be  defiled."  The  root  bearing  gall  and  wormwood
which  Moses  deprecates  is,  Aposfacy  from  God  who  has  revealed  his  will  through
him.  That  which  the  New  Testament  writer  dreads,  and  to  ward  off  which  his  whole
Epistle  was  written  is,  Apostacy  from  God  who  has  revealed  his  will  through  his
only  begotten  Son.  The  parallels  between  the  two  possibilities  would  furnish  a  most
instructive  theme  for  the  preacher ;  so  likewise  would  the  contrasts.  We  propose  now
to  suggest  a  line  of  thought  which  may  "  open  up  "  and  impress  on  the  heart  and  con-
science the  truth  that  heart-apostacy  is  a  root  bearing  gall  and  wormwood;

I.  The  Christian,  like  Israel  of  old,  is  surrounded  with  influences  that  are

UNFAVOURABLE   TO  FIDELITY  TO  ALL   THAT  HE  BELIEVES  AND  HOPES.      Israel  WaS  in  the

midst  of  other  nations,  who  had  a  greatness' and  pomp  with  which  they  could  not  vie,
who  had  a  religious  worship  other  than  theirs,  and  a  literature  and  learning  which
were  greater  than  theirs ;  and  it  was  not  at  all  unnatural  that  now  and  then,  at  any  rate,
they  should  cast  a  longing  look  at  them,  and  cherish  a  wish  to  rival  them.  And  as
their  acquaintance  with  other  nations  increased  in  the  course  of  the  ages,  it  cannot  be
wondered  at  if  they  were  tempted  to  depart  from  the  simplicity  of  their  monotheistic
faith  and  worship.  And  now,  the  parallel  between  them  and  us  is  closer  than  ever  it
has  been.  Increasing  research  has  brought  to  light  much  religiuus  literature  in  the
world,  which  pertains  to  varied  religions,  in  which  even  fifty  years  ago  our  fathers
thought  there  was  nothing  good.  The  great  religions  of  the  world — Brahmanism,
Buddhism,  Confucianism,  Mobamn\edanism — were  looked  on  by  some  as  almost  totally
bad.  And  now,  some  are  so  elated  by  the  features  of  excellence  that  may  be  traced  in
one  and  another,  and  so  startled  by  some  parallels  between  the  Christian  religion  and
others,  that  they  are  tempted  to  indulge  the  thought  that  our  faith  is  but  oue  among
many — the  best,  perhaps,  of  all  the  varied  leligionsin  the  world,  but  yet  differing  from
others  rather  in  its  superior  measure  of  excellence,  than  in  any  features  altogether  and
absolutely  unique  and  incomparable.     Hence —

II.  There  is  a  danger  of  apostact  of  heart  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
ANALOGOUS  TO  THE  PERIL  WHICH  BESET  ISRAEL  OF  OLD.  The  peril  to  which  Christians
are  now  exposed  is  not  merely  the  ordinary  one  arising  from  th%  fickleness  of  the
human  heart,  and  from  the  subtle  temptations  and  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one.  With
the  larger  knowledge  just  referred  to  of  whatever  excellence  other  religions  may  have,  a
new  temptation  is  presented  to  the  understanding,  no  longer  to  regard  our  Saviour  as
the  one  and  only  Bedeemer,  but  as  simply  the  Highest  and  Best  of  the  Beligious
Teachers  of  the  world.  And  so  fat'  as  this  temptation  is  yielded  to,  there  may  come  a  de-
fection from  the  faith  on  any  one  or  more — or  all— of  the  five  following  points: — 1.  Christ
may  cease  to  be  regarded  as  the  only  begotten  Son  of  the  Father.  2.  His  Godhead,
and  tlierefore  his  incarnation,  may  come  to  be  denied,  or  at  least  may  cease  to  be  held
as  a  part  of  the  "  faith  once  [for  all]  delivered  to  the  saints."  3.  His  redemption,  as
at  once  furnishing  us  with  a  gospel  of  deliverance  and  a  gospel  of  power,  may  be
lost  sight  of  as  the  distinctive  feature  of  his  work,  to  which  no  religion  in  the
world  can  furnish  a  parallel  or  point  of  comparison.  We  have  many  religions
in  the  world ;  there  is  but  one  gospel.  4.  His  example  may  come  to  be  regarded  as
simply  one  that  towers  above  that  of  other  men,  and 'as  unattended  with  any  power  of
liftin.;  the  world  up  to  his  own  level.  5.  And  with  all  this,  the  dread  and  august
majesty  with  which  he,  as  the  Mediator  of  our  race,  exercises  all  power  in  heaven
and  nn  earth,  may  be  thrown  into  the  background,  and  may  thus  cease  to  sway  the
heart  and  life.  Ho  one  who  understands  the  times  can  fail  to  see  the  reality  of  these
dangers,  and  the  serious  proportions  they  are  assuming.  That  amid  the  storm,  the
kingdom  of  Christ  will  be  shaken,  we  live  no  fear  whatever,  but  many  may  depart
from  the  faith  meanwhile.

IIL  Such  apostact  would  be  a  boot  of  bitterness.  This  of  itself  would  require
•D  entire  homily  to  do  it  justice.  We  can  but  hint  in  outline.  1.  If  thus  the  heart
lose*  its  hold  of  Christ  as  a  Bedeemer,  the  attainment  of  salvation  will  henceforth
become  impossible.    2.  If  once  the  power  of  Christ  ceases  to  renew,  the  old  self  wjU


453  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xhx.  1— i!9.

reign,  mud  evil  passions  be  under  no  adequate  control.  Inferior  power  may  curb  tht
manifestation  of  passion,  but  only  Divine  power  can  tear  up  its  roots.  3.  Such
defection  from  the  faitli  will  "  defile  "  many.  The  evil  will  not  stop  with  one.  It  will
be  infectious.  4.  Such  dishonour  done  to  the  Son  of  God  will  bring  upon  those  who  are
guilty  thereof  the  Divine  displeasure.  5.  The  sure  effect  will  be  the  bieaking  up
and  disbanding  of  the  Churches  which  are  poisoned  thereby.  There  will  be  no  reason
why  Churches  should  hold  together,  if  their  Divine  Christ  is  gone,  and  there  will  be  no
power  that  can  keep  them  together,  if  his  Spirit  is  grieved  and  departs.

IV.  Hence  against  such  a  grievous  result  Church  members  shoot,d  care-
fully guard.  "Looking  diligently  lest,"  etc.  1.  They  should  watch  the  signs  of  the
times,  in  order  that,  as  far  as  in  tliem  lies,  they  may  guard  the  Cluirch  to  which  they
belong  from  the  dangers  with  which  the  changeful  currents  of  human  thouglit  may
threaten  them.  2.  They  should  seek  so  to  quicken  the  zeal  and  inflame  the  fervour  of
piety  around  them,  that  temptations  to  apostatize  may  have  no  power.  3.  They
should  cherish  a  loving  solicitude,  and  fervently  pray,  for  each  other,  that  mutual  care
and  prayer  may  be  an  effectual  guard  against  the  approach  of  disloyalty  in  faith  or
even  in  thought.  4.  Each  one  should  be  very  jealous  over  his  own  heart.  In  others
we  can  discern  only  fruit ;  in  ourselves  we  can  detect  the  root,  of  evil.  Hence  this
watchfulness  over  our  own  spirits  is  doubly  important,  since  it  may  be  doubly  effective.
Even  in  others  we  may  perhaps  lop  off  the  evil  fruit,  but  in  ourselves  we  can  see  that
pven  the  root  is  plucked  up.  For  this,  the  only  radical,  certain,  and  absolute  preventive
jf  apostacy,  the  Spirit  of  God  can  effect,  and  he  will,  if  wo  resign  ourselves  to  his
almighty  hands.  He  can  so  renew  and  sanctify  the  heart  that  no  "  root  of  bitterness  "
can  find  any  hold.  He  can  make  the  soil  so  receptive  of  truth  that  any  living  seed  ol
righteousness  will  at  once  germinate,  and  yet  withal  so  destructive  of  error  that  any
seed  of  evil  casua'ly  dropping  in  *'ill  perish  in  its  fall.  Happy  man,  whose  lieai  t  is  in
the  effectual  keeping  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  who  is  so  sanctified  that  no  germ  of  ill
can  find  even  a  momentary  home  1

Vers.  22 — 28. — Historical  witnesses  to  the  wrath  of  God.  The  chapter  preceding
this  is  shaded,  yea,  dark  indeed.  Nevertheless,  it  is  an  exact  forecast  of  the  state  o(
Israel  at  this  very  day.  In  fact,  the  comparison  between  the  state  of  the  land  of
Palestine  and  the  words  of  the  Book,  sug<;ests  two  lines  of  instructive  thought.

I.  How  manifestly,  in  the  desolation  op  the  Holy  Land,  is  seen  tub  effect
OF  THE  WRATH  OF  God  !  To  this  cveu  Volucy  bcars  wltucss.  He  asks,  "  From  whence
proceed  such  melancholy  revolutions?  For  what  cause  is  the  fortune  of  these
countries  so  strikingly  changed?  Why  are  so  many  cities  destroyed?  Why  is  not
that  ancient  population  reprciduced  and  perpetuated?  A  mysterious  God  exercises  his
incomprehensible  judgments.  He  has  doubtless  pronounced  a  secret  curse  a.;ainsl.
the  land.  He  has  struck  with  a  curse  the  present  race  of  men  in  revenge  of  past
generations  "  (quoted  by  Jameson,  in  loc).

II.  How  18  THE  ACCURACY  OF  THIS  PART  OF  THE  OLD  BoOE  THEREBY  CONFIRMED  !      It

is  now  a  favourite  canon  of  scientific  men,  that  whatever  cannot  be  verified  must  he
relegated  to  the  past  and  forgotten.  To  this  there  can  be  no  objection,  if  those  who
insist  on  this  negative  will  insist  equally  on  the  reciprocal  positive,  and  say  that
whatever  can  be  verified  must  be  accepted.  For  it  would  be  simply  a  proof,  either  of
discreditable  ignorance  or  of  perversity,  if  men  were  to  deny  or  to  spurn  the  repeated
verifications  of  the  words  of  Moses  in  the  subsequent  course  of  history.

And  it  is  of  no  use  for  men  to  declaim  against  the  possibility  of  miracles,  when
there  is  the  standing  miracle  before  our  eye,  of  some  superhuman  knowledge  havinf;
forecast,  three  thousand  years  ago,  precisely  the  line  along  which  Hebrew  history  would
move,  down  till  the  present  day.  While  there  is  also  this  difference  between  miracle
in  mighty  works,  and  miracle  in  prophetic  words :  The  proof  of  the  works  is  most  clear
to  those  who  see  them  at  the  time ;  it  may  possibly  diminish  with  the  lapse  of  years.
That  of  a  prophetic  word  is  nil  at  the  time :  it  awaits  confirmation  from  the  lapse
of  years.  And  as  long  as  our  present  historical  records  stand,  so  long  will  there  remain
the  confirmation  of  the  precision  with  which  Israel's  lawgiver,  speaking  in  the  name  of
Jehovah,  laid  down  beforehand  the  lines  along  which  the  Jewish  nation  should  move
for  tbovsands  of  treats.    When  we  put  together  the  land  and  the  Book,  the  work  and


cH.  rsix.  1— 29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  453

the  word,  and  see  the  correspondence  between  them,  we  cannot  but  say,  "This  if  the
finger  of  Qoi  1 "

Ver.  29. — Secret  thingB.  "Secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God."  So  sayj
the  great  lawgiver.  On  a  not  dissimilar  topic,  Bishop  Butler  says,  "We  do  not
know  the  whole  of  anything."  Is  it  not  so  ?  Who  can  tell  all  about  a  stone  or  about
a  blade  of  grass?  Who  can  aver  that  the  furthest  star  has  been  yet  discovered,  or  tell
us  what  lies  beyond  it  ?  There  are  secrets  among  the  minute ;  there  are  secrets  among
th«  vast.

I.  Let  ns  ma.kk  a  distinction  as  to  the  mannbb,  kind,  or  deoreb  of  seobeot.

1.  Some  things  are  secret,  awaiting  fuller  discovery  to  reveal  them.  2.  Some  things
are  secret,  but  await  the  unfolding  of  events  in  God's  providence.  3.  Some  things
are  secret  in  one  sense,  but  not  in  another.  We  often  know  manifestations,  but  not
essences ;  phenomena,  but  not  noumena  ;  facts,  but  not  modes  or  reasons.  4.  There  are
some  secret  things  which  are  altogether  unknowable,  and  must  long  remain  so ;  e.g.  Who
can  give  an  account  of  the  reason  why  sin  was  permitted  to  enter?  Who  can  tell
whether  it  will  always  exist  ?  Who  can  explain  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  ?  Who
can  descry  the  reason  why  this  man  had  such  and  such  suffering?  etc.,  etc  How
soon,  when  we  come  to  ask  questions  like  these,  are  we  in  "  a  boundless  deep,  where
all  our  thoughts  are  drowned  "  1

IL  Let  us  inquire.  In  what  respect  do  secret  thinqs  belong  unto  God?  They
belong  unto  him :  1.  To  conceive  them.  2.  To  will  them.  3.  To  originate  them.
4.  To  comprehend  them.  6.  To  overrule  them.  6.  To  conduct  them  to  their  final
issue.

III.  Let  us  ask,  What  effect  should  the  fact  that  secret  THisas  belonq
unto  God  have  upon  us  ?  1.  It  should  humble  us  to  find  out  how  incompetent  we
are  to  scan  the  Divine  works  and  ways.  2.  It  is  obvious  that  we  must  leave  secret
things  with  him  to  whom  alone  they  belong.  3.  It  is  manifestly  right  to  leave  them
with  him.  4.  It  should  give  us  no  uneasiness  to  leave  them  there.  5.  We  should  be
fully  content  to  leave  them  there.  For  we  have  (1)  a  revealed  will  of  love ;  (2)  plain
and  straightforward  duty  to  discharge ;  (3)  a  full  gospel  of  redeeming  mercy ;  and  (4)  a
good  hope  through  grace.  What  more  can  we  want?  6.  We  should  be  adoringly
thankful  that  God  keeps  in  his  own  hands  what  we  could  not  understand,  and  entrusts
us  only  with  what  we  can.  7.  Thankfully  leaving  in  God's  hands  what  belongs  to
him,  let  us  lovingly  attend  to  that  which  belongs  to  us.

Ver.  29. — Revealed  (kings.  This  verse  is  so  full  of  meaning  that  it  is  not  easy  to
do  even  approximate  justice  to  it  in  one  discourse.  Hence  we  have  reserved  the  latter
part  thereof  for  a  suggested  outline  of  a  distinct  homily :  "  Those  things  which  are
revealed  belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever,  that  we  may  do  all  the  words  of  this
Law."  The  statement  here  made  concerning  the  Law  of  God  in  particular,  is  true  of
the  entire  Word  of  God  as  the  regulator  of  faith  and  life.  Three  lines  of  thought  here
naturally  follow  on  each  other.

I.  Within  the  Word  of  God  we  have  the  revealed  mind  and  will  of  God.
He  made  known  his  ways  unto  Moses,  etc.  And  now  he  hath  spoken  to  us  in  his
Sou.  The  sum  and  substance  of  the  Divine  message  is,  "  Where  sin  abounded,  grace
did  much  more  abound."

II.  The  manifest  object  of  this  Revelation  of  and  from  God  is  that  we  mat
thereby  have  an  adequate  guide  for  faith  and  life.  "  That  we  may  do  all  the
words  of  this  Law  "  is  the  Old  Testament  form  of  setting  this.  The  New  Testament
form  is,  "  Preaching  .  .  .  repentance  towards  God,  and  faith  towards  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ."

III.  In  this  respect  the  Word  of  God  is,  emphatically,  "ours."  "Those things
which  are  revealed  belong  unto  us," etc.    1.  They  belong  to  us — our  treasury  of  wealth.

2.  They  belong  to  us — our  measure  of  responsibility.  3.  They  belong  to  us — our  rul*
by  which  we  shall  be  finally  tried  (Kom.  ii.  I — lit).


*  ^


454  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY,  Icb.  xsix.  1^29.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Veri.  2 — 9.— Seeing,  yet  not  seeing.  The  Israelites  had  seen  God's  mighty  worki
(rsr.  9),  yet  Gofl  had  not  given  them  a  heart  to  perceive,  nor  eyes  to  see  (ver.  4).

L  Natural  sight  wiTHonT  spiritual  discernment.  Moses  accuses  tlie  people  of
blindness  to  the  facts  of  their  own  history.  These  facts  included:  1.  God's  mighty
works  in  Egypt ;  here,  as  in  ch.  iv.  34 ;  vii.  19,  classified  as  temptations,  signs,  and
wonders  (vers.  2,  3).  2.  God's  guidance  of  the  people  in  the  desert,  which  also  was
rife  in  signs  and  wonders  (vers.  5, 6),  and  was  a  course  of  discipline  (temptation,  in  sense
of  trial)  throughout.  3.  The  victories  over  Sihon  and  Og  (vers.  7,  8).  No  people  ever
saw  so  many  miracles  or  passed  through  so  extraordinary  a  curriculum  as  Israel  did.
Yet  Moses  says  they  had  failed  to  apprehend  the  lessons  of  their  history.  Seeing,  they
saw  not  (Matt.  xiii.  10 — 16).  That  generation  may  not  have  been  so  dull  as  the  one
which  had  preceded  it,  but  even  it  had  shown  by  recent  rebellions  (Numb,  xx.,  xxi.)
how  far  it  was  from  having  laid  earnestly  to  heart  the  lessons  of  God's  dealings
with  it.  A  like  vail  lies  on  every  unspiritual  mind  (2  Cor.  iii.  13 — 18).  The  Bible  is  a
book  of  riddles  to  it  (Luke  xxiv.  25 — 27,  44 — 46).  Christ  is  known  only  after  the  flesh
(2  Cor.  V.  16).  The  lines  of  a  Divine  leading  in  the  events  of  life  are  not  recognized.
Warnings  are  scorned ;  prosperity  is  misused ;  adversity  hardens.  There  is  outward
experience  of  facts,  but,  as  in  Israel's  case,  the  Word  preached  does  not  profit,  ndt
being  mixed  with  faith  in  them  that  hear  it  (Heb.  iv.  2).

II.  Spiritual  discernment  is  from  God.  Yet  not  arbitrarily  given  or  withheld.
It  is  given  to  those  who  feel  their  need  of  it,  who  seek  it,  and  who  act  in  faithfulness
to  the  light  already  possessed  (Ps.  xxv.  9, 12,  14  ;  cxix.  18  ;  Matt.  xiiL  10 — 16 ;  John
viL  17).  Prom  none  such  will  God  withhold  the  "  heart  to  perceive,  and  eyes  to  see."
On  the  other  hand.  Divine  illumination  is  indispensable  to  the  knowledge  of  spiritual
truth  (cf.  John  vi.  45  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  12—16 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  6 ;  Eph.  i.  17).  As  the  poet's  eye
is  needed  for  the  discernment  of  the  poetic  suggestions  and  analogies  of  nature,  so  ia  the
spiritual  eye  needed  to  penetrate  "  the  secret  of  the  Lord."  The  eye  in  this  case,  as  in
the  other,  "  sees  only  what  it  brings  with  it  the  power  of  seeing."  And  to  gain  this
seeing  eye,  there  must,  as  before  remarked,  be  prayer — prayer  and  obedience.  Without
these  two  golden  keys,  no  thought,  no  labour,  no  learning,  no  cleverness,  will  enable
us  to  force  the  gates  of  the  inner  sanctuary  of  truth.  God's  world,  God's  Word,  God's
providence,  will  be  alike  mysterious;  if  spiritual  instruction  is  ofiered,  the  reply  will  be
"  Doth  he  not  speak  parables  ?  "  (Ezek.  xx.  49).— J.  0.

Ter.  3. — Temptations,  signs,  miracles.    (Cf.  ch.  iv.  34;  vil.  19.)

I.  The  relation  or  the  terms.  "  Temptations"  is  a  wider  category  than  "signs,"
and  "  signs  "  is  a  wider  category  than  "  miracles  "  or  "  wonders."  All  "  wonders,"
however,  in  the  kingdom  of  God  have  the  moral  significance  of  "  signs ; "  and  all
"  signs  and  wonders  "  are  "  trials  "  of  the  disposition.

II.  The  application  of  the  terms.  1.  Wonders,  meaning  strictly,  supernatural
occurrences.  2.  Signs.  Anything  is  a  "  sign "  which  indicates  God's  presence
(Luke  xi.  20),  which  discovers  a  law  of  his  working,  which  is  a  pledge  of  his  grace,
which  furnishes  a  symbol  of  a  spiritual  reality.  Miracles  were  "  signs."  Nature  is  a
"  sign "  in  her  order,  regularity,  and  invariableness  (Gen.  i.  14 ;  viii.  22 ;  ix.  13 ;  Ps.
cxix.  89 — 92 ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  25 ;  Acts  xiv.  17 ;  Rom.  i.  20).  Every  answer  to  prayer,
every  deliverance  from  trouble,  every  indication  of  the  Divine  will  in  providence,
every  specific  warning  and  encouragement,  is  a  "sign."  3.  Temptations,  i.e,  tests  or
trials.  "  Trial "  is  a  word  of  wide  scope,  for  G  od  tries  us  every  moment,  as  well  by  things
little  as  by  things  great.  Every  event  in  providence  contributes  to  the  formation,
testing,  and  discipline  of  character.  Naturally,  however,  we  give  the  name  "  trials  "  tc
the  harder  and  more  severe  experiences  of  life — those  which  most  throw  ua  back  on
our  true  selves,  and  reveal  or  determine  character. — J.  0.

Vers.  10 — IR. — National  covenanting.    This  covenant—

I.  Was  made  with  thk  natiok  as  such.    National  eovensntlng  finds  modern


dfi.  XXIX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEllONOMt.  tos

exempliflcations  in  the  Scotch  covenants,  and  in  the  "  Solemn  League  and  Covenant "  of
1643-44.  Irrespective,  however,  of  the  particular  stipulations  of  these  covenants,  the
propriety  of  such  engagements  must  be  pronounced  doubtful.  The  case  of  Israel  can
scarcely  be  pleaded  as  a  precedent.  Certainly,  were  God  to  reveal  himself  to  any
nation  now  as  hr  did  to  that  chosen  race,  grant  it  a  revival  of  religion,  give  it  laws  and
judgments,  and  summon  it  by  positive  command  to  an  engagement  of  the  kind,
it  would,  as  of  old,  be  its  duty  to  obey.  Even  then :  1.  The  covenant  would  involve
a  remodelling  of  the  constitution  of  the  State.  It  would  be  meaningless  save  on
a  theocratic  basis,  Church  and  State  merging  in  one  body,  and  breaches  of  covenant
obligation  being  regarded  and  punished  as  crimes.  2.  The  arrangement  would  require
for  its  successful  working  conditions  of  strictest  isolation — such  conditions  as  God  in
his  wisdom  devised  for  Israel.  The  difBculties  in  the  way  of  such  a  covenant  amount  now
practically  to  impossibility.  In  ancient  times,  the  units  of  society  were  families,  tribes,
nations,  the  sense  of  individuality  being  comparatively  weak ;  now  the  sense  of
individuality  is  strong,  and  every  arrangement  must  take  large  account  of  the  individual
conscience.  In  Israel,  again,  Church  and  State  were  one,  but  they  are  so  no  longer,
Christ's  kingdom  refusing  to  identify  itself  with  any  earthly  polity.  The  modem  state,
based  on  popular  representation,  and  declining  to  take  cognizance  of  differences  of
creed,  is  least  of  all  favourable  to  the  coalescence  of  civil  with  spiritual  functions.
Oaths  are  to  be  deprecated  in  any  case,  save  where  absolutely  called  for.  They
ensnare  consciences,  and  lead  to  profanation  by  the  disregard  of  them  by  the  irreligious.
Large  sections  of  the  community  must  always  be  left  outside  of  such  covenants,  and
in  so  solemn  a  transaction,  the  right  of  the  majority  to  bind  the  minority,  and  still
more  to  bind  posterity,  must  be  questioned.  The  covenants,  in  Scotland  especially,
were  the  source  of  great  religious  inspirations,  but  the  good  was  not  unmixed  with
evil.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fact  of  such  obligations  being  freely  undertaken  by  a
nation  must  be  admitted  to  involve  it  in  grave  responsibility,  and  greatly  aggravates
the  guilt  of  subsequent  apostacy.

11.  Ikoluded  all  classes,  and  had  respect  to  posteritt.  1.  It  included  children
(ver.  11).  Whatever  may  be  said  of  national  covenants,  it  is  undoubted  that,  in  the
spiritual  sphere,  parents  and  children  stand  in  very  close  relation.  The  act  of  a  parent,
himself  in  covenant  with  God,  in  dedicating  his  child  to  God — probably  naming  the
Name  of  God  upon  it  in  baptism — entails  on  that  little  one  the  weightiest  responsibilities.
It  is  a  child  of  the  covenant,  stands  within  its  bonds,  and  is  pledged  to  love,  serve,  and
worship  the  God  of  its  fathers.  2.  It  hound  posterity.  Covenanting  apart,  the  people
that  is  faithful  to  God  and  zealous  for  his  glory,  abounding  in  fruits  of  righteousness,
may  expect  his  blessing  to  distant  generations ;  whereas  the  nation  that  forgets  him,
and  abounds  in  impiety,  infidelity,  and  wickedness,  with  equal  certainty  provokes  hia
indignation,  brings  down  hia  scourge,  and  bequeaths  to  posterity  the  inheritance  of  a
curse. — J.  0.

Vers.  16 — 21. — The  lying  hope.    We  hare  here^

I.  INEXC08ABLB  UNBELIEF.  (Vcrg.  16 — 18.)  The  man  who,  turning  firom  Jehovah,
went  after  the  gods  by  the  nations,  was  doubly  inexcusable.  1.  The  true  God  had
been  revealed  to  him.  2.  The  worthlessness  of  heathen  idols  had  been  demonstrated.
He  had  the  light,  and  could  compare  it  with  the  darkness  of  the  nations  around.  If
not  himself  a  witness  of  God's  mighty  works  in  Egypt  and  in  the  desert,  he  had
heard  of  them  from  his  forefathers,  or  could  read  of  them  in  his  Scriptures  (ver.  20).
Che  existence  of  the  nation  was  a  proof  that  such  things  had  been  done.  Unbelief  is
iot  less  inexcusable  in  us  :  1.  With  the  Bible  in  our  hands.  2.  With  so  large  a  body
if  avidences  of  Divine  truth.  3.  With  centuries  of  experience  of  the  regenerative
influence  of  Christianity.  4.  With  a  wide  knowledge  of  heathen  nations,  discovering
to  us  by  contrast  our  own  advantages.  Unbelief  may  be :  1.  Speculative.  2.  Practical.
It  is  enough  that  our  practice  be  shaped  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  untruth  of  God's
Word,  to  constitute  us  unbelievers  (1  Tim.  v.  8).

n.  Gboss  self-deceit.  (Ver.  19.)  The  act  of  this  wicked  man  is  very  remarkable.
He  blesses  himself  in  his  heart,  and  says,  "  I  will  have  peace,"  at  the  very  time  that
God's  curses  are  being  read  out  to  him.  Yet  his  case  is  not  a  solitary  one.  He
does  no  more  than  men  do  every  day  in  the  teeth  of  the  threateniugg  of  the  Biblei


456  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMt.  [ch.  xxix.  1— 29


Satan  whispers,  "  Ye  shall  not  surely  die  "  (Gen.  iii.  4)  ;  "  Be  it  far  from  thee :  this
shall  not  be  unto  thee  "  (Matt.  xvi.  22) ;  and  Satan,  not  God,  is  believed.  We  may
explain  this  self-deceit :  1.  Prom  want  of  consideration  (of.  Isa.  i.  3).  The  wicked
man  dots  not  really  trouble  himself  about  the  curses.  They  are  mere  words  to  him.
The  mind  makes  no  application,  scarcely  even  asks  the  meaning,  of  what  it  hears,
The  oracle  with  which  the  wicked  man  consults  is  in  his  own  heart  (Ps.  xxxvi.  1 — 5),
and  the  "  oracles  of  God  "  get  no  attention.  2.  Prom  want  of  faith,  God's  Word,  even
if  attended  to,  could  not  compel  belief  in  a  heart  already  possessed  by  an  opposite  set
uf  beliefs,  and  determined  not  to  part  with  them.  3.  Prom  self-will.  Will  enters  into
the  question  of  our  beliefs ;  so  long  as  it  can  twist  evidence,  resist  unwelcome  conclusions,
find  evasions  and  pretexts,  it  will  not  accept  what  is  contrary  to  its  ordinary  bent.
While,  if  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst,  it  can  cut  the  knot  by  a  simple  "  I  won't,"  and
obstinately  refuse  to  believe  aught  but  what  it  likes.  The  account  of  the  sinner's
unbelief  and  self-deceit  is  therefore  this :  1.  He  has  not  liked  to  retain  God  in  his
k:iDwledge.  2.  Unwelcome  subjects  have  been  banished  from  his  mind.  3.  Through
uufamiliarity  to  his  thoughts,  the  supersensual  world  has  become  less  and  less  a  reality
to  him.    4.  He  acquires  the  power  of  ignoring  it,  and  ends  by  disbelief  in  it.

III.  Unutterable  folly.  (Vers.  20,  21.)  Unbelief,  unhappily  for  the  sinner,  cannot
alter  the  actual  state  of  the  case.  God's  anger  smokes  against  him,  and  will  certainly
destroy  him.  His  sin,  agreeable  as  it  may  appear  at  present,  will  yield  at  last  gall  and
wormwood.  Contending  with  the  Almighty,  be  rushes  on  his  ruin.  The  curses
written  in  the  Book  will  not  fail  to  overtake  him.  It  is  easy  for  sinners  to  "  laugh
nuw"  (Luke  vi.  25),  but  there  awaits  them  a  terrible  undeceiving — ^a  day  when  they
shall  "  mourn  and  weep." — J.  0.

Vers.  22 — 28. — The  stranger's  wonder.    The  state  of  the  Holy  Land —

I.  An  evidence  of  the  truth  of  revelation.  The  sterility  of  Palestine  has  been
uryed  in  disproof  of  Bible  representations  of  its  former  fruitfulness  and  plenty.  It
should  rather  be  remembered  that,  were  the  Holy  Land  in  a  less  desolate  state  than  it
is,  Bible  predictions  would  not  have  been  fulfilled — revelation  would  have  been
discredited,

II.  A  WONDER  TO  THE  STBANGEB.  "  Great  God  ! "  exclaims  Volney,  the  unbeliever,
"  from  whence  proceed  such  melancholy  revolutions  ?  Por  what  cause  is  the  fortune  of
these  countries  so  strikingly  clianged?  Why  are  so  many  cities  destroyed?  Why  is
not  that  ancient  population  reproduced  and  perpetuated?  "  ('  Ruins,'  ch.  ii.)

ILL  A  JUST  BETRIBUTIOH  FOB  BIN — ^pointing  a  warning  to  ourselves. — J.  0.

Ver.  29 — Secret  things.  The  "  secret  things  "  of  this  verse  were  the  things  which  God
had  not  revealed  regarding  Israel's  future — especially  the  time  and  manner  of  the
fulfilment  of  those  promises  and  threatenings  which  were  made  contingent  on  their
obedience  or  disobedience.  The  things  which  had  been  revealed  whetted  their  appetite
to  know  more  (cf.  Dan.  xii.  8;  John  xxi.  21).  Moses  in  this  verse  discourages  the
prying  of  a  too  eager  curiosity  into  things  purposely  kept  secret,  while  directing  the
people  to  the  things  revealed  as  containing  all  that  was  necessary  for  the  doing  of  their
duty.  The  truth  to  be  drawn  from  the  passage  is,  that  the  BiUe  is  primarily  a  Book
for  practical  guidance,  not  for  solution  of  speculative  difficulties  or  gratification  of  a
vain  curiosity.

I.  Duty,  not  curious  speculation.  The  difficulties  and  mysteries  inherent  in  the
scheme  of  revelation  are  acknowledged.  They  may  be  usefully  distributed  into  three
classes.  1.  Those  which  are  not  peculiar  to  the  Bible,  but  inhere  in  all  our  thinking
about  the  facts  of  existence.  The  Bible  did  not  create,  if  it  does  not  undertake  to
solve,  the  mysteries  of  the  origin  and  existence  of  evil,  of  the  suffering  of  the  innocent
with  the  guilty,  of  free-will  and  necessity,  of  the  reconcilability  of  man's  freedom  with
God's  foreknowledge  and  foreordination.  These  are  difficulties  of  all  religion  and
philosophy,  as  well  as  of  the  Bible.  2.  TTiose  which  are  peculiar  to  the  Bible — which
emerge  in  connection  with  the  scheme  and  process  of  revelation  itself.  Such  are
the  doctrines  of  the  Trinity,  of  the  incarnation,  of  the  atonement,  of  regeneration —
doctrines  all  light  and  comfort  to  us  on  the  practical  side,  and  yet  <hi  the  ipeculatiTe
side  inrolving  much  that  is  baffling  to  the  reason.    3.  Those  which  arise  from  our


cfl.  XXIX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  Of*  DEtJTEnoNOMt.  iBI


imperfect  apprehension  of  the  facts  revealed — from  the  overlaying  of  them  with
mistaken  theories  and  false  interpretations.  This  last  class  of  difficulties  does  not
concern  us  here.  If  we  ask,  Why  should  so  much  be  left  unrevealed  in  Scripture?  the
answer  is :  1.  There  is  much  that  cannot  be  revealed — would  not  be  intelligible  to  us.
2.  The  purpose  of  Scripture  does  not  require  more  to  be  revealed  than  suffices  for  our
guidance.  3.  The  existence  of  unsolved  difficulties  acts  as  a  moral  test,  and  aids  the
development  of  faith — faith,  viz.  as  a  practical  principle,  believing  and  trusting  in
God  on  the  strength  of  what  is  revealed,  difficulties  notwithstanding  (John  zx.  29).
This  gives  the  key  to  our  duty,  in  presence  of  these  difficulties.  We  do  not  forget :  1.
That  things  once  kept  secret  are  now  revealed  (Col.  i.  26).  2.  That  in  the  course  of
ages  God  is  ever  making  his  counsels  clearer.  3.  That  it  is  the  privilege  and  duty  of
the  Church  to  be  always  making  progress  in  th«  knowledge  of  God's  will,  as  far  as  he
has  chosen  to  reveal  it  (Eph.  i.  IV,  18  ;  iii.  18,  19  ;  Col.  ii.  2).  Nevertheless,  it  is  the
condition  of  earthly  existence  that  "  ■we  know  "  only  "  in  part "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  9).  Our
dutj',  therefore,  plainly  is,  not  to  neglect  the  light  we  have  in  vain  beating  against  the
wires  of  the  cage  that  confines  us ;  but  diligently  to  improve  that  light  as  the  likeliest
means  of  getting  more.  It  is  more  important  to  get  a  fire  put  out  than  to  know
exactly  how  it  originated;  more  important  to  escape  from  the  burning  building  than  to
know  exactly  the  course  which  the  flames  will  take  after  we  have  left.  We  are  not  to
forego  prayer  because  it  is  mysterious  to  us  how  God  can  answer  prayer ;  to  forbear
fleeing  to  Christ  because  we  cannot  frame  a  theory  of  the  atonement ;  to  renounce
activity  because  we  cannot  reconcile  free-will  and  Divine  foreordination.  Bevelation
resolves  the  central  difficulty,  bow  God  can  be  just,  and  yet  the  Justifier  of  the
ungodly ;  it  gives  light  in  abundance  on  the  character  of  God,  the  way  of  salvation,
the  requirements  of  holiness ;  it  makes  much  certain  that  to  the  natural  reason  must
ever  have  remained  doubtful.  What  folly,  then,  to  make  duty  wait  on  the  solving  of
speculative  difficulties,  many  of  which  will  probably  never  be  solved  on  earth !

II.  DuTT,  NOT  ANXIOUS  PKYiNO  INTO  THE  FUTURE.  The  "  sccret  things  "  in  regard
to  that  also  belong  unto  the  Lord.  His  Word  teaches  us  in  a  general  way  the  issues  of
particular  lines  of  conduct,  but  it  lies  with  God  to  determine  the  when,  how,  what,  and
where  of  the  actual  event.  His  providence  is  a  mystery  unfathomable  by  all  but
himself.  This,  however,  need  not  disquiet  the  children  of  God.  He  is  their  Father,
and  they  can  confidently  trust  their  future  to  his  wisdom  and  his  love  (Matt.  vi.
26 — 34).  Of  little  use  is  it  to  fret  ourselves  with  fears  and  cares  about  what  may
possibly  befall  us.  Do  duty,  and  leave  the  issues  to  him  who  is  above.  Duty,  not
calculations  of  expediency.  Those  who  steei;  by  expediency  rather  than  duty,  in  the
hope  to  avoid  evils,  split  on  a  worse  rock  than  the  one  they  shun. — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 13. — Z%e  renewal  of  God's  covenant  with  Israel.  Every  act  of  obedience
ie  a  step  of  the  soul  upward.  It  leads  us  into  clearer  light  and  into  purer  air.  The
man  is  braced  by  the  exercise.  On  the  other  hand,  the  neglect  of  a  great  occasion  of
blessing  is  an  irreparable  loss.

I.  Note  God's  gracious  activity  on  behalf  of  ras  covenant  people.  Ancient
Israel  was  sadly  prone  to  forget  what  God  had  done  for  them.  Ingratitude  is  base,  it
injures  greatly  the  man  who  is  guilty  of  it.  We  lose  immensely  by  our  obliviousness
of  God's  kindness.  For  the  Hebrews,  God  had  exerted  his  power  and  pity  in  methods
unprecedented.  Almost  every  act  of  his  for  their  deliverance  was  a  miracle.  The
crops  of  Egypt  were  blasted  in  order  to  rescue  the  sons  of  Abraham.  The  firstborn
of  Egypt,  of  man  and  of  beast,  were  slain  to  emancipate  Israel.  The  king,  his  courtiers,
and  Egypt's  military  were  submerged  in  the  sea  to  deliver  the  Hebrews.  For  forty
years  they  had  been  miraculously  led  and  miraculously  fed.  For  forty  years  their
clothes  had  resisted  all  decay,  and  their  sandals  had  not  yielded  to  wear.  Without
ordinary  bread — without  wine — they  had  been  kept  alive;  yea,  had  become  robust
and  irresistible.  Conquest  over  foes  was  already  theirs,  and  Canaan  itself  was,  in  part,
possessed.  Never  before — never  since — has  God  so  set  aside  his  ordinary  methods  of
providing  for  men,  and  revealed  himself  as  the  personal  Friend  of  his  people.

II.  Thm  gracious  activity  contained  pkegnant  pledge  of  hxgheb  oood.
Wondrous  as  were  these  acts  of  Divine  kindness,  they  did  not  terminate  in  themselves.
They  were  the  earnests  of  something  more — something  higher.    Every  gift  in  th<


138  THE  BOOK  Of  DEUTEBOKOMY.  [oh.  iXix.  1—29.

desert  and  ereiy  conquest  in  Canaan  contained  a  kernel  of  Bpiritnal  promise.  These
events  through  which  the  Hebrews  passed,  both  prosperous  events  and  adverse,
were  "temptations,"  or  tests,  by  which  to  develop  their  faith  and  fortitude.  Every
carnal  battle  was  drill  and  discipline  for  spiritual  con6ict.  Very  instructively  are  the
miraculous  deliverances  here  called  "signs"  (ver.  3).  For  signs  and  symbols  they
were  of  realities  in  the  spirit-realm.  The  redemption  from  Egypt  was  the  sign  of  a
better  redemption  for  the  soul.  Sinai  foreshadows  Calvary.  The  smitten  rock
prefigured  Christ.  The  desert  life  was  a  type  of  the  earthly  pil^image.  The  biszea
serpent  symbolized  the  remedy  for  sin.  By  new  and  singular  methods  was  the  host
of  God's  elect  daily  fed,  and  Moses  plainly  indicates  the  gracious  intention  of  the  plan,
viz.  that  "  Te  might  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  your  Ood."  The  descending  manna
was  an  object-lesson.  Every  meal  was  a  revelation  of  God.  Within  the  food  for  the
body  was  to  be  found  richer  food  for  the  soul.

III.  We  see  man's  insensibilitt  to  the  gracious  intention  of  God.  In  this
address  of  Moses  we  discover  an  apparent  ountradiction.  "  Ye  have  se'-n,"  he  says^
"  all  that  the  Lord  did"  (ver.  2).  "  Yet,"  he  adds,  "  the  Lord  hath  not  given  you  eyes
to  see "  (ver.  4).  But  the  contradiction  is  only  on  the  surface.  They  saw,  and  yet
they  did  not  see.  They  saw  the  external  event ;  they  did  not  perceive  the  interior
meaning.  They  had  no  eye  for  spiritual  penetration.  They  had  not  the  pureness  oi
heart  by  which  they  might  have  seen  God.  And  the  blame  of  non-possession  does  not
rest  on  God.  Some  gifts  he  bestows  unasked.  "  He  sendeth  rain  on  the  just  and  on  the
unjust."  But  the  higher  gifts  for  the  soul  he  grants  only  to  the  meek  and  the  prayer-
ful. "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive."  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  I  will  fill  it."  The
Hebrews  saw  the  cloud,  but  did  not  see  the  God  within  the  cloud.  They  saw  the
splendid  coruscations  of  his  glory,  And  they  entrsated  that  the  vision  might  not  be
repeated.  Their  mouths  were  filled  with  material  food,  but  they  had  no  eye  to  discern
the  love  which  supplied  it.  They  remained  deaf  to  the  soft  whispers  of  the  Divine
voice — the  voice  within  the  human  voice.  They  were  too  carnal  to  perceive  the
illustrious  vocation  to  which  they  were  called,  or  the  magnificent  destiny  that  lay  in
their  path.     Jehovah  offered  to  be  "  their  God."

IV.  We  see  a  feesh  opportunity  fob  complete  consecbation.  On  the  threshold
of  the  promised  land  God  summoned  a  halt.  He  reviews,  by  the  mouth  of  Moses,  their
past  history,  reminds  them  of  their  mistakes,  reproves  their  obtuseness  of  mind,  and
invites  them  to  a  renewal  of  the  sacred  covenant.  Another  chance  was  given  them  for
spiritual  reformation.  Here  was  the  commencement  of  a  new  epoch.  Again,  as  in
Horeb,  God  bids  for  man's  allegiance.  He  renews  his  pledge  to  be  in  Canaan  what  he
had  been  in  the  desert — their  special  Friend,  their  God.  In  this  compact  all  the
resources  of  God  were  secured  to  IsraeL  His  power,  his  glory,  his  life,  his  home,  were
conveyed  to  them.  All  was  to  be  theirs ;  but  on  one  condition — and  that  condition  was
a  necessity — that  they  should  be  loyal  and  true  to  him.  What  a  splendid  opportunity
was  there  for  a  new  beginning — for  a  fresh  departure !  So  ever  and  anon  God  comes
near  to  us,  and  offers  to  make  a  covenant  with  us — to  be  our  Friend  and  God  for  ever.
On  the  morning  of  every  day — on  every  returning  sabbath — he  appeals  to  us  afresh  to
make  consecration  of  ourselves.  If  we  will  be  indeed  bis  people,  he  will  be  most  truly
our  God.    We  too  may  "  enter  into  his  oath." — D.

Vers.  14 — 28. — The  government  of  Ocd  all-embracing.  The  detective  force  in  Ckxl's
kingdom  is  perfect.  Escape  through  the  meshes  of  his  Law  is  an  impossibility.  Every
defaulter  is  within  the  custody  of  the  Omniscient  Eye.  Arraignment,  conviction,  and
execution  proceed  (sometimes  leisurely)  with  the  precision  and  certitude  of  irresistible
law.    In  this  paragraph —

I.  Wb  leabn  the  obqanio  unity  of  the  nation.  Every  individual  is  a  member
of  the  community — an  integral  part  of  the  kingdom.  "  No  man  liveth  unto  himself."
A  citizen  of  an  empire  cannot  demean  himself  as  he  please.  He  is  bound  to  consider
the  well-being  of  the  body  politic.  Hence  Moses  affirmed  that  the  covenant  made  with
the  elders  and  officers  present  was  a  covenant  also  made  with  those  not  present.  Who-
ever elected  to  share  in  the  security  and  triumphs  of  the  nation  was  bound  to  share  in
its  obligations.  We  cannot  belong  to  society  and  claim  exemption  from  its  laws.  The
individual  i<  bound  by  the  decisions  of  the  nation.


ea.  XXIX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  459

n.  Wk  lkabm  the  gbeat  uses  op  experience.  "  Te  have  seen  their  ahomina-
tions."  To  a  generation  that  had  not  seen  the  obscenities,  impurities,  and  social
corruptions  of  idolatry,  it  would  be  difficult  to  convey  an  adequate  idea  of  the  eviL  It
was,  therefore,  of  the  first  importance  that  the  experience  of  the  Hebrews  who  had
come  up  from  Egypt  should  mould  and  inspire  the  convictions  of  the  younger  geneta-
tion.  Those  who  had  seen  the  abominations  of  Egypt,  felt  its  oppressions,  and  taken
part  in  uprooting  the  corrupt  races  of  Canaan,  ought  to  have  cherished  a  deep  sense  oi
the  value  of  this  covenant  with  God.  The  evil  against  which  they  solemnly  leagued
they  knew  to  be  a  curse  to  men  and  an  abhorrence  to  Jehovah.  If  only  the  treasures
of  experience  were  garnered  and  utilized,  they  would  be  worth  more  than  mountains  of
silver  and  gold.

III.  We  leabn  the  deceptive  flatteries  of  sin.  "  I  shall  have  peace,  though
I  walk  in  the  imagination  of  mine  heart."  1.  The  transgressor  is  intensely  selfish.  He
plots  for  himself,  and  thinks  only  of  his  comfort.  "I  shall  have  peace."  2.  The
transgressor  is  essentially  blind.  He  imagines  that  although  all  others  may  be  de-
tected, he  shall  escape.  He  sees  no  immediate  danger.  He  vainly  fancies  that  his
evil  course  is  sagacious,  and  will  bring  prompt  returns  of  advantage.  3.  The  trans-
gressor is  a  practical  atheist.  Because  human  magistrates  or  human  witnesses  may  not
discover  his  crime,  he  concludes  that  God  will  not.  In  fact,  he  leaves  God  out  of  the
calculation.  He  lays  his  plans  and  carries  them  as  if  there  were  no  God.  The  great
sin  of  men  is  this,  viz.  tliat  "  God  is  not  in  all  their  thoughts."  Sin  seldom  appears  in
its  true  colour  in  this  life.  It  is  ashamed  of  its  own  fruits.  It  promises  its  dupes  the
fruits  of  righteousness.  The  creed  of  this  world  is  that  men  "  may  gather  grapes  from
thorns,  and  figs'  from  thistles."  .^

IV.  We  leabn  that  God's  detectives  never  faii,.  "The  Lord  will  not  spare
him,"  The  secret  conspiracy  of  the  heart  shall  be  proclaimed  upon  the  housetops.  If
the  culprit  hide  in  the  darkest  den  of  a  populous  city,  thence  will  Jehovah's  arm  drag
him  forth.  "  He  besets  us  behind  and  before."  If  he  be  alone  in  his  guilt,  he  is  the
more  to  blame,  since  he  has  no  help  or  encouragenjent  from  others.  All  social  influences
have  been  deterrent  from  evil ;  but  ho  has  resisted  them  all  with  his  obstinate  folly.
He  has  been  singular  in  his  sin ;  he  shall  be  singular  in  his  suffering.  Against  him  the
anger  of  Jehovah  will  burn  with  a  white  heat  of  justice.  All  the  vials  of  righteous
wrath  shall  be  emptied  on  that  guilty  head.  His  name  stiall  perish.  He  shall  he
"  separated  unto  evil."  The  nation  shall  loathe  him.  The  universe  shall  be  banded
together  to  punish  him.

V.  We  i.eaen  that  the  effect  of  public  retribution  is  to  hake  luminous
God's  righteousness.  God  delights  in  earth's  fertility.  He  finds  pleasure  in  fruits
and  flowers.  But  his  delight  in  the  fruits  and  flowers  of  the  soul  is  so  much  greater,
that  he  will  blast  all  the  beauty  and  fertility  of  earth  in  order  to  produce  in  men  the
fruits  of  holiness.  His  police  force  is  enormous.  Pestilence  and  earthquake,  volcanic
flame  and  electricity,  human  armies  and  microscopic  insects,  execute  his  judicial  word.
And  the  efi'ect  upon  mankind  is  to  excite  inquiry.  Wherefore  this  demolition  and
ourse?  Some  solid  reason  must  exist  for  this  complete  reversal  of  former  blessing.
The  contrast  is  eloquent  with  meaning.  The  flames  of  Sodom  shed  a  lustre  on  the  Divine
rightuousness.  The  barren  hills,  with  mute  yet  mournful  tongue,  declare  God's  faithful-
ness. A  broken  covenant  explains  it  all  I  The  hills  shall  flee ;  the  stars  shall  fade ,;
but  not  a  word  from  Jehovah's  lips  shall  ever  miscarry.  The  sleepless  sword  of  judicial
v3ngeance  shall  pursue  to  the  death  every  false  thing. — ^D.

Ver.  29. — The  purpose  cf  Divine  revelation.  Taught  by  God's  good  Spirit,  Moses
discerned  that  the  purpose  of  Divine  revelation  was  not  to  gratify  intellectual  curiosity,
but  to  qualify  for  practical  obedience.

I.  Revelation  is  the  only  source  of  BAvnia  knowledqe  fob  guiltt  men.
Knowledge  of  God,  his  attributes,  and  methods  of  operation  may  be  obtained  firom
investigation  of  man  and  nature.  But  the  special  knowledge  of  God's  merciful  disposi-
tions and  purposes  respecting  sinners  can  be  acquired  only  from  the  direct  revelation
he  is  pleased  to  make.  Whether  rebellious  men  can  be  reconciled  to  God,  and  by  what
method ;  how  the  injured  nature  of  man  is  to  be  renovated ;  whether  any  existence,
or  serrice,  or  promotion  is  possible  beyond  the  grave ; — these  and  other  vital  questions
can  be  answered  only  by  the  voice  from  heaven.


460  THE  BOOK  OP  DEtJTEllOiJoM5f.  [oh.  xxix.  1—29.

II.  Eevelation  is  not  coextensive  with  reality  and  fact.  There  is  yet  a
realm  of  the  unknown  which  God  has  not  disclosed  to  men.  The  class  of  "  secret
things "  is  in  God's  keeping.  Such  confidence  have  we  in  the  benignity  of  the  Most
High,  that  we  anticipate  further  revelations,  yea,  an  unending  series  of  disclosures ;  but
the  time  and  method  of  these  gradual  unveilings  God  has  wisely  reserved  unto  himself.
One  thing  inspires  a  hope  of  increased  knowledge :  we  have  a  Divine  promise  that  what
we  know  not  now  we  shall  know  hereafter.  Compared  with  the  unknown,  the  knowr
is  »  speck,  an  atom,  an  alphabet  only.  The  universe  of  knowledge  is  still  beyond  us
enticing  our  inquiry.

III.  Bevelation  IB  A  EESPONBiBLE  TKUST  TO  ITS  P08SBSS0K.  The  "  things  which
are  revealed  belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children  for  ever."  So  long  as  this  revelation
is  quite  external  to  us  it  cannot  be  said  to  be  ours.  To  possess  it,  it  must  fill  the
understanding,  move  the  affections,  quicken  the  desires,  cheer  the  conscience,  mould
the  character.  Then  only  does  it  "  belong  to  us."  Thus  we  are  to  conserve  it,  viz.  by
a  wise  appreciation  and  by  practical  use.  It  is  to  be  handed  down  to  our  children
intact;  i.e.  not  the  written  scroll  so  much  as  the  living  belief.  We  are  so  to  prize  and
practise  this  revelation  that  our  children  shall  see  it  is  our  precious  treasure,  our
anchor  in  trouble,  our  pole-star  in  darkness,  oiir  daily  chart  and  guide.  It  belongs  to
us ;  therefore  as  wise  men  we  should  use  it,  yea,  extract  from  it  all  the  advantage  we
can.  For  the  right  improvement  of  the  written  Word  we  shall  be  counted  responsible.
We  "  are  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God."

IV.  EeVELATION  is  MEASURED  OUT  FOB  PRACTICAL  USB.      It   is  given  tO  US  "that

we  may  do  all  the  words  of  this  Law."  It  possesses  regal  authority,  for  it  is  a  "  Law."
In  giving  us  this  Law,  God  deals  with  us  as  with  intelligent  beings,  capable  of  under-
standing his  will,  capable  of  rendering  him  efficient  service.  There  is  no  niggardliness
in  any  of  God's  gifts.  As  soon  as  we  have  imi)roved  to  the  utmost  our  knowledge  of
God's  will,  we  shall  receive  more.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear
him."  "Then  shall  we  know  if  we  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord."  Honest  obedience
enlarges  the  capacity  of  knowledge  ;  it  whets  the  appetite  for  higher  spiritual  acquisi-
tion ;  it  awakens  expectation.  To  know  God  and  his  Son  Jesus  Christ,  this  is  life ;
this  is  an  ever-expanding  life — life  eternal. — D.

Vers.  1 — 9, — Time-defying  habiliments.  After  the  extensive  list  of  curses  to  be
recited  amid  the  mountains,  Moses  proceeds  to  speak  of  the  perfect  providences  of  the
pilgrimage  as  a  loud  call  to  obedience  out  of  gratitude.  He  points  out  not  only  the
miracles  connected  with  the  Exodus,  but  also  the  arrangements  of,  as  we  should  say,
the  commissariat.  They  had  not  to  manufacture  bread,  for  the  manna  fell  from  heaven  ;
they  had  not  to  carry  with  them  wine  or  strong  drink,  for  the  pure  water  out  of  the
smitten  rock  followed  them  all  the  way.  Nor  had  they  to  concern  themselves  about
clothing,  for  their  clothes  defied  the  march  of  time,  and  their  shoes  stood  intact  all  the
rough  journey  of  the  wilderness.  We  have  only  to  consider  what  such  an  arrangement
saved  them,  and  how  at  the  end  of  tho  forty  years'  march,  instead  of  "ragged  regi-
ments," they  presented  themselves  in  bright  and  impressive  array,  to  conclude  that
this  merciful  care  of  their  clothing  as  well  as  of  themselves  was  a  crowning  experience
of  the  wilderness.  It  has  indeed  been  suggested  that  all  here  implied  is  a  providential
blessing  upon  their  ordinary  endeavours  and  barters  with  the  surrounding  tribes;'  but
we  imagine  there  is  much  more  in  this  reference  to  their  time-defying  garments.  We
are  led  to  speak  again  of  the  "  philosophy  of  clothes  "  (cf.  ch.  xxii.  5).

I.  The  PURPOSE  of  clothes  is  to  cover  our  nakedness.  This  was  shown  in
Eden,  and  as  Carlyle  says  about  his  cdter  ego  (Teufetsdrdckh),  "  The  utility  of  clothes
is  altogether  E^iparent  to  him ;  nay,  perhaps  he  has  an  insight  into  their  more  recon-
dite and  almost  mystic  qualities,  what  we  might  call  the  omnipotent  virtue  of  clothes,
such  as  was  never  before  vouchsafed  to  any  man.  .  .  .  Society,  which  the  more  I  think
of  it  astonishes  me  the  more,  is  founded  upon  cloth."'  And  into  this  most  proper
purpose  of  hiding  our  nakedness,  let  us  observe,  the  Lord  entered  in  Eden  and  after-
wards. Man  is  a  spirit,  but  it  is  also  evident  that  in  this  present  world  he  was  meant
to  wear  clothes  and  to  conform  to  decency  thereby.

>  Eitto's  '  Piotorial  Bible,'  in  loeo.  ■  •  Sartor  Beiartns,'  pp.  58, 69.


CH.  XXIX.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  461

n.  There  is  wo  virtub  in  ragqbdness.  In  fact,  one  of  the  prophets,  in  order  to
convey  impressively  the  worthlessness  in  God's  sight  of  our  self-righteousness,  uses
this  very  figure :  "  But  we  are  all  as  an  unclean  thing,  and  all  our  righteousnesses  are
as  filthy  rags ;  and  we  all  do  fade  as  a  leaf ;  and  our  iniquities,  like  the  wind,  have
taken  us  away  "  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6).  Suppose  that.  Israel  had  reached  the  land  of  promise
in  desperate  raggedness ;  it  would  have  been  no  credit  to  themselves  or  to.  their  God.
It  would,  on  the  other  hand,  have  made  the  invasion  more  perilous.  But  when,
instead  of  "  ragged  regiments,"  they  came  with  unworn  uniforms  from  the  wilderness,
the  very  freshness  of  the  appearance  of  the  host  struck  terror  into  their  adversaries.

III.  The  rAOT  had  evidently  tailed  to  strike  the  Israelites  as  it  ought  to
HA^"3  DOHB.  "  Yet  the  Lord,"  says  Moses,  "  hath  not  given  you  an  heart  to  perceive,
and  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear,  unto  this  day  "  (ver.  4).  The  unchanging,  well-
apix)inted  host  had  ceased  to  be  a  marvel  to  itself,  although  it  must  have  been  a
marvel  to  all  other  observers.  The  bright,  unfading,  well-kept  dresses  continually
before  their  eyes  failed  to  make  adequate  impression.  They  took  God's  goodness,  as
we  are  too  prone  to  do,  as  a  matter  of  course.

IV.  God's  provision  for  man's  body  was  a  ttpb  of  his  provision  roB  man's
spirit.  The  spirit  of  man  has  its  hunger  and  thirst  and  nakedness,  just  as  well  as  the
body.  And  we  are  accustomed  to  see  in  the  manna,  which  satisfied  the  hunger  of
the  Israelites,  a  type  of  him  who,  as  the  Living  Bread,  came  down  from  heaven
(John  vi.  49,  50);  in  the  water  from  the  smitten  rock,  which  satisfied  their  thirst,
a  type  of  the  Spirit,  proceeding  from  the  Son,,  to  refresh  the  souls  of  men  (John  vii.
37 — 39).  And  why,  we  ask,  should  we  not  discern  in  the  time-defying  garmenU,
which  God  so  wonderfully  preserved,  a  type  of  that  righteousness  w:th  which  ha
clothes  our  spiritual  nakedness,  which  is  unto  all  and  upon  all  them  that  believe
(Rom.  iii.  22)  ?  Round  the  human  spirit,  as  Carlyle  has  put  it,  there  lies  a  "  garment
of  flesh  contextured  in  the  loom  of  heaven  ...  it  is  sky-woven,  and  worthy  of  a
God ; "'  but  around  it  he  is  pleased  to  place  another  garment,  of  which  the  unworn
uniforms  of  Israel  were  types,  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  sufiicient  to
cover  all  our  nakedness,  and  which  stands  defiantly  against  the  powers  of  time.  It  is
in  this  array  and  panoply  that,  as  pilgrims,  we  shall  reach  the  land  of  eternal  promise.
Vicissitude  and  change  will  work  no  havoc  in  this  garment  of  God.  In  contrast  to
all  man's  "shoddy"  and  "ragged  righteousness,"  it  stands  in  perennial  brightness,
the  time-defying  clothing  out  of  the  commissariat  of  God.  May  we  all  be  arrayed  in
none  other  as  we  approach  the  Jordan  I — K.  M.  E.

Vers.  10 — 28. — The  land  of  promise  becoming  aecurted.  Moses  has  tried  the
principle  of  gratitude  with  the  Israelites,  urging  obedience  from  a  sense  of  the  great
goodness  of  the  Lord.  And  now  he  turns  to  the  other  principle  oi  fear,  which  cannot
be  dispensed  with  in  religion,*  and  urges  obedience  out  of  respect  for  the  promised
land,  since  if  they  are  disobedient  it  will  be  turned  to  a  land  accursed.  The  land  will
in  such  a  case  become  a  witness  to  the  curse  of  God,  instead  of  continuing  a  standing
evidence  of  his  love ;  a  beacon  instead  of  a  type  ;  a  wilderness  instead  of  a  paradise.
And  it  is  instructive  to  notice  the  exact  danger  Moses  meets  in  this  passage.  The
curses  have  already  been  pronounced;  but  it  is  just  possible  for  some  one  to  say  that
tlie  curse  is  levelled  at  collective  sin.  National  apostaoy  is  contemplated,  but  an
individual  will  never  be  noticed  in  his  course  of  licentiousness.  The  wholesale  is
judged;  the  retail  may  escape.  This  is  the  idea  that  Moses  here  refutes.  He  shows
that  the  individual  shall  be  judged,  and  the  land  become  accursed  through  thi  apostaoy
of  individuals.     We  remark,  then —

I.  The  nation  apostatizes  through  the  apostact  of  individuals.  No  nation  as
a  public  act  apostatizes,  but  it  gets  rotten  through  individual  action.  When  then  a
number  of  units,  under  the  delusion  that  as  units  they  shall  escape,  betake  tllemselves
to  evil  courses,  blessing  themselves  in  their  hearts,  saying,  "  I  shall  have  ponce,  though
I  walk  in  the  imagination  of  mine  heart,  to  add  drunkenness  to  thirst,"  then  does
rottenness  enter  into  (he  state  of  Denmark !  It  is  well  for  units  not  to  pretend  to
under  estimate  their  influence  as  an  excuse  for  living  as  they  please.     The  nation

'  Cf-  Mozley's  '  Sernions  Parochial  and  OceaBional,'  pp.  822 — 329.


462  THE   BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xiix.  1— 29.

suffers  through  the  deterioration  of  its  component  particles.  If  the  individual  withers,
the  nation  withers  too.

II.  Individual  waywardness  may  work  the  bdin  of  a  land.  When  we  look
into  the  admirable  work  of  Van  Lennep,  we  find  him  ascribing  the  barrenness  o.
Palestine  at  present  to  the  cutting  down  of  forests,  the  fall  of  terraces,  and  the
consequent  want  of  rain.*  A  land  thus  lies  at  the  mercy  of  individuals  much  more
than  we  imagine.  An  individual  may  cut  down  the  trees  on  his  patch  of  freehold,  and
iiis  neighbour  follow  his  example,  to  carry  on  his  self-indulgence  with  the  proceeds,
and  the  result  may  be  the  change  of  climate  which  turns  a  paradise  into  a  waste.  We
have  already  seen  that  Palestine  was  peculiarly  dependent  upon  bountiful  provision  in
the  shape  of  the  early  and  latter  rains ;  and  if  individuals,  through  the  necessities
begotten  by  their  self-indulgence,  outrage  the  arrangements  of  providence,  the  land
becomes  of  necessity  accursed.

III.  As  A  MATTER   OF  FACT,  THE  HoLT  LaND   IS  KOW  AN  EMBODIMENT  OF  THE   CURSE

OF  God.  Travellers  are  struck  with  the  brown  and  1  arren  aspect  of  the  whole  land.
Spots  here  and  there,  of  course,  burst  into  beauty  through  the  gift  of  rain,  but  as  a
whole  the  land  is  no  longer  "  with  milk  and  honey  blessed,"  but  under  the  anathema
of  Heaven.  How  much  longer  this  blight  is  to  rest  upon  its  bloom  we  cannot  say,  but
the  fact  is  patent  to  all  observers.

IV.  The  hute  appeal  of  a  stricken  land  should  not  bb  lost  upon  the
OBSERVERS  OF  FT.  When  the  question  of  slavery  was  being  discussed,  before  God
settled  it  by  permitting  the  American  civil  war,  attention  was  directed  to  the  "  waste
lands  "  created  by  the  slave-labour.  It  was  shown  that  the  iniquitous  system  made
virgin  and  splendid  soil  in  the  course  of  years,  through  monotonous  cropping,  a
wilderness,  and  that  the  spectacle  of  the  deterioration  of  the  earth  should  weigh  with
tl  linkers.*  And  Nature  is  surely  meant  to  speak  to  man's  spirit  by  her  deformities  as
well  as  by  her  beauties;  by  her  manifest  wrongs  as  well  as  by  her  manifold  bene-
dictions. Such  a  man  as  Buskin,  considering  the  question  as  art  critics  will,  pleads
eloquently  for  the  natural  beauty  which  the  advancing  needs  of  railway  and  of
manufacture  threatens  with  desolation.  But  such  a,  wilderness  as  Palestine  now  is,
such  a  wilderness  as  the  slave  states  of  America  were  becoming,  speaks  to  the
conscience  of  observers,  and  calls  for  penitence  and  tears.  The  muteness  of  the  appeal,
the  golden  silence,  which  characterizes  such  impressive  scenes,  should  make  each
witness  of  the  waste  a  penitent  worshipper!

V.  Obedience  to  God  will  yet  regenerate  nature.  We  see  the  reverse  of  the
disaster  in  Ps.  Ixvii.  5,  6,  "Let  the  people  pniise  thee,  0  God;  let  all  the  peoplu
praise  thee.  Then  shall  the  earth  yield  her  increase."  The  wilderness  shall  yet  blossom
as  the  rose  when  the  children  of  men  shall  learu  their  privilege  and  duty  as  children
ofGod.— R.M.E.

Ver.  29. — The  purpose  and  limits  of  revelation.  This  passage  states  fairly  both
the  purpose  and  limits  of  revelation.

I.  The  purpose  of  revelation.  It  is  not  to  gratify  curiosity,  but  to  secure
obedience  in  the  successive  generations.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  speculative,  but
practical.

1.  The  objections  urged  against  revelation  largely  consist  in  the  disappointments  of
spsctilative  curiosity.  Because  God  did  not  inform  man  scientifically  about  the  creation
af  the  world  ;  because  he  did  not  deliver  an  articulated  theological  system ;  because
he  did  not  compose  a  philosophical  text-book  ; — therefore  this  popular,  miscellaneous,
and  discursive  Book  cannot  be  Divine.  But  so  far  from  such  arguments  being  valid,
they  go  to  substantiate  the  Divine  character  of  the  Book.     For—

2.  It  is  an  intensely  practical  Book,  inculcating  on  parents  and  children  obedience
to  Ood.  It  takes  up  man  in  the  family,  and  urges  him  to  obey  God  and  try  to  get
his  children  to  obey  him.  It  reveals  God  as  a  Father  seeking  the  obedience  and  trust
of  his  human  children,  and  inviting  them  to  the  heaven  of  obedience  to  his  command-
ments. It  makes  man  understand  sufBcient  about  God  to  know  the  duty  and  the
blessedness  of  obeying  him.    And  here  let  us  notice  two  important  positions  taken  up

'  Vm»  Lennep,  u<  supra,  p.  26.  '  Cf.  Caimeg' '  Slave  Po"T9r,'  p.  77,  etc.


OH.  XS.X.  1—20.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMT.


M3


by  the  levelation,  (1)  It  declares  that  we  have  been  made  in  the  Divine  image.  Let
men  make  us  out  to  be  physically  in  the  image  of  the  beast,  we  are  spiritually  in  the
image  of  God.  And  (2)  it  declares  that  for  man's  salvation  God  became  incarnate.
Mutual  acquaintance  and  understanding  are  manifestly  possible  and  practicable  upon
these  terms.  Man  can  reason  upwards  from  his  own  nature,  which,  as  Carlyle  said,
after  Chrysostom,  is  "  the  true  Sheohinah ; "  and  man  can  appreciate  Godhead  when
revealed  through  a  sinless  human  life.     As  a  revelation,  then,  it  is  most  reasonable.

II.  The  limits  of  revelation.  It  leaves  a  realm  of  secrecy  to  God.  That  is,  it
does  not  profess  to  reveal  God  fully,  for  "  he  cannot,  on  account  of  his  incomparable
greatness  and  excellence,  bring  his  plans  and  operations  within  the  comprehension  of
his  creatures."'  The  finite  cannot  take  in  the  infinite.  We  only  know  in  part.  But
we  know.  To  doubt  the  possibility  of  knowing  God  would  lead  us  straight  to
universal  scepticism.  Agnosticism  has  no  logical  halting-ground  on  this  side  of
universal  doubt.*  Hence  we  venture  not  beyond  the  assigned  limits  of  the  knowable.
We  take  all  that  God  gives  and  use  it  reverentially.  At  the  same  time,  we  recognize
a  world  beyond  our  ken,  of  essence  and  of  purpose  and  of  perception,  which  is  God's
•lone.    Oui  f  ride  is  broken ;  we  are  penitent  before  him,  and  we  adore. — B.  M.  E.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXX.


Vers.  1 — 10.— Though  rejected  and  exiled
because  of  rebellion  and  apoataoy,  Israel
should  not  be  absolutely  or  for  ever  cast  off.
When  disperseJ  among  the  nations,  if  the
people  should  return  to  Jehovah  their  God,
ike  would  again  receive  them  into  favour
and  gather  them  from  their  dispersion  (cf.  ch.
iv.  29,  etc. ;  Lev.  xxvi.  40,  etc.).  Moses,  look-
ing into  the  future,  anticipates  that  both  the
blessing  and  the  curse  would  come  upon
the  people  according  as  they  were  faithful
to  their  covenant  engagement  and  obedient
to  God's  Law,  or  were  disobedient  and  un-
faithful. But  even  when  the  curse  came
upon  them  to  the  full,  this  would  not
amount  to  final  rejection ;  but  God  would,
by  the  discipline  of  suffering,  lead  them  to
repentance,  and  then  he  would  again
bestow  the  blessing  (cf.  Neh.  i.  9).

Ver.  1. — Thou  shalt  call  them  to  mind  (of.
1  Kings  viii.  47,  where  the  same  expression
is  rendered  by  "  bethink  themselves  ").  This
is  the  meaning  here  also;  it  is  not  the  mere
recollection  of  the  curse  and  the  blessing
that  is  referred  to,  but  a  general  considera-
tion of  their  own  condition  and  conduct.

Ver.  2. — And  shalt  return  unto  the  Lord
thy  God;  return  from  the  worship  of  false
gods  to  worship  and  serve  Jehovah  ihe  one
true  God,  the  God  of  their  fathers,  aiid  the
God  whom  as  a  nation  ihey  had  before  wor-
■bipped  (c£,  Neb.  i  8,  9).


Ver.  3.— The  lord  thy  God  will  turn  thy
captivity.  This  dous  not  mean  will  cause  thy
captives  to  return,  for  (1)  the  verb  in  Kal
(as  it  is  here,  ^^)  never  has  the  force  of  the
Hiph.;  and  (2)  the  returning  of  the  dis-
persed is  afterwards  referred  to  as  conse-
quent on  the  turning  of  the  captivity.  The
plural  is  used  here  as  elsewhere  to  indicate-
the  cessation  of  aiBiction  or  suffering  (cf.
Job  xli.  10;  Pb.  xiv.  7;  Ixxxv.  2;  cxxvi.  1,
4;  Jer.  xxx  18 ;  Ezek.  xvi.  53).  The  render-
ingof  the  LXX.  here  is  noticeable,  koI  ld<rerai
Kipios  TCLs  afiaprias  aov :  "  and  the  Lord  will
heal  thy  sins,"  i.e.  will  remit  thy  guilt  and
will  deliver  thee  from  the  pernicious  and
destructive  power  of  sin  (cf.  Ps.  xli.  4  ;  Jer.
iii.  22;  xvii.  14;  Hos.  xiv.  4;  Matt.  xiii.
15,  etc.).

Vers.  4,  5. — Consequent  on  this  deliver-
ance would  be  the  gathering  of  Israel  from
all  the  places  of  the  dispersion  and  their
return  to  possess  the  land  which  their
fathers  possessed,  in  greater  numbers  than
their  fathers  were.  This  last  statement
suggests  doubt  as  to  the  literal  interpreta-
tion of  this  prediction,  for,  as  Keil  remarks,
"  If  there  is  to  be  an  increase  in  the  num-
ber of  the  Jews  when  gatliered  out  of  their
dispersion  into  all  the  world,  above  the  num-
ber of  their  fathers,  and  therefore  above  the
number  of  the  Israelites  in  the  time  of  Solo-
mon and  the  first  monarchs  of  the  two
kingdoms,  Palestine  will  never  furnish  room
enough  for  a  nation  multiplied  like  this."
The  reference  in  the  following  veise  to  a
spiritual  renewal  suggests  the  inquiry
whelher  the  reference  hero  is  not  to  such  a
gathering  and  testoratiou  of  Israel  aa  that


»  Cf.  Robert  Hall's  •  Works,'  vol.  vi.  p.  54,  etc.

»  Cf.  B.  P.  Bowne'8  '  Studies  in  Theism,'  oh.  i.,  eta.


464


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[cH.  XXX.  1 — 20


which  St.  Paul  describes  in  Roin.  xi.,  when
the  branches  that  had  been  broken  from  the
olive  tree  shall  be  again  grafted  into  it,  and
all  Israel  shall  be  saved  after  the  fulness  of
the  Gentiles  shall  be  brought  in.  To  Moses,.
and  indeed  to  all  the  Old  Testament  pro-
phets and  saints,  tbe  Israel  of  Grod  presented
itself  as  a  nation  dwelling  in  a  land  given  to
it  by  God ;  but  as  tbe  national  Israel  was  the
type  of  the  spiritual  Israel,  and  as  Canaan
was  the  type  of  the  spiritual  kingdom  of
God,  the  full  import  of  what  is  said  concern-
ing the  former  is  only  to  be  perceived  when
it  is  viewed  as  realized  in  the  latter.  Certain
it  is  that  it  was  on  this  principle  that  the
apostles  interpreted  the  fulfilment  of  the
Old  Testament  declarations  concerning  Is-
rael, of  which  the  explanation  given  by  St.
James  of  Amos  ix.  11,  12  may  be  noted  as
an  instructive  example  (Acta  xv.  15 — 17),
If  tlie  rebuilding  of  the  ruined  tabernacle  of
David  is  to  be  effected  by  "  the  residue  of
men"  being  brought  to  "geek  after  the
Lord,  and  all  the  Gentiles  upon  whom  his
Name  is  called,"  we  need  not  shrink  from
interpreting  this  prophecy  of  Moses  as
referring  to  the  restoration  of  Israel  by  the
bringing  in  of  Jew  and  Gentile  into  the  one
fold  under  the  one  Shepherd,  tlie  Shepherd
of  Israel  (John  ix.  16).

Ver.  6. — The  Lord  will  circumcise  thine
heart;  "  when  thou  wilt  become  better,  God
will  help  thereto  (of.  ch.  x.  16)"  (Herx-
heimer).  When  Israel  should  return  to
the  Lord,  he  would  take  away  from  them  the
evil  heart  of  unbelief,  and  give  them  the
new  heart  and  the  right  spirit.  "  Qui  pravis
affcctibuB  renunciat  is  circumcisus  corde
dicitui"  (Rosenmiiller.  Cf.  Jer.  xxxi.  33;
xxxii.  39;  Ezek.  xi.  19,  etc.;  xxxvi.  26;
Bom.  ii.  29;  Col.  ii.  11).

Vers.  8,  9. — Thou  shalt  retnm  and  obey ;
i.e.  then  shalt  again  hearken  (see  ver.  9,
where  the  same  expression  is  thns  rendered).
These  two  verses  are  closely  connected,  the
former  expressing  the  condition  on  which
the  aspect  expressed  in  the  latter  depends.
Tliey  should  be  rendered  accordingly.  If
thon  Shalt  return  ,  .  .  tiien  the  Lord  thy
Ood,  etc.  (comp.  Gen.  xlii.  38 ;  Exod.  Iv.  23,
where  a  similar  construction  occurs).

Ver.  10. — Israel  would  then  be  restored
to  the  full  enjoyment  «f  privilege,  would


again  enter  into  covenant  union  with  th«
Almighty,  and  would  be  enriched  with  all
the  blessings  of  his  favour  (cf.  ch.  xxviii.  1 1,
63) ;  only,  however,  on  the  indispensable
condition  of  their  hearkening  to  the  voice
of  God  and  being  obedient  to  his  Law.

Vers.  11— 14.— The  fulfilment  of  this  con.
dition  was  not  impossible  or  even  difScult  i
for  (lod  had  done  everything  to  render  it
easy  fur  them.  Tlie  commandment  of  God
was  not  hidden  from  them ;  literally,  was  not
wonderful  to  them ;  i.e.  hard  to  be  understood
or  to  perform  (see  the  use  of  the  Hebrew
word  in  Ps.  cxxxi.  1 ;  Prov.  xxx.  18) ;  nor
was  it  far  off;  it  was  not  in  heaven— <.«.
though  heavenly  in  its  source,  it  had  not
remained  there,  but  had  been  revealed — so
that  there  was  no  need  for  any  one  to  say.
Who  will  ascend  to  heaven,  and  bring  it  down
to  us,  that  we  may  hear  it,  and  do  it?  Tbe
idea  is  not,  as  Keil  suggests,  that  of  "  an
inaccessible  height"  which  none  could  scale;
nor  is  it,  as  suggested  by  Knobel,  that  of
something  "  incomprehensible,  impractic-
able, and  superhuman ;  "  it  is  simply  a  state-
ment of  fact  that  the  Law  had  not  been
retained  in  heaven,  but  had  been  revealed
to  men.  Nor  was  this  revelation  made  in
some  far  distant  place  across  the  sea,  so  that
any  need  say.  Who  will  go  over  the  sea  for
us,  and  bring  it  unto  us,  that  we  may  hear  it,
and  do  it  1  On  t  he  con  trary,  it  was  very  near
to  them,  had  been  disclosed  in  words  so
that  they  could  utter  it  with  their  own
mouth,  converse  over  it,  and  pomler  it  in
their  hearts  (cf.  Isa.  xlv.  19 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  28 ;
Rom.  X.  6).  In  the  allusion  to  the  sea,  the
representation  is  not  that  of  depth  (Targgum
Jon.),  but  that  of  distance.

Vers.  15 — 20. — Moses  concludes  by  eo-
lemnly  adjuring  the  people,  as  he  had  set
before  them,  in  his  proclamation  of  the  Law
and  in  his  preaching,  good  and  evil,  life  and
death,  to  choose  the  fu^er  and  eschew  the
lattei',  to  love  and  serve  the  Lord  which  is
life,  and  to  shun  apostaoy  and  disobeJionoe
which  are  death  (cf.  ch.  xi.  26,  27).

Ver.  17.-  (Cf.  ch.  iv.  19.)

Ver.  19.-  (Cf.  ch.  iv.  26.)

Ver.  20.— For  he  is  thy  life;  rather,  for
this  is  thy  life ;  to  love  the  Lord  is  really
to  live  the  true,  the  higher  life  (cf ,  oh.  iv.  4u  ,-
xxxii  47).


HOMILETICa

Vert.  1 — ^10. — Dispersion  not  rejection.  It  is  very  comforting  to  pass  from  so  gloomy
a  chapter  as  the  twenty-eighth  to  such  a  paragraph  as  this.  In  this  thirtieth  chapter,
the  onlook  and  outlook  of  Moses  are  much  more  extended  than  before.  So  distantly  is
his  eye  cast  now,  that  he  actually  looks  to  the  further  side  of  tbe  gloomy  scene  he
had  so  recently  sketched,  and  sees  in  the  horizon  a  belt  of  glory  bounding  his  view
(ver.  9).    8o  that,  although  the  present  darkness  and  distress  Into  which  the  scattered


OH.  XXX.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  4*111

nation  is  plunged  are  the  exact  fulfilment  of  the  Word  of  God,  yet  that  same  Word
declares  this  to  be  a  transition,  and  not  a  final  state  of  things.  "  (3-od  hath  not  cast  away
his  people."  Concerning  them  there  is  a  twofold  promise :  (1)  of  their  conversion  to  God ;

(2)  of  their  restoration  to  their  land.  Both  are  certain.  Both  will  be  fulfilled.  The
nrst,  in  their  conversion  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  second,  in  whatever  sense  the
Holy  Ghost  used  the  words,  bat  what  that  sense  is  is  not  so  clear.  There  had  been  a
promise  made  to  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  8).  The  Law  did  not  annul  that  (Gal.  iii.  17,  18).
Now,  if  we  turn  to  the  promise  to  Abraham,  we  find  (Gen.  xii.  1 — 8)  there  are  three
parts  in  it :  (1)  that  Abraham  should  have  a  seed;  (2)  ihat  his  seed  should  bless  the  world ;

(3)  that  they  should  inherit  the  land.  Now,  when  Paul  expounds  this  Abrahaniic
promise,  he  shows  :  (1)  that  all  who  are  Christ's  are  Abraham's  seed  (Gal.  iii.  26);
(2)  that  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  was  "the  gospel"  (Gal.  iii.'S), — it  was  made  to
him,  "foreseeing  that  God  would  justify  the  nations  through  Caith."  But  since  the  pro-
mise swells  out  to  the  full  gospel,  since  the  expression  "  Abraham's  seed  "  includes  all
who  are  Christ's, — may  not,  yea,  must  not,  the  land-promise  also  swell  out  into  some-
thing proportionately  larger  and  grander  ?    Such  is  the  question.

Further.  The  same  apostle  not  indistinctly  teaches  that,  witliia  the  lines  of  his  own
exposition,  theie  is  mercy  in  store  for  Israel.  What  are  these  lines  of  exposition?  1.
That  Jew  ami  Greek  are  one  in  Christ  Jesus.  2.  That  the  Jewish  rites  and  ceremonies
•re  for  ever  abolished.  3.  That  the  commonwealth  of  Israel  now  is  made  up  of  men  of
every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation.

In  the  application  of  these  principles,  the  following  steps  of  thought,  taken  in  order,
will  enable  us  to  summarize  Scripture  teaching  thereon : —

L  There  is  a  condition  laid  down  in  ch.  xxx.  2.

II.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  come,  laden  with  blessings  for  Jew  and  Gentile  (Rom.  xi.  26).

IIL  As  the  Gentile  obtained  mercy  through  Jewish  preaching,  so  the  Jew  is  to
obtain  mercy  through  the  instrumentality  of  the  Gentile  (Rum.  xi.  30,  31).

IV.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  declares  (Luke  xxi.  24)  that  Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden
down  of  the  Gentiles,  till  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled.

V.  The  apostle  declares  (Rom.  xi.  25)  that  blindness  in  part  is  happened  to  Israel,
till  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in.

VI.  A  time  is  foreseen  when  Israel  shall  "  turn  to  the  Lord  "  (2  Oor.  iii.  15,  16).
They  will  yet  see  Jesus  as  their  Messiah.

VII.  The  prophets  also  speak  of  their  conversion  to  God  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  21 — 32).

VIII.  Then,  too,  will  such  predictions  as  Ezek.  xxxvi.  24,  28,  34,  35,  etc.,  be  ful-
filled, but  whether  in  the  literal  or  in  the  larger  sense  indicated  above,  we  leave  for  the
providence  of  God  to  show.

IX.  The  same  Book  which  predicts  sU  this  tells  us  also  of  the  meant,  and  agencies  by
which  it  shall  be  brought  about.  There  will  be  providential  moirernents  (Ezek.
xxi.  27).  But  the  supreme  agency  will  be  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Ezek.
xxxvi.  25 — 27 ;  xxxviL  1 — 14;  Zech.  xiii.  10.  For  the  means  to  bi  used  by  us,  sei
Ezek.  xxxvi.  37).

X  The  reason  or  ground  of  all  will  be  the  sovereign  good-pleasure  of  God  (Ezek.
xxxvi.  32 ;  cf.  Isa.  xliii.  25).

XI.  When  Israel  is  thus  restored,  it  will  be  like  "life  from  the  dead"  (Rom.  xi.  15).
When  the  long-lost  nation  is  thus  regathcred,  when  it  returns  with  weeping  and
supplication  to  the  Saviour,  and,  saved  by  him,  sings  the  songs  of  Zion,  then  will  it
become  by  its  evangelistic  zeal  what  it  now  is  by  its  sacred  literature — a  priesthood  fur
the  world !

XII.  Concerning  all  this,  the  fulfilment  of  past  prophecy  is  a  prophecy  of  future
fulfilment!

Ih  conclusion.  1.  Let  us  ever  hold  the  Hebrew  race  in  high  honour.  "  Salvation  is
of  the  Jews."  2.  Let  us  bear  them  on  our  hearts  in  prayer.  3.  Let  us  watch  the
movements  of  God's  providence.  4.  Let  us  heed  the  cautionary  words  in  Rom.  xi.
18— 2L

Ver.  6  (comp.  with  Jer.  xxx.  31 — 34,  and  Heb.  viii.  6). — The  old  and  new
covenants.  It  may  not  be  uninstructive  at  this  stage  of  homiletic  teaching  upon  this
book,  to  place  on  record  the  points  of  comparison  and  of  contrast  between  the  old  anJ

DEnTEBONOUY.  2  H


4M  TUE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMT.  [en.  xxx.  1— 20


new  covenanta ;  ijt,  l)etwee.n  the  covenant  made  through  Moses  and  that  propounded
and  sealed  through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,

I.  Let  us  note  the  points  of  oomfabisoh.  1.  Both  are  made  with  a  people  formed
for  God  (Isa.  xliii.  21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9).  2.  Both  make  Ood  all  in  all  (ch.  xiv.  2 ;  1  Cur.
vi.  20).  8.  Both  inculcate  holiness  (ch.  vii.  6 ;  1  Pet.  i.  15).  4.  Both  of  them  are
based  on  sacrifice  (Heb.  ix.  22,  23).  5.  Both  teach  a  mediatorial  administration  (Lev.
xvi. ;  Heb.  viii.  6).  6.  Both  set  before  the  people  a  future  inheritance  (cb.  zii.  1).
7.  Both  urge  to  duty  by  the  impulse  of  gratitude  (ch,  v,  6  ;  Heb,  It,  9),  8.  Buth
appeal  to  fear  as  well  as  to  hope  (ch.  xi.  16 ;  Heb.  iv.  1).

II,  There  abb  also  foints  of  coiiTBAST,  1.  In  the  form  of  the  covenants.  (1)
They  differ  as  to  the  extent  of  their  compass.  One  includes  a  nation,  the  other  men  of
every  nation.  (2)  The  spirituality  of  its  genius,  and  paucity  of  definite  rules  and  ritual
is  another  mark  of  the  New  Testament  covenant  (cf.  Rom.  xiv.  17).  (3)  The  new  cove-
nant has  clearer  revelations :  (a)  Of  the  law  of  sacrifice  (comp.  Leviticus  with  Hebrews).
(J)  Of  the  Divine  character  (Heb.  i.),  (c)  Of  the  destiny  of  mankind  (Heb.  x.  25 — 31).
(d)  Of  the  tenderness  of  the  Divine  concern  for  man  as  man  (Luke  xv.).  2.  In  their
promissory  grounds  they  differ  quite  as  widely,  (1)  The  old  covenant  ensures  objective
good,  if  there  is  a  subjective  fitness  for  it ;  the  new  covenant  promises  subjective  fitness
that  objective  good  may  be  secured.  The  one  says,  "  Do  this,  and  thou  shalt  live."
The  other,  "  Live,  and  you  will  do  this  "  (ch.  xxx.  6),  (2)  The  security  for  the  fulfil-
ment of  God's  promises  to  us  is  far  more  strikingly  seen  in  Christ  than  it  could  possibly
be  under  Moses  (2  Cor,  L  20).  (3)  The  certainty  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  conditions  of
the  covenant  by  those  who  are  included  in  it,  is  provided  for  under  "  grace,"  as  it  was
not  undsr  "Law,"  This  covenant  is  "  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,"  and  is  in  no  way
contingent  on  the  fickleness  of  human  will.  It  is  a  "  better  covenant,"  and  is  "  estab-
lished upon  better  promises."  And  the  reason  of  the  difference  is  found  in  the  fact  that
the  first  covenant  was  intended  to  serve  an  educational  purpose,  and  so  to  prepare  the
way  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  bring  in  a  greater  and  larger  one,  under  which  regene-
ration unto  salvation  should  be  certainly  secured  (John  vi,  37 — 10),

Vers.  11—14  (comp.  with  Rom.  x.  6 — 1 3). — The  word  of  faith.  No  Christian  preacl  er
is  likely  ever  to  deal  with  these  words  of  Moses  without  setting  by  the  side
thereof  the  words  of  the  Apostle  Paul  respecting  them,  in  which,  indeed,  we  have  the
best  possible  exposition  of  and  commentary  upon  them.  We  propose  to  give  an  outline
Homily  thereupon,

L  ThBBB  is  a  "  WOBD  OF  FAITH  "  WHICH,  THOUGH  ANTICIPATED  IN  THE  OLDEN  TIME,

IS  NOW  ilADE  THE  BUBDEN  OF  CHRISTIAN  FBEACHiNo,  1.  'I'here  is  a  grand  thesis  to  be
muntained  throughout  all  time,  viz.  that  Jesus  is  Lord  (Bom  x.  9 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  3 ;
Phil.  ii.  11).  2.  There  is  a  twofuld  duty  required  with  reference  thereto.  (1)  Believing.
(2)  Confessing,  t.«.  (a)  letting  the  faith  cherished  in  the  heart  become  a  practical  power
in  the  life ;  (6)  letting  the  tongue  speak  for  him ;  (c)  letting  the  noblest  energy  be
(pent  for  him.  We  see  why  these  two  and  just  these  are  named.  Believing  is  the
attitude  of  the  soul  Godward.  Confession  is  the  attitude  of  the  life  manward.  Both
are  required.  A  faith  which  can  content  itself  without  a  confession,  and  a  confession
which  has  not  its  root  in  faith,  are  alike  valueless.  3.  There  is  a  double  effect  of  this
double  act.  (1)  Faith — the  Godward  act — is  followed  by  "  righteousness,"  i.e.  in
Pauline  usage,  justification.  (2)  Confession — the  manward  life — issues  in  "  salvation,"
i.e.  the  sound  use  of  all  our  spiritual  powers  (cf.  Acts  iv.  9 — 12  (Greek)  and  1  John  i.  7).
The  effects  are  as  the  duties.  Justification  is  a  right-setting  before  God.  Salvation,  a
transformed  life  before  man.  4.  For  all  this  we  have  the  sure  guarantee  of  God's  own
Word  (Rom.  x,  11—13).

IL  ThBBE  abb  some  NOTEWOBTHT  FBATUEBS  ABOUT  THIS  "  WOBD  OF  FAITH."     Mosel

had  said, "  It  is  not  too  hard,  nor  too  high,  nor  too  far  off  (cf .  Hebrew),  but  i  t  is  very  near,"
etc.  Paul  quotes  this  with  some  variation,  saying :  1.  "  It  is  near."  It  speaks  to  man's
inner  self — to  his  conscience.  2.  "  It  is  in  thy  mouth."  In  words  which  can  be  uttered
to  the  people  and  by  them.  3,  "  It  is  in  thine  heart."  The  word  "  heart,"  being  quoted
from  Muses,  we  take  rather  in  its  Hebrew  sense,  as  meaning  "understanding,  and
thus  the  phrase  would  signify,  "  It  is  intelligible  to  you."  Being  thus  near,  we  have
not  to  go  to  heaven  to  fetch  a  Saviour,  nor  tu  the  grave  to  letch  him  from  the  dead.


CH.  XXX,  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  467

Ue  came.    The  work  is  done — done  for  all,  without  distinction  of  persons.    Done —
once  and  for  ever.

Hence — ^1.  How  large  the  encouragement  to  call  on  the  Lord  Jesus  and  he  nved  I
2.  Men  need  not  remain  unsaved.    3.  Men  ought  not  to  remain  unsaved.

Vers.  15 — 20. — A  drend  alternative.  While  handling  substantially  the  same
momentous  themes,  the  aged  lawgiver,  as  if  the  thought  were  oppressing  him  that  he
should  very  soon  speak  his  last  word,  becomes  more  and  more  intensely  earnest,  and
mingles  a  solemnity  and  pathos  which  may  well  be  followed  by  those  whose  work  it  is
to  "  warn  every  man,  and  teach  every  man  in  all  wisdom,"  that  they  may  "  present
every  man  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus."  Here  is  presented  to  us  a  series  of  considerations,
which  are  cumulative  in  their  force,  and  which  should  be  deeply  pondered  in  strict  order
of  progress.

I.  Hebe  is  a  obeat  uabs  of  truth  bet  before  men's  consciences  and  hearts.
There  are  a  few  words  and  phrases  here  given,  in  form  most  short  and  simple,  yet  in
meaning  how  august  1  how  deep !  how  high  !  They  are  such  as  these — God, — the  Lord
thy  God, — good, — evil, — life,— death, — blessing, — cursing.  "  Dread  words  1  whose
meaning  has  no  end,  no  bound."  There  are  immeasurable,  yea,  infinite  realities  behind
them.     And  having  once  been  lodged  in  the  conscience  with  the  significance  which  is

-theirs,  no  power  can  dislodge  them,  nor  can  any  one  cause  it  to  he  to  the  man  as
if  he  had  never  heard  them.

II.  There  is  a  great  ddtt  which  presses  on  men  with  whom  this  truth  ib
DEPOSITED.  (See  vers.  16,  20.)  To  love  the  Lord,  to  obey  him,  to  cleave  to  him,  to
walk  in  his  ways,  and  to  keep  his  commandments,  and  his  statutes,  and  judgments, —
this  is  obviously  the  right  course  for  men  to  follow.  On  many  grounds.  1.  The  Lord
God  is  holy,  and  all  his  commandments  are  so  too ;  and  it  is  intrinsically  and  manifestly
right  to  follow  what  is  holy.  2.  As  our  Maker  and  Preserver,  God  has  supreme  claims
on  our  loyalty  of  heart  and  life.  3.  As  our  Lawgiver,  he  has  the  infinite  right  to
require  our  obedience,  i.  As  our  Infinite  Benefactor,  having  commended  his  love
towards  us,  having  bought  us  with  a  price,  he  has  a  claim  of  love  as  well  as  a  right  of
law.  And  it  is  not  possible  for  a  man  to  dispute  this  claim  unless  his  nature  is
becoming  so  perverted  that  he  begins  to  call  evil  good,-or  good  evil.

III.  There  is  a  great  blisssino  which  will  follow  our  loyalty  and  obedience.
This  is  so  under  the  gospel,  as  really  as  under  the  Law.  For  the  Law  rested  on  a  basis
of  gospel,  and  the  gospel  brings  with  it  its  own  law.  How  can  it  be  otherwise?
The  gospel  call  is,  "  Bepent,  believe,  obey."  This  is  the  precise  and  immutable  order.
The  grace  of  Qoi  teaches  us  that  "  we  should  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in  this
present  world,  looking  for  that  blessed  hope,"  etc.  And  we  know  what  is  the  promised
issue :  "  Godliness  .  .  .  hath  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to
come."  "  For  God  is  our  life  and  the  length  of  our  days."  Peace,  joy,  hope,  and  all
joyful  graces  and  blessings  attend  on  a  life  which  is  in  accordance  with  God's  will.

IV.  It  is  not  fossible  that  opfositb  uobal  courses  should  have  liblb  issues.  Men
going  in  opposite  directions,  in  a  right  line,  on  a  plane  surface,  from  the  same  point,  can
never  meet.  If  to  love  and  obey  God  be  good  and  tends  to  good,  then  the  reverse  must  be
evil,  and  can  work  nothing  but  eviU  And  such  ill  efiects  must,  for  aught  we  know,  go  oti
for  ever  and  ever,  unless  something  or  some  being  interposes  (ver.  18).  The  prolongation
of  Israel's  life  in  the  promised  land,  even  though  they  reached  it  in  peace,  would  depend
on  the  continuity  of  their  obedience  to  their  God.  They  rebelled.  Their  kingdom  was
broken  up;  their  people  were  carried  captive;  and  the  sad  story  already  rehearsed
became  theirs.  And  if  now  men  quit  the  leadership  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  there  will
be — there  must  be,  a  sorer  condemnation  than  for  those  who  rebelled  against  the  Law  of
Hoses  (Heb.  vi.,  ix.,  x. ;  John  iiL  36).  The  outlook  for  the  despisers  of  Christ,  in  the
next  life,  is  darkness  without  a  gleam  of  the  light  of  hope  in  the  distant  horizon.  And
even  in  this  life  nothing  but  woe  can  possibly  be  to  him  who  striveth  with  his  Mtiker.

v.  There  are  witnesses  that  wb  have  not  been  left  undirected  ani»  un-
wabned.  (Ver.  19.)  Compare  with  this  solemn  adjuration  of  Moses  that  of  Paal  in
Acta  XX.  26,  27  ;  PhiL  i.  8.  "  Heaven "  was  witness.  For  every  warning  given  to
men  in  God's  Name  is  known  and  received  on  high.  "  Earth  "  is  witness,  for  the
lecord  of  the  warning  is  published  to  the  world.    And  the  warning  itself  was  heard  bjr


468  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxx.  1— 2a

thousands  of  ears,  and  was  heard  of  by  many  thousands  mora.    By  the  very  directions
of  our  Lord,  we  are  to  proclaim  to  the  many,  not  to  whisper  to  a  few.
VI.  Such  open  hebaldiko  should  pbetent  ant  one  who  heabs  the  messaob

FBOU    OHEBISHINO    THE   HOPE    OF    8GBEENINO  HIMSELF    UNDEB   FALSE   PBETENCES.      Thi

following  passages  may  be  compared  with  our  text : — Ezek.  xxxiii.  2 — 5,  9  ;  Matt.  zii.
41,  42;  viii.  11,  12.  If  any  one,  having  heard  the  gospel  message  in  all  its  fulness  and
freeness,  should  ever  attempt  to  throw  the  blame  of  his  destruction  upon  others,  the
light  of  eternity  will  be  to  his  complete  unmasking  and  discomfitire.  No  talse
pretences  will  stand  in  the  judgment  (Ps.  1.).

YIL   Ah  OUTLOOK  such  AB  this  hat  well  give  a  deep  and  deepening  EARNESTNESS

TO  A  pbeacher'b  TONE.  Specially  :  1,  If  he  is  nearing  the  close  of  his  course.  2,  If  a
year  is  approaching  its  close.  3.  If  he  realizes  the  thought  that  soon,  very  soon,
some  of  his  hearers  may  be  in  the  eternal  world.  4.  If  be  gives  due  heed  to  the
thought  that,  even  apart  from  the  possible  nearness  of  the  next  life,  the  acciilents  of
time  may  make  the  period  exceedingly  short  for  teaching  and  warning  any  one  in-
dividual.

VIII.   AfTEB  all,  THEBB   18  A  LIMIT   BETOND   WHICH  NO   HERALD  FOB   GOD   CAN   GO.

He  may  teach  and  warn  and  plead,  but  when  he  has  done  that— w/)e)'e  his  responsibility
ends,  that  of  the  hearer  begins;  ver.  19,  "  therefore  choose  life."  The  preacher  witnesses.
The  hearer  must  be  left  alone  with  God  and  his  own  conscience  to  decide  the  all-
important  question,  on  which  a  whole  eternity  depends.  Man  can  direct  his  fellow-
man  to  God.  He  may  plead  and  beseech,  even  weeping.  He  may,  as  in  Christ's  stead,
pray,  "  Be  reconciled  to  God."  But  on  the  hearer  alone  the  full  responsibility  for  the
final  step  must  rest.  We  may  point  to  God :  but  we  cannot  come  between  the  soul  and
God.  We  can  herald  the  way  :  but  we  cannot  lead  the  soul  along  the  paths  of  ri,;hteous-
ness  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  4).  Hence  the  final  word  must  be,  "  Choose  life."  "  Choose  ye  this
day  whom  ye  will  serve."  With  the  power  of  free  choice  man  cannot  interfere.  With  it
God  will  not  trifle.  And  what  should  be  the  effect  of  such  an  appeal,  but  to  shut  the
sinner  up  alone  with  his  God,  that  between  him  and  Heaven  the  great  matters  of  life  and
death  may  be  decided,  and  that,  with  the  judgment  seat  alone  in  view,  in  full  sincerity
of  soul,  the  sinner,  pressed  with  the  weight  of  the  Divine  claims,  may  then  and  there
"  repent,"  and  "  yield  himself  unto  God  "  ?  And  if  then,  conscious  of  the  feebleness  of  a
will  weakened  by  so  oft  determining  on  the  wrong  side,  he  cries,  "Lord,  help  me,
and  I  will  be  thine  for  ever,"  a  regal  love  shall  cancel  past  sin  and  completely  forgive ;
and  a  gracious  power  shall  cure  the  weakness  and  perfectly  restore  1


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

Ver».  1 — 10. — IiraePs  restoration.  The  blackness  of  the  picture  of  Israel's  rejection
and  desolation  is  relieved  by  this  rim  of  gold  on  the  further  edge.  The  verses  seem  to
teach,  not  only  that  if  Israel  repent,  mercy  awaits  it,  but  that  Israel  will  repent ;  that
a  day  of  repentance  is  ordained  for  it — a  day  in  which  the  veil  that  has  been  so  long
left  lying  on  Jewish  hearts  will  be  lifted  off,  and  the  nation  will  mourn  for  him  whom
it  has  pierced  and  has  so  long  rejected  (Zech.  xii.  9 — 14 ;  Rom.  xi.  25 — 33 ;  2  Cor.
iiL  14 — 16).  The  result  will  be  the  incorporation  of  the  Israelitish  people  irto  Christ's
kingdom,  with  possibly  restoration  to  the  land  given  them  as  a  national  possession,  and
blessings,  temporal  and  spiritual,  beyond  those  bestowed  upon  their  fathers  (ver.  5).
In  a  wider  regard,  the  passage  teaches —

I.  That  in  man's  convbbsion,  it  is  the  sinneb,  not  God,  who  changes.  Israel
is  saved  at  last,  not  by  any  lowering  of  the  standard  of  holiness,  or  by  any  change  in
God's  requirements,  or  by  any  new  and  easier  way  of  life  being  discovered  than  that
originally  provided,  but  by  Israel  coming  round  to  God's  way  of  thinking,  and  doing
in  the  end  what  God  pleaded  with  it  to  do  at  first  (ver.  2).  After  all  their  sorrowful
experiences,  the  people  are  brought  to  this :  that  they  must  submit  to  do  what  they  were
told  in  the  beginning  that  they  ought  to  do.  It  is  so  always.  There  can  be  no  change
on  God's  part.  If  the  sinner  is  to  be  saved,  it  is  he  who  must  forsake  his  thoughts  and
\ii  ways  (Isa.  It.  7).    He  must  do  at  last  what  he  now  feels  he  has  not  the  least


OH.  XXX.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMr.  4G9

inclination  to  do — what,  as  years  go  on,  he  is  getting  the  more  disinclined  even  to
think  about.  Will  he  do  it  ?  Is  it  likely  ?  Is'  it  certain  ?  If  erer  it  is  to  come
about,  what  agonies  of  soul  must  be  gone  through  before  so  great  a  revolution  can  be
produced  I

IL  That  conybrsion  is  sometimes  a  besult  of  the  experience  of  thb  habd-
NE88  OF  TRANSGRESSION.  It  is  in  the  far-off  country,  broken,  peeled,  and  scattered,
that  Israel,  like  the  prodigal  (Luke  xv.  14 — 19),  remembers  the  Father's  house.  Is
not  this  a  reason  why  God  sometimes  leaves  a  sinner  to  eat  of  the  fruit  of  his  own
devices — to  take  the  reins  upon  his  own  neck,  and  plunge  wildly  away  into  sin's
wildernesses? — that  he  may  taste  the  hardness  of  such  cour.ses,  the  bitterness,  the
emptiness,  the  essential  unsatisfyingness  of  a  life  of  evil,  and  so,  if  by  no  gentler
methods,  be  brought  back  to  ways  of  righteousness?  The  penalties  which  attend  sin
are,  whi^e  retributive,  also  designed  in  this  world  for  the  sinner's  correction  (Hos.  ii.
6—23;  xiv.).

III.  That  the  moment  the  sinner  retdbns,  God  is  ready  to  fobqivb  him.  We
must  not,  indeed,  post-date  the  mercy  of  God,  as  if  that  waited  on  the  sinner's  self-
moved  return  as  a  condition  of  showing  him  any  kindness.  God's  gracious  action  goes
before  conversion — leading,  drawing,  striving,  enlightening,  aiding ;  nay,  it  is  this
gracious  action  which  leads  to  conversion.  This  is  of  itself  a  pledge  that  when
conversion  comes,  he  who  has  thus  drawn  iis  to  himself  will  not  say  us  "  nay."  But  we
have  express  assurances,  backed  by  numerous  examples,  that  whoso  cometh  he  will  in
no  wise  cast  out  (Ps.  xxxii.  5 ;  John  vi.  37 ;  1  John  i.  9).  There  is :  1.  Forgiveness,
with  reversal  of  sentence  of  rejection  (ver.  3).  2.  Redemption  from  bondage  (vers.  3,  4;
Col.  i.  13).  3.  Restoration  to  inheritance  (ver.  5 ;  Eph.  i.  14).  4.  A  new  heart  and
spirit  (ver.  6).  5.  Deliverance  from  enemies  (ver.  7  j  2  Thess.  L  5,  6).  6.  Untold
blessings  (ver.  9 ;  Eph,  i.  3).— J.  0.

Vers.  11 — 14. — The  word  o/faith.  Paul,  in  Eom.  x.  6^10,  applies  these  words  to
the  "  righteousness  of  faith,"  and  contrasts  them  with  the  voice  of  the  Law,  which  is,
"  The  man  which  doeth  those  things  shall  live  by  them  "  (Rom.  x.  5).  That  this
application  is  not  a  mere  accommodation  of  the  words  of  Moses  to  a  new  subject,  will
be  evident  from  a  brief  consideration.

I.  Ibbael  and  the  "righteousness  of  faith."  The  constitution  under  which  Israel
was  placed,  while  formally  a  legal,  was  practically  an  evangelical  one.  On  the  legal
footing,  on  any  other  footing  than  that  of  the  "  righteousness  of  faith,"  the  statement
that  the  commandment  was  neither  far  to  seek  nor  difficult  to  obey  would  not  have
been  true.  The  Law,  as  requiring  perfect  holiness,  obedience  unvarying  and  uninter-
rupted, prescribed  as  the  condition  of  life  (Rom.  x.  5)  that  which  no  one  on  earth,
saint  or  sinner — the  sinner's  Saviour  only  excepted — ^has  ever  rendered.  It  was
certainly  "nigh,"  but,  as  a  "ministration  of  death" — "of  condemnation"  (2  Cor.
iii.  7,  9),  its  nighness  was  no  boon.  How,  then,  was  the  curse  averted  or  acceptance
made  possible?  Not  by  the  ability  of  the  Israelite  to  yield  an  obedience  adequate  to
the  Law's  requirements,  but  by  the  introduction  of  the  principle  of  grace.  Sin  was
forgiven,  and,  shortcomings  notwithstanding,  the  sincere  worslii|>per  accepted  in  "  his
full  purpose  of,  and  endeavour  after,  new  obedience ; "  or  rather,  in  view  of  his  faith,
of  that  spiritual  trust  in  Jehovah  in  which  these  strivings  after  obedience  had  their
origin  (Gen.  xv.  6 ;  Ps.  xxxii.  1,  2).  The  hidden  ground  of  this  acceptance  was  Christ,
now  manifested  in  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  (Rom.  x.).  From  this  point  of  view,  the
commandment  no  longer  towered  above  the  Israelite,  stern  and  forbidding,  launching
out  curses  against  him,  and  filling  him  with  dread  and  dismay ;  but  its  precepts  were
sweet  and  consolatory  to  him,  and  only  filled  him  with  the  greater  delight  and  love
the  longer  he  meditated  on  them  or  practised  himself  in  obeying  them  (Ps.  xix.  7 — 14 ;
cxix.).  It  is  in  this  evangelical  spirit  we  are  undoubtedly  to  read  these  exhortations  of
Moses,  whose  standpoint,  therefore,  essentially  harmonizes  with  that  of  Paul.

II.  Ibbael  and  the  highness  of  the  commandment.  "He. hath  showed  thee,
0  man,  what  is  good  "  (Micah  vi.  8).  God  had  written  to  Israel  the  great  things  of
his  Law  (Hos.  viii.  12).  He  had  made  known  his  Name,  his  precepts,  the  conditions
of  acceptable  service,  the  way  of  life ;  had  given  that  people  a  revelation,  full,  clear,
adequate,  adapted  to  their  mental  stature,  and  to  their  condition  as  sinners.    This  takeb


t70  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxx.  1— 20

for  granted  the  underlying  evangelical  element  above  referred  to.  Without  that,  the
"  commandment "  would  but  have  mockeil  their  weakness.  And  it  is  this  evangelical
element  in  Moses'  "  commandment "  which  comes  clearly  to  light  in  Christ,  and  which
is  embodied  in  Paul's  doctrine  of  the  "  righteousness  of  faith."  The  words  of  this  passage
apply  with  increased  lorce  to  the  historical  revelation  of  the  Saviour.  They  strikingly
suggest :  1.  That  man  needs  a  revelation.  2.  That  he  instinctively  craves  for  one  ;
"  Who  shall  go  up  ?  "  etc.  3.  That  he  would  sometimes  make  great  sacrifices  in  order
to  get  one :  "  Go  up  to  heaven  ;"  "  go  over  the  sea."  But  the  revelation  which  man
needs  most  of  all  is  the  revelation  of  a  Saviour.  He  wants  to  know  how  he  can  escape
from  sin,  from  guilt,  from  wrath,  from  bondage ;  how  he  can  be  restored  to  holiness,
to  peace,  to  blessedness.  The  "commandment,"  in  its  wider  sense,  gave  him  this
knowledge  in  part ;  the  full  discovery  is  in  the  gospel.  The  Word,  in  the  preaching
of  this  gospel,  as  well  as  in  the  circulation  of  copies  of  the  Scriptures,  and  the  innumer-
able opportunities  enjoyed  in  Christian  lands  of  getting  acquainted  with  the  way  of
life,  has  now  come  very  ni;4h  to  us.  It  is  in  our  mouths  and  in  our  hearts,  while  the
salvation  which  the  Word  makes  known  is  as  readily  available  as  the  Word  itself  is
simple  and  intelligible.     "  If  thou  shalt  confess,"  etc.  (Itom.  x.  9).

III.  Israel  and  the  practicableness  op  obedibnob.  The  word  which  Moses  gave
was  one  which  could  be  obeyed — ^nay,  obedience  to  which  was  easy.  Only,  however,
provided  there  was  circumcision  of  heart  (ver.  6) — a  sincere  willingness  to  know  and
to  do  God's  will  (John  vii.  17).  To  the  natural  heart  the  commandment  is  hard,  and
must  always  remain  so.  This,  again,  shows  that  the  obedience  Moses  has  in  view  is
the  spiritual,  though  not  faultless,  obedience  of  the  believing  and  renewed  heart — the
result  of  possession  of  and  standing  in  the  righteousness  of  faith.  Only  through  faith
relying  on  a  word  of  grace,  and  apprehending  mercy  in  the  character  of  God,  is  such
obedience  possible.  Ability  to  render  it  is  included  in  that  "being  saved,"  which
Paul  posits  as  a  result  of  believing  with  the  heart  in  the  crucified  and  risen  C'lrist
(Rom.  X.  9).  Observe,  further,  how  tlie  Law,  with  all  its  apparent  complexity  and
cumbrousness,  resolves  itself  in  Moses'  hands  into  one  "commandment"  (ver.  11).
It  is  this  which  makes  the  Law  simple,  just  as  it  is  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel  that  it
reduces  all  "  works  of  God "  to  the  one  work  of  "  believing  on  him  whom  he  hath
sent"  (John  vL  29).  Amidst  the  multiplicity  of  commands,  there  was  but  one  real
command — that  of  loving  the  Lord  their  God  (ch.  vi.  4 ;  x.  12 ;  vers.  6,  10,  16,  20).
In  love  is  implied  faith— the  knowing  and  believing  the  love  which  God  has  to  us.
Love  is  faith's  response  to  the  revelation  God  makes  of  himself  to  man.  Faith  is  thui
the  condition :  1.  Of  justification.  2.  Of  acceptableuess  in  obedience.  3.  Of  power
to  render  obedience. — J.  0.

Vers.  15 — 20. — A  last  word.  I.  An  alternativs.  Life  and  death ;  good  and  evil
(ver.  15) ;  blessing  and  cursing  (ver.  19).  An  alternative  for  the  nation,  but  also  for
the  individual.  "  Life "  is  more  than  existence — it  is  holy  and  happy  existence.
"  Death  "  is  not  equivalent  to  non-existence.  As  respects  the  natural  life,  it  is  the
separation  of  the  living,  thinking  principle  from  the  body,  and  is  compatible  with  the
survival  of  the  soul  in  a  future  state.  As  respects  the  spiritual  life — that  life  which
the  believer  has,  and  the  unbeliever  Juis  pot,  even  now,  while  yet  both  have  conscious
being  (1  John  v.  12) — death  is  the  cessation  in  the  soul  of  all  holy,  spiritual  functions,
implying,  indeed,  a  state  of  moral  ruin,  destruction,  and  disorganization,  but  by  n3
means  the  wiping  out  of  consciousness.  "Eternal  death" — a  phrase  not  scriptural,
though  "  eternal  punishment "  is  (Matt.  xxv.  46) — is  not  held  by  any  one  to  mean
"  eternal  existence  in  suffering ; "  but  it  is  believed  that  a  being  who  exists  eternally,
and  exists  consciously,  whether  in  actual  suffering  or  not,  may  yet  in  a  very  true
sense  be  "dead."  "Death,"  in  this  .verse  (ver.  15),  is  deemed  compatible  with
experience  of  "  evil."  How  strange  that  between  such  alternatives  there  should  be  a
moment's  hesitation !

n.  A  WARNING.  (Vers.  17, 18.)  If  the  heart  is  drawn  away  from  God,  and  turns  tc
idols,  t.e.  sets  up  any  other  objects  in  God's  place,  and  forbears  to  give  to  God  his
proper  love  and  honour,  he  whose  heart  does  this,  or  the  nation  if  it  does  so,  shall
surely  perish.  1.  An  awful  end.  2.  A  certain  end.  3.  An  end  of  whidi  dw
warning  has  been  given.


OH.  XXX.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEROXOMY.  471


nt.  An  appeal.  (Vers.  19,  20.)  "  Therefore  choose  life,"  etc.  On  which  noU  :
1.  That  choice  or  moral  determination  underlies  our  salvation.  2.  That  choice
underlies  the  possibility  of  love  to  Q-od.  3.  That  one  deep  choice  in  the  heart's  centra
underlies  all  the  separate  acts  of  choice  InTolved  in  a  life  of  obedience.  4.  That  the
choice  Qoi  wishes  involves  the  choosing  of  himself,  with  a  view  to  love  him,  to  obey
him,  and  to  cleave  to  him.  5.  That  the  choice  of  God  is  the  choice  of  life,  and  carries
all  lesser  good  with  it. — J.  O.

Ver,  19. — Nature  a  witness.  (See  for  other  instances,  ch.iT.  26 ;  xxxL  28 ;  xxxii.  1 ;
Isa.  i.  2.)  The  invocation  of  heaven  and  earth  as  witnesses  turns  on  deep  principles.
They  are  '*  called  to  record  " —

I.  BeOAUSB  the  mind  BECOQNIZES  THEIB  presence  as  witnesses  of  its  TBANSAOnONB.

It  projects  its  own  consciousness  on  its  surroundings,  and  feels  as  if  earth  and  sky,  sun,
moon,  rock,  river,  tree,  mountain,  were  not  inanimate  but  animate  and  sympathetio
witnesses  of  its  doings.  It  attaches  its  own  thoughts  to  the  outward  objects.  In
presence  of  the  scene  of  any  great  transaction,  it  feels  as  if  the  place  retained  its
memory ;  still  spoke  to  it  of  the  past;  thought,  felt,  rejoiced, accused, praised,  according
to  the  nature  of  the  deed.  Define  as  we  will  this  feeling  of  a  "  Presence  "  in  nature —
this  "  sense  of  something  far  more  deeply  interfused,"  which  we  inevitably  carry  with
us  into  our  relations  with  the  outward  universe — ^it  is  a  fact  in  consciousness,  and
furnishes  a  basis  for  such  appeals  as  those  of  Moses.

II.  Because  God  is  present  in  heaven  and  earth  as  a  witness  op  what  is  donb.
(Cf.  Matt.  V.  34,  bS.)  Heaven  is  bis  throne ;  earth,  his  footstooL  He  is  present  in
them,  upholding  them  by  the  word  of  his  power,  and  through  them  is  a  true  ?ritness
of  all  we  say  and  do.

in.  Because  heaven  and  earth  are  creatures  THGusELVEa  oonspiououblt
FUT.FILLINO  THE  ENDS  OF  THEIR  CREATION.  The  universB  as  a  whole  is  thus  a  standing
protest  against  the  apostacy  and  self-willedness  of  the  sinner  (Isa.  L  1,  2).  It  bears
witness  against  him  by  its  very  fidelity  to  its  Creator.  "They  continue  this  day
according  to  thine  ordinances,  for  all  are  thy  servants  "  (Ps.  cxix.  91).

lY.  Because  heaven  and  earth  are  sional  monuments  of  the  Divine  rAiXH-
FULNESS  AND  IMMUTABILITY.  (Ps.  cxix.  89,  90.)  Tlicy  testify  to  the  reign  of  law,  to
God's  constancy  of  purpose,  to  the  uniformity  and  infiexibility  of  his  rule.  They  dash
the  sinner's  hopes  of  his  Word  failing,  of  his  threatenings  not  being  put  in  force.

V.  Because  heaven  and  earth  retain  an  actual  record  of  what  is  done  in
THEIR  PRESENCE — a  record  which  may  admit  of  being  produced.  This  is  simple  truth
of  science.

VI.  Because  heaven  and  earth  are  interested  spectators  of  what  ib  being
DONE.  They  have  shared  in  the  consequences  of  man's  transgression;  they  will  share
in  the  glory  of  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God.  They  wait  the  day  of  their
redemption  with  earnest  expectation  (Rom.  viii.  19 — 23).

That  Moses,  in  connection  with  his  appeal  to  the  people,  summoned  heaven  and
earth  to  witness,  was  an  evidence :  1.  Of  the  solemnity  of  this  appeal.  It  must  bo  a
matter  of  momentous  importance  when  the  universe  is  called  in  to  witness  it.  2.  Of
the  rationality  of  this  appeal.  Nature  and  nature's  God  were  on  his  side.  He  had
the  universe  with  him,  though  a  foolish  people  mi<;ht  reject  his  counsel.  3.  Of  the
enduringness  of  the  issues  which  depended  on  this  appeal.  Neither  the  blessing  nor
the  c:xiso  would  work  themselves  out  in  a  day.  It  needed  lasting  witnesses  to  take
account  of  the  fulfilment  of  God's  words. — J,  0.

Vera.  1^16. — Divine  discipline  founded  on  known  principle.  Human  an<;er  is  often
an  uncontrollable  passion.  God's  anger  is  directed,  not  so  much  against  the  man,  as
against  his  sin.  God's  anger  is  the  acting  of  sound  principle — a  part  of  his  righteousness.
Hence,  as  soon  as  chastisement  produces  its  designed  effect,  it  ceases.  Instantly  that
\lte  wayward  child  turns  to  its  Father,  the  Father  turns  to  his  child.

I,  Repentance  often  springs  out  of  the  bitter  experience  of  tbouble.  1.  Dis-
vbedience  brings  degradation.  Moses  foresaw  that  the  elect  of  God  would  become,  f  ir
jieir  sin,  captives  iu  a  foreign  land.  No  cha.stisement  would  be  more  galling  to  th<  jr
prideu    Their  renown  as  conquerors  had  spread  far  and  wide.    To  be  crushed,  enchained,


472  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxx.  1— 2<X

and  exiled  was  humiliation  unspeakable.     Such  degradation  is  the  native  fruit  of  sin,

2.  The  curse  would  be  felt  the  more  as  a  contrast  to  former  blessing.  The  ploughboy
does  not  bemoan  his  lot,  but  fur  a  prince  to  be  tied  to  a  plough  would  be  a  galling  pain.
So  the  proiiigal  boy,  in  the  parable,  was  stung  by  the  remembrance  of  former  plenty.

3.  Impression  would  be  deepened  by  the  recollection  that  this  misery  had  been
prodicied.  It  was  evidently  no  casual  occurrence.  They  had  brought  the  disaster
upon  themselves.  They  could  lay  the  blame  nowhere  but  on  their  own  folly.  Unless
tlie  moral  nature  be  utterly  dead,  such  experiences  often  lead  to  reflection,  sorrow,  .^nd
rojientance.

II.  Repentance  ikcludes  pbacticai  reformatiok.  Repentance  that  expends
itself  in  idle  grief  is  a  counterfeit.  True  repentance  takes  instant  decision  to  retrace
false  steps.  Darkness  had  come  by  turning  away  from  the  sun  ;  now  the  penitent  man
turns  fully  toward  it.  He  does  not  wait  for  others  to  act.  He  is  not  going  to  be
deterred  by  others'  indifference  or  by  noisy  ridicule.  Call  him  "  turncoat,"  if  you  will ;
there  are  worse  characters  in  the  world  than  turncoats.  He  is  more  afraid  of  God's
anger  than  of  man's  paltry  spleen.  It  is  pot  only  a  halt  in  the  downward  course,  but
"  right-about  face."  He  returns  unto  the  Lord.  He  now  docilely  listens  to  his  voice;
he  honestly  endeavours  to  practise  all  the  Father's  will.  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have
me  to  do  ?  "  is  his  daily  prayer.  His  whole  heart  goes  out  in  repentance.  To  repair  past
follies — this  is  his  special  work.  So  earnest  is  he  in  his  new  life,  so  marked  a  change
and  so  beneficent  is  there  in  his  character,  that  his  children  feel  the  impression,  and
catch  the  blessed  contagion.  As  formerly  his  influence  over  his  family  was  most
baneful,  so  now  it  becomes  vernal  sunshine,  like  the  fragrance  of  sweetest  flowers,

III.  Repentance  sbcdres  the  reversal  of  the  curse.  No  sooner  do  men  return
to  God  than  God  returns  to  them.  Only  level  the  barrier  which  sin  has  set  up,  and
reunion  of  man  with  God  is  restored.  The  return  of  favour  shall  be  most  complete.
No  matter  how  far  the  ciirse  had  taken  effect;  no  matter  how  far  the  separation  had
proceeded  ;  no  matter  to  what  extremity  of  woe  the  rebels  have  been  driven; — from
thence  will  Jehovah  gather  them, — reconciliation  shall  be  thorough.  Omnipotence  will
outpour  itself  in  benedictions.  Let  the  frost  of  winter  be  ever  so  severe,  the  summer
Sim  shall  melt  it.  He  who  created  the  universe  out  of  nothing  can  reverse  all  the
wheels  of  arlversity ;  and,  out  of  ruins,  rebuild  a  glorious  city.  As  sin  is  the  only
source  of  disorder  and  woe,  so  repentance  is  the  extinction  of  the  cause  of  woe.  If
Gnd  takes  in  hand  to  restore  his  people  to  peace,  all  opposition  is  vain.  The  thing  ia
done.

IV.  Repentance  leads  to  entire  renewal  oe  a  man's  nature.  "  The  Lord  thy
God  will  circumcise  thine  heart,  and  the  heart  of  thy  seed."  Honest  endeavours  after
a  righteous  life  shows  to  us  a  corrupt  heart — a  heart  prone  to  love  evil.  The  man  who
be-ins  to  pray  for  pardon  soon  learns  to  pray  for  purity.  Nothing  will  satisfy  the
mind  (when  divinely  illumined)  short  of  complete  regeneration.  The  repentant  Jew
discovered  that  the  circumcision  of  the  flesh  effected  nothing  to  deter  from  sin ;  now  he
perceives  that  circumcision  of  heart  is  the  only  real  safeguard.  At  a  later  day,  this
inward  change  was  more  clearly  pictured ;  "  I  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of
your  flesh."  To  the  same  effect  tfesus  promised :  "  If  ye  .  .  .  keep  my  commandments,
I,  will  send  you  another  Comforter,  oven  the  Spirit  of  truth,  who  dwelleth  with  you,  and
shall  be  in  you."

V.  Repentance  in  men  awakens  purest  jot  in  God.  "  The  Lord  will  again  rejoice
over  thee  for  good."  So  Jesus  himself  affirmed :  "  There  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one
sinner  that  repenteth."  For  reasons  which  we  cannot  fathom,  the  well-tieing  of  man
is  a  matter  of  the  liveliest  interest  with  God.  Union  of  nature,  and  of  interest  between
man  and  God  is  intimate.  "  His  glory  ia  great  in  our  salvation."  To  bring  all  his
purpo.^es  and  enterprises  to  a  successful  issue — this  is  a  source  of  loftiest  joy  to  God.
"  lie  will  rejoice  over  us  with  singing."  The  gladness  of  Jehovah  at  the  completeness
and  beauty  of  creation  was  great ;  a  hundredfold  greater  will  be  his  joy  at  the  final
success  of  redemption.  Messiah  will  "see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  shall  Im
ialUfied:'—'D.

Vers.  11 — 14. — Revealed  truth,  dear  and  available.  Dishonest  minds  are  wont  to
plead  that  religious  truth  is  recondite,  self-contradictory,  hard  to  be  understood,    Ita


CH.  XXX.  1—20.]  TUB  Bt  OK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  473

oMigations  too,  they  aver,  are  impracticable,  beyond  the  power  of  man  to  fulfil.  Self-
indulgence  and  impiety  have  never  yet  failed  lo  frame  excuses  for  thoir  rejection  of  the
Divine  Word.  But  excuses  avail  them  nothing.  The  indolent  man  has  for  long  ages
past  learnt  to  say,  "There  is  a  lion  in  the  path."  Honest  investigation  suon  finds  the
truth  of  God  "  worthy  of  all  acceptation."

I.  Observe  the  authority  of  God's  Word.  It  is  a  "  commandment."  It  comes
to  men  with  all  the  character  of  a  law.  It  is  not  possible  that  we  should  treat  it  as
we  please.  We  are  not  permitted  to  mutilate  or  dismember  it — not  permitted  to  accept
a  pait  and  reject  apart.  As  in  a  tree  the  living  sap  runs  into  every  branch  and  twig
and  leaf,  so  thai  we  cannot  pluck  the  tiniest  part  without  bieaking  the  vital  current ;
so  every  part  of  God's  Scripture  is  instinct  with  high  authority,  nor  can  we  neglect  Ihe
least  commandment  without  defying  the  majesty  of  heaven.  We  are  bound  to  bow  our
wills  to  it;  it  will,  in  no  degree,  bend  its  requirements  to  suit  our  tastes,

II.  The  perspicuity  of  God's  Word.  Its  essential  truths  are  within  the  compass
of  every  mind.  Every  man  knows  what  it  is  to  love  ;  that  love  is  due  from  each  man
to  his  Maker.  Every  child  knows  what  obedience  means ;  that  obedience  is  due  to  the
Father  of  our  spirits.  Truly,  some  facts  concerning  the  eternal  world  are  so  profound
that,  like  ocean-depths,  human  reason  cannot  fathom  them.  But  these  are  not  the  facts
wiiich  lie  at  the  foundation  of  man's  safety  and  hope.  The  practical  duti<  s  which
appertain  to  virtue  and  well-being  are  so  plain  that  even  a  child  may  understand.
"Whatever  difficulty  lies  in  the  way  of  human  obedience,  it  does  not  lie  in  the  haze  or
uncertain  meaning  of  the  revelation.  The  difficulty  is  within  a  man,  not  without  hiin.
The  objects  of  faith  are  clearly  revealed ;  we  want  only  an  eye  to  discern  tlern.

III.  The  ACC0MM0DATBNES3  OF  God's  Word.  On  the  part  of  scriptural  truth,
there  is  an  exqnisite  fitness  to  meet  the  capacity  of  men's  minds  and  the  needs  of  their
souls.  "  The  word  is  nigh  thee ;  yea,  in  thy  very  heart."  There  is  perfect  accord
between  the  constitution  of  the  man  and  the  contents  of  revelation.  The  Bible  is  tl  e
counterpart  and  complement  of  conscience.  It  is  obvious  that  the  Lord  of  conscience
is  1  .ord  of  Scripture  also.  The  Bible  says,  "  Thou  hast  sinned ; "  and  conscience  admits
the  fact.  The  Bible  says,  "  Thou  art  helpless  to  save  thyself ; "  and  conscience  knows
it  true.  The  Bible  declares  that  happiness  is  inseparable  from  obedience ;  and  con-
science feels  that  it  is  so.  There  is  a  living  witness  in  every  man  (until  gagged  by
sin)  which  testifies  to  the  authority  and  necessity  and  reasonableness  of  Ood's  Tjaw.

IV.  The  peacticaljjess  of  God's  Word.  "  That  thou  mayest  do  it."  Religious
truth  is  not  revealed  to  gratify  a  prurient  curiosity,  not  to  afford  matter  for  specula-
tion, but  solely  to  promote  obedience.  To  know  God's  requirements  will  I  Ting  us  no
advantage  unless  we  heartily  and  loyally  do  them.  Accurate  and  orthodox  beliefs  convey,
in  themselves,  no  life  nor  joy.  Eight  belief  is  barren  and  abortive  until  it  brin2;s  forth
active  obedience.  We  are  not  to  be  judged  at  God'.s  tribunal  for  our  opinions  or  theories,
nor  for  our  religious  creeds  ;  we  are  to  be  judged  of  "  the  deeds  done  in  the  body."  "  I
was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  meat,"  will  be  the  grounds  of  the  judicial  verdict.
Piactlcal  service  is  the  end  and  purpose  of  Divine  revelation. — ^D.

Vers.  15 — 20. — An  alternative  choiee.  The  prophet's  power  to  persuade  and  In-
fluence a  people  is  great — unspeakably  great ;  yet  it  is  not  irresistible.  It  has  its  limits.
After  all  that  has  been  said  t<>  him,  a  man  feels  that  the  determination  and  choice  rest
within  himself.  Reason  may  be  convinced  ;  jud;;ment  may  give  a  decided  verdict ;
still  inclination  may  inordinately  lean  to  the  weaker  side,  and  baffle  all  prudent  cal-
culations. The  intense  eagerness  of  Moses  for  the  people's  weal  is  a  sublime  spectacle
of  generous  devotement — an  unparalleled  instance  of  ardent  patriotism.  Calling  up  all
his  powers  of  persuasive  and  passionate  appeal,  he  makes  a  final  effort  to  win  the  tribes
for  God.    We  have  here —

I.  Alternative  lines  of  conduct.    All  possible  courses  of  life  are  reduced  to  two

one  of  which  every  man  must  take;    a  third  course  is  excluded.      The   two  are

separately  described.  1.  The  course  of  loyalty  is  described :  (1)  By  the  man's  state  of
heart.  "  To  love  the  Lord  thy  God."  This  determines  all  that  follows— the  root  out
of  which  all  flowers  and  fruits  of  obedience  spring.  This  love  arises  from  a  right
appreciation  of  God.  "  He  is  thy.  life,"  yea,  the  life  of  thy  life.  Without  him,  life  is  a
shadow — a  dream — outside  show.   "  In  him  we  live."    "  Christ  is  our  life  "—the  Source


i74  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.  [ch.  xxx.  1— '-JQ

of  all  strength  and  goodness  and  joy.  This  love  arises  from  near  relationship.  He  ia
our  God  ;  he  has  entered  into  loving  covenant  with  us— joined  for  ever  his  interests
with  ours.  (2)  By  the  man's  habit  of  life.  He  "  walks  in  God's  ways."  In  those
ways  he  finds  God.  It  is  the  King's  highway.  He  has  daily  -companionship  with
Jehovah.  All  his  tastea  and  wishes  are  gratified.  His  will  is  sweetly  acquiescent  in
God's  will.  He  steadily  makes  advancement  in  the  beauteous  liie.  He  does  not  halt ;
he  walks.  (3)  By  hit  practical  obedieriee.  "  He  keeps  his  commandments  and  his
statutes."  He  keeps  them  in  memory,  and  has  regard  to  them  in  every  step  he  takes.
They  are  written  upon  the  tablet  of  his  heart ;  they  shine  out  in  lustrous  characters  in
all  his  actions.  He  guards  them  fron  the  assaults  of  others.  As  the  stone  tablets  of
the  Decalogue  were  preserved  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  so  in  the  more  capacious  ark
of  a  good  man's  heart,  the  commandments  of  God  are  kept.  2.  So,  also,  the  course  of
disloyalty  is  portrayed:  (1)  As  a  dislike  of  Qod.  "If  thine  heart  turn  away."
Through  ignorance,  or  prejudice,  or  pride,  or  sensual  indulgence,  men  grow  in  dislike
of  God,  until  his  very  Name  is  odious — ^his  presence  a  very  hell.  Repugnance  to  Qod
is  the  livery  they  wear.  (2)  As  wanton  deafness.  "  So  that  thou  wilt  not  hear."  The
ear  is  only  an  instrument;  the  effective  power  comes  from  a  deeper  sovirce.  We
gradually  bring  ourselves  into  a  condition  in  which  we  hear  only  what  we  wish  to  hear.
The  bulk  of  men  have  made  themselves  deaf  to  God's  voice.  (3)  As  weak  compliance
to  temptation.  Thou  "  shalt  be  drawn  away."  The  habit  of  most  men  is  to  float  with
the  stream.  They  yield  thoughtlessly  to  the  influence  of  public  example.  They^do  as
othew  do,  speak  as  others  dictate.  (4)  As  ignoble  service  of  idols.  "And  worship
other  gods."  Man  must  worship  somewhat.  It  is  a  necessity  of  his  being.  He  is  not
self-contained ;  nor  can  he  be  satisfied  out  of  himself.  He  worships  power,  wealth,
fashion,  social  fame,  fate,  the  devil.

IL  Altebnativb  bxperienob.  1.  The  course  of  loyality  secures :  (1)  AH  real
good.  The  good  is  not  always  apparent — not  always  immediate.  Yet  even  the
experiences  of  pain  and  calamity  prove  ultimately  to  the  obedient  soul  a  real  good.  The
storms  of  winter  are  as  needful  to  the  best  life  as  the  warm  breath  of  spring.  All  that
is  wise,  pure,  excellent,  elevating,  noble,  useful,  is  to  be  gained  in  the  pathway  of
obedience.  Every  stage  accomplished  is  a  new  instalment  of  good.  (2)  It  secures
increase  of  nurnbers.  Rapid  multiplication  was,  humanly  speaking,  Israel's  security.  By
this  means,  they  could  outnumber  their  foes.  Through  our  children,  blessing  and  glad-
ness come.  So  is  it  in  spiritual  things.  We  taste  the  highest  joy  when  we  become  the
channels  of  Christ's  life  to  men.  We  long  to  have  many  genial  companions  in  the  road
to  heaven.  (3)  It  secures  Divine  blessing.  "The  Lord  thy  God  shall  bless  thee."
External  possessions  contain  no  blessing  in  themselves.  The  richest  lands — the  fairest
scenes  on  earth,  are  stripped  of  charm,  so  long  as  they  are  enveloped  in  absolute  dark-
ness. It  is  the  light  of  God's  favour  that  converts  possession  into  blessing.  Hence
the  little  of  the  righteous  is  better  than  the  abundance  of  the  wicked.  If  God's  blessing
be  on  otir  estates,  that  makes  them  secure.  Tliat  blessing  is  the  core  and  marrow  of
true  prosperity.  That  blessing  alone  gives  fragrance  and  gladness  to  life.  This  blessing
is  secured  by  the  oath  of  God.  2.  But  the  course  of  disloyalty  is  marked  by  the  opposite
experience.  (1)  It  is  an  experience  of  evil.  The  table  may  groan  under  the  pro-
fusion of  dainty  food,  but  there  is  a  scarcity  of  food  for  the  soul.  The  body  may  be
pampered,  but  there  is  leanness  in  the  spirit.  Riches  may  increase,  but  they  daily
corrupt  the  mind.  There  may  be  noisy  laughter,  but  it  only  covers  inner  sadness  and
hidden  grief.  No  sorrow  is  sanctified.  The  real  man  is  starved  and  ruined.  (2)  There
is  distressing  insecurity.  We  are  rich  to-day  ;  we  may  be  paupers  to-morrow,  "  Ye
shall  not  prolong  your  days  in  the  land."  Apart  from  God's  favour,  we  have  not  a  day's
lease  of  life — not  the  cii;tainty  that  any  possession  of  ours  shall  continue.  We  dwell
on  the  verge  of  a  volcano.  The  earth  quivers  under  our  feet.  (3)  There  is  a  sense  of
the  Divine  curse.  A  life  of  disloyalty  is  a  life  of  constant  warfare  with  God — a  conflict
with  Omnipotence.  Every  plan  which  impious  men  make  is  a  plan  to  elude  and  defeat
God.  And  they  know  they  cannot  permanently  succeed.  There  is  a  dark  pall  over-
hanging every  prospect— a  night  of  gloom  closing  in  their  little  day.  The  curse  of  a
good  man  is  an  awful  calamity :  what  must  God's  curse  include?

III.  Alternative  destiny.    1.  The  destiny  of  the  good  man  ia  life.     This  means
life  in  its  fullest  measure,  in  its  highest  form,  in  its  perpetual  developments.    Gradually


CH.  XXX.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMI.  475

all  the  elements  of  wealtness  and  pain  and  decay  shall  be  eliminated.  Compared  with
the  future  life  of  the  righteous,  the  present  life  is  but  chililhood— the  feebleness  and
ignorance  of  infancy.  The  life  which  is  promised  to  the  righteous  is  nothing  less  than
the  life  of  God.  "  We  shall  be  like  him.  2.  The  destiny  of  disloyalty  it  destruction.
"  Te  shall  surely  perish."  This  includes  disRppointment — the  sudden  collapse  of  all
earthly  hopes.  It  embraces  shame  and  public  reproach.  The  disloyal  will  be  the
laughing-stock  of  the  universe.  They  shall  be  covered  with  confusion.  This  dark
destiny  includes  poignant  remorse.  The  unrigliteous  will  know,  to  their  deepest  grief
that  they  might  have  been  saved  if  they  would.    Such  despair  baffles  all  description.

IV.  Instant  choice  demanded.  We  cannot  do  other  than  admire  the  condescension
of  God  in  pleading  so  pathetically  with  men.  1.  There  is  full  instriiction.  "  I  Imve
set  before  thee  life  and  death."  Every  element  of  needed  information  is  furnished  ;
and  personal  examination  of  spiritual  facts  is  expected.  Every  man  is  bound  to  in-
vestigate, to  ponder,  to  judge.  2.  There  is  authoritative  command.  "  I  command  thee."
On  the  side  of  righteous  precept  there  is  supreme  authnrity.  Every  appeal  of  God  is
an  appeal  to  the  noblest  part  of  our  nature — to  conscience.  Every  solicitation  of  the
tempter  is  an  appeal  to  appetite  and  passion.  3.  There  is  tender  entreaty.  To  the
activities  of  wisdom  and  authority  is  added  the  impulse  of  love.  If  man's  benevolent
love  prompt  him  to  use  all  measures  to  turn  the  disloyal  unto  God ;  how  much  deeper
must  be  the  love  of  God,  of  which  man's  affection  is  but  a  faint  adumbration  1  With
all  the  pathos  which  human  sympathy  can  lead  to  entreaty  Moses  pleads,  "therefore
choose  life."  4.  Heaven  and  earth  are  summoned  to  hear  the  solemn  charge.  Angels
note  the  fidelity  of  God's  'prophets.  All  heaven  is  interested  in  man's  obedience.  The
joy  of  heaven  rises  to  new  heights  with  every  accession  of  loyal  subjects.  And  all  the
inhabitants  of  earth  are  interested  in  our  obedience,  whether  they  feel  that  interest  or
not.  The  future  history  of  this  world  is  in  our  hands — is  being  moulded  by  our  deeds.
What  we  are  to-day  determines  what  the  next  generation  will  be.  Eich  man  who
hears  the  heavenly  summons  makes  decision  straightway,  if  not  in  form,  yet  in  reality.
Each  man  is  writing  the  epitaph  for  his  tomb — preparing  his  verdict  for  the  last
assize  I    Can  we  not  to-day  forecast  our  final  destiny  ? — D.

Vers.  1 — 10. —  The  restoration  of  the  Jews.  So  certain  is  the  apostacy  and  the  judg-
ment on  the  land,  that  Moses  assumes  it  as  an  accomplished  fact,  thereuiion  proceeding
to  predict  a  restoration  of  the  "scattered  nation  "  in  case  of  their  repentance.  There
must  be  the  penitent  return  to  God,  and  then  God  will  restore  them  and  bless  them
abundantly.  It  was  this  principle  which  was  carried  out  in  the  restoration  from
Babylon,  and  which  will  be  carried  out  in  any  future  restoration  of  Israel.  We  have
here  the  raison  d'etre  of  Jewish  missions.

I.  The  penitence  of  Israel  is  the  preliminary  to  this  restoration.  Their
captivity  and  dispersion  having  arisen  from  their  forsaking  God,  it  is  only  reasonable
that  their  penitence  should  precede  their  restoration.  Into  the  question  of  the
re-establishment  of  the  Jews  in  Palestine  we  need  not  here  enter.  Dr.  Brown,  who  has
written  so  well  on  the  second  advent,  and  shown  conclusively,  we  think,  that  it  will  not
be  premillennial,  has  also  advocated  a  restoration  of  Israel  to  their  own  land.*  However
this  may  bo,  of  one  thing  we  may  be  certain,  that  the  spiritual  restoration  of  Israel  will
precede  any  local  restoration.  They  will  be  restored  to  Ood  before  being  restored — if
restored  they  are  to  be — to  Palestine.

II.  To  the  evangelization  op  the  Jews  Christian  Chubohbs  should  intel-
LiaENTLY  devote  THEMSELVES.  The  winning  of  them  by  and  to  the  gospel  is  the
most  important  service  we  can  render  them.  No  movement  of  the  political  chess-board
is  half  so  important  as  the  winning  of  them  back  to  God,  When,  moreover,  the  local
restoration  is  problematical,  while  the  spiritual  restopation  is  the  indispensable  pre-
liminary to  any  further  good  fortune, — the  duty  of  Christians  is  most  clear.  The
gospel  of  Jesus  must  be  adapted  to  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  Israel,  and  pressed
upon  their  attention  with  all  the  sweet  persuasiveness  Christian  grace  ensures.

IIL  Jbwish  missions  are  the  true  compensation  fob  the  persecution  of  thx

'  <The  Bestoration  of  the  Jews:  the  History,  Prlnoipleg,  and  Bearings  of  the  Question,'
hj  Dr.  David  Brown.    Edinburgh :  1861.


i76  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxx.  1—20.

Jews,  to  which,  alas  I  thet  abb  still  in  some  quaktebs  subjected.  For  it  must
be  remembered  that  the  persecution  of  Israel,  though  allowed  as  a  just  retribution  for
their  rejection  of  God,  may  be  prosecuted  in  such  an  unholy  spirit  as  to  entail  upon  the
persecutors  the  merited  curse  of  God.  Because  there  may  be  Shylocks  among  the
Jews  is  no  reason  why  men  should  wreak  their  vengeance  on  them.  Indeed,  the  Lord
threatens  to  put  the  curses  upon  their  persecutors,  when  they  have  turned  unto  him.

If  this  be  so,  then  it  is  the  duty  of  Christian  people  to  repudiate  all  persecution  of
the  Jews  as  such,  and  to  organize  such  mission  work  as  may  bring  the  truth  and  claims
of  God  before  the  mind  and  heart  of  his  ancient  people.  This  will  prove  the  true
compensation  to  them.  It  will  solace  them  under  suffering  and  trial,  and  enable  them
to  forget  in  the  joys  of  a  new  life  the  pains  and  juilgments  of  the  old.  Besides,  the
mission  work  undertaken  by  God's  people  may  avert  the  judgments  of  Almighty  God
deserved  by  the  nations  that  have  persecuted  the  Jews.  It  is  a  matter  of  great  thank-
fulness that  England  and  America  have  an  open  door  for  Israel,  and  no  sympathy  with
their  present  oppressors.

rV.  The  ruTURB  or  Isbaei.  is  to  exceed  in  globt  the  past.  This  seems  clear
from  this  passage.  The  Jewish  development  is  to  exceed  all  past  developments.  They
are  to  have  a  mighty  population,  great  wealth,  and  God  is  to  rejoice  over  them  for
good  again.  We  do  not  regard  a  national  organization  as  essential  to  influence.
Christianity  is  now,  for  example,  the  mightiest  factor  in  human  society,  and  yet  it  is  not
organized  nationally.  Should  the  Jews  by  their  rare  linguistic  powers,  by  their  patient
courage,  by  their  singleness  of  aim,  become  when  converted  to  Christianity  the  predomi-
nant missionary  factor  in  the  world,  then  we  can  see  in  such  a  restoration  a  more
powerful  and  blessed  influence  than  if  they  furnished  to  the  world  a  new  line  of  famous
kings.  It  is  not  dynasties,  but  the  devotion  of  the  people,  which  goes  to  make  a
people  mighty.  The  kingdoms  over  which  men  rule  may  not  be  defined  in  statute-book
or  in  treaties.  There  are  kingships  exercised  by  humble,  devoted,  cross-bearing  men,
which  explain  the  kingship  of  the  crucified  Nazarene.  It  is  to  this  spiritual  domi-
nation that  we  trust  Israel  shall  yet  come.

And  this  shall  prove  its  glory.  For  glory  consists  not  in  the  employmeut  of  phyEioal
and  mechanical  force,  but  in  the  exercise  of  self-denial  and  devotedness  of  spirit.  As
Carlyle  has  said  in '  Sartor  Besartus,'  "  The  first  preliminary  moral  act,  annihilation  of
self  (Selbst-todlung),  had  been  happily  accomplished ;  and  my  mind's  eyes  were  now
unsealed  and  its  hands  ungyved."  It  is  they  who  have  realized  this  who  are  on  the
path  of  real  glory.  From  their  money-lending  and  money-grubbing  the  Jews,  by
Christianity,  shall  yet  be  delivered,  to  devote  themselves  in  a  more  excellent  way  to  the
interests  of  mankind. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  11 — 14. — ITie  revelation  at  man's  door.  We  have  a  very  beautiful  thought
inserted  by  Moses  regarding  the  proximity  and  handiness — if  we  may  be  allowed  the
thought — of  C  ;d's  commandments.  It  is  used  by  Paul  in  the  same  connection,  and  so
adapted  to  the  gospel  as  to  show  its  practical  tenor  (Bom.  x,  6 — 9).  And  here  we  would
observe —

I.  Extravagant  notions  are  entertained  of  what  a  Divine  revelation  ouoht
to  be.  It  is  thought  that  it  should  be  some  far-away  affair,  to  which  none  but
seraphic  spirits  could  soar ;  as  hij;h  as  heaven,  and  requiring  vast  powers  and  efforts  to
reach.  Or  it  is  thought  to  be  as  recondite  as  matters  lying  in  the  deep-sea  bed,
demanding  such  diving  apparatus  as  practically  to  put  it  out  of  reach  of  ordinary
mortals.  This  is  the  favourite  notion  of  the  self-confident  critics,  that  a  Divine  revela-
tion must  be  something  attainable  only  by  scholars,  appreciable  only  by  the  geniuses
of  mankind.

II.  But  as  a  uatteb  of  fact,  God's  revelation  comes  down  to  evert  man's  doob.
God  came  down  to  Mount  Sinai,  and  spoke  to  the  people  directly.  The  trouble  then
was  that  he  was  too  near — too  homely;  they  wished  him  further  away.  Then
prophets  came,  and  for  fifteen  hundred  years  the  word  was  brought  very  nigh  to  men.
At  last  God's  Son  became  incarnate,  and  was  each  man's  Broi  her,  and  brought  the  message
so  close  to  men  that  only  the  proud  escaped  it.  The  whole  genius  of  revelation  is
contained  in  the  remarkable  words,  "  I  thank  thee,  0  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,
because  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them


CH.  XXX.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  411

unto  babes.  Even  so.  Father :  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight "  (Matt.  li.  25,  26).
The  revelation  is  for  babes;  for  men  of  a  childlike — ^not  a  childish — spirit;  for  men  vbo
have  laid  aside  their  pride  and  presumption,  and  can  take  truth  trustfully  from  the
Infinite  Father.

The  idea  is  surely  monstrous  that  God  cannot  break  his  Divine  bread  small  enough
for  his  human  children  ;  that  none  but  men  of  a  certain  mental  calibre  can  get  hold  of
the  food  or  digest  it.  It  is  surely  a  diviner  plan  to  bring  the  truth  so  plainly  home
that  none  have  any  excuse  for  rejecting  it.

III.  Let  each  of  ns  qivb  up  oub  grand  exocrsions  both  skyward  and  sea-
ward, AND   RECEIVE   God'S   MESSAGE  BROUGHT    NEAR    US  BY  HIS    SoN.        Pride    is    for

ever  leading  men  upon  some  aerial  or  aquatic  adventure,  searching  the  heights  of
heaven  on  the  wing  of  fancy  or  of  sjieculation,  or  exploring  the  deepest  depths,  professedly
to  find  truth  and  God.  Philosophy  is  invoked,  and  everything  brought  to  the  test  of
it.  Now,  all  this  must  be  sacrificed  before  we  receive  the  truth.  We  must  humble
ourselves,  and  recognize  the  truth  brought  in  Jesus  Christ  to  our  very  door.  If  we
required  terrific  effort  to  reach  the  truth,  we  would  boast  that  we  had  succeeded  through
that  effort.  If  it  depended  on  great  mental  powers  and  struggle,  we  would  take  credit  for
both.  But  the  fact  is,  it  is  brought  so  near  to  each  of  us,  and  so  plainly  home,  that  not
one  of  us  can  boast  of  our  discovery,  but  only  chide  ourselves  that  it  was  so  long  near
us  and  so  long  overlooked !

IV.  It  is  HERE  THAT  WE  MUST  BEGIN  WITH  THE  Jews.  Ag  a  Fulo,  they  are  so  puffed
np  with  pride  and  self-importance,  that  the  gospel  is  overlooked  in  its  glorious  proxi-
mity and  adaptation.  They  think  they  are  such  linguists  and  such  thinkers  that  none
can  instruct  them,  and  the  result  is  that  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel  escapes  their
notice  altogether.  The  grandeur  of  what  is  simple  and  comprehensible  by  all  who  are
not  too  proud  to  consider  it  must  be  urged  with  earnestness.  The  apologetic  now  needed
is,  not  what  follows  speculation  to  its  utmost  height  or  utmost  depth,  and  boasts  itself  of
learning  as  great  as  the  objector  has  ;  but  what  .takes  its  firm  stand  upon  the  simplicity
of  revelation  as  the  supreme  proof  that  it  is  Divine.  It  seems  to  us  that  some  of  the
apologetic  to  which  we  are  now  treated  is  as  pedantic  as  those  it  desires  to  convince,  and,
iu  a  contest  of  mere  pedantry,  it  Is  sure  to  be  defeated.  Rather  should  we  assure  men
that  it  is  pedantry  and  pride  which  keeps  them  from  discovering  the  wondrous  reve-
\ition  that  lies  so  near  us.  Let  Gentile  and  Jew  give  up  the  weary  wandering,  the
"  will-o'-the-wisp"  work  of  pride,  and  recognize  the  God  who  is  knocking  at  each  man's
door.— B.  M,  E.

Vers.  15 — ^20. — Death  and  life  tet  hefore  the  people.  In  this  earnest  word  which
concludes  a  section  of  his  address  to  the  people,  Moses  is  summing  up  his  deliverance.
It  has  been  called  by  Havernick  "  the  classic  passage  "  upon  the  subject  of  death  and
life  as  understood  in  Old  Testament  times.*  "  Shut  out  from  the  true  community  of  life
(Lebensgemeinscha/t),"  says  Havernick, "  the  sinner  puts  in  only  a  pretended  life  {Schein-
leben),  without  God,  enduring  and  promoting  ruin  in  himself,  until  death  physical,  with
its  terrors,  overtakes  him.  The  Divine  penalty  manifests  itself  to  the  sinner  as  death."
Let  us  consider  what  is  here  suggested.     And —

I.  GoD  IS  THE  Fountain  of  life.  He  was  before  all  things  ;  In  him  they  live  and
move  and  have  their  being  ;  by  him'all  things  consist.  Life  physical  is  from  him ;  but  so
also,  and  in  a  much  fuller  fashion,  is  life  spiritual.  The  inner  man  is  from  him,  and
depends  upon  him  for  sustenance.  And  when  his  only  begotten  Son  came  into  the  world,
hfe  gave  him  to  havelife  in  himself  (John  v.  26),  so  that  (if  him  it  could  alone  be  said,
"  In  him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men  "  ( Jolin  i.  4).  We  recognize  in  God,
therefore, "  the  Fountain  of  living  waters,"  from  whicii,  to  their  own  great  damage,  men
are  separating  themselves,  as  if  the  broken  cisterns  of  their  own  hewing  could  ever  slake
their  thirst  (Jer.  ii.  13).

II.  LovB  ATTACHES  US  TO  THIS  SPIRITUAL  FOUNTAIN.  Ag  we  love  God  with  all  our
heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength,  we  find  that  we  have  begun  to  live.  On  the
other  hand,  the  loveless  life  is  only  a  pretended  life,  and  carries  within  itself  the
"Anathema  Maran-atha"  (cf.  1  Cor.  xvi.  22).    Love  places  our  heart  at  a  level  with

'  0£  Eahle's  *  Biblische  Eschatologie,'  note  p.  29.


478  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxx.  1—20.

Gh)d's,  and  the  riches  of  his  life  flow  into  us.  As  Emerson,  writing  oi gifts,  says,  "The
gift,  to  be  true,  must  be  the  flowing  of  the  giver  unto  me,  correspondent  to  my  flowing
unto  him.  When  the  waters  are  at  a  level,  then  my  goods  pass  to  him  and  his  to  me.
All  his  are  mine,  all  mine  his."  It  is  exactly  in  this  magnanimous  spirit  God  deals
with  those  who  love  him.  All  his  life  and  fulness  flow  down  to  us;  we  cannot,  of
course,  take  all  in — our  measure  is  a  small  one,  but  we  are  filled  up  to  our  capacity
with  all  the  fulness  of  God  (Eph.  iii.  18).

III.  Love  gives  birth  to  new  obedience.  If  we  love  God,  we  shall  keep  his  com-
mandments (John  xiv.  15).  In  the  eye  of  love,  his  commandments  are  not  grievous
(1  John  V.  3).  Our  meat  is  found  in  doing  the  will  pf  him  that  sends  us,  and  in
finishing  his  work  (John  iv.  34).  We  say  with  the  Master,  "  I  delight  to  do  thy  will,
0  my  God ;  yea,  thy  Law  is  within  my  heart "  (Ps.  xl.  8).  And  so,  in  the  terras  of  the
passage  before  us,  we  walk  in  God's  ways,  and  keep  his  commandments  and  statutes
and  judgments.

Now,  this  obedience  strenathens  the  spiritual  life.  Just  as  exercise  invigorates  the
body,  so  work  of  a  spiritual  kind  invigorates  the  soul.  We  not  only  find  rest  in  coming
to  Jesus,  hilt  refreshment  in  taking  on  us  his  yoke  and  his  biinlcn  (IMatt.  xi.  28 — 80).

IV.  Such  a  lite  op  attachment  and  obedience  unto  God  tunds  to  peepetuatk
OUK  power  and  existence.  Other  things  being  equal,  a  religious  life  tends  to  perpetuate
physical  power.  The  calm  which  pervades  the  faculties,  the  wholesome  exercise  which
devotedness  to  God  administers,  the  deliverance  from  fear  which  religion  bestows  in  face
of  all  possible  vicissitude  and  change, — all  this  favours  health  and  longevity.  Of  course,
Christianity  does  not  need  now  such  outward  testimonies  as  these.  Many  saints  are
sickly,  and  die  young ;  but  religion  never  made  their  sickness  a  whit  more  serious,  nor
shortened  their  career  by  a  single  day.  They  would  have  been  less  easy  in  their  sicl\ness,
and  it  would  have  cut  their  thread  of  life  more  quickly,  had  they  been  strangers  to  its
solaces  and  joys.

V.  Separation  from  the  Source  of  life  is  death  indeed.  In  this  fetriking  passage,
while  "  good  "  and  "  life  "  go  together.  So  do  "  death  "  and  "  evil."  The  idea  in  death  is
not  cessation  of  existence,  but  separation  from  God.  Adam  and  Eve  died  the  day  they
doubted  God's  love  and  ate  the  fruit.  They  ceased  not  to  exist  tliat  day,  but  died  out
of  fellowship  with  God.  Hence  we  are  not  to  associate  an  aninhilation  view  with  the
Biblical  idea  of  death.  Men  die  when  they  are  separated  from  God  as  really  as  tlie
branch  bruken  from  the  stem.  Sin  is  the  mother  of  Death  (Jas.  i.  15).  It  brings  it  forth,
because  it  separates  the  soul  from  him  who  is  the  Fountain  of  life.

The  Jews  found  in  their  national  experience  how  deadly  a  thing  it  is  to  disobey  their
Gk)d  and  to  depart  from  him.  Kor  shall  their  calamities  cease  till  they  return  to  him.
Meanwhile,  may  we  see  to  it  that  we  cleave  trustfully  and  lovingly  to  God,  and  bave
incressing  life  in  his  favour  1 — B.  M.  £.


CH.  XXXI.  1 — 30.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


479


PAKT  IV.


FAEEWELL    ADDRESS    OP    MOSES,    WITH    HIS    PARTING
SONG  AND  BENEDICTION.

CHAPTER  XXXI.— CHAPTER  XXXIIL

EXPOSITION.


MoBBR  bad  now  finfBhed  his  work  as  the
legislator  and  ruler  and  leader  of  Israel.
But  ere  be  finally  retired  from  his  place,  lie
had  to  take  order  for  the  carrying  forward
of  the  work  by  the  nomination  of  a  buc-
cesBor  to  himself  in  the  leadership;  by
committing  the  keeping  of  the  Law  to  the
priests;  and  by  anew  admonishing  the
people  to  obedience,  encouraging  them  to
go  forward  to  the  conquest  of  Canaan,
animating  them  witli  tlie  assurance  of  the
Divine  faTonr  and  blessing,  and  pronounc-
ing on  them  hia  parting  benediction.

CHAPTER  XXXL
Moses'  Final  Abrangements  and  Hans-

INO  OVEB  OF  THE  LaW  TO  THE  PrIEBTS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — Last  acts  of  Motes.

Ver.  1. — ^And  Moses  went;  i.e.  disposed
or  set  himself.  The  meaning  is  not  that  he
"  went  away  "  into  the  tent  of  teaching,  as
one  of  the  Targums  explains  it  (London
Polyglot,  torn.  iv.  p.  377),  which  does  not
agree  with  what  follows;  nor  is  "went"
merely  equivalent  to  "  moreover ; "  nor  is  it
simply  redundant; — it  intimates  that  the
■peaking  was  consequent  on  Moses  having
arranged,  disposed,  or  set  himself  to  speak
(cf.  Ezod.  iL  1 ;  Josli.  ix.  4 ;  Job  i.  4).

Ver.  2. — I  am  an  hundred  and  twenty
years  old  this  day.  When  Moses  stood
before  Pharaoh  he  was  eighty  years  old
(Exod.  vii.  7) ;  since  then  forty  years  had
elapsed  during  the  wanderings  in  the
wilderness.  I  can  no  more  go  cut  and  come
in;  I  am  no  longer  able  to  work  among  and
for  the  nation  as  I  have  hitherto  done  (cf.
Numb,  xxvii.  17).  This  does  not  conflict
with  the  statement  in  ch.  xxxiv.  7,  that  up
to  the  time  of  his  death  his  eyes  were  not
dim  nor  his  natural  strength  abated,  for
this  is  the  statement  of  an  observer,  and  it
often  happens  that  an  individual  feels  him-
self to  be  failing,  when  to  those  around  him
he  appears  to  possess  unabated  vigour.
There  is  no  need,  therefore,  for  resorting,


with  Baschi  and  others,  to  the  expedient  of
reading  "for"  instead  of  "and"  in  the
following  clause;  as  if  the  cause  why  Moses
could  no  longer  go  in  and  out  among  the
tbe  people  was  God's  prohibition  of  his
going  over  Jordan.  This  is  simply  another
and  collateral  reason  why  he  had  now  to
retire  from  his  post  as  leader.

Vers.  3 — 6. — But  though  Moses  was  no
longer  to  be  their  leader,  he  assures  them
that  the  Lord  would  fulfil  his  engagement
to  conduct  them  to  the  possession  of  Canaan,
even  as  he  had  already  given  them  the
territory  of  the  kings  of  the  Amorites;
and  he  therefore  exhorts  them  to  be  of
good  courage  and  fearlessly  go  forward  to
the  conquest  of  the  land  (cf.  ch.  i.  21 ;  x.  3).

Vers.  7,  8. — Moses,  having  in  view  the
appointment  of  Joshua  as  his  successor,
also  encourages  him  to  go  forward  on  the
strength  of  the  Divine  promise.  Then  must
go  with  this  people.  This  is  a  correct
rendering  of  the  words  as  they  stand  in  the
Hebrew  text.  Tbe  Samaritan,  Syriac,  and
Vulgate  have,  "Thou  shalt  bring  this
people ; "  but  this  is  probably  an  arbitrary
correction  in  order  to  assimilate  this  to
ver.  23.  And  thou  shalt  cause  them  to
inherit  it;  i.e.  shalt  conduct  them  to  the
full  possession  of  the  land.

Vers.  9 — 13. — Moses  tnmi  next  to  the
priests  and  the  elders,  and  to  them  he
commits  the  Law  which  he  bad  written,
with  the  injunction  to  read  it  to  the
people  at  the  end  of  every  seven  years
during  the  festival  of  tlie  year  of  release,
viz.  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (cf.  Lev.
xxiii.  84),  when  they  appeared  before  the
Lord.  At  the  end  of  every  seven  years  (cf.
ch.  XV.  1).  The  Law  was  committed  to  the
priests  and  elders,  not  merely  to  preserve  it
in  safe  keeping,  but  that  they  might  see  to
its  being  observed  by  the  people ;  else  why
commit  it  to  tbe  elders  whose  it  was  to  ad-
minister rule  in  the  nation,  as  well  as  to
the  priests  who  alone  bad  access  to  the  ark
of  the  covenant  where  the  Law  was  de-
posited ?  Moses  "  entrusted  (he  reading  to
the  priesthood  and  the  college  of  elders,  as


480


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[oh,  xxi..  1—30.


the  spiritual  and  secular  rulers  of  the  con-
gregaticn;  and  lience  the  singular,  Thou
ahalt  rpad  this  Law  to  all  Israel "  (Eeil).
By  the  Law  here  is  meant  the  Pentateuch ;
but  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the
wkoh  of  the  Pentateuch  was  to  be  thus  read.
As  the  lYiading  was  to  be  only  once  in  seven
years,  11  may  be  concluded  that  it  was  not
60  much  for  the  information  of  the  people
that  thi)  was  done,  as  for  the  purpose  of
publicly  declaring,  and  by  a  solemn  cere-
mony i  upressing  on  their  minds  the  con-
dition Dn  which  they  held  their  position'
and  privileges  as  the  chosen  people  of
the  L  )rd ;  and  for  this  the  reading  of
select  portions  of  the  Torah  would  be
sufSciint.  The  Fiast  of  Tabernacles  was
appointed  as  the  season  for  the  reading,
doubt)  ese  because  there  was  a  connection
betweim  the  end  for  which  the  Law  was
read  ond  the  spirit  and  meaning  of  that
festival  as  a  festival  of  rejoicing  because
of  thoir  diliTeranco  from  the  uncertainty
and  unsettlednesB  of  their  state  in  the
wilderness,  and  their  establishment  in  a
well-ordered  state  where  they  could  in
peace  and  quietness  enjoy  the  blessings
which  the  bounty  of  God  bestowed.  When
all  Itirael  is  come  to  appear  before  the  Lord
(of.  <h.  xvi.  16).  Thou  shalt  read  this  law
(of.  Josh.  viii.  31 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  2 ;  Neh
viii.  1,  etc.).

Vera.  14 — 23. — After  nominating  Joshua
as  his  successor,  and  assigning  the  keeping
of  the  Law  to  the  priesthood  and  body  of
elder^j,  Moses  was  summoned  by  the  Lord
to  appear  with  Josiiua  in  the  tabernacle,
that  Joshua  might  receive  a  charge  and
appointment  to  his  office.  At  the  same
time,  God  announced  to  Moses  that  after
his  death  the  people  would  go  astray,  and
turn  to  idolatry,  and  violate  the  covenant,
so  that  God's  anger  should  be  kindled
against  them,  and  he  would  leave  them  to
suffer  the  consequences  of  their  folly  and
sin.  In  view  of  this,  Moses  was  directed  to
write  a  song  and  teach  it  to  the  people,
thit  it  might  abide  witli  them  as  a  witness
against  them,  rising  up,  as  songs  wUl  do,  in
the  memory  of  the  nation,  even  after  they
had  apostatized  from  the  path  in  which  the
author  of  the  song  had  led  them.

Yer.  14.— The  tabernacle  of  the  congrega-
tion; properly,  the  tent  of  meeling  (ct  Exod.
xxxiii.  7;  zxxix.  32).  May  give  him  a
charge ;  may  constitute  him  (rmi ;  of.  Kumb.
xxvii  19;  "and  constitute  him  in  their
sight,"  Gesenius),  appoint  and  confirm  him
in  this  office.

Yer.  15. — The  lord  appeared  ...  in  a


pillar  of  a  olond  (cf.  Exod.  xxxiii  9;  xl.  38;
Lev.  xvi  2 ;  Xumb.  xii.  5).

Yer.  16.— Behold,  thou  shalt  sleep  with
thy  fathers  (of.  2  Sam.  vii  12;  Ps.  xiii  3;
Ixxvi.  5;  Dan.  xii  2;  Matt,  xxvii.  52;
John  xi  11 ;  1  Thets.  iv.  14).  "The  death
of  men,  both  good  and  bad,  is  often  called  a
ileep,  because  they  shall  certainly  awake  out
of  it  by  resurrection  "  (Poole).  Go  a  whoring
(of.  Exod.  xxxiv.  15;  Judg.  ii.  17)  after
the  gods  of  the  strangers  of  the  land;
literally,  after  gods  of  strangeness  of  &»
land  ;  i.e.  after  gods  foreign  to  the  land,  ai
opposed  to  Jehovah,  the  alone  proper  God
of  the  land  he  had  given  to  them.

Yer.  17. — I  will  hide  my  face  from  them  j
will  not  look  on  them  with  complacency,
will  withdraw  from  them  my  favour  and
help  (cf.  oh.  xxxii  20 ;  Isa.  viii.  17;  Ixiv.  7 ;
Ezek.  xxxix.  23).

Yer.  19. — ^Write  ye  thia  gong.  This  refers
to  the  song  which  follows  in  next  chapter.
Moses  and  Joshua  were  both  to  write  this
song,  Moses  probably  as  the  author,  Joshua
as  his  amanuensis,  because  both  of  them
were  to  do  their  endeavour  to  keep  the
people  from  that  apostucy  which  God  had
foretold.

Yer.  23. — And  he  gave,  etc.  The  subject
here  is  God,  not  Moses,  as  is  evident  partly
from  ver.  14,  and  partly  from  the  expressioii,
the  land  which  I  sware  unto  them ;  and  f
will  be  with  thee  (cf.  Exod.  iii  12).

Yers.  24— 29.— After  the  installation  of
Joshua,  only  one  thing  remained  for  Moses
to  do  that  all  things  might  be  set  in  order
before  his  departure.  This  was  the  finishing
of  the  writing  of  the  Book  of  the  Law,  and
tlie  committing  it  finally  to  the  priests,  to  be
by  them  placed  by  the  ark  of  the  covenant,
that  it  might  be  kept  for  all  future  genera-
tions as  a  witness  against  the  people,  whose
apostacy  and  rebellioa  were  foreseen.

Whether  this  fection  is  to  be  regarded  as
wholly  written  by  Moses  himself,  or  as  an
appendix  to  his  writing  added  by  some
other  writer,  has  been  made  matter  of
question.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,
that  Moses  himself,  ere  he  laid  down
the  pen,  may  have  recorded  what  he  said
when  delivering  the  Book  of  the  Law  to
the  priests,  and  there  is  nothing  in  the
manner  or  style  of  the  record  to  render  it
probable  that  it  was  added  by  another.
What  follows  from  ver.  30  to  the  end  of  the
book  was  probably  added  to  the  writing  of
Moses  by  some  one  after  his  death,  though,
of  course,  both  the  song  in  ch.  xxxii.  and


on,  &XXI.


,-30.]


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


481


the  blessing  in  ch.  xxziii.  are  tlie  compo-
sition of  Moses  (see  Introduction,  §  6).

Ver.  25. — ^The  Levites,  whiohbare  the  ark;
t.e.  the  priests  whose  business  it  was  to
guard  and  to  carry  the  ark  of  the  covenant ;
"  the  priests  the  sons  of  Levi,"  as  in  ver.  9.
According  to  Numb.  iv.  4,  etc.,  it  was  the
Kohathites  who  carried  the  ark  on  the
journey  through  the  desert ;  but  they  seem
merely  to  have  acted  in  this  ri^spect  as  the
servants  or  helpen  of  the  priests,  who  alone
might  touch  the  ark,  and  by  whom  it  was
carefully  wiapped  np  before  it  was  handed
to  the  Kohathites.  On  special  occasions
the  priests  themselves  carried  the  ark  (cf.
Josh.  iii.  3,  etc.;  iv.  9,10;  vi.  6,12;  viii.
33;  1  Kings  viii.  3).

Ter.  26. — ^In  the  side  of  the  ark;  at  or  by
the  side  of  the  ark.  According  to  the
Targnm  of  Jonathan,  it  was  in  a  cofier  by
the  right  side  of  the  ark  that  the  book  was
placed ;  but  the  Talmudists  say  it  was  put
within  the  ark,  along  with  the  two  tables  of


the  Decalogne  ('Baba  Batbia,'  14);  but
see  1  Kings  viii.  8.

Ver.  27. — I  know  thy  rebellion;  rather,
rebeUiouinese,  i.e.  tendency  to  rebel.  In
Numb.  xvii.  25  [10],  the  people  are  de-
scribed as  no  '33, "  sons  of  rebelliousness ;  "
Authorized  Version,  "  rebels."

Ver.  28. — Call  heaven  and  earth  to  record
against  them  (cf.  ch.  xxxii.  1).  These  words ;
the  words  of  his  oharj2;e,  and  especially  the
song  he  had  composed,  and  which  it  irauld
be  the  business  of  these  ofScers  to  teach
to  the  congregation.

Ver.  29. — Ye  will  utterly  corrupt  your-
selves ;  literally,  corrupting,  ye  will  corrupt
(pnnsi'n  nn^n,  se.  oaja-i'j) ;  lo.  your  way»(fii.
for  the  phrase.  Gen.  vi  i2).  The  latter  days;
the  after-time,  the  future,  as  in  ch.  iv.  30 ;
Numb.  zxiv.  14,  etc.  The  work  of  your
hands ;  the  idols  they  might  make  (cf.  ch.
iv  28).  By  some,  however,  the  phrase  is
interpreted  of  evil  deeds  in  general.


HOMILETICa

Vers.  1 — 13. — A  new  generation  receiving  the  heritage  of  the  pari.  The  closing  scene
of  Moses'  life  is  drawing  nigh.  The  time  is  at  hand  when  he  and  Israel  must  part,  and
the  leadership  must  be  undertaken  by  another.  As  far  as  can  be  done,  two  things
have  to  be  ensured — viz.  the  conservation  of  Israel's  Law,  and  the  conduct  of  the  people
to  their  goal.  "  Grod  buries  his  ministers,  but  he  carries  on  his  work."  Hence  Moses
first  addresses  all  the  people ;  then  he  turns  to  Joshua,  confirming  him  as  the  future
leader  (vers.  7,  8) ;  and  finally  to  the  priests,  who  are  to  be  henceforth  the  custodians
and  guardians  of  the  holy  Law.  Having  thus  handed  over  the  leadership  of  an  army,
and  the  conservation  of  a  faith,  Moses  has  little  else  to  do  but  to  go  up  and  die.
Hence  our  theme  —A  new  generation  entrusted  with  the  heritage  of  the  past.  Taking
up  this  as  a  Christian  preacher  may  be  supposed  to  do,  we  find  that  seven  consecutive
lines  of  thought  are  suggested.

I.  There  has  been  given,  prior  to  our  time,  a  "  precious  faith,"  which  has  been  handed
down  to  the  present  day  (vers.  12,  13).

II.  Those  who  have  been  the  leaders  and  warriors  in  Gtod's  Israel  in  past  days  have
commended  this  faith  to  us,  with  all  the  earnestness  created  by  their  deep  and  strong
convictions,  which,  in  the  hard  school  of  experience  and  trial,  were  formed,  fostered,
and  verified  (vers.  3,  4).

III.  The  work  thus  entrusted  to  the  men  of  the  present  is  analogous  to  that
which  was  required  of  the  ancient  people  of  God  :  (1)  to  clear  the  ground  of  alien  faiths ;
(2)  to  occupy  the  ground  so  cleared;  and  (3)  to  maintain  thereon  pure  worship,
Itotherly  fellowship,  and  holy  life.

IV.  In  the  fulfilment  of  this  work  we  shall  enjoy  the  Divine  presence  (ver.  6).

V.  God's  providence  will  also  go  before  us  to  clear  the  way  (ver.  8).

VL  Consequently,  it  behoves  us  to  go  forward,  to  "  be  strong  and  fear  not"  (ver.  G)  :
for—

Vn.  Where  the  responsibilities  of  the  men  of  the  put  leave  off,  our  responubility
begins.

Vers.  9—13. — Importance  of  knowing  the  Word  of  Ood,  In  resigning  his  commis-
sion into  other  hands,  Moses  had  a  double  duty  to  (Uscharge.  There  had  been,  in  fact,
«  twofold  responsibility  resting  on  him  more  or  less  till  the  close  of  hir  life,  which
alter  his  death  would  be  divided.    He  was  not  only  the  leader  of  the  people,  but  also

DECTEBOirOMT.  2 1


182  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxxi.  1—30

the  receiyer,  transcriber,  and  guardian  of  the  Law.  As  the  nation  hecame  consolidated,
this  double  work  would  certainly  become  too  heavy  for  one  man  to  discharge.  Hence
he  commissions  one  man  to  be  the  leader  of  an  army,  and  another  set  of  men  to  be  the
conservators  of  the  truth.  Joshua  is  leader.  The  priests  are  to  be  the  keepers  and  teachers
of  the  Law.  It  is  one  remarkable  feature  of  the  constitution  of  the  Hebrew  common-
wealth, that  such  stress  is  laid  Ufxin  popular  education.  This  was  again  and  again
made  matter  of  Divine  precept.  And  about  this  there  were  two  main  regulations :
one,  that  it  was  to  begin  at  home ;  another,  that  it  was  to  have  as  its  one  golden  thread
running  through  all,  that  the  fear  of  the  Lord  was  the  beginning  of  wisdom.  Over
and  above,  however,  the  home  teaching  from  childhood,  there  was  to  be  at  stated  times
a  public  reading  and  enforcement  of  the  Law.  At  this  public  reading,  the  people  were
to  be  gathered  together.  "  Young  men  and  maidens,  old  men  and  children ; "  the
stranger  that  was  within  their  gates  was  not  to  be  forgotten.  All,  all  were  to  hear  the
Word  of  Gtod,  that  thoy  might  learn,  fear,  love,  and  obey.

It  is  to  secure  this  most  desirable  end  that  Moses,  having  written  the  Law,  delivers  it
to  the  priests,  the  sons  of  Levi,  and  gives  them  the  charge  of  which  the  paragraph
before  us  is  the  sum.  Our  theme  is — The  value  of  the  Word  of  Ood  as  an  educating
power  «f»  home  and  nation.  The  points  to  be  noted  in  the  words  of  Moses  here  given,
are  these :  1.  That  both  young  and  old  were  to  have  ever  before  them  the  truth  that
thdr  life  was  for  Ood,  was  to  be  permeated  by  Divine  influence,  aud  regulated  by  the
Divine  will.  2.  That  the  will  of  God,  so  revealed  as  to  be  the  true  and  sufficient
regulator  of  life,  was  to  be  found  in  the  Book  of  the  Law.  3.  That  all  classes  of  the
people,  home-bom  and  alien,  freemen  and  slaves,  were  to  be  taught  what  was  the
Divine  will  concerning  them.  4.  That  the  object  of  the  teaching  was  that  they  might
grow  up  with  an  intelligent  apprehension  of  the  deep  meaning  of  life,  5.  'ihat
intelligence  was  intended  and  expected  to  blossom  into  piety.  Men  were  to  "  fear  "
the  Lord  their  Gk)d,  and  to  "  observe  to  do  all  the  words  of  this  Law."

Our  purpose  in  this  Homily  is  to  inquire,  How  far  dues  all  this  hold  good  at  the
present  day  ?  When  Moses  wrote  the  Law,  it  served,  as  it  did  for  ages  after,  as  the
people's  literature.  It  would  take  a  like  place  with  the  people  that  our  histories  uf
England  do  now,  and  would,  moreover,  serve  them  as  the  stoiy-book  for  children,  and
the  statute-book  for  all.  And  there  was  a  time  when  to  large  masses  of  our  people
the  Bible  constituted  the  chief  literary  treasure  of  the  home.  And  ere  the  people
could  read,  the  exposition  and  enforcement  of  its  truths  from  the  pulpit  formed  the
staple  of  their  education.  But  things  are  changed  now.  The  increase  of  literary
material  in  every  direction  is  amazing.  The  vastly  wider  field  of  natural  knowledge
takes  so  much  time  and  energy  for  its  exploration,  that  the  Bible  is  in  danger  of  being
"crowded  out."  And  what  may  be  called  in  an  intelligible  sense  the  literary  rivals  of
the  Bible  are  "legion."  We  propose  to  suggest  a  few  lines  of  thought  which  the
Christian  preacher  may  work  out,  with  the  view  of  showing  that  an  intelligent
acquaintance  with  the  Word  of  God  is,  if  possible,  more  important  now  than  ever  it  was.
Many  reasons  may  be  urged  for  this.

I.  Lbt  us  consider  the  various  aspects  in  which  the  Bible  mat  be  be-
OABDED.  We  need  scarcely  observe  (save  for  the  sake  of  completeness  of  setting)
that  our  Bible  is  much  larger  than  Israel's  was,  and  that  thereFore  by  so  much  as  this
is  the  case  there  ii  much  more  to  be  afSrmed  of  It  now  than  could  be  of  the  old  Book
of  the  Law.  1.  In  the  Bible  we  have  a  tiustworthy  history  of  Judaism  and  Cbristiiinity,
in  their  origin  and  meaning.  Of  the  first  we  have  an  outline  during  the  main  per!  jiis
of  its  constitutional  history ;  of  the  secoml,  during  the  first  generation  after  its  planting.
And  80  important  are  these  features  of  history,  that  apart  from  them  the  history  of  the
world  cannot  be  understood.  2.  We  have  the  noblest  ethical  standard  in  the  world.
The  moral  law  cannot,  even  in  conception,  be  surpassed.  3.  We  have  a  revelation
of  »  great  redeeming  plan  steadily  unfolded  from  Genesis  to  Bevelation.  4.  We  have
a  disclosure  of  God  in  the  Person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  6.  We  have  the  manifesta-
tion of  power  from  heaven  to  begin  a  new  creation  of  grace.  6.  We  have  a  body  of
doctrine  for  the  life  that  now  is.  7.  We  have  glorious  glimpses  of  the  life  which  is  to
come.  In  all  these  respects  the  Book  is  unique.  It  has  no  compoer  in  any  literatiu'e
in  the  world  I

IL  Ab  the  contents  of  the  Bible  are  unique,  so  albo  is  its  object  definite.


OH.  XXXI.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOM'K.  483

(See  Pg.  xix. ;  cxix. ;  John  xxi.  31,  et  al.)  That  object  is  the  regulation  of  life  on
earth,  and  the  preparation  of  it  for  heaven.  And  the  Book  seeks  to  secure  this  by
enforcement  of  duty,  revelations  of  truth,  disclosures  of  love,  and  offers  of  power.

III.  No  AMOUNT  OF  NATURAL  LEARNING  CAN  EVER  COMPENSATE  FOB  DBPIOIBNCT
OF   KNOWLEDGE  OB   FAILUBB   IN  PBACTIOB   CONCERNING    MAN's  DUTY     TO    HIMSELF,   HIS

FAMILY,  HIS  NEIGHBOUR,  AND  HIS  GoD.  If  he  fails  here,  he  fails  everywhere.  The.
more  splendidly  a  vessel  is  fitted  up,  the  more  costly  the  wreck  if  she  dashes  on  the
rocks.  To  teach  natural  knowledge  and  leave  out  religion,  is  to  furnish  the  vessel  but
to  fail  to  make  any  provision  for  steering  it  aright.

IV.  NaTUBAL  knowledge  in  the  hands  of  other  than  VIRTUOUS  MEN  MAY
BECOME    AN    INSTRUMENT    OF    ENORMOUS     MISCHIEF.        The    attempt    tO    bloW    Up    the

Winter  Palace  at  St.  Petersburg  is  an  illustration  of  what  science  and  skill  may  do  in
bad  liands.  The  disclosures  after  the  destruction  of  the  Tay  Bridge  showed  us  how
science,  art,  and  skill  may  do  their  best,  and  yet  the  greatest  efforts  of  great  men  may
be  blown  away  in  an  hour  by  a  single  blast,  through  the  weak  points  which  un-
conscientious work  had  left,  in  the  hope  of  being  undetected.
v.  The  gbbateb  the  strength   that  is  put  forth  in  acquiring  khowledge,

THK  ORBATBR  THE   ENERGY     DEMANDED   IN  ORDEB    TO     USB    SUCH     KNOWLEDGE    WELL.

U'he  larger  the  vessel,  the  more  power  is  required  to  propel  her.  So  the  wider  the
culture,  the  stronger  does  moral  principle  need  to  be  in  order  that  natural  knowledge
may  be  not  a  veil  to  conceal,  but  a  book  to  reveal  the  Divine.

VI.  Hence  the  conclusion  follows:  So  far  from  the  accumulating  mass  of
natural  knowledge  making  the  Word  of  Gkid  less  necessary  as  a  guide  to  living  well
and  dying  well,  the  fact  is,  that  the  necessity  of  Bible  study  is  greater  than  ever  I  No
book  can  take  its  place.  No  study  can  supersede  that  of  the  ways  of  God  to  man.
Some  of  the  wisest  men  of  the  age  (so  far  as  science  goes)  confess  themselves  hopelessly
in  the  dark  with  regard  to  man's  origin,  nature,  and  destiny.  Ah!  in  the  Book  of
God,  and  in  that  alone,  can  man  learn  that  which  shall  make  him  wise  unto  salvation.
Here  alone  can  we  learn  the  mystery  of  God's  will  which  was  hidrlen  from  ages  and
generations,  but  now  is  made  manifest.  Here  alone  can  he  be  taught  that  godliness
which  hath  "  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  and  of  that  which  is  to  come."

Vers.  16 — 21. — Faithful  words  silent  accusers  of  those  who  heed  them  not.  In  the
several  paragraphs  of  this  chapter  we  find  that  Moses  was  borne  along  by  the  Holy
Ghost  to  take  a  glance  into  the  future.  He  had  been  instructed  by  God  to  give  a
charge  to  Joshua,  and  to  surrender  into  his  hands  the  leadership  of  the  host.  He  had
given  to  the  priests  their  commission  to  guard  the  Law  for  the  people.  And  now  there
remained  but  for  him  to  give  his  final  words  to  the  people  themselves.  The  Omniscient
One  foresaw  that,  after  the  death  of  their  leader,  they  would  become  corrupt,  forsaking
the  Lord,  and  ensuring  for  themselves  and  their  children  a  heritage  of  woe.  And  hence
it  was  mercifully  provided  that,  even  in  the  worst  of  times,  their  lawgiver's  words
should  be  for  them  a  perpetual  standard  of  appeal;  so  that,  however  the  people  might
have  fallen  from  the  heights  of  virtue,  they  should  still  have  the  same  trusty  words  to
guide  their  path,  and  to  direct  and  restore  their  life.  While  at  the  same  time,  these
words  would  be  a  constant  and  silent  witness  against  them  for  departing  from  the  ways
of  the  Lord.  It  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  our  Lord  had  this  passage  in  mind  when  he
said  to  the  Jews,  "  Do  not  think  that  I  will  accuse  you  to  the  Father :  there  is  one  tljat
accuseth  you,  even  Moses,  in  whom  ye  trust."  Thrit  very  Book,  which  if  rightly  used
is  "  a  lamp  "  to  the  feet  and  "  a  light "  to  the  path,  becomes,  if  neglected,  a  perpetual
and  silent  accuser.  Very  earnestly  and  solemnly  may  the  Christian  preacher  press  tl.is
home  "  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God."  That  selfsame  purpose  which
was  answered  by  securing  permanent  records  of  the  Mosaic  legislation,  is  also  answere.l
by  permanent  records  of  the  Christian  redemption.  The  apostles  and  prophets  of  the
New  Testament,  like  the  legislator  of  the  old,  spake  and  wrote  as  they  were  borne  along
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  It  is,  therefore,  over  the  larger  sphere  that  we  propose  now  to
illustrate  and  enforce  the  truth  that  neglected  teaching  becomes  a  silent  accuser.

I.  When  oub  God  lodged  in  the  world  the  Jewish  and  Christian  faiths,  he

LOOKED  ONWABD  AND  FORESAW  THE  FEATUEE8  OF  THE  COMING  GENERATIONS.      (Cf.  vers.

16—18;  see  »lso  Acts  xx.  29,  30  j  1  Tim.  iv.  1—3;  2  Pet.  iii.  3;  Matt.  xxiv.  24.)


484  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [en.  xxxi.  1—30.


Whatever  developments  of  ungodliness  or  of  unbelief,  of  immorality  or  of  heresy,  may
develop  themselves,  are  all  known  to  him  who  seeth  the  end  from  the  beginning.

n.  With  future  evil  full  in  view,  God  has  had  his  own  Word  put  down  in
WRITING.  The  words  of  Mr^es,  of  the  prophets,  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  hio
apostles  are  faithfully  recorded.  They  have  suffered  no  material  change  through  all
the  accidents  of  transition  (Phil.  iii.  1).  Paul  felt  what  a  safeguard  it  would  be  fcr
after  ages  to  have  his  words  written  down,  and  sent  to  the  Churches,  that  they  migh'
be  by  them  guarded,  distributed,  and  taught  (see  ver.  19).

III.  The  Word  op  God,  so  recorded,  is  a  perpetual  standard  of  appeal  roi!
EVERT  AGB.  Whatever  corruptions  may  enter  into  or  fasten  on  the  Churches ;  however
oral  tradition  may  change  the  original  form  of  Divine  communication, — the  written
Word  changeth  not.  How  very  soon  Churches  as  Churches  may  drift  far  away  from
the  true  in  faith  and  the  holy  in  life,  the  Epistles  to  the  Churches  in  Galatia,  Corinth,
Ephesus,  Pergamos,  Thyatira,  Laodicca,  tell.  We  see  by  them  how  very  soon  our
faith  might  be  seriously  obscured  or  impaired  if  dependent  merely  on  the  oral
transmission  of  any  Church.

IV.  By  the  pure  Word  of  God,  aberrations  mat  from  time  to  time  be  corrected.
It  if  by  the  Church  that  the  Word  of  God  is  kept  and  transmitted.  It  is  by  the  Word  so
kept  and  transmitted  that  the  Church  is  to  be  tested.  Hence,  whatever  respect  it  may
be  appropriate  to  pay  to  the  decision  of  a  Church  or  of  Churches,  those  decisions  are
valid  only  as  they  harmonize  with  what  the  Lord  hath  spoken  in  his  revealed  Word.
Whatever  will  not  abide  the  test  of  an  appeal  to  the  Book  of  God,  with  it  Christian
Churches  and  people  should  have  nothing  to  do.  Of  how  much  importance  our  Lord
regarded  this  final  test  is  seen  by  his  frequent  appeal  to  what  is  written.  Whether  he
was  in  conflict  with  the  evil  one,  or  was  himself  exposing  or  denouncing  evil,  his
ultimate  reference  was  to  what  God  had  said.

v.  COKSEQUENTLT,  BT  HAVING  IN  OUR  HANDS  A  PERPETUAL  STANDARD  OF  REFERENCE,
WE  HAVK   A  CONSTANT  AND  UNVARTINO  GUIDE  TO  WHAT  18  RIGHT  BOTH  IN  FAITH    AND

PRACTICE.  The  accounts  which  we  get  of  the  after  history  of  the  Hebrew  nation  show
us  plainly  enough  how  far  adrift  the  people  might  soon  have  gone,  if  their  faith  had
not  been  once  for  all  enshrined  and  guarded  in  a  book.  And  so  it  is  in  the  New
Testament.  For  though  we  get  therein  hints  of  the  Church's  life  for  but  little  more
than  two  generations  after  they  were  formed,  yet  the  severe  lashings  and  rebukes  which
the  Churches  in  Corinth,  Galatia,  and  Colosse  required,  as  well  as  the  seven  Churches,
show  with  equal  distinctness  that  our  most  holy  faith  might  soon  have  been  all  but
unrecoverable  from  the  mass  of  corruption,  if  it,  too,  had  not  been  recorded  in  the
writings  of  'the  apostles  and  evangelists.  But  thus  recorded  it  was,  and  through  all
the  ages  it  has  been  guarded  for  us  as  a  perpetual  standard  of  appeal.

VI.  JF,  however,  we  are  guided  by  the  varying  OPINIONS  AND  SINFUL  PRACTICES
OF  MEK,  AND  SO  NEGLECT   TO  TAKE  HEED  TO  OUR  STANDARDS,  THEY  WILL  BE  PERPETUAL

WITNESSES  AOAINST  US.  (Ver.  21.)  So  our  Lord  tells  the  Jews  in  reference  to  the
departures  from  the  faith  and  the  corruptions  in  life  which  marked  his  time  (of.  John
V.  54).  And  thus  it  must  ever  be.  The  very  fact  of  having  a  standard  of  appeal
serves  two  purposes.  Which  of  the  two  it  will  serve  so  far  as  we  are  concerned
depends  on  the  use  we  make  thereof.  If  we  abide  by  it  and  conform  thereto,  it  will
verify  our  belief  and  justify  our  life.  But  if  we  depart  from  it,  it  can  only  act  as  a
witness  against  us  to  condemn  us.  Evtry  privilege  is  this  tivo-edged.  If  used  aright,
it  helps  us;  if  disused  or  abused,  it  will  be  for  a  perpetual  reproof.  So  it  is  with
parental  advice,  with  a  teacher's  counsels,  with  a  pastor's  pleadings,  with  a  Saviour's
invitations :  accepted  and  heeded,  they  will  be  a  perpetual  joy ;  but  if  made  light  of,
they  will  plunge  daggers  into  the  soul.

VII.  This  silent  accusation  goino  on  now,  foreshadows  a  more  serious
CRIMINATION  AT  THE  JUDGMENT  DAT.  (Cf.  Malt.  xL  22, 24 ;  xii.  41,42.)  The  whiri  of
life,  and  the  surroundings  of  flesh  and  sense,  conceal  from  many  the  spiritual  world.
Sui  it  exists.  And  when  we  are  summoned  hence  we  shall  see  it  and  know  it.  We
shall  feel  ourselves  with  God — alone.  And  this — this  will  be  the  beginning  of  that
awful  procesi  of  judgment  which,  on  the  last  day,  is  to  be  consummated  and  sealed.
And  what  sore  condemnation  must  await  those  to  whom  Ghxl  has  spoken  in  hie
Word  for  years  on  years,  but  in  vain  (see  Ezek.  xxxiii.)!


CH.  %xxi.  1—30.]  TUE  BOOK  OF  DEUlEfiONOMt.  485


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa.

Ven.  1,  2. — Moses  t?ie  ■  aged,  I.  A  uan  mat  be  in  health  aki  TioonB,  tei
rAST  OAFACITT  FOB  A  CERTAIN  woBK.  Moses'  "  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  his  natural  force
abated"  (ch.  xxxiv.  7),  yet  he  felt  that  he  lacked  the  fire,  the  activity,  the  youthful
energy,  the  elasticity  of  mind  and  body,  which  would  have  made  him  a  suitable  leader
for  Israel  in  the  new  period  of  her  history.  Greatness  is  tested  by  the  magnanimity
with  which  a  man  long  used  to  power  is  able  to  lay.it  down  when  he  feels  that  his  day
for  effective  service  is  past.  Moses  had  served  his  generation  nobly.  There  arose  none
lika  him.  But,  as  has  been  said  of  Luther,  who  reached  his  meridian  at  the  Diet  of
Worms,  and  whose  end,  had  Providence  pleased  to  remove  him  then,  would  have  been
like  an  apotheosis,  "  It  is  a  law  of  history  that  every  personality  bears  within  itself
a  measure  which  it  is  not  permitted  to  exceed"  (Hagenbach).  A  new  age  was
opening,  and  new  powers  were  needed  to  do  justice  to  its  calls.  The  lawgiver,  the
prophet,  the  leader  of  the  desert  march,  the  meek,  long-enduring,  deep-souled  man  of
Gk>d  must  give  place  to  one  more  distinctively  a  soldier.  The  calm  gifts  of  the  legislator
and  statesman  were  not  those  which  were  most  required  for  the  work  of  conquest  and
settlement.  Moses  felt  this,  and  felt,  too,  that  he  was  getting  old.  The  old  man
cannot  enter  as  a  younger  man  would  into  the  thoughts,  circumstances,  and  feelings  of
a  new  time.  He  belongs  to  the  past,  and  is  limited  by  it.  His  powers  have  lost  their
freshness,  and  can  henceforth  only  decay.  This  was  Moses'  situation,  and  he  had  the
dignity  and  wisdom  to  acknowledge  it,  and  to  arrange  for  the  appointment  of  a  suitable
successor.

II.  When  a  man's  dat  or  service  is  past,  it  mat  be  kindness  in  (Jod  to  bemove
HIM  FROM  THE  WORLD.  Moses'  lemoval  was  a  punishment  for  sin,'  but  there  was
mercy  concerned  in  it  also.  Long  life  is  not  always  desirable.  Had  Moses  lived
longer,  he  could  never  have  been  greater  than  he  is.  He  might  have  seemed  less.  Shades
appear  in  the  character  of  Luther  after  it  had  reached  its  meridian  above  spoken  of —
things  which  disturb  and  annoy  us.  Curtainly,  Moses'  position,  with  Joshua  as
actual  leader  in  the  field,  would  not  have  been  an  enviable  one.  Joshua  must  increase,
he  must  decrease.  The  i;.  .petuous  soldier,  the  able  strategist,  the  hero  of  the  battles,
would  have  eclipsed  him  in  the  eyes  of  the  younger  generation.  He  would  feel  that  he
had  overlived  himself.  Fitly,  therefore,  is  he  removed  before  the  decline  of  his  influence
begins.  The  great  thing  is  to  have  done  one's  work — to  have  fulfilled  the  ends  for
which  life  was  given.  That  done,  removal  is  in  no  case  a  loss,  and  in  most  cases  a  boon
in  disguise  (2  Tim.  iv.  6—9).

IIL  When  the  services  of  one  man  fail,  (Jod  will  provide  fob  the  oon-
TornANOE  of  his  work  bt  baisino  up  successors.  So  Joshua  was  raised  up  to
succeed  Moses. — J.  0.

Yers.  3 — 8,  23. — Joshva.  Joshua  a  type  of  Jesus,  the  true  Leader  into  the  rest  of
God  (Heb.  iv.  8).  God  has  given  him,  as  formerly  he  gave  the  son  of  Nun,  for  "  a
Leader  and  Commander  to  the  people  "  (Isa.  Iv.  4).

I.  The  man.  Joshua  as  leader  was:  1.  Divinely  appointed  (yet.  S).  2.  Divinely
led.  "  He  doth  go  before  thee  "  (ver.  8).  The  captam  had  a  higher  Captain  (Josh.  v.
14).  3.  Divinely  assisted.  "  He  will  be  with  thee  "  (ver.  8).  Our  Leader  is  Emmanuel
• — "  God  with  us  "  (Matt.  i.  23).  4.  He  was  to  be  strong  and  courageous  (ver.  7).  The
g;round  of  true  courage  is  God  being  with  us.  It  is  said  of  the  Saviour,  "  He  shall  not
f  jiil  nor  be  discouraged  "  (Isa.  xlii.  4).  The  perseverance  of  the  Saviour  is  as  deserving
of  consideration  as  the  perseverance  of  the  saints.

II.  His  WORE.  While  Joshua's  and  the  people's,  it  was  still  more  God's  work
(vers.  3;  4).  With  Joshua  as  leader :  1.  The  enemy  would  be  overthrown  (vers.  3 — 6).
2.  All  opposition  would  be  overcome.  3.  He  would  conduct  the  people  unto  the
land  of  their  inheritance  (ver.  7).  4.  He  would  cause  them  to  inherit  it  (ver.  7),  ».e.
settle  them  in  their  possessions.  Christ  in  like  manner  has  overthrown  the  enemy
(Col.  ii.  15) ;  has  won  an  inheritance  for  his  people  (Col.  i.  12):  in  his  victory  they  are
enabled  to  overcome  the  world  (John  xvi.  33 ;  1  John  It.  4) ;  Ids  cause  is  steadily


48«  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  Lch.  xxxl  1—30.

triumphing;  he  is   conducting,   and  has  already  conducted,  many  sons  to  glory
(Heb.  ii.  10).— J.  O.

Vers.  9,  24 — 26. — 3%e  authorship  of  the  took.  A  clear  testimony  to  the  Mosaic
authorship  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  The  book,  as  Moses  gave  it  to  the  priests,
has  plainly  been  re-edited,  with  the  additions  of  Moses'  song,  Moses'  blessing,  and  the
account  of  his  death ;  but  only  the  wantonness  of  criticism  can  see  "  a  different  band  or
hands "  in  ch.  ziL — ^xxvi.  from  that  employed  upon  the  earlier  chapters,  or  discern
probability  in  the  assumption  that  ch.  iv.  44 — xxvi.  19  once  constituted  a  separate
book.  The  unity  in  style  and  treatment  is  so  conspicuous  throughout—"  the  same
vein  of  thought,  the  same  tone  and  tenor  of  feeling,  the  same  peculiaritiea  of  conception
and  expression  " — that  unity  of  authorship  follows  as  a  thing  of  course.  The  denial  of
it  is  incomprehensible.  It  is  less  certain  whether  the  "  Book  of  the  Law  "  (ver.  26)
comprehends  Deuteronomy  only,  or  the  bulk  of  the  other  books  of  the  Pentateuch  as
well.  That  Deuteronomy  is  represented  as  existing  in  a  written  form  is  plain  from
ch.  xxviii.  68,  61 ;  xxix.  20,  21,  27 ;  and  Moses  had  probably  the  written  discourses
in  his  band  when  be  delivered  them.  But  Deuteronomy,  as  a  written  hook,  rests  so
entirely  on  the  history  as  we  have  it  in  the  previous  books ;  is  so  steeped  in  allusions
to  it ;  implies  so  full  and  accurate  a  knowledge  of  it,  from  the  days  of  the  patriarchs
downwards ; — that  the  presumption  in  favour  of  that  history  also  existing  in  a  written
furm,  in  authentic  records,  which  subsequent  generations  could  consult,  is  so  strong  as
almost  to  amount  to  certainty.  It  is  incredible  that  Moses  should  have  taken  pains
to  write  out  these  long  discourses — discourses  based  on  the  history,  and  inculcating  so
earnestly  the  keejiing  of  its  facts  and  lessons  in  remembrance — and  yet  have  taken  no
pains  to  secure  an  authentic  record  of  the  history  itself;  that  he  should  not  have  com-
piled or  composed,  out  of  the  abundant  materials  at  his  command,  a  connected  narrative
of  God's  dealings  with  the  nation,  down  to  the  point  at  which  he  addressed  it;
incorporating  with  tliat  narrative  the  body  of  his  legislation.  Confining  our  attention
to  Deuteronomy,  there  can  be  no  fair  question  but  that  it  gives  itself  out  as  from  the
pen  of  Moses.  This  claim  is  disputed,  and  the  book  referred  to  about  the  time  of
Josiah  on  grounds  of  style,  of  discrepancies  with  the,  Levitioal  laws,  and  of  laws  and
allusions  imjilying  the  later  date.  On  the  contrary,  we  hold  that  the  critical  hypothesis
can  be  shown  to  raise  greater  difficulties  than  it  lays,  and  that  the  difficulties  in  the
way  of  accepting  the  book  as  a  composition  of  Moses  have  been  greatly  exaggerated.
We  glance  at  a  few  of  these  difficulties.

I.  Style.  Professor  W.  R.  Smith  ('Old  Testament,'  p.  433)  notes  as  a  crucial
instance  the  laws  about  the  cities  of  refuge  in  Numb,  xxxv.,  and  Deut.  xix.  These
laws  are  supposed  to  have  been  penned  by  the  same  hand  within  a  few  months  of  each
other;  yet,  it  is  alleged,  the  vocabulary,  structure  of  sentences,  and  cast  oi
expression  widely  differ.  But  allowance  must  surely  be  made  for  the  difference
between  a  careful  original  statement  of  a  law,  and  a  later  general  rehearsal  of  its  sub-
stance in  the  rounded"  style  of  free,  popular  discourse.  And  what  are  the  specific  differ-
ences ?  Deuteronomy,  we  are  told,  does  not  use  the  term  "  refuge,"  but  "  the  cities  are
always  described  by  a  periphrasis."  But  the  Deuteronomist  simply  says,  "  Thou  shalt
separate  three  cities  for  thee  in  the  midst  of  thy  land  "  (ch.  xix.  2) ;  "  thou  shalt  separate
three  cities  for  thee  "  (ch.  xix.  7) ;  "  thou  shalt  add  three  cities  more  for  thee  "  (ch.
xix.  9);  and  there  is  no  periphrasis.  The  phrase,  "  that  every  slayer  may  flee  thither  "
(ch.  xix.  3),  "the  slayer  which  shall  flee  thither"  (ch.  xix.  4),  is  derived  from  Numb,
xxxv.  11,  15.  But  Deuteronomy  and  Numbers  use  different  words  for  "  accidentally."
Admitted,  but  the  words  used  are  synonymous,  and  are  only  used  in  each  case  twice
altogether— in  Numb.  xxxv.  11,  15,  and  in  Deut.  iv.  42 ;  xix.  4.  "  The  judges  in  the
one  are  '  the  congregation,'  in  the  other  '  the  elders  of  his  city. ' "  But  Deuteronomy
says  nothing  about  "judges,"  and  "  the  elders"  who  are  once  referred  to  in  ch.  xix.  12,
plainly  act  in  the  name  of  the  congregation.  "  The  verb  for  '  hate  *  is  different."
Rather,  "  the  verb  for  '  hate ' "  does  not  occur  at  all  in  Numb,  xxxv.,  but  the  noun  de-
rived from  it  does  (Numb.  xxxv.  20),  and  is  translated  "  hatred,"  while  in  vers,  21,  22,
a  different  term,  translated  "  enmity,"  is  employed,  which  expresses  nearly  the  same
sense.  Had  these  words  appeared,  one  in  Numbers  and  the  other  in  Deuteronomy
Instead  of  standing  in  consecutive  verses  of  one  chapter,  they  would  doubtless  have  beet


ck.  txjo.  1—30.]  TflE  BOOK  01*  DEUTERONOMY.  481

quoted  as  fiirtber  evidence  of  diversity  of  authorsliip.  So  one  book  uses  the  expression
"  to  kill  any  person,"  while  the  other  has  "  to  kill  his  neighbour  " — a  difference  surely
not  incompatible  vrith  identity  of  authorship.  "  The  detailed  description  of  the
difference  between  murder  and  accidental  homicide  is  entirely  diverse  in  language  and
detaiL"  But  in  Deuteronomy  there  is  no  "  detailed  description  "  of  the  kind  referred
to.  There  is  in  Numbers  (xxxv.  16 — 24) ;  but  Deuteronomy  confines  itself  to  one  simple
illustration  from  concrete  life,  admirably  adapted,  it  will  be  admitted,  to  the  speaker's
popular  purpose  (cb.  xix.  5).  The  statement  in  Deuteronomy,  it  is  evident,  presupposes
the  earlier  law,  and  is  incomplete  without  it,  occupying  only  a  dozen  verses,  as  compared
with  over  twenty  in  Numbers,  while  even  of  the  dozen,  three  are  occupied  with  a  new
provision  for  the  number  of  the  cities  being  ultimately  raised  to  nine  (ch.  xix.  8 — 10).

II.  DiscBEPANCiES  IN  LAWS.  Considering  the  number  of  the  laws,  the  alleged  dis-
crepancies are  singularly  few.  On  the  "  tithes,"  see  ch.  xxvi.  12  ;  on  the  "  firstlings,"
ch.  XV.  20  ;  "  the  priests'  due,"  in  oh.  xviii.  3,  seems,  like  the  "  fleece  "  of  ch.  xviii.  4,  to
be  in  addition  to  the  provision  in  Numb,  xviii.  11 — 18 ;  the  law  of  carrion  (ch.  xiv.  21)
is  slightly  modified  in  view  of  the  altered  circumstances  of  settlement  in  Canaan  (of.
Lev.  xvii.  15) ;  and  so  with  other  instances.  The  chief  moditications  arise  from  the  new
legislation  in  regard  to  the  central  sanctuary,  with  the  permission  to  kill  and  eat  flesh
at  home  (ch.  xii.  20—24).  On  this  depends  the  new  tithe-laws  (provision  for  the
sanctuary  feasts),  the  additions  to  the  priests'  portions,  and  various  minor  changes.

III.  PBOUiiiABiTiBS  iMPLTiNa  A  LATER  DATE.    We  need  not  delay  on  stray  phraies,
such  as  "  unto  this  day  "  (ch.  ill.  14),  or  "  as  Israel  did  unto  the  land  of  his  possession  "
(ch.  ii.  12).  The  instances  usually  cited  are  not  of  great  force,  and  are  easily  explicable
as  glosses.    More  important  cases  are :  1.  The  central  altar.    On  this,  see  under  ch.  xii.
It  suffices  to  meet  most  objections  to  observe  that,  on  the  face  of  it,  the  Law  bears  that  it
was  not  intended  to  be  put  strictly  in  force  till  certaia  important  conditions  had  been
fulfilled— Kjonditions  which,  owing  to  the  disobedience  of  the  people,  who  during  the
time  of  the  judges  so  often  put  back  the  clock  of  their  own  history,  were  not  fulfilled  till
as  late  as  tlie  days  of  David  and  Solomon.     For  thus  it  reads  (ver.  10),   "  When  ye
go  over  Jordan,  and  dwell  in  the  land  which  the  Lord  your  God  giveth  you  to  inherit,
and  when  he  giveth  you  rest  from  all  your  enemies  round  about,  so  that  ye  dwell  in
safety  ;  then  there  shall  be  a  place, "  etc.  (cf.  2  Sam.  vii.  1 ;  1  Kings  iii.  2 ;  v.  4).    2.
Priests  and  Levites.    The  distinction  between  priests  and  Levites,  which  counts  for  so
much  in  Leviticus  and  Numbers,  is  not,  it  is  alleged,  recognized  in  Deuteronomy.  The
phrase  in  use  is  not  "  priests  and  Levites "  (which,  however,  as   little  as  the  other,
occurs  in  the  earlier  books),  but  "the  priests  the  Levites"  (ch.  xvii.  9,  18;  xviii.  1;
xxiv.  8 ;  xxvii.  9).  They  are  not  distinctively  "  the  sons  of  Aaron,"  but  "  sons  of  Levi "
(ch.  xxi.  5 ;  xxxi.  9).    "  All  Levites  are  possible  priests."    But  the  objection  is  dejffired
of  its  force  when  we  discover,  what  any  one  can  verify,  that  these  same  expressions
were  freely  used,  and  used  interchangeably  with  others,  at  a  time  when  it  is  not
doubted  that  the  Levitioal  system  was  in  full  operation.    This  is  the  case  in  the  Books
of  Chronicles,  written,  it  is  asserted,  in  the  interest  of  that  system,  yet  using  this  phrase,
"  the  priests  the  Levites, "  without  hesitation  or  sense  of  ambiguity  (2  Chron.  v.  6 ;
xxiii.  18;  xxx.  27).    "The  priests  the  Levites"  mean  simply  the  Levitical  priests;  and
when  the  tribe  of  Levi  as  a  whole  is  meant,  it  is  either  expressly  designated  as  such
(ch.  X.  8),  or  the  designation  is  appended  to  the  other  phrase  as  a  wider  denomination
(ch.  xviii.  1).    Nor  is  the  idiom  a  strange  one.    At  first,  the  priests, "  the  sons  of  Aaron,"
stood  out  from  the  people  with  sharp  distinctness,  as  alone  invested  with  sacred  cifice.
The  case  was  greatly  altered  tiftor  the  separation  of  the  tribe  of  Levi ;  when  the  designa-
tion "  sons  of  Aaron  "  seems  speedily  to  have  been  dropped  for  another  identifying  the
priests  more  directly  with  their  tribe.  "Sons  of  Aaron  "  is  not  found  in  the  latter  part  of
Numbers.   Priests  and  Levites  had  more  in  common  with  each  other  than  either  class
had  with  the  body  of  the  people ;  and  besides,  the  priests  were  Levites.   So  that  to  the
popular  eye,  the  tiibe  of  Levi  stood  apart,  forming,  as  a  whole,  one  sacred  body,  engaged
in  ministering  in  holy  things  to  God.   Sacerdotal  functions  are  attributed  to  the  tribe,  but
not  necessarily  to  all  members  of  it  (ch.  x.  8 ;  xviii.  7).  (On  the  ministering  of  the  Levites,
comp.  1  Chron.  xv.  2 ;  2  Chron.  xxix.  11 ;  xxxi.  2).    The  counter-theory,  that  this  dis-
tinction had  no  existence  under  the  kings,  and  first  originated  in  the  time  of  the  exile,
is  without  a  jot  of  evidence  in  the  Books  of  Kings,  and  only  escapes  foundering  on  the


488  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY .  [oh.  xxxi.  1—30

statements  in  Chronicles,  Ezra,  and  Nehemiah,  by  robbing  these  books  of  their  his-
torical character.    3.  The  position  of  the  Levitts,    Instead  of  being  furnished  with  cities
and  pasturages,  and  enjoying  an  independent  income  from  the  tithes,  they  are  repre-
sented as  homeless  and  dependent,  wandering  from  place  to  place,  and  glad  to  be  invited,
with  the  stranger,  the  widow,  and  the  fatherless,  to  share  in  charitabltt  feasts.   (See  on  this,
ch.  xii.  19.)  But  if  a  time  is  sought  for  the  composition  of  the  book  when  this  was  the
actual  position  of  the  Levites,  no  time  is  so  suitable  as  that  of  Moses  himself,  before  the
tithe-laws  had  come  into  regular  operation — when,  in  trut.*),  there  was  little  or  nothing
to  tithe — and  when  the  Levites  would  be  largely  dependent  on  the  hospitality  of  in-
dividuals.   The  language  would  have  a  point  and  force  to  Moses'  contemporaries,  which
it  would  have  greatly  lost  had  the  circumstances  of  the  Levites,  at  the  time  of  his
address,  been  more  prosperous.     They  were  dependent  then,  and  might  from  very
obvious  causes  come  to  be  dependent  again.   Their  state  would  not  be  greatly  bettered
in  the  unsettled  times  of  the  conquest.   Nothing  could  be  more  appropriate  in  itself,
better  adapted  to  create  kindly  sympathies  between  Levites  and  people,  or  more  likely
to  avert  neglect  of  the  tribe  by  withholding  of  their  just  dues,  tlian  the  perpetuation  of
these  primitive  hospitalities.    No  doubt  the  Levites  suffered  severely  in  the  days  of  the
judges  and  under  bad  kiugs,  but  we  are  not  to  forget  the  power  and  splendour  V.
which  the  order  attained  under  David  and  Solomon,  and  the  revivals  it  enjoyed  undei
Hezekiah  and  Josiah.    There  is  no  evidence  that  their  condition  was  so  deplorably
destitute  in  the  later  days  of  the  kingdom  as  the  critics  represent.    4.  The  law  of  the
king  (ch.  xvii.).    The  law,  it  is  thought,  is  sketched  in   terms  borrowed  from  the
court  of  Solomon.    The  objection  derives  much  of  its  plausibility  from  not  observing
that  the  description  of  Solomon's  court  in  the  Book  of  Kings  (1  Kings  x.  26 — 29 ;  xi.
1 — i)  is,  on  the  other  hand,  given  in  terms  distinctly  boiTOwed  from  this  law.    The
familiarity  of  the  writer  of  the  Books  of  Kings  with  Deuteronomy  is  undoubted,  and  he
plainly  draws  up  his  account  of  Solomon's  luxury  and  splendour  in  such  language  as
will  impress  the  mind  by  its  contrast  to  the  law.     We,  on  the  contrary,  reading  the
law,  are  apt  to  think  of  Solomon's  reign  as  if  it  were  the  original,  and  the  law  th«
copy.    Solomon  did  what  Moses  knew  too  well  kings  would  be  prone  to  do,  and  there  was
every  reason  for  the  warning  that  was  ^ven.     The  objections  taken  to  the  book  cannot,
therefore,  be  allowed  to  set  aside  its  own  decisive  testimony  to  its  authorship.    If  we
adopt  the  hypothesis  of  the  critics,  we  are  involved  in  graver  difficulties  than  those
from  which  we  flee.    We  must  suppose  a  state  of  things  as  existing  under  the  kings,
in  respect  of  the  Levitical  orders,  which  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  ever  did  exist,
which  there  is  great  difficulty  in  believing  to  have  existed,  and  which  historical
documents  in  the  most  express  langut^ge  tell  us  did  not  exist.    We  must  suppose
Josiah  and  his  people  deceived  about  the  book,  for  they  unquestionably  took  it  for  a
veritable  book  of  Moses,  grieving  that  its  words  had  been  neglected  by  their  fathers
(2  Kings  xxii. ;  xxiii. ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.).    We  must  explain  away  a  multitude  of  the
plainest  allusions  to  the  book,  not  simply  in  Joshua,  but  in  the  prophets,  particularly
in  Hosea,  whose  pages  are  rich  in  such  references  (cf.  ch.  vii.  13 ;  viii.  7 — 20 ;  xi.  14 —
16,  with  Hos.  ii.  8 ;  xii.  8 ;  xiii.  6 ;  ch.  xii.  with  Hos.  viii.  11 ;  ch,  xviii.  18  with  Hos.
xii.  13 ;  ch.  xvii.  12  with  Hos.  iv.  4  ;  ch.  xxviii.  68  with  Hos.  viii.  13 ;  ix.  3 ;  ch.  xxix.
23  with  Hos.  xi.  8 ;  ch.  xxx.  1 — 10  with  Hos.  xiv. ;  ch.  xxv.  13 — 16  with  Hos.  xii.  7,
etc.).    We  must  suppose  such  a  passage  as  Solomon's  prayer  at  the  dedication  of  the
temple  (1  Kings  viii.),  wLich  is  saturated  with  Deuteronomic  language,  to  have  been  a
Iree  and  unhistorical  composition;  though,  if  this  be  allowed  for  Deuteronomy,  it  need
not  trouble  us  with  Solomon.     Even  then  we  are  not  out  of  difficulties,  for  the  book
itself  is  in  many  respects  internally  unsuitable  to  the  times  to  which  it  is  assigned ;
compare  e.^.   the  mild  tone  of  the  book   towards  Edom — the  kindly  and  brotherly
relations  which  are  enjoined — with  the  hostile  tone  to  which  we  are  accustomed  in
the  prophets,  where  Edom  is  a  sort  of  later  Amalek,  a  standing  type  of  implacable
enmity  to  the  people  of  God,    If  Deuteronomy  is  not  by  Moses,  it  bears  false  witness
ef  itself,  was  misconceived  by  the  writers  of  the  later  books  of  Scripture,  imposed  upon
the  Jews  from  the  days  of  its  first  appearance,  and  has  had  its  claims  endorsed  by
Christ  and  his  apostles  in  a  way  which  makes  them  partners  in  the  general  delusion.
— J.O


OH.  XXXI.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  ,  489

Vers.  9,  24 — 27. —  l%e  written  Word.  The  Law  here  put  in  writing  and  solemnly
deposited  in  the  side  of  the  ark,  is  the  foundation  of  our  present  Bible.  All  Scripture  is
built  up  upon  it.  On  this  consignment  of  the  first  instalment  of  the  Word,  we  remark —

L  The  written  Wobd  embodies  and  is  the  vehicle  of  an  AnrHOBiTATiTE
BEVELATioN.  The  Law  was  first  given,  thereafter  recorded.  Bevelation  precedes  the
record  of  it.  But  this  line  must  not  be  drawn  too  finely.  The  record  is  inspired
(1  Tim.  iii.  16),  and  is  to  us  the  revelation  uf  the  will  of  God.  It  is,  as  well  as  contains,
the  Word  of  God.  The  line  must  not  be  drawn  too  finely  :  1.  Between  revelation  and
its  history.  The  threads  of  revelation  cannot  be  picked  out  from  the  texture  of  its
history,  and  exhibited  apart.  They  constitute  one  whole ;  the  record  embraces  both.
2.  Between  revelation  and  inspired  prophetical  discourses — with  psalms,  poems,  wisdom
literature,  etc.,  which  unfold  the  principles  of  revelation,  apply  and  enforce  them,  turn
them  into  subjects  of  praise,  or  deal  with  them  reflectively.  For  discourses,  psalms,
didactic  literature,  etc.,  add  to  revelation  as  well  as  unfold  its  meaning.  3.  Between
revelat-ion  and  the  written  Word.  For  that,  as  above  remarked,  is  the  revelation  to  ua.
It  is  clothed  with  its  own  authority  as  inspired — an  authority  the  nature  and  degree  of
which  is  a  study  by  itself — and  it  is  clothed  with  the  authoritativeness  (objective)
inherent  in  the  revelations  of  which  records  are  preserved.

II.  The  written  Wobd  is  necebsabt  fob  the  febfetuation  of  bevealbo  tbdth.
It  embodies  truth  in  a  form  which  secures  its  transmission  to  posterity  without  material
distortion  or  corruption.  Tradition,  however  carefully  guarded,  would  have  been  a  most
unsafe  medium  for  the  conveyance  of  important  revelations.  A  body  of  facts  and  laws
such  as  we  have  in  the  Pentateuch,  or  discourses  like  these  of  Moses,  could  not  have
been  entrusted  to  it  without  certainty  of  mutilation.  The  Law,  accordingly,  was  put  in
writing.  A  written  revelation  is  one  great  proof  of  the  wisdom  and  care  of  God.
Variations  in  manuscripts  rarely  affect  the  substance  of  the  message.

III.  The  written  Word  is  a  witness  fob  God  against  the  apostaoy  of  those
TO  whom  the  Word  is  given.  (Ver.  26.)  1,  If  it  does  not  prevent  corruption
of  doctrine,  it  testifies  against  it.  It  was  by  appeal  to  the  Scriptures  that  Josiah
wrought  his  reformation  in  Judah  (2  Kings  xxiii.).  It  was  by  appeal  to  the  Scriptures
that  the  Eeformers  aroused  Europe  against  the  Church  of  Borne.  2.  If  it  cannot  prevent
apostacy  in  deed,  it  remains  as  a  witness  against  the  apostates.  It  holds  up  the  Law
from  which  they  have  departed.  It  convicts  them  of  rebellion.  It  denounces  against
them  the  penalties  of  transgression.  While  it  invites  them  to  repeutance,  and  promises,
if  they  return,  healing  of  their  backslidings. — J.  0.

Vers.  10 — 13. — Reading  the  Law.  (For  an  ezfonple  of  fulfilment  of  this  command,
see  Neh.  viii.)    Observe —

I.  It  was  to  be  bead  at  a  religious  feast.  On  an  occasion  of  solemnity — at  the
Feast  of  Tabernacles  (ver.  10).  Our  feelings  in  reading  the  Scriptures,  or  in  hearing  them
read,  ought  always  to  be  of  a  solemn  and  reverential  kind.  But  it  is  well  to  avail  our-
selves of  every  aid  which  may  lend  solemnity  and  impressiveness  to  the  reading  of  words
so  sacred.

II.  It  was  to  be  head  at  a  time  of  general  leisure.  In  the  sabbatical  year —
"  the  year  of  release."  Leisure  hours  cannot  be  better  employed  than  in  making  our-
selves acquainted  with  "  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak  "  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  8).  We  should
avail  ourselves  of  the  leisure  of  others  to  endeavour  to  instruct  thenu

III.  It  was  to  be  read  fubliclt.  (Ver.  11.)  The  private  reading  of  the  Law  would
doubtless  be  attended  to  in  many  pious  homes.  But  the  practice  would  not  be  general
(scarcity  and  expensivencss  of  manuscripts,  want  of  education,  religious  indifference)
The  Levites  were  to  teach  Israel  the  Law  (ch.  xxxiii.  10;  Lev.  x.  II ;  Mai.  ii.  7);  but
they  might  not  do  so,  or  the  people  might  not  wait  on  their  instructions.  The  public
reading  of  the  Law,  even  once  in  seven  years,  was  thus  calculated  to  be  of  great  ad-
vantage. As  long  as  the  practice  was  observed,  multitudes  would  derive  benefit  from
it.  The  reading  was  of  the  nature  of  a  public  testimony,  but  also,  as  we  see  in  Neh.  viii.,
for  purposes  of  real  instruction.  The  public  reading  of  Scripture,  with  or  without  com-
ment, is  an  important  means  of  edification.  Read  with  intelligence  and  judgment,  the
Word  commends  itself.  And  such  readings  are  necessary.  Many  have  Bibles,  yet  do
not  read  them ;  many  read  and  do  cot  understand.


490  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxxi  1- 3().

rV.  It  was  to  bk  read  fob  the  benefit  of  old  and  young.  (Ver.  12.)  All  are
interested  in  listening  to  the  Word  of  God.  Men  and  women,  little  children,  strangers,
no  class  but  ha-s  a  concern  in  it.  None  but  may  be  edified  by  it.  Children  ought  to
be  more  recognized  than  they  are  in  religious  services.  Need  for  making  them  feel  that
they  too  are  interested  in  what  is  being  said;  that  the  Bible  has  a  message  for  them
as  well  as  for  their  elders.

y.  Thk  end  of  BKADma  Ood'b  Wobd  is  that  wi  mat  bx  xmabud  to  obkt  it.
^er.  13.)— J,  0.

Vers.  16 — 22,  28 — 30. — Ood'sforetight  oflsra^t  declension.    We  learn —

L  That  the  Fimnts  is  perfectly  unveiled  to  God.     God  claims  this  power  as

one  of  his  prerogatives  (Isa.  xli.  22 ;  xlii.  9 ;  zliii.  25, 26 ;  xlv.  20,  21).      And  no  one

can  question  but  that  these  predictions  have  been  strikingly  fulfilled.    The  people  did

corrupt  themselves  and  turn  aside,  and  evil  did  befall  them  in  the  latter  days  (ver.  29).

II.  That  the  plainest  warnikos  are  frequently  disreoardeo.  Israel  was
under  no  government  of  fete.  Had  the  people  repented,  they  would  have  been  forgiven.
The  predictions  are  cast  in  absolute  form,  only  because  God  saw  that  warning  would
not  be  taken.  He  would  only  too  gladly  have  revoked  his  threatenings,  had  Israel,
roused  to  alarm,  turned  from  its  evil  (cf.  the  case  of  Nineveh).  This,  however,  it  did
not  do,  but,  with  these  woe-laden  prophecies  spread  before  it,  rushed  madly  on,  as  if
eager  to  fulfil  them.  How  like  sinners  still  1  The  plainest  declarations,  the  most
explicit  warnings,  the  direst  threatenings,  are  as  little  recked  of  as  if  no  Word  of  God
were  in  existence.  Strange  that  God's  Word  should  be  so  disregarded,  and  yet  profession
80  often  made  of  believing  in  it  (cf.  Jer.  xxxvi.) !

III.  That  God's  Word  has  its  uses  even  though  men  prove  disobedient.  It
is  to  be  spoken  to  them  and  taught  them,  "  whether  they  will  hear,  or  whether  they
will  forbear"  (Ezek.  ii.  7).  It  tells  them  the  truth.  It  shows  them  their  duty.  It
warns  them  of  the  consequences  of  disobedience.  It  upholds  a  witness  for  God  in  th(  ir
a[iostacy  (ver.  19).  It  renders  them  inexcusable.  A  solemn  responsibility  thus  attaches
to  us  in  the  possession  of  God's  Word..

IV.  That  a  time  will  comb  when  the  sinnbb  will  be  forced  to  confess  that
God's  words  aoainbt  him  have  all  become  true.  (Yer.  17.^  Only  that  time  may
come  too  late  (ver.  18).    "  Missing  God  is  not  true  repentance     (Keil). — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  leadership  made  over  to  Joshita.  There  is  something  wonderfully
pathetic  in  the  great  leader,  whose  eye  is  yet  undimmed,  laying  down  his  trust  beside
the  Jordan.  He  is  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  old,  but  the  Lord  hath  denied  him
the  privilege  of  entering  the  land  of  promise.  He  now  meekly  resigns  his  command,
and  nominates  Joshua  as  his  successor.  It  might  have  discouraged  the  people,  the  loss
of  their  great  leader;  but  he  points  them  upward  to  the  Lord  their  God,  who  had  been
the  real  Leader  in  the  Exodus  and  pilgrimage,  and  who  was  going  at  their  head  across
the  Jordan.  Their  faith  in  the  invisible  Leader  is  to  be  strengthened  now  that  the  visible
and  human  leader  is  to  be  taken  away  from  them.  Besides,  they  are  to  have  Joshua
as  the  captain  of  the  host.     We  notice  here —

I.  The  men  appointed  by  God  to  special  office  receive  from  him  special
preparation.  Moses  himself  had  received  a  wondrous  preparation,  first  at  his  mother's
knee,  next  in  the  palace  of  Pharaoh,  and  next  in  the  solitudes  of  Midian.  And  Joshua,
who  is  to  succeed  him  as  leader,  though  not  as  lawgiver,  has  also  received  important
preparation.  He  is  first  associated  with  Moses  in  the  mount,  as  he  is  receiving  the
Law.  He  is  thus  trained  to  firm  faith  in  the  invisible  King,  and  accustomed  to  bis
wonders.  He  is  next  exercist  d  in  battle,  leading  the  Isradites  against  Amalek,  and
proving  himself  skilful  in  the  field.  He  had  also,  as  a  spy,  become  minutely  acquainted
with  the  land  of  promise,  and  brought  up  with  Caleb  an  encouraging  report.  None  was
so  fitted  as  he  for  high  command.  Just,  then,  as  the  twelve  were  carefully  trained  to
be  the  apostles  of  the  Church,  so  was  Joshua  trained,  and  so  is  every  one  selected  for
important  work.

II.  The  assurance  that  God  was  associated  with  thk  intabioh  gave  the
invaders  the  best  possible  stimulus.  God  is  to  go  with  them ;  they  need  in  such
a  case  fear  no  evil.    Their  foes  may  be  gigantic,  but  greater  is  he  that  is  for  them  than


OH.  XXXI.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  491

all  that  can  be  against  them.    Their  vantage-ground  is  that  they  can  be  "  strong  in
the  Lord,  and  in  the  powerof  his  might."

And  this  is  the  one  question  to  be  asked  always:  Is  Qod  with  us?  If  bo,  all  is
well.    The  work  always  succeeds  of  which  he  is  the  head.

III.  The  work  befobe  them  is  to  be  judgment.  They  are  to  enter  Canaan  aa
destroyers.  It  is  iconoclasts  that  have  been  brought  from  Egypt.  Their  commission
is  death  to  the  old  religions  of  the  country,  and  to  the  incorrigible  devotees.  They  enter
as  "  the  scourge  of  Grod."  And  such  a  mission  must  have  ]  roved  a  warning  to  them-
selves. If  called  to  be  the  executioners  of  the  apostates  of  Palestine,  they  will  surely
guard  against  apostacy.

IV.  In  the  invasion  they  must  adhere  to  the  letter  of  the  cohmaitd-
MBNTS.  It  is  a  terrible  mission ;  but  God  leaves  no  loophole  for  them  to  escape  it.
He  leaves  nothing  to  licence ;  he  gives  them  strict  orders,  and  these  must  be  carried
carefully  out.  Thus  are  the  rigours  of  the  invasion  brought  under  the  shadow  of  his
throne,  and  he,  who  is  Sovereign  and  legitimate  Avenger,  commissioned  Israel  to
execute  his  orders  amid  the  criminal  population  of  Palestine. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  9 — 13. — Tlie  literary  executors  of  Moses.  It  must  have  been  a  solemn  act  on
the  part  of  Moses,  after  having  nominated  Joshua  as  his  successor  in  the  leadership  of
Israel,  to  suninioti  the  priests  and  the  elders,  that  they  might  be  the  custodians  of  his
manuscripts,  and  deal  with  them  as  he  desired.  It  was  to  the  ministers  of  religion,
and  to  the  rulers  elected  by  the  people  and  ordained  of  God,  that  he  gave  this  important
charge.  Of  course  they  could  not,  as  nowadays,  publish  in  multiplied  copies  the
carefully  written  Law.  .  But  they  were  directed  to  have  a  great  congregation  every
seven  years,  at  the  time  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  for  the  public  reading  of  the  Law.
Hence  in  this  sabbatic  time,  when  no  rain  need  be  feared,  but  brightness  and  peace
reigned  by  night  and  day  in  the  land  of  promise,  they  were  to  make  public,  through
reading,  this  important  Law.  This  intei'esting  arrangement  suggL'sts  such  lessons  as
these —

I.  There  is  nothino  bo  precious  ab  God's  Word.  No  wonder  that  special
officers  got  special  charge  of  it,  when  the  first  instalment  was  given  and  completed.  It
was  a  sacred  deposit  such  as  no  other  nation  possessed.  The  Jew  had  surely  a  great
advantage,  ina'.smuch  as  there  were  committeil  to  him  "  the  oracles  of  God  "  (Rom.  iii.  2).

II.  The  widest  possible  publication  should  be  secured  fob  it.  No  better
arrangement  iu  times  before  printing  can  be  imagineil  than  this  one  of  a  great  congre-
gation with  perfect  publicity  thereat.  What  an  audience  every  seventh  year!  And
amid  the  solemnity  of  the  year  of  release,  the  sabbatic  year,  when  time  lay  plentifully
on  their  hands,  they  could  not  better  spend  a  portion  of  the  year  than  in  meeting
together  to  learn  God's  Law.     It  was  a  splendid,  periodic  publicity.

And  is  it  not  typical  of  that  wider  publicity  which  the  printing  press  is  now  giving
to  the  Divine  Word?  Assuredly  it  is  a  striking  fact  that  the  circulation  of  the  most
successful  human  publication  dwindles  into  insignificance  compared  with  the  circulation
of  the  Word  of  God.     Men  are  trying  to  make  it  as  widely  known  as  possible.

III.  Special  seasons  fob  the  study  of  God's  Law  are  eminently  desibablb.
Had  this  direction  of  Moses  been  faithfully  followed,  there  would  have  been  a  revival
of  religion  every  seventh  year.  A  new  start  would  thus  have  been  given  to  the  study
of  God's  will,  and  greater  devotedness  of  spirit  have  been  created  throughout  the  many
thousands  of  Israel.

Similarly,  congregations  and  Churches  should  have  grand  assemblies  for  the  express
purpose  of  the  public  study  of  God's  Law,  not  merely  on  the  Lord's  day  each  week,  but
at  special  and  stated  seasons.  The  "  camp  meetings  "  of  America  may  have  objection-
able elements  attaching  to  them  ;  but  it  would  be  a  good  day  for  all  the  Churches,  if
some  grand  reunions  could  be  devised,  when  the  highest  aim  of  mankind  would  be
carried  out  in  the  study  of  God's  Law.

IV.  'The  childben  as  well  as  adults  should  be  uadA  bharebb  in  the
SPECIAL  STUDY  AND  BLESSING.  The  purpose  of  the  arrangement  was  not  only  to  publish
truths  as  widely  as  possible  among  the  adult  portion  of  the  population,  but  to  interest
also  the  children  in  the  doctrines  and  discipline  of  the  Church.  Hence  the  meet-
ing was  to  be  an  aggregation  of  families.    It  was  to  be  "  a  gathering  of  the  clans; '


492  THE  BOOK  OF  DBUTEEOKOMY.  [oh.  xxsi.  1—30.

young  as  well  w  old  were  to  hear  the  wonderful  works  of  Gkd  and  his  gracious  com-
mandments.

The  special  religious  serviw,  then,  which  the  Churches  should  aim  at,  will  he  of  the
widest  character.  It  should  contemplate  the  presence  of  the  young  as  well  as  the  old,
and  he  adapted  to  the  revival  of  the  Lord's  work  in  all  sections  of  the  Church.  There
is  power  in  the  aggregation  of  individuals  for  religious  purposes.  The  children  must
he  kept  in  view  in  every  effort  to  extend  the  kingdom.  The  family  must  be  lifted,  if
possible,  all  of  a  piece,  as  a  unit  of  God's  own  making,  and  in  the  elevation  of  families
will  come  the  elevation  of  nations.

There  is  something  peculiarly  bright  and  happy  in  the  picture.  The  sky  is  cloudless
and  the  people  are  living  in  booths  "  without  carefulness."  They  have  met  together
for  the  purpose  of  celebrating  a  feast,  but  there  is  to  be  a  special  study  of  the  Law  for
the  benefit  of  young  as  well  as  old.  Old  heads  and  young  are  bowed  before  the
Majesty  of  heaven,  anxious  to  know  his  will  and  how  to  do  it.  In  such  circumstances
surely  religion  must  be  promoted.  May  we  have  grace  to  imitate  such  an  excellent
example  1— B.  M.  E.

Vers.  14 — 23.—  The  LorcPs  charge  to  Motet  and  Jbthua.  Moses,  in  making  over  the
leadership  to  Joshua,  was  only  anticipating  a  more  formal  assignment  of  it  by  God
himself.  He  directs  the  old  leader  and  his  successor  to  repair  to  the  tabernacle,  and
there  to  receive  their  respective  charges.  The  Shechinah  appeared  to  convince  the
people  of  the  reality  of  the  Divine  interview  with  the  leaders.  Moses  is  first  informed
of  his  own  apprcaching  end,  of  the  certain  apostacy  of  the  people,  and  of  the  desirability  ol
laying  before  them  a  song  which  would  testify  to  the  wickedness  of  the  apostacy  when
it  took  place.   Then  Joshua  is  encouraged  by  the  Lord  himself  and  promised  his  presence.

I.  Let  us  notice  the  expression  that  Moses  is  to  "  sleep  with  his  fathers.''
The  words  (■^nhN-Dj;  aay)  are  literally,  "  lie  down  with  thy  fathers,"  and  in  this  connection
are  surely  significant.  They  point  assuredly  to  fellowship  and  rest  with  the  fathers  in
another  fife.  They  cannot  refer  to  any  depositing  of  the  remains  of  Moses  in  the  same
tomb  as  his  fatliers.  His  sepulchre  was  solitary  and  sacred  ;  his  lying  down  with  his
fathers,  therefore,  can  only  refer  to  the  fellowship  in  a  future  life.  This  is  the  only
place  in  the  Pentateuch  where  this  particular  expression  occurs,  although  we  meet  it
in  the  Books  of  the  Kings  no  less  than  twenty-six  times.  It  was  undoubtedly  an
intimation  to  Moses  that  he  was  about  to  enter  into  restful  fellowship  with  his  fathers,
and  was  most  welcome  consolation  at  this  peculiarly  trying  time.

II.  Apostacy  never  takes  God  bt  surprise.  He  foresees  it  and  makes  provision
for  it,  preparing  his  servants  for  its  appearance,  and  preparing  a  proper  recompense  for
the  apostates  themselves.  It  must  be  a  remarkable  experience  to  be  in  such  a  position
as  G^,  and  to  have  prevision  of  all  the  future,  so  that  there  can  be  no  element  of
surprise  for  him.  His  resources  are  so  adequate  that  he  is  outside  the  region  of  finite
surprises  and  difficulties.

III.  Scepticism  is  the  daughter  of  abundanck  bather  than  of  want.  It
will  be,  the  Lord  says,  when  Israel  has  entered  into  the  promised  land,  and  enjoyed  its
milk  and  honey,  and  when  they  have  waxed  fat,  that  they  shall  turn  to  other  gods  and
be  guilty  of  apostacy.  In  the  same  way,  our  modern  sceptics  are  men  for  the  most
part  in  comfortable  worldly  circumstances,  and  out  of  these  spring  doubts  about  the
existence  of  God  and  suspicions  that  we  can  do  very  well  without  him,  and  with  minor
majesties.  "  It  is  on  the  bed  of  luxury,"  says  Mr.  Martineau,  "  not  on  the  rock  of
nature,  that  scepticism  has  its  birth.  .  .  .  And  while  from  the  centre  of  comforts  many
a  sad  fear  goes  forth,  and  the  warmest  lot  becomes  often  filled  with  the  chillest  doubts,
hidden  within  it  like  a  heart  of  ice  that  cannot  melt,  you  may  find  toiling  misery  that
trusts  the  more  the  more  it  is  stricken,  and  amid  the  secret  prayers  of  mourners  hear
the  sweetest  tones  of  hope."

IV.  Prophect  13  A  witness  subpcenaed  befohehand  aoamst  God's  enemies.
We  have  here  God  giving  a  certain  song  which  is  to  be  a  witness  against  Israel  in  the
coming  apostacy.  And  prophecy  is  the  retaining  of  a  witness  long  beforehand  for  the
coming  trial.  It  is  proof  positive  that  no  varying  moods  of  men  can  ever  surprise  God
or  thwart  his  magnificent  designs.  The  substance  of  this  song  we  are  prewntly  tc
considec


en.  xxxL  1—30,]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  493

y.  Joshua  beceites  ehcouraoeuent  about  a  sucoessful  liEADSRsnip  akd  the
PEBFETUAL  PRESENCE  OF  GoD.  TMs  means  immediate  success  as  a  set-off  to  the  sad
intelligence  about  ultimate  apostaoy.  Joshua  is  assured  that  God  will  be  with  him  and
ensure  the  success  of  the  invasion.  Hence  Joshua  is  only  to  be  a  lieutenant-general
under  the  invisible  Leader  and  King.  And  Joshua  desired  nothing  higher.  The  great
honour  was  in  being  a  fellow-soldier  with  God.  It  was  God's  battles  he  was  going  to
fight,  and  it  would  be  God's  victories  which  Israel  would  win.

VI.  It  is  a  GREAT  BLESSING  AT  LIFE's  CLOSE  TO  HAVE  A  SUCCESSOR  TO  CARRY  ON
DOE  WORK,  AND   AN   ASSURANCE   THAT   WE   OURSELVES   ARE  SAFE   BEYOND   THE   BORDER.

There  was  much  sadness  about  the  close  of  Moses'  career.  He  was  reminded  of  his  sin
in  his  exclusion  from  Canaan.  But  he  had  compensation  in  Joshua  taking  up  his
work,  and  in  the  assurance  of  "  rest  beyond  the  river."  He  was  going  over  to  a  better
land  than  lay  beyond  the  Jordan.  He  was  passing  on  to  peace  with  the  sainted  fathers
who  had  preceded  him.  He  had  thus  calmness  and  blessing  given  in  the  midst  of  his
pain.

May  we  have  work  worth  carrying  on  after  us,  and  some  one  to  succeed  us  is  it ;  and
may  we  have  rest  like  that  of  Moses  after  our  demise  1 — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  24 — 30. — ITie  Divine  testimony  deposited  in  the  ark.  Moses,  being  thus  com-
missioned of  God  to  utter  the  inspired  warning,  loses  no  time  in  summoning  the
congregation.  But  while  doing  so,  he  gives  precise  directions  to  the  Kohathites,  who
had  charge  of  the  ark,  to  dejiosit  his  manuscripts  within  it.  Is  anything  to  be  learned
from  this  consignment  of  the  sacred  books  ?

I.  The  sacred  books  are  not  complimentary  to  human  nature.  The  Pentateuch,
in  its  tremendous  charges  and  indictments  against  mankind,  is  in  unison  with  the  rest
of  the  Word.  It  is  a  sustained  witness  against  the  human  race.  "  Others  may  perhaps
suspect,"  says  Henry  Rogers,  "  that  Jewish  vanity  led  the  writers  thus  to  ignore  or
treat  lightly  the  affairs  of  all  nations  except  their  own.  The  answer  is  concise,  but  con-
clusive. Let  Jewish  vanity  in  general  be  what  the  reader  pleases,  these  writers
would  seem  to  have  had  none  of  it.  If  they  have  passed  by  the  glorious  achieve-
ments of  secular  history,  they  have  recorded  all  the  infamies  of  their  own  nation ;
and,  indeed,  their  principal  references  to  other  nations  are  as  '  scourges '  of  their
own — scourges  justly  sent,  they  confess  and  avow,  for  apostacies  which  had  wearied
out  the  patience  of  Heaven  1"  The  marvel  is  that  the  Jews  and  Christians  should
conspire  to  preserve  what  is  a  most  humiliating  account  of  the  race.

II.  The  ark  was  the  treasdrb-house  op  God  protected  by  his  presenok.  It  was
the  "  safe  "  of  Israel,  not,  alas  I  "  fire-proof,"  like  Milner's,  as  the  Babylonians  demon-
strated, yet  as  durable  and  as  sacred  as  the  times  allowed.  It  was  fenced  around  by
the  holiest  sanctions.  Nowhere  could  the  manuscripts  be  so  safe.  Now,  the  ark  is
regarded  as  a  type  of  Jesus ;  and  if  so,  then  the  depositing  of  the  Law  within  the  ark
would  convey  the  idea  of  the  Law  of  God  being  within  the  heart  of  Christ  (Ps.  xl.  8).
In  other  words,  Jesus  Christ  embodies  the  Divine  Law  or  will,  and  is  at  once  its
most  brilliant  exposition  and  the  most  tremendous  indictment  of  human  nature.  The
Jews  were  not  so  careful  of  the  living  Law  as  their  forefathers  were  of  the  written
Law.  They  recognized  its  charge  against  themselves :  the  charge  had  become  oral ;
it  walked  before  them ;  it  was  something  that  they  could  not  shake  off  except
through  the  desperate  alternative  of  assassination.  They  killed  in  Christ  their  living
Conscience.

III.  We  should  learn  from  the  example  of  Christ  to  treasure  up  God's  Law
wiTHlx  OUR  OWN  hearts.  We  cannot  have  too  much  of  the  Bible  in  our  minds  and
memories.  The  more  we  study  it,  the  more  like  Christ  shall  we  become.  He  whose
"delight  is  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord,  and  in  his  Law  doth  he  meditate  day  and  night,"
is  blessed,  and  he  shall  be  like  the  tree  wliose  roots  are  in  the  waters,  duly  fruitful  and
ever  green  (Ps.'  i.  2,  3).  His  conscience  shall  be  reinforced  and  become  increasingly
tender ;  his  heart  shall  be  elevated  in  its  affections  and  longings ;  and  liis  mind  shall
be  trained  to  what  is  high  and  holy.  Thus  is  the  whole  being  enr'ched  and  the  life
enlarged.  May  we  deposit  the  Word  of  God  with  as  much  care  in  our  heart*  as  the
Levites  did  the  rolls  of  Moses  in  the  ark !— R.  M.  E,


494  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxxl  1—30.

Vers.  1 — 8.— Putting  off  the  harness.  Faith  in  God  anticipates  every  event  without
distress.  If  God's  plan  cut  across  the  grain  of  our  own  inclination,  faith  inspires  us  to
Bay, "  His  plan  is  best."  By  virtue  of  a  living  faith,  we  can  face  death  without  anxiety,
and  advance  to  meet  the  last  foe.    We  see  in  this  passage —

I.  Faith  acquiescent  in  bomlt  dissolution.  Splendid  triumphs  were  in  sight.
The  Jewish  host  was  about  to  complete  its  conquest ;  just  about  to  realize  full  success
after  forty  years  of  patient  trial,  ijuch  an  hour  is  the  most  precious  in  a  man's  history.
Yet  the  faith  of  Moses  saw  a  nobler  conquest  yet — a  conquest  over  self,  a  conquest
over  the  unseen  foe.  A  voice  from  within — the  voice  of  failing  nature — whispered
that  he  was  no  longer  equal  to  the  fatigues  of  a  military  campaiga.  Aud  a  voice  from
above  told  him  that  his  work  was  done;  and,  though  high  reward  was  in  store,  justice
exacted  satisfaction  for  an  earlier  misdeed.  Even  a  single  blemish  in  a  good  man's
life  entails  on  him  loss.  We  cannot  cheat  God.  Without  a  murmur,  Moses,  like  a
little  child,  yields  to  his  Father's  decree,  and  meekly  prepares  to  die.

IL  Faith  bejoicing  in  otheeb'  promotion.  In  every  age,  faith  has  worked  to  the
production  of  love.  It  is  the  extirpator  of  selfishness.  Moses  found  as  much  pleasure
in  announcing  that  Joshua  should  lead  the  people  to  conquest,  as  that  he  should  himself
lead.  Indeed,  Moses  felt  that  Joshua  could  do  better  than  he  could.  He  had  been
emphatically  a  legislator ;  now  a  warrior  was  needed.  If  God  removes  one  servant,  he
provides  a  better.  The  eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  "  I  am  nobler  than  thou."  Each
man  has  a  place  and  an  ofBce  of  his  own.  If  only  God's  work  is  well  and  truly  done,
faith  will  rejoice  in  the  means.

III.  Faith  convinced  that  God  and  man  must  co-opebatb  fob  the  tbiumph  of
THE  KINGDOM.  "  The  Lord  thy  God,  he  will  go  before  thee ; "  and  "  Joshua,  he  shall
go  over  before  thee "  (ver.  3).  The  presence  of  man,  in  action  or  in  warfare,  does  not
exclude  the  presence  of  God.  Joshua  could  gain  no  triumph  if  he  bad  gone  alone.  God
has  chosen  to  work  through  human  agencies.  By  his  wise  appointment.  Divine  and
human  co-operation  is  a  necessity.  "  The  Lord  shall  give  them  up  before  your  face,
that  ye  may  do  unto  them  according  to  his  commandment "  (ver.  5).  Nor  is  Moses'
power  and  influence  to  be  quite  absent  from  the  conflict.  Being  dead,  he  yet  acted.
His  commandment  regulated  their  conduct.  His  word  was  still  a  mighty  spell.  Each
man  can  add  something  to  the  aggressive  activity  of  God's  truth.

IV.  Faith  assubbd  op  God's  self-oonsistenoy.  God  had  succoured  Israel  in  the
past;  therefore  he  would  succour  them  again.  He  had  begun  to  dislodge  the
Canaanite  kings  before  Israel,  therefore  he  would  go  on  until  he  completed  for  them
the  conquest  (ver.  4).  Jehovah  had  foreseen  all  the  weaknesses  and  unfaithfulness  of
Israel  and  yet  he  had  commenced  to  give  them  triumphs.  On  what  reasonable  ground
would  he  do  this,  unless  he  purposed  to  repeat  his  favours,  and  to  subdue  for  them
every  foe?  Half  a  conquest  would  be  no  boon  to  them.  This  would  be  a  vexation  to
Israel  and  a  dishonour  to  God.  The  man  of  faith  knows  that  God  can  never  be  at
variance  with  himself.  When  we  have  discovered  the  method  of  God's  procedure,  we
■hould  act  along  this  line  in  order  to  enjoy  his  help.  In  his  footsteps  let  us  plant
our  feet.

V.  Faith  in  ohe  stimulating  in  others  latent  qualities  of  eneegy.  Although
it  appears  that  Moses  was  lacking  in  martial  skill  and  prowess,  his  faith  in  God  enabled
him  to  stir  up  the  hidden  gifts  of  others.  Faith  foresees  the  victory,  and  conndcnt
hope  is  a  great  inspirer  of  strength.  Like  new  nerve-power,  it  interlaces  and  braces  all
tlje  active  energies  of  a  man.  The  voice  of  robust  faith  has  always  a  magical  charm
Dver  us.  We  perceive  forthwith  that  the  demand  is  most  reasonable,  and  that  largest
?xcrtion  is  our  highest  glory.  It  is  easy  to  be  strong  when  Infinite  Strength  is  awaiting
us.  Every  endeavour  we  make  enlarges  our  capacity  to  receive  more  strength.  The
weaker  parts  of  our  nature  perish  under  the  strain,  but  newer  and  nobler  elements  fill
up  the  room.  And  if  God  be  with  us,  then  fear  of  man  departs.  Faith  to  a  prolific
parent  of  courage.

"Fear  him,  ye  saints,  and  ye  will  then
Have  nothing  else  to  fear."

And  Qod  can  never  fail  the  man  of  faith.    Having  pledged  his  presence,  we  are  well


OH.  xxu,  1— 30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  495

ensured.  For  him  to  forsake  his  friends  is  an  impossibility.  "  The  mountains  may
depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed ;  but  never  shall  the  covenant  of  his  faithfulnesa
fail."— D.

Vers.  9 — 13,  24 — 29,— The  honour  appertaining  to  GocPi  Law,  As  our  Lord,  in  ths
near  prospect  of  death,  employed  his  thoughts  in  comforting  and  instructing  others,
so  Moses,  instead  of  centring  his  thought  upon  himself,  is  only  more  eager  to  provide
for  the  people's  future  obedience.  Inasmuch  as  bis  days  on  earth  were  now  very  few,
he  yearned  to  crowd  into  them  as  much  counsel  and  kimily  warning  as  it  was  possible.
To  be  of  service  to  Israel — this  absorbed  the  passions  and  desires  of  his  soul.

I.  God's  ebdemptive  Law  is  embodied  in  a  written  form.  To  Moses  it  had  been
revealed  that  it  would  hot  sufiSce  to  instruct  the  people  orally  in  the  lines  of  religious
duty.  So  pregnant  with  importance  is  the  Law  of  God,  that  it  must  be  reduced  to
writing,  and  carefully  preserved.  God's  law  concerning  our  bodily  life — how  to  use
food,  how  to  heal  disease,  how  to  prolong  our  days — all  this  is  revealed  in  other  modes :
this  Law  is  written  by  the  finger  of  God  on  the  very  structure  of  man.  In  such
matters,  God's  will  is  to  be  discovered  by  investigation  and  by  experiment.  But  the
law  of  the  soul's  life  is  disclosed  to  us  in  a  different  way.  How  sin  can  be  pardoned ;
how  reconciliation  between  a  guilty  man  and  his  Maker  can  be  secured  ;  how  inward
purity  can  be  gained,  and  immortality  reached ; — all  this  is  disclosed  by  God  through
his  prophets,  and  reduced  to  a  wiitten  form.  If  a  perverse  disposition  prevails  in  a
man,  he  may  refuse  to  read  the  record,  and  so  "  count  himself  unworthy  of  everlasting
life,"

n.  God's  bbdemptivk  Law  ib  committed  to  teustt  stewards.  The  Law  of  Groi
written  by  Moses,  touching  purification  and  obedience,  was  placed  in  the  custody  of
tlie  priests  (ver.  9),  and  secured  in  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  This  was  both  a  realized
fact  and  a  symbolic  figure.  That  ark  is  an  emblem  of  Christ's  Church,  and  the  sons  of
Levi  were  the  early  representatives  of  genuine  believers.  The  Christian  family  has
become  a  royal  priesthood ;  and  one  of  their  delightful  duties  is  to  conserve  God's  Law
so  as  to  hand  it  on  to  coming  generations.  By  the  loving  care  of  loyal  disciples,  the
oracles  of  God  have  been  preserved  intact.  The  vigorous  life  of  tlie  Church  to-day  is
displayed  in  revising  the  exact  text,  translating  it  into  other  tongues,  and  unfolding  it
to  thQ  understanding  of  the  people.     We  are  "  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God."

III.  God's  bedemftivb  Law  is  to  bb  febiodioally  expounded.  Moses  required
this  to  be  done  once  in  every  seven  years.  By  this  method,  the  recollections  of  those
who  had  heard  it  aforetime  would  be  revived,  it  would  be  impressed  on  memory  with
fresh  force,  and  many  would  rise  to  a  higher  understanding  and  appreciation  of  its
meaning.  The  recurring  'period  is  symbolic.  Once  every  seven  days  the  privilege
now  returns.  Nor  have  we  to  journey  to  some  metropolis  to  hear  the  sacred  record.
Printing  has  multiplied  the  copies  of  Ciod's  Law  on  every  side;  and  it  would  be  spiritual
obtuseness  if  we  did  not  recognize  this  modern  invention  as  a  new  agency  in  God's
hands  for  enlightening  the  human  race.  The  Law  was  ordained  to  be  "  read  in  the
year  of  release,  and  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles."  This  was  the  anniversary  of  the
Sinaitic  revelation ;  this  festival  was  signalized  for  its  unusual  joyousness.  And  this
fresh  revelation  of  God's  truth,  in  each  septennial  period,  would  add  new  Best  to
gladness.  Good  men  would  say,  "  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them,  and
they  were  to  me  as  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  my  heart."

ly.  God's  bedemftivb  Law  is  to  be  bbouoht  within  the  undebstakdino  of
ALL.  The  wisdom  and  the  loving-kindness  of  God  are  displayed  in  his  care  for  children.
As  he  has  abundantly  provided  for  their  bodily  and  mental  wants  in  their  long  depen-
dence upon  parents,  so  too  he  provides  for  the  enlightenment  of  their  consciences  by
the  ministry  of  his  Word.  Bight  impressions  are  very  early  made.  It  is  the  highest
wisdom  to  entwine  the  tender  affections  of  cljildren  around  God  and  truth  and  heaven.
Before  they  "  know  anything  "  else,  God  commands  us  to'  see  to  it  that  "  they  hear,
and  learn  to  fear  the  Lord  our  God."  To  neglect  the  religious  training  of  the  young  is
heinous  sin.  This  is  to  deprive  the  host  of  God's  elect  of  young  recruits.  "  Instead  of
the  fathers,  must  come  up  the  children."  God's  will  is  abundantly  revealed,  to  tha
tnd  that  we  may  do  it. — ^D.


496  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxxi.  1— Stt


Vers.  14, 15,  23. — 7%e  official  investiture  of  Joshua.  It  was  fitting  that  a  public
transference  of  authority  should  be  made  from  Moses  to  Joshua.  The  nobleness  of
Moses  comes  prominently  into  view.  As  John  said  of  Jesus,  so  gubstantially  Moses
said  of  Joshua,  "  He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease."

I.  The  occasion.  The  occasion  had  an  aspect  of  moumfulness.  Moses  was  about
to  die  ;  nevertheless,  no  tinge  of  grief  is  in  his  words.  He  contemplates  the  event  wVth
calm  serenity.  His  chief  concern  is  a  competent  successor.  The  good  of  others  wag
still  Moses'  uppermost  desire.     Promptly  he  responded  to  the  Divine  call.

II.  The  place.  God  had  appointed  the  meeting  to  tal;e  place  in  the  tabernacle.
All  great  enterprises  should  be  consecrated  in  the  sanctuary.  Here  we  touch  the
fountain  head  of  eflfectual  blessing.  God  has  engaged  to  be  found  by  us  here.  "  This
is  my  rest  for  ever :  here  will  I  dwell !  "

III.  The  appeakanob.  "  The  Lord  appeared  in  a  pillar  of  a  cloud."  So  inefiably
dazzling  is  the  native  glory  of  God,  that  no  mortal  eye  can  look  upon  it.  We  should
be  blinded  by  the  excess  of  li.<;ht.  In  accommodation  to  human  weakness,  God  tempers
his  brightness  by  an  attendant  cloud.  Such  was  the  form  in  which  he  was  pleased  to
appear  upon  the  merc.\  -seat.  Such  was  the  mode  ni  his  manifestation  on  the  Mount  of
Transfiguration.    In  our  present  imperfect  state  we  need  the  intervention  of  the  cloud.

IV.  I'he  charge.  God's  charge  came  to  Joshua  through  human  lips,  yet  none  the
luss  was  it  God's  cliarge.  We  must  suppose  that  Joshua  was  lacking  that  susceptibility
of  soul  which  is  essential  for  the  bearing  of  God's  voice.  Some  can  hear  that  voice
direct ;  some  can  hear  it  only  through  transmission  of  others'  speech.  God's  charge
and  Moses'  charge  were  one, "  Be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage."  What  God  commands,
God  first  gives.  Says  he  to  men,  "  Here  is  my  entrusted  strength :  use  it  well !  More
is  ready  as  soon  as  it  is  needed."    Best  of  all,  he  adds,  "  I  will  be  with  thee." — D.

Vers.  16 — 22,  29. — 2%e  last  precaution  aguinsl  idolatry.  We  cannot  trace  into
all  its  ramifications  the  subtle  influence  of  a  good  man's  life.  If  it  does  not
accomplish  all  that  he  has  desired,  it  often  achieves  more  than  he  imagines.  It  operates
in  directions  he  had  not  designed.  The  presence  of  a  good  man  will  often  repress  an
evil  which  he  catmot  eradicate.  All  the  faith  and  piety  of  Moses  had  hardly  restrained
the  people  from  idolatry ;  his  removal  will  be  the  loosening  of  the  flood-gates  which
had  held  in  check  the  wayward  passion.     We  have  in  this  paragraph —

I.  God's  fobecast  or  Israel's  future  sin.  "This  people  will  rise  up,  and  go
a-whoring  after  the  gods  of  the  strangers  "  (ver.  16).  Moses  himself  had  surmised  this
result.  With  hidden  sorrow,  he  had  observed  the  base  tendencies  of  the  people  towards
idolatry.  As  he  forecast  the  time  when  warfare  should  cease,  and  the  tribes  should
find  themselves  among  the  relics  of  idols,  he  trembled  for  the  result.  And  now  this
surmise  on  his  part  was  confirmed  by  a  revelation  from  God.  It  is  now  a  foreseen
reality  :  "  They  will  forsake  me,  and  break  my  covenant."  Worldly  success  and  self-
indulgence  would  lead  to  impiety.  Yet  this  foreknowledge  of  Israel's  certain  rin  did
not  deter  God  from  promising  to  Joshua  military  success,  nor  did  it  deter  G'tl  from
using  all  practical  measures  to  dissuade  from  sin.  We  conclude  that  God  see*  it  best
to  employ  alt  remedial  measures,  even  when  it  is  known  that  in  the  chief  fad  they
will  fail.

II.  We  have  Goo'e  announcement  of  consequent  calamity.  "My  arger  shall
be  kindled  apainst  them,  .  .  .  and  I  will  forsake  them."  The  series  of  evihthat  would
spring  from  idolatry  is  vividly  set  before  them ;  and  no  other  motive  can  be  ccmjectureil
for  this  than  a  generous  desire  to  deter  from  sin.  Love  is  more  conspicuous  in  portray-
ing the  certain  miseries  of  misconduct,  than  in  promising  the  rewards  of  cbedience.
The  former  duty  is  done  with  personal  painfulness;  the  latter  is  a  delight.  And  not
only  will  the  severity  of  the  punishment  be  keenly  felt,  but  the  people  will  also
apprehend  the  reason  of  the  calamity.  They  will  trace  it  up  to  God's  displeasure ;  yet
will  they  not  repent.  Men  are  woefully  blind  to  the  iron  force  of  sinful  luibit.  To-
day it  is  a  silken  thread  ;  to-morrow  it  is  an  iron  chain.

III.  God's  last  expedient  to  pbevknt  sin.  Moses,  the  servant  of  God,  was
•bout  to  die ;  but  his  death  was  to  be  a  sleep,  and  he  should  die  with  a  song  in  his
mouth.  At  first  sight,  it  seems  a  strange  expedient  as  a  deterrent  from  sin.  B<tt  the
intention  was,  that  by  the  sweet  and  flowing  sounds  of  rhythm,  the  main  facts  of  Q(>d's


CH.  XXXII.  1—62.]         THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


497


coTenant  might  be  kept  Tividly  alive  in  the  people's  memory.  In  the  absence  of
printing,  and  cheap  circulations  of  written  documents,  poetic  forms  will  lire  when
prose  is  quite  forgotten.  God  condescends  to  employ  every  possible  method  by  which
a  sense  of  religious  duty  might  be  preserved  and  perpetuated.  The  song  would  live  by  ^
the  action  of  known  law,  when  the  full  sense 'would  lie  ignored.  Thus  the  song  of'
Moses,  "  familiar  in  their  mouths  as  a  household  word,"  would  be  an  abiding  witness
against  them.  Said  Grod,  "  It  shall  not  be  forgotten."  By  such  gracious  methods  the
Most  High  would  win  men  unto  obedience  and  life.  The  mightiest  power  ia  in  geatle-
aesa.    If  this  fails,  all  fails, — D.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXXIL

Sons  ov   Moses  and  Annodnckmeht   or

BIS  Death.

In  accordance  with  the  Divine  injunction,
Moses  composed  an  ode,  which  he  recited  in
the  hearing  of  the  people,  and  oommitted  to
writing,  to  remain  with  them  as  a  witness
for  God  against  them.  With  this  end  in
view,  the  ode  is  directed  principally  to  a
contrasting  of  the  unchanging  faithfulness
of  the  Almighty  with  the  anticipated  per-
versity and  unfaithfulness  of  hia  people.
Tlie  poem  may  be  divided  into  six  parts.
1.  An  introduction  (vers.  1 — 3),  in  which
the  importance  of  the  doctrine  to  be  de-
livered is  announced.  2.  Theblamelessness
and  excellency  of  Jehovah  are  placed  in  con-
trast with  the  corruptness  and  perversity  of
Israel  (vers.  4,  5).  3.  The  folly  and  in-
gratitude of  the  rebellious  people  is  dwelt
upon  (vers.  7—18).  4.  The  purpose  of  God
to  punish  and  reject  the  rebellious  genera-
tion is  declared  (vers.  19—23).  5.  The  fulfil-
ment of  this  purpose  in  the  judgments
which  should  come  upon  the  rebels,  whilst
mercy  and  favour  should  be  showed  to  those
that  repented  and  were  humbled  under  the
hand  of  God  (vers.  24—34).  6.  And  finally,
•the  judgment  which  God  would  execute  on
the  enemies  of  Israel,  and  the  mercy  he
would  show  to  his  servants  (vers.  35 — 43).

In  this  ode — ^"carmine  plane  divino"
(Lowth)— Moses  displays  the  genius  of  the
poet,  as  in  the  other  parts  of  this  book  he  has
showed  the  sagacity  of  the  legislator  and  the
^11  of  the  orator.  Vigour  of  diction,  eleva-
tion of  sentiment,  vivacity  of  representation,
beauty  and  sublimity  of  imagery,characterize
this  ode  throughout.  Nor  is  the  piety  less
noticeable  than  the  poetry ;  zeal  for  God,
earnest  desire  for  his  honour,  and  devout
reverence  of  his  majesty  pervade  and  inspire

DEUTEBONOUT.


the  whole.  Bemarkable  also  la  this  ode  in
relation  to  the  later  prophetic  utterances  in
IsraeL  "  It  is  the  compendious  anticipatory
■ketch  and  the  common  watchword  of  all  pro-
phecy, and  stands  related  to  it  as  fundament-
ally as  the  Decalogue  to  all  laws,  and  the
Lord's  Prayer  to  all  prayers.  The  legiiilator
has  here  condensed  in  a  song  the  prophetic
contents  of  his  last  address  (ch.  zxvii. —
xxviii.,xxix.,xxz.),  wherewith  he  lives  on  in
the  memory  and  mouth  of  the  people.  He
here  sets  before  them  their  whole  history  to
the  end  of  the  days.  In  this  ode,  each  age  of
Israel  has  a  mirror  of  its  present  conditioa
and  future  fate.  This  mirror  prophecy  holds
up  before  its  oontempraaries "  (Delitzsch.
'  Jesaias,'  s.  33),

Ver.  1. — Heaven  and  earth  are  summoned
to  hearken  to  his  words,  both  because  of
their  importance,  and  because  heaven  and
earth  were  interested,  so  to  speak,  as
witnesses  of  the  manifestation  of  God's
righteousness  and  faithfulness  about  to  be
celebrated  (cf.  ch.  iv.  26 ;  xxx.  19 ;  xxxL  28,
29  :  Isa.  i.  2  ;  Jer.  iL  12 ;  xxii.  29).

Ver.  2. — My  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  rain.
The  Hebrew  verb  here  and  in  ch.  xxxiii.
28  is  properly  rendered  by  "  drop ; "  it  ex-
presses the  gentle  falling  of  a  genial  shower
or  the  soft  distillation  of  dew.  The  clause
is  best  taken  imperatively,  as  it  is  by  the
LXX.,  the  Vulgate,  and  Onkelos :  Let  my
doctrine  drop  as  the  rain,  let  my  speech  distil,
etc.  The  point  of  comparison  here  is  not  the
quickening,  fructifying,  vivifying  inflnence
of  the  rain  and  dew,  so  much  as  the  effec-
tive force  of  these  agents  as  sent  firom
heaven  to  produce  results.  So  might  his
doctrine  come  with  power  into  the  minds  of
his  hearers.  Doctrine  (np_^,  firom  np^,  to
take) ;  that  which  takes  one  (Prov.  vii  21,
"  fair  speech,"  by  which  one  is  captivated),
or  which  one  takes  or  receives,  via.  in-
struction (Prov.  iv.  2 ;  Isa.  xxix.  24).  Small
rain ;  gentle  showers,  such  as  conduce  to  tho
growing  of  herbs.  The  Hebrew  word  (on'jjfc' )
primarily  means  haixa^and  ia  bamnaed  of


198


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[cu.  xxjUL  1 — 52.


rain  eoming  down  in  thin  streains  like  hair.
Showeia;  heavy  rain  (Q'son,  frojii  33'n,  to
be  much  or  many,  equal  to  multitude  of
dropa).

Ver.  3. — I  will  publish  the  lame  of  the
Lord;  literally,  I  toill  call,  i.e.  proclaim,  or
celebrate,  eto.  Ascribe  ye  greatness  unto
our  Ood.  The  hearers  of  the  song  are  sum-
moned to  join  in  the  celebration  of  the
Divine  majesty.  The  word  rendered  "  great-
ness "  occurs  only  in  this  book  (ch.  ill.  24 ;
v.  21 :  ix.  26 ;  xi.  2),  and  in  Ps.  cl.  2.  It
is  the  greatness  of  God  as  the  Almighty  that
is  here  celebrated.

Vers.  4,  5. — He  is  the  Book,  Ms  work  is
perfect;  rather,  TheEockl  his  work  it  perfect,
i.e.  blameless,  without  fault.  God  is  called
"I he  Eock"  (nwn),  as  the  unchangeable
Refuge  and  Stronghold  of  his  people,  by
which  they  are  sustained,  and  to  which
tl:ey  can  resort  for  defence  and  protection
at  all  times.  The  epithet  is  applied  to  God
four  times  besides  in  this  song  (vers.  15,  18,
SO,  31);  it  occurs  also  frequently  in  the
Psalms  (cf.  Ps.  xiz.  14 ;  xxviii.  1 ;  xxxi.  2, 3 ;
Ixii  2, 7 ;  etc.).  The  Hebrew  word,  teur,  fur,
or  zur,  appears  in  several  proper  names  of
the  Musaic  period,  as  e.g.  Fedahzur,  "  Rock
delivers"  (Numb.  i.  10),  a  name  of  the
same  import  as  Pedahel,  "  God  delivers "
(Numb,  xxxiv.  28) ;  Elizur,"  God  is  a  Roek  "
(Numb,  i  5) ;  Zuriel  (Numb.  iii.  35)  and
Zaruhaddai,  "  the  Almighty  is  Rock "
(Numb.  i.  6;  ii  12).  "If  Jeliovah,"  saya
Baumgarten,  "  is  here  called  Bock,  without
any  qualification,  the  reason  is  that  he  is
the  only  true  rock,  and  all  the  strength
and  firmness  of  earth's  stones  is  but  an
ectype  of  his  unchangeable  faHhfulness  and
rectitude.  If  one  cleaves  to  tne  dualism  of
spirit  and  nature,  and  regards  the  figure  as
a  merely  subjective,  arbitrary  union  of  the
two,  such  an  expression  is  simply  un-
intelligible; but  if  we  would  understand
Scripture  and  religious  speech,  we  must  with
all  earnestness  accustom  ourselves  to  re-
oo^ize  the  spiritual  ground  in  nature,  and
apj[)rebend  this  in  the  Biblical  expression
(oomp.  Stefiens'  ■  Beligionsphilosophie,'  L
a.  lOl,  102)."  It  is  remarkable  that  none
of  the  ancient  versions  have  retained  this
epithet  here.  The  LXX.  have  @ebs:  the
V  ilgate,  peut  ("  Dei  opera  ") ;  the  Targum  of
Onkelos,  NB'fjn,  '  Mighty ;  "•  while  the  Pe-
shito  has  simply  the  pronoun  "  his  "  ap-
pended to  "  works,"  aqiOlS^.  For  all  his
ways  are  judgment ;  i.e.  accordant  with  recti-
tude (of.  Pg.oxlv.  17).  A  God  of  truth;  rather,
of  faithfulnest  {nmn,  from  )D«,  to  stay,  or
be  stayed,  to  be  firm).  They  have  corrupted
thems^lTes,  their  spot  is  not  the  spot  of  his
children:  they  are  a  perverse  and  crooked
generatioii.     Of  this  difficult  passage  the


following  seems  the  best  construction  and
rendering : — A  perverte  an<J  crooked  genera-
tion— not  his  children,  [but]  their  spot— has
become  corrupt  towards  him.  Tlie  subject  of
the  verb  at  the  beginning  of  the  verse  is  the
"perverse  and  crooked  generation,"  at  the
end  of  it,  and  between  the  verb  and  its  subjci  '.t
there  is  interjected  parenthetically  the  clause,
"  not  his  children,  but  their  spot."  Spot  in
here  used  in  a  moral  sense,  as  in  Job  xi.  15 ;
xxxi.  7 ;  ProT.  ix.  7.  These  corrupt  persons
claimed  to  be  children  of  God,  but  they
were  not ;  they  were  rather  a  stain  and  a
reproach  to  them  (cf.  2  Pet.  ii.  13 ;  Isa.  i.  4).
The  rendering  above  given  is  substantially
that  of  De  Wette,  Knobpl,  Keil,  and  Herx-
heimer,  by  all  of  whom  the  "perverso
generation  "  is  regarded  as  the  subject  of
the  sentence.  This  is  the  view  adopted
also  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary.'  Some
would  make  "God"  the  subject, and  render,
"He  hath  corrupted  to  him,  or  to  himself"
(margin.  Authorized  Version ;  Ibn  Ezra,
etc.).  Others  take  "spot "as  the  subject,
thus :  "  Their  spot  or  blemish  hath  corrupted
before  himchildren not  his"  (Lowth,  Dathe) ;
but  such  renderings  are  forced,  and  proceed
on  constructions  of  the  text  which  are  ille-
gitimate. Donaldson  (' Jashar,'  pp.  186,  223,
edit.  Sec.),,  following  Lowtli's  construction,
appeals  to  D3  |DM  ti'?  d<]3  (ver.  20)  as  a  similar
inversion.  But  the  two  cases  are  not
parallel.  To  make  them  so,  we  must  have
here  03  did  lib  v:3,  "his  children  in  whom
is  no  spot."  Ewahl  takes  nwa  as  the
noun  here,  instead  of  did,  and  tracing  it

to  the  Syriao  \^Oa<  juracit,  renders  "to
him  they,  his  not  sons,  have  corrupted  their
oath,"  i.e.  have  broken  it ;  and  this  Fiirst
approves.  But  the  phrase,  "  to  corrupt  an
oath  "  is  unexampled  in  the  Old  Testament,
and  there  is  no  ground  fur  changing  the
noun.  The  ancient  versions  vary  con-
siderably here :  ljX.X..,rindpTO(ra»,  ol/K  aura
vcKVa  /tcK/iTjTct:  Aq.,  Sic'^fleipay  out^  ovx  ii
viol  avTOv :  Sym.,  dUipdeipav  trphs  aUrov  oiix  ot
vtol  rh  a6vo\ov :  Vulgate,  peccaverunt  ei  et
non  fUii  ejus  in  tordibus ;  Vet.  Itala.,  pecca-
verunt  non  ei  filii  maculati  ;  Syriac,  "  TUey
corrupted  but  not  him,  children  of  defile-
ment." These  various  renderings  indicate
thut  probably  the  text  is  and  has  long  been
corrupt.  Some  of  the  older  English  ver-
sions are  worth  noting  on  this  veine.
Rogers  [Matthew],  "The  frowarde  ard
overthwart  generation  hath  marred  them-
selves to  himward,  and  are  not  his  sonnes
for  their  deformitie's  sake ; "  Bishop's  Bible,
"  Frowardly  have  they  done  agaynst  him
by  their  vices,  not  being  his  own  children,
but  a  wicked  and  froward  generation;"
Geneva  Version,  "They  have  corrupted
themselves  towards  him  by  their  vioe,  not


*H.  xxxn.  1 — 52.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


499


being  Ms  children,  but  a  (ioward  and  orooked
generation."

Vers.  6,  7. — ^Instead  of  gratefnlly  ac-
knowledging the  Divine  beneficence,  and
dutifully  obeying  the  Divine  will,  Israel
hnd  perversely  and  foolishly  requited  the
I>nrd  for  all  his  benefits,  by  apostacy  from
him.  Do  ye  thus  requite  t  The  verb  here
signifies  primarily  to  do  to  any  one  either
good  or  evil,  whether  in  return  for  what  he
has  done  or  not  (cf.  Gen.  1. 15 ;  1  Sam.  xxiv.
18;  Frov.  iii.  30);  then,  as  a  secondary
meaning,  to  reward,  repay,  requite,  as  here
and  Ps.  xviii.  21.  To  bring  more  forcibly  to
their  view  the  ingratitude  and  folly  of  their
conduct,  Moses  dwells  upon  what  God  was
and  had  b^en  to  the  nation :  their  Father,
ill  that  he  bad,  in  his  love,  chosen  them  to
be  bis  people  (cf  Isa.  Ixiii.  16;  Ixiv.  7;
Mai.  ii.  10) ;  their  Fnrohaser,  who  had  ac-
quired possession  of  them  by  delivering  them
out  of  Egypt  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxiv.  2);  their
Uaker,  who  had  constituted  them  a  nation ;
and  their  Establisher,  by  whom  they  had
been  conducted  through  the  wilderness  and
settled  in  Cannan.  Says  of  old;  the
times  of  Israel's  deliverance  from  bondage,
and  the  times  during  which  successive
generations  had  lived  and  experienced  the
goodness  of  the  Lord.  The  form  of  the
word  rendered  "  days  "  is  poetical,  and  is
found  only  here  and  in  Ps.  xc.  15,  which
is  also  ascribed  to  Sloses.  The  years  of  many
generations;  literally,  yean  of  geTteration
and  generation;  "setatum  singularum  an-
uos"  (Eosenmttller).

Vers.  8,  9.— From  the  very  beginning,
when  God  first  allotted  to  the  nations  a
place  and  a  heritage,  he  had  respect  in  his
arrangements  to  the  sons  of  Israel,  who  were
his  portion,  and  had  as  it  were  kept  their
interest  in  view  in  all  that  he  appointed
and  ordered.  Accordine;  to  the  number  of
the  children  of  Israel.  Wljcn  the  Most  High
portioned  out  to  the  nations  the  heritage  of
each,  he  reserved  for  lerael,  as  the  people
of  his  choice,  an  inheritance  proporlioned  to
its  numbers.  The  LXX.  has  "  according  to
the  number  of  the  angels  of  God,"  an  arbi-
trary departure  from  the  original  text,  in
accommodation,  probably,  to  the  later  Jewish
notion  of  each  nation  having  its  guardian
angel.  The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people  (cf.
Exod.  XV.  16 ;  xix.  5 ;  1  Sam.  x.  1 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.
71).  The  lot  of  his  inheritance ;  literally,
the  eord,  etc.,  the  allusion  being  to  the  mea-
■uriug  of  land  by  a  cord,  equivalent  to  the
portion  by  mi  asure  which  Jehovah  allotted
to  himself  as  his  inlieritance  (cf.  Ps.  xvi.  6).

Ver.  10. — God's  fatherly  care  of  Israel.
In  the  desert  land,  and  in  the  waste  howling
wilderness ;  literally,  tn  the  land  of  the  desert,
in  the  watte  (the  formless  waste ;  the  word
used  ia  that  rendered.  Gen.  i.  2,  "  without


form"),  the  howling  of  the  wildernett.
"  Israel  is  figuratively  represented  as  a  man
without  food  or  water,  and  surrounded  by
howling,  ferocious  beasts,  and  who  must
needs  have  perished  had  not  God  found  him
and  rescued  him  "  (Herxheimer).  The  apple
of  his  eye;  literally,  (he  mannikin  (pti^'N)  of
his  eye,  the  pupil ;  so  called  because  in  it,  as
in  a  mirror,  a  person  sees  his  own  image  re-
flected in  miniature  (Geseuius),  or  because,
being  the  tenderest  part  of  the  eye,  it  is
guarded  as  one  would  a  babe  (cf.  Ps.  xvii.
8 ;  Prov.  vii.  2 ;  Zech.  ii.  12).  By  Delitzsch
and  others  this  explanation  of  the  word  is
rejected  as  not  philologieally  justified,  there
being  no  evidence  that  the  termination  li
had  a  diminutive  force;  and  as  not  in  keep-
ing with  the  earnestness  of  the  passages  in
which  this  word  occurs.  They  prefer
the-  explanation  man  image  to  mannikin.
Anyhow,  the  use  of  the  word  here  must  be
taken  as  indicating  that  Israel  is  ever  in  the
eye  of  the  Lord,  the  object  of  his  oonstant
and  tenderest  care.

Ver.  11. — God's  treatment  of  his  people  is
compared  to  that  of  an  eagle  towards  its
young  (of.  Exod.  xix.  4).  In  the  Authorized
Ver  ion,  the  apodosis  of  the  sentence  's
made  to  begin  at  ver.  12,  and  ver.  11  is  wholly
understood  of  the  eagle  and  its  young.  To
this  arrangement  it  has  been  objected  that
it  overlooks  the  fact  tbut  the  suliixes  to  the
verbs  "  taketh  "  and  "beareth"  are  singulars,
and  are  to  be  understood  consequently,  not
of  the  eaglets,  but  of  Israel.  It  has,  there-
fore, been  proposed  to  render  the  passage
thus :  As  an  eagle  which  stirreth  up  ite  nest,
flultereth'over  its  young,  he  spread  out  his
wings,  took  him  up,  and  carried  him  on  his
piniont.  The  Lnrd  alone  did  lead  him,
etc.  The  comparison  is  thus  made  to  pass
into  a  metapliorieal  representation  of  the
Lord's  dealing  with  Israel.  One  feels  that
there  is  something  violent  in  this,  for  whilst
God's  care  for  Israel  might  be  fittingly
compared  to  that  of  an  eagle  towards  her
youiig,  it  is  less  fit  to  speak  of  God  himself
as  if  he  were  an  eagle  with  wings  which  he
spread  abroad  and  on  which  he  bare  Israel.
The  rendering  in  the  Authorized  Version  is
on  this  account  to  be  preferred,  if  it  can  be
grammatically  vindicated.  And  this  it  may
on  the  ground  that  the  suffixes  may  he
nnderstood  of  the  "  nest "  as  containing  the
young  ("  oontinens  pro  contento,"  a  common
rhetorical  trope  in  Scripture ;  see  Glass.,
'  Phil.  Sac.,'  p.  686 ;  cf.  Virgil, '  .fflneid,'  xii.
475,  "  nidisque  loquacibus  esoam  ") ;  or  the
young  may  be  referred  to  individually,
"  taketh  it,  beareth  it,"  t.e.  each  of  them ;  or,
if  the  nest  be  understood,  the  whole  body  of
iihem  as  therein  contained.  Stirreth  up  her
ptsjnest  i.e.  its  nestlings ;  provocansadwlan-


600


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.


[oh.  xxxn.  1—62,


dum  puUoi  ntot,  Vulgate.    This  U  the  expla-
nation QBually  given  of  the  initial  clause  of
this  Terse ;  but  its  accuracy  has  been  ques-
tioned.   FQrst  would  render  the  verb  by
"watohesoTer;"  but  though  T^n,a8  the  Hiph.
of  my,  to  watch,  may  have  this  meaning,  it  is  ,
undoubtedly  used  generally  in  the  sense  of
rousing,  exciting,  stirring  up.    Knobel  re-
tains this  meaning,  but  understands  the
clause  of  the  exciiing  of  the  nestlings  by  the
parent  bird  coming  to  them  with  food.    This
is  certainly  more  in  keeping  with  what
follows ;  for  when  the  eagle  nestles  or  broods
over  her  young,  she  does  not  excite  them  to
fly.     Flntteretli  over  her  young;   rather,
broodi    over,    nettles,    or    cheHsJte$    (^nT).
Spreadethabroad  her  wings,  etc.  "I  once  saw
a  very  interesting  right  above  one  of  the
crags  of  Ben  Nevis,  as  I  was  going  in  pursuit
of  black  game.    Two  parent  eagles  were
teaching  their  offspring,  two  young  birds,  the
manoeuvres  of  flight.    They  began  by  rising
from  the  top  of  •  mountain,  in  the  eye  of
the  sun ; — it  was  about  midday,  and  bright
for  this  climate.    They  at  first  made  small
circles,  and  the  young  imitated  them ;  they
paused  on  their  wings,  waiting  till  they  had
made  their  first  flight,  holding  them  on  their
expanded  wings  when  they  appeared  ex-
hausted, and  then  took  a  secnnd  and  larger
gyration,  always  rising  towards  the  sun,  and
enlarging  their  circle  of  flight,  so  as  to  make
a  gradually  ascending  spiral "  (Davy,  '  Sal-
monia ; '  see  also  Bochart, '  Hierozoicon,'  ii.
181).    The  general  reference  is  to  God's
fostering  care  of  Israel,  and  especially  his
dealing  with  them  when  "  he  suffered  their
manners  in  the  wilderness  "  (Acts  xiiL  18),
disciplined  them,  and  trained  them  for  what
they  were  appointed  to  do.

V  er.  12. — ^Iha  Lord  alone  did  lead  him  (cf.
Exod.  xiiL  21;  XT.  13).  With  him;  <a
along  with  Jehovah,  as  aiding  him.

Yer.  13. — He  made  him  ride  on  the  high
places  of  the  earth.  To  ride  over  or  drive
over  the  heights  of  a  country  is  figuratively
to  subjugate  and  take  possession  of  that
country  (cf.  ch.  xxxiii.  29;  Isa.  Iviii.  14).
Israel,  having  subjugated  (Danaan,  could  eat
of  its  produce,  the  inorease  of  the  fields,  as  his
own.  Honey  ont  of  the  rook,  and  oil  out  of
the  flinty  rook.  Canaan  abounded  in  wUd
bees,  which  had  their  hives  in  crevices'  of
the  rock,  and  in  olive  trees,  which  grew  on
a  rocky  soil ;  as  is  still  the  case  in  Palestine.
Ver.  14.— Butter  of  kine.  The  Hebrew
word  (nKon)  here  used  designates  milk  in
a  solid  or  semi-solid  state,  as  thick  cieam,
curd,  or  butter.  As  distinguished  from  this
is  the  milk  of  sheep;  where  the  word  used
(3^n)  properly  denotes  fresh  milk,  milk  in  a
fluid  state,  and  with  all  its  richness  (^Sn,
fatness)  in  it  (of.  Gen.  xviii.  8 ;  Isa.  vii.  22).


Fat  of  Iambs;  lambs  of  the  best,  "fat"
being  a  figurative  expression  foi  the  best
(Numb,  xviii.  12).  Bams  of  the  breed  of
Bashan;  literally,  rams,  sons  of  Sashan;
i.e.  reared  in  Bashan,  a  district  famous  for
its  cattle.  With  the  tat  of  kidneys  of  wheat ;
tHth  the  kidney-fat  of  wheat;  i.e.  the
richest  fat,  the  best  and  most  nutritious
wheat.  And  thou  didst  drink  the  pure  blood
of  tile  grape.  The  blood  of  the  grape  is  the
expressed  juice  of  the  grape,  which,  being
red,  is  compared  to  blood.  The  rendering
"pure"  here  is  not  inapt.  The  original
word  (isn,  from  npn,  to  boil  up,  to  foam,  to
rise  in  bubbles)  describes  this  juice  as  it
appears  when  pressed  into  a  vessel,  when
the  surface  of  the  liquid  is  covered  with
froth  or  foam.  There  is  no  ground  for  the
explanation  "flery  wine"  (Keil);  wine  in
such  a  state  was  never  among  the  Hebrews
counted  a  blessing.  That  they  had  and
used  fermented  wine  is  oertain;  but  what
they  specially  esteemed  as  a  luxury  was
the  pure  unadulterated  juice  of  the  grape
freshly  pressed  out  and  drunk  with  the
foam  on  it.

Vers.  15— 18.— Israel's  ungrateful  return
for  the  Lord's  benefits.

Ver.  15. — Jeshumn.   This  name,  formed
from  IK*^,  righteous,   designates   Israel    as
chosen  to  be  a  righteous  nation ;  and  in  the
use  of  it  here  lies  the  keenest  reproach  of
apostate  Israel,  as  fallen  into  a  state  the
opposite  of  that  to  which  it  was  destined.
"By  using  the  name  righteous  in  place  of
Israel,  Moses  ironically  censures  those  who
had  swerved  from  rectitude;  by  recalling  to
memory  with  what  dignity  they  had  been
endowed,  he  the  more  sharply  rebukes  the
perfidy  which  was  their  crime"  (Calvin).
This  name  appears  also  in  ch.  xxxiii.  5,  2ti,
and  in  Isa.  xliv.  2 ;  but  in  these  places  with-
out   any  implied    censure.    By  some   the
word  is  regarded  as  a  diminutive  firom  ~nl!'<,
the  same  as  le'*,  in  the  sense  of  recluTut,
justidus,  "the  good  littlepeople"  (Gesenius);
others  as  a  diminutive  from  '^vnv^,,  Israel,  as
a  sort  of  term  of  endearment  (Grotius).    But
the  latter  of  these  derivations  is  impossible ;
and  as  to  the  former,  there  lacks  evidence
of  the  termination  un  having  a  diminutive
significance  in  Hebrew.     Besides,  neither
here  nor  in  ch.  xxxiii.  5  would  a  term  of
endearment  be  suitable.    Waxed  fat,  and
kicked  (cf.  oh.  vi.  11 ;  viii.  10 ;  xxxi.  20).  The
allusion  is  to  an  ox  that  had  grown  fat
through  good  feeding,  and  had  become  un-
manageable in  consequence  (cf.  1  Sam.  iL
26 ;    Hos.  x.  4).     Lightly  esteemed.     The
Hebrew  is  strongly  expressive  here:  Tkoa
hast  treated  as  a  fool  (bsi,  from  ^33,  to  be
foolish  (cf.  Micah  vii.  6).
Ver.  16. — They  provoked  him  to  Jealonsy,


OH.  xxxn.  1—52.]


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


601


God  had  bound  Israel  to  himself  as  by  the
marriage  bond,  and  tliey  by  their  unfaith-
fulness had  incited  him  to  jealousy  (of.
ch.  xxxi.  16;  Exod.  xzxiv.  15;  Isa.  liv.  5;
Hos.  i.,  etc.).  Strange  gods  (of.  Jer.  11.  25 ;
■d\.  13).

Ver.  17,— Deyils;  ihedim,  a  word  which
occurs  only  here  and  Ps.  crl.  37.  It  stands
oonnected  with  the  verb  niB*,  to  rule,  and
means  primarily  "  lords."  The  LXX.  render
by  5oi;n<!i'm,  demons.  In  Assyrian  it  is  said  to
be  a  name  for  demigods.  Not  to  God ;  rather,
to  a  not-God,  a  composite  term  in  a|)position
to  ehedim;  the  meaning  is  rightly  given
in  the  marfjin  of  the  Authorized  Version,
"  which  were  not  God."  To  new  gods  that
oame  newly  up.  The  word  rendered  by
"  newly  "  (a'np)  properly  means  "  near ;  "
it  is  an  adjective  both  of  place  and  of
time;  here  it  is  the  latter,  equal  to  of  a
near  time,  recently — gods  recently  invented
or  discovered.

Ver.  18.— Moses  here  returns  to  the
thought  of  ver.  15,  for  the  purpose  of  ex-
pressing it  with  greater  force,  and  also  of
leading  on  to  the  description  he  is  about
to  give  of  the  Lord's  acts  towards  the
nation  who  haii  so  revolted  from  him.  Thou
art  unmindful ;  JjX.^.,iyKaTc\nres :  Vulgate,
dereliquieti.  The  Hebrew  word  ITl^  occurs
only  liere,  and  the  meaning  is  doubtful .  From
the  rendering  of  the  versions,  it  would  seem

to  be  allied  to  the  Arabic  '  P  uj,  faha,  ohlitui

ett.  That  formed  thee ;  literally,  that  brought
thee  forth  or  cauned  thee  to  be  born ;  "  qui  te
eduxit  ex  utero  materno"  (Jarchi.  Cf.  for
the  use  of  the  verb,  Ts.  xxix.  9).  In  the
Bamaritan  CJodex,  -f^hriD, "  who  hath  glorified
or  praised  thee,"  is  the  reading,  instead  of
-I'^^no ;  and  this  the  Syriao  also  expresses.
The  other  versons,  however,  support  the
Masoretic  reading.

Vers.  19 — 33. — Because  of  their  rebellion.
God  would  cast  them  off  and  visit  them
with  terrible  calamities.

Ver.  19. — When  the  Lord  saw  how  they
had  departed  from  him  to  servo  idols,  he
abhorred  (lather,  spurned  or  reji cted)  t\iem
in  consequence  of  the  provocation  which
their  unworthy  conduct  had  given  him.

Ver.  20. — God  himself  comes  forth  to
announce  bis  resolution  to  withdraw  his
fiivour  from  them,  and  to  inflict  chastise-
ment upon  them;  he  would  withdraw  his
protecting  care  of  them,  and  see  how  they
would  fare  without  that ;  and  he  would  also
send  on  them  the  tokens  of  his  displeasure.
A  Tory  froward  generation,  etc.;  literally,
a  generation  of  perversitieB,  an  utterly  per-
verse and  faithless  race.

Ver.  21.—  (Cf.  eh.  v.  16.)  Because  they  had
moved  God  to  jealousy  and  provoked  him  to


anger  by  their  vanities,  their  nothingnesses,
mere  vapours  and  empty  exhalations  (Q'^arj;
of  Jer.  X.  6 ;  John  ii.  8 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  4) ;  as
they  had  forsaken  him  for  a  no-God,  be
would  send  retribution  on  them  by  adopting
as  his  a  no-people,  and  giving  to  a  foolish
nation,  i.e.  a  nation  not  before  possessed  of
that  true  wisdom  the  beginning  of  which  is
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  the  privileges  and
blessings  which  Israel  had  forfeited  by  their
apostacy.  By  "  a  no-people  "  is  not  to  be
understood  a  savage  tribe  not  yet  formed
into  a  community,  but  a  people  without  God,
and  not  recognized  by  him  as  in  covenant
union  with  him  (cf.  Bom.  x.  19  ;  Epb.  ii.
12  ;  1  Pet,  ii.  10).

Ver.  22.— (Cf.  Jer.  xv.  14;  xvii.4  ;  Lam.
iv.  11.)  The  lowest  hell;  the  lowest  sheol,
the  uttermost  depth  of  the  under-world.
The  Hebrew  sTieol  (VlH?0  answering  to  the
Greek  ^Stij,  by  which  it  is  usually  rendered
by  the  LXX.,is  a  general  designation  of  the
unseen  state,  the  place  of  the  dead.  By
some  the  word  is  derived  from  Skb^,  to  ask,
because  sheol  is  ever  asking,  is  insatiable
(Prov.  xsx.  16);  but  more  probably  it  is
from  a  root  signifying  to  excavate,  to  hollow,
and,  like  the  German  hSlle,  joeans  primarily
a  hollow  place  or  cavern.  The  Divine  wrath
kindles  a  consuming  fire,  that  bums  down
to  the  lowest  depths — to  the  deepest  part
of  sheol — consumes  the  earth's  produce,
and  sets  on  fire  the  foundations  of  the
mountains.  This  does  not  refer  to  any  par-
ticular judgment  that  was  to  befall  the
national  Israel,  but  is  a  general  description
of  the  effects  of  the  Divine  wrath  when  that
is  poured  forth  in  judgments  on  men.

Ver.  23.— I  will  spend  mine  arrows  upon
them ;  I  will  inflict  on  them  so  many  cala-
mities that  none  shall  remain.  The  evils
sent  on  men  by  God  are  represented  as
arrows  shot  on  them  from  above.  (C£  ver.
42 ;  Job  vi.  4 ;  Ps.  vii.  13 ;  xxxviii.  2 ;  xlv.
5;  Mil.  7;  Zech.  ix.  14;  Homer,  'Iliad,'  L
45,  etc.)

Vers.  24,  25.— The  evils  threatened  are
famine,  pestilence,  plague^  wild  beasts,
poisonous  reptiles,  and  war.  They  shall  be
burnt  with  hunger,  etc. ;  render :  Sucked  out
by  hunger,  consumed  with  pestilential  heat,
and  bitter  plague ;  I  will  send  against  them
the  tooth  of  beasts  and  the  poison  of  things
that  oiawl  in  the  dust.  When  hunger,
pestilence,  and  contagious  disease  had
wasted  and  exhausted  them,  then  God  would
send  on  them  wild  beasts  and  poisonous
reptiles.  ShdU  be  htimt.  The  Hebrew  word
occurs  only  here ;  it  is  a  verbal  adjective,
meaninp,  literally,  sucked  out,  i.».  utterly
exhausted ;  LXX.,  tij/co^eVoi  Kiiuf,  Tooth  of
beasts  and  poison  of  serpents;  poetical  for
ravenous  and  poisonous  animals  (of.  Lei


502


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOJllr.


[CH.  XXX 1 1.  1—52.


xxvi.  22').  Shall  destroy ;  literally,  shall  make
childless,  shall  bereave,  viz.  the  land  which  is
thought  of  as  a  mother  whose  children  were
destroyed.  The  verb  is  hflre  sensu  prsefnanti,
shall  bereave  by  destroying,  etc.  (of.  ISain.
XV.  23;  Lam.  i.20;  Jer.  xviii.  21).

"Vers.  26,  27.— Israel's  desert  was  to  be
utterly  destroyed,  but  Goil  refrained  from
this  for  his  own  Name's  sake.  I  said,  I  vtonld
scatter  them  into  corners ;  rather,  I  should
say,  1  will  blow  them  away,  i.e.  disperte
them  as  by  a  mighty  wind.  The  verb  here
is  the  Hiph.  of  dko,  to  breathe,  to  blow,  and
is  found  only  here.  The  rabbins  m^ike  it
a  denominative  from  HKS,  a  corner,  and  this
the  Authorized  Version  follows;  others  trace
it  to  an  Arabic  root,  hnd,  amputavit,  excidit,
and  render,  "  will  cut  tliem  off."  The  idea
intended  to  be  conveyed  is  obviously  that  of
entire  destruction,  and  this  is  not  satisfied
by  the  representation  of  their  being  soared
or  diiven  into  corners.  Were  it  not  that
I  feared  the  wrath  of  the  enemy.  Various
renderings  and  interpretations  of  this  pas-
sage have  been  given.  1.  Wet  sit  not  that
I  feared  the  provocation  of  the  enemy,  i.e.
that  I  should  be  provoked  to  wrath  by  the
enemy  ascribing  the  destruction  of  Israel  to
their  own  process.  2.  Were  it  not  that
I  feared  a  wrath  upon  the  enemy,  with  much
the  same  meaning.  3.  Were  it  not  that
I  feared  the  fury  of  the  enemy,  i.e.  agijinst
Israel — feared  lest  the  enemy  should  be  en-
couraged to  rise  up  against  Israel  and
ascribe  their  destruction  to  their  own  valour.
Of  these  that  most  generally  approved  is  the
first.  (On  this  reason  for  sparing  Israel,  see
ch.  ix.  28 ;  Exod.  xxxii.  12-;  Numb.  xiv.  13,
etc. ;  laa.  x.  5,  etc. ;  Ezek.  xx.  13, 14.)  Should
behave  themselves  strangely ;  rather,  should
mistake  oi  falsely  pretend.  The  verb  is  the
Piel  of  'O},  to  look  upon,  to  mark,  and  con-
veys the  idea  of  looking  on  askance  or
prejudicially,  hence  being  ignorant  of,  mis-
faking,  feigning,  or  falsely  pretending.  Our
hand  is  high;  rather,  was  high,  ie.  was
mighty  in  power,

Vers.  28— 33.— The  cause  of  Israel's  re-
jection was  that  they  were  a  pe-.ple  utterly
destitute  of  counsel  and  without  under-
derbtanding.  Had  they  been  wise,  they
would  have  looked  to  the  end,  and  acted  in
a  way  conducive  to  their  own  welfare,  in-
stead of  rushing  upon  ruin.

Ver.  29. — Oh  that  they  were  wise,  that
they  understood  this;  rather,  If  they  were
wise  they  would  understand  this.  They  would
consider  their  latter  end!  t.e.  the  end  to
which  they  were  going,  the  inevitable  issue
of  the  course  they  were  taking.

Ver.  30. — If  Israel  were  wise,  they  could
easily  overcome  all  their  foes  through  the
help  of  the  Almighty  (Lev.  xxvi.  8) ;  but
having  forsaken  him,    they    were  left  by


him,  and  so  came  under  the  power  of  the
enemy.

Ver.  81.— The  heathen  had  also  a  rook  in
which  they  trusted — their  idol-gods;  but
even  they  knew  and  felt  that  their  rock  was
not  as  the  Bock  of  Israel,  for,  having  often
experienced  the  almighty  power  of  Gotl,
they  could  not  but  acknowledge  that  he
was  mightier  far  than  the  gods  whom  they
worshipped  (cf.  Exod.  xiv.  25;  Numb
xxxiii.,  xxxiv.;  Josh.  ii.  9 ;  1  Sam.  v.  7)
Hoses  is  here  himself  again  the  speaker.

Ver.  32.— If  the  Bock  of  Israel  was  so
much  mightier  than  the  rook  of  their
enemies, how  came  it  that  Israel  was  beaten
and  put'  to  flight  by  their  enemies  ?  The
reason  is  here  given :  It  was  because  Israel
had  become  wholly  corrupt  and  vitiated
that  they  were  forsaken  of  the  Lord  and  left
to  the  power  of  their  enemies.  Their  vine ;
i.e.  Israel  itself  (of.  Ps.  Ixxx.  9,  etc. ;  Isa.  v.
2 ;  Jer.  ii.  21 ;  Hos.  x.  1 ).  The  vine  of  Sodom.
It  has  been  supposed  that  there  is  reference
here  to  a  particular  plant,  and  different
plants  have  been  suggested  as  deserving  to
be  so  named.  But  it  is  more  probable  that
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  are  here  advanced  as
types  of  what  is  depraved,  and  to  the  moral
taste  nauseous  (cf.  Isa.  L  10 ;  Jer.  xxiii  11).
GaU  (cf.  ch.  xxix.  18).

Ver.  33. — Tlie  wine  of  these  grapes  is
poison  and  venom.  Dragons ;  tannin
(cf  Exod.  vii.  9, 10).  Cruel  [deadly]  venom
of  asps.  The  pethen,  one  of  the  most
poisonous  of  snakes,  the  bite  of  which  was
immediately  fatal  (Kitto,  '  Bibl.  Oycl.,'  iii.
494;  Smith's  '  Diet.,'  i.  21).  These  figures
express  the  thought  that  Israel  had  utterly
corrupted  their  way  iind  become  abominable ;
probably  also  it  is  intimated  that,  as  they
had  imitated  the  impiety  of  the  inhabitants
of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  they  deserved  to
perish  as  they  did  (J.  H.  Michaelis).

Vers.  34 — 43. — Notwithstanding  the  ini-
quity of  Israel  and  the  judgments  that
should  come  upon  them,  God  would  have
compassion  upon  them  for  his  Name's  sake,
and  would  appear  for  their  vindication
and  defence.  The  "  this  "  in  ver.  34  is  by
some  understood  of  the  sinful  doings  of  the
Israelites  which  (iod  should  not  forget  or
overlook.  So  the  Targum  of  Onkelos :  "  Are
not  all  their  works  manifest  before  me,  kept
against  the  day  of  judgment  in  my
treasures?"  So  also  Calvin,  "Quanquam
de  poenis  huno  versum  quidam  exponunt,
acsi  Deus  assereret  diversas  earum  species
apud  se  paratas  esse,  quas  depromat  quoties
libuerit:  rectius  tamen  est  de  sceleribua
iutelligere."  But  there  is  a  more  compre-
hensive reference  here.  Not  only  the  deeds
of  the  transgressors,  but  the  judgments  that
should  come  on  Israel,  and  also  God's  in-
terposition  on  their  behalf,  tcere  laid  up


OH.  xxxu.  1— 52.]         THE  BOOK  OF  DEtTEROXOMY.


m


in  itore  toith  him,  and  tealed  tip  among  hit
treamrei.  All  that  had  been  done  had
been  note'l.  and  all  that  should  happen  was
ilecreed,  and  should  certainly  come  to  pass.
The  "this"  has  thus  both  a  retrospective
and  a  prospective  reference ;  it  includes  both
the  Bin  of  the  nation  and  God's  dealing
with  them  afterwards,  as  well  as  hia  judg-
ments on  their  enemies.

Ver.  34. — My  treasures.  God's  treasures
contain  not  only  a  ttore  of  blessing,  but  also
instruments  of  punishment,  which  as  he  s>  es
meet,  he  sends  forth  on  men  (of.  ch.  xxviii.
12 ;  Job  xxxviii.  22,  23;  Ps.  cxxxv.  7).

Ver.  35. — Render:  Vengeance  is  mine,
and  retribution  for  the  time  when  their  feet
shall  totter ;  for  the  day  of  their  calamity  is
at  hand,  and  that  which  is  prepared  for
them  maketh  haste.  The  tottering  of  the  feet
represents  the  incipient  fall.  God  would
manifest  himself  as  the  Avenger  when  their
ciilamity  began  to  eome  upon  them.

Ver.  36. — The  Lord  shall  judge  his  people
(cf.  Ps.  cxxxv.  14;  1  Pet.  iv.  17).  And
repent  himself  for  his  servants ;  rather,  and
have  compassion  upon  his  servants.  And
there  is  none  shut  up,  or  left.  The  words
rendered  "  shut  up  or  left "  are  a  proverbial
expression  for  "  every  one,  men  of  all  sorts  "
(of  1  Kings  xiv.  10;:  xxi.  21 ;  2  Kings  ix.  8 ;
xiv.  26);  but  how  the  words  are  to  be
rendered  or  explained  is  uncertain.  Bosen-
miiller  renders  as  in  the  Authorized  Version ;
Gesenius  has,  "the  shut  up  and  the  let  go
free,  the  bond  and  the  fiee ; "  so  also  Fiirst
and  De  Wette ;  De  Dieu,  "  married  and
single,  conjugatus  et  ccelebs,"  referring  to  the
Arabic  usage  in  support  of  his  conclusion
('Animad.  in  Vet.  Test.,'  p.  114),  and  this
Keil  approves.  Ewald  has  "kept  in  (by
iKgal  impurity)  or  at  large."  The  explana-
tion of  Gosfuius  and  Fiirst  seems  best.

Ver.  37 — The  Lord  would  show  his
people  the  utter  worthlessness  of  idols,  and
bring  them  to  acknowledge  liim  as  the  only
true  God.  Their  gods;  the  idols  to  which
Israel  had  turned,  the  strange  gods  which
they  had  foolishly  and  sinfully  preferred  to
Jehovah.

Ver.  39. — See  now  that  I  am,  even  I  am
he.  The  Hebrew  is  more  expressive,  See  now
that  I,  I  <im  ;  LXX  ,1;5€Te,  XSere  '6rt  eyji  elfit
(of.  Isa.  xli.  4;  xlviii.  12;  John  viii.  24;
xviii.  5).  Their  own  experience  of  the  utter
impotency  of  these  idol-gods  to  help  them
or  to  protect  themsel  ves  f i  om  the  stroke  of
the  Almighty  was  enough  to  convince  them
that  they  were  no  gods,  and  that  he  alone
was  to  be  feared  and  worshipped.

Vers.  40,  41. — These  verses  should  be
read  continuously :  For  Ilift  up  my  hand  to
heaven,  and  say.  As  I  live  for  ever,  if  I  whet
my  glittering  sword,  and  if  my  hand  take
hold  on  judgment ;  I  will  render  vengeance  to


mine  enemies,  etc.  Lifting  up  the  hand  to
heaven  was  a  gesture  intended  to  expiegs
that  the  person  taking  an  oath  appealed  to
Goil  as  a  witness  of  his  oath,  and  who  would
perish  for  falsehood  (cf.  Gen.  xiv.  22);
and  "  as  the  Lord  liveth  "  was  a  common
formula  in  taking  an  oath  (cf.  Kumb.  xiv.
21;  1  Sam.  xiv.  39,  45;  Jer.  v.  2).  As
God  could  swear  by  none  greater,  he  sware
by  himself  (cf.  Exod.  vi.  8 ;  Numb.  xiv.  30 ;
Isa  xiv.  23 ;  Jer.  xxii.  5 ;  Heb.  vi.  17),  that
if  he  did  come  forth  to  avenge  himself  of
liis  enemies,  he  would  not  spare,  but  would
do  thoroughly  what  he  had  come  forth  to  do.
— Glittering  sword;  literally,  lightning  of
Bword  (cf.  Ez.  xxi.  10  [15]).

Ver.  42. — My  sword  shall  devour  flesh;
literally,  shall  eat  fiesh ;  "the  edge  of  the
sword  is  called  its  mouth,  becau.se,  like  a
moutli,it  issaidtoeatanddevour"(GejeniuB).
From  the  beginning  of  revenges  upon  the
enemy.  Different  renderings  of  this  have
been  given :  LXX.,  anh  Ke<i>a\fis  apxivruv
Ix^pav,  "from  the  head  of  the  hostile
princes;"  "from  the  head  of  the  chiefs  of
the  enemy  "  (Gesenius,  Fiirst,  Rosenmiiller);
"from  the  hairy  head  of  the  foe"  (Keil,
Herxheimer,  Knobel).  nipig,  the  plural  of
yiB,  hair,  locks,  signifies  primarily  hairs,  and
a  head  of  hairs,  and  may  be  taken  as
equivalent  to  "a  hairy  head;"  but  the
word  is  also  used  in  the  sense  of  "  princes"
or  "  chiefs  "  (probably  because  such  were
distinguished  by  copious  flowing  locks;
cf.  Judg.  V.  2) ;  hence^  the  rendering,
"  head  of  the  chiefs."  The  former  is  to  be
preferred  here,  for  why  chiefs  or  princes
should  be  referred  to  in  this  connection  docs
not  appear  (cf.  Ps.  Ixviii.  22).  The  rendering
of  the  Authorized  Version  is  wholly  un-
authorized. This  verse  presents  an  instance
of  alternate  parallelism ;  each  half  falls
into  two  members,  and  of  the  four  members
thus  constituted,  the  third  corresponda  to
the  first,  and  the  fourth  to  the  second ;  thus —

o  "  I  will  make  my  arrows  drunk  with  blood,
h  And  my  sword  shnll  devour  flesh ;

a'  With  the  blood  of   the  slain  and  tho
captives,
V  From  the  hairy  head  of  the  foe."

Ver.  43. — "  As  this  song  commenced  with
an  appeal  to  heaven  and  earth  to  give  glory
to  the  Lord  (vers.  1 — 3),  so  it  very  suitably
closes  with  an  appeal  to  the  heathen  to
rejoice  with  his  people  on  account  of  the
acts  of  the  Lord"  (Keil).  Bejoice,  0  ye
nations,  with  his  people.  The  Auttkorized
Version  here  follows  the  LXX.,  titppivtrtTf
tdvil  fieTO,  ToS  \aov  avTov,  and  BO  St.  Paul
cites  the  passage  in  Eom.  XV.  10.  The  Jewish
interpreters  generally  render,  Praise  his
people,  0  nations  ;  and  this  several  Christian
interpreters   adopt.      But  as   BoBenmtUle;


504


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMT.


[cH.  XXXII.  1 — 52


remarks,  it  is  the  Divine  righteousness
manifested  in  the  vindication  of  his  people
from  their  enemies  that  is  to  he  celebrated,
and  not  the  people  themselves,  as  what
follows  shows.  Here  as  elsewhere  the  nations
and  the  people  are  in  contrast.

Vers.  44 — 47. — Moses,  having  composed
this  song,  came,  accompanied  by  Joshua,
and  they  together  spoke  it  in  the  hearing  of
the  people ;  after  which  Moses  took  occasion
to  urge  upon  them  anew  the  importance  of
keeping  the  commandments  of  God.

Ver.  44. — Hoshea  the  son  of  Nun.  Moses
invariably  writes  this  name  Jelwehuah
(Jehovah  is  help ;  cf.  Numb.  xiil. ;  ch.  xxxi.
3, 7, 14, 20,  etc.).  The  use  of  Hoshea  here  is
due  to  the  fact  that  this  account  is  part  of
the  supplement  added  by  another  writer  to
the  writing  of  Moses.

Ver.  46.— (Cf.  cli.  vi.  7;  xi.  19.)

Ver.  47. — ^It  is  not  a  vain  thing  for  yon ;
because  it  is  your  life;  these  are  not  mere
empty  words;  they  are  of  vital  import  (cf.
ch.  xxx.  20).

Vers.  48 — 52. — On  the  day  on  which
Hoses  rehearsed  this  song  in  the  hearing  of
the  people,  hi*  death  was  announced  to  him


by  God,  and  the  command  was  again  given
to  him  to  ascend  Mount  Nebo,  thence  to
survey  the  promised  land,  and  there  to  bo
gathered  to  his  people.  The  same  in
substance,  the  command  as  given  here  differs
slightly  in  form  and  in  some  minor  par-
ticulars from  that  as  recorded  by  Moses
himself  (Numb,  xxvii.  12 — 14).

Ver.  49.— Abarim  (of.  Numb.  xxi.  10,  20).
Nebo  (cf.  Numb,  xxxii.  3,  38).  An  idol
Nebo  was  worshipped  by  the  Moabites  (Isa.
xlvi  1).

Ver.  50.— And  be  thou  gathered  unto  thy
people.  "  To  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.
This  signifies,"  saith  B.  Isaac,  "  that  be
should  be  associated  and  joined  to  the  souls
of  the  just  who  are  called  his  people.  For
the  people  of  Moses  were  not  buried  in
Mount  Abarim,  and  therefore  he  doth  not
speak  of  gathering  his  body  to  their  bodies,
but  of  his  soul  to  their  souls  ('Chissute
Emuna,'  L  11)"  (Patrick).

Ver.  51.— (Cf.  Numb.  xx.  13, 24.)  Because
ye  sanctified  me  not  (cf.  Numb,  xxvii,  14;
1  Pet.  iU.  15).

Ver.  52. — ^Tet  thou  shalt  aee  the  land
(cf.  Ueb.  xL  13X


HOMILETICa

Vew.  1 — 4, —  God  the  leh'ever's  Sock.  "  Forms  change  :  principles  never."  So  have
we  had  often  to  remark  in  discovering  in  and  developing  from  this  book  the  everlasting
principles  which  are  therein  set  in  archaic  forms.  The  song  of  Moses  here  recorded
will  yield  us  many  illustrations  of  this  kind  of  teaching.  Its  first  four  verses  suggest
three  lines  of  thought.

I.  Theee  is  herb  a  eevealed  docteine  concerning  God.  In  the  last  song  which
the  old  man  utters  ere  he  climbs  the  mount  of  Nebo  to  die,  he  declares, "  I  will  publish  the
Name  of  the  Lord."  1.  This  Name  is  "  Jehovah."  The  word  involves  self-existence,
self-sufficiency,  immutability,  pure  being,  personality.  "  I  am  that  I  am  "  expresses
all  this.  It  would  be  a  burning  shame  for  any  one  to  apply  the  term  "anthropo-
morphic" to  such  a  revelation  as  this.  Such  a  conception  may  be  revealed  toman,  hut
assuredly  it  borrows  nought /rom  him.  2.  To  this  lieing,  greatness  is  ascribed;  i.e.
royal  magnificence  and  splendour.  The  sovereignty  of  heaven  and  earth  is  there  1
3.  All  moral  perfections  are  in  the  "  Name  "of  (Jod  (cf.  Bxod.  xxxiv.  6, 7).  4.  His  work
is  perfect.  The  revealed  attributes  of  God  warrant  us  in  drawing  this  conclusion.  The
i mention  of  Moses  here  is  to  set  the  perfection  of  God's  work  over  against  the  sin  of
man's.  5.  His  ways  are  judgment ;  i.e.  they  are  according  to  justice.  6.  He  is  the
Jiuck.  This  epithet  is  a  "  piece  of  Mosaic."  It  was  indeed  used  by  others  long  after.
But  the  use  of  it  began  with  Moses.  On  the  rocks  of  Sinai  was  the  Law  proclaimed.
In  the  rock-deft  was  Moses  hidden.  From  the  smitten  rock  the  waters  gushed  forth.
How  natural  for  Moses  to  apply  this  figure  to  the  eternal  God!  In  yer.  81,  Moses
speaks  of  God  as  "  our  Bock."  He  was  known  to  Israel  as  theirs,  their  own  firm,
changeless  ground  of  strength,  through  all  the  chan^ng  years  1

II.  This  doctrine  or  the  living  God  as  the  Rock  is  fraught  with  comfort  akd
REFRESHMENT  FOE  MAN  (ver.  2);  i.e.  what  the  rain  is  to  the  herb,  what  the  showers
are  to  the  grass,  that  is  this  teaching  concerning  God  to  the  soul  ofman.  1.  Our  heart
wants  God  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  2).  2.  Such  a,  God — this  God  is  as  rain  and  as  dew:  refreshing,
enlivening,  restoring.  3.  This  doctrine  of  God  is  meant  to  make  the  heart  productive
of  holiness.  God's  revelation  of  himself  ia  meant  to  draw  men  to  himself;  in  doing
this  God  saves  them  I


OK.  xxxn.  1— 52.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEROlfOMY.  603

III.  The  doctrine  thus  pkopounded  debertes  to  be  universally  heard,  listenbh
TO,  AND  BELIEVED.  (Vei.  1.)  Moses  would  summon  all  to  hear  it.  It  is:  1.  For  all
classes.  2,  For  all  lands.  3.  For  all  the  ages.  The  day  will  never  come  when  this
liocti'iue  of  God  will  be  obsolete — ^never  I

Vers.  6 — 14. —  Ungrateful  men  interrogated.  In  almost  every  clause  of  this  paragraph
there  is  some  specific  allusion,  for  the  elucidation  of  which  the  reader  will  refer  to  the
Exposition.  The  commentary  of  Dr.  Jameson  thereon  is  very  valuable.  Our  aim  is
strictly  homiletic.  The  central  words  around  which  the  preacher's  expository  thoughts
may  gather  are  these — ^' Do  ye  thus  requite  the  Lord?"  Three  main  lines  of  illus-
tration are  suggested.

I.  Here  is  a  rehearsal  or  the  Diyhtb  LoviNa-EiNDNESs  and  tender  ueroieb.

1.  There  is  the  mercy  of  redemption.    "  Is  not  he  thy  Father  that  hath  bought  thee  ?  "

2.  There  is  the  mercy  of  Divine  choice  of  Israel  as  a  people.  "  Hath  he  not  made
thee,  and  established  thee?"  (see  also  vers.  7,  8).  3.  There  is  Divine  leadership.
"  He  led  him  about,"  etc.  4.  There  is  Divine  guardianship.  "  He  kept  him  as  the
api>le  of  his  eye."  5.  There  is  Divine  help  and  training  of  the  most  tender  kind.  A
wonderful  description  is  given  thereof  in  ver.  11.  6.  There  is  abundant  Divine  provision
for  the  wants  of  the  ransomed  ones  (vers.  13, 14).  Each  one  of  these  six  points  may
be  enlarged  upon,  as  applicable  to  present  gospel  blessings  and  providential  mercies.

II.  Here  is  a  btbanoe  response  to  suoh  aboundinos  of  merot.  The  burden  of
Moses  here  is  not  unlike  that  of  a  far  later  prophet,  even  Isaiah  (see  Isa.  L  2 — i).  The
moan  of  many  of  God's  prophets  has  been  the 'same  ever  since;  it  is  so  now.  The
contrast  between  God's  bounty  and  man's  perversity  causes  a  grief  almost  too  heavy  to
be  borne.  Here  are  at  least  fire  complaints.  1,  They  are  corrupt.  2.  They  are
perverse,  or  false.  3.  They  are  crooked,  twisted.  4.  They  are  foolish,  not  acting  as
reasonable  men.  5.  Instead  of  being  like  his  children,  they  are  a  spot  upon  them — a
stain  (see  Hebrew).  The  question  may  fairly  be  asked,  Who  are  they  of  whom  similar
complaints  may  be  made  now?  We  reply:  1.  Those  who  profess  to  be  the  people  of
God,  and  who  show  no  signs  whatever  that  their  profession  is  real.  2.  Those  of  God's
children  who  are  but  half-hearted  in  their  love  and  zeal.  3.  Those  who  are  ready  with
lip-service,  but  are  grievously  defective  in  Christian  morality.  4.  Those  who  have
neither  yielded  themselves  to  God  nor  yet  made  any  profession  thereof.  Of  all  such,
similar  complaints  may  be  made  to  those  here  laid  against  Israel  of  old.

IIL  Here  IS  A  REASONABLE  question.  It  is,  indeed,  a  reproachful  one.  And  if  ever
the  servants  of  God  now  take  it  up  and  apply  it  to  the  heart  and  conscience  of  their
hearers,  it  should  be  done  with  the  utmost  tenderness,  even  unto  tears ;  remembering,
on  the  one  hand,  how  infinitely  greater  the  mercies  of  God  are  now,  compared  with
aught  that  Moses  knew ;  and  also  considering  themselves,  how  often  they  have  been  as
ungrateful  Israel  of  old,  and  that,  if  it  had  not  been  for  almighty  grace,  would  have
been  ungrateful  still.  The  solemn  and  sorrowful  interrogative — "  Do  ye  thus  requite
the  Lord  ?  " — ^may  be  pressed  home  in  a  series  of  cumulative  inquiries.  It  may  be
asked :  1.  Is  this  the  natural  return  for  mercies  so  great?  2.  Do  not  such  love  and
care  demand  a  holy  and  grateful  life  ?  3.  Can  any  reason  whatever  justify  so  poor  a
response  as  God  has  yet  received  ?  4.  Have  men  no  remorse  in  the  review  of  the
contrast  between  God's  mercies  and  their  sin  ?  5.  Should  not  remorse  lead  on  tu
repevtai  eef  6.  And  shall  not  this  penitent  life  begin  nowt  It  is  quite  certain  that,
though  God  is  long-sufiering,  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should
come  to  repentance,"  he  will  not  always  allow  his  mercies  to  be  thus  trifled  with  (ace
Amos.  iv.).  But  why,  why  sh«uld  men  compel  us  to  present  thus  "  the  terrors  of  the
Lord  "  ?    He  would  ,rather  win  by  love.    Judgment  is  "  his  strange  work."

Vers.  15 — 18.— ffod  provoked  to  Jealousy  hy  an  urtfaithf id  people.  (On  the  whole
subject  of  "  anthropomorphism,"  which  is  alleged  against  the  Old  Testament  represen-
tations of  the  Divine  Being,  see  the  Homily  on  vers.  1 — 4  of  this  chapter,  and  also
Homily  on  ch.  iv.  21 — 24).  This  paragraph  is  a  continuation  of  the  same  theme  as
that  touched  on  in  preceding  verses.  It  not  only  sets  forth  the  waywardness  of  the
people  retrospectively,  but  also  prospectively.  In  fact,  it  is  more  of  a  prophetic
forecast  than  otherwise.     Muses  sees  the  people  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  the  blessings  of


506  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxxil  1—52.

God's  providence;  he  looks  onward,  and,  with  the  seer's  eye,  he  beholds  them  in  the
promised  land,  their  wanderings  over,  and  their  marches  hither  and  thither  exchanged
fur  a  settled  life  in  a  land  of  plenty  and  of  delight.  There  they  are  prospering
abundantly;  and  if  they  only  used  their  prosperity  aright  they  would  be  doubly
blessed,  even  with  that  b1es^ing  which  "  roaketh  rich,  and  he  addeth  no  sorrow  there-
with." But,  alas !  how  different  is  the  picture  here  drawn !  And  how  precisely  did
the  »fter-reality  answer  thereto!  There  is  in  these  verses  a  logical  order  of  thought,
in  the  sketch  given,  first,  of  Israel's  downward  course;  and  then,  of  the  effect  of  that
on  the  relations  between  them  and  their  God.

I.  Hebe  is  a  gribvous  picture  of  spiritual  degeneration  in  the  midst  of
WORLDLY  prosperity.  There  are  four  steps  in  the  descent.  1.  Prosperity  generates
wilfulness,  and  a  resistance  to  the  Divine  claims.  If  men  can  have  their  own  way
entirely,  for  a  while,  and  secure  precisely  their  own  ends,  such  success,  if  not
sanctified,  will  but  create  a  self-will  and  self-assertion  stronger  than  ever.  "  Jeshurun
waxed  fat,  and  kicked."  The  restraints  of  duty,  conscience,  God,  will  be  irksome,  and
will  provoke  to  resistance.  Men  will  "  kick  against  tlie  pricks."  2.  Another  stage
will  surely  follow  on.  The  irritation  which  was  at  first  felt  will  subside,  and  insensi-
bility will  steal  over  the  soul.  "  Thou  art  waxen  fat,  thou  art  grown  thick."  Stubborn
obstinacy  without  the  former  stings  of  conscience.  "Past  feeling.''  The  terrible
symptom  of  a  moral  and  spiritual  paralysis  1  3.  To  this  there  will  follow  a  third  stage.
"  He  forsook  God  .  .  .  and  lightly  esteemed  the  Bock  of  his  salvation."  Here  there
sets  in  a  thinking  lightly  of  God  altogether,  and  a  forsaking  of  him.  How  true  is  the
picture  here  given  to  the  actual  progress  of  sin  in  the  soul  everywhere  1  4.  To  this
succeeds  not  only  neglect  of  God,  but  the  suhstiiution  of  other  gods  (vers.  16, 17)1  This
actually  came  about  (see  Jer.  ii.,  specially  ver.  13).  The  heart  of  man  must  have  a
supreme  object  of  love ;  and  if  God  be  not  enthroned  in  the  heart,  some  rival  will  be
seated  there.

Note — How  very  little  all  possible  worldly  good  can  do  for  a  man  unless  there  is  a
process  of  spiritual  renewal  and  culture  going  on,  which  will  enable  him  to  sanctify  all
to  the  highest  purposes !  Yea,  more.  If  worldly  prosperity  is  not  sanctified  to  God
and  by  him,  it  will  be  as  a  dead  weight  upon  the  spirit.  It  will  engender,  first  resist-
ance, then  deadness,  then  estrangement,  then  idolatry  1  This  is  the  sure  and  certain
effect  of  an  accumulation  of  worldly  good,  when  its  possessor  is  not  led  by  Divine  grace
to  use  it  wisely  and  piously.  It  is  an  evil  much  to  be  lamented  that  so  many  glory  in
the  accumulation  of  things,  while  neglecting  the  culture  and  education  of  their  souls.
Why,  even  in  common  life,  there  are  no  more  awkward,  ungninly,  and  impracticable
beings  than  those  who  have  grown  rich  while  neglecting  to  educate  themselves.  They
have  acquired  a  prodigious  strength  of  self-will,  without  the  knowledge  of  self-govern-
ment.    And  of  all  men  in  the  world,  they  are  of  the  least  use  to  their  generation.

II.  Hebe  is  a  strange  effect  or  such  deoenebaoy  on  the  Divine  Being.
"  They  provoked  him  to  jealousy  "  (see  remark  in  "  anthropomorphism,"  tU  supra,  and
also  Homily  on  ch.  iv.  24).  Of  all  the  attributes  or  epithets  applied  to  God,  there  is  no
one  which  endears  him  to  us  more  than  this;  "jealousy"!  What  does  it  mean?  1.
That  God  has  a  heart  of  love.  2.  That  his  love  yearns  to  be  reciprocated.  3.  That
the  reciprocation  of  love  for  which  he  yearns  is  the  whole  undivided  love  of  our  hearts.
4.  That  if  such  devoted  love  is  not  accorded  to  him,  he  feels  wronged.  5.  That  if
supreme  love  is  bestowed  on  any  other  than  God,  his  holy  love  is  outraged ;  his  pure
indignation  is  "  jealousy."  And  consider  how  great  the  wrong  is  which  is  thus  com-
mitted against  a  gracious  God.  What  would  an  earthly  father  think  if  his  children,
who  lived  on  his  bounty,  thought  only  of  eating  and  drinking,  and  cared  not  for
him  t  What  if  the  children  thought  more  of  their  toys  than  of  their  father  ?  Ottght
he  not  to  be  jealous  ? .  Would  he — could  he  be  a  good  father,  and  not  be  Jealous  ?
Surely  not.  It  is  easy  to  apply  this  in  such  a  case.  Christ  teaches  us  to  learn  of
the  heavenly  Father  by  means  of  earthly  ones.  Consider,  moreover,  (1)  the  wrong
done  to  God,  (2)  the  misplacement  of  things,  (3)  the  injustice  and  injury  done  to
ourselves,  and  (4)  the  injurious  efi'ect  of  wealUi,  brcigbt  about  by  such  misuse  of  God's
benefits.

III.  Two  INQUIRIES  CANNOT  BUT  SUGGEST  THEMSELVES.  1.  How  may  such  evil  be
guarded  against  t    This  question  supposes  that  the  evil  has  not  yet  been  fJEillen  into.


ck.  txxu.  1-^2.J  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUtEBONOMt.  60'?

"  Prevention  is  better  than  cure.""  (1)  Let  us  regard  ourselves  as  of  infinitely  more
moment  than  our  possessions.  What  we  are  is  beyond  measure  of  more  concern  than
what  we  have.  Our  culture  for  eternity  is  of  the  first  importance.  (2)  Let  us  from
the  outset  of  life  regard  God  as  the  Author  of  all  good,  and  as  therefore  having  the
first  claim  on  our  regard.  (3)  Let  us  cultivate  the  devotional  habit  of  receiving  all
our  temporal  comforts  as  from  God.  If  we  have  used  means  to  secure  them,  he  it  is
who  has  given  us  the  means  to  use ;  who  has  given  us  the  power  to  use  them,  and  who  has
made  those  means  a  success.  (4)  Let  us  seek  wisdom  from  above  to  hallow  all  our
good  for  God,  and  to  "  honour  the  Lord  with  our  substance,  and  with  the  firstfruits  of
vill  our  increase  "  (see  Homily  on  ch.  xiv.  22).  (5)  Conscious  of  the  deceitfulness  of  the
human  heart,  let  us  entreat  our  Qod  to  fill  us  with  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  as  well  as  to
give  us  providential  mercies.  Then,  the  first  will  ensure  the  sanctification  of  the
second.  The  larger  our  possessions,  the  more  we  need  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  to  ensure
tlieir  becoming  a  blessing,  and  to  prevent  their  becoming  a  snare.  2.  Ifioe  have  fallen
into  such  evil,  how  may  we  he  recovered  therefrom  f  (1)  Let  the  very  suggestion  that
a  spiritual  paralysis  may  have  stolen  over  the  soul,  startle  us  into  the  inquiry.  Is  this
the  case  with  us  ?  (2)  Let  us  inquire  solemnly,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he
sliall  gain  the  whole- world,  and  forfeit  his  life?"  (3)  Let  us  repent  before  God  of
the  wrong  we  have  done  to  him  in  seeking  from  creature  comforts  the  joy  which  he
alone  can  give.  (4)  Taught  by  long  and  sad  experience  how  a  perverted  nature  may
perveit  all  things,  let  us  implore  his  renewing  and  sanctifying  grace  to  enlighten  our
understandings,  to  regulate  our  affections,  to  mould  our  will,  to  empower  and  transform
our  life.  If  God  fills  us  by  his  giace,  then  will  earthly  good  bo  sanctified.  Our  God
will  be  our  richest  joy  of  all,  and  every  worldly  comfort  will  yield  us  double  joy,  when
hallowed  by  him  and  for  him.

Vers.  19 — 25. — An  unfaithful  people  provoked  to  Jealoufy  by  Ood.  This  paragraph
is  the  antithesis  of  the  preceding  one.  In  form  the  expressions  are  archaic.  The
principles  underlying  these  ancient  forms  of  expression  are  for  all  the  ages.  In  fact,
there  are  few  of  the  Old  Testament  passages  which  are  more  pointedly  referred  to  in
the  New  Testament ;  and  none,  the  principles  of  which  are  more  frequently  reproduced.
'I'he  various  clauses  are  seriatim  explained  in  the  Exposition.  We  propose  but  to
develop  the  main  tliought,  which  is  indicated  in  the  heading  of  this  Uomily.  Its
contents  are  fourfold.  1.  God  was  provoked  to  jealousy  by  his  people  choosing  a
no-Ood  instead  of  him.  2.  The  time  would  come  when  he  would,  as  a  pnnishment  to
Israel,  choose  a  no-people  instead  of  them.  3.  Those  who  had  been  exalted  in  privilege
should  be  deprived  of  their  privileges,  and  should  pass  through  the  bitterest  sorrows.
4.  At  the  thought  of  their  privileges  passing  away  from  them,  and  passing  on  to  others,
Israel  should  be  provoked  to  jealousy.

Now,  it  would  be  a  most  instructive  and  impressive  exercise  to  compare  what  is  here
said  by  God  in  his  Word  with  that  which  actually  came  to  pass.  What  does  history
say  ?    Does  it  not  confirm  Moses  at  every  point?    The  facts  of  history  are  these —

1.  The  people  of  Israel  did  fall  away  from  the  God  of  their  fathers,  and  bring  upon
themselves  the  remonstrance  of  prophet  after  prophet,  and  were  made  in  the  course  of
God's  providence  to  suffer  sorrow  upon  sorrow.

2.  The  time  did  come  when  the  kingdom  of  Gbd  passed  away  from  them,  and  when
they  were  no  longer,  as  they  once  had  been,  the  favoured  people.

3.  That  kingdom  of  God  passed  over  to  the  Gentiles.

4.  At  its  so  passing  over,  the  Jews  were  exceedingly  jealous  and  angry.

5.  So  much  so  was  this  the  case,  that  Paul  makes  use  of  the  fact  iu  arguments  to
quicken  both  the  Jew  and  the  Gentile,  as  the  case  may  be.

The  following  passages  of  Scripture  should  be  carefully  compared  together,  bearing  as
they  do  alike  on  the  history,  the  principles  involved  therein,  and  their  everlasting
acplication  : — Horn.  x.  19 ;  Matt.  viiL  11,  12  ;  xxi.  31,  43 ;  Acts  xiii.  46 ;  Bom.  ix.
30—32  ;  xi.  11 ;  Hos.  L  10  (latter  part);  Bom.  ix.  25,  26 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  10;  Eph.  ii  11—
13 ;  Bom.  xL  13 — 25.  From  all  which  several  all-important  truths  of  permanent
significance  may  be  clearly  deduced  and  powerfully  applied.

I.  These  aee  hmes  of  gkeat  religious  pbivileob  with  us.  True,  we  are  not
exclusively  a  favoured  race,  in  the  same  sense  as  was  Israel  of  old.    But  our  advantages


608  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxj.ii.  1—52.

are  not  less  because  others  share  them  with  us.  We  have  all  that  Israel  ever  had,  and
VHStly  more.  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  us."  The  "  word  of  faith  "  is  nigh
us,  ia  our  mouth  and  in  our  heart.  We  are  bidden  to  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  O-od,
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,"  etc.

II.   If   these   PRIVILEGES    EBMAIN  UNIMPBOVBD,  CUB  HEOLEOT  THEREOF   WILL   BE    A

eRiEvous  BIN  IN  THE  EYE  OF  GOD.  We  have  but  to  read  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews
in  urder  to  find  such  an  argument  as  this  repeatedly  presented,  though  in  varying
forms :  If  the  Law  of  Moses  was  trifled  with  by  any  one,  they  did  not  escape  punish-
ment. But  Jesus  Christ  is  greater  than  Moses.  By  as  much  as  he  is  greater  than
Moses,  by  so  much  are  the-  sin  and  danger  of  neglecting  him  greater  than  those  of
neglecting  the  lawgiver  of  old.

in.  Both  Churches  and  nations  have  a  dat  op  probation  granted  them,

DDRIKQ   WHICH    THEIR  PKIVILBQES   ARE   CONTIKHED.       (See    Isa.   xUx.  8 ;    2    Cor.    Vi.  2  ;

Luke  xiii.  6 — 9 ;  Eev.  ii.  5,  21 ;  Luke  xix.  42 — 44.)  An  unending  probation  is  granted
to  no  one.

IV.  If  t^k  period  of  probation  passes  bt  unimpboved,  oub  pbitileoes  will

BE   TAKEN   AWAY   FROM   US.

V.  Other  lands  and  other  peoples  abe  beadt,  tea,  eaoeb   to  beceivs  the

LIGHT   WHICH   SOME   APPRECIATE   SO  LITTLE.

VI.  Many,  many  will  come  from  less  fatottbed  lands  and  from  less  ocltured

RACES,  and  will  STEP  INTO  THE  KINGDOM   OF   HEAVEN  AND  BE   SAVED ;   while  many  of

the  children  of  the  kingdom  will  be  cast  out  into  outer  darkness.  Hear  what  our  Lord
says  to  the  Pharisees :  "  The  publicans  and  harlots  wiU  go  into  the  kingdom  of  Gud
before  you."

Vers.  26 — 28. — The  Divine  mind  influenced  hy  reasons.  Moses,  in  uttering  this  song,
is  "  borne  along  "  (2  Pet.  i.  21)  by  a  power  working  through  him  and  yet  not  of  him,
to  make  a  most  remarkable  assertion  in  the  Name  of  Jehovah ;  viz.  that  Israel's
Deliverer  was  moved  by  fear  of  the  wrath  of  the  enemy  not  to  destroy  them  altogether !
How  is  this  to  be  understood  ?  Some  might  perhaps  pass  it  over  as  a  piece  of  obsolete
anthropomorphism.  So  will  not  we.  To  us,  many  a  sentence  in  the  grand  old  volume,
which  at  first  sight  seemed  uncouth  and  almost  repellent  in  its  archaism,  has  on  further
study  yielded  up  treasures  of  delight  with  which  we  would  not  willingly  part.  Perhai)s
it  may  be  so  here.

Note — The  verb  "  I  said,"  in  ver.  26,  is  rendered  by  Keil,  "  I  should  say."  This  shows
the  sense  more  clearly,  "  J  should  say,  I  will  blow  them  away,  1  wHl  hlot  out  the
remembrance  of  them  among  men;  if  I  did  not  fear  wrath  upon  the  enemy  [i.e.
"  displeasure  on  the  part  of  God  at  the  arrogant  boasting  of  the  enemy,  which  was
opposed  to  the  glory  of  God"  (Vitringa,  quoted  by  Keil,  in  loc.)]  that  their  enemies
might  mistake  it,  that  they  might  say.  Our  hand  was  high,  and  Jehovah  has  not  dmie
all  this.  For,"  etc.  If  we  analyze  these  words,  we  shall  find  that  they  are  separable
into  six  main  thoughts,  expressed  or  implied.  1.  That  Israel  was  a  people  void  ol
understanding.  2.  That  they  consequently  tried  the  patience  of  God,  as  falling  very
far  below  his  ideal  and  their  duty  and  honour.  3.  That  it  would  have  been  no  greai
loss  to  the  world  if  they  should  therefore  be  blotted  out  of  being,  and  should  actually
drop  out  of  the  remembrance  of  the  nations.  4.  That  if  this  extreme  punishment
should  be  meted  out,  then  the  adversary  would  glory  over  them  and  against  them,
»nd  say  that  Israel's  God  either  could  not  or  would  not  guard  the  people  whom  he
chose :  that  their  enemies  were  mightier  than  their  Bedeemer.  6.  That  such  a  result
would  veil  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  and  make  men  uncertain  whether  God  had  a  special
(leople  in  the  world  or  no.  6.  That  consequently,/or  his  own  sake,  God  would  punish,
but  in  measure ;  he  would  scourge,  but  not  destroy.  Hence  there  stands  forth  this  great
and  glorious  truth,  Ood  will  so  govern  and  discipline  his  people  at  to  reveal  his  own
glory  in  them  and  by  them.  This  is  the  thought  we  now  propose  to  develop  in  a  series
of  considerations  arranged  according  to  the  structure  of  the  text.

I.  GoD  HAS  AN  Israel  now.  (Bph.  ii. ;  Heb.  xii.  18 — 28.)  The  redemption  from
Egypt,  the  march  through  the  wiidtmess,  the  formation  of  a  commonwealth,  the
inheritence  of  Canaan,  are  all  at  once  symbolic  and  typical  of  a  greater  deliverance,  a
aobler  commonwealth,  a  spiritual  pilgrimage,  a  heavenly  horae.


OH.  xxm.  1— 52.]         THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  609

IL  During  the  march  of  the  Church  of  God  through  the  wilderness  of  this  world,
God's  people  often  fall  vebt  fab  below  the  ideal  set  before  them.  They  try
the  patience  of  God,  and  excite  the  wonder,  the  laughter,  and  the  ridicule  of  man.
Think  of  what  has  heen  done  in  the  name  of  religion !  Think  of  the  sharp  contro-
versies,  the  angry  words,  and  the  prolonged  strife  of  Christendom  I  Think  of  thr-
numher  of  inconsistent  professors,  who  cause  our  enemies  to  laugh  among  thetu
selves!  etc.

iii.  so  qbievous  have  been  the  stains  and  blots  thus  br0xt8ht  on  the
Christian  name,  that  men  have  been  tempted  even  to  think  that  God's
Churoh  was  an  incubus  in  the  WORLD;  yea,  that  it  might,  with  advantage  to
mankind,  have  ceased  to  exist.  For  certain  it  is  that  the  griat  God  could,  even  if
his  Church  should  hecome  extinct,  create  a  purer  and  nobler  people  in  their  stead,  who
would  honour  him  and  bless  the  world  1

IV.  Many  of  the  advebbabies  abb  wishino  fob  and  seeking  to  bbino  about
THE  Chuboh's  extinction.  They  would  destroy  the  fellowship  by  sajjping  the  life
thereof.  They  would  sap  the  life  by  undermining  the  faith.  And  never  more  eagerly
than  now — they  are  at  work  to  educate  men  into  the  belief  that  God  never  had  a
people,  that  the  people  never  had  a  Ckid,  and  that  all  the  faith  they  have  been  cherish-
ing for  ages  has  been  based  on  a  delusion  and  a  lie !

V.  If  sucni  a  besult  webb  to  accrue,  how  would  the  enemy  glory  I  They
would  say,  "  Our  hand  is  high,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  all  this."  If  only  the
Church  should  be  driven  fru.n  her  moorings,  if  her  anchor  of  hope  should  become
unusable,  and  she  should  be  difted  out  to  a  wild,  pathless,  shoreless  sea, — what  glorying
there  would  be  in  the  enemy's  camp!  "Ha,  ha!  so  we  would  have  it  I"  "How  would
the  powers  of  darkness  boast  if  but  one  praying  soul  were  lost ! "

VI.  Such  a  possibility  is  guarded  against  in  the  Divine  counsels.  It  ia
just  such  a  provision  that  is  indicated  in  the  text.  God  will  not  let  the  "  adversaries
behave  themselves  strangely/"  in  this  way.  They  will  never  have  the  chance!  The
Church  is  built  on  a  rock,  from  which  it  can  never  be  dislodged.  The  day  will  never
come  when  it  will  cease  to  exist.  And  ever  will  God  remember  the  word  on  which  he
has  caused  us  to  hope  1

VII.  God  guards  against  any  such  possibility,  by  doing  what  he  does  fob
HIS  own  sake.  The  revelation  of  his  own  honour  and  glory  in  the  eyes  of  men  is  too
precious  in  his  eye  for  him  to  let  things  so  move  on  that  all  trace  thereof  is  lost  to  his
own  people  (cf.  Isa.  xliii.  45;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  21,  22,  32;  Ps.  cvi.  7,  8  ;  Ezek.  xx.  9,
14,  22).  See  too  what  argument  Daniel  uses  in  prayer  (Dan.  ix.  19).  David  also
(Ps.  XXV.  11).

For  the  sake  of  his  own  honour,  God  will  purify  his  Church  from  all  corruption  by  the
spirit  of  judgment,  and  by  the  spirit  of  burning;  and  while  thus  jealous  for  his  people's
purity,  he  will  as  jealously  watch  over  them,  so  that  "upon  all  the  glory  there  shall
be  a  defence  "  (Isa.  iv.  2—6 ;  cf.  1  Cor.  xi.  32 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  17).

In  conclusion.  1.  Let  the  righteous  rejoice,  yea,  let  them  exceedingly  rejoice.  God's
supreme  aim  is  that  his  glory  shall  be  revealed.  The  bringing  of  it  forth  to  clear  light
is  the  aim  and  tendency  of  events,  without  let  or  pause.  2.  Let  all  men  clearly
distinguish  between  the  two  providential  pncesses  which  are  ever,  ever  in  process  of
fulQlment.  One,  the  purification  of  the  Church.  The  other,  the  condemnation  and
confusion  of  the  world,  3.  Let  the  wicked  tremble.  Or  if  they  are  too  benumbed  to
tremble,  let  them  at  least  cease  to  make  merry  over  the  corruptions  of  the  Church.
They  may  laugh  now.  They  will  not  laugh  always.  The  severing  processes  of  God's
judgment  are  going  on  now,  and  they  will  issue  in  "everlasting  contempt"  to  the
ungodly,  and  in  the  redemption  of  Israel  from  all  his  iniquities  1

Vers.  29 — 35. — The  short-sightedness  of  sinners.  "Oh  that  they  were  wise,  that
they  understood  this,  that  they  would  consider  their  latter  end ! "  Such  is  the  moan
with  which  this  paragraph  begins.  By  "  this  "  is  meant  the  consequence  which  will
certainly  follow  on  their  departure  from  God.  By  "their  latter  end"  is  meant  the
latter  days  of  "their  history,  when  sins  which  were  beforehand  in  germ  should  have
wrought  out  to  full  development.  We  need  not  again  recount  the  historical  aspect*
of  this  serious  outlook.   We  will  but  note,  in  a  series  of  consecutive  thoughts,  the


510  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY,         [oh.  xxxii.  1—52.

truths  which  are  here  isdicated,  and  which  are  of  universal  and  perpetual  application  to
individuals,  families,  and  nations.

I.   It    IS    A    HABE    OF    A    VICIOUS    BH0BT-8IGHTBDNBSS    TO    TAKE    HO    HEED  TO  THE

CONSEQUENCES  OF  A  couKSB  OF  CONDUCT.  If  men  take  no  reckoning  of  their  "  latter
end,"  it  is  the  reverse  of  wise.  Our  Saviour  asks,  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  1"  etc.
To  take  heed  only  to  present  appearances  and  to  avoid  all  preparations  for  the  future,
is  folly  in  the  extreme.

Jl.  WUETHEB  WE  WILL  OB  NO,  CEETAIN  CONSEQUENCES  ABB  BOUND  UP  WITH  CON-
DUCT  BY   A   LAW   WHICH   NO   CBEATED   POWEB   CAN    AVEBT  OB   MODIFT.      They   may    be

"  sealed  up" — hidden  from  sight  at  present,  but  they  are  "laid  up  in  store"  (Bom.  ii.
5  ;  1  Thess.  v.  3).

III.  The  Most  High  eesekves  to  himself  the  execution  of  his  own  laws.
"To  me  belongeth  vengeance."  Vengeance  cannut  safely  be  entrusted  to  frail  and
passionate  man.  Only  in  the  hiinds  of  "the  Judge  of  all  the  earth"  is  there  an
absolute  guarantee  that  in  its  infliction  there  will  be  neither  excrss  nor  defect.  No
weakness  will  cause  delay  or  halt.  No  vindictiveness  will  induce  any  variation  from
the  right.

IV.  HOWEVEB    LONG    VENGEANCE    MAT    BE    DELAYED,   IT    WILL    NOT   BE    POSTPONED

TOO  LONG.  "  Their  feet  shall  slide  in  due  time."  1  Time  is  on  God's  sile.  In  the  moral
world  there  is  not  a  moment's  pause.  Character  is  ripening  for  good  or  for  ill,  and
great  issues  are  working  out  at  every  tick  of  the  dial.

V.  In  the  ripening  of  chabacteb  and  the  advanced  issues  of  conduct  thebb
WILL  BE  AWFUL  EESULTS  ON  THE  SIDE  OF  EVIL.  The  figurative  expressions  in  each
clause  are  of  terrific  si,;;nificance.  They  indicate :  1.  The  failure  of  the  refuge  to  which
they  had  fled.  2.  The  collapse  of  their  strength  in  great  emergencies.  3.  Bitterness
of  misery.  4.  Venomous  poison  as  the  fruit  of  their  vine  of  Sodom.  Now  is  the  day
for  accumulating ;  hereafter  will  be  the  day  for  the  manifestation,  of  these  hidden
treasures  of  ill.

VI.  This  day  of  awful  eecompense  will  come  upon  sinners  suddenly.  "  The
things  that  shall  come  upon  them  make  haste"  (cf.  Matt.  xxiv.  36 — i4 ;  Mark  xiii.
35 — 37 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  10).  It  is  one  remarkable  feature  of  the  Mosaic  outlook,  that  the
lawgiver  scarcely  ever  refers  to  another  life,  but  to  the  working  out  of  God's  judgments
in  this.  The  future  life  comes  into  view  in  the  New  Testament.  The  law  of  sowing
and  reaping  holds  good  for  both  worlds  (Gal.  vi.  7).

VII.  With  an  outlook  so  grievous,  the  thoughtlessness  of  sinners  is  an
evil  gbeatly  to  be  lamented.  "  Oh  that  they  were  wise !  "  etc.  (cf.  Jer.  ix.  1 ;
Ps.  cxix.  136).

In  coNOLUSioir.  There  is  at  least  a  threefold  application  of  the  text,  which
should  be  made  use  of  to  warn  men  against  sin.  1.  Those  who  have  to  direct  or
influence  national  affairs  should  remember  that  a  wrong  policy  is  a  foolish  one.  No
nation  will  continue  to  thrive  that  fights  against  God.  2.  Heads  of  families  should
remember  that,  by  a  course  of  disloyalty  to  God,  they  are  sowing  the  seeds  of  dishonour,
grief,  and  shame  in  their  families,  and  are  entailing  sorrow  on  the  cliildren  of  their  care.
3.  Let  each  individual  learn  that  whatever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap,  both  in
this  world  and  in  that  which  is  to  come.   "  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker  1 "

Vers.  86 — 43. — Jehovah  reigns;  hegladl  This  paragraph  has  about  it  a  remarkably
martial  ring.  It  is  not  to  be  looked  at  as  bald  and  literal  prose.  It  is  part  of  a  song  ;
it  is  laden  with  imagery,  in  which  the  God  of  Israel  is  set  forth  as  a  mighty  Warrior,
whose  march  none  can  hinder,  whose  inflictions  none  can  withstand  or  evade.  The
ftyh  of  the  song  was  precisely  appropriate  to  the  age  in  which  it  was  composed,  and
suited  to  the  people  in  whose  hearing  it  was  addressed.  The  truths  clothed  in  such
Oriental  garb  are  for  all  lands  and  for  all  time.  For  though  there  is  an  abundance  of
figure,  yet  not  all  is  figurative.  There  are  at  least  two  phrases  which  are  plain  in  their
phraseology,  and  which  furnish  us  with  the  key  for  the  right  interpretation  of  the  others.
One  of  these  is  found  at  the  beginning  of  the  passage,  the  other  towards  its  close.  The
first  is  in  ver,  36,  "  The  Lord  shall  judge  his  people."    The  other  is  in  ver.  43,  "  Bejoice,

'  See  a  sermon  of  great  power  on  this  text  in  President  Edwards's  works.


<m.  xxxu.  1— 62.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  611

0  ye  nations — his  people." '  The  former  assures  us  that  all  the  various  processes  of
judgment  to  which  the  seer's  eye  looks  forward  are  in  the  hands  of  God.  The  second
calls  upon  the  nations  to  rejoice  therein.  Between  these  two,  the  varied  details  in  the
paragraph  fall  naturally  into  place.  Our  Homily  will,  therefore,  he  mainly  an  answer
to  one  inquiry,  viz.  W%at  materialtfor  joy  are  here  given  us  t

It  if  useless  to  bid  any  one  to  be  glad  unless  a  reason  is  given  them  why  they  should
be  10.  A  somewhat  careful  study  of  the  paragraph  in  hand  will  show  at  least  eight
reasons  for  holy  and  grateful  joy.

I.  It  is  matter  for  joy  that  God  reserves  in  his  own  hands  the  judgment  of  his  ,
people  (ver.  36).    Where  else  could  it  safely  be?  Who  else  has  the  power,  the  wisdom,
the  justice,  the  kindness,  the  knowledge  required  ?    If  the  sceptre  of  power  were  in  any
other  hands,  the  guarantee  of  righteous  administration  would  cease.

II.  We  may  rejoice  that  in  his  judging  processes  God  will  convince  his  people  of  the
fully  of  relying  on  any  but  on  himself  (vers.  37,  38).  The  reason  of  the  peculiar  imagery
in  these  verses  every  student  knows.  The  underlying  thought  is  clear.  It  may  be  a
sharp,  but  it  is  a  necessary  discipline,  that  every  prop  should  give  way  which  would
prevent  us  from  leaning  on  God  alune.

III.  We  may  rejoice  in  the  severity  with  which  a  righteous  God  will  deal  with  sin.
Severity  against  sin  is  mercy  towards  the  sinner  (ver.  42).  In  the  early  conquest  of
Canaan,  severity  towards  Achan  and  his  accomplices  was  mercy  towards  Israel.  In  the
early  Church,  judgment  on  Ananias  and  Sapphira  was  mercy  to  the  Church.  In  both
cases  the  canker  of  dishonesty  and  hypocrisy  needed  to  be  cut  out  by  a  strong  and  £rm
hand.

lY.  We  may  rejoice  that  the  ruling  motive  and  the  ultimate  intent  of  God's  dealings
are  love  and  mercy  (ver.  43),  Beyond  the  blackest  clouds  Moses  sees  in  the  horizon
light  and  glory.  The  twenty-eighth  and  twenty-ninth  chapters  of  this  book,  with  all
their  threatenings,  are  followed  by  the  thirtieth,  with  all  its  promises.  Wrath  in  the
process,  mercy  as  the  product.

V.  Let  us  rejoice  that  in  this  law  of  recoihpense  there  is  mercy  in  the  educational
process  therein  ensured  (see  Ps.  Ixii.  12).  There  is  a  wide  difierence  between  a
fatherly  correction  and  the  infliction  of  a  legal  penalty.  It  is  the  former  which  God
metes  out  towards  his  people,    'i'heir  relation  to  him  is  one  of  grace,  not  of  bare  law.

YI.  Let  us  rejoice  that  mercy  will  regulate  the  mode,  the  time,  and  the  result  of  the
chastisement.  The  mode :  "  Their  power  is  gone,"  i.e.  their  false  props  are  destroyed.
The  time :  "  He  will  repent  himself,"  i.e,  he  will  not  be  wrath  for  ever ;  when  the
infliction  has  answered  its  end,  he  will  change  his  dealings,  'ihough  God  never
changes  a  plan,  he  may  plan  a  change.  TJie  result :  "  He  will  be  merciful  unto  his  land,"
etc,  t.e.  he  will  be  propitious.  When  his  people  are  brought  back  from  their  wander-
ings, he  will  "  cover  "  all  their  sin  in  eternal  forgetfulness.

VII.  Let  us  rejoice  in  the  clear  and  perfect  discrimination  which  will  mark  all  the
Divine  dealings  with  his  people  and  with  his  adversaries ;  ver.  43,  "  vengeance — mercy."
Both  form  part  of  God's  governmental  methods.  How  can  it  be  otherwise  in  a  world  of
sin  ?  The  perfections  of  Jehovah  guarantee  that  neither  will  infringe  on  the  other.
Tenderness  will  never  weaken  vengeance.  Yengeance  will  never  lessen  tenderness.
God  alone  knows  the  absolutely  perfect  adjustment.

YIII.  Let  us  rejoice  that  the  eye  of  the  seer  beholds  brightness  in  the  far  distance.
The  gloom  does  but  intervene ;  it  does  not  cover  the  whole  canopy  of  heaven,  nor
darken  all  the  outlook.  "Light  is  sown  for  the  righteous."  "Joy  cometh  in  the
morning  "  (ver.  43).

Let  all  these  several  particulars  be  woven  together,  and  they  will  make  one  glorious
pattern — at  the  right  of  which  we  may  well  shout  aloud  for  joy.

Learn — 1.  In  such  a  review  of  the  methods  and  outcome  of  God's  providential
dealings  only  those  who  are  at  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  in  a
position  to  understand  them.    Enmity  cannot  understand  love.    And  where  men  are

»  The  Hebrew  has  not  the  word  "  with."  It  reads,  "  Rejoice,  all  ye  nations — ^hii  people.''
Is  it  not  possible  that  here  the  aged  lawgiver's  prophetic  eye  was  gifted  with  supernaturRl
strength,  and  that  he  foresaw  a  time  when  "all  nations  should  come  in,  and  make  one
undivided  fold  "?


512  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxxn.  1—52.

"  enemies  in  their  mind  by  wicked  works,"  they  are  certain  to  misunderstand  God'i
n-tture,  and  to  misinterpret  his  ways.  Mun's  fir.it  duty  is  to  repent  of  sin  and  oliey
God.  Till  he  does  this  the  mysteries  of  Gud  will  not  be  unveiled  to  him,  2.  When
we  understand  son  e  liing  of  the  redemption  which  is  ia  Christ  Jesus,  then  the  true
key  to  the  interpretation  of  providence  is  in  our  hands  (Rom.  viii.  34).  Hence  we  can
"  rejoice  in  the  Lonl "  (Ps.  xxxiii.  1 ;  Phil.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  4 ;  Ps.  xcvii.  1 ;  icvi.  j  xcviii  ).
3.  In  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  the  love  which  furnishes  the  key  for  unlocking
providential  mysteries  is  the  greatness  of  the  sin  which  turns  away  from  and  finally
rejects  God.  (See  the  use  of  tliis  paragraph  in  Heh.  x.  30,  31.)  However  deep  the
gloom  which  Moses  depicts,  he  sees  a  rim  of  golden  glory  in  the  horizon,  as  if  another
dispensation  were  to  follow.  But  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  sees  no  after-
light for  those  who  turn  away  from  Christ.  "For  if  we  sin  wilfully  after  we  have
received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  there  reraaineth  no  more  sacrifice  for  sins,  but  a
certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  inflignation,  which  shall  devour  the
adversaries.  ...  It  is  a  fearful  thitig  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."  The
I'ontest  of  the  sinner  with  God  must  end  in  the  guilty  one's  ignominious  and  hopeless
defeat ;  Amos  iv.  12,  "  Because  I  will  do  this  unto  thee,  prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  0
IsraeL"

Vers.  44 — 47. — Life  at  stake  I  This  paragraph^oncerning  which  Keil  is  probably
right  in  his  surmise,  that  it  proceeds  from  an  editor's  hand — sets  before  us  in  a  quiet
and  incidental  way,  one  of  the  most  important  transitions  Israel  had  yet  experienced.
We  have  seen  in  ch.  xxxi.  7,  8,  that-  Moses  gave  Joshua  a  charge,  and  told  him  that
he  must  lead  the  people  into  the  promised  land.  After  that  came  the  utterance  of
this  song.  When  it  was  uttered,  Joshua  stood  side  hy  side  with  Moses.  Thus,  just  for
once,  the  two  leaderships  overlap.  The  joint  presence  of  both  the  old  and  new  leaders
this  signifying,  that,  though  the  earthly  administration  changed  hands,  the  same
message  would  be  passed,  and  not  a  word  of  Jehovah's  would  be  lost.  There  are  six
features  about  this  closing  public  scene  of  the  life  of  Moses,  which  open  up  an  invaluabl*
line  of  thought.  1.  Here  is  an  assembly,  met  to  hear  Moses'  last  song.  2.  Though  it
is  the  last,  there  is  in  it  nothing  new.  It  is  the  one  message — God's  goodness,  faith-
fulness, and  love,  calling  for  their  reciprocation  and  obedience.  3.  This  old  message  i^
reimpressed  on  their  hearts.  4.  The  people  were  to  command  their  children  to  observe
it.  The  children  were,  in  their  home  life,  to  receive  an  education  for  God.  5.  This  is
urged  upon  them  by  the  consideration  that  all  that  is  precious  to  them  in  life  depends
on  their  obedience  to  God's  message.  6.  Moses  and  Joshua  appear  together  before  the
people,  as  if  to  declai*  to  them  that  the  same  teachings  which  the  aged  leader  had  laid
down,  the  younger  one  would  accept,  enforce,  and  transmit.  There  was  a  change  in
human  leaders,  but  not  in  Divine  laws  or  the  Divine  message.  And  to  all  the  solemn
sanctions  with  which  Moses  guarded  the  Law,  Joshua  here  pledges  himself  before  the
people  and  before  his  God.  Hence  we  get  this  theme-^^mu^  all  changes  toe  have  an
unchangivg  message  from  above,  on  the  observance  of  which  our  life  depends.

I.  Let  us  clearly  declare  and  show  that  there  is  at  this  moment  a  message  of  law
and  a  revelation  of  grace,  which  have  come  to  us,  not  of  man,  but  by  the  inspiration  of
the  Spirit  of  God,  by  the  manifestation  of  God  in  Christ,  and  by  the  power  of  the  Holy
Ghost  on  and  since  the  day  of  Pentecost.  This  message  is,  in  sum  and  substance,
given  in  John  iii.  16 ;  1  Tim.  i.  15;  Rev.  xxii,  17 ;  Titus  ii.  11 — 13.  This  message  is
the  development  of  tlutt  which  through  Moses  was  given  but  in  germ  (John  t.  46,  47 ;
Matt.  v.  17).

II.  Here  past  and  present  generations  meet,  giving  out  the  same  words.  We  have-
now  "  the  faith  once  [for  all]  delivered  unto  the  saints."  Aged  patriarchs  in  their
declining  years  do  reiterate  the  same  message  they  gave  when  in  the  vigour  of  youth.
And  young  men,  filled  with  the  same  spirit,  and  having  their  hearts  kindled  with  the
same  fire,  take  it  up  with  the  earnest  hope  and  prayer  that  it  may  suffer  no  loM  in
their  hands  I    Often  have  a  Moses  and  a  Joshua  thus  stood  side  by  side.

lU.  The  message  now  is  far  fuller  and  clearer  than  it  was  when  given  to  Israel  of
old.  How  much.  Christian  preachers  and  teachers  can  tell.  Tet  in  three  respects
they  are  similar.  1.  Both  reveal  the  love  of  God,  and  recount  a  great  deliverance.
2.  Boiii  lolicit,  ia  Heaven's  name,  the  lespuuse  of  the  peoples'  hearts  (see  Bom.  xii.  1 ;


CH.  xxxii.  1—52.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  513

2  Cor.  ▼.  14 — 21 ;  Rom.  v.  8).  3.  Butb  require,  on  the  ground  of  Divine  love  to  man,
love  to  the  redeemed  brotherhood,  and  good  will  to  all  men  (1  Cor.  xiii. ;  John
iv.  10—19),

IV.  The  comman^ng  force  of  the  stospel  message  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is
far  greater  than  that  sent  through  Moses.  True,  there  was  terror  at  Sinai ;  there  is
tenderness  in  Calvaiy.  Moses  orders;  Jesus  pleads.  Moses  speaks  in  thunderings  ;
Jesus  with  tears.  Yet  must  we  not  mistake  tenderness  for  weakness,  nor  gentleness
fur  lack  of  authority  or  of  power,  (See  the  entire  argument  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews.)

V,  All  that  can  give  fullest  value  to  this  life  and  joy  to  the  next,  depends  on  how
we  treat  this  message  from  God.  "  It  is  not  a,  vain  thing  for  you ;  it  is  your  life  "  (ver.
47).  The  expansion  of  this  would  require  many  Homilies.  We  can  but  hint.  1.  The
enjoyment  of  peace  with  God  (Rdra.  v.  1).  2.  The  growth  of  character  in  holiness.  3.
The  true  enjoyment  and  use  of  this  earthly  life,  as  families,  as  nations,  as  individuals,
depend  on  loyalty  to  God.  "  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things  ;  having  promise
of  the  life  that  now  is."  4.  All  our  "hope  for  the  next  life  depends  on  our  response  to
God ;  hence  the  close  of  the  verse  just  quoted — "  and  of  that  wliioh  is  to  come."  Apart
from  the  acceptance  of  Jesus  Christ  by  faith,  and  a  life  of  loyalty  to  God,  there  is  not
a  gleam  of  light  or  hope  for  the  next  life  (see  Heb.  ii.  3).  If  God  did  not  allow  his
message  through  Moses  to  be  slighted  with  impunity,  certainly  he  will  not  suffer  men
to  "trample  under  foot  the  Son  of  God,''  and  then  leave  them  unpunished!

VI,  What  dread,  what  awful  possibilities  as  to  the  fate  of  immortal  souls  are  trembling
in  the  balance,  while  they  refrain  from  "  yielding  themselves  unto  God  "  1  How  earnestly
and  frequently  may  we  with  reason  reiterate  the  words,  "  It  is  your  life  "  I  All  that
ensures  life  here  and  hereafter  being  a  blessing,  depends  on  the  way  men  treat  Jesus
Christ  and  his  salvation.

VII.  However  many  changes  there  may  yet  be  in  the  bearers  of  this  message,  yet,
down  to  the  end  of  time,  God  will  never  send  a  greater.  Moses  and  Joshua.  The  old
generation  passing  away,  the  new  coming  on  the  stage.  They  meet  and  greet.  The
faithful  and  tried  veteran  passes  on  the  word.  The  younger  messenger,  with  solemn
vow  to  God  before  his  brother  rhan,  receives  it,  and  swears  before  high  heaven  that  he
will  maintain  the  message  unimpaired,  and  in  Iiis  turn  "  commit  it  to  faithful  men.
who  shall  be  able  to  teach  others  also."

"Thus  shall  the  brighf, snocesslon  ma.
Till  the  last  courses  of  the  sun."

Vers.  & — 52. — Death  immediately  in  view.  The  utterance  of  the  sublime  song
which  we  have  just  treated  on,  was  the  last  recorded  public  act  of  Moses.  His  work  is
all  but  done.  He  receives  an  intimation  that  the  time  is  nigh  at  hand  for  him  to  "go
up  and  die."  The  circumstances  which  gather  round  that  death  are  most  suggestive.
The  following  passages  should  be  compared  together : — Numb.  xx.  12 ;  xxvii.  12 — 14 ;
ch.  i.  37 ;  iii.  23—28  ;  iv.  21,  22 ;  Ps.  cvi.  32,  Historically,  the  following  points  are
indicated  in  this  paragraph  : — 1.  Mose?  recognized  the  call  to  die,  as  well  as  the  call  to
work,  as  from  God  ;  ver.  48,  "  The  Lord  spake,"  etc,  2,  His  joy  in  death  would  be
checked  by  the  remembrance  of  faults  in  life  (ver.  51).  It  is  by  no  means  clear  to  us
why  ac  awsrs  a  sentence  was  imposed  on  Moses  for  one  outburst  of  temper.  Dr.
Jameson  suggests  that  there  may  have  been  other  circumstances,  which  are  unrecorded,
to  account  for  it.  Possibly,  however,  the  phrases,  "  for  your  sakes,"  "  for  their  sakes,"
furnish  a  clue  to  the  reason.  The  people  might  need  thus  to  be  guarded  against  pre-
sumptuous sin.  3.  Visions  of  the  glorious  land  in  store  for  God's  people  would  be
granted  him  ere  he  quitted  the  earth.  His  joy  would  be  rich,  though  not  unalloyed  (ver.
52),  4.  The  work  which  he  had  thus  far  carried  forward  must  be  completed  by  other
hands.  This  is  implied,  and  elsewhere  expressed.  5.  Moses,  like  the  saints  of  God
who  went  before  him,  must  plunge  into  the  unknown  realm.  He  must  "  be  gathered
unto  his  people,"  as  Aaron  had  been  (ver.  50).  6.  He  would  do  so  under  the  eye  of  the
same  God  whom  he  so  long  had  served.  Till  the  very  last  he  lives  in  fellowship  with
God.    At  the  last  he  will  die  in  fellowship  Ivith  him.

No  Christian  expositok  can  fail  to  take  note  of  the  different  aspect  which  death  has

DEUTKBONOMT.  2  Ii


514  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY  [ch.  xxxn.  1— 62

to  believerg,  since  "life  and  incorruption  "  have  lieen  brought  to  light  by  Jesus  Christ.
The  believer,  at  death,  enters  the  invisible  world.  The  names  for  it  are  "  Sheol "  and
"  Hades."  The  former  is  a  Hebrew  word,  the  latter  Greek.  Both  mean  (practically)
the  same,  though  they  present  the  mysterious  realm  of  the  departed  under  different
aspects.  To  the  Hebrew  it  is  the  all-demanding  world.  To  the  Greek,  the  uriknown
region.  In  the  New  Testament  (Revised  Version)  the  word  Hades  is  reproduced.  But
though  the  word  is  reproduced,  its  meaning  is  changed.  The  heathen  view  of  Hades
was  that  of  a  mysterious  under-realm  of  the  dead — gloomy  and  without  hope.  The
Jewish  view  of  Sheol  (LXX.  Hades)  was  also  that  of  a  mysterious  under-realm —
gloomy,  but  with  a  Lope  of  glory  "  in  the  awaking "  fPs.  xvii.  15).  The  Chridian
view  of  Hades  is  that  of  an  invisible  realm  of  departed  souls,  who  are  entirely  under
the  mediatorial  admiDistration  of  the  Son  of  God ;  a  region  without  gloom,  of  perfect
rest  and  of  glorious  hope  for  the  believer.  "  Absent  from  the  body :  at  home  with  the
Lord."  "  Whether  we  live  or  die,  we  continue  to  be  the  Lord's."  Let  us  thankfully
make  use  of  this  new  light  which  Christ  has  thrown  on  the  death  of  believers,  in
meditating  on  "  Christian  dying."

L  The  Chbistiak  is  absolutely  at  thk  disposal  of  bib  Lord^  fob  wobk  or  fob
BEST,  FOB  LiviNO  OB  FOR  DTiKG.  (Rom.  xiv.  9 ;  Phil.  i.  20.)  He  will  be  prepared  to  say,
"  Lord,  it  belongs  not  to  my  care,  whether  I  die  or  live."  Work  is  worth  doing  only
so  long  as  Christ  has  it  for  us  tu  do.  Life  is  worth  living  only  as  we  can  serve  Christ
thereby.

n.  The  Chribtian's  jot  in  death  hubt  surely  be  checked  at  the  thouoht  of
NCUBEBLE68  DEFECTS,  FAILUBES,  AND  FAULTS  IN  LIFE.  Whether  Or  uo  there  have  been
any  such  serious  outbreaks  as  that  of  Moses,  there  must  come  rushing  into  memory  so
much  defective  work,  so  much  mixed  motive,  such  an  utter  lack  of  anything  done  or
said  which  rose  up  to  even  his  own  ideal,  that  he  would  despair  of  his  future,  if  it  were
not  for  the  abounding  grace  of  God ;  and  even  then,  though  this  grace  keeps  him  from
sinking,  and  he  may  feel  assured  that  his  sin  is  forgiven,  yut  it  must  bring  a  shade  ovir
his  spirit  to  think  there  has  been  so  much  for  which  he  needed  forgiveness!

III.  Active  wobkebb  and  leaders  in  God's  Church  often  lay  down  their  work
WITH  A  stbange  FEELING  OF  INCOMPLETENESS.  Moses  had  brought  the  people  thusfiir,
just  to  the  verge  of  the  promised  land  I  He  would  gladly  liave  finished  the  work.  But
it  was  well  for  Moses  to  feel  how  entirely  the  work  was  of  God  and  not  of  man.
How  many  a  worker  would  like  to  see  this  or  that  controversy  closed,  this  or  that
Church  settled,  this  publication  completed,  this  convert  a  little  more  estalilishcd  in
the  faith  I    But  no.    It  is  as  God  wills,  and  that  will  is  best.

IV.  Though  God  bufpbes  this  shade  over  life's  closikg  hours,  yet  he  often

CHEERS  HIS    servants   BY   BRIGHT   VISIONS   OF  THE  GLORY  WHICH    IS   IN   STORE  FOR  THE

PEOPLE  OF  God.  Ver.  52,  "  Thou  shalt  see  the  land  before  thee."  Yes,  and  Moses  knew
that,  though  he  must  leave  the  work  incomplete,  there  was  yet  a  great  future  fur
God's  Church,  when  the  wilderness  life  was  over.  And  so  now.  However  decided
may  be  the  sense  of  unfinished  work,  with  which  God's  servants  close  their  earthly
ciireer,  they  have  no  misgiving  us  to  God's  finding  others  by  whom '  the  work  will  be
carried  on,  nor  have  they  a  do-ilit  as  to  the  future  triumphs  of  Clirist  and  his  cause.
From  the  top  of  faith's  Pisgah,  they  "  see  the  land  before  them,"  and  though  it  lietli
afar  off,  yet  the  sight  ravishes  them.  Lol  "a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth,  wherein
dwelleth  righteousness."

V.  Meanwhile,  the  saint  must  breathe  hib  last  breath,  and  quit  his  hold  of

EARTH,  ENTER  THE  "  GATES  OP  HADES  "  (Matt.  Xvi.  18,  Greek),  AND  FIND  HIS  PLACE,  TILL

THE  Lord  comes,  in  the  invisible  woble.  Like  Moses,-  he  must  be  "  gathered  to  his
people ; "  but  he  knows  a  great  deal  more  than  it  is  probable  Moses  did,  of  what  that
means.    The  words  in  Rev.  i.  18  are  enough  for  faith,  till  God  reveals  the  i  est.

VI.  He  will  do  bo,  like  Moses,  under  the  eye  and  care  of  the  same  God  whom
HI  HAS  SERVED  UT  LIFE.  By  directions  from  God,  Moses  would  go  up  to  die.  And
what  he  thought  thereon  may  be  gathered  from  the  words  of  his  own  blessing.  "  The
eternal  God  is  thy  refuge,  and  umlerneath  are  the  everlasting  arms."  Moses  would
not — could  not  fail  to  take  the  comfort  of  all  this  for  himself.  We  have  a  like  comfori
more  clearly  given  (1  Thess.  v.  10).    Once  Christ's,  we  are  never  out  of  his  hands  1


OH.  xxxu.  1— 52.J  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  ftlS


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOR

Vers.  1—S.— Beneficial  teaching.  Moses  was  directed  to  instruct  th«  people  hy
composing  for  their  use  a  song  (ch.zxxi.  19,21).  A  song  is:  1.  Memorable.  2.  Easily
handed  down  froln  mouth  to  mouth.  3.  Of  singular  power  to  awaken  sympathetic
feeling  (of.  influence  of  ballads, of  Jacobite  songs,  of  the  'Marseillaise/  of  popular
hymns).  The  action  of  song  is  not  violent,  but  gentle  and  persuasive.  It  steals  about
the  heart  like  rippling  water  or  like  sunlight,  trickles  into  its  pores,  works  as  if  by
spirit-influence  on  its  seats  of  laughter  and  tears,  explores  its  innermost  labyrinths
of  feeling.    Here  compared  (ver.  2)  to  the  gently  distilling  dew  and  rain.

I.  The  dew  and  bain  as  emblems  of  the  teachino  most  likely  to  fbove
EFFECTIVE.  Their  action  is:  (I)  gentle,  (2)  silent,  (3)  pervasive,  (4)  kindly;  yet:
1.  Invigorative.  They  revive,  refresh,  stimulate.  2.  Powerful,  Rocks  shattered  by
drops  of  water  in  their  pores  and  crevices.  3,  Deep-reaching.  They  act  on  plants
by  watering  their  roots.  Take  a  lesson  from  them.  It  is  not  the  best  kind  of  teaching
which  is  loud  and  violent,  which  tries  to  force  men's  convictions.  Convictions  must
have  time  to  grow.  Teaching  must  be  loving.  The  earthquake,  the  whirlwind,  the
fire,  have  their  own  place,  but  "  the  still  small  voice  "  is  needed  to  succeed  them.  The
Lord  is  peculiarly  in  that.  Angry  scolding,  petulant  rebuke,  biting  censure,  clever
satire,  seldom  do  much  good.    Love  alone  wins  the  day.

II.  The  dew  and  bain  as  emblems  of  the  teachino  most  suitable  w  the
IN8TBUCTI0N8  OF  EELIQION.  Moses  employed  it  here.  Christ  employed  it.  "  He  shall
not  strive  nor  cry,"  etc.  (Matt.  xii.  19).  Paul  commends  "  truthing  it  in  love  "  (Eph.  iv.
15).  "  The  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive ;  but  be  gentle  unto  all  men,  apt
to  teach,  patient,  in  meekness  instructing  those  that  oppose  themselves"  (2  Tim.  iL  24,
25).  This  kind  of  teaching  harmonizes  best:  1.  With  the  sttJ/erf  of  religion — ^"the
Name  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  3).  God  had  revealed  his  Name  to  Moses  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6, 7),
and  the  attributes  of  mercy  preponderate.  2.  With  the  end  of  religion — the  ascription
of  greatness  to  God  (ver.  3).  Religious  teaching  fails  if  it  does  not  inspire  men  with
such  convictions  of  God's  greatness  as  will  lead  them  to  fear,  honour,  worship,  praise,
and  serve  him.  3.  With  the  special  theme  of  the  gospel — peace,  love,  good  will  to
men.  This  song  of  Moees  has  to  deal  with  stern  truths,  but  even  in  its  sternest  passages
it  breathes  the  pathos  of  tender  and  sorrowful  affection.  It  dwells  largely  on  God's
kindnesses  and  the  people's  ingratitude,  and  ends  with  loving  promises.  The  song  has
numerous  echoes  in  Isaiah. — J.  0.

Ver.  4. — Ood  the  Rock.  (Cf.  vers.  15, 18, 31, 37.)  This  name  for  God  occurs  chiefly
in  this  song  of  Moses,  and  in  the  compositions  of  David  and  of  later  psalmists.  It
was  a  name  full  of  significance  to  those  familiar  with  the  desert.  Rock — rock — rock —
Israel  had  seen  little  else  during  the  thirty-eight  years  of  wandering.  The  older  men
could  remember  the  seclusion. and  granitic  sublimity  of  the  rock  sanctuary  of  Sinai.
The  congregation  had  mourned  for  Aaron  under  the  shadow  of  Mount  Hor,  "  rising  high
aloft  into  the  blue  sky,  like  a  huge,  grand,  but  shattered  rock-city,  with  vast  cliffs,
perpendicular  walls  of  stone,  pinnacles,  and  naked  peaks  of  every  shape."  They  had
witnessed  the  security  of  Edom  in  the  hills  in  which  now  stand  the  wondrous  rock-
hewn  ruin  of  Petra.  They  had  traversed  the  defiles  of  the  terrible  and  precipitous
Arabah.  When  David  was  hunted  in  the  wilderness,  he,  too,  was  often  led  to  think
of  God,  his  Rock  (Ps.  xviii.  2 ;  IxL  2 ;  Ixii.  2, 7,  etc.).  It  is  wilderness  experience  which
still  makes  the  name  so  precious.

I.  Book  a  katdbaii  ihaoe  or  Divine  attributes.  The  image  is  not  an  arbitrary
one.  Nature  abounds  in  shadows  of  the  spiritual.  If  is  what  the  mind  puts  into  the
olijects  of  its  survey  which  makes  them  what  they  are.  "  The  Alps  and  Andes  are  but
millions  of  atoms  till  thought  combines  tl  em,  and  stamps  on  them  the  conception
of  the  everlasting  hills.  Niagara  is  a  gush  of  water-drops  till  the  soul  puts  into  it  that
■weep  of  resistless  power  which  the  beholder  feels.  The  ocean,  wave  behind  wave,  is  only
great  when  the  spirit  has  bieathed  into  it  the  idea  of  immensity.  If  we  analyze  out
feelings,  we  shall  find  that  thought  meets  us  wherever  we  turn.    The  real  grandeu.


518  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.         [oh.  xxxn.  1—52.

of  the  world  is  in  the  soul  which  looks  on  it,  which  sees  some  conception  of  its  own
ruflected  from  the  mirror  around  it ;  for  mind  is  not  only  living,  but  life-giving,  and
has  received  from  its  Maker  a  portion  tff  his  own  creative  power "  (Dr.  John  Ker).
Bock  b  thus  more  than  rock — its  awfulness,  grandeur,  immovability,  everlastingness,
strength,  are  bom  of  spiritual  conceptions.  These  attributes  do  not  in  feality  belong
to  it.  Rock  is  not  everlasting,  moveless,  abiding,  etc.  Old  rocks  are  being  worn  away,
new  rocks  are  being  formed ;  the  whole  system  had  a  beginning  and  will  have  an  end
(Ps.  xc.  2).  It  is  not  that  these  attributes, belong  to  rock,  and  are  thence  by  metaphor
attributed  to  God ;  but  these  attributes  of  Qod,  being  dimly  present  in  the  mind,  are
by  metaphor  attributed  to  rock.  We  clothe  the  natural  object  with  shadowy  attributes
of  Deity.  God  is  the  true  Rock,  the  other  is  the  image.  God  is  rock,  in  virtue  of;  1.  The
eternity  of  his  existence  (Ps.  xc.  2).  2.  Tlie  omnipotence  of  his  might  (Dan.  iv.  35).
3.  The  wisdom  of  his  counsel  (Isa.  xl.  13).  4.  The  immutability  of  his  ptirpose  (Ps.
xxxiii.  11 ;  Isa.  xlvi,  10).  5.  The  faitlifulness  of  his  Word  (Ps.  cxix.  89,  90).  6.  The
rectitude  of  his  government  (Ps.  cxlv.  17).  Whence;  7.  The  perfection  of  his  work.
Christ  is  like  the  Father,  eternal  (Rev.  L  11),  unoliangeable  (Heb.  xiii.  8),  all-powerful
(Matt,  xxviii.  18),  faithful  (John  xiii.  1 ;  xiv.  18 — 20),  righteous  (Rev,  xix.  11),  wise
(Isa.  ix.  6).

II.  Rock  a  hatubal  image  of  what,  in  vibtub  of  his  attbibutbs,  Gk)D  is  to
HIS  PEOPLE.  1.  A  shelter  (Ps.  Ixi.  3).  2.  A  defence  (Ps.  xviii.  2 ;  Ixii,  6).  3.  A
dwelling-place  (Ps.  xc.  1).  i.  A  shaduw  from  the  heat  (cf.  Isa.  xxxii.  2).  6.  A  move-
less standing-ground  (Ps.  xl.  2).  6.  A  foundation  (cf.  Matt.  vii.  24).  The  rock  smitten
in  the  wilderness  furnishes  the  additional  idea  of:  7.  A  source  of  spiritual  refreshment.
Apply  throughout  to  Clirist,  the  Rock  on  which  his  Church  is  built  (Matt.  xvi.  18;  1
Cor.  ii.  11),  the  smitten  Saviour  (1  Cor.  x.  4 ;  1  John  v.  6),  the  spiritual  liefuge  and
Salvation  of  his  people  (Rom.  viii.  1,  34 — 39);  Toplady'a  hymn,  "  Rock  of  Ages."
-J.  O.

Vers.  4 — 7. — God's  righteousness  and  man's  iniquity.  The  sin  of  man  is  only  fully
seen  in  contrast  with  God's  righteousness  and  love.  The  light  is  needed  to  bring  out
the  depth  of  the  shadow.    It  reveals  the  "  spot."

I.  God's  favoub  to  Isbabl.  Gods  dealings  with  Israel  had  been  marked  by :
1.  Rectitude  (ver.  4).  He  had  done  everything  that  was  just  and  right  to  them.  His
ways  had  been  equal.  He  had  given  them  just  statutes.  His  covenant-keeping
faithfulness  had  been  signally  manifested.  There  was  not  the  shadow  of  a  pretence  for
accusing  God  of  injustice  or  of  infidelity  to  his  engagements.  2.  Love.  Love  and  grace
had  been  more  conspicuous  in  his  treatment  of  them  than  even  justice.  It  was  shown
in  their  election,  in  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  in  the  guidance  of  the  desert,  in  pardon
of  offences,  in  the  many  and  undeserved  favours  which  had  been  heaped  upon  them
(cf.  vers.  9 — 14).  Rectitude  and  love  have  reached  their  fullest  manifestation  in  the
gospel.  The  cross  displays  both.  It  harmonizes  their  apparently  conflicting  claims,
and  exhibits  them  in  new  glories.  God's  character,  revealed  in  Christ,  is  the  con-
demnation of  an  unbelieving  world.

II.  Isbael's  bequital  of  God's  kindness.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  Their  requital  was  an
incredibly  base  one.  They  corrupted  themselves.  They  wantonly  departed  from  the
ways  of  right.  They  behaved  ungratefully.  Instead  of  imitating  God  in  the  example
of  rectitude  he  had  set  them,  and  walking  before  him  "as  dear  children,"  they  flung
to  the  winds  the  remembrance  of  his  mercies,  and  brought  disgrace  upon  his  Name.
He  was  their  Father  (ver.  6),  but  instead  of  reflecting  the  features  of  his  image,  they
dishonoured  and  discredited  it  (cf.  Isa.  L  2 — 4,  which  appears  to  be  based  on  ths
passage).  Their  sin  was ;  1.  Self-caused,  There  was  nothing  which  they  had  seen  in
their  God  to  cause  it,  to  account  for  it,  or  to  excuse  it.  2.  Irrational.  Their  powers,
given  by  God,  ought  willingly  to  have  been  devoted  in  his  service.  Obedience  is  the
normal  condition.  Heaven  and  earth,  undeviatingly  obeying  the  law  of  their  existence,
condemn  man's  aix>stacy  (ver.  1).  The  very  brute  creation  testifies  against  him
(Isa.  i.  3).  3.  Ungrateful.  God  had  bought  them  for  himself,  had  made  a  nation  of
them,  and  established  them  in  Canaan.  Yet,  without  compunction,  they  cast  off
his  yoke.  4,  Foolish ;  for  tiie  way  they  chose  was  the  way  of  death,  whereas  in  God's
favour  was  life  (v«r.  47),  with  every  blessing  that  heart  could  wish  for.    The  same


OH.  xxMi.  1—52.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  817

remarks  apply  to  sinners — despising  the  gracious  overtures  which  God  makes  to  them,
with  all  the  favours,  temporal  and  spiritual,  he  has  actually  shown  them,  and  careering
on  to  their  eternal  ruin.    "  0  foolish  people  and  unwise  1 " — J.  0.

Yer.  8.— The  world  rvitdfw  the  benefit  of  the  Church,  What  this  verse  assert!  is
tl.at  in  the  providential  distribution  of  the  nations,  and  assignment  to  them  of  their
special  territories,  respect  was  had  from  the  beginning  to  the  provision  of  a  suitable
dwelling-place  for  the  chosen  race.  Our  subject  is — The  government  of  the  world  con-
ducted with  a  view  to  the  interests  of  the  Church.

I.  A  TRUTH  FREQUENTLY  TAUGHT  IN  ScRiPTUBB.  Both  by  facts  of  history,  and  by
i>>xpress  statement.  Israel's  position  brought  it  into  contact,  not  only  with  petty
ntighbouring  states,  but  with  the  mightiest  empires  of  East  and  West.  These  appear
in  Scripture  only  as  they  affect  the  chosen  race,  but  it  is  then  made  manifest  how
entirely  their  movements  are  directed  and  controlled  by  Divine  providence.  And  the
centre  of  God's  purposes  is  always  Israel.  "  Fur  your  sake,"  says  God, "  I  have  sent
to  Babylonia,  and  have  brouglit  down  all  their  nobles,  and  the  Chaldeans,  whose  cry
is  in  the  ships"  (Isa.  xliii.  14 ;  cf.  vers.  3,  4).  Is  Egypt  visited  with  famines — with
scarce  years  and  good  years  ?  The  design  is  the  working  out  of  a  certain  plan  in  the
chain  of  God's  appointments  for  Israel.  Is  a  Cyrus  raised  up  in  Persia  ?  God  saitb  of
him,  "  He  is  my  shepherd,  and  shall  perform  all  my  pleasure,"  etc.  (Isa.  xliv.  28).  So
is  it  throughout.  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylonia,  Persia,  Greece,  Rome,  appear  in  all
their  relations  with  Israel  as  ministers  of  the  Divine  will,  as  simple  executors  of  the
Divine  purposes,  and  their  power  is  strictly  limited  by  their  commission.  In
harmony  with  this  prophetic  teaching  are  the  express  testimonies  of  the  Epistles
(e.g.'Rom.  viii.  28;  Eph.  i.  20—23;  iii.  9—11).  (1)  Nature,  (2)  history,  are  ruled
for  the  benefit  of  the  Church.

II.  A  TRUTH  IN  ITSELF  REASONABLE.  Ouce  admit  the  goal  of  histoify  to  b*  the
establishment  on  earth  of  a  universal  spiritual  kin<;dom — a  gathering  together  in  one
of  all  things  with  Christ  as  Head  (Eph.  i.  10),  and  it  is  certain  that  herein  must
lie  the  key  to  all  historical  developments,  the  explaiiation  of  all  arrangements  and
movements  of  Divine  providence.  The  centre  of  interest  must  always  be  that  portion  ,
of  the  race  with  which  for  the  time  being  the  kingdom  of  God  is  identified.  "  Just  as,
in  tracing  the  course  of  a  stream,  not  the  huge  morasses  nor  the  vast  stagnant  pools
on  either  side  would  delay  us :  we  should  not,  because  of  their  extent,  count  them
the  river,  biit  recognize  that  as  such,  though  it  were  the  slenderest  thread,  in  which
an  onward  movement  mi|ht  be  discerned;  so  is  it  here.  Egypt  and  Assyria  and
Babylon  were  but  the  vast  stagnant  morasses  on  either  side  of  the  river ;  the  Man  in
whose  seed  the  whole  earth  should  be  blessed,  he  and  his  family  were  the  little  stream
in  which  the  life  and  onward  movement  of  the  world  were  to  be  traced.  .  .  .  They
belong  not  to  history,  least  of  all  to  sacred  history,  those  Babels,  those  cities  of  con-
fusion, those  huge  pens  into  which  by  force  and  fraud  the  early  hunters  of  men,  the
Nimrods  and  Sesostrises,  drove  and  compelld'd  their  fallows  .  .  .  where  no  faith
existed  but  in  the  blind  powers  of  nature  and  the  brute  forces  of  the  natural  man  "
(Archbishop  Trench).

III.  A    TRUTH     FRAUGHT    TO    THE    ChUBCH    WITH    COMFOET    AND    ENCOURAOBMENT.

1.  When  the  powers  of  the  world  are  threatening.  2.  In  times  of  internal  decay.
3.  Under  long-continued  trials. — J.  0.

Vers.  10 — 14. — A  panorama  of  grace.    How  Israel  was  found,  led,  taught,  kept.

I.  Where  Gcd  found  him.  (Ver.  10.)  Partly  metaphorical — the  state  of  Israel  in
Egypt  being  likened  to  that  of  a  man  perishing  in  the  desert ;  partly  literal— it  being
in  the  desert  that  God  found  the  people  when  he  took  them  into  covenant.  An  image
of  the  helpless  and  hopeless  condition  of  the  sinner.  Cut  off  from  life,  without  shelter,
provision,  resting-place,  or  final  home.

II.  How  God  dealt  with  him.  (Vers.  10,  11.)  That  Israel  was  kept  in  the
wilderness  so  long  was  his  own  fault.  But  grace  overruled  the  discipline  for  good
The  long  sojourn  in  the  desert  made  Israel's  case,  also,  a  better  type  of  our  own.
There  are  ends  to  be  served  by  this  sojourn  (John  xvii.  15).  God  showed  himself:
L  Condescending  to  Israel's  feebleness  (Hos.  xL  3,  4).    2.  Mindful  of  his  ignorattee.


513  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxxn.  1—62.


"  Instructed  him.'  3.  Watcliful  of  his  safety.  "  Kept  him."  4.  Careful  of  his
training  (ver.  11;.  The  love  and  solicitude  implied  in  such  phrases  as,  "  kept  him  as
the  apple  of  his  eye"  (ver.  10),  and  "as  an  eagle  stirreth  up," etc.  (ver.  11),  specially
deserve  notice.  1'he  apple  of  the  eye  is  a  sensitive  part,  which  we  protect  with  the
utmost  care,  and  from  the  slightest  injuries.    (On  the  eagle,  see  below.)

III.  Whitheb  Odd  conducted  him.  '  (Vers.  13, 14.)  To  a  land  of  plenty  and  rest.
Made  his  defence  the  munitions  of  rocks.  Provided  him  with  all  that  heart  could
desire.  So  does  God  bring  the  believer  to  a  large  and  wealthy  place — &  place  of
"  fulness  of  joy,"  of  richest  satisfactions,  of  most  perfect  delights.  Spiritually,  even
here,  where  the  most  unpropitious  circumstances  yield  him  unexpected  blessings.
Eternally  and  in  perfected  form  hereafter.  Note :  God  aloa*  did  all  this  for  laraeL
(ver.  12).— J.  0.

Ver.  11. — The  eagle.  "  The  description  is  of  a  female  eagle  exciting  her  young  ones
in  teaching  them  to  fly,  and  afterwards  guarding  with  the  greatest  care  lest  the  weak
should  receive  harm  "  (Gesenius).  In  this  picture  of  the  eagle's  treatment  of  her  young,
note —

I.  Hbb  aim.  She  aims  at  teaching  them  self-reliance.  It  is  not  God's  wish  that
his  children  should  go  in  leading-strings.  They  must  bo  trained  to  prompt,  fearless,
self-reliant  action.  This  was  an  aim  of  the  discipline  of  the  wilderness.  Our  action  ia
to  be  in  a  spirit  of  dependence,  but  it  is  to  be  active,  nqt  passive  dependence.

n.  Heb  method.  ,  She  stirs  up  her  nest.  She  does  not  leave  her  brood  to  the
ignoble  ease  they  would  perhaps  prefer.  So  God  rouses  his  people  to  action  by  making
their  place  uneasy  for  them.  By  placing  them  in  trying  situations,  by  removing
comforts,  by  the  stimulus  of  necessity,  by  the  sharp  provocation  of  afSictions,  he  goads
them  to  think,  act,  and^put  forth  the  powers  that  are  in  them.  It  ia  not  for  the  good
of  Christiaus  that  they  sluiuld  have  too  much  comfort.

III.  Heb  oabe.  T'he  experiment  is  not  carried  to  the  point  of  allowing  the  young
to  hurt  themselves.  She  hovers  over  them,  supports  them  on  the  tip  of  her  wings,  etc.
God  tries  us,  but  not  beyond- our  strength. — J.  O.

Vers.  15. — 18. — Jeshurun.  I.  A  good  name  belied.  Jeshurun,  equivalent  to
righteous.  An  honourable  name,  but  sadly  falsified  by  the  conduct  described.  How
many  Jesliuruns  have  thus  forsaken  the  God  of  their  early  vows!  Notice,  a  good  name
is  of  no  account  without  the  good  character.  Balaam  praised  Israel's  righteousness,
and  wished  to  "  die  the  death  of  the  righteous "  (NUmb.  xziii.  10,  21) ;  but  it  ia  the
being  righteous,  ,pot  the  being  called  so,  which  makes  the  happy  deathbed.

\L  An  evil  effect  of  peospbritt.  "  Waxed  fat — kicked."  How  common  I  The
effect  foTfitold  or  warned  against  in  earlier  chapters  (ch.  viii.  12 — 18,  etc.).  Prosperity,
then  pride,  then  stubborn  self-willedness.  The  self-willed  heart  refuses  to  submit  to
God's  government ;  throws  o£f  the  momory  of  past  obligations,  and  treats  God  with
ill-concealed  indifference  and  dislike;  turns  from  the  true  God  to  gods  of  its  own
choosing.  Two  steps  in  the  great  apostacy — forsaking  the  fountain  of  living  waters,
and  hewing  out  broken  cisterns,  etc.  (Jer.  ii.  13).  Such  conduct  is  (1)  wicked,
(2)  ungrateful,  (3)  irrational,  (4)  fatal  (vers.  22—25).

III.  Result  op  an  itch  fob  novelty.  (Ver.  17.)  The  newness  of  the  gods  was  a
chief  attraction.  The  worship  of  them  was  a  change,  a  novelty.  .  It  pleased  them  by
Tariety.  1.  When  God  has  been  abandoned,  men  are  at  the  mercy  of  the  most  trivial
influences.  " Itching  ears " — " every  wind  of  doctiine "  (Eph.  iv.  14 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  3).
2.  When  God  has  been  abandoned,  novelty  is  greedily  accepted  as  a  substitute  for
truth,  in  theories,  in  creeds,'  in  styles  of  worship,  in  religious  nostrums.  3.  Apostacy
from  God  means  transference  of  the  affections  to  that  which  is  degrading.  In  this
case  to  "  destroyers,"  so  the  word  means ;  devils,  malignant  deities.  But  we  worship
devil's,  or  the  devil  (Matt.  iv.  9),  when  we  bow  in  spirit  to  the  world's  modes  and  shows ;
when  we.  serve  gold,  or  fashion,  or  the  opinion  of  society;  when  we  tut  slaves  to  lust
of  power ;  when  we  bow  to  a  false  gnosis,  etc. — J.  Oi

Vers.  19—27. — A  Ood  provoked.    Consider  here —

I.  The  bealitt  or  wbath  in  God.    Let  it  not  be  minimized  or  explained  away.


(11.  xxiu.  1— 52.J  THE  BOOfc  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  6i9

"  Instead  of  being  shocked  at  the  thought  thut  God  is  wrathrul,  we  sliould  rather  ask.
With  whom  «  and  For  what  t  A  God  without  wrath,  and  a  God  who  is  wrathful  on
other  accounts  than  for  sin,  is  not  a  God,  but  nn  idol "  (Hengstenberg),  It  is  only,  as
this  writer  observes,  when  "  man  himself  is  not  displeased  with  sin,  when  it  assumes  to
him  the  appearance  of  a  bagatelle,"  that  he  no  longer  perceives  why  God  should  feel
wrath  at  it.  But  man,  we  may  observe,  is  by  no  means  disposed  to  treat  lightly  sins
against  himself.  He  never  feels  that  he  does  not "  do  well  to  be  angry  "  on  account  of
these  or  against  the  person  who  does  them.  A  very  slight  wound  to  his  honour  makes
him  clamour  for  satisfaction.  A  God  who  is  incapable  of  moral  indignation  would  be
equally  incapable  of  moral  love,  and  could  not,  with  truth,  be  spoken  of  as  dispensing
mercy.  Wrath  and  love  are  opposite  poles  of  one  affection.  Where  there  is  no  offence,
there  needs  no  forgiveness.

II.  Wrath  in  God,  when  it  bukns  against  Hxir,  n  tbrribls  ts  its  effeotb.
Two  aspects  of  its  operation  :  1.  Leaving  men  to  themselves  (ver.  20).  When  Qod
hides  his  face  from  them,  there  need  be  little  doubt  what  the  "  end  "  will  be.  Tet  can
the  sinner  complain  if  he  is  at  length  permitted  to  eat  the  fruit  of  the  devices  which
nothing  will  persuade  him  to  give  up?  2.  Heaping  on  them  positive  inflictions  (vers.
22 — 25).  It  is  a  fire,  burning  to  destroy  them.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  conflagration
of  the  Divine  wrath  is  represented  as  not  only  taking  in  iheol,  but  as  widening  till  it
embraces  the  whole  earth  (ver.  22).  This,  in  connection  with  the  glimpse  at  the
calling  of  the  Gentiles  in  ver.  21,  points  to  tlie  future  universal  extension  of  the  out-
ward dispensation  of  grace.  The  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  God  brings  all  nations
within  the  range  of  the  Messianic  judgment  (Matt.  xxv.  31).  The  wrath  of  God  is  not
represented  in  less  terrible  colours  in  the  New  Testament  than  it  is  in  the  Old.  The
individualized  description  of  these  verses  (vers.  24,  25)  figures  out  terrors  of  a  future
life  too  painful  to  allow  the  mind  to  dwell  upon  them,

III.  Wrath  in  God  is,  in  this  life,  not  divobobd  from  meroy.  Not  at  least
BO  long  as  hope  of  recovery  remains.  He  would  fain  make  punishment  subservient  to
conversion.  This  is  the  thought  in  ver.  21.  Israel  is  not  cast  off  for  ever.  Qod  is
seeking  to  provoke  it  to  jealousy  by  a  transference  of  his  regard  to  the  Gentiles.  His
retaliation  has  a  merciful  as  well  as  a  wrathful  desigfu-  Mercy  waits  on  every  sinner,
courting  his  repentance.

IV.  The  manifestation  of  wrath  in  God  ib  iiuited  bt  regard  to  his  honour.
(Vers.  26,  27.)  God  is  jealous  of  his  honour.  '  He  will  take  from  his  adversaries  the
power  of  boasting  against  him,  by  marvellously  restoring  those  who,  had  they  received
their  full  deserts,  would  have  been  utterly  destrpyed.  This  stays  his  hand  from  expend-
ing his  wrath  against  them  to  the  uttermost.  We  may  read  this  otherwise,  and  say  that
zeal  for  his  honour  leads  God  to  spare  them,  that  he  may  glorify  his  Name  by  causing
mercy  to  rejoice  over  judgment.  There  is  more  honour  to  God  in  saving  men  than  in
destroying  them.

And  what  provokes  this  wrath  in  God  ?  Sin — sin  only.  Most  especially  the  sins  of
his  own  people.     1.  "No  faith" — want  of   fidelity  to  vows.     2.  " Frowardness "—

Eersistence  in  sin  (ver.  20).    Those  who  have  stood  in  nearest  relations  to  him,  who
ave  enjoyed  most  favours,  are  those  who  will  be  moat  Hverely  f  unished  (Amos  iiL  2J|i
— J.  0.

Vers.  28,  29. — Hie  irue  wtsi^ym.    Consider—

I.  In  what  wisdom  consists.  1.  The  choice  of  right  enclfl.  2.  Of  tight  means  to
secure  these  ends.  3.  In  harmony  with  a  just  and  proportioned  view  of  all  the  circum-
stances of  our  situation.  When  essential  circumstances  are  omitted  \n  the  calculation,
when  the  horizon  is  unduly  narrowed,  when  all-important  factors  or  the  situation  are
left  wholly  out  of  account, — it  is  vain  to  speak  of  wisdom.  Absolutely,  and  as  regards
our  standing  as  moral  beings,  wisdom  embraces :  1.  The  choice  of  a  (rue  end,  i.e.  the
ehoice,  as  our  end  in  life,  of  that  end  for  which  we  were  created.  2.  The  practiced  shading
of  conduct  with  a  view  to  that  end,  and  in  the  way  best  calculated  to  attain  it.  And
this :  3.  In  view  of  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  i.e.  with  right  apprehensions  of
God,  of  the  issues  of  moral  conduct,  of  eternity.  What  wisdom  is  more  to  be  desired
than  this  ?  What  efforts  ought  to  be  put  forth  to  attain  it  t  What  incalculable  value
ought  to  be  set  upon  it  I


520  THE   BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxxii.  1—52.


II.  Sin  is  the  absolute  unwisdom.  1.  For  the  true  end  of  life  it  substitutes  a  false
one.  The  end  for  which  we  were  made  was  holiness — the  service  of  God  with  all  our
powers  of  soul,  body,  and  spirit.  In  this  consists  our  life,  our  happiness,  our  well-being.
In  pursuit  of  this  end,  our  nature  works  harmoniously  with  itself,  and  with  the
general  constitution  of  the  world.  But  sin  substitutes  for  this  an  end  which  yiolates,
disturbs,  perverts  the  harmony  of  every  sphere  of  our  existence.  It  asserts  a  false
independence  of  the  creature.  It  bids  us  use  our  powers  for  self,  and  not  for  God.  It
holds  up  as  an  end  a  shadowy  good  which  is  never  realized.  It  cheats  with  insincere
promises.  By  perverting  the  nature,  it  gives  to  fleshly  lusts  a  tyrannical  predominance,
and  degrades  the  spirit  to  the  position  of  a  bondservant.  For  unity  there  is  thus
established  anarchy — each  lust,  as  its  own  master,  seeking  an  independent  gratification.
Life  in  this  way  falls  asunder — it  has  a  proper  end  no  longer — and  the  strife  continues
till  a  new  , equilibrium  is  established  by  one  lust  or  passion  usurping  the  mastery
over  the  rest.  2.  For  the  true  conduct  of  life  it  substitutes  a  course  of  conduct  resting
on  false  bases.  The  false  end  yields  its  natural  £:uit  in  false  principles  of  life.  Tije
sinner's  whole  career,  whatever  he  may  think  of  it  himself,  is  one  tissue  of  errors  and
illogicalities.  If  measured  by  the  end  he  ought  to  set  before  him,  it  is  seen  to  be  a  course
leading  him  wildly  and  hopelessly  astray.  The  more  skilfully  and  assiduously  lie
applies  himself  to  his  ends,  only  the  more  conspicuously  does  he  convict  himself  of  folly.
3.  Instead  of  taking  all  the  factors  of  the  case  into  account,  it  usually  leaves  Ood  and
eternity  out  of  it.  This  is  that  which  most  convincingly  brands  the  sinner's  course  as
folly.  If  Ciod  exist,  and  if  be  have  the  power  to  bless  or  blast  our  schemes,  and  if  in  the
end  we  have  to  meet  him  as  our  Judge, — it  surely  cannot  be  wisdom  to  leave  this  fact
unnoticed.  So,  if  we  are  beings  made  for  eternity,  destined  to  exist  for  ever,  he  must
be  a  fool  who  makes  preparations  for  everything  but  for  eternity.  If,  again,  the  issues
of  obedience  and  sin  are  on  the  one  hand  life,  and  on  the  other  death,  he  must  le
insane  who  deliberately  makes  a  preference  of  the  latter.  Even  if  the  choice  is  not
deliberately  made,  but  the  eyes  are  kept  closed  to  the  issues,  this  does  not  alter  the
unwisdom  of  the  choice  itself.  We  can  see,  therefore,  how  a  man  may  be  most  wise  as
regards  this  world,  and  yet  the  veiiest  fool  as  regards  the  whole  scope  of  his  existence.
He  may  be  gifted,  talented,  energetic,  a  shrewd  man  of  the  world,  sagacious  in  pursuit  of
earthly  ends,  yet  totally  blind  to  his  eternal  interests.  He  may  be  neglecting  the  "  one
thing  needful,"  making  no  preparation  for  a  hereafter,  missing  the  end  of  his  existence,
treasuring  up  wrath  and  sorrow  for  himself  at  the  end.  "  Thou  fool  I "  was  the  stern
word  of  Heaven  to  a  man  who,  in  earthly  respects,  was  probably  deemed  very  wise  (Luke
xii.  20),      Men  are  fools  who  neglect  the  voice  of  religion. — J.  0.

Ver.  31. — TTie  superiority  of  the  belicver't  Sock.  Pew  men  but  feel  that  they  need
a  rock  of  some  kind.  Only  when  their  mountain  stands  very  strong  do  they  feel  as
if  they  were  absolutely  secure  and  independent  (Obad.  3,  4).  Even  then  their  trust  is
in  acquired  power  and  riches,  which  is  a  "  rock  "  to  them,  though  their  confidence  often
proves  delusive  (Haman,  Nebuchadnezzar,  Wolsey).  When  men  have  lost  faith  in
religion,  they  frequently  take  refuge  in  the  "  rock  "  of  philosophy.  The  *'  rock  "  of  the
heathen  is  their  idols  and  the  arts  of  the  soothsayer.  Men  tend  to  make  a  "  rock  "  of
those  superior  to  them  in  power  and  wisdom.  The  "  rock  "  of  nations  is  too  often  their
military  and  naval  defences,  with  arts  of  diplomacy,  and  alliances  with  stronger  powers
(Isa.  XXX.).  The  believer's  Bock,  which  is  the  best  of  all,  is  God.
,  I.  The  supbriobitt  of  thk  believer's  Rook  evinced.  1.  From  the  nature  of  this
Rock.  Grant  that  God  tg,.a  Being,  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable,  wise  in  his
counsel,  omnipotent  in  his  power,  faithful  in  his  promises,  righteous  in  his  actions,
infinitely  gracious  and  merciful  to  those  who  put  their  trust  in  him,  a  "  strong  Rock,"
"  an  House  of  defence  "  to  save  them  (Ps.  xxxii.  7),  a  "  Hiding-place  "  to  preserve  them
from  trouble  (Fs.  xxxii,  7), — and  the  superiority  of  this  Bock  to  every  other  needs  no
further  demonstration.  It  is  self-evidently  impossible  to  have  a  surer  or  a  better.
What  can  man  ask  more  than  that  the  "  eternal  God  "  should  be  his  "  Refuge,"  and
that  underneath  him  should  be  the  "everlasting  arm3"?(ch.  xxxiii.  27).  2.  From
the  advantages  derived  froTK  this  Bock.  These  are  luch  as  no  other  can  pretend  to
give.  The  believer's  life  being  hid  with  God  (Col.  iii.  3)  and  guaranteed  by  the  lii'u
of  Christ  in  heaven  (John  xiv.  19),  and  his  inheritance  lying  beyond  death  (1  Pet.  i.  4),


OH.  xxxn.  1— 52.]  THE  BOOK  01  DEUTBEONOMY.  62]


no  hostility  of  man  can  reach  either.  No  otlier  "rock"  can  give  the  same  security,
the  same  peace,  joy,  shelter,  streogth,  comfort,  and  refreshment,  as  the  believer's.
To  whicli  considerations  add  the  following : — 1.  Many  of  these  so-called  "  rocks  "  are
nonentities.  The  idols  .of  the  heathen  are  of  this  description.  So  with  the  arts  and
charms  of  sorcery,  prayers  to  the  Virgin,  eta  2.  The  surest  of  these  "  rocks  "  are  not
to  be  depended  on.  "  Wisdom  is  better  than  strength  "  (Eccles.  ix.  16) ;  but  wisdom,
strength,  riches,  rank,  powerful  friends,  long-consolidated  might, — ^all  sometimes  fail
those  who  put  their  trust  in  them.  3.  Not  one  of  these  "  rocks  "  can  stand  whem  Ood
wills  its  overthrow.  God's  helj),  on  the  other  hand,  is  real,  always  to  be  relied  on,  and
invincible  against  opposition,    .

II.  The  superiority  of  the  believeb'b  Boos  confessed.  It  i8  often  confessed,
even  by  the  enemy.  How  often,  e.g.  have  ungodly  men  expressed  themselves  envious
of  the  religious  trust  and  peatieof  the  believer  I  How  often  have  they  admitted  its
superiority  to  anything  possessed  by  themselves  I  How  often^  again,  have  they  owned
fo  their  own  "  rocks  "  failing  them  in  time  of  need  1  How  often,  even,  when  it  came
to  the  end,  have  they  lamented  that  they  had  not  sought  the  Bock  of  the  believer!
Philosophy  is  admitted,  even  by  those  who  take  refuge  in  it,  to  be  but  a  sorry
substitute  for  religion.  Passages  could  be  culled  from  current  literature  showing  very
distinctly  this  need  of  the  believer's  rock — the  almost  agonizing  expression  of  a  wish
that  belief  were  possible — the  confession  that  in  the  surrender  of  Christian  beliefs  a  large
part  of  life's  hopefulness  and  joy  baa  gone  for  ever  (see  in  Mallock's  "  Is  Life  worth
Living?").— J.  0.

Ver.  31. — Our  Bock,  Apply  to  the  religion  of  the  Bible.  Proved  to  be  superior  to
every  other  system :  1.  In  proofs  of  supernatural  origin.  2.  In  moral  and  spiritual
power.  3.  In  the  privileges  it  offers.  4.  In  the  prospects  it  holds  out.  Admissions
and  concessions  on  each  of  these  points  could  be  gathered  from  the  writings  of  many
of  the  most  noted  unbelievers. — J.  0.

Vers.  32,  33. — The  vitte  of  Sodom.  Emblem  of  fruit  of  sin.  1.  Tempting.
2.  Deceptive.    3.  Ending  in  disappointment  and  disgust. — J,  O.

Vers.  34 — 43. — Retribution,  L  ■Vbnobancb  a  pberooativb  of  Deitt.  As  just
Judge  of  the  earth,  God  must  avenge  transgression.  Vengeance  is  to  be  distinguished
from  personal  vindictiveness.  Of  that  God  is  incapable.  But  Scripture,  supported  by
reason  and  conscience,  attributes  to  him  a  holy  and  inflexible  determination  to  punish
sin — to  visit  on  the  wrong-doer  the  consequences  of  his  transgression.  The  rule  for
individuals  is,  "Avenge  not  yourselves,"  etc. ;  but  the  reason  for  this  is  not,  that
vengeance  is  unnecessary,  but  that  God  will  avenge  (Rom.  xii.  18).  Magistrates,
however,  bear  from  God  a  certain  delegated  power  to  punish  public  offences — to
"  avenge"  evil  (Rom.  xiii.  4).  He  who  "  takes  away  vengeance  from  God,  at  the  same
time  takes  it  from  God's  servant,  the  magistracy,  which  carries  the  sword  of  vengeance
over  evil-doers  "  (Hengstenberg).  God  has  his  own  time,  as  well  as  his  own  way,  of
avenging  sin,  and  it  is  not  for  man  to  anticipate  this.

II.  Venoeance  assuredly  in  store  for  God's  enemies.  However  delayed  by
forbearance.  Because  judgment  is  not  executed  speedily,  sinners  take  contidence
(Eccles.  viii.  11;  2  Pet.  iii.  9,  10).  But  the  sleepless  eye  of  God  is  all  the  while
upon  them,  and  the  stroke  falls  when  tbey  are  least  expecting  it.  Sooner  or  later,
every  transgression  and  disobedience  will  meet  with  its  due  recompense  of  reward,
Note :  1.  "  Judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  God  "  (vers.  35,  36 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  17).
2.  It  will  ultimately  extend  to  all  who  are  God's  enemies  (vers.  41,  42).  We  are
taught  that  the  Messianic  kingdom  will  be  established  on  earth  amidst  mighty  displays
of  judgment  (Rev.  xix.  ll-r-21).  There  will  follow  the  general  judgment  of  quick  and
dead — "  that  day  of  wrath,  that  dreadful  day " — which  will  complete  the  work.
God's  vengeance  is:  1^  Assured.  "As  I  live,"  etc.  (ver.  40).  2.  Terrible.  "My
glittering  sword  ; "  "arrows  drunk  with  blood,"  etc.    3.  No  escape  from  it  (ver.  39).

III.  Judgments  employed  to  convince  backsliders  of  their  bins.  They  tend  •
1.  To  break  up  false  confidences  (vers.  37,  38).  2.  To  create  a  feeling  of  the  need  -jf
God's  help  (ver.  39).     3.  To  convince  of  the  folly  of  past  conduct.     God  corapasssEatsa


521  THE  BOOS  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxxn.  1—52.

even  while  he  punishes  (ver.  36).  He  would  fain,  through  judgment,  break  •  way  for
mercy.  Illustrate  this  use  of  judgments  from  Israel  in  time  of  the  judges,  or  from  case
of  Manasseh  (2  Cbron.  xxxiii.  11 — 14).  This  one  use  of  the  present  exile.  May  we
hope  that  the  day  of  God's  "  repenting  himself"  toward  Israel  is  drawing  near !

IV.  The  kecovery  of  Israel  thb  inadoubation  op  a  time  of  blessing  to  the
woBLD.  The  nations  are  to  share  in  the  joy  (ver.  43).  God  is  to  be  merciful  to  his
land  and  people.  The  latter-day  glory  includes  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  (Rom.
xi.).--J.  0.

Ver.  47. — Tow  U/e.  Th«  doing  or  not  doing  of  God's  will,  the  obeying  or  not
obeying  of  God's  Word,  is  a  matter  of  life  and  death  to  us.  This  is  the  simple  and
solemn  and  uniform  testimony  of  Scripture  from  its  first  page  to  its  last.  The  gospel,
with  its  revelation  of "  life  and  immortality,"  only  heightens  the  solemnity  of  the
alternative.  Instead  of  bare  "  life,"  it  is  now  "  eternal  life  "  which  is  proposed  for  our
acceptance,  and  which  is  lost  or  forfeited  by  sin.  If  "  life  "  is  the  promise,  the  counter-
alternative  is  death,  and  "  death  "  accordingly  is  denounced  against  the  sinner  in  gospel,
as  in  Law.  "  The  wages  of  sin  are  death  "  (Rom.  vi.  23).  Eternity  is  a  factor  to  be
taken  into  account  here,  as  well  as  in  the  case  of  "  life."  Death,  indeed,  is  not  non-
existence, but  it  is  the  loss  of  all  that  makes  existence  a  boon  ;  the  extinction  in  the
soul  of  holiness,  happiness,  and  love.  Whatever  the  final  state  of  the  lost  may  be,
whether  one  of  active  torment  or  not,  it  will  be  true  death.  The  man  loses  his  "  soul "
—his  "  life  "—"himself"  (Matt  xvi.  26 ;  Luke  ix.  25).  Oh  that  men  were  wise,  that
they  understood  these  thijigs,  and  acted  on  their  choice  as  wise  men  should  1— J.  0.

Vers.  43 — 52.— Moses'  end  (see  ch.  xxxiv.) — J.  0,

Vers.  1 — 14. — The/Merhood  of  Ood.  In  this  first  section  of  the  Divin*  song,  the
predominating  idea  is  God's  fatherhood.  It  comes  out  in  ver.  6  in  express  terms  ;  it  is
implied  in  the  care  that  is  attributed  to  him  for  his  children  of  Israel;  it  passes  into
the  still  tenderer  idea  of  motherhood  in  the  illustration  of  the  eagle  (ver.  1 1) ;  and  may
fairly  be  taken  as  the  idea  dominating  the  whole.  It  has  been  thought  that  the  father-
hood of  God  is  almost  altogether  a  New  Testament  idea ;  but  we  have  it  here  expressly
stated,  and  it  underlies  many  portions  of  the  Old  Testament.  This  whole  song  is,  in
fact,  a  paternal  expostulation  with  children  that  have  been  wayward  in  the  wilderness,
and  will  be  more  wayward  still  in  the  land  of  promise.  We  shall  notice  in  order  the
ideas  suggested  by  this  section,

I.  Fertilizing  doctbine.  Divine  doctrine,  even  in  its  severest  forms,  has  a  gracious
and  fertilizing  influence  like  rain  or  dew.  It  comes  down  upon  the  wilderness  of  human
nature,  and  makes  it  a  fruitful  field.  It  comes  down  upon  the  tender  heib  of  implanted
graces,  upon  the  grass  of  humble  and  useful  piety,  and  makes  all  to  grow  more  luxu-
riantly.    Nothing  is  so  important  as  "good  doctrine."

II.  The  rock-stability  of  God.  This  is  the  first  inquiry.  Can  Ch>d  be  trusted
as  truly  stable  ?  The  answer  is  that  he  is  a  Rock,  and  that  upon  his  veracity  and
justice  and  hel[ifulness  we  can  constantly  rely.  Moses  and  the  Israelites  had  ex-
perienced this ;  as  they  wandered  amid  the  rocky  fastnesses  of  the  desert,  they  had
found  him  as  firm  and  as 'reliable  as  the  rocks.  Up  to  this  time,  the  figure  had  not
been  applied  to  God.  The  Israelites  have,  indeed,  from  the  hard  and  fiinty  rock,  had
refreshing  sireanis;  the  i:ck  was  to  them  a  fountain  of  waters;  and  doubtless  when
here  the  figure  is  for  the  first  time  applied  to  God,  they  would  find  it  delightful  to
associate  refreshment  and  shelter  with  him.  Then  in  course  of  time  it  became  a
favourite  figure,  as  the  Psalms  in  many  passages  show  (of.  Ps.  xxviii.  1 ;  xxxi.  2,  3 ;
xlii.  9 ;  Ixii.  2,  7 ;  Ixxviii.  20,  35 ;  xct.  1,  etc.).  And  we  rejoice  to  call  our  Redeemer
"  Rock  of  Ages,"  in  the  clefts  of  which,  according  to  Toplady'g  idea,  taken  from  Exod,
xxxiii.  22,  we  can  take  shelter  and  feel  safe.*

III.  Paternal  appeal.  Although  God  is  so  worthy  of  trust,  the  Israelites  have
corrupted  themselves;  they  are  unwilling  to  have  upon  them  the  mark  or  spot  of

<  Of.  Gerok's  <  Filgerbrod,'  p.  S95 ;  and  his '  Evangelien-Fiedigten,*  pi.  730,  for  anvo'eitiv*
diicoQTsas  on  this  text


OH.  XXXII.  1—62.]        THE  BOOK  Off  DEUTEEONOMY.  S23

the  children  of  God,  but  the  mark  of  lome  other  tribe ; '  and  so  ae  a  Father  he  appeals
to  them  because  of  their  ingratitude.  Has  he  not  made  them,  bought  them,  and
established  thorn,  and,  in  consequence,  earned  a  right  to  different  treatment  from
this?  Fatherhood  has  rights  by  reason  of  service  which  no  grateful  child  can
overlook.

IV.  Patebnal  fobesiqht.  He  speaks  next  of  the  days  of  old,  of  the  years  of  many
generations,  which  the  fathers  and  elders  could  testify  about,  during  which  time  the
Father  was  but  evolving  his  glorious  plan,  separating  and  scntteiing  the  sons  of  Adam
according  to  the  interests  and  number  of  the  children  of  Israel,  At  Babel  and  the
subsequent  migrations  of  men,  "  God  so  distributed  the  earth  among  the  several  peoples
that  were  therein,  as  to  reserve,  or  in  his  sovereign  counsel  to  appoint,  such  a  part  for
the  Israelites,  though  they  were  then  unborn,  as  might  prove  a  commodious  settlement
and  habitation  fur  them."*  Koble  foresight,  worthy  of  an  everlasting  and  infinite
Father.

V.  Paternal  instruction.  One  element  in  fatherhood  is  a  sense  of  possession  in
the  children.  The  father  rejoices  that  the  children  are  his,  and  will  not  part  readily
with  his  portion.  So  with  Grod.  "  The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people  ;  Jacob  is  the  lot
of  his  inheritance."  Out  of  this  sense  of  property  comes  the  improvement  of  the
children  by  faithful  instruction.  Hence  Israel  were  led  into  the  wilderness,  and  their
Father  found  them  there,  and  led  them  about,  instructing  them,  and  keeping  them  as
"  the  apple  of  the  eye."  It  was  the  Father  educating  them  through  his  own  com-
panionship, and  leading  them  onwards  in  safety  towards  their  home.

VI.  Pa  BENT AL  DISCIPLINE.  The  song  introduces  (ver.  11)  the  figure  of  the  eagle,
and  the  motherly  discipline  to  which  she  subjects  her  brood.  "  Naturalists  tell  us  that
when  her  young  are  old  enough  to  fly,  the  eagle  breaks  her  nest  in  pieces,  in  order
to  compel  them  to  use  their  powers  of  flight;  fluttering  over  them,  that  bj  imitation
they  may  learn  how  to  employ  their  wings,  but,  when  unwilling  to  fly,  spreading
abroad  her  wings,  she  bears  them  upwards  in  the  air,  and  then  shaking  them  off,
compels  them  to  use  their  own  exertions."  '  From  this  Mr.  Hull  deduces  the  truth
that  "  the  Divine  discipline  of  life  is  designed  to  awaken  man  to  the  development
of  his  own  powers."  We  see  thus  the  kindness  of  the  parental  disci|jliue,  and  that
it  takes  motherhood  as  well  &s  fatherhood  to  illustrate  the  Divine  relation  (fit.  La.
xlix.  15).

YII.  Parental  blessiko.  Having  exercised  such  parental  care  over  the  people,  the
result  was  abundant  temporal  success  and  blessing.  1  bis  is  beautifully  brought  out  as
a  "  riding  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth."  And  then  the  whole  panorama  of
agricultural  prosperity  is  presented,  "  the  increase  of  the  fields "  providing  bread,
the  rocks  affording  shelter  for  the  bees  which  extracted  abundant  honey  from  the
flowers,  the  olives  clinging  to  the  flinty  rocks  and  affording  abundance  of  oil,  while  the
kine  in  the  fat  pastures  gave  butter,  and  the  sheep  milk,  and  the  lambs  were  choice
food,  and  the  rams  of  the  breed  of  Basban,  while  the  finest  wheat  and  the  purest  wiiie
made  the  lot  of  Israel  princely.  It  was  a  land  of  promise  surely  which  supplied  their
wants  in  such  a  fashion.     God's  goodness  was  exceeding  great.

The  "  fatherhood  of  God  "  had  thus  its  grand  exemplification  in  the  history  of  Israel.
A  Father  who  was  firm  as  the  rocky  fastnesses  around  them  and  as  reliable  ;  who  pro-
vided for  his  children  long  before  they  were  born ;  who  instructed  and  disciplined  them,
and  brought  them  eventually  to  a  splendid  inheritance, — might  well  look  for  their  trust
and  obedience.  The  Lord  shows  a  similar  fatherly  care  still  to  all  men,  even  those
who  do  not  return  a  filial  spirit ;  and  if,  in  his  grace,  they  yield  at  length  to  his  paternal
appeals,  then  he  comes  and  gives  them  a  fellowship  such  as  they  never  dreamed  of.
"  He  that  loveth  me,"  saith  Jesus,  "  shall  be  loved  of  my  Father,  and  I  will  lore  him.
and  will  manifest  myself  to  him  "  (John  xiv.  21). — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  15—18. — ITie  danger  of  worldly  succets.  Success,  when  granted,  bids  for  men'i
trust.    They  begin  accordingly  to  insinuate  that  the  reliable  Rock  who  begat  them  ia  not

'  Cf.  '  The  Land  and  the  Book,*  p.  67.

•  So  Bochai  t,  as  quoted  in  Jennings'  '  Jewish  Antiquities,'  p.  KX

*  Hull's  '  Sermons,*  3rd  eeries,  p.  133.


524  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  ixxii.  1— 52,

the  Bonrcc  of  ftll  success,  and  that  the  rill  may  be  tracked  to  some  nearer  source.
Hence  new  gods,  novelties  ol'  n;ian's  imagination,  or  demons  from  the  wasle,  gratsful  for
eTcn  a  false  faith,  are  worshipped;  and  the  ever-living  and  true  Uud  forgotten.
Apostasy  and  scepticism,  we  would  repeat,  are  born  of  luxury  and  success.  Men  think,
because  they  are  rich,  that  they  can  do  bravely  without  God.

I.  It  is  well  to  consider  the  danoeb  of  worldly  success.  Many  a  man  was
more  religious  when  poor  than  after  he  became  rich.  Increase  of  riches  needs  increase
of  grace;  and,  if  men  are  not  watchful,  riches  only  minister  to  biicksliding.  It  is
undesirable  independence  which  proves  independence  of  God.  Better  to  trust  God  in
the  absence  of  wealth  than  to  defy  him  or  ignore  him  with  it.  Many  a  successful
worldling  would  have  had  more  success  in  a  poor  station,  through  increase  of  faith  and
of  heart.     The  success  was  at  the  price  of  leanness  being  sent  into  his  soul.

II.  Those  who  will  kot  sackifiob  to  God  are  always  found  bacbipioino  to
THEIR  FEARS.  The  Credulity  of  unbelief  is  one  of  the  most  curious  questions  of  the
time.  When  men  deny  God  his  due  reverence  and  ignore  his  existence,  their  fancy
haunts  them  with  new  gods,  and  powers  whom  they  must  propitiate — the  luck  and
chance  that  they  advance  to  the  throne.  The  man  alone  is  free  from  vain  fears  who
trusts  in  the  living  God ;  all  others  sooner  or  later  prove  adepts  at  new  religions,  and
are  devotees  at  fancy  shrines.

III.  The  Divine  jealousy  is  justly  provoked  by  such  foboetfulness.  Jealousy
is  the  anger  of  ill-requited  love.  It  is  what  has  been  called,  as  already  observed,
"  love-pain,"  and  is  eminently  worthy  of  him  who  is  love  itself.  God  cannot  but  feel
he  deserves  man's  love ;  he  cannot  but  desire  it ;  he  longs  for  it  more  intensely  than
ever  love-sick  one  among  the  children  of  men  has  longed;  and  when  he  sees  the  love
he  deserves  made  over  to  another,  when  he  sees  his  life  of  lore  and  death  of  love  ignored,
— is  it  not  eminently  reasonable  that  he  should  be  jealous  and  have  his  holy  anger
stirred  ?

Herein  lies  the  ganger,  then,  of  success.  It  may  decoy  the  unguarded  soul  to  mean
fears  and  fancy  shrines,  and  lead  at  length  to  the  encountering  of  that  jealousy  which
a  God  of  love  most  justly  entertains.  Hence  the  prayer  of  souls  should  be  that  with
success  may  come  watchfulness;  that  with  fatness  may  come  faith;  that  out  of
goodness  may  come  repentance.  Then  success  may  help  and  not  hinder.  Successful
saints  become  a  blessing  to  their  kind,  and  make  success  a  stewardship.  "  It  takes  a
steady  hand  to  carry  a  full  cup ; "  so  sa/s  the  proverb.  Blessed  be  God,  amid  many
shaky  hands,  unequal  to  the  task,  there  is  a  select  few  that  carry  their  success  in  a
cool,  conscientious  fashion ! — R.  M.  E.

Yen.  19 — 47. —  Vengeance  and  recompense.  The  reasonableness  of  the  Divine
jealousy  being  shown  already,  we  can  have  little  difficulty  in  recognizing  the  further
reasonableness  of  the  Divine  vengeance.  Paul's  tieatmont  of  the  question  is  concise
and  conclusive.  "Is  God  unrighteous  who  taketh  vengeance?  (I  speak  as  a  man).
God  forbid :  for  then  how  shall  God  judge  the  world  ?  "  (Rom.  iii.  5,  6).  Vengeance  is
recognized,  therefore,  as  belonging  to  God's  justice,  which  shall  be  called  into  play  as
vengeance  through  the  ingratitude  and  folly  of  many  of  mankind.  Let  us  briefly
indicate  the  course  of  the  Divine  vengeance  as  presented  in  the  remainder  of  this  song.

I.  God  proposks  to  move  ins  ungrateful  people  by  introducino  Gentiles  to
their  privileges.  Tliis  is  the  first  experiment  of  the  holy  jealousy,  to  see  what  effect
the  ingathering  of  the  Gentiles  will  have.  And  to  a  Jewish  mind  there  must  be
something  striking  and  convincing  in  the  history  of  Christianity.  Surely  the  elevation
and  civilization  of  the  heathen  world  must  be  due  in  large  measure  to  that  Divine
favour  which,  as  Jews,  they  despised  and  forfeited.  Such  a  spectacle  is  calculated  to
lead  them  to  earnest  thought  and  deep  contrition.  Were  their  hearts  not  dull  and
gross,  they  would  hunible  themselves  before  God,  and  acknowledge  that  they  deserve
other  heirs  to  be  put  into  their  room.

II.  The  actualities  of  the  Divine  venoeanob  hate  been  tbbbible.  The  Lord
repreMUts  his  anger  as  burning  to  the  lowest  hell  (n'nriR  V.Nb'),  reaching  manifestly  to
that  "  under  world,"  as  Kahle  would  call  it,  where  the  spirits  of  the  faithleu  are  oonfiB«d.'

■  See  his  '  Eschatologie,*  ut  $ufra,  pp.  S7, 5S.


3H.  xuu.  1—52.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  625

But  in  the  present  life  there  is  a  foretaste  given  of  the  vengeance  which  embrace!  the
life  to  come,  which  may  be  summed  up,  as  given  in  these  verses  (vers.  23 — 25),  in  the
terms  hunger,  pestilence,  wild  leasts,  and  war.  The  faithless  nation  experienced  all
these,  as  an  earnest  of  the  Divine  vengeance  which  justly  burns  even  to  the  lowest  hell.
The  only  limit  to  it  is  lest  the  enemies  employed  to  execute  part  of  the  vengeance
should  say,  "  Our  hand  is  high,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  all  this  "  (vers.  26,  27).
rhe  Lord  will  modify  and  limit  his  vengeance,  lest  his  instruments  should  regard  it  as
their  work  and  not  his.

III.  The  ebgrbt  about  POSSiBiLrrrES  thrown  away  will  fobm  past  o»  thk
Divine  vengbancb.  Very  pathetically  is  this  put  in  this  song  (vers.  29—31).  The
Israelites,  though  in  a  vast  minority  sometimes,  hail  been  carried  by  their  most  faithful
Father  and  God  to  victory,  and  this  would  have  still  characterized  them  had  they
remained  faithful  to  him.  They  would  have  proved  his  "  invinoibles."  And  no  effort
of  faithless  souls  can  keep  regret  at  bay.  We  see  Milton  very  properly  putting  it  into
the  mouth  of  the  archangel  when  he  says —

•'  Farewell,  happy  flelde.
Where  joy  for  ever  dwells  I "

and  subsequently  sumTnons  his  associates  from  "  the  oblivious  pool,"  where  ttiey  are
lying  astonished.  Unholy  spiiits  may  doubtless  see  the  vanity  of  regret,  but  they
cannot  dismiss  it.  Indeed,  it  is  one  of  the  test  struggles  of  the  Christian  life  to  But
legret  away.     We  need  the  rousing  words  of  the  poetess  continuallj— •

**  nise  I  if  the  past  detains  you,

Her  sunshine  and  storms  forget ;
Kg  chains  so  unworthy  to  hold  you

As  those  of  a  vain  regret.
S.ul  or  bright,  she  is  lifeless  evert

Cast  her  phantom  arms  away,
Koi'  look  back,  save  to  learn  the  lesson

Of  a  nobler  strife  to-day."

Bow  deep  a  sorrow  this  regret  must  be  to  all  who  despise  God  and  reject  \Aa  love  wo
cannot  in  this  life  tell.

IV.  Apparent  pbospbritt  will  prove  real  disaster.  Just  as  the  osher  plant,
which  flourishes  best  near  the  site  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha,  presents  apparently  most
luscious  and  attractive  fruit,  which  yet  prove  but  bags  of  air  and  ashes,  so  the  apparent
prosperity  of  the  faithless  souls  proves  emptiness  and  bitter  disappointment  at  last.  All
the  investments,  so  to  speak,  which  seem  so  fortunate  turn  into  splendid  mistakes  and
miseries.    Upon  the  whole  life,  opposed  as  it  is  to  God,  there  broods  a  curse.

V.  The  programme  op  vengeance  ib  carefully  prepared.  This  is  the  spirit  of
the  remaining  verses  (vers.  35 — iS).  God  makes  his  calculations  calmly  and  deliberately.
The  foot  of  his  enemies  shall  slide  in  due  time,  and  bis  work  of  vengeance,  like  all  his
other  work,  prove  perfect.  As  God  refuses  to  exercise  •'  unprincipled  meicy,"  so  will  he
refuse  to  execute  random  wrath.  The  great  Jonathan  Ed  wards  has  a  remarkable  sermon
on  ver.  35,  entitled  '  Sinners  in  the  Hands  of  an  Angry  God,'  which  may  be  distasteful  to
some  easy-going  theologians,  but  is  nevertheless  weighty  with  doctrinal  and  convincing
truth.  The  idea  should  surely  be  got  rid  of  that  there  is  any  difference  in  principle
between  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New.  The  prerogative  of  vengeance  so  powerfully
asserted  in  this  song  of  the  Lord,  put  into  the  mouth  of  Moses,  has  not  been
renounced  nor  laid  down  for  an  instant.  TJie  Lord  still  claims  it,  as  Bom.  xii.  19 ;
Hsb.  X.  30,  and  other  passages  show.

VL  The  policy  of  the  Lord  shall  hayk  a  splendid  consummation.  After  the
cycle  is  complete,  Jews  and  Gentiles,  as  ver.  43  distinctly  indicates,  shall  be  found
rejoicing  in  concert  before  the  Lord,  who  has  shown  himself  merciful  to  his  land  and
his  people.  We  need  not  in  this  Homily  enter  upon  the  discussion  of  the  great  differ-
ence between  the  Hebrew  of  ver.  43  and  the  LXX.  It  does  not  affect  the  truth  we  draw
from  the  remarkable  passage.  However  the  individuals  may  suffer  through  the  Divine
vengeance,  it  will  not  be  lost  as  a  lesson  upon  the  race.  Jew  and  Gentile  shall  alike
recognize  its  justice  and  the  compensating  mercy  which  always  lay  for  men  in  tht


j2«  the  book  op  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxxil  1—52.

tender  hands  of  God.    The  vengeance  is  forced  upon  him — the  judgment  is  his  itrang*
work ;  but  he  delighteth  in  mercy.

VII.  Moses  sums  up  the  lesson  op  thb  bono  bt  ursino  obedience  upon  the
PEOPLE  AS  THEIR  LIFE.  And  when  we  remember  that  God  is  the  source  of  life ;  that
spiritual  life  lies  in  his  favour  and  fellowship ;  then  it  is  clear  that  the  Israelites  had
but  one  duty  to  discbarge — to  obey  God  and  live.  All  the  energy  of  Moses  and  all  the
urgency  of  God  are  devoted  to  secure  this  obedience.  The  remembrance  of  God's  love,
tlie  recognition  of  his  vengeance  and  deserved  wl'ath,  and  the  consummate  wisdom
manifested  in  the  whole  policy  pursued,  should  move  our  hearts  to  love  and  obey.  Let
us  accept  of  the  mercy,  and  not  force  the  Lord  to  judgment  I — E.  M.  B.

Vera.  48 — 52. — Death  a  judgment  even  to  the  most  faithful  servants  of  God,  After
the  solemn  address  to  the  people,  God  gives  a  personal  address  to  Moses.  It  is  about
his  approaching  death.  He  is  to  see  the  land,  but  not  to  enter  it,  because  he  sanctified
not  the  Lord  at  the  waters  of  Meribah.  It  raises,  therefore,  the  whole  question  of  death
as  the  portion  even  of  the  most  faithful  servants  of  God.

L   It  is   SURELY  REMARKABLE   THAT,  WHEN    SAVED   THROUGH   THE  MERCY   OF   GOD   IN

Christ,  we  do  not  become  immortal.  Salvation  seizes  on  the  spirit,  it  becomes  life
through  the  righteousness  of  Jesus,  but  the  liody  is  still  dead  (or  mortal)  because  of
sin  (Horn.  viii.  10).  Why  does  salvation  take  our  personality  in  instiilments  ?  save
spirit  first,  and  leave  the  body  to  the  repairs  of  a  resurrection  ?  Can  the  procedure  be
rindicated  ?    We  tliink  it  can.    For —

II.  If  we  became  physically  immortal  through  the  reception  of  salvation,  a
mercenary  element  would  be  introduced  into  our  motives,  and  men  WOULD  seek
salvation  TO  ESCAPE  THE  PAIN  OF  DYING.  Under  the  present  arrangement,  saint  as
well  as  sinner  has  to  pass  the  dark  poi  tal.  Dying  is  maiie  the  general  lot  of  man,  and,
if  salvation  is  desired,  it  is  for  spiritual  purposes.  Just  as  God  does  not  promise
immediate  success  to  our  efforts  or  our  prayers,  lest  we  should  be  tempted  to  live  by
sight  and  not  by  faith.

III.  It  is  not  DESIRABLE  THAT,   WITH  PARDON,   WE  SHOULD  ESCAPE  ALL  SUFFERING

FOR  OUR  SIN.  It  is  a  wise  arrangement  on  God's  part,  even  when  forgiving  sinners,  to
take  ven!:eanceonourinventions(Ps.xcix.  8).  -  For  suppose  that,  in  praying  for  pardon,
we  escaped  all  physical  consequences  of  our  sin,  the  result  would  be  that  pardon  would
bo  used  as  a  great  physical  agent  and  factor,  and  the  physical  escape  would  be  more
thought  upon  than  the  spiritual.  It  is  better,  therefore,  that  things  should  take  their
course  so  far  as  the  body  is  concerned,  and  that,  meanwhile,  the  spirit  should  he  the
chief  recipient  of  the  benefit.  God  does  not  take  the  seeds  of  mortality,  therefore,  out
of  our  bodies :  he  leaves  them  there  as  sin's  own  work ;  and  he  gives  us  the  earnest
of  complete  redemption  in  the  resurrection  and  emancipation  of  our  spirits.

IV.  It  is  a  SPLENDID   TEST    OF    OUR   FAITH    IN  GOD  TO   BE  ASKED  TO  DIE.      For  Up  tO

the  hour  of  death,  we  have  found  persons  and  things  to  lean  upon  in  a  meosure;  we
have  not  as  yet  been  left  to  lean  on  God  alone.  But  when  death  comes,  we  are  forced
to  lean  on  God  only,  if  we  are  to  have  any  support  at  all.  God  says,  "  Can  you  trust
me,  even  when  I  take  away  your  physical  life?"  "Though  he  slay  me,"  said  Job,
"  yet  will  I  trust  in  him."  Death  brings  us  all  to  this  test,  and  happy  are  we  if  we
reach  the  same  assurance.

"  The  real  is  but  the  half  of  life ;  it  needs
The  ideal  to  make  a  perfect  whole ;
The  sphere  of  sense  is  incomplete,  and  pleads
The  closer  union  witli  the  sphere  of  souL
•  •  «  •  •

"Then  let  us,  passing  o'er  life's  fragile  arob,
Regard  it  as  a  means,  and  not  an  end ;
Aa  but  the  path  of  faith  on  which  we  march
To  where  all  glories  of  our  being  tend."

B.1LE.

Vera.  1— 6.— ffocTi  vicegerent  as  ■poet.    The  true  poet  is  GcA'i  messenger.    He  that
gings  not  of  truth  and  goodness  is  not  a  genuine  poet ;  he  is  but  a  rhymester.    As


CH.  XXXII.  1—62.J         THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  62'.

the  swan  is  said  to  sing  sweetly  only  in  the  act  of  dying,  so,  on  the  eve  of  his  departure,
Moses  sings  bis  noblest  strains.

I.  Obsebth  Tm  poet's  auditoby.  He  summons  heaven  and  earth  to  hef^^.  We
read  in  ancient  story  that  when  Orpheus  made  music  with  his  lyre,  the  wild
beasts  listened,  and  the  trees  and  rocks  of  Olympus  followed  him  about.  This  may
serve  as  a  just  reproof  to  some  men,  who,  having  ears,  act  as  if  they  had  them  not.

1.  Heaven  and  earth  may  denote  both  angda  and  men.  For  even  "  the  principalities  of
heaven  learn  from  the  Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God."  2.  Heaven  and  earth
may  denote  all  classes  of  the  people,  high  and  low.  Frequently  in  Scripture  great  men
are  represented  as  the  stars  of  heaven.  The  man  of  ambition  is  said  to  lift  his  head  to
the  stars.  The  righteous  are  to  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament.  3.  Heaven
and  earth  may  denote  the  intelligent  and  the  material  creation.  On  account  of  man's
sin,  "the  whole  creation  groaneth';"  and  the  effect  of  man's  obedience  will  be  felt
beneficially  on  the  material  globe.  It  will  increase  its  fertility,  its  beauty,  its  fragrance,
its  music.  "  Truth  "  shall  spring  out  of  the  earth,  and  righlieousness  shall  look  "down
from  heaven."    "  Then  shall  all  the  trees  of  the  wood  rejoice."

n.  The  poet's  beneficent  influJincb.  "  My  doctrine  shall  drop  as  the  rain,"  etc.
(ver.  2).  This  imagery  teaches  us:  1.  77ie  silent,  unobtrusive  power  of  truth.  1;
finds  it  way,  quietly  and  unobserved,  to  the  roots  of  human  judgment  and  feeling.

2.  It  is  refreshing.  What  a  draught  of  clear  water  is  to  a  thirsty  man,  truth  is  to  a
healthy,  active  soul.  3.  It  is  fertilizing.  It  nourishes  all  good  affections,  and
strengthens  every  virtue.  4.  It  is  most  suitable.  No  fitness  can  be  more  manifest  than
dew  for  tender  grass.    Poetic  truth  is  suited  to  every  grade  of  human  understanding.

III.  The  poet's  lofty  theme.  His  theme  is  God ;  but  God  is  only  known  as  he
reveals  himself  in  his  Name.  1.  He  descants  upon  his  majesty,  his  supreme  power,  and
the  splendours  of  his  state.  2.  He  touches  upon  his  eternal  stability.  What  the
unchanging  rock  is  amid  the  shifting  sands,  God  is — unalterably  the  same.  3.  He
dwells  upon  the  perfections  of  his  character  ("  just  and  right  is  he  ") ;  upon  the  perfection
of  his  works,  which  are  incapable  of  any  improvement ;  upon  the  perfection  of  his
government  ("  all  his  ways  are  judgment ") ;  and  upon  the  perfection  of  his  apeech.
He  is  "  a  God  of  truth."    He  alters  nothing,  retracts  nothing.

IV.  The  poet's  moral  purpose.  To  restore  harmony  between  man  and  God.  1.  He
proclaims  man's  fallen  state  :  "  they  have  corrupted  themselves."  Human  nature  is
nut  as  it  was  when  it  came  from  the  hands  of  God.  Man  holds  this  tremendous  power
of  ruining  his  own  nature.  2.  The  mark  of  sonship  has  disappeared.  "Their  spot  is
not  the  spot  of  his  children."  Childlike  docility  and  submissiveness  form  the  family
lineament.  3.  This  depravity  has  spread  like  the  virus  of  disease.  The  whole  race  is
infected.  "  They  are  a  perverse  and  crooked  generation."  4.  Such  conduct  is  suicidal
folly.  It  is  most  antagonistic  to  self-interest.  No  madman  could  have  acted  worse.  5.
Such  conduct  is  the  basest  ingratitude.  "  Do  ye  tlius  requite  the  Lord  1 "  Consider  his
claims.  Did  he  not  create  thee  ?  Has  he  not  been  a  Father  to  thee  ?  Has  he  not
redeemed  thee  ?  Tender  expostulation  with  the  conscience  is  the  poet's  mission.  For
this  vocation  he  has  been  specially  inspired  by  God.  A  heavenly  spirit  breathes  through
his  every  word.    No  higher  honour  can  man  attain  on  earth. — D.

Vers.  7 14. — History's  testimony  for  Ood.    A  defective  character  often  results  from

mental  indolence.  Men  do  not  use  their  faculties.  Did  they  consider,  reflect,  and
ponder,  they  would  be  better  men.  To  call  into  activity  all  our  powers  is  an
imperative  and  sacred  duty.  For  this  purpose  God  has  given  them.  Whose  am  I?
ivhence  have  I  come?  what  is  my  business  in  life?  what  are  my  obligations  to  my
Maker? — these  are  questions  possessing  transcendent  interest,  and  are  vital  to  our
joy.  Ask  intelligently  and  thoroughly ;  then  act  upon  the  answers.  God's  careful
provision  for  Israel  had  been  long-continued,  thoughtful,  special.  No  less,  probably
greater,  has  been  his  considerate  and  far-seeing  provision  for  us,

L' Wk  sote  a  special  habitation  prepared  by  God.  1.  Our  earth  has  for  untold
ages  been  undergoing  preparation  as  a  suitable  <Uvel ling-place  for  man.  Socks  have
been  formed  for  man's  use,  treasures  of  coal  and  metals  have  been  stored  up  for  his
advantage.  The  soil  has  been  pulverized  to  receive  his  seed.  A  marvellous  and  pains-
taking preparation  has  been  made.      2.   Equally  conspicuous   is  God's   wisdom   in


its  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxxii.  1— 52.

selecting  special  territory  for  special  nations.  Amidst  all  the  hurly-burly  of  war,  the
unseen  hand  of  God  has  "  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance."  Oceans  and
rivers,  jnountains  and  deserts,  hare  beea  God's  walls  of  partition.  3^  All  these  selec-
tions have  been  subordinate  to  Israel's  welfare.  All  the  lines  of  God's  government  met
here.  To  Israel's  good  everything  was  to  bend,  4.  The  reason  of  this  is  declared.
"  The  Lord's  portion  is  his  people."  Some  location  on  earth  was  to  be  reserved  for
Jehovah.  He  too  had  chosen  a  dwelling-place,  an  inheritance.  And  his  habitation  was
in  the  hearts  of  his  people  Israel.  "  Fur  to  that  man  will  I  look,  and  with  him  dwell,
who  is  of  an  humble  and  contrite  spirit."    "  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance."

II.  Special  tbaininq  bt  God.  1.  Apart  from  God,  earth  would  be  a  barren  desert.
Man's  environment,  where  God  is  not,  would  be  discordant,  unsuitable,  painful.  The
flowers  and  fruits  of  life  are  divinely  provided.  2.  Inscrutable  are  the  methods  of
God's  training.  "  He  led  him  about."  A  masterly  hand  is  in  the.  matter,  and  we  are
very  incompetent  critics.  Those  marches  and  counter-marches  in  the  wilderness  were
all  needful  to  nourish  robust  courage  and  simple  faith  in  the  Hebrews.  In  God's
arrangements  no  waste  is  permitted.  3.  Tenderest  kindness  is  here  expressed.  "  He
kept  him  as  the  apple  of  his  eye."  We  count  the  eye  among  our  most  precious
endowments.  It  is  protected  by  the  most  clever  contrivances.  No  part  of  the  body  is
so  delicate  or  so  susceptible  of  pain.  So  God  regards  his  chosen  people.  As  a  man
guards  from  harm  his  eye,  so  Qod  guards  his  own.  4c.  Consummate  skill  was  expended
to  develop  the  best  qualities  of  Israel.  This  is  set  forth  by  a  piece  of  impressive
imagery.  As  the  eagle  knows  the  perils  of  indolence,  and  is  anxious  to  train  her
young  brodd  to  early  self-exertion,  she  breaks  up  the  nest,  takes  the  eaglets  on  her
strong  pinions,  bears  them  heavenward,  shakes  them  free,  then,  as  they  sink,  darts
beneath  them,  bears  them  up  again,  and  encourages  them  to  seek  the  sun;  so,  by  a
thousand  kind  devices,  God  taught  his  people  "  to  seek  the  things  which  are  above."
So  precious  an  end  is  worthy  of  the  largest  expenditure  of  means.

III.  Dominion  ovbr  nathbe  and.  over  man  accorded  by  God.  In  proportion  as
man  has  loyally  served  his  God,  man  has  gained  earthly  dominion.  To  Adam  was
accorded  sovereignty  over  all  living  things  in  air,  or  earth,  or  sea  ;  and  of  the  second
Adam  we  read,  "  Thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet."  1.  Victory  over  enemies  is
secured.  "  He  made  him  ride  on  the  high  places  of  the  earth."  Every  mountain
fortress  was,  one  by  one,  possessed.  To  ride  is  significant  of  military  c^quest.  The
triumphs  of  Israel  were  swift,  signal,  and  complete.  2.  The  peacefnl  conquest  of
nature  followed.  To  the  arts  of  industry,  the  earth  yielded  in  sevenfold  profusion.
The  olives  on  the  rugged  hills  filled  their  presses  with  oil.  Wild  bees  toiled  early  and
late  to  lay  up  stores  of  honey.  Their  cattle,  plentifully  fed,  yielded  butter  and  milk  in
abundance.  Under  the  curse  of  civil  strife  and  petty  feuds  of  the  Canaanites,  cro|is
had  been  devastated,  and  flocks  had  been  destroyed.  Now,  peace  rei;j;ned  in  every
valley,  and  the  very  trees  blossomed  with  ruddy  gladness.  Hill  and  plain  poured  their
unceasing  tributes  at  the  feet  of  lordly  man.  3.  The  sole'Auihor  of  this  splendid
inheritance  was  God.  "The  Lord  alone  did  lead. hito."  The  deities  of  the  Araoiites
(if  they  had  any  power  at  all)  had  bestowed  on  their  votaries  an  inheritance  of  lust
and  war  and  ruin.  Jin  whatever  respect  Israel's  inheritance  was  a  contrast,  it  was  due
to  the  beneficence  of  Jehovah.    He  had  blessed  them  with  an  ungrudging  hand.    'Twas

.  the  indulgence  of  his  native  instinct  to  give  and  to  make  glad.  No  sane  man  among
them  could  reach  any  other  conclusion  than  that  Jehovah  was  the  royal  Giver  of  all.
And  with  one  voice  they  should  have  made  the  clear  welkin  ring  with  hearty  halle-
lujahs : "  The  Lord  hath  done  ureat  things  for  us."  The  gift  was  unique.  It  was
conspicuously  a  deed  of  grace. — D.

Vers.  15 — 25. — Sowing  and  reaping.  The  connection  between  sin  and  suflfering  is
natural,  organic,  and  universal.  Suffering,  in  some  form,  is  the  proper  development  of
sin.    Like  the  plants  of  nature,  sin  has  its  seed  within  itself.

I.  We  have  a  case  or  aggravated  sin.  1.  Jt  was  a  wanton  abuse  of  special
kindness.  The  sjilendid  gifts  of  providence,  which  ought  to  have  bound  them  by
golden  ties  of  obligation  to  Qod,  were  erected  into  barriers  to  shut  out  God  from  them.
An  inner  principle  of  selfish  perverseness  turned  all  food  into  poison.  Instead  of
gratitude,  there  was  scoffing ;   instead  of  loyalty,  there  was  insolence.    So  it  often


OH.  XXXII  1—52.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  629

happens  that  earthly  wealth  is  an  injury  instead  of  a  benefit.  It  detains  a  raaa'a  faith
and  delight  on  itself.  He  exalts  his  riches  into  a  god.  Entering  a  man's  heart,  aa  his
professed  friends,  riches  become  his  secret  foes  :  they  sap  the  foundations  of  his  piety  ;
they  degrade  and  stultify  the  man.  2.  Thejlagrancy  of  sin  is  seen  in  the  perversion
of  privilege.  The  Hebrews  had  been  chosen  by  God  to  a  place  of  pecnliar  honour.
They  had  been  admitted  to  a  nearer  access  to  his  friendship  than  any  other  nation.
God  had  called  them  his  sons  and  daughters.  Nothing  of  good  had  God.withheld  from
them.  For  these  privileged  persons  to  turn  their  backs  on  God,  and  act  as  traitors  to
their  Lord,  was  sin  of  more  than  ordinary  flagrancy.  If  such  fall  from  their  allegiance,
how  great  must  be  their  fall !  3.  Tke  course  of  sin  proceeds  by  perceptible  stages.  Sin
often  begins  by  culpable  omissions.  There  is  first  negative  good,  then  positive  offence.
The  people  began  their  downward  course  by  being  "  unmindful "  of  their  Maker.  Their
sense  of  dependence  on  God  declined.  Then  they  quite  forgot  the  Goil  who  had  so  often
rescued  them.  The  next  stage  was  openly  to  forsake  God.  They  avoided  his  presence,
neglected  his  worship.  Soon  they  "lightly  esteemed"  their  Deliverer.  If  they
thought  of  him  at  all,  it  was  only  to  look  down  on  him — yea,  to  despise  him.  Yet  in
a  condition  of  atheism  they  could  not  long  remain.  Their  nature  demanded  that  they
should  worship  somewhat.  So  they  set  up  strange  deities;  they  sacrificed  unto
demons.  They  provoked  to  jealousy,  and  to  just  indignation,  the  God  of  Israel.
Beyond  this  it  was  impossible  fur  human  rebellion  to  proceed.  4.  Sin  leads  to  u.
terrible  alternative,  viz.  the  worship  and  service  of  devils.  There  is  no  middle  place
at  which  a  man  can  halt.  He  either  grows  up  into  the  image  of  God  or  into  the
image  of  Satan.

IL  We  hate  a  case  or  equitable  punishment.  1.  It  was  the  reversal  of  former
good.  He  who  aforetime  had  promised  them  prolific  plenty  now  threatens  to
"  consume  the  earth  with  her  increase."  Instead  of  the  sunlight  of  his  favour,  he
was  about  to  "  hide  his  face  from  them."  The  wheels  of  providence  were  to  be  reversefl,
and  the  effect  would  be  to  overthrow  and  to  crush  them.  2.  God's  judgments  are
tardy.  He  did  not  smite  at  once.  His  first  strokes  were  comparatively  light,  and
then  he  patiently  waited  what  the  effect  might  prove.  "  I  will  see  wliat  their  end
shall  be."  The  long-suifering  of  God  is  an  immeasurable  store.  He  "  is  slow  to  anger."
Attentively  he  listens,  if  so  be  he  may  catch  some  sigh  of  penitence.  "  I  have  suiely
heard  Ephraim  bemoaning  himself."  3.  We  may  observe  here  the  equity  of  Ood's
procedure.  By  making  his  punishments,  in  great  measure,  like  the  sins,  the  Hebrews
would  the  readier  detect  their  folly  and  guilt.  They  had  forsaken  God  :  therefore  God
will  "  hide  his  face  from  them."  They  had  "  lightly  esteemed  "  God :  therefore  he  will
abhor  them.  They  had  "  excited  his  jealousy,"  by  choosing  another  object  of  worship  :
he  will  excite  their  jealousy  by  choosing  another  nation  to  fill  their  place.  They  had
provoked  his  anger  by  their  choice  of  vanities :  he  will  provoke  their  anger  by  sup-
planting them  with  a  "foolish  nation."  The  emotions  which  exist  in  man  have  their
correspondences  in  the  nature  of  God.  Thus,  by  stupendous  condescension,  God
accommodates  his  messages  to  human  understanding — employs  a  thousand  comparisons
by  which  to  impress  our  hearts.  4.  Ood's  agents  to  execute  his  behests  are  numerous
and  terrible.  A  few  only.are  mentioned  here,  but  these  may  serve  as  samples  of  others.
Material  forces  are  pressed  into  service.  The  atmosphere  will  be  a  conveyer  of
pestilence.  Fire  is  a  well-known  minister  of  God.  Earthquake  and  volcano  have  often
been  commissioned  to  fulfil  Jehovah's  will.  As  a  skilled  warrior  aims  well  his  deadly
arrows  upon  his  foes,  so  God  sends  his  lightnings  abroad  out  of  his  quiver.  Famine  is
decreed :  "  they  shall  be  burnt  with  hunger."  Sickness  and  fever  shall  follow :  they
'shall  be  "  devoured  with  burning  heat."  Pestiferous  insects  shall  assail  them,  and  wild
beasts  shall  overrun  the  land.  The  sword  of  the  invader  shall  fall  with  ruthless  violence
upon  young  and  old — upon  babe  and  veteran.  They  who  escape  from  one  peril  shall
fall  under  another.    From  the  hand  of  God  release  is  impossible.— D.

Vers.  26 — 29. — The  pleading  of  Divine  wisdom.  The  judicial  anger  of  God  is  not
an  uncontrollable  passion ;  it  acts  in  harmony  with  infinite  wisdom.  The  vast  and
varied  interests  of  all  God's  creatures  are  tenderly  considered  in  the  act  of  judicial
retribution.    We  have  her&—  ,        ,   ,  .,      ,

I.  God's  estimate  of  human  desert.    Were  guuty  men  alone  to  be  considered,  n«;

DBUTEUONOMY.  2  M


530  TUE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.  [oh.  Xixii.  1—52.

fjenalty  would  be  too  severe  as  the  award  for  their  Ligh-handed  offences.  Every  vestiga
of  merit  has  disappeared.  Tlie  consensus  of  all  righteous  beings  requires  unreserred
condemnation.  !Nor  can  the  condemned  offender  himself  escape  this  conclusion.  When
his  conscience  awakes  to  ponder  his  guilt,  he  joins  in  his  own  condemnation ;  he
confesses  the  justice  of  his  sentence.  If  the  demerit  of  the  sinner  were  the  only
question  to  be  solved,  the  answer  would  be  at  once  forthcoming ;  the  verdict  would  be
complete  destruction.

II.  We  bee  God's  foeesight  EUBBAcma  wideb  interests.  1.  The  advantage  of
other  races  is,  hy  God,  taken  into  the  account.  What  effect  upon  other  nations  will  the
condign  punishment  of  Israel  have  ?  Will  it  make  them  self-confident,  arrogant,  dtfiant  ?
The  true  king  has  at  heart  tlie  well-being  of  all  his  subjects.  2.  ITie  honour  of  Ood
himself  must  he  taken  into  account.  The  public  reputation  of  God  is  indissolubly  bound
up  with  the  well-being  of  his  intelligent  creatures.  His  honour  is  dear  to  him  ;  for  his
honour  is  nothing  more  than  his  native  excellence  illustrated  and  made  known.  3.  How
graciously  tlie  Most  High  accommodates  his  speech  to  suit  the  conceptions  of  men  I  As  a
man  may  fear  the  wrath  of  his  foes,  so  God  (to  bring  his  doings  within  the  compass  of
the  human  understanding)  speaks  of  himself  as  the  subject  of  fear.  In  our  present  state,
we  cannot  rise  to  the  comprehension  of  God  at  he  i$:  oar  knowledge  of  him  is
conditioned  by  our  limitations  of  mind.

III.  God's  gbief  fob  human  follt.  The  tender  affection  of  God  in  pleading  with
men  to  avoid  sin  is  very  impressive ;  but  more  impressive  still  are  his  exclamations  of
grief  when  the  final  step  has  been  taken,  and  when,  for  many,  recovery  is  impossible.
Thus  when  Jesus  looked  down  from  Olivet  upon  the  guilty  metropolis,  and  knew  that
the  die  was  cast,  he  nevertheless  wept  and  said,  "How  often  would  I  have  gathered
your  children,  as  a  hen  her  brood  ;  but  ye  would  not  I  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto
you  desolate  1 "  So  too  in  the  Psalms  God  thus  speaks,  "  Oh  that  my  people  had
hearkened  unto  me  1  that  Israel  had  walked  in  my  ways  1 "  The  measure  of  God's  luve
transcends  all  known  limits ;  its  forms  are  infinite  in  their  variety  1  When  every
remedial  measuie  has  been  tried  in  vain,  love  can  only  weep. — D.

Ver.  29. — God's  pntLeiic  appeal  to  men.  Wisdom  is  far-seeing.  Not  content  with
estimating  present  experiences  and  fortunes,  it  embraces  the  remoter  issues  of  our  choice ;
it  takes  in  all  the  possibilities  of  the  future.

I.  As  THESE  HAS  BEEN  A  BEQINNINa  OF  THE  FBEBENT  LIFS,  80  THERE  WILL  COUB  AN
END.

U.  The  END  OF  pbobationabt  life  demands  cub  SERIOUS  consideration.
IIL  The  highest  wisdom  fobeoabtb  the  whole  beach  of  life,  both  fbesent  and
futubb. — D.

Vers.  30 — 35. — The  deviVi  counterfeit  coin.  It  Is  not  in  >the  power  of  Satan  to
originate  any  new  thing.  Knowing  that  his  power  is  restricted,  the  utmost  he  can  do
is  to  make  spurious  imitations  of  God's  good  things.  His  base  purpose  is  to  deceive
man  with  spectral  illusions.  His  nefarious  design  is  to  raise  before  the  world's  eye  an
empty  mirage  of  a  carnal  paradise.

1.   EvEBY  man  crates  fob  some  SBOtTND  OF  CONFIDENCE,  EXTERNAL  TO  HIMSELF.     To

the  men  of  the  East,  this  external  foundation  of  trust  was  best  described  as  a  rock.
What  the  solid  rock  is  amid  the  loose  alluvial  soil  of  Egypt,  or  amid  the  shifting  sand
of  the  desert,  that  God  is  designed  to  be  unto  every  man.  Complete  independence  is
Impossible  to  created  man.  He  can  never  be  self-contained  nor  self-nourished.  Pure
atheism  has  never  been  a  permanent  resting-place  for  the  human  heart.  When  the
invisible  God  is  forsaken,  the  human  mind  swings  toward  idolatry.  The  carnal  mind
finds  delight  in  a  ground  of  confidence  that  is  visible  and  tangible.  Some  god  we
must  have,  if  it  be  only  the  shadowy  deity  named  Fate,  or  Law,  or  Chance.

IL  Complete  contrast  exists  between  the  objects  of  human  tbust.  The  only
point  of  similarity  is  the  name.  The  devil  borrows  this,  so  as  the  better  to  throw  dnst
in  the  eyes  of  his  followers.  Our  God  is  a  Rock  ;  the  world  also  has  its  counterfeit  rock.
Uy  the  judgments  and  verdict  of  worldly  men,  our  Eock  differs  in  toto  from  theirs.
'J'heir  rock,  they  acknowledge,  is  unstable  and  unreliable.  They  trust  it  simply
because  they  know  nol  a  better.     It  is  nusuamed  a  rock.     Their  rock  ofttimes  deserts


OH.  xixn.  1— 52.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  (31

them  in  the  hour  of  greatest  need.  Ah  1  fortune,  say  they,  is  fickle.  Yery  tyrannical
and  self-willed  is  fate.  But  our  God  is  a  Bock  in  very  deed.  He  never  forsakes  hii
liege  disciples.  In  the  darkest  hour  he  is  nearest — the  "  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a
weary  land."  Their  misnamed  rock  encourages  them  to  enter  the  battle-field,  and  then
forsikes  them.    They  are  "  sold  to  the  enemy."

IIL  Notwithstanding  the  contrast  in  these  objects  of  tbust,  the  false  is  a
oi.BVER  IMITATION  OF  THE  TRUE.  All  through  life,  We  find  that  the  false  counterfeita
the  true.  The  thief  puts  on  the  pretence  of  honesty.  The  villain  trains  himself  to  use
fair  speech.  The  adulterer  wears  the  garb  of  virtue.  Beauty  is  the  robe  of  God,  but
the  devil  fabricates  meretricious  tinsel.  He,  too,  has  bis  "  promised  land,"  but  ii  is  a
fool's  paradise.  He  has  his  vine,  but  his  vine  is  the  vine  of  Sodom,  which  p:enerates
drunkenness  and  unchastity.  He  also  has  his  fields,  but  they  are  fields  of  Gomorrah.
The  fruits  are  pleasant  to  the  eye,  but  they  turn  to  ashes  in  the  mouth.  There  is  the
appearance  of  grapes,  but  lol  the  juice  is  gall— the  clusters  are  bitterness  itself.  And
not  only  is  the  experience  disappointing,  it  is  even  disastrous  and  deadly.  This
pretended  wine  is  only  poison,  it  is  a  gilded  pill.  Cruel  deceit  has  provided  this
counterfeit  banquet.  Beneath  the  glamour  of  a  fair  exterior,  there  is  the  "  serpent's
venom."  Thus  fares  it  with  all  who  leave  their  God.  They  find  out  the  bitter  miHtaka
»t  last.    So  tang  Byron  in  his  last  days—

"  The  worm,  the  canker,  and  the  grief
Are  mine  alone."

IV.  Such  human  experiences  of-  the  false,  God  uses  in  the  uoveknmkkt  of
THE  WORLD.  "  Is  not  this  laid  up  in  store  »ith  me,  and  sealed  up  amung  my
treasures?"  God  knew  well  what  the  effects  of  an  idolatrous  course  would  be,  what
bitter  vexation  and  disaster  would  come  at  last.  But  he  foresaw  that  it  was  better  for
men  that  they  should  pass  through  this  experience  than  that  he  should  remove  the
possibility  of  it.  He  might  have  prevented,  by  exercise  of  power,  the  stratagems  of  the
tempter.  He  might  have  curtailed  Satan's  freedom,  and  put  on  him  chains  of  daik-
ness  from  the  first.  But  his  infinite  wisdom  has  decided  otherwise.  He  foresees  more
glorious  results  from  this  method,  so  he  patiently  waits ;  he  calmly  watches  the  stages
of- the  process.  "Their  foot,"  says  he,  "shall  slide  in  due  time."  "The  day  of  their
calamity  is  at  hand."  Now,  it  is  difficult  to  discern  between  a  grain  of  living  seed
and  a  grain  of  dead  sand ;  but  put  both  into  the  furrowed  field,  and  give  them  time,
so  when  the  day  of  harvest  comes,  the  man  who  sowed  the  sand  will  be  covered  with
shame,  while  he  who  sowed  good  seed  will  bear  gladly  his  sheaves  into  the  heavenly
garner.  Our  business  now  is  to  discriminate  between  Ckid's  com  and  the  devil's  chaff.
«  The  day  will  declare  it."— D.

Vers.  36 — 43. — 2%e  final  revelation  of  Oo^s  mpremacy.  In  this  inspired  song — an
epitome  of  the  Bible — Moses  looks  adown  the  long  vista  of  history,  and  discerns  what
will  be  the  outcome  of  the  whole,  viz.  to  establish  on  a  safe  basis  the  acknowledged
supremacy  of  Jehovah.  Truth  shall  eventually  conquer,  whatever  be  her  present
fortunes  ;  and  the  supreme  authority  of  Jehovah  is  a  fundamental  truth,  which  must
in  due  time  effectually  shine  forth.

I.  Human  experience  will  ultimately  confirm  the  vanitt  asd  futilitt  of
IDOLATRY.  Men  will  accept,  at  the  close  of  a  changeful  and  bitter  experience,  what
they  would  not  accept  at  the  outset  of  their  course,  viz.  that  there  is  one  God —
invisible,  supreme,  eternaL  In  the  conscious  piide  of  self-will,  men  will  sound  all  the
possible  problems  of  life.  They  will  not  at  first  accept,  with  the  docility  of  a  child-like
nature,  the  ipse  dixit  even  of  God  himself.  But  when  all  trust  in  self  and  in
created  power  has  proved  a  failure ;  when  all  power  is  gone,  and  we  lie  on  the  battle-
field, wounded  and  helpless; — then  we  begin  to  give  heed  to  the  heavenly  voice.  Then
the  gentle  message  of  God  comes,  with  the  charm  of  evening  music,  upon  the  ear— yea,
as  an  anodyne  and  a  balm  upon  the  bleeding  heart.  In  a  mood  of  self-despair,  we
clutch  the  hope  of  the  gospel,  viz.  God  manifest  to  man.  God  invites  us  to  earnest
and  profound  inquiry.  He  asks  us  to  give  a  mature  deliverance  touching  the  power
and  helpfulness  of  the  God  whom  we  have  long  trusted;  and  the  final  experience  of
men,  in  all  lands  and  ages,  is  uniform.  "  The  gods  who  have  not  created  the  heavens
And  the  earth  shall  perish  1 "


632  THE  BOOK  OF  DBUTEfiONOMY.  [ch.  xxsii.  1-5Z

IL  HnuAN  Experience  attests  the  sufbemact  akd  tbiumfh  or  Jehotah,
"  See  DOW,  that  I,  even  /  am  he,  and  there  is  no  god  with  me."  The  eye  of  man
can  clearly  discern  the  fact — the  foundation-fact  of  all  religion — so  soon  as  the  veil  of
prejudice  and  sin  is  removed.  The  revelation  is  clear  enough,  if  only  the  organ  of
mental  vision  he  in  healthful  vigour.  Without  question,  God  is  the  sole  Arbiter  of  life
and  death.  Ko  other  deity  has  ever  assumed  an  act  of  creation.  The  powers  of  evil
have  flourished  the  wand  of  a  necromancer,  and  have  pretended  to  eCTcct  sudden
changes  in  the  conditions  of  nature ;  but  not  one  has  ever  pretended  to  create  a  star  oi
to  produce  a  single  human  life.  God  is  still  left  upon  the  throne,  as  sole  and  undis-
puted Monarch.

Eternal  existence  is  another  prerogative  of  Jehovah,  Where  are  now  the  gods
of  the  heathen  ?  Who  now  worships  Jupiter,  or  Dagon,  or  Isis,  or  Moloch?  Their
names  are  historic  only.  They  had  a  passing  popularity,  but  it  has  long  since
vanished.  But  with  solemn  form  of  adjuration,  the  Most  High  lifts  bis  hand  and
swears,  "  I  live  for  ever  1 "  As  in  a  court  of  justice  men  accept  the  testimony  of  a
fellow-man,  when  that  testimony  is  given  under  the  sanction  of  a  religious  oath ;  so,  in
self-consistency,  are  we  bound  to  accept  the  asseveration  of  the  eternal  God.  In  pity
for  his  creatures,  he  also  takes  the  form  of  oath,  and  since  "  he  can  swear  by  none
greater,  he  swears  by  himself."

III.  The  kotal  supremacy  of  Jehovah  is  a  ground  tor  human  jot.  Every
perfection  of  ,God  is  suitable  material  for  grateful  pvaise.  His  power  is  a  security  for
<;ood  men.  All  our  interests  are  safe,  being  under  the  protection  of  such  a  Friend.  His
lioliness  also  affords  distinct  ground  for  gladness.  Because  he  is  holy,  we  can  cherish  a
confident  hope  that  we  shall  be  holy  too.  Hence  we  "  give  thanks  at  the  remembrance
of  his  holiness."  We  'rejoice  to  know  that  the  sceptre  of  the  universe  is  in  the  hands
of  a  God  who  is  absolutely  and  incorruptibly  just.  We  know  that  "  the  right "  will
not  long  be  trodden  underfoot  of  the  oppressor.  We  are  assured  that  the  malice  and
craft  of  Satan  shall  not  triumph.  We  heartily  rejoice  that  Jehovah  Is  King  of  all
the  earth;  £ar  "all  things  must  now  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  lore  him.''

"Truth,  crushed  to  earth,  sliall  rise  again;
The  eternal  years  of  God  are  hers ;
But  Error,  wounded,  writhes  with  pain,
And  dies  amid  her  worshippers."

Most  of  «11,  we  fejoice  in  his  mercy.  "  He  will  be  merciful  to  his  land  and  to  Us
people."  We  are  the  very  persons  who  need  Divine  mercy  ;  for  lack  of  that  mercy  we
die.  Kot  more  iirgently  does  the  parched  land  need  the  liquid  shower,  than  do  wc,
who  have  so  grossly  sinned,  need  Jehovah's  mercy.  Yet  not  more  sure  is  the  need
than  the  supply.  That  mercy  is  made  amply  secure  to  all  who  desire  it  As  certainly
as  light  streams  from  the  natural  sun,  so  freely  and  copiously  does  mercy  stream  forth
from  Jehovah's  heart.  Therefore  we  do  well  to  "  rejuice  and  to  be  exceeding  glad."
For  saith  Jehovah,  "I  will  pardon  your  unrighteousness,  and  your  sins  and  your
iniquities  will  I  remember  no  more."  God's  revelation  closes  with  the  theme  of
mercy. — D.

Vers.  44—47. — Beligitm  a  reality.  The  bulk  of  men  treat  religion  as  if  it  were
a  fancy  or  a  myth.  They  deem  it  useful  for  the  sick,  the  aged,  and  the  dying.  But
for  the  healthful  man  and  the  active  man  of  business  it  is  voted  a  bore.  Now,  Moses
puts  religion  in  its  right  place  when  he  declares  it  vital  to  human  interests — vital,  in
the  highest  and  largest  sense.    "  It  is  your  life."

I.  The  objects  about  which  religion  treats  are  real,  not  shadowy.  "  It
is  not  a  vain  thing."  The  eye  of  man  cannot  embrace  God's  univeree.  The  material
kingdoms  are  not  all.  God's  creation  extends  above  and  beyond  the  reach"of  mortal
tense.  With  respect  to  much  that  God  has  made,  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard
nor  mind  conceived."  Science  deals  with  one  class  of  objects,  religion  with  another
class.  The  subject-matter  of  religion  is  the  most  excellent,  substantial,  and  enduring.
It  treats  of  God,  heaven,  eternity,  the  soul  of  man— its  sins  and  sorrows,  the  way  to
holiness,  the  hope  of  everlasting  life.    These  things  come  not  under  the  cogni2»nce  of


OH.  xxxn.  1—52.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  533

our  sensuous  organs ;  they  are  more  substantial  than  the  granite  rocks — more  real  than
jewels.

II.  The  truths  ooNOEBNiNa  religion  are  authentic,  not  illusory.  They  come
to  us  supported  by  abundant  evidence,  both  internal  and  external.  They  come  with  a
better  title  to  belief  than  any  books  of  equal  antiquity.  If  we  reject  Moses  and  Isaiah,
we  are  bound,  in  self-consistency,  to  reject  Thucydides  and  Herodotos,  Bede  and
Gibbon.  But  to  every  Christian,  the  most  conclusive  evidence  is  experimental.  He
has  the  "witness  in  himself."  The  truth,  admitted  to  his  mind,  has  elevated  his
tastes,  enlarged  his  views,  purified  his  affections,  ennobled  and  beautified  his  whole
nature.  As  light  suits  the  eye  and  music  the  ear,  so  the  truth  of  Scripture  exquisitely
suits  the  needs  and  aspirations  of  the  soul.    It  meets  a  real  want.

III.  The  human  interests,  which  religion  promotes,  are  real  and  precious,
NOT  VAPID  OR  FANCIFUL.  Those  interests  are  internal  and  external ;  they  reach  to  the
family  and  to  the  utmost  limits  of  human  society ;  they  embrace  the  present  and  the
unbounded  future.  Reconciliation  with  God,  the  removal  of  sin,  the  development  of
man's  best  nature,  the  heritage  of  inward  tranquillity,  the  conquest  of  care,  the
extraction  of  blessing  out  of  sorrow,  a  hope  that  conquers  death, — these  are  among  the
advantages  obtained  by  religion.  It  makes  men  better  husbands,  better  masters,
better  servants,  better  citizens,  nobler,  truer,  wiser.  It  imparts  a  meetness  for  the
society  and  the  service  of  heaven.  It  brings  advantage  to  every  relationship  and
circumstance  of  human  life.  "  It  ia  not  a  vain  thing ; "  it  is  life  and  health  and
ioy.--D.

Vers,  48 — 62.—"  Obedient  unto  death."  In  Moses,  Faith  had  achieved  one  of  her
most  signal  triumphs.  From  early  youth  to  latest  manhood,  he  had  acted  and
"  endured  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible."  No  earthly  or  visible  honour  had  ever
enchanted  his  vision.  He  had  lived  very  simply  "  in  his  Great  Taskmaster's  eye."
Therefore  it  was  that  he  submitted  to  be  deprived  of  the  earthly  Canaan  without  a
murmur,  "  for  he  looked  for  a  city  which  had  foundations,  whose  builder  and  maker
was  God."    To  him  death  was  but  a  darksome  passage  to  an  enduring  home.

I.  The  godly  man  dies  at  God's  command.  In  this  respect,  Moses  was  a  type  of
Christ,  and  has  left  us  an  example  deserving  our  imitation.  It  should  be  enough  for
us  to  know  that  God  requires  it.  It  is  no  .accident — ^no  unforeseen  event.  Every
circumstance  touching  the  believer's  death  is  wisely  arranged  by  God.  "  Precious  in
the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  his  saints."  Our  Elder  Brother  has  passed  the  dark
valley  before  us,  and  his  presence  lights  up  the  once  gloomy  way.  "  I  will  fear  no
evil,  for  thou  art  with  me."  At  the  girdle  of  our  Captain  hang  "  the  keys  of  death
and  of  Hades."  "  He  opens,  and  no  man  shuts."  To  the  genuine  disciple  death  is
no  terror.  "  It  is  my  Father's  voice  I  hear.  I  see  his  beckoning  hand.  I  feel  his
sustaining  arm."    "  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory."

II.  The  godly  man's  death  is  partly  judicial,  partly  merciful.  To  the  full-
grown  and  ripe  Christian,  earth  has  little  attraction.  Its  ioys  pall  upon  the  taste.
We  aspire  after  nobler  and  better  things.  "  I  would  not  \\n  alway."  A  time  comes
in  the  good  man's  history  when  he  wishes  the  probation  to  close,  and  the  real  life  to
begin.  The  heir  longs  for  his  majority  and  for  the  ancestral  heritage.  The  believer
dies  because  death  is  the  most  convenient  portal  by  which  he  can  enter  heaven.

Yet  judgment  is  mingled  with  the  mercy.  Moses  was  on  the  tiptoe  of  earthly
expectancy— on  the  threshold  of  a  great  success,  when  God  required  him  to  relinquish
all  for  heaven.  To  him  it  was  revealed,  in  clearest  form,  that  earlier  sin  required  this
late  correction.  For  Israel's  sake,  for  the  world's  sake,  and  for  Moses'  sake,  his  trespass
must  bear  fruitage  in  loss  and  sorrow.  In  the  very  nature  of  things,  it  is  impossible
that  men  can  sin  without  privation  of  some  kind.  We  may  flatter  ourselves,  at  times,
th«t  God  has  winked  at  our  folly,  and  that  no  ill  consequence  has  ensued.  But  judge
not  prematurely.  Possibly,  in  our  last  hours  of  life,  the  remembrance  of  that  sin  will
rob  us  of  our  peace,  will  impose  some  serious  loss.  In  the  moral  re^lm,  "  whatsoever  •
man  sows,  that  shall  he  also  reap."

III.  The  godly  man  departs  this  life  from  the  mountain-peaks  of  pbrsonai
attainment.  There  were  solid  reasons  in  the  Divine  mind  (partly  hidden  and  partly
revealed)  whv  Moses  should  die  upon  the  mount.     He  might  have  viewed  the  magni-


534


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.        [oh.  xxxn/.  1— 29.


ficent  prospects,  and  then  have  descended  to  die.  But  mountains  have  often  been
selected  by  God  as  the  scene  of  grand  events.  On  the  summit  of  a  mountain  we  are
inspired  with  a  sense  of  awe.  We  take  in  the  sense  of  the  infinite.  We  are  con-
strained to  worship.  Thence  we  are  already  half  disposed  to  mount  and  soar  to
heaven.  This  is  suggestive.  When  through  much  active  energy  of  faith  we  have
climbed  the  heights  of  practical  holiness,  we  feel  that  the  work  of  life  is  dune.  We
have  finished  our  course.  There  has  been  steady  advancement  thus  far,  and  now,  what
next  ?  We  feel  that  the  world  is  beneath  our  feet ;  and  from  this  pinnacle  of  moral
elevation  we  wait  the  revelation  of  the  future,  we  prepare  for  the  strange  tiansition.

From  such  an  elevation  of  faith,  too,  we  clearly  discern  the  scene  of  the  Church's
future  conquests.  The  past  is  a  light  which  irradiates  the  prospective  triumphs  of
truth  and  holiness.  "  Much  land  remains  to  be  possessed ; "  but  the  assurance  of
success  is  absolute.    Already  the  foes  of  God  are  at  our  feet.     "  He  must  reign."

IV.  The  godly  man's  depaktube  is  not  to  solitude,  but  to  society.  "  Thou
shalt  be  gathered  unto  thy  people."  Whatever  thoughts,  or  hopes,  or  fears  this
language  of  God  suggested  to  Moses'  mind,  it  suggests  to  our  minds  one  of  the  charms
of  heaven.  We  love  to  think  of  it  as  a  home.  Next  to  the  ecstasy  which  God's
presence  shall  inspire,  is  the  rapture  of  reunion  with  departed  friends.  "In  my
Father's  house  are  many  mansions."  No  question  need  distress  us  touching  mutual
recognition.  Moses  and  Elijah  were  recognized  as  such  when  they  came  down  in
glorified  state,  and  conversed  with  Jesus  on  the  mount.  Not  a  faculty  shall  be
wanting  there  which  we  possessed  here.  "  Then  shall  we  know,  even  as  also  we  are
known."  If  men  from  distant  climes  shall  "sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and
Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  God,"  one  main  element  of  honour  and  of  joy  wonid  be
missed  unless  these  illustrious  patriarchs  were  known. — D.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XXXin.

Moses'  Blessing.
Before  ascending  Mount  Nebo,  to  take  a
view  of  the  land  he  was  not  permitted  to
enter  and  tlien  to  die,  Moses  took  farewell
of  the  people  he  had  so  long  guided  and
ruled,  by  pronouncing  on  them  a  blessing
in  their  several  tribes.  This  blessing  was
probably  spoken  on  the  same  day  aa  the
song  recorded  in  the  preceding  chapter,  and
to  the  same  assembly.  The  one  may  be
regarded  as  the  counterpart  of  the  other.
In  the  song,  Moses  dwells  chiefly  on  the
Oiilamities  that  were  to  befall  the  people
because  of  theii  apostaoy;  in  the  blessing,
he  depicts  the  benefits  that  were  to  be
enjoyed  by  them  through  the  Divine  favour.
The  tone  of  the  one  ia  sombre  and  mina-
tory; the  tone  of  the  other  is  serene  and
cheering.  The  one  presents  the  darker  side,
the  other  the  brighter  side,  of  Israel's
fortunes.  Both  were  fitting  utterances  for
the  occasion :  the  one  the  farewell  warning,
the  other  the  farewell  benediction,  of  him
nho  had  so  long  proved  them  and  known
their  ways;  who,  whilst  he  desired  their


welfare,  feared  they  might  forieit  thla  by
their  folly  and  sin ;  and  who  sought,  both
by  warning  and  by  blessing,  to  encourage
them  to  pursue  that  course  by  which  alone
prosperity  and  happiness  could  be  secured.

The  blessing  consists  of  a  series  of  bene-
dictions on  the  several  tribes  (vers.  6 — 25),
preceded  by  an  introduction  (vers.  1 — 5),  and
followed  by  a  conclusion  (vers.  26 — 29).

Vers.  1 — 5. — Introduction.  The  blessing
opens  with  an  allusion  to  the  making  of  the
covenant  and  the  giving  of  the  Law  at  Sinai,
when  the  Lord  revealed  himself  in  glory
and  majesty  as  the  King  of  Israel,  in  order
at  the  outset  to  fix  the  minds  of  the  people
on  the  source  whence  alone  blessing  could
come  to  them.  God's  love  to  Israel  is  cele-
brated, and  the  intention  and  end  of  his
choice  and  elevation  of  Israel  to  be  his
people  is  declared.

Ver.  1. — ^Moses  the  man  of  God.  This
appellation  is  applied  to  Mosei  only  here
and  in  Josh.  xiv.  6  and  the  heading  of
Ps.  zc.  The  phrase, "  man  of  God,"  indicates
one  favoured  with  Divine  communications,
and  employed  as  God's  messenger  to  men
(cf.  1  JSam.  ix.  6;  1  Kings  zii.  22).  In  tliis
heading,  the  author  of  the  blessing  is  clearly


m.  xxiili.  1—29.]         THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


636


iiatiugui^hed  from  the  person  by  whom  it
was  inserted  in  tins  place.

Ter.  2. — And  he  said.  Here  begin  the
words  of  Moses.  He  commences  by  depict-
ing the  majesty  of  Jehovah  as  he  appeared  to
Isnel  when  he  came  to  make  the  covenant
with  them  and  give  them  his  Law.  The
Lord  same  from  Sinai,  and  rose  up  from  Seir
onto  them,  etc.  Seir  is  the  mountain  land
of  Kdom  to  the  east  of  Sinai.  Mount  Faran
is  probably  the  range  of  lofty  hills  which
form  the  southern  boundary  of  the  promised
land  to  the  north  of  the  desert  of  Et-Tih.
These  places  are  not  mentioned  as  scenes
of  different  manifestations  of  the  Divine
glory,  but  as  indicating  the  extent  to
which  the  one  manifestation  given  at
Sinai  reached.  Tlie  light  of  the  Divine
glory  that  rested  on  Sinai  was  reflected  also
from  the  mountains  of  ,Seii  and  Paran  (of.
Hub.  iii.  3 ;  Judg.  y.  4).  He  came  with  ten
thousands  of  saints;  rather,  he  came  from
ten  thousands  of  holyonet;  literally,  out  from
myriads  of  holiness;  i.e.  "from  his  celestial
seat,  where  myriads  of  angels  surround  his
throne "  (Boeenmiiller).  The  rendering
"with,"  though  that  of  the  Targum,  LXX.,
and  Vulgate,  cannot  be  retained ;  nor  does
Scripture  represent  God  as  attended  by
angels  when  he  comes  forth  to  manifest  his
glory  to  men.  They  are  represented  as
surrounding  his  throne  in  heaven  (1  Kings
xxii.  19;  Job  i.  6;  Dan.  vii.  10),  as  his
servants  awaiting  his  behest,  and  his  host
that  do  Ids  pleasure  (Gen.  xxviii.  12;  xxxii.
2,  3 ;  Ps.  ciii.  21) ;  and  God  is  represented
as  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  them  (Fs.  Ixviii.
17).  Hence  he  is  represented  here  as
coming  forth  from  among  them  to  manifest
himself  to  his  people.  A  fiery  law.  There
is  a  various  reading  here ;  instead  of  n^  ktk,
fire  of  law,  many  codices  have  mtilii  in  one
word,  and  this  is  supported  by  the  Samaritan
toxt  and  other  authorities,  and  is  accepted
by  most  critics  and  interpreters.  It  is  a
fatal  objection  to  the  textual  reading  that
rn  is  not  a  Semitic  word,  but  one  of  Persian
origin,  brought  by  the  Jews  from  Babylonia,
and  found  only  in  the  post-exilian  books
(Esth.  i.  8, 19;  ii.  8,  12;  iii.  8,  14;  iv.  11,
15;  Ezra  vii  12,  21 ;  viii.  36;  Dan.  ii.  9,
13,  15;  vi.  5,  9,  13,  16);  and  in  them  as
a]  plied  to  the  Law  of  God  only  by  heathens.
It  is,  therefore,  altogether  improbable  that
this  word  should  be  found  in  any  Hebrew-
writing  a'uterior  to  the  Captivity.  Besides,
what  is  the  sense  of  m  ti'Mj  supposing  m  to
mean  "  law  "  ?  The  words  cannot  be  ren-
dered, as  in  the  Authorized  Yersion,  by
"  fiery  law ;  "  tliey  can  only  be  rendered  by
"  a  fire,  a  law,"  or  **  a  fire  of  law,"  and  what
either  of  these  may  mean  it  is  not  easy  to
see.  The  ancient  versions  vary  here  very
considerably :  LXX.,  ^k  Se^my  airov  &yyeKot


lier'  dvTov :  Vulgate,  In  dextpra  ejus  ignea
lex  ;  Targum  of  Onkelos,  "  Writt(  n  by  his
right  hand,  from  the  midst  of  the  fire,  a  law
gave  he  to  us ; "  Syriac,  "  With  myriads  of
his  saints  at  his  right  hand.  He  gave  to
them,  and  also  caused  all  peoples  to  love
them."  The  best  Hebrew  manuscripts  have
me'K  as  one  word.  T^e  Masoretic  note  is,
"The  Chatiph  is  one  word,  and  the  K'ri
two."  The  word  rn»N  is  best  explained  as
a  compound  of  »'«,  fire,  and  Nnty,  an  Ara-
maic word  signifying  to  throw  or  dart ;  the
Syriac  fr«,  or  the  Hebrew  ni',  having  the

tame  signification,  so  that  the  meaning
is  "  fire-dartings : "  from  his  right  hand
went  rays  of  fire  like  arrows  shot  forth
(of.  Hab.  iii.  4;  Exod.  xix.  16).  To  them;
i.e.  to  the  Israelites,  to  whom  this  manifesta-
tion was  vouchsafed.

Ver.  3.— Yea,  he  loved  the  people.  The
proper  rendering  is,  he  loveth  peoples  (D'aj)).
This  is  generally  understood  of  the  tribes
of  Israel ;  but  some  would  understand  it  of
nations  in  general,  on  the  ground  that  such
is  the  proper  meaning  of  the  word,  as  in
ch.  xxxii.  8  and  other  places.  A  reference  to
nations  at  large,  however,  would  seem
incongruous  here ;  and  the  use  of  the  word
in  relation  to  Israel  in  such  passages  as
Gen.  xxviii.  3;  Judg.  y.  14;  Isa.  iii.  lo;
Hos.  X.  14 ;  Zech.  xi.  10,  justifies  the
taking  it  so  here.  All  his  saints  are  in  tuy
hand.  The  people  of  Israel  are  here  called
God's  saints,  or  holy  ones,  because  they  were
chosen  by  and  consecrated  to  him.  It  is
not  probable,  as  some  suggest,  that  the
angels  are  here  intended.  The  change
from  the  third  person  to  the  second  is  not
uncommon  in  Hebrew  poetry  (of.  ch.  xxxii.
15 ;  Ps.  xlix.  14,  etc.).  They  sat  down  at
thy  feet.  The  verb  rendered  "sat  down"  here
(isn)  is  found  only  in  this  passage,  and
is  of  unctirtain  meaning.  Kimchi  ex-
plains it  as  "they  united  or  assembled
together  to  follow  thy  steps ; "  Knobel  miikes
it  "  they  wandered  at  thy  feet,"  and  under-
stands it  of  Israel's  followinic  the  lead  of
Jehovah  in  the  wilderness,  whidi  the  ark  of
the  covenant  preceded  tliem  n  their  march  ;
G^senius  and  Furst,  "  they  lie  down  at  thy
feet."  Tliis  last  is  accepted  by  Keil,  ami
seems  to  have  most  in  its  favour.  Every
one  shall  receive  of  thy  words.  Some
lender  here,  they  rise  up  at  thy  words;  but
though  tlie  verb  »«^:  is  sometimes  used  in-
transitively, it  is  properly  an  active  verb,
and  there  seems  no  reason  why  it  should
not  be  so  regarded  here:  everyone  receives
[the  singular,  K^;,  used  distributively]  thy
words.

Ver.  4. — Moses  here,  identifying  himself
with  the  people,  uses  the  third  person,  and
includes  himself  among  those  to  whom  tha


536


THE  BOOK  OF  DEDTEEONOMY.


[CH.  XXXIU.  .1 — 2&


Law  was  given;  cf.  Ps.  zx.,  xxi.,  where
.Uavid  not  only  (peaks  ot  himself  in  the
third  person,  but  addresses  such  prayers
for  himself  as  could  only  be  offered  by  the
people  for  their  king  (of.  also  Judg.  v.  12,
15;  Hab.  iii.  19).  Even  the  inheritance  of
the  oongregation.  The  "  even,"  which  the
translators  of  the  Authorized  Version  have
inserted  here,  were  better  omitted ;  the
words  are  in  apposition  to  "law."  The
Law  which  Moses  commuiiir-ated  to  Israel
was  to  remain  with  them  as  the  inheritance
(if  the  congregation.  The  Bishops'  Bible
and  the  Genpva  Version  have,  more  correctly,
"  for  an  inheritance  of  the  congregation."

Ver.  6.— Some  refer  this  to  Moses,  but
Moses  was  never  recognized  as  king  in
Israel :  he  "  was  f^iithful  iu  all  his  house  as
a  servant"  (Heb.  iii.  5);  but  Jehovah  alone
was  King  (Exod.  xv.  18;  Ps.  xlvii.  6,  7).
Jeshurun  (cf.  ch.  zxxii.  5).  The  gathering
together  refei  s  to  the  assembling  of  the
people  at  Sinai,  when  Jehovah  came  forth
as  their  King  to  give  them  bis  Law.

Vers.  6 — 25.  —  BlesHnga  on  the  tribes
individually.  With  these  may  be  compared
the  blessing  which  Jacob  pronounced  on
his  sons  as  representing  the  tribes  of
which  they  were  the  heads.  The  two
resemble  each  other  in  many  points ;  the
differences  are  such  as  naturally  arose
from  the  different  relations  of  the  speakers
to  the  objects  of  their  address,  and  the
changes  in  the  condition  and  prospeots  of
the  tribes  which  during  the  lapse  of
centuries  had  come  to  pass.

Ver.  6. — And  let  not  his  men  be  few.
The  negative,  though  not  expressed  in  the
Hebrew,  is  to  be  carried  into  this  clause
from  the  preceding.  Though  the  rights  of
primogenilure  had  been  withdrawn  from
Eeulien,  and  Jacob  Imd  declared  that  he
sliould  not  excel,  Moses  here  assures  the
trib3  of  continuance,  and  even  prosperity.
Tlieir  number  was  not  to  be  small ;  which
was,  perhaps,  said  to  comfort  them,  in  view
of  the  fact  tliat  their  numbers  liad  greatly
diminished  in  the  course  of  their  wanderings
in  the  desert  (comp.  Numb.  i.  21  with  xxn.
7).  At  no  time,  however,  was  this  tribe
numerous  as  compared  with  the  others;
nor  was  it  ever  distinguished  either  by  the
enterprise  of  its  members  or  by  the  emi-
nence of  any  of  tliem  in  the  councils  of  the
nation  or  the  management  of  affairs.

Ver.  7. — The  blessing  on  J  ml  ah  is  in  the
form  of  prayer  to  Jehovah.  As  Jacob  had  pro-
mised tc  Juduh  supremacy  over  his  breti  ren
and  success  in  war,  so  Moses  here  names
him  next  after  Beuben,  whose  pre-eminence
he  had  assumed,  and  prays  for  him  that,
going  forth  at  the  head  of  the  tribes,  he


might  return  in  triumph,  being  helped  rt
the  Lord.  Let  his  hands  he  sufficient  for
him ;  rather,  with  his  hands  he  conlendeth
for  it  (to  wit,  his  people).  3T  here  is  not  the
adj.  much,  enough,  but  the  part,  of  the  verb
an,  to  contend,  to  strive;  and  1'T  is  the
accus.  of  instrument.  The  rendering  in  the
Authorizeil  Version  is  grammatically  possi-
ble; but  the  meaning  thereby  brought  out  i»
not  in  keeping  with  the  sentiment  of  the
passage;  for  if  Judah's  hands,  i.e.  his  own
power  and  resources,  were  sufiSdent  for  him,
what  need  had  he  of  help  from  the  Lord  ?

Vers.  8 — 11. — The  blessing  on  Levi  i»
also  in  the  form  of  a  prayer.  In  Jacob's
blessing,  Simeon  is  joined  with  Levi,  but
Moses  passes  him  over  altogether,  probably
becrinse,  as  Jacob  foretold,  he  was  to  be
scattered  among  his  brethren  (Gen.  xlix.  7),
and  so  lose  his  tribal  individuality.  Simeon,
however,  is  included  in  the  general  blessing
'  pi'onouuced  on  Israel ;  and  as  this  ti  ibe
received  a  number  of  towns  within  the
territory  of  Judah  (Josh.  xix.  2—9),  it  was
probably  regai  ded  as  included  in  the  bless-
ing on  that  tribe.  Thy  Thummim  and  thy
Urim ;  thy  Sight  and  thy  Light  (cf.  Exod.
xxviii.  30).  The  high  priest  wore  the
breast-plate  on  which  these  were  placed
when  he  went  in  before  the  Lord ;  and  this
is  here  represented  as  the  prerogative  of  the
whole  tribe.  Thy  holy  one;  i.e.  Levi,  the
tribe-father,  representing  the  whole  tribe  to
which  the  blessing  applies;  hence  in  the
following  verses  the  verb  passes  into  the
plural.  For  "  holy  one,"  it  would  be  butter
to  read  "  pious  "  or  "  godly  one ; "  literally,
(Ae  man  thy  pious  one.  Some  would  render
"the  man  thy  favoured  one,"  or  "the  man
of  thy  friendship; "  but  this  is  wholly  arbi-
trary, the  word  (Ton)  has  no  such  meaning.
Toexplain  this  more  particularly ,reference  is
made  to  the  trials  at  Kassah  and  the  waters
of  Meribah  (strife),  when  the  people  rebelled
and  murmured  against  Moses  and  Aaron,
whereby  the  piety  of  these  men  was  put  to  the
test,  and  in  them,  the  heads  of  the  tribe  of
Levi,  the  whole  tribe  was  proved.  (On  Mas-
sah,  see  Exod.  xvii.  1  7 ;  and  on  the  watert
of  strife,seeNumb.xx.  1 — 13.)  Inthesetrials
Levi  had  proved  himself  faithful  and  godly
having  risen  up  in  defence  of  the  honour  o)
Jehovah,  and  in  support  of  his  covenant
though  in  the  latter  ease  both  Moses  and
Aaron  stumbled.  Who  said  unto  his  fathei
and  to  his  mother,  etc.  This  refers  to  what
is  narrated  in  Exod.  xxxii.  26—29,  when  the
Levites  drew  their  swords  against  their
brethren  at  the  command  of  Moses,  to
execute  judgment  without  respect  of  per-
son, because  of  the  sin  of  the  people  in  the
matter  of  the  golden  calf  (cf.  also  14  umb.  xxv.
8,  and,  for  the  principle  here  implicitly
commended,  see  Matt.  x.  37  ;  xix.  29 ;  Luke


OH.  xxxin.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


637


KIT.  26).  Because  of  their  zealous  devotion
to  the  claims  and  si-rvice  of  the  Lord,  the
dignity  of  the  priesthood  had  been  conferred
on  this  tribe;  and  to  them  belonged  the
high  office  of  being  instructors  of  the  people
in  Divine  things,  and  of  presenting  tlie
sacrifices  of  the  people  to  the  Lord.  For
those  entrusted  with  such  an  office,  nothing
was  more  to  be  desired  than  that  they
should  be  blessed  with  jjower  rightly  to
discharge  the  duties  of  their  office,  that
their  seivioe  should  be  accepted  with  favour,
and  tliat  their  enemies  and  haters  should
be  foiled  and  rendered  impotent;  and  for
this  Moses  prays  on  their  behalf.

Ver.  12.— Benjamin,  the  beloved  of  his
father,  is  also  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  and
would  be  cared  for  and  protected  by  him.
Shall  dwell  in  safety  by  him;  ehall  dweU
teeurely  upon  him,  i.e.  resting  on  him.  Shall
aover  him.  Tho  word  rendered  "cover"
(e)Bn)  occurs  only  here ;  construed  with  hy,

upon,  it  conveys  the  idea  of  sheltering  :  he
continually  is  sheltering  him.  And  he  shall
dwell  between  his  shonlders.  "To  be
between  the  shoulders"  is  to  be  carried  on
the  back  (cf  1  Sam.  xvii.  6);  and  as  a
father  might  thus  bear  his  child,  so  should
Benjamin  be  borne  of  the  Lord.  There  can
be  no  doubt  that  Benjamin  is  the  subject  of
this  clause;  to  understand  it  of  Jehovah
dwelling  on  the  shoulders  of  Benjamin,  in
the  sense  of  having  the  temple,  the  place  of
his  rest,  within  the  territory  of  Benjamin,  is
too  violent  and  far-fetched  an  interpretation
to  be  admitted.  In  the  change  of  subject
in  the  three  clauses  of  this  verse,  there  is
nothing  strange,  since  such  a  change  re-
peatedly occurs,  and  is  found  even  in  prose,
as  e.g.  2  Sam.  xi.  13.  "  To  dwell  upon  God,
and  between  his  shoulders,  means  as  much
as  to  lean  upon  him ;  the  similitude  being
taken  from  fathers  who  carry  theii  sons
while  yet  small  and  tender"  (Calvin).

Vers.  13-17. — The  blessing  on  Joseph
by  Moses  closely  resembles  that  pronounced
by  Jacob  on  his  favourite  son;  be  solicits
for  him  the  utmost  abunitance  of  temporal
blessing,  and  the  riches  of  the  Divine
favour.  There  Is  tliis  dilference,  however,
between  the  two  blessings,  that  in  that  of
the  patriarch  it  is  the  growth  of  the  tribe  in
power  and  might  that  is  chiefly  contem-
plated; whilst  in  that  of  Moses  it  is  the
advance  of  the  tribe  in  wealth,  prosperity,
and  influence  that  ia  chiefly  indicated.
"Jacob  described  the  growth  of  Joseph
under  the  figure  of  a  luxuriant  branch  of  a
fruit  tree  planted  by  the  water;  whilst
Moses  fixes  his  eye  primarily  upon  the  land
of  Joseph,  and  desires  for  him  the  richest  pro*
ductions  "  (Kell).  For  the  preoiouB  things  of
heaven,  for  the  dew.  Several  codices,  for  7DD,
"for  dew,"  read  ^J)d,  above — ^"the  preoions


things  of  heaven  above ; "  and  this  reading,
some  critics  of  eminence  adopt.     Probably,
however,  this  is  only  a  correction,  to  bring
this    passage    into  accordance  with   Gen.
xlix.  25.      The  Targnms  and  the  Peshito
combine  both  readings.    Instead  of  "for  the
precious  things,"  it  is  better  to  read  "  with,"
etc.,     and    so    throughout    vers.     13 — 16,
Literally,  it  is  from,  etc. ;  njQD,  the  d  ex-
pressing the  instrumental  cause  of  the  bless-
ing, of   which    the  Lord   is  the  efficient
cause.    The  noun  njo,  literally,  excellency,
precioMsnesg,  occurs  only  here  and  iu  Cant.
IV.  13,  16  and  vii.  13,  where  it  is  rendered
by  ''  pleasant."    The  precious  fruit  of  the  .
heavens  is  the  dew,  which,  with  the  waters
stored  up  in  the  recesses  of  the  eartli,  fur-
thers the  growth  of  the  earth's  produce,
ripened  by  tlje  influences  of  sun  and  moon.
And  for  the  chief  things  of  the  ancient  moun-
tains;  literally,  and  from  the  head  of  the
mountains  of  old.     The  precious  things  of
the  mountains  and  hills  are  the  vines  and
olive  trees  with  which  the  lower  slopes  are
adorned,  and  the  forests  that  crown  the
loftier.     The  good  will  of  him  that  dwelt  in
the   bush.      The   reference  is  to   the  ap-
pearance of  Jehovah  to  Moses  in  the  bush
at  Hnreb  (Exod.  iii.),  when  ho  manifested
himself  as  the  Deliverer  of  Israel,  whose
good  pleasure  it  was  that  they  should  be
redeemed  from  bondage  and  favoured  with
blessing.      That  was   separated  from  lUs
brethren;   separated  in  the  sense  of  con-
lecrated,  or  dislinguighed  (TlJ,  from  ~m,  to
consecrate),  from  among  his  brethren.     Hia
glory  is  like  the  firstling  of  his  bullook;
rather,  <Ae  firelborn  of  hia  oxen,  majesty  it
to  him.     The  singular,  nil!',  ia  here  used
collectively,  as  in  ch.  it.  19.    The  oxen  are
Joseph's  sons,  all  of  whom  were  strong,  but
the  firstborn  excelled  the  rest,  and  was  en-
dowed with  majesty.    It  is  Ephraim  that
is  referred  to,  whom  Jacob  raised  to  the
position  of  the  firstborn  (Gen.  xlviii.  8,  etc.y
His  horns  are  like  the  horns  of  unicorns ;
literally,  and  horns  of  a  reem  are  his  horns.
The  reem  is  supposed  to  be  the  aurochs,  an
animal  of  the  bovine  species,  allied  to  the
buffalo,  now  extinct,  but    which  the  As-
syrian    bas-reliefs    show    to    have    been
formerly  hunted  in  that  region  (cf.  Job
xxxix.  9,  etc. ;  Ps.  xxii.  22;  Rawlinson '  Anc.
Mon.,'  i.  284).  By  his  strong  power,  Ephrai  m
should  thrust  down  nations,  even  the  most
distant.    And  they  are  the  ten  thousands  of
Ephraim ;  and  these  are,  etc. ;  i.e.  in  such
might  will  the  myriads  of  Ephraim  come
forth.    To  Ephraim,  as  the  chief,  the  myriads
are  assigned;  to  Manassehonly  the  thousands.
Vers.  18, 19. — Zebulun  and  Issachar,  the
two  last  sons  uf  Leah,  are  taken  together  by
Moses ;  and  Zebulun,  though  the  younger
son,  is  placed  first,  In  accordance  with  Gen,


53S


THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.         [<!=•  xxxiu.  1— 2&.


xlix.  13.  Sncceii  In  enterprise,  and  felicity
at  home,  are  assured  to  both.  "  Although
'going  out'  (enterprise,  labour)  is  attri-
buted to  Zebulun,  and  'remaining  in  tents '
(the  comfortable  enjoyment  of  life)  to
Issaohar,  in  accordance  with  the  delineation
of  their  respective  characters  in  thu  blessing
of  Jacob,  this  is  to  be  attributed  to  the
poetic  parallelism  of  the  clauses,  and  the
whole  is  to  be  underetooJ  as  applying  to
both  in  the  sense  suggested  by  Graf,  '  Re-
joice, Zebulun  and  I.-^sachar,  in  yoiir  labour
and  your  rest ' "  (Keil).  They  shall  call  the
people  unto  the  mountain;  r.ither,  they
shall  call  nationt  to  the  mountain,  i.e.  the
mountain  of  the  Lord's  inheritance  (Exod.
XV.  17),  the  place  of  bis  sanctuary.  Saori-
fioes  of  righteousness ;  i.e.  siicrlfices  offered
according  to  God's  Law,  and  in  a  manner
and  a  spirit  well  pleasing  to  him(Ps.  iv.  6;
li.  21).  They  shall  suck  of  the  abundance
of  the  seas,  etc.  The  treasures  of  both
sea  and  land  should  be  theirs.  The  Tar-
gumist  Jonathan  Ben  Uzziel  explains  this
as  referring  especially  to  the  obtaining  of
the  rich  purple  dye  from  the  shell  of  the
oyster  (murex  Byrius),  and  the  producing
of  mirrors  and  glass  vases  from  the  sand.
The  existence  of  vitreous  sand  on  the  coast
of  Zebulun  is  attested  both  by  Strabo  (lib.
vvi.  p.  757)  and  Pliny  ('  Nat.  Hist.,'  lib.
xxxvi.  c.  286).

Vers.  20,  21. — As  in  the  blessing  of  Shem
by  Noah,  God  is  praised  for  Shem's  pros-
purity  (Gen.  ix.  26),  bo  here  God  is  praised
for  the  enlargement  of  the  warlike  tribe  of
Gad  (cf.  Gen.  xlix.  19).  He  dwelleth  as  a
lion ;  rather,  a$  a  lionett.  Tliough  the
noun  K'3^  has  a  maso.  termination,  usage
shows  that  it  was  the  female  and  not  the
male  that  was  thereby  designated  (see  e.g.
Gen.  xlix.  9 ;  Numb.  xxiv.  9,  where  it  can
hardly  be  a  mere  synonym ;  and  Job  iv.  11 ;
xxxviii.  39,  where  the  reference  to  the
young  of  the  animal  accords  better  with  the
lioness  than  with  the  lion,  Gesenius).  Ver.
21  refers  to  Gad's  obtaining  an  inheritance
for  himself  firom  Moses  beyond  Jordan.
And  he  provided  the  first  part  foi  himself;
literally,  and  he  mut  for  himself  (i.e.  chose)
the  first,  i.e.  either  the  most  excellent  part
or  the  firstfruits  of  tbe  conquest.  Because
there,  in  a  portion  of  the  lawgiver,  was  he
seated ;  rather,  for  there  the  portion  of  the
leader  was  reserved.  The  word  rendered
"  lawgiver,"  or  "  leader  "  (ppn?),  signifies
primarily  one  who  ordains  or  appoints,  and
is  used  in  both  the  above  senses  (cf.  Exod.
xxxiii.  22;  Judg.  v.  11);  it  is  here  applied
to  Gad,  because  that  tribe  displayed  such
promptitude  and  energy  at  the  head  of  tbe
tribes  in  the  conquest  of  the  land,  that  it
might  be  regarded  as  their  leader.  An  en-
tirely different  view  of  the  passage  has  been


tiilcen  by  some,  who  by  the  mechokeh  nnder^
s'and  Moses  as  the  lawgiver,  and  his
portion  as  the  place  of  his  grave,  which  wag
concealed,  but  was  within  the  inb^ritance
of  Gad.  But  it  is  a  fatal  objection  to  this
view  that  not  only  is  the  word  rendered
"  portion"  (nj3^n)  nnwhere  used  of  a  griive,
but  the  grave  of  Moses  on  Mount  Nebo  was
in  the  territory  of  Reuben,  not  in  that  of
Gad.  Gesenius  renders,  "The  portion  of
(assigned  by)  the  lawgiver  was  preserved."
But  this  does  not  iuUy.with  the  immediately
preceding  statement,  that  Gad  chose  his
portion  for  himself;  at  any  rate,  it  could  not
be  hecauie  of  this  that  he  chose  it.  Gad
chose  for  himself  a  portion  on  the  east  of
Jordan,  and  the  portion  he  had  chosen  was
sacredly  kept  fur  him,  though  he  went  with
his  brethren  to  the  conquest  of  Canaan.
And  he  came  with  the  heads  of  the  people;
i.e.  his  place  of  marching  was  with  the
leaders;  his  place  was  at  the  head  of  the
tribes  (cf.  Kumb.  xxxii.  17,  21,  32,  and  Josh,
i.  14 ;  iv.  12).  He  executed  the  justice  of
the  Lord,  etc.;  i.e.  he  did  what  God  re-
quired of  him,  obeying  his  commands,  and
thereby  fulfilling  all  righteousness  (cf.
M..tt.  iii.  15;  Phil.  iii.  6).  With  Israel;
in  the  fellowship  of  Israel.

Ver.  22. — Jacob  compared  Dan  to  a  ser-
pent that  suddenly  springs  forth  by  the
way,  and  bites  the  heels  of  a  horse  so  that
the  rider  falls  backward.  Moses  here  com-
pares the  tribe  to  a  young  lion  that  sud-
denly leaps  from  its  lair  in  Bushan  on  the
object  of  its  attack.  Both  eimilitudes
relate  to  the  vigour  and  force  which  the
tribe  should  display  in  conflict.

Ver.  23.— In  Jacob's  blessing,  Naphtali
appears  invested  with  the  attributes  of
freedom,  gracefulness,  and  graciousness ;
here  Moses  assures  that  tribe  of  the  Divine
grace  and  blessing,  and  promises  to  it
prosperity  and  felicity.  Possess  thou  tbe
west  and  the  south.  The  word  rendered
"  west "  here  (n^)  properly  means  sea,  and
came  to  signify  "  west "  from  the  fact  of  the
Mediterranean,  or  Great  Sea,  lying  to  the
west  of  Palestine.  Tbe  proper  meaning  of
the  word  is  to  be  retained  here.  As  the
territory  of  Naphtali  lay  in  the  north  of
Canaan,  and  was  far  from  the  sea,  the
blessing  here  pronounced  upon  him  must
be  understood  generally  of  prosperity  and
felicity.  He  was  to  possess  riches  as  of  the
sea,  and  gonial  and  fructil'ying  warmth  as
of  the  south.

Vers.  24,  25. — Asher,  the  prosperous  one,
as  bis  name  implies,  was  to  be  rich,  and
honoured,  and  strong,  and  peaceful.  Blessed
with  children ;  rather,  hlessed  among  the  soris  ;
i.e.  either  blessed  more  than  the  rest  of  the
sons,' or  blessed  by  the  sons  who  were  to
reap  benefit  from  him.    From  what  follows


ua.  xxxui.  1— 29,]       THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBEONOMY.


6S9


the  latter  explanation  seems  the  one  to  be
preferred.  The  proposition  JD  is  constantly
used  ai  indicating  the  source  whence  any-
thing proceeds,  or  the  agent  by  whom
anything  is  done.  Ii«t  him  he  acceptable  to
Ms  bretijren ;  "  iis  e  terrse  'suse  pro ventibus
res  optimas  suppeditaturus ;  of.  Gen.  xlix.
20"  (Rosen  miiller).  This  tribe  should  find
itself  in  so  advantageous  and  luxurious  a
condition  that  the  other  tribes  should  have
(ielight  and  pleasure  in  it "  (Knobel).  Others
render,  "  favoured  among  his  brethren ;  "
.  favoured,  that  is,  by  the  Lord  more  than
his  brethren  (Keil).  But  the  former  seems
I  referable.  And  let  him  dip  his  foot  in  oU.
This  points  to  a  land  abounding  in  olives,
and  generally  richly  fertile,  a  fat  land  and
yielding  rich  dainties,  such  as  Jacob  pro-
mised to  Asher  (Gen.  xlix.  20).  Thy  shoes
•hall  be  iron  and  brass.  The  word  rendered
"shoes"  (byic)  occurs  only  here.  It  is  a
derivative  from  h'^:,  to  bolt  or  shut  fast,  and
is  to  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  a  fastness  or
fortress,  a  place  securely  closed :  iron  and
brass  shall  he  thy  fortress ;  i.e.  his  dwelling
should  be  strong  and  impregnable.  The
rendering  "  shoas  "  is  from  a  supposed  deri-
vation of  tits  If  ord  from  hp,  a  shoe.  As  thy
days,  go  shall  thy  strength  be;  literally,  as
thy  days,  thy  rest ;  i.e.  as  long  as  thou  livest,
80  long  shalt  thou  have  rest  and  quiet.  The
noun  rendered  "strength"  (N^'i)  in  the
Authorized  Version,  occurs  only  here,  unless
it  be  found  in  the  proper  name  iaya  (_Me-
deba),  and  has  no  cognate  in  Hebrew ;  but

the  Arabic  supplies  a  root  for  it  in  Li  (debd),
to  rest.  Fiirst  connects  it  with  3t,  and  the
Targum  with  nrt,  to  flow,  and  translates  by
"riches."

Vers.  26 — 29. — As  Moses  commenced  by
celebrating  the  glorious  majesty  of  Jehovah
when  he  appeared  to  establish  his  covenant
with  Israel,  so  he  concludes  with  a  reference
to  God  as  the  eternal  Befuge  and  the  saving
Help  of  his  people.


Yer.  26. — ^There  is  none  like  unto  the  Ood
of  Jeshnrun,  The  points  and  accents  direct
that  this  should  be  read.  There  is  none  like
Ood,  0  Jeshurun ;  and  though  all  the
ancient  versions  read  as  does  the  Autho-
rized Version,  the  Masoretio  punctuation
is  vindicated  here  by  the  following  thy
help,  which  shows  that  Israel  is  here
addressed.

Ver.  27.— God  is  the  Befuge  or  Dwelling-
place  of  his  people,  their  Protection  amid  the
storms  of  life,  and  the  unfailing  Source  of
comfort  and  blessing  to  them  in  their
pilgrimage  state.  Over  them  is  his  shelter-
ing protection,  and  underneath  them  the
support  of  his  everlasting  arms.

Ver.  28. — The  clauses  of  this  verse  are
parallel  to  each  other;  their  symmetry  will
be  seen  if  we  render  and  arrange  thus —

"  And  Israel  dwelleth  securely,
Alone,  the  fountain  of  Jacob,
On  a  land  of  corn  and  new  wine ;
His  heavens  also  drop  down  dew."

The  fountain  of  Jacob  is  parallel  to  Israel.
Israel  is  so  designated  because  they  came
forth  from  Jacob  as  waters  from  a  copious
source  (Ibn  Ezra;  cf.  Isa.  xlv'ii.  1;  Ps.
ixviii.  26).

Ver.  29. — "This concluding  verse  compre-
hends the  whole  blessing.  Israel  is  to  be
congratulated  and  praised  because,  through
the  true  God,  it  lias  unparalleled  protec-
tion, salvation,  and  triumph  "  (Herxhoimer).
Thine  enemies  shall  be  found  liars  unto  thee ;
literally,  shall  feign  unto  thee ;  i.e.  shall
pretend  to  be  thy  friends,  in  order  to  obtain
favour  with  thee.  The  verb  conveys  the
idea  of  fawning  upon  a  person  with  a  feigned
humility  and  submissiveness  (cf.  Ps.  xviii.
44;  Ixvi.  2;  Ixxxi.  15).  Then  shalt  tread
npon  their  high  plaoei;  i.e.  shalt  wholly
subdue  them  and  triumph  over  them  (cf.
ch.  xxxii.  13) ;  "  arces  coram  in  montibus
positas,  loca  eorum  inaccessa  victor  calcabis,
iis  potieris;  qua  ipsa  phrasi.  Am.  iv.  13,
Mio.  i3,  superbe  incedens  victor  desori-
bitur  "  (Boseumiiller).


HOMILETICS.

Yers.  1 5. — ^The  general  import  of  this  paragraph  is  clear.     Some  of  its  phrases,

however,  are  far  from  being  so  easy  that  we  can  be  quite  sure  of  their  meaning.  (For  a
discussion  of  the  points  in  dispute,  see  the  Exposition  ;  also  Keil,  Lange,  and  a  work  far
too  little  known,  Barrett's  '  Synopsis  of  Criticisms,'  vol.  i.  pt.  2.)  There  is,  however,  quite
enougi  that  is  sufficiently  clear  to  furnish  us  with  a  topic  for  valuable  pulpit  teaching,
albeit  there  may  be,  in  this  introductory  paragraph  and  between  each  blessing,  indications
of  an  editor's  hand.  The  whole  paragraph  has  reference  to  God's  august  manifestation
of  himself  at  the  delivery  of  the  Law  on  Sinai.  In  it  there  are  eight  matters  to  be
noted.  1.  The  new  disclosure  of  God  was  as  the  rising  of  a  bright  light  in  the  midst  of
the  darkness  (see  (Jesenius,  tub  verb,  rn;  (zdh-ra'gh!),  and  all  the  uses  of  the  verb  in  the


640  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEltONOMY.        [oh.  xxxiii.  1— 29i

Old  Testament).  2.  The  beams  of  the  newly  risen  light  flooded  the  region  of  Sinai,
Mount  Paran,  and  Mount  Seir  (ver.  2).  3.  In  the  displays  of  his  glory,  Jehovah  wai
attended  by  ten  thousands  or  his  holy  ones  (ver.  2).  4.  From  Jehovah  thus  attended
there  went  forth  a  Law  (ver.  2).  5.  This  Law  thus  given  was  the  expression  of  Jehovah's
love  (ver.  3).  6.  All  the  holy  ones  (English  Version,  "  saints  ")  thus  surrounding
Jehovah,  were  at  his  disposal,  to  serve  the  people  of  his  choice,  and  reverently  waited
for  his  words  of  command  (ver.  3).  7.  The  Law  thus  given  in  august  majesty  was  the
rich  inheritance  of  the  people  (ver.  4).  8.  On  a  people  so  honoured  of  God,  the  man
of  God  is  moved  to  utter  a  blessing,  as  his  last  act  ere  he  quits  the  scene  of  toil  for  the
realm  of  rest  (ver.  1).  The  exposition  and  illustration  of  all  this  will  furnish  Christian
preachers  and  teachers  in  every  age  with  abundance  of  material  for  the  understanding,
heart,  conscience,  and  lifoi

Ver.  B.—The  blessing  of  Reuben  ;  or,  life  impoverished  through  ancestral  Hiu.  For
a  blessing,  there  seems  something  unusually  weak  in  that  pronounced  on  Feubeo.
Continuance — a  preservation  from  being  blotted  out  of  existence — is  all  that  the  man
of  God  seems  to  hope  or  expect  from  him.  The  English  reader  may  wonder  to  see  that
the  word  "  not "  is  in  italics,  as  not  being  in  the  Hebrew,  but  supplied  by  the  translators.
It  is,  however,  wisely  done  in  this  case,  as  will  be  seen  if  the  reader  will  put  stress
sufficient  on  the  word  "  not "  in  the  following  rendering  to  carry  the  force  of  the  negative
on  to  the  end  of  the  sentence  : — "  Let  Reuben  live  ;  and  not  die  and  his  men  be  few ; "  i.e.
if  his  men  became  a  mere  handful,  the  tribe  would  be  virtually  extinct ;  and  Moses  desires
that  this  may  not  be  the  case  ;  so  that,  according  to  English  idiom,  the  insertion  of  the
italic  not  is  required  to  preserve  the  meaning  of  the  original.  The  gist  of  the  blessing
then  is,  let  not  the  tribe  have  such  a  paucity  of  men  as  to  sink  out  of  siglit  altogetlier.
Bare  continuance ; — this  is  all  that  is  propljesied  concerning  that  tribe.  This  is,  as  far
as  we  can  follow  its  history, in  strict  cdirespondence  with  its  after  experience.  There
may  be  noted  again  and  again  a  decrease  in  its  numbers ;  cf.  Numb.  i.  21 ;  xxvi.  7  ;
1  Chron.  v.  18,  from  which  it  appears  "  that  the  tribe  had  decreased  since  the  Exodus,
and  also  that  in  later  times  its  numbers,  even  when  counted  with  the  Gadites  and  the ,
li  alf  of  Manasseh,  were  fewer  than  that  of  the  Reubenites  alone  at  the  cen  sus  of  Numb.  i.
They  took  possession  of  a  large  and  fertile  district  east  of  Jordan.  Occupied  with  their
flocks  and  herds,  they  appear  soon  after  the  days  of  Joshua  to  have  lost  their  early
energy :  they  could  not  be  roused  to  take  part  in  the  national  rising  against  Jabin
(Judg.  V.  15,  16).  They  dc  not  seem  to  have  cared  to  complete  the  conquest  of  their
own  territory;  and  even  the  cities  assigned  them  were  wrested  from  them  by  the
Moabites.  While  from  this  tribe  no  judge,  prophet,  or  national  hero  arose  "  to  redeem
it  from  insignificance  (see '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  in  foe,  to  which  we  are  indebted
for  the  above  details).  We  are  not  at  a  loss  to  account  for  this.  The  gross  wickedness
of  the  head  of  this  tribe  left  a  stain  upon  its  name  which  not  generation  after  generatitm
could  wipe  out,  and  "  destroyed  at  once  the  prestige  of  birth,  and  the  spirit  of  lead  r-
ship"  (J.  L.  Porter*).  Hence  our  topic  for  homiletic  treatment — a  topic  whicli  no
teacher  who  desires  to  declare  the  "  whole  counsel  of  God  "  can  forbear  to  touch  upon
in  due  season.  It  is  this — Life  impoverished  through  ancestral  sins  (see  Gen.  xxxv.
22 ;  xlix.  4).

I.  There  are  certain  sins — sins  of  the  flesh — to  Which  men  oenkrally  are

LIABLE  ;   which  TO  SOME  CONSTITUTIONS  PRESENT  THEMSELVES  AS  TEMPTATIONS  SPECIALLY

STRONG.  In  every  one  there  is  some  weak  point,  at  which  seductive  influences  may
easily  enter :  "  Every  one  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn  away  of  his  own  lust  (M
T^s  ISias  iiriBniilai)  and  enticed."

II.  There  are  no  sins  which  work  greater  havoc  in  a  man  than  those  to  which
Reuben  gave  way.  The  desperately  wicked  act  recorded  of  him  indicates  with  too
much  certainty  a  previously  formed  habit  of  self-indulgence,  in  which  he  had  suffered
the  reins  of  self-control  and  self-respect  to  fall  from  his  hands.  The  effect  of  such  habits
in  •  physiological  point  of  view  is  disastrous.  But  more  grievous  still  are  their  moral
issues.    They  lower  the  man  himself  in  his  own  eyes.     They  lower  his  view  of  mankind

>  See  Mr.  Porter's  valuable  article  on  '  The  Tribe  of  Beuben,'  in  Dr.  Alexander's  eilitloB
ofKitto'B'Bibl.  Cyc'


CH.  xxxni.  1— 29.]       THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMY.  641

at  large.  They  lead  inevitably  to  the  association  of  thought  with  wliat  is  lowest  in
human  nature,  rather  than  with  what  is  highest  and  best.  And,  unless  renounced,
these  sins  will  drag  the  whole  man  after  them,  and  make  of  him  a  wreck  and  a  ruin.
Hence  the  terrific  warning  of  our  Saviour  in  Matt.  v.  29.  Nothing  will  sooner
becloud  and  deaden  the  moral  sense  than  indulgence  in  sensual  sins.

III.  The  evil  effect  of  such  sins  stops  not  with  the  man  niMSELr.  With  regard
to  those  whose  good  opinion  and  respect  are  most  worth  having,  it  is  impossible  for  them
to  look  on  one  who  indulges  in  such  sins  otherwise  than  with  profoundest  pity  and  shame,
and  even  with  disgust  I  They  see  that  one  who  by  his  sex  is  meant  to  be  the  guardian
of  woman's  purity,  honour,  and  joy,  is  basely  tampering  with  them  all  I  Not  even
Jacob,  though  the  tenderness  of  the  old  patriarch  under  such  circumstances  must  have
been  at  its  height,  could  bring  himself  to  pronounce  a  rich  blessing  even  on  his  firstborn,
whose  life  had, been  thus  disfigured  and  disgraced.  Beuben's  whole  family  and  trilje
shared  in  the  stigma  of  their  father's  sin ;  not  as  being  guilty  in  like  manner,  but
because  the  name  of  their  sire  could  not  henceforth  be  dissociated  from  the  thought  of
base  and  treacherous  lust.

IV.  Nob  does  the  ill  effect  of  such  sins  exfibe  with  the  generation  in  which
they  were  committed.  The  foul  odour  of  Beuben's  crime  rises  up  before  Moses.  'Tis
not  named  indeed.  But  he  has  no  blessing  for  his  tribe  of  any  richness  or  dept'.
"  May  he  not  become  so  weak  as  to  be  lost  sight  of  altogether ! ",  Such  is  the  gist  of
it.  The  descendants  of  Jacob's  firstborn  were  long,  long  under  the  gloomy  shadow  cabt
on  them  by  the  sins  of  their  sire !  There  is  nothing  in  this  record  of  the  Word  of  God
which  does  not  frequently  find  its  counterpart  in  the  generations  of  men  now.  Many,
many  there  are  who  inherit  some  physical  ill,  some  mental  weakness,  or  some  moral
incapacity  or  obliquity,  through  a  constitutional  taint  from  sins  long  gone  by  I

Learn — 1.  We  know  not  whence,  on  the  physical  and  moral  side  of  our  constitution,
a  mightier  argument  can  be  drawn  for  purity  of  life  and  manners,  than  from  such  a
theme  as  that  suggested  by  the  text.  If  men  have  little  care  for  themselves,  let  thera
at  least  guard  against  shading  with  sadness  or  marring  with  weakness  the  lives  of  those
who  may  hereafter  owe  their  existence  to  them.  2.  Maybe  some  who  may  read  these
words  may  be  disposed  to  say,  "  If  I  may  possibly  be  the  possessor  of  an  enfeebled
constitution  on  account  of  some  sins  which  preceded  me,  then  how  can  I  or  any  one
jud:4e  of  my  measure  of  responsibility  before  God  as  to  how  far  it  is  affected  thereby  ?  "
We  reply  :  (1)  No  living  man  can  gauge  exactly  another's  responsibility,  or  even  his
own ;  but  Qod  can.  He  does,  and  he  makes  all  allowances  that  equity  requires.  He
who  is  most  just  is  most  kind.  (2)  God  invites  every  man  to  come  to  him  through  his
Son  Jesus  Christ,  that  sin,  as  guilt,  may  be  forgiven ;  and  that,  as  disease,  it  may  be
cured.  (3)  Wherever  God's  invitation  is  accepted,  his  grace  will  cancel  guilt  and  cure
corruption  ;  thus  imparting  health  and  soundness  for  the  life  that  now  is,  and  promising
the  life  to  come.  (4)  To  this  each  one  may  well  be  urged,  not  only  on  the  ground  ol'
his  individual  well-being,  but  also  on  the  ground  that  the  streams  of  purifying  grace,
cleansing  his  nature,  may  do  much  to  check  the  onward  flow  of  the  poison  he  inherits,
and  to  help  towards  a  sounder  life  in  those  who  shall  follow  him.

Ver,  7. — Tlie  Messing  of  Judah ;  or,  help  needed  to  fulfil  destiny.  It  cannot  but
suggest  itself  to  the  student  to  compare  the  blessing  on  Judah  pronounced  by  Moses,
with  the  renowned  pmphecy  of  Jacob  concerning  him  and  his  tribe.  That  the
I  atriarch's  words  declared  the  future  pre-eminence  of  that  tribe  is  well  known ;
consequently,  it  could  not  be  surprising  to  the  other  tribes  to  find  precedence  given
to  Judah  in  the  order  of  encamping  and  of  marching  (cf.  Numb.  ii.  1 — 4  ;  x.  14).  This
thought  of  Judah's  firstness  gives  its  hue  to  the  words  uttered  respecting  him.  They
take  the  form  of  a  prayer,  which  is  at  once  the  holy  benediction  of  the  dying  leader,  the
pious  breathing  of  the  saint,  and  the  prophetic  fore-glance  of  the  seer.  It  could  not  be
a  matter  of  doubt,  that  being  in  the  front  would  involve  not  only  eminence  in
honour,  but  also  precedence  in  weiglit  of  responsibility;  and  in  order  to  sustain  aright
great  responsibility,  there  is  need  for  an  unusual  supply  of  Divine  strength.  This  it
is  which  forms  the  contents  of  the  prayer.  Jacob  had  said,  "To  him  shall  the
gathering  of  the  people  be ; "  Moses  prays,  "  Lord,  fulfil  that  prediction,  and  (1)  sustain
him ;  so  that  he  may  be  brought  to  his  people ;  (2)  give  him  all  the  strength  he


542  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.        [oh.  xxxiu.  1—39.

requires  to  enable  him  to  fulfil  his  high  and  holy  destiny ;  '  let  his  hands  be  sufficient
for  himj'  and  (3)  when  the  enemy  would  endeavour  to  overthrow  him,  let  thine
almighty  aid  he  near;  'be  thou  a  Help  to  him.  from  his  enemies.'"  That  this
prophetic  blessing  and  prayer  is,  in  the  highest  meaning  thereof.  Messianic,  seems
to  admit  of  no  question.  Its  complete  fulfilment  will  be  realized  in  the  ultimate
triumph  of  him  who  is  at  once  "  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Jiidah,"  and  yet  "  the  Lamb
that  was  slain."  He  will  be  brought  "unto  his  people;"  his  hands  have  been  and  will
be  "  sufficient  for  him  ; "  and  power  no  less  than  that  of  tlie  eternal  Father  will  ensure
the  defeat  of  the  enemy  and  the  enthronement  of  the  Son,  that  "in  all  things  he
may  become  the  pre-eminent  One."  For  this  believers  have  prayed  tjnplicitly  ever
since  the  days  of  Moses ;  for  this  they  have  prayed  explicitly  ever  since  the  day  of
Pentecost.

But  there  is  another  bearing  of  this  blessing  of  Judah,  perhaps  less  obvious,  though
not  less  real  than  the  one  already  named ;  while  it  equally  suggests  a  topic  for  pulpit
teaching  of  no  small  interest  and  value,  viz.  Divine  help  needed  for  man,  that  he  may
realize  his  true  destiny.  The  fullowiug  line  of  thought  may  serve  to  press  home  this
truth : —

I.  The  life  of  man  has  a  noble  destiny  before  it.

IL  According  to  the  greatness  of  destiny  must  be  the  measure  of  responsibility-

IIL  According  to  responsibility,  so  is  the  need  of  Divine  help  to  give  imity  and
directness  to  life.  We  need  (1)  strength :  "  let  his  hands  be  sufficient  for  him ; "  (2)
protection  :  "  be  thou  a  help  to  him  from  his  enemies."

IV.  That  such  Divine  help  may  be  granted  may  well  be  made  matter  of  earnest
prayer:  (1)  of  pastors  fur  people  ;  (2)  of  parents  for  children ;  (3)  of  friend  for  friend.

V.  It  is  a  great  stimulus  to  prayer,  when  the  one  prayed  for  is  known  to  pray
for  himself.  Moses  was  not  praying  for  a  prayerless  tribe.  "  Hear,  Lord,  the  voice  of
Judah."

VI.  When  prayer  has  great  promises  to  fall  back  upon,  we  may  be  absolutely  sure  of
its  success.  The  prayer,  "  Bring  him  unto  his  people,"  was  based  on  the  promise,  "To
him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be."  It  is  equivalent  to,  "  Lord,  fulfil  thine  own
promise."  The  great  Messianic  promise  was  made  through  Judah,  and  through  him
and  in  him  was  it  fulfilled.

Vers.  8 — 11. — The  llessing  of  Levi;  or,  entire  devotion  to  Ood  a  necessary  qualifi-
cation/or  ministerial  service,  Moses  and  Aaron  were  themselves  of  the  tribe  of  Levi.
Consequently,  Moses  is  here  speaking  of  his  own  tribe ;  he  forecasts  its  future ;  he
fieems  in  a  remarkable  manner  to  revoke  the  harsh  sentence  of  the  patriarch  Jacob
upon  it.  Nor  is  this  altogether  unaccounted  for.  The  tribe  had  manifested  a  genuine
repentance  by  a  remarkable  zeal  for  God's  honour  on  several  occasions.  It  was  the
tribe,  moreover,  which  God  had  selected  from  the  rest,  to  minister  in  holy  things ;  and
these  facts,  blending  themselves  with  a  painful  reminiscence  of  his  own  breakdown
at  Meribah,  give  the  character  to  the  blessing  of  Moses.  The  points  therein  which
furnish  a  basis  for  historic  and  homiletic  teaching  are  these:  1.  Here  is  an  office
divinely  appointed  and  assigned  to  a  particular  tribe — "thy  holy  one"  (ver.  8).
2.  Here  is  a  history,  in  some  sort  chequered  and  sad,  connected  with  the  tribe  (ver.  8)
— ^"Massah,"  "Meribah"  (Numb.  xx.  1 — 13).  There  had  been  a  grievous  failure  on
Aaron's  part  too,  as  well  as  on  that  of  Moses  (Exod.  xxxii.,  xxxiii.).  Still,  as  a
whole,  the  tribe  had  been  marked  by  great  zeal  for  God,  great  concern  for  his  honour,
and  great  devotion  to  his  service  (ver.  9 ;  cf.  Numb.  viii.  14 — 26 ;  xxv.  1 — 15 ;  Exod.
ixxii.  26 — 28).  The  honour  of  God  was  deemed  by  this  tribe  paramount  to  all  personal
and  family  considerations.  3.  Here  is  a  commission  for  the  discharge  of  varied  duties
resting  on  the  tiibe  (ver.  10) — teaching,  incense,  sacrifice  (see  ch.  x.  8;  Mai.  ii.  4 — 7).
The  duties  of  the  priesthood  were  more  varied  than  is  generally  supposed  (cf.  Dean
Stanley  on  the  Jewish  Church,  vol,  ii.  lect.  xxxvi,).  Whatever  a  man  could  be  or  do  to
help  his  people  in  prayer,  work,  war,  worship,  knowledge,  or  life, — all  this  was  charged
upon  the  priest.  4.  Here  is  a  danger  espied  to  which  the  tribe  would  be  liable  (ver.  11)
— "them  that  rise  agaiust  him;"  "them  that  hate  him."  This  hatred  had  already
manifested  itself  in  jealousy  (Numb.  xvi.  3,  et  seg.).  It  is  very  suggestive  that  we  find
one  of  the  Keubeuites,  a  tribe  which  had  lost  its  bii  thright,  concerned  in  that  conspiracy


OH.  xxxin.  1— 29.]         THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEKONOMY.  543

There  always  has  been  and  there  will  be  jealousy  and  odium  towards  God's  ministers,
as  "taking  too  much  upon  them."  As  Moses  had  found  it  out  already,  he  knew  by  some
e:iperience  what  it  was  likely  to  be  in  the  future.  Hence:  5.  Here  is  a  prayer  which
takes  its  shape  from  a  review  of  the  varied  facts  named  above  (ver.  11),  that  a  blessing
might  attend  on  their  consecrated  eneigies :  " Bless,  Lord,  his  strength ;  "  that  the  work
might  be  accepted  in  God's  sight ;  and  that  the  enemies  and  haters  of  the  tribe,  who
rose  up  in  jealousy  against  the  ofBce  and  those  who  filled  it,  might  be  put  to  utter
shame  I*

Here  is  a  mass  of  truth  suggested  of  great  interest  and  value.

I.  There  is  a  ministry  appointed  by  God  under  the  Christian  economy.

IF.  To  this  office  great  honour  now  belongs.

in.  Its  faithful  discharge  makes  varied  demands  on  those  who  hold  it.

IV.  These  demands  cannot  be  rightly  met  without  entire  and  unreserved  conse-
cration.

V.  However  faithful  God's  ministers  may  be,  they  will  certainly  meet  with  hatred
and  opposition.

VI.  That  their  work  may,  in  the  midst  of  all  difficulty,  be  divinely  accepted  and
guarded,  may  well  be  made  matter  of  earnest  prayer.

Ver.  12. —  The  llessing  on  Serjamin;  or,  safety  in  the  thdtmng  cart  of  Divine
love.  Though  not  without  difficulty  in  some  points  of  detail,  the  general  tenor  of
this  blessing  on  Benjamin  is  tolerably  clear.  It  is  well  known  that  Benjamin  was  the
object  of  his  father's  special  love.  The  expiring  lawgiver  seems  to  see  in  that  a
reflection  of  a  tenderer  and  mightier,  yea,  a  Divine  love,  wliich,  as  it  had  leen  manifest
to  the  head  of  his  tribe  in  time  past,  would  also  be  manifest  to  the  tribe  itself  in  the
ages  yet  to  come.  Benjamin  had  been  and  would  be  "  the  beloved  of  the  Lord."  The
words,  "  he  shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders,"  are  variously  interpreted  (see  the
Exposition ;  also  Keil,  Calvin,  Jameson,  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  et  al.  in  foe).
We  prefer  the  simpler  meaning  accepted  by  Calvin,  that  the  figure  is  that  of  a  father
carrying  on  his  shoulders  a  young  and  feeble  child  (see  ch.  i.  31).  During  all  the
changes  of  Israel's  history,  a  special  lustre  shone  forth  from  this  tribe.  From  hence
its  first  king  was  chosen.  On  or  by  its  territory  was  God's  "  foundation  "  in  the  holy
mountains.  And  as  far  on  as  the  time  of  the  first  century  of  the  Christian  era,  Paul
reckoned  it  as  one  of  his  points  of  native  glorying  that  he  was  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin
(see  Bom.  xi.  1 ;  Phil.  iii.  5).  Our  topic  for  meditation  is — Safety  in  the  sheltering
tare  tf  Divine  love,  an  inestimable  blessing.

I.  There  are  those  whom  God  loves  with  a  special  love.  They  are,  in  a  degree
to  which  others  are  not,  "  the  beloved  of  the  Lord."  No  doubt  there  is  a  sense  in
which  it  is  true  that  God  loves  all  mankind.  His  love  to  our  race  is  such  that  he  has
given  U8  the  noblest  gift  which  even  Heaven  itself  could  bestow  (Juhn  iii.  16  ;  Hom.
v.  8  ;  Eph.  ii.  4).  This  is  a  luve  of  benevolence.  But  our  Lord  spenks  of  something
further  in  John  xiv.  21,  23  ;  xvi.  27.  And  Paul  the  apostle,  in  describing  the  blessings
of  a  justified  life,  speaks  of  the  "  love  of  God  "  being  "  shed  abroad  in  the  heart  by
the  Holy  Ghost,"  «.e.  a  pervading  sense  of  that  love.

But  who  are  they  who  are  thus  specially  loved  of  God  ?  They  do  not  belbng,  at
such,  to  any  nation,  tribe,  or  tongue.  They  may  be  found  in  all  of  them.  Those  who
are  "in  Christ,"  pardoned,  renewed,  accepted,  justified,  sanctified,— these,  these  are
"  beloved  of  God,  called  to  be  saints."

II.  ThBT  can  BEJOICE   "  ALL  THE   DAT  LOKO  "  IK  THAT   NEW  RELATIONSHIP  WHICH   18

THE  CREATION  OF  REDEEMING  LOVE.  In  the  figure  used  in  the  text,  and  in  a  not  dis-
similar verse  in  ch.'  i.  SI,  there  is  the  underlying  thought  of  a  gracious  fatherly
relation.  That  is  also  disclosed  in  the  gospel  j  and  in  both  cases  it  has  its  reci-
procal— that  of  "son  "  (see  Rom.  viii.  14 — 17).  This  is  not  that  general  relation  to
God  indicated  in  Acts  xvii.  28 ;  that  is  common  to  man  as  man.  This  is  peculiar  to
those  who  are  born  again.  The  former  may  be  and  is  marred  by  sin.  The  latter  will
never  be ;  it  is  made  possible  through  a  propitiation  for  sin  by  the  blood  of  Christ.

'  On  the  prayer  of  Hoses  conoersing  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim,  see  Eengstenberg'.-
'  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses,'  pp.  149 — 153.


544  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY,         [ch.  xxxin.  1— 29.

and  made  actual  through  the  destruction  of  gin  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost
(1  John  iii.  9).  Hence  in  the  perpetuity  of  this  relationship  there  is  matter  ol
constant  joy  (Rom.  viii.  38,  39).

III.   In   connection  with  this  BELATION  there  is  a  COKKESPONDINa  OABB  ON  THE

PABT  OP  Jehovah.  The  father  carries  the  child  "between  his  shoulders,"  not  only
because  the  child  is  too  young  or  too  weak  to  go  alone — true  enough  though  that  may
be — ^but  because  he  feels  that  the  child's  safety  is  its  father's  care.  And  the  pare:'t
would  feel  it  a  reproach  to  himself  if  the  weal  of  the  child  were  not  the  care  of  hU
heart.  Now,  we  know  how  our  Lord  permits,  yea,  teaches  us  to  look  up  from  huioaa
tenderness  to  the  Divine,  as  if  the  lower  were  but  the  reflection  (and  consequently  the
image)  of  the  higher  (Matt.  rii.  9 — 11).  And  St.  Peter  directly  teaches  the  positive
truth,  "  he  careth  for  you  "  (1  Pet.  v.  7).  And  so  does  Peter's  Lord,  in  Luke  xii.  6,
7,  22 — 30 ;  Matt.  xxi.  32,  33.  How  much  of  loving  care  is  indicated  in  John  vi.
38 — 40 ;  X.  1 — 29,  words  would  fail  to  tell.  The  believer  may  meditate  thereon  to  his
heart's  delight,  but  he  will  find  no  words  adequately  to  express  the  glories  revealed  to
his  faith  in  the  infinite  care  for  him  of  God  the  Father  and  the  Son.

IV.  Hence  the  beloved  op  the  Lobd  are  in  perpetual  sapbtt.  "  The  beloved
of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in  safety  by  him  " — "  upon  him  "  the  word  is :  God  bears  him
up ;  he  rests  safelr  ;r  God.  God  is  his  "  Shelterer  "  all  the  day  long,  without  let  or
pause.  The  Old  Testament  saints  felt  this,  or  they  could  never  have  penned  Psalms
xxiii.,  xci.,  and  cxxi.  1.  They  are  safe  in  Divine  love.  None  can  wrest  them  thence.
2.  They  are  safe  at  all  hours.  "  He  that  keepeth  Israel  shall  neither  slumber  nor
sleep."  3.  They  are  safe  from  all  plots,  snares,  and  fiery  darts.  4.  They  are  safe
under  all  circumstances  of  duty,  care,  trial,  affliction,  bereavement,  death.  They  may
be  tossed  about  on  the  Rock,  but  never /fw»  it.

In  conclusion.  1.  Let  the  believer  rejoice  in  the  Lord ;  yea,  let  hira  shout  aloud  for
joy  (Ps.  xxxiii.  1 ;  Phil.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  1).  2.  If  any  ask  us  this  question — "  If  the  believer
is  so  safe,  how  is  it  that  one  like  Paul  can  virrite  as  he  does  in  1  Cor.  ix.  23 — 27  ?  " — the
answer  is.  This  is  one  way  in  which  God  secures  the  safety  of  loyal  souls,  by  giving
them  to  see  the  danger  they  are  in  from  themselves,  that  they  may  look  ever  to  the
Rock  that  is  higher  than  they  are.  For :  3.  No  siich  security  is  ever  enjoyed  as  to
warrant  any  departure  from  duty's  path,  or  any  presuming  on  God's  providence.  To  a
temptation  in  this  direction,  even  our  dear  Lord  was  exposed,  and  his  followers  must
not  expect  to  be  free  therefrom  yet  awhile  (see  Matt.  iv.  5 — 7).  4.  The  great  reason
why  God  takes  our  cares  on  himself  is  that  he  may  set  us  free  for  the  one  business  of
life,  which  is  in  loyalty  and  love  to  do  the  work  of  the  day  in  the  day,  and  to  leave
all  else  in  his  hands.    Let  us  say —

"  I  have  no  cares,  O  Blessed  Will ;
My  cares  thou  makest  thine.
I  live  in  triumph,  Lord,  for  then
Hast  made  thy  triumphs  mine  I "

And  sooner  shall  heaven  and  earth  pass  than  one  such  beloved  one  of  the  Lord  shall
ever  be  put  to  shame.

Vers.  13 — 17. —  The  blessing  of  Joseph ;  or,  Ood's  favour  the  mercy  of  mercies.  We
may  see  here  a  reflection  of  Jacob's  blessing,  both  as  in  Gen.  xlviii.  19  and  also  Gen.
xlix.  25,  et  seq.  In  Dean  Stanley's  '  Sinai  and  Palestine,'  pp.  226—250,  there  is  much
interesting  information  as  to  the  correspondence  between  this  prophecy  of  Moses  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  extent  of  territory,  the  beauty  and  fertility  of  the  district,  the
dignity,  valour,  and  advance  of  the  tribes  of  Ephraim  and  Manasseh  on  the  other.
(For  an  elucidation  of  each  clause  in  this  somewhat  lengthened  blessing,  see  the
Exposition.)  By  way  of  "  opening  up,"  however,  the  theme  of  our  Homily,  we  must  call
the  readers'  attention  to  the  structure  of  the  verses.  Wo  regard  them  as  a  blending
at  once  of  prophecy  and  prayer.  Both  the  beginning  and  the  close  are  prophetic.  The
beginning,  from  ver.  13  down  to  the  word  "thereof,"  in  ver.  16;  the  ending  in
ver.  17.  In  the  intervening  clauses  we  regard  (so  Calvin,  Keil,  et  oi.)  the  word  pxT
(retzon)  as  a  nominative  case.  We  read  thus :  "  And  may  the  good  will  of  him  thai
dwelt  in  the  hush  com*  upon  the  head  of  Joseph"  etc.     It  will  be  observed  that  in  the


OH.  XXXIII.  1—29.]         THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEBOXOMY.  645


English  Version  the  words  "  for"  and  "  the  blessing"  are  in  italics,  to  show  that  they
are  added  by  the  translators.  And  the  fact  that  there  is  no  "  for  "  in  the  original  at
the  commencement  of  this  clause  seems  to  show  that  it  is  not  co-ordinate  with  the
preceding  ones,  and  so  to  mark  a  new  starting-point ;  as  if  Moses  had  said,  "  He  will
have  a  noble  territory,  rich  in  all  temporal  wealth  ;  his  tribe  will  be  an  enterprising,
hardy,  and  pushing  one;  may  there  b^  superadded  to  all,  the  favour  of  him  who
dwelt  in  the  bush,  to  crown  and  glorify  the  whole."  The  reader  will  find  the  varied
scriptural  senses  of  the  word  here  translated  "  good  will,"  in  the  following  passages,
where  it  occurs :— Bxod.  xxviii.  38 ;  Lev.  xxiii.  11 ;  Ps.  v.  12 ;  xix.  14 ;  xxx.  5  ;  Prov.
XV.  8;  Isa.  xlix.  8  ;  Ix.  7  ;  Ixi.  2.  If  in  addition  to  all  that  earth's  varied  wealth  and
tribal  renown  and  conquest  could  yield,  Joseph  had  the  "  favour  "  of  the  Lord,  that
would  make  him  rich  indeed.  Whence  our  theme  suggests  itself — Ood's  favour  the
mercy  of  mercies.

I.  The  store  of  meroibs  which  abb  the  tempobai,  gifts  of  God's  hand  n
mr  no  means  small.  The  land,  with  its  wondrous  capacities  and  its  adaptation  to
this  seed  and  to  that ;  the  dew  that  gently  distils,  or  the  vapour  that  exhales ;  the  lakes
that  lie  sleeping  on  the  bosom  of  the  hills;  the  variety  of  beauty,  fragrance,  and
fruitfulness  coming  through  the  sunbeams ;  the  produce  of  the  several  months,  year
by  year ;  the  wealth  stored  up  in  the  mountains  and  hills ;  the  varied  productions
of  the  soil; — all  these  are  referred  to  in  the  text;  and,  in  a  few  brief  touches,  what
a  conception  they  give  us  of  the  wealth  with  which  God  has  enriched  this  globe,  and
of  the  series  of  constant  adaiitations  with  which  it  is  made  subservient  to  the  use
of  man !  So  great  are  all  these  blessings  which  go  to  make  up  the  enjoyments  of  life
on  its  temporal  side,  that  meditation  thereon  may  well  call  up  from  the  soul  a  grand
song  of  praise  such  as  we  find  in  Ps.  civ.

Nor  can  we  in  such  an  age  as  this,  leave  out  the  additional  fact  that,  owing  to  the
rapid  communication  between  the  people  of  one  land  and  those  of  another,  the
productions  of  one  country  supply  the  wants  of  another ;  and  thus  the  nations  at
large  share  the  supplies  sent  thera  by  a  gracious  God.

And  be  it  remembered  these  supplies  are  not  less  from  God  because  he  uses  means
in  sending  them ;  it  is  rather  a  proof  of  his  care  for  the  culture  and  education  of  man,
that  he  makes  him  the  means  of  the  cultivation  and  tillage  of  the  soil.  "  Whoso  is  wise
and  will  observe  these  things,  even  he  shall  understand  the  loving-kindness  of  the
Lord."

II.  There  is  a  fab  gebateb  mercy  than  ant  of  these — one  which  we  have
called  "  the  mercy  of  mercies."  It  is  referred  to  in  ver.  16,  "  'ilie  good  will  .  ,  .  may
it  come  upon  the  head  of  Jose]  h."  Favour,  mercy,  on  Joseph's  head,  is  a  boon  greatei-
far  than  plenty  on  his  land !  There  are  three  questions  which  we  may  appropriately
ask  concerning  it.

1.  What  is  this  "goodwiW'l  It  is  not  simply  that  benevolence  to  which  our
Saviour  refers  in  Matt.  v.  45.  In  this  sense  God's  goodness  extendeth  to  all.  "  His
tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works."  'lliis  good  will  is  something  special.  If
the  student  will  compare  the  several  passages  (those  given  ut  supra  et  al.),  in  which
the  same  word  is  used  which  is  here  translated  "good  will,"  he  will  see  how  much  meaning
it  conveys.  It  includes :  (1)  acceptance  in  God's  sight- — forgiveness,  access  ;  (2)  God's
delight  in  the  accepted  one ;  (3)  the  constant  possession  of  God's  special  love,  which
enriches  the  accepted  one  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.

2.  now  can  this  good  will  be  assured  to  its  possessor  t  (1)  There  is  a  word  of
promise  which  assures  tis  that  it  is  made  over  to  the  believer  in  Christ  (John  i.  12 ;
Gal.  iii.  26).  (2)  To  him  who  believes,  the  Spiiit  is  given,  confirming  to  the  soul  its
toterest  in  Christ,  and  sealing  it  "  to  the  day  of  redemption."

3.  Why  is  this  the  mercy  of  mercies  t  (1)  Because  the  possessor  thereof  can  delight
in  God  himself.  He  can  realize  that  in  God  he  has  One  who  is  infinitely  more  than
all  his  gifts,  and  who  will  be  his  joy  when  all  earth's  joys  have  lost  their  power  to
charm.'  (2)  Because  all  other  mercies  have  new  joy  stamped  upon  them  when  they  are
enjoyed  as  coming  from  a  reconciled  God  and  Father.  (3)  Because  we  are  then  enabled
to  use  other  mercies  aright.  Surely  that  must  be  a  crowning  blessing  which  teaches
the  right  use  of  every  blessing.-  (4)  The  conscious  enjoyment  of  God's  favour  and
love  gives,  as  nothing  else  can,  strength  for  the  duties  of  life.    "  The  joy  of  the  Lord

DEUTEBOUOMT.  2  N


546  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERUNOMY.         [ch.  xxxm.  1—29.

is  your  strength."  (5)  With  such  joy  and  strength  life  will  be  so  sanctified  as  to
be  rich  in  influence  for  good.  (6)  God's  favour  and  love  will  be  a  source  of  joy  long
after  we  have  ceased  to  dwell  below,  yea,  for  ever  and  ever.

Oh,  it  is  not — it  is  not  merely  having  a  wealthy  land,  or  great  estates,  or  splendid
revenues,  or  military  prowess,  or  pushing  energy,  that  can  make  life  a  success.  We
may  have  all  these,  and  yet  life  may  be  a  miserable,  an  unredeemed  and  irredeemable
failure.  It  may  well  be  a  matter  for  frequent  wonder  how  parents  who  profess  to
aim  at  and  to  be  living  the  higher  life,  do  seek  so  earnestly  to  get  the  best  situations
in  life  for  their  children,  yet  never  manifest  half  the  same  amount  of  anxiety  that  their
loved  ones  may  have  "  the  good  will  of  him  that  dwelt  in  the  bush  "  resting  on  their
heads.  And  yet,  without  God's  favour,  what  is  life,  what  is  wealth,  what  are  earthly
friends,  but  blessings  that  disappoint  oui  hopes,  and  prove,  perhaps,  anything  but
blessings  in  the  end  ?

Finally:  This  most  needful  op  all  blessinqs  is  the  vert  one  of  which
ALL  who  crave  IT  SUPREMELY  MAY  MAKE  MOST  SURE.  God  may  not  give  US  much
of  this  world's  goods.  lie  will  give  us  himself.  He  waits  to  be  gracious.  He  delights
in  loving-kindness.  He  will  be  the  seeker's  God  for  ever  ftnd  ever;  his  Guide  even  unto
death.

Vers.  18,  \^.— Trade  and  commerce  subservient  to  evof^dieation.  There  is  room  for
considerable  divergence  of  view  with  regard  to  some  of  the  minutiae  of  this  passage,
on  which  the  reader  will  consult  the  Exposition,  and  may  also  refer  with  great  advantage
to  Keil,  Jameson,  and  Wordsworth,  on  the  blessing  of  Issaohar  and  Zebulun.  The
following  points,  however,  stand  out  with  a  fair  degree  of  clearness: — 1.  Zebulun  and
Issachar  had  the  territory  which  corresponds  to  the  Galilee  of  our  Lord's  time.
2.  They  had  a  fine  piece  of  sea-board,  which  would  enable  them  to  open  up  trafSc  with
other  nations.  3.  They  had  also  a  considerable  space  inland,  reaching  to  the  lake  of
Gennesaret.  4.  With  this  double  advantage,  there  would  be  scope  for  the  development
of  foreign  and  home  trade.  5.  They,  having  the  inestimable  blessings  of  the  knowledge
of  God,  of  a  pure  faith,  and  of  a  holy  worship,  would  be  in  a  far  better  position  religiously
than  any  of  the  nations  with  whom  they  would  carry  on  intercourse  for  the  jiurposes
of  trade.  6.  They  would  be  made  rich  by  the  treasures  of  wealth  brought  to  them
from  afar.  "They  shall  suck  of  the  abundance  of  the  seas,"  etc.  7.  They  would  make
their  trafiSc  with  other  peoples  a  reason  for  and  an  opportunity  of  inviting  them  to  join
them  in  the  sacrifices  of  righteousness  (see  Gesenius,  siib  verl.  naj).  As  other  nations
enriched  them  in  temporal  things,  they  would  enrich  other  peoples  in  spiritual  things
(see  a  fine  suggestive  note  by  .Bishop  Wordsworth,  in  loc').  This  was  fulfilhd  "  when
the  apostles  and  evangelists  of  Galilee  went  forth  to  evangelize  all  nations  in  the  ships
of  the  Christian  Church."  The  apostles,  "  men  of  Galilee,"  called  all  nations  to  the
mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  on  the  day  of  Pentecost.  A  greater  fulfilment  awaits
this  passage  (see  Isa.  Ix.  5,  6, 16 ;  Ixvi.  11,  12).  Hence  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  the  law-
giver, gives  us  here  a  great  theme  for  homiletic  teaching — The  development  of
commerce  subservient  to  evangelization.

I,  The  Church  of  God  is  here  prospectively  regarded  as  upon  a  "  mountain  "  (ver.  19  ;
see  this  figure  carried  out  in  Isa.  ii.  2  ;  Micah  iv.  1).

II.  From  this  mountain  an  invitation  to  the  nations  is  to  be  sent  forth ;  ver.  1 9,
"  They  shall  call,"  etc.  (cf.  Isa.  ii.  3  ;  Micah  iv.  2  ;  Zech.  viii.  20—23 ;  Isa.  Iv.  5).

IlL  There  will  be  such  national  intercommunication  as  shall  help  to  forward  these
world-wide  invitations  (Isa.  Ix.  3,  4 ;  Dan.  xii.  4 ;  cf.  Acts  ii.  5 — 11).

IV.  The  time  will  come  when  the  Church  of  God  shall  be  enriched  by  the  glad
inflowing  of  a  people's  wealth  ;  ver.  19,  "  For  they  shall  suck,"  etc.  (cf.  Isa.  Ix.  9,  et  seq. ;
Micah  iv.  13).

V,  The  nations  at  large  shall  then  "  offer  sacrifices  of  righteousness  "  (ver.  19  j  cf.
Mai.  i.  11 ;  Bom.  xv.  16;   Heb.  xiii.  15, 16 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5),

Learn — 1.  With  what  interest  may  believers  contemplate  the  commercial  progress
of  the  age,  and  the  increased  facility  of  communication  between  people  and  people  I
Man  i«  seeking  to  bring  about  all  this,  to  serve  himself.  God  overrules  all  for  the
higher  purposes  of  his  race,  and  governs  the  world  in  the  interests  of  the  Church.
^.  |Iow  great  a  shame  is  it  when  men  from  Christian  lands,  in  carrying  on  tfafuc  with


€H.  xxxiu.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  Ul

other  nations,  make  such  traffic  a  means  of  propagating  corruption,  lust,  and  crime  !
3.  Commerce  may  be  "  holiness  unto  the  Lord,"  and  will  never  reach  its  true  splendojir
till  such  is  the  case  (Zecli.  xiv.  20).  Its  stainless  purity  is  of  infinitely  more  moment
than  its  extent  or  amount.

Vers.  20,  21.— Oad ;  or,  a  place  in  the  Church  and  the  world/or  Uonlike  strength.
"  The  territory  of  Gnd  lay  in  the  east  of  the  Jordan  ...  it  included  several  cities
remarkable  in  the  history  of  the  patriarchs  and  of  the  judges,  as  Mahanaim,  Ramoth,
Mizpeh,  Succoth,  and  Peniel ;  but  it  was  pre-eminently  remarkable  because  it  contained
the  grave  of  the  Esreat  general  and  lawgiver,  Moses— a  fact  which  so  decidedly  invested
the  province  with  a  character  of  holiness  that,  though  situated  on  the  east  of  the  river,
it  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  honoured  parts  of  the  promised  land,  from  which
the  leaders  of  the  people  might  legitimately  arise"  (Kalisch  on  Gen.  xlix.  19).

The  blessing  of  Moaos,  like  that  of  Jacob,  upon  Gad,  has  a  warlike  ring  about  it.
He  is  spoken  of  here  as  linnlike  in  courage  and  strength,  and  also  as  buing  cliiirged  with
tlie  execution  of  the  justice  of  the  Lord  and  his  ordinances  with  Israel.  "  The  clause,
'  He  came  to  the  heads  of  the  people,'  expresses  the  thought  that  Gad  joined  the  heads
of  the  people  to  go  at  the  head  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  (comp.  Josh.  i.  14  ;  iv.  12,  with
Numb,  xxxii.  17,  21,  32),  to  conquer  Canaan  with  the  whole  nation,  and  root  out  the
Canaanitas  "  (Keil,  in  loc).  The  character  of  this  tribe  is  described  with  remarkable
vividness  in  the  Book  of  Chronicles.  It  was  strong,  hardy,  fierce,  warlike,  magnificent
in  heroism,  invaluable  to  friends,  terrible  to  foes.  Among  them  were  "  strong  men  of
might,  men  of  war  for  the  battle,  that  could  handle  shield  and  buckler,  their  fices  the
feces  of  lions,  and  like  roes  upon  the  n)ountain  for  swiftness :  "  "  the  least  of  them  more
than  equal  to  a  hundred,  and  the  greatest  to  a  thousand  "  (1  Ghron.  xii.  8,  14).  And  amid
all  the  conflicts  which  were  inevitable  to  the  Hebrews  with  the  nations  round  about,
such  li'inlike  courage  and  hardiness  would  he  invaluable  in  leading  them  on  to  victory,
and  in  helping  them  through  great  crises  of  their  political  and  military  history.  And
when  such  courage  and  valour  are  animated  by  the  right  spirit,  and  engaged  on  the
side  of  righteousness,  upon  them  an  aged  saint  may  well  pronounce  his  blessing.  It  is
indicative  of  the  spirit  which  pervaded  this  tribe  that  such  men  as  Jephthah,  Barzillai,
and  (probal)ly)  Elijah  were  of  it.  Our  theme  fur  hoiuiletic  teaching  is — That  the  special
qualities  of  courage  and  strewjth  have  a  valudbU  place  in  carrying  out  b'od's  work  both
in  the  Church  and  the  world.

I.  There  are  not  unfbeqoentlt  great  crises  which  arise  in  the  Chdhch  or  in
THE  WORLD.  Work  has  to  be  done  which  requires  no  ordinary  amount  of  indepeudeiice
and  assurance ;  as  e.g.  when  a  way  has  to  be  opened  up  through  new  and  untried
districts ;  or  a  step  has  to  be  taken  on  which  the  weal  or  woe  of  ages  may  depend.
Sometimes  in  the  military  career  of  a  nation  a  giant  foe  has  to  be  grajipled  with,  or,  in
the  progress  of  a  Chiu-ch,  some  heresy  has  to  be  attacked,  and  battles,  harder  than  any
on  a  nation's  battle-field,  have  to  be  foughtin  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Terchance
gome  Ahab  with  his  pi  ide  and  coVetousness,  or  some  Herod  or  Felix  rioting;  in  lust  and
splendour,  may  have  to  be  sternly  addressed  for  righteousness'  sake.  Or  there  may
come  a  time  when  the  flood-gates  of  iniquity  are  burst  open,  and  sin  rushes  forth  in
torrents,  and  the  wicked  ride  high  and  triumph  over  the  righteous,  and  the  greater  part
of  men  are  cowed  before  the  storm-blast.

II.  The  work  of  God  at  such  times  may  be  stern  and  hard.  It  may  be  that
some  special  form  of  service  is  just  then  imperatively  needed.  "  Who  will  rise  up  fur
ine  against  the  evil-doers  ?  who  will  stand  up  for  me  against  the  workers  of  iniquity  ?  "
The  quiet  souls,  precious  as  they  are,  will  seem  to  be  at  a  discount  then.  There  requires :
1.  Leadership  in  the  caiise  of  the  right.  2.  Men  who  can  venture  all,  to  clear  the  way
to  an  unknown  region.  3.  Men  who  can  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus
Christ.    4.  Men  who  can  fearlessly  rebuke  ill,  and  fear  the  face  of  neither  man  nor  devil.

III.'  Fob  this  special  form  of  bkrvicb,  enterprise,  courage,  bra  very,  and  the
sterner  virtubs  are  required.  Those  who  are  naturally  timid  and  retiring  will
probably  be  out  of  sight  at  such  times.  Their  work,  indeed,  is  not  lost.  Their  sighs
and  cries  and  prayers  do  enter  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  sabaoth.  But  still  there
th«n  is  need  of  the  shaggier  spirits  to  come  to  the  front.  There  was  time  when  evil
w  jverspread  Israel,  and  persecution  was  so  sore,  that  it  seemed  as  if  virtue  would  gooo


648  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEllONOMY.        [ch.  xxxui.  1—29.


become  extinct  unless  God  arose  in  his  might.  There  were  seven  thousand  soula
hidden  in  obscurity.  But  one  man,  stern  and  strong,  must  be  to  the  front.  It  was
Elijah  (cf.  also  John  the  Baptist).

IV.  God  in  Mebct,  as  he  foresees  these  crises,  prepares  mkn  for  them.  The
Hebrews  could  not  have  dis|iensed  with  the  men  of  Gad.  Their  strength  was  required
as  much  as  the  sanctity  of  the  Levites.  Every  virtue,  every  grace,  has  its  own  dis-
tinctive sphere  of  service.  God  gives  some  more  of  the  kindlier  graces,  that  they  maj
be  comforters;  and  others  more  of  the  hardier  ones,  that  they  may  be  awakeners.  Ont
is  a  BarnaVias ;  another  a  Boanerges.

V.  Therefore,  whatever  oub  natural  gifts  mat  be,  let.  ds  be  sufbemely  con-
cerned TO  SANCTIFY  THEM  FOR  GoD.  Let  no  One  regret  that  he  cannot  be  anybody
else.  Rather,  "  as  much  as  in  him  is,"  let  him  use  his  powers,  whatever  they  may  be,
for  his  redeeming  God.  The  meek,  quiet,  gentle,  retiring  souls  have  their  work.  The
rougher,  sterner  ones  have  also  theirs.  '.'  Each  one  in  his  place  is  best."  Be  it  ours
every  day -to  ask,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  In  a  great  house  there  are
not  only  vessels  of  gold  and  of  silver,  but  also  of  wood  and  of  earth  ;  some  to  honour
and  some  to  dishonour.  If  a  man,  therefore,  purge  himself  from  these,  he  shall  be  a
vessel  unto  honour,  sanctified  and  meet  for  the  Master's  use,  and  prepared  unto  every
good  work.

Vers.  22,  23. — The  blessing  of  Dan  and  Naphtali;  the  satis/action  which  accmes
from  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour.  The  word  rendered  "  favour  "  in  this  verse,
is  the  same  as  the  one  translated  "  good  will "  in  the  blessing  of  Joseph.  (For  several
instances  in  which  that  word  is  used,  see  the  Homily  on  that  passage.)  We  are  not
going  beyond  the  significance  attached  to  the  word  in  the  time  of  Moses,  in  thinking
of  it  as  conveying  to  us  the  meaning  of  that  favour,  grace,  and  mercy  of 'God  which  is
the  portion  of  those  who  are  accepted  in  his  sight.  And  the  Mosaic  expressirn,
"  satisfied  with  favour,"  suggests  to  us  this  theme  for  meditation — Acceptance  with
Ood  a  matter  for  devout  satisfaction.

I.  The  blbssino  here  pronounced  on  Dan  and  Naphtali  speaks  of  temporal
MERCIES  of  no  MEAN  VALUE.  To  Dan  is  promised  the  strength  and  leaping  freedom  of
young  life.  Samson  was  a  mighty  hero  in  this  tribe.  The  historical  details  are  net
pufiBcient  to  enable  us  to  compare  the  history  of  the  tribe  with  the  blessing  upon  it.
Nevertheless,  in  general,  it  is  sufficiently  obvious  that  an  amplit\ide  of  power  is  a  great
boon,  if,  indeed  it  be  attended  with  the  greater  one,  of  wisdom  to  use  it  aright.
Naphtali,  too,  was  to  enjoy  "  the  sunny  south  "  (see  Hebrew).  To  be  permitted  to
know  this  earthly  life  on  its  sunny  side  is  indeed  a  mercy ;  how  it  sweetens  our
existence  when,  enjoying  the  warm  sunbeams,  we  are  permitted  to  feel  that  life  is  a
privilege.  Let  such  as  have  the  earthly  gifts  bestowed  on  Dan  and  Naphtali —
strength  and  sunshine — not  be  slow  to  perceive  or  to  acknowledge  their  indebtedness
and  responsibility  to  God.

II.  Yet  great  as  these  temporal  mercies  are,  by  themselves  they  will  not

YIELD  satisfaction  TO  THE  HIGHER  NATURE  OF  MAN,  HOWEVER  ABUNDANT  THE  DEGREE

IN  WHICH  THEY  MAY  BE  POSSESSED.  It  IS  true  that  this  is  not  so  much  expressed  in
the  text  as  implied  in  the  form  of  it.  The  satisfaction  of  which  Moses  speaks  arises
from  something  else  which  neither  might  nor  brightness  can  secure.

III.  There  is  a  greater  boon,  even  "favoivr " — acceptance  with  God.  This  the
Hebrews  enjoyed  who  had  made  a  covenant  with  God  through  sacrifice.  (For  the
lilessedness  of  this  in  its  ripest  Christian  form,  see  Bom.  v.  1 — 11).  Earthly  blessings
are  the  ^fts  of  God's  hand.  Spiritual  blessings  are  the  outflowings  of  his  grace
(Eph.  i.  1— 3;  ii.  1— 6).

IV.  This  greater  boon  it  is  which  yields  entire  satisfaction.  With  God's
"  favour,"  all  who  possess  it  are  abundantly  satisfied.  It  must  be  so.  For  in  this
blessed  state  of  acceptance,  we  enjoy  what  the  Apostle  Paul  speaks  of  as  a  resurrection
life.  We  are  in  "  a  new  creation,"  "  all  things  are  become  new."  (1)  The  intellect  is
satisfied.  For  so  much  comes  into  view  to  delight  the  soul  (1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10).  (2)
The  conscience  is  pacified.  For  the  enjoyment  of  God's  favour  comes  out  of  Chiist's
own  reconciling  work,  and  is  attended  with  pardon  and  adoption.  (3)  The  affections
are  satisfied.     For  Divine  love  is  "  shed  abroad  in  the  heart."    Fellowship  with  God  is


cfi,  xxxm.  1— 29.]         THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  549

ever  maintained.  (4)  A  double  joy  is  put  into  the  use  of  earthly  gifta.  They  are
received  as  a  Father's  tokens  of  love.  They  mean  so  much  mure  than  they  can  to
others.  (5)  The  expectations  are  satisfied.  In  God's  love  they  have  an  enduring
treasury  of  wealth.

"...  when  all  earthly  pleasures  fail, —
(And  fail  they  always  will  to  every  soul  of  man).
He  senda  his  hopes  on  high ;  reaches  his  sickle  forth.
And  reaps  the  clusters  from  the  vines  of  God."

Verily  such  a  one  is  "  satisfied  with  favour,  and  filled  with  the  blessing  of  the  Lord."

Vers.  24,  25.— Aaher's  blessing ;  strength  as  the  day.  There  are  several  features  in
this  blessing  to  Asher.  He  is  to  have  a  numerous  seed :  to  enjoy  above  his  brethren
the  favour  of  the  Lord ;  to  be  surroumied  with  plenty  ;  to  be  guarded  with  bars  of  iron
and  brass ;  and  to  have  strength  according  to  the  days.  (The  Hebrew  word  translated
"days  "  is  so  rendered  or  explained  by  the  Targum,  Boothroyd,  and  Parkhurst.  The
LXX.  render  it  lirxus :  the  French  version  has  it  ta  force ;  Gesenius  renders  it  "  rest."
In  this  Homily  we  follow  the  LXX.,  and  accept  our  translation,  "  strength.")  However
great  the  temporal  blessings  may  be  which  are  here  promised  to  Asher,  this  last-named
one  is  surely  the  greatest  of  all,  yea,  greater  than  any  merely  earthly  blessings  could
possibly  be.  And  perhaps  there  is  no  promise  of  God's  Word  which  has  more  deeply
touched  the  hearts  of  his  people,  or  more  frequently  proved  itself  a  balm  in  care,  than
this  one.  For  that  it  was  made  to  Asher  first,  need  not  shut  off  any  child  of  God  from
taking  the  comfort  of  it.  There  is  a  distinct  promise  made  to  Joshua,  "  I  will  not
fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee ; "  but  yet  the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  bids  the
people  whom  he  is  addressing  to  make  that  promise  their  awn.  And  so  assuredly  may
the  people  of  God  in  every  age  and  land  do  with  the  promise  before  us.  They  have
done  so  hitherto,  and  will  do  so  till  the  end.  Let  us  meditate  on  it  now,  presenting,
as  it  does,  this  topic — Strength  promised  for  the  day.

I.  What  dobs  the  promise  include  ?  It  suggests  truths  of  which  we  are  often
reminded,  viz. :  That  we  have  to  live  by  the  day.  In  one  sense  we  can  do  no  otherwise.
We  can  never  with  certainty  look  over  the  rim  of  one  day  so  as  to  see  what  will  happen
to-morrow.  Then  each  day  has  its  own  peculiar  alternations  and  variations  of  liyht
and  shade.  One  day  all  is  smiling  ;  the  next,  perchance,  all  is  in  gloom.  Every  hour,
every  place  has  "  hues  of  its  own  fresh  borrowed  from  the  heart."  Consequently,  each
day  brings  its  own  demands  with  it.  And  for  each  day  we  require  new  self-adaptedness.
Moreover,  the  strength  of  each  day  will  not  serve  for  the  next.  Now,  these  are  the
facts  which  this  promise  is  intended  to  meet.  How  does  it  meet  them  ?  1.  It  assures
us  of  strength  as  varied  as  the  day.  Whatever  kind  of  strength  is  wanted,  that  kind
of  strength  will  be  given — whether  for  work  or  war,  pain  or  sickness,  poverty  or
temptation,  bereavement  or  death.  "They  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  renew  [i.e.
change]  their  stiength."  2.  It  is  a  promise  of  strength  as  lure  as  the  day.  No  day
shall  come  without  its  due  measure  of  might  to  enable  us  to  meet  its  demands.  He
who  hath  taught  his  children  to  cry,  "  Give  us  day  by  day  our  daily  bread,"  in  teach-
ing them  so  to  pray  reveals  his  purpose  to  fulfil  the  prayer  he  has  taught..  We  shall
never  find  a  day  when  the  Saviour's  grace  is  a-wanting.  3.  It  pledges  strength  as  long
as  the  days  shall  last.  So  long  as  any  demands  are  made  upon  us,  so  long  will  God's
grace  be  sufficient  to  enable  us  to  meet  them.  We  need  not  look  wistfully  and
anxiously  ahead.  Our  Father  cares.  One  whose  words  are  more  to  us  than  thousamis
of  gold  and  silver  has  said,  "  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow,"  etc.  And  an  inspired
writer  has  given  us  an  impregnable  argument,  "  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but
delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  "
But  let  us  inquire—

II.  What  it  is  which  oiteb  this  promise  a  special  value  ?  "  As  thy  days,  bo
shaU  thy  strength  be."  The  words  remind  us  of  a  picture  drawn  by  Mrs.  Stowe,  in
'  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,'  of  a  slave  weary  and  worn  with  toiling  in  the  sultry  sun.  One
quotes  the  words,  "  Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will
give  you  rest !  "  "  Them's  good  words,"  is  the  reply,  "  but  who  says  'em  f  "  Obviously
all  depends  on  that    So  it  is  here.    The  words  are  said — by  1.  One  who  knows  whai(


«50  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTEEONOMt.         [oh.  xxxiu.  1-29

our  days  will  be.  2.  One  who  orders  our  days.  3.  One  who  measures  our  days.  4.  One
who  lored  us  from  everlasting  days.  5.  One  whose  love  changes  not  with  the  day&
6.  One  who  has  infinite  resources  on  which  we  can  draw  throughout  the  days.  7.  One
whose  love  as  revealed  in  Christ  is  a  pledge  that  be  will  be  with  us  to  the  end  of  the  diiys.
Is  anything  wanting  to  heighten  the  value  of  a  promise  if  it  comes  from  such  a  Promiser  ? .

III.   OUQHT  NOT  SUCH  A  PROMISE  TO  HAVE   GREAT  POWBB  OVBB   US  ?      Yea,  VeHly.      A

triple  power.  1.  It  should  stimulate  to  holy  obedience.  2.  It  should  prepare  us  to
look  onward  with  holy  calmness.  "  I  will  trust,  and  not  be  afraid."  3.  it  should
embolden  usto  meet  emergencies  with  a  valiant  heart.  4.  It  should  lead  ua  to  look
upward  with  a  waiting,  expectant  eye.

Vers.  26—29. — The  glory  of  IsraeVt  Ood,  and  the  blessedneis  of  Ood's  Israel.  Ere
Moses  quite  throws  up  his  task,  he  gives  us  his  view  of  Israel  as  a  whole.  He  has  had
a  word  of  blessing  for  tribe  by  trilje,  and  now  he  takes  one  last  look  at  the  whole
nation,  and  viewing  it  m  the  light  of  that  eternal  world  on  which  ho  is  so  soon  to
eater,  his  Words  are  richer,  riper,  sweeter  than  any  we  yet  have  read.  The  name  he
gives  to  the  people  is  very  significant — "Jeshurun."  The  word  is  found  but  four
times  in  the  Scriptures,  viz.  in  cb.  xxxii.  15;  xxxiii.  5,  26  ;  Isa.  xliv.  2.  It  seems  to  be
a  kind  of  diminutive  from  "^l,  and  in  the  passage  before  us  it  appears  to  be  used  as  a
term  of  admiration  and  endearment ;  some  would  think  it  equivalent  to  "  a  righteous
little  people  "  (see  Gesenius).  Anyway,  the  root-notion  of  the  word  is  connected  with
righteousness.  And  the  fundamental  conception  which  Moses  has  of  the  nation  is  that
it  is  a  nation  in  covenant  with  Jehuvah  on  the  righteous  basis  of  sacrifice,  and  that  it
is  one,  moreover,  which  has  righteousness  for  the  corner-stone  of  its  constitution  and
polity.  And  he  pronounces  them  blessed  in  two  senses  :  they  have  a  God  who  is
infinitely  greater  than  all  gods  ;  they  Jiave  privileges  which  make  them  greater
than  all  other  peoples.  Hence  we  have  a  double  theme  to  meditate  upon,  from  the
evangelic  standpoint.        ,

I.  None  is  so  globious  as  Isbael's  God.  It  is  one  mark  of  Divine  condescension
that  our  God  lets  his  people  speak  of  him  in  laijgiiage  they  can  best  understand ;  ■e.g.
"  None  like  unto  the  God  of  Jeshurun  "  is  a  phrase  which  would  seem  to  imply  that
there  may  be  some  other  gods,  but  none  equal  to  the  one  God  (cf.  Micah  vii.  18 ;
1  Sam.  ii.  2),  whereas  in  fact  there  is  no  other.  Still,  men  of  other  nations  worshipped
other  beings  whom  they  deemed  to  be  gods ;  and  Israel's  God,  in  his  infinite  condescen-
sion, suffers  himself  to  be  put  in  contrast  from  them,  although  he  is  God  alone.  1.  He
is  "  the  eternal  God."  The  word  rendered  "  eternal"  here-  is  one  which  refers  to  God's
having  existed  from  the  eternal  past.  "  From  everlasting"  he  is  God — he  is  Jehovah,
lie  changes  not.  2.  He  is  one  who  "  rideth  above  the  heaven,"  etc. ;  he  is  over  alL  In
the  glory  of  his  transcendent  majesty,  all  things  are  under  his  feet.  "  He  maketh  the
clouds  his  chariot ;  he  walketh  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind."  3.  He  is  one  who  bears
up  Israel  and  all  things  in  his  arms.  "Underneath  are  the  everlasting  arras" — arms
spread  out,  expanded  with  the  intent  of  bearing  all.  "  Everlasting  arms,"  that  will
remain  thus  spread  out  and  bearing  all  to  eternity,  without  weariness,  tliough  they
Lave  borne  the  weight  of  all  things  from  eternity.  4.  He  is  one  whose  active  energies
aru  ever  going  before  his  people,  to  "thrust  out"  their  enemies.  Whatever  would
obstruct  them  shall  be  taken  out  of  the  way.  5.  He  himself  is  and  will  be  the
Dwelling-place  in  which  his  people  can  abide.  "  Thy  Refuge  "  (see  Ps.  xo.  1 ;  xci.  2,  9 ;
Isa.  iv.  6).  It  is  not  at  all  unlikely  that  the  figure  of  God  as  a  permanent  Home  to  his
people  suggested  itself  to  Moses  by  way  of  contrast,  as  the  people  had  lived  such  a
wandering  life,  and  abode  in  tabernacles  (so  Eeil).

Let  these  five  features  which  mark  Israel's  God  be  put  together.  May  we  not  well
i>ay,  "  Who  is  like  to  the  God  of  Jeshurun  1 "

II.  None  can  be  bo  blessed  as  God's  Israel.  This  is  seen  whether  we  consider
what  God  is  to  them,  or  what  they  have  and  are  in,  through,  and  from  God.  1.  Their
blessedness  arises  from  what  Ood  is  to  them;  it  is  an  incomparable  blessedness.
For :  (1)  Who  else  has  an  eternal  God?  (2)  Who  else  has  one  so  great  in  majesty  ?
(if)  Who  else  has  one  so  strong  to  bear  ?  (4)  Who  else  has  one  so  mighty  to  defend  ?
(5)  Who  else  has  one  in  whom  is  such  a  home  ?  Each  of  these  five  points,  the
'correlatives  of  those  under  the  first  head,  requires  expansion.    2.  It  arises  also  from


-u.  iiiiii.  1—^9.]       TflE  BOOit  OF  DEUTEfiOilOMt.  661

what  they  have  and  are  in  and  through,  God.  (1)  They  have  security.  "  Israel  shall
dwell  ia  safety,"  (2)  Plenty  shall  be' theirs.  "  The  fountain  of  Jacob  shall  be  upon  a
land  of  com  and  wine."  "  They  that  fear  the  Lord  shall  not  want  any  good  thing."
(3)  They  shall  have  refreshment.  "  His  heavens  shall  drop  down  dew."  Gtod  will  be
"  as  the  dew  unto  Israel."  (4)  Victory  shall  be  theirs,  (o)  "  Thine  enemies  shall  be
found  liars  unto  thee:  ».e.  they  threatened  to  destroy,  and  they  are  proved  false.
(6)  "Thou  Shalt  tread  upon  their  high  places;"  i.e.  the  high  and  fortified  places  in
which  they  gloried  shall  be  as  ramparts  over  which  you  shall  walk.
^  'JVho  can  desire  to  be  more  blessed  than  this  ?  Yea,  who  can  conceive  of  a  greater
blessedness  ?  Is  it  not  enough  to  set  the  heart  a-longing  ?  May  not  the  remark  be
appropriately  made  in  closing,  that—

It  behoves  each  one  of  us  to  make  sure  that  we  are  of  the  Israel  of  God,  so  that  we
may  know  this  blessedness  is  ours  I


HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHOB&

Ver.  2. — A  fiery  Law.    The  fieriness  of  the  Law,  significant :  1.  Of  the  hoIineM

from  which  the  Law  emanated.  2.  Of  the  fiery  sanctions  by  which  it  is  guarded.
3.  Of  the  threatening  aspect  which  it  wears  to  sinners.  4.  Of  the  purifying  effects
which  it  exerts  in  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  believers.— J.  O.

Ver.  3. — Qod's  saints.  1.  Their  happiness — Gloved  of  God.  2,  Their  safety — ^in
God's  hand.  3.  Their  altitude — sitting  at  God's  feet— at  the  feet  of  God's  Son  (Luke
X.  3,  9).  (1)  Willing  to  know  God's  will.  (2)  Seeking  instruction  in  it.  (3)  Wait-
ing on  God  for  that  instruction.  (4)  Their  duty — to  receive  of  God's  words.  The
receiving  to  be  of  the  practical  kind  of  hiding  God's  words  in  the  heart,  and  going
on  to  put  them  in  practice  (Matt.  xiii.  23). — J.  0.    ^

Vers.  6,  7. — Eeuhen  and  Judah,     The  tribe  without  a  destiny  and  the  tribe  with

one.

I.  The  presehvatiok  akd  increase  of  evert  part  op  the  Cbuboh  is  of  interest
ro  evert  other.  Reuben's  sins  liad  incurred  the  forfeiture  of  privilege.  His  numbers
were  diminishing.  It  had  been  predicted  of  him  that  he  would  'bot  excel  (Gen.  xlix.
4).  But  Moses  desires  that  his  tribe  should  not  perish.  He  prays  for  its  preservation
and  revival.  Or,  on  another  view,  he  prays  that,  though  its  numbers  are  few,  it  may
not  utterly  die  out.  So  ought  we  to  pray  for  any  part  of  the  Church  that  seems
in  a  dwindling  condition,

II.  The  strength  of  the  sthono  is  btilIi  to  be  sought  from  God.  Judah,
though  strong,  with  great  promises  behind  and  great  hopes  before,  was  yet  to  recognize
that  his  help  and  sufficiency  were  of  God.  That  there  may  be  strength,  there  must
be  prayer,  "  Hear,  Lord,  the  voice  of  Judah,''  etc. — J.  0,

Vers.  8 — 11. — Levi.     The  priestly  tribe.     Its  curse  (Gen.  xlix,  7)  turned  into

a  blessing.  Repentance  and  zeal  cut  off  the  entail  of  a  curse,  or  so  transform  it  that
out  of  the  very  curse  God  evokes  a  blessing  (of.  Exod.  xxxii.  29 ;  Ps.  cvi.  31).

I.  The  ground  of  the  blessing.  1.  Levi's  fidelity  (ver.  8).  "  Among  the
faithless,  faithful  only  he."  The  zeal  and  constancy  of  the  tribe  on  critical  occasions
had  been  remarkable.  Learn  how  the  wicked,  returning  to  God  and  proving  zealous
in  his  service,  may  retrieve  past  forfeitures  and  win  great  honour,  2.  Levi's
renunciation  of  earthly  ties  (ver.  9).  Christ  also  requires  that  no  earthly  tie  be
allowed  to  stand  between  his  disciples  and  the  allegiance  they  owe  to  him  (Matt.  x.  37).

II.  The  blessing  itself.  1.  Great  privileges  were  conferred.  (1)  Levi  vias  to  be
ihe  medium  of  Qod's  revelations.  Urim  and  Thummim  (ver.  8).  This  privilege  of  the
tribe  receives  its  highest  fulfilment  in  Christ — God's  "  Holy  One,"  by  pre-eminence,
and  the  Revealer  of  all  his  counsel  to  men.  Note ;  The  Urim  and  Thummim  is  attributed
to  the  whole  tribe,  equally  with  burning  incense  and  offering  sacrifice  (ver,  10),  though


b5t  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.         [oh.  xxxin.  1— 29.

no  one  pretends  that  the  prerogative  of  consulting  through  the  oracle  helonged  to  any
other  than  the  high  priest.  This  shows  the  futility  of  the  argument  that  in  Deuteronomy
all  Levites  must  be  held  as  priests  because  priestly  functions  are  in  ch.  x.  8,  etc.,
attributed  to  the  tribe  as  such.  (2)  They  were  to  teach  the  Law  to  Israel  (ver.  10).
This  privilege  now  preserved  by  ministers  of  the  gospel,  and  other  teachers  in  the
Christian  Church.  In  Levi's  fidelity  and  spirit  of  consecration  we  see  the  qualifications
required  for  such  work.  (3)  T^ey  were  to  bum  incense  and  offer  sacrifice.  This  privilege
has  its  fulfilment  in  Christians  in  general,  in  whose  personal  consecration  and  ofTeiing
of  spiritual  sacrifices,  with  the  incense  of  prayers,  the  character  of  a  "  royal  priesthood  "
is  maintained  (1  Pet.  ii.  5,  9).  Their  sacrifices  are  acceptable  through  the  High  Priest,
Christ.  2.  Great  promises  were  given  (ver.  10).  His  substance  would  be  blessed,  and
special  protection  afforded  him.  God's  servants  have  all  an  interest  in  these  promises,
especially  those  whose  lacred  calling  deprives  them  of  the  ordinary  means  of  live-
lihood.—J.  0.

Vera.  12 — ^17. — Benjamin  and  Joteph.    The  name  given  to  one  of  these  ions  ol

Rachel  (ver.  12)  would  apply  to  both — "  Beloved  of  the  Lord."

I.  Whom  God  chooses  to  preseevk  no  foe  can  injukb.  Benjamin  would  dwell  in
safety  as  between  the  shoulders  of  Jehovah  (ver.  12).  The  Lord  would  cover  him  all
the  day  long.  This  is  true  of  every  good  man.  No  power  can  separate  him  from  God's
love.  No  enemy  can  reach  him  to  harm  him  (Ps.  cxxi.).  Christ's  sheep  are  in  the
Father's  hand,  whence  no  man  can  pluck  them  (John  x.  29).

IL  Whom  God. chooses  to  bless  all  things  conspibe  to  pocb  blbssino  upon.
(Vers.  13 — 16.)  All  things  would  "  work  together  "  for  the  good  of  Joseph — would
combine  to  fill  his  lap  with  treasures.  They  would  unite  to  benefit  and  enrich  him.
Precious  things  of  heaven  and  of  the  deep,  precious  things  of  sun  and  moon,  precious
things  of  the  hills,  precious  things  of  the  earth,  and  with  these  "  the  good  will  of  him
that  dwelt  in  the  bush  " — a  better  portion  than  all,  would  be  multiplied  to  this  favoured
tribe.  So  all  things  in  the  spiritual  respect  work  for  the  believer's  good  (Bom.  viii.  28),
even  alBictions  turning  to  his  salvation  through  prayer  and  the  supply  of  the  Spirit  of
Christ  Jesus  (Phil.  i.  19).

III.  Whom  God  chooses  to  help  no  aotebsabt  can  withstand.    fVer.  17.)— J,  O.

Ver.  16. — The  good  will  of  him  that  dwelt  in  the  hush.  God  chose  a  bush  of  the
desert  as  the  medium  of  his  appearance  to  Moses  (Exod.  iii.  2),  which,  burning,  was
not  consumed.  A  symbol :  1.  Of  Divine  condescension.  God  stooping  to  dwell  with
men  (1  Kings  viii.  27),  using  humble  and  despised  instruments  (1  Cor.  ii.  18 — 31 ;
2  Cor.  iv.  7).  The  bush,  "a  neglected  manifestation  of  God."  2.  Of  indwelling
■presence..  A  symbol  of  the  Church,  and  of  the  individual  believer,  indwelt  in  by  God,
Jnconspicuous  and  contemned,  yet  the  seat  of  the  Divine  presence — a  medium  of  the
Divine  manifestation.  3.  Of  miraculous  preservation.  1.  God's  presence  is  a  fire  in
the  midst  of  his  Church — flaming  out  upon  the  adversaries.  2.  God's  presence  j>reserves
the  Church  amidst  fires  of  persecution  and  affliction. — J.  0.

Vers.  18,  19. — Zeltdun  and  Issachar.  I.  Two  fobms  of  thb  blessiko  of  the
Almighty.  1.  Commerce.  2.  Agriculture  (ver.  18).  Note:  1.  Some  are  fitted  for
one  kind  of  life,  some  for  another.  Varieties  of  disposition  and  talent.  Variety  of
situation,  giving  scope  for  innate  gift^.  Divine  providence,  as  here  in  allotment  of  the
tribes,  fits  the  one  to  the  other.  2.  God's  blessing  is  needed  in  one  kind  of  life  as  well
as  in  another.  Neither  in  commerce  nor  in  agriculture  can  that  blessing  be  dispensed
with.  It  may  rest  on  us  in  both,  both  being  legitimate  lines  of  human  activity.  It  is
in  both  equally  efficacious.  3.  Prosperity  flovnng  to  vs  from  OocCs  blessing  is  a  Just
cause  for  r^oicing.  Unblessed  prosperity  is  not  to  be  rejoiced  in,  but  prosperity  with
God's  blessing  attending  it  is  riches  indeed.

II.  Wealth  derived  fbom  God's  blessing  is  to  be  banctified  to  hib  olobt.
(Ver.  19.)  1.  The  natiuni  are  to  be  invited  to  share  the  blessing.  Note  here:
Commercial  nations  have  peculiar  opportunities  for  being  missionary  nations.  Cosmo-
politan in  spirit.  Come  in  contact  with  many  nationalities.  Usually  possess  the
weaua.    The  preaching  of  Christ  was  largely  in  the  region  of  Zebulun  and  Issachar,


,  xxxm.  1— 29.]        THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTBBONOMY.  553


with  that  of  Naphtali,  who  "  giveth  <;oodly  words  "  (Gen.  xlix.  21).  Application  to
ourselves,  and  duty  of  consecrating  wealth  to  missionary  enterprise.  2.  Saerificts  of
righteousness  are  to  be  offered  in :  (1)  recognition  of  God's  gift ;  (2)  dedication  of
wealth  to  (Jod's  service ;  (3)  personal  surrender  of  the  offerer  to  God. — J.  O.

Vers.  20—25. — Oad,  Dan,  Naphtali,  Ather,    The  blessings  on  these  tribe*  are

conn»cted  with —

^,  PboWbss.  (Vers.  20, 21.)  The  chivalrous  heroio~spirit,  which,  as  well  as  in  bloodier
conflicts,  fiuds  scope  for  its  exercise  in  the  battles  of  the  cross,  has  here  its  appropriate
recognition.    A  first  portion  is  reserved  for  it.

II.  Activity.  Dan's  characteristic  was  agility.  In  Genesis,  the  dart  of  the  serpent
(xlix.  17) ;  here,  the  leap  of  the  lion's  whelp  (ver.  22).  A  counterpart  in  minds  of
bold,  nimble,  adventurous  type ;  prompt  in  decision,  subtle  in  tliought,  swift  in  action.
Such  minds,  if  to  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  is  added  the  dove's  harmlessness  (Matt.
X.  16),  are  of  immense  service  in  Christian  enterprises  needing  bold  pioneers  or  swift
and  decided  action.

III.  CoNTENTMBNT.  (Ver.  23.)  Naphtali  was  less  active  than  receptive.  Did  less,
but  received  more.  Possessed  a  region  of  great  sweetness  and  beauty,  and  dwelt  in  it
with  unambitious  satisfaction.     Such  dispositions  are  needed  as  a  balance  to  the  others.

IV.  Skill  in  the  arts.  (Vers.  24,  25.)  Iron  and  brass.  Asher  appears  to  have
wrought  these  metals,  whether  from  mines  in  its  own  district  or  brought  from  a  distance
does  not  appear.

Lessons— i.  Talents  are  diverse.  2.  All  have  their  place.  3.  A  community  needs
all.  4.  The  blessing  of  God  rests  on  a  faithful  use  of  all.  6.  AH  should  co-
operate.— J.  0.

Vers.  26 — 29. — IsraeVs  happinesB.  A  noble  climax  I  The  round  of  blessing  has  been
completed,  and  the  dying  lawgiver  revels  in  the  thought  of  the  greatness  and  felicity
thence  resulting  to  favoured  Israel.  One  by  one  the  tribes  have  passed  before  his  eye,
and  he  has  sketched  in  outline,  not  indeed  their  actual  future,  but  what  might  have
been,  what  would  have  been  their  future,  had  ttey  remained  faithful  to  their  God.
The  picture  is  largely  an  ideal  one,  though  in  the  after-history  of  the  tribes,  in  the  lots
assigned  to  them  in  Canaan,  in  the  types  of  character  exhibited  by  them,  in  the  variety
of  their  callings  and  destinies — as  in  the  ruins  of  a  temple  we  may  trace  someUiing  of
its  original  design — we  discern  the  fulfilment  of  many  features  of  the  prophecy.
Moses'  blessing  on  the  tribes  is  at  once  a  wish,  a  prayer,  and  a  prediction :  a  wish  that
certain  blessings  may  be  theirs ;  a  prayer  that  the  blessings  may  be  given ;  and  a
prediction  of  what,  conditionally  on  obedience,  would  actually  be  realized.  Beading
the  blessings,  we  think,  as  in  the  parable,  of  servants  entrusted  with  certain  talents  to
be  used  in  their  Lord's  service,  but  capable  of  making  a  bad  as  well  as  a  good  use  of  them
(Matt.  XXV.  14 — 31).  The  tribes,  speaking  generally,  used  theirs  badly,  and  the
blessings  were  not  fulfilled.  What  applies  to  the  blessing  as  a  whole  applies  especially
to  this  magnificent  concluding  passage.  It  is  the  ideal,  not  the  actual  Israel  which
stands  here  before  the  great  lawgiver's  eye,  and  the  language  applies  to  the  actual,
only  in  so  far  as  it  was  also  the  ideal,  people  of  Jehovah.  Its  full  application  is  to
the  Church  of  Christ — the  Church  catholic  and  invisible.

I.  The  basis  of  Israel's  happiness,  viz.  the  relation  which  the  tribes  sustained
to  the  eternal  God.  He  was  the  God  ,of  Jeshurun— of  the  righteous  people.  He  was
a  God  bound  to  them  by  covenant.  They  had  been  saved  by  him.  He  was  their
changeless  Dwelling-place,  Defender,  and  Support.  All  power  in  heaven  and  earth  was
at  their  service,  and  engaged  for  their  defence.  They  had  nothing  to  fear  with  a
Protector  so  almighty ;  they  had  everything  to  hope  for  from  one  so  able  to  save  and
bless.    Precisely  similar  is  the  relation  of  God  in  Christ  to  the  Church  of  believen.

XL  The  greatness  of  it.  1,  Complete  as  regards  its  elements.  No  element  of
good  a-wanting.  Bising  from  natural  blesbings,  and  safety  and  protection  against
enemies,  they  had  also,  in  the  favour  of  God  and  communion  with  him,  every  pledge
of  spiritual  blessing.  2.  l-'ermanent.  Enduring  as  the  eternal  God.  3.  Exalting  and
ennobling  to  the  soul  of  its  possessor.  Such  a  relation  to  God  as  Israel  sustained  should
have  wrought  in  the  people,  did  in  part  work  in  them,  a  surpassing  elevation  of


5S4  tfiE  BOOK  OJ-  CEUTEEONOMt.         [oh.  xixin.  1— 26,


consciousness ;  was  fitted  to  raise  thouglit  and  feeling  to  the  pitch  of  sublimity ;
should  have  made  of  them  a  great  nation,  in  the  best  s  m  ;  of  the  words,  a  nation  great
in  thought,  aspirati'  n,  and  endeavour — heroically  great.  A  like  elevation  of  spirit  should
characterize  the  people  of  Christ. — J.  0.

Ver.  27. — The  eternal  God  a  'Refuge.  I.  The  sublimity  of  this  fbouibe.  Is  there
one  who  can  open  his  mind  s\ifficieiitly  to  take  in  anything  like  the  grandeur  of  this
thought?  To  ihink  realizingly  of  God  at  all  is  to  many  a  difficulty.  It  shows  how
little  we  do  think  of  him ;  how  habitually  our  minds  are  occupied  with  other  objects ;
that  when  we  wish  to  bring  even  his  existence  clearly  before  our  minds,  we  find  it
difficult  to  do  so.  It  is  not  a  difficulty  which  wouLl  be  felt  if  our  relations  with  God
were  close  aud  intimate,  if  our  communion  with  him  was  habitual,  if  we  were  trying
to  live  continually  as  in  his  presence  and  under  his  eye.  "I  believe  in  God  the  Father
Almighty  1 "  Is  not  that  just  what  most  of  us  do  not  do?  Is  there  one  who  would
not  tremble  far  more  in  the  presence  of  many  of  his  fellow-mortals  than  he  ever  does
at  the  thought  of  standing  in  the  presence  of  his  God  ?  What  sort  of  a  belief  is  it  which
leaves  us  so  destitute  of  all  real  apprehension  of  what  God  is,  and  even  of  a  habitual
realization  of  the  feeling  that  lae  is?  We  tiiink  of  him,  but  often  how  coldly,  how
distantly,  how  notionally,  how  unbelievingly !  We  speak  of  "  revivals,"  but,  sooth  to
say,  we  need  a  revival  of  living  belief  in  the  first  article  of  the  Creed.  We  need  to  have
our  eyes  opened,  thought  set  to  work,  faith  made  more  real.  If  that  were  given,  then
should  we  know,  as  we  had  never  known  before,  how  wonderful,  how  sublime,  how
infinitely  grand  a  thing  it  was  to  have  this  God  as  our  Refuge,  and  to  know  tliat
underneath  us  were  these  everlasting  arms.  If  it  is  difficult  to  attain  to  a  steady
persuasion  even  of  God's  existence,  vastly  more  difficult  is  it  to  frame  a  just  conception
of  his  eternity.  Before  worlds  were,  God  existed ;  when  they  shall  have  waxed  old
and  disappeared,  he  shall  exist  still.  Time  flows,  but,  Uke  the  rock  in  the  midst  of  the
stream,  which,  from  its  stable  base,  laughs  at  the  flood  whose  impetuous  course  it  over-
looks ;  BO,  amidst  the  flow  of  ages,  God  endures,  "  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for
ever."  Does  it  not,  then,  seem  as  something  incredible  that  this  eternal  God  should
constitute  himself  a  Home  and  Refuge  for  weak,  sinning,  mortals ;  should  even  stoop  to
press  himself  on  such  mortals  as  a  Friend,  Saviour,  Protector,  Support,  Helper  ?  If  we
see  nothing  strange  in  this,  it  is  impossible  that  anything  should  seem  strange  to  us ;
if  we  can  believe  this,  we  need  not  stumble  at  much  else  in  revelation.  For  this  is
just  the  central  truth  the  Bible  has  to  tell.  It  tells  of  a  God,  infinite,  everlasting,
almighty,  inflexibly  righteous,  unutterably  pure,  incomprehensibly  great  and  wise  and
good;  from  whom  men  have  indeed  wandered  in  numberless  paths  of  error ;  but  wlio
has  revealed  himself  for  the  very  purpose  of  bringing  them  back  to  himself,  that  they
may  be  saved  from  death  and  may  enjoy  eternal  life ;  who  will  by  no  means  clear  the
guilty,  but  who  waits  to  be  gracious  to  every  penitent  sinner  returning  to  his  care ;
and  who  has  jirovided  all  means  for  that  return  in  the  atonement  of  his  Son,  our  Saviour
Jesus  Chiist,  and  in  the  grace  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  That  is  the  message  the  Bible  has
to  biing,  and  it  is  nothing  else  than  the  almifihty  and  eternal  God  oflering  himself,  in
his  grace,  as  a  Refuge  for  our  otherwise  defenceless  souls ;  stretching  out  those  everlasting
arms  of  which  the  text  speaks,  to  draw  us  to  himself  and  save  us  from  otherwise
inijyitable  ruin.  Say  not,  you  do  not  need  this  refuge !  The  son  of  man  is  not  yet
born  who  does  not  need  it,  and  who  will  not  one  day,  whether  he  does  so  now  or  not,
acktowledge  that  he  needs  it.  And  say  not,  you  will  delay  in  seeking  it!  for  even
could  a  day  or  a  year  be  guaranteed  in  which  to  rethink  the  question  now  proposed,  it
is  plainly  folly  in  itself,  and  giievous  dishonour  done  to  God,  that  so  vast  and  glorious
an  opportunity  should  stand  for  a  single  day  unimproved ;  that  God  should  sue  to
you,  and  you  refuse  his  gracious  invitations.  Rather,  "  seek  the  Lord  while  he  may  be
found,"  etc.  (Isa.  Iv.  6).

II.  The  COMPBEHEKSIVENE88  OP  THIS  PB0MI8E.  View  it  in  three  relations.  In
relation :  1.  To  our  temporal  existence.  Having  God  as  our  Befuge  does  not  indeed
imply  that  we  are  to  have  a  great  abundance  of  this  world's  possessions,  or  be  abso-
lutely free  from  cares  and  sorrows.  It  does  not  secure  that  we  are  to  be  either  th«
richest  or  the  least  tried  of  all  around  us.  God  knows  how  often  it  is  otherwise.
Some  of  the  best  of  God's  saints  have  been,  like  Paul,  the  worst  off  of  humankind


i!H.  xxxui.  1—29.]  ■      THE  BOOK  OS'  DEUTERONOMt.  6&&

"  They  were  stoned,  they  were  sawn  asunder,"  etc.  (Heb.  xi.  37).  Was  Qod  therefore  not
the  "  Befuge  "  of  those  saints  because  they  were  so  ill  ofE  in  this  life,  or  did  the  "  ever-
lasting arms ''  not  sustain  them  ?  Or  was  it  not  in  the  midst  of  these  "  great  fights  of
afflictions  "  that  they  first  realized  how  true  a  Refuge  God  was  to  them  ?  When  Paul
was  at  his  work,  "  in  journeyings  often,  in  perils  of  waters,  in  perils  of  robbers,  in  perils
of  his  countrymen,  in  perils  of  the  heathen,  in  perils  of  the  city,  in  perils  of  the  wilder-
ness, in  perils  of  the  sea,  in  perils  of  false  brethren  ;  in  weariness  and  painfulness,  in
watchings  often,  in  hunger  and  thirst,  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  and  nakedness"  (2  Cor.
xi.  24 — 28),  had  God  in  these  circumstances  falsified  his  promise,  and  failed  to  be  a
Refuge  to  him  V  The  question  needs  only  to  be  put  to  be  its  own  auswer.  Yet  it  is
certain  that,  even  in  outward  things,  God  is  a  Refuge  for  his  people,  and  that  under  his
care  they  ordinarily  enjoy  both  unusual  blessing  and  a  quite  especial  protection.  Jesus
teaches  us  to  trust  our  Father  in  heaven,  while  of  course  using  the  means  he  gives
us,  for  all  our  temporal  necessities  (Matt.  vi.  25 — 34).  He  pledges  himself  that,  so
long  as  it  is  the  Father's  will  that  we  should  live  in  the  world,  we  shall  be  protected
from  harm,  and  suitably  provided  for.  This  was  David's  confidence,  expressed  in
many  of  the  psalms,  and  it  has  been  the  confidence  of  all  God's  people.  Experience
verifies  that  the  good  man's  dwelling  is  the  "munitions  of  rocks; "  his  bread  is  given
him,  his  water  is  sure  (Isa.  xxxiii.  16).  2.  To  our  spiritvai  existence.  God  is  the
soul's  (1)  spiritual  Saviour.  Though  our  Lord  and  Judge,  it  is  only  in  his  bosom,  in
his  forgiving  grace,  we  can  find  refuge  from  our  sins,  from  the  unhappiness  they  cause
us,  and  from  the  ruin  they  have  brought  upon  us.  The  child  that  has  ofi'ended  his
parent  may  seek  the  whole  world  through  in  vain  for  the  rest  he  can  find  at  once  by
Cdming  back,  confessing  his  sin,  and  being  forgiven.  God  has  devised  means  "  that
his  banished  be  not  expelled  from  him "  (2  Sam.  xiv.  14).  The  way  is  open.  "  0
Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself ;  but  in  me  is  thy  help  "  (Hos.  xiii.  9).  (2)  Unfailing
Keireat  in  trouble.  No  matter  what  storms  beat  without,  what  blessings  of  an  outward
kind  are  given  or  withheld,  what  threatening  forms  the  enmity  of  man  may  assume,
the  soul  has  in  God  a  Ketreat,  a  place  of  resort  and  Refuge,  which  never  fails  it.  There
it  dwells  in  a  region  of  love,  breathes  an  atmosphere  of  peace,  holds  a  communion  with
the  Father  of  spirits,  which  only  grows  the  sweeter  the  longer  life  lasts,  and  the  more
the  outward  cup  is  bitter  to  the  taste.  In  this  inward  home  of  the  spirit  it  renews  its
strength  and  drinks  of  living  waters,  has  meat  to  eat  which  the  world  knows  not  of,
finds  satisfaction  for  its  deepest  needs  (Hab.  iii.  17, 18).  (3)  Unfailing  Support.  He
upholds  the  soul.  Has  the  believer  trials  to  come  through?  He  is  upheld  to  bear
them.  Has  he  temptations  to  face?  He  is  upheld  to  conquer  in  them.  Has  he  work  to
do?  He  is  upheld  and  strengthened  to  perform  it.  Has  he  enemies  to  fight ?  His
courage  is  snstained,  and  he  is  made  "more  than  conqueror."  But  for  the  upholding
of  the  "  everlasting  arms,"  how  many  of  God's  saints  would  never  have  come  through
what  they  have  experienced  I  3.  To  our  eternal  existence.  "  The  etemdt  God,"  etc.
Heavenly  and  eternal  existence  are  wrapped  up  in  this  promise.  God  does  not  make
his  eternity  a  refuge  for  beings  of  a  day.  There  would  be  an  utter  disproportion  between
an  everlasting  dwelling-place  and  a  creature  of  some  three  score  years  and  ten.  All
eternal  good  is  here  implied,  and  this  crowns  the  promise  and  carries  it  beyond  all
comprehension  of  its  greatness.     "  Eye  hath  not  seen,"  ete. — J.  0.

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  King  and  his  viceroy.  Moses,  having  received  the  direction  about
his  death,  proceeds  next  to  formally  bless  the  tribes.  We  have  in  these  verses  the
introduction  to  the  blessing.  It  brings  under  our  notice  the  Great  King  himself,  and
the  minor  king,  Moses,  the  viceroy.  As  the  parting  blessing  of  him  whom  God  had
made  "  king  in  Jeshurun,"  it  has  more  weight  and  significance  than  anything  which
ever  came  out  of  the  lips  of  kings.  Even  David's  dying  words  are  not  so  sublime
as  these  of  Moses  (cf.  2  Sam.  xxiii.  1—7).  Let  us  look  first  at  the  Great  King,  and  then
at  his  viceroy  who  reigned  in  Jeshurun.

I.  The  advent  of  God.  He  is  represented  as  rising  at  Sinai,  as  scattering  rays
from  Seir,  and  as  riding  forth  in  sunlike  majesty  from  Mount  Paran.  The  idea  in
borrowed  from  the  dawn.  Just  as,  before  the  sun  appears  in  splendour,  the  mountain-
tops  are  tipped  with  gold,  and  then  the  dawn  gathers  into  glory,  and  the  sun  at  last
Bteps  forth  in  might,  so  the  Lord  made  his  proximity  felt  on  the  top  of  Sinai;  (here


556  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.       [oh.  xxxiu.  1— «9.

was  a  still  greater  impression  made  at  Seir,  with  the  mercy  of  the  brazen  serpent ;  and
last  of  all  in  Paran,  in  whose  wilderness  was  Kadesh,  the  scene  of  chequered  experience
and  yet  abundant  blessing,  the  sunlight  having  then  fully  come.  God  had  come  as  the
Light-giver.    "  God  is  light,  and  in  him  is^no  darkness  at  all "  (1  John  i.  5).

Next  let  us  notice  his  court — "  myriads  [nhaan,  which  may  mean  a  million^  of  saints."
This  cannot  refer  to  Israel,  as  some  suggest,  but  to  the  holy  ones  accompanying  the
Lord  from  heaven.  What  a  magnificent  airay  I  Only  the  holy  can  stand  in  his  sight
or  constitute  his  train.

Next  let  us  notice  his  gift  to  men — "  from  his  right  hand  went  a  fiery  Law  for  them."
I'his  fiery  Law  can  only  mean  that  moral  law  which  penetrates  unto  the  heart  with  its
fiiTy  heat.

And  all  was  in  love  (ver.  3),  for  the  God  who  is  light  and  fire  is  also  love.  The
saints  are  safe  in  his  hand,  and  they  gather  round  his  feet.

II.  'J'hb  viceroy.  He  is  called  here  "  the  man  of  God,"  and  justly  so.  He  waa  the
man  who  recognized  himself  as  God's  property,  as  God's  servant,  as  God's  minister.

And  this  is  why  he  was  "king  in  Jeshurun."  It  is  consecration  to  God's  glory
which  secures  the  real  kingship.  No  kingship  is  worth  the  name  which  consists  not
in  holy  influences ;  and  every  man  is  a  "  king  of  men  "  who  reigns  over  them  by  the
sovereignty  of  intelligent  consecration.

In  these  respects  Moses  was  a  type  of  Jesus.  Pilate  could  not  understand  his
kingship  through  truth;  but  the  world  recognizes  it.  He  was  so  devoted  to  the
Father's  glory,  and  so  bent  on  the  good  of  men,  that  increasing  multitudes  every  year
are  owning  his  sway  and  accepting  of  the  Law  at  his  mouth.  Fiery  it  is  doubtless,
fitted  to  kindle  the  coldest  heart  to  rapture.  As  it  dwells  within  us,  it  moulds  to
highest  good  the  life. — K.  M.  E.

Vers.  6 — 25. —  Watchwords  fur  the  tribes.  The  blessings  authoritatively  pronounced
by  these  old  wortliies  amounted  to  watchwords  for  their  future  development.  They
were  divinely  suggested  ideas  regarding  their  future  courses.  We  shall  look  at  the
ideals  thus  presented  in  their  order.

I.  The  unostentatious  development  of  Reuben.  Deposed  from  the  primacy
among  the  brethren,  because  of  his  self-inddlgence,  he  is  to  content  himself  with
pastoral  proi;ress  amid  the  mountains  of  Moab.  The  blessing  is  a  good  one,  quiet  life
and  progress.

II.  The  sovereignty  through  surFERiNO  of  Judah.  In  ver.  7  we  have  clearly
the  regal  strain.  It  is  the  struggle  and  the  victory  and  the  reign.  The  brunt  of  battle
is  to  fall  on  Judah,  and  the  sovereignty  in  the  end.  That  it  refers  to  Messiah  ultimately
is,  we  think,  quite  reasonable.  Indeed,  Kennioott  regards  ver.  5  as  referiing  to  tlie
Messiah  and  not  to  Moses,  and  consistently  therewith  he  would  have  the  words  "  bring
him  to  his  people  "  to  refer  to  the  ting,  Shiloh,  of  Judah's  tribe.  However  this  may
be,  we  can  discern  in  this  watchword  of  Judah  the  key-note  of  the  Saviour's  suffering
life.

III.  The  self-denial  and  devotedness  of  Levi.  The  treasure  of  the  oracle  was
to  be  with  the  Levites,  and,  in  prosecuting  the  work  of  God,  they  were  to  show  that
they  loved  their  Master  more  than  even  father  or  mother,  sister  or  brother,  sons  or
daughters.  In  prosecuting  their  ministerial  work,  tliey  were  to  illustrate  discipleship
as  a  giving  unto  God  the  first  place  above  the  nearest  and  the  dearest  (cf.  Luke  xiv.  20).
Moreover,  in  this  holy  work  the  sons  of  Levi  sliall  need  the  Lord's  blessing  on  their
substance,  since  they  lived  by  voluntary  contributions,  and  the  Lord's  help  against
calamities.  A  special  blessing  is  thus  looked  for  in  connection  with  special  work,  of
a  self-denying  character.     And  the  same  is  applicable  to  the  ministry  still.

IV.  The  shadow  of  God  fob  Benjamin.  This  powerful  tribe  was  to  afford  shelier
to  the  central  government  and  worship  in  the  time  of  the  monarchy.  The  Divine
presence  thus  was  specially  to  overshadow  the  descendants  of  Benjamin.  As  Joseph
so  tenderly  overshadowed  his  brother,  so  will  the  central  government  and  worshij
his  seed.

V.  The  splendid  success  and  pbowbss  of  Joseph.  All  the  fatness  of  the  earth  and
the  favour  of  God  and  the  power  to  push  successfully  their  way  against  all  opposing
forces  are  to  belong  to  Ephraim  and  to  Manasseh.    From  Jbppa  unto  Carmel,  on  the  sea


OB.  ixxiu.  1—29.]        THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  557

across  to  the  pastures  of  Gilead,  the  two  half-tribes  were  destined  to  hold  sway,  and  to
enjoy  all  the  wealth  this  encircled.  It  was  the  magnificent  central  province  of  Samaria,
with  any  amount  of  pasture-land  beyond  the  Jordan.

VL  The  highway  of  Zebulun.  Its  outlets  are  to  be  peculiarly  important,  as  we
know  they  proved  between  the  Great  Sea  and  the  sea  of  Tiberias.  Through  Zebnlun
the  traffic  passed  from  the  great  Eastern  kingdoms.  Their  situation,  mercantilely
regarded,  was  superb.

VII.  The  confidence  and  consolidation  of  Issachab.  Settled  beside  Zobulun,
with  a  series  of  mountain  fastnesses  behind,  aud  Esdrnclon's  plain  down  to  the  sands
of  the  Mediterranean  as  their  coast,  the  children  of  Issaohar  were  to  feel  settled  and
secure  in  their  tents.  The  mountain  tracts  will  nurse  the  piety  of  the  people,  while
the  sea  shall  yield  its  abundance,  and  the  sand  become  a  source  of  treasure.  No  better
home  could  be  found  for  a  trading,  manufacturing  people.

VIII.  The  vantage- srodnd  of  Gad.  This  tribe  is  represented  as  hemmed  in  like
a  lion  at  bay,  and  thus  compelled  to  take  a  prominent  part  in  critical  affairs.  Lying
between  the  mountains  and  the  Jordan,  it  became  the  battle-ground  of  the  monarchy,
and  at  Bamoth-Gilead  and  Mahanaim  important  issues  were  decided.  The  watchword
was  vigilance,  because  of  the  vantage-ground.

IX.  The  oocbage  op  Dan.  He  is  represented  as  a  lion's  whelp,  full  of  courage,
though  small  in  size.  Leaping  from  Bashan,  he  made  his  lair  northwards,  but  ever
ready  to  shift  to  better  quarters  if  he  heard  of  them.  He  found  a  lair  too  at  the  sea,
in  the  borders  of  Philistia.

X.  East-qoino  Naphtali.  This  tribe  is  represented  as  taking  a  south-west  location
after  the  northernmost  Danites,  and  as  rejoicing  there  in  the  manifold  goodness  of  God.

XL  Blessed  by  name  and  nature  as  Asher.  This  tribe  is  to  be  blessed,  as  the
very  name  implies,  in  domestic  relations,  in  fraternal  relations,  in  the  olive-yards
yielding  such  magnificent  oil,  and  in  the  iron  and  brass  with  which,  instead  of  the
ordinary  wooden  bars,  they  could  protect  themselves.  To  this  tribe  was  given  the  oft-
quoted  promise,  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be."  They  were  to  have  "  strength
proportioned  to  their  work."

•  It  does  not  appear  why  to  Simeon  no  blessing  is  assigned  ;  and  yet  it  is  noticeable
that  this  tribe  played  but  a  small  part  in  the  drama  of  Israelitish  history. — E.  M.  B.

Vers.  26 — 29. — The  incomparable  Saviour.  In  finishing  the  blessing  of  the  people,
Moses  cannot  refrain  from  bursting  into  a  tribute  of  admiration  for  him  who  had
brought  them  thus  far.  He  speaks  of  God's  incomparable  excellency,  and  how  happy
Israel  was  in  relying  upon  his  power.  We  shall  notice  the  two  thoughts  in  this  order
as  cause  and  effect.

L  The  inoompaeable  exobixekot  of  God.  This  is  brought  out  in  several  particulars.
And:  1.  God  is  incomparably  excellent  in  himself.  He  "rideth  upon  the  heaven
in  his  help,  and  in  his  excellency  on  the  sky."  The  reference  is  believed  to  be  to  the
Shechinah  cloud,  which  passed  in  calm  majesty  along  the  upper  heavens  to  indicate  to
Israel,  or  "  Jeshurun,"  as  Israel  is  here  called,  the  way  they  should  take.  In  no  more
beautiful  way  could  God's  essential  sovereignty  be  brought  out.  He  moves  in  calm
majesty  among  the  spheres,  the  Buler  because  Maker  of  them  all.  No  one  can  for  a
moment  be  compared  with  him.  2.  God  is  incomparably  excellent  at  the  Saviour  of  his
people.  Israel  experienced  his  help  in  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  in  the  pilgrimage
to  Palestine,  and  they  were  about  to  experience  still  further  favour  in  the  success  of
the  invasion.  The  language  is  most  beautiful  by  which  all  this  is  conveyed.  "The
eternal  God  is  thy  Befuge ; "  to  him  who  dwells  in  the  eternities  and  who  orders  their
processions,  the  difficulties  of  time  must  be  as  nothing.  "  Underneath  are  the  everlasting
arms,"  no  weariness  ever  overtaking  arms  which  are  full  of  everlasting  strength.  "  He
shall  thi-ust  out  the  enemy  from  before  thee ;  and  shall  say.  Destroy  them."  Now,  in
all  this  we  have  a  figure  of  the  salvation  which  God  extends  still  to  men.  (1)  He
delivers  us  from  the  bondage  of  tin ;  (2)  he  Justifies  us  freely  from  all  things;  (3)  he
imctifies  us  by  his  Spirit ;  (4)  he  protects  and  delivers  us  from  all  our  enemies.

II.  The  consequent  happiness  of  Israel.  What  distinguishes  Israel  and_  renders
them  a  happy  people  is  the  possession  of  such  an  incomparable  Saviour.  It  is  not  in
Israel  themselves,  but  in  their  God,  that  the  cause  of  their  happiness  dwells.    And  ii


668  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.        [oh.  xxxm.  1— 29.

is  well  to  remember  this,  1.  Frames  and  feelings  are  no  proper  foundation  for  our
spiritual  confidence.  Anxious  souls  prolong  their  anxiety  and  postpone  their  peace  by
excessive  introspection.  Instead  of  occupying  themselves  with  the  incomparable
excellency  of  their  Saviour,  they  occupy  themselves  with  the  incomparable  vileness  of
their  own  hearts.  No  peace  and  joy  can  come  from  within.  2.  The  changeless  Saviour
is  a  true  Foundation  for  our  confidence  and  hope.  It  is  "  Jesus  Christ,  the  same
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,"  in  whom  we  are  asked  to  confide.  He  has  every
sxcellency  which  our  necessities  demand.  He  has  the  atonement  and  the  sympathy
and  the  intercessory  powers  we  need  to  free  us  from  deserved  penalties  and  fit  us  for
undeserved  blessing.  3.  We  stand  in  consequence  as  an  expectant  people  awaiting  our
entrance  to  the  land  of  promise.  For  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  Israel  were  not  only
happy  in  their  experience,  but  happy  also  in  their  hopes.  They  were  about  to  enter  the
promised  land.  There  they  were  to  dwell  safely  alone,  like  the  heavenly  state  where  "  the
wicked  cease  from  troubling  and  the  weary  are  at  rest."  They  are  to  have  plenty  of
corn  and  wine,  as  the  redeemed  have  in  heaven,  where  they  eat  angels'  food  and  drink
the  new  wine  of  the  kingdom.  They  are  to  dwell  under  the  fertilizing  dews  of  heaven,
as  the  redeemed  shall  under  the  benedictions  of  God.  In  hope,  then,  Israel  was  happy :
and  we  too  may  "  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God." — R.  M.  £.

Vers.  1 — 5. — JTOe  Godlike  act  of  Messing.  Moses  is  finely  described  as  "  the  man  of
God."  Among  his  contempnraries  there  was  no  man  who  bore  so  much  of  the  Divine
image.  In  character,  in  o£Bce,  in  deed,  he  was  eminently  Godlike.  As  his  earthly  life
drew  to  a  close,  the  real  man  came  more  fully  into  view.  Death  is  a  clever  unveiler  of
a  man — it  strips  off  shams  and  masks,  it  discovers  the  reality.  Like  his  great
Antitype,  Moses  forgets  himself  in  the  crisis  of  death,  and  concerns  himself  about  others.
As  his  hours  are  few,  he  will  crowd  into  them  as  many  acts  of  blessing  as  he  can.  It
is  in  the  power  of  one  man  to  bless  many.    This  is  Goillike.

I.  Blbssino  can  come  to  men  only  thbouqh  the  ohannbls_of  law.  It  is  useless
to  wish  a  man  some  good  fortune,  unless  he  is  prepared  to  follow  the  lines  along  which
good  fortune  comes.  It  is  useless  to  wish  a  man  health,  while  we  know  that  he  is
wedded  to  the  wine-cup.  The  only  real  blessing  we  can  confer  is  to  put  men  into
connection  with  God's  channels  of  blessing.  The  man  who  unveils  to  us  the  law  of
God  respecting  the  expansion  of  steam,  confers  real  blessing  on  the  race.  Similarly,
the  man  who  reveals  to  us  the  law,  or  method,  throuf;h  which  God's  favour  flows  to
sinners,  imparts  solid  blessing.  Respecting  blessing,  God  is  the  only  primal  Source,  but
men  can  be  subordinate  agents  in  distributing  it.  "  Order  is  Heaven's  first  law  ; "  and,
in  blessing  others,  we  must  observe  God's  order  of  procedure.  Submission  to  law  is  an
essential  condition  of  blessing.

n.  Blessing  to  men  has  always  been  the  purpose  op  God's  bublimest  mani-
festations. Desiring  to  bless  the  tribes,  Moses  at  once  reverted  to  Sinai,  and  to
God's  grand  plan  for  blessing  men.  Heart  and  soul,  Moses  was  a  legislator,  tie  saw
the  grandeur,  the  eternity,  the  utility  of  Law.  Tiie  "  ruling  passion  was  strong  in
death."  The  splendid  manifestation  of  God's  majesty  at  Sinai  again  passed  before
the  eye  of  memory.  All  those  splendours  of  royal  state  were  destined  to  illustrate  the
intrinsic  majesty  of  Law.  That  magnificent  retinue  of  consecrated  ones  illustrated  the
native  glory  of  the  Divine  Law.  That  entire  epiphany  of  God  culminated  in  this
significant  act :  "  from  his  right  hand  went  a  fiery  Law  " — a  Divine  force  to  soften,  melt,
purify,  and  consume.  Those  honoured  beings  that  found  a  place  in  the  retinue  of  Goil
received  that  exaltation  and  that  office  by  virtue  of  submission  to  Law ;  "  they  sat  down
at  thy  feet."  To  reveal  to  men  his  Law  is  a  Divine  equivalent  for  largest  blessing.
God's  Law  is  the  outcome  of  his  love.  The  spring  and  motive  of  this  stately  display  of
Law  is  deep  and  generous  love.    "  Yea,  he  loved  the  people."

III.  To  bless  men,  through  their  observance  of  law,  18  THE  AMBITION  OF  EVERT

REAL  KING.  God  is  Supreme  Sovereign  of  all  intelligent  beings.  The  supreme
Monarch  manifests  irrepressible  desire  to  bless  his  subjects.  Amidst  impressive
solemnities,  he  declares  that  blessing  can  only  come  through  the  channels  of  righteous
Law.  Moses,  too,  is  a  subordinate  king — king  in  Jeshurun — God's  vicegerent.  Moses,
too,  desires  to  bless  the  people.  His  life  had  been  spent  in  their  interests.  Even
during  the  forty  years  he  spent  as  a  shepherd  in  Midian,  he  was  undergoing  preparation


CH.  xixiii.  1— 29.]       THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  559

for  his  great  undertaking.  But  Moses  likewise  knew  that  tlie  greatest  blessing  he
could  confer  on  Israel  was  love  of  God's  Law.  No  wishis,  or  hopes,  or  aspirations,
which  he  could  cherish  for  them  would  he  of  any  practical  value  apart  from  their
dutiful  obedience  to  God.  Therefore,  his  legacy  was  counsel  and  prayer :  "  He  com-
manded a  Law,  even  the  inheritance  of  the  congregation  of  Jncob."  This  is  the  richest
heritage  we  can  acquire  on  earth,  viz.  God's  Law  enshrined  in  the  heart.  Then  we  we
living  temples,  the  "  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit." — D.

Ver.  B.—A  prayer  for  the  firstborn.  The  personal  character  of  Reuben  had  not  been
exemplary.  His  salient  ftatures  were  coarse.  Moral  qualities  were  entailed  to  posterity ;
and  the  tribe,  generation  after  generation,  occupied  a  low  place  in  the  history  of  the
nation.     Nothing  noble  seeras  ever  to  have  been  aoliieved  by  it.

I.  Pbiobitt  of  place  dobs  not  ensure  nobleness  of  ohabactkr.  Reuben  was,  in
Jacob's  household,  first  in  the  order  of  time,  but  not  first  in  native  dignity.  "  Many
that  are  first  shall  be  last."  The  king  has  not  always  the  most  royal  character  in  the
empire.  The  palace  does  not  always  contain  the  noblest  society.  The  most  obscure
may  yet  become  the  purest  and  the  best.  Moral  rottenness  has  often  been  on  the
throne,  and  real  royalty  on  the  gibbet.

IL  Pbbbbnt  life  does  not  secure  continuous  life.  Human  life  is  not  self-created ;
it  is  sustained  through  every  hour  by  a  Divine  hand ;  and  whenever  Divine  wisdom
sees  best,  that  life  is  brought  to  a  close.  As  life,  with  all  its  advantages,  is  a  trust
from  God,  which  may  be  terminated  any  moment,  we  should  use  every  moment  well,  ir>
order  to  deserve  its  continuance.  In  proportion  to  the  precariousness  of  life  is  the
value  of  every  moment  increased.  So,  too,  in  the  life  beyond  the  grave,  the  samo
dependence  on  God  remains.  We  hang  on  him  for  continued  life.  Christ  is  our  life.
Through  eternity  we  live  (if  we  live  at  all)  by  faith  on  the  Son  of  God.  Hourly  the
prayer  ought  to  ascend,  "  Let  me  live,  and  not  die."

III.  Present  units  mat  become  future  myriads.  At  the  time  of  Moses' dissolution,
the  number  of  Reuben  seems  to  have  been  small.  Possibly  this  may  have  been  a  penalty
for  Reuben's  incest.  In  this  case  it  would  be  an  appeal  to  God's  mercy  to  remove  the
curse.  Beneath  the  benediction  of  God,  "a  little  one  soon  becomes  a  thousand."
Prolific  increase  is  a  sign  of  Divine  approvaL  All  the  oak  forests  on  the  globe  sprang
from  a  single  germ. — D.

Ver.  7. — The  royal  house  of  Judah.  The  name  Judah  signifies  praise.  Here  Moses
represents  Judah  as  the  praying  tribe — in  this  respect  inheriting  the  spirit  of  its  great
father,  Jacob.  Prayer  and  praise  usually  «  ed ;  they  make  a  happy  pair  in  the  habitation
of  the  heart,  and  the  offspring  is  royal  nobleness.

I.  True  pbater  pleads  for  an  appointed  destiny.  What  God  has  designed  and
destined  for  us — this  is  a  proper  object  of  prayer.  For  although  God  has  designed
some  good  for  us,  our  prayer  is  the  last  link  in  the  succession  of  causes  which  brings  us
into  actual  possession.  "  For  all  these  things,"  saith  God,  "  I  will  be  inquired  of  .  .  .
to  do  it  for  them."  Prayer  has  respect  to  the  will  of  God.  The  purpose  and  oath  of
God  have  prepared  the  blfssing.     The  hand  of  faith  is  stretched  forth  to  take  it.

II.  True  prayer  is  supported  by  others'  intercessions.  The  prayer  of  a  good
man  on  our  behalf  is  an  inestimable  boon.  Here  Moses  prayed  that  Judah's  petition
might  be  heard.  Example  is  contagious.  When  good  men  see  us  praying,  they  will
pray  with  us,  and  for  us  too.  If  only  combustible  material  be  at  hand,  the  fiery  flame
will  spread.  It  is  always  an  inspiration  to  lis,  if  we  remember  that  while  we  iJray,
Christ  our  Elder  Brother  is  praying  for  us  above.

III.  TbUE  PRAYEB  18  ALWAYS  SECONDED  BY  PERSONAL  BNDEAVODB.       "  Let  his  hands

be  sufficient  for  him."  What  we  can  do  to  gain  the  blessing,  God  will  not  do  for  us
What  we  cannot  do,  God  will,  if  we  meekly  ask  him.  Prayer  without  effort  is
hypocrisy.  We  are  not  sincere  in  our  request.  Labour  without  prayer  is  stark  atheism.
The  boat  of  human  progress  must  be  rowed  with  two  oars — prayer  and  effort.  Unless
both  wings  are  in  motion,  the  eagle  cannot  rise.

IV.  Tbdb  PRAYER  OBTAINS  THE  HELP  OF  GoD.  It  obtains  help  for  every  undertaking
—husbandry,  commerce,  art,  and  war.  Prayer  always  has  prevailed — it  always  will.
Prayer  and  painstaking  can  accomplislt  anything.    Prayer  secures  for  us  the  best  help,


660  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.         [ch.  xxxni.  1— 29.

the  presence  of  Goil  himself.  "  Be  thou  a  Help  to  him."  This  is  an  Ally  worth  having
— an  Ally  who,  by  a  breath,  secures  success.  If  the  Lord  be  our  Helper;  we  can  wisely
speak  the  challenge, "  What  can  man  do  unto  me  ?  "  God  with  me,  Gkid  in  me,  in-
spiring every  thought,  and  purpose,  and  desire  and  deed, — this  makes  a  mean  man  royal
indeed.  Thus  we  may  all  obtain  a  place  in  the  honoured  tribe  of  Judah,  and  be
"  kings  unto  God."— D.

Vers.  8 — 11. — The  priestly  tribe.  The  abuse  of  the  priestly  office  has  brought  the
name  of  priest  into  contempt.  Best  things,  when  corrupt,  l>ecome  the  worst.  Sour
milk  and  rotten  grapes  and  stained  snow  are  things  most  obnoxious.  Yet  a  true  priest
is  the  noblest  form  of  man — the  greatest  benefactor  of  his  species.  A  pompous,
bedizened,  arrogant  ecclesiastic,  is  not  a  true  priest.  God's  priest  is  meek,  self-forget-
ful, saintly.  Christlike.

I.  PnnlTY   AND  CONSECB&TION  ABE  THE   ESSENTIAL  QnAIiIFIOATIONa  FOB  THB  FBIEST-

HOOD.  Levi  is  here  described  as  "  thy  holy  one."  This  was  God's  ideal,  though  never
fully  realized  except  in  Christ.  If  there  was  not  perfect  purity  of  character,  there  wag
the  nascent  germ  within — ^the  inner  yearning  and  desire  after  holiness.  Levi  was  the
rude  type,  the  rough  outline  of  the  perfect  priest.  A  further  qualificatiou  was  con^
secration.  This  personal  righteousness  was  to  be  practical.  It  was  required  to  be
actively  devoted  to  the  service  of  God.  Begard  for  God  was  to  dominate  regard  for
earthly  relatives.  When  called  to  God's  service,  the  Levite  was  to  regard  his  parents
as  if  he  had  them  not ;  he  was  to  forget  his  brethren  and  his  father's  house ;  yea,
he  must  love  bis  children  as  though  he  loved  them  not.  Ood  first ;  every  one  else
must  find  a  subordinate  place  (ver.  9).  Here  we  have  the  forecast  of  Christ's  axiom,
"  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me."  Further,
this  character  was  a  tested  one.  To  an  offloe  so  responsible,  God  does  not  admit  a  novice.
Mere  innocence  is  not  a  qualification.  There  must  be  tried  and  tested  character —
character  tried  in  the  furnace  of  temptation.  So  with  respect  to  this  tribe  of  Levi ;
him  "  thou  didst  prove  at  Massah,"  with  him  "  thou  didst  strive  at  the  waters  of
Meribah."

II.  Pbiestlt  conseobation  is  a  condition  fob  beceivino  ebvelation  from  God.
"  Let  thy  Thummim  and  thy  Urira  be  with  thy  holy  one."  Although  it  ia
confessedly  difiBcult  to  determine  precisely  what  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim  were,  it
is  obvious  that  it  was  God's  ancient  method  for  revealing  his  will  to  Israel.  In
emergencies,  whether  personal  or  national,  it  was  the  practice  to  ask  counsel  of  God
by  means  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim.  It  is  a  necessity  that  there  should  be  internal
fitness  in  order  to  receive  and  transmit  the  will  of  God.  Light  can  only  circulate
through  a  fitting  medium.  Music  can  only  be  transmitted  by  a  specific  conductor.
As  it  is  in  the  natural  world,  so  in  the  spiritual,  only  the  pure  in  heart  can  see
God.  His  will  is  revealed  only  to  the  dutiful.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them
that  fear  him."  On  this  account,  God's  priests  have  often  been  God's  prophets;  e.g.
Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  Samuel,  and  John  the  Baptist.  Moses  too  belonged  to  the  tribe
of  Levi.

HI.  Priestly  consecration  includes  service  Godwaed  and  manwaed.  (Ver.
10.)  Every  true  priest  is  a  mediator  between  God  and  men.  He  receives  of  God  and
imparts  to  men ;  he.  receives  from  men  and  presents  unto  God.  The  only  perfect
Mediator  is  the  "  Son  of  the  Highest ; "  but,  in  a  humbler  sphere,  earthly  priests  are
also  mediators.  They  receive  God's  Law  from  the  fountain  of  his  lips,  and  they  convey
it  unto  their  brethren.  Every  real  teacher  is  a  real  mediator.  He  delivers  unto  others
that  which  he  has  first  received.  The  priest  has  also  a  service  to  perform  Godward.
He  brings  human  ofi'erings  before  the  Most  High — the  offerings  of  gratitude  and  praise.
But  men  have  sinned,  and  this  sad  fact  must  be  recognized.  They  stand'in  urgent
need  of  Divine  mercy.  Hence  substantial  proofs  of  penitence  and  confession  are
required.  God  has  a  proper  and  prescribed  method  for  conveying  his  mercy.  He  will
be  approached  in  the  way  of  sacrifice,  and  it  is  part  of  the  priest's  vocation  to  present
"  whole  burnt  sacrifice  upon  Rod's  altar."

IV.  Complete  consecration  ensures  complete  baltation.  Salvation  is  many-
sided  ;  it  is  negative  and  positive.  It  embraces  deliverance  from  every  evil,  present
and  future ;   it  embraces  every  good  that  can  enrich  and  ennoble  the  man.    While


on,  xxxm.  1—29.]         THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEBONOMY.  661


we  care  wholly  for  God's  interests,  he  will  most  completely  care  for  ours.  No  external
substance  will  bring  us  any  real  advantage  unless  God's  blessing  be  upon  it,  ay
pervade  it.  The  Levites  were  compelled  by  official  duties  to  be  often  absent  from'
their  families  and  homesteads,  which  needed  therefore  special  protection  from  God
"  Bleas,  Lord,  his  substance."  But  more  important  yet  was  it  for  the  whole  nation
that  the  offerings  and  intercessions  of  the  priests  might  find  acceptance  with  God
If  anything  upon  their  part  should  nullify  the  offices  of  religion,  the  effect  would  be
unspeakably  disastrous.  Therefore,  looking  along  the  vista  of  the  future  in  fervont
anticipation,  Moses  prays,  "  Accept  the  work  of  his  hands."  It  is  as  if  he  had  said,
"Let  thy  gracious  plan  for  pardoning  and  saving  men  completely  succeed!"  And'
lastly,  he  prays  for  the  priest's  security  against  all  Ibes.  We  may  not  here  confine  our
thoughts  to  foreign  adversaries.  The  true  and  faithful  priest  will  always  find  enemies
in  proportion  to  his  fidelity.  His  foes  shall  be  those  of  his  own  household.  'J'hey  will
assail  his  earnestness,  suspect  his  motives,  attack  his  reputation.  But  God  shall
undertake  his  servant's  cause.  He  will,  in  his  own  way,  so  smite  his  foes,  that  they
shall  be  completely  silenced  ;  "  they  shall  not  rise  again." — D.

Ver.  12. — OoiTs  fatherly  interest  irC  Benjamin.  The  circumstance  of  Benjamin's
birth  has  a  melancholy  interest.  His  birth  was  the  occasion  of  Eachel's  death.  If  we
may  argue  back  from  the  qualities  of  Kachel's  children  to  the  qualities  of  Rachel,
she  must  have  been  a  woman  deserving  high  esteem.  Bare  excellences  embellish  the
characters  of  her  sons.  To  Joseph  and  to  Benjamin  were  assigned  territory  in  the  very
heart  of  Canaan.     In  the  benediction  of  Moses  we  have —

I.  Ah  endearing  name.  A  name  given  by  Goil  is  pregnant  with  meaning.  It
Is  no_  empty  compliment.  If  God  regarded  Benjamin  as  his  "  beloved,"  there  was
sufficient  ground  and  reason  for  it.  This  tribe  may  not  have  been  conspicuous  for
robust  ener.;y  or  for  martial  enterprise,  but  it  was  distinguished  for  its  genuine  piety
and  its  devout  attachment  to  the  cause  of  God.  If  we  cannot  all  be  great,  we  can
all  be  good.  To  be  consistently  and  thoroughly  pious  is  within  the  reach  of  all.
Bach  of  us  can  be  knighted  and  ennobled  with  this  title,  "  The  beloved  of  the  Lord."
We  have  indicated  here —

II.  The  best  society.  "  He  shall  dwell  in  safety  by  him."  This  promise,  in  ali
likelihood,  alludes  to  the  position  of  Benjamin's  inheritance.  His  portion  in  Canaan  in-
cluded the  hill  of  Moriah,  on  which,  in  later  days,  the  temple  was  erected.  This  was  eg
insignificant  honour — no  mean  token  of  Jehovah's  favour.  The  successive  generations
of  Benjamin  would  dwell  in  closest  vicinity  to  the  oracle  of  God,  and  would  enjoy  easy
access  to  the  public  ordinances  of  worship.  So  long  as  man  needs  the  aid  and
inspiration  of  external  ordinances,  so  long  will  this  vicinity  to  the  temple  be  a  real
advaiitage.  In  our  folly  we  may  despise  the  privilege,  but  this  foolish  contempt  no  way
derogates  from  its  value.  They  who  most  prize  the  house  of  God  most  prize  God
himself.     We  have  also —

IIL  Complete  peotection  feomised.  "The  Lord  shall  cover  him  all  the  day  Jong."
God  was  pleased,  in  a  very  remarkable  manner,  to  disclose  himself  to  the  Hebrews  by
metaphors  easily  interpreted.  In  a  climate  where  men  suffered  most  from  a  scorching
sun,  a  covert  from  the  burning  heat  was  most  appreciated.  Therefore  God  was
to  them  just  what  they  needed,  "  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  The
fervent  heat  was  tempered  with  a  cloud.  From  every  evil  thing  God  covers  his  saint.-:
— from  the  heat  of  trial,  sorrow,  care,  excessive  prosperity.  He  never  fails  as  dees  a
passing  cloud.  He  covers  his  chosen  "all  the  day  long."  We  have  piomised
likewise^

IV.  Unebbiko  guidanoe.  "  He  shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders,'  As  the  temple
of  God  was  to  rest  on  Moriah,  and  the  visible  Shechinah  be  enshrined  within,  this
would  properly  seem  as  a  crown  of  glory  on  the  head  of  Benjamin;  or,  what  the
head  is  to  the  human  body,  that  God  would  be  to  this  favoured  tribe.  The  head
informs,  enlightens,  directs  the  whole  body ;  so,  saith  Gtod,  "  I  will  guide  thee  with  my
eye."  That  man  has  reached  the  perfecti<n  of  being  when  Christ  dwells  in  him,
as  "wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,"  life.  To  be  most  godly  ia  to  b«  most
manly. — D.

PBDTEBONOlfT.  2  O


562  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  ixxiu.  1^29,

Vera.  13 — 17. — Royal  donations  on  Joseph.  It  is  instructive  to  observe  with  what
loving  ardour  Moses  speaks  of  Joseph.  No  sooner  does  he  mention  this  name  than
his  tongue,  the  ready  servant  of  his  heart,  gives  vent  to  a  flood  of  eloquence.  No
good  is  too  great  to  predict  for  Joseph.  No  benediction  ia  too  costly  for  him.  The
tinest  imagery  that  his  fancy  can  invent  is  employed  to  foreshadow  bis  greatness.
rhe  imagination  of  the  d}'ing  saint  fondly  revels  in  the  prospect  of  Joseph's  prosperity
and  power.     Touching  Joseph,  we  have  mentioned—

I.  His  faithful  improvement  of  tbial.  The  description  of  Rachel's  firstborn
";9  truly  pathetic.  He  is  pictured  to  us  as  he  "  that  was  separated  from  his  brethren."
In  a  sense  he  had  always  been  separate.  In  youth,  his  temper  and  tastes  and
predilections  were  all  superior  to  theirs.  They  were  coarse,  vulgar,  cruel;  he  was
refined,  thoughtful,  gentle — cast  in  a  nobler  mould.  But  the  reference  made  by  Moses
to  separation  is,  doubtless,  to  that  violent  and  murderous  separation,  when  by  his
brothers'  hands  he  was  sold  as  a  bond-slave  and  carried  into  Egypt.  How  nobly
he  had  borne  that  treatment  is  a  matter  of  historic  fact.  How  Joseph's  behaviour
in  captivity  had  led  to  the  development  of  Israel's  fortunes  could  never  be  erased
from  Jewish  memory.  His  affectionate  treatment  of  his  aged  father,  and  his  generous
forgiveness  of  his  brethren,  marked  him  as  "  separate "  from  the  common  herd  of
men.    This  is  a  kind  of  separateness  we  may  aspire  to  emulate.    Here  is  a  pattern  man.

IL  His  foreseen  pbospebitt.  This  forecast  of  prolific  prosperity  was  founded  on
a  double  basis,  viz.  on  the  native  resources  of  the  district  which  was  to  be  his
favoured  portion ;  and  on  the  abiding  benediction  of  Jehovah.  Yet  these  two  sources
of  prosperity  were  in  reality  one — one  source  flowing  through  many  channels.  His
hills  should  laugh  in  fertility  and  gladness  beneath  the  sunny  smile  of  God.  The  vale
of  Shechem  has  always  enjoyed  a  wide  celebrity  for  its  beauty  and  fniitfulness.
Samaria  was  the  paradise  of  Canaan.  Its  hills  were  covered  with  olives  and  vines
and  figs.  Its  valleys  waved  with  golden  com.  One  natural  source  of  abundance  is
its  perennial  fountains  and  flowing  streams — the  "deep  that  coucheth  beneath."
Here  it  was  that  Jacob  made  his  first  purchase  of  land,  and  here  he  digged  the
well  which  to  this  hour  bears  his  name.  To  this  verdant  district  Jacob's  sons  led
their  flocks  when  drought  and  barrenness  covered  the  land.  And  in  this  district
occurred  the  shameful  deed  when  Joseph  was  imprisoned  in  the  pit  and  then  sold
to  Ishmaelites.  By  a  generous  retribution  of  God's  sagacious  providence,  Joseph
obtained  his  permanent  portion  in  this  very  territory,  and  with  all  the  energy  of
his  soul  Moses  prayed,  "  Blessed  of  the  Lord  be  his  land."

III.  His  future  power.  A  double  portion  of  property  and  power  fell  to  Joseph.
By  the  dying  bequest  of  his  father  Jacob,  each  of  Joseph's  sons,  Manasseh  and
Ephrium,  was  to  rank  in  the  flrst  degree,  adopted  by  Jacob  in  the  place  and  rank  of
his  own.  Yet  the  two  sons  were  destined  not  to  grow  in  the  same  proportion  of  power.
While  there  were  to  be  the  "  thousands  of  Manasseh,"  there  were  to  be  the  "  ten
thousands  of  Ephraim."  '  God  "  divideth  to  every  one  severally  as  he  will."  The  glory
of  these  young  men  was  to  be  "their  strength,"  and  this  would  be  fostered  by  the  fatness
of  their  land.  Yet  their  strength  was  not  pictured  nnder  the  image  of  a  lion  or  an
eagle.  It  was  to  be  rather  the  quiet,  patient  strength  of  the  ox — the  strength  which
endures,  as  did  Joseph's  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  Horns  are  the  bullock's  natural
weapons  of  defence,  and  these  are  significant  emblems  of  power.  But  Joseph's  horns
were  to  be  like  those  of  the  unicorn.  His  was  to  be  royal  authority  and  strength.
Evidently  Moses  foresaw  the  day  when  the  sovereignty  of  the  Hebrews  would  be
divided,  and  when  Joseph  should  wield  a  sceptre  in  Israel.  The  royal  emblazonry  of
Britain  thus  corresponds,  in  part,  with  the  heraldry  of  ancient  Samaria.  "  With  the
horns  of  unicorns  he  was  destined  "  to  push  the  people  together  to  the  ends  of  the
earth."  His  "horn  Qoi  exalted  unto  honour."  To  this  hour,  a  remnant  of  Joseph's
power  remains  in  Samaria.  There  still  in  the  synagogue  is  enshrined  the  ancient  Liaw,
and  then  yet  ii  observed  the  Paschal  feast. — D.

Vers.  18, 19. — Oombintd  work  and  worship.  Some  tie  of  afiSnity  bound  these  two
tribes  in  peculiar  intimacy.  We  cannot  find  this  cementing  link  in  the  fact  that  their
lands  lay  in  close  contiguity  ;  this  fact  was  not  unique.  Other  tribes  bordered  on  their
coasts,  with  whom  no  such  intimate  alliance  prevailed.     Neither  were  their  secular


OH.  xxxm.  1— 29.]        THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  563

occupations  alike.  It  was  an  affinity  springing  out  of  congenial  character.  The  same
tastes  and  purposes  and  aims  were  dominant  in  both.  To  their  honour,  it  is  handed
down  to  distant  posterity  that  they  were  zealous  for  the  worship  of  God.

I.  Seoul AB  fdbsttits  should  bk  followed  in  a  spibit  op  oladness.  The  man  of
God  leaves  it  as  a  charge  upon  these  tribes  to  rejoice  in  their  several  avocations.  The
earthly  callings  of  Zebulun  and  Issachar  seem  to  have  been  quite  distinct  the  one  from
the  other.  Zebulim's  territory  abutted  on  the  aea-coast,  and  enjoyed  the  advantage  of
a  small  harbour  under  shelter  of  Mount  Carmel.  Hence  the  people  had  access  to  the
sea ;  they  had  a  fishery ;  they  possessed  opportunities  for  commerce.  Though  they  had
no  maritime  tastes  (like  the  Phoenicians),  yet  the  ships  of  other  nations  would  visit  their
coast,  and  the  merchandise  of  distant  lands  would  find  their  way  thither.  "  They  shall
suck  of  the  abundance  of  the  seas."  Issachar  was  an  agricultural  tribe.  The  people
dwelt  in  tents,  and  their  possessions  consisted  in  flocks  and  herds.  But  whatever  their
occupation,  it  ought  to  be  an  occasion  for  joy.  It  gave  scope  to  the  pleasant  exercise  of
their  powers.  It  furnished  them  with  the  means  of  family  subsistence.  It  was  a  fine
field  for  the  discipline  of  their  virtues,  for  the  exercise  of  brotherly  help  and  mutual
kindness.  It  enabled  them  to  trace  in  their  daily  walk  the  footsteps  of  Jehovah,  and
provided  material  for  daily  praise.  Whatever  out  work  be,  it  should  be  fulfilled  with
gladness.    Happy  is  the  man  who  sings  at  his  work.

II.  Seculab  puesuitb  are  not  incompatible  with  Divine  worship.  "  They  shall
call  the  people  unto  the  mountain."  Although  their  abodes  were  far  away  among  the
northern  hills,  they  did  n<jt  hold  themselves  free  to  abstain  from  public  ordinances  of
worship.  Yea,  not  only  did  they  stir  themselves  up  to  this  delightful  duty,  but  they
summoned  the  surrounding  tribes  also  to  keep  the  sacred  festivals.  In  the  absence  of
modern  reminders  of  the  seasons — in  the  absence  of  almanacks  and  clocks — these  twin
tribes  noted  the  revolutions  of  sun  and  moon,  became  the  timekeepers  of  the  nation,
and  called  the  tribes  to  prayer  and  sacrifice.  Probably  their  secular  duties  as  fishermen
and  as  shepherds  furnished  the  opportunities  for  observing  the  phases  of  the  moon.
New  moon  or  full  was  the  signal  in  the  heavens  for  the  recurrence  of  the  special
festivals ;  then  the  silver  trumpets  would  ring  out  the  summons  from  hill  to  hill,  and
from  hamlet  to  hamlet.  If  there  be  the  disposition  to  worship  God,  facilities  will  be
found  or  made.

III.  Secular  puEsnrrs  fuenish  the  means  fob  acceptable  SAOEmcB.  "They
shall  offer  sacrifices  of  righteousness."  Secular  pursuits  will  never  satisfy  all  the
yearnings  of  the  human  heart.  There  is  a  hunger  within  which  no  material  banquet
can  relieve.  There  is  a  thirst  of  soul  which  can  be  slaked  only  by  the  water  of  eternal
life.  To  gratify  all  the  cravings  of  the  mind  we  must  come  to  God.  But  he  will  be
approached  by  means  of  sacrifice.  This  furnishes  a  test  of  our  sincerity.  This  awakens
a  sense  of  our  deepest  need.  This  provides  a  channel  for  our  highest  joy.  Whatever
form  our  sacrifices  may  take — whether  com,  or  oil,  or  fruit — whether  lambs  or  doves—
whether  contrition,  praise,  or  gratitude — it  must  be  a  sacrifice  of  righteousness,  or
it  cannot  be  accepted.  As  the  act  of  devout  obedience  to  Divine  command,  or  as  the
outgoing  of  desire  after  holiness,  or  as  the  expression  of  righteous  obligation,  it  will
find  acceptance  on  God's  altar.

IV.  Seculab  success  is  promoted  bt  gbnbbous  consboeation  of  substance  to  Qot>.
"  Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour."  God  is  the  most  generous  of  Masters,  but  he
hates  empty  pretensions  of  loyalty.  He  will  not  accept  words  where  deeds  are  possible.
The  honour  is  conferred,  not  on  the  God  who  receives,  but  on  the  man  whose  gifr  finds
acceptance.  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  is  a  lesson  not  easily  learnt—
an  experience  not  common  enough.  This  is  not  a  firstfruit,  but  one  of  the  latest  fruits
of  Christian  living.  Yet  without  the  favouring  smile  of  Jehovah  no  secular  pursuit
can  succeed.  Men  often  sow  a  bushel  and  reap  a  peck.  But  when  God  is  on  our  side,
our  seed  multiplies  a  hundredfold:  "a  little  one  becomes  a  thousand;"  "  godliness  is
profitable  unto  all  things."  The  only  real  insurance  for  successful  enterprise  is  the
benediction  of  God.  The  treasures  remain  in  the  land  (ver.  19)  until  God  teaches  us
how  to  draw  them  forth.  The  eye  of  faith  is  clearer-sighted  than  the  eye  of
expediency. — ^D.

Vers.  20  21.-— OcufB  valrmr  and  chivalry  commended.    Q*A  had  been  prematurely


564  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMY.  [ch.  xxxiii.  1—29.


hasty  in  seeking  an  allotment  in  Canaan.  When  the  heads  of  this  tribe  perceived  how
suitable  were  the  hills  of  Gilead  for  pasturing  their  extensive  flocks,  they  clamoured  at
unce  for  this  possession,  ere  yet  an  inch  of  land  had  been  gained  on  the  west  of  Jordan.
Moses  yielded  to  their  request,  on  condition  only  that  they  should  go  over  Jordan
armed  with  their  brethren,  and  should  fight  in  the  front  of  battle.  This  they  nobly
did,  and  returned  to  their  families  and  flocks  only  when  Joshua  released  them  from
fuither service.    We  see —

I.  A  HASTT  CHOICE  OVERRULED  FOB  GOOD.  There  Can  be  little  doubt  that  selfishness
was  the  originating  motive  for  this  choice.  The  well-being  of  other  tribes  was  not,  for
I  he  time,  weighed.  Yet  it  was  a  choice  beset  with  perils.  The  district  coveted  lay  on
the  borders  of  the  wilderness,  and  was  exposed  to  raid  and  depredation  from  foes.  It  is
wiser  always  to  look  heavenward  and  to  say,  "  Thou  shalt  choose  our  inheritance  for
us."  Yet,  though  selfishness  was  for  the  hour  dominant,  othe'  and  better  qualities
dwelt  in  the  tribe.  As  often  happens,  God  allowed  their  choice,  and  then  led  them
through  severe  discipline  to  enable  them  to  enjoy  it.

II.  Theik  choick  was  pubchased  by  habd  and  perilous  warfare.  "He  came
with  the  heads  of  the  people,  he  executed  the  justice  of  the  Lord,  and  his  judgments
with  Israel."  To  acquire  this  territory,  Moses  stated  at  once  the  simple  condition,  viz.
that  they  should  fight  in  the  van  of  Israel's  battalions.  This  condition  they  accepted,
and  bravely  they  acquitted  themselves.  The  event  taught  them  valuable  lessons.  It
taught  them  that  they  were  an  integral  part  of  a  great  commonwealth,  and  could  net
separate  themselves,  without  injury,  from  it.  It  taught  them  to  look,  not  only  on  their
own  welfare,  but  also  to  consult  for  the  welfare  of  others.  It  taught  them  that  rest
aud  quiet  possession  were  more  valued  after  a  hard-fought  campaign  than  before.

III.  Their  chivalrous  conduct  developed  their  latent  qualities  of  martial
PROWESS.  The  greatest  advantage  resulting  from  their  military  encounters  was  the
personal  strength  and  heroism  which  were  developed  in  themselves.  They  were  better,
braver,  nobler  men  afterwards  than  ever  before.  Now,  and  not  till  now,  they  were
qualified  to  protect  their  own  hills  and  flocks.  This  advantage  they  had  not  foreseen,
yet  it  was  the  -best  and  most  enduring.  Now  the  men  of  Gad  "  dwelt  like  a  lion  "  in
fearless  possession ;  now  they  were  able,  when  assailed, "  to  tear  the  arm  "  of  a  foe,  "  with
the  crown  of  the  head."  This  heroic  quality  reappeared,  in  brighter  form,  in  the  person
of  Elijah,  and  probably  also  in  the  forerunner  of  our  Lord.

IV.  This  fearless  courage  obtains  a  prater  for  steady  enlargement.  "  Blessed
be  he  that  enlargeth  Gad."  It  was  a  boon  to  the  whole  of  Israel  to  have  such  a  martial
tribe  occupying  an  outpost  in  the  land.  To  enlarge  and  strengthen  Gad  was  to
strengthen  their  military  defence,  was  to  increase  their  own  safety,  was  to  perpetuate
their  own  peace.  So  long  as  the  lion-hearted  tribe  of  Gad  had  a  numerous  generation,
no  foe  could  invade  Israel  from  that  side.  The  very  reputation  of  Gad  eastward  kept
the  nations  in  salutary  awe.    The  welfare  of  Gad  was  the  welfare  of  all. — ^D

Ver.  22. — The  blessing  of  strength.  Prom  the  tribe  of  Dan  sprang  Samson,  whom
ne  may  regard  as  a  typical  child  of  Dan.  In  all  probability  the  whole  tribe  was  noted
fur  strong  men,  and  their  pride  waB  to  cultivate  and  increase  muscular  strength.  We
have  here  promised —

I.  Youthful  strength.  This  is  confessedly  not  the  highest  form  of  blessing ;  yet,
in  some  conditions  of  civic  society,  it  is  essential  to  the  preservation  of  independence,
property,  and  life.    The  picture  is  that  of  a  young  lion.

II.  Desteuctive  strength.  This  has  its  place  in  God's  kingdom.  The  destructive
strength  of  Samson  was  an  inestimable  boon,  when  the  Philistines  threatened  to  over-
whelm the  land.  We  cannot  otherwise  regard  the  prodigious  strength  of  Samson
but  as  God's  scourge  for  the  chastisement  of  gross  idolaters.  Yet,  what  prodigies
of  good  might  such  strength  accomplish  if  directed  into  beneficent  channels  1

III.  Stubngth  undeb  the  dibeotion  and  control  of  sagacity.  "  He  shall  leap
from  Bashan."  Stiength  is  ofttimes  wasted  from  want  of  prudence.  The  strength  of
Dan  was  reueired  for  suitable  occasions.  It  displayed  itself  in  forms  surprising  and
unexpected.  The  close  vicinity  of  the  Philistines  to  one  part  of  Dan's  allotment  neces-
sitated this  training  of  muscular  strength.  It  is  instructive  to  note  what  latent  energiea
there  reside  in  man,  which  come  into  view  only  when  great  occasions  require. — D.


jH.  xxxm.  1—29.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DKUTEItONOMY.  666

Ver.  2S. — NaphtaKs  goodly  choice.  Naphtali's  position  was  in  the  north  of  Canaan,
and  liad  its  southern  border  adjacent  to  the  sea  of  Galilee.  A  large  proportion  of
our  Lord's  ministrations  were  bestowed  on  the  inhabitants  within  this  district.
Obviously  the  heads  of  this  tribe  in  Moses'  day  aspired  after  the  best  possessions.

I.  We  obskeyi  hekb  the  best  human  ambition.  "  Satisfied  with  favour."  It
is  scarcely  conjecture  that  imports  into  Moses'  words  the  meaaing,  "the  favour  of
God ; "  for  in  the  next  clause  he  mentions  distinctly  the  "  blessing  of  the  Lord."
No  other  favour  can  satisfy  save  the  "  favour  of  Jehovah.'"  This  is  all-sufficient —
an  ocean,  in  which  the  soul  of  man  can  bathe  itself  with  amplest  delight.  This  phrase,
"the  favour,  or  grace,  of  God,"  includes  everything  which  God  can  supply  for  human
need.  In  it  is  embraced  light,  pardon.  Divine  friendship,  purity,  peace,  strength,
liberty,  rest.     A  comprehensive  prayer  is  this,  "  Oh,  satisfy  me  early  with  thy  mercy !  "

II.  We  note  the  best  ambition  batispibd.  "  Full  with  the  blessing  of  the
Lord."  We  often  desire  inferior  good,  and  desire  in  vain.  The  love  of  God  is  too
deep  and  wise  to  indulge  our  foolish  requests.  But  when  we  ask  for  highest  good,
and  desire  it  earnestly,  we  never  fail  to  obtain.  What  man  ever  sued  for  grace  aud
was  sent  empty  away  ?  No ;  God's  chief  complaint  is  that  we  come  too  seldom,
and  ask  too  little  at  his  hands.  Still  he  says  to  us,  "  Open  thy  mouth  wide,  and  1
will  fill  it."  The  possession  and  wise  use  of  God's  grace  enlarges  our  capacity  to
receive.     It  is  a  cure  for  all  murmuring  and  discontent.

III.  We  bee  how,  with  the  highest  blessing,  God  gives  the  lowbb  unaskeo.
Naphtali  desired  to  be  satisfied  with  the  Divine  favour ;  and  a  voicp  was  commissioned
to  say,  "  Possess  thou  the  sea  and  the  south."  It  is  a  recognized  method  of  God's
procedure  that  when  men  ask  for  spiritual  riches,  God  giants  b  ^th  spiritual  and
temporal  good.  In  Gibeah,  God  appeared  to  Solomon,  and  proposed  to  him,  "  Ask
what  I  shall  give  thee;"  and  when  Solomon  craved  to  possess  the  gift  of  wisdom,
his  generous  God  assured  him  that  not  only  should  wisdom  be  his,  but  things  he  had
not  asked — even  unprecedented  riches  and  honour.  To  the  same  effect,  our  Lord
affirmed,  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteousness,  and  all  other
(needed)  things  shall  be  added  unto  you."  He  is  "  able  to  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly
above  aU  that  we  can  ask  or  think." — ^D.

Vers.  24,  25. — The  comprehensive  henediction  of  Asher.  No  one  can  read  this  series
of  poetical  benedictions  without  cherishing  the  conviction  that  Moses  "spake  as
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  The  peculiar  fitness  of  his  aspirations  for  the  future
exigencies  of  the  tribes,  and  his  clear  foresight  of  their  distant  fortunes,  indicate
unmistakably  that  a  supernatural  light  suffused  his  understanding.  This  benediction
of  the  dying  prophet  foretokens^

I.  Numerical  inckeasb.  By  a  natural  law  of  God's  providence,  rapid  increase
of  the  people  is  a  fruit  of  material  prosperity.  When  scarcity  of  food  is  a  permanent
condition,  infanticide  prevails,  or  children  perish  for  lack  of  nutritious  food.  This
increase  of  children  was,  in  former  times,  a  distinct  token  of  God's  favour,  and  a
frequent  subject  of  promise.  As  the  numbers  of  Israel  increased,  so  would  their
strength  to  resist  aggression.  It  was  when  Israel's  numbers  were  diminished  by
intestine  wars,  that  the  Eastern  potentates  gained  decisive  triumphs.  Occupying,
as  Asher  did,  the  extreme  north-west  of  Canaan,  numerical  increase  was  a  source  of
defensive  strength.  To  the  Christian  parent — to  the  Church,  children  are  a  blessing.
"  Happy  they  who  have  their  quiver  full "  of  these  Divine  arrows.

n.  There  is  set  forth  social  reputation  and  good  will.  "  Let  him  be  aoceptabU
to  his  brethren."  So  long  as  the  tribal  relationship  was  maintained  in  strength,  there
was  a  constant  danger  of  mutual  jealousies  and  animosities.  Occasionally  this  evil
passion  took  fire  and  broke  into  open  flame.  From  tribal  suspicion  and  dislike  Asher
would  be  free.  It  is  an  honour  and  a  joy  to  live  in  the  esteem  and  good  will  of  brethren.
The  outward  reach  of  influence  is  enlarged.  Life  is  felt  to  have  nobler  interests.  The
better  part  of  human  nature  finds  development.

in.  There  is  foreshadowed  agricultural  prospbbitt.  Upon  the  northern  hills
of  Palestine  the  ohve  tree  flourishes,  and  authorities  affirm  that  no  agricultural  produce
is  so  abundant  and  so  remunerative  as  that  of  the  olive.  It  is  hardy,  will  flourish
in  rooky  soil,  and  attains  veneraW    age.     Its  fruit  is  valuable,  is  utilized  for  domestio


56«  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.        [oh.  Xixin.  1— Z!).

purposea,  and  has  always  been  a  staple  commodity  of  commerce.  So  prolific  were
the  olives  of  Asher  to  become,  that  the  people  should  have,  not  only  the  head,  but  the
feet  also,  in  the  abundant  oil;  or  the  language  may  be  designed  as  a  bold  figure,  to  indicate
that  so  full  should  be  the  oil-vats  at  the  base  of  every  olive-clothed  hill,  that  the  very
land  should  seem  to  be  foot-deep  in  golden  oil.

IV.  'i'HBRB  IS  PREDICTED  IMPREGNABLE  DEFENCB.  The  poetical  imagery  here  may
be  better  translated,  "  Thy  bars  shall  be  iron  and  brass."  It  may  be  that  these  metals
were  found  in  veins  among  the  hills,  or  rather  iron  and  copper.  It  may  that  the  gates
of  their  cities  were,  in  some  cases,  fashioned  with  these  metals.  Doors  and  gates  of  iron
are  still  to  be  seen  in  the  district  of  Bashan.  But  it  is  better  to  treat  the  language  as
elegant  imagery,  to  indicate  the  matchless  strength  of  Asher's  fortresses.  Over  all  her
internal  wealth  there  shall  be  a  sure  defence.  The  Chaldee  paraphase  reads,  "  Thou
shalt  be  strong  and  bright,  like  iron  and  brass."

V.  There  is  pledged  internal  strength  proportionbd  to  need.  "  As  thy  days,
thy  strength."  A  precious  promise  this  of  universal  application.  Our  days  are  under
Divine  inspection ;  our  circumstances  are  under  Divine  control.  It  is  better  for  the  man
every  way  that  his  strength  should  be  increased  than  that  the  trial  should  be  abated.
The  outcome  is  that  the  man  emerges  stronger,  nobler,  more  highly  developed.  The
supply  is  always  adjusted  to  the  particular  need.  God  is  the  model  of  frugal  economy.
In  his  administration  there  is  no  waste.  But  there  wuold  be  waste  if  the  supply  of
strength  daily  given  were  in  excess  of  the  requirement.  This  would  be  a  blot  upon  his
wisdom.  What  should  we  spj  of  the  water  company  that  sent  daily  into  our  houses  ten
times  the  quantity  of  water  that  is  required  ?  Or,  what  advantage  would  it  be  to  us  if
the  supply  of  light  from  the  sun  daily  were  a  hundredfold  in  excess  of  this  world's
need  ?  Our  God  is  perfect  wisdom,  as  well  as  infinite  love.  Strength  shall  be  supplied,
not  in  superabundant  waste,  but  in  exact  proportion  to  our  need.  "  As  our  days,  our
strength."  The  infant  would  be  crushed  with  the  strength  of  the  full-grown  man. — D.

Vers.  26 — 29. —  God,  the  crown  of  Israd's  glory.  Ai  soon  as  Moses  touches  npon
this  theme,  language  seems  too  poor  to  express  the  greatness  of  his  thought — too  cold
to  convey  the  glowing  ardour  of  his  love.  Here  all  metaphors  fail ;  all  comparisons  are
vain.  God  is  above  all  imagery,  or  metaphor,  or  illustration.  As  there  is  none
like  him,  so  nothing  can  fitly  express  his  deeds  towards  his  chosen.  His  conduct  is,  like
himself,  inefiable.  As  heaven  is  loftier  than  earth,  so  do  God's  thoughts  and  ways
transcend  human  conception.

I.  Observe  Israel's  Source  of  greatness.  Withont  question,  Israel's  source  of
greatness  is  God.  Inconceivable  as  it  is  to  mortal  minds,  the  eternal  Sovereign  of  the
universe  has  come  into  intimate  alliance  with  his  chosen  people.  He  is  not  simply  God
— the  abstract  Deity — he  is  the  "  God  of  Jeshurun."  His  eternity  is  brought  into
human  use — is  available  for  human  needs.  In  the  eternal  and  unchangeable  God  we
may  dwell.  He  is  our  Refuge,  our  Dwelling-place,  our  Sanctuary.  All  the  resources  of
his  omnipotence  are  for  us :  beneath  xis  "  are  the  everlasting  arms."  But  hath  God  arms  ?
Hath  he  human  members  and  organs  ?  "  He  that  formed  the  eye,  shall  he  not  see  ?  "
He  that  fashioned  our  arms  and  hands,  hath  he  no  instruments  with  which  to  support
our  sinking  frame  ?    Yea,  "  in  him  we  live."

All  the  activities  of  his  providential  government  are  for  us.  "  He  rideth  upon
the  heavens,"  like  a  king  in  his  chariot,  for  our  help.  This  is  true,  both  for  Israel
collectively,  and  for  every  individual  believer.  In  every  decree  that  issues  from  his
throne,  he  has  us  in  view.  All  the  machinery  of  his  extendtd  providence  works  with
one  design,  viz.  our  advantage.  He  thinks,  and  plans,  and  executes,  and  overturns
for  one  main  end — the  final  redemption  of  his  people.     God  and  we  are  one.

II.  Israel's  safety.  "  Thou  shalt  dwell  in  safety  alone."  From  the  foregoing
premiss,  this  is  a  sound  and  certain  conclusion.  "  If  God  be  for  us,"  who  can  assail  us
successfully  ?  What  can  prevail  against  omnipotence  ?  What  can  penetrate  the
thick  bosses  of  Jehovah's  shield  ?  Pear  in  such  a  case  is  unreasonable  disloyalty.
This  globe  must  be  shivered  into  a  thousand  atoms,  all  the  forces  in  God's  universe
must  be  rendered  powerless  and  ineffective,  the  sceptre  of  Jehovah  must  be  broken,
before  any  danger  can  touch  the  elect  of  God.  Safe,  beyond  the  spectre  of  a  fear^  an
those  whom  Gud  defend*.


cii.  xxxiv.  1—12.]         THE  BOOK  OF  DEaTERONoMy.


667


in.  Ibbabl's  abundancb.  "  The  fountain  of  Jacob  shall  be  upon  a  land  of  oorn
and  wine."  Jacob  is  represented  as  the  fount  or  source  of  many  people,  all  of  whom
shall  find  an  abode  in  the  land  of  corn  and  wine.  Every  want  shall  be  met.  In  this
"  mountain,  shall  the  Lord  of  hosts  prepare  a  feast  of  fat  things."  In  the  paradise  of  •
God  there  flourishes  on  both  sides  of  the  stream,  the  tiee  of  life,  which  bears  twelve
manner  of  fruits,  and  yieldeth  her  fruit  every  month.  Here  is  a  perennial  supply  and
satisfying  variety.  And  though  this  is  expressed  by  material  images,  it  sets  forth
substantial  and  eternal  truth — the  very  truth  of  God.  In  the  kingdom  of  God  there
is  provided  whatever  can  please  the  eye,  delight  the  ear,  regale  the  appetite,  relieve  a
need,  gratify  a  sense.  For  perpetually  does  the  voice  of  the  King  ring  out  a  hearty
welcome,  "  Eat,  0  friends ;  yea,  drink  abundantly,  0  beloved."

IV.  Israel's  triumph.  God's  triumph  is  Israel's  triumph  also.  God  will  not
dissociate  himself  from  his  people.  "  His  covenant  is  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered
in  all  things  and  sure."  Yea,  God's  conquests  are  not  separate  and  distinct  from  ours.
He  conquers  through  us — yea,  by  means  of  us.  If  we  belong  to  the  true  Israel,  God's
foes  are  our  foes,  God's  weapons  are  our  weapons,  God's  interests  are  our  interests.
Our  excellent  Sword  in  this  warfare  is  God ;  he  himself  is  "  the  Shield  of  our  help."
The  contest  may  be  protracted,  severe,  wavering;  success  may  seem  to  hang  in
suspense ;  but  beyond  the  smoke  and  dust  and  uncertainty  of  battle,  faith  clearly  sees
the  final  triumph,  and  hears  the  immortal  pean :  "  Thou  sbalt  tread  upon  their  high
places."

V.  Israel's  transcendent  happiness.  "  Happy  art  thou,  0  Israel ;  who  is  like
unto  thee  ?  "  Surely,  their  happiness  is  complete,  and  impossible  of  enlargement,  who
repose  themselves  in  the  very  lieart  of  God,  and  dwell  peipetually  in  his  level  The
utmost  capacity  of  human  speech  is  impotent  to  express  their  deep  and  satisfying  joy.
It  is  a  thing  to  be  experienced,  not  expressed.  Such  joy  hath  no  vocabulary,  no
tongue.  It  is  "  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory."  What  the  noonday  sun  is  to  a
glowworm's  spark,  so  is  the  joy  of  the  righteous  compared  with  the  joja'  of  earth.
God's  own  joj  is  convened  to  godly  hearts. — D


exposition:


CHAPTER  XXXIV.
Death,  Bdrial,  and  Encomidm  oi'  Moseb.

After  blessing  the  people,  Moses,  in
obedience  to  the  Divine  command,  as-
cended Mount  Nebo,  the  highest  peak  of
the  Pisgah  range,  and  tlience  surveyed  the
whole  laud  of  Canaan,  from  north  to  south,
and  from  east  to  west,  as  well  as  the  district
on  the  east  of  the  Jordan,  not  included  in
Canaan  proper.

Ver.  1. — TJnto  the  mountain  of  Nebo,  to
the  top  of  Pisgah ;  rather,  unto  Mount  Nebo,
the  tvmmit  of  Pisgah.  Gilead  unto  Dan.
Not  Dan  Laish,  near  the  central  source  of
the  Jordan,  which  was  not  in  Gilead,  but
another  Dan  in  Northern  Perea,  the  site  of
which  has  not  yet  been  discovered  (cf.  Gen.
xiv.  14).

Vers.  2 — 4. — Unto  the  utmost  sea ;  rather,
the  hinder  tea,  viz.  the  Mediterranean  (cf.
eh.  xi.  24).  The  south;  the  Negeb,  the
pasture-land  in  the  south,  towards  the
Arabian  desert  The  plain  of  the  valley  of
Jericho ;     the    extensive    plain    through


which  the  Jordan  flowi,  «xtencHng  ttosa
Jericho  to  Zoar,  at  the  south  end  of  the
Dead  Sea.  This  wide  prospect  could  not
be  surveyed  by  any  ordinary  power  of
vision ;  so  that  Moses  must  for  the  occasion
have  had  his  power  of  vision  miraculously
increased.  There  is  no  ground  for  suppos-
ing that  he  saw  the  scene  in  an  ecstatic
vision,  and  not  with  his  bodily  eyes.

Ver.  5. — According  to  the  word  of  the
Lord;  literally,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.
The  rabbins  interpret  this,  "by  a  kiss  of
the  Lord  "  ('  Baba  Bathra,'  17  a) ;  i.e.  as  Mai-
monides  explains  it  ('More  Nevoch.,'  iii.  51),
Moses  "  died  in  a  moment  of  holiest  joy  in
the  knowledge  and  love  of  God."  The
phrase,  however,  simply  means  "  by  or
according  to  the  command  of"  (cf.  Gen.
xlv.  21;  Exod.  xviL  1 ;  Lev.  xxiv.  12;  Numb.
iii.  16,  etc.).

Ver.  6.— The  valley  In  which  God  is
supposed  to  have  buried  Moses  was  pro-
bably some  depression  on  the  Pisgah  range,
upon  or  close  by  Nebo.  The  rabbins  say
that  Moses  was  buried  by  reliring  into  a
cavern,  where  he  died  and  where  his  body
remained.    It  ia  probable  that,  like  Enoch


568


THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.


[CH.  xxxiv.  1 — 12


snd  Elijah,  he  was  transferred  to  the
invisible  world  without  seeing  corruption.
Hence  his  appearance  along  with  Elijah  in
bodily  form  on  the  Mount  of  the  Transfigu-
ration ;  and  hence  also,  perhaps,  the  tra-
dition of  the  contest  for  the  body  of  Moses
between  Michael  and  Satan  (Jude  9).  If  the
body  of  Moses  was  actually  buried,  the  con-
cealment of  his  grave  so  that  no  man  knew
of  it  may  be  justly  regarded  as  "  the  first
instance  on  record  of  the  providinfial
obliteration,  so  remarkably  exemplified
afterwards  in  the  gospel  history,  of  the
'  holy  places '  of  Palestine  ;  the  providential
safeguard  against  their  elevation  to  a
sanctity  which  might  endanger  the  real
holiness  of  the  history  and  religion  which
they  served  to  commemorate"  (Stanley).
The  reverence  which  the  Jews  paid  to
graves  shows  that  there  was  no  small  danger
of  their  coming  under  a  superstitious  regard
to  that  of  Moses  had  it  been  known.

Ver.  7. — Though  Moses  had  reached  the
age  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  years,  his  eye
had  not  become  dim,  nor  were  the  juices  of
his  body  dried.  Natural  force.  The  word
so  rendered  (rh)  occurs  only  here;  but  it
is  doubtless  the  subst.  connected  with'  the
adj.  n^  moist,  fresh  (of.  Gen.  xxx.  .S7;  Numb,
vi.  3),  and  properly  means  moisture,  fresh-
ness. It  is  used  here  of  the  natural  juice*
of  the  body.


Ver.  8. — The  people  mourned  for  Moses
thirty  days,  as  they  did  (or  Aaron  (Nnmb.
XX.  29).

Ver.  10.— <Cf.  Exod.  xxxiii.  11.)  Whom
the  Lord  knew.  "For  the  Lord  was  revealed
to  him  face  to  face  "  (Onkelos).  The  know-
ledge here  referred  to  was  not  merely  that
cognizance  which  God  as  the  Omniscient
has  of  all  men,  but  that  special  knowledge
by  whicli  men,  being  known  of  God,  are
made  to  know  him  (cf.  1  Cor.  viii.  3).  The
statement  in  tliis  verse  could  only  have
been  inserted  some  time  aftc  r  the  death  of
Moses,  and  after  the  people  had  had  mani-
festations of  God's  presence  with  them,  both
by  communications  from  him  tlirough  the
prophets  and  by  the  successes  which  he  had
given  them  over  their  enemies.  But  it  is
not  necessary  to  suppose  that  a  long  period
during  which  a  lengthened  succession  of
prophets  had  arisen  Ijad  elapsed.  "Moses
was  the  founder  and  mediator  of  the  old
covenant.  As  long  as  this  covenant  was  to
last,  no  prophet  could  arise  in  Israel  like
unto  Moses.  There  is  but  One  who  is
worthy  of  greater  honour  than  Moses,
namely,  the  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  our
profession,  who  is  placed  as  a  Son  over  all
the  house  of  God,  in  which  Mnses  was  found
faithful  as  a  servant  (comp.  Heb.  iii.  2 — 6
with  Numb.  xii.  7),  Jesus  Christ,  the  Pounder
and  Medi  .tor  of  the  new  and  eTerlasting
oovenant"  (Heilji


HOMILETICa

Vers.  1 — ^9. — The  last  Journey.  (For  other  aspects  of  the  death  of  Mases^  see
Homily  on  ch.  xxxii.  48—52.)  We  have  come  at  last  to  the  closing  scene.  It  is
evidently  recorded  by  other  hands ;  for  "  Dan  "  (ver.  2)  did  not  exist  by  that  name
till  a  much  later  period  (see  Judg.  xviii.  1,  27—29).  Vers.  10—12  indicate,  more-
over, a  period  later  still ;  very  possibly,  it  may  have  been  as  far  on  as  the  time  ol

Ezra  when  those  verses  were  added.     And  whoever  will  make  use  of  the  formula,

"early  authorship,  late  editorship,"  as  applicable  to  the  Book  of  Denteronomy, will
have  in  his  hands  a  key  which  will  enable  him  to  unlock  many  of  the  intricacies  with
wliich  unbelieving  writers  seek  to  worry  us.  In  all  probability  there  was  an  ample
supply  of  men  in  the  later  schools  of  the  prophets  who  would  be  quite  equal  to
editorial  work ;  and  most  assuredly,  Ezra  would  not  be  lacking  in  fitness  for  such
service.  It  is  altogether  gratuitous  and  unnecessary  to  attempt  to  lower  the  value  of
the  hook  in  the  eyes  of  others  on  account  of  the  manifest  touches  of  a  later  age.  The
revision  of  an  ancient  book,  freeing  it  from  archaisms,  and,  as  we  should  say,  "posting
it  up  to  date,"  would  increase,  not  diminish  its  value.

By  whomsoever  written,  this  closing  chapter  is  a  fitting  appendix  to  the  words  of  the
lawgiver  himself.     For  homiletio  use  it  is  exceedingly  suggestive.

I.  Moses  has  to  take  a  remarkable  journey.  (Vers.  1,  5.)  He  has  to  go  up  and
die.  In  one  sense  this  is  true  of  us  all.  We  are  all  on  a  pilgrimage,  at  the  close  ol
which,  on  its  earthly  side,  there  must  be  the  act  of  dying.  But  in  two  respects  there
is  a  notable  element  in  the  journey  of  the  aged  lawgiver :  in  one  of  these  it  was  unique.
I.  His  act  of  dying  was,  as  much  as  his  acts  in  life,  one  of  conscious  and  intentional
obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  He  knew  that  he  held  his  life  absolutely  at  the  disposal
of  ano*her,  and  he  would  not,  if  he  could,  have  prolonged  it  beyond  its  appointed  timfr


8H.  xixxv.  1— 12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  .609

In  this  respect  believers  now  are  in  full  sympathy  and  accord  with  him.  For  them  to
live  is  Clirist.  Their  supreme  desire  is  that  Christ  may  be  magnified  in  their  body,
whether  by  life  or  by  death.  They  desire  to  honour  their  Saviour  in  their  dying  as
well  as  in  their  living  work.  "  Whether  "  they  "  live "  they  "  live  unto  the  I^ord ;  and
whether"  they  "die"  they  "die  unto  the  Lord;  whether"  they  "live  therefore  or
die,"  they  "are  the  Lord's."  2.  Moses,  however, takes  a  journey,  knowing  just  wien
and  where  he  should  die.  It  is  not  easy  for  us  to  enter  into  his  feelings  then.  The
time  and  place  of  our  death  are  entirely  unknown  to  us.  How  could  we  bear  it  if  it
were  otherwise?  Or  if  we  could,  how  could  our  fondest  ones  on  earth  ?  We  are  often
glad  to  throw  ourselves  anew  on  God,  in  thankfulness  at  the  uncertainty  which  ghrouds
the  future.    We  c>>eerfully  say —

"Lord,  it  belongs  not  to  our  care
Whether  we  die  or  live."

But  what  a  pall  would  leem  to  be  thrown  over  the  home,  if  it  were  disclosed  when  we
should   be  called  away  I     The    holier  and  more   beautiful  the  life,  the  more  painful  •
would  the  thought  of  parting  with  it  be.

II.  Bbe  he  departs,  visions  of  qlobt  ake  vouchsafed.  (Ver.  2.)  ."  The  Lord
showed  him  all  the  land."  The  vision  was  in  part  physical,  but  that  which  faith
beheld  in  the  glorious  future  which  was  assured  to  the  people  of  &id,  was  by  far  the
most  precious  part  of  the  sight — incomparably  so.  Thus  the  Lord  was  merciful  to
Moses,  in  that,  though  his  joy  in  death  was  checked  by  the  sense  of  his  own  defect  and
failures,  he  would,  on  the  other  hand,  be  borne  up  by  the  thought  that  Ood  never  had
failed,  and  never  would.  The  future,  from  which  he  was  cut  off,  would  assuredly  •
develop  gloriously  under  the  care  and  grace  of  Israel's  covenant  God.  Even  so,  when
God's  heroes  sink  in  death,  they  know  that,  though  they  die,  God's  Church  will  live  on,
and  that  the  promised  inheritance  will  yet  be  theirs.  And  many,  many  a  believer
has  had  a  vision,  in  death,  akin  to  that  of  Stephen,  and,  though  appalled  at  his  own
shortcomings,  has  been  borne  up  by  a  sight  of  Jesus,  as  "  mighty  to  save,"  and  as  the
Captain  of  salvation,  who  will  bring  the  Church  onward  to  the  fulness  of  redemption.

III.  When  these  death-scenes  abb  witnessed  the  soul  will  be  absolutblt
ALONE  WITH  GoD.  Moses  lay  himself  down  to  die,  without  any  attendant  by  his  side.
How;6ver  many  there  might  have  been  around,  between  himself  and  God  no  one  could
possibly  come.  He  must  die  alone;  so  must  we.  Alone  must  we  pass  through
"  death's  iron  gate,"  save  as  we  can  use  the  words  in  Pa.  zxiii.  4.  There  is  but  One
whose  real  presence  can  comfort  us  then.

IV.  The  bodies  of  God's  saints  akb  kot  oveblookbd  by  him.  (Ver.  6.)  "  The
Lord  buried  him,"  says  the  editor,  "  and  no  man  knoweth  of  bis  sepulchre  unto  this
day."  Some  have  assigned  it  as  a  reason  for  the  concealment  of  the  body  of  Moses,
"  that  his  tomb  might  not  become  the  occasion  of  idolatry  or  superstition."  Others,
rejecting  this  as  inconsistent  with  the  known  fact  that  in  the  eye  of  the  Hebrews  every
dead  body  was  unclean,  have  sought  for  a  reason  by  comparing  Jude  9  with  Matt.
xvii.  They  deem  it  not  improbable  that  there  might  be  some  change  in  the  body  of
Moses  in  death,  which  would  account  for  his  appearing  in  the  Transfiguration  scene
with  another,  who  was  taken  up  to  heaven  without  dying,  and  also  for  the
mysterious  conflict  over  the  body,  of  which  Jude  informs  us.  This  may  have  been,
but  we  can  go  no  further  than  the  text  takes  us  by  the  hand.  It  snlBces  to  know  that
God  cared  for  Moses'  body  as  well  as  for  him.  The  body  of  believers  is  now  the
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Christ  is  "  the  Saviour  of  the  body."  The  Spirit  who
dwells  in  us  will  quicken  the  mortal  body  at  the  resurrection.

V.  The  wobk  which  Moses  has  done  ib  one  which  will  find  ko  paballbl  to  it.
(Ver.  10.)  (See  next  Homily.)  Every  worker  for  God  has  his  own  distinfitive  work,
which  only  he  can  do.

VI.  God  has  albeadt  baised  up  one  to  cabby  on  the  wobk  of  Moses,  bo  that
it  will  not  ^all  to  pieces  when  he  dies.  (Ver.  9.)  Joshua  is  ready.  So  that
there  are  no  chasms  in  the  service.

VII.  The  incompleteness  of  Moses'  wobk  is  not  only  a  histobioal  but  a
ITMBOLlo  fact.    It  is  not  a  lawgiver  alone  who  can  lead  the  Church  on  to  Canaan,  but


570  .  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.         [ch.  xxxiv.  1—12.

a  Joshua — Jesus,  a  Saviour.  "The  Law  was  given  by  Moses,  but  [the]  grace  and  [the]
truth  came  liy  Jesus  Christ."  Moses  had  proiiounded  truth  in  his  legislative  precept
and  teachings.  He  had  taught  God's  grace  in  the  institutions  of  sacrifice,  and  in  the
ordinances  of  worship,  prayer,  and  praise.  But  the  truth  he  disclosed,  the  grace  he
declared,  were  brought  in  by  another,  long  ages  after,  for  whose  work  he  was  intended
to  prepare  the  way.  "The  Law  was  a  child-guide  until  Christ."  Happy  are  they
whose  life-work  is  in  harmony  with  the  plan  of  him  who  seeth  the  end  from  the
beginning  1  Happy  they,  whether  in  more  prominent  or  more  obscure  positions,  who  arc
in  their  Lord's  owra  appointed  way  workers  together  with  him  1

Vers.  10 — 12. — The  distinctive  greatness  of  Moses.  These  closing  verses  do  not
touch  upon  the  character  of  Moses,  but  upon  his  unique  position  as  a  prophet.  "  There
arose  not  a  prophet  since  in  Israel  like  unto  Moses,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  This  does  not
exactly  ascribe  inferiority,  but  rather  dissimilarity  to  all  who  had  followed,  up  to
the  date  of  this  editorial  postscript.  "Noihing  can  have  two  beginnings;"  and
in  this  lies  the  one  and  sufficient  reason  why  Moses  could  not  be  followed  in  the
after  ages  by  any  one  who  took  a  like  position  with  his  own.  Purposely  avoiding  any
outline  of  the  character  of  Moses,  we  propose  to  enumerate  a  few  of  those  features
in  which  the  work  of  Moses  was  altogether  unique,  and  ever  must  so  remain,

L  MOSBS  WAS  THE  FIRST  TO  DISCLOSE  THE  GLORIOUS  NATURE  OF  GoD  AND  HIS
GRACIOUS  RELATIONSHIPS  TO  CUB  RACE;  AS  THE  CoENEE-STONB  OF  A  GREAT  COMMON-
WEALTH.

II.  He  was  THE  FIRST  TO  PROCLAIM,  BT  HIS  SACRIFICIAL  INSTITUTES  AND  TEACHINGS,
THE   ONE  PRINCIPLE  THAT   "WITHOUT  SHEDDING   OF  BLOOD   IS  NO   REMISSION."      Saciifice

was  adopted  in  other  nations  as  a  human  expedient  for  appeasing  Divine  wrath ;
Moses  declares  it  to  be  a  Divine  appointment  for  the  acknowledgment  of  human  sin
and  of  the  Divine  holiness.

III.  He  was  THE  FIRST  TO  PROCLAIM  THE  ELEMENTARY  PRINCIPLES  AND  THE  TRUE
BASIS  OP  THE  NOBLEST  HUMAN  ETHICS  :   "  Bb  ¥E  HOLY  :  FOB  I  AM  HOLT."

IV.  He  was  the  first  to  require  of  a  people  love  to  God  as  the  spring  of  all

OBEDIENCE,  AND  TO  ASSIGN  A8  THE   REASON  FOB  THEIR  LOVE  THE  OABK  OF  GOD  TO  THEM.

(Ch.  V.  6 ;  vl.  5.)

V.  He  was  the  first,  tea,  the  only  one  in  all  history,  to  demand  of  a  tyban*

THE  LIBERATION  OP  AN  OPPRESSED  PEOPLE,  AND  TO  FORM  THEM  INTO  A  NEW  COMMON-
WEALTH, WITH  THE  AVOWED  AIM  AND  PURPOSE  OF  PLANTING  IN  THE  WORLD  A  NEW
RELIGIOUS  FAITH  AND  LIFE,      (Ch  vii.  1-^11  ;  ix.  1 — 6.)

VI.  He  WAS  THE  FIRST  WHO  MADE  PROVISION  FOR  THE  EDUCATION  OF  A  WHOLE
PEOPLE   IN   THE   THINGS  OF   GOD  J    WITH  VIRTUE   AND   PIETY   FOB   ITS  LESSONS,  AND  THE

HOME  FOR  ITS  TRAINING-SCHOOL.     (Ch.  xxxi  i2,  13  ;  vi.  1 — 9  ;  X.  12 — 22 ;  xi.  18 — 21.)

VII.  He  was  THE   FIRST  WHO   AIMED  AT  EDUCATING  A  PEOPLE  TO  SELF-GOVERNMENT.

They  were  to  choose  their  own  officers,  judges,  and  magistrates,  according  to  principles
of  righteousness.  And  (as  we  have  shown  in  loc.)  even  the  government  of  Jehovah
was  not  forced  upon  them.  Their  consent  was  asked  again  and  again ;  and  their
solemn,  loud  "  Amen "  was  required,  confirming  the  sentence  of  God  as  if  it  were
their  own.    Thus  from  the  first  the  people  were  made  "  workers  together  with  God."

Others  might  follow  on  in  all  these  respects,  but  no  one  else  ever  could  be  like
Moses  in  starting  all  this  new  national  life,  thought,  and  virtue,  in  organized  form.
And  yet  how  much  more  than  one  lilie  Moses  do  we  need  for  a  world's  regeneration
and  a  Chiirch's  education  1  "  If  there  had  been  a  Law  given  which  should  have  given
life,  verily  righteousness  should  have  been  by  the  Law."  But  "  what  the  Law  could
not  do,"  God  has  done  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Moses  can  give  rules.  Only
the  Lord  the  Spirit  can  give  life.  A  Greater  than  Moses  has  come,  and  has  created
by  his  power  a  new  commonwealth,  whose  iroMrcv/ia  is  in  the  heavens.  In  this  "  new
Jertisalem,  which  cometh  down  from  Ood  out  of  heaven,"  lo I  "all  things  are  made
new."

Ver.  10. — "  Face  to  face ;  "  or,  the  secret  of  power.    "  Whom  the  Lotd  knew  face  to

face."  Such  is  the  remarkable  expression  used  with  regard  to  Moses.  This  certainly
implies  that  there  was  in  his  case  unwonted  closeness  of  fellowship  with  God.    There


ott.  XXXIV.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OP  DEUTERONOMt.  671

are  expressiong  not  dissimilar  in  Num.  xii.  7,  8,  but  yet  we  must  make  allowance  for
the  prevalence  of  the  vividness  of  Eastern  imagery,  and  not  press  the  literalness  of  the
words  too  closely.   In  fact,  we  are  guarded  against  that  by  the  words  in  Exod.  xxxiii.  20.

To  what  extent  Moses  saw  any  manifested  form,  it  is  not  likely  we  shall  ever  in  this
state  of  being,  be  able  to  tell.  It  is  the  duty  of  thoughtful  men  to  penetrate  beneath
the  archaisms  and  Orientalisms  of  the  ancient  text,  and  to  seize  the  permanent  truth
which  underlies  them.  The  thought  which  we  here  detect  as  that  which  is  under  the
surface  is  this— that  Moses  had  very  close  communion  with  God.

Every  spirit  which  yearns  after  God  may  hold  communion  with  God.  And  inas-
much as  "  every  man's  life  is  a  plan  of  God,"  God  may  make  that  fellowship  serve  any
purposes  he  has  for  the  man  to  fulfil.  By  such  communion  there  may  be:  (1)  an  inner
life  of  devotion  and  an  outer  life  of  godliness  to  be  nurtured  and  sustained ;  or  there  may
be  (2)  a  spur  and  a  pressure  applied  to  high  and  holy  service  in  one  specific  direction, —
this  is  the  case  where  men  are  borne  along  to  the  fulfilment  of  a  special  mission ;  or
there  may  bo  (3)  some  new  truth  or  clearer  light  which  God  wills  to  impart  to  and
through  the  soul  so  communing  with  him.

Now,  there- is  a  specific  term  for  each  of  these  three  effects  of  communion  with  God.
When  it  simply  subserves  the  life  of  holiness  which  all  may  lead,  we  call  it
reliijion ;  when  it  is  made  tributary  to  a  special  form  of  service,  we  call  it  inspira-
tion ;  when  it  is  made  the  means  of  causing  new  truth  to  appear,  we  call  it  revelation.

The  latter  has  been  realized  by.  those  few — extremely  few — of  the  human  race  by  whom
God  has  unfolded  new  truth.  The  medial  one  has  been  experienced  by  the  more
numerous  souls  who  have  been  borne  along  as  by  a  special  outside  force  to  the  fulfil-
ment of  a  great  mission.  The  first-named  is  the  common  privilege  of  all  God-fearing
souls.

Moses  TTas  one  of  the  very  few  who  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  "  seeing  the  Unseen
One  "  for  all  three  purposes  ;  and  the  four  following  sentences  will  sum  up  his  life  :—

I.  By  the  power  of  eelioion  he  lived  the  life  of  the  saint.

II.  By  that  of  inspiration  he  discharged  the  functions  of  leader,  administrator,  and
recorder.

11 L  By  that  of  bevblation  he  had  the  visions  of  the  seer.
IV.  Communion  with  God  was  the  secret  of  all :  "  face  to  face."
To  those  who  understand  communion  with  God,  either  of  the  three  will  be  regarded
as  in  the  highest  degree  reasonable,  Intel lij^ible,  and  credible.  Those  who  do  not  know
what  it  is  to  pour  out  the  soul  unto  God,  may  indeed  accept  all  three  in  a  formal
manner,  but  they  can  go  no  further.  And  if  such  formal  believers  should  chance  to  be
subject  to  the  fierce  storms  of  modern  criticism,  there  is  no  telling  but  they  may  come
to  deny  them  all ;  yea,  they  may  come  to  think  that  religion,  inspiration,  and  revelation
are  swept  clean  away ;  and  all  because  they  understand  nothing  of  man's  highest  pri-
vilege— Communion  with  God  I

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 12. — The  death  and  hurial  of  Moses.  We  have  in  this  concluding  chapter
the  remarkable  account  of  the  dfeath  and  burial  of  Moses.  He  had,  as  we  have  seen,
blessed  the  tribes ;  he  had  laid  his  hands  on  Joshua  (ver.  9),  and  thus  ordained  him,  so
to  speak,  to  the  leadership  ;  he  had  given  his  manuscripts  to  the  priests  to  be  deposited
in  the  ark ;  and  now  all  th-at  remains  for  him  to  do  is  to  take  the  course  God  indicated
to  the  mountain-top,  see  the  promised  land,  and  die.  It  has  suggested  some  noble
sermons,  to  which  we  would  at  once  refer  before  proceeding  with  a  few  observations
suggested  by  the  history.'

I.  Let  us  notice  the  view  of  Canaan  and  of  life  fbom  the  mountain-top.  It
is  evident,  we  think,  that  Moses  went  up  the  mountain  without  an  escort.  He  was
going  up  to  hold  high  communion  with  God,  as  he  had  done  on  Siani.     Mountain-tops

•  Of.  Bersier*!  'Sermons,'  torn.  ii.  p.  125,  a  very  fine  sermon  on  'La  Terra  Promise;'
Ear's  'Sermons,'  p.  153,  a  sermon  equally  fine  on  'The  Burial  of  Moses:  ite  Lessoni
and  Suggestions;'  and  Hull's  'Sejmons,'  3rd  series,  p.  119,  a  very  suggestive  though
short  discourse,  on  '  The  Death  of  Moses.'


573  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.         [CH.  xxxiv.  1— 1!j.

axe  fiiTOurite  places  for  communion  witli  God  in  the  case  of  busy  men  like  Moses  and
our  Saviour  (cf.  Luke  ix.  28).  It  was  a  sublime  solitude,  filled  with  the  presence  of
God.  Sooner  or  later,  God  draws  his  ^el■vant.s  upwards  out  of  the  bustle  of  life  to  have
special  communion  with  him  and  finish  their  course  with  joy.

Moses,  moreover,  had  an  undimmed  eye  at  this  time,  and  his  natural  force  was  in  no
wise  abated.  His  outlook  was  consequently  clear.  The  laud  of  promise  lay  out
before  him  in  all  its  attractiveness,  and  be  could  have  wished  to  cross  the  Jordan  and
see  it,  and  the  goodly  mountain,  Lebanon.  But  the  view  of  it,  clear  and  glorious,  is  all
that  in  the  present  life  he  is  to  receive.

Now,  it  is  sometimes  insinuated  that  saintly,  self-denying  men,  whose  lives  according
to  worldly  notions  hive  been  incomplete  and  unsuccessful,  are  unable  to  form  a  proper
judgment  about  their  careers,  and  must  regret  them.  But  as  a  rule,  God  gives  in  life's
last  hours  the  "  undimmed  eye,"  and  his  servauts  are  enabled  to  see  life's  relations
clearly,  and  the  land  of  promise  under  the  sunset  glow.  They  regret  their  incomplete
lives  as  little  as  Moses  did  Lis  from  the  mountain-top.

Jonathan  Edwards  notices,  in  his  '  Notes  on  the  Bible,'  that  "  God  ordered  that
Aaron  and  Moses  should  go  up  to  the  tops  of  mountains  to  die,  to  signify  that  the
death  of  godly  men  is  but  an  entrance  into  a  heavenly  state  ; "  and  Baumgarten  has
made  a  similar  remark  regarding  the  death  of  Aaron.  "  The  circumstance  that  it  was
expressly  fixed  that  Aaron  should  die  upon  a  mountain,  and  so  upon  a  place  which
through  its  very  nature  points  to  heaven,  the  scat  of  Jehovah,  throws  into  the  darkness
of  his  death  a  ray  {tStruhl)  uf  hope."  *  The  mountain-tops  to  these  great  brothers  were
indeed  the  gate  of  heaven,  whence  clear  views  of  life  and  of  the  hereafter  were
obtained.

II.  The  circumstantials  of  the  death  of  Moses  are  unique  in  theib  simple
MAJESTY.  It  has  been  said  that  the  presence  of  Moses  on  the  mount  of  Transfiguration
must  have  suggested  a  contrast  bitween  his  death  on  the  top  of  Pisgah  and  our  liord's
approaching  death  amid  tlie  mocking  crowds  at  Jerusalem.^  Andwhat  a  contrast  there
is  between  the  two  departures  I  In  the  one  case,  the  servant  of  God  dies  amid  the
solemn  grandeur  of  the  hills,  with  the  sunset  glow  around  him — dies,  as  some  Jewish
doctors  say,  "  of  the  kiss  of  the  Eternal ; "  in  the  other  case,  our  Lord  dies  amid  the
ribaldry  and  scoffing  of  overcrowded  Jerusalem.  There  may  have  been  an  element  of
sadness  in  Moses  dying  on  the  threshold  of  tlie  promised  land;  but  there  was  an
element  of  glory  in  the  death-bed  among  the  mountains.

III.  God  in  his  love  not  only  took  charge  of  the  dtinq  but  also  of  the  dead.
He  died  with  God;  and  God  buried  him.  No  wonder  the  poetess  calls  it  "the
grandest  funeral  that  ever  passed  on  earth."

"  And  had  he  not  high  honour  ?—

The  hill-side  for  his  pall ;
To  lie  in  state,  while  angels  wait

With  stars  for  tapers  tall ;
And  the  dark  rock-pines,  like  tossing  plumei^

Over  his  bier  to  wave  ;
And  God's  own  hand,  in  that  lonely  land,

To  lay  him  in  the  grave  I "

Thia  disposal  of  the  body,  as  well  as  of  the  departed  spirit,  was  snrely  a  significMkt  act
on  the  part  of  God.  He  took  the  matter  as  completely  out  of  the  hands  of  Israel,  as  in
the  Resurrection  our  Lord's  body  was  taken  out  of  the  keeping  of  the  Roman  guard.
Was  it  not  to  indicate  that  the  body  as  well  as  the  soul  is  to  share  in  the  redeeming
care  of  God,  and  so  far  an  earnest  of  the  resurrection  ?

IV.  The  privacy  of  the  tomb  is  also  instructive.  Manifestly  all  Israel  aaio  was
the  retirement  of  Moses  to  the  mount;  for  the  rest,  his  death  and  his  Divine  burial,
they  were  dependent  upon  faith — they  believed  him  when  he  told  them  he  was  going
away  by  death,  and  that  they  need  make  no  preparations  for  him,  as  God  would  bury
him.    Had  it  not  been  for  his  prophetic  notice,  tliey  might  have  concluded  he  was

'  Quoted  in  Kahle's  '  Eschatologie,'  note  p.  48.

•  Cf.  Godet  sur  '  L'Evangile  de  Saint  Luo,'  oh.  ii.  30—33.


CH.  XXXIV.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEliOxMOMY.  573

translated.  It  was  a  matter  of  faith  entirely,  and  no  searching  could  bring  it  within
the  range  of  sight.  The  privacy  of  the  tomb  compelled  them  to  take  the  funeral
and  burial  on  trust.  The  mourning  and  weeping  for  a  month  arose  really  from  faith ;
Moses  was  not — God  took  him  ;  but  they  had  only  Moses'  word  for  it  that  he  was  to'
die  with  God,  and  be  buried  by  him.

And  God's  dealing  with  our  dead  must  remain  still  a  matter  of  faith  to  us,  though
of  fruition  unto  them.  We  believe  the  very  dust  of  the  saints  is  dear  to  God,  but  we
have  to  put  their  remains  in  a  cofSn,  and  deposit  them  amid  common  clay.  We  believe
their  spirits  are  in  his  safe  keeping,  but  they  send  no  messages  and  make  no  sign.  If
sense  is  the  measure  of  our  knowledge,  then  assuredly  we  may  put  Christian  hope
into  the  realm  of  beautiful  dreams,  of  which  there  is  as  little  sensible  evidence  as  of
Moses'  tomb.  But  there  are  "  foundations  of  faith  "  as  strong  as  those  of  sense  and  sight.'
In  such  assurance,  we  believe  that  God  took  charge  of  Moses,  body  and  soul,  and  will
take  as  real  and  as  faithful  charge  of  us. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  1—8. — The  calm  sunset  of  an  eventful  day.  A  man's  death  is  in  keeping
with  a  man's  life.  You  cannot  have  a  tropical  sunset  in  an  arctic  zone.  It  is  vain
to  live  the  life  of  the  voluptuous,  and  desire  "  the  death  of  the  righteous."  Enoch's
death  corresponded  with  Enoch's  life.  The  spirit  of  Elijah  was  charactei-ized  by
heavenly  fire:  be  ruled  men  with  burning  words  of  truth;  it  was,  therefore,  meet
that  he  should  depart  as  a  king,  "  in  a  chariot  of  flame."  Our  Lord's  whole  life  was
a  crucifixion — sublinie  self-sacrifice;  il  was  fitting,  then,  that  he  should  die  upon  a
cross.  Moses  was  transcendently  great ;  in  native  grandeur  he  towered  like  a
mountain  above  his  brethren.  To  be  in  the  society  of  God  was  his  delight ;  hence  there
was  a  propriety  that  he  should  die  alone,  and  upon  the  mount  with  God.

I.  The  death  of  a  good  man  has  mant  geaoious  mitigations.  It  is  not  un-
mingled  sorrow.  The  evil  in  it  is  reduced  to  an  infinitesimal  point.  It  is  a  passing
cloud,  while  the  sun  in  its  strength  shines  oh  the  other  side,  and  often  penetrates  the
thin  vapour.  It  is  not  the  valley  of  humiliation,  but  the  mount  of  communion.  Visions
denied  to  us  before  are  vouchsafed  to  us  now.  God  is  nearer  to  us  than  ever  yet ;  and
though  earthly  friends  cannot  accompany  us  along  the  mystic  path,  strong  angels  are
at  oui  side  to  bear  us  on  their  wings  to  the  glory-land.

"  The  chamber  where  the  good  man  meets  his  fate
Is  privileged  above  the  common  walks  of  life ;
Almost  upon  the  very  verge  of  heaven."

n.  Death  often  eevbals  to  us  what  wb  might  hate  attained,  fii  the
hour  of  dissolution,  Moses  saw  what  he  might  have  enjoyed  if  he  had  neglected  no
opportunity  in  the  past.  Tliat  faulty  past  is  irrecoverable.  We  may  obtain  pardon
the  most  ample  and  complete;  but  we  cannot  regain  lost  ground.  Well  for  us  if,
on  our  death-beds,  we  have  only  one  fault  to  bemoan ;  and  yet  one  fault  may  entail
immeasurable  loss.  When  we  stand  face  to  face  with  death,  we  shall  see  the  value
of  life  as  we  have  never  seen  it  yet ;  we  shall  lament  our  negligences  as  we  have
never  lamented  them  before.  What  illustrious  characters  we  might  have  acquired  !
What  conquests  of  good  we  might  have  won !  What  service  for  God  we  might  have
wrought !    Alas  I  some  well-meant  purpose  still  remains  immature  1

III.  Death  to  a  good  man  is  needful  fob  full  possession.  The  land  which
God  had  sworn  to  give  to  Abraham  and  his  seed,  Moses  was  permitted  to  see,  and
in  part  to  possess.  Yet,  had  he  gone  over  Jordan  and  endured  the  fatigues  of  battle
and  dwelt  in  the  land,  his  soul  would  not  have  been  satisfied  therewith.  As  his  powers
of  soul  matured  and  ripened,  he  would  have  desired  a  better  inheritance  than  Canaan
could  yield.  The  old  yearning  would  have  come  back  again,  "  I  beseech  thee,  show
me  thy  glory."  The  soul  yearns  for  knowledge  which  earth  does  not  permit.  We
long  to  pass  the  barritrs  of  darkness  and  tread  the  plains  of  everlasting  light.  Im-
patiently the  spirit  beats  against  the  bars  of  this  fleshly  cage,  and  longs  to  find  her
proper  wings.  We  must  pass  through  the  dark  gateway  of  death  ere  the  aool  can
enter  upon  the  full  "  inheritance  of  the  saints."

'  Of.  Professor  Wace's  •  The  Foundations  of  Faith,'  'pantut.


574  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.         [oh.  xxxiv.  1—12.

IV.  The  death  of  a  aooD  man  is  in  part  the  pbocess  of  natubal  law,  in
PART  THE  PENALTY  OF  MORAL  LAW.  So  far  as  man  partakes  of  animal  life,  so  far
he  is  under  the  law  which  rules  animal  natures.  In  every  animal  species  we  discern
the  stages  of  birth,  growth,  maturity,  decay,  death.  But  man  is  endowed  with  regal
powers,  which  give  him,  in  some  measure,  dominion  over  his  animal  nature.  Yet,
as  a  fact,  men  die  before  their  physical  powers  have  decayed.  In  earlier  ages  of  human
history,  human  life  reached  to  centuries,  while  now  barely  to  four  score  years.  Moses
was  called  to  die,  but  "  his  eye  was  not  dim,  nor  had  his  natural  force  abated."  In
his  case  we  are  authoritatively  informed  that  his  premature  decease  was  due  to  guilt.
The  moral  conduct  of  men  does  operate,  then,  in  modifying  the  laws  of  nature.  There
is  an  unseen  law — a  law  of  God — which  interlaces  the  laws  and  forces  of  the  visible
world,  just  as  the  system  of  nerves  interlaces  and  animates  the  muscles  of  human  flesh.
The  time  and  the  mode  of  tlie  believer's  death  are  not  the  outcome  of  natural  law ;
they  are  fixed  by  the  wisdom  and  the  kindness  of  our  personal  God.

V.  The  lifeless  bodies  of  the  saints  are  the  especial  caee  of  God.  "  God
buried  him  in  a  valley  in  the  land  of  Moab."  There  is  a  secrecy  and  a  mystery  about
Moses'  burial,  which  it  would  be  proft|,nity  to  attempt  to  penetrate.  On  a  later  page
of  Scripture  we  read  that,  respecting  this  body  of  Moses,  Michael  had  a  serious  dispute
with  the  devil.  We  feel  bound  to  connect  this  mysterious  disposal  of  Moses'  lifeless
body  with  the  appearance  of  the  same  glorified  body  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguratiou.
But  the  point  which  concerns  us  at  present  is  this ;  God  has  manifested  in  various
ways  his  tender  regard  for  the  mortal  remains  of  his  servants.  The  elementary  particles
may  dissolve,  but  the  personal  organization  shall  survive.  "It  is  sown  a  natural  body;
it  is  raised  a  spiritual  body."  Yet,  by  the  conserving  power  of  Deity,  it  is  a  body  still,
though  fitted  more  completely  in  the  future  as  a  vehicle  for  perception,  intercourse,
motion,  and  free  activity.  We  can  be  well  content  to  entrust  every  interest  we  have
in  life  with  him  "  who  counts  the  very  hairs  of  our  head."

VI.  The  death  of  a  good  man  is  an  occasion  for  extensive  sorrow.  "The
children  of  Israel  wept  for  Moses  in  the  plains  of  Moab  thirty  days."  Although  he
had  often  severely  censured  them,  exposed  faithfully  their  faults,  and  denounced  their
vices,  they  knew  they  had  lost  a  genuine  friend.  Never  would  they  look  upon  their
noble  leader's  face  again.  His  fatherly  interest  iu  them  could  never  be  replaced.  Not
till  he  was  gone  did  they  learn  what  a  fount  of  blessing  he  had  been.  Had  this  coming
event  been  steadily  kept  before  tliem,  they  would  have  treated  him  with  more  generous
esteem,  and  would  have  rendered  to  his  counsels  a  more  loyal  respect.  Now  they  lash
themselves  with  just  remorse.  A  good  man's  departure  leaves  a  great  vacancy  in  the
Church  and  in  the  social  circle.     Shall  we  be  thus  missed  when  death  hath  laid  us  low  1

Yet  the  days  of  mourning  even  for  a  good  man  must  cease.  There  are  sterner  duties
in  life  demanding  unceasing  care,  and  oui  sorrow  for  the  departed  ought  to  qualify  us
for  future  Bervice. — D.

Ver.  9. — Posthumous  influence.  Although  dead,  Moses  still  ruled.  His  spirit
reappeared  in  his  successor.  The  principles  of  Moses  had  been  planted  in  the  nature
of  Joshua :  these  had  flourished  and  come  to  maturity.  The  memory  of  Moses  was
still  a  mighty  power  in  Israel,  and  they  "did,"  all  through  the  days  of  Joshua,  "as  the
Lord  commanded  Moses."  The  legislator  had  moulded  and  trained  the  wairior.  Moses
was  promoted  to  higher  honour,  because  Joshua  was  better  qualified  for  this  new  work
— the  realization  of  Israel's  destiny.

I.  Note  the  high  qualification  of  Joshua.  He  was  "full  of  the  spirit  of  wisdom."
This  is  a  rare  gift.  By  nature  he  had  been  endowed  with  strength  and  fearless
courage  so  that  he  had  been  military  lieutenant  to  Moses  all  through  the  desert.  He
was  illustrious  also  for  diligence  and  fidelity  in  a  long  career  of  service.  Among  the
spies  despatched  to  Canaan,  he  (in  company  with  Caleb)  had  been  "  faithful  among
the  faithless  found."  Now  to  courage  and  unbending  loyalty  there  was  added  another
endowment,  and  this  in  amplest  measure:  he  was  "filled  with  the  spirit  of  wisdom."
"  To  him  that  hath,  it  shall  be  given."

IL  Observe  the  method  by  which  this  wisdom  was  acquired.  "  Moses  had
laid  his  hands  upon  him."  We  need  not  limit  our  thoughts  to  a  solitary  act,  even
though  it  might  be  a  solemn  and  religious  act.     We  may  rather  think  of  the  plastic,


OH.  XXXIV.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  675

formative  influence  which  Moses  Viad  exerted  over  the  growing  character  of  this  young
man.  It  is  astonishing  what  immense  power  God  has  entrusted  to  our  hands  for
fashioning  and  embellishing  the  spiritual  nature  of  men.  By  a  wise  employment  of
spiritual  energy,  we  can  direct  into  right  channels  the  lives  of  many  ;  by  implanting
right  principles  into  youth,  and  by  awakening  into  vigorous  activity  the  latent  forces  of
character,  we  may  elevate  a  city— we  may  influence  the  destinies  of  the  world.

III.  Mass  the  beneficial  effect.  "  The  children  of  Israel  hearkened  unto  him."
Moses  influenced  for  good  his  servant  Joshua.  Joshua  iufluenoed  for  good  the  nation
of  Israel.  The  twelve  tribes  felt  the  force  of  Joshua's  character,  and  yielded  to  the
wisdom  which  he  displayed.  They  were  a  difi'erent  people  as  the  consequence  of
Joshua's  leadership.  He  touched,  through  Israel,  the  fortunes  of  the  world.  The  high
example  of  Joshua  provoked  the  imitation  of  the  tribes.  His  combined  wisdom  and
energy  led  them  on  to  triumph.  By  virtue  of  his  supeilative  wisdom  he  became,
in  God's  hands,  a  Saviour,  and  remains,  in  name  and  office,  the  type  of  the  world's
Redeemer. — D.

Vers.  10 — 12. — Communion  with  God  the  secret  of  real  power.  Leaving  out  of  view
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  there  is  no  man  who  has  left  so  deeply  the  impress  of  his
character  upon  the  world  as  the  Jewish  legislator.  By  no  man  have  so  many  and
such  mighty  works  been  achieved.  By  no  man  has  such  wise  legislation  been  devised
for  the  government  of  human  society.  By  no  man  has  a  great  national  emancipation
been  so  skilfully  and  successfully  executed.  At  the  time  of  our  Lord,  Moses  still
wielded  a  mighty  sceptre  among  the  Jewish  nation  ;  and  from  that  day  to  this,  the
influence  of  Moses  has  been  powerfully  felt.  The  history  of  the  AVestern  world  would
have  been  very  different  from  what  it  is,  if  Moses  had  found  an  early  grave  among
the  rushes  of  the  Nile.     The  secret  of  it  is — he  was  a  "  man  of  God."

L  Communion  with  God  is  the  highest  advantage  man  oa.n  enjoy.  The
friendship  of  a  wise  and  great  man  is  an  inestimable  boon.  To  be  in  the  society  of
a  good  man  for  an  hour  leaves  a  purifying  and  an  elevating  stimulus  behind.  We  feel
better  and  nobler  for  the  contact.  And  if  the  friendly  influence  of  a  good  man  can
find  its  way  to  intellect  and  conscience  and  feeling,  how  much  more  can  the  influence
and  energy  of  God!  There  is  no  doubt  that  God  can  find  access  to  the  nato'e  he  has
made,  and  can  enrich  it  with  all  good.  The  question  is  whether,  considering  our
great  demerit.  Will  he  ?  This  question  also  is  completely  answered  by  himself.  He
invites  us  to  the  closest  friendship — welcomes  us  to  fullest  iutimacy.  Tlie  words
of  Jesus  Christ  suffice  to  allay  all  doubt, "  If  any  man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words:
and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come  unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him."
We  may  not  have  visions  of  God  precisely  after  the  form  and  fashion  that  Moses  had :
these  were  adapted  to  a  particular  state  of  human  development ;  but  we  may  have
contact  with  God  as  close — communion  as  sweet  and  tender,  as  ever  Moses  enjoyed.
"The  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  is  our  special  privilege.  To  us  ."the  Spirit
of  truth "  is  given.  And  ''  uuly  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son
Jesus  Christ."

II.  Communion  with  God  produces  eeal  gbbatness  or  charactbb.  As  a  result
cf  the  intimacy  between  God  and  Moses,  we  read,  there  "  arose  not  a  prophet  since
in  Israel  like  unto  Moses."  Intercourse  with  God  purifies  every  feeling,  elevates  every
aspiration,  energizes  every  sterling  principle,  ennobles  the  whole  man.  The  creative
influence  of  the  Almighty  renews  our  innermost  life.  In  the  presence  of  God  vire
become  ashamed  of 'our  meanness  and  pride  and  folly.  We  see  and  feel  how  noble  it
is  possible  to  become.  We  confess  into  his  fatherly  ear  our  sin :  we  resolve  to  do  better  in
the  futtire.  The  assurance  of  his  sympathy  and  aid  encourages  ua.  We  grow  up  into
his  image ;  we  gradually  find  that  this  is  our  proper  destiny — "  to  be  conformed  to  the
image  of  his  Son."

ni.  Communion  with  God  gives  ub  power  over  nature  and  over  men.  It  is
admitted  by  scientists  that  the  human  will  is  the  greatest  force  known,  save  the  power
of  God.  Now.  fellowship  with  God  strengthens  that  will.  To  his  chosen  friends,  God
conveys  new  power.  On  man  was  originally  bestowed  complete  dominion  over  nature ;
and  this  prerogative  is  to  be  restored  through  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  Thus  the
■codigies  wrought  by  Moses  are  declared  to  be  signs— symbols  of  greater  things  yet


576  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  [oh.  xxs.lv.  1— la

to  be  acliievcd.  Our  Lord  has  taught  us  that  true  faith  can  overturn  the  mountaini.
The  possessor  of  faith  is  predicted  to  outstrip  eren  Christ  in  mighty  deeds. — D.

Vers.  1 — i.—MoBei'  vision.  The  end  of  Moses,  viewing  the  land  to  which  he  had
so  long  and  so  painfully  been  leading  the  people,  yet  not  permitted  to  enter  it —
dying  on  the  threshold  of  the  accomplishment  of  all  his  hopes,  and  leaving  Canaan  to
be  won  by  his  subordinate  minister,  Joshua, — has  often  been  likened  to  the  common  fate
of  the  highest  characters  in  history,  "  removed  from  this  earthly  scene  before  their
work  has  been  appreciated,  and  when  it  will  be  carried  on,  not  by  themselves,  but  by
others."  (See  the  development  of  the  thought  in  Stanley's  '  Jewish  Church,'  vol.  i.
p.  175,  with  the  application  to  Lord  Bacon  by  Macaulay.)  Often,  also,  it  has  been
likened  to  the  visions  of  the  "land  beyond  the  fiood  "  received  through  faith  by  dying
Christians.  They,  however,  see  a  land  into  which  they  are  soon  to  eater ;  Moses
looked  on  one  from  which  he  was  debarred.     This  vision  was —

I.  A  COMPENSATION  FOB  A  aEBAT  LOSS.  Not  permitted  to  enter  Canaan,  Moses  was
yet  permitted  to  see  it.  His  eyes  were  strengthened  to  take  in  the  vision  of  its  good-
linuss  from  north  to  south,  from  east  to  west.  How  his  spiiit  must  have  feasted  on
the  widespread  prospect !  This  compensation,  we  remember,  was  won  from  God  by
l^rayer  (ch.  iii.  23-39).  We  cannot  always  gain  reversal  of  our  punishment  of  loss ;
no,  though  we  seek  it  carefully,  with  tears  (Heb.  xii.  17).  But,  while  the  losses  remain,
they  may  be  sanctified  to  us,  and,  in  answer  to  prayer,  gracious  compensations  and
mitigations  granted.

II.  A  PERFECTiNQ  OF  HOLT  RESIGNATION.  Then,  DO  doubt,  while  looking  on  that
good  land,  and  feeling  that  he  could  not  enter  it,  would  Moses  have  his  last  struggle,
and  conquer  his  last  lingering  wish  to  have  it  otherwise  than  as  God  willed.  We  know
how  sore  the  struggle  in  his  mind  had  been,  how  earnestly  he  had  wrestled  with  God
to  have  the  sentence  reversed  (ch.  iii.  23 — 29).  But  it  was  not  to  be,  and  Moses  must
learn  to  say,  as  the  Greater  than  Moses  said  long  after,  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be
done  1 "  (Luke  xxii.  42).  Who  doubts  but  that  the  sacrifice  was  made  ?  that  Moses  was
brought  to  the  point  of  perfect  aquiescence  before  he  died  ?  And  that  in  truth  was  a
greater  compensation  than  the  other.  The  achieving  so  great  a  spiritual  victory  was
well  worth  the  surrender  of  the  land.  That  victory,  too,  would  take  the  sting  of  the
trial  away.  The  worst  part  of  a  trial — ^nearly  all  that  is  bitter  in  it — is  past,  when  we
are  brought  to  the  point  of  embracing  the  Divine  will  in  it.

IIL  A  TRANSITION  TO  A  HIGHER  HOPE.  Is  it  possible  to  think  that  Moses,  in  laying
down  his  life  on  that  mountain  summit,  believed  that  he  was  laying  it  down  for  ever?
Could  he  believe,  after  all  the  relations  of  friendship  which  had  subsisted  between  him
and  Jehovah,  in  view  of  that  land  of  promise  from  which  he  was  debarred,  and  at  this
very  moment  of  his  greatest  spiritual  triumph, — ^that  his  death  ended  all  ?  that  theru
was  no  hereafter  ?  that  there  was  no  compensation  beyond  ?  We  may  rather  believe
that,  in  this  very  perfecting  of  his  soul  in  its  holy  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  will,  there
would  spring  up  in  his  mind  a  holier  hope — a  trust  and  assurance  that  all  be  now
surrendered  would  be  made  up  to  him  in  some  better  form  in  heaven.  What  we  part
with  on  earth  for  Christ's  sake  are  our  ultimate  gains. — J.  0.

Vers.  5,  6. — Moses'  death  and  lurial.    Lessons  from  it —

L  God  will  have  no  one,  living  or  dead,  to  stand  between  hib  cbeatubes
AN'D  HIMSELF.  "  He  dies  apart,  and  is  buried  in  secret,  where  his  grave  can  be
d  -ilmnoiired  by  no  pilgrimage,  and  where  no  false  veneration  can  rear  altars  to  his
memory."

il.    (jOD   wishes   men  to   bee    something    more   LEFT   OF   HIS    SERVANTS    THAH   TH«

OUTWARD  SHEINB.  They  had  the  life  and  words  of  Moses,  which  his  shrine  might
have  obscured.  It  was  expedient  that  even  Jesus  should  go  away,  that  his  spiritual
presence  and  the  spiritual  significance  of  his  work  might  be  fully  realized  {John  xvi.  7).

IIL  God  takes  the  honour  of  his  servants  into  his  ows  keeping.

IV.  God  would  teach  men  that  he  has  a  belavion  to  his  sbbvants  which
extends  betond  death.  "  Can  the  Maker  put  so  disproportionate  an  estimate  upon
his  own  handiwork,  as  carefully  to  store  up  the  casket  and  throw  away  the  pracious
juwei  which  it  held  ?  "


M.  jLXiiT.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  DEUTERONOMY.  677

y.  OOD  WOULD    TEACH  MEN  THAT  HIE   BEGABD  IB    HOT  CONFINED   TO    AKT    OH08KI4

80IL.    "  In  »  Tklley  in  the  land  of  Moab."    We  have  one  more  lesson  &om  the  New
Te8tamen4>—

YI.  That  the  beeuino  failubb  or  a  tbub  life  hat  at  last  hayb  a  oohplxtr
coiiFENSATiOK.  Moses  did  at  last,  with  Ellas,  tread  the  soil  of  Palestine,  and  there  see
"  the  King  in  his  beauty  "  (Matt.  xvii.  3).    (Dr.  John  Eer.)— J.  0.

Vera.  10 — ^12. — The  greatneu  tf  Moms.  It  was  a  greatness  entirely  unique.  "There
arose  not  a  prophet,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  His  greatness  uy  largely  in  character.  Ai  a  man
— in  respect  of  quEklitiei  of  character — Moses  waa  one  of  the  greatest  men  who  have
ever  lived;  perhaps,  all  things  taken  together,  tht  greatest  next  to  Christ.  But  so
entirely  is  Moses  the  man  lost  in  his  relation  to  God  as  instrument  of  M»  will  and
work,  that  his  greatness  in  the  former  respect  is  not  in  these  verses  even  referred  to.
Moses  is  overshadowed  by  the  God  of  Moses,  whose  power  he  wielded,  and  in  whose
Name  alone  he  wrought.    This  greatness  of  Moses  arose —

I.  Fboh  the  BELATioir  OF  FEOuiJAB  INTIUAOT  HE  HELD  TO  GoD.  "  There  arose  not
a  prophet  since  in  Israel  like  unto  Mo8<)s,  whom  the  Lord  knew  face  to  fitee"
(ver.  10).  In  this  greatness  Moses  stood  alone  till  there  arose  that  greater  Ftophet,
whose  advent  he  had  predicted  (ch.  xviii.  18).

n.  Fbom  the  obeatnebb  of  his  wobk.  (Yer.  11.)  He  was  sent  to  Egjrpt  to  deliver
IsiaeL     In  this  also  a  type  of  Christ.

m.  In  the  foweb  of  God  fdt  fobth  thbouoh  hih.  (Vers.  11,  12.)  True
greatness  therefore  lies :  (1)  in  power  of  near  approach  to  God;  (2)  in  great  work  done
for  God ;  uid  (3)  in  spiiitual  power  axerted  through  God  acting  in  and  with  ns.— J.  0,


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


T^HE  BOOK  OF  DEUTEEONOMY.


OEAPTICB  L

rASB

The   Vati  of  God  FuU  of  Hidden

Treasnre          „.            ...           -.„  7

The  Eebrcir  Bight  to  Canaan  ...  8
BuleB  to  be  OWenred  in   Choosing

Bolen              ...            ...            ...  9

Divine  Covenant  and  Hnman  Conduct  10

The  Blessing  of  Good  OoTemmeut  ...  11

The  Denteronomio  Disoonrses           ...  12

The  Might-have-beens  of  Life         ...  13

A  Bmnmons  to  Advance    ...            ^  13

Israel's  Increase ...            ».            ...  14

Division  of  Laboot            m*            »•  14

Judging...            ...            .«            ...  14

The  Impartiality  of  God  to  be  Be-

fleotedintheJudgesof  EisFeople...  16

Sending  the  Spies              ...            ...  19

The  Grievous  Conseqnenoes  of  tin-

belief...            ...            ...            ...  Zl

EVjroed  Back  I      ...            ...            ...  22

Irrecoverableness  of  Wasted  Oppor.

tonity                ...             ...             ...  28

"That  Great  and  Terrible  Wilderness"  24

Courage                ...             ...             ...  25

The  Uission  of  the  Spiea  .»            n.  26

Love  in  the  Wilderness     ...            ...  26

The  Excluded  and  the  Admitted     ».  26

Tardy  Bepentance             ...            ...  27

The  Unbelief  in  Sending  out  and  in

Hearkening  to  the  Spiea              ...  28

The  Heirs  of  fromiae        m            m  28

OHAFTEB  n.

God's  Knowledge  of  Oar  I^Igrimag*  24

International  Belationsliips              ...  86


MSB

Warrantable  Warfaiw        «a.  ^86

Edom,  Moab,  Ammon        ...            ...  88

The    Emims,  Horims,  Zamiummina,

etc.    ...            ...            ...            ...  89

Dying  out            ...             ...             ...  89

The  Effects  of  Israel's  Conquests    ...  40

The  Conquest  of  Sihon      ...             ...  40

God's   Faithfalnesa  in  Dealing  with

Nations  outside  the  Covenant       ...  41

The  Wasting  of  the  Warriors  ...  42
The  Destruction  of  Sihon,  King  of  tiM

Amoritea          m.            m           m.  42

OHAFTEB  nil

The  Last  of  the  Giants      ,„           m«  47

Self-Propagating  Conquest               m.  49

Prospect  of  Death              m>           w.  60

The  Conquest  of  Og           ...            ...  61

The  Destruction  of  the  Fopulationa...  62

Distribution  of  Territory  ...            ...  63

Encouragement  ...             ...            «•  63

God's  Befnsal  of  Man's  Wishes  ...  19
The   Destruotion  of    Og,    King   of

Bashan   '         ...            ...            ...  64

The    Pioneers  «l    Um    Invasion   of

Palestine          ...            ...            ...  66

Moses'  Longing  to  Enter  the  Promised

Land  Befused ...            «•            m.  66

OHAFTEB  17.
Life  and  Prosperity  Dependent  OM

Obedience  to  God           ,..            ...  60
National    Greatness   Dependent   en

Obedience  to  God          ...            ...  62

Israel's  Peculiar  Belation  to  God    ...  93


INDEX.


Qod  a  Oonanming  File       ...             ...  66

The  Saoredness  of  the  Divine  Iaw  ...  67

The  Corse  of  Idolatry        ...             ...  63

Aooeptable  Obedienoa       ...            ...  69

A  Nation's  Glory...            69

The  Beligions  Edacation  of  Children  70

The  Eevelation  at  Horeb    ...             ...  70

Warning  against  Heathenish  Idolatiy  71

The  Iron  Furnace               ...             ...  71

Obedience  the  Secret  of  Snooess      ,„  71

The  Divine  Jealonsy  of  Graven  Image*  72

National  Backsliding         ...             ...  76

The  Wonderf  nlness  of  Israel's  History  77

Beloved  for  the  Fathers'  Sake          ...  78

The  Meroy  of  God             ...            ...  78

The   Cities  of  Befnge  (see  also  ch.

xix.)...  79,82

Tndgment  Leading  to  Mercy  ,,.  80
The  Deliverance  of  the  Lord's  People

Unparalleled  ...  .„  ...  81
The  Cironmstances  nnder  whioh  the

Law  was  Beiterated       ...             ...  82

CHAPTEB  V.

The  Divine  Law  Based  on  a  Divinely

Bevealed  Belationship    ...             ...  86

The  First  Commandment  ...             ...  87

The  Second  Commandment              ...  89

The  Third  Commandment ...             ...  91

The  Babbath,  or  a  Best-Day  for  ]!•■  93

The  Fifth  Commandment  ...             ...  96

The  Sixth  Commandment ...             mi  97

The  Seventh  Commandment             ...  99

The  Eighth  Commandment               »..  101

The  Ninth  Commandment...            ...  103

The  Tenth  Commandment...             ...  104

The  Law  as  a  Whole,  and  its  Effect

npou  the  People              ...            ...  106

The  Abrahamic  Covenant  Benewed...  108
The  Divine  Flan  for  the  Condnot  of

Onr  Life  on  Earth         ...             ...  109

Character  Determines  Environment  110

Beminisoences  of  Horeb    ...             „.  112

The  Covenant  at  Horeb     ...            ...  112

Mediation            ...            ...            ...  118

The  Iniquity  of  the  Fathers  Visited

on  the  Children               ...            ...  113

The  Babbath        ...             ...            ...  114

Honour  to  Parents             m            ,„  116

Moial  Law           ...            ...            ...  116

The  Element  «f  Terror  in  Beligion  ...  116


nzKB  l*aB

God's  Desire  for  Man's  Goad  «•  116

The  Deoalogne     ...  ...  «w  116

How  Moses  became  Mediator  «■  117

OHAFTBB  YL

Obedience  to  God  OondnoiTa  to  the

Highest  Good  ...  ...  ...  120

Tmth  and  Godliness  to  be  Perpetoated

by  Means  of  Home  Training         ...  122

"  Dangers  Ahead  I    Beware  I"         ...  123
The  Yalae  of  History  in  Parental

Teaching  ...  ...  ...  126

"  Obedience  the  End  of  Law  "         ...  127

Love,  the  Boot-Principle  of  Obedienoa  129

The  Peril  of  Prosperity     ^  ...  129

The  Parental  Office  ».  •»  129

Descending  Obligations     ^t  ...  130

The  Great  Commandment ...  ...  131

The  Beligions  Education  of  Children  131

God's  Words  to  be  Valued...  ...  133

The  Creature  Displacing  the  Creator  132

Tempting  God      ...  ...  ...  132

Our  BighteousnesB  ...  ....  133

The  Essence  of  the  Deoalogne  is  Love  184
Family  Training  is  to  Propagate  tho

LAW    ...  ...  ...  asa  MM

OHAPTBB  yn.

A  Holy  People's  Pdioy  of  Self.Ptess*.

vation  ...  ...  ...  U7

Temporal  Prosperity  a  Besult  of  Obo-

dienee  to  Divine  Law    ...  ...  189

An  Anxious  Questioii,  or  Dreading

Difficulties       ...  ...  ,„  14|

Israel's  Iconoclastic  Mission  .„  142

Beward  in   Proportion   to   Ardaawi

Service  144

Judgment  vrithont  Meroy  ...  ...  145

Marriage  in  the  Lord        ...  .„  14^

Beasons  for  Non-Conformity  to  Ae

World,  and  for  Aggressioa  en  It*

"▼a 146

Lessons  from  History        ...  „,  147

The  Bawards  of  ObetUanoo  ...  147

God  for  Us  148

The  Cursed  Thing  ...  ...  148

Extermination  with  a  Moral  Parpoao  149

On  the  Election  of  Katiooa  ...  149

The  Divine  Veracity  ...  ...  160

Canaan  Gradually  Won      .,.  „.  161


INDEX.


Ui


CHAPTER  Vin.

THEHI  »A0»

Life's  leaning  Discerned  hj  the  Be-

tiospeot  of  it    ...            ...            ...  154

The  Daty  of   Tbankfnlneaa  for  the

Boonty  «f  God  in  Nature              ...  156

Danger  of  Self-Glorifioation             »•  157

The  Moral  Uses  of  Memory             •••  158

Wealth  PerJlons  to  Piety  ...            ...  159

The  Uses  of  Adversity       ...            ...  161

Not  Bread,  but  God's  Word             ...  161

Gk>d  the  Chastener              ...            m.  162

The  Good  Land   ...             .«             ^  162

The  Dangers  of  Wealth      ...             ...  162

The  Blessing  of  a  Thankful  Spirit    ...  163

Good  at  the  Latter  End     ...             ...  163

The  Lessons  of  the  Wilderness         ...  164

God  Forgotten  amid  Second  Causes...  164

CHAPTER  EC

A  Six-Week^  Beligion;  or,  Emotional

Beligionsness  not  Tital  Godliness  167
True    Greatness    Manifested    in    a

Great  Emergency,  by  Self-Sacrifice  169

Self.Eighteonsness             ...             ...  171

The  Sin  at  Horeb               .«             ...  172

Moses'  Intercession            ...             ...  173

Against  Self-Bighteous  Conoeii        ...  178

Human  Memory  a  B,epository  of  Guilt  174

The  Place  of  Human  Mediation        ...  175

The  Policy  of  Beprobation                ...  177

Hwuiliating  Memories       •••             n.  178

CHAPTEE  X.

The  Eesults  of  the  Intercessory  Prayer

of  Moses           ...            ...            ■•.  180

Israel's  Duty  Summed  up  and  Touok-

ingly  Enforced...            ...            ...  183

God  no  Bespeoter  of  Persona           ...  184

Tokens  of  Mercy...             ...             ...  186

The  Supreme  Bequirement              ...  186

The  Supreme  Persuasive   ...            >..  187

Heart  Circumcision            ...             —  187

Love  the  Stranger             ...            ...  188

Beligion  in  Brief...             ...             ...  188

The  Law  Deporited  in  Vte  Aric        ...  188

ProgreM              ...            •••            •••  1^^

XaamMigo  of    God   the    Parmt  of

Obedient  Faith               ...            ...  190

n«  Covenant  Benewed     ...            ...  192

•the  Separation  of  fte  Sooa  U  Uwi...  192
193


CHAPTEE  XI.

TREHX  rASI

The  Voice  of  God  in  Passing  Events
to    be    Heeded,   Interpreted,    and
Obeyed  ...  ...  ...     196

The  Order  of  Nature  Subservient  to
Moral  Purposes  ...  ...     198

The  Moral  Power  of  National  Bigh.
teousness  ...  ...  ...     200

The  Dread  Alternative  before  every
Man   ...  ...  ...  ...     201

Obligations  Arising    from    Personal
Experience       ...  ...  ...     203

Canaan  and  Egypt  ,„  ...     204

The  Great  Alternative       ...  ...     205

Vastness  of  Promise  ...  ...     205

Gerizim  and  Ebal  ...  ...     206

Ocular  Demonstrations  of  God's  Near-
ness Increase  Human  Responsibility    206
Obedience  Leads  to  Prolonged  Posses,
sion    ...  ...  ...  ...     207

Taluable  Possessions  Reserved  for  the
i     Eighteons         ...  ...  ...     207

God's  Word  Potent  to  Dominate  the
Whole  Life       ...  ...  ...     208

He  who  best  Serves  is  most  fit  to  Bole    208
Startling  Alternatives        ...  ...     209

Divine   Judgments   upon  Others,  to

Ensure  Obedience  in  Us  ...     209

The  Land  of  Promise  ...  ...     210

Family  Training  an  Element  of  Suo
cess    ...  ...  ...  ...     211

Life's  Solemn  Alternative...  ...    213

CHAPTER  XIL

Regulations    for    Divine    Worship  |
Specific  Rules  Embodying  Perma-
nent Principles  ...  ...  217

Destruction  of  Monuments  of  Idolatry  219

The  Central  Sanctuary       ...  ...  219

Public  Worship    ...  ...  ...  220

The  Divine  Regulation  of  Food        ...  22]

TheLevite  ...  221

Unworthy  Inquiries  ...  «.  221

The  Invasion  a  Religions  One  ...  222

Centralization  in  Worship  ...  .«  223

Private  Worship  not  the  Sabstitnte

forPubUo         ...  .M  ...  224

The  Sanctity  of  Blood        .»  ...  225

The  Doom  of  Idolatry        ...  .»  22f

Characteristio    Signs    of    Jehovah'i

Worship  ...  ...  ...  226

The  Subtle  Ensnarement  of  IdoUtiy  S27


1»


INDEX,


CHAPTER  XIII.

r>ox
Temptations  to  Depart  from  God  to  be

Besisted  at  all  Costa       ,.,             ..,  229

False  Prophets    ...             ...             ...  231

God  or  Onr  Brother            ...             ...  232

A  City  nnder  Ban               ...             ...  233

Idolatry  to  be  Treated  as  a   Capital

Crime                ...             ...             ...  234

God's  Executioners  upon  Idolaters  ...  235

CHAPTER  XIV.

The  People  of  God  when  Death  ia  in

the  Home        ...             ...              ...  238

The  People  of  God  at  Their  Own  Table  240
A  Threefold  Cord  ;  or,  the  Triple  Use

ofProperty      ...             ...              ...  241

Self-Bespect  in  Mourning,..              ...  243

Olean  and  Unclean            ...              ...  243

Seething  a  Kid  in  Its  Mother's  Milk  244

The  Second  Tithe              ...              ...  245

Sorrow  ia  to  be  in  Holy  Hopefnlness  246
A  Holy  People   will   Eat  Sanctified

Things              ...              ...               ...  247

Systematic  Provision  for  Fellowship

with  God         ...             ...             ...  248

Against    Conformity    with   Heathen

Customs           ...             ...              ...  250

Discrimination  in  Meats  ...              ...  250

God'a  Claim  upon  Our  Money  Gaina  251

CHAPTER  XV.

Diyine  Checks  on  Human  Greed      ...  854

The  Duty  of  Kindness  to  the  Poor  ...  256

The  Rights  of  the  Slaves   ...            ...  258

Sacrifices  to  be  without  Blemish      ...  260

"The  Lord's  Release"        ...             ...  261

The  Poor  in  the  Land        .«            ...  262

Bondmen              ...             .«             ...  263

The  Firstlings      ...             ...             ...  263

The  Tear  of  Forgiveneia    ...             ...  263

Open-HandednesB               .„            ...  264

The  Freedom  of  the  Slave ...            ...  265

The  Firstlings  for  God       ...            ...  267

A  Bulwark  against  Cupidity            _.  267

Slavea  to  be  Regarded  aa  Brethren  ...  268

The  lint  for  God              ...            ...  869

CHAPTBB  XVL

Tlw  Feast  of  the  P&Bsover. . .    272,  276, 282

Th«  Feast  of  Weeks,  or  of  Harvest  ...  274
PentMoai              ...            ...           277, 280


TUEUE  FAOl

Feast  of  Tabernacles,  or  of  Ingather-
ing      276,278,283

Model  .Tndgea      ...            ...            ...  279

The  Passover  a  Memorial  of  Deliver-
ance   ...            ...           , 279

The   Feast    of    Tabernacles— Life   •

Tented  State    ...            ...            ...  281

ImpartialJudges ...            ...             ...  282

The  Administration  of  Jnatioe          ...  284
The  Pathwaya  to  Tettiptation  to  be

Shunned           ...             ...             .,,  285

CHAPTER  XVn.

The  Bacredness  of  Personal  Bepnt*-
tion  Seen  in  the  Regulations  Con-
cerning Human  Testimony            ...  287
Religion  the  Guard  of  Justice           ...  288
Kings  Subject  to  the  King  of  Kings  290
"  No  Retreat  I  "  or,  "  The  Gate  Behind

Us  Closed"      ...  291

The  Blemished    ...             ...            ...  292

SabBBism               ...             .„            ...  292

Criminal  Procedure            ,„             „,  293

The  Priest  and  the  Jndge  ...             „,  293

The  King  in  Israel             ...             ...  294

Idolatry  a  Capital  Crime  ...             ...  295

The  Ruling  Power  of  the  Priests  in

the  Jewish  Church          ...             ...  296

The  Limitations  of  Monarchy  297,  300

The  Prevention  of  Religious  Fraud' ...  298

Idolatry  a  Crime  against  Society     ...  299

High  Court  of  Appeal        ...            „.  299

CHAPTER  XVIIL

The  Support  of  the  Ministry  the  Duty

of  God's  People...             ...             ...  805

"  Spiritualism "  condemned              ...  306

God  Speaking  to  Man  through  Man  808
God's  Proviaipn  for  the  Priests  and

Levites             ...            ...            ...  810

Divination  Forbidden         ...            .^  811

The  Promised  Prophet       „           „,  811

The  Lord  Our  Inheritance ...            „,  812

The  Priesthood    ...            ,.,            ^.  813

Love  to  the  Sanotnuj       m            —  S13

Magic ^            „.  ii3

Prophecy             ^.  »14

The  Prophet  like  unto  Hoaea           „.  SIS

The  False  Prophet             ...            ...  815

The  True  Priest  ia  the  Higheat  Type

of  Man .„            ,„  iig


lifDEi.


Oross  Superstition  the  Altematira  of

True  Beligion  ...  ...  ...  817

Presages  of  the  Tme  Prophet  m  817

OHAFTEB  XIX.

The  Oities  of  Befaga       820,  322,  324,  326

Bemoving  the  Landmark  ...  ...  823

False  Witness      ...  m>  ...  824

The  Law  of  Betaliation     .„  ...  825

Lex  Talionia         ...  .m  m.  827

Caution  againat  Fraud       .«  •«  828

Bulwark  againat  Perjury   ...  «•  S28

OHAPTBB  XX.

Wars  to  b«  Begnlated  by  Dirine  Pre-
cept! .» '  ...  ...  331

War       ...  M.  M.  ...  832

Exemption*  ...  .m  •••  833

Forbearance  and  Severity  ...  ••.  834

Beligious  Wars    ...  ...  ...  834

Military  Service  to  be  Voluntary     ...  335

The  Terrible  Side  of  Enman  Dnty  ...  836

OHAPTBB  XXL

The  Frecionsness  of  One  Human  Life

in  the  Sight  of  Qoi        ...  ...  840

The  Female  Oaptive;  or,  Divine  Begard

for  Woman's  Safety  and  Honour  ...  840
Home  Partialities   never   to    Warp

Home  Justice  ...  .m  ...  841

A  Bad  Son  a  State  Peril    m  —  842

Upon  the  Tree  I   ...  ...  ...  843

Atonement  for  Unknown  Bia  ...  845

Through  Love  to  Liberty  ...  ...  846

The  Bights  of  the  Firstborn  in  the

House  of  a  Bigamist       ...  ...  847

Parental  Authority  Enforced           ...  847
Purification  from   Quilt  of  an  Un-
certain Murder               ...            ...  848

The  Captive  Wife  ...  ».  849

The  Firstborn  of  the  Hated  Wife    ...  849

The  Bebelliona  Son  ...  ...  849

Aeonrsed  of  God  ...  ...  850

The   Creation  of   Bighteooi  Public

Sentiment  ...  161

The  Captor  Captured         ...  ...  862

Monogamy   Essential    to    Domeitio

Peace  862

A  Slippery  Path  to  Buin    ...  ...  868

The  Doom  of  Law  the  Embodiment

of  Divine  Cnrw  ...  ••■  864


OHAPTEE  XXn.


The  Duty  of  Cultivating  Neighbourly

Kindness  ...  ,..  ...  856

Divine  Care  for  Sexual  Honour        ...  856
Kindness  to  Animals  a  Beligious  Dnty  867
Bisks  to    Human  Life  to    be  Mini-
mized               ...             ...         '    ...  867

Evil  Assooiationa  to  be  Avoided       ...  863

Love  Unfeigned  ...  ...  m.  858

Man  and  Woman...  .^  —  859

The  Minutisa  of  Condnot  ...  „.  869

Chastity  ...  ...  ...  860

Consideration  for  Man  and  Heart    ...  860

The  Philosophy  of  Clothea  ...  861

Birds'  Nests        ...  .^  ».  862

Linsey-Woolseyg ...  ...  ...  863

Expedients  to  Secure  Purity  ...  363

Brotherly  Service  in  Daily  Life       ...  864

Against  Deceptions  in  Dresa  ».  864

God's  Care  for  Birds  ...  ...  365

The  Perils  of  Inadvertence  ...  „.  865

Directions  in  Minor  Matters  m.  866

Slander,  Unohastity,  and  Fraud        ...  866

Yarious  Penalties  for  Unohastity    ...  867

OHAPTEB  XXm.

Stem  Safeguards  sometimes  Needed  869
Cleanliness  a  Beligious  Duty            ...  870
Israel's  Land  a;Befnge  for  the  Op-
pressed           ...            ...            ...  870

Unholy  Wealth  may  not  be  Put  to

Divine  Uses     ...  ...  ...  870

The  Opposite  Working  of  Like  Piio-

oiples    ...  ...  870

Vows  to  God  to  be  Performed  ...  870

Kindliness  to  Neighbours  a  Duty  of

the  Holdlers  of  Property  ...  870

The  Excluded  from  the  Congr-^^ation  871

The  Curse-  Turned  into  a  Blessing    ...  871

Purity  in  the  Camp  ...  ...  872

Various  Precepts  ...  ...  872

The  Vineyard  and  Oom-Field  ...  873

The     Congregation     of     the    Lord

Jealously  Guarded  ...  ...  873

A  Pure  Camp  for  a  Pure  King         ...  874

The  Hebrew  Fugitive  Law  ...  876

Money-Making     must      be     above

Suspicion  ...  ...  ...  87S

Loss  of  Sacred  Privilege  a  Qrievou

Penalty  876

Terminable  Chastisementa...  «,  t77


INDEX.


Sympathj  for  the  Oppressed  n<  378

TTnaooeptable  Offerings      ...  m<  878

Usury  Lawfnl  and  Unlawful  ...  878

The  Place  of  Tows  ...  ...  879

Possession  of   Earthly  Things  only

Partial  ...  ...  ...  880

OHAPTBE  XXIT.

PermiaaiTe  Legislation       ...  ...  882

Neighbonrly  Lore  and  Good  Will  to

be  Cnltirated  in  Detail  ...  ...  883

Divorce...  ...  ^  ...  883

The  Man  Newlj  Kanied   .m  •»  884

Leprosy...  ...  ...  ~.  384

The  Treatment  of  the  Poor  ...  884

Doing  Jnstice  and  LoTing  Meroy     ...  385

The  Bights  of  Women        ...  ...  886

Man-Stealing  a  Capital  Crime  ...  886

Consideration  for  tke  Poor  and  Needy  887
BesponsibiUty  not  to  be  Transferred

according  to  Hnman  Caprice        ...  387

Nnptial  Joy  ...  ...  ...  387

Prohibited  Pledges  ...  ...  388

Slave-Traffic  a  Coital  Offence         ...  889

Leprosy  Symbolic  ...  ...  389

Omitted  Duty  Bipens  into  Cnrse      ...  890

Public  Jnstice  to  be  Fore  ...  ...  890

A.atnmn  Generosify  ...  m.  891

OHAPTBB  XXV.
Hamanity  to  be  Bespected  in  Judicial

InfliotionB         ...  ...  ...  394

Labourers  to  IjiTe  by  thwr  Labour  ...  894

Family  Honoar  to  be  Maintained     ...  896

An  Offending  Hand  ...  ...  895

BighteousnesB  in  Trade  ImperatiTS ...  896
Kindness  to  Enemies  ia  not  to  Degene-
rate into  Sympathy  with  or  Indiffer-
ence to  Ungodlineaa       ,„           ...  895
The  Bastinado      ...            ».            •.  895
The  Oxen             ...            ...            «.  896

The  Levirate  Law  n.  ~.  897

MoraUty  in  Trade  ...  ...  898

Amalek...  ...  ...  ...  898

Earthly  Magistracy  an  Argnment  for

theHearenly   ...  ...  ...  899

Doing  Good  Inseparable  from  Getting

Good 899

Bdigion  Inspires  Commercial  Life  ...  400

CowMdiea  and  Omelty  Arenged     ...  4D1

Oorponl  Fonishment         ...  ...  401


The  Bights  of  Labour        ...  w.  402

The  Bights  of  the  Firstborn  «.  403

Honesty  the  Best  Policy    ...  ...  404

The  Extermination  of  the  Mercilesa...  405

OHAPTBB  XXn.

Joy  in  the  Use  of  Temporal  Mercies . . .  407
Integrity  in  the  Will  a  Condition  of

Acceptable  and  Snocessfol  Prayer  409

The  Golden  Chain  ...  ...  410

The  Presentation  of  the  First&nita  ...  412

The  Year  of  Tithing  ...  ...  413

"  A  QooA  Conscience  toward  God  "...  413

Aronohing  Extraordinary  ...  ...  414

Commemorations  of  National  Deliver-
ance  ...  ...  ...  ...  414

Complete  Consecration  a  Condition  of

0<mtinned  Blessing         ...  ...  415

The  Spiritual  Creation       ...  ...  416

The  Dedicatiim  of  the  Flrstfrnita    m.  417

Looking  ap  for  the  Blessing  m.  418


OHAPTBB  xxyn.


421

421
422
423
423
424


"Very  Plainly"  ...  ...

A  Grand  "Amen I"            m*  ..<

The  Stones  on  Ebal            ,^  „,

A  People  of  God  ...            ...  ...

Ebal  and  Gerizim               ...  „.

Safeguards  for  Obedience  ...  ...

The  Decalogue  Nationally    Becipro-

cated ...             ...            .M  ...  425

Law-Abiding  Fettle          m*  ...  426

Besponsea            ...            ...  m.  427

CHAPTBB  XXVin.

God's  Blessing  FiDmised  to  the  Obe-
dient...             ...             ...  ...  431

Love  Veiled  in  Frown        ,m  ...  433

The  Blessing        ...             ...  ...  434

The  Blessing  that  Maketh  Uch  „.  435

Established          ...             ...  ...  436

The  World  Afraid  of  the  Godly  „.  436

Moral  Oraritation...           ...  ...  436

The  Cnrse            ...            ^  „.  436

God,  Bnler  in  Nature         ...  m.  ^8

The  Extremity  of  the  Curse  m.  438

The  High  and  Fenced  Walls  m.  439

The  Delicate  Lady             ...  „,  439

God  Bejoicing  in  Judgment  .»  440

Mental  Torture  as  a  Besult  of  Sin    .m  440

The  Parpose  of  Tempocal  Blessing  ...  i41


INDEX


PA*B

A  Nation  Beooming  a  Beacon          ...  442

The  Present  Fortitm  of  a  Good  Man  444

The  Neraeaia  ol  Dialoyalty  ...  446
The  Bemoter  OoBMqnenooa  «f  Be-

beUibn              ...  446

OHAFTXB  XXIX,

Witneeaing  withont  Seeing  ...  440
Apostaoy  in  Heut  a  Boot  of  Bitter-

neas   ...            ...            ...            ...  450

Historical  Witneasea  to  the  Wrath  of

God   ...            ...            ...            ...  452

Secret  Thinga      ...  ^  463,456

Beyealed  Thinga  ...            „,            ...  453

Seeing,  yet  not  Seeing       ...            ...  464

Temptations,  Signs,  Miraolea          ».  464

National  Covenanting        ...             „,  454

The  Lying  Hope  ...             ...             ...  466

The  Stranger's  Wonder     ...            ...  456

The  Benewal  of  God's  Covenant  with

Israel               ...            ...            ...  457

The  Government  of  God  AB-Embrao-

ing     ...            ...            ...            ...  458

The  Forpose  of  Divine  Bevelation   ...  459

Time-Defying  Habiliments  ...  460
The  Land  of  Promise  Becoming  Ao-

omrsed              ...            ...            ...  461

The  Pnrpoae  and  Limits  of  Bevelation  462

OHAFTEB  XXX.

SJaperaion  not  Bejeotion    ...            ,^  464

The  Old  and  New  Covenants            ...  465
.  The  Word  of  Faith             .„           466,  469

A  Dread  Alternative          m            ...  467
Israel'a  Bestoratiim            m<           468, 475

A  Last  Word        ...            ...            ...  470

Natnre  a  Witness               ...            ...  471

Divine  Discipline  Fonnded  on  Known

Principle          ...             ...             ...  471

Bevealed  Tmth  Clear  and  AvaUaU*  472

An  Alternative  Choice       ...            ...  478

The  Bevelation  at  Han's  Door         ...  476

Death  and  Life  Bet  before  the  People  477

OHAPTEB  XXXL

A   New   Ctoneration   Beoeiving   Uw

Heritage  of  the  Fast      ...            ...  481

Importance  of  Knowing  the  Word  of

God 481

Faithful   Words  Silent  Accnsera  of

nose  who  Heed  Them  not           ...  488


Twtum

Hoses  the  Aged  _  att

Joshna  ...

The  Authorship  of  the  Book

The  Written  Word

Beading  the  Law


..  485

...  486

^  489

...  489


God's  Foresight  of  Israel'a  Deelenaion  490

The  Leadership  Hade  over  to  Joshoa  490

The  Literary  Exeoatora  of  Hoses  ...  491
The   Lord's  Charge   to   Hoses   and

Joahoa  ...  ...  ...  492

The  Divine  Testimony  Deposited  ia

the  Ark  ...  ...  ...  493

Putting  ofi  the  Harneaa     ...  ...  404

The  Honour  Appertaining  to  God'a

Law  ...  ...  ...  ...  406

The  Official  Investiture  of  Joshna    ...  406

The  Last  Precaution  against  Idolatry  496

OHAFTEB  XXXn.

God  the  Believer's  Book    ...  „•  B04

Ungrateful  Hen  Interrogated  ...  605

God   Provoked   to   Jealonsy  by   an

Unfaithful  People  ...  ...  505

An  Unfaithful   People  Provoked  to

Jealousy  by  God  ...  ...  607

The    Divine     Hind    Influenced    l>y

Beasons  ...  ...  ...  608

The  Short-Sightednesa  of  Sinners    ...  609

Jehovah  Beigna;  be  Glad!  ...  610

Life  at  Stake  I     ...  ...  ...  612

Death  Immediately  in  View  ^  613

Beneficial  Teaching  ...  ...  615

God  the  Book      ...  ...  ...  615

God'a  Bighteonsneaa  and  Han'a  Ini-
quity ...  ...  ...  516

The  World  Bnled  for  the  Benefit  of

the  Churoh       ...  ...  ...  617

A  Panorama  of  Grace        m.  m.  617

The  Eagle  ...  «»  »  618

Jeshumn  •—  mt  —  618

A  Gk>d  Provoked ...  „.  ...  618

The  True  Wisdom  ...  ...  619

The    Superiority   d  the   Believer'a

Bock...  .„  M.  ...  620

Out  Bock  ...  m  m.  621

The  Tine  of  Sodoa  «•  m  621

Betribution  ...  mt  m.  621

Tour  Life  ...  ...  m  622

The  Fatherhood  of  God     ...  ...  622

The  Danger  of  Worldly  Saooesa      ...  623

Tengeanoe  and  Beoompenae  ...  624


HU


IliDElL


Death  m  Judgment  eTen  to  the  Most

Faithful  Serranta  of  God  ...  626

God's  Vicegerent  as  Poet  ...  ...  626

Histoiy'B  Testimony  for  God  .»  627

Sowing  and  Beaping          ...  ...  628

The  Pleading  of  Divine  Wisdom  ...  629

God's  Pathetic  Appeal  to  Men  ...  630

The  Devil's  Connterfeit  Coin  ...  680

The  Final  Bevelation  of  God's  Sa>

premacy           ...            ...  ...  631

Beligion  a  Beality              .„  „.  632

"Obedient  onto  Death**    ...  m.  633

OHAPTBB  xxxrn.

The  Blessing  of  Beoben ;  or,  Life  Im-
poTerished  thiongh  Ancestral  Sins    640

The  Blessing  of  Jndah;  or,  Help
Needed  to  Fnlfil  Destiny  ...    641

The  Blessing  of  Levi;  or,  Entire
Devotion  to  God  a  Kecessary  Quali-
fication for  Ministerial  Service     ...     MS

The  Blessing  on  Benjamin ;  or,  Safety
in  the  Sheltering  Care  of  Divine
Love  ...  ...  ...  ...     643

The  Blessing  of  Joseph;  or,  God's
Favonr  the  Mercy  of  Mercies       ...     644

Trade  and  Commerce  Subservient  to
Evangelization  ...  ...     646

Gad;  or,  a  Place  in  the  Chnrch  and
the  World  for  Lionlike  Strength  ...     647

The  Blessing  of  Dan  and  Naphtali;
the  Satisfaction  which  Accmes  from
the  Enjoyment  of  the  Divine  Favonr    648

Asher's  Blessing ;  Strength  as  the  Day     649

The  Glory  of  Israel's  God,  and  the
Blessedness  of  God's  Israel  ...     660

A  Fiery  Law       ...  ...  m    661

God's  Saints        ...  m»  ...     661

Benben  and  Jndah  •»■  «.    661


Levi      ...  ...  tH  ...  661

Benjamin  and  Joseph         ...  ...  662

The  Good  Will  of  Him  that  Dwelt  is

theBnsh  ...  ...  ...  652

Zebnlnn  imd  Issachar        „,  m.  662

Gad,  Dan,  Naphtali,  Asher  „,  663

Israel's  Happiness  .^  ».  653

The  Eternal  God  a  Befage  m.  654

The  King  and  His  Viceroy  m.  666

Watchwords  tor  the  Tribes  ...  666

The  Incomparable  Saviour  «,  667

The  Godlike  Act  of  Blessing  ».  668

A  Prayer  for  the  Firstborn  m.  669

The  Boyal  Honse  of  Jndah  ...  659

The  Priestly  Tribe  ...  ...  660

God's  Fatherly  Interest  in  Benjamin  661

Boyal  Donations  on  Joseph  ...  662

Oombined  Work  and  Worship  ...  66S

God's   Valonr   and    Chivklry    Com.

mended  ...  ...  ...  663

The  Blessing  of  Strength  ...  ...  664

Naphtali's  Goodly  Choice  ...  ...  665

The  Comprehensive   Benediction   of

Asher  ...  ...  ...  665

God  the  Crown  of  Israel's  Glory     m  666

OHAPTEB  XXXIT.

The  Last  Jonmey  ...  ...  668

The  Distinctive  Greatness  of  Moses  670
"Faoe  to  Face;"  or,  the  Secret  of

Power  ...  ...  ...  670

The  Death  and  Bnrial  of  Moses       ...  671

The  Calm  Snnset  of  an  Eventful  Day  673  .

Posthnmons  Influence        ,„  ...  674

Communion  with  God  the  Seorst  of

Beal  Power      ...  .^  ».  676

Moses!  Vision      ...  .m  m.  676

Moses'  Death  and  Bnrial  ,„  m.  676

The  Greatness  of  Moses    m  «m  177
