nd 


AZOAODeA pue SASdeTOA pers. Tae 
‘oanieu sat SofFtT az9uuTt el 
“e/8T “Pp ‘Ssntae200 “MOTSUTA | 
: L9GM* SOL Ld | 


‘¢ MN ‘NOLHONIYa A 
P gu 


Mita ge 
MattiopoayD, ayy 3 


THE INNER LIFE. 


THE INNER LIFE, 


ITS 


NATURE, RELAPSE, AND RECOVERY. 


BY 


OCTAVIUS WINSLOW, M.A. 


“ Strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man.” Ern. iii. 16. 


LONDON : 


JOHN FARQUHAR SHAW, 27, SOUTHAMPTON ROW, 
RUSSELL SQUARE; 


C. H. COX, LEAMINGTON; J. JOHNSTONE, W. P. KENNEDY, 
EDINBURGH; J. ROBERTSON, DUBLIN. 


MDCCCL. 


ts ; pe ; 
AIK? i F " 
igh we 

} 7 ¥ 

‘ 

y ‘ 
2 é 
Be) ¥ a : ; 
Pata ers ; 
ix 
i! 
' 
i ‘ik 
‘ 


aa i ay a 


kM ae re iat ee my 


te 


— 


"7 Ay a yy ‘ A , f > Ne i 
soja aU | Maa! Bra 


uli ded A 


mera) es ; oF ie od ae 
pa 4 ; oe . fy ie | 


Pry ‘ld ve { 7 eg ac VAS 
Yin, t¥5 i 


yayt: aes 
me * 


PREFACE. 


Ir was the dying observation—penned the 
day preceding her departure—of one of the 
most amiable and intellectual of her sex *— 
“Did you know what thoughts I have now, you 
would see as I do, that the whole business of 
life is preparation for death.” In contrast 
with this weighty sentiment of the dying Chris- 
tian, we place the solemn testimony of the 
dying worldling—“I have all my days,” said 
he, “been getting ready to live, and now I 
must die!’ What an affecting declaration 1s 


this! And how true of the great mass of our 


* Jane Taylor. 


* 


V1 PREFACE. 


fellow immortals,—all planning, and toiling, 
and preparing to live—how few preparing to 
die! ‘To place before such the subject of real 
life, and to awaken in their minds a considera- 
tion of its nature, and a sense of its solemnities, 


is one design of the following pages. 


But they address themselves more especially, 
and at length, to a smaller, though by no means 
a limited class—the religious professors of the 
day. The subject of his work suggested itself 
to the Author’s mind during a visit to the 
metropolis. His close intercourse, at that time, 
with what is called the ‘religious world,’ forced 
upon his mind the painful conviction, that whilst 
religious profession was greatly on the increase 
—and never more so in the higher classes of 
society than at the present—vital godliness was 
in proportion on the decline; that while—to 
speak commercially—the commodity of religion 
was increasing, its quality was deteriorating. 


The vast number whose Christian profession was 


PREFACE. Vii 


avowed—whose religious character was recog- 
nised—whose theological creed was sound— 
whose conversation was pious—whose sacred 
observances were rigid—whose benevolence 
was applauded—whose zeal was admired—who 
prided themselves upon their eloquent preacher, 
and their favourite religious author; but who yet 
were living in the world, and living as the world, 
and living to the world—deeply and painfully 
affected him. The question frequently arose in 
his mind—“ Where is the salt ? where are the 
really living souls ? where are those who know 
what true conversion is? who are following 
Christ, and are living for God? Where are the 
possessors of the inner life?” Alas! the world 
has become so like the Church, and the Church 
so closely resembles the world—the one so reli- 
gious, and the other so carnal—an unskilled eye 
may be deceived in searching for the essential 
points of difference. Nor this alone. Even 


amongst those in whose souls it would be wrong, 


Vill PREFACE. 


nay, impossible, to deny the existence of spirit- 
ual life, how few are found who really seem for 


themselves to know it! 


On his return to his flock, the Author—in 
his usual extemporary mode of address—un- 
burdened his mind from the pulpit. The 
result, ina calmly written and greatly amplified 
form, is now, with lowliness and prayer, pre- 
sented to the public. Deeply sensible as he 
is of the many imperfections of his perform- 
ance, he yet does not regret its undertaking. 
The hours of holy, tranquil thought stolen from 
the pillow, abstracted from the attractions of 
the domestic circle, and the engagements of a 
pleasant pastorate—and devoted to the prepara- 
tion of this work, have been to his own mind 
inexpressibly soothing and solemn: may a 
kindred influence—tenfold in its measure—rest | 


upon the spirit of the reader ! 


The object of this simple treatise—as its 


PREFACE. 1x 


title sufficiently intimates—is to unfold the 
nature, the relapse, and the recovery of the 
spiritual life of the believer. The work may 
with propriety,—and with God’s blessing, may 
with profit,—be placed in the hands of the 
unconverted, to whom much of its contents are 
particularly and earnestly addressed. It chiefly, 
however, appeals to the conscience of the 
religious professor, and is designed to meet 
the general character of the prevailing Chris- 
tianity of the day. But the experienced and 
matured Christian is not overlooked m the 
discussion of the subject. The temptations— 
the conflicts—the trials, and the various fluc- 
tuations of feeling, through which he passes 
in his difficult but blessed way to his heavenly 
rest, together with his encouragements, con- 
solations, and hopes, pass under review in 
these pages. To the prayers of the living 
soul the work is commended—to the blessing 
of the Holy Spirit of life it is committed 


x PREFACE. 


—to the glory of the Trrune Gop it is dedi- 
cated. And should He condescend to own it, 
to the quickening of any dead soul,—to the 
reviving of spiritual life in any believer,—to 
the confirmation of any wavering, or to the 
comfort of any tried child of God,—to Him 
shall be all the praise. Amen. 


LEAMINGTON, 
January, 1850. 


SROPERTY OF 
PRINCHTON 
KEC, FEB 1881 


SUUINKB LY: 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. 


PAGE 
THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS OF THE INNER 


LIFE e e e e e e e e e ° e ° ° ° 1 
CHAPTER II. 
THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL AND IMPERCEP- 
Pe EeLEE APSE 0G rot. (el eihues Shi. | ol teh te eh! Serna o#O 


CHAPTER III. 


THE INNER LIFE CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTER- 


i NEO RE a ea aL RY 
CHAPTER IV. 

THE INNER LIFE IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. . l11 
CHAPTER V. 


THE RE-QUICKENING OF THEINNER LIFE .. . . 1388 


” 


eaneneaion 2 


Xd1 CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER VI. 


PAGE 
THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER OF THE INNER LIFE . 163 


CHAPTER VII. 


THE RENEWED ANOINTING OF THE INNER LIFE . . 182 


CHAPTER VIII. 


THE INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL UPON THE 


INNER LIFE (fs GS eR 
CHAPTER IX. 
THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST IN ITS RELATION TO 
THE INNER LIFE OF THE CHRISTIAN ... .~ 2ol 
CHAPTER X 


HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF THE INNER LIFE . 268 


DEROPERTY ow 
PRINCETON 

BEC, FEB 1881 
THEOLOGICAL 
> SEMIN EBT a 


fi 


THE INNER LIFE. 


CHAPTER IL 


THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS OF THE 
INNER LIFE. 


“T live; yet not I, but Christ liveth m me.”—GAt. ii. 20. 


Ir is impossible for a truly spiritual mind to 
resist the conviction, or close the eye to the 
fact, that-inward vital godliness by no means 
keeps pace with the profession of Christianity 
which almost universally prevails. A more 
alarming sign could scarcely appear in the 
moral history of the world. If the prevalence 
of a nominal Christianity be one of the predicted 
and distinct characteristics of the approaching 
consummation of all things,—if it is to be re- 
garded as the precursor of overwhelming judg- 
ments, and as immediately ushering in the com- 
ing of the Son of man, then who can contemplate 
the religious formalism which so generally 
exists amongst professing Christians without a 

B 


Hy THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


feeling of sadness, and the excitement of alarm ? 
Were we duly affected by the spectacle which 
we see around us, of multitudes substituting 
signs for things, symbols for realities, an exter- 
nal profession of Christ for the indwelling of 
Christ, the mere semblance of life for life 
itself, how should we, sympathising with man, 
and jealous for the Lord, sigh and cry, as those 
who have God’s mark upon their foreheads. 
Ezek. 1x. 4. 3 

It seems but proper that, in a work called 
forth by this alarming state of the professing 
Church, and designed to lay open that state in 
some of its scriptural and figurative delinea- 
tions, we should commence with a considera- 
tion of the nature, properties, and actions, of 
the spiritual, or inner life, of the quickened 
soul. It is a self-evident truth, that the 
absence of spiritual life is but the existence of 
spiritual death. ‘There is no link that unites 
the two conditions. A soul is either living or 
dead. The artificial representation of life is 
no more!real life than a painted sun is the real 
sun, or than a corpse under powerful galvanic 
shocks is a living body. ‘The reader will 
therefore at once perceive that, in entering upon 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 3 


an inquiry into this state of religious formalism, 
it is of the greatest moment that we have a clear 
and distinct idea of that inward, deep, spiritual 
life, apart from which, with all his intellectual 
hight, orthodox creed, and religious profession, a 
man is ‘“ dead in trespasses and in sins.” I know 
of no words which more distinctly and beauti- 
fully bring out this subject than those of the 
apostle, in referring to his own experience—“ I 
live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.” 

The first great truth which the passage sug- 
gests is, that every true believer in the Lord 
Jesus is the subject of an inward, spiritual life 
—I tive. It 1s altogether a new and super- — 
natural existence. The old and the natural 
state, as we have just affirmed, is a state of 
death. Death! it is a solemn word! Dead! 
it is an awful state! And yet how difficult to 
bring a man to areal belief and conviction of 
this his condition! And why? because he is 
dead. No argument, no reasoning, no per- 
suasion, however profound or affecting, can con- 
vince a corpse that it is lfeless. Equally im- 
possible is it to convince the natural man that 
his soul is spiritually dead, and that before he 
ean be a true expectant of heaven, an heir 


4 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


of glory, he must be born again, and so become 
the subject of a new and spiritual life. Indig- 
nant at the statement, he rejects, spurns, and 
deprecates the idea. The reason is, that in 
pressing home upon him the fact, we are met 
with death in the judgment, with death in the 
wil, with death in the affections, with death in 
the whole soul. The original sentence under 
which every individual of the human family lies 
is thus recorded—“ In the day that thou eatest 
thereof thou shalt surely die: in the Hebrew, 
“Thou shalt die the death.” Our parent dis- 
obeying this law, died, and in him, as their federal 
head, died every son and daughter of Adam. 
“You hath he quickened WHO WERE DEAD. He 
that hath the Son hath life, but he that hath 
not the Son of God HATH NoT LIFE.” On another 
occasion Jesus said, ‘“ Let the dead bury their 
dead,” i.e. let those who are spiritually dead 
bury those who are naturally dead. What an ap- 
palling condition! ‘The spectacle of a dead 
body is solemn. ‘The idea of natural death is 
awful. 'To see the eye that gleamed with bright 
intelligence fixed and glazed in death; the 
lips that spake so kindly, and that discoursed 
so profoundly,—sealed in unbroken silence ; the 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 5 


countenance whose every feature was radiant 
with the light of intellect and love, cold and 
rigid,—how instinctively we shudder at the 
sight, and recoil from the touch! But with 
all the affecting and humiliating circumstances 
of our natural dissolution, what, in comparison, 
is this spectacle of a lifeless form of clay with 
that of the soul dead in sin? With all its 
intellectual greatness, its splendid genius, its 
powers of thought, its rich endowments, its 
varied acquisitions, its creative energies, its 
brilliant achievements, its religious creed and 
forms and observances, its name to live,—it is 
yet spiritually dead. Dead to all that is worthy 
the name of life, dead to every lofty consideration 
and feeling, purpose and enterprise, in harmony 
with its creation, and parallel with its endless 
being. Dead as to any spiritual understanding 
of God, or knowledge of Christ, or transform- 
ing power of the Holy Spirit, or experience 
of those spiritual exercises, and sacred feelings, 
and hallowed emotions, and animating hopes, 
which belong to the soul made alive unto God. 
The question is repeated,—what, with all its 
attendant circumstances, humiliating and affect- 
ing, is the spectacle of a lifeless body, in con- 


6 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


trast with the spectacle of a lifeless soul? We 
might almost reply—nothing. The dissolution 
of the body is not the destruction of the soul. 
The perishing of the material is not the anni- 
hilation of the immaterial. Death is not the 
end of our being; nay, it is not even an inter- 
ruption of it. It is an event that befals a man 
at a certain point of his existence, but it is a 
change of place and circumstance only, in- 
volving the suspension of his immortality—no, 
not for a moment. How infinitely more mo- 
mentous, solemn, and appalling, then, is that 
Spiritual state of man which links his future des- 
tiny to all the certain horrors of thesecond death! 
O that this might be a quickening truth, a 
startling, an arousing reflection to the uncon- 
verted reader! What grand impertinences, what 
mere non-entities, do all other considerations 
appear in contrast with this! You may lose and 
recover again everything else but—your soul. 
This, once lost, is irrecoverably and for ever 
lost. And have you never paused and reflected 
upon the probability of your losing it? You 
are at this moment the subject of spiritual 
death : in the strong language of the Saviour you 
are condemned already; and the last enemy, with 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 7 


the funeral pall of your soul in his hands, stands 
prepared to enshroud you within its dark folds, 
at the word of Him “in whom you live, and move, 
and have your being.” Does not this affect you, 
alarm you, arouse you? Spirit of God! who 
but thyself can quicken the soul? Who can 
convince of danger, convict of sin, and lead to 
Christ, but Thee? Speak but the word, and 
there shall be ight. ‘Touch but the soul, and 
it shall awaken. ‘‘ Come from the four winds, 
O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that 
they may live.” 

But, with regard to the great truth before us, 
we again remark, that every truly gracious man 
is a living soul. He is im the possession of an 
inner, spiritual life. He can appropriate to 
himself the words of the apostle—J live. The 
first important characteristic of this spiritual 
life is its engrafting upon a state of death. The 
words of the apostle will explain our meaning: 
“For I through the law am dead to the law, that 
I might live unto God,” ver. 19. “Iam cruci- 
fied with Christ, nevertheless I live.” Addressing 
the believing Colossians, he says, “ Ye are dead, 
and your life is hid with Christ in God.” The 
simple meaning of these declarations is—the 


8 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


living soul is dead to the law of God as an in- 
strument of life, and to its works as a ground 
of salvation. It is dead, too, to the curse and 
tyranny of the law, and consequently to its 
power of condemning. To all this, the soul 
made alive by Christ, is dead with Christ. 
Thus is it most clear that a man, dead already, 
though he originally is, in trespasses and in sins, 
must morally die ere he can spiritually live. 
The crucifixion with Christ must precede the 
living with Christ. He must die to all schemes 
and hopes of salvation in or by himself, before 
he can fully receive into his heart Christ as the 
life of his soul. This spiritual mystery, this 
divine paradox, the natural man eannot under- 
stand or receive ; he only can whois “born of the 
Spirit.” Then let me ask and press upon you the 
personal and searching question, has the law of 
God been brought into your conscience with 
that enlightening, convincing, and condemning 
power, as first to startle you from your spiritual 
slumber, and then to sever you from all hope 
or expectation of salvation in yourself? If so, 
then will you know of a truth what it is, first, 
to die before you live. Dying to the law, dying 
to self, you will receive him into your heart 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 9 


who so blessedly declared, “I am come that 
ye might have life, and that ye might have it 
more abundantly.” ‘Thus is the life of God in 
the soul engrafted upon a state of death. “I am 
crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live.” 

The second view of this inner, spiritual life 
is, Its supernatural character. It is above nature, 
and therefore all the power of nature cannot 
inspire it. Nature, we admit, can go far in 
imitating some of its characteristics, but 
nature cannot create the essential property or 
principle of this life. Nature can produce a 
semblance of faith, as in the case of Simon 
Magus; of repentance, as in the case of Judas ; 
of hearing the word with joy, as in the case of 
Herod ; it can even appear to taste the heavenly 
gift, and feel the powers of the world to come: 
all this, and much more, can nature do, and yet 
be nature still. Here its power stops. There is 
that which it cannot do. It cannot counterfeit 
the indwelling of Christ in the sinner’s soul. It 
cannot enable a man to say, “I live, and Christ 
liveth in me.” This infinitely transcends its 
mightiest power. Spiritual life, then, springs 
not from nature, and is therefore produced by no 
natural cause or means. It is from God. He 


10 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


it 1s who calls this new creation into being, 
who pencils its wonders, who enkindles its 
glories, and who breathes over it the breath of 
life. It is God’s life in man’s soul. 

Thus the true Christian is one who can adopt 
the expressive and emphatic language of Paul— 
I live. Amplifying the words, he can exclaim, 
“ T dive—as a quickened soul. J live—as a re- 
generate soul. J dive—as a pardoned sinner. 
I live—as a justified sinner. J dve—as an 
adopted child. J dive—as an heir of glory. 
I live, and I never lived before! My whole 
existence until now has been but as a blank. 
I never truly, really lived, until I died! I 
lived, if life it may be called, to the world, to 
sin, to the creature, to myself; but I never 
lived by Christ, and I never lived to God.” O 
tremendous truth! O solemn thought! for a soul 
to pass away into eternity without having 
answered the great end of its creation—without 
having ever really ived! With what feelings, 
with what emotions, with what plea, willitmeetthe 
God who created it? “created you,” that God 
will say, “for myself, for my glory. I endowed 
you with gifts, and ennobled you with faculties, 
and clothed you with powers second only to my 


OF THE INNER LIFE. ll 


own. I sent you into the world to expend 
those gifts, and to employ those faculties, and 
to exert those powers, for my glory, and with a 
view to the enjoyment of me forever. But you 
buried those gifts, you abused those faculties, 
you wasted those powers, and you lived to 
yourself and not unto me; and now to your- 
self, and in everlasting banishment from my 
presence, you shall continue to live through 
eternity.” Come from the four winds, O breath 
of the hving God, and breathe upon the dead, 
that they may live! Avert from the reader so 
dire a doom, so fearful a catastrophe! And 
permit none, whose eye lights upon this solemn 
page, any longer to live to themselves, but from 
this moment and forever, gracious Saviour! may 
they live for thee—their solemn determination 
and their sublime motto this—For ME TO LIVE 
1s CHRIST. 

But we are now conducted to a great and 
a most precious truth—the indwelling of Christ 
in the heart as constituting the spiritual life of 
the believer. “I live; yet not I, sur Curisr 
LIVETH IN ME.” It is not so much that the 
believer lives, as that Christ lives in the believer. 
Tin them. The Lord Jesus is Essentran LiFe. 


12 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


Were it not for this, the doctrine of indwelling 
life would be butadream. With what authority 
of tone, and with what sublimity of language, 
has he affirmed this idea, “J am the resurrection 
and the life: he that believeth in me, though he 
were dead, yet shall he live.” Can thought be 
more grand, or words be more intelligible ? 
“ With Thee is the fountain of life.” Couple to- 
gether these two passages, and what demonstra- 
tive proof do they afford to the doctrine of the 
essential Deity of the Saviour. How could he 
be the Resurrection and the Life, and in what 
sense the Fountain of Life, but as he was 
Eissrentratty Gop? No comparison can be 
instituted between finite being, however exalted, 
and Infinite. It has been truly said, that all 
finite beings are infinitely more destitute of life 
than they are possessed of it; and this will be 
the case forever. Standing by the grave that 
entombs the soul dead in sin, Essentian Lire 
exclaims— I am the Resurrection and the Life 
—Come forth!’ and m a moment the soul is 
quickened, and rises to newness of life. What 
but Derry could accomplish this? Take off 
thy shoes from thy feet, for thou standest upon 
holy ground! Jesus is the TRur Gop, and 


OF THE INNER LIFE. Wee 


Essentian Lire. The smallest seed, the 
meanest insect, the lowest creature on earth, 
and the mightiest angel, and the brightest saint 
in heaven, draw their life from Christ. All life— 
vegetable, animal, rational, spiritual—emanates 
from him, the Fountain of Life to all creatures. 
What a mighty and glorious Being, then, is the 
Son of God, the ceaseless energy of whose 
essence prevents each moment every thing that 
hath life from being destroyed, and from ac- 
complishing its own destruction! Who would 
not believe in, who would not love, who would 
not serve such a Bemg? Who would not 
crown him Lord of all? 

The spiritual life, then, of the believer is the 
life of Christ, or rather, ‘Christ who is our life” 
in the soul. The Scripture proof of this is 
overwhelming. J in them, are words declarative 
of this truth by the Saviour himself. Again, in 
2 Cor. xi. 5, the apostle thus exhorts—“ Ex- 
amine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith ; 
prove your own selves. Know ye not your own 
selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye 
be reprobates?” Alas! how is this precept over- 
looked! How few are they who rightly and 
honestly examine themselves! 'They can ex- 


14 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


amine others, and speak of others, and hear for 
others, and judge of others ; but themselves they 
examine not, and judge not, and condemn not. 
To the neglect of this precept may be traced, as 
one of its most fruitful causes, the relapse of the 
inner life of the Christian. Deterioration, and 
eventually destruction and ruin, must follow in 
the steps of wilful and protracted neglect, be the 
object of that neglect what it may. The vine- 
yard must become unfruitful, and the garden 
must lose its beauty, and the machinery must 
stand still, and the enterprise must fail of suc- 
cess, and the health must decline, if toilsome and 
incessant watchfulness and care hath not its 
eye broad awake to every symptom of feebleness, 
and to every sign of decay. If the merchantman 
examine not his accounts, and if the husband- 
man examine not his field, and if the nobleman 
examine not his estate, and if the physician 
examine not his patient, what sagacity is needed 
to foresee, as the natural and inevitable result, 
confusion, ruin, and death? How infinitely 
more true is this of the soul! The want of 
frequent, fearless, and thorough searching into 
the exact state of the heart, into the real con- 
dition of the soul, as before God, in the great 


OF THE INNER LIFE. baa 


matter of the inner life, reveals the grand secret 
of many a solemn case of declension, shipwreck, 
and apostacy. Therefore, the apostle earnestly 
exhorts, Haamine yourselves; as if he would say, 
“Do not take the state of your soul for granted. 
Be not deceived by the too fond and partial 
opinion of others. Judge not yourselves by 
a human and a false standard, but examine 
yourselves, prove your own selves by the word ; 
and rest not short of Christ dwelling in your 
hearts,—your present life and your hope of 
glory.” 

But how does Christ dwell in the believer ? 
—a most important question this. An igno- 
rance with regard to the mode of Christ’s 
indwelling at one time opened the door for the 
introduction into the Church of one of the most 
fanatical errors that ever assailed its purity. We 
allude to the heresy of the personal, corporeal 
indwelling of Christ in the believer, which, 
being believed and asserted by many, they set 
themselves up as being themselves Christ, and 
thereby rushed into innumerable extravagant, 
blasphemous, and deadly sins. Thus has Satan 
ever sought to engraft the deadly nightshade of 
error, upon the life-giving Rose of Sharon, ren- 


16 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


dering the most spiritual and sanctifying truths 
of God’s word subservient to the basest and 
most unholy purposes. But by what mode does 
the Lord Jesus dwell in the truly regenerate ? 
We answer,—by his Spirit. Thus it is a spiri- 
tual and not a personal or corporeal indwelling 
of Christ. The Scripture testimony is most full 
and decisive on this point. “ Know ye not that 
your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost? If 
Christ be in you, the body is dead because of 
sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteous- 
ness. Butif the Spirit of him that raised up 
Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that 
raised Christ from the dead shall also quicken 
your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth 
in you.” And that this inhabitation of Christ 
by the Spirit is not the indwelling of a mere 
erace of the Spirit, but the Spirit himself, is 
equally clear from another passage :—“ Hope 
maketh not ashamed, because the love of God 
(here is a grace of the Spirit) isshed abroad in our 
hearts by the Holy Spirit which he hath given us” 
—(here is the possession of the Spirit himself). 
Thisisthe fountain of allthe spiritual grace dwell- 
ingin the soul of the trulyregenerate, and at times 
so. blessedly flowimg forth in refreshing and 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 1: 


sanctifying streams. “He that believeth on me, 
as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall 
flow rivers of living water. But THIS SPAKE 
HE OF THE Spirit,” John vu. 38, 39. Thus, 
then, is it most clear that by the indwelling of 
the Holy Spirit, Christ has his dwelling in the 
hearts of all true believers. Christian reader, 
what a solemn truth is this! What an unfold- 
ing of true Christianity! What a view of real, 
vital, saving religion, does this truth present! 
How do all religious rites, and forms, and 
ceremonies, dwindle into just and impressive 
insignificance, before this all-important, all- 
essential, all-commanding doctrine of the in- 
habitation of Christ in the soul by the Holy 
Spirit of God! Apart from the experience of 
this truth, every other is a false religion. 

But there is one view of our subject too 
interesting and important to be overlooked. 
“ Christ LIVETH in me,” says the apostle. It is 
a living Christ dwelling in a living soul. It 
implies permanency. ‘The religion of some is 
a religion of the moment. Like the gourd of 
the prophet, it appears in a night, and it withers 
ina night. It is the religion of impulse and of 
feeling. It comes by fits and starts. It is con- 

Cc 


18 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


vulsive and periodical. It is easily assumed, 
and as easily laid aside. But here is the grand 
characteristic of a truly converted man. Christ 
lives in him, and lives in him never to die. 
He has entered his heart, never to retire. He 
has enthroned himself, never to abdicate. And 
although the fact of his permanent indwelling 
may not always appear with equal clearness and 
certainty to the mind of the believer himself, 
nevertheless Christ is really there by his Spirit. 
It is his home, his dwelling-place, his kingdom. 
He lives there, to maintain his government, to 
sway his sceptre, and to enforce, by the mild 
constraint of his love, obedience to his laws. 
He lives there, to guard and nourish his own 
work—shielding it when it is assailed, strength- 
ening it when it is feeble, reviving it when it 
droops, restoring it when it decays; thus pro- 
tecting the “lily amongst the thorns,” preserving 
the spark in the ocean, and keeping, amid 
opposing influences, the life of God that it die 
not. ‘Truly is the believer in Jesus a living 
soul; and all are dead who cannot say, “Christ 
LIVETH 1n me.” 

But let us briefly contemplate some of the 
characteristics of the inner spiritual life of the 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 19 


soul, as more fully illustrating its character, 
and as supplying evidences by which we may 
test the question of its personal possession. 
The first characteristic which we notice is its 
self-renouncing tendency. J live, yet not I. 
The life of Christ and the life of self cannot 
co-exist in the same heart. If the one lives, 
the other dies. The sentence of death is 
written upon a man’s self when the Spirit of 
Christ enters his heart and quickens his soul 
with the life of God. “TI live,” he exclaims, 
“yet Not I.” What a striking and beautiful 
example of this have*we in the life and 
labours of the Apostle Paul. Does he speak 
of his ministry ?—what a renunciation of self 
appears! Lost in the greatness and gran- 
deur of his theme, he exclaims—‘“ We preach 
NOT OURSELVES, but Christ Jesus the Lord.” 
Again—“ Unto ME, WHO AM LESS THAN THE 
LEAST of all saints, is this grace given, that I 
should preach amongst the Gentiles the un- 
searchable riches of Christ.” Does he refer to 
his office ?—what self-crucifixion! ‘“ I magnify 
_ mine office.” In what way? Was it by vaunting 
proclamations of its grandeur and legitimacy, its 
Divine institution, or its solemn functions ? 


20 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


Did he challenge for it, “ otherwise than as it 
was connected with miraculous endowments, 
the unquestioning and instant submission of 
men’s hearts and consciences, as to an oracle 
that must not be disputed—or their subservi- 
ency in the conduct of life, as to a law that was 
death to disobey? Did he ever exalt its possess- 
ors to a height of unintelligible and mystical 
sacredness, above the condition of humanity and 
the common feelings and infirmities of nature, 
which might demand the prostration of others 
at their feet, as if separated from them by an 
impassable, though invisible chasm—an abyss 
which it was sacrilege to traverse even in ima- 
eination, and which still divided the priest, the 
bishop, or the pastor, from the man?” Never! 
But he magnified his office, by diminishing him- 
self and exalting his Master. He was nothing © 
—ay, and even his office itself was compara- 
tively nothing—that “ Christ might be all and in 
all.” Does he speak of his gifts and labours ? 
what absence of self! “ I am the least of the 
apostles, that am not meet to be called an 
apostle, because I persecuted the church of God. 
But, by the grace of God, I am what I am; 
and his grace, which was bestowed upon me, was 


OF THE INNER LIFE. Pal 


not in vain, but I laboured more abundantly 
than they all: yet, nor I, but the grace of 
God which was with me.” Such was the reli- 
gion of Paul. His Christianity was a self- 
denying, self-crucifying, self-renouncing Chris- 
tianity. “Ilive, ver norlI. I laboured more 
abundantly than they all, yet nor I.” O what 
a self-denying spirit was his! “ But where,” 
asks somewhat quaintly a writer of olden time, 
—and how appropriate the inquiry to our own! 
—‘ where is this self-denying power of heart 
now to be found amongst us? how does this [, 
this same self, creep into all our speeches, and 
into all our doings! If it please the Lord to 
use a minister in his service, what an J-ing is 
there! J converted such a man, and J com- 
forted such a man; and it was my prescription, 
and it was my receipt, and J didit. And if a 
Christian do but pray, or perform a duty, Thus 
and thus J said, and these words J spake! did 
not J tell you so ? J told you what would come 
to pass. O what an I-ing is there among the 
people! How does this I and self creep into 
all our speeches, and into all our doings !’* 
But every truly spiritual man is a self-re- 
* Bridge. 


22 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


nouncing man. In the discipline of his own 
heart, beneath the cross of Jesus, and in the 
school of trial and temptation, he has been 
taught in some degree, that if he lives, it is not 
he that lives, but that it is Christ who liveth 
in him. Upon all his own righteousness, his 
duties, and doings, he tramples as to the great 
matter of justification ; while, as fruits of the 
Spirit, as evidences of faith, as pulsations of 
the inner spiritual life, as, in a word, tending to 
authenticate and advance his sanctification, he 
desires to be “ careful to maintain good works,” 
that God in all things might be glorified. This 
thought suggests another of much importance. 
We should be always careful to distinguish 
between the denial of self and the denial of the 
life of God within us. The most entire renun- 
ciation of ourselves, the most humiliating ac- 
Inowledgment of our personal unworthiness, 
may comport with the strongest assurance and 
profession of Christ living in us. Self-denial 
does not necessarily involve grace-denial. It 
is the profoundest act of humility in a Chris- 
tian man to acknowledge the grace of God in 
his soul. Never is there so real a crucifixion, 
never so entire a renunciation of self as when 


OF THE INNER LIFE. aS 


the heart, in its lowly but deep and grateful 
throbbings, acknowledges its indebtedness to 
sovereign grace, and in the fervour of its ador- 
ing love summons the whole Church to listen 
to its recital of the great things God hath done 
for it—‘‘ Come, all ye that fear the Lord, and I 
will tell you what he hath done for my soul.” 
O yes! it isaself-denying life. Listen to Job— 
“T abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes.” 
Listen to Isaiah—* Woe is me! for Iam undone; 
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell 
in the midst of a people of unclean lips: for 
mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts.” 
Listen to the penitent publiican—*< God be mer- 
ciful to me a sinner!” Listen again to Paul— 
“T live, yet not I.’ Thus does a sense of sin, 
and a believing sight of Christ, lay the soul low 
before God in self-renunciation and self-abhor- 
rence. Judge your spiritual condition, dear 
reader, by this characteristic of the inner life. 
Is it yours? Has there been this renuncia- 
tion of your sinful self, and of your righteous 
self? Has the Spirit of God emptied you? has 
the grace of God humbled you? has the life 
of God crucified you? Are you as one in 
whom Christ lives, walking humbly with God? 


24 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


O, it is the essence of vital godliness, it is the 
very life of true religion. If Christ is living in 
you, you are a humble soul. Pride never ex- 
isted in the heart of Christ. His whole life 
was one act of the profoundest self-abasement. 
In the truest and in the fullest sense of the 
emphatic declaration, “he humbled himself.” It 
is impossible, then, that he who was thus “meek 
and lowly in heart” can dwell im one whom 
‘pride compasseth as a chain.” ‘TI live, yet Nor 
J,” are two states of the renewed soul as insepa- 
rable as any cause and effect. A humble and a 
self-denying Christ dwells only with a humble 
and a self-denying soul. If your gifts inflate 
you, if your position exalts you, if your useful- 
ness engenders pride, if the honour and dis- 
tinction which God or man have placed upon 
you have turned you aside from the simplicity 
of your walk, and set you upon the work of 
self-seeking, self-advancing, so that you are not 
meek and gentle, child-like and Christ-like 
in spirit, be sure of this—you are either not 
a partaker of the lfe of Christ, or else that 
life is at a low ebb in yoursoul. Which of the 
two, think you, is your real state? And have 
the self-denying, the self-renouncing, no reward ? 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 25 


O yes! their reward is great. They are such 
as the King delights to honour. When John the 
Baptist declared, ‘He must increase, but I must 
decrease,’ and on another occasion, ‘“ Whose 
shoe-latchet I am not worthy to unloose,” Christ 
pronounced him “the greatest born of women.” 
When the centurion sent to say, “Lord, I am 
not worthy that thou shouldest come under my 
roof,” our Lord places this crown upon his faith, 
“T tell you I have not found so great faith, no not 
in Israel.” When the publican exclaimed, “God 
be merciful to me a sinner!” he descended from 
the temple “justified rather’ than the self-vaunt- 
ing Pharisee. Yes, “ when men are cast down 
then there is lifting up.” There is a present re- 
ward of grace to the humble. Christexalts them. 
“Humble yourselves under the hand of the Lord, 
and he will exalt you in due time.” And what 
tongue can describe the inward peace, satisfac- 
tion, and contentment of that soul in whom this 
self-denying life of Christ dwells! Such an 
one hath a continual feast. He may be deeply 
tried, sorely tempted, heavily afflicted, severely 
chastened, but his meek and submissive spirit 
exclaims, “ It is the Lord, let him do as seemeth 


good in his sight.” 


26 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


Another characteristic of this life is—it is a 
Christ-honouring, Christ-advancing life. A self- 
denying life, proceeding from a gospel princi- 
ple, must be a Christ-exalting life. The Lord 
Jesus can only erect and carry forward his 
kingdom in the soul upon the ruins of self: 
and as this kingdom of grace is perpetual in its 
growth, so the demolition of self is a work of 
gradual advancement. “He must increase,” 
says the lowly-minded Baptist. As the inner 
life grows, Christ grows more lovely to the eye, 
more precious to the heart. Huis blood is more 
valued, his righteousness is more relied on, his 
grace 1s more lived upon, his cross is more 
gloried in, his yoke is more cheerfully borne, 
his commands are more implicitly obeyed. In all 
things Christ is advanced, and the soul by all 
means advances in its knowledge of, and in 
its resemblance to, Christ. Reader, is Christ 
advanced by you? Is his kingdom widened, 
is his truth disseminated, is his fame spread, is 
his person exalted, is his honour vindicated, is 
his glory promoted by the life which you are 
living? O name not the name of Christ if it 
be not to perfume the air with its fragrance, and 


OF THE INNER LIFE. aa 


to fill the earth with its renown. We must group 
the remaining characteristics of the imner life. 
It is a conflicting life. It always wears the 
harness, and is ever clothed with the armour. 
Opposed by indwelling sin, assailed by Satan, 
and impeded by the world, every step in ad- 
vance is only secured by a battle fought and a 
victory achieved. It is a ho/y life—springing 
from the indwelling of the Holy Spirit, it must 
necessarily be so. All its actings are holy, all 
its breathings are holy, all its fruits are holy; 
and without holiness no man hath this life, or 
can be an inheritor of that life to come, of 
which this is the seedling and the germ, the 
foretaste and the pledge. ‘“ The water that I 
shall give him,” says Christ, alluding to the 
spiritual life, “shall be in him a well of water 
springing up into everlasting life.” Need Iadd 
that happiness, progression, and deathlessness, 
are equally its characteristics ? Happiness is 
but a phantom and a name, where Christ dwells 
not in the heart. Progression is but an advance 
towards eternal woe, where the love of God is 
not in the soul. And death is an eternal, lin- 
gering despair, the soul and body ever dying, 


28 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


yet never ceasing to exist—where the Spirit of 
life has not quickened the inner man, creating 
all things new. 

Such, reader, is the life, the inner, spiritual, 
and deathless life, the relapse and recovery of 
which, the pages that follow will unfold. No 
imagination can fully depict, nor language ade- 
quately describe, the importance of this life, the 
grandeur of its nature and destiny, and the 
necessity of its progression and its manifesta- 
tions. Reader, the world without you teems 
with sentient existence. All is life, activity, and 
progress. ‘There is vegetable life, and animal 
life, and rational life. The flower that scents the 
air with its perfume, the insect that renders it 
vocal with its music, and man who fills and beau- 
tifies the earth with monuments of his greatness 
and creative genius, testify to the possession of a 
life of amazing power, activity, and progression. 
To this may be added a species of moral life, 
maintained by many, developed and embodied 
in religious forms, observances, and sacrifices. 
But there is a life as infinitely superior to all 
these as the life of him whose mind conceived 
the towering pyramid, is to that of the little 
insect that flutters its brief hour in the sunbeam 


OF THE INNER LIFE. PAS) 


and then vanishes for ever. It is THE LIFE OF 
GoD IN THE souL oF MAN. Deep planted in the 
centre of his spiritual nature, lodged within the 
hidden recesses of his deathless mind, diffusing 
its mysterious but all-pervading and renovating 
influence through the judgment, the will, the 
affections, and linking his being with a future 
of glory, “which eye hath not seen, nor ear 
heard, neither hath entered into the heart of 
man to conceive,’ the world rushes on, and 
knows not its existence, and sees not its glories, 
and heeds not its joy,—so deeply veiled from 
human eye, ay, and so far removed from human 
power, is the inner spiritual life “hidden with 
Christ in God.” Reader, there is a religion 
towering as far above your religion of merit, and 
of works, and of forms, as the heavens are above 
_the earth, even as the spiritual life of God is 
above the sensual life of man. It is the re- 
ligion of a renewed mind, of a renovated heart, 
of a conquered will, of a soul—all whose sanc- 
tified faculties are consecrated to the glory of 
God here, and are destined to the enjoyment 
of God hereafter. Illustrious as may be your 
position in the Church, luminous as may be 
your profession of Christianity, splendid as your 


30 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


gifts, and rich as your endowments, and costly as 
your offerings, and apostolic as your zeal, and un- 
wearied as your labours may be, bear withme while 
with all solemnity I remind you, that you still 
may live, and toil, and die, a stranger to the INNER 
uIFE. Deeper and loftier and more momentous 
than all these is the great truth upon which 
we are expatiating—‘“ CHRIST LIVETH IN ME.” 
Its foundation is in the soul, its summit is in 
heaven. I enunciate to you a great mystery 
—the mystery of Christ and his Church, of the 
soul of man and the life of God—both spirit- 
ually and indissolubly one. Have you thus 
“passed from death unto life?” Has the great 
transformation taken place? Has the destroyer, 
intrenched within, in all the plenitude of un- 
disputed power, been dispossessed ? Have the 
avenues of the heart, closed and barred against 
the admission of Christ, been thrown open ? 
Has the fearful alienation, and the withering — 
curse, and the deep guilt, which portrays to 
you God as an enemy, and which arms all the 
powers of your soul against him as his foe, 
been revealed, felt, and deplored? Has the 
captive spirit been disenthralled, the prey taken 
from the mighty, the power of the destroyer 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 3] 


broken, and the soul awakened from its deep 
slumber to listen to its Creator speaking in 
tones of mercy, and in thoughts of love? Has 
light, emanating from the abodes of glory—in- 
visible to others—dawned upon the midnight 
of your moral desolation ? has a voice, speak- 
ing from the throne of heaven—unheard by 
others—startled your spirit in its deep trance, 
and dispelled its floating dreams ? has a hand, 
mighty and unseen, riven the chain, thrown 
open the dungeon, and led you forth to liberty 
and joy, to life and immortality? In a word— 
and this is the sum and consummation of all— 
has another and a Diviner life, a new and a 
superior nature, descending from God, and 
begotten within you by the Spirit, and unfold- 
ing to your view a heaven of brightness, full of 
purity and fragrance and song, been communi- 
cated to your soul, thus creating you a new 
creature, and constituting you an “heir of God, 
and a joint heir with Christ Jesus?” If so, 
then you may adopt the language of Paul, and 
. exultingly exclaim, “I live, yet not I, but Christ 
liveth in me.” O deem not this a vain thing, 
for it is your life! But I will suppose your 
honest reply to these searching interrogatives 


32 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


decides the case against your claims to a pos- 
session of spiritual life; then let me beseech 
you, with a knowledge of this alarming fact, 
rest not where you are. What is your natural 
life but a vapour that is soon dissolved, a dream 
that vanishes away? And what are your pre- 
sent pursuits but things unworthy of your 
rational existence, and inappropriate to your 
approaching destiny? O what egregious folly, 
O what moral insanity, to merge all considera- 
tion of your future existence in the present 
brief space graciously allotted you for its study 
and its preparation! You are all life, all nerve, 
all animation, all ardour, all activity, all excite- 
ment, all hope, to whatever is noble, and intel- 
lectual, and refined, and enterprising, of earth,— 
but all death, all insensibility, all indifferent, all 
languor, all hopeless, to every thought and feeling 
and consideration of the great things that relate 
to your state beyond the grave. Is this wise, 
is this rational, is this sane? Your walks of 
literature, your pleasures of taste, your pursuit 
of gain, your toil of ambition,—those splendid | 
impertinences,those cruel mockeries, those heart- 
less soul-murderers of the present time-state, 
stifle in your heart all feeling, and annihilate in 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 33 


your mind all thought that you are an account- 
able steward, a moral agent, a deathless being ; 
and that soon, yea, in one moment, your 
soul may be in eternity—standing agitated, 
trembling and speechless, before the tribunal 
of God! Yearning for your salvation, let 
me with the tenderest affection and the deep- 
est solemnity plead with you for your life. 
- Reflect for a moment what your present care- 
less, unbelieving and impenitent state really is. 
It is nothing less than to challenge the ven- 
geance of the Most High God, to defy his 
power, to disdain his clemency, to refuse his 
compassion, to reject his pardon, to insult his 
majesty, and to expose yourself to the fierce- 
ness of his eternal wrath. It is to be without 
the regeneration of his Spirit, to have no part 
in the propitiation of his Son, to have all your 
sins uncancelled, and to stand before the throne 
of eternal justice, a culprit and a criminal, 
upon whom the righteous judgment of God 
must pronounce and execute its withering 
sentence of an unchanging destiny, and an 
inexorable doom. Whither, then, can you flee 
to hide you from the dark storm that gathers 
over you, from the thick clouds, and treasured 
D 


34. THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


lightning, and embosomed bolt, and desolating 
winds; that wait but the signal of God’s up- 
lifted hand to rush forth upon you in all their 
unchecked, unmitigated fury? Whither can 
you flee? You have “made a covenant with 
death, and are at an agreement with hell.” You 
are fascinated with the world, and are ena- 
moured with yourself, and are satisfied to have 
no other portion. You reject the Rock of Ages, 
refuse the sheltering pavilion of the Saviour’s 
cross, and despise the proffers of his grace,— 
whither, then, when the tempest leaps forth in 
all its maddening fury, will you fiée? Yet 
how calmly you tread upon the very brink of 
ruin, how sportively you sail along the very 
edge of the vortex, how content and happy to 
course your way to the bar of a holy and a just 
God, through a world of disease and casualty 
and death, without one anxious thought to 
obtain deliverance, or one earnest struggle to 
escape your doom! Listen to a fact of recent 
occurrence, for the truth of which, in all its 
awful particulars, my personal knowledge of the 
parties can safely vouch. The conversation of a 
party of gentlemen, after dinner, turned upon 
the doctrine of a future state. Hach one gave his 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 30 


opinion. It came to the turn of an elderly gentle- 
man, a man of high legal attainments, of consi- 
derable wealth, and generalesteem. Heremarked 
that, “as it regarded himself, this life was good 
enough for him; that he desired no better, and 
would be willing to enter into an agreement to 
live in this world for ever.” The words had 
scarcely passed his lips when his hand relaxed 
its hold upon the glass it was grasping, his 
countenance changed, his head drooped, and 
he was borne insensible to a sofa. A vein was 
opened, restoratives were used, and every effort 
made that skill could devise; but life was 
extinct,—his spirit had fled to the God who 
gave it! Reader, I leave this appalling fact to 
make its own impression. May that impres- 
sion be deep, permanent, and saving! 

But I turn to the hving. I address those in 
whose souls are the deep, holy, deathless 
throbbings of an inner, spiritual life. Blissful 
day, Christian reader, that witnessed your re- 
surrection from the grave of sin to walk in 
newness of life! Happy hour when you left 
your soul’s shroud in the tomb, exchanging 
it for the robe of a glorious deathlessness,— 
when your enmity was conquered, and your 


36 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


hostility was subdued, and you were Jed in 
willing and joyous captivity, amidstthe triumphs 
of your Lord, to the altar where he bled,—self- 
consecrated to his service. O memorable 
moment, when Jesus, by the resistless but 
gentle power of his grace, broke down every 
barrier, entered your heart, and planted there 
the germ of a life as Divine, as holy, and as 
immortal as his own! Ever keep in mind 
your deep indebtedness to sovereign grace, 
your solemn obligation to Divine love, and the 
touching motives that urge you to “walk worthy 
of the vocation wherewith ye are called.” Wel- 
come all the dealings of God, whatever the 
character of those dealings may be, designed 
as they are but to animate, to nourish, and 
to carry forward this precious hfe im your 
soul. The zorth wind of sharp trial, and the 
south wind of covenant mercy, are made to 
breathe their blended gales over this beauti- 
ful garden, that the fruits and flowers of 
holiness may abound,—that the actings of a 
living faith and love and hope may evidence 
to yourself, to the Church, and to the 
world, that you are indeed “risen with Christ,” 
a partaker of his new resurrection-life. 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 37 


It is perhaps a question of deep anxiety with 
you,—“ Would that I knew I were in reality a 
possessor of this inner spiritual hfe! My heart 
is so hard, my affections are so cold, my spirit 
is so sluggish, in every thing that is spiritual, 
holy, and divine.” Permit me to ask you, Can 
a stone feel its hardness, or a corpse its 
insensibility ? Impossible! You affirm that 
you feel your hardness, and that you are 
sensible of your coldness. From whence 
does this spring but from Wfe? Could 
you weep, or mourn, or deplore, were the 
spiritual state of your soul that of absolute 
death! Again I say, Impossible! But rest 
not here—go to Jesus. What you really need 
is a fresh view of, a renewed application to, the 
Lord Jesus Christ. Sit not brooding over your 
mournful condition, in fruitless lamentation, 
but rise, and go to Jesus. ‘Yake to him the 
stone-like heart, the corpse-like soul. ‘Tell 
him that you want to feel more, and to weep 
more, and to love more, and to pray more, and 
to live more. Go, and pour out your heart, 
with all its tremblings, and doubts, and fears, 
and wants, upon the bleeding, loving bosom of 
your Lord, until from that bosom hfe more 


38 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


abundant has darted its quickening energy, 
vibrating and thrilling through your whole 
soul. “I have come,” says Jesus, “that they 
might have life, and that they might have it 
more abundantly.” 

You are, perhaps, a severely sient a sorely 
tempted, a deeply afflicted believer. But cheer 
up! You have Christ living in you, and why 
should you yield to despondency or to fear ? 
Christ will never vacate his throne, nor relin- 
quish his dwelling. You have a suffering 
Christ, a humbled Christ, a crucified Christ, 
a dying Christ, a risen Christ, a living Christ, 
a triumphant Christ, a glorified Christ, a full 
Christ, dwelling in you by his Spirit. Yes! 
and you have, too, a human Christ, a feeling 
Christ, a sympathising Christ, a tender, loving, 
gentle Christ, spiritually and eternally reposing 
in your heart,—why, then, should you fear the 
pressure of any want, or the assault of any foe, 
or the issue of any trial, since such a Christ is 
in you? “Fear not!” They are his own 
familiar and blessed words—‘ It is I, be not 
afraid.” You cannot want for any good, since 
you have the fountain of all good dwelling in 
you. You cannot be finally overcome of any 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 39 


spiritual evil, since you have the Conqueror of 
sin and Satan and the world enthroned upon 
your affections. Your life,—the inner, divine 
and spiritual life—can never die, since Christ, 
EissENTIAL Lire, liveth and abideth in you. 
Like him, and for him, you may be opposed, 
but ike him and by him you shall triumph. 
The persecution which you meet, and the trials 
which you endure, and the difficulties with 
which you cope, shall but further your well- 
being, by bringing you into a closer communion 
with Jesus, and by introducing you more fully 
into the enviable state of the apostles—“ Always 
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord 
Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be made 
manifest in our body. ..... For which cause 
we faint not: but though our outward man 
perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by 
day. For our light affliction, which is but for 
a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory.” 

Soon the portals of glory will expand their 
gates, and receive you into the beatific life— 
the life which is eternal. You are, perhaps, 
mourning the loss of those who sleep in Jesus, 
or you are the occupant of a sick chamber, or, 


40 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


—ecstatic thought !—it may be you are poised 
upon the wing for heaven, waiting only the 
signal for your upward flight. Whether it be 
the sorrow of bereavement, or the languishing 
bed of sickness, or the immediate prospect of 
eternity, how appropriate, and animating, and 
soothing, the contemplation of the life which is 
before you! How exceeding great and precious 
are the promises which refer to the security 
and assured enjoyment of that life: ““ My sheep 
hear my voice, and I know them, and they fol- 
low me; and I give unto them eternal life: and 
they shall never perish, neither shall any man 
pluck them out of my hand. My Father, 
which gave them me, is greater than all: and 
no one is able to pluck them out of my Father’s 
hand.” Listen to his words of indescribable 
sweetness and overwhelming grandeur, breathed 
over the grave of one whom he loved: “ I am 
the resurrection and the life: he that believeth 
in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; 
and whosoever believeth in me shall never die.” 
“ Wnough, dear Lord,’ may you not exclaim. 
“ Thou hast spoken words of soothing and of 
hope to this bleeding, sorrowing heart of mine, 
and I am comforted. Thou hast dried my 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 4] 


tears, bound up my wounds, and calmed 
my spirit, healing, and hushing it to rest 
upon thine own gentle, loving bosom—once 
stricken with a sorrow infinitely deeper, and 
keener, and bitterer than mine.” 

Are you, my reader, a searcher of this 
life? Are you breathing for it, panting 
after it, seeking it? Then, be it known to you, 
that he who inspired that desire is himself the 
Life for which you seek. That heaving of thy 
heart, that yearning of thy spirit, that ‘ feeling 
after God, if haply you may find him,’ is the 
first gentle pulsation of a life that shall never 
die. Feeble and fiuctuating, faint and flutter- 
ing, as its throbbings may be, it 1s yet the life of 
God, the life of Christ, the hfe of glory in your 
soul. It is the seedling, the germ of an im- 
mortal flower. It is the sunshine dawn of an 
eternal day. The announcement with which we 
meet your case—and it is the only one that can 
meet it—is, “ THrs MAN RECEIVETH SINNERS.” 
O joyful tidings! O blessed words! Yes, he 
receiveth sinners—the vilest, the meanest, the 
most despised! It was for this he relinquished 
the abodes of heavenly purity and bliss, to 
mingle amidst the sinful and humiliating scenes 


42 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS 


of earth. For this he quitted his Father’s 
bosom for a cross. For this he lived and 
laboured, suffered and died. ‘“ He receiveth 
sinners!” He receives them, of every name and 
condition—of every stature, and character, and 
chime. There is no limit to his ability to par- 
don, as there is none to the sufficiency of his 
atonement, or to the melting pity of his heart. 
Flee, then, to Jesus the crucified. To him 
repair with your sins, as scarlet and as 
crimson, and his blood will wash you whiter 
than snow. What though they may be as 
clouds for darkness, or as the sand on the 
sea-Shore for multitude—his grace can take 
them all away. Come with the accusations and 
tortures of a guilty conscience, come with 
the sorrow and relentings of a broken heart, 
come with the grief of the backslider, and with 
the confession of the prodigal, Jesus still meets 
you with the hope-inspiring words—“ Him 
that cometh unto me, I will in no wise cast 
out 


99 
. 


Then, “return unto the Lord, and he 
will have mercy upon you; and to our God, 
for he will abundantly pardon.” 

Such, reader, in conclusion, is the nature, 
and such the manifestations of the inner spirit- 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 43 


ual life, whose relapse and recovery, whose 
declensions and revivings, we are about to con- 
sider. Alas! that a life so heavenly and divine, 
so holy and so happy, should ever fluctuate 
and change—should ever droop and decay. 
Alas! that in its onward progress to the paradise 
of God, it should have its autumn and its winter 
—the seared leaf and the congealed current—and 
not be always clothed with the perpetual verdure 
of spring, and be ever laden with the ripe fruit of 
summer. Butsuch isthe fallen nature in which it 
dwells, and such the hostileinfluences by whichit 
is surrounded and assailed, the utmost vigilance 
is demanded to maintain the heavenly spark alive 
and glowing in the soul. Ere, beloved reader, 
we pass to amore minute examination of our 
important subject, together let us solemnly 
“bow our knees unto the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ,” praying “that he would grant us, 
according to the riches of his glory, to be 
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the 
inner man: that Christ may dwell in our 
hearts by faith: that we, being rooted and 
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend 
with all saints what is the breadth, and length, 
and depth, and height; and to know the love 


44 THE NATURE AND MANIFESTATIONS, ETC. 


of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that we 
might be filled with all the fulness of God. 
Now UNTO HIM THAT IS ABLE TO DO EXCEEDING 
ABUNDANTLY ABOVE ALL THAT WE ASK OR 
THINK, ACCORDING TO THE POWER THAT WORK- 
ETH IN US, UNTO HIM BE GLORY IN THE CHURCH, 
BY CHRIST JESUS, THROUGHOUT ALL AGES, 
WORLD WITHOUT END. AMEN.” 


GIA D PER» LT. 


THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL AND 
IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 


GRAY HAIRS. 


“ Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not ; 
yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth 
it not.” —Hos. vii. 9. 


Sucu is the graphic and mournful description 
of that peculiar state of backslhding which 
must be regarded as the most dangerous and 
alarming, because the most insidious and con- 
cealed, of all processes of spiritual relapse from 
God. It is not a surprisal into sin, a sudden 
fall before the power of a strong temptation, a 
stolen march of the enemy upon the tardy 
steps of the celestial traveller—a man overtaken 
by a fault—but it is the slow, gradual, yet 
certain relapse of the inner hfe, lullng all 
suspicion of its existence, and veiling itself 
from the most searching eye. Having its 
original in the Jewish Church, it will not yet 


46 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


be difficult to point out the strong resemblance 
of this moral portrait to a large portion of the 
Christian Church in the present day—profes- 
sors of religion, office-bearers, sentinels upon 
the outposts of the camp, workmen upon the 
scaffolding of the building, in whose souls this 
species of spiritual attenuation and decay of 
the Divine life may be proceeding, like the 
footfall of death, stealthy and unsuspected ; 
or like the progress of age, gradual and un- 
observed. “ Ephraim, he hath mixed himself 
among the people; Ephraim is a cake not 
turned. Strangers have devoured his strength, 
and he knoweth it not; yea, gray hairs are 
here and there upon him, yet he knoweth it 
not.” Deeply and solemnly impressed with 
this consideration, we propose to spread 
before the Christian professor several distinct 
views of this state of spiritual relapse, each 
one unveiling a new symptom, and presenting 
a new phase of the disease. Having in the 
preceding chapter explained the nature of the 
inner life of the believer, and glanced at its 
tendency to decay, we now proceed with a more 
minute analysis of our subject. May the Holy 
Spirit be our teacher! May we be kept from 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. AT] 


unprofitable speculation, and from all trifling 
with a case so desperate, and with a theme so 
momentous! May an unction from the Holy 
One impart a searching, personal, and sancti- 
fying application of the truth to our hearts! 
The first idea which the passage suggests is 
that of spiritual loss. “Strangers have devoured 
his strength.” The existence of real strength 
in the soul is here supposed. All spiritual 
declension in the true believer necessarily im- 
plies the actual possession of grace. We must 
not lose sight of this truth. Never, in the 
lowest condition of the believer, does Christ 
deny his own work in the soul. “Thou hast a 
little strength,” are his heart-melting words to 
the backsliding Church in Sardis. O what a 
gracious, long-suffermg Saviour is ours! But 
there is a real loss affirmed. It may be proper 
to inquire what are some of these strangers that 
devour the spiritual strength of the believer. 
The world may be quoted as a promi- 
nent and formidable one. The world is a 
strange thing to a child of God. It is but his 
temporary dwelling, not his home; the inn at 
which he tarries for a night, not his abiding- 
place; his path, rough and perilous, to his 


48 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


Father’s house. It is a strange world to one 
who is born of God. Its principles are strange, 
its policy is strange, its maxims are strange its 
pleasures are strange, its religion is strange, its 
entire genius and inhabitants are strange to 
him whose citizenship is of heaven, and whose 
treasure and heart are there. He sojourns in 
it, he passes through it only as a stranger and 
pilgrim. And yet—melancholy truth !—this 
stranger devours the spiritual strength of many 
a Christian professor! The power which the 
ungodly world still maintains over the renewed 
mind, and the influence which it exerts in modi- 
fying and deteriorating the religion of many 
professing Christians, is of an appalling cha- 
racter. JI am solemnly convinced that the 
world, m its relation to the religion of the day, 
is the giant snare and the crying evil of our 
times. Itis not the world in one form only, 
but the world in its many shapes, its numerous 
forms of fascination and power, which gives it 
so amazing and subtle an influence over the 
Christian Church. Were the onset of the 
world from one quarter only, familiarity with 
its mode of attack, and experience gathered 
from its past assaults, might place the Chris- 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 49 


tian upon his guard. But, like the impersona- 
tion of vice, portrayed by Solomon, its “ways 
are moveable, and cannot be known.” There 
is no shape it cannot assume, no garb it will not 
wear, no plea it may not urge, no concession it 
is not prepared to yield, thus to obtain the 
ascendancy over the Christian’s mind. Alas! 
the infidel expediency of the day, and the 
compromising character of the prevailing reli- 
gious profession, present but little obstruction, 
and offer but faint resistance, to its rapid 
and alarming encroachments. ‘There is every 
thing in the easy Christianity of the times to 
court, and but little to discourage, the advances 
of the world upon the Church—impairing its 
strength, crippling its efforts, and shading its 
lustre. ‘The facile compliance with its solicit- 
ations, the inordinate attachment to its prin- 
ciples, the sinful conformity to its customs, the 
humiliating participation in its pleasures, form 
the grand secret of the dwarfish religion of so 
many who ought to have arrived at the “ stature 
of perfect men in Christ Jesus.” This strange 
world has devoured their spiritual strength, 
and thus the life of God in their souls is 
stunted in its growth, and they are but infants 
E 


50 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


when they ought to be men—dwarfs when they 
should be giants in knowledge, in grace, and in 
holiness. ‘The policy of the world—the gay 
enjoyments of the world—the self-indulgence 
of the world—the soaring ambition of the world 
—the vain-glory of the world—the sinful alli- 
ances of the world—the covetous, grasping 
desires of the world—the love of vain show 
and fondness for dress—and the easy religion of 
the world—are the fearful and fatal snares 
into which many professing Christians are 
drawn. The ball—the quadrille party—the 
concert—the novel—the whist—the drama—O 
how do these things devour the little strength 
that some seem to possess; to what small 
dimensions do they contract their Christianity; 
how do they wither and shrivel up their reli- 
gion, reducing their moral power of resistance 
to an infant’s weakness! Professor of religion! 
can you cross the broad separating line between 
the Church and the world, can you transact 
business with it for a day, or participate in its 
pleasures for an hour, and come forth with the 
locks of your spiritual strength as thick and 
flowing as before? Impossible! You have 
suffered a real loss; and you cannot but be 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 5k 


sensible of it. There is an exhaustion in the 
soul, a wound in the conscience, a deadness in 
the spirit, a vagrancy of thought, an indolence 
and listlessness of mind, with feelings which par- 
take more of earth and less of heaven, which 
unfit you for communion with God, incapacitate 
you for any spiritual duties whatever, and leave 
you, lke Samson despoiled of his glory, the 
victim and the sport of the uncircumcised 
Philistines. “ Art thou also become weak as 
we are? art thou become like unto us ?” is the 
exclamation of the world that has thus cruelly 
robbed you of your vigour, and now exultingly 
taunts you with your loss. O! itis “for this 
cause many are weak and sickly, and many 
sleep.” I repeat it with earnestness and in 
bitterness of soul—the world—the wor p is the 
deadly foe, and worldliness is the crying sin of 
the Church of God. This is the great hin- 
drance to the success of the Christian ministry, 
and the growth in grace of many who are 
“ called to be saints.” You profess to have 
separated yourselves from the world, to be not 
of the world, and by the cross of Jesus to be 
dead to the world; and yet how opposite and 
falsifying is your practice! You mix up with 


52 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


the world, you float down the stream with the 
world, you woo and embrace the world; and 
but for the enrolment of your name upon the 
records of the Church, and your punctilious ap- 
pearance at the communion table of the Lord, 
we should scarcely suspect that you were a 
follower of him who solemnly and emphatically 
declared, “ My kingdom is not of this world.” 
But, take warning! Upon this rock numbers 
who once walked outwardly with Jesus, have 
made shipwreck of faith, and walk with him no 
more. One of the most heart-affecting sen- 
tences the apostle ever penned was the record 
of such a case: “ Demas hath forsaken me, 
having loved this present world.” He was a 
professed Christian, was baptized as a believer, 
and was the companion and associate of the 
apostle. But he loved the world, and loving the 
world he forsook the apostle ; and forsaking the 
apostle he forsook Christ ; and forsaking Christ 
he forsook the way of holiness, the way of hap- 
piness, the way of heaven. And where is he now! 
No mention is made of his restoration. No 
record is left of his return as a penitent to the 
cross. All that we know of his melancholy 
history is a solemn warning to professors to 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 53 


shun the world, and to beware of worldliness, 
as the foe and the bane of their religion. O, 
listen to the faithful yet tender pleadings of the 
Spirit—“ Be not conformed to this world, but 
be ye transformed in the spirit of your mind. 
Love not the world, neither the things that are 
in the world. If any man love the world, the 
love of the Father is notin him. For all that 
is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the 
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of 
the Father, but is of the world. And the world 
passeth away.” Listen to the words which 
warn you against contracting unholy alliances, 
either in the way of business or of marriage, 
with the people of the world—“ Know ye not 
that the friendship of the world is enmity with 
God? whoever therefore will be a friend of 
the world, is the enemy of God. Be ye not 
unequally yoked together with unbelievers: 
wherefore come out from among them, and be 
ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the 
unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will 
be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons 
and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.” 
Christian professors! can you resist these 
touching appeals? ‘Will you not retire from 


54 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


their perusal, resolved, that “ by the grace that 
is in Christ Jesus,” from henceforth you will 
“keep yourselves unspotted from the world ?” 

Again, with increased earnestness we beseech 
you, love not the world—imitate not the world 
—go not needlessly into the world! It is a 
cruel, treacherous, soul-destroymg world. It 
crucified your Lord, and seeks nothing less 
than your eternal destruction. Come out of it, 
and let your unearthly principles, and holy 
enjoyments, and heavenly mindedness, and sim- 
plicity of walk, integrity and uprightness in all 
your transactions with the world, be a witness 
against it for God, for Christ, and for eternity. 
Labour for its good, pray for it, be kind and 
gentle to it, and, if need be, suffer for it; but 
let your daily motto be—the mark of Christ 
upon your forehead—“ God forbid that I 
should glory, save in the cross of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified 
unto me, and I unto the world.” 

The unsubdued power of indwelling sin must 
be regarded as occasioning the Christian severe 
spiritual loss. Even where there is the ab- 
sence of that outward worldly conformity of 
which we have been speaking, there may yet 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 53d 


be the prevalency of unmortified corruption in 
the heart, secretly and silently, but effectually 
undermining the fabric of the soul’s strength. 
Alas! how effectually does this ‘stranger’ devour 
the vigour of our faith, the fervour of our 
love, the power of our prayers, the simplicity 
of our confidence in God. In how many 
sad instances of secret declension, of outward 
backshding, and of avowed apostacy from God, 
may the evil be traced to this cause! Sin 
dwells in the heart of the most deeply sanc- 
tified, is ever at work in the most eminent 
Christian ; and it has been truly remarked, that 
the best of saints have need to be warned 
against the worst of sms. Where there is not, 
then, a perpetual battle with this hidden foe, a 
constant mortification through the Spirit of this 
deep-seated, veiled corruption, the most dire 
and mournful consequences must ensue. Hence 
the agitation of doubts and fears, the drooping 
wing of faith, the powerlessness of the pro- 
mises, the unanswered prayers, the plague in 
the camp, the ship in the storm,—the Achan 
andthe Jonah. Nothing enfeebles a Christian 
man like this. No ‘stranger’ devours his strength 
more voraciously and effectually. It closes the 


56 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


heart to the fruitful reception of the word, and 
shuts up heaven to the dew and the rain of the 
Spirit’s grace. The idol of the soul still occu- 
pies its niche, and is enthroned upon its pedes- 
tal ; and so long as it is not deposed and re- 
moved, the Spirit retires, God ceases to answer 
prayer, and thereis no profitable trading between 
the soul and heaven, and no refreshment flow- 
ing through the channel of means and ordi- 
nances. ‘These are solemn words: “Son of 
man, these men have set up their idols in their 
hearts, and put the stumbling-block of their 
iniquity before their faces; should I be in- 
quired of at all by them? ‘Therefore speak 
unto them, and say unto them, Thus saith the 
Lord God, Every man of the house of Israel 
that setteth up his idols in his heart, and 
putteth the stumbling-block of his imiquity 
before his face, and cometh to the prophet, I 
the Lord will answer him that cometh, accord- 
ing to the multitude of his idols,” Ezek. xx. 31. 
“Tf I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will 
not hear me.” “Strangers have devoured his 
strength.” 

But in what does this mortification of sin 
consist ? We reply, in nothing less than the 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 57 


drying up of its fountain, the destruction of its 
root. ‘The great evil and power of sin les in 
the sin of our nature, the body of death which 
we bear about with us. And herein consists 
true mortification—the slaying of the principle 
from whence all sin proceeds; the subduing 
of the original corruption, the strength of which 
weakens the actings of grace, by impairing the 
principle of grace. O, then, be earnest in 
seeking this attainment! Be not content to 
arrest the stream while the fountain runs; nor 
to sever the branches while the root remains. 
But going to the source of the evil, descending 
_to the depth of the corruption, begin the holy 
work where the potency of sin mainly lies. 
What is your predominant sin ?—lay the axe at 
its root. Seek its death and destruction, or it 
will be death and destruction to you, as long as 
it prevails. It must bring a deathliness into 
the life of God within you, and prove the ruin 
of your peace and joy and happiness. “ There- 
fore, brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh 
to live after the flesh. For if ye live after the 
flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit 
do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.” 
O, then, take this ‘stranger’ which seeks to 


58 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


devour your strength, to the cross of Jesus, and 
transfix it there; and as it dies, your soul shall 
live. Nothing but the cross of Jesus will prove 
its death, and your life. “Iam crucified with 
Christ, nevertheless I live.” There must be 
the crucifixion before the life. Christ's death 
for sin must be our death unto sin. No mere 
outward mortification, no fastings, nor self- 
inflictions, nor painful austerities, will ever 
weaken the principle or mortify the root of sin. 
Nothing but faith in the atoning blood of the 
Son of God can effectually meet the case. Far 
be it from me to speak indifferently of that aid 
to the mortification of in-being sin which God’s 
word encourages. I would not lightly esteem, 
as auxiliary to faith in the atonement, the 
diligent reading of the word—frequent medita- 
tion upon its truths,—seasons of retirement 
from others, and from surrounding objects— 
private communion with God—self-examination 
—self-judging, and honest, minute confession 
of sin. Nor would I overlook the immense 
blessing which often flows from deep affliction, 
from painful, bitter trial, traced in the deeper 
mortification of sin in the temper, spirit, 
and lifé of the true believer. But in this 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 59 


great and solemn work our constant motto 
must be, “ Looking unto Jesus.” Without the 
eye of faith upon the cross, apart from the 
efficacy of the atoning blood, and the power of 
the grace that is in Jesus, there can be no 
effectual progress in the real work of sanctifi- 
cation. One sight of a crucified Saviour im- 
parted by the Holy Spirit will more effectually 
weaken the power of indwelling sin than all 
other means combined. O the might of the 
cross! O the virtue of the blood! O the power 
of the grace ‘of Jesus to crucify, cleanse, and 
subdue our iniquities! Suffer not this ‘ stran- 
ger, then, any longer to devour your strength, 
seeing Jesus can enable you to oppose it, and 
will crown your sincere and persevering opposi- 
tion with a certain and glorious victory. ‘“ He 
will subdue our iniquities.” 

Spiritual decay is another idea suggested by 
the expressive figure of the passage—“ Gray hairs 
are here and there upon him.” These ‘gray 
hairs’ are decided evidences of backsliding. 
And what are some of them? What are a few 
of the more marked symptoms of spiritual 
decay in the soul? A lessened appreciation of 
Jesus is a clear and affecting evidence of spirit- 


60 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


ual relapse. Once he was, in your estimation, 
“the chief amongst ten thousand.” He was 
the sovereign of your hearts. ‘ His name was 
as ointment poured forth. He was to you as 
the “apple tree of the wood.” You “sat down 
under his shadow with great delight, and his 
fruit was sweet to your taste.” His cross at- 
tracted you, his love constrained you, his voice 
charmed you, his person was all your admira- 
tion, and his work all your boast. O how 
precious was Jesus to you then! You never 
thought his yoke irksome, nor his burden 
heavy, nor his ‘cross painful. No time spent 
with him was deemed lost; no sacrifice made 
for him was counted costly; no labour for him 
was wearisome; no shame, or ignominy, or 
suffering for his sake, was worthy of a thought. 
The secret of all was—you loved the Saviour 
with a deep and intense affection. But the 
‘gray hair’ has appeared! Jesus is less 
precious to you now. Reverse the picture, 
just drawn of your former self, and you 
have the faithful portrait of your soul’s present 
state! Your love has waxed cold, the ardour 
of your affection has waned, your heart is 
divided, other objects have displaced the 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 61 


Saviour ; and if you follow him at all, it is like 
Peter, “ a great way off.” Is not this real de- 
cay? “Gray hairs are here and there upon him.” 

Another symptom is, neglected prayer. I 
will not say that the habit of prayer is entirely 
relinquished ; but the spirit and fervour of 
prayer seem greatly to have evaporated. ‘The 
time was when communion with God was the 
element in which you lived. You could more 
conveniently live without your daily food, and 
even pass your nights without sleep, than live 
without prayer, or compose yourself to rest 
without converse with God. That was regis- 
tered as a lost day which found you holding 
no filial intercourse with your Heavenly Father 
—spending no blissful moments with Jesus. 
O happy days! How precious their memory! 
How sanctifying their recollection! Then, 
your walk was with God—your “ fellowship 
truly was with the Father and his Son Jesus 
Christ.” You were wont to take every thing to 
the throne of grace. As your wants came, you 
told your Father; and as your sorrow was 
felt, you laid it upon Jesus. You walked with 
God in every thing, the most minute, in your 
history. And O what an opening was there of 


62 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


the heart of God to you at the mercy-seat! 
More truly, and how much more fully, was God 
wont to realise to you the promise to Moses— 
“ There I will meet with thee, and I will com- 
mune with thee from above the mercy-seat.” 
But the ‘ gray hair’ is seen—sad symptom of 
decay in prayer. As to frequency and power, 
earnestness and success—as to any real com- 
munion, any filial, confidential opening of the 
heart to God, there is a palpable and melancholy 
falling off. Weak in prayer, you have no longer 
power with the Angel of the Covenant to pre- 
vail. Is not this decay? ‘Gray hairs are here 
and there upon him.” 

The neglect of confession 1s an undoubted 
symptom of a state of soul backsliding from 
God. Perhaps there is not one more strongly 
indicative of the true decay of grace in the heart 
than this. When the habit of a contrite ac- 
knowledgment of sin is cherished, when a daily 
confession over the head of the atoning Sacrifice 
is made, and the blood is thus constantly 
sprinkled upon the conscience, the soul main- 
tains, even in its advance to the “ stature of 
the perfect man,” all the vigour and beauty of 
youthful piety. There is a freshness and verdure 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 638 


which distinguish the soul in close proximity 
to the open Fountain. But the “ gray hair” 
betrays a change in this holy habit. It is now 
almost entirely neglected ; or, if not quite 
abandoned, is yet performed in so careless and 
partial a manner, as to rob it of all its power, 
and neutralise all its efficacy. Your acknow- 
ledgment of sin is so general and heartless, 
blended with so imperfect a view of the turpi- 
tude of the sin confessed, with so feeble a sense 
of holy, humble contrition—in a word, the true 
spirit and posture of confession are so entirely 
absent, as to deprive the whole performance of 
its character, and to render it of none effect. 
This was not always the state of your soul. 
In times that are past, the least sin gave you 
distress, the slightest speck upon the conscience 
made you uneasy, and you could not rest until 
you had told it to the Lord, and had sought 
end found a renewed application of the peace- 
speaking blood. Surely this is a manifest 
decay of grace in your soul. “ Gray hairs are 
here and there upon him.” 

A slighting of the means of grace, and the 
ordinances of God's house, is not the least mark 
ofa state of heart-backsliding. How ‘green’ 


64 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


were these ‘ pastures’ once to your soul! How 
you hailed the arrival of the hour that took you 
to them! How you delighted to walk and feed 
inthem! To have neglected the assembling of 
the saints—to have refused to meet them for 
praise and prayer—as, alas! the manner of 
some is—to have turned your back upon the 
house of God, upon the ministry of the word, 
upon the ordinance of the Lord’s supper, upon 
the hour of social prayer, would have filled your 
heart with inexpressible pain. But, ah! you 
can do so now without an emotion! Your 
place is often vacant in the sanctuary—at the 
Lord’s table—and when others meet to promote 
the kingdom of Christ; and yet your absence 
creates in your heart no sense of loss, and 
awakens in your conscience no alarm nor sorrow. 
The preached word, when you are in attendance, 
does not profit you. You have lost your relish 
for a Christ-exalting, soul-awakening, soul-win- 
ning, soul-searching, soul-loving ministry, and 
can only tolerate that service which intones its 
lullaby to your drowsy spirit, or deepens the 
slumber in which you are profoundly locked. 
To this we must add,—your sad lack of sympathy 
for the salvation of others. Ah! what can 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 65 


more truly betray the real condition of your 
own soul than your cruel, criminal apathy, in 
view of the multitudes perishing around you 
without the ‘vision,’ each one raising that wail 
of agony, as 1t passes away—“‘ No man cared 
for my soul!” These are some of the “ gray 
hairs” which indicate a weakening and decay 
of the kingdom of God within the soul. 

But there is one feature of this state of back- 
shding brought out by the prophet which we 
must not overlook. I allude to the ignorance 
and insensibility which mark it. “ Strangers 
have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it 
not ; yea, gray hairs are here and there upon 
him, yet he knoweth it not.” It is by slow and 
imperceptible degrees that time steals upon us. 
Old age never surprises a man. We are not 
young to-day, and old to-morrow. ‘To-day, 
revelling in all the life, elasticity, and buoyancy 
of youth—and to-morrow, suffering from all the 
melancholy effects of senility. But we grow old 
by degrees: “ Gray hairs are here and there 
upon us, and we know it not.” Thus is it with 
the progress of spiritual declension. A Chris- 
tian professor may lose the power and freshness 
of grace in his soul, and for a time not be sensi- 

F 


66 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


ble of his loss. This I consider to be the most 
alarming symptom of his case. For a man to 
be going further and further from God, losing 
ground every moment, the ‘ gray hairs’ thicken- 
ing around him while he continues insensible to 
his condition—supposing that all is prosperous 
with his soul, when all is the very reverse,—is 
alarming in the extreme. The case of Samson, 
already alluded to, fully illustrates this trait. 
While in a state of slumber we read that his 
wife Delilah “called for a man, and she caused 
him to shave off the seven locks of his head; 
and she began to afflict him, and his strength 
went from him. And she said, The Philistines 
be upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out of 
his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other 
times before, and shake myself. And he wist 
not that the Lord was departed from him.” 
How soon the strong man had become weak! 
Strangers had devoured his strength, and he 
knew it not! Thus is it with many a Christian 
professor. Asleep upon the lap of some sinful 
self-indulgence, his enemies come upon him 
and sever the locks in which his might lay— 
and he knoweth not that the Lord has departed 
‘from him. 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 67 


You are ignorant, too, of the great extent of 
your backslding from God. You are not aware 
how far you have gone, what a fearful breach 
has been made between God and your soul, what 
a distance has come between Jesus and your 
spirit. You are not sensible how many steps 
you will have to retrace before you recover what 
you once so blissfully possessed,—the presence 
of God, the witness of the Spirit, the conscious- 
ness of your being a pardoned sinner, an 
adopted child. ‘There is, too, an alarming un- 
concern as to your state. It becomes a matter of 
very little moment, whether God sees in you a 
srowing conformity to his image, or a growing 
conformity to the world. You have been robbed 
of the locks of your strength, and either you do 
not know it, or are coldly indifferent to it. 

But let us, in closing, briefly trace this me- 
lancholy state to some of its causes, that we 
may be better able to point out its appropriate 
remedy. 

The first cause undoubtedly is, the unguarded 
state of your soul. A merchant or a trades- 
man accustomed to neglect his accounts through 
the year must be prepared to find himself at its 
close in a state of embarrassment and uncer- 


68 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


tainty as to his actual position—his affairs 
bordering perhaps on a state of insolvency. A 
Christian living in the daily neglect of self- 
examination must not marvel if, at a certain 
period of his religious course, he finds himself 
trembling upon the brink of gloomy despond- 
ency, his evidences gone, his hope obscured, 
and all the past of his Christian profession 
appearing to his view as a fearful delusion. 
But here let me suggest the cure. Examine 
before God the real state of your soul. Ascer- 
tain where you have lost ground. Retrace 
your way. Look honestly and fairly at your 
condition. Be not appalled atit. Discouraging 
and repelling as it may appear, look it fully 
in the face, and lay it open before God exactly 
as it is, in the spirit and language of the 
Psalmist—“ Search me, O God, and know my 
heart; try me, and know my thoughts; and 
see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead 
me in the way everlasting.” 

I quote the grieving of the Spirit of God as 
a most fruitful cause of your present state of 
spiritual relapse. We have yet much to learn 
of our entire dependence upon the Holy Spirit, 
and of our eternal obligation to him for all 


AND IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. 69 


the blessings of which he is the author and the 
conveyancer. What themes for grateful con- 
templation to the spiritual mind are the love of 
the Spirit—the faithfulness of the Spirit—the 
tenderness of the Spirit—the grace of the Spirit 
—the long-suffering of the Spirit! And yet, in 
the long catalogue of the believer’s backslidings, 
not the least is, his grieving this Holy Spirit of 
God. ‘To this must be traced that barrenness 
and unfruitfulness, that premature decay, those 
spiritual relapses, which impart a death-like, 
skeleton appearance, to the Christianity of so 
many of its professors. Their worldliness 
erieves him—their sinful indulgences grieve 
him—their light, frothy conversation grieves 
him—their inattention to his ‘ still small voice,’ 
and their forgetfulness of all his kindnesses 
grieves him,—and suspending, but not wholly 
withdrawing, his gracious influence, their souls 
become like Mount Gilboa, upon which no 
dew rested. But there is a remedy. Seek 
that Spirit whom you have driven from your 
presence; implore his return, beseech him for 
Jesus’ sake to revisit you, to breathe his reviving 
influence as of old upon your soul, “that the 
spices thereof may flow out,’ and that your 


70 THE INNER LIFE IN ITS GRADUAL 


“beloved may come into his garden, and 
eat his pleasant fruits.” Then will return 
the happy days of former years, the sweet 
seasons of your early history, and you shall 
“sing as in the days of your youth, and as in 
the day when you came up out of the land of 


Egypt.” 


“Return, O holy Dove, return, 
Sweet messenger of rest; 
I hate the sins that made thee mourn, 
And drove thee from my breast.” 


Distance from the cross has contributed 
greatly to your present state of spiritual relapse. 
Retiring from beneath its shelter and its shade, 
you have left the region of safety, light, and 
peace, and, wandering over the mountains of 
sin, worldliness, and unbelief, have lost your- 
self amidst their darkness, solitude, and gloom. 
Finding in your backslidings no ‘green pastures,’ 
nor refreshing spring, nor shadowing rock, nor 
sweet repose, you have been almost ready to 
lie down, weary, faint, and bewildered. Turning 
away from the cross of Jesus, you have lost the 
view you once had of a sin-pardoning, reconciled 
Father; and judging of him now by his pro- 
vidences and not by his promises, and contem- 


AND. IMPERCEPTIBLE RELAPSE. Te 


plating him through the gloomy medium of a 
conscience unsprinkled with the blood of Christ, 
you are disposed to impeach the wisdom, the 
faithfulness, and the love, of all his conduct 
towards you. But listen tothe remedy. Yield 
yourself afresh to the attractions of the cross. 
Return, return to it again. No burning Che- 
rubim nor flaming sword guards its avenue. 
The atoning blood, there shed, has opened the 
way of the sinner’s approach, and the inter- 
ceding High Priest in heaven keeps it open for 
every repentant prodigal. Return to the true 
cross. Come and sit down beneath its grateful 
shade. Poor, weary wanderer! there is life and 
power, peace and repose, for you still in the cross 
of Christ. Mercy speaks from it, God smiles 
in it, Jesus stands by it, and the Holy Spirit, 
hovering above it, 1s prepared to reveal it to you 
afresh, in all its healing, restoring power. 

And is it thus that ‘ strangers’ have devoured 
your strength, and that ‘gray hairs are here and 
there’ upon you ? Despair not of a better state. 
How powerful and persuasive the motives to 
your return to God which we have arrayed 
before you! The Father holding out his hand 
—Jesus alluring you—the Holy Spirit bending 


72 THE INNER LIFE, ETC. 


over you—and your vacant seat at the gospel- 
feast, so long deserted, still inviting your return. 
Say not, O wandering child, O mourning peni- 
tent, “My way is hid from the Lord.” No! 
His eye has been upon thee in all thy way- 
wardness and wanderings; and now, in the 
tender character and with the quenchless, 
deathless love of a Father, he is on the watch 
for your return. Will he upbraid that loss of 
spiritual strength? will he despise those thin, 
oray hairs? Ono! “He giveth power to the 
faint: and to them that have no might he 
increaseth strength. Even the youths shall 
faint and be weary, and the young men shall 
utterly fall: but they that wait upon the Lord 
shall renew their strength; they shall mount up 
with wings as eagles; they shall run, and not 
be weary ; they shall walk, and not faint.” 


CHAPTER III. 


THE INNER LIFE CONTRASTED WITH ITS 
COUNTERFEIT. 


“ THESE ARE WELLS WITHOUT WATER.”—2 PETER il. 7. 


Iris one of the ever-working schemes and 
master strokes of the prince of darkness—and 
too successful is his exploit—to annihilate in 
the view of man the essential difference which 
God’s holy word draws between the mere exter- 
nal profession of Christianity, and its internal 
and vital possession. And yet, while we concede 
that in every true disciple of Jesus these two 
extremes meet—the possession and the profes- 
sion of Christ—at the same time we must re- 
mark that, existing apart and alone, heaven and 
earth, midnight darkness and meridian light, 
life and death itself, are not more essentially 
distinct from each other than they. To break 


74 THE INNER LIFE 


down this broad, unbending line of separation, 
and thus to reduce the life-possessing and life- 
imparting religion of Jesus to a religion of mere 
sentiment, or of feeling, or of form,—in other 
words, to the religion of death,—is Satan’s grand 
and too successful scheme. It would be, perhaps, 
difficult to say from which field he has reaped 
amore appalling harvest of souls—that of a 
nominal religious profession, or that of a profane 
and avowed ungodliness. We speak not lightly, 
but it is our solemn conviction, that more souls 
have gone down to the regions of despair re- 
posing in their baptismal vows, and sacramental 
grace, and works of human righteousness, than 
those who made no profession of religion what- 
ever, save the religion of the infidel, the atheist, 
or the world. It is to this large and solemn 
class the apostle applies the searching words 
selected as the basis of our present remarks— 
“These are wells without water.” The passage 
suggests two distinct and important topics of 
consideration: the character of the true 
believer, or what the real Christian possesses ;_ 
the character of the false Christian, or what 
the mere professor does not possess. 

The figure of the text is not only one of fre: 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 75 


quent occurrence in the word of God, but in its 
best interpretation it is highly expressive of the 
gracious character, and holy, dispensing in- 
fluence of the true believer in the Lord Jesus. 
Reverse the awfully significant meaning in which 
itis used by the apostle, and you have the exact 
portrait of a truly Christian man. The well 
without water, supposes the existence of the 
well with water. And as the well without 
water is descriptive of the false Christian, so 
the well with water is descriptive of the true— 
and it is of him we are first to speak. 

The real believer in Jesus is a gracious man. 
He is a ‘living soul.’ He is the partaker of a 
new and a Divine nature, and is the depository 
of a heavenly and a precious treasure. In ex- 
‘hibiting him under the figure of the well with 
water, we are naturally led to trace the source 
of his supply. ‘The well may contain, but it 
does not originate the supply. It holds the 
water, but it cannot create the water. It is 
dependent upon a foreign and a hidden source. 
From a depth which no line can fathom, and 
which no skill can explore, the precious fluid 
rushes forth, sparkling and bounding in the 
joyousness of its own independent and myste- 


76 THE INNER LIFE 


rious existence. It is thus with Christianity 
and the Christian. There is not a well of sal- 
vation in the gospel, nor a spring of life in the 
believer, which is not dependent for its supply 
upon a source extraneous from itself. The 
Lord Jesus Christ is that Source. He is the 
well-head of all salvation and of all grace. The 
well with water is the well that has its source 
in him — “of whose fulness all we have 
received, and grace for grace.” God, the 
‘Fountain of life,’ light, and grace, has ordained 
that the Lord Jesus Christ, his own beloved 
Son, should be the well-spring, the one source 
of supply from whence all the salvation of the 
sinner, all the sanctity of the saint, and all the 
grace and truth of the Church, collectively 
and individually, should be derived. “It 
pleased the Father that in him should all ful- 
ness dwell.” What a glorious declaration is 
this! How should our hearts leap for joy, and 
our souls thrill with gladness at its very sound! 
All the “fulness of the Godhead bodily ;’ all 
the fulness of the Church graciously; all the 
fulness of the sinner savingly; all the fulness of 
the Christian sanctifyingly ;—in a word, all 
that a poor, fallen, tried son of Adam wants, 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. TE 


until he reaches heaven itself, whence this ful- 
ness has come,—is, by God’s eternal love and 
wisdom, treasured up in the “Second Adam, 
the Lord from heaven.” From him the well 
derives its water. In the description which we 
have of the creation of the world, there is a 
distinction observed between the “waters which 
were under the firmament and the waters which 
were above the firmament,’ Gen.1. 7. In the 
new creation not less striking and observable is 
this difference. The water above, is the 
“ pure river of the water of life, clear as crystal, 
proceeding out of the throne of God,’ and 
gathered together in one mighty confluence in 
Jesus; and by him brought down to earth and 
deposited in all true believers, who thus become 
wells with water; and so, by the dispensing in- 
fluence of their grace and holiness, “water the 
whole face of the ground.” Thus the “waters 
are divided from the waters’—the water in 
the Fountain above, from the water in the well 
below. But this truth will be unfolded more 
fully in the consideration of— 

The well itself. The Christian, figuratively 
speaking, is this well, deriving, as we have seen, 
his supply from that hidden Spring to whom he 


78 THE INNER LIFE 


is closely united. There is, first, the interest- 
ing fact upon which a preceding chapter has 
fully expatiated, and therefore to which we need 
but simply now refer—the in-being of Christ in 
the soul. Christ himself enunciates the truth: 
“Tin them.” Observe, these are not the words 
of the apostle, whose ardent mind and glowing 
imagination might be supposed to exaggerate a 
truth beyond its proper limits; but they are 
words of Jesus himself—of him who is the 
Truth, and who therefore cannot lie. “I in them.” 
Christ dwelling in the soul forms the inner life 
of that soul. The experience of this blessing 
stands connected with the lowest degree of 
grace, and with the feeblest faith; the lamb 
of the flock, the soul that has but touched 
the hem of the Saviour’s garment, prostrate as 
a penitent at the feet of the true Aaron-—in each 
and in all Christ alike dwells. He has a throne 
in that heart, a temple in that body, a dwelling 
in that soul, and thus, as by a kind of second 
incarnation, God is manifest in the flesh; in 
Christ’s manifestation in the believer. Truly 
is he a well with water, who has “ Christ in him 
the hope of glory.” 

In addition to this is, the indwelling of God's 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 79 


grace in the soul. Grace is a thing foreign to 
the natural state of man. His possession of it 
is not coeval with his birth, nor can it be his 
by right of hereditary law. No parent, however 
holy, can transmit a particle of that holiness to 
his posterity. The law of primogeniture, or the 
privilege of the birthright, is set aside in the 
kingdom of grace, whose subjects are “ born, not 
of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the 
will of man, but of God.’ But see how this 
mystery is cleared up in the conversation which 
Jesus held with the Samaritan woman, as he 
sat wearied upon the mouth of Jacob’s well: 
“ Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou 
knewest the gift of God, and who it is that 
saith to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest 
have asked of him, and he would have given 
thee living water.” ‘This is the grace of which 
we speak, and this the source from whence it 
flows into the hearts of all the truly regenerate. 
It is in you, Christian reader, “a well of water,” 
a springing well, mounting upward and ascend- 
ing to the source from whence it rises. God 
looks upon you, not as a dry well, but as a 
springing well—his own renewing, adopting, 
sanctifying grace, flowing into your heart—and 


80 THE INNER LIFE 


thus ascending to Him from whom it proceeds, 
in holy desires, and spiritual aspirations, and 
divine actings—the living water seeking its 
level, and rising to its source. Blessed words, 
—“ Springing up into everlasting life!’ As the 
first blush of morning is a part of the day, so 
the least dawn of grace in the soul is a portion 
of heaven. ‘The well below, is the spring of 
grace—the well above, is the fountain of glory. 
‘The one inchoate, the other consummate ; 
the one preparatory, the other satisfactory; the 
former a prelibation, the latter a fruition.” 

Yet a third blessing of the renewed state is 
the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. Thus says 
the apostle: “ Know ye not that ye are the 
temple of God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you ?” He would seem to say—“ If 
you do not know it, you ought to know it as 
one professing godliness.” O what a celestial 
well—though in himself a poor earthen vessel, 
a broken cistern—is that regenerate man who 
has the Holy Spirit reigning in him, living in 
him—never to abdicate his throne, never to 
forsake his sanctuary, never to vacate his 
dwelling, never, by all the corruptions that are 
there, by all the slightings, and piercings, and 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 81 


woundings which he receives, forced to retire 
from the temple he has constructed, beautified, 
and made his own ! 

In view of these statements, who will, then, 
deny that all believers in Jesus are wells with 
water ? What an exalted character, and what 
an enviable man, is the true Christian! All 
the resources of the Triune God unite to re- 
plenish this earthen vessel. No angel in 
heaven contains a treasure half so costly and 
So precious as that poor believing sinner, who, 
getting near to the Saviour’s feet, and bathing 
them with tears of penitence and love, can 
look up and exclaim, “ Whom have I in heaven 
but thee ? and there is none upon earth that I 
desire beside thee.” 

But we must not overlook an interesting 
thought suggested by the figure of the text. I 
allude to the dispersing influence of the well. 
What is the proper design of a well? Cer- 
tainly it is not constructed for itself. It is 
designed to disperse abroad its fulness, and to 
communicate the blessing it contains. Unless 
the water of a well finds an outlet, it becomes 
of necessity stagnant and inert; and instead of 
being a well giving out and spreading abroad 

G 


82 THE INNER LIFE 


its sparkling streams, it is a still, lifeless 
reservoir, yielding nothing, and consequently 
receiving nothing. Striking emblem of the 
Christian! The knowledge and the grace that 
God has given you, though for yourself pri- 
marily, are not for yourself exclusively. God, 
in making you a well of living water—in other 
words, a possessor of Divine grace—designed to 
disperse abroad the streams; so that through 
the consistency of your walk, the holiness of 
your life, and the personal activity of your 
grace in the cause of God and of truth, it might 
find an outlet for the benefit of others. 

What a well of spiritual nowledge is the 
true believer! To him it is given to know the 
mysteries of the kingdom, while from others 
they are hidden. Where may we look for an 
understanding of the revealed mind of God 
but to him? Who knows the secret of the 
Lord, and to whom does he show his covenant, 
- but to those who fear him? Having ‘ an unction 
from the Holy One,’ he knows all things. He 
knows something of that mystery, which no 
philosophy of man can teach him—the plague 
of his own heart. He knows something, too, 
of the value of Christ—his person, his work, 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 83 


his glory, his fulness, his tenderness, his sym- 
pathy, his preciousness. He knows something 
of the character and dealings of God—as a holy 
God, as a sin-forgiving God, as a just God, and 
yet who blots out sin and remembers it no 
more for ever. He knows, in some measure, 
what the intricacies of the intricate way are; 
what the narrowness of the narrow path is; 
what are the difficulties of walking with God; 
what are the conflicts, the trials, the tribulations 
of the Christian life,—and the stream flows 
abroad. What a well of holiness is the true 
believer! The Spirit of holiness inhabiting 
him, despite the corrupt sediment of his fallen 
nature, he contains and dispenses abroad ‘that 
stream of holy influence which carries with 
it a blessing wherever it flows. Where do we 
look for true holiness save in the soul born 
again of the Spirit? A holy man is earth’s 
greatest blessing, is the world’s richest orna- 
ment and shield. What a well of compassion 
is the real Christian! He it is who, taught the 
priceless value of his own eternal happiness, has 
bowels of compassion for the souls of others 
involved in like ruin with himself. “O 
that my head were waters, and mine eyes a 


84 THE INNER LIFE 


fountain of tears!” says Jeremiah. “ Rivers of 
‘waters run down mine eyes because they keep 
not thy law!” exclaims David. These men 
were mourning wells—and God has distin- 
guished such. “Set a mark upon the foreheads 
of the men that sigh and cry for all the abomi- 
nations that be done,’ Ezek.ix. 4. The Lord 
Jesus, the great mourner, who wept, not for 
himself, but for others, has his bottle for the 
tears of these wells of pity and compassion ; 
whose sympathies, and prayers, and exertions, 
flow forth for the conversion of sinners, for the 
salvation of soul8. Wells of charity, too, are 
they. Where shall we look for the Divine 
cement, the true bond, which unites the heart 
of man to man, but in the one Church of God? 
Who is the true peace-maker, the diligent 
sower of peace, the zealous promoter of love, 
charity, and good-will amongst men, but he in 
whose heart the love of God finds a home ? 
Who has such sincere pity for the poor, whose 
hand is more ready to relieve their necessities 
—than he who himselfis a conscious partaker of 
the benevolence of God? Such, reader, are 
some of the characteristics of true Christians— 
the wells with water—dispensing wells. 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 835 


There is yet another essential feature of a 
gracious state suggested by the figure, which 
we must not overlook. ‘These wells with 
water are perpetually receiving as well as dis- 
pensing. Indeed, they can only communicate 
to others what is communicated to them. We 
have intimated that believers are but wells. 
All their springs are in God. Listen to the 
acknowledgment: ‘As the hart panteth after 
the water brooks, so panteth my soul after 
thee, O God! My soul thirsteth for God, for 
the living God. O God, thou art my God! 
early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for 
thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and 
thirsty land where no water is.” And then 
comes the Divine answer: “ When the poor 
and needy seek water, and there is none, and 
their tongue faileth for thirst, I the Lord will 
hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake 
them. I will open rivers in high places, and 
fountains in the midst of the valleys: I will 
make the wilderness a pool of water, and the 
dry land springs of water,” Isa. xli. 17, 18. 
And then follows the response of the soul 
thirsting after righteousness: “ Lord, give me 
this water, that I thirst not.” Thus does the 


86 THE INNER LIFE 


gracious soul derive all its grace from Christ, 
“who of God is made unto him wisdom, 
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.” 
He stands by to replenish the well as its re- 
sources are exhausted. When the water is low, 
he raises it; as it gives out, he pours in; 
and the more liberally it imparts, the more 
bountifully it receives. “The liberal soul 
deviseth liberal things, and by liberal things 
shall he stand.” ‘“ There is that scattereth, 
and yet increaseth.” Who has ever become 
poor for God? Who has given freely that has 
not in return received freely ? Who has ever 
laid himself out for the Lord, consecrating his 
substance, his influence, his time, his talents, 
that has not experienced a welling up in his own 
soul of the hidden spring, more than replacing 
all that he has dispensed? The grace that has 
been employed, the faith that has been exer- 
cised, the wealth that has been consecrated, 
the influence that has been exerted, the re- 
proach that has been endured, the suffering 
that has been experienced, the health that has 
been expended, the loss that has been sus- 
tained for Christ, Christ has more than re- 
compensed even in the present time-state. 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 87 


“Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his 
righteousness’ —is the precept—“ and all these 
things shall be added unto you”—is the pro- 
mise; and He who enjoins the precept, will 
make good the promise. 

Such, then, are some of the characteristics of 
true Christians. The reverse of all this we 
now proceed to consider, in an analysis of the 
character of the false Christian—the graceless 
professor—the self-deceived. “ These are wells 
without water.” 

Let it be distinctly observed that they are 
spoken of as wells; that is, they are professors 
of religion. They have the “form of god- 
liness.” They have all the external appear- 
ance of real grace and sanctity. Judging of 
them by their church, or by their minister, or 
by their creed, or by their party zeal, or even by 
their knowledge, we should at once rank them, 
and perhaps rank them high, with the true pos- 
sessors of grace. So strong are some of the 
features of resemblance, that it needs the most 
skilful eye to detect the difference. Looking, 
not at the external construction of the well— 
the beautiful and costly materials of which it is 
composed—but looking within the well, we 


88 THE INNER LIFE 


soon discover that it is a well without water. 
Again we remark, that, forming our judgment 
of them by their church membership, their 
correct orthodoxy, their showy Christianity, 
many would be deceived as to their real state, 
beguiled into the belief that they were truly 
converted. But when judged of by God’s 
word—alas, how awful the lack! Thus far may 
you go, professors of religion, and yet rest short 
of the reality. You may be baptized, may par- 
take of the Lord’s Supper, may be enrolled 
upon the records of the Church, be thought a 
Christian, be respected as a Christian, be con- 
fided in as a Christian, and yet His searching 
glance ‘ whose eyes are as a flame of fire,’ dis- 
covers in you nothing but a well without water, 
a soul without grace,—religious profession 
without religious principle. 

Thus have we shown that a godless professor, 
a false Christian, is but a dry well. There 
is no inhabitation of the Spirit, no indwelling of 
Christ, no possession of Divine grace. No tears 
of repentance have ever moistened the eyes. 
There are no wellings up from the heart of 
holy aspirations after God, of loving desires 
after Jesus. ‘There are no indications of the 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 89 


plague known, of the burden felt, or of the con- 
flict experienced. No echoing of the apostle’s 
language—“ Wretched man that I am! who shall 
deliver me from the body of this death ?” There 
are no breathings after holiness, no longings 
after Divine conformity, no desires to depart 
and be with Christ, no anointing of the Spirit. 
With all the light that is in his judgment, and 
his observance of days, and months, and 
seasons, he is but a dry well—a well without 
water. He possesses not the inner life. 
Contemplate this affecting character in yet 
another point of light—the influence which a 
mere religious professor exerts. A well with- 
out water !—what a miserable privation! The 
weary traveller after much endurance of thirst 
and suffering descries in the distance the in- 
viting well. MRejoicing in the discovery, he 
quickens his pace, and lo! he finds it indeed 
a well, but a dry well—a well without water! 
His expectation is turned into disappointment, 
his joy into sorrow; and like the Saviour who 
came hungry to the fig-tree and found upon it 
no fruit, and retiring, breathed upon it his 
withering curse, so departs the traveller from 
the well which has so cruelly mocked his raging 


90 THE INNER LIFE 


thirst. Thus is it with a mere professor—an 
empty, graceless professor of religion. We go 
to him, hoping for a little lift in our journey 
homeward; we go, seeking for some sweet 
consolation in our deep trial, for counsel in our 
perplexity, for sympathy with our sorrow, for 
the communion of saints,—but alas! there is no 
response, no echo, no vibrating chord—nothing 
in union with what we feel: the well is dry, 
and not one drop can we extract from it. Oh, is 
it not one of the bitterest reflections that can 
fasten upon your mind, that, perhaps, many a 
poor thirsty soul has repaired to you for in- 
struction, for sympathy, for strength, and find- 
ing you a stranger to the mysteries of the Divine 
life, to the trials, the conflicts, and the joys of 
the Christian, has turned away in bitter dis- 
appointment, even as the soul, parched with 
thirst, turns from the well without water. It 
is a solemn thing to be mistaken for a real 
believer, to be looked up to as a true Christian, 
and yet to prove destitute of the knowledge 
and grace of Christ!—to awaken hope, and to 
raise expectation, and to create an interest, and 
to inspire confidence, and when the test is 
made, when the trial comes, to prove but a 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 91 


praceless soul—deceived and deceiving! And 
yet what numbers there are of such! We 
speak of Jesus—there is no echo. We intro- 
duce the subject—of all subjects the most in- 
teresting and momentous—the subject of reli- 
gion—there is no response. We go into the 
detail of Christian experience, the warfare, the 
sorrows, the joys, the trials, the burdens, the 
progress, the hope of the Christian, but we 
speak a language that they understand not. 
“These are wells without water.” No inge- 
nuity can elicit, no possible effort can extract, 
one drop of the living water. “ We pipe unto 
them, but they do not dance; we mourn to them, 
but they do not weep.” 

Turning now to the true Christian, in view 
of this affecting character we have been at- 
tempting to portray, let me remark upon the 
deep humility which ought to distinguish him 
as a real professor of the grace of Christ Jesus. 
What are you in yourself but the mere well ?— 
the grace which you possess is a communicated 
grace. We have this precious treasure in 
earthen vessels. All that is really holy and 
gracious in us, springs not from our fallen 
nature, but, like “ every good and perfect gift, 


92 THE INNER LIFE 


cometh down from the Father of Lights.” It is 
the spontaneous outflowing of the heart of God 
—the free, unmerited bestowment of his so- 
vereign mercy. ‘Then what meekness of heart, 
what profound humility of mind, ought to mark 
you! What a prostration of every form of self 
—self-confidence, self-seeking, self-boasting, that 
overweening view of our attainments and doings, 
which mars the Christianity of so many— 
should there be, as reasonably becometh those 
who have nothing but what they have received, 
and whom free and sovereign grace alone has 
distinguished from others! 

How precious ought Jesus to be to us, who 
has condescended to pour this heavenly trea- 
sure into our hearts, and to undertake its 
constant supply! In what way can we best 
prove our sense of his goodness, but by drawing 
largely from the Fountain, and by glorifying 
him in what we receive? ‘Truly “ the well is 
deep” from whence we draw this living water! 
Our resources are inexhaustible, because they 
are infinite. Nor can we come too frequently, 
nor draw too largely. “Spring up, O well of 
grace and love, into our hearts! Let not our 
waters be shallow nor sluggish. O for more 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 93 


depth of indwelling grace! O for more fervour 
of holy love! O for richer supplies from the 
fulness of Christ! O for a gracious revival in 
our souls! ‘Come down,’ blessed Jesus, ‘as 
rain upon the mown grass!’ Breathe, O south 
wind of the Spirit, upon the garden of our 
souls, that the spices may flow out! Truly the 
well is deep, from whence we have this living 
water ; but faith can reach it, and in proportion 
to the strength of our faith, and the directness and 
simplicity with which it deals with Christ, will 
be the plenitude of our supply. “ Drink, yea, 
drink abundantly, O beloved,” is our Lord’s 
gracious invitation to his Church. 

Nor let us fail to learn the secret of receiving 
much from Christ,—even the free dispensing 
abroad of what we have already received. Be 
assured of this, that he will receive the most 
from God who does the most for God: “ The 
diligent soul shall be made fat. He becometh 
poor that dealeth with a slack hand: but the 
hand of the diligent maketh rich. There is 
that scattereth, and yet increaseth.” This is 
God’s law, and he will never repeal it ; his pro- 
mise, and he will ever, and in all cases, make 
it good. Go forth, believer in Christ, and let 


94 THE INNER LIFE 


your beams of light irradiate ; let your streams 
of grace be dispersed abroad; live for God, 
suffer for Christ, witness for the truth, and 
labour for man. Be you such a depositary of 
this living and life-giving treasure, that others, 
less favoured than yourself, instructed, guided, 
and strengthened by your wisdom, experience, 
and grace, may proceed on their way, glorifying 
God for the grace given to you. O to have the 
word of God dwelling in us so richly, and our 
hearts so intensely glowing with the love of 
Christ, as to be ever ready to open our lips for 
God—a well always full, and running over. 
This, then, is the secret of augmenting our 
stores, even by scattering them,—of replenishing 
our resources, even by exhausting them. Who, 
we repeat the question, has ever become im- 
poverished by giving and labouring for God ? 
Where lives the Christian steward whose fidelity 
to his Master’s interests has compromised the: 
welfare of his own ? Where is the Christian man 
who, with cheerful munificence, has consecrated 
his intellectual wealth or his temporal wealth to 
advance the truth and kingdom of Jesus, whom 
Christ has not reimbursed a thousand fold ? 
Where is the believer in Jesus who has en- 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 95 


dured reproach and suffering, patiently and 
silently, for conscience’ sake, for truth’s sake, 
for Christ’s sake, who has not infinitely gained 
in the rest which he has found in God ? Where 
is the active Christian, who, zealously labour- 
ing to dispense abroad the life-giving waters, 
has not felt, in the solemn retirement and 
calm repose of his closet, when pouring out 
his sorrow into the bosom of his Saviour, or 
in holding close and holy communion with his 
God, the springing up into his soul of a hidden 
well of peace, and joy, and love, which has 
more than restored the energies he has ex- 
hausted, and recompensed him for the sacrifice 
which he has made? God meets his people 
in all their works of faith and labours of love. 
They are never alone. He meets them in the 
path of duty and of trial—both in doing and in 
suffering his will. He meets them, when em- 
barrassed,—with counsel; he meets them, when 
assailed, with protection; he meets them, when 
exhausted, with strength; he meets them, when 
faint, with cordials. If we take up Christ’s 
cross upon our shoulder, Christ will take both us 
and our cross up in his arms. If we bow down 
our neck to his yoke and bend low our back to his 


96 THE INNER LIFE 


burden, we shall find our rest in both. “Thou 
meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righte- 
ousness, those that remember thee in thy ways.” 

“ How may I know that I am a well with 
water ?” may be the anxious inquiry of many 
as they come to the conclusion of this subject. 
“QO that I were guite sure that I was more than 
a mere professor!” But why ask the question ? 
why be in doubt? Never was so momentous a 
matter more easily and speedily settled. “ He 
that believeth in the Son of God hath the 
witness in himself.’ Thus, from yourself 
you need not travel in order to ascertain your 
true spiritual condition. No one can be a 
substitute in this great matter for yourself. 
It is a thing which has too close and personal 
a relation to you as an individual, to admit of a 
transfer of its obligations to another. You 
must feel for yourself,—you must experience for 
yourself,—you must have the witness for your- 
self —and you must decide for yourself alone. I 
repeat the solemn words—“ He that believeth 
in the Son of God, hath the witness in himself.” 
And again says the same apostle, “ Let every 
man prove his own work, and then shall he 
rejoice 7” himself alone, and not in another,” 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. OF 


Gal. vi. 4. Thus may you come to a right 
and safe decision in a question involving inte- 
rests as solemn and as deathless as eternity 
Seek this inward witness. Witnessing to what ? 
—that your heart has been convinced of sin— 
that you have renounced your own righteous- 
ness—that you have fled to the Lord Jesus 
Christ—and that your soul is breathing after 
personal holiness. Do not, I beseech you, 
rest short of this. Here I must hold you. 
All your reasonings, and objections, and cavil- 
lings, and hair-splittings, and subtleties, and 
sophistries—I cannot away with them. They 
are but sparks of your own kindling, in the 
midst of which you will le down and die, and 
die the horrors of the second death, if you are 
not broad awake to your real condition before God. 
Give them all up, Iimplore you. Be not con- 
cerned about others; let your first and chief con- 
cern be about yourself. You have no time, just 
now, to analyse the motives, or sift the principles, 
or search into the character, or mark the foibles, 
and detect the inconsistencies of Christian pro- 
fessors : every moment to you is more priceless 
and precious than all the gems of India; yea, one 
second of time saved, is of more value to you 
H 


98 THE INNER LIFE 


than a whole eternity lost! Once you shoot 
across the dark gulph and land on the other 
side without the inner life——you may ‘then 
trifle with your existence, and sport with your 
soul, and laugh at death and hell, and recrimi- 
nate and reproach others, and brave your doubts, 
and invent your objections, and frame your 
excuses, and speculate, and refine, and analyse 
in theology, and play the fool, as you like,—for 
“there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins, but 
a certain fearful looking for (an eternal antici- 
pation) of judgment and fiery indignation, 
which shall devour the adversaries.” But you 
cannot afford to act so mow. Your precious 
soul is in danger, your future happiness is in 
peril, you are in the hands of an angry God, 
and you are, in fact, fast coming to the close of 
your probation. To act the fool and to assume 
the lunatic now, would be more than a mere 
semblance of the melancholy and awful reality. 
O come, then, to Christ,—I bid you, invite you, 
implore you to come to Christ. He will an- 
swer all your questions, resolve all your doubts, 
remove all your difficulties, meet all your 
objections, and quiet all your fears. Only 
come to Christ. To this one alternative, to 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 99 


this last resort, I would shut you up. From 
this I cannot release you. You must come to 
Christ, or you are lost. He is all, and he has 
all, and he will freely give you all that you 
want. One drop of his blood falling upon 
your conscience, one beam of his love darting 
in upon your soul, one stream of his grace 
flowing into your heart, will make all right 
within; and the morning, when the sun rises 
in splendour, will not look more radiant, and 
the lark when it mounts heavenward bathed in 
its beams, will not sing more sweetly, than you— 
when Jesus thus enters your soul, filling it with 
sunshine and music. Accept the invitation— 
“Him that cometh unto me I will in no wise 
cast out’”—and you are saved. 


“ Just as I am—without one plea, 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
And that thou bidd’st me come to thee— 
O Lamb of God, I come! 


“ Just as 1 am—and waiting not 
To rid my soul of one dark blot,— 
To thee, whose blood can cleanse each spot, 
O Lamb of God, I come! 


“Just as I am—though toss’d about 
With many a conflict, many a doubt, 
With fears within and wars without— 

O Lamb of God I come! 


100 THE INNER LIFE 


“ Just as I am—poor, wretched, blind; 
Sight, riches, healing of the mind, 
Yea, all I need, in thee to find— 

O Lamb of God, I come! 


“Just as I am—thou wilt receive, 
Wilt welcome, pardon, cleanse, relieve, 
Because thy promise I believe— 
O Lamb of God, I come! 


“Just as I am—thy love unknown 
Has broken every barrier down; 
Now, to be thine, yea, thine alone— 

O Lamb of God, I come!” 


We may anticipate another anxious enquiry. 
“What course am I to adopt when the water is 
low, when the well is dry, when no effort avails 
to bring the living fluid to the surface ?—in 
other words, when I find a spiritual drought 
and deadness in my soul, and cannot feel, nor 
weep, nor sigh, nor desire ?—when to read and 
meditate, to hear and pray, seem an irksome 
task?—when I cannot see the Saviour’s 
beauty, nor feel him precious, nor labour as 
zealously, nor suffer as patiently for him as I 
would?” ‘he answer is at hand—Look again to 
Jesus. This is the only remedy that can meet 
your case. Search the Bible through, inquire 
of all the ministers who have ever lived, and 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 101 


,still the answer would be—Loox acGarn To 
Jmsus. Go direct to Christ—he is the Foun- 
tain-head, he is the living Well. True, the well 
is deep—for its fulness is infinite—but faith, 
be it of the smallest capacity, can with joy draw . 
sufficient to quench your thirst, and make your 
soul as a garden which the streams have re- 
freshed and made to “rejoice and blossom as 
the rose.” The Infinite and Eternal Well is 
near to you. Like Hagar you are within its 
reach. May the Holy Spirit open your eyes 
to see that while all emptiness exists in you, 
all fulness dwells in Jesus,—that, however low 
may be the living waters in the well of your 
heart, there is a fathomless depth in the heart 
of Christ—of love unchangeable, of grace all- 
sufficient, of truth immutable, of salvation from 
all sin and trial and sorrow, commensurate with 
your need, and vast as his own infinity. Never 
can your grace be too low, nor your frame too 
depressed, nor your path too perplexing, nor 
your sorrow too keen, nor your sin too great, 
nor your condition too extreme for Christ,— 
because he is both Divine and human: thus 
uniting the nature that can relieve, with the 
nature that can sympathise. “Son of God! 


102 THE INNER LIFE 


Son of man! how wondrous and glorious art . 
Thou!” Weeping in lonely sorrow, and pining 
in sickening want, you may, like the banished 
wife of Abraham, be looking wistfully around 
-you for succour and relief. See! that relief 
and succour are near! rise,—that relief is 
at hand! Christ is with you, Christ is near 
you, Christ is in you a Fountain of living 
water. Cease your sadness, dry your tears,— 
rise! and “with joy draw water out of this 
Well of salvation.” 

Be very honest and diligent in ascertaining 
the cause of your soul’s dryness. ‘The correct 
knowledge of this is necessary to its removal; 
and its removal is essential to the effectual 
recovery of the inner life from its sad relapse. 
Is it indulged sin ?—is it the neglect of private 
prayer ?—is it the forsaking of the means of 
grace ?—is it worldliness, carnality, unwatchful- 
ness? Anyone of these wouldso grieve the Spirit 
of God within you, as to dry up the spirituality 
of your soul. Be not beguiled withthe belief that 
the real recovery has taken place, simply because 
that, conscious of your state, in common-place, 
meanlessregrets, you acknowledge and deplore it. 
“The sluggard desireth, and hath nothing.” Ob- 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 103 


serve, he has his deszres, but nothing more, because 
with them he is satisfied. There is no effectual 
rousing from his sleep, no earnest attempts 
are made to shake off the spirit of slumber, no 
resolute putting away of the narcotic which 
produced and which protracts it. There is no 
drawing near to God, no looking to Christ, no 
seeking of the Spirit, no thorough mortification 
of sin, no coming out of the world, no pressing 
forward. It is the mere desire of the sluggard, 
and nothing more. Let not this be your state. 
Receive with gladness any awakening to a 
consciousness of your spiritual relapse, and 
cherish with prayer any real desire for a better 
state; but do not rest here. Seek earnestly, 
importunately, believingly, until you possess 
more abundantly life from Christ. Seek a 
gracious revival of the inner life—the life of 
God in your soul. Seek a clearer manifesta- 
tion of Christ, a renewed baptism of the Spirit, 
a more undoubted evidence of your conversion, 
a surer, brighter hope of heaven. Thus seeking, 
you will find it; and finding it, your “peace will 
flow like a river, and your righteousness as the 
waves of the sea.’ O the joy of a revived 
state of the inner life of God! It is the joy of 


104 THE INNER LIFE 


spring succeeding to the gloom and chill of 
winter. It is the joy of the sunlight after a 
cloudy and dark day. Jesus, walking in the 
midst of the grace which his own Spirit has 
thus revived, gently addresses the soul: “ Rise 
up, my love, my fair one, and come away. For, 
lo! the winter is past, the rain is over and gone; 
the flowers appear on the earth; the time of 
the singing of birds is come, and the voice of 
the turtle is heard in the land; the fig-tree 
putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with 
the tender grape give a good smell. Arise, my 
love, my fair one, and come away.” 

Give all diligence in the use of the means of 
grace, if you desire a flourishing state of soul. 
They are the Divinely appointed channels of 
conveyance from the Fountain. ‘They are the 
tributary streams from the Great Ocean. You 
cannot possibly maintain a healthy, vigorous 
state ofthe inner life, without them. Youcannot 
neglect, with impunity, private prayer, medita- 
tion, and self-examination; or public ordinances 
—the ministry of the Word, the services of the 
sanctuary, the assemblies of the saints. A 
slight thrown upon these must entail a severe 
loss to your soul. Some professors can go 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 105 


from Sabbath to Sabbath, plunged in worldli- 
ness, or eager in the pursuit of gain, in total 
neglect of the social prayer-meeting, or of the 
weekly lecture—those needed rests and _ hal- 
lowed pauses in the way—as if there were no 
such appointments. These are among the 
things which weaken the hands, and discourage 
the heart, and hinderthe usefulness of the faithful 
pastor. Buta more painful calamity even than 
this, is the dryness, deadness, and barrenness . 
which this neglect brings into their own souls. 
It would seem as if this were the punishment of 
their sin. They turn their backs upon God, and 
God turns his back uponthem. ‘They neglect to 
make the pool, and he withholds the rain that 
fills it. But, Christian professor, this must not 
be! The wells must be digged, the water must 
be searched for. We are told that “Isaac’s 
servants digged in the valley, and found there 
a well of springing water’—or, as the margin 
renders it—‘ a well of living water.” And he 
is pronounced a blessed man ‘“ who, passing 
through the valley of Baca, makes it a well; 
the rain also filleth the pools.” It is in this 
way of diligent, prayerful waiting upon the 
means, that “he goes from strength to strength, 


106 THE INNER LIFE 


until he appears before God.” O, dig for this 
precious water! Search, O search, for this 
living grace! Make the pool, and trust the 
faithfulness and lovingkindness of God to fill 
it with “the early and the latter ram.” No 
man shall wait upon the Lord in vain. “They 
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their 
strength.” They who plough deeply the fallow 
ground, and in its furrows sow the precious 
‘seed, shall not lack the Holy Spirit’s descending 
influence, in silent dew by night, and in copious 
showers by day, to quicken and to fructify it. 
Only honour the God of grace in all the 
means of grace, and God will honour you by 
imparting to you all grace through the means. 
“The diligent soul shall be made fat.” Re- 
turn, O return to the forsaken Christ, to the 
neglected sanctuary, to the despised means, 
and you shall then no longer have reason to 
exclaim, ‘My leanness ! my leanness !” 

What a truly appalling character it has been 
the endeavour of these pages to portray—an 
empty, graceless professor of Christ! Reader, 
is this your state? Hxamine yourself, prove 
your own self, and ascertain truly if you have 
“Christ in you the hope of glory.” Satisfy not 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 107 


yourself with external ceremonies, with the 
observance of days, of matins, and vespers, and 
frequent communions—with almsgiving and 
charities. Are youa well with water ? This, this 
is the great and momentous question which, in 
the near prospect of death, and of the judgment 
that follows death, it behoves you to decide. 
Is Christ dwelling in your heart by his Spirit ? 
Is your religion more than a mere outward 
profession ? O, it is an awful thing to go into 
eternity with your Bible, and your Psalm-book, 
or your Prayer-book in your hand, but without 
Christ living in your soul; with the elements 
of the Saviour’s love melting upon your lips, 
but without the experience of the Saviour’s 
love glowing in your heart; to go reposing in 
false dependence upon Church privileges, and 
to have come short of the only true foundation 
upon which the sinner can build his hope of 
heaven,—the sliding sand substituted for the 
Eternal Rock. How exactly has the Lord 
Jesus met such a case! In one of his striking 
parabolical discourses, he has furnished us 
with a description of certain persons who in 
the day of judgment will be found to have put 
in the plea of Church union, and Church ordi- 


108 THE INNER LIFE 


nances, and Church privileges, as justifying 
their claim to admission into heaven; but who 
will be rejected on that very ground, to their 
shame and everlasting contempt. Listen to 
his description: “ When once the Master of 
the house is risen up, and hath shut to the 
door, and ye begin to stand without, and to 
knock at the door, ‘saying, Lord, Lord, open 
unto us; and he shall answer and say unto 
you, I know you not whence ye are. ‘Then shall 
ye begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in 
thy presence, and thou hast taught in our 
streets. But he shall say, I tell you, I know 
you not whence ye are: depart from me, all ye 
workers of iniquity.” Luke xin. 25—27. And 
who, my reader, are these? Be not deceived! 
They are not the profane, and the profligate, 
and the neglecter of means, and the despiser of 
ordinances: far otherwise. They are pro- 
fessors of religion, nominal Christians—“ al- 
most Christians ;’ individuals who had been 
baptized, who frequented the house of God, who 
were regular in their attendance upon ordi- 
nances, and who believed that, by their zealous 
labours, and their amiable qualities, and their 
charities and good-will to men, they would at 


CONTRASTED WITH ITS COUNTERFEIT. 109 


last be saved. But, alas! they are deceived. 
With all this outward profession, they were un- 
regenerated by the Spirit, were uncircumcised in 
heart, were unjustified by Christ, and had never 
given themselves up “a habitation of God 
through the Spirit.” Baptism could not re- 
generate them, the Lord’s Supper could not 
sanctify them, their own works could not jus- 
tify them ; and when with confidence they went 
up to the very gate of heaven, and knocked for 
admission, lo! they were met with the stern 
rebuke, “I know you not whence ye are: de- 
part from me, all ye workers of iniquity.” O 
beware, we beseech you, of those public teachers 
who tell you that you were regenerated in bap- 
tism, and that the Lord’s Supper is the instru- 
ment of maintaining you in that state of 
salvation into which, as they teach, baptism 
introduced you. Give not place to such false 
instructors, such blind guides, such perverters 
of the truth, such soul-destroyers ; no, not for 
one moment. Let not their eloquence entice 
you, let not their reasoning ensnare you, let 
not their show of sanctity beguile you. You 
have interests at stake too dear and precious 
to peril on such terms as these. 


110 THE INNER LIFE, ETC. 


I leave these solemn, Searching considera- 
tions to your prayerful reflection, passing on to 
another figurative representation of the Inner 
Life,—in its relapse and recovery. 


CTV ACP Te Ri Ni. 
THE INNER LIFE IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 


THE UNSAVOURY SALT. 


“ Ve are the salt of the earth: but of the salt have lost its savour, 
wherewith shall it be salted ? It is thenceforth good for 
nothing but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of 
men.” Mart. v. 13. 


Tue more deeply the subject now engaging 
our attention—the spiritual life, its decay and 
recovery—unfolds itself to the mind, the more 
irresistible and overwhelming must be the 
conviction of its measureless importance and 
solemnity. All other considerations, in com- 
parison, having their relation to the present, 
however important, interesting, and absorbing 
for the moment, dwindle into impressive insig- 
nificance. The personal interests of an indi- 
vidual must, to that individual, be of greater 
moment and more precious than all other 


112 THE INNER LIFE 


interests. It is a law of nature that we should 
love ourselves; and it is the law of revelation 
that we should love our neighbour as ourselves; 
thus, the word of God, while recognising the law 
of self-love, divestsit atthe same time of its selfish- 
ness. Nowhere does this law find such proper 
and ample scope for its exercise, and in nothing 
is it more affectingly and strongly appealed to, 
than in the matter of personal salvation. “Yor 
what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole 
world, and lose himself, or be cast away?” The 
law of self-preservation, the law of his being, is 
here addressed in its most solemn relation,—its 
relation to eternity. To this eternity we are 
hastening. We are passing from shadows to 
realities—from things that are seen and tem- 
poral, to things that are unseen and eternal. 
The inevitable and awful crisis is near, when all 
that now awakens so much interest, and creates 
so much excitement, and absorbs so much 
time, will be as the arrow winged through the 
air—leaving no impression and no trace. One 
moment’s personal, actual contact with eternity, 
one drop of the cold moisture of death trem- 
bling upon the brow, one dim glimpse within 
the parting vail of the invisible world, will 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 1138 


dissipate the false, and invest with its true cha- 
racter everything that is real. We are as 
much convinced of the truth as we are con- 
scious of the solemnity of the fact, that if the 
mind is not then beclouded, and the conscience 
is not then seared, and the heart is not then 
abandoned by God to the wedded idol, and 
the whole soul is not given over to judicial 
impenitence and unbelief—if indeed there be 
any moral sensibility, any the faintest appre- 
hension of the awfulness of the position,—the 
one question of that tremendous moment will 
be—“ Is my soul in a prepared state to meet 
God ? Am I safe for eternity ?” 

And yet will it be considered discrepant with 
this statement to affirm of individuals in gene- 
ral, that men die much as they have lived ? 
It would seem to be the cherished delusion of 
many, that a kind of moral transformation 
transpires in death ; that because death itself is 
a change of relation, around which gather new 
sensations, new feelings, new thoughts, new 
solemnities, new prospects, that therefore the 
soul passes through a kind of spiritual pre- 
paredness to meet its approaching destiny. 
But such is not the case. The character which 

I 


114 THE INNER LIFE 


time has for years been shaping, it yields to 
the demands of eternity in the precise mould 
in which it was formed. Death hands over 
the soul to the scrutiny and the decisions of 
the judgment exactly as life relinquished it. 
The ‘king of terrors’ has received no commis- 
sion and possesses no power to effect a moral 
change in the transit of the spirit to the God 
who gaye it. Its office is to unlock the cell, 
and conduct the prisoner into court. It can 
furnish no plea, it can suggest no argument, it 
can correct no error, it can whisper no hope, to 
the pale and trembling being on his way to the 
bar. The turnkey must present the criminal 
to the Judge, precisely as the officer delivered 
him to the turnkey—-witb all the marks and 
evidences of criminality and guilt clinging to 
him as at the moment of arrest. The suppo- 
sition of multitudes seems to be, just what we 
have stated, that when the strange and mys- 
terious, but unmistakeable signs of death, are 
stealing upon them—when the summons to 
appear before the Judge admits of not a doubt, 
and allows of no delay, that then what has been 
held as truth, and now, in the mighty illumina- 
tion of an unveiling eternity, is found to be 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 115 


error, may be with ease abandoned; and that, 
however negligent they who have lived all their 
lifetime without God, may have been of reli- 
gion, while the last day appeared distant,—and 
however careless they who had made a Chris- 
tian profession, may have been of the ground 
of their confidence, and the reason of their 
hope, under an indefinite expectation of ap- 
pearing in the presence of God,—yet now that 
the footfall of death is heard approaching, and 
the invisible world becomes visible through the 
opening chinks of the earthly house of their 
tabernacle, they will be enabled to summon all 
the remainder of strength, and with the utmost 
strenuousness turn their undivided attention to 
the business of saving the soul. But is it 
really so? Is not the whole course of expe- 
rience against a supposition so false as this? 
Do not men die mostly as they have lived ? 
The infidel dies in infidelity, the profligate dies 
in profligacy, the atheist dies in atheism, the 
careless die in indifference, and the formalist 
dies in formality. There are exceptions to 
this, undoubtedly, but the exceptions confirm 
rather than disprove the general fact, that men 
die as they lived. ‘“ He that is unjust, let him 


116 THE INNER LIFE 


be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him 
be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let 
him be righteous still; and he that is holy, let 
him be holy still. And, behold, I come quickly; 
and my reward is with me, to give to every 
man according as his work shall be.” 

In view, then, of this solemn statement,— 
deeply affecting it must be to the Christian 
professor,—we now turn to the great subject 
immediately before us. If it be thus that 
our death will derive much of its character and 
complexion from the present tenor of our life 
—that in proportion to the lack of spirituality 
and the undue influence which the world has 
had upon the mind—to the habitual distance 
of the walk with God, and the gradual separa- 
tion from us of those holy, sanctifying in- 
fluences which go to form the matured, influen- 
tial, and useful Christian,—will be the lack of 
that bright evidence, and full assured hope in 
death, which will give to the departing soul an 
“abundant entrance into the everlasting king- 
dom,”—then, of what great moment is it that 
every individual professing godliness, should 
know the exact state of his soul before God! 
We have endeavoured to aid you in this ex- 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCES. ay, 


amination by stating the nature of the inner 
spiritual life, by exhibiting some of the indica- 
tions and evidences of a state of relapse, and 
then by portraying the character of the sincere 
and the false professor of religion. ‘The decay 
of Christian influence, under the figure of the 
unsavoury salt, is a topic which seems naturally 
to follow. The words which suggest the state 
are taken from one of our Lord’s graphic and 
awakening discourses, in which, with a skill 
he only was master of, he so dissects and 
individualises human character and respon- 
sibility, in their relations to the high and 
paramount claims of God and eternity, as to 
turn the eye of each believer within upon 
himself. Addressing professing Christians, he 
says, “ Ye are the salt of the earth; but if the 
salt have lost his savour, wherewith shall it be 
salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, 
but to be cast out and to be trodden under 
foot of men.” The world—the salt,—the un- 
savoury salt, are the topics which these words 
suggest. 

Our first remark bears upon the world as 
constituting the particular sphere of the Chris- 
tian’s influence. ‘“ Ye are the salt of the 


118 THE INNER LIFE 


earth.” We bestow but little observation, it is 
feared, upon the moral state of the world at 
large, and upon that portion in particular where 
our influence is the most concentrated and felt. 
It is true we admire its beauty, can paint its 
scenery, are absorbed im its history, are excited 
by its antiquities, and are astonished at its 
wonders,—but in its momentous relation to 
eternity, O how little interest does it awaken ! 
T am not about to descant upon the unsatisfying 
nature of the world, nor upon its passing away. 
Your own experience of what the world really 
is—of how much it promises and of how little 
it performs—will compile a better volume for 
your study than that which any human pen 
could compose. But I refer you to its deep, 
universal ungodliness. I speak of it as a 
world full of moral pollution, of anarchy, and 
of rebellion against God. A world crowded 
with all the present consequences of sin— 
poverty and suffering, disease and death. Who 
can read its statistics of crime, or glance at the 
journals which chronicle its daily history, and 
not feel the full force of the truth, that Satan 
is the supreme god of this world, and that 
“the whole world hes in wickedness”—literally, 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 119 


“in the wicked one.’ But how insensible are 
we of this! How faintly and imperfectly do 
we realise it! How little affected by the 
hatred—the bloodshed—the intemperance—the 
debauchery—the fraud—the grinding oppres- 
slon—the gross injustice—the suffering—the 
misery—the death—which confront us at every 
step, and lift their wail of agony and cry of ven- 
geance to heaven! How few of us sigh and cry 
for all these abominations that are done ! 

Nor yet of this alone, awful as itis. Equally 
insensible are we of the existence and progress 
of error in the world—truth-denying, God- 
dishonouring, Christ-supplanting, and soul- 
destroying error. We know and believe that 
no fallen child of Adam can be saved apart 
from the knowledge and experience of Divine 
and revealed truth—that the truth is the 
instrument of his renewal, and of his sanctifica- 
tion. Believing, then, that men are saved only 
by the truth, and are made holy only through 
the truth, how little concerned and alarmed 
are we by the fearful inroads of doctrinal 
errors, and popish practices, tending to mislead, 
and peril the best interests of the multitudes, 
to whose blind understanding and sin-loving 


120 THE INNER LIFE 


hearts the error that rocks the cradle of their 
soul’s deep slumber, is ever more welcome than 
the truth that disturbs their carnal security, 
and arouses them from their false repose, by 
portraying their present sinfulness, and testi- 
fying of the “ judgment to come.” 

Such is the world in which Christ has 
placed his Church as the sphere of its in- 
fluence, as the theatre of its grace, and as the 
school of its graces. Such is the world of 
which all sincere believers in Jesus are declared 
by him to be, individually and collectively,— 
“the salt of the earth.” 

We now proceed to illustrate and apply this 
interesting and important truth. 

The metaphor, from its frequent use in the 
word of God, has come to be a holy and 
expressive one. In the sacrifices offered under 
the Levitical law, God commanded the use of 
salt: “ And every oblation of thy meat- 
offering shalt thou season with salt; neither 
shalt thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy 
God to be lacking from thy meat-offering : with 
all thine offerings thou shalt offer salt,’ Lev. 
ii. 18. It was used in this relation as a 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 131 


symbol of holy sincerity in their service, and 
as expressive of communion in their worship. 
We find, too, that God employs it as an emblem 
of his everlasting covenant: “ All the heave- 
offerings of the holy things, which the children 
of Israel offer unto the Lord, have I given thee, 
and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, by 
a statute for ever: it 1s a covenant of salt for 
ever before the Lord unto thee and to thy seed 
with thee,” Numb. xviii. 19. When the pro- 
phet Elisha was desired to purify the waters of 
the corrupt fountain of Jericho, he cast salt into 
them, saying, “Thus saith the Lord, I have 
healed these waters; there shall not be from 
thence any more death or barren land. So the 
waters were healed,” 2 Kings 1. 21—22. But 
it is under the gospel dispensation we find the 
richest and most expressive meaning of the 
figure. When our Lord reminds his people 
that they are “ the salt of the earth,’ he 
describes the gracious state of all real believers. 
The grace of God is that “ salt,” apart from 
which all is moral corruption and spiritual 
decay. Where Divine grace exists not, there 
is nothing to stunt the growth, or to check the 


122 THE INNER LIFE 


progress, or to restrain the power of the soul’s 
depravity. The fountain pours out its streams 
of corruption and death, bidding defiance to all 
human efforts either to purify or restrain. ‘Educa- 
tion cannot, public sentiment cannot, human law 
cannot, moral suasion cannot, self-love cannot ; 
all these instruments fail in the attempt. There 
is going on in the soul a process of moral decay, 
which, if not averted by grace, must terminate 
in the insufferable and interminable pangs of 
the second death—the soul departing into 
eternity one mass of moral corruption. What 
a spectacle for the eye of a holy God to behold! 
With all his natural loveliness and amiable 
instincts—admired, lauded, caressed by man— 
the being is yet an object of the Divine loathing 
and abhorrence. If God loves himself, if he 
delights in his own holiness, he must hate sin, 
while yet enduring with all long-suffering the 
sinner, not willing that he should perish. But 
let one grain of the salt of God’s grace fall into 
this corrupt fountain, and there is deposited 
a counteracting and transforming element, 
which at once commences a healing, purifying, 
and saving process. And, what parental re- 
straint, and the long years of study, and human 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 123 


law, had failed to do, one hour’s deep 
repentance of sin, one believing glance at a 
crucified Saviour, one moment’s realisation of 
the love of God, have effectually accomplished. 
O the intrinsic preciousness, the priceless value, 
the sovereign efficacy of this Divine salt—God’s 
converting, sanctifying grace! Lffecting a 
lodgement in the most debased and corrupt 
heart, it revolutionises the whole soul,— 
changing its principles, purifying its affections, 
ennobling its sentiments, and assimilating it to 
the Divine holiness. Be assured of this, my 
reader, that nothing short of the grace of God 
can renew and sanctify your nature, and fit you 
for the abodes of infinite holiness and bliss. 
You must become a subject of grace, ere you 
can become an heir of glory. 

Thus all true believers in Jesus, from their 
gracious character, are denominated the “ salt 
of the earth.” And why so? Because all 
that is Divine, and holy, and sanctifying, and 
precious, exists in them, and in them only. 
It is found in that nature which the Holy 
Ghost has renewed, in that heart which Divine 
grace has changed, in that soul humbled in the 
dust before God for sin, and now, in the exer- 


124 THE INNER LIFE 


cise of faith which he has given, reposing on 
the atoning work of Jesus, exclaiming,— 


“ Other refuge have I none, 
Hangs my helpless soul on thee.” 


There, where God’s love is felt—there, where 
the Holy Spirit is possessed—there, where the 
Saviour’s atonement is received, and his image 
is reflected—there is found the precious “ salt 
of the earth.” The world does not know it, and 
even the lowly grace may be veiled from the 
eye of the church ;—few mark the silent tear, or 
see the deep prostration of the spirit before the 
Lord, or are cognizant of its hidden joy, or 
measure the extent of the holy influence, 
noiselessly, yet effectually exerted; but God, 
looking from his throne of glory through the 
ranks of pure intelligences that encircle him, 
beholds it; and in that humble mind, and in 
that believing heart, he sees the Divine and 
precious ‘ salt,’ which beautifies, sanctifies, and 
preserves the world. He sees true holiness no- 
where else ; he recognises his own moral image 
in no other. The Christian is emphatically, 
“the salt of the earth.” 

But here a view of the subject presents 
itself of a deeply interesting character. We 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 125 


allude to the moral influence of the Christian 
as it ts exerted. This undoubtedly was the 
leading thought in the mind of our Lord when 
he employed the metaphor in its application to 
his people, “ Ye are the salt of the earth.” But 
in describing this influence, where shall I com- 
mence, and where shall I terminate? I can 
easier place my hand upon its commencement 
than upon its termination, because it never 
terminates! Christian influence begins with the 
first grain of grace, the first throb of life, the 
first beam of light, the first tear of godly sor- 
row, the first glance of faith—but its impres- 
sions and its results are as lasting as eternity. 
Solemn thought! The holy, gracious influence 
of a good man, stretches far away into the invisi- 
ble world. - But consider his present influence ; 
his sphere, be it what it may, is just what God 
has made it,—but in that sphere, be it limited 
or boundless, he is God’s salt, designed to 
preserve and to transform, by the holy influ- 
ence which he exerts, the community in which 
he dwells.. What a blessing is that Christian! 
Be the relation what it may which binds him 
to society—a husband, a wife, a parent, a child, 
a brother, a sister, a friend,—he is the salt of 


126 THE INNER LIFE 


the circle in which he moves. That little spark 
which glows in his bosom, may light the steps 
of some benighted wanderer to eternity; that 
measure of grace, diffusing its fragrance through 
his soul, may cheer and invigorate some tried 
and drooping spirit; that degree of spiritual 
knowledge which he possesses, may confirm 
some waverer, or guide some anxious and 
perplexed seeker after truth. The holy and 
commanding influence which God has given 
him, may, with its power, awe and subdue the 
mightiest agent of evil; or with its smile, cheer 
and encourage the weakest and lowlest effort 
of good. Blessed of God, he is a blessing 
to man. Of course it is understood that we are 
now speaking of the salt that has not lost its 
savour,—the savoury salt; we are describing the 
character and influence of a spiritually-minded 
Christian—of the influence exerted by one in 
whom the inner lfe is in a healthy, vigorous, 
active state. Such a believer is an incalculable 
blessing in any sphere in which he may move 
—he is truly “the salt of the earth:” there isa 
savouriness about him which betrays his inward 
grace: his example is savoury, his prayers are 
savoury, his conversation 1s savoury; we feel, 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 127 


when we converse with him, that he has the 
Divine salt in his soul, that we are in the 
presence of a true Christian, that we are holding 
communion with one who is wont to hold 
communion with God, one who dwells near 
the cross, who lives beneath the anointing, who 
walks humbly with God, who lives as “ behold- 
ing Him who is invisible.” There is that 
in him which bespeaks the gracious man,— 
there is an echo to your voice, a response to 
your thought, a vibration to your touch, which 
rebounds upon your own soul with thrilling 
effect. You feel yourself, as it were, salted 
afresh by the salt that is in your brother; you 
have caught the contagion of his holiness,—his 
example has rebuked you, his zeal has quick- 
ened you, his love has melted you, his faith 
has invigorated you, his grace has refreshed 
you, his smile has gilded the dark cloud that 
perhaps hung around your spirit, his word has 
fallen balmy and healing upon your sorrowing, 
bleeding heart,—and the secret of all is, he is 
“a sweet savour of Christ” to your soul. 

The same interpretation of the figure will 
equally apply to the church of God in its 
collective capacity. As the conservator of the 


128 THE INNER LIFE 


truth, what a blessing is the Church to the world 
—the only depository of this Divine and precious 
treasure—the sole living, practical exhibition of 
it upon earth—the only Divinely appointed and 
proper agent for its propagation throughout the 
world! How solemn and responsible her posi- 
tion, how commanding and far-reaching her 
influence ! The counteracting agent of error is, 
undoubtedly, its opposite—TrruTH. And who 
possesses the truth, and who experiences the 
truth, and who loves the truth, and who guards 
and disseminates the truth, save the “ Church of 
God, the pillar and ground of the truth?” And 
what apreservative of the world has been the truth 
of God, thus defended and diffused by the influ- 
ence of the Christian Church! What but the 
truth, as held and maintained by the different 
sections of the Church of Christ, has arrested 
those fearful errors, the inroads of which have 
already worked such disasters in the world, and 
the unchecked progress of which must have 
proved its total destruction? Systems rose, 
flourished, and fell ; schools existed, influenced, 
and died. Infidelity, popery, semi-popery, 
anti-christian, Christ-denying errors, have in 
their turns, and in different ages, had their 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 129 


day; but the truth, for whose overthrow and 
destruction they all leagued, confederated, com- 
bined, and laboured, still lives, and lives to bless 
and save its enemies. When false doctrine has 
come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord has 
lifted up the standard of the gospel, and rolled 
it back. The pulpit and the press—those 
powerful agents in the hands of the Church of 
God—have scattered broad-cast the salt of 
truth, and those precious grains have counter- 
acted the influence and stayed the progress of 
schisms and of errors. What but the salt of 
truth cast into the fountain of public opinion, 
by the labours of the Christian Church, has on 
many occasions so purified and changed its 
character, that on great questions deeply in- 
volving the welfare of individuals, of commu- 
nities, and of nations—it has sent abroad an. 
influence so healthy, vigorous, and command- 
ing, as to effect a complete revolution in the 
decisions of cabinets and in the histories of 
states ? 

But we proceed to speak of the decay of the 
inner life, as manifest in the impaired vigour of 
Christian influence, figuratively set forth by the 
“ salt that hath lost its savour,” and its conse- 

K 


130 THE INNER LIFE 


buent unprofitableness. The indestructibility of 
the divine life in the soul of man, the imperish- 
able nature of real grace, is a truth so deeply 
involving the holiness and happiness of the 
Christian,—and what is of still greater moment, 
—the glory of God, that we would place it in the 
foreground of the statement we are about to 
advance. In the most searching investigation 
we would make into the state of religion in the 
soul, we would never forget that where there 
exists real grace, that grace 1s as imperishable 
as the God who implanted it; that where true 
faith has led your trembling footsteps to Jesus, 
to receive him as all your salvation, that faith 
is as deathless as its Author. 

But with this broad and emphatic statement 
of a great and holy truth, we must proceed to 
justify the affecting declaration of the Saviour’s 
words, that the salt may lose its savour. In 
what sense will this apply to the inner, spi- 
ritual life of the believer? Most clearly and 
indisputably in the sense of a relapsed state 
of grace, and of its consequent loss of vigorous 
influence. The first symptom of this state 
which appears, may be a change which the in- 
dividual detects in his own soul as to his actual, 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 131 


personal enjoyment of religion. Propose to him 
the question,—With all your observance of 
external religious duties and activities, what 
amount of spiritual enjoyment have you of 
vital religion in your soul? In other words,— 
What real power does the spiritual life within 
you possess? Have you a heartfelt realiza- 
tion of the actuality and heavenliness of the 
divine things embodied in your creed, and 
avowed in your Christian profession? Have 
spiritual truths that holy savour and sweetness 
to your taste which indicate a healthy state of 
soul? Do you know habitually what close, 
filial, and confidential communion with God 
is ?—the purifying power of confession ?—-the 
frequent sprinkling of the atoning blood ?—the 
meek, submissive temper of mind in trials sent 
by God, or under provocation received from 
man? Were he to reply to these close, searching 
interrogatories, as a man honest with himself 
and to his God, he would perhaps unhesi- 
tatingly answer,—‘“ Alas! the salt hath lost 
its savour! ‘There was a period when all this 
was the happy experience of my soul. ‘There 
was then a savour in the very name of Jesus— 
but itis gone! There was a reality in divine 


132 THE INNER LIFE 


truth—but it is gone! There was an attrac- 
tion in the throne of grace—but it is gone! 
There was a bright ascending flame upon the 
altar of my heart, of love to Jesus, of com- 
munion with God—but it is gone! I once 
walked filially with my heavenly Father; I felt 
the power of godliness in my soul; I knew 
what heart-religion was, what secret, closet 
religion was—but alas! the salt hath lost its 
savour.” 

Trace another symptom of this unsavoury 
religion in the deterioration through which 
his graces have passed. His love has lost its 
fervour, his faith its vigour, his zeal its fire, 
his spirit its lowliness, his carriage and de- 
portment its gentleness and simplicity. ‘There 
seems not a grace of the Holy Spirit in his 
soul to have escaped the blighting influence 
which has swept over him—not one that hath 
not lost something of its heavenly savour. 

The feeble, if not the injurious influence which 
his religion exerts upon others is not the least 
marked and affecting evidence of the decay of 
spiritual life in his soul. His Christianity is of 
so sickly and doubtful a character, it produces 
no favourable impression. The world,—Argus- 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. L3a 


eyed, keen to discern the mote in the eye, and 
ever ready to detect the slightest discrepancy of 
principle and practice,—knows him to be a pro- 
fessor of religion, and that is all of his Christi- 
anity that it does know. It is aware that he has 
passed through the solemn ordeal of a Christian 
profession, that he is enrolled amongst the 
saints, and mingles in their hallowed services ; 
but such are the glaring inconsistencies of 
his Christian walk, such is his worldliness, his 
lust of power, his thirst for wealth, his love of 
pleasure, the lightness of his spirit, his religion 
_has become a proverb and a by-word amongst 
the immoral and profane, and produces no 
more winning, sanctifying effect upon others 
than the salt that has lost its savour. What is 
the church holier for his union with her? 
What is the world better for his religion? 
What moral darkness does he illumine ? What 
evil does he correct? What misery does he 
alleviate ? What raging vice does he check? 
What healthy impetus in the career of social 
progress does his Christian profession give to 
society? Alas! in all these things he is but 
as the salt that has lost its savour. Melan- 
choly spectacle !—to witness a professing man, 


134 THE INNER LIFE 


who seemed for a time to run well, and whose 
Christian example was powerful and command- - 
ing, now faltering and pausing in his course, 
waning and deteriorating in his influence, his 
religion becoming tasteless and insipid. Yet 
such is the individual whose affecting character 
is portrayed by the expressive figure of the 
Saviour. 

But a solemn question is proposed,—“ Where- 
with shall it be salted?” In other words, how 
can such a relapsed state of the spiritual life 
be recovered? The question of the Saviour 
would seem to imply an utter impossibility in . 
the thing; and we admit that at first sight it 
would so appear. The case is indeed a trying 
and a desperate one. Spiritual relapse is 
easy; but spiritual recovery is difficult. It 
is easier, we all know, to imbibe a disease 
than to counteract and arrest it—to plunge into 
difficulties than to escape from them. It is 
thus with the concerns of the soul. A case 
of conversion would seem to demand less power 
than a case of re-conversion,—to enkindle love 
in arebel’s heart, than to re-kindle it in the heart 
of a child,—to bring a poor sinner to ground his 
arms, and prostrate himself a penitent sup- 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. 135 


pliant before the cross, than to reclaim a wan- 
derer to the feet of the Saviour he had forsaken. 
Truths, motives, arguments, pleas, once so 
effective, have now lost their attraction and 
their power; and pride, shame, and hardness 
of heart, seem to have gained the ascendancy. 
The ashes of extinguished affection smother 
in the heart every fresh spark which each effort 
to bring back has re-kindled. ‘“ Wherewith,” 
then, “shall it be salted ?” 

But the recovery is not impossible, and the 
case, therefore, is not hopeless. ‘The salt may 
again be salted ; the inner life may be revived ; 
the waning strength may be restored; and the 
salt of grace, now apparently worthless and lost, 
may yet again be recovered, and prove as sweet 
and savoury as before. Let it be observed, 
that Jesus speaks of the salt being re-salted. 
Impossible as this may be to man, with God it 
is possible. By infusing a new life into the 
renewed nature, a fresh impartation of grace to 
the heart; by rekindling the smouldering em- 
bers in the soul; and thus by putting his hand 
again to the entire work of resuscitating, re- 
storing, and reviving the whole inner man, the 


136 THE INNER LIFE 


salt, re-salted, may regain its former sweetness 
and power. ‘The means by which this great 
and gracious recovery may be effected, are such 
as his wisdom will suggest and his sovereignty 
will adopt. But of this we may rest assured : 
all will be under the direction of unchangeable 
love. Whether it may be by the gentle gales 
of the Spirit, or by the severe tempest of trial, 
is but of little moment in comparison of the 
happy and glorious result. If the salt that has 
lost its savour be but re-salted, the mysterious 
process by which it is effected we will calmly 
and submissively leave in his hands. “ This 
also cometh forth from the Lord of hosts, who 
is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in work- 
ing,” Isa. xxvii. 29. 

We would suggest, in concluding this chap- 
ter, the Sayiour’s injunction as supplying an 
effectual check to this tendency to relapsed 
influence in the spiritual life,—‘ Have salt in 
yourselves.” Adding to this the apostle’s ex- 
hortation,—‘“ Let your speech be alway with 
grace, seasoned with salt,” Col. iv. 6. Repair 
constantly to Christ, where a sufficiency of grace 
for each day, and for each circumstance of each 


IN ITS RELAPSED INFLUENCE. lan 


day, will keep your soul supplied and nou- 
rished ; so that while restraining and uphold- 
ing, sanctifying and comforting grace is abun- 
dantly vouchsafed for yourself, the influence of 
that same grace will make you a far-reaching 
and an untold blessing to others. 


Cai? Thee 


THE RE-QUICKENING OF THE INNER LIFE. 
DAVID IN THE DUST, BREATHING AFTER GOD. 


“ My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to 
thy word.”—-Psa. cxix. 25. 


We have more than once in this work ad- 
verted to the indestructible nature of true 
grace, the deathlessness of God's life in man’s 
soul. But we may associate with this truth 
another idea. Not only cannot the spiritual 
life be destroyed—but it cannot even, for any 
great length of time, be depressed. Such is its 
divine elasticity—so to speak,—such its vital 
energy, whatever the superincumbent weight 
sinking it to the earth, whatever the fetters 
that would confine it to the dust,—it succeeds 
eventually im throwing off its pressure, in 
bursting its bonds, and in soaring again to its 
native skies. Thus in the lowest spiritual 


THE RE-QUICKENING OF THE INNER LIFE. 139 


frame of the child of God, though cleaving 
even to the dust, there is a divine, ascending 
power in the soul, which ever lifts it in holy 
breathings and aspirations after God. Not 
merely is the principle of spiritual life secured, 
but its power cannot be destroyed. 

How striking the confirmation of this truth 
afforded by the experience of David—two or 
three features of whose spiritual history we pro- 
pose, in the present and succeeding chapters, to 
review, as illustrative of a relapsed and recovered 
state of the inner life. We can scarcely imagine 
a lower depth of sorrow and humiliation to a 
heavenly mind than that set forth by the words, 
“ My soul cleaveth to the dust,’—prostrated, 
grovelling in the very earth. And yet, behold 
the indestructible principle of grace !—his soul 
mounts heavenward, in the holiest and most 
spiritual breathings that ever rose from hu- 
man lips,—‘‘ Quicken thou me according to 
thy word.” May the Spirit of God now be 
our teacher, and impart to each reader a per- 
sonal application of his truth, while from these 
instructive and striking words we consider the 
RE-QUICKENING OF THE INNER LIFE OF THE 
SOUL. 


140 THE RE-QUICKENING 


We must not, however, entirely overlook 
Davyid’s painful and humiliating posture and 
confession,—“ My soul cleaveth to the dust.” 
There is a profound signification in this sen- 
tence. Were we to restrict its meaning to the 
unconverted state of man, what words, or what 
image, could more forcibly and vividly describe 
and portray that fearful condition? No principle 
is more true and palpable than that the centre 
of the soul’s moral gravity is earth. It origi- 
nally was heaven: “God made man upright.” 
The centre of his soul’s repose was God. 
Standing erect in conscious innocence, his 
countenance, the index of his soul, was ele- 
vated, beholding the countenance of his Father 
and his God. 


“Whilst other creatures tow’rds the earth look down, 
God gave to man a front sublime, and rais’d 
His noble view to ken the starry heavens.” 


But falling from that elevation, his soul wan- 
dering away from God, earth then became the 
centre of its gravitation. All his moral and 
intellectual tendencies are now downward and 
earthly. It is an awful view to take of a 
rational and immortal being, and yet from its 


OF THE INNER LIFE. LAT 


truthfulness we dare not shrink. “ The first 
man is of the earth, earthy.” He is described 
as “minding earthly things.” arth is the 
centre to which all the faculties and powers of 
his soul tend, the point where all his schemes 
terminate, the boundary by which all his de- 
sires and expectations are limited. This little 
planet of ours circumscribes all the powers and 
tendencies, tastes and pursuits, of his rational 
and deathless mind. Select the most intel- 
lectual pursuits, the most refined enjoyments, 
the most reasonable schemes that ever awoke 
a thought or inspired a feeling in the natural 
man, and the utmost we can say of it is—It is 
of the earth, earthy. His soul cleaveth to the 
dust ; his mind clings to, and grovels upon, the 
earth. There is nothing of God in his thoughts, 
of Christ in his affections, or of eternity in his 
plans. There is no looking beyond this little 
speck of matter, which, like the insect crawling 
upon its leaf, seems all the universe to him. As 
that insect knows nothing of, and cares nothing 
for, a world teeming with life beyond its in- 
finitesimal boundary, so the carnal mind—alas 
that an irrational creature should be our com- 
parison !—groyelling upon the ground, sees not 


142 THE RE-QUICKENING 


what a world, thinks not what a universe, 
stretches far away beyond it, of which it soon 
itself is to be an inhabitant. For this flight 
of the soul to eternity, for this its solemn ap- 
pearing in the presence of God—its scrutiny, its 
judgment, and its destiny,—is there any adequate 
care, or thought, or preparation ? None what- 
ever! Everything else is cared for, prepared for, 
and thought of, but the soul’s departure to the 
other world. Is not this folly ? is it not mad- 
ness? is it not a crime of the deepest dye? 
“ Harthly, sensual, devilish,” he cleaves to the 
dust. All his enterprises, pleasures, aggran- 
dizements,—magnificent, refined, noble as they 
are,—spring from the dust, are restricted to the 
dust, and with the dust they perish for ever. 
What an awful, yet unexaggerated description, 
this, of the natural man! Reader, if not a 
subject of the converting grace of God, you 
are the original of this dark, gloomy, repulsive 
picture ! 

But the words upon which we are now 
commenting are those of a living, heaven- 
born, heaven-breathing, and heaven-destined 
soul. They admit us into one of the secrets 
of the inner and divine life, with which, alas! 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 148 


we are, the most of us, but too familiar. Shall 
we attempt an analysis of this peculiar state 
of spiritual mind, of which David’s language 
is so expressive? It presents a mournful 
acknowledgment of the influence of an evil 
nature. David deeply felt this. Flesh in the 
child of God is as really flesh as in the child 
of Satan. The old man, the Adamic nature, 
is precisely the same that it always was. Re- 
generation does not transform flesh into spirit. 
It proposes not to eradicate and expel the 
deep-seated root of our degenerate nature ; 
but it imparts another and a superadded na- 
ture,—it implants a new and an antagonistic 
principle. This new nature is divine; this 
new principle is holy: and thus the believer 
becomes the subject of two natures, and his 
soul a battle-field, upon which a perpetual 
conflict is going on between the law of the 
members and the law of the mind; often re- 
sulting in his temporary captivity to the law 
of sin which is in his members. Thus every 
spiritual mind is painfully conscious of the 
earthly tendency of his evil nature, and that 
from the flesh he can derive no sympathy or 
help, but rather everything that discourages, 


144 THE RE-QUICKENING 


encumbers, and retards his spirit in its breath- 
ings and strugglings after holiness. His “soul 
cleaveth to the dust.” 

A mournful sense of the seductive power of 
earthly things enters deeply into this state of 
mind. As we bear about with us, in every 
step, an earthly nature, it 1s not surprising 
that its affinities and sympathies should be 
earthly ; that earthly objects should possess a 
magnetic influence, perpetually attracting to 
themselves whatever was congenial with their 
own nature in the soul of the renewed man. 
Our homeward path lies through a world 
captivating and ensnaring. ‘The world, cha- 
meleon-like, can assume any colour, and 
Proteus-like, any shape, suitable to its purpose, 
and answerable to its end. There is not a 
mind, a conscience, or a taste, to which it cannot 
accommodate itself. For the gross, it has sen- 
sual pleasures ; for the refined, it has polished 
enjoyments; for the thoughtful, it has intellect- 
ual delights ; for the enterprising, it has bold, 
magnificent schemes. ‘The child of God feels 
this engrossing power ; he is conscious of this 
seductive influence. Worldly applause—who 
is entirely proof against its power? Human 


THE INNER LIFE. 145 


adulation—who can resist its incense? Crea- 
ture power—who is free from its captivation ? 
Love of worldly ease and respectability, in- 
fluence and position; a liking to glide smoothly 
along the sunny tide of the world’s good opinion 
—who is clad in a coat of mail so impervious 
as to resist these attacks? Have not the mighti- 
est fallen before them? Such are some only 
of the many ensnaring influences which weave 
themselves around the path of the celestial 
traveller, often extorting from him the hu- 
miliating acknowledgment—“ My soul cleaveth 
to the dust.” 

In this category we may include things 
which, though they are in themselves of a 
lawful nature, are yet of an earthly tendency, 
deteriorative of the life of God in the soul. 
What heavenly mind is not sadly sensible of 
this? Our ever-foremost, sleepless, subtle foe, 
stands by and says, “'This is lawful, and you 
may freely and unrestrictedly indulge in it.” 
But another and a solemn voice is heard issuing 
from the sacred oracle of truth,—“ All things 
are lawful for me, but all things are not ex- 
pedient.” And yet, how often are we forced 
to learn the lesson, that things lawful may, in 

L 


146 RE-QUICKENING OF 


their wrong indulgence and influence, become 
unlawful, through the spiritual leanness which 
they engender in the soul! Oh, it is a narrow 
path which conducts us back to paradise! But 
our Lord and Master made it so; he himself 
has trodden it, “leaving us an example that 
we should follow his steps;” and he, too, is 
sufficient for its straitness. Yes; such is the 
gravitating tendency to earth of the carnal 
nature within us, we are ever prone and ever 
ready, at each bland smile of the world, and at 
each verdant, sunny spot of the wilderness, to 
retire into the circle of self-complaisance and 
self-indulgence, and take up our rest where, 
from the polluted and unsatisfying nature of all 
earthly things, real rest can never be found. 
Thus may even lawful affections, and lawful en- 
joyments, and lawful pursuits and pleasures, 
wring the confession from the lips of a heavenly- 
minded man—“ My soul cleaveth unto the dust.” 

But there is sometimes a casting down to 
the dust which springs immediately from the 
mighty hand of God himself. The Lord oc- . 
casionally brings his people very low. He 
may lay upon them heavy trial, sore affliction, 
causing them to ‘lie low in a low place.’ This 


THE INNER LIFE. 147 


is often done to take off the fine edge of their 
too free indulgences, to humble them in the 
midst of their too fond enjoyments; and thus to 
prove their grace, and to exercise their graces, 
God brings them down even to the dust. “Be- 
cause we cannot keep our hearts low, therefore 
God maketh our condition low.” 

Such, reader, was the low estate of David 
when he exclaimed, “ My soul cleaveth to the 
dust!” Ah! how many whose eye scans this 
page may take up and breathe his words! You 
' feel a deadness, a dulness, and an earthliness, in 
enjoyments, and duties, and privileges, in which 
your whole soul should be all life, all fervour, 
all love. You are low where you ought to be 
elevated ; you grovel where you ought to soar ; 
you cleave to the earth where you ought to be 
embracing the heavens. Your thoughts are low; 
your affections are low; your feelings are low; 
your spirits are low; and you seem almost ready 
to question the existence of the life of God in 
your soul. But even in this sad and depressed 
state may there not be something cheering, 
encouraging, hopeful? There was evidently 
in Dayid’s,—“ My soul cleaveth unto the dust; 
quicken thou me.” This was the cheering, 


148: RE-QUICKENING OF 


encouraging, hopeful feature in the psalmist’s 
case—his breathing after the re-quickening of 
the Divine life of his soul. Here was that 
which marked him a man of God. It was a 
living man complaining of his deadness, and 
breathing after more life. It was a heaven- 
born soul lamenting its earthliness, and panting 
after more of heaven. It was a spiritual man 
mourning over his carnality, and praying for 
more spirituality. It is not the prayer of one 
conscious of the low state of his soul, and yet 
satisfied with that state. Perhaps no expres- 
sion is more familiar to the ear, and no ac- 
knowledgment is more frequently on the lips 
of religious professors, than this. And yet, 
where is the accompanying effort to rise above 
it? Where is the putting on of the armour? 
Where is the conflict? Where is the effort to 
emerge from the dust, to break away from the 
enthralment, and soar into a higher and purer 
region? Alas! many from whose lips smoothly 
glides the humiliating confession, still em- 
brace the dust, and seem to love the dust, and 
never stretch their pinions to rise above it. 
But let us study closely this lesson of David’s 
experience, that while deep lamentation filled 


THE INNER LIFE. 149 


his heart, and an honest confession breathed 
from his lips, there was also a breathing, a 
panting of soul, after a higher and a better 
state. He seemed to say,—‘ Lord, I am pros- 
trate, but I long to rise; I am fettered, but I 
struggle to be free; my soul cleaveth to the 
dust, but, quicken thou me!” Similar to this 
was the state of the Church so graphically 
depicted by Solomon in his Song,—“I sleep, 
but my heart waketh.” 

But what does the petition, thus breathed, 
imply ? What does the blessing, thus craved, 
involve ? 

First, a restoration of soul from past back- 
slidings. Let the spiritual believer but take the 
history of a single week as the gauge of the 
general tenor of his life, and what a lesson does 
it read to him of the downward, earthly ten- 
dency of his soul! Yea, in one short week how 
have the wheels lessened in their revolutions— 
how has the timepiece of his soul lost its 
power—how have the chords of his heart be- 
come unstrung! But his prayer is for Divine 
quickening. What a petition! and what a 
blessing! “ Quicken thou me.” Blessed 1s 
that soul that can echo these words. ‘The 


150 RE-QUICKENING OF 


Lord quickens the longing souls of his people. 
‘“ He restoreth my soul,” is the testimony not 
of David only. What do we rank amongst our 
most prized mercies ?—what do we count our 
sweetest joys ?—what constitutes our most hal- 
lowed seasons? Are they not the fresh gales of 
grace from heaven, blowing softly over our 
souls ? and “ lo, the winter is past, the rain is 
over and gone; the flowers appear on the 
earth ; the time of the singing of birds is come, 
and the voice of the turtle is heard in 
our land; the fig-tree putteth forth her green 
figs, and the vines with the tender grapes give 
a good smell.” What a spring-time of soul is 
it then! It is a ‘little reviving’ from the Lord— 
a quickening of the soul in its dead, wintry 
state. 

This prayer also implies what, alas! is so 
needful in many, a re-conversion of soul. It 
is a putting of the Lord’s hand a second 
time to the work of grace in the heart. “ When 
thou art converted,’ said our Lord to Peter, 
“ strengthen thy brethren.” What! had not 
Peter already been converted? Most truly. 
But although a regenerate man, he had so 
relapsed in grace as to need a re-conversion. 


THE INNER LIFE. 151 


Our Lord’s meaning, then, obviously is, ‘““When 
thou art restored, recovered, re-quickened, then 
strengthen thy brethren.” How many reli- 
gious professors stand in need of a fresh 
baptism of the Holy Spirit! You, perhaps, 
my reader, are one. Where is the spiritual 
vigour you once displayed ? where the spirit- 
ual joy you once possessed ? where the 
unclouded hope you once indulged? where 
the humble walk with God you once main- 
tained ? where the fragrance that once 
breathed around you? Alas! your soul 
cleaveth to the dust; and you need the re- 
converting grace, the renewed baptism of the 
Spirit. ‘“ Quicken thou me,” is your prayer. 
A clearer manifestation of Divine life in the 
soul is not the least blessing contained in this 
prayer for quickening, How little realisation 
enters into the religion of many! There is the 
full credence of the judgment to the truth; a 
conversing about religion, the ministry, and the 
church. But where is felt the realising power, 
the earth-fading, heaven-attracting power, of 
vital godliness in the soul? Dear reader, the 
hour that will bring your religious profession, 
your religious creed, your religious notions, to 


152 RE-QUICKENING OF 


the test, is at hand; and the great question in 
that awful moment will be, “ Am I fit to die ? 
—have I in my soul the life of God ?—am I 
born of the Spirit ?—have I a living Christ in 
my now failing, dying heart?” But what a 
prayer is this in view of a scene and a scrutiny 
so solemn: “Quicken thou me! Lord, quicken 
thy work in my soul, and strengthen that which 
thou hast wrought in me. ‘The love that con- 
geals, the faith that trembles, the hope that 
fluctuates, the joy that droops, do thou 
inspire with new life, new energy, new power ! 
It is of little moment what others think of me ; 
Lord, thou knowest my soul cleaveth to the 
dust. ‘There is in my heart more of earth than 
of heaven; more of self than of Christ; more 
of the creature than of God. Thou knowest me 
in secret—how my grace wanes, how my affec- 
tions chill, how seldom my closet is visited, how 
much my Bible is neglected, how insipid to 
my taste the means of grace, and how irksome 
and vapid are all spiritual duties and privileges. 
Lord, stir up thyself to the revivifying of my 
soul; quicken, O quicken thou me in thy ways. 
Enlarge my heart, that I may run the way of 
thy commandments.” 


THE INNER LIFE. 158 


The argument with which this holy petition 
is urged is most powerful and prevalent: 
“ According to thy word.” According to the 
promise of the word, and the instrumentality 
of the word. Both are engaged to quicken the 
soul. The promise is most precious: “I 
will heal their backslidings, I will love them 
freely; for mine anger is turned away from 
him. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he 
shall grow as the lily, and cast forth his roots as 
Lebanon. They that dwell under his shadow 
shall return; they shall revive as the corn, 
and grow as the vine.” ‘This precious promise 
to quicken and revive you, to shed the dews of 
his grace upon your soul, thus moistening and 
nourishing the roots and fibres and fruits of 
the new and heavenly life within you, God 
stands ready to fulfil in your holy and happy 
experience : “I will be as the dew unto Israel.” 
Christ is our dew—the dew of his love, 
the dew of his grace, the dew of his Spirit, is 
prepared—silent and unseen, but effectual and 
vivifying—to fall upon the renewed powers of 
your nature—reviving the work of God in your 
soul. 

But by the instrumentality of the word, 


154 RE-QUICKENING OF 


the Lord quickens the soul. The word of 
Christ is “ spirit and life ;” therefore it is a 
quickening word. “ This is my comfort in my 
affliction ; for thy word had quickened me.” 
Again, ‘“ I will never forget thy precepts; for 
with them thou hast quickened me.” ‘TVhere- 
fore did Jesus pray to his Father in behalf of 
his Church, “ Sanetify them through thy truth.” 
Thus does the word quicken. We are here 
constrained to suggest an inquiry—May not the 
prevalent decay of spiritual life in the church 
of God,—the low standard of spirituality,— 
the alarming growth of soul-destroying error,— 
the startling discovery which some modern 
teachers appear to have stumbled upon, that 
doctrines which the church of Christ has ever 
received as revealed truth, which councils have 
authorised, and which decretals have embodied, 
and which the sanctified intellects of master 
spirits—the Anakims and the Shamgars of 
polemic divinity and divine philosophy of past 
ages—have contended for and maintained, are 
not found in the Bible, but are the visionary 
dogmata of a bygone age,—we say, may not 
these prevalent evils be mainly attributable to 
the contempt thrown upon the word of God ? 


THE INNER LIFE. 155 


We verily and solemnly believe it to be so. 
We need to be constantly reminded that the 
great regenerator and emancipator of the world 
is the Bible,—that nothing short of this will 
disturb the spiritual death which universally 
prevails, and that nothing short of this will free 
the human mind from the shackles of error 
and superstition which enslave at this moment 
nearly two-thirds of the human race. This 
“ Sword of the Spirit,’—like that of Goliath, 
“ there is none like it”—has overcome popery 
and infidelity, and, unimpaired by the conflict, 
it is ready to overcome them yetagain. “What 
Sheridan said of the liberty of the press,” are 
the eloquent words of a departed divine, 
* admits of most emphatic application to the 
religion of truth and liberty: ‘ Give,’ says 
that orator, ‘ give to ministers a corrupt House 
of Commons; give them a pliant and servile 
House of Lords; give them the keys of the 
Treasury, and the patronage of the Crown; 
and give me the liberty of the press, and with 
this mighty engine I will overthrow the fabric 
of corruption, and establish upon its ruins the 
rights and privileges of the people.’ In like 
manner, . . . give me the circulation of 


156 RE-QUICKENING OF 


the Bible, and with this mighty engine I will 
overthrow the tyranny of Antichrist, and esta- 
blish the fair and original form of Christianity.” 
O that in this day of sad departure from the word 
of God, we may rally round the Bible in closer 
and more united phalanx! Firm in the belief 
of its divinity, strong in the conviction of its 
potency, may we go forth in the great con- 
flict of truth and error, wielding no weapon 
but the “ Sword of the Spirit, which is the 
word of God.” In all our spiritual relapses, 
too, may the word of the Lord quicken us: may 
it, like a mighty lever, raise our soul from the 
dust to which it so much cleaves! 

And what will be some of the effects of a 
revived, re-quickened state of the inner life ? 
Oh, many and blessed! Then will follow a 
clearer perception of Divine truth, the meaning 
and beauty of which, now so much obscured 
by reason of the dust which adhereth to the 
soul, will appear in clearer and richer lustre. 
The public means of grace will be seen to be 
Divinely appointed and indispensably needful. 
Vain excuse for their neglect will be laid aside, 
and the Sabbath and the week-day services 
will find you at your “well,” waiting for Him 


THE INNER LIFE. dF 


who stands by it, to draw the water and give 
you to drink. Private duties will be sought 
more eagerly, and will be found more precious. 
The dust will be swept from your Bible, and 
the smouldering embers be rekindled upon 
your altar, and you will be found “watching 
daily at the Lord’s gates, waiting at the posts 
of his door.’ ‘The seal of adoption more 
deeply impressed upon your heart, you will 
have a more vivid sense of your sonship, and 
“Abba, Father,” will oftener breathe from your 
lips. Tribulation and suffering—the cup which 
your Heavenly Father may give you to drink— 
will then be received without a question, and 
be drunk without a murmur. Your moral in- 
fluence, now so greatly impaired, will then, in 
the exhibition of a more healthy profession of 
Christianity, of a more holy and consistent 
example, be felt, acknowledged, and honoured. 
These are but a mere tithe of the blessings 
which will result from your re-quickening. 

We may here meet a question which has 
often been asked by those who are conscious 
of a relapsed state of soul. “Am I still to be 
found in spiritual duties and enjoyments while 
sensible of a backsliding state of heart from 


158 RE-QUICKENING OF 


God?” To this we reply,—The warrant of a 
Christian’s duty is not the measure of his 
grace, but the command of his God. If this 
be so—and we have no reason to question its 
truth—then be your state of soul low as it may, 
you are bound to meet all those obligations 
and to discharge all those duties which a pro- 
fession of Christ enjoins, irrespective of the 
spiritual and mental fluctuations to which the 
soul is always exposed. Unless aware of his 
design, Satan will here attain a great advantage 
over you. Assuming the form of an angel 
of light, and with angelic gentleness and 
plausibility, he will suggest that your frame 
of soul is too torpid and lifeless and dull to 
draw near to God. That your affections are 
too frigid, your love too congealed, your heart 
too carnal, your mind too grovelling, your pur- 
suits too earthly, your backslidings too great, 
your neglects too many to take to Christ. He 
will hold up to view the folly and the hypocrisy 
and the inconsistency of being found in the 
employment and use of holy and spiritual 
duties, while your soul thus cleaves to the dust. 
But listen not to his false suggestions, and 


THE INNER LIFE. 159 


heed not his sophistical reasoning, no not fora 
moment. It is only in the way of waiting upon 
God that you will be recovered from the lapsed 
state of your soul. In the way of meditation, 
of confession, of tears, of prayer, you may 
yet rise from the dust, and with bolder pinion, 
and richer plumage, and sweeter song, soar 
to the gate of heaven, and return again, scat- 
tering around you its blessings, and reflecting 
its glory. Oh! go to Jesus, then, however low 
and discouraging your spiritual state may be, 
and relax not a single mean of grace. 

Suffer a closing exhortation. Beware how 
you clog yourself needlessly with the dust; 
there is no necessity wherefore you should 
cling to it. It is most true, that in the dust of 
self-abasement you cannot lie too deeply. “I 
abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes,’ 
says the repentant Job. “He putteth his 
mouth in the dust; if so be there may be 
hope,” says the weeping Jeremiah. But the 
dust of earthly pursuits and pleasures become 
you not as a heaven-born soul. The dust 
is the serpent’s meat, not the aliment of a 
renewed mind. You were born again—not 


o 


160 RE-QUICKENING OF 


to dig into the earth with the mole, but to soar 
to the heavens with the eagle. Your God is 
in heaven, your Saviour is in heaven, the glo- 
rified saints are in heaven; and in faith, and in 
hope, and in conversation, you should be in 
heaven also. Then clog not yourself need- 
lessly with dust. Be not in haste to be rich. 
Be not anxious after great worldly enterprises, 
magnificent schemes, with a view merely of 
accumulating wealth. ‘They that will be rich 
fall into temptation and a snare, and into many 
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in 
destruction and perdition.” Be content with 
God’s disposal of you, and with his allotment 
.to you. Walking uprightly and in his fear, 
you shall want no good thing. “ He will never 
leave you, nor forsake you, so that you may 
boldly say, The Lord is my helper.” Let the 
world, and worldly things, sit lightly upon 
you. Its smiles and its frowns, its caresses 
and its woundings, are but for a moment—and 
then all will for ever have fled. ‘Brethren, 
the time is short: it remaineth, that both 
they that have wives be as though they had 
none; and they that weep as though they wept 
not; and they that buy as though they pos- 


THE INNER LIFE. 161 


sessed not; and they that use this world as 
not abusing it: for the fashion of this world 
PASSETH AWAY.” Arise, then, and shake thyself 
from the dust, and put on thy beautiful gar- 
ments, and array thyself in thy costly orna- 
ments—the righteousness of the incarnate 
God, and the graces of the sanctifying Spirit. 
Thus quickened and revived, thus rising from 
the dust to which your soul has so long been 
cleaving, O how sweetly will you sing as heaven- 
ward you soar!—“ I will greatly rejoice im the 
Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God: for 
he hath clothed me with the garments of sal- 
vation, he hath covered me with the robe of 
righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh himself 
with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth her- 
self with her jewels.” Go to Jesus just as 
youare. Take your deadness to Christ,—take 
your barrenness to Christ,—take your decay to 
Christ,—take to Christ your frame of mind 
just as it is. Jesus stands between you and 
God, prepared to present ¢o God every sigh, 
and groan, and desire, and tear, and request; 
and to convey from God every blessing, cove- 
nant, blood-purchased blessing, which it is 
possible for him to give, or needful for you te 
M 


162 RE-QUICKENING OF THE INNER LIFE. 


receive. Exult in the prospect of soon reaching 
heaven, where there are no frosts to congeal, 
where there is no blight to wither, and where 
no earthly tendencies will ever weigh down to 
the dust the life of God in your soul. 


CHAPTER VI. 


THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER OF THE INNER LIFE. 
THE BROKEN AND CONTRITE HEART. 


“The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a 
contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.” —Psam li. 17. 


Ir has been the lowly but the earnest attempt 
of the preceding pages to stir up the grace of 
God in the living, believing soul. There is 
not a moment in the history of the child of 
God—even those moments that would appear 
the most favourable to the progress of the 
Divine life—but there is a tendency in that 
grace to descend. We have seen how affluent 
the Word of God is in its metaphorical eluci- 
dation of this important subject. And if the 
figure of ‘ gray hairs’—of ‘wells without water’— 
of the ‘salt that has lost its savour,’ can at all 


164 THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER 


depict this melancholy condition of the soul’s 
spiritual deterioration, then is the sad portrait 
presented to our view in its most vivid colour- 
ing, as drawn by the hand of a Divine master. 
Although we might have dwelt much longer on 
this part of our general subject,—for we have 
by no means exhausted all the metaphors of 
the Bible illustrative of a relapsed state of the 
spiritual life—but anxious to apply to the 
disease we have been probing—we hope with 
not too rude a hand—the Divine balm which 
the Great Healer has mercifully provided, we 
leave at this stage of our work the consideration 
of the relapse, and pass on to that of the re- 
covery,—praying, that if to the mind of the 
reader there is any real discovery of the low 
state of his soul, if any true and powerful 
concern as to that state, if any secret contrition, 
any lowly repentance, and any breathing after 
a better and a revived condition of the inner 
life, the words of the royal penitent, which we 
are about to open up, may fall upon his wounded 
spirit like balsam from the bleeding tree—with 
an influence soothing, cheering, and healing. 
How sweet and expressive are the words— “ The 
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 165 


and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not 
despise!” In further prosecution of our design, 
let us direct our attention to this broken heart, 
as unfolding the certain evidence of a recovered 
state of spiritual relapse,—and then, to God’s 
especial regard for it, as constituting the great 
encouragement to our return. 

The subject enters deeply into the very soul 
of real, vital religion. All other religion that 
excludes as its basis the state of mind por- 
trayed in these words, is as. the shell without 
the pearl, the body without the spirit. It has 
ever been a leading and favourite scheme of 
Satan to persuade men to substitute the reli- 
gion of man for the religion of God. The 
religion of man has assumed various forms and 
modifications, always accommodating itself to 
the peculiar age and history of the world. 
Sometimes it has been the religion of intellect 
—and men have prostrated themselves before 
the goddess of reason. Sometimes it has been 
the religion of creeds—and men have prided 
themselves upon the bulwarks of a well-ba- 
lanced and accurate orthodoxy. At other times 
it has been the religion of the ascetic and the 
recluse—and men have fled from the dwellings 


166 THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER 


of the living, and have entombed themselves in 
caves and dungeons of the earth. Yet again, 
it has been the religion of forms and ceremo- 
nies—and men have strutted forth in the 
fancied habiliments of superior sanctity. And 
thus we might proceed almost ad infinitum. 
All these are human religions, invented by 
Satan, and palmed upon the world as the 
religion of God. We have observed that the 
religion of man—be its form what it may— 
has ever kept at the remotest distance from the 
spiritual; every thing that brought the mind 
in contact with truth, and the conscience and 
the heart into close converse with itself and 
with God, it has studiously and carefully 
avoided,—and thus it has evaded that state and 
condition of the moral man which constitutes 
the very soul of the religion of God—*the 
broken and contrite heart.” 

There is a sense in which the history of the 
world is the history of broken hearts. Were 
the epitaph of many over whose graves—those 
“ mountain-peaks of a new and distant world” 
—we thoughtlessly pass, faithfully inscribed 
upon the marble tablet that rears above them 
so proudly its beautifully chiselled form, it 


OF THE INNER LIFE. - 167 


would be this—“ Diep OF A BROKEN HEART.” 
Worldly adversity, blighted hope, the iron heel 
of oppression, or the keen tongue of slander, 
crushed the sensitive spirit, and it fled where 
the rude winds blow not, and “ where the wicked 
cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.” 
Passing beyond the limit of time, we visit in 
imagination the gloomy precincts of the lost, 
and lo! we find that the abodes of the finally 
impenitent are crowded with weeping, mourn- 
ing, despairing souls. Yes! there are broken 
hearts there,—and there are tears there,—and 
there is repentance there, such as the betrayer 
of his Lord felt, ere he “went to his own 
place,’—but, alas! it is the “sorrow of the 
world, which worketh death.” In all this grief 
there enters nothing of that element which 
gives its character and complexion to the sor- 
row of David—the broken and contrite heart, 
the sacrifice of God which he despiseth not. 
A man may weep, and a lost soul may despair, 
from the consequences of sin; but in that sor- 
row and in that despair there shall be no real 
heartfelt grief for sin itse/f, as a thing against a 
holy and a righteous God. But we are now to 
contemplate, not the broken spirit merely, but 


168 THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER 


the contrite heart also—the sorrow of sincere 
repentance and deep contrition springing up in 
the soul for sin—its exceeding sinfulness and 
abomination in the sight of God. 

The state which we have now in contempla- 
tion defines the first stage in conversion. ‘The 
repentance which is enkindled in the heart at 
the commencement of the Divine life, may be 
legal and tending to bondage; nevertheless it is 
a spiritual, godly sorrow for sin, and is ‘ unto 
life. The newly awakened and aroused sinner 
may at first see nothing of Christ, he may see 
nothing of the blood of atonement, and of God’s 
great method of reconciliation with him, he 
may know nothing of faith in Jesus as the way 
of peace to his soul—yet, he is a true and sin- 
cere spiritual penitent. The tear of holy grief 
is in his eye,—ah! we forget not with what 
ease some can weep; there are those the foun- 
tain of whose sensibility lies near the surface ; 
an arousing discourse, an affecting book, a 
thrilling story, will quickly moisten the eye,— 
but still we must acknowledge that the religion 
of Jesus 1s the religion of sensibility; that there 
is no godly repentance without feeling, and no 
spiritual contrition apart from deep emotion. 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 169 


Yes! the tear of holy grief is in his eye ; and if 
ever it is manly to weep, surely it is now, when 
for the first time the soul that had long re- 
sisted every appeal to its moral consciousness, 
is now smitten to the dust, the heart of adamant 
broken, and the lofty spirit laid low before 
the cross of Jesus. O it is a holy and a lovely 
spectacle, upon which angels, and the Lord of 
_ angels himself, must look with ineffable delight. 
Reader, have you reached this the primary 
stage in the great change of conversion ? Have 
you taken this the first step in the soul’s travel 
towards heaven? It is the knowledge of the 
disease which precedes the application to the 
remedy ; it is the consciousness of the wound 
which brings you into contact with the Healer 
and the healing. O who, once having experi- 
enced the truth, would wish to escape this pain- 
ful and humiliating process ? who would refuse 
to drink the wormwood and the gall, if only 
along this path he could reach the sunlight spot 
where the smiles of a sin-pardoning God fallin 
focal glory and power? Who would not bare 
his bosom to the stroke, when the hand that 
plucks the dart and heals the wound, is the 
hand through whose palm the rough nail was 


170 THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER 


driven,—“ wounded for our transgressions, 
bruised for our iniquities ?” Who would not 
endure the uneasiness of sin, but to feel the 
rest that Jesus gives to the weary? and who 
would not experience the mourning for trans- 
gression, but to know the comfort which flows 
from the loving heart of Christ? Again the 
question is put—has the Spirit of God revealed 
to you the inward plague, has he brought you 
just as you are to Jesus, to take your stand 
upon the doctrine of his unmerited, unpur- 
chased mercy—asking for pardon as a beggar, 
praying for your discharge as a bankrupt, and 
beseeching him to take you as a homeless 
wanderer into the asylum of his loving and 
parental heart ? 

But the state of holy contrition which we are 
describing marks also a more advanced stage 
in the experience of the spiritual man; a stage 
which defines one of the most interesting periods 
of the Christian’s life—the Divine restoring. 
David was a backslider. Deeply and grievously 
had he departed from God. But he was a 
restored backslider, and, in the portion we are 
now considering, we have the unfoldings of his 
sorrow-stricken, penitent, and broken heart,— 


OF THE INNER LIFE. Ly 


forming, perhaps, to some who read this page, 
the sweetest portion of God’s word. But of 
the truth of this we are quite assured, that in 
proportion as we are brought into the condi- 
tion of godly sorrow for sin, deep humiliation 
for our backslidings from God, our relapses, and 
declensions in grace, there is no portion of the 
sacred word that will so truly express the deep 
emotions of our hearts, no language so fitted 
to clothe the feelings of our souls, as this 
psalm of the royal penitent: ‘“ Have mercy 
upon me, O God, according to thy loving-kind- 
ness : according unto the multitude of thy ten- 
der mercies blot out my transgressions. Wash 
me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse 
me from my sin. For I acknowledge my trans- 
gressions: and my sin is ever-before me. 
Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and 
done this evil in thy sight: that thou mightest 
be justified when thou speakest, and be clear 
when thou judgest.” Thus upon the altar of 
God he lays the sacrifice of a broken heart, and 
seems to exclaim, “ Wretch that I am to have 
forsaken such a God, to have left such a Father, 
Saviour and Friend. Has he ever been unto me 
a wilderness, a barren land? Never! Have I 


172 THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER 


ever found him a broken cistern? Never! Has 
he ever proved to me unkind, unfaithful, un- 
true? Never! What! did not God satisfy me, 
had not Jesus enough for me, did not a throne 
of grace make me happy, that I should have 
turned my back upon such a God, should have 
forsaken such a bosom as Christ’s, and slighted 
the spot where my heavenly Father had been 
so often wont to meet and commune with me ? 
Lord! great has been my departure, grievous 
my sin, and now most bitter is my sorrow ;— 
here at thy feet, upon thine altar, red with the 
blood of thine own sin-atoning sacrifice, I lay 
my poor, broken, contrite heart, and beseech 
thee to accept and heal it.” 
“Behold, I fall before thy face; 
My only refuge is thy grace. 
No outward forms can make me clean, 
The leprosy lies deep within.” 

Such is the holy contrition which the Spirit 
of God works in the heart of the restored 
believer. Such isthe recovery of the soul from 
its spiritual and mournful relapse. Brought 
beneath the cross and in the sight of the cruci- 
fied Saviour, the heart is broken, the spirit is 
melted, the eye weeps, the tongue confesses, 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 173 


the bones that were broken rejoice, and the 
contrite child is once more clasped in his 
Father’s forgiving, reconciled embrace. “ He 
restoreth my soul,” is his grateful and adoring 
exclamation. O what a glorious God is ours, 
and what vile wretches are we! 

But there is one declaration of the royal 
penitent which enunciates a most precious 
truth—the Lord’s especial regard for the broken 
and the contrite heart. “A broken and a con- 
trite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.” 
There are those by whom it is despised. Satan 
despises it,—though he trembles at it. The 
world despises it,—though it stands in awe of it. 
The Pharisee despises it,—though he attempts 
its counterfeit. But there is one who despises 
it not. ‘“ THov wilt not despise it,” exclaims 
this penitent child, with his eye upon the loving 
heart of his God and Father. But why does 
God not only not despise it, but delights in 
and accepts it? Because he sees in it a 
holy and a fragrant sacrifice. It is a sacrifice, 
because it is offered to God, and not to man. 
It is an oblation laid upon his altar. Moses 
never presented such an oblation—Aaron never 
offered such a sacrifice in all the gifts which 


174 THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER 


he offered, in all the victims which he slew. 
And while some have cast their rich and 
splendid gifts into the treasury, or have laid 
them ostentatiously upon the altar of Christian 
benevolence, God has stood by the spot to 
which some poor penitent has brought his 
broken heart for sin, the incense of which has 
gone up before Him as a most precious and fra- 
grant sacrifice. Upon that oblation, upon that 
gift, his eye has been fixed, as if one object, and 
one only, had arrested and absorbed his gaze,— 
it was a poor, broken heart that lay bleeding 
and quivering upon His altar. It is a sacrifice, 
too, offered upon the basis of the atoning © 
sacrifice of his dear Son—the only sacrifice 
that satisfies Divine justice—and this makes it 
precious to God. So infinitely glorious is the 
atonement of Jesus, so divine, so complete, and 
so honouring to every claim of his moral 
government, that he accepts each sacrifice of 
prayer, of praise, of penitence, and of personal 
consecration, laid in faith by the side and upon 
that one infinite Sacrifice for sin. He recognises 
in it, too, the work of his own Spirit. When 
the Spirit of God moved upon the face of un- 
formed nature, and a new world sprang into life, 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 175 


light, and beauty, he pronounced it very good. 
But what must be his estimate of that new 
creation which his Spirit has wrought in the 
soul, whose moral chaos he has reduced to life, 
light, and order! If God so delighted in the 
material and the perishable creation, how deep 
and ineffable must be his delight in the spiritual 
and the imperishable creation! If such his 
satisfaction at a new-born world, destined so 
soon to be marred by sin, and smitten by the 
curse, and consumed by the flames—what 
think you must be his satisfaction in beholding 
a world springing from its ruins, whose purity 
sin shall never deface, whose loveliness no curse 
shall ever blight, and whose duration shall 
survive in ever-growing and imperishable beauty 
and grandeur the destruction of all worlds ! 
But in what way does God evince his satis- 
faction with, and his delight in, the broken 
and contrite heart? We answer—first, by the 
manifestation of his power in healing it. There 
are two portions of God’s word in which this 
truth is strikingly brought out. Psa. cxlvi. 3, 
“ He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth 
up their wounds.” In Isa. lxi. 1, the office 
of Jesus asa Divine healer is with signal beauty 


176 THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER 


set’ forth :—“ The Spirit of the Lord God is 
upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me 
to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath 
sent me to bind up the broken-hearted.” Never 
did a physician more delight to display his 
skill, or exercise the benevolent feelings of his 
nature in the alleviation of suffering, than does 
Jesus in his work of binding up, soothing and 
healing the heart broken for sin, by speakinga 
sense of pardon, and applying to it the balsam 
of his own most precious blood. But our 
Lord not only heals the contrite heart, but as 
if heaven had not sufficient attraction as his 
dwelling-place, he comes down to earth and 
makes that heart his abode: “'Thus saith the 
Lord, To this man will I look, even to him that is 
poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth at my 
word,” Isa. Ixvi. 2. And again, “ Thus saith 
the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, 
whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and 
holy place, with him also who is of a contrite 
and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the 
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite 
ones.” What, dear, humble penitent, could 
give you such a view of the interest which 
Christ takes in your case—the delight with 


OF THE INNER LIFE. LE 


which he contemplates your contrition, and the 
welcome and the blessing which he is pre- 
pared to bestow upon you, on your casting 
yourself down at his feet, nay, m throwing 
yourself in his very arms, wide expanded to 
receive you, than this fact, that he waits to 
make that sorrow-stricken heart of yours his 
chief and loved abode—reviving it, healing it, 
and enshrining himself for ever within its 
renewed and sanctified affections. 

Thus we have attempted to describe the two- 
fold process by which the lapsed state of the 
inner life is arrested and restored,—this pro- 
cess, as we have shown, consisting in the know- 
ledge which the believer entertains of the real 
state of the spiritual life in his soul, and then 
in the godly sorrow, the holy contrition, which 
that discovery produces. What more shall we 
say ? One thing only.—Be your state what it 
may, seek, cherish, and cultivate constantly and 
habitually—a broken heart for sin. Think not 
that it is a work which once done is to be done 
nomore. Deem it not a primary stage in your 
spiritual journey, which once reached, never 
again occurs in your celestial progress. O no! 
As in the natural life we enter the world weep- 

N 


178 THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER 


ing and leave it weeping, so in the spiritual life 
—we begin it in tears of godly sorrow for sin, 
and we terminate it in tears of godly sorrow 
for sin,—passing away to that blessed state of 
sinlessness where God will wipe away all tears 
from our eyes. The indwelling of all evil—the 
polluting nature of the world along which we 
journey—our constant exposure to temptations 
of every kind—the many occasions on which 
we yield to those temptations,—the perpetual 
developments of sin unseen, unknown, even 
unsuspected by others,—the defilement which 
attaches itself to all that we put our hands to, 
even the most spiritual and holy and heavenly,— 
the consciousness of what a holy God must 
every moment see in us,—all, all these consider- 
ations should lead us to cherish that spirit of 
lowliness and contrition, self-abhorrence and 
self-renunciation, inward mortification and out- 
ward humility of deportment, which belong to, 
and which truly prove the existence of, the life 
of God in our souls. 

And what, too, prompts a constant travelling 
to the atoning blood—what endears the Saviour 
who shed that blood? What is it that makes 
his flesh meat indeed, and his blood drink 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 179 


indeed ? What is it that keeps the conscience 
tender and clean? What enables the believer 
to walk with God as a dear child? O it is the 
secret contrition of the lowly spirit, springing 
from a view of the cross of Jesus, and through 
the cross leading to the heart of God. 

Your religion, dear reader, is a vain religion, 
if there enter not into it the essential element 
of a broken and a contrite heart for sin. With 
Job you may have heard of Jesus “with the 
hearing of the ear,’ but not with him, have 
“ abhorred yourself, and repented in dust 
and in ashes.” Oh! with all your gettings, 
get, I beseech you, a broken heart for sin. 
God can have no transactions with you in the 
sreat matter of your soul’s salvation, but as he 
sees you prostrate at his feet in repentance, 
humiliation, and confession. He will only treat 
with you for the stupendous blessings of pardon, 
justification, and adoption, in the character and 
posture of a broken-hearted sinner, urging your 
suit through the mediation of a broken-hearted 
Saviour. He can negotiate only on those terms 
which justify and magnify the stupendous 
sacrifice of his only-begotten and well-beloved 
Son. If, then, you value your eternal interests, 


180 THE PENITENCE AND PRAYER 


if you cherish any proper regard for the final 
happiness of your soul—if you wish to escape 
the wrath to come—the undying worm, the 
quenchless flame, the unutterable, interminable 
torments of the lost,—if you shrink from the 
risk, the almost certain risk, involved in the 
circumstances of your final sickness, and a dying 
hour—then repent, repent sincerely, repent 
deeply, repent evangelically, repent—now ! 
For, “God Now commandeth all men every- 
where to REPENT, because he hath appointed 
a day in which he will judge the world in 
righteousness.” 

Backsliding Christian do you feel within 
your heart the kindlings of godly sorrow? 
Are you mourning over your wandering, loath- 
ing the sin that drew you from Christ, that 
grieved his Spirit, and wounded your own 
peace? Are you longing to feed again in the 
green pastures of the flock, and by the side of 
the Shepherd of the flock, assured once more 
that you are a true sheep, belonging to the one 
fold, known by, and precious to, the heart of 
Him who laid down his life for the sheep? 
Then approach the altar of Calvary, and upon 
it lay the sacrifice of a broken and a contrite 


OF THE INNER LIFE. 181 


heart, and thy God will accept it. The door 
of your return stands open—the pierced heart 
of Jesus. The golden sceptre that bids you 
approach is extended—the outstretched hand 
of a pacified Father. The banquet is ready, 
and the minstrels are tuning their harps to 
celebrate the return from your wanderings to 
your Father’s heart and home, with the glad- 
ness of feasting, and with the voice of thanks- 
giving and of melody. 


“Return, O wanderer, return! 
And seek an injured Father’s face; 
Those warm desires that in thee burn 
Were kindled by recovering grace. 


“Return, O wanderer, return! 
Thy Saviour bids thy spirit live; 
Go to his bleeding side, and learn 
How freely Jesus can forgive. 


“Return, O wanderer, return! 
Regain thy lost lamented rest; 
Jehovah’s melting bowels yearn 
To clasp his Ephraim to his breast.” 


CHAPTER YEE 
THE RENEWED ANOINTING OF THE INNER LIFE. 
THE FRESH OIL. 


“ T shall be anointed with fresh oil.’—Psa. xcii. 10. 


Davip,—the evidence of whose spiritual re- 
storation we have just been contemplating, in 
the deep, lowly contrition of his penitent heart 
—presents to our view, in the present subject, 
another and a deeply interesting phase of the 
recovered life of God in the soul. As apersonal 
type of Christ, he, like his Divine and glorious 
Prototype, was an anointed “ priest upon his 
throne.” Upon his head the holy oil had been 
poured, setting him apart as king of Israel ; 
and, as one of the “ royal priesthood,” he shared 
in that divine and holy anointing, by which 
all the “kings and priests of God” are con- 
secrated, and of which they all alike partake. 


RENEWED ANOINTING, ETC. 183 


But was this single act of anointing sufficient 
for David? Nay, conscious of the perpetual 
tendency of the grace within to decay, sensible 
of those spiritual relapses to which the inner 
life is ever exposed, he felt the necessity, and 
earnestly sought the application, of the renewed 
anointing, by which alone he could be 
“ strengthened with all might in the inner 
man.” Nothing could more clearly betray the 
present state of David’s soul than the words, 
the precious meaning of which we propose 
endeavouring to unfold—‘“TI shall be anointed 
with fresh oil.” There is an evident conscious- 
ness of loss, a sense of deterioration, a convic- 
tion of relapse. ‘The fragrance and the power 
of the former anointing were felt in a measure 
to have gone; and, painfully alive to the oss 
the anointed of the Lord breathes the deep 
desire for, and expresses the full expectation 
of, the renewed anointing of the Holy Ghost in 
the inner life of his soul. The subject must be 
deeply interesting to the true Christian. Let us 
consider the anointing—the decay of the anoint- 
ing—and the renewal of the anointing. 

“The Lord’s anointed” is the expressive 
and appropriate designation of all the Lord’s 


184 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


people. This anointing it is that marks them 
as a “chosen generation, a royal priesthood, 
an holy nation, a peculiar people.” It is the 
Lord’s peculiar mark upon them which dis- 
tinguishes and designates them as his own. 
All who are strangers to this anointing are 
strangers to the grace of God, and the calling 
of the Holy Ghost. There may be much 
spiritual light In the judgment, and even an 
open profession of religion before the world, 
added to which there shall be something of 
Jehu’s “ zeal for the Lord;” and yet that 
anointing of the Holy Spirit be still wanting, 
apart from which all intellectual illumination, 
and outward profession, and party zeal, pass 
for nothing with a heart-searching God. As 
the proper signification of the endeared name 
Christ, is anointed, so the true signification of 
the honoured appellation Christian, points us 
to the anointing, of which all who have union 
with Christ personally share. I believe the 
remark to be as solemn as it is true, that 
eternity will only fully unfold the amount of 
evil that has sprung from calling those Chris- 
tians who call themselves Christians, without 
any valid title to the high, holy, and distin- 


THE INNER LIFE. 185 


guished appellation. How imperfectly are men 
in general aware of the deep, the awful, the 
Spiritual import of the term! They think not, 
they know not, that a Christian is one who 
partakes, in his renewing, sanctifying grace, of 
that same Divine Holy Spirit with which 
Christ was anointed of the Father for his 
great work. 

Our first inquiry relates to the anointing oil 
itself. What is its nature? Of what is it 
composed? ‘Truly it is most costly, precious, 
and fragrant. Let the type explain: “ The 
Lord spake unto Moses, saying, Take thou 
also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh 
five hundred shekels, and of sweet cinnamon 
half so much, even two hundred and fifty 
shekels, and of sweet calamus two hundred 
and fifty shekels, and of cassia five hundred 
shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and 
of olive oil an hin: and thou shalt make it an 
oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound 
after the art of the apothecary: it shall be an 
holy anointing oil,” Exod. xxx. 22—25. Then 
observe the use to which Moses was to appro- 
priate this anointing oil: “And thou shalt 
anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate 


186 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


them, that they may minister unto me in the 
priest’s office. And thou shalt speak unto the 
children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy 
anointing oil unto me throughout your gene- 
rations,” ver. 30,81. Another reference to this 
anointing oil occurs in a deeply interesting 
connection. We allude to this same anointing 
of Aaron, the nature of which is used to 
symbolise the beauty and fragrance of brotherly 
love: “ Behold, how good and how pleasant it 
is for brethren to dwell together in unity! It 
is like the precious ointment upon the head, 
that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron’s 
beard, that went down to the skirts of his 
garment,’ Psa. cxxxui. 1, 2. Thus valuable 
and cheering is the communion of saints! 
and they who partake the most richly of the 
anointing of Christ’s Spirit in their hearts, feel 
the most deeply, and exemplify the most fully, 
on all occasions, sweet and holy love to all 
who bear the image of the Father, and who 
breathe the spirit of the Saviour, whatever be 
their creed or name. O let it not be forgotten, 
that one of the strongest evidences of our 
personal possession of this anointing, one of 
the most indubitable marks of our union to the 


THE INNER LIFE. 187 


kingdom of priests, is, owr love to the bre- 
-thren! How valuable and costly must true 
Christian unity be, when it is compared by the 
Holy Ghost to the precious unguent poured 
over the person of God’s High Priest. ‘“ By 
this shall all men know,” says our spiritual 
Aaron, “ that ye are my disciples, because ye 
have love one to another.” 

But the type sets forth the anointing oil, or, 
in other words, the true spiritual anointing of 
every believer in Jesus, in three of its essential 
features. Its costliness. It is costly oil, be- 
cause it is Divine. The Holy Spirit renews, 
sanctifies, and inhabits the believer as a Divine 
person. It is not the common light of nature, 
nor the ordinary teaching of man, nor the 
moral suasion of truth, which has made him 
what he is—an experimental CurisTIAN: all 
his real grace, his true teaching, flows from the 
Divine Spirit. His light is divine, his renew- 
ing is divine, his comfort is divine, his sanctifi- 
cation is divine, and must, therefore, be 
essentially most costly. Oh, there is more real 
value in one ray of the Spirit’s light, beaming 
in upon a man’s soul, than in all the teaching 
which books can ever impart! ‘The Divine 


188 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


Spirit, loosing the seals of the written Word, 
and unfolding to him the mysteries of the 
kingdom, the glories of Christ’s person, the 
perfection of Christ’s work, the fulness of 
Christ’s grace, the revealed mind and will of 
God, has in it more worth and glory than 
all the teaching the schools ever imparted. 
This oil is costly, then, because it is Divine. 
What shall we say of its preciousness? How 
precious the grace of the Holy Spirit, what 
tongue is sufficiently gifted to describe? How 
precious is his indwelling—an ever-ascending, 
heaven-panting, God-thirsting, Christ-desiring 
Spirit! How precious are all the revelations 
he makes of Christ! How precious are the 
consolations he brings, the promises he seals, 
the teachings he imparts; all the emotions he 
awakens, the breathings he inspires, and the 
affections he creates; how precious are those 
graces in the soul of which he is the Author, 
—the faith that leads to a precious Saviour, 
the love that rises to a gracious God, and 
the holy affections which flow forth to all 
the saints! And how shall we speak of its 
fragrance? No art of the apothecary can 
imitate it. One drop of this holy oil, falling 


THE INNER LIFE. 189 


upon the soul, breathes around it a perfume 
like that of heaven. There is a fragrance in 
the man’s spirit, in his conversation, in his 
example, in his very look, that speaks of the 
holy anointing: “ The ointment of the right 
hand betrayeth him.” ‘There is a savour of 
Christ, a heavenliness of temper, a kind of 
divinity of soul, which mark him as belonging 
to the “royal priesthood.” One drop of this 
costly, precious anointing oil, fills the whole 
house with its perfume. ‘There is a peace in 
that abode, a light in that dwelling, an order, 
and regularity, and affection in that family, 
which distinguish it as the residence of a 
royal priest. And travel where he may, sojourn 
with whom he will, that anointed believer car- 
ries the conviction to the heart, and awakens 
the exclamation from the lip, “ By this I know 
that thou art a man of God, for the anointing 
of the Holy One is upon thee.” Thus fragrant 
is this anointing oil. 

But through what channel does this anoint- 
ing come? Only through the union of the 
believer to Christ the Anointed One. All the 
saving operations of the Spirit upon the mind are 
connected with Jesus. If he convinces of sin, it 


190 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


is to lead to the blood of Jesus; if he reveals 
the corruptions of the heart, it is to lead to the 
grace of Jesus » if he teaches the soul’s igno- 
rance, it is to conduct it to the feet of Jesus— 
thus all his operations in the soul are associated 
with Jesus. Now, in conducting this holy 
anointing into the soul, he brings it through 
the channel of our union with the Anointed 
Head. By making us one with Christ, he 
makes us partakers of the anointing of Christ. 
And truly is the weakest, lowliest believer, one 
with this anointed Saviour. His fitness, as 
the Anointed of God, to impart of the plenitude 
of his anointing to all the members of his body, 
is a truth clearly and beautifully set forth. 
Thus is he revealed as the Anointed Head of 
the Church, the great High Priest of the 
royal priesthood: “ Thou lovest righteousness 
and hatest wickedness; therefore God, thy God, 
hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness 
above thy fellows,” Psa.lxv. 7. “The Spirit of 
the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord 
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto 
the meek,” Isa. lxi. 1. In the Acts of the 
Apostles, x. 38, a distinct reference is made to 
this truth: “ How God anointed Jesus of 


THE INNER LIFE. 191 


Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with power.” 
It was this anointing that was upon Christ that 
led the Church of old to exclaim, in the 
fervour of her love, “ Because of the savour of 
thy good ointments thy name is as ointment 
poured forth; therefore do the virgins love 
thee,” Song Sol. i. 3. His human soul, filled 
with the measureless influence of the Divine 
Spirit, the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in 
him bodily, he became the true Aaron, of 
whose anointing all the priests were alike to 
partake. One, then, with Jesus, through the 
channel of his union to the Head, the lowest 
member is anointed with this precious oil. 

The effects of this anointing are what might 
be expected from a cause so glorious. It 
beautifies the soul. It is that anointing spoken 
of by the Psalmist: ‘“ And oil to make his face 
to shine,” Psa. civ.15. Therefore is it called 
the “ beauties of holiness.” How does a man’s 
face shine—how is his countenance lighted up 
—when the joy of the Lord is his strength, 
when the Spirit of adoption is in his soul, when 
the love of God is shed abroad in his heart! 
It gladdens, too. Therefore it is called the 
“ oil of joy,” and “the oil of gladness.” It 


192 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


causes the heart to sing in its deep sorrows, 
imparts the “ garment of praise for the spirit of 
heaviness,” and fills the soul with the glory of 
that “ kingdom which consists not in meats 
and in drinks, but in righteousness and peace 
and joy in the Holy Ghost.” Another effect 
springing from this anointing is the deep 
teaching it imparts: “ Ye have an unction from 
the Holy One, and ye know all things. The 
anointing which ye have received of him 
abideth in you, and ye need not that any man 
teach you; but as the same anointing teacheth 
you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, 
and even as it hath taught you, ye shall abide 
in him,” 1 John u. 20, 27. Such are some of 
the effects of this holy anointing. It beautifies, 
gladdens, and teaches. 

And is there a possibility of the decay of this 
anointing? May its power lessen, and its 
fragrance evaporate? We fear the possibility 
of this melancholy change is but too true. 
That the true priesthood of the Lord can en- 
tirely lose this Divine anointing, we do not for 
one moment assert. Never more will God 
withdraw his Spirit where he has once implanted 
the precious gift. We speak it solemnly for 


THE INNER LIFE. ' 198 


the glory of God, we utter it confidently for the 
comfort of the weak-minded, those who are of 
a fearful heart,—that when once God has poured 
this anointing upon a soul, that soul shall never 
utterly and for ever lose it. ‘To every foe that 
seeks its destruction, to all the hostile influences 
opposed to its well-being, God will utter his 
solemn words of warning: “Do mine anointed 
no harm.” Yea, there is that in the very anoint- 
ing itself that forms a shield around the royal 
priest. 

But, sad truth—there is not a stronger evi- 
dence of the lessening of a man’s grace, of the 
declension of the inner life, of the backsliding 
of his heart, of the spiritual leanness of his 
soul, than is found in the decay of this anoint- 
ing. It may lose its freshness, shed no 
fragrance, impart no power, and scarcely be 
discernible in the character and tone of the 
believer's piety. How may we trace this 
melancholy state—this evaporation of the 
anointing oil? Variously: in the matter of 
real, close transaction with God,—where there 
is the decay of the Divine anointing, there is 
but little dealing between God and the soul,— 
the walk is distant—the spirit is shy; searching 

O 


194 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


of heart, and confession of sin, and dealing 
with the blood, are things laid aside for a more 
convenient season. ‘The want of real power in 
prayer betrays the loss; perhaps in nothing is 
it more evident. The habit of prayer may not be 
suspended ; the form of prayer is still observed: 
but there is no life, nor power, nor unction 
in prayer; no taking of heaven with holy vio- 
lence; no wrestling with the Angel of the 
Covenant; no taking hold of God’s strength ; 
no grasping the promise of God, or leaning 
upon God in the promise; no real faith to 
believe that God will perform what he has 
engaged to do. And why ?—because there is 
a decay of the anointing, and with it a decay of 
the spirit and power of prayer. We listen to 
his voice in supplication, but we feel his loss 
in our own soul. There is nothing in his 
prayer that breaks our heart, that embitters 
sin, that leads us to Christ, that lifts our soul 
from the dust into the sweet sunshine of com- 
munion with God; and we are forced to trace 
it to the lack of that Divine and holy oil which 
maketh the face to shine, and which, in its 
reflected lustre, throws a radiance over the 
countenance of others. In Christian tinter- 


THE INNER LIFE. 195 


course, too, we are sensible of the lack. The 
ttle sparks that we strike, fall upon no kin- 
dling material. In vain we endeavour to light 
up his soul; dampness, coldness, and deathli- 
ness seem to extinguish every effort. We can 
extract nothing that imparts an elevation to 
our own, perhaps, depressed minds. There is 
no savour in his salt, no water in his well, no 
rays of warmth radiating from his soul; but a 
dryness, a deadness, a deteriorating influence, 
of which every spiritual mind brought in con- 
tact with him is sensible. We speak to him of 
Jesus, but the echo is faint; we talk of the 
blessedness of holding communion with God, 
and we advance the sentiment that the throne 
of grace is the sweetest, loveliest, holiest spot 
on earth—but there is no cordial response. 
Indeed, there is nothing that lifts us up, but 
everything, rather, that depresses and that 
sinks us. We are painfully conscious that we 
have spent an hour in the society of one whose 
intercourse has occasioned us a serious loss. 
We feel as if we had been in the contiguity of 
an iceberg, the influence of which has sunk 
the spiritual thermometer of our souls well nigh 
to its lowest point. And what is the cause? 


196 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


—our brother has lost the power and freshness 
of the anointing oil in his soul. In another, 
this decay may be traced in his low views of 
Christ, with the invariable accompaniment of 
high thoughts of himself. He has low views 
of the personal glory of the Saviour, the sight 
of which ought to fill his soul with adoring 
transport. He has depreciating views of the 
atoning blood of the Saviour, the thought of 
which should fill his mouth with the highest 
praise. He seldom contemplates that glory; 
he rarely travels to that blood; and the mourn- 
ful consequence is, his little love to Christ. 
And what is the cause ?—his distance from the 
Anointed One. He has left the feet of the 
true Aaron, like Peter, and has mixed himself 
up with the world, ike Ephraim; and so has 
lost the Christ-endearing, Christ-exalting, self- 
abasing influence of the Divine anointing. In 
yet others it may be traced in an uncertain 
state of mind as to their personal acceptance. 
Inquire what they know of the Spirit’s witness 
—of a well-founded hope of heaven—of the joy 
of pardoned sin? Nothing! Lacking that 
inward anointing which enlightens, confirms, 
and strengthens the soul im the joyous con- 


THE INNER LIFE. 197 


sclousness of its acceptance, they seem to dwell 
for ever in the region of doubt and uncertainty, of 
agitation and fear, as to their personal salvation. 

What are some of the causes to the operation 
of which we are to trace an effect so sad? Many 
are the deteriorating influences to which the an- 
ointing of the Christian is exposed. The influ- 
ence of the world is injurious. There are few 
who can have much transaction with it, even in 
a lawful way, and not be conscious of real spi- 
ritual loss. But few Christians can bear up 
against it. There are but few THorNTOoNS, we 
fear, in the commercial world—men who build 
their sacred oratories by the side of their bank- 
ing and their counting-houses—and who, from 
the world’s turmoil, are wont to retire and hold 
communion with God. Anointed Christian, 
the world in which you live, through which you 
journey, is the great foe to that sacred anointing 
that is upon you! ‘Therefore would we say— 
beware of it! Give it no advantage over 
you; mix not unnecessarily with it; float not 
down with its tide; be not eager for its 
wealth. Grind not the faces of the poor; op- 
press not the needy; withhold not from the 
hireling his wages. Conform not to its plea- 


198 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


sures; countenance not its public amusements. 
Bear not the sacred unction into the world’s 
light, earthly, polluted, God-disowning, and 
Christ-dishonouring atmosphere. The opera, 
and the semi-theatrical oratorio—even though 
the passion and the agonies of the Divine 
Messiah are set to the gamut—and the ball- 
room, are not seemly places for him upon 
whose head the sacred anointing oil has been 
Shed. ‘To this power of the world, may be 
added those unfavourable influences arising 
from unmortified sin, from known derelictions 
of duty, and from intercourse with cold, life- 
less professors of religion—all of which tend 
to absorb the sacred fluid. 

But let us turn to a more pleasing theme— 
the renewal of this Divine anointing: “I shall 
be anointed with fresh oil.” 

That David felt conscious of the evaporation 
there can be no question. But with this con- 
viction he was not content to remain. He panted 
for more life; he longed for more quickening ; 
he lifted up his soul for the renewed anointing : 
“T shall be anointed with fresh oil.” That the 
Lord re-anoints his people, who can doubt? 
Alas for them, if He did not! The ample pro- 


THE INNER LIFE. 199 


vision which he has made for the exigence 
proves it. There is more of the precious oil 
in the sacred Vessel! O blessed, holy, com- 
forting truth to those who, mournfully con- 
scious of their loss, are earnestly desirous for 
their recovery. In the Lord Jesus Christ all 
fulness of anointing dwells. “With him is the 
residue of the Spirit.” He is prepared to im- 
part more grace to those who have lost grace, 
or, who to their present state desire to add an 
increase. In the renewed quickening of the 
Spirit, the re-anointing is received. ‘ Quicken 
thou me!” was the reiterated prayer of David. 
What! was he not already a quickened soul ? 
Undoubtedly. Yet, feeling the need of a re- 
newed quickening, he earnestly importunes for 
it: ‘Quicken me in thy truth, through thy 
judgments, by thy precepts: only quicken thou 
me,—for this my soul pants.” And while the 
world was asking, “Who will show us any 
good?” the fervent breathing of this anointed 
priest of God was, “ Quicken me, O Lord, for 
thy name’s sake,” Psa. cxlii. 11. O seek 
this renewed quickening! New supplies of 
grace from Christ are implied in this fresh 
anointing. New grace—to subdue new cor 


800 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


ruptions, perpetually rising to the surface ; 
to meet new temptations, through the ever- 
shifting ways of the subtle enemy; to overcome 
new difficulties, perpetually occurring in the path 
to heaven; and to bear up under new trials, 
ever transpiring in a world of tribulation. The 
renewed joys and comforts of the Holy Spirit 
are also found in the fresh anointing. The 
joys which had evaporated, are replaced by 
others ; the peace which had been interrupted, 
flows back again; consolations which had fled, 
are restored; and confidence in God, which 
seemed shaken, is once more established in 
the soul. 

In view of a blessing so needed and so 
precious, is it necessary that, in closing this 
chapter, we exhort the spiritual reader that he 
set himself earnestly, believingly, expectingly, 
to be re-anointed with fresh oil? And yet 
there are some who need to be stirred up to 
this their great privilege. To them we would 
say,—Be not content with the old anointing. 
It is essential to a more holy and happy life, 
it is essential to a peaceful and cloudless death, 
that you seek to be anointed with fresh oil. 
Be not satisfied with past experiences. You 


THE INNER LIFE. 201 


may at one time have possessed the clear wit- 
ness of the Spirit; you may have enjoyed the 
love of God in your heart ; you may have lived 
so near to Christ, as to have found ‘‘ Wisdom’s 
ways, ways of pleasantness, and her paths, 
paths of peace:’ but the old anointing ceases 
to afford you now the high delight which you 
once experienced. Seek, then, the fresh anoint- 
ing of the Spirit. Seek to have a new revela- 
tion of Christ to your soul. Seek the renewed 
application of his precious blood to your con- 
science. O seek the fresh oil! There is a 
fresh supply in Christ; a fresh supply in the 
Spirit; a fresh supply in the heart of God; a 
fresh supply in the covenant of grace. Jesus is 
prepared to pour it upon your soul more abun- 
dantly. ‘The Holy Spirit is prepared to lead 
you to the source where this costly treasure 
dwells. A vessel of clay though you are— 
your capacity small, your unworthiness great— 
yet is the Triune God ready to recognise your 
exalted dignity and rank as a king and a priest, 
by shedding more copiously than ever the oil 
of gladness upon your head. Let aged Chris- 
tians, especially, look to the state of their 
souls, and seek this renewed anointing. In 


202 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


nearing the end of their journey, in looking into 
their graves, and beyond them, to the meeting 
with their God and Saviour, they will need to 
be anointed with fresh oil. One drop—O 
how will it insinuate itself through the whole 
inner life, diffusing energy and might!—the soul 
thus renewing its strength, and composing its 
ruffled pinions for its heavenly flight. Come, 
pilgrim of many a weary stage! come, soldier 
of many a hard-fought battle! come, voyager 
of many a storm and tempest, and sit down 
at the Saviour’s feet, and receive of the fresh 
oil! Come, gather up the trailing garments, 
shake off the gathered dust from your sandals, 
wipe the sweat from your brow, and rest awhile 
upon the bosom of your Lord, while with fresh 
oil he anoints you for your burial. Is it not 
time for you to give up this poor world’s pur- 
suit, and lay aside, in some measure, its needless 
anxiety and care, and allow a holy pause, a 
solemn calm, to intervene—ere you unclasp 
your helmet, lay down your staff, and are ga- 
thered to your fathers ? 

As ministers of Christ, as stewards of the great 
mysteries of the gospel, let us not be satisfied 
without this renewed anointing. We stand 


THE INNER LIFE. 208 


perpetually in need, beloved, of the rrrsu oii. 
The power we are incessantly exhausting, the 
grace we are constantly using, the multiform 
duties, the numerous labours in which we are con- 
tinually engaging, demand that we keep our eye 
intently fixed upon the state of our own anoint- 
ing. The past application of the holy oil will 
not meet our present exigencies. We need an 
ever-overshadowing, ever-teaching, ever-anoint- 
ing Spirit. Going to our work relying upon 
former communications of grace, upon old stores 
of knowledge—the present teaching and anoint- 
ing of the Holy Ghost unsought—that work 
must of necessity be performed in a cold and 
insipid, in a perfunctory and powerless manner, 
to the great detriment of the truths we preach, 
of the souls we instruct, and of the Master we 
serve. In the absence of the fresh anointing, 
we shall be tempted, either to substitute old 
performances for new, or else to serve the 
sanctuary with unbeaten oil. In order to come 
before our people with new treasures, or to ex- 
hibit truths, already known and familiar, with 
such unction and vigour as will impart to 
their presentation all the freshness and power 
of newly-discovered revelations, we must be 


904 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


anointed with fresh oil. Why is it that we sow 
so much, and reap so little? why, after our 
studious preparation, and exhausting toil, there 
is so little real power in our preaching, and 
from that preaching so little immediate result ? 
why is it that our words, instead of burning 
upon our lips, and thrown like glowing embers 
into the bosoms of our hearers, enkindling 
holy fires, alas! do but drop like icicles, con- 
gealing ere they reach a solitary heart? Is 
it not, verily, because we lack the fresh oil? 
Necessary as is education,—valuable as is learn- 
ing,—useful auxiliaries as are all the treasures 
we can draw from science,—enriching as is in- 
tellect,—and entrancing as is eloquence, these 
alone constitute not the able minister of the 
New Testament. Other and far more import- 
ant requisites are needed to compose and 
perfect this high and holy character. With- 
out the anointing of the Holy Ghost, what 
spiritually enlightening, sanctifying, saving 
power has the most erudite, and eloquent, and 
convincing ministry? None whatever. O how 
greatly we overlook this! Why is it deemed 
almost a crime to declare fully and broadly the 
distinguishing doctrines of grace? Why is it 


THE INNER LIFE. « 205 


that the preaching of other days—the clear, 
bold enunciation of the great fundamental truths 
of the gospel,—would be sufficient to peril the 
popularity of almost any minister in some of 
the high places of the Christian Church? The 
answer is,—-the formation of a distaste for such 
preaching, by a ministry, in many instances, 
possessing much intellectual power, but lacking 
the power of the Holy Ghost. It is to be 
feared that much of the ministry of the day is 
creating a taste and forming a character sadly 
opposed to preaching thoroughly evangelical, 
deeply spiritual, and possessing, in a large de- 
gree, the anointing of the Spirit of God. We 
do not hesitate to affirm of the generality of the 
preaching of our times, that it is too intellectual 
and recondite. Men are aiming to throw off 
magnificent sermons, the result of mental toil 
the most exhausting. Hence the constant 
rotation in the Christian ministry, the perpetual 
change in the pastoral relation. It is utterly 
impossible that any physical or mental consti- 
tution, the most robust, can long endure such 
close study, such severe thinking, such incessant 
application, such overtasked powers, without 
either an utter prostration, or else seeking 


206 RENEWED ANOINTING OF 


repose in another and a new sphere of labour, 
where old material is made to supply the place 
offresh. That there are some holy and honour- 
able exceptions to this statement, both within 
and without the Establishment, we rejoice to 
believe—men of God who preach not them- 
selves, but with beautiful. simplicity, and holy 
fervour, and fresh anointing, preach Jesus in 
all his personal glories, and in all the fulness 
and perfection of his atoning work—men who 
do not shun to declare the whole counsel of God; 
—upon them we depend as the conservators of 
the truth, and to them we look as the spiritual 
regenerators of the prevailing style of pulpit 
labour. 

We would venture upon one more exhorta- 
tion. Remember your priesthood—it comes 
through a royal line, and it proceeds from the 
Anointed One. Let the thought be ever pre- 
sent with you, “ I am a king—I am a priest— 
I bear about me the anointing of the Lord!” 
The abiding, solemn reflection, the awful con- 
sciousness of the fact, will arm you against 
those influences which tend to wither the life of 
your soul. You will especially watch and pray 
against whatever is known to be injurious to 


THE INNER LIFE. < DOG 


your anointing, to produce a dryness and dead- 
ness in your spirit. See well to the character 
of your reading. Avoid the writings that absorb 
the sweet, holy oil. Can you peruse a chap- 
ter of a novel, or a light romance, or a tale of 
fiction, and not be conscious of violence, in 
some measure, done to this Divine anointing ? 
Impossible! Beware, then, of the drying, 
absorbing tendency and effects of worldly 
literature. Guard, too, against the influence of 
worldly associations—the deadening, carnalising 
influence of the society of the ungodly. We 
bid you not separate yourself entirely from 
them, for this were to go out of the world. 
The gospel of Jesus 1s not reclusive nor selfish. 
The religion of Christ is not the religion of 
convents, and monasteries, and hermit’s cells. 
It bids, and it constrains a Christian to love the 
souls of men, to live for the world’s good, to 
labour for the world’s blessing, to purify it with 
his grace, and to illumine it with his Christi- 
anity. But, we beseech you, avoid its intimacies, 
its friendships, its alliances, and a needless 
exposure to its society, if you would keep fresh 
upon your soul the sweet holy oil. If, then, 
upon an honest examination of the circle in 


208 RENEWED ANOINTING, ETC. 


which you move, of the profession you have 
assumed, of the business you pursue, of the 
pleasures you indulge, of the connections you 
are forming, of the friendships you are culti- 
vating, you discover that which is injurious to 
the life of God in your soul, which despoils you 
of the fragrance of your grace, which impairs 
your moral power, and lessens your usefulness 
in the church and in the world,—beneath the 
cross, and under the renewed anointing of the 
Holy Ghost, yield it at once and for ever. 
Surrendering it heartily, solemnly, for Christ’s 
sake, you shall suffer no loss but the loss of 
that which robbed you of the costliest, sweet- 
est, holiest blessing this side the sunny land of 
heaven. Loss! Ono! You shall be a rich 
gainer. He in whose name you did it—whose 
love constrained you, whose grace strengthened 
you, whose glory guided you, whose eye 
watched you, whose smile beamed upon you, 
and whose ministering spirits, invisibly but 
closely, clustered around you, will pour a tide 
of blessing so rich into your soul, as shall 
compel you, in wondering, adoring gratitude 
and praise to exclaim—‘ T'HoU ANOINTEST MY 
HEAD WITH OIL; MY CUP RUNNETH OVER.” 


CHAPTER VIII. 


THE INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL UPON 
THE INNER LIFE. 


“ Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thow wilt revive me.” 
PgaLM cxxxviii. 7. 

Parriat and imperfect as the present en- 
deavour to lay before the Christian Church 
some views of spiritual life must be considered, 
a more marked deficiency, and one of still greater 
moment, would exist, were we to allow an 
occasional allusion only to a period in the 
believer’s history, which, of all others, has fre- 
quently proved most favourable to the matured 
advancement of the indwelling life—the period 
of sanctified trial. It would not be difficult, 
were the correctness of the fact disputed, to 
summon a cloud of witnesses to testify, that 
seasons of trouble have invariably proved, in 
the experience of the spiritual mind, seasons of 

P 


210 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL 


soul-quickening ; that times of Divine chasten- 
ing have ever been times of heart-recovery; and 
that, consequently, we may regard the hour of 
affliction as bearing upon its sombre wings, 
concealed indeed beneath their dark plumage, 
some of the golden blessings of the Christian 
life. The raven carrying food to the languid 
prophet, and the lion yielding honey to the 
mighty Samson, are symbols of the mode 
which God sometimes adopts of transmitting 
nourishment and reviving to the inner life of 
his people. Truly in their case it may be said 
—and the enigma admits of easy solution— 
“ Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of 
the strong came forth sweetness.” 

We have been studying in the preceding 
pages several illustrations of spiritual life, 
gleaned from the experience of David. Deeply 
instructive as each must have been, we cannot 
regard them as surpassed in tender, touching, 
and holy interest, by that one upon which we 
now propose to fix the attention of the spiritual 
reader,—David in deep trouble, yet assured of 
Divine reviving: “ Though I walk in the 
midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me.” And 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. Xb 


yet how difficult it often is to win an assent to 
the truth taught in these words; to bring the 
sentiment they contain to a practical bearing 
upon the judgment and feelings of the tried 
Christian, while yet in the midst of the furnace ! 
How hard, especially under the first stunning 
effects of his affliction, to reason him into the 
belief that those very circumstances which are 
now weaving their web of difficulty around 
his path, may yet possess a power and a 
buoyancy so great, as to lift his soul from the 
region of coldness, despondency, and gloom, 
into that of life, hght, and joy. Nor should 
this slowness to admit a statement so appa- 
rently contradictory surprise us. Affliction 
wears neither a pleasant nor a promising aspect. 
Frowning and foreboding, there is at first view 
something before which the stoutest heart 
quails, and from which the sternest spirit 
shrinks—whose tincture of wormwood and gall 
the lips would fain allow to pass, untasted and 
untouched. And although that darkening cloud 
embosoms a heaven-sent message, and although 
that rod, dotted with buds and blossoms, is 
prepared to burst into fruit and beauty, and 


OW Be INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL 


although the “ Man of sorrows” left the per- 
fume of his own lips lingering upon the brim 
of that cup, we would yet willingly forego the 
experience of the blessing which it conveys, to 
escape the present pain of the discipline which 
it enjoins. But let us turn our attention to the 
deeply instructive and precious truth before us 
—the relation which sanctified trial has to the 
reviving of the inner life of the soul. 
Contemplate the Psalmist’s circumstances : 
“ Walking in the midst of trouble.” It was no 
new and untrodden path along which he was 
pursuing his way to God. ‘The footprint— 
sometimes stained with blood, always moistened 
with tears—of many a suffering pilgrim might 
be descried in that way, from the time that Abel, 
the primeval martyr, laid the first bleeding 
brow that ever reposed upon the bosom of 
Jesus. And yet how often does trial overtake 
the believer, as ‘though some strange thing had 
happened to him!’ That atthe peculiar nature 
of an affliction a Christian man should be 
startled and alarmed, would create no surprise ; 
but that he should be startled at the trial itself, 
as if he alone—the only one of the family— 
were exempted from the discipline of the cove- 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. 218 


nant, and had no interest in the Saviour’s 
declaration,—“ In the world ye shall have tri- 
bulation ’—might well astonish us. 

But David’s experience is that of many of 
the spiritual seed of David. Huis words seem 
to imply continuous trial: “I walk in the midst 
of trouble.” With how many travellers to the 
celestial city it is thus! They seem never to 
be without trial. They know no cessation, 
they obtain no repose, they experience no rest. 
The foam of one mountain billow has scarcely 
broken and died upon the shore, ere another 
follows in its wake: “ Deep calleth unto deep.” 
Is it the trial of sickness ?—the darkened 
chamber, scarcely ever illumined with one 
cheering ray of light—the bed of suffering, 
seldom offering one moment’s real repose—the 
couch of weariness, rarely quitted, are vivid 
pictures of trial, drawn from real life, needing 
no colouring of the fancy to heighten or exag- 
gerate. Is it domestic trial ?—what scenes of 
incessant chafings, and anxieties, and turmoils, 
and sources of bitterness, do some families 
present; trouble seems never to absent itself 
from the little circle. Yes, it is through a 
series of trials that many of Christ’s followers 


214 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL 


are called to travel. The loss of earthly sub- 
stance may be followed by the decay of health, 
and this succeeded, perhaps, by that which, of 
all afflictions, the most deeply pierces and 
lacerates the heart, and for a season covers 
every scene with the dark pall of woe—the © 
desolation of death. Thus the believer ever 
journeys along a path paved with sorrow, and 
hemmed in by trial. Well, be it so! We do 
not speak of it complainingly. God forbid! 
We arraign not the wisdom, nor doubt the 
mercy, nor impeach the truth of Him who has 
drawn every line of that path, who has paved 
every step of that way, and who knows its 
history from the end to the beginning. Why 
should our heart fret against the Lord ? Why 
should we weary at the way? Itis the ordained 
way—it is the right way—it is the Lord’s way; 
and it is the way to a city of habitation, where the 
soul and body—the companions of the weary 
pilgrimage—will together sweetly and eternally 
rest. ‘Then all trouble ceases—then all conflict 
terminates. Emerging from the gloom and laby- 
rinth of the wilderness, the released spirit finds 
itself at home, the inhabitant of a world of 
which it is said,—“ God shall wipe away all 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. “ Die 


tears from their eyes; and there shall be no 
more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither 
shall there be any more pain, for the former 
things are passed away.” 

But the spiritual troubles which encompass 
the Christian walk are the deepest and the 
severest of all his trials. What in comparison 
are others? Our Lord keenly felt this when 
he uttered that affecting exclamation: “ Now 
is my soul troubled; and what shall I say ? 
Shall I say, Father, save me from this hour ? 
But for this cause came I unto this hour.” 
What to him—galling and agonising as they 
were—what to him the smiting, and the scourg- 
ing, and the spitting, and the excruciating tor- 
ture, compared with the sword which was now 
entering his soul—the mental conflict and spi- 
ritual sorrow which, in the hour of atonement, 
amazed, staggered, and overwhelmed him ? 
Listen again to his affecting cry: “ My soul is 
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death.” ‘Then, 
withdrawing himself from his disciples—for the 
human sympathy upon which he had relied in 
anticipation of the hour of suffering failed him 
now—retiring from man, he flung himself 
upon the bosom of God, and kneeling down, 


216 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL 


he prayed, “ O my Father, if it be possible, let 
this cup pass from me!’ Such, my soul, was 
the conflict which thy Saviour endured for 
thee ! 

Partakers of Christ’s sufferings, all true be- 
lievers are in a measure acquainted with some 
of those soul troubles which thus overwhelmed 
the Son of God. The suspensions of Divine 
consolation—the hidings of God’s countenance 
—the assaults of Satan—the contact and con- 
flict with sin—are bitter ingredients in that cup 
of spiritual sorrow of which they are sometimes 
called deeply to drink. But the subject more 
immediately before us is, the influence of all 
sanctified trial upon the life of God in the soul: 
“ ‘Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou 
wilt revive me.” 

That there was a consciousness in Davyid’s 
mind of spiritual relapse is clearly evident. It 
would appear that in the process of trial 
through which he was now passing, the dis- 
covery of this relapse was made. O what a 
detecter of the secret state of our souls does 
the season of trial often prove! We are not 
aware of our impaired strength, of our weak 
faith, of our powerless grace ;—how feeble our 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. . Oe 


hold on Christ is; how legal our views of the 
gospel are; how beclouded our minds may 
be; how partial our acquaintance with God 
is,—until we are led into the path of trouble. 
The season of prosperity veils the real state 
of our souls from our view. No Christian can 
form an accurate estimate of his spiritual con- 
dition who has not been brought into a state 
of trial. We faint in the day of adversity, 
because we then find—what, perhaps, was not 
even suspected in the day of prosperity,—that 
our strength is small. 

But seasons of trial are emphatically what 
the word expresses—they ¢ry the work in the 
souls of the righteous. ‘The inner life derives 
immense advantage from them. ‘The deeper 
discovery that is then made of the evil of the 
heart is not the least important result: “ Fool- 
ishness is bound in the heart of a child; but 
the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.” 
What folly still dwells in the hearts of the 
wise—bound up and half concealed—who can 
tell? Who would have suspected such de- 
velopments in the life of Abraham, of David, 
of Solomon, of Peter? And so is it with 
all who yet are the possessors of that wisdom 


218 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL 


which will guide their souls to eternal glory. 
Folly is bound up in their hearts; but the 
sanctified rod of correction reveals it, and the 
discovery proves one of the costliest blessings 
in the experience of the disciplined child. 
Listen to the language of Moses, addressed 
to the children of Israel,—“ Thou shalt re- 
member all the way which the Lord thy God 
led thee these forty years in the wilderness, 
to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know 
what was in thine heart, whether thou wouldest 
keep his commandments or no.” And O whata 
discovery that forty years’ marching and counter- 
marching in the wilderness was to them of 
the pride, and impatience, and unbelief, and 
ingratitude, and distrust, that were bound up 
in their heart! And yet, though all this evil 
was deep-seated in their nature, they knew it 
not, and suspected it not, until trial brought it 
to the surface. Thus, beloved, is it with us. 
The latent evil is brought to light. God leaves 
us to try what is in our heart, and this may 
be the first step in the reviving of his gracious 
work in our souls. O let us not, then, shrink 
from the probing, nor startle at its discovery, 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. " 919 


if it but lead us nearer to holiness, nearer to 
Christ, nearer to God, nearer to heaven ! 

The time of trouble is often, too, a time 
of remembrance, and so becomes a time of 
reviving. Past backslidings,—unthought of, 
unsuspected, and unconfessed,—are recalled to 
memory, in the season that God is dealing 
with us. David had forgotten his transgres- 
sion, and the brethren of Joseph their sin, 
until trouble summoned it back to memory. 
Times of trial are searching times, remem- 
bering times. Then it is we turn in upon 
ourselves, and “bethink ourselves in the land 
whither we are carried captive ;’ and then 
with David we exclaim, “J thought on my 
ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.” 
And thus it is that the Lord revives us in 
trouble. j 

By bringing us into a closer acquaintance 
with the word, trial stimulates the inner life. 
We flee to the word for counsel or for comfort, 
and the word proves a quickening word. Di- 
vine correction not only teaches, but it stimu- 
lates our relish for the spiritual parts of God’s 
truth. In times of prosperity we are tempted 


220 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL 


to neglect the word. The world abates the 
keenness of the soul’s appetite. We taste no 
sweetness in its promises, and cannot receive 
its admonitions and rebukes. “ The full soul 
loatheth a honeycomb, but to the hungry soul 
every bitter thing 1s sweet.” MReplenished with 
created good, and surfeited with earthly com- 
fort, the soul, in its pride and self-sufficiency, 
loathes the Divine honey of God’s word. But 
when the Lord removes the creature, and em- 
bitters the world—both proving cisterns that 
can hold no water—then how precious becomes 
the word of Jesus!—not its doctrines and its 
consolations only, but even its deepest search- 
ings and its severest rebukes—that which lays 
us the lowest in the dust of shame and self- 
abhorrence—are then sweet as the honey and 
the honeycomb to our renewed taste. Then 
in truth we exclaim—‘“ How sweet are thy 
words to my taste! yea, sweeter than honey 
to my mouth!” 

And from whence flows our true comfort 
in the hour of deep heart-sorrow? David, in 
his trouble, shall answer: “This is my comfort 
in my affliction—/for thy word hath quickened 


9) 


me.” O how many a deeply-tried Christian 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. PPh 


has set his seal to this truth! What is the 
comfort sought by the worldling in zs afflic- 
tion? Alas! he seeks to drown his sorrow 
by plunging yet deeper into that which has 
created it. He goes to the world for his com- 
fort—that world that has already belied him, 
betrayed him, and stung and wounded him more 
keenly and deeply than the adder. The crea- 
ture is his idol, money is his god, and pleasure 
his only resource. But turn to the man of 
God. What was the Psalmist’s comfort in his 
sorrow? Was it the lightness of his afflic- 
tion ? was it the love of Jonathan? was it 
the soothing tenderness and sympathy of the 
saints? Ah no!—it was none of these. It 
was the spiritual quickening his soul received 
through the truth of God! This healed his 
sorrow-stricken heart; this poured a tide of 
richer comfort into his deeply afflicted soul 
than the sweetest human balm, or even the 
entire removal of his trial, could have done. 
O favoured soul, who, when in deep and dark 
waters—when passing through the fiery fur- 
nace—art led to desire spiritual quickening 
above all other comforts beside—sweetly tes- 
tifying, “ Z'his is my comfort in my afiliction, 


222 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL 


thy word hath gquickened me.” ‘That word, 
unfolding to us Jesus, leading us to Jesus, and 
transforming us into the image of Jesus, proves 
a reviving word in the hour of trial: “I should 
have perished in my affliction, unless thy law 
had been my delight.” 

The grace that is brought into exercise in 
the particular season of affliction, must neces- 
sarily tend greatly to promote the revival of the 
inner life. In a time of prosperity, grace is apt 
from desuetude to become feeble and torpid. 
And yet, were the believer but keenly alive to 
the perils of his path, he would feel as deeply 
the necessity of especial grace to hold him up 
in the smooth as in the rough way. “Hold thou 
me up in thy paths,” was a prayer replete with 
holy, heavenly wisdom. Thus walking in the 
very ways of God, the believer requires the 
sustaining power of God. And yet how sadly 
does grace often decay, and the inner life go 
back, in the time when all things smile, and the 
path is smooth. A spiritual paralysis seems to 
steal over the whole moral man. But blessed 
is he who, learning this truth, in the midst 
of his most active and spiritual and holy duties, 
—when laying himself out the most for God, 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. 293 


and treading with all uprightness in the Lord’s 
path,—is led to distrust his own wisdom, 
strength and truthfulness, and breathe the 
prayer, “ Hold up my goings in thy paths, that 
my footsteps slip not.” 

And yet how liable is grace to decay, and the 
inner life to lose ground, when all things smile 
upon a path smooth and unruffled! But God 
sends affliction, and the grace that lay con- 
cealed is brought to view, and the grace that 
remained dormant is summoned to arms; the 
whole soul is awakened, energized and inspired 
as with new life. “ The trial of faith worketh 
patience.” Thus one tried grace stirs up 
another grace, until all the links in the golden 
chain feel the electric influence and are set in 
motion. O blessed trouble, that so stirs up the 
life of God in the soul as to make each grace 
of the Spirit a “ew sharp threshing instrument 
having teeth;’ a weapon re-cast, and newly 
furbished in the furnace, and so coming forth 
with keener edge and more polished blade, to 
“fight the good fight of faith,” with mightier 
power and success. 

But the influence of sanctified affliction upon 
the inner life is, perhaps, the most evident and 


224 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL 


powerful in the revival of the spirit of prayer. 
Truly, in reference to this happy result, may 
the believer exclaim, “ Though I walk in the 
midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me.” Nothing 
more effectually quickens us to communion with 
God than the trial that flows from his love, and 
is sanctified by his Spirit. Strange that to this, 
the highest, holiest, and sweetest privilege pre- 
pared for the Christian, he is often the most 
indifferent, and in its observance his feelings 
are the most chilled and sluggish. What an 
evidence—one more melancholy there cannot 
be—of the moral deadness of the soul by 
nature, that even after it 1s quickened with a 
life that brings it into union with the life of 
God,—after the Spirit of God has entered 
and made his abode there, ever dwelling and 
reigning and working in it, there should still 
remain so much deadness to that which is 
spiritual, especially the most spiritual of all 
duties and the most precious of all privileges— 
communion with God! | 

But in the time of trouble we stir ourselves 
up to calling upon God; we awake to the con- 
viction—perhaps it is as new and as novel as 
though it were for the first time felt—we 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. 225 


awake to the conviction that we are in posses- 
sion of a mighty instrument, which when exerted 
brings all heaven, and the God of heaven, into 
our soul. We start as from a dream; and just 
at the identical moment when all creature 
assistance droops, and all earthly resources fail, 
and leave us like a dismantled wreck drifting 
upon the billows, we discover that we are 
furnished with a power of relief mightier than 
the mightiest angel’s,—a power which, when 
exerted, (we speak it with reverence,) overcomes, 
like the wrestling patriarch, Omnipotence itself 
—the power of prayer! And what is prayer 
but God’s power in the soul of a poor, feeble 
worm of the dust, over Himself? It was no 
human might of Abraham which enabled him 
to wrestle with, and prevail with, the Angel of the 
covenant: it was the power of the Holy Ghost 
in his soul ; and when the Divine Angel yielded, 
he yielded but to himself, and so God had all 
the glory—and shall have, of all that he has 
wrought for us, and of all that we have wrought 
by him, through eternity. 

It is in the time of trouble, then, that we 
learn to pray with new power. We become 
more thoroughly acquainted with the Divine 

Q 


226 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL 


nature and the omnipotent energy of prayer. 
We learn what our resources, as the true sons 
of Israel, are. Many are then led to pray, 
-who never prayed before. ‘“ Lord, in trouble 
‘have they visited thee, they poured out a 
‘prayer when thy chastening was upon them,” 
Isa. xxvi. 16. Then it is the proud spirit 
yields ; the knee that never bent before, bends 
now, and the terrified soul cries out unto Him 
whose chastening is upon it. The slumbering 
Christian, too, is awakened to call upon God. 
Then it is he finds at what a distance he had 
been living from God. Then he discovers his 
true position—the real state of his soul, touching 
prayer. Thus aroused, like the slumbering 
prophet, by a voice and startled by a rebuke 
issuing from a quarter he would least have 
suspected—“ What meanest thou, O sleeper ? 
arise and call upon thy God !’—he awakes, and 
finds himself in a storm threatening instant 
destruction. To what does he then betake 
himself? David shall answer: “I give myself 
unto prayer,” Psa. cix. 4. And oh, how elo- 
quent is then the voice of the wrestling be- 
hever! Never did the fugitive prophet “ pray 
unto the Lord his God” as when walking 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. PA2..7 § 


in the midst of trouble. “TI cried by rea- 
son of mine affliction unto the Lord, and 
he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried 
I, and thou heardest my voice. When my 
soul fainted within me I remembered the 
Lord: and my prayer came in unto thee, into 
thine holy temple,” Jonah 11.1, 2, 7. In this 
way the Lord revives the spirit of prayer 
within us. And oh, what words can describe 
the blessedness of prayer in trial!—the pre- 
ciousness of the privilege of having a God to 
go to, a Father to flee to in trouble! To 
bring you more deeply and personally into the 
experience of this, dear tried Christian, the 
Lord thy God is dealing with you now. Oh, 
beloved, betake yourself unto prayer! Thou 
shalt indeed find it the outlet of all sorrow, and 
the inlet of all joy. Welcome the trouble 
that thus revives you. Receive with meekness 
of spirit, yea with gladness of heart, the disci- 
pline, however humbling, that throws you upon 
God—yea, that severs you from all creatures, 
and that shuts you up to Him alone. That 
discipline, painful as it is, springs from love. 
In love that trouble is sent, in love that cross 1s 
permitted, in love that cup is given, in love that 


228 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED ‘TRIAL 


rod is used,—it is to set you upon the work of 
prayer. What are these frowns of thy Father, 
what these hidings of thy Saviour, what these 
withholdings of the Spirit, but to allure you 
within the holiest, there to find the throne of 
grace? “I will go,” says the Lord, “and 
return to my place till they acknowledge their 
offence, and seek my face; in their affliction 
they will seek me early,’ Hos. v. 15. And 
what, too, the chastening beneath which your 
tender, sensitive spirit is now smarting, but to 
bring you into Ephraim’s state of revived 
prayer,—‘I have surely heard Ephraim be- 
moaning himself thus: Thou hast chastised 
me, and I was chastised as a bullock unac- 
customed to the yoke: turn thou me, and I 
shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my 
God,” Jer. xxxi. 18. Then, beloved, “ de- 
spise not the chastening of the Lord, nor faint 
when thou art rebuked of him,” for he only 
seeks to draw you closer within his bosom. 
Give your troubled spirit unto prayer. Yield 
it to the reposing, soothing influence, of com- 
munion with God. Withhold not from thy 
bleeding wound this healing balsam, rob not 
thy sick heart of this precious panacea. Give 


UPON THE INNER LIFE. 229 


yourself unto prayer. You hold in your hands 
a power which God cannot resist. Approaching 
him in the name of Jesus, you may embosom 
your tried and weary spirit in the very heart of 
Jehovah. Take the praying saints of old for 
your example and encouragement,—‘ Moses and 
Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among 
them that call upon his name; they called 
upon the Lord, and he answered them. He 
spake unto them in the cloudy pillar,” 
Psa. xcix. 6, 7. The Lord who “maketh the 
clouds his chariots,” 1s prepared to speak to 
you in love from your ‘ cloudy pillar.’ 


“ O wondrous power of faithful prayer ! 
What tongue can tell the Almighty grace ? 
God’s hands or bound or open are, 

As Moses or Elijah prays; 
Let Moses in the Spirit groan, 
And God cries out—‘ Let me alone! 


“ «Vet me alone, that all my wrath 
May rise the wicked to consume! 
While justice hears thy praying faith, 
It cannot seal the sinner’s doom: 

My Son is in my servant’s prayer, 
And Jesus forces me to spare.’ ” 


Are you, beloved, walking in the midst of 
trouble? Think not that you are alone. May 


230 INFLUENCE OF SANCTIFIED TRIAL, ETC. 


your eye of faith be “ anointed with fresh eye- 
salve,’ to see One walking side by side with 
you, the same who walked with the three 
children through the fiery furnace: “ whose 
form is like the Son of God.” Yes! Jesus is 
with you in your trial. Christ is with you in 
your trouble. The path, however straight, is 
not so narrow that your Lord cannot tread it 
with you, side by side. Your way is not so in- 
tricate that he cannot enable you to thread your 
steps through the labyrinth. There is room 
enough for you and Christ to walk together. 
He is with you: though like the two disciples 
journeying, in mournful communion one with 
the other, to Emmaus, your eyes may be holden 
that you see him not, yet is he journeying with 
you along that sad and mournful, that lone and 
pensive path. Christ is in your adversity— 
Christ is in your cross—Christ is in your crook 
—Christ is in your sufferimg—Christ is in your 
persecution—Christ is in your sickness—yea, 
Christ is at your side every step you take, and 
he will conduct you safely to your Father’s 
house. Though you walk in the midst of 
trouble, he will revive you. | 


CHAPTER IX. 


THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST IN ITS RELATION 
TO THE INNER LIFE OF THE CHRISTIAN. 


“ That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection.” 
PHIL. iii. 10. 


Tuer real value of any truth to a child of 
God is the conscious power of that truth in 
his own soul. The Bible is designed to be an 
experimental and a practical book. It deals 
not in abstract truth, in mere theoretical teach- 
ing, but in revelations intended by its Divine 
Author to address themselves to the judgment, 
thus finding an inlet to the conscience and the 
heart, and becoming a leaven of holiness in the 
soul, diffusing its influence through the entire 
moral and intellectual man. We repeat the 
observation, that any one truth is valuable to 
the Christian in proportion to his personal and 
experimental acquaintance with its nature and 
effects. And here it is impossible to resist the 
solemn remark,—how far an individual may go in 
an intellectual subscription to, and a theoretical 


232 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


reception of, vital and essential truth, and yet 
be utterly ignorant of its renewing and sancti- 
fying power in his soul ! 

It is another characteristic of the true be- 
hever in Jesus, that he places no limit to his 
knowledge and experience of Divine truth. 
Take the apostle, whose words are now under 
consideration, for an example of this. Did he 
not already know something of Christ? As- 
suredly! And yet he panted to know more: 
“That I may know him.” Had he not already 
felt in his soul—and in no mean degree, too— 
the power of the Lord’s resurrection? Un- 
doubtedly! And yet behold how he desires to 
know more: “ That I may know him, and the 
power of his resurrection.” Thus placing no 
bound to the extent of his knowledge of 
Christ, and his experience of the truth, but 
defining for himself a scope worthy the objects 
of his study, and placing his eager and fixed 
gaze upon the loftiest standard of Christian 
attainment, he forgot the things that were 
behind, and pressed forward to those things 
which were before, never regarding himself as 
having attained, so long as the goal was yet 
unreached, and the “ mark for the prize of the 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 233 


high calling of God in Christ Jesus” was still 
before him. O that there were more of this 
Christianity in the Church of God! LEvery- 
thing in creation and providence is advancing 
to its given point of perfection; why should 
the believer alone be stationary ?—why should 
he, possessing already the germ of a perfection 
so glorious, and destined to a development so 
great, be content with a dwarfish stature, rather 
than the “ stature of a perfect man in Christ 
Jesus?” O Lord, stir us up to greater ad- 
vances in the Divine life ! 

The resurrection of Christ is a vital doctrine 
of Christianity. It sustains an essential rela- 
tion to the spiritual life of the believer. View- 
ing it in connection with the union of Christ 
and his people, the two facts become identical— 
standing in the relation of cause and effect. 
Our Lord, in his great atoning work, acted in 
a public, or representative character. He re- 
presented in his person the whole elect of God, 
who virtually were in him each step that he 
took in working out their redemption. In his 
resurrection from the grave this was pre- 
eminently so. The Head could not be resusci- 
tated apart from the Body. Christ could not 


934 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


rise without the Church. To have left the 
Church, which he represented, and in whose 
place and behalf he acted, still in the grave, 
would have been, to say nothing of the impos- 
sibility of such a thing, her eternal destruction. 
Thus, then, the new, or the resurrection life of 
Christ, and the inner, or spiritual life of the 
believer, are one and indivisible. Now, when 
the resurrection of the Head is spiritually 
realised, when it is fully received into the 
heart by faith, it becomes a quickening, 
energizing, sanctifying truth to each member 
of his body. It transmits a power to the in- 
most soul, felt in all the actings and manifesta- 
tions of the spiritual life: “ That I may know 
him, and the power of his resurrection.” 
Blessed are they who feel, and who feel daily, 
that they are indeed “ risen with Christ,” and 
who find every new perception of this great 
truth to act hike a mighty lever to their souls—. 
lifting them above this “ present evil world ’— 
a world passing away. I propose in the present 
chapter to adduce a few observations upon the 
authenticity of this great doctrine, and then 
proceed to illustrate its relation to the inner 
life of the believer. 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 235 


How truly has the “ Stone which the builders 
rejected become the head stone of the corner !” 
The single doctrine upon the truth of which 
Christianity rests, and which, for the same 
reason, is, of all the truths of the Bible, the 
most impugned and rejected by the unbeliever, 
is the doctrine of Christ’s resurrection. Both 
the Jew and the infidel have sagacity enough 
to perceive that, if this fact be proved, all is 
proved that appertains to Christianity. The 
great question of the divinity of our holy reli- 
gion is at once and for ever set at rest. Christ 
is then declared to be the true Messiah, and 
Christianity the true religion. But come we 
to the argument. Quietly and reverently his 
disciples composed his mangled limbs, and 
laid them to rest in the new-made sepulchre. 
Up to this touching and eventful moment 
the chain of evidence had been powerful and 
complete. Event had succeeded event, and 
- miracle had followed miracle—each one ful- 
filling some new prediction, and supplying 
some still more convincing demonstration of 
his Messiahship. But suppose that at this 
crisis the chain were broken! Suppose the 
last link were wanting to complete the mighty 


936 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


proofs of his divinity! What if he had not 
come back again to life—death and the grave 
prolonging beyond the predicted moment their 
boasted victory ? Who does not see that the 
whole case would have fallen to the ground— 
that the entire testimony would have been 
overthrown—that the great volume of prophecy 
would have proved a fiction—the hopes of past 
ages a dream—salvation a stupendous lie—re- 
demption a splendid delusion—and Christ the 
prince of impostors? But eternal love and 
omnipotent power were pledged for the certain 
and glorious issue. 

Were we disputing with an objector, we should 
probably pursue a line of argument somewhat 
like this:—The great question is, Was the 
tomb of Christ emptied or not? If it was, 
what became of its sacred deposit—the body of 
Jesus? The first and leading point is conceded 
by all—viz., that the grave was vacated. ‘Then, 
what became of the body? Was it retained 
by the Jews? Then let them produce it, and 
the question is fairly and for ever set at rest, 
and decided in their favour. Was it true, as 
affirmed by his enemies, that his disciples, 
who but three days before clustered a feeble 


AND THE INNER LIFE. PSE 


weeping band around that tomb, had, in the 
quietude of night, and in the face of a Roman 
guard, armed to the teeth, and wakeful to 
every breath, sacrilegiously invaded its sanc- 
tity, and robbed it of its precious treasure ? 
Still the act would not have aided their 
cause, while it must have furthered the de- 
sign of the Jews. But mark the perfect 
asreement of the witnesses who testified that 
he was risen from the dead. Five hundred of 
them declare and affirm that Christ was alive. 
They were all examined, and cross-examined 
apart, and still nothing could shake their testi- 
mony that he was alive. And where did they 
publish the fact? Did they travel to some 
remote place, where the evidence could not be 
sifted, and where they might succeed in palming 
their story upon the ignorance and credulity of 
strangers ? No! but in Jerusalem—in the 
synagogues—upon the very spot where he had 
asserted his Messiahship, foretold his death, 
and predicted his resurrection, they affirmed 
that he was alive. And when did they publish 
the doctrine? Did they wait until the epoch 
of his resurrection had passed, and the circum- 
stance of its novelty and interest had subsided ? 


238 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


Nay; but from the moment that the celestial 
sentinels, who still lingered within the tomb, 
announced that he was not there, but was risen 
—pointing to the vacant spot where he had 
Jain, as an affirmation of the truth—they went 
forth and published the fact; and while the 
whole city was in a tempest of excitement, and 
the eyes of his enemies were still sparkling 
with rage, and the storm that had laid low the 
Saviour threatened to crush his followers, they 
fearlessly and boldly affirmed everywhere that 
Jesus was alive. Is it likely, we ask, that these 
men, timid and unlearned as they were, and 
confronted, too, with the sternest tribunal of 
the world, could have invented such an impos- 
ture, or if so, could have succeeded in winning 
such multitudes over to its belief? We think 
it impossible. 

The circumstances of the Saviour’s resurrec- 
tion were in harmony with its lonely and solemn 
srandeur. No human witness was privileged 
to behold it. The mysterious re-union of the 
human soul with the body of Christ was an 
illustrious event, upon which no mortal eye was 
permitted to gaze. There is a moral grandeur 
of surpassing character in the resurrection of 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 239 


Christ unseen. The fact is not an object with 
which sense has to do so much as faith. And 
that no human eye was permitted to witness 
the stupendous event, doubtless was designed 
to teach man that it was with the spiritual and 
not with the fleshly apprehension of this truth 
‘that he had especially to do. What eye but 
that of faith could see the illustrious Conqueror 
come forth, binding, with adamantine chains, 
hell, death, and the grave? What principle but 
the spiritual and mighty principle of faith could 
enter into the revealed mind of God, sympathise 
with the design of the Saviour, and interpret the 
sublime mystery of this stupendous event? It 
was proper, therefore, nay it was worthy of 
God and in harmony with the character and 
the design of the resurrection of our Lord, that 
a vail should conceal its actual accomplishment 
from the eye of his Church, and that the great 
evidence they should have of the truth of the 
fact should be, the power of his resurrection 
felt and experienced in their souls. O yes! the 
only power of the Saviour’s resurrection which 
we desire to know is that which comes to us 
through the energy of an all-seeing, all-conquer- 
ing, all-believing faith. O give me this, rather 


240 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


than to have witnessed with these eyes the 
celestial attendants clustering around the tomb 
—the rolling away of the stone that was upon 
the sepulchre—the breaking of the seal— 
and the emerging form of the Son of God, 
bearing in his hands the emblems and the tokens 
of his victory. The spiritual so infinitely tran- 
scends the carnal— ie eye of faith is so much 
more glorious than tue eye of sense, that our 
Lord himself has sanctified and sealed it with 
his own precious blessing—“ Jesus saith unto 
him, Thomas, because thou hast seen me thou 
hast believed: blessed are they that have not 
seen, and yet have believed.” Blessed Jesus! 
in faith would I then follow thee each step of 
thy journey through this vale of tears—in faith 
would I visit the manger, the cross, and the 
tomb,—for thou hast pronounced him blessed 
above all, who, though he sees not, yet believes 
in thee. Lord, I believe, help thou mine 
unbelief.” 

Perhaps no circumstance connected with the 
resurrection of Christ conveys to the mind a 
clearer idea of its bearings upon the happiness 
of the Church than the part which the Divine 
Father is represented as having taken in the 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 241 


illustrious event. His having committed him- 
self to the fact, at once stamps it with all its 
saving interest. Thus is it ascribed to him— 
“Whom God hath raised” —“ Like as Christ 
was raised up from the dead by the glory of 
the F'ather”—“ If the Spirit of him that raised 
up Jesus from the dead.’ By this act of rais- 
ing up his Son from the grave, the Father 
manifested his infinite delight in, and his full 
acceptance of, the sacrifice of Christ, as a finished 
and satisfactory expiation for the sins of his 
people. So long as Jesus remained in the grave, 
there was wanting the evidence of the acceptance 
of his death—the great seal of heaven, the signa- 
ture of God, was needed to authenticate the fact. 
But when the Father released the Surety from 
the dominion of death, he annihilated, by that act, 
all legal claim against his Church, declaring the 
ransom accepted and the debt cancelled. ‘He 
was taken from prison,’—as the prisoner of jus- 
tice,—and the prisoner of death,—and the pri- 
soner of the grave: the Father, in the exercise of 
his glorious power, opens the prison door and 
delivers the illustrious captive,—and by that 
door through which he emerges again to life, 
enters the full justification of his whole Church 
R 


949 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


—for it is written: “He was delivered for our 
offences, and was raised again for our justifica- 
tion.” Such is the doctrine, whose relation to 
the inner life is so essential, interesting, and 
influential, as to be worthy of our especial and 
deepest consideration. 

A more important truth—where all are of 
infinite moment to the happiness of man—is 
not found in the word of God. As it forms 
the keystone to the mighty arch of Chris- 
tianity—essential therefore to the stability and 
beauty of the whole fabric—so it constitutes the 
groundwork of spiritual life upon the basis of 
which the Holy Spirit of God quickens the 
souls of all who are the “called according to his 
purpose.” The relation of the Lord’s resur- 
rection to the life of his people springs from 
the union which subsists between them. The 
Lord Jesus acted not, as we have just intimated, 
in his private or individual capacity, in any 
step which he took in the accomplishment of 
our salvation. He lived and laboured, died and 
rose again, as a public man, and standing in a 
_ federal relation to the Church. He needed not 
to obey for himself, for he was holy. He needed 
not to die for himself, for he had no sin to 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 243 


atone. He needed not to rise from the dead 
for himself, for he was Essential Life. But 
when he lived and died, rose and revived 
again, he acted in behalf of, and in union with, 
a people who were one and indivisible with 
himself. Hence the influence of the great 
truth of Christ’s resurrection upon the state of 
the inner life. It was a knowledge of this 
truth which awoke the ardent desire of the 
Apostle’s soul, “That I may know him and 
the power of his resurrection.” 

Trace this power as it first appears in the 
spiritual resurrection of the child of God. ‘The 
Apostle Paul, in behalf of the Ephesian saints, 
prays that, “the eyes of their understanding 
being enlightened, they may know what is the 
exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward 
who believe, which he wrought in Christ when 
he raised him from the dead.” Thus the same 
resurrection power which brought back to life 
again the Head of the Church, is exerted in 
effecting the spiritual resurrection of the Church 
itself. The true believer is already risen. He 
was once dead in sin, and entombed in the 
orave of his iniquities. But a power—the same 
which awoke the death-slumber of Lazarus, 


244 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


has darted from the tomb of Jesus, and has 
quickened him to a new and a deathless life. 
Oh, were we more directly to trace the mighty 
energy of the Eternal Spirit in our souls, 
raising us from the region of death to life and 
immortality, to that stupendous fact of redemp- 
tion—the resurrection of Christ from the dead 
—how would it exalt our views of its import- 
ance, and fill our souls with its glory! What 
must be the power of our Lord’s resurrection, 
that can even now awake the profoundest sleep 
of spiritual death! When the Spirit of God 
puts forth his own grace to raise a soul from 
the grave of sin, oh, forget not it is in virtue of 
a risen, living Saviour. Despair not of the 
spiritual life of any, though they may have laid 
in the grave so long as well nigh to have 
quenched all hope of their conversion, since 
Christ has risen from the dead, and is alive, to 
give life in answer to the prayer of faith: “ The 
Second Adam is a quickening Spirit.” 

The power which the resurrection of Christ 
possesses in opening up to view the doctrine of 
Divine reconciliation is great. The moment 
faith can look up to God through the medium 
of a risen Christ, all its views of his character 


AND THE INNER LIFE. De 44) 


instantly become kind and soothing. How 
beautifully the Apostle associates the two 
blessings: “ The God of peace, that brought 
again from the dead our Lord Jesus!” He is 
now truly the ‘God of peace’—the pacified 
God, the reconciled Father; and the evidence 
of it is, his raismg up his dear Son from the 
grave. Thus what a bright view does this 
truth unfold to us of God! When we 
retire within ourselves we see much to en- 
gender dark views of, and distrustful feelings 
towards, him. But when faith travels to the 
grave of Jesus, and we see it empty, we have 
such an overwhelming evidence of the perfect 
reconciliation of God, of his thoughts of peace 
towards us, that instantly faith triumphs, and 
all our gloomy, trembling apprehensions of his 
character vanish and disappear. He is the “God 
of peace,’ because Jesus is a risen Saviour. 
And in proportion as you lay hold by faith of 
the resurrection-life of Christ, you will have 
that pillar to sustain you upon which rests the 
whole fabric of salvation. The peace of God 
will fill your heart, as you know from experience 
the power of the Lord’s resurrection in your 
soul. The power of Christ’s resurrection, in 


246 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


fact, lies in a sense of pardoned sin, in our 
apprehension of complete justification, im the 
living hope of eternal glory. Jesus saves to 
the uttermost all that come unto God by him, 
because he is a risen and a living Saviour, and 
ever liveth to make intercession in behalf of all 
his people. O deal believingly with a risen 
Christ ! 

But I wish to lay before the Christian reader 
an illustration of the practical power which this 
great and precious truth exerts in the healthy act- 
ings of theinnerlife. Itquickensandstrengthens 
the Divine life against the influence of worldly 
things. Of the earthward tendency of our hearts 
“we are, alas! but too conscious. We want an 
antagonistic principle, something to counteract 
the ever-working influence of an ungodly world. 
Where shall we meet with it? We answer,— 
in the power of Christ's resurrection, felt, 
realised, and experienced in the soul. How 
beautifully and forcibly does the apostle place 
this truth before us: “If ye, then, be risen 
with Christ, seek those things which are above, 
where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. 
Set your affection on things above, not on 
things on the earth.” This is the argument of 


AND THE INNER LIFE. Q47 


Paul—“ You are a risen people, risen in union 
with Christ. If this be so, then seek after 
heavenly-mindedness, setting your affections 
on things above.” What a heaven-attracting 
power, then, has this glorious truth! What is 
Christ ? heis alive. Where is Christ? he is in 
heaven, at the right hand of God, as my Head,— 
my Representative,—my Forerunner,—my Trea- 
sure,—my all. Then, let merise! Shall not 
my affections soar to their best Beloved ? Shall 
not my heart be where its treasure is? Shall 
I set my mind upon things on the earth, when 
my Lord rose out of the earth, and ascended 
above the earth, and bids me rise and follow 
him in faith, in spirit, and in love, until he 
calls me to come away to him entirely, that 
I might be ever with him, and behold his 
glory ? If I am indeed risen with Christ, then 
let me evidence it by my increasing spiritual- 
mindedness. Christ, who is my life, is in 
heaven,—why should I needlessly be buried in 
the earth? Why allow—as I appear to do— 
that there is an object upon earth whose claims 
to my love are paramount, whose beauty to my 
eye is greater, whose attraction to my soul.is 
stronger, than my risen, ascended, and glorified 


948 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


Lord? Is there upon earth one who loves me 
as Jesus loves me? Is there one who has 
done for me what Jesus has done? Is there 
one who is doing for me now what Jesus is 
doing? Is there one who is to me such a 
friend, such a brother, such a counsellor, as 
Jesus ? No, not one! Then, why should not 
my thoughts be more with him? Why should 
not my heart cling closer to him? Why this 
vagrancy of mind, this truancy of affection, 
this wandering of desire; why this forgetfulness, 
coldness, and cleaving to earth, when my Lord 
is risen, and I am professedly risen with him? 
O to feel more sensibly, more deeply, more 
constantly, the power of his resurrection ! 
Lord! I detect my heart settling down on crea- 
ture things—objects of sense and sin. My 
business is a snare—my domestic blessings are 
a snare—my friendships are a snare—my posi- 
tion is a snare—the too fond opinion which 
others entertain of me, is a snare—my grace, 
my gifts, my usefulness, through the corrup- 
tion of my heart, are snares. Lord, place 
beneath my soul the mighty lever of thy resur- 
rection, and lift me towards thyself! O let me 
feel the earth-severing, the heaven-attracting 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 249 


power of thy resurrection-life! Having been 
buried with thee by baptism into death, fain 
would I now rise with thee, like as thou wast 
raised up from the dead by the glory of the 
Father, that I might walk with thee in new- 
ness of life, until I reach thee in the realms 
of glory. 

But not only is this a quickening, it is also 
a most comforting truth ; and thus there is a 
power which is felt in the very consolation 
which it conveys. What a blessed declaration 
is that—“ Where Christ sitteth at the right 
hand of God!” The words are mexpressibly 
sweet— sitting at the right hand of God.” 
Having finished his work, having made an end 
of sin, having brought in an everlasting right- 
eousness, having risen from the grave, having 
ascended up on high, he has sat down at the 
right hand of God, reposing in the full satis- 
faction, glory, and expectancy of his redeeming 
work. And for what object is he there seated ? 
Why is he thus presented to the eye of faith ? 
That the Church of God might have visibly 
and constantly before its view—a risen, living 
Christ. O how constantly is the Lord teach- 
ing us that there is but one Being who can 


250 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


meet our case, and but one Object on which 
our soul’s affections ought to be supremely 
placed—even a risen Saviour. We have tempt- 
ations various, trials the world knows nothing - 
of, crosses of which those who know and love 
us the most, never suspect—for often the heart's 
acutest sorrow is the least discoverable upon 
the surface. 

But here is our great mercy—Christ is alive. 
What if we are unknown, tried, tempted, and 
sad, we yet have a risen Saviour to go to; 
who, as Rutherford says, “sighs when I sigh, 
mourns when I mourn, and when I look up he 
rejoices.” How can I want for sympathy when 
I have a risen Christ? how can I feel alone 
and sad, when I have the society and the sooth- 
ing of a living and an ever-present Jesus—a 
Jesus who loves me, who knows all my circum- 
stances, all my feelings, and has his finger upon 
my every pulse—who sees all my tears, hears all 
my sighs, and records all my thoughts—who, 
go to him when I will, and with what I will, 
will never say to me nay, nor bid me depart 
unblest—who is risen, exalted, and is set down 
at the right hand of his Father and my Father, 
his God and my God, to administer to me all 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 851 


the blessings of the everlasting covenant, and to 
mete out, as I need them, all the riches of his 
grace, and the supplies of his salvation? Why, 
then, should I despond at any circumstance, 
why despair at any emergency, or sink beneath 
any trial, when I have a risen—a living Christ to 
go to? “When we are enabled to look at things 
above, to set our affections upon them, remember- 
ing that Christ is sitting at the right hand of God, 
that he has blotted out sin and made an end of 
it; and when his precious blood is sprinkled 
on our hearts, we can then say with ardent de- 
sire, ‘ Lord God, give me every grace, make me 
like thyself, make me conformed in body, soul, 
and spirit to thee, dead to the world and alive 
to thee, thirsting for thee and loving thee 
“supremely, willing to do and suffer thy will, so 
that at last I may be able to finish my course 
with joy, and that which the Lord hath com- 
mitted unto me.’ It is a sweet, and quiet, and 
happy posture of soul, to look at Christ sitting 
at the right hand of God,” and to know that he 
is there with the breastplate upon his heart, 
and with the ephod upon his shoulder, inter- 
ceding every moment for each individual mem- 
ber of his body. O the amazing power of the 


Q52 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


Lord’s resurrection! O the preciousness of the 
fruit that springs from it! ‘“ Communion with 
our heavenly Father, near walking with God, 
a life of faith in Christ, living on high, living 
not only on Christ’s fulness but on Christ 
himself; not only on what he has, but on what 
he is, in his Godhead, in his humanity, in the 
tenderness of his heart as well as the fulness of 
his salvation ; living in the blessed anticipation 
of glory, and honour, and immortality ; rising 
in the morning and saying, This day, and every 
day, I would consecrate to my God,”—these 
are some of the fadeless flowers and precious 
fruits that grow around the grave of Jesus, 
when faith, listening to the voice that issues 
from the vacant sepulchre—“ He is not here, 
but is risen ’—looks up and beholds him alive, 
“seated at the right hand of the Majesty on 
high.” Then, O then, it exclaims in a transport 
of joy, “ Whom have I in heaven but thee ? 
and there is none upon earth that I desire 
beside thee,” thou risen, living, and glorious 
Redeemer ! 


“ Thou art my all—to thee I flee ; 
Take me, oh, take me to thy keeping! 
Make me thy branch, thy husbandry; 
Be thine the seed-time, thine the reaping, 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 958 


“For what on earth but tells thy power? 
And what but makes thy love its theme? 
I read it in the vernal shower, 
It cheers me in the summer beam: 


“Tt glows while memory lingers yet, 
O’er hours a mother’s love beguiled; 
For ah! a mother may forget, 
But thou wilt not forget thy child. 


“T had a friend—nor false his love, 
But him on earth no more I see: 
Oh, thou unchanging Friend above, 
What is an earthly friend to thee? 


“ Give me no bright behest of care, 
No grovelling boon of envied sod; 
No hopes that lead but to despair ;— 
Ease, honours, wealth, are not my God. 


“ Nor aught in heaven; for, angels, say, 
And saints escaped earth’s guilt and sadness, 
What makes your everlasting day? 
What tunes your heart to joy and gladness? 


“ Oh, there is nought in yon bright sky, 
Worthy this worthless heart to own; 
On earth there’s nought; friends, creatures, fly; 
I pant, my Lord, for thee alone.” 


But a signal and glorious illustration of the 
power of our Lord’s resurrection is yet to ap- 
pear—the first resurrection and glory of all the 
saints. “Now is Christ risen from the dead, 
and become the first-fruits of them that slept.” 


254 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


All who in this and in other places are de- 
scribed as sleeping, are the saints of God: the 
ungodly die, but the righteous only sleep. 
This distinction the Holy Ghost observes. Now 
Jesus, in his resurrection, is the first-fruit of 
them that slept; that is, in virtue and in con- 
sequence of his resurrection from the grave, all 
who sleep in him shall have a“ part in the first 
resurrection.’ This period will distinguish 
the saints from the ungodly. It is distinctly 
affirmed by the inspired apostle, that “the dead 
in Christ shall rise first,” while “we who are 
alive and remain, shall be caught up together 
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in 
the air.” Now to this prior, or, firstresurrection, 
there are some pointed and remarkable allu- 
sions. Our Lord distinctly refers to it in the 
words, “ They which shall be accounted worthy 
to obtain that world and the resurrection from 
the dead,” Luke xx. 35. It was to this first 
resurrection the apostle Paul was anxious to 
arrive,—“ If by any means I might attain unto 
the resurrection of the dead,” Phil. 11. 11. To 
this, too, the saints and martyrs of the Old 
Testament looked as the crown of their suf- 
ferings, and the recompense of their reward. 


AND THE INNER LIFE. di 45, 


“Others were tortured, not accepting deliver- 
ance, that they might obtain a better resurrec- 
tion,’ Heb. xi. 85. And this is the resurrection 
—and the only one—which God has pronounced 
blessed. ‘Blessed and holy is he that hath 
part in the first resurrection; on such the 
second death hath no power, but they shall be 
priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign 
with him a thousand years,” Rev. xx. 6. How 
important that we should give to the prophet- 
ical events with which the resurrection of the 
saints stands connected, and which, indeed, are 
but preparatory to the ushering in of that great 
event, our most profound and prayerful con- 
sideration and study! 

There is so much scriptural clearness and 
power in the following excellent remarks of an 
unknown, but evidently a deeply taught and 
spiritual writer, that I am induced to quote 
them in connection with our present interesting 
and important subject. 

“Tt is desirable for us to know, what are the 
peculiar glories and advantages of the first 
resurrection ; and also at what time we may 
expect it to take place. It is to the first resur- 
rection saints, that the promise is made of 


256 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


reigning with Christ, and partaking with him 
of his millennial glory, Rev. xx. 6; and it shall 
be the privilege of those who are alive when 
the event happens, to be ‘ clothed upon,’ and 
not ‘unclothed, 2 Cor. v.4; thatis, to be given 
glorified bodies, without having seen death and 
corruption ; and to escape those premillennial 
troubles, which, in the great day of the Lord, 
will come on the earth. 

“In 1 Thes. iv. 17, we read, that the living 
saints are caught up to meet the Lord in the 
air. This must be for some purpose. They 
would not be caught up to descend again im- 
mediately ; and accordingly, we find repeated 
promises of their being thus kept in safety from 
the destruction of the earth, as Noah from the 
flood, and Lot from Sodom. 

« At the close of the premillennial troubles, 
when, at the battle of Armageddon, our Lord 
descends, his feet stand upon the Mount of 
Olives, and he completes the destruction of his 
enemies,—‘ he brings his saints with him,’ in- 
cluding those who had been caught up alive 
previously. ‘A man’ had been their hiding- 
place from the wind, their covert from the tem- 
pest, Isa. xxxul. 2. From what portion of the 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 257 


final troubles we know not, or how long they 
had been hid; but we know that Noah and Lot 
escaped entirely. And St. Peter says that from 
these types it is manifest, that the Lord knows 
how to deliver the godly out of temptations 
(trials). Our Saviour refers to the same events, 
saying, ‘Even thus shall it be in the day when 
the Son of man is revealed.’ For until the day 
Noah entered the ark, the world went on as 
usual; and the ‘ same day that Lot went out of 
Sodom, it rained fire and brimstone,’ Luke xvii. 
26. St. Paul also declares, people are to be 
saying, ‘ Peace and safety,’ just before the sud- 
den destruction or day of the Lord’s revealing, 
when his saints are taken. It is from this sud- 
den destruction Christ teaches us to pray that 
we may escape, and that when these things 
shall come to pass, we may be able to stand 
before him, Luke xxi. 36. Habakkuk hoped 
to ‘rest in the day of trouble, 11.16; and 
Zephaniah says, ‘It may be we shall be hid in 
the day of the Lord’s anger,’ 1. 3. In Isa. 
XxXvi. 20, 21, we read, ‘Come, my people, enter 
thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors 
about thee ; hide thyself as it were for a little 
moment, until the indignation be overpast, 
S 


258 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place 
to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their 
iniquity: the earth also shall disclose her 
blood, and shall no more cover her slain.’ 
The Prophets and Psalms abound with pro- 
mises of this safety from trouble, which are 
only partially fulfilled if we take them meta- 
phorically, since believers are more in trouble 
than other men; but will be literally fulfilled 
when the time arrives. 

“Seeing, then, that a literal safety 1s pro- 
mised during a time of trouble, such as ‘never 
was, —and that things are prepared for those 
who escape, such as ‘could not have entered 
into the heart of man,’ had they not been re- 
vealed by the Spirit,—no wonder that St. John 
says, ‘ Those who have this hope, purify them- 
selves, 1 John i. 2, 8. No wonder St. Peter 
says, ‘Seeing ye look for such things, be dili- 
gent that ye may be found of him in peace, 
without spot,’ 2 Pet. ii. 14; for if not, we lose 
all the glory of the new heavens and the new 
earth. No wonder that the whole creation 
groans, waiting for the redemption of the body, 
and that the earnest expectation of the creature 
waits for this manifestation of the sons of God, 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 259 


Rom. vii. 19. Then, when the merciful men 
are taken from the evil to come, Isa. lvii. 1, 2, 
and ‘the godly men cease,’ ‘ then shall ye return, 
and discern between the righteous and the 
wicked, Mal. ii.18. For it is expressly said, 
that when one is taken, another is left—while 
the one who loves his Lord’s appearing, and 
expects it, shall meet him in the air, (as natu- 
rally as an eagle is attracted by a body,) the 
other is left, because of unbelief, to go through 
the time of the desolation of the earth, Matt. 
xxiv. 40. 

“We next consider when these things may 
be ; and if it should appear only probable that 
they may be at hand, we shall find sufficient 
cause for watchfulness. Persons in general 
suppose that they will not take place till our 
Lord descends to the earth at the end of the 
troubles; and as many events must happen 
first, viz., the restoration of the Jews, the battle 
of Armageddon, &c., they have a snare in their 
hearts to put off daily expectation. But let 
those who desire to be partakers of a ‘better 
resurrection, observe, that the re-establishment 
of the Jews in Jerusalem, marks the time when 
the church will have been removed. 


260 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


“ By comparing Matt. xxiv. with Luke xx1., 
we see that ‘the tribulation’ began with the 
dispersion of the tribe of Judah, and ends with 
it; and that afterwards, ‘immediately after, 
are the signs in sun, moon, and stars; or that 
period of trouble commences from which the 
Church is saved. This is the period mentioned 
by Daniel, as the last end of the indignation to 
the Jewish nation, and which they will have to 
go through, with the exception of that remnant 
‘according to the election of grace,’ which, 
having been converted to the faith of Jesus, 
will be raptured with the Church. This last 
end of indignation is the time of the final 
development and overthrow of antichrist, and 
does not begin till the ‘ times of the Gentiles’* 
are over; which times are commensurate with 
the treading down of Jerusalem. Thus, at the 
re-establishment of Judah, the Lord must have 
gathered his people out of all nations; have 
made up the number of his elect; and have 

* “There appears to be a double termination to ‘the times 
of the Gentiles;—first, that mentioned in Luke xxi. 24, when 
Judah is restored before the troubles; and the second, at the end 
of the troubles; when Gentile ascendancy will be abolished, and 


all Israel saved by the coming of their Deliverer. See Rom. xi. 
25, where it is called, ‘ the fulness of the times of the Gentiles.’ ” 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 261 


secured them from the judgments coming on 
the earth. 

“ From hence we may perceive how very 
near that appearing of our Lord may be, which 
will either begin our blessedness or leave us 
to be partakers of the destruction which cometh 
upon the earth. The Jews are now in a re- 
markable state of excitement, and expecting an 
immediate restoration. Nothing seems to be 
more likely than their speedy re-establishment 
in their own land. If, then, their restoration 
be near, the Lord’s appearing to meet his saints 
must be near also. 

“The sign which the Papacy affords, is one of 
the most striking and conclusive. Its destruc- 
tion takes place during the final troubles, and 
after the dispersion of the Jews is over; for in 
Daniel we read, ‘When he shall have accom- 
plished to scatter the power of the holy people, 
all these things shall be finished.’ 

“ ‘Turning to Rev. x. 7, we see written, that 
at the sounding of the seventh trumpet, and 
pouring out of the seventh vial, the mystery of 
God shall be finished. The seventh trumpet 
includes the seventh vial; and when this vial is 
poured out, we read, in chap. xvi. 17, ‘ There 


262 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


came a great voice, saying, It is done.’ Just 
before this vial it is written, ‘ Behold, I come 
as a thief. The midnight cry is made, and 
then the great earthquake takes place, in which 
Babylon is destroyed by a sudden and unex- 
pected destruction. 

* Let us now observe, that at the Freneh 
Revolution, when, the 1260 years being over, 
the seventh trumpet began to sound, the Papacy 
was, according to the prophecy, hated, and 
made desolate; or, as Daniel expresses it, the 
judgment sat, and they took away her dominion, 
‘ to consume and to destroy unto the end.’* 

“ Her state, at the end, we find from Rev. 
xvul., to be one of exultation ; for having risen 
again from depression, she cries, ‘I sit a queen! 
and am zo widow, and shall see no sorrow;’ 
alluding to her late widowhood and sorrow, 
from which she now believes herself to be de- 
livered. But what follows? Her sudden and 
eternal destruction! In one hour is she made 
desolate ; with violence is she thrown down, 
and is never to be found again. Universal 
lamentation succeeds ; all on earth lament over 


“* See Elliott’s Horse Apocalyptica, vol. iii. 1100, &¢.” 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 263 


her; for the Church, having been previously 
translated, praises God in heaven for the 
judgment, ‘ Much people in heaven said, 
Alleluia ! 

“We certainly have abundant evidence that 
Popery is now on the very brink of the destruc- 
tion denounced ; but it is clear that this cannot 
take place before the restoration of the Jews 
and the rapture of the Church;—may we, then, 
lift up our heads, for our redemption draweth 
nigh !* 


“* The 14th Rev. affords such corroborative evidence, it must 
not be omitted. We have in this chapter the cry of three mis- 
sionary angelsin our own time, after the termination of the 1260 
years. First an angel preaches the everlasting gospel (ver. 6); 
and never did prophecy meet with more complete fulfilment. It 
will be enough to state, that the Bible Society alone has circu- 
lated fifteen millions of Bibles; and ten millions have been 
circulated by foreign Bible Societies. Of these societies, there 
are now more than 7000; and of these, nearly 4000 are in Great 
Britain. The number of versions of the Holy Scriptures is 159. 

“ The Tract Society has since its institution (at the time of the 
angel’s flight) circulated THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY MIL-~ 
Lions of publications; and its works are published in eighty- 
eight different languages. 

“ These two societies alone show in what manner the prophecy 
has been accomplished; and if we take the most superficial 
glance at the work of other missionary societies during this 
period, we shall find the evidence overwhelming. 

“The second angel declares the corruptions and impending fall 


264 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


“ Let us also observe that the cry, ‘ Behold, 
the bridegroom cometh,’ has been long and 
universally raised. This is a most remarkable 
sign, and sufficiently convincing that midnight 
was come when it began. ‘The cry has been 
raised before at different periods, but never so 
widely, or combined with those other signs for 
which we are commanded to watch. For now 
is the gospel preached as a witness in all lands. 


of the Papacy; and the third angel warns men against worship- 
ping the Beast, and receiving his mark. What do we see?—the 
people of the Lord everywhere obeying the voice, and coming 
out of the Papacy. In France, whole communities renouncing 
the faith of Rome; and at this moment 800 converts in Ireland, 
suffering persecution and starvation, rather than receive the 
mark of the Beast! Then immediately follows the blessedness 
of the raptured church. From henceforth will they be blessed, 
by having their glorified bodies, and receiving the reward of 
their works. 

“ The destruction of the Papacy succeeds. This is symbolised 
by a harvest of the earth. In Jer. li. 833, where the type, or 
literal Babylon, is spoken of, we read, ‘ The daughter of Baby- 
lon is like a threshing floor, it is time to thresh her; yet a little 
while, and the time of her harvest shall come. And when the 

DRIED’ harvest of the anti-type (Rome) shall have been 
reaped, the vintage takes place, or that final battle of Armageddon, 
in which the Lord appears personally, and treads down his ene- 
mies.) Compare Rev. xiv. 18—20; xix. 11—21; Joel iii, 11— 
18; Isa. Ixiii. 1—7; Zech. xiv. 3-6; 2 Thess. i. 7—11.) See 
Hore Apocalypticee, vol. iii. 1283, &¢.” 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 265 


Now is Jerusalem no longer despised, but 
‘sought out, and the Lord’s servants take 
pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust 
thereof, Psa. cil. 18, 14. Now, many run to 
and fro, and knowledge is increased. Now, we 
see that word of St. Paul fulfilled to the very 
letter, ‘ A form of godliness, denying the power 
thereof,’ which was to characterise the last of 
the latter days. 

“‘ Now, also, the prophetic dates clearly point 
to the present moment; and now is there 
universal peace, while wars and commotions 
are confessedly looked for, by those who discern 
the political signs of the times. These men 
see that a great crisis is at hand; they see that 
the world cannot go on in its present state, and 
they announce the coming storm! and does not 
the eye of faith perceive the same, with greater 
certainty and assurance? are the children of 
this world always to be wiser than the children 
of light? shall they wake, and the Church 
sleep? Oh, let not the day overtake us as a 
thief! let not the cry be unheeded, ‘ Behold, 
He cometh! but Jet us prepare for His ap- 
pearing. 

“What will be the nature of that ‘ appearing, 


266 THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 


we know not; but it is distinct from our Lord’s 
standing on the earth, at the end of the 
troubles. He has himself told us that we need 
not fear mistaking it, Matt. xxiv. 23, 26, 27. 
Whatever the appearance may be, it will be 
universally seen, and the saints will be imme- 
diately caught up. And remember, ‘ When once 
the master of the house is risen up, and hath 
shut the door,’ it will be too late to prepare for 
this event—either you will be found ready or 
unready—either you will be taken, or left; and 
the Lord hath said, if we will not watch, we 
shall not know the hour when the Son of 
man comes upon us, Rey. ui. 8. But if we 
keep the word of his patience, he will keep us 
‘from the hour of temptation, which shall come 
upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon 
the earth,’ Rev. iii. 10.”* 

In view of such glorious predictions—living 
in times so momentous—encireled by events 
so spirit-stirring—by signs so significant—and 
in the anticipation of a glory so resplendent 
and of a rapture so great, who would not desire, 
and pray, and labour to have “part in the 
first resurrection ?” Would you, my reader ? 


* “ The First Resurrection and Rapture of the Saints.” 


AND THE INNER LIFE. 2967 


Then seek to know in your soul the power of 
Christ’s resurrection! And, if sensible of this 
power, quickening you with the inner life— 
raising you above sin, above the world, above 
the bondage of the law, above self, above all 
earthly, carnal attractions,—then labour on, 
and toil on, and fight on, and suffer on a while 
longer,—for soon you shall spring from the 
dust, and bathing your quickened spiritual body 
in the beams of the resurrection morn, you 
shall unite with all the risen saints in singing, 
“QO death, where is thy sting? O grave, where 
is thy victory ?” 


CHA Pad aXe 


HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF THE 
INNER LIFE. 


“ Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be 
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light.”—Cou. i. 12. 


Ir is necessary that we should now conduct 
our subject to a close. What more appropriate 
and pleasing termination of a theme so heavenly 
than a brief contemplation of the heaven itself, 
to whose ultimate perfection the inner life of 
the Christian 1s tending,—of which it is the germ 
and the earnest—and in whose deathless splen- 
dours it will soon be enshrined! The spiritual 
life which God has breathed into our souls will 
never rest until it reaches its full and perfect 
development. It 1s now but in its embryo state. 
Deep as are its pulsations, powerful as are its 
actings, mighty as are its achievements, holy as 
are its breathings, it is yet but in its infancy, 
compared with that state of perfection to which 


HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION, ETC. 269 


it is destined to arrive. The most complete 
impress of the Divine image upon the renewed 
soul of man is but an outline of the picture. 
The highest state of sanctification to which the 
believer can arrive here, is but the first dawn of 
day, contrasted with the “far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory,’ which will burst 
upon him in a world of perfect holiness. Hea- 
ven will complete the work which sovereign 
grace has begun upon earth. Heaven is the 
consummation of the spiritual life of the believer. 
We have selected, as an illustration of this 
thought, the deeply interesting words addressed 
by the apostle to the Colossian saints: “Giving 
thanks unto the Father, which hath made us 
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the 
saints in light.” There are in this passage 
some points of the deepest moment, all bearing 
a close relation to the great subject which, in 
the preceding pages, has been occupying our 
attention. 

Our first inquiry relates to the ‘ meetness’ 
for heaven here spoken of. And with regard 
to this point, let me observe, it forms the very 
basis of our subject—the groundwork of the 
whole. There are those, perhaps, who would 


270 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


make the consideration of heaven their start- 
ing-point: but of what real value are mere 
notions of heaven? Magnificent, poetic, and 
even accurate, though they may be, yet if a 
man has no scriptural, no real meetness for 
heaven, his notion of it is but the dream of 
a Mahometan—the vision of a Turkish para- 
dise; it is not that bright, that holy, that 
Divine conception of heaven, which a mind, 
renewed by the Spirit, and sanctified by grace, 
forms. It is an earthly picture of heaven, 
conceived by an earthly mind. 

In what, then, consists this ‘meetness’ for 
heaven, to which the apostle refers? Need I 
say, that it excludes all idea of any personal, 
natural, or original meetness in the sinner him- 
self ?—the destructive doctrine of the Popish 
church, and may I not add, the wretched 
figment of many who falsely call themselves 
Protestants! The only moral meetness there 
is in man natural—be not alarmed, my reader— 
is a meetness for hell! There are already 
in the natural man the elements of hell, even 
as there are in the spiritual man the elements 
of heaven. The smouldering embers of eternal 
destruction are there, a fitness only for the 


THE INNER LIFE. OL 


abodes where, in regions of darkness and woe, 
the sinner is banished for ever from God. And 
before man can have a moral meetness for 
heaven, he must pass through a moral change, 
assimilating him to the nature of heaven. 
“Enter not into judgment with Thy servant, 
for in Thy sight shall no man living be justified.” 

Our first observation, then, with regard to 
this ‘meetness,’ refers to the renewal of the 
Holy Spirit, through which the believer passes. 
Heaven is the abode of a renewed people; it 
is a holy place, and the home of the holy; and 
before the sinner can have any real meetness for 
heaven, any well-grounded hope of glory, he 
must be a partaker of a nature harmonising 
with the purity, and corresponding with the 
enjoyments, of heaven. Heaven would be no 
heaven to a carnal mind, to an unsanctified 
heart. Were it possible to translate an uncon- 
verted individual from this world to the abodes 
of eternal glory, overwhelmed with the efful- 
gence of the place, and having no fellowship of | 
feeling with the purity of its enjoyments, and 
the blessedness of its society, he would ex- 
claim —“ Take me hence—it is not the place 
for me—I have no sympathy with it—I have 


272 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


no fitness for it—I have no pleasure in it.” 
Solemn thought ! 

Here let me remind the reader of those 
searching words of God’s Holy Spirit, in the 
fifth chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, 
where the apostle says, in the fifth verse—“ For 
this ye know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean 
person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, 
hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ 
and of God.” In the twenty-first chapter of 
the book of the Revelation, and the twenty- 
seventh verse—‘ And there shall in nowise 
enter into it anything that defileth, neither 
worketh abomination, or maketh a le; but 
they which are written in the Lamb’s book of 
life.” And what were the words of the Saviour 
to Nicodemus? In the third chapter of the 
Gospel by John, and the third verse, we have 
them: “Jesus answered and said unto him, 
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be 
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of 
God.” These are Divine and awful verities. 
Reader ! you must be born again of the Spirit, 
or heaven will be to youa distant, an unknown, 
and unapproachable region. You must “be 
renewed in the spirit of your mind,’ and 


THE INNER LIFE. 273 


become “a new creature in Christ Jesus ;” or, 
be it known unto you, heaven will never be 
your eternal dwelling-place. 

This ‘meetness,’ then, to which the apostle 
refers, implies a spiritual change in the inward 
man, the begetting of an inner life. ‘The 
Christian is a renewed creature—he is a par- 
taker of the Divine nature: he has sympathies, 
affections, and desires imparted to him by the 
Spirit, which assimilate him to the happiness 
and purity of heaven. It is impossible but 
that he must be there. He possesses a nature 
unfit for earth, and congenial only with heaven. 
He is the subject of a spiritual life that came 
from, and now ascends to, heaven. All its 
aspirations are heavenly—all its breathings are 
heavenly—all its longings are heavenly,—and 
thus it is perpetually soaring towards that 
world of glory from whence it came, and for 
which God is preparing it. So that it would 
seem utterly impossible but that a renewed man 
must be in heaven, since he is the partaker of a 
nature fitted only for the regions of eternal 
purity and bliss. 

The second step in this preparation, or 
meetness for heaven, introduces to us the work 

se 


Q74 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


of Jesus—the great atoning, finished work of 
the Son of God. And here we are referred to 
the meetness of title which the believer pos- 
sesses to this “inheritance.” And what is his 
title, beloved? What is it that gives the 
Christian a valid deed, a right of possession to 
eternal glory? Itis his justification by faith 
through the imputed righteousness of Christ. 
This is the only valid title to eternal glory which 
God will admit,—the righteousness of His 
dear Son, imputed to him that believeth. Here 
is the grand meetness of a poor, lost, polluted, 
undone sinner!—The meetness that springs 
from the spotless righteousness of the Lord 
Jesus, “who of God is made unto us wisdom, 
and righteousness, and sanctification, and re- 
demption.” “ He hath made Him to be sin 
for us who knew no sin, that we might be made 
the righteousness of God in Him.” 

Behold, then, beloved, the high vantage- 
ground on which a saint of God stands, with 
regard to his hope of heaven. He stands out 
of his own righteousness, in the righteousness 
of another. He stands accepted in the Accepted 
One, he stands justified in the Justified One, 
and justified, too, by God, the great Justi- 
fier. As we spoke of the necessity of the new 


THE INNER LIFE. DW is) 


birth—of the spiritual renewal of the mind, 
as supplying a spiritual change necessary for 
the enjoyment of heaven, so we speak of the 
necessity of an interest in this justifying 
righteousness, as supplying a spiritual title 
necessary for the possession of heaven; and 
we say to every man who has not fled out of 
the ruin of his own righteousness, and taken 
up his rest in the righteousness of Christ, that 
he has no valid title to glory: if the great 
divorce has not taken place—the separation 
of himself from himself—and if he has not 
been brought to the grand trust of a poor 
sinner—the righteousness of the incarnate God 
—then, all his hope of heaven is as unsubstan- 
tial as a dream—a vision that passeth away. 

We must connect with this statement the 
atoning blood which cleanseth us from all sin 
—the blood which purifies—the blood which 
washes—the blood in which are drowned all 
the believer’s iniquities—the blood which has 
cancelled all his transgressions, and which 
presents him before God, washed whiter than 
virgin snow. 

Nor must we overlook, in this consideration 
of the meetness for heaven, the adoption of the 
believer. God having made him His son, has 


276 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


adopted him as His child, has taken him into 
His family, so that he becomes “ an heir of 
God, and a joint-heir with Christ ;’ and stand- 
ing in this filial relation to God he has a 
meetness for the Father’s house, which belongs 
only to the children of adoption. 

And what, let me ask,—as entering very 
essentially into this meetness for glory,—what 
is the great end of all God’s dealings with his 
people? For what purpose is the Lord’s 
furnace in Zion, and his fire in Jerusalem? It 
is to purify, and sanctify, and meeten the 
believer for “ the inheritance of the saints in 
hight.” All your heaven-blessed trials, all your 
sanctified temptations, all the covenant trans- 
actions of God with you, beloved, in the way of 
afflictive providences, are designed but to 
meeten you more thoroughly for “ the inherit- 
ance of the saints in light.” All the disen- 
twining of your affections from around creatures 
and created things, all the disappointments 
you meet with,—the cisterns He breaks, and 
the beautiful gourds He withers,—yea, all the 
steps of God with you, beloved, are but to 
detach you from earth, and earthly things ; 
and thus the more perfectly to meeten you 


THE INNER LIFE. yar) 


for “the inheritance of the saints in light.” 
In this point of view, who would not welcome 
the severest chastisement ? who would not 
drink willingly the bitterest cup? who would 
not take joyfully the spoiling of all that is dear 
and fond? who would not be willing to have 
the fetter unbound, the chain snapped, the bond 
severed, that gives liberty to his struggling and 
ascending spirit, and brings him, in a state of 
holy meetness, nearer and still nearer heaven ? 

The second inquiry relates to the inheritance 
itself, for which this ‘ meetness’ is given— 
“ The inheritance of the saints in light.” 

Our first remark refers to heaven as an 


> 


“inheritance ;” under this figure it is here 
presented to the mind. Nor is this the only 
passage in which the same similitude occurs. 
In the first of Ephesians, and the eleventh 
verse, we read,—‘‘ In whom also we have ob- 
tained an inheritance, being predestined accord- 
ing to the purpose of Him who worketh all 
things after the counsel of his own will.” In 
the ninth chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, 
and the fifteenth verse,—‘“ And for this cause 
He is the Mediator of the New Testament, that © 


by means of death, for the redemption of the 


278 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


transgressions which were under the first tes- 
timony, they which are called might receive 
the promise of eternal inheritance.” In the 
first epistle of Peter, the first chapter and the 
fourth verse, we have a striking unfolding of 
our inheritance: “ Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according 
to his abundant mercy hath begotten us again 
unto a lively (or a living) hope, by the resurrec- 
tion of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an 
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and 
that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven for 
you who are kept by the power of God through 
faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in the 
last day.” And if we will turn to the first 
chapter of Ephesians, and the thirteenth verse, 
it will be observed we have a pledge or an 
earnest of this inheritance: “ In whom, also, 
after ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy 
Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our 
inheritance, unto the redemption of the pur- 
chased possession, to the praise of his glory.” 
And if it be inquired what the saints of God do 
thus inherit ? the answer will be found in the 
twenty-first chapter of the Revelation by John, 
and the seventh verse: “ He that overcometh 


THE INNER LIFE. 279 


shall inherit all things, and I will be his God, 
and he shall be My son.” How vast, how 
illimitable, then, the inheritance of the saints— 
inheriting “ all things!” It is a beautiful idea 
of heaven ; it is a lovely picture, on which the 
eye of faith delights to dwell. The earthly 
heir looks at his inheritance, surveys it, walks 
through it, luxuriates amidst its beauties, and 
anticipates its full possession. The heir of 
glory has his inheritance too. It is heaven: 
he looks to it, he longs for it, and soon the 
Saviour will come in personal glory, and in- 
stitute him into its full and eternal possession. 

But observe whose is this inheritance. It is 
the “ inheritance of the saints.” And who are 
“ the saints ?” Ask the world, and it will 
answer, “ They are the fanatics, the enthusiasts, 
the deluded of society.” Ask others, and they 
reply, “ The baptized—all who have been 
baptized are saints.’ And ask many who 
profess not to be of the world, and who laugh 
to scorn the dogmas of the Papacy, and the semi- 
Popish doctrines of the Tractarian, and even they 
are at a loss for a better answer. But who are 
“the saints,’ beloved? They are the Lord’s 
people—the Lord’s holy ones, of every name, 


280 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


and from every fold. They form the whole 
election of grace; the chosen, ransomed, called 
people of God, be their outward name amongst 
men what it may—whether they belong to your 
section of the Church or to mine—all who are 
sanctified by God the Father—all who have 
been washed in the blood of the Lamb—all 
who are renewed by the Holy Spirit—all who 
are partakers of the inner life—all who have 
“ the white stone,” and “the new name” in 
that white stone—all who are living holy, godly 
lives, ail belong to the family of the “ saints.” 
Is it yet asked, Who are the “ saints?” ‘They 
are God's sanctified ones, in whom dwelleth the 
Holy Spirit, and by whose grace the Lord is, 
day by day, step by step, carrying on that 
blessed kingdom of grace in their hearts which 
will soon fit them for the full possession of 
eternal glory. You may think it, my reader, a 
light matter to be a “ saint’—an epithet of 
scorn by an, ungodly world; but, oh! let me 
tell you, the day will come when you would 
gladly lick the very dust of the saints’ feet— 
gladly take hold of the skirts of their gar- 
ments, as they ascend up into everlasting 
glory. But as you loathed them, and scorned 


THE INNER LIFE. 2881 


them, and persecuted them, and separated 
yourselves from them when upon earth—so, 
when they enter the abodes of bliss, you will 
be separated from them, banished into ever- 
lasting woe, to mingle and to herd throughout 
eternity with those with whose unrenewed 
natures, and carnal minds, and earthly pur- 
suits, you now sympathise and assimilate. 
Awful thought ! 

But observe, they are “ the saints m light.” 
Shall we refer this to their character? They 
are indeed “ the children of the lght, and of 
the day.” They have “ passed from death unto 
life,’ and “ from darkness into marvellous 
light.” The light of the Spirit is in them—the 
hight of truth is in them—the light of hohness 
isinthem. They, and they alone, possess real 
light ; all others are in darkness—-the darkness 
of death. With all a man’s deep, erudite, 
beautiful philosophy, his pure ethics, his 
splendid attainments in human science—yet, 
apart from the indwelling of the Spirit of grace, 

‘the inbeing of Jesus “the Sun of Righteous- 
ness,” he is the “child of the night and of 
darkness.” But the “ child of the day” is the 
true believer in Jesus, who has been “ trans- 


282 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


lated out of darkness into his marvellous light,” 
by the mere act of his sovereign mercy. What 
a beautiful image of the true Christian is light! 
The child of the hght! “The saints in ight!” 
Walking in the light of a Father’s reconciled 
face—walking in the light that beams from the 
cross of Jesus—walking in the light of an in- 
dwelling, teaching, sanctifying Spirit—walking 
in that bright, luminous path, which “ shineth 
more and more unto the perfect day.” 

Or shall we refer this description of the glo- 
rified saints to their present place of abode? 
Emphatically and truly, they are “ the saints 7” 
light.” 'They are in heaven, the abode of Him 
who is “Light,” essential light, in whom is “no 
darkness at all” —*“ dwelling in light which no 
man hath seen, nor can see.” ‘They are in the 
abodes of perfect purity, of which light is the 
expressive symbol; they are in the regions of 
perfect knowledge, of which light is the magni- 
ficent metaphor; they are in heaven, the place 
of perfect light, in which is no more darkness. 
How beautifully is this description of heaven 
placed before us in the holy Word! Thus in 
the sixtieth chapter of Isaiah, and nineteenth 
verse—oh, what words are these !—“ The sun 
shall be no more thy light by day, neither for 


THE INNER LIFE. 2838 


brightness shall the moon give light unto thee; 
but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting 
light, and thy God thy glory. Thy sun shall 
no more go down, neither shall thy moon with- 
draw itself; for the Lord shall be thine everlast- 
ing light, and the days of thy mourning shall be 
ended.” “'T’he inheritance of the saints in light!” 
We find the same beautiful figure, setting forth 
heaven, in the twenty-second chapter of Reve- 
lation, the fifth verse: ‘‘ And there shall be no 
night there; and they need no candle, neither 
light of the sun, forthe Lord God giveth them 
light, and they shall reign for ever and ever.” 
And if we refer back to the twenty-first chapter 
and the twenty-third verse, we read—‘“ And the 
city had no need of the sun, neither of the 
moon to shine in it, for the glory of God did 
lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. 
And the nations of them that are saved shall 
walk in the light of it; and the kings of the 
earth do bring their glory and honour into it. 
And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by 
day; for there shall be no night there.” The 
glorified saints are “the saints in light.” No 
more veilings of the Father’s countenance—no 
more “ walking in darkness, having no light "— 
no more mourning over Divine desertions, the 


284 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


suspensions of the Father’s experienced love— 
no more tears to dim the eye—no more clouds 
of unbelief to darken the mind—no more men- 
tal despondency to enshroud the spirit ;—they 
leave the gloom, and the mist, and the fog, 
and the darkness of ignorance, error, and pol- 
lution behind them, and they flee to the regions 
of light, to “the inheritance of the saints,” of 
which “the Lamb is the light thereof.” 

But it will be observed, that these glorified 
saints are said to be “ partakers of the inherit- 
ance.” ‘ Who hath made us meet to be par- 
takers of the inheritance of the saints in lght.” 
There is something very emphatic in the word. 
We are “ partakers ” of it now, in Christ our 
Head. In consequence of our union to Christ, 
the exalted Head of the church, we are at pre- 
of this mheritance. We 


b 


sent “ partakers ’ 
have the first dawnings of it in our soul: the 
foretaste and the antepast—and, what is best 
of all, the indwelling of the Spirit, who is the 
earnest of its possession. Beloved, we warn 
you against the doctrine held by some, which 
teaches, that after passing through the great 
changes which we have just specified, and while 
standing upon the very borders of heaven, the 
believer may miss the goal and never enter 


THE INNER LIFE. 285 


“the inheritance of the saints in light ;’ may be 
a partaker of the renewing, sanctifying grace of 
the Spirit, and stand accepted in the righteous- 
ness of Christ, and yet, after all, may fall away 
and be lost for ever! We speak of this—not 
to wound the feelings of those who hold it— 
whose persons we would love—but to warn you 
against a doctrine so contrary to God’s Word. 
We speak of it to the glory of God and of 
his truth, which teaches us that we have 
the earnest of that inheritance in the in- 
dwelling of the Spirit; and if we have the 
“earnest” of the inheritance in the possession 
of the Spirit, we must, and shall assuredly, have 
the inheritance itself. ‘“ Partakers of the in- 
heritance of the saints in light ’’—“ partakers ” 
with all the saints of God—<“ partakers ” with 
the whole family of the elect—“ partakers ” with 
all the children of adoption—“ partakers ” with 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with David, and 
Solomon, and with all who have gone before 
us, with all who have entered heaven a little in 
advance ; and partakers with all the “ ransomed 
of the Lord, who shall yet come to Zion with 
everlasting songs upon their head, obtaining 
joy and gladness, their sorrow and their sighing 
fleeing away!” Oh, who would not be a “ par- 


286 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


taker of the inheritance of the saints in light ?” 
Reader, if you are a humble possessor of the 
inner life, you shall be a happy partaker of this 
glorious inheritance—the life which is to come. 

A few words only, upon the precept based 
upon this subject. “ Giving thanks unto the 
Father, which hath made us meet to be par- 
takers of the inheritance of the saints in 
light.” 

Beautiful is the order of the Holy Ghost 
here. Observe to whom this grateful acknow- 
ledgment is made—“ unto the Father.” Then 
the sweet truth stands revealed,—luminous in 
its own celestial light,—that heaven is a Fa- 
ther’s gift. And oh, how sweet, to trace all our 
mercies to a Father’s love, to a parent’s heart, 
—to look to Jesus, whose righteousness gives 
us a title—to look to the Holy Spirit, whose 
sanctifying grace gives us a meetness, as the 
precious gifts of a Father’s love; then to rise 
through these up to the Father himself, and 
trace the gift of heaven—the consummation of 
the inner liife—to the heart of the First Person 
of the glorious Trinity. Who, after reading 
this passage, will any longer rest entirely and 
exclusively in Jesus—precious as he is? Who 
will not, through Jesus as the Mediator, rise to 


THE INNER LIFE. 287 


the Father, and trace up all the blessings of 
redemption, and all his hope of glory, to the 
part which the Father took in the great and 
wondrous work? Oh, how unutterably blessed 
is it to see the Father engaged, equally with the 
Son and the Spirit, in preparing for us, and in 
preparing us for, “the inheritance of the saints 
in light!’ “Giving thanks unto the Father.” 
Upon what grounds, beloved? Oh! it was the 
Father who provided the Saviour, his beloved 
Son. It is from the Father that the Spirit 
emanates who renews and sanctifies. It is the 
Father who has prepared the inheritance, and 
who, by his upholding power, will at last bring 
us safely there. All thanks, then, all adoration 
and praise unto the Father, “ who hath made us 
meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the 
saints in light.” 

In closing, let me affectionately ask you, my 
reader—in what does your meetness for heaven 
consist ? Put not the question from you— 
transfer it not to another ; let it come home to 
your own conscience—for in a little while 
your destiny will be fixed—eternally, irrevo- 
cably fixed; and one half-second of hell’s 
torment will fill thy soul with remorse, 
terror, and unavailing regret, that in the land 


288 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


of hope and in the day of grace you turned 
your back upon both, refused the merey of 
God in Christ, rejected his dear Son, and died 
in your sins. In what does your meetness 
for heaven, then, consist? If it is only the 
meetness of a mere profession—if itis but the 
meetness of a mere notional reception of truth 
—if it is the meetness merely of an external 
waiting upon the sanctuary, the public means 
of grace,—it is a meetness not for heaven, but 
for banishment from heaven! Are you born 
again of the Spirit of God? Have you fled to 
the Lord Jesus Christ for salvation? Have 
you the “earnest,” the pledge of heaven, in the 
indwelling of the Holy Spirit of God—in the 
life of God in your soul? Have you the first 
sheaf of the harvest bound up in your bosom ? 
Have you been sealed by God’s Spirit as an 
heir of glory ? 

To God’s saints I would say—cultivate an 
habitual, a growing meetness for heaven. Be 
not satisfied with past attamments, with your 
present measure of grace and standard of holi- 
ness; but, beloved, since heaven is a holy 
place, cultivate holiness—an habitual growing © 
meetness for ‘the inheritance of the saints in 
light.” Be advancing, be progressing, be 


THE INNER LIFE. 289 


pressing onwards; “putting on the whole ar- 
mour of God,’ “casting aside the weight that 
so easily besets you,” the garment that trails 
upon the earth, and pressing onward and hea- 
venward, until you reach the confines of bliss, 
and enter within the portals of glory. 

And I would say—look upon all the Lord’s 
covenant dealings with you as but preparatory 
to your approaching emancipation from all sin, 
suffering, and sorrow. Welcome your trials,— 
they are sent by your Father. Welcome the 
stroke of his rod,—it is a parent smiting. 
Welcome, oh! welcome, beloved, whatever de- 
taches you from earth, and wings your spirit 
heavenward. Oh! welcome the furnace that 
consumes the dross and the tin, and brings out 
the precious gold and silver, to reflect in your 
soul, even now, the dawnings of “the inherit- 
ance of the saints in light.” Oh! be submis- 
sive, meek, and quiet, under God’s chastening 
and afflicting hand, and receive all his dispen- 
sations as only tending to meeten you more per- 
fectly for “the inheritance of the saints in light.” 

Let this subject cheer and comfort the be- 
reaved of the Lord, from whose hearts have 
fled the loved and sanctified ones of earth, 
to the eternal heaven. Oh! how full of conso- 

U 


290 HEAVEN, THE CONSUMMATION OF 


lation to the bereaved heart is this subject! 
Whither have the departed fled, who sleep in 
Jesus? They have but exchanged the region 
of darkness and shadow, for the regions of 
light and glory. ‘They have gone from the 
scene of impurity, defilement, and sin, to the 
place of perfect holiness, complete sanctifica- 
tion, and of eternal love. ‘Then dry your tears 
—then press the consolations of the Gospel to 
your sorrowing heart, and look up with that 
eye of faith that pierces and penetrates the 
dark clouds that intervene between them and 
you, and behold them now “ partakers of the 
inheritance of the saints in hght.” And oh! 
yourselves anticipate the blessed moment, 
when the Saviour shall send, not an enemy, 
but a friend—for such is death to the Chris- 
tian—to open the cage that imprisons your 
spirit, and let you escape to the abodes of eter- 
nal glory. Oh! anticipate, and by anticipating, 
be preparing, day by day, for its realisation ; 
anticipate the happy moment which releases 
you from “the body of sin and death,” and 
ushers you into the full and eternal blaze of 
“the inheritance of the saints in light.” 

Such is heaven, and such is the consumma- 
tion of the Inner Life. As that life descended 


THE INNER LIFE. 291 


from God, so to God it shall ultimately and 
finally return. It shall never, never die. Not 
a spark shall be quenched, nor shall a pulse 
cease to beat—not a thought that it has con- 
ceived, nor a desire it has cherished, nor a 
prayer it has breathed, nor a work it has ac- 
complished, nor a victory it has won, shall die; 
all, all shall survive in ever-verdant, ever-grow- 
ing, ever-enduring glory. The babe in grace 
shall be there! ‘The young man, strong in 
overcoming the wicked one, shall be there! The 
father, matured in experience, and laden with 
the golden fruits of age, shall be there! All, 
all shall reach heaven at last—the end and the 
consummation of the life of God in their souls. 
Oh, to have this heaven in our hearts now! 
Heaven is love—the place of love—the perfec- 
tion of love. And what is God’s love in our 
hearts but the foretaste of heaven—the pre- 
libation of heaven—the first-gatherings of the 
vintage—the pledge and earnest of all that is 
to come ? 


“ Thou hidden love of God, whose height, 
Whose depth unfathom’d, no man knows; 
I see from far thy beauteous light, 
Inly I sigh for thy repose: 
My heart is pain’d, nor can it be 
At rest, till it find rest in thee. 


292 THE CONSUMMATION OF THE INNER LIFE. 


“?Tis mercy all, that thou hast brought 
My mind to seek her peace in thee! 
Yet while I seek, and find thee not, 
No peace my wand’ring soul shall see. 
Oh, when shall all my wand’rings end, 
And all my steps to Jesus tend? 


“Ts there a thing beneath the sun 
That strives with thee my heart to share? 
Oh! take it thence, and reign alone, 
The Lord of every motion there! 
Then shall my heart from earth be free, 
When it has found repose in thee. 


“O hide this self from me, that I 
No more, but Christ in me, may live; 
My vile affections crucify, 
Nor let one darling lust survive. 
In all things nothing may I see, 
Nothing desire or seek, but thee. 


“O Lord, thy sov’reign aid impart, 
To save me from low-thoughted care; 
Chase this self-will through all my heart, 
Through all its latent mazes there. 
Make me thy duteous child, that I 
Ceaseless may Abba, Father, cry. 


“Hach moment draw from earth away 
My heart, that lowly waits thy call; 
Speak to my inmost soul, and say, 
‘T am thy Love, thy God, thy all! 
To feel thy power, to hear thy voice, 
To taste thy love, be all my choice.” 


Reed and Pardon, Printers, Paternoster Row, London. 


LIST OF BOOKS 


PUBLISHED BY 


JOHN FEF. SHAW, 


27, SOUTHAMPTON. ROW, RUSSELL SQUARE, 


LONDON. 


CHRIST RECEIVING SINNERS. 


By the Rev. Jonn Cummine, D.D. 
Foolscap 8vo., pp. 184, 2s. 6d. cloth. 


Contents. 
CHAP. CHAP. 
1. The Audience. 6. The Prodigal Son. 
2. The Objection. 7. The Prodigal Son—Conver- 
3. The Lost Sheep. sion. : 
4. The Hidden Coin. 8. The Prodigal Son—his reception 
5, Joy in the presence of the by his Father. 
Angels. 


“ A series of discourses in which the beautiful parables contained in the fifteenth 
chapter of St. Luke’s Gospel are explained, and the principal truths conveyed in 
them vigorously enforced. The object and aim of the author is to put the mode of 
a, sinner’s acceptance with God in the plainest possible point of view, to induce the 
sinner to arise and go at once as he is to God in Christ, and to see and be satisfied 
thatinstead of rejection he will meet with instant and cordial welcome.” 


“ Like all the writings of Dr. Cumming, the present volume is full of pure gospel 
truth. Christ, the precious Saviour, is held forth as the Alpha and Leah etl 
sinner’s only refuge. Most heartily do we commend this volume as an anti lote to 
the Tractarian poison which leavens many of the so-called religious publications of 
the present day.”—Christian Lady’s Magazine. 


“ A valuable little work, Na a to present the mode of a sinner’s acceptance before 
God, in the plainest possible point of view, and at the same time, to induce the 


sinner to go at once to God in Christ, assured that he will find pardon and peace.” 
—Christian Times, 


Works Published by J. F. SHAW, 
GOD IN HISTORY ; 


or, Facts Illustrative of the Presence and Providence of God in the 
Affairs of Men. By the Rev. Joun Cummine, D.D. 


Foolscap 8vo., pp. 156. 2s. 6d. cloth. 


“The Christian delights to trace everywhere the footprints of his 
God—to hear in every sound the voice of his Father, and to gather 
new proofs of his. love, his power, his acting in and through and by 
all things for his glory. He sees and hears him in the Bible. He 
thirsts to see and hear him in Creation also; and the more clearly he 
is able to realize his presence above, around, below, the nearer he 
believes is that blessed time when the whole earth shall be filled 
with his glory.” 

“But God is in history. It is impossible for any dispassionate 
mind to turn over the leaves of history, and fail to see what many 
would denounce as a disturbing element, but what the Christian hails 
as the finger of Deity. * * * The evidences of a presiding 
Providence in the affairs of men, in the biographies of peasants and 
in the exploits of conquerors, and in the policy of cabinets, and in the 
rise, and reign, and abdication of kings, is just as patent to a reflect- 
ing—above all to a Christian mind—as is the sun to the outward eye 
in the unfolding buds of spring and in the rich blossoms of summer.” 


“ The writings of Dr. Cumming are invariably marked by eloquence and vigour. In 
point of style he reminds us of Croly. The work before us contains some of Dr. 
Cumming’s finest pieces, and at the same time furnishes us with many illustrations 
of the fault to which he in common with most orators, is liable. We gladly reite- 
rate our conviction of the merits, both literary and moral, of the work before us, 
which, we doubt not, will command an extensive sale.’’— Eclectic Review. 

“As a work of history, the book is valuable; as an auxiliary to religion, it is 
perhere the most valuable of any that have appeared in modern times.”— Sherborne 

OUrnal. 

‘* An eloquent work, in which the facts illustrative of the presence and providence of 
God in the affairs of men are laid down in an interesting ‘and able manner,”— 
Exeter Post. . j 

“This is a finely conceived and ably written work, worthy of the high reputation for 
learning and eloquence of Dr. Cumming.” — Hampshire Advertiser. 

‘A strong current of evidence is here adduced from ancient and modern history. to 
prove God’s presence and providence in‘the affairs of men. The lan e is 
graphic and often eloquent. The little volume will, no doubt attain, as it deserves, 
a very extended circulation.”— Glasgow Examiner. 

“We heartily recommend this work; it will be.perused with interest and delight.’-— 
Nottingham Guardian. 

“Tt is distinguished by that eloquence and beauty of diction for which the writer is 
famous; we have no hesitation in’ saying it ,will impart very great profit to who- 
ever peruses it.”—-Exeter Gazette. 

‘* This work cannot be too widely circulated.” — Bridgewater Times. 

“ This. isan.excellent little work. The subject is happily described as an intensely 
Pevlesrggh one—rich in suggestive illustrations, and practical in so far ag it comes 
home to the bosom and business of every man.”— Blackburn Standard. 

“ This is one of the most interesting and instructive little volumes that have ever come 
under our notice.”’— Doncaster Chronicle. , 

“In the publication of this little volume, Dr. Cumming has added another to the 
many important services he has rendered to the cause of truth,”—Liverpool 

Courter. 

“ This is a most serious, but, at the same time, a most seasonable book. It ought to be 
in the hands of every real Christian.”— Stockport Advertiser. ‘ 

“The subject, which all must admit to be an intensely interesting one, has been ad- 
mirably treated, and the well-directed mind of the Christian cannot avoid being 
gratified by the happy illustrations brought forward by Dr. Cumming.”—Ply- 
mouth Herald: ¥ i 

“We meet Dr. Cumming, again and again, with renewed pleasure. He does all like a 
man and a Christian.” — Atlas. 


2 


27, Southampton Row, Bussell Square. 


eee i ee eee Uee 
WORKS BY THE REY, OCTAVIUS WINSLOW. 


enestneonnin 


Just published, in 1 vol. foolscap 8vo., price 4s. 6d. cloth, 


THE INNER LIFE, 
ITS NATURE, RELAPSE, AND RECOVERY. 


Contents, 
CHAP. 

1. The Nature and Manifestations of the Inner Life. 

2. The Inner Life in its gradual and imperceptible Relapse. 
3. The Inner Life contrasted with its Counterfeit. 

4. The Inner Life in its Relapsed Influence. 

5, The Re-quickening of the Inner Life. 

6. The Penitence and Prayer of the Inner Life. 

?. The Renewed Anointing of the Inner Life. 

8. The Influence of Sanctified Trial upon the Inner Life. 

9, The Resurrection of Christ in its relation to the Inner Life of the 

Christian, 

10. Heaven, the Consummation of the Inner Life. 


Tn one vol., foolscap 8vo., pp. 350. Price 4s. 6d. 


GRACE AND TRUTH. 


Coutenis. 
CHAP. CHAP. 

1. Jesus full of Grace. 7. Holiness, the Fruit of the Chas- 
2. Faith in God. tening of Love. 
3. God Comforting the Disconso- 8. The Vitality of the Atoning Blood. 

late. 9, Three Degrees of Christ’s Mani- 
4. Christ’s Intercession for Tried festations. 

Faith. 10. The Sick One whom Jesus loves. 
5. Nourishment for the Journey. 11. The glorious Prospects of the 
6. The Chastening of Love. Believer. 


12. God resting in his Love. 


“This is one of Mr. Winslow’s happiest efforts. The topics which form the theme of 
the volume are well selected, and are all treated with that, skill, and tact, and fer- 
vent piety, which give to most of his writings an indescribable charm. We com- 
mend this volume to our pious readers as a cordial to the heart; as having found 
the perusal of it very refreshing to our own spirits.” —Evangelical Magazine. 


“This volume is a sequel to the author’s * Glimpses of the Truth as it isin Jesus.’ In 
various chapters and with perpetual reference to the inner and spiritual life of the 
believer, he treats of the divine manifestations of grace and truth in the person and 
work of the Lord Jesus Christ. The earnest and evangelical character of the 
writings of ;Mr. Winslow is well known, nor will our readers fail to find in his 
present work the same fulness of evangelic sentiment.”—Christian Record. 


“Tn this case, Mr. Winslow, as usual, has selected points of the first moment, on which 
to address the public. Seizing these two ideas, he analyses, melts the matter, and 
throws it into a dozen channels, through which he pours a flood of precious instruc- 
tion, combined with consolation. This will give some notion of the course adopted 
by the writer, and his reputation is a sufficient pera’ for the superiority of the 
execution. The book will be found an excellent help to personal religion.”— 
British Banner. 3 


ee ee EOE EEEEEEEEEEaietemidenemmmeinamettl 


Works Published by J. F. SHAW, 
WORKS BY THE REY. OCTAVIUS_WINSLOW—continued 


THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 
IN HIS PERSON AND WORK. 
Fourth Edition, 8vo., pp. 450. Price 7s. cloth. 


CHAP. Contents. 
The Pre-existent Glory of the Redeemer. 
. The Redeemer, the Revelation of the Father’s Glory. 
The Typical Glory of the Redeemer. 
. The Prophetical Glory of the Redeemer. 
. The Glory of the Redeemer in his Humiliation. 
. The Glory of the Redeemer in his Resurrection. 
The Glory of the Redeemer in his Ascension and Exaltation. 
. The Glory of the Redeemer in his People. 
. The Holy Spirit Glorifying the Redeemer. 
10. The Glory of the Redeemer in his Second Coming. 
‘* Mr. Winslow has written much and written well. Always happy in the selection 


of his subjects, he was never more so thanon the present occasion. ‘The work is 
richly evangelical, highly spiritual, and Scripturally practical.”’—Christian Witness. 


“The deep and pure spirituality that characterises all the preceding works of this 
dear servant of God, shines most beautifully here. The object of the treatise is to 
assist the believer in maintaining spiritual ground, and to fill him with high and 
holy thoughts concerning his Lord, is the end at which the Writer has aimed ; and 
if he succeeds not, the fault lies not in him, but in the faithless spirit of the reader. 
The whole volume is a feast both for body and soul.” Christian Lady’s Magazine. 


. 


DOONOahowhe 


PERSONAL DECLENSION AND REVIVAL 


OF RELIGION IN THE SOUL. 
Fourth Edition, foolscap 8vo., pp. 852. Price 5s. cloth. 


Contents. 
CHAP. CHAP. 
1. Incipient Declension. 7. The Fruitless and Fruitful Pro- 
2. Declension in Love. fessor. 
3. Declension in Faith. 8. The Lord, the Restorer of his 
4. Declension in Prayer. People. 
5. Declension in Connexion with 9. The Lord, the Keeper of his 
Doctrinal Error. People. 


6. On Grieving the Spirit. 


‘¢ This is a book of rare excellence. We have risen from the perusal with much grati- 
fication; and, we trust, with some permanent profit. The object of the author is to 
fix the attention of the reader on the state of his own personal religion, and to pro- 
mote the revival of true godliness throughout the Church. We freely recommend 
it, assured that few will read it in aright spirit who will not be led to a greater 
jealousy over themselves, and to a solemn concern about the enjoyment of increased 
spiritual light, life, and holiness.” The Covenanter. 

“The zeal and etre of the esteemed author of this volume are so well known ; 
that it is hardly necessary to say anything in recommendation of the present work.”’ 
— Home Missionary Magazine. 

“‘ Mr. Winslow is an author who has acquired the happy art of writing usefully and 
practically. There isa warmth, and a fervour too, in his writings which we like, 
and which eminently adapts them to the spirit of the New ‘Testament, in which 
nothing cold or frigid obtains. Thereis so much real excellence and adaptation to 
usefulness, that we are at a loss to particularize. If we have any preference, it is 
for the two on Declension in Prayer and Grieving the Holy Spirit. It richly 
deserves a wide circulation, and need to be read by the majority of Christian pro- 


fessors.”— Evangelical Magazine. 


“ It is an eminently spiritual and practical treatise, on a subject, alas! too extensively 
applicable in our day. We pray and trust that the volume may be made instru- 
mental in reminding many from whence they are talling, and rousing them again 
to their first love and their first works.” —Christian Lady’s Magazine. 

4 


I, 


27, Southampton Row, Russell Square. 


WORKS BY THE REV. OCTAVIUS WINSLOW—continued. 


THE INQUIRER DIRECTED 
TO AN EXPERIMENTAL AND PRACTICAL VIEW 
OF THE ATONEMENT. 
Fourth Edition, foolscap 8vo., pp. 242. Price 3s. 6d. cloth. 


Contents. 


InTRODUCTION.—The Province of Reason in the Investigation of Spiritual 
and Experimental Truth. 


CHAP. 
1. The Spiritual and Experimental Character of the Atonement, inex- 
plicable to the Unregenerate. 
2. The Atonement in relation to the Godhead of Christ. 
3. The Speciality of the Design of the Atonement. 
4. The Freeness of the Atonement. 
5. The Sympathy of the Atonement. 
6. The Fearful Alternative of rejecting the Atonement. 
“The volume contains enough of the soundest doctrine, couched in the most persuasive 
and impressive language, to engage the mind and conscience for many a long day. 
It is a heart-searching treatise; we pray the Great Searcher of all hearts to ac- 
company with his Divine influence the striking and solemn appeals with which it 
abounds.” —Christian Lady’s Magazine. 


‘* The author of this manual contemplates a mind anxiously inquiring, ‘ What shall I 
do to be saved?’ And anticipating the difficulties connected with the doctrine of 
the Atonement, meets every ct ee with a lucid explanation and a salutary address 
to the heart. Its sound scriptural views, its pathetic appeals, its insinuating style, 
and its deep-toned piety, commend it to the candid attention of every awakened 
mind.”— Eclectic Review. 


THE INQUIRER DIRECTED 


TO AN EXPERIMENTAL AND PRACTICAL VIEW OF 
THE WORK OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


Fifth Edition, enlarged, foolscap 8vo., pp. 440. Price 5s. cloth. 


Contents. 
CHAP. 
6. The Sealing of the Spirit. 
7. The Witness of the Spirit. 


CHAP. 
1. The Personality of the Godhead 
of the Spirit. 


2. The Spirit a Quickener, 8. The Spirit the Author of Prayer. 
8. Ditto ditto. 9. The Spirit the Comforter. 

4. The Indwelling of the Spirit. 10. The Inbeing and Operation of 
5. The Sanctification of the Spirit. the Spirit in Christ. 


“Tt is saying a good deal for an author in the present day, to say, that, in our judgment 
his views are sound and Scriptural. But Mr. Winslow deserves further praise. 
Not only are his materials unexceptionable—they are admirably used. Mr. Winslow 
aims at being a practical author. He evidently writes with the desire of producing 
an effect, and, we think, he succeeds without the appearance of art ; but by a happy 
exercise of it, he enlists all the powers of the soul.as his audieuce. The conscience, 
the will, the understanding, the heart, are all cited to hear what he has to say to: 
each of them. He argues with you, and you are overcome,—accuses you, and you 
are convicted,—his pleadings persuade you, and his appeals are irresistible. He has 
not one truth with which to ply this faculty,and another with which to assail that; 
every truth is brought to bear upon the whole man. An argument in his hand, is 
not a pointless arrow made to be suspended on the walls of the understanding, and 
admired; it is a polished shaft made to be used. Indeed one cannot read this book 
without feeling that God has been addressing him, and dealing closely with his soul. 
It approaches, in warmth and simplicity of power, nearer to a Scriptural standard 
than many works of higher pretensions, and must be the savour of life unto life, 
or of death unto death, to all who read it.”— Presbyterian Review. 


‘““Mr. Winslow’s work is eminently scriptural, and, as we believe, deeply imbued 
with the influences of that Holy Spirit of whose work it treats. It is not merely 
safe, but profitable in a high degree.”—Christian Lady’s Magazine. 

5 


ei. | Busch y SOS ee bad SUN Dos a Ee eS ee ean 


Works Published by J. F. SHAW, 


WORKS BY THE REV. OCTAVIUS WINSLOW.—continued. 


GLIMPSES OF THE TRUTH 
AS ITF IS IN JESUS. 
Third Edition, foolscap 8vo., pp. 352. Price 5s. cloth. 


Contents. 
CHAP. CHAP. 
1. The Voice of the Charmer. 5. The Axe laid at the Root, 
2. Alone with Jesus. 6. Broken Cisterns. 


8. The Pastor’s Request for the 7. The Coming of the Lord in rela- 
Prayers of his Flock. tion to Nominal Christianity. 

4, A Word in Season from Christ 8. Christian Love, a Test of Chris- 
to the Weary. tian Character. 


CHRIST 
THE THEME OF THE MISSIONARY. 


An Argument for the Spiritual Character and Specific Design of 
Christian Missions. Foolscap 8vo., pp. 92. 2s. cloth. 


“It is aluxury to read such a writer as the author of this neat volume. He enters 
upon the subject with his whole soul, and his style is both nervous and flowing. 
He captivates your attention until you get through the book; and you feel sorry 
that he presents no more of his arguments to which you can add a grateful re- 


sponse.’’—Christian Watchman, 


SELECT PIECES, 
PRACTICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL. 
32mo., 2s. cloth, gilt edges. 


“ Full of truth and love, savour and sanctity; a fine pocket companion.” 
Christian Witness, 


THE SILVER TRUMPET; 


Or, THE CHURCH GUIDED AND WARNED IN PERIL- 
OUS TIMES. Second Edition. 18mo. Price Is. cloth. 


** In every new publication of Mr. Winslow’s, we trace the increasing growth of the wis- 
dom, knowledge, and love, that has marked from the first the labours of his pen. 
This is a small book, but of very great importance. He has uttered a note of warn- 
ing; by no means with an ‘uncertain sound,’ but with a very direct and avowed 
reference to the prevalent errors of this present tes In treating of the schism in 
the body of Christ, committed by a very devout, but mistaken community, who 
call themselves the ‘Plymc uth Brethren,’ he has spoken with extreme tenderness 
and respect of the individuals concerned, while faithfully exhibiting some of the 
main points of their error. i Tractarianism he soundsa war note, denounc- 
ing it asit deserves. The werk is very practical; searching aud powerfully writ- 
ten. We can, and do joyfu'ly, point to this our honoured brot ver, as an illustra- 
tion of the real tendency and effect of views too often de-med, idly if not 
presumptuously, speculative. he reception of the doctrine 01 our Lord’s speedy 
Advent has changed Mr. W nslow’s silver into gold, and his gold into precious 


stones.” 


6 


: sete. Sia 


27, Southampton Row, Russell Square. 


WORKS BY THE REV, OCTAVIUS WINSLOW—continued. 


" - 


THE CHASTENING OF LOVE. 32mo., price 4d, gilt edges. 

THE SICK ONE WHOM [JESUS LOVES. 32mo., price 4d,, 
‘gilt edges. 

THE HOLY SPIRIT THE AUTHOR OF PRAYER. 17th 
Thousand. 32mo. price 4d. gilt edges. 


THE SYMPATHY OF THE ATONEMENT; THE TRIED 
BELIEVER COMFORTED. 18th Thousand. 82mo. price 4d. 
gilt edges. 


ON DECLENSION IN PRAYER. 8th Thousand. 382mo. 
price 4d. gilt edges. 

ON GRIEVING THE HOLY SPIRIT. 8rd Thousand. 32mo. 
price 4d. gilt edges. 

THE LORD THE KEEPER OF HIS PEOPLE. sth Thou- 
sand. 32mo. price 4d. gilt edges. 

THE FRUITLESS AND FRUITFUL PROFESSOR. 2nd 
Thousand. 32mo. price 4d. gilt edges. 

THE DANGER OF REJECTING THE ATONEMENT. 8th 
Thousand. 382mo. price 2d. gilt edges. 

THE RESURRECTION OF CHRIST THE LIFE OF THE 
CHRISTIAN. 2nd Thousand. 32mo. price 8d. 


INFIDELITY; OR, THE SCEPTIC’S DEATH-BED. 3rd 
Thousand. 382mo. price 6d. . 
THE WIDOW AND HER PRODIGAL SON. 2nd Thousand. 

32mo. price 4d. gilt edges. 
THE PASTOR’S REQUEST FOR THE PRAYERS OF HIS 
FLOCK. 32mo. price 6d. gilt edges. 


CONSIDERATIONS ADDRESSED TO YOUNG MEN. 12mo. 
price 6d. Cloth 1s. 


Works Published by J. F. SHAW, 


THE HARMONY OF HISTORY WITH 
PROPHECY: 
AN EXPOSITION OF THE APOCALYPSE, 
By Jos1aH ConDER, 


Author of “ The Literary History of the New Testament.” 
Foolscap 8vo. pp. 542. Price 7s. 6d. cloth. 


Contents. 
Prefatory Title. VISION 
ApostolicSalutation and Exordium. The Lamb and his Followers. 
VISION The Triple Proclamation. 
1. The Messages to the Seven 8. The Harvest and the Vintage. 
Churches. 9. The Seven Vials. 
2. The First Six Seals. 10. The Judgment upon the Mystical 
3. The Sealing of the 144,000. Babylon. 
4. The Trumpets. 11, The Battle of Armageddon. The 
5. The Angel with the Little Book, Binding of the Dragon. The 
The Two Witnesses. First Resurrection. The Judg- 
6. The Woman and Male Child, and ment and the New Creation. 
the Dragon. 12. The New Jerusalem. Conclusion. 
7. The Seven-headed Wild Beast. Chronology of the Apocalypse. 


The Two-horned Wild Beast. 


“ This very valuable book Ae nis jr fulfils the expectations which the announcement 
of it awakened in the minds of those who were acquainted with the very peculiar 
qualifications of the writer for the work he had undertaken....... Clear, sagacious, 
able, temperate, full of knowledge, and admirably calculated to become a text-book 
in the future study of the Apocalypse. ... . While we have certainly not met with 
any book which we could, with equal confidence, recommend as a suitable basis 
for Apocalyptic studies, and so well adapted to render such studies interesting to 
those to whom they are new, Mr. Conder’s complete possession of the subject, and 
the fulness of his various knowledge, have enabled him to produce a work of no 
small value, even to those who have made the visions with which the Exile of 
Patmos was favoured the subject of their daily thoughts.’”’-—Kitto’s Journal of 
Sacred Literature, July, 1849. 

“This work is not by any means to be confounded with the mass of writing of which 
the Apocalypse has, for the last two centuries, been the subject. We know not one 
of them with which it may not, in some respect or other, be advantageously con- 
trasted. To most of them itis incomparably superior. Its characteristic excellence 
lies in the soundness of its principles, its well-digested learning, its lucid exposi- 
tion, and its judicious conciseness. Believing that, whether regarded as to its plan 
or execution, this volume is one of the best, in some respects the very best of all 
that we have seen onthe Apocalypse.’’— Eclectic Review. 

‘6 We are indebted to Mr. Conder for much valuable information, and some useful 
hints—for his work is one of research, ability, and candour; but from many of his 
views we dissent.”— Quarterly Journal of Prophecy. 

‘© We are glad to see an interesting work from the able pen of Mr. Conder, in which 
much that we have suggested has been carried into effect. We have perused it 
with much gratification and profit.”— Christian Observer. 

‘‘' The work bespeaks a sound, discriminating judgment, anda refined and cultivated 
taste; and, as a condensation of much that is written by learned men in different 
ages upon the Book of Revelation, will be found a most valuable companion in the 
studies of ministers and private Christians. ‘The great excellence of Mr. Conder’s 
work is its thorough consecration to its professed object, namely, History the Ex- 
positor of Prophecy.”— Evangelical Magazine. 

‘¢ We need hardly say, that this Care: is full of historic interest, and will not fail 
to reward the perusal of intelligent men. We need say no more to recommend the 
volume.”—The British Banner. 

*“‘ Mr. Conder’s book is written in a good style and in an amiable spirit; it also shows 
considerable research. In the main, he agrees with Mr. Elliott, in the application 
of prophecy to past history, and differsfrom him chiefly in es tothe future, and 
especially in postponing the Second Advent till after the Millennium.”— Church of 
England Quarterly Review, Oct., 1849, (p. 272). 


8 


27, Southampton Row, Russell Square. 


IMPORTANT WORKS ON MISSIONS. 


eee 


HAND-BOOK OF BENGAL MISSIONS, 
IN CONNECTION WITH THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. 


Together with an account of General Educational Efforts 
in North India. 


By the Rey. JAmus Lone, Church Missionary in Calcutta. 
Illustrated with a Map of North India. Post 8vo. Price 9s. cloth. 


THE design of this Hand-Book is to serve as a guide to the present as well 
as past history of various Institutions connected with the English Church in 
Bengal, interspersed with illustrations drawn from the Mythology, Literature, 
and Manners of the Hindus and Mussulmans, Topographical and Ethno- 
graphical notes, with characteristic notices of various Missionaries, and 
zealous friends of Missions. It contains a complete history of the rise and 
progress of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, the Society for 
the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts, and the Church Missionary 
Society. Besides information to be obtained from published Reports of the 
Religious Societies, and his own observation whilst in India, the Author has 
had the manuscript Minutes of these Societies placed at his disposal, and 
each portion has been revised by their respective Secretaries. 


This work has received the approbation of the Bishop of Calcutta, who 
took fifty copies; of the Venerable Thomas Dealtry, Bishop of Madras, who 
took twenty-five copies; and four hundred copies were taken by Clergymen 
and Gentlemen resident in Bengal. 


‘6 This is one of the most useful works on Missionary topics with which we have ever 
met. We should like to present our readers with many extracts from its valuable 
statements, but extracts would not describe a book which is in itself the fruits of a 
patient and unwearying search through more than two hundred volumes. We have 
placed before us a sketch of the operations of the three great Missionary Societies of 
the Church of England, so far as they relate to the Presidency of Bengal. The 
sketch is rapidly but clearly drawn, and traces the rise of Missionary effort from 
its first feeble organization to its rich development. We confidently recommend 
this Hand-Book to all who are interested in the great and glorious cause of mis- 
sions,’’—Church of England Sunday- School Quarterly. 


‘‘ The wide field of observation implied in this volume, has been thoroughly gleaned 
tor the purpose of making it a work of reference for the friends and supporters of 
Missionary Societies ; it is impossible to follow the compiler, for whose diligence, 
however, we feel great respect. Someof the incidental matter is eminently interest- 
ing.”’— Atheneum. 


“ Mr. Long’s book relates to Church of England Missions in the Bengal Presidency. 
The industry of the compiler is in it as conspicuous as the modesty of the author— 
Mr. Long aims at collecting a large body of facts—he shows what the Church of 
England has done in Bengal to disseminate a knowledge of the Gospel of Christ. 
He is candid and tolerant, and there never was yet a book written on the statements 
contained in which more reliance might with safety be reposed.”— Atlas, Sep!, 2, 1848. 


See also Christian Observer, Sept. 1848, Colonial Church Chronicle, and 
Missionary Journal, May 1848, Church Times, &c. &c. 
: 9 


Works Published by J. F. SHAW, 


IMPORTANT WORKS ON MISSIONS—continwed. 


eee 


Missionary Labours in British Guiana. 


With Remarks on the Manners, Customs, and Superstitious Rites 
of the Aborigines. 


By the Rev. J. H. Bernau, 
Missionary of the Church Missionary Society. 


Illustrated by a Map, and numerous Engravings. 
Post 8vo., pp. 254. Price 7s. cloth. 


‘This is a volume of modest pretensions, but of very considerable merit, as entering 
into a number of questions deeply interesting to a man of science, the philanthropist, 
and the Christian. With its many beautiful pictorial illustrations of the natural 
and other scenes which it describes, it will be found by our intelligent and pious 
readers one of the most pleasing and instructive of our missionary records. Our 
readers will be much interested with what they will here find on the subjects of 
production, climate, geology, natural history, origin, customs, and religious belief of 
the Indian tribes, but more than all, with the intelligenee furnished respecting 
the triumphs of the Gospel.” — Evangelical :Magazine. 


“ This is a history of no common interest. It first introduces us to the natural wonders 
of a tropical climate, where beasts, birds, fruits, trees, and flowers, are all strange to 
the European eye; we are then shown the poor Indian, with his superstitious cere- 
monies, his drunken orgies, his thirst for revenge. The trials and blighted hopes of 
former Missionaries are then delineated, and, finally, we are cheered with good 
tidings, that a blessing from the Lord has at length descended upon the weary land. 
It is a narrative full of touching incidents.”—Christian Lady’s Magazine. 


Protestant Missions in Bengal Ilustrated. 
By J. J. WertsBrecut, Church Missionary. 
Second Edition, foolscap 8vo., pp. 354. Price 5s. cloth. 


CHAP. Contents. 

1. Character of the Country, and the Moral Condition of the Inhabitants of 
India. 

2. Religious Books and Mythology of the Hindoos. 

3. Idolatrous Ceremonies of the Hindoos. 

4, Labours of Missionaries in India. 

5. Missionary Labours—Translation and Dissemination of the Holy Scrip- 
tures, and Education. 

6. Difficulties of Missionary Labour in India. 

7. Success and Prospects of Missionary Labours in India. 


“ 4 volume written in the spirit of these lectures is a boon to the Christian Church. 
Mr. Weitbrecht has long laboured in the East, and now places before the friends of 
Christian missions the result of a lengthened observation and a matured expe- 
rience. It isin all respects an unpretending production, but withal an invaluable 
addition to the store of our missionary intelligence....There is a charm of Christian 
simplicity pertaining to it, which makes it very convincing to the judgment, and 
very impressive to the heart. The style is excellent, and the illustrations are such 
as keep the attention awakened to the close of the volume. We regard the entire 
volume as one of the most acceptable contributions yet made to the cause of mis- 
sions.” Evangelical Magazine. 

“ This volume treats of the Sacred writings, mythology, and customs of the Hindoos, of 
the peculiar character of teaching rendered necessary by these, and has a final 
chapter on the success which has hitherto attended endeavours to promote the 
gospel, and on the prospects for the future. Mr. Weitbrecht’s illustrations have 
not only the usual interest of such narratives, but are written in a most catholic 
spirit.”"— Eclectic Review. 

10 


a 


27, Southampton Row, Russell Square. 


WORKS BY THE REY. WILLIAM BURGH, 
An Exposition of the Book of Revelation. 


Fourth Edition, revised and enlarged, pp. 472, 7s. cloth. 

In preparing this Edition, the whole work has been subjected to the most 
careful revision, and much improved matter has been interspersed; in ad- 
dition to which is an Appendix of Notes on various subjects, not in former 
editions. 

Contents. 
CHAP. 
10 and 11. The Little Book — The 
Two Witnesses—The Woman 


CHAP. 

1. The Title and Inscription—The 
Commission and Vision, 

2. The Epistle to Ephesus— and Dragon. 
Smyrna—Pergamos—Thyatira. 12, The Woman and Dragon. 

3. The Epistle to Sardis—Phila-| 15. ihe Beast and False Prophet. 
delphia—and Laodicea. 14. The First Fruits and Harvest. 

4. The Vision introductory to the 15 and 16. The Seven Vials of 
Seals. Wrath. 


5. The Vision of the Sealed Book. 

6. The Opening of the First Six 
Seals. 

7. The Sealing of the Twelve Tribes 

8 and 9. The Opening of the 
Seventh Seal. 


17 and 18. The Fall of Babylon. 
19. The Second Advent. 
20. The Millennium. 
21 and 22. The New Heaven and 
New Earth. 
Appendix. 


The Second Advent of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
AND CONNECTED EVENTS. 
With an Introduction on the use of Unfulfilled Prophecy. 
Third Edition, pp. 324, 5s. cloth. 


Contents. 
INTRODUCTION—THE RicutT USE OF PROPHECY AND Duty 
OF ATTENDING TO IT. 
CHAP. 
4. The Antichrist continued — 
The Last Days. Jerusalem trodden down of 
2. The Mystery of Iniquity—The the Gentiles. 
Man of Sin, or Antichrist. 5. The Second Advent — The Day 
8. The Antichrist continued — of Vengeance—The Year of the 
The Image and Beasts of Redeemer, 
Daniel and Beasts of the 6. The Second Advent continued. 


Apocalypse. 7. Ditto ditto. 
8. Practical View. 


New Marginal Readings and References 

On the Four Gospels, adapted to the Authorised Version of the 
Holy Scriptures; with a Harmony, and Occasional Notes. New 
and improved Edition, pp. 316, 4s. cloth. 


“The object of this work is to give, in a small compass, to the great mass of readers of 
the Scriptures, the advantage now confined to ministers, and the limited number of 
others who have the time and means for extensive theological studies, of the light 
thrown on many passages by the labours of various critical annotators. This is 
done, 1, By an extension of the various readings of the received version, so as to em- 
brace almost every material improvement of the authorised text. 2. By a collec- 
tion of marginal references, for the purpose of comparing spiritual things with 
spiritual; making them as complete as possible, with reference to things rather 
than words. 3. By occasional notes, for the most part critical, showing the exact 
meaning of particular terms. Many difficulties occurring to the reader of the Gos- 


pels are solved by this work.” 
ll 
EE OE Oe ey ae ee Re a oe 


CHAP. 
1. The Gentile Dispensation — 


Works Published by J. F. SHAW, 
WORKS BY THE REY. J. H. EVANS, 


THE SPIRIT OF HOLINESS 
AND SANCTIFICATION THROUGH THE TRUTH. 
Fourth Edition, revised. 
Foolscap 8vo., pp. 196, 2s. 6d. cloth. 


CHAP. Contents. 


1. The Nature, Necessity, and Author of Holiness. 

2. The Incipient Principle of Holiness, as developed in Regeneration. 

3. The operation of the Spirit of Holiness, as viewed negatively, in the 
mortification of Sin. . 

4, The operation of the Spirit of Holiness, as viewed positively, in the 
work of Sanctification. 

5. Sanctification through the Truth. 


‘“ We need only notice the fact of this being the fourth edition, and say that the success 
of the volume is sufficiently accounted for by its earnest, practical tendency, and 
its thorough command and abundant use of Scriptural language.’’— Eclectic Review. 


‘*This is a very valuable piece of experimental and practical oe The single fact 
that it has reached a fourth edition says something for it; and the fact that it is the 
production of the knowledge and experience of one of the most able and enlightened 
ministers of the day, leads to the presumption that the published volume is deserv- 
ing,—a conclusion which examination will confirm.’’— British Banner. 

“ The circulation this little book has had, shows that the Christian public know how to 
appreciate it. It is emphatically a book for the closet, for every page is calculated 
to awaken prayer and holy meditation. We cordially recommend it.’’—Christian 
Lady’s Magazine. 

“A very admirable treatise, in an experimental and practical style; full of results of a 
deep acquaintance at once with the Word of God, and with the human heart.”— 
Evangelical Christendom: 


VINTAGE GLEANINGS. 


SELECTIONS from SERMONS delivered by the Rev. JAMES 
Harinewon Evans, Minister of John Street Chapel. 


Royal 32mo. pp. 280, 3s. cloth, 5s. mor. 


“This book is a collection of what the compiler truly calls ‘‘ Gems of Thought,’’: and 
they have been evidently treasured up as precious sentences dropped from the lips 
of a beloved pastor. Such was indeed the late Mr. Evans of John Street; he has 
now passed from the ministry of the Church below, to join that pores assembly 
and Church of the Firstborn, whose members see eye to eye, and who join in one 
harmonious anthem of praise. He was a deeply spiritual minister of the true 
sanctuary. His name will be long regarded with affectionate remembrance and 
veneration.” —Christian Guardian. 

‘¢ A book of gems. Short pithy sentences. each containing some sound practical truth 
in plain Janeuage, the cezasional perusal of which will supply a motive to prayer, 
an incentive to obedience, and a means of invigorating the faith of the pious Chris- 
tian.”’— British Mother’s Magazine. 

“ This little volume consists of many original and striking thoughts uttered by the Rev. 
James H. Evans in the pulpit, and secured by the ready ype of one of his hearers, 
‘who owes much to them.’ There is great practical wisdom and a rich experience 
of Divine things indicated in many of these observations, which will be acceptable 
to experienced Christians.” — Christian Times. 


Letters of a Pastor to his Flock. 


Third Edition. 32mo., price 1s. cloth lettered. 


27, Southampton Row, Russell Square. 
WORKS BY THE REV. J. H. EVANS—continued. 


——— 


CHECKS TO INFIDELITY, 


Contained in Four Essays on the Being of God; the Scriptures, as 
the Word of God; The Holy Nature of God; The Righteous 
Character of the Day of Judgment. 18mo., ls. sewed. 


‘“* We earnestly recommend these essays to the notice of those who spend a portion of 
their property in the circulation of works fitted for general usefulness.” — Evangeli- 
cal Magazine. 


“Mr. Evans has rendered these essays very instructive, by the judicious adoption of 
the most prominent arguments in favour of the doctrines he aims to establish, 
clothed in chaste and popular language. We think he has done well to present our 
youth with a volume of this description. We most cordially recommend it as ad- 
mirably adapted to prepare the minds of youthful readers against specious sceptical 
productions. Such a work was greatly needed, and we hope it will be extensively 
circulated.”’— New Methodist Connexion Magazine. 


Man’s Right to God’s Word. 


Translated from the French Prize Essay of M. Boucurr; 
With a recommendatory Preface by the Hon. and Rey. 
H. Montagu Vixurers, M.A., Rector of St. George, Bloomsbury. 
Foolscap 8vo., pp. 144, 2s. 6d. cloth. 


po grileiy Contents. 


1. The Rights of the Bible over Man. 
2. The Rights of Man over the Bible. 
8. Obligations of Man with respect to the Bible. 
“This is a very powerful essay, the truth of which cannot be too deeply impressed upon 
the mind in these Romanising times.’ — Evangelical. 


“Tt contains some striking and original thoughts, and is well entitled to the considera- 
tion of sceptical and indifferent minds.”— Biblical Review. 

“ An admirable little work. It is polished in style, and philosophical in general cha- 
racter; its arguments are conclusive, and its language easy to be understood.”’— 
Lowe’s Edinburgh Magazine. 


“ The book is worthy of a large circulation.” —Baptist Record. 


A Key to the Apocalypse ; 
Being a Concise and Simple Explanation of the Prophetical part 
of the Revelation of St. John. 
Foolscap 8vo., pp. 140, 2s. 6d. cloth. 


“Fear Not.” 


By Miss BunBuRY. 
Author of “ A Visit to My Birth Place,” “ Thoughts in Suffering.” 
Royal 32mo., 1s. 6d. cloth, 2s. silk 


Christians while here are much exposed, and frequently assailed by formidable 
spiritual foes, and are apt to give place to doubts and fears. This little volume is 
prepared to inspire them with confidence, and to dissipate their fears, and is well 
adapted topanswer the end designed. We recommend it as a well-written book, 
admirably adapted for a closet and pocket companion.” —New Methodist Connexton 


The Widow’s Text Book. 


Price 3d. 


18 


Works Published by J. F. SHAW, 


Short Memorials of the Lord’s Goodness. 


Also, On the Power and Grace of the Holy Spirit; 
and Serious Thoughts for the Aged. 
A New Edition, Enlarged, 18mo. Price 8s, 6d. clota, 
The “Short Memorials of the lLord’s Goodness” are well 
adapted for general circulation, and may be had separately ; are 
printed in large type, and reasonable in price. 


No. 1. OLD GABRIEL. Sixth Edition. Price 2d. . 
2. CATHERINE RADDEN. Sixth Edition. Price 2d. 
8. THE HAMLET OF ST. BUDEAUX, Sixth Edition. 
Price 2d. 

. THE AGED SHEPHERD. Sixth Edition. Price 2d. 

. THE AGED WIDOW. Sixth Edition. Price 2d. 

THE AGED GIPSEY. Sixth Edition. Price 4d. 

. VISIT TO A COTTAGE IN SCOTLAND. ~ Sixth 
Edition. Price 2d. 

8. THE TWIN BROTHERS. Price 6d. 


ON THE POWER AND GRACE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. 
Eighth Edition. Price 2d. 
SERIOUS THOUGHTS FOR THE AGED. Eighth Edition. 
Price 2d. 


The above are sold in Packets containing a Set. First and 
Second Series. Price ls. each. 


MOO 


NEW SERIES 


OF THE . a 


Short Memorials of the Lord’s Goodness. 


No. 9. THE ORKNEY ISLANDS, &c. No. 1, price 6d. 
10. No, 2, price 6d. 


11. HENRY’S EARLY GRAVE. Price 4d. 


Hymns with Scripture References, 
Selected by the Author of “Short Memorials of the Lord’s Goodness.” 
Second Edition, corrected and enlarged, printed in large type. - 

Price ls. 6d. sewed ; 2s. cloth. ; 

“This selection is chiefly designed for THE AGED, the IN- 
VALID, and THOSE who read imperfectly; who by reason of small 
type are frequently deprived of the advantage derived from Hymns, 
which are often made the means, through the teaching of the Holy 
Spirit, to fix Divine Truth in the memory, while the heart is edified 
and comforted.” 

14 : 


2%, Southampton Row, Russell Square. 


BLOOMSBURY TRACTS. 


A Series of Practical and Experimental Tracts, suitable for general 
distribution, especially among the Christian Poor. 


Price 13d. each, or 10s. 6d. per 100. 


, THE FRUITLESS AND FRUITFUL PROFESSOR. 
. ON GRIEVING THE HOLY SPIRIT. 

. THE SYMPATHY OF THE ATONEMENT 

. ON DECLENSION IN PRAYER. 

. THE HOLY SPIRIT THE AUTHOR OF PRAYER. 
. THE LORD THE KEEPER OF HIS PEOPLE. 


(TO BE CONTINUED.) 


arr OD = 


CHILDREN’S BOOKS. 


Adapted for distribution in Village, Sunday, and Ragged Schools. 
1. LITTLE JOSEPH. Price 3d. 


2. JAMES BALL, THE ERRAND BOY. Price 4d. 
3. TOM STANLEY. Price 1d. 

4. THE YOUNG BRICKLAYER. Price 1d 

5. JOHN AND SIMON. Price 3d. 

6. EDWARD AND HIS MOTHER. Price 3d. 

7. HANNAH NORTH. Price 1d. 

8. DAVID HUTT AT HOME, Price 3d. 

9. DAVID HUTT IN SERVICE, Price 3d. 

10. THE TWO SCHOOLFELLOWS. Price 3d. 

11. THE BIBLE. Price 3d. 


12. SCRIPTURE TRUTHS. Price 1d. 
13. THE LORD’S COMING. Price 1d. 


“ These little books form a series of children’s books. Their cheapness, their easy style, 
and their decidedly religious tone,render them peculiarly adapted to young children 
who are able to read books of two syllables. In most of these, all words of more 
than one syllable are divided by a hyphen, so as to lessen the difficulties of the 
young student. We earnestly recommend them to the notice of mothers,” — British 
Mothers’ Magazine. 

THE WILD STRAWBERRIES. Edited by Lady CaTHERINE 

Lone. Price 2d. 


By the same Author, 
LILIES OF THE VALLEY. Price 3d. 
15 


Le i AS 


Works Published by J. F. SHAW. 


WORDS OF COMFORT FOR THE 
AFFLICTED. 


In Daily Portions: comprising Meditations, Hymns, and Prayers. 
12mo., pp. 162, 3s. cloth boards, 2s. 6d. cloth limp. 


% The opening pages of this book contain a series of brief passages from God’s Word for 
every day of the year. Then follow a meditation, hymn, and prayer for each day 
fora month. The whole is adapted for the use of the child of God suffering the 
Ciscipline of affiiction. Itisa Pech companion for the sick room; and will prove 
very suggestive of those thoughts and emotions most desired for seasons of trial. It 
has our hearty commendation.”—Christian Record. 

“It is an office of gentle, sympathising love, to provide a solace for the burthened 
mourner, and to direct a rill of comfort to roll its limpid and_ refreshing waters 
through the chambers of weariness and pain. Many achild of God, shut up in the 
chamber of affliction, wili bless the unknown hand which, in this little volume 
brings to his side a wise and winning monitor to discourse to him of his trials, an 
teach him to extract honey from the gall.”— Evangelical Christendom. 

* This is an ingenious book, comprising thirty-one meditations, selected from our best 
writers of all sects and parties, hymns of the same miscellaneous and catholic cha- 
racter, as also prayers. It will, therefore, be seen, that the book can hardly fail to 
find favour with persons whose circumstances admit of much retirement, and who 
ae vehy such assistance to the cultivation of a spirit of devotion. It will be an ex- 
cellent companion on journeys, strolls in the fields, or summer lounges upon the 
mountain side.”— Banner. 


J. F. SHAW has just issued a 
CATALOGUE OF SECOND-HAND BOOKS, 


consisting of valuable Works in 


Theology, History, Biography, Travels, &c. 
WHICH ARE OFFERED ON SUCH TERMS AS ENSURE A RAPID SALE. 


A Catalogue will be forwarded on application, postage free, 
to any part of the United Kingdom. 


An early application and examination of this List is respectfully 
solicited. 


J. F. Saw respectfully informs the Public, that, besides the 
Works contained in this List, which are only those published by 
himself, he has constantly on sale all Standard Books in every 
department of general as well as TureorogicaL LITERATURE ; 
also, a large selection of JUVENILE Works, an extensive assort- 
ment of Brptes, PrRayER Booxs, and CHURCH SERVICES, in 
every variety of binding. 


DEPOT FOR THE PUBLICATIONS OF THE RELIGIOUS TRACT 
SOCIETY. 


REED AND PARDON, PRINTERS, PATERNOSTER-ROW. 


i 
7 
“eo 
7 
‘ 
oe 
-# 


Bcc tilts 


Date Due 


TTT 
Puaitt 


irl | 


T 


ary 


Speer Libr 


9 


I 


gical Seminary 


1012 0102 


B=) 
° 
a 

= 

= 
fo) 

3 
ry 
rs} 
= 

a 


{ 


UT 


Picrpoertrerercieevencorreststat=ent 


