cc. 


a 


ro 


\  \ 


THE 

WORKS 

OF     THE     REVEREND 

GEORGE   WHITEFIELD,  M.  A. 

Late  of  Pembroke-College,  Oxford, 
And  Chaplain  to  the  Rt.  Hon.  the  Countefs  of  Huntingdon. 

CONTAINING 

.All  his  SERMONS  and  TRACTS 

Which  have  been  already  publifhed  : 
WITH 

A  Select  COLLECTION  of  LETTERS, 

Written  to  his  moft  intimate  Friends,  and  Perfons  of  Diftindlion,  in 
Eiigland,  Scotland,  Ireland,  ^Yi^  America,  from  the  Year  1734,  to 
1770,  including  the  whole  Period  of  his  Miniltry. 

ALSO 

Some  other  Pieces  on  Important  Subjects, 

never  before  printed  ;  prepared  by  Himfeif  for  the  Prefs. 
To  which  is  prefixed. 

An     ACCOUNT     of    his     LIFE, 

Compiled  from  his  Original  Papers  and  Letters. 

VOL.      L 


LONDON: 

Printed  for  Edward  and  Charles  Dilly,  in  the  Poultry  j 
and  MefFrs.  Kincaid  and  Bell,  at  Edinburgh. 

MDCCLXXI. 


Entered  at  Stationers-Hall,   agreeable 
to  Ad  of  Parliament, 


ADVERTISEMENT. 

THIS  complete  Edition  of  the  late  Rev.  Mr. 
Whitefield's  Works  (printed  under  the 
Diredion  of  his  Executors)  it  is  prefumed,  will  be 
highly  acceptable  to  all  his  Friends,  as  the  juft  and 
proper  Monument  of  his  Memory  and  Merit ;  and 
both  pleafing  and  ufeful  to  the  Public  in  general,  but 
efpecially  to  thofe  who  deiire  to  cherifli  and  promote 
the  Spirit  of  primitive  Chriftianity. 

To  the  Sermons  and  Tracls  formerly  publiilied,  and 
which  are  now  ranged  in  their  proper  Order,  are  alfo 
added  other  Pieces,  on  the  moft  Important  Subjefls  : 
together  with  a  valuable  Colledion  of  Letters,  feleded 
and  prepared  by  himfelf  for  Publication  ;  in  which  is 
difplayed,  that  native  Spirit  and  Simplicity,  fo  emi- 
nently confpicuous  in  his  Life  and  Converfation.  His 
Friends,  and  even  his  Enemies  (fliould  there  be  any 
fuch)  will  here  openly  behold  his  unwearied  Diligence, 
undaunted  Firmnefs,  noble  Difintereftednefs,  and  ex- 
ceeding Ufefulnefs  in  the  Work  of  the  MiniO:ry  ;  alfo, 
his  remarkable  Fidelity  in  Friendfhip,  exemplary 
Piety,  and  fervent  Zeal  for  the  Profperity  of  pure  and 
undefiled  Religion. 

The  Letters  and  Works  can  (land  in  no  need  of  any 
Recommendation  :  Conneded  with  the  account  of  his 
Life,  (now  drav/n  from  original  Papers)  they  exhibit 
a  plain  and  undifguifed  View  of  the  worthy  Author,  in 
all  Parts  of  his  public  Service,  as  well  as  in  his  private 
Retirements,  and  inward  Trials;  faithfully  fliewing 
the  Whole  of  that  livhig  I'emple^  which  was  facred  to 
God,  and  happily  inflrudling  Mankind  in  the  Ways  of 
Godlinefs  and  eternal  Life, 


LETTERS. 


LETTER    L 

To  Mr.  G,  H. 
Dear  Sir^  Oxon,  July  i8,  1734. 

HAVING  heard  the  melancholy  news  of  your  brother's 
death,  I  could  not  help  fending  you  a  line,  to  let 
you  know  how  much  I  am  concerned.  Indeed,  I  can- 
not fay,  I  am  fo  much  grieved  on  his  account,  as  for  that 
forrow,  which  the  lofs  of  fo  valuable  a  youth  muft  necelTarily 
occafion  to  all  his  relations.  No  !  I  rather  envy  him  his 
blefled  condition.  He,  unqueftionably  is  divinely  blelTed, 
whilft  we  are  ftill  left  behind  to  wreftle  with  unruly  paltions, 
and  by  a  continued  looking  unto  Jesus  and  running  in  our 
thriftian  race,  to  prefs  forward  to  that  high  prize,  of  which 
he,  dear  Touthy  is  now  in  full  fruition.  Thefe  are  my  true 
fentiments  about  his  death  ;  I  leave  you  to  judge  then,  whe- 
ther I  had  need  be  concerned  on  his  account ;  and  furely  was 
it  to  be  put  to  your  choice,  whether  fo  religious  a  young  man 
(hould  live  or  die,  no  one  could  be  fo  cruel,  as  to  wi(h  to  detain 
him  from  his  wifhed-for  glory.  Be  not  then  too  much  con- 
cerned at  his  death,  but  let  us  rather  learn  that  important 
leflbn,  which  his  whole  life  taught  us  :  "  That  there  is  no- 
thing comparable  to  an  early  piety."  I  thought  to  have 
fpent  many  agreeable  hours  with  him  in  chriftian  and  edifying 
converfation,  when  I  came  to  Glouccfter ;  but  he  is  gone  to 
more  agreeable  company^  and  long  before  now  has  joined  the 
heavenly  choir. 

I  (hall  only  add,  that  as  your  brother  Imitated  our  blefled 
Saviour  iu  his  life,  fo  I  pray  God,  he  may  refemble  him  in 

Vol.  I,  B  liis 

I 


2  LETTERS. 

his  death,  and  be  a  means,   like  his  beloved  Redeemer,  of 
reconciling  all   former  animofities,  which  is  the  hearty  wifh 

of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  fmcere  friend  and  humble  fervant, 

G.  IV. 

L  E  T  T  E  R     II.  I 

-  To  Mr,  G.  H. 

Dear  Sir^  Brlfol,  Sept.  lo,  1734. 

THIS  morning  I  wrote  to  you  in  hafte,  expeding  Mr. 
/.  would  foon  be  going  ;  but  to  my  great  fatisfadion, 
he  came  hither  this  night,  and  foon  afterwards,  your  very  much 
wifned-for  letter  was  brought  to  hand;  which  (after  ten  thou- 
fand  thanks  for  fo  many  repeated  favours)  I  (hall  now  beg 
leave  to  anfvver.  You  tell  me  "  Mr.  P.  likes  N.'*  God 
be  praifed  !  That  he  hath  recommended  fomething  to  my 
perufal.  I'll  read  it,  God  willing,  with  care,  at  my  return. 
"  That  he  wants  to  know  my  quality,  ftate,  condition,  circum- 
«'  fiances,  &c."  Alas!  that  anyone  (hould  enquire  after  fuch 
a  wretch  as  I  am.  However,  fmce  he  hath  been  fo  kind, 
pray  tell  him,  that  as  for  my  quality,  I  was  a  poor,  mean 
drav/er  ;  but  by  the  diftinguifhing  grace  of  God,  am  now 
intended  for  the  miniftry.  As  for  my  eftate,  that  I  am  a  fer- 
vitor;  and  as  to  my  condition  and  circumftances,  I  have  not  of 
my  own  any  where  to  lay  my  head.  But  my  friends,  by  God's 
providence,  minifler  daily  to  me,  and  in  return  for  fuch  un- 
merited, unfpeakable  bleflings,  I  truft  the  fame  good  Being 
\yill  give  me  grace  to  dedicate  myfelf  without  referve  to  his 
fervice.  .  To  "  fpend  and  be  fpent  "  for  the  welfare  of  my 
fellow-creatures,  endeavouring  to  promote  the  gofpel  of  his 
Son  as  much  as  lies  in  my  poor  power.  But  "  obferve  his 
"  humility,"  fays  Mr.  H.  Aye,  catch  an  old  Chriftian 
without  profound  humility,  if  you  can.  Believe  me,  Sir,  it 
i$  nothing  but  this  flcfli  of  ours,  thofe  curfed  feeds  of  the 
prouH  apoflatc,  which  lie  lurking  in  us,  that  make  us  to  thinlc 
ourf.lves  worthy  of  the  very  air  we  breathe.  When  our  eyes 
are  opened  by  the  influences  of  divine  grace,  we  then  fhall 
begin  to  think  of  ourfelves.as  we  ought  to  think,  even,  that 
God  is  all,  and  we  are  lefs  than  nothing.  Well,  you  may- 
cry,  O  happy  temper,  could  I  but  learn  of  Christ  to  be  meek 

and 


LETTERS,  3 

and  lowly  in  hearty  I  (hould  certainly  find  reft  to  my  foul. 
May  God,  for  his  dear  Son's  lake,  give  it  to  you,  to  me, 
and  to  all  our  dear  friends!  "  Some  like,  fome  djillke  the  ex- 
"  tracSl,"  you  fay.  I  did  not  do  it,- to  pleafe.  ;nan,  but  God. 
''  Mr.  JV.  is  too  much  engaged  in  temporals."  Is  he  ?  Ola 
dear  Sir,  pray  that  when  I  enter  the  miniitry,  I  may  be  wholly 
engaged  in  fpirituals  :  But  "  Mrs.  H.  has  beeff  ill,  and  is 
*'  now  recovered."  God  be  praifed  for  both  !  Our  Saviour, 
^ir^  learnt  obedience  by  the  things  which  he  fi^fFered,  fo  mufi: 
we.  Pain,  if  patiently  endured,  and  fancliiied  to  us,  is  a  great 
purifier  of  our  corrupted  nature.  It  will  teach  us  excellent 
lefTons.  I  hope  A4r.  H.  has  been  enabled  to  learn  fome 
of  thenfi.'  So  .nuch  in  anfwer  to  your  kind  letter.  You  fay 
"  it  was  too  long."  Believe  rhe,  5fV,  it  was  much  toornort; 
but  a  line  is  more  than  I  deferve.  However,  I  have  made  out 
in  mine,  what  was  wanting  in  yours.  A^Iy  Adother*s  jour- 
ney to  GUuceJler^  I  fea^r,  is  fpoiled  by  the  weather.  God's 
blefTed  will  be  done  I  J  hope  to  be  with  you  about  next  Tucfday 
fevennight.  "  I  am  milled,"  you  fay  ;  and  you  may  well  mifs 
fuch  a  troubiefome  gueft.  .Well,  God  will  reward  you  richly, 
I  truft.  Never  defpair  oi  my  brather -^  when  God  ads  upoa 
the  foul,  he  makes  quick  work  of  it.  Be  pleafed  to  tell  Mr. 
M.  that  his  remiflhefs  hath  occafioned  me  many  a  figh,  and  his 
return  from  his  relapfe,  m.atter  of  abundant  thanks  to  God  in 
his  behalf.  Oh  let  us  young,  unexperienced  foldiers,  be  always 
upon  our  guard  ;  the  very  moment  we  defert  our  poft,  the 
enemy  ruflies  in;  and  if  he  can  but  divert  our  eyes  from  look- 
ing heavenward,  he  will  foon  fo  blind  us,  that  we  fnall  not 
look  towards  it  at  all.  A  great  deal  may  be  learned  from  a 
little  fall.  But  I  muft  not  detain  you  any  longer,  than  to  aiTure 
you  how  much  I  am,  Dta?-  Sir, 

Your  and  Mrs.  H.'s  fincere  friend  and  fervant, 
in  our  common  Lord, 

G.  IF. 


I 


LETTER     III. 

To  Air,  H. 
Dear  Sir^  Oxon^  Sept.  17,  1 734. 

Had  the  favour  of  your  letter  laft  Friday^  which  brought 
me  the  agreeable  news  of  your  and  Mrs,  H,'s  welfare,  to- 
B  2  gether 


4  LETTERS. 

gether  with  the  much-defired  account  of  your  approving  the 
fcheme,  inclofed  in  my  Jaft.  Indeed,  I  did  not  doubt  of  its 
meetins;  with  a  candid  reception,  from  all  thofe  perfons  to 
whom  it  was  recommended.  Their  known  concern  for  reli- 
gion, giving  me  fufficient  affurance,  that  nothing  can  be  un- 
acceptable to  them,  which  any  way  tended  to  promote  their 
improvement  in  the  divine  life.  It  muft  be  confefTed,  indeed, 
as  you  very  juftly  obferved,  that  we  muft  make  a  great  pro- 
grefs  in  religion,  and  be  inured  by  frequent  prayer  and  medi- 
tation, to  the  extatic  contemplation  of  heavenly  objedts,  before 
we  can  arrive  at  true  heavenly-mindednefs ;  and,  perhaps,  after 
all  our  endeavours,  whilft  our  fouls  are  immerfed  in  thefe 
flefhly  tabernacles,  we  (hall  make  but  very  fm all  advances  in  fo 
delightful  and  glorious  an  undertaking.  But  believe  me,  Sir^ 
you  cannot  imagine,  how  vaftly  ferviceable  the  conftant  ufe  of 
all  the  means  of  religion  will  be,  in  acquiring  thisblefled  habit 
of  mind.  Such,  as  an  early  rifmg  in  the  morning,  public 
and  private  prayer,  a  due  temperance  in  all  things,  and  fre- 
quent meditation  on  the  infinite  love  and  purity  of  that  un- 
paralleled pattern  of  all  perfection,  our  dear  Redeemer.  As 
for  your  mentioning,  *S/V,  the  degeneracy  of  the  age,  as  the 
leaft  objedlion  againft  our  making  further  advances  in  any 
religious  improvement,  I  cannot  by  any  means  admit  of  it. 
The  fcriptures  (as  I  take  it)  arc  to  be  the  only  rules  of  a<5lion. 
And  the  examples  of  our  bleiled  Lord  and  his  apoftles,  the 
grand  patterns  whereby  we  are  to  form  the  conduct  of  our 
lives.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  inftances  of  an  exalted  piety 
are  rarely  to  be  met  with  in  the  prefent  age,  and  one  would 
think,  if  we  were  to  take  an  eftimate  of  our  religion,  from  the 
livesof  moftof  its  profeffors,  that  chriftianity  was  nothing  but 
a  dead  letter.  But  then  it  is  not  our  religion,  but  ourfelve? 
that  are  to  be  blamed  all  this  while.  Would  we  live  as  the 
primitive  chriftians  did,  we  might  no  doubt  have  the  fame 
afliftance  vouchfafed  us,  as  they  had.  God's  grace  is  never 
rcftrained,  and  though  we  ihould  not  arrive  at  thofe  heights 
of  heavenly-mindednefs,  as  fome  of  the  primitive  chriftians 
were  eminent  for,  yet,  methinks  we  fhould  imitate  them  as  far 
as  we  can,  and  rely  on  the  divine  goodnefs  for  grants  of  fuch 
a  fupply  of  grace,  as  he,  in  his  good  pleafure,  fhall  judge  moft 
^jgnvenient  for  us.    Be  pleafed  to  fend  for  Mr.  Law's  Chrtfiian 

P(rfu'Jien 


LETTERS.  S 

Perfeawn  for  me   againft  my  coming  into   the  country,  if 
printed  in  a  fmall  edition.     I  am,  with  due  refpeds  to  felf, 

fpoufe,  and  all  other  friends,  ,      ,     ^         , 

^  Your  s  fmcerely, 

LETTER    IV. 

To  the  Same, 

r,       cv  Oxon^  Dec.  ^y  lyS^' 

Dear  Sir,  r    i7     u  j  r 

T  Am  heartily  glad  to  hear  that  the  c.uMry  parfon  has  had  fo 
1  good  an  efFea  upon  you,  and  that  you  are  refolved  to  fet  m 
earneft,  about  working  out  your  falvation :  Be  f^^;  quench  not 
theife  firft  motions ;  but  go  on  vigoroufly  and  manfully,  without 
the  leaft  regard  to  what  the  world  may  fay ;   if  you  can  once 
break  with  that,  you  are  fafe.     The^r.;.r;,  I  hope  to   end 
you  next  week.    Only  let  me  give  you  this  caution,  no    to 
depend  on  any  advice  or  book,  that  is  given  V""  j.  b"t  fo'e'/ 
on  the  grace  of  Goo  attending  it.     The  book  which  I  have 
fent  to  my  brother,  and  would  recommend  to  you  and  all  my 
GkuuJIer  friends,  will  foon  convince  you  how  dangerous  it  is 
to  be  a  lukewarm  chriftian,  and  that  there  is  nothing  to  be 
done  without  breaking  from  the  world,  denying  ourfelves  daily, 
taking  up  our  crofs,  and  following  Jesus  Christ.    Thefe 
thincr!  may  feem  a  little  terrible  at  firft,  but  believe  me,  they 
are  nothing  but  fuggeftions  of  our  -emy  'o  deter  us  from 
fettingout;  and  if  you  can  credit  me,  mortification  itfelf.whea 
once^raaifed,  is  the  greateft  pleafure  in  the  world     But  hold, 
I  fhaM  tranfgrefs  the  time  prefcribed  me,  therefore  give  me 
only  leave  to  add  my  hearty  prayer  for  your  fuccefsful  pro- 
grefs  in  religion,  and   to    fubfcribe  myfelf  in    great  hafte. 

Your  ftncere  friend  and  humble  fervant, 

G.  fV. 

L  E  T  T  E  R    V. 

To  the  Same, 

DMr  Sir  O"'"'  ^'*-  ^°'  '''^5' 

I  Believe  you  think  me  a  ftrange  fort  of  a  perfon,  for  not 
being  fo  good  as  my  word  in  coming  down  this  wmter^ 


■6  LETTERS. 

and  what  is  vvorfe,  in  not  letting  you  have  a  line  to  acquaint 
you  of  my  reafons  for  it.  And,^  indeed,  I  am  not  as  yet  de- 
termined j  providence  having  ordered  (I  hope)  that  this 
feeming  unkindnefs  fhajl,  in  the  end,  prove  very  ferviceablc 
on  all  fides.  Hov/cver,  though  I  have  been  thus  hindred,  yet, 
I  think  you  heard  from  mc  lall,  and  am  really  furprized  tq 
find  you  Ihould,  now  To  long  fuice,  have  defired  that  col" 
le6iicn  of  prayers^  and  be  wholly  unconcerned  about  them 
ever  after.  -Indeed,  they  will  be  of  no  fervice  to  you,  unlefs 
you  grant  me  this  one  poilulatum  :  'S  Xhat  we  murt  renounce 
ourfelvcs."  What  the  meaning  of  this  phrafe  may  be,  the 
preface  to  the  prayers  will  beft  inform  you.  I  did  not  doubt  of 
its  meeting  with  but  a  cold  reception,  it  being  (at  firft  view) 
fo  very  contrary  to  fie(h  and  bjood.  For,  perhaps,  you  may 
think,  that  this  renouncing  of  ourfelves,  muft  neceflarily  lead 
us  (as  it  certainly  does)  to  a6ls  of  felf-denial  and  mortification; 
and,  that  we  probably  may  be  faved  without  them.  And  left 
you  fliould  after  all  imagine,  (which  I  truft  you  will  not) 
that  true  religion  does  confiil  in  any  thing,  befides  an  entire 
renevv'al  of  our  riatures  into.the  image  of  God  ;  I  have  fent 
you  a  book  entitled,  The  Life  of  God  in  the  Soul  of  Mariy 
written  by  a  young,  but  an  eminent  chriftian,  which  will  in- 
form you,  what  true  religion  is,  and  by  what  means  you  may 
attain  it.  As  iikewife,  how  wretchedly  moft  people  err  in 
their  fentiments  about  it,  who  fuppofe  it  to  be  nothing  elfe  (as 
he  tells  us  page  3d)  but  a  mere  model  of  outv.^rd  performances^ 
without  ever  qonfidering,  that  all  our  corrupt  paffions  muft 
be  fubdued,  and  a  complex  habit  of  virtues,  fuch  as  meeknefs, 
Jowlinefs,  faith,  hope,  and  the  love  of  God  and  of  man,  be 
implanted  in  their  room,  before  we  can  have  the  leaft  title  to 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  Our  divine  mafter  having  ex- 
prefsly  told  us,  that  "  unlefs  v/e  renounce  ourfelves,  and  take 
*'.  up  our  crofs  daily,  we  cannot  be  his  difciples."  And  again, 
*'  unlefs  we  have  the  fpirit  of  Christ,  we  are  none  of  his." 
You  will  fcarce  have  time,  I  imagine,  before  Mr.  H.  leaves 
Glouccfler^  to  revife,  what  I  have  recommended  to  your  perufal. 
However^  be  pleafed  to  let  me  hear  from  you  by  him,  together 
with  an  account  of  your  free  fentiments  about  this  matter.  I 
truft  (by  God's  grace)  we  fhall,  at  laft,  rightly  underftand  one 
another's  meaning,     I  lliould  be  glad  to  hear  t.oo>  whether  you 

kerp 


LETTERS.  7 

keep  mdrnlng  prayers,  and  how  often  you  receive  the  holy  com- 
munion, there  being  nothing,  which  (o  much  be-dwarfs  us 
in  religion,  and  hinders  our  progrefs  towards  the  heavenly 
Canaan,  as  ftarving  our  Ibuls  by  keeping  away  from  the 
heavenly  banquet.  I  have  nothing  more  to  add  at  prefent  on 
this  fubjc(S^,till  you  favour  me  with  a  line,  which,  I  hope,  you 
will  not  fail  doing  by  Mr.  H.  who  will  willingly  bring  it  to, 
Dear  Sir, 

Your  fincere  friend  and  very  humble  fervant, 

LETTER    VI. 

To  the  Same.  ,^ 

Dear  Sir,  Oxon,  March  6,  1735, 

I  Had  the  favour  of  your  letter  by  Mr.  H.  and,  as  defired, 
I  have  made  enquiry  about  the  poft-mafters  and  clerks 
of  Merton.  As  to  the  former,  I  hear,  that  the  five  fenior  fel- 
lows have  each  a  power  to  ele61:  one  in  his  turn,  and  that  there 
is  now  a  vacancy,  but  one  ready  on  the  fpot  to  fupply  it,  and 
no  likelihood  of  there  beiiig  another  this  long  while.  The 
latter,  are  folely  in  the  power  of  the  warden,  and  though  all 
the  places  are  at  prefent  filled  up,  yet,  there  will  be  a  vacancy 
next  term,  fo  that,  perhaps,  by  a  feafonable  application,  your 
brother  may  get  a  friend  in.  Thus  much  for  bufinefs.  As 
for  the  other  particular,  fpecified  in  the  latter  part  of  your  laft ; 
I  find  by  what  I  can  gather  from  your  own  and  my  brother's 
expreflions,  as  well  as  from  Mr.  H.'s>  difcourfc,  that  my  late 
letters  have  met  with  but  a  cold  reception  ;  and  that  you  fecm 
defirous  of  hearing  no  more  of  fo  feemingly  ungrateful  a  fub- 
jecSl,  as  fubmitting  our  wills  to  the  will  of  God  ;  which,  in- 
deed,  is  all  that  is  implied  in  that  phrafe  (which  our  enemy 
would  reprefent  as  fo  formidable  to  us)  oi  renounchig  ourfelves. 
Alas,  Sir  !  what  is  there  that  appears  fo  monftroufly  terrible 
in  a  doctrine  that  is,  (or  at  Icaft  ought  to  be)  the  conftant  fub- 
je6t  of  our  prayers,  whenever  we  put  up  that  petition  of  our 
Lord's  :  "  Thy  zviil  be  done  in  earthy  as  it  is  in  I  leaven. ^^ 
The  import  of  which  feems  to  be  this,  ift.  That  we  do  every 
thing  that  God  w'lls,  and  nothing  but  what  he  v/illcth. 
2dly,  That  we  do  every  thing  he  wills,  C7i}y  in  the  manner 
he  willeth,     3dly5  I'hat  we  do  thofe  things  he  willcth,  only 

B  4  hicaiij} 


S  LETTERS. 

becaufe  he  willeth.     This  is  all,  Sir,  I  have  been  endeavour- 
ing to  inculcate  in  my  late  letters ;  and  though  it  feems  as 
clear  as  the  light,   upon  an   impartial  and  confiderate  view, 
yet,  our  grand  impoftor  (whofe  very  corruption  is  having  a  will 
diftin<3:  from,  and  therefore  contrary  to   GoD*s)  would  fain 
fet  it  out  in  the   mofl:  hideous   colours,  as   though  we  were 
*'  Setters  forth  of  ftrange  dodlrines  ;"  or  propofmg  fome  higher 
degrees  of  perfection,  than  every  ordinary  chriftian  is  obliged 
to  afpire  after ;   whereas,  in  truth,  it  is  nothing  but  the  fimple 
and  evident  language  of  the  gofpel.     It  muft   be  confefled, 
that  through  the  corruption  of  our  depraved  nature,  and  that 
power,     which    felf-will  has,   fince  the  Fall,  ufurped  in  the 
foul,  we  muft   necefTarily   break  through    a    great  many  ob- 
ftacles.     But,  dear  Sir,  be  not  difmayed,  the  difficulty  lies  only 
in  our  firft  fetting  out.     Be  but  vigorous  at  the  firft  onfet,  and 
never  fear  a  conqueft.     The  renewal  of  our  natures  is  a  work 
of  great  importance.     It  is  not  to  be  done  in  a  day.     We 
have  not  only  a  new  houfe  to  build  up,  but  an  old  one  to  pull 
dov/n.     But  then,   methinks,  this  would  be   an  odd  way  of 
reafoning,  "  Becaufe  a  thing  requires  fome  pains,  I  therefore, 
will  never  fet   about  it."     No,  Sir,  rather  up  and   be  doing. 
Exert  your  utmoft  efforts  at  yourfirfl:  fetting  out,  and  take  my 
word,  your  ftrength  as  well  as  refolution  will  increafe  daily. 
The  means  alfo  which  are  neceffary  to  be  ufed  in  order  to  at- 
tain this  end,  our  curfed  adverfary  the  devil  would  reprefent 
to  us  in  the  moft  hideous  forms  imaginable.     But  believe  me. 
Sir,  the  difficulty  here  too,  only  lies  in  our  firft  breaking  from 
ourfeWes,  and  that  there  is  really  more  pleafure  in  thefe  for- 
rnidLible  duties  of  felf-denial  and   mortification,  than  in  the 
higheft  indulgences  of  the  greateft  epicure  upon  earth.    Give 
me   leave,  dear    Sir,  only  to  remind  you  of  one  particular, 
which,  if  duly  obferved,  will  vaftly  facilitate  your  future  en- 
deavours.    Let  the  fcriptures,   not  the  world,   be  your  rule 
of  adion.     By  thofe  you  are  to  form  your  prailice  here,  and 
to  be  judged   hereafter.     Upon  this  account,  for  the  future,  I 
piould  be  glad,   if  you  would  communicate  what   pafTes  be- 
tween you  and  me,  to  none  but  my  brother  and  your  fpoufe. 
And  if  you  have  any,  the  leaft  fcruple,  be  pleafed  to  fend  me 
word  of  it  by  a  letter  in  an  open,  friendly  manner  j  and,  by 
Cod's  blefiing,  uU  things  will  be  yet  fet  right ;  only  be  fer- 
vent 


LETTERS.  9 

vent  in  prayer.     As  for  what  the  Rev.  Mr.  Hoar  has  beea 
pleafed  to  fay,  either  to  you  or  Mr.  H,  it  is  not  my  bufmcfs 
(out  of  deference,   as   he  is  fo  much  my  fuperior,  as  to  the 
dignity  of  his  office,   his  age,  and  his  learning)  to  make  any 
reply.     I  fhall  only  add,  what  I  am  fure  I  can  prove,  "  That 
*'  the  gofpel  tells  us  that   there    is    but  one  thing  needful. 
*«  That  we  cannot  fit  down  content  with  juft  fuch  a  degree 
*'  of  goodnefs,  and  claim  juft  fuch  a  proportionable  degree   of 
"  glory ;"  but  that  "  we  are  to  love  the  Lord  with  all  our 
*'  fouls,  ftrength,  &c.'*  and  that  *'  he  who  endureth  to  the 
*'  end,  (and  he  only)  iliall  be  faved."     There  is  a  little  trea- 
tife  lately  come  out,  which  I  have  made  bold  to  fend  to  Mr; 
Hoary  where  we  may  be  fully  convinced  by  argument  deducible 
merely  from  reafon,  *'  that  God  is  our  fole  end,"  and  that 
barely  upon  a  principle  of  prudence,   (fuppofing  we  could  be 
happy  without  it)  we  ought  to  prefs  forward,  in  order  to  attain 
the   greateft    degrees    of   happinefs  hereafter.     Whether  this 
letter.   Sir,    may    prove  as  ofFenfive  as  the  former,  is  not  my 
bufmefs  to   enquire.     God's    will    be    done    in    all  things. 
He,  and  he  alone  can  (and  indeed  will,  if  we  are  defirous  of 
it  ourfelves)   work   this  convidion   in   our  minds.     Give  me 
leavejuft  to  add,  that  I  thought  it  my  duty  to  anfwer  thefe  fevw 
objections,  that   have    been    raifed   againft    the   difficulty  of 
conforming  our  wills   to  the  will  of  God,  by  fhcwing  that 
the  greateft  ftruggle  lies  only  at  our  firft  beginning,  and  that 
it  is  no  more  than  what  is  indifpenfably  neceftary   for  our 
falvation.     As  for  the  means  to  be  employed  for  the  attain- 
ment of  this  end,  I  fhall   be  wholly   filent  :    Being   fenfible, 
that  if  you  are  once  fully  convinced  of  the  greatnefs  of  it, 
you  will  be  necefTarily  carried  on  to  the  ufe  of  fuch  means  as 
God  hath  conftituted  for  that  purpofe.     I  hope   my  writing 
after  this  manner.  Sir,  will  not  be  efteemed   a  piece  of  felf- 
conceit,  or  be  an  inftrument  of  unloofing  our  former  band    of 
friendship,    which  was  once   defigned  to  be  bound  the  fafter, 
by  tying  it  with  a  religious  knot.     But  whether  this  proves  to 
be  the  event,   or  not,   of  my   telling  my   friends  the  truth,  I 
wholly  leave  to  God's  Providence.     Be  pleafed    however  to 
favour  me  v/ith  a  line  in  return,  and  give  me  leave  to  fubfcribe 
myfelf.  Dear  Sir, 

Your  fmcere  friend  and  moft  obliged  humble  fervant, 

G.  IK 
LETTER 


■      [      10     1 
LETTER    Vlf. 

To  the  Same. 
My  dear  Friend,  Briflol,  June  ii^  '735- 

LAST  night  about  eight  o'clock,  your  good  fpoufe  and 
myfelf  came  fafe  to  our  journey's  end,  and  met  with 
a  very  kind  reception  from  all  parties.  After  you  left  us, 
the  ladies  grew  more  ferious,  and  at  laft  by  the  alTiftance  of 
Mr,  Nor r IS,  our  difcourfe  ran  into  a  proper  channel.  My 
brother  does  not  propofc  failing  this  fortnight ;  but  tho'  he 
ftays  longer  than  he  propofed,  yet  I  hope  to  be  at  Gloucejier  on 
Wednefday,  for  methinks  my  heart  is  ftill  there,  tho*  my 
body  be  at  thirty  miles  diftan-ce.  On  whofe  account,  I  leave 
you  to  guefs.  I  cannot  help  refle£ling  on  Sunday.  Did  not 
thofe  fighs,  think  you,  Sir,  proceed  from  fome  unufual  medi- 
tations on  the  importance  of  religion  ?  Were  they  not  fome 
infant  flrugglings- after  the  new  birth?  Surely  they  were. 
And  I  truft  ere  long,  after  a  few  flrugglings  with  corrupted 
nature,  th6  Holy  Ghofl  will  replenifh  your  heart  with  comfort 
and  peace.  Proper  retirement  and  folitude  are  no  bars;  but 
rather  great  helps  to  a  religious  life.  We  find,  our  Saviour 
was  led  into  a  wildernefs,  before  he  entered  on  his  publick 
miniftry,  and  fo  mull  we  too,  if  we  ever  intend  to  tread  in 
his  fteps.  As  for  my  brother,  I  truft  the  cares  of  the  world, 
"the  defire  of  riches,  &c.  will  not  always  choak  the  good 
feed.  However,  I  hope  you  my  dear  friend  will  not  defer 
fo  important  a  thing.  But,  why  do  I  fay  hope,  when  I  am 
afiured  you  will  not.  Methinks,  I  would  willingly  undergo 
the  pangs,  fo  you  might  enjoy  the  pleafures  of  the  new  birth. 
But  this  muft  not  be.  All  we  can  do  is  to  fympathize 
•with  and  pray  for  each  other,  which  I  hope  will  not  be  want- 
ing on  either  fide,  as  fuch  a  clofe  friendfhip  has  commenced 
between   dear  Mr.  H.   and 

Your  fmcere  friend  and  humble  fervant, 

G,  TV, 


H 


LETTER    VIII. 

To  the  Same. 
Dear  Sir,  Brl/iol,  Sept.  5,  1735. 

OW  welcome  is  a  line  from  a  faithful  friend?  even  as 
welcome  as  a  fhower  of  rain  in  a  droughty  feafon.    But 

here's 


LETTERS.  II 

here's  the  misfortune,  the  very  kindnefles  of  friends  may  be 
cruelty:  Commendations,  or  even,  the  hinting  at  them,  are 
poifon  to  a  mind  addi6led  to  pride.  A  nail  never  finks 
deeper  than  when  dipt  in  oil.  A  friend*s  words  may  be  fofter 
than  butter,  and  notvvithftanding  be  very  fv/ords.  Pray  for 
me,  dear  Sir,  and  heal  the  wound  you  have  made.  To  God 
alone  give  glory.  To  fmners  nothing  belongs,  but  (hame  and 
confufion.  So  much  in  anfwer  to  one  part  of  your  too  kind 
letter.  Mrs,  Powell  you  fay  continues  very  ill.  No  wonder. 
Sir ;  defperate  difeafes  muft  have  defperate  remedies.  Satan  has 
(defired  to  fift  her  as  wheat;  but  Christ  will  pray  for  her, 
1  truft,  and  then  her  faith  will  not  fail.  Oxford  friends  have 
pot  been  v/anting  in  letters,  and  I  find  I  muft  not  ftay  much 
longer  here.  For  fome  are  going  to  travel,  fome  are  dead, 
and  one  is  married,  {o  that  we  muft  join  and  warm  one  ano- 
ther, as  well  as  we  can  in  their  abfence.  I  hope  to  feaft 
with  you  at  Crypt  next  Sunday.  Amazing,  that  ever  fmners 
fhould  lit  with  their  Saviour!  To  what  dignity  has  Christ 
exalted  human  nature.  And  how  did  he  do  it  ?  Why,  by 
humbling  himfelf.  Let  us  go  and  do  likewife.  Give  me 
leave,  with  due  refpeds  to  all  friends,  to  fubfcribe  myfelf. 
Your  and  fpoufes  very  humble  fervant  and  fmcere  friend, 

G,JV. 

•\ 

P.  S.  If  Mr.  Pauncefort's  petitions  run  after  this  manner 
for  me,  I  (hould  be  thankful :  "  That  God  would  linifh  the 
good  work  he  has  begun  in  me,  that  I  may  never  feek  nor  be 
fond  of  worldly  preferment ;  but  employ  every  mite  of  thofe 
talents  it  ftiall  pleafe  God  to  entruft  me  with,  to  his 
glory  and  the  church's  good,  and  likewife,  that  the  endea- 
vours of  my  friends  to  revive  true  religion  in  the  world,  may 
meet  with  proper  fuccefs." 

LETTER    IX. 

To  the  Same. 
jPear  Sir,  Brj/lol,  SepJ,  l8,  1735. 

AS  you  did  not  expe6l:  to  hear  from  me  till  Mr.  B d 
came,  I  hope  you  have  not  as  yet  accufed  me  of  being 
too  dilatory  in  writing.  Now  I  have  taken  the  freedom, 
what  can  be  more  proper  for  me  to  begin  with,  than  to  return 

ten 


it 


LETTERS. 


ten  thoufand  thanks  for  thofe  innumerable  favours  conferred 
on  me  at  your  houfe  ?  I  truft  they  are  all  regiftcrcd  in  the 
court  of  heaven,  and  will  in  due  time  meet  with  a  fuitable 
return  from  my  all-gracious  and  good  bcnefa6lor.  Next  to 
this,  I  imagine  you  will  enquire,  how  I  like  Briftol  ?  As  for 
the  place  itfelf,  that,  like  all  others,  is  indifferent  to  me, 
who  have  here  no  continuing  city,  but  feek  one  to  come ; 
and  as  for  the  inhabitants,  tho'  they  teach  me  nothing  elfe, 
yet  I  may  learn  this  one  important  leflbn,  that  unlefs  I  am 
very  vigilant,  the  children  of  this  world,  will  be  much  wifer 
in  their  generation,  than  I,  who,  by  the  grace  of  God,  hope 
am  a  child  of  light.  Alas  !  was  1  half  fo  folicitous  to  attain 
heavenly,  as  they  are  worldly  riches,  I  (hould  be  rich  indeed. 
That  you  all  may  be  rich  towards  God,  is  the  hearty  prayer 
of,  dear  Sir,  Your  very  unworthy, 

but  fmcere  friend  and  humble  fervant, 

G.  IV, 

LETTER    X. 

To  the  Same. 

Dear  Sir^  Oxcn^  March  13,  1736. 

I  Have  now  but  juft  time  to  acquaint  you,  that  God  gave 
me  a  pleafant  and  fafe  journey,  and  what  was  ftill  a 
greater  blelling,  a  joyful  meeting  with  my  zealous,  hearty, 
finccre  friends.  The  alderman  bore  my  expences,  and  was 
very  agreeable  company  ;  fo  that  on  all  accounts  I  have 
great  reafon  to  thank  my  good  and  gracious  God,  and  to 
beg  others  to  join  with  me  in  that  important,  that  delightful 
duty.  You  will  not  forget  retaining  your  old  cuftom  of 
reading  and  fmging.  It's  bad  to  leave  off  a  good  cuftom, 
and  the  bcft  way  to  make  a  prngrefs  in  religion,  is  to  per- 
fift  in,  and  to  improve  on  the  means  we  enjoy.  I  fuppofe 
honefl  James  by  this  time  is  with  you.  My  hearty  love  to 
him,  and  tell  him,  it  would  do  his  heart  good  to  fee  what 
a  number  of  true  altogether  chriftians  here  are  of  his  rank. 
I  hope  he  will  let  none  of  them  outftrip  him  :  He  muft  watch 
and  pray  againft  felf-indulgencc,  floth,  &c.  efpecially  if  he 
goes   to   a  place  where  plenty  of  all   thiiigs  abound.     My 

2  due 


LETTERS.  i^ 

due  refpCiSls  and   hearty  thanks  to  i^rj.  H.  and  all  friends. 
1  hope  none  of  their  kindneffes  will  ever  be  forgotten  by 
Your  fincers  friend  in  great  hafte, 

L  E  T  T  E  R    XI. 

To  the  Same, 
Deareji  Sir^  Oxon,  /fpriJ  2^   1 7  36. 

WH  AT  a  comfort  *s  it  for  chriftian  friends  to  relate 
to  each  other  the  loving-kind nefs  of  the  Lord  ? 
O  let  his  praifes  be  ever  in  our  mouths,  that  we  may  be  telling 
of  his  falvation  from  day  to  day.  O  dear  Sir^  I  heartily  join 
with  you  in  the  delightful  duty  of  thankfgiving.  I  hope  that 
you  will  have  every  day  more  and  more  experimental  proofs 
of  that  intercourfe  which  is  carried  on  between  God  in 
heaven,  and  faints  on  earth. 

I  muft  now  inform  you,  that  the  perfon,  who  under 
God  has  given  me  the  annuity,  is  Sir  John  Philips  of  Lon- 
don. The  occafion  of  it  was  as  follows.  Upon  my  com- 
ing up,  two  or  three  of  our  trufty  friends  were  called  from 
us,  and  being  folicitous  to  keep  up  our  fociety  here,  the 
gentleman  to  whom  you  fent  the  book,  wrote  to  Sir  John 
Philips  and  propofed  me  (alas!  how  unfit)  as  a  proper  perfon 
to  (lay  here  and  encourage  our  friends  in  fighting  the  good 
fight  of  faith.  Accordingly  he  immediately  offered  me  an  an- 
nuity of  twenty  pounds.  To  (hew  his  difintereftednefs,  he 
has  promifed  me  that,  whether  I  continue  here  or  not  ;  a/id 
if  I  refolve  to  ftay  at  Oxon,  he'll  give  me  thirty  pounds  a  year. 
1^  that  will  not  do,  I  may  have  more  j  fo  that  you  fee,  my 
dear  friend,  what  a  critical  point  it  is.  All  that  we  have  to 
do  is  to  pray,  and  watch  Providence  between  this  and  June^ 
when  I  propofe,  God  willing,  to  enter  into  orders,  and 
then  no  doubt  my  call  will  be  clear.  What  makes  me  to 
think  that  this  is  a  call  from  God  is,  that  it  will  be  con- 
venient for  taking  my  degree,  and  improving  me  in  my  ftu- 
dies.  Whether  it  be  or  no,  God  only  knows  ;  Father,  there- 
fore into  thy  hands  I  commend  my  fpirit,  for  thou  haft  re- 
deemed me,  O  Lord  thou  God  of  truth.  I  approve  greatly 
of  your  reading  Henry.  God  works  by  him  here  greatly, 
and  may  the  Lord  profper  it  in  your  hands.    Good  dear  Sir, 

never 


t4  L    E    T    T    E    R    $; 

never  leave  oft*  v/atchlng,  reading,  praying,  ftriving,  till  you 
experimentally  find  Christ  Jesus  formed  vi^ithin  you.  In  a 
particular  manner,  my  dear  friend,  watch  againft  all  tempt- 
ations to  floth.  When  you  receive  the  facrament,  earneftly 
endeavour  to  be  inwardly  bettered  by  it  the  week,  following. 
Live  every  day  as  holily  as  you  can.  Be  frequent  in  felf- 
exainination  morning  and  evenmg.  Pray  earnellly  from  your 
heart.  Wrcftle  with  God,  beg  him  to  haften  the  new 
birth.  Moreover  be  careful,  diligent  in  your  calling,  labour 
hard  with  your  own  hands,  that  you  may  have  to  give  to 
him  that  needeth.  And  labour  not  fo  much  for  the  meat 
that  periftieth,  as  to  negletft  purfuing  that  which  endureth 
to  eternal  life.  O  JUr.  H.  my  bowels  are  enlarged  towards 
you.     Believe  me  to  be  your  fmcere,  tho'  unworthy  friend, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    XIL 

To  the  Same, 
Dear  Mr.  H.  Oxon^  April  22y    1 736. 

NO  W  tell  me  the  truth,  have  not  you  called  me  un- 
grateful ?  If  you  have  not,  it  is  more  than  I  deferve.  I 
have  nothing  to  plead  but  buftnefs,  as  an  excufe  for  not 
anfwering  your  lafl  kind  letter.  Well,  forgive  me  this 
once,  and  if  I  ofFend  fo  again,  then  call  me  ungrateful 
indeed.  You  order'd  me  to  make  no  acknowledgments  for 
kindncfles  received.  You'll  fuffer  me  to  afk  another  favour, 
if  not  to  return  any  more  thanks.  Be  fo  kind  then,  dear 
Sir,  to  defire  your  brother  to  write  to  me  as  foon  as  poflible. 
My  good  friend,  iS/>  John  Philips^  has  promifed  me  thirty 
pounds  a  year,  if  I'll  continue  at  Oxford,  and  yet  I  am  ia 
doubt,  whether  that  annuity,  and  the  being  appointed  to 
ferve  the  prifon  here,  will  be  a  fufficient  title  for  orders,  there- 
fore I  beg  both  his  advice  and  prayers.  This  is  all  I  think, 
that  concerns  outward  affairs.  But  this  folemn  fcafon  na- 
turally leads  me  to  fay  a  word  or  two  on  a  more  impor- 
tant fubjeci:,  "  the  death  and  paflion  of  our  blefied  Lord 
and  Saviour."  If  I  miftake  not,  you  commemorate  it  to- 
morrow at  Crypt.  And  blefTed  be  God,  I  do  at  Chrift 
Church.  And  oh  that  we  may  cgrameraorate  it  as  we  ought ; 

that 


LETTER    S.  15 

that  we  may  fix  our  thoughts  intenfely  on  that  great  ex- 
amplar  and  all  atoning  blood  ;  that  we  may  grow  in 
love  with  his  meeknefs  and  patience,  and  endeavour  daily 
to  be  conformed  to  his  moft  blelTed  image.  Surely  we  can- 
not grow  angry  at  trifles,  when  the  Son  of  God  endured 
fuch  bitter  ufage,  without  the  leaf:  murmur  or  complaint. 
Surely,  we  cannot  repine  at  any  difpenfations  of  Provi- 
dence tho'  ever  fo  fevere,  when  we  confider,  how  it  pleafed 
God  to  bruife  our  Saviour  and  lay  upon  him  the  iniqui- 
ties of  us  all.  Whatever  befalls  us,  is  but  the  due  reward 
of  our  Climes;  but  this  Redeemer  had  done  nothing  amifs : 
he  was  bruifed  for  our  iniquities.  I  could  run  through 
every  part  of  our  Lord's  fufFerings,  and  Ihew  how  necef- 
ary  it  is  that  we  fhould  fympathize  with  him  in  every  parti- 
cular. But  as  it  now  grows  late,  and  I  v/ant  a  little  time  to 
prepare  for  to-morrow's  folemnity,  you'll  excufe  me  if  I  now 
only  paraphrafe  a  little  on  the  prayer  of  the  thief  on  the  crofs. 
Lord  remember  us  and  pray  for  us;  Lord  remember  us 
and  rule  us;  Lord  remember  us  and  prepare  a  place  for  us. 
Lord  remember  us  in  the  hour  of  death,  and  in  the  day  of 
judgment.     My  due  refpe6ls  to  all  friends,  and  am  fincerely 

Yours, 

G,  TV, 

LETTER    XIIL 

To  Mr,  S. 
My  dear  Friend^  Gloucejler^  June  20,    1 7  36. 

TH  I  S  is  a  day  much  to  be  remember'd,  O  my  foul ! 
for  about  noon,  I  was  folemnly  admitted  by  good 
Bi/hop  Benfon^  before  many  witneffes,  into  holy  orders,  and 
was,  blefied  be  God,  kept  compofed  both  before  and  afrer 
impofition  of  hands.  I  endeavoured  to  behave  with  unaf- 
fe(Sled  devotion;  but  not  fuitable  enough  to  the  greatnefs  of 
the  office  I  was  to  undertake.  At  the  fame  time,  I  trufl", 
I  anfwered  to  every  queftion  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart, 
and  heartily  prayed  that  God  might  fay  Amen.  I  hope  the 
good  of  fouls  will  be  iny  only  principle  of  action.  Let 
come  what  will,  life  or  death,  depth  or  heighth,  I  fhall 
hcnceforwards  live  'ike  one  who  this  day,  in  the  prefence  of 
^  '      men 


!6  LETTERS. 

men  and  angels,  took  the  holy  facramcnt,  upon  the  profcffiort 
of  being  inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghoft  to  take  upon 
me  that  miniftration  in  the  church.  This  I  began  with 
reading  prayers  to  the  prifoners  in  the  county  goal.  Whe- 
ther I  myfelf  (hall  ever  have  the  honour  of  ftiling  myfelf  a 
prifoner  of  the  Lord,  I  know  not ;  but  indeed,  my  dear 
friend,  I  can  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witnefs,  that  when 
the  Bifhop  laid  his  hand  upon  me,  I  gave  myfelf  up  to 
be  a  martyr  for  him,  vi^ho  hung  upon  the  crofs  for  mc. 
Known  unto  him  are  all  future  events  and  contingences;  I 
have  thrown  myfelf  blindfold,  and  I  trull  without  referve,  into 
his  almighty  hands  ;  only  I  would  have  you  obferve,  that  till 
vou  hear  of  my  dying  for,  or  in  my  work,  yoti  will  not  be 
apprized  of  all  the  preferment  that  is  expelled  by 

Yours,  &c,     G.  ir. 

LETTER    XIV. 

To  the  Same, 
Dear  Friend^  Gloucejler^  'June  23,  1 7  36* 

NEVER  a  poor  creature  fet  up  with  fo  fmall  a  itock. 
When  the  good  Bifhop,  who  ordained  me  on  Sun- 
day, gave  out  laft  year  in  his  vifitation  charge,  that  he  would 
ordain  none  under  full  three  and  tweiity,  my  heart  leap'd 
for  joy,  for  then  I  thought  my  friends  would  not  only  be 
difappointed  in  their  hope  of  having  me  enter  into  orders  fo 
foon  i  but  that  I  flionld  alfo  have  time  (as  was  my  inten- 
tion) to  make  at  leaft  a  hundred  ferinons,  with  which  to 
begin  my  miniftry  ;  but  this  is  fo  far  from  being  the  cafe, 
that  I  have  not  a  fingle  one  by  me,  except  that  which  I  made 
for  a  fmall  chriftlan  fociety,  and  which  I  fcnt  to  a  neighbour- 
ing clergyman,  to  convince  him  how  unfit  I  was  to  take  upon 
me  the  important  work  of  preaching.  He  kept  it  for  a  fort- 
night, and  then  fent  it  back  with  a  guinea  for  the  loan  of  it ; 
telling  me  he  had  divided  it  into  two,  and  had  preached  it 
morning  and  evening  to  his  congregation.  With  this  fermon 
I  intend  to  begin,  God  willing,  next  Sunday,  not  doubting, 
but  that  he,  who  increafcd  a  little  lad's  loaves  and  iifhes 
for  the  feeding  of  a  great  multitude,  will  from  time  to  time, 
in  the  proper  ufe  of  appointed  means,  fupply  me  with  fpi- 

ritual 


LETTERS.  17 

ritual  food  for  whatever  congregation  he  in  his  ali-wife 
Providence  Ihall  be  pleafed  to  call  me  to.  Help,  help  me, 
my  dear  friend,  with  your  warmcfl  addreffcs  to  the  throne 
of  grace,  that  I  may  not  only  find  mercy,  but  grace  to  help 
in  time  of  need.  At  prefent  this  is  the  language  of  my  heart, 
j^  guilty  weak  and  belplefs  worm  into  thy  nnns  I  fall  ^ 
Be  thou  ?ny Jhength^  my  righteoufnefsy  my  Jesus,  and  my  all. 

Oh  c^-^k  not,  for  I  muft  again  repeat  it,  ceafc  not  to  pray  for 

Yours,   &c. 

G,  IK 

LETTER    XV. 

Dear  Mrs,  H.  Gloucejler,  June  28,  1736. 

ACCORDING  to  my  promife  I  am  now  feated  to  write 
you  a  farewell  letter.  For  providence  feems  to  de- 
mand my  prefence  at  Oxford  immediately,  and  therefore  I  pro- 
pofe  being  there,  God  willing,  on  Monday  night.  But  firft 
let  me  return  dear  Mrs.  H.  my  heartieft  thanks  for  all  paft  kind- 
nefles,  and  afiure  her,  that  my  inceflant  prayers  fhall  never  be 
wanting,  that  God  may  not  forget  her  labour  of  love,  in  that 
fhe  has  fo  plentifully  adminiftered  to  me  his  unworthy  fervant, 
and  yet  does  minifter.  To-morrow  I  am  to  preach  at  Crypty 
but  believe  I  fhall  difpleafe  fome,  being  determined  to  fpeak 
againft  their  aflemblies.  But  I  mufl  tell  them  the  truth,  or 
otherwife  I  (hall  not  be  a  faithful  minifter  of  Christ.  Had 
providence  fo  ordered,  I  fhould  have  been  glad  to  have  given 
you  the  cup  of  blefling  ;  but  fmce  that  favour  is  denied  to  me, 
I  am  refigned.  However,  I  hope  I  fhall  not  be  unmindful  of 
you,  when  I  ccme  near  your  place,  nor  be  wanting  in  my 
prayers,  that  God  would  mercifully  fupply  the  want  of  out- 
ward means  to  you,  by  the  operation  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  I 
fuppofe  you  are,  by  this  time,  pretty  well  reconciled  to  fFcr- 
cejler^  2nd  that  providence  has  fhewn  you  that  v/e  may 
ferve  God  acceptably  in  any  place.  Yes,  Madam,  let  but 
our  hearts  be  upright  towards  him,  and  by  faith  united  to 
our  dear  Lord  Jesus,  we  (hall  find  that  wherever  we  are,  he 
will  be  with  us,  and  wc  (hall  be  with  him.  So  far  I  had 
written  on  Saturday  night;  but  being  detained  here  in  expec- 
tation of  feeing  my  brother  James^  (who  has  not  as  yet  been 
Vol.  I.  C  /» 


i8  LET    T    E    R    S. 

(o  good  as  bis  word)  I  believe  I  can  now  acquaint  you  that  I 
muft  let  out  on  WedneJ}Liy  morning.  1  preached  yefterday  at 
Cr>'/»/,  and  was  mercifully  fupportcd  and  afTiftcd,  for  which- 
great  blciiing,  I  hope  you  will  return  hearty  thanks  in  my  be- 
half. I  truft  Mhfs  James  continues  her  former  earnell  deiircs  to 
be  renewed  in  the  fpirit  of  her  mind  ;  for  nothing  will  do  but 
that.  Indeed  we  may  flatter  ourfelves,  that  we  may  go  to 
heaven  without  undergoing  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth  ;  but 
we  {hail  certainly  find  ourfelves  defperately  miftaken  in  the 
end.  For  till  we  are  changed,  till  we  are  made  meet  for,  we 
cannot  in  the  nature  of  the  thing  be  partakers  of  the  heaven- 
ly inheiif.ance  with  the  faints  in  -  light.  Let  us  therefore 
never  eeafe  praying  and  ftriving,  till  we  find  this  bleiled 
change  wrought  in  us,  and  thereby  wc  ourfelves  brought  ofF 
from  relying  on  any  or  all  outward  ordinaiK:es  for  falvation. 
Our  good  bifhop  Bcnfon  was  plcafed  to  give  me  another  prefent 
of  five  guineas,  a  ^reat  fupply  for  one  who  has  not  a  guinea  ia 
the  world.  May  the  great  Bifhop  of  fouls  amply  reward  both 
him  and  you,  foF  all  favours  conferred  on 

Your  fineere  friend  and  humble  fervant, 

G.   U\ 

LETTER    X¥L 

ro  Mr,  H. 
My  Dear  Friend^  Gloucejler,  June  30,  1 7  36. 

GLORY !  glory  I  glory  I  be  afcribed  to-an  almighty  triunf 
God.— ^Laft  Sunday  in  the  afternoon ^  I  preached  my 
firfl:  fcrmon  in  the  church  of  St.  Alary  De  Crypt,  where  I  was 
baptized,  and  alfo  firfl  received  the  facrament  of  the  Lord's 
fupper.  Curiofity,  as  you  may  eafily  guefsydrew  a  large  con- 
gregation together  upon  the  occafion.  The  fight  at  firft  a 
little  awed  me;  but  1  was  comforted  with  a  heart-felt  fenfe  of 
the  divine  prcfencc,  and  foon  found  the  unfpeakable  advan- 
tage of  having  been  accuflomed  to  public  fpeaking  when  a  boy 
at  fchool,  and  of  exhorting  and  teaching  the  prifoners  and  poor 
people  at  their  private  l>oufcs,  whilft  at  the  univerfity.  By 
thefe- means  I  was  kept  from  being  daunted  over  much.  As  [ 
proceeded,  I  perceived  the  fire  kindled,  till  at  laft,  though  (o 
young,  and., afiiidfi:  a  croud  of  thx^fe^  who  knew  me  in  my 

infant 


LETTERS.  19 

Inf'ant  childifn  days,  I  truft,  I  was  enabled  to  fpcak  with  ibme 
degree  of  gofpel  authority.  Some  icw  mocked,  but<.mofl:  for 
the  prcfent  fccmed  ftruck  ;  and  I  have  fmce  heard,  that  a  com- 
plaint had  been  made  tothebifhop,  that  I  drove  fifteen  mad  the 
iirft  fermon*  The  worthy  prelate,  as  I  am  informed,  vvi{hed 
that  the  madnefs  might  not  be  forgotten  before  next  Sunday, 
Before  then,  I  hope,  my  fermon  upon  He  that  is  in  Christ,  is  a 
veiv  creature^  will  be  compleated.  BlelTed  be  God,  I  now 
find  freedom  in  writing.     Glorious  Jesus, 

Ihikofe  my Jiamfu^ring  tongue  to  tell 
Thy  love  immenfe^  iinfearchable. 
Being   thus    engaged,  I    muft   haflen  to   fubfcribe  inyfelf, 
my  dear  Sir,  Your's,  &c. 

G,  IK 

LETTER    XVIL 

To  Mrs,  H. 
Dear  Mrs.  H.  Oxcn^  July  7,  1 736. 

WHAT  fhall  I  fay  in  defence  of  my  feemingly  ungrate- 
ful filence  ?  Why,  I  hope,  your  kindncfs  will  ac- 
cept of  the  reafons  I  gave  in  Mrs.  JVell's  letter,  as  a  fufHcient 
excufe  for  it,  nothing  but  thofe,  I  aflure  you,  being  the  caufe 
of  it.  Well  then,  prefuming  on  your  kind  pardon,  give  me 
leave,  (after  all  acknowledgments  of  gratitude  for  kindneffcs 
received)  to  bid  you  once  more  welcome  to  Gloucejler^  and  to 
wifh  you  and  IVlr.  H,  with  all  my  foul,  the  greatefl  comfort, 
that  either  this  or  the  other  world  can  afford  you.  It's  true, 
indeed,  we  mud  not  expccb  mucli  comfort  here,  except  what 
refults  from  a  good  convi6lion  that  we  arc  in  a  fafe  ftate,  by 
being  born  again  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  This,  will  afford 
us  inexpreffible  fatisfac^ion,  even  on  this  fide  the  grave. 
It  will  give  us  eafe  in  pain,  becaufe  we  know,  if  we  bear  it  pa- 
tiently, it  will  end'  in  glory.  This,  will  make  us  meek  and 
gentle  under  croffes  and  difappointments,  becaufe  we  know  we 
are  taught  to  expect  them,  and  that  our  bicffed  Malter  has  gone 
before  us  in  them.  In  fnort,  it  Vv'ill  make  us  eafy  in  every 
ftation,  becaufe  we  have  a  general  promife,  that  all  things  fhall 
work  for  good  to  them  that  love  God.  But  fuppofmg  we 
were  to  b^ve  no  plcafure   on    this   Tide    of  Heaven,  yet  the 

C  2  thoughts 


\J 


20  LETTERS. 

thoughts  of  being  happy,  and   that  too  for  all  eternity  here- 
after, methinks  {hould  teach  us  to  bear  up  under  every  cala- 
mity here,  not  only  with  fubmiflion,  but  a  holy  joy.     Good 
God  !  the  very  idea  of  what  we  are  to  be  in  glory^  tran(ports 
me  while  I  am  writing.     There,  there,  Mrs.  H.  we  fhall  fee 
the  bleflcd  Jesus,  whom  our  fouls  have  fo  eagerly  thirfted  after 
in  this  life,  furrounded  with  glory,  and   attended  with  myriads 
of  his  holy  angels,  who  will  rejoice  at  our  fafe  arrival  to  their 
happy   manfions,  and  with  repeated    echoes   welcome   us   to 
heaven.     There,  there,    we   fhall   not  only  fee,  but  live  with 
him  and  enjoy  him  too,  not  for  a  day,   a  month,  a  year,  an 
sigc,   but  to  all   eternity.     And   who  can  tell   the  pleafure, 
comfort,   peace,  joy,  delight,   and  tranfport,  a   glorified  faint 
will   feel  in  the  poffeffion   of  his  wifhed-for,  longed-for,  ever 
adorable,  ever  gracious,  blefled,  beloved,  triune  God,  and  that 
for  ever  ?    Surely  the  happinefs  will  be  fo  gfeat,  that  eye  hath 
not  feen^  nor  ear  heard,   neither   can   the  heart  of  man    con- 
ceive the  thoufandth  part  thereof.     And  yet,   great  as  it  is,    I 
not  only  wifli,  but  have  good  hope  through  Christ,  that  not 
only  you   and   Mr.  H.  but  all  my  chriftian  friends,  and  even 
I  myfelf  through  grace,  (hall  one  day  be  partakers  of  it.     The 
way  and  means  we  know.     "  If  any  one,  fays  Christ,  will 
come  after  me  (to  glory)  let  him  renounce  himfclf."  i.  e,  make 
his  own  will  no  principle  of  a£lion,  be  no  felf-pleafer,  *'  and  take 
up  his  crofs"  patiently  (whether  of  ficknefs  or  outward  circum- 
ftances,  &c.)  "and  then  let  him  follow  me,"  follow  me  in  away 
of  duty  here,  and  he  (hall  follow  me  to  glory  hereafter.     May 
we  all  be  fuch  followers  of  the  blefled  Jesus  !   And  why  fhould 
we  defpair  of  becoming  fuch  ?    What  is  there  in  Christ's 
dodrine  or  example  but  that  we  may  all,  through  the  afTiftance 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  imitate  him   in  ?    Suppofe  it  does  oblige  us 
to  be  a  little  itrider  than  our  neighbours  ?     Suppofe    it  does 
forbid  us  fpending  too  much  time   in  the  feemingly-innocent 
entertainments  of  the  age  ?   Suppofe  it  does  command    us   to 
be  conflant  and  frequent  in  prayer,  in  watchings,  faflings,  and 
other  a<Sts  of  mortification  ?    Suppofe  it  does  bid  us  not  to  in- 
dulge our  unruly  pafTions;  but  to  learn  of  Christ  to  be  meek, 
patient,  and  lowly  ?   Suppofe  it  does  compel  us  to  redeem  our 
time,   to  fill   up  every   day  with   proper  duty  and  devotion  ? 
Yet,  what  in  all  this,  that  is  terrible  \   Has  not  fuch  a  behavi- 
A  our 


LETTERS.  21 

our  a  natural  tendency  to  make  us  calm,  cafy,  peaceful,  happy  ? 
And  then,  why  {hould  we  refufe  (o  cafy  a  yoke,  (o  light  a 
burden?  I  am  fure  the  little  (alas  I  too,  too  little)  time  1  have 
drawn  in  it,  I  have  found  it  not  galling  but  healing,  and  the 
longer  I  bear  it,  the  eafier  and  pleafanter  it  is.  Let  us  then, 
Dear  Mrs.  H.  chearfully  take  it  upon  us,  and  then 
No  mortal  living  of  us  all  can  mifs 
A  permanent^  a  fure  fubftantial  blifs. 

Your  fmcerc,   though  very  unworthy  friend 
and  humble  fervant, 

G.  W, 

LETTER     XVIII. 

^0  Mr,  H. 
Dearejl  Sir^  Oxon^  Ocf.  14,  1736. 

IWas  agreeably  detained,  as  you  was  pleafed  to  term  it, 
laft  Tuefday^  in  reading  your  kind  letter,  and  had  1  not 
been  afTifted  by  the  grace  of  God  to  receive  every  thing  with 
an  equal,  uiidifturbed  mind,  perhaps  the  contents  of  it  might 
have  given  me  fome  fmall  uneafmefs.  But  religion  quite 
changes  the  nature  of  man,  and  makes  us  to  receive  all  the 
(difpen rations  of  providence  with  refignation  and  thankfulnefs. 
Of  this,  dcareft  Sir,  I  hope  you  have  had  an  experimental  proof, 
in  bearing  up  with  courage  and  refolution  under  thofe  acute 
pains  the  Almighty  was  pleafed  to  vifit  you  with  laft  Sunday^- 
and  with  which,  perhaps,  his  infinite  wifdom  and  goodnefs 
may  continue  to  vifit  you  longer.  My  dear  friend  (if  1  miftake 
not)  ufed  to  fay,  he  was  afraid  God  did  not  love  him,  becaufe 
he  did  not  chaften  him.  Behold  then,  now  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  is  upon  you,  not  fo  much  to  punifh,  as  to  purify  your 
foul.  Not  in  anger  but  in  love.  Pray  therefore  in  your  eafy 
intervals,  that  you  may  know,  wherefore  the  Lord  contcndeth 
with  you,  and  that  you  may  not  come  cankered  out  of  the 
furnace  of  affliction.  OlFer  up  every  groan,  every  figh,  in 
the  name  of  your  dying,  rifen  Redeemer,  and  doubt  not,  but 
they  will  be  as  prevalent  as  fet  times  of  prayer.  Our  being 
enabled  to  pray  when  ficknefs  comes  on  us,  doubtlefs,  is  to 
teach  us  the  neccfHty  of  praying  always,  when  v/e  are  in  health, 
^ut,  dear  Mr.  H,   wants  no  fuch  lefTons,  or  excitements,  I 

C  3  believe, 


22  LETTERS. 

believe,  to  prayer.     Alcthinks  I  could  bear  fonje  of  your  paiti 
for  you,  if  that  would  give  you  comfort.     But  as  it  is  im- 
poiliblc,   O  let  mt  never  ccafe  moil  cariicitly   to   bcfeech    my 
heavenly    Father,    that    he    would    fandify  this    his  fatherly 
correc):ion  to  you,  and  that   the  fenfe  of  your  wcaknefs  may 
add  ftrength  to  your  faith,  and  ferioufnefs  to  your  repentance. 
Poor  Mr,  Pawicefoot^  I  lind,  is  vifited  in  a  far  more  grievous 
manner,     pear  good  iiian,  furely  the  time  of  his  diiiblution  (\ 
ihould  fay  of  his  coronation)  draweth  near,     See,  dear  Mr.  //, 
through  what  tribulations   we  muft  enter   into  glory.      Be 
pleafed  to  give  my  hearty  love  and  thanks  to  him  for  his  laft 
kind  letter.     B^g   bim  not  to  ceafe  praying  for  me,  unworthy 
•  as  I  am.     And,  I  hope,  I  fhall  not   be   wanting  in  returning 
his  kindncfs  in  the  fame  manner.     But  alas,  I  have  nothing 
to  depend  on,   but  the  merits   of  a  crucified    Redeemer    to 
have  my  poor  petitions   anfwered.     But  does  dear  Mrs.  H, 
complain  of  deadnefs  and   coldnefs   in  devotion.?    Alas   poor 
"Woman  !  let  her  not  be  difheartened.     This  is  a  complaint, 
which  all   the  children   of  God   have  made.     And  we  muft 
take  a  great  deal   of  pains   with  our  hearts,  muft  pray  often 
and   long,  before  we  jQrall   be  able  to  pray  well.     And  the 
only  way  I  can  think  of,  to  fliarae  ourfelves  out  of  deadnefs  in 
prayer,  is  to  cenfure  and  condemn,  to  humble  and  bewail  our- 
felves for  it  every  time  we  go  upon  our  knees,  at  leaft  every 
time  we  folemnly  retire  to  converfe  with  GoDi     But  why  docs 
clear   Mrs.  //.   fo  much    as  think  of  on;itting  but  once  the 
receiving  of  the  holy  facrament  ?  Or  if  fatan  does   put  fuch 
thoughts    in    her  head,  v.'hy   does  not  fhe  repel  them  with 
the  utmoft  abhorrence  ?      Alas  1   fhould    the    devil   gain  his 
point  here,    would  not  the    ridiculing  world   fay,    Mrs.  /f, 
began  to  build,  but  had  not    wherewith   to  finifh.     I  have 
feen  too  many  fatal   inftances  of  the  inexpreifible  danger  and 
fad    confequences    of  leaving  off  any   one    means   of  grace, 
not  to  encourage  Mrs.  H.  ftedfaftly   to   perfevere  in  the  good 
way   fhe    has  begun  ;  and  would  exhort   her,    in   the  name 
of   the   Lord  Jesus  Christ,     to  labour   daily  to  mortify 
and  fubdue  her  corruptions,  not  wilfully   to   indulge    herfelf 
in  any  ill  habit,  cuftom,   or  temper,    and  then   alTure  herfelf, 
one  time  or  another,  Christ  will  be  made  known  unto  her  in 
^rc^king  of  bread,     But  what  fhall  \  fay,  dear  Sir,  about  Mr. 


LETTERS.  23 

fF.  ^V.  'Iffc.  ?  Alas  !  I  find,  they  are  all  in  the  gall  ofbittcr- 
nefs,  in  the  very  bondage  of  iniquity,  and  all  I  can  do,  is 
to  pity  and  pray  for  them.  I  find  more  and  more,  that  where 
tiue  religion  is  wanting,  there  is  confufion  and  every  evil 
work.  But  why  is  my  honoured  mother  fo  folicitous  about  a 
few  paultry  things,  that  will  quickly  perifli  ?  Why  will  (lie  not 
come  and  fee  her  youngeft  Ion,  v/ho  will  endeavour  to  be  a 
yofcph  to  her,  before  fne  dies  ?  What  makes  my  <Jcar  friend 
and  his  kind  v/ife,  give  me  another  \n\\\.2^i\on  io  Gloucejier  i' 
Alas  !  have  I  not  wearied  and  been  expenfive  enough  to  you 
already  ?  I  hope  to  fend  you,  in  a  fliort  time,  two  guineas  to- 
wards paying  for  Mr.  Henry  ^  Expofition.  I  wiih  I  could 
fpare  more,  but  time  will  bring  all  things  to  pafs.  You  fee 
what  a  large  letter  I  have  written  to  you  to  make  amends 
for  the  many  fhort  ones,  I  have  fent  lately.  Though  1  be- 
lieve you  may  fay  of  mine,  the  quite  contrary  to  what  I  fay  of 
yours  ;  the  ihorter  the  better.  My  due  refpedls  to  all  friends, 
^nd  believe  me  to  be,  in  the  utmoft  fincerity,  Deareft  Sir, 
Your  and  Mrs.  //.'s  aft-eciionate  friend  and  humble  fervant, 

G\  TV, 

LETTER    XIX. 

To  the  Sa?ne. 
Dcarcjl  Sir,  Oxon^  Nov,  5,  1736. 

HEREWITH  I  have  fent  you  kvtn  pounds  to  pay  for 
Mr.  Henry  ^  Commentary.  Dear  Efqr.  Thorold  lately 
made  me  a  prefent  of  ten  guineas,  fo  that  no;^  (for  ever  blefied 
be  the  divine  goodnefs)  I  can  fend  you  more  than  I  thought 
for.  In  time,  I  hope  to  pay  the  apothecary's  bill.  If  I  for- 
get your  favours,  I  fhall  alfo  forget  my  God.  Say  nothin^^ 
of  your  receiving  this  money,  only  give  thanks,  give  heartv 
thanks  to  our  good  and  gracious  God  for  his  infinite,  un- 
merited mercy  to  me,  the  vileft  of  the  fons  of  men.  Oh,  dear 
Sir,  may  fuch  inftances  of  free  grace  ftrengthen  your  faith, 
and  make  you  put  your  fole  truft  and  confidence  in  the  Lord 
your  God.  For  he  hath  faid,  /  will  never  leave  thee  nor  for  fake 
thee.  Have  not  you  experienced  his  loving  kindnefs  and 
mercy,  in  fupporting  you  under  your  ficknefs  ?  Methinks 
I  feel  you  have.  May  you  experience  it  more  and  more  !  Did 
r.ot  Christ  give  you  the  meeting  lad  Sunday  ?  I  hope  he  did, 

C  4  nay 


24  L    E-  T    T    E    R    S. 

nay  I  am  fure  he  did,  if  our  hearts  were  duly  prepared  by 
faith  and  repentance  to  receive  him  ;  but  without  an  entire  rc- 
fignation  of  ourfelves  to  God,  and  a  thorough  renunciation 
of  all  worldly  and  corrupt  affetSlions,  all  God's  ordinances  will 
profit  nothing.  Your  reverend  brother's  kmd  letter  I  hope  to 
anfwer  foon,and  to  fend  him  alfo  a  fmall  parcel  of  books.,  The 
good  Lord  fandify  them  to  his  own  glory,  and  the  good  of 
fouls. .  I  find  dear  Mr.  Pauncefoot  is  ftill  nfflided,  but  bid  him 
be  of  good  cheer.  In  his  latter  end  he  may  yet  greatly  in- 
creafe.  When  we  are  weak,  then  are  we  ftrong.  There  is 
hope  concerning  his  legacy.  Let  us  in  the  mean  while  con- 
tinue inftant  in  prayer  in  behalf  of  this  our  dear  and  worthy 
friend.  Good  man  1  falute  him  kindly  in  my  name.  Beg  his 
prayers  for  my  unworthy  felf,  and  tell  him  I  will  write  as  foon 
as  poffible.  The  gofpel  flourifhes  atOjf^?;?.  Our  focietyhere, 
blefTed  be  God,  goes  on  well.  I  received  the  papers  and 
thank  you.  How  does  dear  Mrs.  H.  ?  The  divine  blefling  reft 
on  you  both.  My  prayer  night  and  day  is,  that  you  may  be 
faved.  Salute  all  friends  by  name.  From  Dcareft  Sir, 
Your  unworthy  friend  and  humble  fervant, 

G.  W. 


LETTER    XX. 

To  the  Same, 

Dear  Sir,  Brijlol,  Fch.  lO,  1 737. 

WHAT  ihall  I  fay?  I  cannot  be  with  you  this 
week.  Methinks,  it  would  be  almoft  fmful  to  leave 
^r'ljhl  at  this  critical  jun£lure,  there  being  now  a  profpe£l  of 
making  a  very  confiderable  colle6lion  for  the  poor  Americafis, 
The  whole  city  feems  to  be  alarmed.  Churches  are  as  full 
week  days,  as  they  ufe  to  be  on  Sundays,  and  on  Sundays  fp 
full,  that  many,  very  many  are  obliged  to  go  away,  becaufe 
they  cannot  come  in.  Oh  pray,  dear  Mr.  H,  that  Gop 
would  always  keep  me  humble,  and  fully  convinced  that  I  am 
nothing  without  him,  and  that  all  the  good  which  is  done 
upon  earth,  God  doth  it  himfelf.  Qiiakers,  baptifts,  prefby- 
terians,  kc.  all  come  to  hear  the  word  preached.  San6lify 
it,  holy  Father,  to  thy  own  glory  and  thy  people's  good  !     I 

hope 


LETTERS.  25 

hope  to  be  with  you  without  fail  on  Tuefday  morning.     What 
letters  you  haye,  pray  fend  to,  Dear  Sir, 

Your  unworthy  friend,  &c. 

LETTER    XXI. 

To  the  Same, 
Dear  Sir,  Stonehoufe^  Jprii  26,  1737. 

BE  pleafed  to  fend  the  Poor  Country  Curate,  and  FlaveFs 
Hujbandry  Spiritualized,  I  know  not  wh^  to  do  for 
want  of  a  clock  in  the  houfe.  How  fliall  I  know,  how  my 
precious  time  pafles  away  ?  YouMl  mind  your  promife  to  come* 
Here  are  lovely,  folitary,  and  pleafant  walks  to  commune 
with  your  own  heart,  and  fearch  out  your  fpirit.  Has 
Mr.  Pauncefoot  wrote  to  me  ?  My  dear  friend  Stratford's 
death  affeds  me  flill,  Methinks  I  long  to  be  above,  employed 
as  he  is.  But  alas,  I  am  not  ripe  for  glory  ;  if  I  was,  my 
heavenly  Father  would  gather  me  into  his  garner.  Farewell, 
pear  Sir;  remember  I  am  alone,  and  pray  accordingly  for 
Your  fmcere,  though  weak  friend, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    XXII. 

To  the  Same. 
Dear  Sir,  Stonehoufe,  May  4,  1 737. 

WHY  does  not  Mr.  H.  let  me  hear  from  or  fee  him  ? 
Surely  no  evil  has  befallen  cither  him  or  his  family 
in  their  way  to  eternity.  Why  then  tarry  their  horfes  ?  Why 
are  they  fo  long  in  coming  to  vifit  the  country,  which  now 
looks  like  a  fecond  paradife,  and  which,  to  me,  feems  the 
pleafantefl  place  I  ever  was  in,  through  all  my  life  ?  Surely 
I  can  never  be  thankful  enough  for  being  fent  hither  ;  people 
flock  to  hear  the  word  of  God  from  theneighbourine:  villages, 
as  well  as  our  own.  They  gladly  receive  me  into  their  houfes, 
and  I  have  no  let  or  hindrance  to  my  minifterial  bufinefs;  and 
what  is  flill  better,  God  has  opened  my  heart,  and  enabled  mc 
to  finifh  a  fermon  on  "  Remember  thy  Creator,  &c." — If 
you  will  come  on  Sunday  you  may  hear  it  perhaps.  —  Your 
fifter- in-law  talks  of  being  here  again  on  Friday,  but  I  be- 
lieve 


iG  LETTER     S. 

lievc  it  will  be  more  agreeable,  if  you  chufc  another  oppor- 
tunity, that  we  may  have  our  own  convcrfation.  I  hope  that 
dear  Mrs.  H.  took  nothing  ill,  that  was  in  my  laft.  I 
meant  it  well,  and  wrapt  up  the  pill  in  as  much  fugar  as  I 
could.  My  hearty  love  to  her  and  Mils  J.  Poor  A4r.  AL 
and  Mr.  IP\  will  fet  out  to  morrow,  1  fuppofc.  The  LoRi> 
profpcr  them  and  be  with  them  wherever  they  go,  and 
make  them  good  foldicrs  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  finally  bring 
them  and  us  to  his  heavenly  kingdom  !   So  wilhes,  fo  prays. 

Tour's  afFectionatelv, 

'     G.  JV, 

LETTER    XXIII. 

To  the   Same, 
Dior  Sir,  Sto/uboufe,  May  ii,  I  737. 

I  Thank  you  for  your  lafl,  and  blefs  God  that  you  got 
home  fafc  :  your  obfervations  on  the  weather  were  per- 
tinent and  fpiritual.  Honeft  James  and  I,  were  out  in  the 
midft  of  the  lightning,  and  never  v\  ere  more  delighted  in  our 
lives.  May  we  be  as  well  pleafed,  when  the  SonofGor> 
Cometh  to  judgment.  What!  no  news  from  your  brother? 
Well,  Stonehoufc  people  atid  I  agree  better  and  better.  I 
believe  we  (hall  part  weeping.  Had  I  time  I  would  now  write 
to  Mifs'7.  but  I  mull  away  among  my  flock,  and  fo  deny  myfclf 
that  pkafure  till  another  opportunity  is  given  to.  Dear  Sir, 
Your  fincere  friend  and  humble  fervant, 

LETTER     XXIV. 

To  the   Scwu, 
Dear  Sir,  Brijiol,  Aluy  24,  1 737. 

BY  the  particular  good  providence  of  God,  I  got  fafe  to 
Brijlol  yefterday  by  ten  in  the  morning,  and  was  re- 
ceived (unworthy  as  I  a^n)  with  the  utmoil  civility  and  kind- 
i\z{s.  I  have  learnt  from  hence  the  benefit  of  fetting  out  on 
cur  journey  to  eternity  betimes,  and  v/hat  a  pleafmg  re£ec- 
ticn  it  will  be  to  look  back,  though  not  to  depend,  on  one*s 
•paft  life,  and  find  a  great  deal  of  work  done  in  a  little  time. 
The  people  h.re  are  exceeding  kindly  affected  towards  me ; 

and. 


LETTERS.  27 

and,  I  hope,  I  have  feen  the  effecls  of  my  doiS^rine  In  the 
reformation  of  fome  of  their  lives.  Remember  me  always  \n 
your  prayers.  Accept  my  hearty  thanks  for  all  favours,  and 
believe  me  to  be. 

Ever  your's, 

LETTER    XXV. 

To   Mrs.   H. 
Dear  Mrs.  H.  Oxon,  July  14,  1737. 

IF  you   remember,  I   promifed  you    a  long    and   particular 
letter  when  I  was  at  GhuceJIer^  and    nothing  hinders  but 
I  may  now  perform   it.     Permit  me  then  firff ^   to  begin  this, 
as  I  v.'ould  all  my  letters,  with  thanks  to  you  and   kind  Mr. 
H.  for  your  inexprefTible  favours  conferred   on  the  moft  un- 
worthy of  my  mailer's  fervants  ;  and,  withall,  to  affure  you, 
how  incelll\ntly  I  pray,   that  the  God  of  all  grace  and  mercy, 
for  the  fake  of  his  dear  Son  Jesus  Christ,  would  reward 
you  in  fpirituals,  for  what  you  have  done  to  me  in  temporals, 
and  feed  your  foul  with  his  heavenly  graces,  as   plentifully  as 
you  have  fed  my  body  with  nourifhing  food.     But  as,  in  al-l 
probability,  this  will  be  the  laft  letter  I  fhall  write  to  dear  Mrs. 
H.  before  1  fail,  what  can  I  fill  the  remainder  with  better,  than 
by  exhorting  you,  to  lay  afide  every  weight,  particularly  the 
fm  that  does  moft  eafily  befet  you,   and  fo  run  with  patience 
the   race  fet  before  you.      I   fay,  the  fm   that    moft   eafily 
befets  ;    for  unlefs    we   lay  the  ax  to  the  root,  unlefs   we  fm-r 
cerely  refoive  in  the  ftrengih  of  Jesus  Christ  to  fubdue  our 
favourite,  our  darling  paftion,  and  fpare  not  one  Agcig^  though 
ever  fo  engaging,  ever  fo  beautiful,  all  our  other  facrificcs 
will  avail  us  nothing.     Suppofe  therefore,  for  inftance,  Pas^ 
SIGN  be  our  greateft  foible.     A  fmcere  perfon  will  never  ceafe 
night  or  day,  till  he  is  made  meek  and  lowly  in  heart.     But  if 
it  be  afked,  how  he  fhall  do  this  ?  I  anfwer,/r,/?,  let  him  con- 
fider  how  odious  it  is   in  the  fight  of  God,  and    how  con- 
trary  to  the  lamb-like   mccknefs   of  the  holy   Jesus.     5^- 
condly^  Let  him  refledl  how  troublefome  it  muft  be  to  others, 
(for  alas  what  unneceflary   diforders,  what   needlefs  troubles 
doth  the  paftionate  perfon  occafion  to  ?11  that  are  round  about 

him?J 


28  LETTERS. 

him?)   TJj'trdly^  Let  him  confider  how  exceeding  hurtful   and 
unplcafant  it  is  to  himfclf ;  how  it  ruffles  and  difcompofes  his 
mind  ;  unfits  him  for  every  holy  duty,  and  in  fhort  makes  him 
a  torment  to  himfclf  and  a  burden  to  others.    Well,  after  he 
has  thus  {t^n  the  deformity  of  his  darling  pafllon,  the  next  en- 
quiry muft  be,  how  to  get  the  maftery  over  it.     The  firft  anJ 
grand  thing,  is  to  get  a  true  and  lively  faith  in  Christ  Jesus, 
feeking  for  it  by  carncft  prayer.     To  this,  we  muft  have  re- 
courfe  in  all  our  ftruggles  ;  for  it's  God  alone,  who  can  fub- 
due  and  govern   the  unruly  wills  of  finful   men,  and  it  is  his 
grace  which  alone  can  enable  us  to  mortify  our  corrupt  paf- 
fions.     But  then    we  muft  take  care  not  to  reft  in  general 
petitions  for  conquering  this  or  that   corruption  ;  but  muft 
defcend  to  particulars.     For  inftancc,  fuppofing  I   am   angry 
with  a  fervant  or  huftjand  without  a  caufe  ;    What  muft  I  do  ? 
Why,  take  the  very  firft  opportunity    of  retiring  from  the 
world,   and   after  having  bewailed  my  being  angry,  earneftly 
bcfcech  the  Lord  of  all  power  and  might  to  enable  me  to 
withftand  fuch  and  fuch  a  provocation  for  the  future,  and  not- 
withftanding  I  fhould  fail  again  and  again  in  the  very  fame 
inftance,  yet  I  would  again  and   again   renew  my   petitions 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  never  ceafe  praying  and  ftriving, 
till  inftead  of  a  blind,  perverfe,  troublefome  pallion,  I  had   the 
lovely,  calm,  and  delightful  grace  of  meeknefs  and    humility 
planted  in  its  room.     Now  would  dear  Mrs.  H.  take  fome 
fuch  method  as  this  (for  I  fuppofe  by  this  time,  flie  guefies 
to  whom  all  this  points)  I  dare  fay,  fhe  would  quickly  find  as 
much  difference  in   herfelf  as   there  is  between  a   wife  man 
and  an  idiot.— -And  that  fnc  may  both   begin  and  fucceed  in 
this  method,  is  the  earneft  prayer  of.  Dear  Mrs.  H. 
Your  afFe£tionate  friend,  &c. 

G,  JK 

L  E  T.T  E  R    XXVL 

To  Mr,  H. 
My  Dear  Friendy  London^  Sept.  28,  I737» 

I  Thank  you  for  your  laft  kind  letter  and  kinder  wifhes. 
May  they  be  turned  into  prayers,  and  heard  ai:  the  throne 
of  grace.  BlcfTed  be  God  for  your  new  correfpondence  with 
our  Oxford  friends.     I  hope  you  will  be  inftrumental'to  build 

each 


LETTERS.  29 

each  other  up  in  the  knowledge  and  fear  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  God  ftill  works  powerfully  here. 
People  flock  more  than  ever,  and  (hew  the  fincerity  of  their 
hearts  by  giving  liberally  to  the  poor.  I  have  preached  four 
charity  fermons  within  this  little  while,  and  the  colleclioos 
were  larger  than  ever  were  known.  Not  unto  me,  O  Lord, 
not  unto  me  ;  but  unto  thy  Name  be  the  glory  and  praife  there- 
of !  1  am  glad,  fmce  its  the  divine  will,  that  my  brother  is 
coming  up,  though  my  ability  as  to  temporals  you  know 
is  fmall.  But  I  have  an  all-fufficient  God  to  apply  to  hi 
all  emergencies.  I  am  forry  fiMtfor  my  brother's  lofs  j  but  I 
fear  he  muft  have  greater,  before  he  is  awakened  out  of  his 
fpiritual  lethargy.  God  fancStify  all  his  difpenfations  to  him. 
I  know  not  why  we  go  not  to  Georgia ;  but  there  is  no  like- 
lihood of  it  yet,  as  I  fee.  Friends  univcrfally  difluade  mc 
from  going  by  myfelf ;  but  I  hope  it  will  not  be  long  now, 
before  we  fliall  launch  into  the  deep.  To-night  I  preach 
again  at  Bow  church,  before  the  religious  focieties.  God 
opens  my  heart  to  compofe  freely.  O  praife  him,  dear  Mr. 
H.  for  this  and  all  his  other  mercies,  conferred  on,  Dear  Sir, 
Your  and  Mrs.  i/.'s  afFedionate  friend, 

LETTER    XXVIL 

To  the  Same, 
Deareji  Sir,  London,  OSf.  25,  1 737. 

MULTIPLICITY  of  bufmefs  prevented  my  writing 
to  you  before.  But  though  you  have  not  heard  from 
me  by  letter,  yet  you  may  affure  yourfelf,  dear  Sir,  I  never 
forget  mentioning  you  in  my  prayers.  God  knows  that  I 
and  fome  other  friends  intercede  moft  fervently  for  you,  and 
very  frequently  even  at  midnight.  May  God,  for  Christ's 
fak-e,  hear  and  anfwer  them  !  We  fail  not  for  Georgia  this 
nwnth.  I  fuppofc  you  have  heard  of  my  ?nighty  deeds ^  falfely 
fo  called,  by  reading  the  news-papers ;  for  I  find  fome  back- 
friend has  publifhed  abroad  my  preaching  four  times  in  a 
day  ;  but  I  befeech  Mr.  Raikes,  the  printer,  never  to  put  mt 
into  his  news  upon  any  fuch  account  again,  for  it  is  quite 
contrary  tp  my   inclinations  and  pofitivc  orders.     God  ffill 

works 


^o  LETTERS. 

works  here.  The  collections  for  the  charity  fchool.s*,  in  all  the 
churches  where  I  preach,  are  very  large.  All  Loudon  is 
alarmed.  Many  youths  here  fincerely  love  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  ;  and  thoufands,  I  hope,  are  quickened,  ftrengthened, 
and  confirmed  by  the  word  preached.  I  was  never  in  better 
health,  and  never  compofed  more  freely.  O  praife  the  Lord, 
dear  Sir,  and  pray  that  I  may  not  be  felf-fufficient  but  hum- 
ble. I  am  glad  dear  Mrs.  H.  is  recovered.  May  flie,  with 
Peie?''s  wife's  mother,  arife  and  minifter  to  Jesus  Christ. 
God  reward  her  for  all  her  works  and  labours  of  love.  BlefT- 
ed  be  God  my  hands  are  full  of  bufinefs.  A  third  edition  of 
my  fermon  on  regeneration  is  coming  out.  Write  to  me 
quickly,  accept  my  hearty  thanks  and  love,  and  expedl  to 
hear  again  from,    Dear  Sir, 


Ever  your's, 


LETTER    XXVIIL 


G,  IK 


To  the  Same* 
Dear  Sir,  Nov.  1 4,  1737. 

I  Heartily  thank  you  for  your  lafl-,  and  having  a  lew  mo- 
ments, fit  down  to  anfwer  it.  Let  not  my  friendj  trouble 
me  with  temporal  offers,  I  fhall  accept  (God  aiTilting  me) 
of  no  place  this  fide  Jordan.  We  embark  for  Georgia  in 
abou'.  three  weeks  or  a.  month  at  fartheft.  You  wilh  me 
good  luck  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.     I   hope   to   fend   to 

you   again   before  I   fail.     Mr.  M n  is  going    amongft 

the  colliers  again  at  BriJIol,  and  a  church,  I  hope,  will  be 
built  for  them.  Profper,  O  Lord,  the  work  of  his  hands 
upon  him  ! — Mrs.  Farj?ur,  whenever  my  circumflances  will 
admit,  fiiall  be  paid  all  that  is  due  to  h^r  on  my  mother's  ac- 
count. (jOD  dill  works  more  and  more  by  my  unworthy 
minifiry.  Laft  v.'eek,  fave  one,  I  preached  ten  times  in  dif-^ 
fcrent  churches  ;  and  the  lad  week  feven  ;  and  yefterday 
four  times,  and  read  prayers  twice,  though  I  ilept  not  above 
an  h-our  the  night  before,  which  was  fpent  in  religious  con- 
verfation,  and  in  interceding  for  you,  Mrs.  jF/.,  goad  Mr. 
Pauncifoot^  he.  I  now  begin  to  preach  charity  fermons  twice 
or  thrice  a  week,  bcfides  two  cr  three  on  Sundays^   and  fixty 

or 


LETTERS.  31 

or  Icventy  pounds  arc  collccSted  weekly  tor  the  poor  children. 
Thoiifands  would  come  in  to  hear,  but  cannot.  This  night 
I  preached  a  funeral  fcrmon  before  a  moft  crouded  audience, 
and  God,  I  believe,  worked  upon  the  people's  hearts.  O 
pray  for  me  ftill,  dear  Sir,  that  I  may  renew  my  flrength, 
that  I  may  walk  and  not  be  weary,  run  and  not  be  faint. 
Admire  God's  free  grace  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  let  his 
goodnefs  to  me,  the  worfb  of  Tinners,  ftrengthen  your  faith,  and 
make  you  never  to  defpair  of  mercy.  Farewell.  My  love  to 
alK  and  am,  Dear  Sir,  in  fmcerity, 

Your  friend,  kc. 

G,  IK 

LETTER     XXIX. 

To  Mrs.   H, 
Dear  Mrs.  II.  London^  Dec.  2'^,  1737' 

ONCE  more  I  fend  you  a  line.  Nothing  but  an  exctfs 
of  bufiaers,  {hould  have  prevented  mc  writing  to  yoii 
oftner.  Your  favours,  I  hope,  will  never  be  forgotten,  and 
never  ceafe  to  be  mentioned  before  the  throne  of  grace, 
God  only  knows,  hov/  earneftly  I  have  recommended  you 
and  your's  to  his  never-failing  mercy.  On  Wednofday  night 
eighteen  of  \i.i>  continued  all  night  in  praifes,  and  praying  for 
you  and  our  other  friends.  1  know,  that  pailion  is  the  fin, 
which  moft  eafily  befets  you,  and  therefore  I  always  pray 
that  vou  may  have  grace  given  you  to  conquer  it,  and  to 
learn  of  Jtsus  Christ  to  be  meek  and  lov/ly  in  heart. 
Then,  ajid  not  till  then,  you  will  find  reft  to  your  Ibul. 
Pardon  me,  dear  Mrs.  H.  for  being  thus  free.  Your  kindncfs 
Gompels  me  to  it.  Had  I  not  a  fmcere  regard  for  you,  I 
ftiould  not  exprefs  myfelf  thus.  Bcfidcs,  it's  the  laft  time, 
perhaps,  I  ftiall  write  to  you  in  this  v/orld,  and  therefore  v/ould 
have  this  letter  contain  fomc  inftruiStive  hints.  We  fail,  Goo 
willing,  next  week.  Great  things  have  been  done  for  us  here. 
Perhaps  upwards  of  a  thoufand  pounds  have  been  collected  for 
the  poor,  and  the  charity  fchools,  and  I  have  preached  above 
an  himdred  times,  fmce  I  have  been  here.  A  vifible  altera- 
tion is  made  alfo  in  hundreds.  Laft  Sunday  at  fix  in  the  morn- 
ing, wi>en  I  gave  my  l^rewell,  the  whole  church  waj 
drowned   in   tears  ;   they  wept  and  cried  aloud,  as  a  mother 

wcepeth 


32  LETTERS. 

weepeth  for  her  firft  born.  Since  that,  there  is  no  end  of  per- 
fons  coming  and  weeping,  telling  me  what  God  has  done  for 
their  fouls :  others  again  beg  little  books,  anddefire  me  to  write 
their  names  in  them.  The  time  would  fail  me,  was  I  to  relate 
how  many  have  been  awakened,  and  how  many  pray  for  me. 
The  great  day  will  difcover  all.  In  the  mean  while,  I  be- 
feech  you  Mrs.  H.  by  the  mercies  of  God  to  pray,  that  the 
goodnefs  of  God  may  make  me  humble.  As  yet  the  divine 
ftrength  has  been  magnified  in  my  weaknefs.  Many  have 
oppofed,  but  in  vain.  God's  power  conquers  all.  I  am 
now  going  as  Jbraham  did,  not  knowing  whither  I  go  ; 
but  I  commit  myfelf  to  the  guidance  of  God's  good  pro- 
vidence and  fpirit.  He  that  has  and  doth,  will  deliver  me 
out  of  all  my  troubles.  I  only  wifh,I  could  debafe  myfelf  low 
enough,  that  I  might  be  more  fitted  for  the  high  and  lofty 
one  who  inhabiteth  eternity,  to  work  by.  I  am  a  proud, 
imperious,  fmful  v>^orm  ;  but  God,  I  hope,  in  time,  will  con- 
form me  to  the  image  of  his  dear  Soru  He  has  begun  (for 
ever  adored  be  his  free  grace),  and  I  truft,  he  will  fini{h 
his  good  work  in  me.  Out  of  the  money  that  God  has  fent 
me,  I  will  pay  all  the  debts  I  can.  I  have  fent  fome  of  it  to 
Mrs.  TVells^  with  particular  orders  how  to  be  difpofed  of; 
two  guineas  are  for  Mrs,  Far?rjer  towards  the  debt  due  to  her 
from  my  mother.  My  farewell  fermon  will  be  publilhed 
fhortly,  with  two  or  three  more.  Dear  Mrs.  H.  farewell. 
God  reward  you  and  your's  for  all  your  works  of  faith  and 
labours  of  love,  and  grant  we  may  fo  believe,  and  fo  live  hers, 
as  to  meet  in  eternal  glory  hereafter. 

Ever  your's, 

G.  IK 

LETTER    XXX. 

To  Mr,  H. 
Dear  S'lr^  Margate^  Jan,  9,  1738. 

HITHER  the  good  providence  of  God  has  fafely  brought 
us  ;  our  fhip  caft  anchor  near  this  town,  and  my 
dear  fellow-traveller  and  I  came  on  fhore  (to  our  great  com- 
fort) to  buy  fome  things  we  wanted.  We  have  been  moft 
courteoufly  treated  by  the  curate  of  the  place,  and  had  fome 
chriftian  converfation.     The  winds  and  ftorms  are   bluftering 

about 


LETTERS.  33 

about  our  ears,  and  teaching  us  leflbns  of  obedience  to  him, 
whom  winds  and  ftorms  obey.  Goo  give  us  grace  to 
learn  them.  IMr.  B.  can  inform  you,  what  other  particulars 
have  happened  to  us,  fince  we  left  you  ;  I  need  only  add,  that 
the  divine  goodnefs  attends  us  wherever  we  go*  Oh  dear 
Sir!  who  would  but  leave  their  few  ragged,  tattered  nets 
to  follow  Jesus  Christ?  Who  would  but  follow  the  Lamb 
wherefoevcr  he  fhall  be  pleafed  to  lead  P  Pray,  dear  Sir^  that 
I  may  always  do  fo,  and  then,  I  am  fure,  God  will  never 
leave  or  forfake  me.  You  fee,  dear  Sir^  I  have  anfvvcrcd  your 
kind  letter  much  fooner  than  expectation,  in  order  to  exprefs 
how  fmcerely  1  value  your  friendihip,  though  you  differ  from 
me  in  fomsC  outward  modes.  Indeed,  Sir,  I  hope  the  favours! 
have  received  from  you  and  others  of  your  chriftian  brethrenj 
will  never  go  out  of  my  mind  ;  but  I  fliall  often  plead  them 
(as  I  have  done  already)  at  the  throne  of  grace.  I  would  will- 
ingly be  of  fo  catholic  a  fpirit,  as  to  love  the  image  of  my  di- 
vine mafter,  wherever  I  fee  it :  I  am  far  from  thinking  God's 
grace  is  confined  to  any  fct  of  men  whatfoever :  no,  I  knov/ 
the  partition-wall  is  now  broken  down,  and  that  Jesu3 
Christ  came  to  redeem  people  out  of  all  nations  and  lan- 
guages and  tongues  ;  and  therefore  his  benefits  are  not  to  be 
confined  to  this  or  that  particular  fet  of  profcflbrs.  I  only 
wifii,  that  I  may  have  grace  given  me  to  preach  the  truth,  as 
it  is  in  Jesus  ;  and  then,  come  what  will,  I  hope  I  iliall  (as 
I  do,  blelled  be  God)  rejoice. 

You  know,  Sir,  what  a  defign  I  atn  going  upon,  and  what 
n  ftripling  I  am  for  fo  great  a  work  ;  but  I  (land  forth  as 
David  againil  Goliah  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  and 
I  doubt  not,  but  he  that  has  and  doth,  will  ftill  deliver  unta 
the  end.  Got)  give  me  a  deep  humility,  a  well-guided  zeal, 
a  burning  love,  and  a  finglc  eye,  and  then  let  men  or  devils  j 
do  their  v/orlh — Dear  Sir,  I  could  write  more,  but  nnture 
calls  for  reft.  Be  pleafed  to  give  my  hearty  love  to  all  yoii 
arid  I  know,  and  acquaint  them,  how  fiifc  I  am  here;  for 
other  wife  the  tempcftuous  night  might  put  them  and  others  in  ; 
pain  for,  Dear  Sir^ 

Your  un worth V.  though  affcd^ionats  friend, 

G.  JV. 

Vol.  L  ®  LETTER  ; 

1 


34  LETTERS. 

LETTER    XXXL 

Tolldrs.  H, 
Dear  Mrs.  H.  Dcal^  Jan.  li,  1738. 

HITHER  has  God  fafely  brought  us.  Pray  give  thanks 
^  on  my  behalf.  We  have  had  two  little  ftorms,  the 
one.  we  cfcapcd  by  being  at  Alar  gat  e^  the  other  we  were 
enabled  to  bear  manfully,  and  to  pray  for  you  and  yours 
on  open  deck  in  tiie  midft  of  it.  All  the  officers  are  ex- 
ceeding civil.  The  captain  gives  me  the  free  ufe  of  his 
cabin,  and  fome  impreffion  is  made  on  the  foldiers.  I  read 
prayers  and  preach  twice  every  day,  and,  would  you  think  it, 
the  very  foldiers  ftand  out  to  fay  their  catechifm.  Oh  that 
they  may  be  foldiers  of  Jesus  Christ.  God  gives  me 
great  joy,  and  excites  me  to  adore  him  more  and  more,  when 
I  behold  his  wonders  in  the  deep.  I  am  but  a  frefh- water 
failor  ;  but  God's  ftrength  will  be  magnified  in  my  weak- 
iiefs,  and  I  verily  believe  we  fhall  arrive  at  the  haven,  where  we 
wou'd  be.  Oh  that  we  may  all  fo  pafs  thro'  the  waves  of 
this  troublefome  world,  that  at  laft  we  may  arrive  at  the  port 
of  everlafting  reft  !  Expe6l  to  hear  from  me  at  Gibraltar^  and 
allure  yourfelf  your  favours  (hall  never  be  forgotten  by 

Your  fmcere  friend, 

G.  IF. 

L  E  T  T  E  R    XXXII. 

To  Mr, -. 

Deal.,  Jan,  21,   1 738. 

SUPPOSE  lanfwer  dear  Mr. before  I  reach  Georgia j 
"Will  he  be  angry  ?  I  fancy  not.  I  had  a  mind  to  write 
to  you  again,  before  I  received  yours.  For  as  you  have  been 
fo  liberal  in  your  prefents,  it  would  be  unpardonable  in  me, 
was  I  niggardly  in  my  letters.  No,  my  dear  friend,  I  hope 
I  never  Ihall  ceafe  pr.:ying  for  you  and  yours,  fo  long  as  I 
live.  Hitherto  I  have  not.  I  was  praying  for  you  juft  as  I 
received  yours  :  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  prayed  before  you 
wrote  to  me.  Surely  God  will  blefs  fuch  a  corrcfpondence. 
O  my  friend,  let  us  ftill  wreftie  with  God,  that  we  may  lie 
ftedfaft,  unmoveablc,  always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord,     For  it  is  perfeverance  crowns  our  labours.     He,  and 

Hi 


LETTERS.  35 

fie  only  can  he  faved.  The  world,  the  fiefh  and  the  devil  are 
three  fuch  potent  enemies,  that  we  mufr  ftiive,  we  muft  per- 
fevere,  if  we  will  gain  a  conqueft.  Strive  then  ;  let  us,  my 
dear  friend,  ftrivc  as  perfons  driving  for  eternity.  Let  us 
abftain  from  all  appearance  of  evil,  and  avoid  all  company^ 
that  doth  not  diredlly  tend  to  the  promoting  our  fpiritual 
welfare.  Whether  one  of  the  focietics  you  frequent,  my  dear 
friend,  has  a  tendency  that  way,  I  leave  you  to  judge.  I 
think  I  have  heard  you  fay,  it  keeps  you  from  family  and  fe- 
cret  prayer.  If  that  is  not  a  fufficient  reafon  for  abfenting  from 
it,  I'll  fay  no  more.  I  believe  you  to  be  fmcere,  and 
therefore,  if  you  confult  God  by  prayer  and  reading  his 
word,  your  way  will  be  made  clear  before  you.  I  only  add, 
that  I  could  wifh,  inftead  of  frequenting  that^  you  would  fct 
up  another  fociety  of  a  quite  contrary   nature  on  the   fame 

night  of  the  week.     I  know  Mr. had  fdine  fuch  defio-n  on 

foot,  and  defired  me  to  mention  it.  I  wifb  you  good  fuccefs 
in  this  and  every  pious  undertaking  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  May  God  reward  you  for  all  your  kindnefTes,  and 
make  you  to  abound  in  every  good  v/ord  and  work  !  may  you 
\valk  by  faith  and  not  by  fight  5  and  tho'  you  are  in  the  world, 
may  you  not  be  of  it !  I  preach  here,  God  willing,  to-morrow  ; 
there's  likely  to  be  a  great  congregation.     O  pray,  that  they 

may  not  be  fent  away  empty,  but  converted  by,  dear  Mr. ^, 

Your  afFedionate  friend, 

LETTER    XXXIII. 

t)ear  Sir^  Deal,  Jan.  25,  173^. 

I  Am  afhamed  of  my  ingratitude  in  not  writing  to  you  be- 
fore i  but  you'll  not  wonder  I  am  ungrateful  to  my 
friends,  when  I  tell  you  I  am  ungrateful  to  my  God.  How- 
ever, as  I  always  remark'd  you  for  your  charity,  I  know  you 
will  imitate  Him  you  fo  refemble,  and  upon  my  promife  of 
amendment    for   the   future,   will  pardon  what   is   paft.     Oh 

dear  Sir,  how  fhall  I  exprefs  my  gratitude  to  dear — ?  But 

above  all,  what  return  fliall  I  make  to  my  ever-blefled  Re- 
deemer for  all  the  favours  he  hath  beftowed  upon  me  ?  Help, 
I  entreat  you,  help  me  to  be  thankful,  and  as  you  abound  in 
prayer,  abouiji   in  praifes.     1  find  my  heart   too  backward 

D  2  to 


36  LETTERS. 

to  this  divine  exercife.  I  am  ready  enough  to  afk  for  mercies, 
but  alas  !  how  flow  to  return  thanks  !  Indeed  fometimes  God 
touches  me  from  above,  and  my  heart,  hard  as  it  is,  is  melted 
down  and  quite  overcome  with  the  fenfe  of  his  free  grace  in 
Christ  Jesus  towards  me.  But  I  want  always  to  goon 
my  way  rejoicing  ;   I  want  the  heart  of  a  feraphim  j 

/  luant  tofing  as  loud  as  they^ 
IVho  JJnne  above  in  endlefs  day, 

I  could  almoft  fay  more  than  they,  and  why  (hould  I  not  re- 
turn angelic  thanks  r  But  my  heart  is  as  yet  unhumbled,  1 
fee  not  what  I  am,  what  I  defcrve,  and   therefore  fet  not  a 

due  value  on  the  divine  mercies.    Pray  therefore,  dear  Mr. , 

that  I  may  receive  my  fight,  that  my  eyes  may  be  opened, 
and  that  feeing  what  God  hath  done  for  me,  I  may  break 
out  into  fongs  of  praife,  and  by  fuch  heart-transforming 
divittc  excreifcs  be  gradually  trained  up  for  eternal  uninter- 
rupted communion  with  that  heavealy  choir,  who  ceafe  not 
chanting  forth  day  and  night  hallelujahs  to  Him  that  iltteth 
upon  the  throne  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever.  Dear  Mr.  — ,  I  can 
relate  to  you  frtih  matter  for  praife  and  thankfgiving  ;  a  di- 
vine fire  feems  to  be  kindling  in  DeaL  I  preached  on  Sun- 
day^ and  this  day*  The  mhabitants  are  quite  affe6lionate,.  and 
fo  deiirous  to  hear  the  word,  at  my  private  lodgings,  as  well 
as  at  public  churches,  that  I  am  obliged  to  divide  them  into 
two  companies.  And  God,  bleflTed  be  his  free  grace  in 
Christ  Jf.sus,  helps  me  through.  I  fuppofe  my  dear  friend 
has  heard  how  affairs  go  on  fliipboard.  I  need  only  add, 
that  God  makes  his  pov/er  to  be  known  among  thofe  that  fail 
with  me,  and  there  are  great  hopes  of  the  captain's  converiTon. 
O  pray,  that  he  may  not  be  an  almoft,   but  an  altogether  chri'- 

ftian.    Dear  Mr. , farewell.  It*s  late,  and  many  other  friends 

muft  have  a  line  to-night.  May  God  reward  you  for  all  kind- 
ncfTes,  and  keep  you  fledfaft  unto  the  end.  Pray  return  my 
hearty  thanks  to  all  your  Brethren  ;  tell  them  I  fmcerely  pray 
for  their   growth  and  pcrfeverance  in  holinefs,  and  am,  dear 

Mr, , 

Your  affeclionate,  tho'  unworthy  friend 

and  fervant  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G,  W, 

LETTER 


LETTERS.  37 

LETTER    XXXIV. 

Dear  Mr. Gibraltar  Harbour  Feb.  24,  1 738. 

IBIefs  God  for  Inclining  your  heart  to  take  my  advice.  I 
know  it  was  intended  well,  and  I  hope  proceeded  from 
the  fpirit  of  God.  The  many  f^ital  confequcnces  I  have 
daily  k^n^  proceeding  from  converfmg  with  lukewarm 
chriftians,  makes  me  jealous  of  my  dear  fiicnds,  left  they 
fliould  be  infe£ted  by  them  ;  and  the  great  tendency  I  find  in 
my  own  heart  to  catch  every  infeilion,  makes  me  to  refolvc 
for  myfelf,  and  to  put  others  on  refolving  to  keep  no  fet 
company  but  with  religious  perfons.    I  hope  by  this  time  I 

may  wi(h  you  joy  of  fettling  a  new  fociety  with  Mejfrs. ; 

and  I  doubt  not  but  your  hearts  have  already  burnt  within 
you,  whilft  you  talked  to  one  another  of  the  fcriptures  of 
truth.  I  am  fure  there  is  fcarce  a  night  has  pafled  over  my 
head  but  I  have  wreftled  with  God  for  you,  and  prayed 
that  he  would  profper  this  work  of  your  hands  upon  you.  My 
hearty  defire  and  daily  petition  at  the  throne  of  grace  is,  that 
you  may  be  faved  ;  and  tho'  I  know  not  much  of  your  dear 
wife's  temper,  yet  I  pray,  that  fhe  may  be  meek  and  lowly 
in  heart,  not  eafily  provoked,  nor  anfwer  unneceflarily  again. 
I  pray,  that  you  both  may  walk  as  Zachary  and  Elizabeth  did 
before  the  Lord  blamelefs,  that  you  may  love  one  another, 
as  Christ  and  the  church,  and  fee  your  children  like  olive- 
branches  round  about  your  table.  I  pray,  that  you  may  pcr- 
fevere  in  the  good  way  you  have  begun,  that  you  may  ab- 
ftain  from  all  appearance  of  evil,  and  dare  to  be  exemplarily 
good.  I  pray,  that  you  may  pratftice  an  univerfal  felf-denial,^ 
and  perfect  holinefs  ii)  the  fear  of  God.  I  could  fay  much 
piore,  but  muft  away  to  Gibraltar;  one  of  the  Majors  of  the 
regiments  has  fent  for  me,  having  provided  a  lodging  at  a  mer- 
chant's houfe  unknown  to  me.  Oh  admire  God's  goodnefs  ? 
Accept  my  thanks  and  love,  and  believe  me  to  be,  more  than 
words  can  exprcfs. 

Your  afFeftionatc  friend  in  Christ, 

G,  rr. 


D  3  LETTER 


3$  LETTERS, 

LETTER    XXXV. 

^0  Mr.  — — . 
Dear  Mr. ,  Gibraltar^  Feb.  25,  1 7 38. 

I  Should  think  myfelF  unworthy  of  your  friendlhip,  did  I 
not  fend  you  a  line  now  God  ha5  brought  me  in  fafety 
hither.  I  know  you  will  give  thanks,  and  therefore,  God 
forbid  I  fliould  fm  againft  the  Lord  in  not  informing  you 
of  it. — Your  prayers  have  already  been  heard  ;  for  God  (ever 
adored  be  his  free  grace  in  Christ  Jesus)  hath  been  with 
us  of  a  truth.  lie  hath  led  us  through  the  fea,  as  through  a 
wildernefs,  and  brought  us  to  a  haven,  where  I  am  honoured 
with  many  honours. — Any  one  that  knows  Gibraltar  would 
be  apt  to  fay.  Can  any  good  come  out  from  thence  ?  Yes,  I 
aflure  you,  there  may  ;  for  there  arc  fome  that  are  not  afhamed 
of  the  gofpcl  of  Christ.  About  fix  o'clock  this  morning  I 
went  to  the  church,  where  was  afTembled  a  number  of  decent 
foldiers  praying  and  fmging  pfalms  to  Christ  as  God.  They 
meet  conflantly  three  times  a  day,  and  I  intend,  God  willing, 
henceforward  to  meet  them.  For  my  delight  is  in  the  faints 
who  are  in  the  earth,  and  thofe  that  excel  in  virtue.  I  have 
talked  with  fome  of  them,  and,  bleffed  be  God,  can  find  the 
marks  of  the  new  birth  in  them.  They  pray  without  ceafing, 
have  overcome  the  world,  hate  fin,  as  fin,  love  their  enemies 
and  one  another.  They  glory  in  the  crofs  of  Christ,  and 
rejoice  that  they  are  accounted  worthy  to  fuffer  (hame  for  the 
fake  of  Christ.  O,  who  would  but  travel  to  fee  how  the 
fpirit  of  God  is  moving  on  the  faces  of  poor  finners  fouls  up, 
a.nd  down  the  world  !  God,  I  find,  has  a  people  every  where  ; 
Christ  has  a  flock,  though  but  a  little  flock,  in  all  places. — 
God  be  praifed,  that  we  are  of  this  flock,  and  that  it  will  be 
our  Father's  good  pleafure  to  give  us  the  kingdom  ! — Gibraltar 
is  bleficd  with  a  governor,  who  hath  not  abfented  himfelf  from 
public  v/orihip,  unlefs  when  he  was  fick,  for  thefe  feven  years, 
and  yet  is  very  moderate  towards  the  diflfenters.  Both  con- 
formifts  and  nonconformifls  perform  public  worftiip,  though  at 
tliflerent  times  of  the  day,  in  the  fame  place  :  They  alfo  have 
a  religious  fociety.  The  good  Lord  profper  this  work  of 
their  hands  upon  them.  Whenever  we  go  away,  may  we 
k;ive  a  blciiing  behind  us.     Pic  is  a  prayer-hearing  God. — 

Yellerday 


LETTERS.  29 

Yefterday  a  major  of  one  of  the  regiments,  unknown  to  me, 
took  two  handfome  rooms,  and  fent  for  me  from  on  board, 
defiling  me  to  lodge  in  them  ;  and  I  find  the  people  of  the 
houfe  fear  God. — "  When  I  fent  you  without  fcrip  or  (hoe, 
lacked  you  any  thing?'*  faid  our  Lord.     They   faid  nothing, 

- — O,  dear  Mr. ,  I  befeech  you  abound  in  thankfgiving, 

and  pray  that  all  thefe  blefwngs  may  humble  my  proud  heart, 
and  make  me  willing  to  follow  the  Lamb  whitherfoever  he  fhall 
lead  me.  AfTure  yourfclf,  that  you  and  all  your  chriftian  friends 
are  conftantly  prayed  for  by,  dear  Sir, 

Your's  moft  affedtionately  in  the  Lord  J  esu6, 

'  .  G.  ;/: 

LETTER    XXXVL 

Dear  o/r,  Gibraltar^  Feb,  27,  173S. 

EVER  fince  I  left  GravefenJ^  I  remember  the  fulnefs  of 
your  heart.  I  have  been  a  conftant  petitioner  at  the 
throne  of  grace  for  you,  and  intended  writing  to  you  before, 
but  was  lett  hitherto.  However,  God  has  now  brought  me 
fafe  to  Gibraltar^  and  as  I  hayc  time,  I  fliould  think  myfelf  in^ 

excufable,  did  I  not  fend  a  line  to  dear  Mr. ,  to  aflurc 

bim,  I  forgot  not  his  tears,  and  wifh  him  to  be  not  only  an 
almoft,  but  an  altogether  chriftian.  Dear  Sir,  you  are  youn?- 
and  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  and  it  would  rejoice  my  heart  to 
fee  you  triumph  over  the  luft  of  the  eye,  the  luft  of  the  ^cihy 
and  the  pride  of  life,  and  to  become  a  poor  defpifed  fervant  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Others,  indeed,  may  wifli  you  wealth,  may 
wifh  you  pomp  and  grandeur ;  but  believe  me,  my  dear  friend, 
thefe  will  not,  thefe  cannot,  make  you  happy  :  No,  nothino- 
but  God  can  fatisfy  the  heart  of  man  ;  nothing  but  an  afiiir- 
ance,  that  we  are  born  again,  that  we  are  members  of  Christ, 
that  we  are  united  to  him  by  one  .and  the  fame  fpirit  with 
which  he  himfelf  was  actuated.  Without  this,  if  we  were  to 
have  our  appetites  regaled  with  the  richeft  dainties,  be 
cloathed  with  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fare  fumptuoudy  every 
day,  yet  the  hand-writing  upon  the  wall,  the  confideration, 
that  all  thefe  things  are  quickly  to  be  taken  away,  would  make 
our  vifage  to  change,  and  our  knees,  IWlq  Bcljlazzar's,  to  Imite 
^ne  againft  another.     Strive  then,  my  dear  friend,  to  get  the 

D  4  fpirit 


40  L    E    T    1     E    R     S. 

fpiiit  of  Christ,  who  vviil  keep  clofc  to  you,  when  ill  other 
comforts  fail ;  will  niuke  you  happy  here,  and  unfpcakably 
happy  hereafter. — Never  fear  the  contempt  you  will  niccf  with  ; 
yet  a  little  while,  and  they  that  call  you  fool,  will  call  them- 
fclves  fo,  and  curfe  that  worldly  wifdom,  which  tempted  them 
to  evade  the  crofs  of  Christ.  Strange  !  that  any  one  fhould 
let  a  little  reproach  deprive  them  of  an  eternal  crown  !  Lord, 
what  is  man  !  How  blind  as  to  the  knowledge  of  his  true  in- 
terefl  !   How  backward  in  the  purfuitofhis  eternal  good  !   O, 

dear  Mr. ---,  let  us   not   be  of  the  number  of  thofe,  who 

defirc  the  honour  that  cometh  of  man  ;  but  be  content  with 
that  which  cometh  from  God.  In  a  fliort  time,  we  (h<i]]  have 
praife  enough,  Heayen  will  echo  with  the  applaufc  that  iliali 
be  given  to  the  true  followers  of  the  Lamb,  and  then  you  will 
fee  how  fir.c^icl}-  I  wa-^,  dear  Sir, 

Your  aflsdlionatc  friend  and  fcrvant, 

G.   IK 

LETTER    XXXVII. 

Tc  Mu.  H. 
Dcjy  Mrs,  H.  At  Sea,  ^pi i!  14,  17 38. 

THOUGH  through  exccfs  of  bufinef?,  and  the  fhort- 
nefs  of  the  time,  that  was  allotted  me,  I  wTOte  but  a  few 
lines  to  you  from  Gibraltar^  yet,  what  hinders,  but  that  I 
may  fend  you  a  longer  letter  now  ?  It's  true  we  are  now  near 
a  thoufand  miles  from  Georgia  \  but  as  I  fliall  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  ("ending  immediately  on  our  arrival,  I  chufe  to  take 
time  by  the  forelock,  and  embrace  the  firft  opportunity  of  ac- 
knowledging my  obligations  to  dear  Mrs.  H.  and  her  hufband  ; 
for  whom  1  pray  without  ceafmg.  Your  pafi:  favours  are  fel- 
dcm  out  of  my  mind  ;  I  plead  them  daily  before  God  in 
prayer,  and  hope,  if  it  is  ever  in  my  ppwer,  I  fliall  imitate  the 
example  of  pious  David  in  ycfterday  evening's  firft  Icflbn,  and 
jequite  my  friends,  particularly  dear  Mrs.  H.  and  her  fpoufe, 
\^x  the  kmdnelies  they  have  fliewn  me.  However,  fuppofmg 
this  ihouki  not  happen,  they  will  in  no-wife  \o{^  their  re- 
WMfd.  Bot  I  know  you  do  not  care  I  fhould  dwell  on  this, 
'"i'ou  want  to  be  informed,  how  God  has  dealt  with  me  fince  I 
Itit  Gihaltarf  K^iceedin^  ^racioufly  indeed.  He  has  com- 
forted 


LETTER    S.  41 

fortcd  me  on  every  occafion,  moft  rcmarkabiy  blcfTcd  my  un- 
v/orthy  miniftry  on  board  the  (hip,  Tent  us  moil  delightful 
weather,  and  made  us  to  ride  as  it  were  on  tiic  winrs  of  the 
wind.  ■  We  live  in  perfect  love  and  harmony  one  with  ano- 
iher.  I  know  but  little  diftcrence  between  Tea  and  land,  and 
have  G:reat  reafon  to  blcfs  (tOD  for  fendinr  me  abroad,  A 
grievous  heknefs  has  been  fent  amongft  us,  by  which  moil:  of 
the  fhip  have  been  chaftencd  and  corrc6tcd  but  only  two 
given  over  unto  death  ;  and  God  hath  been  fo  good  to  me, 
that,  except  for  .\  little  time  after  we  fiiijed  from  Gibraltar^  I 
have  been  in  perfect  health,  and  now  God  fatisfieth  my  mouth 
with  good  things,  making  me  ftrong  and  lively  as  a  young  eagle, 
I  have  nothingto  diilurb  my  joy  in  God, but  the  diforder  of  my 
pafiions.  Were  thefe  once  brought  into  a  proper  fubjedtion  to 
divine  grace,  O  well  would  it  be  with  me,  and  happy  fliould 
I  be.  But  fo  long  as  I  am  angry  for  trifles,  and  throw  myfelf 
into  needlefs  diforders,  fo  long  muft  my  heart  be  like  the 
troubled  fea,  fo  long  confequently  mufl  I  be  unhappy.  Pray 
therefore,  dear  Mrs,  H.  that  I  may  lay  the  ax  of  mortification 
to  the  root  of  my  moft  darling  corruptions,  and  fmce  I  have 
but  little,  if  any  thing,  to  difturb  me  without,  O  pray  that  I 
may  meet  with  no  difturbance  from  m,yfelf  within.  The  far- 
ther particulars  of  my  voyage,  you  will  fee  in  my  journal, 
which  I  have  fent  to  Mr.  Huiton^  and  for  the  bleffings  con- 
tained therein,  I  befeech  you  to  return  God  m.oft  humble  and 
hearty  thanks.  About  Chrijhnas  next,  God  willing,  I  pur- 
pofe  to  come  to  England  to  take  priefis  orders,  and  to  return 
as  foon  as  poflible  to  Georgia,  In  the  mean  while,  dear  A4rs. 
H.  let  us  ftrive  to  enter  in  at  the  f{:rait  gate,  that  we  may  be 
chriftians  indeed,  and  know  what  jt  is  truly  to  be  born  again 
from  above,  and  to  be  renewed  by  the  fpirit  in  our  minds. 
Remember  me  moft  affcdionately  to  all  friends.     I  am, 

Your's,  &c, 

G,  jr. 

LETTER    XXXVIII. 
To  Mr.  . 

Dear  Mr . ,  On  board  the  IFki taker,  y/p 7/7  1 7 ,  1 7 3 8 . 

O  ailTure  you  I  do  not  forget  you,  I  write  to  you,  as  yet, 
eight  hundred  miksgfflhore,     Your  lioneft  heart  has 


42  LETTERS. 

won  my  affe£lions.  I  make  mention  of  you  and  your*s  con- 
tinually at  the  ihrone  of  grace  in  my  prayers,  and  fhall  have 
no  greater  pleafure  than  to  hear  you  walk  in  the  truth.  In  your 
laft,  I  think  you  faid,  you  would  defift  from  frequenting  any 
other  focieties,  but  what  immediately  tended  to  the  promoting 
of  true  religion,  and  ere  now,  I  doubt  not  but  you  have  (een 
the  benefit  of  it.     I  have  often  pleafed  myfelf  with  the  hopes, 

that  you,  dear  Mr. ,  had  fet  up  another  fociety  among 

yourfelves,  and  often  have  I  thought,  I  felt  the  benefit  of  your 
prayers  ;  for  God  hath  blefied  me  exceedingly,  and  brought 
us  on  our  way  rejoicing  ;  and  has  flievi^n  me,  that  he  doth  not 
fend  me  abroad  in  vain. — Hov^  God  will  deal  with  me  a.t  Sa- 
vamiahy  I  know  not ;  hov/ever,  let  my  friends  be  always  lifting 
up  their  hands  in  intercefPion,  and  then  our  fpiritual  Amalek 
will  not  prevail.  Hitlierto  I  have  been  made  to  go  on  from 
conquering  to  conquer.  God  gives  me  a  chearful  fpirit,  and 
crowns  my  feeble  labours  with  fuccefs.  And  why  iliould  I 
defpair  of  future  affiftance  ?  Are  not  thefe  earnefts  of  future 
mercies  ?  And  may  I  not  expedl:,  when  I  am  duly  prepared, 
to  fee  greater  things  than  thcfe  ?  Cry  therefore  mightily  unto 
the  Lord,  that  I  may  be  humble,  and  that  I  may  tremble  at 
his  word,  and  then  he  will  delight  to  honour  me.  I  live  in 
hopes  of  feeing  you  and  your  wife  again  (growing  in  grace)  in 
England,  You  told  me,  (he  defired  I  would  draw  her  pi6lure  ; 
but  alas !  (he  has  applied  to  an  improper  limner.  However, 
though  I  cannot  defcribe  what  fhe  is,  I  can  tell  what  fhe  ought 
to  be.— Meek,  patient,  long-fuffering,  obedient  in  all  things, 
»ot  felf-willed,  not  foon  angry,  no  brawler,  fwift  to  hear,  flow 
to  fpeak,  and  ready  to  every  good  word  and  work.  But  I  can 
no  more,  I  dare  not  go  on  in  telling  another  what  fhe  ought 
to  be,  when  I  want  fo  much  myfelf  j  only  this  I  know,  when 
poflefied  of  thofc  good  qualities  before-mentioned,  fhe  will 
then  be  as  happy  as  her  heart  can  wifli,  and  afibrd  great  reafoa 

•f  thankfgiving  to,  dear  Mr. , 

Your  and  Airs. 's  afFedionate  friend, 


LETTER^ 


LETTERS.  43 

LETTER    XXXIX. 

To  Mr.  . 

My  dear  Friend^  On  board  the  JVhitahr^  May  6,  173S. 

HOW  goes  time  ?  I  can  fcarce  tellj  fori  have  been  fome 
time  paft,  as  one  would  think,  launching  into  eternity, 
God  has  been  pleafed  gracioufly  to  vifit  me  with  a  violent 
fever,  which  he  notwithftanding  fo  fvveetened  by  divine  con- 
folations,  that  I  was  enabled  to  rejoice  and  fing  in  the  midft  of 
it.  Indeed,  I  had  many  violent  conflicts  with  the  powers  of 
darknels,  who  did  all  they  could  to  difturb  and  diftracl  me; 
J)ut  Jesus  Christ  prayed  for  me  :  And  though  I  v/as  once 
reduced  to  the  laft  extremity,  and  all  fupernatural  afliftance 
feemed  to  be  fufpended  for  a  while,  and  fatan  as  it  were  had 
dominion  over  me,  yet  God  fuffered  not  my  faith  to  fail ;  but 
came  in  at  length  to  my  aid,  rebuked  the  tempter,  and  fromi 
|:hat  moment  I  grew  better.  Surely  God  is  preparing  me  for 
fomething  extraordinary  :  For  he  has  now  fent  me  fuch  ex- 
traordinary conflids  and  comforts  as  I  never  before  experi- 
enced. I  was  as  I  thought  on  the  brink  of  eternity.  I  had 
Jicaven  within  me  ;  I  thought  of  nothing  in  this  world  ;  I 
.earneftly  defircd  to  be  diiTolved  and  go  to  Christ  ;  but  God 
was  pleafed  to  order  it  otherwife,  and  I  am  refigncd,  though 
I  can  fcarce  be  reconciled  to  come  back  again  into  this  vale  of 
inifery.  I  had  the  heavenly  Canaan  in  full  view,  and  hoped  I 
was  going  to  take  poiTcfTion  of  it ;  but  God  faw  I  was  not  yet 
ripe  for  glory,  and  therefore  in  mercy  fpared  me,  that  I  may 
recover  my  fpiritual  ftrength  before  I  go  hence  and  am  no 
rnore  {zzw.  Oh  pray,  my  dear  friend,  that  I  may  not  grow 
lukewarm,  or  Hothful,  but  arife  from  my  late  bed  of  ficknefs, 
and  adminifter  with  ten  times  more  alacrity  to  my  bleiTed 
Mafter,  than  ever  [I  did  before.  I  would  write  more,  but 
my  ftrength  failcth  me.  We  hope  to  be  at  Savannah  on 
Morulay. 


Your's, 


c.  w. 


LETTER 


44  LETTERS. 

LETTER     XL. 

'To   My,    H, 
Dcareji  Sir^  Savnfinah^  Juue  lO,  1 738. 

ABOUT  five  weeks  I  have  been  ?i\.  Savamiahy  where 
providence  fccms  to  intend  tontinuing  me  for  feme 
time.  God  has  gracioufly  vifited  me  with  a  fit  of  ficknefs  ; 
but  now  I  am  lively  as  a  young  eagle.  AH  things  have  hap- 
pened better  than  expectation.  America  is  not  fo horrid  a  place 
as  it  is  reprefented  to  be.  The  heat  of  the  weather,  lying 
on  the  ground,  he.  are  mere  painted  lions  iij  the  way,  and  to  a 
foul  filled  with  divine  love  not  worth  mentioning.  The  coun- 
try, mornings  and  evenings,  is  exceeding  pleafant,  and  there 
are  uncommon  improvements  made  (confidering  the  indiffer- 
ence of  the  foil)  in  divers  places.  With  a  little  afliftance  the 
country  people  would  do  very  well.  As  for  my  minifterial  office, 
I  can  inform  you,  that  God  (fuch  is  his  goodnefs)  fets  his  feal 
to  it  here,  as  at  other  places.  We  have  an  excellent  chrif- 
tian  fchool,  and  near  a  hundred  conflantly  attend  at  evening 
prayers.  The  people  receive  me  gladly,  as  yet,  into  their 
houfcs,  and  feem  to  be  mod  kindly  afFc£led  towards  me.  I 
have  a  pretty  little  family,  and  find  it  poflible  to  manage  a  houfc 
without  diliraclion.  Piovifions  we  do  not  want  to  feed  on, 
though  we  are  cut  off  from  all  occafions  to  pamper  our  bodies. 
Blefled  be  God,  I  vint  from  houfe  to  houfe,  catcchife,  read 
prayers  twice  and  expound  the  two  fecond  Icflbns  every  day  ; 
read  to  a  houfe- fcl  of  people  three  times  a  week  ;  expound  the 
two  leffons  at  five  in  the  morning,  read  prayers  and  preach 
twice,  and  expound  the  catcchifm  to  fervants,  &c.  at  feven  in 
the  evening  every  Sunday,  What  I  have  moil  at  heart,  is  the 
building  an  orphan-houfe,  which  I  truft  will  be  efi^edled  at  my 
return  to  England,  In  the  mean  while,  I  am  fettling  little 
fchools  in  and  about  Savannah;  that  the  rifing  generation  may 
be  bred  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  The 
Lord  profper  my  weak  endeavours  for  promoting  his  glory 
and  his  people's  good.  Oh,  dear  Mr.  H.  pray  for  me.  For 
I  do,  indeed  I  do,  pray  for  you  and  your's.  Remember  me  to 
dear  Mrs.  H.  and  exhort  her  to  perfe^  holinefs  in  the  fear  of 

God.     Remind  Mr.  TV ,    (fince  he  will   not  hearken 

I  to 


LETTERS.  45 

to  me)  to  work  out  his  falvation  with  fear  and  trcmbh'ng, 
and  beg  him  to  pray  for,  though  he  will  not  write  to, 
dear  Mr.  H, 

Ever,  ever  your*s, 

G.  JK_ 

LETTER    XLL 

To  Mr, . 

Dear  Mr, ,  K'druJJ),  (Ireland)  Nov.  i6,  1738, 

I  Have  not  forgot  you  ;  and  as  a  proof  of  it,  feivi  you  this  to 
acquaint  you  of  my  fafc  arrival  here.  I  know  you  will  re- 
joice and  give  thanks,  and  pray  that  my  coming  to  London  may- 
be in  the  fulnefs  of  the  blelTing  of  the  gofpel  of  peace.  God  has 
done  for  mc  more  abundantly  than  I  could  dare  afk  or  think. 
The  k^d  of  the  glorious  gofpel  has  taken  root  in  the  American 
ground,  and,  I  hope,  will  grow  up  into  a  great  tree.  By  my 
friends  prayers  I  believe  it  hath  been  planted.  Oh  that  they 
may  continue  to  water  it  with  the  fame  means,  and  then  our 
great  God  will  give  it  an  efie6\nA  increafe. — I  hope  to  fee 
you  in  a  few  days  at  my  old  lodgings,  and  to  rejoice  with  you 
for  what  God  has  done  for  our  fouls.  Indeed,  I  have  felt 
his  power  ;  I  have  tafted  and  knov/n  of  a  truth,  that  the  Lord 
is  gracious  !  Jimerica^  infant  Georgia,  is  an  excellent  foil  foy 
chriflianity  ;  you  cannot  live  there  without  taking  up  a  daily 
crofs.  Therefore,  I  (hall  haften  back  as  foon  as  pollible  after 
Chrijhnas.  Oh  !  that,  in  the  mean  while,  I  may  be  enabled  to 
be  inflant  in  feafon  and  out  of  feafon,  and  preach  with  de- 
monftration  of  the  fpirit,    and  with   power  I    Ivlethlnks  I  fee 

Mr. lifting  up  his  eyes  towards  heaven,   and  filently 

faying.  Amen. — I  hope  you  will  excufe  Mr.  Z).'s  letter.  I 
have  forgot  his  houfe,  though  not  his  perfon  and  his  love. 
No,  all  your  kindnefles,  O  my  friends,  are  engraven  upon  my 
heart,  and  I  trufl:  will  never  be  forgotten  by,  dear  Sir, 

Your  afFeftio;iat€  friend  and  humble  fervant, 

G.  rr. 


T.ETTER 


46  LETTERS. 

LETTER    XLII. 

To  Mr.  H. 
My  dear  Fr'tend^  London^  Bee,  3c,  173H. 

IAm  appointed  by  the  truftces  to  hz  mxm^^x  o^  Savannah o 
The  bifhop  o{  London  ( Doctor  Gibfon)  accepts  the  title, 
and  has  given  me  letters  demifory  to  any  other  bifhop.  I 
have  waited  alfo  on  Doctor  Seeker^  bifhop  oi  Oxford^  who  ac- 
quaints me  that  our  worthy  diocefan,  good  Bifhop  Benfon^ 
ordains  for  him  to-morrow  fortnight  at  Oxford^  and  that  he 
\fi\\  give  me  letters  demifory  to  him.  God  be  praifed  ;  I  was 
praying  night  and  day^  whilft  on  fhip-board,  if  it  might  be 
the  divine  will,  that  good  Bifhop  BcnJ'on^  who  laid  hands  on 
me  as  a  deacon,  might  now  make  me  a  prieft.  —  And  nov/  my 
prayer  is  anfvvCred.-^^Be  pleafed  to  wait  on  his  Lordfhip,  and 
defire  him  to  inform  you,  when  I  mufl  be  at  Oxford  in  order 
to  receive  impofiticn  of  hands.  Oh  pray  that  1  may  be  duly 
prepared.  It  will  be  a  month  before  I  can  fee  Gloucejler.  I 
lono;  to  fee  you.  I  love  you  and  your's  in  the  bowels  of 
Jesus  Christ  \  but  I  have  fcaree  time  to  fubfcribe  myfelf^ 
dear  Sir, 

Your's  eternally^ 

G.  W, 

L  £  T  T  E  R    XLIIL 

^0  the  Same. 
Dear  Siry  London^  Jan.  27,  1739. 

IF  I  forget  Mr.  H.  and  his  wife,  may  my  right-hand  forget 
her  cunning.  Excefs  of  bufmefs  alone  was  the  caufe  of 
my  filence.  I  fleep  but  little,  very  little.  Had  I  a  thoufand 
hands,  I  could  employ  them  all.  I  fcaree  know  what  it  is  to 
have  an  idle  moment.  It  is  late  now.  I  have  jufl  been  ex- 
pounding. God  fills  me  with  his  fpirit,  and  I  muft  redeem  a 
little  time  to  write  to  dear  Mr.  H,  Indeed,  indeed  I  love  you 
in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  O  when  fliall  I  return 
your  pafl  favours  !  I  thank  you  for  blefling  God  on  my  behalf^ 
I  want  a  thoufand  tongues  to  praife  him.  He  flill  works  by 
me  more  and  more.  Subfcriptions  for  ere£ling  an  orphan* 
houfe  conic  in  a-pace.     On  Monday  fevennight,  God  willing^ 

I 


LETTERS.  47 

I  fet  out  for  Brijlol^  with  Mr.  Seivard^  and  from  thence  propofe 
coming  to  Gloucejier,  Oh  that  it  may  be  in  the  fulnefs  of  the 
blefiing  of  the  gofpel  of  peace  !  Mr.  Hotvel  Harris^  and  I,  are 
corrcfpondents,  blcfled  be  God  !  May  I  follow  him,  as  he  ^' 
does  Jesus  Christ.  How  he  outftrips  me  !  Fye  upon 
me,  fye  upon  me.  How  does  my  brother  ?  My  love  to  him  and 
all,  I  long  to  fee  yoir  and  yours,  and  to  give  you  repeated 
aflurances  of  my  being,  dear  Sir, 

Your's  eternally, 

LETTER    XLIV. 

To  the  Air,  

Dear  Slr^  Bafingjloke^   Feb.   8,    1739. 

THOUGH  I  defired  you  to  write  firft,  yet  the  love  I 
bear  you,  will  not  fufier  me  to  wait  fo  long  before  you 
hear  from  me. — Juft  nov/  has  God  brought  us  to  Bafingjloke^ 
where  I  hope  an  effe6lual  door  will  be  opened  before  we  leave 
it,  as  well  as  at  IVindjor. — Oh  my  dear  friend,  more  and  more 
do  I  fee  the  benefit  of  confeiiing  our  blelTed  Lord  before 
men. — You  have  not  been   afhamed  of  the  crofs. — No,  dear 

Mr. has  put  his  hand  to  the  plough  ;   he  will  not,  furely 

he  cannot  look  back  ;  but  Jesus  Christ  alone  can  keep  me 
nnd  my  dear  friend  from  falling.  Fie  has  begun  and  he  will 
carry  on,  he  will  finifh  the  good  v/ork  in  our  fouls. — We  have 
nothing  to  do,  but  to  lay  hold  on  him  by  faith,  and  to  depend 
on  him  for  wifdom,  righteoufnefs,  fancSlification  and  redemp- 
tion. Not  but  \MQ  muft  be  workers  together  with  him ;  for  a  true 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ  will  not  fufFer  us  to  be  idle. — No,  it  is 
an  active,  lively,  reftlefs  principle ;  it  fills  the  heart,  {o  that  it 
cannot  be  eafy,  till  it  is  doing  fomething  for  Jesus  Christ. 
— Methinks  I  hear  my  dear  friend  crying  out,  "  Lord,  ever- 
more give  me  this  faith  1"  Believe  me,  I  heartily  fay,  jlinerii 
Afk  then,  my  dear  Sir,  and  it  fhall  be  given  you,  feek  and  ftrive 
for  it,  and  yet  a  little  while  and  I  fliaii  fee  you  a  new  creature ; 
your  heart  I  hope  is  fomewhat  broken  already. — All  praifc  be 
to  God's  free  grace  in  Christ. — Go  on,  my  dear  friend,  and 
never  ceafc  till  you  know  you  are  Christ's,  by  the  fpirit  that 
(hall  be  given  you.  Never  fear  your  carnal  friends,  renounce 
r  thciu 


43  LETTERS. 

them  and  every  thin^  ell'e  that  (lands  in  competition  with  yo^r 
duty  to  God. — What  have  we  to  do  to  know  any  one  after 
the  flefli :  Let  him,  who  doth  the  will  of  our  Father  in  hea- 
ven, be  our  bro:her,  our  filler,  our  mother.  For  this  reafon  I 
fubfcribe  myfejf,  dear  Sir, 

Your's  molt  afFectionately  in  Christ, 

G.  JK 

LETTER    XLV. 

r,    Mr.  H 

Dear  Mr.  H ,  Ox  on.,   Jpril^  24,  1 7  39. 

BLESSED  bcGoD  for  working  upon  your  heart  by  my 
minillry.  I  hope  the  wifh'd-for  time  will  come,  when 
I  fhall  fee  you  full  of  faith  and  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Copies  may 
be  taken  of  my  letter  ;  but  1  wo-jld  not  have  it  printed,  be- 
caufe  I  intend,  when  rctirM  from  the  world,  to  make  fome  dif- 
courfes  on  the  fubjedl  of  free  grace.  Pray  acquaint  your  mo- 
ther, that  I  interceded  for  her  folcmnly  laft  night.  I  befought 
God,  that  fhe  might  have  her  Saviour  revealed  in  her  heart ; 
that  is  the  onlvvvay  to  get  above  the  fears  of  death.  Chrifl 
in  i^s  is  the  hope  of  glory.  I  rejoice  to  hear  Air,  CM  builds 
you  up  in  your  mcft  holy  faith.  I  exhort  you  to  go  on,  and 
who  knows  but  dear  Mr.  H.  may,  under  God,  keep  up  reli- 
gion in  GhuceftcT.  Mr.  Kinckhii  conduct  in  fearing  the 
church,  and  giving  up  the  parfonage,  has  fadly  grieved  the 
fpirit  of  many  good  fouls  here  ;  but  I  blefs  God  they  are 
now  a  little  comforted.  Oh  dear  Air.  H — ,  my  heart  is  drawn 
towards  L'jnd:>n  nK^fr  ftrangely.  Perhaps  vou  may  hear  of  your 
friend's  imprifonmcnt.  I  expect  no  other  preferment.  God 
^-ant  I  may  behave  fo,  that  when  I  fufter,  it  may  not  be  for 
mv  own  imprudencies,  but  for  rightcoufi^efs  fake,  and  then 
I  am  fure  the  fpirit  of  Christ  and  of  glory  will  reft  upon  my 
foul.  Oh  dear  Mr.  H — ,  I  befeech  you,  break  oflT  from  the 
world.  Shake  off  everv  fetter  that  keeps  your  foul  from  God, 
and  then  how  w!ll  it  rejoice  th^  heart  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your's  eternally, 

G.  JK 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  49 

LETTER    XLVI. 

T:  the  Sam*. 
Dear  Mr.  H L:^d:n,    April  27,  1739* 

I  Rejoice  to  hear  of  the  affection  of  my  countr)-men.  It  is  a 
cood  fign,  that  the  word  has  taken  deep  root  in  their  hearts* 
But  above  all,  da  I  rcioice  that  dtTLZ  Mr.  //—  is  tnily  fenfib!^ 
of  the  free  grace  qx  <joi>  in  Christ.  No^-,  my  dear  friend^ 
VGu  will  begin   to  be  a  chriflian  indaed.      Bleared  be  God, 

I  he,ir.mv  honoured  M is  becoming  a  fcfol    for  Christ's 

fike.  I  do  not  dcfp^ir  cf  Mr.  //'.  nay,  I  cannot  defpair 
of  anv  one,  when  I  confider,  what  I  once  W35  myfelf.  Let 
but  God  fpeak  the  word,  and  the  work  (hail  be  done.  I  al- 
ways hope  well  of  oppolers.  To-day,-  m^'  mafler  by  his  pro- 
vidence and  ipirit  compelled  me  to  preach  in  the  church-yard 
a:  Ifl'ingizn.  To-morrow  I  am  to  repeat  that  mad  trick,  and 
on  Sunday  to  go  oat  into  M^zr^idds.  The  wcrd  or  the 
Lord  runs  and  is  glorified.  Peoples  hearts  feem  quite  broken. 
God  ftrengthens  me  exceedinirlv.  —  I  preach  til!  I  f^eat 
through  and  through.  All  is  well  at  Savannah.  Brave  news 
from  Gibraltar,  Innumerable  bleiSngs  does  GcD  pour  dowa 
upon  me.  Oh  that  1  had  a  thankful  hear.  1  love  you  both, 
fincerely  ;  I  thar.k  you  both  heartily.  I  falute  all  cur  dz2l 
friends  moft  affectionately,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 

Ever,  ever  vours, 

G,JF, 

LETTER     XLVIL 

To   the   Sam::.  '  ' 

Da-  Mr.  H .  -      -  LTnd^.Ty  Mar  IC,  1-39, 

THE  hour  for  my  ifrprifcnrnent  is  net  }et  come.  I 
am  not  ht  as  vet  to  be  fo  highly  honoured.  God 
only  knows  the  treachery  of  my  heart  5  but  arr.':.^  all 
my  late  fuccefs,  I  have  fcaree  felt  one  felf-ecn.-'icent 
thought.  I  fpcak  this  to  the  honour  cf  God's  free  ^race. 
In  about  three  week>,  God  willing,  wj  -rrbark  for  Pi^fdzC' 
nia.  The  truftees  bave  granted  to  mc  ^^nd  and  every  thing 
upon  xT.^  own  terrhi  ;  the  officers  and  general  are  exceeding 
kind  to  my  friend  Hahirjmm  upon  mv  account,  fo  that  all 
things  fjccecd  be-ur.d  xv  expeirtattOx'-.j.  I  aia  :"^r/  tc  htur 
Vol.  I.  £  of 


50  LETTERS. 

of  Mr.Jf 's  conclu£l — Poor  man  !  The  love  of  money  is 

rooted  in  his  heart.  Where  is  the  honefty  he  fo  much  boafts 
Oi  and  relies  on  ?  Docs  not  this  more  and  more  convince  you 
that  nothing  hut  a  true  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  will  enable 
you  to  3(51  aright?  However,  he  is  not  to  be  envyed.  1  pity 
him.  Money,  thus  got,  will  never  profper.  I  rejoice  that 
you  and  your  fpoufe  are  content.  I  wifh  you  both  may  have 
Jlsus  Christ  formed  in  your  hearts,  and  am 

Ever,  ever  yours,  Sec. 

G.  IK 

LETTER    XLVIII.      ,^ 

To  

My  dear  Brethren  in  Christ,        Blcndon^  June  I2,  1739. 

I  Am  jealous  over  you  with  a  godly  jealoufy,  and  therefore 
write  to  you  this  fecond  letter.  I  find  more  and  more  that  fa- 
tan  has  defired  to  have  fome  of  you  in  particular,  that  he  may 
fift  you  as  wheat,  and  will  ftrlve  if  pofTible  to  divide  and  fepa- 
rate  you  all. — I  hear  there  is  a  woman  among  you,  who  pre- 
tends to  the  fpirit  of  prophecy,  and  what  is  more  unaccount- 
able, I  hear  that  Brother- ("whom  I  love  in  the  bowels  of 

Jesus  Christ)  feems  to  approve  of  her.  Need  therefore,  great 
need  have  you,  my  brethren,  at  this  time  to  take  the  apoftle's 
advice,  and  to  try  the  fpirits  whether  they  be  of  God.  For  the 
devil  is  beginning  to  mimic  God's  work,  and  becaufe  ter- 
rors will  not  do,  he  is  now  transforming  himfelf  into  an  angel 
of  light  in  order  more  efFeiStually  to  gain  his  point.     Brother 

alio,  I  cannot  but  think,  at  prefent  is  under  a  fpirit  of 

deluiion.    He,  as  well  as  brother ,  I  believe  imagines  there 

will  be  a  power  given  to  work  miracles,  and  that  now  Christ 
is  coming  to  reign  a  thoufand  years  upon  the  earth. — But 
alas  !  what  need  is  there  of  miracles,  fuch  as  healing  fick 
bodies,  and  reftoring  fight  to  blind  eyes,  when  we  fee 
orcater  miracles  every  day  done  by  the  power  of  God's  word  ? 
Do  not  the  fpiritually  blind  now  fee  ?  Are  not  the  fpiritually 
dead  now  raifed,  and  the  leprous  fouls  nov»^  cleans'd,  and  have 
not  the  poor  the  gofpel  preached  unto  them  ?  And  if  we 
have  the  thing  already,  which  fuch  miracles  were  only  intended 
to  introduce,  why  fhould  we  tempt  God  in  requiring  further 

figns.? 


LETTERS;  St 

figns  ?  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear.  And  as  for 
our  Lord's  coming  at  this  time  to  reign  upon  the  earth,  I 
anfwer,  it  is  not  for  us  to  know  the  times  and  feafons,  which 
the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  power. — That  a  great  work  is 
begun  is  evident,  that  it  will  be  carried  on  I  doubt  not  ;  but 
how  it  will  end,  I  knov/  not,  neither  do  I  dcfire  to  know.  It 
is  fufficient  for  me  to  do  the  work  of  the  day  in  its  day, 
and  to  reft  fatisficd  in  this,  that  all  will  end   in  God's   glory. 

Lately,  brother told  me  he  was  {hortly,  he  believed,  to 

be  called  to  fome  public  work. — I  pray  God  he  may  not  run 
before  he  is  called.  To  teach,  I  know,  is  a  pleafing  thing ; 
but  to  begin  to  teach  too  foon  or  without  a  commiffion,  will 
be  deftru6tion  to  ourfelves,  and  of  ill  confequence  to  others. 
Uzzah  might  mean  well,  when  he  touched  the  ark,  but  his 
good  intention  did  not  prefcrvc  him  from  the  juft  judgments 
of  God.  Be  not  many  matters,  fays  the  apoftle.  Oh  that 
that  verfe  was  deeply  engraven  on  the  tables  of  our  hearts  ! 
My  dear  brethren,  be  not  offended  at  this  plainnefs  of  fpeech. 
I  would  all  the  Lord's  fervants  were  prophets,  but  then  t 
would  not  have  people*  think  themfclves  prophets  of  the  Lord, 

when  they  are  only  enthufiafts-— If  Mr. is  aded  by  a  good 

fpirit,  why  is  he  not  patient  of  reproof?  Why  does  he  fly  in 
a  paffion,  when  contradicted  ?  why  does  he  pretend  to  be  in- 
fallible, and  that  God  always  fpeaks  in  him  ?  May  God 
give  us  all  a  right  judgment  in  all  things.  Pure  unfeigned 
Jove  caufes  me  to  ufe  this  freedom.  Many  of  you  God  has 
worked  upon  by  my  miniftry,  and  therefore  I  would  not  have 
vou  ignorant  of  fatan's  devices.  O  beware  of  him  at  this  time. 
Do  not  conceive  prejudices  againft  each  other*  Do  not  dif- 
pute,  but  love  ;  purge  out  the  old  leaven  from  amongft  you. 

Have  no  fellowfiiip   with  any  that  converfe  with  Mr.  ■ If 

they  have  a  mind  to  depart  from  you,  let  them  depart.  Do 
you  build  up  each  other  in  your  moft  holy  faith.  My  dear 
brethren, 

I  am  your  common  fcrvant  in  our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 


LETTER 


52  LETTERS. 

LETTER    XLIX. 

To  the  Rev.  ullr. 

T)car  Sir,  Leachhidr^   July   1 8,    1739- 

TUK  Iccne  thismornrng  much  alRctcd  rric  -,  you  both  put 
me  ill  miiul,  how  that  happy  pair,  Ada?/!  and  Eve^ 
looked  when  arraign'd  by  the  Ahiughry  after  having  eaten  the 
forbidden  fruit.  Behold  the  fame  remedy  reached  out  to  you 
as  to  them.  —  The  feed  of  the  woman  (IkjU  bruife  the  ferpent's 
head.— Look  up  to  him  whom  you  have  pierced.. — He  will 
heal  your  backflidings  and  love  you  freely — Had  he  not  loved 
you  both,  both  of  you  ere  now  would  have  been  given  over  to 
a  reprobate  mind.  I  know  the  time,  when  you  both  were 
erlightned,  when  you  tatted  the  good  word  of  God,  and  felt 
the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.— Honour,  falfely  fo  called, 
has  caufed  you  to  draw  bsick,  but  I  believe  not  unto  perdition. 
jESiis  js  if  ill  frriving  with  your  heart.  Come  to  him  by  faith, 
renounce  the  world,  and  be  will  yet  delight  to  lx)nour  you. 
*'  Now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  iir  th€  day  of  falvation." 
Mention  not  old  things^  let  all  things  become  new.  I  love, 
both  of  you  from  my  heart.  Come  forth^and  be  ye  feparate, 
faith  the  Lord  almighty.  Break  with  the  world  at  once, 
and  you  fliall  become  fools  for  Christ's  fake.  What  if  your 
wife  fent  fome  fuch  letter  as  the  following  to  her  parents. 

Honoured  Fathsr  and  Mother^ 
^Tp  HE  contents  of  this  letter  will  furprlze  you,  but  I  can 
no  longer  halt  between  God  and  the  world;,  the  happy 
convictions,  tliat  God  once  put  into- my  heart,  now  arife  xw 
my  mind,  I  will  no  longer  be  an  almoft  chriftian.  I  am  re- 
folved  to  become  a  fool  for  Christ's  fake.  Blefletl  be  God? 
Mr.  M —  is  like-minded. — Hitherto  have  I  hindered  him  ia 
his  fpiritual  progrefs,  God  forbid  I  fliould  do  it  any  longer. 
Hence  forward  will  we  go  hand  in  hand  together,  and  nakedi 
follow  a  naked  Christ. 

Dearcft  Mr. ,  I  am  ever  jjour^,. 


LETTER 


LETTERS. 


LETTER    L. 


53 


Dear  Aladam^  London^   July  23,  1739. 

YOUR  letter  filled  me  with  jr>y  and  with  pity.  Pity,  to  ice 
you  tempted,  joy,  to  find  you  arc  thought  worthy  of 
enduring  temptation.  Satan  hath  dcfired  to  have  you,  that  he 
may  fift  you  as  wheat.  But  be  not  afraid,  Jesus  Christ  \% 
praying  for  you,  and  your  faith  fliall  not  fail.  Your  mafter  hath 
been  in  the  wildernefs  before  you,  and  knows  by  expericncfr, 
how  to  fuccour  thofe  that  are  tempted.  Lift  up  then  the 
hands  that  hang  down,  and  ftrengthen  the  feeble  knees.  In- 
fidel books  have  poifbncd  your  underftanding,  and  rivctted 
great  pride  therein.  Strong  temptations  are  nece/lary  to  mor- 
tify that  pride,  and  to  teach  you  that  lowlinefs  of  heart,  which 
our  Lord  calls  all  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden  to  learn 
of  him.  Lookup  then  to  Jesus,  the  author  and  finifher  of 
your  faith.  He  will  fend  you  help  in  every  time  of  need.  In- 
deed he  vvill  never  leave  you,  nor  forfake  you.  Follow  him 
as  the  poor  Syrophcenician  woman  did,  and  though  he  may  now 
turn  away  his  face  feemingly  for  a  while,  yet  he  will  always 
fupport  you  inwardly  by  a  living  faith,  and  fhortly  give  you 
the  fpirit  of  adoption,  whereby  you  will  be  enabled  to  cry, 
"  Abba,  Father."  I  fpeak  this  by  happy  experience.  I  have 
mourned,  but  now  I  am  comforted.  I  have  o-one  throuo-h 
the  fpirit  of  bondage,  and,  for  ever  be  adored  God's  free 
grace,  he  has  given  me  the  fpirit  of  adoption.  And  that 
you  alfo  vvill  have  this  in  God's  due  time  and  way,  is  the 
ilrm  belief  of 

Your  unworthy  brother,  and  fcrvant  in  Christ, 

LETTER     LL 

Dear  Mr.  H Londo?!^  July  23,   1739. 

IWiih  you  joy  of  your  new-born  fon.  Oh  that  it  may  be 
made  a  real  child  of  God.  I  purpofe,  God  willing,  to 
ftand  to  my  promife,  either  in  perfon,  or  by  proxy.  1  know 
not  yet,  how  providence  will  be  pleafed  to  difpofe  of  me. 
I  have  written  to  the  Lords  of  the  Admiralty  for  a  licence. 
Saturday  evening  next,  I  hope  you  will  fee  Afr.  Chnrlis 
JVeJIey,  He  intends  to  preach  at  Gkucejhr,  Raindwick,  kr, 
E  3  V..y 


/ 


54  LETTERS. 

Pray  defire  Mr.  CoU  and  our  other  dear  friends  to  appoijit 
places.  Matters  go  on  moft  bravely  here.  I  think  people  are 
ten  times  more  affciSled  than  ever.  The  audiences  full  and 
numerous,  and  they  give  their  mites'for  the  orphan  houfe  with 
a  chcnrful  and  ready  heart.  Have  you  heard  how  1  preached 
npon  the  ftagc  among  the  cudgel  players  at  Bafmgjlokc^  and 
got  a  blow  ?  Both  I  and  my  companions  were  alfo  turned  out 
of  oiiir  inn, and  in  danger  of  being  beaten  heartily.  BlefTed  be 
God  !  My  fcrmon  comes  out  on  Wedncjday.  Heartieft  love 
to  dear  Mrs.  H — .  That  Jesus  Christ  may  be  fully  formed 
in  both  your  hearts,  is  the  prayer  of, 

Ever,  ever  yours, 

LETTER     Lll. 

Honoured  S'lr^  London^  ^uJy  lA^^  i739* 

THOUGH  but  a  child  in  grace,  and  a  novice  in  the 
things  of  God,  yet  I  could  not  efcape  this  opportunity 
of  fliewing  you,  hov*'  dear  you  are  to  my  foul.  Though  un- 
known in  perfon,  yet  you  have  long  fince  been  known  to  me 
in  fpirit.  I  hoped  to  have  feen  you  ere  I  left  London.  I  hafted 
up  to  town  hoping  to  have  fome  fpiritual  gift  imparted  to  me 
by  that  means,  but  I  was  not  worthy  of  it,  I  was  not  prepared 
for  fuch  a  blciling. — You  went  before  I  came.  A  great  work 
of  God  is  doing  here.  The  Lord  Jesus  gets  himfelf  the 
vi6i:ory  every  day  ;  free  grace  compels  poor  fmners  to  come  in. 

Our  brother can  inform  you  of  particulars.     As  for  my 

own  foul,  God  mightily  ftrengthcns  me  in  the  inw^ard  man,  and 
gives  me  often  fuch  foretaftes  of  his  love,  that  I  am  almoft 
continually  wifliing  to  be  difiblved,  that  I  may  be  with  Christ. 
. — But  I  am  only  beginning  to  begin  to  be  a  chriftian. — I  mud 
fufter  alfo,  as  well  as  do  for  my  dear  Mailer.  Perhaps  a  ftorm 
is  gathering.  I  believe  God  will  permit  it  to  fall  on  my  head 
firfh — This  comes  then,  honoured  Sir,  to  defire  your  prayers, 
that  none  of  thofe  things  may  move  me;  and  that  I  may  not 
count  even  my  life  dear  unto  me,  fothat  I  may  finifh  my  courfe 
with  joy,  and  the  miniftry  which  I  have  received  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Though  I  die  for  him,  yet,  I  befeech  you,  honoured 
Sir,  to  pray  that  I  may  not  in  any  way  deny  him.     But  what 

4  am 


LETTERS.  55 

am  I  doing  ?  I  fear,  honoured  Sir,  I  am  too  free.  A  fcnfe  of 
your  humility  and  love  for  the  bleflcd  Jesus  makes  me  thus 
open.  How  (hould  I  rejoice,  if  you  Vv'ould  honour  me  with  a 
line. — I  am  young,  and  therefore  a  word  of  exhortation  and 
advice,  would  much  profit,  honoured  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  fcrvant,  in  our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER    LIII. 

Dear  Sir,  London,  July  25,  1 7  39. 

NOTa  want  of  love,  but  of  time,  has  obliged  me  to  fhortea 
my  late  letters.  Had  I  an  hundred  hands  I  could  em- 
ploy them  all.  The  harveft  is  very  great.  I  am  afhamed  I 
can  do  no  more  for  him,  who  hath  done  fo  much  for  me  j  not 
by  way  of  retaliation,  but  gratitude.  Fain  would  1  love  my 
mailer,  and  will  not  go  from  him  ;  his  fervice  is  pcrfed  free- 
dom ;  his  yoke  is  eafy,  his  burden  light.  Still  he  is  plcafcd  to 
fliew  us  greater  things.  Every  day  affords  frefli  inftances  of 
the  power  of  his  word,  I  am  now  about  to  attack  fatan  in  one 
of  his  ftrong- holds,  if  I  perifh.' — To-night  I  preach,  God 
willing,  where  an  horfe-race  is  to  be.  I  find  my  Mafter 
ftrengthehs  me  for  the  work.  O,  dear  Sir,  pray  for  mc,  that 
my  faith  fail  not,  and  that  my  zeal  be  tempered  with  know- 
ledge. Our  brother will  prove  an  agreeable  correfpondent. 

If  bufinefs  prevents  my  writing,  he  v.'ill  inform  you  what  hap- 
pens from  time  to  time  to,  dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  affeiSlionate  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER     LIV. 

Rev.  Sir,  London,  July  26,  1739. 

JUST  now  I  received  your  kind  letter,  and  am  endeavour- 
ing to  catch  a  few  moments  to  anfwer  it.  I  thank  you  for 
your  encouraging  hints.  O  !  dear  Sir,  continue  to  exhort,  and 
■provoke  me  to  love  and  to  good  works,  that  I  may  with  patience 
run  the  race  that  is  fet  before  me.  Hitherto  my  dear  Mafter 
magnifies  his  ftrength  in  my  weaknefs.  Ever  fince  he  honour- 
ed me  to  fuffer  a  little  reproach  for  his  name's  fiike,  at  Bafing^ 
jlokey  he  has  caufed  me  to  rejoice  with  exceeding  great  joy. 

1^  4  My 


^6  L    E    T    T    E    R    S. 

IV'ly  rpirlt  v/as  ftiircd  within  rrc.  Methinks  I  could  willingly 
have  died  to  have  boine  my  teflimony  againllthc  lying  vanities, 
and  clcvilifh  entertainments  of  this  generation.  By  the  help 
of  my  Madcr,  I  will  go  on  and  attack  the  devil  in  his  flrongeii: 
holds.  D  pray,  dear  Sir,  that  my  ^eal  may  be  always  temper- 
ed with  true  chriftian  prudence.  It  would  grieve  me,  ihould 
I  bring  fuflerings  caufclelsly  upon  myfelf.  A  trying  time,  per- 
haps, is  at  hand.  O  that  I  may  be  found  faithful  !  If  provi- 
dence permits,  I  will  perform  my  promife.  I  am  blind,  1  am  a 
child,  I  know  nothing.  I  only  dcfire  the  whole  will  of  God 
may  be  done,  in,  by,  and  upon,  dear  Sir, 

Your  unworthy  brother  and  fellow-labourer  in  oqr  dear 
jLpRp  Jesus, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    LV. 

S/r,  Lonclcn,  'July  26,  1739* 

I  Received  voyr  kind  letter,  but  mud  beg  to  be  excufed  from 
diffuading  yoiir  fon  to  go  with .     The  employment 

in  which  he  is  engaged  will,  in  the  end,  if  faithfully  im- 
proved, tend  much  to  God's  glory  and  his  own  good.  He 
now  fits  by  me ;  I  read  over  your  letter  to  him,  and  he  con-» 
tinues  as  refolute  as  ever.  The  being  dtfinherhed  does  not 
terrify  him  at  all.  He  has  a  more  abiding  inheritance,  and  is 
willing  naked  to  follow  a  naked  Christ. — Dear  Sir,  let  me 
advife  you  to  do  nothing  raihly.  If  you  can  pray  for  a  blefling 
on  your  will  when  you  are  about  to  difmherit  your  fon,  I  fliall 
wonder.  Have  a  little  patience,  and  then  you  will  find  that, 
your  fon  is  about  to  a<Sl  wifely.  If  I  thought  otherwife,  no 
^Vi^  vvQuld  be  more  fqrward  to  difiuade  him,  than.  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  fprvant, 

LETTER    LVI. 

London^  July  31,  1739. 

OH   that   my   head   was   water  and  my  eyes  fountains  of 
tears,    that    I    might  weep  over  my  dear  Mr. -. — . 

What  r  And  has  my  familiar  friend,  who  has  been  dear  to  mc 
^s  fiiy  pwp  foul,  has  he  taken  part  with,  and  gone  back  to  th«i 

e|icn)y  .^ 


LETTERS.  57 

enemy  ?  Surely  it  cannot  be  ! — And  yet  I  mufl:  believe  it. — 
But  if  any  one  had  told  my  dear  friend,  that  he  would 
have  behaved  thus,  would  he  not  have  cried  out,  "  Is  thy  fer- 
vapt  a  dog  that  he  fhould  do  this  ?"  Qh,  my  dear  friend,  I 
am  in  pain  for  you  !  Alas  !  who  hath  bewitched  you,  that 
you  fhould  not  obey  the  truth  ?  You  did  run  well ;  who,  or 
what  hath  hindered  you  ?  Not  a  fear  of  man,  I  hope  ;  not  a 
dcfire  of  that  praife,  that  comcth  of  man.  I  know  the  time 
when  my  dear  friend's  heart  flood  fledfaft.  I  know  the  time 
wheniny  dear  friend  was  willing  to  be  accounted  a  fool  for 
Christ's  fake,  and  chofe  rather  to  fufFer  afHiiilion  with  the 
people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the  pieafures  of  fm,  of  falfe 
politenefs,  for  a  feafon.  And  why  fhould  I  defpair  of  my  dear 
friend  now?  No,  I  know  Jesus  Christ  was  fet  for  the 
falling  and  rifing  again  of  many  in  Ifrael.  Our  LoRp,  I  trufl, 
has  prayed  for  you,  and  1  hope  your  faith  will  not  totally  fail. 
Forgive  me,  I  muit  flop  and  figh  :  God  forbid  I   fhould  be 

called,  at  the  great  day,  to  fay,  that  my  dear  A4r.  ^ —  put 

his  hand  to  the  plough  and  turned  back  unto  perdition.  Good 
God  !  the  thought  flrikes  me  as  though  a  dart  was  fhot 
through  my  liver.  Return,  return.  My  dear  friend,  I  can- 
not part  from  you  for  ever.  Do  not  fpeak  peace  to  your  foul, 
when  there  is  no  peace.  Do  not  turn  fabler  for  the  devil. 
Po  not  prejudice  or  hurt  my  brother,  and  thereby  add  to  the 
grief  you  have  already  occafioned 

Your  mofl;  affectionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

6\  IK 

LETTER     LVII. 

My  dear  Brother^  Brjjhl,  July  31,  1 739. 

BLESSED  be  God  for  bringing  you  in  fafety  home. — ? 
He  is  a  God  hearing  prayer.  May  he  fiinclify  our 
meeting.  I  hope  to  fee  you  here  this  week.  I  fliall  fet  out 
for  Deal  on  Monday, — I  long  to  hear  how  the  foul  of  my  dear 
brother  profpers. — I  long  to  embrace  you  in  thcfe  unworthy 
arms. — Methinks  I  could  now  fmg  my  nunc  dimittis  with 
pleafure,  if  my  eyes  could  fee  my  dear  brother's  falvation.  I 
hope  you  have  converfed  v/ith  Mr.  JVcfley.  It  will  require 
tpme  degree  of  boldnpfs  to  owii  eithpr  of  us  before  men.  God 

vouchfafes 


58  LETTERS. 

vouchfafcs  to  honour  us  :  No  wonder  our  names  are  caft  out 

as  evil.— Dear  Mr. ,  I  hear,  is  ftaggered  with  the  fear 

of  man. — Sifter,  I  truft,  is  in  a  good  way.  When  ftall  I  fee 
you  ?  Come,  Oh  come  and  warm  my  heart,  by  telling  me  what 
God  hath  done  for  your  foul.  Eternity  will  be  too  fliort  to 
praife  him  for  what  he  has  done  for 

Your  aiteflionate  brother, 

G.  JV, 

LETTER     LVIII. 

Reverend  and  dear  Sir^  Lo?idon^  Augujl  3,  1739. 

THIS  morning  I  received  yours,  and  though  I  leave  Lon- 
don  this   evening,  yet  I  cannot  but  fnatch  a  few  mo- 
ments to  fend  you  an  anfwer.     I  love  all  that  love  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.     The  fpirit  of  Christ,  with  me  is  the  cen- 
ter.    I   love  the  man,  and   you  in   particular,  though  in  all 
things  he  may  not  follow  with  me.     I  rejoice  there  is  a  revival 
of  true  religion  in  Scotland,     The  fpirit  of  God  is  moving  on 
the  faces  of  thoufands  of  fouls  in  England,     The  word  runs 
very  fwift,  and  fatan  falls  like  lightning  from  heaven.     God 
hath  fent  me  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  to  compel  poor 
fmners  to  come  in  j  many  are  left  to  water,  what  God  hath 
hten  pleafcd  to  plant ;  I  doubt  not  of  his  giving  a  great  incrcafe. 
But  I  am  a  child,  I  cannot  fpeak,  yet  God  will  magnify  his 
iree  grace.     God  will  work,   and   all  oppofitions    muft  for- 
ward, but  not  hinder  it. — Inclofed  I  have  fent  you  a  fermon 
juft  pubiifhed. — You  may  judge  of  my  principles  from  that. 
The  picture  I  highly  honour. — May  I  follow  them  as  they 
follow  Christ.     I  am  no  friend  to  fmlefs  perfe6lion.— I  be- 
lieve the  being  (though  not  the  dominion)  of  fm  remains  in 
the  hearts  of  the  greateft  believers. — Time  and  bufinefs  will 
not  give  me  leave  to  enlarge. — Befides,  I  am  but  a  novice  in 
the  fchool  of  Christ  ;  and  therefore  moft  earneftly  beg  your 
prayers,  that  I  may  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  our  common 
Lord.     At  his  call,  I  am  now  going  abroad,  and  expect:  to 
fuffer  many  things  ere  I  return  home. — Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 
I  wifh  you  much  fuccefs  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  am 
Your  brother  and  fervant  in  the  beft  bonds, 

G.  rv, 

LETTER' 


LETTERS.  59 

LETTER    LIX, 

Dear  Sir,  London,  Auguji  3,  1739, 

I  Cannot  leave  London  without  anfwering  your  laft  letter. 
I  am  convinced  that  God  calls  me  now  to  Georgia^  and  fo  are 
our  friends.  God's  ways  are  like  the  great  deep. — He  will  go 
a  way  by  himfclf.  Exitus  a6ta  probat.  The  prophecy  you 
mention,  I  dare  not  apply  to  myfelf.  What  am  I,  that  God 
fhould  fo  delight  to  honour  me  ?  However,  I  believe  the  Lord 
will  work  a  great  work  upon  the  earth.  Whatever  inftru- 
ments  he  fliall  make  ufe  of  in  effed^ing  it,  I  care  not.  If 
Christ  be  preached,  if  my  dear  Lord  be  glorified,  I  rejoice; 
yea,  and  will  rejoice.  I  wifh  all  the  Lord's  fervants  were 
prophets.  Oh,  dear  Sir,  my  heart  is  now  melted  down  with 
a  fenfe  of  the  divine  love  I  Never  was  a  greater  inftance  of 
God's  free  grace  in  Christ,  What  am  I,  O  Lord,  that 
thou  fhouldeft  delight  to  honour  me  ?  Even  fo.  Father,  for  fo 
it  feemeth  good  in  thy  fight  !  Dear  Sir,  I  could  now  write  afl 
day;  but  other  bufinefs  demands  my  attendance. — Yet  a  little 
while,  and  we  fliall  fit  down  in  the  kingdom  of  God  for  ever, 
pear  Sir  adieu.  Oh  give  thanks,  give  thanks,  and  pray  for 
Your's  moft  affedlionately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  Jl\ 

L  E  T  T  E  R    LX. 

Blendon,  Juguji  6y  1^29' 

AND  would  not  dear  Mr. fiay  for  my  laftletter  ? 
What,  is  he  retired  into  the  country  to  learn  how  to  for- 
get his  God  ?  Is  he  got  into  favour  with  the  polite  world  .?  Are 

not  thefe  fad  fymptoms,  that  my  dearell  Mr.  — ■ is  fallino- 

away  a-pace  ?  He  runned  into  one  extreme  lately,  and  now 
fatan  is  driving  him  into  another.  Did  not  I  forwarn  you  of 
this  ?  O  my  dear  friend,  my  brother,  return  to  your  firft  love, 
otherwife  you  will  find  the  fpirit  of  God  deferting  you  m.ore 
and  more  every  day.  Nemo  repente  fuit  turpiffimus.  But  I 
can  fay  no  more. — Perhaps  I  am  troublefome.  However, 
give  me  leave  to  weep.  Permit  me  to  pray  for  you.  Though 
you  arc  now  dead  comparatively,   yet,  I  truft,  you  will  be 

alive. 


6o  LETTERS. 

alive.  Though  now  fc-emiMgly  loft,  yet  I'urely  you  {hall  be 
tound  a2:ain.  God  only  knowij  how  Tuch  news  would  rejoice 
the  heart  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  aiRclionate  friend  in  the  beft  bnnds, 

G.  JV. 

L  F  T  T  E  R     LXI. 

Dsjr  Mr. AugttJ}  7,  1739. 

I  Thank  you  moll  heartily  for  your  laft:  Had  you  been  more 
particular,  I  fliould  have  thanked  you  ftill  more.  May 
God  reward  you  for  watching  over  my  foul !  Pride  and  felfilh- 
jicfs  are  the  tempers  of  the  devil.  By  the  help  oi  my  God  1 
will  never  reft  till  my  Mafler  gives  me  power  to  overcome 
-  them.  It  is  difficult,  I  believe,  to  go  through  the  fiery  trial 
y  of  popularity  and  appluufc  untainted.  Bledcd  be  God,  I  am 
new  fweerly  retired.  O  help  me,  my  dear  Sir,  by  your  prayers, 
as  well  as  your  advice,  and  believe  me  defirous  to  fubfcribe 
myfelf, 

Your's  mofl  affectionately  in  our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 

G,  n\ 

LETTER     LXII. 

On  hoard  the  Eilz^ahdhy  Gravcjmd^  Augujl  14,  1 7 39. 
Reveraid  and  dear  S'u\, 

YOUR  kind  letter  gave  me  much  fatisfa6lion.  It  breathed 
the  language  of  one,  who  is  a  Boanerges  In  the  church 
of  God.  Excefs  of  bufinefs  prevented  my  anfwering  it  fooner. 
As  I  am  now  retired  from  a  public  life,  I  truft  I  {hall  have 
time  to  try  my  heart  and  fearch  out  my  fpirit.  Forget  me  not, 
dear  Sir,  when  you  are  praying  for  all  thofe,  who  travel  by 
land  and  by  water,  when  Itorms  and  winds  are  blowing  over 
me.  I  hope  I  fhall  always  carry  you,  and  others  of  my  dear 
fi  lends  in  JFales^  upon  my  heart,  whenever  I  go  in  and  out 
before  the  Lord.  It  would  rejoice  my  foul  to  hear  from  you, 
when  abroad.  Exhort  me,  oh  exhort  me,  to  be  valiant  for 
the  truth.  Bid,  oh  bid  me,  dear  Sir,  to  be  mindful  of  a  dying 
and  rifen  Jesus. — Bid  me  to  remember  the  riches  of  his  free 
grace  in  pulling  me  as  a  brand  out  of  the  fire,  and  exhort  me 
to  lay  dovv-n  my  life  for  his  dike.— Brother  Harris^  I  find,  ha^ 

come 


LETTER     S,  6i 

come  offtriumphantly. — The  hour  of  fuffViing  is  not  yet  come, 
(jod  prepare  us  all  for  It  !  I  cxpe6t  to  fuflcrr  for  my  bltfled 
maker's  name  fake.  But,  wherefore  do  1  fear  ?  My  mafter 
will  pray  for  me. — Dear  Sir,  adieu.  I  know  you  not  in  perfon. 
Perhaps  1  may  never  fee  your  face  in  the  fleOi.  However,  I 
ihall  fee  you  in  heaven,  and  then  you  fhall  fee  how  finccrely  I 
jiow  fubfcribc  myfcif, 

Your  unworthy  brother  ai\d  fellow- fcrvant  in  Crrist, 

LETTER     LXIIL 

On  hoard  the  Elizahth,  Cravefrfid^  Juguf!  14.,  I7'5g. 
Dear  Madam ^ 

I  Cannot  think  of  your  favours,  and  yet  forbear  writino-  a 
letter  of  thanks.  I  cannot  think  of  your  parting  tears^ 
and  not  inform  you,  how  fir.cerely  I  pray  God  to  comfort 
and  refrefli  your  foul. — Oh  Madam,  your  kindnefs  to  fuvh  a 
desd  dog  as  I  am,  quite  furprizes  me.  How  much  more  ought 
V(.u  and  I,  and  ail  mankind,  to  adore  the  unfpeakable  good- 
iicfs  of  our  heavenly  Father,  wh.o  has  fo  loved  the  world,  as  to 
give  his  only-begotten  Son,  that  whofocver  believeth  in  him 
fliould  not  perifli,  but  have  everlafting  life.  Dear  Madam, 
never  reft  till  you  have  a  lively  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  God 
has  put  into  your  heart  good  defires  after  it.  Continue  inllant 
in  prayer  ;  apply  to  J tsvs  Christ,  as  a  poor  finner,  and  yet 

a  little  while,  and  dear  Mrs. fliall  be  a  chriftian  indeed. 

Kaften,0 Lord, that  blefTed  time.  Oh  let  thy  kingdom  come, 
in  full  power,  into  this  thy  liandmaiden's  heart  !  Innum.erable 
temptations  furround  you,  to  make  you  take  up  your  reft  here. 
But,  I  hope,  Aladum^  you  will  be  upon  your  guard,  and  let 
nothing  be  thought  of,  or  done,  by  you,  which  may  any  way 
tend  to  indulge  the  luft  of  the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life.  Sim- 
plicity is  the  very  fpirit  of  the  gofpel  ;  therefore,  the  more  we 
learn  Christ,  the  more  regardlefs  we  {hall  be  of  worldly  va- 
nithC"?.  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  make  you  a  widow  indeed  \ 
You  fee,  IVIadam,  how  freely  I  have  wrote  to  you.  It  is  bc- 
caufe  I  value  your  v/elfare. — It  is  the  bcft  return  that  can  b< 
made,  for  all  favours  conferred  on,  Madam, 
Your  moft  obligi'd  friend  and  fervent  in  uur  dear  Lop.d  Jt^jU'^, 

c;.  //-: 

I  T.  E  T  i'  K  R 


6s  LETTERS. 

LETTER    LXIV. 

On  board  the  EUzabcthy  Gravejendy  Augiifl  14,  1739* 
Dear  Madam^ 

YOUR  affectionate  parting,  and  the  tears  I  obfervcd  you 
to  filed,  even  when  I  was  at  a  diftance  from  you,  made 
me  almoft  ready  to  cry  out  "  What  mean  you  to  weep  and 
to-  break  my  heart  ?'*  Oh  may  our  dear  Lord  put  your  tears 
into  his  bottle,  and  reward  you  a  thoufand  fold  for  all  the  kind- 
nefles  you  have  fhcwn  to  me  !  Indeed  I  am  lefs  than  the  lead 
of  his  fervants.  But  yet,  fo  loving  is  my  dear  Mafter,  that  he 
will  not  let  a  cup  of  cold  v/ater  given  in  his  name,  to  pafs  by 
unobferved  or  unrewarded.  When  partaking  of  your  bounty 
of  flour,  I  hope  I  fhall  pray  that  you  and  your's  may  eat  bread 
in  the  kingdom  of  God.  You  have  all  good  defircs ;  I  hope 
you  are  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God. — Oh  let  there  not 
be  any  thing  lacking.  Give  God  your  hearts,  your  whole 
hearts;  let  Jesus  Christ's  be  your  whole  wifdom,  your 
whole  righteoufnefs  ;  and  then  he  will  be  your  whole  fanclifi- 
cation  and  eternal  redemption.  I  write  this  from  my  floating 
habitation,  to  afTure  you  how  fmcerely  I  am 

Your  moft  obliged  friend  and  afFeiElionate  humble  fervant, 

G,  W, 

LETTER    LXV. 

Gn  hoard  the  Elizabeth ^  Augnjl  14,  1 739. 


My  dear  Mr. 


AT  length  we  are  embarked  ;  our  fhip  is  now  going  ta 
the  Downs. — Yet  a  little  while,  and,  God  willing,  I 
fliall  fee  you  once  more  in  the  flcfh.  My  family  confifts  of 
more  than  twelve,  befides  two  children  ;  I  hope  all  are  defirous 
to  know  Christ.  God  flrengthens  ane  mightily  in  the  inner 
man.  The  fermon  I  have  fent  you  is  one  of  my  extempore 
fcrmons. — The  journal  will  acquaint  you  with  particulars.— 
My  brother,  the  captain,  hath  been  with  me  this  lafl  week.— 
If  he  leaves  oil'difputing,  and  will  conae  to  Christ  as  a  poor 
loft  fmner,  he  will  do  well. — The  bifnop  oi  London  has  lately 
wrote  againfl  m.e  ;  I  trufl  GgD  hath  afiiltcd  me  in  writing  an 
anfwer. — It  is  now  in  the  profs. — All  the  feif^righteous  are  up 


LETTERS.  6:} 

in  arms. — My  Maftermakes  me  more  than  a  conqueror  through 

his  love.     Mr. has  about  forty   focictics  in  Torkjlnre. 

Both  the  Mr.  JVeJleys  go  on  well — Go  where  you  will,  reli- 
gion (either  for  or  againft  it)  is  the  talk. — Prohably  a  fufferin^ 
time  wiil  come.  You  will  not  be  afhamed  of  mc,  thoin^h  I 
fliould  be  a  prifoner.  Perhaps  you  will  be  put  to  the  trial  : 
But  how  does  my  dear  friend's  heart?  Have  you  found  Christ? 
Does  he  live  in  you,  fo  as  to  be  the  alpha  and  omega,  the 
beginning  and  end  of  all  your  actions  ?  Are  you  enlightened 
to  fee  the  exceeding  great  riches  and  fulnefs  of  his  grace  \  Oh 
hoiv  will  it  rejoice  my  foul  to  fee  you  a  proficient  in  the  fchool 
of  Christ  ?  How  will  it  delight  me  to  fee  your  little  flock 
prefling  towards  the  mark. — Soon  after  this  reaches  Georgia^  I 
hope  to  fee  you. — My  ftay  will  be  as  (hort  as  poiTible  at  Phlla- 
delphia.  I  muft  not  delay  coming  to  my  dear,  thouo-h  poor 
charge. — I  exped  to  find  Savannah  almoft  defolate  ;  but  our 
extremity  is  God's  opportunity.  I  believe  it  will  lift  up  its 
flrcoping  head. — For  the  prcfent,  my  dear  friend,  farewell. 
Your's  moft  affectionately  in  Christ, 

6\  W. 

LETTER    LXVI. 

On  heard  the  Elizabeth  going  to  the  Downs^  Augujl  15,  1739. 
My  dear  Brother^ 

THE  agony  I  was  in  at  your  departure,  and  the  many 
{trong  cryings  and  tears  which  I  offered  up  to  God 
afterwards,  plainly  fhew,  that  I  love  you  in  fincerity  and  truth. 
Though  I  am  now  about  to  launch  into  the  great  deep,  yet  I 
muft  write  you  a  parting  line.  .  I  cannot  but  think  you  will 
come  to  Christ  in  earnefl,  God  has  moft  remarkably  met 
you  by  his  providence. — His  fpirit  has  been  driving  with  you, 
and  I  doubt  not  but  it  will  get  the  vidory  over  your  carnal 
reafonings,  and  the  rebellion  of  a  depraved  heart.  But  do  not, 
my  dear  brother,  I  befcech  you,  difpute  againfl  your  own  hap- 
pinefs. — Be  not  unvv'illing  to  confefs  that  you  arc  not  yet  a 
chriftian.  Remember  what  our  Lord  hath  faid  :  "  Whofo- 
ever  recciveth  not  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  a  little  child,  fliall 
isn  no-wife  enter  tlierein." — I  befcech  you,  by  the  mercies  of 
God  in  Christ  Je'Sus  our  Lord,  to  leave  Q^difputing,     You 

have 


64  LETTERS. 

have  been,  I  think,  frequently  convinced  ;  but  naturC,- 
I  find,  has  as  frequently  inter pofcd,  and  perfuadcd  you  that 
you  had  gone  far  enough  already. —  But  does  not  my  dear 
brother  find,  that  he  yet  lacks  fomething  ?  Have  not  his  tem- 
pers and  corruptions  ;  nay,  hath  not  fm  itfclf  dominion  over 
him  ?  Are  his  affections  weaned  from  the  world  ?  Docs  he 
feel  himfelf  a  poor  loft  finner :  Is  he  willing  the  Lord  Jesus 
fhould  be  his  wliole  righteoufnefs  ?  Is  he  convinced  of  the  free- 
ncfs,  as  well  as  of  the  riches  of  his  grace  ?  You  fee,  my  dear 
brother,  how  freely  I  deal  with  jou.  It  is  becaufe  I  love  you 
with  a  peculiar  love. — Never  did  my  heart  exult  at  the  fight 
of  any  relation,  as  at  the  fight  of  youj  Surely  God  intends  to 
give  me  my  dear  brother.  Pie  is  alrcidy  an  almoft  ;  haften, 
O  Lord,  that  blefTed  time,  when  he  fhall  be  an  alto'^ether 
chriftian,  and  let  thy  kingdom,  with  full  power,  come  into  my 
dear  brother's  heart  ! — How  fliall  I  fay  farewell  ?  If  you  have 
opportunity,  pray  write  to 

Your  moft  aficClionate,  though  unworthy  brother, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER    LXVIL 

On  hoard  the  Elizabeth  go'wg  to  the  Downs,  Augifft  16,  1 7  39. 
Dear  Mr. 

I  Thank  God  for  his  goodnefs  to  brother  Howell  Harris,  I 
thank  you  for  informing  me  of  it.  The  ftorm  is  diverted 
for  a  Vvhile,  but  1  cxpe6l  it  to  break  upon  my  head  one  time  or 
another.  God  has,  for  a  while,  prepared  me  a  place  of  refuge 
in  the  fnip,  from  whence  I  write  this.  Oh  befeech  him,  that  I 
may  improve  the  retirement  by  fearching  out  my  fpirit,  I 
have  almoft  forgot,  that  I  was  in  the  world.  My  family  on 
board  is  quite  fettled,  and  wc  live  and  love  like  chriftians. 
God  only  knows  wjicre  you  and  I  ftiall  meet  again  ;  whether 
in  time  or  eternity.  However,  this  we  know,  that  both 
nuift  be  tried  to  the  uttermoft.  Inward  and  outward  afRidiions 
await  us,  and  all  the  children  ofGoD.  I  am  now  reading  the 
book  of  martyrs.  7'hey  make  me  blufli  to  think  hov/  little  I 
fufFer  for  Christ's  fake.  They  warm  my  heart,  and  make 
mc  think  the  time  long  till  I  am  called  to  refift  even  unto 
blood  :    i'ut  I  fear  the  treachery  of  this  heart  of  mine.     Dear 

Mr. 


LETTERS.  63 

Mr.  •* ,  to  your  paft,  add  one  more  favour,  "  pray  that 

I  may  be  found  faithful."  I  truft  I  fhall  have  a  fweet  remem- 
brance of  you  and  my  other  dear  friends,  when  I  go  in  and  out 
before  the  Lord.  Salute  them  moft  affedionately.  Exhort 
them,  oh  exhort   them  to  continue  in  the  grace  of  God  ; 

and  forget  not  to  v/rite  to,  dear  Mr. , 

Yours  moft  affedionately  in  our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 

G.  //'. 

LETTER     LXVIIL 

Reverend  and  dear  Sir,  Philadelphia y  Nov.  TO,  173c.  *" 

THOUGH  bufinefs  prevents  my  correfponding  with  you 
fo  frequently  as  I  did  when  in  England^  yet  what  can 
hinder  me  now,  but  a  want  of  gratitude  and  love?  Accept 
then,  dear  Sir,  my  fmcere,  though  late  thanks,  for  all  favours 
conferred  upon  me,  and  aiTure  yourfelf,  I  remember  both  you 
and  your  beloved  people  at  the  throne  of  grace.  Nothing  will 
rejoice  me  more  than  to  hear,  that  the  good  pleafure  of  the 
LoRDprofpers  in  your  hand.  Oh  dear  Sir,  what  a  gracious  Ma- 
fler  do  we  fcrve  I  His  loving-kindnefs  ftill  prevents,  accompa- 
nies, and  follows  me.  He  has  not  given  me  over  unto  death,  but 
is  ftiil  pleafed  to  dig  and  dung  round  me,  and  not  cut  me  down 
as  a  cumberer  of  the  ground.  I  long  to  be  purged,  dear  Sir, 
that  I  may  brinor  forth  more  fruit,  Smce  mv  retirement  from 
the  world,  I  have  leen  more  and  more  how  full  I  am  of  corrup- 
tion. Nothing  could  pofTibly  fupport  my  foul  under  the  many 
agonies  which  opprefTed  me,  when  on  board,  but  a  confidera- 
tion  of  the  freenels,  eternity,  and  unchangeablencfs  of  God's 
love  to  me,  the  chief  of  fmners.— ^In  about  a  twelvemonth, 
probably,  I  (hall  return  again  to  my  native  country.  Satan  no 
doubt  will  endeavour  to  ftir  up  all  his  forces  againfi:  me.  By 
the  help  of  my  God,  I  will  once  more  come  forth  with  my 
fling  and  my  ftone.— I  fhall  wait  with  impatience  to  hear  how 
the  work  goes  on  in  my  abfence.  I  truQ-,  God,  by  this  time, 
has  fent  forth  more  labourers  into  his  harveft.  I  heaniiy  wiUi 
all  the  Lord's  fervants  were  prophets.  I  verily  believe,  the 
right-hand  of  the  Lord  will  not  only  have  the  pre-emi- 
nence, but  alfo  bring  mighty  things  to  pafs.    O  how  do  1  long, 

*  Many  of  the  letters  of  this  dare  were  wri'ten  on  .Oiip-board   duiirg 
the  paffage,  but  dated  when  knl  off  fVuin  F kila.ielph.a. 

Vol.  L  ¥  dear 


66  LETTERS. 

dear  Sir,  to  lee  bigotry  and  party-zeal  taken  away,  and  all  the 
Lord's  fervants  more  knit  together.  Pray,  my  due  refpe(5t=; 
to  all  that  are  fo  kind  as  to  enquire  after  mc.  Exhort  them  to 
pray  and  give  thanks  for, 

Your  unworthy  friend,  brother,  and  fervant  in  our 
dear  Lord's  vineyard, 

LETTER    LXIX. 

Reverend  and  dear  Sir^        '      Philadelphia^  Ncv.  lO,  1 739. 

MA  N  appoints,  but  God  difappoints.  No  doubt  it  was 
befty  that  I  fhould  not  fee  your  anfvver  to  the  biftiop^s 
lecter  before  I  left  England.  I  hope  it  was  wrote  with  the 
meeknefs  and  gentlenefs  of  Christ,  and  then  no  doubt  God 
will  give  his  bleffing.  Oh,  dear  Sir,  how  is  the  glory  departed 
from  Ifrael !  In  what  dregs  of  time  are  we  born  ?  Boafting  of 

our  oi  thodoxy  and  primitive  purity,  and  yet  alas !    but is 

not  this  enough,  dear  Sir,  to  excite  our  zeal  even  till  it  do  eat 
us  up  f  Wherefore  hath  God  called  us  by  his  free  grace,  and 
made  a  difference  between  us  and  others,  but  that  we  fhouH 
ftand  up  in  defence  of  his  injured  honour  ?   Your  friend,  Mr. 

» ,  has  told  me  how  plentifully  you  once  taftcd  of  the 

good  word  of  life,  and  felt  the  pov^-ers  of  the  world  to  come. 
Oh  that  the  divine  fpark  may  again  kindle  in  the  heart  till  it 
become  a  flame  of  fire  !  Nothing  will  fo  much  enforce  your 
arguments  as  a  life  exadly  conformable  to  the  holy  Jesus. — 
When  with  .you  laft,  I  thought  you  fpoke  too  favourable  of 
horfe- races,  and  fuch  things.  But  what  diverfion  ought  a 
chriftian  or  a  clergyman  to  know  or  fpeak  of,  but  that  of  do- 
ing good  ?  Many  who  are  right  in-  their  principles,  are  worfc 
than  I  could  wifli  in  their  pravSlice.  Oh  for  a  revival  of 
true  and  undefiled  religion  in  all  feiSls  whatfocvcr  !  I  long  tQ 
fee  a  catholic  fpirit  over-fpread  the  world  ;  may  God  vouch- 
f\fe  to  make  me  an  inftrument  of  promoting,  it !  Methinks,  I 
care  not  what  I  da-  or  fufler.,  fo  that  I  may  fee  my  Lord's 
kingdom  come  with  power.  But  I  know  not  my  ov/n  weak- 
nefs,  till  I  am  tried.  Dear  Sir,  pray  for  me,  that  I  may  b? 
found  faithful  in  an  hour  of  temptation.  I  expecl  to  be  tried 
to  the  uttermoft,  and  to  hear,  that  many  arc  become  my  ene- 
mies, who  once  would,  as  it  were,  have  olucked  out  their  even 

for 


LETTERS.  6f 

for  me.     Ins  necclTary  that  fuch  offences  fliould  come  ;  other- 
I       wife,    how   can   I   know  that  I  am,  what  I  deilre  to  be,  dear 
Sir, 

Your  affectionate  friend  and  true  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  ir, 

LETTER     LXX. 

Philaddphia^  Nov.  lO,  1739. 
My  dear  Brethren^  and  worthy  fellow-labourers  i?j  Christ, 

THOUGH  I  know' none  of  you  in  perfon,  yet,  from  the 
time  I  heard  of  your  fairh  and  love  towards  our  dear 
Lord  Jesus,  I  have  been  acquainted  with  you  in  fpirit,  and 
have  conflantly  mentioned  you  in  my  poor  prayers.  The  good 
pleafure  of  the  Lord',  I  find,  profpers  in  your  hands  ;  and  I 
pray  God  incrcafc  you  more  and  more,  both  you  and  your 
children.  Scotland^  like  England^  hath  been  fo  much  fctded 
upon  it's  Ices  for  fomc  time,  that  I  fear  our  late  days  may  pro- 
perly be  called  the  midnight  of  the  church.  BlefTed  be  GoD, 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hath  fent  fortl* 
many  of  his  fervants  with  this  cry,  "  Behold  the  bridegroom 
Cometh."  Thoufands  obey  the  call^  and  are  trimming  their 
ipiritual  lamps,  in  order  to  go  forth  to  meet  him.  I  cannot 
but  think  a  winnowing  time  will  come  after  this  in-gathering; 
of  fouls.  O  that  we  may  fufFer  only  as  chriftians,  and  thea 
the  fpirit  of  Christ  and  of  glory  will  red  upon  us.  Li  pa- 
tience pofiefs  your  fouls,  and  I  will  leave  my  caufe  to  God. 
You,  my  reverend  Brethren,  I  am  perfuaded,  are  no  otherwife 
minded  ;  may  we  go  on  then  in  the  power,  and  under  the 
guidance  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts.  The  eternal  God  will  be 
your  perpetual  refuge.  He  that  employs,  will  prote^l:;  as  your 
day  is,  fo  (liall  your  ftrengrh  be.  Let  not  our  dear  Lord's 
lambs  perifh  for  lack  of  knowledge.  *'  Give  ye,  give  ye  themi 
1(1  cat,"  m.ethinks,  is  the  endearlitg,  conftraining  command  of 
the  great  Shepherd  and  B  (liop  of  fouls.  And  O  that  a  due 
obedience  may  be  paid  to  it  by  me,  your  unworthy  brother. 
But  I  bluOi  almoft,  when  I  llile  myfelf  your  brother;,  for  I 
am  a  child,  and  all  of  you  are  fathers.  Oh,  drive  together 
with  me  in  your  prayers,  that  the  divine  flrength  may  be  ftilL 
•magnified   in  my  weaknefs.     You  will  intreat  the  LoRp   to 

F;i  bJtfs 


68  LETTERS, 

blefs  the  orphan-houfe.  I  have  reafon  to  think,  GoU  will 
bring  great  good  out  of  it.  Oh  that  I  may  be  prepared  for  fu- 
ture favours  !  Oh  that  pride  and  fclf-love  may  thoroughly  be 
fubdued  !  Brethren,  I  befeech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus,  to  pray  for  me,  whilft  winds  and  florms  are 
blowing  over  me.  You  are  not  forgotten  by  him,  who,  though 
the  mod  unworthy  of  his  Lord's  fcrvants,  defires  to  fubfcribc 
himfclf, 

Your  afFe£lionate  brother,  and  fellow-pilgrim  and 
labourer  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G,  JF. 

LETTER    LXXI. 

My  dear  Friend^  Philadelphia^  Nov.  lo,  1739. 

BECAUSE  I  will  not  forget  you,   I  begin  to  write  before 
we  get  on  fhore.     How  is  dear  Mr.  • 's  heart  ?   Has 

he  yet  recovered  his  firfl  love  ?  And  is  that  prophecy,  "  This 
child  is  fct  for  the  falling  and  rifing  again  of  many  in  Ifrael^*'' 
as  yet  fulfilled  in  him.  I  cannot  but  think  a  good  work  was 
once  wrought  upon  your  foul.  I  cannot  but  think,  God  vi'iU 
vet  fulfil  his  whole  will  in  you.  But  let  not  my  dear  friend 
linger  any  longer.  If  there  is  mercy  with  God,  let  him  be 
feared,  not  difobeyed.  If  he  has  promifed  to  heal  our  back- 
flidings,  and  love  us  freely,  let  his  goodnefs  lead  us  to  repent- 
ance. Profperity  hath  been  a  fnare  to  you  ;  every  day  1  fee 
the  excellency  of  that  part  of  y/^«r*s,  prayer,  "  Give  me  not: 
riches,  left  I  be  full  and  deny  thee,  and  fay,  who  is  the  Lord." 
And  that  petition  in  our  liturgy,  "  In  all  time  of  our  wealth, 
good  Lord  deliver  us."  I  always  take  particular  notice  of  it, 
1  believe  you  will  not  be  at  all  richer  this  year,  than  you  was 
the  laft. — For  as  riches  increafe,  our  wants  increafe  with  them, 
-^I  write  not  this  to  have  you  defert  your  flation,  but  to  excite 
a  holy  jealoufy  in  your  heart. — Oh,  what  would  I  give  to  fee 
my  dear  friend,  as  formerly,  "  Fervent  in  fpirit,  ferving  the 
Lord."  If  God  fends  me  to  England  zg-diUy  I  fnall  try  my 
friends.  However  that  be,  I  am  perfuaded,  that  fufiering  for 
righteoufnefs  fake,  is  the  beft,  the  greateft  preferment  in  the 
church  of  Christ.  But  how  does  your  little  —  I  would  not 
willingly  fay,  your  great  idol.     Pray  accept  a  quarto^  bible  for 

,.   -  him. 


LETTER    s:  6^ 

him.  Oh,  my  friend,  give  him  up  to  God,  and  do  not 
provoke  him,  by  over-rondnefs  and  too  great  indulgence,  to 
tiilce  him  from  you.  The  little  lambs  on  board  improve  brave- 
ly; they  bear  the  voyage  beft  of  all.  They  are  as  lufty  as 
eagles  :  God  has  dealt  moft  gently  with  us.  I  hope  I  may 
fay,  the  church  in  my  houfe  falute  you  and  your  wife. — I  do 
not  forget  her  ;  may  fhc  never  reft  till  (he  comes  into  the  glo- 
rious liberty  of  the  children  of  Geo  !  It  is  a  blefied  thing,  my. 
dear  friend,  to  be  the  Lord's  freeman.  My  heart  is  full  j  I 
repent  I  have  not  allowed  more  paper.  My  dear  Sir,  excufs 
and  pray  for 

Your  mod  affedionate,  though  unworthy  frfend, 

LETTER    LXXII. 

My  dear  S>tftcr  ?'«  Christ,         Phlladdphla^  Nov.  lo,  1739. 

WAN  r  of  time,  not  want  of  refpecl,  has  prevented  my 
anfwering  your  kind  letters.  I  efleem  you  highly  for 
Christ's  fake.  I  believe  you  to  be  one  whom  God  has 
chofen  out  of  the  world,  and  hath  fealed  to  the  day  of  redemp- 
tion. Nothing,  therefore,  (hall  pluck  you  out  of  his  hands. 
Was  it  not  for  this  promife,myfoul  would  be  exceed ingforrow- 
ful  at  the  profpedt  of  what  I  may  undergo.  The  innumerable 
temptations  that  attend  a  popular  life,  fometimes  make  me 
think  it  would  be  beft  for  me  to  withdraw.  But  then  I  con- 
fider,  that  He,  who  delivered  Daniel  out  o(  the  den  of  lions, 
and  the  three  children  out  of  the  fiery  furnace,  is  able  and 
willing  to  deliver  me  alfo  out  of  the  fiery  furnace  of  popularity 
an'd  applaufc,  and  from  the  fury  of  thofe,  who,  for  preaching 
Christ,  and  him  crucified,  are  my  inveterate  enemies.  In 
his  ftrength  therefore,  and  at  his  command,  whenever  his 
providence  fliall  call,  I  v/ill  venture  out  again.  As  yet  mv 
trials  have  been  nothing.  Hereafter  a  winnowing  time  maj- 
come ;  then  we  {hall  fee,  who  is  on  the  Lord's  fide,  and  wlio 
dare  to  confefs  Christ  before  men.  None  but  thofe  who 
wholly  rely  on  the  Redeemer's  righteoufnefs,  and  arc  trulv 
born  again  of  God.  Oh  pray,  that  I  may  be  found  faithful. 
Satan  hath  been  very  bufy  with  me  fince  I  favv  you,  bur  I  truft 
the  Lord,  by  thefc  inward  trials,  v»'ilKpurge  mc,  that  T  may 

F  3  biin^ 


70  letters; 

brinp:  forth  more  fruit.     Ceafe  not  to  pray,  that  this  may  \i2 
the  happy  cafe  of, 

Your  fcrvant  in  the  gofpel, 

&.  IK 
LETTER     LXXIII. 

Dear  Mr.  • Philadelphia^  Nov,  10,  173^. 

YOU  cannot  well  conceive  how  conftantly  you  have  ben 
upon  my  heart,  fince  I  faw  you.  I  think  there  has  been 
a  fympathy  between  your  heart  and  mine.  I  have  often  pitied 
my  dying  friend,  and  as  often  prayed,  that  he  may  leave  a  word 
foL-  God.  I  fay,  prayed,  for  God  alone  can  remove  the  load. 
— I  know  too  v/ell  what  fuch  temptations  are,  to  think  they 
may  be  overcome  by  our  own  ftrength.  But,  my  dear  Friend, 
you  and  I,  weak  as  we  are,  can  do  all  things  through  Christ 
ftrengthcning  us. — Do  you  believe  on  the  Son  of  Gop  ^  AH 
things  are  poilible  to  him  that  believeth.  If  the  devil  there- 
fore continues  his  afiaults,  refift  him,  ftedTaft  in  the  faith.  Re- 
fifl  him,  my  dear  Friend,  and  he  yvill  flee  from  you  ;  rather 
fuffer  any  thing,  than  be  unequally  yoked  with  an  unbeliever. 
If  you  cannot  overcome  where  you  are,  abfence,  perhaps,  may 
cure  you.  Methinks,  I  would  do  and  fufrer  any  thing,  rather 
than  dear  Mr.  — —  fliould  be  lecj  av/ay.— My  companions  in 
travel  have  an  equal  rclpcct  for  you.  We  have  often  joined 
in  prayer  for  you,  when  eating  your  cake.  May  God  reward 
you  for  that,  and  all  your  other  kind  refpccls  and  favours  con-? 

fcrred  on,  dear  Mr. , 

Tour's  moft  affcdlicnately  in  Christ, 

LETTER     LXXIV. 

Dear  Madam^  Philadelphia,  Nov,  lO,  1 7 39. 

I  Should  think  myfelf  highly  ungrateful,  did  I  not  take  all 
opportunities  of  acknowledging  the  many  kindnefTes  I  have 
received  at  your  hfinds.  Your  laft  prcfcnts  have  been  exceed- 
ing ferviceable  on  board  the  {hip,  and  every  time  we  have  tafted 
your  bounty,  I  have  endeavoured  to  dart  up  a  fhort  ejaculation 
k)i  our  kind  benefactbei^j.     You  cannot  conceive,  dear  Mada7n, 

t  how 


LETTERS.  jn. 

liow  loving  the  Lord  has  dealt  with  us  ;  he  has  given  us  all 
things  richly  to  enjoy,  and  coniforted  us  on  every  fide.  In- 
deed rometimes  he  has  been  plcafcd  to  withdraw  from  me, 
and  to  permit  fatan  to  fend  me  a  thoi  n  in  the  flclh. — But  that 
was  only  to  fliew  me  my  vilenefs,  and  to  prepare  me  for  fur- 
ther manifcftations  of  his  goodnefs  to  my  foul.  Our  voyage 
though  long  has  not  been  teJious  or  burdenfome.  My  foul 
wants  retirement. — I  dread  coming  out  into  the  world  again. 
J  am  confidentj  dear  Madam,  that  you  will  pray  for  me,  that 
I  may  be  kept  unfpottcd  from  it.  (.)h  what  a  blefied  Mafter 
do  we  ferve  !  His  rod  as  well  as  flaff  comforts  the  foul.  His 
corrections  are  all  loving,  and  are  only  intended  to  make  us 
truly  great.  Though  you  fcemed  to  doubt,  yet  I  hope  to  fee 
you  once  more  before  you  go  hence.  I  cannot  fay  I  expect 
liberty  long,  if  I  fpeak  boldly  the  truth  as  1  ought  to  fpcak. — 
Indeed  there  is  no  being  a  true  chriflian,  and  yet  holding  with 
the  world,  fo  much  as  feme  may  imagine.  Jesus  Christ 
calls  us  to  fimplicity.  I  have  often  thought,  dear  Madam, 
that  you  did  not  fee  through  the  world  enough.  Numbers  are 
a^CGOunted  chriftians,  who  have  only  a  name  to  live.  I  pray 
God  to  open  all  our  eyes,  that  we  may  fee  every  thing  clearly. 
A  time  of  perfecution  will  fhow  who  are  Ijraelites  indeed,  and 
who  outfide  profeilbrs. — I  hope.  Madam,  that,  when  tried, 
you  will  come  forth  as  gold  purified  fevcn  times  in  the  fire.  I 
only  fear  for,  and  fufpe6t  myfelf. — The  Lord  my  righteouf- 
iiefs  will  uphold  me.  Dear  Madam,  God  only  knows  vv^ith 
M'hiit  gratitude  I  defire  to  fubfcribe  myfelf 

Yqur  mcft  oblij^cd  friend  and  fervant, 

LETTER    LXXV. 

Dear  Adrs.  - — ^  Philadelphia^  Nov.  to,  1739. 

WHEN  laft  abrond,  I  couKl  not  writ-e  to  you  for  want 
of  knov/ing  your  name.  Blefled  be  God  v.e  have 
fuicc  been  better  acquainted,  and  1  now  know  your  name  and 
place  of  abode.  May  the  God,  whom  I  defn-e  to  ferve,  richly 
r<?ward  you  for  receiving  me  into  your  houfe.  You  were  one 
of  my  moft  conilant  hearers  j  may  you  be  my  joy  and  crowa 
.  oi  rejoicing  in  the  day  of  the  Lor  d  J  cu  s>     1  ti  uli  ere  now, 

F  4  you 


71  LETTERS. 

you  have  felt,  that  the  kingdom  of  God    does    not  conhft  ia 

word,  but  in  power.     I  know  that  Mrs. would  have  nie 

deal  plainly  with  her  foul;  therefore  I  fliall  not  fcruple  to  tell 
her,  how  I  have  fometimes  thought  fhe  was  not  yet  clearly 
enough  convinced  of  fin,  and  of  the  perfe6l  righteoufnefs 
wrought  out  for,  and  to  be  imputed  to  her,  by  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  through  faith  in  his  blood. — Since  I  have  been 
on  fliipboard,  ble/Ted  be  God,  his  name  has  made  my  foul  to 
fmart,  and   caufcd   me  to  fee  more  of  my  own  wretchednefs. 

Oh,  Mrs. ,  you  know  not,  neither  do  I  myfelf  know  as 

yet,  what  a  myftery  of  iniquity  is  hid  even  in  a  heart  timely 
renewed.  I  faw  a  little  of  it  the  other  day  ;  and  had  1  not 
known  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  ever  livcth  to  make 
interccffion  for  me,  I  mutt  have  funk  into  defpair  : 

But  there  s  a  voice  offovereign  grace 

Sounds  from  the  facred  word;  ^ 

Here  ye  defpairing  ftnners  come^ 
Jnd  truji  upon  the  Lord. 

May  God  of  his  infinite  m.ercy  fo  work  upon  you,  that,  at 
at  the  laft  day,  you  may  be  found  having  on  the  wedding- 
garment  !  was  I  to  ftudy  to  eternity,  I  could  wifh  you  nothing 
better.     May  the  ever-blefied  God  fay  Amen  to  it.     I  hope 

your  little  daughters  are  in  good  health.    Dear  Mrs. ,  ex^ 

hort  them  to  renounce  the  luft  of  the  eye  and   the  pride   of 
life,  and  to  abftain  from  all  appearance  of  evil.     I  have  a  fin- 
cere  concern  for  you  and  yours,   and  with  all  poffible  thanks 
for  your  kind  prefents  and  affection,  I  fubfcribe  myfelf 
Your  fincere  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  JK 

LETTER    LXXVI. 

Dear  Mrs. Philadelph'uiy  Nov,  10,  1739. 

AS  I  do  not  forget  to  pray  for,  fo  I  do  not  forget  to  write 
to  you,  to  make  a  proper  acknowledgment  of  your  and| 
your  hufband's  love  j  exhorting  you  to  fave  yourfelves  from 
this  untoward  generation.  Before  I  left  London^  1  perceived 
God  was  working  upon  your  foul.  I  truft  the  fame  God, 
fmce  my  departure,  has  carried  it  on,  and  that  you  are  con- 
vinced 


J 


LETTERS;  ^5 

Vinced  of  the  fin  of  unbelief.  Oh  dear  Mrs.  _— ,  it  is  a 
difficult  thing  to  believe  aright;  it  can  only  be  given  from 
above.  I  know  many  of  my  acquaintance,  who  love  to  hear 
me  talk  and  preach,  and  who  receive  me  gladly  into  their 
houfes  ;  but  alas  !  I  fear  they  are  felf-righteous,  and  were 
never  yet  truly  convinced  of  fm.  They  have  good  dcfircs, 
and  therefore  flatter  themfelves,  that  they  are  good  chriftians  : 
But  I  fear  many  of  them  are  only  fooliih  virgins.  I  would 
not  have  dear  Mrs.  ■■  or  her  hufband   of  this   number. 

If  (he  hath  followed  on  to  know  the  Lord,  I  am  per- 
fuaded  ere  now,  fhe  is  in  fome  mcafure  brought  out  of 
herfelf,  and  taught  of  God  to  rely  only  on  Jesus  Christ 
for  wifdom,  righteoufnefs,  fan(3:ilication,  and  redemption. 
If  thus  minded,  your  foul  is  at  peace  with  God,  itfelf,  and 
the  world.  If  not,  let  her  afk  and  it  fhall  be  given  her,  let 
her  fcek  and  fhe  fhall  find,  let  her  knock  and  a  door  of 
mercy  fhall  be  opened  unto  her. — All  things  are  pollible  to 

him  that  believeth — Oh   dear  Mrs. ,  my  heart  is  in- 

largcd  towards  you ;  I  long  for  your  falvation :  prefs  on  and 
faint  not.  Whenever  I  come,  I  fhall  expe£l  to  fuffer.  Bat 
though  we  die  for  Christ,  oh  let  us  pray  that  we  may 
not  deny  him  in  any  wife.  Nothing  but  the  free  almighty 
grace  of  God  can  uphold, 

Your  fincere  friend  in  Christ, 

G.  IK 

LETTER    LXXVIL 

R(V.  and  Dear  Sir,  Philadelphia ,  Nov.  lo,  1739. 

I  Think  I  may  fay  of  you,  as  the  Samaritans  did  upon  ano- 
ther occafion,  I  believe  you  to  be  a  true  lover  of  our  dear 
Lord  Jesus.  Not  merely  becaufe  my  brother  told  me  (g, 
but  becaufe  I  have  it  under  his  own  hand.  Your  lad  kirid 
letter  has  knit  my  heart  moft  clofely  to  you.  I  love  thofc  that 
thunder  out  the  word.  The  chriftian  world  is  in  a  deep  fleep. 
Nothing  but  a  loud  voice  can  awaken  them  out  of  it.  1  pray 
God  to  llrengthen  you  more  and  more,  and  caufe  you  to 
triumph  in  every  place.  Though  abfent  in  body,  I  am  pre- 
fcnt  with  you  in  fplrit.  It  would  rejoice  me  to  hear  of  your 
fuccefs  in  the  Lord,  In  about  a  twelvemonth  I  purpofe,  God 

willing. 


74  LETTERS. 

willing,  to  return  to  England \  who  knows  but  then  I  may  fee 
you  face  to  face,  and  have  foine  fpiritual  gift  imparted  to  my 
foiil  ?  I  long  to  die  to  myfcif,  and  to  be  aHvc  unto  God.  Me- 
tbinics  I  would  be  alwjys  upon  the  wing  ;  but  alas  !  I  have 
a  body  of  fin,  which  at  times  makc^  me  cry  out,  "  who  (hall 
deliver  me  ?"  I  thank  God,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will 
deliver.  But  I  never  expecl  intire  freedom,  till  I  bow  down 
my  head,  and  give  up  the  ghofb.  Every  freih  employ,  I  find 
brings  with  it  frefn  temptations.  God  always  humbles 
before  he  exalts  me.  Sometimes  I  fpeak  and  write  freely,  at 
other  times  I  am  comparatively  barren  ;  one  while  on  the 
mount,  another  while  overfliadowed  with  a  cloud  ;  but  blefled 
be  God,  at  all  times  at  peace  with  him,  and  afiured  that  my 
fins  are  forgiven.  I  want  to  leap  my  feventy  years ;  I  long  to 
be -diiVolved,  and  to  be  with  Christ.  But  I  mull  be  made 
perfect  by  fufterings.  I  expert  no  other  preferment.  And 
you  no  doubt  will  have  your  fliare.  This  is  our  comfort,  if 
we   fufFer  we  fhall  alfo  reign   w;th    Christ  ;   haften  on,  O 

Lord,  thatbleffed    time,   when    dear   Mr.  fhall    fit 

tiown  at  thy  right  hand,  with  all  the  fpirits  of  juft  men  made 
perfect  in  heaven  !  where  I  truft  a  feat,  though  of  the  Iqweft 
cJafs,  is  prepared  for 

Your  unworthy  friend  and  fervant, 

LETTER     LXXVIIL 

Rev.  and  Dear  Sir y  Philadelphia ^  Nqv.  ic,   1739. 

SINCE  I  favv  you  lafl,  you  cannot  well  tell  with  what 
pleafure  I  have  rcfledied  on  the  uncommon  power  that 
frequently  attended  the  word  at  Bi\\Iey.  It  was  to  mc  a  figri 
of  God's  good  will,  both  to  minifters  and  people.  The  for- 
mer I  was  convinced  of,  before  I  left  England.  The  laft  fer- 
mon  I  heard  you  preach,  gave  me  much  fatisfacftion.  1  hope 
ere  now  you  are  convinced  of  the  latter  alfo,  and  have  (een 
fame  good  efre6\s  amongft  your  parifhioners.  However,  this 
1  am  afiured  of,  we  fliall  all  in  due  time  reap  the  fruit  of 
our  labours,  if  we  faint  not.  Let  me  therefore  exhort  you, 
by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  continue  un- 
>ve^ripd  in  well  doing.  You  have  fccn  the  affiidlions  of  God's 

fpiritual 


LETTER    S.  7^ 

fpiritual  Ifrael.  "  Do  and  live,"  is  moft  they  hear.  But  what 
Is  this,  bat  requiring   them   to  make   bricks  without  ftraw  ? 

Arii'e,  arile,  then,  my  dear  Ml. i  proclaim  the  Lord 

to  be  their  righteoufnefs.  The  everlafling  JAM  now  fends 
you  forth  :  fay  not  they  will  difbelieve  my  report,  for  God 
foems  to  have  given  his  people  the  hearing  ear  and  obedient 
heart.  Ycax  not  the  face  of  man,  for  the  Lord,  if  you  go 
out  in  his  ftrcngth,  fhall  be  with  you,  whitherfoever  you  go. 
I  hope  my  dear  and  honoured  friend  ere  now  luth  prevented 
my  exhortations.  Mcthinks  I  fee  him,  with  all  boldncfs  de- 
claring the  whole  counfel  of  God,  and  the  attentive  people 
receiving  joyfully  the  gracious  words,  which  proceed  out  of 
his  mouth.  Go  on,  my  dear  brother,  go  on  j  may  the  Lord 
blefs  you  more  and  more,  daily  adding  to  the  number  of  your 
fpiritual  children. —  I  thai^k  you,  from  my  foul,  for  alJ  fa- 
vours conferred  on  me,  and  I  pray  you  may  always  confefs 
our  Lord  and  his  difciples  before  men,  My  moft  finccre  re- 
fpe6ts  attend  your  help-mate  and  true  yoke-fellow.  You  are 
<:cnftantly  upon  my  heart.  My  next  joornal  will  acquaint 
you  how   lovingly  God  hath  dealt  with 

Your  moft  unworthy  friend  and  fervant, 

G,  IF. 

LETTER    LXXIX. 

J^hiu:dclph:n^  Nov.  lo,  1 739. 

AND  how  does  my  dear  Mr.  H —s?  Is  he  yet  com- 
menced 7X  Jield  preacher  ?  I  am  perfuaded  my  dear  friend 
is  under  the  guidance  of  God's  fpirit,  and  therefore  am  con- 
vinced he  will  be  dirtvSled  for  the  bell.  He  defircs  to  do  his 
Lord's  will,  and  fhall  he  not  know  it?  Undoubtedly  he 
{l:iall.  Nay,  ere  now  i»truft  God  has  pointed  out  his  way, 
and  he  has  been  upon  many  a  mount  flretching  out  his  hands, 
and  inviting  all  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden  to  come  to 
Jesus  Christ.  Oh  my  dear  brother,  though  you  come  af- 
ter me,  yet  I  pray  God,  you  may  always  be  preferred  before 
me.  I  truft  I  fhall  not  envy,  but  rejoice  in  my  brother's  fuc- 
cefs.  At  prefent,  I  flrfd  1  love  him  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus 
ChR'Ist  ;  I  am  frequently  with  you  in  fpiiit,  and  (liall  wait 
\yith  impatijpiicc  till  I  hear  of  my  dear   brother'i  progrefs  in 

the 


76  LETTERS. 

the  Lord.  Alas !  I  fear  I  do  not  improve  my  retirement  aS 
I  ought.  God  has  gracioufly  pleafcd  to  condud  me  in  mercy. 
The  tempter  has  been  bufy  with  me,  and  I  never  before  was 
more  deeply  wounded  for  fin.  Christ's  love  will  let  no- 
thing pluck  us  out  of  his  hands.  However,  let  us  conftantly 
watch  and  pray,  that  we  enter  not  into  temptation.  The' 
fpirit  is  willing,  but  the  flcdi  is  weak.  In  about  a  twelve- 
month, God  willing,  I  think  of  returning  to  England,  I 
fhould  rejoice,  if  you  would  come  and  fupply  my  placQ  at 
Savannah.  If  not,  I  muft  refign  the  parfonage,  and  take  upon 
me  only  the  care  of  the  orphans.  I  intend  bringing  up  two  or 
three,  that  are  with  me,  for  the  miniftry  :  more,  no  doubt, 
will  {hortly  be  added  to  their  number.  If  you  could  come 
and  teach  them  the  languages,  for  an  hour  or  two  in  the  day  ; 
we  could  ferve  both  the  orphan-houfe  and  parfonage  to- 
gether. Great  things  I  truft  will  come  out  of  Georgia.  The 
Lord  Jesus  direci:  your  fpirit,  and  if  it  be  his  will,  fend  you 
as  a  help  to,  dear  Sir, 

Your's  moft  affecliojiately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G\  IF. 

LETTER    LXXX. 

Rev.  and  dear  Sir y  Philadelphia^  Nov»    10,    1739. 

THOUGH  but  little  acquainted  with  you,  yet  I  write 
this  to  afiure  you,  what  a  cordial  refpe6l  I  have  for 
you.  The  love  of  GoD,  which  I  truft,  through  his  free  grace, 
is  ftied  abroad  in  both  our  hearts,  conftrains  me  to  love  you 
in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  remember  you  in  m/ 
unworthy  prayers,  and  am  perfuaded  I  am  not  forgotten  in 
vour*s.  No  one  more  needs  them,  whether  confidered  as  a 
iprivate  chriftian,  or  a  public  miniftcr ;  thoufands  are  waiting 
for  my  halting  ;  and  I  know  fo  much  of  the  corruption  of  my 
own  heart,  that  was  God  to  leave  me  to  myfelf  but  one  mo- 
ment, I  {hould  with  oaths  and  curfes  deny  my  mafter.  As, 
for  my  final  perfeverance,  I  blefs  God,  I  have  not  the  Icaft 
doubt  thereof,  l^he  gifts  and  callings  of  God  are  without 
repentance.  Whom  he  loves,  I  am  perfuaded,  he  loves  tq 
the  end.  But  then  I  fear,  left  being  puffed  up  with  abundance 
of  fuccefs,  I  fhould  provoke  the    Lo?.D   to  Icr  me  fall  into 

fom« 


LETTERS.  77 

Come  heinous  fin,  and  thereby  give  his  adverfliries  reafon  to 
rejoice.  A  public  life  is  attended  with  innumerable  fnares  ;  ^r" 
and  a  fcnfe  of  my  uhworthinefs  and  unfitnefs  fo  weighs  me 
dovvii,  that  I  have  often  thought  it  would  be  beft  for  me  to 
retire.  But  I  know  thefe  are  all  fuggcdions  of  the  enemy. 
Why  fhould  I  diftruft  omnipotence  ?  Having  had  a  legion  of 
devils  cad  out  of  my  heart  by  the  power  of  Christ,  why 
fhould  I  not  tell  what  he  hath  done  for  my  foul,  for  the  en- 
couragement of  others.  By  the  help  of  God,  I  will  fpeak  ; 
and  the  more  fatan  bids  me  to  hold  my  peace,  the  more  ear- 
nedly  will  I  proclaim  to  believing  faints,  that  Jesus  the  fon 
of  David  will  have  mercy  on  them  ;  nay,  I  do  not  defpair  of 
publifliing  thefe  glad  tidings  even  at  JVethersfidd,  In  a  little 
above  a  twelvemonth,  God  willing,  I  intend  returning.  But 
ere  that  time  comes,  I  truft  my  dear  Lord  will  purge  mc, 
that  I  may  bring  forth  more  fruit. — Satan  has  not  been  want- 
ing to  fift  me  as  wheat ;  but  my  friend,  the  friend  of  all, 
even  Jesus,  has  prayed  for  me,  and  as  yet  my  faith  hath  not 
failed.  Oh  had  I  a  thoufand  lives,  my  dear  Lord  Jesus 
fhould  have  them  all  I  For  he  is  worthy,  he  hath  plucked  me 
as  a  brand  out  of  the  burning,  and  is  continually  comforting 
me  on  every  fide — Read,  read,  dear  Sir,  the  account  I  have 
fent  over  to  be  publiflied  of  what  God  hath  done  for  mc 
in  the  days  of  my  youth,  and  it  will  afford  more  thankfgiv- 
ing  and  praife. — Pray  in  the  behalf  of,  Sir, 

Your  moll  afFedionate  friend,  brother,  and  fervant, 

G.  TF, 

LETTER    LXXXL 

My  dear  Friend  and  Brother^         PJ/iladelphia^  Nov,  lO,  1739. 

I  Love  you  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  a  proof  of 
it,  I  fend  this.  I  heartily  wifh  I  could  correfpond  with 
you  oftener.  Your  advice  would  always  be  feafonable  to  me  ; 
becaufe  you  have  been  a  long  time  in  the  fchool  of  Christ. 
lam  butjuft:  now  entering  the  lift,  and   frequently   tremble 

at  the  confideration  of  what  I  am  to  do  and  fuffer. But 

when  I  confidcr  it  is  for  Jesus  Christ,  who  ha§  called  me 
by  his  free  grace  into  his  marvellous  light,  and  has  promifcd 
to  be  with  us  always,   even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,  a  di- 

4  "vine 


7$  LETTERS. 

vine  £re  kindles  in  my  heart,  and  I  long  to  call  the  Imgring 
battle  on.  Satan  hath  been  bufy  with  me  fmce  I  faw  you, 
efpecially  fmce  my  retirement  on  fhip-board.  I  have  often 
thought  of  the  folly  of  thofe,  who  go  out  of  the  world  to 
avoid  temptation.  Satan  now  buffets  me  more  than  when 
confined  in  a  (hip.  I  receive  this  as  a  great  mercy  at  the  hands 
of  the  Lord  to  keep  me  in  action,  and  to  prepare  me  for 
greater  tokens  of  his  love.  Before  I  am  exalted,  I  am  always 
\i  humbled  by  fome  inward  trials.  They  are  the  moft  foul- 
grieving,  but  they  are  the  nioR  foul-improving  confli^ls. 
My  dear  friend,  I  can  fay  from  my  heart,  *'  I  am  the  chief  of 
finners :  "  I  feel  myfelf  fo  wretched  and  miferable,  fo  blind 
and  naked  in  myfelf,  that  fatan  would  tempt  me  to  v»^rite 
to  no  one.  But  the  Lord  hath  rebuked  him,  and  after  a 
long  tedious  hour  of  temptation,  fills  my  foul  as  it  were  with 
marrow  and  fatnefs,  and  makeih  my  pen  the  pen  of  a  ready 
writer.  Oh  that  my  mouth  was  filled  with  his  praifc  1  As 
yet,  blefTed  be  God,  in  my  darkcft  hours  my  evidences  have 
not  been  in  the  leaft  clouded.  I  have  been  afTured  my  Lord 
hath  forgiven  all  my  iniquities,  tranfgreflions  and  fins,  but 
I  cannot  forgive  myfelf.  Oh  that  I  fliould  ever  oflend  againft 
fuch  dying  love  !  Pray  for  me,  my  dear  brother,  pray  for 
me,  that  I  may  never  by  pride  or  floth  tempt  the  blefTed  fpi- 
rit  to  depart  from  me.  I  fear  not  falling  finally  ;  for  God  I 
believe  chofe  me  in  Christ  before  ever  the  earth  and  the 
world  were  made,  as  a  vclicl  of  his  favirtg  mercy  ;  but  I  fear 
1  fhall  provoke  him  to  let  me  fall  foully,  and  then  how  v.-ill 
the  Phiiyrines  rejoice  ?  This  confideration  fometimes  makes 
me  to  wifh  that  the  Lord  would  cut  off  my  ftrength  in  my 
iourney,  and  fhortcn  my  days.  But  wherefore  do  I  fear  ^ 
Ah  me  of  little  faith  1  You  fee,  my  dear  friend,  how  freely  I 
have  unbofomed  my  heart  to  you.  I  cannot  call  you  my 
friend,  and  yet  hide  from  you  God's  dealings  with  my  foul. 
Salute  all  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  in  fincerity,  and  bcfcech 
them  to  pray  for  your  finccrc  friciid,  but  the  molt  unprofita- 
ble of  hiii  dear  Lord's  feivaiits^ 

G.  n\ 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  7^ 

LETTER    LXXXIL 

Rev.  and  Diar  Sir,  Pbiladdphia,  Nov,  lo,  1 7  39. 

YOUR,  kind  letters,  and  kinder  vifit,  have  made  me 
frequently  to  long  for  a  more  clofc  correfpondence  with 
you.  I  find  my  heart  drawn  out  in  love  towards  you,  and 
had  God  fo  ordered  it,  could  have  wiflicd  to  have  perufcd 
what  you  have  written  in  my  defence.  I  pray  God  to  con- 
fer on  you  that  reward,  which  he  has  promifcd  to  give  thofs 
who  confcfs  him  before  men.  If  the  gofpel  continues  to  rum 
and  have  fuch  free  courfe,  I  mud  fufter,  as  well  as  preach 
for  my  dear  Lord  Jesus.  Oh  lift  up  your  hands,  dear  Sir^ 
in  the  congregations  of  the  faithful,  that  I  may  willingly, 
(if  need  be)  refifteven  unto  blood  ;  but  not  with  carnal  wea- 
pons. Taking  the  fword  out  of  the  hand  of  God's  fpirit,  I 
fear  has  more  than  once  {lopped  the  progrefs  of  the  gofpel. 
The  Quaker s^  though  wrong  in  their  principles,  yet  I  think 
have  left  us  an  example  of  patient  fuffering,  and  did  more 
by  their  bold,  unanimous  and  perfevering  teiiimonies,  than 
if  they  had  taken  up  allahe  arms  in  the  kingdom,  \n  this 
refpe^il  I  hope  I  fhali  follow  them  as  they  did  Christ,  and 
though  I  die  for  him,  yet  take  up  no  carnaJ  weapon  in  de- 
fence of  him  in  any  Vv'ife.  7'he  doiSlrines  of  our  eledion, 
and  free  juftification  in  Christ  Jesus,  are  daily  more  and 
more  prelled  upon  my  heart.  They  fill  my  foul  with  a  \\o\v 
fire,  and  afford  me  great  confidence  in  God  my  Saviour. 
Surely  I  am  fafe,  bccaufe  put  into  his  almighty  arms. 
Though  I  may  fall,  yet  I  (hall  not  utterly  be  caflavvay.  The 
fpirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  will  hold,  and  uphold  me.  That 
God  may  every  day  enrich  you  more  and  more  with  the 
anointings  of  this  fpirit,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  Reverend  and 
<jcar  Sir, 

Your  moft  obliged  friend,  brother,  and  f^:rvant  in  Christ, 


LETTER 


tQ  LETTERS. 

LETTER    LXXXIir. 

To  the  brethren  in 

Philadelphia^  Nov.  xo,  1 7 39. 

TWICE  did  I  purpofe  to  come  and  fee  you  at '^ 
but  was  prevented  by  that  all-wife  providence,  which 
ordereth  all  things  for  the  beft :  however,  though  abfent,   I 
am  not  unmindful  of  you.     As  a   tcftimony  thereof  I   fend 
you  this.   And  oh  that  you  may  be  filled  with   an  holy  fire, 
and  fuch  an  ardent  zeal  for  God  as   even  to  eat  you  up  ! 
Look  round,   look  round,  my  brethren,  and   in   imitation  of 
vour  common  Lord,  weep  over  the  defolations  of  the  univer- 
fity  wherein  you  live.     Alas  !  how  is  that  once  faithful  city 
become  an  harlot  !   Have  pity  upon  her,  ye    that  are  friends, 
and  whatever  treatment  you  may  meet  with  from  an  ungrate- 
ful world,  endeavour  at  leaft  to  refcue  fome  of  her  fons  out  of 
that  blindnefs,   ignorance,  bigotry  and  formality,  into  v/hich 
fhe  is  unhappily  fallen.     Arife,  ye  Tons  of  the  prophets ;  fhiine 
forth,  ye  who  are  appointed  to  be  the  lights  of  the  world.  The 
rulers  of  this  world  will  endeavour  to  put  you  under  bufliels  j 
but  if  your  light  is  of  God's  kindling,  all  the  devils  in  hell 
ihall    not   be  able   to   extinguifh  it.     Be  not  therefore,  my 
brethren,  weary  of  well  doing.    Have  you  true  faith  ?   keep  it 
not  to  yourfelves  ;  be    willing,  as  occafion  offers,   freely  ta 
communicate  it  to  others.     How  will  you  be  apt  to  teach 
hereafter,  unlefs  you  begin  to  teach  now  ?   None  but  thofe^ 
who  are  of  a  different  fpirit  from  that  meek  man  Mofes^   will 
be  offended  at  you.     All   God's  people  will  wifh  you  God 
fpeed.     1    am    fure  I  do  with  all  my  heart.     And   I  pray 
God  to  fandtify  your   whole  fpirits,  fouls   and   bodies,   and 
make  you  veffels   meet  for  our   common    Mafter's   ufe  !  for 
none  but  thofe  who  have  felt  the  fpirit  themfelves,  can   freely 
or  feelingly  fpeak  of  him  to  others.     My  dear  brethren,  for- 
get not  to  pray  for, 

Your  affet^tioAatc,   though  weak  brother 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IF. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  8i 

LETTER     LXXXIV. 

To  . 

My  dear  Brethren  in  CfIrist,       Philadelphia^  Nov.  lo,  1739. 

THE  cordial  love  I  bear  you,  will  not  fufrer  me  to  ncglc6l 
writing  to  you  :  as  God  has  been  pleafcd  to  blel's  my 
miniftry  to  your  fouls,  To  I  think  it  my  duty  to  watch  over  you 
for  good,  and  afTure  you,  cotiflantly  you  are  all  upon  my 
heart.  Your  laft  letter  gave  me  great  pleafurc  ;  but  it  was 
too  full  of  acknowledgments,  which  I  by  no  means  dcferve* 
To  him  alone,  from  whom  every  good  and  perfect  gift  comcth, 
be  all  the  thanks  and  glory,  I  heartily  pray  God,  that  you 
may  be  burning  and  Ihining  lights  in  the  midft  of  a  crooked 
and  perverfe  generation.  Though  you  are  not  of  the  church 
of  England^  yet  if  you  are  perfuaded  in  your  own  minds  of  the 
truth  of  the  way  wherein  you  now  walk,  I  leave  it.  How- 
ever, whether  Conformijls^  or  Nonconformijls^  our  main  con- 
cern (hould  be,  to  be  aflured  that  we  are  called  and  taught  of 
God  ;  for  none  but  fuch  are  fit  to  minifter  in  holy  things. 
Indeed,  my  dear  brethren,  it  rejoiced  me  much  to  fee  fuch 
dawnings  of  grace  in  your  fouls  ;  only  I  thought  moft  of  you 
were  bowed  down  too  much  with  a  fefvile  fear  of  man  :  but 
as  the  love  of  the  Creator  increafes,  the  fear  of  the  creature 
will  daily  decreafe  in  your  hearts.  Nicode?mis,  who  came  at  firft 
by  night  to  our  Lord,  afterwards  dared  to  own  him  before 
the  whole  council  in  open  day.  I  pray  God  make  you  all  thus 
minded.  For  unlefs  your  hearts  are  free  from  worldly  hopes 
and  worldly  fears,  you  never  will  fpeak  boldly,  as  you  ought 
to  fpeak.  The  good  old  Puritans^  I  believe,  never  preached  s, 
better,  than  when  in  danger  of  being  taken  to  prifon  as  foon  as 
they  had  finifhed  their  fermon.  And  however  the  church  may 
be  at  peace  now,  yet  I  am  perfuaded,  unlefs  you  go  forth 
with  the  fame  temper,  you  will  never  preach  with  the  fame 
demonftration  of  the  fpirit,  and  of  power.  Study  therefore,  my 
brethren,  I  befeech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ* 
Jesus,  fludy  your  hearts  as  well  as  books— afk  yourfelves 
again  and  again,  whether  you  would  preach  for  Christ,  if 
you  were  fure  to  lay  down  your  lives  for  {o  doing  ?  If  you 
fear  the  difpleafurc  of  a  man  for  doing  your  duty  now,  aflure 
Vol.  I.  G  yourfelves 

2 


82  LETTERS. 

youiTclves  you  are  not  yet  thus  minded.  But  enough  of"  this. 
I  love  to  hope  well  of  you  all.  I  truft,  as  you  are  enlightened 
with  fome  degree  of  knowledge  in  the  myfteriesof  godlinefsjyou 
will  henceforth  determine  not  to  know  any  thing  but  Jesus 
Christ,  and  him  crucified.  This  is,  and  this,  the  Lord 
being  my  helper,  fliall  be  the  only  ftudy  of,  my  dear  brethren. 
Your  affediionate  friend,   brother, 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER    LXXXV. 

RiV.  and  Dear  Sir,  Philadelphia^  Nov.  lO,  1739. 

WHY  fo  long  filent  during  my  ftay  in  England? 
why  did  you  not  write  me  a  letter  of  reproof,  and 
fmite  me  friendly  for  what  you  thought  amifs  in  the  difcourfe 
between  me  and  a  friend  at  Brijlol?  I  fliould  have  taken  it 
kindly  at  your  hands.  When  I  am  unwilling  to  be  told  of 
my  faults,  dear  Sir,  correfpond  with  me  no  more.  If  1  know 
any  thing  of  this  treacherous  heart  of  mine,  1  love  thofe  mod, 
who  are  mod  faithful  to  me  in  this  refpedi: :  henceforward,  dear 
Sir,  I  beftech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus, 
fpare  me  not.  I  am  blind,  I  am  full  of  felf-pride,  and  felf- 
love,  and  yet  know  it  not.  Blcfied  be  God,  who  during  my 
retirement  has  been  pleafed  to  let  me  fee  fomething  of  my 
own  vilenefs.  I  truft  he  will  never  leave  nor  forfake  me, 
till  I  know  myfelf  even  as  I  am  known.  I  need  not  fear 
the  fight  of  fin,  when  I  have  a  perfe(51:  everlafting  rightQOufnefs 
wrought  out  for  me  by  that  GoD-man  Christ  Jesus.  The 
riches  of  his  free  grace,  caufe  me  daily  to  triumph  overall  the 
temptations  of  the  wicked  one,  who  is  very  vigilant,  and  feeks 
all  occafions  to  difturb  me.  The  Lord  Christ  is  my  helper, 
and  the  lifter  up  of  my  head.  It  is  good  for  me  to  be  tempted. 
By  inward  trials  I  truft  my  divine  maftcr  will  prepare  roe  for 
his  future  mercies.  I  am  perfuadcd  I  fha'l  yet  fee  great  things, 
and  be  called  to  fufier  for  his  name  fake.  Through  much 
tribulation,  I  muft  enter  into  glory.  Lift  up  your  hands, 
dear  Sir,  when  praying  at  the  fancluary,  in  my  behalf;  in- 
treat  the  fame  favour  of  the  elecSl  lady.  As  I  am  enabled, 
it  ftiail  be  returned  3  and,  GoD  willing,  when  I  come  next 
4  to 


L    E     t    t    E     R    S.  8j 

to  knghml^  you  may  expert  a  vifit  from,  dear  and  reverend 
Sir, 

Your  moil  obliged  friend  and  fcrvant, 

LETTER    LXXXVI. 

My  Pjv.  and  very  dearBrother^     Philadelphia^  Nov,  lo.  1 7  30. 

EVER  fmce  fincc  I  was  favoured  with  your  laft  mod  en- 
dearing letter,  you  have  been  upon  my  heart  more  and 
more.  As  I  wiih  all  the  Lord's  fervants  were  prophets,  fo  it 
gives  me  uncommon  pleafure,  when  the  Lord  raifes  up  one 
of  our  own  church.  Believe  me,  dear  Sir,  when  I  look  upon 
her  defolations,  I  can  fcarce  forbear  weeping  over  her.  But 
blefled  be  God,  who  has  been  pleas'd  to  vifit  her  in  this  our 
day.  Henceforward,  I  truft  (he  will  be  a  joyful  mother  of 
fpiritual  children.  Many  of  late,  under  God,  have  been  be- 
gotten by  fome  of  her  fons  through  the  gofpel,  amongft  whom 

I  may  reckon  • :  He  has  been  I  believe,  and  truft  will 

ftill  be  the  ghoftly  father  of  many  fouls.  May  he  increafe 
with  all  the  increafe  of  God,  and  appear  before  his  redeemer 
at  the  laft  day,  faying,  *'  Behold  me,  O  Lord,  and  the  chil- 
dren which  thou  haft  given  me."  Oh  dear  Sir,  words  cannot 
exprefs  how  affedionately  I  defire  to  efteem  and  love  you. 
None  but  the  all -feeing  God  knows  how  carneftly  I  pray  and 
defire  to  labour  for  the  profperity  of  Jerufalem,  Had  we  a 
thoufand  hands  -iwi  tongues^  there  is  employment  enough  for 
them  all  :  people  are  every  where  ready  to  perifh  for  lack  of 
knovv'ledge.  As  the  Lord  has  been  pleafcd  to  revcad  hi's 
dear  Son  in  us.  Oh  let  us  ftir  up  that  gift  of  God,  and  with 
all  boldnefs  preach  him  to  others.  Freely  we  have  received, 
freely  let  us  give  ;  what  Christ  tells  us  by  his  fpirit  in  our 
clofets,  that  let  us  proclaim  on  the  houfe  top.  FIc  who  fends, 
will  protect  us.  All  the  devils  in  hell  (hall  not  hurt  us,  till 
we  have  finiftied  our  teftimony.  And  then,  if  we  fhould  feal 
it  with  imprifonment  or  death,  well  will  it  be  with  us,  and 
happy  (liall  we  be  evermore  !  But  the  proof  of  our  fm- 
cerity,  will  be  Vv^hen  we  come  to  the  trial.  I  fear  for  no  one  io 
much  as  myfelf.  Dear  Sir,  pray  that  you  never  may  have 
reafoa  to  be  aflianied  of  the 

Moft  unprofitable  of  our  Lord's  fervants, 

(?.  IK 
G  2  LETTER. 


84  LETTERS. 

LETTER    LXXXVII. 

Dear  Mr. ,  Philadelphia^  Nov.  IC,   I73'9' 

I  Hope  dear  brother hath  fatisfied  you  about  the  que- 
ries in  your  laR.  I  truft  you  are  not  angry  with  me  for 
being  fo  long  filent.  Excefs  of  bufinefs  was  the  caufe.  I 
write  you  this,  my  dear  brother,  to  afllirc  you  I  have  not  for- 
gotten you.  No,  you  are  upon  my  heart  j  I  pray  for  your 
profperity  both  in  body  and  foul,  and  hope  ere  v/e  die  to  take 
another  tour  with  you  round  Wales.  God  has  dealt  moCt 
lovingly  with  us  on  fliip-board.  We  had  very  fair  weather 
moft  part  of  our  way.  Both  the  good  and  bad  fpirit  have 
been  with  us  in  the  fhip.  The  one  to  tempt  and  terrify,  the 
other  to  fuppcrt  and  comfort.  I  need  not  tell  you  which  has 
prevailed.  Who  fliall  ftand  before  the  fpirit  of  Jesus  Christ  ? 
I  have  had  great  intimations  from  above  concerning  Georgia, 
Who  knows  but  we  may  have  a  college  of  pious  youths  at 
Savannah?  I  do  not  defpair  thereof.  ProfeJJor  Fra?2ks' sunder^- 
taking  in  Germany  has  been  much  preiled  upon  my  heart.  I 
really  believe  that  my  prefent  undertaking  will  fucceed.  A'ly 
dear  brother,  call  down  a  bleffing  by  your  prayers.  The  Lord 
will  hear  thofe  who  put  their  truft  in  his  mercy  through 
Christ.  You  fee,  you  know,  how  many  would  rejoice  at, 
and  do  wait  for  my  halting.  Befeech^the  Lord  that  they  may 
be  difappointed  of  their  hope  ;  intreat  the  people  of  Wales  to 
join  with  you.  I  love  them  moft  tenderly.  I  hope,  at  my 
return,  to  fee  them  grown  in  grace.  I  pray  God  fo  to  im- 
prove my  retirement,  that  my  progrefs  may  be  made  known 
unto  them  all.  Salute  them  moft  affe6:ionately  in  my  name, 
and  exhort  them  to  continue  inflant  in.  prayer  and  thankf- 
givings  for,  dear  and  honoured  Sir, 
Your  fellow  pilgrim  and  labourer  in  our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    LXXXVIIL 

My  dear  hr other  in  Chri/?^  Phikdelphia^  Nov,  10,  17  JQ. 

AS  there  has  been  joy  in  heaven  at  your  converfion,  fo  I 
can  afTure  you  there   has  been  on  earth.     I,  and  my 
fri'endf,  have  not  failed  to  ^ive  thanks,  that  you  our  brother 

was 


LETTERS.  85 

was  dead,  but  is  alive  again  ;  was  lofl,  but  is  found.  Oh 
blellbd  be  God  for  calling  you  at  the  eleventh  hour.  Doth 
not  this  difplay  the  riches  of  his  free  grace  ;  and  ought  it  not 
to  fill  you  with  his  praife  all  the  day  long  ?  I  wonder  not  that 
you  are  already  become  a  fool  for  Christ's  fake.  All  that 
will  live  godly  in  him  muft  fuffer  perfecution.  But  fear  not 
man.  The  Lord  of  Hosts  HvdW  be  with  you  ;  the  ftrength 
of  that  God  who  hath  called  you  fhall  be  your  refuge.  As 
you  have  not  ^ong  to  live  in  this  world,  Satan,  no  doubt, 
will  rage  moft  horribly  againft  you.  Watch  and  pray  that 
you  enter  not  into  temptation.  Your  cafe,  God  willing,  I 
intend  to  publifli  in  my  next  journal.  It  is  good  to  keep  clofe 
the  fecrets  of  a  king,  but  it  is  honourable  to  fpeak  of  the 
works  of  the  Lord.  That  God  may  carry  on  and  finifli 
the  good  work  begun  in  your  foul,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of 
Your  affedlionatc  friend  and  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER     LXXXIX. 

Dear  Adifs  B.  Philadelphia^  Nov,  lO,   1 7  39. 

THOUGH,  when  I  came  firft  to  London,  1  thought  you 
had  not  made  the  progrefs  which  might  be  expected  in 
the  twelve  months,  for  want  of  company ;  yet  your  laft  beha* 
viour  gave  me  reafon  to  think  that  you  was  yet  alive  to  God, 

Oh,  dear  Mifs  B ,  do  not  flumber  or  fleep,  but  be  always 

trimming  your  fpiritual  lamp,  knowing  you  are  fliortly  to 
meet  the  Bridegroom.  Study  to  fhew  the  fimplicity  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  ftrive  to  imitate  thofe  holy  matrons,  who  not 
only  adminiftred  to  our  Lord  of  their  fubftance,  but  alfo  fol- 
lowed him  to  the  accurfed  tree.  Love,  love  to  Jesus,  cads 
out  fear.  No  doubt  they  were  reproached  for  his  name  fake, 
and  accounted  mad  women  ;  but  they  had  a  faith  which  en- 
abled them  at  that  time  to  overcome  the  world,  and  by  which 

they   climbed   up  to  heaven.     May  dear  Mifs  B be  thus 

minded  !   And  may  I  fee  her  at  the  laft  day  amongft   the   wife 

vir2;ins!  Cultivating  an  acquaintance  with  Mifs  D ,  ajid 

the  Mifs  C 'j,  will  be  a  ftcp  towards  bringing  you  thither. 

Dear  Mifs  B ,  I  am  your  friend  and  fcrvant 

G.  jr. 

G  3  LET  T  L  R 


S6  LETTERS, 

LETTER    XC. 

To  my  Brother. 

Philadelphia^  Nov.  IC,    1739. 

THOUGH  I  have  wrote  now  for  fome  years  to  my  dear 
brother,  and  have  availed  nothing,  yet  I  cannot  cea(e 
ftriving  with  him  ;  Vv'ho  knows  but  at  length  the  Almighty 
may  remove  the  fcalcs  from  his  eyes,  and  enable  him  to  fee 
the  want  of  a  Redeemer.  Indeed,  my  dear  brother,  you  do 
not  fee  it  yet,  becaufe  you  do  not  feel  it ;  your  moral  honcfly 
and  good  nature  deceives  you.  You  think  you  are  rich,  and 
increafed  in  goods,  and  do  not  confidcr  that  you  are  poor  and 
miTerable,  blind  and  naked.  You  are  felf- righteous,  and  do 
not  rely  on  the  righteoufnefs  of  the  God-Man,  Christ 
Jesus,  for  falvation.  What  would  I  give  was  my  dear  bro- 
ther convinced  of  this  ?  P'or,  till  he  is  convinced,  he  is 
niiferable,  and  docs  not  knov/  it.  I  pray  God  to  open  your 
eyes  with  a  fenfe  of  his  love.  Send  me  a  line  to  Georgia. 
God  has  fent  us  a  comfortable  paflage.  In  about  a  twelve- 
month I  expc6t:  to  return.  Be  not  furprifed  if  you  hear  of 
my  being  more  caft  out.  We  muft  fufFer,  as  well  as  do,  for 
Christ.     If  you  are  one  of  his  you  will  rejoice 

Your  afiedlionatc  brother, 

G.  J'K 

LETTER    XCI. 

To  Madam  M— . 

Philadelphia^  Nov.  lO,   1739. 

I  Cannot  think  of  the  repeated  affiftances  you  gave  me  by 
the  loan  of  your  coach,  and  at  the  fame  time  forbear 
fending  you  a  line  of  thanks.  But  what  is  of  greater  con- 
cern, I  think  it  m.y  duty  to  write  to  you  about  a  more  im- 
portant affair  ;  I  mean  the  falvation  of  your  precious  and 
immortal  foul.  God  was  pleafed  to  incline  your  heart.  Madam, 
to  hear  and  receive  the  word  with  joy.  Neither  the  cares  of 
the  v/orld,  nor  the  deceiifulnefs  of  riches,  I  trud  have  been 
permitted  to  choak,  and  hinder  the  growth  of  it  in  your  foul. 
Indeed,  Madam,  you  cannot  be  too  watchful.  It  is  ablelTed, 
and  careful  thing,  to  be  a  true  Chriflian.     The  liril  ftcp  to  it 

is 


LETTER     S.  87 

is  a  broken  heart,  a  heart  melted  down  with  a  fenfe  of  fin, 
and  flying  to  Jesus  Christ  for  righteoufnefs,  fantftificntion 
and  eternal  redemption.  Thoufands  indeed  place  chriftianity 
in  good  dcilres,  and  the  having  good  deftres  ;  but  this  and 
much  more  a  perfon  may  have,  and  yet  mifcarry  at  laft.  Pure 
and  undeHled  religion  confiTcs  in  a  lively  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,  as  the  only  mediator  between  God  and  man.  A 
faith  that  changes  and  renews  the  whole  foul,  takes  it  entirely 
oft'  the  world,  and  fixes  it  wholly  upon  God.  This,  Madam, 
is  the  faith  that  you  have  fo  often  heard  me  preach,  and  of 
which  I  pray  GoD  you  may  be  a  partaker.  Though  you 
have  it  not  yet,  you  need  not  defpair ;  God  v/ill  give  it  to 
all  who  fmcerely  afk  of  him.  It  is  true.  Madam,  that  not 
many  mighty  are  called  ;  but  it  is  not  your  riches  (hall  keep 
you  from  heaven  if  you  truly  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Paith  in  him  will  enable  you  to  overcome  the  world,  and 
caufe  you  even  to  triumph  over  the  luft  of  the  eye  and  the 
pride  of  life.  Faith  will  fet  you  above  the  fear  of  man,  and 
enable  you  to  rejoice  in  being  accounted  a  fool  for  Christ's 
fake.  That  God  may  impart  this  faith  to  your  own,  and 
little  m.after's  foul,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  Adadam, 
Your  obliged  humble  fervant, 

G.  TK 


I 


LETTER    XCII. 

DeGr  hr other  H.  Philadelphia^  Nov,  10,    1739. 

Con£;!atulate  you  on  your  fuccefs  at  Monmouth.  God 
__  has  yet  further  work  for  you  to  do,  ere  you  are  called  be- 
fore rulers  and  governors,  for  his  name  fake.  By  divine  per- 
mifFxon,  in  about  a  twelve-month,  I  hope  to  make  a  fecond 
ufe  of  your  field  pulpits.  Our  principles  agree,  as  face  an- 
fwers  to  face  in  the  water.  Since  I  faw  you,  God  has  been 
pleafed  to  enlighten  me  more  in  that  comfortable  do6trinc  of 
Eleclion^  &c.  At  my  return,  I  hope  to  be  more  explicit  than 
1  have  been.  God  forbid,  my  dear  brother,  that  we  fliould 
Ihun  to  declare  the  whole  counfel  of  God.  The  people  of 
IVaUa  are  much  upon  my  heart.  I  long  to  hear  how  the 
Gofpel  flourlflies  among  you.  How  profpers  your  in- 
y/ard  man  ?    Being    always  doing,  no  doubt  you   grow  in 

G  4  grace. 


8S  LETTERS. 

grace.  May  you  increafe  with  all  the  increafc  of  God  !  You 
will  fee  my  letters  to  Mr.  Jones,  &c.  As  faft  as  I  can,  the 
reft  of  our  Welch  friends  fhall  hear  from  me.  Oh  that  I 
may  never  forget  their  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love  I 
Salute  them  moft  afFedionately  in  my  name  ;  and  exhort  them, 
my  dear  brother,  to  contend  carneftly  for  the  faith  once  deli- 
vered to  the  faints.  Put  them  in  mind  of  the  freenefs  and 
eternity  of  God's  ele61:ing  love,  and  be  inftant  with  them, 
to  lay  hold  on  the  perfedl:  righteoufnefs  of  Jesus  Christ  by 
faith.  Talk  to  them,  oh  talk  to  them,  even  till  midnight,  of 
the  riches  of  hisall-fufficient  grace.  Tell  them,  oh  tell  them, 
what  he  has  done  for  their  fouls,  and  how  carneftly  he  is  now 
interceding  for  them  in  heaven.  Shew  them  in  the  map  of 
the  word,  the  kingdoms  of  the  upper  world,  and  the  tran- 
fcendent  glories  of  them ;  and  afiure  them  all  {hall  be  theirs, 
if  they  believe  on  Jesus  Christ  with  their  whole  hearts. 
Prefs  them  to  believe  on  him  immediately.  Interfperfe 
prayers  with  your  exhortations,  and  thereby  call  down  fire 
from  heaven,  even  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Ghoft, 

*T^o  foften,  fweeien  a7id  refine ^ 
And  melt  them  into  love. 

Speak  every  time,  my  dear  brother,  as  if  it  was  your  laft ; 
weep  out,  if  pofTible,  every  argument,  and  as  it  were  com- 
pel them  to  cry,  Behold  how  he  loveth  us.  Remember  me, 
Remember  me  in  your  prayers,  as  being  ever,  evef 

Yours,  &c. 

G,  TV, 

LETTER    XCIII. 

To  Mr.  and  Mrs.  D , 

My  dear  Friends,  Philadelphia,  Nov,  lO,   1 7  39. 

WH  E  N  I  confider  how  conftantly  you  attended  my 
miniftry,  how  gladly  you  received  me  into  your 
houfe,  and  how  affectionately  you  took  your  laft  farewell ; 
methinks  gratitude  obliges  mc  to  fend  you  a  line.  It  hath 
often  given  me  pleafure  to  fee  in  what  harmony  you  feem  to 
Jive,  and  how  you  walked  to  hear  the  word  of  God  as  friends, 
purely,  thought  I,  thefe  are  a  happy  pair,     Thefe  I  truft  are 

Jielp-meets 


LETTERS.  89 

help-meets  for  each  other.  Oh  that  you  may  go  on  and  prof- 
pcr,  and  be  plentifully  rewarded  for  the  favours  (hewn  to  me, 
the  moft  unprofitable  of  our  Lord*s  fcrvants :  he  will  not 
forget  your  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love.  Whenever 
you  attend  his  word  preached,  I  hope  he  will  fend  you  rcplc- 
nifhed  away.  Oh  that  all  knew  what  it  is  to  believe  in 
Jesus  !  How  foon  would  they  renounce  the  world,  take  up 
their  crofs  and  follow  him  !  Lord  evermore  give  us  all  this 
faith,  even  a  faith  working  by  love ;  a  faith  that  will  enable 
us  to  overcome  the  world,  and  caufc  us  to  fhake  off  all  fear 
of  man.  Pray  give  my  due  refpeds  to  your  friend  and  his 
wife,  who  ufed  to  dine  with  us.  I  pray  God  fantSlify  you 
all  in  fpirit,  foul  and  body,  and  caufe  you  to  fit  down  on  his 
right  hand  with 

Your  afFe.dionate,  though  moft  unworthy, 

Fiiend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IF, 

LETTER    XCIV. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  P . 

Reverend  Sir,  Philacklphla,  Nov.  10,   1739. 

YOU  may  juftly  cenfure  me  as  unkind  for  not  anfwering 
your  kind  letter.  I  can  only  plead  by  way  of  excuic 
an  hurry  of  bufmefs,  and  my  fuddcn  departure  from  Eng- 
landf  At  my  return,  Gop  willing,  I  purpofe  to  fee  Nciv- 
hury,  and  there  to  preach  the  Gofpcl  of  the  Prince  of  Peace. 
Perhaps  my  enemies  may  have  fo  much  power  given  them  from 
above,  as  to  confine  my  body:  but  if  I  am  bound,  the  word 
of  the  Lord  will  not  be  bound.  God  will  fpeak,  and  great 
(hall  be  the  company  of  preachers.  It  often  rejoices  me  to 
think  what  a  profpc£i:  we  have  once  again  of  hearing  the 
truth  preached  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  I  hope  we  fhall  catch  fire 
from  each  other,  and  that  there  will  be  an  holy  emulation 
amon^ft  us,  who  fliall  moft  dcbafe  man  and  exalt  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Nothing  but  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation  can 
do  this.  All  others  leave  freewill  in  man,  and  make  him,  in 
part  at  leaft,  a  Saviour  to  himfclf.  My  foul  come  not  near 
'^   the  fecrct  of  thofc  who  tc^ch  fuch   thi.ngs,  mine  honour  be 

not 
2 


go  LETTER    S. 

not  thou  united  to  them.  I  know  Christ  is  all  in  all.  Man 
is  nothing :  he  hath  a  free  will  to  go  to  hcl),  but  none  to  go 
heaven,  till  God  worketh  in  him  to  will  and  to  do  after  his 
good  pleafure.  It  is  God  muft  prevent,  God  muft  accom- 
pany, God  muft  follow  with  his  grace,  or  Jesus  Christ 
will  bleed  In  vain.  That  God  may  continue  his  blefiing  to 
us  both,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  reverend  and  dear  Sir, 
Your  obliged  brother  and  fervant, 

G.  JV, 

LETTER    XCV. 

Dear  Mr. ,  Philadelphia,   Nov.  lo,  1739. 

WA  S  not  my  heart  with  your  heart,  When  we  rode  by 
the  way  and  talked  to  each  other  concerning  the 
Scriptures  ?  I  thought  our  fouls  tallied  together,  and  that  we 
had  both  drank  of  the  fame  fpirit.  1  have  often,  fmce  that 
time,  admired  the  grace  of  God  In  you,  and  even  now  feci 
my  foul,  whilft  I  am  writing,  intimately  united  with  yours. 
What  is  all  this,  but  the  etfecSl  and  fruit  of  God's  everlafting 
love  through  Christ  our  Lord  ?  What  is  it,  but  an  in- 
ftance  of  the  fovereign  will  and  good  pleafure  of  God,  who 
will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy?  Oh  how  doth 
the  free,  the  diftinguifliing  grace  of  God  excite  the  love  of 
thofe,  who  are  made  partakers  of  it  !  What  was  there  in  you 

and  In  me,  dear  Mr.  0 ,  that  fliould  move  God  to  chufe 

XLS  before  others  ?  Was  there  any  fltnefs  forefeen  in  us^  ex- 
cept a  litnefs  for  damnation  ?  I  believe  not.  No,  God  chofe 
us  from  eternity,  he  called  us  In  time,  and  I  am  perfuaded 
will  keep  us  from  falling  finally,  till  time  fhail  be  no  more. 
Confider  the  Gofpel  in  this  view,  and  it  appears  a  confident 
fcheme,  though  diredly  contrary  to  the  natural  man  ;  and 
nothing  convinces  me  more  of  the  truth  of  thefe  do(5lrines, 
than  the  enmity  that  is  in  the  heart  of  carnal  minds  againft 
them.  However,  the  power  of  God  is  able  to  pull  down 
every  thing  that  exalts  itfelf  againft  the  knowledge  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Henceforward  I  hope  I  (hall  fpeak 
boldly  and  plainly  as  I  ought  to  fpeak,  and  not  fail  to  declare 
the  whole  counfcl  of  God.  I  pray  daily,  that  I  may  know 
his  w^ill  more  perfcdly,  not  only  that  I  may  do  it  myfelf,  but 

that 


LETTERS.  91 

that  I  may  teach  it  to  others.  If  I  die  for  it,  I  cannot  but 
fpeak  the  things  which  I  know.  Oh  my  dear  friends,  lift  up 
your  hands  for  me  in  the  fan£tuary.  The  prayers  of  the  faith- 
ful, God  will  hear.  Entreat  the  fame  favour  of  your  brother. 
I  love  you  both  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  remem- 
ber you  often  when  I  go  in  and  out  before  the  Lord  :  He  has 
been  with  us  in  the  fliip.  His  rod  has  corrciSted,  his  ftafFhas 
comforted  us ;  both  his  rod  and  ftafF  have  edified  and 
flrengthened  our  fouls.  In  a  year's  time  I  hope  to  fee  England. 
My  love  to  all  friends,  and  befcech  them  to  pray  that  I  may 
be  prepared  for  whatever  awaits 

Your  affedtionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  JK 

LETTER    XCVI. 

To  Mrs.  Ann  D. 
My  dear  Sifter  /«  C H R i s  t ,         Philadelphia^  Nov.  lo,  I J 29- 

I  Owe  you  feveral  letters,  I  will  pay  you  one  now ;  have 
patience  with  me  and  I  will  pay  you  all.  If  any  one  ought 
to  long  to  enjoy  the  communion  of  faints  hereafter,  I  ought  in 
a  particular  manner.  God  has  highly  favoured  me  in  the  ac- 
quaintance of  numbers  of  his  dearefi:  children.  I  cannot  fee 
fome,  and  to  but  hw  of  them  can  I  write,  on  account  of  other 
bufniefs.  Haften,  O  Lord,  that  blelTed  time,  when  we  fhall 
all  fit  dov/n  to  eat  bread  in  thy  kingdom  ! — My  dear  Sifter, 
pray  that  I  may  patiently  wait  till  my  change  (hall  come.  I 
want  to  leap  my  feventy  years.  I  long  to  be  dilTolved  to  be 
with  Christ.  Sometimes  it  arifes  from  a  fear  of  fallino-, 
knowing  what  a  body  of  fm  I  carry  about  me.  Sometimes, 
from  a  profpe6l  of  future  labours  and  fufFerings,  I  am  out  of 
humour,  and  wifh  for  death  2.s  Elijah  did  :  At  others,  I  am 
tempted,  and  then  I  long  to  be  freed  from  temptations.  But 
it  is  not  thus  always  :  There  are  times  when  my  foul  hath  fuch 
foretaftes  of  God,  that  I  long  more  eagerly  to  be  with  him  ; 
and  the  frequent  profpe6l  of  the  happinefs  which  the  fpirits  of 
juft  men  made  perfedl:  now  enjoy,  often  carries  me  as  it  were 
into  another  world.  Many  fuch  fweet  meditations  hath  my 
foul  been  favoured  with  ;  but  in  the  midft  of  all,  I  have  felt, 
2nd  do  feel,  that  I  am  the  chief  of  finncrs.  A  myftcry  of  ini- 
quity 


92  LETTERS. 

quity  that  lay  in  my  heart  undifcovered,  has  been  opened  to  my 
view,  fincc  my  retirement  in  the  fliip.  May  he  enlighten  me 
more  and  more,  to  know  and  feel  the  myftcry  of  his  elecling, 
foul-transforming  love.  Nothing  like  that,  to  fupport  us  un- 
der prefent,  and  all  the  various  future  trials  which  await  us. 
But  the  Lord  has  apprehended  us,  and  will  not  let  us  go. 
Men  and  devils  may  do  their  worft  j  our  Jesus  will  fuffer  no- 
thing to  pluck  us  out  of  his  Almighty  hands  ;  for  he  has  loved 
us  with  an  everlafting  love,  and  therefore  his  right-hand  fliall 
uphold  us.  By  his  affiftance,  we  fliall  hold  out  to  the  end. 
By  his  grace,  I,  you,  and  all  his  chofen  ones  fhall  finally  be 
faved.  Then,  my  dear  Sifter,  fhall  we  converfe,  not  with  ink 
and  paper,  but  face  to  face.  I'hen,  but  not  till  then,  fliall  we 
fully  know  what  a  legion  of  devils  Jesus  Christ  hath  caft 
out  of  our  fouls,  and  how,  after  all  our  ftrivings  againft,  and 
quenching  many  of  the  motions  of  his  fpirit,  he  at  Jaft  brought 
us  to  glory.     Ceafe  not  to  pray  for 

Your  unworthy  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  IF, 

LETTER    XCVII. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  R. 
My  dear  Brother  R,  Philadelphia y  Nov,  lO,  1739. 

BEFORE  I  left  England^  I  heard  of  your  progrefs  in 
LeiccJlerPnre  and  Nottingham.  I  then  rejoiced,  yea,  and 
I  do  now  rejoice  that  God  hath  fent  you  forth  into  his  vine- 
yard. I  wi(h  you  all  imaginable  fuccefs  with  my  whole  heart, 
l^he  next  news  I  hear  from  England^  I  fuppofe,  will  inform 
me  of  your  fuffering,  as  well  as  preaching  for  Christ.  But  I 
am  pcrfuaded  a  profpeil  of  fuffering  does  not  damp,  but  excite 
the  zeal  of  my  dear  fcUow-Iabourer.  He  lives  in  a  place  where 
honeft  John  Bmiyan  was  a  prifoner  of  the  Lord  for  twelve 
years.  And  oh,  what  fweet  communion  did  he  enjoy  in  Bed- 
ford gaol  !  I  really  believe  a  miniftcr  will  learn  more  by  one 
month*s  confinement,  than  by  a  year's  fludy.  Prefs  on  then, 
my  dear  Brother,  prefs  on  and  faint  not  3  fpeak  till  you  can 
fpeak  no  more.  Wait  upon  the  Lord,  and  you  fliall  renew 
yourftrength.  Though  fometimes  faint,  yet  ftill  purfue.  Up 
and  be  doing,  and  the  Lord  be  with  you.     See  how  the  fields 

are 


LETTERS,  93 

are  white,  every  where  ready  to  harveft.  See  how  our  Lord's 
fhcep  are  I'cattered  abroad,  having  too,  too  few  true  flicp- 
herds  ;  I  befcech  jou,  go  on,  and  pouit  out  to  them  the  Re- 
deemer's good  paftures.  Say  not,  wherewithal  fliall  I  feed 
them?  The  great  fliepherd  fliall  furnifli  you  with  food  enough, 
and  to  fpare.  Give  of  your  loaves,  and  you  fhall  take  up  of 
the  fragments  that  remain.  T.'o  him  that  hath,  fliall  be  given. 
Satan  no  doubt  will  refill:  you  ;  he  will  bid  you,  out  of  a  falfc 
humility,  to  hold  your  peace  ;  but  let  my  friend  fpeak  out 
boldly  as  he  ought  to  fpeak.  The  Holy  Spirit  will  give  him 
utterance,  and  apply  the  word  to  the  hearers.  If  prayers  may 
water  the  good  feed,  you  may  depend  on  mine.  I  remember 
the  dear  Bedford  people.     O  let  them  not  forget 

Your  poor  weak  brother  in  Christ, 

G,  JV, 

LETTER    XCVIIL 

To  the  Rev,  Mr.  T. 
Reverend  and  dear  SiKy  Philadelphia,  Nov,  10,  1739. 

BEFORE  I  faw,  I  loved  you.  Ever  fmce  our  perfonal  ac- 
quaintance, I  have  often  thought,  what  a  noble  inftru- 
ment  you  might  be  of  turning  many  to  righteoufnefs,  if  your 
heart  was  entirely  freed  from  the  world,  and  inflamed  with  the 
love  of  God.  Your  vivacity  of  fpirit,  your  warm  imagina- 
tion, the  energy  and  ftrength  of  your  endearing  manner  of 
writing,  together  with  your  loving,  tender  difpofition,  if  orice 
duly  influenced  by  the  fpirit  of  God,  could  not  fail  of  winning 
fouls  to  Christ.  Come  out  therefore  my  brother,  my  friend  ; 
come  out  from  among  your  carnal  connections,  and  "  be 
thou  feparate,"  faith  the  Lord  Almighty.  Throw  ofFa  falfe 
politenefs,  ftudy  the  fimplicity  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  be  dc- 
fpifed  for  fomething.  O  pity^pity  the  church  o^  England.  See- 
how  too,  too  many  of  her  fons  are  fallen  from  her  articles,  and 
preach  themfclves,  not  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord.  My  dear 
friend,  I  could  wifh  my  head  was  waters,  and  my  eyes  foun- 
tains of  tears,  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night  before  the 
Lord.  O  let  us  befeech  him  to  fpirit  up  more  of  his  faithful 
fervants,  to  go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  and  compel" 
poor  finncrs  to  come  in.     Oh  that  dear  Mr.  T.  may  be  one  of 

them ! 


94  LETTERS. 

them  !  How  would  the  fplrit  of  Christ  and  of  glory  rc{l  uport 
his  foul  !  Arifc,  arife,  my  dear  brother,  and  gird  up  the  loin* 
of  your  mind.  Arife,  arife,  and  be  not  of  the  number  of  thofe 
who  only  fleece  their  flocks.  Lift  up  your  voice  like  a  trumpet, 
and  preach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Dear  Mr.  T.  forgive 
this  freedom.  My  heart  is  full.  I  long  to  have  the  pure 
fcripture  truths,  as  delivered  in  our  homilies  and  our  articles, 
preached  up  univcrfally.  This  is  all  that  is  contended 
for,  by 

Your  moft  unworthy  friend,  brother,  and  fervant 
in  our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 


G.  JV, 


LETTER    XCIX. 


To  the  Rev.  Mr,  D.  TV, 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir .y  Philadelphia^  Nov.  10,  1 739. 

I  Love  you,  though  I  have  been  fo  ungrateful  as  not  to  write 
to  you.  I  love  you  in  the  bowels  of  our  common  Mafter 
whofe  name  we  bear,  and  in  vvhofe  glorious  fcrvice  we  are  both 
employed.  Oh,  dear  Sir,  what  are  we  that  we  fhould  be  fo 
highly  favoured  I  Why  are  we  honoured  ?  Why  are  we  called 
to  the  miniftry,  and  others  that  are  efFecSluaily  called  by  grace, 
yet  advanced  no  higher  than  private  chriftians  ?  I  can  only 
cry  out.  Oh  the  depth  of  God's  fovereign,  ele<Sling,  unmerited 
love.  Even  fo  Father,  for  fo  it  feemed  good  in  thy  fight  \ 
Surely,  dear  Sir,  the  love  of  Christ  muft  conftrain  us  to- 
fpend  and  be  fpent  for  the  good  of  fouls.  Never  was  the  har- 
veft  greater;  never  were  the  labourers  fewer.  If  we  do  not 
now  lift  up  our  voices  like  trumpets,  the  very  ftones  would; 
cry  out  againft  us.  I  could  almoft  fay,  "  the  glory  is  de- 
parted from  Ifrael;  the  ark  of  the  Lord  is  fallen  into  enemies 
hands."  Oh  let  us  endeavour,  dear  Sii',  let  us  endeavour  to 
bring  it  back,  by  preaching  and  living  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.  The  light  that  has  been  given  us,  is  not  to  be  put 
vnder  a  bufliel,  but  on  a  candleftick.  Satan,  indeed,  by 
blafts  of  pcrfecution,  will  do  all  he  can  to  put  it  out.  If  our 
light  be  the  light  of  Christ,  thofe  blafts  will  only  caufe  it  tO' 
fhine  the  brighter.  You  have  Irappily,  dear  Sir,  experienced 
this.      You,   I  believe,  was  both   in  Christ  and   in   the 

miniftry 


LETTERS.  95 

minlftry  before  me.  I  pras,  fequar,  etfi  non  pafTibus  equis. 
The  devil  and  all  his  hofts  will  let  their  battle  in  array  againft 
us.  My  Lord  has  given  me  a  fling  and  a  ftone  j  {tripling  as 
I  am,  I  will  go  forth  then  in  his  ftrength,  make  mention  of  his 
righteoufncfs  only,  and  by  that  lay  proftratc  the  ftrong  Goliahs. 
By  your  prayers  I  truft  to  be  fent  to  Wales  once  more.  The 
hmplicity  of  that  people  much  delights  me.  What  (hall,  what 
can  I  do  for  them  ?  My  prayers  they  have,  and  whatever 
God  fliall  enable  me  to  do,  they  may  demand  a  fhare  from, 
dear  Sir, 

Your  afFe6lionate  friend,  brother,  and  fervant, 

G.  TV, 

LETTER     C. 

To  the  Rev,  Mr.  H, 
Dear  Mr.  H,  Philadelphia.,  Nov.  lo,  1739. 

I  Received  no  anfwer  to  my  laft,  yet  I  muft  write  to  you  again. 
The  many  happy  hours  I  fpent  with  you  when  at  Oxoriy 
and  the  benefit  I  have  received  from  your  inflruclions  and  ex- 
ample, are  yet  frefli  upon  my  memory.  I  long  to  have  my 
dear  friend  come  forth,  and  preach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 
Not  a  righteoufncfs  or  inward  holinefs  of  our  own,  whereby 
we  may  make  ourfclvcs  meet,  but  a  righteoufncfs  of  another, 
even  the  Lord  our  righteoufncfs  j  upon  the  Imputation  and 
apprehending  of  which  by  faith,  we  ihall  be  made  meet  by 
his  Holy  Spirit  to  live  with,  and  to  enjoy  God.  Dear  Mr. 
H.  it  is  an  excellent  thing  to  be  convinced  of  the  freenefs  and 
riches  of  God's  grace  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  fwect  to  know 
and  preach,  that  Christ  juftifies  the  ungodly,  and  that  all 
truly  good  works  are  not  fo  much  as  partly  the  caufe,  but  the 
^^of  our  juftiiication  before  God.  Till  convinced  ofthefe 
truths,  you  muft  own  free-will  in  man,  which  isdireilly  con- 
trary to  the  holy  fcriptures,  and  the  articles  of  our  church. 
Let  me  advife  dear  Mr.  H.  laying  afide  all  prejudice,  to  read 
and  pray  over  Saint  Paul's  cpiftles  to  the  Romans  and  GaIaiia?2Sy 
and  then  let  him  tell  me  v/hat  he  thinks  of  this  dodlrine.  Moft 
of  your  old  friends  are  now  happily  enlightened.  God  fets 
his  feal  to  fuch  preaching  in  an  extraordinary  manner,  and  I 
am  perfuaded  the  gates  of  hell  fhall  never  be  able  to  prevail 

againft 


^6  LETTERS. 

agalnft  it.  Oh  that  dear  Mr.  H.  would  alfo  join  with  us  ? 
Oh  that  the  Lord  would  open  his  eyes  to  behold  aright  this 
part  of  the  myftery  of  godlinefs  !  How  would  it  rejoice  my 
heart !  How  would  it  comfort  his  own  foul  !  He  would  then 
no  longer  groan  under  the  fpirit  of  bondage  :  No,  he  would 
be  brought  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  fons  of  God.  I 
,  have  wrote  to  dear  Mr.  0,  as  well  as  to  you,  out  of  the  fim- 
plicity  of  my  heart. 

Ever  your's  in  Christ, 


G.  JV. 


L  E  T  T  E  R    CI. 


To  the  Rev,  Mr.  K. 
Dear  Brother  K.  Philadelphia^  Nov.  IC,  1739. 

I  Long  to  hear  how  it  is  with  you,  and  the  church  in  your 
houfe.  I  verily  believe,  though  it  is  but  a  little  flock^  yet 
it  will  be  our  heavenly  Father's  good  pleafure  to  give  you  the 
kingdom.  Hov/  happy  is  it,  when  all  are  of  one  mind  in  a 
houfe  y  all  agreed  to  entertain  and  love  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Their  heaven  is  begun  on  earth.  I  pray  God  to  continue 
this  blefling,  and  caufe  you  daily  to  build  up  each  other  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  He  is 
a  o;racious  Mafter.  Oh  that  I  knew  and  loved  him  more  !  for 
he  is  altogether  lovely.  Has  he  yet  revealed  himfelf  in  dear 
Mr.  K,*s  heart  ?  Is  he  aflured  that  his  beloved  is  his  ?  Is  he 
brought  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God  ?  Is 
his  mind  free  from  fcruples  ?  Is  he  active  ?  Is  he  pundual  ? 
Is  he  ftrong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might?  Is 
the  meeknefs  of  the  lamb  and  theboldnefs  of  the  lion  blended 
in  his  foul  ?  Do  his  parifhioners  fear,  yet  love  him  ?  Is  he  a 
Boanerges^  and  yet  a  Barnabas  in  the  church  of  God  ?  Does 
he  thunder  againfl:  obftinate  fmners,  and  by  difplaying  the 
riches  of  the  promifcs,  comfort  and  build  up  the  faints  ?  Dees 
he  preach  as  the  fpirit  gives  him  utterance  ?  Can  he  rely  on 
the  promife,  ''  L9  I  am  with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end 
of  the  world  ?" 

Forgive  this  freedom,  my  dear  broiher.  Love  makes  me  thus 
impertinent.     I  want  to  fee  you  perfect,  entire,  lacking  no- 
thing.    May  Gcd  from  day  to  day  fupply  what  is  flill  defi- 
cient 


L    E    T    T    E    R     S.  97 

cicnt  in  you  and  in  me,  till  we  come  to  the  fulncfs  of  ihc  mea- 
sure oF  the  ftature  of  Christ.     He  is  faithful  that  has   pro- 
mifed.     God  has  been  gracious  to  me  his  fervant.     In  about 
a  twelvemonth,  I  hope  you  will  again  fee  and  rejoice  with 
Your  affedioiiate  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  IK 

LETTER    GIL 

Dear  Mrs,  F.  Philadelphia^  Nov,  lO,  1739. 

THE  Lord  reward  you  for  all  your  works  of  faith  and 
labours  of  love  !  They  {hall  be  brought  forth  as  fo 
many  evidences  of  your  lively  faith,  when  we  meet  before  our 
Lord  in  judgment.  Does  not  the  profpe«£l:  of  that  glorious 
day,  often  fill  your  foul  with  joy  ?  It  does  mine*  Why  ?  Be^ 
caufe  I  know  my  Redeemer  is  to  be  my  judge*  Satan  will 
accufe  mej  my  anfwer  fhall  be,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  my  righte- 
oufnefs,  how  dareft  thou  to  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of 
God*s  Ele6l  ?  I  ftand  here  not  in  my  own,  but  his  robes  ;  and 
though  I  deferve  nothing  as  a  debt,  yet  I  know  he  will  give  me 
a  reward  of  grace,  and  recompence  me  for  what  he  has  done 
in  and  by  me,  as  though  I  had  done  it  by  my  own  power. 
Oh,  dear  Mrs./',  how  ought  this  to  excite  our  zeal  and  love  for 
the  holy  Jesus.  Why  fhould  we  defire  to  plead  for  a  righteouf- 
jiefs  of  our  own, and  cry  up  freewill,  when  we  have  an  infinitely 
better  righteoufnefs  than  our  own  to  appear  in,  and  a  God  that 
wiilcrown  us  with  eternal  glory  for  working  in  us  both  to  will  and 
to  do  after  his  good  pleafure  ?  Happy  are  you  and  your*s,  that 
have  been  taught  thefe  glorious  principles  from  your  youth  ! 
Oh  (hew  them  forth  more  and  more  by  your  works,  and  let 
the  world  fee  what  it  is  to  have  a  faith  working  by  love.  Study, 
oh  ftudy,  day  by  day,  the  fimplicity  of  Jesus  Christ.  Caft 
away  every  thing  from  you  that  favours  of  the  lull  of  the  eye 
and  pride  of  life.  Be  quick  to  hear,  flow  to  fpeak,  and  let  your 
converfation  always  be  feafoncd  with  grace.  Oh,  dear  Mrs.  F. 
my  heart  is  enlarged  towards  you  :  My  kind,  my  liberal  hoflefs, 
what  ihaU  I  fay  or  do  to  exprefs  my  gratitude  ?  I  will,  I  do 
fpeak  for  you  to  the  king  of  kings.  Though  I  am  fo  great  a 
finner,  he  frequently  admits  me  into  his  privy  chamber,  and 
then  I  often  figh  out,  *'  O  that  my  dear  i^^^^^r^ friends  may  live 
Vol.  L  H  before 


98  LETTERS. 

before  thee."  This  is  all  the  return,  dear  Mrs.  F.  that  I  can 
make.  It  is  a  prophet's  reward.  Being  my  all,  though  but  two 
mites,  I  know  you  will  accept  it  from 

Your  moft  obliged  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    cm. 

To  Mr,  S, 
Rcvcnnd  and  dear  Sir,  Philadelphia,  Nov.  lo,  1739. 

I  Rejoice  that  God  fent  you  fo  opportunely  to  Monmouth :  I 
find  every  day  that  two  are  better  than  one.     God  fufFers 
his  dear  children   to  fall  into  little  mifcarriages,  that  the  eye 
■may  not  fay  to  the  hand,  "  I  have  no  need  of  thee  ;"  or  again, 
the  head  to  the  foot,  ''  I  have  no  need  of  thee."     We  muft 
be  helps  to  each  other  on  this  fide  eternity.     Nothing  gives 
me  more,  comfort,   next  to  the  alTurance  of  the  eternal   con- 
tinuance of  God's  love,  than  the  pleafmg  refledion  of  having 
fo  many  chriftian  friends  to  watch  with  my  foul.     I  wifh  they 
would  fmite  me  friendly,  and  reprove  me  oftner  than  they  do; 
I  would  force  my   proud    heart  to  thank  them.     But  I  am 
amazed  at  your  coming  ofFfo  triumphantly.     Surely  the  devil 
is  afleep,  or  rather  that  roaring  lion  thinks  to  break  out  upon 
us  with  double  fury  hereafter.     It  often  fhames  me,  when  I 
read  St.  Paul's  account  of  his  fufferings,  to  think  in  how  few 
particulars  I  can  as  yet  fympathize  with  him.     It  as  often 
makes  me  long  to  be  like  him,  and  yet  I  fear  how  I  fhall  ad: 
when  put  to  the  trial.   This,  however,  is  my  comfort,  "  Jesus 
Christ  the  fame  yefrerday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.".   He  faw 
me  from  all  eternity  j  he  gave   me   being  •,    he  called   me  in 
time  ;  he  has  freely  juftified  me  through  faith  in  his  blood ;  he 
has   in  part  fan6tified  me  by   his  fpirit ;   he  will  prcfcrve  me 
underneath  his  everlafling  arms,  till  time  fliall  be  no  more. 
Oh  the  blcfTednefs  of  thefe  evangelical  truths  !    Thcfe  are  in- 
.  deed  gofpel ;  they  are  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  to  all  that  have 
"ecTS  to  hear.    Thefe,  bring  the  creature  out  of  himfelf.   Thefe, 
.make  him  to  hang  upon  the  promifes,  and  caufe  his  obedience 
.'to.  flpw  from  a  principle  of  love.     They  are  meat  indeed,  and 
t  dj^ink  (indeed  unto,  m.y  foul.     lam  pcrfuaded  they  are  fo  like- 
5  wife 


LETTERS.  gg 

wife  to   you   and  dear  Mrs.  S .     I  hope  fhe  is  yet  in  the 

land  of  the  living,  and  that  fhe,  yourfclf,  and  your  Ton,  are  daily 
preparing  for  eternity.  I  pray  God  fancftify  your  whole  fpirits, 
fouls,  and  bodies,  and  reward  you  for  all  kindnefles  Ihewn  to, 
dear  Sir, 

Your  unworthy  brother  and  fcrvant  in  Christ, 


LETTER    CIV. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  T. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir ^  Philadelphia^  Nov.  lO,  1739. 

SHALL  I  promife  and  not  perform  ?  God  forbid.  When 
I  faw  you  firil  at  Cardiff^  it  rejoiced  my  heart  to  hear  what 
God  had  done  for  your  foul.  You  was  then  under  fomedif- 
pleafure  of  your  redor,  if  I  mlflake  not,  for  fpe^iking  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Ere  now,  I  hope  dear  Mr.  T.  has  had  the 
ho.Mour  of  being  quite  thruft  out.  Rejoice,  my  dear  brother, 
and  be  exceeding  glad,  for  thus  was  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
ferved  before  you.  Naked  therefore  follow  a  naked  Christ. 
Freely  you  have  received,  freely  give.  If  you  preach  the  gof- 
pel,  you  fhall  live  of  the  gofpel.  Though  you  go  out  without 
fcrip  or  flioe,  yet  (hall  you  lack  nothing.  Rather  than  you 
fhall  want,  ravens,  thofe  birds  of  prey,  (hall  be  commanded  to 
feed  you.  It  is  a  blefled  thing  to  live  upon  God.  Did  ever 
any  truft  in  him  and  was  forfaken  ?  No  ;  fearch  the  genera- 
tions of  old,  climb  up  into  heaven  if  you  can,  and  all  with  one 
confent  will  declare, 

The  Lord  their  pajlure  did  prepare^ 
And  fed  them  with  a  Jhephcrd's  care, 

T,  though  hell-deferving.  am  a  living  witnefsof  his  good  pro- 
vidence 3  having  nothing,  I  pollcfs  all  things;  he  has  'i&i^  mc 
with  the  kidneys  of  wheat,  and  commanded  fomc  one  or  ano- 
ther to  fuftain  me  whitherfoever  I  was  fent  on  his  errand. 
Jesus  is  the  fame  yeflerday,  to-day,  and  forever.  Ifwcpo 
forth  in  the  fpirit  of  the  lirft  apoRles,  we  fhall  meet  wi.h 
npoflolical  fuccefs.  And- never  was  there  more  occafion  for 
the  revival  of  fuch  a  primitive  fpirit.     Alas,  the  life,  the  pov;er 

Hz  of 


zoo  LETTER    S. 

of  religion  is  almoft  loft  amongft  us.  Stir  up  then,  dear  Sir, 
the  gift  of  God,  which  is  in  you.  Be  initant  in  fcafon  and 
outoffeafon.  Dcbafe  man  and  exalt  Tf.sus.  Self-riiihteOuf- 
ncfs  overturn,  overturn.  The  people  of  IFales^  the  common 
people  at  leail,  will  receive  you  gladly.  The  Lord  fhall  fight 
all  battles  for  you  here,  and  reward  you  with  a  crown  that 
never  fadeth  hereafter.  If  I  have  but  the  loweft  place  in  your 
afteclions,  it  will  abundantly  fatisfy 

Your  moft  affectionate  brother, 

G.  JV, 

LETTER    CV. 

To  Mr.  M. 
Dearcjl  Sir,  Philadelphia,  Nov.  lO,  1739. 

EVER  fince  you  opened  your  heart  fo  freely  in  the  garden, 
you  have  been  much  upon  my  heart.  Though  abfent 
from,  yet  I  have  been  prefent  with  you.  I  am  acquainted  in 
fome  meafure  with  the  ftrugglings  of  a  foul  juft  awakening 
into  new  life.  I  know  too  many  have  ftiflcd  their  convictions, 
and  therefore  am  importunate  on  your  behalf.  I  hope  you 
have  taken  my  advice,  and  laid  the  ax  to  the  root  of  the  tree. 
Oh  pray  for  a  new  heart  and  a  new  fpirit,  and  then  all  old 
things  will  fubfidc  and  give  way  of  themfelves.  The  (Irong 
man  armed  muH:  go  out  when  the  fhonger  than  he,  even  the 
fpirit  of  God,  comes  to  take  polVcflion  of  your  foul.  What 
therefore  have  you  to  do,  dear  Sir,  but  to  throw  yourfelf  as  a 
poor  fmner  at  the  feet  of  the  holy  Jesus  ?  You  need  not  doubt 
his  holdmg  out  the  golden  fccptre  to  you.  Whofoevcr 
Cometh  to  him  by  faith,  he  w\\\  in  no-wife  caft  out.  He  calls, 
he  draws  you  :  what  is  it  for,  but  to  aflure  you  he  will  make 
you  happy  ?  Come  then,  dear  Sir,  weary  and  heavy  laden  as 
you  are,  the  Lord  your  righteoufnefs  fhall  give  you  refl: 
He  (hall  refrcfh  you  with  a  multitude  of  peace,  and  caufe  you 
to  rejoice  in  his  falvation  ;  there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  the 
Lord  Christ.  He  can  draw  your  mind  from  the  creature, 
he  can  fix  it  upon  himfelf ;  he  can  enable  you  to  live  above 
the  world,  whilft  you  are  in  it  j  he  can  tranflate  you  to 
heaven^   Vvhen  he  has  taken  you  away  from  earth.     As  the 

LuP.i> 


LETTERS.  loi 

Lord  Jesus  can,  (o  that  he  may  do  all  thcfe  things  for  your 
Ibul,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  fincere  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  jr. 

LETTER    CVI. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  H. 
Reverend  and  dearejl  Sir,  Philadelphia,  Nov.  lO,  1739. 

IT  often  concerned  me,  when  in  London,  that  I  could  not 
enjoy  more  of  your  company.  Your  converfation  was  al- 
ways feafoned  with  grace,  and  fuch  as  became  the  gofpel  of 
Christ.  Your  great  kindnefs,  in  publicly  praying  for  me, 
can  never  be  fuiKciently  acknowledged.  The  thought  almoft 
Riakes  me  to  weep  for  joy.  Surely  the  Lord  will  not  let 
me  mifcarry,  fincehe  has  ftirred  up  the  choiceft  of  his  fervants 
to  intercede  in  my  behalf.  The  fearcher  of  all  hearts  alone 
knows,  what  agonies  my  poor  foul  has  undergone  fmce  my 
retirement  from  the  world.  The  remembrance  of  my  paft 
fins  has  overwhelmed  my  foul,  and  caufed  tears  to  be  my  meat 
day  and  night.  Indeed  I  have  mourned  as  one  mourneth  for 
a  firft  born  :  But  I  looked  to  him  whom  I  have  pierced.  I 
was  enabled  to  fee  the  freenefs  and  riches  of  his  grace, 
the  infinitenefs  and  eternity  of  his  love,  and  my  foul 
received  comfort.  Oh  the  excellency  of  the  dodlrine  of  elec- 
tion, and  of  the  faints  final  perfeverance,  to  thofe  who  are 
truly  fealcd  by  the  fpirit  of  promife  !  I  am  perfuaded,  till  a 
man  comes  to  believe  and  feel  thcfe  important  truths,  he 
cannot  come  out  of  himfelf;  but  when  convinced  of  thefe,  and 
afiured  of  the  application  of  them  to  his  own  heart,  he  then 
walks  by  faith  indeed,  not  in  himfelf,  but  in  the  Son  of  God, 
who  died  and  gave  himfelf  for  him.  Love,  not  fear,  con- 
flrains  him  to  obedience.  The  promifcs  of  God  are  all  Yea 
and  Amen  to  his  foul.  Supported  by  thefe  conviclions,  in 
about  a  twelvemonth,  God  willing,  I  intend  returning  to 
England,  and  to  begin  my  teftimony  afrefh.  I  trufl  I  fliall 
not  be  afhamed  to  declare  the  whole  counfel  of  God.  Satan, 
no  doubt,  and  his  emifiaries,  will  endeavour  to  block  up  my 
way  ;  but  the  faints  of  God  are  praying  for  me  on  earth,  and. 
the  holy  Jesus   is  interceding   in   heaven.     Why  fliould  I 

H  3  not 


loz  LETTERS. 

not  go  forth  and  offer  his  cverbfting  and  perfe£):  rlghteoufnefs 
to  all  that  fliall  be  brought  to  believe  on  him  ?  Satan  fuggefts 
even  whilft  I  am  writing,  "  How  canft  thou  fpeak,  feeing 
thou  art  fuch  a  fmner  ?"  But  therefore  will  I  fpeak,  becaufe  I 
can  fay,  by  happy  experience,  that  Jesus  Christ  will  have 
mercy  on  the  chief  of  finners  -,  for  among  fuch  you  may 
trulv  rank 

Your  unworthy  brother,  and  unprofitable  fellow- 
Jabourer,  in  our  dear  Lord's  vineyard, 

G.  TV, 

LETTER     CVII. 

Dear  Mrs,  D.  Philadelphia^  Nov.  lo,  1739. 

TEN  thoufand  bleffings  light  upon  you  and  yours  !  The 
Lord  reward  you  ten  thoufand-fold  for  receiving  me 
snd  my  friends  into  your  houfe.  The  Lord  fliower  down 
his  heavenly  manna,  and  feed  you  with  the  bread  of  life  for 
thofe  comfortable  meals  we  have  had  of  your  providing  fince 
we  came  on  board.  We  have  not  been  flack  to  pray  for  you  ; 
mv  heart  is  now  full  of  a  fenfe  of  your  kindnefies.  I  know 
not  when  to  begin  and  when  to  leave  ofF  adoring  the  God 
and  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  t:hefe  and  all 
other  of  his  love-tokens  :  He  is  the  father  of  mercies,  and  the 
God  of  ail  comfort ;  he  hath  comforted  me  in  all  my  tribu- 
lation, and,  I  am  afiured,  will  ftill. comfort  me  in  whatfoever 
I  am  to  do  or  fufFer  for  his  name's  fake.  You,  dear  Mrs.  D, 
can  fubfcribe  to  this  truth,  that  God  is  a  God  of  all  comfort. 
You  have  been  comforted  on  every  fide  ;  you  have  been  filled 
as  it  v/ere  vv^ith  new  wine;  you  have  tailed  that  the  Lord  is 
o-racious,  and  yet  the  beft  wine  is  and  will  be  always  referved 
till  the  lafl:.  The  Lord's  companions  fail  not;  they  are, 
they  will  be  renewed  to  you  every  morning  ;  and  though, 
throu2;h  much  tribulation,  you,  as  well  ^others,  muft  enter 
into  glory,  yet  you  will  find  God  to  be  your  comforter  in  all 
tribulation.  God  has  made  you  a  joyful  mother  of  chriftian 
children;  remember  the  mother  in  the  Maccabees ;  and,  if  ever 
your  children  are  called  to  fuff'ering,  beg  of  God  that  you 
may  ftand  by  and  encourage  them  to  die  for  Christ.  Oh 
that  would  be  a  fpedacle  indeed  !  A  fpedlacle  worthy  of  men 

and 


LETTERS.  103 

and  angels  !  I  pray  God  to  arm  you  with  this  mind,  and  then 
you  will  find  that  God's  rod  as  well  as  his  ftaff  will  comfort 
you ;  nay,  though  you  pafs  through  the  valley  of  the  fhadow 
of  death,  yet  {hail  the  Holy  Spirit  refrefh  you  ;  your  heart  {hall 
fland  faft,  and  be  ftedfaft  in  the  Lord.  Oh,  my  dear  Madam, 
my  heart  is  enlarged  towards  you  ;  I  pray  God  to  fill  you 
with  all  his  divine  fulnefs,  and  make  you  daily  more  and  more 
meet  to  be  an  inheritor  among  the  faints  in  light.  With 
much  love  I  have  wrote  to  dear  Mr.  D,  Oh  pray  him  not 
to  be  angry  with 

Your  moft  afFedlionate  friend  and  brother, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER     CVIII. 

To  Mr.  N, 
Honoured  Sir <y  Philaddphlay  Nov.  10,  1 739. 

BE  not  difpleafed  at  the  contents  of  this ;  if  I  was  not 
perfuaded  that  love  to  your  foul,  and  my  duty  towards 
God,  moved  me  to  write,  I  fliould  be  filent.  When  laft  at 
Gioucefter^  1  heard  you  v^^as  highly  offended  at  my  meetings  in 
the  fields,  and  at  the  fame  time  countenanced  and  encoura^-ed 
the  ading  of  plays  in  the  Boothall.  This  I  thought  hi2;hly 
unbecoming  the  chara£ler  of  a  chriflian  magiilrate,  whofe  pe- 
culiar bufinefs  it  is  to  be  a  terror  to  evil  doers,  and  a  praife  to 
them  that  do  well.  This  made  me  to  fpeak  againft  thofe  pro- 
ceedings in  my  fermoris.  This  is  the  occafion  of  my  troubling 
you  with  a  letter.  I  cannot  think  I  have  delivered  my  foul, 
unlefs,  with  all  meeknefs  and  humility,  I  exhort  you  hence- 
forward not  to  promote  or  fo  much  as  any  vi^ay  countenance 
the  flage-players.  In  our  common  law  they  are  ftilcdy^^^r^ 
beggars.  As  a  minifter  of  the  king,  upon  that  account  it  is 
your  duty  to  put  a  flop  to  them  :  As  a  difciple  and  minlfter 
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  king  of  kings,  you  are  obliged,  te^wrg.-/ 
Sir,  to  exert  your  authority  in  fupprefiing  them.  It  is  notori- 
ous that  fuch  meetings  are  the  nurferies  of  debauchery;  they 
are  the  pefl:  of  our  nation,  and  the  bane  of  true  chriftianity  : 
To  be  prefent  at,  or  in  the  leaft  to  contribute  towards  their 
fupport,  is  therefore  a  great  fin  ;  but  to  countenance  them  by 
our  authority,  and  let  them  ac^  by  our  permiiTion,  what  is  this 

H  4  but 


104  LETTERS. 

but  becoming  public  patrons  for  vice  and  immorality  ?  It  is 
not  only  fmning  ourfelves,  but  it  is  taking  pleafure  in  the  fms 
of  others.  This  the  apoftle  accounted  the  higheft  pitch  of 
heathenifh  wickednefs.  Honoured  Sir,  pray  be  not  offended  : 
Thefe  are  not  the  words  of  a  madman  j  no,  they  are  the  words 
of  truth  and  fobernefs,  and  words  which  our  Lord  will  ap- 
prove of,  when  I  ftand  with  you  before  him  in  judgment. 
However  men  may  now  put  wrong  namiCS  to  things,  and  call 
that  an  innocent  amufem.ent,  which  has  no  other  tendency  but 
to  corrupt  and  debauch  the  heart,  yet  then,  Sir,  we  fhall  fee 
all  things  clearly  ;  then  fliall  you  know  that  it  was  my  duty  to 
write  as  I  have  done,  and  will  confefs  before  men  and  angels 
that  you  had  an  humble  and  afFe(Stio;ir»te  warning  given  you, 
by,  honoured  Sir, 

Your  very  humble  fervant, 

LETTER    CIX, 

To  Mr.  Thamas   P. 
Dear  Sb\  Philadelphia^  Nov.  10,  1 739. 

THOUGH  unknown  to  you  in  perfon,  yet  as  you  was 
pleafed  to  think  me  worthy  of  the  care  of  your  dear  fon, 
I  think  it  my  duty  to  acquaint  you  of  his  welfare.  I  blefs 
God  that  he  came  with  me.  He  is  diligent  and  pious,  and 
I  truil  will  be  a  comfort  to  you  in  your  declining  years  :  His 
mind  feems  fettled  and  compofed,  and  by  reading  and  follow- 
ing the  bible,  he  is  partaker  of  that  peace  which  the  world 
cannot  give.  His  dear  and  honoured  father  is  much  upon  his 
heart.  How  would  it  rejoice  him  to  hear  that  you  alfo  was 
become  a  chriftian  indeed  ?  Be  not  offended,  dear  Sir,  at  my 
expreffmg  myfelf  thus.  Affure  yourfelf  that  chriftianity  is 
fomething  more  than  a  name  and  a  bare  outward  profciTion. 
Morality  of  itfejf,  dear  Sir,  will  never  carry  us  to  heaven  ;  no, 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.  There  is 
no  being  happy  without  a  lively  faith  in  him,  wrought  in  the 
heart  by  the  bleiled  fpirit  of  G06.  This  faith  transforms  the 
whole  man,  delivers  him  from  the  tyranny  of  his  pailions,  and 
makes  him  entirely  a  new  creature.  This  is  the  reafon  why 
it  is  roolifhnefs  to  th?  world*     Your  fon's  cafe  in  this  refpe(5t 

vvas 


LETTERS.  105 

was  not  fihgular.  As  foon  as  ever  we  commence  chriflians, 
we  commence  fools  for  Christ's  fake.  Every  truly  religious 
man  muft  be  deemed  a  madman.  Forgive  this  freedom,  dear 
Sir  ;  whilft  I  am  writing,  I  find  a  love  for  your  foul  arifinn-  ia 
my  heart,  and  methinks  I  could  do  any  thing  to  bring  your 
grey  hairs  with  comfort  to  the  grave.  Dear  Sir,  there  is 
mercy  with  Christ  even  for  thofe  who  come  in  at  the  eleventh 
hour.  Christ  came  to  fave  poor  fmners ;  he  came  to  favc 
you,  dear  Sir,  if  you  lay  hold  on  him  by  a  living  faith.  That 
G-op  may  give  you  this  faith,  and  thereby  make  you  happy 
in  time  and  tp  eternity,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  friend  and  fervant, 

LETTER    ex. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  R.  D. 
Reverend  and  dear  5/r,  -  Philadelphia^  Nov.  10,  1739. 

I  Think  I  am  a  little  in  your  debt ;  if  not,  love  and  gratitude 
call  upon  me  to  fend  you  a  line.  Man  appoints,  but  God 
difappoints  :  His  providence  called  me  away,  before  I  could 
poiTibly  fee  Cornwall,  In  about  a  twelvemonth  I  purpofe  re- 
turning. Who  knows  but  then  I  may  be  enabled  to  perfornl 
my  promife  ?  The  whole  world  is  nov/  my  parifli.  Where- 
foever  my  mafler  calls  me,  I  am  ready  to  go  and  preach  his 
everlafting  gofpel.  My  only  grief  is,  that  I  can  do  no  more 
for  Christ  ;  for  I  am  fure  I  ought  to  love  and  do  much, 
having  had  fo  much  forgiven  ;  not  that  I  expect  in  the  leafl 
to  be  juftified  by  any  or  all  the  works  I  either  can  or  fhall  do  : 
No,  the  Lord  Christ  is  my  righteoufncfs,  my  whole  and 
perfect  righteoufncfs  ;  but  then  I  would  iliew  forth  my  faith, 
I  would  declare  to  the  world  the  fmcerity  of  my  \ovc^  bv 
always  abounding  in  the  works  of  my  Lord.  Oh  pray,  dear 
Sir,  that  I  may  be  never  weary  in  well-doing.  The  devil 
and  his  fervants  will  fhoot  fore  at  me  that  I  may  fall  ;  but  this 
confideration  comforts  and  fupports  me,  "  The  Lord  is  my 
helper  ;"  he  has,  he  does,  he  will  deliver.  I  am  pcrfuaded  you 
feel  his  gracious  prefence,  and  the  influences  of  his  biefled 
fpirit,  whenever  you  go  forth  to  fpeak  in  his  name.  Mav  a 
double  portion  of  his  fpirit  and  precious  anointings  defcend 

upon 


io6  LETTERS. 

upon  your  foul  1  May  you  be  filled  with  all  his  fulnefs,  an4 
be  enabled  thereby  to  turn  many  to  righteoufnefs  here,  and  fo 
fhine  as  the  firmament  of  heaven  for  ever  hereafter  !  Oh  that 
a  place  at  fome  faints  feet  may  be  affigned  to,  dear  Sir, 

Your  weak  though  affedionate  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER     CXI. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  B, 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir^  Philadelphia,  Nov,  lo,  1 739. 

YOU  have  been  too  kind,  and  I  have  been  too  ungrateful. 
Bufinefs  would  not  permit  me  to  have  fo  much  private 
converfation  with  you  as  I  ought.  Succefs  I  fear  elated  my 
mind.  I  did  not  behave  towards  you,  and  other  minifters  of 
Christ,  with  that  humility  which  became  me.  I  freely  con- 
feCs  my  fault;  I  own  myfelf  to  be  but  a  novice.  Your  chari- 
ty, dear  Sir,  will  excite  you  to  pray  that  I  may  not  through 
pride  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil.  Dear  Sir,  fhall 
I  come  out  into  the  world  again  or  not?  Muft  I  venture  my- 
felf once  more  among  fire-brands,  arrows,  and  death  ?  Me-r 
thinks  I  hear  you  reply,  *'  Yes,  if  you  come  forth  in  the 
flrength  of  the  Lord  God,  and  make  mention  of  his  righte- 
oufnefs only.*'  It  is  my  deare  fo  to  do.  I  would  have  Jesus 
all  in  all.  Like  a  pure  chryftal,  I  would  tranfmit  all  the 
light  he  poureth  upon  me.  Oh  pray,  dear  Sir,  that  I  may  be 
thus  minded,  and  then,  God  v/illing,  in  about  a  twelvemonth, 
I  intend  vifiting  the  Brijhl  brethren  once  again.  In  the  mean 
while,  I  hope  the  Lord  will  purge  me,  that  I  may  bring  forth 
more  fruit,  and  v/ork  upon  me  mightily  in  the  inner-man,  for 
otherwife  his  bleffings  will  prove  curfes  to  me.  He  has  been 
pleafed  to  dig  and  dung  round  me,  during  my  retirement.;  he 
has  fhewn  me  fomething  of  the  treachery  of  my  own  heart, 
and  more  and  more  convinced  me  that  I  am  the  chief  of  fm- 
ners.  Oh  that  my  heart  may  fhew  forth  the  eternity  and 
fovereignty  of  his  love  !  for  never  furely  was  there  a  greater 
initance  of  it  than  myfelf.  Happy  are  thofe  that  are  brought 
to  an  experimental  knowledge  of  thefe  myflcries  of  the  kingdom 
of  God.  Many  of  your  charge  have  been,  I  believe  ;  I  pray 
God  to  increafe  the  number  of  your  fpiritual  children  more 

and 


LETTERS.  107 

and  more,  and  to  add  dally  to  the  church  fuch  as  fliall  bt 
faved.  My  cordial  refpecls  attend  your  fellow-Jabourcrs,  and 
all  who  are  fo  kind  as  to  aflc  for  me  ;  as  faft  as  opportunity 
permits,  they  may  expect  to  hear  from,  reverend  Sir, 

Your  unworthy  brother  and  fellow-labourer, 

G,  IV. 

LETTER     CXII. 

Dear  Mrs.  F.  Philadelphia^  Nov.  10,  1739. 

I  Have  now  time  to  anfwer  your  laft  letter.  It  gave  me  much 
fatisfaiftion.  I  rejoice  that  you  begin  to  know  yourfelf. 
If  pofTible,  fatan  will  make  us  to  think  more  highly  of  our- 
felves  than  we  ought  to  think.  I  can  tell  this  by  fatal  expe- 
rience. It  is  not  fadden  flafhcs  of  joy,  but  having  the  humi- 
lity of  Christ  Jesus,  that  muft  denominate  us  chriftians.  If 
we  hate  reproof,  we  are  fo  far  from  being  true  followers  of  the 
Lamb  of  God,  that  in  the  opinion  of  the  wifefl:  of  men,  we  arc 
brutiQi.  I  love  you  and  your  dear  hufband  in  the  bowels  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Under  God,  I  begot  you  both  through  the 
gofpel,  I  therefore  think  it  my  bounden  duty,  from  time  to 
time,  more  particularly  to  y/atch  over  your  precious  fouls.  Never 
account  me  your  enemy  for  fpeaking  the  truth.  Tell  me  of 
my  faults  in  your  turn.  I  will  pray  God  to  give  me  an  hear- 
ins;  ear  and  an  obedient  heart.  But  how  do  our  brethren  after 
their  late  difperficn  ?  I  heard  they  had  in  part  recovered  them- 
felves.  Ere  now,  I  truft,  they  have  refumed  their  courage, 
and  ftand  ftedfall:  as  a  wail  of  brafs.  If  you  vvere  all  to  be 
carried  to  prifon  the  next  moment,  I  think  you  fiiould  not  ^c-, 
cline  your  chriftian  fellowlhip  and  fociety  meetings.  My 
brethren,  in  this  refpcifl,  I  befeech  you  to  obey  God  rather 
than  man.  Happy  are  you,  if  you  patiently  fufFer  in  fuch  a 
caufe.  Our  Lord  will  ftand  by  you  ;  he  Vv'ill  fight  all  your 
battles,  and  make  ycu  more  than  conquerors  throu;^h  his  love. 
My  heart  would  fay  more  j  but  other  letters  muft  be  wrote. 
Salute  all  the  brethren  by  name,  and  accept  this  as  a  token  of 
your  no^  being  forgotten  by 

Your  afFsiclionate  brother  and  fcrvant  in  Christ, 

G,  n\ 

LETTER 


loS  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CXIII. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  S. 
Rrjcrend  a77d  dear  Sir.,  Pbiladelphia^  Nov.  lO,   I739» 

THE  favours  received  at  Hertford^  from  you  and  your 
dear  flock,  are  not  yet  out  of  my  mind  :  They  were 
exceeding  endearing,  and  deferve  my  utmoft  acknowledg- 
ments. Had  providence  permitted,  I  fliould  have  paid  you 
another  vifit  j  but  God's  thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts : 
However,  in  about  a  twelvemonth,  by  his  leave,  I  hope  to  re- 
turn amongfl:  you  once  more.  Oh  !  that  I  may  come  in  the 
bleffing  of  the  gofpel  of  peace  !  The  do£lrines  I  have  already 
preached  come  with  double  evidence  upon  my  mind  day  by 
day.  I  am  more  and  more  convinced  that  they  are  the  truths 
of  God  ;  they  agree  with  the  written  word,  and  the  experience 
of  all  the  faints  in  all  ages  :  Nothing  more  confirms  me  in  the 
belief  of  them,  than  the  oppofition  that  is  made  againft  them 
by  natural  men.  Election,  free  grace,  free  juflification  with- 
out any  regard  to  works  forefeen,  are  fuch  paradoxes  to  carnal 
minds,  that  they  cannot  away  with  them.  This  is  the  wifdom 
of  God,  which  is  foolifhnefs  with  man,  and  which,  the  Lord 
being  my  helper,  I  intend  to  exalt  and  contend  for  more  and 
more;  not  with  carnal  weapons,  that  be  far  from  me,  but 
with  the  fvvord  of  the  fpirit,  the  word  of  GoD  :  No  fword 
like  that.  Dear  Sir,  pray  for  me  that  I  may  rightly  divide 
the  word  of  truth,  and  give  to  each  his  portion  in  due  feafon. 
The  Lord  has  been  exceeding  gracious  to  me  fmce  I  faw  you 
Jaft.  Oh  let  your  fongs  be  of  him,  and  praife  him  for  all  \\\% 
wonderful  works.  As  I  am  enabled  I  remember  you  and 
yours.  Many,  when  I  was  with  them,  were  mourning  ;  ere 
now  I  hope  they  are  comforted.  He  is  faithful  who  has  pro- 
mifed,  who  alfo  will  doit.  If  they  hunger  and  thirlt  after 
Christ's  righteoufnefs,  verily  they  fliall  know  that  it  is  im* 
putcd  to  them.  That  you  and  your  whole  charge  may  be 
filled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of  Goj:),   is  the   earneil:  prayer   o£, 

ckai  Sir, 

Youi's  mod  ^ifFcdlionatcly  in  Christ  Jesu^, 

G.  ly. 


LETTEPw 


LETTERS.  109 

LETTER     CXIV. 

To  Mr.  Win.  D . 

My  Diar  Brother y  Pbllachlphia^  Nov.  10,  1739. 


Y 


OUR  laft  brought  glad  tidings.     I  endeavour  to 


thanks  for  you  with  nny  whole  heart.  I  truft  God  has 
enabled  you  to  take  the  advice  you  gave  nic,  and  that  you 
have  been  kept  from  idolatry.  Oh  my  dear  brother,  let  us 
watch  and  pray,  that  we  may  not  be  led  into  temptation.  The 
fpirit  is  willing  in  both  ;  but  the  flefh,  mine  in  particular,  Is 
exceeding  weak.  Blclled  be  God  for  fending  me  on  fiiip- 
board.  He  has  given  me  to  fee  fomething  of  that  myftery  of 
iniquity,  which  was  in  my  heart.  I  have  loathed  and  abhorred 
my  own  feif.  Tears  have  been  my  meat  day  and  night ;  but 
glory  be  to  God,  who  has  lately  afTured  me  of  a  victory 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  At  prefcnt  my  heart  is 
quite  free.  You  will  fee  what  I  have  written  to  thofc  of  your 
houfehold.  I  pray  the  Lord  to  fend  you  and  many  more  fuch. 
labourers  into  his  harveft.  I  intend  refigning  the  parfonage 
of  Savmniah.  Th  Orphan  Houfe  I  can  take  care  of,  fuppofing 
I  fhould  be  kept  at  a  diftance  ;  befides,  when  I  have  refigned 
the  parifh,  I  fhall  be  more  at  liberty  to  take  a  tour  round 
America^  if  God  fhouW  ever  call  me  to  fuch  a  work.  Hov,'- 
ever,  I  determine  nothing,  I  wait  on  the  Lord.  I  am  per- 
fuaded  he  will  fhew  what  is  his  will  :  though  my  heart  is  as 
yet  perverfe,  in  time  I  hope  to  drink  deeper  into  his  fpirit. 
How  earneftly  do  I  defire  to  be  difiblved,  that  I  may  be  with 
Christ  !  Sometimes  my  weak  body  gives  me  hopes,  that  I 
fhall  not  be  long  in  the  flefh  ;  but  then,  the  ftrength  that  is 
communicated  to  me,  and  the  confideration,  that  I  have  but 
juft  begun  my  teftimony,  fills  me  v^ith  fears,  left  I  (liould 
live  to  be  greyheaded.  But  I  endeavour  to  refign  myfclf 
wholly  to  God.  I  deiire  his  v/ill  may  be  done  in  me,  by  me, 
and  upon  me.  If  the  Lord  prefervcs  me  from  falling  into 
fm,  and  difhonouring  his  holy  name,  let  him  do  what  feem- 
eth  him  good   with 

Yours  moft  affedlionatcly  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER 


no  LETTERS. 

LETTER     CXV. 

To  Mada?n   C . 

Madmn^  Philadelphia^  Nov.  fO,  1 739. 

TO  be  made  good  by  the  righteoufnefs  and  fpirit  of  Jesus 
Christ,  is  a  diftJDguiflilng  blelTing.  To  be  made 
good,  and  yet  to  be  great  and  rich  in  this  world's  goods,  is 
ftill  more  extraordinary.  BJefied  be  God,  who  has  thus 
highly  favoured  3'ou.  I  truft  he  hath  gi^ven  you  that  faith, 
which  enables  you  to  overcome  the.  .wqrld,  and  emboldens 
you  to  confefs  both  our  Lord  and  his  fervants,  in  the  midft 
of  a  wicked  and  adulterous  generation.     Once  indeed  I  feared 

you  had  been  offended.     Dear  Mr.  M foon  convinced 

me  of  my  error.  Yourfelf,  Madam,  amply  fatisfied  me  before 
I  left  London^  that  you  were  not  afliamed  of  the  gofpel  and 
miniilers  of  Christ.  May  the  Lord  enable  you  more  and 
more  to  fet  your  face  as  a,  flint,  and  entirely  to  live  above 
the  fear  of  man.  If  the  work  goes  on  in  England^  a  trying 
time  will  come.  I  pray  God,  the  fame  fpirit  may  be  fciind 
in  all  that  profefs  the  Lord  Jesus,  as  was  in  the  primitive 
faints,  confefTors  and  martyrs.  Further  oppofition  then  will 
not  hurt,  but  highly  profit  the  church.  The  chafF  Vv^ill  be 
winnowed  from  the  wheat,  and  they  that  are  approved  be  made 
manifeft.  As  for  my  own  part,  I  expedl  nothing  but  afflidions 
and  bonds.  The  fpirit,  as  well  as  the  do6lrine  of  popery,  pre- 
vails much  in  many  proteftants  hearts ;  they  already  breathe 
out  threatnings.  What  v^'onder,  if  vvhen  in  their  power,  they 
fhould  breathe  out  {laughters  alfo  ?  This  is  my  comfort,  the 
do6lrincs  I  have  taught  are  the  do6lrines  of  fcripture,  the  doc- 
trines of  our  own  and  of  other  reformed  churches.  L'^  I  fuf- 
fer  for  preaching  them,  {0  be  it.  "  Thou  (lialt  anfwer  for  me, 
O  Lord  my  God  !"  1  rejoice  in  tha  profpedl  of  ir,  and  befeech 
thee,  my  dear  redeemer,  to  ftrengthen  me  in  a  fufFering  hour. 
You,  dear  Madam,  and  the  reft  of  my  friends,  will  not  be 
wanting  in  praying  for 

Your  moft  obliged  humble  fcrvant, 

(?.  TV. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  Ill 

LETTER     CXVI. 

To  Mr.  D ~. 

Dear  Sir^  Philadelphia^  Nov.  ic,  1739. 

GRATITUDE  and  love  call  upon  me  to  write  a  letter 
of  acknowledgment   for   favours   received   when  lately 

at .     The  Lord  remember  them  at  that  day  !   You  have 

confeiled  his  fervants  before  men,  he  has  promifed  to  confefs 
fiich,  before  his  angels  in  heaven.  The  principles  which  I 
maintain,  are  purely  fcriptural,  and  every  way  agreeable  to 
the  church  of'  England  articles.  What  I  have  been  chiefly 
concerned  about  is,  left  any  fhould  reft  in  the  bare  fpeculative 
knowledge,  and  not  experience  the  power  of  them  in  their 
own  hearts. — What  avails  it,  Sir,  if  I  am  a  patron  for  the 
righteoufnefs  of  Jesus  Christ  in  behalf  of  another,  if  at  the 
fame  time  I  am  felf-righteous  myfelf?  I  am  thus  jealous,  I 
truft  with  a  godly  jealoufy,  becaufe  I  fee  fo  many  felf-deceiv- 
ers  among  my  acquaintance.  There  is  one  in  particular 
(whom  I  love,  and  for  whom  I  moft  heartily  pray)  who  ap- 
proves of  my  doctrine,  and  hath  heard  it  preached  many  years 
paft,  but  I  could  never  hear  him  tell  of  his  experiences,  or 
of  what  God  has  done  for  his  foul.  He  hath  excellent  good 
defires  and  intentions,  but  I  think  he  wants  fomething  more  : 
Lord,  for  thy  infmite  mercy's  fake,  grant  he  may  know  him- 

fclf  even  as  he  is  known  1   I  need  not  tell  Mr.  D ,  who 

this  dear  friend  is  —  you  are  intimately  acquainted  with  him, 
you  love  him  as  you  do  your  own  heart ;  you  are  never  out 
of  his  company.  Oh,  dear  Sir,  be  not  angry.  Methinks 
I  hear  you,  by  this  time,  making  an  application,  and  faying, 
'^  Then  I  am  the  man.'*  True,  dear  Sir,  I  confeis  you  arc. 
But  love,  love  for  your  better  part,  your  foul,  your  precious 
foul,  this  love  conftrains  me  to  m^q  this  freedom.  You  are 
more  noble  than  to  take  it  ill  at  my  hands  ;  I  could  not  bear 
even  to  fufpedl  that  you  deceived  yourfelf,  dear  Sir,  and  not 
tell  you  fuch  a  fufpicion  was  in  my  heart.  T'hat  God  may 
powerfully  convince  you  of  felf-righteoufnefs,  and  cloath  you 
wich  the  righteoufnefs  of  his  dear  Son  ;   that  he  may    till   you 

v;ith 


U2  LETTERS. 

with  his  grace,  and  thereby  fit  you   for,    and  at  laft  tran- 
llate  you  to,  his  glory,  is  the  hearty  prayer  o^,  dear  Sir, 
Your  moft  obliged  and  affectionate  friend 

and  humble  fervant, 

G.  tF. 

LETTER    CXVII. 

To  a  Servant, 

Philadelphia^  Nov,  lo,  1739* 

WHEN  I  was  at  Mr. ,  I  fear  I  did  not  afk  you 
often  enough  what  God  had  done  for  your  foul.  I 
write  this  to  beg  your  pardon.  Want  of  time  was  the  caufe. 
1  believe  Christ  hath  manifefted  himfelf  to  your  foul. 
Shew  it,  I  entreat  you,  by  labouring  to  adorn  his  gofpel  in 
all  things.  A  meek  and  quiet  fpirlt  is  in  the  fight  of  God 
of  great  price.  You  are  happy  in  a  place.  I  hope  you  know 
and  are  thankful  for  it.  Take  heed  that  you  ferve  with  fin- 
glenefs  of  heart,  as  unto  Christ.  Go  when  you  are  bid  to 
go,  come  when  you  are  bid  to  come  ;  when  commanded  to  do 
this,  do  it  with  all  your  might.  Bear  with  the  perverfe- 
TieCs  of  others.  Remember  how  filent  Mary  was,  when  her 
fifler  Alar t ha  pecvifhly  faid,  "  Lord,  careft  thou  not  that 
my  fifter  has  left  me  to  ferve  alone?"  My  unfeigned  love 
attends  all  the  Martha's  and  Marys  of  your  acquaintance.  I 
pray  they  may  in  all  things  walk  as  v/omen  profefnng  god- 
linefs.  To  hear  of  your  progrefs  in  the  gofpel,  would  much 
pleafe 

Your  fincere  friend  and  fervant, 

G,  IV, 

LETTER    CXVIII. 

To  ihc  Rev.  Mr, 

Rev.  and  dear  Sir,  Philadelphia,  Nov.  ic,  1739. 

THE  many  favours  I  have  received  at  your  hands,  are  llill 
deeply  impreficd  upon  my  heart  j  as  I  have  often  faid, 
fo  I  fay  again,  I  hope  they  v/ill  never  be  forgotten  by  me  lb 
long  as  I  live.  But,  reverend  Sir,  I  have  obferved  fome  par- 
ticulars in  your  principles  and  condud,  v/hich  I  muft  confefs 
have  given  me  much  concernj  and  of  which,  from  love  and 
2  gratitude. 


LETTERS.  11^ 

gratitude,  I  think  myfelf  obliged  to  itifoim  you. I  be- 
lieve, dear  Sir,  you  have  often  been  inwardly  offended  at  me, 
becaufe  you  fufpeiSled,  I  thought  you  to  be  no  true  cbritVian. 
Your  fufpicions  were  not  groundlefs.  i  cannot  yet  rh.nk, 
that  a  thorough  work  of  converfioii  was  ever  wrou^,;  t  upon 
your  foul.  I  fear  you  deny,  that  '*  Jescjs  Christ  is  truly 
and  properly  GoD."  I  infer  this,  from  your  not  reading  the 
NUene  Creeds  and  your  palliating  that  text  I  once  urged  to 
prove  it.  '*  I  and  my  Father  are  one."  I  doubt  alfo,  your 
owning  "  Original  Sin."  This  I  gather  from  your  wonder- 
ing I  fhould  touch  on  fuch  a  point,  when  I  preached  my 
fermon  on  juftification  by  J  Esus  Christ.  Befides,  the  fad 
definition  you  once  gave  of  religion  in  a  letter  to  your  brother 
* ;  the  ftranger  alfo  which  you  feemcd  to  be  to  the  *^  de- 
vil's temptations, "  when  I  converfed  with  you  ;  and  your 
fuppofing,  that  converfion  was  to  be  wrought  in  the  foul 
by  moral  perfuafion  ;  all  thefe  put  together,  dear  Sir,  con- 
vince me,  that  you  were  never  yet  truly  and  effectually  born 
again  of  God.  Befides,  Reverend  Sir ^  does  your  going  weekly 
to  a  club,  where  the  company  play  at  cards,  and  fit  up  iate 
at  night,  does  this,  dear  Sir,  agree  with  your  holy  vocation^ 
either  as  a  chriftian  or  a  minifler .?  Be  not  offended,  Rev.  Sir^ 
at  this  plainnefs  of  fpeech.  I  have  forborne  a  long  while  ; 
love  and  gratitude  would  not  fuffer  me  to  forbear  any  longer. 
I  wifli  I  had  no  occafion  to  write  in  this  mianner.  I  believe 
you  fo  ingenuous  as  not  to  be  angry  with  me.  I  pray  GoO 
to  quell  all  refentment  in  your  heart,  and  fend  you  his  holy 
fpirit  to  guide  you  into  all  truth.  Your  brother's  eyes  are 
now  in  fome  meafure  opened  :  he  is  convinced  of  the  per- 
feft  righteoufnefs  wrought  out  for  him  by  Jesus  Christ, 
and  ere  now  I  hope  hath  received  faith  to  apply  it  to  his  heart. 
This  is  the  dodlrine  of  the  church  o^  E?igland.  Unlefs  you 
hold  this  and  other  evangelical  principles,  how,  dear  Sir,  is 
it  confident  with  fmcerity  to  eat  her  bread  .?  V/ith  humility, 
refpeft,  and  love,  do  I  offer  thefe  things  to  your  confidera- 
tion— Be  pleafed  to  weigh  them  in  a  proper  balance,  and 
refledt  from  what  principle  they  are  wrote,  and  I  am  perfuadcj 
you  will  not  be  offended  at,  reverend  and  dear  Sir, 
You  moft  obliged  friend  and  fervant, 

Vol.  I,  J  LETTER 


114 


LETTERS. 


I 


LETT  E  R     CXIX. 

Dear  Mr,  S PJAladclphia^  Nov.  lO,  1739^ 

Love  an  IjracUic  indeed,  I  love  a  catholic  fpirit  dcftitute  of 
guile  ;  you  I  am  perfuadcd  are  thus  minded.  The  Lord 
hath  highly  favoured  you  :  he  hath  given  you  a  meek  and 
quiet  fpirit.  My  heart  hath  been  knit  to  you,  ever  fince  God 
firft  brought  us  together.  Oh  pray,  that  what  I  admire  in 
another,  I  may  imitate  myfelf,  and  have  the  graces  of  Jesus 
Christ  damped  upon  my  heart.  It  fills  me  with  confufion, 
whenever  I  confider  how  far  I  am  from  his  likenefs.  Alas  ! 
What  would  become  of  me,  was  I  to  be  faved  by  any  thing 
within  myfelf.  BlelTed  be  God,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  my. 
whole  righteoufnefs.  By  virtue  of  that  I  know  I  am  juftified, 
I  believe  I  fhall  be  fantStified,  and  am  afi'ured  I  fhall  be  ever- 
laftingly  redeemed  :  for  God  loved  me  with  an  everlafting 
love.  Oh,  dear  Sir,  the  profpedl  of  an  hereafter  fills  my 
foul  Vv'ith  comfort.  Then  (hall  I  have  enough  of  your  com- 
pany, and  of  the  other  children  of  God.  The  Lord  give 
me  patience  to  wait  till  my  blefled  change  cometh.  He  often 
gives  me  fuch  forctaftes  of  the  glory  to  be  revealed  in  us,  that 
I  want  to  leap  my  feventy  years.  But  in  a  degree,  I  may 
fay  with  my  blefled  maftcr,  "  I  have  a  cup  to  drink  of,  and  a 

baptifm  to  be  baptized  with.'*     Dear   Mr.  S wiil  fee 

me  humbled,  I  believe,  as  much  as  once  exalted  ;  L  look  for 
*'  Away  with  him,  away  with  him,  "  every  day.  Then,  I  trull:, 
I  {hall  begin  in  earncfl:  to   be  a  difciple  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Even  in  fuch  an  hour,  I  believe  dear  Mr.  5 will   dare 

own 

His  aiFctSlionatc  though  moft  unworthy  friend, 

brother  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CXX. 

Dear  Sir y  Philadelphiay  Nov,  lO,  1739. 

TO  i-hink,   that  you  fliould  be  engaged  publickly   to  prav 
for   me,  hath  often   given  me  much  fatisfa<5lion,  and 
now  excites  me  to  fend  vou  this  letter  0^  thawks  :  help  me 


LETTERS.  115 

ftil],  help  me,  dear  Sir,  by  your  prayers.  They  will  be  a 
means  of  lifting  up  my  hands  when  they  hang  down,  and 
of  ftrengthning  my  feeble  knees.  Though  in  all  things  we 
do  not,  yet  in  cflcntials  we  both  think  and  fpaak  the  fame 
ihings.  I  wifh  all  nanries  anu)ng  the  faints  of  God  were 
fwallowed  up  in  that  one  of  Chnjiian.  —  I  long  for  profellbrs 
to  leave  off  placing  religion  in  faying  '*  I  am  a  Churchman," 
*'  I  am  a  Dillenter."  My  language  to  fuch  is,  *'  Arc  you  of 
Christ  ?  If  fo,  I  love  you  with  all  my  heart  :"  for  this  rea- 
fon  chiefly,  dear  Sir,  my  heart  is  drawn  out  towards  you. 
On  this  account,  though  io  long  in  Christ  before  mc^ 
I  make  bold  to  call  you  brother,  and  to  wifh  you  God  fpeed  : 
blefied  be  his  name,  you  have  little  reafon  to  cry  out ;  "  My 
leannefs,  my  leannefs."  Many  gracious  fouls  are  among  your 
flock,  they  love  to  be  fed  with  the  fmcere  milk  of  the  word. 
I  hope  they  will  be  your  joy  and  crown  of  rejoicing  in  the  day 
of  the  Lord  Jesus.  I  often  think  of  them  with  pleafure  ; 
pray  falute  them  moft  affectionately  in  my  name,  and  exhorc 
them  to  entreat  the  L0R.D  that  I  may  make  full  proof  of  my 
miniftry.  In  about  a  twelvemonth^  God  willing,  I  intend 
returning  to  England  \  I  wifli  it  m.ay  be  in  the  fulnefs  of 
the  bleffmg  of  the  gofpel   of  peace.     I  think  you  are  happy 

in  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  B 5 .     I   truft  he 

will  be  as  good  as  he  is  great,  and  after  he  is  made  perfe6i: 
through  manifold  temptations  and  trials,  fit  down  with  you^ 
and  all  the  other  fpirits  of  juft  men  made  perfect,  in  heaven. 
This  is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  affe(Stionatc  brother  and  fellow  labourer 

in  our  Lord's  vineyard^ 
G,  IK 

LETTER    CXXI. 

My  d^ar  Hr other ^  Philadelphia^  Nov,  lo,  1739- 

YOU  cannot  conceive  how  often  you  have  been  upon  my 
thoughts,  fmce  I  faw  you,  Eternity  itfelf  I  hope  will 
not  diminifh,  but  more  and  more  increafe  that  love,  which  I 
bear  you  from  my  heart.  Your  ftature  reminds  me  of  little 
Zaubeus  :  he  that  called  him,  I  am  perfuaded  hath  called  you  : 
Have  you  uqx  heard  him  fay  to  your  foul,  *'  I  am  your  fal- 

1  2  vation  ? 


ii6  LETTERS. 

vation  ?"  If  fo,  fear  not,  thou  art  a  fon  of  David,  Let 
worldly  affairs  be  ever  fo  bad,  he  that  has  given  you  his  own 
dear  Son,  will  make  you  more  than  conqueror  in  all  things. 
Still  dare  to  own  our  dear  Loud  before  m>en.  It  is  no  fcan- 
dal  for  a  follower  of  Jesus  Christ  to  be  poor.  Our  Lord 
was  poor  before  us — So  that  we  are  rich  in  faith  and  good 
works,  it  is  not  much  mater  if  we  are  not  rich  in  this 
world's  goods.  Having  Christ,  though  we  have  nothing 
elfe,  we  poflefs  all  things.  However,  fmce  godlinefs  hath 
the  promife  of  the  life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  that  which  is 
to  come,  I  would  advife  you  to  plead  the  promifcs  for  tempo- 
ral blcilings.  In  the  name  of  Jesus,  many  a  fweet  morfcl 
and  opportune  fupply,  have  I  fetched  in  from  God  by  this 
means.  That  is  the  v^^ay  I  live,  and  hope  fhall  coiitinue  {o 
to  live  till  death  is  fwallov/ed  up  in  viilory.  Death  — 
what  a  comfortable  v^ord  is  that  for  a  believer  !  Christ 
hath  taken  the  fting  of  it  away ;  henceforward  it  is  no 
longer  a  king  of  terrors,  but  a  welcome  mciFenger  to  con- 
duel  the  faints  to  glory.  My  dear  brother,  let  us  comfort 
one  another  with  thefe  things.  We  are  not  to  live  here  al- 
ways ;  our  inheritance  is  above.  When  Christ  who  is  our 
life  fhall  appear,  then  ftiall  we  alfo  appear  with  him  in  glory. 
Why  then  fiiould  we  value  thefe  light  affiiclions,  which  are 
but  for  a  moment  ?  No,  let  us  patiently  bear  our  crofs,  fmce 
we  are  fo  fhortly  to  vvear  a  crown.  Oh  the  riches  of  free, 
diftinguifliing  grace  !  Why  were  you  and  I  taken  into  fa- 
vor? "  Even  fo  Father,  for  fo  it  feemed  good  in'  thy  fight." 
O  !  my  friend,  my  brother,  let  us  for  ever  extol  free  grace  ! 
However  others  exalt  man  and  debafe  God,  let  us  exalt  God  :| 
and  debafe  man.  Let  Jesus  Christ  have  all  the  glorv  :  f 
for  he  is  the  author,  carrier  on,  and  finifhcr  of  our  faith. 
He  hath  begun  it  in  time,  he  fhall  compleat  it  in  eternity.  — 
My  brother,  I  have  been  fo  expanded  u'hilil;  writing,  that  I 
muft  refer  you  to  other  friends,  to  know  hov/  gracioufly  God 
hath  dealt  with 

Your  affedionate  brother  in  Christ, 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  117 

LETTER     CXXII. 

Dear  Mr.  TV,  Philadelphia^  Nov.  10,  1739. 

I  Long  to  be  in  heaven,  chiefly  to  fee  God  even  as  he  is  ; 
next,  that  I  may  have  my  foul  fatisfied  with  the  blifsful 
communion  of  faints.  There  I  hope  to  fee  you  and  your 
wife,  and  to  Ihew  how  finccrely  I  love  you  both  in  the  bow- 
els of  Jesus  Christ.  My  heart  has  went  along  with  m.y 
hand,  when  I  ufcd  to  ftrctch  it  out  to  you  in  the  field.  I 
only  v/anted  more  time  to  converfe  with  you.  Oh  my  dear 
brother^  let  us  keep  ourfelves  in  the  love  of  God  through 
faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  then,  yet  a  little  v/hile  v.'e  fhall 
meet  in  glory.  As  faith  is  the  beginning,  fo  faith  is  the  end 
of  the  chriftian  courfe.  Let  us  keep  this  grace  in  continual 
exercife,  and  v.'e  may  bid  death  and  hell  defiance.  Faith 
makes  us  more  than  conquerors  over  all ;  I  fpeakthus  to  you, 

becaufe  I  hope  you  and  dear  Mrs. have  been   in  fome 

meafure  made  partakers  of  this  free  gift  of  God.  I  pray  God 
to  incrcafe  it  more  and  more,  till  it  be  fwallowed  up  in  the 
fruition  of  our  fupreme  good.  Perhaps  our  faith  may  be  put  to 
the  trial  ere  it  be  long  ;  I  expect  nothing  but  fufierings.  Oh 
pray  that  1  may  be  faithful  unto  the  end,  and  that  a  crown  of 
Jife  may  be  given  to 

Your  afFe£lionate  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  rr. 

LETTER     CXXIIL 

To  Mr,  H. 
My  dear  Brother^  Philadelphia^   Nov.    10,1739. 

THE  chriftian  love  I  bear  to  both  your  fifter  and  you, 
excites  me  to  fend  you  a  line.  Providence  prevented 
your  failing  with  us  ;  but  as  we  have  drank  into  the  fame  fpi- 
rit,  I  hope  brotherly  love  will  continue  and  incrcafe  between 
us,  to  all  eternity.  I  have  often  v/reftlcd  in  prayer  for  you 
fmce  we  have  been  on  board.  Your  fifter  has  watered  thofe 
prayers  with  her  tears,  and  I  truft  the  Lord  was  entreated  of 
us.  Our  voyage  has  been  highly  profitable  to  our  fouls.  I 
can  never  be  thankful  eaough  for  this  fweet  retreat.  My 
^ear  brother,  how  do  you  find  your  heart  ?  Mine  Is  like  Eze- 

1  3  kicrs 


Ii8  LETTER    S. 

hers  temple^  the  farther  I  fearch  into  it,  the  greater  abomina- 
tions I  difcover ;  but  there  is  a  fountain  opened  for  iln  and  all 
uncleannefs.  There,  my  dear  brother,  we  may  jjoth  wafh  and 
be  made  clean.  The  Lord  hath  already  vouchfafed  us  fome 
afiuranccs  of  his  love.  Oh  let  us  continually  keep  faith  in 
exer.cife,  till  it  be  entirely  fwaljowcd  up  in  the  boundlefs 
pcean  of  the  beatific  vifion.  That  God  may  daily  renew 
you  by  his  fpirit,  and  more  and  more  fit  you  for  the  happj- 
nefs  which  awaits  you  above,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of 

Your  aftectronate  though  vi^eak  brother  iu  Christ, 

LETTER    CXXIV. 

To  Mrs.  — . 

Aly  Dear  Friend^  Philadelphia^  Nov.  lo.  1 739. 

SHALL  I  have  any  leifure  time  and  not  write  you  a  line 
of  thanks  for  your  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  love  ? 
God  forbid.  I  know  not  your  name,  but  I  neither  forget 
your  houfe,  nor  favours.  The  Lord  feward  you  a  thoufand 
fold  !  I  only  fear  that  you  have  my  perfon  too  much  in  ad- 
miration. If  you  look  to  the  inftrument  lefs,  and  to  Gop 
more,  it  v/ill  be  better.  By  the  grace  of  God  alone,  I  am 
what  I  am.  If  any  good  hath  been  done  to  you  or  others,  it 
was  not  I,  but  the  grace  of  God  that  was  in  me.  Oh,  not 
unto  me,  not  unto  me,  but  unto  God's  name  be  all  the 
<y\o\y,  I  pray  God  to  make  you  partaker  of  the  fame  grace; 
for  I  would  not  have  you  an  hearer  only,  I  would  have 
voii  a  doer  alfo.  Surely  you  are  more  noble  and  wife,  than 
to  deceive  your  own  foul.  And  yet  it  is  but  too  notorious, 
that  numbers  reft  in  the  outward  form,  and  are  ftrangers  to 
the  inward  power  of  godlincfs  in  their  hearts.  Do  not  ypu 
fo  learn  Christ.  Beg  of  God  that  you  may  feci  his  fpirit 
working  mightily  in  your  foul,  and  witnelling  with  your  fpi- 
rit that  yo\i  lire  a  child  of  God.  I  could  go  on,  but  other 
letters  muft  be  wrote — Pray  tender  my  love  to  all  that  dined 
with  me  at  vour  houfc  ;  exhort  them  to  keep  clofe  by  faith 
to  Christ,  and  to  pray  to  and  give  him  thanks  in  my  behalf  j 
fo;  he  hath  dealt  moft  gracioufly  with 

Youi  obliged  friend  and  fervant, 

^  E  T  1^  E  li 


LETTER    S.  119 

LETTER     CXXV. 

Dear  Mrs. ,  Philadelphia^  Nov.  10.  1739. 

STILL  I  mu(t  repeat  my  former  requeft.  Be  not  angry 
becaufe  I  did  not  vifit  you  oftener.  I  love,  I  honour  you 
the  more  Jbr  being  of  low  degree.  You  are  thereby  rendered 
more  conformable  to  our  dear  and  common  Lord.  His 
bufinefs  alone  prevented  my  feeing  you  fo  often  as  I  would. 
However,  though  abfent,  I  rejoice  that  our  Saviour  has  dealt 
fo  lovingly  with  you.  As  afflidions  have  abounded,  confo- 
lations  have  much  more  abounded.  I  am  perfuaded,  you  can 
affirm  that  God  is  the  father  of  all  mercies,  and  the  God  of 
all  comforts.  Has  he  not  comforted  you  my  dear  fifter  in  all 
your  tribulation  ?  He  that  hath,  and  docs,  will  ftill  dejiver 
you.  Y^t  a  little  while,  and  he  that  comcth  will  come,  and 
will  not  tarry.  Shortly  I  fuppofe  the  earthly  houfc  of 
this  your  tabernacle  will  be  dilTolved  :  fear  not,  you  (hall  then 
be  cloathed  upon  with  your  houfe  which  is  from  heaven. 
Oh  pray  that  fuch  honour  may  be  alfo  conferred  on 

Your  unworthy  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER    CXXVL 

Dear  Mr.  C ,  Philadelphia^  Nov.  lO,  1739. 

I  Cannot  forget  your  frequent  attendance  on  my  miniflry 
when  iaft  at  London.  I  am  prefled  in  fpirit  to  write  you 
a  line,  to  exhort  you  to  contend  earneftly  for  the  faith  once 
delivered  to  the  faints.  You  have  learned  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.  You  have  been  taught  it  of  (tod.  Electing  love 
hath  fnatchcd  you  as  a  brand  out  0/  the  fire,  and  you  have 
followed  our  Lord  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach. 
The  Lord's  tabernacle  has  lately  been  pitched  in  the  fields. 
Ere  long  it  may  be  driven  into  the  wildernefs.  I  hope  you 
will  follow  it  even  there.  The  divine  prcfencc,  I  am  per- 
fuaded, will  accompany  it.  Flath  not  your  heart  often  burnt 
within  you  when  the  Scriptures  have  been  opening  to  you, 
though  not  under  a  church  roof  ?  God  is  not  confined  to 
places.  Wherever  his  people  arc,  he  will  find  and  vifit  them. 
Our  Lord  (oh  (lupendous  lov^!)   has   been  pleafcd  to  fail 

I  4,  Willi 


I20  LETTER    S. 

v/ith  US.  I  have  tafted  both  of  his  rod  and  ftafF;  each  has 
given  me  unfpeakable  comfort.  My  dear  brother,  help  me 
to  praue  him.  Who  io  great,  fo  good  a  God,  as  our  God? 
In  about  a  tu'elve- month  I  hope  to  fee  you  again.  Oh  pray 
for  me,  my  dear  brother,  that  I  may  meanv/hile  be  let  fur- 
ther into  the  myfteries  of  godljnefs,  "  God  manifeft  in  the 
flefji."  As  yet,  Ifind  I  am  but  a  child,  and  a  meer  novice, 
B  It  this  is  my  comfort,  "  The  Lord  who  has  begun  will 
cany  on  the  good  work,"  till  I  am  grown  a  ilrong  man  in 
Christ  Jegus.  I  long  to  know  more  of  his  love,  I  hunger 
and  third  after  the  teachings  of  his  bleiTeJ  fpirit.  You,  I  am 
perfuaded,  are  no  otherwife  minded.  Still  prefs  on  and  faint 
not.  Yet  a  little  while  and  you  fhall  enter  into  pcrfe6t  joy 
with 

Your  affedtionate  brother  in  our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER     CXXVIL 

Reverend  Sir ^  New-Tor k^  Nov.  16,    1 739. 

SEEING  a  paiTage  in  your  letter  to  Mr.  P- concerning 
me,  I  find  my  he-rt  immediately  fct  to  fend  you  a  line. 
I  love  to  be  acquainted  with  the  true  and  old  fervants  of 
Jesus  Christ,  becaufe  I  delight  to  fit  at  their  feet  and  receive 
inllrudtion  from  them.  You  faid  right,  reverend  Sir,  when 
you  faid  "  I  was  but  a  young  divine."  Indeed  I  am  a  novice 
in  the  things  of  God.  I  can  only  fay,  that  I  defire  to  know 
the  whole  will  of  God,  that  I  may  communicate  it  to 
others.  Christ  is  fo  good  a  mafter,  that  I  would  have  all 
men  drawn  after  him.  He  is  pleafed  to  let  me  experience  daily 
teachings  of"  his  blefled  fpirit,   and  to  fnow    me  the  riches, 

frecncrfs,   and  eternal  duration  of  his  love. But  as  yet  I 

only  fee  men  as  trees  walking.  Oh  pray,  reverend  Sir,  that 
the  Lord  would  again  touch  me,  and  enable  me  to  fee  all 
things  clearly.  I  dcllre  it  only  for  the  good  of  his  church. 
Reverend  Sir,  into  what  a  lethargy  is  the  chriftian  world 
fallen  !  Foolifh  and  wife  virgins  are  all  flumbering  and  fleeping. 
It  is  high  time  for  all  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  to  lift  up  their 
voices  like  trumpets,  and  to  give  warning  of  the  bridegroom's 

coming  ;   many  I   hope  are  already  alarmed. Fh'iladei- 

4  iiliia 


LETTERS.  i2t 

phia  people  receive  the  gofpel  gladly.  Here,  indeed,  has  been 
(ome  little  oppofition,  and  therefore  I  hope  fuccefs  will  be 
given  to  the  word,  and  what  has  been  done  in  England^  the 
journal  fent  with  this  will  inform  you.  Oh  reverend  Sir,  I 
befeech  you  give  thanks  for  me  with  your  whole  heart.  En- 
treat the  Lord  that  I  may  be  kept  humble  and  dependent 
upon  our  dear  Lord  Jesus.  God  willing,  in  about  feven 
months  I  hope  to  fee  Neiu  England  in  my  return  to  Europe. 
An  efFejSlual  door  is  there  opened,  and  no  wonder  that  there 
are  many  adverfaries.  Shortly  I  expert  to  fuffer  for  my 
dear  mafter.  May  I  not  deny  him  in  that  hour !  If  you 
would  pleafe  to  favour  me  with  a  line,  I  (hould  be  glad  to 
continue  this  correfpondence,  and  acquaint  you  from  time  to 
time  how  the  work  of  God  goes  on.  Mr.  N  ■  ■  will  con- 
vey any  thing  you  fhall  fend.  May  the  Lord  richly  reward 
both  him  and  you,  for  your  love  to 

The  moft  unprofitable  of  all  his  fervants, 

G\  IV. 

.if^H^-        LETTER     CXXVIIL 

Rev,  Sir,  New  York,  Nov.  1 6,  1 739. 

MR.  N ',  and  the  report  of  your  fin  cere  love  for  our 
dear  Lord  Jesus,  embolden  me  to  write  this.  I  re- 
joice for  the  great  things  God  has  done  for  many  fouls  in 
Northampton,  i  hope,  God  willing,  to  come  and  fee  them  in 
a  k\v  months.  The  journal  fent  with  th/s,  will  fhew  you 
what  the  Lord  is  about  to  do  in  Europe.  Now  is  the  gather- 
ing time.  A  winnowing  time  will  fiiortly  fuccecd.  Perfecu- 
tion  and  the  power  of  religion  will  always  keep  pace.  Our 
Lord's  word  begins  to  be  glorified  in  America.  Many  hearts 
gladly  receive  it.  Oh  Rev.  Sh\  it  grieves  me  to  fee  people, 
every  where  ready  to  perifh  for  lack  of  knowledge.  I  care 
not  what  I  fufFer,  fo  that  feme  may  be  brought  home  to 
Christ.  I  am  but  a  ftripling,  but  the  Lord  choofes  the 
weak  things  of  this  world  to  confound  the  ftrong.     I  fliould 

rejoice  to  be  inftrutSted  by  you.     Mr.  A^ will  convey  a 

letter  to  me — May  the  God  of  all  grace  give  you  all  peace  and 
joy  in  believing  !  May  he  increafe  you  more  and  more,  both 
you  and  your  children  !   May  you  cv^^ry  day  be  feafted,  and 

built 


i2!i  LETTERS. 

built  up  with  (rdh  anointings  of  his  blelTcd  Tpirit  !  And  by 
your  fervent  prayers,  may  you  be  enabled  to  hold  up  the 
hands  of,  reverend  Sir, 

Your  unworthy  brother,   fellow  labourer 

and  fervant  in  our  dear  Lord, 

G.  ir, 

LETTER    CXXIX. 

Hon.  Mother^  Neiu  Tork^  Nov.  i6,  1 7  39. 

LASl'  night  God  brought  me  hither  in  health  and  fafety. 
I  mud  not  omit  informing  you  of  it.  Here  is  likely  tp 
be  fome  oppofition,  and  confcquently  a  likelihood  that  fome 
good  will  be  done.  New  friends  are  raifed  up  every  day 
whitherfoever  we  go  ;  the  people  of  Philadelphia  have  ufed 
me  mod  courteouflv,  and  many  I  believe  have  been  pricked 
to  the  heart.  God  willing,  I  leave  this  place  next  Monday., 
and  in  about  a  fortnight  think  to  fet  out  for  Firginia  by  land. 
In  about  a  twelvemonth,  I  propofe  returning  to  England; 
exped  then  to  have  the  happinefs  of  feeing  me  fufFer  for  my 
mafter's  fake.  Oh  that  God  may  enable  you  to  rejoice  in  it  ' 
If  you  have  the  fpirit  of  Christ  you  will  rejoice,  if  not,  you 
will  be  forrowful.  Oh  my  honoured  mother,  my  foul  is  in 
djftrefs  for  you  :  Flee,  flee  I  befeech  you  to  Jesus  Christ 
by  faith.  Lay  hold  on  Him,  and  do  not  let  Him  go.  God 
hath  given  you  convi6lions.  Arifc,  arife,  and  never  reft  till 
they  end  in  a  found  converfion.  Dare  to  deny  yourfelf.  My 
honoured  mother,  I  befeech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus,  dare  to  take  up  your  crofs  and  follow 
Christ. 

I  am,  honoured  mother,  your  ever  dutiful 
though  unworthy  fon, 

G.  n\ 

LETTER     CXXX.  ^ 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  P -. 

Rev.  and  dear  Sir,  Philadelphia,  Xcv.  28,  17  39. 

I  HAVE  been  much  concerned  fmce  I  faw  you,  left  1  be- 
haved not  with  that  humility  toward  you,  which  is  due 
from  a  babe  to  a  father  in  Christ  :  but  you  know,  reve- 
rend Sir,  how  difficult  it  is  to  meet  with  fuccefsj  and  not  be 

pufFed 


LETTERS.  12^ 

puffed  up  with  it,  and  therefore  if  any  fuch  thing  was  difcern- 
ibic  in  my  condu<St,  oh  pity  me,  and  pray  to  the  Lord  to 
heal  my  pride.  All  I  can  fay  is,  that  I  defire  to  learn  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  be  meek  and  lowly  in  heart  j  but  my  corruptions 
are  fo  ftrong,  and  my  employ  fo  dangerous,  that  fometimcs  I  am 
afraid.  But  wherefore  do  I  fear  ?  He  that  hath  given  me 
himfelf,  will  he  not  freely  give  me  all  things?  By  his  help 
then  I  am  refolved  to  afk  till  I  receive,  to  feek  till  I  find,  and 
to  knock  till  I  know  myfelf.  BlefTed  be  God,  I  have  had  a 
fweet  retirement  to  fcarch  out  my  fpirit  and  bewail  the  infir- 
mities of  my  public  miniftrations.  Alas  !  who  can  hope  to 
bejuflified  by  his  v/orks  ?  My  preaching,  praying,  &c.  are 
only  fphidida  peccata.  The  blood  of  Christ  applied  to  my 
foul  by  a  living  faith,  is  the  only  thing  that  can  render  them 
acceptable.  This  is  the  doctrine  which  you,  reverend  Sir, 
have  been  enabled  to  preach,  and  for  which  no  doubt  you 
have  fuffered  reproach  :  But  you  are  now  almofl  at  your  jour- 
ney's end.  Yet  a  little  while,  and  you  Ihall  enter  into  your 
Mailer's  joy.  In  the  miean  while  the  Lord,  I  am  perfuaded, 
will  keep  you  as  the  apple  of  his  eye.  He  will  not  forfake 
you  when  you  are  grey-headed,  and  your  flrength  failethyon. 
The  moment  you  are  ripe  for  our  common  Mafler,  he  fhall 
tranflate  you  to  glory ;  Ipra^fequar.  lama  child  3  I  mufl 
be  tutored  and  made  meet  by  fufferings  to  be  a  partaker  of  the 
heavenly  inheritance  with  the  faints  in  light :  But  I  am  per- 
fuaded God  will  for  Christ's  fake  finally  fave,  reverend 
Sir, 

YoiLir  unworthy  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CXXXL 

Bear  Brother  J,  Philadelphia,  Nov.  2??,  1739. 

INDEED  I  love  you.  Why  ?  Bccaufe  I  hope  you  are  an 
Ifraelite  indeed  j  and  one  of  thofe  babes  to  whom  it  has 
been  our  Lord's  good  pleafure  to  reveal  ihe  myfleries  of  the 
kingdom  of  God.  It  is  fpecial  ;  it  is  a  diflinguifhing  gift. 
Be  humble,  d-ear  Jamcs^  be  humble.  Talk  little,  and  think 
much.  A  wile  man  will  guide  his  words  with  difcretion.  Be 
^?atous  for  your  dear  Mailer.     Let  a  zeal  for  his  honour  even 

eat 


124  LETTERS. 

cat  you  up  ;  but  then  beg  of  God  that  it  may  be  according  to 
knowled^^'j.  Stuiid  faft  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Chk.ist 
hath  maJc  you  free,  and  be  not  again  entangled  with  a  yoke 
of  bondage.  Join  not  one  of  your  works  with  your  faith,  in 
order  to  juftify  you  before  God  :  And  if  God  gives  you  a 
fpirit  of  prayer  and  fupplicatiori,  fear  not  to  pray  as  the  fpirit 
gives  you  utterance.  Man  may  deride,  but  ChPvIst  will  ap- 
prove and  accept  you.  Dear  'Jav.ies^  you  fee  I  do  not  forget 
you.  I  hope  your  little  fociety  increafes,  and  th.it  the  Lord 
will  always  be  adding  to  it  fuch  as  fliall  be  Aived.  Salute 
them  all  mofl  kindly  in  my  name.  Exhort  them  to  continue 
^n  the  grace  of  God,  and  to  pray  for,  dear  ^ames. 

Your  affectionate  friend,  brother,  and  fervant, 

G.  JK 

LETTER    CXXXII. 

Dear  Airs.  S,  Philadelphia,  Nov.  28,  1739. 

HAS  the  Lord  yet  heard  your  prayer  r  Often  have  I  heard 
you  fay,  "  Oh  !  that  I  had  received  the  faith  !"  As 
often,  to  the  bcft  of  my  knowledge,  have  I  laid,  "  Jmen.^* 
£re  now,  I  hope  our  common  Mafter  has  fulfilled  all  your 
petitions,  and  given  you  your  heart's  defire.  If  not,  v/hat 
binders  ?  Our  Lord  doth  not  want  power,  for  he  is  Almighty; 
he  does  not  want  a  will,  for  he  invites  you  to  come  unto  him. 
Search  your  heart,  and  fee  what  is  the  reafon  the  King  of 
glory  does  not  enter  in.  Is  it  too  full  of  the  world?  Renounce 
U.  Do  you  not  afk  often  enough  ?  Refolve  to  afk  ofiencr. 
Dq  you  look  too  much  to  fome  who  fay  they  have  received 
faith,  but  do  not  bring  forth  good  fruit  ?  Henceforward  look 
only  to  God  and  your  own  foul.  Or  do  you  not  know  the 
reafon  I  A(k  our  Lord  to  (hew  you,  and  indeed  he  will ;  for 
he  hath  promifed  to  fulfil  the  defires  of  them  that  fear  him. 
Your  Coiipi  can  afiure  you  of  this.  Oh  follow  him,  as  he 
does  Christ,   and  you  will  be  as  happy   as  your  heart  can 

wifh.     Dear  Mrs.  *S ,   I  am,  v/ith  all  poffible  thanks  foi: 

paff  favours. 

Your  obliged  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  TV.  ' 


L  E  T  I'  E  11 


i 


LETTER     S.  125 

LETTER     CXXXIII. 

To   Mrs.   Martha  B, 
My  dear  Sifierj  Philadelphia^   Nov.  28,    1739. 

I  Call  you  not  Alartha,  but  Mary,  for  I  hope  you  have 
chofcn  the  better  part,  which  fhall  not  be  t:ikcn  from  you: 
And  yet  not  fo  properly  may  you  be  faid  to  chufe,  as  the  LoRP 
to  have  chofen  you  ;  for  we  love  God,  becaufe  he  firft  loved  us. 
I  can  trace  my  converfion  through  its  feveral  ftcps,  but  cannot 
find  one  ftep  I  firfl  took  towards  God.  I  have  been  a  back- 
fiidcr  from  my  very  infancy.  Had  not  God  called  after  me, 
and  by  his  fpirit  faid  unto  me,  as  unto  Jdain^  "  Where  art 
thou  }  Into  what  a  dreadful  condition  haft  thou  plunged  thy- 
felf  r"  I  fiiould  have  fled  from  him  (if  poflible)  for  ever.  I  am 
perfuaded  you,  my  dear  Sifter,  can  readily  fay  the  fame  5  for 
otherwife  how  can  we  truly  value  our  Lord's  redeeming 
blood  ?  Kow  can  we  rclifti  the  do£i:rine  of  God's  free  grace, 
and  our  being  freely  juftified  by  faith  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  ?  Oh  let  us  beg  of  God  to  teach  us  thefe  divine  truths 
more  and  more,  (for  he  alone  can  teach  them)  and  let  us  lay- 
out ourfelves  to  teach  them  to  others.  You  are  happy  in  be- 
ing in  fellowfhip  with  fome,  who  I  hope  will  be  ready,  if  need 
be,  to  fcal  thefe  truths  with  their  blood.  Be  humble,  my  dear 
Sifter,  be  humble  ;   and  ceafe  not  to  pray  for 

Your  afFeilionate  brother  and  fexvant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CXXXIV. 

Dear  Mrs,  H.  Philadelphia^  Nov,  28,  1 739. 

RACHEL  brings  me  glad  tidings  :  She  tells  me  the 
Lord  hath  touched  your  heart  by  the  power  of  his 
word,  and  that  your  relations  have  threatened  to  caft  you  out 
for  our  Lord's  fake.  Rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad.  If  you 
endure  to  the  end,  and  naked  follow  a  naked  Christ,  great 
fliall  be  your  reward  in  heaven.  There  is  no  being  a  chriftian 
without  enduring  contempt;  no  being  happy  hereafter,  with- 
out fufFering  reproach  here.  The  world  can  only  love  its  own. 
As  they  hate  God,  fo  they  muft  hate  thofe  that  are  defirous 
to  be  like  him  ;  But  be  not  difmayeJ  3  Christ's  ftrcngth  fhall 

be 


ia6  LETTERS, 

be  magnifleJ  in  your  weaknefs  :  A  living  faith  will  fupport 
you  under  all.  When  your  father  and  mother  forfake  you, 
the  Lord  will  take  you  up.  The  grcateft  foes  you  will  find 
to  be  thofe  of  your  own  heart.  Subdue  thcfc,  and  outward 
erodes  will  afFe6t  you  but  little.  To  conquer  yourfelf  will  be 
a  laborious  tafk  ;  but  if  you  believe,  Jesus  Christ  fhall  even 
do  this  for  you.  Get  out  of  yourfelf,  rely  wholly  on,  and  be 
a  co-worker  with  him,  and  he  (hall  be  to  you  wifdom,  righte- 
oufnefs,  fandtification,  and  redemption.  Rachel  greatly  wifhes 
this,  but  not  more  fincerely  than 

Your  friend  and  fcrvant  in  Christ, 

G.  JV, 

LETTER    CXXXV. 

Dear  Mr,  P.  Philadelphia^  Nov.  28,  1739. 

WHAT  a  divine  fympathy  and  attraction  is  there  be- 
tween all  thofe  who  by  one  fpirit  are  made  mem- 
bers of  that  myftical  body,  whereof  Jesus  Christ  i?  the  head! 
I  loved  your  departed  wife,  now  with  God.  1  love  your 
daughter,  and  the  church  in  your  houfe,  in  the  bowels  of 
Jesus  Christ.  Blciled  be  God  that  his  love  is  fo  far  fiicd 
abroad  in  our  hearts,  as  to  caufe  us  to  love  one  another, 
though  we  a  little  differ  as  to  externals  :  For  my  part,  1  hate 
to  mention  them.  My  one  fole  queftion  is,  Are  you  a  chrijUan  ? 
Are  you  fealed  by  Christ's  fpirit  to  the  day  of  redemption  \ 
Are  you  hungering  and  thirfting  after  the  perfeci,  everlafting 
righteoufnefs  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  If  fo,  you  are  my  brother, 
my  filler,  and  mother.  I  defire  to  love  you  as  myfelf.  This 
is  my  temper ;  I  am  perfuaded  it  is  your's.  Why  otherwife 
did  you  fo  gladly  receive  me  i/ito  your  houfe  ?  The  Lord 
reward  you  and  the  reft  of  your  chriftian  brethren.  Indeed  I 
am  prefent  with  you  in  fpirit,  and  wifti  you  good  luck  iji  the 
name  of  the  Lord.  O  be  not  flack  to  praife  him  in  my  be- 
half;  for  I  have  experienced  fomc  rich  anointings  of  his  holy 
fpirit,  and  have  been  made  to  fee  more  into  the  wonders  of 
redeeming  love.  Did  I  know  more  of  your  names,  I  would 
write  to  more.  This  is  my  comfort,  I  truft  our  names  are 
wriueft  in  the  book  cf  life.     Yet  a  little  while,  and  wc  fhall 


LETTERS,  127 

fit  down  together  in  the  kingdom  of  our  Father.     A  place, 
though  on  a  lower  form,  is,  I  humbly  hope,  prep;ired  for 
Your  afFedionatc  friend  and  fervant, 

LETTER     CXXXVI. 

Dear  Mr.  H.  Philadclphiay  Nov.  28,  1 7 39, 

IF  I  remember,  you  ufed  to  exprefs  a  great  value  for  my 
perfon  and  doctrine,  otherwife  why  {Viould  you  defire  a 
line  from  fiich  a  wretch  as  I  am  ?  When  I  look  into  myfelf, 
and  confider  how  poor  and  miierablc,  and  blind  and  naked  my 
ibul  is,  I  wonder  that  any  one  fliould  pay  me  the  leaft  regard. 
But  what  {hall  we  fay  ?  God  will  have  mercy  upon  whom  he 
will  have  mercy.  I  am  entirely  indebted  to  free  grace  for  all 
I  have,  am,  or  Ihail  be.  You  alfo,  I  trwfi:,  dear  Sir,  are  ready 
to  fubfcribe  to  this  ;  for  what  have  we  but  what  we  have  re- 
ceived ?  What  (liould  we  have  been  had  God  left  us  to  our- 
felves  f  Oh  let  a  fenfe  of  this  free,  diftinguifhing  love  conftrain 
us  to  obedience  :  A  chriflian  needs  no  other  motive.  That 
is  a  true  gofpel-faith  which  works  by  love.  I  often  think  it 
almoft  prefumption  to  think  of  rewards  in  a  future  ftate;  my 
Mafter  amply  rewards  me  in  this :  But  prefent  mercies  are  only 
earnefts  of  future  favours.  Be  not  therefore,  dear  Sir,  weary 
of  well-doing,  for  in  due  time  we  {hall  reap,  if  we  faint  not. 
The  Lord  hath  multiplied  his  favours  towards  me  fince  I 
faw  you  laft.  We  have  had  a  long  but  pleafant  and  profitable 
voyage.  Oh  fmg  praifes  unto  our  God  in  behalf  of,  dear 
Sir, 

Your  afFedlonate  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    CXXXVII. 

Dear  Mr:.  A.  Philadilphia^  Nov.  28,  1 7 39. 

THESE  words  of  the  pfalmift,  "  Let  us  rejoice  in  the 
ftrength  of  our  falvatign,"  often  come  with  great  power 
and  comfort  upon  my  foul.  You  and  I  need  take  much  no- 
tice of  them  :  For  otherwife  how  often  (hould  we  have  falica 
away  from  God  fince  our  firft  looking  Zi<?n- wards  ?  But  the 

LoRs 


T2S  LETTERS. 

Lord  as  he  loves  us  freely,  To  he  will  heal  our  backflidingf- 
He  neither  will  let  us  fall  into  fin  or  error.  To  as  finally  to  dc- 
ftroy  our  fouls.  God  forbid  this  fliould  encourage  us  in  fin. 
It  Is  only  intended  to  fupport  us  in  danger,  and  to  ftrengthen 
us  under  temptations.  Since  there  is,  fuch  infinite  mercy 
WMth  God,  it  is  a  cogent  rcafon  why  he  (hould  be  loved  and 
feared  ;  but  not  why  he  fliould  be  difobeyed  :  And  fince  God 
has  lately  led  you  out  of  dclufion,  be  more  watchful  over  your- 
felf,  my  dear  Sifter,  to  follow  thofe  who  truly  fnew  you  the 
way  of  fjllvation. — To  hear  of  your  {landing  ftedfaft  in  the 
Lord,  will  highly  ddight 

Your  afi^e£tionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IK 

LETTER    CXXXVIIL 

To  the  Rev,  Mr.  R.  E. 

Rev.  a7td  Dear  Sir,  Philadelphia,  Nov.  28,  1739^ 

THE  cordial  and  tender  love  which  I  bear  you,  will  not 
permit  me  to  neglecl:  any  opportunity  of  fending  to  you- 
I  blefs  the  Lord  from  my  foul,  for  raifing  you  and  feveral  other 
burningand  fliininglights  to  appear  for  him  in  this  midnightof  the 
church.  My  heart  has  been  much  vjarmed  during  my  voyage^ 
by  reading  fome  of  your  fermons,  efpecially  that  preached  be- 
fore the  aiTociate  prefbytery.  I  long  more  and  more  to  hear 
the  rife  and  progrefs  of  your  proceedings,  and  how  far  you 
would  willingly  carry  the  reformation  of  tlie  church  of  iSri?/- 
land.  There  are  fome  expreffions  which  I  fuppofe  will  be 
interpreted  to  your  difadvantage,  both  by  your  domeftic  and 
foreign  enemies.  I  fhculd  be  glad  to  know  who  are  thofe 
martyrs  to  which  you  refer,  and  of  what  nature  thofe  cove- 
riant  s  w  eve  which  you  mention  in  yourfernion.  My  igno- 
rance of  the  conftitution  of  the  Scotch  church  is  the  caufe  of 
my  writing  after  this  manner.  I  fhould  be  obliged  to  you,  if 
you  would  be  pleafed  to  recommend  to  me  fome  ufeful  books, 
efpecially  fuch  which  open  the  holy  facrament ;  for  in  God's 
law  Is  my  delight.  Bcjiori's  fourfold  State  cf  Man  I  like  ex- 
ceedingly. Under  God  it  has  been  of  much  fervice  to  my 
foul*    1  believe  I  agree  with   yoa  and  him  in  the  efiential 

Uuth^ 


LETTERS.  129 

truths  of  chriftianityi  I  blefs  Goi>,  his  fpirit  has  convinced 
mc  of  our  eternal  eIe£tion  by  the  Father  through  the  Son,  of 
our  free  juftification  through  faith  in  his  blood,  of  our  fancSti- 
fication  as  rhe  confcqucnce  o^*  that,  and  of  our  final  perfeve- 
rance  and  glorification  as  the  refult  of  all.  7^hefc  I  am  pcr- 
fuaded  Got>  has  joined  together  j  thefe,  neither  men  nor 
devils  fliall  ever  be  able  to  put  afunder.  My  only  fcruple  at 
prefent  is,  '•  Whether  you  approve  of  taking  the  Avord  in  de- 
fence of  your  religious  rights  ?'*  One  of  our  Engli/h  biftiops  I 
remember,  u'hen  I  vi-as  with  him,  called  you  Catneronians, 
They,  I  think,  took  up  arms,  which  I  think  to  be  contrary  to 
the  fpirit  of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  apoftles.  Some  few 
paflages  in  your  fermon  before  the  prefbytcry,  I  thought  were 
a  little  fufpicious  of  favouring  that  principle.  I  pray  God 
your  next  may  inform  me  that  I  am  miftaken  :  For  when  zeal 
carries  us  to  fuch  a  length,  I  think  it  ceafes  to  be  zeal  accord- 
ing to  knowledge.  Deareft  Sir,  be  not  angry  at  my  writing 
thus  freely.  I  love,  T  honour  you  in  the  bowels,  and  for  the 
fake  of  Jesus  Christ,  from  my  foul.  1  wifti  you  good  luck 
in  all  your  pious  undertakings.  I  pray  God  to  profper  the 
works  of  your  hands^  and  to  make  you  a  noble  inftrument  in 
bringing  many  fons  to  glory.  Pray  fend  an  immediate 
anfwer,  dire<Sled  as  ufual,  and  care  will  be  taken  to  have  it 
jemitted  to,  reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  afFe£lionate  brother,  friend,  fellow-labourer, 
and  obliged  fervant. 


G.  W. 


LETTER    CXXXIX. 


Dear  Brother^  Philadelphia,  Nov.  28,  1739. 

IT  is  much  upon  my  heart  to  fend  you  a  line.  Although 
you  are  not  with  me,  yet  as  God  was  pleafed  to  touch 
you  by  my  unworthy  miniftry,  I  love  you  with  a  peculiar  love. 
Bufmefs  prevented  my  writing  to  you  when  in  Yorkshire.     I 

was  forry  to  Har  that  Brother  j had  reafon  to  blame 

your  conduct.  Sfty  dear  brother,  be  not  offended,  if  in  the 
meeknefs  and  gentlenefs  of  Christ,  I  exhort  you  to  be  fober- 
minded.  Follow  after,  but  do  not  run  before  the  blcfi^d  Spirit; 
if  you  do,  although  you  may  benefit  others,  and  God  may 
Vol.  I.  K  over- 


ijo  LETTERS. 

over-rule  every  thing  for  your  good,  yet  you  will  certainly 
deftroy  the  peace  of  your  own  foul.  God  has  been  pleafed 
to  call  you  by  his  grace,  and  to  give  you  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghoft  :  But,  my  brother,  I  hope  it  will  be  more  fettled  and 
iubftantial,  and  joined  with  meeknefs  and  humility  of  heart. 
A  joy  which  is  the  refult  of  inward  trials,  and  flowing  from  a 
long  experience  of  the  buffeting  of  fatan.  Such  a  joy  will  make 
you  apt  and  fit  to  teach,  and  keep  you  from  being  puffed  up 
above  meafure.  It  will  exalt,  at  the  fame  time  as  it  humbles 
your  foul.  The  Lord  diredl  my  dear  brother  in  all  things  :. 
I  wifh  all  his  fcrvants  were  prophets ;  but  let  every  one  be 
rightly  perfuaded  of  his  call  to  public  teaching.  It  is  danger- 
ous to  touch  the  ark,  though  it  be  falling,  without  a  com- 
miilion  from  above.     But  no  more.     I  am 

Your  moft  affedionate  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  If, 

LETTER    CXL. 

Dear  Mr.  B.  Philadelphia^  Nov.  28,  1 739. 

YOUR  kind  prefent  of  flour  has  been  of  fingular  u[^  to 
me  and  my  family;  I  pray  God,  in  return,  to  feed  you 
with  that  bread  which  cometh  down  from  heaven.  You  are 
one  of  my  firft  and  choiceft  friends.  You  have  not  been 
afhamed  to  own  me,  or  to  attend  on  my  miniftry.  It  will 
wonderfully  rejoice  me,  to  fee  you  exalted  at  our  Lord's  right- 
hand  in  a  future  ftate.  The  way  you  know.  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  ^^^ay,  the  truth,  and  the  life.  Through  faith  in  his  blood 
Iball  you  have  free  accefs  into  the  holy  of  holies.  I  hope 
dear  Mr.  B.  is  not  In  the  number  of  thofe,  who  want  to  make 
a  Saviour  of  their  own  works,  and  thereby  deny  the  Lord, 
who  has  {o  dearly  bought  them  with  his  precious  blood  :  No, 
J  am  perfuaded  you  are  more  noble.  Mr.  B — • —  has  not  fo 
learnt  Christ.  He  is  willing,  I  truft,  to  afcribe  his  falvation 
\o  God's  free  grace,  and  to  let  Jesus  Christ  be  all  in  all. 
I  hope  your  brother,  and  thofe  young  men  you  brought  with 
you  out  o^ Splttlefields^  are  likcwife  thus  minded.  Though  ab- 
fent,  yet  I  do  not  forget  them.  O  exhort  them  from  me,  to 
favc  themfelvcs  from  this  untoward  generation.  My  dear 
friend,  do  you  go  before  them,  and  let  them  learn  of  you  how 

t«J 


LETTERS  i3t 

to  walk  with  God.  It  is  a  difficult  thing  to  be  a  chriftian 
indeed.  Numbers  are  P/;^;'//}^^,  and  do  not  know  it.  I  pray 
God  you  may  be  delivered  from  them,  and  be  made  experi- 
mentally to  know  that  no  one  can  call  Jesus  Christ  "  his 
Lord,"  till  he  has  really  received  the  Holy  Ghoft.  I  could 
dwell  on  this,  but  other  bufinefs  obliges  me  to  haften  to  fub- 

fcribe  myfelf,  dear  Mr.  B— , 

Your  mod  obliged  friend  ai!id  fervant, 

LETTER    CXLI. 

Reverend  Sir ^  Philadelphia^  Nov.  i^,   I739» 

I  AM  not  willing  to  go  on  fhore  till  I  have  performed  my 
promife,  and  fent  you  a  line.  I  heartily  wifti  I  could  write 
fomething  u^hich  might  advance  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
good  of  his  church.  As  vfQ  botK  profefs  ourfelves  minifters 
of  the  gofpel,  thefe  two  things  ought  to  be  our  chief  and  only 
concern,  and  more  efpecially  at  this  time,  when  men  feek  their 
own  and  not  the  things  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  Oh,  dear  £ir^ 
the  care  of  fouls  I  find  to  be  a  matter  of  the  greateft  importance. 
You  have  a  great  number  committed  to  your  charge.  What 
a  dreadful  thing  will  it  be  for  any  of  them  to  perifh  through 
your  negled  ?  And  yet  I  fear.  Sir,  you  do  not  walk  worthy  of 
the  holy  vocation  wherewith  you  are  called.  It  is  no  good 
report  that  I  hear  of  you  in  common  life.  Your  practice 
contradi(it£  your  c!o£lrine,  and  what  good  can  you  do,  if  every 
one  of  your  parifhioners,  whilft  you  are  preaching,  may  reply, 
**'  Phyficiafi  heal  thyfelf  r"  Befides,  Sir,  how  can  you  preach 
Christ  toothers,  when  you  are  a  ftranger  to  his  powder  your- 
felf  ?  It  is  next  to  impoflible.  I  make  no  apology  for  this  plain- 
^efs  of  fpeech.  Simplicity  becomes  embaffadors  of  CHRlsf ." 
I  am,  reverend  Sir, 

Your  obliged  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  n\ 


:fe  2  LETTER 


132  LETTER    S; 

LETTER    CXLII. 

Dear  Mr.  G,  Philadelphia,  Nov,  28,  fj^^ 

INDEED  I  love  you,  though  it  was  (o  long  before  I  cam« 
to  fee  you.  Want  of  time,  not  of  rcfpecf ,  was  the  caufer  > 
God  is  my  judge  how  earneltly  I  long  after  your  falvation^ 
and  how  willingly  I  would  fpcnd  and  be  fpent  in  order  to  pro- 
mote it.  Oh  how  elofely  does  true  faitfe  in  Jesus  Christ 
our  head,  knit  all  his  members  in  love  to  one  another  j.  what 
a  divine  harmony  and  attraction  i-s  there  between  them,  when- 
they  have  drank  into  and  been  made  partakers  of  one  and  ths 
fame  fpirit  ?  How  does  the  love  of  God  dilate  and  enlarge 
their  hearts  I  How  do  all.  little  dift5-r!<Slions  about  externals  fall 
away,  and  every  other  name  is  fwallowed  up  in  the  name  of 
Jesus  Christ  ?  This,  my  dear  brother,,  is  that  catholic  fpi- 
rit, which  will  cement  all  denominations  of  lincere  profeiTors 
together.  This  is  the  fpirit  of  which  free  diftinguifliing  grace 
has  made  you  a  partaker,  and  which  I  pray  God  we  both  may 
partake  of  every  day  more  and  more.  He  is-  faithful  who  has- 
promifed,  who  alfo  will  do  it.  I  find  it  is  not  in  vain  that 
vve  have  believed  in  Jesus.  He  is-  God,  and  his  work  is  per- 
fect ;  bis  love  is  like  himfelf  unchangeable  ;  his  gifts  and  cal- 
lings are  without  repentance,  and  therefore,  though  I  am  but 
a  babe  in  Christ,  yet  I  am  perfuaded  I  fhall  fee  you  crowned 
with  glory.  Then,  my  dear  brother,  we  fball  have  time 
enough  together.  Then,  there  will  be  no  parting,  no  fear  of 
falling ;  but  we  fhall  drink  eternally  of  thofe  pleafures  which 
flow  from  God's  right  hand  for  evermore.  Supported  with 
this  hope,  what  hinders  but  I  may  come  once  again,  when 
the  Lord  permits,  and  offer  Christ's  everlafting  righteouf- 
nefs  to  poor  perifhing  finners.  The  devil  and  his  fervants 
will  rage  horribly,  and  perhaps  caft  me  into  prifon,  nay,  put 
me  to  death  :  But  if  you  will  come  and  vifit  me,  by  the  help 
of  my  God,  I  will  preach  to  you  even  there ;  for  I  am  not 
afliamed  of  the  gofpel  of  Christ.  1  have  fell  it  to  be  th& 
power  of  God  unt©  my  falvation.  Oh,  my  brother,  the  fire 
kindles  whilft  I  am  writing  ;  but  I  muft  have  done.  Pray 
falutc  thofe  dear  fouls  that  I  fpoke  to  at  your  houfc,  and  all 

other 


L    E    t    T    E    R    S.  133 

•Other  friends.     Entreat  them  to  pray  and  give  thanks  for  me  ; 
and  aflure  thCm  they  are  not  forgotten  by 

Ever  yours  in  Christ, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    CXLIII. 

'  Mr.  H Philadelphia,  Nov.  28,  17:^9. 

AS  you  {land  fo  nearly  related  to  your  daughter,  who  is 
with  me,  though  I  am  un'lcnown  to  you  in  perfon,  yet 
1  make  bold  to  fend  you  a  line  to  inform  you  of  her  welfare. 
I  find  fhe  did  not  confer  much  with  you  about  her  intended 
voyage.;  but  1  hope  both  you  and  her  will  have  great  reafon 
to  rejoice  in  the  end.  -God  has  beenpleafed  tovifit  her  with 
fome  illnefs,  but  now  fhe  is  perfe£l:ly  recovered.  What  is  beft 
•of  ail,  I  hope  her  foul  profpers,  and  is  fitting  more  day  by  day 
for  the  enjoyment  of  God.  This  was  the  chief  end  of  her 
goftig  abroad,  and  give  me  leave  to  tell  you,  this  is  the  chief 
thing  you  ought,  and  muft  purfue  at  home.  But  why  do  I 
fay  at  home  ?  A  chriftian  hath  no  home  but  heaven.  He  is  a 
ftrang.crand  pilgrim  while  here  on  earth.     I  hope  you  know 

ibetter^  Mr.  H ,  than  to  thi.nk  you  was  born  to  drive  a 

team,  or  plough  a  piece  of  ground.  Thefe  things  mufi:  be 
done,  but  then  they  fhould  be  done  in  fubordination  to  the 
care  of  your  better  part,  the  foul.     Your  daughter  tells  me, 

you  are  now  grey   beaded.     Take  heed,  dear  Mr.  H ,  to 

make  yo.ur  calling  and  election  fure.  Reft  not  in  outward 
things.  Do  not  flatter  yourfelf  that  you  are  a  chriftian,  be- 
caufe  you  go  to  churchy  and  do  no  one  any  harm.  Nothing 
hut  a  living  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  our  dear  Lord,  can  qua- 
lify you  for  eternal  life.  Without  this,  God  will  be  to  us  a 
confuming  fire  ;  and  unlcfs  we  are  bom  again,  and  made  new 
creatures  in  Christ,  we  never  fliall  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  God.  If  you  know  not  what  I  mean  by  thefe  terms,  you 
may  depend  upon  it,  you  are  a  ftranger  to  this  new-birth,  and 
confequently  in  a  ftate  of  death  :  but  you  need  not  fear  ;  even 
at  the  eleventh  hour  Christ  will  accept  you,  if  you  come  to 
him  by  faith.  He  hath  fhewn  mercy  to  your  fon  and  daughter. 
Why  may  he  not  fhevv  mercy  to  their  father  alfo  ?  Whofoever 
jcomcth  to  him>  he  will  in  no-wIfc  caft  out.     Haftethen,  dear 

K  3  Sir, 


134  LETTERS. 

Sir,  out  of  your  fpiritual  Sodom,     Linger  not.     Nothing  will 
more  rejoice  your  dear  children,  than  to  fee  you  brought  to 
an  experimental  knowledge  of  the  truth,  that  you  may  be  fa- 
ved.     For  their  fakes,  you  are  particularly  remembered  by 
Yeur  unknown  but  fmcere  friend 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 


?mrT^^ 


LETTER    CXLIV, 

To  the  Rev,  Mr,  P :—. 


Upper  Marlborough  (Mary  Land)  Dec.  8,  1739. 
Rev.  and  dear  Sir, 

TILL  now,  I  have  neither  had  leifure  nor  freedom  to 
anfwer  your  kind  letter.  Blefled  be  God,  who  has 
opened  the  hearts  of  fome  of  his  people  at  New  York  to  receive 
the  word.  May  he  enable  you  to  water  what, his  ov/n  right 
hand  hath  planted,  and  grant  to  your  labours  a  divine  increafe  I 
Indeed  I  wifli  you  good  luck  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  I 
wifli  all  his  fervants  were  prophets.  Oh  that  he  would  be 
pleafcd  to  fend  forth  experimental  labourers  into  his  harveft : 
• — for  I  fear  amongft  you,  as  well  as  in  other  places,  there 
are  many  who  are  well  verfed  in  the  doctrines  of  grace,  ha- 
ving learned  them  at  the  univerfity,  but  notwithftanding  are 

heart-hypocrites,   and  enemies  to  the  pov/er  of  godlinefs. 

Dear  Sir,  I  ufe  this  freedom,  becaufe  I  love  fimplicity.  I  con- 
fefs  I  am  but  a  child  in  grace,  as  well  as  years.  Pardon  this 
freedom,  for  out  of  the  fulnefs  and  fmcerity  of  my  heart  my 

pen  writeth.  —  I  thank  your  fon  and  dear  Mr,  S for 

what  they  did  on  my  account.  Alas,  I  fear  they  think  too 
highly  of  me.  Oh  dear  Sir,  entreat  the  God  of  all  grace  to 
give  me  humility,  fo  Ihall  fuccefs  not  prove  my  ruin.  My 
moft  cordial    refpecls    and   hearty  thanks    attend  dear  Mrs, 

P ,  I  pray  God  in  all  things  to  make  her  a  help  mee'i 

for  you — As  faft  as  I  can  fnatch  a  few  moments  from  public 
bufmefs,  more  New  York  friends  may  expe(Sl  to  hear  from  me 
—A  fenfe  of  their  favours  is  flill  upon  my  heart — I  would 
willingly  remember  them,  whenever  I  go  in   and  out  before 

the  Lord.     Mr.  N — 's  letter,  and  my  next  journal,  will 

acquaint  )'ou,  how  the  Lord  Jesus  has  been  getting  him- 

felf 


LETTERS.  135 

felf  the  vI(£tory,   fmce  I  left  New  York There  has  been 

fuch  little  oppofition,  that  I  have  been  tempted  almoft  to  cry 
out,  "  Satan,  why  fleepeft  thou  f "  But  God  pities  my  weak- 
nefs.  Oh,  dear  Sir,  thank  him  in  my  behalf,  for  indeed  he  deals 
moft  lovingly  with,  Rev.  Sir, 

Your  moft  unworthy  brother  and  fellow-labourer, 

G,  JK 

LETTER    CXLV. 

Dear  Slr^  Upper  Marlborough^  Dec,  8,  1739. 

I  Cannot  defer  writing  to  dear  Mr.  N any  longer. 
— This  afternoon  God  brought  us  hither.  Some  arc 
folicitous  for  my  flaying  herp  to-morrov/.  As  it  feems  to  be 
a  call  from  providence,  1  have  complied  v/ith  their  requeft.  Oh 
that  I  may  be  enabled  to  lift  up  my  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and 
to  fpeak  with  the  demonflration  of  the  fpirit  and  with  pov^er. 
Thefe  parts  are  in  a  dead  fleep.  At  Anapdis^  I  preached  twice, 
and  fpoke  home  to  fome  ladies  concerning  the  vanity  of  their 
falfe  politenefs.  But  alas,  they  are  wedded  to  their  ^adrille 
and  Ombre,  The  miniffer  of  the  place  was  under  convic- 
tions— He  wept  twice,  and  earneftly  begged  my  prayers.  He 
will  not  frighten  people  I  believe  with  harfli  do6frine,  — 
he  loves  to  prophefy  fmooth  things. — God  bleffed  the  word 
wonderfully  at  Philadelphia,  I  have  great  reafon  to  think 
many  are  brought  home  to  God.  When  I  return,  it  will 
then  be  fecn,  who  has  received  the  word  into  an  honeft  and 
good  heart.  By  the  divine  affiftance,  I  propofe  revifiting  PZ^/- 
ladelphia^  New  Tork^  and  to  go  as  far  as  Bo/Ion^  and  fo  return 

to  Georgia^  before  I  take  {hipping  again  for  England The 

Lord  dircvSl  my  going  in  his  way  !  About  May  you  may  ex- 
peel  to  fee  mc.  My  dear  friend,  pray  that  I  may  ^o  improve 
the  time  of  my  abfence,  that  at  my  return  my  progrefs  may  be 
made  known  to  all  men.  Itfhames  me  to  fee  what  little  pro- 
ficiency I  have  made  in  the  fchool  of  Christ.  If  I  do  not 
begin  to  prefs  forwards,  how  fhall  I  appear  before  my  blefTcd 
Lord  ?  I  feel  myfelf  to  be  the  chief  of  finners;  furely  never 
was  a  greater  inflance  of  redeeming  diftinguifhing  love.  God 
forbid  that  I  fhould  glory  in  any  thing  but  free  grace :  had 
liot  God  plucked  me  as  a  brand  out  of  the  fife,  I  had  now 
K  4  either 


136  LETTERS. 

cither  been  given  over  to  a  reprobate  mind,  or  caft  into  a  place 

of  torment.     Oh  help  me,  help  me,  dsarejl  Mr,  N , 

help  me  to  be  thankful,  and  accept  my  thanks,  though  late, 
for  ail  favours  received  when  at  New  York.  Indeed  I  love  you 
in  the  bov^els  of  our  dear  Lord  Jesus.  Salute  your  dear 
wife  my  kind  hoftefs  :  exhort  her  to  be  feverely  kind  to  her 
little  boy. — My  moft  cordial  refpe6ts  attend  all  who  aflc  after 
me.     Entreat  them  to  continue   their   prayers,   deareft  Mr. 

A'^ ,  for 

Your  weak,  but  affe£lionate  friend,  brother 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 
G,  IK 

LETTER     CXLVL 

ro  Mr,  B . 

Dear  Sir,  Upper  Marlborough.^  Dec,  8,  1739, 

GRATITUDE  obliges  me  to  fend  you  a  letter  of  thanks 
for  your  lall  kind  prcfent,  and  all  other  favour.^  ;  but  the 
love  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  conilrains  me  to  write  to 
you,  exhorting  you  earned-ly  to  contend  for  the  faith  once  de- 
livered to  the  faints.  I  humbly  hope  the  Lord  has  been 
pleafed  to  blefs  my-  coming  in  thcfe  parts  to  many,  and 
amongfl  them  to  you  alfo.     It  rejoiced  mc  to  find  dear  Mr, 

B was   convinced   that  1  preached   the  truth  as  it  is  in 

Jesus.  It  pleafed  me  exceedingly,  to  find  how  his  eyes  were 
opened  to  fee  the  direct  contrariety  there  is,  between  the  fpi- 
rit  of  Chrjst  and  the  fpirit  of  the  world.  What  has  my 
dear  friend  now  to  do,  but  to  profecute  thcfe  convictions, 
and  never  refl  till  they  end  in  a  found  converfion.  God  has 
given  you  richly  all  things  to  enjoy.  Be  pcrfuaded  hence- 
forward not  to  be  fo  cumbered  about  the  many  triHes  of  this 
life,  as  to  neglect  the  one  thing  needful,  Dare,  Sir,  to  be  fm- 
gularly  good.  Oh  dare  to  let  your  light  fliine  before  men — ^ 
Be  not  afhamed  of  Christ  and  his  gofpel.  Come  out  from 
your  carnal  acquaintance,  and  live  as  becomes  a  true  follower 

of  our  Lord  Jesus.     Dear  il^r.  5^— ,   I   hope  will  join 

with  you.  God's  fpirit  has  been  and  is  now  ftriving  with  his 
heart.  I  pray  God  to  make  this  the  accepted  time,  and  caufe 
it  to  be  the  day  of  his,  falvitioi).     How  will  it  fill  mc  with 

joy 


LETTERS.  "137 

joy  at  my  return  to  Philadelphia^  to  fee  dear   Mr,  B — 

and  fome  other  excellent  welUnnieaning  people,  whom  I  love, 
become  defpifed  followers  of  the  ^-amb  of  God.  If  my  prayers 
may  be  any  ways  aflifting,  as  GoD  fliall  enable  me  you  may 
depend  on  them — Our  dear  friend  5—- — -  can  inform  you 
what  God  has  done  for  us,  fince  we  faw  you.  One  favour 
more  I  beg  of  you  ;  give  thanks  as  well  as  pray  for 

Your  moil  obliged  friend  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CXLVIL 

To  Captain  B 

JViUiamJburgh,  (Virginia)  Dec,  15,  1 7  39. 

HITHER  God  brought  us  laft  night ;  I  truft  the  fame 
gracious  being,  by  his  good  prpvidence,  has  conducted 
you  fafc  to  Philadelphia.  I  cannot  fay,  I  have  met  with  fo 
much  as  even  an  abnoft  chrijlian^  fmce  I  parted  from  you, 
till  I  came  to  Colonel  Whitings  — —^ There,  GosD  put  in  my 
way  a  planter,  that  is  feeking  to  know  the  way  of  God  more 
perfedlly — He  is  now  with  us,  and   I  hope  our  converfation 

will  be  bleiTcd  unto  him.     Oh  dear  Mr,  B — ,  ftrive,  I 

befeech  you  by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  ftrive 
to  enter  in  at  the  ftrait  gate.  God  of  late  has  loudly  called 
you  —  Take  heed  that  neither  the  lui}  of  the  eye,  the  luft  of 
the  flefh,  nor  the  pride  of  life  prevail  on  you  to  lie  down  in  a 
carnal  fecurity  again.  1  am  confident  you  will  be  moft  hear- 
tily defpifed,  if  you  are  a  real  chriflian  j  but  dear  Mr.  B -'s 

refolution  will  be  built  on  a  better  foundation,  than  to  let 
a  little  breath  blow  it  down.  In  Christ  is  your  ftrength  ; 
look  up  to  him  day  by  day,  and  as  your  day  is,  fo  fhall  your 
ftrength  be,  I  fear  and  pray  for  you.  God  only  knows, 
how  often  you  have  been  upon  my  heart.  Wc  have  not  failed 
interceding  for  you  at  the  throne  of  grace.     I  (hall  be  much 

miftaken,  if  Mr.  B does  not  prove  a  chriftian  indeed. 

About  May  I  pro'pofe,  God  willing,  to  be  with  you  again. 
Then  1  (hall  rejoice  to  fit  and  hear  you  tell  what  God  has 
done  for  your  foul  —  Be  not  afraid  of  convi£lion.  Be  not 
afraid  of  inward  feelings.  Now  pray  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  to 
lay  the  ax  of  mortification  to  the  root  of  your  heart.  Make 
%  thorough 


I3S  LETTERS. 

thorough  work  with  it.     Do  not  fpare  yourfelf  In  the  leafl.— • 
Now  is  the  accepted  time,   and  that  it  may  be  the  day  of  fal- 

vation,   is  the  earneft  prayer  of,  dear  Mr,  B- , 

Your  obliged  aftectionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    CXLVllI. 

^'^'  To  the  Rev.  Mr.  G T . 

My  dear  Brother^  Williamjburgh^  Dec.  15,  1739. 

BE  not  angry  becaufe  you  have  not  heard  from  me.  in- 
deed I  love  and  honour  you  in  the  bow^eis  of  Jesus 
Christ.  You  are  feldom  out  of  my  thoughts  ;  but  till  novv 
I  have  not  had  liberty  given  me,  to  fend  you  a. line  —  I  truit 
the  work  goes  on  glorioufly  in  your  parts.  The  hand  of  th.e 
Lord  brought  wondrous  things  to  pafs,  before  we  left  Penfii- 
vania  ;  but  in  thcfe  parts  fatan  feems  to  lead  people  captive  at 
his  will.  The  diftance  of  the  plantations  prevents  people's  af- 
fembling  themfelves  together. — Here  are  no  great  towns,  as  in 
other  provinces,  and  the  commonalty  is  made  up  of  Negroes 
and  co7ivi£is^  and  if  they  pretend  to  ferve  God,  their  mafters, 
Pharaoh  like,  cry  out,  "  Ye  are  idle,  ye  are  idle."  Laft  night 
I  read  the  affeiSting  account  of  your  brother  Johi ;  let  me  die, 
O  Lord,  the  death  of  that  righteous  man,  and  let  my  future 
ftate  be  like  his  !  O  my  dear  friend,  my  brother,  entreat  the 
Lord  that  I  may  grow  in  grace,  and  pick  up  the  fragments 
of  my  time,  that  not  a  moment  of  it  may  be  loft.  Teach 
me,  oh  teach  me  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly.  Rebuke, 
reprove,  exhort  me  with  all  authority — I  feel  I  am  but  a 
babe  in  Chrift,  I  long  to  know  more  of  thd^hoiy  Jesus.  He 
has  manifefted  himfelf  to  my  foul,  both  in  a  way  of  humili- 
ation and  exaltation.  Since  I  faw  you,  both  his  rod  and  ftalF 
have  comforted  me.  At  prefent,  he  makes  me  young  and 
lively  as  an  eagle;  I  only  wifti  I  was  more  worthy  to  fub- 
fcribe  myfelf 

Your  afFcdionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  n\ 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  139 

LETTER     CXLIX. 

To  Mrs,  a 

NezutONy  Cape  Fear^  Dec.  28,  1739. 
My  dear  Siflcr  /;2  Christ, 

JUST  now  we  have  beeo  finging  the  hymn,  which  wc 
fung.  at  Broad-oak ;  and  as  I  generally  do  at  fuch  feafons, 
I  thought  of  that  happy  time  wherein  we  fung  it  in  your  great 
hail,  it  was  a  time  much  to  be  remembered,  an  anticipation, 
I  believe,  of  that  blefled  time  when  we  all  fnall  meet  to  Cwg 
the  fong  of  the  Lamb  in  the  heavenly  Jerufalem  —  For 

the  adoption  of  the  fpirit,  if  truly  received,  is  the  earncft  of 
pur  promifed  inheritance.  We  are  fealed  thereby  to  the  day 
of  redemption,  and  therefore  may  give  both  men  and  devils 
the  challenge  to  feparate  us,  if  they  can,  from  the  love  of 
God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord — I  am  verily  per- 
fuaded,  that  fmce  I  left  you,  all  things  have  worked  together 
for  your  good.  As  I  am  travelling,  often  does  my  foul  think 
both  of  you  and  yours,  and  out  of  the  fulnefs  of  my  heart,  do  I 
often  pour  forth  this  or  fuch  like  petitions,  "  Deareft  Lord,  be 

for  ever  gracious  to  the  houfhold   of !"  My  confcience 

hath  fmote  me  frequently,  for  not  writing  you  a  longer  letter. 
I  fend  this  to  afk  pardon,  and  to  aflure  you  how  often  you 
and  your  daughters  are  upon  my  heart,  when  I  go  in  and  out 
before  the. Lord — I  long  to  hear  how  the  Lord  Jesus  hath 
magnified  his  flrength  in  your  weaknefs.  It  would  fill  a 
volume  to  tell  his  goodnefs  and  truth  ;  and  my  bafe  ingrati- 
tude fometimes  comes  with  fuch  convi£lion  upon  my  heart, 
that  I  can  fcarce  forbear  getting  ofF  my  horfe,  and  humbling 
myfelf  in  the  way  fide.  Indeed,  I  am  the  chief  of  finners,  and 
yet  overflowing  hath  the  Lord  Jesus  been  in  his  love. 
You  will  hear  more  foon  by  the  journal  which  will  be  fcnt. 

Dear  Mrs.  C ,  my  love  to  all. 

Your  afFedionate  though  unworthy  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  TV. 
LETTER    CL. 

"B^cver end  and  dear  Siry  Savannah,  jan,  16.  1740. 

WITH  much  pleafure  (tho'  not  till  laft  week)  I  received 
your  kind  afteclionate  letter.   I  thank  you  for  it  with 

ail 


HO  LETTERS. 

all  my  foul,  and  pray  God  to  reward  you  for  this,  and  all 
other  your  works  of  faith  and  labours  of  lov€.  You  may  de- 
pend, on  my  not  being  prejudiced  againft  you  or  your  bre- 
thren, by  any  evil  report.  They  only  endear  you  to  me  more 
and  more  ;  and  were  your  enemies  to  reprcfent  you  as  black  as 
hell,  I  fhould  think  you  were  the  more  glorious  in  the  fight 
of  heaven.  Your  fweet  criticifms  and  remarks  upon  my 
journal  and  fermons,  were  exceeding  acceptable,  and  very 
juft.  I  afiure  you,  dear  Sir,  I  am  fully  convinced  of  the  doc- 
trine of  ele£lion,  freejuftification,  and  final  perfeverancc.  My 
obfervations  on  the  Quakers,  were  only  intended  for  thole  par- 
ticular perfons  with  whom  I  then  converfed.  The  tenets  of 
the  quakers  in  general,  ^howt  jujiificaiton^  I  take  to  be  falfe 
and  unfcriptural.  Your  adverfaries  need  take  no  advantage 
againft  you,  by  any  thing  I  have  written  j  for  I  think  it  every 
minifter's  duty  to  declare  againft  the  corruptions  of  that  church 
to  which  they  Belong,  and  not  to  look  upon  thofe  as  true 
members  of  their  communion,  who  deny  its  publick  confli- 
tutions.  This  is  your  cafe  in  Scotland,  and  ours  in  England. 
I  fee  no  other  way  for  us  to  adt  at  prefent,  than  to  go  on 
preaching  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  ;  and  then  if  our  brethren 
caft  us  out,  God  will  dirc6t  us  to  take  that  courfe  which  is 
moil:  conducive  to  his  glory,  and  his  people's  good.  I  think 
I  have  but  one  obje6iion  againft  your  proceedings ;  "  Your 
infifting  only  on  preflytert^n  government^  exclufive  of  all  other 
ways  of  worfhipping  GoD."  Will  not  this,  dear  Sir,  nccefia- 
rily  lead  you  (whenever  you  get  the  upper-hand)  to  oppofc 
and  perfecute  all  that  differ  from  you  in  their  church  govern- 
ment, or  outward  way  of  worfhipping  God  ?  Our  dear  bro- 
ther and  fellow-labourer  Mr.  G T thinks   this 

will  be  the  confequence,  and  faid  he  would  write  to  you  about 
it.  As  for  my  own  part,  (though  I  profefs  myfclf  a  minifter 
of  the  church  oi  Engknd)  I  am  of  a  catholic  fpirit  ;  and  if  I 
fee' a  man  who  loves  the  Lord  Jesus  in  fincerity,  I  am  not 
very  folicitous  to  what  outward  communion  he  belongs.  The 
kingdom  of  God,  I  think,  does  not  confift  in  any  fuch  thing. 
Thefe  are  my  fentiments,  dear  Sir,  and  I  write  them  out  of 
love — ^^I  am  afhamed  (becaufe  only  a  babe  in  Christ)  to  pre- 
tend as  it  were  to  dire£l ;  but  true  friendftiip  needs  no  apo- 
logy,    QqX}  is  doing  great  things  in  Amerlau     My  joOrrtal, 

which 


E    E    T    T    E    R    S.  ,4, 

which  I  fend  over  with  this,  will  fliew  you  what  he  has  done 
already.  Your  welfare  is  much  upon  my  heart,  and  as  I  am 
enabled,  I  make  mention  of  you  in  my  prayers.  Affairs  o*' 
the  Orphan-houfe  go  on  v^ell.  Some  few,  even  here^  love  the 
Lord  Jesus.  Oh,  dear  Sir,  pray  far  us,  and  efpecially  for 
Your  weak  unworthy  brother 

and  fellow-labourer  \i\  Christ, 

G.  JV, 

LETTER    CLL 

Savannah^  Jan,  22,  1 740. 
My  Hon,  Friend  and  Brother  in  Christ, 

YOUR  laft  letter  quite  confounded  me.  What  am  I,  thac 
I  {hould  be  thus  highly  favoured  I  I  can  only  fay,  tha: 
♦*  Lefs  than  the  leaft  of  all  God's  mercies,"  fhall  be  my  mot- 
to ft  ill.  I  have  experienced  many  inward  trials,  fmce  I  faw 
you  laft.  But  I  find  they  work  continually  for  my  good. 
I  rejoice  in  what  our  dear  Lord  Jf.sus  has  done  for  your  foul, 
^ay  a  double  portion  of  his  bleffed  fpirit  reft  upon  you  ;  may 
our  glorious  ever-blefled  Emanuel  caufe  all  his  glory  to  pafs 
before  you,  and  may  you  be  filled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of 
God  !  Since  my  arrival  here,  I  have  received  a  fweet  endear- 

ing  inftrudive  letter  from  Mr,  Ralph  E — ■ j  I  have  an- 

iwered  it,  and  told  him  you  promifed  to  write  about  the  ne- 

ceffity  of  a  catholic  fpirit.     Dr.  C alfo  has  favoured 

me  with  a  loving  epiftle.  I  have  received  and  read  his  fermons 
fince  I  faw  you :  they  are  acute  and  pointed,  but  I  think  not 
fearching  enough  by  many  degrees — My  dear  brother,  I  love 
writers  that  go  to  the  bottom  —  God  willing,  I  hope  to  be 
with  you  at  the  fynod — But  what  think  you  ?  I  am  fometimes 
doubting,  whether  I  ftiall  have  fufficient  matter  given  me  to 
preach  upon.  Methinks  I  hear  you  fay,  «  O  thou  of  little 
faith  !  wherefore  doft  thou  doubt  I  As  thy  day  is,  fo  fhalt 
thy  ftrcngth  be."  Michael  and  the  dragon,  I  hear,  are  car- 
rying onwar  moft  bravely  in  England,  I  really  believe  we  ftiali 
not  die,  till  we  fee  the  kingdom  of  God  come  with  power. 
The  affairs.of  the  orphan-houfe  are  in  great  forwardnefs.  I 
have  much  to  fay  j  but  time  and  bufinefs  will  not  permit. 
Blefled  be  God,  eternity  is  at  hand,  a<id  then  we  (hali   have 

time 


142  LETTER    S. 

time  enough.  I  have  read  fome  of  your  books  to  my  grea^ 
profit.  I  want  to  be  taught  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly 
ali  the  day  long.  My  tendered  refpech  await  the  brethren  5 
my  dear  fellow-travellers  falute  you— You  arc  often  remem- 
bered both  by  them,  and 

Your  affe(£i:ionate  though  very  weak  and  unworthy 
brother,  fervant  and  fellow-labourer  in  Christ, 

LETTER    CLII. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr,  C. '     ' 
Rev.  mid  dear  Sir,  Savannah,  ^^^'  24>  1 740 

I  Received  your  kind,  though  undeferving  letter,  and  now 
fnatch  a  few  moments  from  my  other  avocations,  in  order 
to  fend  you  a  fhort  anfwer.  May  God  who  knits  the  eledl 
in  one  communion  and  fellowfhip,  fanctify  our  friendihip  and 
correfpondence  to  the  ftirring  up  each  other  to  love  and  td 
good  works  ! — It  pleafed  me  to  find  you  breathe  fo  catholic  a 
Ipirit.  —  O  that  bigotry  and  party  zeal  were  not  fo  much  as 
once  named  am.ongft  us,  as  becometh  faints  !  Since  Christ 
is  not  divided  in  himfelf,  why  fliould  chriftians  be  divided  one 
amongft  another  ?  Bigotry,  I  am  fure,  can  never  be  the  fruit 
of  that  wifdom  which  cometh  from  above. — No,  it  is  earthly, 
fenfual,  and  devilifh.  When  I  come  to  New  England  I  fhall 
endeavour  to  recommend  an  univerfal  charity  amongft  all  the 
true  members  of  Christ's  myflical  body.  Perhaps  therefore, 
the  fields  may  be  the  moft  unexceptionable  place  to  preach 
in.  You  and  your  brethren,  I  am  pcrfuaded,  will  follow  our 
Lord  even  without  the  camp,  and  rejoice  to  bear  his  facred 
reproach.  AfTifi:  me,  dear  Sir,  in  your  prayers,  that  my  com- 
ing may  be  in  the  fulnefs  of  the  gofpel  of  peace— ^I  fhall  come 
only  with  my  fling  and  with  my  flone.— If  the  Lord  fhall 
be  pleafed  fo  to  dire6t  me,  that  I  may  flrike  fome  felf-rigb- 
teous  GoUahs  to  the  heart,  I  know  yoa  will  rejoice  with. 
Rev.  and  dear  Sir, 

Yours  moft  afFe£lionately  in  the  love  of 

our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 


LETTER 


LETTER,'.  143 

LETTER    CLIII. 

To  Mr.  W,  D, 

Savannahy  Jan.  31,  1740. 
My  dear  Brother  in  Christ, 

BLESSED  be  God,  for  the  good  report  I  hear  of  your 
zeal  for  our  dear  E?naniieL  Go  on,  I  befcech  you  by  the 
merciesof  God  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  go  on,  and  I  am  perfuaded 
the  pleafure  of  the  Lord  fliall  profper  in  your  hands.  If  I 
am  throv/n  afide  as  a  broken  veflel,  fo  I  fee  you  and  others 
ftirred  up  to  carry  on  our  dear  Lord's  kingdom,  if  my  heart 
does  not  deceive  me,  I  fhall  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice. 
God  bleiTes  the  affairs  of  the  orphan-houfe.  The  work  is 
large,  but  we  have  omnipotence  for  our  fupport. — I  believe  I 
fhall  take  in  near  fifty  children.  God  lets  me  fee  every  day, 
that  he  orders  my  goings.  He  vifits  me  with  inward  trials  ; 
but  if  I  had  not  fuch  thorns  in  the  flefh,  what  would  become 
of  me  ?  Fear  not  to  fpeak  the  truth  ;  if  driven  out  o^  Engl  and y 
here  is  a  noble  range  for  you  in  America,  At  prefent  I  am 
reftrained  ;  but  I  could  not  reft,  without  letting  you  have  a 
line  from 

Your  moft  affe(Slionate  friend  brother,  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CLIV. 

To  Mrs.  D, 
Dear  Madam^  Savannah.,  Jan.  31,  1740. 

I  REJOICE  to  hear  that  you  are  likely  to  be  caft  out  of 
your  mother's  Will  only  for  following  Christ.  This 
may  be  only  the  beginning  of  temptations.  God,  I  believe, 
out  of  love  will  try  you  to  the  uttermoft.  You  have  drank 
deep  of  heavenly  comforts ;  you  muft  pledge  our  Lord  in 
his  cup  of  fufFerings.  Thofe  who  faw  him  on  mount  Tabor 
afterwards  were  with  him  in  the  garden.  But  fear  not— 
The  Lord  is  with  you — Neither  men  nor  devils  fhall  hurt  you. 
The  fweet  communion  we  have  had  with  God,  and  through 
him  with  one  another,  often  comfocts  my  foul.  Who  knows, 
4  IbuC 


144  LETTERS. 

but  that  time  may  be  again  repeated  ?  Indeed,  I  want  wof(!s 
as  well  as  time  to  exprefs  with  what  thankfulncfs  I  defire  to 
fubfcribe  myfelf,  dear  madam, 

Your  unworthy  brother 

and  obliged  fervant  in  our  common  Lord, 

G.  iv: 
LETTER    CLV. 

To  Captain  M. 
Dear  5/>,  Savannah,  Jan,  31,   1740". 

I  Rejoice  to  hear  of  your  good  health,  and  take  this  oppor- 
tunity of  fending  you  Mr.  Law's  and  Mr.  Haliburto7i's  life  j 
which  I  pray  God  to  fandtify  to  your  benefit  and  comfort.  I 
hope  you  will  watch  over  your  heart,  and  take  care  to  keep 
up  thofe  convi(S\ions,  which  God  once  put  into  your  fouL  I 
am  afraid  of  Mr.  B.     The  world,  the  world  I  fear  has  got 

hold  of  him.     Dear  Captain  M- -,  I  truft,  will  not  defert 

his  Mafter.-— I  am  fure  he  would  die,  rather  than  prove  falfe 
to,  an  earthly  prince. — Oh  let  him  not  defert  his  dear  Re- 
deemer's colours.  Dear  Sir,  beg  of  God  to  root  out  of  your 
heart  a  defire  for  that  honour  which  cometh  of  man.  Till  dead 
to  the  world  you  will  not  be  alive  to  Gox>.  Honour ,  falfely 
fo  called,  has  deftroyed  millions.  That  you  may  be  never 
ca-rried  away  with,  or  ruined  by  it,  is  the  liearty  prayer  of^ 
dear  Sir, 

Your's,  &c. 

G.  jr, 

LETTER    CLVI. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  IF.  T.Qi'^^Qrit' 

Savannah f  yan.  31,    1740*. 
My  dMT  and  honoured  Brother^ 

BLESSED  be  God,  who  hath  pleafurc  in  the  profperity 
of  his  fervaats. — I  am  abafed  to  think  what  our  all-gra- 
cious Redeemer  hath  done  by  my  uaworthy  hands,  and  rejoice 
to  hear  that  he  is  working  by  your's.  Oh  that  you  may  ex- 
perience frefh  anointings  and  teaching  from  above  I  O  that 
you  may  be  ftrcngthened  by  God's  mighty  power  in  the  inner 
man,  and  pull  down  fatan's  flrong-holds  daily.  Got)  willing, 
1  hope  to  be  with  you  at  the  Synod.     I  find  as  yet  I  fcarce 

kftow 


LETTERS.  145 

know  any  thing  ;  but  if  I  give  out  of  my  little  flock,  I  trufl:  the 
Loud  will  increafe  it,  as  he  did  the  little  lad's  Ipavcs  and 
fifhes.  My  journal,  which  I  have  fcnt  to  Philadelphia^  will 
tell  you  what  God  has  done  in  AlaryLrid  and  [''irginia.  A 
foundation  of  great  things  I  believe  is  laying  here.  Oh  pray 
that  a  fenfe  of  his  owa  littlenefs,  may  be  given  to 

Your  affcclionatc,  though  unworthy  brother  and 
fellow-labourer  in  Christ, 

G.  JF, 

LETTER    CLVIL 

A'fy  dear  Sijlcr^  Snvafwah,  yan.  31,   1740. 

I  Rejoice  to  hear  that  you  are  enabled  to  fee  not  only  the 
freenefs  but  eternal  duration  of  God's  grace.  Till  the 
finner  is  convinced  of  this,  I  am  perfuadcd  he  can  neither 
work  from  a  principle  of  true  love,  nor  give  Jesus  Christ' 
the  honour  due  unto  his  name.  He  muft  alv/ays  be  making 
his  falvation  to  depend /j^rz/y  at  leaft  on  his  own  doings  ;  "  If  I 
do  fo  and  fo,  Jesus  Christ  will  give  me  his  grace  :*'  But  can 
any  believer  who  knows  himfelf,  help  confefling,  that  after  he 
had  received  grace,  he  (hould  have  finally  fallen  from  it,  had 
the  continuance  of  it  depended  on  his  own  will  ?  Indeed,  my 
dear  Sifter,  nothing  fo  much  comforts  my  own  foul  as  the 
thought  that  God  will  never  leave  me  nor  forfake  me  ;  if  he 
does,  it  muft  be  for  my^unworthinefs  :  But  on  that  account  it 
cannot  be  ;  for  he  never  chofe  me  on  account  of  my  unworthi- 
nefs.  He  loved  me  freely,  he  prevented  me  by  his  grace  3  he 
chofe  me  from  eternity,  he  called  me  in  time,  and  I  am  pcr- 
fuaded  will  keep  me  till  time  fliall  be  no  more. — This  con- 
fideration  makes  my  faith  to  work  by  love.  Novv^,  I  can  live 
not  barely  upon  my  frames,  which  notvvithftanding  are  blefTed 
things,  but  on  the  promifes.  Now,  I  can  go  on  my  way  re- 
joicing, and,  amidft  all  dejeilions,  lift  up  my  head  in  profpecT: 
of  a  certain  and  exceeding  weight  of  glory.  Though  I  fal), 
I  know  I  ftiall  rife  again  j  for  he  that  is  brought  truly  to  be- 
lieve on  Jesus  Christ,  his  faith  Ihall  never  die.  The  Lord 
Jesus  will  not  fufter  to  be  loft  the  purchafe  of  his  blood. 
He  knew  for  whom  he  died,  and  neither  men  nor  devils  fhall 
ever  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand.9.  Such  ag  have  been  taught 
Vol.  I.  L  moft 

A. 


146  LETTER    S. 

moft  of  God,  I  find,  are  thus  minded.  And  I  am  perfuaded 
were  the  effects  of  our  Lord's  redemption  to  depend  on  a 
roan's  own  compliance,  or  was  the  continuance  of  God's  grace 
to  depend  folely  on  man's  improvement,  Jesus  Christ  would 
have  died  in  vain.  Jdam  could  not  ftand  in  paradife  when 
left  to  his  own  free-will,  how  then  can  we  ?  No,  bleffed  be 
God,  cur  falvation  is  put  into  better  hands  than  our  own. 
Jesus  Christ  has  purchafed  not  only  wifdom,  righteoufnefs, 
and  fandliiication,  but  alfo  eternal  redemption  for  us.  Let 
this  thought,  my  dear  Sifter,  lift  up  our  hands  v/hen  they 
hang  down,  and  llrengthen  our  feeble  knees  ;  God's  gifts  and 
callings  are  without  repentance.  There  is  no  condemnation  to 
them  that  are  truly  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  I  write  thus  pe- 
remptorily to  you,  becaufe  I  find  now  you  are  able  to  bear  it. 
— BlefTed  be  God  !  my  dear  Sifter,  flefli  and  blood  has  not  re- 
vealed this  unto  you.  I  hope  ere  long  our  brethren  will  lay 
all  carnal  reafoning  afide,  and  fee  and  preach  the  truth  in  this 
refpe£l,  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  My  kindeft  love  to  your  fifter. — - 
What  I  write  to  one,  I  write  to  both.  The  Lord  direct  your 
going  in  his  way,  and  caufe  you  to  continue  inftant  in  prayer 
for 

Your  weak  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  JK 

LETTER    CLVIIL 

To  Mrs,  Elizabeth  JV . 

My  dear  Sijhr^  Savannah^  Jan,  31,   174G. 

I  Have  been  juft  reading  over  yo\ir  letter,  and  felt  a  fweet 
fympathy  with  the  writer.  Oh  that  it  may  increafe  till  we 
are  filled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of  God  I  Some  pafiages  in  your 
letter  were  dangerous  to  my  foul.  Whenever  you  fee  an}F 
Ijrowth  of  grace,  pray  that  I  may  grow  in  humility  in  particular. 
Oh  that  I  was  lowly  in  heart  !  Honour  and  difhonour,  good 
report  and  evil  report  would  then  be  alike,  and  prove"  a  fur- 
therance to  me  in  my  chriftian  caufe. — I  believe  the  time  is 
iliortly  coming  in  which  1  am  to  endure  fomething  for  my 
Lord  and  Mafter  ;  then  will  1  ery  out,Wha  is  on  the  Lord's 
iide  ?  Nothing  fupports  me  under  a  profpcct  of  a  trying  time,  fa 
much  as  a  fenfe  of  God's  everlafting  love.  I  am  perfuaded, 
ths»i  neither  men  n<?r  devils  flull  ever  pluck  me  out  of  his 

Almiq;ht)r 


LETTERS.  147 

Almighty  hands.  Let  this  fupport  you,  my  dear  Sifter,  in  your 
change  of  life.  Wherever  you  are,  I  am  confident  you  will 
have  reafon  to  fay,  ^*  Surely  God  is  in  this  place."  That 
you  may  wvlx  ftronger  and  ftronger,  and  ripen  daily  for  glory, 
is  the  hearty  prayer  of 

Your  affedlionate  brother  and  fervant  in  our  dear  Emanuel^ 

G.  JV. 

LETTER    CLIX. 

To  Mr.  J,   N, 
Dear  Sir^  Savannah,  'Jan.  31,  1740, 

I  Hope  you  will  cxcufe  my  not  anfwering  your  kind  letter 
fooner.— The  many  avocations  that  at  prefent  furround  me^ 
prevented  it.  I  rejoice  to  hear  that  our  Lord  Jesus  is  getting 
himfelf  the  vidlory  in  the  hearts  of  poor  finners.  I  hope  many 
will  now  rejoice  in  his  falvation.  One  good  fign  is,  that  he 
has  employed  the  meaneft,  as  well  as  vileft  wretch,  that  he 
ever  yet  fent  forth. — When  I  hear  that  any  good  is  done  by 
my  unworthy  hands,  it  almoft  makes  me  to  blufh. — Oh  that 
I  could  humble  myfelf  in  the  duft,  that  the  Lord  alone  may 
be  exalted  in  his  ftrength.  I  purpofe  to  revifit  New-Tork  at 
the  appointed  time.  You  told  me,  "  Our  Lord  has  not  fent 
me  into  his  vineyard  at  my  own  charge.'*  Indeed,  I  always 
find  he  furniflies  me  with  things  convenient :  Nay,  he  is  often 
fo  abundant  in  goodnefs  and  truth,  that  I  am  obliged  to  cry 
out  in  holy  admiration,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God  !"  Dear 
Sir,  help  me  to  be  thankful.  Blefled  be  God,  the  Orphan- 
houfe  affairs  fucceed  well.  Many  fouls  will  be  redeemed  by 
it  from  temporal,  and  I  trull,  from  eternal  bondage.  I  have 
taken  in  upwards  of  twenty  children  already,  and  I  take  in 
more  daily.  —  I  am  building  a  large  houfe,  have  many 
fervants,  and  a  good  flock  of  cattle.  It  will  coft  much  money. 
— But  our  Lord  will  fee  to  that.  My  friends  at  New-Tork 
will  aflift  me  when  1  come  amongft  them.  Oh  that  my  com- 
ing may  be  in  the  fulnefs  of  the  blcffings  of  the  gofpel  of  peace  I , 
I  am  perfuaded,  you  will  not  be  wanting  in  your  prayers  on 
behalf  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  obli^^ed  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  //:  . 

L  2  LETTER 


hs  letters, 

letter   clx. 

To  Mrs.  Elizabeth  D . 

My  dear  S'l/ier  in  Christ,  Savannah^  Feb,  i,  174O. 

I  Generally  obferve  that  whom  the  Lord  loves,  for  the  moft 
part    he    keeps    from    preferment. — Your     grandmother 
cannot  do  any  more  than  fhe    is  permitted.     It  is  God's  free 
grace  alone,   that  has  made  the  difference   between  us   and 
others.     Oh  that  we  were  duly  fenfible  of  electing  love  I  In- 
deed it  muil;  ncceffarily  conltrain  us  to  obedience.     I  am  glad 
you  like  Bochm.     His  works  are  truly  evangelical,  and  a9:,oid 
fwcet  nourifhnient  to  the  new-born   foul.     The   nearer  we 
come  to  God,  the  better  we  fliall  relifli  fearching  books.     It 
is  an  evident  fign  of  a  falfe  heart,  when  it  is  unwilling  to  be 
probed.     BleiTed  be  God,  you  are  not  thus  minded.     I  truft 
the  Lord  Jesus  has  apprehended  you,  and  will  henceforward 
never  let  you  go.     O  that  I  may  hear  of  your  growth  in  grace, 
and  of  your  zeal  for  the  Lord  of  Hosts. — You  do  well  to 
go  about  doing  good;  your  Mailer  did  fo  before  you.     Dare^ 
dear  Mifs^  to  follow  his  good  example,  and  never  fear  the  re- 
vilings  of  men.     Set  your  face  as  a  flint  againft  all  the  adver- 
faries  of  our  Lord  ;    for  fliortly  you  fhall  tread  all  your  ene- 
mies under  feet.     I  befeech  you  by   the   mercies  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Saviour,  to  keep  up  a  clofe  walk  and  com- 
munion  with  God.     Nothing  elfe  can    preferve  you   from 
Idols  ;  and  you  know  when  once  the  foul  is  off  its  watch,  tlve 
devil  makes  fad  ravages  in  it.     There  is  nothins;  I  dread  more 
than  having  my  heart  drawn  away  by  earthly  objects. — When 
that  time  comes,  it  will  be  over  with  me  indeed ;  I  muff  then 
bid  adieu   to  zeal  and  fervency  of  fpirit,  and  in  effedl,  bid'the 
Lord  Jesus   to  depart  from  me.     For  alas,  what  rooni  can 
there  be  for  God,  when  a  rival  hath  taken  poffeffion  of  the 
heart  ?    Oh  my  dear  Sifter,   pray  that  no  fuch  evil  may  befal 
me.     My   blood  runs  cold  at  the  very  thought   thereof.     I 
cannot,  indeed  ;  I  cannot  away  with  it.     In  a  multiplicity  of 
bufinefs,  have  I  wrote  you  thefe  lines.     I  thank  you  for  your 
kind  letter,  and  hope  I  fhall  always  retain  a  grateful  fenfe  of 
the  many  favours  I  have  received  from  your  dear  family.    My 
kindeft  refpects  attend  your  fifter ;  I  long  to  hear  of  her  being 

brought 


LETTERS.  149 

brought  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 
How  does  your  father  ?  Oh  that  he  may  have  a  well-grounded 
intereft  in  Christ  !  How  does  my  dear  brother  Charles?  I 
pray  God  to  fill  him  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing.  And 
how  does  your  little  fifter  ?  Deareft  Redeemer,  keep  her  un- 
fpotted  from  the  world  !  My  heart  is  now  full.  Writing 
quickens  me.  I  could  almoft  drop  a  tear,  and  wifli  myfelf, 
for  a  moment  or  two,  in  England,  But  hufli,  nature  :  God 
here  pours  down  his  bleflings  on 

Your  fincere  friend  and  fervant  in  Cpirist, 

G,  TF, 

LETTER    CLXI. 

To  the  Rev,  Mr.  D.  R, 

Savannahy   Feb.   4,    1 740. 
Afy  reverend  and  dear  Brother ^ 

I  Received  your  kind  letter  juft  on  my  arrival  at  this  place. — 
My  journal,  which  I  fuppofe  you  will  have  read  ere  this 
reaches  jyalesy  can  beft  inform  you  what  God  hath  done  for 
my  own  and  other  people's  fouls. — Even  here,  he  is  plcafcd 
to  be  with  and  alTifl  us.  The  Orphan-houfe  goes  on  bravely. 
I  believe  I  fliall  take  in  near  fifty  children  before  I  return  to 
England.  He  that  feedeth  the  young  ravens  which  call 
upon  him,  will  not  fufFer  them  to  want. — I  rejoice  to  hear 
that  the  Lord  Jesus  is  fo  publicly  confelled  among  your 
countrymen. — If  the  Lord  is  pleafed  to  fend  me,  I  fhall  gladly 
take  a  tour  into  Wales. — In  this  time  of  retirement,  I  expert 
many  inward  confli^ls.  How  otherwife  (hall  I  be  prepared 
for  future  mercies  ?  Experience  of  God's  work  upon  our  own 
'i-^^^-i  is  the  beft  qualification  to  preach  it  effc6tually  to  others. 
In^bout  two  months  I  take  another  tour  round  America.  The 
^ofpel,  I  believe,  will  come  with  power  in  thefe  parts.  I  ex- 
pect to  fufFer  in  the  flefh  for  what  hath  been  done  already  : 
But  what  have  we  to  do  with  the  confcquences  of  performing 
our  duty  }  Leave  them  to  God.  Oh,  my  dear  brother,  pray 
for  me  that  my  faith  fail  not,  and  then  I  care  not  what  per- 
1-cution  befals 

Your  weuk  unworthy  brother  in  Christ, 

G,JV, 

L3  LETTER 


i5d  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CLXII. 

To  Mr,  H,  H. 
My  dear  Br  ether  ^  Savannah,  Feb.  \^   1740. 

WILL  this  find  you  in  prifon  or  not  ?  Your  laft  letter 
(which  I  received  upon  my  arrival  here)  gave  me 
fome  expedations  that  ere  long  you  would  be  both  in  prifon 
and  bonds.  By  and  by,  I  (hall  follow  perhaps. — The  Lord 
fandify  all  his  difpenfations  to  us,  and  make  us  not  only  wil- 
ling to  be  bound,  but  even  to  die  for  the  fake  of  our  dear 
Mafter.  When  I  read  how  my  letters,  &c.  are  blefled  to  your 
comfort,  it  quite  confounds  me.  Oh  the  free-grace  of 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  !  My  dear  Brother,  let  us  continue 
inflant  in  feafon  and  out  of  feafon. — Let  us  continually  preach 
up  free-grace,  though  we  die  for  it ;  we  cannot  lofe  our  lives 
in  a  better  caufe.  As  I  am  enabled,  I  remember  you  at  the 
throne  of  grace  ;  in  general  I  figh  out  my  prayers. — But  the 
fpirit,  I  truft,  makes  interceflion  for  me  with  groanings  that 
cannot  be  uttered. 

I  have  not  had  much  enlargement  in  preaching,  fince  I  have 
been  here ;  but  my  heart  is  often  weighed  down,  and  torn  to 
pieces  with  a  fcnfe  of  my  defperately  wicked  and  deceitful 
heart.  I  can  fubfcribe  to  what  you  fay,  *'  Was  God  to  leave 
ttie  to  myfelf,  I  fhould  be  eminent  for,  and  a  ring-leader  in 
fin."  I  fometimes  think  my  heart  is  more  vicious  and  per- 
verfe  than  any  one's ;  and  yet  Jksus  Christ  will  come  and 
dwell  in  me. — Methinks  I  hear  you  fay,  "  Glory  be  to  free 
grace:  All  praife  be  given  to  eledring  love."—Let  all  that 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  fay,  Jmen  !  Pray  write  to  me  as  often 
as  poffible. — God,  I  believe,  is  laying  a  foundation  for 
great  things  in  Georgia.  1  am  building  a  large  houfe,  and 
taking  in  many  children.  Wr^ftle  with  Gop  in  behalf 
of,  Brother, 

Youfs  eternally  in  Christ  Jesuj, 

G.  ir 


J.  E  T  T  E  K 


LETTERS.  rsx 

TETTER    CLXIIL 

ro  Mr.  H — 

Savannah^  Feb,  4,  1740. 

HOW  is  it  with  your  heart  ?  I  hope  the  Lord  Jesus 
leads  you  on  from  conquering  to  conquer,  and  gets 
himfelf  the  vi<9:ory  every  day.  I  cannot  but  think  that  here- 
after great  things  will  be  done  in  America,  God  feems  to 
have  given  fome  earnefts  of  it  already.  My  next  journal  will 
acquaint  you  what  they  are.  It  often  pleafes  me,  to  reflect 
how  Christ's  kingdom  is  fecurely  carried  on  in  fpite  of  men 
and  devils,  and  that  too  by  the  weakeft  inftruments  in  different 
parts  of  the  world.  Surely  we  {hall  unite  at  laft,  and  that 
glorious  time  will  come,  when,  with  one  heart  and  with  one 
voice,  we  fhall  fing  praifes  to  him  who  fitteth  upon  the  throne 
for  ever.  A  glorious  epiphany,  I  truft,  will  ftiortly  be  mads 
in  the  hearts  of  many  fouls.  My  deareft  Brother,  let  us  do 
or  fuffer  anything,  fo  we  may  be  made  inftruments  of  begin* 
riing  and  carrying  on  fo  divine  a  work.  As  for  my  own  part, 
I  often  ftand  aftonifhed  at  the  riches  of  free  diflinguifhing 
grace,  and  I  often  feel  myfelf  fo  great  a  fmner,  that  I  am 
tempted  to  think,  nothing  can  be  blefled  which  comes 
from  fuch  unhallowed  hands  and  lips ;  but  yet  the  Lord  is 
with  me, and  attended  his  word  with  mighty  power  onChriJlmas 
day.  Pray  remember  me  to  all  friends.  I  expecS^  you  will  re- 
ceive the  letters  I  fent  from  Philadelphia^  ere  this  comes  to 
hand.  I  depend  on  feeing  your  journal,  and  hope  you  will 
accept  of  my  mofl  cordial  love  from,  dearefl  Brother, 

Your's  eternally  in  Christ  Jesus, 

LETTER    CLXIV. 

To  Mr,  H,  G, 
My  dear  Br  other  ^  Savammh^  Feb,  4,  174O. 

WHAT  fliall  I  fay  to  your  kind  letter?  1  blefs  the 
Lord  for  awakening  you  to  fee  the  ncceffity  of 
trufting  in  a  better  righteoufnefs  than  your  own,  and  I  adore 
him  for  making  ufe  of  fo  mean  an  inftrumcnt  as  I  am,     I^- 

ly  4  ^^ 


152  LETTERS. 

IS  a  plain  proof  that  the  power  is  not  of  man,  but  of  God 
alone.  Labour,  dear  Sir,  to  keep  up  thefe  convidions  in 
your  heart.  Now  God  has  called  you,  take  care  of  lying 
down  again. — Be  always  trimming  your  lamp,  as  though  you 
were  in  expe^lation  every  moment  to  meet  the  heavenly  Bride- 
groom.'—Search  more  and  more  into  the  corruption  of  your 
heart,  and  never  reft  till  God's  fpirit  witnefleth  with  your 
fpirit,  that  you  are  a  child  of  God.  Let  the  deadnefs  of  thofe 
around  you,  excite  your  zeal.  See  that  you  are  a  burning 
and  a  fhining  light  in  the  midft  of  fuch  a  crooked  and  pcr- 
veffe  generation. — And  let  a  fenfe  of  God's  diftinguifhing 
Jove  to  you  above  others,  excite  you  to  diftinguifli  yourfelf 
by  your  obedience;  ftill  remembering  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
is  our  whole  and  everlafting  righteoufnefs.  That  we  both 
may  be  found  in  him,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of 

Your  fincerc  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  rr. 

LETTER     CLXV. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  J . 

Reverend  and  dear  Sir^  Savannah y  Feb.  29,  17 40. 

WITH  great  pleafure  I  anfwer  your  kind  letter,  and 
earneftly  pray  that  God  would  be  pleafed  to  fan(5^ify 
our  correfpondeiice.  It  rejoices  my  foul,  when  I  find  a  cler- 
gyman that  loves  our  Lord  Jesus  in  fmccrity.  It  is  with 
regret  that  I  fpeak  againft  any  of  the  facred  fun(St:ion ;  but 
when  their  preaching  and  walk  are  dire£tly  contrary  to  the 
gofpcl  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  I  cannot  but  fpeak  to  them,  as 
well  as  to  the  laity.  To  the  beft  of  my  knowledge,  I  preach 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  and  fimply  aim  at  bringing  fouls 
to  him.  Bleiled  be  his  free  grace  for  the  fuccefs  he  hath  been 
pleafed  to  give  me.  Not  unto  me,  not  unto  me,  but  unto 
his  holy  name  be  all  the  glory  !  Daily  I  am  convinced,  that 
God's  hand  is  not  (hortened — He  blefles  me  here  as  well  as 
clfewhcre.  The  Orphan-houfe  is  in  great  forwardnefs.  I 
feed  near  an  hundred  mouths  daily,  and  am  afTured  I  fcrve  a 
God  who  will  fupply  all  our  wants.  It  would  rejoice  me 
to  fee  you  at  Savannah,  if  your  bufinefs  will  permit. — I  can 
5  now 


LETTERS.  153 

now  provide  things  convenient  for  your  reception. — In  about 
fix  weeks  I  propofe,  God  willing,  to  go  northv/ard. — If  you 
can,  pray  favour  me  with  your  company  before  that  time. — 
My  friends  will  rejoice  to  hear  and  fee  you. — They  join  with 

me  in  affectionate  refpedts  to  yourfelf  and   Mrs.  J •.     I 

have  fent  you  a  few  little  tracis,  and  long  for  opportunities  to 
convince  you,  reverend  and  dear  Sir,  how  fmcercly  I  fubfcribe 
myfclf 

Your  affectionate  brother  and  fellow-labourer  in  our 
dear  Lord  Jesus, 

G.  JK 

LETTER     CLXVI. 

To  Captain  H.  M. 
Dear  Sir,  Savannah,  March  2,  1740. 

WITH  pleafure  I  received  your  kind  letter  laft  night, 
and  immediately  prayed,  that  God  would  never  leave 
you  before  he  had  finiihed  the  good  work  begun  in  your  heart. 
He  has  given  you  a  rational,  I  hope  ere  long,  he  will  give  you 
zfpiritiial  convidion  of  fin  and  of  Christ.  When  that  comes, 
all  oppofition  will  fall  before  it.  The  world  will  be  as  no- 
thing in  your  eyes,  and  you  will  a6l  like  a  foldier  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Indeed,  dear  Sir,  I  travail  as  it  were  in  birth,  till 
Jfsus  Christ  be  thoroughly  formed  within  you.  If  I  do 
not  forget  my  promifc,  I  do  not  forget  your  favours. — I 
make  m.ention  of  you  in  my  prayers.  Linger  not,  dear  Sir, 
but  hafte  out  of  your  fpiritual  Sodom.  Flee,  flee  to  Jesus 
Christ,  whofe  facred  blood  has  made  an  atonement  for  fin- 
ners.  Lay  hold  on  his  everlafting  righteoufnefs,  and  chufe 
rather  to  fuffer  afHiclion  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to  en- 
joy any  thing  which  this  world  may  afford,  for  a  fcafon. 
Accept  the  fermons  I  have  herewith  fent,  and  believe  me  to 
be,  dear  Sir, 

Your  affedlionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.JV. 


LETTER 


154 


LETTERS. 


LETTER    CLXVII. 


To  Mr.  James  S- 


Dear  Mr.  S.  March  j,   1740. 

BLESSED  be  God,  that  you  are  yet  alive  as  to  your 
body  ;  biefled  be  God,  that  fome  fparks  of  divine  light 
are  yet  difcernible  in  your  foul.  Indeed,  I  have  been  frequent- 
ly diftreficd  for  you  and  your  companions,  left  fatan,  through 
the  corruption  of  your  hearts,  and  the  deceitfulnefs  of  worldly 
bufinefs,  fhould  get  an  advantage  over  you.  Oh  v^'atch,  my 
dear  friend,  watch  unto  prayer  ',  keep  clofc  to  God  through 
?  living  faith  in  his  dear  Son  ;  forget  not  your  firft  love  j  for- 
get not  a  bleeding  God  ;  forget  not  that  iime^  when  your  foul 
was  about  to  take  its  laft  flight.  O  that  I  may  meet  you  in 
triumph  at  the  laft  day  !  Providence  thwarts  my  feeing  you. 
Adieu;  write  as  often  as  you  can.  You  have  my  prayers, 
and  as  a  token  of  my  love,  be  pleafed  to  accept  this  letter  and 
the  books  fent  with  it,  from 

Your  afFe£lionate  friend  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CLXVIII. 

ro  the  Hon,  J.  IV. 
Honoured  Sir,  Savannah^  March  10,  1740. 

YESTERDAY,  after  public  worfhip,  I  received  with 
pleafure  your  kind  letter,  and  was  immediately  ready 
to  cry  out.  Why  do  fo  many  of  my  Lord's  fervants  take 
notice  of  fuch  a  dead  dog  as  I  am.  Surely  fovereign,  rich, 
and  free  grace  was  never  iexalted  more  than  in  the  mercy 
(liewn  to  me,  who  am  in  truth  the  unworthief!:  of  the  fons  of 
men. — Honoured  Sir^  it  rejoices  me  to  hear  that  there  are  fo 
■  many  at  Nevj  England^  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  in  fmce- 
rity,  and  dare  to  fhinc  as  lights  in  the  world  amongft  a 
crooked  and  perverfe  generation. — I  wifh  they  may  be  all 
Jquila\  and  Prijcilla's  to  me,  and  teach  me  the  way  of  GoDs 
more  perfectlv  ;  for  i  long  to  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  know- 
ledge of  my  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus.  Christ.  Oh  he  is  a 
Iweet  roaflcr ,  even  here  do  I  feel  his  blclled  influences,  and 
3  j:ejoicG^ 


LETTERS.  155 

rejoice  with  joy  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory. — He  is  often 
with  us  in  the  midft  of  his  fan£luary,  and  much  fucceeds  the 
Orphan-houfe. — I  have  digged  low,  and  intend  to  build  it 
high,  becaufe  I  have  a  great  God  to  pay  the  charges.  I 
have  about  thirty-fix  children  which  I  maintain  and  cloath, 
and  have  upwards  of  forty  perfons  more  who  are  employed  in 
the  work.  The  plantation  is  in  great  forwardncfs. — Many 
families  are  kept  here  by  my  employing  them,  and  I  hope  to 
fee  many  a  youth  bred  up  for  God  ;  for  I  defign  to  breed  up 
for  the  miniftry,  all  that  at  any  time  I  (hall  perceive  to  be  re- 
newed by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and  endued  with  fuitable  natural 
abilities.  The  work,  I  am  perfuaded,  is  of  God,  and  I  know 
he  will  raife  up  inftruments  to  fupport  it.  Let  him  chufe 
whom  feemeth  him  good. — In  about  three  months,  God  wil- 
ling, I  hope  to  be  near,  or  at  New  England.  I  thank  you  from 
my  foul,  honoured  Sir,  for  your  kind  invitation  ;  but,  I  be- 
lieve, am  pre-engaged  to  one  Mr.  5 d.  The  Lord  re- 
ward both  him,  and  all  others  who  receive  me  in  his  name  I  I 
have  not  yet  received  the  books,  which  you  was  pleafed  to 
fend  me,  becaufe  they  are  fent  to  the  fouthward,  but  I  expecSl: 
them  daily,  and  doubt  not  of  their  being  profitable.  I  know 
not  how  to  exprefs  my  gratitude  for  your  great  condefcenfion 
in  writing  to  me,  but  that  I  may  always  behave  fo  as  not  to 
be  afhamed  of  fubfcribing  myfelf 

Your  obliged  humble  fervant, 

LETTER    CLXIX. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  J.  IV. 
Honoured  Sir^  Savannahy  March,  26,  1740. 

SINCE  I  returned  here,  I  received  your  letter  and  journal. 
—  I  thank  you  for  both,  and  {hall  wait  almoft  with  im- 
patience to  fee  a  continuance  of  your  account  of  what  God  is 
doing  or  has  done  amongft  you — He  knows  mv  heart,  I  rejoice 
in  v^hatever  God  has  done  by  your  hands.  I,  prae,  fequar, 
etfinon  paflibus  equis. 

I  could  now  fend  a  particular  anfwcr  to  your  lail  ;  but,  my 
honoured  friend  and  brother,  for  once  hearken  to  a  child,  who 
is  willing  to  wafli  your  feet.  I  befeech  you  by  the  mercies 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lo^d>  if  }0u  would  have  my 

love 


156  LETTERS. 

love  confirmed  towards  you  ;  write  no  more  to  me  about  mlf- 
reprefentations  wherein  we  differ.  To  the  beft  of  my  know- 
iedge  at  prefent,  no  fm  has  dominion  over  me,  yet  I  feel  the 
flrugglings  of  indwelling  fm  day  by  day  ;  I  can  therefore  by 
jio  means  come  into  your  interpretation  of  the  pafiage  men- 
tioned in  the  letter,  and  as  explained  in  your  preface  to  Mr, 
Halyhurton — The  do6trine  of  eleSiion^  and  the  final  perfevera7ice 
of  thofe  that  are  truly  in  Christ,  I  am  ten  thoufand  times 
more  convinced  of,  ifpoflible,  than  when  I  faw  you  lafl  — 
You  think  otherwife  :  why  then  (hould  we  difpute,  when  there 
is  no  probability  of  convincing  ?  Will  it  not  in  the  end  de- 
flroy  brotherly  love,  and  infenfibly  take  from  us  that  cordial 
union  and  fweetncfs  of  foul,  which  I  pray  God  may  always 
fubfift  between  us  ?  How  glad  would  the  enemies  of  the  Lord 
be  to  fee  us  divided  ?  How  many  would  rejoice,  (hould  I 
join  and  make  a  party  againft  you  ?  And  in  one  word,  hov/ 
would  the  caufe  of  our  common  mafter  every  way  fuffer  by 
our  raifmg  difputes  about  particular  points  of  doctrines  I 
Honoured  Sir,  let  us  ofFcr  falvation  freely  to  all  by  the  blood  of 
Jesits  ;  and  whatever  light  God  has  communicated  to  us, 
let  us  freely  communicate  to  others.  I  have  lately  read  the 
life  of  Luther,  and  think  it  in  no  wife  to  his  honour,  that  the 
laft  part  of  his  life  was  fo  much  taken  up  in  difputing  with 
Zuitiglius  and  others  ;  who  in  all  probability  equally  loved  the 
Lord  Jesus,  notwithftanding  they  might  difler  from  him  in 
other  points.  Let  this,  dear  Sir,  be  a  caution  to  us,  I  hope 
ifc  will  to  mc  ;  for  by  the  bleiling  of  God,  provoke  mc  to  it 
as  much  a«  you  plcafe,  I  do  not  think  ever  to  enter  the  lifts  of 
eontroverfy  with  you  on  the  points  wherein  we  differ.  Only 
I  pray  to  God,  that  the  more  yaw  judge  mc,  the  more  I  may 
ioveyou,  and  learn  to  defire  no  ones  approbation,  but  that  of  my 

Lord  and  mafter  Jesus  Christ. Ere  this  reaches  you, 

1  fuppofc  you  will  hear  of  my  late  excurfion  to  Charles  Toivn, 
A  creat  work  I  believe  is  beo;un  there.  Enclofed  I  have  fent 
you  Mr.  Garden^s  letters — They  will  ferve  to  convince  you, 
more  and  more,  of  the  neceffity  you  lie  under  to  be  inftant  in 
fcafon  and  out  of  feafon.  Oh,  dear  honoured  Sir,  I  wifti  you 
jis  much  fuccefs  as  your  own  heart  can  wifti.  Was  you  here, 
I  would  weep  over  you  with  tears  of  love,  and  tell  you  what 
great  things  God  hath  done  for  mv  foul,  iince  we  parted 

iaft. 


LETTERS.  157 

laft.  Indeed  and  indeed,  I  often  and  heartily  pray  for  your 
fuccefs  in  the  gofpel  :  May  your  inward  ftrength  and  outward 
fphere  increafe  day  by  day  1  May  God  ufe  you  as  a  choice 
and  fingular  inftrument  of  promoting  his  glory  on  earth,  and 
may  I  fee  you  crowned  with  an  eternal  and  exceeding  weight 
of  o-lory  in  the  world  to  come  !  This  is  the  hearty  defire  of, 
honoured  Sir, 

Yours  mofl  affectionately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  r/. 

LETTER     CLXX. 

To  Mr.  IF. 

Savannah^  March  26,  1740. 

AND  how  does  dear  Mr.  J'Fal — ?  His   letter  lies  by  me, 
and  I  now  am  inclined  to  anfwer  it.     My  dear  brother, 
how  do  you  feel  your  heart  ?  Is  it  grown  fick  of  original  and 
actual  fm  ?   Is  it  grown  Tick  of  unbelief  and  felf-righteoufnefs  ? 
Is  it  clofely  united  to  the  holy  Jesus  ?   Do  you  feed   on  hiai 
in  your  heart  by  faith  ?    And  do  you  receive  of  his  fulnefs  day 
by  day  ?   I  afk  thefe  queftions,  becaufe  I  want  to  fee  you  v/rite 
of  the  inward  life,  and  to  hear  you  talk  of  your  having  a  feeling 
pofleffion  of  your  God.    For  he  that  believeth  aright,  hath  the 
v/itnefs  within  himfelf.     How  do  the  brethren  r  I  hope  there 
is  no   more   faying   "  I  am  of  Paul^''  or   ''  I  am  of  Jpollos^'^ 
but  that  you  are  only  defirous  of  being  one  in  Christ.     I 
pray  for,   though  diftant  from  you.     I  believe  I  am  preparing 
a  place  for  many.     Our  work  goes  on  bravely.     I  have  near 
forty  little  ones  now  in  my  houfe.     Some  of  them  I  truft  will 
be  efFedtually  wrought  upon,  and  made  chriftians  indeed.  We 
all  live  in  love  and  unity,  and   moft  I   hope  are  feeking  after 
Jesus  Christ.     He  is  pleafed  from  time  to  time  to  manifeft 
Iiimfclf  to  my  foul,  and  to  fhcw  me  hov/  unworthy  I  am  of  the 
leaft  mercy.     Shortly  I  fliall  go  northward,  to  preach  the  gof- 
pel and  colleCl  frefli  contributions  for  my  orphans.     God  has 
given  me  an  earneft  of  what  he  will  do   in  America^  by   the 
large  collection  that  was  made  at  Charla  Town  —  I  live  tv^rj 
day  in  expectation  of  hearing  from   my  London   friends.     My 
brother,   the  captain,  rcfrefhcu  my  foul  v/ith  glad  tidings  and 
letters  from  Brijhl,     God   gave   »ne  gre;u  comfort  and  fatil- 

faclioii 


158  LETTERS. 

fadion  in  converfing  with  him,   and  I  hope  he  will  be  a  chrl* 
flian  indeed.     Adieu.     All  falute  you  and  the  brethren. 

I  aip  yours  molt  affedionately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

LETTER    CLXXI. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  B.  L 

Savannah^  March^  28,  1 740. 

HOW  glad  Ihould  I  be  of  a  letter  from  dear  brother 
/ f  When  (hall  my  foul  be  refrefhed,  with  hear- 
ing that  the  work  of  the  Lord  profpers  in  his  hand  ?  I  fup- 
pofe  before  now  you  have  received  my  letters,  and  fecn  my 
journal,  and  I  believe  God  is  yet  preparing  great  things  for 
us.  Many  at  Cbarles-iown^  lately  were  brought  to  fee  their  want 
of  Jesus  Christ — Next  week,  God  willing,  I  purpofe  go- 
ing to  Philadelphiay  and  then  perhaps  may  fee  England  the 
latter  end  of  this  year,  or  beginning  of  the  next.  The  orphan- 
houfe  goes  on  bravely.  I  have  forty  children  to  maintain,  be- 
fides  workmen  and  ailiftants  —  The  great  houfholder  of  the 
world  does,  and  will  I  a-m  perfuaded  richly  provide  for  us  alL 
The  colony  itfelf  is  in  a  very  declining  way.  But  our  extre- 
mity is  God's  opportunity — Our  brethren  I  truft  go  forward? 
in  the  fpiritual  life,  I  have  often  great  inward  trials— Fray 
that  I  may  be  kept  in  all  changes,  and  feeming  chances  of 
this  mortal  life.  I  believe  it  to  be  God's  will  that  I  (hould 
marry.  One,  who  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  fuperior,  is  abfo- 
lutely  necefTary  for  the  ^ue  management  of  affairs.  However,  I 
pray  God,  that  I  may  not  have  a  wife,  till  I  can  live  as 
though  I  had  none — You  may  communicate  this  to  fome  of 
our  intimates  5  for  I  would  call  Christ  and  his  difciples  to 
the  marriage.  If  I  am  deluded,  pray  that  God  would  re- 
veal it  to 

Your  moft  affectionate  brother  and  fervant, 

G.  IF. 


h  £  1^  T  E  R 


LETTERS.  15^ 

LETTER    CLXXIL 

To  Mr,  and  Mrs,  D, 
On  board  the  Savannah^  bound  to  Phila'delphia  from  Georgia^ 
Aprils  4,  1740. 
My  dear  friends y 

SINCE  I  wrote  laft,  we  have  buried  our  Sifter  L . 
Rachel  I  left  at  Philadelphia^  and  fifter  T Teems  to 

be  in  a  declining  ftate  ;  (o  that  fifter  A alone  is  like 

to  be  left  of  all  the  women  which  came  over  with  mc 
from  England,  I  find  by  experience,  that  a  miftrqfs  is  abfo- 
lutely  neceflary  for  the  due  management  of  my  increafing  fa- 
mily, and  to  take  off  fome  of  that  care,  which  at  prefent  lies 
upon  me.  Befides,  I  ftiall  in  all  probability,  at  my  next  re- 
turn from  England^  bring  more  women  with  me  :  and  I  find, 
nnlefs  they  are  ail  truly  gracious  (or  indeed  if  they  are)  with- 
out a  fuperior,  matters  cannot  be  carried  on  as  becometh  the 
gofpel  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  hath  been  therefore  much  im- 
prefTiid  upon  my  heart,  that  I  fhould  marry,  in  order  to  have 
a  help  meet  for  me  in  the  work  whereunto  our  dear  Lord 
Jesus  hath  called  me.  This  comes  (like  Abraham's  fervant 
to  Rehekah's  relations)  to  know  whether  you  think  your  daucrh- 

ter,   M'lfs  E 5  is  a  proper  perfon  to  engage  in  fuch  an 

undertaking  ?  If  fo  ;  whether  you  will  be  pleafed  to  give  me 
leave  to  propofe  marriage  unto  her  ?  You  need  not  be  afraid  of 
fending  me  a  refufal.  For,  I  blefs  God,  if  I  know  any  thing  of 
my  own  heart,  I  am  free  from  that  foolifti  paftion,  which  the 
world  calls  Love.  I  write,  only  becaufe  I  believe  it  is  the  will 
of  God,  that  I  fhould  alter  my  ftate  j  but  your  denial  will 
fully  convince  me,  that  your  daughter  is  not  the  perfon  ap- 
pointed by  God  for  me.  He  knows  my  heart ;  I  would  not 
marry  but  for  him,   and   in  him,   for  ten  thoufaiid   worlds, 

—But  I  have   fometimes  thought   Alifs  E- would   be 

my  he!p-mate  3  for  ftie  has  often  been  imprefTcd  upon  my 
heart.  I  fhould  think  myfelf  fafer  in  your  family,  becaufe  fo 
many  of  you  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  confequently  would 
be  more  watchful  over  my  precious  and  immortal  foal.  After 
ilrong  crying  and  tears  at  il^c  throne  of  grace  for  direiTtion, 
'^ad  after  unOx-akablc  troublv^i  with  mvown  heart,  I  v/ritethis. 

Be 


i6o  LETTERS. 

Be  pleafed  to  fpread  the  letter  before  the  Lord  ;  and  if  you 
think  this  motion  to  be  of  him,  be  pleafed  to  deliver  the  in- 
clofed  to  your  daughter  —  If  not,  fay  nothing,  only  let  me 
know  you  difapprove  of  it,  and  that  {hall  fatisfy,  dear  Sir  and 
Madam, 

Your  obliged  friend  and  fer^ant  in  Christ, 

G.  jr. 

LETTER     CLXXIII. 

To  Mijs  E . 

On  hoard  the  Savannah^  Jpril  d.ih,  1740* 

BE  not  furprifed  at  the  contents  of  this  : — The  letter  fent 
to  your  honoured  father  and  mother  will  acquaint  you 
with  the  reafons.  Do  you  think,  you  could  undergo  the  fa- 
tigues, that  muft  neceflarily  attend  being  joined  to  one,  who 
Is  every  day  liable  to  be  called  out  to  fuffer  for  the  fake  of  Je- 
sus Christ  ?  Can  you  bear  to  leave  your  father  and  kindred'a 
houfe,  and  to  truft  on  him,  (who  feedeth  the  young  ravens 
that  call  upon  him)  for  your  own  and  childrens  fupport,  fup- 
^pofmg  it  Tnould  pleafe  him  to  blefs  you  with  any?  Can  you 
undertake  to  help  a  hufband  in  the  charge  of  a  family,  con- 
fiding perhaps  of  a  hundred  perfons  ?  Can  you  bear  the  incle- 
mencies of  the  air  both  as  to  cold  and  heat  in  a  foreign  cli- 
mate ?  Can  you,  when  you  have  an  hufband,  be  as  though 
you  had  none,  and  willingly  part  with  him,  even  for  a  long 
leafon,  when  his  Lord  and  mafter  (hall  call  him  forth  to 
preach  the  gofpel,  and  command  him  to  leave  you  behind  ?  If 
after  feeking  to  God  for  diredlion,  and  fearching  your  heart, 
you  can  fay,  "  I  can  do  all  thofe  things  through  Christ 
ihengthening  me,"  what  if  you  and  I  were  joined  together 
in  the  Lord,  and  you  came  with  me  at  my  return  from 
England^  to  be  a  help  meet  for  me  in  the  management  of  the 
orphan-houfe  ?  I  have  great  reaibn  to  believe  it  is  the  divine 
will  that  I  fliould  alter  my  condition,  and  have  often  thought 
you  was  the  pcrfon  appointed  for  me.  I  fhall  ftill  wait  on 
God  for  dire6Vion,  and  heartily  intreat  him,  that  if  this  mo- 
tion be  not  of  him,  it  m.ay  come  to  nought. — I  write  thus* 
plainly,  becaufe,  I  truft,  I  write  not  from  any  other  principles 
but  the  love  of  God. — I  fliall  make  it  my  bufmefs  to  call  on 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  v/ould  advife  you  to  confult  both-  him 

and 


LETTERS.  i6t 

and  your  friends For  in  order  to  attain  a  bicfling,  we 

fhould  call  both  the  Lord  Jesus  and  his  difciples  to  the  mar- 
riage— I  much  like  the  manner  of  Ifaac's  marrying  with  Re- 
heknh^  and  think  no  marriage  can  fucceed  well,  unlcfs  both 
parties  concerned  are  like-minded  with  To i^i as  and  his  wift.' — I 
think  1  can  call  the  God  of  Jbraham,  Ifaac  and  Jacobs  to  witnefs 
that  I  (iefne  *'  to  take  you  my  filter  to  vv'ife,  not  for  lufl,  but 
uprightly  ;"  and  therefore  I  hope  he  will  mercifully  ordain,  if 
it  be  his  blefled  will  v/e  fhould  be  joined  together,  that  we  may 
walk  as  Zachary  and  Elizabeth  did,  in  all  the  ordinances  of  the 
Lord  blamelefs.  I  make  no  great  profeiTion  to  you,  becaufe 
I  believe  you  think  me  fmcere.  The  paffionate  exprellions 
which  carnal  courtiers  ufe,  I  think,  ought  to  be  avoided  by 
thofe  that  would  marry  in  the  Lord.  I  can  only  promife,  by 
the  help  of  God,  "  to  keep  my  matrimonial  vow,  and  to  dd 
what  I  can  towards  helping  you  forward  in  the  great  work  of 
your  falvation."  If  you  think  marriage  will  be  any  way  pre- 
judicial to  your  better  part,  be  fo  kind  as  to  fend  me  a  denial* 
I  would  not  be  a  fnare  to  you  for  the  world.  You  need  not 
be  afraid  of  fpeaking  your  mind.  I  truft,  I  love  you  only  for 
God,  and  defire  to  be  joined  to  you  only  by  his  command, 
and  for  his  fake.  With  fear  and  much  trembling  I  write,  and 
Ihall  patiently  tarry  the  Lord's  leifure,  till  he  is  pleafed  to  in- 
cline you,  dear  Mifs  E ,  to  fend  an  anfwer  to 

Your  afFedionate  brother,  friend  and  fervant  In  Christ, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER    CLXXIV. 

To  Mr.   H . 

On  board  the  Savafinah,  Jpril  lOt   1740. 

IT  is  now  full  tim.e  to  anfwer  your  letter.  You  acknow- 
ledge me  the  firft  inftrument,  under  God  (for  ever  adored 
be  the  riches  of  his  free  grace)  of  awakening  you  to  the  divine 
life:  and  (hall  not  I  endeavour  to  quicken  and  inflame  the 
heavenly  fpark  infufed  Into  your  foul  ?  God  forbid  !  Oh  that 
my  power  was  equal  to  my  will !  How  fhould  my  dear  brother 

H glow  with  divine  love,  and  lean  by  faith  on  the  bofom 

of  his  deareft  Redeemer  !  But  I  truft  ere  now  you  have  indeed 
received  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and  knov/  what  it  is  to  fcafl  on  a 
Vol.   L  M  crucU 

4 


i62  LET    r    i:    R    s. 

crucifieJ  Jfsus.  Does  he  not,  my  dear  brother,  often  mar/i- 
feft  himfclf  i'wcetly  to  your  panting  foul  ■  Does  he  not  often 
teach  you  the  hidden  things  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ?  Does 
he  not  tell  you  that  he  loves  you,  and  will  fufFer  nothing  to 
pluck  you  out  of  his  almighty  hand  r  Thus  often  is  he  pleafed 
to  manifeR-  himfelf  to  me  :  and  who  then  dares  defpair  ?  No  ; 
i  can  aflure  the  worft,  the  chief  of  finners,  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  to  fave  them.  My  dear  brother,  here  are  glad 
tidings  of  great  joy  1  The  fire  kindles  whilft  I  am  mufing. 
Oh  let  us  call  all  to  come  and  fee  Him,  who  has  forgiven  us 

'  to 

all  the  fins  that  ever  we  committed.  Is  not  this  the  Christ? 
Adieu.  My  hearty  and  dcarcft  love  to  all.  Fail  not  writ- 
ing to 

Your  affedionate  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER     CLXXV. 

To  Mr.  C— . 

My  dear  Brother,  0?i  board  the  Savannah,  April  lo,  1 740* 

YOU,  as  well  as  your  dear  aflr)ciatcs,  are  much  upon 
my  heart.  I  long  to  hear  that  you  are  advanced  in 
grace,  ar.d  grown  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  your 
Lord.  I  fay^'^^r  Lord-,  for  I  hope,  ere  now,  you  can  ap- 
propriate Christ  to  yourfelf,  and,  without  the  leaft  diffidence 
or  doubt,  cry  out  affuredly,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God." 
When  the  foul  fiiys  this,  then,  but  not  till  then,  is  it  truly 
married  to  the  dear  Lord  Jesus  j  then  are  v»e  true  children 
of  the  bridegroom,  and  arc  real  partakers  of  the  fupper  of  the 
Lamb.  IMiis,  this  is  faith  :  this  is  believing  j  not  with  the 
head  j  not  in  notion  only  ;  but  with  the  heart,  indeed  and  in 
truth.  The  foul  now  puts  its  a?ncn,  and  fcts  the  feal  to  God's 
cverlafling  promifes  ;  it  now^  foars  upwards  tov/ards  heavenly 
things,  and  feels  continually  the  invifible  realities  of  another 
world.  Thougii  fometimes  overlliadowcd  by  a  cloud,  yet  flill 
it  knows  that  its  Redeemer  liveth,  and  juftifieth  the  ungodly. 
It  cannot  doubt  of  his  favour,  though  fometimes  he  is  pleafed 
to  withdraw  his  fcnfible  prefcnce.  The  root  of  the  matter  is 
twifted  round  every  faculty  of  the  foul,  which  daily  is  fupport- 
ed  with  this  aflurance,  that  Christ  can  no  more  forfake  the 
fyal  he  loves,  than  he  can  forfiikc  hirnfdf.  Oh  iny  dear  bro- 
ther, 

X 


LETTERS.  1^3 

thet*,  i  find  myfclf  much  carried  out  to  write  of  that  divine 
life,  that  divine  myftery  of  godlincfs,  the  hidden  kingdom  of 
Got)  in  the  heart.  If  any  thing  I  can  fay,  or  do,  or  write, 
may  be  any  way  fcrviceable  to  dear  Mr.  C — ,  it  will  much  re- 
joice 

His  moft  unvvorthy  brother  and  fcrvant  in  Christ, 

G.  rK 

LETTER     CLXXVL 

To  A4r.  I B- -. 

0.'2  hoard  the  Sa-vaiinah^  Jpri!  lO,   1 740, 
A^Iy  dfdr^  dear  Friend^ 

I  Remember   your  words  that   day  I  took  my  leave  of  you, 
with  Dr.  John  S ,   at   London,     I  have  not  forgotten 

you,  therefore  do  I  now  write  a  line  to  my  dear  Mr.  B , 

May  the  Holy  Ghoil:  come  upon  him,  and  the  power  of  the 
Higheft  overfhadow  him  ;  and  may  our  glorious  Redeemer 
never  ceafe  driving  with  him,  till  he  hath  a  witnefs  withiiv 
himfelf  that  he  is  a  true  child  of  God.  Oh,  when  will  you 
anfwer  the  character  of  your  name-fake  and  forefather  I/d,7c/ 
When,  like  him,  will  my  dear  friend  give  himfelf  up  a  whole 
burnt-offering  unto  the  Lord  !  May  I  hear  that  you  have 
recovered  your  firft  love,  and  are,  as  formerly,  zealous  of 
good  works  !  I  think  I  never  yet  really  doubted  of  your  return. 
If  prayers  to  God,  if  entreaties  to  him,  can  bring  my  dear  friend 
back,  he  fhall  n  it  be  led  away  captive  by  the  world;  he  fliall, 
he  fhall  be  a  Chriftian  indeed.  I  long  to  fee  you,  and  till  then 
fliall  wreftlc  with  (Irong  cryin^s  and  many  tears  with  my  dear 
Lord  Jesus,  in  your  behalf.  I  feel,  I  feel  Christ's  love; 
I  can  no  more  doubt  of  my  interejR:  in  him,  than  1  can  of  the 
{hining  of  the  fun  at  noon  day.  He  fills,  he  fweetens  and 
gladdens  my  foul  ;  he  loves  me  freely  :  he  will  bring  me  to 
behold  his  glory.  I  think  I  could  now  bid  to  men  and  devils 
defiance.  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  .?  It  is  Christ  that 
juftifies,  who  even  now  fitteth  in  heaven  to  make  intcrcefiion 
fjr  me.  You  fee,  my  dear  friend,  I  am  upon  the  mount.  I 
know  not  how  to  (lop.  It  is  true,  I  muft  come  down  ;  but  it 
is  only  that  I  may  go  up  again,  and  take  a  view  of  the  heaven- 
ly Canaa?i,     I  am  now  near  the  port  wla.ithsr  we  are  bound  : 

M  2  J  yet 


i64  LETTERS. 

yet  a  little  while,  and  I  (liall  be  in  heaven;  and  fhall  I  not  meet 

my  dear/- there?  God  forbid  !  No,  no;  Icannot  bear  the 

thought  of  it.  Away,  my  dear,  dear  brother,  to  Jnsus 
Christ.  Lay  hold  on  his  cverlafting  righteoufnefs  :  look, 
look  unto  him  by  faith,  and  be  faved.  Call  your  dear  wife 
to  look  alfo.  Help,  oh  help  her  in  the  great  work  of  her  fal- 
vation  ;  and  breed  up  your  dear  child  in  the  nurture  and 
admonition  of  the  Lord.  Adieu.  My  heart  is  full.  With 
fmcerity  I  fubfcribe  myfelf 

Your's  moft  afted^ionajtely  in  our  dearcfl-, 

dcareft  Lord  Jesus, 

G.  IK 

LETTER    CLXXVIL 

To  Mr,  N . 

My  Dear  Brother^      On  hoard  the  Savannah,  Jpril  lo,  1740. 

IHave  been  a  few  days  returned  from  Charles-Town,  where 
our  dear  Lord  Jesus,  I.  truft,  has  begun  a  glorious  work. 
Many  came  to  me  under  convidions,  and  were  made  to  cry 
out,  *'  What  (liall  we  do  to  be  faved  ?"  The  people  were 
exceeding  defirous  of  my  return  amongft  them.  If  I  call  there, 
as  I  come  northward,  it  may  prevent  my  being  at  New-York 
fo  foon  as  was  propofed.  The  Lord  dire6l  my  going  in  his 
wav.  A  Fojierian  Preacher  loft  ground  there.  1  think  you  are 
not  much  to  be  blamed  for  going  out  of  church  ;  but  perhaps 
it  might  be  better,  on  another  fuch  occafion,  to  hear  the  whole 
difcourfe,  and  then  go  and  converfe  with  the  preacher  upon 
it ;  otherwife  a  man  may  fay,  you  are  angry,  and  could  not 
judge,  becaa  c  you  did  not  hear  all.  Pralfe  is  more  dangerous 
than  conte.jipt :  but  when  our  Lord's  honour  can  be  promot- 
ed by  the  difplay  of  our  graces,  we  need  not  fear.  His  grace 
will  be  fiifHcient  for  us.     I  know  not  what  perfon  it  is  that 

you  would  not  have  me  be  fo  open  to,  unlefs  it  be  A4r. . 

I  had  rather  be  too  open  than  too  referved.  Simplicity  much 
becomes  the  IJrocl  of  God.  A  few  days  pad,  with  full  aflur- 
ance  of  faith,  I  laid  the  firil  brick  of  our  great  houfe:  yeremiah 
bought  land  when  the  people  were  leading  into  captivity.  M7 
faniilv  daily  increale,  and,  blefied  be  God,  as  yet  I  am  kept 
from  doubting.     Pray  that  my  faith  may  never  fail.     Some  of 

the 
5 


I 


LETTERS.  165 

the  Germans  In  America  are  holy  fouls,  and  deferve  the  cha- 
racter they  bear.  They  keep  up  a  clofe  walk  with  God,  and 
arc  remarkable  for  their  fweetnefs  and  fimplicity  of  behaviour. 
They  talk  little,  and  think  much.  Moft  of  them,  I  believe, 
are  Lutheram,  But  where  there  is  the  image  of  my  dear  Maf- 
ter,  there  are  my  afR-6lions  drawn.  This  is  the  catholic  fpirit 
you  breathe  after :  the  Lord,  I  am  pcrfuaded,  will  give  it  to 
your  foul.  All  that  people  do  fay  of  me,  affedts  me  but  little  ; 
becaufe  I  know  worfe  of  myfelf  than  they  can  fay  concerning 
me.  My  heart  is  defpcrately  wicked.  Was  God  to  leave 
me,  I  fhould  be  a  remarkable  fmner.  But  redeeming  love,  I 
believe,  will  not  let  us  go.  Oh  !  dear  Mr.  N*  pray,  and  giv« 
thanks  for  me.  I  daily  tafle  that  the  Lord  is  gracious.  All 
things  go  on  well.  My  dear  brethren  falute  you,  as  does 
Your  affectionate,  unworthy  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CLXXVIIL 

To  Mr.  S . 

WilUngtown,  {Penfylvania)  Jpril  14,  1740. 

READ  where  I  am,  and  judge  whether  or  not  I  am  a 
ftranger  and  pilgrim  upon  earth.  Yeftcrday,  after  a 
fhort  paffiige  often  days,  did  God  bring  us  from  Georgia  to 
Neiv-Cajile :  there  I  preached  twice.  To-day  I  {hall  preach 
here,  and  in  the  evening  hope  to  reach  Philadelphia.  People 
are  much  alarmed  already ;  and  great  things,  I  find,  God  has 
been  pleafed  to  do,  by  what  he  enabled  me  tb  deliver  when 
laft  here.  Two  minifters  have  been  convinced  of  their  formal 
(late,  notwithftanding  they  held  aiid  preached  the  doctrines 
of  grace.  One  plainly  told  the  congregation  he  had  been  de- 
ceiving himfelf  and  them,  and  could  not  preach  any  more, 
but  defired  the  people  to  pray  v/jth  him.  Another  is  as  aflame 
of  fire,  and  hath  been  much  ov/ned  of  God.  An  oppofcr  read- 
ing my  fermon,  in  order  to  convince  them  I  did  not  preach  as 

Mr.  T ,   was   much  difappointed  ;  for  power  went  along 

H  with  the  fermon,  God's  fpirit  fell  on  tlie  people,  and  formal 
oppofers  went  affrighted  away.  It  is  unknown  what  a  glo- 
rious Itir  here  is  in  the  province.     Many,  very  many,  I  be- 

M  3  lievc, 


i66  LETTERS. 

lieve,  of  late  have  been  brought  favingly  to  believe  on  t\\Q 
LoRP  Jesus.  The  work  much  increafes,  and  here  is  employ- 
ment for  many  months  :  but  I  mull:  return  fhortly  to  Savan- 
72ah,  A  primitive  fpirit  revives  ;  and  many,  I  hope,  will  be 
brought  to  live  flcdfaft  in  the  aportles  do6lrine,  in  fellowfliip, 
^nd  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayer.  Perhaps  dear  Mr,  iS^— 
may  be  one  «f  them.  Pray  how  does  that  young  man  do  ?  Is 
he  deeply  humbled,  and  clofely  united  to  the  dear  Lord 
Jesus  ?  Does  he  feel  hlmfelf  a  poor  fmner,  and  daily  experi- 
ence the  outgoing  and  incoming  of  the  blciied  fpirit  in  the 
fan6luary  of  his  heart  ?  Bleffed  be  God,  I  do  :  even  whilft  I  am 
ivriting  I  feel  his  power.  I  am  perfuaded  I  fiiall  be  more  than 
conqueror  over  every  evil,  through  my  Redeemer's  love.  Oh  ! 
my  dear  friend,  keep  clofe  to  the  dear  Lord  Jesus  I  Do  not 
go  without  his  leading,  and  then  you  are  fafe,  though  in  the 
mld{k  of  devils.     Adieu. 

Ever,  ever  yours, 

G.  IK 

LETTER     CLXXfX. 

To  Madam  C . 

Madam,  New  Brunfwick,  Aprils'],   1 740. 

AL  L  things   go   on  wejl    in  America — nay,  better  than  I 
dare  afk,  or  could  think.     Our  Lord's  kingdom  comes 
V'ith  power.     It  is  amazing  to  fee  how  God  is  prefent  in  our 

alTemblies :  I  refer  you  to  dear  brother  5 for  particulars, 

My  animal  fpirits  are  exhauRed,  but  I  am  filled  v/ithin.  Na- 
ture would  fometimes  cry  out,  ''  Spare  thyfelf  j"  but  when  I 
am  offering  Jesus  to  poor  Inmers,  I  cannot  forbear  exerting 
all  my  powers.  Oh  that  I  had  a  thoufand  lives  !  my  dear 
Lord  Jesus  (hould  have  them  all.  I  long  to  be  out  of  the 
body,  that  I  may  love  and  ferve  him  as  I  would  :  but  I  mufl 
fiifFer  before  I  can  reign  with  him.  That  you  and  I  may  never 
deny  our  Lord,  is  the  carncii  prayer  of.  Madam, 

Your  obliged  humble  fervant. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  167 

LETTER     CLXXX. 

To  Mr.  M . 

Neiu  Brunfwkk^  April  28,  17 40. 

BLESSED  be  God,  I  can  fend  you  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is  getting  himfelf  the  vi(5lory  in 
thefe  parts.  The  Orphan-houie  affairs  go  forward  beyond 
€xpe6tation.  I  have  upwards  of y^r/yJ^/Vi/vw  in  my  houfe  at  Sa- 
vannah^  t\Q2iV  feventy  perfons  in  family,  and  upwards  of  an  hundred 
people  to  provide  for  every  day.  As  yet  we  want  for  nothing. 
The  great  houfholdep  of  mankind  gives  us  all  things  richly  to 
enjoy,  and,  T  am  perfuaded,  will  provide  for  us  v/hilft  we  truft 
in  him.  I  had  rather  live  by  faith,  and  depend  on  God  for 
the  fupportofmy  great,  and  yet  increafing  family,  than  to  have 
the  laro;eft  vifible  fund  in  the  univerfe.  About  five  weeks  aero 
the  Lord  flirred  up  the  Charks-Tcwn  people  to  contribute  up- 
wards of  feventy  pounds  fterling  towards  the  fupport  of  my 
little  ones.  A  glorious  work  was  alfo  begun  in  the  hearts 
of  the  inhabitants ;  and  many  were  brought  to  cry  out, 
''  What  fhall  we  do  to  be  faved  ?"  A  fortnight  ago,  after  a 
fhort  paflage  of  ten  days,  I  landed  in  Penfyhania^  and  have  had 
the  pleafurc  of  feeing  and  hearing,  that  my  poor  endeavours 
for  promoting  Christ's  kingdom,  when  there  laft,  were  noc 
altogether  vain  in  the  Lord.  I  cannot  well  tell  you  how  man^ 
have  come  unto  me,  labouring  under  the  deepeft  convidions, 
and  feemingly  defirous  of  finding  reft  in  Jesus  Christ.  Se- 
veral have,  I  humbly  hope,  actually  received  him  into  their 
hearts  by  faith,  and  have  not  only  righteoufnefs  and  peace,  but 
alfo  joy  in  the  Floly  Ghoft.  In  iliort,  the  word  hath  run  and 
been  much  glorified  ;  and  many  Negroes  alfo  are  in  a  fair  way 
of  being  brought  home  to  God.  I  daily  receive  frefh  and 
moft  importunate  invitations  to  preach  in  all  the  adjacent  coun- 
tries. God  is  pleafed  to  give  a  great  blcfling  to  my  printed 
Sermons  :  they  are  now  in  the  hands  of  thoufands  in  thefc 
parts,  and  are  a  means,  under  God,  of  enlightening  and 
building  up  many  in  their  moft  holy  faith.  Since  fuch  an  ef- 
fe£lual  door  is  opened  for  preaching  the  evcrlafting  gofpcl,  you 
will  not  be  furprized  if  I  acquaint  you  there  are  many  advcr- 
faries.     The  Clergy ^  I  find,  are  greatly  offended  at  mc.     The 

M  J,  com- 


i6S  LETTERS. 

commlffary  of  Philadelphia,  having  got  a  little  ftronger  party 
than  when  I  was  there  laft,  has  thrown  oflF  the  mafk,  denied 
me  the  pulpit,  and  lalt  Sunday  preached  up  an  hi/iorical 
faith,  and  juftification  by  works.  But  people  only  flock  the 
more  to  me.  The  power  of  God  is  more  vifible  than  ever  in 
our  aflemblies  ;  and  more  than  ever  before  are  convinced  that 
I  preach  the  dodrine  of  Jesus  Christ.  Some  few  bigotted 
felf-righteous  ^takers  alfo,now  begin  to  fpit  out  a  little  of  the 
ferpent :  they  cannot  bear  the  do6lrine  of  original  fin,  or  of 
imputed  rightcQufneJs  as  the  caufe  of  our  acceptance  with  GoD. 
One  calls  original  fin  "  original  nonfenfe  ;"  and  feveral  have 
been  to  me,  under  the  apprehenfion  of  being  thruft  out,  for 
owning  and  confeffing  what  I  take  to  be  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.  God  has  now  brought  me  to  New  Brunfwick,  where 
I  am  blefied  with  the  converfation  of  Mr.  G —  T'— .  Indeed 
be  is  a  good  foldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  God  is  pleafed  in  a 
wonderful  manner  to  own  both  him  and  his  brethren.  The 
congregations  where  they  have, preached  have  been  furprizing- 
]y  convi6led  and  melted  down.  They  are  unwearied  in  doing 
3  good,  and  go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges  to  compel  poor 
fmners  to  come  in.  Yefterday  alfo  I  heard  of  two  minifters 
in  Long  Ifiand,  near  New-Tork^  who  had  large  communica- 
tions from  God,  and  have  been  inftrumental  in  bringing  many 
fouls  to  Christ.  I  could  add  more  ;  but  I  muft  away  :  the 
people  are  v/aiting  for  a  fpiritual  meal.  They  fly  to  the  doc- 
trine as  doves  to  the  windows,  and  I  truft  the  Lord  is 
now  reviving  his  work  in  the  midft  of  the  years.  With 
great  difficulty  I  have  redeemed  time  to  fend  you  thefe  {qw 
lines.  I  hope  you  and  the  refl  of  my  dear  friends  continue  to 
pray  for  me  :  for  I  believe  never  was  fo  weak  a  wretch  fent  on 
fuch  an  important  errand.  But  when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I 
ftrong.  My  bodily  ftrength,  by  frequent  journeying  and  con- 
tinued fpeaking,  fometimes  fails  me  -,  but  the  Lord  quickens 
nnd  flrengthens  me  by  his  mighty  power.  The  more  I  am 
oppofed,  the  more  joy  I  feel  ;  and  the  firfl;  fruits  of  God's 
fpirit,  which  he  hath  imparted  to  my  foul,  are  fo  fweet,  that 
I  almoft  with  impatience  wait  till  I  reap  a  full  harveft  in  the 
fraition  of  my  God.     Continue,  I  bcfeech  you,  ta  intercede 

fov 


LETTERS.  ,69 

for  me ;  and  reft  fatisfied  that  both  yoli  and  my  other  Englijb 
friends  are  always  remembered  by 

Yours, 


I 


LETTER    CLXXXL 

To  JV.  S.  Efq, 

My  char  Brother^  Reedy  Ifiand^  May  19,  1740. 

Know  very  well  what  it  is  to  part  from  a  friend  which  is 
as  one's  own  foul ;  and  therefore  could  in  fome  meafure 
fympathize  with  you  in  what  you  felt  when  partino-  from  me. 
The  good  Lord  fandify  my  friendfiiip  to  you,  and  grant  we 
may  go  hand  in  harid  to  heaven.  One  of  the  inclofed  papers 
will  fliew  you  the  event  of  what  you  inferted  (unknown  to 
me)  in  the  News.  However,  be  not  difneartened  ;  God  fliall 
make  even  this  to  work  together  for  your  good.  The  war  be- 
tween Michael  and  the  dragon  has  much  increafed.    Mr.  C 

has  preached  moft  of  his  peopl^  away  from  him.     He  Jafhed 

me  moft  bravely  the  Sunday  before  I  came  away.     Mr.  J 

alfo  preaches  againft  me.  Mr.  C—  did  not  come  to  take  his 
leave  of  me  ;  and  Mr.  J—  is  very  inveterate.  Now  I  believe 
our  Lord's  kingdom  will  come  wiih  power.  At  New-York 
the  word  ran.  Twice  or  thrice  our  Lord  appeared  for  us  in 
a  moft  glorious  manner.  Mr.  T—  and  his  brethren  glow  with 
divine  warmth;  and  I  have  convcrfed  with  one  of  the  mini-' 
fters  of  Long  IJland,  whom  God  has  lately  fent  forth  :  he  is  a 
fweet  zealous  foul.  Laft  week,  at  Nottingham  and  Mr.  ^— 's 
how  did  God  manifeft  his  glory  !  We  had  about'  twelve 
thoufand  hearers  3  and  fuch  a  melting,  fuch  a  crying,  (they 
fay)  was  fcarcely  ever  fccn.  Blcfied  be  God,  the  devil's  chil- 
dren begin  to  throw  oft'  the  mafk.  I  want  to  draw  the  linger- 
ing battle  on.  At  Philadelphia  aft'airs  go  on  better  and  better; 
only  Satan  now  begins  to  throw  many  into  fits.  I  have  generally 
preached  twice  and  rode  near  thirty  miles  a-day  fince  you 
left  me.  The  Lord  hath  been  my  fupport,  and  has  often  fo 
melted  me  with  a  fenfe  of  his  free,  fovereign,  and  everlaftinr^ 
love,  that  fome  thought  I  was  giving  up  the  ghoft.  Oh  neveT 
let  go  your  fenfe  of  God's  fovereign,  everlafting  love  I  It  is 
food  to  my  poor  foul.     Was  it  not  for  that,  furely  I  muft  fink 

under 


170  LETTERS. 

under  the  prorpe<5l  of  the  labours  aud  fufferings  that  are  bcfoje 
me.  My  dear  brother,  What  is  the  Lchp  doing  in  thcfe 
parts  ?  I  believe  the  work  will  go  on  better  here  than  in  Eng- 
Imi^,  We  are  more  united  in  our  principles,  and  do  not  print 
one  againil  another.     Pray  obferve  the  hint  given  to  Captain 

G ,   and  let  the  Lord  order   for  mc  as  it  fliall   fcem 

good  in  his  fight.  We  are  now  at  Rcuiy  IJland  waiting  for  a 
wind.  I  heard  of  a  fliip  going  to  Duhlin^  and  could  not  lofe 
the  opportunity  of  writing  to  my  dear  brother  iS— ~- — .  I 
need  not  remind  you  to  haften  over  as  faft  as  pofiible — Our 
Lord  has  taught  you  not  to  flay  by  the  way — -J  have  rebuked 

Mr.  C —  fharply,   and  I  truft  have  gotten   fome  gracious 

fouls  on  board — The  Lord  is  with  me  ;  I  am  fomewhat  bet- 
ter as  to  bodily  health,  but  i  live  chiefly  on  inward  fuppliea 
from  above.  My  mailer  never  fails  me.  Oh  exhort  all  tQ 
fall  in  loye  with  Jesus,  and  to  pray  for. 

Ever  yours  in  the  beft  bonds, 

LETTER    CLXXXIL 

,^/  To  Mr.  M — ,  an  Indian  Trader. 

Bear  Mr.  M ^ ,  ^ccdy  IJland^  May  19,  1 740. 

1  Received  your  letter,  and  have  been  reading  part  of  your 
journal.  I  think  it  your  bounden  duty  to  go  amongft  the 
Indians  again,  not  as  a  minijier^  but  as  a  private  chriftian, 
whole  duty  it  is,  when  converted  himfelf,  to  ftrengthen  his 
brethren.  An  effedual  door,  I  would  hope,  is  opening 
amongft  fome  of  the  heathen.  I  remember,  when  it  was  firft 
impreffed  upon  me,  that  I  ibould  go  to  Georgia^  this  promife 
came  with  fuch  power  as  never  will  be  forgotten,  and  that  too, 
long  before  I  had  any  outward  call — "  I  have  ma<le  thee  the 
head  of  the  heathen." — I  fpcak  this  for  your  encouragement, 
but  defire  you  would  not  mention  it  to  others.  Who  knows 
but  that  time  may  be  now  near  at  hand  ? — However  that  be, 
it  is  plain  God  calls  you,  and  I  wifh  you  good  fuccefs  in  the 
name  of  the  Lor.d.  Be  fure  you  keep  a  clofe  walk  with  Cjod. 
' — Be  much  in  prayer,  and  prepare  for  the  gre^iteft  hardfliips. 
Your  grcateft  perils  will  be  araongft  your  own  countrymen. 
The  heathens  will  be  ftirred  up  by  them,  as  the  Gentiles  v/ere 

by 


LETTERS.  ryt 

by  the  Jews;  but  the  Lord  Jesus  will  make  you  more  than 
conqueror  over  all.  The  word  of  the  Lord  will  make  its 
own  way.  Beg  of  (jOD  to  give  you  true  notions  of  our  free 
juftification  by  iaith  in  Jesus  Christ.  Bring  your  Indian 
hearers  to  believe,  before  you  talk  of  baptifm,  or  the  fupperof 
the  Lord.  Otherwife  they  will  catch  at  a  fliadow,  and  ne- 
^le6l  the  fubftance.  Improve  the  leifure  you  now  enjoy, 
and  fee  that  you  feel  the  truths  you  fpeak.  Feed  on  this  pro- 
mife,  "  It  fhall  be  given  you  in  that  hour  what  you  (hall  fay.'* 
Your  circumftances  call  for  a  fulfilling  of  it  —  Tell  them 
what  God  has  been  doing  here,  and  how  happy  Jesus 
Christ  will  make  them.  Be  fure  tell  them,  tell  them,  that 
true  faith  is  not  merely  in  the  head,  but  in  the  heart,  and  that 
it  will  certainly  be  produ6live  of  good  works.  PVcquently 
meditate  on  Gop's  free  love  to  yourfelf,  and  that  will  beft 
qualify  you  to  fpeak  of  it  afJedficnately  to  others.  I  could 
fay  more,  but  time  will  not  permit.  Pray  for  me.  All. with 
me  falute  you.  My  poor  petitions  you  may  depend  on,  as 
the  Lord  ftiall  enable  me.  My  love  to  aii,  and  believe  me 
to  be 
Your  affedlionate  friend,  brotherj  and  fervant  ih  Christ, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    CLXXXIU. 

To  the  Allega-iiy  Indians. 
My  Dear  Brethren.,  Reedy  IJIand^  May  21,  1 740. 

FOR  fo  I  call  you,  becaufe  you,  and  I,  and  all,  have  one 
common  father.  One  God,  in  whom  we  live,  move  and 
have  our  beings  We  all  came  at  firft  out  of  the  dufi:  of  the 
earth.  For  after  God  made  the  fun,  moon,  flars,  and  every 
thing  you  fee,  he  alfo  made  a  creature  called  man.^  and  breathed 
into  him  the  breath  of  life  ;  he  then  became  a  living  foul. 
He  could  not  only  walk  and  fpeak,  but  he  could  alfo  think, 
and  reafpn,  and  was  full  of  goodnefs,  peace,  and  joy.  This 
man,  this  happy  creature  God  placed  in  a  garden,  which  his 
own  right  hand  had  planted.  He  then  call  him  into  a  Aat^^ 
ileep,  and  out  of  one  of  his  ribs  made  what  we  call  a  woman, 
that  fhe  might  be  his  wife.  Their  names  were  Adam  and 
l^ve.     With  thcfe^  Go^  made  an  agreement  that  they  fliould 

cat 


172  LETTER    S. 

eat  of  every  tree  of  that  garden,  except  one  ;  but  if  they  ate 
the  fruit  of  that  particular  tree,  they  fhould  die  ;  they  Ihould 
return  to  the  dufl  from  whence  they  were  taken,  lofe  the 
comforts  they  enjoyed  in  their  fouls,  and  be  unhappy  for  ever 
in  another  world.  But  if  they  did  not  eat  this  fruit,  none  of 
thefe  things  fhould  come  upon  them.  A  being,  which  we 
call  the  devily  (and  who  for  his  pride  had  been  call  dut  of  hea- 
ven) envying  their  happinefs,  tempted  them  to  eat  the  forbid- 
den fruit.  They  confented,  they  ate,  they  died.  Their  bodies 
became  mortal,  their  fouls  were  deprived  of  the  prefence  and 
love  of  God  ;  and  unlefs  a  way  was  found  out  to  make 
fatisfa£lion  for  what  they  had  done,  they  mull  have  been  loft 
for  ever.  Thefe  were  our  parents,  and  God  made  this  agree- 
ment with  us  their  children,  as  well  as  with  them.  For  they 
a6led  in  our  name,  as  a  king  adls  in  the  name  of  his  people, 
or  a  father  in  the  name  of  a  child — What  therefore  befel 
them,  befel  us.  "We  died  in  them  ;  and  come  into  this  world 
poor  and  miferable,  blind  and  naked,  as  they  were,  when  they 
had  eaten  of  the  forbidden  tree.  Hence  it  is,  that  we  are 
given  to  lufl,  anger,  envy,  hatred,  pride,  and  malice,  and 
all  thofe  troublefome  pafTions  which  you  all  mufl  ht\  in  your 
own  hearts,  and  cannot  but  fee  even  in  the  hearts  of  your  chil- 
dren. If  then,  you  only  look  into  yourfelycs,  you  muft  con- 
fefs  thefe  things  are  fo.  But  God  hath  given  us  a  book^  where- 
in he  alTures  us  of  the  truth  of  all  this:  —  And  we  know  that 
book  came  from  God,  becaufc  none  but  God  could  tell  us 
the  things  therein  contained.  And  I  fpeak  firft  of  this,  be- 
caufe  'till  you  feel  and  believe  this,  you  cannot  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ;  and  without  the  knowledge 
of  Jesus  Christ  you  cannot  be  faved.  For  after  our  firft 
parents,  Adam  and  Eve^  had  taken  the  forbidden  fruit,  and 
with  all  their  children,  thereafter  to  be  born,  became  guilty 
before  God,  God  out  of  his  own  free  love  fent  his  only  be- 
gotten Son  into  the  world,  to  die,  and  fo  to  make  an  atone- 
ment for  the  fin  of  fallen  man,  and  alfo  to  obey  the  law, 
which  man  had,  broken  ;  fo  that  though  fallen  man  had  no 
righteoufnefs  of  his  own,  yet  upon  believing  in  God's  Son, 
he  fhould  find  a  perfe£l  righteoufnefs  in  him.  This  Son  is 
called  Jesus,  "  A  Saviour,"  becaufc  he  was  to  fave  us  from 

the 


LETTERS.  173 

the  guilt  and  power  of  our  fins.  He  was  truly  God, 
and  therefore  cowld  fatisfy  ;  he  was  truly  man,  and  there- 
fore could  obey  and  fuffer  in  our  ftead.  He  was  God  and 
man  in  one  perfon,  that  God  and  man  might  be  happy  to- 
gether again.  My  dear  brethren,  (for  fo  I  muft  call  you, 
though  I  never  faw  you)  thefe  are  ftrajige  things,  l^ut  if 
you  are  willing  to  learn,  the  holy  fpirit  fliall  teach  you.  For 
Jesus  Christ  by  dying,  and  obeying  God's  law,  hath 
bought  for  us  the  holy  fpirit,  who  fliall  change  your  corruot 
natures,  and  fit  you  for  happinefs  hereafter  with  the  ever-bleffed 
God,  if  you  do  but  believe  in  your  hearts. — Thoufands  of 
white  people  only  believe  in  their  heads,  and  therefore  are  no 
more  chriifians  than  thofe  v>^ho  never  heard  of  Jesus  Christ 
at  all.  They  call  Christ,  "  Lord,  Lord,"  but  they  do 
not  live  as  Jesus  Chr-IST  hath  commanded.  No,  they  curfe 
and  fwear,  they  break  the  fabbath,  they  get  drunk,  they  play, 
they  whore,  they  commit  adultery,  and  have  taught  many  poor 
Indians  to  do  thefe  abominable  things  as  well  as  themfelves. 
Do  not  you  thsrefore  learn  of  them.  For  true  chrlftians  are 
fober,  chaile  and  holy.  They  will  not  get  drunk,  they  will 
not  play  the  whore,  they  will  not  cheat,  lie,  curfe  or  fwear; 
but  they  will  blefs  and  praife  God,  keep  the  fabbath,  and  do 
all  the  good  they  can;  for  thus  Jesus  Christ,  their  Lord 
and  mafter,  lived  when  he  was  here  on  earth.  I  fay,  when 
he  was  here  on  earth  ;  for  after  he  died,  he  rofe  again,  and 
went  up  into  heaven  from  whence  he  came,  and  there  he  fits 
praying  for  all  that  (hall  believe  on  Him  to  the  end  of  the 
world.  For  as  the  world  had  a  beginning,  fo  it  alfo  will  have 
an  end.  And  Jesus  Christ  will  come  again  in  the  clouds  ta 
judge  all  mankind  ;  and  then  he  that  hath  believed  in  Christ, 
and  hath  (hewn  forth  his  faith  by  his  works,  fhall  be  faved  ; 
and  he  that  hath  not  believed  in  Christ,  fliall  be  damned  for 
ever,  and  be  cafl  into  a  lake  of  fire  an^i  brimftone.  But  be- 
fore he  comes,  he  hath  promifed  that  the  heathen  fhall  be 
brought  to  b-elleve  on  him,  and  therefore  I  write  this  letter  to 
you.  I  would  come  myfelf,  and  preach  the  glad  tidings  of 
falvation  among  you,  as  the  bearer  of  this  could  interpret  for 
me;  but  my  other  bufinefs  will  not  permit.  I  am  a  mini- 
fterof  the  fame  Jesus,  and  once  was  as  ignorant  of  Him  com- 
paratively as  you  may  be.     I  once   lived   like  other  people  ; 

but 


174  LETTERS. 

but  the  Lord  Jesus  hath  brought  me  to  believe  on  Him, 
and  I  now  do  fo  no  more.  I  once  was  full  of  envy,  hatred, 
malice,  and  fuch  like  curfcd  tempers  ;  but  now  I  have  love, 
and  peace,  and  joy.  And  becaufc  Jesus  Christ  hath  (hewn 
fuch  mercy  to  me,  I  dcfirc  that  all  others  fhould  be  made  as 
happy,  nay  happier  than  I  am  myfelf.  —  Hearken  therefore 
now  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord.  Pray  to  God  that  you  may 
feel  yourfelves  poor,  miferable  Tinners,  and  come  by  a  living 
faith  to  Jesus  Christ.  Then  he  will  pardon  you  of  all 
your  fins,  make  you  holy  by  his  fpirit  here,  and  take  you  into 
everlafting  happinefs  hereafter.  Your  traders,  fome  of  them 
at  leaft,  will  tell  you,  that  you  muft  he  miferable,  if  you  will 
be  chriftians.  But  thefe  know  nothing  of  Jesus  Christ  ; 
for  they  are  ungodly  men,  walking  after  their  own  wicked 
lufts.  Whofoever  will  follow  Jesus  Christ,  though  happy 
in  himfelf,  muft  be  looked  upon  as  a  fool  by  others.  The 
fpirit  of  the  world,  and  the  fpirit  of  Jesus  are  quite  contrary 
one  to  the  other  ;  and  therefore  if  you  will  live  godly  in  Him, 
you  muft  fufter  perfecution  ;  you  muft  have  all  manner  of  evil 
fpoken  againft  you  falfely,  and  be  called  madmen  and  fools  ; 
but  let  not  that  daunt  you,  or  make  you  afraid.  There  is 
a  world  to  come,  there  is  a  judgment-day,  and  then  Jesus 
Christ  (hall  crown  all  thofe  with  glory,  who  have  fuffered 
for  his  name's  fake.  Once  more,  therefore,  hearken  to  the 
voice  of  the  Lord.  For  the  Lord  Jesus  died  for  you,  as 
well  as  for  the  white  men  among  you,  and  that  you  might  be 
taught  the  gofpel  ;  but  they  have  made  you  worfe  than  you 
were  before,  and  therefore  (hall  receive  the  greater  damnation. 
He  who  brings  this,  no  doubt,  will  be  defpifed  amongft  them, 
becaufe  he  will,  I  hope,  neither  get  drunk,  nor  curfe,  nor 
fwear.— But  I  truft  the  Lord  will  ftrengthenJiim,  and  caufe 
him  to  Ihew  many  of  you  the  true  way  of  (alvation  —  I  fhall 
not  fail  to  pray  for  him,  and  for  you  ;  for  though  I  know  you 
not,  yet  if  I  could  thereby  fave  your  precious  fouls,  I  think 
I  could  die  for  your  fake.  May  the  Lord  Jesus  blefs  you, 
and  bring  you  out  of  darknefs  into  his  marvellous  light,  for  his 
infinite  mercy's  fake.  This  is  the  prayer  of,  dear  brethren. 
Your  foul's  well-vvilher  and  fervunt  in  Christ, 

G.  //-: 

L  E  r  T  E  R 


LETTERS.  ^75 

LETTER    CLXXXIV. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  I— — ,  at  PMIadelphla 
My  dear  Brother^  Reedy  IJIand^  May  21,  1740. 

STILL  our  Lord  is  with  me  both  in  the  fhip  and  on  the 
fljore.  Adoie  him  for  his  free  grace.  Sailors,  I  believe, 
are  coming  to  Jesus.  One  or  two  of  our  crew  are  under  con- 
victions. The  Lord  does  not  keep  me  here  for  nothing.  I 
dcfire  to  learn  of  winds  and  ftorms  to  obey  Him.  I  pray  daily 
for  your  fuccefs.  May  the  Lord  make  you  a  happy  inftru- 
ment  of  bringing  many  fons  to  glory.  Your  wcaknefs  need 
not  difcourage  you.  The  Lord  is  pleafed  to  make  ufe  of  me. 
He  ftrengthens  me  mightily  in  the  inner  man.  Oh  orace 
grace  !  "  Lefs  than  the  leaft  of  all,"  ihall  be  my  motto  ftill. 
I  need  not  exhort  you  to  feed  the  flock  of  God  ;  he  has  pur- 
chafed  them  with  his  own  blood.  Oh  admit  of  a  mixed  com-* 
tnunlon.  I  think  the  glory  of  God  requires  this  at  your  hands. 
May  the  Lord  give  you  a  right  underftanding  in  all  ihino-s, 
awd  enable  you  to  remember 

Your  unvv'orthy  brother  and  fellow-labourer 

in  our  dear  Lo^d  Jesus, 
G.  Jf\ 

LETTER    CLXXXV. 

To  Mr.  M~-,  at  PhUadehhia. 
Dear  .Mr.  M.  Reedy  Jjhnd,  May  21,  174c. 

AS  the  Lord  is  pleafed  to  detain  me  here  by  contrary 
winds,  why  fhpuld  I  not  fend  you  a  line  ?  You  have 
flood  up  for  the  truths  of  GoD.,  and,  I  truft,  will  not  be 
afliamed  of  our  Lord  and  his  gofpel.  I  expect  a  great  falling 
away  amongft  thofe  that  followed  me  :  But  I  hope  dear  Mr. 
AI.  will  continue  fledfait  and  unmoveable  to  the  laft.  The 
only  v;ay,is  to  keep  a  conftant  eye  to  Christ,  to  go  forth  in 
his  ftrength,  and  never  to  reft  till  you  feel  his  blcfled  truths 
copied  and  tranfcribed  on  your  heart.  You  have  often  heard 
me  exclaim  againft  refting  on  a  head-knowledge.  You  are  a 
man  of  ftrong  pafllons,  and  fprightly  imagination,  and  there- 
fore (I  know  yc-M  villi  not  be  affronted)  you  will  make  either 


lyS  LETTERS. 

a  great  faint,  or  an  accomplifhed .     I  believe  the  former, 

though,  as  a  friend,  I  remind  you  of,  and  caution  you  againft 
the  latter.  You  love  to  be  dealt  plainly  with.  Oh,  dear  Sir, 
1  feel  that  I  love  you,  and  have  a  real  concern  for  you  and  your 
houfhold. — What  would  I  give  to  fee  your  daughters  become 
wife  virgins,  and  fallen  in  love  with  the  blefled  Jesus.  How 
amiable  would  they  then  appear  I  But  before  this  can  be  done, 
all  pertnefs,  and  lightnefs  of  fpirit,  muR  be  taken  away,  and 
they  muft  not  only  leave  off  dancing,  but  be  made  new  crea- 
tures. How  is  your  fon  ?  Pray  tell  him  it  is  time  for  him  to 
come  home.  The  fatted  calf  w^aits  for  him.  I  could  fay 
more;  but  time  will  not  permit.  Dear  Sir,  pray  for  me. 
Indeed  I  will  endeavour  to  return  the  favour  ;  many  are  wait- 
ing for,  and  would  rejoice  at  my  halting  ;  but  the  Lord  is 
my  helper.  He  is  with  me  in  my  little  cabin,  and  gives  me  a 
feeling  pofleffion  of  his  blefled  fpirit.  May  the  Lord  enrich 
you  with  a  great  meafure  of  it,  and  fill  you  with  all  his  fulnefs ! 
Methinks  I  fee  you  lifting  up  your  eyes,  and  faying,  J7?2en. — 
And  fo  faith,  dear  Mr.  M. 

Your  affectionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  W. 

LETTER     CLXXXVL 

To  Mr,  R ,  at  Philadelphia. 

Dear  R,.  Reedy  IJIand,  May  22,  1740. 

ET  nothing  faid  to  you  in  my  abfence  affe£l  you.  God 
has  lately  delivered  you  out  of  one  fnare  ;  take  heed  how 
you  fall  into  another.  If  you  watch  unto  prayer,  who  knows 
but  God  may  blefs  your  endeavours  amongft  the  poor  negro 
women  and  children  ?  I  could  not  w'lih  you  more  happily  fitu- 
ated.— My  love  to  all  the  fociety. — Exhort  them  not  to 
reft  in  good  defires.  Shew  them,  O  fhew  them  the  neceffity 
of  being  deeply  wounded,  before  they  can  be  capable  of  heal- 
ing by  Jesus  Christ.  Bid  them  to  beware  of  a  light  be- 
haviour, and  light  company.  Both  do  grieve  the  buffed  fpirit 
oi"GoD.  Take  beed,  take  heed  of  thofe  accurfed  fnares.  I 
could  fay  more,  but  time  will  not  permit.  My  love  to  the 
Nfgro  Peggy-,  and  all  her  black  fifters.  Bid  them  to  pray  for 
me.     May  the  blood  of  Jesus   wafh  away  all  the  pollutions! 

of 


LETTERS.  177 

bf  their  fin-fick  fouls  !  What  if  they  were  put  into  a  fociety 
by  themfelves,  and  you,  or  fome  white  woman,  met't  with 
them  ?  The  good  Lord  direct}:  and  blefs  you  in  a!l  thin-^s. — 
This  is  the  hearty  prayer  of 

Your  finccre  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IK 

LETTER     CLXXXVIL 

To  Air.  E . 

•  Rsedy  IJIand^  May  22,  174O, 

GOD  only  knows  when  the  wind  will  favour  our  removal 
hence  ;  I  dcfire  patiently  to  tarry  the  Lord's  leifure, 
and  to  wait  the  moving  of  the  cloud  of  his  providence.  How- 
ever, in  the  mean  while  I  fend  you  a  line  amongft  my  other 
friends.  God,  I  believe,  hath  ftruck  you  to  the  heart,  and 
fhewn  you  the  rottennefs  of  that  foundation  v.'hereon  you  was 
once  building.  O  keep  clofe  to  our  dear  Lord  Jesus,  and 
never  fear  what  men  or  devils  can  fay  of,  or  do  unto  you.  I 
am  perfuaded  you  muft  be  bufi-eted. — You  mull:  be  perfecuted^ 
if  you  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  Let  this  be  your 
comfort,  when  the  world  forfakcs  you,  the  Lord  whom  vou 
ferve,  (hall  take  you  up.  I  pray  for  you^  and  my  other  dear 
Philadelphia  friends  daily.  The  Lord  be  with  you  all.  Adieu. 
You  would  do  well  to  publifh,  "  that  all  who  have  not  been 
baptized  already,  and  fhall  appear  to  be  prepared  for  it,  I  will^ 
by  God's  leave,  baptize^  at  my  return  to  Phiiculclpbia."  O 
that  all  who  followed  me  vvcre  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghoft  1 

But  there  mufi:  be  a  falling  away. — Dear  Mr.  E ,  I  truff, 

will  not  defert  his  Lord.  Truft  in  hi-^,  and  not  in  your  own 
flrength,  and  you  fliall  be  fafe.  Once  more  farewel.  All 
with  me  falute  you.  The  people  on  foore  wait  for  me.  Re- 
member me  in  your  prayers  as 

Your  affe6lionate  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  fp: 


Vol.  L  N  LETTER 

4 


178  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CLXXXVIII. 

To  the  Alemlers  of  a   Society  at  Philadelphia. 
My  dear  Friendi^  Rcecly  Ijland^  May  22,  1 740. 

AS  the  Lord,  for  wife  rcafons,  detains  me  here,  I  cannot 
but  fend  you  a  line  as  a  token  of  my  unfeigned  concern 
for  the  welfare  of  your  better  part.  I  mud  confefs,  that  the 
account  many  of  you  gave  of  your  experiences,  was  not  fb 
fatisfadory  as  I  could  wifh;  but  I  hope  you  will  none  of  you 
reft  in  good  dcfires,  or  think  you  arc  chriftians,  becaufe  you 
have  followed  aft.  r  me.  I  thank  you,  God  knows  my  heart, 
I  thank  you  for  all  expreffions  of  your  love  :  But  I  bcfcech  you 
to  rcm.cmber,  that  the  kmgdom  of  God  does  not  confift  iti 
v:Drd^\)Wi\i-\  pzxvcr.  Keeping  company  with  God's  people, 
does  not  give  you  a  title  to  the  privileges  of  God's  children. 
It  may  incrcafe,  but  not  extenuate  your  condemnation,  if  you 
are  not  found  in  heart,  and  truly  converted  to  our  dear  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  I  am  pcrfuaded  you  will  not  be  offended  at 
this  plain  dealing.  God  has  been  pleafed  to  work  upon  you 
by  my  unworthy  miniiiry.  I  would  therefore  watch  over  you 
for  good,  and  warn  you  againft  thofe  fnares  which  await  all 
the  true  followers  of  the  Lamb  of  God.  At  my  next  return, 
I  hope  I  fliall  fee  you  are  that  inwardly,  which  you  would  be 
cfteemcd  outwardly.  The  fearcher  of  hearts  knov/s  I  long  for 
your  falvation.  My  dear  friends,  adieu.  Pray  for  me.  Be 
humble,  be  ftrong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might, 
A  fiery  trial  awaits  you.  There  is  no  being  a  chriflian  with- 
out giving  up  all  for  Christ.  We  mufl  all  have  the  fpirit 
of  martyrdom,  though  we  may  not  all  die  martyrs. — That 
the  Lord  m.ny  keep  you  by  his  power  unto  falvation,  and 
make  you  more  than  conquerors  through  his  love,  is  the  hearty 

prayer  of 

Your  afFe6lionate  friend  and  fervant, 

G.W. 
LETTER    CLXXXIX. 

To  Mr,  A S ,  at  Philadelphia, 

Dear  Mr,  S,  Reedy  I/Ian d.  May  22,  1 740. 

Defire  that  you  and  your  wife  would  accept  of  theiis  izvf 
farewel  lines  as  a  token  of  my  love.     My  heart's  defire 

and 


I 


LETTERS.  179 

and  prayer  to  God  is,  that  you  both  may  be  faved. — Your 
wife  was  mourning  when  I  faw  her  lad.  I1:ic  Lord  Jesus 
prepare  her  thereby  for  true,  loJiJ,  and  lalling  comfort !  The 
more  we  are  humbled,  the  more  will  the  glorious  Emmanuel 
exalt  us;  but  we  muft  v;ait  his  time.  Jesus  is  love,  and 
jievcr  corre(fls  us  but  for  our  own  good.  1  find  it  is  always 
thus  with  mc.  I  am  a  llubborn,  ungrateful,  difobedicnt  child, 
and  often  oblige  him  to  ftrilce  me  fcvcrcly  ;  but  love,  I  find, 
holds  the  rod,  and  therefore  his  rod,  as  well  as  his  flaff  com- 
forts mc.     f^arewel  ;    the  Lord   be  with   you   both  ! — John 

S and  all  friends  falute  you.      We  live  and  walk  in  love. 

My  tendercfl:  rcfpecls  await  all  that  truly  follow  the  Lamb.  I 
befeech  you  forget  not  to  pray  for 

Your  affectionate  friend,  brother^  and  fervant, 

G,  JV. 

LETTER    CXC. 

To  Mr.  G L -,  in  London. 

Reedy  IJldnd^  May  22,  1 740. 
'*  /^N  Thurjday  lad,  in  the  evening,  the  Pvcv.  Mr.  JVb'itefiM 
\J  went  on  board  at  Nevj-Caftle^  in  order  to  fail  to  Georgia^ 
after  having  been  on  ihore  thirty-three  days^  and  travelled 
fome  hundreds  of  miles,  and  preached  fifty-eight  times  in  the 
provinces  of  New-Jerfey^  New-York^  and  Penfylva?:ia,—-]r{\^ 
congregations  confliled  fometimes  of  four,  fometimes  of  five, 
fometimes  of  eight,  twelve,  fifteen,  and  once  at  Philadelphia^ 
of  twenty  thoujand  people.  He  had  gotten  near  five  hundred 
pounds  fterling,  in  money  and  provifions,  for  the  Orphan- 
houfe  at  Georgia,  Great  and  vifible  efi-ecSfs  followed  his  preach- 
ing, almoft  v.'hercfoever  he  went,  efpeclally  in  Philadelphia, 
There  was  never  fuch  a  general  awakening,  and  concern  for 
the  things  of  God  known  in  America  before.  He  intended 
to  vifit  New-England  foon  after  his  .arrival  at  Georgia^  and  to 
come  by  land  as  far  as  Philaddphia^  at  the  latter  end  of  the 
year." 

The  above  Advcrtifement  may  fufHce  for  the  prefent,  'till  I 
have  an  opportunity  of  fending  you  my  journal.  That  will 
flicw  you  wonderful   things.     1   fuppofe  ere  this  reaches  you, 

our  dear  brothers,  S and  G ,  will  be  arrived  :  1  have 

N  2  km 


i8o  LETTERS. 

fent  a  packet  of  letters  to  them,  by  the  way  of  Dublin.  I  ant 
now  v.'aiting  for  a  fair  wind,  and  can  fay  the  Lord  is  v/ith 
me  of  a  truth.  Several  fliips  are  lying  by  us,  and  the  captains 
and  their  companies  come  to  our  fliip  to  prayers.  Sailors 
weep  :  It  is  unknown  how  many  are  under  conviiSlion.  I 
long  to  hear  v/hat  is  doing  in  Eiigland.  The  embargoes,  I 
fuppofe,  prevent  your  fending  ;  however  my  heart  is  with  you. 
I  do  not  forget  you.     I  hope  there  is  a  door  opening  among' 

jthe  Allegany   Indians.     I  have  read  M 's  journal,    and 

;have  wrote  both  to  him  and  them.  We  have  been  near  a 
week  at  Recciy  Ijland :  I  have  preached  there  five  times.  The 
captaii^.s  and  their  crews  come  conftantly  to  public  wor- 
fliip  on  {hote,  and  to  private  prayer  in  our  iloop.  We  have 
fome  with  us  that  love  our  dear  Lord  Jesus  in  fmcerity. 
My  heart  is  exceedingly  drawn  towards  Savannah-,  but  the 
Lord's  time  is  the  beft.  The  Lord  Jesus  blefs  you  all, 
and  reward  you  for  all  kindnefTes  fhev^'n  to  his  unworthy  fcr- 
vant,  but 

Your  afFciSlionate  brother  In  Christ, 

LETTER     CXCL 

To  JV S 5  Ejq\  in  London, 

Lewis-Town^  (Penfylvania)  May  24,  1740. 
Aly  dear  Friend  and  Brother^ 

MY  will  is  much  to  go  to  Georgia^  but  my  dear  Lord 
Jesus  is  pleafed  to  crofs  me.  For  ever  blelled  be  his 
great  and  glorious  name.  Juft  now  the  Lord  hath  brought 
me  hither.  Your  letter  pleafed  me,  I  hope  our  Lord  is 
now  beginning  to  anfwer  my  prayers,  and  that  my  dear  Bro- 
ther 5 is  about  to  know  himfclf.     You  know   I  have 

often  told  you,  that  you  ouglit  to  fufpect  your  experiences. 
You  have  miftaken,  in  my  opinion,  preparation^  for  converfion 
itfelf.  Your  nine  years  round  of  duties,  were  no  efFecSls  of 
the  new- birth  at  all.     How  could  they  be  ?  when  you  did  not 

know  you  was  to  be  born  again,  before  you  heard  Mr.  C 

If/ expound  the  feventh  chapter  of  the  Romans :  Then,. 

but  not  till  then  did  you  begin  to  be  enlightened,  and  illumi- 
nation and  converfipn  are  twQ  different  things.    All  nw  great 

trials 


LETTERS.  i8i 

trials  were  confcquent  on  this.  Not  that  God*s  way  of  deal- 
ing with  me,  ought  to  be  a  rule  for  others  :  But  I  think  your 
cafe  and  mine  fomewhat  parallel. — Thofe  that  have  been  mod 
humbled,  I  find,  always  make  the  moft  folid,  ufeful  chriftians. 
It  (lands  with  rcafon  :  The  more  a  man  is  emptied  of  himfcJf, 
the  more  room  is  there  made  for  the  fpirit  of  God  to  dwell  in 
him. — Your  caution  to  dear  Mr.  H.  was  very  good.  Opcn- 
nefs  is  the  beft  prefcrvative  of  fpiritual  fricndfhip.  I  would 
behave  fo,  that  no  one  might  be  afraid  to  confult  me  j  but  if 
people  will  not  open  their  hearts,  let  them  not  blame  me  ;  I 
cannot  fpcak,  where  I  perceive  a  (hynefs,  and  where  I  fee  per- 
fons  are  afraid  of  me.  I  am  furc  they  muft  harbour  fom.e  un- 
generous fufpicions  or  other  againfl  me,  and  how  then  can 
there  be  a  harmony  of  foul.  My  dear  brother,  my  fri  nd, 
now  I  have  told  you  my  heart  :  Be  not  angry,  I  am  juft  ready 
to  v,-eep. — Indeed,  I  am  willing  to  wafh  your  feet,  and  to 
acknowledge  all  favours  under  God  that  I  have  received  from 
you.  Be  ftable,  be  willing  to  confult  others  that  have  trod  in 
the  fpiritual  road  before  you  ;  do  not  miflake  workingy^r  life, 
for  %vorking  from  life.  Watch  unto  prayer,  and  do  not  be 
carried  away  by  every  wind  of  doctrine.     Hov/  could  you  not 

fee  through  L of  Germcm-Toivn  ?    But  I  muft  not  chide, 

but  love.  Much  I  owe  you  ;  have  patience  with  me  and  I 
will  endeavour  to  pay  you.  I  fhall  long  to  fee  you  at  Savan- 
nah. Once  more,  my  dear  friend  and  brother,  adieu.  My 
heart  is  much  melted  down.  God  continually  fills  me  v/ith 
himfelf.     O  give  thanks  for,  dear  Sir, 

Your  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  TV, 

LETTER     CXCIL 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  J.  JV, 

Honoured  Sir.,  Cape-Lopen^  May  2\,  i-j^o. 

I  Cannot  entertain  prejudices  againit  your  conducl  and 
principles  any  longer,  without  informing  you.  The 
more  I  examine  the  writings  of  the  mofc  experienced  men, 
and  the  experiences  of  the  moil  eftablifiied  chriftians,  the  more 

N  3  I 


i82  LETTERS. 

I  differ  from  your  notion  about  not  committing  fin,  and  your 
denying  the  dodrines  of  e]e6tion,  and  final  perfeverance 
of  the  faints,  I  dread  coming  to  Evgland^  unlefs  you  are  re- 
folvcd  to  oppofe  thefe  truths  with  lefs  warmth,  than  when  I 
was  there  laft.  I  dread  your  coming  over  to  America ;  becaufe 
the  work  of  God  is  carried  on  here  (and  that  in  a  moft  glori-^ 
ous  manner)  by  doctrines  quite  oppofite  to  thofe  you  hold. 
Here  are  thoufands  of  God's  children,  who  will  not  be  pcr- 
fuadcd  oat  of  the  privileges  purchafed  for  them  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus.  Here  are  many  worthy  experienced  miniflers,  who 
would  oppofe  your  principles  to  the  utmoft.  God  dirc£t  me 
what  to  do  !  Sometimes  I  think  it  heft  to  flay  here,  where  v/c 
all  think  and  fpeak  the  fame  thing  :  The  woi-k  goes  on  with- 
out divifions,  and  with  more  fuccefs,  becaufe  all  employed  in 
it  are  of  one  mind.  I  write  not  this,  honoured  Sir,  from  heat 
of  fpirit,  but  out  of  love.  At  prefent,  I  think  you  are  entirely 
inconfiOent  with  yourfelf,  and  therefore  do  not  blame  me,  if 
1  do  not  approve  of  all  that  you  fay.     God  himfelf,  I  find, 

teaches  my  friends  the  do6lrine  of  election.    Sifter  H hath 

lately  been  convinced  of  it ;  and,  if  I  miftake  not,  dear  and 

honoured  Mr.  ly hereafter  will  be  convinced  alfo.     From 

ir.y  foul  I  vvifli  vou  abundant  fuccefs  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  I  long  to  hear  of  your  being  made  a  fpiritual  father 
to  thoufands.  Perhaps  1  may  never  fee  you  again,  'till  we 
meet  in  judgment  ;  then,  if  not  before,  you  will  know,  that; 
fovereign,  diftinguifliing,  irrefiflibie  grace  brought  you  to  hea- 
ven. Then  v/iil  you  know,  that  God  loved  you  with  an 
everlafting  love,  and  therefore  with  loving-kindnefs  did  he 
draw  you.  Honoured  Sir,  farewel.  My  prayers  conftantly 
attend  both  you  and  your  labours.  I  negleft  no  opportunity 
of  writing.  My  next  journal  will  acquaint  you  with  nev/ 
and  furprizing  wonders.  The  Lord  fills  me  both  in  body 
and  foul.  I  am  fupported  under  the  profpccl  of  prefent  and 
impending  trials,  with  an  afiurance  of  God's  loving  me  to  the 
end  ;  yea,  even  to  all  eternity.  Ere  this  reaches  you,  1  fup- 
pofe  you  will  hear  of  my  intention  to  marry.  I  am  quite  as 
tree  as  a  child  :  If  it  be  God's  will,  I  befeech  him  to  prevent 
it.  I  would  not  be  hindered  in  my  dear  Lord's  bufinefs  for 
the  world,     I  am  now  waiting  for  a  fair  wind.     God  bleifcs 

the 


LETTERS.  183 

the  Orphan-houfe.     Do  not  be   angry  with,  but  pray   for, 
honoured  Sir, 

Your  unworthy  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  rr. 

LETTER     CXCIII. 

^0  Mr.  S 5   in  Charles-TGivn. 

Dear  S'lr^  Sava7inah^  J^^^^  7»  ^74^' 

BEFORE  I  knev/  you  by  name,  my  heart  was  uncommon- 
ly afFccled  towards  you.  Whenever  I  faw  you  at  church, 
I  enquired  concerning  you,  and  to  my  great  but  plealing  iur- 
prize,  when  I  came  to  your  houfe,  found  ycu  was  the  man  I  was 
enquiring  after.  Your  letter  gives  me  ftill  hopes,  that  our  dear 
Lord  Jesus  is  about  to  awaken  you  from  a  carnal  fecurity  in 
which  you  have  long  lain.  He  is  nov/  calling  you,  dear,  dear 
Sir.  I  befecch  ycu,  by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus 
our  Saviour,  take  heed  that  you  do  not  lie  down  again.  Jf  you 
will  be  a  follower  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  you  mud  prepare 
your  foul  for  manifold  temptations  ;  you  mull  become  the 
ibng  of  the  drunkard,  and  have  all  manner  of  evil  fpokcn 
againft  you  falfely  for  Christ's  fake  :  But  let  none  of  thefe 
things  move  you,  dear  Sir.  Dare,  I  befeech  you,  to  be  fni- 
gularly  good. — Be  not  afiiamed  of  your  glory. — Learn  a  lefibn 
of  boldnefs  even  from  the  devil's  children.  How  refolutc, 
how  daring  are  they  in  their  mailer's  caufe  ?  Why  {hould  not 
we  be  equally  courageous  in  the  caufe  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  O 
Sir,  I  feel  a  concern  for  the  welfare  of  your  better  part.  God 
hath  vouchfafed  you  fome  convictions  ;  do  not  reft  in  them. 
Catch  not  too  greedily  at  comfort.  Beg  of  God  that  you 
may  be  thoroughly  wounded,  before  you  defire  to  be  made 
whole  ;  otherwife  you  will  go  but  halfway,  and  be  only  an 
unftablc,  double-minded  man  at  laft.     God  forbid  that  dear 

Mr.  S fliould  ever  fctth  in  fuch  a  dangerous  ftate  !    Ere 

long  I  hbpe  to  fee  you  in  Charus-Tc%vn^  and  then  I  fhall  have 
an  opportunity  of  enquiring  more  particularly  into  the  flatc  of 
your  foul.  I  came  home  but  two  days  ago,  and  theret'ore 
could  not  anfwer  your  letter  before.  If  I  can  be  ferviceablc 
to  you  in  any  refpedt,  be  pleafed  to  command,  dear  Sir, 
Your  afiured  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  IF, 
N4  LETTER 


184  LETTERS; 


LETTER    CXCIV. 

To  Mr,  J // ,  in  London. 

My  dcar^  dear  Brother^  Savannah^  June  7,  174.0. 

WITH  great  comfort  I  received  your  long  wifiied-for 
letter.  It  warmed  my  heart,  and  knit  my  foul  to  you 
much  more  than  ever.  Whenever  I  fee  the  child-like  fimpli- 
city  and  love  of  Jesus,  it  quite  melts  me  down.  Let  all  for- 
mer mifunc!crilandino;s  between  me  and  vour  friends  be  entire- 
ly  forgotten.  I  always  pitied  your  parents,  and  moft  earnellly 
prayed  for  them  and  you.  BIciTcd  be  God  that  you  arc  come 
home.  You  are  now,  I  believe,  as  I  always  did  believe,  in 
your  proper  dation.  May  God  give  you  a  fettled  habit  of 
devotion,  and  fo  nil  you  with  his  fpirit,  that  whilfl  you  are 
working  for  God  on  earth,  you  may  be  like  thofe  blclTed 
f  ngels,  who,  though  miniilring  to  us,  yet  do  always  behold 
ihz  face  of  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven,.  My  dear  bro- 
ther, let  the  love  of  Jesus  conurain  you  to  love  him  with  all 
your  foul.  A  fenfe  of  his  divine  love  now  melts  down  my 
iieart,  and  draws  tears  from  mv  eyes.  O  what  wonderful 
thiiigs  is  God  doing  in  J?::jcj ica  I  Savannah  a'fo,  ?}:y  dear  Sa^ 
'hunnah^  efpecially  my  little  orphans,  now  begin  to  feel  the 
.love  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  arrived  here  but  about  two  days 
ago,  in  an  hour  quite  unexpected  by  my  friends.  How 
did  u'c  weep  oyer  one  another  for  ioy  !  Perhaps  I  may  never 
feel  the  like  again,  till  I  meet  with  the  fons  of  God  in  glory  : 
But  oh  what  a  fcene  was  to  be  {^^t\■\  laft  ni^-ht  in  the  conere- 

O  ;    fa        ' 

gation  !  Hov/did  the  ftately  fleps  of  our  glorious  Emmanuel 
appear !  Kis  glory  dione  with  exceeding  brightnefs.  The 
pou'cr  feemed  to  be  coming  on  all  the  d^^y.  My  foul  has  been 
much  carried  out  in  behalf  of  this  place,  and  now  the  Lord 

is  about  tq  anfwer  my  prayer.     T- D was   ycfterday 

in  a  glorious  agony.  1  prayed  wi:h  three  of  the  girls  before  I 
went  to  church,  and  their  hearts  were  ready  to  break  :  I  prayed 
alfo,  with  ftrcng  cryings  and  tears,  v/ith  my  other  dear  friends, 
and  God  v/as  m.uch  with  us  then  5  hut  when  we  came  to 
church,  oh  what  was  to  be  fecn,  and  heard,  and  felt  there  ! 
The  power  of  the  Lo?.d  came  as  it  were  upon  all.     Mod  of 

^  ftp 


LETTERS.  185 

the  children,   both  boys  and  girls,  cried  bitterly,  and  moft  of 
the  congregation  were  drowned  in  tears,  and    mourned   as  a 
woman  mourneth  for  her  firft-born.     Expence  of  fpirits  made 
my  body  weak,  but  my  foul  ftill  wreitJed  earncftly  with  God. 
V/hcn  I  came  home,  1  lay  upon  my  bed  ;  but  Teeing  the  chil- 
dren and  people  come  honie  crying,  I  went  to  prayer  again, 
and  a  greater  power  than  ever  ftill  attended  it.     O  how  was 
my  foul  carried  out,  and  how  did  the  Holy  Ghoft  fill  the  room  I 
At  lafl  I  thought  proper  to  difmifs  them  ;    but  it  would  have 
charmed  your  heart  to  hear  the  little  ones  in  different  parts  of 
the   houfe  praying,   and  begging  of  Jesus  to  take  full  poflef- 
fion  of  their  hearts.     The  fame  power  continues  to-day  :  For 
near  two  hours,  four  or  five  of  the  girls  have  been  before  the 
Lord  weeping  mofl  bitterly,  and  under  fuch  agonies,  as  gives 
me  hope  our  Lord  will  foon  fend  them  deliverance.     I  have 
not  yet  talked  with  the  boys,  who  alfo  have  been  under  great 
concern,   and  one  efpecially  in  great  agonies.     I  believe  two 
or  three  will  be  truly  gracious.     I  have  brought  with  me  a 
Latin  mafter,  and  on  Monday  laid  a  foundation  in  the  narr.e  of 
our  dear  Jesus  for  an  univerfity  in  Georgia.     God  blelTes  me 
(O  free  and  foyereign   grace)    in  every  thing  I  undertake. 
Our  Orphan -houfe  comes  under  better  regulations  every  day, 
and  I  am  perfuaded,  in  the  end,  will   produce  fome  true  fol- 
lowers of  Jesus  Christ.     I  am  now  looking  for  frefii  attacks 
from  the  enemy,   after  fuch  inroads.     He  has  been  bufy  fmce 
my  departure,   but. the  Lord  hath  vouchfafed  to  rebuke  and 
difappoint  him.     My  dear  brother,    may  the  Lord    be  with 

you  !  For  Christ's  fake  defire  d-ear  Brother  W to  avoid 

diiputing  with  me,  I  think  I  had  rather  die,  than  to  fee  a 
divifion  between  us  j  and  yet,  how  can  we  walk  together,  if 
we  oppofe  each  other?  Adieu.  Dear  James,  with  much 
tendernefs  I  fubfcribe  myfelf 

Jvcr  yours, 

G,  IV. 


LETTER 


i86  LETTERS. 

LETTER     CXCV. 

To  T T ,  Efq;  in  London. 

My  dear  Friend  and  Br  other ,  Savannah,  June  7,  1740, 

I  Wrote  to  you  very  lately  ;  but  your  kind  letter  is  now 
before  mc,  and  I  cannot  forbear  anfwering  it  :  BlefTed  be 
God,  that  you  ftill  look  upon  me  as  your  friend.  May  the 
friend  of  all,  unite  us  in  the  beft  bonds,  and  bring  us  to  him- 
fclf  at  laft  !  I  long  to  fee  the  fon  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds 
of  heaven.  I  have  now  fuch  large  incomes  from  above,  and 
fuch  precious  communications  from  our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 
that  my  body  fometimes  can  fcarcely  fuftain  them.     Our  dear 

Brother  H 's  letter  (which   I  defire  you  may  fee)    will 

ihew  you  what  a  work  is  begun  at  Savannah.  I  am  in  great 
hopes,  that  fix  or  feven  boys  and  girls  are    really  coming  to 

Jjtsus  Christ.     Dear  Brother  H n  fojourns  with  us.     I 

love  him,  and  all  the  brethren,  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus 
Christ.  I  am  now  looking  for  fome  ftrong  attacks  from 
fatan.  The  Lord  comforts  me  on  every  fide,  and  lets  me 
fee  my  dcfire  in  the  falvation  of  many  fouls.  O,  dear  Mr. 
y*— — ,  forget  not 

Your  weak  unworthy  friend  and  brother  in  Christ, 

G,  IV. 

LETTER    CXCVL 

To  Mr.  M . 


Dear  Mr.  M Savannah,  Junr  it,  1740. 

I  Am  not  uneafy,  but  rather  joyful,  to  fmd  God  lets  you 
fee  more  and  more  into  the  mid-ry  of  your  depraved  nature. 
I  pray  God,  thefe  convictions  may  ftill  increafe,  and  that  you 
may  not  fall  fliort  of  a  faving  union  with  Jesus  Christ. 
I  am  concerned  to  find  you  have  loft  a  fenfe  of  your  firft  love. 
— Take  heed,  my  dear  friend,  and  wreftle  Vv'ith  your  dear 
Lord,  till  he  lets  you  fee  the  root  of  bitternefs  that  muft  cer- 
tainly be  in  fome  corner  of  your  heart.  Perhaps  you  have  not 
renounced  the  woild  iind  your  own  righteoufncfs,  and  then  no 
wonder  our  Lord   doth   noi:  manifeft  himfelfto  your  foul. 

Sometimes, 


LETTERS.  187 

Sometimes,  indeed,  God  withdraws  on  purpofe  to  wean  us 
from  fenfible  devotion,  and  to  take  us  off  from  feeking  any  felf- 
complacence  in  our  duties.  If  this  be  the  cafe  of  you  and 
your  friends,  you  are  patiently  to  tarry  the  Lord's  leifure,  and 
to  continue  driving  with  all  your  might  till  he  is  pleafed  to  lift 
up  thclight  of  his  blellcd  countenance  upon  you.  You  mufl 
feek  Jesus  though  it  be  forrowing,  and  then,  after  three  days, 
you  will  find  him  j  for  the  Lord  will  not  always  be  chiding, 
neither  keepeth  he  his  anger  for  ever.  That  God  may  daily 
renew  you  in  the  fpirit  of  your  mind,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of, 
dear  Sir, 

Your  affured  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  JF. 

LETTER    CXCVIL 

To  Mr,  IF TV ,  in  London. 

Dear  TV Savannah,  June  11,  1 740. 

IAm  forry  to  hear,  that  you  and  your  makers  cannot  agree  ; 
but  this  I  know,  fuppofmg  the  cafe  to  be  as  you  reprefent 
it,  you  muft  notwithftanding  "  be  obedient,  not  only  to  the  good 
and  gentle,  but  alfo  to  the  froward." — Rough  ufage  will  do 
you  good,  if  you  are  fmcere  ;  God  fees  the  pride  and  ftub- 
bornnefs  of  your  heart,  and  therefore  fends  you  thefe  trials  to 
beat  it  down  :    I  find  the  benefit  of  erodes.     What  (hould  I 

do  without  them?    Dear   brother  S v/ould    write  to 

you,  I  believe,  but  is  much  engaged. — Wo  love  one  another 
in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  O,  dear  TV.  keep 
clofe  to  God,  and  fee  you  are  that  inwardly,  which  you  would 
be  efteemed  outv/ardly. — Reft  in  nouiii'.g  Ihcrt  of  a  found 
and  thorough  converfion.  That  God  may  blefs  you,  and  all 
the  brethren,  with  all  fpiritual  blellings,  is  the  hearty  prayer 
oi 

Your  allured  fiicnd  and  fervant, 

G.  TV, 


LETTER 


iSS  LETTERS.  ■ 

LETTER     CXCVIII.     l^   o/^'v' 

To  the  Rev.  Mr,  J B ,  at  New-Tor k. 

Reverend  and  dear  Brother,  Savannah^  June  13,  1 740, 

IHavc  juft  been  reading  the  three  letters  you  Tent  ibme  time 
ago  to  our  dear  brother  N ,  and  find  my  heart  mucii 

inclined  to  write  you  a  line.  Whatever  others  may  do,  yet  I 
am  far  from  judging  you  on  account  of  God's  dealings  with 
your  foul.  I  rather  rejoice  in  them,  having  myfelf  been  blef- 
ied  with  many  experiences  of  the  like  nature.  But,  my  dear 
brother,  if  God  works  upon  us  in  an  extraordinary  manner, 
we  miifl  prepare  for  temptation,  even  from  our  chriftian 
brethren. 

Moft  judge  of  others  from  what  has  pafied  within  thcm- 
felves ;  and  many  of  the  dear  children  of  God  are  too  apt  to 
confine  God  to  this  or  that  particular  way  of  acting; 
whereas  he  is  a  fovereign  agent :  his  facrcd  fpirit  blowcth 
when,  and  where,  and  how  it  liftcth;  and  when  an  uncom- 
mon work  is  to  be  done,  no  doubt  he  will  work  upon  his 
chofen  inflruments  in  an  uncommon  manner.  What  the. 
event  of  the  prefent  general  awakening  v^ill  be,  I  know  not. 
I  defire  to  follow  my  dear  Lord  blindfold,  whitherfoevcr  he 
is  plcafed  to  lead  me  ;  and  to  do  juft  fo  much,  and  no  more, 
as  his  providence  points  out  to  me.  Wonderful  things  have 
been  done  ever  fince  my  arrival  at  Savannah:  fuch  an  awaken- 
ing among  little  children,  I  never  faw  before.    Our  dear  bro- • 

ther  N 's  letter  will  acquaint  you   with   particulars.     O 

my  dear  brother,  how  ought  fuch  manifeftations  of  God's 
glory,  to  quicken  our  fouls,  and  excite  us  to  lay  out  ourfelvcs 
more  and  more  in  the  fervice  of  the  bell:  of  Mafters,  Jesus 
Christ  !  Every  day  he  fills  me  with  himfelf,  and  fometimcs 
brings  me  even  upon  the  confines  of  eternity.  Methinks  I 
often  (land  upon  Amount  Pifgah^  and  take  a  view  of  the  heavenly 
Canaan^  and  then  long  to  be  gathered  to  my  people  :  hut,  my 
dear  brother,  both  you  and  I  muft  fufFer,  and  that  great  things, 
before  we  enter  into  glory.  My  work  is  fcarce  begun; 
my  trials  arc  yet  to  come.  What  is  a  little  fcourge  of  the 
tongue  ?  What  is  a  thrufling  out  of  the  fynagogues  ?  The 
^iaie  of  temptation  will  be,  v/hen  we  are  thruft  into  an  in- 


LETTERS.  iS^ 

uer  prifon,  and  feci  the  iron  entering  even  into  our  fouls.' 
Then,  perhaps,  even  God's  people  may  be  permitted  to  for- 
fake  LIS  lor  a  while,  and  none  but  the  J^ord  Jesus  to  ([and  by 
us.  "  But  if  thou,  O  deareft  Redeemer!  wilt  ftren^thcn  mc 
in  the  inner  man,  let  enemies  plunge  me  into  a  fiery  furnace, 
or  throw  me  into  a  den  of  lions."  My  dear  brother,  my 
heart   is  enlarged   towards  you:   though  I    never   faw,   vet  I 

love  you   moil   tenderly.     How   does   dear  brother/) P 

Does  he  yet  walk  in  the  light  of  God's  countenance  ?  Prav  fa- 
lute  him  lovingly  in  my  name.  In  the  fall,  I  hope  to  fee  you 
in  Lc?7g  I/land,  and  to  be  fomewhat  filled  with  your  company. 
In  the  mean  while,  let  us  all  keep  a  clofc  walk  with  Jesus  j 
and  be  pleafed,  in  an  efpecial  manner,  to  remember 
Your  unworthy,   though  aftedionate  brother, 

fellow-labourer,  and  fervant  In  our  common  Lorb, 

G,  IF. 

LETTER    CXCIX. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  J.  JV. 

Savannah,  J U7ie  2^^  I74^»  " 
Ajy  honoured  Friend  and  Brother, 
Thank  you  for,  and  heartily  fay  a?ncn  to  all  the  petitions 
you  have  put  up  in  my  behalf.  I  want  to  be  as  my  Maf- 
ter  would  have  me  ;  I  mean,  meek  and  lowly  in  heart.  Dear 
Sir,  bear  with  me  a  little  longer ;  pray  for  me  with  great  ear- 
neftnefs  ;  and  who  knows  but  my  God  may  give  me  to  abhor 
myfelf  in  duft  and  afhes  I  He  that  hath  given  us  his  Son,  will 
he  not  with  him  freely  give  us  all  things  i*  For  Christ's  fake, 
if  pofTible,  dear  Sir,  never  fpeak  againft  election  in  your  fer- 
mons  :  no  one  can  fay  that  I  ever  mentioned  it  in  public  dif- 
courfes,  whatever  my  private  fentiments  may  be.  For 
Christ's  fake,  let  us  not  be  divided  amongft  ourfelves  :  no- 
thing will  fo  much  prevent  a  divifion  as  your  being  filent  on 
this  head.  I  fhould  have  rejoiced  at  the  fight  of  your  Journal. 
I  long  to  fmg  a  hymn  of  praife  for  what  God  has  done  for 
your  foul.  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  you  fpeak  up  for  an  attend- 
ance on  the  means  of  grace,  and  do  not  encourage  perfons  w^ho 
run  (I  am  perfuaded)  before  they  are  called.  The  work  of 
God  will  fufFer  much  by  fuch  imprudence,     I  trull  you  will 

flill 


I90  LETTERS. 

ftill  perfifl  in  field-preaching.  Others  are  (Irangers  to  ouP 
call.  I  know  infinice  good  hath  been  done  by  it  already,  and 
greater  good  will  yet  be  done  thereby  every  day  :  but  we  muft 
be  judged  of  our  brethren.  May  God  blefs  you  more  and 
more  every  day,  and  caufe  you  to  triumph  in  every  place. 
Next  Monday^  God  willing,  I  go  to  Charles-Town,  My  fa- 
mily is  well  regulated  ;  but  I  want  fome  more  gracious  allift- 
ants.  I  have  near  an  hundred  and  thirty  to  maintain  daily, 
without  any  fund.  The  Lord  gives  me  a  full  undifturbed 
confidence  in  his  power  and  goodnefs.  Dear  Sir,  adieu.  I 
can  write  no  more  ;  my  heart  is  full.  I  want  to  be  a  little 
child.     O  continue  to  pray  for 

Your  moil:  unworthy,  but  affectionate  brother  and  fervant 
in  our  dear  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 

C.  JV, 

LETTER    CC. 

To  Mr,  J H . 

Dearejl  J  Savannah,  June  25,  174c. 

EVERY  letter  you  write,  knits  my  heart  more  and  more 
to  you  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  Your  laft:  I 
received  on  Saturday.  God  had  been  preparing  me  for  it,  by 
a  week's  intimation  upon  my  heart,  and  by  an  InexprelTible 
agony  in  my  foul  juft  before  it  came  to  hand.  Bleffed  be  God 
that  our  friends  preach  up  poverty  of  fpirit,  for  that  is  the  only 
foundation  whereon  to  build  folid  abiding  comfort.  The  flony 
ground  received  the  word  v/ith  joy;  but  how  did  thofe  hearers 
ftand  in  a  day  of  temptation  ?  They  fell  away  ;  for  it  is  very 
poflible  that  the  heart  may  have  much  joy  floating  on  the  top 
of  it,  and  yet  be  as  hard  as  the  nether  miUftone.  Hence  it  is 
that  fo  many,  v/ho  boaft  of  reft  in  their  flafhes  of  joy,  are  felf- 
willed,  impatient  of  reproof,  defpifers  of  others  in  a  mourning 
fiate,  and  wile  in  their  own  conceits  :  whereas  the  believer, 
that  hath  been  with  his  Lord  in  the  wildernefs,  and  has  a 
truly  broken  and  contrite  heart,  though  his  joy  may  not  be  fo 
extravagant,  yet  it  is  fubflantial.  Such  a  foul  hangs  upon 
God  ;  thinks  before  he  fpeaks ;  and  is  continually  hearkening 
for  what  the  Lord  will  fay  to  him,  by  the  fmall  ftill  voice  of 
his  fpirir.    This  is  the  ftate  I  want  all  our  friends  to  arrive  at. 

I  can" 


LETTERS.  191 

I  cannot  fee  how  they  can,  with  aflurance,  talk  of  their  enjoy- 
ing folid  fellowfliip  with  the  Father,  and  his  dear  Son  Christ 
Jesus.  I  fhall  not  be  furprizcd  if  many,  who  feemin^^ly  be- 
gan in  the  fpirit,  do  end  in  tlic  flefh,  and  turn  perfecutors  of 
the  doctrines  and  difciples  of  Jesus  Christ.  How  can  they 
pofiibly  ftand,  who  never  felt  themfelves  condemned  crimi- 
nals ?  who  were  never  truly  burthened  with  a  fenfe  not  only 
of  their  a^luai,  but  original  fin,  efpecially  that  damning  fin 
of  unbelief  f  who  were  never  brought  to  fee  and  heartily  confcfs, 
that  after  they  had  done  all,  God  might,  notv/ithftanding,  deny 
them  mercy;  and  that  it  is  owing  merely  to  his  fovereign  love 
in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  that  they  can  have  any  hopes  of 
being  delivered  from  the  wrath  to  come  ?   It  is  for  preachino- 

in  this  manner  that  I  like  MelF.  T s.     They  wound  deep 

before  they  heal  ;  they  know  that  there  is  no  promife  made 
but  to  him  that  believeth  ;  and  therefore  they  are  careful  not 
to  comfort  over  much  thofe  that  are  convicled.  I  fear  I  have 
been  too  incautious  in  this  refpedl:,  and  have  often  given  com- 
fort  too  foon.  The  Lord  pardon  me  for  what  is  paft,  and 
teach  me  more  rightly  to  divide  the  word  of  truth  for  the  fu- 
ture. DeareO:  J ,   pardon  this  freedom  ;   I  am  conftrained 

to  write   in  this  manner.     I  thank  you  moft  heartily  for  your 

hiftorical  letter.     Fail  not  writing  to  m.e  often.    Deareft  J , 

help  me  by  your  prayers  :  for  Christ's  fake  help  me.     Our 
Lord    is  ye:   with  us.     I  hear  different  accounts  of  things ; 
h\it  I  pray  for  all,  and  fufpend  my  judgment  till  you  fee 
Your  affectionate  brother  and  fervant, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER     CCL 

To  Mrs.  E C . 

My  dear  SiJIer^  Savannah,  June  25,  1 7 40, 

YOUR  letter  afforded  me  much  inward  pleafure.  Surely 
it  bcfpeaks  the  Vv'riter  not  to  be  far  from  the  kingdom 
of  God.  You  was  then  waiting  for  our  Lord's  falvation  : 
ere  now,  I  trufl,  Christ  hath  manifefted  his  glory,  filled  you 
with  his  bleilcd  fpirit,  and  thereby  fcaled  you' to  the  day  of  re- 
demption. 'Tis  good  to  be  long  in  an  humbled  Hate  :  it  is 
the  bed  preparation  for  fulid,  lafiing  comfoit.  Blcilcd  are 
5  they 


igj  LETTER    S. 

they  that  mourn  moft,  for  they  fhall  be  the  moft  comforted  : 
not  that  we  are  violently  to  keep  ourfelves  in  fuch  a  ftate;  but 
when  God's  hand  lies  heavy  upon  us,  we'are  patiently  to  tarry 
the  Lord's  leifufe,  till  he  reveals  himfelf  to  our  fouls.  1  was 
a  mourner  a  long  while;  but,  glory  be  to  God  !  I  have  for 
fome  years  been  almoft  continually  corhforted  ;  at  leaf!;  kept 
fl-om  doubting;  of  my  intereft  in  Jesus  Christ.  I  can  v^ith 
an  humble  boldnefs  cry  out,  *'  My  Lord  and  my  God!" 
He  daily  manifefts  himfelf  to  my  foul,  and  caufes  me  to  feel 
my  dependance  on  his  free  grace  and  fovereign  love.  Th  s  is 
the  kingdom  of  God  within  us.  O,  my  dear  fifter,  what 
would  I  give,  were  all  the  world  partakers  of  this  urifpeakable: 
gift !  I  long,  I  burn  with  an  ardent  zeal  after  the  falvation  of 
my  dear  brethren,  who  are  dead  in  trefpafles  and  fins.  Poor 
fouls  !  Why  am  I  taken,  and  they  left  ?  O  the  fovereign, 
free,  unmerited,  diftinguifliing  love  of  my  and  your  Jesus  I 
My  dear  fifter,  let  us  love  him,  let  us  obey  him  ;  let  us 
fufFer  for  him  with  a  chearful  heart  !  His  love  will  fweeten 
every  cup,  though  never  fo  bitter.  Let  us  pledge  him  wil- 
lingly, and  continue  faithful  even  unto  death.  A  fcene  of  fuf- 
ferings  lies  before  us.  Who  knows  biit  v/e  may  wade  to  our 
Saviour  through  a  fea  of  blood  ?  I  expe6l:  (O  pray  that  I  may 
be  ftrengthened  if  called  to  it)  to  die  for  his  great  name's  fake, 
'Twill  be  fweet  to  wear  a  martyr's  crown.  Dear  Madam, 
adieu.  I  remember  God's  2;oodnefs  to  us  at  Broad-Oaks.  I 
pray  for  you  and  yours.  I  truft  your  daughters  keep  clofe  to 
Jesus.  Salute  them  kindly  in  my  name.  Read  my  Journal, 
and  give  hearty  thanks  for 

Your  unworthy  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ  Jesus, 

LETTER    ecu. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr,  S ,  in  London, 

llev.  and  dear  Sir^  Savannah,  June  26,  1740. 

AND  is  one  of  the  priefts  alfo  obedient  to  the  word  ? 
BlcfTed  be  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesu$ 
Christ,  who  hath  tranflated  you  from  darknefs  to  light; 
from  the  power  of  Satan  to  the  fervlcc  of  the  ever-living  God. 
Now  know  I5  that  our  glorious  E?jjmanud  has  not  commanded 

us 


LET    T    E    R    S,  193 

us  to  pray  in  vain.  Surely  we  fnall  never  tafte  of  death,  till 
vvc  fee  our  dear  Lord's  kingdom  coming  with  greater  power. 
He  feems  to  be  thrufting  out  more  labourers  into  his  harvefl. 
Glory  be  to  his  free  grace  that  you  are  one  of  the  happy  num- 
ber. O  dear  Sir,  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad  ;  and  let  the 
love  of  Jesus  condrain  you  to  go  out  into  the  highways  and 
hedges  to  compel  poor  fmners  to  come  in.  Some  (even  that 
are  true  lovers  of  the  Lamb)  may  fay  "  this  is  not  proceeding 
with  a  zeal  according  to  knowledge  :"  but  I  am  perfuaded, 
when  the  power  of  rclij^ion  revives,  the  gofpcl  muft  be  pro- 
pagated in  the  fame  manner  as  it  was  firft  eftablifhcd,  "  itinc^ 
rant  preaching,"  Go  on,  dear  Sir,  go  on,  and  follow  your 
glorious  Mafler  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  facred  reproach. 
Never  fear  the  fcourge  of  the  tongue,  or  the  th;-eatnings  that 
are  daily  breathed  out  againft  the  Lord,  and  againft  his 
Christ.  Sufler  we  muli,  I  believe,  and  that  great  things. 
Our  Lord,  by  his  providence,  begins  to  fliew  it.  Ere  long, 
perhaps,  we  may  fing  in  a  prifon,  and  have  our  feet  fet  faft  in 
the  {tocks.  But  faith  in  Jesus  turns  a  prifon  into  a  palace, 
and  makes  a  bed  of  flames  become  a  bed  of  down.  Let  us  be 
faithful  to-day,  and  our  Lord  will  fupport  us  to-morrow. 
O  dear  Sir,  though  I  know  you  not,  yet  my  heart  is  en- 
larged towards  you,  and  I  make  mention  of  your  name  in  my 
prayers.  I  pray  God  to  give  you  ftrength  to  bear  the  heat 
and  burden  of  every  day,  and  to  enable  you  to  preach  with 
fuch  wifdom,  that  all  your  adverfaries  may  not  be  able  to 
gainfay  or  refift.  BlefTed  be  his  holy  name,  I  drink  deep  of 
his  love  every  moment.  A  greater  power  than  ever  attends  my 
poor  labours  i  and  fcveral  of  my  own  houfhold,  both  boys  and 
girls,  1  really  believe,  are  coming  favingly  to  Jesus  Christ. 
lam  now  about  to  go  to  Charles-Town -y  a  work  of  God  is 
begun    there.     Who    knows   but  I  may  fee  my  dear  brother 

S in  America  ?    But  future  things  belong  to  God  ;  to 

his  grace  and  love  I  commend  vou.  Keep  clofe  to  your  dear 
Jesus,  and  pray  that  a  child-like,  humble  fpirit,  may  be  given 
to 

Your  unworthy  brother  and  fellow-labourer 

G.  n\ 

Vol.  L        -  O.       .  LETTER 

5 


194  LETTERS. 

LETTER     CCIII. 

To  JVm,  S ,  Efq-y  in  Loyidon. 

My  dear  Brother  S ,  Savannah,  June  26,    1 740. 

I  Sent  you  a  packet  of  letters  from  Charles-Town,  the  middle 
of  this   month.     Since  that  time,  I  have   received  many 
agreeable  letters   kova  England ;  but   find   from  Blendon  letters 

that  Mifs  E D is  in  a  fecking  ftate  only.     Surely 

that  will  not  do  ;  I  would  have  one  that  is  full  of  faith  and 
the  Holy  Ghoft.  Juft  now  I  have  been  weeping,  and  much 
carried  out  in  prayer  before  the  Lord.  My  poor  family  gives 
nie  more  concern  than  every  thing  elfe  put  together.  I  u'ant 
a  gracious  zvornan  that  is  dead  to  every  thing  but  Jesus,  and  is 
qualified  to  govern  children,  and  dired  perfons  of  her  own 
fex.  Such  a  one  would  help,  and  not  retard  me  in  my  dear 
Lord's  work.  I  wait  upon  the  Lord  every  moment ;  I  hang 
upon  my  Jesus  :  and  he  is  fo  infinitely  condefcending,  that 
he  daily  grants  me  frefli  tokens  of  ,bls  love,  and  affures  me 
that  he  will  not  permit  me  to  fall  by  the  hands  of  a  woman. 
I  am  almoft  tempted  to  wifli  I  had  never  undertook  the  or- 
phan-houfc.  At  other  times,  I  am  willing  to  contrive  mat- 
ters fo  that  I  may  not  marry  :  but  I  am  always  checked  ;  and 
looking  back  upon  the  workings  of  my  heart  in  this  affair,  I 
am  more  and  more  convinced  that  it  is  of  God  ;  and  there- 
fore know  he  will  order  affairs  for  me,  as  will  beft  promote 
his  own  glory.  So  that  my  dear  Lord's  honour  does  not  fuf- 
fer,  I  care  not  what  trouble  in  the  flefh  I  undergo.  His  glory, 
to  the  beft  of  my  knowledge,  is  my  only  aim,  \n  my  thoughts, 
words,    and  adions.     My  dearefl  brother,    adieu.     By   this 

time,  I  truft,  you   are  near  England.     Dear  brother  S 

goes  with  me  to  Charles-Toivn.   Brother  B keeps  houfe  in 

my  abfence.  Take  heed  that  the  people  you  bring  believe  on 
Jesus.     Expe6t  to  hear  Shortly  again  from 

Your  affe£tioiiate  brother  and  fervant  In  Christ, 

G.  IV. 


LETTER 


LETTER    S  igs 

LETTER    CCIV. 

To  Mr,  IF D— -. 

My  dear  Brother^  Savarmahy  June  28,   1740. 

1  Thank  you   for  your  kind  letters  and  friendly  cautions  ; 
and  truft   fhall  always  reckon  thofe  my  choiceft  friends,, 
who,  in  funplicity  and  meeknefs,  tell  me  the  corruptions  of 

my  heart.     It  is  that  faithfulnefs  which  hath  endeared  J 

S to  me.  I  think  I  never  was  obliged  to  any  one  fo  much 

before  :  for  that  reafon  alfo  I  find  my  heart  knit  to  you.  O 
my  dear  brother,  ftill  continue  faithful  to  my  foul  :  do  not 
hate  me  in  your  heart ;  in  any  wife  reprove  riie.  Exhort  all 
my  dear  brethren  to  forgive  my  paft  (I  fear)  too  imperious 
carriage  ;  and  let  them  pray  that  I  may  know  myfelf  to  be 
what  I  really  am,  lefs  than  the  lead  of  them  all.  I  have  abun- 
dant reafon  to  blefs  God  for  fending  me  abroad.  I  cannot 
fay  I  have  improved  my  retirement  as  1  ought;  biit  I  can  fay 
it  hath  been  highly  beneficial  to  my  foul.  I  have  a  garden 
near  at  hand,  where  I  go  particularly  to  meet  and  talk  with 
my  God,  at  the  cool  of  every  day.  I  often  fit  in  filence,  of- 
fering my  foul  as  fo  much  clay,  to  be  ftamped  juft  as  my  hea- 
venly potter  pleafes  :  and  whilft  I  am  mufing,  I  am  often  filled 
as  it  were  with  the  fulnefs  of  God.  I  am  frequently  at  Cal- 
varyy  and  frequently  on  Mount  Tabor  ;  but  always  afTured  of 
rny  Lord's  everlafting  love.  O  continue  to  pray  for  mc, 
that  I  rr:ay  know  myfelf  even  as  I  am  known.  I  want  to  have 
a  proper  mixture  of  the  lion  arfd  the  lamb,  of  the  ferpent  and 
the  dove.  I  do  not  defpair  of  attaining  it.  Jesus  is  love  ; 
Jesus  willeth  my  perfecftion  ;  Jesus  hath  died  for  me;  Jesus 
can  deny  me  nothing.  He  hath  given  me  himfclf ;  will  her 
not  then  freely  give  me  all  things  befides  ?  I  Wait  for  thy  c6m- 
pleat  falvation,  O  LoRD  !  My  dear  broth'er,  my  heart  is 
now  enlarged.  Your  prayer  is  anfwered.  The  whole  God- 
head no'.v  fills  my  foul.  O  grace,  grace  I  O  Jefu,  Jefu  ! 
was  ever  love  like  thine  !  Lord,  I  abhor  myfelf  in  duil  anJ 
afties.  O  that  I  could  praife  thee  !  that  I  could  love  thee" 
as  I  ought !  My  dear  brother,  I  hear  you  have  been  zealous  for 
the  Lord  your  God  fince  my  departure.  You  have  done 
well  :  you  never  can  be  zeahous  for  a  better  mafter  :  but  why" 

O  2  filent?' 


196  LETTERS. 

filent  ?  why  withdrawn  ?  Did  you  go  before  you  was  called 
or  qualified  ?  If  fo,  you  have  done  right:  but  I  fufpend  my 
judgment ;  for  I  find  there  is  no  judging  at  a  diftance.  I  only 
pray  God  that  you  may  always  feel  yourfelf  a  very  poor  finner, 
and  find  refuge  in  the  wounds  and  blood  of  the  Lamb.  I  re- 
joice to  hear  the  work  of  God  goes  on,  and  heartily  wifli  you 
may  not  be  divided  among  yourfelves.  Our  dear  Lord  is 
with  us  here  :  I  only  want  a  few  more  gracious,  folid  affift- 
ants.     The  Lord  will  fend  them  in  his  due  time  to 

Your  affediionate  brother  and  fervantin  Christ, 

LETTER    CCV.   ,1^^%^} 

To  J B ^'-^^ 

Good  Hope,  {South-Carolina)  'July  2,  1740-. 
My  dear  Brother  B , 

IS  it  true,  that  one  night  whilft  you  was  expounding,  you 
told  your  hearers,  from  your  own  experience,  that  "  they 
tould  not  go  on  without  throwing  afide  the  means  of  grace  r" 
or  words  to  that  purpofe  ?  If  fo,  I  pity  you  ;  for  you  arc  not 
only  mifled  yourfelf,  but  are  alfo  mifgufding  others.  But  this 
is  no  more  than  I  expe£led.  I  think  you  begun  to  teach  too 
foon,  and  before  you  had  a  commiffion  given  you  from  above. 
Brother  J- — ^ —  was  of  the  fame  opinion,  before  I  left  England. 
For  that  reafon,  I  would  not  take  you  to  Georgia,  Blefl'cd  be 
God,  I   have  no  fuch  over-forward  fpirits  there.     My  dear 

B -y  I  write  in  love.     For  Christ's  fake  try  your  fpirit: 

I  fear  you  was  never  yet  truly  humbled.  I  know  you  have 
had  joy  ;  but  I  always  thought  it  was  joy  floating,  on  the  fur- 
face  of  an  unmortified  heart.  From  fuch  a  joy,  good  Lord 
deliver  us  !  O  that  you  had  been  in  the  wildernefs  a  little 
longer  !  then  you  might  have  been  an  experienced  teacher  j 
but  I  fear  you  are  now  only  a  novice.  May  the  Lord  keep 
you  from  faHing  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil.  I  write 
not  this  to  damp,  but  to  regulate  your  fpirit ;  if  you  are 
humble,  you  will  take  it  kind.  God  knows,  I  wifh  all  the 
Lord's  fervants  were  prophets  ;.  but  I  would  not  have  my 
Mafter's  work  fuffcr  by  a  too  heady  way  of  proceeding.  Why 
fhould  you    difhonour    him   by  a«Sling   above  your  fpherej 

whereas 


LETTERS.  197 

whereas  you  might  honour  him  by  ailing  in  it.  Every  one 
is  not  fit  to  be  a  public  expounder.  To  build  up  awakened 
finners  in  private,  is  what  is  more  wanted  at  prefent  than 
young  unexperienced  preachers.  But  I  have  done  ;  I  fear  I 
have  offended  my  brother  :  forgive  me  this  wrong.  As  Goo 
was  pleafed  firft  to  work  upon  you  by  my  miniftry,  you  muft 
always  expeft  to  be  watched  over  by 

Your  affedionate  friend,  brother  and  fcrvant, 

LETTER    CCVL 

Dear  Mr.  R  ■,  Charles-Town,  July  ii,  I740# 

YOUR  letter  much  rejoiced  me.  O  that  you  may  ftill 
follow  on,  till  you  truly  know  the  Lord  !  I  (hall  be 
glad  to  have  you  for  a  fcribe,  if  you  are  well  inftru6led  in  the 
things  which  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven.     Keep  clofe, 

my  dear  friend,  keep  clofe  to  the  dear  Mr.  T s :  under 

God,  they  will  build  you  up  in  your  moft  holy  faith.  It 
gladdens  my  heart  to  hear  of  their  fuccefs  in  the  Lord.  The 
Lord  increafe  them  more  and  more,  and  multiply  the  num- 
ber of  their  fpiritual  children  1   I  fuppofe  brother  G *s 

letter  informed  you  what  a  fpeedy  paflage  the  Lord  gave  us, 
and  how  we  were  received  at  Georgia,  Surely  I  fhall  never 
fee  the  like  again,  till  I  meet  the  fons  of  God  in  glory. 
Praife  the  Lord,  O  my  foul  !  my  dear  friend,  help  me  to 
praife  the  Lord.  I  have  been  here  above  a  week.  The  Lord 
hath  been  pleafed  to  work  on  many  hearts.  On  Sunday  the 
commijjary  denied  me  the  facrament ;  but  my  dear  Mafter  fed 
me,  notwithftanding,  with  the  bread  which  cometh  down 
from  heaven.  Perfecution  feems  to  be  coming  on  more  and 
more.  My  dear  friend,  fee  that  you  are  rooted  aud  ground- 
ed in  love  and  faith  ;  or  how  will  you  Hand  faft  in  a  dying 
hour  ?  With  difficulty  I  write  this  before  morning  fervice.  I 
preach  generally,  in  town  or  country,  twice  a-day.  The  heat 
is  great;  but  the  Lord  enables  me  to  bear  the  burden  of  it. 
Next  month,  God  willing,  I  go  to  New- England,  and  hope 
to  fee  Philadelphia  in  November.  On  Tuejday  next  1  am  cited 
to  appear  before  the  commiflary  and  his  court  in  a  judicial 
way  :  the  even:  I  leave  to  my  dear  LojiD  Jesus,  O  dc\^.r 
O  3  Mr, 


198  LETTERS. 

Mr.  R — ' — ,  let  not  the  crofs  keep  you  from  Jesus.  If  we 
fufFer,  we  fhall  reign  with  him.  Salute  your  honoured  mo- 
ther in  my  name,  and  all  that  love  our  dear  LoiiD  in  fmcerity, 

from,  dear  Mr.  R ', 

Your  afFe<ftionate  fiicnd  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  rv, 

LETTER     CCVII. 

To  Mr,  J R . 

Dear  J ,  Charles-Town,  "July  15,  1740. 

MAY  you  anfwcr  your  name,  be  freely  gracious,  and 
filled  with  as  much  love  as  he  was,  who  leaned  on  the 
facred  bofom  of  our  dear  Redeemer.  1  believe  God  has  be- 
gun ;  if  fo,  God  will  carry  on  the  good  work  in  your  heart. 
It  is  the  Lord's  doing.  Not  uiito  me,  not  unto  me  ;  but  to 
free,  rich,  diftinguifliiiig,  fovereign  grace,  be  all  the  glory  ! 
The  wearing  off,  or  forgetting  your  convictions  formerly, 
ought  to  make  you  more  jealous  of  yourfelf  now.  The  more 
you  fee  the  enmity  of  the  heart,  the  better  :  you  cannot  then 
avoid   abhorring  yourfelf  in   duft   and  adies.      I   rejoice  you 

have  been   at  Ntjfhamim.     I  can   fay  of  Mr.  T and  their 

brethren,  as  David  did  of  Gcliah\  fword,  *^  None  like  them.'* 

I  am  glad  you  and  my  friend  R are   acquainted.     O  fee 

that  you  keep  one  another  warm,  and  be  zealous  for  the  Lord 
your  God.  I  wonder  not  at  your  mafter's  inhnuations.  In- 
deed, dear  ^ ,  you  muft  be  tried  thoroughly,  if  you  would 

approve  yourfelf  to  the  glorious  EmmanueL  Exhort  all  to  die 
for  him,  rather  than  deny  him  in  any  wife.  I  find  my  fuf- 
fering  time  at  hand  :  but  my  dear  Lord  comforts  me  with 
his  gracious  and  refrefhing  prefence.  A  good  work  is  carry- 
ing on  here  :  let  my  dear  friends  hplp  it  forwards  by  their 
prayers.  My  love  to  ?ill  at  the  fociety  ;  and  accept  of  the 
iame  from 

Your  aiFedionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  W. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  199 

LETTER     CCVIH. 

To  Air.  B J  in  Penfyhania. 

My  dear  Brother^  Charles-Town^  "July  18,  1740. 

PRAISE  the  Lord,  O  my  foul  !  Our  glorious  Einmanuel 
Teems  to  have  girt  his  fword  upon  his  thigh,  and  to  he 
riding  on  from  conquering  to  conquer.  He  gets  himfclf  the 
vidory  in  Philadelphia.  He  is  getting  himrdFthe  victory  in 
Charles-Town  alio.  Indeed  a  glorious  work  is  begun,  and  car- 
rying on  here.     Many  louls  are  awakened   to   a   fenfe  of  the 

divine  life. The  alteration  in  the  people  fmce  I  came  here 

at  firft,  is  furprizing.  I  preach  twice  a  day,  generally,  either 
in  town  or  in  the  villages  around.  The  commiflary  fhoots 
out  his  arrows,  even  bitter  Vv'ords.  He  hath  denied  me  the 
facrament,  and  cited  me  to  appear  before  him  and  his  court; 
I  was  obliged  to  appeal  home.  O  my  dear  brother,  pray 
that  I  may  be  humble  and  of  a  child-like  fpirit.  Every  day 
God  {hews  me  frefh  inftances  of  his  love.  Here  are  fome 
faithful  minifters  amongft  the  baptifts.     One  of  them,  Mr. 

C ,  has  wrote  to  you  ;  pray  anfwer  him.    Some  time  next 

month  I  hope  to  be  at  Nevj  England^  and  to  return  to 
you  according  to  promife.  Be  pleafed  to  falute  the  brethren 
in  my  name.  Indeed  I  honour  and  love  you  in  the  bowels  of 
Je.sus  Christ.  O  that  I  was  worthy  of  your  acquaintance  ! 
But  I  am  not.  All  that  I  can  fay  is,  that  I  will  endeavour  to 
approve  my  lei  f 

Your  affectionate  friend,  brother, 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER    CCIX. 

To  Mr.  I.  R . 

My  Dear  Friend^  Charles-Town,  July    18,1740. 

I  Thank  you  for  going  with  friend  E and  B to 
Nazareih.  May  God  blefs  you,  and  caufe  great  good  to 
come  to  that  place  !  God  feems  to  be  carrying  on  as  great  a 
WQfk  in  Cbarles-Tjwn,  comparatively  fpcaking,  as  in  Philadel- 

O  4  ph'ia. 


200  LETTERS. 

phia.  Surely  our  Lord  intends  to  fet  the  world  in  a  flame, 
O   that   the  holy  fire  of  hib  divine  love  v/as  kindled    in  every 

heart  !   Be  pleafed  to  read  wliat  1  have  fent  to  Mr.  iV- -. 

If  you  pleafc  you  may  print  that  extract,  which  I  fent  from 
my  journal  :  God  willing,  I  hope  to  be  at  New  England  by 
the  beginning  of  Scpiejnhcr^  and  to  be  refrelhed  vyith  your  and 
my  dear  friend's  letters.  Indeed,  I  love  you  all  in  the  bovveli; 
of  my  dear  Lord  Jesus.  Do  not  let  us  forfake  him. 
Let  us  not  be  afliamed  of  him,  though  we  live  in  a  crooked  and 
perverfe  generation.  I  thank  my  dear  friends  for  their  zeal  in 
building  a  houfc  j  *  but  defire  it  may  not  have  any  particular 
name,  or  be  put  to  any  particular  ufe,  till  my  return  to  Phi- 
ladelphia. I  wifh  them  good  luck  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
Lafl  nieht  I  appeared  a  third  time  in  a  public  court ;  but  they 
not  accepting  my  Rccufatio judicis^  I  appealed  home;  fo  that 
now  I  have  free  liberty  to  embark  when  providence  pleafeth. 

0  my  dear  friend,  think  of  a  bleeding,  dying  Lord.. 
Keep  clofe  to  him,  and  exhort  all  friends  to  pray  and  give 
thanks  for 

Your  afllired  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER    CCX. 

To  Mr.  G L . 

Dear  Brother  L — ,  Char ks -Town .^  July  i8,  174O. 

GOD  v/ill  v/ork,  and  v/ho  fhall  hinder  r  The  facrament 
hath  been  refufed  to  mc,  and  I  have  appeared  thrice  in 
open  court,  before  the  commilFary  and  fome  of  his  clergy  ;  but 
6ur  LokD  rides  on,  from  conquering  to  conquer.  Many,  I  be- 
lieve, are  really  pricked  to  the  heart.  The  commiflary's  detain- 
ing me  here,  has  much  tended  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gofpel. 

1  put  in  my  exceptions  againft  his  fitting  as  my  judge,  and 
they  were  repelled  ;  fo  that  I  have  appealed  home,  and  all 
Other  proceedings  here  are  Ptoppcd.  By  this  means  I  fhall 
have  liberty  to  preach  the  gofpel  without  further  interruption, 
•and  my  call  to  Englund  will  be  more  clear.  The  enclofed 
paper  will  fhew  you  what  is  doing  in  Philadelphia.  Private 
letters  received  from  thence  lad  night  and  this  morning,  have 
much  refreftied  mv  heart.     Many  fouls  are  flocking   to  the 

LoRi> 
*  Tiiio  'S  ncv/  t.!:e  cou^ze  at  Philadelphia* 


I.    E    T    T    E    R    S.  201 

Lord  Jesus.  I  need  not  exhort  you  to  praife  the  Lord. 
You  may  advertife  what  paragraphs  you  think  proper,  only 
add  that  Philadelphia  people  are  building  a  houfe  for  me  to 
preach  in,  jo6  Tcct  long  and  74  feet  wide.  The  Lord  is 
bringing  mighty  things  to  pafs.  \  api  furprizingly  ftrength- 
ened  to  bear  the  heat  and  burden  of  every  day.  My  dear 
Lord  never  leaves  nor  forfakcs  me,  but  works  by  my  unwor- 
thy miniftry  more  and  more.  O  that  I  was  humble  !  O  that 
I  was  a  little,  little  child  !  I  know  not  how  foon  I  may  be 
called  to  EngUmd,  The  inhabitants  here  are  wondrous  kind* 
They  attend  morning  and  evening  moft  chearfully  on  my 
preaching.  V/c  often  fee  the  ftately  fteps  of  our  dear  Lord 
in  his  fan^luary.  I  am  more  than  happy.  I  am  amazed  at 
the  divine  goodnefs.  Lord,  I  abhor  myfelf  in  duft  ahd  afhes  ! 
See  the  wonders  of  the  Lord  ;  help  us  to  praife  him. 
Excufe  me  to  all  my  dear  friends.  For  this  fortnight  paft 
I  have  not  wrote  a  word  of  my  journal.  My  fermons,  &c* 
are  bought  off  exceedingly,  northward.  O  pray  that  an  hum- 
ble child-like  fpirit  may  be  given  to 

Ever  yours  in  Christ, 

G,  IV, 

LETTER    CCXr. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr,  D , 

My  dear  Brother  D ,  Savannah^  jfugiift  15,  174O. 

OUR  dear  Lord  (after  being  pleafed  to  bring  me  low  by 
bodily  ficknefs)  now  gives  me  liberty  to  write  to  you. 
Whilft  I  am  writing,  I  find  my  heart  united  with  yours.  I 
hope  we  have  both  drank  into  the  fame  fpirit,  and  are  both 
inftances  of  the  fame  fovereign,  diftinguiihing,  evcrlafting 
love.  O  let  us  extol  it  !  O  let  us  improve  daily  !  And 
fincc  God  fees  fit  that  we  fhall  not  die,  but  live,  let  us 
lay,  ourfelves  out  to  declare  the  works  of  the  Lord.  I  arn 
^Ihamed  of  my  paft  unfruitfulnefs.  Had  others  received  the 
(lock,  that  hath  been  intrufted  to  me,  how  would  they  havp 
improved  it  ?  Indeed  I  am  an  unprofitable  fervant.  In  the 
righteoufnefs  of  Jesus  my  Lord,  is  my  only  refuge.  Well 
may  God  afflict  me  j  I  richly  dcfervc  it ;  and  when  he  brings 
jiie  low^  nothing  grieves  me  fo   much,  as  to  think   that   I 

lliould 


202  LETTERS. 

ihoulci  be  fo  froward  as  to  oblige  the  God  of  love  to  ftrike  me 
with  his  rod.  But  oh  the  goodnefs  of  the  Lord  !  His  rod, 
as  well  a«  ftafF,  do  comfort  and  build  up  my  foul.  I  would 
not  but  be  tried  for  ten  thoufand  worlds.  Blefled  be  God, 
I  am  enabled  to  clafp  the  crofs,  and  defire  to  glory  in  nothing 
more.  Dear  brother,  help  me  with  your  prayers.  Our  vic- 
torious Jesus  makes  his  power  to  be  known  ;  many  have  1 
fecn  ftruck  quite  down  by  the  power  of  the  word.  The  holy 
Ghoft  hath  often  come  like  a  mighty  rufhing  wind.  Satan 
has  defired  to  fift  us  as  wheat.  But  our  Lord  ftill  fhcws 
me,  that  the  orphan-houfe  will  go  on  and  flourifii.  It  is  of- 
ten a  great  weight  upon  my  foul ;  but  through  your  and  my 
dear  friends  prayers,  the  Lord  I  am  perfuaded  will  ftill  fup- 

jpurt  it. 

Yours  eternally  in  Chr;st  Jesus, 

LETTER    CCXir. 

To  Mr,  N—-,  m  New  York, 
My  dear  Brother^  Savannah^  Aug,  15,  I  740. 

YOUR  letter  rejoiced  my  heart.     May  our  dear  Lord's 
kingdom  be  advanced   more  and   more  every   day  !    O 
that  I  may  meet  you  at  New- England  !  Blefied  be  God  that 

Mr.  M is  yet  alive.     Salute  him  from  me;   I   hope  to 

fee  him  before  I  die,  and  fo  be  taught  the  way  of  God  more 
perfeclly.     1  thank  you  for  your  kind  hints  ;    I   have   always 

paid  great  deference  to  dear  Mr.  N 's  judgment :  indeed  I 

love  him  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus.  God  has  been  pleafed  to 
bring  me  low,  for  feme  time,  by  inward  weaknefs,  and  faint- 
Refs  of  fpirits.  The  firft  ftrength  that  is  given  me  to  write, 
I  make  ufe  of  in  writing  to  you.  The  Lord  is  purging  me, 
that  I  may  bring  forth  more  fruit.  I  long  to  die,  not  that  I 
may  be  rid  ofcrofTes,  but  that  I  may  be  with  Christ.  He 
draws  me  more  and  m.ore  to  him  every  day.  I  have  had  many 
clofe  domeftic  trials  of  late.  But  thefe  words,  "  David 
ftrengthened  himfelf  in  the  Lord  his  God,"  came  with  fwect 
power  to  my  foul.  I  find,  the  nearer  I  come  to  Christ,  the 
clofer  my  trials  are.  I  have  been  fometimes  through  weak- 
nefs kept  from  preaching ;  but  when  I  have  fpokcn,  the  word 

has 


LETTERS.  20J 

l?as  come  with  power.  I  have  reafon  to  think,  that  three  per- 
fons  who  came  to  fee  the  orphan-houfe,  have  been  efFedu- 
ally  called  by  our  Lord  Jesus.  I  have  now  fome  Carolina 
yifitors  in  my  houfe  ;  two  of  them,  1  believe,  are  coming  tru- 
ly to  Jesus. — The  word  runs  like  lightning  in  Charles-Toivn. 
A  fcrious  lively  Baptift  miniftcr,  named  Tillyy  is  here  alfo ;  he 
has  preached  often  for  me,  and  lafl  Sunday  received  the  flacra- 
ment  in  our  way.  —  O  bigotry,  thou  art  tumbling  dowa 
a-pace  !  BlelTed  be  God. — Next  week,  God  willing,  I  em- 
|jark  for  Cbarles-Toiun,  fl:iaU  ftay  there  a  few  days,  and  from 
thence  purpofe  going  to  New-England.  God  wonderfully 
provides  for  my  orphans. — I  am  kept  from  every  degree  of 
QQubting  ;  nay,  the  Lord  fills  me  daily  with  a  full  afluranee 
of  faith.     He  chaftens  and  corre6ls  me,   but   it   is  all  in  love. 

0  help  me  to  praifc  him,  and  thereby  add  to  the  obligati- 
ons already  laid  on,  dear  Mr.  N , 

Ever  yours, 

G.  ir, 

LETTER    CCXIII. 

To   Mrs.   L . 

Honoured  Mother .^  Charles-Town^    ///v^.  22,  1 740. 

ALTHOUGH  I  had  not  the  pleafure  of  receiving  one 
line,  either  from  your  dear  felf,  or  from  any  other  of 
my  beloved  friends ;  yet  my  heart  was  rejoiced  juft  now  by  a 
failor,  who  told  me,  that  he  faw  and  converfed  with  you  the 
twenty-ninth  of  May  laft.  I  thank  you  for  the  falutation  fent 
to  m.e  by  him.     Indeed  I  thank  you  from  my  very  heart :  for 

1  feci  myfelf  unworthy  of  your  notice.  Every  day  I  love  and 
honour  you  more  and  more;  and  when  you  come  to  judg- 
ment, God  will  (hew  you  how  many  tears  1  have  (bed  in  fe- 
cret  for  you  and  my  dear  fifter.  O  let  them  not  be  in  vain  ! 
Honoured  Mother^  fly  to  Jesus. — Behold,  with  open  arms, 
yonder  he  ftands,  ready  to  embrace  you,  if  you  feel  your 
mifery,  and  are  willing  to  come  to  him  to  find  reft.  May  the 
great  God,  who  only  can  govern  the  wills  and  afPe^tions  of 
fmful  men,  make  you  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power  !  Ye- 
flerday  God  brought  me  hither  again.  In  a  few  days,  I  hope 
to  embark  for  KcW'Enrlanu^-ih^wQQj  God  willing,  you  may 

expert 


204  LETTERS. 

expe£l  another  letter.  For  near  fix  weeks  paft  I  have  been 
under  great  weaknefs  of  body  ;  but  notwithftanding  have  been 
Enabled  fometlmes  to  preach  with  great  power.  I  am  novyf 
fomewhat  better,  but,  without  a  miracle,  cannot  think  of  be- 
ing long  below.     Indeed,  honoured  Mother^  I   every  day  long 

to  be  diffolved  and  to  be  with  Christ.  Pray  tell  Mr,  JV , 

that  Mr.  H ,  and  L B ,  with  one  or  two  more 

of  their  relations,  I  believe,  arc  effectually  called  of  God.  We 
had  much  power  at  Savannah.  God  hath  fent  me  fome  family 
trials ;  but  all  things  are  working  for  good.  I  am,  honoured 
Mother, 

Your  ever  dutiful  fon. 


(?.  //' 


LETTER    CCXIV. 


To  the  Reverend  Mr,  J- JV . 

Defir  and  Honoured  Sir,  Charles-Town,  Jug.  25,  1740. 

LAST  night  I  had  the  plcafure  of  receiving  an  extra£l  of 
your  journal.' — This  morning  I  took  a  walk  and  read  it. 
J  pray  God  to  give  it  his  bleffing.  Many  things  I  truft  will 
prove  beneficial,  efpecially  the  account  of  yourfelf.  Only, 
give  me  leave  with  all  humility  to  exhort  yon  not  to  be  flre- 
nuous  in  oppofing  the  doctrines  of  ele^ion  Tiud final perjeverance^ 
when,  by  your  own  confefTion,  *'  you  have  not  the  witnefs  of 
the  fpirit  within  yourfelf,'*  and  confcquently  are  not  a  pro- 
per judge.     I  remember  dear  brother  E told  me  one  day, 

that  "  he  was  convinced  of  the  perfeverance  of  the  faints." 
I  told  him,  you  was  not.  He  replied,  but  he  will  be  con- 
vinced when  he  hath  got  the  fpirit  himfelf.  I  am  aflured, 
God  has  now  for  fome  years  given  me  this  living  witnefs  in  my 
foul.  I  cannot  fay,  I  have  fince  indulged  any  doubts  (at  leaft 
for  no  confiderable  time)  about  the  forgivenefs  of  my  fins ; 
nay,  I  can  fcarce  fay,  that  I  ever  doubted  at  all.  When  I 
have  been  neareft  death,  my  evidences  have  been  the  cleareft. 
I  can  fay,  I  have  been  on  the  borders  of  Canaan,  and  do  every 
day,  nay,  almoft  every  moment,  long  for  the  appearing  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  not  to  evade  fufPerings,  but  with  ^ 
fmgle  defire  to  fee  his  blefled  face.  I  feci  his  blefiTed  fpi- 
rit daily  filling  my  foul  and  body,  as  plain  as  I  feel   the  air 

whicl^ 


LETTERS,  205 

which  I  breathe,  or  the  food  I  eat.— Perhaps  the  do£lrincs  of 
eletSlion  andofiinal  pcrfeverance  hath  been  abufed,  (and  what 
dodrine  has  not,)  but  notwithftanding,  it  is  children's  bread, 
and  ought  not  in  my  opinion  to  be  with-held  from  them,  fup- 
pofing  it  is  always  mentioned  with  proper  cautions  againft  the 
abufc.  Dear  and  Honoured  Sir,  I  write  not  this  to  enter  into 
difputation.  I  hope,  at  this  time,  I  feel  fomcthing  of  the 
meeknefs  and  gentlenefs  of  Christ.  I  cannot  bear  the 
thoughts  of  oppofing  you  :   but  how  can  I   avoid   it,   if  you 

go  about  (as  your  brother  C once  faid)  to  drive  Jolm  Cal- 

vin  out  of  Brijiol.  Alas,  I  never  read  any  thing  that  Cal-* 
vin  wrote  j  my  do<5lrines  I  had  from  Christ  and  his  apoftles  ; 
I  was  taught  them  of  God  ;  and  as  God  was  pleafed  to  fend 
me  out  firft,  and  to  enlighten  me  firft,  fo  I  think  he  ftill  conti- 
nues to  do  it.  My  bufinefs  feems  to  be  chiefly  in  planting  ;  if 
God  fend  you  to  water,  I  praife  his  name. — I  wifh  you  a  thou- 

fandfold  incrcafe.  I  find,  by  young  JV 's  letter,  there  is  dif- 

puting  among  you  about  election,  and  perfeSiion. — I  pray  God 
to  put  a  ftop  to  it,  for  what  good  end  will  it  anfwer  ? — I  wifh  I 
knew  your  principles  fully  5  did  you  write  oftner,  and  more 
frankly,  it  might  have  a  better  efFe6l  than  filence  and  referve.  I 
have  lately  had  many  domeflic  trials,  and  that  about  points  of 
doctrine,  not  by  myfelf,  but  from  others  in  my  abfence.  I  daily 
wait  upon  God,  depending  on  his  promife,  that  all  things, 
even  this,  (hall  work  together  for  my  good.  Many  in  Charles- 
Town,  I  believe,  are  called  of  God.  You  may  now  find  a 
chriftian,  without  fearching  the  town  as  with  a  candle.     Mr. 

G is  lefs  furious,   at  leaft  in  public.     He  hath  expended 

all  his  ftrcngth,  and  finds  he  cannot  prevail.  Adieu,  Ho- 
noured Sir,  Adieu  !  My  health  is  better,  fmce  I  laft  left 
Charles  Town,  and  am  now  freed  from  domeftic  cares.  With 
almoft  tears  of  love  to  you,  and  the  brethren,  do  I  fubfcribe 
myfelf,  honoured  Sir, 

Your  moft  affectionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 


LETTER 


2o6  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCXV. 

To  Mrs,  J L ,  in  Brijlol 

Dear  y ,  Charles-Town.^  Aug.  26,  174O, 

I  Hope  you  and  your  little  fociety  go  on  and  proCper, 
I  hear  there  are  dlvifions  among  you.  Avoid  them 
if  poflible.  The  do6lrines  of  eledtion,  and  of  final  perfever- 
ance,  I  hold  as  well  as  you.  — But  then,  they  are  not  to  be 
contended  for  with  heat  and  paflion.  Such  a  proceeding 
will  only  prejudice  the  caufe  you  would  defend.  Pray 
fhew  this  to  your  other  friends. — Exhort  them  to  avoid  all 
clamour,  and  evil  fpeaking,  and  with  meeknefs  receive  the 
ingrafted  word  which  is  able  to  fave  your  foul.  God  has 
begun  a  great  work  here,  and  in  other  parts  of  America  ;  but 
yet,  I  believe,  I  fliall  fhortly  have  a  call  to  England,  O  pray 
it  maybe  the  divine  will,  that  I  may  have  a  profperous  jour- 
ney ;  and  that  you  may  fee  me  grown  in  grace,  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. — With 
tendereft  love  to  all,  I  am 

Your  affectionate  brother  and  fervant, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER     CCXVI. 

To  the  Right  Reverend  Father  in  GoD,  Edmund  Lord  Bijhop  of 

London. 
On  board  the  Savannah^  bound  from  Charles-Toivn  to  Bojiony 

September  — ,  174O. 
My  Lord, 

ALTHOUGH  your  Lordfliip  has  been  pleafed  to  cau- 
tion the  people  againft  running  into  thofe  extremes, 
to  which  your  Lordfliip  apprehended  my  docSlrine  would  lead 
men  ;  yet  I  am  perfuaded  that  will  not  any  way  influence 
vour  Lordfhip,  as  to  the  contents  of  this  letter.  The  on©  fin- 
gle  point  which  it  contains,  is  this  query,  "  Whether  the 
commiflary  o^  South-Carolina  has  power  given  him  from  your 
Lordfhip,  to  exercife  2iny  judicial  authority  againft  me,  or  any 
other  clergyman,  who  doth  not  belong  to  his  province  ?"  The 
reafon  of  my  putting  this  queflion,  I  fuppofe  your  Lordfhip 
will  be  apprized  of,  before  this  reaches  jowi  Lordfliip's  hands.- 

I  hav^ 


LETTERS.  207 

J  have  been  lately  cited  to  appear  in  an  eccleliaftical  court, 
ereded  by  the  Reverc7id  Mr.  G ,  fi)r  not  reading  the  com- 
mon prayer  in  the  meeting-houfc,  which  I  was  obliged  to 
preach  in  at  Charlcs-Towny  (unlefs  I  would  be  fiicnt)  becaufe 
the  commifTary  would  not  let  me  have  the  ufe  of  his  church.  I 
appeared,  and  have  appealed,  according  to  law,  to  four  of  his 
majefty's  commiflion-crsfor  reviewing  appeals,  to  know,  whether 
the  commiflary  ought  not  to  have  accepted  a  Recufaiio  judicis^ 
which  I  lodged  in  court.  This,  I  fuppofe,  they  will  deter- 
mine. I  only  defire  your  Lordfhip's  explicit  opinion  and  deter- 
mination, whether  Mr.  G ,  (fuppofing  he  hath  power  over 

his  own  clergy,)  has  authority  to  ere6l  fuch  a  court  to  arraign 
me,  who  belong  to  the  province  of  (j^ijr^/^.  The  bearer  hereof 
will  give  me  your  Lordfhip's  anfv/er.  In  favouring  me  with 
which,  your  Lordfhip  will  oblige,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfliip's  obedient  fon  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CCXVII. 

To    Mr,    P . 

My  dear  Brother^  Bojlon^  Sept.  19,  1 740. 

Ihave  juft  now  read  your  kind  letter.  BleiTed  be  the  Lord, 
for  imparting  fomewhat  of  his  divine  prefence  to  your  foul. 
O  may  he  fill  you  brimful,  and  enable  you  fo  to  preach,  that 
all  your  adverfaries  may  not  be  able  to  gainfay  or  refifl.  Never 
fear  undertaking  to  preach  without  notes ;  remember  the  pro- 
mife,  "  Lo  I  am  with  you  always,  even  to  the  end  of  the 
world.'*    By  my  maflcr's  leave,  I  propofe  to  preach  with  you, 

and   dear  brother  IV .     I  am  a  worm  and  no  man  :   I  de- 

ferve  to  be  the  outcaft  of  the  people.  On  Sunday  I  arrived  at 
Rhode-Ifmnd.  Our  Lord  called  fome.  Yefterday  I  came 
hither,  to-day  I  preached.  May  the  Lord  give  a  divine  in- 
creafe  to  the  feed  fown  !  A  great  work  is  carrying  on  at 
Charles-Toiun,  The  fpirit  of  God  is  moving  in  different  parts 
of  the  world.  O  m.y  dear,  dear  brother,  let  us  up  and  be 
doing,  and  the  Lord  will  be  v/ith  us.  The  world  is  lying 
in  the  wicked  one.  May  God  make  you  inftrumental  to  de- 
liver thoufands  from  his  curfed  flavery  !    With  difficulty  I  re- 

<lgem  ;ime  to  write  this.     Brother  B- ,  and   B •,  are 

4  with 


2o8  LETTERS. 

with  me.     I  will  endeavour  to  give  you  notice  of  my  coming. 
In  the  mean  while,  ceafe  not  praying  for 

Your  weak  and  unworthy  brother, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER    CCXVIII. 

To  Mr.  N ,  at  New-Tor k. 

My  dear  Brother^  Bojlon^  Sept.  23,  1740. 

HITHER  God  brought  me  on  Thurfday  evening  :  I 
preached  once  on  Friday^  and  twice  every  day  fmce.  The 
power  of  the  Lord  advances  fweetly.  Our  Lord,  I  believe, 
will  revive  his  work  in  the  midft  of  the  years;  he  enables  me  to 
preach  plainly.  Some  minifters,  I  hope,  will  be  quickened,  as 
well  as  people.  They  attend,  and  are  exceeding  civil,  as  alfo 
the  governor.  I  wrote  to  you  from  Rhode  IJland\  I  fhall  call 
there,  as  I  come  to  you.     On  Monday^  God  willing,  I  fhall 

fct  out  to  fee  Mr.  M ,  and  on  Monday  fortnight  hope  to 

go  to  Northampton.     All  the   packets   of    letters    came  fafe. 

God  blcfs  my  dear,  dear  Brother  A^ for  his  great  care. 

Friends  from  £w^/««^/ write  ftrange  things  ;    God,  I  believe, 

calls  me  thither.     Mr.  /^ and  the  M .f,  I  think,  arc 

fadly  erroneous  in  fomc  points  of  docSlrine.  When  I  fee  you, 
I  will  communicate  many  particulars ;  now,  I  have  fcarce 
time  to  write  this.  Our  dear  Lord  fweetly  fills  me  with  his 
prefence.  My  heaven  is  begun  indeed.  I  feaft  on  the  fatted 
ealf.  The  Lord  ftrengthens  me  mightily  in  the  inner  man, 
I  find  a  few  fouls  left  in  Sardis  that  have  not  defiled  their  gar- 
ments.    Excufe  me  to  Mr.  P ;  I  have  not  time  to  anfwer 

his  kind  letter  !   Adieu  ;  I  hope  to    be  with  you  in  about  five 

weeks. — I  pray  for  dear  Brother  T ,   that  he  may  efpoufe 

more  fouls  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — My  hearty  love 
to  all. 

Ever  yours, 

G.  7K 


LETTER 


L    E    t^    t    E    R    S.  ±0^'"^ 

LETTER    GCXIX. 

To  Mr.  A- , 

My  d£C',r  Brother  y/—  Bojlon^  Sept,  23,  T740. 

I  Thank  you  for  your  letter :  May  the  Lord  cniible  me  to 
fend  you  an  anfwer  of  peace.  Sin/efs  perfeciion^  I  think,  is 
unattainable  in  this  life.  Shew  me  a  man  that  could  ever 
juftly  fay,  "  I  am  perfc£l.'*  It  is  enough  if  we  can  fay  fo^* 
when  we  bow  down  our  heads  and  give  up  the  ghoft.  In- 
dwelling ftn  remains  till  death,  even  in  the  regenerate,  as  the 
article  of  the  church  exprefles  it.— There  is  no  man  that  liveth 
and  fmneth  not  in  thought,  word,  and  deed  :  However,  to 
affirm  fuch  a  thing  as  perfedion,  and  to  ^^ny  final perfeverancey 
what  an  abfurdity  is  this  ?  To  be  incapable  of  fmning,  and 
capable  of  being  finally  damned,  is  a  contradiction  in  terms. 
From  fuch  dcclrine  may  I  ever  turn  av/ay  !  Labour,  dear  Mr» 
J.  to  be  holy,  even  as  God  is  holy  ;  but  do  not  look  for  com- 
plete perfedion  here  below.  What  is  this,  but  in  efFedl  to' 
vacate  the  righteoufnefs  of  Christ  ?  I  hear  many  amongft  you 
who  begun  in  the  fpirit,  are  now  ending  in  the  flefh.  Christ 
hath  freely  juftified  them,  i,  e,  entitled  them  to  all  his  merits, 
and  yet  they  muft  do  fo  and  fo  to  keep  themfelves  in  a  juflified 
flate.  Alas,  this  is  forry  divinity  ;  I  have  not  fo  learned 
Christ.  No,  his  gifts  and  callings  are  without  repentance. 
Whom  he  loves,  he  loves  totbeend.  Work  I  will,  but  not 
to  keep  myfelf  in  a  juftified  ftate.  My  Lord  hath  fecurcd 
that ;  but  I  will  work  to  (hew  my  gratitude  for  his  putting 
me  into  a  juftified  ftate.  O  that  all  would  ftudy  the  covenant 
of  grace.  Dear  Mr.  A.  I  feci  that  I  love  you,  and  I  find  my- 
felf carried  cut  to  v.'rite  in  this  manner.  My  Lord  blefles 
me  with  all  fpiritual  blcffings  \  he  caufcs  me  to  rejoice  in  his 
falvation.  I  pray  him  to  carry  on  his  work  in  Londm^  and  to 
keep  his  church  from  errors;  but  there  muft  be  a  fifting  as 
well  as  a  gathering  time.  It  is  rheet  that  fuch  offences  fhould 
come.  All  fiiall  work  together  for  good  to  thgfe  who  are 
called  after  Govi' s^.purpcfe :    They  fhall  finally  be  faved.     This 

much  comforts,  dear  Brother  A , 

Your  afFedionatc  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  //<■ 

Vol,  I.  ?  LETTER 


210  L    E    T    T    «;    R    S. 

LETTER    CCXX. 

ro  H.  H.  in  Wales, 

Bojhn^  Sept,  24,  I'J^O, 

AND  Is  dear  Brother  H,  H.  yet  alive  in  body  and  foul  ? 
Bleffed  be  God,  who  caufes  thofe  that  wait  on  him  to 
renew  their  llrcngth.  I  rejoice  in  your  fuccefs  :  May  you 
mount  with  wings  like  eagles,  walk  arjd  not  be  weary,  run 
and  not  be  faint  !  You  fhall  not  be  taken  or  hurt,  till  the 
appointed  hour  is  come.  I  hope  your  convcrfation  was  blefl'ed 
to  dear  ^4r.  IV.  O  that  the  Lord  may  batter  down  his  free- 
will,   and  compel  him  to  own  his  fovereignty  and  everlafting 

love !   Some  of  i^ Lane  fociety,  I  fear,  are  running  into  fad 

errors  ;  but  this  happens  for  our  trial,  efpecially  mine.  Thofe 
that  before,  I  fuppofe,  v/ould  have  plucked  out  their  eyes  for 
me,  now  I  fufpecl,  I  fhall  fee  very  fliy,  and  avoiding  mc. 
This  is  my  comfort,  the  Lord  is  a  never-failing  friend ;  his 
truth  will  make  its  way  in  fpite  of  all  carnal  reafoning.  O 
pray  for  me  that  I  may  have  the  fpirit  of  judgment  and  a  found 
mind.  My  coming  to  England  will  try  my  fidelity  to  my 
Mafter  :  Nothino-  but  his  ftreno;th  can  enable  me  to  hear  ail 
contradidions  with  meeknefs,  and  to  preach  with  love  his  ever- 
lafting truths.  O  that  all  would  ftudy  the  covenant  of  grace! 
The  more  I  look  into  it,  the  more  is  my  foul  delighted. 
Dear  Brother  H.  adieu.  My  dear  friend  J.  S,  fits  by  and 
cordially  falutes  you.  I  hope  you  have  received  my  letters.  1 
expe6l;  to  hear  from  you  by  dear  Brother  S.  God  is  working 
powerfully  in  America,  He  fills  me  with  his  prefence,and  caufes 
me  to  go  on  my  way  rejoicing.  Grace!  grace  1  I  greet  all 
moll  afFedionately,  and  am,  dear  Brother  H, 

Yours  eternally, 

G,  VA 

LETTER    CCXXL 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  J.  W. 
Honoured  Sir^  Bojlon,  Sept.  25,  1740. 

THIS  is  fent  in  anfwer  to  your  letter  dated  March  25. — 
I  think,  I  have  for  fome  time  known  what  it  is  to  have 
righteoufncf^,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft.     Thefe,  I. 
5  believe. 


LETTERS.  211 

believe,  are  the  privileges  of  the  fons  of  God  :  But  I  cannot 
hy  I  am  free  from  indwelling  fm  ;  no,  I  find  a  law  in  my 
members  warring  againfl  the  law  of  my  mind  :  This  makes 
me  to  cry  out,  even  now,  "  Who  fhall  deliver  me  from  the 
body  of  this  death  ?"  I  thank  God,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
will.  I  cannot  fee  wherein  the  heterodoxy  of  the  article  of  our 
church  doth  confiil,  which  fays,  "  That  this  corrupcion  re- 
mains even  in  the  regenerate  i"  and  if  that  after  converfion 
we  cannot  fin  in  thought,  word  or  deed,  I  do  not  know  why 
our  Lord  taught  us  to  pray  to  our  heavenly  Father,  "  P'or- 
give  us  our  trefpalTes.'*  I  am  forry,  honoured  Sir,  to  hear 
by  many  letters,  that  you  feem  to  own  2i  fuikfs  perfeolion  \a 
this  life  attainable.  1  think  I  cannot  anfwer  you  better,  than 
a  venerable  old  minifter  in  thefe  parts  anfwered  a  Q^iaker. 
"  Bring  me  a  man  that  hath  really  arrived  to  this,  and  I  will 
pay  his  expences,  let  him  come  from  where  he  will.'*  I  knov/ 
not  what  you  may  think,  I  do  not  expert  to  fay  indwelling  fin 
is  finifhcd  and  deflroyed  in  me,  till  1  bow  down  my  head  and 
give  up  the  ghoft.  There  muft  be  fome  Amakk'iies  left  in  the 
Jfraelites  land,  to  keep  his  foul  in  acSlion,  to  keep  him  humble, 
and  to  drive  him  continually  to  JesOs  Christ  for  pardon 
and  forgivenefs.  I  know  many  abufe  this  dodrine,  and  per- 
haps wilfully  indulge  fin,  or  do  not  afpire  after  holinefs,  be- 
caufe  no  man  is  perfect  in  this  life.  But  what  of  that  ?  muft  I 
therefore  aflert  do6irines  contrary  to  the  gofpel  ?  God  forbid. 
Whether  the  feventh  to  the  Romans^  is  applicable  to  a  con- 
verted perfon  (as  many  very  eminent  faints  have  thought)  is 
not  at  all  to  the  purpofe  :  There  are  other  paflliges  of  fcrip- 
ture,  which  plainly  (hew  that  fmlefs  perfection  is  not  attainable 
here  below.  Such  as  thefc,  "  There  is  no  m.an  that  liveth 
and  finneth  not."  *'  I"  many  things  we  cfFend  all."  And  I 
know  no  fin  except  the  fin  againft  the  Holy  Ghoft,  of  which 
a  child  of  God  may  not  be  guilty,  if  God  fhould  withdraw 
his  grace. 

Whatever  you  may  think  o^ David^  the  fcripture  fays,  "  He 
was  a  man  after  God's  own  heart  j"  yet  how  did  he  fall  ? 
And  if  you  will  not  permit  Peter  to  have  been  converted  when 
he  denied  his  Mafter  ;  what  will  you  fay  to  St.  Patd?  Did 
net  he  fin,  do  you   think,   (at  leaft  were  not  his  pafiicns  irre- 

P  2  gular 


2!2  LETTER    S. 

gular,  antl  what  is  that  but  fm)  when  he  fpoke  to  the  HifMi 
Prifll,  and  called  him  whited  wall  ?  Befidcs,  dear  Sir,  vrhat  a 
fond  conceit  is  it  to  cry  u^perferiioji^  and  yet  cry  down  the  doc- 
trine o{  final  per jcver an ce  ?  But  this,  and  many  other  abfurdi- 
ties  you  will  run  into,  becaufe  you  will  not  own  EleHion  : 
And  you  will  not  own  Elei^^ion,  bceaufe  you  cannot  own  \t 
without  believing  the  doiSlrine  of  Rsprobation,  What  then 
is  there  in  reprobation  fo  horrid  ?  I  fee  no  blaf|)hemy  in  hold- 
ing that  dodrine,  if  rightly  explained.  If  God  might  have 
pailcd  by  all,  he  may  pafs  by  fome.  Judge  whether  it  is  not 
a  greater  blafphemy  to  fay,  "  Christ  died  for  fouls  now  in 
hell,"  Surely,  dear  Sir,  you  do  not  believe  there  will  be  a 
general  gaol  delivery  of  damned  fouls  hereafter.  O  that  you 
would  ftudy  the  covenant  of  grace  !  O  that  you  were  truly 
convinced  of  fin,  and  brought  to  the  foot  of  fovereign  grace  ! 
Elifna  Cole  on  Gob's  /over  eignty,  and  Veritas  Redux,  written  by 
Do6tor  Ediuards,  are  well  worth  your  reading.  But  I  have 
done  J  if  you  think  fo  meanly  of  Bunyan,  and  the  Puritan 
writers,  I  do  not  wonder  that  you  think  me  wrong.  I  find  your 
fermon  has  had  its  expected  fuccefs  ;  it  hath  fet  the  aation  a 
difputing ;  you  will  have  enough  to  do  now  to  anfwer 
pamphlets ;  two  I  have  already  feen.  O  that  you  would  be 
more  cautious  in  cafting  lots  !  O  that  you  would  not  be  too 
jafh  and  precipitant  !  If  you  go  on  thus,  honoured  Sir^  how 
can  I  concur  with  you  ?  It  is  impoffible  ;  I  muft  fpeak  what 
I  know\ — Thus  I  write  out  of  the  fulnefs  of  my  heart  :  I  feel 
niyfelf  to  be  a  vile  fmner. — I  look  to  Christ  ;  I  mourn  be- 
caufe  I  have  pierced  him.  Honoured  Sir^  pray  for  me. 
'1  he  Lord  be  with  your  dear  foul.  About  Spring  you  may 
expeill  to  fee. 

Ever,  ever  yours  in  Christ, 
G.IK 

LETTER     CCXXII. 

To  Mr.  G L . 

My  dear  Friend  and  Br  other ,  Bojhn,  Sept.  26,  1740. 

I  Wrote  to  you  about  a  month  ago  from  Charks-Tcwn.^-^ 
Since  I  came  here  I  have  received  two  letters  from  you. 
May  the  great  God  of  heaven  and  earth  blefs  your  dear  foul 
for  thus  aflifling  his  poor  unworthy  fcivant  :   A  fen fe  of  my 

ingratitude 


LETTERS.  tzij 

ingratitude  almoft  melts  me  into  a  flood  of  tears. — Indeed  I  am 
the  very  chief  of  fmners.— O  the  love,  the  fovereign,  diftin- 
guifhing,  everlafting  love  of  God  my  Saviour  !  Praife  him, 
praife  him,  dear  Mr.  L ,  vv^ith  all  your  foul. — I  hope  no- 
thing will  caufe  a  divifion  between  me  and  McfTrs.  J^'' s : 

But  I  muft  fpealc  what  I  know,  and  confute  error  vvhcrefo- 
ever  I  find  it.  About  Spring  I  hope  to  come  over  if  the  Lord 
will. — Be  pleafcd  to  inform  my  friends,  that  lafl  Simday  was 
fevennight  I  arrived  at  Rhodc-ljland^  where  I  preached  and  read 
prayers  in  the  church  on  Monday  and  Tuefday  to  very  large 
and  afFeded  auditories. — On  JFedncfday  I  preached  at  BriJIol^ 
in  my  way  to  Bcjhn, — On  Tburfday  night  I  got  there,  and 
on  Friday  preached,  and  have  preached  once  or  twice  every 
day  fmce. — Almoft  all  the  minifters,  and  vaft  bodies  of  people, 
have  been  continually  prefling  to  hear  the  word  of  God, 
fometimes  in  the  fields,  and  fometimes  in  the  meeting-houfes. 
My  health  is  much  reftored  by  the  coolnefs  of  the  air. — I  in- 
tend ftaying  about  a  month  in  thefe  parts,  then  to  go  to  Phi- 
ladelphia by  land,  from  thence  to  Georgia  by  water,  and  I  hope 
to  embark  for  England  the  beginning  of  the  Spring. — You  fee 
by  this,  dear  friend,  how  our  Lord  works  by  my  unworthy 
hands.  Minifters  and  people,  I  believe,  will  be  much  quick- 
ened.— I  hope  your  dear  foul  profpers.  For  Christ's  fake 
avoid  difputing ;  ftudy  your  heart  and  the  fcriptures  ;  get  nearer 
and  nearer  to  Christ,  he  will  lead  you  into  all  truth.  My 
moft  tender  love  to  all;  if  opportunity  any  way  ofters,  every 

Jetter  received  fljall  be  anfwered  by,  dear  dear  Mr.  L , 

The  meaneft  of  al|  your  chriftian  friends, 

LETTER    CCXXIIL 

To  Mr.  I .. 

My  dear  Brother^  I ,  Jiojlon^  Sept.  26,  1740. 

I  Thank  you  for  your  kind  letter.  It  is  the  firft  I  have  re- 
ceived from  you  fince  I  left  England. — I  blefs  God  the 
work  goes  on  in  TorkJJnre. — May  our  glorious,  fin-forgiving 
Lord  blefs  you  and  your  fpiritual  children  more  and  more  ! 
I  find,  our  friends  arc  got  into  disputing  one  with  another. — 
O  that  the  God  of  peace  may  put  a  ftop  to  it  !  I  wilh  many 
piay  not  be  building  on  a  falfe  foundation,  and  reft  in  a  falfe 

P  3  peace. 


214  LETTERS. 

peace.  They  ov^n  free  juft'if cation^  and  yet  feem  to  think, 
that  their  continuance  in  a  juftified  ftate  depends  on  their  do- 
ings, and  their  wills. — This,  I  think,  is  eftabliftiing  a  righte- 
oulners  of  our  own.  My  dear  brother,  if  we  fearch  the  fcrip- 
tures,  we  (hall  find  that  the  ^oi^  jujiified  implies  not  only 
pardon  of  fin,  but  alfo  all  its  confequences.  — ."  Thus  (fays 
Saint  Paul)  thofe  whom  he  jufiificd,  them  he  alfo  glorified  ,'* 
fo  that  if  a  man  was  once  juftified,  he  remains  fo  to  all  eternity, 
— Here  lies  the  anchor  of  all  my  hopes.  —  Our  LoRO  having 
once  loved  me,  he  will  love  me  to  the  end.  —  This  fills  me 
with  joy  unfpeakable  and  full  of  glory. — I  now  walk  by  faith. 
— I  work  not  to  keep  myfelf  in  a  juftified  ftate,  (for  men  or 
devils  can  never  pluck  me  out  of  Christ's  hands,)  but  to  ex- 
prefs  my  love  and  gratitude  for  what  Jesus  hath  done  for  my 
foul.  This,  I  think,  is  what  the  apoftle  calls  ^'  faith  working 
by  love."  My  dear  brother,  my  heart's  defire  and  prayer  to 
God  is,  that  we  may  all  think  and  fpeak  the  fame  things.  — 
For,  if  we  iire  divided  among  ourfelves,  what  an  advantage 
will  fatan  get  over  us  ?  Let  us  love  one  another,  excite  all  to 
come  to  Christ  without  exception,  and  our  Lord  will  (hew 
us,  who  are  his.  The  work  of  God  goes  on  exceedingly  in 
America.  The  Lord  is  pleafcd  to  manifeft  himfelf  unto  my 
foul  more  and  more.  I  am  a  naughty,  ftuhborn  child  ;  but  my 
dear  Lord  will  have  mercy  becaufe  he  will  have  mercy.  It  is 
owing  to  his  diftinguifliing  love  that  I  am  not  hardened.  Here 
is,  and  I  believe  will  be  a  great  quickning  in  thefe  parts. — . 
The  cloud  feems  to  be  moving.  Perhaps  in  the  Spring  we 
may  meet  face  to  face.     With  difficulty  I    get   time  to  write 

this,   but  I  muft  anfwer  dear   Brother   / 's  letter. — May 

the  Lord  jEsus.be  continually  with  your  fpirit,  and  make  your 
foul  brimful  of  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghoft.  I  love 
you  in  the  bowels  of  the  crucified  Lamb.  May  he  unite  us 
more  and  m.ore  intimately  to  his  dear  felf,  and  to  one  another. 
Salute  all  that  love  him  in  fincerity. — Brethren,  pray  for  us.— « 
That  you  may  be  kept  by  God's  power  to  eternal  falvation,  is 
the  prayer  of 

Your  moft;  affe^llonate,  though  unworthy  brother  and 
poor  weak  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 

I.ETTER 


LETTERS.  215 

LETTER    CCXXIV. 

To  Mr.  TV D . 

Dear  Brother  W ,  Bojion^  September  28,    1740. 

I  Thank  you  for  your  klatl  letter  from  OJJk  ;  I  wi(h  it  was 
written  with  more  life.  I  fear  you  are  turning  almoft 
to  a  fpirit  of  bondage:  but  it  is  good  for  you  to  be  fifted, 
to  make  an  experienced  minifter  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  could 
not  but  fmile,  to  find  you  wink  at  the  deceney  of  my  drefs. 
Alas  !  my  brother,  I  have  known  long  fmce  what  it  is  to  ba 
in  that  ftate  you  are  (in  my  opinion)  about  to  enter  into. 
I  myfelf  thought  once  that  chriftianity  required  me  to  go 
nafty,  I  neglected  myfelf  as  much  as  you  would  have  mc,  for 
above  a  twelvemonth  :  but  when  God  gave  me  the  fpiiic  of 
adoption,  I  then  drefled  decently^  as  you  call  it,  out  of  prin- 
ciple :  and  I  am  more  and  more  convinced,  that  the  Lord 
would  have  me  ad,  in  that  refpe<Sl-,  as  I  do.  But  I  am  almoft 
afhamed  to  mention  any  fuch  thing  :  rather  let  us  talk  and 
write  of  the  love  of  Jesus  ;  "  Let  us  ftand  faft  in  the  liberty 
wherewith  Jesus  Christ  hath  made  us  free,  and  not  be  again 
entangled  in  a  yoke  of  bondage."  God  only  knov/s  whether 
you  have  done  right  in  leaving  the  univerfity,  or  in  declining 
to  exhort.  If  you  do  not  preach  till  you  are  perfectly  free 
from  all  fin,  I  believe  you  v/ill  never  preach  again.  I  could 
never  hear  of  fuch  a  minifler  or  chriilian  yet.  My  dear  bro-- 
ther,  I  fpeak  freely  to  you,  becaufe  I  love  you  in  the  bovv^cly 
of  Jesus  Christ,  He  fent  his  difciples  to  preach  before  they 
were  perfeft  ;  nay,  when  they  were  weak  in  grace.  Fxercifc 
the  talents  you  have,  and  that  is  the  way  to  get  more.  Thu:j 
has  God  dealt  v/ith  me  for  thcfc  feven  years.  "  To  him  tha; 
harh,  diall  be  given.'*  Many  of  our  friends  talk  againft  elec- 
tion :  a  good  rcafo-n  may  be  given.  I  believe  they  have  never 
taken  pains  .0  fearch  into  the  true  {late  of  the  cafe.  What  if 
fome  abuf.  that  do^Slrme  ;  is  it  therefore  falfc  ?  No  ;  by  no 
means.  I  am  periuaded,  if  any  ofour  friends  would  examine: 
their  experiences,  they  would  find  that  Jesus  Christ  freely 
prevented  them  by  his  grace  ;  that  he  compelled  them  to  come 
in  ;  and  that  it  is  not  ov/ing  to  themfclves,  but  to  the  will 
$nd  promife  of  God,  that  they  are  now  kept   in  a  ftate  of 

P  4.  grace. 


2i6  LETTERS. 

grace.  But  I  will  fay  no  more.  My  dear  brother,  I  love 
you.  May  the  Lord  lead  you  into  all  truth.  Our  dear 
Maftcr  is  doing  wonders  among  us.     Praife  him    luftily,   and 

with   a   good    courage.     Adieu.     Dear  J S falutes 

you  and  the  brethren,  as  does 

Yours  affectionately, 

G.  rp\ 

LETTER    CCXXV. 

To  the  Rev,  Air,  Z M -. 


Reverend  and  dear  Brothery  Bojlm^  Sept.  28,  1 740. 

I  Received — I  felt  your  letter.  Surely  there  is  a  fympathy 
between  fouls  that  have  drank  into  the  fame  fpirit.  Go3 
willing,  I  purpofe  to  come  and  fee  you  ;  and  will  endeavour  to 
fend  you  timely  notice  :  but  oh  do  not  expe6l  too  great  things 
from  me  ;  for  if  you  do,  who  knows  but  my  Lord  may  defert 
me  ;  and  then  what  am  I  ?  Excufe  the  brevity  of  this.  So 
many  perfons  come  to  me  under  convi6i:ions,  and  for  advice, 
that  I  have  fcarce  tim.e  to  eat  bread.  Wonderful  things  are 
doing  here.  The  word  runs  like  lightning.  Dagon  daily 
falls  before  the  ark.  I  know  you  will,  in  fpirit,  pray  that  a 
due  fcnfc  of  his  own  vilencfs  may  be  continually  given  to 
Your  afFcclionatc,  though  unworthy, 

brother  and  fervant  in  our  glorious  Emmanuel 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCXXVI. 

ro  Mr,  IV ,  at  Br\pi. 

Tiear  Brother  W — ,  Bojhn^  Sept,  28,  1740. 

WHAT  mean  you  by  difputing  in  all  your  letters  ? 
May  God  give  you  to  know  yourfelf,  and  then 
ypu  will  not  plead  for  ahfolute  perfeSilon  ;  or  call  the  docSlrine 
of  cletStion  a  ^'  dodrine  of  devils."  My  dear  brother,  take 
heed  ;  fee  you  are  in  Christ  a  new  creature.  Beware  of  a 
falfe  peace  ;  ftrive  to  enter  in  at  the  ftrait  gate  j  and  give 
all  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  elcdion  fure.  Remem- 
ber you  are  but  a  babe  in  Christ,  if  fo  much.  Be  humbles 
talk  little,  think  and  pray  much.  Let  God  teach  you,  and 
he  will  lead  you  into  all  truth.     I  love  you  heartily  :  I  pray 

you 
4 


LETTERS.  217 

you  may  be  kept  from  error,  both  in  principle  and  pradlice. 
Salute  all  the  brethren.  If  you  muft  difpute,  ftay  till  you  are 
mafter  of  your  fubjed  5  other  wife  you  will  hurt  the  caufe  you 
would  defend.  Study  to  adorn  the  gofpel  of  our  Lord  in  all 
things  ;  and  forget  not  to  pray  for 

Your  afFedlionate  friend  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CCXXVir. 

To  Mr,  G L . 

My  dear  Brother  L ,  Bojhn^  OSloher  9,   174O. 

I  Write  to  you  again  by  this  fhip,  though  I  have  fcarce 
time  to  write  a  line.  God  works  by  me,  I  think,  more 
than  ever.  I  am  quite  well  in  bodily  health.  Minifters  as 
well  as  people  are  ftirred  up,  and  the  government  is  exceeding 
civil.  In  (hort,  God  is  doing  greater  things  than  can  be 
exprefled.  Oh  exhort  all  to  pray,  and  to  give  thanks  for  me 
with  their  whole  hearts.  The  bearer  brings  the  authentic 
copy  of  my  appeal  ;  I  fent  you  another  copy  before  from  Ca^ 
rolina*  Be  pleafed  to  keep  this  I  have  now  lent,  till  you  hear 
of  my  coming  to  England:  if  I  come  in  the  Spring,  I  will 
lodge  it  myfelf  J  if  not,  be  pleafed  to  lodge  it  for  me,  and  I 

will  pay  all  expences.     O  dear  brother  L ,  what  a  fcene 

of  labours  and  fufterings  lies  before  me  !  My  dear  Jesus  will 
make  me  more  than  conqueror  over  all :  he  ftrengthens  and  com- 
forts, he  converfes  with  me  by  night  and  by  day :  he  gives  me 
all  peace  and  joy  in  believing.     I  pray  God  to  keep  our  dear 

brother  5 and  others  from  a  falfe  ftillnefs.     I  am  forry  to 

hear  fuch  errors  are  rifen  amongft  the  brethren.  Adieu  ;  the 
Lord  be  with  your  fpirit.  I  have  already  colle£led  upwards 
of  four  hundred  pounds  fterling  for  the  Orphan-houfe.  God 
ihews  me  that  America  muft  be  my  place  for  a6lion.  Once 
more  adieu.     Ceafe  not  to  pray  for, 

Ever,  ever  yours, 

G.  W. 


LETTER 


2i8  LETTER    S. 

LETTER    CCXXVIIL 

To  Mr.  J //- 


Newhaven^  OSf,  24,  1740. 
My  very  dear  Friend  and  Brother , 

YOUR  letter,  juft  now  brought  to  me  by  dear  brother 
N ',  gave  me  great  comfort.  With  fear  and  trem- 
bling, ever  fmce  the  late  difputations,  have  1  opened  letters 
fent  from  Sa-jannah-,  but  blefTed  be  God,  our  dear  Lord  is 

with  my  dear  friend  H .     Bleficd   be  God,  my   family 

dwell  together  in  unity.  The  God  of  love  fill  you  with  all 
peace  and  joy  in  believing.  I  hope  a  fupply  for  your  then  pre^- 
ient  wants,  came  to  you  foon  after  you  fent  your  letters  :  fmce 
that,  I  have  fent  from  Bofion  100 1.  fterling ;  next  week  I 
hope  to  fend  again  from  New-York^  and  before  Chrijlmas  I 
truft  I  fhall  fee  you  face  to  face.  Wonderful  things  God 
does  for  me.  I  am  enabled  to  preach  and  travel  better  than 
ever.  There  has  been  joy  in  heaven,  I  believe,  over  many 
fouls  repenting.     There  are  fome  hopes  of  dear,  dear  brother 

N 's  coming  with  me.     Mr.  B ,    one  of  the  young 

minifters  of  Long  JJland^  with  his  wife,  accompanies  me  alfo  ; 
and  another  fettled  chriftian,  who  holds  and  experiences  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  O  that  all  my  family  may  be  thus 
minded  !  I  fuppofe  by  this  time  you  know  how  matters  are 

determined  for  me,  if  Mr.  C is  arrived.     God  keeps  me 

in  fufpcnfe  :  fufpenfe  did  I  fay  ?  BlefTed  be  his  holy  name,  I 
am  quite  eafy  ;  I  am  perfuaded  he  will  chnfe  for  me  a  daugh- 
ter of  Abraha?n.  I  know  not  but  it  may  be  the  divine 
will  that  you  fhould  abide  in  Georgia^  whilft  I  go  to  England. 
Be  refigncd  :  fee  if  GoD  docs  not  bring  all  things  about  for 
your  good  :  there  is  but  little  comfort  to  be  expected  in 
England.  I  find  I  muft,  if  I  am  faithful,  oppofe  the  errors  of 
many  who,  I  believe,  fear  God  :  O  that  I  may  do  it  with 
meeknefs  and  wifdom.  Methinks  I  now  long  to  be  with  you 
all  at  Savannah.  Pray  for  my  fpecdy  pafiage.  lam  glad  God 
is  fcourging  out  the  children  o^  Belial :  you  have  often  heard 
me  fay  God  would  do  fo.  Never  fear  ;  a  remnant  will  be 
left,  which  (hall  take  root  downwards,  and  bear  fruit  upwards, 
and  yet  fill  the  land.     My  dear  brother,  adieu  :  I  am  called 

away. 


LETTERS.  ^i^ 

awav.  I  love  you  more  folidly  than  ever.  Dear  J S , 

Mr.  F ,  and  P ,  love  you  too  :  we  travel  very  com- 
fortably :  thoufands  of  prayers  are  continually  put  up  for  mc 
and  mine.  My  love  to  all,  without  exception.  Feed  the 
iambs,  fludy  the  purity  of  their  hearts,  and  thereby  rejoice 
the  foul  of 
Yours  moft  affectionately  and  eternally  in  Christ  Jesus, 

LETTER     CCXXIX. 

To  Mr.  y l^' . 

Dear  and  hojioured  S:r,  Philadelphia,   Nov,  9,  1 740. 

I  Received  your'.^,  dated  March  li,  this  afternoon.  Oh 
that  we  were  of  one  mind  :  for  I  am  yet  perfuaded  you 
greatly  err.  You  have  fct  a  mark  you  will  never  arrive  at,  till 
you  come  to  glory.  I  think  few  enjoy  fuch  continued  manifefta- 
tions  of  God's  prefence  as  I  do,  and  have  done,  for  fome  years  ; 
but  I  dare  not  pretend  to  faj'  I  fliall  be  abfolutely  perfct^l:.  O, 
dear  Sir,  many  of  God's  children  are  grieved  at  your  prin- 
ciples ;  O  that  God  may  give  you  a  fight  of  his  free,  fove- 
reign,  and  ele6ling  love  !  But  no  more  of  this  :  why  will  you 
compel  me  to  write  thus  ?  why  will  you  difpute  ?  I  am  wil- 
ling to  go  with  you  to  prifon,  and  to  death  ;  but  I  am  not 
willing  to  oppofe  you.  My  heart  is  now  much  affeded  :  in- 
deed I  love  and  honour  you.  Dear,  dear  Sir,  ftudy  the  cove- 
nant of  grace,  that  you  may  be  confident  v/ith  yourfelf :  haflen 
O  Lord,  the  blelTcd  time  !  I  fancy  I  fnall  embark  for  Eng- 
/i7;2^  about  Spring  ;  but  am  not  yet  determined.  God  fhews 
me  his  goodnefs  plcntcoufly  every  day.  I  dwell  in  Christ, 
and  Christ  in  me  :  glory  be  to  fovercign  grace.  I  feem  to 
have  a  new  body,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  greatly  enriches  my 
foul.  O  I  am  a  poor  finner  !  but  our  Lord  frequently  mani- 
fcfts  himielf  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  it  throws  me  into  an  agony 
which  my  body  is  almoft  too  weak  to  bear.  Honoured  Sir, 
adieu.  O  build  up,  but  do  not  lead  into  error,  the  fouls  once 
committed  to  the  charge  of 

Your  affedionate,  unworthy  brother  and  fcrvant, 

in  the  loving  Jesus, 

G.  fV. 

LETTER 


220  LETTERS. 

•      LETTER     CCXXX. 

To  Mr,  H H ,  in  Wales. 

PJ/dadelphia^  Nov.  9,    1740. 
My  very  dear  Brother  H , 

I  Wrote  to  you  from  Bojion,  Your  letter,  written  near  a 
twelve-month  ago,  came  to  my  hand  this  afternoon.  My 
foul  is  knit  to  you:  we  both  fpealc  and  think  the  fame  things. 
The  Lord  be  with  your  fpirit.  Jesus  manifefts  forth  his 
glory  daily  in  thefe  parts.  Though  I  am  fuch  a  vile,  worth- 
3efs,  ungrateful  wretch,  yet  the  Lord  fills  me  out  of  his  di- 
vme  fulnefs  day  by  day.  His  word  is  like  a  fire,  and  a  ham- 
mer :  lafl  week  I  faw  many  quite  Uruck  down.  Our  Lord 
is  working  upon  little  children.  America^  ere  long,  will  be 
famous  for  chriftians.     Surely  the  candleftick  will   fhortly  be 

removed  from  England.     Little  did  I  think,  when  Mr.  E 

y wrote,  that   I  fhould   preach  in  all    the  chief  places 

q{  America  :  but  that  is  now  done  ;  glory  be  to  rich,  free,  and 
fovereign  grace  !  Perhaps  about  Spring  I  may  embark  for  my 
native  country  :  the  Lord  vouchfafe  us  a  happy  meeting.  O 
WaleSy  thou  art  dear  to  my  foul  !  My  love  to  all  the  brethren. 

Dear  brother  H ^5  I   pray  God  you  may  profper,   even 

as  your  foul  profpers.  Expect  another  journal  fliortly  :  but 
wait  till  we  come  to  glory,  fully  to  fee  and  hear  what  God 
hath  done  for 

Your  afredionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER    CCXXXL 

Xo  hii  Excellency  Jonathan  Belcher,  Efqy  in  Bofton, 

Philadelphia,  Nov.  9,  17 40. 

TFIOUGH  late,  I  now  fnatch  a  few  moments  to  fend 
your  excellency  my  acknowledgments  for  all  honours 
received  at  Bojhn:  they  are  much  upon  my  heart.  I  pray 
God  to  reward  your  excellency  a  thoufand-fold. 

Great  things  hath  the  glorious  Emmanuel dont  for  me  2.rs!i  his 
people  on  the  way  :  the  word  has  been  attended  with  much 
power.     Surely  our  Lord  intends  to  fet  America  in  a  fiomc. 

This 


LETTERS.  ill 

This  week  Mr.  G T purpofcs  to  let  out  for  Bojion^ 

in  order  to  blow  up  the  divine  fire  lately  kindled  there.  I 
recommend  him  to  your  excellency  as  a  folid,  judicious,  and 
zealous  minifter  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  :  he  will  be  ready 
to  preach  daily  :  I  fuppofe  his  brethren  will  readily  open  their 
doors  :  may  the  Lord  at  the  fame  time  open  the  people's 
hearts,  that  they  may  diligently  attend  to  the  things  thatfhall 

be  fpokcn.     Dear  Mr.  R grows  in  grace:  I  left  him  at 

Brunfivicky  full  of  gratitude  for  his  late  journey.  I  am  per- 
fuaded  it  was  of  God.  I  hope  he  will  be  inftrumental  \i\ 
quickening  both  miniftcrs  and  people.  He  is  worthy  of  your 
excellency's  particular  regard  :  under  God  he  may  need  ir. 
I  expe6l  he  will  foon  be  reviled  and  perfecuted  for  his  blef- 
fed  Mafter's  fake  :  may  the  Lord  enable  him  to  rejoice  and 
be  exceeding  glad.  Dear  Sir,  the  welfare  of  dear  BoJIott 
people,  efpecially  the  welfare  of  your  own  foul,  lies  upon  me 
night  and  day.  I  remember  your  tears  :  I  remember  your  ex- 
cellency's words,  "  Mr.  IVh'itefield^  pray  that  I  may  hunger 
and  thirft  after  righteoufnefs."  O  how  did  thefe  words  re- 
joice me  !  for  I  thought  your  excellency  wanted  a  more  clear 
view  of  your  own  vilenefs,  and  of  the  all-fufnciency  of  Jesus 
Christ  \  1  mean  a  more  clear,  experimental  view  :  for  what 
is  all  head-knowledge  without  that  of  the  heart  ?  it  only  fettles 
people  more  upon  their  lees.  May  God  give  you  to  fee  and 
to  follovi^  the  fimplicity  of  the  blefled  Jesus.  Whilft  you  are 
in  the  world,  may  you  not  be  of  it :  may  you  be  dead  to  mag- 
nificence, and  alive  to  nothing  but  what  leads  you  diredly  to 
your  God. 

HGnourecl  Sir^  I  make  no  apology  for  this  freedom  :  your 
excellency  bid  me  not  fpare  rulers;  no,  not  the  chief  of  them. 
Indeed  I  long  after  your  falvation  ;  O  that  I  could  do  any 
thing  to  promote  it !  If  my  prayers,  or  any  thing  within  my 
power  may  be  inftrumental  thereunto,  your  excellency  may 
command,  honoured  Sir, 

Your  Excellency's  obliged  humble  fervant, 

G.  rr. 


LETTER 


222  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCXXXII. 

To  Mr.  M ,  at  London, 

My  dear  Brother^  ' Philadilphia^  Nov.  lo,  1 740. 

STILL  my  Lord  fliews  me  greater  things.  At  New 
Tcrk  the  Holy  Cihoft  came  dov/n  liice  a  mighty  rufiiing 
wind.  At  Bajhcnridge  frill  a  greater  awakening  among  young 
and  old.  One  that  received  Christ  cried  out,  "  He  is  come ! 
He  is  come  !"  ^V.  The  poor  creature  was  wrapped  up  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  :  and  borh  there  and  at  New-Tork  my  foul  was 
taken  almoft  out  of  the  body.  At  Newark  the  Lord  worked 
wonderfully  amongft  fome  young  men  ;  and  here  at  Philadel- 
phm  the  word  runs  very  fwiftly.  This  afternoon,  how  beau- 
tiful did  the  Lord  appear  in  his  fancStuary  I  I  would  cry  out, 
*'  How  amiable  are  thy  dwellings,  thou  Lord  of  hofts  !'*  In 
feveral  places,  almoft  as  large  as  Northampton^  are  many  faith- 
ful labourers.  We  all  think  and  fpeak  the  fame  things  :  O 
that  it  was  fo  at  London!  The  Lord  enables  me  to  confute 
error  wherever  I  fee  it.  Pray  for  me,  that  I  may  be  made 
faithful  lo  my  Lord  and  Mailer  :  he  is  dearer  to  me  every 
day  :  he  will  have  mercy,  becaufe  he  will  have  m^rcy.     See 

brother  L 's  letter.     Another  journal  comes  out  fhortly. 

My  hearty  love  to  all.     Stand   faft   in   the   faith  :   quit  your- 
felves  like  men  :   be  ftrong.  Above  all,  give  thanks  to  God  ; 

and  pray  in  behalf  of,  dear  Air.  M , 

Your  moft  affectionate  brother  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CCXXXIIL 

To  Mr.  G L . 

Dear  Brother  L ,  Philadelphia^  Nov,  10,  1740. 

I  Wrote  to  you  lad  v/eek  from  Nevj-Tork.  You  may  give 
friends  this  brief  account  of  me  :  On  \:\^  Saturday  evening  I 
arrived  at  this  place,  having  preached  at  Statcn  Ijiand^  Newark, 
Bajkenridge^  New  Bru7ijwick,  and  Trenton,  in  my  way  hither 
from  Ne7v  Tor L  A  wonderful  prefence  of  God  was  obferv- 
able  at  Neut-Tork,  Bafienridge^  '^i^d  Neusrk,     I  preached  here 

twice 


LETTER    a  a23 

twice  yeflerdny,  and  alfo  to-day,  in  a  large  houfe  built  by  the 
people  fince  I  v/as  here  laft.  It  is  an  hundred  feet  long,  and 
feventy  feet  wide  ;  and  is  intended  for  a  fchool,  as  well  as  a 
place  for  public  worfhip.  The  walls  are  brick,  and  the  roof 
is  now  almoft  ready  to  be  put  up.  God  hath  rernarkably  ap- 
peared in  the  carrying  on  the  building  ;  and  the  holy  fpirit 
hath  fwcetly  moved  on  the  hearers  fouls  every  time  I  preached 
in  it.  I  intend,  God  willing,  to  flay  here  this,  and  to  em- 
bark for  Georgia  the  latter  end  of  next  week  ;  and  propofc, 
God  willing,  to  return  to  England  for  a  (hort  time,  in  the 
Spring. 

The  Lord  highly  favours  me  ;  I  am  more  (ick  of  myfelf, 
and  more  in  love  with  Christ  daily  :  he  is  a  dear,  dear  Maf- 
ter  :  Oh  that  all  would  love  him  with  all  their  hearts  [  Adieu: 
it  is  late.     The  Lord  be  with  your  fpirit. 

Your  affe6tionate  friend,  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  ir. 

LETTER    CCXXXIV. 

To  the  Rev.  Air,  D ,  at  New  Brunjwick» 

My  very  dear  Brother^  Salem^  Nov,  20,  1740. 

EXCESS  of  bufinefs,  not  a  want  of  love,  prevented  my  writ- 
ing to  you  from  Philadelphia.  I  feel  that  I  love  you  in  the 
bowels  of  the  dearjefus,  our  ever  blefled  and  glorious  Em?rianuel : 
he  hath  done  great  things  for  me  fince  you  left  us.  Yefterday  at 
Cohanfte  the  fpirit  of  the  Lord  moved  over  the  whole  congre- 
gation :  what  reafon  have  we  to  be  thankful  for  the  great 
things  we  both  fee  and  hear  I  IVIy  dear  brother,  indeed  I  de- 
fire  to  lie  in  the  duft.  O  how  good  is-  my  Lord  to  me  ! 
thoughts  cannot  conceive,  or  words  exprefs  it  !  I  long  to  be 
in  glory,  that  I  may  praife  him  as  I  would.  I  rejoice  to  hear 
that  the  Lord  is  with  you.  Shortly,  I  believe,  you  will  evan- 
gelize. All  friends  kindly  falute  you.  Adieu.  In  gretit 
hafte,  I  am 

Your  very  affedlionate,  though  unworthy  brother 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  JV. 


LETTER 


224  LETTERS. 

LETTER     CCXXXV- 

To  Mr,  J H . 

Bohemia^  (Maryland)  Nov.  24,   1740. 
My  very  dear  Brother, 

I  Rejoice  to  hear  that  you  are  married :   I  falute  your  wife 
and  my  fifter  in  Christ  :  may  you  love  one  another,  as 
Christ  and  his  church.    I  have  lately  converfed  clofely  with 

P B :    alas  !   we   differ  widely  in    many   refpe61:s  ; 

therefore,  to  avoid  difputation  and  jealoufies  on  both  fides,  it 
is  beft  to  carry  on  the  work  of  God  apart.  The  divifions 
among  the  brethren  fometimes  grieve,  but  do  not  furprize  me. 
How  can  it  be  otherwife,  when  teachers  do  not  think  and 
fpeak  the  fame  things  ?  God  grant  we  may  keep  up  a  cordial 
undiflembled  love  towards  each  other,  notwithftanding  our 
different  opinions.  O  how  do  I  long  for  heaven  !  Surely, 
there  will  be  no  divifions,  no  ftrife  there,  but  who  fliall  fmg 
with  moft  afFedion  to  the  Lamb  that  fitteth  upon  the  throne. 
Dear  James,  there  I  hope  to  meet  thee  ;  for  the  dear  Jesus, 
I  believe,  hath  locked  thee  faft  in  his  almighty  arms.  Lean 
thou  on  his  facred  bofom  night  and  day  ;  keep  clofe  to  him, 
and  be  what  I  long  to  be,  a  little  child.  Adieu.  I  am  ready 
to  weep  tears  of  love.  My  dear  brother,  I  (liould  be  glad  to 
wafh  any  of  the  brethren's  feet  :  indeed  I  am  now  willing  to 
be  the  fervant  of  all.  The  more  the  Lord  honours  me,  the 
more  I  feel  my  unworthinefs.  I  am  fometimes  fick  of  love, 
and  often,  often  fick  of  felf.  O  that  God  fhould  have  mercy 
on  fuch  a  fmner  1  Help  me,  dear  James,  to  praife  my  Saviour. 
A  glorious  church  is  raifing  in  America,  The  Lord 
mightily  reveals  his  arm.  It  would  pleafe  you  to  fee  his  out- 
goings, his  {lately  fteps  in  the  great  congregation.  I  only 
want  fellow-labourers.  I  look  to  Jesus  for  this,  and  for 
every  thing.  I  defire  you  to  print  nothing  againft  your  con- 
fcience  :  only  do  not  immediately  cenfure  every  thing  that 
m^y  not  feem  clear  to  you  :  our  Lord  may  guide  me,  even 
into  things  which  as  yet  you  may  not  fee  into.  The  day  of 
judgment  will  difcover  all.     Adieu. 

£ver,  ever  yours  in  our  blcffed  Emmanuel, 

G.  rr. 

LETTER 


LETTERS.  225 

LETTER    CCXXXVL 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  J.  JV. 

Bohemia  [Maryland)  Nov,  24,  174O. 
Dear  and  Hon.  Sir, 

LAST  night  brother  G— —  brought  me  your  two  kind 
letters.  O  that  there  may  be  harmony,  and  very  inti- 
mate union  between  us  !  Yet  it  cannot  be,  fmce  you  hold 
univerfal  Redemption.  But  no  more  of  this.  Perhaps,  iu 
Springs  we  may  fee  each  other  face  to  face.  This  evening, 
God  willing,  I  propofe  to  embark  for  Georgia,  Wonderful 
things  our  Lord  brings  to  pafs,  in  thefe  parts,  every  day. 
Here  is  a  clofe  oppofition  from  fome  of  the  Prejlyterian  Clergv, 
The  feed  of  the  ferpent  is  the  fame  in  all,  of  whatever  com- 
munion. I  expedi:  much  more  oppofition  every  hour.  The 
devil  rages  in  London.  He  begins  now  to  triumph  indeed. 
The  children  of  God  are  difunited  among  themfelves.  The 
king  of  the  church  fhall  yet  over-rule"  all  things  for  good.  My 
dear  brother,  for  Christ's  fake  avoid  all  difputation.  Do 
not  oblige  me  to  preach  againlt  you  ;   I  had  rather  die.     Be 

gentle  towards  the .     They  will  get  great  advantage  over 

you,  if  they  difcover  any  irregular  warmth  in  your  temper.  I 
cannot  for  my  foul  unite  with  the  Moravian  Brethren,  Ho- 
mured  Sir,  Adieu  ! 

Yours  eternally  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER     CCXXXVII. 

Saint  George's  (Penfylvania)  Nov.  24,  i  740, 
Dear  Brother  T , 

GOD  has  revived  his  own  work  in  Philadelphia.  His 
glory. filled  the  great  houfe.  The  aflairs  belonging 
thereto,  I  believe,  are  well  fettled.  We  have  had  precious 
times  at  Cohanft,    Salem,   Fogs-mannor,   Nottingham,  Whiteclay^ 

Creek  and  Bohemia.     Brother   G is   come   from   Engla?jd 

very   opportunely.     Brother  S comes    about    Chrijhnas. 

The  brethren  I  think  do  grow,  though  fadly  divided.     But  our 
Lord  will  order  all   for  good.  —  Upon   feveral  accounts,  I 
Vol.  L  C^  think 

5    - 


'226  LETTERS. 

think  it  beft  to  embark  for  England  as  foon  as  poflible  in  the 
Spring.  O  pray  for  me,  that  I  may  not  by  any  means  grieve 
the  children  of  God.  1  hope  the  weather  is  warm  enough 
for  you.  I  truft  our  Lord  has  warmed  and  filled  your  dear 
foul.  Your  brother  Charles  is  with  me.  My  dear  fellow  tra- 
vellers falute  you  and  our  dear  brother  R .     My  love  to 

all  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  war  goes  on  bravely  be- 
tween Michael  and  the  Dragon,  Our  dear  Lord  (O  conde- 
fcending  love  !)  is  wonderous  kind  to  your  poor,  weak,  unwor- 
thy brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  TF. 

LETTER    CCXXXVIIL 

Dear  Mr,  F ,  Reedy-IJIand^  Nov.  26,  17 40. 

I  Thank  you  for  your  letter. — You  may  print  my  life,  as 
you  defire.  God  willing,  I  (hall  correct  my  two  volumes 
of  fermons,  and  fend  them  the  very  firft  opportunity.  —  Pray 
write  to   me  by   every   fhip,   that  goes  fhortly  to  Charles- 

Town. 

I  fhall  embark  for  England^  God  willing,  about  February, — 
I  defire  1  may  hear  from  you  there  alfo,  as  often  as  poflible. 
I  have  prefaced  Jenks,  and  Prefumptuous  fmners  dete^ed.  Mr. 
Bradford  has  the  laft,  becaufe  he  faid  he  was  to  print  it.  You 
may  have  it  of  him. — The  Ornaments  of  the  daughter  of  Sion^ 
you  may  have  hereafter.  Dear  Sir,  Adieu.  I  do  not  defpair 
of  your  feeing  the  reafonablenefs  of  chriftianity.  Apply  to 
God  ;  be  willing  to  do  the  divine  will,  and   you  fhall  know 

it.     I  have  heard  from  Mr.  S ;   all  is  well.     To-day  fe- 

veral  friends  have  taken  leave  of  me  at  this  place,  waiting  for 
a  fair  wind  in  order  to  embark  for  Georgia,  I  think  I  have 
been  on  fhore  73  days,  and  have  been  enabled  to  travel  up- 
wards of  800  miles,  and  to  preach  170  times,  befides  very 
freouent  exhortations  at  private  houfes.  I  have  colle6led,  in 
goods  and  money,  upwards  of  700/.  fterling,  for  the  Orphan- 
houfe  ;  blefled  be  God  !  Great  and  vifible  are  the  fruits  of 
my  late,  as  well  as  former  feeble  labours,  and  people  in  gene- 
ral feem  more  eager  after  the  word  than  ever.  O  the  love  of 
God  to 

Your  unworthy  friend, 

G.  TF. 

LETTER 


LETTERS.  227 

LETTER    CCXXXIX. 

To  Mr,  N.  in  New-Tor L 
My  very  dear  Brother^  Charles-Town^  Dec.  10,  1740. 

IN  eight  days,  the  Lord  brought  us  hither.  We  arrived 
laft  night,  when  the  Redeemer  vouchfafed  fo  to  fill  me  with 
his  divine  confolations,  that  I  could  fcarce  fleep.  I  have  been 
preaching  this  morning  on  the  fire  that  happened  of  late  from 
thefe  words,  Ifa.  i.  9.  "  Except  the  Lojid  of  Hosts  had  left 
unto  us  avery  fmall  remnant,  we  ihould  have  been  as  5(?- 
dam^  and  we  fhould  have  been  like  unto  Gomorrah^  I  am 
now  determined  to  fee  England  as  foon  as  poffible.  I  have  had 
much  of  God's  prefence  in  our  paflage  hither  from  FhtladeU 
phia^  and  have  many  precious  letters  to  fend  you.  O  follow 
me  with  your  prayers.  I  leave  Chatles-Town,  God  willing, 
to-night,  in  order  to  haften  to  their  relief,  and  fhall  go  in  the 
fame  floop  which  brought  me  here,  to  my  beloved  Georgia4 
As  foon  as  poffible,  I  will  fend  you  a  long  letter.  In  the  mean 

while,  accept  of  my  love  from,  dear  Mr.  N , 

Your  very  afFe6tionate  friend  and  brother 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER    CCXL. 

To  Mr.  G C . 

On  board  the  Savannah  for  Georgia.^  Dec,  II,  1740. 
Dear  Brother  C , 

YOUR  late  letters,  efpecially  that  which  you  fent  me  by 
way  of  Charles-Town^  made  me  fmile.  —  I  was  glad  to 
find  that  you  had  not  fo  far  thrown  off  all  outward  things,  as 
to  refolve  not  to  write  to  any  one  ;  and  I  thought  I  knew  the 
frame  of  your  heart,   as  though  I  was  within  you.     My  dear, 

dear  George  C ,  I  love  you  tenderly  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus 

Christ,  and  therefore  would  not  have  you  be  deceived. 
Alas,  why  do  you  pervert  this  text  of  fcripture,  "  Be  ftill, 
and  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,"  as  if  it  was  defigned  to  keep 
a  chriftian  from  driving,  or  meant  z-Jlillnefs  of  body ^  or  waiting 
upon  God  only  in  filencc  ?  The  expreffion  is  taken  out  of 
the  46th  Pfalm,  where   God's  fury  againft   the   heathen   is 

Q^  2  defcribed. 


S28  LETTERS. 

defcrlbed  In  the  moft  lively  colours  ;  and  then  left  his  people 
fhould  complain  of  the  feverity  of  his  difpenfations,  God  com- 
mands them  to  bey?///,  "  not  to  murmur  or  repine,  knowing 
that  he  was  the  Lord,  and  might  do  what  feemed  him  good." 
Thus  Tate  and  Brady  in  their  tranflations  explain  it,  and  this 
is  the  true  and  genuine  meaning  of  that  fentence.     It  hath  no 
reference  to  ftillnefs  in  prayer,  or  ftillnefs  of  body.     Dear  bro- 
ther,  I  fpeak  to  you  plainly,  becaufe  I  love  you.     I  think   I 
know  what  it  is  to  wait  upon   the  Lord   in  filence,  and   to 
feel  the  fpirit  of  God  making  intercefnon  for  me  with  groan- 
idgs  which   cannot  be  uttered.     Often  have  I  been  at   fuch 
times  filled  as  it  were  with  the  fulnefs  of  God,  and  I  do  now 
daily  carry  on  a  communion  with  the  moft  high  God  and   the 
erer-bleded  Jesus.     But  all  this  I  fear  is  contrary  to  xh^  falfe 
Jtillnejs^  you  and  fome  others  feem  to  have  fallen  into.     I  was 
juft  in  the  fam.e  cafe  fome  years  ago  at  Oxford^   when  I  de- 
clined   writing,    reading,    and  fuch  like  exercifes,    becaufe  I 
would  h^Jilll.   The  Lord  convinced  me  ;  I  pray  he  may  alfo 
convince  you  of  this   delufion.    Dear   George^  'confider  how 
contrary  your  maxim  is  to  our  Saviour's.    You  fay,  "  Beftill'* 
He  fays,  "  Strive.''     As   in  an  agony,  "  Strive  that  you  may 
enter  in  at  the  ftrait  gate."     Indeed,    my  dear  man,  I  pity 
you,  knowing  you  have  but  a  weak  judgment,  though  a  well- 
meaning  heart.     You  once  thought  that  you  was  born  again  ; 
then,  you  found  it  was  only  an  elapfc  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.    You 
ufed  to  fay,  you  wiflied  you  could  believe  from  experience   in 
the  do6trine  of  election ;  now,  you  find  as  yet  no  evidence 
within  yourfelf  that  you  are  a  real   chriftian.     You  take  too 
much  refuge,  I  fear,  in  the  dodlrine  of  unwerfal  redemption. 
It  is  the  fineft  doclrine  in  the  world   to  caufe   a   foul   to  be 
falfely  itill,   and   to  fay  Peacc^  Peace^  when  there  is  no  peace. 
You  fecm  to  infift  upon  finlefs  perfection,  and  to  think  a  man 
hath  no  real  falvation  till  he  literally  cannot  commit  fin.   PVom 
whofe  experience  do  you  write  this  ?  Not  from  your  own^  dear 
George ;   for  I  much  queftion,  if  ever  your  heart  was   truly 
broken  cw  had  a  faving  clofure  with  Christ.     You  feem  to 
mention  Peter  Bochler  as  an  inftance  ;  but  alas,  though  he  has 
been  wafhed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  fo  as  to  be  juftified  from 
all  his  fin-s,  yet  like  me  his  feet  want  waftiing  ftill,  and  will, 

til] 


I 


LETTERS.  229 

tHl  he  bows  down  his  head  and  gives  up  the  ghoft.  I  have 
converfed  with  him  intimately.  Take  heed,  brother,  of  having 
any  thing  too  much  in  admiration,  or  of  thinking  you  muft  ne- 
cefHirily  find  Christ  at  fuch  and  fuch  a  place.     You  have 

been  at  M .     I  believe  you  have  feen  many  dear  children 

of  God  ;  but  have  you  returned  home  with  Christ  in  your 
heart  ?  Your  letters  do  not  fpcak  much  improvement  in  the 
fchool  of  Christ.  If  God  loves  you,  he  will  let  you  fee 
the  vanity  of  your  prefent  imaginations,  and  bring  you  to  fee 
that  fiilvation  is  not  of  him  that  willeth,  or  of  him  that  run^ 
neth,  but  of  God  that  ilieweth  mercy.  Dear  George^  be  not 
given  to  change  ;  be  not  too  food  of  new  things.  *'  To  the  law 
and  to  the  teftimony,"  and  fee  what  Christ  and  his  apoftles 
have  fpoken.  I  fpeak  this  out  of  love,  and  not  in  reference 
to  myfeif.  If  God  blefies  another  miniftry  to  your  foul,  I 
rejoice,  yea  and  will  rejoice.  But  if  I  fee  you  fall  into  errors, 
do  not  be  angry  if  I  tell  you  the  truth.  If  you  are,  I  will  not- 
withftanding  love  and  pray  for  you.  That  errors  are  crept  in 
among  you,  I  think  is  too  plain:  but  I  fufpend  my  judg- 
ment till  the  Spring,  when,  God  willing,  I  hope  to  be  in 
London.  In  the  mean  while  pray  for  me,  that  I  may  with 
joy  bear  to  be  deferted  by  thofe,  who  once  were  blefled  and 
av^^akened  by  my  miniftry,  and  to  whom  I  am  a  fpiritual  fa- 
ther, though  they  may  have  many  inftru6lors.  Dear  GeorgCy 
may  the  Lord  be  with  you.  He  only  knows  how  dear  you 
are  to  my  heart.  It  is  near  midnight ;  but  it  was  much  upon 
my  heart  to  write  you  this  letter.  That  God  may  fandify 
it  to  your  edification  and  comfort,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of 
Your  affedlionate  friend,   brother 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  IF. 


i 


I 


LETTER    CCXLI. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  C— -^.  ''^"^r 

Good-Hope  {South-Carolina)  Jan.  i.  1 741. 

Rev,  and  dear  Sir, 

am  now  going  to  Charles-Town^  in  order  to  embark  for 

England  y  the   cloud  of  God's  providence  feems   to   be 

Q,  3  moving 


230  LETTERS. 

moving  that  way ;  I  have  enjoyed  much  of  the  divine  prefencd 
fmce  I  left  Bofton^  and  have  had  a  comfortable  Chriftmas  with 
my  dear  family  at  Georgia.  At  my  return,  I  found  my  Orphan- 
houfhold  removed  from  ^^y^w?^^/'  \.oBcihefda^2i,x\^  great  improve- 
ments made  during  the  time  of  my  abfence.  The  great  houfe 
will  be  finifhed,  God  willing,  fo  as  to  be  habitable,  in  about 
two  months.  It  would  have  been  finifhed  fo  far  by  this  time, 
if  the  Spaniards  had  not  taken  a  fchooner  loaded  with  bricks 
and  other  provifions  to  a  confiderable  value  ;  but  God  about 
the  fame  time  flirred  up  the  heart  of  a  planter  in  South-C*iroli- 
na^  lately  brought  home  at  the  orphan-houfe  to  God,  to  fend 
my  family  fome  rice  and  beef.  At  other  times,  when  they  have 
wanted  food,  the  Indians  have  brought  plenty  of  venifon.  God, 
every  day,  more  and  more  convinces  us  that  this  work  is  of 
him.  His  power  has  been  made  known,  efpecially  among 
the  young  ones.  I  blefs  God,  I  have  fettled  my  family  to  my 
great  fatisfa6tion,  and  verily  believe  I  fliall  live  to  fee  great 
things  come  from  the  Orphan-houfe.  God  works  upon  the 
hearts  of  the  labourers.  One  woman  hath  had  a  glorious  dif- 
covery  of  Christ  made  to  her  heart :  laft  week,  two  or  three 
men  where  brought  into  heart-diftrefs,  and  another  young 
man  that  came  to  fee  us,  was  made  fo  fick  of  fin,  as  to  feel 
the  want  of,  and  to  enquire  after  the  great  and  all-powerful 
phyfician  of  fouls.  My  family,  I  think,  confifls  now  of  89 
perfons.  Next  year  my  expences  will  be  contracted  much  5 
but  at  prefent,  I  am  in  debt  about  500/.  flerling.  However, 
I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed.  One  who  is  able  to  pay  it. 
My  public  accounts  will  be  publifhed  as  foon  as  I  arrive  at 
London^  with  a  profpeCl  of  the  Orphan-houfe,  and  other  little 
houfes  and  gardens  annexed  unto  it.  I  am  now  at  the  houfe 
of  one  Mr.  Jonathan  B — •,  who,  I  trufl,  with  his  brother  Mr, 

H B ,  and  another  young  man,  lately  a  player  in 

New-York^  are  fettled   by  a  living  faith  in  Jesus  Christ. 

The  latter,  I  intend  for  the  miniflry.     Mr.  H B 's 

wife  died  not  long  fmce,  rejoicing  in  God  her  Saviour.  Se- 
veral others  alfo  in  thefe  parts  are  grown   in  grace,  and  Mr. 

C 's  miniftry  hath   been  much  blefTed. — Satan  hath   been 

fowing  tares  in  old  England.     Oh   that  Bojion  miniflers  and 

people 


LETTERS.  231 

people  may  pray  for  me  !  Indeed,  I  love  them  in  the  bowels 
of  the  blefled  Jesus.  Vale  f  longum  eifi  fpero  non  in  aternum^ 
•vale.  That  Christ's  kingdom  may  flourifh  in  your  heart, 
and  that  you  may  greatly  promote  it  in  the  fouls  of  others,  is 
the  hearty  prayer  of.  Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  afFedionate  unworthy  fellow-fervant, 

in  our  common  Lord, 

G,  TV. 

LETTER    CXLIL 

To  the  Rev.  Mr,  C . 

Dear  and  Reverend  Sir,  Charles-Town,  Jan,  12,  1 741. 

LA  S  T  iS^/wr^^;/ I  was  taken  up  for  being  concerned   in 
corrc£ting  the  inclofed  printed  letter,  written  by  Mr.  H — 

B n,  whofe  converfion  you  have  an  account  of  in  the 

olher  letter  fent  herewith.  I  think  it  may  be  for  God's  glory 
to  have  them  all  printed  in  Bojlon.     I  am  bound  over  to  appear 

next  feflions,  as  well  as  Mr.  B .     He,  I  believe,   fof  //'- 

belling  the  king,  and  I  for  libelling  the  clergy,  in  faying  they  break 
the  Canons  daily.  I  think,  dear  Sir,  thefe  are  earnefts  of  what 
I  muft  expe6t  to  meet  with  in  my  native  country.  Oppofition, 
as  yet,  feems  to  be  only  like  a  cloud  rifmg  out  of  the  fea,  no 
bigger  than  a  man's  hand.  Perhaps  it  will  gather  to  a  great 
body,  and  break  upon  the  church  of  God.  Our  Lord  will 
be  our  refuge  in  every  ftorm.  He  is  much  with  my  foul,  and 
fills  me  abundantly,  1  could  almoft  fay  fuperabundantly,  with 
his  prefence.  We  have  feen  precious  times.  One  perfon  had 
a  glorious  difcovery  of  Christ  about  two  days  ago.  I  ex- 
peft  my  family  will  be  like  the  burning  bufh.  I  find  I  am  in 
debt  for  them  upwards  of  fix  hundred  pounds  :  but  the  Lord 
will  provide. — My  moft  tender  love  awaits  all  that  love  him. 
I  am  to  appear  at  the  feflions  by  an  attorney.  Dear  Sir,  re- 
larvember, 

Ever  yours  in  Christ, 

G,  W, 


0^4  X.ETTER 


53i  LETTERS. 


LETTER     CCXLIII. 

To  the   Rev.  Mr.  C ,  at  Rhode  IJJand. 

Reverend  and  Dear  Sir ^         Charles-Toivn^  Jan.  i6,  1 74 1. 

1  Snatch  a  few  moments  to  write  you  a  line  before  I  embark 
for  England.  BlefTed  be  God,  you  are  near  your  defirecl 
haven.  Yet  a  little  while,  and  you  fhall  fafely  arrive  in  Jbra- 
harns  bofom.  /  />r^,  fequar^  efh  non  paffihus  equis.  —  Great 
things  God  is  doing  daily.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  (I  hope) 
Js  at  hand.  I  am  bound  over  to  appear  at  the  feffions  here, 
by  my  attorney,  for  libelling  the  clergy,  becaufe  I  corre6^ed 
the  letter  inclofed.  A  fcene  of  fuffering  lies  before  me,  but 
wherefore  fnould  I  fear  ?  Our  Lord  ftrenghthens  me  mightily 
jn  the  inner  man.  We  have  had  much  of  his  prefence  in  our 
ailemblles.  But  I  muft  have  done.  Dear  and  Reverend  Sir, 
adieu.  I  fcarce  exped  to  fee  you  again  in  the  flefli  ;  but  this 
is  my  comfort,  I  fhall  fee  and  rejoice  with  you  above.  There, 
J  will  fit  and  tell  you  what  God  hath  done  for 

Your  unworthy  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ  Jesus, 

LETTER     CCXLIV. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  Cl^^^i^;  in  '^Jion. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir^  Charles-Town^  Jan,  16,  174 1. 

THOUGH  I  have  packed  up  two  letters  for  you  already, 
yet  I  cannot  refrain  from  fending  you  a  third.  Juft 
now  I  was  favoured  with  yours  dated  laft  December  i.  Indeed, 
it  gave  me  much  comfort,  and  endeared  the  writer  of  it  to  me 
more  and  more.  Sir,  why  am  1  thus  highly  favoured  !  I  now 
wifh  to  fmk  exceeding  low,  and  cry  out,  Grace,  grace  !  O 
the  love  of  God  !  The  fovereignty  of  Christ  !  The  un- 
changeable loving-kindnefs  of  our  heavenly  Father  !  Excufe 

n;e,    dear  Mr.  C ;    my  heart  is  full.     I  want  for  all  men 

to  love  the  Lord  Jesus.     It  greatly  rejoices  me,  to  hear  fo 
many  are  coming  to  him.     He  is  a  loving  tender  mafter.     He  . 
attends  to  my  minutcft  wants,  and   furprizingly  helps  me  in 

every  emergency.   I  thank  dear  Mr.  C ,  for  the  kind  token 

^f  his  love.    Good  meafure  prefTed  down  and  running  over,  may 

Goi? 


LETTERS.  233 

God  return  into  your  bofom  !  You  will  be  pleafed  to  correct 
the  prefs.  I  am  tilled  with  comfort  to  hear  of  the  condu(S  of 
the  dear  governor,  &c.  I  cannot  but  think  our  Lord  will  let 
his  word  run,  and  be  abundantly  glorified  in  America.  Bojion 
people  are  much  upon  my  heart.  The  memory  of  their  forefa- 
thers is  precious  to  my  foul.  May  you  live  to  fee  the  fpirit  of 
fcriptural  Puritanijm  univerfally  prevail !  I  hope  you  will  write 
every  opportunity.  If  I  am  in  prifon,  it  will  make  me  arife 
at  midnight  to  fing  praifes  to  God,  to  hear  thTit  Bo/ion  people 
are  alive  to  Christ.  At  prefent,  my  heart  is  full  of  peace 
and  joy.  We  have  had  Iblemn  meetings.  I  am  much 
ftrengthened  on  every  fide  ;  but  1  rauft  not  fay  more.     Time 

is  fhort.     Dear  Mr.  C ,  adieu.     May  the  Lord  be  with 

you  and  yours,  I  could  now  drop  a  tear  of  love. — My  love 
to  all, 

I  am  yours  &c. 

LETTER    CCXLV. 

To  Mr.   W D ,  at  Bojlon. 

On  hoard  the  Minerva^  for  England^  Jan.  jy,  1741. 
Dear  Sir, 

MR.  P hath  juft  brought  me  your  kind  letter.  Blef- 
fed  be  God,  that  his  word  runs  and  is  glorified  in  Bof- 
ton.  Surely,  dear  Sir,  I  fhall  never  forget  that  people  ;  in- 
deed, they  are  very  near  and  dear  unto  my  foul.  May  thofe 
of  your  own  houfehold,  in  particular,  be  not  only  convi(Sled 
but  converted  ;  may  the  dear  Jesus  fill  you  with  all  peace  and 
joy  in  believing,   &nd  enable  you  to  pray  for,  dear  Sir, 

Yours  in  the  blefled  Jesus, 
G.  W. 

P.  S.  Excufe  great  hafte  ;    our  fhip  is  jufl  under  fail.    My 
dear  companions  kindly  falute  you  and  yours. 


LETTER 


234 


LETTERS. 


LETTER    CCXLVI. 

To  Mr.  lV?n,  G . 

On  hoard  the  Minerva^  Feb.  8,  1741.  in  latitude  35,  24  N. 
My  dear  brother^ 

SEE  how  foon  I  write  to  you,  and  from  thence  Infer  how 
I  love  you.  Whether  it  proceeds  from  the  pride  and 
naughtinefs  of  my  heart,  I  cannot  tell  ;  but,  I  frankly  confefs, 
I  love  to  fee  perfons  humble,  kind,  and  courteous  to  thofe, 
whom  God  hath  made  their  fpiritual  fathers.  I  believe  it  is 
well  pleafing  to  God,  and  very  amiable  in  the  fight  of  all 
good  men.  Your  chriftian  grateful  behaviour  to  me  in  this 
refpe61:,  hath  much  endeared  you  to  me.  God  only  knows 
how  I  love  you.  I  bear  you  upon  my  heart,  and  often  fe- 
cretly  figh  out  before  the  Lord, — ''  O  let   my  dear  brother 

G live  before  thee."  This  is  the  defire  of  my  foul  for  you. 

I  cannot  wifh  you  a  better  thing.  Yet  a  little  while,  and  we 
fhall  be  together  again.  But,  before  that  time,  I  expe£l  to 
fufFer  great  things.  The  Lord  is  able  to  deliver  me  out  of 
all.  I  have  juft  now  experienced  his  divine  afliftance  in  com- 
pofing  a  fermon.  This  is  the  Jjxth  which  he  has  enabled  me 
to  finifti,  fmce  I  have  been  on  board.  O  my  dear  brother, 
Jove  a  precious  Christ,  and  fhew  it  by  adorning  his  gofpel 
in  all  things.  He  has  hi-hly  favoured  you,  indeed  he  hath. 
U  you  and  I  are  not  eminently  holy,  if  you  and  I  think 
any  thing  too  much  to  be  done  for  the  Lord,  we  are  of  all 
men  the  moft  ungrateful.  O  the  love  of  Christ  !  I  feel  it, 
I  feel  it.  God  now  (heds  it  abroad  in  my  heart.  May  it 
abundantly  alfo  be  flied  on  you  by  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Write 
to  me  if  in  prifon,  my  friends  will  bring  it  to  me  there.  God 
will  hear  me  for  you  even  in  a  dungeon.  Methinks  I 
fee  you  weep  ;  but  weep  not  for  me,  unlefs  it  be  before  the 
Lord,  and  then  I  care  not  how  foon  you  retire,  and  pour 

out  your  prayers  in  behalf  of,  dear  Mr.  G , 

Your  affedionate  friend,  brother  and  fervant, 

G.  rr. 


LETTER 


Dear  Mrs.  L- 


LETTERS.  235 

LETTER    CCXLVIL 

To  Mrs,  L ,  at  Charles-Town, 

On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb.    ii,    1741. 


YO  U  was  upon  the  mount  when  I  left  Charles-Town  ;  I 
hope  you  have  not  thrown  yourfelf  down.  Keep  clofe 
to  Christ,  and  caft  not  off  your  firft  love.  Remember  what 
God  has  done  for  your  foul.  Forget  not  the  glorious  difco- 
very  Jesus  Christ  has  made  of  himfclf  to  your  heart ;  and 
though  a  cloud  fhould  overfhadow  you,  let  not  Satan  make 

you  doubt  of  your  being  a  child  of  God.     O  Mrs.  L , 

how  holy  ought  you  to  be  in  all  manner  of  converfation  and 
godlinefs  !  Why  are  you-  taken  ?  Why  are  you  in  the  arms  of 
everlafting  love  ?  Methinks  I  hear  you  cry  out,  Grace  !  grace  ! 
And  well  you  may ;  for  indeed  you  are  faved  by  grace. 
The  free  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you 
now  and  for  ever  more.  Blefled  be  God,  I  experience  much 
of  it  in  the  (hip.  I  hope  divine  grace  moves  me  to  fend  you 
this  fmall  letter.  If  God  blefles  it  to  your  foul,  put  up  a 
ihort  prayer  for 

Your  afFe<Slionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    CCXLVIII. 

To  Mrs.  IV ,  at  James-IJland. 

Dear  Madam^  On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb,  11,  1 741. 

MY  heart's  defire  and  prayer  to  God  is,  that  you  may  be 
faved.  I  hope  you  will  find,  it  is  not  impoffible  for  you 
to  be  born  again  when  you  are  old.  God  forbid.  Though 
at  the  eleventh  hour,  I  truft  our  Lord  will  meet  you,  and 
caufe  you,  whenever  you  depart,  with  good  old  Simeon,  to  de- 
part in  peace.  I  heartily  thank  you,  madam,  for  all  favours 
conferred  on  me  and  mine.  We  have  not  forgotten  you  on 
board.  I  do  not  forget  to  mention  you  in  my  fecret  prayers. 
May  God  reveal  his  dear  Son  in  your  foul,  and  fill  you  with 
all  peace  and  joy  in  believing  !  O  what  a  ftafF  will  this  be  to 
you  in  your  old  age  !  How  pleafantly  then  will  you  walk  by 
your  vault,  and  fay,  "  There  (liall  I  lay  my  weary  bones  ere 

long.- 


2^6  LETTER    S. 

long."  I  hope  you  do  not  ftarde  at  the  thoughts  of  death. 
Believe  in  Christ.  Get  a  faving  intereft  in  his  blood,  and 
then  you  may  cry  out,  "  O  death,  where  is  thy  fting  !  O 
grave,  where  is  thy  vidory  ?"  Blefled  be  God,  the  prorpe6l  of 
death  is  pleafing  to  my  foul.  I  would  not  live  here  always  : 
I  want  to  be  gone.  That  you  and  I,  whenever  our  appointed 
time  is  come,  may  live  with  Christ,  is  the  earneft  prayer  of, 
madam. 

Your  obliged  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  Jf\ 

LETTER    CCXLIX. 

Dear  Mrs.  T.  On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb,  I2,  1 74 1. 

MUST  I  pray  for  you  in  the  language  of  Martha  and 
Mary^  faying,  "  Lord,  fhe  whom  thou  loveft  is 
fick  !"  Or  hath  he  who  touched  Peter'' s  v/ife's  mother,  rebuked 
the  illnefs  that  was  coming  upon  you,  when  I  faw  you  lafl, 
and  caufed  it  to  leave  you  ?  But,  however  the  Lord  has  dealt 
with  you,  I  hope  he  hath  been  glorified  in  and  by  you.  I 
heard  he  had  by  his  word  and  fpirit  fpoken  to  your  foul,  and 
given  you  fatisfadlion,  that  he  had  loved  you  with  an  ever- 
lafting  love.  I  rejoice  in  it  from  my  foul.  The  Lord  in- 
creafe  your  comforts  daily,  and  fhew  you  all  his  glory.  Dear 
Mrs.  T-  ' — ,  think  often  of  your  departed  f^fter.  Follow  her 
as  file  did  Christ  ;  and  then  Ihortly,  where  fhe  is  you  fhall 
be  alfo.  O  the  happinefs  flie  now  enjoys  !  It  is  too  dazzling 
for  mortal  eyes,  1  want  to  leap  my  feventy  years,  and  fly  away 
to  God.  Well,  it  will  not  be  long.  Dear  Mrs.  T — -,  let 
us  patiently  tarry  till  our  change  come.  Our  Lord  wili 
carry  us  fafe  through  time,  and  waft  us  triumphantly  into 
eternity.  The  love  of  Christ  conftrained  me  to  write  thefe 
lines  j   accept  them  for  his  fake,  from 

Your  afFedionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  W. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  2J7 

LETTER     CCL. 

To  Mr.   H ,  at  Port- Royal,  South-Carolina. 

Dear  Mr.  H.  On  board  the  A^inerva^  Feb.  16.  174!'; 

THE  love  of  Christ  conftrains  me  to  write  yo\x  2l  line, 
though  as  yet  no  further  than  the  weftern  iflands.  I 
truft  the  Lord  hath  called  you  by  name,  and  enabled  you  to 
fay  "  Speak  Lord,  for  thy  fervant  heareth."  Who  knows  but 
he  may  call  you  yet  further,  even  to  minifter  before  him  ? 
Whether  it  be  fo  or  not,  make  it  your  daily  ftudy  to  prepare 
your  heart  to  ferve  the  Lord  in  any  ftation.  To  be  a  door- 
keeper in  the  houfe  of  God,  is  a  glorious  poft.  Surely,  you 
and  I  may  fing  of  mercy  and  elefting  love.  How  often  have 
we  a6led  a  part  for  the  devil  ?  The  remembrance  of  it  is  grie- 
vous unto  me.  Let  us  both  now  labour  daily  to  ad!  a  part  for 
God.  He  heaps  kindnefles  on  me  every  hour.  We  have 
hitherto  had  a  wonderful  pleafant  paflage.  I  hope  it  is  in 
fome  meafure  owing  to  your  prayers.  Let  this  encourage  you 
to  pray  again.  Our  God  is  a  God  hearing  prayer.  I  write 
now,  left  excefs  of  bufmefs  fhould  prevent  my  writing  in  Eng- 
land.  The  Lord  is  girding  me  for  the  battle,  and  ftrength- 
ening  me  mightily  in  the  inner  man.  ''  O  give  thanks  unto 
the  Lord  of  all  Lords,  becaufe  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever.'* 
You  will  not  fail  writing  to 

"Your  affe6lionate  friend,  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER    CCLL 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  C ,  in  Charles-Toivn. 

My  dear  Brother^       On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb.  17,  1741, 

THE  Lord  hath  been  with  me,  and  is  now  with  me  in 
an  efpecial  manner.  I  have  been  enabled  to  prepare 
nine  difcourfes  for  the  prefs.  My  body  waxes  ftronger,  and 
laft  night  the  great  God  in  a  glorious  manner  filled  and  over- 
ihadowed  my  foul.  I  am  panting  after  the  complcat  holinefs 
of  Jesus  my  Lord.  I  have  various  fcencs  of  adion  lying  be- 
fore me,  and  am  waiting  upon  the  Lord  my  God  for  direc- 
tion. He  afTures  mc  that  he  will  be  with  me.  He  faith  unto 
me,  "  Fear  not,  fpeak  out,  no  one  ihail  fet  upon  thee  to  hurt 
3  th:e." 


27S  LETTERS. 

thee."    Dear  Mr.  C ,  God's  goodnefs  quite  furprizes 

me.     T  cannot  exprefs  myfelf  better,  than  in  a  ftanza  or  two 
of  Erjkine  in  his  Paraphrafe  upon  SolotnorCs  fong. 

I. 

JVhat  wonders  Lord  doji  thou  perform ^ 

That  Jioopeji  thus  fo  low^ 
To  put  thy  beauty  on  a  ivortriy 

And  then  cotnmend  it  fo. 
II. 
JVhiit^  dofl  thou  prafe  a  native  black  F 

I  blujh  to  find  it  true  ; 
O  lend  me  words  to  render  back 

The  praife  to  whom  'tis  due. 

I  hope  my  love  will  find  acceptance  with  all  your  flock 
who  know  me,  and  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  in  fincerity.  I 
have  often  comforted  myfelf  and  companions  with  this  faying^ 

*'  Now  Mr.  C and  our  other  friends  are  praying  for 

us."     At  the  receipt  of  this,   turn  your  prayers  into  praifes, 
and  then  turn  your  praifes  again  into  prayers,  in  behalf  of, 

dear  Mr.  C , 

Your  afFedlionate  brother  and  fellow-labourer 

in  Christ  Jesus, 

LETTER     CLIL 

To  Mr.  H.  B. 
.  On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb,  i6,  1 74 1. 
My  dear  brother  in  Chrtst, 

BEFORE  this  is  brought  to  your  hands,  I  fuppofe  you 
will  have  been  arraigned  befor?  the  Chief  Juftice.  I  an-j 
perfuaded  our  Lord  will  plead  on  your  behalf,  and  ftrengthen 
you  with  his  mighty  power  in  the  inner  man.  The  greater 
progrefs  you  make  in  the  divine  life,  the  more  you  will  difco- 
ver  of  the  enmity  that  is  in  the  feed  of  the  ferpent.  It  bruifed 
our  mafter's  heel ;  it  will  alfo  bruife  ours.  Here  is  our  com- 
fort, God  who  cannot  lie,  hath  told  us,  that  "-  we  fhall  bruife 
his  head."  In  the  ftrength  of  this  promife,  I  can  give  men 
and  devils  the  challenge.  Whole  legions  are  ready  to  befct 
4  me^ 


LETTERS.  239 

me.  By  the  help  of  my  God,  I  fhall  triumph  over  all,  — I 
hope  we  (hall  grow  in  grace  before  we  meet  again.  You  and 
I  have  weak  crazy  tabernacles  ;  I  hope  you  rejoice  in  the  prof- 
pe£t  of  putting  them  oflf  Ihortly  ;  blefled  be  God,  I  do. — 
Dear  Sir,  get  acquainted  more  and  more  with  electing  love; 
ftudy  the  covenant  of  redemption,  and  fee  how  God  loved 
you  with  an  everlafting  love.  This  will  caufe  you  to  glory 
only  in  the  Lord,  and  to  pafs  through  the  valley  of  the  fha- 
dow  of  death,  with  a  full  affu  ranee  of  faith;  knowing  that 
Christ  hath  engaged  to  lodge  you  fafe  in  eternal  glory. 
Thither  your  dear  wife  is  gone  before  us  ;  I  often  think  of, 
I  could  almoft  fay  envy  her  ;  but  perhaps  that  is  wrong.  Yet 
a  little  while,  and  our  precious  Lord  fhall  take  both  you, 
and 

Your  afFedionate  friend,  brother, 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 
G.  W. 

LETTER    CCLIIL 

To  Mr,  B ,  at  Port-Royal, 

Dear  Mr,  B,  On  hoard  the  Minerva^   Feb,  16.  1741. 

I  Hope  you  will  never  forget  that  day,  hour,  or  moment, 
wherein  God  met  you  at  Savannah,  If  you  have  in  fome 
meafure,  do  fo  no  more.  "  Awake  thou  that  fleepeft,  and 
Christ  (hall  give  thee  light."  Love  not  the  world,  neither 
the  things  that  are  in  the  world.  No  man  can  ferve  two 
mafters.  Ufe  the  world,  but  lat  it  be  as  though  you  ufed  it  not. 
The  faftiion  of  this  world  will  foon,  very  foon,  fade  away.  Dear 

Mr.  B ,  I  am  perfuaded,  will  not  be  ofFended  at  this  plain 

dealing.     He  knows  I  love  him.     God  knows  it  alfo.     With 
much  afFedion,  I  fubfcribe  myfelf 

Your  friend  and  fervant, 

G,  JV. 

LETTER    CCLIV. 

To  Mrs,  B, 

Dear  Mrs,  B,  On  board  the  Minerva,  Feb,  1 6,  1741. 

WHEN  you  read  that  Jesus  loved  Lazarus,  Mary,  and 
their  fifter  Martha,  do  you  not  make  a  particular  ap- 
plication 


240  LETTERS. 

plication  to  your  own  family  ?  I  think  our  Lord  has  been 
equally  kind  to  your  houfhold.  Walk  as  becometh  members 
of  the  houfhold  of  faith.  I  hope  you  have  had  full  fatisfadion 
about  your  ftatc,  and  know  afTuredly  that  Christ  is  your 
Saviour.  If  not,  be  not  difcouraged  j  go  on ;  the  way  of  duty, 
is  the  way  of  fafety.  By-and-by  your  foul  fliall  magnify  the 
Lord,  and  your  fpirit  rejoice  in  God  your  Saviour.     This  is 

the  hearty  dcfirc  of,  dear  Mrs.  B , 

Your  afFeclionate  friend  and  fervant  in  ChrisV, 

G.  rK 

LETTER     CCLV. 

To  Mr.  7—  B.^-^^ 
■  Dear  Mr,  B ^,       On  beard  the  Minerva^  Feb.  i6.  1741. 

YOUR  name,  'Jonathan^  puts  me  in  mind  of  a  good  old 
teftament  worthy.  Follow  him  in  his  faith,  and  dare 
to  fcale  the  wall  of  the  BhUtftincs,  Be  not  afraid,  though  al- 
ready bound  over  as  a  libeller -^  ihortly  you  fhall  fhine  in  the 
kingdom  of  your  Father  ;  I  fay,  your  Father  \  for  God  is  your 
God,  and  will  be  your  guide  and  guard  unto  death.  Does 
not  this  aflonifh  you  ?  Do  not  you  feel  your  heart  melt  ?  Are 
you  not  ready  to  cry  out,  "  Why  me.  Lord  V  The  oftener 
you  repeat  fuch  language  the  better.  I  love  to  fee  a  foul  lie  in 
the  duft  under  a  fenfe  of  electing  love  ;  you  and  yours  have 
been  highly  favoured.'  May  God  give  you  all  grace  to  walk 
worthy  of  the  holy  vocation  wherewith  you  are  called,  I  write 
this  out  of  the  fulnefs  of  my  heart.  Though  not  prefent, 
yet  I  fain  would  converfe  with  you.  O  that  I  may  fee  you 
grown  in  grace  !  Remember  me  to  your  wife.  The  Lord 
be  with  you  both  :  He  hath  been,  he.  is  now  with  me.  You 
are  often  upon  my  heart.  .God  reward  you  for  your  kind- 
nefs  to  the  Orphans.  Do  not  flack  your  hands  towards  them. 
Qur  bountiful  malkr  will  richly  reward  you.  Go  on  ftea- 
dily  in  the  ufe  of,  but  do  not  trufi  in  ordinances.  You  know 
Vv'hat  I  mean,  ik  fteady  and  bold,  yet  meek  and  catholic  in 
your  converfatlon  and  pradice  ;  and  if  GoD*hath  influenced 
you  by  my  miniflry,  give  him  the  glory,  and  for  Christ's 
fake  pray  for 

Your  affcclionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  W, 
LETTER 


LETTERS.  241 

LETTER    CCLYI. 

To  Mr.  B ,  in  Charks-Town, 

Dear  Mr.  B.  On  hoard  the  Minerva^  Feb.  16,  1 741. 

I  Think  of  you  often,  indeed  I  do.  I  long  to  hear  that  com- 
plete falvation  is  come  to  your  foul.  I  fay  complete  fal- 
vation,  for  my  dear  friend  knows  that  reformation  is  not  con- 
verfion.  O  that  you  may  experience  a  life  hid  with  Christ 
in  God  !  Some  who  feemingly  put  their  hands  to  the  plough, 
have  already  fliamefully  looked  back  ;  will  Mr.  B.  alfo  go 
away  P  Adcthinks  I  hear  him  fay,  "  Whether  fhall  I  go  ? 
Jesus  Christ  alone  hath  the  words  of  eternal  life."  True, 
Jesus  alone  is  the  way,  the  truth  and  the  life  ;  flee,  flee  to  him, 
my  dear  friend  j  with  arms  he  ftands  ready  to  embrace,  and  will 
fave  you  to  the  uttermoft.  Remember,  my  friend,  the  vows 
of  the  Lord  are  upon  you.  Thefe  hands  reached  out  to  you 
the  facred  fymbols  of  his  precious  body  and  blood.  Thefe 
eyes  faw  you  eat  and  drink  of  his  bread  and  his  wine.  O  do 
not  betray,  but  manfully  ftand  up  for  the  Lord  Jesus.  You 
was  once  bold  for  fatan,  be  now  bold  for  your  Christ.  His 
love  excites  me  to  Vv^rite  to,  and  pray  for  you.  Your  wife  alfo 
I  intreat  the  Lord  to  blefs,  together  with  your  children.  My 
friends  join  me  in  hearty  wifhes  for  your  welfare^     I  am,  dear 

Mr.  B , 

Your  affe6lionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  JK 
LETTER    CCLVIL 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  D ,  at  Edinburgh. 

On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb.  16,  1 74?. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir^ 

IF  I  miftakenot,  Mr.  M.  informed  me,  that  you  was  entered 
into  the  miniftry  ;  I  pray  God  to  enable  you  to  make  full 
proof  of  it.  O  dear  Sir,  how  holy  ought  we  to  be,  who  are 
called  to  ftand  before  the  Lord. — When  I  confider  the  great- 
nefs  of  the  ofHce  and  my  own  unworthinefs,  I  am  fometimes 
quite  abafhed.  This  promife,  *'  Lo  I  am  with  you  always," 
is,  my  daily  fupport.  Bleffcd  be  God,  I  find  it  fulfilled  in  my 
Vol.  L  R  foul. 

6 


242  LETTERS. 

foul.  A  great  work  is  begun  in  America^  at  Georgia.,  South- 
CarcUna,  New-York^  Philadelphia^  and  IsUw- England.  God 
lias  confirmed  the  word  by  fpirltual  miracles  and  figns.     You 

will  fee  what  I  have  wrote  to  dear  Mr.  T .  Your  afliftance 

in  refpecSl  to  the  Orphan-houfe  will  be  very  acceptable.  I  am 
feveral  hundreds  of  pounds  in  debt  on  that  account.  The 
God  whom  I  ferve  is  able  to  difchargc  it.  You  have  heard  of 
the  liberality  of  the  New-Eriglaytd  people  ;  dear  Mr.  D 
God's  goodncfs  aftoniflies  me.  What !  can  I  think  any  thing 
too  much  to  do,  or  to  fuftcr  for  fo  dear  a  Maftcr  ?  I  was  lately 
bound  over  at  Charles-Town  in  South-Carolinay  for  libelling  the 
clergy.  I'he  libel,  falfely  fo  called,  I  fhall  foon  fend  you  after 
my  arrival.  Thus  oppofition  is  coming  on  gradually :  pray 
that  the  Lord  may  cover  mc  with  all  his  armour.  I  am  a  weak 
defencelefs  creature  in  myfelf;  Jesus  alone  is  my  ftrength 
and  my  Redeemer.  I  wiite  this  on  board,  that  you  may 
know,  you  are  not  forgotten  j  no,  tho'  I  never  faw  you  in  the 
flefh,  you  are  much  beloved  by,  dear  Sir, 

Your  affeclionate  brother  and  fellow-labourer 
in  our  dear  Lord's  vineyard, 
G.  JV. 

LETTER     CCLVIIL 

V  To  the  Rev,  Mr.  T ,  at  EdiJIo. 

On  board  the  Aluurva^  Feb,  17,  1 741. 
Dear  Mr.  T. 

PROVIDENCE  prevented  my  coming  to  fee  you  at 
Edijio^  —  however,  I  muft  not  omit  writing  to  you  now. 
How  is  it  with  your  heart  ?  I  hope  you  are  not  nimis  uxorius  ; 
lake  heed,  my  dear  B — ,  take  heed.  Time  is  (hort.  It  remains 
that  thofe  wiio  have  wives,  be  as  tho'  they  had  none.  Let 
nothing  intercept,  or  interrupt  your  communion  with  the 
bridegroom  of  the  church.  Lhope  you  do  not  feel  fuch  damps 
of  foul,  as  you  u fed  to  complain  of.  May  the  Lord  of  glory 
difpel  every  black  cloud,  and  caufe  you  continually  to  rejoice 
in  his  falvution.  You  have  ftrong  paflion?.  The  Lord  Jesus 
is  ftronger :  In  his  (trength  nuy  ygu  fubdu^  {hem,  till  you  arc 

meek 


J.    E     T     T     E    R     S.  .45 

Ricek  ns  a  Iamb,  and  arc  become  a  very  little  chilJ.  1  write 
tluiF,  bccaufc  I  pray  for  you  mofl:  heartily. — Deal  with  mc  ia 
the  Tame  manner ;  and  now,  dear  brother,  farcvvcl.  The  Lord 
be  with  you.  He  is  pleafed  to  refrcfh  my  foul,  and  give  me 
the  profpetft  of  a  (hort  palTage.  I  commend  myfclf  and  affairs 
to  the  prayers  of  your  flock,  and  1  earncftly  recommend  you 
to  the  God  of  all  grace.  That  he  may  blefs  you  and  give  you 
an  inheritance  amohg  all  them  that  are  fandilicd,  is  the  ear-» 
reft  prayer  of,  dear  Mr.  7'.—-, 

Your  afreclionate  brother  and  fi:llow-labourcr  in  the  Lord, 

G,  JV. 

LETTER    CCLIX. 

To  Airs,  B ,  in  Charles-Town, 

Dear  Mrs.  B.  On  board  the  Minerva,  Feb.  17,  1741. 

I  Am  much  obliged  to  you  m.any  u^ays.  The  Lord  reward 
you  a  thoufand-fold.  Your  prayers  are  heard.  God  is 
carrying  us  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind.  The  angel  of  the 
covenant  accompanies  us  in  the  way.  The  prefent  feafon  is  a 
time  of  refrcfhing  to  my  foul.  I  hope  it  will  be  a  profitable 
voyage.  I  think  I  fee  more  into  the  wickednefs  of  my  owa 
heart,  and  the  unfearchable  riches  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  wha 
hath  redeemed  me  by  his  precious  blood.  I  believe  yoj*  can  fay 
fo :  Why  do  you  fhake  your  head  ?  Woman,  why  doubteft 
thou  ?  Has  not  the  Lord  vifited  your  foul  ?  Have  you  not 
heard  him  fay  in  his  word,  applied  by  his  fpirit,  *'  I  have  loved 
thee  with  an  everlafting  love  r"  And  do  you  think  God  would 
tell  you  fo,  if  it  was  not  fo?  Away  therefore  with  all  defponding 
fears;  come  boldly,  with  a  full  afTurance  of  faith,  and  drav/ 
water  plentifully  out  of  the  wells  of  fiilvation.  O  that  all 
were  comforted,  as  I  am  now  comforted  of  God.  1  would 
rot  eat  my  fpiritual  morfds  alone.  I  hope,  a  letter  from  you 
will  acquaint  me,  how  good  the  Lord  has  been  to  your  fouL 
I  have  no  greater  joy,  than  to  hear  that  my  chriftian  friends 
walk  in  the  truth.  71ie  Lord  be  with  you.  Remember  me 
to  your  father  and  fifters.  That  you  all  may  be  true  member* 
of  the  houfiiold  of  faith,  prays  _ 

Your  aftedionate  brother  and  fervant 

G.  IF. 
R2  LETfER 


244  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCLX. 

To  Mr,  B.  and  his  wife  at  Beihefda. 
Dear  brother  B ,     On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb.  17,  1741^ 

WHEN  I  left  Charks'Toivn^   the  Lord  feemed  to  give 
me  a  full  affurance,  that  we  fhould  have  a  fpeedy 

paflage. We  have  hitherto  had  fcarce  any  contrary  winds, 

and  are  novi'  very  near  the  Weftern  Iflands.  We  had  one  ftorm 
the  firft  week,  but  almoft  ever  fince  have  been  favoured  with 
weather  as  well  as  wind.  O  that  you  would  call  the  family 
together,  and  praife  the  Lord  for  the  mercies  conferred  on  us 
the  unworthleft  of  the  {bns  of  men !  I  do  not  know  that  I 
have  failed  praying  for  you  one  day,  fmce  I  have  been  out.  I 
long  to  hear  what  the  Lord  hath  done  for  your  fouls,  ^V'hat 
fay  you  ?  Do  you  live  in  love  ?  Do  you  flrive  together  with  me 
in  your  prayers  ?  Are  any  of  the  Orphan  Lambs  bleating  after 
their  great  Shepherd  ?  Is  your  mouth  opened  ?  Is  your  heart 
enlarged  ?  Is  your  foul  fwallowcd  up  in  God  ?  Does  Bethefda 
anfwer  its  name  ?  Is  it,  indeed,  an  houfe  of  mercy?  Thefts 
queftions,  I  hope  to  have  anfwer'd  in  the  affirmative.  If  you 
afk,  how  it  is  with  my  foul  ?  Blelled  be  God,  I  can  reply, 
<^  Very  well."  The  Lord  gives  me  a  feeling  poflefTion  of 
himfelf.  I  have  been  enabled  to  compofe  nine  difcourfes  for  the 
prefs.  God  willing,  you  fhall  hear  from  me  often.  I  write 
this,  that  I  m.ay  be  ready,  if  I  fliould  hear  of  any  fhip  coming 
your  way  immediately  upon  my  arrival  5  receive  it  as  a  token 
of  my  love,  which  God  knows  is  unfeigned,  from 

Your  afFe6lionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  IK 

LETTER     CCLXI. 

To  Mr,  y,  B ,  Charles-Town,. 

Dear  Mr,  B ,       On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb.  17,  1741. 

1  Think  I  owe  you  a  letter ;  I  believe  you  love  me  in  the 
bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  hope  our  love  is  reciprocal. 
How  can  it  be  otherwife  with  thofe,  who  have  drank  of  the 
fame  fpirit  ?  I  long  for  that  happy  time,  when  we  fhall  be 
fv/allowed  up  in  the  vifion  and  full  fruition  of  the  glorious 

G©dhcad» 


LETTERS.  245 

Godhead.  The  bunch  of  grapes  makes  me  long  to  eat  of  the 
full  clufters  in  the  heavenly  Canaan.  The  lirft-fruits  make 
me  pant  after  the  full  harveft.  Perhaps  you  may  go  and  par- 
take of  it  firft,  and  drink  new  wine  before  me  in  the  kingdom 
of  our  Father;  I  hope  I  fhall  not  ftay  long  after  you,  if  not 
called  before.  My  foul  is  fick  of  love.  Nothing  can  fatisfy 
it,  but  the  full  fight  and  enjoyment  of  Chrift.  He  now  vifits 
my  foul,  and  caufes  it  mightily  to  rejoice  in  hiafalvation.  How 
lovingly  he  hath  dealt  with  me  in  other  refpec^s,  letters  fent 
to  other  friends  can  beft  inform  you.  Hafte,  read,  hear,  and 
join  with  them  in  giving  thanks  and  praying  for 

Your  afFc£tionate  friend  and  brother  and  ("ervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER    CCLXII. 

Ti  Alrs>  8- ,  m  Charles-Towu. 

Dc'ur  Mrs.  S ,       On  board  the  Alincrva^  Fch,  J7,  1^41. 

MY  foul  is  now  in  an  heavenly  frame,  fwallowed  \i^  in 
God,  and  melted  down  by  the  love  of  my  dear  Lord 
Jesus.  It  is  aimed  too  big  to  fpeak.  I  wJll  give  it  vent  bv 
writing  to  you.  Our  mafter  hath  been  exceeding  graciou:., 
and  has  fnewn  me  feveral  tokens  for  good,  which  1  defired  oi 
him  in  fecret  prayer.  Laft  night,  I  think  I  received  as  full  fa- 
tisfaclion  as  I  could  del'ire,  in  refpecl  to  my  marriage,  I  believe 
what  I  have  done,  is  of  God  ;  the'  I  know  not  when  my  heart 
was  more  difengaged  from  earthly  thoughts  than  now.  I  on- 
ly defirc,  that  the  dear  Jesus  may  be  glorified  in  me,  whether 
it  be  by  life  or  by  death.  I  depend  on  your  fending  me  a  par- 
ticular account  of  affairs  at  Charks-Toiv?!,  I  have  wrote  to 
many;  you  will  hear  how  my  letters  are  received.  I  Ihall  ber 
glad  to  hear  how  it  is  with  your  own  foul.  I  befeech  yon  to 
live  near  to  Christ,  and  to  keep  up  a  holy  walk  with  Gou. 
Be  inward  with  God  in  your  duties.  Truit  and  hang  011 
God,  even  when  he  hides  himfelf  from  you.  He  will  be  your 
guide  unto  death.  .Hunger  and  thirft  daily  after  the  righteouf- 
nefs  of  Christ.  Be  content  with  no  degree  of  fan6lification. 
Be  always  crying  out,  "  Lord,  let  me  know  more  of  myfelf 
and  of  thee ;  O  let  me  receive  grace  for  grace  of  thy  dear  Son." 

R  3  This 


246  LETTERS. 

This,  at  prcfent,  is  the  full  dcfire  of  my  foul.  I  am  perfuaded 
the  Lord  will  fatisfy  it.  Gop  is  love;  we  cannot  think  too 
highly  of  him  ;  we  cannot  expe6l  too  great  thiiigs  to  be  done 
by  him.  His  right  hand,  I  believe,  will  bring  mighty  things  to 
pafs.  I  am  now  entering  on  a  fcene  of  trials.  The  LoRP 
hath  fcnt  me  on  the  fcas  to  prepare  me  for  them.  Not  that  I 
depend  on  any  flock  of  grace  already  received,  I  would  look 
to  Christ  continually.  But  whither  am  I  running  ?  I  forget 
myfelf.  I  almoft  fancy,  I  am  talking  with  you,  I  have  only 
room  to  acquaint  yoj,  that  dear  J — =«•  S--  ■  fits  by  me,  and 
cordially  falutes  you,  with 

Your  alleclionate  fiicnd,  brother,  and  fcryant  in  Christ, 

LETTER    CCLXIII. 

To  ike  Rev.  Mr.  S ,  Charles-Town. 

Rev.  and  dear  Sir,         On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb.  17,  I74I« 

YOU  have  been  very  kind  to  me  in  many  refpe^ls  ;  but  I 
have  been  ungrateful  to  you,  and  infinitely  more  fo  to 
ir.y  gracious  GcD.  I  have  not  failed  frequently  to  bemoan 
my  unworthinefs.  Since  I  have  been  on  board,  the  Lord 
hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  weeping,  and  now  fills  my  foul 
with  all  peace  and  joy  in  belie\'ing.  I  have  been  much  aflifted 
in  Gompofing  fermons  for  the  prefs.  At  prcfent  my  foul  is 
clofely  adverting  to  GoD,  who,  1  believe,  will  bring  me  fafe  to 
glory.  My  bodily  ftrength  is  much  renewed.  In  Ihort,  I  am 
comforted  on  every  fide.  Dear  Sir,  praife  the  Lord  in  my 
behalf,  O  let  us  magnify  his  name  together,  I  hope  you  feel 
what  it  is  to  havefellowfhip  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and 
experieiice   the  influences   of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  in    de]iverin<5 

your  blclTed  mafter's  meflage.     I  falute  Mr.  P and  your 

whole  church.  My  rcquefl:  is,  ♦'  Brethren,  pray  and  give 
thanks  for  us." — When  you  write  to  New-England^  pray  re- 
member me  to  all  friends  in  the  kindeft  manner.  Ihat  coun^ 
try,  and  the  people,  He  ^-ry  near  my  heart.  I  hope  to  be  fa- 
voured with  a  line  from  you  ere  I  return  from  Evgland.  Great 
perils  there  await  me^  but  Jesus  Christ  will  fend  his  angel, 
a:id  roll  ayvay  every  Hone  of  difficulty.  In  his  fticngth  alone 
I  is 


LETTERS.  247 

IS  my  truft,  and  for  his  fake  and  in  his  name,  I  fubfcribe  my- 
fclf,  reverend  and  dear  Sir, 
Your  afFcdtionate  brother  and  fcllow-labourcr  in  the  Lord, 

G.  fK 

LETTER     CCLXIV. 

To  Mr.  J H ,  at  Beti)cfda, 

On  hoard  the  Minerva^  Feb.  18,  \^\i» 
My  dear  Friend  and  Brother^ 

YESTERDAY  we  humbled  ourfelvcs  before  God,  and 
by  prayer  and  fading  fought  for  a  blcifing,  and  direction 
fn  all  our  affairs.  I  wifh  I  had  kept  family  fafts  at  Savannah. 
Suppofc  you  had  one  moiUhly  at  Bethefda?  You  will  fee,  by 

dear  Brother  B 's  letter,  the  frame  of  my  mind.  Since  that, 

I  have  been  a  little  in  the  valley,  but  the  Lord  is  my  com- 
forter. I  hope  I  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  my- 
felf,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  My  heart  is  much  united 

to  Meffrs.  W J,  tho'  we  differ  in  fome  particulars.     May 

God  make  us  of  one  minJ,  as  well  as  heart.  I  fliall  make  all 
poffible  hafte  back,  and  remit  money  to  you  as  often  as  I  can. 

Mr.  P tells  me,  his  brother  is  to  fend  you  upwards  of  a 

hundred  pounds,  and  I  fuppofe  other  fupplies  will  befent  from 
the  Northward.  I  have  alfo  wrote  to  Charles-Toiun.  I  am  per- 
fuaded  God  will  not  let  you  want.  I  would  not  have  any 
thing  left  undone,  that  is  neceffary  for  the  family's  comfort- 
able fubfiftence.  The  Lord  is  our  Shepherd,  therefore  we 
{hall  not  lack.  I  (hall  long  to  hear  how  the  blcffcd  Jesus 
deals  with  you.  He  is  wonderfully  gracious  unto  mc,  and  hath 
made  this  voyage  profitable  to  my  foul.  O  my  friend,  my 
friend,  the  Lord  be  with  you.  My  love  is  firm  to  you  at  the 
bottom,  tho*  fometimes  it  hath  ebbed  and  flowed  ;  in  heaven 
it  will  not  be  fo.  On  earth  it  is  needful  it  ftiould  ;  othcrwife, 
how  fhould  we  learn  to  ceafe  from  nian  ?  But  I  am  a  worm  and 
no  man,  and  deferve  to  be  the  outcaft  of  all  people.  My  eyes 
are  now  ready  to  gufli  out  with  water.  O  the  fovcreign  love 
of  Christ  in  chufmg  mc  !  My  dear  friend,  let  us  fludy  to 
be  holy  even  as  he  is  holy,  and  walk  even  as  he  alfo  walked, 
Let  thefe  be  your  daily  queftion';,  *'  Am  I  rpore  like  Christ  ? 

R  4.  Am 


248  LETTERS. 

Am  I  more  meelc  and  patient  ?  Does  my  pradice  correfpond 
with  my  knowledge,  and  am  I  a  light  to  enlighten  and  en- 
flame  all  that  are  around  me  ?"  I  could  %  more,  but  I  think 
to  write  again  when  I  get  on  (hore.  God  blefs  you  and  yours. 

J  fuppofe  you  have  heard  that  Mr.  P iails  with 

Your  afFedionate  friend,  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  JV, 

LETTER    CCLXV. 

To  Mr.  S If^ ,  at  Brijiol. 

On  hoard  the  Minerva y  Feb.  20,  1 741, 

AN  D  does  my  friend  W- look  again  towards  God  ? 
Never  did  the  Father  with  greater  joy  receive  the  re- 
turning prodigal,  than  I  fhall  embrace  you  in  thefe  unworthy 
arms,  if  you  are  alive  to  God.  I  truft  your  late  tepidity  will 
now  make  you  more  fervent  in  fpirit.  I  pray  God  to  give 
you  a  fettlement  in  Christ,  that  you  may  be  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love.  My  brother,  the  captain,  gave  me  a  parti- 
cular account  of  your  foul.  I  hope  he  will  yet  appear  for  God  ; 
will  you  alfo  appear  with  him  ?  Why  ihould  you  flrive  to 
pleafe  a  pleafure-taking  world  ?  Why  fhould  you  keep  in  league 
with  the  apparent  enemies  of  God  \  But  no  more  of  this. 
Let  old  things  pafs  away,  let  all  things  become  new.  I  believe 
God  fuiFered  you  to  fall,  becaufe  you  thought  more  highly  of 
yourfelf  than  you  ought  to  think.     My  love  to  all.     I  feel 

a  great  union  of  foul  with  Mr.  W- -;  we  differ  in  principles, 

but  I  hope  the  Lord  will  make  us  of  one  mind.     You  muft 

not  be  furprizedj  if  I  publifh  an  anfwer  to  Mr.  John  W 's 

fermon,  entitled.  Free  Grace.  It  is  wrote  in  much  Lve  and 
meeknefs.  Adieu  for  the  prefcnt.  Give  thanks  on  my  be- 
half.    The  Lord  hath   dealt  wonderoufly  kind  with,  dear 

Mr,  ,;r— ^, 

Yours  eternally  in  ChrisTj 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  249 

LETTER    CCLXVr. 

To  Mr,  T S ,  in  London, 

My  dear  Brother ^        On  board  the  Minervn^  Feb.  20,  1741, 

IHave  kept  your  letter  by  me  till  now,  that  I  might  anfwer 
it  on  my  voyage.  It  fpeaks  the  language  of  a  perplexed 
heart,  and  plainly  fhews  me,  that  fatan  loves  to  keep  us  ia 
bondage.  My  dear  Brother,  I  think  you  have  done  u^rong  in 
holding  your  peace.  I  am  fure  you  once  felt  that  freedom  of 
foul,  u'hich  you  are  a  ftranger  to  nov/.  The  way  of  duty  is 
the  way  of  fafety.  Whatever  you  may  fay  to  the  contrary, 
unlefs  you  will  give  the  lie  to  your  own  experiences,  you  muft 
confefs,  that  you  have  indeed  tafted  of  the  good  word  of  life. 
You  fhould,  therefore,  have  ,  went  forwards,  and  not  have 
turned  back  again,  and  thereby  plunged  yourfelf  into  dark- 
nefs ;  darknefs  that  may  be  felt.  Alas,  you  have  too  eagerly 
embraced  principles  (I  fear)  contrary  to  the  gofpel  ofCpiRisT. 
You  are  aiming  at  a  falfe  voluntary  humility,  and  are  return- 
ing back  to  the  flefh  pots  of  Egypt.  I  know  my  words  will 
have  but  little  force  with  fome,  but  I  muft  deliver  my  foul. 
God  was  once  pleafcd  to  work  upon  you  by  my  miniflry,  and 
therefore  I  am  more  folicltous  for  your  welfare.  I  know  the 
advice  you  would  give  me  is,  "  beJ^ilL''  I  hope  I  am,  fo  far 
as  really  to  know  the  Lord;  but  y^t  I  will Jirive^  yet  will 
I  walk  in  all  the  ordinances  of  God,  and  go  on  fi om  ftrength 
to  ftrength  till  I  come  to  appear  before  him  in  his  heavenly 
Zion.  I  write  this,  out  of  the  fulnefs  of  my  heart.  Indeed 
I  love  5'ou,  and  the  brethren ;  I  am  willing  to  be  the  fervant 
of  you  all.  I  am  lefs  than  the  leaft.  However,  I  dare  not 
embrace  tenets  that  are  not  agreeable  to  the  form  of  found 
words.  Let  mc  fee  you  as  foon  as  may  be  after  my  arrival, 
and  in  the  mean  while  accept  of  hearty  love,  from 

^  our  affectionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  JV. 


LETTER 


250  L    E    T    T    E    R    S, 

LETTER    CCLXVII. 

To  Mrs.  A  D. 
My  dear  Si/Ier,  On  beard  the  Muicrvay  Feb.  20,  174 1. 

MY  confcience  almoil  reproaches  me,  that  I  have  not 
wrote  to  you  often,  nor  full  enough  ;  accept  this  as  an 
acknowledgement  of  my  fault.  I  am  forry  for  it.  We  are 
now  about  a  thoufand  miles  off  England,  I  hope  this  will 
provoke  you  to  fend  me  a  letter  immediately  after  my  arrival. 
I  find  Luther  s  obfervation  to  be  true  :  "  Times  of  reforma- 
tion are  times  of  confufion  ;"  as  yet  the  churches  in  America 
are  quiet,  but  I  expe6^  a  fifting  time  ere  long.  My  family 
in  Georgia  was  once  fadly  fliakcn,  but  now,  blelTed  be  God, 
it  is  fettled,  and,  I  hope,  ellabliflied  in  the  docSlrines  of 
grace.  Your  name  is  precious  among  them.  I  wifli  you 
would  fend  them  a  long  letter.     Your  book  on  walking  with 

God  has  been  bleiled  to  one  Mr.  B ,  and  others  in  South' 

CaroUria.  It  hath  alfo  been  ferviceahle  to  a  dear  friend  nov/ 
with  me,  as  alfo  to  myfelf.  1  cannot  well  tell  you  what  great 
things  are  doing  abroad,  I  have  a  fccne  of  fufferings  lying  be- 
fore me ;  I  expect  (hortly  to  cry  out  with  the  fpoufe,  "  Look 
not  upon  me,  becaufe  I  am  black,  becaufe  the  fun  hath  looked 
upon  me,  my  mother's  children  were  angry  with  me."  Pvly 
Lord's  command,  now,  1  believe,  is,  "  Take  the  foxes,  the 
little  foxes  that  fpuil  the  vines ;  for  our  vines  have  tender 
grapes." — Help  me  by  your  prayers.  It  is  an  eafe  thus  to  un- 
bofom  one's  felf  to  a  friend,  an.^  an  inftancc  of  my  confidence 
in  you.  O,  my  dear  Sifter,  I  am  lefs  than  the  leaft  of  all 
faints,  I  am  the  chief  of  finners,  and  yet  Jesus  loves  me,  and 
fheds  his  love  abroad  in  my  heart  abundantly  by  the  Holy 
Ghoft.  1  have  been  much  aflifted  in  compofing  fome  gofpel 
fermons,  which  I  intend  for  the  prefs.  1  have  fought  the  Lord 
by  prayer  and  fafting,  and  he  allures  me,  that  he  will  be  with 
me.  Whom  then  ihould  i  fear  ?  Hitherto  we  have  had  an  ex- 
traordinary pailage,  praife  the  Lord.  Herewith  I  fend  you 
a  letter  from  one  of  the  children  which  God  has  given  me: 
He  will  rejoice  to  receive  a  line  from  you.  If  poiTible,  1  hope, 
tho'  you  are  in  the  decline  of  life,  to  lee  you  face  to  face  be- 

Ibre 


i 


LETTERS.  251 

fore  I  kuvc  England,  1  ihould  be  glad  to  hear  how  you  are 
3s  to  worldly  circumftances  5  if  I  can  help  you  in  any 
degree,  fieely  command 

Your   aflfeiTtionate  friend,   brother,   and   fcrvant 
in  Christ, 

LETTER    CCLXVIII. 

TCo  T K ,  at  London, 

On  hoard  the  Minerva^  Feb.  20,  1 74 1. 
My  dear  Brother  K , 

I  Received  your  kind  letter  at  Savannah^  and  though  I  hope 
to  fee  you  face  to  face  foon  after  you  receive  this,  yet  love 
to  your  dear  foul  conftrains  me  to  write  you  an  anfwcr  before 
I  come  on  fhore. 

I  find,  fmce  my  departure,  the  brethren   have  fallen   into 

errors.     Dear  Brother  K will  not  be  offended,  if  I  fayy 

•■'  He,  I  fear,  is  one  of  them  j"  for  his  letter  bewrayeth  him. 
My  dear  Brother,  you  fay,  ''  You  have  been  driving  a  long, 
long  while,  but  to  very  little  purpofe,  &c."     By  this,  I  fup- 
pofe,   you   have   left  off  the  means,  and  fallen  into  J?ttlnefs ; 
expecting  now,  that  Jesus  Christ  will  fo  work  upon  your 
heart,   that  you  fhall  not  feel  the  leaft  ftin  ing  of  indwelling 
corruption  in  your  foul  ;  in  (hort,  that  you  fhall  be  complete- 
ly perfect :  This  was  pretty  near  my  cafe  about  fix  years  ago, 
and  now  I   fee  why  God   fuffered  me  thus  to  be  tempted, 
''  that  I  might  be  more  capable  of  fuccouring  my  brethren, 
now  they  are  tempted."     My  dear  Brother,  let  us  reafon  to- 
gether.  "  You  have  been  ftriving  (you  fay)  a  long  while,  but 
to  very  little  purpofe."     And  what  then  ?  muft  you  be  there- 
fore ftill,  and  drive  no  more  ?    God  forbid  :  No,  you  are  yet 
to  wait  at  the  pool.    *'  Conftantly  attend  on  ordinances ;"  and 
who  knows  but  by-and-by  the  loving  Saviour  may  pafs  by  and 
vifityour  foul.     Have  you  not,  in  fome  degree  at  leaf!,  felt  his 
divine  power  in  the  ufe  of  the  means?  Why  fliould  not  that  en- 
courage you  to  expcdi  more  in  the  fame  way  ?  But  you  fay,  "  I 
find  all  that  is  of  felf  is  ftn."     And  do  you  expect  ever  to  do 
any  thing,  or  to  offer  up  to  God  one  facrificc,  without  a  mix- 
ture of  fin  in  it  r   If  you  do,  indeed  you  are  building  z  fplritual 
Babel,     My  dear  Brother,  even  our  moll  holy  thoughts  are 

tin6tured 


252  LETTERS. 

tinctured  with  fin,  and  want  the  atonement  of  the  Mediator  ; 
and  therefore,  if  you  leave  ofF  ftriving,  becaufe  "  whatever 
is  of  felf  is  fin,"  you  muft  never  attempt  to  do  any  duty  what- 
focvcr  again.  Your  ftilhiefs  hath  as  much  a  mixture  of  felf 
in  it,  as  your  ftriving,  and  if  you  proceed  in  this  manner,  you 
muft  become  a  profcllcd  ^uetijL  Six  weeks  did  fatan  keep 
me  under  this  delufion,  but  the  Lord  helped  me  in  the  hour 

of  extremity  :  May  he  alfo  help  my  dear  Brother  K / 

Another  error  you  feem  to  be  fallen  into  is,  "  that  a  man 
cannot  be  a  chriftian,  at  leaft  that  he  is  a  very  weak  one,  fo 
long  as  he  finds  corruption  ftirring  in  his  heart."  If  I  was  to 
urge  the  feventh  to  \\\q  Ro7nans,  you  would  fay,  St.  P^^// only 
fpeaks  of  a  man  under  firft-awakenings,  and  not  of  a  convert- 
ed man  3  but  my  dear  Brother,  did  you  ever  know  a  man,  that 
vas  not  really  converted,  delight  in  the  law  of  God  after  the 
inner  man  ?  And  yet  fuch  an  one  the  Apoftle  fpeaks  of  in 
the  latter  part  of  that  chapter.  Be  not  deceived,  wc  are  to  be 
holy  as  Christ  is  holy;  we  are  to  receive  grace  for  grace; 
every  grace  that  is  in  the  bleflTed  Jesus,  js  to  be  tranfplanted 
into  our  hearts;  we  are  to  be  delivered  from  the  power,  but 
not  from  the  indwelling  and  being  of  fin  in  this  life.  Hereaftery 
"we  are  to  be  prefented  blamelefs,  without  fpot,  or  wrinkle,  or 
any  fuch  thing.  If  you  labour  after  any  other  perfe6tion  here, 
you  will  labour  in  vain.  St.  Paul  had  attained  no  other,  when 
he  wrote  to  the  Fhilippiam^  and  to  the  other  churches  :   But 

my  dear  Brother  K feems  to  think,   "  I  did  wrong  in 

writing  to  Mr.  H to  know  his  fentiments  upon  feveral 

texts  of  fcripturc,  and  in  fending  for  feveral  oi  Calvin\  books." 
And  v/hy,  my  dear  Brother,  was  this  wrong  ?  Why  you  fay, 
*'  you  think  it  is  contrary  to  St.  Paul  in  his  Epiftles,  when 
he  fays,  he  would  not  fpeak  other  men's  words  ;"  hut  St,  Paul 
fays  no  fuch  thing  :  The  place  you  aim  at,  I  believe,  is  2  Cor. 
X.  16.  ''  And  not  to  boaft  In  another  man's  line,  of  things 
made  ready  to  our  hand."  My  dear  Brother,  examine  the 
context,  and  you  will  find  the  Apoille  means  no  more  than 
that  he  would  not  enter  into  other  men's  labours,  as  vcr.  15. 
He  would  not  preach  where  churches  were  already  fettled,  but 
go  where  the  gofpcl  had  not  been  delivered.  This,  and  this 
ciilv,  is  the  meming  of  the  paffi^oc,  which  dear  miftakcn  Mr. 

A'- 


LETTERS.  253 

K  has  wrongly  quoted.     My  dear  Brother,  did  not  St, 

Paul  bid  Timothy  to  give  himfelf  to  reading  ?  What, if  the  Holy- 
Spirit  is  to  lead  us  into  all  truth,  does  not  the  Holy  Spirit 
make  ufe  of,  and  lead  us  by  the  means  ?  Has  he  not  indited 
the  fcriptures  ?  Has  he  not  helped  holy  men  to  explain  thofe 
fcriptures  ?  And  why  may  I  not,  in  a  due  fubordination 
to  the  Holy  Spirit,  make  ufe  of  thofe  men's  writings  ?    Has 

not  my  dear  Brother  K bought  fermons  ?    And  why  then 

does  "  He  make  ufe  of  other  men's  words  ?"  O,  my  dear 
brother,  you  are  in  the  wilderncfs  j  God  bring  you  fafc  out 
of  it. 

I  fuppofc,  becaufe  the  DiiTenters  oppofe  fome  of  your  new 
principles,  you  term  them  enemies  j  but,  my  dear  Brother, 
though  there  are  many  Chriftlefs  talkers,  and  hypocritical 
formalifts  among  the  Dillenters,  as  no  doubt  there  are  fome 
fuch  in  the  pureft  church  under  heaven  \  yet  many  of  them 
hold  and  practice  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  But  I  have 
done.  Count  me  not  your  enemy,  becaufe  I  tell  you  the 
truth.  I  expe<5l  that  great  numbers  will  look  fiiy  on  me,  for 
thus  oppofmg  what  I  think  to  be  error.  Thus  the  Galatiam 
treated  St.  Paul\  but  I  muft  be  tried  every  way.  I  could 
add  a  thoufand  kind  things,  but  I  hope  you  fliortly  will  have 
a  pcrfonal  interview  with 

Your  afFedionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  n\ 

LETTER     CCLXIX. 

To  Mrs,  J F ,  m  Cbarles-Toivn, 

On  board  the  A<Iincrva,  Feb.  25,   1741. 
My  very  dear  Friend^ 

IKnow  you  will  rejoice  at  the  receipt  of  this  :  You  have 
abundant  reafon  ;  the  Lord  hath  been  wonderous  kind. 
We  are  now  flying  on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  and  if  it  con- 
tinues, we  hope  to  be  at  Coives  the  beginning  of  next  week. 
Your  kind  prefents  were  of  great  fervice  to  my  crazy  body. 
The  woman  pafTengcr  has  been  ferviccable  in  making  us  bread ; 
and  in  fhort,  God  has  v/onderfully  ordered  all  things  for  our 
great  conveniency  and  comfort.  O  that  my  dear  friends  at 
Charlci-Town^  may  hereby  be  excited  to  thankfulnefi  on  our 

behalf. 


2  54  ^    ^^     T     T     l\    R     S. 

behalf.  I  have  frequently  prayed  for  you  both  with  my  fricnJj, 
and  when  in  fccrct  before  the  Lord.     Indeed  you  are  feldoim 

out  of  mind.     Dear  Mrs.  F ,  I  believe  God  fent  you  to 

invite  me  to  your  houfc,  and  I  believe  the  Lord  will  plenti- 
fully reward  both  of  you,  for  all  your  works  of  faith  and  la- 
bours of  love.  1  think  henceforward  I  mufl:  call  you  ^^ti;^, 
and  your  hufband,  I  hope,  will  be  truly  ftiled  James  the  fervant 
of  the  Lord.  I  truft  you  will  both  ferve  the  Lord  Christ, 
and  give  yourfelves  up  to  the  guidance  of  his  bleiVed  word  and 
providences  day  by  day.  It  is  a  glorious  privilege  to  be  led 
by  the  fpirit  of  God.  I  think  I  have  felt,  and  do  feel,  at  thia 
time,  his  facrcd  influences  upon  my  foul.  My  body  is  but 
weak,  though  better  by  much  than  when  I  left  Charles-Toivn  ; 
however,  my  foul  hath  confidence  in  God.  The  archers 
will  (hoot  forely  at  me  that  I  may  fall ;  but  God  will  caufc 
my  bow  to  abide  in  flrength,  and  my  arms  (hall  be  ftrengthen- 
cd  by  the  hands  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob.  I  need  not  afk 
for  a  continuance  of  your  prayers,  nor  you  for  mine.  I  hope 
we  (hall  be  always  prefent  with  each  other  in  fpirit,  at  the 
throne  of  grace.  My  dear  friend,  adieu  :  All  with  me  falute 
you.     Write  often  to 

Your  unworthy  giicft,  but  truly  slTet^ionate  fervant, 
friend,  and  brotlier  in  the  Lord, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER     CCEXX. 

To  Mrs,  F ,  in  Churhs-Town, 

On  hoard  ihs  Ai'i'ierva^  Feb.  25,  1741. 

I  Hope  dear  Mrs.  F will  not  be  offended  with  thefe  few 
lines  ;  they  are  written  with  a  fmccre  defne  to  promote 
your  welfare.  1  want  to  fee  you  entirely  dead  to  the  worlds 
and  alive  to  (iod.  You  have  been  often  convinced  under  the 
word;  may  it  fink  deep  into  your  heart.  God,  by  the  late 
fire,  hath  fnewn  you  the  vanity  of  all  thiags  here  below  j  hence- 
forward fet  your  affections  on  things  above.  You  are  old, 
and  at  the  head  of  a  great  family  j  you  have  fealcd  your  pro- 
mife  to  lead  a  holy  life,  more  than  once,  by  receiving  the  fyni- 
bols  of  the  bleffcd  body  and  blood  of  Christ. 

Henceforth 


LETTER    S. 


JD 


/[c-ih-efjrth  lit  no  profane  delight 
Divide  your  confecr<ited  foul ; 
But  give  it  Christ,  who  has  the  right ^ 
Js  Lord  and  Majlcr  of  the  whole. 

Be  not  afliamed   to  own  you  have  vowed   never  to  dance 

again  :   Dear  Mrs.  F ,  fear  not  contempt.     What  is  it  \ 

only  a  little  breath.  Reft  not  in  duties ;  reft  not  in  outward 
partial  reformation. — He  that  is  in  Christ,  is  a  new  creature. 
That  old  things  may  pafs  away,  and  all  things  become  new 
in  your  heart,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of.  Madam, 

Your  fincerc  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER    CCLXXr. 

Ti?  the  Rev,  Mr,  C ,  in  Bojlon, 

On  board  the  Minerva^  Feb,  16^   I'J^u 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir^ 

ACCEPT  a  few  lines  from  one,  who  defires  feelingly 
to  ftile  himfelf,  iefs  than  the  leaft  of  all.  I  hope  you 
received  my  packet  from  Charles-Toivn  :  What  happened  to 
me  there,  was  only  an  earneft  of  future  trials,  God  hath 
ble/Ted  the  reading  of  the  prophecy  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah  to 
my  foul  ;  as  alfo  the  hiftory  of  fofeph^  and  hath  let  me  fee 
more  into  the  covenant  of  redemption  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son  :  I  am  more  and  more  in  love  with  the  good  old  Puri" 
tans ;  I  am  plcafed  at  the  thoughts  of  fitting  down  hereafter 
with  the  venerable  Cotton^  Norton^  Elliot y  and  that  great  cloud 
of  witnefTes,  which  firft  crofted  the  Weftern  ocean  for  the 
fake  of  the  gofpel,  and  faith  once  delivered  to  the  faints.  At 
prefent,  my  foul  is  fo  filled,  that  I  can  fcarce  proceed.  Dear 
Sir,  God  is  with  me  of  a  truth  ;  he  now  gives  me  a  feeling 
pofteftion  of  himfelf :  I  blefs  his  holy  name  for  fending  me  to 
fea ;  it  is  profitable  both  for  foul  and  body.  I  find  the 
Pfalmift's  words  to  be  true,  "  The  fccretof  the  Lord  is  with 
them  that  fear  him."  O  that  I  may  walk  humbly  with  my 
God  !     The  language  of  my  foul  is  this : 

Cor^eei 


2S$  LETTERS. 

CorreSi  me  when  I  go  nj}ray\ 
And  lead  me  in  thy  perfe£i  way. 

And  now,  dear  Mr.  C ,   I  have  in  fome  meafure  un* 

bofomed  my  heart.  What  fhall  1  fay  more  ?  Pray  for  me 
both  in  public  and  private  ;  give  thanks,  as  well  as  pray, 
efpccially  for  the  mercies  of  this  voyage.  Dear  Sir,  adieu  till 
1  come  on  {hore,  which  I  hope  will  be  very  fpeedily,  being 
now  in  foundings  j  then  you  fhall  hear  again,  God  willing* 
from 

Your  truly  aftedtionate  friend,  brother,  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CCLXXIL 

•        To  Mr,  y H . 

My  dear  Sir^  London,  March  25,  174T' 

1  Wrote  to  you  immediately  on  my  coming  on  fliore.  We 
arrived  at  Falmouth  laft  JP^ednefday  Vv^as  fevennight,  and  got 
here  the  Sunday  follov-^ing. — Blefied  be  God,  we  had  a  fum- 
mer's  paflage.  Many  of  our  friends,  I  find,  are  fadly  divided, 
and,  as  far  as  I  am  able  to  judge,  have  been  fadly  milled. 
Congregations  at  MoorfieUs,  and  Kcnnington  Common,  on  Sim- 
day ,  were  as  large  as  ufual. — On  the  following  week  days, 
quite  contrary  :  Twenty  thoufand  dwindled  down  to  two  or 
three  hundred.  It  has  been  a  trying  time  with  me.  A  large 
orphan  family,  confifting  of  near  a  hundred,  to  be  maintain- 
ed, about  four  thoufand  miles  off,  without  the  leaft  fund,  and 
in  the  deareft  part  of  his  Majefty's  dominions  ;  alfo,  above  2 
thoufand  pounds  in  debt  for  them,  and  not  worth  twenty 
pounds  in  the  world  of  my  own,  and  threatened  to  be  arreted 
for  three  hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  drawn  for  in  favour  of  the 
Orphaivtioufe,  by  my  late  dear  dcceafed  friend  and  fellow- 
traveller  Mr.  iS .    My  Bookfeller,  who,  I  believe,  has  got 

fome  ht'-ndreds  by  me,  being  drawn  away  by  the  M  ■  ns,  re-" 
fufes  to  print  for  me  ;  and  many,  very  many  of  my  fpiritual 
children,  who,  at  my  lafl  departure  from  England,  would  have 
plucked  out  their  own  eyes  to  have  given  to  me,  are  fo  prejudiced 
bv  the  dear  MefTrs.  JV,*s  dreiTmg  up  the  do6lrine  of  Ele6lion 
in  fuch  horrible  colours^  that  they  will  neither  hear,  fee,  nor 

give 


LETTERS.  257 

give  me  the  leaft  afliftance:  Yea,  fome  of  them  fend  threaten- 
ing letters,  that  God  will  fpeedily  deftroy  me.  As  for  the 
people  of  the  world,  they  are  fo  imbittered  by  my  injudicious^ 
and  too  fever e  exprejftons  againft  Archbifliop  Tiihtfon^  and  the 
Author  of  the  old  Duty  of  Man ^  that  they  fly  from  me  as  from 
a  viper  ;  and  what  is  moft  cutting  of  all,  I  am  now  con- 
ftrained,   on  account  of  our  differing  in  principles,  publicly  to 

feparate  from  my  dear,  dear  old  friends  Meflrs.  J —  and  C 

^ y^   whom  I  ftill  love  as   my  own   foul  :  But,  through 

infinite  mercy,  I  am  enabled  to  (Irengthen  myfelf  in  the  Lord 
my  God.  I  am  caft  down  but  not  deftroyed,  perplexed 
but  not  in  defpair.  A  few  days  ago,  in  reading  Bezas,  Life  of 
Calviii^  thefe  v/ords  v/ere  much  prefled  upon  me,  ''  Calvin  is 
turned  out  of  Geneva^  but,  behold  a  new  church  arifes  !" — • 
Jesus,  the  ever  loving,  altogether  lovely  Jesus,  pities  and 
comforts  me.  My  friends  are  creating  a  place,  u'hich  I  have 
called  a  Tabernacle,  for  morning's  expofition.  I  have  not,  nor 
can  I  as  yet,  make  any  colledions ;  but  let  us  not  fear. — Our 
heavenly  Father,  with  whom  the  fatherlefs  find  mercy,  v.ill 
yet  provide  ;  let  us  only  feek  firft  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
his  righteoufnefs,  and  all  other  neceflluy  things  fhall  be  added 
unto  us.  In  about  a  fortnight,  though  I  fcarce  know  an  oak 
from  a  hickery,  or  one  kind  of  land  from  another,  I  am  fub- 
pcena'd  to  appear  before  parliament,  to  give  an  account  of  the 
condition  of  the  province  of  Georgia,  when  I  left  it.  This,  I 
fuppofe,  is  occafioned  by  the  party,  which  hath  been  fo  in- 
veterate againft  the  honourable  thetruftees,  whom  they  accufe 
of  mifemploying  the  public  monies.  The  event,  which  un- 
doubtedly will  be  in  favour  of  the  truft,  you  may  know  here- 
after.    In  the  mean  while,  believe  me  to  be 

Yours  moft  affedlionately, 

LETTER     CCLXXIII. 

To  Mr.  J C- — . 

My  very  dear  Brother^  London^  March  25,  1 741. 

HASTEN  hither  with  all  fpeed,  and  then  we  ftiall  fee 
what  God  intends  to  do  for  and  by  us.     It  is  a  trying 
time  now  in  the  church. — The  Lord  give  us  a  due  mixture 
Vol.  L  S  of 

6 


25S  letters; 

of  the  h^mb  and  lion.  Some  that  have  been  led  altiay,  begin 
to  recover.  .  The  Lord  make  way  for  his  own  truths.  My 
love  to  the CoIIiers^znd  all  friends.  Many,  1  fuppofe,  will  be  fliy. 
I  am  become  a  monfter  even  to  feveral  who  were  wrought  upon 
by  my  miniftry;  but  it  muf!:  needs  be  that  ofFcnces  fhouldcome: 
otherwife,  how  fhould  I  learn  to  ceafe  from  man  ?  Adieu  j 
cxcufe  brevity — Haftcn,  and  fpeak  face   to  face  with 

Yours  mod  afFeclionately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G\  IK 

LETTER     CCLXXIV. 

To  Mr.  H . 

My  vrry  dear  Friend,  London^  April  ic,   1741. 

I  Ordered  Mr.  H to  fend  you  fome  fermons  and  ac- 
counts, fome  time  ago  :  I  fuppofe  he  has  done  it.  I  have 
been  at  the  Parliament-houfe  ;  the  Georgia  afFair  was  adjourn- 
ed. The  gentlemen  feemed  apprehenfive  that  my  account  oS. 
tlie  colony,  would  have  too  mu.ch  weight.  It  was  fomewhat 
of  a  trial  to  be  in  the  Houfe.  I  then  remembered  what  the 
Apoftle  faid,  "  We  are  become  a  fpectacle  to  men  and  to 
sngels."  J^Iy  appeal  will  come  to  nothing,  1  believe.  1  have 
waited  upon  the  Speaker  j  he  received  me  kindly.  I  cannot 
yet  determine  "When  I  fhall  fee  you.  If  you  fear,  I  hope  you 
will  pray   for  me.     The  Lord  blefles   my   miniftry.     Salute 

dear  Mrs.  // ;    I  will   write  to  her  next  j  but  you  two 

are  one.  The  Lord  be  with  you  both.  At  prefent  I  am 
weak  in  body,  and  therefore  muft  beg  leave  to  fubfcribe 
rr.yfclf 


Yours,  5cc. 


G.  n\ 


L  E  T  T  E  R    CCLXXV. 

To  Air.  S AI '5  at  Loudon, 

My  dear  Friend  and  Brother,  BrijJsl^  April  27,  1741. 

ON  Tuefday,  April  2 2d,  I  left  London,  and  preached  ou 
jycdnefday  and  Thurjday  mofning  at  Neivlury,  to  large 
coiigregations.  .  On  Friday  evening  I  preached  at  Brijtd,  and 
huvc  continued  to  do  fo  twice  every  dav  Co  great  and  aftccicd 

auditories. 


LETTERS.  250 

S'uiltorles,  I  received  your  kind  letter,  and  thank  you  for  it. 
I  rejoice  in  the  good  news  from  New- England.  Lad:  night,  I 
rejoiced  much  in  feeing  a  foul  wonderfully  exult  in  God,  juft 
lit  the  borders  of  death.  Great  manifeftations  of  the  divine 
prefcnce  have  attended  my  fermons.     "  Praife   the  Lord  O 

my  foul  !    I  am  glad  to  find  Mr.  S goes  en    well.     Pray 

give  my  love  to  brother  G .    My  body  is  fometimcs  weak, 

but  my  foul  rejoices  in  God  my  Saviour.  I  know  not,  whe- 
ther I  iliall  come  fo  foon  as  propofcd  to  London.  I  find  it 
njccfiary,  through  the  incrcafe  of  awakened  fouls,  to  get  a 
fociety-room  built  adjoining  to  our  nev/  tabernacle.  I  pray 
God   to  fill  it  with  his  glory,   and  beg  leave  to  fubfcribe  my- 

felf,    dear  Mr.  M , 

Your  afFeclionute  friend,  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  Ji\ 

LETTER    CCLXXVL 

To  Mr.  H H . 

My  dear  Brother.,  Brljlol,  April  28,  174?. 

BLESSED  hz  God  for  knitting  us  together  in  love. 
May  it  continue,  and  incrcafe  till  confummated  in  eter- 
nity !  The  Lord  Jesus  direcT:  you.  It  is  now  a  trying  time 
with  the  church.  Our  LoRp  is  now  chiefiy  wounded  in  the 
lioufe  of  his  friends.  The  Lord  keep  us  both  from  a  party 
fpirit  on  one  hand,  and  from  too  much  rafiinefs  and  pofitivc- 
nefs  on  the  other.  I  fpeak  thus,  bccaufe  you  fecm  offended 
that  fome  affirm,  ''  That  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  dominion 
over  indwelling  fin,  nor  reft  from  Working  for  life  wholly." 
Now  this  is  certainly  true  in  one  fenfe.  We  fhall  never  b:ive 
fuch  a  dominion  over  indwelling  fin,  as  entirely  to  be  deliver- 
ed from  the  ftirring  of  it ;  and  the  grcateft  faint"  cannot  be  af- 
fured,  but  fome  time  or  other  for  his  humiliation,  or  punifh- 
ment  for  unfaithfulnefs,  God  may  permit  it  to  break  out  into 
icme  a6iual  breach  of  his  law,  and  in  a  grofs  v/2y  too.  Let 
us  not  be  high-minded,  but  fe:ir.  It  is  equally  true,  that  w« 
(hall  not  reft  wholly  from  working  for  \\i^.  tor  whilft  there 
is  any  part  of  us  unr^generate,  that  part  wilt  be  always  lead- 
ing us  to  the  old  covenant.  Luther  often  complained  of  the 
propenfity  of  his  heart  this  way.  If  we  know  ourfclves,  we 
ih*li  find  it  to  b^  \q  wilh   us  \   but  I  fuppofe  you  have  been 

S  2  tin«Sl«rci 


260  LETTERS. 

tin(£lured  with  the  do£lrine  o^  fmlefs  perfe^lon.  No  wonJef 
therefore  you  write  thus.  May  God  give  you  a  right  judg- 
njent  in  all  tilings,  and  enable  you  rightly  to  divide  the  word 
of  truth  !  As  for  affitrance^  I  cannot  but  think,  all  who  are 
truly  converted  niuft  know  that  there  was  a  time  in  which 
they  clofcd  with  Christ  :  But  then,  as  fo  many  have  died 
only  with  an  humble  hope,  and  have  been  even  under  doubts 
and  fears,  though  they  could  not  but  be  looked  upon  as  chrif- 
tlans  ;  I  am  lefs  pofitive  than  once  I  was,  left  haply  I  fhould 
condemn  fome  of  God's  dear  children.  The  farther  we  go 
in  the  fpiritual  life,  the  more  cool  and  rational  fliall  wc  be, 
and  yet  more  truly  zealous.  I  fpeak  this  by  experience.  Dear 
brother  H will  not  be  angry  with  me.  I  hope,  and  be- 
lieve, you  pray  for  me.  The  Lord  Jesus  carries  me  on. 
Many  have  been  convinced  at  London,  I  preach  here  twice 
daily,  to  large  congregations,  with  great  power.  The  Lord, 
I  believe,  will  yet  bring  mighty  things  to  pafs.     I  am,  dear 

H , 

Your  moft  afFe6lionate  brother 

in  our  dear  Lord  Jesus, 

LETTER    CCLXXVIL 

To  the  Rev,  Mr.  S 

Rev.  and  dear  i^/r,  Brijiol^  May  r,  1741. 

I  Am  glad  to  hear  by  brother  M -,  that  the  Lord  is 
with  you.  May  you  increafe  with  all  the  increafe  of  God. 
The  more  we  do,  the  more  we  may  do  for  the  dear  Lord 
Jesus.  He  ftrengthens  me  here  mightily. — I  am  enabled  to 
fpeak  here  with  great  power,  rather  greater  than  when  at  Lon- 
don. My  congregations  are  as  large  as  ufual,  and  they  go 
refreflied  away.  This  is  the  Lord's  doings ;  may  all  that  is 
within  us  praifc  his  holy  name  !  Exhort  the  dear  London  people 
to  pray  tor  u^.  The  Lord  be  with  you  all.  Dear  Sir,  pray 
for 

Your  alFedlionate  brother  and  ufiworthy 

fellow-labourer  in  our  Lord, 
G,  IV. 


LETTER 


,       LETTERS.  261 

LETTER    CCLXXVIII. 

To  Mr,  S ,  at  JVorceficr, 

Reverend  and  dear  Sir^  Gloncejler^  May  ^^  i74Jf' 

WITH  this,  I  fend  you  my  anfwer  to  brother  Wejleys 
fcrmon,   and  my  account   of  the  Orphan-houfc.     I 

have  feen  your  letter  to  Mr.  N ,  and  thank  you  for  cfpouf- 

jng  the  caufe  of  a  poor  defpifed  minifter  of  Jesus  Christ.  I 
hope  as  I  make  advances  in  the  fpiritual  life,  I  fliall  Ihow  my 
zeal  more  and  more  tempered  with  true  chriftian  knowledge 
and  prudence.  I  would  willingly  have  none  of  my  wild  fire 
minfrled  with  the  facred  fire  that  comes  down  from  God's 
altar.  I  defire  not  only  to  do  things  for  God,  but  to  do  them 
in  the  befl  manner.  I  am  a  poor  unworthy  fmner,  and  yet, 
(O  fovereign  grace  !)  the  Lord  works  by  me  day  by  day.  At 
Brijlol^  error  is  in  a  great  meafurc  put  a  flop  to.  The  Lord 
manifeftcd  himfelf  in  the  great  congregation  there,  and  doth 
likewile  here.     Laft  night,  wc  faw  and  felt  his  power.   I  have 

had  the  pleafure  of  feeing  dear  Mr.  P ,  and  I  long  for  that 

time  when  I  fliall  fee  you,  Reverend  Sir,  and  all  the  chofcn 
of  God  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  I  defire  to  wait  till 
my  change  fliall  come.  Dear  Sir,  be  plcafed  to  pray  for  me. 
I  have  prayed  for  you  often.  I  am  a  weak  fmful  worm.  As 
fuch  pray  remember,  Reverend  Sir, 

Your  afFedionate  though  unworthy  brother 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 
G.ir, 
LETTER     CCLXXIX. 

To  Mr,  IVm,  IV ,  at  Edinburgh^ 

Dear  Sir,  Bri/Iol,  May  16,  1741. 

I  Received  both  your  kind  letters,  and  with  this  fend  you  my 
hearty  thanks  for  them.  1  alfo  thank  you  for  your  kind 
\n\'\i2iX.io\\  o^  mQ  to  Scotland.  God  only  knows  when  lean 
come. — All  I  can  fay  at  prefent  is,  I  will  come  when  the 
LoPD  permits.  Sad  tares  have  been  fown  here.  It  will  re- 
quire fome  time  to  pluck  them  up.  The  doclrines  of  the  gof- 
pel  are  fadly  run  down,  and  moft  monflrous  errors  propagated. 
They  aflert,  "  That  the  very  in-being  of  fm  muft  be  taken 
out  of  us,  or  otherwifc  we  are  not  new  creatures."     O   dear 

S  3  Sir, 


262  LETTERS. 

Sir,  exhort  all  to  pray  for  mc,  that  I  may  be  faithful  to  my 
J^ORD,  and  yet  kept  gentle  in  my  temper.  At  prefent,  our 
dear  Lord  caufes  me  to  triumph  in  eveiy  place.  His  gofpcl 
gets  ground,  and  his  power  is  manifefted  among  us  day  by 
day.  The  fields  are  white,  every  where  ready  unto  harveft. 
Our  Lord  I  truft  will  gather  his  wheat  into  his  heavenly  gar- 
ners.    My  kind  refpects  attend  Mr.  M and  Mr.  D -. 

Had  I  time  I  would  write  a  long  letter  to  each.  But  I  am 
interrupted.  However,  I  am  glad  to  fnatch  a  few  moments  to 
bco;  a  continuance  of  your  prayers  for  a  poor  unworthy  worm, 
^nd  to  afTure  you  that  I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  afFe£lionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER    CCLXXX, 

To  Mr,  E E ,  at  Sterling. 

Jlevere7id  and  dear  Sir ^  BriJloU   May  i6,  I74I» 

I  Owe  you  much  love.  Only  want  of  time,  prevents  my 
writing  to  you  oftner.  This  morning  I  received  a  kind 
lettter  from  your  brother  Ralphs  v/ho  thinks  it  bed  for  me 
wholly  to  join  the  a^ciate  prefbytery,  if  it  fhould  pjeafe  God 
to  fend  me  into  Scotland.  This  I  cannot  altogether  come  into. 
I  come  only  as  an  occahonal  preacher,  to  preach  the  fimple 
c;ofpel  to  all  that  are  willing  to  hear  me,  of  whatever  denomi- 
ration.  It  will  be  wrong  in  me  to  join  in  a  reformation  as  to 
church  government,  any  further  than  I  have  light  given  me 
from  above.  If  I  am  quite  neuter  as  to  that  in  my  preach- 
ins:,  I  cannot  fee  how  it  can  hinder  or  retard  any  defign  you 
may  have  on  foot.  My  bufinefs  feems  to  be,  to  evangelize,  to 
be  a  Prefbyter  at  large.  VVhen  I  fliall  be  fent  into  your  parts 
I  know  not.  I  write  this,  that  there  may  not  be  the  leaft 
iiiifunderftanding  between  us.  1  love  and  honour  the  aflb- 
ciate  Prefbytery  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  With  this 
J  fend  them  my  due  refpeds,  and  moft  humbly  beg  their  pray- 
ers. But  let  them  not  be  offended,  if  in  all  things  I  cannot 
immediately  fall  in  with  them.  Let  them  leave  me  to  God. 
Whatever  li^ht  he  h  plcafed  to  give  me,  I  hope  I  Ihall  be 
faithful  to  it.  Our  dear  and  precious  mafter  ftill  carries  me 
on,     Gop  enables  ine  to  nght  my  way  through.     The  gofpel 

doctrines^ 


LETTERS.  263 

do«£ir:ncs,  I  believe,  will  yet  prevail.  I  feel  a  divine  power 
attending  mv  miniftrations.  I  preach  twice  daily,  and  am 
invited  to  many  places.  I  believe  the  Lord  intends  to  Iceep 
me  on  this  fide  the  water  tor  fome  time.  Hlcflcd  be  God, 
all  places  are  alike  to  me^  O  dear  Sir,  pray  for  me. — I  am  a 
poor  unvvoithy  worm.  I  love  you  tenderly,  but  am  almolt 
alhamed  to  fubfcribe  myfelf 

Your  brother  in  the  beft  of  bonds, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCLXXXI. 

Tg  D A 5   In  London. 

Biijiol,  May  16,  1 741. 

I  Am  glad  to  receive  a  line  once  again   from  dear  brother 
A .     I  rejoice  that  God  lets  you  fee  more  and   more 

into  the  corruptions  of  your  heart.  The  more  perfc(Sl  you  are, 
the  more  will  you  fee  and  bewail  your  imperfe6lions  in  thought, 
word,  and  deed  j  the  more  will  you  be  made  to  ^\ng^  ^'  In 
the  Lord  alone,  and  not  in  myfelf,  have  I  compleat  righte- 
oufnefs  and  llrength."  The  do6lrine  of  eledling  love,  is  pre- 
cious to  my  foul.  I  am  enabled  to  fpeak  of  it  feelingly  to 
others.  My  foul  is  kept  in  peace  and  fweetnefs.  Our  Lord's 
caufe  needs  net  noife  and  raflinefs.  I  defire  that  none  of  my 
wlld-iire  maybe  mixed  with  the  pure  fire  of  holy  zeal  coming 
from  God's  altar.  I  think  it  my  (lixty  to  wait,  to  go  on  lim- 
ply in  preaching  the  everlafling  gofpc!,  and  I  believe  we  iliall 
yet  fee  the  falvation  of  God.  Methinks,  the  cloud  begins  to 
break  off  your  mind  ;  I  pray  God  to  keep  you  from  extremes. 

Brother  H is  more   and  more  enlightncd  ;  but  withal, 

more  and  more  quickened  every  ^txy,  ■  He  finds  there  is  no 
fuch  thing  zsfmlefs  perfection,  and  yet  is  prelTing  after  holinefs 
of  heart  and  life  rather  more  than  ever.     May  God  make  my 

dear  brother  A thus   minded  !    For   indeed  I  love  him 

in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  Wc  have  had  frequently 
fweet  communion  with  God,  and  one  anotlver.  I  fliould  have 
rejoiced  to  have  converfed  with  you  at  BriJloL  Thh  is  my 
comfort,  yet  a  little  while  and  we  (IkiII  converfe.in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven,  for  ever  and  ever.  My  foul  is  waiting  for 
this  falvacion.  I  know  not  when  I  lli^l)  go  Xq  Axmwjief, 
■    ^  %  ^  When 


2^4  LETTERS. 

When  I  do,  you  fhall  have  timely  notice.  God  blefTes  my 
miniftry,  wherever  he  fends  me.     I  am  invited  to  frefh  places 

daily.     Dear  Mr.  A ,  I,  even  vi^orthlefs  I,  fubfcribe  my- 

fclf, 

Years  moft  afFe<51ionately  in  the  loving  Jesus, 

G,  IF. 

LETTER    CCLXXXII. 

To  Mr.  I e . 

Dc-ar  Brother  C ,  Brijiol^  May  i8,  1 741. 

I  Received  your  letter  this  morning,  and  am  jufl  fctting  out 
for  JViliJhire.  The  Lord  hath  been  much  w^ith  us. 
Yeflerday  I  preached  three  times.  At  every  fermon,  a  fweet 
melting  was  obferved  in  the  congregation.  Lall  night  I  gave 
your  fifter   the   facrament ;  fhc  is   recovering.     I  afterwards, 

adminiftcrcd  the  facrament  at  Mr.  T -'s,  and  had  a  love  feaft, 

Jesus  was  in  the  midft  of  us.  I  know  not  but  I  may  come 
towards  London  next  y/eek.  I  wonder  not  at  your  heavinefs. 
< — Before  every  increafe  of  your  work,  you  muft  expert  fome 
trials.     Humblings  are  neceilary  for  your  fpirit,   and  mine.    I 

return  my  love  to  all.     I  muft  away.    Brother  H rejoices 

in  fpirit,  and  joins  with  me,  who  am. 

Ever  yours  in  Christ, 
G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCLXXXIIL 

ro  the  Rev.  Mr.  J. 
My  dear  Br  other  .^  Br'ijhl.,  May  23,  1741. 

IBlefs  God  for  making  any  thing  of  mine  ufeful  to  your 
foul.  May  the  blefled  Jesus  breathe  upon  you  day  by  day, 
and  make  you  eminently  ufeful  to  the  church  of  God.  I 
think  you  write  with  a  kind  of  prophetic  fpirit.  The  Lord 
only  knov/s  how  he  will  be  pleafed  to  difpofe  of  me.  Great 
afflicSlions  I  am  fure  of  having,  and  a  fudden  death,  bleffcd 
be  God,  will  not  be  terrible.  1  know  that  my  redeemer  liveth. 
I  every  day  long  to  fee  him,  that  I  may  be  free  from  the  re^ 
mainder  of  fm,  and  enjoy  him  without  interruption  for  ever- 
more, I  defire  patiently  to  wait,  till  my  bielTed  change  fhall 
:  com^. 


LETTERS.  265 

come.  The  Lord  hath  been  with  mc  here.  There  is  a 
great  awakening  in  JViltJh'irc,  and  the  work  is  moft  wonder- 
fully carried  on  in  New-Efighmd.  I  hope  to  lend  you  a  letter, 
ftiortly,  that  will  rejoice  your  heart.  I  leave  Briftol^  and  ^o 
through  I f'^iltjhire  io  Louden  next  Monday.  —  I  then  purpofe 
going  to  StCiffordjlnre^  and  then  through  fj'alcs  to  Scotland,  A 
wider  door  than  ever  is  opened  for  preaching  the  everlafting 
gofpel.  I  have  now  only  lime  to  beg  your  prayers,  and  to 
jiITure  you  that  I  am 

Your  moft  afFedtionate  though  weak  and  unworthy 

brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER.     CCLXXXIV. 

•        To  Mr.   I R ,  at  Philadelphia. 

Dear  I ,  Br'ijicl^  May  23,  1741. 

I  Rejoice  to  find,  that  you  fee,  feel,  and  bewail,  the  plague 
of  your  heart,  ^4ay  the  Lord  fhew  it  you  more  and 
more  !  It  will  excite  your  love  to  the  dear  Lord  Jesus  more 
fervently. — I  return  my  love  to  your  fifter.  1  thought  ere  now 
(he  had  been  with  Jesus.  I  believe,  fhe  has  the  grace  of  God 
in  truth,  and  therefore  our  Lord  will  make  her  conqueror  over 
all.  I  am  glad  to  hear  of  the  fuccefs  of  the  gofpel  \i\  Bcjlon. 
It  is  a  gathering  time  there,  but  a  winnowing  time  with  us 
here.  All  is  ordered  for  the  good  of  the  church,  by  Christ 
Jesus  :  Let  us,  my  dear  brother,  keep  clofe  to  him  in  this 
and  every  trying  time.  Wefliall  find  but  few,  very  {f:.\N.,  true 
followers  of  the  Lamb  of  God.  JMay  you  and  I  be  in  the 
happy  number  !  God  is  plea  fed  to  give  fuccefs  to  the  word 
preached.  Though  I  am  oppofed  much,  Jesus  is  my  flrenf^th. 
The  Lord  v/ill  enable  me  to  fight  his  battle?.  My  love  to 
Pe^gy-i  and  all  that  love  Jesus.     Forget  not  to  pray  for 

Your  affectionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 


LETTER 


i66  LETTERS. 

LETTER     CCLXXXV. 

To  Mr,  r . 

Dtar  Sir,  BriJI:!^  May  23,  1 74 1. 

I  Am  glad  to  receive  a  letter  from  you.  I  was  fearful,  left  I 
had  done  fomcthing  to  offend  you.  I  thank  j^ou  and  the 
other  gentlemen  for  their  kind  invitation  of  jnc  to  Scotlan/I.  I 
believe  it  will  be  near  three  months  before  I  can  fee  Ed'mhiirgh. 
On  Monday  I  fet  out  for  London  :  then  I  plirporc,  God  willing, 
to  go  Into  EJc-x,  and  then  to  return  through  B rijh I  znd  Wales 
in  my  way  to  you.  I  intreat  all  the  brethren  to  pray  for  me, 
that  I  may  come  in  the  fulnefs  of  the  bleiTmg  of  the  gofpel 
of  Christ.  I  am  a  poor,  v/eak,  unv/orthy  worm.  God 
hath  been  wnth  me  here,  and  in  Glouccjierjhire,  In  JViltJInre 
there  is  a  great  awakening.  Abroad  in  New-England  the 
work  goes  on  wonderfully.  O  dear  Sir,  never  was  fuch  a 
weak  wretch  fent  on  fuch  an  important  errand.  I  have 
many  trials  of  various  kinds.  Jesus  fupports  me;  Jesus 
makes  me  more  than  conqueror.  He  is  a  dear  and  a 
tender  mafter.  Dear  Sir,  help  me  to  praife  him.  I  will 
write  to  all  the  gentlemen  that  wrote  to  me,  if  I  can 
any  ^vay  redeem  time.  In  the  mean  while,  be  pleafed  ta 
remember  me  to  them  in  the  kindefl  manner,  and  believe 
mc  to  be 

Vour  affedionate  though  unworthy  brother 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER     CCLXXXVI. 

To   Mr,   J EI ,    at   Savommk 

London,   "Jwu  i,    1741. 
7\/Ty  very  dear  Friend  and  Brother, 

I  Received  a  (liort  letter  from  you,  but  it  was  date<3  in  Janu- 
ary laft.- — I  have  fent  feveral  to  Georgia,  and  lately  alfo  a 
parcel  of  things  for  the  children.  God  appears  much  in  our 
congregations.  We  feldom  or  never  have  a  dry  meeting.  As 
to  outward  things,  I  never  was  more  embarrafied  ;  but  my  con- 
folations  are  equivalent.  Praife  the  Lord,  O  my  foul!  lam 
apprehenfive  of  no  oppofition  from  the  government.     I  have 

waited 


LETTERS.  2C7 

waited  on  the  Speaker.  He  treated  me  kindly,  and  affiired 
me  that  there  would  be  no  perfecution  in  this  king's  reign  ; 
they  know  I  am  loyal  from  principle,  but  I  believe  1  fhall  yet 
be  greatly  humbled,  T.  he  ftory  of  "Jojcph  in  the  priTon,  and 
David  in  his  troubles  before  he  came  to  the  throne,  has  been 
much  and  comfortably  prefled  upon  my  foul.  1  hope  you  en- 
joy peace  !  May  the  Lord  blefs  you  and  the  whole  houfehold. 
I  am  fometimes  enabled  to  pray  with  great  faith  for  you  all. 
The  Lord  will  yet  provide.  I  am  to  preach  thrice  to  day.  It 
is  now  paft  five  in  the  morning.  I  am  going  to  the  tabernacle 
lately  erected  for  a  morning  lecflure.  We  have  fwcet  meet- 
ings, bleilcd  be  GoD  !  In  the  bowels  of  our  common  Jesus, 
\  iubfcribe  myfelf 

Yours  cternallv, 

G,  jy. 

LETTER    CCLXXXVII. 

To  Mr.  I,  C ,  at  BriJioL 

London^  June  3,  1 74 1. 
Have  enjoyed  the  efpecial  prefence  of  God  ever  fmce  I 


I 


came  to  Loyidon,  I  preach  three  times  daily.  The  Lord 
is  remarkably  with  me.  Congregations  increafe.  I  am  going 
to  have  a  fociety-room  joined  to  the  tabernacle.  The  Lord  is 
really  on  our  fide. — O  let  us  be  meek  and  quiet  !  O  let  us 
wait,  and  we  fliall  fee  the  falvation  of  God.  I  preach  daily 
3t  Deptford.  Our  dear  mafter  helps  me  to  preach  and  pray 
with  great  power.  Your  miniftry  hath  been  blefTed.  Let  us 
both  give  all  the  glory  to  everlaftjng  Love.  Salute  the  dear 
prethren.  Renuimber  me  moft  kindly  to  all  in  JVinc-Jlrcci. 
Ever  yours  in  the  blefied  Jesus, 

G.  W. 


LETTER     CCLXXXVUL 

Jo  Mr.  R E^Ajk^^AH..-^ 

Reverend  aTid  dear  Sir^  London,  June  4,  1741. 

Have  now  a  little  time  to  mvfelf.     I  muft  improve  it  and 


I 


anfwer  your  kind  letter,     JilclTed  be  God,  for  enabling 

Hie 


268  LETTERS. 

mc  to  write  any  thing,  that  may  be  of  fervice  to  his  church, 
and  of  comfort  to  your  foul.  Glory  be  to  our  dear  and  com- 
mon Lord,  his  caufe  here  fucceeds.  Truth  gets  ground. 
The  Lord  ftrengthens  mc  mightily.  His  power  is  manifefted 
in  our  congregations.  Converfion  work  is  going  on  apace 
among  us.  I  am  not  yet  determined,  about  the  exa£t  time  of 
coming   to   Scctland :    but   I  believe,  I  fhall  be  with   vou 


m 


about  three  months.  I  can't  but  think  the  afTociate  prefbytery, 
arc  a  little  too  hard  upon  me.  If  I  am  neuter  as  to  the  par- 
cular  reformation  of  church  government  till  I  have  further 
light,  it  will  be  enough.  I  come  fnnply  to  preach  the  gofpel, 
and  to  be  received  only  as  an  occafional  itinerant  preacher  by 
all,  and  not  to  enter  into  any  particular  connection  whatever. 
The  Lord,  I  hope,  will  order  my  goings  in  his  ways.  I  de- 
fire  to  hear  frequently  from  you.  I  have  need  of  your  prayers. 
My  trials  are  great,  my  comforts  far  greater,  I  am  a  poor 
worm,  and  yet  Jesus  delights  to  honour  me.  We  are  likely 
to  have  fettled  focieties  in  feveral  places.  Jesus  rides  on  from 
conquering  to  conquer.  I  am,  Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 
Your  unworthy  fellow-labourer  and  afFedionate 
brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  JK 

LETTER     CCLXXXIX. 

My  Brother  H H ,  London^  June  6,  1741. 

I  Do  aflure  you,  that  my  heart  is  as  your  heart.  I  am  quite 
fick  of  CbrijVcfs  confenters.  They  talk,  and  that  is  all.  I 
(like  you)  am  heartily  defpifed  by  mod  of  them.  I  am  refolvcd 
to  open  againil:  their  luke-warmnefs,  and  worldly-mindcdncfs. 
May  God  open  my  mouth  wide  when  I  come  to  Wales.  Outr 
ward  enemies  are  now  more  quiet.  Enemies  within  the  church, 
carnal  profclTors,  and  felf-righteous  Pharifees,  moft  try  us.  Let 
us  not  fear,  Jesus  Christ  will  give  us  the  vitSiory  over  all. 
God  mightily  ftrengthens  me.  Our  congregations  are  very 
large  and  folemn.  I  never  had  greater  freedom  in  preaching. 
God  enables  me  to  call:  all  my  care  upon  him,  with  a  full  af- 
furance  that  he  careth  for  me.  You  need  not  fear  my  believ- 
ing any  reports  to  your  difadvantage.  I  love  you  in  the  bow- 
els of  Jesus  Christ.     I  was  not  in  the  lead  oftcnded,  when 

B — 


LETTERS.  269 

jB H wrote  me  word   that  "  you  thought  In  ibm^ 

things  I  did  not  a6l  as  a  little  child.''  The  more  open  you  are 
with  me  the  better.  If  nature  and  pride  rife  in  my  heart,  I 
will  go  to  Jesus,  abhor  myfelf,  and  pray  for  my  dear  repro- 
vers. All  that  I  can  fay  is,  that  I  dcfire  to  be  a  very  HttU 
child.  All  things  are  poiTible  with  Jesus  Christ.  He  is 
wonderfully  kind  to  me.  Truth,  I  believe,  will  prevail.  I 
want  to  fee  you  face  to  face.  Satan  does  not  love  that  Christ's 
minifters  fhould  come  together.  I  wifh  you  could  come  up 
immediately,   and  ftay  2ii  London  whilft  I  am  in  the  country  : 

or  rather  go  and   preach  at  B /,   GlcuceJIer^  and  JViltJJnre^ 

for  about  a  fortnight,  and  then  come  up  to  London.  This,  I 
believe,  will  be  bed.  About  that  time,  God  willing,  I  fliali 
return  from  EJfex^  and  then  we  can  confult  what  is  bell:  to  be 
done  for  the  caufe  of  our  dear  mafter.  O  Jesus  is  love  !  i 
am  glad  to  hear  brother  Rowl — d  is  with  you.  Go  on  in  the 
ftrength  of  our  dear  Lord,  and  you  (hall  fee  fatan  like  light- 
ning fall  from  heaven.  Times  are  not  yet  dark  enough  for 
the  dawning  of  a  thorough  reformation.  At  even-tide  God 
fpeaks.  My  love  to  all  that  follow  Jesus  Christ  with  an 
unfeigned  fmiplicity.  May  the  Lord  hide  your  precious  foul 
under  the  (hadow  of  his  almighty  wings !  Ceafs  not  to  pray 
for 

Yours  eternally  in  Christ  Jesus, 


LETTER    CCXC. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  D ,  at  Dedham  in  EJfc«, 

Rev.  and  dear  Sir,  London,  June  6,  1741. 

MULTIPLICITY  of  bufmefs  has  prevented  my  an- 
fwering  your  kind  letter.  However,  I  have  often  borne 
you  upon  my  heart  before  the  Lord.  Your  Cafe,  methinks, 
is  fomewhat  like  that  man  of  God,  J.  Bunyans.  He  was 
often  fo  depreffed  with  a  fenfe  of  fin  in  the  pulpit,  that  he  has 
been  tempted  to  hold  his  peace.  This  has  been  my  cafe  alfo 
both  in  public  and  in  private.  I  find  the  befl  way  is  to  prefs 
forward,  and  to  look  up  to  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  faithful  to 
his  promifes.  I  write  but  (hort,  having  but  little  time,  and 
becaufe  I  hope  foon  to  fee  you  in  Effex.  I  pray  God  to  clear 
up  your  evidences,  and  give  you  no  reft  till  he  fills  you  with  a 

full 


Iy6  LETTERS. 

full  aflurance  of  faith.  Our  Lord  rides  on  triumpbantty 
here.  He  enables  me  to  go  on  from  conquering  to  conquer^, 
I  am  a  poor  weak  unworthy  worm.  As  fuch,  be  pleafed  to 
remember,  Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  unworthy  brother  and  fellow-labourer  in  the  gofpel, 

LETTER     CCXCI. 

To  Mrs.  R . 

Dear  Airs.  R.  London^  June  6,    1741. 

I  Have  been  much  hindred  in  anfwering  your  letter.  Perhaps 
you  have  expedled  too  much  comfort  from  man.  That 
comfort  is  alone  lading,  which  comes  from  God.  I  know 
not  your  experiences,  and  therefore  cannot  fo  well  judge  of 
your  cafe :  however,  I  would  have  you  prefs  forward,  and 
labour  after  a  full  allurance  of  faith.  Judge  not  yourfelf  by 
others  joys  and  comforts.  Look  not  top  much  upon  the  hap- 
pinefs  you  think  others  may  enjoy.  This  may  lead  you  to  i-e- 
pine  and  murmur  againft  God.  Look  to  yourfelf,  and  to 
Christ.  Remember,  you  deferve  nothing,  and  therefore  he 
does  you  no  wrong.  Remember  alfo,  that  he  is  full  of  love, 
and  therefore  in  his  own  due  time  will  manifeft  himfelf  to 
your  foul.  That  you  may  patiently  tarry  the  Lord's  leifurc, 
and  be  bleffed  with  abundance  of    peace,  is  the  hearty  prayer 

ofj  dear  Mrs.  R , 

Your  afFedionate  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  IF. 
LETTER    CCXCIL 

To  Mr.  K -. 

Dear  Sir^  London,  "June  8,  1741. 

I  Like  your  laft  letter  bcft.  There  is  one  thing  you  ftill  lack^ 
"  to  be  convinced  of  unbeJief."  By  faith,  and  not  by 
works,  are  you  to  be  juftified  in  the  fight  of  God.  Make  ufc 
of  the  means.  You  mull  take  care  that  you  do  not  reft  in 
them.  You  muft  not  think  any  thing  you  can  do,  will  in  the 
lead:  recommend  you  to  the  favour  of  God  ;  and  yet  you  muft 
ftnvCj  as  if  you  were  to  be  faved  by  your  ftriving.  The  only 
1  caufe 


LETTERS,  271 

caufe  of  our  acceptance  with  God  lies  at  the  feet  of  fovcrciga 
mercy,  through  Christ.  Entreat  the  Lord  to  give  you 
faith,  Txnd  who  knows  but  he  may  have  mercy  upon  you.  Re- 
member you  are  a  poor  rinner,and  defervc  nothing.  That  GoD 
may  reveal  his  dear  Son  in  you,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of 
Your  aftedionate  fripnd  and  fervant, 

G.  7K 

LETTER    CCXCIII. 

To  Adr.  J C ,  at  Kings  wood, 

Afy  dear  Brother^  London^  June  8,  1741. 

HOW   fweetly  docs  providence  order  all  things  for  us! 
Jail  before  yours  came,  I  was  refolved  to  fend  you  20/. 

to  begin  the  fociety-room   at  Kingfwood.  Mrs.  C gives  it, 

and  1  believe  will  make  it  up  fifty.  7'his  gentlewoman  hath 
been  made  happily  inltrumental  in  relieving  me  out  of  my  late 
d.ftrefs.  You  know  how  1  was  threatened  to  be  arrefted,  foon 
after  my  arrival,  for  above  three  hundred  pounds,  due  on  ac- 
count of  the  Orphan-houfe  in  Georgia^  and  I  do  not  know  but 
a  writ  was  actually  taken  out.  This  drove  me  to  my  knees. 
God  gave  me  to  wreftle,  with  ftrong  cryings  and  many  tears, 
both  before  and  after  I  went  to  reft — I  could  plead  with  him 
that  it  was  not  for  myfelf  but  his  poor.  The  example  of  Pro- 
fcjfor  Frank  encouraged  me  to  pray,  tho'  I  found  he  ventured 
only  week  by  week ;  bat  my  fituation  in  fuch  a  foreign  cli- 
mate conftrained  me  to  run  upon  larger  arrears.— God  was 
pleafed  to  give  me  an  anfwer  of  peace.  Having  as  I  thought 
a  full  allarance  of  immediate  help  from  fome  quarter  or  ano- 
ther, I  v/ent  to  fleep  moft  comfortably.  Early  the  next  ^orn- 
ing  a  friend  came  to  me  to  enquire,  if  I  knew  where  a  gentlewo- 
man of  his  acquaintance  might  put  out  three  or  four  hundred 
pounds.  I  replied,  let  her  lend  it  to  me,  and  in  a  hwi'  months, 
God  v/illing,  Oie  fliall  have  it  again. — Upon  being  acquainted 
with  my  circumftances,  flie  mofl:  chearfully  fent  me  the  fum 
i  wanted,  and  thus  my  enemies  were  difappointed  of  their 
hope.  Praife  the  Lord,  O  m.y  foul  I — But  to  return.  I 
would  have  you  lay  the  foundation  immediately,  but  take  care 
of  building  too  large  or  too  handfome.  Notwithflanding  my 
1  prefent 


272  LETTERS. 

prefent  embarralTments,  who  knows,  but  it  may  be  in  my 
power  to  dilchargemy  Orphan-houfe  debt,  and  make  coilcdi- 
ons  here  for  Kivgjwood-fchool  too  ?  When  I  could  get  no  af- 
fiftance  at  all  from  my  old  friends  and  fpiritual  (prejudiced) 
children,  and  was  almoft  quite  pennylefs,  and  left  to  Tit  alone 
like  a  fparrow  upon  the  houfe-top,  a  ferious  perfon,  whom  1 
never  faw  or  beared  of,  came  the  other  day  and  put  a  guinea 
into  my  hand.  At  receiving  it,  fomething  as  it  were  faid  to 
me,  '*  Cannot  that  God  who  fent  this  perfon  to  give  thee  this 
auinea,  make  it  up  fifteen  hundred?"  As  I  told  a  friend 
immediately,  to  whom  I  ran  down,  fo  I  (ball  tell  you  ;  I  doubt 
not  but  this  will  be  the  cafe.  My  debt  is  all  for  God,  and 
contraded  in  providing  for  the  fatherlefs  and  widow.  As  to 
the  work  here,  though  perhaps  I  may  be  blamed  by  fome 
for  venturing  fo  far,  blefled  be  God,  it  goes  on  fweetly.  All 
things  happen  for  the  furtherance  of  the  gofpel.  I  have  wrote 
brother  S—^ —  to  let  you  have  twenty  pounds. 

if  ours  eternally  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G,  m 

LETTER    CCXCIV. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  S ,  at  Charles -Town. 

Rev.  and  dsar  Sir^  Londo?:,  June  9,  1741. 

I  Wrote  you  a  few  lines  lately  from  BriJloL     Since  that,  I 
have  had  the  pleafure  of  receiving  a  letter  from  you ;  for 

which  I  thank  you  heartily.     What  Mr.  P brings  with 

him,  will  inform  you  how  affairs  ftand  here.  BlefTed  be  God, 
the  word  runs  and  is  glorified.  The  heat  of  the  battle  is  now, 
I  hope,  pretty  well  over.  God  is  plcafed  to  give  me  great 
power,  and  to  flrengthen  me  both  in  body  and  foul.  Our 
congregations  are  large  and  awful.  We  generally  fee  and 
feel  much  of  the  divine  prefence  in  the  fan61:uary.  Many  are 
pricked  to  the  heart.  I  have  three  truly  experienced  young 
men  that  joined  me.  Affairs  being  fomev/hat  fettled  here,  I 
am  going  a  long  journey  of  feveral  months,  thro'  fevcral  coun- 
ties in  Engla7id^  JVales,  and  Scotland,  The  door  was  never 
opened  wider  for  my  preaching  the  everlafting  gofpel.     I  am 

glad  to  hear  by  Mrs.  S ,  &c.  of  your  faithfulnefs  to  our 

common  Lord. — O,  dear  Sir,  what  are  we  that  we  are  called 
2  out 


LETTERS.  273 

out  to  rpeak  in  his  great  name  !  Let  us  never  Fear  fufTering  for 
owning  his  eternal  truths. —  The  witneflcs  cannot  be  flain 
'till  they  have  finifhed  their  teftimony.  At  prefent  here  is  no 
great  fear  of  oppofition  from  the  men  in  power  j  tho'  I  hear 
theHoufe  of  Lords  intend  to  give  a  hearing  to  my  appeal.  How- 
ever it  be,  I  am  cafy.  Tiie  Lord  Jesus  over-rules  every 
thing  for  the  good  of  his  church.  I  fuppofe  I  cannot  come 
over  to  you  'till  about  next  Spring.  In  the  mean  while,  tho* 
abfent  in  body,  I  am  prefent  with  you  in  fpirit,  and  am,  reve* 
rend  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  aftedlionate,  but  unknown  brother 
and  fervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER     CCXCV. 

To  Mr,  J P ,  in  Georgia. 

Dear  brother  P ,  London^  June  9,  1741; 

IAm  forry  to  hear  you  are  ftill  in  darknefs.  Let  uie  little 
light  you  have,  make  you  hold  up  your  head,  and  think 
not  of  changing  your  ftation  without  a  proper  call.  We  are 
apt  to  place  our  happinefs  in  places,  and  often  think  we  do 
not  pleafe  God,  becaufe  we  do  not  pleafe  ourfelves.  But  I 
find  the  fault  is  in  the  heart,  not  the  place.  Wait,  therefore, 
my  dear  brother,  flill  patiently  upon  the  Lord.  Who  knows, 
but  by  and  by  Jesus  Christ  may  lift  up  the  light  of  his 
blefTed  countenance  upon  your  foul  ?  Why  fhould  you  doubt 
it  ?  My  dear  brother,  Christ  is  love.  He  tries,  but  yet  fup- 
ports  me  ;  nay,  makes  me  more  than  conqueror  thfo'  his  love. 
You  will  hear  by  other  letters,  how  it  goes  with  the  church 
in  England,  She  is  fhaken,  but  it  is  only  that  {he  may  be  the 
more  fettled.  My  love  to  your  wife.  I  hope  you  find  her  aa 
help-meet  for  you.  May  the  God  of  Abraham,,  Ijaac  and  Ja^ 
cob,  blefs,  preferve,  and  keep  you.  May  you  both  walk  in  the 
comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghoft,  and  be  edified  ;  and  may  God 
give  you  hearts  to  remember 

Your  afFe6lionate  friend,  and  brother, 
and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  TK 

VoL.L  T  LETTER 

6 


274  LETTERS. 

LETTER     CCXCVI. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  F ,  at  Southampton. 

Rev.  and  dear  Sir,  London,  June  13,  1 741. 

JUST  now  I  received  your  kind  letter,  and  the  generous 
benefacHon  of  you  and  your  friends  for  the  Orphan-houfe. 
It  came  very  opportunely,  and  flrengthens  my  faith  in  the 
bleiFed  Jesus.  I  find  he  will  help  me  by  ways  I  know  not. 
O.  dear  Sir,  the  love  of  God  to  fuch  an  unworthy  worm 
quite  amazes  me.  Surely,  if  I  did  not  ftand  up  for  free  diftin- 
guifhing  grace,  the  very  ftones  would  cry  out  againft  me. 
Blefled  be  our  glorious  Etmnanuel,  the  gofpel  runs  and  is  glori- 
fied. A  wonderful  power  attends  the  word  preached.  Every 
day,  I  believe,  fome  or  other  are  pricked  to  the  heart.  I  have 
alfo  glad  tidings  from  abroad.  In  New- England  there  is  an 
extraordinary  work  of  God.  I  hope  the  dear  Jesus  will  fet 
the  whole  world  in  a  flame.  Dear  Sir,  help  me  with  your 
prayers.  The  archers  (hoot  fore  at  me  that  I  may  fall,  but 
the  Lord  is  my  helper.  I  hope  my  thanks  will  find  accept- 
ance with  your  other  friends,  who  joined  in  helping  my  poor 
Orphans.  Good  meafure  prefTed  down  and  running  over, 
m;iy  the  Lord  return  into  your  bofoms.  Dear  Sir,  I  pray 
God  to  m.ake  you  a  flaming  fire,  and  fill  you  with  a  holy  burn- 
ing zeal  for  promoting  our  dear  Redeemer's  kingdom.  I  find 
but  few  truly  zealous.  The  love  of  too,  too  many  is  waxed 
cold.  I  thank  you,  dear  Sir,  for  encouraging  me,  and  beg 
leave  to  fubfcribe  myfelf,  reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  affedlionate  brother  in  Christ  Jesus, 

Q.  n\ 

LETTER    CCXCVIL 

ro  the  Rev.  Mr.  H . 

Reverend  and  dear  Sir,  London,  June  13,  1 741. 

I  Received  your  kind  letter.  You  do  not  know,  and  there- 
fore think  too  highly  of  me.  "  Lefs  than  the  Icaft  of  all,** 
fhall  be  my  motto  ftill.  Providence  is  pleafed  to  prevent  my 
leaving  London  on  Monday  next.  I  muft  neceflarily  defer  my 
journey  to  Hertfordjhire  and  EJfex^  till  the  Monday  following. — 

I  approve 


LETTERS,  27.; 

1  approve  of  the  circuit  you  have  fixed,  but  I  chufe  to  preach 
at  each  place  twice.  Dear  Sir,  I  moft  heartily  thank  you  for 
promifing  me  your  afTiftance  in  refpe<5l  to  the  orphans.  I  am 
perfuaded  our  Lord  will  be  well  pleafed.  He  gives  me  great 
encouragement.  We  daily  feel  and  fee  his  prefence  in  the 
great  Congregation.  I  hear  glorious  news  from  abroad  :  New- 
England  is  in  a  holy  flame.  O  that  we  at  home,  may  be  ftir- 
red  up  to  fpervi  ourfelves,  and  be  fpent,  for  the  good  of  fouls  ! 
Dear  Sir,  pray  that  fuch  a  mind  may  be  given  to 

Your  moft  afFedlionate,  though  unworthy  brother 
and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  m 

LETTER    CCXCVIII. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr,  S ,   at  TVorceJier, 

Revereiid  and  dear  Sir^  London ^  June  13,  1741. 

I  Thank  you  heartily  for  your  laft  kind  letter  :  As  you  are 
fo  aged  and  infirm,  I  take  it  as  an  efpecial  favour,  that 
you  are  pleafed  to  write  to  me.  You  need  make  no  apology, 
reverend  Sir,  for  your  plain  dealing  :  I  love  thofe  beft,-  who 
deal  moft  fincerely  with  me.  Whatever  errors  1  have  been, 
or  fhall  be  guilty  of  in  my  miniftry,  I  hope  the  Lord  will 
fhew  me,  and  give  me  grace  to  amend.  This  is  the  language 
of  my  heart  : 

Corre^  me  when  I  go  ajlra)\ 
And  lead  me  in  the  perfeH  way. 

I  alfo  thank  you,  dear  Sir,  for  your  kind  benefacSlion.  My 
arrears  upon  the  Orphan-houfe  are  yet  large  ;  but  I  Kope  ere 
long  the  Lord  will  enable  me  to  pay  them  all.  At  prefent,  I 
am  kept  from  doubting.  Unworthy  as  I  am,  Jesus  Christ 
is  yet  with  me,  and  is  pleafed  daily  to  ftrengthen  me  both  in 
foul  and  body.  My  miniftry  (for  ever  adored  be  fovereign 
grace)  is  attended  with  a  continual  power.  I  am  fhortly  go- 
ing a  large  circuit,  perhaps  as  far  as  Scotland.  Dear  Sir,  let 
your  prayers  follow  after  me. — 1  am  a  poor,  weak,  unworthy 
tvorm  -,  as  fuch  be  pleafed  to  remember,  reverend  and  dear 
Sir, 

Your  obedient,  though  unworthy  brother  and 

fervant  in  our  common  Lord, 

T  2  LETTER 


27^  LETTERS, 

LETTER    CCXCIX. 

To  Mr,  J C ,  at  Briftol 

My  dear  brother,  Hertford,  July  I,   1 74 1. 

THE  Lord  has  been  with  me  greatly,  ever  fince  I  left 
London, — I  have  been  enabled  to  preach  twice  every 
day,  and  to  ride  feveral  miles.  The  congregations  have  been 
every  where  very  large.  God's  prefence  has  accompanied 
the  word.  People's  hearts  have  been  enlarged.  Within  thefe 
fevv  days,  we  have  colledled  near  a  hundred  pounds  for  the 
poor  orphans.  Numbers  of  fouls,  I  believe,  are  under  con- 
viftions.  In  fome  places  we  have  had  near  ten  thoufand  hear- 
ers. Invitations  are  fo  prefling,  that  I  purpofe  going  another 
circuit  to  Bedford,  and  to  preach  in  the  counties  round  about 
for  near  a  fortnight,  and  then  return  to  London.  I  hope  the 
Lord  is  with  you  ;  I  am  fomewhat  weak  in  body,  but  fweet 

and  comfortable  in  my  foul.     Dear  J joins   with  me  in 

love  to  you  and  all.     Pray  for. 

Yours  in  the  beft  bonds, 

G,  n\ 

LETTER    CCC. 

To  Mr.  J H ,  at  Savannah. 

ColchcJIer,  July  12,  1 74 1. 
Afy  very  dear  Friend  and  Brother, 

I  Have  not  heard  from  you  fince  you  wrote  laft  January.  I 
have  been  a  circuit  into  Hertfordjhire,  Effl-x,  BedfordJJnre, 
Cambridgepre,  and  Suffolk,  I  have  been  enabled  to  preach 
twice  daily,  and  to  ride  feveral  miles.  Congregations  have 
been  furprifmgly  large;  the  word  is  attended  with  power,  and  the 
alarm  in  the  country  rather  greater  than  ever.  Contributions 
aiife  and  increafe.  You  are  all  much  upon  my  heart.  God 
will  yet  provide  for  you.  I  wrjte  this  in  great  hafte.  God 
gives  me  much  of  his  prefence.  I  am  more  and  more  con- 
vinced, that  evangelizing  is  my  prppcr  bufinefs  at  prefent. 
God  gives  me  great  accefs  every  where.     The  Lord  be  with 

you 


LETTERS.  277 

you  all,  Amen  and  Amen  !     To  the  bed  of  my  knowledge,  I 
have  negledled  no  opportunity  of  writing.     I  am 

Ever  yours  in  Christ, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER    [  CCC.  ] 

To  Mr.  J H ,  at  London. 

Coggejhall,  7^.5/  13,  1741. 

I  Received  your  letter  at  Bury  \  but  cannot  think  matters  are 
quite  ripe,  or  you  duly  qualified  for  fettling  a  church. 
God  lets  me  fee  more  and  more,  that  I  muft  evangelize.  I 
find  you  are  for  fettling  :  do  as  God  fhall  direct,  I  am  eafy.  I 
only  wifh  you  may  find  fettled  perfons  to  be  your  affiftants. 
Without  this,  a  church  cannot  be  rightly  ordered,  I  have  no 
freedom,  but  in  going  about  to  all  denominations.  I  cannot 
join  with  any  one,  fo  as  to  be  fixed  in  any  particular  place. 
Every  one  hath  his  proper  gift.  Field-preaching  is  my  plan  : 
In  this  I  am  carried  as  on  eagles  wings.  God  makes  way 
for  me  every  where.  The  work  of  the  Lord  increafes.  I 
am  comforted  night  and  day.  O  free  grace  to  fuch  an  hell- 
deferving  finner  !  I  pray  God  to  give  you  a  right  judgment 
in  all  things.     I  am,  dear  brother  H-^ — , 

Yours  moft  afFedlionately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER    CCCI. 

To  Mrs,  D ,  at  Gran/den, 

My  dear  SiJIer,  London^  July  17,  1741. 

IBlefs  God  that  I  faw  you  at  Granfclcn.  The  Lord  was 
with  us,  and  has  been  with  me  the  remaining  part  of  my 
journey.  We  fhall  yet  fee  greater  things  than  thefe.  Won- 
derful things  from  abroad.  The  inclofed  will  fhew  you,  how 
defirous  my  family  is  of  correfponding  with  you.  Pray  write 
to  my  dear  little  orphans,  boys  and  girls.  God,  I  hear,  hath 
been  working  powerfully  upon  their  hearts.     I  would   have 

you  alfo  write  to  Mr.  J- B^ ,  a  converted  planter ;   to 

Mrs.  B ,  his  kinfwoman,  who  has  lately  received   the  af- 

furance  of  faith  j  to  Mr.  C ,  a  dear  baptift  minlfler ;  to  Mrs. 

T  3  S , 


278  LETTERS. 

S ,  who  is  carried  on  the  wings  of  faith  and  love  ;  and  to 

my  dear  Mr.  H ,  who  is  Superintcndant  of  the  Orphan- 

houfe  affairs.  You  will  excufe  this  freedom.  I  am  willing 
your  ufefulnefs  fhould  be  as  extenfive  as  may  be.  May  the 
Lord  blefs  you  ever,  more  and  more,  I  expe(Sl:  to  go  to  Scot- 
land Ihortly.     A  fhip  will  foon  fail  towards  Georgia,     Write 

fbon,  dear  Mrs.  D ,  to 

Your  afjedionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  fK 

LETTER    GGGII. 

To  Mr.  G H 5  in  Gloucefter, 

My  dear  Friendy  London^  July  i8,  I74f. 

GOD  has  mightily  blefied  my  journey  in  the  country- 
Thoufands,  and  ten  thoufands,  have  flocked  to  hear  the 
word.  It  was  attended  with  power,  and  pear  a  hundred  and 
eio^hty  pounds  were  colle<^ed  for  the  Orphan-houfe.  I  know 
you  will  give  thanks  on  my  behalf.  On  Thurfday  morning, 
God  willing,  I  hope  to  embark  for  Scotland  i  I  am  perfuaded 
the  LoPvD  calls  me  thither.  Invitations,  both  from  the  SscederSy 
anu  others  that  do  not  fecede  from  the  Kirk^  are  very  ftrong.  I 
{hould  be  glad  of  a  line  next  poll.  It  is  now  near  eleven  at 
nieht.  I  hope  my  friends  will  accept  my  thanks  for  their 
kiiid  benefactions  to  the  dear  orphans,  and  with  their  prayers 

follow,  dear  Mr.  // , 

Ever  yours  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  m 

LETTER    CCCIIL 

To  Mr,  B S . 

Dear  Sir ^  LewiJham^July  l^^   1741. 

THOUGH  I  have  but  little  time,  yet  I  muft  redeem  3 
little  to  anfvvcr  your  kind  letter.  God  is  doing  great 
things,  both  at  home  and  abroad.  The  inclofed  will  in  fome 
meafure  inform  you.  Every  day  our  Lord  appears  for  us  in 
the  great  congregations.  Weak  as  I  am  in  myfelf,  the  Lord 
is  my  ftrcngth.  O,  dear  Sir,  I  am  a  worm  and  no  man  ;  I 
deferve  to  be  the  outcaft  of  the  people,  and  yet  the  Lord  de- 
lights to  honour  me.     Free,  free  grace  !    1  long  to  be  above, 

that 


LETTERS.  279 

that  T  may  praife  God  as  I  defire.  In  about  two  days  I  hope 
to  embark  for  Scotland.  I  will  come  and  vifit  you  when  pro- 
vidence permits.  In  the  mean  while,  I  beg  that  you  will  pray 
that  the  glorious  Jesus  would  blefs  all  my  poor  endeavours  to 
promote  his  glory  !  My  love  to  all  that  love  the  dear  Em- 
manuel.    In  his  great  name,  I  fubfcribe  myfelf 

Your  affedionate  brother  and  fervant, 

G.  IV, 

LETTER    CCCIV. 

To  Mr.  G H ,  at  Gloucefter, 

My  very  dear  Friend^  Lew'ijham^  y«/y  23,  1 741* 

I  Thought  to  have  embarked  this  morning  for  Scotland^  but 
am  likely  to  be  detained  a  day  or  two.  I  muft  therefore' 
fend  you  a  line.  Wonderful  things  is  the  Lord  doing  for  me. 
In  the  country  I  meet  with  furprifmg  fuccefs.  In  London  I 
fee  fuch  things  that  I  never  faw  in  England  ht^orc.  A  mighty 
power  almoft  continually  accompanies  the  word.  The  Lord 
Jesus  is  pleafed  toftrengthen  me  very  much  in  the  inner  man. 
O,  my  dear  friend,  give  thanks  for,  and  pray  that  I  may  walk 
humbly  with  my  God.     The  Lord  be  with  you  and  yours. 

I  hope  both  you  and  dear  Mrs.  H do  keep  clofe  to  God. 

My  love  to  all  that  love  the  dear  Lord  Jesus.  God  willing, 
you  (hall  have  a  line  from  Scotland.  Wonderful  news  is  come 
from  abroad,  which  will  ere  long  rejoice  your  heart,  and  caufe 

you  to  give  thanks  in  behalf  of,  my  dear  Mr.  H , 

Ever  yours  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  JK 

LETTER    CCCV, 

To  Mr,  T ,  at  Colchejler, 

Dear  Sir^  Lewijlmm^  July  23,  1741. 

PROVIDENCE  detaining  me  one  day  more,  I  fnatch 
a  few  moments  to  anfwer  your  kind  letter,  and  to  return 

Mr.  J thanks  for  his  kind  prefent.     How  good  is  the 

blefled  Jesus  to  me  the  chief  of  finners  !  He  takes  care  both 
of  my  body  and  foul.  His  power  has  attended  me  lately,  more 
than  ever  it  did  before  in  England,     God's  right  hand  is  bring- 

T  4  i"g 


aSo  LETTERS. 

ing  mighty  things  to  pafs.  I  earneftly  intreat  our  Lord,  that 
you  may  live  above  the  world,  and  be  dead  to  all  things  here 
below.  Dear  Sir,  there  is  nothing  like  a  life  of  faith.  It  is  a 
glorious  thing  to  be  able  to  fay,  "  Not  I  live,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me."  Then,  are  we  chriftians  indeed,  when  we 
come  to  live  on  the  invifible  realities  of  another  world.  This, 
and  this  only,  is  true  and  undefiled  religion.  May  God  make 
you  a  lively  partaker  thereof.     I  hope  my  kind   refpe61:s  will 

find  acceptance  with  Mefirs.  V—, — ,  D ,  J ,  and  all 

friends.     Fail  not  to  pray  for 

Your  affedionate  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  tr. 

LETTER    CCCVI. 

To  Mr,  B . 

My  very  dear  B ,  Greenwich^  July  24,  1741. 

TO-MORROW,  God  willing,  I  embark  for  Scotlandy 
and  hope  to  redeem  time  abroad  to  anfwer  my  dear 
lambs  letters  :  They  rejoiced  me  exceedingly.  What  I  have 
done  with  yours,  the  inclofed  will  fhew.  Pray  be  particular 
in  your  accounts.  Much  good  has  been  done  by  thofe  fent 
already.  You  cannot  tell  how  many  hearty  prayers  are  put  up 
for  you  all,  daily.  May  they  enter  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord 
of  Sabaoih  !  The  work  is  beginning  afrefh  in  England.  The 
Holy  Ghoft  defcends  in  a  glorious  manner,  amidfl  the  con- 
gregation. Weak,  unworthy  as  I  am,  Jesus  Christ  works 
in  and  by  me.    O  fovereign  free  grace  !    I  have  fent  the  letter 

to  Mrs.  D .     I  have  lately  feen  her.     Her  converfation 

is  as  weighty  as  her  letters.  You  will  receive  more  from  her, 
I  hope,  before  it  be  long.  I  believe  you  are  where  God  would 
have  you  to  be.  I  defpair  not  of  feeing  your  mouth  opened 
remarkably  for  God.  O  that  the  dear  Jesus  may  blefs  you, 
and  the  whole  houfliold  !  I  fhould  rejoice  to  fee  you,  but  God, 

I  believe,  will  d,etain  me  here  the  Winter.     Mr.  P 's  bro- 

,ther  is  to  pay  for  the  ufe  of  the  Orphan-houfe  feventy-five 
pounds.  Shortly  I  hope  to  fend  you  frefh  fupplies.  In  the 
mean  while  I  aiTure  you  all,  that  you  are  conflantly  upon  my 
heart:.     My  head  pains  me;  good  night.     The  Lord  be  with 

you 


LETTERS.  281 

you  all.     Expe6t  to  hear  again  very  fpeedily  from,  dear  Bro- 
ther B ', 

Yours  moft  afFedionately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  /K 

LETTER    CCCVII. 

To  Mr,  I B-^ ,  at  South- Carolina, 

Dear  Mr.  B ,  Greenwich,  July  24,  1 741. 

WITH  much  pleafure  I  received  your  kind  letter. 
Blefled  be  God,  even  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  v^^ho  I  truft  hath  begotten  you,  and  called  you  out 
of  darknefs  into  his  marvellous  light.  What  an  honour  is  it, 
that  vi^e  fhould  be  counted  worthy  to  fufter  the  leaft  degree  of 
reproach  for  his  great  name  fake  ?  I  am  afhamed  to  think  how- 
little  I  do,  or  fufFer  for  him.  O  free  grace  !  fovereign  and 
elcding  love !  how  fweet  to  the  foul,  who  really  feels  the 
power  of  it  !  May  we  walk  worthy  of  that  holy  vocation 
wherewith  we  are  called  !  I  hear  your  brother  is  dead  ;  happy 
foul  I  you  and  I  fhall  go  and  fee  him  by  and  by.  I  thank  you 
heartily  for  your  kindnefs  to  the  dear  orphans.  I  am  fure  Gon 
will  amply  repay  you.  The  Lord  be  with  you  and  yours. 
I  muft  away  to  the  fhip  bound  for  Scotland.    I  will  anfwer  dear 

Mrs.  B 's  letter,  when  I  get  on  board.     Adieu.     O  pray 

for 

Ever  yours  in  Jesus  Christ, 

G.m 

LETTER     CCCVIIL 

To  Mr.  I F ,    at  Charhs-Toiun. 

Dear  Mr.  F ,  Greenwich,  July  24,    1 741. 

1  Rejoice  to  hear  the  Lord  is  carrying  on  a  good  work  in 
your  foul.  I  hope  you  will  not  think  all  is  done,  be- 
caufe  you  have  been  baptized  and  received  into  full  commu- 
nion. I  know  too  too  many  that  "  make  a  Christ  of  their 
adult  baptifm,"  and  reft  in  that,  inftead  of  the  righteoufnefs 
of  the  blefied  Jesus.  God  forbid  that  you  fliould  fo  learn 
Cfirist.  O  my  dear  friend,  feek  after  a  fettlement  in  our  dear 
Lord,  fo  that  you  may  experience  that  life  which  is  hid  with 

Christ  in  God.     Dear  Mrs.  F ,  I  thank  you  heartily 

for  your  kind  letter.    It  rejoices  my  foul  to  hear,  that  you  and 
3  ^^r- 


282  LETTERS. 

Mr.  F are  going  on  hand  in  hand  to  heaven.    This  is  the 

i'acred  end  of  marriage  ;  to  be  helpers  of  each  other  in  the 
great  things  of  God.  I  am  not  yet  entered  into  that  ftate. 
I  am  looking  up  to  Christ,  and  fhall  wait  his  diredion. 
'I'he  gofpel  runs,  and  is  glorified.  The  work  is  beginning 
a  frefh  in  England.  Never  was  my  preaching  attended  with  fo 
great  power  on  this  fide  the  water.  Our  Lord  pours  his  com- 
forts into  my  foul,  and  rejoices  me  with  the  glad  news  I  hear 
from  your  parts.  May  you  all  increafe  and  multiply  in  every 
good  word  and  work.  My  moft  tender  love  to  all.  As  faft 
as  poffibly  I  can,  each  fhall  hear  from,  my  dear  friends. 

Ever  yours, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCCIX. 

To  Mr,  H '<i  at  Georgia, 

Greenwich^  "July  24,  I74i« 
My  very  dear  Friend  and  Brother^ 

BEFORE  the  boat  comes  to  take  me  down  to  the  fhip, 
I  would  write  you  a  line  or  two.  I  greatly  rejoice  to 
hear  that  you  live  in  love.  But  I  fhall  not  be  furprifed,  if, 
after  this  remarkable  work  of  the  fpirit,  you  meet  with  fome 
trials.  But  fear  not  :  we  are  all  in  the  Mediator's  hands.  I 
find  all  things  work  together  for  my  good,  and  io  I  am  furc 
you  will.  My  dear  friends,  I  know  you  fympathize  with  me. 
— Indeed,  I  alfo  do  with  you.  My  dear,  dear  family,  you  are 
continually  upon  my  heart.  I  redeem  a  moment  or  two  as 
often  as  I  can  to  write  to  you.  God  only  knows  how  I  love 
and  long  after  you  in  the  bowels  of  the  ever- blefled  Jesus.  O 
may  you  lean  on  his  bofom,  and  may  his  banner  over  you  be 
love.  Adieu  !  for  the  prefent.  I  mufl  foon  away  to  the  fhip. 
I  have  ordered  hats  andfhoes  for  the  children,  and  intend  fend- 
ing brother  H 's  order  and  other  things,  with  fome  cafii, 

very  fhortly.  But  the  arrears  hang  on  me  yet.  My  Lord 
bears  my  burden ;  may  he  bear  all  yours  for  you  !  I  am  per- 
fuadcd  he  will.     With  great-  tendcrnefs  I   fubfcribc  myfclf^ 

dear  Mr.  H , 

Your  mofl  afFedionatc,  though  unworthy  brother 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 
G,  IK 

LETTER 


LETTERS.  2S3 

L  E  T  f  E  R     CCCX. 

To  Mrs.  S ,  at  Charles-Town. 

In  a  boat  going  to  Grave fend^  July  24,  1741. 
Dear  Mrs.  S , 

I  Am  now  in  a  boat,  in  order  to  embark  for  Scotland.  I  have 
the  conveniency  of  writing  upon  a  trunk,  and  therefore 
cannot  be  eafy  without  fending  you  a  line.  I  rejoice  to  hear 
that  you  are  carried  upon  the  wings  of  love.  Methinks  I  fee 
you  fitting  under  the  Redeemer's  fhadow  with  great  delight, 
and  exalting  his  free  grace  in  plucking  you  as  a  brand  out  of 
the  fire.  O  when  (hall  we  go  to  heaven,  that  we  may  praife 
God  for  what  he  hath  done  for  our  poor  fouls  !  The  Lord  is 
better  to  me  than  ever.  Conviction,  and  converfion,  both  in 
tovyn  and  country,  are  beginning  again.  The  divine  prefence 
is  much  manifefted  in  our  aflemblies.  Blefled  be  the  Lord, 
who  is  alfo  working  with  you.  The  fpiritual  profperity  of 
the  orphan  family,  rejoices  my  heart.  God  will  ere  long, 
I  believe,  make  a  feparation  between  the  precious  and  the  vile. 

poor  Mr.  G ,  CommifTary  G d^  and  Chief  Juftice 

W- ,  bitter,  bitter,  though  unfuccefsful  perfecutors,  what 

will  become  of  you  ?  O  that  God  may  grant  them  repentance 

unto  life  !  What  reafon  have  you  and   I,  dear  Mrs.   S , 

to  exalt  rich  diftinguifhing  grace  !   'Tis  that  alone  hath  made 
the  difference.     I   believe  I  need  not  remind  you  to  pray, 

dear  Mrs.  S ,  for    - 

Yours  moft  afFedionately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    CCCXL 

To  Serjeant  B ,  at  Gibraltar. 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann^  hound  from  London  to  Leith^ 

J.uly2S'>  1741- 
Dear  Mr.  B , 

I  Am  glad  to  hear  that  you  are  yet  alive,  and  what  is  more, 
I  truftyou  are  alive  to  God.  Perhaps  I  may  never  fee 
you  again  on  this  fide  eternity.  O  that  we  may  approve  our- 
felves  good  foldiers  of  Jesus  Christ  !  How  bright  will  our 
crown  be  then,  at  that  laft  great  day  !   I  find  there  is  nothing 

like 


284  LETTERS. 

like  being  valiant  for  the  truth.  Jesus  Christ  is  a  glorious 
captain.  He  makes  me  more  than  conqueror  through  his  love. 
I  have  feen  great  things,  within  thefe  kw  months.  I  (hould 
have  anfwered  you  fooner,  but  could  not  get  time  till  novir : 
I  am  embarked  for  Scotland.  I  hope  you  take  particular  care 
to  beat  down  felf-righteoufnefs,  and  exalt  the  Lord  Jesus 
alone  in  your  hearts.  I  find,  the  only  happinefs  is  to  lie  down 
as  a  poor  fmner  at  the  feet  of  the  once  crucified,  but  now  ex- 
alted Lamb  of  God,  who  died  for  our  fins  and  role  again  for 
our  juftification.  I  rejoice  to  hear,  that  fome  even  at  Gibraltar 
ftill  dare  to  own  a  too  too  much  negle£led  Saviour.  BlefTed 
be  God,  the  governor  is  fo  favourable  to  you.  This  is  a  great 
motive  to  love  and  thankfulnefs.  The  work  of  God  ftill 
goes  on  in  England,  and  other  parts.  O  for  that  glorious  period, 
when  the  whole  earth  fhall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the  feas !  That  our  dear  Lord 
may  every  day  reign  as  kin-g  in  all  your  fouls,  is  the  prayer  of, 
dear  Serjeant, 

Your  afFecSlionate  friend  and  fcrvant, 

G,  W. 

LETTER    CCCXIL 


To  Mifs  R . 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann^  J"^  25,  1741. 
Dear  Mifs^ 

A  Few  hours  ago  I  came  on  board.  To  fhew  that  you 
are  in  my  mind,  I  employ  fome  of  my  firft  leifure  time 
in  anfwering  your  letter.  The  condition  you  are  in  now, 
ought  not  to  make  you  think  that  Jesus  Christ  has  caft  you 
off^,  and  that  it  will  be  prefumption  in  you  to  believe  on  him. 
The  Lord  is  now  fliewing  you,  that  you  are  poor,  and  mifera- 
ble,  and  blind,  and  naked,  and  fuch  only  are  the  perfons  that 
think  they  want  his  almighty  aid.  I  fear  you  look  too  much 
intoyourfelf,  and  from  thence  are  difcouraged.  Whereas  you 
Ihould  look  directly  to  Christ,  and  come  to  him  in  all  your 
blood.  You  will  always  fly  from  him,  as  long  as  you  count  him 
your  enemy.  But  do  not  think  fo  hardly  of  him  ;  Jesus  is 
the  finncr's  friend.  O  how  doth  his  bowels  yearn  towards 
you!  Are  you  made  willing  to  be  made  whole  ?  Christ  invites 
and  commands  vou  to  come  to  him  j  venture  then  upon  him. 

If 


*~  LETTERS.  285 

If  you  never  have  believed  yet.  It  is  time  for  you  to  believe 
now,  "  Lord,  give  me  faith  !"  for  faith  is  the  free  gift  of 
God.  What  if  your  heart  be  hard,  Jesus  can  foften  it. 
What  if  you  have  yet  no  marks  of  your  cle(5tion  ?  furely  you 
dare  not  fay,  *'  You  are  not  eleded,"  or  that  Christ  hath 
not  died  for  you,  even  for  you.  It  is,  indeed,  a  bad  thing 
to  have  only  notions  in  the  head,  and  no  folid  experience  in 
the  heart.  But  it  is  a  good  thing  to  be  convinced  of  this. 
Blefled  be  God,  who  hath  given  you  to  bewail  it.  Look  up- 
on this  as  a  token  for  good.  —  Truft  not  to  means ;  when 
they  are  taken  from  you,  Christ  can  and  will  work  with- 
out them.  The  Lord  may  bi-ing  you  help  in  a  way,  and  at 
a  time  you  know  not  of.  Your  extremity  ftiall  be  God*s 
opportunity.  If  the  Lord  vouchfafcs  to  blefs  this  letter  in 
the  leaft  degree  to  your  comfort,  it  will  much  rejoice  the  heart 
of,  dear  Mifs, 

Your  afFedionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER    CCCXIII. 

To   Mr,  J H ,  at  Georgia. 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  25,  1 74 1. 
My  dear  Brother^ 

WITH  much  pleafurel  have  again  read  over  your  kind 
letter.     God   is   a  God    hearing  prayer.     My  dear 

brother  H is  awakened  out  of  fleep.    Help  me  men,   help 

me  angels,  to  praife  God  in  his  behalf!  My  dear  brother,  I 
pray  God  you  may  never  lie  down  again.  Christ  is  now 
giving  you  light ;  walk  and  rejoice  in  that  light.  Keep  clofe, 
keep  clofe,  my  dear  man,  and  let  nothing  fteal  away  your  poor 
heart  from  the  blefled  Jesus.  Give  it  all  to  him,  give  it  to 
him,  hard,  earthly,  fenfual,  devilifli,  as  it  is.  He  will  wafh 
it  in  his  precious  blood.  Do  not  tic  him  down  to  any  degree 
of  convlclion.  So  that  he  brings  you  home,  let  him  do  it  in 
that  way  he  fhall  think  beft.  What  a  loving  Saviour  have  you 
to  deal  with  !  You  cannot  conceive  how  kind  he  is,  even  to 
me  every  day.  I  feel  and  fee  his  power  more  and  more.  He 
feems  to  be  beginning  his  vv^ork  afrefh  in  England^  and  it 
gladdens  my  heart  to  hear  he  is  among  you  at  Bethefda,  O  do 
nothing  to  grieve  the  blefled  fpirit !  Let  your  converfation  be 

fuch 


286  LETTERS, 

fuch  in  all  things,  as  becomes  the  gofpcl  of  the  blefTed  JesVs^ 
Have  the  greateft  regard  for  the  little  lambs.  Do  nothing  that 
may  prove  a  {tumbling  block  to  their  precious  fouls.  Warm 
yourfelf  by  talking  to  them.  Be  not  one  moment  idle.  Re^ 
deem  your  precious  time  ;  for  you  knowr  not  when  your 
Lord  may  come.  My  brother,  my  heart  is  full  of  love  to 
thee. — May  you  be  a  beloved  phyfician  I  Beloved  of  the  Lord, 
beloved  of  the  Lord's  people,  and  a  continual  comfort  to 
Your  moft  unworthy,   though  truly  afFedionate 

brother,  and  fervant  in  the  dear  Jesus, 

G.  JV, 

LETTER    CCCXIV, 

To  Mr.  Wm,  G . 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  25,   1741?. 
My  dear  Brother  G , 

YOUR  kind  letter  I  have  juft  been  reading  over  a  fecond 
time.     It  gave  me  comfort  ;  but  the  high  ftile  extorted 
a  fmile  or  two  from  me,     I  believe  you  have  been  reading  over 
Mrs.  D— — 's  letters.     You  wanted  to  imitate   her  way  of 
writing,   but  fail  for  want  of  her  experience.     It  is  a   good 
thing  not  to  go  out  of  our  depth.     Methinks  I   fee  you  look 
down  and  blufti ;  but  look  up   again  immediately  to  Jesus 
Christ  :    He  knows  whereof  we  are  made,  and  remembers 
we  are  but  duft.     Indeed  L  write  to  my  dear  man  out  of  much 
love.     BlefTed  be  God,   that  ajl  things  are  carried   on    with 
fuch  decency  and  order.     I  pray   God  that  you  may  fo  live, 
that  all  who  come  to  fee  you  may  fay,   "  Surely   God   is  in 
this  place."     Your  prayers   in  my   behalf  are  heard.     I  aiw 
quickened,   and  ftrengthened  mightily  both  in  foul  and  body  : 
controverfial   points  are  ended,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
triumphs  glorioufly.   I  find  my  heart  often  drawn  towards  Be- 
thefda.     I   hope  I  (hall  yet  meet  you   again  in  the  flefh,  and 
embrace  you  one  by  one  in  my  unworthy  arms.    In  the  mean 
time,  I  commit  you  to  the  bofom  of  Jesus.     May  you  lean 
upon  his  bread,  and  fit  under  his  {hadow  with  great  delight  \ 
May  you  be  truly  Ample,  truly  childlike,  and  QVQxy  way  con- 
4  formable 


LETTERS.  287 

formable  to  our  great  exemplar  the  fpotlefs  Lamb.  I  long  for 
that  time,  when  we  (hall  fit  down  at  his  marriage  fupper : 
thout^h  I  have  the  loweft  place,  it  will  fuffice,  dear  brother 

Your  afFedlionate  brother,  friend  and  fervant, 
LETTER    CCCXV. 

To  Mr,  J 5 ,  at  Georgia. 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann,  July  25,    1 74 1. 
Dear  John, 

YOUR  cafe  puts  me  in  mind  of  that  paflage,  where  we 
are  told  that  our  Lord  looked  upon  Peter,  Surely,  he 
has  looked  upon  and  prayed  for  you,  otherwife  how  would 
Satan  have  fifted  you  ?  But  fee  what  comfort  another  paflage 
may  afford  you,  "  Go  tell  my  brethren  and  Peter"  Poor, 
weeping,  penitent  Peter  muft  in  no  wife  be  forgotten.  ''  Go 
tell  them  that  I  am  rifen."  Here  are  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  to 
a  difconfolate  foul.  May  God  apply  it  to  your's  in  particular. 
Dear  John,  may  you  learn  from  hence  to  ftab  your  dear  Savi- 
our no  more.  I  wonder  not  that  you  are  in  darknefs.  God 
will  furely  vifit  your  offences  with  a  rod,  and  your  back- 
flidings  with  fome  fpiritual  fcourge.  That  is  enough  to  keep 
us  from  fmning,  though  we  know  that  his  loving-kindnefs 
he  will  not  utterly  take  from  us,  nor  fufFer  his  truth  to  fail. 
How  dearly  did  David  pay  for  his  ftolen  fweets  ?  What  an- 
guifli  has  your  poor  foul  felt,  fmce  I  left  you.  Blefled  be  God, 
that  he  has  awakened  you  out  of  fleep.  O  free  grace  !  I  re- 
joice, yea  and  I  will  rejoice.  That  you  may  never  provoke 
God  to  leave  you  to  yourfeU*,  is  the  earneft  prayer  of,  dear 
John, 

Ever  yours, 

G.  jr. 


LETTER 


288  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCXVI. 

Tfl  Rebekah  B ,    an  Orphan  at  the  Orphan-houfe. 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  25,  I74I« 
Dear  Bekky, 

AND  is  the  Lord  ftill  ftrlving  with  you  ?  O  then  ad- 
mire his  patience,  and  give  him  your  whole  heart.  I 
had  no  other  end  in  bringing  you  to  Bethefda^  but  that  you 
might  be  brought  to  Jesus.  I  hope  you  will  yet  find  it  a 
houfe  of  mercy  to  your  foul.  Take  heed  of  refting  in  con- 
vidion.  You  know  by  experience  how  fadly  it  wears  ofF. 
You  may  well  wonder,  that  God  has  not  fent  you  to  hell 
long  ago.  I  pray  God,  that  his  goodnefs  may  lead  you  to 
repentance,  and  that  you  may  walk  before  the  Lord  in  all 
well-pleafmg,  fo  long  as  yau  live.  What  fweet  opportuni- 
ties do  you  enjoy  !  How  freely  may  you  go  into  the  woods, 
and  pour  out  your  heart  before  the  dear  Jesus.  How  early 
was  Samuel  acquainted  with  the  Lord,  and  why  fhould  not 
you  be  acquainted  with  him  ?  Unlefs  you  are,  you  can  never 
be  at  peace.  Come  then,  my  dear  lamb,  and  wander  no  lon- 
ger ;  return  to  the  fhepherd  and  bifhop  of  your  foul.  Behold, 
he  fhed  his  blood  for  you,  and  will  carry  you  to  heaven,  re- 
joicing over  you  to, all  eternity.  Away  to  him  then  in  all 
your  blood,  juft  as  you  are  ;  and  when  you  are  near  to  God, 
forget  not 

Your  afFe(Slionate  friend, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER    CCCXVIL 

To  Elizabeth  G ,  an  Orphan, 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  25,  1 741. 
Dear  Beity^ 

I  Am  glad  you  begin  to  feel  the  hardnefs  of  your  heart,  and 
your  utter  inability  to  pray»  I  pray  God  you  may  in  all 
things  fee  your  helplcflhefs,  that  you  may  come  as  a  poor  help- 
Icfs  nothing  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  take  him  for  your  all  in 
all.  I  wonder  not  that  fatan  endeavours  to  terrify  your  foul. 
You  know  how  he  tore  the  voung  child  in  the  Gofpel,  whilft 
be  was  coming  to  Jesus  Christ.     Your  convictions  at  pre- 

fent 


LETTERS.  289 

fcnt  feem  to  arife  from  a  fear  of  hell ;  but  before  you  receive 
this,  I  hope  the  Lord  Jesus  will  have  fcaled  your  pardon, 
and  have  faid,  "  Be  of  good  cheer,  thy  fins  are  forgiven  thee." 
O  Beityy  why  has  God  fingled  you  out  ?  Why  was  you 
brought  to  Bethefda  ?  Away  when  you  read  this,  and  blefs 
God  for  it,  and  devote  yourfelf  again  and  again  to  that  Lord, 
who  has  bought  you  with  his  precious  blood.  Having  much 
forgiven  you,  love  much.  Lie  down  in  the  duft,  and  be  conti- 
nually looking  to  the  rock  from  whence  you  are  hewn.  To 
hear  that  you,  and  my  dear  family,  love  the  Lord  Jesus  in 
fmcerity,  will  much  rejoice  the  heart  of 

Your  fmcere  friend, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCCXVIIL 

To  Mary  A ,  an  Orphan, 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  25,  1 74 J* 
Dear  Molly ^ 
T  TPON  reading  your  letter,  I  put  up  this  prayer,  "  Lord 
\J  lift  thou  up  the  light  of  thy  countenance  upon  her  foul." 
You  once  had  joy.  I  found  it  puffed  you  up.  I  pray  God 
to  humble  you  by  your  prefent  darknefs.  You  may  now  fee 
what  a  poor  wretch  you  are,  how  proud,  how  earthly,  how 
fenfual,  \\o\v  deviliih ;  and  yet,  ftupendous  love  1  Jesus 
Christ  will  ftill  receive  you.  Your  loving  Saviour  opens 
his  arms,  and  invites  you  to  throw  the  whole  of  your  load 
upon  him.  I  am  perfuaded  he  will  receive  you  :  go  to  him 
then,  and  confefs  that  you  have  finned.  He  will  receive  you; 
for  what  fays  the  fcripture  ?  "  Look  unto  me,  all  ye  ends  of 
the  earth,  and  be  ye  faved."  Surely  Molly  A is  includ- 
ed here.  The  dear  Jesus  is  all  love.  He  has  brought  you  to 
a  houfe  of  mercy.  Out  of  love,  keep  his  commandments,  and 
Jove  all  that  are  around  you.  Be  willing  to  be  the  fervant  of 
all,  and  from  gratitude  to  God  ftudy  to  be  a  comfort  to 
Your  fincerc  friend  in  Christ, 

G.  TV, 


Vol.  L  U  LETTER 

7 


290  LETTERS/ 

LETTER    CCCXIX. 

f^dc  ^/Cr  c^^  ^j^^  Honourable  J- B ,  Efqy 

Hon.  Slr^         On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann ^  July  26,  1741. 

WITH  much  pleafure  I  received  yours  ty  the  hands  of 
your  fon,  who  offered  to  do  me  any  fervice  that  lay 
in  his  power.  This,  as  v/ell  as  your  other  paft  favours,  quite 
furprize,  and  ought  to  humble  me  ;  for  who  am  I,  that  I 
{hould  be  thus  highly  honoured  I  O  fovereign  grace  !  O  dif- 
tinguifhing  love  !  If  1  did  not  ftand  up  in  defence  of  that,  the 
very  (lones  would  cry  out  againft  me.  Indeed,  honoured  Sir, 
your  kindnefs  makes  mealmoft  toblufli,  and  the  love  of  Jesus 
quite  confounds  me.  I  am  loft,  I  want  to  fmk  into  nothing 
whenever  I  think  of  Christ's  dying  for  me.  I  really  think, 
I  am  the  moft  ungrateful  fmner  that  ever  was,  and  yet  the  Re- 
deemer follows  me  with  his  mercies  every  day.  Unfpeakable 
are  the  trials  vi^herewith  I  have  been  vifited  fmce  my  arrival. 
But  out  of  all  the  Lord  delivers  me.  I  experience  daily 
much  of  his  divine  prefence  ;  a  wider  door  than  ever  is  open- 
ed for  preaching  the  everlafting  gofpel,  and  God  feems  to  be 
beginning  his  work  again  in  Old- England :  it  adds  to  my  joy, 
to  hear  what  the  Lord  is  doing  amongft  you.  BlefTed,  for 
ever  blefled  be  God,  for  caufing  fuch  a  ftirring  among  the  dry 
bones.  I  pray  the  glorious  Redeemer,  to  carry  on  the  good 
work  begun,  and  to  makq  New-England  the  joy  of  the  whole 
earth.  I  fuppofe  you  have  heard,  honoured  Sir,  of  the  remark- 
able efl  ufion  of  the  fpirit  among  the  children  of  the  orphan- 
houfe.  Surely,  Jesus  Christ  is  about  to  bring  mighty 
things  to  pafs.  Whilft  the  kings  of  the  earth  are  enlarging 
their  dominions,  I  trull:  our  Lord  will  uflier  in  his. —  I  Ihall 
not  be  furprized,  if  after  this  great  commotion  in  New-Eng^ 
land,  I  hear  that  fome  outward  troubles  befal  them.  The 
removal  of  you,  honoured  Sir,  from  being  governor,  I  take  to 
be  no  good  figii.  I  hope  this  has  no  other  efFe^l  upon  your 
own  heart,  than  to  make  you  more  and  more  hunger  and 
thirft  after  that  righteoufnefs,  which  neither  men  nor  devils 
fhall  ever  be  able  to  take  from  you.  God  only  knows,  how 
often  I  have  prayed,  that  this  afflr(Si?ion  may  be  fandified  untar 
you.     I  thUk,  Ironoured  Sir,  1  cannot  forget  you   and  your 

people. 
% 


LETTERS.  291 

people.  Both  are  dear,  very  dear  to  my  foul.  I  fomctimcs 
long  to  fee  Bojlm  again,  that  I  may  rejoice  in  what  great 
things  the  Lord  has  dane ;  but  various  circumftances  concur 
to  detain  me  on  this  fide  the  ocean,  all  the  next  Winter.  I  am 
now  in  my  pailage  to  Scotland.  What  the  Lord  is  plcafed  to 
do  there,  your  honour  may  hear  in  my  next.  I  rejoice,  that 
I  am  a  little  retired  from  the  world,  and  have  the  opportunity, 
honoured  Sir,  of  writing  td  you.  How  fweet  is  retirement 
v/hen  Christ  is  prefent  in  the  heart  ?  Having  him,  I  find  I 
poflTefs  all  things.  Happy  they  that  can  wrap  themfelves  in 
God.  May  you  and  yours  be  thus  happy  !  This  will  enable 
you,  honoured  Sir,  to  rejoice  in  tribulation,  and  give  thanks 
for  ev&ry  thing  that  does  befal  you.  Tho*  thefliip  is  moving, 
and  I  am  fomewhat  fick,  I  knew  not  how  to  leave  ofF.  In- 
deed, I  love  and  honour  you  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ. 
That  you  and  yours  may  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  his  love, 
and  filled  v/ith  all  tUe  fulnefs  of  God,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of, 
honoured  Sir, 

Your  mofl:  afFedlionate,  obliged  humble  fervant, 

G.  W. 

LETTER   ;CCCXX. 

To  the  P^everend  Dr.  C — — ,  at  BoJIon, 

On  board  the  Alary  and  Ann,  July  26,  1741. 
Rev.Mnd  dear  Sir, 

I  Had  the  pleafure  of  yours,  and  have  taken  the  freedom 
to  publifti  part  of  it,  becaufe  I  thought  our  Lord's  caufe 
might  be  promoted  thereby.  Glory  be  to  the  ever  blefl'ed 
Jesus,  for  the  great  work  begun  in  your  province.  Glory  be 
to  his  great  name,  for  raifing  up  inltroments  to  carry  it  on } 
efpecially  for  working  fo  powerfully  among  the  fons  of  thje 
prophets.  A  mod  promifing  omen  this  for  dear  New-England. 
Reverend  Sir,  the  fearcher  of  hearts  only  knows,  how  deeply 
the  welfare  of  your  people  is  imprefTed  upon  my  foul.  I  con- 
tinually make  mention  of  them  in  my  poor  prayers,  both 
public  and  private,  and  have  not  failed  to  give  thanks  in  their 
behalf.    You  feem  a  little  offended,  that  I  did  not  mention  old 

^^Mr.  TV J.    It  was,  becaufe  by  his  converfation  I  could  not 

/  iind  he  ca^ne  yp  to  that  character  v.hich  you  gave  him.     Mr. 
'  U  2  S 


292  LETTERS. 

S I  truly  value,  and  lately  have  had  reafon  to  think  much 

better  of  him  than  formerly,  when  his  experiences  to  me  feem- 
ed  too  fuperficial ;  but  I  am  a  poor,  vi^eak,  fallible  u^orm,  and 
therefore  my  judgment  is  of  littleworth.  I  rejoice  to  hear  that  the 
minifters  with  you  help  forward  the  work  of  God.  I  find  no 
fuch  enemies  to  the  crofs  of  Christ,  as  thofe  who  keep  up  the 
form  of  religion,  and  are  orthodox  in  their  notions,  but  are  ig- 
norant of  an  experimental  acquaintance  with  Jesus.  How- 
ever, the  work  of  God  is  beginning  afrefti.  I  have  free  ac- 
Cefs  every  where,  and  have  been  upon  the  full  ftretch  preaching 
to  large  auditories  twice  a  day,  for  fome  time  paft.  The  Lord 
is  pleafed  to  ftrengthen  me  both  in  body  and  foul.  His  pre- 
fence  fills  the  aflemblies,  and,  I  verily  believe,  we  {hall  yet  fee 
glorious  days.  I  have  fweet  accounts  from  the  Orphans.  I 
thank  you,  dear  Sir,  for  your  care  concerning  them.  1  have 
been  in  great  ftraits ;  but  the  dear  Jesus  helps  me  through 
them  all.  Help  me,  dear  Sir,  help  me  to  praife  him.  My 
tender  love  awaits  both  you  and  your  people.  I  am  glad  to 
hear,  that  my  kind  hoflefs  is  recovered.  May  the  Lord 
ftrengthen  her  mightily,  and  caufe  her  to  go  down  to  the  grave 
in  peace  I  I  earneftly  defire  a  continuance  of  your  own  and 
people's  prayers  in  behalf  of,  reverend  Sir, 

Your  affectionate  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  W. 
LETTER    CCCXXL 

To  John  D ,  at  Bofton. 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Jnn,  July  26,  1 741. 
A'fy  dear  ch'ddy 

I  Thank  you  for  your  letter:  I  neither  forgot  you  nor  my 
proniife.  O  that  God  may  effedually  work  upon  your 
heart  betimes,  for  you  cannot  be  good  too  foon,  or  too  good. 
The  little  orphans  at  Georgia  are  crying  out,  "  What  Ihall  we 
do  to  be  faved  ?"  And  I  am  glad  to  hear,  that  this  is  the 
language  of  fome  little  ones  in  New-England.  If  you  know 
any  of  them,  pray  give  my  love  to  them,  and  tell  them,  I  pray 
that  Jesu>  Christ  may  be  revealed  in  their  dear  hearts. 
How  early  was  Jesus  Christ  in  the  Temple,  firft.  hearing, 
and  then  afking  qi^eftions  ?  How  did  he  love  the  little  chil- 
dren, how  did  he  take  them  up  in  his  facred  arms  and  blefs 

them  I 


1.    E    T    T    E    R    S.  2493 

them;  and  when  he  was  juft  afcending  to  the  highcft  heaven, 
how  tenderly  did  he  fpeak  to  Peter,  and  bid  him  "  feed  hi« 
lambs."  Let  all  this  encourage  you  to  come  unto  him.  He 
will  certainly  receive  you,  tho'  you  have  been  wicked ;  nay, 
he  will  abundantly  pardon  you.  And  uhat  comfort  will  you 
enjoy,  when  you  know  your  fms  arc  forgiven  you  ?  You  will 
then  have  a  heaven  upon  earth.  In  expedbition  of  feeing  you 
a  chriftian  indeed,  and  grown  in  grace,  I  fubfcribe  myfeif 
•    Your  afFe6^ionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER     CCCXXII. 

To  the  Honourable  jf fV ,  at  Bojion. 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  26,  1 74 1 . 
Honoured  Sir, 

PRESUMING  it  would  not  be  difagreeable  to  you,  I 
have  taken  the  liberty  to  print  part  of  the  letter  you  was 
fo  kind  as  to  fend  me.  Surely  it  will  rejoice  the  hearts  of 
thoufands,  to  hear  what  good  things  the  Lord  is  doing  in  thefe 
parts.  It  has  put  much  gladnefs  into  my  heart,  and  caufed  me 
to  give  many  thanks  in  behalf  of  the  people  of  New-Ejigland* 
How  good  is  our  God  !  When  things  are  a  little  trouble- 
fome  without,  he  fends  his  gofpel  to  comfort  his  children 
within.  Surely  Jesus  Christ  is  about  to  fet  the  world  in  a 
flame.  He  is  working  powerfully  at  home  ;  he  is  working 
powerfully  abroad.  I  truft  he  will  continue  working,  'till  the 
earth  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters 
cover  the  fea.  I  hope  you  will  yet  feel  more  of  this  light  and 
life  in  your  own  heart,  before  you  go  hence,  and  be  com- 
forted with  the  comforts  wherewith  I  am  daily  comforted 
of  God.  Dear  Sir,  Jesus  is  a  precious  Adafter.  He,  as  it 
were,  dandles  me  upon  his  knees.  He  carries  me  in  his  arms, 
he  fights  all  my  battles,  and  makes  me  more  than  con- 
queror thro'  his  love.  My  work  is  great,  but  my  fupports  are 
greater.  He  aflures  me  from  day  to  day,  that  he  will  never 
leave  me  nor  forfake  me.  My  infirmities  often  make  me  blufh, 
^nd  yet  Jesus  pafles  them  all  by.  Dear  Sir,  think  often  on 
the  love  of  Christ  :  tliink  of  his  dying  love  ;  that  muft 
give  you  comfort.     I  rejoice  at  this  opportunity  of  writing 

U  3  to 


294  LETTERS, 

to  you,     I  thank  you  for  your  kind  caution,     I  pray  God  to 
teach  me  how  to  improve  it.     Help  me,  dear  Sir,  with  your 
prayers  ;  and  accept  of  thefe  few  lines  from,  honoured  Sir, 
Youi:  moft  afFedionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ. 

G.  IK 
LETTER    CCCXXIII. 

to  Mr,  E D ,  at  Bojion, 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann y  July  26,  1741. 
Dear  Mr,  D , 

I  Am  to  be  blamed  for  not  fending  you  a  line.  I  am  an  un- 
grateful creature  -,  ungrateful  to  my  earthly  friends,  un* 
fpeakably  more  fo  to  the  friend  of  all.  Pardon  me  this  once. 
God  willing,  you  fhall  have  no  reafon  to  complain  of  me 
any  more.  If  you  remember,  once  in  my  fermon  I  faid^  '^  O 
that  New-England  was  full  of  new  creatures !"  I  hope  the 
Lord  ip  feme  meafure  is  going  to  anfwer  that  prayer. — It  re-^ 
joices  my  heart,  to  hear  that  the  gofpel  runs  fo  fwiftly,  and  is 
fo  remarkably  glorified  amongft  you.  This  is  the  Lord's  do- 
ings, and  it  ought  to  be  marvellous  in  our  eyes.  BlefTed  are  the 
eyes  that  fee  the  things  which  we  fee  3  blefled  are  the  ears 
that  hear  the  things  which  we  hear,  for  many  righteous 
men  have  dcfircd  to  fee  and  hear  them,  and  have  nor.  I  re- 
joice alfo  to  hear,  that  there  is  like  to  be  a  church  in  your 
houfe.  O,  dear  Sir,  take  care  that  none  of  you  reft,  till  you 
have  got  fad  hold  of  the  blefled  Jesus.     My  kind  love  to  dear 

Mrs.  D '.     May  Christ's  juftifying  blood  be  upon  you 

and  your  children.  I  return  my  love  to  all  that  are  fo  kind  as 
to  remember  me.  I  believe  I  fhall  not  fee  you  this  Winter. 
The  w'ork  is  tery  great,  and  goes  on  very  profperous  in  Eng^ 
fand.  However,  you  are  all  upon  my  heart,  and  the  more 
heartily  you  pray  for  me,  the  fooner  fhal)  I  be  reftored  unto 
you.  I  hope  I  feel  the  benefit  of  your  dear  people's  prayers  j 
for  God  comforts  and  ftrengthens  me  daily,  and  carries  me  on 
from  conquering  to  conquer.  On  fhorc,  I  have  fcarce  time  to 
•write  a  line  ;  being  now  on  board,  I  take  this  opportunity  of 
returning  you  my  hearty  thanks  for  your  kind  letter,  and  of 
afTuring  you  that  I  am,  dear  Mr.  D— — -, 

Your  affectionate  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  IK 

1  E  T  T  E  R 


LETTERS.  295 

LETTER    CCCXXIV. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  R ,  at  Bojicn, 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann,  July  26,  1741. 
My  dear  Brother  R , 

HOW  glad  was  I  to  receive  a  letter  from  your 'hands, 
having  heard  nothing  of,  or  from  you  particularly,  fince 
we  parted.  What  great  things  has  the  Lord  fliewn  us  fince 
that  time.  Methinks  I  hear  you  fay,  "  and  yet  I  can  tell  of 
greater  things."  I  believe  we  fliall  fee  far  greater  yet  before  we 
die.     The  work  is  beginning  afrefti  here.     I  fometinies  think 

B G muft  take  a  voyage  over  to  Old- England.    Mod 

of  our  London  minillers  too  much  fliun  the  ciofs,  and  do  rK)t 
appear  boldly  for  God. —  Now  the  Lord  hath  worked  fo 
powerfully  in  your  college,  I  have  Icfs  to  fay  againft  your 
joining  with  Mr.  W •.  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  fpcak  plain- 
ly and  clofely.  What  comfort  will  this  afford  you  in  a  dying 
hour  ?  Go  on,  my  dear  brother,  go  on  ;  venture  daily  upon 
Christ,  go  out  in  his  flrength,  and  he  will  enable  you  to  do 
wonders.  He  is  with  me  more  and  more.  I  have  been  fweet- 
ly  carried  thro'  the  heat  and  burden  of  every  day^s  labour. 
Jesus  bears  all  my  burdens.  Jesus  enables  me  to  cafl:  all  my 
cares  upon  him.  O  then  let  us  magnify  his  name  together  \ 
I  am  now  going  to  Scotland^  knowing  not  what  will  befal  me. 
What  God  does,  you  may  expert  to  hear  fliortly.  In  the 
mean  while,  let  us  pray  for  and  write  to  each  other.  As  iron 
fharpeneth  iron,  fo  doth  the  letters  of  a  man  his  friend.  Your 
laft  I  have  printed  :  God's  glory  called   me  to  it.     My  dear 

brother,  adieu  !  Dear  Brother  S fits  by  and  falutes   you. 

My  kind  love  awaits  Mr.  JV ,  and  all  that  love  the  Lord 

Jesus  in  fincerity.  Li  hopes  of  receiving  another  letter  from 
you  fliortly,  I  fubfcribc  myfelf,  dear  Mr.  R. 

Your  very  affesftionate,  tho'  very  unworthy  brgtber 
an  J  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  n\ 


U4  '     LETTER 


296  LETTER    S, 

LETTER    CCCXXV. 

To  the  Student  Si  &c.  wider  convictions  at  the  colleges  of  Cambridge 
and  New- haven ^ — in  New- England  and  Conneclicut, 
Dear  GeniUincn^ 

Wi  T\\  unfpeakable  pleafure  have  I  heard,  that  there 
fecnis  to  be  a  general  concern  among  you  about  the 
things  of  God.  Ir  was  no  fmall  grief  to  me,  that  I  was  oblig- 
ed to  iay  of  your  college,  that  "  your  light  was  becorric  dark- 
nefs  i"  yet  are  ye  now  become  light  in  the  Lord.  I 
vheartily  tnank  God,  even  the  Father  of  our  glorious  Redeem- 
er,  for   fending  dear  Mr,    ^i among  you.     What   great 

things  may  we  not  nowexpf.cl:  to  fee  in  New-England^  Tmce  it 
has  pleafed  God  to.  work  fo  remarkably  among  the  fons  of  the 
prophets  ?  Now  we  may  expe6l  a  reformation  indeed,  fince  it 
is  beginning  at  the  houfe  of  God.  A  dead  miniftry  will  al- 
ways make  a  dead  people.  Whereas,  if  miniflers  are  warmed 
with  the  love  of  God  themfelves,  they  cannot  but  be  inflru- 
rnents  of  diiTufing  that  love  among  others.  This,  this  is  the 
beft  preparation  for  the  work  whereunto  you  are  to  be  called. 
Learning  without  piety,  will  only  make  you  more  capable  of 
promoting  the  kingdom  of  fatan.  Henceforward,  therefore,  I 
hope  you  will  enter  into  your  ftudies  not  to  get  a  pariOi,  nor  to 
be  polite  preachers,  but  to  be  great  faints.  This,  indeed,  is  the 
mofl  compendious  way  to  true  learning  :  for  an  underftanding 
enlightened  by  the  fpirit  of  God,  is  more  fufceptible  of  divine 
truths,  and  I  am  certain  will  prove  moft  ufeful  to  mankind. 
The  more  holy  you  are,  the  more  will  God  delight  to 
honour  you.  He  loves  to  make  ufe  of  inrtruments,  which  are 
like  himlelf.  I  hope  the  good  old  divinity  will  now  be  precious 
foycur  foulsj  and  you  will  think  it  an  honour  to  tread  in  the 
fteps  of  your  pious  forefathers.  They  were  acquainted  with 
their  own  hearts. — They  knew  what  it  was  to  be  tempted 
themfelves,  and  therefore  from  their  own  experience  knew  how 
to  fuccour  others.  O  may  you  follow  them,  as  they  follov/ed 
Christ.  Then  great,  very  great  will  be  your  reward  in 
heaven.  I  am  fure  you  can  never  ferve  a  better  Mafter  than 
Jesus  Christ,  or  be  engaged  in  a  higher  employ  than  in 
falling  heme  fouls  to  him.     I  truft,  dear  gentlemen,  you  will 

not 


LETTERS.  297 

pot  be  offended  at  me  for  fending  you  thefe  few  lines.  I  write 
out  of  the  fulncfs  of  my  heart.  I  make  mention  of  you  always 
^n  my  prayers.  Forget  me  not  in  yours.  I  am  a  poor  weak 
worm.  I  am  the  chief  of  finners,  and  yet,  O  ftupendous  love! 
the  LoRp*s  work  ftill  profpers  in  my  unworthy  hands. — Fail 
pot  to  give  thinks,  as  well  as  to  pray  for 

Your  affcdlionate  brother  and  fervant,. 
in  our  common  Lord, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER     CCCXXyi. 

To  Mr.  D ,  at  Bo/Ion, 

Dear  Sir,  On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann,  July  25,  1 74 1. 

YO  U  R's  as  well  as  other  letters,  which  I  received  from 
Bojion,  gave  me  no  fmall  fatisfadion.  Now,  now  I 
Jive,  if  poor  linners  are  floeking  for  life  t9  the  dear  Lord 
Jesus.  How  may  we  fuppofe  the  angels  to  be  rejoicing  over 
Bojion,  and  other  places  in  N ew- England !  How  glad  are  they 
to  fee  the  kaures  frequented  as  in  times  of  old,  and  the  fpirit 
of  your  good  forefathers  reviving  among  you  I  Sure  it  muft  be 
delightful  to  fee  black  and  white,  young  men  and  maidens,  old 
men  and  children,  praifing  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Blefled  be 
God,  who  in  this  great  awakening  hath  not  pafled  by  your 
houfe.  Fear  not,  dear  Sir  :  Who  knows  but  the  blefled  Jesus 
may  yet  vifityou  with  the  light  of  his  blefled  countenance?  I 
rejoice  to  hear  he  has  been  gracious  to  your  wife  and  daughter, 
I  pray  God,  you  may  be  all  built  up  in  our  moft  holy  faith, 
and  go  on  from  ftrength  to  ftrength,  till  you  come  to  appear 
before  the  Lord  Christ  in  glory.  I  thank  God,  who  hath 
heard  prayer  on  my  behalf.  I  am  fl:rengthened  daily  both  in 
body  and  foul,  and  have  reafon  to  think  my  miniftry  is  blefl^ed 
more  and  more.  Let  God's  goodnefs  to  me,  encourage  you 
to  exped  great  things  from  our  Lord.  He  is  able  and  wil- 
ling to  do  for  us  more  abundantly  than  we  can  afk  or  think. 
That  you  and  your  dear  family  may  daily  drink  of  his  divine 
pleafures,  as  out  of  a  river,  is  the  earnefl:  prayer  of,  dear  Sir, 
Your  affectionate  friend  and  fervant, 

G,  JV, 

LETTER 


29^  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCXXVir. 

To  John  R ,  an  Orphan,  at  the  Orphan-houfe. 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  27,  174I. 
X)ear  John, 

I  Remember  you  once  wanted  to  go  av/ay  from  Bethefda, 
Adore  the  free  grace  and  mercy  of  that  God,  who  has 
kept  you  there.  I  truft,  it  will  prove  the  faving  of  your  preci- 
ous and  immortal  foul.  To  fee  onefelf  loll  and  condemned  by 
nature,  is  the  firft  Hep  to  converfion.  I  hope  before  this  time 
you  have  found  yourfelf  faved  by  grace  :  for  "  by  grace  alone 
you  are  to  be  faved,  and  that  not  of  yourfelves,  it  is  the  gift 
of  God.'*  The  Lord  Jesus  hath  indeed  been  knocking 
at  the  door  of  your  heart.  I  truft,  now  he  will  break  the 
door  open,  and  give  himfelf  admilTion.  Dear  John,  you 
may  well  wonder,  that  the  Lord  hath  not  fent  you  to  hell.  I 
truft,  that  you  feel  you  deferve  it.  O  that  God  may  pluck 
you  as  a  brand  out  of  the  burning.  This  was  my  only  view 
in  bringing  you  to  Bethefda.  This  is  the  only  defire  df  the 
dear  friends  v/ho  have  the  rule  over  you  ;  they  watch  for  your 
foul,  &c.  The  devil  (as  you  obferve)  watches  to  deflroy  it : 
and,  therefore,  my  dear  boy,  away  to  Jesus  Christ.  He 
can  take  away  the  heart  of  ftone  :  he  can  give  you  an  heart  of 
flefh.  All  things  are  poflible  with  Him.  That  God  may 
give  you  grace  to  take  the  kingdom  of  heaven  with  a  holy  vio- 
lence, is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  dear  John, 

Your  fmcere  friend, 

LETTER    CCXXVIIL 

To  James  M ,  an  Orphan. 

On  Lard  the  Mary  and  Ann,  July  27,  1741. 
Dear  James, 

I  Am  glad  to  hear  by  dear  brother  B 's  letters,  that  your 
foul  has  received  comfort.  I  am  comforted  at  the  news. 
May  God  increafe  it  daily,  'till  your  joy  be  full.  I  muft 
think  God  loves  you,  and  that  he  has  begun  a  good  work  in 
your  foul.  1  hope  to  find  at  my  return  that  it  is  carried  on, 
and  that  you  have  been  prelTing  forward  towards  the  mark  for 
the  prizeof  your  high  calling  in  Christ  Jesus  your  faviour. 

Dear 


LETTERS.  299 

Dear  James^  I  do  not  forget  you.  I  hope  you  never  will  forget 
the  love  of  Christ,  who  died  and  hath  given  himfclf  for  you. 
Does  not  the  very  thought  of  this  make  you  even  to  weep  ? 
Do  you  not  want  fome  private  place  where  to  vent  your  heart  ? 
Aw^ay  then,  I  will  detain  you  no  longer.  Retire  into  the 
woods.  Go  look  to  him  whom  you  have  pierced,  and  with  a 
godly  forrow  mourn  for  your  fms,  as  a  woman  for  her  iirfl- 
born.  At  the  fame  time,  forget  not  to  figh  out  a  prayer  in 
t)ehalfof,  dQzr  James y 

Your  affe£lionatc  friend  an^  fervant, 

G.  IK 

LETTER    CCCXXIX, 

To  Thomas  JP'tbb^  an  Orphan, 
On  hoaid  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  27,  1 74 1, 
-  Dear  Thomas^ 

HOW  inconfiftent  is  the  devil  !  How  artfully  does  he 
rtrive  to  keep  poor  fouls  from  Christ  1  Sometimes  he 
labours  to  drive  poor  fouls  into  defpair ;  fometimes  to  pre- 
fumption.  Thefe  are  the  two  rocks,  againft  which  he  would 
fain  have  poor  fouls  to  make  fhipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good 
confcience.  I  pray  God  to  enable  you  to  fleer  a  middle 
courfe. — May  you  fee  your  mifery,  and  at  the  fame  time  fee 
your  remedy  in  the  crofs  and  wounds  of  Jesus  Christ.  He 
calls  to  all  weary  heavy  laden  fouls  ;  confequently  he  calls 
you.  Your  coming  to  him,  will  be  a  proof  of  your  elecSlion, 
The  devils  know  nothing  of  God's  decrees.  If  ever  he 
(hould  tempt  you  fo  again,  fay,  *'  If  I  do  perifti,  I  will  pe- 
rifti  at  the  feet  of  Christ."  He  is  willing  to  favc,  to  fave 
to  the  uttermoft.  He  fees,  he  feels  your  anguifh.  He  longs 
to  rejoice  over  you.  V^enture  therefore  upon  him.  Thomas, 
be  not  faithlefs,  but  believing.  Christ  ihall  yet  (hew  you 
his  hands  and  his  feet.  He  is  the  fame  now,  as  he  was  yefter- 
day,  full  of  love  and  condefcenfion  to  felf-ccndemncd  finners. 
That  you  may  experier.ce  the  full  power  and  efficacy  of  the 
Redeemer's  blood,  is  the  ardent  prayer  of,  dear  Thomas, 

Ycur  finccre  friend, 

LETTER 


300  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCXXX. 

To  miliam  B . 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann ^  y-aJy  ^.y^  1 74 1. 

I  Thought  your  father  had  fent  for  you   from  Beihtfda ;  but 
I  hope  your  heavenly  Father  has  kept  you  there  to  brino- 
you   home  to  hinif*^^^*     Your  deadnefs  has  often  grieved  \TxQ. 

O  that  I  may  have  leafon  to  fing,  at  my  return,  "  Billy  B 

was  dead,  but  is  alive  again  ;  he  was  loft,  but  is  found.'* 
You  do  well  to  pray  to  God,  to  fearch  your  heart,  and  to 
try  your  reins  j  for  otherwife  your  treacherous  heart  will  de- 
ceive you.  I  would  not  have  you  forget  what  the  Lord  is 
doing  for  you,  for  ten  thoufand  worlds.  O  defer  not  repen- 
tance to  a  death-bed.  It  will  be  hard  to  ftrive  with  princi- 
palities and  powers,  when  you  can  fcarce  turn  in  your  bed. 
A  man,  at  that  time,  can  hardly  bear  up  under  his  bodily  in- 
firmities;  but  a  wourided  fpir.it  who  can  bear  ?  Reje<Si:,  there^ 
fore,  fuch  a  horrid  temptation,  with  the  utmoft  abhorrence. 
Be  a  worker  together  with  God  ;  and  now  God  is  working 
in  you  to  will  and  to  do,  fee  that  you  work  out  your  own 
falvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  Do  not  ftab  your  Saviour 
any  more.  Dear  Billy^  think  on  his  bitter  agony  and  bloody 
fweat,  and  fly  to  him,  as  a  Redeemer  ready  and  willing  to  re- 
ceive you.  That  you  may  be  happy  in  him  here,  and  with 
him  hereafter,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of 

Your  fmcere  friend, 
G.  W. 

LETTER    CCCXXXI. 

To  R ^ ,  an  Orphan. 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  27,  I74I* 
Dear  Richard^ 

THE  contents  of  your  letter  pleafed  me.     I  have  fome- 
times  thought,  if  God  did  not  convert  Richard  W , 

"be  would  be  one  of  the  moft  unhappy  boys  in  the  world.  YoU 
have  head' knowledge  \  and  unlefs  you  are  made  to  fee  the  fm- 
fulnefs  of  your  heart,  it  will  much  mcreafe  your  condemnation. 
Blefled  be  God,  who  yet  hath  patience  with  you,  and  feems 
to  be  flrivJng  with  your  fouK     I  dp  not  wonder  that   the 

devil 


LETTERS,  301 

devil  tells  you,  "  it  is  time  to  repent  when  you  are  a  man." 
You  may  well  fay,  it  is  the  devil  that  tells  you  fo :  Such  a 
fuggeftion  cannot  come  from  God.  Behold,  now  is  the  ac- 
cepted time,  now  is  the  day  of  falvation  !  Jefus  will  even  now 
accept  you,  vile  as  you  are,  and  ungrateful  as  you  have  been  : 
if  you  feel  your  mifcry,  and  fly  to  him  for  fuccour,  he  will 
accept  you.  Every  conviction  cries,  "  Come,  Richard,  came, 
to  me,  that  thou  mayeft  have  reft."  .  Let  me  advife  you,  as 
old  Eli  advifed  young  Samuel :  fay,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy 
fervant  heareth." 

I  :»m  your  fmcere  friend, 

LETTER    CCCXXXIL 

To  John  F ,  an  Orphan. 

On  board  the  Alary  and  Ann,  July  27,  1 74 1. 
Dear  John, 

I  Willingly  fulfil  your  requeft,  and  fit  down  to  write  you  a 
line  or  two.  I  am  glad  you  begin  to  fee  the  wickednefs 
of  your  own  heart.  You  cannot  conceive  what  a  myftery  of 
iniquity  is  hid  therein.  The  more  you  fee  it,  the  more  you 
will  find  the  want  of  a  faviour,  and  adore  God  for  giving  his 
dear  Son  to  die  for  finners.  There  was  once  a  young  man, 
named  John,  who  leaned  on  the  Saviour's  bofom,  and  was 
his  particular  favourite.  What  if  you  fliould  be  thus  highly 
honoured.  Would  it  not  be  an  amazing  inftance  of  love  and 
condefcenfion  ?  And  what  doth  the  Saviour  do  lefs,  for  all 
that  feel  themfeives  poor,  loft,  undone  finners  ?  Nay,  does 
he  not  do  for  them  infinitely  more  ?  Yes,  he  does.  Come 
to  him,  therefore,  by  faith,  and  he  (hall  embrace  you  in  the 
arms  of  his  mercy,  clothe  you  v/ith  hi-  righteoufnefs,  fandify 
you  by  his  fpirit,  guide  you  by  his  counfel,  and  after  death 
receive  you  up  into  glory.  Look  up,  then,  and  never  reft 
till  you  have  it.  Convi£tion  is  not  converfion.  But  you 
know  who  has  promifed  not  to  quench  the  fmoaking  flax,  or 
break  the  bruifed  reed.  That  this  promife  may  be  fulfilled 
in  your  foul,  is  the  hearty  prayer  9/ 

Your  fincere  friend, 
G.  IV. 

LETTER 


'302^  Letters, 

letter  cccxxxiil 

To  L M ,  an  Orphan. 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann ^  July  27,  1 741* 


Dear  L M- 


AND  are  little  boys  and  girls,  at  this  and  that  corner  of 
the  wood,  crying  unto  the  Lord  ?  I  hope  you,  dear 

/, ,  are  always  among  them  ;  and  may  the  Lord  hear 

your  prayers,  when  you  cry  unto  him  !  Surely  he  will, 
if  you  feel  yourfelves  poor  fmners.  Never  did  Jesus  reject 
an  humble  fuppliant.  *'  Suffer  (fays  he)  little  children  to 
come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them  not ;  for  of  fuch  is  the  king- 
dom  of  heaven.'*     Dear   L ,   take  all   poffible   care  to 

cherifh  your  convi6lions.  God  has  fpoken  once,  yea  twice 
to  you,  in  an  extraordinary  manner.  You  are  one  of 
the  oldeft;  you  ought  to  go  before  the  reft,  and  to  encourage 
them  to  follow  the  ever-bleffed  Jesus.  Satan  will,  no  doubt, 
be  very  bufy ;  and  therefore  you  ought  to  be  bufy  alfo.  You 
fight  under  a  good  captain,  even  Jesus  Christ,  who  will 
tread  all  enemies  under  your  feet.  My  dear  child,  redeem 
your  precious  time.  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith  ;  and  when 
you  ar.e  wreftling  with  God,  fail  not  to  pray  for 

Your  fmcere  friend, 
G,  IV. 

LETTER    CCCXXXIV. 

Ts   Mr,  Thomas   J ,   at   Savannah, 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann y  July  29,  1741. 
Dear  Sir, 

I  Thank  you  for  your  continued  kindnefs  to  my  dear  family. 
The  God  whom  I  ferve,  will  richly  reward  you;  I  am 
mpre  and  more  convinced,  that  the  Orphan-houfe  is  of  God. 
He  will  uphold  it  with  his  mighty  arm.  Dear  Sir,  there  is 
nothing  like  a  life  of  faith.  It  is  more  and  more  pleafant  to 
me  every  day,  I  pray  God,  you  may  experience  it  every 
moment,  and  be  enabled  entirely  to  overcome  the  world. 
My  letters,  to  my  dear  family,  will  inforn?  you,  how  the 
Lord  bath  been  pleafed  to  deal  with  me.  Bleffcd  be  his 
name,  he  hath  delivered,  hp  does,  he  will  yet  deliver.     My 

foul 


LETTERS.  303 

foyl  has  been  among  lions.  JesUs  hath  been  my  helper.  I 
am  vciry  comfortable  within,  and  experience  more  of  the  di- 
vine prefence  in  preaching,  I  think,  than  ever  I  did  before 
in  Eftgland.  I  fuppofe  I  (hall  not  embark  for  America  till 
Spring,  Whatever  good  offices  you  are  pleafed  to  do  for  my 
family,  fhall  be  then  fully  acknowledged  by,  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  friend  and  ferrant  in  Christ, 

C.  IK 

LETTER     CCCXXXV. 

To  Mr.  L ,  at  BnJloL 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann,  fitly  29,  1741. 


Dear  ?/Ir.  L- 


WE  are  now  within  thirty  miles  of  our  defired  haven. 
We  have  had  a  pleafant  paflage.  Before  I  go  afhorc, 
I  would  fain  anfwer  your  kind  letter.  Fear  not  for  BriftoL 
No  weapon  formed  againft  Zisn  fhall  profper.  Let  us  wait 
patiently,  and  we  (hall  certainly  fee  the  falvation  of  God. 
The  Lord  is  beginning  his  work  afrefh.     I  fuppofe  brother 

C-* has  told  you  fomething  of  it.     I  never  felt  greater 

power  in  England.  I  have  had  God's  continued  prefence 
during  the  paiTage.  God  has  given  me  fweet  fleep  at  night, 
and  a  good  appetite  to  my  food  by  day.  Faithful  is  he  who 
hath  promifed,  that  thofe  who  wait  ypon  the  Lord  fliall  renew 
their  ftrength.  I  fpeak  thus  freely  to  you,  b^caufe  I  know 
you  will  be  thankful  on  my  behalf.  I  hope  both  you  and 
your  dear  wife,  are  making  daily  advances  in  the  divine  life. 
Whilft  others  are  difputing,  let  us  be  growing.  This  wilj 
be  the  bed  way  to  convince  thofe,  who  you  find  will  not  be 
convinced  any  other  way.  Adieu  !  The  Lord  be  with  you. 
May  your  foul  breathe  nothing  but  gentlenefs  and  love  ! 
I  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  affeiiionate  friend  .^nd  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  IV, 


LETTER 


304  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCXXXVI. 

To    Mr.   H -^^    at    the   Orphan-houfn 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann^  July  30,    I742.' 
My  very  dear  Friend  and  Brother^ 

I  Have  been  five  days  on  board,  and  am  now  juft  at  our  de- 
fired  haven.     God's  prefence  has  fweetened  the  paflage, 
and  I  have  had  freedom  to  virrite  many  letters  befides  thofe 

lent  to  Bethefda,     If  you,  and   dear  brother  B ,   think 

proper,  the  little  ones  may  be  called,  and  the  letters  read 
before  you.  A  w^ord  of  exhortation,  and  a  fhort  prayer,  may 
not  be  unfeafonable.  I  thank  you  all  for  the  tender  care  you 
take  of  the  dear  iambs.  You  ferve  a  mafter,  v^ho  vi^ill  richly 
revi^ard  all  your  pains.  I  hope  there  vi^ill  come  a  time,  when 
I  fhall  embrace  and  weep  over  you  all  with  tears  of  love  I  At 
prefent,  I  feel  myfelf  a  poor  fmner,  and  fland  amazed  at 
God's  goodnefs  and  patience  extended  towards  me.  I  am 
lefs  than  the  leaft  of  his  mercies.  You  may  exped  to  hear 
from  me  again  fhortly,  O  do  not  forget  to  pray  for  me.  My 
dear  friends,  for  the  prefent,  adieu  1  The  Lord  be  with  your 
fpixit. 

Ever,  ever  yours, 

G.  IV, 
LETTER     CCCXXXVII. 

To  Mr,  J C -. 

'    My  very  dear  Brother^  Edinburgh^  Jug.  I,  I74I_. 

THE  Lord  was  very  gracious  to  me  on  board.  He  gave 
us  a  pleafant  paflage.  As  you  know  that  the  MefTrs. 
Erjkines  gave  me  the  firft  invitation  to  Scotland,  and  hath  been 
praying  for  me  in  the  moft  public,  explicit,  I  could  almofl 
fay  extravagant  manner,  for  near  two  years  lafl  paft,  I  was 
determined  to  give  them  the  firit  offer  of  my  poor  miniftra- 
tions.     Accordingly,  I  went  yefterday  t(>  Dumfermling,  where 

dear  Mr.  R E hath  got  a  large  and  feparate,  or, 

as  it  is  commonly  termed,  feceding  meeting-houfe.  He  re- 
ceived me  very  lovingly.     I  preached  to  his  and  the  town's 

people 


LETTERS,  305 

people. — A  very  thronged  aflembly — After  I  had  done  prayer, 
and  named  my  text,  the  ruftling  made  by  opening  the  bibles  all 
at  once,  quite  furprized  me  :  a  fcenc,  I  never  was  witnels  to 
before.  Our  converfation  after  fermon,  in  the  houfe,  was 
fuch  as  became  the  gofpel  of  Christ.  They  entertained  me 
with  various  accounts  of  the  fuccefs  of  the  Scceders  labours; 

and,  as  a  proof  of  God's  being  with  them,  Mr.  R 's  fon- 

in-law  told  me,  that,  at  one  of  their  late  occafions,  a  woman 
was  fo  deeply  afFeded,  that  Ihe  was  obliged  to  flop  her  mouth 
with  an  handkerchief  to  keep  herfelf  from  crying  out.  They 
urged  a  longer  ftay,  in  order  to  converfe  more  clofely,  and  to 
fet  me  right  about  church  government,  and  the  folemn  leacyue 
and  covenant.  I  Informed  them,  that  I  had  given  notice  of 
preaching  at  Edinburgh  this  evening;  but,  as  they  defired 
it,   I  would  in  a   few  days  return,  and    meet  the  afTociate 

prefbytery  in  Mr.  R 's  houfe.    This  was  agreed  on.    Dear 

Mr.  E accompanied  me,  and  this  evening  I  preached 

to  many  thoufands,  in  a  place  called  The  Orphan-houfe  Park» 
The  Lord  was  there.  Immediately  after  fermon,  a  large 
company,  among  whom  were  fome  of  the  nobility,  came  to 
falute  me.  Amidft  our  converfation,  came  in  a  portly,  well- 
looking    Qiiaker,   nephew   to  MefTrs.  E ,    formerly  a 

Baptifl  minifter  in  the  north  of  England,  who,  taking  me  by 
the  hand,  faid,  "  Friend  George,  I  am  as  thou  art ;  I  am  for 
bringing  all  to  the  life  and  power  of  the  everliving  God  :  and, 
therefore,  if  thou  wilt  not  quarrel  with  me  about  my  hat,  I 
will  not  quarrel  with  thee  about  thy  gown."  In  this  refpef^, 
I  wifh  all,  of  every  denomination,  were  thus  minded,  I  find 
God  has  bleficd  my  works  in  thefe  parts.  I  am  mod  cordially 
received  by  many  that  love  the  Lord  Jesu::.  I  have  juft 
been  in  company  with  a  nobleman,  who,  I  believe,  truly  fears 
God  ;  and  alfo  with  a  lady  of  fafliioo,  that  difcovers  a 
chriftian  fpirit  indeed.  I  already  hear  of  great  divifions.  But 
Jesus  knows  how  to  bring  order  out  of  confufion.  I  hope 
the  Lord  is  much  with  you,  my  dear  brother.  O  may  you 
be  anointed  more  and  more,  till  you  are  filled  with  all  the  ful- 
nefs  of  God.  Be  pleafed  to  read  this  to  all  in  JVine-Jlrect ; 
and  remember  me  kindly  to  all  that  love  the  glorious  Re- 
deemer. He  is  a  dear,  dear  Jesus.  Tho'  we  die  for,  yet 
Vol.  L  X  lec 


3o6  LETTERS. 

let  us  not  deny  him  in  any  wife.  Pray  that  fuch  a  midid  may 
be  always  given  to 

Your  weak  and  unworthy  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  li\ 

LETTER    CCCXXXVIII. 

To   the  Rev.  Mr,  G,  IV ,    at   Maxton, 

Dear  Sir,  Edinburgh^  Jug.  i,  1 741. 

YOUR  kind  letter,  like  all  other  tokens  of  my  precious 
Mafter's  love,  quite  amazes  me.  I  hear  you  are  a  good 
old  foldier  of  Jesus  Christ.  O  that  you  had  wrote  to  me 
fooner  !  I  want  the  advice  and  exhortation  of  thofe  who  have 
been  in  Christ  before  me.  The  Lord  is  pleafed  greatly 
to  blefs  me.  His  work  feems  to  be  beginning  afrefli  in  England. 
How  it  goes  on  abroad,  the  papers  fent  with  this  will  inform  you. 
Help  me,  dear  Sir,  help  me  with  your  prayers,  that  the  Lord 
may  blefs  my  coming  here.  I  hope  fome  have  felt  the  divine 
prefence  in  this  evening's  exercife.  Thro'  grace  I  can  fay,  I 
did,  and  do  now.     O  that  I  could  be  humble  and  thankful  ! 

0  that  my  heart  glowed  with  the  love  of  God  and  men  !  I 
would  breathe  nothing  but  love.  I  would  love  all  that  love 
the  Lord  Jesus,  of  whatfoever  denomination.  May  the 
Lord  heal  our  divifions,  and  grant  that  we  may  not  thereby 
provoke  him  to  fend  us  a  common  perfccution  to  drive  us  toge- 
ther !  O  that  we  may  ftand  in  a  trying  hour.  Dear  Sir,  I 
fhall  be  glad  to  fee  you  at  Edlnhivgh  any  day  after  Wednejdoy 
next,  and  then  we  can  fettle  when  to  come  into  your  parts. 

1  am  willing  to  preach  the  gofpe)  to  all.  It  is  now  late,  but  I 
was  willing  to  write,  left  fomcthing  fliould  hinder  me  on 
Monday.  Dear  Sir,  good  night.  I  commend  you  to  God,,- 
thank  you  for  your  prayers,  and  dcfire  a  continuance  of  them 
in  behalf  of 

Your  afTec^tionate  younger  brother,  and 

fellow-labourer  in. the  Redeemer's  vineyard, 

G.  IF. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  307 

LETTER     CCCXXXIX. 

To    Mr.  Thorn  as    N- ,    at    New-Tcrk, 

My  dear  Brother^  Edinburgh.,  Aug.  ^^    1741. 

TT  Have  written  you  feveral  letters  5  and  I  rejoice  to  hear  that 
JL  the  W9rk  of  the  Lord  profpers  in  the  hands  of  Mcflrs. 
T<\'^'^<v^lS]  kc.  am  glad  they  intend  to  meet  in  a  fynod  by 
themfcjves.  Their  catholic  fpirit  will  do  good.  The  aj/o- 
ciate  prefiytery  here,  are  fo  confined,  that  they  will  not  fo  much 
as    hear    me    preach,    unlcfs    I    only    will   join    with    them. 

Mr.  Ralph  E ,  indeed,  did  hear  me,  and  went  up  with 

me  into  the  pulpit  of  the  Cannon-gate  church — The  people 
were  ready  to  fhout  for  joy  ;  but,  I  believe,  it  gave  offence  to 
his  affbciates.  I  met  moft  of  them,  according  to  appointment, 
on  JVedncfday  laft. — A  fet  of  grave  venerable  men  !  They  fooa 
propofed  to  form  themfclves  into  a  prefbytery,  and  were  pro- 
ceeding to  chufe  a  moderator — I  afked  them  for  what  purpofc  ? 
They  anfwercd,  to  difcourfe,  and  fet  me  right,  about  the 
matter  of  church-government,  and  the  folemn  league  and  co- 
venant. I  replied,  they  might  fave  themfelves  that  trouble, 
for  I  had  no  fcruples  about  it;  and  that  fettling  church-go- 
vernment, and  preaching  about  the  folemn  league  and  cove- 
nant, was  not  my  plan  ;  I  then  told  them  fomething  of  my 
experience,  and  how  I  was  led  out  into  my  prefent  way  of 
acting.     One  in  particular  faid,  he  was  deeply  affetSted  ;  and 

the  dear  Mr.  E defircd  they  would  have  patience  with 

me,  for  that  having  been  born  and  bred  in  England^  and  never 
fludied  the  point,  I  could  not  be  fuppofed  to  be  fo  pcrfedly 
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  their  covenants.  One,  much 
warmer  than  the  reft,  immediately  replied,  "  th«t  no  indul- 
gence was  to  be  fliown  me  ;  that  England  had  revolted  moft 
with  refpecl  to  church  government  j  and  that  I,  born  and 
educated  there,  coulJ  not  but  be  acquainted  with  the  matter 
now  in  debate."  I  told  him,  I  had  never  yet  made  the  folemn 
league  and  co\enant  the  object  of  my  ftudy,  being  too  bufy 
about  matters,  as  I  judged,  of  greater  importance.  Several 
replied,  that  every  pin  of  the  tabernacle  was  precious. — I  faid, 
i  that  in  every  building  there  v/cre  outfiuc  an  1  infide  workmen  ; 
that  the  latter,  at  prefent,  was  my  province  ;  that  if  they 
X  2  thought 


3oB  LETTERS. 

thought  themfelves  called  to  the  former,  they  might  proceed 
in  their  own  way,  and  I  fhould  proceed  in  mine.  I  then  afked 
them  ferioufly,  what  they  would  have  me  to  do;  the  anfwer 
was  that  1  was  not  defired  to  fubfcribe  immediately  to  the 
folemn  leao-ue  and  covenant ;  but  to  preach  only  for  them  till 
I  had  further  light.     I  afked,  why  only  for  them  ?  Ur.  Ralph 

P ^-^'ij^    4c  they   were   the  Lord's   people.       1   then 

alked     whether  there  were  no  other  Lord's  people  but  them- 
felves'-  and  fuppofing  all  others  were  the  devil's  people,  they 
certainly  had  more  need  to  be  preached  to,  and  therefore  I 
was  more  and  more  determined  to  go  out  into  the  highways 
and  hedoes  ;  and   that  if  the  Pope  himfelf  would  lend  me  his 
pulpit    I  would  gladly  proclaim  the  righteoufnefs  of  Jesus 
Christ  therein.     Soon  after  this,  the  company  broke  up  ; 
and   one    of  thefe,   otherwife   venerable   men,    immediately 
went   into    the   meeting-houfe,    and    preached    upon    thefc 
words,    "   Watchman,    what   of   the   night?    Watchman, 
what  'of  the   night  ?    The   watchman   faid.   The   morning 
Cometh,  and  alfo  the  night,  if  ye  will  enquire,  enquire  ye  ; 
return,  come."  I  attended  ;  but  the  good  man  fo  fpent  himfelf 
inthe'formerpartofhis  fermon,  in  talking  againft  prelacy, 
the  common-prayer  book,  the  furplice,  the  rofe  in  the  hat,  and 
fuch  like  externals,  that  when  he  came  to  the  latter  part  of 
his  text,  to  invite  poor  finners  to  Jesus  Christ,  his  breath 
was  fo  gone,  that  he  could  fcarce  be  heard.     What  a  pity  that 
the  laft'^was  not  firft,  and  the  firft  laft  !  The  confequence  of 
all  this  was,  an  open  breach.    I  retired,  I  wept,  I  prayed,  and 
after  preaching  in  the  fields,  fat  down  and  dined  with  them, 
and  then  took  a  final  leave.     At  table  a  gentlewoman  faid, 
fhe   had  heard   that  I  had  told  fome  people,  that  the  aflbciate 
prefbytery  were  building  a  BM.    I  faid,  "  Madam,  it  is  quite 
true  ;  and  I  believe  the  Babel  wlW  foon  fall  down  about  then- 
ears  :"  but  enough  of  this.   Lord,  what  is  man,  what  the  beft 
of  men  ?  but  men  at  the  beft  I    I  think  I  have  now  feen  an 
end  of  all  perfection.     Our  brethren  in  Jmerica,  blefTed  be 
God,   have  not  fo  learned  Christ.     Be  pleafed  to  inform 
them  of  this  letter.     I  have  not  time  to  write  now.     The 
Lord  blefies  my  preaching  here,  and  the  work,  I  think,  h 
begun  afrefn  in  London.     I  preach  to  many  thoufands  daily, 
jind  fevcral  have  applied  to  me  already  under  conviaions.     I 

have 


LETTERS.  309 

have  been  here  about  eight  days.  You  may  expe6l  to  hear 
from  me  (hortly  again.  The  Lord  be  with  you.  I  love  you 
in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ  :  He  will  blefs  you  for  what 
you  have  done  for  the  poor  orphans.     He  comforts  me  on 

every  fide.     O  free  grace  !    Dear  brother  S falutes  you 

all. 

Ever  yours  in  our  common  Lord. 

LETTER    CCCXL. 

To   Mr.  T G ,   at   London, 

Edinburgh^  Jug,  8,  1741. 

YOU  will  fee,  my  dear  brother,  by  the  following,  what 
God  is  ftill  doing  for  me.  On  Sunday  evening,  I 
preached  in  a  field  near  the  Orphan-houfe,  to  upwards  of 
fifteen  thoufand  people ;  and  on  Monday^  Friday^  and  Saturday 
evening,  to  near  as  many.  On  Tuefday  I  preached  in  the  Can-- 
nongate  church  ;  on  Wednefday  and  Thurfday  at  DumfermUng ; 
and  at  my  return  on  Friday  morning,  at  about  eight  o'clock,  I 
preached  at  a  town  called  ^leem-Ferry^  feven  miles  from 
Edinburgh,  Every  where  the  auditories  were  large,  and  very 
attentive.  Great  power  accompanied  the  word.  Many  have 
been  brought  under  convictions  ;  and  I  have  already  received 
feveral  invitations  to  different  places,  which,  God  willing,  t 
intend  to  comply  with.  At  prefent  I  can  fay  no  more,  but 
defire  you  to  pray  for,  and  expert  foon  to  hear  further  from, 
Your  affedionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  U\ 

LETTER     CCCXLL 

To  the   Rev.  Air.  IF ,    at    Duyidec. 

Edinburgh,   Aug,  10,  1741. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

IJuil:  now  had  the  pleafure  of  your  letter  ;  for  which  be 
pleafed  to  accept  my  hearty  thanks.  1  truft  your  prayers 
will  be  heard  in  my  behalf.  Glory  be  to  free  grace  !  many 
are  here  brought  under  convictions.  Unworthy  as  I  am,  the 
glorious  Emmanuel  is  pleafed  to  clothe  his  word  v/ith  power. 

X  3  1  ana 


(^IO  LETTERS, 

I  am  amazed  at  his  loving-kindnefs,  and  want  heaven  and 
earth  to  join  with  me  in  praifing  his  holy  Name.  By  your 
fon  I  have  Tent  ionic  papers,  and  (hall  gladly  receive  any  from 
you.  I  wifh  you  would  not  trouhlc  yourfelr  or  me  in  writing 
about  the  corruptions  of  the  Church  of  Engla?ui.  I  believe 
there  is  no  church  perfect  under  heaven  j  but,  as  God,  by 
his  providence,  is  pleafed  to  fend  me  forth  fimply  to  preach 
the  gofpel  to  all,  1  think  there  is  no  need  of  cafting  myfclf 
cut.  The  divifions  in  ScOiLvid  vltc  afFedting,  and  undoubtedly 
they  will  occafion  great  fcarchings  of  heart.  I  pray  God  to 
iupport  us  in  a  trying  hour.  I  am  not  yet  determined,  when 
I  fhall  come  your  way.  I  can  only  promife,  it  (hall  be  the 
faft  opportunity,  and  that  you  (hall  be  apprized  of  it  fome  time 
before.  In  the  mean  time,  be  pleafed  to  bear  me  upon  your 
heart.  1  am  a  weak  hclplefs  worm.  Your  correfpondence 
will  always  be  agreeable  to  me.  That  you  may  daily  receive 
frefli  anointings  from  above,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  reverend 
and  dear  Sir, 

Ypur  affectionate,  tho'  younger  brother  and 
fervant  in  the  Gofpel, 

G,  JK 

LETTER     CCCXLIL 

To  the  Rev,  Mr.  0 . 

Edinburgh  J  Aug.  lO,  1 74 1. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

IThsnk  you  for  your  kind  and  obliging  letter. —  I  had  not 
time  to  anfv^er  it  before.  God  willing,  I  hope  to  come 
into  the  northern  parts.  The  precife  time  I  cannot  yet  tell. 
For  ever  adored  be  the  Lord  for  his  free  grace  !  the  word  is 
jccompanied  with  great  power.  Several  apply  to  me  daily 
ujider  convictions.  I  find  it  bed  fnnply  to  preach  the  pure 
gofpel,  and  not  to  meddle  at  all  v/ith  controverfy.  The  pre- 
leilt  diviiions  arc  a  fore  judgment  to  Scotland.  This  is  my 
comfort,  Jesus  is  king.  Kc  v/ill  either  heal,  or  bring  good 
cut  of  them.  I  have  been  with  feveral  of  the  aflbciate  pref- 
bytery  ;  but  I  fee  no  hopes  of  accommodation.  O  that  the 
power  of  religion  may  revive  !  Nothing  but  that  can  break 
down  the  partition  wall  of  bigotry.  Dear  Sir,  forget  not  to 
pray  for  me.     I  lee  more  and  more  that  I  am  nothing,  and 

that 


LETTERS.  311 

that  Jesus  is  all  in  all.  Did  I  know  how,  I  would  fend  you 
i'ome  papers ;  but  I  hope  ere  long  to  have  a  pcrfonal  inter- 
view ;  and  in  the  mean  while,  I  beg  leave  to  fubfcribe  myfelf, 
reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  afFeclionate  brother  and  fcrvant, 

G.  jr. 

LETTER     CCCXLIII. 

To  the  Rkht  Honourable  the  Lord  R •. 

Aly   Lord,  Edinburgh,  Jug.  II,  174T. 

THOUGH  I  am  jufl  going  out,  yet  I  cannot  fatisfy  my- 
felF  without  fnatchino;  a  fev/  moments  to  write  to  you. 
I  hope  this  will  find  your  Lordfliip  fafe  at  your  journey's  end, 
rejoicing  in  God  for  giving  his  angels  charge  concerning  you 
in  the  way.  It  will  plcafe  your  Lord{l:iip,  to  inform  you  that 
the  Lord  of  all  Lord^  hath  dealt  moft  lovingly  with  me, 
iince  your  departure  hence.  His  power  hath  been  frequently 
made  known  in  the  great  congregation,  and  many  come  to 
me  daily,  crying  out,  "  What  (hall  I  do  to  be  faved  ?"  The 
work  of  the  Lord  alfo  goes  on  in  America,  and  in  England,  io 
that  I  hope  v/e  fhall  fee  the  kingdom  of  GoD  come  with  power. 
This  is  the  full  defire  of  my  foul.  I  am  determined  to  feck 
after  and  knovv  nothing  elfe.  For  befides  this,  all  other  things 
are  but  dung  and  drofs.  O  my  Lord,  v/hy  fliould  we  that 
are  pilgrims,  mind  earthly  things  ?  Why  fliould  we  that  are 
foldiers,  entangle  ourfclves  with  the  things  of  this  life  ?  Hea- 
venly-mindecinefs  is  the  very  life  of  a  chriftian.  It  is  all 
in  all. — I  pray  the  Lord  that  your  heart  may  be  drawn  more 
and  more  towards  him,  and  be  filTd  with  all   his   fuinefs.     I 

could    fay  more,  but  Mr.  G JF waits    for  me.     I 

am,   my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfliip's  moil  obedient  humble  fervanr, 

G.  ir 


X  4  r.  ^  T  r  p: 


31 


LETTERS. 


LETTER     CCCXLIV. 

To  Mr.   H H ,   in  London, 

Edinburgh^   Aug.  il,  1 74 1. 
My  'very  dear  Brother  //—- — , 

THOUGH  my  eyes  are  dim,  and  my  body  calls  for 
rell,  yet  I  would  fain  fend  you  a  line  before  I  go. 
The  Lord  Jesus  is  getting  himfelf  into  many  hearts.  I 
fcarce  feel  any  reftraint  in  preaching.  Both  in  public  and 
private,  the  Lord  clothes  his  word  with  power.  Poor  fouls 
come  to  me  under  deep  convi£lions.  Sweet  letters  are  fent  to 
me  of  the  fuccefs  of  my  writings  and  fermons  ;  and  feveral 
preffing  invitations  to  many  places.  I  hope  God  is  beginning 
fuch  a  work  here,  as  he  begun,  and  is  now  carrying  on  in 
New-England.  Night  and  day  Jesus  fills  me  with  his  love. 
My  bodily  ftrength  is  daily  renevi'ed.  The  Lord  is  pleafed 
to  open  my  mouth  wide  3  praifc  him  for  it.  I  have  preached 
twice,  and  talked,  and  walked  much  to  day.  My  dear  man, 
good-night.     The  Lord  be  with  you  ! 

Ever,  ever  yours,  in  the  moft  adorable  Jesus, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER     CCCXLV. 

To  the  Moji  Honour  able  the  M — — y}  of  U n. 

My  Lordy  Edinburgh^  Aug.  12,  1 74 1. 

I  Am  furprized  to  find  your  Lordfhip  fo  condefcending  as  to 
write  to  me.  How  bright  does  humility  fhine  in  great 
perfonages  ?  It  is  this  renders  God  f®  amiable  to  his  creatures. 
He  is  infinitely  good,  and  withal  infinitely  condefcending. 
What  an  unparalleled  inflance  was  that  of  his  loving  kindnefs, 
his  giving  his  only  begotten  Son  to  die  for  fmful  man.  How 
low  did  jEius  Itoop  vvhen*he  lay  in  a  manger,  much  more 
when  he  hung  upon  the  accurfed  tree.  When  I  think  of  this 
myftery  of  godllnefs,  I  am  loll  in  thought.  This  makes  me 
to  defpife  all  human  happinefs,  and  fets  my  foul  a  longing  for 
a  full  fruition  of  my  Jesus.  I  pray  God  to  give  your  Lord- 
(hip  grace  to  determine  to  know  nothing  but  Jesus  Christ, 
and  him  crucified.  He  is  the  only  center  of  true  happinefs. 
Jn  him  alone,  folid,  laftingjoys  are  to  be  found.  Having 
JiZ5U2, 1  find  in  him  I  pofTefi.  all  things.  But  whither  am  I 
J  going  ? 


LETTERS.  313 

going  ?  Your  Lordfhip  will  excufe  me.  My  heart  at  prefent 
is  enlarged.  I  pray  God  to  vifit  your  Lordfliip  with  his  great 
falvation.  I  thank  your  Lordfhip  for  your  intended  benefadion 
to  the  poor  Georgia  orphans.  I  hope  the  glorious  Emmanuel 
will  accept  it  at  your  hands.  I  have  fent  your  Lordfliip  ano- 
ther parcel,  feeing  the  firft  hath  mifcarried.  I  fliall  follow  it 
with  my  poor  prayers,  being,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordftiip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervant, 

G.  IK 

LETTER    CCCXLVL 

To  Mr.  H H . 

My  very  dear  Brother y  Edinburgh,  Aug.  13,  1741. 

I  Longed  to  receive  a  letter  from  you.  Blefled  be  God,  my 
longing  was  fatisfied  this  day.  My  heart  is  much  united 
to  you,  and  carried  out  for  you.  I  utterly  difapprove  of  fome 
perfons  feparating  principles.  I  find,  Satan  now  turns  him- 
felf  into  an  angel  of  light,  and  ftirs  up  God's  children  to  tempt 
me  to  come  over  to  fome  particular  party.  The  afTociate 
Prefbytery  have  been  hard  upon  me ;  but  I  find  no  freedom, 
any  longer  than  I  continue  juft  as  I  am,  and  cvan2;ellze  to  all. 
I  know  not  that  I  differ  from  you  in  one  thing.  Glory  be  to 
God  for  what  he  has  done  at  London !  He  is  doing  great 
things  here.  I  walk  in  the  continual  funfhinc  of  his  counte- 
nance. Every  day,  frefh  feals  are  given  of  my  miniftry.  This 
morning  God  opened  my  voice  to  fpeak  to  preachers  of  the 
gofpel.  Be  pleafcd  to  accept  of  this  fummary  account  of  my 
proceedings.  On  Sunday  morning,  I  vifitcd  and  preached  to 
the  orphans  here,  and  in  the  evening  to  as  many  people  as  the 
Sunday  before.  Every  day  fmce,  excepting  Monday^  I  have 
preached  either  in  the  churches  or  field  twice  a  day,  and 
yefterday  I  colleded  upwards  of  ninety-three  pounds  for  the 
Georgia  orphans.  People  are  daily  coming  under  d:.'ep  convic- 
tions, and  frefli  invitations  are  fent  me  to  preach  at  divers 
places  round  about.  On  Sunday,  I  purpofe  to  preach  in  the 
country,  and  alfo  the  greatefl:  part  of  the  following  week,  and 
ihall  return  again,  God  willing,  about  Friday  to  this  city. 
O  my  brother,  exhort  all  to  praife  the  LoPvD.  I  have 
moft  fvvect  letters  from  many  awakened  ones,     God,  I  believe, 

will 


314  L    E     T    T     E    R    S. 

will  work  in  the  minlfters  and  young  ftudents    hearts.     Even 
fo  Lord  Jesus.     Amen.     Pray  fail  not  writing  to 

Ever  yours, 
'  G.  JV, 

LETTER     CCCXLVII. 

To  Mr.  D E ,  at  SurliNg. 

My  dear  Brcthdr^  Edinburgh^   Jug.  13,  1 74 1. 

I  Received  your  kind  letter,  and  heartily  blcfs  God,  if  any 
thing  dropping  from  niy  unworthy  lips  was  made  of  fer- 
vice  to  your  foul.  I  believe,  God  inciined  me  to  fpeak  to 
you.  The  fons  of  the  prophets  are  much  upon  my  heart. 
I  pray  God  that  you  may  be  polifhed  fhafts,  and  noble  in- 
ftrumcnts  in  his  hands,  of  building  up  living  temples  for  the 
Holy  Ghoft.  The  treatment  I  met  with  from  the  aflbciate 
prefbytery,  was  not  altogether  I'uch  as  I  expecSlcd.  It  grieved 
me,  as  much  as  it  did  you.  I  could  fcarce  refrain  from 
burfting  into  a  flood  of  tears.  I  wifli  all  were  like-minded 
with  your  honoured  father  and  uncle  :  matters  then  would 
not  be  carried  on  with  fo  high  an  hand.  I  fear  they  are  led  too 
much.  Such  violent  methods,  fuch  a  narrow  way  of  acting, 
can  never  be  the  way  to  promote  and  enlarge  the  kingdom 
of  the  blcfled  Jefus.  It  furely  mufl  be  wrong  to  fix  fuch  bounds 
to  ourfelves,  as  forbid  even  our  hearing  thofe  who  love  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  fincerity,  and  have  alfo  been  owned  of  him. 
Christ  would  not  have  done  fo. — Suppofing  the  fcheme  of 
government  which  the  allbciate  prefbytery  contend  for  to  be 
fcriptural,  yet  forbearance  and  long-fuflering  is  to  be  exercifed 
towards  fuch  as  may  differ  from  them  ;  and  1  am  verily  perfuad- 
ed,  there  is  no  fuch  form  of  government  prefcribed  in  the  book 
of  Gcd,  as  excludes  a  toleration  of  all  other  forms  whatfoever. 
Was  the  New  Teftament  outward  tabernacle  to  be  built  as 
pundtuai  as  the  old,  as  pun6tual  directions  would  have  been 
given  about  the  buildin<j  it  ;  v/hcreas,  it  is  oiily  deduced  by- 
inference,  and  thus  we  fee  Independents,  Prefbyterians,  and 
Epifcopalians  bring  the  fame  text  to  fupport  their  particular 
fcheme,  and  I  bvlicve  Jr.sus  Christ  thereby  would  teach  us  to 
excrcife  forbearance  and  long-fufFering  to  each  other.  Was  the  ' 
aflbciatc  pren:)ytery  fcheme  to  take  efr'e£l,  out  of  cohfcience,  if 
they  acted  confidently,,   they  muft  refrrain,  and  grieve,  if  not 

perfecute 


LETTERS.  315 

^erfecute  many  of  God's  children  who  could  not  pofTibly  come 
into  their  meafu-res  ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  their  prcfent  vio- 
lent methods,  together  with  the  corruptions  of  that  allembly, 
will  caufe  many  to  turn  Independents,  and  let  up  particular 
churches  of  their  own.  This  was  the  eflecl  of  archbifhop 
'Laud's  ading  with  fo  high  an  hand  ;  and  vv'hether  it  be  pref- 
tytcry  or  epifcopacy,  if  managed  in  the  fame  manner,  it  will 
be  productive  of  the  fame  eftecls.  Blefled  be  God,  I  have 
cot  fo  learned  Christ.  I  preach  the  fimple  gofpel,  and  our 
glorious  Jesus  is  plealed  to  attend  it  with  his  power.  Every 
day  1  feel  more  and  more  of  the  divine  prefence,  and  people 
are  coming  to  me  crying,  ^'  What  fiiall  we  do  to  be  faved." 
The  love  of  Jesus  fills  my  foul,  and  conftrains  me  to  write 
thus  freely  to  you.  O  dear  Sir,  I  love  and  honour  your  pious 
father.  Remember  me  in  the  kindeft  manner  to  the  good  old 
man.  I  pray  God,  Ris  lafl:  days  may  not  be  employed  too 
much  in  the  non-cfTentials  of  religion.  My  heart  is  knit  to 
the  family.  God  forbid,  that  any  thing  fhould  hinder  us 
from  taking  fweet  counfel  together.  God  willing,  I  am  to 
preach  at  Falkirk  on  Tuefday  evening,  and  purpofe  to  be  at 
Stirling  that  night,  and  to  preach  twice  there  the  next  day. 
If  it  was  thought  advilable,  I  would  collect  for  the  Orphan- 
houfe  at  Georgia  in  the  afternoon.  The  Lord  be  with  you, 
auu  all  the  family.  Forget  me  not  in  your  prayers.  — I  am 
a  poor  unworthy  wretch.     As  fuch,  pray  for 

Your  afTedlionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

C\  JV. 

LETTER     CCCXLVIII. 

ro  Mr.  H H , 

Aly  very  dear  Brother ,  Edinburgh^  Jug.  15,  1 74 1. 

IT  would  make  your  heart  leap  for  joy,  to  be  now  in 
Edinburgh.  I  queftion  if  there  be  not  upwards  of  300  in 
this  city  fceking  after  Jesus.  Every  morning,  I  have  a  con- 
ilant  levee  of  wounded  fouls,  many  of  whom  are  quite  flain 
by  the  law.  God's  power  attends  the  word  continually, 
juft  as  when  I  left  Lor.don,  At  {q^zw  in  the  morning,  we 
have  a  Icclure  in  the  fields,  attended  not  only  by  the  com- 
mon people,  but  perfons  of  great  rank.  I  have  reafon  to  thiiik 
f£veral  of  the  latter  fort  are  coming  to  jEbUS.     Little  children 

alio 


3i5  LETTERS. 

alfo  are  much  wrought  upon.  God  much  blefles  my  letters 
from  the  little  orphans.  He  loves  to  work  by  the  moft  con- 
temptible means.  O  my  dear  brother,  I  am  quite  amazed, 
when  I  think  what  God  hath  done  here  in  a  fortnight.  My 
printed  journals  and  fermons  have  been  blefled  in  an  uncom- 
mon manner.  I  am  only  afraid  left  people  fhould  idolize 
the  inftrument,  and  not  look  enough  to  the  glorious  Jesus, 
in  whom  alone  I  defire  to  glory.  Congregations  confift  of 
many  thoufands.  Never  did  I  fee  fo  many  bibles,  nor  people 
look  into  them,  when  I  am  expounding,  with  fuch  attention. 
Plenty  of  tears  flow  from  the  hearers  eyes.  Their  concern 
appears  various  ways.  I  preach  twice  daily,  and  expound 
at  private  houfes  at  night,  and  am  employed  in  fpeaking  to 
fouls  under  diftrefs  great  part  of  the  day.  I  have  juft  fnatchcd 
a  few  moments  to  write  to  my  dear  brother.  O  that  God 
may  enlarge  your  heart  to  pray  for  me.  This  afternoon  I 
fhall  preach  out  of  town,  and  alfo  to-morrow.  Next  poft, 
God  willing,  you  fhall  have  another  letter.  I  walk  conti- 
nually in  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  The  love  of 
Christ  quite  ftrikes  me  dumb.  O  grace  !  grace  !  Let  that 
be  my  fong,  Adieu.  My  dear  fellow-traveller  joins  with  me 
in  hearty  love  to  you  all.     I  muft  away. 

Ever  yours  in  Christ, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER    CCCXLIX. 

r<fMr.  7——  H ,  at  Georgia. 

Edinburgh^  Aug,  24,  1 74 1. 
My  very  dear  Friend  and  Br  other  ^ 

WITH  very  great  diinculty  I  get  time  to  write  this. 
The  Lord  is  doing  great  things  in  Scotland,  I  preach 
twice  daily  to  many  thoufands  with  great  power.  I  have  col- 
le6led  here  very  near  two-hundred  pounds,  and  have  a  prof- 

pccSt  of  colleding  much  more.     Mr.  iY has  drawn  upon 

me  for  three  hundred  pounds  ftcrling.  I  have  paid  two  of  it. 
Some  hundreds  remain  yet  unpaid.  God  gives  me  to  put  my 
truft  in  him.  I  have  bought  five  hundred  yards  of  cloth  for 
the  dear  orphans  winter's  wear,  and  fliall  fend  you  the  other 
things  you  mentioned.  I  rejoice  to  hear  that  the  Lord  is 
with  you.    J  do  not  v^'ondcr  at  the  contempt  you  meet  with, 

or 


LETTERS.  317 

©r  the  calumnies  which  are  fpread  abroad.  Remember  the 
burning  bufh.  O  my  friend,  my  dear  friend,  how  (hall  I 
thank  you  for  your  prayers,  care,  and  love  ?  I  am  willing  to 
wafti  all  your  feet.  Perhaps  in  the  Spring,  I  may  embark  ;  but 
cannot  yet  determine.  I  have  written  to  you  many  letters, 
and  I  always  remember  you  in  my  prayers.  I  am  glad  to  hear 
that  you  can  go  to  market  without  money.  The  Lord  in- 
creafe  your  faith.     My  dear  brother,  I  love  you  in  the  bowels 

of  Jesus  Christ.     I  v/ill  do  what  I  can  for  Mr.  B .     I 

thank  dear  Mr.  J ,  from  my  heart,  for  his  great  kindnefs. 

I  wrote  to  him  and  to  Mr.  B ,  and   near  thirty  more,   a 

month  ago.  Exped:  alfo  feme  money  flVortly.  I  had  rather 
bear  any  burden,  than  have   my  dear   family   burdened.     I 

thank  Mr.  TF for  his  care.     His   brethren  here  are  well. 

I  have  not  time  to  tell  you,  how  I  love  and  efteem  you  for 
the  care  you  take  of  the  dear  lambs.  I  long  to  weep  over  you 
all.  Excufe  me;  for  not  writing  particularly.  The  Lord 
be  with  you  all     As  foon  as  I  can  polTibly  redeem  time,  you 

iliall  hear  again,  my  dear  Mr.  H ,  from 

Ever  yours  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  IF, 

LETTER    CCCL. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  R E . 

Edinburgh^  Jug.  24,  1741. 
P^cverend  and  dear  Sir^ 

I  Thank  you  for  your  kind  letter.  I  believe  it  proceeded 
from  love  ;  but,  as  yet,  I  cannot  think  the  folemn  league 
and  covenant  is  any  way  obligatory  upon  me.  Indeed,  dear 
Sir,  you  miftake  if  you  think  I  temporize  on  account  of  the 
orphans.  Be  it  far  from  me.  I  abhor  the  very  thought  of  it. 
I  proceed  now,  juft  as  I  have  done  ever  fince  I  came  out  in 
the  miniflry  ;  and  fo  far  from  not  fctting  a  hedge  about  our 
Lord's  garden,  that  was  I  called  to  it,  I  fliould  fet  a  much 
clofer  hedge  than  that  which  the  aflociate  prefbytery  are  plant- 
ing. I  fhould  enquire  into  people's  experiences,  before  1  ad- 
mitted them  to  the  Lord's  table.  I  would  have  church  mem- 
bers meet  in  church  fellowfliip,  and  tell  one  another  what 
God  has  done  for  their  fouls.  You  feem  to  think  lam  not 
open  to  light.     Thut  I  muy  give  you  fatisfacHon,   I  am  will- 

inir 


3iS  LETTERS. 

ing  to  confer  with  Mr.  IF at  Perth,  where  I  arri  \-o  b'e  by 

divine  permiffion  on  Thurfday,  September  3.  On  Tuefday  next, 
about  four  in  the  afternoon,  I  purpofe  preaching  at  Dumferm- 
Ihig. — I  am  engaged  to  fup  at  your  colleguc's  houfe,  but  in- 
tend to  lie  at  yours.  Jn  the  mean  time  be  pleafed  to  pray  for 
me,  and  to  remember  my  love  to  all  your  family  y  and  believe 
me,    reverend  Sir,    to  be 

Your    mofl:  afFcdionate,  though  unworthy 

brother  and  fcrvant, 

G.  /r. 

LETTER     CCCLI. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  O ,  at  Jherdeen, 

Perth,  Sept.   3,    1741. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

I  Have  received  two  letters  from  you,  which  much  affcct  mc^ 
knowing  how  unworthy  I  am   of  fuch   endearing   expref- 
fions,  or  indeed  of  any  notice  at  all.     i>ut  what  fhall  I  fay  ? 
Grace  !  grace  I   Jesus  loves  me,  and  fo  does  his  fervant  for 
Jesu's  fake.    O  free  grace  I  I  am  forry  to  find  that  any  fnould 
infmuate,  my  iiot  coming  to  Aberdeen  is  owing  to  your  cold  in- 
vitation.    Such  a  thought  never  entered   my  heart,    but  quite 
♦he  contrary.     The  dillance  of  the  way,   and  my  mcismg  call 
to  England.,  will  keep  me  from  you,  and   nothing  elfc.    I  love 
and  honour  you  for  my  mafrer's  fake.     I   Ibiould    be   glad    to 
wafli  your  feet,  and  if  pofiible  I  will  yet  fee  you.      But  if  God 
ihould  not  permit  me,  dear  Sir,  be  not  offended.     The  Lord 
is  pleafed  to  give  me  much  freedom  and  power  in    preaching. 
Congregations  arc  every  where  large,  and  they  have  been  very 
liberal  to  my  poor  orphans.  O  that  I  was  humble,  and  thankful  ! 
J  am  the  chief  of  fmntrs :    I  feel  myfelf  fuch.     O  the  cmcacy 
o^  Christ's    blood  !   It  is  omnipotent ;   it   hath   faved   m*c. 
Dear  Sir,   my  heart  is  melted  down  with  the  love   of  Jksus. 
He  is  a  dear  mafter.     He   hath  fuffered  no   evil  to  befal  me, 
as  you  have  already  henrd.     I  have  not  fo  much    as   hurt   my 
foot  againft  a  ftone.     Help  me  to  praifc  him.     Worthy  is  tlie 
Lamb  that  was  (lain,  to  receive  all  honour  and  glory  ?ind  riches 
3  and 


LETTERS.  319 

and  power  and  bleiTing !  With  much  difficulty,  I  get  time  to 
fend  you  thefe  few  lines. — Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  very  afFe6lionate,  obedient  friend,  younger 

brother,  and  fcrvant  in  the  gofpel, 

G\"  JV. 

P.  S.  For  nine  days  part,  I  have  continued  preaching  with 
great  power  twice  every  day,  to  very  large  and  affecSled  au- 
ditories in  many  towns  and  villages. 

LETTER     CCCLir. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  W . 

Edinburgh^  Sept,  19,   1 74 1. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

THOUGH  nature  calls  for  refi:,  and  I  am  to  preach 
four  times  to-morrow,  yet  I  cannot  go  to  bed  with- 
out anfwering  your  kind  letter.  Blcfled  he  God  for  any 
good  done  at  Dundee!  Not  unto  me,  not  unto  me,  but  unto 
Jesus  Christ  be  all  the  glory.  Thanks  be  to  God,  lean 
yet  fend  you  more  glad  tidings.  At  Creif  we  had  a  mod 
precious  meeting.  At  Glafgcw  I  preached  ten  times.  The 
Lord  was  with  me  of  a  truth.  The  congregations  were 
very  large,  as  were  the  contributions,  and  many  were  brought 
under  the  deeped  convictions.  With  great  regret  we  parted, 
and  with  great  joy  was  received  at  Edinburgh.  I  had  fomc 
thoughts  of  abiding  in  Scotland  longer,  but  lad  night  I  re- 
ceived a  letter,  which  almoft  determined  my  return  to  Eng^ 
land.  Next  Saturday^  God  willing,  I  purpofe  to  leave  this 
place,  and  fhall  return  into  thefe  parts,  if  providence  points 
a  way,  in  the  Spring.  I  do  notdcfpair  of  feeing  Seot/and  Vike 
Nezu- England.  Reverend  Sir,  for  the  prefcnt  adieu.  My 
poor  body  bids  me  to  dop.  O  when  diall  I  fleep  no  more  ! 
I  am  exceedingly  weary,  but  am  affectionately.  Reverend  and 
dear  Sir, 

Your  mod  unworthy  and  obedient  brother, 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 


LETTER 


320 


LETTERS. 


LETTER    CCCLIII. 

To  Mr.  T ^  G ,  in  London, 

Edinburgh^    Sep,  24,   174I' 
My  very  dear  Brother^ 

THIS  ferves  to  inform  you,  that  on  Sunday  laft  I  preached 
here  four  times,  twice  in  a  church,  and  twice  in  the 
£elds  ',  in  the  evening  I  collected  twenty  pounds  for  the  royal 
infirmary.  On  Monday  morning,  I  vifited  the  children  in 
three  hofpitals,  and  preached  in  the  evening  in  the  park  ; 
alfo  at  Kinglajfy^  Aberdour^  and  Innerkeithing^  on  Tuefday  and 
Wedncfday,  On  Thurfday  I  vifited  the  prifon,  and  in  the 
evening  preached  to  the  children  of  the  city,  with  a  congrega- 
tion conhfting  of  near  twenty  thoufand  in  the  park.  It  is  re- 
markable that  many  children  are  under  convidtions,  and  every 
where  great  power  and  apparent  fuccefs  attend  the  word 
preached.  Calls  to  divers  places^  are  fo  numerous  and  impor- 
tunate, that  I  think  it  my  duty  to  ftay  in  Scotland  fome  time 
longer  :  being  in  hafte,  can  fay  not  more  at  prefent.  My  love 
to  all  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Your  moft  afiedlionate  friend,  brother,  and  fervant, 

G,  jr. 

LETTER    CCCLIV. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  Lord  L-^-^—L^ 
My  Lord^  Edinburgh^  Sept.  25,  1 74 1. 

THOUGH  nature  calls  for  reft,  yet  love  and  gratitude 
oblige  me  to  fit  up  to  anfwer  your  Lord  (hip's  letter,  left 
I  fhould  not  have  time  in  the  morning.  BlefTed  be  the  glori- 
ous Redeemer  !  who  feems  in  fome  degree  to  be  working  upon 
your  heart.  My  prayer  to  God  is,  that  thcfe  convictions 
may  continue,  'till  they  end  in  a  found  converfion.  You  do 
well,  my  Lord,  to  fear,  left  they  ftiould  wear  off.  I  have  not 
had  fo  much  acquaintance  with  the  world  as  your  Lordfhip ; 
but  I  know  it  is  a  deceitful  thing,  and  without  the  utmoft  care 
and  watchfulnefs,  will  infenfibly  divert  the  foul  from  GoD. 
Your  Lordfliip  is  in  a  dangerous  fituation.  A  fear  of  contempt, 
and  a  love  for   honour,  falfely  fo  called,   render  religion  un- 

,  fafhionable 


Letters.  321 

faiTilonable  amongfl  the  rich  and  polite  part  of  mankinJ.  But 
the  blood  of  JesUs  is  almighty,  and  makes  the  foul  more 
than  conqueror.  Here  is  the  fountain  to  which  you  and  I 
muft  apply,  to  wafli  away  all  our  fins.  And  is  it  yet  open  for 
all  poor  fmners  ?  Come  then,  my  Lord,  and  lay  yourfelf  at  the 
feet  of  the  bleiTed  Jesus.  He  can,  he  will,  if  you  believe  ori 
him,  abundantly  pardon  you.  But  faith  Is  the  gift  of  God. 
I  pray  God  to  give  you  no  reft,  'till  you  have  received  Che  full 
afTurance  *of  faith.  Then  will  you  recover  yolir  primitive 
dignity,  trample  earth  under  your  feet,  and  with  your  foul  be 
panting  after  God.  O  my  Lord,  it  is  a  blclTed  thing  to  have 
fcllowfhip  with  the  Father,  and  with  the  Son.  I  am  a  poor 
defpifed  minifler  of  Jesus  Christ  ;  but  I  would  hot  change 
my  Mafter  for  ten  thoufand  worlds.  I  have  food  to  eat,  that 
the  world  knows  nothing  of.  I  long  to  have  your  Lordfhip 
tafte  of  it  too,  and  fliall  as  it  were  travail  in  birth  'till  Jesus 
Christ  is  formed  in  you.  Your  Lordfhip  need  not  remind  me 
to  pray  for  you.  Your  eternal  welfare  is  much  upon  my  heart. 
My  Lord,  now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  falva- 
tion.  The  blefTed  fpirit  is  now  ftriving  with  you,  and  faying, 
'*  My  fon,  give  me  thy  heart ;  what  haft  thou  to  do  any  more 
with  idols  ?"  I  hope  your  reply  will  be,  **  Lord,  I  give  thee 
my  heart,  my  whole  heart,  and  will  no  longer  keep  back  from 
thee  the  leaft  part."  Then  will  your  Lordfhip  be  truly  happy  5 
for  fo  far  as  we  are  void  of  God,  fo  far  we  are  miferable.  But 
whither  am  I  running  ?  It  is  late ;  but  your  Lordftiip  defired  a 
long  letter,  and  therefore  I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  write 
freely.  I  am  fcnfible  of  the  honour  put  upon  me  by  you^ 
Lordfliip,  and  hope  I  fhall  never  betray  any  truft  repofed  in  me," 
I  pray  God  to  fandlify  this,  and  blefs  our  fellowftiip  when  we 
meet  together,  t  thank  your  Lordftiip  for  your  concern  about 
the  orphans.  I  am  perfuaded  you  will  in  no  wife  lofe  your 
reward.  I  hope  your  Lordfliip  received  my  laft  letter,  which 
gave  an  account  of  my  intended  preaching  at  Kinglajjle  and 
Coupar.  May  the  glorious  Jesus  fandify  my  continuance  in 
thefe  parts,  to  the  promoting  his  own  glory  and  the  good  of 
fouls !  I  think  I  can  fay,  '^  to  me  to  live  is  Christ."  It 
revives  me  to  fee  fo  many  feeking  after  Jesus.  At  Kinglajfie 
the   power   was    extraordinary.     O   free   grace  !    that    Gom 

as  I  am.     I  defirc  to  lie 
humbly 


Til  0  Li  id 

m< 

ike 

ufe  of  in 

cha 

wretch 

Vol. 

L 

Y 

7 

322  LETTERS. 

humbly  in  the  duft,  and  fay,  "  Why  me,  Lord,  why  me  ? 
Fear  not,  my  Lord,  I  have  received  rcmiflion  of  fms  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus.  Into  his  arms,  I  am  juft  about  to  commend  your 
Lordfnlp.  1  pray  God  to  vifit  your  foul  with  his  falvation  ; 
and  hoping  my  humble  refpe(Sls  will  find^acceptance  with  your 
Loidfhip,  your  lady,  and  lady  Ann^  I  beg  leave  to  fubfcribe 
myfelf. 

Your  Lord(l:iip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervant, 

G,  W. 

LETTER     CCCLV. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  Lord  R . 

My  Lor d^  Gallq/hielsy  Sept.  iS^  ly^-J. 

YOUR  letter  I  fear  has  been  too  long  unanfwered,  but 
gratitude  will  not  permit  me  to  defer  anfwcring  it  any 
longer.  I  have  alfo  received  your  Lordfliip's  liberal  benefatStion 
for  the  orphans,  for  which  and  all  other  favours,  your  Lord- 
fhip  hath  my  hearty  thanks. — The  innumerable  inflances  of 
God's  goodnefs  quite  melt  me  down.  The  word  of  God 
prevails  more  and  more.  Every  where  Jesus  Christ  is  get- 
ting himfclf  the  victory  in  poor  fmners  hearts.  Young  and 
old  from  many  quarters  fly  to  the  gofpel,  as  doves  to  the  win- 
dows. I  truft,  your  Lordlhip's  daughters  will  feci  the  power  of 
Christ's  blood.  Happy  they,  who  do  feel  it.  They  reft  in 
God.  They  are  fons  and  daughters  of  the  Lord  Almighty. 
What  a  rich  perfon  is  the  pooreft  chriftlan  ?  He  is  joint  heir 
with  Jesus  Christ.  Supported  with  this  thought,  and  feel- 
ing the  power  of  it  in  my  foul,  I  can  defpife  all  fubl unary  en- 
joyments, and  long  to  be  wholly  fwallowed  up  in  God.  Hap- 
py day,  when  we  (hall  converfe  with  the  world  no  more !  I 
pray  God  to  give  me  patience  to  wait  'till  Jesus  comes.  I 
would  leap  my  feventy  years,  and  fly  upon  the  wings  of  faith 
and  love,  into  the  blcfled  Redeemer's  prcfencc.  I  hope  vour 
Lordfhip  is  thus  minded.  May  the  glorious  Emtnanuel  keep 
you  fo,  'till  your  foul  is  carried  into  Abraharti^  bofom.  This 
is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfhip's  moft  obedient  and  obliged 
humbl    fervant, 

G.  W, 
LETTER 


LETTERS.  323 

LETTER     CCCLVI. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  lord  L 

Ady  Lord.,  Edinburgh^  05i.  2,  1 74 1.  ' 

LAST  night  I  returned  from  the  fouth  country,  and  re- 
ceiv'd   your   Lordfliip's  kind    letter.      My    invitation    to 
Coupar  was  in  the  name  of  many  :   who  the  perfons  were  that 
figncd  the  letter  I  cannot  tell.     1  have  fcnt  it  inclofcd  in  this. 
Had  I  known  it  to  have  been  more  agreeable  to  your  Lordfhip, 
I  would  have  appointed  the  meeting  at  Adelvill  -,  but  I  fear,  as 
fuch  public  notice  has  been  given,  it  will  be  now  impradtica- 
ble.    I  cannot  poflibly  ftay  with  your  Lordfhip  all  Tiiefday.,  be- 
ing to  preach  at  Dundee.     But  in   my  return  from  Aberdeen.,  I 
hope  to  be  at  your  Lordfliip's  houfe.    I  am  glad  your  Lordfhip 
intends  to  be  at  KinglaJJie,     1  (hall  have   both    fermons   very 
early,  and  hope  the  glorious  Jesus  will  be  with  us  in  our  go- 
ing to  Meh'ill,     O  my  Lord,   I  want  a  thoufand  tongues  to 
fet  ofF  the  Redeemer's  praife.     Having  him,   tho'  I  have   no- 
thing elfe,  I  find  I  pofTefs  all  things.  I  have  not  forgotten  your 
Lordfhip  fmce  I  wrote  laft.  You  are,  and  will  be  much  upon 
my  heart.     I  have  heard  of  the  piety  of  your  Lordftiip's  ancef- 
tors,  and  hope  many  prayers  are  yet  in  ftore  for  you.     Above 
all,  I  truil:,  Jesus  prays  for  you,  and  then  you  cannot  but  be 
a  conqueror;  nay,  more  than  conqueror  over  the  world,  the 
ficfh  and  the  devil.   Take  courage  then,  my  Lord,  and  fear  not 
to  follow  a  crucified  Jesus  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  fa- 
cred  reproach.     Beware  of  honour,  falfely  fo  called  :  dare  to 
be  Angularly  good,  and  be  not  afhamed  of  Jesus  or  his  gofpel. 
O  that  you  may  find  it  to  be  the  power  of  God  to  your  fal- 
vation !  Look  but  to  Christ  by  faith,  and  your  Lordfliip's 
great  poflTelnons  will  not  retard,  but  further  and  promote  your 
progrefs  in  the  divine  life.  What  fweet  communion  will  your 
Lordfhip  then  enjoy  with  God,  in  your  walks  and  gardens  ? 
It  will  then  be  a  little  paradife  to  your  foul,  and  every  thing 
you  meet  with,  will  only  draw  you  fo  much  nearer  to  Jehovahy 
in  whom  all  fulnefs  dwells.    This  I  find  by  daily  experience  ; 
and  that  your  Lordfhip  may  daily  experience  the   fame,  is  the 
earneft  prayer,  my  Lord,  of 

Your  Lordfhip's  mofl  obliged  humble  fervant, 

G.  JK 
Y2  LETTER 


3H  LETTERS.  \ 

LETTER     CCCLVII. 

ro  Mr,  H  , 

Melvill^  OcJoher  5,  1741. 
J-Zy  ^vrj  ^^^r  Friend  and  Brother^ 

I  Have,  by  the  (hip  that  brings  you  this,  fent  you  70/.  worth 
of  different  forts  of  goods  to  be  difpofed  of,  and  the  money 
to  be  appHcd  for  the  ufe  of  the  Orphan-houfc.     You  are  to  let 

Mr.  B have  20/.     I  have  alfo  fent  600  yards  of  cloth,  a 

prefent  of  my  own,  to  make  the  boys  and  girls  gowns  and 
coats,  fome  whereof  I  have  had  made  up  here.  The  other 
things  were  given  by  various  pcrfons.  Amongft  thefe,  you 
will  find  fome  damafk  table-cloths,  which  I  defire  you  will 
fell,  they  being  too  good,  in  my  opinion,  for  our  ufe.  O 
my  dear  friend,  how  faithful  is  the  Lord  Jesus  !  He  has 

now  enabled  me  to  pay  my  brother,  and  Mr.  A^ 's  bill  of 

thice  hundred  pounds  fterling.  There  is  yet  200/.  to  be  paid, 
which  I  borrowed  fmce  my  arrival  in  England;  but  very  fliort- 
\y  I  hope  to  difcharge  that  alfo.  I  have  been  in  Scotland  2ho\xt 
two  months,  and  think  to  be  here  about  a  fortnight  longer. 
(jOD  is  pleafcd  to  give  me  health,  and  to  blefs  my  miniftra- 
tions  in  an  abundant  manner.  The  little  children  in  the  hof- 
pitals,  are  much  wrought  upon.  Saints  have  been  ftirred  up 
and  edified,  and  many  others,  I  believe,  are  tranflated  from 
darknefs  to  light,  and  from  the  kingdom  of  fatan  to  the  king- 
dom of  God's  dear  Son.  The  good  that  has  been  done,  is 
inexprelnble.  I  am  intimate  with  three  noblemen,  and  fevera! 
ladies  of  quality,  who  have  a  great  liking  for  the  things  of 
God.  I  am  now  writing  in  an  earl's  houfe,  farrounded  with  ' 
fine  furniture  J  but  glory  be  to  free  grace  !  my  foul  is  in  love 
only  with  Jesus  :  he  helps  me  more  and  more.  I  feel  but 
little  flraitnefs  in  preaching,  and  we  have  often  fweet  appear- 
ances of  the  divine  prefence  in  our  large  afiemblies.  As  to 
my  own  foul,  it  is  very  comfortable  and  compofed  ;  I  feel  the 
power  of  Jesus  more,  and  the  power  of  indwelling  fin  \t(s. 
I  am  daily  waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God.  I  fear 
I  am  too  impatient  to  be  gone  j  but  what  can  the  foul  do, 
when  fick  Of  love?  I  have  fome  thoughts  of  vifiting /r^Z^w^. 
Whether  I  (hall   do  that,  or  cCme  to  America  in  the  Spring, 

God 


LETTERS.  -75 

God  only  knows.  I  pray  for,  and  long  to  fee  you  and  the 
reft  of  my  dear  family.  I  truft,  I  then  (hall  behold,  what  [ 
long  to  behold,  a  houfhold  of  faith,  a  company  of  poor  fmncrs 
walking  in  the  fimplicity  and  love  of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jk- 
sus.  O  that  you  may  fo  live,  that  whofoever  comes  amon^ft 
you  may  fay,  "  Surely  God  is  in  this  place."  Thoufands  of 
prayers  are  put  up  for  us,  and  thoufands  of  lies  are  fpread 
abroad  againft  us.  But  Jesus  enables  me  to  fight  my  way 
through  all,  and  I  am  perfuaded  he  will  make  me  more  than 
conqueror  through  his  love.  In  England,  the  work  goes  on 
well.  Brother  C is  much  blefled  in  Wiltjhlre  ;  and  bro- 
ther H wrote  me  word  fome  time  ago,  that  he  had  exa- 
mined about  three  hundred  fouls  of  our  focicty,  moft  of  which 
had  been  wrought  upon  fmce  my  return  from  Georgia,  Help 
me  to  cry,  Grace  !  grace  I  My  dear  friend  and  brother,  for 
the  prefent  adieu  !  I  love  you  in  the  bowels  of  a  crucified 
Jesus.     Brethren,  pray  for  us. 

I  am  ever,  ever  yours  in  Christ, 

G.  IK 

LETTER    CCCLVIII. 

T^o  Mr,  H in  Edinburgh, 

Me  hilly  O^ioher  5,  1741. 
Dear  Mr,  H , 

I  Received  your  kind  letter  with  the  bill,  and  alfo  that  figned 
by  you,  and  my  other  friends  at  Edinburgh,  I  take  all 
they  fay  in  good  part,  but  think  fome  of  their  reafonings  a 
little  too  worldly.  The  calumnies  of  evil  men  are  not  to  be 
regarded.  I  value  them  not  in  the  leaft.  My  largeft  donati- 
ons have  been  from  the  rich  and  fubftantial.  The  mites  which 
the  lower  fort  of  people  have  given,  I  am  perfuaded  will  not 
prevent  their  paying  their  debts,  or  impoverifii  their  families. 

Mr.  fV ,  in  a  letter  to  Mr.  S ,  wifties  there  may  be  a 

private  contribution  for  myfelf ;  but  I  know  nothing  of,  and 
will  not  admit  of  any  fuch  thing.  I  make  no  purfc  ;  what  I 
have,  I  give  away. —  Freely  I  have  received,  freely  1  defirc  to 
give.  "  Poor,  yet  making  many  rich,"  fhall  be  my  motto 
ftill.  My  great  and  profeffcd  defign,  is  to  bring  poor  fmners 
to  Jesus  Christ  :  but  as  my  orphan  family  abroad  is  now 

y  3  large. 


326  LETTERS. 

large,   and  dally  to  be  provided  for,  without  the  leaft  vifibic 
fund,   and  I  believe  much  glory  will  redound  to  God  from 
that  houfe  ;  I  think  it  my  duty  to  fpeak  to  thofe,  who  I  be- 
lieve, for  Christ's  fiike,  arc  willing  to  help  them.     I  would 
have  no  one  afraid  of  doing  too  much  good,  or  think,   that  a 
little  given  in  charity  will  impoverifh  the  country. — May  God 
reward  you,  and  all   others  that  have  affifted  me  for  his  dear 
Son*s   fake  !   My   poor   prayers   will  alv/ays    attend  my  Scetch 
friends.     When   I   fhall   go   to  England^  I   know  not,  but  I 
hope  God  will  dire£l  me.    I  muft  have  done.    Dear  Sir,  may 
the  Lord  be  with  you,  and  be  your  eafe  in  pain.     My  kind- 
eft  refpedls  attend  your  kind  wife,  and  all  my  dear  friends.     I 
thank  you  and  them  for  their  advice,  and  defire  to  fubfcribe 
myfelf,  with  much  affe6lion,  dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged,  and  alte£iionate  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  JV, 

LETTER     CCCLIX. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  M ,  at  Dornock. 

Aberdeen^  OSfober  9,  1 74 1. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

SOME  time  paft,  I  received  a  letter  from  your  Prefbytery 
of  Sutherland,  and  if  I  miftake  not,  with  your  name  fub- 
fcribed.  However,  as  I  this  night  have  feen  your  fon,  I  think 
jt  my  duty  in  a  letter  to  you,  to  thank  the  reverend  prefbytery 
for  their  kind  invitation  ;  but  as  my  flay  in  Scotland  is  fo  fhort, 
and  Sutherland  i'o  far  Northv^ard,  I  cannot  think  of  going  thi- 
ther at  this  time.  Notvvithflanding,  my  prayer  to  God  is, 
that  the  glorious  gofpel  may  fiourifli  in  your  hands,  and  that 
you  may  bring  many,  very  many  fouls  to  Jesus.  This,  re- 
verend Sir,  unlefs  my  heart  deceives  me,  is  my  only  airn. 
For  this  let  men  revile  my  name, 

IjJmn  no  Crofs,  I  fear  no  foarne  ; 
All  hail  reproach,  and  welcome  pain. 
Only  thy  terrors.  Lord,  rejlrain  I 

P,  dear  Sir,   m.y  heart  is  warmed  with  the  love  of  Jesus  ; 

whilft  I  am  writing,   the  fire  kindles.      Amazing,  that  Jesus 

ftiould  fufFer  me  to  fpeak  for  him  !  But  what  fliall  we  fay  ? 

. • His 


LETTERS.  327 

His  grace  is  free.  Dear  Sir,  help  me  to  cry,  Grace  !  grace  ! 
Surely  I  fliall  fmg  it  in  heaven.  I  long  to  be  there,  but  am 
willing  to  tarry  the  Lord's  leifure.  Dear  Sir,  excufe  this 
freedom  ;  I  hope  I  am  writing  to  one  that  loves  Jesus.  I 
would  write  more,  but  muft  away  to  give  a  word  of  exhorta- 
tion. That  the  Lord  Jesus  may  fill  you  with  all  joy  and 
peace  in  believing,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of,  Reverend  and  dear 
Sir, 

Your  afFe^lionate  friend,  brother.  Sec, 
in  Christ, 

G.  IK 
LETTER    CCCLX. 

To  Major  M . 

Dear  Sir,  Aberdeen,  O£loher  9,  1 741. 

BEING  come  thus  far  Northward,  and  hearing  that  you 
are  this  way,  1  cannot  forbear  writing,  though  nature 
calls  for  fleep.  1  was  concerned  I  could  not  fee  you  at  Lon- 
don ;  but  hope  this  will  find  you  retired  from  a  noify  world, 
and  walking  with  your  dear  fpoufe  as  becometh  the  gofpel  of 
Jesus  Christ.  It  is  what  I  have  longed  and  prayed  for 
many  a  time.  I  am  of  the  fame  mind  as  formerly.  Nothing 
but  Jesus  can  fatisfy  the  foul.  Aided  by  his  Almighty  pow- 
er, I  ftill  go  on  through  good  report  and  evil  report,  preach- 
ing the  gofpel.  Blefled  be  God,  I  am  not  afhamed  of  it.  For, 
I  find  it,  as  do  many  others,  to  be  the  power  of  God  to  our 
eternal  falvation.  O,  dear  Sir,  I  feel  more  and  more  of  the 
love  of  Christ  every  day.  It  is  paft  expreffion.  I  hope  ere 
now  you  have  had  it  (hed  abroad  in  your  heart  abundantly, 
by  the  Holy  Ghoft.  A  letter  informing  me  of  this,  will  re- 
joice my  foul.     Be  pleafed  to  direct  to  me   at  Mr.  T 's, 

Edinburgh,  GoD  willing,  I  purpofe  leaving  Scotland  in  about 
a  fortnight.  Whether  I  fhall  fee  you  in  the  flefh,  I  know  not. 
However,  fince  I  know  what  God  once  did  for  you,  be  not 
offended,  if  I  charge  you,  dear  Sir,  not  to  let  me  mifs  you  at 
God's  right-hand  in  the  great  day.  But  God  only  can  brir.g 
this  to  pafs  :  That  you  and  your  dear  wife  may  be  kept  by  his 
mighty  power  unto  falvation,  prays,  dear  Sir, 

Ever  yours, 

G.  jy. 

Y4  LETTER 


28  LETTERS. 


LETTER     CCCLXI. 

To  Mrs,  Ann  D ,  at  great  Granfden. 

My  dear  Sijiery  Aberdeen^  03ober  9,  1 74 1. 

THIS  evening  your  letter  came  to  hand.  Though  it  is 
paft  eleven  at  night,  and  I  have  rode  many  miles  this 
day,  yet  I  cannot  go  to-bed  without  fending  you  a  line*  I 
fear,  by  your  manner  of  writing,  you  are  offended  with  me  for 
my  lafl  letter.  I  knew  very  well,  it  would  be  a  trial  to  you  5  but 
I  wrote  out  of  pure  love,  and  am  glad  it  is  now  in  your  power 
to  clear  yourhufband,  which  I  much  deftred  to  do.  I  have  top 
many  afperfions  of  the  fame  nature  caft  upon  me,  not  to  fym- 
pathize  with  you  both.  But  Jesus  is  our  advocate,  and  ere  long 
we  fh^ll  fee  all  the  accufers  of  the  brethren  caft  down.  In  fpite 
of  all,  J^sus  has  been,  and  is  getting  himfelf  the  vi£lory  in 
many  finncrs  hearts.  I  am  yet  carried  on  day  by  day,  ftrength- 
ened  in  bodyj  and  niuch  refreflied  and  comforted  in  foul.  Your 
letter  gives  me  a  little  prefent  pain,  left  my  laft  ftiould  have 
pained  you.  But  Geo  permits  thefe  things  to  happen  among 
ourfelves,  to  teach  us  to  look  ofF  from  all  creatures,  and  to 
centre  all  our  happinefs  in  himfelf.  Glory  be  to  God  for  his 
almighty  love  !  At  my  firft  coming  here,  things  looked  a  lit- 
tle gloomy  ;  for  the  magiftrates  had  been  fo  prejudiced  by  one 

Mr.  B 5  that  when  applied  to,  they  refufed  me  the  ufe  of 

the  kirk-yard  to  preach  in.  This  Mr.  B — —  is  collegue 
^ith  one  Mr.  O ,  at  whofe  repeated  invitation  I  came  hi- 
ther. Though  collegues  of  the  fame  congregation,  they 
are  very  different  in  their  natural  tempers.  The  one  is  what 
they  call  in  ScoiIa?2d,  of  dfweet  blooded,  the  other,  of  a  .chole- 
ric difpofition.    Mr.  B- is  neither   a  Seceder,   nor  quite 

a  Kirk-man,  having  great  fault  to  find  with  both.  Soon  after 

my  arrival,  dear  Mr.  O took  me  to  pay  my  refpe6ts   to 

him  ;  he  was  prepared  for  it,  and  immediately  pulled  out  a 
paper,  containing  a  great  number  of  infignificant  queries, 
which  I  had  neither  time  near  inclination   to  anfwer.     The 

next  morning,   it  being   Mr.  0 's  turn,  1  lectured  and 

preached  ;  the  magiftrates  were  prefent.  The  congregation 
very  large,  and  light  and  life  fled  ail  around.  In  the  after- 
noon Mr.  B — = —  ofHciated  ,   I  attendedo  He  began  his  pray« 

ers 


LETTERS.  329 

crs  as  ufua] ;  but  in  the  mldft  of  them  naming  me  by  name,  he 
intrealed  the  Lord  to  forgive  the  difhonour  that  had  been  put 
upon  him,  by  my  being  fufFcred  to  preach  in  that  pulpit;  and 
that  all  might  know  what  reafon  he  had  to  put  up  fuch  a 
petition,  about  the  middle  of  his  fermon,  he  not  only  uro-ed 
that  "  I  was  a  curate  of  the  church  of  Eyiglancl^'  but  alfo 
quoted  a  paflage  or  tv/o  out  of  my  firft  printed  fermons,  which 
he  faid  were  grofsly  Armiman.  Moft  of  the  congregation 
feemed  furprizcd   and  chagrined,   efpecially  his  good-natured 

collegue  Mr.  O ,  who  immediately  after  fermon,  without 

confulting  me  in  the  leaft,  flood  up  and  gave  notice,  that  Mr. 
Whitefield  would  preach  in  about  half  an  hour.  The  interval 
being  fo  fliort,  the  magiftratcs  returned  into  the  feiTion's- 
houfe,  and  the  congregation  patiently  waited,  big  with  expec- 
tation of  hearing  my  refefitment.  At  the  time  appointed,  I 
went  up,  and  took  no  other  notice  of  the  good  man's  ill-timed 
zeal,  than  to  obferve  in  fome  part  of  my  difcourfe,  that  if  the 
good  old  gentleman  had  feen  fome  of  my  later  writings,  where- 
in I  had  corrected  feveral  of  my  former  miftakes,  he  would 
not  have  exprelTed  himfelf  in  fuch  ftrong  terms.  The  people 
being  thus  diverted  from  controverfy  with  man,  were  deeply 
impreffed  with  what  they  heard  from  the  word  of  God.  All 
was  huflied  !  and  more  than  folemn  !  and  on  the  morrow  the 
magiftrates  fent  for  me,  exprefled  themfelves  quite  concerned 
at  the  treatment  I  had  met  with,  and  begg'd  I  would  accept 
of  the  freedom  of  the  city.  But  of  this  enough.  The  Lord, 
my  dear  fifter,  i^  my  fupport ;  let  us  both  continually  fly  to 
him,  and  then  let  men  or  devils  do  their  worft.  Christ 
will  by  and^  by  take  away  our  reproach.  Into  his  hands  I  com- 
mend your  fpirit.  Good  night;  the  Lord  be  with  you  and 
yours  !  I  hope  to  fet  out  for  England  ioon.  Pray  write  when 
you  h?ar  of  my  arrival  there,  and  fo  convince  me,  that  you 
are  not  angry  with 

Your  afFedlionate  tho*  unworthy  brother 
and  fervant  in  Christ, 

C.JK 


LETTER 


si"^ 


LETTERS. 


LETTER    CCCLXII. 

To  Mr.  IV ,  at  Edinburgh. 

Dear  Sir,  Aberdeen,  OSlober  lo,  1 74 1. 

IJuft  fnatch   a  few  moments  to  anfwer  your  letter.     Want 
of  leifure  prevented  my  doing  it  before.     I  have  not  as  yet 
feen  your  mother's  memoirs.     Happy  are  you  in  having  fuch 
a  parent.     No  doubt  many  prayers  are  in  ftore  for  you.     As 
for  your  entering  upon  the  miniftry,  I  cannot  advife  you,  'till 
you  have   gotten  full  fatisfadlion  that  you  are  born  again  of 
God.     1  know  more  than  one,  who  are  ready  to  give  up  their 
miniftry   for  want  of  this  ;  and  as  for  my  own  part,  I  could 
not  feelingly  prefs  the  love  of  God  to  others,  unlefs  I  was  fure 
of  his  love  to  myfelf.     I  know  not  what  may  have  pafted  be- 
tween God  and  your  foul.     You  can  tell,  I  fuppofe,  whether 
or  not  God's  fpirit  witnefleth  with  your  fpirit,  that  you  are  a 
child  of  God  ?  For  he  that  believeth,  hath  the  wicnefs  in  him- 
felf.  If  you  have  got  this  withamoderateftiareof  learning,  a  good 
elocution  and  a  burning  love  for  precious  fouls,  then,  I  think 
vou  may  do  fervice  in  a  public  ftation.     If  godly,  and  real  ex- 
perienced friends  are  for  your  entering  into  the  miniftry,  their 
advice  is  fomewhat  to  be  regarded.     If  their  advice  proceeds 
from  worldly  motives,  do  not  mind  them  at  all.    The  difcou- 
ragements  you  meet  with  from  fome,  are  not  worth  your  no- 
tice.   If  God  loves  you,  he  will  try  you  every  way.    Prayer, 
meditation,  and  temptation,  are  three  neceflary  qualifications 
for  a  gofpcl   miniftcr.     I  know  not  what  to  fay  about  your 
going  to  Georgia.     In  Penfylvania,  and  other  places,  there  are 
moft  noble  opportunities  of  preaching  the  gofpel  of  Jesus. 
But  I  hope  to  be  in  Edinburgh  in   about  ten  days,  and  then 
fhall  be  glad  to  convcrfe  with  you.     In  the  mean  time,  dear 
Sir,  I  commend  you  to  God,  and  defire  you  would  not  forget 
the  unworthy  creature,  who  now  fubfcribes  himfelf 

Yours  in  Christ  Jesus, 
G.  W. 


LETTER 


LETTERS. 


23^ 


LETTER     CCCLXIII. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  J JV . 

Aberdeen^  O^ober  lo,  1741. 
Reverend  and  dear  Brother, 

I  Have  for  a  long  time  expeiSled  that  you  would  have  fent 
me  an  anfwer  to  my  laft  ;  but  I  fuppofe  that  you  are 
afraid  to  correfpond  with  me,  becaufe  I  revealed  your  fecret 
about  the  lot.  Though  much  may  be  faid  for  my  doing  it, 
yet  I  am  forry  now,  that  any  fuch  thing  dropped  from  my 
pen,  and  I  humbly  afk  pardon.  I  find  I  love  you  as  much  as 
ever,  and  pray  God,  if  it  be  his  blefTed  will,  that  we  may  be 
all  united  together.  It  hath  been  fpr  fome  days  upon  my 
heart  to  write  to  you,  and  this  morning  I  received  a  letter 

from  brother  H ,  telling  me  how  he  had  convcrfed  with 

you  anci  your  dear  brother.  May  God  remove  all  obftacles 
that  now  prevent  our  union  I  Though  I  hold  particular  elec- 
tion, yet  I  offer  Jesus  freely  to  every  individual  foul.  You 
may  carry  fan6lification  to  what  degrees  you  will,  only  I 
cannot  agree  that  the  in-being  of  fin  is  to  be  deflroyed  in  this 
life.  O,  my  dear  brother,  the  Lord  hath  been  much  with 
me  in  Scoilond.  I  every  morning  feel  my  fellowfliip  with 
Christ,  and  he  is  pleafed  to  give  me  all  peace  and  joy  in  be- 
lieving. In  about  three  weeks  I  hope  to  be  at  Briftol.  JVlay 
all  diiputings  ceafe,  and  each  of  us  talk  of  nothing  but  Jesus, 
and  him  crucified  !  This   is  my  refolution.     The    Lord  be 

with   your  fpirit.     My  love  to  brother  C ,   and    all  that 

love  the  glorious  Emmanuel.     I  am,  without  diflimulation. 

Ever  yours, 

G.  W. 
LETTER     CCCLXIV. 

ro  Peter  5-^-i-il. 

Aberdeen,  Ooiober  10,  1741. 
My  dear  Brother, 

I  Write  this,  to  afk  pardon  for  mentioning  your  name  in  my 
anfwer  to  brother  TV 's  fcrnioi^,.  I  am  very  forry  for  it. 

Methinks  I  hear  you  fay,  for  Christ's  fake  I  forgive  you.    I 

thank 
2 


,,2  LETTERS. 

thank  you,  and  fhall  be  glad  of  a  conference  with  you  when 
I  come  to  London,  There  have  been  faults  on  both  fides. 
I  think,  my  dear  brother,  you  have  not  a£led  fimply  in  fomc 
things.  Let  us  confefs  our  faults  to  one  another,  and  pray  for 
one  another,  that  we  may  be  healed.  I  wifh  there  may  be  no 
dilTention  between  us  for  the  time  to  co;iie.  May  God  prc- 
ferve  us  from  falling  out  in  our  way  to  heaven  !  The  world 
and  the  devil  are  united  againft  us ;  O  that  we  could  all  unite 
ao-ainft  them  !  "  God  is  love,  and  he  that  dwclleth  in  love, 
dwelleth  in  God."  I  long  to  have  all  narrow-fpiritednefs 
taken  out  of  my  heart.  Jesus  is  able  to  deliver  me.  His 
blood  is  Almighty.  I  truft  I  fhall  not  reft,  'till  I  have  felt  the 
full  power  of  it  in  my  foul.  BlefTed  be  God,  I  am  ftill  car;-i- 
ed  on  from  conquering  to  conquer.  Jesus  caufes  me  to  tri- 
umph in  every  place.  I  defire  to  lie  as  a  poor  firmer  at  his 
feet,  and  to  cry,  Grace  !  grace  !  I  find  I  am  fliortly  to  be  called 
before  the  higher  powers.  Help  me,  my  dear  brother,  by 
vour  prayers.  In  about  nine  days  I  think  to  leave  Scotland, 
I  commend  you  to  Jesus,  and  defire  to  fubfcribe  myfelf,  dear 

brother  B — ^ — , 

Yours  afFe£lionately  in  the  bleeding  Lamb, 

G.  IK 

LETTER     CCCLXV.  \ 

To  ihs  Reverend  Mr,  C . 

Aberdeen^  OSloher  13,  I74I, 
My  dear  Brother^ 

I  Received  your  letters,  and  am  glad  to  hear  that  the  glorious 
Einmanuel  is  pleafed  to  countenance  your  miniftry.  May 
he  fmile  on  you  more  and  more,  and  make  you  the  fpiritual  fa- 
ther of  many  children  !  I  have  very  great  reafon  to  be  thank- 
ful to  our  common  Saviour.  Fie  hath  been  with  me  greatly, 
both  in  England  and  Scotland.  I  generally  preach  twice  every 
day,  fometimes  three,  even  four  times,  and  generally  expound 
in  private  every  night.  The  Lord  has  fought  many  battles 
for  me,  and  ftill  continues  to  make  me  more  than  conqueror 
through  his  love.  This  morning  I  felt  his  power  in  the  pul- 
pit, and  now  feel  it  much  in  my  foul.  O  what  a  blefled  thing 
it  is,  to  have  God's  fpirit  witncfs  with  our  fpirit,  that  we  are 

Gqd'3 


LETTERS.  333 

God's  children  !  This,  glory  be  to  free  grace!  I  have  con- 
tinually; and  let  me  be  in  what  frame  ibcver,  my  foul  is 
waiting  for  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  Man.  Blefled  be  God, 
it  will  not  be  long  ere  I  fhall  fee  him  as  he  is.  The  fight  I 
have  of  him  by  faith,  ravifhes  my  foul  :  how  ihall  I  be  ra- 
vKhed  when  I  fee  him  face  to  face  !  "  Lord,  purify  me,  even 
as  thou  art  pure  ;  for  only  the  pure  in  heart  fee  thee  !"  My 
dear  brother,  the  love  of  GoA  now  fills  my  foul.  May  you 
feel  it  fhed  abroad  abundantly  in  your  heart  !  About  Spring, 
perhaps,  I  may  leave  England, '  F'orget  not  to  pray  for  me» 

I  am,  dear  Mr.  C , 

Ever  yours  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER    CCCLXVI. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  L^^— . 

My  Lord,  Brechen^  O^oher  17,  1741. 

I  Would  have  wrote  to  your  Lordfhip  from  Aberdeen,  but 
could  not  then  determine  when  I  fhould  be  at  MelvilL 
This  comes  to  acquaint  your  Lordfhip,  that,  God  willing,  I 
hope  to  be  at  your  Lordfhip's  houfe  on  IVednefday  night,  and  to 
preach  at  Coupar  on  Thurfday.  I  fhould  be  glad  if  the  ma- 
giftrates  were  apprized  of  it,  and  the  tent  fixed  in  a  more 
convenient  place,  and  at  a  lefs  diftance  from  the  ground.  I 
cannot  tell  your  Lordfhip,  how  good  the  glorious  Emmanuel 
has  been  unto  me.  He  has  caufed  me  to  triumph  in  every 
place,  and  fills  my  foul  with  joy  unfpeakable,  even  with  joy 
that  is  full  of  glory,  I  wifli  your  Lordfhip  was  not  almoft, 
but  altogether  fuch  as  I  am,  excepting  my  indwelling  cor- 
ruptions. O  my  Lord,  none  but  Chriftians  know  the  plea- 
fure  of  renouncing  the  world  for  God.  I  am  perfuaded  you 
felt  unfpeakable  pleafure  at  Coupar,  I  hope  thbfe  days 
have  continued  with  yoU;  Happy  are  you  in  having  a  con- 
fort  that  will  forward  you  in  the  fpi ritual  life.  That  you 
may  both  live  together  as  becomes  heirs  of  the  grace  of  God, 
and  have  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  is  the  earncft  prayer 
€)f,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordihip^s  moft  obedient  humble  fervant, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER 


554  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCLXVII. 

To   Mr,  Thomas   G ,    at   London. 


Dundee^  O^oher  21,  1 741. 


Dear  Brother  G- 


YOU  will  fee,  by  the  following,  what  God  is  ftill  doing 
for  me.  On  TVednefday  night  laft  I  left  Aberdeen^ 
after  preaching  there  feven  times,  befides  expounding  in  pri- 
vate. Before  I  came  among  them,  numbers  were  much  pre- 
judiced againft  me  j  but  God  was  pleafed  to  attend  my  mi- 
niftry  with  fuch  power,  that  all  oppofition  fell  before  me. 
Many  were  brought  under  great  convictions.  The  magi- 
ftrates  made  me  free  of  the  city  ;  and  the  people  much  re- 
gretted my  fpeedy  departure  from  them.  On  Thurfday  laft  I 
preached  at  Stonhkhe  and  Benham ;  on  Friday^  thrice  at  Mon- 
trofe  ',  on  Saturday  twice,  and  on  Sunday  thrice  at  Brechen^  and 
ledlured  in  the  evening  at  a  private  houfe.  On  Monday  I 
preached  twice  at  Forfar  ;  on  Tuefday  twice  at  Coupar^  in  Angus ; 
and  once  at  Dundee^  five  miles  from  Coupar,  at  four  in  the  af- 
ternoon, and  again  at  night ;  here  I  have  alfo  preached  twice 
this  day.  The  prefence  of  God  accompanies  me  more  and 
more.  Wherever  I  have  preached,  1  hear  of  the  good  fruits  of 
it,  both  in  convi6ling  finners,  and  reviving  faints.  At  Dundee, 
the  concern  among  the  hearers  is  very  remarkable.  People 
are  ftill  more  defirous  to  hear  the  word.  Bur,  God  willing, 
I  purpofe  fhortly  to  fet  out  for  England,  My  dear  brother, 
pray  for  me,  that  I  may  be  humble  and  thankful.  I  am  glad 
to  hear  your  wife  is  recovered.  My  love  to  her,  and  all 
friends.     I  am,  with  cordial  affedion, 

Dear  brother  G , 

Ever  yours  in  Christ, 

G.  PK 


LETTER     ; 


LETTERS. 
LETTER    CCCLXVIir. 

To  thi   Right   Honourable   the  Lord  L 


^IS 


My  Lord ^  Edinburgh^   Oaoher  %b^    l']\l, 

IT  is  now  paft  eleven  at  night ;  all  is  wrapt  in  awful  filcnce. 
My  foul  is  in  a  quiet  compofed  rcamc.  I  have  been  giving 
your  Lordlhip's  letter  a  fecond  reading,  with  afpirations  to 
God  whilft  I  perufed  it.  Surely  God  has  not  let  me  wreftlc 
with  him  in  vain.  The  Holy  Spirit  Teems  to  be  moving  upoa 
the  face  of  your  foul.  1  truft  God  hath  faid,  "  Let  there  be 
light,"  and  therefore  there  is  light.  O  that  the  work  may  be 
carried  on,  till  you  enter  into  that  rcll:  which  remains  for  the 
people  of  God,  I  truft  your  Lordfhip  will  now  awake  into  a 
new  world,  and  know  what  it  is  to  live  by  faith.  Did  I  not 
know  the  power  of  Christ's  blood,  I  fliould  fear  for  you. 
But  I  commend  you  to  a  glorious  Redeemer,  that  will  cer- 
tainly take  care  of  you.  As  I  left  your  Lordflnp's  houfe,  I 
was  thinking,  that  the  narrow  efcape  your  Lordfhip  had  be- 
tween the  ftones,  foreboded  fomething  good.  Jesus  has 
taken  care  of  you  when  in  your  blood.  I  hope  he  is 
now  pafling  by  you,  and  faying  unto  you,  ''  Live."  O  that 
the  ftone  of  infidelity,  which  before  lay  at  the  door  of 
your  heart,  may  be  now  rolled  awny  !  O  that  you  may  rife, 
be  loofed  from  your  corruptions,  and  go  about  doing  good  ! 
Satan  will  not  let  you  go  without  much  oppofition.  He  will 
defire  to  have  you,  that  he  may  fift  you  as  wheat.  But  if  Jesus 
prays  for  you,  all  will  be  well.  The  comfort  which  you  had 
with  him  in  reading  the  pfalms,  is  a  tafte  of  the  food  believers 
daily  eat,  and  which  the  carnal  world  knows  nothing  of.  My 
Lord,  if  you  could  be  brought  once  to  love  fecret  prayer,  and 
to  converfe  feelingly  with  God  in  his  word,  your  heaven  will 
begin  on  earth  j  you  will  enjoy  more  pleafure  than  in  all  man- 
ner of  riches.  What  will  thofe  avail,  if  you  are  not  rich  to- 
wards God  ?  Be,  therefore,  my  Lord,  much  in  fecret  retire- 
ment. Commune  with  your  own  heart  in  your  chamber,  and 
be  ftill,  and  you  will  then  hear  the  fecret  whifpcrs  of  the 
Holy  Ghoft.  As  for  praying  in  your  family,  I  intreat  you, 
my  Lord,  not  to  neglect  it.  You  are  bound  to  do  it.  Apply 
to  Christ  for  ftrength  to  overcome  your  prefent  fears.  They 
arc  the  effects  of  pride,  or  infidelity,  or  of  both.     After  once 

©r 


Z^e  LETTERS. 

or  twice,  the  difficulty  will  be  over.  O  that  the  blcflcd  Spirft 
may  enable  you  to  make  intcrcefilon  with  groaning  that  can- 
not be  uttered  !  It  rejoices  me  to  think,  that  I  (liall  one  day 
perhaps  fee  a  church  in  Melvlll  houfe.  Happy,  happy  are  vou^ 
my  Lord,  iji  having  fuch  a  confort,  who  will  forward  your 
Lordfliip  in  every  good  word  and  work.  How  fweet  will  it 
be  for  you  to  go  early  to  your  devotions,  flriving  to  live  like 
the  firft  happy  pair,  before  they  had  eaten  the  forbidden  fruit. 
As  God  fliall  enable  me,  J  fhall  bear  you  both  upon  my 
heart.  God  forbid  that  I  fliould  fm  againft  him  in  ceafmg  to 
pray  for  you.  My  riding  upon  your  Lordfhip's  horfe,  will 
often  remind  me  to  pray  for  the  donor.  My  Lord,  you  are 
upon  my  heart.  Methinks  I  would  undergo  the  pangs  of  the 
new  birth  for  you  ;  but  Jesus  can  carry  you  through.  Fear 
not.  Go  on  in  his  ftrength,  and  your  Lordfliip  will  be  en- 
abled to  ftand  the  fhock  of  all.  I  fhould  be  glad  to  hear,  from 
time  to  time,  what  the  Lord  is  doing  for  your  foul.  Since 
your  Lordfliip  has  laid  your  commands  upon  me,  I  fliall  write 
as  often  as  poffible.  If  your  Lordfliip  is  pleafed  to  write 
within  this  week,  a  letter  may  be  direded  to  me  at  Mrs, 

y 's,  in  Abergavenny.     If  afterwards,   at  Mr.  S 's. 

Grocer,  in  IVine-Jheet^  Br'iJloL  Your  Lordfliip  may  depend 
on  my  fecrefy  -,  no  one  hath  feen  your  Lordfliip's  letter,  but 

Mr.  5 ,  who  copies  this,   and  who  Is  as  my  own  foul. 

His  prayers,  I  trufl:,  will  benefit  your  Lordfliip.  His  humble 
refpe£ls  await  both  you  and  your  lady.  Once  more,  I  pray 
God  to  blefs  you  both  together.  But  it  is  late,  the  clock  has 
flruck  tv/clve.  Methinks  I  could  wifli  the  cry  was  now  made, 
**  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh."  My  foul  longs  to  go 
forth  to  meet  him.  This  evening  I  was  greatly  refreflied  by 
preaching  on  thefe  words,  "  This  is  my  beloved,  and  this  is 
my  friend,  oh  daughters  of  Jerufalcm.'''  O  when  fhall  I  fee 
him  as  he  is  I  Well  may  your  Lordfljip  fay,  "  He  is  altoge- 
ther lovely."  The  more  you  know  him,  the  more  you  will 
have  reafon  to  commend  him.  Eternity  is  too  fliort  to  utter 
all  his  praife.  With  a  heart  full  of  nfFection  and  thanks- for 
all  favours,  I  beg  leave  to  fubfcribe  myfelf,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfliip's  mofl:  obUged  humble  fervant, 

G.  W, 

LETTER 


LETTERS. 


^21 


LETTER     CCCLXIX. 

To   Mr.  J C ,    at    London. 

Edinburgh^  Ouloher  27,  174 1. 
Aly  very  dear  Brothtr^ 

LTHOOGH   it  be  paft  eleven  at  night,  yet  I  cannot 


A 


mifs  a  poft.    The  Lord  is  doing  very  great  things  here. 

At  Dundee  the  C was  very  extraordinary.      On  fab- 

bath-day,  the  Lord  enabled  inc  to  preach  four  times,  and  to 
ledurc  in  the  evening  at  a  private  houfe.  Ycfterday  I  preached 
three  times,  and  Icdlared  at  night.  This  day  Jesus  has  en- 
abled me  to  preach  fcven  times.  Once  in  the  church,  twice  at 
the  girl's  holpital,  once  in  the  park,  once  at  the  old  people's 
bofpital,  and  afterwards  twice  in  a  private  houfe.  Notwith- 
ftanding,  I  am  now  as  fielh  as  when  I  arofe  in  the  morning. 
"  They  that  wait  u;  on  the  Lord  fhall  renew  their  ftrength  ; 
they  (hall  mount  on  wings  like  eagles."  It  would  delight  your 
foul  to  fee  the  eifeds  of  the  power  of  God.  Both  in  the  church 
r.nd  park  the  Lord  was  with  us.  The  girls  in  the  hofpira!  were 
exceedingly  afFecled,  and  fo  were  the  ftanders-by.  One  of 
the  miflreires  told  me,  flie  is  now  awakened  in  the  mornino- 
by  the  voice  of  prayer  and  praife  ;  and  the  mafter  of  the  boys 
fays,  that  they  meet  together  every  night  to  fing  and  pray; 
.'ind  when  he  goes  to  their  rooms  at  night  to  fee  if  all  be  fafe, 
he  generally  difturbs  them  at  their  devotions.  The  prcfence 
of  God,  at  the  old  people's  hofpital,  was  really  very  wonderful. 
The  Holy  Spirit  feemed  to  come  down  like  a  mighty  rufhing 
wind.  The  mourning  of  the  people,  was  like  the  weeping  in  the 
valley  of  Hadadrimmon.  They  appear  more  and  more  hungry. 
Kvery  day  I  hear  of  fomc  frcfh  good  wrought  by  the  pov/er 
f  f  God.  I  fcarce  know  how  to  leave  Scotland.  I  believe  I  ftiall 
'Jiink  it  my  dutv  to  pay  the  inhabitants  another  vifit  as  foon  as 
po/Hble.  May  the  Lord  order  my  goings  in  his  ways  ! 
Abo^-e  five  hundred  pounds  hath  been  collected,  in  money  and 
goods,  for  the  poor  orphans.  Let  all  that  is  within  me  praiie 
CjOd's  holy. name.  To-morrow,  God  willing,  I  fti all  leave 
ibis  place,  and  go  through  IFaleSy  in  my  way  to  London. 
Vou  may  hear  from  me  on  the  road.  At  prefent,  I  mufl  con- 
VoL.  L  Z  cl.udej 

8 


53S  LETTERS.- 

elude  ;  it  is  very  near  twelve.     I  intreat  you  to  pray  and  give 

thankb  for,  dear  brother  C — ' , 

Your's  mod  aficirlionately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

LETTER     CCCLXX. 

To  the  Right  Honourable   the  Lord  L . 

My  Lordy  Abergavenny^  Nov.  lo,   1 741. 

I  Cannot  bear  the  thoughts  of  forbearing  to  write  to  your 
Lordfliip  any  longer.  I  know  your  Lordfliip  will  be 
pleafed  to  hear  that  we  had  a  good  journey.  Christ's  pre- 
fence  made  it  fo.  The  horfe  carried  me  exceeding  well.  My 
heart  was  often  drawn  out  to  pray  for  the  donor.  Does  your 
Lordlhip's  foul  profper  ?  Has  Jesus  faid,  "  Be  of  good  cheer, 
it  is  I  J  be  not  afraid,  thy  fms  are  forgiven  thee."  Can  it 
vet  be  laid,  "  Behold,  he  prayeth."  I  find  a  reftraint  upon 
me  now,  fo  that  I  cannot  write.  God  calls  me  to  retirement ; 
being  to  enter  into  the  marriage  ftate  to-morrow.  I  am 
perfuaded  your  Lordfliip  will  not  fail  to  pray,  that  we  may, 
like  Zacharlah  and  Elizabeth^  walk  in  all  the  ordinances  and 
commandments  of  the  Lord  blamelefs.  I  hope  my  moft 
humble  refpecls  will  find  acceptance  with  your  Lady.  Indeed, 
my  Lord,  you  are  both  much  upon  my  heart.  Though  I  have 
only  liberty  now  to  fubfcribe  myfelf,  with  all  gratitude,  my 
Lord, 

Your  Lordfhip's  moft  obedient  and  obliged 
humble  fervantj 

G.   TV, 

LETTER    CCCLXXL 

To  Mr,  T ,   at  Edinburgh, 

Abergavenny^  Nov.  Ig,  1 74 1. 

THIS  morning  I  received  your  kind  letter;  for  which, 
and  all  other  favours,  you  have  my  moft  hearty  thanks. 
I  remembered  you  in  prayer,  foon  after  your's  came  to  hand  : 
blefled  be  God  for  the  news  which  it  contained.  I  yetexpe£l 
to  hear  of,  if  not  to  fee  far  greater  things  in  Scotland.  The 
Lord  has  begun,  and  he  will  carry  on  a  work,  which  fhall 
make  the  ears  of  his  enemies  to  tingle.  I  have  enjoyed  much 
of  the  tjivine  prefence  fince  we  parted.     On  Saturday  I  was 

2  married, 


LETTERS.  339 

married,  In  the  fear  of  God,  to  one  who,  I  hope,  will  be  a 
help  meet  to  me.  God  has  been  pleafed  to  work,  by  my 
hands,  fince  I  have  been  in  Wales.  O  ftupendous  love  !  O 
infinitely  condefcending  God  !  Be  pleafed  to  direct  your  next 
to  London,  I  hope  to  be  there  in  about  three  weeks.  My 
wife  I  ftall  leave  in  the  country  for  fome  time.     Dear  Mr, 

T ,  pray  for  us.     I  do  for  you  and  yours.     Labour  after 

an  abiding  of  God  in  your  foul,  fo  that  you  may  continually 
by  failh  fee  him  who  is  invifible.  Do  not  be  content  with  being 
a  dwarf  in  religion:  afpire  after  the  utmoft  degrees  of  inward 
purity   and   holinefs.     I   could  go  on,   but  muft  write  fome 

more  letters.     Dear  brother  5 ,  and  my  dear  wife,  falute 

you  and  all  friends.    They  are  not  forgotten,  dear  Mr.  T , 

by 

Your  moft  unworthy,  but  moft  afFedionate 

friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 
G.  W, 

LETTER    CCCLXXII. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  Lady  D— — ^ — ,  In  Scotland. 
Honoured  Madam^  Brijlol^  Nov.  22,  1741. 

AT  length  I  have  a  little  leifure.  I  muft  improve  it, 
by  writing  a  letter  to  your  Ladyfhip.  The  many  fa- 
vours conferred  on  me,  loudly  called  for  a  more  fpeedy  ac- 
knowledgment ;  but  hitherto,  bufmefs  for  my  Mafter  has 
prevented.  Dear  Mrs.  C *s  letter  will  inform  your  La- 
dyfhip that  I  have  altered  my  ftate ;  I  truft  for  the  better  ; 
for  I  think  my  foul  is  more  intimately  united  to  Jesus  Christ 
than  ever.  I  would  humbly  hope  your  Ladyfhip  can  fay  fo 
too  ;  for  there  is  no  happinefs  till  we  can  feel  an  union  of  foul 
with  God.  That,  and  that  only,  as  your  Ladyfhip  has  often 
heard  me  afTert,  is  true  and  undefiled  religion.  Your  own 
experience  will  befl  convince  you  of  the  truth  thereof.  Your 
Ladyfliip  enjoys  great  advantages,  and  glorious  means  of  mak- 
ing progrefs  in  fpiritual  things.  You  are  rich  in  this  world's 
goods  ;  may  God  make  you  rich  in  faith  and  good  works  1 
My  Mafler  will  not  forget  the  kindnefs  you  havefhewn  to  one 
of  the  leaft  of  his  fervants.  It  gives  me  comfort  to  think, 
what  fweet  freedom  of  fpirit  I  have  enjoyed,  when  opening  the 

Z  2  fcriptures 


340  LETTERS. 

fcriptures  in  your  Ladyfliip's  houfe.  Surely  God  was  with 
us  of  a  truth.  The  favour  of  it  is  not  yet  gone  off  my  own 
foul,  nor,  I  hope,  from  your  Ladyfliip's  alfo.  Since  I  left  Edin- 
burghy  I  have  put  up  many  hearty  prayers  for  you  and  your  fa- 
mily. The  Lord  make  it  an  houfhold  of  faith,  and  make  you 
perfe<5l,  entire,  lacking  nothing !  The  glorious  Eimnanuel  feems 
to  be  repairing  the  breaches  of  his  tabernacle,  which  were  fallen 
down.  In  r/uks  we  had  much  of  the  divine  prefence.  The 
people  there  are  fo  hungry  after  the  word,  that  they  are  refolved 
not  to  leave  wrcflling  with  the  Moft  High,  till  he  fhall  be 
pleafcd  to  fend  rae  thither.  O  that  God  may  incline  your 
Ladyftip  to  intercede  in  my  behalf !  for  I  long  to  be  hum- 
ble, and  to  lie  low  as  a  very  poor  fmncr  at  the  Redeemer's 
feet.  I  think  I  can  fay,  he  brings  me  nearer  and  nearer  to 
himfelf  daily  \  and  I  will  not  reit,  till  I  am  moulded  into  the 
image  of  my  bleeding  Lord.  I  pray  God  that  your  Lady- 
fliip  may  be  content  with  no  degrees  of  holinefs  ;  but  may  be 
daily  preffing  forward,  till  you  arrive  at  the  mark  of  the  prize 

of  the  high  calling  in  Christ  Jesus.     Mr.  iS defires 

to  join  with  me  in  fending  our  moft  affectionate  refpe6ts  and 
thanks  toyour  LadyOiip  and  all  friends.   Our  particular  refpecls 

await  dear  Mr.  M"  V — .     I  truft  he  will  yet  live  to  fee 

glorious  days  oi  the  Son  of  Man,  Surely  Christ  is  getting, 
himfelf  the  victory.  May  he  long  reign  king  in  your  foul,, 
and  reward  you  a  thoufand-fold  for  every  token  of  love  fhewii 
to,  honoured  Madam, 

Your  Ladyfliip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervant, 

G.  JK 

LETTER    CCCLXXIIL 

To  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of  L . 

My  Lord ^  Briftol,  Nov.  24,  1741. 

MY  heart  longs  to  fend  you  another  letter.  I  wiffi,  above 
all  things,  that  your  foul  may  profper.  I  had  an  ex- 
traordinary power  given  me  to  pray  for  you  lately  in  Wales, 
God  gave  me  to  wreftle,  and  I  think  an  affurance  that  I 
ihould  prevail.  I  am  looking  out  for  an  anfwer.  Your  Lord- 
fhip's  next  letter,  I  hope,  will  afford  me  matter  for  rejoicing 
in  your  behalf.     Your  Lordfhip  is  now  entered  on  the  field 

of 


LETTERS.  341 

©f  battle  :  you  are  engaged  in  a  cruel,  but  a  glorious  warfare. 
Go  on  J  though  faint,  yet  ftill  purfue  :  nil  dcfperandu»i^ 
Chrijio  duce,  aitfpice  Chnjio,  My  prayer  for  your  Lordfhip  is 
this  : 

Give  him  a  willy  give  him  the  poiv'ry 

Still  equal  to  the  war  ; 
Great  Captain  of  Salvation^  thou 
Thy  trembling  foldier  chear  / 

O,  my  Lord,  it  is  a  blefied  thing  to  fight  the  Redeemer's  bat- 
tles :  I  find  he  makes  us  more  than  conquerors  through  his 
love.  I  flill  enjoy  much  of  the  divine  prefencc,  and  hope  I 
pafs  from  glory  to  glory  daily.  I  preach  here  at  fix  in  the 
morning,  and  alfo  in  the  evening.  God  caufes  his  goodnefs 
to  pafs  before  us.  In  a  week  I  hope  to  fet  out  for  London, 
Be  pleafed  to  dire£l  your  next  thither.  The  lords  have  re- 
turned my  appeal.  At  prefent,  a  hook  is  put  in  the  le- 
viathan's nofe.  ''•  When  a  man's  ways  pleafe  the  Lord,  he 
maketh  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him."  I  hope  your 
Lady  profpers  both  in  body  and  foul.  My  own,  and  dear- 
fellow-travellers  mofl  humble  refpe£ls  and  prayers  attend  your 
whole  houihold.  I  am,  with  great  affeclion,  my  Lord, 
Your  Lordlliip's  moft  obedient  humble  fcrvant, 

LETTER    CCCLXXIV. 

To    T E 5    in    Edinburgh, 

Afy  dear  Friend^  Brijlci^  Nov.  27,  1741. 

WHEN  we  parted,  I  promifed  your  wife  to  write  upon 
the  road  ;  but  I  found  it  imprafticable.  Since  I 
came  to  IFalcs  I  have  had  no  time.  Now  I  have,  God  gives 
me  freedom.  Though  late,  be  pleafed  to  accept  a  letter  of 
thanks  for  all  favours.  I  think  we  felt  each  others  fpirits, 
both,  I  truft,  united  myflically,  really,  and  eternally  to 
Christ,  our  common  head,  and  to  one  another  in  love.  O 
that  all  v/ould  center  here.  It  would  then  be  faid  once  again, 
*'  See  how  thefe  Chriftians  love  one  another." — As  for  my  own 
part,  I  am  refolved  not  to  reft  till  every  thing,  contrary  to 
true,   catholic,   chriftian   love,  be  rooted   out  of  my  foul, 

Z  3  Christ''} 


342  LETTERS. 

Christ's  blood  and  fpirit  are  able  to  do  this  for  me.  I  only 
need  to  pray  to  God  to  make  me  willing  to  have  it  done.  Be 
pleafed  to  help  me,  my  dear  friend,  when  God  enables  you  to 
draw  near^unto  him.  My  dear  companion  would  beg  the  fame. 
Our  tender  love  awaits  both  you  and  your  wife.  I  am  lately 
entered  into  the  marriage  relation.  Jesus  was  called  to ; 
Jesus  v/as  prefent  at  the  marriage.  We  have  lately  enjoyed 
much  of  the  divine  prefence.  Many  precious  promifes  have 
been  prefTed  upon  my  foul.  I  believe  I  (hall  fee  greater  things 
than  ever.  We  cannot  expe£l  too  great  things  from  God. 
But  I  muft  have  done.  I  am  waited  for.  Accept  thefe  fe\y 
lines  in  love, '  from 

Your  aiFedionate  friend  and  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  TV, 

LETTER.     CCCLXXV. 

To  Mr,  A—         ',  in  London. 

Bnjiol^   Nov,  30,    1 741. 
My  very  dear  Brother^ 

I  Thank  you  for  your  kind  letter.  Though  I  hope  to  fee 
you  on  Friday^  yet  love  conftrains  me  to  fend  you  an  anr 
fwer.  I  rejoice  that  your  foul  is  thirfling  for  holincfs.  God 
grant  it  may  never  ceafe  till  you  experience  the  full  and  glo- 
rious liberty  of  his  children,  I  fee  plainly  how  fatan  loves  to 
drive  to  extremes.  Since  there  is  no  fuch  thing  as  having  the 
in-being  of  fm  deflroyed,  he  would  not  have  people  prefs  after 
a  delivery  from  the  power  of  it.  This  is  alfo  owing  to  the 
corruption  of  our  own  hearts.  The  old  man  doth  not  love  to 
be  crucified  and  fiain  j  but  I  hope  the  language  of  your  heart 
and  mine  Is  this, 

Reign  in  nie^  Lord,  thy  foes  controul^ 

That  would  refuje  thy  jway  \ 
J^i^ufe  ihy  image  thro*  ?ny  joul^ 

And  bring  the  perfe5i  day, 

.     Scatter  the  lajl  remains  rf M'h 
And  feal  rue  thine  abode  ; 
0  Jet  me  purified  within  ; 
^'  AtcTnplenicetforQoDo 


LETTERS.  343 

V     My  root  of  holme fs  thou  art^ 

For  faith  hath  made  thee  mine ; 
JVith  all  thy  fulnefs  fill  my  hearty 
Till  I  am  wholly  thine. 

No  wonder,  when  we  come  to  be  thus  minded,  if  carnal  mi- 
nifters,  and  carnal  profeflbrs  of  all  kinds,  cry  out  againft  us. 
Nay,  even  fome  who  have  tafted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious, 
having  {lumbered  and  flept,  and  mixed  too  much  with  the 
world,  even  fuch  frequently  fight  againft  their  privileges,  and 
reft  in  an  infant  ftate  of  piety.  But,  I  believe,  the  Lord  will 
roufe  them,  and  let  the  world  know,  what  the  blood  of  JesUvS 
can  and  will  do.  BleiTed  be  his  name,  we  have  a  growing 
church  at  Brijiol:  Yefterday,  and  feveral  other  times,  the 
Lord  hath  filled  many  as  with  new  wine.  Sometimes  I 
fcarce  have  known  whether  I  have  been  in  or  out  of  the  body  j 
but,  I  find,  the  more  I  receive  of  grace,  the  more  I  defire  to 
lie  as  a  poor,  very  poor  finner  at  the  feet  of  the  wounded 
Lamb.  Several  have  juft  now  been  with  me,  who  have  this 
laft  week,  efpecially  yefterday,  drank  deep  of  divine  love. 
They  are  now  full  of  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  I 
pray  that  they  may  walk  humbly  with  their  God  ;  for  it  is  a 
good  thing  to  know  how  to  manage  a  manifeftation  aright  : 
nature  fo  frequently  and  artfully  blends  with  grace,  that,  for 
want  of  a  clofe  watch  and  tender  walk,  we  grieve  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Hence  arife  deadnefs  and  darknefs  in  the  foul.  Un- 
belief creeps  in,  the  chariot  wheels  of  divine  love  are  taken 
off,  and  the  foul  drives  heavily.  Let  us,  therefore,  my  dear 
brother,  live  a  life  of  great  nearnefs  to  Jf.sus  ;  and  labour 
day  by  day  to  perfed  holinefs  in  the  fear  of  God.  There  is 
a  glorious  reft  to  be  entered  into  even  here.  May  the  Lord 
make  us  partakers  of  it  !  But  why  ftiould  I  in  the  leaft  doubt 
it? 

Thou  wilt  give  Jlrength^  thou  wilt  give  poivcr^  thou  ivilt  in  time 

fet  free  : 
This,  great  Deliverer,  let  7ne  hope  j  this,  not  for  f elf  ,  hut  Thee, 

Far  the  prefent,  adieu! 

Yours  moft  affeaionately  in  Christ, 

G.  W.  - 

Z4  LETTER 


344  LETTERS, 

LETTER    CCCLXXVI. 

To  Mr.  J // . 

LondoYiy  Dec.  7,  1741, 
My  very  dear  Friend  and  Brother^ 

I  Came  hither  laft  Friday^  and  received  a  packet  of  letters 
from  Beihejda  5  but  wonder,  to  find  none  from  you. 
When  I  read  brother  Grant's  account  of  the  circumftances  of 
the  family,  I  reir ember  v.-hat  the  Lord  prefled  upon  my  foul 
on  fhip-board,  "  The  bridegroom  lli^ll  be  taken  from  them, 
and  then  fiiall  they  faft  in  thofe  days.'*  However,  be  not  dif- 
couraged;    profcfibr  F^  .  's  ftudents  were  once  obliged  to 

lell  their  cloatlis  to  buy  candles.  The  work  of  God  advances 
here  greatly.  V/e  have  a  large  focicty,  confifting  of  fevcral 
hundreds,  and  a  noble  place  to  meet  in  :  I  have  called  it  a 
Tabernacle^  becaufe,  perhaps,  we  may  be  called  to  move  our 
tents.  In  IV'ihjhlre.^  and  at  'Kingfivood^  there  are  many  good 
fouls,  and  two  new  houfes  built.  In  IVaks  the  door  is  opened 
wider  than  ever.  From  thence  (Abergavenny)  the  Lord  has 
given  me  a  wife.  Her  name  was  Janies^  a  widow,  between 
thirty  and  forty  years  of  age.  She  has  been  a  houfekecper 
many  years.  Once  gay  j  but,  for  three  years  laft  paft,  a  de^ 
ipifed  follower  of  the  Lamb  of  God.  I  left  her  about  three 
v/eeks  ago,  and  am  going  to-morrow  to  fettle  affairs,  and  to 
bring  her  up  to  London.  I  thank  your  dear  wife  for  her  let- 
ter :    had  I  freedom  I   would   anfwer  it  :    but  I  have  efTayed 

feveral  times  before  I  could  finifh  this.     My   fifter  G- is 

dead  :  1  trull  (be  fltpt  in  Jesus.  God  is  pleafed  to  let  me 
feel  more  of  his  power  than-  ever.  O  that  his  whole  mind  was 
in  m.e  !  I  hunger  and  thirft  i^fter  righteoufnefs  :  bleffed  be 
God,  there  is  a  promife  that  fuch  foail  be  filled.  By  the  let- 
ters fent  with  this,  my  dear  family  will  fee  that  I  have  not 
forgotten  them.  No  :  I  pray  for  them  continually.  I  cannot 
certainly  tell  v/hcn  I  fiiall  leave  England.  Providence  detains 
me  here.  I'he  work  is  very  extraordinary  in  Scotland.  I  hear 
daily  accouj}ts  of  its  continuance  and  increafe.     The  door  is 

opened  in   all    places.     The  Lords   fee  through  Mr.  G 's 

enmity,  and  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  my  appeal  :  fo  that 
a  hook  is  put  into  the  leviathan's  jaws.     1  believe  we  fnall  fee 


LETTERS.  345 

greater  things  than  ever.  My  dear  friend,  falute  all  moft 
tenderly  in  my  name  ;  I  am  exceedingly  engaged,  or  each  of 
them  ihouJd  hear  particularly  from. 

Ever,  ever  yours  in  Christ, 

G\  TV. 

LETTER    CCCLXXVII. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  Lord  R . 

My  Lord^  Ghucejler^    Dec.  19,  1741. 

THIS  comes  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  Lord- 
fnip's  kind  letter.,  dated  November  qth.  Hafmefs  has 
prevented  my  anfv^^ering  it  fooner.  The  Lord  is  yet  pleafed 
to.  deal  bountifully  with  me.  Li  England^  ul^  well  ao  Scotlandy 
the  Redeemer  is  riciing  on  from  conquering  .to  conquer.  About 
Spring  I  hope  to  fee  iSW/^W again,  and  then,  if  polTible,  I  will 
come  as  far  as  your  Lordfliip's  houfe.  I  have  lately  been  at 
Brijloly  and  London^  and  have  had  the  pleafure  of  feeing  the 
church  w^alk  in  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  I  have 
preached  here  twice  every  day,  for  fomc  days  lail  part.  Ths 
LoPvD  greatly  countenances  my  adminiftrations,  and  gives  me 
conftant  peace  and  uninterrupted  joy  in  believing.  This  is 
what,  I  truft,  our  glorious  Emmanuel  will  confer  upon  your 
Lordfnip.  Christ  wills  that  our  joy  fhould  be  full  ;  but  we 
entangle  ourfelves  with  the  world,  we  indulge  ourfelves  in 
fenfual  pleafures,  we  trifle  away  our  time  in  what  the  world 
calls  innocent  diverfions,  and  thereby  we  grieve  the  fpirit  of 
God,  and  lofe  the  comforts  we  fhould  otherwife  enjoy,  from 
a  clofe  v;alk  and  communion  with  God.  Moft  complain  of 
a  deadnefs  and  kannefs  in  their  fouls  ;  what  is  it  owing  to  ?  Not 
to  God,  but  to  ourfelves.  We  leave  God,  and  then  God 
leaves  us.  Not  that  we  can  keep  ourfelves  by  our  own  faich- 
fulnefs  ;  but  notwithftanding,  we  muft  be  f^iithful,  and  work- 
ers together  with  God.  I  know  not  why  I  am  led  to  write 
thus  to  your  Lordfhip,  but  nothing  elfe  occurs  to  my  mind 
2X  prefent.  I  am  athirft  for  holinefs  myfelf,  and  long  to  fee 
others  athirft  alio.  O  my  Lord  !  I  fee  fuch  beauty  and 
tranfcendent  excellencies  in  Christ,  that  1  long  to  have  his 
whole  mind  and  image  ftamped  upon  my  fo'^l.  Nothing  can 
fatisfy  Bie,  bat  the  highefl  degrees  of  fandiification  and  in- 

I  ward 


34^  LETTERS. 

ward  holinefs.  Here,  I  believe,  I  am  laudably  ambitious. 
My  Saviour  wills  my  fandlification,  my  Saviour  vi^ould  have 
me  filled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of  God.     Ev<en  (o  Lord  Jesus 

come  quickly  !  Dear  Mr.  S humbly  falutes  your  Lord- 

ftiip,  and  prays  for  your  temporal  and  eternal  welfare,  with, 
my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfhip's  moft  obedient,  , 

obliged  humble  fervant, 
G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCCLXXVIIL 

To  Mr,  J C ,  at  London. 

My  dear  Brother^  GlouceJleY^  Dec,  22,   174 1. 

LAST  Thurfday  evening  the  Lord  brought  me  hither.  I 
preached  immediately  to  our  friends  in  a  large  barn,  and 
had  my  mafter's  prefence.  On  Friday  and  Saturday  I 
preached  again  twice.  Both  the  power,  and  the  congrega- 
tion incrcafed.  On  Sunday  God  by  a  particular  providence 
opened  a  door  for  my  preaching  in  St.  John's^  one  of  the  pa- 
rifh  churches.  The  late  incumbent  was  my  grand  oppofer. 
He  being  dead,  and  the  new  minifter  not  having  taken  pof- 
feffion,  the  power  of  the  pulpit  was  in  the  church-wardens 
hands.  God  inclined  them  to  let  me  preach  there  on  Sunday 
morning,  and  yefterday  afternoon.  Great  numbers  came, 
and  the  Lord  gave  me  unfpeakable  power.  On  Sunday  af- 
ternoon,  after  I  had  preached  twice  at  Glouajler^   I  preached 

at  Mr.  F 'sat the  hill,  fix  miles  ofF  and  again  at  night  at 

Stroud.  The  people  feem  to  be  more  hungry  than  ever,  and  the 
Lord  to  be  more  amongft  them.  Yefterday  morning  I  preach- 
ed at  Painfwick  in  the  parifli  church,  here  in  the  afternoon, 
and  again  at  night  in  the  barn.  God  gives  me  unfpeakable 
comfort,  and  uninterrupted  joy.  Here  feems  to  be  a  new 
awakening,  and  a  revival  of  the  work  of  God.  I  find,  feveral 
country  people  were  awakened  when  I  preached  at  Tewkfbury^ 
and  have  heard  of  three  or  four  that  have  died  in  the  Lord, 
who  were  called  under  God  by  me.  We  fliall  never  know 
what  good  field-preaching  has  done,  till  we  come  to  judg- 
ment.    Many  who  were  prejudiced  againft  me,  begin  to  be 

cf 


LETTERS.  347 

of  another  mind,  and  God  fliews  me  more  and  more,  "  that 
when  a  man's  ways  pleafe  the  Lord,  he  will  make  even  his 
enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him,'*  To-morrow  morning  I 
purpofe  to  fet  out  for  Abergavenny^  and  to  preach  at  Brjjioly 
in  TVilts^  Gkucejier^  and  Gloucejhrjhire^  before  I  fee  London, 
The  people  in  thefe  parts  Teem  excellently  well  difpofed.  I 
hope  the  work  of  the  Lord  profpers  in  your  hand  ;  though 
abfent  in  body,  I  am  prefent  with  you  in  fpirit.  May  the 
Lord  Jehovah  comfort  you  continually  with  thofe  comforts 
wherewith  I  am  comforted  in  him  !  I  hope  my  comforts  are  of 
3  right  nature ;  they  humble  at  the  fame  time  that  they  c?calt 
me.     I  find  all  my  happinefs  lies  in  a  crujpified  God. 

To  the  hleji  fountain  of  thy  bloody 

Incarnate  GoD,  I Jly ; 
Here  let  me  wajh  my  fpottedfoul^ 

From  crimes  of  deepejl  dye. 

A  guilty^  weak^  and  helpkfs  worm^ 

Into  thy  arms  I  fall'. 
Be  thou  myjirength  and  righteoufnefsy 

My  Jesus,  and  my  alL 

Pray  for 

Your  unworthy  brother,  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  ;r. 

LETTER    CCCLXXIX. 

To  the  Right  Honqurable  the  Lord  L . 

My  Lordy  Abergavenny^  Dec.  24,  1 74 1. 

THI3  day  I  received  a  letter  from  your  Lordfhip,  which, 
I  finda  your  Lordfhip  wrote  before  my  third  and  laft 
came  to  hand,  wherein  I  gave  your  Lordftiip  an  account  of 
the  circumftance  of  n>y  marriage.  As  foon  as  I  received  your 
liOrdfhip's  letter,  I  kneeled  down  and  prayed,  that  your  Lord- 
fhip might  be  entirely  delivered  from  unbelief,  and  be  made 
a  partaker  of  that  faith,  wl]ich  will  make  you  more  than  con- 
queror over  all.  BlefTed  be  God,  for  convincing  you  thus 
far.  I  hope  the  event  will  prove,  that  Jesus  is  taking  pof- 
feffion  of  your  whole  heart.  Your  Lordfhip's  opinion  of  thofe 
who  call  themfelves  chriflians,  is  veryjuft.  Free  grace  has 
.opened  your  eyes.     Your  Lordfhip  can  therefore  join  in  the 

following 


348  LETTERS, 

following  verfes,  which  I  think  applicable  to  your  Lordfliip's 
cafe, 

L 
Long  did  wy  foul  in  Jesu'j  Formy 

No  comelinefs  or  beauty  fee  ; 
His  [acred  name  by  others  pri-z^d^ 
If  as  taftlefs  Jl'illy  and  dead  to  mi, 
11. 
Men  caird  me  chrijiian,   and  my  heart 

On  that  delufion  fondly  Jiaid  y 
Ji'Ioral  niy  hcpe^   my  Savicur  fcif, 
Till  mighty  grace  the  cheat  difplafd, 
III. 
Thanhs  to  the  hand  that  wak'*d  my  foul ^ 

That  ftjeivd  me  wretched^  naked^  poor  j 
That  fweetly  led  me  to  the  rock^ 
Where  all falvation  Jiands  fecure. 
IV. 
Glad^t   I  forfook  my  righteous  pride^ 

My  morale   tarnifh*d^  fmful  drefs ; 

Exchang  d  my  lofs  aivay  for  Christ, 

And  found  the  robe  of  righieoufnefs. 

If  your  Lordfliip  from  your  foul  can  fing  thus,  fear  not  that 
Jesvs  will  leave  you. 

O  unbeliefs  injurious  bar^ 

Source  of  tormenting  fruitlcfs  fear  ; 

Wherein  thy  loud  objections  fall ^ 

''  Tis  finif^ed;'  fillfhall  anfwer  all. 

Remember,  my  Lord,  the  Redeemer's  love  is  evcrlafling.  If 
he  has  pafl'ed  by,  and  faid  unto  you  "  Live,"  you  (hall  live 
for  evermore  ;  for  whofoever  livcth  and  believeth  in  Jesus, 
fhall  never  die.  Does  my  Lord  believe  this  ?  Then  welcome 
into  the  new  world,  welcome  among  the  defpifcd  Ij'racl  of 
God,  welcome  into  the  Mediator's  kingdom,  where  you  (hall 
have  all  peace  and  joy  in  believing.   When  hril  I  was  awakened^ 

Refrefhed^  I  thought  my  joys  compleaty 
When  lo  !   Immanuel's  bounties  rife  ; 

Still  frefo  discoveries  he  unfolds^ 
Tt>e  lo'jcly  treaj'ures  yet  furprize  ' 

My' 


LETTERS.  349 

My  Lord,  I  now  wonder  no  longer  at  the  choice  6f  Mofes. 
Well  might  he  count  the  reproach  of  Christ  of  more  value 
than  all  the  riches  of  Egypt,  God  forbid,  therefore,  that  yon 
or  I  fhould  henceforth  glory,  fave  in  the  crofs  of  Christ. 
It  will  be  more  honour  to  be  a  fuffcring  fervant  of  Christ, 
than  to  be  the  king's  commiflioner.  Your  Lordfnip  will  par- 
don this  freedom.  Methinks  I  hear  you  fay,  "  There  is  no 
comparifon.'*  Indeed  there  is  none.  I  would  not  change  my 
poft  for  ten  thoufand  kingdoms.  BlefTcd  be  God,  that  has 
given  you  a  diftant  view  of  the  emptlnefs  of  all  things  here 
below,  and  the  infufficiency  of  every  thing  to  make  us  happy 
befides  God.  May  thefe  things  be  realized,  and  (lamped  upon 
your  Lordfhip's  heart  !  Then  what  a  happy  creature  will  vour 
Lordfhip  be  ?  How  will  it  rejoice  me  to  fee  your  Lordfhip 
next  Spring.  I  know  not  but  my  friends  prayers  may  draw 
me  there,  about  that  time.  In  the  mean  while,  I  pray  God 
from  time  to  time  to  grant  you  a  growth  of  grace,  that  you 
may  know  what  it  is  to  abide  in  God,  and  have  a  conftanC 
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  I  rejoice  to  hear  that  lady 
Jnn  feems  to  look  heavenward.  May  Jesus  make  her  a  wife 
virgin  !  Yor  her  encouragement,  I  have  fent  an  extracft  of  a 
letter  lately  fent  to  me  by  a  friend  in  London  ;  and  that  your 
Lordfhip  may  know  how  it  is  with  me,  I  have  fent  a  copy  of 
a  letter  I  wrote  to  that  friend  a  day  or  two  ago.  Lafl:  night  I 
came  hither,  and  preached  this  afternoon.  I  purpofe  (hortly 
to  go  to  Gkuccjier^  Briftol^  Wilijh'tre^  and  fo  to  London,  The 
church  there  as  well  as  elfewhere  flourifhes.  The  time  for 
favouring  X'lon^  I  believe,  is  indeed  come.  You  fee,  my  Lord, 
how  long  my  letters  are,  when  I  have  freedom  and  leifure.  I 
have  thought  feveral  times  to  write  to  your  Lordfhip,  but  was 
reftrained  till  I  received  your  Lordmip's  letter   this   morning. 

Be  pleafed  to  direct  your  next  to  be  left  with  Mr.  F —  S , 

Leadcnhall-Jheet^  London.  My  prayers  fliall  follow  this.  O 
may  Jesus  breath  upon  it,  and  then  it  muft  be  blcfTcd  to  your 
foul  !  1  heartily  arid  humbly  fa'utc  the  elect  lady  your  wife. 
- — May  you  both  be  filled  with  all  the  fulnefs   of  God  !  My 

dear    wire   and   Mr.  6" join   heartily  with  me.     We  all 

plead  at  the  tbronc  of  grace  in  your  behalf,  and   God   alone 

knows, 


S50  LETTERS. 

knows,  how  often  you  are  remembered  and  wrcftled  for,  by, 
my  Lord, 

Your  Lordlhip's  moft  obliged  humble  fervant, 

LETTER    CCCLXXX. 


To  the  Right  Honourable  Lady  Mary  H . 

Abergavenny y  Dec,  24,    1 741. 
Honoured  Madam^ 

THIS  morning  I  received  your  Lady(hip*s  kind  letter  ; 
when  perufed,  I  laid  it  before  the  Lord  of  all  Lords, 
and  prayed  for  you  and  yours  with  all  my  power.  My  dear 
wife  and  Mr.  S  joined  heartily  with  me,  and  by  thi^ 

fend  their  moft  humble  refpe6^s.  We  do  not  defpair  of  waiting 
upon  your  Ladyfhip  next  Spring  :  but  ere  that  time,  we  may 
be  all  launched  into  the  world  of  fpirits,  where  we  fhall  fing 
glory  to  him  that  fitteth  upon  the  throne  for  ever.  Does  not 
your  Ladyfliip  long  for  that  happy  hour  ?  Methinks  I  hear 
you  ready  to  fay 

L 

How  long^  great  God  /   how  long  miifl  /, 
Iinmers'd  in  this  dark  prifon  lie  P 
TVhen  Jhall  I  leave  this  duf^y  fpherCy 
And  be  all  mi?id^   all  eye,  all  ear  P 

II. 
I  long  to  fee  that  excellence^ 
Which  at  fuch  dijiancejlrikes  my  fenfe  ; 
My  foul  attempts  to  dif engage 
Her  wings  frcm  this  her  earthly  cage, 

III. 
JVouldJl  thou.  Great  Love^  once  fet  her  free, 
Hciffning  fhe'd  quick  unite  to  thee  j 
She" d  for  no  guardian  angels  Jlay, 
But  fly  and  love  thro'  cdl  the  way. 

This,  I  believe,  was  the  language  of  your  honoured  mother's 
heart,  who  is  now  joined  with  the  heavenly  choir  above.  Me- 
thinks I  hear  her  fay,  *'  Daughter,  follow  me  as  I  followed 
Christ  ;  afpire  after  the  higheft  degrees  of  holinefs,  for  the 
more  holy  you  are,  the  nearer  fhall  you  fit  to  the  GoD-Man 

Christ 


LETTERS.  isi 

Christ  Jesus,  the  deeper  infight  fhall  you  have  into  the 
beatific  vifion."  This,  honoured  Madam,  is  a  great  motive 
to  my  foul  to  copy  after  my  glorious  Jesus.  Bleffed  he  God, 
that  made  my  letter  favory  to  your  foul.  For  this,  and  all 
other  mercies,  I  defire  to  lie  in  the  duft,  and  kifs  the  Redeem- 
er's feet.  I  do  not  wonder  that  Mary  loved  to  fit  there  :  I 
do  not  wonder  that  another  Mtny  wiped  them  with  the  hairs 
of  her  head.  Was  my  Lord  here,  I  fhould  wifli  for  a  thou- 
fand  alabafter  boxes  of  ointment,  to  break  for  him.  But  Jesus 
fays,  "  Give  me  thy  heart,  and  I  defire  no  more."  My  foul 
replies, 

Take  my  poor  heart,  and  let  it  be 
For  ever  closed  to  all  but  thse  ; 
^eal  thou  my  breaji,  and  let  me  wear 
That  pledge  of  love  for  ever  there. 

How  blejl  are  they  whojilll  abide, 
Clofe  Jhelter'd  in  thy  bleeding  fide  -, 
JVho  life  and  fir ength  from  thence  derive. 
And  by  thee  move^   and  in  thee  live, 

Ohonoured  Madam,  I  am  amazed  at  Jesus's  love.  I  willingly, 
join  with  you  in  faying,  "  Amen,  Halleluiah  I  Worthy,  in- 
deed, is  the  Lamb  that  was  flain."  I  blefs  God  for  enlarging 
your  heart,  and  giving  you  freedom  to  write.  It  is  fweet  to 
communicate  our  thoughts  of  Jesus.  I  hope  the  Lord  will 
blefs  this  to  your  Ladyfhip,  and  reward  you  for  all  paft  favours. 

My  humble  refpeds  attend  Mr.  H ,  and  my  hearty  love 

to  your  little  lambs.    I  prayed  for  them  this  morning.    When 

I  go  to  town,  I  hope  to  wait   upon   the  Adarquis, 1   have 

been  a  (hort  circuit  into  Gloucefierfinrc,  and  find  the  divine 
prefence  accompanying  me  more  and  more,  O  that  I  was 
humble  !   O  that  I  was  thankful  ! 

I. 

And  can  it  he  that  I  Jhould  gain 
An  inter efi  in  the  Saviour's  blood  ? 

Died  he  for  fuch  as  caused  his  pain. 
Sinners  wh^  him  to  death  piofud  F 

IL 


'35^  LETTERS. 

II. 

'Tis  myjlcry  all,  MeJJiah  dies ; 

Who  can  explore  thisjirange  fh'fign  ? 
In  vain  the  curious  feraph  tries 

To  fou?id  the  depths  of  love  divine,  ^ 

But  whither  am  I  going  ?  Your  Ladyfhip  will  excufe  me  3 
whilft:  I  am  writing,   the  fire  kindles. 

Thro    all  eternity  to  Gob ^ 
A  grateful fong  Pll  raife  ; 
But  0  eternity's  tojhorty 
To  utter  all  his  praife. 

With  expeclation  of  another  letter,  and  with  hearty  prayers 
for  your  temporal  and  fpiritual  welfare,  !  fubfcribc  myielf^ 
honoured  Madam, 

Your  Ladyfhip's  obedient  fervant, 

G. ;;: 

LETTER    CCCLXXXL 

To  Mr.  Samuel  Ax ,  iri  London, 

Dear  Mr,  M ,  Brijlol^  Dec.  28,    174T, 

BOTH  my  wife  and  I  received  your  letters.  I  fend  tliis^ 
to  thank  you  for  them.  I  came  from  Abergavenny  on 
Saturday  night.  My  dear  wife  was  pretty  well ;  I  expect  her 
here  on  Friday,  We  fliall  bring  no  more  goods  to  London^ 
than  we  fhall  ufc  ;  but  I  know  npt  what  to.  fay  about  com- 
ing to  your  houfe,  for  brother  S tells  me,  you  and  your 

family  arc  dilatory,  and  that  you  do  not  rife  fometimes  till  nine 

or  ten  in  the  morning.     This,  dear  Mr.  M ,  will  never 

(\o  for  me;  and  I  am  perfuaded  fuch  a  conduct  tends 
much  to  the  dlfhonour  of  God,  and  to  the  prejudice  of  your 
own  precious  foul.  Sometimes  I  have  looked  upon  you  with 
gtief;  you  have  buficd  yourfelf  about  the  outward  affairs  of 
religion  in  refpe6l  to  others,  antl  all  the  while  I  fear  negleclcd 
to  look  into,  and  ftudy  the  improvement  of. your  own  heart. 
I  think  you  go  backwards  indead  of  forwards.  I  fear  your 
prefent  buGncfs  will  not  anfvver,  and  I  am  fure  you  will  have 
no  folid  comfort,  till  you  look  lefs  abroad  and  more  at  home. 
Somebody  faid,  you    was  like   the  Athenians^  v/ho  defired  to 

hear 


LETTERS*  353 

he2T  Tome  new-thing.  I  thought  the  obfervation  was  toojuft. 
You  are  jealous  about  principles,  (which  is  right)  but  all  the 
%vhile  your  own  pradlice  is  not  fufiiciently  watched  over.  I 
have  heard  that  you  fpend  much  time  in  coffee-houfes,  and 
from  your  own  houfe.  I  hope  thefe  things  are  not  fo  j  and 
it  is  with  grief  and  out  of  tender  love  that  I  now  mentioa 
them  to  you.     For  fome  time  I  felt  my  heart  quite  locked  up 

from  writing  to  you.     Mr.  A^I-^ will  not  be  offended  witU 

me  for  this  plain  dealing.  You  know  I  love  you,  and  I  aai 
fure  this  letter  proceeds  from  love.  I  know  too  much  of  my 
own  weaknefs  and  infirmities  to  infult  others  ;  and  when  a 
brother  is  overtaken  in  a  fault,  I  dcfire  to  reftore  him  in  the 
fpirit  of  meeknefs.  But  I  know  how  much  the  glory  of  God 
is  concerned  in  our  walk.  The  eyes  of  the  world  are  now  iti 
an  efpecial  manner  upon  you.     How  holy  ought  you  and   I, 

dear  Mr.  M ,  to  be,  in  all  manner  of  converfation  and 

godlinefs  I  Labour  therefore,  my  dear  brother,  to  get  an  abid- 
ing prefcnce  of  God  in  your  heart.  Be  willing  to  be  fearched. 
Pray  that  you  may  feel  the  full  power  of  the  Redeemer's  blood  ; 
and  walk  in  the  continued  comforts  of  the  holy  ghoft.  Be 
not  flothful  in  bufmefs.  Go  to  bed  feafonably,  and  rife  early. 
Redeem  your  precious  time  :  pick  up  the  fragments  of  it, 
that  not  one  moment  may  be  loll-.  Be  much  in  fecret  prayer. 
Converfe  lefs  v/ith  man,  and  more  with  God.  Accept  this 
advice,  given  in  great  love.     I   purpofe  ftaying  here  about  a 

fortnight.    Dear  Mr.  A^ ,  I  am 

Your  affectionate  though  unworthy  brother, 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER    CCCLXXXII. 

'  To  the  Rev.  Mr.  JV ,  at  Dundee. 

Reverend  and  dear  ^h\  Briflol^  Dec.  7^0,  IJ^T, 

I  Should  blame  myfelf  much,  for  not  writing  to  you  before 
nov/,  was  I  confcious  it  was  owing  to  any  wilful  negle6l  : 
but  my  mailer's  bufmefs  hath  fo  engaged  me,  that  I  really 
have  not  had  an  opportunity.  God  gave  us  a  fwcet  journey 
to  England.  Since  my  return  hither,  I  have  been  at  Gloiicejler^ 
Bnjlol^  in  Wales^i  and  at  Lcndon^  and  have  great  reafun  to 
Vol.  I,  A  a  blefs 

8 


354  LETTERS. 

blefs  our  Rmmnnuel  for  what  he  has  done  for  his  church.  My 
foul  hath  drank  largely  of  the  divine  love.  I  have  been  carried 
as  on  eagles  wings,  and  am  now  better  in  health  than  perhaps 
ever  fince  I  have  been  in  the  miniftry.  I  preach  here  twice 
daily.  In  about  a  fortnight,  1  fliall  remove  to  London^  where 
I  purpofe  to  continue,  God  wijling,  till  the  weather  permits 
of  field-preaching  again.  About  Spring,  if  Providence  favours, 
I  hope  to  pay  you  a  fccond  vifit.  In  the  mean  while,  I  fliould 
be  glad  to  hear  from  you,  what  fruits  you  have  feen  fpring 
from  my  firft.  I  hope  the  Lord  will  make  your  latter  end 
greatly  to  increafe.  I  fhall  rejoice  to  hear  of  your  fuccefs. 
My  loul  is  much  engaged  for  poor  Scotland.     I  fhall  be  glad 

to  hear  who  has   fucceeded  the   good  Mr.  TV- of  Perth, 

Ah  dear  man  !  He  is  now^one  into  the  world  of  fpirits,  where 
there  is  no  feceding,  but  all  join  in  one  common  ftrife,  who 
fhall  praife  their  Lord  and  mafter  in  the  moft  exalted  ftrains. 
I  long  to  follow,  but  defire  patiently  to  wait  till  my  blefled 
change  come.  What  a  comfort,  dear  Sir,  is  it  to  think, 
that  death  is  conquered.  How  fweet  to  be  one  of  Christ's 
waiting  fervants !  It  is  a  blefled  poft  \  And  fuch  honour  be- 
longs to  all  his  faints.  Thanks  be  to  God  for  this  unfpeak- 
able  gift.  Dear  Sir,  whilft  I  am  writing,  the  fire  kindles. 
I  long  to  leap  my  feventy  years.  Welcome  eternity  ;  I  want 
to  fee  time  fwallowed  up.  But  I  mufl:  have  done,  having 
other  letters  to  write.  My  kind  love  to  your  houfehold  and 
all  friends.  I  hope  ere  long  you  will  fend  a  line  to,  reverend 
and  dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  afFedlionate,  though  unworthy 

brother  and   fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER    CCCLXXXIIL 

To  the  Reverend  Air.  O ,    at  Aberdeen, 

Reverend  and  dear  Sir ^  Brijlol^   X)^r.  30,  1741. 

I  Long  to  write  you  a  line,  to  teftify  the  undiflembled  love 
my  foul  bears  towards  you.  I  alfo  long  to  hear  what 
Jesus  hath  done  at  Aberdeen.  I  believe  he  fent  me  thither, 
and  I  am  perfuaded  he  did  not  fend  me  there  in  vain.  I  have 
experienced  frefli  wonders  of  mercy,  fince  I  faw  j'ou.     The 

Lord 


LETTERS.  ^55 

Lord  has  blefTed  my  miniftry  in  England,  and  in  TVales^  where 
I  trufl  I  was  married  in  the  Lord  ;  and  as  I  married  for  him, 
I  truft  I  (hall  thereby  not  be  hindered,  but  rather  forwarded 
in  my  work.  O  for  that  blefled  time  when  we  fhall  neither 
marry  nor  be  given  in  marriage,  but  be  as  the  angels  of  God  ! 
My  foul  longs  for  that  glorious  feafon.  Perhaps,  fomctimes 
I  am  too  impatient.  But  who  that  has  taftcd  of  Jesus's  love, 
can  forbear  longing  to  be  with  him  ?  I  long  to  fee  him  as  he 
i^,  and  my  foul  will  never  be  compleatly  fatisfied  till  I  arife 
after  his  divine  likenefs.  This,  I  believe,  is  the  defire,  and 
frequently  the  frame  of  dear  Mr.  0 's  foul.  But  I  be- 
lieve we  both  have  crolles  to  take  up,  and  many  trials  to  un- 
dergo, before  we  (hall  be  admitted  to  the  beatific  vifion.  Alas  I 
What  a  ftrangcr  am  I  to  the  meeknefs  which  was  in  Jesus  ? 
How  much  acrimony  is  there  in  my  temper,  that  wants  to  be 
taken  away  ?  BlefTed  be  GoD,  my  Saviour  is  omnipotent. 
He  can,  he  will  deliver  me.  He  can,  he  will  conform  me  to 
himfclf.     1  think  I  can  fing  thefe  lines, — 

My  root  ofholincfs  thou  arty 

For  faith  hath  made  thee  ?jnne : 
JVith  all  thy  fulnefs  fill  my  hearty 

Till  all  I  have  be  thine. 

Dear  Sir,  what  a  fulnefs  is  there  in  Jesus  ?  What  a  pity 
is  it,  that  we  ftiould  not  draw  largely  out  of  it  ?  Why  fhould 
we  be  content  v/ith  low  degrees  of  holincfs  ?  Why  fhould  we 
be  always  dwarfs  in  religion  ?  I  am  quite  afhamed  of  my  low 

ftature.     I  am  an  unprofitable  fervant.     O  dear  Mr.  O , 

pray  for  me,  that  the  Lord  may  purge  me,  and  that  I  may 
bring  forth  more  fruit.  I  have  lately  been  at  London^  Glou- 
ceftery  JViltSy  and  IVales,  The  work  of  the  Lord  profpers. 
1  preach  here  twice  every  day.  That  God  may  blefs  and  re- 
ward you  all,  is  the  earneft  prayer  of,  dear  Mr.  O , 

Yours  moft  afFeclionately  in  Christ, 

G,  IV. 


Aa2  LETTER 


356  letters; 

letter   ccclxxxiv. 

To  the  Rev,  Mr,  W ,  at  GalUJJ/ieh. 

Bt'ijioly  December  30,  174*. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

THE  love  of  Jesus  conftralns  me  to  trouble  you  with  2 
letter  at  this  time.  Nothing  but  his  work  fliould  have 
prevented  my  writing  to  you  fooner.  But  you  know  how  it 
ufed  to  be  with  me.  O  how  little  do  I  for  Jesus,  who  has  done 
fo  much  for  me  I  I  abhor  myfelf  in  dufi:  and  afiies.  I  run  to 
hide  myfelf  in  his  wounds.  His  righteoufncfs,  his  blood  a- 
lone  can  recommend  me  to  the  Father.  O  that  I  was  like 
Christ,  that  his  whole  mind  was  wrought  in  my  foul  !  I 
am  now  panting  after  his  image  ;  I  am  now  thirfting  after  his 
purity  and  holinefs  -,  help  me,  dear  Sir,  help  me  by  your  pray- 
ers, that  I  may  feel  the  power  of  the  Redeemer's  blood.  He 
hath  done  great  things  already  for  me  -,  but  as  yet  I  have  afked 
nothing.  Greater  things  are  yet  before  me.  There  is  an  in- 
exhauilible  fulnefs,  out  of  which  the  Redeemer  would  have 
me  draw  continually.     O  for  faith,  for  ftrong  faith  ! 

/  more  luoidd  blefs,  I  more  ivould  thanky 
I  more  would  live  to  Jefus  praife. 

Since  my  return,  I  have  been  vifiting  the  churches.  They 
grow  and  incrcafe  daily.  I  preach  twice  every  day.  The 
Lord  is  among  us.  I  hope  I  (hall  hear  the  fame  from  you. 
In  about  fourteen  days  I  go  to  London.  About  Spring  I  hope 
to  fee  Scotland  once  more.  I  have  good  news  from  the  Or- 
phan-houfe.  As  yet,  I  have  not  freedom  to  write  out  the 
fermon  which  you  mention.  Through  inadvertence,  I  did  not 

fend  you  Mi-.  M 's  letter.     God's  time  is  heft.     Perhaps 

difputes  about  church-government  had  better  fubfide.  I  am 
determined  to  knov/  nothing  but  Jesus   Christ,  and  him 

crucified.     Be  pleafed  to  remember  me  to  dear  Mr.  O ,  at 

Kelfo,  I  hope  he  behaves  like  a  good  foldier  of  Jesus  Christ. 
My  kind  refpec^s  attend  your  fon.  Be  pleafed  to  accept  of  the 
fame  in  a  moft  tender  manner  from  dear  Mr.  S ,  and  from, 

viear  Sir> 

Yours  mgft  afFedionatcly  in  Christ, 

G.  IV, 
LETTER 


LETTERS.  357 

LETTER    CCCLXXXV. 

To  Mr.  R S ,  hi  London, 

Brijioly  Jan.  2,  1 742. 
My  dear  Brother  S , 

I  Find  freedom  to  anfwcr  your  kind  letter  immediately.  I 
thank  God  for  blefHng  my  writing  to  your  poor  foul. 
Your  falvation  I  long,  and  pray  for.  So  that  fouls  arc  built 
up  in  their  holy  faith,  let  the  Redeemer  make  ufe  of  what  in- 
£lrument  he  pleafes.  Brother  Robert,  it  is  a  blefled  thing  to  have 
always  a  Catholic  fpirit.  I  am  perfuaded,  Jesus  will  give  it  to 
me.  I  am  refolved  never  to  reft,  'till  felf-love,  bigotry,  pre- 
judice, and  all  narrownefs  of  fpirit  be  expelled  out  of  my  foul. 
Blefled  be  the  Redeemer's  free  grace  !  I  fee  more  and  more 
into  the  inward  receflcs  of  my  mind.  Dear  Robert,  there  is 
fuch  a  thing  as  pafling  from  glory  to  glory.  For  Jesus 
Christ's  fake,  ftrive  to  enter  in  at  the  ftraight  gate,  and  ne- 
ver ceafe  ftriving  'till  you  enter  into  that  reft  which  awaits  the 
people  of  God.  It  is  a  fweet  thing  to  abide  in  Jesus's 
wounds,  and  from  a  feeling  pofteflion  of  God  in  the  heart,  to 
be  able  to  fay,  "  My  fellowfhip  is  with  the  Father  and  the 
Son."  It  is  true  we  are  not  to  live,  or  rely  on  our  frames. 
The  righteoufnefs  of  Jesus  Christ  alone,  and  not  our  doings 
or  fufFerings,  can  recommend  us  to  the  Father.  But  however, 
we  ought  always  to  labour  to  be  in  a  fweet  and  humble  frame, 
^nd  be  watchful  againft  any  thing  whatever,  that  may  inter- 
rupt our  communion  with  God.  Peace  and  joy  fhould  flow 
in  a  believer's  foul,  like  a  river.  If  any  thing  fhould  obftruif^ 
the  paftage,  he  fliould  not  reft  'till  faith  overflows,  and  drives 
it  away  before  him.  I  know  not  what  others  may  fay,  but 
thro'  grace  I  can  ftng  with  biftiop  Ken, 

*'  To  my  foul  it's  hell  to  be, 

*'  But  for  a  moment  void  cf  thee. ^^ 

O  the  fulnefs  that  there  is  in  Christ  !  It  fills  my  heart,  and 
out  of  the  abundance  of  my  heart  my  pen  writeth.  Dear  Ro- 
bert, may  the  Lord  blefs  it  to  your  foul,  and  that  will  greatly 
icjoice 

Your  moft  unworthy,  though  moft  affedionate 
fnend,  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  TV. 
Aa   3  LETTER 


35S  LETTERS, 

LETTER    CCCLXXXVL 

To  Mr.  I H 5  in  London. 

My  dear  Brother  H ,  Brifiol^  Jan.  2,  1742. 

I  Owe  you  a  letter,  and  very  much  love.  I  thank  you  for 
calling  to  fee  me,  when  laft  in  London.  May  the  love  of 
Jesus  be  fhed  abroad  abundantly  in  your  heart  by  the  Holy 
Ghoft.  My  foul  is  now  thirfting  after  the  Redeemer's  love. 
I  truft  you  and  I,  and  all  the  brethren,  (hall  watch  and  pray 
againft  every  thing  in  our  hearts,  that  is  any  way  felfifh,  or 
contrary  to  the  boundlefs  love  of  our  exalted  head.  I  long 
after  a  folid,  real,  undifTembled  union  with  all  that  bear  the 
Redeemer's  image.  If  I  know  any  thing  of  my  heart,  I  care  not 
how  the  old  man  be  crucified  and  cut  to  pieces,  fo  that  I  may 
put  on  the  new  man,  which  is  created  after  God  in  righteouf- 
nefs  and  true  holinefs.  BlefTed  be  the  free,  rich,  and  fovereign 
grace  of  our  glorious  Redeemer !  who  has  begun  the  good 
work  in  my  foul.  Great,  very  great  things  hath  Jesus  done 
for  me,  a  worthlcfs  worm  :  but  I  fee  infinitely  greater  things 
lying  before  me.  There  is  an  inexhauftible  fulnefs  in  Jesus 
Christ,  out  of  which  I  hope  to  draw  to  the  endlefs  ages  of 
eternity.  O  the  meeknefs,  the  love,  purity  and  holinefs, 
that  is  in  Jesus.  Why  fhould  we  be  dwarfs  in  holinefs?  If 
Christ  came  into  the  world,  that  we  might  have  life,  and  fo 
much  the  more  abundantly,  why  fhould  we  not  afk  and  feek 
for  it,  efpecially  fince  we  are  fure  to  obtain  ?  My  dear  brother, 
you  fee  how  free  I  write.  Love  conftrains  me  to  do  fo.  O 
that  I  was  a  flame  of  fire  !  I  have  lately  been  at  Gloucejler. 
The  Lord  was  with  us  of  a  truth.  In  Brijiol^  God  attends 
me  with  his  mighty  power.  Laft  night  Jesus  rode  on  tri- 
umphantly indeed.  Sometimes  my  heart  is  fo  full,  that  I  am 
tempted  to  think 

'■     ■  My  joy  complete: 
When  hi  Emmanuel's  mercies  rifc^ 
Still freJJ)  difcoveries  he  unfolds^ 
The  lovely  treajures  yet  fur  prize. 

Uiibelief  fciys,  this  will  not  hold  to-morrow  ;  when  lo,   '*  to- 
rtv.>rrow  is  as  the   day   pall,   and   much  aiore  abundant."    I 

find 


LETTERS.  359 

find  there  is  yet  oil,  if  there  be  yet  a  vefTcI,  and  an  empty 
heart  to  contain  it.  Pray  that  my  heart  may  be  emptied  of 
fclf,  and  that  Jesus  may  be  my  all  in  all.  I  pray  God,  that 
none  of  us  may  give  in  to  narrownefs  of  fpirit,  but  look  up 
to  Jesus  for   power  over  felf,  in  all  its  (hapes.     Yefterday  I 

went  to  hear  Mr.  C .  The  Lord  helped  him,  I  believe,  in 

fome  part  of  his  difcourfe.  I  would  be  free  ;  I  would  meet  more 
than  half  way  ;  but  we  are  all  too  fliy.  The  Lord  fill  his  foul 
with  more  of  the  difintcrefted  love  of  Jesus.  To-night  I  be- 
gin a  general  monthly  meeting  to  read  correfponding  letters. 
Pray  give  thanks  for  the  fucccfs  of  the  gofpel  in  my  unworthy 
hands.    It  (hall  be  returned,  as  Jesus  fliall  enable 

Yours  moft  afFedtionately  in  Christ, 


LETTER    CCCLXXXVn. 

To  Mrs.  K ,  in  London. 

My  dear  St/ier^  BriJhL  Jan.  4,  1742. 

THIS  morning,  in  a  letter  from  brother  C ,  I  heard 
that  your  dear  hufband  was  dangerous  ill  of  the  fmall- 
pox.  1  was  touched  with  a  tender  fympathy  or  vourcafe-  I. 
immediately  kneeled  down,  and  laid  your  circumftances  before 
our  compa'ffionate  high-prieft.  I  doubt  not,  but  he  \i  touched 
with  a  feeling  of  your  affliclions,  and  v/ill  give  you  c;race  to 
help  in  time  of  need.  I  hope  the  laiigunge  of  your  heart  is 
this  : 

Thy  gifts  ^  if  caird  for.^  I  refign^ 
Pleas' d  to  receive^  pkas'd  to  rejlore  ; 

Gifts  are  thy  work.,  itjhall  be  mine 
Ths  giver  only  to  adore. 

I  was,  before  I  received  the  news  of  your  dear  hulband'-f 
illnefs,  thinking  that  God's  people  muft  meet  with  un- 
conamon  trials.  We  fnall  often  find  God's  providences  as 
it  were  contradicting  his  promifcs.  Thus  it  was  with  Abra- 
ham and  Jacobs  and  thus  I  believe  it  is  in  fornc  degree  or  other 
with  all  the  children  of  God  ;  for  othcrvvife,  how  can  faith 
be  exercifed  ?  I  doubt  not  but  the  cnemv  of  fouls  vvill  now  be 
very   bufy  with  you,  and  break  in   with  his  fiery  darts   upon 

A  a  4  your 


^6o  LETTERS. 

your  foul;  but  I  pray  Jesus  to  keep  you  from  daggering 
through  unbelief.  May  you  be  ftrong  in  faith,  giving  glory  to 
God  !  A<^ainll  hope,  may  you  believe  in  hope.  However  your 
hufband  may  be  difpofcd  of,  my  prayer  for  you  is,  "  Lord  ! 
make  her  ftill  and  refigned."  I  think  the  love  of  Christ 
conftrains  me  to  write  you  this  letter.  Who  knows  but  the 
Lord  may  blefs  it  to  your  foul  r  However,  as  you  love  the 
Lord  Jesus,  I  hope  you  will  receive  it  as  a  token  of  unfeign- 
ed chriilian  fympathy  and  affection  from,  dear  Sifter, 
Your  moft  unworthy  brother  and 
fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  IF. 

LETTER    CCCLXXXVIIL 

To  Mr.  Peter  S — - — ,  in  London. 

Bri/iol,  Jan.  7,  1742. 

I  Have  been  obeying  your  rcqueft  :  I  mean,  bowing  my 
knees  before  the  God  and  Father  of  our. Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  your  behalf.  O  that  he  may  live  before  thee  ^ 
that  he  may  efcape  the  pollutions  that  are  in  the  world  th-rough 
luft ;  that  he  may  be  hiled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of  God,  was 
the  breathing  and  language  of  my  heart.     I   truft  the  Lord 

is  now  working  upon  brother  S .      He  feems  to   have  had 

fome  difcoveries  of  the  Redeemer's  love.  May  my  dear  Peter 
receive  the  full  affurance  of  faith,  and  be  truly  fixed  upon  the 
yock  of  a2:es  !  "  Even  fo  Lord  Jesus  come  quickly.  Amen 
and  amen,"  Excufe  my  writing  to  you  in  this  manner,  but 
God  has  put  into  my  heart  fuch  an  undiffembled  love  for  you, 
and  your  dear  brothers,  that  I  cannot  be  fatisfied  'till  I  fee  the 
;^edeemer's  love  fhed  abroad  in  all  your  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Ghoft.  Ah  Peter ^  Peter ^  I  truft  Jesus  prays  for  thee,  and 
then  the  world  fliall  not  fteal  away  thy  heart  from  God.  Sa- 
tan hath  been  fifting  me  feverely,  thefe  two  or  three  days.  I 
have  had  feme  clofe  combats  with  the  great  dragon,  but  Jesus 
bath  gotten  himfelf  the  vi£\ory,  I  am  enabled  greatly  to  re- 
joice. For,  '^  Blefled  is  the  man  that  endureth  temptations; 
when  he  his  tried,  he  fhall  receive  the  crown  of  life."  The 
bri^htnefs  of  it,  even  at  this  diftance,  dazzles  my  f'ght.  Yet  a 
little  while^  and  Jesus  Christ  {hA\  give  it  unto  us.     Dear 

brother 


LETTERS.  361 

brother  K has  got  the  ftart  of  us.     Happy  man  !  He  is  at; 

the  end  of  his  race.  I  fympathize  with,  aud  have  been  pray- 
ing for  his  furviving  friends.  The  Lord  enable  us  all  to 
walk:  fo  circumipeiSlly,  that  the  common  enemy  may  not  have 
an  occafion  to  fpeak  reproachfully  of  us.  But  whither  am  I 
running  ?  Excufe  me,  dear  PsUr,     God  gives  me  freedom  in 

writing  to,  and  praying  for  you.     I  hope  dear  brother  R 

received  my  lail:  in  good  part.  God  only  knows  hov/  the 
happinefs  of  both  of  you  is  longed  for  by,  dear  brother, 

Yours  in  the  crucified  Jesus, 

G.  TF. 

LETTER     CCCLXXXIX. 

To  Mr.  y C 5  in  Londo?2. 

Gloucefcr^  Jan.  28,    1742. 
Aly  very  dear  Brother^ 

ON  Friday  lafi:  1  left  Brij^ol,  having  firft  fettled  affairs  al- 
moft  as  I  could  wifh.  At  JCingJivood,  I  adminiflred  the 
facrament.  On  JVednefday  night  it  was  the  Lord's  pafTover ; 
on  Thurjday  we  had  a  fweet  lovc-feaft  ;  on  Friday  the  Lord 
was  with  me  twice  at  Tockingion  ;  on  Saturday  morning  I 
broke  up  fome  fallow  ground  at  Newport^  by  preaching  with 
power  to  about  two  thoufand  people,  and  in  the  evenino-  to 
many  thoufands  at  Stroud  with  wonderous  power  ;  on  Mon^ 
day  morning  at  Painfivicky  and  ever  Tmce  twice  a  day  here. 
Our  congregations  I  think  are  larger  than  at  Brijlol.  The 
word  proves  iharper  than  a  two-edged  fword.  Every  fermon 
is  blefied.  Thefe  words  follow,  "  1  have  much  people  in  this 
city."  I  am  jufl  now  going  to  Chafford.  7'o-morrov/ I  ex- 
pe6l  my  wife.  In  my  next,  I  will  fend  you  word  what  I  in- 
tend to  do.     I  was  one  day  at  Bath.     I  fnould  be  glad  to  fee 

brother  R 's  defence  before  it  be  publifhed.  I  told  him  of 

it;  I  believe  he  will  be  upon  his  guard.  His  foul  profpers. 
Siidefs  perfedion  I  fear  v/ill  be  propagated  in  thefe  parts.  The 
Lord  in  his  due  time  vv^ill  root  out  that  pernicious  weed.  I 
thank  you  for  writing  to  me.  Pray  write  to  me  often.  God 
\villing,  1  (hall  examine  Hampton  Society  tc-night.  The  fame 
1  thiiik  to  do  in  JViltjhlre.  I  want  to  be  in  London  as  foon  as 
may  be.     Pray  that  I  may  know  the  Lord's  will.    We  muft 

away 


362  LETTERS. 

away  to  Chafford.     The  Lord  be  with  you,  and  abundantly 
refrefli  you.     My  moft  tender  love  awaits  all.    Brethren,  pray 

for 

Yours  moft  afte£lionately  in  Jesus, 

G.  W. 

LETTER     CCCXC. 

To  the  Rev,  Mr,  G T-i^iki;^'^' "' 

Gloucejiery  Feb,  2,  1742. 

Reverend  and  dear  Brother ^ 

I  Have  longed  for  ibme  time  to  fend  you  a  line,  and  have 
wondered  that  I  have  heard  no  oftener  from  you  ;  but  as  I 
know  my  own  circumftances,  I  can  the  more  eafily  guefs  how 
it  is  with  you.  God  has  been  very  good  to  me  fmce  my  ar- 
rival. I  found  when  I  came  at  firft,  1  had  all  my  work  to  be- 
gin again.     Brother  IF had   fo   prejudiced   the    people 

againft  me,  that  thofe  who  were  my  fpiritual  children  would 
not  fo  much  as  come  and  fee  me;  nay  they  have  gone  by  me 
whilft  preaching  in  Moor-fields,,  and  flopped  their  ears.  This 
I  find  in  fome  meafure  hath  been  your  cafe,  and  God  wifely 
permits  this,  to  teach  us  to  ceafe  from  man.  Pauls  Epiftles  to 
the  Galatians  much  comforted  me.  Befidcs,  I  was  embarrafTed 
with  brother  Seward's  death.  He  died  without  making  any 
provifion  for  me,  and  I  was  at  the  fame  time  much  indebted 
for  the  Orphan-houfe. — But  all  this  was  to  humble  and  pre- 
pare me  for  future  bleffings.  The  Lord  hath  enabled  me, 
bleflcd  be  his  name,  to  keep  fteady  to  my  principles  and  ufual 
pra6lice.  A  new  and  numerous  church  has  been  raifed  at 
London.  In  EJJex^  the  Lord  was  wonderfully  with  me. 
Every  where  the  congregations  increafe.  In  Brlftol  God 
enabled  me  to  fight  my  way  through.  We  have  hired  a  large 
hall,  and  have  expounded  there  twice  a  day.  In  Scotland^  the 
work,  for  its  beginning,  is  rather  greater  than  at  New-England, 
I  hear  continually  of  the  {tQ6.  fown  increafing,  and  fpringing 
up.  God  willing,  I  purpofe  paying  iS^i///(7«^' another  vifit.  I 
have  lately  been  at  Brijiol^  and  both  there,  and  here,  and  alfo 
at  London^  the  word  runs  and  is  glorified.  Through  the  tender 
mercies  of  our  God,  I  have  been  carried  as  on  eagles  wings 
through  a  variety  of  outward  and  inward  trials.  The  greatnefs 

of 


LETTERS.  363 

of  which  none  knows  but  God  and  my  own  foul.  About 
•eleven  weeks  ago  I  married,  in  the  fear  of  God,  one  who  was 
a  widow,  of  about  thirty-fix  years  of  age,  and  has  been  a 
houfekeeper  for  many  years  ;  neither  rich  in  fortune,  nor  beau- 
tiful as  to  her  perfon,  but,  I  believe,  a  true  child  of  God,  and 
would  not,  I  think,  attempt  to  hinder  me  in  his  work  for  the 
world.  In  that  refpetSl,  I  am  juft  the  fame  as  before  marriage. 
I  hope  God  will  never  fufFer  me  to  fay,  "  I  have  married  a 
wife,  and  therefore  I  cannot  come."  I  am  glad  that  matters 
are  fettling  fo  amicably  at  Philadelphia.  What  a  pity  is  it, 
that  we  fhould  fall  out  in  the  way  to  heaven  !  I  would  do  any 
thing  except  defiling  my  confcience,  and  giving  up  what  I 
think  is  truth,  to  prevent  it.  The  aflbciate  brethren  are  much 
to  be  blamed;  I  never  met  with  fuch  narrow  fpirits.  1  do  not 
forget  you,  or  your  brethren,  or  the  churches  in  your  parts. 
The  Lord  be  with  you.  He  is  pleafed  to  fliew  me  more  and 
more  of  my  own  heart,  and  day  by  day  refrefhes  my  foul. 
My  body  is  weak  as  ufual  ;  but  Jesus  is  my  ftrcngth.  Help 
me  to  praife  him.  Pray  fend  a  line  to,  reverend  and  dear  Sir, 
Your  mofl  afFe6tionate,  though  mod:  unworthy 
brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER    CCCXCr. 

To    M}\  S ,    at   New-Brunfwick. 

Dear  Mr.  S — — ,  Gloucejler^   Feb.  2,  1742. 

LAST  week  I  received  your  kind  letter.  Blefled  be  God, 
who  hath  brought  you  out  of  darknefs  into  his  marvel- 
lous light.  I  hope  the  Redeemer  hath  now  {hewn  you  his 
hands  and  his  feet,  and  you  can  now  fay,  "  IVIy  Lord  and 
my  God."  What  have  you  to  do  now  but  to  walk  humbly 
with  your  God,  and  daily  to  afpire  after  the  whole  mind  that 
was  in  Jesus  ?  I  find  but  few  truly  labouring  after  this. 
Who  can  fay,  "  My  foul  is  athirft  for  God,  yea  even  for  the 
living  God  :"  and  yet  to  fuch  only  is  the  promifed  blelTed- 
nefs,  of  being  filled,  given.  As  for  my  own  part,  I  am 
afhamed  to  think  how  unlike  I  am  to  my  Saviour  ;  I  fee  fuch 
beauty   in   him,   that  I  long  to  be  conformed   to  his  divine 

image  and  likenefs.     May  you  and  I,  dear  A4r.  «S ,  never 

reft 


364  LETTERS. 

reft  till  vvc  have  attained  unto  it ;  and  the  more  we  do  attain, 
the  more  willing  we  fhall  be  to  come,  as  poor  Tinners,  to 
Jesus  Christ  ;  it  is  a  blefied  thing,  dear  Sir,  to  be  brought 
out  of  felf.  It  v/ill  be  continually  creeping  in  :  happy  they 
who  have  pov/er  over  it.     I   do  not  wonder  at  your  being 

united  with  Mr.  J C ;  he  is  a  dear  foul,   and  one 

whom  the  Lord  delights  to  honour.  Blcfibd  be  God,  the 
work  in  our  hands  every  where  increafes.  I  am  fupportcd 
and  encouraged,  quickened  and  comforted  day  by  day.  Jesus 
loves  and  blclles  me.  May  he  blcfs  you  and  yours  more  and 
more,  and  caufc  you  to  v/alk  in  the  comforts  of  the  Holy 
Ghoft.  My  tender  love  to  all.  1  hope  yet  to  fee  you  once 
more  in  the  flcfli.  In  the  mean  while  1  beg  leave  to  fubfcribc 
myfelf,  dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  afFe6lionate  friend,  brother,  and  fcrvant 
in  Christ, 

G.  JP\ 

LETTER    CCCXCII. 

To  Mr,  TV . 

Dear  Mr,  W ,  Gloucrjler^  Feb.  2,  T742. 

Thank  you  for  your  kind  letter.     It  ftiould  have  been  an- 


I 


fwered  fooncr,  had  an  opportunity  oftered.  I  blefs  God  for 
vcu,  who  carries  on  in  your  foul  the  fpiritual  building.  I  doubt 
not  but  the  top-ftone  will  yet  be  brought  out,  and  the  builders 
be  made  with  (liouting  to  cry,  "  Grace  !  Grace  !"  I  fliould 
think  it  was  not  of  God,  if  the  work  was  not  oppofed. — What 
difficulties  did  Nehemiah  go  through  in  building  the  wall  \  But 
fear  not,  the  Lord  is  with  you.  He  built  not  for  man,  but  for 
the  Lord.  By  his  leave,  1  propole  bringing  a  fchool-mafter 
and  miftrefs  with  me.  When  1  (hall  embark,  I  know  not. 
The  calls  here  are  fo  loud  and  numerous,  and  fo  few  la- 
bourers fent  forth  to  aiSt  in  a  popular  way,  that  I  think  it  my 
dutv  not  to  leave  England  yet.  God  is  pleafed  to  work  by  my 
miniftry  more  and  more.  My  foul  is  refrefhed,  and  my  body 
ftrengthened  and  renewed  day  by  day.  In  Scotland  there  is  a 
very  great  awakening;  and  alfo  in  Lcndon^  Brijhly  Wiltftjire^ 
and  Glmcejlerjbire,  But,  notwithftanding  all  this,  my  Ameri^ 
can  friendii  are  by  no  means  forgotten.     I  continually  pray  for 

them. 


LETTER     S.  ^% 

them.  The  Lord,  in  his  due  time,  will  fend  me  to  you.  la 
the  mean  time,  be  plcalcd  to  remember  me  in  the  tendered 
manner  to  aH  that  love  the  glorious  Redeemer.  Grace, 
mercy,  and  peace  be  multiplied  upon  them  and  you  ;  fo  prays, 

dear  Mr.  JV , 

Your  moft  affcclionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  //'. 

LETTER    CCCXCIII. 

T:o   Mr.  James  R ,    in  Philadelphia^ 

Dear  Mr.  R ,  Gkucejler,  Feb.  2,  1742. 

I  Was  glad  to  hear  (though  by  another  hand)  of  your  fafe 
arrival.  May  your  foul  profper,  being  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love,  and  built  upon  the  rock  of  ages,  the  dear 
Lord  Jesus.  BlefTed  be  God,  the  church  is  in  much  greater 
peace  than  when  you  left  England.  There  hath  been  a  very 
great  awakening  in  fevcral  places.  God  hiith  brought  order 
out  of  confufion  ;  and  (as  he  always  will)  hath  caufed  even 
our  divifions,  though  no  thanks  to  us,  to  work  for  good.  I 
hear  you  have  had  a  fifiing  time  at  Philadelphia.  I  never 
yet  heard  of  a  work  of  God,  but  fome  fuch  thing  happened. 
This  is  my  comfort,  the  government  of  the  church  is  upon 
the  Redeemer's  (boulders  ;  and  therefore  the  gates  of  hell 
{hall  never  be  able  to  prevail  againfl:  it.  I  hope  ere  now 
Christ  has  revealed  himfelf  in  your  heart,  and  given  you  the 
•witnefs  of  the  Spirit.  For  he  that  believeth,  hath  the  witnefs 
in  himfelf.  I  fuppofe  you  will  be  glad  to  hear,  that  the  Lord 
hath,  in  a  good  degree,  delivered  me  from  the  embarraffinents 
with  which  I  was  environed  when  you  embarked.  God  was 
then  preparing  me  for  further  mercies.  Wc  muft  be  humbled 
before  we  are  exalted.  I  fuppofe  you  have  heard  of  my  mar- 
riage. The  Lord  hath  given  me  a  daughter  of  Abraham  ; 
fhe  joins  in  fending  love  to   you    and    all,  with,   dear  Mr. 

R , 

Your  afFcclionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 


LETTER 


366  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCXCIV. 

To  Mr.  G^-i^i^  yxiLiii^;* ' 

Cloucejler^   Feb,  5,    1 742. 
Reverend  and  dear  Brother ^ 

ON  Tuefday  I  received  yours.     I  blefs  God  for  delivering 
brother  R out  of  the  hands  of  his  enemies.     I 

am  perfuaded  he  will  deliver  your  brother  TFilliam  alfo.  By 
your  defertion  and  temptations,  I  believe  God  is  preparing 
you  for  a  frefh  work.  I  believe  you  would  be  better,  if  you 
would  always  evangelize.     I  (hall  write  to  fome  friends  about 

Mr.  C 's  principles.   I  thank  you  for  your  kind  caution. 

My  mirtakes  often  humble  me.  Never  did  Jesus  fend  out  a 
more  weak  and  worthlcfs  wretch.  I  have  not  freedom  now 
to  continue  writing  a  journal  as  ufual.  I  fhall  proceed,  for 
the  future,  in  a  more  compendious  way.  Since  I  wrote  the 
inclofed,  we  have  feen  a  glorious  appearance  of  the  Son  of 
Man.  O  infinite  condefcenfion  !  The  Lord  is  with  me. 
That  he  may  be  abundantly  with  you,  and  blefs  your  labours 
more  and  more,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of.  Reverend  and  dear 
Sir> 

Your  moft  afFe6lionate  and  loving,   though 

moft  unworthy  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    CCCXCV. 

To    Mr,  B ,    at    Philadelphia. 

Dear  Mr.  B ,  Gloucejier^  Feb.  5,  1742. 

IWas  much  rejoiced  to  receive  a  letter  from  your  hands. 
Blefled  be  God  for  carrying  on  the  work,  which,  I  hope, 
was  begun  in  your  heart  long  ago  !  I  truft  you  will  never  reft 
till  you  are  poflefied  of  the  whole  mind  which  was  in  Christ 
Jesus.  He  is  our  pattern  ;  and  if  we  have  true  grace  in  our 
hearts,  we  {hall  be  continually  labouring  to  copy  after  our 
great  exemplar.  O  the  life  of  Jesus  !  How  little  of  it  is  to  be 
feen  in  thofe  that  call  themfelves  his  followers.  Humility, 
meeknefs,  love,  peace,  joy,  goodnefs,  faith,  and  the  other 
blelu'd  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  whither  are  they  fled  ?   I  fear  moft 

take 


LETTERS.  367 

take  up  with  the  fliadow,  inftead  of  the  fubftancc.  God  for- 
bid that  I,  or  dear  Mr.  B ,  (houLd  be  of  that  unhappy 

number.  Dear  Sir,  there  is  an  unrpcakabh:  fulnefs,  un- 
fearchable  riches  in  Christ.  Out  of  him  we  are  to  receive 
grace  for  grace.  Every  grace  that  was  in  the  Redeemer,  is  to 
be  tranfcribe^l  and  copied  into  our  hearts.  This  is  Chriflianity ; 
and  without  this,  though  we  could  difpute  with  the  utmoft 
clearnefs,  and  talk  like  angels,  of  the  dodrines  of  grace,  it 
would  profit  us  nothing.  To  prevent  the  growth  of  thi-s  in- 
ward life,  I  am  perfuaded  facan  introduces  herefies  in  the 
church,  hoping  thcrel^y  to  ftir  up  ftrife,  envy,  prejudice,  and 
narrownefs  of  fpirit  ;  and  where  thefe  are,  there  will  be  every 
evil  work.  To  this  end, y7«/^/'<??yi?<f?/£>«  hath  been  propagated 
in  England^  and  Antinomian  principles  fufFercd  to  be  fpread 
among  you.  But,  bleflbd  be  God,  both  in  England^  and 
with  you,  I  truft  difputations  and  diftra£tions  are  abated,  and 
love  and  unity  once  more  are  lifting  up  their  hsads.  This, 
at  prefent,  is  the  language  of  my  heart  : 

Lee  us  find  out  the  ancient  way^ 

Our  wondering  foes  to  ?nove  ; 
And  force  the  heathen  world  to  fay  ^ 

See  bow  thefe  Chrijlians  love. 

*'  Love  is  of  GoD;  and  he  that  dwelleth  in  love,  dwelleth  in 
God."  I  am  glad  you  are  creating  a  fociety  to  promote  this 
love.  Fear  not  the  fmallncfs  of  your  beginning.  What  is 
begun  in  the  fear  of  God,  he  will  profper.  I  believe  them  to 
be  true  followers  of  Jesus  Christ  ;  and  though  we  agree  not 
in  all  things,  yet  I  pray  God  to  make  us  one  in  heart.     Now, 

dear  Mr.  B ,    what   (hall   I   fay    more.     The   blefled 

Jesus  has  been  fupcrabundantly  good  to  my  foul  fince  my 
arrival.  I  have  been  carried,  though  through  much  weaknefs, 
as  on  eagles  wings.  In  England^  JVales^  and  Scotlattd,  God 
hath  blefled  my  poor  labours  more  than  ever.  The  calls  to 
divers  places,  arc  loud  and  importunate  ;  and,  as  God  has 
raifed  up  many  labourers  among  you,  I  think  it  my  duty 
to  flay  here  fome  time  longer,  and  to  vifit  Scotland  once 
more.  However,  my  friends  abroad  are  continually  upon 
my  heart.  I  pray  God  for  you  night  and  day.  May  the 
Lord  fill  you  with  all  his  fulnefs  !  I  defire  to  be  remem- 
bered 


368  LETTER     S. 

bered  to  all  mentioned  in  your*s,  and  to  all  that  love  the  Lord- 
Jesus.  I  love  you  unteignedly,  and  entreat  you  to  write 
again  to,  dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  affedionate  friend  and  fcrvant, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER     CCCXCVI. 

To  the   Reverend  Mj\  C ,    at  Bath, 

Ghucejler^  Feb,  5,    1 742. 
My  dear  Friend  and  Brother^  ' 

TO  fliew  you  how  willing  I  am  to  comply  with  your  re- 
queft,   and   make  dear  Mr.  C one  of  my  clofe 

correfpondents,  I  fit  down  this  evening  to  write  an  anfvver 
to  your  kind  letter.  What  has  been  doing  lately,  the  tran- 
fcript  on  the  other  fide  will  fhcw  you.  Since  the  writing  of 
that,  the  blellcd  Jesus  hath  been  wondrous  kind.  Yefterday 
I  preached  three  times,  and  vifited  a  private  fociety  in  the 
evening.  To-day  I  was  enabled  to  preach  three  times,  with 
great  power.  Here  is  fuch  an  awakening  in  this  country,  as 
I  never  heard  of,  or  faw  in  thefe  parts  before  :  "  The  fields 
are  white  already  unto  harveft."  It  is  pleafant  to  hear  the 
people  come  and  tell  how  God  wrought  upon  them  by  my 
unworlhy  miniftry  tv»7o  years  ago.  l^he  fruits  of  the  Spirit 
arc  now  apparent  in  their  lives  and  converfations.  Letters 
from  SeciJand  bring  blcffcd  tidings,  as  alfo  from  Philadelphia, 
O  the  blefied  effedts  of"  field-preaching  !  O  that  I  was  hum- 
ble, that  I  was  thankful  I  Help  me,  my  dear  friend,  to  en- 
treat the  Redeemer  to  make  me  as  a  little,  a  very  little  ehild. 
The  beginning  of  next  week  I  hope  to  be  at  Bath',  but  can- 
not tell  cxacSliy  the  day.  I  thank  my  friends  for  their  kind 
intention  to  meet  mc,  but  I  had  rather  avoid  it :  the  lefs 
parade  the  better.  Let  us  (land  ilill,  and  we  fnall  fee  the  fal- 
vation  of  (jod.  He  will  not  blefs  what  doth  not  come  from 
himfelf.     May  the   Lord   make   me  an  Jfraelite  indeed,    in 

whom  is  no  allovv'cd  guile  !    I  am  glad  dear  Mr.  T is 

coming.  My  hearty  love  to  him.  O  that  our  meeting  may- 
be blcfled,  and  all  three  of  us  be  made  a  flame  of  lire  I    Dear' 

Mr.  C ,   I  love   you   unfeignedly.     I  v/ifb,    above   all 

things,  your  foul  may  profper.    Good  night.   My  fpul  is  filled 
I  with 


LETTERS.  569 

with  Jtsus's  love.     I  am  going  tO  pray  for  you  and  yours, 

being,  dear  Mr.  C ' — -,  without  diirimulcuion, 

Vours  moft  afFe<Slionately  In  Jesus  Christ, 

G.IK 

LETTER    CCCXCVn. 

Td  the  Ri^ht  Honouj-abie  the -. 


ThaU^^   near  Readings  Feb,  23,  1 742. 

AND  (Joes  the  clear —  know  adurcdly  that  Jesus 
hath  died  for  him  ?  Sing,  O  heavens  \  Rejoice,  O  earth  ! 
I   would  join  with  angels  and  archangels  in  iinging   "  Glory 

to  God  on  high."     Welcome,   my ,   into  the  world  of 

new  creatures.  You  are  infinitely  more  happy  than  thofe 
who  have  lately  been  preferred,  and  kified  his  Majefty's  hand. 
Jesus  hath  holden  out  his  golden  fcepter,  and  given  you  a  pa- 
tent for  eternal  life.      Methinks  I  hear  your nov/ 

raying,  ''  I  account  the  reproach  of  Christ,  of  more  value 
than  all  the  riches  of  Egypt'* 

Be  goyu^  -vain  ivorU,,  my  heart  rcf.gn^ 
For  I  ean  he  no  longer  thine  \ 
A  nobler^  a  diviner  gueji^ 
Hath  took  pojpffton  of  my  hreajl. 

Well  may  your fay,  "  you  have  been  in  a  dream/' 

XVhen  God  firft  fiiewed  me  that  I  muft  be  a  nev^  creature, 
I  awaked  as  it  v/ere^  into  a  new  world.  I  ilood  quite  amazed. 
I  was  aftonifhed  to  think,  what  a  deep  deep  the  world  around 
me  was  in.  Thought  I,  O  that  I  was  made  inftrumcntal  to 
fome  of  them  I  The  Lord  heard  my  prayer.  He  has  fent 
me  to  awaken  the  dear  man  I  am  now  writing  to.  Not  unto 
me,  O  God,  not  unto  me,  but  to  thy  free  grace  and  rich 
mercy  be  all  the  glory  !  With  your  Lordihip's  letter  to-day, 
came  fcveral  others  from  different  parts,  all  with  glad  tidings 
of  great  joy.     O  that  I  was  humble  and  thankful  !    Why  me. 

Lord,,  why  me  ?     Surely  I  will  join  with  your in 

faying,  not  becaufe  I  chofe  GoD,'but  God  (O  Infinitely  con- 
fccndljig  majefly  !)  did  chufe  me.     What  (liall  we  render  to 

tr.c  glorious  Emmanuel?    Methinks  I  hear  your fay- 

\\vi^    *'  Behold,   Lord,   herceforwAid  I  look  wpon  myfelf  as 
VcL.  L  3  b  a  ikward^ 

% 


370  LETTERS. 

a  fteward,  and  not  as  a  proprietor  of  thy  manifold  gifts;  I 
will  live  no  longer  to  myfelf,  but  to  him  that  died  for  me.'' 
Amen,  Lord  Jesus,  amen  and'amcn  !  Be  pleafed  to  excufe 
the  defcds  of  this,  being  written  upon  the  road.  I  am  now 
goir>g  to  London,     There  has  been  a  great  awukeoing  lately  iri 

Gkucejlerjhire.     I  rejoice  to  hear  that  the  lady is  fo  well 

difpofcd.     May  a  church  be  always  in  your houfe  ; 

and  every  one  of  your family  be  made  a  living  mem- 
ber of  the  houfhold  of  faith  !   No  greater  thing  can  be  defined 

in  your  behalf  by,  my , 

Your  — ■  moft  obedient  humble  fervant, 

G.  W. 

LETTER    CCCXCVIII. 

To  the  Right  Honourable  Lady  M H : .  ^ 


ThaleSy   (near  Reading)   Feb.  23,  1 742. 
Honoured  Madam^  '  r 

IAm  now  upon  the  road  to  London.  This  ryiorning  your 
acceptable  letter  came  to  hand.  Though  fomewhat 
wearied,  I  would  fain  anfwer  it  before  I  retire  to  reft.  Blefled 
be  God  who  caufesyour  Ladyfliip  to  be  never  lefs  alone,  than 
when  alone.  O  Madam,  what  a  comforter  is  the  Holy  Ghoft  r 
What  fweet  company  is  Jesus  Christ?  What  a  privilege 
is  it  to  have  fellowftiip  with  the  great  Three-One?  A  world 
lying  in  wickednefs  knows  nothing  of  it.  Every  thing 
yields  comfort  when  the  blcfled  Spirit  breathes  upon  it.  Even 
this  fcribble,  from  the  chief  of  finners,  from  one  who  is  lefs 
than  the  leaft  of  all  faints,  ihall  again  refrefh  your  foul,  if 
Jesus  fpcaks  the  word.  Amazed  am  I,  that  God  fhould 
work  by  my  hands.  But  Jesus  is  love.  He  yet  delights  to 
honour  me.  I  have  lately  feen  the  Redeemer  riding  in  his 
ftrength,  and  getting  himfelf  the  vi6lory  in  poor  fmners 
hearts.  Letters  from  abroad  inform  me  of  the  fame.  O  that 
our  glorious  Jesus  may  fet  the  world  in  a  flame  of  love  ! 
Haftcn  that  time,  O  bleffcd  Jesus  :  O  let  thy  kingdom  come! 
I  have  heard  from  my  dear  Orphans  to-day.  They  have  been 
reduced  to  ftraits  ;  but  the  Lord  hath  ftirred  up  a  wealthy 
friend  or  two  to  aflift  them.  The  everlafting  God  reward  all 
their  benefadtors  !  I  find  thcte  has  been  a  frefh  awakening 
^  among 


LETTERS.  37r 

among  them.  I  am  informed,  that  twelve  negroes,  beloniring 
to  a  planter  lately  converted  at  the  Orphan  -houfe,  arc  favingly 
brought  home  to  Jesus  Christ.  This  will  rejoice  your 
Ladyfhip's  heart.  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  the  work  goes  on  in 
Scotland.  The  Lord,  I  truft,  will  ripen  your  foul  apace  for 
glory.  He  hath  various  ways  of  perfc6ling  his  faints.  Me- 
thinks  I  fee  your  Ladyfhip  fitting  in  your  chair,  and  raviflied 
with  the  Redeemer's  beauty  day  by  day.  Sometimes  you  are 
as  it  were  wafliing  his  feet  with  your  tears  ;  at  other  times 
fitting  by  faith  at  his  feet,  and  hearing  or  reading  his  word. 
Sometimes  your  heart  is  too  big  to  fpcak  ;  then  again,  out  of 
the  abundance  of  your  heart,  your  mouth  poureth  forth  halle- 
lujahs. Sometimes  you  are  lofl  in  wonder ;  at  all  times 
longing  to  be  dilTolved  and  to  be  with  Christ  ;  for,  when  you 
hear  him  fay,  "  Rife  up^  my  love,  and  come  away," 

Tou7'  heart  would  fain  out  fly  the  w'lnd^ 
And  leave  all  earthly  loves  behind. 

This,  I  truft,  is  the  life  your  Ladylhip  lives.  This  is  life 
iiideed.  They  who  live  otherwife,  are  dead  whilft  they  live. 
They  call  for  our  compafiion  and  prayer^ ;  for  who  hath 
made  the  diiFerence  ?  Diftinguifhing  grace  !  O  the  unfearch- 
able  riches  of  Christ  ?  I  could  fpeak  of  him  for  ever  j  but  it; 
grows  late  :  nature  calls  for  reft. 

O  when  Jhall  I  in  endlefs  day^ 
For  ever  chafe  dark  fleep  aivay  ; 
And  hymns  with  the  celejlial  quire 
Incejfant  flng^  and  never  tire  ? 

Come,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly  !     The  Lord  be  with 

your  fpirit,  arid  abundantly  blefsboth  you,  Mr.  H ,  and 

your  child.  Indeed  I  do  not  forget  your  Ladyfhip  j  your  laft 
fhould  not  have  remained  fo  long  unanfvvered,  but  it  came 
only  to-day  into  the  hands  of,  honoured  Madam, 

Your  Ladyfhip's  moft  obedient  humble  fervant, 

G.  jr. 


Bb  2  LETTER 


572  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCXCXIX. 

To   Mr,  Thomas   iV-~,   at   Nav-Tork, 

London^    Feb,  26,    1742. 
My  very  dear  Brother^ 

I  Have  herewith  fcnt  you- a  pnrccl.  Be  plcafed  to  read  the 
letters,  and  fend  them  as  directed.  I  received  your  kind 
letter,  dated  in  December^  and  thank  you  for  all  kindnefies 
fhewn  to  the  poor  orphans.  The  Lord  Jesus  will  richly 
reward  you.  Before  yours  came,  the  Lord  had  given  me  air 
enlarged  heart,  and  unfeigned  love  and  freedom  to  converfe 
with  all  his  dear  children,  of  whatever  denomination.     I  talk 

freely  with  the  Meflrs.  IV 's,  though  we  widely  differ 

in  a  certain  point.  Moft  talk  of  a  catholic  fpirit ;  but  it  is 
only  till  they  have  brought  people  into  the  pale  of  their  own> 
church.  This  is  downright  fe6larianifm,  not  catholicifm. 
How  can  I  act  confiftently,  unlefs  I  receive  and  love  all  the 
children  of  God,  v^^hom  I  eReem  to  be  fuch,  of  whatever  de- 
nomination they  may  be  }  Why  fhouTd  wc  difpute  when  there 
is  no  probability  of  convincing  ?  I  think  this  is  not  giving  up 
the  faith,  but  fulfilling  our  Lord*s  new  command,  "  Love 
one  another :"  and  our  love  is  but  feigned,  unlefs  it  produces 
proper  effects.  I  am  perfuaded,  the  more  the  love  of  God  is- 
fhed  abroad  in  our  hearts,  the  more  all  nsrrownefs  of  fpirit 
will  fubfide  and  give  way  :  befides,  fo  far  as  we  are  narrow 
fpirited,  we  are  uneafy.  Prejudices,  jealoufies,  and  fufpicions 
make  the  foul  mifcrable,  fo  far  as  they  arc  entertained.     But 

enough   of  this :    my  dear  brother  N is  of  my  mind. 

Only  let  me  give  you  one  caution  :  Take  heed  that  your 
getting  acquainted  with  any  new  fet  of  Chriftians,  does  not 
lead  you  infenfibly  to  defpife  others  of  your  old  acquaintance. 
Watch,  and  deal  very  tenderly  with  all  ;  otherwife  you  will 
grow  referved  and  artful,  and  lofe  a  fimple,  open,  guilelefs,- 
Ifraelitijh  fpirit,  before  you  are  aware.  There  needs  a  clofe 
adherence  to  the  motions  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  a  conflant 
watching  over  the  corruptions  of  our  own  hearts,  in  order 
that  we  may  walk  before  GoD^as  very  little  children.  O  that 
I  was  a  little  child  indeed  !  Jesus  can  make  me  one.  My 
dear  brother,  I  thank  you  for  your  kind  invitation.  God 
J  wijlingr 


LETTER     S.  §73 

willing,  I  fliall  accept  it,  if  ever  I  fee  New-Tork.  Kut  I  think 
Providence  calls  me  once  more  to  Scotland.  I  have  been  lately 
plowing  up  Tome  fallow  ground,  and  now  preach  twice  everv 
day.  The  Lord  docs  indeed  blei':;  the  word,  and  gives  me 
to  rejoice  in  the  felicity  of  his  cliofen.  Bs  fo  kind  now  and 
then  to  drop  a  line  to  my  dear  orphan-family.  As  op- 
portunity oftcrs,  and  the  Lord  gives  freedom,  you  fhall  hear 

ifom,  dear  brother  A^ , 

Yours  moft  affectionately  in  Jesus  Christ, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER    CCCC. 

To  Mifs ,  at  Edinburgh. 

Dear  Mifs,  London,  Feb.  27,   1742. 

I  Did  not  receive  your  letter  till  this  night.  Whilft  I  was 
reading  it,  my  heart  grew  warm  with  thankfulnefs  to  that 
God,  who,  I  truif,  by  his  almighty  Spirit  hath  called  you  out 
of  darknefs  into  his  marvellous  light.     In  his  light  you  now  fee 

light.     Do  you  not,  dear  Mifs  //^ ,  find  what  I  faid  to 

be  true,  "  That  Jesus  Christ  is  the  faireft  among  ten 
thoufands."  Is  he  not  altogether  lovely  ?  Henceforth  you 
may  well  fay, 

/  bid  this  world  of  nolfe  and  fhew. 
With  all  its  flattering  fnares,  adieu. 

The  greater  advances  you  make  in  the  divine  life,  the  more 
you  will  fee  what  a  dream  you  and  the  pojite  world  have  been 
in.  And  O  the  diftinguifhing  grace  of  God  to  you  !  Me- 
thinks  I  hear  you  calling  on  angels  and  archangels  to  join  in 
praifmg  our  comm.on  Lord.  Well  may  you  fay,  "  You  are 
not  henceforth  your  own  :"  No,  dear  Mifs,  let  Jesus  have 
your  whole  heart.  Let  his  blood,  his  wounds  be  continually 
before  you.  God  forbid  that  you  fhould  now  glory?  f-ive  in 
the  crofs  of  Christ,  by  whom  the  world  is  crucified  to  you, 
and  you  unto  the  world.  Pity  the  poor  chriftlefs  creatures 
about  you.  Pray  for  them,  as  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  you  free- 
dom. Tell  them  of  the  love  of  Jesus.  They  need  no  other 
motive.  This,  backed  with  almighty  power,  muft  break 
the  molt  hardened  hearf.  With  much  pleafurc  I  rcflcft  on 
'   B  b  3  the 


374  LETTERS. 

the  blcfTed  confolations  I  have  been  favoured  with,  whilft  ex* 
plaining  the  fcriptures  to  you  and  your  honoured  relations. 
O  that  not  one  may  remain  unconverted  !  May  Jesus  look 
on  them  ;  then  v^'ill  they  look  on  him  and  be  faved.  Blefled 
be  God  for  fending  me  to  Scotland^  if  it  w^as  only  to  bring  you 
home.  Ere  long  1  hop^e  to  vifit  your  country  again  j  ani 
then,  O  that  I  may  fee  you  all  meek,  humble,  heavenly- 
minded,  clofe  follower's  of  the  bleeding  Lamb  I  Thanks  be  to 
God,  he  hath  dire6led  me  to  a  wife,  who  was  once  gay,  but 
now  with  you  can  {ivig, 

I. 

Come^  Saviour  Jesus,  from  ahove^ 
Jjjiji  me  with  thy  heavenly  grace  j 
Withdraw  fny  heart  from  worldly  lovs^ 
Jndfor  thy/elf  prepare  the  tlace, 

II. 
O  let  thy  facred  prefence  filly 
And  fet  my  longing  fpir it  free  ; 
Which  pants  to  have  no  other  love^ 
But  night  and  day  to  feajl  on  Thee. 

III. 
That  path  ivith  hiimhle  fpeed  Vllfeeky 
Wherein  my  Saviour  s  footjleps  fnne  \ 
Nor  will  I  hear,  tior  zvill  I  [peak 
Of  any  other  love  but  thine, 

IV. 
To'  Thee  fny  ling' ring  foul  afpires ;  • 
To  Thee  I  offer  all  my  vows  ; 
Keep  me  from  vain  and  filfe  defires^ 
My  God,  my  Saviour^  and  my  fpouf, 

V. 
Wealth,  honour,   or  whatever  elfe 
This  tranfitory  world  can  give. 
Tempt  as  you  ivill,  my  heart  repels^ 
71?  Christ  alone  refohed  to  live, 

VI. 
Thee  I  can  love,  and  thee  alone., 
With  inward  joy  and  holy  hlifs ; 
To  find  thou  tak'Ji  me  for  thy  own^ 
O  what  a  happinefs  is  this  / 

Dear 


LETTERS.  3.75 

Dear  Mifs,  whilft  I  am  writing,  the  love  of  Jesus  fills  my 
foul.     I  have  been  talking  to  night  of  his  love  to  poor  finners. 

0  that  his  fpirit  may  break  afrefh  upon  your  foul  when  you 
are  reading  this  !  I  muft  now  commend  you  to  the  Redeemei's 
care.  In  the  world  you  (hall  have  tribulation  ;  be  not  afraid, 
Jesus  hath  overcome  the  world.  — I  have  many  letters  before 
me  unread  ;  but  I  could  not  help  writing  this  long  one  to  you. 
Accept  it  as  a  token  of  unfeigned  regard  for  the  good  of  your 
precious    foul,   and   depend   on    the    prayers    of,    dear   Mifs 

IV — , 

Your  moft  afFedionate  friend  and 

iervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV, 

LETTER    CCCCl. 

T^o  the  Reverend  Mr.  C . 

London,  March  ^,    ^742. 
My  dear  Friend  and  Brother, 

I  Remember  my  promife.     You  are  to  be  one  of  my  clofe 
correfpondents.    I  am  unworthy  to  write  to  any  ;  but  love, 
the  love  of  Jesus  will  conftrain  me  frequently  to  write  to  you. 

1  hope  you  are  not  offended,  becaufe  you  did  not  fee  me  in 
Bath  again.  The  glorious  Emmanuel  pointed  out  my  way 
hither.  Since  I  came  (O  amazing  goodnefs  !)  he  has  been 
wonderfully  kind  to  me,  and  to  his  people.  I  am  much  af- 
filed daily,  in  preaching  to  poor  fmners  the  unfearchable 
riches  of  Christ.  Life  and  power  fly  all  around,  and  the 
Redeemer  is  getting  himfelf  the  victory  daily  in  many  hearts. 
Letters  from  abroad  give  me  glorious  accounts.  In  New-En- 
gland, the  work  goes  on  amazingly.  In  Scotland,  the  awaken- 
ing is  greater  and  greater.  The  fpirit  of  God  has  been 
ftriving  among  the  little  orphans  in  Georgia,  and  in  Carolina 
I  hear  that  twelve  negroes  belonging  to  a  planter,  converted 
at  the  Orphan-houfe,  are  favingly  brought  home  to  jEsu-i. 
Christ.  Indeed  the  Lord  is  about  to  do  great  things, 
"  Blefled  are  the  eyes  that  fee  the  things  which  we  fee  ; 
bleiTed  are  the  ears  that  hear  the  things  that  wc  hear  i" 
blefTed  are  thofe  that  the  Lord  employs  as  his  own  children, 
to  brinp-  about  his  o;rcat  defijrns.     O  that  my  dear  A4r.  C 

O  CD  &  J 

may  be  made  a  flaming  fire,  a;Kl  a  fpiiitual   father  to  thou- 
B  b  4  fands  1 


3/6  LETTER     S. 

faiids  !   Dcai  Mr.  T ,  who  was  lb  kind  as   to  come  and 

f«-e  me  l.ifl:  night,  I  trufi:  is  coming  on.  I  hope  both  you  and 
him  Vv^ill  experience  a  folid  ellablilhm-nit  in  the  giace  uf  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Tiicre  is  no  reft  here,  no  true  foh'd 
lafting  left,  till  we  come  to  this.  Our  hearts  are  dcceiUul 
above  all  things.  We  feek  reft  in  outward  things.  We 
change  our  places,  circutiiftanccs,  and  ftationb  ; — but  if  Jesus 
loves  us,  he  will  put  a  thorn  in  the  place  where  we  would 
i'ain  neftlc.  A  foul  that  has  had  fomc  awakenings,  and  been 
v.'andring  from  Christ,  is  like  NoaJ/s  dove  which  could  find 
no  reft  for  the  fole  of  its  foot,  till  it  came  back  to  the  ark  again. 
This  ark  is  Christ,  and  when  we  are  fafely  locked  in  there, 
and  the  foul  hath  received  an  abiding  witnefs,  then  out  of  the 
abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  fpeaketh.  l^his  is  the  rea- 
fon  why  Jesus  bid  his  difciples  to  wait  for  the  promife  of  the 
Father.  Filled  with  this,  the  v.'oman  of  Samaria  could  not  but 
call  on  others  to  come  and  fee.  And  were  we  but  animated, 
ltd  and  influenced  by  this  fpirit,  what  a  blefled  union  would 
there  be  among  all  i\\Q  churches  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  It  is  a 
want  of  more  of  this,  that  now  at  prefent  difunites  us.  I 
defpair  therefore  of  a  greater  union,  till  a  greater  meafure  of 
the  fpirit  be  poured  from  on  high,  flence,  therefore,  I  am 
refolved  limply  to  preach  the  gofpel  of  Christ,  and  leave 
ethers  to  quarrel  by  and  with  themfelvcs.  To  contend,  where 
there  is  no  probability  of  convincing,  only  feeds  and  adds  fuel 
to  an  unhallowM  fire,  which  a  mifguided  zeal  kindles  in  the 
heart.  Love,  forbearance,  long-fufFering,  and  frequent  prayer 
to  your  dear  ]>ord  Jesus,  is  the  beft  way  to  extinguifli  and 
put  it  out.  O  love,  true,  fmiple,  chriftian,  undiilcmbled 
love,  whither  art  thou  fled  !  The  language  of  my  heart  is, 
• — But  whither  am  I  going  ?  You  fee,  my  friend,  how  freely 
1  v/rite.  7'he  blefted  Jesus  warms  and  fills  me,  whilft-  I  am 
writing.  I  know,  though  I  am  unworthy,  you  will  fend  me 
a  line  in  return,  Methinks  I  could  waih  your  feet,  Me-^ 
thinks,  I  long  to  fee  your  fhackles  drop  ofF,  and  your  foul 
free  for  the  unuiterruptcd  fcrvice  of  the  beft  of  inaftcrs.  Faith 
in  his  blofidy  wounds  is  the  only  means.  Lord,  evermore 
give  my  dear  friend  and  his  wife  living  faith,  which  may  pu- 
rify their  hearts,  enablQ  them  to  overcome  the  world^  and  will 

wor^ 


LETTERS.  377 

work  by  love  !   The  Lord  make  you  both  as   little   shildrcn 

tefofc  him  !    This  is  the  prayer  of,  dear  Mr.  C , 

Yours  ali-edionaicly  in  Christ, 

G\  IK 

LETTER     CCCCII. 

To  Air.  A . 

Dear  Mr.  A ,  Lotidon,  March  4,  1742. 

I  Received  your  comfortable  letter  concerning  the  dear  Jambs 
at  Hi-r::i'o  hofpitaL  I  pray  God  give  you  grace  to  feed 
them,  that  they  may  grow  in  grace  as  they  grow  in  years, 
and  make  perpetual  advances  in  tlie  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Be  pleafcd  to  falute  them  from  me,  in  the  kindcft 
manner.  Entreat  them,  O  exhort  them  to  remember  their 
Creator  in  tliC  days  of  their  youth,  and  to  keep  clofc  by  his 
wounded  fide.  Tell  them,  dear  Sir,  from  time  to  time,  of  the 
power  and  efHcacy  of  his  all-atoning  blood  :  it  purifies  the 
heart,  overcomes  the  world,  and  fills  the  believer  with  joy  un- 
fpeakable  and  full  of  glory.  Watch  over  their  dear  fouls  day 
by  day,  and  wait  clofely  upon  the  Lord  yourfelf,  that  you 
may  be  taught  of  him  to  feed  his  lambs.  It  is  a  work  of  the 
utmoft  importance.  No  lefs  than  infinite  wifdom  can  be  [ui'- 
ficient  for  you  ;  but  if  any  man  lack  wifdom,  let  him  afk  ic 
from  above;  God  giveth  liberally  to  the  lovers  of  his  dear 
Son,  and  upbraideth  not.  Dear  Sir,  God  is  love.  He  halh 
loved  me,  and  is  plcafed  to  work  by  me  more  and  more. 
At  home,  and  abroad,  Jesus  Christ  rides  on  glo.ioufiy.  I 
hope,  at  my  return  to  Scotland^  to  fee  greater  things  than  ever. 
When  it  fnall  be,  I  know  not  yet.  God's  people  mufl:  pray 
me  to  them.  With  difficulty  I  get  time  to  write  this.  I  once 
more  falute  you  and  the  dear  Iambs,  and  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  molt  affedionate  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  IK 

LETTER    CCCCin. 

To    Mr.   J K ,  at  Exon. 

^^^''  ^'"'S  London^   March  6,  j  742. 

Now  fnatch  a  few  moments  to  anfwer  your  kind   letter. 
As  yet,  i  have  no  juiiiraation  from  providence  in  rcfpect  to 

coming 


378  LETTERS. 

coming  into  your  parts.     The  cloud  at  prefent  cloth  not  feein 
to  move  that  way.     So  many  places  want  fupplies,    that  I 
could  wifli  I  had  a  thoufand  lives  and  tongues.    Jesus  Christ 
fbould  have  them  all.     Only  I  am  aftoiiiflicd,  that  the  Lord 
of  the  harveft  fliould  fend  out  fuch  a  worthlefs  labourer,  or 
rather  loiterer  as  I  am.     But   his  grace  is   free,  like  himfelf 
infinite  ;  "  For  to  me,  who  am  lefs  than  the  Icaft  of  all  faints, 
is  this  grace  given,   that  I  fliould  preach  to  poor  fmners  the 
linfearchable  riches  of  Christ."     Blefled  be  God,  I  do  not 
preach  in  vain.     The  accounts  from  New-England^  Scotland^ 
and  Caroiinay  are  furprizing.     In  London^  the   word   of  the 
Lord  runs  and  is  glorified.    IVery  day  we  fee  the  Redeemer's 
ftately  ftcps.     I  have  not  time,  dear  Sir,  to  tell  you  what  great 
things  our  great  mafter   is  doing  for  his  people,  and  yet  I 
believe  we  fhall  fee  greater  things  than  thefe.     From  Georgia 
alfo,  I  have  great  accounts.     The  fpirit  of  tho  Lord   hath 
been  breathing  upon  the  orphans.     I  thank  you,  dear  Sir,  for 
your  intended  benefa6tion,  and  kind  invitation.     If  ever  our 
dear  Lord  calls  me  your  way,  I  fhall  accept  it  :  though  I  am 
utterly   unworthy  to  come   under   any  one's   roof,  but   more 
efpecially  that  Jesus  fliould  come  under  the  roof  of  the  houfe 
of  my  foul. — But  Jesus  is  love.     That  his  love  may  be  abun- 
dantly flied  abroad  in  your  heart,   by  the  Holy  Gholl,   is  the 
hearty  prayer  of,  dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  aft'edionate  friend  and  fervant  unknown, 

G.  TV. 

LETTER    CCCCIV. 

To  Mr,  G H ,   in  Gloucejler. 

J} ear  Mr.  H ,  London^   Mcirch^   12,  1 742. 

BY  no  means  leave  off  reading  to  the  fociety.  It  is  not 
taking  too  much  upon  you,  or  going  out  of  your  depth. 
The  caufe  of  your  fo  much  as  thinking  to  decline,  is  not  good. 
The  more  unworthy  you  are,  the  more  gJory  will  you  give  to  a 
glorious  Redeemer :  the  greater  finn-er  you  are,  the  more  feelingly 
will  you  read  of,  and  recommend  the  glorious  Ranfom  paid  for 
llnners.  Goon,  my  dear  man  •,  venture  boldly  to  the  throne  of 
grace  ;  fear  not. — God  will  heal  our  backflidings ;  he  loves  us 
freely.  Jesus  hath  been  my  glorious  Saviour.  I  would  have 
mentioned  this  afFair  of  the  fuciety  in  my  lad,  but  I  was  then 


LETTERS.  379 

ignorant  of  it. — My  dear  wife  has  written  to  dear  Mrs.  H . 

How  does  the  dear  woman  as  to  fpirituals  ?  I  do  not  defpair 
of  feeing  you  both  good  cluiflians.  Jesus  is  almighty.  Qo 
to  him  juft  as  you   are.     The  Lord  be  with  you  both  !   I 

fuppofe  you  have  feen  the  letter  fent  to  dear    AI.  C by 

brother  S .     My  tender  love  to  him,  and  all  that  love  the 

bleiled  Ennnannel.    I  have   fecn  Mr.  y .     The  Lord   is 

wonderfully  good  to  me.     Pray  fend  a  line  to,  dear  Sir, 
Yours  affectionately  in  Christ  Jesus, 

LETTER     CCCCV. 

To  Mifs  R . 

Dear  A^ifs,  Londo7t,  March  18,  1 742. 

I  Am  yet  of  opinion,  there  is  mercy  and  love  laid  up  for  you 
in  the  heart  of  the  blefTed  Jesus.  You  look  backward, 
inftcad  of  forward.  You  look  into  yourfelf,  inftead  of  look- 
ing up  to  Him,  who  is  mighty  and  willing  to  fave.  O  that 
you  may  have  ftrength  to  go  to  him  juft  as  you  are  !  You 
would  then  be  delivered  from  your  bondage.  The  cafe  of  the 
poor  Syrcphisnician  woman  may  give  you  comfort.  Hov/  did 
the  Lamb  of  God  feem,  as  it  were  to  turn  lion  ?  How  did 
he  feem  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  her  complaints  ?  And  yet  heard 
and  loved  her  all  the  while.  Why  may  not  you  believe  ?  He 
will  yet  fay  to  you,  "  Be  it  unto  you  even  as  thou  wilt."  I 
fear  fome  tell  you,  that  it  is  well  to  doubt.  Lideed  they  are 
mifl-aken.  Dear  Mifs,  expect  great  things  from  Jesus 
Christ.  "  He  is  able  to  do  abundantly  for  you  above  what 
you  can  afk  or  think."  His  name,  his  nature  is  Love.  P'ear 
not ;  be  not  faithlefs,  but  believing.  Wait,  and  you  fhall 
yet  fee  the  falvation  of  God.  In  Jesus  there  is  plenteous 
redemption.  That  you  may  feel  the  full  power  of  his  blood, 
prays,  dear  Mifs, 

Your  afFedionatc  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 


LETTER 


58o  L    E    T     T    E    R    S. 

LETTER    CCCCVI. 

To  Mr.  jy ,  in  Bnjhl. 

LorJ^Uy  April  6,  I742» 
My  deaVy  yea  very  dear  Brother^ 

YOU  mull  needs  think,  that  your  kind  letter  gave  me  no 
imall  pleafure.  Glory  be  to  God  for  that  rich  love 
wherewith  he  hath  loved  you  !  Surely  Jesus  Christ  will 
be  now  exceeding  precious  to  your  dear  foul.  What  does  he 
now  require  of  you,  but  to  walk  humbly,  clofely,  and  with 
a  child-like  fimplicity  before  him  ?  He  hath  followed  you, 
as  well  as  prevented  you  with  his  mercies,  and  would  fuffer 
nothing  to  take  you  out  of  his  hands.  Satan  hath  defired  you, 
fatan  has  fifted  you  as  wheat ;  but  Jesus,  that  friend  of  fm- 
ners,  hath  prayed  for  you,  and  therefore  your  faith  hath  not 
failed.  The  Lord  hath  looked  upon  my  dear  Samuel.  Me- 
thinks  I  fee  him  weeping  tears  of  love,  and  faying,  "  Speak, 
Lord,  thy  fervant  heareth  now." 

I  doubt  not  but  many  will  reproach  you  for  your  paft  back- 
Hiding,  and  queftion  your  future  (lability.  Let  all  ferve  to 
humble  you  in  the  dud,  and  drive  you  to  the  loving  Jesus 
for  refuge.  '-'-  In  him,"  furely  fliall  my  dear  friend  fay,  "  I  have 
righteoufnefs  and  firength."  Look  up  to  him,  and  you  Ihall 
be  delivered  from,  nay,  made  more  than  conqueror  over  every 
temptation.     He  will  fight  your  battles   for  you,  and  crown 

you  v^'hcn  you  have  done.     Dear  Mr.   JV- ,    the   love  of 

Jesus  now  fv/allows  up  my  foul.  I  fee  him  more  and  more 
lovely  every  day.  In  Jesus  there  is  plenteous  redemption. 
He  caaie,  that  we  might  have  life,  nay  that  we  might  have 
it  more  abundantly.  O  what  a  bleiTmg  is  it  to  be  redeemed 
from  a  vain  converfation,  and  from  this  prefent  evil  world.  O 
that  every  poor  finner  felt  it !  Then  would  his  children  agree  in 
one,  and  divifujus  would  be  at  an  end.  Blcfled  be  our  Lord, 
there  is  a  greater  profpecl  of  union  than  ever.  It  is  what 
my  foul  longs  after,  and  labours  for.  It  is  a  great  pity  that 
poor  pilgrims  fbould  fall  cut  in  their  way  to  heaven  ;  but  this 
will  be,  till  we  get  more  of  the  divine  fpirit.  Pray  we  there- 
fore for  a  great  cfFufion  of  the  Holy  Ghofl.     BleiTed  be  God, 

we 


LETTERS.  381 

we  ted  the  Holy  Ghoft  daily  in  our  congregations.  It  fur- 
prizes  me  to  fee  what  a  company  of  fettled,  folid  chriftians 
are  amonj^ft  us.  The  work  goes  on  daily.  This  morning, 
how  did  Jesus  pierce  and  melt  poor  finners  hearts  ?  Amaz- 
ing accounts  are  brought  from  abroad. — Frelh  av/akenings  in 
many  places  at  home.  Does  not  your  foul  long  to  tell  fmncrs, 
Jesus  is  Love.  I  am  glad  to  hear  you  are  foacTiive.  Go  on 
in  the  ftrength  of  the  triumphing  Lamb.  My  heart  is  warm. 
Welcome  home  again,  my  dear  friend,  welcome  to  Jesus 
your  Lord  and  your  God.    Pray  write  often,  dear  Mr.  IV , 

to 

Your  mod  afpedlionatc  friend,  brother  and 

fervant  in  the  glorious  Emmanuel^ 

G.  //'. 

,  L  E  T  T  E  R    CCCCVn. 

To  Mr,  O ,  in  Leominjler, 

My  dear  Brother^  London^  Jprll  6^  I'jo^l. 

YOUR  letter  gave  me  uncommon  pleafurc,  and  confirm'd 
me  more  in  the  opiniorv,  that  where  our  Lord  gives  a 
will,  he  will  alfo  give  an  opportunity  of  glorifying  his  great 
and  mofi:  adorable  name.     Indeed,  I  believe  there  is   fuch  a 
work  begun,  as  neither  we   nor  cur  fathers  have  heard   of. 
The  beginnings  are  amazing;  how  unfpeakably  glorious  will 
the  end  be  !   From  Neiv-England^  freih  and  furprizing  gUid 
tidings  are  (tnt-^  the  Lord  takes  poor  fmners  there  by  hun- 
dreds, I  may  fay  by  thoufands.     In  Scotland^  the  fruits  of  my 
poor  labours  are  abiding  and  apparent.     In  IVales^  I  hear  the 
word  of  the  Lord  runs  and  is  glorified,  as  alfo  in  many  places 
in  England.     In  London^   our  Saviour  is   doing  great   things 
daily  ;  we  have  many  dear  growing  children  among  us,  who 
can  fay,   "  Our  fellowfhip  is  v/ith  the  Father  and  the  Son." 
We  fcarce  know  what  it  is  to  have  a  meeting  without  tears. 
Our  Lord  always  meets  with  us.     My  dear  brother,  I  re- 
joice to  hear  that  you  are  helped  in  your  work.     Let  this 
encourage  you  ;  go  on,  go  on  ;  the  more  we  do,   the  m«re 
we  may  do  for  Jesus.     I   fleep  and  eat  but  little,  and  am 
conflantly  employed  from  morning  till    midnight,  and   yet  I 
walk  and  am  not  weary,  I  run  and  am  not  faint.   My  ftrength 
is  daily  renewed.     My  bow  abides  in  ftrength,  and  my  hands 

are 


332  LETTERS. 

are  upholder!  by  the  arms  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob.  O  free 
grace  !  It  fires  my  foul,  and  makes  me  long  to  do  fomething 
more  for  Jesus.  It  is  true  indeed,  I  want  to  go  home  ;  but  here 
are  fo  many  fouls  ready  to  perifh  for  lack,  of  knowledge,  that 
I  am  willing  to  tarry  below,  as  long  as  my  mafter  hath  work 
for  me  to  do. — When  I  fliall  come  your  way,  I  cannot  deter- 
mine.—All  I  fay  is,  I  will  come  when  the  Lord  gives  me 
leave.  At  prefent  my  call  is  in  London^  where  I  propofe  ftay- 
ino-  for  fome  time.  My  wife  came  up  lait  Saturday^  and  joins 
with  me  in  wilhing  you  all  manner  of  fuccefs.  I  am,  my  dear 
brother. 

Yours  moft  affeiSlionately  In  our  glorious  Emmanuel^ 

G,  m 

LETTER    CCCCVIII. 

To  Mr,  J C ,  in  Glouceflerjhire. 

London^  April  ^^  1742. 

Dear  Mr.  J C , 

OURS  came  to  hand  laft  night.     I  rejoice  to  hear  that 


Y 


the  Lord  is  with  you,  and  that  he  was  pleafed  to  blefs 
my  poor  labours  in  Glouceflerjlnre.  I  would  have  you  to  dif- 
pute  as  little  as  poflible.  Awakened  fouls  (hould  be  told  to 
look  continually  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  more  you  are  ac- 
quainted with  Christ,  and  the  more  deeply  you  drink  into 
his  fpirit,  the  more  folid  you  will  grow.  Fear  not  becaufe  of 
your  prefent  trials  ;  "  the  Lord  is  thy  God  ;  he  will  never 
leave  thee  nor  forfake  thee."  Caft  all  your  care  upon  him, 
he  careth  for  you.  Your  wife's  illnefs  fhall  work  for  good. 
The  things  I  promifed,  are  provided  and  fhall  be  fent  fpeedily. 

Brother  H will  be  with  you,  God  willing,   next  week  ; 

I  pray  God  that  his  coming  may  be  in  the  fulnefs  of  the 
blefling  of  the  gofpel  of  peace  !  Our  Lord  is  with  us  much 
here.  1  preach  twice  daily.  Our  fociety  grows.  My  mafter 
fills  me  with  his  prefence,  and  continually  meets  with  us. 
My  tender  love  awaits  all  the  fociety.  Be  ftrong  in 
the    hQKT>^  and   in   the  power  of  his  might.     Seek  after  a 

nearer 


LETTERS.  383 

nearer  conformity  to  the  blefled  Jesus.    Grow  in  grace  j  and 
as  you  are  enabled,  dear  "John^  pray  for 

Your  affedionate  friend,   brother, 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 
G.  JV, 

LETTER     CCCCIX. 

To  Captain  G ,  in  Philadelphia, 

Dear  Brother  G ,  London^  April  11^  1 742. 

I  Hope  this  will  find  yoji  very  happy  in  the  love  of  Christ. 
I  was  glad  to  hear  you  had  fo  good  a  time,  before  our 
friends  left  you.  I  wifli  you  no  lefs,  than  that  you  may  be 
filled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of  God.  We  have  had  a  glorious 
Eajier^  or  rather  a  Pentecojl.  Jesus  Christ  is  rifen  indeed. 
I  have  been  preaching  in  Moorfulds^  and  our  Saviour  carries 
all  before  us.  Nought  can  refift  his  conquering  blood.  It 
would  have  delighted  you,  to  have  fecn  the  poor  finners  flock 
from  the  booths,  to  fee  Jesus  lifted  up  on  the  pole  of  the  gof- 
pel.  I  have  received  many  tickets  from  young  apprentices, 
&c.  &:c.  Our  fociety  goes  on  wonderfully  well.  Every  day 
we  hear  of  frefh  conquefts.  God's  children  are  expedincp 
very  great  things.  I  believe  they  will  not  be  difappointed 
of  their  hope.     But  I  am  in  hafte.     Your  wife  was  well  the 

laft  time  1  faw  her.     Brother  5 and  his   wife  have  been 

to  fee  her. — My   dear  wife  and   brother  5 kindly  falute 

you,  and  all  that  love  our  glorious  Emmanuel.     Pray  write  a 

line  to,  dear  brother  G , 

Yours,  ho.. 

G,  TV. 

LETTER    CCCCX. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  J ,  in  Torkfiire, 

My  dear  Brother.,  London.,  Jpril  22,  I742» 

I  Thank,  you  and  your  wife  for  your  kind  bcnefacHon.  Our 
Saviour,  I  believe,  will  take  it  kindly  at  your  hands.  I 
rejoice  that  the  work  of  our  common  mafter  is  carried  en  in 
Yorkjhire.  We  fee  greater  things  than  ever  at  London.  The 
awakening  is  quite  frelh.  I  never  v/as  flrengthencd  more. 
Every  day,  poor  fmners  are  brought  home  to  Jc^us  Christ. 

Our 


384  LETTERS. 

Our  people  are  filled  as  with  new  wine  j  it  fecms  to  be  a  Pen^ 
tecnji.  I  have  preached  fix  or  feven  times  in  Moorfields^  thele 
holidays.  It  v»'ould  rejoice  you  to  fee  the  people  flock  from  fa- 
tan's  booths  to  hear  the  gofpcl  of  the  Son  of  God.  The 
people  feem  to  have  fuch  a  fpirit  of  fupplication  poured  out 
upon  thein,  that  I  believe  we  fhall  fee  great  things.  I  am 
often  weak  in  body,  but,  as  my  work  requires,  I  am  pro- 
portionably  (hengthened  in  the  inner  man.  Was  there  ever 
fuch  a  finner  as  1  am  ?  Was  there  ever  fuch  a  Saviour  as  my 
Saviour  ? 

Loxv  at  thy  feci ^   0  Jfsus,   Id  me  Uc^ 

And  love  and  pniijc  to  all  eieniify, 

I  falute  all  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  in   hncerity,   and  am, 

dear  brother  '/ ? 

Yours  mofl  afieclion:itc!y  in  Jesus  Christ, 

L  E  T  T  E  R     CCCCXI. 

To  Mr,  L . 

London,   May  11,    1 742. 

WITH  this,  I  fend  vou  a  few  out  of  the  many  notes  I 
have  received  froiii  perfons,  who  were  convicted, 
converted,  or  comforted  in  Mccrfields,  during  the  late  holi- 
days. For  many  weeks,  I  found  my  heart  much  preiTed  to 
determine  to  venture  to  preach  there  at  this  feafon,  when,  if 
ever,  fatan's  children  keep  up  their  annual  rendezvous.  I 
muft  inform  you,  that  yM<?^;;^i.Wi 'is  a  large  fpacious  place, 
given,  as  I  have  been  told,  by  one  ALidam  Moore^  on  purpofc 
for  all  forts  of  people  to  divert  thcmfelves  in.  For  many 
years  pail,  from  one  end  to  the  other,  booths  of  all  kinds  have 
been  erected,  for  mountebanks,  players,  puppet  (liows,  and 
fuch  like.  With  a  heart  bleeding  with  companion  for  fo 
many  thcufands  led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will,  on  JVbit- 
Monday^  at  fix  o'clock  in  the  morning,  attended  by  a  large 
«on2;regation  of  praying  people,  I  ventured  to  lift  up  a  ftandard 
arnon^ll  them  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Oi  Nazareth,  Perhaps 
there  were  about  ten  thoufand  in  waiting,  not  for  me,  but  fop 
fatan's  inflruments  to  amufe  them. — Glad  was  I  to  find,  that 
I  had  for  once  as  it  v/cre  got  the  Hart  of  the  devil.     I  mounted 

my 


LETTERS.  385 

my  field  pulpit,  almoft  all  flocked  immediately  around  It.  I 
preached  on  thefe  words,  *'  As  Alofis  lifted  up  the  ferpent 
in  the  wildernefs,  fo  fhall  the  Ton  of  man  be  lifted  up,  ^'c.'* 
They  gazed,  they  liftened,  they  wept  \  and  I  believe  that 
many  felt  themfelves  flung  with  deep  convi6^ion  for  their  pad 
fins.  All  was  huflied  and  folcmn.  Being  thus  encouraged, 
I  ventured  out  again  at  noon  ;  but  what  a  fcene  !  The  fields, 
the  whole  fields  fcemeu,  in  a  bad  fenfe  of  the  word,  all  white, 
rcaily  not  for  the  Redeemer's,  but  Beelzebub's  harvefl.  All 
his  agents  were  in  full  motion,  drummers,  trumpeters,  merry 
andrews,  mailers  of  puppet  fliows,  exhibiters  of  wild  beafts, 
players,  ^c.  Szg.  all  bufy  in  entertaining  their  rcfpedivc  au- 
ditories. I  fuppofc  there  could  not  be  lefs  than  tv/cnty  or 
thirty  thouland  people.  My  pulpit  was  fixed  on  the  oppofite 
fide,  and  immediately,  to  their  great  mortification,  they  found 
the  number  of  their  attendants  fadly  lelTened;  Judging  that 
like  faint  Panl^  I  fhould  now  be  called  as  it  were  to  fight 
with  beads  at  Ephefus^  I  preached  from  thefe  words  :  "  Great 
is  Diana  of  the  Ephefians"  You  may  eafily  guefs,  that  there 
was  fome  noife  among  the  craftsmen,  and  that  I  was  honoured 
with  having  a  few  fi:ones^  dirt,  rotten  eggs,  and  pieces  of  dead 
cats  thrown  at  me,  whilft  engaged  in  calling  them  from  their 
favourite  but  lying  vanities.  My  foul  was  indeed  among  lions  ; 
but  far  the  greatefi:  part  of  my  congregation,  which  was  very 
large,  feemed  for  a  while  to  be  turned  into  lambs.  This  en- 
couraged me  to  give  notice^   that  I  would  preach  again  at  fix: 

o'clock  in  the  evening.     I  came^   I  faw,  but  what thou- 

fands  and  thoufands  more  than  before  if  poiTible,  flill  more 
deeply  engaged  in  their  unhappy  diverfions  ;  but  fome  thou- 
fands amongft  them  waiting  as  earneflly  to  hear  the  gofpcl. 
This  fatan  could  not  brook.  One  of  his  choiceil  fervants 
was  exhibiting,  trumpeting  on  a  large  ftage  ;  but  as  foon  as 
the  people  faw  me  in  my  black  robes  and  my  pulpit,  I  think 
all  to  a  man  left  him  and  ran  to  me.  For  a  while  I  was 
enabled  to  lift  up  my  voice  like  a  trumpet,  and  many  heard  the 
joyful  found.  God's  people  kept  praying,  and  the  enemy's 
agents  made  a  kind  of  a  roaring  at  fome  diflance  from  our 
camp.  At  length  they  approached  nearer,  and  the  merry  andrew, 
(attended  by  others,  who  complained  that  they  had  taken 
many  pounds  lefs  that  day  on  account  of  my  preaching)  got 
Vol.  I.  C  c  up 

9 


3S6  L    E     T     T    E    R    S. 

uponaman^s  {houlders,and  advancing  near  the  pulpit  attempted 
to  flafh  me  with  a  long  heavy  whip  fcveral  times,  but  always 
with  the  violence  of  his  motion  tun;bled  down.  Soon  after- 
wards, they  got  a  recruiting  feijeant  with  his  drum,  &c.  to 
pafs  through  the  congregation.  I  gave  the  word  of  command, 
and  ordered  that  v^ay  might  be  made  for  the  king's  officer. 
The  ranks  opened,  while  all  march'd  quietly  through,  and 
then  clofed  again.  Finding  thofe  efforts  to  fail,  a  large  body 
quite  on  the  oppofite  fide  alfembled  together,  and  having  got 
a  large  pole  for  their  flandard,  advanced  towards  us  with  fteady 
and  formidable  fteps,till  they  came  very  near  the  fkirts  of  our 
hearing,  praying,  and  almofl  undaunted  congregation.  I 
faw,  gave  warning,  and  prayed  to  the  captain  of  our  falvatioii 
for  prefent  fupport  and  deliverance.  He  heard  and  anfwered  ; 
for  jull:  as  they  approached  us  with  looks  full  of  refentment,  I 
know  not  by  what  accident,  they  quarrelled  among  themfelves, 
threw  down  their  ftaffand  went  their  way,  leaving  however 
many  of  their  company  behind,  who  before  we  had  done,  I 
truft  were  brought  over  to  join  the  befieged  party.  I  think  I 
continued  in  praying  preaching  and  finging,  (for  the  noife 
was  too  great  at  times  to  preach)  about  three  hours.  We 
then  retired  to  the  tabernacle,  with  my  pockets  full  of  notes 
from  perfons  brought  under  concern,  and  read  them  amidfE 
the  praifes  and  fpiritual  acclamations  of  thoufand?,  who 
joined  with  the  holy  angels  in  rejoicing  that  fo  many  fmners 
were  fnatched,  in  fuch  an  unexpeded,  unlikely  place  and 
manner,  out  of  the  very  jaws  of  the  devil.  This  was  the  be- 
ginning of  the  taberiiacle  fociety. — Three  hundred  and  fifty 
awakened  fouls  were  received  in  one  day,  and  I  believe  the 
number  of  notes  exceeded  a  thoufand  ;  but  I  muft  have  done, 
believing  you  want  to  retire  to  join  in  mutual  praife  and 
thankfgiving  to  God  and  the  Lamb,  with 

Yours,  Sec. 

G.  JV. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  387 

LETTER     CCCCXir. 

To  the  fume. 

My  dear  Friend^  London^  May  15,  17^2. 

FRESH  matter  of  praife  ;  blcfs  ye  the  Lord,  for  he  hath 
triumphed  glorioufly.  The  battle  that  was  be^un  on 
Monday^  was  not  quite  over  till  //Ww/f/z/^j  evening,  though 
the  fcene  of  adioti  was  a  iiftle  fliiftcj.  Being  (Irongly  invit- 
ed, and  a  pulpit  being  prepared  for  me  by  an  honeft  quaker,  a 
coal  merchant,  I  ventured  on  Tucfday  evening  to  preach  at 
Mary  le  bon  fields^  a  place  almoft  a<;  much  frequented  by- 
boxers,  gamerters,  and  fuch  like,  as  M':or-fiolds.  A  vaft  con- 
courfe  was  aflemblcd  together,  and  a^  focui  as  I  got  into  the 
field  pulpit,  their  countenance  befpoke  the  enmity  of  their 
hearts  againA  the  preacher,  I  opened  with  tlsefe  words — 
**  I  am  not  alhamed  of  the  gofpcl  of  Christ,  for  it  is  the 
power  of  God  unto  falvation  to  every  one  that  belicveth."  I 
preached  in  great  jeopardy ;  for  the  pulpit  being  high,  and  the 
fupports  not  well  fixed  in  the  ground,  it  tottered  tvery  time  1 
moved,  and  numbers  of  enemies  drove  to  pufii  my  friends  a- 
gainft  the  fupporters,  in  order  to  throw  me  down.  But  the 
Redeemer  ftayed  my  foul  on  himfeif,  therefore  I  was  not  much 
moved,  unlefs  with  compaflion  for  thofe  to  whom  I  was  deli- 
vering my  maftei's  mefLige,  which  I  had  reafon  to  think,  by  the 
flrong  impreiTions  that  were  made,  was  welcome  to  many.  But 
fatan  did  not  like  thus  to  be  attacked  in  his  flrong-holds,  and 
I  narrowly  efcaped  with  my  life  :  for  as  I  was  pallin^  from 
the  pulpit  to  the  coach,  I  felt  my  wig  and  hat  to  be  almoft  ofp. 
I  turned  about,  and  obferved  a  fword  jufi:  touching  my  tem- 
ples. A  young  rake,  as  I  after-wards  found,  was  determined 
to  (lab  me,  but  a  gentleman,  feeing  the  fword  thruftint^-  near 
•me,  ftruck  it  up  vi'ith  his  cane,  and  fo  the  deftincd  victim  pro- 
videntially efcaped.  Such  an  attempt  excited  abhorrence; 
the  enraged  multitude  foon  feized  him,  ar.d  had  it  not  been 
fur  one  of  my  friends,  who  received  him  into  his  houfe,  he  muft 
have  undergone  a  fevere  difcipline.  The  next  d.iy,  I  renewed 
my  attack  in  Mc'jr-ficlds\  but  would  you  tliink  it  ?  after  they 
found  that  pelting,  noi!e,  and  threatnings  would  not  do,  one 
cf  the  mivry  /indreivs  got  up  into  a  tree  very  near  the  pulpit, 

C  c  2  and 


3S8  LETTERS. 

and  fliamefuUy  expofed  his  nakednefs  before  all  the  people. 
Such  a  beaftly  a6lion  quite  abafhed  the  ierious  part  of  my  au- 
ditory ;  whilft   hundreds  of  another  (lamp,    inftead   of  rifing 
up  to  pull  down  the  unhappy  wretch,  cxprelTcd  their  approba- 
tion by  repeated  laughs.     1   muft  own  at  firft  it  gave   me  3 
fhock  ',  I  thought  fatan  had  now  almoft  outdone  himfelf  ;  but 
recovering  my   fpirits,  I  appealed  to  all,   fmce  now  they  had 
fach  a  fpe6tacle  before  them,   whether  I  had  wronged  human 
nature  in  faying,  after  pious  B'ljlwp  Hall^  "  that  man,  when 
left  to  himfelf,  is  half  a  devil  and  half  abeaft  ;"  or  as  the  great 
Mr.  Laiu  exprefled  himfelf,  "  a  motley  mixture  of  the  beafl 
and  devil." — Silence  and  attention  being  thus  gained,  I  con- 
cluded with  a  warm  exhortation,  and  clofed  our  feftival  entcr- 
prizes,  in  reading  frefh  notes  that  were  put  up,  praifmg  anil 
bicffino-  God  amidft  thoufands  at  the  tabernacle,  for  what  he 
had  done  for  precious  fouls,  and  on  account  of  the  deliveran- 
ces he  had  wrought  out  for  me  and  his  people.     I  could  en- 
laro-e  ;  but  being  about  to  embark  in  the  Mary  and  Ann^  for 
Scotland^  I  muft  haften  to  fubfcribe  myfelf. 

Yours,  &c. 

'   G.  JV, 

P.  S.  I  cannot  help  adding,  that  fevera!  little  boys  and  girls 
who  were  fond  of  fitting  round  me  on  the  pulpit,  while  I 
preached,  and  handing  to  me  peoples  notes,  though  they  were 
often  pelted  v/ith  eggs,  dirt,  &c.  thrown  at  me,  never  once 
gave  way  :  but  on  the  contrary,  every  time  I  was  [truck,  turn- 
ed up  their  little  weeping  eyes,  and  Teemed  to  wifh  they  could 
receive  the  blows  for  me.  God  make  them  in  their  growing 
years  great  and  living  martyrs  for  him,  who  out  of  the  mou-tb 
of  babes  and  fucklings  perrc(Sts  praife  1 

LETTER    CCCCXIII. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  M ,  in  the  IJle  of  Man, 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann ^  hound  to  Scotlandy  May  26,  1742. 
Rev.  and  dear  Sir, 

I  Received  your  letter  on  Saturday  laft,  and  felt  great  concern 
on  my  foul,    while  perufmg    it.     One   thing   efpecially 
plcafed  mei  I  found  by  the  contents,  that  a  report  I  had 

lately 


LETTERS.  3S9 

lately  heard  .concerning  you  was  falfc  ;  for  I  had  heard,  that 
the  bifliop  feeing  your  zeal,  ami  finding  his  oppofition  had  in- 
flamed, at  laft  had  ordered  the  clergy  to  open  the  church 
doors  for  3'ou,  and  that  now  you  had  done  with  appearing 
openly  in  the  defence  of  the  glorious  Gofpel.  Blclled  be  God 
this  is  not  true  !  Though  I  find,  both  you  and  your  people 
have  been  greatly  difcouraged.  I  fee  no  way  of  extricating 
yourfelf,  but  by  acting  up  to  the  dictates  of  your  own  confci- 
ence,  and  leaving  the  confequences  to  the  great  head  and  king 
of  the  church.  You  find,  dear  Sir,  a  fenfible  withdrawing  of 
the  fpirit  ever  fince  you  gave  way.  It  would  not  have  been 
fo,  had  you  obeyed  God  rather  than  man.  Up  then,  and  be 
doing,  and  the  Lord  will  be  yet  with  you.  If  you  cannot 
preach  freely  in  the  Ijle  of  Man ^  go  whitherfoever  the  Lord 
fliall  be  pleafed  to  lead  you.  Our  commiUion  is  very  exten- 
five  :  "  Go  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gofpel  to  every 
creature."  We  want  labourers  much  in  England.  It"  our  af- 
cended  Saviour  hath  given  you  popular  gifts,  and  freedom  and 
authority  in  fpeaking  without  notes,  you  need  not  fear.  He 
will  afiiil:  you  from  time  to  time,  and  make  you  a  bleiTmg  to 
many  fouls.  Your  being  a  miniiler  of  the  eftabliflied  church, 
will  be  an  advantage,  and  your  age  alfo  will  give  you  yet  more 
authority ;  but  an  uncSlion  from  the  Holy  One  of  Ifrael  is  the  beft 
qualification  5  I  would  therefore,  dear  Sir  (if  fuch  a  one  as  I,  am 
capable  of  advifing)  by  all  means  perfuade  you  to  humble 
yourfelf  before  the  great  bifhop  of  your  foul,  and  afkhim  again 
and  again  what  he  would  have  vou  to  do?  I  am  apt  to  think, 
he  will  not  reftore  to  you  the  comforts  of  the  Ploly  Ghoft,  or 
ftablifh  you  with  his  free  fpirit,  'till  you  give  up  yourfelf  fimply 
to  follow  the  di6lates  of  his  providence  and  fpirit.  Then  let 
men  or  devils  fay  or  do  their  worfl.  How  can  we  know 
God's  power  unlefs  we  try  it  ?  Not  that  I  would  have  you, 
dear  friend,  do  any  thing  rafl:ily.  No,  "  he  that  bclieveth 
doth  not  make  hafte."  Wait  upon  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
certainly  (hew  you  what  lie  would  have  you  to  do.  I  wonder 
not  that  your  brother's  love  is  grown  cold.  It  is  hard  for  one 
in  his  ftation,  unlefs  he  be  thorou2;hly  inured  to  contempt,  and 
will  give  God  leave  to  act  in  his  own  way,  to  withiland  a 
whole  body  of  lukewarm,  prejudiced,  envious,  malignant 
<:lcrgy.    Thefe,  have  always  been  the  greateft  oppofers  of  true 

C  c  3  vital 


-go  LETT     E     R     S. 

vital  religion.  Thcfc,  were  our  Saviour's  moft  bitter  enemies. 
Thefe,  will  be  ours  alfo,  if  we  come  forth  in  his  fpirit,  and 
preach  by  hib  power.  But  blclled  be  God,  I  can  fay  by  hap- 
py experience,  our  gloi  ious  Emmanuel  will  make  us  more  than 
conquerors  over  them  all.  He  hath  continually  fought  my 
battles  for  me,  and  I  am  perfuaded  will  do  fo  to  the  end.  Of 
Icite,  I  have  fecn  more  of  his  power  and  goodnefs  than  ever,  and 
I  truft  we  ihall  yet  fee  greater  things  than  thefe.  I  am  now 
once  more  going  to  Scotland^  and  purpofc  (God  willing)  the 
latter  end  of  the  year  to  embark  for  America,  Pray  let  me  hear 
from  vou,  and  if  pulliblc  let  me  have  a  perfonal  interview.  I 
hope  this  will  reach  you.  In  the  next,  be  pleafed  to  tell  me 
how  to  diretSi,  for  I  have  forgotten.  The  Lord  be  with  you. 
I  wifli  you  abundant  profperity  in  the  name  of  the  exalted  Rc^ 
ciccmer,  and  am 

Your  airu(5Llonate  brother  and  fervant,  &c. 

G,  JK 

LETTER     CCCCXIV. 

To  Mr.  S — —  Ai ,  in  Gaiii/horciigb. 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann^  May  26,  1742. 
My  dear  Brother^ 

YO  U  R  liiiler  dated  May  5th  was    very  agreeable   to  me. 
I  think  it  favoured  ot  a  true  Ifraelitifii  fpirit,  and  there- 
fore I  find  freedom  to  fend   you   a   plain   and   fimple  anfwer. 

Who  J H is,  1  cajinot  tell.    If  he  was  converted  by 

my  unworthy  minifliy,  or  others  by  his   means,  let  our   dear 
Jesus  have  all  the  gloiy.     I  Ihall  know  who  they  are,  at  the 

great  day.     Mr.  P I  know  very  v.ell.     I  believe  he  is 

a  good  man,  but  am  not  enough  acquainted  with  his  proceed- 
ings, cnhcr  wholly  to  commend  or  condemn  them.  Whether 
he  preaches  in  public,  or  convcrfes  only  in  a  private  manner,  I 
know  not.  This  one  thing  I  know,  if  he  be  fent  of  God,  I 
wifh  him  profperity.  The  anfwer  which  our  Lord  gave  to 
thofe  who  forbad  fuch  as  were  calling  out  devils  in  his  name, 
bccaufe  they  followed  not  with  them,  makes  me  particularly 
cautious,  how  I  interrupt  any  one  that  feems  to  fpeak  of  Jesus 
with  fmcerity  of  heart.  As  for  his  fpeakiiig  fo  little  againft 
the  church  of  England,  I  cannot  difcommend  him  for  that.  I 
I  find 


L     E     T     T     E     R     S.  391 

find  it  bed  to  talk  only  of  Jesus's  blood,  and  the  power  of 
his  Redemption,  and  not  dwell  much  on  outward  thint^s  or 
outward  worfliip.  When  the  woman  of  Samaria  afked  our 
Lord,  "  where  men  ought  to  worfhip,"  he  diverted  the  dif- 
courfe  from  the  outward  to  the  inward  worfliip.  "  "rhe  wor- 
fhip  of  the  Father  in  fpirit  and  in  truth.**  Some  things  may 
be  wrong  in  the  church  of  England^  and  in  this  mixed  ftate  we 
muft  never  expedl:  to  fee  a  perfect  church,  or  a  perfciSl  man.  It 
is  therefore  my  conftant  aim  to  agree  with  all  the  children  of 
God,  as  far  as  I  can,  and  not  to  quarrel  though  we  differ  in 
fome  points.  \a  civil  fociety,  one  family  doss  not  differ  with 
another,  becaufe  it  hath  not  the  fame  orders  in  every  refpect. 
Would  to  God  we  obferved  the  fame  rule  in  fpirituals.  The 
world  falls  out  enough  with  us  ;  it  is  pity  we  (hould  fall  out 
among  ourfelves.  My  brother,  I  have  written  to  you  out  of 
the  fulnefs  of  my  heart;  whether  I  fliall  fee  your  face  in  the 
flefli,  1  know  not.  At  prefent,  my  call  is  to  Scotland.^ —  If  the 
cloud  fliould  move  towards  Lincoln/})ire^  my  anfwer  is,  "  Lord, 
lo  I  come  I"  I  am  quite  confounded  when  I  think  that  fuch  a 
wretch  as  I  fliould  ever  be  employed  in  preaching  the  everlaff- 
ing  gofpel.  I  often  fall  down  under  a  fcnfe  of  God's  diftin- 
guifhing  mercy,  and  with  awful  adoration  am  frequently  made 
to  cry  out,  "  Why  me,  Lord  ;  why  me  ?"  O  my  brother,  help 
me  to  praife  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  taketh  away  the  fins  of  the 
world.  A  wonderful  work  is  carried  on  both  at  home  and 
abroad.  I  (hall  be  glad  to  hear  from  you  again.  Be  plcafed  to 
direct  as  before.  I  am,  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ, 
Your  affcdionate  friend,  brother  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CCCCXV. 

To  Mr.  J B ,  in  London. 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann ^  May  27,  1 742. 
My  dear  Brother  B , 

YOUR  letter  was  fweet  to  my  heart.  Bufinefs  prevent- 
ed my  anfwering  it  on  fliore.  Our  Saviour  is  plcafed 
at  this  time  to  give  me  leifure  and  freedom.  I  will  now  en- 
deavour to  anfwer  it  on  board.  I  need  not  tell  you,  I  love 
you.  God  has  often  bore  witnefs  to  our  fdlowfliip,  by  giving 

C  G  4  us 


392  LETTERS. 

us  his  prcfence,  and  filling  us  as  with  new  wine.  What  has 
happened  of  late  to  difunite,  will  in  the  end,  1  am  perfuaded, 
only  promote  a  clofer  union.  •■'  Out  of  the  eater  will  come 
forth  meat,  and  out  of  the  ftrong  will  come  forth  fweetnefs. '• 
Blefled  be  our  Savipur's  free  grace  !  I  feel  my  heart  more  and 
rnore  enlarged  towards,  and  niorc  and  more  difpofed  to  love 
and  honour  all  denominations  of  believers,  than  ever  I  expe- 
rienced before.  In  all  focieties  of  chriftians  under  heaven, 
there  muft  neccflarily  be  perfons  of  a  different  (landing  in  the 
fchool  of  Christ.  Thofe  who  are  not  fqlidly  eftablifhed  in 
the  love  of  God,  will  fall  too  much  in  love  with  the  outward 
form  of  their  particular  church,  be  it  what  it  will.  But  as 
the  love  of  God  gets  the  afcendency,  the  more  they  will  be 
like  him  and  his  holy  angels,  and  confequently  rejoice  when 
fouls  are  brought  to  Jesus,  whatever  inftruments  may  be  made 
ufe  of  for  that  purpofe.  If  therefore  fome  that  you  and  I 
know,  are  too  confined  (as  I  believe  is  too  much  the  cafe)  ;  if 
they  do  not  preach  more  frequently,  and  abound  niore  in  good 
works,  I  think  it  is  for  want  of  haying  their  hearts  more  in- 
flamed with  the  love  of  God,  and  their  graces  kept  in  more 
conftant  exercife.  To  ftir  up  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in  us, 
is  an  apodolical  injun£lion  ;  and  if  we  do  not  keep  upon  our 
yvatch  we  fliall  fall  into  a  falfe  ftillnefs.  Nature  loves  eafe  ; 
and  as  a  blind  zeal  often  prompts  us  to  fpeak  too  much,  fo  te- 
pidity and  lukewarmnefs  often  caufe  us  to  fpeak  too  little. 
Divine  wifdom  alone,  is  profitable  to  direcl ;  and  I  would  be 
very  cautious  how  I  fpeak,  Icall  I  fl:iould  take  too  much  upoi^ 
me.  I  love  thofe  you  mention,  from  my  foul  ;  and  all  I  can 
fay  is,  "  Lord,  do  thou  lead  and  guide  both  them  and  us.'* 
We  ave  blind  helplefs  creatures.  I  wilh  there  was  more  confi- 
dence between  us  all  j  but  I  fee  that  none  but  the  fpirit  of 
God  can  outwardly  unite  us,  and  therefore  I  have  now  given 
it  up  into  the  Redeemer's  hand.  Only  this  I  pray,  that  I  may 
be  one  of  the  firft  and  not  the  laft  in  bringing  back  the  k 


If  I  have  at  any  time  fee  improper  bounds  to  the  fpirit  of  God, 
or  grieved  it  in  his  children,  I  defire  to  be  very  low,  and  to  be 
broken  hearted  for  it.  I  am  fure  it  hath  not  been  done  wil- 
lingly. I  muil  own,  I  have  fometimes  oppofed  you,  becaufe 
1  think  you  have  made,  and  are  yet  making,  too  much  hafte. 
Youfeem  to  belike-minded  with  thofe,  who  in  our  Saviour's 

time 


LETTER     S.  393 

time  thought  that  the  kingdom  of  God  would  then  come: 
but  you  know  how  oijr  Lord  checked  them  for  it,  and  told 
them,  "  it  was  not  for  them  to  know  the  particular  times  and 
feafons  of  his  coming  to  fct  up  his  kingdom."  I  believe  with 
you,  that  our  glorious  Emmanuel  is  about  to  do  great  things. 
But  how,  when,  and  where,  1  leave  to  his  divine,  foverejtrn 
difpofal.  I  dcfire  flridtly  to  mind  the  particular  plan  affitrncd 
me  ;  at  the  fame  time  to  look  about,  and  fee  what  others  the 
wonderful  counfellor  is  pleafcd  to  employ  in  other  diflrii^s : 
and  though  they  may  difl'er  from  me  in  fome  points,  I  wifh 
them  abundant  profperity  in  the  name  of  our  common  Lord. 
I  am  of  your  mind  with,  refpedt  to  the  church  of  England, 
This,  this  is  the  conftant,  abiding,  intenfe  language  of  my 
heart ;  "  Lord  Jesus,  let  thy  kingdom  come."  You  fee,  my 
dear  brother,  how  fully  I  write  to  you.  It  is  becaufe  I  love  you. 
O  that  we  may  be  taught  to  bear  one  another's  burdens,  and 
fo  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ  !  May  the  Lord  keep  us  all  from 
falling  out  in  our  way  to  heaven.  Amen  and  amen  !  You  and 
yours  will  join  heartily  in  the  fame  petition,  with 

Your  aftectionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER     CCCCXVL 

To  the  Rtv   Mr.  O ,  at  Lecrn'mjler, 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann^  May  27,  1742. 
Aly  dear  Brother^ 

I  Have  not  till  now  had  tirnc  to  anfwcr  your  kind  letter.  I 
rejoice  abundantly  in  the  ufe  our  dear  Lord  is  beginning 
to  make  of  you.  May  he  ufe  and  blefs  you  ever  more  and 
more.  Our  Lord  loves  to  encourage  faith.  They  that  truft 
in  him,  fhall  find  now  as  well  as  formerly,  that  "  it  fliall  be 
given  them  in  that  hour  what  they  fliall  fpeak."  This  I  find 
true  by  happy  experience,  and  am  perfuaded  fliall  prove  the 
truth  of  it  more  and  more.  Since  my  lail,  the  captam  of  our 
falvation  has  can  ied  me  on  to  frtih  conqueft,  and  caufcd  his 
people  to  rejoice  exceedingly  in  his  great  falvation.  Our  foci- 
ety  is  in  great  order.  If  the  Lord  gives  us  a  true  catholic 
fpirit,  free  from  a  party  fecfarian  zeal,  we  iball  do  well.  I  am 
forry  to  hear  that  there  is  fo  much  narrowncfs  among  fome  of 

the 


594  LETT     E    R     S, 

the  brethren  In  iralcs.     Brother  // complains  fa.Jiy  of  it. 

I  hope  dear  Mr.  0 will  be  kept  free,  and  not  fall  intodif- 

putnicr  about  Baptifm  or  other  non-eilentials ;  for  I  am  perluad- 
cd,  unlcfs  we  all  are  content  to  preach  Christ,  and  to  keep  otF 
from  dirputable  things,  wherein  we  differ,  God  will  not  blefs  us 
loner.  If  we  a6l  otherwife,  however  we  may  talk  of  a  catho- 
lic fpirit,  we  fhall  only  be  bringing  people  over  to  our  own 
party,  and  there  fetter  them.     I  pray  the  Lord  to  keep  dear 

Ty/Jr.  Q and  me   from   fuch  a  fpirit.     Dear  Sir,  may  the 

Lord  be  with  you  !  Remember  us  poor  but  willing  pilgrims, 
efpecially  him  who  is  lefs  than  the  leaft  of  all,  but 

Your  affectionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV, 

LETTER    CCCCXVIL 

To  the  Rev.  Mr*  J S ,  ^7  Stockport. 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann^  May  29,  1742. 
HcV.  and  dear  Sir, 

I  Received  your  letter  fome  time  ago,  but  through  multipli- 
city of  bufinefs  could  not  poffibly  anfwcrit  on  fhore.  I 
do  not  remember  feeing  you  at  London  j  but  if  you  love  the 
Redeemer  in  fincerity,  and  preach  the  gofpel  in  the  demonffra- 
tionof  the  fpirit  and  with  power,  I  wi{h  you  all  poiTible  fuccefs 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  As  for  coming  into  your  parts,  it 
is  intirely  uncertain.  My  prefent  call  is  to  Scjtland.  How  my 
Maiter  will  difpofe  of  me  hereafter,  I  know  not.  I  limply  de- 
Tire  to  go  whither  he  fliall  be  plcafed  to  call  me.  I  am  amaz- 
ed that  he  Ihould  call  me  any  wheie,  or  employ  me  as  his 
ambaiiador  to  befeech  poor  finners  to  be  reconciled  to  God. 
But  what  iliall  we  fay  ?  I  can  only  fall  down  at  the  feet  of  the 
Lamb,  and  cry,  Grace  !  grace  !  Of  late  the  Lord  hath  done 
greater  things  for  me,  and  his  church,  than  ever;  and  yet  great- 
er things  I  am  perfuaded  he  Is  about  to  bring  to  pafs.  Dear 
Sir,  help  me  at  the  throne  of  grace,  and  as  you  feem  to  have  a 
third  for  the  Redeen^r's  glory,  recommend  me  to  the  prayers 
of  God's  people,  being  the  chief  of  finners,  but,  for  the  Re- 
deemer's fake. 

Your  mofl  affectionate  friend,  brother  and  fervant, 

G.  IV, 
LETTER 


LETTERS. 


395 


LETTER     CCCCXVIU. 

To  the  Rrj.  Mr.  D ,  in  Ejf.x, 

M-j  vn-y  dear  Brother^  May  29,  1742. 

YOUR  letter  ]ics  by  me,  yet  unanrwcred  ;  the  contents 
hov-evcr  have  not  been  fc;r2;otten  before  the  Lord.  Sure- 
ly the  days  uFyour  pilgrimage  will  erelong  be  ended,  and  the 
liar  which  you  once  faw,  appear  to  you  ai^ain,  and  caufe  vou 
to  rejoice  wit!)  exceeding  great  joy.  I  think  there  is  forne- 
thing  very  extraordinary  in  the  Lord's  dealing  with  you.  I 
can  oi^ly  relblve  it  ir.to  the  divine  fovereignty,  and  fay,  "  even 
ii'^-i  Father,  for  fo  it  feenieth  good  in  thy  Tight."  This  is  often 
the  language  of  my  heart,  with  rcfpc6t  to  God's  dealir.g  with 
my  own  foul.  Many  things  our  Saviour  does  to  me,  which  I 
know  not  now.  It  is  fufficient  that  I  fliall  know  hereafter, 
and  that  1  knov/  thus  far  even  now,  "  that  all  things  are 

working   together   for   good."     Dear  Mr.  D ,   indeed  I 

love  and  pray  for  you.  Our  Saviour,  I  trufl,  will  yet  fet  your 
feet  in  a  large  room,  and  enable  you  to  run  the  way  of  his 
commandments ; 

Thro^  ivinds^  and  clouds^,  andjlorins^  he  II gently  clear  the  wav  ; 
JVait'ihen  his  Ume^Jo  Jhall  this  night  fz on  end  in  joyous  day. 

My   tender   love   await   the   flock  at  D m  ;  I   pray  for 

them  and  you.  Our  Saviour  hath  done  great  thijigs  of  late 
in  London.  I  believe  he  will  yet  do  more  in  Scotland.  O  my 
bi-othcr,  forget  not  to  pray  for  the  chief  of  finners. 

Your  truly  affectionate  friend,  brother 
ai:d  fervant  in  Jesus  Christ, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCCCXIX. 

To  the  Rev.  Mr.  C ,  at  Bath, 

On  I'oard  the  Alary  and  Ann ^  May  29,  1742. 
Aly  very  dear  Friend  and  Brother^ 

NOT  want  of  love,   but  cxcefs  of  bufinefs  prevented  my 
anf^cring  your  kind  letter   dated  yfpril  bth.    In  London 
I   had  f.arcc  time  to  cat  bread,  or   to  take  my  natural  reft. 

Our 


296  LETTERS. 

Our  blefled  Saviour,  with  his  own  right  hand  got  himfelf  the 
vidory  in  many  hearts,  and  brought  mighty  things  to  pafs.  I 
never  faw  the  like  before.  I  muft  renew  my  old  requeft. 
*'  Help,  my  dear  friend,  help  me  to  be  thankful."  I  am  now 
going  a  fecond  time  to  Scotland,  and  purpofe,  God  willing,  at 
the  latter  end  of  the  year  to  embark  for  America,  My  foul  is 
a  thirft  for  the  falvation  of  poor  finners,  Thefe  words,  "  G^ 
ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gofpel  to  every  creature, 
&c,"  have  been  particularly  prefled  upon  my  heart.  O, 
dear  Mr.  C ,  if  the  Lord  has  accounted  us  worthy,  put- 
ting us  into  the  miniftry,  how  careful  fhould  we  be  to  make 
full  proof  thereof  ?  God  willing,  when  I  come  on  fhore  I  will 
begin  in  earneft.  For  alas !  haolcnus  Ji'ihilfeci. — Indeed  I  am 
afhamed  of  myfelf  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart.  Was  not 
my  Mafter's  love  like  himfelf,  infinite,  I  fhould  have  been  caft 
oft'  long  before  this  time.    But  I  find  thofe  whom  he  loves,  he 

loves  to  the  end.     Mr.  W- ,   myfelf,  and  others,   are   in- 

Hances  of  this.  I  hope  our  great  Shepherd  will  now  carry 
him  in  his  arms,  and  not  let  him  to  ftay  again.     I  have  wrote 

to  Mr.  T from  on  board. — If  you  go  to  him,  or  labour 

elfewhere,  that  the  blefled  Jesus  may  be  always  with  you,  is 

the  hearty  prayer  of,  dear  Mr,  C , 

Your  moft  affetStionate  brother  and  fervant 
in  Christ, 


(?.  n 


LETTER    CCCCXX. 


To  Mr.  J H ,  in  London. 

On  hoard  the  Mary  and  Ann,  May  ic^,\'j^i, 
Dear  Sir, 

YOUR  letter  much  afPecled  me.  I  hope  the  contents 
have  made  the  angels  to  rejoice,  and  that  before  this 
time  you  have  found  reft  in  the  wounded  Lamb.  That  God, 
who  firfl:  fpoke  light  out  of  darknefs,  I  truft  is  beginning  to 
iliine  into  your  heart,  and  to  perfect  a  new  creation  in  your 
Ibul.  You  are  not  the  firft,  dear  friend,  by  thoufands,  who 
have  thought  themfelvcs  rich  and  increafed  in  goods,  not  con- 
fidering  they  were  poor  and  miferable  and  blind  and  naked.  I 
iuppofc  you  can  now  join  with  me  in  the  following  verfes : 

Lonc^ 


LETTERS.  397 

I. 

iong  did  my  foulin  Jefus  form 
No  comcUncfs  nor  beauty  fee  ; 
His  facred  7iame  by  others  priz'dy 
TFas  tajUkfsJldl  and  dead  to  me, 

11. 

Men  caird  me  Chrijlian^  and  ?ny  heart 
On  that  dehifan  fondly Jl ay  d  ; 
Moral  my  hopes^  my  Saviour  felf, 
'Till  mighty  grace  the  cheat  difplafd. 

III. 

Thanks  to  the  hand  that  walCd  ?ny  dreamy 
That  fhew^d  me  wretched^  naked^  poor  j 
That  fweetly  led  me  to  the  Rocky 
Where  all  falvationfla?ids  fecure, 

IV. 

Glady  I forfook  my  righteous  pride^ 
My  moraly  tarnifh' d^finful  drefs^ 
Exchanged  my  drofs  away  for  Chrijl^ 
And  found  the  robe  of  right  eoufnefs, 

Thefc  lines,  dear  Sir,  I  think  are  very  emphatical.  I  trufl 
you  can  now  repeat  them  from  your  heart.  If  fo,  hail  happy 
man  !  Jesus  hath  waflied  you  in  his  blood,  and  given  you 
eternal  life.  You  now  then  have  nothing  to  do,  but  to  live  to 
him,  who  hath  lived  and  died  for  you,  and  if  neceflary  would 
die  again  for  you  with  all  his  heart.  Surely  our  Saviour  loves 
you,  otherwife  he  would  not  have  fliewed  you  all  thefe  things. 
I  love  you  for  his  fake  (though  unknown)  ;  and  if  he  hath 
been  pleafed  to  work  by  my  unworthy  miniftry,  let  him 
have  all  the  glory,  and  forget  not  to  pray  for  the  poor,  weak 
inftrument,  who  has  not  forgotten  to  pray  for  you,  being, 
dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  afFedlionate  friend  and  fervant, 
in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 


LETTER 


39^  LETTER    S, 

LETTER     CCCCXXr. 

To  Mr.  H H ,  in  Wales. 

On  board  the  Mary  and  Ann^  May  29,    1 7  42. 
My  very  dear  Brother^ 

THOUGH   I   could    not  write   to  you  on    (liore,   yet  I 
inijft  not  omit  writing  to  you  on  board.     I  am  heartily 
forry  that  fuch  a  narrow  fpirit  prevails  in  IFalcs.  I  have  written 

to  Mr.  // .     But  what  (hall  we  fay  ?  The  Redeemer's 

love  alone  can  unite  and  keep  together  his  floclcs.  Difput- 
ing  with  bigots  and  narrow-fpirited  people  will  not  do.  I 
intend  henceforward  to  lay  Ids  to  them,  and  pri.y  more  and 
more  to  our  Lord  for  them.  "  Lord,  enlarge  their  hearts,'* 
is  my  continual  prayer  for  fuch,  who  are  (o  flreightened  in 
their  own  bowels.  Elefled  be  God,  this  partition-wall  is 
breaking  down  daily  in  fome  of  our  old  friends  hearts  in  Lon- 
don. I  exhort  all  to  go  where  they  can  profit  moft.  I  preach 
what  I  believe  to  be  the  truth,  and  then  leave  it  to  the  fpirit 
of  God  to  make  the  application.  When  we  have  done  this, 
I  think  we  have  gone  to  the  utmoft  bounds  of  our  commif- 
iion.  O  my  brother,  I  find  more  and  more,  nothing  but  that 
wifdom,  which  is  from  above,  can  teach  us  how  to  build  up 
fouls.  I  never  was  {o  much  allifted  in  this  kind  of  work,  as 
fmce  I  came  to  London  laft.  We  have  public  i'ocietics  twice 
a  week,  and  a  general  meeting  for  reading  letters  once  a  month. 
Our  Lord  has  been  much  with  us.  We  fcem  to  move  on 
iiov/  in  gofpel  dignity,  and  are  terrible  as  an  army  with  ban- 
ners. If  the  Lord  inclines  you,  a  vifit  to  London  vjou\6  be 
very  acceptable.  (3ur  people  can  now  bear  fcarching  more 
than  formerly.  I  find  that  our  Lord  hath  particularly  blefled 
you  that  way.  We  have  had  a  moft  bleffed  funeral  of  one  of 
our  filters  in  Christ,  and  the  awakening,  I  think,  has  been 
as  great  as  when  I  firft  came  out,  and  abundantly  more  folid. 
The  Eajier  Holidays  were  high  days  indeed.  My  wife  doth 
not  forget  her  friends  in  IP'ales.  But  our  Lord  has  feen  fit 
to  excrcife  her  with  exceeding  clofe  inward  trials.  She  and 
all  with  mc  moft  cordially  falute  you.  1  cxpecl:  great  things 
in  Scotland.  If  pofiible,  at  my  return,  I  hope  to  fee  you  in  Wales. 
But  future  things  belong  to  God.  Adieu.  Forget  not  to  pray  for 
Your  aricciioiiate  brother  pilgrim, 

G.   W, 
LETTKR 


LETTERS.  399 

LETTER    CCCCXXII. 

To  Mr,  A ,  in  London. 

Edinburgh^  'June  4,   1 742. 
A'ly  dear  Brother  A , 

FROM  a  heart  overflowing  with  a  fcnfe  of  God's  love,  I 
write  you  thefe  few  lines.  Yefterday  our  Saviour 
brought  us  hither.  On  board,  I  fpent  moll  part  of  my  time 
in  fccret  prayer.  Satan  (hot  many  of  his  fiery  darts  againft 
me.  Our  great  Michael  gave  me  a  fhield  of  faith,  by  which  1 
was  enabled  to  repel  them  all.  As  foon  as  I  came  on  fhore, 
the  holy  fpirit  filled  my  foul.  The  Lord  commanded  people 
to  receive  me  and  my  fellow  pilgrim  into  their  houfes.  Our 
fouls  rejoiced  in  him.  The  people  were  foon  alarmed  at  my  ar- 
rival. As  foon  as  I  came  on  fhore  at  Leith,  many  came  blefl- 
ing  me,  and  weeping,  took  hold  of  me.  About  four  in  the  af- 
ternoon we  came  to  Edinburgh.  Great  numbers  followed  our 
coach,  and  almoft  catched  me  in  their  arms,  as  foon  as  I  cama 
out  of  it.  How  did  they  weep  for  joy  !  It  would  have  melted 
you  down  to  have  feen  them.  When  I  came  to  my  lodging-, 
many  dear  friends  came  to  falute  us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
About  feven  o'clock  I  went  to  fee  fome  perfons  of  diftindliofi, 
whofe  hearts  the  Lord  reached,  when  I  was  here  laft.  Some 
were  ready  to  faint  with  excefs  of  joy  :  with  thefe  I  prayed 
and  gave  thanks.  The  Holy  Ghofb  filled  us  with  all  joy  and 
peace  in  believing. —  At  eight  I  went  to  a  nobleman's  houfe, 
where  his  lady  and  feveral  other  dear  friends  received  us  with 
great  gladnefs.  The  culhions  and  bible  were  immediately- 
brought.  I  gave  a  word  of  exhortation.  We  fung,  and  prayed, 
and  fpent  the  remainder  of  the  evening  moft  delightfully  in 
talking  of  the  things  of  God.  When  we  came  home,  we 
joined  in  bleffing  God's  holy  name.  Though  late,  I  fcarce 
knew  how  to  go  to  reft. —  This  morning  I  received  glorious 
accounts  of  the  carrying  on  of  the  Mediator's  kingdom.  The 
w^ork  of  God  is  beyond  exprefHon.  Three  of  the  litile  boys 
that  were  converted  when  I  was  lafl:  here,  came  to  me  and 
v/ept,  and  begged  me  to  pray  for  and  with  them.  A  miniftcr 
tells  me,  that  fcarce  one  is  fallen  back,  who  was  awakened, 
either  among  old  cr  young.  The  ferjeant,  whofe  letter,  bro- 
ther 


400  LETTERS. 

thcr  C has,  goes  on  well  with  his  company.     O  my  dear 

brother,  help  me  to  praife  the  Lamb  that  fitteth  upon  the 
throne  for  ever  ;  and  defire  all  the  fociety  to  join  with  you. 
I  believe  within  thefe  four  months  you  will  hear  of  very  great 
things.  Pray  that  I  may  be  very  little  in  my  ovrn  eyes,  and 
not  rob  my  dear  Mafler  of  any  part  of  his  glory.  We  do  not 
forget  you.  Once  a  day  we  meet  together  and  pray  for  ab- 
fent  friends.  He  gives  us  leave,  as  it  were,  to  afk  of  him 
what  we  will,  and  promifes  never  to  leave  or  forfake  us.  f^or 
the  prefent,  my  dear  brother,  adieu  !  As  opportunity  cfFcrs, 
and   if  poflible  every  poft,  fome  or  other  of  my  dear  friend*^ 

ihall  hear,  dear  brother  A ,  from 

Your  moft  affectionate,  though  moft  unworthy 
brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  TF. 

LETTER     CCCCXXIII. 

Tg  the  Right  Honourable  Lord  R . 

My  Lord^  Edinburgh^  'June  4,  1742. 

YESTERDAY  morning  our  glorious  Enunanucl  brought 
us  hither.  Your  Lordfhip's  kind  letter  was  put  into' 
iny  hands.  I  heartily  fympathize  with  your  Lordfl:iip  ;  but 
could  not  help  rejoicing  on  your  honoured  lady's  account^ 
knowing  fhe  is  now  entered  into  her  bleffed  Maimer's  joy. 
Indeed,  my  Lord,  I  think,  among  chriftians,  death  hath  not 
only  loft  its  fting,  but  its  name.  I  never  was  fo  joyful  as  I 
am  now  at  the  death  of  thofe  who  die  in  the  Lord  ;  and 
never  was  fo  reconciled  to  Jiving  myfelf.  My  general  lan- 
guage, when  I  hear  of  the  faints  departure,  is,  ^'  Let  them 
go."  Lately  at  London  we  had  a  filler  in  Christ  departed. 
Her  laft  words  were,  *'  Holy,  holy,  holy  ! "  flie  could  fay  no 
iTiore  here  ;  but  our  Saviour  fent  for  her  to  finifh  her  fong  in 
heaven.  I  preached  over  her  corpfc  ;  our  fociety  attended  :  but 
furely  never  did  fouls  triumph  over  death  more  than  we  did 
that  night.  Many  would  fay,  "  O  death  !  where  is  thy  fting  \ 
O  grave  !  where  is  thy  viiSlory  r  "  As  for  my  own  part,  I  was 
enabled  to  trample  death  under  my  feet :  and,  bleffcd  be 
God,  through  rich  grace  I  can  do  that  daily.  But  then  your 
Lordftiip  may  afk,  *<  Why  are  you  reconciled  to  life  ?"  Be- 
\  caufe 


LETTER     S.  4ot 

fca'tife  I  can  do  that  for  Jesus  on  earth,  which  I  cannot  do  in 
heaven  :  I  mean,  be  made  inftrumental  in  bringing  fomc  poor^ 
v/eary,  heavy  laden  finncrs  to  find  reft  in  his  blood  and  rio-hte- 
oufnefs  :  and,  indeed,  if  our  Saviour  was  to  orTer  cither  to 
take  me  ndW)  or  to  ftay  only  to  take  one  finner  more,  I  wouli 
defire  to  ftay  to  take  him  with  me.  But  whither  am  I  run- 
ning ?  O  my  Lord,  death  is  a  delightful  topic.  Excufe  ms 
if  I  forget  myfelf  when  vvriting  about  it.  Blefled  be  our  God 
for  fupporting  your  foul  under  fo  clofe  a  trial  !  How  fweet 
Vill  it  be  to  meet  your  Lady  glorified  at  the  great  day  !  Yet 
a  little  while,  and  that  happy  day  fhall  come.  But  it  is  time 
to  anfwer  your  Lordfhip's  queftion  :  "  How  was  you  on  the 
24th  of  laft  November  f"  I  thank  God,  very  well.  My 
foul  was  much  refrelhed  with  the  Redeemer's  prefence  ;  and 
1  was  rejoicing  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  1  hear  of  won- 
derful things  in  Scotland.  I  can  only  fall  dov^n  and  worfnip. 
I  have  feen  greater  things  than  ever  in  E?iglajicL  I  expecl  to 
fee  far  greater  in  Scotland.  Our  Lord  will  not  let  his  people 
be  difiippointed  of  their  hopes.  But  I  muft  away.  We  were 
very  happy  together  with  fome  other  dear  friends  laft  night. 
I  have  not  feen  your  Lordftiip's  daughters,  though  they  have 
been  fo  kind  as  to  fend  to  enquire  after  my  health.  I  hope  to 
fee  them  to-day  ;  and  am,  my  Lord,  with  all  poffibie  refpc.^t, 
my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfhip's  moft  obedient  humble  fcrvant, 

LETTER     CCCCXXIV. 

to  the  P^ruerend  Mr.  M ,  at  Camhuf.nv.g, 

Edinburgh^  June  8,    174-^' 
Reverend  and  very  dear  Brother, 

Heartily  rejoice  at  the  awakening  at  Camlv.Jhng^  and 
eirev.here.  I  believe  you  v/ill  both  fee  and  hear  of  far 
greater  things  than  thefe.  I  truft  that  not  one  corner  of  poor 
Scotland  will  be  left  unvvatcred  by  the  dew  of  God's  heavenly 
blefiing.  The  cloud  is  now  only  rifing  as  big  as  a  man's 
hand;  yet  a  little  v/hile,  and  we  fliall  hear  a  foinvi  of  an 
abundance  of  gofpel  rain.  Our  glorious  Err.Tnrmufl\\.\s  given 
us  much  of  his  divine  prefence  fince  my  arrivul.  O  that'ic 
Vol.  h  D  d  may 

9 


402  LETTERS. 

may  accompany  me  to  CambuJJang  !  God  willing,  I  hope  to 
be  with  you  the  beginning  of  next  week  ;  but  cannot  exadly 
tell  the  day.  In  the  mean  while,  forget  not  to  pray  for, 
levcrend  and  dear  brother. 

Yours  mofl  alFedionately  in  Christ, 

LETTER    CCCCXXV. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr,  E E •,  at  Sterling, 

Edinburgh^  June  lo,  1742. 
Reverend  and  very  dear  S'lr^ 

I  Am  now  at  Mr.  G 's  houfe  ;  and  finding  his  wife  about 
to  fet  out  for  Sterlings  the  love  which  I  bear  you,  for  my 
dear  Mafter's  fake,  conftrains  me  to  fend  you  a  line.  It  is 
feme  concern  to  me,  that  our  difference  as  to  outward  things, 
Ihould  cut  off  our  fweet  fellowfhip  and  communion  with  each 
other.  God  knows  my  heart,  I  highly  value  and  honour 
vou.  Reverend  and  dear  Sir,  I  do  aflure  you  I  love  you  and 
your  brethren  more  than  ever.  I  applaud  your  zeal  for  God  ; 
and  though,  in  fome  refpedls,  I  think  it  not  according  to 
knowledge,  and  to  be  levelled  frequently  againft  me,  yet 
indeed  I  feel  no  refentment  in  my  heart,  and  fhould  joyfully 
fit  down  and  hear  you  and  your  other  brethren  preach.  I  fa- 
lute  them  all ;  and  pray  our  common  Lord  to  give  us  all  a 
right  judgment  in  all  things.  I  hope  the  glorious  Emmanuel  will 
be  prefent  at  the  facrament,  and  make  himfelf  known  to  you 
in  breaking  of  bread.  I  have  made  bold  to  fend  you  the  in- 
clofcd  pamphlets,  and  fliould  be  glad  to  know  your  opinion 
of  them.  When  I  fhall  come  to  Sterlings  I  know  not.  How- 
ever, I  earneflly  pray  for  you  and  yours.  I  could  drop  i  tear. 
O  when  fiiall  the  time  come,  when  the  v/atchmen  will  fee  eye 
to  e3^e  ?  Harten  that  time,  our  Lord  and  our  God  !  But 
perhaps  I  am  troublefomc.  Forgive  me,  reverend  and  dear 
Sir,  being,  without  diiTunulation,  your 

Younger  brother  and  fervant  in  the 

2;orpcl  of  ChRPST, 

G,  W, 


L  E  T  T  E  R 


LETTERS.  403 

LETTER     CCCCXXVL 

To    Mr,  D A ,    //;   Londoji, 

Dear  Friend^  Edinburgh^  "July  7,  1742. 

I  Arrived  here  laft  Saturday  evening  from  the  Z^^/?,  where  I 
preached  all  the  laft  week  :  as,  twice  on  Monday  at  PaiJIeyy 
iix  miles  from  Glajgow  ;  on  the  Tuefday  and  Wedncfday^  three 
times  each  day,  at  Irvine^  16  miles  from  thence;  on  Thuj-f- 
day^  twice  at  Mearns,  fifteen  miles  from  that ;  on  Friday^ 
three  times  at  Cmnhcrnauld\  and  on  Saturday^  twice  at  Falkirk^ 
in  my  way  to  Edinburgh,  In  every  place  there  was  the 
greateft  commotion  among  the  people  as  was  ever  known. 
Their  mourning  in  moft  of  the  places,  was  like  the  mourning 
for  a  lirft-born.  The  auditories  were  very  large,  and  the 
work  of  God  fcems  to  be  fpreading  more  and  more.  Laft 
fabbath-day  I  preached  twice  in  the  park,  and  once  in  the 
church,  and  twice  every  day  fince.  A  number  of  feats  and 
(hades,  in  the  form  of  an  amphitheatre,  have  been  ere6led  in 
the  park,  where  the  auditory  fit  in  a  beautiful  order.  I  have 
received  very  agreeable  news  from  my  family  abroad. — I  pur- 
pofe  going  to  Ca^nbujlang  to-morrow,  in  order  to  aflift  at  the 
communion  ;  and  fliall  preach  at  various  places  weftward  be- 
fore I  return  here.  I  intend  to  embark  for  /Imerica  as  foon  as 
pofiible  after  I  leave  Scotland.  Thus  you  fee,  my  dear  bro- 
ther, how  I  have  been  employed.  O  give  thanks  to  our 
blelTed  Saviour,  for  his  great  unparalleled  goodncfs  to  a  moft 
unworthy  worm.  Indeed  I  have  fecn  and  felt  fuch  things,  as 
I  never  faw  and  felt  before.  I  never  was  enabled  to  preach  fo 
pov/erfully  as  whilft  I  have   been  in  the  TVeJl.     I  hear  that 

brother  C is  in  the  country,  and  that  yoii  exhort  in  the 

fociety.  May  the  Lord  open  your  mouth,  and  caufe  your 
lips  to  (hew  forth  his  praife  !  Let  us  talk  of  his  loving-kind- 
nefs  all  the  day  long.  God  gives  me  faith  for  my  poor  or- 
phans. Help  me  with  your  prayers,  God  will  fupply  all  my 
wants.  Glory  be  to  his  name,  I  am  kept  from  doubting. 
My  brother,  I  love  you  dearly.  You  have  been  a  dole  and 
faithful  brother.  May  the  Lord  blcfs  you  and  yours.  Adieu! 
Pray  fail  not  of  writing  as  particular  as  may  be,  to, 

Moft  afFe<5lio]iatcly  yours  in  Christ, 

G.  JV. 
Dd2  LETTER 


404 


LETTERS. 


LETTER    CCCCXXVII. 

To   Mr.  H ,    at   the    Orphan-houfe. 

Edinburgh  J  July  7,  1742^. 
My  very  dear  friend,  faithful  Jieward^ 
and  brother  m  Christ, 

LAST  Monday  I  received  an  agreeable  packet  of  letters 
from  you.  I  think  they  are  dated  in  OBober  and  De- 
cemhsr  laft.  They  rejoiced  our  hearts.  As  foon  as  I  read  yours, 
my  wife  faid,  let  U3  give  thanks  and  pray.  Accordingly  wc 
kneeled  down,  and  had  very  near  accefs  to  the  Father  of  Mer- 
cies on  your  behalf.  At  night,  after  our  coming  home,  we 
did  the  fame.  Our  common  Lord  enabled  us  to  wreftle  in 
faith.  V/e  ail  felt  our  hearts  drav^^n  mightily  towards  you. 
1  could  wi(h  for  wings  to  fly  unto  you.  I  long  to  thank  you 
in  perfon,  for  your  faithfulnefs  to  your  poor  unworthy,  but 
mo{l  affectionate  friend.  My  dear  brother,  God  is  flill  doing 
greater  things  for  me  than  ever.  The  awakening  here  in 
Scotland  is  unfpeakable.  The  congregations  in  the  //^^,  are 
juft  like  thofe  which  you  and  I  favv  at  Foggs-Manor^  in  Pen- 
fyhania.  God  feems  to  awaken  fcores  together.  I  never 
was  enabled  to  preach  fo  before.  O  that  I  may  lie  low  at 
the  feet  of  my  dear  Redeemer  !  to  vvhofe  image  I  arti  ftudying 
to  be  more  conformed  every  day.     Your  letter  to  dear  brother 

J pleafed   us  very  much.     I  have  dcfircd  him  to  print  it. 

I   paid  a  three  hundred  pound   bill  drav/n  upon  me  by  Mr. 

iV' ,  as  well  as  Mr.  B 's :  whether  ycu  include  that  in 

the  eleven  thoufand  pounds,  I  know  not.  However,  biefTed  be 
God,  if  it  wcretleven  thoufand  more  I  hope  1  fnould  be  kept 
from  doubting.  At  prefent,  I  am  lookin-  up  to  our  great 
Houfl:oider  for  frelh  fiipplics  ;  which  I  believe  he  wii"!  give 
me,  and  which  I  will  fend  to  you  as  foon  as  poflible.  I  hope 
to  fee  vou  foon,  and  to  thar.k  you  m  particul  '.r  for  your  faith- 
fulnefs  to  me.  My  friend  and  brother,  you  fliall  in  no  wife 
loie  your  reward.  I  belicvc  God  will  take  Georgia  into  his 
own  hands.      Its   affairs  have  lately  been  before  the  Houfc  of 

Commons.      'lAr.  Ste was  reprimanded   for  his- abufe  of 

the  tiuicces  ;  the  ufe  of  rum  v/as  granted,  but  the  ufc  of  flaves 
denied.     Let  us  fhnd  fcill,  be  infiant  in  prayer,  and   we  f})all 

certainly 


LETTERS.  405 

certainly  fee  the  falvation  of  God.  I  am  yet  made  to  hope 
againft  hope,  in  behalf  of  poor  Georgia.  The  Lord  Ihcngthcn 
your  weak  body,  and  continually  comfort  your  fowl.  That 
you  may  be  filled  with  all  the  fulnefs   of  God,   is  thj  hearty 

prayer  of,  dear  Mr.  H , 

Yours  eternally  in  the  flridefl  bonds  of  gofpcl  love, 

G,  IK 

LETTER     CCCCXXVIII. 

To  Mrs.  JFhheficld. 
My  dear  Love^  Edlnhwghy  July  7,  1742. 

SINCE  I  wrote  the  lad,  I  have  feen  fuch  things  as  I 
never  beheld  before.  Yefterday  morning  I  preached  at 
Glafgow  to  a  very  large  congregation.  At  noon  I  came  to 
Cambi^Jlang^  the  place  which  God  hath  {o  much  honoured. 
I  preached  at  two,  to  a  vaft  body  of  people,  and  at  fix  in  the 
evening,  and  again  at  nine  at  night.  Such  a  commotion 
furely  never  was  heard  of,  efpecially  at  eleven  at  night.  It 
far  out-did  all  that  I  ever  faw  in  Amzrica.  For  about  an  hour 
and  a  half  there  was  fuch  weeping,  fo  many  falling  into  deep 
diftrefs,  and  exprefling  it  various  ways,  as  is  inexprcfTible. 
The  people  feem  to  be  {lain  by  fcores.  They  are  carried  off, 
and  come  into  the  houfe  like  foldiers  wounded  in,  and  carried 
off  a  field  of  battle.     Their  cries  and  agonies  are  exceedingly 

affecting.     A4r.  M preached  after  I  had  ended,  till  pad 

one  in  the  morning,  and  then  could  fcarce  perfuadc  them  to 
depart.  All  night  in  the  fields,  might  be  heard  the  voice  of 
prayer  and  praife.  Some  young  ladies  were  found  by  a  gen- 
tlewoman praifing  God  at  break  of  day.  She  v/ent  and 
joined  with  them.  The  Lord  is  indeed  much  with  me.  I 
have  preached  twice  to-day  already,  ar.d  am  to  preach  twice, 
perhaps  three  times  more.  The  commotions  increafe.  To- 
morrow, and  on  fabbath-day,  I  fhall  preach  at  Caldcr  ;  on 
Monday^  here  again  \  and  on  Tucfday  at  Kilfytb,  and  tlien, 
God  willing,  at  Glajgow.  I  am  perfuaded  the  work  will 
fpread  more  and  more.  My  kindeft  refpects  to  all.  Accept 
gf  the  fame  from,  my  dear  love. 

Yours,  ^c. 

G.  VA 

Dd  2  LETTER 


4o6  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCCXXIX. 

Tq  the  Reverend  Mr»  W- ,  of  Dundee, 

Edinburgh^  July  7,   1 742. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

YOUR  letter  gave  me  fome  little  concern.     I  thought  it 
breathed  much  of  a  fc6tarian  fpirit  ;  to  which  I  hoped 

dear  Mr.  IP^- was  quite  averfe.     Methinks  you  feem,  dear 

Sir,  not  fatisfied,  unlefs  I  declare  myfelf  a  Prefbytcrian,  and 
openly  renounce  the  church  of  England.  God  knows  that 
I  have  been  faithful  in  bearing  a  teftimony  againfl:  what  I 
think  is  corrupt  in  that  church.  I  have  fhewn  my  freedom  in 
communicating  with  the  church  of  Scotland,  and  in  baptizing 
children  their  own  way.  I  can  go  no  further.  As  for  what 
you  mention  about  the  Qiiakers,  I  know  not  what  particular 
exceptionable  paflages  there  were  in  my  fermons,  in  which  I 
mentioned  them.  That  fome  good  fouls  are  among  the 
Qi^iakers,  I  doubt  not. — For  fuch  1  have  charity,  becaufe  our 
Lord  hath  given  to  them  his  fpirit. — Though  I  am  a 
ftrenuous  defender  of  the  righteoufnefs  of  Christ,  and  ut- 
terly deteft  Arjjwiian  principles,  yet  I  know  that  God  gave  me 
the  Holy  Ghoft,  before  I  was  clear  in  either  as  to  head-know- 
ledge :  and  therefore,  dear  Sir,  I  am  the  more  moderate  to 
people  who  are  not  clear,  fuppofing   I  fee  the  divine  image 

damped   upon   their  hearts.     Mr.  TV ,  AJr.  L ,  &c. 

I  take  to  be  holy  men  of  God,  though  they  think  far  widely 
from  me,  and  from  each  other  in  fome  particular  branches  of 
dodtrine.  Dear  Sir,  be  not  offended  at  my  plain  fpeaking. 
I  find  but  few  of  a  truly  catholic  fpirit.  Moft  are  catholic 
till  they  bring  perfons  over  to  their  own  party,  and  there  they 
would  fetter  "them.  I  have  not  fo  learned  ChrisIt.  I  defire 
to  a6l  as  God  adis.  I  fhall  approve,  and  join  with  all  who 
are  good  in  every  fe6t,  and  caft  a  mantle  of  love  over  all  that 
are  bad,  fo  far  as  is  confiftent  with  a  good  confciepce.  This 
I  can  do  without  temporizing  ;   nay  I  (hould  defile   my  con- 

iciencc  if  I  did  otherwife.     As  for  my  anfwer  to  Mr.  M , 

dear  Sir,  it  is  very  fatisfying  to  iny  own  foul.  Morning  and 
evening  retirement  is  certainly  exceeding  good  ,  but  if  through 
wcuknefs  of  body,  or  frequency  of  preaching,   I  cannot  go  to 

GCD 


LETTERS.  407 

God  in  my  ufual  fet  times,  I  think  my  fpirit  is  not,in  bond- 
age. It  is  not  for  me  to  tell  how  often  I  ufe  fecret  prayer  ; 
if  I  did  oot  ufe  it,  nay,  if  in  one  fenfc  I  did  not  pray  without 
ceafing,  it  would  be  difficult  for  mc  to  keep  up  that  frame  of 
foul,  which  by  the  divine  bleiling  I  daily  enjoy.  If  the  work 
of  God  profpers,  and  your  hands  become  more  full,  you  will 
then,  dear  Sir,  know  better  what  I  mean.  But  enough  of 
this.  God  knows  my  heart,  I  would  do  every  thing  I  pofTibly 
could,  to  fatisfy  all  men,  and  give  a  reafon  of  the  hope  that 
is  in  me  with  meeknefs  and  fear  ;  but  I  cannot  fatisfy  all  that 
are  waiting  for  an  occafion  to  find  fault :  our  Lord  could 
not ;  I  therefore  defpair  of  doing  it.  However,  dear  Sir,  I  take 
what  you  have  faid  in  very  good  part  :  only  I  think  you 
are  too  folicitous  to  clear  up  my  character  to  captious  and 
prejudiced  men.  Let  my  mafter  fpeak  for  me.  Blefled  be 
God,  he  will,  fo  long  as  I  fimply  throw  myfelf  into  his  aU 
mighty  arms.  I  am  glad  the  work  goes  on  with  you.  Glory 
be  to  God,  we  have  feen  glorious  things  in  the  Weft.  My 
tender  love  to  all  that  are  pleafed  to  remember  me.  When  I 
fhall  come  your  way,  I  know  not.  On  Friday^  God  will- 
ing, I  go  to  Camhujlang^  where  I  expe£l  to  fee  great  days  of 
the  fon  of  man.  That  God  may  blefs  you  abundantly  more 
and  more,  and  caufe  your  latter  end  greatly  to  increafe,  is 
the  hearty  prayer  of,  reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

Yours  &c. 

G,  TV, 

LETTER    CCCCXXX. 

Ti?  the  Reverend  Mr,  A ,  In  Dublin. 

GlafgoWy  July  12,    1742. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

ON  Saturday  I  received  your  very  kind  letter,  and  being 
juft  now  returned  from  Carnhiijlang,  I  fnatch  a  fcv/  mo- 
ments to  acknowledge  it.  I  have  long  fmce  waited  for  a  call 
to  Ireland.  In  fuch  an  important  ftep,  I  care  not  to  proceed 
without  great  caution.  When  I  find  the  cloud  of  divirjc  pro- 
vidence moving  your  way,  I  truft  the  language  of  mv  heart 
will  be.  Lord,  I  come  to  do  or  fufier  thy  will  !  In  the  irjcan 
while,   I  will  watch  unto  prayer.     I  doubt  not  but  you,  reve- 

D  d  4  I  end 


4oS  L    E    T     T    E    R    S. 

rend  and  tlenr  Sir,  will  help  me  herein.  I  thank  you  moll 
heartily,  for  being  jealous  over  me.  I  believe  it  is  with  a  godly 
icaloufy.  I  wifh  I  was  more  jealous  over  myfelf.  Bi!t  blefied  be 
God,  this  I  can  fciy  in  the  midft  of  the  honours  wherewith  the 
glorious  Emfjianuel h3.{h  honoured  me,**- Not  unto  me, O  Lord, 
not  unto  me,  but  unto  thy  name  be  all  the  glory."  Dear  Sir, 
I  think  I  am  the  worft  of  the  fons  of  men.  Yet  I  dare  not 
deny  what  the  blefied  Jesus  hath  done  for  my  finful  foul. 
Keisplcafed  (O  infinitely  condefcending  God  1)  to  honour  me 
I'lill  more  and  more.  Saturday  lail  I  came  to  CamhujJang^  and 
I  think  I  never  faw  fuch  things  before.  The  work  feems 
to  be  fpreading.  O  that  it  may  reach  and  overfpread  poor 
Ireland  2\\o\  All  things  are  pofTible  with  God.  Now  the 
Lord  is  watering  fo  many  other  places,  I  pray  he  may  not 
leave  that  intirely  deftilute  and  dry. — O  for  faith  to  expect 
great,  and  very  great  things  from  God  !  He  d.es  not  love  to 
difappoint  people  of  their  hope.  Dear  Sir,  riiy  heart  is  now 
enlar.o-ed    with    a    fenfe  of  the   freenefs    and    fulnefs  of    the 

o 

Redeemer's  loving-kindnefs.  You,  de^r  Sir,  are  an  old 
weather  beaten  foldicr.  You  are  ripened  for  glory,  and  are 
ready  to  {mg  your  Nunc  difniiiis  *. — 1  am  jufc  about  to  begin  to 
be  a  foldier.  But,  bleiTed  be  God,  I  fliall  follow  focn.  The 
hopes  of  bringing  more  fouls  to  Jesus  Christ,  is  the 
only  confidcration  that  can  reconcile  me  to  life.  For  this 
caufe  I  can  willingly  flay  long  from  my  wifh'd-for  home, 
my  wiihed-for  Jesus.  But  whither  am  I  going  f  I  forget 
myfelf  when  writing  of  jEstJs.  IJis  love  fills  my  foul, 
O  free  grace  I  Surely  I  fhall  fing  the  loudeftin  heaven  ;  but  I 
mufl  have  done  j  nature  calls  for  red.  Depending  on  the 
continuance  of  your  prayers,  and  with  my  hearty  falutation  to 
all  that  love  the  blefied  Jesus,  I  fubfcribe  myfelf,  reverend 
and  dear  Sir, 

Your  moil:  afFeclionatc,  though  ^ounger  and 

moil  unv/orthy  brother  and  fervant  in 

the  gofptl  of  God's  dear  Son, 

G.  FA, 
'^  Now  iettefl  thou  thy  fervant,  &Ca 


L  E  T  T  £ 


LETTERS.  409 

LETTER     CCCCXXXI. 

To   Mr.  y C ,    in    London, 

New-KUpatricky  July  15,    1742. 
My  dear  Brother^ 

OF  all  my  fellow-labourers  letters,  I  think  yours  come 
the  fweeteft  to  my  foul.  You  do  not  forget  the  rock 
from  wnen.ce  you  was  hewn,  and  therefore  the  Lord  will 
honour  ynu  more  and  more.  Though  I  have  fo  fmall  a  de- 
gree of  humility  myfelf,  I  c?in  fee  and  admire  it  in  others. 
It  is  the  queen  of  graces.  O  beg  of  the  exalted  Je3Us  to  make 
ine  humble.  Indeed  I  have  need  of  humility,  for  I  am  ho^ 
noured  m.ore  and  more.  What  I  have  fent  you  already,  does 
not  near  come  up  to  vi'hat  I  have  feen  fmce.  Laft  Thurfday 
nigtit,  and  Friday  morning,  there  was  fuch  a  fhock  in  Edinburgh' 
as  i  never  felt  before.  O  what  a  melting  and  weeping  was 
there  !  I  have  heard  blefied  efFe6cS  of  it  fmce.  All  glory  be 
to  GoT)  through  Christ.  On  Friday  night  I  came  to  Cam- 
lufiaug^  to  afTill:  at  the  bleffed  facramcnt.  On  Saturday  I 
preached  to  above  twenty  thoufand  people.  In  my  prayer  the 
power  of  God  came  down  and  was  greatly  felt.  In  my  two 
fermons,  there  was  yet  more  power.  On  fabbath  day,  fcarce 
ever  was  fuch  a  fight  feen  in  Scotland,  There  were  undoubt- 
edly upwards  of  twenty  thoufand  people.  Two  tents  were 
fet  up,  and  the  holy  facrament  was  adminiftered  in  the  fields. 
When  I  began  to  ferve  a  table,  the  power  of  God  was  felt 
by  numbers  ;  but  the  people  crouded  fo  upon  me,  that  I  was 
obliged  to  defift  and  go  to  preach  at  one  of  the  tents, 
whilft  the  miniflers  ferved  the  reft  of  the  tables.  God  was 
with  them,  and  with  his  people.  There  was  preaching  all 
day  by  one  or  another,  and  in  the  evening,  when  the  facra- 
ment was  over,  at  the  requeft  of  the  minifters  I  preached  to 
t:he  whole  congregation.  I  preached  about  an  hour  and  a  half. 
Surely  it  was  a  time  much  to  be  remembered.  On  Monday 
piorning,  I  preached  again  to  near  as  many  ;  but  fuch  an 
univerfiil  ftir  I  never  faw  before.  The  motion  fled  as  fwift 
as  lightning  from  one  end  of  the  auditory  to  another.  You 
might  have  feen  thoufands  bathed  in  tears.  Some  at  the  fame 
tirne  wringing  their  hands,  others  almoft  fwconing,  and  others 

crying 


4IO  LETTER    S. 

crying  out,  and  mourning  over  a  pierced  Saviour.  But  I 
muft  not  attempt  to  defcribe  it.  In  the  afternoon,  the  con- 
cern again  was  very  great.  Much  prayer  had  been  previoufly 
put  up  to  the  Lord.  All  night  in  different  companies,  you 
might  have  heard  perfons  praying  to,  and  praifmg  God.  The 
children  of  God  came  from  all  quarters.  It  was  like  the 
pafTover  in  Jojiah's  time.     We  are  to  have  another  in  about 

two  or  three  months,  if  the  Lord  will.     One  Mr.   IV , 

a  miniflcr,  who  has  great  popular  gifts,  was  as  well  as  others 
much  owned  and  helped  at  this  time.  On  Tuefday  morning 
I  preached  at  Glafgow^  (it  was  a  moft  glorious  time)  and  in  the 
afternocn  twice  at  Inchanmn,  The  Lord  gave  a  blow  to 
many.  Yefterday  morning  I  preached  there  again,  and  here 
twice.  Every  time  there  was  a  great  flir,  efpecially  at  this 
place.  A  great  company  of  awakened  fouls  is  within  the  com- 
pafs  of  twenty  miles,  and  the  work  feems  to  be  fpreading  a- 
pace.  1  am  exceedingly  ftrengthened,  O  unmerited  mercy  ! 
both  in  foul  and  body,  and  cannot  now  do  well  without 
preaching  three  times  a  day.  The  Lord  gives  me  great  con- 
fidence about  the  Orphan-houfe,  and  aflures  me  that  he  will 
provide  for  me  and  mine.  O  help  me  to  thank  him.  Call 
upon  all  to  blefs  his  holy  name.  I  know  you  will  not  be 
Hack  to  praife  him.  I  rejoice,  my  dear  brother,  to  find  that 
you  enjoy  fo  much  of  God.  May  he  fill  you  with  all  his 
fulnefs.  The  trials  you  meet  with,  will  only  make  you  a  more 
able  miniiler  of  the  New  Teftament.     I  am  of  your  mind 

with  refpeft  to .    He  will  not  profper.     The  Lord  hates 

feclarian  zeal.  Dear  brother,  adieu.  Exped  to  hear  every 
opportunity  from 

Yours  moft  affe£lionately  and  eternally 
in   the  blcfled  Jesus, 

LETTER    CCCCXXXII. 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  R ,  in  Londsn. 

InchannGn^  July  21,  1742, 

Reverend  and  dear  Sir^ 

Heartily  rejoice  that  the  Lord  is  bleiTingand  ov/ning  you. 
Go  on,   dear  Sir,  go  on,  and  you  will  certainly  find    the 

glorious 


I 


LETTERS;  4tr 

glorious  Emmanuel  v/\\\  be  with  you  more  and  more.  It  Is 
obfervablc,  that  there  is  but  one  thing  in  fcripture,  that  we 
are  commanded  to  do  out  of  feafon,  preaching.  Be  inflant 
therefore,  dear  Sir,  in  feafon  and  out  of  feafon.  The  Lord 
will  ftand  by  you  and  ftrengthen  you,  and  deliver  you  from 
wicked  and  unrcafonable  men.  You  will  find  the  blcfTedncfs 
of  the  crofs,   and  the  fpirit  of  Christ  and  of  glory  to  reft 

upon  your   foul.     The  Meflrs.  E and  their  adherents, 

would  you  think  it,  have  appointed  a  publick  faft  to  humble 
themfelves,  among  other  things,  for  my  being  received  in  Scot- 
landy  and  for  the  delufion,  as  they  term  it,  at  Cambujlang^  and 
other  places  ;  and  all  this,  becaufe  I  would  not  confent  to 
preach  only  for  them,  till  I  had  light  into,  and  could  take 
the  folemn  league  and  covenant.  —  But  to  what  lengths  may 
prejudice  carry  even  good  men  ? — From  giving  way  to  the  firft 
rifings  of  bigotry  and  a  party  fpirit,  good  Lord  deliver  us  ! 
Your  moft  afFedtionate  brother  in  Christ, 

G.  IV, 

LETTER    CCCCXXXIIL 

to  Mr.  M A — — ,  at  Morpeth, 

Dear  Sir,  Edinburgh,  July  26,  1 742. 

IJuft  now  received  and  read  your  letter.  It  much  afFe£led 
me.  It  befpeaks  the  language  of  an  uneafy  rcftlefs  heart. 
In  reading  it,  I  thought  of  the  great  AufAn,  who  ufcd,  when 
he  prayed  agrunft  luft,  fecretly  to  wifli  that  his  prayer  might 
not  be  aafwered,  and  yet  he  made  a  moft  eminent  faint,  and 
fhone  in  the  church  as  a  ftar  of  the  firft  magnitude.  I  likcwife 
thought  how  our  Saviour  would  receive  you,  if  here  on  earth; 
even  as  he  received  and  anfwered  the  poor  woman  taken  in 
adultery. — I  am  fure  he  would  fay,  "  Neither  do  I  condemn 
thee."  Another  text  offers  itfelf,  "  I  will  heal  their  backflid- 
ings,  and  love  them  freely."  God  does  not  fay,  I  will  heal 
thy  backfliding  for  any  certain  term  of  years,  but  I  will  heal 
thy  backflidlngs  in  general.  Dear  Sir,  if  you  have  been  a 
backllider  thefe  fifty  years,  nay,  was  it  poflible  for  you  to  have 
been  a  backflider  a  thoufand  years,  yet  if  with  hearty  repen- 
tance and  true  faith  you  turn  unto  him,  he  'will  abundantly 
pardon  you.  O  dear  Sir,  if  any  one  had  need  to  dcfpair  of 
3  mercy, 


412  LETTERS. 

mercy,  I  had  ;  but  Jesus  has  waftied  me  in  his  blood,  and 
I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth.  Your  temptations,  and 
atheifm,  and  hard  thoughts  of  God,  do  not  furprize  me.  Dear 
Sir,  what  elfe  can  be  expected  from  a  heart  defperately  wicked, 
and  deceitful  above  all  things  ?  Dear  Sir,  let  all  this  drive 
you  to  the  fountain  which  is  open  for  fm  and  all  unclean nefs. 
1  once,  in  your  circumfrances,  thought  Christ  was  hard- 
hearted ;  but  now  I  find,  nay  have  long  fince  found,  that  his 
heart  is  full  of  love.  Take  courage,  dear  Sir  ;  draw  near  to 
the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  fm  of  the  world.  Re- 
turn, thou  wandering  prodigal,  thy  heavenly  father  is  running 
to  meet  thee. — Come  back,  thou  fluttering  dove,  Jesus  is  ready 
to  take  thee  into  the  ark.  May  God  blefs  this  to  you  !  If  he 
does,  I  will  blefs  his  name.  I  am  a  vile  fmner,  and  have 
need  to  lie  low  before  him,  whom  I  have  pierced  by  my  tranf- 
grefTion  and  unprontablenefs,  times  without  number.  In  his 
blood  and  righteoufnefs  I  find  perpetual  refuge.  Many  in 
thefe  parts  are  flying  to  him.  May  you,  Sir,  add  to  the  happy 
number.  You  are  but  a  fmner,  and  Jesus  died  for  fanners. 
Come  and  welcome  to  Jesus  Christ.  I  expe6i  to  rem^ain 
in  Scotland  a  few  months,  and  hope  to  be  your  way,  if  the 
Lord  diredl.  If  your  way  fhould  be  dlre61:ed  hither,  I  fhotild 
be  glad  to  fee  you  ;  if  not,  you  are  welcome  to  w^rite  to  me. 
As  my  multiplicity  of  affairs  will  admit,  you  fhall  be  anfwered 
t>y,  dear  Sir, 

Your  truly  affeclionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  W. 

LETTER     CCCCXXXIV, 

To  the  Reverend  Mr,  M'  L , 

pdinburgh^  July  28,   174a. 

Reverend  and  dear  Slr^ 

WITH  this,  I  fuppofe,  you  will  receive  feveral  young 
ones,  who  I  think  have  afted  wrong  in  leaving  their 
refpedive  employs  under  parents  and  mafters  to  go  after  me. 
Be  pleafed  to  examine  them,  and  fend  them  home.  The  Lord 
was  with  me  at  Falkirk^  and  is  pleafed  to  work  by  me  here. 
O  free  grace  !  I  am  perfuaded  I  fhall  have  more  power,  fmce 

dear   Mr.  G hath  printed  luch  a  bitter  pamphlet.     Now 

.  I  lie. 


LETTERS.  4.t3 

I  begirt  to  be  a  difciple  of  Jesus  Christ,  I  rejoice  and  am 
exceeding  glad.  The  archers  {hot  fore  at  me  that  I  might  fall, 
but  the  Lord  is,  and  the  Lord  will  be  my  helper.  At 
prefent  I  can  add  no  more  j  but  beg  the  continuance  of  your 
prayers  for  me  and  mine.  We  all  join  in  hearty  falutation  to 
you  and  your  whole  houfliold.  I  am,  reverend  and  dear  Sir, 
Your  mofi:  obedient  humble  fervant, 

and  brother  in  Christ, 
G.  ^K 

LETTER    CCCCXXXV. 

To  Mr.  D — —  A ,  in  London, 

Edinburgh^   ^uly  30,  1 742. 
Dear  Brother  A , 


WHAT  is  the  meaning  T  hear  no  oftner  from  you  ? 
It  always  gives  me  great  pleafure  to  hear  of  your 
v/elfare.  I  write  to  you  as  often  as  polHble.  At  prefent  I 
am  fomewhat  indifpofed  in  body  ;  but,  glory  be  to  God, 
the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  in  my  foul.  1  feel  a  blelling  I  cannot 
exprefs. 

July  31. 
So  far  I  wrote  yederdny.,  but  was  obliged  through  illnefa 
to  leave  off. — Notwithfianding,  in  the  pulpit  the  Lord  out  of 
weaknefs  makes  me  to  wax  flrong,  and  caufes  me  to  triumph 
more  and  more.  One  of  the  adociate  preibytery  has  publifhed 
the  moft  virulent  pamphlet  I  ever  faw,  afcribing  all  that  has 
been  done'here,  and  even  in  New-England^  Sec.  to  the  influence 
of  the  devil.  O  how  prejudice  v/ill  blind  the  eyes  even  of  good 
men.  Laft  night  fome  of  my  friends  thought  I  was  going 
off;  but  how  did  Jssus  fill  my  heart!  To-day  I  am,  as 
they  call  it,  much  better  ;  next  poft,  if  able,  I  will  fend  you 
fome  more  news.  Aly  health  will  not  permit  me  to  enlarge 
now.  In  lefs  than  a  month,  we  are  to  have  another  facra- 
nicnt  at  Cambujlang^  a  thing  not  pradifed  before  in  Scotland. 
I  entreat  all  to  pray  in  an  efpecial  manner  for  a  blefiing  at 
that  time.  Our  bleffed  mader  is  exceeding  good  to  us.  O 
4  help 


414  LETTERS. 

help  me  to  pralie  him  for  the  fignal  unmerited  mercies  con- 
ferred on,  dear  brother  J , 

Your  moft  afFedlionate  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  JV. 


LETTER    CCCCXXXVI. 

To  Mr,  H B 5  in  South-Carolina. 

-Dear  Mr.  B Auguji  6,  1742. 

IHave  juft  been  walking  with  a  nobleman  in  his  fine  houfe, 
and  likewise  talking  with  him  about  the  houfe  not  made 
with  hands,  of  which  you  and  I  are  heirs.  Blefled  be  God, 
who  has  given  us  the  earneft  of  an  inheritance  amongft  all  them 
that  are  fanclified.  This  you  fhall  furely  in  a  very  little  time  be 
a  pofTeflbr  of,  notwithftanding  of  late  fatan  has  bruifed  your 
heel.  That  cunning,  cruel  archer  has  ihot  forely  at  you, 
that  you  might  fall,  but  the  Lord  has  been,  and  the  Lord 
will  be  your  helper.  Even  this  fhall  work  together  for  good 
to  your  own  and  many  other  fouls.  Our  Saviour  would 
never  have  given  fatan  leave  to  have  fifted  you,  had  he  not 
prayed  for  you,  and  intended  to  bring  great  good  out  of  it. 
If  it  makes  you  more  like  a  little  child,  and  your  friends  and 
acquaintance  more  watchful  and  felf-diffident,  it  will  be  very 
well.  O  dear  Sir,  I  fee  every  day  plainer  and  plainer  that  I 
am  nothing,  have  nothing,  and  can  do  nothing,  and  yet  I 
can  do  all  things  through  Jesus  Christ  flrengthening  me. 
What  God  has  lately  done  for  me  and  his  church,  is  unfpeak- 
able.  Ere  long  I  hope  to  tell  you  face  to  face.  In  the  mean 
time,  be  pleafed  to  remember  me  in  your  prayers  and  praifes. 
Accept  my  hearty  thanks  for  all  favours  conferr'd  on  my  orphan 
family.  Be  pleafed  to  remember  me  in  the  kindeft  and  moft 
cordial  manner,  to  all   your  dear  relations,  and  believe  me  to 

be,  dear  Mr.  B , 

Your  moft  obliged  afFtdionate  friend,  brother 

and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  IV. 


L  E  1^  T  E  R 


LETTERS.  415 

LETTER    CCCCXXXVIL 

ro  Mr.  R S 

Strath-martin^  Augujl  10,  1742. 
Dear  brother  Robert^ 

ICan  never  let  a  letter  of  yours  lie  long  unanfwered.  The 
love  I  bear  to  you  and  yours  is  unfeigned,  and  I  continually 
remember  you  before  the  Lord.  His  word  runs  and  is  much 
glorified  in  thefe  parts.     I  truft  it  alfo  makes  advances  in  your 

foul.    How  is  it  with  you,  my  dear  brother  R ?  Do  you 

grow  in  grace  ?  Is  the  world  more  under  your  htt  than  ufual  I 
Do  you  find  a  real,  folid,  abiding  reft  in  Jesus  Christ  ?  Or  is 
it  only  tranfitory  and  fuperficial  ?  It  is  a  very  uncommon  thing 
to  be  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  love  of  Jesus.  I  find  per- 
fons  may  have  the  idea,  but  arc  far  from  having  the  real  fub- 
ftance.  To  fay,  "  I  am  a  poor  finner,"  and  to  be  a  poor 
fmner  indeed,  are  two  different  things.  Methinks  I  hear  my 
dear  man  fay,  and  fo  they  are.  Well  then,  let  us  go  to  Je- 
sus, and  he  will  mal:e  us  poor  and  yet  free.  Bleffed  be  his 
name,  I  feel  the  pov/er  of  his  precious,  life-givirig,  all-aton- 
ing blood  more  and  more  every  day.  I  was  happy  when 
at  Lo7idon.  I  am  ten  times  happier  now.  The  Lord  hath 
done  great  things  for  us,  whereof  we  are  glad.  How  is  my 
dear  Peter  ?  Is  his  heart  yet  eftabliflied  and  fettled  upon  the 
rock  ?  Or  is  the  dove  only  fluttering  about  the  door  of  the 
ark  ?  If  fo,  may  the  dear  Redeemer  reach  out  his  almighty 

and  extended  arm,  and   take  him  in  !    Dear  B I  hope 

grows,  becaufe  he  feems  to  fee  more  of  his  heart.  We  {hall 
certainly  bear  fruit  upwards,  in  proportion  as  we  take  root 
downwards.  May  the  eternal  fpirit  breathe  upon  this  letter, 
and  blefs  it  to  your  foul  !  O  my  brother,  keep  clofc  to  Jesus. 
Do  not  be  content,  unlefs  you  feel  a  fenfible  growth  in  your 
foul.     Accept  my  hearty  love  from, 

Ever  yours, 

G.  JV, 


LETTER 


4i5  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCCXXXVIII. 

To  P ,   at  London. 

Sirath-?nartiny  Augvjl  lo,  1742. 
Bear  P , 


THE  great  trouble  which  1  gave  you  when  at  London^ 
and  the  rcadincfs  you  fhcwed  in  waiting  upon  a  poor 
unworthy  minifter  of  Christ,  hath  made  me  often  to  pray 
for  you,  and  alfo  to  hope,  that  in  time  you  would  be  brought 
to  love  the  Lord  Jesus  himfclf.  I  truft  that  time  is  now 
come,  and  that  the  glorious  Em?nanuel  hath  at  length  capti- 
vated and  taken  full  poiTeffion  of  your  heart.  Will  you  give 
me  leave  to  afk  a  few  friendly  queftions  ?  Has  religion  funk: 
out  of  your  head  into  your  heart  ?  You  was  civilized  whert 
I  was  at  London  :  Are  you  yet  really  converted  ?  Your  affedli- 
ons  were  now  and  then  raifed  towards, — are  they  now  centered 
in  and  fixed  on  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  If  you  can  anfwer  thcfe 
queftions  in  the  affirmative,  I  pronounce  you  a  wife  virgin, 
even  wife  to  eternal  falvation  ;  blciTcd  art  thou  among  women. 
If  not,  I  do  not  dcfpair  of  you.  Jesus  can  change  the  heart. 
Jesus  can  make  of  a  proud  pharifee,  a  poor  fmner.  Let  you 
and  I  then,  dear  P — — ,  apply  to  the  Redeemer's  blcod. 
He  can  wafh  us  as  white  as  i'now.  I  feel  his  power  every- 
day more  and  more,  and  fo  do  thofe  with  me.  May  v/e  go  0/1 
from  ftrength  to  ftrengtb,  till  grace  be  fwallowed  up  in  glory. 
We  fee  great  days  of  the  fon  of  man  in  Scotland,  May  ths 
kingdom  of  God  come  v.-ith  full  power  over  all  the  earth  \ 
The  Lord  be  with  you.  Accept  this  as  a  token  of  unfeigned 
love,  from 

'\'our  affeciionate  friend  and  fcrvant  in  Christ, 

G.  FK 

LETTER    GCCCXXXIX. 

To  Mr.  B ,   at  the  Orphan-houfe. 

Camhiifkmg^  AuguJ}  17,  1742. 

AND  has  my  dear  brother  B- got  the  dart  of  me  \ 
What,  put  into  prifon  before  me  ?  I  wifli  you  joy,  my 
dear  brother,  with  all  my  heart.  Kad  I  been  at  Savannah^ 
furely   I  v/ould  gladly  have  conic  (and  if    there  had   been 

Jiecd) 


LETTERS.  417 

need)  gladly  have  wafhed  your  feet.     I  doubt  not  but  your 
imprifonment  v/as  for  Christ*s  fake.     I  am   perru.»'led,  the 
letter  from  your  friend  that  doubted,  was  the  foreft  flab  of  all  ; 
but  all  is  intended  to  draw  us   from  the  creature,  even  from 
the  new  creature,  and  bring  us  nearer  to  the  Creator,  God 
blefled  for  evermore.     PWs  friends  defcrted)   and   no  doubt 
judged  him.     "  All  they  in  Afia  forfook  me,"   fays  he  ;   and 
again,   *<  At  my  firft  trial  no  man  flood  by  me  ;  '*  and   what 
follovi^s  ?  but  "  the  Lord  flood  by  me  :'*  and  will  he  not, 
dear  brother,  alfo  fland  by  you  ?   I  cannot  help  believing  but 
that  Georgia  will  yet  be  a  glorious  colony.     The   counfel  of 
God  (hall  fland.     He  furely  put  it  into  my  heart  to  build  the 
Orphan-houfe.     He  certainly  brought  you  to  Georgia  to  fu- 
perintend  it.     He  will  blefs  you  and  yours.     I  join  in  bleffing 
God  with  you,  and  in  admiring  how  he  has  fpread  a  table  for 
my  dear  family  in  that  wildernefs.     But  what  fhall  we  fay  ? 
The  Lord  loves  to  encourage  faith  ;  and  fmce  his  honour  is 
fo  much  concerned,  I  am  fure  he  will  vindicate  it^  and  never 
fufFer  his  enemies  to  fay  thus  of  us,  *'  There,  there,  fo  would 
we  have  it."     I  am  kept  from  the  leafl  doubting  ;   and  God 
only  knows  how  many  prayers  of  faith   I  have  put   up  for 
you.     I  have  often  wifhed  as  it  were  for  the  wings  of  a  dove, 
that  I  might  fly  unto  you,  and  take  you  one  by  one  into  my 
unworthy  arms,  and  weep  over  you  with  tears  of  love.   BlfefTed 
be  God,  the  time  draws  near  apace.     I  am  jufl  now  about 
to  publifh  a  further  account  of  the  Orphan-houfe,  and   hope 
(hortly  to  colled  fome  more  money  towards  its  fupport.     I  am 
blefTed  with    far  greater  fuccefs  than   ever,   and   fatan  roars 
louder.     You  will  fee  by  what  I  here  fend,  how  the   archers 
of  different  clafTes   fhoot  at  me;  but  the  Lord   (for  ever 
adored  be  his  never-failing  love)  caufes  my  bow   to  abide  in 
llrength,  and  enables  me  to  triumph  in  every  place.     The 
comforts  and  fuccefs  the  Lord  gives  to  me,  is  unfpeakable. 
Lafl   Lord's  day,  I  believe  there  were  here  thirty   thoufand 
people,  and  above  two  thoufand  five  hundred  communicants. 
The  work  fpreads,  and  I  believe  will  yet  fpread.     My  bodily 
llrength  is  daily  renewed,  and  I  mount  on  the  wings  of  faith 
and  love  like  an  eagle.     I  can  only  cry  Grace  !   grace  !   My 
dear  brother,  I  feel  every  day  more  and  more,  that  I  am  a  poor, 
very  poor  fmner.     I  often  wonder  why  Jesus  fufFers  me  to 
Vol.  I,  Ee  live, 

9 


4i8  LETTERS. 

live,  much  more  to  fpeak  for  him.  But  he  will  havfe  merer 
on  wh<MX)  he  will  have  mercy.  O  free  grace  !  Oh  unparalleled 
love  of  an  inftnitely  condefcending  God  !  Whilft  1  am  mufmg, 
the  fire  kindles.  Surely  we  fiiall  have  a  happy  meeting  in 
Georgia.  My  Mafter  \^ill,  1  truft,  come  along  with  me. 
Otherwife,  may  I  not  go  up  hence.  In  the  mean  while,  I 
pray  him  to  quicken  and  revive  your  dear  fouls,  and  fill  you 
as  with  new  wine.  Thus  he  deals  with  me  and  mine  daily. 
1  am  retired  for  a  day,  on  purpofe  to  write  letters.  The 
Lord  blefs  them  to  your  dear  fouls,  whom  I  love  in  the 
bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  wifh  you  had  told  me  who 
ilood  by  at  Savannah  and  brought  you  refrefhment.  Greet 
them,  and  give  them  particular  thanks  in  my  name.  My 
heart  is  full ;  I  know  not  how  to  flop.  But  I  muft  write  to 
the  truftees,  and  to  others.  I  heard  nothing  of  the  aff'air,  till 
I  received  your  letter  laft  week.     A  word  or  tv/o  of  yours  to 

Mr.  0 ,  I  think  a  little  too  harfh  ;  but  Paul  fpoke  once  a 

little  too  harfn  to  the  high-prielh  Our  Jesus  will  overlook 
this  ',  and  reward  you  for  your  imprifonment  by  and  by. 
Adieu  !  my  dear  man,  adieu  !     P'orget  not, 

•  Ever  yours, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCCCXL. 

To    the    Honourable   Trujlees  for    Georgia. 

Canihujlang,  Aug.  17,   1742. 
Honoured  Gentlemen^ 

SOAIE  letters,  which  I  received  lafl  week  from  Georgia^ 
occafion  my  troubling  you  with  this,  which  I  doubt  not 
v/ill  meet  with  a  candid  reception  at  your  hands.  I  find  that 
Mr.  H '  and  Mr.  B- have  been  taken  up  by  a  war- 
rant, and  were  imprifoned  above  a  week,  for  a  thing  which, 
1  believe,  none  of  you,  honoured  gentlemen,  will  judge  cog- 
nizable by  the  civil  mao;irtrate.     It  feems  that  Mr.  B ,  in 

a  private  converfution  with  Mr.  0 ,  (who,  I  fuppofe,  is 

the  prefent  minifter  of  Savannah)  told  him,  "  He  was  no 
*'  chrifrian  ;  that  he  wondered  at  the  impudence  of  young  men 
in  fubfcribing  articles  they  did  not  believe  ^  and  that  he  (hould 
think  it  his  ^\xiy  to  v/arn  his  friends  not  to  hear  him,"  I  ac- 
i  know- 


LETTERS.  419 

knowledge  that  fuch  language  was  too  harfli ;  but  Mr.  H , 

wh6  did  hot  fay  near  To  much,   was  linked  in  the  fame  profe- 

cution,  and  imprifoned  with  him.     Mr.  y ,   who  was 

then  at  Freder'ica^  being  informed  of  it,  declared  fuch  a  pro- 
cedure to  be  illegal  ;  and  his  Excellency  General  Oglethorpe 
tlefired  my  friends  to  lay  the  matter  before  the  board  of  the 
Honourable  Truflees.  I  being  now  upon  the  fpot,  they  have 
i'cnt  to  me  a  very  particular  account  of  what  has  palled  ; 
which^  if  you  plcafe,  honoured  gentlemen,  I  will  tranfmit 
unto  you,  or,  when  I  come  to  Loyulm-t  will  wait  upon  you  ia 
perfon.  I  find  alfo,  that  my  friends  were  denied  a  copy  of  the 
proceedings  of  the  court  :  in  which,  I  am  perfuaded  the  ho- 
nourable gentlemen  to  whom  I  am  writing,  will  think  they 
l^ave  been  wronged.  My  friends  require  no  fatisfa(51ion,  but 
only  dcllie  fuch  a  proceeding  may  be  animadverted  upon  ; 
knowing  that  oiherwife  it  will  be  a  great  difcouragement  to 
people's  fettling  in  Gejrgia,  I  am  forry  alfo  to  inform  you, 
honoured  gentlemen,  that  five  very  fmall  children,  {Sw/fs  or 
Dutch)  whofe  parents  lately  died  in  their  paffage  from  England^ 
have  had  their  goods  fold  at  Vendue^  and  are  bound  out  till  the 
age  of  twenty-one  years.  This  I  think  dire611y  contrary  to 
the  grant  given  me  by  you,  honoured  gentlemen  ;  for  thereby 
I  was  impovvered  to  take  as  many  orphans  into  the  houfe  as 
my  fund  would  admit  of.  The  magiftrates,  I  undcriland, 
have  alfo  been  at  the  Orphan-houfe,  and  claim  a  power  to 
take  away  the  children  when  they  pleafe,  whether  the  children 
chufe  it,  or  complain  of  ill-treatment,  or  not.  This  grieves 
fome  of  the  children,  and  makes  others  of  them  infolent,  who 
are  hereby  taught,  that  they  have  a  power  to  go  away  v.'heri 
they  will.  This,  honoured  gentlemen,  muft:  be  very  difcou- 
r.'ging  to  thofe  who  are  entrufled  with  their  education  ;  and 
who,  I  am  perfuaded,  aim  at  nothing  but  the  glory  of  God, 
the  welfare  of  the  colony,  and  the  falvation  of  the  children's 

fouls.     I  fuppofe  that  the  magiftratcs   (I  mean   Mr.  P • 

and  Mr.  T )  have  taken  fuch  a  liberty  from  the  inflruc- 

tions  which  were  fent,   honoured  gentlemen,   from  you  fome 

t.me  ago.     But  Mr.  y -—  has  tolJ  them,  they  have  mif- 

underftood  you  ;  and  his  Exccllencv  Geiieral  OgL'thorp  I  find 
has   wrote  to  vou,    honoured  gentlemen,    about   it.     By  the 

E  €  2  accounts 


420  LETTERS. 

accounts  I  have,  our  plantation  thrives  well  j  and  Mr.  i^— — 
hopes  we  fhall  do  with  white  fervants  alone.  I  do  afTure  you, 
honoured  gentlemen,  I  will  do  all  I  can,  with  the  moft  difin- 
tereiled  views,  to  promote  the  good  of  Georgia :  only  I  beg 
the  management  of  the  Orphan-houfe,  and  orphans,  may  be 
fecured  to  me  and  my  fucceflbrs  for  ever  ;  and  that  the  magi- 
flrates  be  not  fufPered  to  difturb  us,  when  there  is  no  ground 
of  complaint.  They  acknowledged,  when  at  the  Orphan- 
houfe  laft,  that  the  children  were  taken  good  care  of,  both  as 
to  their  bodies  and  fouls ;  and  will  it  not  then,  honoured 
gentlemen,  tend  much  to  the  welfare  of  the  colony,  that  the 
Orphan-houfe  fllould  meet  with  all  poffible  encouragement. 
His  Excellency   General   Oglethorp  has   informed    my  friend 

Mr.  H ,  that,  if  I  defired  it,  he  thought  you  would  grant 

me  a  greater  tra6l:  of  land,   which  I  fhould  be  obliged  to  give 
away  in  a  certain  term  of  years,  and  that  we  might  have  our 
own  magiilrates,  as  have  the  people  of  Ehenezer.     Whether 
I  fhall  defire  fuch  a  favour,  I  know  not ;  but,  if  I  fiiould, 
I  defire  to  know,  what  you,  honoured  gentlemen,  would  fay 
to  it.     Many  have  applied  to  me  to  fettle  in  Georgia ;  hitherto 
I  could  give  them  no  encouragement.     I  wifli  I  may  be  en- 
abled to  give  them  a  great  deal  for  the  future.     Indeed,   ho- 
noured gentlemen,  I  do  not  defire  to  find  fault.     I  doubt  not 
but  you  have  been  prejudiced  both  againft  me  and  my  friends. 
The  event  will  fhew  what  friends  we  are  to  Georgia,     The 
Orphan-houfe  will  certainly  be  of  great  utility  to  the  colony  ; 
and  the  children  educated  therein,  I  truft,  will  be  the  glory  of 
the  fociety  to  which  they  belong.     They  are  bred  up  to  in- 
duftry,  as  v/ell  as  to  other  things  ;  and  are  taught  to  fear  God, 
and   honour  the  king.     I  am  glad  to   hear   that  you  have 
lately  fent  over  a  gentleman  who   (I  fuppofe)  will  do  juftice. 
I  think  I  defire  nothing  elfe  ;  and  heartily  pray  God  to  blefs 
him,  and  you,  honoured  gentlemen,  and  all  that  are  concerned 
in  the  management  of  Georgia  affairs.     I  hope  to  be  in  town 
in  about  two  months ;  in  the  mean  while,  I  would  beg  the 
favour  of  a  line  by  your  fecretary ;  and  alfo  entreat  you,  ho- 
noured gentlemen,  to  write  to  the  magiflratcs  of  Savannah^  to 
let  the  Orphan-houfe  managers  alone.  If  I  or  my  friends  fliould 
happen  to  fay  or  do  any  thing  amifs,  I  ^afTure  you,  honoured 


LETTERS.  421 

gentlemen,  you  (hall  have  all  poITible  fatisfaf^ion  given  you 
by  them,  and  alfo  by,  honoured  gentlemen. 

Your  very  humble  fervant, 

G,  TV, 

LETTER    CCCCXLI. 

To  Mr.  H ,  in  Georgia, 

CambuJJangy  Aug*  17,  1742. 
My  very  dear  Friend  and  Brother^ 

WITH  a  great  deal  of  pleafure  I  received  your  letters 
dated  May  14th,  26th,  29th,  and  June  ift.  Blefled 
be  God  !  for  all  his  goodnefs,  in  providing  for  my  dear  family 
in  that  wildernefs,  by  fuch  various  unexpected  ways.  It 
caufed  my  heart  to  leap  for  joy.  I  find  you  have  been  wrong- 
fully imprifoned.  I  fhould  have  been  glad  (if  time  had  per- 
mitted) that  you  had  wrote  me  word,  how  it  has  been  with 
your  foul  under  fuch  a  circumftance.  1  hope  the  fpirit  of 
Christ  and  of  glory  refted  upon  you.  Glad  fhould  I  have 
been  to  have  fung  and  prayed  with  you  ;  but  my  hour  is  not 
yet  come.  I  have  juft  now  wrote  to  the  truftees,  and  intend 
waiting  upon  them  as  foon  as  I  come  to  Lotidon,  I  am  per- 
fuaded  the  Lord  will  influence  their  hearts  to  do  us  juftice. 
I  am  glad  you  wrote  fo  properly  to  the  General,  and  that  God 
hath  given  you  favour  in  his  fight.  "  When  a  man's  ways 
pleafe  the  Lord,  he  makes  his  very  enemies  to  be  at  peace 
with  him."     I  intend  fending  him  and  Mr.  Jones  a  letter  of 

thanks.     I  owe  Mr.  S only  about  ninety   pounds,  and 

about  a  hundred  and  fifty  more  in  all,  upon  the  Orphan-houfe 
account  in  England.  I  am  jufV  publifhing  a  further  account, 
which  I  am  perfuaded  the  Lord  will  blefs.  I  would  not 
have  you  to  undertake  any  bufinefs70u  do  not  like.  I  think 
the  Lord  has  fitted  you  for  your  prefent  ftation.  ProfefTor 
Franck  held  it  dangerous  to  change  perfons  frequently,  who 
were  entrufted  witn  the  care  of  the  orphans.  I  am  of  your 
opinion  as  to  hiring  fervants. — It  is  impollible  to  tell  you,  my 
dear  man,  what  I  have  feen,  heard,  and  felt  fincc  I  came  laft 
to  Scotland.  The  glorious  Emmanuel  rides  daily  on  in  the 
chariot  of  his  gofpel,  frorri  conquering  and  to  conquer.     The 

E  e  3  con- 


422  LETTERS. 

congrcgatlvons  are  juft  liUc  that  at  Fogg- Manor, — T  am  oppofed 

on  all  iidcs.     Dear  Mr.  E 's  people  have  lately  kept  a 

faft  upon  my  account.  The  kirk  picfbyters  alio,  now  they 
fee  the  Seccders  fplitting,  notvvithftanding  I  have  been  inftru- 
mental  in  God's  hands,  in  fotr.e  degree,  in  flopping  the  fe- 
ceflion,  begin  to  call  Tome  of  their  minillers  to  account  for 
employing  mc  :  but  who  can  ftand  before  envy  ?  In  the 
midft  of  all,  my  dear  Mafter  keeps  me  leaning  upon  himfelf, 
and  caufes  me  to  walk  in  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghoft 
from  morning  to  night.  I  wifh  time  would  have  allowed  yoa 
to  have  wrote  a  little  about  his  love,  and  to  have  abounded 
more  in  thanks  for  the  opportune  fupplies  which  he  fent  you. 

But  I   am   fure  that  my  dear  Mr.  H is  not  wanting  in 

either  of  thefe.  I  think  that  I  fee  you  grow  in  grace.  I  afl'ure 
you,  you  are  dearer  to  me  than  ever.  My  wife  readily  excufes 
your  not  wn  iting,  knowing  what  it  is  to  be  in  a  hurry  of  bufi- 
nefs.  O  pray  that  we  may  have  a  profperous  voyage  to  you, 
by  the  will  of  God.  By  this  time  I  fuppofe  you  are  a  father. 
May  God  teach  you  and  your  wife  how  to  order  the  child  ! 
J  have  much  to  fay  to  you  both,  when  I  fee  you.  My  dear 
old  friend,  and  firft  fellow-traveller,  God  has  yet  great  blelTings 
in  ftore  for  us.  He  will  give  grace  and  glory,  and  no  good 
thing  will  he  Vv'ith-hold  from  them  that  lead  a  godly  life.  Me- 
thinks  I  am  converfing  with  you  now.  May  God  give  us  a 
happy  meeting  !  FJ^  will,  he  will  !  For  the  prc'ent  I  muft  bid 
my  dear  man  good  night.  I  flole  this  day  from  public  preach- 
ing, to  difpatch  my  private  affairs.  All  join  in  hearty  love  to, 
and  prayers  for  you.     Accept   of  the  fame  in  the  m.olt  tender 

manner,  from,  my  dear  Mr.  H ,  •      , . 

Your  moil  affectionate  friend,  brother, 
and  fervant  till  death. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  42J 

LETTER    CCCCXLII. 

To  his  Excellency  General  Ogkthorp, 

CambuJIang,  Aug.  i8,  1742. 
Honoured  Sir^ 

IMoft  heartily  thank  you  for  being  fo  kind  to  my  family  In 
Georgia^  and  for  efpoufing  my  friends  caufe  when  I  thiiik 
they  were  apparently  wronged.  In  a  letter,  I  yefterday  laid 
the  cafe  before  the  honourable  truftees,  not  doubting  but 
they  will  preferve  us  from  opprefTion,  and  from  perfecutioii  in 
all  its  fhapes.  I  think  we  have  only  the  glory  of  God,  and 
the  good  of  the  colony  at  heart.  Prejudices  may  be  raifed 
againft  us  by  evil  reports  and  mifreprefentations  ;  but  your 
Excellency  is  more  noble  than  to  hearken  to  infmuations, 
which  are  not  fupported  by  evident  matters  of  fad.  I  am 
fure  God  will  blefs  you  for  defending  the  caufe  of  the  father- 
lefs,  and  efpoufing  the  caufe  of  injured  innocence.  J\!y 
friends,  I  truH",  will  at  all. times  readily  acknowledge  any  thing 
they  may  either  fay  or  do  wrong  ;  and,  if  I  know  any  thing 
of  my  own  heart,  I  would  not  offend  any  one  caufelefsly  and 
wilfully,  for  the  world.  In  a  fev/  months  I  hope  to  fee  Georgia,. 
In  the  mean  while,  I  beg  3'our  Excellency  to  accept  thefe  fev/ 
lines  of  thanks  from,  honoured  Sir, 

Your  Excellency's  moft  obliged  humble  fervant, 

LETTER     CCCCXLIII. 

To  Th:j?nas  J ,  Efq\  in  Georgia. 

CamhuJlaJigi  Jug.  18,   1742. 
Dear  Mr.  J , 

WITH  this  I  fend  you  my  repented  thnnks  for  your 
great  kindnefs  to  my  dear  family.  The  Father  of 
Mercies  and  the  God  of  all  Confolations  will  plentifully  re- 
ward you  for  fuch  well-doing.  In  a  few  months  I  hope  to 
thank  vou  in  perfon.  God  hath  done,  and  is  dill  (5oing 
greater  things  for  me  than  I  am  able  to  exprefs.  Indeed  many 
fouls  have  been  born  again,  both  in  England  and  Scotland, 
fmce  I  left  you  at  Georgia.     I  defire  to  caft  my  crown  at  the 

E  e  4  Hvt 


424  LETTERS. 

feet  of  Jesus,  and  to  cry  Grace  !  grace  !  Dear  Sir,  what  a 
charming  word  is  that  ?  I  am  fure  I  can  freely  own,  that  all 
my  falvation  is  of  grace,  unmerited,  diflinguifliing,  electing 
grace  !  If  I  could  be  favcd  by  my  own  righteoufnefs,  I  had 
rather  be  faved  by  the  righteoufnefs  of  Christ  ;  becaufe  that 
way  of  falvation  brings  mod  glory  to  our  glorious  God.     I 

doubt  not  but  Mr.  J is  like-minded.    May  he  be  fo  more 

and  more,  and  daily  feel  the  full  power  of  the  Redeemer's 
blood  !  Be  pleafed  to  remember  me  to  all  that  are  pleafed  to 
enquire  after  unworthy  me,  who  am,  dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  obliged  friend  and  (eryant, 

LETTER    CCCCXLIV. 

fo  Mrs.  B' — —5   ^i   the   Orphan-houfe. 

Camhiijlang^  Aug*  1 8,  1 742. 
Dear  Sipr  B , 

HA  S  the  Lord  called  for  your  dear  lambs  ?  If  fo,  I  truft 
you  have  been  enabled  to  fay,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and 
the  Lord  hath  taken  away :  blelTed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord." 
I  am  glad  to  find  you  was  fo  well  reconciled  to  your  dear 
Jiufband's  imprifonment.  It  is  fweet  when  wives  are  ftrength- 
(Bned  to  encourage  their  hufbands  in  a  fuffering  hour.  Then 
are  they  helps  meet  for  them  indeed.  You  do  well,  my  dear 
fifter,  to  lament  the  vilenefs  of  your  heart.  I  find  more  and 
more  that  my  heart  is  defperately  wicked.  But,  blefTed  be 
GoDj  I  have  a  fountain  to  go  and  wafii  in  every  moment, 
even  the  blefled  fountain  of  the  Mediator's  blood.  There  I 
can  have  free  ^pcefs  j  there  I  can  wafli,  and  daily  be  made 
clean.  Indeed,  my  dear  fifter,  without  difTimulation,  I  am  a 
poor,  very  poor  finner  ;  but  I  am  rich  in  Jesus,  and  rejoice 
in  his  great  falvation  from  day  to  day.  I  long  to  fee  you  and 
my  4ear  family,  to  acquaint  you  what  God  l^ath  done  for  my 
foul :  and  yet  he  is  ftill  doing  more  and  more.  He  does,  he 
will  delight  to  honour  me.  I  thank  you  for  the  great  refpe6l 
you  pay  me  for  his  great  name's  fake.  I  will  endeavour  not 
to  be  behind  with  you,  and  the  reft  of  my  dear  friends,  in 
Jji^mility  af>4  loye.  I  am,  my  dear  fifter,  moft  fincerely^ 
Your  affedionate  friend,  brother,  and 

fervant  in  Jesus  Christ^ 

G.  W, 
BETTER 


LETTERS.  425 

LETTER    CCCCXLV. 

To  Mr.  B . 

Cambujlang^  Aug.  18,   1 742. 
Dear  Mr.  5——, 

I  Think  there  is  a  myflery  in  the  Lord*s  dealing  with  you 
and  your  brother.  Surely  he  would  never  fufl'er  you  to  be 
thus  tempted,  did  he  not  intend  to  honour  you  by  and  by. 
What  our  Saviour  does  to  us  now  we  know  not  j  it  is 
enough  that  he  hath  afTured  us  we  Ihall  know  hereafter.  I  re- 
joice to  hear  that  you  have  fo  many  chriftian  negroes.  1  hope 
they  are  only  the  firft-fruits  of  a  more  glorious  harvcft. 
Though  the  work  may  be  at  a  flop  for  a  while,  fear  not ;  Jesus 
will  revive  his  own  work  in  his  own  time.  Notwithftanding 
our  blunders,  imprudence,  and  the  oppofition  of  enemies  from 
without,  yet  the  counfel  of  the  Lord  fhall  {land,  and  he  will 
fet  his  king  upon  his  holy  hill  of  Zion.  The  Mediator's  king- 
dom makes  glorious  advances  here.  I  cannot  tell  you  the  hun- 
dredth part.  I  verily  believe  we  fhall  fee  greater  things  abroad, 
I  know  you  pray  that  I  may  have  a  profperous  journey  to  you, 
by  the  will  of  God.  I  expe£l  to  embark  for  Georgia  in  a 
few  months.     In  the  mean  while,  you  fhall  not  be  forgotten 

J)y,  dear  Mr.  B , 

Your  moft  afFedlionate  friend,  brother  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CCCCXLVI. 

To  Mrs.  T ,  in  South-Carolina, 

Camhujlang^  Aug,  18,  1742;, 
My  dear  Friend.^ 

I  Am  glad  to  hear  by  your  filler,  that  you  are  become  a  de- 
fpifed  follov/er  of  the  lowly  Jesus.— O  glorious  charac^ 
tcr  !  I  am  perfuaded  you  had  rather  have  that  title  truly  ap- 
plied to  you,  than  to  be  emprefs  of  the  univerfe.  I  long  to  fee 
you,  and  to  hear  you  tell  what  a  happy  change  you  feel.  How 

does  dear  Mr.  T ?   Is  he  yet  truly  broken,   and  going 

Jiand  in  hand  with  you  to  heaven  ?  Happy  pair! — I  know, 
J)y  fwcet  experience^  the  comforts  you  enjoy.     Death  itfelf 

fhall 


420  LETTERS. 

fhall  not  part  you.     I  hope,  nothing  that  has  happened  to  dear 

Mr.  B will  prove  a  ftumbling  block  to  your  foul.     Such 

things  muft  be  glory  to  him,  that  has  laid  "  all  things  fhall 
*'  work  together  for  good."  My  dear  friends,  what  a  my- 
flery  is  the  chriftian  life .?  Happy  thofe,  who  are  acquainted 
with  it.  That  it  may  be  revealed  more  and  more  in  your 
hearts,  is  the  earnefl  prayer  of,  dear  friends. 
Your  moft  aftedionate  friend,  brother  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  m 

LETTER      CCCCXLVII, 
toMr.H i/— . 

CamhuJIa7ig^  Jug.  26,  1 742. 
Aly  very  dear  Brciber, 

GL  A  D  was  I  laft  night  to  receive  a  letter  from  your 
hands.  I  love  your  fimple  honefl  heart,  and  earneft- 
ly  pray  the  dear  Redeemer  to  give  you  a  true,  lafting,  abiding 
reft  in  himfelf.  BlelTed  be  his  name,  I  think  I  can  fay, 
through  free  grace,  that  I  am  in  a  meafure  entered  into  it, 
and  know  what  it  is  by  happy  experience,  to  pafs  from  glory 
to  glory  every  day.  My  dear  brother,  I  am  oppofed  on  every 
fide  ;  the  archers  fhoot  fore  at  me  that  I  may  fall,  but  the 
Lord  is  my  helper.  He  caufes  my  bow  to  abide  in  flrength, 
and  makes  me  more  than  conqueror  through  his  love.  The 
account  fent  with  this,  will  fhew  you  how  often  I  have  been 
enabled  to  preach  ;  but  with  what  efficacy  and  fuccefs,  pen 
cannot  defcribe.  The  glorious  Redeemer  feems  to  be  advan- 
cing from  congregation   to  congregation,   carrying  all    before 

him.    The  MelFrs.  E 's  people  have  kept  a  faft  for  me, 

and,  give  out,  that  all  the  work  now  in  Scotland  is  only  delu- 
fion,  and  by  the  agency  of  the  devil.  O,  my  dear  brother,  to 
v^hat  great  lengths  in  bigotry  and  prejudice  may  good  men 
run  .?  Blefled  be  God,  I  can  fee  the  differences  between 
GoD*s  children,  and  yet  love  them  from  my  heart.  What 
you  faid  about  poor  fVales^  affected  me.  I  laid  upon  my  face 
this  day,  and  for  fome  time  pleaded  with  groans  unutterable, 
for  direction  in  that,  and  feveral  other  matters  of  great  ccnfe- 
quence.  I  fear  my  dear  brother  thinks  too  highly  of  me. 
Indeed,  I  feel  myfelf  to  be  a  poor  fmnef,  and  yet  I  am  rich  in 

Christ, 


LETTER     S.  427 

Christ,  and  lean  upon  his  bofom  from  morning  to  nigiht; 
ray,  all  the  night  long.  By  his  grace  alone  I  am  what  1  am  ; 
and  if  he  is  pleafed  to  honour  me  ib  fir,  I  fhould  h^  gljd  to 
help  the  brethren  in  iVaL^s.  I  am  forry  to  hear  there  has  been 
fuch  divifions.      But  dividing   times  generally  precede  lettlin'>- 

times.     Upon  the  receipt  of  your  laft,  I  wrote  to  Mr.  0 . 

Laft  night  I  received  his  anfwcr.  He  fpeaky  very  honourably 
of  you,  but  thinks  that  you  are  too  cenforious,  iji  condemnino- 
a  whole  fociety  for  the  faults  of  but  fome,  and  too  b'gottcd 
alfoto  your  ^  wn  way.  IVIy  dear  brother  v/ill  excufe  this.  I 
would  not  deal  fo  freely,  or  take  fuch  liberty,  did  I  not  believe 
you  would  take  it  kindly.  My  brother,  my  foul  loves  you. 
Dear  Mifs  Nancy  wrote  me  word  you  v/as  at  my  houfe,  ([ 
rejoiced)  and  that  you  prayed  heartily  for  unworthy  me. 
The  Lord  reward,  and  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  be- 
lieving !  Our  Lord  is  fovereign  in  his  dealing  with  his  dear 
children.  I  walk  in  much  liberty.  O  free  grace!  Your  being 
fo  exercifed  with  inward  conflids,  helps  you  to  fcarch  hypo- 
crites. But  glory  be  to  our  heavenly  Father,  there  is  a  glori- 
ous reft  awaits  us,  and  all  the  children  of  God.  I  think  I 
feel  a  foretafte  of  it  now  ;  nay,  I  believe  I  feel  the  thing  it- 
felf  in  a  degree,  and  when  I  fpeak  of  it,  I  fpeak  what  I  know. 
O  infinitely  condefcending  God  !  My  brother,  my  heart  is 
full.  The  Lord  Jesus  blefs  you,  and  fill  your  dear  foul 
with  all  his  fulnefs  I   So  prays,  with  his  whole  heart, 

Your  molt  affectionate  though  molt  unworthy  brother, 
3nd  willing  fervant  in  Christ, 

G,  n\ 


LETTER     CCCCXLVIlf. 

To  Mrs,  L ;,  in  Brijhl. 

Car?ibufkirig^  Aug,   26,  1742. 
Honoured  Mother,, 
Rejoice  to  hear  that  you  have  been  fo  long  under   my  roof. 


I 


BlefTed  be  God,  that  I  have  a  houfe  for  my  honoured 
mother  to  come  to.  You  are  heartily  welcome  to  any  thing 
my  houfe  affords,  as  long  as  you  pleafe.  i  am  of  the  fame 
mind  now^   as  formerly.     If  need  was,   indeed   thefe  hands 

(l:iould 


428  LETTERS. 

{hould  admlniftcr  to  your  neceflities.  I  had  rather  want  myfelf 
than  you  lliould.  I  fliall  be  highly  pleafcd  when  I  come  to 
Brijioly  and   find  you  fitting  in   your  youngeft  fon's  houfe. 

0  that  I  may  fit  with  you,  in  the  houfe  not  made  with  hands 
eternal  in  the  heavens  !  Ere  long,  your  doom,  honoured  mo- 
ther, will  be  fixed.  You  muft  fhortly  go  hence,  and  be  no 
more  feen.  Your  only  daughter,  I  truft,  is  now  in  the  paradife 
of  God.  Methinks  I  hear  her  fay,  *'  Mother,  come  up  hi- 
ther." Jesus,  I  am  fure,  calls  you  in  his  word.  May  his 
fpirit  enable  you  to  fay,  '*  Lord,  lo  I  come  I"  My  honoured 
mother,  I  am  happier  and  happier  every  day.  Jesus  makes 
me  exceeding  happy  in  himfelf.  I  hope  by  Winter  to  be  at 
BriJhL  If  any  enquire  after  me,  pleafe  to  tell  them,  1  am 
well  both  in  body  and  foul,  and  defire  them  to  help  me  to  praife 
free  and  fovereign  grace  ?  O  that  my  dear,  my  very  honoured 
mother  may  be  made  an  everlafting  monument  of  it !  How 
does  my  heart  burn  with  love  and  duty  to  you  ?  gladly  would 

1  wafti  your  aged  feet,  and  lean  upon  your  neck,  and  weep 
and  pray  'till  I  could  pray  no  more.  With  this  I  fend  you  2, 
thoufand  dutiful  falutations,  and  ten  thoufand  hearty  and 
moft  humble  thanks  for  all  the  pains  you  underwent  in  con- 
ceiving, bringing  forth,  nurfmg,  and  bringing  up,  honoured 
mother. 

Your  moft  unworthy,  though  moft  dutiful  fon, 

'till  death, 

G.  W, 

LETTER    CCCCXLIX. 

To  Mr,  A ,  in  London, 

Camhujlang^  Aug,  27,  1742. 
My  very  dear  Brother  A -, 

THIS  day  fortnight  I  came  to  this  place,  to  aftift  at  the 
facramental  occafion  with  feveral  worthy  minifters  of 
the  churchr  of  Scotland,  Such  a  pafTover  has  not  been  heard 
of.  The  voice  of  prayer  and  praife  was  heard  all  night.  It 
was  fuppofed,  that  between  30  and  40,000  people  were  afTem- 
bled,  and  3000  communicated.  There  were  three  tents. 
The  minifters  were  enlarged,  and  great  grace  was  among  the 
people.     I  preached  once  on  Saturday^  once  on  the  Lord's 

Day 


LETTERS.  429 

Day  morning,  ferved  five  tables,  and  preached  about  ten  at 
night  to  a  great  number  in  the  Church-yard.  Though  it  rain- 
ed much,  there  was  a  great  awakening.  On  Monday  at  Icven 
in  the  morning,  the  Reverend  Mr.  IVshJhr  preached,  and 
there  was  a  very  great  commotion,  and  alfo  in  the  third  fcr- 
mon  when  I  preached,  a  very  great  and  ferious  concern  was 
vifible  through  the  whole  folemnity.  The  Lord's  people 
went  home  much  refreflied.  On  Thurfday  I  preached  twice  at 
Greenock  ;  on  Friday  three  times  at  Kilbride^  and  again  on  Sa- 
turday once,  and  twice  at  Stevenfon  ;  on  Sunday  four  times  at 
Irvine.  On  Monday  once  at  Irvine.^  and  three  times  at  Kil- 
tnarncck;  on  Tuefday  once  at  Kilmarnock^  and  four  times  at 
Stewarton  ;  on  Wednejday  once  at  Stewarton,  and  twice  at  the 
Mearnes ;  and  yefterday  twice  at  this  place.  I  never  preached 
with  fo  much  apparent  fucccfs  before.  At  Greenock^  Irvine^ 
Kilbride^  Kilmarnock-^  and  Stewarton,  the  concern  was  great :  at 
the  three  laft  very  extraordinary.  The  work  feems  to  fpread 
more  and  more.  O,  my  friend,  pray  and  give  praife  in  be- 
half of  the  moft  unworthy  wretch  that  was  ever  employed  in 
the  dear  Redeemer's  fervice.  I  fpeak  this  from  my  inmoft 
foul.     I  muft  cry  out  continually,   *'  Why  me  Lord,  why 

me  ?"  My  dear  brother  A ,  I  love  you  dearly  in  the 

bowels  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  think  I  could  live 
with  you  always.  The  Lord,  I  think,  hath  given  you  a 
meek,  and  teachable  difpofition.  O  what  is  it  to  be  as  little 
children  I  I  am  glad  to  find,  you  fo  hunger  and  third  after  a 
continual  abiding  reft  in  God.  Aflure  yourfelf,  the  Lord 
will  fill  and  fatisfy  your  foul.  He  is  faithful,  who  hath  pro- 
mifed,  who  alfo  will  do  it.  Wait,  and  thou  fhalt  fee  and 
feel  the  faWation  of  God.  I  think  I  have  feen  it  more  for 
fome  days  paft,  than  in  any  journey  before.  Our  Saviour 
loves  to  let  us  fee  yet  greater  things.  O  for  a  large  heart  to 
receive  all  the  fulnefs  of  God  !  I  rejoice  to  hear  that  the 
Lord  is  with  you  at  the  Tabernacle.  May  his  glory  appear, 
and  fhine  in  it  more  and  more  !  I  believe  it  will.  I  believe 
God  will  blefs  your  fchool.  Our  Lord's  Difciples  are  gene- 
rally too  much  in  a  hurry  ;  at  leaft  I  am.  They  are  not  con- 
tent to  wait.  "  He  that  believeth,  doth  not  make  hafte."  O  for 
a  paflive,  tender,  truly  broken,  child-like  heart  I  that  we  could 

watch 


430  LETTERS. 

watch  in  real  it  v,  and  from  moment  to  moment  hear  the  crv 
of  every  Chriftiao,  with  every  call  from  God,  whether  by  his 
providence  or  fpirit.  It  is  faid,  that  God  brought  and  kept 
Jbrahatn  at  his  feet.  O  that  we  were  always  there,  waiting  for 
divine  direction  !  Blcllcd  be  liis  name,  I  am  for  the  moft  parC 
at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  indeed  he  gracioufiy  teaches  me  mo- 
ment after  mon-'.cnt.     I  have  many  things  before  me  now.     I 

know  brother  A will  help  me  by  his  prayers.     Blciled  be 

God,  our  heaven  is  begun  here. 

Your  truly  affectionate  brother  and 
fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCCCL. 

To  Mr,  S C ,  in  Deptford, 

GlafgoWy  Sept.  2,  1742. 
My  very  dear  Brother  C , 

I  Am  juil  now  come  from  the  pulpit,  wherein  I  have  experi- 
enced much  of  the  Redeemer's  power,  and  feen  his  ftately 
out2;oings  in  the  fanciuary.  My  brother,  the  cry  of  my 
heart  is,  "  and  will  God  indeed  dwell  with  fuch  a  wretch  as 
I  am."  IMethinks  a  voice  echo's  from  above,  "  I  have  dwelt 
in  thee,  I  do  dwell  in  thee,  I  will  dwell  in  thee  for  ever- 
more."   My  heart  replies,  ''  Lord,  I  believe  and  worlliiip." 

A  heart  that  710  drftre  can  move^ 
But  jiill  to  adorcy  believe,  and  love. 

This,  my  dear  brother,  is  the  prcfent,  and  indeed  continual  bent 
of  m.y  foul,  which  I  truft  profpers.  I  feel  my felf  to  growr 
more  poor  inwardly;  I  fee,  I  am  but  a  learner  in  the  fchool 
of  Christ,  and  my  dear  Mafter  teaches  m.c  new  leilbns  every 
day.  About  a  week  ago,  I  think  he  did  more  for  me  than 
ever  I  faw  before.  Glory  be  to  God,  that  he  is  fo  much  with 
you  at  Londm,  I  rejoice,  yea  and  I  will  rejoice.  I  atn 
amazed  when  I  hear,  as  I  do  almofl  every  day,  of  Ibme  frcfh 
perfons  wrought  upon  by  my  unv/orthy  miniftry.  This  hum- 
bles me  very  much,  and  brings  me  very  low  at  the  icet  of  the 
ever-loving  Jesus.  I  dare  not  deny  that  I  am  one  of  his  cho- 
fen  ;  but  I  am  jealous  for  myfelf  and  for  thofe  about  me,  left 
we  iliOuld  grieve  the  holy  fpirit,  ^i.d  oblige   him  to  withdraw 

for 


LETTERS.  43t 

for  our  ingratitude,  unfruitfulnefs,  pride,  fclfiQincfs,  and  in^ 
fenfibiJity  of  the  hleflings  we  enjoy.  Lad  night  I  went  to 
fleep  quite  angry,  but  chiefly  with  myfclf. —  I  law  that  I  had 
received  much,  and  did  lb  little  for  my  God,  and  Christ,  that 
I  could  feelingly  fmite  upon  my  bread,  lay  my  head  upon  my 
pillow,  and  clofe  my  eyes  with  thefe  words,  "  God  be  mer- 
ciful to  me  afmner?'*  And  to-day,  what  have  I  feen  ancl 
felt,  yea  what  do  I  now  feel?  My  foul  is  fwallowed  up  in 
God.  His  prefence  is  filling  my  foul,  and  renewing  my  bodi- 
ly ftrength.  Here  is  free  grace,  my  dear  brother.  Was  you 
here,  I  think  I  could  now  warm  your  heart  with  a  Icctur!? 
upon  the  unparalleled  love  of  Jesus  ;  but  time  is  (hort :  blcfled 
be  God,  an  eternity  is  before  me,  but  "  eternity  too  (hort  to 
utter  all  his  praife."  I  think:  I  love  you  and  yours  unfeign- 
edly,  and  rejoice  that  you  enjoy  fwect  fcllowfhip  together. 
Glory  be  to  God,  that  you  have  gotten  many  living  fiones. 
Truft  the  great  Redeemer,  the  all-wife  contriver  and  perfetSler 
of  his  fpiritual  temple,  to  put  them  together.  I  have  bcea 
faulty  in  looking  too  much  to  foreign  help,  and  defpifing  that: 
which  God  had  given  me.  When  our  Lord  was  to  feed  the 
multitude,  he  would  not  create  new  bread,  but  multiplied  the 
loaves  that  were  already  at  hand.  "  Ye  need  not  fend  them 
away,  give  ye  them  to  eat,"  faid  he  :  fo  fay  I  to  my  dear  bre- 
thren at  the  tabernacle.  "  Work  with  the  materials  you 
have."  In  doing  the  work,  God  will  teach  you  how  to  do 
it. — Experience  will  grow  up  with  the  work  itfelf.  Thus  God 
hath  dealt  with  me,  and  fo  he  continues  to  deal.  May  his 
blefled  fpirit  guide  you  all  into  all  truth,  and  give  you  a  right 
judgment  in  all  things  I  1  love  to  fee  the  little  child  in  other?, 
though  I  fee  fo  little  of  it  in  my  unworthy  felf.  But  I  muil 
not  exceed  ;  other  bufinefs  demands  my  attention.  Write 
to  me  often  about  the  ftate  of  the  church.  Mr.  E 's  peo- 
ple rather  run  greater  and  greater  lengths  in  mifguided  zeal. 
Our  love  to  all.  I  intreat  a  continuance  of  your  prayers,  be- 
caufe  the  archers  are  (hooting  from  every  quarter  at,  dear  bro- 

tiicr  C . 

Your  poor  weak  brother  in  the  kingdom  and 
patience  of  Jfisus  Christ, 

G.  rr. 

LETT  K  R 


43^ 


L    £    T    t    E    R    S. 


LETTER    CCCCLT. 

To  Brother  T- ,  /«  London, 

GlafgoWy  September  4,  174^* 
My  dear  Brother^ 

I  Hope  this  letter  will  find  you,  where  your  laft  left  you,  aC 
the  feet  of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus.  My  dear  brother, 
it  is  a  delightful  fituation  :  Mary  found  it  fo.  O  true  poverty 
of  fpirit,  what  a  rare,  yet  what  a  precious  thing  it  is  !  The 
foundation  of  it,  is  a  deep,  abiding  knowledge  of  the  corrup- 
tion of  the  heart,  and  its  defperate  wickednefs.  I  find  more 
and  more  the  necelTity  of  leaning  upon  my  beloved,  whilft  tra- 
velling through  the  wildernefs  of  this  world.  I  find  I  am  yet 
but  learning  in  the  fchool  of  Christ,  and  fcarce  know  any 
thing  as  I  ought  to  know.  I  often  blufh  at  a  fenfe  of  my  un- 
fruitfulnefs,  ingratitude,  &c.  and  yet  am  made  continually  to 
lejoice  in  his  great  falvation.  My  brother,  prefs  on  and  faint 
riot ;  though  faint,  yet  ftill  purfue.  When  your  father  and 
mother  forfake  you,  the  Lord  will  take  you  up.  I  do  not 
wonder  at  your  father's  oppofition.  His  letter  befpeaks  him 
to  be  a  man  of  a  very  bad  fpirit.  I  thought  proper  to  burn  it. 
My  brother,  pray  for  him,  and  beg  of  Jesus  that  you  may  be- 
have with  all  meeknefs,  humility  and  love.  I  would  enlarge, 
but  time  is  fhort,  and  much  of  my  dear  Mafter's  bufmefs  is 
lying  before  me.  For  the  prefent,  adieu  !  A^Iy  kind  love  to  all. 
May  the  Lord  keep  you  unfpotted  from  the  world.  You  fhall 
overcome  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  We  fee  wond'rous 
things  here.     Pray  and  give  thanks  for 

Your  afFedionate  friend,  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

G.  m 

LETTER    CCCCLH. 

To  Mr.  B ,  in  London, 

Glafgowy  Sept.  4,  1 742. 
My  dear  Brother  B , 

I  Embrace  a  few  moments  to  anfwer  your  kind  letter.     Not 
want  of  love  but  leifure  prevented  my  doing  it  before; 
yet  I  have  not  forgotten  you  in  my  prayers.     Your  cafe  hath 
2  been 


LETTERS.  4^3 

been  upon  my  heart.  I  pray  God  you  may  be  enabled,  at  this 
time  efpecially,  to  plead  the  promife  of  temporal  bleiTino-?. 
Remember,  my  dear  brother,  you  can  call  God,  your  God  and 
Father  :  if  fo,  your  God  will  fupply  all  your  wants.  Thefe 
words  were  fo  preficd  upon  my  foul  once  when  in  extremity, 
that  I  hope  I  fhali  never  forget  them  :  "  Be  careful  for  no- 
thing, but  by  prayer  and  fupplication  with  thank:fgiving,let  your 
requefts  be  made  known  unto  God."  •  I  have  for  thefe  eio-ht 
or  nine  years  paft,  had  no  vifible  fettled  fund,  but  fetched  in 
all  temporal  fupplies  by  pleading  the  promifes.  My  God  ne- 
ver failed  me,  he  never  will.  This  morning  I  have  been  lec- 
turing upon  EliJ}m\  multiplying  the  widow's  oil.  The  Lord 
God  of  EliP)a  is  yet  living.  O  that  you  may  have  faifh 
to  apply  to  him.  O  that  you  may  be  willing  to  be  made 
poor.  My  brother,  I  find  freedom  in  writing  to  you.  BlefTed 
be  God,  who  hath  made  any  thing  that  I  have  fpc.ken  of 
ufeto  your  foul.  Tell  your  wife,  ftie  muft  take  my  advice,  and 
pray  with  you.  She  fins,  I  think,  in  omitting  it.  I  rejoice  to 
hear  that  the  Lord  is  with  you  at  the  tabernacle.  May  he 
be  with  you  more  and  more  !  My  brother,  God  is  doing  won* 
ders  here  indeed.  Every  day  he  fhews  us  great  things.  Yef-^ 
terday,  and  the  day  before,  how  did  hedifplay  his  power  i^  I 
am  loft  when  I  think  of  it:  O  that  God  fhou'.d  ever  dwell 
with  fuch  an  ill  and  hell-deferving  wretch  as  I  am  !  Amaz- 
ing !  Thy  mercies,  O  God,  they  humble  me.    Adieu. 

Your  unworthy  and  affectionate  friend  and  brother, 

LETTER    CCCCLIIL 

To  Mr.  J A^ . 

Edinburgh^  Sept,  13,  1 742, 
My  very  dear  hroiher  N , 

I  Have  juft  been  writing  to  our  dear  brother  G T , 
and  now  fit  down  to  write  to  you.  Both  your  letters 
came  to  me  at  the  fame  time,  and  had  I  not  been  ufcd  to  trials 
of  that  nature,  would  have   affe6ted  me  much.     Dear  Mr. 

T fpeaks  mar.y  things,  that  I  know  are  too  true  oF  tiie 

Moravian  Brcthroi  \  but  his  fpirit  fccms  to  be  too  much  heat- 
ed, and  I  fear   fome  of  his  own  wild-fire  is  mixed  with  that 
facred  fire  of  zeal,  which  comes  from  Qqh.     My  dear  bro* 
Vol.  I.  Y  i  thcr, 

10 


434  LETTERS. 

iher,  I  want  to  be  more  like  unto  God,  who  fees  aiid  corrcc!? 
all  things  that  are  amifs,  and  yet  continues  unmoved  in  his 
own  nature.  I  want  to  be  more  like  unto  Jesus,  God  blelT- 
cd  for  evermore  !  who  fees  all  the  quarrels  and  heart-rifmgs  o-f 
his  children  one  amongft  another,  and  yet  bears  wrth,  and 
loves  them  ftill.  My  heart  doth  not  reproach  me^  for  my  krnd- 
nefs  and  fricnclfliip  with  thofe  that  differ  from  me.  I  think  I 
have  been  led  by  the  word  and  fpirrt  of  God-  into  this  part  of 
my  conJudl ;  but  I  confefs  that  I  am  jearlous,  and  tru'ft  with  a 
godly  jcaloufy,  over  many  who  talk  and  wrice  of  the  Lamb, 
and  who  mimic  fome  particular  perfons  in  their  outward  way 
of  behaviour,  but  yet  are  not  truly  poor  in  fpirit.  They  a6t 
too  much  like  me,  who  at  my  firft  fetting  out  imitated  the 
outward  fhew  of  humility  in  Monfieur  Dezenly,  before  I  got 
true  fmiplicity  of  heart.  Indeed,  I  have  too  little  of  it  now. 
But,  biclTed  be  God  by  his  free  grace,  I  am  what  1  am.  I 
think  I  can  fay  I  am  made  unfeignedly  happy  in  the  Lorl> 
Jesus  Chri&t,  and  can  difcover  in  fome  meafure  between  a 
talfe  and  difguifed  hoJrnefs.  Glory  be  to  the  Rcdeemtr's 
name,  I  walk  in- light  and  liberty,  and  am  ejaabled  to  rejoice 
in  the  Lord  always.  Though  1  can  f^y  to  corruption,  "  Thou 
art  mv  lifter,"  yet  I  can  with  a  full  alilirance  of  faith  at  all 
times  fay,  *'  God  is  my  father,  and  all  is  mi-ne,  becaufe  I  am 
Christ's."  My  dear,  very  dear  hbft  and  brother,  I  pray  God 
that  you  and  I  may  more  experience  the  glorious  liberty  oFth>t 
children  of  God  :  a  liberty  not  from  the  in-being,  but  fron^. 
the  reigning  power  and  dominion  of  fm.  Jesus  came  to 
make  us  kingjs,  as  well  as  pricPis,  and  it  is  our  privilege  to 
reign  upon  the  earth.  We  that  believe,  do  enter  into  rcfb. 
Faith  is  of  an  all-conquering  nature,  and  caufes  us  to  trarnpl' 
im,  death,  and  hell  under  our  feet.  My  dear  brother,  I  ex- 
perience more,  unfpeakably  more  of  the  PvedeeiPiCr's  powc:\ 
than  when' I  faw  you  lai^.  My  happinefs  increafes  daily,  and 
I  am  perfuaded  will  increafe,  'till  grace  is  fwaliowed  up  in  glo- 
ry. My  principles  as  to  the  fundamentals  of  the  gofpel  are 
juft  the  fame  as  yours.  I  cannot  renounce  thofe  precious 
truths,  that  I  have  felt  the  power  of,  and  which  were  taugh: 
me  not  of  man  but  of  God.  At  the  fame  time,  1  would  love 
all  that  love  Jesus,  though  they  differ  from  me  in  fome  pointii. 
The  angels  love  all  the  true  worfliippers  of  Jesus  every  where, 

anc 


LETTER     S.  4:?5 

and  v/hy  (hculd  not  we:  If  mir  brethren  will  quarrel  with 
us,  let  us  not  quarrel  with  them.  O  my  dear  broihcr,  I  pray 
our  dear  Redeemer  to  give  you  mceknefs  to  ihofc,  who  may 
not  fee  (o  far  as  you  do.  1  entreat  you,  my  dear  brother,  to 
overcome  their  evil  with  your  good.  Zeal  tor  God  may  ex- 
cite others  to  oppofe  you,  as  well  as  you  to  oppole  them  ; 
th'^refore  bear  with  and  love  them.  This  will  (hew  you  to  be 
a  difciple  indeed,  and  to  have  that  mind,  which  was  in  Christ 
Jfsus.  O  that  we  grevv  up  into  his  divine  likenel's,  and  were 
indeed  conformed  to  our  great  Exemplar  !  How  truly  tlmple 
and  void  of  guilt  (liould  we  be  !  Our  brother,  I  fear,  has  not 
dealt  uprightly  with  me.  At  firft  he  called  me  a  fervant  of 
God,  and  then  a  blafphemer  and  deceiver,  and  faid,  I  (hould 
be  in  a  miferable  condition.  Pray  tell  P of  it,  and  ac- 
quaint him  at  the  fame  time,  that  I  grow  happier  and  happier 
in  the  Lamb  every  day,  and  more  and  more  honoured  by  the 
great  Head  and  King  of  the  Church.  O  fimplicity  !  whether 
art  thou  fled  r — In  a  (hort  time  I  hope  to  embark  for  Gt^orgia, 
and  then,  God  willitig,  I  iliidl  fee  you  face  to  face.  Won- 
derful things  have  been  doing  here  ;  things  unfpeakable  and 
full  of  glory.  The  confufions  abroad  are  no  greater  than 
what  I  expelled  to  hear  of.  J  all:  fuch  a  fccnc  hath  been  at 
home  :  but  the  glorious  Enimanucl  will  over-rule  all  for  (^ood. 
Why  have  y(^\x  not  written  to  my  poor  fam'ly  in  Georgia?  I 
am  perfuaded  great  things  will  come  from  the  orphan-houfe. 
O  remember,  my  dear  brother,  to  exercife  catholic  love  in  all 
its  branches.    I  love  and  long  much  to  fee  you.     I  fhall  write, 

(3OD  willing,  to  Mr.  IP''- .     I  find  his  fplrit  is  alfo  ini- 

bittered.     May   the  Lord   fweeten  all    your  hearts !  With 
hearty  thanks  for  all  favours,  I  am,  my  very  dear  brother, 
Moll;  aRc61ionately  yours  in  the  gloiious  Jesits, 

G.    JP\ 

LETTER     CCCCLIV. 

1:0  Mr  E ,  in  Pkihdelphit]. 

Edinl^urgby^'S/'pt.  14,  1 742. 
Afy  very  char  Brother^ 

YOU  R  kmci  letter  came  to  hand  a  few  days   ago,  and  I 
rejoice  to  hear  that  you  are  now   happy,     I   wifh  you 
niav  be  :ea!l>'   fettled   and    rooted   and  giourided  in  love,   and 
F  f  2  no 


436  LETTERS. 

no  longer  fo  tofled  about  as  you  have  been  in  times  paft.  I 
find  many  talk  and  boaft  of  reft,  of  which  I  fear  they  have  not 
yet  got  a  feeling  polfcfTion.  There  is  as  much  difi'erence  be- 
tween thofe  two,  as  between  a  fhadow  and  the  fubftance.  Far* 
be  it  from  me,  to  think  thus  of  you,  my  dear  brother.  No, 
I  believe  our  Saviour  has  really  loved  and  wafhed  you  in  his 
blood,  and  redeemed  you  unto  God,  that  you  might  be  a 
king  and  prieft,  and  reign  upon  the  earth.  Inhere  is  plente- 
ous redemption  in  the  blood  of  Jesus.  He  came,  not  only 
that  we  might  have  life,  but  that  we  might  have  it  more  abun- 
dantly. He  that  beiieveth  on  Jesus,  out  of  his  belly  fhall 
flow  rivers  of  living  water.  They  that  believe  enter  into  reft* 
O  glorious  redemption  !  O  glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of 
God  !  Blefled  are  they  who  have  not  feen,  and  yet  have  be- 
lieved ;  they,  who  having  not  feen,  yet  have  loved  Jesus,  and 
do  rejoice  with  joy  unfpeakable,  even  with  joy  that  is  full  of 
glory.  Blefled  be  God,  that  you  feel  more  of  this  than  you 
did  a  twelvemonth  ago.  In  a  year's  time,  you  will  be  afhamed 
to  think  what  a  dwarf  you  are  now.  A  believer  is  to  pafs 
from  glory  to  glory.  It  is  ignorance  and  pride  that  makes  us 
think  we  have  already  attained.  The  more  we  are  acquaint- 
ed with  Jesus,  the  more  we  (hall  be  acquainted  with  our  own 
hearts,  and  grow  more  truly  poor  in  fpirit  every  day.  Indeed, 
my  dear  brother,  I  am  a  thoufand  times  happier  than  when  you 
faw  me.  Jesus  hath  faved  me  from  many  corruptions,  and 
is  every  day  transforming  me  more  and  more  into  his  own 
likenefs,  I  cannot  reft,  unlefs  I  feel  a  fenfible  growth  in  my 
foul,  and  find  that  I  get  more  of  the  true  artlefs  fimplicity  that 
was  in  Jesus.  Blelled  be  God  for  that  fulnefs  which  is 
in  Christ,  out  of  v^hich  we  are  all  to  receive  grace  for 
grace.  Many,  many  fouls  have  lately  been  drawing  out  of 
this  fulnefs.     I  am  amazed  at  his  love  to  me  I  O  free  grace  I 

0  fovereign,  diftinguiftiing,  unmerited  love  ! — I  think  you  did 
well  in  receiving  fome  particular  perfons  into  your  houfe. 
*'  Be  not  forgetful  to  entertain  ftrangers,"  fays  the  Apoftlc. 

1  cannot  think  it  is  right,  to  be  fo  far  carried  away  with  aa 
orthodox  fcheme,  as  to  neglc6t  a(51:s  of  love  to  the  members  of 
Christ's  body.  Give  me  leave,  my  dear  brother,  to  behave 
with  all  mecknefs  tov/ard  thcfc,  who  may  not  be  fo  well  affect- 
ed toward  fuch  whom  you  love.     If  you  do  not  take  care,  and 

keep 


LETTERS.  437 

keep  clofe  to  the  bJcfTed  Jesus,  your  fpirit  may  be  imbittered, 
and  you  may  yet  infenfibly  fmk  into  bigotry.  Some  of  our 
Bnglijh  friends,  I  am  fure,  have  done  fo.  It  is  a  blefied  thing 
to  be  kept  free.  Jesus  can  do  this  for  you,  my  dear  brother, 
and  I  am  perfuaded  he  will.     In  the  love  of  a  cruciiied  Jesus, 

Ever  yours. 


G.  W. 


LETTER    CCCCLV. 

To  Mr,  M ,  at  CambuJJang. 


Rev.  and  dear  Brother 


Edinburgh,  Sept.  15,   1 742. 


YOUR  kind  letter  I  received  this  morning.  I  wonder 
you  can  love  me,  for  I  feel  myfelf  more  unworthy  every 
day;  and  yet,  dear  Sir,  the  King  of  Kings  ftill  delights  to 
honour  me.  At  Cumbernauld^  and  Torphicheuy  the  Lord  was 
with  me.  I  was  much  led  to  difcourfe  upon  walkin"-  with 
God,  and  had  a  fwect  opening  upon  thofe  words,  "  And 
*'  Enoch  walked  with  God,  &c."  Since  I  have  been  at  Edln- 
lurgh,  the  Lord  has  much  blefled  me,  and  given  me  fome 
frefh  teachings  from  his  blelTed  fpirit.  I  believe  hundreds  are 
fed  day  by  day.  O  dear  Sir,  help  me  to  adore  free  o^race. 
May  God  reward  you  for  all  kindneiles  fhewn  to  me  and 
mine !  Indeed,  dear  Sir,  I  have  fcarce  patience  with  myfelf. 
I  can  do  fo  little  in  the  day  for  God,  that  when  I  go  to  bed 
at  night,  I  am  quits  afhamed.  I  truft  I  fhall  begin  to  do 
fomething  now.  Dear  Sir,  help  me,  help  me  by  your  prayers, 
that  I  may  ftir  up  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in  me.  I  fliall  not 
eafily  forget  you  ;  fear  not,  the  Lord  will  yet  he  with  you. 

I  have  fent  to  Mefirs.  O— —  and   L .     I  fear  I  cannci 

reach  cither  of  their  places  ;  but,  God  willing,  I  purpofe  to 
come  home  once  more  to  Cambujlang,  and  then  muft  take  a  long, 
long  farewel.  Blefled  be  God,  wc  fliall  meet  by  and  by,  ne- 
ver to  part  any  more.  Then,  dear  Sir,  our  warfare  will  be  a^- 
compli{hed,  and  the  archers  will  fhoot  at  us  no  more.  My 
foul  glows  with  love  whilft  I  am  writing.  Sometimes  I  am 
enabled  to  look  within  the  veil,  and  to  take  a  view  of  the  pro- 
jnifed  land.  I  am  nothing,  but  Christ  is  my  all.  For  the 
gjefent^  adieu  !  Pear  Sir,  adieu  !  My  love  to  Koherty  furnaraed 

F  f  3  NathanuL 


438  L    E    T     T     E     R     S. 

Kathaniel,     All  with   mc  dearly  love  him.     O  join  with  liiin 
in  praying,  and  giving  thaiiks    for  us,  elpeciully,   dear  Mr. 


M^ ,  fo 


Your  weak,  unworthy,  though  hnppy  brother 
and  Tcivant  in  Jesu$  Christ, 

G.  IV, 

LETTER    CCCCLVI. 

To  Mr,  F' ,  ///  Penfyhania, 

Edinburgh^  Sept.  22,  1 742. 
My  clear  Brother  P , 

I  Received  your  two  kind  letters,  dated  June  the  id  aivi 
6th,  and  can  only  fay,  Christ  is  king  in  Z'lon,  and  or- 
ders all  things  well.  1  think  vou  cannot  have  a  fcene  ot 
greater  confulion  among  )ou,  than  there  has  been  in  Euglcnd, 
But  blclTcd  be  God,  matters  are  brought  to  a  better  illue,  and 
though  we  cannot  agree  in  principles,  yet  we  agree  in  love, 
Tho',  as  you  know,  1  am  clear  in  the  truths  of  the  gofpel,  yet  I 
find  that  principles  of  themfelves,  without  thefpirit  of  God,  will 
not  unite  any  fet  of  men  whatever  j  and  where  the  fpirit  of  God 
is  in  any  great  degree,  there  will  be  union  of  heart,  though  there 
may  be  difference  in  fentimcnts.  This  I  havelearnt,my  dear  bro- 
ther,  by  happy  experience,  and  find  great  freedom  and  peace  in 
my  foul  thereby.  This  makes  me  to  love  many,  though  1  cannot 
agree  with  them  in  fome  of  their  principles.  I  dare  not  look 
upon  them  as  wilful  deceivers,  but  as  perfons  who  hazard 
their  lives  for  the  fake  of  the  gofpel. — Mr.  JV — r~  I  think  is 
wrong  in   fome  things,    and    Mr.  Z — --^   wrong  alfo;   yet  I 

believe  that  both  Mr.  L and  Mr.  W ,  and  others, 

with  whom  we  do  not  agree  in  all  things,  will  fliine  bright  in 
glory.  It  is  beft  ihereiore  for  a  gofpel-minifter,  Hmply  and 
powerfully  to  preach  thofe  truths  he  has  been  taught  of  God, 
and  to  meddle  as  little  as  pofiible  with  thofe  who  are  children 
of  God,  though  they  fliould  differ  in  many  things.  This 
would  keep  the  heart  fwetr,  and  at  the  fame  time  not  betray 
the  truths  of  Jesus.  I  have  tried  both  the  difputing,  and  the 
quiet  way,  and  find  the  latter  far  preferable  to  the  former.  I 
have  not  given  way  to  the  Moravian  Brethren,  or  Mr.  JV--^^ 
Ot  to  Auy^  whom  I  thought  in  aa  error,  no  not  for  an  hour. 

But 


LETTERS.  439 

But  I  think  it  bcft  not  to  difpute,   when  there  is   no  probabi- 
lity of  convincing.     I  pray  you.   For  Christ's  lake,  to  take 
hceJ  left  your  Iprrit  fliould  be  imbittcrcd,  when  you  arc  fpeak- 
inT  or  writing  for  God.     'I'his  will  give  your  a<lverfaries  ad- 
vantacTc  over  you,  and   make  people  think  your  paflion  is  thi- 
eftect  of  your  principles.     Since  I  have  been  .in  E  fig  land  ihls 
time,  CahiKS  example  has  been  very  much  prefled  upon  mc. 
You  knov/  how  Lritlhr  abufcd  him.     As  we  are  of  Calvini/U' 
CKil  principles,    I  truft  wc  fhall  in  this    refped  imitate  Calvin  s 
praaice,  and  fliew  all  mcekncfs   to  thofe  who  may  oppofe. 
My  dear  brother,  you  will  not  be  offended   at  my  ufing  this 
freedom.    I  am  a  poor  creature,  unworthy  to  advife  you  ;   but 
I   fimply  tell  you  a  little  of  my  own   experience.     May  the 
Lord  give  you,  and  all  that  ftand  up  for  the  dodrines  of  the 
^ofpel,  a  right  judgment  in  all  things !  For  Jesus  Christ's 
Eike,  iis  much  as  in  you  lies,  put  a  ftop  to  difputing.     It  im- 
bitters  the  fpirit,  ruffles  the  foul,  and  hinders  it  from  hearing 
the  fmall  ftill  voice  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.     May  you  be   filled 
with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing  !   God   has  been  very  gra- 
cious to  me  here.     Wonderful  things  have  been  done  in  Scot- 
laud.     When  I  fhall  come  to  you,  I  cannot  as  yet  determine. 
I  hope  to  embark  in  a  few  months.     In   the   mean  time,  be 
pleafed  to  remember  me  to  all  that  love  the  glorious  Emmanuel^ 
and  accept  this  in  tendereft  love  from,  my  very  dear  brother, 
-  Yo4ir  nioft  affeaionate  though  moft  unworthy  brother  and 
fervant  in  the  kingdom  and  patience  of  Jesus, 

G,  n\ 

LETTER    CCCCLVII. 

<ro  Mr,  H 

Edinburgh,  Sept.  24,  1 742. 

My  mojl  endeared  Friend  and  Brother., 

YO  UR  fhort  letter,  dated  July  the  14th,  I  received  two 
days  ago,  to  my   great   fatisfaaion.     I    am    glad    my 

dear  family  js°  removed   to  Mr.  B ,  and  rejoice   that  our 

glorious  God  had  raifed  him  and  his  brother  up,  to  be  fuch 
friends  in  time  of  need.  Our  all-wife  Saviour  law  this,  and 
therefore  lent  them  to  be  converted  at  the  Orphan-houfe.  O 
Lord,  thou  art  fearful  in  praifes,  glorious  in  holinefs,  doing 
Y  i  ±  worwders  ! 


440  LETTERS. 

wonders  !  I  truft  this  will  find  you,  my  dear  friends,  and  my 
dear  latnbs,  happily  fettled  at  Bethefda.  I  cannot  think,  God 
will  give  you  over  into  the  epemics  hands,  or  that  he  will 
fufFer  the  enemy  to  ab'de  in  Georgia  for  any  confiderable  tin^e. 
My  thoughts  h  ave  been  varioufly  exercifed,  but  my  heart 
kept  ftedfiift  and  joyful  in  the  Lord  of  all  Lords,  whcfe 
mercy  endureth  for  ever.  The  kings  taking  Lot,  and  Abra- 
ham recovering  him  out  of  their  hands,  hath  been  much  prefT- 
cd  upon  my  heart.  Abraham^  goij^g  into  the  land  of  Canaan^ 
and  being  driven  out  by  a  grievous  famine  foon  after  he  came 
there,  has  alfo  been  applied  to  my  foul.  And  thofe  words  of 
JUofesy  "  Thcfe  enemies  which  you  fee,  you  fhall  fee  them  no 
more,"  have  fallen  with  great  warmth,  and  wait  upon  me, 
Thefe  things  put  together,  keep  my  mind  humbly  depending 
upon  God,  in  a  full  aflurance  that  fome  great  and  good  event 
for  the  kingdom  of  Jesus  will  erelong  be  brought  about.  I 
am  fupported  in  a  peculiar  manner,  and  kept  from  ftaggering 
through  unbelief. — With  this,  I  fend  you  a  continuation  of 
the  Orphan- houfe  account,  which  I  printed  to  fatisfy  the  pub- 
lic, and  to  promote  future  colletSlions.  The  news  about  the 
Spaniards,  perhaps  may  ilrike  a  damp  upon  the  colle£lion  at 
this  time  5  but  even  this  fhall  work  for  good.  God  has  ^ 
wheel  within  a  wheel.  O,  my  dear  brother,  how  do  I  long  to, 
be  with  you  !  You  need  not  fay,  "  if  poflible  now  come  over," 
for  I  have  long  wifhed  for  the  wings  of  a  dove  to  fly  to  Geor^ 
gia.  I  yet  owe  upwards  of  two  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  in 
England,  upon  the  Orphan-houfe  account,  and  have  nothing 
towards  it.  Hov/  is  the  world  midaken  about  my  circumftan- 
ces  :  worth  nothing  myfelf,  embarrafiTed  for  others,  and  yet 
looked  upon  to  flow  in  riches?  Our  extremity  is  God's  op- 
portunity. O  faith,  thou  haft  an  all-conquering  power  I 
furely,  my  dear  man,  you  and  the  reft  of  you  will  grow  now^ 
in  this  time  of  trial.  Fear  not,  neither  be  difmayed  :  the 
Lord  your  Gop  will  fight  for  you.  1  put  my  truft  in  him, 
and  through  his  mercy  I  fhall  not  mifcarry.  He  flill  ftrength- 
cns  me  to  go  on  from  conquering  to  conquer.  I  pray  for 
you,  I  think  and  dream  of  you  almoft  continually.  I  long,  I 
long  to  be  with  you,  and  methinks  could  willingly  be  found 
at  the  head  of  you  kneeling  and  praying,  though  a  Spaniard's 
fword  fliould  be  put  to  my  throat.  But  alas  I  I  know  not  how  I 

lhoul4 


LETTER     S.  441 

fhould  behave,  it"  put  to  the  trial :  only  we  have  a  promife, 
"  that  as  our  day  is,  fo  our  ftrength  fhali  be."  I  vi^ould  gladly 
write  to  you  all,  but  being  fo  varioufly  employed,  having  the 
fuperintendency  of  fo  many  fouls  and  fo  many  fpiritual  affairs,  in 
many  different  places,  I  feel  a  little  of  what  St.  Paul  fays,  when 
he  wrote  thefe  words,  "  befides  that  which  cometh  upon  me 
daily,  the  care  of  all  the  churches."  What  am  I  ?  Lord,  I 
adore  and  worfhip  !   I  hope  ere  now  you  have  had  letters  from 

brother   G and   Philadelphia    friends.     Some  there,  are 

fufpicious  that  I  am  joined  with  the  Moravian  Brethren,  but 
indeed  I  am  not.  My  principles  are  ftill  the  fame  ;  only  as  I 
believe  many  of  them  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  I  would  love  and 
be  friendly  to  them,  as  I  would  be  to  all  others,  who  I  think 
bear  the  image  of  our  common  Mafter,  notwithftanding  fome 
of  my  principles  differ  from  theirs,  and  are  as  fardiftant  as  the 
Eaft  is  from  the  Weft.  Glory  be  to  God,  for  keeping  me 
ftedfaft  to  thofe  truths,  which  himfelf  and  not  man  hath  taught 
me.  I  feel  the  power  of  them  more  and  more  every  day,  and 
am  continually  made  happier  and  happier  in  the  righteoufnefs  of 
the  glorious  Redeemer.  O  free,  fovereign,  diftinguifhing,  elect- 
ing, everlafting,  infinitely  condefcending  love  I  it  quite  amazes 
me.  The  thoughts  of  this  love  carry  mz  above  every  thino'. 
My  dear  friend,  the  Spaniards  cannot  rob  us  of  this,  nor  can 
men,  or  devils.  It  is  immutable  and  eternal  as  God  himfelf. 
May  the  meditation  on  this,  lead  us  nearer  and  nearer  to  God 
in  Christ,  that  we  may  every  day,  every  hour,  Qv^ry  mo- 
ment be  more  and  more  conformed  to  his  blefled  image,  and 
fipen  more  and  more  for  eternal  glory.  But  I  muft  have 
done.  Adieu  !  my  dear  man,  adieu  I  I  am  ready  to  weep 
tears  of  love.  Humbly  hoping,  that  I  fhall  fliort.ly  hear  of  the 
fpiritualand  temporal  welfare  of  you  all,  I  fubfcribe  myfelf, 
>vith  the  utmoft  fmcerity  and  affedlion. 

Ever,  ever  yours, 

G.  r/. 


LETTER 


h^ 


p  LETTER     S, 

^<W      L  E  T  T  E  R     CCCCLVliL 

Ts  the  RcV£)cnd  Dr.  C ,    /'//  hyi-jn. 

EJnibur^h^  Sept.  24,    1742. 
Rcv^vend  and  dear  Sir, 

TO  my  c;i'cat  and  abundant  rati>fa6tion,  I  received  vouv 
long  wifiiedfor  letter  of  June  3.  It  was  late  at  night 
ere  it  came  to  hand  ;  but  I  could  not  go  to  reft  without  read- 
ino-  it.  I  read,  and  rejoiced,  and  prayed  for  the  writer  with 
my  v/holc  heart.  O  reverend  and  dear  Sir,  God  only  knows 
how  clofcly  t  am  knit  to  the  dear  minifters  and  people  of 
New-En(rhind,  I'hey  arc  ever  upon  my  heart,  and  it  rejoiced 
me  to  find  I  was  not  forgotten  (unworthy  as  I  am)  by  them. 
Dear  Sir,  I  am  glad  to  hear  that  the  work  ftill  goes  on  ;  be 
not  furprizcd,  if  you  are  forfaken.  Paul  \v2ls  ferved  fo,  and 
when  I  came  to  England  moft  of  my  old  friends  and  fpiritual 
children  were  exceedingly  prejudiced  againfl:  me.  Our  great 
high-prieft  fees  thefe  trials  to  be  necefTary  for  us,  to  try  our 
faith,  and  teach  us  to  ceafe  from  man.  I  hope  they  have  pro- 
;  duced  this  bleffed  effed  in  fome  meafure  upon  my  foul.  There 
v^  feems  to  be  I'uch  a  fcene  in  Philadelphia,  as   we  have   had   in 

>''  old  Eyigland.    I  have  wrote  to  Mr.  T .    He  in  a  late  letter 

thinks  me  too  charitable  j  but  my  confcicncc  doth  not  reproach 
me  for  that.  My  principl'.s  are  ftill  the  fame.  I  embrace 
the  calviniftical  fcheme,  not  bccaufe  Calviny  but  Jesus 
Christ,  I  think,  has  taught  it  to  me.  I  go  on  preaching 
the  crols  and  power  of  the  Redeemer,  and  defire  to  fay  as  little 
as  poffible  about  others,  left  thereby  I  fliould  divert  people's 
minds  from  the  fimplicity  of  the  gofpel.  I  have  often  found 
that  oppofinir,  inftead  of  hurting,  makes  erroneous  people 
become  more  confiderable.  This  made  me  wilh,  that  the  Bojlcn 
rninifters  would  not  take  up  fo  much  time  In  fpeaking  againft 
the  Exhorters.  It  will  only  fet  the  people  the  more  upon  fol- 
lowing after  them  ;  but  I  cannot  well  judge  at  fuch  a  diftance, 
and  indeed  I  find  I  am  fuch  a  poor  creature,  that  I  fcarcc 
know  any  thing  yet,  as  I  ought  to  know.  At  the  fame  time, 
I  will  not  deny  what  I  have  received  ;  no,  this  would  be  dif- 
honouring  my  dear  Saviour.  He  makes  me  daily  more  and 
more  happy  ia  himfelf,  and  I  continually  rejoice  in  his  great 

falvation. 


LETTER     S.  443 

falvation.  Ar  prefcr.t  he  Uipports  mc  in  an  uncommon  man- 
lier, and  the  nevvs  of  the  Spaniaidi  attacking  Georgia  atFedts 
me  no  othcrs&'iie,  than  to  incieal'e  my  faith  and  eonhdcncc  in 
hiin,  whom  I  am  fuie  tarcth  for  me  aiid  m/mc.  O  dear  Sir, 
what  a  'glorious  thing  is  divine  faith  !  iVl;!y  you  have  much 
of  it,  and  feel  the  power  of  it  more  and  mcMe  every  day  ! 
Wit^i  repeated  lalutati(»ns  and  returns  of  love,  I  one;:  more 
fubferibe  myfeh'',   reverend  and  dear  S.r, 

Your  moft  aiYectionate  friend,  your.gcr  brother, 

vai)d  fervant  in  the  <i,lorious  gofpel  of 

the  ever  bkiied  Jesus, 

LETTER     CCCCLIX. 

To  Jonathan  B ,  Efq\  in  Nciv-En^Iand, 

Ho7icured  Su\  Edinburgh^   Sept.  2^,    1742- 

IRe'ioiced  to  hear  by  the  reverend  and  dear  Dr.  C ,  that 
you  are  retired  from  the  world,  full  of  piety  and  devotion. 
1  congratulate  you,    honoured  Sir,  upon  your  happy   change, 
and  pray  that  von  may  be  filled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of  God, 
Exceedmgly  engaged  as  I  am,  I  could  not  but  fend  a  line   to 
you,  becaufe  I   love   you   in  the   bowelo  of  Jesus   Christ. 
1  remember  your  command  ;  I  have  you  upon  my   heart,  and 
pi  ay  the  glorious  Emmanuel  to  do  more  abundantly  for  you  and 
youis,  than  you  are  able  to  afk  or  think.      It  is   impoirible  to 
tell  you  what  the  Lord  hath   done   for   unworthy   me.     Ho- 
noured   Sir,   I  feel  a  blils    I   cannot   exprefs.     My    happinefs 
in  Jesus  incrcafes  daily.     1  am  only  alhamed  of  my  unfruit- 
fulncfs,   and  the  little  I  do  for  God.     Indeed,   honoured  Sir, 
1   could  wifn  for  a  thoufand   lives.     My  Jtsus  (liould   have 
them  all.     Methinks  I  hear  you  fay,    "  thus  it   is   with   me." 
Kail  then  happy  man  I    All  generations  fhall  call   you  blelled. 
Honoured  Sir,   my  foul  is  full  in  the   midft   of  many   trials. 
O   what  a  glorious  redemption  hath  Jesus  purchafcd  lor  us  I 
Indeed  it  is  a  plenteous   redemption.     By    the   power  of  his 
death  we  are  enabled  to  tread  fin,  death,   and  faran  under  our 
feet.     I'his  is  the  prefent  frame  of  my  foul.     O   free   grace  ! 
unfearchable  riches  I   The  brighinefs  of  it  dazzles  the  eyes  of 
tt^y  fuith.     LoRD;  I  adore  and  wordiip  in  the  temple  of  my 

heart ! 


444  LETTERS. 

heart  !  Honoured  Sir,  be  pleafed  to  accept  thefe  few  lines 
from  a  heart  overflowing  with  love  to  God,  and  for  his  great 
name  fake  to  you.  With  moft  humble  refpeds,  and  afFedi- 
onate  returns  of  gratitude  for  all  favours,  I  beg  leave  to  fub- 
fcribe  myfelf,  honoured  Sir, 

Your  moft  obliged  humble  fervant, 

G.IV, 

LETTER    CCCCLX. 

To  Mr,  E ,  in  Philadelphia, 

Edinburgh^  Sept,  25,  1 742. 
My  very  dear  Brother  &m    ■  >, 

SINCE  I  wrote  laft,  your  other  kind  letter,  dated  July2^y 
came  to  hand,  by  which  I  find  matters  at  Philadelphia  are 
much  the  fame  as  when  you  wrote  before.  I  pray  God  to 
give  me  wifdom,  and  a  right  underftanding,  to  judge  of  thofe 
different  jarring  accounts  that  are  fent  me.  As  far  as  I  am 
able  to  determine,  I  think  fome  who  have  the  truths  of  Gop 
on  their  fide,  defend  themfelves  with  too  great  a  mixture  of 
their  own  fpirit,  and  by  this  means  perhaps  fome  perfons  may 
be  prejudiced  even  againft  truth  itfelf.  This  is  one  rock, 
I  pray  God,  my  dear  brother,  to  keep  your  foul  from  fplitting 

againft.    Again,  I  think  the  Ad-, n  Brethren  (hew  a  better 

and  milder  fpirit  in  the  general  ;  but  many  of  their  principles 
deviate  as  far  from  the  truths  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  eaft 
is  from  the  weft,  or  the  north  from  the  fouth.  I  wifh  you 
may  not  have  gone  a  ftep  too  far.     It  was  unjuft  for  Mr. 

B 's  brother  to  be  denied  preaching  in  the  new  building. 

Shall  I  commend  Mr.  B -for  this?   I  commend  bim  not. 

The  brethren  fhould  have  fome  other  place  to  preach  in,  and 
not  make  that  houfe  a  Babel.  I  cannot  give  up  truth  for  them, 
or  for  any  other  under  heaven.  I  find  they  are  as  weak  and 
fallible  as  thofe  whom  they  judge  not  to  have  drank  fo  deeply 
of  the  fpirit  of  Christ  ;  and  therefore,  my  dear  man,  though 
we  love  all,  we  muft  be  upon  our  guard,  and  follow  not 
man's  teaching,  but  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghoft.  Though 
principles  are  not  to  be  refted  in,  yet  it  is  a  good  thing  to 
have  a  clear  head  as  well  as  a  clean  heart.  Some  people  make 
nothing  of  principles  ;  but  why  are  they  fo  zealous  in  propa- 
gating their  own  ?  I  think,  my  dear  brother,  I  am  a  happy 


LETTERS.  445 

firmer,  and  have  really  entered  into  an  abiding  reft  in  God, 
through  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ;  but  yet  the  ftirrings  of 
corruption  I  expert  in  fome  degree  or  other,  till  I  breathe  my 

laft.     This  I  hope  is  all  that  dear  Mr.  T infifts  on.     My 

dear  brother,  love  the  brotherhood,  but  do  not  give  up  the 
truths  of  God  ;  and  when  you  are  brought  ofFfrom  idolizing 
©ne  creature,  take  care  you  do  not  infenfibly  fall  into  idolizing 
another.  Do  not  think  that  all  things  the  moft  refined  chrif- 
tian  in  the  world  does,  is  right  ;  or  that  all  principles  are 
wrong,  becaufe  fome  that  hold  them  are  too  imbittered  in  their 
fpirits.  It  is  hard  for  good  men,  when  the  truths  of  God  are 
oppofed,  to  keep  their  temper,  efpecially  at  the  firft  attack. 
Nothing  but  the  all-conquering  blood  of  the  dear  Redeemer 
can  deftroy  the  wild-fire  in  the  heart.  You  will  fee  what  I 
have  wrote  to  the  dear  Truftees.  I  hope  our  loving  Saviour 
will  incline  you  to  comply  with  my  advice.  I  believe  it  is 
from  him,  and  will  much  tend  to  the  profperity  of  Zion.  That, 
I  truft,  we  have  all  at  heart.  I  pray  God  we  may  be  enabled 
fo  to  a61:,  as  to  do  nothing  to  obftrudl:  it,  but  bear  and  for- 
bear with  one  another  in  love,  and  give  way  in  fome  things 
to  promote  the  common  good.  You  fee,  my  dear  man,  bow 
freely  I  write  to  you.  It  is  out  of  the  fulnefs  of  my  heart, 
I  hope  you  and  I  fliall  be  happily  furprized,  in  finding  each 
other  better  than  we  expected.  God  forbid  that  we  fhould 
live  one  hour  without  growing  more  like  the  bleffed  Lamb  of 
God.  I  am  too  credibly  informed,  that  fome  make  it  their 
bufinefs  to  prejudice  my  friends  againfl  me.  Such  wifdom 
cometh  not  from  above.  They  are  as  the  falfe  apoftles,  of 
whom  Saint  Paul  fpoke,  "  They  would  exclude  us,  that  you 
might  affedl  them."  But  glory  be  to  hQQ  grace  !  I  can  re- 
pofe  myfelf  in  Jesus,  and  am  happy  in  him.  However  I  may 
be  dealt  with  by  man,  blelTed  be  his  name,  I  am  now  happy 
in  the  midft  of  various  trials,  even  beyond  expreffion.  I  only 
add,  through  grace  I  have  laid  the  foundation  ;  let  others 
beware  how  they  build  thereon.  Adieu,  my  dear  brother. 
I  am,  with  cordial  refpects  and  affeition. 

Ever,   ever  yours. 


LETTER 


•446  I.    E     T    T    E    U     a 

LETTER     CCCCLXI. 

Tg  the  Reverend  Mr,  R J ,  in  IFahs. 

Edinburgh^   Od.  6,  174:". 
My  very  dear  Broi/'-r, 

YKSTKRD  A  Y  your  kind  ano*  proft:^.ble  letter  came  to 
hand.  My  d'.'ar  wife  being  emb.jrked,  I  opened,  read,  ?.nd 
now  fnatch  a  few  moments  to  anfwer  it.  I  took  yotir  hints  upon 
yacol's  ladder,  and  preached  upon  it  with  freedom  yefterday  ui 
the  afternoon.  I  truft  fojne  will  be  induced  to  begin  to  climb, 
and  others  be  iVirrcd  to  climb  fafter  ;  at  leaft  I  fliail  mvlcir 
for  one,  for  indeed  1  am  afliamed  1  have  mounted  no  higher 
yet.  Bieflcd  be  (jod,  I  am  afcended  fo  far  as  to  have  the 
world  almoft  out  of  niv  light,  and  I  fee  my  dear  mafter  ftand- 
in'?  at  the  top  reaching  out  his  band,  readv  to  receive  me  up 
jnto  heaven.  Indeed,  my  dear  brother,  the  J^ord  hath  dealt 
iTioft  bountifully  with  niC  j  he  gives  !ne  to  rejoice  in  all  h\s 
diipenfatlons  towards  me.  It  we'd  becometh  God's  chi'dren 
to  give  thanks  for  all  things  that  befal  them,  fince  it  is  God's 
will  concerning  them.  I  am  taught  more  and  more  every  day 
to  live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  (jOD,  v/ho  loved  and  gave  him- 
ielf  for  me.  God  keeps  me,  and  brings  me  where  I  woulJ 
defire  to  be,  at  his  feet,  waiting  his  will,  and  watching 
the  motions  of  his  bleiicd  fpirit,  word,  and  providence.  Here 
i  find  fafety  and  refuge  amidft  the  various  fiorms  of  oppofition 
and  reproach  which  1  daily  meet  with.  (tOD  isonmvfKJe, 
i   will  not  fear  what  men  nor  devils  can  fay  of,  or  do  unco 

me.     The  dear  McAVs.  E ;  have   dreiTcd   me  in    very 

black    colours. — Mr.    G 's    pamphlet    will     Ihew"  voti 

how  black.  Dear  men,  I  pity  them.  Writing  I  fear  will  be 
in  vain.  Surely  they  mufl"  grieve  the  holy  fpirit  much.  O 
for  a  nnnd  divellfd  of  all  feels  and  names  and  parties!  i 
think  it  is  my  one  fimple  aim  to  promote  the  kingdom  oi 
Jesus,  without  partiality  and  wnhout  hypocrify,  indefinitely 
amonp^ft  all.  I  care  not  if  the  name  of  George  lyijitefield  be 
banifned  out  of  the  world,  fo  that  Jesus  be  exalted  in  it. 
Glory  be  to  his  great  name,  we  have  fccn  much  of  his  power 
apd  greatnefs  in  S.toUmid.  The  work  ni  the  weft  (till  goes 
on  snd  increafcs.  i.aft  fabbaih-day,  and  iVIondciy^  very  great 
things,  greater  than  ever,  were  itt.i\  at  Kiifyth.      Inhere   js   a 


i 


I,     E     T     T    E    R     S.  447 

great  awakening  alio  at  Aluihel^  and  many  living  ftoncs  build- 
ing up  in  Edinburgh.  I  preach  twice  every  day  with  great 
power^  and  walk  in  liberty  and  love.  At  the  lame  time  I 
fee  and  feel  my  vilcneis,  and  take  the  bleilcd  Jesus  to  be  my 
rightcoufnefs  and  all.  I  purpole,  God  willing,  to  go  through 
Newcajile  and  Torkjhire  to  England.  Ireland  i  believe  mull  be 
left  till  another  circuit.  In  about  three  weeks,  I  purpofc,  God 
•willing,  to  leave  Scotland^  and  hope  to  fpend  a  month  ere  long 
in  /rules.  My  dear  and  honoured  brother,  I  hope  the  Lord 
will  give  you  an  heart  to  pray  for  me,  for  indeed  I  am  a  very- 
poor  finncr,  and  many  are  waiting  for  my  halting  ;  but  Jesus 
is  able  and  willing  to  make  me  fland.  I  have  been  much 
Urcngthened,  hncc  the  Spaniards  have  invaded  Georgia,  I  think 
I  am  like  the  ark  iurrounded  on  all  fides  with  waves,  but 
through  free  rich  grace  am  enabled  to  fwim  above  all.  Ere 
long,  I  fhail  rell  on  mount  Zhn  in  the  arms  of  my  beloved 
Jfsus.  Here  Is  love  would  make  me  drop  a  tear,  and  fet 
my  pen  a  writing  quicker,  but  other  bufinefs  calls  for  me. 
Dear  Sir,  be  pleafed  to  pray  for  me,  and  remember  me  to 
your  dear  wife,   and   all   the   followers   of  the   Lamb.     Pray 

write  to  Mr.  M^  C immediately,  and  [(^nd  as  ofcen  as  you 

can,   dear  ?vlr.  'J ,  to 

Your  v/eak,   unworthy,  but  truly  affeftionate 

bi other  and  fervant,   in  the  kingdom 

and  patience  of  Jesus, 

L  E  T  T  E  R    CCCCLXIIv 

To  Colonel  G . 

l-lof^'Ured  Siry  Edinburgh^^  Ot7^^^r  7,  1742. 

(^"T"^  ii  O  U  G  H  I  never  had  the  pleafure  of  feeing  you,  yet 
X  ^  have  often  prayed  for  you,  and  can  afiure  you  I  love 
you  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ.  I  hope  you  will  not  be 
cift'eiided  with  me,  for  troubling  you  with  this.  Your  ho- 
noured lady  tells  me,  you  will  not.  Love,  I  am  pcrfuaded, 
inclines  me  to  write,  and  I  doubt  not  but  you  will  receive  it 
in  the  fame  fpirir.  Dear  Sir,  I  rejoice  to  hear  that  you  are 
a  good  foldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  t'aat  you  delight  to 
light  the  Redeemer's  battles.  May  you  be  covered  v/ith  all 
h:s  annours  and  HUed  with  all  his  fulnefs  !  I  have  the  plea- 
fure 


44?  LETTERS. 

fure  often  to  go  without  the  camp,  and  to  bear  a  little  of  hii 
facred  reproach,  and  I  prefer  it  to  all  the  treafurCs  in  the  world. 
Weak  as  I  am,  my  Jesus  makes  me  more  than  conqueror 
through  his  love.  He  has  brought  mighty  things  to  pafs 
here,  and  gotten  himfelf  the  vi6lory  in  many  hearts.  I  truft, 
there  is  not  a  day  palTcs  but  fome  poor  creature  or  another  is 
plucked  as  a  brand  out  of  the  burning.  I  wifti  I  could  hear 
God  was  more  in  the  camp.  BlefTcd  be  his  name  for  raifing 
you  up,  honoured  Sir,  to  lift  a  ftandard  for  him.  May  you- 
be  endued  with  the  meeknefs  of  MofeSy  the  courage  of  Jojhua, 
the  zeal  of  Paul,  and  a  large  portion  of  the  blelTed  fpirit  of^ 
Christ  !  I  hope,  honoured  Sir,  you  will  now  and  then  re- 
member me  a  poor  Tinner,  and  fpeak  a  word  for  me  to  the  King 
of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  that  I  may  not  turn  my  head 
in  the  day  of  battle,  but  rather  die  for,  than  deny  him  in  any 
wife.  Neither  you  nor  yours  are  forgotten  '  by  me.  Indeed 
I  am  a  poor  creature,  but  happy,  very  happy  in  the  once  cru- 
cified, but  now  exalted  Jesus.  For  his  fake,  and  in  his 
great  name,  I  beg  leave  to  fubfcribe  myfelf,  honoured  Sir, 
Your  affedlionate  humble  fervant,  &c. 

G.   IV'. 

LETTER    CCCCLXIIL 

To  the  Reverend  Mr.  J TV . 

Edinburgh^  O^obsr  1 1,  1742. 
Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

ABOUT  ten  days  ago,  I  fent  you  a  packet  by  my  deaf 
wife,  which  I  hope  you  will  have  received  ere  this 
comes  to  hand.  Yederday  morning  1  had  your  kind  letter 
dated  O^ober  5.  In  anfwer  to  the  firft  part  of  it,  I  fay,  ''  Let 
old  things  pafs  away,  and  all  things  become  new."  I  can 
heartily  fay,  "  Amen"  to  the  latter  part  of  it.  "  Let  the  king 
ViVQ  for  ever,  and  controverfy  die."  It  has  died  with  me  long 
ago.     I  fhall  be  glad  to  fee  the  extracl  of  your  journal.     Be 

pleafed   to  fend  it  immediately,  under  cover,  to  Mr.    E y 

member  of  parliament  in  Edinburgh.  I  (hall  not  leave  Scot-> 
land  in  lefs  than  three  weeks.  Before  yours  came,  I  had  en- 
gaged to  go  through  Nezvcajlle  in  my  way  to  London.  I  re- 
foice  to  hear  the  Lord  has  bkflcd  your  dear  brother's  labours. 
I  am  enabled  to  preach  twice  iaily  with  great  power,  and  find 

A  I  v/.dk 


LETTERS.  449 

I  walk  in  light  and  liberty  continually.  Like  the  ark,  I  ant 
iurrounded  on  all  fides,  but  enabled  to  fwim  triumphantly  over 
all.  O  free  grace  !  I  thank  you,  dear  Sir,  for  praying  for 
me,  and  thank  our  common  Lord  for  putting  it  in  your 
heart  fo  to  do.  I  have  been  upon  my  knees  praying  for  you 
and  yours.  O  that  nothing  but  love,  lowlinefs,  and  fimpli- 
city  may  be  among  us.     It  grieves  me  to  fee  u'hat  a  fad  fpirit 

prevails  among  Mr.  E 's  people.     Father,   forgive  them  ! 

I  truft  you  will  remember  my  poor  orphans.  God  gives  me 
flrong  faith  for  them,  though  no  news  yet  of  the  Spa-niards 
leaving  Georgia,  Yefterday  morning  a  dear  little  hofpital  girl 
went  off  in  triumph.  The  work  is  ftill  increafing  in  Scotland^ 
efpecially  at  Kilfytb.  Surely  we  (hall  fee  great  things  crc  long. 
Dear  friend,  my  foul  is  on  lire.  O  let  us  not  fall  out  in  the 
way  !  Let  us  bear  with,  and  forbear  one  another  in  love. 
God  be  praifed  for  giving  you  fuch  a  mind.  My  kind  love 
to  all  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  in  fincerity.  In  much  hafte, 
and  with  great  thanks  for  your  laft  letter,  I  fubfcribe  myfelf,- 
reverend  and  very  dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  affectionate,  though  younger  brother, 

in  the  gofpel  of  our  glorious  Emmanuel^ 

G.  IK 

LETTER     CCCCLXIV. 

To  Airs,  Ann  £)— •,   in  HuntingdonJJy'ire. 

Edinburgh^  OSioher  13,  1742. 
My  very  dear  Sijler^ 

WITH  great  pleafure  I  received  your  kind  letters. 
They  incrcafed  that  love,  Vv'hich  I  had  before  to  the 
writer  of  them.  I  redeem  a  few  moments  to  return  you  aiY 
anlwer  to  them,  2nd  am  afhamed  to  think  how  I  put  voir 
off;  but  I  fee  vou  confider  my  circumftances,  and  love  to 
our  dear  Jesus  inclines  you  to  excufe  me.  Bleffed  be  God,' 
I  can  ftili  fend   vou  an  account   of  the   increrJc    of  Rynma- 


71  lit 


/'c 


kino;dom.  I  preach  always  twice,  fomctimcs  three  or 
four  times  in  a  day.  The  people  are  more  c.i?^er  than  ever, 
and  much  folid  work  is  done  for  God.  My  ftreng-th  is 
daily  renewed.  Still -I  delire  to  cry,  grace!  grace!  I  nrrr 
f  ndied  exceedinirly,  I  icarce  have  nnv  damp."  My  foul  conr- 
tinually  magn,itic3  the  Lord,  and  my  fpirit  rejoices  in  Qovi' 
Vol!   L  G^    ■     '  ^  nvf 

JO 


450  LETTERS. 

my  Saviour.  I  know  you  will  help  me  to  praife  him.  I  col- 
lected laft  week  128/.  for  my  poor  orphans.  I  have  fent  you  an 
account  of  them.  You  will  continue  writing  to,  and  pray- 
ing for  my  dear  family,     I  hope  to  fee  you  hefore  I  embark. 

By  this,  you  will  receive   a  line  from  one   Mr.   j^ ,  an 

humble   walker  with  God,  and   Mr.  T ,  a  bookfeller, 

who  I  believe  loves  the  Lord  Jesus  in  fmcerity.  Pray  an- 
fwer  them.  1  would  have  your  correfpondence  enlarged,  and 
therefore  I  fet  other  people  writing  to  you,  though  I  cannot 
write  fo  much  myfelf.  My  dear  fifter,  adieu.  The  Lord 
be  with  you,  and  yours.  I  am  now  in  a  lady's  family,  whom 
God  has  blefled. — We  have  feveral  fuch  here.  With  great 
lincerity  and  affedion,  I  fubfcribe  myfelf, 

Ever  yours,  in  yours  and  mine, 

G,  TV, 

LETTER    CCCCLXV. 

To  Mr,  T 5  in  Edinburgh, 

Glafgcw,  OSioher  20,  1742. 
Dear  Mr.  T , 

YOUR  letter  much  refreflied  me.  Thanks  be  to  God, 
for  putting  it  into  your  heart  to  write  to  unworthy  me. 
The  blefled  Jesus  hath  been  the  author  of  cur  friendfhip,  and 
therefore  it  will  be  blefled.  I  rejoice  much,  that  the  Lord 
is  with  you  and  your  minifters.  May  you  all  increafe  with 
all  the  increafe  of  God  !   O  that  the  focieties  may  remember 

to  pray  and  give  thanks  on  my  behalf.     Dear  Mr.  T , 

what  deliverances  hath  the  Lord  wrought  for  me  ?  Before 
the  news  came  of  the  Spaniards  leaving  Georgia^  the  words 
came  to  my  mind,  that  were  prefied  on  me  in  the  park  with 
great  power  :  "  Thefe  enemies  which  you  have  now  feen,  you 
fiiall  fee  no  more."  W^hat  a  life  is  a  life  of  faith  ?  I  know  I 
am  reckoned  enthufiaftic,  even  by  many  chridian  friends,  in 
refpedt  to  my  Orphan-houfe;  but  "  he  that  believeth,  doth 
not  make  hafl:e."  I  find  we  mufl  be  tried  by  friends,  as  well 
as  by  foes.  All  is  intended  to  bring  us  nearer  to  the  friend  of 
all.  I  hope  I  improved  my  intereft  in  him  juft  now,  for  you 
and  yours,  and  for  all  Edinburgh  friends.  As  foon  as  we  had 
perufed  the  letters,  we  kneeled  down,  and  prayed,  and  gave 
thanks.     Good  news  came  from  London,     I  hope,  next  poft, 

2  to 


LETTERS.  451 

to  hear  that  our  dear  friends  have  got  fafe    thither.     O   what 
reafon   have   I  to  be  thankful  !    Help  me  ftill,   my  dear  Mr. 

T ,   to  praife   the  Lord.     I  hope  to  be  with  you   next 

week.   In  the  mean  time  pray  for,  and  if  leifure  permit,  drop  a 

line  to,  dear  Mr.  T ^ 

Ever  yours,  &c. 

G.  ly. 

LETTER     CCCCLXVI. 

To  Mr.  J r ,  in  Edinburgh. 

Decir  Mr   T-^ ^,  London^  Nov.  6,  1 742. 

ABOUT  five  this  evening,  our  ever  blefTed  Jesus  brought 
us  hither,  and  gave  us  a  happy  meeting  with  our  dear 
friends.  How  good  is  Jesus  to  the  chief  of  finners !  He  {o^ 
laced  my  foul  all  the  way,  and  gave  his  angels  charge  con- 
cerning us,  otherwife  we  muft  have  been  frequently  hurt  ia 
our  ways  :  but  he  heard  the  prayers  of  his  people.  I  am  per- 
fuaded  he  gave  them  a  fpirit  of  fupplication  in  our  behalf. 
I  felt  it,  I  feel  it  now,  and  long  to  preach  again.  My  dear 
friend,  remember  us  in  the  dearefi:  manner  to  all.  I  hope 
to  write  to  feveral  on  Monday  next.  Hov/  fweet  is  reft  after  fa- 
tigue !  How  fweet  will  heaven  be,  when  our  journey  is  ended. 
Forgive  the  brevity  of  this. 

Ever  yours, 

G.  JK 

LETTER    CCCCLXVII. 

To  Mr.  J H ,  at  Bethefda. 

Lcndon^  Ng*u.  12,  174^. 
My  dear  eft  Friend  and  Brother  in  a  crucified  ]esvs^ 

HO  W  do  I  long  to  come  over  to  fee  you,  and  the  reft 
of  my  dear  family  ?  How  do  I  long  to  hear  how  it  is 
with  your  dear  fouls,  and  that  you  are  returned  to  Beihcfda  in 
fafety  !  The  cloud  feems  now  to  be  moving  toward  America, 
I  truft  I  (hall  be  with  you  in  a  few  months.  Wonderful 
great  things  did  the  Lord  perform  for  me  and  his  people  in 
Scotland.  The  concern  exprefled  at  my  departure,  was  really 
unfpeakable.  O  my  dear,  my  very  dear  brother,  the  love  of 
God  to  fuch  an  unworthy  wretch  quite  amazes  me.     I  rode 


452  LETTERS. 

poft,  and  came  here  in  rather  lefs  than  five  days  from  ^rt'/'w- 
burgh  on  Saturday  laft,  and  here  feems  to  be  a  new  awakenin<^. 
We  have  been  obliged  to  enlarge  the  tabernacle.   The  Lord's 

glory  does   indeed   appear  in   it.^     Dear  brother  H has 

been  fent  with  a  fweet  fearching  commiffion.     Brother  C 

is  much  bleft  in  Wiltjlnre.  The  word  runs  and  is  glorified  in 
IValcs^  and  God  is  raifing  fome  frefli  vvitnclles  of  the  power  of 
his  dear  Son's  blood  in  Gloucrjierjhire.  BlefTed  are  the  eyes  that 
fee  the  things  that  we  fee.  God  doth  greatly  countenance 
us  indeed.  O  free  grace  !  O  electing  love  !  The  collections  in 
ScotIa7id  were  large.  At  Edinburgh^  I  collected  128/.  at  one 
time,  and  44/.  at  another  ;  at  Glafgcw  2iho\it  128/.  with  private 
donations.  I  think  we  got  about  300/.  in  all.  Blefled  be 
God,  I  owe  nothing  now  in  England  on  the  Orphan-houfe  ac- 
count ;  what  is  due  is  abroad.  I  think  fince  I  have  been  in 
England^  we  have  got  near  1500/.  The  Lord  will  raife 
up  what  we  want  further  ;  glory  be  to  his  name.  He  keeps 
my  faith  from  failing,  and  upholds  me  with  his  right  hand, 
and  makes  me  happier  in  himifelf  every  day.  My  wife  lies  now 
very  weak.  She  was  tofled  for  ten  days  in  her  voyage  from 
Scotland:  The  fhip  was  in  imminent  danger,  but  the  Lord 
gave  her  much  of  his  prefence,  and  I  trufc  Ihe  v/ili  be  ready 
{hortly  for  another  voyage.  She  heartily  and  moft  lovingly 
greets  you  all,  as  does  in  hafle. 

Ever,  ever  yours,  &c. 

C.  TV, 

LETTER    CCCCLXVIIL 

To  Lady  Frances  G . 

Honoured  Madam^  Loyidon  Nov.  13,  1742. 

MINDFUL  of  my  promife,  v/hich  I  made  before  I 
left  Edinburgh,  I  now  fteal  a  few  moments  to  fend 
your  Ladyfhip  a  letter  of  thanks,  and  which  1  trufi:  will  find 
you  fitting  under  the  Redeemer's  fliadow  with  great  delight.  It 
rejoiced  me  when  I  heard  that  our  infinitely  condefcending 
God  had  blcfied  my  unworthy  minifiry,  to  recover  your  La- 
dyfhip from  a  ftatc  of  diirknels  and  fpiritual  defertion.  Glory, 
Cilory  be  to  rich,  free  and  fovereign  grace  I  I  truft  your  Lady- 
Ihip  will  now  be  kept  in  the  love  of  God,  and  no  idol  in- 
tcrpofe  between  the  Ivcdeeaiei  and  your  loui,  I  hope  the 
c  dear 


LETTERS.  453 

dear  Colonel  is  now  in  his  proper  place,  and  that  you  can 
think  of  him  without  anxiety  or  diftradino-  care.  This  is 
that  freedom,  wherewith  Jesus  Chr»ist  makes  us  free.  To 
love  all  things  in  him,  an"d  for  him,  and  to  love  him  above 
all.  Thus  we  have  peace  and  joy.  Whenever- we  deviate 
from  it,  we  fall  into  darknefs  and  dirtrefs  of  foul.  I  pray 
God  your  Ladyfliip  may  be  thus  kept,  and  enabled  to  rejoice 
in  God  all  the  day  long.  For  ever  adored  be  frcQ  "iace. 
1  have  enjoyed  much  freedom  of  foul  fincc  I  left  Edinburgh, 
Very  good  was  my  mafl:er  to  us  on  the  road,  and  ilill  better 
to  me  now  I  am  in  London.  We  have  bjeficd  feafons.  O 
who  can  exprefs  the  loving-kindnefs  of  the  Lord,  or  fhow 
forth  all  his  praife  !  We  beg  your  prayers  ;  and  wifliing  you 
and  your  honoured  Colonel  all  manner  of  profperity,  1  beo- 
leave  to  fubfcribe  myfelf,  with  unfeigned  thanks  for  all  paft 
favours,  honoured  Madam, 

Your  Ladyfliip's  moft  obliged  humble  fervant, 

G,  IV. 

LETTER    CCCCLXIX. 

To  Mifs  S . 

London^   Nov.  13,  1742. 

AS  I  have  been  writing  to  the  honourable  lady  Frances^  I 
am  willing  to  inclofe  a  line  to  you.  I  trult  it  vvilj  find 
you  walking  by  faith,  and  trampling  upon  the  luft  of  the  eye, 
the  luft  of  the  flefh,  and  the  pride  of  life.  This  is  the  happi- 
nefs  which  Jesus  Christ  has  purchafed  for  poor  Tinners. 
This  is  that  better  part,  which  I  hope  you  have  been  enabled  to 
choofe,  and  in  which,  I  truft,  through  grace  you  will  be  ena- 
bled to  perfevere  even  to  the  end.  Dear  Mifs,  if  this  be  the 
cafe,  well  v.'ill  it  be  v/ith  you,  and  happy,  exceedingly  happy 
fhall  you  be.  Methinks  I  hear  you  fay,  "  I  feel  my  happi- 
nefs  begun."  Keep  clofe,  Dear  Mifs,  keep  clofe  to  the 
lovely  Jesus,  and  you  will  find  it  increafe  day  by  day. 
Many,  many  temptations  and  difficulties  you  will  meet  with  ; 
but  fear  not;  look  unto  Jesus,  and  he  will  make  you  more 
than  conqueror  through  his  love.  Never  reft  without  look- 
ing up  to  him,  in  and  for  every  thing  you  ftand  in  need  of. 
He  will  richly  fupply  all  your  wants.     I  fpeak  this  by  happy 

G  g  3  experience. 


'454  LETTERS. 

experience.     Many  bleflings  have   I  received  fince  I  came 
hither.     O  help  me  to  praife  our  prayer-hearing  God. 
Your  moll  afFeclionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Christ, 

LETTER     CCCCLXX. 

To  the  Honourable  Lady  Jane  H- ,   in  Edinburgh, 

Honoured  Madam^  London^  Nov.  13,  1742. 

IT  is  with  fome  regret,  that  I  look  back  upon  my  not  writ- 
ino-  to  you,  when  I  was  at  Glafgoiv.  I  refolved  ever  fince, 
to  fend  your  Ladyfhip  a  line  as  foon  as  poflible,  after  I  reached 
London.  Being  now  fomewhat  fettled,  I  attempt  in  the  di- 
vine flrength  to  put  my  defign  in  execution.  And  now, 
honoured  Madam,  what  fhall  I  fay  ?  I  hope  this  will  find  you 
a  very  poor  fmner,  and  fitting  at  Jesu's  feet.  With  pleafure 
I  have  often  thought  your  Ladyfliip  has  been  made  willing  to 
become  truly,  inly  poor,  and  to  feel  the  full  power  of  the  Re- 
deemer's precious  blood.  If  I  miftake  not,  your  foul  is  a- 
thirft  for  God,  yea  to  be  filled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of  God. 
Go  on,  dear  Madam,  for  God  (hall  fatisfy  all  your  defires  : 
He  has  promifed,  and  he  will  perform.  I  find  my  happinefs 
in  Jesus  increafing  daily,  and  that  there  is  no  end  of  his 
goodnefs.  Greatly  did  he  ftrengthen  me  on  the  road  j 
greatly  has  he  blefled  me  fince  I  came  hither,    I  believe  your 

Ladyfhip  will  hear  fhortly  from   Mr.  H .     He   is  a  dear 

foul  indeed,  and  left  London  on  Thurfday  morning  lafi-,  full  of 
fimplicity  and  love.  The  work  goes  on  bravely  in  IVales^ 
and  eifewhere.  Surely  it  is  the  midnight  cry  ;  Surely  the 
bridegroom  is  coming.  Methinks  I  hear  your  Ladyfhip  fay, 
«'  Then  I  will  make  ready  to  go  forth  to  meet  him."  That 
you  may  be  always  ready  to  obey  the  moft  fudden  call,  is  the 
hearty  prayer  of,  honoured  Madam, 

Your  Ladyfhip's  mofi:  obliged 

bumble  fervant  in  Jesus  Ckrist, 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  455 

LETTER     CCCCLXXI. 

To  Mifs  N 'i. 

London^  Nov.  13,   1742. 
Dear  young  Ladies^ 

THIS  week  I  wrote  a  few  lines  to  your  honoured  mamma. 
I  now  fnatch  a  few  moments  to  fefid  a  line  to  you. 
And  why  ?  Becaufe  I  love  you  both  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  wifli  above  all  things,  that  your  dear  fouls  may 
profper.  I  faw  a  happy  alteration  in  you  for  the  better,  whilft 
I  was  at  Edinburgh,  and  my  conftant  prayer  is,  that  you  might 
flill  go  on  from  ftrength  to  ftrength.  Here  f<fem$  to  be  a  new 
awakening.  We  had  a  glorious  faft-day  indeed.  I  truft  you 
had  the  fame  at  Edinburgh,  I  am  fure  we  prayed  heartily,  it 
might  be  fo.  O  Edinburgh  !  Edinburgh  !  I  think  I  (hall  ne- 
ver forget  thee.  Surely  many  can  fay,  "  Our  fellowfhip  has 
"  been  with  the  Father  and  with  the  Son."  And  now  though 
abfent,  we  may  have  fellowfhip  together  in  and  through  the 
eternal  Spirit.  Thus  it  is  with  me,  and  thus  it  is,  I  believe, 
with  my  dear  wife.  She  moft  heartilyjoins  with  me  in  falut- 
ing  your  moft  honoured  mamma,  as  well  as  yourfelves.  Wifh- 
ing  that  your  lamps  may  be  always  trimmed,  and  your  loins 
always  girded,  and  that  you  may  be  continually  in  readinefs 
to  meet  the  heavenly  bridegroom  j  I  fubfcribe  myfelf,  dear 
young  ladies. 

Your  moft  afFedionate  friend  and  fervant  in  Jesus, 

LETTER    CCCCLXXII. 

To  . 

London^  Nov.  15,  1742. 
My  Lordy 

IT  has  given  me  fome  concern,  that  I  could  not  write  to 
your  Lordfliip  before  I  left  £ .    My  departure  from 

thence  was  very  fudden,  and  it  was  but  a  few  days  before  that 
I  heard  of  your  Lordftiip's  illnefs.  However,  I  have  not  been 
unmindful  of  your  Lordfhip,  and  I  truft,  in  anfwer  to  prayer, 
our  Lord  has  rebuked  your  fever,  and  that  this  will  find  you 
rifen  and  miniftring  unto  him.     O,  my  Lord,  I  think  I  can 

G  g  4  fay. 


456  LETTERS. 

fav,  "It  Is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  affli6led  j"  for  had  it 
;  ot  been  fo,  I  fhould  have  gone  aftray.  How  apt  are  we  when  in 
health,  to  follow  Jesus  afar  off,  and  fink  into  tepidity  and  a 
Jaodicean  fpirit  ?  May  this  ficknefs  be  fandified  to  the  purg- 
ing of  your  Lordlhip's  foul,  and  be  a  means  of  drawing  you 
r.ear?r  to  God  !  Our  glorious  High-prieft  ftill  continues  to 
load  me  u'ith  his  benefits.  He  dealt  moil:  tenderly  with  me 
oj^.  the  road,  and  blefles  me  much  here.  I  am  now  in  my 
winter  quarters,  preparing  for  a  frefli  campaign.  Happy 
they  that  fight  under  the  Redeemer's  banner !  That  your  Lord- 
fhip  may  be  always  fighting  the  good  fight  of  faith,  and  at 
length  lay  hold  on  eternal  life,  is  the  carnefl  prayer  of,  my 
Lord, 
Your  Lord/hip's  mofl  obedient  and  obliged  humble  fervant, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER     CCCCLXXIII. 

To  Mr.  S ,  of  Bri/loL 

London  J  Nov.  15,   1742. 
M^  dear  Brother  S- , 

I  Gave  thanks  on  your  behalf,  when  I  read  your  letters ; 
being  encouraged  thereby  to  hope,  that  Jesus  Christ  is 
indeed  about  to  take  full  poffenion  of  your  foul.  A  proper 
feafon  this  to  enter  into  the  marriage  flate,  an  union  repre- 
fenting  the  myflical  union  between  Jesus  Christ  and  his 
Church.  My  brother,  you  cannot  think  of  it  with  too  much 
folemnity.  It  ib  a  matter  of  great  importance,  in  which  the 
future  comfort  of  your  life  much  depends.  I  would  advifc 
you  to  read  over  the  matrimonial  office,  and  turn  it  into  a 
prayer.  As  for  outward  affairs,  I  think  it  quite  proper  to 
have  them  fettled,  as  I  am  a  minifler  of  Jesus  Christ,  and 
ou^ht  therefore  to  be  freed  as  much  as  may  be  from  all  world- 
ly incumbrances.  Be  pleafed  to  draw  out  your  account,  and 
when  the  captain  comes,  defire  him  to  draw  out  his,  that  re- 
ceipts m.ay  pafs  on  both  fides.     I  fliall  pay  Mr.  N as  de- 

fired.     I  am  glad  you  are  fo  friendly  with  Mr.  IV- .     I 

truil  we  fhail  learn  more  and  more  to  love  one  another. 

Yours  mod:  aiiectionately  in  Jesus  Christ, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER 


LETTERS. 


457 


LETTER     CCCCLXXIV. 

To  the  B'ifi)op  of  Bangor, 

London^  Nov.  17,    1 742. 
My  Lord., 

THE  inclofed  vvas  fcnt  by  a  young  man,  who  was  com- 
ing up  to  London^  and  was  in  his  way  as  far  as  LndlovOy 
on  purpolc  to  wait  on  your  Lordfhip  about  the  contents  of  't. 
If  your  Lordfhip  pleafcs,  I  will  wait  upon  your  Lordf]:iip  for 
your  Lordfhip's  anfwer.  The  charaL,lcr  your  LordHiip  has 
tor  candour  and  moderation,  makes  me  believe,  your  Lordfliip 
will  not  favour  any  pcrfccuting  proceedings  againft  thcfe  that 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  in  fincerity.  If  your  Lordfliip  thinks 
proper  to  fpeak  with  me,  upon  the  Icaft  intimation,  you  (hall 
be  attended  by,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfhip's  mod  obedient  fon  and  fcrvant, 

G.  W, 

LETTER     CCCCLXXV. 

To  Mr.  J ,   ofTo'ven  in  Wales. 

London^  Nov,  18,   1742. 
My  dear  Brother^ 

HOW  fweetly  does  the  blefied  Jesus  guide  the  meek  in 
his  way  !   I  believe  your  turning  back  from  Ludlow  was 

of  God.     Dear  brother  H was   about  that  time  p-ointr 

mio  JVales^  and  the  Lord  fending  me  hither  (unworthy  as  1 
am)  to  tranfact  affairs  for  you.     1  have  feen  your  letter  to  Mr. 

L ,  and  likewife  that  from  brother  C ,  to  the  bifliop  of 

Bangor.  I  am  juft  now  fending  it  to  him,  with  a  letter  from 
myfelf,  dcfiring  leave  to  wait  upon  his  Lordiliip.  What  the 
event  will  be,  our  Lqrd  only  knows.  This,  however,  we 
know,  "  All  things  fhall  work  together  for  good  to  thofe  that 
love  God  i"  and  the  gates  of  hell  fliall  never  prevail  againft: 
the  church  of  Jesus  Christ.  What  you  have  met  with,  is 
no  more  than  might  be  expected  long  ago.  There  has  been  a 
hook  in  the  Leviathan's  jav/s,  or  otherwil'e  our  mouths  had 
been  flopped  long  before  this  time.  I  had  once  the  honour  of 
being  publickly  arraigned,  for  not  reading  the  Common  Prayer 
in  a  Mceting-houfe.     At  another  time,  I  was  taken  up  by  a 

warrant 


458  LETTERS. 

warrant  for  corrcding  a  letter  wherein  were  thefe  words,  **  Shall 
our  Clergy  break  the  Canons."  The  profecutions  were  un- 
juft,  but  there  is  our  glory.  I  remember  when  Socrates  was 
about  to  fuffer,  his  friends  grieved,  that  he  fuffered  unjuftly. 
What,  fays  he,  would  you  liave  me  fufFer  juftly  ?  If  we  are 
buffettcd  for  our  faults,  and  take  it  patiently,  fays  a  greater 
than  Socratesy  we  are  not  to  glory  ;  *'  but  if  we  are  reproached 
for  Christ,  and  fuffer  as  Chriftians,  happy  are  we."  I  think 
our  prefent  fufferings  are  for  him.  Surely  the  fpirit  of  Christ 
and  of  glory  will  reft  upon  you.  However,  I  truft  this  ftorm 
will  foon  blow  over.     If  poflible,  let  an  open  feparation  from 

the  church  be  avoided.     Mr.  H can  tell  you  more  by 

word  of  mouth.  I  truft  the  glorious  Jesus  has  fent  him  a- 
mongft  you,  in  the  fulnefs  of  the  blefting  of  the  gofpel  of 
peace.  He  is  a  dear  foul.  I  am  perfuaded  you  are  dear  to 
him  :  1  find  you  are  dear  to  me,  though  I  never  faw  you.  It 
is  enough,  that  we  have  drank  into  one  fpirit.  This  create* 
an  indiflbluble  union.     Pray  remember  my  kind  love  to  dear 

brother  C .    I  wifti  him  joy  with  all  my  heart ;  but  would 

not  have  him  deny  that  exhorting  is  preaching.  The  Chan- 
cellor will  be  too  many  for  him ;  for  to  be  fure,  exhorting  is 
at  leaft  one  part  of  preaching.  Granting  this,  he  has  warrant 
enough,  notwithftanding,  from  fcripture,  to  tell  others  what 
God  has  done  for  his  foul,  and  to  bid  them  come  and  fee 
and  believe  in  a  precious  Christ.  O  that  word  !  How  fwcet 
is  it  to  my  foul  ?  It  is  like  ointment  poured  forth.  Had  I 
time,  I  could  tell  you  much  of  his  love.  He  has  been  exceed- 
ing good  to  me  in  Scotland :  He  is  ftill  fo  to  me  here.  Vile, 
bafe,  ungrateful  as  I  am,  he  lets  me  lean  on  his  bofom  night 
and  day.  My  dear  brother,  help  me  to  praife  him,  and  engage 
all  the  brethren's  prayers  in  behalf  of  one,  lefs  than  the  leaft  of 
^11  faints,  but 

Yours  raoft  affcdionately  in  Christ, 

G.  W. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  459 

LETTER    CCCCLXXVI. 

To  the  Reverend  Dr,  C— ,  in  Bojlon. 

London^  Nov,  18,   1742. 
Rev.  and  dear  Sir, 

GLAD  was  I  to  receive  another  letter  from  you,  before  I 
lent  off  my  packets.  I  thank  our  loving  Lord,  for  grant- 
ing me  the  continuance  of  his  minifters  affcdions.      I  hope 
this,  and  all  his  other  mercies,  will  lead  me  nearer  and  nearer 
to  himfelf  the  fountain  of  all  mercies.     Surely  the   friends  of 
Jesus  pray  in  my  behalf;  for  I  am  ftill  ftrengthened   more 
V  than  ever^  and  enabled  to  rejoice   in  his  goodnefs  all  the  day 
..-Hong.     The  confufion  at  Nezv- England  has  given  me  concern  j 
^'  but  our  Lord  will  over-rule  all  for  good.    I  was  forry  to  hear 

^y  "  o(  Mr.  D 's  imprifonment ;  and  to  be  imprifoned  for  an 

P       unguarded  exprejrion,  I  think  is  too,  toofevere,  and  not  for  the 
honour  ot  Bo/ion  at  all.     Had  I  been  in  his   place,  I  fnould 
have  accepted  bail.     When  I  fhall  come  to  Bojion,  the  Lord 
Jesus  only  knows.     I  believe  it  will  not  be  long.     I  find  I 
ihall  come  in  perilous  times ;  but  that  all-gracious  Saviour, 
who  has  helped  me  hitherto,  will   guide  me  by  his  council, 
and  give  me  a  true  fcriptural  zeal.     This  is  what  I  defire  all 
my  friends  to  beg  in  my  behalf.  How  hard  is  it  to  keep  in  the 
trne  narrow  path,  when  fpeaking  for  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  God 
preferve  me,  and   all  his  minifters,  from  defending  his  truths 
and  caufe  in  our  own,  or  under  the  influence  of  a  falfe  fpirit ! 
It  deftroys  the  very  caufe  we  would  defend.     As  yet,  in  Scot- 
land  there  have  been  but  hvj  of  the  diforders  complained  of 
amongft  you.     But  as  the  work  increafes,  I  fuppofe  the  ene- 
mies flratagems  will  increafe  alfo.  This  is  my  comfort,  Jesus 
reigns.    The  gates  of  hell  fhall  never  be  able  to  prevail  againft 
his  church.     I  have  had  a  late  inftance  of  his  power  and  good- 
nefs, in  driving  the  Spaniards  out  of  Georgia.     I  hear  they  are 
gone.    I  hope  the  Orphans  are  now  at  Bethefda  in  peace.    The 
continuation  of  my  account,  I  have  fent  with  this,  and  a  par- 
cel of  my  fcrmons.    Be  pleafed  to  difpofe  of  them,  as  you  (hall 
think  proper.      I  falute  all  my  Reverend  brethren  that  preach 
Jesus  Christ  in  fmcerity.     I  wifii  them  profperity  with  all 
r»iy  heart,  and   pray  for  them  every  day.     Ps.cyerend  Sir,  my 

(ouj 


46o  LETTERS. 

foul  is  now  filled  with  a  fenfe  of  redeeming  love.  O  why  me, 
Lord,  why  me  ?  Even  fo  my  Saviour,  for  fo  it  fecmed  good 
in  thy  fight  !  But  I  can  write  no  more,  having  much  bufinefs 
on  my  hands.  We  go  on  well  here.  Our  Lord  bleffes  us 
much.     I  am,  with  much  afFcclion,  Rev.  Sir, 

Your  moft  unworthy  and  younger  brother 
in  the  gofpel  of  Jesus  Christ, 

G.   TK 

LETTER    CCCCLXXVII. 

To  Mr,  J E . 

London^  Nov.  18,   1 742. 
Dear  Sir, 

YOUR  letter  pleafed  me  much.  As  foon  as  I  read  it,  I 
kneeled  down,  prayed,  and  gave  thanks  on  your  behalf. 
How  faithful  is  he  that  hath  faid,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  or 
forfake  thee.'*  Surely  the  Lord  intends  to  honour  you,  in 
making  you  an  inrtrument  in  bringing  many  fons  to  glory.  I 
Ijopc  he  will  biefs  your  fiift  public  effays  to  ferve  the  intereft 
of  his  great  name,  and  enable  you  to  go  on  from  ftrcngth  to 
ftrength.  I  cannot  think  you  will  be  long  v.ithout  a  feeling 
poficlTion  of  your  God.  Shortly,  I  truii:,  you  will  be  touched 
with  a  coal  from  the  heavenly  altar,  and  be  made  to  fay,  "Lord 
fend  me."  I  think  our  Saviour  has  given  you  great  know- 
ledge in  the  fcripturcs.  May  you  be  kept  clore  to  and  be 
daily  taught  of  him.     My  prayer  for  you  is, 

Tah  bis  poor  heart,  and  let  it  be 
For  ever  closed  to  all  but  thee. 

1  think  you  may  ftudy  conveniently  in  Scotland \  but  in  this 
and  every  thing  elic,  1  pray  the  Lord  Jesus  to  direct  and 
'ruide  your  foul.  I  mofl:  heartily  love  you,  and  widi  you 
profperity  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Our  blefled  Saviour 
has  been  exceeding  kiud,  nnce  I  have  been  here.  I  go  on  my 
wav  rejoicing,  and  am  flrengthened  day  by  day.  Tiiat  you 
may  abundantly  experience  the  fame,  is  the  hearty  prayer  of, 
dear  Sir, 

Yours  mod  afteclionatelv  in  Christ  Jesus, 

G.  W. 

L  E  T  1'  E  R 


LETTERS.  4.61 

LETTER    CCCCLXXVIJI. 

To  Mr.  M 5  JJle  of  Man, 

London^  Nov.  19,   1742, 
Rev.  and  dear  Sir^ 

I  Am  concerned  to  find  by  your  laft,  dated  November  4th, 
that  the  letter  I  fent  you  from  Scotland  did  not  come  to 
hand.  But  providence  over-ruleth  all  things ;  even  this  {hall 
work  for  good.  I  wonder  not,  if  the  Lord  has  given  you  more 
zeal,  that  you  meet  with  more  oppofition.  However,  I  would  not 
have  you  rafh,  or  over  hafty  in  leaving  the  [/Je  of  Man,  Wait, 
continue  inflant  in  prayer,  and  you  fliail  fee  the  falvation  of 
God.  I  have  not  heard  from  my  family  abroad  for  fome  time, 
and  cannot  give  you  any  determinate  anfwer  about  your  going 
to  Georgia^  becaufe  I  know  not  how  their  aftairs  ftand.  God 
will  yet  {hew  you  what  he  would  have  you  to  do.  Even  fo 
Lord  Jesus,  Amen  and  Amen  !  Our  glorious  Em?nanuelh\c(- 
fed  me  exceedingly  after  we  parted  from  Scoilandy  and  blefTes 
me  in  like  manner,  now  he  has  brought  me  to  England.  Vile, 
ungrateful  as  I  am,  he  vouchfafes  to  give  me  much  of  his  pre- 
fence,  and  keeps  me  under  the  fliadovv  of  his  wings.  Let  his 
goodnefs  to  me,  encourage  you  to  hope  and  tru{l  in  him.  Re- 
member, dear  Sir,  Jesus  came  to  make  poor  fmners  happy, 
and  to  give  them  victory  over  their  lulls  and  paffions.  Plead 
his  promifes,  be  much  in  fecret  prayer,  and  never  give  God 
rcll,  'till  your  foul  is  filled  with  ail  his  fulnefs.  That  the 
Lord  may  haften  that  blefied  time,  wherein  his  kingdom  lliall 
come  with  full  power  into  your  dear  foul,  is  the  earneft  prayer 
of.  Rev.  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  moft  aftedtionate  friend,  brother  and  fervant, 

G.  JV. 

LETTER    CCCCLXXIX. 

To  Mr,  B ,  at  Bethefda. 

Lo?:don^  Nov.  19,   1742s 

BLESSED,  blelTcd  be  God,  the  p:icket  is  not  gone  ; 
fothat  I  have  juft  time  to  tell  you,  I  received  your  kind, 
very  kind  letter,  though  I  have  rot  time  to  reaJ  it  tho- 
roughly,   leaft   I   (hould   mifs  this  opportunity.     God  only 

knov»'s 


462  LETTERS. 

knows  how  I  fympathize  with  you  and  my  dear  family. 
Though  I  have  no  money  to  pay  Mr.  Jones^  &c.  yet,  if  I  can 
take  up  two  or  three  hundred  pounds  upon  my  own  account, 
I  will  come  over,  God  willing,  the  very  firft  opportunity. 
The  time  of  your  faPiing,  I  hope  is  now  near  over,  and  the 
days  of  your  mourning  ended.  Remember  the  burning  bufh  ; 
it  was  on  fire,  but  not  confumed.  Surely  fome  great  good  is 
to  come  out  of  the  Orphan-houfe.  Blefled  be  God,  for 
ftrengthening  you  to  ftay  with  my  dear  family.   Ten  thoufand 

bleflings  defcend  upon  your  foul  !  I  wifh  dear  brother  G • 

joy.  I  am  much  obliged  to  my  dear  friend  and  faithful  fteward. 
Next  fhip,  I  hope  to  anfwer  his  letters  di{lin6tly.  O  my  dear 
man,  I  do  not  forget  any  of  you.  God,  and  not  my  own 
will,  has  kept  me  on  this  fide  the  water  fo  long.  But  furcly 
you  muft:  judge  me  fometimes.  You  need  not  make  any  apo- 
logy for  moving  ;  it  is  what  I  wiflied  you  might  do.  Your 
care  and  tendernefs  towards  me,  makes  me  long  to  embrace 
and  weep  over  you  one  by  one.  Forget  you  !  no,  no  ;  I  think 
I  could  rather  die  for  you.  My  brother,  my  dear  brother,  go 
on.  Surely  God  is  with  us.  Great  things  are  to  come  out 
oi  Georgia.  Remember  Abraham^  how  did  he  fojourn  in  the 
land  of  Promife,  as  in  a  ftrange  land  ?  The  Lord  increafe 
your  faith.     My  tendcreft  love,  and  ten  thoufand  thanks,  to 

dear  Mr.  J s.    God  v/ill  blefs  him  for  helping  you.    The 

Lord  Jesus  be  with  you  ail. 

Ever,  ever  yours, 

G,  W. 

LETTER    CCCCLXXX. 

To  the  B'ljhop  of  Bangor » 
My  Lord^  London^  Nov.  19,  1 742. 

THIS  evening  I  received  your  Lordfhip's  kind  letter.  1 
humbly  thank  your  Lordfhip  for  it.  It  confirmed  me 
in  the  charad^er  given  me  of  your  Lordfhip's  fpirit.  I  verily 
believe  your  Lordfliip  abhors  every  thing  that  has  a  tendency 
to  perfecution,  and  yet,  in  my  humble  opinion,  if  Mr.  C — — 
is  not  fomewhat  redrefled,  he  is  perfecuted  indeed.  That 
your  Lordfhip  may  know  his  fpirit,  and  the  fpirit  of  the  per- 
fon  who  came  as  far  as  Ludlow  on  the  i)ufinefs,  I  have  fent 

your 


LETTERS.  46j 

your  Lordfhip  a  letter  from  each,  which  was  written  fome  time 

ago  to  Mr.  H H .     In  them  your  Lordfliip   will 

fee  their  whole  hearts.  I  verily  believe  they  would  rather  die 
than  wilfully  fpeak  or  write  a  falfhood.  My  Lord,  the  whole 
of  the  matter  feems  to  be  this  :  In  JVales  they  have  little  fel- 
lowship meetings,  where  fome  well-meaning  people  meet  to- 
gether, fimply  to  tell  what  God  has  done  for  their  fouls.     In 

lomeof  thcfe  meetings,  I  believe  Mr.  C ufed  to  teil  his 

experience,  and  to  invite  his  companions  to  come  and  be  hap- 
py in  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  therefore  indided  as  holding  a 
conventicle}  and  this  I  find  is  the  cafe  of  one,  if  not  two  more. 
Nov/,  my  Lord,  thefe  perfons  thus  indidted,  as  far  as  I  can. 
judge,  are  loyal  fubjedis  to  his  Majefly,  and  true  friends  to, 
and  attendants  upon  the  Church  of  England  fervice.  You 
will  fee  by  thefe  letters,  how  unwilling  they  are  to  leave  her; 
and  yet,  if  all  thofe  a6^s,  which  were  made  againft  perfons 
meeting  together  to  plot  againfl  Church  and  State,  were  put 
in  execution  againft  them,  what  muft  they  do?  They  muft 
be  obliged  to  declare  themfelves  Difienters.  I  afTure  your 
Lordfhip,  it  is  a  critical  time  in  JVales.  Hundreds,  if  not 
thoufands,  will  go  in  a  body  from  the  Church,  if  fuch  proceed- 
ings are  countenanced.  I  lately  wrote  them  a  letter,  difiuad- 
ing  them  from  feparating  from  the  Church,  and  I  write  thus 
freely  to  your  Lordfhip,  becaufe  of  the  excellent  fpirit  of  mo- 
deration difcernible  in  your  Lordfhip,  and  becaufe  I  would 
not  have  (to  ufe  your  Lordfhip*s  own  exprefTion)  *'  fuch  a 
fire  kindled  in,  or  from  your  (Lordfhip's)  diocefc.'*  I  would 
beg  the  favour  of  your  LordOiip  to  return  me  the  inclofed,  be- 
caufe I  have  not  kept  copies.  I  fend  them  to  your  Lordfhip 
juft  as  they  are,  that  your  Lordfliip  may  fee  the  whole  alTair, 
and  cenfure  what  is  exceptionable.  I  really  believe  the  wri- 
ters will  thank  your  Lordfhip  for  it.  I  afk  pardon  for  taking 
up  fo  much  of  your  Lordfliip's  time,  but  I  thought  your  Lord- 
fhip would  defire  to  have  ali  poflible  information,  that  you 
might  be  better  capable  of  judging.  I  pray  the  great  Shep- 
herd and  Bifliop  of  fouls  to  direct  your  Lordfliip  in  this,  and 
every  other  affair  that  comes  before  you,  and  that  you  may  be 
faluted  at  the  great  day  with  an  Euge  bone^  is  the  hearty  and 
fervent  prayer  of,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfhip's  moft  obedient  fon  and  fervant, 

G.  JV. 
LETTER 


464.  LETTERS. 

LETTER     CCCCLXXXL 

To  Mr.  C . 

London^  Nov.  20,  1742. 
Afy  dear  Brother  C , 

I  Catch  a  few  moments  to  give  you  an  account  of  my  agency. 
Your  letter  I  fent  to  the  Bifhop  of  Bangor,  inclofed  in  one 
from  myfelf.  His  anfwcr  you  have  tranfcribed  in  this.  That 
he  might  not  be  impofed  upon  by  the  Chancellor's  reprefent- 
ing  of  things,  I  laft  night  fent  his  Lordfhip  another  long  letter, 

with  that  which  you  wrote  to  dear  brother  H fome  time 

ago.  As  the  Biiliop  fccms  to  be  a  man  of  a  moderate  fpirit, 
I  truft  this  ftorm  will  blow  over.  In  the  mean  while,  let  us 
wait  upon  the  Lord,  commit  the  caufe  into  his  hands  who 
judgeth  righteoufly,  and  pray,  that  wc  may  be  "  as  wife  as  fer- 
pents,  and  harmlefs  as  doves."  Glad  fiiall  I  be  to  ferve  you, 
my  dear  brother,  in  this,  or  any  other  affair,  for  advancing 
our  glorious  Mediator's  kingdom.  Let  this  be  our  comfort, 
the  gates  of  hell  fliall  never  be  able  to  prevail  againft  it.  Let 
us  go  on  then,  and  never  fear  what  men  or  devils  can  fay  of, 
or  do  unto  us.     I  fuppofe  this  is  the  language  of  your  heart. 

The  love  ^Christ  doth  ine  conflrain 
To  feck  the  wand' ring  fouls  of  tmn  : 
All  hall  reproach^  and  welcome  pain^ 
Only  thy  terrors^  Lord,  refirain. 

And  if  fo,  furely  the  fp^it  of  Christ  and  of  glory  will  reft 

upon  you.    Our  dear  brother  C is  fadly  ufed  in  JVutfhire. 

The  compalTionate  Redeemer  of  fouls  pities  my  weaknefs,  and 
fufFcrs  very  little  difturbance  to  be  made.  We  have  fweet 
times,  and,  vile  as  I  am,  Jesus  is  plcafed  to  keep  me  near  him. 
I  hope  this  will  find  your  dear  foul  fitting  under  his  fhadow 
with  great  delight.  I  know  you  not  in  the  flefn,  but  hope  to 
fee  you  before  I  embark.  Letters  call  me  loudly  to  Georgia. 
My  dear  family  are  returned  to  their  Bcthefda  in  fafcty.  O 
help  me,  my  dear  brother,  to  praife  the  Lord.     SuiUte  all  the 

t>f 

Ycr.rs  mof^  afll'^iionatcly,  ^ic. 

G.  W. 

LETTER 


LETTERS.  46.^ 

LETTER    CCCCLXXXII. 

To  Mr.  V ,  Secretary  to  the  Trujices  of  GtorpL'. 

Dear  Sir^  Lomloti^  Nov.  20,   I'] 42* 

GOD  willing,  I  intend  waiting  upon  the  honourable  Truf- 
tees  at  the  time  appointed.  Ycflerday  1  received  a  packet 
of  letters  from  my  friends  at  the  Orphan-houfe.  I  find  they 
are  returned  in  fafety  to  Bethefda^  and  give  a  noble  account  of 
the  General's  condu61.  Blefi'ed  be  God,  for  enabling  him  to 
repel  the  enemy  j  but  nov/  another  diftrefs  is  come  upon  poor 
Georgia.  A  violent  fickncfs  rages  and  has  taken  oft  many. 
My  letters  fay,  the  Orphan-houfe  furgeon  had  50  under  his 
hands.  This,  I  truft,  will  more  and  more  convince  the  Ho- 
nourable Truftees,  of  the  benefit  the  Orphan-houfe  is  and  will 
be  to  the  Colony.     I  hear,  that  Mr^  0— — ,  the  minifter   of 

Savannah^  is  dead.     I  know  one  Mr.  M ,  a  clergyman  in 

the  IJlc  of  Mcm^  who  would  go  over  and  fupply  his  place,  if  he 
was  applied  to.  The  Bifhop  of  Zodor  and  Man  I  believe  will 
give  him  a  recommendation.  You  may  acquaint  the  Honour- 
able Truftees  with  this,  and  let  me  know  th;ir  anfwer.  I  hope 
jn  about  two  months  to  embark  for  Georgia.  I  find  God  has 
given  my  family  a  good  crop  ;  but  the  hands  are  Tick,  {o  they 
cannot  Ipeedily  carry  it  in.  What  condition  the  Orphan-houfe 
was  in  lately,  the  inclofed  will  (hew.  Be  pleafed  to  let  the 
Honourable  Truftces  have  a  fight  of  it,  and  believe  me  to  be, 
dear  Sir, 

Your  obliged  friend  and  fervant, 

G.  IV, 

LETTER    CCCCLXXXin. 

To  Mr.  C . 

LondoHy  Nov.  20,  1742, 
My  very  dear  Brother^ 

THE  firfl  part  of  your  letter  did  not  fi.Tprizc  me  st  all, 
though  it  made  me  look  up  to  the  Lord  for  you.  I 
believed  you  would  be  down  in  the  valley  of  humiliation  foon; 
but  fear  not,  it  is  only  that  you  may  be  exalted  the  more.  I 
truft,  this  will  find  you  mounting  on  wings  like  an  eagle, 
v/alking,  yet  not  weary  3  running,  yet  not  faint.  Qqd  hay. 
Vol.  L  '  Hh  does, 

10 


466  LETTERS. 
doe?,  and  will  remarkably  appear  for  you.  Doubtlefs,  yotJT 
are  his  fervant  and  minifter.  He  therefore  that  touches  you, 
touches  the  apple  of  God's  eye.  Poor  IViltJhire  people!  L 
pity  them.  If  I  knew  their  Bifhop,  I  would  apply  to  him  on: 
their  behalf.  I  wrote  to  the  Bifhop  of  Banger  for  our  bre- 
thren in  IVahs^  and  have  received  a  very  favourable  anfwer. 
The  wrath  of  man  fhall  turn  to  God's  praife,  and  the  re- 
mainder of  it  he  will  reflrain.  How  wonderfully  has  he  ap- 
peared in  all  ages  for  his  church  and  people  I  My  dear 
family  abroad  has  been  marvelloully  preferved.  Bleffed  be 
God,  they  are  returned  to  Bethefda  m  peace.  We  have 
fweet  feafons  daily,  and  I  am  carried  in  the  arms  of  love.  My 
Mafter  careth  for  me,  and  fcems  to  order  my  goings  in  his 
way.  O  help  me  to  praife  him.  I  think  you  are  never  for- 
gotten by,  my  dear  C , 

Your  mod  aflcdionate  brother  and  fervant, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER     CCCCLXXXIV. 

7o  Mr.  J E . 

Dear  Sir^  Lo?uion,  Nov.  23,  1742. 

HOW  gently  does  the  Lord  deal  with  his  followers? 
*'  As  a  father  pitieth  his  own  children,  fo  is  the  LoRO 
merciful  to  them  that  fear  him."  Now  your  father  is  a  little 
uneafy,  your  grandfather  is  more  favourable.  The  Lord 
wilt  never  fufFcr  you  to  be  tempted  above  what  you  will  be 
enabled  to   bear.     He  will  make  a  way   for   you  to   efcapc. 

I    am    glad    you    have    determined    to    fludy    at  E . 

Two  things,  f  would  earncftly  recommend  to  your  conllant 
(ludy,  the  l>ook  of  God,  and  ysur  ozvn  heart.  Thefc  two, 
well  underftood,  will  make  you  an  able  minifter  of  the 
New  Tcftament.  In  what  manner  you  ihall  be  here- 
after employed,  I  would  have  you  be  iiidiflcrent  about. 
''  Take  no  thought  for  the  morrow/'  i  et  the  Lord  fenvi 
you,  when  and  where  he  will  fend  you.  in  the  mean  while, 
do  as  much  for  CjOD  in  a  private  way  as  you  can.  '*  i^xer- 
cife  thyfelf  unto  godlinefs,"  and  walk  \'o  humbly,  that  all 
niay  know  our  Lord  has  chofen  you  to  be  a  gofpel  prophet, 
i  rejoice,  tli4t  the  woili.  iS  ftiii  goi-ig  on.     BleJfcd   be  God*, 


Letters.  41S7 

We  have  good  times  here.     I  am   kept  in   great  liberty.     Be 
pleated  to  define  all  to  accept  of  hearty  love  from,  dear  Sir, 
Your  moft  aftetStionate  friend  and  fervant, 

LETTER    CCCCLXXXV. 

To  thi  Earl  of  ^^. 
My  Lord^  London^  Nov.  23,  1 742. 

SINCE  1  wrote  to  your  Lordfnip,  I  have  received  a  com- 
fortable packet  of  letters  ivGrn  Georgia^  giving  me  an  ac- 
count of  my  family's  fafe  return  to  their  Bcthefda.  The  deli- 
verance of  Georgia  from  the  Spaniards^  one  of  my  friends 
writes  me,  is  fuch  as  cannot  be  parrallcled,  but  by  fome  few 
inftances  out  of  the  Old  Teflamcnt.  I  find  that  the  Spam^ 
ards  had  caft  lots,  and  determined  to  give  no  quarter.  They 
intended  to  attack  Carolina,  but  wanting  water  they  put  into 
Georgia,  and  fo  would  take  that  Colony  in  their  way.  But 
•*  the  race  is  not  to  the  fwift,  nor  the  battle  to  the  ilrong." 
Providence  ruleth  all  things.  They  were  wonderfully  repelled 
iand  fent  away,  before  our  fhips  v/ere  feen.  Surely  God  re- 
membered the  prayers  of  the  poor  orphans,  and  the  carncft 
cries  which  have  been  put  up  on  their  behaU".  I  find  they 
now  live  at  a  fmailer  expence.  They  hunt  and  ihoot  for  a 
good  part  of  their  food.  Their  crop  gives  them  a  confiderabls 
quantity  of  pea<?,  potatoes,  &c.  and  they  kiU  fome  cf  their 
own  flock.  There  has  been  a  greait  fickneff?  at  Savamiah, 
Some  of  the  labourers  have  been  taken  off,  but  none  of  th^ 
thilairen,  as  I  hear^  have  died  as  yet.  I  hope  this  will  find 
your  Lo:d(}iip  perfedtly  recovered,  and  your  honoured  conforr, 

Lady ,  and  all  your  Lord(h:p*s  fainiiy^  rejoicing  in  God. 

He  is  pleafed  to  give  me  much  of  his  love,  and  to  blefs  mz 
every  day.  Several  of  our  friends  in  jya'cs  have  been  unjuft- 
ly  excommunicated.  I  have  fent  two  letters,  and  have  re- 
ceived kind  anfwers  from  the  Biihop  of  Bangor,  Perilous 
times,  perhaps,  are  coming  on  j  but  this  is  my  comfort,  "  the 
gates  of  hell  Ihall  never  prevail  againft  the  church  cf  ChrIst." 
Hoping  for  a  line  from  your  Lordlh^,  if  it  be  not  too  much 
tioublej  I  iubfcnbe  myfelf,   my  Lordj 

Yc^ur  Lordfbip's  mod  obedientj 
©b'i^eu  humble  fervant, 

G.  tV. 
Hh2  LtTTER 


468  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCCLXXXVL 

To  Mifs  W . 

London^  November  23,  1742. 

My  dear  Mifs  IV , 

YOUR  letter  affcaed  me  much,  and  if  it  had  not  been 
for  bufmefs,  I  fliould  have  anfvvered  it  ere  now.  It  is 
the  hardeft  thing  in  the  world  to  keep  the  creature  in  his  pro- 
per place,  "^e  are  apt  to  efteem  the  minivers  of  Jf.sus  either 
too  much  or  too  little.  One  while,  we  could  pluck  out  our 
eyes  to  give  them  ;  at  another  time,  run  into  a  contrary  ex- 
treme, and  not  pay  them  that  refpe6t  which  is  their  due 
for  their  Mailer's  fake.  The  love  that  a  child  of  God  feels 
for  its  fpiritual  father,  is  certainly  unfpeakable.  O  how  can 
I  but  love  him,  who  under  God  has  brought  me  from  dark- 

nefs   into  light  I    Methinks    I  hear  dear  Mifs   IV fay, 

"  how  indeed  !"  But  here  is  danger,  left  the  afFedlions  fhould 
be  too  much  entangled,  and  we  unwilling  to  give  up  the  be- 
loved obje6t  to  our  God.  This,  I  fuppofe,  is  dear  Mifs 
W 's  cafe,  and  I  can  fay, 

/  kiioxv  hoiv  fore  this  trial  isy 
For  I  have  fdt  the  fame. 

O  what  have  I  fufFered  in  parting  from  fpiritual  friends,  ef- 
pecially  fuch  as  were  my  Jfaac\  !  But  Christ's  grace  has 
been  fuincient  for  me,  and  fo  it  will  be  for  you.  I  have  pray- 
ed for  you,  and  hope  by  this  time  dear  Mifs  IV can  fay, 

my  fpiritual  Father  keeps  his  proper  place,  and  1  walk  in  li- 
berty and  the  love  of  God.  Indeed,  my  dear  Mifs,  no  one 
but  the  fcarcher  of  hearts  knows,  v/hat  a  real  concern  I  have 
for  your  eternal  welfare.  I  verily  believe  I  (hail  fee  you  fit- 
liug  at  the  right  hand  of  your  Redeemer.  Surely  he  has  cap- 
tivated and  ftolen  your  heart  av/ay.  I  hope  nothing  wiil  di- 
vert you  from  him;  but  with  a  Tingle  eye  to  his  glory,  you 
will  go  through  good  report  and  evil  report,  'till  you  come  to 
the  blelled  place,  where  the  wicked  will  ceafe  from  troubling, 
and  your  weary  foul  enjoy  an  everlafting  reft.  Glad  fliall  I 
be  to  hear  from  yoa  every  opportunity.  Ere  long  I  muft 
awiiv.  Pray  our  Saviour  to  help  me  under  all  my  difHculties, 
4  but 


LETTERS.  46^ 

but  at  the  fame  time  help  me  to  praife  him  :  for  amidft  all 
my  various  circumftances,  I  am  kept  joying  in  God,  and 
made  more  than  conqueror  through  his  love.  We  have  had 
b'efied  times  fmcc  my  arrival  here. 

Your  moft  afFcttionate  friend  and  fervant  In  Christ, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER    CCCCLXXXVII. 

To  the  Bifiop  of  Bangor. 

My  Lord,  Londoriy  Nov.  23,  1742. 

1  Humbly  thank   your  Lordfliip  for  your  Lordfnip's  fccond 
kind    letter.      Your  Lordfliip   fliall    have   Mr.    C 's 

letter  vi'henever  your  Lordftnip  pleafes  to  demand  it.  I  fent  it 
for  no  other  purpofe,  than  to  let  your  Lordfhip  into  the  affair 
as  far  as  lay  in  my  power.  I  am  quite  willing  your  Lord- 
fhip fhould  hear  both  fides.  I  doubt  not  but  your  Lordfhip 
will  do  juftlce.  The  candour  and  moderation  which  breathe 
in  your  Lordfhip's  letters,  and  your  condefcenfion  in  writing 
to  me,  incline  me  to  take  the  freedom  of  begging  your  Lord- 
fhip's  acceptance  of  my  laft  volume  of  fermons,  and  the 
Orphan-houfe  accounts,  from,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordfliip's  moft  obliged, 

obedient  fon  and  fervant, 

G.  IF. 

LETTER    CCCCLXXXVIIL 

To  Profejfor  Franky  in  Germany, 

Rev.  Sir^  Lond.iiy  Nov.  24,  1742. 

LONG  have  I  defigned  writing  to  you,  but  fomcthing  or 
another  has  always  prevented  me.  However,  I  can  now 
defer  it  no  longer.  For  though  I  never  faw  you  in  the  flefli, 
yet  I  love  and  highly  efteem  you  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  wifh  you  much  profperity  in  the  work  of  the 
Lord.  Your  honoured  father's  memory  is  very  precious  to 
nie.  His  account  of  the  Orphan-houfe  hath,  under  God, 
been  a  great  fupport  and  encouragement  to  me  in  a  like  un- 
dertaking. How  it  profpers,  the  account  fent  with  this  will 
inform  you.  Only  it  will  be  proper  to  obferve,  that  fnice  the 
publication  of  the  laft,  there  have  been  upwards  of  300/.  col- 

Hh  3  leaed. 


470  LETTERS.' 

leded.  T  am  yet  about  40c/.  in  arrears.  But  I  know  In  wh»m 
I  have  believed,  for  the  carrying  on  of  that  building.  Hi- 
therto it  has  anfvvered  its  motto,  and  has  been  like  the  burn^ 
ing  bufli  on  fire,  but  not  confumed.  The  Colony's  late  de- 
liverance from  the  Spaniards  was  very  extraordinary.  I  cannot 
but  think  the  Lord  intends  yet  to  do  great  things  for  Georgia. 
How  is  it  with  the  Saltzburghers  ?  I  have  not  heard.  Some- 
time ago  I  fent  them  over  twenty  pounds,  and  wi(h  it  was  in 
|ny  power  to  fend  them  more.  About  January^  God  willing,  I 
intend  to  embark.  In  the  mean  while,  I  fhould  be  glad  to 
know.  Rev.  Sir,  how  it  is  with  your  Orphan-houfe  ?  and 
whether  yoi4  have  any  commands  to  Georgia?  I  fuppofe  you 
have  heard  of  the  work  of  God  in  Scotland,  Indeed  the  word 
has  run  and  been  glorified,  and  Jesus  has  gotten  himfelf  the 
vidlory  in  many  hearts.  In  Brtgland  alfo  he  is  pleafed  to  blefs 
us.  Here  are  many  clofe  followers  of  the  bleffed  Lamb  of 
God,  and  though  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  bet\veen  me 

and  Mr.  JV ,  yet  Jesus  pities  us  and  blefles  us  al].    I  long 

for  that  time,  "  when  the  watchmen  fhall  all  fee  eye  to  eye  ; 
when  the  leopard  fhall  lie  down  with  the  kid,  the  lioq  e^t 
draw  like  the  ox,  and  the  people  of  God  learn  war  and  jangle 
no  more.'*  Haflen  that  time,  Q  glorious  Emmanuel,  and  let 
thy  kingdom  come  !  —  Rev.  Sir,  whilft  I  am  writing,  the  fire 
of  love  kindles  in  my  heart.  I  am  amazed,  to  think  the  blef- 
fed  Jpsus  fhould  employ  fuch  an  unworthy  wretch  as  I  am. 
I^ut  thy  grace  is  free,  for,  O  my  God,  it  fount}  me  out. 
The  love  yoM  bear  to  the  lovely  Jesus,  I  am  perfuaded  will 
excite  you  to  pray  for  me.  Glad  fhould  I  be  of  a  line  from 
v-ou,  and  the  Rev.  Mr.  Uifpurgher ;  but  I  deferve  no  regard 
for  not  writing  to  vou  both.  But  you  know  how  to  forgivie, 
for  God  for  Christ's  hko:  hath  forgiven  you.  Hoping  there- 
fore for  a  line  from  you  by  the  hands  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Z ■, 

I  fubfcribe  myfelF,  Reverend  and  dear  Sir, 

Your  mofl  obliged,  aftccfionate,  tho'  unworthy  younger 
brother  and  fcrvant  in  the  kingdom 

and  patience  of  the  blefl<;;d  Jesus, 

G.  IF. 


LETTER 


LETTERS.  471 

LETTER    CCCCLXXXIX. 

To  Mr,  P ,  cf  Newbury. 

Lomkri^   Nov.  27,    J  742. 
Rf-j.  end  dear  Sir^ 

THIS  morning  I  received  your  fwect  and  lovely  letter. 
It  humbled  me  before  God  ;  but  I  rejoiced,  as  I  had 
Jong  fmce  publickly  recanted  all  that  is  exceptionable  in  that 
•extra(5i:.  1  think  I  was  overfecn  in  publifliing  it;  but  this  is 
not  the  firfl:  blunder  1  have  made.  My  miftakes  have  been  Co 
many,  and  my  imprudence  i'o  great,  that  I  have  often  won- 
dered that  the  glorioAis  Jes^J'S  would  employ  me  in  his  Service 
But  he  has  pr-ovc<i  his  eternal  goodnefs,  long-fuffering,  and 
love,  by  bearing  with  me,  and.  Rev.  and  dear  Sir,  he  ftill 
delights  to  honour  me.  Since  I  have  been  in  London^  he  has 
given  me  great  frcc<iom  of  foul,  and  caufed  his  word  to  come 
with  power.  I  have  news  of  my  family  being  fafe  at  Georgia, 
God  willing,  I  purpofc  to  embark  next  January.  I  molt 
heartily  thank  you  for  this  laft  inftancc  of  your  love,  and  pray 
our  dear  Jesus  to  reward  you  for  it.  Your  feeing  what  a 
poor,  weak-,  fallible  creature  I  am,  I  truft  will  ftir  you  up  to 
be  more  earned  for  me  at  the  throne  of  grace.  Next  week  I 
intend  fending  you  a  parcel,  wherein  you  will  have  more  par- 
ticular accounts  of  the   work  in  Siioiland,     I  hear  the  gofpcl 

^ouriflies  in  Gloucejierjhire  and  IVdlcs,     Dear  Mr.  C will 

be  fadly  mifTed.  But  he  is  in  peace,  aiid  the  refidue  of  the 
fpirit  is  in  the  Redeemer's  hands.  That  you  and  your  dear  flock 
and  family  may  experience  a  large  effuUon  of  it  in  your  dear 
/buls,  is  and  (hall  be  the  carncft  jrayer  oi^  dear  and  Rev.  Sir, 
Your  ?noft  afFedlionate,  tho'  moil:  unworthy  brother 
and  fervajit  in  Jesu^  Christ, 

G,  JV, 

LETTER    CCCCXC. 

To  the  Bijhop  of  Sarum, 
Aly  Lordy  Nov.  30,   I742- 

I  Beg  your  Lordfhip's  pardon  for  troubling  von  with  this. 
I  helieve  your  Lorddiip  will   not  be  offended,  when*"  you 

know  the  cauie.  There  is  one  Mr.  C ,  a  true  lover  of  Jesus 

H  h  4  Chkisti^ 


^7x  LETTERS. 

Christ,  who  has  been  much  honoured  in  bringing  many  poor 
fmners  in  If^dtjlnre  to  the  knowledge  of  themfelves  and  of  God- 
He  is  a  member  of  the  Church  of  Ef7gla7id^  but  f:\dly  oppofed 
by  the  clergy  in  JVlltj})ire^  as  well  as  by  many  that  will  come 
to  hear  him  preach.  In  a  letter,  dated  November  \(j\.\\^  from 
Tcxham^  he  writes  thus:  "  The  enemy  feems  to  be  more  awaken- 
"  cd  in  the  villages  round  about  us,  than  before.  The  mini- 
"  fters  of  Bramhk^  Segcry^  Langley^  and  many  others,  have 
"  ftridly  forbidden  the  church-wardens  and  overfeers  to  let  any 

"  of  the  C ''s  have  any  thing  out  of  the  parifh  j  and  they 

**  obey  them,  and  tell  the  poor,  if  they  cannot  flop  them  from 
"  following  any  other  way,  they  will  famifn  them.  Several 
"  of  the  poor,  who  have  great  families  (to  my  ov/n  knowledge) 
"  have  already  been  denied  any  help,  for  this  reafon,  bccaufe 
'^  they  f(jllow  this  way.  Some  of  the  people  have,  out  of  fear, 
'^  denied  they  ever  came,  and  others  have  been  made  to  pro- 
*'  mife  tli.?v  will  come  no  more ;  whilil  the  moft  part  come  at 
"  the  lof?  of  friends  and  all  they  have.  When  the  ofEccrs 
"  threatned  fome  to  take  away  their  pay  ;  they  anfwered,  if 
^^  vou  ftarve  u?,  v/e  will  go,  and  rather  than  we  will  forbear, 
«'  we  will  live  upon  grafs  like  the  kinc.  Surely  the  cries  of 
*'  the  diftrefTed  people  have  already  entered  into  the  cars  of  the 
*'  Lord  of  Sabacih.''  In  another  letter  I  received  from  hini 
laft  night,  he  writes  thus  :  '«  I  fhould  be  glad  if  you  could 
"  mention  the  cruelty  of  the  miniiicrs  Oi  Brn?/ihle^  and  Scgery, 
*'  to  the  Bifiiop  of  Sanwiy  indeed,  their  doings  are  inhuman. 
"  llie  cry  of  the  people,  becaufe  of  their  oppreffion,  is  vtry 
*-''  great;  federal  fufier  amazingly." — In  compliance  with  my 
dear  friend's  rcqucil,  I  prefume  to  lay  the  matter,  as  he  repre» 
fttits  it,  before  your  LordPnip,  being  pcrfiiaded  that  your 
Lordfhip  will  not  favour  perfccuting  pra<5iices,  or  approve  of 
fuch  proceedings  to  keep  people  to  the  Church  of  EnglancL 
Should  this  young  man  leave  the  Church,  hundreds  would 
leave  it  with  him.  But  I  know  that  at  prefent  he  has  no  fuch 
defi'^n.  If  your  Lordfnip  pleafes  to  give  n:ic  leave,  I  v/ould 
Vv'ait  upon  your  Lordfliip  upon  the  lead  notice.  Or  if  your 
LordPaip  is  plcafl-d  to  fend  a  line  into  V/Uif:nrt\  to  know  the 
truth  of  the  matter,  and  judge  accordingly,  it  will  fati^fy,  my 

Lord, 

Your  Lord*]iip'5  inofl  obedient  fen  and  fervant, 

G.  IV. 
L  E  1^  T  E  R 


LETTERS.  473 

LETTER    CCCCXCL 

To  Mr.  J . 

Londsuy  Dec.  4,   1742. 

IF  my  dear  brother  J took  it  kind,  that  I  called  at  his 
houfe,  I  am  fure  I  took  it  much  kinder  that  he  was 
plealed  to  fend  unworthy  me  fo  kind  a  letter.  It  has  fo  af- 
fected me,  that  I  have  been  praying  before  my  Saviour  for  you; 
and  though  nature  calls  for  reir,  1  cannot  obey  it,  before  I 

have  written  to  my  dear  Mr.  J .     Vile,   unfaithful  as  I 

am,  my  Mafter  lets  me  have  my  hands  full  of  work.  Froni 
morning  'till  midnight  I  am  employed,  and,  glory  be  to  rich 
grace,,  I  am  carried  through  the  duties  of  each  day  with  chear- 
fulnefs,  and  almoft  uninterrupted  tranquility.  Our  fociety  is 
large,  but  in  good  order,  and  we  make  improvements  daily. 
My  Mafter  gives  us  much  of  his  gracious  prefence,  both  in  our 
public  and  private  adminiftrations.  In  our  love-feafts,  Jesus 
comes  and  fays,  "  Peace  be  unto  you."  In  our  great  congre- 
gation, he  gives  poor  finners  to  look,  and  mourn,  and  live, 
\n  ScGiland  the  work  was  very  extraordinary.  In  TVales  the 
word  runs  and  is  glorified  much.  In  Gloucejlerfolre^  JFiltJhirey 
and  Br'ijlol^  our  Lord  gets  himfclF  the  victory  in  many  hearts. 

In  Neivcajlle^  our  brother  TV 's  are  blclTed  much,  and   I 

heartily  rejoice  to  hear  that  our  dear  Saviour  is  fo  much  amono- 
you.  If  I  know  any  thing  of  this  my  defperately  wicked 
heart.  I  am  dead  to  parties,  and  freed  from  the  pain,  which 
on  that  account  once  difturbed  the  peace  of  my  foul.  In- 
deed, Jesus  has  taken  many  things  from  me,  and  made  me  to 
experience,  that  in  him  there  is  plenteous  redemption.  About 
yanuary,  I  purpofe,  GoD  willing,  to  embark  for  Georgia. 
My  dear  family  hath  been  wonderfully  prefervcd.  As  the 
Qrphan-houfe  was  built  by  faith,  1  truft  the  gates  of  hell  fhall 

never  prevail  againfi:  it.     Methinks  I  hear  my  dear  Mr.  f . 

iay,  Amen.  I  mofl  cordially  falute  your  dear  Lady,  dear  bro- 
ther S 5  and  all  the  brethren.  I  faw  our  dear  S be- 
fore he  went.  I  intended  having  fomc  fwect  fcllowfhip  v/ith 
the  church  in  TorkJJnrc^  but  was  prevented  by  riding  poll.     If 

dear  brother  H ,  ov  D ,  or  any  of  the  brethren,  have 

any  thing  to  fay  tq  a  poor  finne(j  I  ihovtid  be  glad  to  hear 

IVom 


474  LETTERS. 

from  them.     Let  this  provoke  you,  my  dear  brother,  to  fend 

rre  another  letter.     I'll  redeem  time  from  fleep,  rather  than  it 

(hould  not  be  anfwercd  by,  my  dear  Mr.  */ a^. 

Your  moft  afte^lionate,  though  unworthy,  fmful  and 
younger  brother  in  Jesus  Christ, 

G.  JK 

LETTER    CCCCXCII. 

To  the  B'lfnap  of  BriftoL 
My  L^^d,  London^  Dec.  5,   1 742. 

AS  your  Lordftiip  was  pleafed  to  contribute  towards  the 
Otphan-houfe  in  Georgia^  I  think  your  Lordfhip  has  a 
right  to  hear  how  that  undertaking  fucceeds.  I  have  mads 
bold  to  fend  your  Lordfliip  the  accounts  of  it,  which  are  pub- 
lifhed.  Since  the  Jaft  was  printed,  I  have  co]le(£^ed  about  300/, 
and  have  heard  that  my  family  are  all  fafe  at  the  Orphan- 
houfc.  I  have  alfo  taken  the  freedom  of  fending  your  Lordfhip 
Kiy  laft  volume  of  fcrmons ;  in  accepting  of  which,  your  Lord* 
ihip  will  much  oblige 

Your  Lordfliip^s  moft  obedient  fonand  fervant, 

G.  IF, 

LETTER    CCCCXCIIL 

To  Mr.  5——,  at  IForceJler, 

L^ndan^  T)ec.  9,   1 745. 
R€v.  and  dear  Sir, 

HOWEVER  engaged  I  may  be,  I  think  it  my  duty  to 
anfwer  your  kind  letter  as  foon  as  pOilible.  It  is  not  fit 
that  my  Malkr'ii  aged  fervant  (hould  wait  long  for  an  anfwer 
from  a  younger  broiher,  cfpccially  as  I  know  you  write  with  i'o 
much  difficulty.  I  thank  you.  Rev,  Sir,  for  your  plain  dealing. 
It  is  what  pleafcth  mc  well.  Indeed,  I  feel  myfelf  a  poor,  vile, 
woithlcfs  creature.3  and  am  glad  to  receive  advice  from  you, 
who  have  been  fo  long  in  the  Redeemer's  fcrvice.  However 
ungrateful  it  may  be  to  thp  old  man,  the  langu.ige  of  my  heart 
is,  *'  LoRD,.rtarch  mc  ai\d  try  nic,  and  whatever  fecret  wick- 
*'  ednefs  lurks  in  my  foul,  difcover  it  to  me,  and  give  rne 
''  power  over  it,  that  nothing  may  divert  me  from  that  way, 
**  which  leads  nie  to  lite  eveilcifting/'     Your  advice.  Rev, 

Sir, 


LETTERS.  4y^ 

Sir,  in  refpe^t  to  prcachinp;,  was  falutary  and  pooii,  and  if  I 
may  fpcak  any  thing  of  myfelf,  is  what  i  keep  ciofe  to.  I  am 
remarked  for  my  evangelical  preaching,  and  comforting  the 
mourners  of  Z/'^w.  I  am  never  fo  much  in  my  element,  as 
when  I  preach  free  grace  to  the  chief  of  linners.  As  to  the 
gentleman  you  mention,  I  do  not  remember  I  ever  converfed 
with  fuch  a  perfon.  I  believe  there  can  fcarce  an  inftancc  be 
given  of  any  one  font  to  Bedlam  by  my  fcrmons.  But  I  rejoice 
in  this,  and  all  other  calumnies  that  are  caft  upon  me. 

j^ii  hail  reproach^  and  zvclcomc'  pa'iriy 
Only  thy  terrors^  Lord,  re  ft  rain. 

I  muft:  have  fome  thorn  in  the  flefli,  to  ferve  as  a  poifc  to  the 
great  honour  my  Mafter  is  pleafed  to  put  upon  me.  la 
Scotland^  my  reception  was  extraordinary.  It  was  almoft 
wholly  amongft  the  people  and  clergy  of  the  kirk^  with  many 
of  the  highcft  rank.  1  was  very  intimate  with  feveral  perfons 
of  quality,  who  I  truft  have  been  awakened  to  a  true  feiife  of 
the  divine  life,  and  enabled  to  count  all  things  but  dung  and 
drofs  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus 
their  Lord.     My  chief  pppofition  was  from   the  dear  Mr. 

E s   and  the  alTociate  prelbytery.     They  firft  invited  me 

to  Scotland',  but  finding  I  would  preach  for  the  minifters  of 
the  eftabliflied  church,  as  well  as  for  them,  they  fpoke  all 
manner  of  evil  againft  me  falfly,  and  imputed  all  the  work  ia 
Scotland  and  New- England  to  the  agency  of  the  evil  fpirit.  I 
pitied,  prayed  for,  and  loved  them,  and  do  fo  flill.  O,  reve- 
rend Sir,  v/hat  thanks  (hall  I  give  to  my  Lord  for  carrying 
me  through  fo  many  trying  difpenfations  ?  I  know  you  will 
help  me  to  adore  and  praife  him.  I  am  much  blefied  here. 
V/e  have  many  gracious  fouls.  Ere  long  1  mufl  leave  them. 
I  have  not  the  leaft  thought  of  feeing  JVorceJier.  Glad  fhali 
I  be  to  kifs  your  aged  hands  ;  but  I  (ball  fee  you  in  glory. 
Begging  the  continuance^  of  your  prayers,  and  with  all  poiTible 
thanks  for  all  favours,  I  fubfcribe  myfclf,  reverend  and  dtar 
^ir, 

Your  njoft  obliged  and  affe^^lionate  friend  and  younger 
l&rolher  and  Rrvant  in  Jesus, 

G.  IV. 

LETTER 


47^  LETTERS. 

LETTER     CCCCXCIV. 

To  Mr.  D 5  of  Edinburgh. 

Loiidouj  Dec.  185  1742. 
My  very  dear  Friend  and  Brother^ 

LAST  night,  juft  before  your  kind  letter  came  to  hand, 
I  had  been  lying  on  my  face  before  our  compaffionate 
High-Prleit,  telling  him  what  great  expenccs  lay  before  mc 
for  his  great  Name  fake,  I  wanted  300/.  to  pay  for  the  Or- 
phans, and  much  to  pay  for  my  own  ncceilary  expences, 
which  he,  by  his  providence,  brought  upon  me.  Your  letter 
came  as  an  anfwcr  to  my  prayer.  It  humbled,  at  the  fame 
time  that  it  elated  my  foul,  and  greatly  ftrengthcned  my  faith. 
Surely  the  Lord  is  on  my  fide,  and  the  Orphan-houfe  will 
ftand  uncon-umed  in  fire.  The  enemies,  and  even  many 
friends  of  Jesus  fpeak  againft  it ;  but  this  is  all  to  bring  me 
nearer  to  the  bleffcd  Jesus,  and  to  convince  me  that  our  ex- 
tremity is  God's  opportunity.  My  dear  man,  God  will 
abundantly  blcfs  you  for  helping  me  at  this  jun6ture.  I  can 
find  but  few,  who  think  it  a  favour  to  do  any  thing  for  God, 
and  love  to  help  a  friend  to  the  very  laH:.  O,  dear  Sir,  was 
you  here,  I  could  weep  over  you,  and  thank  you  moil  hearti- 
ly. Lafl-  night  I  was  enabled  to  intercede  for  you  very 
much.  God  will  hear  my  prayer,  and  not  let  my  dear  friend 
iofehis  rew^ard.  The  16th  of  this  month  v/as  my  birth-day. 
It  made  me  -blufh  to  think  how  much  fin  I  have  committed 
againft,  and  hov/  little  good  I  have  done  for  God.  As  foon 
as  1  opened  and  read  your  letter,  amazed,  I  cried  out,  I  am 
the  vileft  wretch  living,  and  fo  I  thii^.k  nov/.  I  know  you  will 
pray  for.  me,  and  thank  our  Saviour  too.  He  is  very  kind  to 
me.  Our  fociety  goes  on  well.  I  am  now  in  my  winter^ 
quarters,  preparing  for  a  i':^'iVi  cai^paign.  Though  I  richly 
defervc  it,  yet  our  infinitely  condefcending  Jesus  will  not  lay 
me  afide,  until  he  has  performed  all  his  good  pleafure  in  and 
by  me.  Wifliing  you,  my"  dear  Sir,  all  the  blefiings  of  the 
cverlafting  covenant,  and  fending  you  ten  thoufand  tha'nks 
for" all  favours,  I  fubfcribe  myfelf. 

Your  mcO:  obliged  afieaionatc  friend,  brother,  and 
unwortlw  fcrvant  in  Jnsus  CuRibT, 

G.  W> 
LETTER 


LETTERS.  477 

LETTER    CCCCXCV. 

To  Mr  I . 

London^  Dec*  21,   1742. 
My  very  dear  Brother^ 

WHEN  your  letters  come,  I  find  great  freedom  to  fend 
immediate  anfwcrs.     A  proof  this,  I  truft,  that  our 
Saviour  intends  our  brotherly  love  not  only  to  continue,  but 

increafe.     This  day  I  dined  with  old  Mr.  F ,  and  w^as 

kindly  entertained  by  him  and  his  wife.  I  then  remembered 
what  fweet  counfel  we  had  there  taken  together,  and  rejoiced 
in  the  happy  profpedl  of  our  being  ere  long  for  ever  together 
with  our  blefled  and  glorious  Lord.  My  brother,  what  has 
our  Saviour  done  for  us  fince  that  time  ?  What  is  he  doing 
for  us  now  ?  what  did  he  do. ere  time  began  ?  what  will  he  d© 
when  time  fhall  be  no  more?  O  how  fweet  is  it  to  be  melted 
down  with  a  fenfe  of  redeeming  love  !  It  is  this  muft  ftrike 
the  rock,  and  break  the  bars  of  unbelief  afunder.  O  !  to  be 
kept  always  low  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  !  It  is  right,  my  bro- 
ther, always  to  infift  on  poverty  of  fpirit,  and  emptying  the 
creature  of  felf.  I  heartily  join  with  you  In  your  petition  for 
yourfelf  and  unworthy  me.  I  know  what  a  dreadful  thing 
it  is,  to  carry  much  fail  without  proper  ballaft,  and  to  rejoice 
in  a  falfe  liberty.  Joy  floating  upon  the  fuifacc  of  an  unmor- 
tified  heart,  is  but  of  (hort  continuance.  It  pufFs  up,  but 
doth  not  edify.  I  thank  our  Saviour  that  he  is  fliewing  us 
here  more  of  our  hearts,  and  more  of  his  loye.  I  doubt  not 
but  he  deals  fo  with  you.  I  heartily  greet  your  dear  honlhold, 

and  your  focieties,  and  return  my  love  to  Mr.  S .    I  have 

heard  him  mentioned  by  hAy  F G .     If  our  Saviour 

gives  me  leave,  I  would  gladly  come  to  Torkjhire.  But  I 
think  the  cloud  points  ftrongly  towards  Georgia.  He  hatli 
taken  wonderful  care  of  the  Ihcep  left  in  yonder  wildernefs, 
and  interpofed  mightily  in  their  behalf.  I  know  you  will 
thank  him  for  it.     I  have  had  a   loving  conference  with  dear 

Mr.  B ,   and  have  received  a  fweet  gofpel-letter   from 

dear  Mr.    H .     With   this   I  fend  to   him,   you,    and 

yours,   and  all   the  brethren,  moft  hearty  love,   ar;u  .r.n,    my 


"ry  dear  brother, 


Ever  vours  in  Chz'iist, 

G.  TV. 
LETTER. 


47S  LETTERS. 

LETTER    CCCCXCVI. 

To  the  Honourable  Colonel  G . 

Honoured  Sir ^  London^    Dec.  2lj  ij^lo 

YOUR  kind  letter  put  me  in  mind  of  righteous  Z^f,  who-fc 
foul  was  grieved  day  by  day  at  the  ungodly  converfatioii 
of  the  wicked.  It  wns  the  fame  with  holy  David.  His  eyes, 
like  yours,  honoured  Sir,  gulhed  out  with  water  bccaufe  men 
kept  not  God's  law.  Let  this  be  your  comfort,  honoured  Sir, 
that  ere  long  "  the  wicked  fhall  ceafe  from  troubling  you,  and 
your  weary  foul  fhall  be  at  reft."  Our  Saviour  will  give  you  a 
difcharge,  when  you  have  fought  a  few  more  battles  for  him. 
An  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  is  laid  up  for  you, 
which  God  the  righteous  judge  fhall  give  you  at  that  day. 
1  confefs  your  fituation  and  employment  cannot  be  very  agree- 
able to  a  difciple  of  the  prince  of  peace.  But  perfons  can  bet- 
ter judge  for  themfelves,  than  ftrangers  can  judge  for  them. 
However,  I  cannot  fay,  I  would  change  ports.  Indeed,  ho- 
noured Sir,  I  think  mine  is  a  glorious  employ.  I  am  not 
aihamed  of  my  mailer,  though  my  mafter  may  well  be  afhamed 
of  me.  I  know  no  other  rcafon,  why  Jesus  has  put  me 
into  the  miniftry,  than  becaufe  I  am  the  chief  of  finners,  and 
therefore  fitted  to  preach  free  grace  to  a  world  lying  in  the 
wicked  one.  BlciTed  be  God,  he  gives  much  fuccefs,  and 
for  the  generality  anfwers  your  prayers,  by  giving  me  a  thriv- 
ing foul  In  a  healthful  body.  But  O  my  unfruitfulncfs  1  I 
am  often  afhamed  that  I  can  do  no  more  for  that  Jesus  who 
hath  redeemed  me  by  his  own  moft  precious  blood.  Honoured 
Sir,  the  thoughts  quite  confound  me.  O  that  I  could  lie 
lower  I  then  (liould  I  rife  higher.  Could  I  take  deeper  root 
downwards,  then  (hould  I  bear  more  fruit  upwards.  I  want 
to  be  pool  in  fplrit.  I  want  to  be  meek  and  lowly  in  heart. 
I  want  to  have  the  whole  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus, 
Blcfied  be  his  name  for  what  he  has  given  me  already.  BlefieJ 
be  his  name,  that  out  of  his  fulnefs  I  receive  grace  for  grace, 
O  that  my  heart  was  Christ's  library  f  1  would  not  have 
one  thief  to  lodge  in  my  Redeemer's  temple.  ''  Lord,  fcourge 
out  every  thief,*'  is  the  daily  language  of  my  heart.  The  Lord 
1^411  be>ir  my  prayer^  and  let  my  cry  come  unto  h'rm.  I  have 
I  jujft 


LETTERS.  479 

juft  been  writing  to  your  honoured  lady.  I  think  (he  grows 
in  grace.  May  you  and  yours  be  filled  with  all  the  fulnefs  of 
God  !  In  about  fix  weeks,  God  willuig,  I  purpofe  to  em- 
bark, for  Georgia.  Our  Lord  has  wonderfully  appeared  for 
my  poor  orphans.  I  am  yet  in  arrears  for  them,  but  my  God 
knows  how  to  fupply  all  my  wants.  I  am  enabled  to  caft  all 
my  care  upon  him,  believing  that  he  careth  for  me.  I  hope 
to  have  the  favour  of  another  letter  before  I  embark.  In  the 
mean  while,  I  beg  the  continuance  of  your  prayers,  and  am, 
honoured  Sir, 

Your  moft  afFe£lionate,  though  very  unworthy 

brother,  arvi  fervant  in  our  glorious  head, 


G.  n' 


LETTER    CCCCXCVII. 

To  Lady  Jane  H C . 


Homured  Aladain^  London^  Dec.  23,  1 742. 

HOW  are  we  obfigf^d  to  your  Ladyfhip  ?  Had  I  time  I 
would  endeavour  to  tell  you;  but  this  is  my  comforr, 
when  I  have  not  time  to  write,.  I  have  a  heart  given  me  to 
pray  for  my  dear  friends,  and  you.  Honoured  Madam,  have 
a  conllant  Ihare  in  my  poor  petitions.  I  find  by  yours  to  my 
wife,  that  you  complain  of  darknefs.  Ere  now,  I  hope  the 
day-ftar  hath  again  rifen  in  your  heart,  and  you  have  been 
made  to  rejoice  with  exceeding  j^reat  joy-  Our  Lord  will 
not  leave  you  comfortkfs  ;  he  will  fend  the  Holy  Ghoft  to 
comfort  you.  The  time  of  finging  of  birds  /hall  come.  Our 
Lord  will  not  be  a!ways  chiding. — This  is  only  to  fhew  you 
more  of  your  hearf,  and  make  you  what  you  long  to  be,  a 
very  poor  finner.  Our  hearts,  Honoured  Madam,  are  fo  dcf- 
perately  wicked,  deceitful  above  all  things,  that  without  re- 
peated inftances  of  feeling  our  helplefsnefs  and  mifery,  wc 
{hould  forget  ourfelves,  and  run  away  from  the  feet  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour.  He  therefore,  in  love,  empties  before  he 
fills  ;  humbles  before  he  ex-alts.  At  Icaft,  he  is  pjeafcd  to 
deal  thuj  with  me.  1  thank  him  for  it,  from  my  inmoft  foul  : 
for  was  it  not  fo,  his  mercies  would  deftroy  us.  He  heJps 
mc  alfo  to  praifc  him.  When  I  difcovcr  a  new  corruption,  I 
am  as  thankful  as  a  ccntincl  keeping  warch  in  a  garrifon, 
would  be  at  Ipying  a  flraggUng  anemy  com'5  nea;  him.   1  ftani 

not 


48o  LETTERS. 

not  fighting  with  it  myfelf  in  my  own  ftrength,  but  run  im- 
mediately and  tell  the  captain  of  my  lalvation.  By  the  fworcl 
ofhisfpirit,  he  foon  deftroys  it,  and  makes  me  exceeding 
happy.  This  is  what  I  call  a  fimple  looking  to  Christ, 
I  know  of  no  other  efFecShial  way  of  keeping  the  old  man  down, 
after  he  has  gotten  his  deadly  blow.  Look  up  then,  dear 
Madam,  to  a  wounded  Saviour..  Go  to  him  as  a  little  child. 
Tell  him  your  whole  heart.  He  will  hear  your  lifping,  and 
fet  your  foul  at  liberty.  He  is  pleafed  gracioufly  to  anfwer 
my  petitions,  and  to  blefs  my  poor  labours.  We  have  "many 
good  fouls  in  our  fociety,  that  are  gently  coming 'into  the 
knowledge  of  themfelves.  Our  Saviour  deals  moft  lovingly 
with  us  indeed.  Laft  night  we  had  a  general  love-feafl.  It 
was  exceeding  awful  and  refrefiiing.  I  could  have  wifhed 
for  fome  of  my  dear  Scotland  friends.  I  was  enabled  to  pray 
for  them  mofl  fervently.  May  Jesus  blefs  this  letter  to  your 
foul  !  Wifhing,  above  all  things,  that  it  may  be  in  health  and 
profper,  and  with  humble  acknowledgments  for  all  favours, 
1  fubfcribe  myfelf,  Flonoured  Madam, 

Your  Ladyfliip's  moft  obliged  humble  fervant, 

G,  IK 


The  End  of  the  Fi  r  s t  Vo  l  u  m  k. 


