DUKE 

UNIVERSITY 


DIVINITY  SCHOOL 
LIBRARY 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe21wesl 


THE 


WORKS 


O F T H E 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A. 


Late  FeHow  of  Lincoln-College,  Oxford. 


Volume  XXL 


BRISTOL: 


WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street, 

MDCCL  XXIII* 


V".  1 


* f 


t 3 J 


-3,0- ' {• 

V r A/ 


THE 


DOCTRINE 


O F 


ORIGINAL  SIN: 


ACCORDING  TO 


Scripture,  Reason,  and  Experience. 


The  P R E F A C E. 


xvhk.lt  I read  carefully  over  and  partly  tr  an fcr  ib- 
id: and  have  many  times  face  diligently  con- 
A 2 fidcred . 


[ 4 ] 

fidered.  The  author  is  doubtlefs  a perfon  of  finfi, 
nay,  of  unu finally  fir  ong  underfunding , joined  with 
no  fmall  livelinefs  of  imagination,  and  a good  de- 
gree of  various  learning.  'He  has  likewife  an  ad- 
mirable command  of  temper,  fo  that  he  almofi  every 
where  fpeaks  as  one  in  good  humour.  Add  to  this, 
that  he  has  a fnooth  and  pleafing,  yet  a manly 
and  nervous  file.  And  all  thefe  talents  he  exerts 
to  the  uttermofl,  on  a favourite  Jubjetl,  in  the 
treatife  before  us  : which  he  has  had  leifure  for 
many  years,  to  revife , fie,  correct  and  frtnglhen 
againf  all  objections. 

2.  So  finifhed  a piece  fa  rely  deferves  the  con- 
federation of  all  thofe  m afters  of  reafon  which  the 
age  has  produced.  And  I have  long  hoped,  that 
fume  of  thofe  would  attempt  to  few,  how  far  the 
doRrine  there  laid  down  is  true?  And  what  weight 
there  is  in  the  arguments  which  are  produced,  in 
confirmation  of  it.  I know  not  how  to  believe,  that 
all  the  clergy  in  England  are  of  the  fame  opinion 
with  this  author . And  certainly  there  are  Joint  whom 
all  his  f ill  in  Greek,  arid  even  in  Hebrev.’  does 
■not  make  afraid.  I fiiould  rejoice  had  any  cf 
theje  undertaken  the  tafk , who  are  in  many  re- 
fpcRs  better  qualified  for  it ; particularly  in  this, 
that  they  have  time  upon  their  hands  y they  have 
full  leifm  e for  fuch  an  employment.  But  fr.ee 
i none  elfe  will , I cannot  but fipeak,  tho  lying  under 

many 

+ Since  the  writing  cf  this,  I have  feen  feveial  trafrs.  which 
I ihall  have  occaiion  to  take  notice  of  hereafter.  The  c are  like* 
wife  many  excellent  remarks  on  this  fubjefl,  in  Mr.  Hervey’s 

dialogues. 


[ 5 J 

? fiany  peculiar  difadvantges.  I dare  not  be  fdent 
any  longer : nece/fity  is  laid  upon  me,  to  provide 
thofe  who  defire  to  know  the  truth  with  fame  anti- 
dote again ft  that  deadly  poifon,  which  has  been  dij- 
fufingitfelffor  feveral  years , thro'  our  nation,  cur 
church , and  even  our  univer/ities.  Nay  one  (/ 
hope,  only  one)  father  of  the  church  has  declared , 
“ That  he  knows  no  book  more  proper  than  this,  to 
fettle  the  principles  of  a young  clergyman."  Is  it 
not  time  then  for  the  very  (tones  to  cry  out  ? 

3.  For  this  is  not  a point  of  [mall  importance  ; 
dTqueflion  that  may  fafely  be  deter  mind  either  way. 
On  the  contrary,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  tke 
fcketne  before  us,  be  not  far  more  dangerous  thdn 
open  deifm  itfelf.  It  does  notfhock  us  like  bare- 
faced infidelity : we  feel  no  pain,  and fufpell  no 

evil  while  it  Jltals  like  water  into  our  bowles,  like 
oil  into  our  bones.  One  who  would  be  upon  his 
guard  in  reading  the  works  of  Dr.  Middleton 
or  Lord  Bolingbroke,  is  quite  open  and  unguard- 
ed in  reading  the  fnooth,  decent  writings  of  Dr, 
Taylor:  one  who  does  not  oppofe,  (far  be  it 
from  him  /}  but  only  explain  the  /crip  lure,  who 
does  not  raife  any  difficulties  or  objefhons  agamfl 
the  Ckrifidn  revelation,  but  only  removes  thofe  with 
which  it  had  been  unhappily  incumbered fot  fo  rtutriy 
centuries ! 

4.  Ifaid,  “ Than  open  deifm."  For  I cannot 
look  on  this  fcheme  as  any  other  than  old  deifn 
vi  a new  drefs : feeing  it  faps  the  very  founda-. 
'Uon  of  all  revealed  religion * whether  Jtwifh  o'r 

A 3 Chriflian. 


[ : 3 

Chrijlian.  “ Incited,  my  L — fata  an  eminent 
man  to  a perfon  of  quality,  I cannot  fee  that  we 
have  much  need  of  Jef us  ChriffP  And  who  might 
not  fay,  upon  this  fuppoftion,  “ I cannot  fee  that 
we  have  much  need  of  ChriJHanity Nay,  not  any 
at  all\  for  they  that  are  whole,  have  no  need 
of  aphyfician  : and  the  Chrijlian  revelation fpeaks 
of  nothing  elfe,  hut  the  great  Phyfician  of  our 
fouls:  nor  can  Chrijlian  philcfophy,  whatever  he 
thought  of  the  Pagan,  be  more  properly  def  ned 
than  in  Plato  j words  : it  is  The 

only  true  method  of  healing  a djlempered  foul. 
But  what  need  of  this,  if  we  are  in  perfeEl  health  ? 
If  we  are  not  dijeaftd,  we  do  not  want  a cure.  If 
we  are  not  fee,  why fiould  we  feek  for  a medicine 
to  heal  our  ficknefs  ? What  room  is  there,  to  talk 
of  our  being  renewed  in  knowledge  or  holinefs, 
after  the  image  wherein  we  were  created,  if  we 
never  have  lojt  that  image  ! If  we  are  as  knowing 
and  holy  now,  ( nay  jar  more  fo ) than  Adam  was 
immediately  after  his  creation  ? If  therefore  we 
take  away  this  foundation,  that  man  is  by  nature 
foolifi  and  fnful,  fallen  fhort  of  the  glorious 
image  of  God,  the  Chiifian  fflem  falls  at  once  : 
nor  will  it  defrve  fo  honourable  an  appellation, 
as  that  of  a cunningly  devifed  fable. 

g.  In  conf  dering  this  confutation  of  the  Chrif- 
tian  fyftem,  I am  under  fome  difficulty  from  Dr. 
Taylor’ j manner  of  writing.  It  is  his  cufom  to 
fay  the  fame  thing,  (fometimes  in  different,  fome - 
times  in  nearly  the fame  words  J fix  or  eight,  per- 
haps 


[ 7-  T 

Tiaps  twelve  or  fifteen  times , in  different  parts 
of  his  book . Now  I have  accufiomed  myfelf 
for  many  years,  to  fay  one  and  the  fame  thing 
once  only.  However  to  comply  with  his  manner  as 
far  as  pojfible,  I fall  add  at  proper  intervals , ex* 
trails  from  others , exprefiing  nearly  the  fame  fen- 
timents,  which  I have  before  expreffed  in  my  own 
words. 

6.  I am  fenfible , in  fpeaking  on  fo  tender  a point 
as  this  mufi  needs  be,  to  thofe  who  believe  the 
Chrifiian  fyflem,  there  is  danger  of  a warmth 
which  does  no  honour  to  our  caufe , nor  is  at  all 
countenanced  by  the  revelation  which  we  defend.  I 
defire  neither  to  Jhew,  nor  to  feel  this,  but  to 
fpeak  the  truth  in  love  ( the  only  warmth,  which- 
the  gofpel  allows)  and  to  write  with  calmnefs, 
though  not  indifference.  There  is  likewfe  a danger - 
of  defpifing  our  opponents,  and  of  fpeaking  with  an 
air  of  contempt  or  difdain.  I would  gladly  keep 
clear  of  this  alfo  ; well  knowing  that  a diffidence 
of  ourfelves,  is  far  from  implying  a diffidence  of 
our  caufe : I difirujl  myfelf,  not  my  argument. 
0 that  the  God  of  the  Chrifiians  may  be  with  me  ! 
That  his  Spirit  may  give  me  underfianding,  and 
enable  me  to  think  and  fpeak  as  the  oracles  of 
God,  without  going  from  them  to  the  right-hand 
or  to  the  left  ! 

Lewisham, 

Nov.  3 o,  i 756. 

A 4 THE 


[ 8 ] 


THE 

Do£trine  of  Original  Sin,  &c. 

PART  i. 

The  p aft  and  prejent  State  of  Mankind. 

TQEFOREwe  attempt  to  account  for  any  fafl, 
we  fhould  be  well  allured  of  the  fa£l  itfelf. 
Firll,  therefore  let  us  -enquire  what  is  the  real  Hate 
of  mankind?  And  in  the  fecond  place  endea- 
vour to  account  for  it. 

I.  Fiift,  I lay  let  us  enquire,  What  is  the  real 
Hate,  with  regard  to  knowledge  and  virtue, 
wherein  mankind  have  been  from  the  earlieft 
times  ? And  what  Hate  are  they  in  at  this  day  ? 

I.  i.  What  is  the  ftate  (to  begin  with  the  for- 
mer branch  ©f  the  enquiry)  with  regard  to 
knowledge  and  virtue,  wherein  according  to  the 
moft  authentic  accounts,  mankind  have  been 
from  the  earlieft  times?  We  have  no  authentic 
account  of  the  ftate  of  mankind  in  the  times  an- 
tecedent to  the  deluge,  but  in  the  writings  of  Mo- 
les. What  then  according  to  thefe  was  tire  ftate 
of  mankind  in  thofe  times  ? Mofes  vives  us  an 

O 

exaft  and  full  account;  God  then  faw  that  tlie 
zvickednejs  oj  man  was  great,  and  that  every  imagi- 
nation of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil 
- ‘ '■  con - 


[ 9 ] 

continually,  Gen.  vi.  g,  12,  13.  And  this  was 
not  the  cafe  of  only  part  of  mankind;  but  all 
flejh  had  corrupted  his  way  upon  the  earth.  And 
accordingly  God  laid,  The  end  of  all  flefi  is  come , 
for  the  earth  is  filled  with  violence  through  them. 
Only  Noah  was  righteous  before  God,  c.  vii.  1. 
Therefore  he  and  his  houlhold  were  fpared, 
when  God  brought,  the  flood  upon  the  world  of  the 
ungodly,  and  deftroyed  them  all  from  the  face  of 
the  earth. 

“ Let  us  examine  the  moft  didinguilhing 
features  in  this  draught.  Not  barely  the  works 
of  their  hands,  or  the  words  of  their  tongue, 
but  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  their 
heart  was  evil.  The  contagion  had  fpread  itfelf 
through  the  inner  man;  had  tainted  the  feat  of 
their  principles,  and  the  fource  of  their  afliohs. 
But  was  there  not  fome  mixture  of  good  ? No  ; 
they  were  only  evil.  Not  fo  much  as  a little 
leaven  of  piety,  unlefs  in  one  fihgle  family.  But 
were  there  no  lucid  intervals  ? No  happy  mo- 
ments wherein  virtue  gained  the  afcendency? 
None  : Every  imagination,  every  thought  was 
only  evil  continually. ”+ 

2.  Such  was  the  flate  of  mankind  for  at  leafl 
fixteen  hundred  years.  Men  were  corrupting 
themfelves  and  each  other,  and  proceeding  from 
one  degree  of  wickednefs  to  another,  till  they 
were  all  (Tave  eight  perfons)  ripe  for  deffruftion. 
So  deplorable  was  the  ftate  of  the  moral  world,, 
while  the  natural  was  in  its  highelt'  perfection,. 

A 5 And 

d Mr,  Hcrvey’s  Theron  and  Afpafio.  Dial.  ii* 


[ *0  ] 

And  yet  it  is  highly  probable,  that  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  earth  were  then  abundantly  more  nu- 
merous, than  ever  they  have  been  fince,  conft- 
derin'g.  the  length  of  their  lives,  falling  little 
fhort  of,  a thoufand  years,  and  the  ftrength  and 
■vigour  of  their  bodies,  which  we  may  eafilv  ga- 
ther from  the  time  they  were  to  continue:  To 
fay  nothing  of  the  fertility  of  the  earth,  proba- 
bly far  greater  than  it  is  at  prefent.  Confequent- 
ly  it  was  then  capable  of  fuff  dining  fuch  a num- 
ber of  inhabitants,  as  could  not  now  fubfili  on 
the  produce  of  it. 

3.  Let  us  next  take  a view  of  the  families  of 
the  Jons  of  Noah,  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  af- 
ter the  flood.  The  firft  remarkable  incident  we 
read  concerning  them  is,  that  while  thev  wen 
all  of  one  language,  they  faid  one  to  another.  Let 
us  build  a city  and  a tower,  wkofe  top  may  reach 
Unto  heaven,  lef  we- be  fattened  abroad  upon  the 
face  of  the  earth . It  is  not  eafv  to  determine, 
what  were  the  peculiar  aggravations  which  at- 
tended this  attempt.  But  it  is  certain,  there  was 
daring  wickednefs  therein,  which  brought  upon 
them  the  very  thing  they  feared.  Tor  ^ tks 
Lord  by  confounding  their  language  (not  their 
religious  worjhip:  Can  we  fnppofe  God  would 
confound  this?)  fatter  ed*?f&m  abroad  upon  the 
face  of  all  the  earth.  Now'  whatever  particular 
in  this  account  may  be  varioully  interpreted, 
thus  much  is  clear  and  undeniable,  That  ail 
1 thefej 


| G«n,  xi.  4,  9. 


[ *1  ] 


thefe,  that  is,  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth 
had  again  corrupted  their  way ; the  univerfal 
wickednefs  being  legible  in  the  univerfal  pu- 
nifhment. 

4.  We  have  no  account  of  their  reforming 
their  ways,  of  any  univerfal  or  genera]  repent- 
ance, before  God  feparated  Abraham  to  himfelf, 
to  be  the  father  of  his  chofen  people  |j.  Nor  is 
there  any  reafon  to  believe,  that  the  reft  of  man- 
kind were  improved  either  in  wifdom  or  virtue, 
when  § Lot  and  Abraham  feparated  them  fives, 
and  Lot  pitched  his  tent  toward  Sodom.  Of  thofe 
among  whom  he  dwelt,  it  is  particularly  re- 
marked, t The  men  of  Sodom  (and  of  all  the  cities 
of  the  plain)  were  zonked  and  [inner  s before  the 
the  Lord  exceedingly , fo  that  not  even  ten  right  e- 
ous  perfons  could  be  found  among  them  : The 
confequence  of  which  was,  that  The  i Lord 
rained  upon,  them  brimftone  and fre  from  the  Lord 
out  of  heaven. 

5.  We  have  no  ground  to  fuppofe,  that  the 
other  inhabitants  of  the-  earth  (Abraham  with 
his  family  and  defendants  excepted;)  had  either- 
the  knowledge  or  the  fear  of  God,  from  that 
time  till  Jacob  went  into  Egypt.  This  was  then 
as  well  as  for  feveral-ages  after,  the  great  feat  of 
learning  : infomuch  that  the  wifdom  of  the  Egyp- 
tians, tvas  celebrated  even  to  a proverb.  And - 
indeed  for  this  end,  (as  well  as  5 to  fave  muck 
A 6 people. 

| Gen.xiii,  11,12.  ^ v.  n,  12.  + Gen.  xiii.  33. 

% Ibid.  xix.  .241.  5 Ibid.  1.  20,. 


[ «*  3 

people  alive ) did  God  fend  Jofeph  into  Egypt  even 
to  inform  their  princes  after  his  will,  and  to  teach 
their  fenators  wifdom.  And  yet  not  long  after  his 
death,  as  their  king  knew  not  Jofeph,  fo  his  peo- 
ple knew  not  God.  Yea,  they  fet  him  at  de- 
fiance ; they  and  their  king  provoked  him  more 
and  more,  and  hardened  their  hearts  againfl  him; 
even  after  they  had  fetn  his  wonders  in  Egypt, 
after  they  had  groaned  under  his  repeated  ven- 
geance. They  {fill  added  fin  to  fin,  till  they 
conllrained  the  Lord  to  deftroy  them  with  an 
utter  deftru&ion ; till  the  divided  waters  returned 
and  covered  the  chariots  and  horfemen  and  all  the 
hof  of  Pharaoh. 

6.  Nor  were  the  other  nations  who  then  inha- 
bited the  earth,  any  better  than  the  Egyptians ; 
The  true  knowledge  and  fpiritual  worfhip  of 
Cod  being  confined  to  the  defeendants  of  Abra- 
ham. + He  had  not  dealt  fo  with  other  nations, 
neither  had  the  Heathens  knowledge  of  his  laws. 
And  in  what  ftate  were  the  Ifraelites  themfelves? 
How  did  they  worfhip  the  God  of  their  fathers  ? 
Why  even  thefe  were  J a fnbborn  and  rebellious 
generation,  a generation  that  fet  not  their  heart 
aright.  |]  They  kept  not  the  covenant  of  God,  and 
jefufed  to  walk  in  his  law.  They  provoked  him  at 
thefea,  even  at  the  red  fea ; the  very  place  where 
he  had  fo  fignally  delivered  them.  § They  made 
fl  calf  in  Horeb,  and  worf  lipped  the  molten  image , 

where 

Pfalm  cxlvii.  20.  | Pf.  Ixxxviii.  8.  ||  v.  10.  Ff.  c\ii.  *. 

Excd.  xiv,  Uji2.  ^ Pf,  evi,  19. 


[ *3  ] 

where  (.hey  had  heard  the  Lord,  but  a little  be- 
fore, faying  out  of  the  midft  of  the  fire,  Thou 
Jhall  net  make  unto  thyfelf  any  graven  image ; thou 
Jho.lt  not  how  down  to  them,  nor  worjhip  them . 
And  how  amazing  was  their  behaviour  during 
thofe  whole  forty  years,  that  they  fojourned  in 
the  wildernefs?  Even  while  he  + led  them  in  the 
Aay  time  with  a cloud , and  all  the  light  with  a light 
of  Jre?  Such  were  the  knowledge  and  virtue  of 
God's  peculiar  people  (certainly  the  moil  know- 
ing and  virtuous  nation  which  was  then  to  be 
found  upon  the  face  of  the  earth)  till  God  brought 
them  into  the  land  of  Canaan  : confiderably 
more  than  two  thoufand  years  from  the  creation 
of  the  world. 

None,  I prefunie,  will  fay,  There  was  any 
other  nation  at  that  time  more  knowing  and 
more  virtuous  than  the  Ifraelites.  None  can  fay 
this  while  he  prcfefTes  to  believe,  according  to 
the  fcriptural  account,  That  Ifrael  was  then  un- 
der a theocracy,  under  the  immediate  govern- 
ment of  God:  That  he  converfed  with  their  fub- 
ordinate  governor  face  to  face,  as  a man  talketh 
with  his  friend ; and  that  God  was  daily  through 
him  conveying  fuch  inftruft ions  to  them,  as  they 
were  capable  of  receiving. 

7.  Shall  we  turn  our  eyes  for  a moment  from 
the  fcriptural,  to  the  prophane  account  of  man- 
kind in  the  earliefl  ages?  What  was  the  general 
fentiment  of  themoft  polite  and  knowing  nation, 
the  Romans,  when  their  learning  was  in  its  utmofl 

perfe&ion? 

+ Pfalm  lxxviii,  14, 


C M ] 

perfection?  Let  one,  who  certainly  was  no  bigot 
or  enthufiaft,  fpeak  for  the  reft.  _And  he  fpeaks 
home  to  the  point. 

Fiat  ante  Helenam  mulier  telerrima  Belli 
Cavfa  : fed  ignotis  perierunt  mortibus  omnes 
Ouos  venerem  incertain  rapientes,  more  ftrarum , 
Viribus  edition  cadebat,  ut  ingrege  taurus. 

Full  many  a war  has  been  for  women  wag'd 
E’er  half  the  world  in  Helen’s  caufe  engag’d; 
But  unrecorded  in  hiftoric  verfe 
Obfcurely  diedthofe  favage  rawfhers  : 

Who  like  brute  beafts  the  female  bore  away. 
Till  fome  fuperior  brute  re-feiz’d  the  prey. 

As  a wild  bull,  his  rival  bull  o’erthrown, 
Claims  the  whole  fubjeCt  herd,  and  reigns 
alone. 

I doubt  he  who  gives  this,  not  as  his  peculiar 
opinion,  but  as  what  was  then  a generally  re- 
ceived notion,  would  fcarce  have  allowed  even, 
fo  much  as  Juvenal, 

Pudicitiam  faturno  rege  moratam 
In  ter  r is 

C.haftity  did  once,  I grant,  remain 
On  earth,  and  flourifh’d  in  old  Saturn's  reign. 

Unlefs  one  fhould  fuppofe  the  reign  of  Saturn  to 
have  expired,  when  Adam  was  driven  out  of  pa- 
rad  ife. 


I cannot 


E * 3’ 

I cannot  forbear  adding  another  pi£ktre* 
of  the  antient  dignity  of  human  nature,  drawn 
by  the  fame  mafterly  hand-  Before  men  dwelt 
in  cities  he  fays,  this 

*Turp.e  pec  us,  glandem-  atq:  cubitia  propter 
Certabant  pugnis,  dein  fujlibus,  atq ; ita  porro 
Pugnabant  armis,  qua  poji  fabr  leaver  at  ujus 

The  human  herd,  unbroken  and  untaught, 

For  acorns-  find,  and  gralfy  couches  fought ; 
With  fills, . and  then  with  clubs,  maintain’d  the 
fray, 

Till  urg’d  by  hate  they  found  a quicker  way, 

And  forg’d  pernicious  arms,  and  learnt  the  art 
to  flay. 

What  a difference  is  there  between  this,  and  the 
gay,  florid  accounts,  which  many  moderns  give 
of  their  own  fpecies. 

8.  But  to  return  to  more  authentic  accounts- 
At  the  time  when  God  brought  the  Ifraelites 
into  Canaan,  in  what  Hate  were  the  reft  of  man- 
kind ? Doubtlefs  in  nearly  the  fame,  with  the 
Canaanites  ; with  the  Amorites,  Hittites,  Pe- 
rizzites,  and  the  reft  of  the  feven  nations.  But. 
the  zoickeanefs  of  thefe,  we  know,  was  full : they 
were  corrupt  in  the  higheft  degree.  All  manner 
of  vice,  all  ungodlinefs  and  unrighteoufnefs 
reigned  among  them  without  controul.  And 
therefore  the  wife  and  juft  Governor  of  the 

worfdi 


[ i6  ] 

iv o rid  gave  them  up  to  a fwift  and  total  deftruc- 
tion. 

g.  Of  Ifrael  indeed  we  read,  that  they  \ ferved 
the  Lord  all  the  days  of  Jofhua,  and  all  the  days 
of  the  elders  that  over  lived  jofhua.  And  yet  even 
at  that  time,  they  did  not  ferve  him  alone  ; 
they  were  not  free  from  grofs  Idolatry.  Other- 
wife  there  had  been  no  need  of  his  giving  them 
that  exhortation  a little  before  his  death,  %Nou> 
therefore  put  away  the  f range  gods  which  are  a- 
mongyou,  the  gods  which  your  fathers  fetved  on  the 
other  fide  of  the  river  (Jordan.)  What  gods  thefe 
were,  we  learn  by  the  wTords  of  Amos,  cited  by 
St.  Stephen,  ||  0 ye  houfe  of  Ifrael , have  ye  offered 
facrifices  to  me,  hy  the  /pace  of  forty  years  ? Yea, 
ye  took  up  the  tabernacle  of  Moloch , and  the  far 
of  your  god  llemphan,  figures  which  ye  made  to 
worfnp  them. 

to.  The  facred  hiftory  of  what  occurred  with- 
ina  fhort  fpaceafter  the  death  of  Jofhua,  for  fome 
hundred  years,  even  ’till  the  time  that  Samuel 
judged  Ifrael,  gives  us  a large  account  of  their 
afionifhing  wickednefs,  during  almoft  that  whole 
period.  It  is  true,  juft  § when  God f mote  them,  then 
they  fought  him  ; they  returned  and  enquired  after 
God.  Yet  their  heart  was  not  right  with  him,  neither 
were  they  fed fafl  in  his  covenant.  And  we  find 
little  alteration  among  them  for  the  better,  in 
the  fucceeding  ages  : i n fount ch  that  in  the 

reign 

^ J0^1,  31-  J Jofti.  x*iv.  23.  []  Afis  vii.  ^2,  43, 

$ Pfal.  Lx.xviii.  34,  37, 


[ *7  ] 

reign  of  Ahab,  about  nine  hundred  years  before 
Chrid,  there  were  only  t /even  thoujand  left  in 
If>  ad  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal.  What 
manner  of  men  they  were  for  the  next  three 
hundred  year^  we  may  learn  from  the  books  of 
the  kings  and  from  the  prophets:  whence  it  fully 
appears  that  except  a few  fhort  intervals,  they 
were  given  up  to  all  manner  of  abominations  ; 
by  reafon  of  which  the  name  of  the  Mod  High 
was  the  more  abundantly  blafphemed  among 
the  Heathens.  And  this  continued,  ’till  their 
open  rebellion  againd  God,  brought  upon  the 
whole  nation  of  the  Jews  (an  hundred  and  thirty 
four  years  after  the  captivity  of  the  ten  tribes, 
and  about  fix  hundred  before  Clirijl ) thofe  terri- 
ble and  long  deferred  calamities,  which  made 
them  a fpefclacle  to  all  that  tv  ere  round  about 
them.  The  writings  of  Ezekiel,  Daniel  and 
Jeremiah , leave  us  no  room  to  think,  that  they 
were  reformed  by  thofe,  calamities.  Nor  was 
there  any  lading  reformation  in  the  time  of  Ezra, 
or  of  Nehemiah  and  Malachi  : but  they  were 
dill,  as  their  forefathers  had  been  a faitldejs  and 
Jhibborn  generation.  Such  were  they  likewife 
as  we  may  gather  from  the  books  of  Maccabees 
and  Jofephus,  to  the  very  time  when  Clirijl 
came  into  the  world. 

11.  Our  bleffed  Lord  has  given  us  a large 
defeription  of  thofe,  who  were  then  the  mod 
eminent  for  religion.  iYe  devour,  fays  he,  midairs 

hmfes 


i i Kings  xix,  i8. 


| Matt,  ir,  &c, 


C * I 

(lottfes,  and  for  a pretence  make  long  prayers. 
Ye  make  your  profelytes  two-fold  more  the  child- 
ren of  hell  than  yourfelves.  Ye  negleB  the  weigh- 
tier matters  of  the  law , judgment , mercy  and 
faith.  Ye  make  clean  the  outfide  of  the  cup,  but 
within  are  full  of  extortion  and  txcefs.  Ye  are 
like  whited  fcpulchres,  outwaidly  beautiful,  but 
within  full  of  dead  mens  bones,  and  of  all  unclean- 
nefs.  Ye  ferpents,  ye  generation  of  vipers,  how. 
can  ye  efcape  the  damnation  of  hell  ? And  to  thefe 
very  men,  after  they  had  murdered  that  Juft  One, 
his  faithful  follower  declared,  fYefif-necked  and 
uncir cumcifed  in  heart  and  ears, ye.  do  always  refjl 
the  Holy  Ghof ; as  your  fathers  did,  fo  do  ye.  And 
fo  they  continued  to  do,  ’till  , the  wrath  of  God 
did  indeed  come  upon  them  to  the.  uttermofl ; ’till" 
eleven  hundred  thoufand  of  them,  were  deftroy- 
ed,  their  city  and  temple  levelled  with  the  duff, 
and  above  ninety  thoufand,  fold  for  {laves  and' 
fcattered  into  all  lands. 

12.  Such  in  all  <Tenerations  were  the  lineal 

O 

children  of  Abraham,  who  had  fo  unfpeakable 
advantages  over  the  reff  of  mankind  : To  whom 
pertained  the  adoption,  and  the  glory,  and  the  cove- 
nants, and  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  the  fervice  cf 
God,  and  the  promifes : among  whom  therefore  we 
may  reafonably  expe£l  to  find  the  greatefl  emi- 
nence of  knowledge  and  virtue.  If  thefe  then 
were  fo  ffupidly,  brutifhly  ignorant,  fo  defper 
stately  wicked;  what  can  we  expe£t  from  the 

Heathen. 


+ A£ls  vli.  51. 


C *9  1 

‘Heathen  world,  from  them  who  had  not  the 
•knowledge  either  of  his  law  or  promifes  ? Cer- 
tainly we  cannot  expett  to  find  more  goodnefs 
among  them.  But  let  us  make  a fair  and  impar- 
tial enquiry  : and  that  not  among  wild  and  bar- 
barous nations,  but  the  moll  civilized  and  refin- 
ed. What  then  were  the  antient  Romans  ? 
The  people  whole  virtue  is  fo  highly  extolled* 
and  fo  warmly  commended  to  our  imitation  ? 
We  have  their  character  given  by  one  who  can- 
not deceive  or  be  deceived,  the  unerring  Spi- 
rit of  God.  And  what  account  does  he  give 
of  thefe  bell  of  men,  thefe  heroes  of  antiquity  ? 
f When  they  knew  God,  fays  he,  at  leaf!  as  to  his 
enternity  and  power,  (both  implied  in  that  ap- 
pellation, which  occurs  more  then  once  in  their 
own  poet,  Pater  omnipotens,  Almighty  Father) 
they  glorified  him  not  as  Goa,  neither  we  re  thank- 
fill.  So  far  from  it  that  one  of  their  oracles  of 
wifdom,  (tho’  once  he  Humbled  on  that  great 
truth.  Nemo  unquam  vir  magnus  fine  afflalu 
dwino  jnit\  there  never  was  any  great  man, 
without  the  afflatus  or  infpiration  of  God  ; yet 
alrnoft  in  the  fame  breath)  does  not  fcruple  to 
afk,  Qins  pro  vertute  aut  fapientia  gratias  diis 
unquam  ? A'Vho  ever  thanked  God  for  virtue 
or  wifdom  P No,  why  fhould  he  ; fince  thefe 
are  “ his  own  acquifition,  the  pure  refult  of 
his  own  indullry  ?”  Accordingly  another  vir- 
tuous Roman  has  left  it  on  record,  as  an  unquef- 
tioned  maxim. 

Ea^ 


+ Rom.  i.  21,  &c. 


[ 20  I 

Wcei  fa  lies  eft  or  are  j'ovem  qua:  donut  id  avfat  a 
Detvitam ; detopes:  cequum  mi  aninium  ipje  pa~ 
rabo. 

Enough  for  common  benefits  to  pray. 

Which  Jove  can  either  give,  or  take  away  i 
Long  life  or  wealth  his  bounty  may  bellow  ; 
Wifdom  and  virtue  to  myfelf  I owe.- 

So  + vain  were  they  become  in  their  imaginations  l 
So  were  their  joohfh  hearts  darkened  ! 

1-3.  But  this  was  only  the  firft  Hep.  They 
did  not  hop  here.  Profejfmg  theni/elves  wife, 
they  yet  funk  into  fuch  grofs,  aflonilhing  folly 
as'  to  change  the.  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God 
(whom  they  might  have  known  even  from  their 
own  writers  to  be 

Vaflam 

Mens  agitans  molem,  id  magnofe  copore  mifeens 
The  all-informing  foul 
That  fills  the  mighty  mafs,  and  moves  die 
whole.) 

into  an  image  made  like  to  corruptible  man,  yea, 
to  birds,  to  heaps,  to  creeping  things!  What 
wonder  was  it  then,  that  after  the)'  had  thus 
changed  his  glory  into  an  image,  God  gave  them 
up  to  uncleannejs,  though  the  lifts  of  their  own 
hearts,  to  df  ionour  their  own  bodies  between  them- 
fives?  How  jiiflly,  when  they  had  changed  the 
truth  oj  God  into  a lie,  and  wo  flipped  and ferv- 
id 


+ Rom.  i.  21,  &c. 


[ *t  } 

ed  the  creature  rather  than  the  Creator , did  hs 
for  this  caufc,  punifhing  fin  by  (in,  give  them  up 
unto  vile  ajfeEhons.  For  even  the  women  did  change 
the  natural  aft  into  that  which  is  againjl  nature „ 
Yea,  the  model!  honourable  Roman  matrons, 
(fo  little  were  they  a blamed !)  wore  their  priapi 
-openly  on  their  breads.  And  lihewift  the  men 
burned  in  their  iujl  one  coward  another , men  with 
men  wording  that,  which  is  unfemly.  What  an 
amazing  teftimony  ol.this  is  left  us  on  record, 
even  by  the  moil  mode  ft  ol  all  the  Roman 
poets ! 

Formofum  pafl'or  nQovy  don  ar  ete-bat  Afexin  ! 

How  docs  this  pattern  of  Heathen  chabity-avow, 
without  either  fear  or  diame,  as  if  it  '.cere  an 
innocent  at  lead,  if  not  laudable'  paliion,  their 
burning  in  Iujl  one  Lowardranother  / And  did  men 
■of  the  fined  talVe  in  the  nation  cenfnre  the  fong, 
or  the  fubjeot.  of  it  ? We  read -nothing  of  this  : 
on  the  contrary,  the  univerfat  honour  and  ebeern 
paid  to  the  writer,  and  that  by  perfons  of  the 
higheft  rank,  plainly  ihews  that  tlie  cafe  of 
Corydon,  as  it  was  not  uncommon  in  any  part 
ol  the  Roman  dominions,  fo  it  was  not  conceiv- 
ed to  be  any  blemihi,  either  to  him  or  his  maf- 
ter,  but  an  innocent  infirmity. 

* Meantime  how  delicate  an  idea  of  love,  bad 
this  favourite  of  Rome  and  of  the  mufes  ? Hear 

-him 


on 


[ 22  ] 

him  explaining  himfelf  a little  more  fully, 
this  tender  point. 

Eheu  ! quam  pingui  macer  ejl  mihi  taurus  in 
agro  ! 

Idem  amor  exilium  eji  pecori,  pecorifq  magijlro. 

Idem  amor ! The  fame  love  in  the  bull  and  in 
the  man  ! What  elegance  of  fentiment ! Is  it 
pohible  any  thing  can  exceed  this?  One  would 
-imagine  nothing  could,  had  not  the  fame  chafte 
.poet  furnifhed  us  with  yet  another  fcene,  more 
abundantly  fhocking  than  this. 

Pafipliaen  nivei folatur  amove  juvenci  ! 

“ He  comforts  Patiphae  with  the  love  of  her 
milk-white  bull !”  Nihil  fupra  ! The  condol- 
ing a woman  on  her  imfuccefsful  amour  with  a 
hull,  fhews  a brutality  which  nothing  can  ex- 
ceed ! Plow  juftly  then  does  the  apofile  add,  as 
they  did  not  like  or  defire  to  retain  God  in  their 
knowledge , God  gave  them  over  to  an  undifcern - 
ivg  mind , to  do  thofe  things  which  are  not  con- 
venient. In  confequence  of  this,  they  were  fill- 
ed  with  all  umighteoufnefs,  vice  ot  every  kind, 
and  in  every  degree  : in  particular  with  j or  men- 
tion (taking  the  word  in  its  largeft  fenfe,  as  in- 
cluding every  fin  of  the  kind)  with  wickednefs, 
covetoufnefs,  malicicufnefs , with  envy,  murder \ 
debate,  deceit , malignity : being  haters  of  God , 

the 


L 23  3 

the  true  God,  the  God  of  Ifrael,  to  whom 
they  allowed  no  place  among  all  their  herd  of 
deities  : defpiteful,  proud , boajlers,  in  as  emi- 
nent a degree  as  ever  was  any  nation  under  hea- 
ven: inventers  of  evil  things,  in  great  abun- 
dance, of  mille  nocendi  artes,  both  in  peace  and 
war  : difobedient  to  parents,  although  duty  to 
thefe  is  fuppofed  to  be  infcribed  on  the  hearts 
of  the  moll  barbarous  nations  : covenant-break- 
ers, even  of  thofe  of  the  moft  folemn  kind, 
thofe  wherein  the  public  faith  was  engaged  by 
their  fupreme  magiftrate  : which  notwithlland- 
ing  they  made  no  manner  of  fcruple  of  breaking, 
whenever  they  faw  good  : only  colouring  over 
their  perfidioufnefs,  by  giving  thofe  magiftrates 
into  their  hands  with  whom  the  covenant  was 
made.  And  what  was  this  to  the  purpofe  ? Is 
the  king  of  France,  or  the  republic  of  Holland, 
at  liberty  to  violate  their  moll:  folemn  treaties  at 
pleafure,  provided  they  give  up  to  the  king  of 
England,  the  ambaffader  or  general  by  whom 
that  treaty  was  made  ? What  would  all  Europe 
have  faid  of  the  late  Czar,  ifdnftead  of  pun&ual- 
ly  performing  the  engagements  made  with  the 
Porte  when  in  hi-s  diftrefs,  he  had  only  given 
up  the  perfons  by  whom  he  tranfafted,  and  im- 
mediately broke  through  them  all  ? There  is 
therefore  no  room  to  fay 

Modo  punic  a fcripta  fuperfint , 

Non  minus  vnjamis  fotte  latina. fdes. 


Perhaps, 


[ H ] 

Perhaps,  if  the  Carthaginian  writings  were  ex- 
tant, Roman  faith  would  he  as  infamous  as  Ru- 
nic. We  need  them  not.  In  vain  have  they 
deflroyed  the  Carthaginian  writings  ; for  their 
own  fufficiently  teftify  of  them ; and  fully  prove 
that  in  perfidy,  the  natives  of  Carthage  could 
not  excel  the  fenate  and  people  of  Rome. 

* 14.  They  were  as  a nation  hrof/at.  Void  of 
natural  affePhon , even  to  their  own  bowels, 
Witnefs  the  univerfal  cuflom,  which  obtained 
for  feveral  ages  in  Rome,  and  all  its  dependen- 
cies fas  it  had  done  before  thrcuoh  all  the  cities 

• v O 

of  Greece}  when  in  their  flight  ft  repute  for  wif- 
dom  and  virtue,  of  expofing  1 heir  own  new- 
born children,  more  or  fewer  of  them,  as  every 
man  pleated,  when  he  had  as  many,  as  he 
thought  good  to  beep,  throwing  thcmouttoperifii 
by  cold  and  hunger,  unle'fs  fume  more  merciful 
Wild  bead  fhortened  their  pain,  and  provided 
them  a fepulchre.  Nor  do  I remember  a finglfe 
Greek  or  Roman,  of  all  thofe  that  occafionallv 
mention  it  ; ever  complaining  of  this  diabolical 
cuftora,  or  fixing  the  lead  touch  of  blame  upon 
it.  Even  the  tender  mother  in  Terence,  who 
had  fome  compaffion  for  her  helplefs  infant, 
-does  not  dare  to  acknowledge  it  to  her  hutband, 
without  that  remarkable  preface,  Ut  imfre  fu- 
perfitiofee  fumus  onmes  ; as  we  women  are  all 
miferably  fuperftitiotis. 

15.  I would  defire  tbofe  gentlemen  who 
are  fo  very  fevere  upon  the  Ifraelites,  for  kil- 
ling 


[ *3  3 


ling  the  children  of  the  Can  aanites,  at  tlxeir  entrance 
into  the  land  of  Canaan,  to  fpend  a few  thoughts 
on  this.  Not  to  infill,  that  the  Creator  is  the 
abfolute  lord  and  proprietor  of  the  lives  of  all 
his  creatures  : that  as  fuch  he  may  at  any  time, 
without  the  leaft  injuftice,  take  away  the  life 
which  he  has  given  : that  he  may  do  this,  in 
whatfoever  manner,  and  by  whatever  inftru- 
ments  he'pleafes  : and  confequently  may  inflifl 
death  on  any  creature  by  whom  he  pleafes,  with- 
•out  any  blame  either  to  him  or  them  : not  to 
infill,  I fay,  on  this,  or  many  other  things 
which  might  be  offered,  let  us  at  prefent  fix  on 
this  fingie  confideration.  The  Ifraelites  deftroy- 
ed  the  children  for  fome  weeks  or  months  : 
the  Greeks  and  Romans  for  above  a thoufand 
years.  The  one  put  them  out  oltheir  pain  at  once, 
doubtlefs  by  the  Ihorteftfhid  eafieft  way.  The 
others  were  not  fo  compaffionate  as  to  cut  their 
throats,  but  left  them  to  pine  away  by  a linger- 
ing death.  Above  all,  the  Hebrews  deftroyed 
only  the  children  of  their  enemies  ; the  Romans 
deftroyed  their  own.  O fair  pattern  indeed! 
Where  fhallwe  find  a parallel  to  this  virtue  ? I 
read  of  a modern,  who  took  up  a child,  that 
fell  from  its  mother’s  "womb,  and  threw  it  back 
into  the  flames.  (Pure,  genuine  human  na- 
ture!) and  reafon  good  : for  it  was  the  child 
of  an  heretic.  But  what  evil,  ye  worthies  of 
>antient  Rome,  did  ye  find  in  your  own  children  ? 

Vol.  XXI.  ' B ' Imuft 


X mu  ft  Pull  fay,  this  is  without  a parallel,  even 
in  the  Papal  hiRorv. 

* 1 6.  They  were  implacable,  unmerciful. 
Witnefs  (one  or  two  inftances  of  ten  thoufand) 
poor,  grey-headed  Hannibal  (whom  very  pro- 
bably, had  we  any  other  accounts  of  him  than 
ihofe  which  were  given  by  his  bittereft  enemies, 
we  fhould  have  reverenced,  as  one  of  the  mod 
amiable  men,  as  well  as  the  mofl  valiant  of  all  the 
antient  Heathens)  hunted  from  nation  to  nation, 
and  never  quitted,  till  he  fell  by  his  own  hand. 
Witnefs  the  famous  fuffrage,  “ Delenda  ejl  Car- 
thago. Let  Carthage  be  deftroyed.”  Why  ? It 
was  imperii  amnia  : the  rival  of  the  Roman 
glory.  Thefe  were  open,  undeniable  eviden- 
ces of  the  public,  national  placability  and  mercy 
of  the  Romans.  Need  infiances  of  a more  pri- 
vate nature  be  added^  Behold  then  one  for  all : 
In  that  glory  of  Rome,  that  prodig)-  of  virtue, 
the  great,  the  celebrated  Cato.  Cato  the  Elder , 
when  any  of  his  domefticks  had  worn  tbemfelves 
out  in  his  fervice,  and  grew  decrepid  with  age, 
confiantly  turned  them  out  to  ftarve,  and  was 
much  applauded  for  his  frugality  in  fo  doing. 
But  what  mercy  was  this?  Juft  fuch  as  that 
which  dwelt  in  Cato  of  Utica  : who  repayed  the 

tendernefs  of  his  fervant  endeavouring  to  fave 

0 

his  life,  to  prevent  his  tearing  open  his  wound, 
by  ftriking  him  on  the  face  with  fuch  violence, 
as  to  fill  his  mouth  with  blood.  Thefe  are  thy 

gods. 


C 27  ] 

gods,  O deifm  ! Thefe  the  patterns  fo  zealoufly 
recommended  to  our  imitation  -! 

17.  And  what  was  the  real,  charafter  of  that 
hero,  whom  Cato  himfelf  fo  admired  ? Whofe 
caufe  he  epoufed  with  fuch  eagernefs,  with  fuch 
unwearied  diligence  ? Of  Pompey  the  Great  ? 
Surely  never  did  any  man  purchafe  that  title  at 
fo  cheap  a rate  ! What  made  him  great  ? The 
villainy  of  Perpenna  and  the  treachery  of  Phar- 
naces,  had  not  the  one  murdered  his  h i end,  the 
other  rebelled  againft  his  father,  where  had 
been  Pompey’s  greatnefs  ? So  this  ftalking- 
horfe  of  a party  procured  his  reputation  in  the 
.common-wealth.  And  when  it  was  procured, 
how  did  he  ufe  it  ? Let  his  own  poet,  Lucan 
fpeak, 

Nec  Cafar  fcrrt  prior  em* 
Pompeiufve  par  an  potuii. 

Nor  Caefar  could  to  a fuperior  look  : 

Nor  patriot  Pompey  could  an  equal  brook  ! 

He  would  bear  no  equal  ! And  this  a fenator 
of  Rome ! Nay,  the  grand  patron  of  the  re- 
publick  ! But  what  a republican  himfelf, 
when  this  principle  was  the  fpring  of  all  his 
defigns  and  aftions  ? Indeed  a lefs  amiable, 
char  after  it  is  not  eafy  to  find,  among  all  the 
great  men  of  antiquity  : ambitious,  vain,  haugh- 
ty, furly  and  overbearing,  beyond  the  com- 
mon rate  of  men.  And  \vrhat  virtue  had  he 
.to  ballance  thefe  faults  ? I can  fcarce  find  one, 
B 2 even 


[ 23  ] 

even  in  Lucan’s  account : it  does  not  appear 
that  in  the  latter  part  of  his  life,  he  had  even 
military  virtues.  What  proof  did  he  give  of 
perfonal  courage,  in  all  his  war  with  Csefar  ? 
What  inftances  of  eminent  conduft  P None  at 
all  if  we  may  credit  his  friend,  Cicero  : who 
complains  heavily  to  Attieus,  that  he  a£led 
like  a madman,  arid  would  ruin  the  caufe  he 
had  undertaken  to  defend. 

18.  Let  none  therefore  look  for  placability  or 
mercy  in  Pompey.  But  was  there  any  unmerci- 
fulnefs  in  Cm  far  ? 

“ Who  than  Julius  hopes  to  rife, 

More  brave,  more  generous,  or  more  tvife  ?” 

Of  his  courage  and  fenfe  there  can  be  no 
doubt.  And  much  may  be  faid,  with  regard 
to  his  conteft  with  Pompey,  even  for  the 
juftice  of  his  caufe.  For  with  him  he  cer- 
tainly fought  for  life,  rather  than  glory : of 
which  he  had  the  flrongeft  convi&ion  (tho’ 
he  was  afhamed  to  own  it)  when  he  palled  the 
Rubicon.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted  but  he  was  often 
merciful.  It  is  no  proof  of  the  contrary,  that 
lie  rode  tip  and  down  his  ranks,  during  the 
battle  of  PharfaJia,  and  cried  to  thole  who 
were  engaged  with  the  pretty  gentlemen 
of  Pompey ’s  army,  Mites , facinn  fen  ; “ Sol- 
dier, ilrike  at  the  face.'1  For  this  greatly  fhor- 
t.ened  the  difpute,  with  thofe  who  were  more 
afraid  of  lofing  their  beauty  than  their  lives, 

and 


[ 29  ] 

and  fo  prevented  the  effufion  of  much 
blood.  But  I cannot  get  over  (to  fay  no- 
thing of  the  myriads  of  common  Gauls  whom  he 
deliroyed)  a Ihort  fentence  in  his  own  commen- 
taries, Vercingetorix  per  tormenia  necatus.  Who 
was  this  Vercingetorix  ? As  brave  a man,  and 
(confidering  his  years)  as  great  a general  as 
even  Csefar.  What  was  his  crime  ? The  love 
of  his  parents,  wife,  children,  country,  and 
facrificing  all  things  in  the  defence  ol  them. 
And  how  did  Ctefar  treat  him  on  this  account  ? 
He  tortured  him  to  death.  O Roman  Mercy  ! 
Did  not  Brutus  and  Caffius  avenge  Vercingeto- 
rix  rather  than  Pompey  ? How  well  was  Rome 
repefented  in  the  prophetical  vifion,  bythatbeaft 
dreadful  and  terrible,  which  had great  iron  teeth, 
and  devoured  and  brake  in  pieces,  and  Jlamped 
under  his  feet  all  other  kingdoms ! 

II.  l.  Such  is  the  ftate,  with  regard  to  know- 
ledge and  virtue,  wherein  according  tothe  moll 
authentic  accounts,  mankind  was  from  the  ear- 
lied  times,  for  above  four  thoufand  years.  Such 
nearly  did  it  continue,  during  the  decline,  and 
fince  the  deftruftion  of  the  Roman  empire.  But 
we  will  wave  all  that  is  paft,  if  it  only  appears, 
- that  mankind  is  virtuous  and  wife  at  this  day. 
This  then  is  the  point  we  are  at  prefent  to  con- 
fider.  Are  men  in  general  now  wife  and  virT 
tuous  P 

b3 


Can 


[ 3°  i 

Our  ingenious  countryman,  Mr.  Brerewood, 
after  his  mofl  careful  and  laborious  enquiries 
computes,  that  fuppofing  that  part  of  the 
earth,  which  we  know  to  be  inhabited,  were 
divided  into  thirty  equal  parts,  nineteen  of thefe 
are  Heathen  Hill : and  of  the  remaining  eleven 
fix  are  Mahometan,  and  only  five  Chriftian. 
Let  us  take  as  fair  and  impartial  a furvey  as  we 
can,  of  the  Heathens  firft,  and  then  of  the  Maho- 
metans and  Chriftians. 

2.  * Andfirft,  of  the  Heathens.  Whatmanner 
of  men  are  thefe,  as  to  virtue  and  knowledge 
at  this  day  ? Many  of  late,  who  ftill  bear  the 
Chrififan  name,  have  entertained  very  ho- 
nourable thoughts  of  the  old  Heathens.  They 
cannot  believe  them  to  have  been  fo  ftupid 
and  fenfelefs,  as  they  have  been  reprefented 
to  be  : particularly,  with  regard  to  idolatry,  in 
worfhipping  birds,  bealls  and  creeping  things. 
Much  lefs  can  they  credit  the  ftories  told  of 
many  nations,  the  Egyptians  in  particular, 

“ Who  are  faid  to 

Have  fet  the  leek  they  after  prayed  to.” 

But  if  they  do  not  confuler,  who  they  are  that 
tranfmit  to  us  thefe  accounts,  namely  both  thofe 
writers  who,  they  profefs  to  believe,  fpake  as 
they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Gko/i , and  thofe 
■whom  perhaps  they  value  more,  the  mofl  credi- 
ble of  their  cotemporary  Heathens  : If,  I fay, 

they 


C 31  J 

they  forget  this,  do  they  not  confider  the  prefe.ni 
iiate  of  the  Heathen  world  ? Now  allowing  the 
bulk  of  the  antient  Heathens  (which  itfelf  is  not 
eafily  proved)  to  have  had  as  much  underftand- 
ing  as  the  modern,,  we  have  no  pretence  to  fup- 
pofe  they  had  more.  What  therefore  they  were,- 
we  may  fafely  gather  from  what  they  are : we 
may  judge  of  the  paft  by  the  prefent.  Would 
we  know  then  (to  begin  with  a part  of  the  world 
known  to  very  early  antiquity)  what  manner  of 
men  the  Heathens  in  Africa  were  two  or  three 
thoufand  years  ago  ? Enquire  what  they  are  now, 
who  are  genuine  Pagans  ftill,  not  tainted  either 
with  Mahometanifm  or  Chriftianity.  They  are 
to  be  found  in  abundance,  either  in  Negro-land, 
or  round  the  Cape  of  Good-Hope.  Now  what 
meafure  of  knowledge  have  the  natives  of  thefe 
countries  ? I do  not  fay  in  metaphyfics,  mathe- 
matics, or.  aftronomy.  Ox  thefe  it  is  plain  they 
know  juft  as  much  as  their  four-footed  brethren. 
The  lion  and  the  man  are  equally  accomplifhed 
with  regard  to  this  knowledge.  I will  not  alk, 
what  they  know  of  the  nature  of  government, 
of  the  refpective  rights  of  kings  and  various  or- 
ders ot  fubje&s.  In  . this  regard,  an  herd  of  men 
are  manifeftly  inferior  to  an  herd  of  elephants. 
But  let  us  view  them  with  refpeft  to  common 
hie.  Y\  hat  do  they  know  of  the  things  they, 
continually  ftand  in  need  of?  How  do  they  build 
habitations  for  themfelves  and  their  families  ? 

B 4 How 


[ 32  ] 

How  feleft  and  prepare  their  food  ? Cloath  and 
adorn  their  perfons  ? As  to  their  habitations,  it 
rs  certain,  I will  not  fay,  our  horfes,  ('particu- 
larly thofe  belonging  to  the  nobility  and  gentry) 
but  an  Englifh  peafant’s  dogs,  nay  his  very 
fwine  are  more  commodioufly  lodged.  And  as 
to  their  food,  apparel,  and  ornaments,  they  are 
juft  fuitable  to  their  edifices. 

“ Your  nicer  Hottentots  think  meet 
With  guts  and  tripe  to  deck  their  feet. 

With  downcaft  eyes  on  Totta’s  legs 
The  love-lick  youth  molt  humbly  begs, 

She  would  hot  from  his  fight  remove, 

At  once  his  breakfaft  and  his  love.” 

Such  is  the  knowledge  of  thefe  accomplilhed 
animals  in  things  which  cannot  but  daily 
employ  their  thoughts : and  wherein  confe- 
quently  they  cannot  avoid  exerting  to  the  utter- 
moft  both  their  natural  and  acquired  underftand- 
ing. 

And  what  are  their  prefent  attainments  in 
virtue  ? Are  they  not,  one  and  all,  without  God 
hi  the  world?  Having  either  no  knowledge  of 
him  at  all,  no  conception  of  any  thing  he  has 
to  do  with  them,  or  they  with  him : or  fuch 
conceptions  as  are  far  worfe  than  none,  as  make 
him  fuch  an  one  as  themfelves.  And  what  are 
their  focial  virtues  P What  are  their  difpofitions 

and 


C 33  ] 

and  behaviour  between  man  and  man?  Are  they 
eminent  for  juftice  ? For  mercy,  or  truth?  A.s 
to  mercy,  they  know  not  what  it  means,  being 
continually  cutting  each  other’s  throats,  from 
generation  to  generation,  and  felling  for  {laves 
as  many  of  thofe  who  fall  into  their  hands,  as 
on  that  confideraiion  only  they  do  not  murder. 
Juftice  they  have  none  ; no  courts  of  juftice  at 
all;  no  public  method  of  redrafting  wrong,  but 
every  man  does  what  is  right  in  Ins  own  eyes, 
till  a ftronger  than  he  beats  out  his  brains  for  fo 
doing.  And  they  have  juft  as  much  regard  to 
truth  ; cozening,  cheating,  and  over-reaching 
every  man  that  believes  a word  they  fay  Such 
are  the  moral,  fuch  the  intelle&ual  perfections, 
according  to  the  lateft  and  moft  accurate  ac- 
counts, of  the  prefent  Heathens  who  are  diffufed 
in  great  numbers  over  a fourth  part  of  the 
known  world  ! 

3.  It  is  true,  that  in  the  new  world,  in  Ame, 
rica,  they  feem  to  breathe  a purer  air,  and  to  be 
in  general  men  of  a ftronger  underftanding,  and 
a lefs  favage  temper.  Among  thefe  then  we 
may  furely  find  higher  degrees  of  knowledge  as 
well  as  virtue.  But  in  order  to  form  a juft  con- 
ception of  them,  we  muft  not  take  our  account 
from  their  enemies ; from  any  that  would  juftify 
themfelves  by  blackening  thofe  whom  they  feek 
to  deftroy.  No,  but  let  us  enquire  of  more  im- 
partial judges,  concerning  thofe  whom  they  have, 
perfonally  known,  the  Indians  bordering  upon. 

5 our. 


[ 34  3 

onr  own  feltlements,  from  New-England  down 
to  Georgia. 

We  cannot  learn,  that  there  is  any  great  dif- 
ference in  point  of  knowledge,  between  any  of 
thefe,  from  eaft  to  weft,  or  from  north  to  fouth. 
They  are  all  equally  unacquainted  with  Eu- 
ropean learning,  being  total  ftrangers  to  every 
branch  of  literature,  having  not  the  leaft  con- 
ception of  any  part  of  philofophy,  fpeculative 
or  pra&icaT.  Neither  have  they  (whatever  ac- 
counts fome  have  given)  any  fuch  thing  as  a re- 
gular, civil  government  among  them.  They 
have  no  laws  of  any  kind,  unlefs  a few  tempo- 
rary rules  made  in  and  for  the  time  of  war. 
They  are  likewife  utter  ftrangers  to  the  arts  of 
peace,  having  fcarce  any  fuch  thing  as  an  arti- 
ficer in  a nation.  They  know  nothing  of  build- 
ing ; having  only  poor,  miferable,  ill-contrived 
huts,  far  inferior  to  many  Englifh  dog-kennels. 
Their  cloathing,  till  of  late,  was  only  fkins  of 
beafts,  commonly  of  deer,  hanging  down  before 
and  behind  them.  Notv,  among  thofe  who 
have  commerce  with  our  nation,  it  is  frequently 
a blanket  wrapt  about  them.  Their  food  is 
equally  delicate;  pounded  Indian  corn  fome- 
times  mixed  with  water,  and  fo  eaten  at  once  : 
fometimes  kneaded  into  cakes,  meal  and  bran 
together,  and  half  baked  upon  the  coals.  Fifh 
or  flefh,  dried  in  the  fun,  is  frequently  added  to 
this  ; and  now  and  then  a piece  of  tough,  frefh- 
killed  deer. 


Such 


[ 35  ] 

Such  is  the  knowledge  of  the  American--, 
whether  in  things  of  an  abftrufer  nature,  or  in 
the  affairs  of  common  life.  And  this,  fo  far  as 
we  can  learn,  is  the  condition  of  all,  without 
any  confiderable  difference.  But  in  point  of  re- 
ligion, there  is  a very  material  difference  be- 
tween the  Northern  and  the  Southern  Indians. 
Thofe  in  the  north  are  idolaters  of  the  loweft 
kind : If  they  do  not  worlhip  the  devil  appear- 
ing in  perfon  (which  many  firmly  believe  they; 
do,  many  think  incredible)  certainly  they  war, 
ffiip  the  moft  vile  and  contemptible  idols.  It. 
were  more  excu fable  if  they  only  turned  the 
glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  into  the  image  of  ear* 
ruptible  man ; yea,  or-  of  birds , or  four-footed 
beafls , or  reptiles,  or  any  creature  which  God  has 
made;  But  their  idols  are  more  horrid  and  de- 
formed than  any  thing  in  the  vifible  creation  ; 
and  their  whole  worfhip  is  at  once  the  highelt 
affront  to  the  divine,  and  difgrace  to  the  human 
nature. 

On  the  contrary,  the  Indians  of  our  foutherm 
provinces  do  not  appear  to  have  any  worfhip  at 
all.  By  the  moft  diligent  enquiry  from  thefe- 
who  had  fpent  many  years  among  them,  I could, 
never  learn  that  any  of  the  Indian  nations,  who 
border  on  Georgia  and  Carolina,  have  any  public: 
worfhip,  of  any  kind:  nor  any  private..  Fcrs 
they  have  no  idea  of  prayer.  It  is  not  without* 
much  difficulty  that  one  can  make  any  of  them? 
underftand  what  is  meant  by  prayer.  And  when 
B 6 they 


[ 36  ] 

they  do,  they  cannot  be  made  to  apprehend,  that 
God  will  anfwer  or  even  hear  it.  They  fay, 
“ He  that  fittethin  heaven  is  too  high,  he  is  too 
far  off  to  hear  us.”  In  confequence  of  which 
they  leave  him  to  himfelf,  and  manage  their  af- 
fairs without  him.  Only  the  Chicafaws,  of  all 
the  Indian  nations,  are  an  exception  to  this. 

I believe,  it  will  be  found  on  the  ft  rift  eft  en- 
quiry, that  the  whole  body  of  fouthern  Indians, 
as  they  have  no  letters  and  no  laws,  fo  properly 
fpeaking,  have  no  religion  at  all.  So  that  every 
one  does  what  he  fees  good:  and  if  it  ap- 
pears wrong  to  his  neighbour,  he  ufually  comes 
upon  him  unawares,  and  fhoots  or  fcalps  him 
alive.  They  are  likewife  all  (I  could  never  find 
any  exception] gluttons,  drunkards,  thieves,  dif- 
femblers,  liars.  They  are  implacable,  never 
forgiving  an  injury  or  affront,  or  being  fatisfied 
with  lefs  than  blood.  They  are  unmerciful , 
killing  all  whom  they  take  prifoners  in  war, 
with  the  moll  exquifite  tortures.  They  are  mur- 
derers of  fathers,  murderers  of  mothers,  murder- 
ers of  their  own  children  : It  being  a common 
thing  for  afon  to  fhoot  his  father  or  mother,  be- 
caufe  they  are  old  and  pall  labour,  and  for  a 
woman  either  to  procure  abortion,  or  to  throw 
her  child  into  the  next  river,  becaufe  fhe  will 
go  to  the  war  with  her  hufband.  Indeed  hufbands 
properly  fpeaking,  they  have  none;  for  any 
man  leaves  his  wife,  fo  called,  at  pleafure;  who 

frequently 


[ 37  J 


frequently  in  return,  cuts  the  throats  of  all  the 
children  (he  has  had  by  him. 

The  Chicafaws  alone  feem  to  have  fome  no- 
tion of  an  intercourfe  between  man  and  a fupe- 
rior  being.  They  fpeak  much  of  their  beloved 
cues ; with  whom  they  fay,  they  converfe  both 
day  and  night.  But  their  beloved  ones  teach 
them  to  eat  and  drink  from  morning  to  night,  and 
in  a manner  from  night  to  morning  ; For  they 
rife  at  any  hour  of  the  night  when  they  wake, 
and  eat  and  drink  as  much  as  they  can,  and  fleep 
again.  Their  beloved  ones  likewife  exprefslv 
command  them,  to  torture  and  burn  all  their 
prifoners.  Their  manner  of  doing  it  is  this: 
They  hold  lighted  canes  to  their  arms  and  legs, 
and  feveral  parts  of  their  body,  for  fome  time*, 
and  then  for  a white  they  take  them  away.  They 
alfo  ftick  burning  pieces  of  wood  in  their  flefh  ; 
in  which  condition  they  keep  them  from  morn- 
ing to  evening.  S-uch  are  at  prcfent  the  know- 
ledge and  virtue  of  the  native  Heathens,  over 
another  fourth  of  the  known  world. 

4.  In  Aha,,  however  we  are  informed,  that  the 
cafe  is  widely  different.  For  although  the  Hea- 
thens bordering  on  Europe,  the  thoufands  and 
myriads,  of  Tartars  have  not  much  to  boaff  either 
as  to  knowledge  or  virtue;  and  although  the  nu- 
merous little  nations  under  the  Mogul  who  retain 
their  original  Heathenifm,  are  nearly  on  a level 
with  them,  as  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  many 
large  and  populous  iflands  in  the  eaffern  feasr 

yet 


r 38  j 

yet  we  hear  high  encomiums  ox  the  Chinefe,  who 
are  as  numerous  as  all  thefe  together:  fome  late 
travellers  alluring  us,  That  China  alone  has  fifty 
eight  million  of  inhabitants.  Now  thefe  have 
been  defcribed  as  men  of  the  deepefi.  penetration, 
the  higheft  learning,  and  the  ftri&eft  integrity. 
And  fuch  doubtlefs  they  are,  at  leaft  with  regard 
to  their  underfianding,  if  we  will  believe  their 
own  proverb,  “ The  Chinefe  have  two  eves,  the 
Europeans  one,  and  other  men  none  at  all.1’ 

* And  one  circumftance,  it  muff  be  owned  is 
much  in  their  favour:  They  live  fome  thoufand 
miles  off  So  that  if  it  were  affirmed,  That 
every  Chinefe  had  literally  three  eyes,  it  would 
be  difficult  for  us,  to  difprove  it.  Neverthelefs 
there  is  room  to  doubt  even  of  their  underftand- 
ing:  Nay,  one  of  the  arguments  often  brought  to 
prove  the  greatnefs,  to  me  ckarly  demonftrate3 
the  littlenefs  of  it;  namely,  The  thirty  thoufand 
letters  of  their  alphabet.  To  keep  an  alphabet 
of  thirty  hundred  letters,  could  never  be  recon- 
ciled to  common  fenfe:  fince  every  alphabet  ought 
to  be  as  ffiort,  fhnple,  and  eafy  as  poffible.  No 
more  can  we  reconcile  to  any  degree  of  common 
fenfe,  their  crippling  all  the  women  in  the  empire, 
by  a filly  fenfelefs  affedlation  of  fqueezing  their 
feet,  till  they  bear  no  proportion  to  their  bodies: 
fo  that  the  feet  of  a woman  at  thirty,  muff  Hill 
be  as  fmall  as  they  would  be  naturally  when  four 
years  old.  But  in  order  to  fee  the  true  meafure- 

cf 


[ 39  ] 

of  their  underflanding  in  the  cleared:  light,  let  113 
look  not  at- women  or  the  vulgar,  but  at  the  no- 
bility, the  wifeft,  the-politeft  part  of  the  nation. 
Look  at  the  Mandarins,  the  glory  of  the  empire, 
and  fee  any,  every  one  of  them  at  his  meals, 
not  deigning  toufe  his  own  hands,  but  having  his 
meat  put  into  his  mouth,  by  two  fervants  plant- 
ed for  that  purpofe,  one  on  his  right  hand,  the 
other  on  his  left ! O the  deep  underftanding  of 
the  noble  lubber  that  fits  in  the  midft,  and 

“ Hiat,  ceu  pull  us  hirundinis !” 

Gapes,  as  the  young  fwallow  for  his  food. 

Surely  an  Englifh  ploughman,  or  a Dutch  failor, 
would  have  too  much  fenfe  to  endure  it.  If  you 
fay,  Nay,  the  Mandarin  would  not  endure  it,, 
but  that  it  is  a cujlom : I anfwer,  Undoubtedly 
it  is;  but  how  came  it  to  be  a cuftom  ? Such  a 
cultom  could  not  have  begun,  much  lefs  have 
become  general,  but  through  a general  and  mar- 
vellous want  of  common  fenfe. 

What  their  learning  is  now,  I know  nott 
But  notwithftanding  their  boaft  of  its  antiquity,, 
it  was  certainly  very  low  and  contemptible  in  the 
laft  century,  when  they  were  fo  aflonilhed  at  the 
lkill  of  the  French  Jefuits,  and  honoured  them 
as  almofl  more  than  human.  And  whatever  pro- 
grefs  they  may  have  made  fince  in  the  knowledge 
of  allronomy,  and  other  curious  rather  than  ufe- 

fui 


C 40  ] 

fi;I  fciences,  it  is  certain,  they  are  flill  utterly  ig- 
norant of  what  it  moft  of  all  concerns  them  to 
know.  1 hey  know  not  God  any  more  than  the 
Hottentots:  They  are  all  idolaters  to  a man. 
And  fo  tenacious  are  they  of  their  national  idola- 
try, that  even  thofe  whom  the  French minionaries 
called  converts,  yet  continued  one  and  all,  to 
worfhip  Confucius,  and  the  fouls  of  their  ances- 
tors. It  is  true,  that  when  this- was  flrongly  re- 
prcfented  at  Rome,  by  an  honed  Dominican 
who  came  from  thence,  a bull  was  iffued  out 
and  Sent  over  into  China,  forbidding  them  to  do 
it  any  longer.  But  the  good  fathers  kept  it  pri- 
vately among  themfelves,  faying,  The  Chinefe 
were  not  able  to  bear  it. 

Such  is  their  religion,  with  refpefl  to  God. 
But  are  they  not  eminent  for  all  focial  virtues, 
all  that  have  place  between  man  and  man?  Yes, 
according  to  the  accounts  which  fume  have  given. 
According  to  thefe,  they  are  the  glory  of  mankind, 
and  may  be  a pattern  to.all  Europe.  But  have  not 
we  fome  reafon  to  doubt,  if  thefe  accounts  are 
true?  Are  pride  and  lazinefs  good  ingredients 
of  focial  virtue  ? And  can  all  Europe  equal  ei- 
ther the  lazinefs  or  pride  of  the  Chinefe  nobility 
and  gentry  ? Who  are  too  {lately  or  too  indolent 
even  to  put  the  meat  into  their  own  mouths  ? Y et 
they  are  not  too  proud,  or  too  indolent,  to  opprefs, 
to  rob,  to  defraud  all  that  fall  into  their  hands: 
How  flagrant  inflances  of  this  may  any  one  find 

even 


[ 4*  ] 

even  in  the  account  of  Lord  A nfonV  voyage  ? 
Exaftly  agreeing  with  the  accounts  given  by.  all 
our  countrymen,  who  have  traded  in  any  part 
of  China:  as  well  as  with  the  obfervation  made 
by  a late  writer,  in  his  geographical  grammar. 
“ Trade  and  commerce,  or  rather  cheating  and 
over-reaching,  is  the  natural  bent  and  genius  of 
the  Chinefe.  Gain  is  their  god  : They  prefer 
this  to  every  thing  befides.  A Granger  is  in  great 
danger  of  being  cheated,  if  he  trulls  to  his  own 
judgment.  And  if  he  employs  a Chinefe  broker, 
it  is  well  if  he  does  not  join  with  the  merchant 
to  cheat  the  flranger. 

“ Their  laws  oblige  them  to  certain  rules  of 
civility,  in  their  words  and  actions.  And  they 
are  naturally  a fawning,  cringing  generation: 
hut  the  greateft  hypocrites  on  the  face  of  the 
earth.” 

5.  Such  is  the  boaded  virtue  of  thofe  who  are 
beyond  all  degrees  of  comparifon  the  belt  and 
wifell  of  all  the  Heathens  in  Afia.  And  how  lit- 
tle preferable  to  them  are  thofe  in  Europe?  Ra- 
ther, how  many  degrees  beneath  them?  Vail 
numbers  of  thefe  are  within  the  borders  of  Muf- 
covy.  But  how  amazingly  ignorant  ? How  to- 
totally  void  both  of  civil  and  facred  wifdom  ? 
How  fhockingly  favage  both  in  their  tempers 
and  manners  ? Their  idolatry  is  of  the  bafeft  and 
vileft  kind.  They  not  only  worlhip  the  work 
of  their  own  hands,  but  idols  of  the  moil  horrid 
and  deteftable  forms  that  men  or  devils  could 

devife* 


t 4°  ] 

devife.  Equally  favage  (or  more  fo,  if  more 
can  be)  as  is  well-known,  are  the  natives  of 
Lapland  ; and  indeed  of  all  the  countries  which 
have  been  difeovered  to  the  north  of  Mufcovy 
or  Sweden.  In  truth,  the  bulk  of  thefe  nations 
feem  to  be  confiderably  more  barbarous,  not 
only  than  the  men  near  the  Cape  of  Good- 
Hope,  but  than  many  tribes  in  the  brute  crea- 
tion. 

Thus  have  we  feen  what  is  the  prefent  hate 
of  the  Heathens  in  every  part  of  the  known 
world.  And  thefe  hill  make  up,  according  to 
the  preceding  calculation,  very  near  two-thirds 
of  mankind.  Let  us  now  calmly  and  impartially 
confider,  What  manner  of  men  the  Mahome- 
tans in  general  are. 

6.  An  ingenious  writer,  who  a few  years  ago 
publifhed  a pompous  tranflation  of  the  Koran, 
takes  great  pains  to  give  us  a very  favourable 
opinion  both  of  Mahomet  and  his  followers. 
But  he  cannot  wafh  the  Ethiop  white.  After 
all,  men  who  have  but  a moderate  fhare  of  rea- 
fon,  cannot  but  obferve  in  his  Koran,  even  as 
polifhed  by  Mr.  Sale,  the  mod  grofs  and  impi- 
ous abfurdities.  To  cite  particulars  is  not  now 
my  bufinefs.  It  may  fuffice  to  obferve  in  gene- 
ral, That  human  underftanding  mull  be  debafed 
to  an  inconceivable  degree,  in  thofe  who  can 
fwallow  fuch  abfurdities  as  divinely  revealed. 
And  yet  we  know  the  Mahometans  not  only 

condemn 


[ 43  ] 

condemn  all  who  cannot  fwallow  them  to  ever- 
lafting  fire  ; not  only  appropriate  to  themfelves 
the  title  of  Mujfulmen,  or  True  Believers : but 
even  anathematife  with  the  utmofl  bitternefs, 
and  adjudge  to  eternal  deflruffion,  all  their  bre- 
thren of  the  fe£l  of  Hali,  all  who  contend  for  a 
figurative  interpretation  of  them. 

* That  thefe  men  then  have  no  knowledge 
or  love  of  God  is  undeniably  manifefl,  not  only 
from  their  grofs,  horrible  notions  of  him,  but 
from  their  not  loving  their  brethren.  But  they 
have  not  always  fo  weighty  a caufe  to  hate  and 
murder  one  another,  as  difference  of  opinion. 
Mahometans  will  butcher  each  other  by  thou- 
fands,  without  fo  plaufible  a plea  as  this.  Why 
is  it  that  fuch  numbers  of  Turks  and  Perfians 
have  ffabbed  one  another  in  cool  blood  P Truly, 
becaufe  they  differ  in  the  manner  of  dreffing 
their  head.  The  Ottoman  vehemently  main- 
tains, (for  he  has  unqueftionable  tradition  on  his 
fide)  that  a Mujfulman  fhould  wrear  a round  tur- 
bant.  Whereas  the  Perfian  infills  upon  his  li- 
berty of  confcience,  and  will  wrear  it  pithed  be- 
fore. So,  for  this  wonderful  reafon,  when  a 
more  plaufible  one  is  wanting,  they  beat  out 
each  others  brains  from  generation  to  genera- 
tion. 

It  is  not  therefore  flrange,  that  ever  fince  the 
religion  of  Mahomet  appeared  inthe  world,  the 
efpoufers  of  it,  particularly  thofe  under  the 
Turkifh  emperor,  have  been  as  wolves  and  tygers 

to 


I 44  J 


in  ail  other  nations,  rending  and.  tearing  all  that 
fell  into  their  mercilefs  paws,  and  grinding  them 
with  their  iron  teeth  : that  numberlefs  cities  are 
raled  from  the  foundation,  and  only  their  name 
remaining : that  many  countries  which  were 
once  as  the  garden  of  God,  are  now  a defolate 
wildernefs ; and  that  fo  many  once  numerous- 
and  powerful  nations  are  vanifhed  away  from  the 
earth  ! Such  was,  and  is  at  this  day  the  rage, 
the  fury,  the  revenge,  of  thefe  deitroyers  of 
human-kind  f 

7.  Proceed  we  now-  to  the  ChrifUan  world. 
But  we  mull  not  judge  ofChrihians  in  gener- 
al, from  tliofe  who  are  mattered  thro’  thcTur- 
kiih.  dominions,  the  Armenian,  Georgian,  Men- 
grelian  Chrifiians  : nor  indeed  from  any  others 
of  the  Greek  communion.  The  grofs,  barba- 
rous ignorance,  the  deep,  ftupid fuperftition,  the 
blind  and  bitter  zeal,  and  the  endlefs  third  after 
vain  jangling  and  flrife  of  words,  which  have 
reigned  for  many  ages  ia  the  Greek  church, 
and  well  nigh  banilhed  true  religion  from  among 
them  ; make  thele  fcarce  worthy  of  the  Chriflian 
name,  and  lay  an  infuperable  flumbling-block 
before  the  Mahometans. 

8.  Perhaps  thofe  of  the  Romifh  communion 
may  fay,  “ What  wonder,  that  this  is  the  cafe 
with  heretics  ? With  thofe  who  have  erred 
from  the  Catholic  faith,  nay,  and  left  the  pale 
of  the  church  ?”  But  what  is  the  cafe  with  them 
who  have  not  left  that  church,  and  who  retain 

the 


t 45  ] 

'the  Romany  faith  ftiil  ? Yea,  with  the  molt 
Eealous  of  all  its  patrons,  the  inhabitants  ol  Italy, 
of  Spain  and  Portugal  ? Wherein  do  they  excel 
the  Greek  church,  except  in  Italianifm  ? 'receiv- 
ed by  tradition  from  their  Heathen  fathers,  and 
diftufed  thro’  every  city  and  village.  They 
may  indeed  praife  chaftity  and  rail  at  women, 
as  loudly  as  their  fore-father  Juvenal.  But 
■what  is  the  moral  of  all  this  ? 

<!  Nonne  putas  melius,  quod  tecum  pujio  dormut  ?*’ 

This,  it  mufl  be  acknowledged,  is  the  (dory 
of  the  RomiJh  church.  Herein  it  does  excel  the 
Greek. 

They  excel  it  likewtfe  in  deifm.  Perhaps 
there  is  no  country  in  the  world,  at  lead,  in 
that  part  of  it,  which  bears  the  Chriltian  name, 
wherein  fo  large  a proportion  of  the  men  of  edu- 
cation, are  abfolute  deifls,  if  not  athiefts,  as 
Italy.  And  from  hence  the  plague  has  fpread 
far  and  wide;  thro’  France  in  particular.  So 
■that  did  not  temporal  motives  reftrian,  no  fmall 
/part  of  the  French  nobility  and  gentry,  would 
pay  no  more  regard  to  the  Chrifttan  revelation, 
than  do  the  Mandarins  in  China. 

■'Whey  excel  ftiil  more  in  murder,  both  private 
and  publick.  In  dances  of  the  former  abound 
-all  over  Italy,  Spain  and  Portugal.  And  the 
frequency,  of  fhedding  blood  has  taken  away 
•all  that  horror  which  ctherwife  might  attend  it. 

Take 


[ 46  ] 

Take  one  inftance  of  a thoufand.  AnEnglilh  gen- 
tleman was  fonie  years  ago  at  an  entertainment 
in  Brefcia,  when  one  who  was  near  him  whif- 
pered  a few  words  in  his  ear,  which  he  did  not 
well  underhand.  He  alked  his  hoft,  “ What 
did  that  gentleman  mean  by  thefe  words  ?”  And 
was  anfwered,  “That  he  will  murder  you.  And 
an  Italian  is  never  worfe  than  his  word  in  this. 
You  have  no  way  but  to  be  before-hand  with 
him.”  This  he  reje&ed  with  abhorrence.  But 
his  hoft,  it  feems,  being  not  of  fo  tender  a 
confcience  fent  a ftranger  to  him  in  the  morn- 
ing, who  faid,  “ Sir,  look  out  of  your  window, 
I have  done  his  bufmefs.  There  he  lies.  You 
will  pleafe  to  give  me  my  pay.”  He  pulled  out 
an  handful  of  money,  in  great  diforder  and  cried, 
“ There  take  what  you  will.”  The  other 
replied,  “ Sir,  I am  a man  of  honour  : I take 
only  my  pay  took  a finall  piece  of  filver,  and 
retired. 

* This  -was  a man  oj  honour  among  the  Cln  if- 
tiansof  the  Romifh  church!  And  many  fuclr  are 
to  be  found  all  over  Italy,  whole  trade  it  is,  to 
cut  throats  ; to  ftab,  for  hire,  in  cool  blood. 
Thev  have  men  of  confcience  too.  Such  were 
two  of  the  Catholic  foldiers  under  the  famous 
Duke  of  Alva,  who  broke  into  the  houfe  of  a 
poor  countryman  in  Flanders,  butchered  him  and 
his  wife  with  five  or  fix  children  ; and  after 
they  had  finifhed  their  work,  fet  down,  to  en- 
joy the  fruit  of  their  labour.  But  in  the  midft: 

of 


[ 47  3 

of  their  meal,  confcience  awaked.  One  of  then 
ftarted  up  in  great  emotion,  and  cried  out,  “ O 
Lord  ! What  have  I done  ? As  I hope  for 
falvation  I have  eaten  flefh  in  Lent  !” 

* The  fame  fort  of  confcience  undoubtedly  it 
was,  which  conftrained  the  late  moft  Chriftian 
king,  in  defiance  of  the  moft  folemn  treaties, 
yea,  of  all  ties,  divine  and  human,  moft  gra- 
cioufly  to  murder  fo  many  thoufands  of  his 
quiet  unrefifting  fubjefts  : to  order  his  dra- 
goons, wherever  they  found  the  Proteftants 
worlhipping  God,  to  fall  in  upon  them, 
fword  in  hand,  without  any  regard  to  fex  or 
age.  It  was  confcience,  no  queftion,  which  in- 
duced fo  many  of  the  dukes  of  Savoy,  notwithftand- 
ing  the  pubilc  faith  engaged  over  and  over,  to  fhed 
the  blood  of  their  loyal  fubjefls,  the  Vaudois, 
like  water,  to  ravage  their  fields  and  deftroy 
their  cities.  What  but  confcience  could  move 
the  good  Catholics  of  a neighbouring  kingdom 
in  the  laft  century,  to  murder  (according  to 
their  own  account)  two  hundred  and  fifteen 
thoufand  proteftants  in  fix  months ! A coftly 
facrifice  this  ! What  is  an  hecatomb,  an 
hundred  oxen,  to  two  hundred  thoufand 
men  ? And  yet  what  is  even  this  to  the  whole 
number  of  viftims  who  have  heen  offered  up 
in  Europe  fince  the  beginning  of  the  reforma- 
tion ? Partly  by  war,  partly  by  the  inquifition, 
and  a thoufand  other  methods  of  Romifh  cruel- 
ty ? No  lefs  within  forty  years,  if  the  computa- 
tion 


[ 4*  ] 

tion  of  an  eminent  writer  be  juft,  than  five  and 
forty  millions  ! 

Such  is  the  confcience,  fuch  the  religion  of 
Romifh  Chriftians  ! Of  their  inquifition  (the 
hou/e  of  mercy  as  it  is  moll  unfortunately  called) 
Ilhould  give  fome  account,  hut  that  it  has  been 
largely  defcribed  by  others.  Vet  it  may  not  be 
improper,  to  give  a fpecimen  of  that  mercy 
which  they  (hew  to  thole  under  their  care.  At 
the  aft  of  faith,  fo  called,  which  was  celebral- 
-ed  fome  years  ago,  when  Dr  Geldes  was  in 
Portugal,  a prifoner,  who  had  been  confined 
mine  years,  was  brought  out  to  execution. 
Looking  up  and  feeing  what  he  had  not  feen  for 
fo  long  a time,  the  fun  in  the  lnidft  of  heaven, 
he  cried  out,  “ How  can  any  who  fees  that  glo- 
rious creature  worftiip  any  but  the  God  that 
made  it?”  The  father  who  attended,  immedi- 
ately ordered  a gag  to  be  run  thro’  his  lip,  that  he 
might  fueak  no  more. 

x 

See  the  Chriftians,  who  have  received  all 
the  - advantages  of  education  ; ail  the  helps 
of antient  and  morde-n  learning  ! “ Nav,  but  we 
•have  ftill  greater  helps  than  them  : we  are  reform- 
■rued  from  the  errors  ol  popery  : we  breteji  again  ft 
all  thofe  novel  corruptions,  with  which  the 
church  of  Rome  has  polluted  antient  Ohriftianity. 
The  enormites:  therefore  of  Vapijli  countries,  are 
not  to  be  charged  upon  us  : we  are  P}  olefiant  s, 
and  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  vicesand  vil- 
lainies ol  Romifh  nations,’* 


o.  Have 


[ 49  ] 

g.  Have  we  not  ? Are  Protejlflnt  nations 
nothing  concerned  in  thofe  melancholy  re* 
fle&ions  of  Mr.  Cowley.  “ If  twenty  thoufand 
naked  Americans  were  not  able  to  refift  the  af* 
faults  of  but  twenty  well-armed  Spaniards,  how 
is  it  pofiible  for  one  honeft  man  to  defend  him* 
felf  againft  twenty  thoufand  knaves,  who  are 
all  furnilhed  cap-a-pe  with  the  defen  five  arms 
of  worldly  prudenee,  and  the  offenfive  too  of 
craft  and  malice  ? He  will  find  no  lefs  odds  than 
this  againft  him-,  if  he  have  much  to  do  in  hu- 
man affairs.  Do  you  wonder  then  that  a virtuous 
man  fltould  love  to  be  alone  ? It  is  hard  for  him 
to  be  otherwife.  He  is  fo  when  he  is  among;  ten 
thoufand.  Nor  is  it  fo  uncomfortable,  to  be  alone 
without  any  other  creature,  as  it  is  to  be  alone 
in  the  midft  of  wild  beafts.  Man  is  to  man  all 
kind  of  beafts,  a fawning  dog,  a roaring  lion, 
-a  thieving  fox,  a robbing  wolf,  a diffembling 
crocodile,  a treacherous  decoy,  and  a rapacious 
vulture.  The  civilleft,  methinks  of  all  nations 
are  thofe  whom  we  account  the  molt  barbarous. 
There  is  fome  moderation  and  good-nature  in 
the  Toupinambaltions,  who  eat  no  men  but  their 
enemies : while  we  learned  and  polite  and 
Chriftian  Europeans,  like  fo  many  pikes  and 
{harks,  prey  upon  every  thing  that  we  can  fwal- 
low.” 

Are  Protefiant  nations  nothing  concerned 
in  that  humourous,  but  terrible  picture  drawn 
by  a late  eminent  hand?  “ He  was  perfe&l.y 

Vol.  XXL  C aftoni  fired 


I [ 50  ] 

aftonilhed  (and  who  would  not,  if  it  were  thefirft 
time  he  had  heard  it  ?)  at  the  hiftorial  account 
I gave  him  of  our  affairs  during  the  laft  century : 
protefting  it  was  only  an  heap  of  confpiracies, 
'rebellions,  murders,  maffacres  ; the  very  world 
effefts  that  avarice,  fafdion,  hypocrify,  perndi- 
oufnefs,  cruelty,  rage,  madnefs,  hatred,  envy, 
luff,  malice  and  ambition  could  produce. — - — 
Even  in  times  of  peace,  how  many  innocent 
and  excellent  perfons,  have  been  condemned 
to  death  or  banifhment,  by  great  minifters  prac- 
tifing  upon  the  corruption  of  judges,  and  the 
malice  of  factions  ? How  many  villains  have 
been  exalted  to  the  highieft  places  of  truft, 
power,  dignity  and  profit  ? By  what  methods 
have  great  numbers  in  all  countries  procured 
titles  of  honour  and  vaft  eftates  ? Perjury,  op- 
preflion,  fubornation,  fraud,  pandarifm  were 
fome  of  the  moll:  eXcufable.  For  many  owed 
their  greatnefs  to  fodomy  or  inceft : others, 
to  the  proffituting  of  their  own  wives  or  daugh- 
ters; others,  to  the  betraying  of  their  country,  or 
their  prince  : more,  to  the  perverting  of  juftice 
to  deftroy  the  innocent.”  Well  might  that  been 
author  add,  “ II  a creature  pretending  to  rea- 
fon  can  be  guilty  of  fuch  enormities,  certainly 
the  corruption  of  that  faculity  is  far  worfe  than 
brutality  itfelf.” 

Now  are  Popiffi  nations  only  concerned  in 
this  ? Are  the  Proteftant  quite  clear  ? Is  there 
no  fuch  thing  among  them  (to  take  one  inftance 

only) 


t 5*  ] 

Only)  as  “ perverting  of  juflice,”  even  in  pub- 
lic courts  of  judicature  ? Can  it  not  be  faid 
in  any  Proteftant  country,  * “ There  is  a fociety 
of  men  among  us,  bred  up  from  their  youth  in 
the  art  of  proving,  according  as  they  are  paid, 
by  words  multiplied  for  the  purpofe,  that  white 
is  black  and  black  is  white  ? For  example  : if 
my  neighbour  has  a mind  to  my  cow,  he  hires  a 
lawyer  to  prove  that  he  ought  to  have  my  cow 
from  me.  I mull  hire  another,  to  defend  my 
right,  it  being  againft  all  rules  of  law,  that  a 
man  fhould  fpeak  for  himfelf.  In  pleading 
they  do  not  dwell  on  the  merits  of  the  caufe, 
but  upon  crrcumflances  foregin  thereto.  For  in- 
flance  : they  do  not  take  the  fhorted  method  to 
know,  what  title  my  adverfay  has  to  my  cow : 
but  whether  the  cow  be  red  or  black,  her 
horns  long  or  fhort  ; whether  the  field  fhe  graze 
in  be  round  or  fquare,  and  the  like.  After 
which  they  adjourn  the  caufe  from  time  to  time, 
and  in  ten  or  twenty  years  time  come  to  an  iffue. 
This  fociety  likewife  has  a peculiar  cant  and 
jargon  of  their  own,  in  which  all  their  laws  are 
written.  And  thefe  they  take  fpecial  care  to  mul- 
tiply : whereby  they  have  fo  confounded  truth 
and  falfhood,  right  and  wrong,  that  it  will  take 
twelve  years  to  decide,  whether  the  field  left 
me  by  my  anceflors  for  fix  generations,  belong 
to  me  or  to  one  three  hundred  miles  off.” 

Is  it  in  Popifh  countries  only  that  it  can  be 
faid,  “ It  does  not  appear,  that  any  one  per- 
C 2 feftion 


i ] 

fe£Kon  is  required  toward  the  procurement  of 
any  one  ftation  among  you:  much  lefs,  that 
men  are  ennobled  cn  account  of  their  virtue  ; 
thatpriefts  are  advanced  for  their  piety  or  learn- 
ing, judges  for  their  integrity,  fenators  for  the 
love  of  their  country,  or  counfellors  for  their 
ivifdom.” 

10.  * But  there  is  a ftill  greater  and  more  un- 
deniable proof,  that  the  very  foundations  of  all 
things,  civil  and  religious,  are  utterly  out  of 
courfe,  in  the  Chri Ilian  as  well  as  the  Heathen 
world.  There  is  a hill  more  horrid  reproach  to 
the  Chrifiian  n mie,  yea,  to  the  name  of  man, 
to  all  reafon  and  humanity.  There  is  war  in  the 
world  ! War  between  men  ! War  between  Chrif- 
tians!  I mean  between  thofe  that  bear  the  name 
of  Chrifl,  and  profefs  to  walk  as  he  alfo  walked. 
Now  who  can  reconcile  war,  I will' not  fav  to 
religion,  but  to  any  degree  of  reafon  or  common 
fenfe  ? 

But  is  there  not  a caufe  ? O yes,  “ The  caufcs 
of  war  (as  the  fame  writer  obferve)  are  innumer- 
able. Some  of  the  chief  are  thefe  : the  ambi- 
tion of  princes  ; or  the  corruption  of  their  mi- 
nifters.  Difference  of  opinion  ; as  whether  flejh 
be  bread,  or  bread  be  JleJh?  Whether  the  juice 
of  the  grape  be  blood  or  wins  ? What  is  the  bell 
colour  for  a coat,  whether  black,  white,  or  grey ; 
and  whether  it  fliould  be  long  or  fhort  ? 
Whether  narrow  or  wide  ? Nor  are  there 

any 


[ <53  ] 


any -wars  fo  furious,  as  thofe  occafioned  by  fuch 
difference  of  opinions. 

* “ Sometimes  two  princes  make  war,  to  decide 
which  of  them  fhall  difpoffefs  a third  of  his  do- 
minions. Sometimes  a war  is  commenced, 
becaufe  another  prince  is  too  ftrong  : fome- 
times  becaufe  he  is  too  weak.  Sometimes 
our  neighbours  want  the  things  which  we 
have,  or  have  the  things  which  we  want.  So 
both  fight,  until  they  take  ours,  or  we  take 
theirs.  It  is  a reafon  for  invading  a country,  if 
the  people  have  been  wafted  by  famine,  deftroy- 
ed  by  peftilence,  or  embroiled  by  faftion  : or  to 
attack  our  nearefi  ally,  if  part  of  his  land  would 
make  our  dominions  more  round  and  compafh 

“ Another  caufe  of  making  war  is  this.  A 
crew  are  driven  by  a ftorm  they  know  not 
where;  at  length  they  make  land  and  go  afhore, 
they  are  entertained  with  kindnefs.  They  give 
the  country  a new  name  ; fet  up  a ftone  or  rot- 
ten plank  for  a memorial  ; murder  a dozen  of 
the  natives,  and  bring  away  a couple  by  force. 
Here  commences  a new  right  of  dominion  ; fhips 
are  fent,  and  the  natives  driven  out  or  deftroy- 
ed.  And  this  is  done  to  civilize  and  convert 
a barbarous  and  idolatrous  people.” 

* But  whatever  be  the  caufe,  let  us  calmly  and 
impartially  confider  the  thing  itfelf.  Here  are 
forty  tlioufand  men  gathered  together  on  this 
plain.  What  are  they  going  to  do  ? See  there 
are  thirty  or  forty  thoufand  more  at  a little  dif- 

C 3 tance. 


C 54  ] 

tance.  And  thefe  are  going  to  fhoot  them  thro’ 
the  head  or  body,  to  ftab  them,  or  fplit  their 
fculls,  and  fend  moft  of  their  fouls  into  ever- 
lafting  fire,  as  f aft  as  poffibly  they  can.  Why 
fo,  what  harm  have  they  done  to  them  ? O 
none  at  all.  They  do  not  fo  much  as  know  them. 
But  a man,  who  is  king  of  France,  has  a quar- 
rel with  another  man,  who  is  king  of  England. 
So  thefe  Frenchmen  are  to  kill  as  many  of  thefe 
Englifhmen  as  they  can,  to  prove  the  king  of 
France  is  in  the  right.  Now  what  an  argument  is 
this  ? What  a method  of  proof  ? What  an  amazing 
way  of  deciding  controverfies  ? Whatmuft  man- 
kind be,  before  fuch  a thing  as  war  could  ever 
be  known,  or  thought  of  upon  earth  ? Flow' 
fhocking,  how  inconceivable  a want  muft 
there  have  been  of  common  underftand- 
ing,  as  well  as  common  humanity,  before 
any  two  governors,  or  any  twro  nations  in 
the  univerfe,  could  once  think  of  fuch  a me- 
thod of  decifion  ? If  then  all  nations,  Pagan, 
Mahometan  and  Chriftian,  do  in  faft  make  this 
their  laft  refort : what  farther  proof  do  we  need 
of  the  utter  degeneracy  of  all  nations,  from  the 
plaineft  principles  of  reafon  and  virtue  ? Of  the 
abfolute  want  both  of  common  fenfe  and  com- 
mon humanity,  wdiich  runs  through  the  whole 
race  of  mankind  ? 

* In  how  juft  and  ftrong  a light  is  this  placed 
by  the  writer  cited  before  P “ I gave  him  a de- 
fcription  of  cannons,  mufkets,  piftols,  fwords, 

bayonets : 


C 55  ] 

bayonets  : of  fieges,  attacks,  mines,  ■ counter- 
mines, bombardments  ; of  engagements  by  lea 
and  land : flnps  lunk  with  a thoufand  men, 
twenty  thouland  killed  on  each  fide,  dying 
groans,  limbs  flying  in  the  air:  fmoke,  noife, 
trampling  to  death  under  horfes  feet,  flight,  pur- 
fuit,  viftory  : fields  ftrewed  with  carcafes  left 
for  food  to  dogs  and  beafls  of  prey:  and  farther, 
of  plundering,  Gripping,  ravilhing,  burning  and 
deftroying.  I allured-  him,  I had  feen  an  hun- 
dred enemies  blown  up  at  once  in  a fiege,  and 
as  many  in  a fhip,  and  beheld  the  dead  bodies 
drop  down  in  pieces  from  the  clouds  to  the  great 
diverfion  of  the  fpe&ators.” 

* Is  it  not  aftonifhing*  beyond  all  expreflion, 
that  this  is  the  naked  truth?  That  within  a Ihort 
term  of  years,  this  has  been  the  real  cafe,  in  al- 
moft  every  part  of  even  the  Chriflian  world  ? 
And  mean  while  we  gravely  talk  of  the  “ Digni- 
ty of  our  nature,”  in  its  prefent  ftate  ! This  is 
really  furprizing,  and  might  eafily  drive  even  a 
well-tempered  man  to  fay,  “ One  might  bear 
with  men,  if  they  would  be  content  with  thofe 
vices  and  follies  to  which  nature  has  entitled 
them.  I am  not  provoked  at  the  fight  of  a pick- 
pocket, a gamefter,  a politician,  a fuborner,  a 
traitor,  or  the  like.  This  is  all  according  to  the 
natural  courfe  of  things.  But  when  I behold  a 
lump  of  deformity  and  difeafes,  both  in  body  and 
mind  fmitten  with  pride,  it  breaks  all  the  mea- 
fures  of  my  patience.  Neither  fliall  I ever  be 
C 4 able 


[ 56  } 

able  to  comprehend,  how  fuch  an  animal  arid 
fuch  a vice  can  tally  together.” 

* And  furely  all  our  declamations  on  the 
ftrength  of  human  reafon,  and  the  eminence  of 
our  virtues,  are  no  more  than  the  cant  and  jar- 
gon of  pride  and  ignorance,  fo  long  as  there  is 
fuch  a thing  as  war  in  the  world.  Men  in  ge- 
neral can  never  be  allowed  to  be  reafonable  crea- 
tures, till  they  know  not  war  any  more.  So 
long  as  this  monlter  ftalks  uncontrolled,  where 
is  reafon,  virtue,  humanity?  They  are  utterly 
excluded ; they  have  no  place : they  are  a 
name,  and  nothing  more.  If  even  an  Heathen 
were  to  give  an  account  of  an  age,  wherein  rea- 
fon and  virtue  reigned,  he  would  allow  no  war 
to  have  place  therein.  So  Ovid  of  the  golden 
age. 

Nondum  prcecipites  cingebant  opbida  fojfce  : 

Non  galeae,  non  enjis  erat.  Sine  militis  uju 
Mollia  fecurce  percigebant  otia  gentes. 

Steep  ditches  did  not  then  the  towns  furround, 
Nor  glitt’ring  helm,  nor  flaught’ring  fword  was 
found. 

Nor  arms  had  they  to  wield,  nor  wars  to  wage, 
But  peace  and  fafety  crown’d  the  blifsful  age. 

1 1.  How  far  is  the  world  at  prefent  from  this 
ftate  ? Yet  when  we  fpeak  of  the  folly  and  wick- 
ednefs  of  mankind,  may  we  not  except  our  own 

country, 


[ 57  J 

country,  Great -Britain  and  Ireland  ? In  thefe 
we  have  fuch  advantages,  for  improvement  both 
in  knowledge  and  virtue,  as  fcarce  any  other 
nation  enjoys.  We  are  under  an  excellent  con- 
ditution,  which  fecures  both  our  religious  and 
civil  liberty.  We  have  religion  taught  -in  its 
primitive  purity,  its  genuine,  native  fimplicity. 
And  how  it  profpers  among  us,  we  may  know 
with  great  eafe  and  certainty.  For  we  depend 
not  on  hearfay,  on  the  report  of  others,  or  on 
fubtle  and  uncertain  reafonings,  but  may  fee 
every  thing  with  our  own  eyes,  and  hear  it  with 
our  own  ears.  Well  then,  to  make  all  the  al- 
lowance poffible,  we  will  fuppofe  mankind  in 
general,  to  be  on  a level,  with  regard  to  know- 
ledge and  virtue,  even  with  the  inhabitants  of 
our  fortunate  i Hands  : and  take  our  meafure  of 
them,  from  the  prefent  undeniable  Hate  of  out 
own  countrymen. 

'*  In  order  to  take  a thorough-  furvey  of  thefe, 
let  us  begin  with  the  lowed,  and  proceed  up- 
ward. The  bulk  of  the  natives  of  Ireland  are  to 
be  found  in  or  near  their  little  cabins  throughout 
the  kingdom,  moll  of  which  are  their  own 
workmanlhip,  confiding  of  four  earthen  walls*, 
covered  with  draw  or  fods,  with  one  opening 
in  the  fide-wall,  which  ferves  at  once  for  door, 
window  and  chimney.  Here  in  one  room  are 
the  cow  and  pig,  the  woman  with  her  children, 
and  the  mailer  ol  the  family.  Now  what  know- 
ledge have  thefe  rational  animals  ? They  know 

- C & ^ 


[ 58  ] 

to  plant  and  boll  their  potatoes,  to  milk  their  cow, 
and  to  put  their  cloaths  on  and  off,  if  they  have 
any  befides  a blanket.  But  other  knowledge 
they  have  none,  unlefs  in  religion.  And  how 
much  do  they  know  of  this  ? A little  more  than 
the  Hottentots,  and  not  much.  They  know  the 
names  of  God,  and  Chrid,  and  the  Virgin  Man'. 
They  know  a little  of  St.  Patrick,  the  pope,  and 
the  pried  : how  to  tell  their  beads,  to  fay  Ai>e 
Maria  and  Pater  Nojler ; to  do  what  penance 
they  are  bid,  to  hear  mafs,  confefs,  and  pay  fo 
much  for  the  pardon  of  their  fins.  But  as  to  the 
nature  of  religion,  the  life  of  God  in  the  foul, 
they  know  no  more  (I  will  not  fay,  than  the 
pried,  but)  than  the  beads  of  the  field. 

And  how  very  little  above  thefe  are  the  nume- 
rous inhabitants  of  the  northern  parts  of  Scot- 
land, or  of  the  iflands  which  lie  either  on  the 
wed,  or  the  north  fide  of  that  kingdom  ? What 
knowledge  have  thefe?  And  what  religion? 
Their  religion  ufually  lies  in  a fmgle  point,  in 
implicitly  believing  the  head  of  their  clan,  and 
implicitly  doing  what  he  bids.  + Meantime  they 
are,  one  and  all,  as  ignorant  of  rational,  fcriptu- 
ral  religion  as  of  Algebra:  and  altogether  as  far 
from  the  praflice,  as  from  the  theory  of  it. 

“ But  it  is  not  fo  in  England.  The  very  low- 
ed of  the  people  are  here  better  indrufled.”  I 
Ihould  be  right  glad  to  find  it  fo:  But  I doubr 

a fair 

+ By  a late  aft  of  parliament  there  is  an  happy  alteration 
made  in  this  particular. 


[ 59  3 


a fair  trial  will  {hew  the  contrary.  I am  afraid 
we  mav  fti  1 1 fey,  of  thoufands,  myriads  of  pea- 
fants,  men,  women,  and  children,  throughout 
our  nation 

“ Wild  as  the  untaught  Indian’s  brood, 

The  Chriftian  favages  remain  ; 

Strangers,  yea,  enemies  to  God, 

They  make  thee  fpena  thy  blood  in  vain.” 

» ' 

The  generality  of  Englifh  peafents  are  not  only 
grofly,  ftupidly,  I had  almofl  faid,  brutifldy  igno- 
rant, as  to  all  the  arts  of  this  life,,  but  eminent- 
ly fo,  with  regard  to  religion  and  the.  life  to  come, 
Afk  a countryman,  What  is  faith  ? What  is  re- 
pentance? What  is  holinefs?  What  is  true  reli- 
gion? And  he  is  no  more  able  to  give  you  an  in- 
telligible anfwer,  than  if  you  were  to'  afk  him 
about  the  North-eaft  Paffege.  Is  there  then  any 
pohibility  that  they  fhould  praftife  what  they 
know  nothing  of?  If  religion  is  not  even  in  their 
heads,  can  it  be  in  their  hearts  or  lives  ? It  can- 
not. Nor  is  there  the  lead  favour  thereof,  either 
in  their  tempers  or  converfation..  Neither  in  the. 
one,  nor  the  other  do  they  rife  one  jot  above  the. 
pitch  of  a Turk  or  au  Heathen. 

Perhaps  it  will  be  faid,  “ Whatever  the  clowns 
in  the  midland:  counties  are,  the  people  near  the 
fea-coafls  are. more  .civilized.”  Yes,  great  num- 
bers of  them  are,  in  and  near  all  our  ports-:  many 
thoufends  there  are  civilized  by  frnuggling.  The 
numbers  concerned  herein  upon  all.ourcoafts^  are 
Q 6 ha 


[ 6o  ] 

far  greater  than  can  be  imagined.  But  what  rea- 
fon,  and  what  religion  have  thefe  that  trample  on 
all  laws,  divine  and  human,  by  a courfe  of  thiev- 
ing, or  receiving  flolen  goods,  of  plundering 
their  king  and  country  ? I fay  king  and  country : 
feeing  whatever  is  taken  from  the  king,  is  in 
effect  taken  from  the  country,  who  are  obliged, 
to  make  up  all  deficiencies  in  the  royal  revenue. 
Thefe  are  therefore  general'  robbers.  They  rob 
you  and  me,  and  every  one  of  their  country- 
men: feeing  had  the  king  his  due  cufloms,  a 
great  part  of  ourtaxes  might  be  fpared.  A fmug- 
gler  then  (and  in  proportion  every  feller  or  buv- 
er,  of  uncudomed  goods,  is  a thief  of  the  firff 
order,  a highwayman  or  pickpocket  of  the  word 
fort.  Let  not  any  of  thofe  prate  about  reafon  or 
religion.  It  is  an  amazing  inflance  of  human 
folly,  that  every  government  in  Europe  does- 
not  drive  thefe  vermin  away  into  lands  not  inha- 
bited. 

We  are  all  indebted  to  thofe  detachments  of 
the  army,  which  have  cleared  fome  of  our  coafls 
of  thofe  public  nuifances.  And  indeed  many  of 
that  body  have  in  feveral  refpedis  deferred  well 
of  their  country.  Yet  can  we  fay  of  the  Joldiery 
in  general,  that  they  are  men  of  reafon  and  reli- 
gion ? 1 fear  not.  Are  not  the  bulk  of  them 
void  of  almoft  ail  knowledge,  divine  and  hu«- 
man  ? And  is  their  virtue  more  eminent  than 
their  knowledge  ? But  I fpare  them.  May  God 

be 


[ 6*  3 

be  merciful  to  them ! May  he  be  glorified  by 
their  reformation,  rather  than  their  deftruc- 
tion ! 

Is  there  any  more  knowledge  or  virtue  in  that 
vaft  body  of  men  (fome  hundred  thoufands]  the 
Englifh Jailors ? Surely  no.  It  is  not  without 
caufe,  that  a flnp  has  been  called  “ a floating, 
hell.”  What  power,  what  form  of  religion  is  to 
be  found  in  nine  out  of  ten,  fhall  I fay  ? Or 
ninety-nine  out  of  an  hundred,  either  of  our 
merchantmen  or  men  of  war  ? Whatdo  the  men 
in  them  think  or  know  about  religion  ? What  do 
they  praffife  ? Either  bailors  or  marines  ? I doubt 
whether  any  Heathen  bailors,,  in  any  country  or 
age,  Greek,  Roman,  or  Barbarian,  ever  came  up 
to  ours,  for  profound  ignorance  and  bare-faced,, 
fhamelefs,  knocking  impiety.  Add  to  thebe,  out 
of  our  renowned  metropolis,  the  whole  brood 
of  porters,  draymen,  carmen,  hackney-coach- 
men, and  I am  forry  to  fay,  noblemen  and  gen- 
tlemen’s footmen  (together  making  up  fome 
thoufands)  and  you  will  have  fuch  a colleftion  of 
knowing  and  pious  Chriflians  as  all  Europe  cannot 
exceed. 

“ But  all  men  are  not  like  thefe.”  No,  it  ia 
pity  they  fhould.  And  yet  how  little  better  are- 
the  retailers  of  brandy  or  gin,  the  inhabitants  of 
blind  ale-houfes,.  the  oyften-women,  fifh-wives,. 
and  other  good  creatures  about  Billinfgate,  and, 
the  various  clans  of  pedlars  and  hawkers,  that 
patrol  through  the  flreets,  or.  ply  in  Rag-fair,. 

and 


[ 62  ] 

anti  other  places  of  public  refort.  Thefe  like- 
wife  amount  to  feveral  thoufands,  even  within 
the  bills  of  mortality.  And  what  knowledge 
have  they  ? "What  religion  are  they  of?  What 
morality  do  they  praFtife  ? 

“ But  thefe  have  had  no  advantage  of  educa- 
tion, many  of  them  fcarce  being  able  to  write 
or  read.”  Proceed  we  then  to  thofe  who  have 
had  thefe  advantages,  the  officers  of  the  excij'e 
and  citj loins.  Are  thefe  in  general  men  of  rea- 
fon?  Who  think  with  clearnefs  and  connexion, 
and  fpeak  pertinently  on  a given  fubjeft?  Are 
they  men  of  religion?  Sober,  temperate?  Fear- 
ing God,  and  working  righteoufnefs  ? Having  a 
confcience  void  of  offence  toward  God  and  to- 
ward man?  Flow  many  do  you  find. of  this  kind 
among  them  ? Men  that  fear  an  oath,  that  fear 
perjury  more  than  death  ? That  would  die  ra- 
ther than  negleft  any  part  of  that  duty  which 
they  have  fworn  to  perform?  That  would  fooner 
be  torn  in  pieces,  than  fuffer  any  man,  under 
any  pretence,  to  defraud  his  majefty  of  his  juft 
right?  How  many  of  them  will  not  be  deterred 
from  doing  their  duty,  either  by  fear  or  favour  r 
Regard  no  threatnings  in  the  execution  of  their 
office*  and  accept  no  bribes,  called  prefents? 
Thefe  only  are-wife  and  honeft  men.  Set  down- 
all  the  reft  as  having  neither  religion  nor  found 
reafon. 

“ Rut  furely  tradtfmen  have.”  Some  of  them 
have  both  : and  in  an  eminent  degree.  Some 

o£ 


[ «3  ] 

-of  our  traders  are  an  honour  to  the  nation.  But 
are  the  bulk  of  them  fo  ? Are  a vad  majority  o{ 
our  tradefmen,  whether  in  town  or  country,  I 
will  not  fay,  religious,  but  honed  men  ? Who 
{hall  judge  whether  they  are  or  no  ? Perhaps 
you  think  St.  Paul  is  too  drift.  Let  us  appeal 
then  to  Cicero,  an  honed  Heathen.  Now, 
when  he  is  laying  down  rules  of  honedy  between 
man  and  man,  he  propofes  two  cafes. 

x.  * Antilfhenes  brings  a blip-load  of  corn  to 
Rhodes,  at  a time  of  great  fcarcity.  The  Rhodi- 
ans flock  about  him  to  buy.  He  knows  that 
five  other  {hips  laden  with  corn  will  be  there 
to-morrow.  Ought  he  to  tell  the  Rhodians 
this,  before  he  fells  his  own  corn?  Undoubtedly 
he  ought,  fays  the  Heathen.  Otherwife  he 
makes  a gain  of  their  ignorance,  and  fo  is  no 
better  than  a thief  or  a robber. 

2.  * A Roman  nobleman  comes  to  a gentle- 
man to  buy  his  houfe,  who  tells  him,  “ There 
is  another  going  to  be  built  near  it,  which  will 
darken  the  windows,”  and  on  that  account  makes 
a deduftion  in  the  price.  Some  years  after,  the 
gentleman  buys  it  of  him  again.  Afterward  he 
fues  the  nobleman  for  felling  it  without  telling 
him  find,  that  houfes  were  built  near,  which 
darkened  the  windows.  The  nobleman  pleads, 
“ I thought  he  knew  it.”  The  judge  afks,  Did 
you  tell  him  or  not  ? And  on  his  owning,  he 
did  not,  determines,  “ This  is  contrary  to  the 
the  law,  Ne  quid  dolo  mcilo  fiat”  (let  nothing  be 

don© 


t «4  ] 

done  fraudulently)  and  fentences  him  immedi- 
ately to  pay  back  part  of  the  price. 

Now,  how  many  of  our  tradefmen  come  up  to 
the  Heathen  ftandard  of  honefty  ? Who  is  clear 
of  Dolus  malusP  Such  fraud  as  the  Roman  judge 
would  immediately  have  condemned  ? Which 
of  our  countrymen  would  not  have  fold  his  corn 
or  other  wares  at  the  higheft  price  he  could  ? 
Who  would  have  funk  his  own  market,  by  tel- 
ling his  cuftomers  there  would  be  plenty  the 
next  day  ? Perhaps  fcarce  one  in  twenty.  That 
one  the  Heathen  would  have  allowed  to  be  an 
honeft  man.  And  every  one  of  the  reft,  accord- 
ing to  his  fentence,  is  “ no  better  than  a thief 
or  a robber/’ 

I muft  acknowledge,  I once  believed  the  body 
of  Englijh  merchants  to  be  men  of  the  ftri&eft 
honefty  and  honour.  But  I have  lately  had 
more  experience.  Whoever  wrongs  the  widow 
and  fatherlefs,  knows  not  what  honour  or  ho- 
nefty means.  And  how  very  few  are  there  that 
will  fcruple  this  ? I could  relate  many  flagrant 
inftances. 

But  let  one  fuffice.  A merchant  dies  in  the 
full  courfe  of  a very  extenfive  bufinefs.  Ano- 
ther agrees  with  his  widow,  that  provided  lhe 
will  recommend  him  to  her  late  hufband's  cor- 
refpondents,  he  will  allow  her  yearly  fuchapro* 
portion  of  the  profits  of  the  trade.  She  does  fo, 
and  articles  are  drawn,  which  fhe  lodges  with. 

ah 


[ 65  ] 

an  eminent  man.  This  eminent  man  pofttiveiy 
refufes'to  give  them  back  to  her;  but  gives  them 
to  the  other  merchant,  and  fo  leaves  her  entirely 
at  his  mercy.  The  confequence  is,  the  ocher 
fays,  there  is  no  profit  at  all.  So  he  does  not  > 
give  her  a groat.  Now  where  is  the  honefty  or 
honour,  either  of  him  who  made  the  agreement,, 
or  him  who  gave  back  the  articles  to  him  ? 

That  there  is  honour,  nay,  and  honefty  to  be 
found  in  another  body  of  men,  among  the  gen- 
tlemen of  the  law , I firmly  believe,  whether 
Attorneys,  Solicitors , or  CounJ'ellors,  But  are 
they  not  thinly  fpread?  Do  the  generality  of 
Attorneys,  and  Solicitors  in  Chancery,  love  their 
neighbour  as  themfelves  ? And  do  to  others,  what, 
(if  the  circumftance  were  changed)  they  would 
have  others  do  to  them  ? Do  the  generality  of 
Councilors  walk  by  this  rule  ? And  by  the  rules 
of  juftice,  mercy,  and  truth?  Do  they  ufe  their 
utmoft  endeavours,  do  they  take  all  the  care 
which  the  nature  of  the  thing  will  allow,  to  be 
allured  that  a caufe  is  juft  and  good,  before  they 
undertake  to  defend  it  ? Do  they  never  knowing- 
ly defend  a bad  caufe,  and  fo  make  themfelves 
accomplices  in  wrong  and  opprellion  ? Do  they 
never  deliver  the,  poor  into  the  hand  of  his  op- 
prcftor,  and  fee  that  fuch  as  are  in  neceffity  have 
not  right  ? Are  they  not  often  the  means  of 
with-holding  bread  from  the  hungry,  and  rai- 
ment from  the  naked  ? Even  when  it  is  their 
own,  when  they  have  a clear  right  thereto,  by 

the 


[ 66  ] 

the  law  both  of  God  and  man?  Is  not  this  effec- 
tually done  in  many  cafes,  by  protracting  the  fuit 
from  year  to  year?  I have  known  a friendly  bill 
preferred  in  Chancery,  bv  the  confent  of  all  par- 
ties; the  manager  alluring  them,  adecree  would 
be  procured  in  two  or  three  months.  But  al- 
though feveral  years  are  now  elapfed,  they  can 
fee  no  land  yet.  Nor  do  I know,  that  we  are  a 
jot  nearer  the  conclufion  than  we  were  the  firft 
day.  Now  where  is  the  honeftv  of  this?  Is  it  not 
picking  of  pockets,  and  no  better?  A lawyer 
who  does  not  finifh  his  client’s  fuit,  as  foon  as  it 
can  be  done,  I cannot  allow  to  have  more  ho- 
nedy  (though  he  has  more  prudence)  than  if  he 
robbed  him  on  the  highway. 

“ But  whether  lawyers  are,  or  no,  fure  the 
Nobility  and  Gentry  are  all  men  of  reafon  and  re- 
ligion.” Tfyou  think  they  are  all  men  of  religi- 
on, you  think  very  differently  from  your  matter, 
who  made  no  exception  of  time  or  nation, 
■when  he  uttered  that  weighty  fentence,  How  dif- 
ficultly Jliall  they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  heaven!  And  when  fome  who  feem 
to  have  been  of  your  judgment,  were  greatly 
aftonifhed  at  his  faying:  inffead  of  retracing  or 
foftening  he  adds.  Verily , I fay  unto  you,  it  is  ea- 
fer  for  a camel  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a needle, 
than  for  a rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
God.  You  think  differently  from  St.  Paul,  who 
declares,  in  thofe  remarkable  words,  verified  in 

all 


[ «7  ] 


all  ages,  Not  many  rick  men,  not  many  noble  are 
called:  and  obey  the  heavenly  calling.  So  ma- 
ny fnares  furround  them,  that  it  is  the  greateft  of 
all  miracles,  if  any  of  them  have  any  religion  at 
all.  And  if  you  think  they  are  all  men  of  found 
reafon,  you  do  not  judge  hy  fa  El  and  experience. 
Much  money  does  not  imply  much  fenfe;  nei- 
ther does  a good  eftate  infer  a good  underftand- 
ing.  As  a gay  coat  may  cover  a bad  heart,  fo  a 
fair  peruke  may  adorn  a weak  head.  Nay  a cri- 
tical judge  of  human  nature,  avers  that  this  is 
generally  the  cafe.  He  lays  it  down  as  a rule 

Senjiis  communis  m ilia 
Fortuna  rarus. 

“ Common  fenfe  is  rarely  found  in  men  of  for- 
tune.” “ A rich  man,  fays  he,  has  liberty  to 
be  a fool.  His  fortune  will  bear  him  out.” 
Stultiticnn  patiuntur  opes : But  Tibi  parvula  res 
ejl.  “ You  have  little  money,  and  therefore 
fhould  have  common  fenfe.” 

I would  not  willingly  fay  any  thing  concerning 
thofe  whom  the  providence  ot  God  has  alotted 
for  guides  to  others.  There  are  many  thoufands 
of  thefe  in  the  eftabliflred  church : Many,  a- 
mong  di (renters  of  all  denominations.  We  may 
add,  fome  thoufand  of  Romilh  priefts,  fcattered 
thro  England,  and  fwarming  in  Ireland.  Of 
thefe  therefore  I would  only  afk,  “ Are  they  all 
moved  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  to  take  upon  them 

that 


that  office  and  mimftry  ?!’  If  not,  they  do  not 
inter  by  the  door  into  the  Jhetp-Jold  ; they  are  not 
fentof  God.  1st  heir  eye  / 'ingle  ? Is  it  their  fole- 
intention  mall  their  mi  a i fixations,  to  glorify  God- 
and  to  fave  fouls  ? Othei  wife,  the.  light  which 
is  in  them  is  darknefs.  And  if  it  be,  how  great 
is  that  darknefs  ? Is  their  heart  right  with  God  ? 
Are  their  affections  fet  on  things  above,  net  on  things 
oj the  earth  ? Elfe  how  will  thev  themfelves  go  one 
hep  in  the  way,  wherein  they  are  to  guide  others  ? 
Once  more;  At  ethex  holy  in  all  manner  of  conver- 
J'ation,  as  he  who  hath  called  them  is  holy  ? If 
not,  with  what  face  cau  they  fay  to  the  flock. 
Be  ye  follower s oj  me,  as  I am  oj  Chrift  ? 

12.  We  have  now  taken  a curfory  view  of  the 
prefent  hate  of  mankind  in  all  parts  of  the  ha- 
bitable world,  and  feen  in  a general  way,  what 
is  their  real  condition,  both  with  regard  to  know- 
ledge and  virtue.  But  becaufe  this  is  not  fo 
pleafing  a picture,  as  human  pride  is  accuftom- 
ed  to  draw  : and  becaufe  thofe  who  are  prepoffieft 
with  high  notions  of  their  own  beauty,  will  not 
eafily  believe,  that  it  is  taken  from  the  life  ; 
I fhall  endeavour  to  place  it  in  another  viets, 
that  it  may  be  certainly  known,  whether  it  refem- 
bles  the  original.  I fhall  deftre  every  one  who 
is  willing  to  know  mankin’d,  to  begin  his  en- 
quiry at  home.  Firft,  let  him  furvey  himfelf  , 
and  then  go  on,  flep  by  ftgp,  among  his  neigh- 
bours. 


[ % ] 

I afk  then,  Hr  ft,  are  you  throughly  pieafcd 
with  yourfelf  ? Say  you,  who  is  not  ? Nay  I 
fay,  who  is  ? Do  you  obferve  nothing  in  your- 
felf which  you  diflike  ? Which  you  cannot  cor- 
dially approve  of?  Do  you  never  think  too  well 
of  yourfelf  ? Think  yourfelf  wifer,  better  and 
frronger,  than  you  appear  to  be  upon  the  proof  ? 
Is  not  this  pride?  And  do  you  approve  of  pride  ? 

* Was  you  never  angry  without  a caufe  ? 

Or  farther  than  that  caufe  required  ? Are  yon 
not  apt  to  be  fo  ? Do  you  approve  of  this  ? Do 
not  you  frequently  refolve  agai-nft  it  ? And  do 
'not  you  break  thofe  refolutiohs-ggain  and  again  ? 
Can  you  help  breaking  them  ? If  fo,  why  do 

you  not  ? Are  not  vou  prone  to  unreafonable 

de/ires,  either  of  p'leafure,  praife,  or  money  ? 
Do  not  you  catch  yourfelf  defiring  things  not 
worth  a defire  : and  other  things  more  than  they 
deferve  ? Are  all  yo>ur  defires  proportioned  to 
the  real,  intrinfic  value  ol  things  ? Do  not  you 
know  and  feel  the  contrary  ? Are  not  you  con- 
tinually liable  to foolifh  and  hurtful  de/ires?  And 
do  not  you  frequently  relapfe  into  them,  know- 
ing them  to  be  fuch  : knowing  that  they  have 
before  pierced  you  through  with  many  for  rows  ? 
Have  you  not  often  rcfolved  againll  thefe  de- 
fires ? And  as  often  broke  your  refolutions  ? 
Can  you  help  breaking  them  ? Do  fo : help  it 
■if  you  can : and  if  not,  own  your  hclplellneis. 

* Are  you  throughly  pleafcd  with  your  own 
life  ? Nikilne  vides  quod  nclis  ? Do  you  obferve 

nothing 


[ 70  ] 

nothing  there  which  you  diflike?  I prefume 
you  are  not  too  fevere  a judge  here.  Neverthe- 
lefs  I afk,  are  you  quite  fatisfied,  from  day  to 
day,  with  all  you  fay  or  do  ? Do  you  fay  no- 
thing, which  you  afterwards  wifh  you  had  not 
faid  ? Do  nothing,  which  you  wifh  you  had  not 
done  ? Do  you  never  fpeak  any  thing  contrary 
to  truth  or  love  ? Is  that  right  ? Let  your  own 
confcience  determine.  Do  you  never  do  any 
thing  contrary  to  juftice  or  mercy  ? Is  that  well 
done?  You  know  it  is  not.  Why  then  do  you 
not  amend?  Moves,  fed  ml  promoves.  You  re- 
folve  and  refolve,  and  do  juft  as  you  did  before. 

Your  wife  however  is  wifer  and  better  than 
you.  Nay,  perhaps  you  do  not  think  fo.  Pof- 
fibly  you  faid  once 

“ Thou  haf  vo  faults,  or  I no  faults  can  fpy  ; 

Thou  art  all  beauty,  or  all  blindnefs  IT 

But  you  do  not  fay  fo  now  : fhe  is  not  without 
faults:  and  you  can  fee  them  plain  enough.  You 
fee  more  faults  than  you  deftre,  both  in  her  tem- 
per and  behaviour.  And  yet  you  cannot  mend 
them  : and  fhe  either  cannot  or  will  not.  And 
flie  fays  the  very  fame  of  \ou. — Do  your  parents 
or  her’s  live  with  you  ? And  do  not  they  too 
exercifeyour  patience  ? Is  nothing  in  their  tem- 
per or  behaviour  that  gives  you  pain  ? Nothing 
which  you  wifh  to  have  altered  ? Are  you  a 
parent  yourfelf  ? Parents  in  general  are  not  apt 

to 


t 71  ] 

to  think  too  meanly  of  their  own  dear  offspring. 
And  probably  at  fometimes  you  admire  your’s 
more  than  enough  ; you  think  there  are  none 
fuch.  But  do  you  think  fo,  upon  cool  reflec- 
tion ? Is  the  behaviour  of  all  your  children,  of 
mod,  of  any  of  them,  juft  fuch  as  you  would 
defire  ? Toward  yourfelf,  toward  each  other, 
and  toward  all  men  ? Are  their  tempers  juft  fuch 
as  you  would  wifh  ; loving,  modeft,  mild  and 
teachable  ? Do  you  obferve  no  felf-will,  no  paf- 
fion,  no  ftubbornhefs,  no  ill-nature  or  furlinefs 
among  them  ? Did  you  not  obferve  more  or  lefs 
of  thefe  in  every  one  of  them,  before  they  were 
two  years  old  ? And  have  not  thofe  feeds  ever 
fince  grown  up  with  them,  till  they  have  brought 
forth  a plentiful  harveft  ? 

Your  fervants  or  prentices  are  probably  older 
than  your  children.  And  are  they  wifer  and  bet- 
ter ? Of  all  thofe  who  have  fucceeded  each 
other  for  twenty  years,  how  many  were  good 
fervants  ? How  many  of  them  did  their  work 
unto  the  Lord,  not  as  pie afing  man  but  God?  How 
many  did  the  fame  work,  and  in  as  exafl  a man- 
ner, behind  your  back  as  before  your  face  ? 
They  that  did  not  were  knaves  ; they  had  no 
religion;  they  had  no  morality.  Which  of  them 
ftudiedynwr  intereft  in  all  things,  juft  as  if  it  had 
been  his  own  ? I am  afraid,  as  long  as  you 
have  lived  in  the  world,  you  have  feen  few  of 
thefe  black  fwans  yet. 


Have 


[ 7^  3- 

Have  ycu  had  better  fuccefs  with  th t journey-, 
men  and  labourers , whom  you  occafionally  em* 
ploy  ? Will  they  do  the  fame  work  if  you  are  at 
a diftance,  which  they  do  while  you  are  hand- 
ing by  ? Can  you  depend  upon  their  ufing  you, 
as  they  would  you  fhould  ufe  them  ? And  will 
they  do  this,  not  fo  much  for  gain,  as  for  con- 
fcience  fake  ? Can  you  trull  them  as  to  the 
price  of  their  labour?  Will  they  never  charge 
more  than  it  is  fairly  worth  ? If  you  have  found 
a fet  of  fuch  workmen,  pray  do  not  conceal  fo 
valuable  a treafure;  but  immediately  advertife 
the  men  and  their  places  of  abode,  for  the  com- 
mon benefit  of  your  countrymen. 

Happy  you,  who  have  fuch  as  thefe  about 
your  houfe  ! And  are  your  neighbours  as  honell 
and  loving  as  they  ? They  who  live  either  in 
the  fame,  or  in  the  next  houfe:  do  thefe  love 
you  as  themfelves  ? And  do  to  you  in  every 
point,  as  they  would  have  you  do  to  them  ? Are 
they  guilty'  cf  no  Untrue  or  unkind  fayings, 
no  unfriendly  aclions  towards  you  ? And  are 
they  (as  far  as  you  fee  or  know)  in  all  other  re- 
fpedls,  reafonablc  and  religious  men  ? How  ma- 
ny of  your  neighbours  anlwer  this  chara£ler  ? 
Would  it  require  a large  houfe  to  contain  them? 

* But  you  have  intercourfe  not  with  the  next 
neighbours  only,  but  with  feveral  tradefmen. 
And  all  very  honell:  ate  thev  not?  You  may 
eafily  make  a trial.  Send  a child  or  a country- 
man  to  one  of  their  Ihops.  If  the  Ihop keeper 

is 


I 7 3 3 

is  an  hone  ft  n*ian,  he  will  take  no  advantage  of 
the  buyer’s  ignorance.  If  he  does,  he  is  no 
honefter  than  a thief.  And  how  many  tradef- 
men  do  you  know  who  would  fcruple  it. 

* Go  a little  farther.  Send  to  the  market 
for  what  you  want.  “ What  is  the  lowed:  price 
of  this?”  “ Five  {hillings,  Sir.”  “ Can  you 
take  no  lefs?”  “No,  upon  my  word.  It  is 
worth  it'every  penny.”  An  hour  after  he  fells 
it  for  a {hilling  lefs.  And  it  is  really  worth  no 
more.  Yet  is  not  this  the  courfe  (a  few  per- 
fons  excepted]  in  every  marked  throughout  the 
kingdom?  Is  it  not  generally,  though  not  al- 
ways, cheat  that  cheat  can  ? Sell  as  dear  as  you 
ean,  and  buy  as  cheap  ? And  what  ai'e  they  who 
fteer  by  this  rule  better  than  a company  of  New- 
gate-birds  ? Shake  them  all  together  ; for  there 
ts  not  a grain  of  honefty  among  them. 

But  are  not  your  own  tenants  at  leaft,  or  vour 
landlord , honeft  men  ? You  are  per  loaded  they 
are.  Very  good  : remember  then  an  honeft 
man’s  word  is  as  good  as  his  bond.  You  are 
preparing  a receipt  or  writing  for  a fum  of  mo- 
ney, which  you  are  going  to  pay  or  lend  to  this 
honeft  man.  Writing  ! What  need  of  that  ? 
You  do  not  fear  he  fhould  die  foon.  You  did 
oot  once  think  of  it.  But  you  do  not  care  to 
to  trufthim  without  it;  that  is,  you  are  not  fure 
hut  he  is  a rneer  knave.  What,  your  landlord  ? 
Who  is  a juftice  of  peace  l It  may  be  a judge  ; 
ray,  a member  of  parliament : poftibly  a peer 
Vou  XXL  D of 


[ 7i  ] 

of  the  realm ! And  cannot  you  trull;  this  ho- 
nourable (if  not  right  honourable)  man,  without 
a paltry  receipt  ? I do  not  a(k  whether  he  is  an 
whoremonger,  an  adulterer,  a blafphemer,  a 
proud,  a paflionate,  a revengeful  man.  This  it 
may  be  his  neareft  friends  will  allo.w : but  do 
you  fufpefl  his  honelty  too  ? 

13.  Such  is  the  Hate  of  the  Protejlant  Chrif- 
tians  in  England.  Such  their  virtue  from  the 
leaft  to  the  greatell,  if  you  take  an  impartial 
furvey  of  your  parents,  children,  fervants,  la- 
bourers, neighbours,  of  tradefmen,  gentry,  no- 
bility* Whart  then  can  we  exp  eft  from  Papijls? 
What  from  Jews,  Mahometans,  Heathens  ? 

And  it  may  be  remarked,  that  this  is  the  plain, 
glaring,  apparent  condition  of  humankind.  It 
ftrikes  the  eye  of  the  moll  carelefs,  inaccurate 
obferver,  who  does  not  trouble  himfelf  with 
any  more  then  their  outfide.  Now  it  is  certain 
the  generality  of  men  do  riot  wear  their  worll 
fide  outward.  Rather,  they  ftudy  to  appear 
better  than  they  are,  and  to  conceal  what  they 
can  of  their  faults.  What  a figure  then  would 
they  make,  were  we  able  to  touch  them  with 
Ithuriel’s  fpcar  ? What  a profpeft  would  there 
be,  could  we  anticipate  the  tranfaQions  of  the 
great  day  ? Could  we  bring  to  light  the  hidden 
things  of  darkne/s,  and  make  manijejl  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart  ? 

This  is  the  plain,  naked  fa£i,  without  any 
extenuation  on  the  one  hand  or  exaggeration  on 

the 


[ 75  ] 

the  other.  The  prefent  ftate  of  the  moral 
world  is  as  confpicuous  as  that  of  the  natural. 
Ovid  faid  no  more  concerning  both  near  2000 
years  fmce,  than  is  evidently  true  at  this  day. 
Of  the  natural  world  he  fays  (whether  this  took 
place  at  the  fall  of  man,  or  about  the  time  of 
the  deluge) 

Jupiter  antiqui  contraxit  temper  a vens, 

Perq;  hiemes , cejlufq',  13  inaquales  auiumnffs 
Et  breve  ver fpatiis  exegit  quatuor  annum. 

The 'God  of  nature,  and  her  fovereign  king, 
•Shorten’d  the  primitive  perennial  Tpring 
The  fpringgave  place,  nofooner  come  than  paff. 
To  fummer’s  heat,  and  winter  s chilling  blaft  ; 
And  autumn  lick,  irregular  and  uneven  : h 
While  the  fad  year  thro’  different  feafons'T 
driven  ( 

Obey’d 'the  Item  decree  of  angry  heaven.  J 

And  a man  tnayas  moaefily  deny,  ’that  fpring 
-and  fummer,  autumn  and  winter  fucceed  each- 
other,  as  deny  one  article  of  the  enftiing  account 
of  the  moral  world. 

Irrupit  veniz  py oris  in  avum- 
Omnenefas:  fugere  pudor,  verumq;  fidefq-. 

In  quorum  fubiere  locum  fraude/q;  doliq-, 
injidiaq\  13  vis,  & amor  Jceleratus  habendi  : 

•D  2 A 


C 76  ] 

A flood  of  general  wickednefs  broke  in 
At  once,  and  made  the  iron  age  begin : 

Virtue  and  truth  forfook  the  faithlefs  race, 

And  fraud  and  wrong  fucceeded  in  their  place* 
Deceit  and  violence,  the  dire  third;  of  gold, 

Luft  to  poffefs,  and  rage  to  have  and  hold. 

What  country  is  there  now  upon  earth,  in  Europe, 
Aha,  Africa  or  America,  be  the  inhabitants 
Pagans,  Turks  or  Chriffians,  concerning  which 
we  may  not  fay, 

Vivitur  ex  rapio : non  hofpes  ab  hofpite  tutus  : 
Filins  ante  diem  patrios  hnquirit  in  annos, 

Vitta  jaccl  pietas  ; 03  virgo  cade  madentes 
Ultima  cadtjlum  terras  ajlrcea  rediquit. 

They  live  by  rapine.  The  unwary  gueft 
Is  poifon’d  at  the  inhofpitable  feaft. 

The  fon,  impatient  for  his  father’s  death. 
Numbers  his  years,  and  longs  to  flop  his  breath ; 
Extinguifh’d  all  regard  for  God  and  man  : 

And  judice,  laft  of  the  celeflial  train, 

Spurns  tire  earth  drench’d  in  blood,  and  flies  to 
heaven  again. 

14.  Univerfal  mifery  is  at  once  a confequence 
and  a proof  of  this  univerfal  corruption.  Men 
are  unhappy,  (how  very  few  are  the  exception 
becaufe  thy  are  unholy.  Culpum  pxna  premit 
comes.  Pain  accompanies  and  follows  fin.  Why 
is  the  earth  fo  full  of  complicated  diflrefs  P Be- 
caufe 


L 77  ] 

caufe  it  is  full  of  complicated  wickednefs.  Why 
are  not  you  happy  ? Other  circumftances  may 
concur  : but  the  main  reafon  is,  becaufe  you  are 
not  holy.  It  is  impoffible  in  the  nature  of 
things,  that  wickednefs  can  confift  with  happi- 
nefs.  A Roman  Heathen  tells  the  Englifh  Hea- 
thens, Nemo  malus  felix:  no  vicious  man  is  hap- 
py. And  if  you  are  not  guilty  cl  any  grofs  out- 
ward vice,  yet  you  have  vicious  tempers  : and  as 
long  as  thefe  have  power  in  your  heart,  true 
peace  has  no  place.  You  are  proud;  you  think 
too  highly  of  yourfelf.  You  are  pafhonate ; 
often  angryr  without  reafon.  You  are  fell-willed  j 
you  would  have  your  own  will,  your  own  way 
in  every  thing  ; that  is  plainly,  you  would  rule 
over  God  and  man  ; you  would  be  the  governor 
of  the  world.  You  are  daily  liable  to  unreafona- 
ble  defires ; fome  things  you  defire  that  are  no 
way  defirable  : others  which  ought  to  be  avoid- 
ed, yrea  abhorred,  at  leaft  as  they  are  now  circum- 
ftanced.  And  can  a proud  or  a pafhonate  man 
be  happy'?  Oh  no : -experience  {hews  it  impof- 
fible. Can  a man  be  happy,  who  is  full  of  felf- 
will  ? Not  unlefs  he  can  dethrone  the  moll  High. 
Can  a man  of  unreafonable  defires  be  happy  ? 
Nay,  they  pierce  him  through  with  many  Jorrczus. 

I have  not  touch’d  upon  envy,  malice,  revenge, 
covetoufnefs,  and  other  grofs  vices.  Concern- 
ing  thefe  it  is  univerfally  agreed,  by  all  thinking 
men,  Chriftian  or  Heathen,  that  a man  can  no 
more  be  happy,  while,  they  lodge  in  his  bofom, 

D 3 than 


[ 7«  3 


than  if  a vulture  was  gnawing  his  liver.  It  is  fnp- 
pofed  indeed,,  that  a very  fmall  part  of  mankind,, 
only  the  vileft  of  men  are  liable  to  thefe.  I know 
not  that:  but  certainly  thisds  not  the  cafe  with 
regard  to  pride,  anger,  felf-wifl,  foolifh  defires. 
Thofe  who  are  not  accounted,  bad  merr,  arc  by 
no  meansfr-se  from  thefe.  And  this  alone,  (were 
they  liable  t©  no  other  pain)  would  prevent  the 
generality  of  men,  rich  and  poor,  learned  and 
unlearned,  from  ever  knowing  what  happinefc 
means. 

ip.  You  think  however  yon  could  bear  your- 
felf  pretty  well  ,-but  you  have  fuch  an  hufhand,  or 
wife,  fuch  parents  and  children  as  are  intolera* 
ble ! One  has  fuclx  a tongue,  the  other  fo  per- 
vade a temper  f The  language  of  thefe,  the  car- 
riage of  thofe,  is  fo  provoking  !'  Otherwife  s ou 
fhould  be  happy  enough.  True,  if  both  you 
and  they  were  wife  and  virtuous.  Mean-while, 
neither  the  vices  of  your  family,  nor  your  own 
will  fiiffer  vou  to-reft.. 

Look  out  of  your  own  doors : is  there  any 
evil  in  the  city , and  fin  hath  net  done  ii  ? Is  there 
any  misfortune  or  miferv  to  to  be  named,  where- 
of it  is  not  either  the  direft  or  remote  occafion  ? 
Why  is  it  that  the Jritnd  or  relation  for  whom 
you  are  fo  tenderly  concerned,  is  involved  in  fo 
many  troubles  ? Have  not  you  done  your  part  to- 
ward making  them  happy  ? Yes,  but  they  wilF 
notdo  their  own  : one  has  no  management,  no  fru- 
gality, or  no  induftry.  Another  is  too  fond  <af 

pLeafures. 


[ 79-  ] 

pleafure.  If  he  is  not  what  is  called  fcarrdaloufiy 
vicious,  he  loves  wine,  women  or  gaming.  And-' 
to  what  does  all  this  amount  ? He  might  be  hap- 
py ; but  fin  will  not  fuffer  it. 

Perhaps  you  will  fay,  nay,  he  is  not  in  fault, 
he  is  both  frugal  and  diligent.  But  he  has  fal- 
len into  the  hands  of  thofe,  who  haveirapofed 
upon  his  good-nature.  Very. well;  but.ftill-fin 
is  the  caufe  of  his  misfortunes.  Only  it  is  an- 
other's, not  his  own. 

* If  you  enquire  into  the  troubles  under  which 
your  neighbour,  your  acquaintance,  or  one  yorr 
cafually  talk  with,  labours,  Hill  you  will  find  the 
far  greater  part  of  them  arife,  from  feme  fault 
either  of  the  fufferer  or  of  others.  So  that  ftili 
fin  is  at  the  root  of  trouble,  and  it  is  unholinefs 
which  caufesunhappinefs. 

And.  this  holds  as  well  with  regard  to  families, 
as  with  regard  to  individuals.  Many  families  are 
miferable  through  want.  They  have  not  the  con- 
veniences, if  the  necelfavies  of  life.  Why  have 
they  not  ? Becaufe  they  will  not  work  : were 
they  diligent  they  would  want  nothing.  Or  if 
not  idle,  they  are  waileful : they  fquander  away 
in  a fhort  time,  what  might  have  ferved  lor  many 
years.  Others  indeed  are  diligent  and  frugal  too  ; 
but  a treacherous  friend,  or  a malicious  enemy 
has  ruined  them  : or  they  groan  under  the  hand 
of  the  oppreffor  r or  the  extortioner  has  entered 
into  their  labours.  You  fee  then,  in  all  thefe 
cafes,  want,  (though  in  various  ways)  is  the  ef- 
D 4 fe& 


left  of  fin.  But  is  there  no  rich  man  near  ? 
None  that  could  relieve  thefe  innocent  fufferers, 
without  impairing  his  own  fortune  ? Yes,  but 
he  thinks  of  nothing  !efs.  They  may  rot  and 
perifh  for  him.  See,  more  fin  is  implied  in 
their  fuffering. 

* But  is  not  the  family  of  that  rich  man  him- 
felf  happy  ? No  ,*  far  from  it : perhaps  farther 
than  his  poor  neighbours.  For  they  are  not  con- 
tent : their  eye  is  not  Satisfied  until  feeing,  nor 
their  ear  with  hearing.  Endeavouring  to  fill 
their  fouls  with  the  pleafures  of  fenfe  and  imagi- 
nation, they  are  only  pouring  water  into  a fieve. 
Js  not  this  the  cafe  with  tire  wealthref!  families 
you  know  ? But  it  is  not  the  whole  cafe  with 
fome  of  them.  There  is  a debauched,  a jealous, 
or  an  ill-naiurecf'  hufband : a gaming,  paflionate, 
or  imperious  wife  : an  undutiful  fon,  or  an  im- 
prudent daughter,  who  banifhes  happinefs  from 
the  houfe.  And  what  is  all  this,  but  fin  in  vari- 
ous fhapes,  with  its  fure  attendant  mifery  P 

In  a town,  a corporation,  a city,  a kingdom, 
is  it  not  the  fame  thing  ftill  ? From  whence 
comes  the  complication  of  all  the  miferies  inci- 
dent to  human  nature,  war  ? Is  it  not  from  the 
tempers  which  war  in  the  foul  ? When  nation 
rifes  up  againft  nation,  and  kingdom  againft  king- 
dom, doe$  it  not  necefTarily  imply  pride,  ambi- 
tion, coveting  what  is  another’s,  or  envy,  or 
malice,  or  revenge,  on  one  fide,  if  not  on  both  ? 
Still  then  fin  is  the  baleful  fource  of  affliftion. 

ArA 


r 81  3 


And  confequently  the  flood  of  miferies,  which 
covers  the  face  of  the  earth,  which  overwhelms 
not  only  Angle  perfons,  but  whole  families, 
towns,  cities,  kingdoms,  is  a demonftrative 
proof  of  the  overflowing  of  ungodlinefs,  in  every 
nation  under  heaven. 


PART  IT. 

The  fcripturai  method  of  accounting  for  tins 
defended, 

hi-  r I 1 H E fa£t  then  being  undeniable, ' 1- 
would  alk.  How  it  is  to  be  account- 
ed for?  Will  you  refolve  it  into  the  prevalence 
of  cufiomr  and  fay,  “ Men  are  guided  more  by 
example  than  reafon?”  It  is  true.  They  run 
after  one  another,  like  a flock  of  fheep  (as  Sene- 
ca remarked  long  ago)  non  qua  eund'um  ejl,  fed 
qua  itur : Not  where  they  ought  to  go , but  where 
others  go.  But  I gain  no  ground  by  this  : lam 
equally  at  a lofs  to  account  for  this  cufo'm, 

* How  is  it  (feeing  men  are  reafonable  creatures, 
and  nothing  is  fo  agreeable  to  reafoii  as  virtue) 
that  the  cuftom  of  all  ages  and  nations,  is  noton 
the  fide  of  virtue  rather  than -vice?  If  you  fay, 
This  is  owing  to  bad  education,  which  prepagatfe 
ill  c'uftoms.  I own,  education  has  air  amazing 
5,.  force, 


[ 82  ] 

force,  far  beyond  what  is  commonly  imagined. 
I own  too,  that  as  bad  education  is  found  among 
Chriftians,  as  ever  obtained  among  the  Heathens. 
But  I am  no  nearer  ftill : I am  not  advanced  ail 
hair’s  breadth  toward  the  eonclufion.  For  how 
am  I to  account  for  the  almoft  univerfal  preva- 
lence of  this  bad  education?  I want  to  know, 
when  this. prevailed  firft,  and  how  it  came  to  pre- 
vail? How  came  wife  and  good  men  (Tor  fucR 
they  muff  have  been  before  bad  education  com- 
menced) not  to  train  up  their  children  in  wifdorn 
and  goodnefs  ? In  the  way  wherein  they  had 
been  brought  up  themfelves  ? They  had  then 
no  ill  precedent  before  them:  How  came  they 
to  make  fuch  a precedent  ? And  how  came  all 
the  wifdorn  of  after  ages,  never  to  correft  that 
precedent?  You.  mud  fuppofe  it  to  have  been  of 
antient  date.  Prophane  hiftory  gives  us  a large 
account  of, univerfal  wickednefs,.  that  is,  univer- 
fal bad  education , for  above  two  thoufand  years 
laft  part.  Sacred  hiftory  adds  the  account  of 
above  two  thoufand  more : In  the.  very  begin- 
ning of  which  (more  than  four  thoufand  years 
ago)  all  flejh  had  corrupted  their  ways  before  the 
Lord!  Or,  to  fpeak  agreeably  to  this  hypothefis, 
were  very  corruptly  educated.  Now  how  is 
this  to  be  accounted  for,  that  in  fo  long  a tra£i 
©f  time,  no  one  nation  under  the  fun,  has  been 
able,  by  wholefome  laws  or  by  any  other  method 
to  remove  this  grievous  evil  ? So  that  their  chil- 
dren 


[ 83  ] 

dren  being  well  educated , the  fcale  might  at 
length, — turnon  the  fide  of  reafon  and  virtue? 

Thefe  are  queftions  which  I conceive  will  not 
eafily  be  anfwered,  to  the  fatisfablion  of  any  im- 
partial enquirer.  But  to  bring  the  matter  to  a 
fhort  illue.  The  firft  parents  who  educated  their 
children  in  vice  and  follv,  either  were  wife  and 
virtuous  themfelves,  or  were  not.  If  they  were 
not,  their  vice  did  not  proceed  from  education: 
So  the  fuppofition  falls  to  the  ground  : Wicked- 
nefs  was  antecedent  to  bad  education.  If  they 
were  wife  and  virtuous.  It  cannot  be  fuppofed, 
but  they  would  teach  their  children  to  tread  in 
the  fame  Heps.  In  no  wife  therefore  can  we  ac- 
count for  the  prefent  Hate  of  mankind  from  ex- 
ample or  education. 

2.  Let  us  then  have  recourfe  to  the  oracle? 
of  God.  How  do  they  teach  us  to  account-for 
this  faff,  That  all JleJh  corrupted  their  way  before 
God,  even  in  the  antediluvian  world?  That  man- 
kind was  little,  if  af  all,  Iefs  corrupt,  from  the 
flood  to  the  giving  of  the  law  by  Mofes  : That 
from  that  time  till  Chrift  camev  even  God's  cho~ 
fen  people  were  a fiithlefs  and  f'ubborn  genera- 
tion, little  better,  though?  certainly  not  worfe 
than  the  Heathens  who  knew  . not  God  : That 
when  Chrilf  came;  both,  fetes  and  Gentiles  were 
all  .under  fin;  all  the  world  was  ginlty  before 
God:  That  even  after  the  gofpet  had  been 
preached  In  all  nations,  ft  ill  the  wife  and  virtn- 
stus  were  a little  fsck ; bearing  fo  Imall  a proper- 
B6  tiers. 


[ 84  ] 

tion  to  the  bulk  of  mankind,  that  it  might  vet 
be  faid,  The  whole  world  lietk  in  zeickednefs : 
That  from  that  time  the  mxjlery  of  iniquity 
wrought  even  in  the  church,  till  the  Chriftians 
were  little  better  than  the  Heathens:  Andlafllv, 
That  at  this  day  the  whole  world , whether  Pa- 
gan, Mahometan,  or  nominally  Chriftian,  'lit- 
tle indeed  is  the  flock  which  is  to  be  excepted  f) 
again  lieth  in  wickednefs  ; doth  not  know  the  only 
true  God;  doth  not  love,  doth  not  worfhip  him 
as  God  ; hath  not  the  mind  which  was  in  Chrijl, 
neither  walkelh  as  he  walked ; doth  not  praftife 
juftice,  mercy,  and  truth,  nor  do  to  others  as 
they  would  others  fhould  do  to  them  : How,  I 
fay,  do  the  oracles  of  God  teach  us  to  account 
for  this  plain  fa£l  ? 

3.  * They  teach  us.  That  in  + Adam  all  die: 
That  by  the  firjl  man  came  both  natural  and  fpi- 
ritual  death  : That  + by  this  one  man  Jin  entered 
into  the  zqorldt  and  death  in  confequencfe  o [fin  : 
And  that  from  him  death  paffed  upon  all  men , in 
that  all  have Jinned. 

Bat  you  aver,  jj  That  “ no  evil  but  temporal 
death  came  upon  men  in  confequence  of  Adam  s 
fin.”  And  this  you  endeavour  to  prove  by  con- 
fidering  the  chief  feriptures  which  are  fuppofed 
to  relate  thereto. 

Tire 

1 Cor.  xv.  22*  compared  with  Ges.  h.  and  lii. 

+ Rom.  v.^12. 

i|  Dr.  TayloK  Doftrine  of  Original  Sin.  Fart  I.  to  whom.  I 
addrefs  myfclf  in  whgt  follows.  What  is  quoted  irom  him,  ge- 
aeraHy  in  his  own  woids,  is  inclofed  in  commas  “ ’ • 


[ §5  7 

The  firft  you  mention  is  Gen.  ii.  17.  But  of 
the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  thou 
Jhalt  not  eat  of  it : For  in  the  day  that  thou  eatejl 
thereof  thou  Jhalt  firely  die . 

On  this  you  obferve  : “ Death  was  to  be  the 
confequence  of  his-  difobedience.  And  the  deatk 
here  threatened  can  be  oppofed  only  to  that  life 
God  gave  Adam  when  he  created  him.”§  True: 
But  how  are  you  affined,  that  God  when  he 
created  him,  did  not  give  him  fpiritual  as  well 
as  animal  life  ? Now  fpiritual  death  is  oppofed  to 
fpiritual  life.  And  this  is  more  than  the  deatk 
of  the  body. 

“ But  this  is  pure  conjefture,  without  a folid- 
foundation.  For  no  other  life  is  fpoken  of  be- 
fore.’’ Yes  there  is.  The  image  of  God  is  fpo- 
ken of  before.  This  is  not  therefore  pure  con- 
jecture ; but  is  grounded  upon  a- folid  foundation, 
upon  the  plain  word- of  God; 

Allowing  then,  that  “ Adam  could  underhand 
it  of  no  other  hje  than  that  which  he  had  newly 
received yet  would  he  naturally  underhand  it 
of  the  life  of  God  in  his  foul,  as  well  as  of  the  life 
of  his  kod\. 

“ In  this  light  therefore-  the  fenfe  of  the 
threatening  will  hand  thus.;  Thou fialtftrely  die-, 
as  if  he  had  faid,  I have  t formed  thee  of  the  dufl 
of  the  ground , and  breathed  into  thy  nojlrils  the 
breath  of  lives  f both  of  animal  life  and  o Ifpiri- 
tual  life ; and  in  both  refpecls  thou  art  become  a 

5 P-  7- 


living- 


• 7 ■ I iiii  d edilion,  p.  3, 


T- 

J 


r 

living-foul.  “ Bat  if  thou  eated  of  the  forbid- 
den tree,  thou  (halt  ceafe  to  be  a living  foul. 
For  I will  take  from  thee”  the  lives  I have 
given,  and  thou  {halt  die  fpirituallv,  temporally 
eternally. 

But  “ here  is  not  one  word  relating  to  Adam’s, 
pofterity.  Though  it  be  true,  if  he  had  died 
immediately  upon  his-  tranfgreflion,  all  his  pode- 
rlty  mud  have  been  e.xtindt  with  him.”  It  is 
true : yet  “ not  one  word”  of  it  is  exptef. 
Therefore  other  confequences  ol  his  fin  may  be. 
equally  imp  lied,  though  they  are  no  more  e.xprefl 
than  this. 

4.  The  fecond  feripture  you  cife  is  Gen.  iii. 
from  the  7th  to  the  24th  verfe.h 

On  this  you  obferve,  HeFe,  “ we  have  feme 
confequences  of  our  find  parents  fin  before  God 
judged  • them : Some  appointed  by  his  judicial 
fentencc;  and  fome  which  happened  after  that 
fentence  was  pronounced,  f 

“ Immediately  upo-n  their  tranfgreflion,  they 
were  feized  with  fhameand  fear.  Guilt  will  al- 
wavs  be  attended  with  fhame;  And  a date  of 
guilt  is  often  in  feripture  expred  by  being  naked _ 
Exod.  xxxii.  25.  Moles- jaw  that  the  people  mere 
naked,  for  Aaron  had  made  them  naked  to  their 
fhame  among  their  enemies Certainly  naked 
does  not  mean  guilty  here ; but  eitheF  drrpt  of 
their  ornaments  (C.  xxxiii.  5,  6.)  or  of  their 
ikords,  or  their  uppergarment.  “ IfaL  xlvii.  3- 

Ihy 


+ p.  9,  10. 


t P-  w. 


r Sr  1 

[)  Thy  naked ndfs Jhall  be  uncovered,  yea,,  thy  Jhams 
Jhall be JeenJ’  Here  alfo- nakednefs  does  not  mean 
guilt;  but  is  to  be  taken  literally,  as  manifeflly 
appears,  from  the  words  immediately  preceeding, 
V.  2.  Make  bare  the  leg,  uncover  the  thigh , pafs 
over  the  rivers.-  “ And- Rev.  xvi.  ig.  BUffed  is 
he  that  watcheth  and  keepeth  his  garments,  lejl  he 
walk  naked  and  they  Jet  his- JiameT  1 he  plain 
meaning  is,  left  he  lofe  the  graces  he  has  receiv- 
ed, and  fo  be  afhamed  before  men  and  angels. 

“ Their  fear  is  deferibed  v.-8.  Adam  and  his 
wje  hid  themfelvesfrom  the  prtjence  oj  the  Lord 
Gocl  among  the  trees  of  the  garden - They  had  no 
fuch  fear-  >vhile  they  were  innocent:  But  now* 
they  were  afraid  to  ftand  before  their,  judged’^ 
This  is  all  you; can  aifeern  in  the-MoIaic  ac- 
count as  the  confeqnence  of  our  firft  parents  fin>r. 
before  God  judged  them.  Mr.  Hervey  difeerns 
fomething  more..  I make  no  apology  for  trans- 
cribing fome  of  his  words-.  + 

“ Adam  violated  the  precept,,  and  a&  the  ner- 
vous original  expreiTes  it,  died  the  death.  He. 
before  poffeft  a life  incomparably  more  excellent 
than  that  which  the  hearts-  enjoy..  He  poffefted  a 
divine  life,  confifting,  according  to  the  apoftle,  m 
knowledge,  in  nghteoufnefs,  andtrue  hohnefs.  d his 
which  was  the  diftinguifhing  glory  of  his  nature, 
in  the  clay  that  he  eat  the  forbidden  fruit,  was  ex- 
tin£L 

* “ His  nnderftandrng,  originally  enlightened 

witk 

S'P»  1S^  §p>i3;>  t Theron-and  ATpafio, 


[ 88  ] 

with  wifiom,  was  clouded  with  ignorance.  His 
heart,  once  tvarmed  with  heavenly  love,  be- 
came alienated from  God  his  maker.  His  padi- 
ons  and  appetites,  rational  and  regular  before, 
fhook  off  the  government  of  order  and  reafon. 
In  a word,  the  whole  moral  frame  was  unhinged, 
disjointed,  broken. 

“ The  ignorance  of  fallen  Adam  was  palpable. 
Witnefs  that  ablurd  attempt,  to  Jude  himfelf  from 
the  eye  ot  omni /Hence,  among  the  trees  of  the 
garden.  His  averlion  to  the  all-gracious  God 
was  equally  plain.  Othenvife  he  would  never 
have  fled  from  his  Maker,  but  rather  have 
'halted  on  the  wings  of  defire,  into  the  place  of  the 
divine  manifedation. 

“ * A 11  range  variety  of  diforderly  pajfions  were 
evidently  predominant  in  his  bread.  Vnat ; for 
he  refutes  to  acknowledge  his  guilt,  though  he 
cannot  but  own  the  fafcr.  Ingratitude-,  for  he  ob- 
liquely upbraids  the  Creator  with  his  gift,  as 
though  it  had  been  a fnafe  rather  than  a blefling; 
The  woman  thou  gavejl  me.  The  female  criminal 
a61s  the  fame  wnhnmbled  pan.  She  neither  takes 
fhame  to  herfelf,  nor  gives  glory  to  God,  nor  puts 
up  a Tingle  petition  for  pardon. 

* “ As  all  thefe  difaders  enfued,  upon  the 
breach  of  the  commandment,,  they  furnifh  us  with 
the  bed  key,  to  open  the  meaning  of  the  penaltv 
annexed.  They  proven  beyond  any  argument. 
That  fpiruiual  death  and  all  its  confequences 
were  comprized  in  the  extent  ofthe  threatning.' 

5.  However 


r 

L 


% ] 

5.  However  “ no  other  could  in  juftice  be  pu- 
nifhable  for  that  tranfgreffion,  which  was  their 
own  aft  and  deed  only.”  If  no  other  was  juflJy 
punijhable,  then  no  other  was  punifhed  for  that 
tranfgreffion.  But  allwer e punifhed  for  that  tranf- 
greffion, namely,  with  death.  Therefore  all 
men  were  juftly  punijhable  for  it. 

By  punishment  I mean,  fuffynng  confequent 
upon  fin,  or  pain  inflicted  becaufeof  fin  preceding* 
Now  it  is  plain  all  mankind  fuffer  death  ; and 
that  this  fuffer  in g is  confequent  upon  Adam’s fin . 
Yea,  and  that  this  pain  is  inflifted  on  all  men, 
becaufe  of  his  fin.  When  therefore  you  fay,. 
“ Death  does  + defcend  to  us,  in  confeqtience  of  his 
tranfgreffion  you  allow  the  point  we  contend 
for  ; and  are  very  welcome  to-  add,  “ Yet  it  is 
not  a punifiment  for  his  fin.”  You  allow  the  thing. 
Call  it  by  what  name  you  pleafe. 

But  “ punifiment  X always  connotes  guilt.™ 
It  always  connotes  fin  and fuffering , arid  here 
are  both.  Adam  finned  : his  poflerity  fuffer : 
and  that,  in  confequence  of  his  fin. 

But  “ fuf  'erings  are  benfts  to  us.”  Doubtlefs, 
but  this  does  not  hinder  their  being puniffiments. 
The  pain  I fuffer  as  a punifiment for  my  own  fins, 
may  be  a benefl  to  me,  but  it  is  a punifiment  ne- 
verthelefs. 

But  “ as  they  § two  only  were  guilty  of  the  firft 
fin,  fo  no  other  but  they  two  only,  could  be  con- 
fciou&ofktzr  their  fin.”  No  otheryould  be  confci- 

oys 


tp.2Q.  }p.21.  § p.  14. 


[ 9®  ] 

Qus  of  it  as  their  fin,  in  the  fame  fenfe  ar  Adam 
and  Eve  were  : and.  yet  others  may  “ charge 
it  upon  themfelv.es; : in  a different  fenfe,  fo  as  to 
judge  themfeives-  children  oj  wrath  on  that  ac- 
count. 

* To  fura  up  this  point  in  Dr.  Jenning's 
words:  “ If  there  be  any  thing  in  this  argument 
that  Adam's  pofterity  could  not  be  juftly  punith- 
.able  for  his  tranfgreflion.becaufe  it.was.his  perfenal 
a£f  and  not  theirs  : it  mult  prove  univerfally 
that  it  is  unjuft,  to  punifh  the  pofterity  of  any 
man  for  Iris  perfonal  crimes.  And  yet  moft  cer- 
tain it  is,  that  God  has  in  other  cafes  actually 
p.unifhed  mens  fins  on  their  pofterity.  Thus 
the  pofterity  of  Canaan,  the  foil  of  Ham,  is 
punifhed  with  flaveiy,  for  his  ||  fin.  Noah  pro- 
nounced the  curfe  under  a divine  afflatus,  and 
God  confirmed  it  by  his  providence.  So  we  do 
in  fafl  fuffer,  for  Adam's  fin„  and  that  too  by 
the  fentence  inflifled  on  our  firft  parents-  We 
fuffer  death  in  confequence  of  their  tranfgref- 
fion.  Therefore  we  are,  in  foine  fenfe,.  guilty  of 
their  fin-  I would  alk.  What  is  guilt,  but  an  ob- 
ligation to  fuffer  punifhment  for  fin  P Now  fince 
we  fuffer  the  fame  penal  evil,  which  God  threat- 
ened to,  and  inflifled  on  Adam  for  his  fin,  and 
fince  it  is  allowed  we  fuffer  this  for  Adam's  fin, 
and  that  by  the  fentence  of  God,  appointingali 
men  to  die,  becaufe  Adam  finned  : is  not  the- 

confequencftt 


ti  Gen.  ix.  25,  ar. 


C 9*  J 

'eonfequence  evident  ? Therefore  we  are  all  fonxsr 
wav  guilty  of  Adam's  fin.  A) 

6.  “ The  confequences  + appointed  by  the 
judicial  fentence  of  God  are  found’. in  that  pro- 
nounced on  the  ferpant,.  or  the  woman,  or  the 
man, 

“ Tire  ferpent  is  curbed,  v.  14,  15.  And' 
thofe  words  in  the  25th  verfe,  I will  put  enmiy 
between  thee  and  the  woman , and  betioeen  thy  feed 
and- her  Jeed  : He  (To  the  hebrew  ) fiall  bruif  tliy 
head,  and  thou  jhalt  bruife  his  heel ; imply,  that 
God  would  appoint  his  onLy-begotten.  fon,  to 
maintain  a kingdom  in  the  world  oppofite  to  the 
kingdom  of  Satan,  till  he  Ihould  be  born  of  a 
woman,  and  by  his  doftrine,  example,,  obedi- 
ence and  death,  give  the  lad  ftroke,  by  the 
way  of  2noral  means,  to  the  power  and  works  of 
the  J devil” 

I do  not  underdand  that  expreffion,  “ By  the 
way  of  moral  means.”  What  I' underdand  from 
the  whole  tenor  of  fcripture  is,  that  the  eternal, 
almighty  fon  of  God,  who  is,  over  all,  God  bl 'ejfed 
for  ever,  having  reconciled  us  to  God  by  his 
blood,  createams  anew  by  his  fpirit,  and  reigns 
till  he  hath  dedroyed  all  the  works  of  the  devil. 

“ Sentence  is  pad  upon  the  woman,  v.  1 6» 
that  die  diould  bring  forth  children  with  more 
pain  and  hazard,  than  otherwife  fhe  would  have 
done.  ” ||  How  ? With  more  pain  and  hazard 
than  otherwife  fire  would  have  done  ! Would 

fhe 

§;  Vindication  of  life  doftrine  of  original  fin.  f p.  15.  1 p.  .if*. 

1P-!?r 


f 9»  ] 

n>c  otherwife  had  any  pain  at  all  ? Or  have 
brought  forth  children  with  any  hazard  ? Hazard 
of  what  ? Certainly,  not  of  death.  I cannot  com- 
prehend this. 

“ Lailly,  the  .fentence  upon  the  man,  v.  17, 
18,  lg,  firft  affefls  the  earth,  and  then  de- 
nounces death  upon  himfelf.” 

“ After  fentence  t pronounced,  God  having 
clothed  Adam  and  Eve,  drove  them  out  of  para- 
dife.” 

Here  “ obferve  1.  a curfe  is  pronounced  p 
on  the  ferpent  and  on  the  ground  ; but  no  curfe 
upon  the  woman  and  the  man.”  But  a curfe  fell 
upon  them  in  that  very  moment,  wherein  they 
tranfgrelfcd  the  law  of  God.  For  ciirjed is  every 
one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  which  are  con- 
tained in  the  law  to  do  them.  Vainly  therefore  do 
you  fubjoin,  “ Tho’  they  are  fubjecied  to  bor- 
row, labour  and  death,  thefe  are  not  infliHed 
under  the  notion  of  a curfe.”  Surelv  they  are  ; ' 
as  the  feveral  branches  of  that  curfe,  which  he 
had  already  incurred.  And  which  had  already 
not  only  “ darkened  and  weakened  his  rational 
powers.”  but  difordered  his  whole  foul. 

“ Obferve  2,  here  is  not  one  word  of  any 
other  death,  but  the  di/Tolution  of  the  body.” 
Nor  was  it  needful.  He  felt  in  himfelf  that  fpi- 
ritual  death,  which  is  the  prelude  of  death  ever - 
lafling.  <‘‘  But  the  words,  Duji  thou  art,  and  un- 
to dujl  thou  Jhalt  return,  reftrain  this  death  to 

this 


+ p.  18.  $ p.  19. 


[ 93  ] 

this  diffohition  + alone.  This  diffolution  alone” 
is  exprejl  in  thofe  words.  But  how  does  it  ap- 
pear, that  nothing  more  is  implied?  The  direft 
contrary  appears  from  your  own  affertions.  For 
h thefe  words  refer  clearly  to  thofe,  And  the  Lord 
i God  formed  man  out  of  the  dufl  of  the  ground,  and 
breathed  into  his  noflrils  the  breath  of  lives  and 
if  “ the  judicial  aft  of  condemnation  clearly  im* 
plieth,  the  depriving  him  of  that  life  which  God 
then  breathed  into  him  f ! it  undeniably  follows, 
that  this  judicial  aft  impliefh  a deprivation  of 
Jpinjual  life  as  well  as  temporal:  feeing  God 
breathed  into  him  both  one  and  the  other,  in  or- 
der to  his  becoming  a living  foul. 

It  remains,  that  the  death  cxprf  in  the  original 
threatning  and  implied  in  the  {entente  pronounc- 
ed upon  man,  includes  all  evils  which  could  be- 
fal  his  foul  and  bo dvr : death  temporal,  fpiritual, 
and  eternal. 

7.  You  next  cite  t 1 Cor.  xV.  21,  22.  Since 
by  man  came  death , by  man  came  aljo  the  refur- 
retlion  of  the  dead.  For  as  in  Adam  all  die,  even 
fo  in  Chri.fl  Jhall  all  be  made  alive. 

On  this  you  obferve  1.  ||  “ The  apoille  is  in 
this  chapter  proving  and  explaining  the  refurrec- 
tion.  It  is  this  faff  or  event,  and  no  other,  which 
he  here  affirms  and  demonftrates.'’ 

If  you  mean,  “ The  refurr  eflion  of  the  body  to 
that  life  which  it  enjoyed  in  this  world,  is  the  only 
thing  which  the  apoffle  fpeaks  of  in  this  chapter,” 

your 

+ P*  20.  % p.  2ST.  11  p.  23. 


[ 94  ] 

your  aflertion  is  palpably  falfe.  For  he  fpeaks 
therein  of  that  glorious  lift  both  of  foul  and  body, 
which  is  not,  cannot  be  enjoyed  in  this  world. 

Youobferve  2.“  It  is  undeniable,  that  all  man- 
kind die  in  Adam , all -axe  mortal,  in  confequence 
of  his  § fin.”  3,  “ It  is  equally  clear,  that  by 
'Chrijl  came  the  refur reftion  of  the  dead : that  in 
Chrijl  all  who  die  in  Adam,  that  is,  all  mankind 
are  made  alive."  It  is  neither  dear  nor  true,  that 
St.  Paul  affirms  this,  in  either  of  the  texts  before 
ns.  For  in  this  whole  chapter  he  fpeaks  only  of 
the  refurreftion  of  the  juft,  of  them  that  are 
Chrift’s,  v.  23.  So  that  from  hence  it  cannot  be 
inferred  at  all,  that  all  mankind  will  be  made 
alive.  Admitting  then,  “ That  the  re/urreccion 
of  the  dead  and  being  made  alive , are  expreffions 
of  the  fame  fignification,”  this  proves  nothing ; 
lince  the  apoftle  affirms  neither  xme  nor  the 
other,  of  any  but  thofe  who  are  fallen  afleep  in 
Chrijl , v.  18.  It  is  of  thefe  only  that  he  here 
allerts,  their  death  Came  by  the  firft,  their  refur- 
reftion , b\  the  fecund  Adam:  or,  that  in  Adam 
they  all  died  ; in  Chrijl  they  ali  are  made  alive. 
Whatever  life  they  all  loft  by  means  of  Adam, 
they  all  recover  by  means  of  Chrift. 

“ From  t this  place  we  cannot  conclude,  that 
any  death  came  upon  mankind  in  confequence 
of  Adam’s  fin  befide  that  death  from  which  man- 
kind (hall  be  delivered  at  the  refurre&ion.” 

Nay, 


+ P-  25- 


C 95  ] 

Nay,  from  this  place  we  cannot  conclude,  that 
mankind  in  general  fhall  be  delivered  from  any 
death  at  all:  feeing  it  does  not  relate  to  mankind 
in  general,  but  wholly  and  folely  -to  them  that 
are  Ckriji’s. 

But  from  this  place  we  may  firmly  conclude, 
that  -more  than  the  mere  death  -of  the  body  came 
even  upon  thefe  by  man,  by  Adam's  fin,  feeing 
the  refurreclion  which  comes  to  them  by  man , by 
Chrift,  is  far  more  than  the  mere  removal  of  that 
death  : therefore  their  dying  in  Adam  implies  lar 
more  than  the  bare  lofs  of  the  bodily  life  we  now 
enjoy  : feeing  their  being  made  alive  in  Chrift  im- 
plies far  more,  than  a bare  recovery  of  that  life . 

Yet  k is  true,  that  whatever  death  came  on 
them  by  one  man,  came  upon  ail  mankind;  and 
that  in  the  fame  fenfe  wherein  they  died  in  Adam, 
all  mankind  died  likewife.  And  that  all  man- 
kind are  not  made  alive  in  Chrift,  as  they  are,  is 
not  God's  lault,  but  their  own. 

I know  not  therefore  what  you  mean  by  faying, 

that  after  Dr  J has  proved  this  whole  chapter, 

and  consequently  tire  two  verfes  in  queftion,  to 
relate  wholly  and  folely  to  the  refurreftion  of 
the  juft,  “ he  leaves  you  in  full  pofftffion  of  your 
argument.’  Surely  if  he  proves  this,  he  wrefts 
your  whole  argument  out  of  your  hands.  He 
leaves  you  not  one  fhrecl  of  it. 

8.  “ W e come  now,  you  fay,  to  the  moll  dif- 
ficult fcripture,  which  fpeaks  of  this  point,  Rom. 

12 — 19. 


As 


[ S>6  ] 

As  by  one  man  fin  entered  into  the  world  and 
death  by  Jin , even  Jo  death  pajjed  upon  all  men, for 
that  all  have  f nn ed. 

For  until  the  law,  fin  was  in  the  world-,  but  fin 
is  not  imputed  where  there  is  no  law. 

t Neverlhelefs  death  reigned  from  Adam  to 
Mofes,  even  over  them  that  had  not  finned  after 
the frnilitude  of  Adams  tranfgreffion,  who  is  the 
figure  of  him  that  was  to  come. 

But  not  as  the  off  ence , fo  alfo  is  the  free-gift. 
For  if  through  the  offence  of  one  many  be  dead , 
much  more  the  grace  of  God , and  the  gift  by  grace, 
which  is  by  one  man,  Jejiis  Ckrifl,  hath  abounded 
unto  many. 

And  not  as  it  was  by  one  that  finned  fo  is  the 
gift,  for  the  'judgment  was  by  one  offence  unto  ccn * 
demnation,  but  the  free-gift  is  of  many  offences, 
unto  j uflifica  lion. 

For  if  by  one  man’s  offence  death  reigned  by  one, 
much  more  they  who  received  the  abundance  of 
grace  and  of  the  gift  of  rightecufnfs , Jhall  reign 
in  life  by  one , Jefus  Clnrfi. 

Therefore  as  by  the  offence  of  one,  judgment 
came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation,  even  fo  by  the 
righteoufnefs  of  one  the  free-gift  came  upon  all 
men,  untojufiificalron  of  iije. 

For  as  by  one  mans  difobedience  many  were 
made  finners,  fo  by  the  obedience  of  onejkall  many 
\ be  made  righteous. 

On 


t y.  16, 


[ 97  ] 

On  this  you  obferve,  I.  That  this  pafTagc 
“ fpeaks  t of  temporal  death  and  no  other.” 
That  it  fpeaks  of  temporal  death  is  allowed  ; but 
not  that  it  fpeaks  of  no  other.  How  prove  you 
this  ? Why  thus,  “ He  evidently  fpeaks  of  that 
death,  which  entered  into  the  world  by  Adam’s 
fin  : that  death  which  is  common  to  all  mankind, 
which  paffed  upon  all  men , that  death  which 
reigned  from  Adam  to  Mofes  ; that  whereby  the  * 
many,  that  is  all  mankind  are  dead”  He  does 
fo : but  how  does  it  appear,  that  the  death 
which  entered  into  the  world  by  Adam’s  fin,  which 
is  common  to  all  mankind,  winch  paffed  upon  all 
men,  which  reigned  from  Adam  to  Mofes,  and 
whereby  the  many,  that  is,  all  mankind  are  dead  : 
how,  I fay,  does  it  appear,  from  any  or  all  of 
thefe  exprefiions,  that  this  is  temporal  death 
ONLY ? Juft  here  lies  the  fallacy.  “ No  man, 
fay  you,  can  deny,  that  the  apoftle  is  here 
fpeaking  of  that  death.”  True:  but  when  you 
infer,  “therefore  he  fpeaks  of  that  only”  we 
deny  the  confequence. 

q.  You  affirm,  II.  “B y judgment^  to  condemn 
nation  v.  16,  18,  he  means  the  being  adjudged 
to  the  fore-mentioned  death  : for  the  condemna- 
tion inflicted  by  the  judgment  of  God,  v.  16,  is 
the  fame  thing  with  being  dead,  v.  15.”  Perhaps 
fo  ; but  that  this  is  merely  the  death  cf  the  body, 
ftill  remains  to  be  proved  : as,  on  the  other 
Vql.  XXI.  E hand, 

+'  p.  28.  p.  27: 


[ 98  ] 

Land,  that  “ th e gift,  orfth-gift"  oppofed  there- 
to, is  merely  deliverance  Jr  om  that  death. 

You  add,  “ In  all  the  feriptures  there  is  re- 
corded but  one  judgment  to  condemnation , one 
fentence,  one  judicial  a£l  of  condemnation, 
which  catne  upbn  t all  men."  Nay,  in  thisfenfe 
of  the  word,  there  is  not  one : not  one  formal 
fentence , which  was  explicitly  and  judically  pro- 
nounced upon  all  mankind.  That  which  you 
cite,  Gen.  iii.  17,  19,  was  not:  neither  does 
all  that  fentence  in  fa  cl  come  upon  all  men.  Unto 
dujl  fhalt  thou  return , does  come  upon  all,  but 
that  other  part  does  not,  In  forrow  fialt  thou  eat 
of  it  all  the  days  of  thy  life.  This  was  formally 
pronounced , and  aftually  fulfilled  upon  Adam  : 
but  it  is  not  fulfilled  upon  all  his  poflerity. 

xo.  You  affirm,  III.  “ Thefe  ^ words  in  the 
19th  verfe.  As  by  one  man's  dif obedience  many 
a 'ere  made  finners , mean  the  fame  as  thofe  in  the 
X 8th,  As  by  the  offence  of  one  judgment  came  upon 
all  men  to  condemnation Not  exactly  the  fame. 
The  being  made  finer  s is  different  from  thebe- 
in g judged,  condemned,  or  punifhed  as  futh.  Y'ou 
fubjoin,  “ But  thefe  § words,  By  the  offence 
of  one  judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  condem- 
nation, anfwer  in  fenfe  to  thofe,  v.  17.  By  one 
man's  offence  death  reigned  by  one."  Neither  is 
this  exaflly  true.  Condemnation  came  firfi: ; and 
in  confequence  of  this  death  reigned.  You  add, 

“ And  by  death  mod  certainly  is  intended  no 

other 

fp.  29.  ip.  30.  SP-3°- 


C 99  .] 

ether  than  temporal  death”  Moll  certainly  this 
cannot  be  proved.  Therefore  it  does  not  follow, 
“ That  thefe  words.  By  one  mans  difobedien.ee 
many  were  made fnneirs , mean  no  more  than,  by 
one  ?nans  difobedience  mankind  were  made  fub- 
jeef  to  temporal  death.”  “ Review,  you  fay, 
this  reafoning,  and  fee  if  you  can  find  any  flaw 
in  it.”  There  are  feveral,  but  the  grand  flaw 
lies  in  the  very  firfl  link  of  the  chain.  You  have 
not  yet  proved,  that  “ death  throughout  this  paf- 
fage  means  only  the  death  of  the  body.” 

This  flaw  is  not  amended  by  your  obferving, 
that  St.  Paul  was  a Jew,  and  wrote  to  Jews  as 
well  as  Gentiles  : that  he  often  ufes  Hebrew  Idi- 
oms.; and  that  the  t Hebrew  word  which  figni- 
fies  to  be  a finntr s in  Hippil  fignifies  to  condemn , 
or  make , (i.  e.  declare ) a man . a J. inner  by  a judi- 
cial fentence:  that  .you  can  (by  the  help  of  your 
concordancej  produce  fifteen  Hebrew  texts,  in 
which  the  word  is  fo  taken  !”  For  if  it  would 
follow  from  hence,  That  by  the  ofence  of  one , 
judgment  came  upon  all  men  to  condemnation,  is 
juft  equivalent  with,  by  one  mans  difobedience 
many  were  made  fnners  : ftill  this  ddes  not  prove, 
that  the  death  in  queftion  is  no  other  titan  tem- 
poral death. 

But  indeed  it  does  not  follow,  that  two  ex- 
preffions  are  juft  equivalent,  becaufe  one  Hebrew 
word  may  contain  them  both  : nor  can  it  there* 
fore  he  inferred  from  hence,  that  many  were 
E 2 made 

+ P-  3>i  32» 


[ 100  ] 

fnadejinntr  s is  juft  equivalent  with  judgment  came 
upon  all  men  to  condemnation.  Rather  the  former 
expreflion  anfwers  to  all  have  finned  the  latter  to 
death , pafed  upon  all  men.  Sin  is  the  caufe  of 
their  condemnation,  and  not  the  fame  thing  with 
it. 

You  go  on.  “ Befides  t all  this,  it  is  here 
exprefsly  affirmed,  that  the  many  are  made  finners 
by  the  difobedience  of  another  man.”  It  is  exprefs- 
ly affirmed  ; and  by  an  infpired  apoftle.  There- 
fore I firmly  believe  it.  “ i But  they  can  be  made 
finners  by  the  difobedience  of  another  in  no  other 
fenfe  than  as  they  are  fuffcrers .”  How  is  this 
proved  ? We  grant,  the  Hebrew  words  for  fin  and 
iniquity,  are  often  ufed  to  fignify  buffering:  But 
ilfis  does  not  prove  that  the  phrafe  mere  made 
finners,  fignifies  only,  they  mere  made  fufferers. 

“ So  Chrifl  mas  § made  fin  for  us.” — No  : 
not  fo  : but  as  he  -was  made  an  offering  for  fin. 
“ He  fullered  on  account  of  the  fins  of  men, 
and  fo  he  was  made  fin  yes,  a fin-offer- 
ing. But  it  is  never  faid,  he  was  made  a fuiner ; 
therefore  the  exprefiions  are  not  parallel.  But 
he  need  not  have  been  made  fin  at  all,  if  we 
had  not  been  made  finners  by  Adam.  “ And  men 
n ffer  on  account  of  Adam’s  fin,  and  fo  they  are 
made  Jinn  as.”  Are  they  made  finners,  fo  only  ? 
That  remains  to  be  proved. 

“ Itfeemsthen  confirmed  beyond  all  doubt, 
That  by  one  mans  difobedience  many  mere  made 

finners. 


% F-  35. 


[ ioi  J 

Jtnners,  meaneth  only,  by  Adam’s  fin  the 
many,  that  is,  all  mankind  were  made  fubjedl  to 
death .”  He  that  will  believe  it,  (taking  death  in 
the  common  fenfe)  may.  But  you  have  not  con- 
firmed it  by  one  found  argument. 

11.  You  affirm,  IV,  “ The  ||  apofile  draws  a 
comparifon  between  Adam  and  Chrift,  be- 
tween what  Adam  did,  with  the  confequences 
of  it,  and  what  Chrift  did,  with  the  confe- 
quences of  that.  And  this(comparifon  is  the  main 
thing  he  has  in  view.”  , 

This  is  true.  “ The  § comparifon  begins  at 
the  12th  verfe.  Wherefore  as  by  one  man  Jin 
entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  fin. — There 
he  flops  awhile,  and  brings  an  argument  to 
prove,  That  death  came  on  mankind  thro’ 
Adam’s  tranfgreffion.”  He  does  fo  : but  not 
before  he  had  finifhed  his  fentence,  which  liter- 
ally runs  thus  : As  by  one  man  fin  entered  into  the 
world  and  death  by fur , even  fo  death  pJJed  upon 
all  men,  in  that  all  had  finned.  The  comparifon 
therefore  between  Adam  and  Chrift,  begins  not 
at  the  12th  but  the  lqth  verfe.  Of  this  you 
feem  fenfible  yourfelf  ; when  you  fay,  “ Adarrf 
is  \kv<t pattern  of  him  that  was  to  come,  t Here  a 
new  thought,  ftarts  in  the  apoftle’s  mind.”  For 
it  was  not  a new  thought,  darting  into  his  mind 
here,  if  it  was  the  fame  which  he  began  to  ex- 
prefs  at  the  12th  verfe. 

E 3 

11  P-  36.  § p.  37>  38'  + p.  39- 


You 


[ 102  ] 

You  proceed,  u The  extent  of  the  fFee-gift 
in  Chrilt  anfwers  to  the  extent  of  the  confe- 
quences  of  Adam’s  fin  : naf,  abounds  far  beyond 
th  em.  This  he  incidentally  handles,  v.  ij,i6, 
ty,  and  then  refumes  his  main  defign,  v.  18 
tg,  half  of  which  he  had  executed  in  the  12th 
verfe.”  Not  one  jot  ofit.  That  yerfe  is  a com- 
pleat  fentence,  not  half  of  one  only.  And  the 
particle  therefore  prefixt  to  the  18th verfe  fhews, 
that  the  difcourfe  goes  firait  forward  ; and  that 
this  as  well  as  the  19th  verfe  are  clofely  ccnneft- 
ed  with  the  17th. 

Allowing  then,  “ That  the  + apoftle  draws  a 
comparifon  between  the  difodedience  of  Adam,  by 
which  all  men  avebrought  under  condemnation,  and. 
the  obedience  of  Chrifl,  by  which  all  men  are  (in 
fome  ienfe)  juflifed  unto  life : Hill  it  does  not  ap- 
pear, either  that  this  conde motion  means  no  more 
than  the  death  of  the  body,  or  that  this  juftif- 
cation  means  no  more  than  the  refurrcBion  of  the 
body. 

12.  You  affirm,  V.  “ The  whole  of  the  a- 
poflle’s  argument  Hands  upon  thefe  two  princi- 
ples, that  by  the  (ffence  of  one  death  palled  upon, 
all  men  and  by  the  obedience  of  one,,  all  are  julti- 
fied.” 

This  is  allowed.  But  I cannot  allow  your 
interpretation  of fin  is  net  imputed , when’there  is  no 
law,  or  (as  you  w'ould  odly,  and  contrary  to  all 
precedent,,  tranllate  it,  where  lain  is  not  in  being.) 

“ The 


+ ?■  3P> 


L 103  J 

“ The  fins  t of  mankind,  fay  you,  were  not  im- 
puted, were  not  taxed  with  the  forfeiture  of  life, 
becaufe  the  law  which  fubjecls  the  tranfgreffor 
to  death,  was  not  then  in  being,  dor  it  was  abro- 
gated upon  Adam’s  tranfgrelhon,  and  was  not 
again  in  force  till  revived  by  Mofes.'’  On  this 
I would  afk,  1.  Where  is  it  written,  that  “ the 
law  which  fubjefled  the  tranfgreffor  to  death,  was 
abrogated  by  Adamh  tr  anfgrefifion  ?”  I want  a 
clear  text  for  this.  2.  Suppofe  it  was,  how  does 
it  appear,  that  it  was  not  again  in  force  till  rf- 
1 nved  by  Mofes  ? 3.  Did  not  that  law,  whofo 
Jheddetli  man’s  blood , by  man  Jhall  his  blood  be 
Jhed , “ fubjeft  the  tranfgreffor  to  death  ?”  And 
was  it  “ not  in  force'’  after  Adam’s  tranfgrefhon 
and  before  Mofes?  4.  What  do  you  mean  by  that 
ambiguous  expreffion,  “ Were  not  taxed  with 
the  forfeiture  of  life  ?”  Your  argument  re- 
quires that  it  fhould  mean , “ Were  not  pumjhed, 
or  punifhable  with  death:’  But  is  this  true  ? 
Were  not  the  fins  of  the  men  of  Sodom  and  in- 
deed the  whole  antediluvian  world  punifhed 
with  death,  during  that  period  ? — ,5.  Was  not 
every  wilful,  impenitent  tranfgrefTor,  during 
this  whole  time,  fubjeft  to  death  everlafting  ? 

Neither  can  I allow  that  unnatural  interpreta- 
tion of  them  who  had  not  finned  after  the  fimilitude 
of  Adam’s  tr  anfgrejfion,  “ had  ^ not  finned  againlt 
law,  making  death  the  penalty  of  their  fin,  as 
E 4 Adam 

t p.  4.U 


t P-  i2- 


f 104  J 

Adam  did.”  Do  no*  the  words  obviouflv  mean, 

“ Had  not  finned  by  any  atlual  fin,  as  Adam 
did  ?” 

Nay,  “ the  Sodomites  and  Antediluvians  are 
no  objeftion  to  this.”  That  is  llrange  indeed  ! 
But  how  fo  ? “ Becaufe  extraordinary  interpofi- 
tions  come  under  no  rule,  but  the  will  of  God.” 
What  is  that  to  the  purpofe  ? Their  fins  were 
actually  punifhed  with  death,  “ during  that  fpace, 
wherein  you  fay,  mankind  were  not  fubject  to 
death  for  their  tranfgreflions.”  They  were  fub- 
je£I  to  death  for  their  tranfgreflions,  as  God 
demon flrated  by  thofe  extraordinary  interpofitions. 

You  add,  “ That  i law,  Whofo Jheddcth  mans 
Hood,  by  man  Jliall  his  blood  be  jhcd , makes  death 
the  penalty  of  murder.”  It  does,  and  thereby 
overthrows  j our  whole  aflertion.  “ No,  for  1. 
It  was  not  enafled  till  the  year  of  the  world 
1657.”  Well,  and  if  it  had  been  enafted  only 
the  year  before  Mofes  was  born,  it  would  Hill 
have  deflroyed  your  argument.  But  2.  “It  is 
given  as  a rule  for  magillrates  in  executingjuflice, 
and  not  as  a declaration  of  the  penaltjT  of  fin  to 
be  inflifted  by  God  himfelf.”  What  then? 
What  does  it  matter,  whether  the  penalty  annext 
by  God,  were  inflifled  by  God  or  man?  How- 
ever, I fuppofe,  this  punifhment  on  the  Antedi- 
luvians and  on  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  was 
“ infli&ed  by  God  himfelf.”  But  3.  “ None  of 
thefe.  were  made  mortal  bjT  thofe  fins.”  Certainly, 

infallibly 


X P.  43- 


r 10  j ■ ] 

infallibly  true  ! And  yet  the  cafe  of  any  of  thefe 
abundantly  proves,  that  the  law  was  in  lorce  from 
Adam  to  Mofes  even  according  to  your  own  defi- 
nition of  .it,  “ a rule  of  duty,  with  the  penalty 
of  death  annext,  as  due  to  the  tranfgreffor  from 
God.” 

13.  You  affirm  VI.  “ The  § confeqttences  of 
Adam’s  fin  anfwer  thofe  of  Chrifl’s  obedience  ; 
but  not  exactly,  Not  as  the  offence , fo  is  thefree- 
gift.  For  if  through  the  offence  of  one  many  he 
dead,  much  more  the  grace  (or  favour)  of  God 
and  the  gif t (the  benefits  that  are)  by  grace,  which 
is  by  one  man  Jefus  Clirifl,  hath  abo  unded  unto 
many.  ver.  ry.  That  is,  he  hath  in  Clirifl  be- 
llowed benefits  upon  mankind,  far  exceeding  the 
confequences  of  Adam’s  fin  ; in  erecting  a new 
difpenfation,  furnifhed  with  a glorious  fund  of 
light  and  truth,  means  and  motives.”  1 his  is 
true  : but  how  fmall  a part  of  the  truth  ? What 
a poor,  low  account  of  the  Chriflian  difpenfation. 

You  go  on,  ver.  16.  Not  as  it  was  by  one  that 
finned,  fo  is  the  gift : for  the  judgment  was  by  one 
offence  to  condemnation  ; but  the  free  gift  is  of 
many  offences  unto  juflif  cation  : That  is,  The 
grace  of  God  in  Clirifl  difcharges  mankind  from 
the  confequences  of  Adam’s  one  offence.”  Does 
it  entirely  difcharge  them  from  thefe  confequen- 
ces ? From  forrow,  and  labour,  and  death  ? 
Which  you  affirmed  a while  ago,  to  be  the  only 
confequences  of  it  that  affefl  his  poflenty.  It 

' ^ h 5 - “ alio 

S i* 


£ zoo  j 

“ affo  fets  them  quite  to  rights  with  God,  both 
as  to  a conformity  to  the  law  and  eternal  life.” 

Is  not  this  allowing  too  much:  is  it  well  con- 
fident with  what  you  faid  before  ? ||  “ In  the  19th 
verfe  the  apollle  concludes  the  whole  argument : 
As  by  one  man s dif obedience  many  zra  e made  Jr  li- 
ners, Jo  by  tiie  obedience  of  one  Jiiall  many  be  made 
righteous.  Were  made  Jinners  you  aver  means 
only,  were  made  mortal.  If  fo,  die  counter  part, 
made  righteous , can  only  mean,  made  immortal. 
And  that  you  thought  fo  then,  appears  from  your 
citing  as  a parallel  text,  In  Chnjl  Jhall all  be  made 
alive : which  you  had  before  afferted  to  mean 
only,  fhall  be  raifed from  the  dead.. 

14.  “ Hence  t it  followeth,  1.  That  the 
ABOUNDING  of  God’s  grace , and  the  bledings 
by  that  grace,  doth  not  refpeff the  confequences 
of  Adam’s  fm,  hath  no  relerence  to  his  tranf- 
grefiion,  but  to  the  grace  of  God  and  the  obedi- 
ence of  Chrift.”  “ The  abounding  of  God  s 
grace,"  you  inform  us,  “ has  reference  to  the 
grace  of  God.”  Mod  hire.  But  this  does  not 
prove,  that  it  has  no  reference  to  the  confequences 
of  Adam’s  fin.  If  we  gain  more  bleffing  by  Chrid 
than  we  lod  by  Adam  it  is  doubtlefs  abounding 
grace.  But  dill,  it  lias  a reference  to  Adam’s- 
tranfgredion,  and  the  confequences  of  it.-  It  is 
over  thefe  that  it  abounds.  Therefore  ir  has  a 
tnanifed  refpedl  to  them. 

It  followeth,  ± fecondly.  That  irr  the  18th 

tv 

ana. 

JP.  29,2nd  feq-  + 2.  4^.'  } P.4G- 


[ 107  ] 

and  igth  verfes  the  apoftle  confiders  the  effects 
of  Chrifi  s obedience  only  fo  far  as  they  anfwerto 
and  reverfe  the  confequences  of  Adam’s  difobe- 
dience  ; the  additional  benefits  flowing  therefrom 
having  been  mentioned  apart  in  the  15,  16  and 
17  verfes.”  In  thofe  verfes  the  apoftle  does  un- 
doubtedly drew,  how  the  blefting  by  Chrilt 
abounded  over  the  curfe  by  Adam.  But  what 
then?  How  does  this  prove,  that  the  18th  and 
19th  verfes  do  not  refpeft  all  the  benefits  menti- 
oned before  ? Without  queflion  they  do  : they 
are  a general  conclufion,  not  from  one,  but  all 
the  preceding  verfes. 

“ Again  obferve.  That  the  \ jujhf  cation  to  life 
is  fuch  a juftification  as  comes  upon  all  men.''  It 
may  in  fame  fenfe.  But  does  it  in  fact  ? .Accord- 
ing to  your  fenfe  of  it,  it  comes  upon  none.  For 
if  it  means,  “ The  difeharging  men  from  the  con - 
fequences  of  Adam’s  fin  ; and  if  the  only  confe- 
quences  of  that  fin  are  forrow,  labour  and  death,  ' 
it  is  manifeft,  no  man  upon  earth  is  jufiified  to 
this  day. 

But  you  go  on.  “ As  jujlifi cation  to  life  comes 
trpon  all  men.”— -No  : not  in  the  proper,  ferip- 
tural  fenfe  of  j unification That  term  is  never 
once  in  the  bible  ufed  for  the  refurre&ion,  no 
more  than  for  heaven  or  heiL- 

It  may  be  proper  here  once  for  ail  to  obferve, 
that  what  St.  Paul  fay:?  of  abounding  grace  is  Am- 
ply this?  1 The  condemnation  came  by  one  of- 
E 6 fmc « 

V2'  vtr 


[ io8  ] 

fence  only : the  acquittal  is  from  many  offences . 
2.  They  who  receive  this  fhall  enjoy  a far  higher 
bl e fling  by  Chrift  than  they  loft  by  Adam.  In 
both  thefe  refpecis  the  confequences  of  Chrift's 
death  abound  over  the  confequences  of  Adana’s 
fin..  And  this  whole  blefftng  by  Chrift  is  termed 
in  the  i8thverfe  j unification,  in  the  19th  being 
made  righteous. 

“ Further,  The  phrafe,  being  ||  made  righteous 
as  well  as  being  made  /inner s,  is  an  Hebrew  way 
of  fpeaking.”  I do  not  allow  that.  Both  the 
phrafes  y.xSlrccjbxt  S'mocioi,  or  afj.x^ruXo)  are  pure, 
and  good  Greek.  That  therefore  there  is  any 
Hebraifm  at  all  in  thefe  expreffions,  cannot  be 
admitted  without  proof.  If  then  the  fame  He- 
brew word  does  fignify  to  make  righteous , and  to 
acquit  in  judgment-,  it  does  |j  not  follow,  that  the 
Greqjk  word,  here  tranllated,  made  righteous „ 
means  only  being  acquitted.  You  yourfelf  fay  the 
contrary.  You  but  now  defined  this  very  gift, 
“ Thet  benefits  that  are  by  grace.”  And  in  ex- 
olaining  thofe  very  words,  The  free  gift  is  of 
many  offences  unto  juf  if  cation,  affirmed;  that  is. 
“ The  grace  of  Godin  Chrift,  not  only  difeharges 
mankind  from  the  confequences  of  Adam's  fin, 
but  alfo  fets  them  quite  to  rights  with  God,  both 
as  to  a conformity  to  the  law,  and  as  to  eternal 
life.”  And  is  this  110  more  than  “ acquitting  them 
in  judgment?”  “ Or  reverfing  the  fentence  of 
■condemnation  ?” 


t!  P.49,  ^P.44. 


Through: 


C 109  ] 

Through  this  whole  paffage  it  may  be  obferved. 
that  the  gift , the  free  gift,  the  gift  by  grace  mean 
one  and  the  fame  thing,  even  the  whole  benefit 
given  by  the  abounding  grace  of  God,  through 
the  obedience  of  Chrift : abounding  both  with" 
regal'd  to  the  fountain  itfelf,  and  the  flreams  : 
abundant  grace  producing  abundant  bleffings. 

If  then  thefe  verfes  are  “ evidently  parallel  to 
thofe  1 Cor.  xv.  21,  22.”  It  follows  even  hence, 
that  dying  and  being  made  alive,  in  the  latter  paf- 
fage,  do  not  refer  to  the  body  only : but  that' 
dying  implies,  all  the  evils  temporal  and  fpiritual, 
* which  are  derived  from  Adam’s  fin;  and  being 
made  alive,  all  the  bleffings  which  are  derived 
from  Chrift,  in  time  and  in  eternity. 

Whereas  therefore  you  add,  “ It  is  § now  evi- 
dent furely  beyond  all  doubt,  (ftrong  expreffions !) 
that  the  confequences  of  Adam’s  fin  here  fpoken 
of,  are  no  other  than  the  death  which  comes 
upon  all  men:”  I muft  beg  leave  to  reply,  It  is 
not  evident  at  all  ; nay,  it  is  tolerably  evident  on 
the  contrary,  that  this  death  implies  all  manner 
of  evils,  to  which  either  the  body  or  foul  is 
liable. 

jy.  You  next  re-confider  the  t2th  verle,  which 
you  under  Hand  thus,  “ ||  Death  paffed  upon  all 
men,  for  that  all harue finned,  namely,  in  Adam, 
All  have  finned,  that  is,  are  fubjefted  to  death 
through  that  one  offence  of  his.” 

You  faid  before,  t:  Death  pajjed  upon  all  men , 

means. 


{ ?■  50. 


L i io  J 


means-,  all  were  by  a judicial  fentence  made  fub- 
jett  to  death.’’  And  here  you  fay,  “ All  have 
finned,  means,  all  have  been  fubjetied  to  death. ’’ 
So  the  at io file  afferts,  “ All  were  ftibje&ed  to 
death,  becaufe  all  were  fubje&ed  to  death  Vr  Not 
fo.  Sin  is  one  thing,  death  another  j and  the 
former  is  here  aligned  as  the  caufe  of  the  latter. 

Although  the  h criticifm  on  l<p’Z,  is  liable  to 
much  exception,  yet  I leave  that  and  the  Hebrew 
citations  as  they  land:  becaufe,  though  they 
may  caufe  many  readers  to  admire  your  learn- 
ing, 'yet  they  are  not  to  the  point. 

“ Seeing  I then  the  phrafe  all  are  made  firmer  s 
hath  been  demonflrah  d to  fignify,  all  are fiubjefted 
to  'death  by  a judicial  fintence:  and  feeing  the 
apolle’s  whole  argument  turns  on  this  point, 
that  all  men  die  through  the  one  offence  of  Adam  : 
who  can  doubt,  blit  all  have  finned,  means  the 
fame  with  a/l  are  made finners  ?"  I do  not  doubt 
it  ; but  I fiill  deny  that  either  phrafe  means  no 
more  than  "■all are  in  ajlale  oj fufifermfi' 

16.  In  order  fully  to  clear  this  important  text, 

I (hall  here  fubjoin  fame  of  Dr.  Jennings’s  re- 
marks, § M The  apoltle  having  treated  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter  of  the  caufe  and  manner  of  a fin- 
ner’s  jufiif cation  before  God,  namely  through 
the  merits  of  Chrilb,  and  by  faith  in  his  blood  , 
and  having  fpoken  of  the  fruits  of  jufliHcation  in 

the 


+ P.  5a:  + P- 53.54- 

, ^Vindication  of  the  Scfipttrre  Doftrine  of  Original  Sin, 
vS— 35- 


[ lit  ] 

the  former  part  of  this- chapter  : he  proceeds  hr 
the  verfes  before  us,  to  illuftrate  our  falvation  by 
Chrift,.  by  comparing  it  with  our  ruin  by  Adam, 
He  compares  Adam  with  Chrift,  and  flrews  how 
what  we  loft  by  ll'.eone,  is  reftored  by  the  other 
with  abundant  advantage.  He  makes  Adam  to 
be  a figure  or  type  cfChrift:  confidering  them, 
b-oth  as  public  perfons,  reprefenting,  the  one  all 
his  natural,  dependents,  the  other  all  hisfpiritual 
feed-,  the  one,  A.dam,  all  mankind,,  who-  are  all 
guilty  before  God : the  other,  Chrift,  ail  thofe 
who  obtain  the  right eoufnejs  oj  God , which  is  by 
faith , to  all  them  that  believe. 

“ Concerning  the  confequcnces  of  Adam’s  fin 
upon  his  pofterity,  we  have  here  the  following 
particulars': 

h That  by  one  mar.-  fin  entered  into  the 
world ; that  the  whole  world  is  fome  way  con- 
cerned in  Adam's- fin..  And  this  indeed  is  evi- 
dent, becaufe 

II.  Death:,  which  is  the  wages  oj finr  and  the 
very  punifhment  threatened  to  Adam’s  firft 
tranfgrelfion,.  enured  by  fin  and  pajfed  upon  all 
men-,  is  actually  inflifted  on  all  mankind. 
Upon  which  it  is  afferted  in  the  next  words 

III.  That  all  have  finned  : Even  fo  death  pajfed 
upon  all  men , f*  that  all  have  finned ..  All  men 
then,  are  deemed  firiners  in  the  eye  of  God,  on 

account; 


[ 112  ] 


account  of  that  one  fin,  of  which  alone  the  apof- 
tle  is  here  fpeaking.  And 

IV.  Not  only  after,  but  before,  and  until  the 
law  (given  by  Mofes)  fin  was  in  the  world. ; and 
men  were  deemed  firmers  and  accordingly  pu- 
nched with  death,  through  many  generations. 
Now  fin  is  not  imputed  where  there  is  no  law ; ne- 
ver thelefs  death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Mofes: 
plainly  fhdwing,  that  all  mankind  during  that 
whole  period  had  finned  in  Adam  and  fo  died, 
in  virtue  of  the  death  threatened  to  him.  And 
death  could  not  then  beinflifted  on  mankind  for 
any  a&ual  fin,becaufe  it  was  inflicted  on  fomany 
infants,  who  had  neither  eaten  of  the  forbidden 
fruit,  nor  committed  any  aftual  fin  whatever, 
and  therefore  had  not  finned  in  anv  fenfe,  after 
the  finihtu.de  of  Adam  s trarfgrefjion.  Therefore 

V.  It  was  through  the  offence  of  one  that  many 
are  dead , ver.  15.  By  one  offence  death  rtignedby 
one , ver.  17.  And  feeing  the  fin  of  Adam  is  thus 
punifhed  in  all  men,  it  follows 

VI.  That  they  were  all  involved  in  that  fen- 
tence  of  condemnation,  which  God  paffed  .upon 
him.  The  judgment  was  by  one  to  condemnation , 
ver.  16.  By  one  offence  judgment  came  upon  all 
men  to  condemnation , ver.  18.  And  fince  it  is  fo 
plain,  that  all  men  are  a&nally  punifiied  lor 
Adam’s  firs,  it  mu  ft  needs  follow, 


VII.  That 


[ J13  ] 

VII.  That  they  all  finned  in  Adam.  By  one 
mans  difobedience  many  mere  made  fnners.  They 
were  fo  eonjlituted  finners  by  Adam  s finning  as 
to  become  liable  to  the  pumfhment  thieatenedto 
his  tranfgreflion. 

Between  Adam  and  Chrift,  the  type  and  the 
antitype,  St.  Paul  draws  the  parallel  in  the  fol- 
lowing particulars. 

I.  Both  have  done  fomething  by  which  many 
others  are  a hefted,  who  either  lofe  or  gain  by 
what  they  did  : Through  the  offence  of  one  many 
are  dead:  by  one  the  gift  of  grace  hath  abounded  to 
many,  verfe  15. 

II.  That  which  the  firft  Adam  did,  by  which 
many  i.  e.  all  men  receive  hurt,  was  fin,  offence 
and  difobedience : they  all  buffer  by  one  that  finned, 
ver.  16.  By  the  offence  off  one,  by  one  mans  diff- 
obedience , ver.  18,  19.  That  which  the  fecond 
Adam  did  by  which  many,  that  is,  all  who  be- 
lieve, receive  benefit,  is  righteouffnefs  and  obedi- 
ence: by  the  right  eon fneffs  off  one,  by  the  obedience 
off  one,  ver.  18,  19. 

* III.  The  detriment  which  all  men  receive 
through  Adam  is,  that  they  are  made  Jinners: 
that  judgment  is  come  upon  them  to  condemnation-, 
in  confequence  of  which,  death,  the  wages  of  fin, 
is  inflifted  on  every  one  of  them.  The  benefit 
which  all  believers  receive  through  Chrift,  is 

grace 


[ "4  •] 

grace,  or  the  favour  of  God,  juftification,  rigk- 
teoufnefs,  or  fanfitifi  cation,  and  eternal  fife.  The 
grace  of  God,  and  the  gift  by  grace,  hath  by  one 
man,  Jefus  Cknji,  abounded  to  many.  By  the 
righteoufnefs  of  one,  the  fee-gift  came  upon  all 
men  (who  recite  itj  to jujlif cation  oj  lije.  By  the 
obedience  of  one,  many  ai  e made  righteous,  v.  \g, 
18,  19. 

Thus  the  apoflle  fl  ews  the  parity  between 
the  effects  of  Adam’s  fm,  and  of  Chrifl’s  right- 
eoufnefs. Only  in  two  inflances  he  (hews,  that 
the  effetf  of  the  latter,  vaftly  exceeds  the  effect 
of  the  former. 

I.  It  removes  many  fins,  befides  that  one  fin 
of  Adam,  which  fo  affefled  all  his  pofterity.  If 
through  one  offence  many  be  dead,  much  more  the 
grace  of  God  by  Jefus  Chrifl  hath  abounded  to 
many.  The  judgment  was  by  one  to  condemnation  ; 
but  the  free-gift  is  of  many  offences  unto  juf if ca- 
tion, v.  15,  16. 

II.  Chriil  raifes  believers  to  a far  happier  flate 
than  that  which  Adam  enjoyed  in  paradife. 
Much  more  they  who  receive  abundance  of  grace , 
and  of  the  gift  of  1 ighteoujhefs,  J. hall  reign  in  life, 
by  one,  Jfus  Chrifl.  ver.  17.” 

17.  Your  paraphafe  t on  the  text,  being  on- 
ly a repetition  of  what  von  had  find  over  and 
over  before,  does  not  require  any  feparate  confi- 

deration 


+ F*55— 


C 1J5  ] 

deration.  Only  I muft  obferve  a few  miftakes 
which  have  not  occurred  before  + “ The  refurrec- 
tion  is  the  firft  and  fundamental  ftep  in  the 
gofpel-falvation.”'.  No:  he  Jkall  fave  Jus- people 
from  their  fins ; this  is  the  firft  and  fundamental 
Hep.  2.  You  have  very  grievouffy  miftaken  the 
meaning  of  four  texts  in  the  6th  of  St.  John. 
Tits  is  the  father’s  will,  that  of  all  which  he  hath 
given  me,  I fkouUl  life  nothing,  but  f could  raife  it 
up  again  at  the  lafi  day,  v.  39.  This  is  the  will  of 
him  that  fent  me,  that  every  one  that  feeth  the  Son 
and  helieveth  on  him fiould  have  everlafiing  life , 
and  I will  raife  him  up  at  the  lafi  day , v.  40.  No 
man  can  come  to  me,  except  the  Father  draw  him  ; 
and  I will  raife  him  up  at  the  lafi  day,  v.  44.  Wkofo 
eateth  my  fefh  and  drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eternal 
life , and  I will  raife  him  up  at  the  lafi  day,  v.  ,54. 
Now  you  cite  all  thefe  texts,  as  relating  to  the 
general  refurre&ion  : whereas  not  one  of  them 
relates  to  it  at  all.  They  are  all;  promifes  made 
to  true  believers  only;  and  relate  wholly  and  fole- 
ly  to  the  refurre&ion  of  the  jufi. 

18.  It  remains  then,  all  that  has  been  advanced 
to  the  contrary  notwith  Handing,  that  the  only  true 
and  rational  way  of  accounting  for  the  general 
wickedrtefs  of  mankind,  in  all  ages  and  nations 
ts  pointed  out  in  thofe  words.  In  Adam  all  die. 
In  and  through  their  firft  parent,  all  his  pofterity 
died  in  a fpiritual  fenfe  : and  they  remain 
wholly  dead  in  treffaffes  and fins,  ’till  the  fecond 

Adam. 


+ p. 


[ J 

Adam  makes  them  alive.  By  this  one  man  Jin 
entered  into  the-  a or  Id  and  pajfed  upon  all  men. 
And  thro  the  intection  which  thev  derive  from 
him,  all  men  are  and  ever  w ere.  by  nature  ,-entir e- 
ly  alienated  Jr  om  tke  IJepf  God , without  hope , uith- 
out  God  in  the  world . * 

i.  Your  appendix  to  the  firft  part  of  your  book 
is  wholly  employed  in  anfwering  two  queftions, 
“I  One  is,  How  is  it  confident  with  jujlice,  that 
all  men  Jhoitld  die  by  the  dijobedicnee  cj  one 
man?  The  other,  How  Jliall  ue  account  for  all 
mens,  ri/ing  again,  by  the  obedience  oj another  man, 
Jefus  Chrift  ?” 

You  may  determine, the  former  queftion  as  you 
pleafe,  lince  it  does  not  touch  the  main  point 
in  debate.  I fhall  therefore  take  no  farther 
pains  about  it,  than  to  make  a fliort  extrattofwhat 
Or.  J — fpeaks  on  the  head. 

2.  “ ||  As  to  the  firft  queftion  Dr.  T — gets 
rid  of  all  difficulty,  that  may  arife  from  the  con- 
fideration  of  God's  juftice,  by  aferibingit  wholly 
to  his  goodnefs,  that  death  pajfed  upon  all  men. 
Death,  he  tells  us,  is  upon  the  whole  a benefit.”  It 
is  certain,  that  believers  in  Chrift  receive  benefit 
by  it.  But  this  gentelman  will  have  death  to  be 
an  “ Original  benefit,  and  that  to  all  mankind  : 
meetly  intended  to  increafe  the  vanity  of  all  earth- 
ly things,  and  to  abate  their  force  to  delude  us.”  He 
afterward  difplays  the  benefit  of  fhortening  hu- 
man life,  to  its  prefent  ftandard  : that  death  being 

nearer 

t p.  65.  I]  Vindication,  p.  36,  &c. 


C ] 

nearer  to  our  view  might  be  a powerful  motive 
to  regard  lefs  the  things  of  a tranfiory  world  : 
but  does  the  nearer  mew  of  death,  in  faff  produce 
this  effeft  ? Does  not  the  common  obfervation 
-of  all  ages  prove  the  contrary?  Has  not  covet- 
oufnefs  been  the  peculiar  vice  of  old  age  ? As 
death  is  nearer  to  the  view,  we  pllinly  fee,  that 
men  have  more  and  more  regard  for  the  things- 
of  a tranfitory  world.  We  are  fure  therefore 
■that  death  is  no  fuch  benefit  to  the  generality  of 
men.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  king  of  terrors 
■to  them,  the  burden  of  their  lives,  and  bane  of 
their  pleafur-es.  To  talk  therefore  of  death’s  being 
a benefit,  an  original  benefit,  and  that  to  all  man- 
kind, is  to  talk  againft  the  common  fenfe  and 
experience  of  the  whole  world,” 

“ ’Tis  flrange  death  fhould  be  originally  given 
by  God  as  a benefit  to  man,  and  that  the  fhorten- 
ing  of  man’s  life  afterward  fhould  be  defigned 
as  a farther  benefit  : and  yet  that  God  fhould  fo 
often  promife  his  peculiar  people  long  life  as  the 
reward  of  obedience,  and  threaten  them  with 
.death,  as  a punifhment  of  di (obedience  ! 

“ But'.y/zc  friplure , he  fays,  affirms,  Thpitf/ offer- 
ings, are  the  cJuf'iifements  of  our  heavenly  Father, 
end  death  in  particular.  But  does  not  every 
cluflifement  fuppofe  a fault  ? Mull  he  not  be 
a cruel  father,  who  will  chilfen  his  children  for 
no  fault  at  all  ? If  then  God  does  but  chaflen  us 
for  Adam’s  fin,  the  fault  of  it  muff  fome  way  lie 
upon  us,  Elfe  we  fuppofe  God’s  dealings  with 

his 


t 118  ] 

h.k  children  to  be  unreafonabie  and  unrighte- 
ous.” £ 

3.  I would  only  add  two  or  three  obvious 
queflions.  1.  Did  God  propofe  death  as  a be- 
nefit in  the  original  threatning?  2.  Bidherepre- 
fent  it  as  a benefit  in  the  fentence  pronounced  on 
Adam,  Daft  thou  art,  and  anio  duj}  thou Jhalt  re- 
turn ? 3.  Do  the  infpi'red  writers  fpeak  of  God’s 
bringing  a flood  on  the  world  of  the  ungodly,  as  a 
benefit  or  a punifhment?  4.  Do  they  mention 
the  deftru&ion  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  as  de- 
figned  for  a benefit  to  them  ? 3.  Is  it  by  way  ol 
benefit,  that  God  declares,  The  foul  that  finneth, 
it Jhall  die  ? Certainly  this  point  is  not  defenfi- 
ble.  Death  is  properly  not  a benefit,  but  a 
punifhment. 

4.  The  t other  queflion  is,  How  Jhall  we  ac- 
count for  all  men' s rifing  again,  by  the  obedience 
of  another  man  Jefus  Chrifi  ? 

*l  To  fet  this  in  a clear  light,  I all;  another 
queflion,  What  ± was  it  that  gave  the  glorious 
perfonage,  emblemized  by  the  Lamb  (Rev.  v.  1, 
&c.)  his  fupefior  worthinefs , his  prevailing  in - 
terejt  in  God,  beyond  all  others  in  heaven  and 
earth  ? It  was  his  being  fain,  that  is,  his  obedi- 
ence to  God,  and  good-will  to  men  : it  was  his 
confummate  virtue.  Thou  art  worthy — Why? 
Becaufe  thou  haft  exhibited  to  God  fuch  au  in- 
flance  of  virtue,  obedience  and  good-nefs.  d hou 
haft  facrificed  thy  life  in  the  cauie  of  truth,  and 

hajl 

1 p.  70.  J p.  71,  72' 


[ 1!9  ] 

kajl  redeemed  us,  by  that  aft  of  the  highefl  obe- 
dience.” 

With  what  extreme  wearinefs.  is  this  whole  pa- 
ragraph worded?  You  do  not  care  to  fay  direft- 
ly,  “ Jefus  Chrift  is  either  a little  God,  or  he  is 
no  God  at  all.”  So  you  fav  it  indireftly,  in  an 
heap  of  frnooth,  laboured,  decent  circumlocu- 
tions. Yet  permit  me  to  afk,  was  “ that  acl  of 
obedience,  the  original  and  [ole  ground.”  of  his 
prevailing  interejl  in  God,  and  of  his  worthinejs, 
not  only  to  open  the  book,  but  to  receive  from  all 
the  armies  of  heaven,  the  power,  and  the  riches , 
and  the  wrfdom,  and  the  Jl rength  ; and  the  ho- 
nour, and  the  glory,  and  the  blejfng  ? Rev.  v.  12. 
And  is  this  add  the  original  and  the  foie  ground, 
why  all  men  mitft  honour  him  even  as  thev  ho- 
nour the  Father  ? Yea,  and  why  every  creature 
which  is  in  the  heaven,  and  on  the  earth,  and  under 
the  earth,  and  on  the  fea,  and  all  that  are  in  them, 
fay,  To  him  that  Jittelh  on  the  throne  and  to  the 
Lamb,  is  the  blejjing,  and  the.  honour,  and  the 
glory  and  the  power,  for  ever  and  ever  / v,  13. 

" 1 o him,  that  fitteth  on  the  throne  and  to  the 
Lamb — Does  that  mean,  to  the  great  God  and 
th  e little  God  ? If  fo,  when  all  creatures  in  hea- 
ven and  earth , all  throughout  the  univerfe,  thus 
honour  him  even  as  they  honour  the  Father , are 
they  not  doing  him  too  much  honour  ? My  glory, 
faith  the  Lord,  / will  not  give  to  another.  How 
comes  it  then  to  be  given  to  the  Lamb? 


5-  You 


C 120  ] 

5.  You  proceed,  “ The  worthinefs  of  Guilt 
is  his  confummate  virtue , obedience  to  God,  and 
benevolence  to  his  creatures.”  Is  this  the  only 
ground  of  his  worthinefs  to  be  honoured  even  as 
the  Father  ? Is  it  on  this  ground  alone , that  alt  the 
angels  of  God  axe  to  w or  flip  him?  Or  rather,  be- 
caufe  in  the  beginning , from  everlafting,  he  was 
with  God,  and  was  God. 

*l  Virtue  is  the  only  price  which  purchafdh 
every  thing  with  God.  True  + virtue,  or  the 
right  exercife  of  reafon  is  true  wcith , and  the 
only  valuable  co/f  deration  which  prevails  with 
God.”. 

* Do  you  then  conceive  this  to  be  the  exact 
meaning  of  St.  Paul,  when  lie  fays,  Ye  are 
bought  with  a price  ? And  that  where  he  fpeaks 
•of  the  church  of  God  which  he  hath  pur  chafed  with 
his  own  blood,  he  means,  with  his  own  virtue  ? 
Agreeably  to  which,  Thou  haf  redeemed  us  by 
thy  blood,  mull  mean,  By  “ the  right  exercife  of 
thy  reafon  /”  W ell  then  might  lather  Socinus  fa}', 
“ Tota  redemptions  no  free  per  Chr  ilium  Meta- 
phora.  The  whole  metaphor  of  our  redemption  by 
ChriJlF  For  on  this  fcheme,  there  is  nothing 
° real  in  it. 

“ It  teas  not  the  mere  natural  power  or  ftrength 
of  the  Lamb,  but  his  moll  excellent  charaEer.  ' — 
Sir,  Do  you  honour  the  Son,  even  as  you  honour 
the  Father  ? If  you  did  could  vou  poflibly  talk  of 
him  in  this  Hrain  ? 


+ P-  73* 


However 


t IS*  ] 

however  all  this  does  not  affe£f  the  queftion  : 
but  it  ftill  remains  art  unfhaken  truth,  that  all 
mens  dying  in  Adam  is ' the  grand  caufe,  why 
■the  whole  world  lieth  in  wickednefs. 

Newington,  Jan.  18,  1 757, 

1.  In  your  fee ond  part  you  profefs  to  “ exa- 
mine the  principal  palfages  of  fcripture,  xvh ich  di- 
vines have  applied,  in  fupport  of  the  doctrine  of 
original  fin  : particularly  thofe  cited  by  i the  af. 
jembly  of  divines  in  their  larger  cateclu/in.''  To 
this  I never  fubferibed:  but  I think  it  is  in 
the  main,  a very  excellent  coinpofition.  Which 
I fhall  therefore. chearfully  endeavour  to  defend, 
fo  far  as  I conceive  it  is  grounded  on  clear  ferip- 
ture- 

But  I would  firft  obferve  in  general,  with  Dr. 
j — , that  there  are  two  kind  of  texts  in  the  en- 
fuing  colleftien;  feme  that  duedly  prove,  others 
that  properly  illufirate  the  doftrine  of  or  iginal  fin. 
And  there  are  fo  many-,  in  vlpch  it  is  either  di- 
reftly  fpoken  of,  or  evidently  implied,  that  the 
author  might  well  have  fpared  his  obfervation, 
“ The  WJcripture /peaks  very  fparmgly  of  the  con- 
fcquences  of  Ad  and  s Jin  upon  us,  becaufe  as  thefe 
are.  freely  reverfed  to  mankind  by  Chrijf,  we  a< e 
not  fo  much  concerned  to  know  them The  faff 
here  affirmed  is  equally  true  with  the  reafon  ar- 
figned  for  it. 

Vo  1..  XXL  F 2.  The 

t p.  87,  -88, 


II  P-  5°- 


t 122  J 

2.  The  firft  proportion  in  the  catechif/n 
-which  relates  to  original  fin  is  this. 

The  § covenant  being  made  with  Adam  as  a 
public  perfcn,  not  for  himfelf  only , but for  his  pof- 
terity , all  mankind  defending  from  him  by  ordi- 
nary generation,  finned  with  him , and  Jell  with 
him  in  that  firf  tranfgrejfion. 

Adis  xvii.  26.  GoJ  hath  made  of  one  blood  all 

nations  of  men. 1 believe  Dr.  J — Ts  remark 

here  will  fuffice. 

“ + This  is  quoted  to  prove,  that  all  mankind 
defcend  from  Adam.  But  Dr.  T — adds,  That  is, 
hath  made  all  the  nations  of  the  world  oj  one  fpe- 
cies,  endowed  with  the  fame  faculties T And  fo 
they  might  have  been,  if  all  men  had  been  creat- 
ed fingly  and  feparatelv,  juft  as  Adam  was  : but 
they  could  not  then,  with  any  propriety  of  lan- 
guage, have  been  faid  to  be  of  one  blood.  This 
fcripture  therefore  is  very  pertinently  quoted  to 
prove  what  it  is  brought  for.  That  Adam  was  a 
public  perfon , including  ail  his  pojlenty , and  confe - 
quently , that  all  mankind  defending  from  him  by 
ordinary  generation,  finned  i him , and  fell  with 
him  in  his  firjl  trail fgreffion,  the  allembly  have 
proved  very  methodically  and  fubftantially : 
firft,  from  Gen.  ii.  16,  17,  where  death  is 

threatened  to  Adam  in  cafe  of  his  finning  : then 
from  Rom.  v.  12 — 20,  and  1 Cor.  xv.  21,  22, 
where  we  are  exprefly  told,  that  all  men  die  in 

Adam, 

t p.  91,  92.  + Vindication  p.  49,  &c. 


[ 123  1 

Adam,  and  that  by  his  offence,  judgment  is  come 
upon  all  men  to  condemnation. 

Prop.  All  t mankind  finned  in  him , and  fell 
with  him  in  thatfirjl  tranfgrejfion : which  they 
prove  by  Gen.  ii.  16,  17,  eompared  with  Rom. 
v.  12 — 20. 

On  this  you  remark,.  “ The  ± threatning, 
Thou ffialt  furely  die , is  addreft  to  Adam  perfon= 
ally.  And  therefore  nothing  can  be  concluded 
thence,  with  regard  to  Adam's  pofterity.”  Is 
this  confequence  good  ? Was  not  the  fentence 
alfo  grounded  on  this  threatning,  Unto  duf  thou, 
Jhalt  return,  perfonally  dire&ed  to  him  ? And  is 
this  nothing  to  his  pofterity  P Nay  does  it  not 
from  this  very  confideration  appear,  that  all  his 
pofterity  were  concerned  in  that  threatning,  be- 
caufe  they  are  all  partakers  of  the  death  which 
was  fo  threatened  to  Adam  ? 

“ But  we  cannot  gather  from  Rom,  v.  or 
1 Cor.  xv.  That  all  mankind  finned  in  Adam,  if 
we  underhand  finned  as  diftinguilhed  from fffer- 
ing.”  It  has  been  largely  proved,  that  we  can : 
and  that  finning  mull  necelfarily  be  underftood 
there,  as  diftinguilhed  from  fuffering . 

“ But  the  apoftle  fays.  The  offence  § of  one 
brought  death  into  the  world ; whereas  had  all 
mankind  finned  in  Adam  when  he  finned,  then 
that  offence  would  not  have  been  the  offence  of 
one,  but  of  millions.  ’ It  might  be,  in  onefenfe, 
f 2 • the 

* P-  93?  94*  t 94-  § P 95- 


[ 3 

I' the  offence  of  millions , and  in  another,  the  of- 
fence of  one. 

“ It  is  true,  Adam’s  pofterity  fo  fell  with  him 
in  that frjl  trarfgrefion,  that  if  the  threatning 
had  been  immediately  executed,  he  would  have 
had  no  poflerity  at  all.”  The  threatning!  What 
was  the  threatning  to  them  ? Did  not  you  affure 
us,  in  the  very  laft  page.  The  threatning  is  aa- 
dreffed  to  Adam  per  finally  \ and  therefore  nothing 
can  be  concluded  Jrom  thence  with  regard  to  his 
pofenty  ? 

And  here  you  fay,  Their  very*"  Evidence 
did  certainly  fall  under  the  threatning  ol  the  law 
and  into  the  hands  of  the  judge  to  be  difpofed  of 
as  he  Humid  think  fit.”  “ As  he  fhould  think  fit !” 
Then  he  might  without  any  injuftice,  have  de- 
prived them  of  all  bleffmgs:  of  being  itfelf,  the 
only  pollible  ground  ©1  all  ! And  this,  for  the fin 
tf  another.. 

You  clofe  the  article  thus.  We  cannot  from 
thole  paffages  conclude,  that  mankind  by 
Adam’s  offence,  incurred  any  evil  but  temporal 
death.”  ]ufl  the  contrary  has  been  fhewn  at  large. 

3.  Their  fecond  propofition  is,  The  pall 
hr  audits  mankind  into  a fate  of fin  and  mifery. 

To  prove  this,  they  cite,  Rom.  v.  12.  A proof 
which  all  the  art  of  man  cannot  evade : and 
Rom.  iii.  2 3,  AU  have  finned,  •ana  come  fiort  of 
the  glory  of  God.  “ But  this  you  fay,  means 
©rdy,  ± Jews  as  well  as  Gentiles,  -men  of  all  na- 
tions 


+ p.  96. 


? P-  97- 


[ 125  ] 

tipns  have  finned  Nay,  it  is  mod  certain,  as 
Dr.  j_  obferves,  that  he  “ means  + all  men  of 
all  nations : or  he  means  nothing  to  the  purpofe 
of  his  conclufion  and  his  inferences,  v.  19,  20, 
zi,  2 The  apoflle  concludes  from  the  view  he 
had  given  before  of  the  univerfal  corruption  of 
mankind,  That  every  mouth  niujt  flopped,  and  all 
the  world  become  guilty  before  God,  v.  19.  From 
whence  he  draws  two  inferences,  1.  Thereforeby 
the  works  of  the  law  there  fhall  no  flefh  be jifified. 
2.  The  only  way  of  juftification  for  all  finners  is, 
By  faith  in  fefus  Chrifl.  For  there  is  no  dif- 
ference, as  to  the  way  of  juftification;  for  all  have 
finned  and  come  fiort  of  the  glory  of  God.  And 
therefore  whoever  they  are  whom  Dr.  T — ex- 
cludes from  this  all  ( all  have  finned ) he  muff 
likewife  exclude  from  having  any  need  of  jollifi- 
cation by  Chrift.” 

Be  this  as  it  may,  it  is  certain,  1.  That  man- 
kind are  now  in  a fate  of  jin  and  fuffering.  2. 
That  they  have  been  fo  in  all  ages,  nearly  from 
the  time  that  Adam  fell.  Now  if  his  fall  did  not 
bring  them  into  that  hate,  I would  be  glad  to 
know,  what  did  ? 

4.  Their  third  propofition  is,  ± Sin  is  any 
want  of  conformity  to,  or  tranfgrejjion  of  the  law 
of  God , given  as  a rule  to  the  rcafonable  creature. 
This,  you  fay,  has  no  immediate  relation,  to  our 
prefent  defign.’1  But  it  had  to  their's  : which 
was  to  illultrate  the  pieceding  afTertion,  That  the 
F 3 M 

t Vindication  p.  50,  &e.  J p.  98, 


C 3 

Jail  of  Adam  brought  mankind  into  a fate  cffm , m 
both  thefe  fenfes  of  the  word. 

g.  Their  fourth  propofition  is ; The  JinfuL- 
ne.fs  of  that  fate  into  which  man  Jell , confjls  in  the 
guilt  of  Adam  s frjl  fin , the  leant  of  that  righteouf- 
ntfs  wherein  he  was  created , and  the  corruption  of 
his  nature , whereby  be  is  utterly  indifpojed,  difa- 
bled , and  made  oppofite  to  all  that  is  fpiritually 
good , and  wholly  inclined  to  evil,  and  that  conti- 
nually, which  is  commonly  called  original fin,  and 
from  which  do  proceed  all  aBual  Iranjgreffions. 

On  the  firft  article  of  this  you  fay,  “ + Adam’s 
firft  fin  was  attended  with  confequences  which 
affedt  all  his  pofterity:  But  we  could  not  on  ac- 
count of  his  fin,  become  obnoxious  to  puni fit- 
ment.By  punijhment  1 mean  evil,  buffered  on. 
account  el  fin.  And  are  we  not  obnoxious  to 
any  evil,  on  account  of  Adam’s  fin  ? 

To  prove  the  reft  of  the  propofition,  they  cite 
firft,  Rom.  fii.  10 — zo.  On  which  you  remark, 
“ The  ^ apoftle  is  here  fpeaking  of  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  not  in  a perfonal  but  in  a national  capa- 
city. The  mouth  fays  he,  of  all  forts  of  people  is 
fiopped,  and  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  are  brought  in 
guilty  ; for  I have  proved,  that  there  aretranf- 
greffors  among  the  Jews,  as  well  as  among  the 
Gentiles."  Not  at  all.  If  he  proved  no  more 
than  this,  not  one  perfon  would  become  guilty 
before  God.  Not  one  mouth  of  Jew  or  Gentile 

would 

[ 4 P-99-  fp.  102. 


[ 127  ] 

would  be  flopped,  by  Shewing,  16  There  were 
Jewiflh  as  well  as  Heathen  tranfgreffors.” 

I proceed  to  your  observations. 

“ Obfl  i.  In  this  whole  feHion  there  is  not 
one  word  of  Adam."  There  is  enough  in  the 
next  chapter  but  one.  The  apoftle  firft  defcribes 
the  effefi,  and  afterward  points  out  the  caufe. 

“ Obfl.  2.  He  is  here  Speaking,  not  of  all 
men,  but  of  the  Jews  ; of  thofe  alone  who 
were  under  the  law , v.  19,  and  proving  from  their 
own  writingst,  that  there  were  great  corruptions, 
among  them  as  well  as  other  people.” 

He  is  Speaking  of  them  chiefly,  but  not  of  them 
only,  as  appears  from  the  9th  verfe,  We  have 
heflore  proved  both  Jews  and  Gentiles , that  they 
are  all  under  fin  : As  it  is  written,  there  is  none 
righteous  (neither  among  the  Jews  nor  Gentiles ) 
no,  not  one.  Does  this  refpeft  them,  in  their 
•national  only,  not  perflonal  capacity  ? Does  it 
prove  no  more  than,  “ That  there  were  great 
corruptions  among  the  Jews,  as  well  as  other  peo- 
ple ?” 

“ Obfl.  g.  The  feHion  ^ confifls  of  feveral 
quotations  out-of  the  Old  Teftament;  but  1.  None 
of  them,  taken  Separately,  fpeaks  of  any  depra- 
vity of  nature,  but  of  habits  of  wickednefs,  which 
men  had  themfelves  contracted.”  They  do  fpeak 
of  habits  w'hich  men  had-contrafted  themfelves : 

F 4 but 

+ p.  103.  + p.  103. 


r 12.8  ] 

but  do  th«y  fpeak  of  thefe  only  ? The  way  to 
know  this  is,  not  to  “ take  them  feparately;” 
not  to  conhder  the  precife  meaning,  wherein 
they  wereoccafionally  fpoken,  by  David,  Solomon 
©r  Ijaiah  : but  to  take  them  conjointly,  as  they 
are  here  put  together  by  the  Holy  Ghoft,  to 
form  the  character  of  all  mankind. 

On  one  of  them,  “ feparatly  taken,”  you 
fay,  How  could  God  look  down from  heaven,, 
to  fee  if  there  were  any  that  did  feeh  God,  if  he 
knew  all  mankind  were  naturally  difabled  from 
feeking  him  ?”  Why  not,  if  whatever  they 
were  by  nature  the  grace  of  God  was  more  or 
lefs  given  to  all  ? Though  they  were  wholly  in- 
clined to  all  evil  by  nature,  yet  by  grace  they  might 
recover  all  goodnefs. 

You  affirm.  2,  “ In  none  + of  thefe  places 
does  God  fpeak  flriftly  of  every  individual  Jew 
under  David  or  Salomon.  Very  many  were  bad; 
but  fome  were  good.”  They  were ; though  by 
grace,  not  nature.  But  among  all  tlrofe  of 
whom  God  fpeaks  by  St.  Paul,  there  was  none 
good  or  righteous,  no,  notone  : every  individual, 
whether  Jew  or  Heathen  was  guilty  before  God. 

“I  conclude  i therefore,  i.That  noneofthofe 
texts  refer  to  any  corruption  common  to  all 
mankind.”  Perhaps  they  do  not,  as  fpoken  by 
David  ; but  they  do  as  fpoken  by  St.  Paul.  “ I 
conclude,  2.  Such  a general  corruption  as  ad- 
mits of  no  exception,  was  not  necelfaty  to  the 

apollle's 

+ p.  1134.  i ?■  106,  10?. 


C - 129  ] 

apoftle’s  argument.'’  Abfolutely  neceffary  : had 
it  not  included  every  individual  per  fori,  no  perfon s 
mouth  would  have  been  flopped. 

Thefe  texts  therefore  do  “ direflly  and  cer- 
tainly prove/'  that  at  the  time  when  the  apollle 
wrote,  every  individual  few  and  Gentile,  (except 
only  thofe  who  were  J'aved  by  grace ) were  all 
under  Jin  ; That  there  was  none  of  them  righteous, 
no  not  one ; none  that  underjlood  or  that  fought 
after  God.  This  was- the  faff  : And  who  can 
find  out  a more  rational  way  of  accounting  for 
this  universal  wickednefs,  than  by  an  univerfal 
corruption  of  our  nature,  derived  from  our  firfl 
parent  ? 

S.  The  next  proof  is,  ^ Eph.  ii.  l,  2,  g. 
And  you  hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead  in 
trefpaffes  and  Jins:  wherein  in  time  pafl  ye, 
walked,  according  to  the  courj'e  of  this  world,  ac- 
cording to  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,  the 
fpirit,  that  now  worheth  in  the  children  of  difo- 
bedience:  among  whom  alfo  we  air  had  our  Con- 
nerfation  in  limes  pafl,  in  the  defires  of  our  fefi 
fulfilling  the  d fires  if  the jlfhand  of  the  mind  ; and 
were  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath  even  as  others. 

1.  “ Nothing  is  here  intimated  of  any  ill  effects 
of  Adam's  fin  upon  us.”  No  ? Not  if  we  are 
children  of  wrath  by  nature ? 

2.  “ The  Ephefians  were  Gentilesconverted  to 
the  faith.”  Yea,  and  Jews  alfo.  In  this  very  paf- 
fagethe  apoftle  fpeaks  of  both:  firft,  the  Gentile,: 
then  the  Jewifh  converts. 

+ p.  lo&v  ■ 


3-  “ 


[ *3°  ] 

3-  “ In  thefe  verfes  lie  is  defcribing  their 
wretched  hate,  while  they  were  in  Gentile  dark* 
nefs,  ’ — and  while  they  were  in  Jewifli  darknefs ; 
the  Jews  having  been  juft  as  wicked  before  their 
converfion  as  the  Heathens.  Both  the  one  and 
the  other  had  walked  till  then  in  the  vanity  of  their 
mind , having  their  under /landing  darken'd,  being 
equally  dead  in  trefpaffes  and  fins , equally  alienated 
from  the  lift  of  God,  through  the  blindnefs  of  their 
heart : a very  lively  defcription,  not  I'o  much  of  a 
wicked  life,  as  of  an  evil  nature. 

4.  t “ When  he  faith,  they  were  dead  in  trej- 
faf/es  and  fins,  he  fpeaks  of  their  perfonal  iniqui- 
ties.” (True,  both  of  heart  and  life.  I muft 
make  fome  variation  in  the  reft  of  your  para- 
phrafe)  Wherein , faith  he,  in  times  pafl  ye,  Hea- 
thens particularly,  walked ; inwardly  and  out- 
wardly, according  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of 'the 
air , the  fpirit  that  now,  ftill,  worketh  in  the  children 
ef  dif obedience  : among  whom  we  Jews  alfo  had  our 
converfutio'n,  being  as  dead  in  trefpaffes  and  fins  as 
you. 

“ Therefore  5.  i When  he  adds.  And  were  by 
nature  the  children  of  width  even  as  others,  he 
cannot  mean,  they  were  liable  to  wrath,  by  that 
nature  which  they  brought  into  the  world. 
Why  not  ? This  does  not  follow  from  any  thing 
you  have  faid  vet.  Let  us  fee  how  you  prove  it 
now.  “ This  nature  is  no  other  than  God  s own 
work.  The  nature  of  every  man  comes  out  of 

the 


t p.  109. 


ICC, 


[ 131  J 

the  hands  of  God.”  The  fame  may  be  ' faid  of 
thofe  who  are  hill  dead  in  trefpajfes  and  Jins. 
Their  original  nature  came  from  God  and  was  no 
other  than  God’s  own  work.  Yet  the  prfent 
corruption  of  their  nature  came  not  from  God, 
and  is  not  his  work.  “ Confequently  the  nature 
of  every  perfon  when  brought  into  being,  is  juft 
wThat  God  fees  fit  it  fhould  be.”  This  is  true  of 
the  original  nature  of  mankind,  when  it  was  firft 
brought  into  being.  But  it  is  not  true  of  our  pre- 
fen t corrupt  nature.  This  is  not  what  God  fees  fit 
it  fhould  be.  “ It  is  his  power  alone  that  forms 
it.”  Yes,  that  forms  us  men  ; but  not,  that  forms 
us  Jinful  men.  “ To  fay  the  nature  HE  gives  is 
the  objefft  of  his  wrath,  is  little  lefs  than  blaf- 
phemy.”  As  he  gave  it,  it  is  not  the  objeft  of  his 
wrath  ; but  it  is,  as  it  is  defiled  with  fin.  “ Far 
was  it  from'  the  apoftle  to  depreciate  our  nature” 
True,  our  original  nature.  But  never  did  man 
more  deeply  depreciate  our  prefent , corrupt  na- 
ture. “ His  intent  is,  to  fhew  the  Ephefians,  they 
were  children  of  wrath,  through  the  fins  in  which 
they  walked .”  Yea,  and  through  the  defires  of  the 
JleJh  and  the  mind  mentioned  immediately  before: 
through  the  vanity  of  their  mind,  through  the  blind- 
nefs  of  their  hearts,  pajl  Jteling,  alienatedjrom  the 
life  of  God.  Is  he  “ not  here  § fpeaking  of  their 
nature , but  of  the  vicious  courfe  of.  life  they  had 
led  ?”  “ He  well  underftood  the  worth  of  the 
human  nature” — he  did,  both  in  its  original , apd 
F 6 in 

S 5p 


'[  J32  ] 

in  its prefent  ftate — “ And  elfewhere  {hews,  it  was 
endowed,  even  in  the  Heathens,  with  light  and 
power  fufficient  to  know  God,  and  obey  his 
will.”  In  what  Heathens,  in  Europe,  Afia,  Afri- 
ca, or  America,  is  nature  now  endowed  with  this 
light  and  power  ? I have  never  found  it  in  any 
Heathen  yet : and  I have  converfed  with  manv, 
of  various  nations.  On  the  contrary,  I have 
found,  one  and  all,  deeply  ignorant  of  the  very 
end  of  their  exigence.  All  of  them  have  con- 
firmed what  an  Heathen  Meeko  (or  chief)  told  me 
many  years  ago,  “ He  that  fitteth  in  heaven 
knoweth  why  he  made  man : but  we  ’ know  no- 
thing.” 

* “ But  St.  Paul  fays,  When  the  Gentiles  which 
have  not  the  law,  do  by  nature  the  things  contained 
in  the  law,  they  are  a law  to  themjelves.  Thisfup- 
pofes,  they  might  have  done  them  by  nature . or 
their  natural  powers But  hosv  does  it  appear, 
that  by  nature,  here  means,  by  their  mere  natural 
powers?  It  is  certain,  they  had  not  the  written 
law.  But  had  they  no  Ju per  natural  ajjijlance  ? 
Is  it  not  one  God  who  works  in  us  and  in  them, 
both  to  will  and  to  do  ? They  who  by  this  help  do 
the  things  contained  in  the  law,  we  grant  “ are 
not  the  objebis  of  God’s  wrath.” 

“ Again,  he  affirms,  the  + Gentiles  had  light 
fufficient  to  have  feen  God’s  eternal  power  and 
godhead.”  They  had  ; but  how  does  it  appear, 
that  this  was  the  merely  natural  light  of  their  own 

unapjijled 


1 Rom.  i,  191  20, 


[ m J 

unafffted  reafon  ? If  they  had  affiftance  from 
God,  and  did  not  ufe  it,  they  were  equally  with- 
out excufe.  “ Nay,  if  their  i nature  was  corrupt, 
and  therefore  they  did  not  glorify  God,  they  had" 
a fair  e-xcufe.”  True,  if  God  had  not  offered 
them  grace  to  balance  the  corruption  of  nature. 
But  if  he  did,  they  are  flilt  without  excufe : be- 
cattfe they  might  have  conquered  that  corruption^ 
and  would  not.  Therefore  we  are  not  “ obliged 
to  feek  any  other  fenfe  of  the  phrafe,  by  nature ,, 
than  by  the ■ nature  we  bring  into  the  world.” 

However  you  think  you  have  found  another. 
“ By  nature  may  fignify  really  and  truly.  Thus, 
§ St».  Paul  calls,  Tin  rotliy  yp'/io-iov  rsy.i/oy,  his  own , 
genuine  [on  in  the  faith  : not  to  fignify  he  was  the 
child  of  the  apoftfe,.  but  that  he  was  a real  imita- 
tor of  his  faith.  In  like  manner  he  calls  the 
Ephefians  tplc-a  rsy.m- genuine  children  of  wrath  ; 
not  to  fignify  they  were  related  to  wrath  by 
their  natural  birth  ; but  by  their  fin.  and  dfobedi~ 
ence . ... 

This  is  fimply  begging  the  queftion,  without 
fo  much  as  a (hadow.  of  proof.  For  the  Greek 
word  in-  one  text  is  not  the  fame,  nor  any  way 
related  to- that  in  the  other.  Nor  is,  there  the 
Jeaft  refemblance  between,  the  apoftle’s  calling 
Timothy  v his  own  fon.  in,  the  faith,  anrihis  affirm-, 
ing,  that  even,  thqfe-who  are  now  faved  by  grace 
were  by  nciture  children  of  wrath. 

To  add  therefore,.  “ Not  as  they  came  under 

condemn 

t p.  112,  ’ $ p.  J1& 


[ m ] 

condemnation  by  the  offence  of  Adam ,”  is  only  beg* 
ging  the  queftion  once  more  : Though  it  is  true, 
they  had  afterwards  inflamed  their  account,  by 
“ their  own  trefpaffes  and  fins.” 

You  conclude,  “ [|  By  nature  therefore  may  be 
a metaphorical  expreflion.  and  confequently  is 
not  intended,  ' ( may  be  in  the  premifs,  is  not  in 
the  conclufion ! A way  of  arguing  you  frequently 
ufe)  “ to  fignify  nature  in  the  proper  fenfe  of  the 
word;  but  to  mean,  they  were  really  and  truly 
children  of  wrath.”  But  where  is  the  proof? 
Till  this  i'S  produced,  I muff  ftill  believe,  with 
the  Chriflian  church  in  all  ages,  that  all  men  are 
children  of  wrath  by  nature  in  the  plain,  proper 
fenfe  of  the  word. 

7.  The  next  proof  is  Rom.  v.  6.  While  we  were 
yet  without  frength,  in  due  timeChrifl  died  for  the 
ungodly.  You  anfwer,  1.  “ The  apoflle  is  here 
fpeaking,  not  of  mankind  in  general,  but  of  the 
Gentiles  only,  as  + appears  by  the  whole  thread  of 
his  difcourfe  from  the  beginning  of  the  epiflle.” 
From  the  beginning  of  the  epiflle  to  die  6th 
verfe  of  the  5th  chapter,  is  the  apoftle  fpeaking 
of  the  Gentiles  only  ? Odierwife  it  cannot  appear 
“ by  the  whole  thread  of  his  difcourfe  from  the 
beginning  of  the  epifde.”  “ But  it  appears  ef- 
pecially  from  chap.  iii.  ver.  9.  What  then  ? Are 
we  Jews  better  than  they  Gentiles?”  Nay,  from  that 
very  verfe  he  fpeaks  chiefly  of  the  Jews.  And  you 

yourfelf 

•I  P-  "4-  + P- 


[ 135  ] 

yourfelf  a few  i pages  ago,  roundly  affirmed, 
“ that  he  there  fpoke  of  the  Jews  only” 

And  will  you  affirm,  that  in  the  4th  chapter 
likewife  “ he  is  fpeaking  of  the  Gentiles  only?'’ 
Is  it  not  manifeft,  that  he  does  not  fpeak  of  them 
at  all,  in  a confiderable  part  of  that  chapter  ? 
How  then  does  it  appear,  by  the  whole  thread  of 
his  difeourfe  from  the  beginning  of  the  epiflle, , “ that 
he  is  here  fpeaking  not  of  mankind  in  general, 
but  of  the  Gentiles  only  ?” 

However  you  boldly  go  on  “ § Having  efta- 
bliffied  the  point,  that  the  Gentiles  have  as  good 
a title  to  God's  favour  as  the  Jews.  ’ — How  ? Is 
this  the  only,  or  the  chief  point  which  St.  Paul 
eflablifhes  in  the  4th  chapter?  Is  not  his  main 
point  throughout  that  chapter  to  prove,  that  both 
Jews  and  Gentiles  were  juflified  by  faith?  Or,  is 
he  “ fpeaking  this,  not  of  mankind  in  general, 
but  of  the  Gentiles  only?  Heproceeds  chap.v.  1. 
Therefore  being  juf  if ed  by  faith,  we  Gentiles  have 
peace  with  God.”  In  thefame  manner  you  thruft 
in  the  word  Gentiles  into  each  of  the  following 
verfes.  Had  then  the  Gentiles  only  peace  with 
G 'd ? You  might  with  more  colour  have  inferted 
Jews  in  ever)'  verfe.  For  of  them  chiefly  the 
apoftle  had  been  fpeaking.  To  fay  that  “ he  |[ 
principally  fpeaks  of  and  to  the  Gentiles,  to  the 
end  of  the  6th  chapter,”  is  another  affertion 
which  cannot  be  proved.  It  is  therefore  by 
no  means  true,  that  “ he  is  in  this  verfe  fpeak* 

ing 

} p.  102,  &c,  jl  p.117. 


[ 136  ] 

i-ng  of  the  Gentiles,  in-  contradiftin&ion  to  the 

Jt  9 9 

etvs. 

You  affirm,  2.  “By  the  fame  argument,  he 
here  confiders  the  Gentiles  only  in  a body , as 
tlifti'nguilhed  from  the  body  of  the  Jews.  For  fo 
he  does  all  along  in  the  four  firll  chapters*”  No, 
not  in.  one  of. them.  If  he  had,  the  mouth  of  no 
one  individual  perfon  had  been flopped.  On  the 
contrary  he  fpeaks  both  here  and  all  along  of 
every  individual,  that  every  one  might  believe 
in  him,  who  died for  every  one  of  the  ungodly. 

You  affirm,  3.  “ In  this  + verfe  he  defcribes 
the  condition  of  the  converted  Gentiles  when  in 
their  Heathen  Hate,  in  which  they  were  without 
Jlrength , unable  to  recover  themfelves ; they  were 
ungodly .year [inner s*.  and  enemies  to  God.’’  And 
were  not  the  unconverted  Jews  alfo  flnners ,.  and 
enemies  to  God,  ungodly,  and  without  Jlrength  to 
recover  themfelves?  Thefe  four  characters  there- 
fore are  no  proof  at  all,  “ that  the  Gentiles  only 
are  here  fpoken  of.” 

“ Their  fin  and  enmity  an aungodiinefs  confided 
in  their  wicked  works.'  Primarily  in  their  wicked 
tempers.  But  how  came  all  men,  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles, to  have-thpfe. wicked  tempers , and  to  walk 
in  thofe  wicked  works  f How  came  they  all,  till 
converted,  to.be  dead  in  Jin,  and  without  flrtngtk 
to  recover  from  it  ? Unlefs  in  Adam  alt  died ^ 
iji  a deeper  fenfe  than  you  are  willing  to  allow. 

You  fum  up  your  argument  thus : “ Th.e- 

apoftle. 


•t  p.  118,. 


[ 137  ] 

% ‘apoflle  is  not  fpeaking  here  of  all  mankind's 
being  corrupted  in  Adam,  but  of  the  Gentiles 
being  corrupted  by  the  idolatry  and  wickedndfs 
into  which  they  had  plunged  themfelves,  and 
out  of  which  they  were  unable  to  recover  them- 
felves, without  the  extraordinary  interpofal  of 
divine  grace.” 

If  ihis  was  the  cafe  of  the  Heathens  only,  then 
the  Jews  were  not  without  Jirengtk,  but  were  able 
to  recover  themfelves  from  their  wickednefs, 
without  any  fuch  interpofal  ! But  with  regard  to 
the  Heathens  I afk,  1.  Was  this  the  Hate  of  all 
the  Heathen  nations,  or  of  fome  only  ? 2.  If  of 
fome  only,  which  were  they  that  were  not  cor- 
rupted ? 3.  If  it  was  the  Hate  of  all  Heathen  na- 
tions, how  came  it  to  be  fo  ? How  was  it,  that 
there  was  not  one  uncorrupted  nation  on  earth  ? 
4.  How  could  any  Heathen  nation  be  in  this 
Hate  ? Without  Jirength  ? Unable  to  recover  them- 
felves from  fin,  without  the  extraordinary  inter- 
pofal of  the  divine  grace  ? Since  you  are  clear  in 
this,  that  “ all  the  § Gentiles  are  endowed  with 
light  and  power,  fufficient  to  know  God,  and 
perform  obedience  to  his  will,  by  their  na- 
tural powers  of  reafon  and  underflanding.. 
If  you  fay,  “ They  were  once  endowed, 
with,  thefe  powers,  but  now  they  had  calf 
them  away  I am  not  fatisfied  Hi il.  What, 
did  all  nations  call  away  their  natural  powers  of 
reafon  and  underfianding ? Surely  not!  But  if 

not,. 

$ p.  1-20,  § p,  11 1 » 


r ] 

fiot,.liow  came  they  ail  to  plunge  themfelves  int« 
this  dreadful  corruption  ? 

8.  Another  proof  is,  Rom.  viii.  7,.  8.  The  car- 
nal mind,  is  enmity  againfi  God : Jor  it  is  not  fub- 
jeB  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be*  So 
then  they  that  are  in  the  flefh  cannot  pleaft  God. 

On  this  you  obferve,  j.  “ Here  is  not  one 
wofd  of  Adam,  or  any  confequence  of  his  fin 
upon  us.” 

The  whole  paflage-  fpeaks  of  that  corruption 
of  our  nature,  which  is  the  confequence  of 
Adam’s  fin. 

The  plain  and  obvious  fenfe  of  it  is  this,  ver. 
3.  What  the  Icizu  could  not  do,  ( in  that  it  was 
weak  through  the  fefi,  too  weak  to  contend  with 
our  corrupt  nature)  God  hath  done  : fending  his 
own  Son,  he  hath  condemned  that  fin  which  was 
in  our  fefi : hath  given  fentence  that  it  Ihould  be 
defiroyed,  ver.  4.  That  the  nghteoufncfs  of  the 
law  might  be  fulfilled  in  us,  who  walk  not  after 
the  fefh,  but  after  the  fpirit : who  are  guided  in  all 
our  thoughts,  words  and  actions,  not  by  corrupt 
nature  but  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  ver.  5.  They 
that  are  after  the  fefi— who  are  Hill  guided  by 
corrupt  nature,  mind  the  things  of the  fefi : have 
their  thoughts  and  affeclions  fixt  on  fuch  things 
as  gratify  corrupt  nature:  but  they  that  are  after 
the  Spirit,  who  are  under  his  guidance,  mind  the 
things  of  the  Spirit : think  of,  relifh,  love  the. 
tilings,  which  the  Spirit  hath  revealed,  which  he 
moves  us  to,  and  promifes  to  give  us.  Ver.  6. 

For 


[ *39  3 

For  to  be  carnally  minded , to  mind. the  things  of 
thejlejh,  of  our  corrupt  nature,  is  death:  the  fure 
•mark  of  fpiritual  death,  and  the  way  to  death 
everlafting.  But  to  be  fpiritually  jninded,  to  mind 
the  things  of  the  Spirit,  is  life : the  fure  mark  of 
Spiritual  life,  and  the  way  to  life  everlafting  : and 
attended  with  the  peace  of  God,  and  peace  with 
God,  which  otherwife  can  have  no  place  : ver. 
7.  Becaufe  the  carnal  mind,  the  mind,  tafte,  in- 
clination, the  whole  bias  of  our  evil  nature  is 
enmity  againji  God.  For  it  is  not fubjeFl  to  the  law 
of  God , neither  indeed  can  be  : being  as  opposite 
tliereto  as  hell  to  heaven.  Ver.  8.  So  then  they 
that  are  in  the Jlefh—  ftill  unrenewed  by  the  Spi- 
rit, ftill  following  the  bent  of  corrupt  nature, 
cannot  pleafe  God.  Every  man  notv  may  fee 
whether  this  paftage  does  not  ftrongly  illujlrate 
the  depravity  of  our  nature. 

9.  The  laft  proof  of  this  part  of  the  propofition 
+ is,  Gen.  vi.  5.  God  Jaw  that  the  wichednefs  of 
man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every  imagi- 
nation oj  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil 
continually.  And  below,  ver.  11.  The  earth  was 
corrupt  before  God,  and  the  earth  was  filled  with 
violence. 

“ Mankind,  you  fay,  was  univerfally  debauch- 
ed into  lull  and  fenfuality,  rapine  and  violence/’ 
And  how  came  this  univerfal  wichednefs,  if  all 
mankind  were  quite  upright  by  nature  ? You 
anfwer,  “ They  had  corrupted  themfelves:  fo 
: the 


i Qi  122. 


[ i'^o  ] 

text,  ver.  12.  All  JleJli  had  corrupted  his  zcay 
upon  the  earth.”  This  exprefiion  does  not  ne-- 
eefTarily  imply  any  more,  than  that  all  flejh,  all 
men  were  corrupted*  But  taking  it  literally,  I 
aik,  How  came  all  fi-efh  to  corrupt  themfeives? 
“ Oh,  by  Seth's  pofterity  inter-marrying  with  the 
Cainites.  ’ But  how  came  all  the  Cainites  to 
corrupt  themfeives  ? And  all  the  Sethites  to  follow, 
not  reform  them  ? If  the  balance  was  even,  if 
nature  leaned  neither  way,  there  ought  to  have 
been  as  many  good  as  had  Hill : And  the  Sethites 
ought  to  have  reformed  as  many  of  the  children 
of'Cain,  as  the  Cainites  corrupted  of  the  children 
of  Seth.  How  came  it  then,  that  only  Noah  was  a 
jujl  man  ? And  does  one  good  man  amidft  a 
world  of  the  ungodlv,  prove  that  the  “ nature 
of  mankind  in  general  is  not  corrupted  ?”  Or 
rather  ilrongly  prove,  that  it  is?  It  does  not 
prove,  that  Noah  himfelf  was  not  naturally  in- 
clined to  evil  ; but  it  does,  that  the  world  was. 

“ i But  if  the  corruption  of  nature  was  the 
reafon  why  the  old  world  was.  deftroyed,  it  is  a 
reafon  for  the  deftruftion  of  the  world  at  any 
time/’  This  alone  was  never  fuppofed  to  be 
the  reafon  ; but  their  acdual  wickednefs  added 
thereto- 

You  add,  “ It  may  be  urged,  that  God  faid 
Sen.  viii.  21.  I will  not  again  cur fe  the  ground 
for  man's fake  : for  the  imagination  oj  mans  heart 
is  evil  from  his  youth.  But  the  Hebrew  parti- 
cle 


i?3- 


14*  ] 


cle  >>fometimes  fignifies  although."  That  does  not 
prove,  that  it  fignifies  fo  here.  But  what  if  it  does  ? 
What  if  the  texts  be  rendered,  Tkd  ike  imagination 
of  mans  heart  is  evil pent  his  youth  ? Even  thus 
rendered,  it  implies  as  flrongly  as  it  did  before, 
that  mans  heart  is  naturally  inclined  to  evil. 

The  Hebrew  word,  i tranflated  youth,  is  always 
applied  to  childhood,  or  tender  age , I fa.  vii.  16: 
*73/3  fignifies  a little  child.  And  none  of  the  texts 
you  have  cited  prove  the  contrary.  Heman,  the 
author  of  the  88th  pfalm , was  doutlefs  affhfled 
from  his  youth  or  childhood . The  Babylonians 
mentioned  Ifa.  xlvii.  12.  may  well  be  luppofed 
to  have  been  trained  up  in  the  way  ef  their  fa* 
thers,  from  t-hei r earliefi  childhood : , and  the 
plain  meaning  of  feremiah,  oh,  iii.  24.  23.  Shame 
hath  devoured  the  labour  of  our  fathers  from  our 
youth — Wehe  down  in  our  fame ; for  ice  have  fin- 
ned againfl  the.  Lord  our  God , we  and  our  fathers 
from  our  youth,  is.  Ever  lince  we  began  to  think 
or  a£f,  we  have  gone  allray  from  God. 

10.  The  preceding  texts  were  brought  to  prove 
(and  they  do  abundantly  prove  it)  that  our  na- 
ture is  deeply  corrupted, 'inclined  to  evil,  and  dif- 
■inclined  toall  rhat  rs  fpiritually  good,  fo  that  with- 
out fupernatural  grace,  we  can  neither  will  nor 
do  what  is  plealing  to  God.  And  this  eafily  ac- 
counts for  the  wickednefs  and  mifery  ofmankind, 
in  all  ages  and  nations  : whereby  experience  and 
reafon  do  fo  ftrongly  confirm  this  fcriptural 
doftrine  of  onginal  fin. 

Yet 


+ p.  121. 


[ 142  3 

Yet  it  will  not  “ follow,  That  men  afe  nd 
moral  agents .”  If  you  afk,  “ Why,  how  are 
they  capable  of  performing  duty  ?:’  I anfwer. 
By  grace  though  not  by  nature.  And  a mea- 
fure  of  this  is  given  to  all  men. 

Nor  does  it  follow,  “ That  we  can  by  no 
means  help  or  hinder  that  fin  which  is  natural 
to  rts.”  Yes,  we  can.  Anger,  for  inflance,  is 
natural  tome:  yea,  irregular,  unreafonable  an- 
ger. I am  naturally  inclined  to  this,  as  I experi- 
ence every  day.  Yet  I can  kelp  it  by  the  grace 
of  God  ; and  do  fo  as  long  as  I watch  and  pray. 

Dr.  J — anfwers  this  affertion  more  at  large, 
“ IJJin  be  natural , then  it  is  necej]'ary.\\  If  by  fin 
is  meant  the  corrupt  bias  of  our  wills,  that  indeed 
is  natural  to  us,  as  our  nature  is  corrupted  bv 
the  fall ; but  not  as  it  came  original lv  out  of  the 
hand  of  God.  Therefore  it  is  improperly  compar- 
ed to  the  appetites  of  hunger  and  third,  which 
might  be  in  our  original  nature . Now  this  bias 
of  the  will  is  certainly  evil  and  finful,  and 
hateful  to  God  ; whether  we  have  contraft- 
ed  it  ourfelves,  or  whether  we  derive  it  from 
Adam  makes  no  difference.  A proud  or  paffionate 
temper  is  evil,  whether  a man  has  contracted  it 
himfelf,  or  derived  it  from  his  parents.  There- 
fore the  inference,  If  natural  and  (in  fome  fenfe) 
neceffary  then  no  f/n,  does  bv  no  means  hold. 

“ But  if  by  fin  be  meant  finful  aftions,  to 
which  this  corrupt  bias  of  the  will  inclines  us ; 

it 

§ p.  I2j.  ||  Vindication,  p.  68,  &c. 


t M3  ] 

it  remains  to  be  proved,  that  a corrupt  bias  of 
the  will,  makes  the  aftions  neceflary  and  con» 
fequentlynot  finfu'l.  And  indeed,  if  a corrupt  bias 
makes  fin,  to  be  neceflary,  and  eonfequently  to 
be  no  fin,  then  the  more  any  man  is  inclined  to 
fin,  thelefsfinhe  can  commit : and  as  that  cor- 
rupt bias  grows  ftronger,  his  aftual  finning  be- 
comes more  necefiary  : and  fo.  the  man  iafiead 
of  growing  more  wicked  grows  more  innocent.” 

11.  That  this  doftrine  has  been  tlong  “ held  in 
the  church  of  Rome’  is  true.  But  fo  it  has  in  the 
Greek  church  alfo  : and  fo  far  as  we  can  learn,  in 
-every  church  under  heaven,  at  lealf  from  the  time 
that  God  fpakc  by  Mops. 

From  this  infection  of  our  nature  /'call  it 
original  fin,  or  what  you  pleafe)  fpring  many  if 
not  all,  aftual  fins.  And  this  St.  James  (i.  iq.) 
plainly  intimates,  even  according  to  your  para- 
phrafe  on  his  words.  “ Everyman  is  tempted,  is 
overcome  by  temptation  when  he  is  drawn  away 
by  his  own  lujl , his  own  irregular  a'ejire  ; 

! where  the  apolUe  charges  the  wickednefs  of  men 
on  its  proper  caufe,  their  Gian  ItiftE  Very  true. 
And  irregular  defire  is  (not  fo  much  a fruit  as  a) 
part  of  original  fin.  For  to  fay,  “ Eve  ihad  irre* 
gular  defiresbdoYxt  file  finned”  is  a contradiction ; 
fince  all  irregular  defire  is  fin. 

12.  Another  proof,  that  atlual  fins  fpring 
from  original  is.  Matt.  xv.  19.  Out  of  the  heart 

proceed 

t p.  126.  £ p.  127, 


t *44  ] 

pioce'ed  evil  thoughts , murders,  adulteries,  form- 
cations,  thefts,  falfe-xvitnefs,  blafpkemies. 

But  what  has  this  text  to  do  with  Adam'; 
(in  ?”  It  has  much  to  do  with  the  point  it  is 
brought  to  prove  : namely,  That  actual  fin  pro- 
ceeds from  original,  evil  works  from  an  evil 
heart.  Do  not  therefore  triumph  over  thefe  ve- 
nerable men  (as  you  have  done  again  and  again) 
becaufe  a text  cited  in  proof  of  one  claufe  of  a 
proportion,  does  not  prove  tire  whole-. 

+ But  “ neither  of  thofe  texts  proves,  that 
all  our  wickednefs  proceeds  from  our  being  cor- 
rupted by  Adam’s  fin.”  But  they  both  prove 
what  they  were  brought  to  prove,  that  all  out- 
ward wickednefs  proceeds  from  inward  wicked- 
nefs. Thofe  pious  men  therefore  did  not  mix 
“ the  forgery  of  their  own  imagination  wi:h  the 
truth  ofGod.” 

But4*  if  all  aftual  tranfgreflions  proceed  from 
Adam’s  fin,  then  he  is  the  only  guilt}-  perfon  that 
ever  lived.  For  if  his  fin  is  the  caufe  of  all  ours, 
he  alone  is  chargeable  with  them.” 

True  : if  all  our  tranfgreflions  fo  proceed  from 
his  fin,  that  we  cannot  poflibly  avoid  them.  But 
this  is  not  the  cafe  : by  the  grace  of  God,  we 
may  caft  away  all  out  Iranfgrejfions.  Therefore 
if  we  do  not,  they  are  chargeable  on  ourfelves. 
We  may  live  : but  we  will  die. 

Well,  but  “ on  i thefe  principles,  all  ac- 
tual fins  proceed  from  Adam  s fin,  either  by  ne- 


p.  1 29. 


[ H5  ] 

eeffary  confequence  ; or  thro5  our  own  choice  ; 
or  partly  by  one,  and  partly  by  the  other.”  Yes, 
partly  by  one  and  partly  by  the  other.  We  are 
inclined  to  evil,  antecedently  to  our  own  choice. 
By  grace  we  may  conquer  this  inclination,  or 
we  may  chufe  to  follow'  it,  and  fo  commit 
aflnal  fin. 

13.  Their  fifth  propofition  is,  t Original  finis 
■conveyed  from  our  JirJl  parents  to  their pojlerity  by 
natural  generation, fo  as  all  that  proceed  from  them 
in  that  way,  are  conceived  and  bornin  fin. 

In  proof  of  this  they  urge,  Pf  li.  5.  i Be- 
hold I was  fiapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  fin  did  my 
mother  conaeive  me. 

On  this  you  obferve.  “ The  word  which  we 
tranfiate  fiapen,  fignifies  to  bring  forth  or  bears 
So  here  it  means,  Behold  I was  brought  forth  or 
born  in  iniquity .” 

Suppofe  it  does  (which  is  not  plain;  for  you 
cannot  infer,  from  its  meaning  fo  fo  me  times. 
that  .it  means"  fo  here)  what  have  you  gained  ? 
If  David  was  born  in  iniquity,  it  is  little  differ* 
ent  from  bei ng  fiapen  therein. 

That  the  Hebrew  word  does  not  always  mean 
to  be  born,  but  rathen  to  be  fiapen, formed  or 
made,  evidently  appears  from  Pf  xc.  2 ; where 
1 rt  is  applied  to  the  formation  of  the  earth.  And 
in  this  very  text,  the  feventy  render  it  by 
I -a  word  of  the  very  fame  .import.  It  is  therefore 

Vol.  XXL  G here 


+ p.  130. 


+-P-  13'1- 


[ «*€  ] 

here  v£ry  properly  rendered  fhapen  : nor  can 
it'be  more  exaftly  mandated. 

But  “ the  word  jncn'  properly  fignifies  warm- 
ed vie?'"  You  fhould  fay,  literally  fignifies.  But  it 
fignifies  conceived  me  neverthelefs.  And  fo  it 
is  taken  >Gen,  xxx.  38,  39,  41,  &c.  xxxi. 
10.  “ Nay  it  f fignifies  there  the  aB  of  copula- 
tion. So  feveral  tranfiators  render  it.”  And  fe- 
veral  render  it  otherwife.  So  this  does  not  deter- 
mine the  point  either  way. 

It  mult  therefore  be  determined  by  the  fenfe. 
Now  for  what  end  did  Jacobput  the  pilUd  rods 
before  the  cattle?  That -the  lambs  might  be  marked 
as  the  rods  were.  And  when  is  it  that  females, 
of  any  kind  mark  their  young  ? Not  in  that  aft  : 
But  fometinie  after,  when  the  feetus  is  ether 
forming  or  aftually  Iromed.  Throw  a phturb 
or  a pear  at  a woman  before  conception,  and 
it  will  not  mark  the  feetus  at  all  : but  it  will, 
if  thrown  while  (he  is  conceiving,  or  after  Ihe 
lias  conceived,  as  we  fee  in  a thoufand  infiances. 
Thisobfervation  jullifies  our  tranfiators  in  render- 
ing the  word  by  conceiving  in  all  thofe  places. 

And  indeed  you  own,  “ David  could  not 
apply  that  word  to  his  mother,  in  the  fenfe  where 
in  you  would  apply  it  to  the  cattle.  ' You  there- 
fore affirm,  I it  means  here,  io  nur  re.  You 
mav  as  well  fay,  it  means,  to  roajl.  You  have  a$ 
much  authority  from  die  bible,  for  one  interpre- 
tation as  for  the  other.  Produce,  d vou  can,  one 

fingk 

.....  O 

f p.  132,  133.  tp.13* 


[ H7  ] 

fmgle  text,  in  which  Dn»  fignifies  to  nurfe,  or 
any  thing  like  it. 

You  ftride  on.  i.  “ The  verfe  means,  In  Jin 
did  my  mother  nurfe  me  : 2.  That  is,  I am  a [inner 
from  the  womb : 3.  That  is,  I am  a great [inner  : 
4.  That  is,  I have  controlled frong  habits  of fn 
By  this  ait  you  may  make  the  moft  expreflive 
texts,  mean  juft  any  thing  or  nothing. 

“ So  Pf  lviii.  3.  The  wicked  are  ef  ranged from 
the  womb : they  goaflray  asfoon  as  they  are  born , 
telling  lies.  That  is,  my  unjuft  periecutors  in 
Saul’s  court  are  exceedingly  wicked.”  If  this 
was  all  David  meant,  what  need  of  nj  are  ali- 
enated? And  that  from  the  bowels  of  their  mo- 
ther? Nay,  but  he  means  as  he  fpeaks.  They 
are  alienated  from  the  life,  of  God,  from  the  time 
of  their  coming  into  the  world.  From  the  time 
of  their  birth  they  knew  not  the  way  of truth  : nei- 
ther can,  unlefs  they  are  born  of  God. 

You  cite  as  a parallel  text,  “ Thou  wafl  called 
d tranfgrejfor  from  'the  womb,  that  is,  fet  to  ini- 
. quity  by  prevailing  habits  ' and  cuftoms.”  Nay, 
the  plain  meaning  is,  the  Ifraelites  in  general  had 
never  kept  God’s  laws  fince  thev  came  into  the 
world. 

Perhaps  the  phrale,  from  the  womb  is  once 
ufed  figuratively,  namely,  Job  xxxi.  18.  But  it 
is  manifeft,  that  it  is  to  be  literally  taken,  I fa. 
xlix.  1.  The  Lord  hath  called  me  from  the  womb , 
from  the  bowels  of  my  mother  hath  he  made  men- 
tion of  my  name.  For  1,  This  whole  paffage  re- 
G 2 fifes 


f H*  ] 

Jates  to  Chrift ; tliefe  expreflions  in  particular. 
2.  This  was  literally  fulfilled,  when  the  angel  was 
font  while  he  was  yet  in  the  womb,  to  order  that 
his  name  fhould  be  called  Jesus.  This  is  not 
therefore  barely  x‘  an  hyperbolical  form  of  aggra- 
vating fin  but  an  humble  confefiion  of  a deep 
and  weighty  truth,  whereof  we  cannot  be  too 
fenfible. 

“ But  you  have  + no  manner  of  ground  to  con- 
clude that  it  relateth  to  Adam’s  fin.” 

Whether  it  relates  to  Adam’s  perfonal  fin  or 
no,  it  relates  to  a corrupt  nature.  This  is  the 
prefent  queftion  ; and  your  pulling  in  Adam’s 
fin,  only  tends  to  puzzle  the  reader. 

But  how  do  you  prove  (fince  you  will  drag 
this  in)  that  it  does  not  relate  to  Adam’s  fin  ? 

Thus;  “ J.  In  the  whole  pfalm  there  is  not 
one  word  about  Adam,  or  the  effeCls  of  his  fin 
upon  us.” 

Here,  as  ufual,  you  blend  the  two  questions 
together  ; the  read}-  way  to  confound  an  umvarv 
reader.  But  firll,  to  the  firft,  “ In  the  whole 
pfalm  there  is  not  one  word  about  Adam.  There- 
fore it  relateth  not  to  him.”  Juft  as  well  you 
may  argue,  “ In  the  whole  pfalm  there  is  not 
one  word  about  Uriah.  Therefore  it  relateth  not 
to  him.”  The  fecond  aflertion,  “ There  is  not 
one  word  of  the  effefts  of  his  fin,”  is  a fair  beg- 
ging the  queftion. 

“ 2.  The  pfahnift  is  here  charging  himfelf  with 

Iris 


+ p-  13G. 


C H9  J 

his  own  fin.”  He  is ; and  tracing  it  up  to  the 
fountain. 

“ 3.  But  according  to  our  verfion,  he  does  not 
charge  himfelf  with  his  fin,  but  fame  other  perfori. 
He  throws  the  whole  load  of  his  fin  from  off 
himfelf  on  God  who  fhaped  him,  and  his  mother 
who  conceived  him.” 

What  you  fay  might  have  had  weight,  if  he 
had  offered  this  in  excufe  of  his  fin,  or  even  in 
extenuation  of  it.  But  does  he  do  this?  Does 
he  in  faft  “ throw  the  whole  blame,  or  any  part 
of  it  from  off  himfelf?”  Juft  the  reverfe.  He 
acknowledges  and  bewails  his  own  total  iniquity  : 
not  to  excufe , but  to  abafe  himfelf  the  more  be- 
fore God,  for  his  inward  as  well  as  outward 
wickednefs. 

And  yet  he  might,  in  perfedl:  confiftency  with 
this  when  God  had  caufed  the  bones  which  had 
been  broken  to  rejoice , cry  out,  I will  praife  thee, 
O God  : for  I am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made : 
yea,  and  repeat  all  that  follows  in  the  fame 
pfalm : whichproves  fo  much  and  no  more,  that 
every  feetus  in  the  womb  is  formed  by  the  powef 
and  wifdom  of  God.  Yet  does  it  not  follow,  that 
the  fin  tranfmitted  from  the  parent  “ mull  t be 
attributed  to  God.” 

“ But  how  could  he  with  pleafure  reflefl  upon 
his  formation,  or  praife  God  for  it?”  As  I can  at 
this  day  : though  I know  I was  conceived  in  fn, 
and  fiapen  in  iniquity.  But  where  Jin  abounds, 
G 3 grace 

+ p- 137. 


[ »So  ] 

grace  does  much  more  abound.  I lofe  lefs  by  Adam 
than  I gain  By  Chrift. 

This  alfo  perfeftly  confifts  with  the  following 
verfe,  i Behold  thou  defirejl  truth,  or  it  is  thy  will 
that  we  fhould  have  truth  in  the  inward  parts  : 
thou  art  willing  to  remove  all  that  iniquity 
wherein  I was  Jhapen,  to  give  me  a clean  heart , 
and  renew  a right  Jpirit  within  me.  And  in  the 
hidden  part  thou  hajl  made  me  to  know  wifdom  : 
thou  haft Jhewn  me  what  was  good.  So  that  I am 
every  way  without  excufe-  I knew  thy  will  and 
did  it  not. 

“ But  il  after  § all  vou  will  adhere  to  the  literal 
fenfe  of  this  text,  why  do  you  not  adhere  to  the 
literal  fenfe  of  that  text,  this  is  my  body,  and  be- 
lieve tranjubjlantialion  ?”  For  thofe  very  reafons 
which  you  fuggeft;  1.  Becaufe  it  is  groflyabfurd 
to  fuppofe  that  Chrift  fpeaksofwhat  he.  then  held 
in  his  hands,  as  his  real,  natural  body.  But  it  is 
no  way  abfurd  to  fuppofe  the  pfalmift  was  con- 
ceived in  fin.  2.  The  fenfe  of  this  is  my  body,  may 
be  clearly  explained  by  other  fcriptures,  where 
the  like  forms  of  fpeech  are  ufed.  But  there  are 
no  other  fcriptures  where  the  like  forms  with  this 
of  David  are  ufed  in  any  other  fenfe.  g.  Tran - 
fubfantiation  is  attended  with  confcquences  hurt- 
ful to  piety.  But  the  doftrine  of  original  fin,  and 
faith-grounded  thereon,  is  the  only  foundation  of 
true  piety. 

14.  The  next  proof  is,-  Job  xiv.  4.  TfTio 

can 


} p.  138.  § ibid. 


t ***  1 

can  bring  a clean  thing  out  cf  an  unclean  ? Net 

ene. 

On  this  you  obferve,  “Job  is  here.  j|  fpeaking 
©f  the  weaknefs  of  our  nature,  not  with  regard  to 
fin,  but  to  the  fhortnefs  and  aftliflions  of  life.” 
Certainly,  with  regard  both  to  the  one  and  the 
other.  For  though  in  the  fir  ft  and  fecond  verfes, 
he  mentions  the  fhortnefs  and  troubles  of  life,  yet 
even  thefe  are  mentioned  with  a manifeft  regard 
to  fin.  This  appears  from  the  very  next  verfe,  + 
And  doji  thou  open  thy  eyes  upon  Juch  a one , to 
punifh  one  already  fo  wretched  ? And bringeji  me 
into  judgment  with  thee , bychaftifingine  ftill  more? 
It  then  immediately  follows,  Who  can  bring  a 
clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean?  Not  one:  It  does 
therefore  by  no  means  appear  that  “ Job  is  here 
fpeaking  only  with  regard  to  the  fhortnefs  and 
troubles  of  life.” 

Part  of  the  following  verfes  run  thus  ; ver. 
16,  17.  Now  thou  number ef  my  feps:  doji  thou, 
not  watch  over  my  fin?  My  travfgrejjion  is  feahcl 
up  in  a bag , and  thou  fowejl  up  mine  iniquity. 
Let  any  one  judge  then,  whether  Job  in  this 
chapter  does  not  fpeaks  of  “ the  finfwlnefs  as  well 
as  the  mortality  of  human  nature.” 

Not  that  he  “ urges  J his  natural  pravity  as  a 
reafon  why  he  fliould  not  be  brought  into  judg- 
ment.”  No  more  than  David  urges  his  being 
fiapen  in  wichednefs,  as  an  excufe  for  that  wicked- 
nefs.  Rather  Job  (as  well  as  David)  humbly 
G 4 ac  know- 

11  p.  139.  t p.140.  :j:p.  Gi. 


[ ] 

acknow  ledges  his  total  finfulnels : eotifefling, 
that  he  defer  ved  the  judgment , which  yet  he  prays 
God  not  to  inflict. 

15.  Another  proof  is,  Job  xv.  14.  What  is  man 
that  he  Jkould  be  clean,  and  he  that  is  born  of « 
woman  that  he  ficuld  be  righteous ? 

On  this  you  obferve,  “ Born  of  a woman  fig- 
nifies  no  more  than  a man.”  Often  it  does  not; 
but  here  it  is  emphatical.  “ The  phrafe  indeed 
T includes  Jrailty  and  imperfcElidn  How  can 
that  be  ? Was  Adam  made  frail  and  imperfect? 
And  have  you  forgot  that  every  man  is  now  born 
in  as  good  a Ifate  as  Adam  was  made  at  find  ? 
“ But  it  is  not  to  be  underfiood  as  the  reafon, 
why  man  is  unclean  and  unrighteous.-’  From 
the  placing  of  the  words  one  would  really  judge 
:t  was:  and  how  do  you  prove  it  is  not  ? Why, 
“ Job  and  his  friends  ufe  this  manner  of  fpeeck, 
in  other  places  of  this  book.  § Shall  mortal  man 
be  morejujl  than  God?  Shall  a man  be  more  pure 
than  his  maker  ?”  Nay,  this  is  not  the  manner  of 
fpeech  which  is  in  queftion  ; fo  you  are  here  quite 
wide  of  the  mark.  “ However  that  is,  How  can 
man  be  jujlifed  with  God?  Or  how  can  he  be  clean 
that  is  born  of  a woman  ?”|| 

And  does  not  this  point  at  original  fin  ? You 
fay,  No.  For  “ if  Job  and  his  friends  had  known, 
that  the  reafon  of  our  uncleannefs  and  imperfec- 
tion was  our  receiving  a corrupted  nature  from 
Adam,  they  ought  to  have  given  this  reafon  of 
. it.” 

{ p.  i$s.  §Jobiv.  17.  D Job  xxv.  4. 


[ >53  1 

it,”  And  do  they  not,  in  the  very  words  before 
us?  You  fay,  “No:  they  turn  our  thoughts  to  a 
quite  different  reafon,  namely,  the  uncleannefs  of 
the  belt  of  creatures  in  his  fight.”  This  is  not  a 
different  reafon,  but  falls  in  with  the  other  : and 
the  natural  meaning  of  thefe  texts  is,  ||  How  can 
he  be  clean  that  is  born  of  a woman,  and  fo  con- 
ceived and  born  in  fin  ? Behold,  even  to  the  moon , 
and  it  Jhinetk  not,  compared  with  Cod ; vea,  the 
fiars  are  not  pure  in  his fight ! How  much  lefis  man 
that  is  a worm  ? In  how  much  higher  and  ftri&er 
a fenfe  is  man  impure,  that  carries  about  with 
him  his  mortality,  the  teftimony  of  that  unci  earl 
nature  which  he  brought  with  him  into  the 
world  ? 

i Shall  mortal  man  be\morejufi  than  God! 
Shall  a man  be  more  pure  than  his  maker?  Shall 
mandate  to  arraign  the  juftice  of  God?  To  fay, 
Gcd  punilhes  him  more  than  he  deferves?  Be- 
hold he  puts  no  trufi  in  his  fir  vants,  and his  angels 
he  charged,  with  Jolly . Many  of  thefe  left  their 
firft  eftates;  even  their  wifdom  was  not  to  be 
depended  on.  How  muik  Itfis  in  the  • that  dwell 
in  houfis  of  clay : whofe  bodies,  liable  to  pain, 
ficknefs,  death,  are  Handing  monuments  of  the 
folly  and  wickednefs  which  are  deep  rooted  in 
their  fouls  ? 

^ What  is  man,  that  he  Jha/l  be  clean , and  he 
which  is  born  of  a woman,  that  he  Jhould  be  righ- 

G,5  te^.is? 

1 Job  xxv.  4.  + Job  iv.  17,  &c.  t P> 

h Job  xv.  14,  <ks.  j 


[ r54  ] 

teous  f Behold  he  putteth  no  trufi  in  his  holy  cuts  ; 
yea,  the  heavens  are  not  pure  in  his  fight.  His 
holy  angels  have  fallen,  and  the  higheft  creatures 
are  not  pure  in  comparifon  of  him.  How  much 
more' abominable  and  flthy,  in  the  flrifteft  fenfe, 
is  man , every  man  born  into  the  world  •'  Who 
drinketh  iniquity  like  water , iniquity  of  every 
kind,  fo  readily,  fo  naturally,  as  being  fo  throughly 
agreeable  to  the  defires  of  his  fiefih,  and  oj  his 
mind? 

You  conclude  the  head  thus,  “ Man  in  his  pre- 
fent  weak  and  flelhy  hate  cannot  be  clean  before 
God.”  Certainly,  as  clean  as  the  moon  and  ftars 
at  leaft : if  he  be  as  he  was  firft  created.  He 
was  made  but  a little  lower  than  the  angels.  Con- 
fequently  he  teas  then  far  higher  and  more  pure, 
than  thefe,  or  the  fun  itfelf,  or  anv  other  part  of 
the  material  creation.  You  to  on,  “AYhvcan- 
not  a man  be  clean  before  God  ? Becaufe  he  is 
conceived  and  born  in  fin?  No  fuch  thing.  But 
becaufe  if  the  pureft  creatures  are  not  pure  in 
comparifon  of  God,  much  lefs  a being  fubjeft  to 
fo  many  infirmities  as  a mortal  man.”  Infirmi- 
ties ! What  then  ? Do  innocent  infirmities  make 
a man  unclean  before  God?  Do- labour,  pain,  bo- 
dily weaknefs,  or  mortality,.  make  us  filthy  and 
abominable  ? Surely  not.  Neither  could  they  make 
a man  pure  from  fin,  lefs  pure  than  the  moon  and 
flars.  Nor  can  we  conceive  Adam  as  he  came 
out  of  the  hands  of  God,  to  have  been  in  any 
fenfe  If  clean  than  thefe.  All  thefe  tests  there- 


[ *55  ] 

foveunuh  refer  to  that  fmful  impurity,  which 
every  man  brings  intb  the  world. 

You  add,  “ Which  Is  a demonhration  to  me, 
that  Job  and  his  friends  were  wholly  hrangers 
to  this  do&rine.”  A demonhration  of  a pecu- 
liar kind!  I think  neither  mathematical,  nor 
logical. 

16.  The  lah  proof  t i3  John  iii.  6.  That  which 
is  born  of  the  flefi  is  flejh , and  that  which,  is  born 
of  the fpirit  is  fpirit. . 

“ J Here  by  flejh  Dr.  Taylor  under  hands  no- 
thing elfe,  but  the  meer  parts  and  powers  cf  a 
man  : and  bv  being  born  of  the  fefh , the  being 
born  of  a woman , with  the  confiitution  and  natural 
powers  of  a man.”  Now  let  us  fuppofe  that  hu- 
man nature  is  not  at  all  corrupted,  and  let  us  try 
what  fenfe  we  can  make  of  other  fcriptures, 
where  the  word  ffh  is  ufed  in  oppofition  to 
fpirit , as  it  is  here,  Rom.  viii.  x.  There  is  no  con- 
demnation to  them  who  walk  not  after  the  flefi,.  but 
after  the  fpirit ; that  is,,  not  after  the  pure,  . un- 
corrupted confiitution  and  powers  of  man. 
Again,  ver,  8.  They  that  are  in  the  flefi  cannot 
pleafe  God ; that  is,  they  that  have  the  parts. and 
powers  of  a mam  Again,  If  ye  live  after  the  fefh 
ye Jhall  die  : that  is, .if  ye  live  fuitably  to  the  con- 
ftitution  and  powers  of  your  nature.  Once  more  : 
how  fhall  we  underhand  the  fefi  lujleth  again H 
the  fpirit,  and  the  fpirit  •. agciinjl  the  flefi , 

G6  (Gali. 

J P;  $ Vindication  p.  78,  &c. 


[ ‘56-1 

(Gal.  v.  17.)  If  JleJh  means  nothing  but  the 
pure  and  uncorrupted  powers  of  human  nature? 

“ But  this  text,  John  iii.  3,  is  according  to  Dr. 
Taylor,  fo  far  from  implying  any  corruption  of 
our  nature,  that  “ on  the  t contrary  it  Juppofes  ice 
have  a nature  Jufceptible  of  the  bejl  habits,  and 
capable  of  being  born  of  the  fpirit And  who 
ever  denied  it  ? Who  ever  fuppofed,  that  fuch  a 
corruption  of  nature,  as  for  the  prefent  difables 
us  for  fpiritual  good,  renders  us  incapable  ofbe- 
ing  born  of  the  Spirit  ?” 

“ But  if  natural  generation  is  the  mean  of 
conveying  a finful  nature  from  our  firft  parents 
to  their  pofterity,  then  mull  itfelf  be  a finful  and 
unlawful  thing.”  1 deny  the  confequence.  You 
may  tranfmit  to  your  children  a nature  tainted 
with  fin,  and  yet  commit  no  fin  in  fo  doing. 

“ Again,  we  produce  one  another,  only  as  the 
oak  produces  the  acorn.  The  proper  produflion 
of  a child  is  from  God.  i But  if  God  produces  a 
foetus,  which  has  finful  difpofitions,  he  produces 
thofe  difpofitions.”  Your  argument  proves  too 
much.  It  would  prove  God  to  be  the  author  of 
all  a&ual  (as  well  a s original]  fin.  For“  it  is  the 
power  of  God  under  certain  laws  and  eftablifhed 
rules,”  which  produces  not  only  the  fatus,  but 
all  the  motion  in  the  univerfe.  It  is  his  power 
which  fo  violently  expands  the  air,  on  the  dif- 
charge  of  a pillol  or  cannon.  It  is  the  fame  which 
produces  mufcular  motion,  and  the  circulation  of 

all 

+ p.  145.  tp.J-iS- 


[ »57  ] 

all  the  juices  in  man.  But  does  he  therefore  pro- 
duce adultery  or  murder  ? Is  he  the  caufe  of  thofe 
finful  motions  ? He  is  the  caufe  of  the  motion  (as 
he  is  of  the  Jcetus)  of  the  fin,  he  is  not.  Do  not 
fay,  This  is  too  fine  a diftinftion  ? Fine  as  it  is, 
you  muff  neceflarily  allow  it.  Otherwife  yon 
make  God  the  direft  author  of  all  the  fin  under 
heaven.  To  apply  this  more  direftly  to  the 
ooint.  God  does  produce  the  foetus  of  man,  as  he 
does  of  trees,  impowering  the  one  and  the  other 
to  propagate  each  after  its  kind.  And  a fnful 
man  propagates  after  his  kind,  another  finful  man . 
Yet  God  produces,  in  the  fenfe  above-mentioned, 
the  man , but  not  the  Jin . 

17.  Their  fixth  propofition  is,  The  fall  brought 
upon  mankind  the  iojs  of  communion  with  God , 
\kis  difpleaf ure  and  curje, Jo  as  we  are  by  nature 
children  of  wrath,  \bondJlaves  to  Satan,  § and 
]ujlly  liable  to  all  punijkments,  in  this  world  and 
that  which  is  to  rc7«<?||. 

In  proof  of  the  fir  ft  ciaufe  of  this  propofition, 
they  cite  Gen.  iii.  t>,  10,  24.  On  this  you  ob* 
ferve,  “ f Adam  and  Eve  by  their  fin  did  forfeit 
communion  with  God.  But  God  did  not  take 
the  forfeiture.”  Surely  he  did,  when  they  were 
afraid  and  hid  tkemfehes  from  his  prefence.  “ But 
afterward  they  had  frequent  communion  with 

him.”  This  does  not  prove,  they  did  not  lofe  it 
before. 

“ But 

+ Gen.  iii.  8,  so,  24,  J Eph.  ii.  2,  3.  § 2 Tim.  ii.  26, 

[I  Gen.  ii.  17. — Rom.  vj,  23.  i p,  147. 


[ «8  ] 

l*  But  their  pofterity  did  not.  t Abel  had 
communion  with  him,  and  fo  had  the  patriarchs 
and  prophets.  And  fo  have  we  at  this  day.  So 
that  as  we  could  not  juftly  have  loft  this  com- 
munion by  Adam’s  fin,  it  is  true,  in  faft,  that 
wre  have  not  loft  it.  We  ft  ill  have  fellow  flu p 
with  the  father  and  Son. 

Could  we  not  juftly,  by  Adam's  fin,  have  loft 
our  very  exiftence  ? And  il  he  had  not  exifted,. 
could  we  have  had  communion  with  God  i1 
“ But  wTe  have  not  loft  it  in  faff.  We  ftill  have 
fellow  [hip  with  the  Father  and  with  the  Son.'’  Who 
have  ? All  men  born  into  the  world  ? All  Jews, 
and  Turks,  and  Heathens?  Have  all  that  are 
called  Chriftians  ? Have,  the  generality  of  pro- 
teftanjs  felloafhip  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  ? 
What  followfhip-.?  Juft  as  much  as  light  has  with 
darknefs,  as  much  as  Chrift  has  with  Belial. 
The  bulk  of  mankind  Chrifhans  as  well  as  Hea- 
then, protejlants  as  well  as  papifts,  are  at  this, 
day,  and  have  been  ever  fince  they  were  born 
without  God.”  U Alheijls  in  the  world. 

We  need  not  therefore  fay,  “ Their  fellow- 
ftiip  with  God,  is  owing  tohis  mercy. thro.’  a Re- 
deemer.” They  have  none  at  all  : no  fellowship 
with  the  only  true  God,  and  with  Jefus  Chrift 
whom  he  hath  fent.  Indeed  they  have  no  great 
need  of  Jfus  Chrifl,  according  to  your  account  .- 
Seeing  “ All  that  God's  grace  doth  for  us  in 

Chrift*. 


+ p.  14?.' 


r m ] 

C hr  iff,  to  repair  what  we  loft  in  Adam,  is  railing 
ns  up  at  the  Iaft  day!'  You  add,  “ And  § therefore 
communion  with  God,  is  either  the  fame  grace 
which  was  vouchsafed  to  Aclam,  continued  to  us ; ' ’ 
(to  every  man  horn  into  the  world,  as  natural])"  as 
feeing  or  hearing  !)  “ Or,  if  there  be  any  things 
extraordinary  in  it"  (which  you  judge,  can 
hardly  be  allowed!)  “ it  belongs  to  the  redun- 
dancy of  grace,  which  has  no  relation  to  any 
thing  we  left-  by  Adam  A That  that  whole- pah 
Page  has  relation,  to • what  we  loft  in  Adam,  has 
been  {hewn  already.  But  what  conception  you . 
have  of  communion  with  .God is  .eafily  (een  by 
this  wonderful  account  of  it. 

“ However,  this  text  gives  no  intimation,  that 
Adam’s  pofterity  loft  communion  with  God  for 
his  fin.”  It  (hews  that  Adam  did  To.  And  ail 
his  pofterity  has  done  the  fame.  Whence  is  this 
unlefs  from  his  fin  ? 

V.  24.  So  he  drove  out  the  man  : ana  lie 
placed  at  theeafl  of  the  garden  oj  Eden  cherubim 
and' a flaming  /word,  '.which  turned  everyway,  to 
keep  the  way  of  the  tree  of  life. 

Although  God  is  equally  prefent  in  every  place 
yet  this  w-as  a clear  token,  that  man  had  not  now 
that  near  communion-  with  him,,  which  he  had 
enjoyed  before  his  find 

18.  Prop.  The  fall  brought  upon  mankind 
God’s  difpleafure  and  curfe,  Jo  as  we  are  by  nature 
the  children  of  wrath . . 

54  The. 


ij  p,  149. 


[ 160  ] 

The  text  on  which  this  is  t grounded  Eph.  ii. 
2,  3.  we  have  confidered  before  And  thofe 
confiderations  have  been  anfwered  at  large. 

You  add,  “ How  mankind  could  be  juhly 
brought  under  God’s  difpleafure  for  Adam’s  fin, 
we  cannot  underhand,  On  the  contrary,  we  do 
underhand,  it  is  unjujl.  And  therefore,  unlefs 
our  under  Handing  or  perception  of  truth,  be  falfe, 
it  mujl  be  unjujl.  But  underhanding  mull  be  the 
fame  in  all  beings,  as  far  as  they  do  underhand. 
Therefore  ± if  we  underhand,  that  it  is  Unjujl, 
God  underhands  it  to  be  foo  too.” 

Plaufible  enough.  But  let  us  take  the  argu- 
ment in  pieces.  “ How  mankind  could  he  jujlly 
brought  under  God's  difpleafure,  for  Adam’s  fin. 
we  cannot  underhand.”  I allow  it.  I cannot 
underhand,  that  is,  clearly  or  fully  comprehend 
the  deep  of  the  divine  judgment  therein : no 
more  than  I can,  how  the  whole  brute  creation 
through  his  fin  fhculd  have  been  made JubjeEl  to 
vanity,  and  fhould  groan  together,  in  weaknefs, 
in  various  pain,  in  death,  until  this  day . “ On 

the  contrary,  we  do  underhand,  it  is  uvjujl” 
I do  not  underhand,  it  is.  It  is  quite  beyond 
my  underhanding.  It  is  a depth  which  I cannot 
fathom.  “ Therefore  unlefs  our  underhanding, 
or  perception  oj  truth  be  falfe,  it  mujl  be  unjuj l.” 
Here  lies  the  deceit.  You  fhift  the  terms,  and 
place  as  equivalent  thofe  which  are  not  equiva- 
lent. Our  perception  of  truth  cannot  be  falfe : 


+ p.  >50-  t P-  »5»* 


our 


[ 101  ] 

our  under Jtaading  or  apprehenfion  of  things  may. 
“ But  underllanding;  mu  ft  be  the  fame  in  all  be- 
ings.”  Yes  in  the  former  fenfe  of  the  word,  but 
not  the  latter.  “ Therefore  if  we  underftancf 
(apprehend)  it  is  unjujl,  God  underftands  it  fo 
too/’  Nay  verily  : as  the  heavens,  are  higher  than 
the  earth , fo  are  his  thoughts  higher  than  our 
thoughts. 

“ What  a God  muft  he  be,  who  can  curfe 
his  innocent  creatures,  before  they  have  a being  ? 
Is  this  thy  God,  O Chriftian?”  Bold  enough! 
So  Lord  B — — • “ Mofes’s  God  your  God  ?’-  He. 
is  mine:  although  he  faid,  Curftdbe  Canaan , in- 
cluding his  pofterity,  before  they  had  a being. 
And  although  he  now  permits  millions  to  come 
into  a world,  which  every  where  bears  the  marks 
of  his  difpleafure.  And  he  permits  human  fouls 
to  e.vift  in  bodies,  which  are  (how  we  know  not, 
but  the  faft  we  know)  conceived  and  born  in  fin , 
by  reafon  whereof,  all  men  coming  into  the 
world  are  children  of  wrath.  Blithe  has  provided 
a Saviour  for  them  all.  And  this  fully  acquits 
both  hisjuftice  and  mercy. 

19.  So  as  we  are  by  nature  bondflaves  to  Satan, 

2 Tim.  ii.  26.  f And  that  they  may  recover 
tkemfelves  out  of  the  fnare  of  the  devil  who  are 
taken  captive  at  his  will. 

But  you  fa}',  “ The  apoftle  fpeaks  this  of  the 
unconverted  Gentiles,  who  were  Haves  to  Satan, 
not  through  Adam,  but  through  their  own  fault.” 

Both 


* P-  152> 


[ ] 

Both  one  and  the  other.  But  how  does  it  ap- 
pear, that  he  fpeaks-  this  of  th Gentiles  only  ? 

Without  offering  at  any  prooi  of  this,  you  go 
©u.  “ The  clauf taken  captive  by  him  is  fpoken, 
not  of  the  devil  but  of  the fervant  of  the  Lord 
For  thus  the  place  fhould  be  rendered  ; That 
they  may  awake  out  oj  the  friar  e cj  the  devil,  being 
revived  by  him,  that  is,  the  fervant  ofthe  Lord,  to- 
his,  that  is,  God’s  will. 

Well  the  proof.  “ The  word  T-yf  ffgnifies 
to  revive:  and.  fo  here,  to  ref  ore  men  to  life  and 
fal ration.  As  a proof  of  this  fenfe  of  the  word 
you  cite  Luke  v.  1 o.  But  this  rather  proves  the 
contrary.  For  there  it  has  nothing  to  do  with. 
reviving.  We  read  in  the  verfe  before  of  die 
frfhes  which  they  had  taken  : alluding  to  which 
Jefus  faid  unto.  Simo wfrom  henceforth  then  /halt 
catch  men  : take  them  captive  in  the  gofpel  net- 
A 1th o'  therefore  it  were  allowed  (which  cannot 
be  done)  that  his  related,  not  to  the  word  immedi- 
ately preceding,  but  to  another  which  {lands 
three  verfe s off,  yet  even  this  would  a\ad 
nothing : fince  the  fenfe  which  you  impofe 
upon  is- what  it  will  by  no- -means  bear. 

You  fay  indeed.  “ It  always  jj.  means  to  take 
alive,  or  fake  alive."  It  does  mean,  to  take  alive. 
Butyou  bring  not  one  authority  to  prove,  that 
it  ever  means,  To  five  alive.  It  therefore  “ fuits 
the  devil  and  his  fnare”  admirably  well : for 
he  does  not  take  therein  thofe  11110  aie  free 

among 


X P-  J53- 


lip- 


[ l63  3 

amontr  the  dead : but  thofe  who  axe  alive  in  a 

O 

natural,  though  dead  in  a Ipiritual  lenfe. 

“ But  however  § this  be,  they  were  not  led 
captive  thro’  Adam's  fin,  but  their  own  wick- 
edneis.”  They  were  “ boudfiaves  to  Satan  ’ ("which 
was  the  point  to  be  proved)  through  Adam  s 
fin,  and  their  own  wickcdnefs. 

“Yea,  but  what  an  inconfiftency  mull  that  be 
in  the  divine  difpenfations  and  in  the  Scriptures, 
if  it  can  be  made  appear  from  them,  that  God 
hath  for  no fault  of  ours,  but  only  lor  Adam’s  one 
fin,  put  us  all  into  the  hands  of  the  devil  : whenf 
he  hath  been  in  all  ages  providing  means,-  to 
preferve  or  refeue  mankind  from  him  ? What 
can  be  made  appear  from  the  Scriptures 
is  this  ; that  from  Adam  Jin  pcjjed  upon  all  men  : 
that  hereby  all  men  being  by  nature  dead  infn- 
cannot  of  themfelves  refill  the  devil  : and  that 
confequently,  all  who  will  not  accept  of  irelp  from 
God,, are  taken  captive  by  Satan  at  his  will.  And 
there  is  no  inconfiftency  between  this,  and  any 
of  the  divine  difpenfations. 

Prop.  And  jufily  liable  to  all  punijhments  in- 
this  world , and  that  which  is  to  come. 

That  all  men  are  liable  to  thefe  for  Adam's  fin- 
alone,  I do  not  aftert : but  they  are  fo,  for  their  own 
outward  and  inward  fins,  which  thro’ their  own 
fault,  Spring  from  the  infection of  their  nature. 
And  this,  I think  may  fairly  be  inferred  from 
Rom.  vi.  23.  ± The  wages  of  fin  is  death  : its  due- 

reward 
t p-  1 57 > ’5-8. 


§P- 


i p.  156. 


1 


reward : death,  'temporal,  fpiritual  and  eternal, 
God  grant,  we  may  never  feel  it  fo  ! 

19.  You  conclude  this  part  : “ I cannot  t 
fee,  that  we  have  advanced  one  flop  further,  than- 
where  we  were  at  the  conclufion  of  the  fir  ft 
part,  namely,  That  the  conferences  of  Adam's 
firft  fin  upon  us,  are  labour,  forrow  and  mor- 
tality, and  no  other.” 

The  contrary  to  this  having  been  fo  largely 
proved,  inftead  of  repeating  thofe  proofs  over 
again,  I fhall  clofe  this  part  with  that  beautiful 
defeription  of  the  prefent  ftate  of  man,  which 
Mr.  Hervey  gives  us  from  Mr.  Howe's  Living 
Temple.  “ Only,  fays  he,  let  me  hint,  that  it 
confiders  the  human  foul,  as  originally  an  habita- 
tion of  God  through  the  Spii  it. 

“ That  he  hath  withdrawn  himfelf  and  left 
this  his  temple  defolate,  we  have  many  fad  and 
plain  proofs  before  us.  The Jlately  ruins  are  vi* 
fible  to  every  eye,  and  bear  in  their  front  (yet 
extant)  this  doleful  infeription,  Here  God  once 
dwelt.  Enough  appears  of  the  admirable  ftruffure 
of  the  foul  of  man,  to  fhew  the  divine  prefence 
did  fometime  refide  in  it : more  than  enough 
of  vicious  deformity,  to  proclaim  he  is  now  re- 
tired and  gone.  The  lamps  are  extinft,  the  altar 
overturned ; the  light  and  love  are  now  vanifh- 
ed,  which  did  the  one  (bine  with  fo  heavenly 
brightnefs,  the  other  burn  with  fo  pious  fervor. 
The  golden  candlejlick  is  difplaced,  to  make  room 

for 


+ p.  162* 


[ *«5  ] 

Tor  the  throne  of  the  prince  of  darknefs.  The  fa» 
cred  incenfe , which  fent  up  its  rich  perfumes,  is 
exchanged  for  a poifonous  hellifh  vapour.  The 
comely  order  of  this  houfe  is  all  turned  into  con- 
fufiont  the  beauties  of  holinefs  into  noifome 
impurities:  the  houfe  of  prayer  into  a den  of 
thieves.  Thieves  of  the  work  kind ; for  every 
-luff  is  a thief,  and  every  theft  is  facrilege.  The 
noble  powers  which  were  defigned  and  dedicat- 
ed to  divine  contemplation  and  delight  in  God, 
are  alienated  to  the  fervice  of  the  molt  defpica- 
ble  idols,  and  employed  in  the  vileft  embraces 
to  behold  and  admire  lying  vanities,  to  indulge 
and  cherifh  lull  and  wickednefs. 

" “ There  is  not  now  a fyjlem,  an  entire  ta- 
ble of  coherent  truths  to  be  found,  or  a frame  of 
holinefs,  but  fome  fhivered  parcels.  And  if  any 
with  great  toil  and  labour  apply  themfelves,  to 
draw  out  here  one  piece,  and  there  another,  and 
fet  them  together;  they  ferve  rather  to  fhe\yi 
how  exquihte  the  divine  workman  Hup  was  in 
the  original  compojition , than  to  the  excellent 
purpofes  for  which  the  whole  was  at  firft  defign- 
ed. Some  pieces  agree,  and  own  one  another  : 
but  how  foon  are  our  enquiries  non-pl ufed  and 
fuperfeded  ! How  many  attempts  have  been 
made,  fmee  that  fearful  lali  and  ruin  of  this  fa- 
bric, to  compofe  again  the  truths  of  fomanyfeve- 
ral  kinds  into  their  diftinfl  orders,  and  make  up 
l#ames  of  feience  or  ufeful  knowledge?  And 
after'  fo  many  ages,  nothing  is  fimfhed  in  any 

kind. 


[ *66  ] 

hind.  Sometimes  truths  are  mifplaced;  and 
what  belongs  to  one  kind,  is  transferred  to  ano- 
ther, where  it  will  not  fitly  match  : fometimes 
falfhood  inferted,  which  {hatters  or  difturbs  the 
whole  frame.  And  what  with  amich  fruitlefs 
pains  is  done  by  one  hand  is  da{hed  in  pieces  by 
another  : and  it  is  the  work  of  a following  age, 
to  fweep  away  thefine-fpun  cobwebs  of  a former. 
And  thofe  truths  which  are  of  greateft  ufe,  tho’ 
not  moll  out  of  fight,  are  leait  regarded  : their 
tendency  and  defign  are  overlooked,  or  they  are 
fo  loofened  and  torn  off,  that  they  cannot  be 
wrought  in,  fo  as  to  take  hold  of  the  foul,  but 
hover  as  faint,  inefFeftual  notions,  that  fignify 
nothing, 

O 

*“  It’s  very fundamental  powers  are  fhaken 
and  disjointed,  and  their  order  toward  one  ano- 
ther confounded  and  broken.  So  that  what  is 
judged  conf'derabU  is  not  covfdered , what  is  re- 
commended as  lovely  and  eligible  is  not  loved  and 
chofen.  Yea,  the  truth  which  is  after  godhnefs  is 
not  fo  much  difbelieved,  as  hated,  or  held  in  un- 
righteevjnefs  ; and  {bines  with  too  feeble  a light, 
in  that  malignant  darknefs,  which  comprehends  it 
not.  You  come  amidft  all  this  confufion,  into 
the  ruined  palace  of  fome  great  prince,  in  which 
you  fee,  here  the  fragments  of  a noble  pillar, 
there  the  fhattered  pieces  of  fome  curious  im- 
agery, and  all  lying negTefled  and  ufelefs,  among 
heaps  of  dirt.  He  that  invites  you  to  take  a view 
of  the  foul  of  man,  gives  you  but  fuch  another 

profpeft. 


E 167  ] 

profpeCi,  and  doth  but  fay  to  you,  behold 
the  defolation  ! All  things  rude  and  wafte,  So 
that  fhould  there  be  any  pretence  to  the  divine 
prefence,  it  might  be  faid,  If  God  be  here,  why 
is  it  thus  ? The  faded  glory,  the  darknefs,  the 
diforder,  the  impurity,  the  decayed  ftate  in  all 
refpefts  of  this  temple,  too  plainly  fhew,  The 
Great  inhabitant  is  gone ! 55 

Newington , Jan.  2 1. 

In  your  third  part  you  propofe,  firlt,  to  an- 
fwer  fome  objections  and  queries  : and  then  to 
confider  the  connection  of  the  doCfrine  of  ori- 
ginal fm  with  other  parts  of  religion, 

“ Obf  I.  Are  t we  not  in  worfe  moral  circum- 
llances,  than  Adam  was  before  he  fell  ? I an- 
fwer,” 

1.  “ II  by  moral  eirctioiflances  you  mean,  the 
flate  of  religion  and  virtue,  it  is  certain  the 
greateft  part  oi  mankind,  ever  were  and  hill  are 
■ very  corrupt.  But  this  is  not  the  fault  of  their  na- 
ture, hut  occafioned  by  the  abufe  of  it,  in  profti- 
tuting  reafon  to  appetite,  whereby  in  procefs  of 
time,  they  have  funk  themfelves  into  the  moft 
lamentable  degrees  of  ignorance,  fuperftition, 
-idolatry,  injuft  ice-,  debauchery,55 
I . * But  how  came  this  ? How  came  all  nations 
tnus  to  “ abufe  their  nature,  ’ thus  to  proffltute 
reafon  to  appetite?  ’ How  came  they  all  to  fink 
into  this  “ lamentable  ignorance,  fuperftition, 

4 * idolatry, 

f p.  168. 

' 1 


[ 168  ] 

idolatry,  injullice,  debauchery  ?”  How  came  it, 
that  half  of  them,  at  leaf!,  if  their  nature  was  un  • 
corrupt,  did  not  ufe  it  well  ? Submit  appetite  to 
reafon,  and  rife,  while  the  other  funk  ? “ Pro- 
cefs  of  time”  does  not  help  us  out  at  all.  For  if 
it  made  the  one  half  of  mankind,  more  and  more 
vicious,  it  ought  by  the  fame  degrees  to  have 
'made  the  other  half,  more  and  more  virtuous. 
If  men  were  no  more  inclined  to  one  fide  than 
the  other,  this  mull  abfolutely  have  been  the 
event.  Turn  and  wind  as  you  pleafe,  you  will 
never  be  able  to  get  over  this.  You  will  never 
account  for  this  faff,  that  the  bulk  of  mankind 
have  in  all  ages,  “ proflituted  their  reafon  to  ap- 
petite,” even  till  they  funk  into  “ lamentable 
ignorance,  fuperllition,  idolatry,  injuftiee  and 
debauchery:”  but  by  allowing  their  very  nature 
to  be  in  fault,  to  be  more  inclined  to  vice  than 
virtue. 

“ But  if  we  have  all  a corrupt  nature,  which 
as  we  cannot,  fo  God  will  not  wholly  remove  in 
this  life,  then  why  do  we  try  to  reform  the 
world?”  Why?  Becaufe,  whether  the  corrupt 
nature  be  wholly  removed,  or  no,  men  may  be 
reformed,  as  to  ccafe from  evil,  to  be  renewed  in 
ihe Jpirit  of  their  mind , and  by  patient  continuance 
in  well-doing,  iofeek  and  find,  glory,  end  honour, 
and  immortality . 

“ I anfwer,+  2.  II  bv  moral  cir,  urn  dames  voil 
mean,  provifion  and  means  J 01  fill  dual  improve- 
ment^ 


+ p.  iSq» 


[ l69  ] 

went,  thofe  given  us  through  Chrift  are  far  greater 
than  Adam  had  before  he  finned.”  To  thofe 
-who  believe  in  Chrift  they  are.  But  above  four- 
fifths  of  the  world,  are  Mahometans  or  Pagans 
Hill.  And  have  thefe,  (Immenfely  the  greater 
part  of  mankind : to  fay  nothing  of  popijh  na- 
tions) greater  provijion  and  means  for  Jpiritual 
improvement , than  Adam  before  he  finned  ? 

“ But  if  3.  by  d moral  circumjlances  you  mean 
moral”  (rather  natural)  “ abilities,  or  mental 
powers ,”  (a  confideration  quite  foreign  to  the 
queftion)  “ I anfwer,  The  feriptures  no  where 
compare  our  faculties  with  Adam’s.  Nor  know. 
I how  we  can  judge,  but  by  comparing  the  ac- 
tions of  Adam  in  innocence  with  what  men 
-have performed  fince.” 

Yes,  we  can  judge  thus.  There  could  be  no 
defeft  in  Adam’s  understanding,  when  he  came 
firft  out  of  the  hands  of  his  Creator,  but  there 
are  efiential  defefts  in  mine  and  your’s,  and  every 
man’s  whom  we  know — Our  apprehevjion  is  indif- 
tinft,  our  judgment  falfe,  our  reafoning  wrong, 
in  a thoufand  inftance.  So  it  always  was  : and 
fo  it  is  Hill,  after  all  the  care  we  can  poflibly 
take.  Therefore  “ our  faculties  are  not  as  found 
and  fit  for  right  aftion,  as  Adam’s  were  before  he 
finned.” 

“ But  any  man  of  common  underftanding 
might  have  drejl  and  kept  the  garden  as  well  as 
Vol.  XXL  H he.” 

+ P-  17°» 


[ *7°  ] 

he.”  I can  neither  affirm,  nor  deny  this.  For 
we  know  not  how  hedreffed  and  kept  it. 

“ Nor  doth  it  appear,  ||  That  in  giving  names 
to  all  the  creatures,  he  ffiewed  any  extraordinary 
penetration  into  their  natures.  For  that  the 
names  he  gave  truly  exprefled  the  feveral  qua- 
lities of  them,  is  a meer  ficiion,  without  any 
foundation  in  fcripture-hiftory,  or  the  names  of 
animals  in  the  original  Hebrew.” 

This  is  really  ftrange  ! That  any  man  of  learn- 
ing fhould  be  fo  hardy  as  to  affirm  this,  after  the 
numberlefs  inftances  which  have  been  produced 
of  Hebrew  names,  expreffing  the  moll  efiential 
property  of  each  animal. 

And  is  this  fuppofition  likewife  “ without  any 
foundation  in  feripture-hiftory  ?”  What  is  that  ? 
Gen.  ii.  19.  And  the  Lord  God  brought  every 
beaji  oj  the  Jield,  and  every  fowl  of  the  air , unto 
Adam , to  fe  what  he  would  call  them , to  make 
proof  of  his  underllanding.  And  whatfoever 
Adam  called  every  living  creature , that  was  the 
name  thereof.  Now  whether  thofe  names  were 
Hebrew  or  no  [which  you  ajftcl  to  doubt)  can  it 
be  luppofed  that  God  would  have  permitted 
them  to  Hand,  if  they  had  not  fuited  the  nature 
of  each  creature  ? ’Tis  bold  therefore  to  affirm, 
That  “ many  of  his  poflerity  could  have  given 
names  to  them  as  well  as  he  : and  that  therefore 
this  is  not  a proof,  that  § he  had  any  capacity 
fuperior  to  us.” 

S p-  »7S- 


. >71. 


You 


[ v-l,  ] 

You  proceed,  “ Surely  § his  eating  the  for- 
bidden fruit  is  no  evidence  of  fuperior  abilities.” 
And  it  is  no  evidence  of  the  contrary  ; “ feeing” 
(as  you  yourfelf  obferve)  “ what  his  Jpecial  temp- 
tation was,  we  do  not  know/’  Therefore  nei- 
ther do  we  know  whether  any  of  his  pofterity 
could  have  overcome  it : much  lefs,  that  “ many 
of  his  pofterity,  have  overcome  temptations 
more  violent  than  his.”  All  this'  is  talking  in  the 
dark,  not  knowing  what  we  Jay,  neither  whereof 
we  affirm. 

“ And  + now  let  any  man  fee,  whether  there 
beany  ground  in  revelation,  for  exalting  Adam’s 
nature  as  divines  have  done,  who  have  affirmed, 
that  all  his  faculties  were  eminently  perfedt,  and 
entirely  fet  to  the  love  and  obedience  of  his 
Creator,  i And  yet  thefe  fame  fuppofe  him  to 
have  been  guilty  of  the  viLeft  act  that  ever  was 
committed.” 

They  fuppofe  Adam  to  have  been  created  holy 
and  wife,  like  his  Creator ; and  yet  capable  of 
falling  from  it.  They  fuppofe  farther,  that 
through  temptations  of  which  we  cannot  poffibly 
judge,  he  did  fall  from  that  ftate  ; and  that  hereby 
he  brought  pain,  labour  and  borrow,  on  himfelf 
and  all  his  pofterity  : together  with  death,  not 
only  temporal,  bat  fpiritual,  and  (without  the 
grace  of  God)  eternal.  And  it  muft  be  confeft, 
that  not  only  a few  divines,  but  the  whole  body 
of  Chriftians  in  all  ages,  did  fuppofe  this,  till 
H 2 after 

+ P-  1 


§£.-173. 


f p.,76. 


[ ] 

after  feventeen  hundred  years  a fweet-tongued 
orator  arofe,  not  only  more  enlightened  than 
filly  Adam,  but  than  any  of  his  wife  pofterity : 
and  declared,  that  the  whole  fuppofition  was 
folly,  nonfenfe,  inconfiflency  and  blafphemy  ! 

“ Obj.  II.  But  do  not  the  fcriptures  fay,  Adam 
was  created  after  God’s  own  ima^e  ? And  do  his 

O 

pofterity  bear  that  image  now?” 

“ The  fcriptures  do  fay,  Gen.  i.  27.  God 
created  man  in  his  own  image.  But  whatever  that 
phrafe  means  here,  it  doubtlefs  means  the  fame  in 
Gen.  ix.  6.  Whofo  Jheddeth  mans  blood,  by  man 
Jha/l  his  blood  be  Jhed : for  in  the  image  of  God 
made  he  man.”  Certainly  it  has  the  fame  mean- 
ing in  both  places:  for  the  latter  plainly  refers  to 
the  former.  And  thus  much  we  may  fairly  infer 
from  hence,  § that  the  image  of  God  wherein  man 
was  at  fil'd  created,  whereinfoever  it  confifted, 
was  rrot  utterly  effaced  in  the  time  of  Noah,  Yea, 
fo  much  of  it  will  always  remain  in  all  men,  as 
will  juftify  the  punifhing  murderers  with  death. 
But  we  can  in  no  wife  infer  from  hence,  that 
that  entire  image  of  God,  in  which  Adam  teas 
at  firfl  created,  now  remains  in  all  his  pofterity. 

The  words  of  Gen.  v.  3.  rendered  literally 
are,  He  begat  in  his  likenefs,  according  to  his 
image.  “ Adam,  fays  Mr.  Hervey,  was  created 
in  the  image  of  God.  After  his  fall  the  facred 
hiftorian  varies  his  ftile,  and  with  a remarkable 
peculiarity,  as  well  as  propriety,  fays,  Adam  begat 

a fon 


‘77- 


[ m ] 

a fon  in  his  own  likenefs ; (fo  it  mull  be  tranflated 
according  to  all  the  rules  of  grammar,  Adam 
being  the  neareft  antecedent.]  That  every 
reader  may  advert  to  this  melancholy,  but  im- 
portant truth,  it  is  inforced  by  a very  emphatical 
repetition  : after  his  own  image , as  contradilhn- 
guifhed  from  that  image  of  God,  mentioned  in  the 
preceding  verfe  : which  expreffions  are  evidently 
intended  to  denote  the  difference  between  the 
ftate,  in  which  Adam  was  created  and  Seth  be- 
gotten.” 

“ The  ||  two  following  texts  are  brought  by 
the  afjembly  to  drew,  what  the  image  of  God 
was,  in  which  Adam  was  made.” 

Col.  iii.  10.  And  have  put  on  the  new  man , 
which  is  renewed  in  knowledge,  after  the  image  of 
him  that  created  him. 

Eph.  iv.  24.  Put  on  the  new  man,  which  after 
the  image  of  God  is  created,  in  righteoufnefs  and 
true  hohnefs. 

“ I anfwer,  Thefe  texts  are  parallel.  The  old 
man  means  a wicked  Ife,  the  new  t man,  a good 
life  ; to  which  they  were  formed  and  created  by 
the  gofpel  difpenfation.  And  this  new  man,  this 
new  life  is  after  the  image,  that  is  agreeable  to  the 
nature  of  God.” 

As  you  advance  no  proof  of  this  perfedlly  new 
interpretation,  I leave  it  to  fhift  for  itfelf. 

To  difprove  the  common  interpretation  you 
add,  “ Adam  could  not  be  originally  created  in 
H 3 righte- 

||  P.178.  + P.  1791 


[ *74  j 

righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs ; becaufe  habits  ci 
holinefs,  cannot  be  created  without  our  know- 
ledge, concurrence  or  confent.  For  ^ holinefs 
in  its  nature  implies  the  choice  and  confent 
of  a moral  agent,  without  which  it  cannot  be 
holinefs.1’ 

* What  is  holinefs  ? Is  it  not  efTentially  love  ? 
The  love  of  God  and  of  all  mankind  ? Love  pro- 
ducing bowels  of  mercies,  humblenefs  oj  mind, 
meeknefs , gentlenejs , long-Jiiffering  ? And  cannot 
God  fired  abroad  this  love  in  any  foul,  without 
his  concurrence  P Antecedent  to  his  knowledge 
or  confent  P And  fuppofing  this  to  be  done,  will 
love  change  its  nature  ? Will  it  be  no  longer  holi- 
nefs ? This  argument  can  neveF  be  fultained ; 
unlefs  you  would  play  upon  the  word  habits ; 
Love  is  holinefs  wherever  it  exills.  And  God 
could  create  either  men  or  angels,  endued  hour 
the  very  firft  moment  of  their  exigence,  with 
whatsoever  degree  of  love  he  pleafed. 

* You  “ think,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  demon- 
ftration,  that  we  cannot  be  righteous  or  holy, 
we  cannot  obferve  what  is  right,  without  our 
own  free  and  explicit  choice.’^  I fuppofe  vou 
mea n,.prailije  what  is  right.  But  a man  may  be 
righteous  before  he  does  what  is  right,  holy  in 
heart  before  he  is  holy  in  life.  The  confounding 
thefe  two  all  along,  feems  to  be  the  ground  of 
your  ftranga  imagination,  that  Adam  “ mujl 
chufe  to  be  righteous,  muft  exercife  thought  and 

reflection 


J P.  180. 


[ *75  1 

reflection  before  he  could- be  righteous.”  Why 
fo  P “ Becaufe  righteoufnefs  is  the  right  ufe  and 
application  of  our  powers.’’  Here  is  your  capital 
miftake.  No;  it  is  not : it  is  the  right  Jlate  of 
our  powers.  II  is  the  right' difpojition  of  our  foul, 
the  right  'temper  of  our  mind.  Take  this  with 
you,  and  you  will  no  more  dream,  that  “ God 
could  not  create  man  in  righteoufnefs  and  true 
l-.olinefs or  that  “to  § talk  of  Wanting  that 
righteoufnefs  ih  which  Adam  was  created , is  to 
talk  of  nothing  we  want.” 

On  Rom.  ii.  14.  you  obferve,  “ This  [[  text 
clearly  proves,  that  natural  reafon  and  under- 
llanding,  is  a rule  of  aftion  to  all  mankind, 
and  that  all  men  ought  to  follow  it.  This  there- 
fore overthrows  the  whole  doftrine  of  original 
fn.” 

How  do  you  prove  the  confequence  ? May 
not  men  have  fome  reafon  left,  which  in  fome 
meafure  difcerns  good  from  evil,  and  yet  be 
deeply  fallen,  even  as  to  their  underfianding,  as 
well  as  their  will  and  affeftions  ? 

On  Ecclef.  vii.  2 9.  + God  hath  made  man  up- 
right, but  they  have  found  out  many  inventions  ; 
Y ou  fay 

“ Man  here  means,  all  mankind;  upright, 
endued  with  powers  to  know  and  perform  their 
duty.”  You  offer  no  proof  for  either  of  thefe 
affertions.  And  without  it  I cannot  receive 
them. 

H 4 Again, 

Sjp.  Up- 183.  + p.  184, 185. 


[ i76  ] 

Again,  “ They  (you  fay)  means  mankind  in 
general.”  I rather  believe  it  means  our  firlt  pa- 
rents, who  are  by  Mofes  likewife  comprehended 
under  the  common  name  of  man  or  rather  DiK 
Adam.  So  Gen.  v.  2.  God  called  their  name 
Adam  in  the  day  when  they  were  created.  And  in 
the  day  that  they  fell,  whoever  reads  Gen.  iii. 
will  fee  they  found  out  not  one,  but  many  inven- 
tions. This  text  therefore  in  its  obvious  mean- 
ing teaches  both  the  original  uprightnefs,  and 
fubfeque’nt  fall  of  man. 

From  all  thefe  texts  it  manifeilly  appears,  1. 
That  man  was  created  in  the  image  of  God,  2. 
That  this  image  confilled  not  only  in  his  rational 
and  immortal  nature,  and  his  dominion  over  the 
creatures,  but  alfo  in  knowledge , aftual  know- 
ledge both  of  God  and  of  his  works,  in  the  right 
fate  of  his  intelleftual  pov/ers,  and  in  love,  which 
is  true  holinejs. 

“ Obj.  III.  But  do  we  t not  derive  from  A.dam 
a moral  taint  and  infeUion , whereby  we  have  a 
natural propenfiiy  to  fin  ? 

* “ I anfwer,  We  have  many  natural  appetites 
and  paffions,  which  if  they  grow  irregular,  be- 
come finful.  But  this  does  not  amount  to  a na- 
tural propenfity  to  fin.”  But  is  not  pride  fin  ? 
Is  not  idolatry  fin  P And  is  it  not  idolatry',  to 
love  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator  ? Is  not 
revenge  fin  ? Is  it  not  fin  to  look  upon  a woman , 
fo  as  to  lajl  after  her  ? And  have  not  all  men  a 

natural 


+ p.  186. 


[ *77  ] 


natural  propenfity  to  thefe  things  ? They  have 
all  then  a natural  propenfity  to  fin.  Nevertheless 
this  propenfity  is  not  ncccffary,  if  by  neceffary 
you  mean  irrefijlible.  W e can  refill:  and  con- 
quer it  too,  by  the  grace  which  is  ever  at  hand. 

This  propenfity  to  pride,  to  revenge,  to  ido- 
latry (call  it  taint,  or  any  thing)  cannot  be  pleaf- 
ing  to  God,  who  yet  in  faff  does  permit  that  it 
Should  defcend  from  Adam  to  his  latefi  pofterity. 
And  “ we  can  neither  help  nor  hinder”  its  de- 
scending to  us.  Indeed  we  can  heap  up  plaufi- 
ble  arguments,  to  prove  the  impoffibility  of  it. 
But  I feel  it,  and  the  argument  drops.  Bring 
ever  fo  many  proofs,  that  there  can  be  no  Such 
thing  as  motion.  I move  and  they  vanifh  away. 

“ But  nature  t cannot  be  morally  corrupted 
but  by  the  choice  of  a moral  agent.”  You  may 
play  upon  words  as  long  as  you  pleafe ; but  Hill 
i hold  this  fall : I,  (and  you  too,  whither  you 
will  own  it  or  no)  am  inclined,  and  was  ever 
Since  I can  remember,  antecedently  to  any 
choice  of  my  own,  to  pride,  revenge,  idolatry. 
If  you  will  not  call  thefe  moral  corruptions * call 
them  juft  what  you  will.  But  the  fa£l  I am  as 
well  allured  of,  as  that  I have  any  memory  or 
underftanding. 

“ But  fame  t have  attempted  to  explain  this  - 
intricate  affair.”  I do  not  commend  their  wiff 
dom.  I do  not  attempt  to  explain  even  how 

H 5 . J, 

+ P*  187.  }p,'i88, 


[ «7«  ] 

I,  at  this  moment,  flretch  out  my  hand,  or  move 
my  finger. 

One  more  of  your  aflertions  I mult  not  pais 
over.f  “ It  is  abfurd  to  fay,  infeftion  is  derived 
from  Adam,  independent  of  the  will  of  God. 
And  to  fay,  it  is  hy  his  will,  is  to  make  him  the 
author  of  the  pollution.” 

We  anfwer.  It  is  not  derived  from  Adam,  in- 
dependent of  the  will  of  God  ; that  is,  his  per- 
miffive  will:  but  our  allowing  this,  does  not 
make  him  the  author  of  the  pollution. 

“ Obj.  IV.  But  do  % not  the  vices  of  parents 
often  infe£l  their  children  ?” 

I think  we  cannot  deny  it. 

“ Obj.  V.  How  \ can  we  account  for  chil- 
dren’s beginning  fo  foon  to  fin,  but  by  fuppofing 
they  have  a natural  propenfity to  it?’’ 

* “ I anfwer,  Who  can  tell,  how  foon  they 
begin  ?”  Then  they  begin  when  they  firft  fhew 
wrong  tempers : fuch  as  plain,  undeniable  fro- 
wardnefs,  revenge,  fell-will,  which  is  as  foon  as 
they  have  any  exercife  of  reafon.  So  that  the 
ufe  of  reafon  and  the  abufe,  generally  commence 
and  grow  up  together.  As  foon  as  their  facul- 
ties appear  at  all,  they  appear  to  be  difordered  : 
the  wrong  Jlate  of  their  powers,  being  eafily  in- 
ferred from  their  continual  wrong  application  of 
them. 

“ But  if  parents  were  wife  anu  virtuous  them- 
•felves,  and  then  endeavour  to  bring  up  their 

children 

f p,  i&9»  190,191,  §p,  192,- 


[ *79  J 

children  virtuoufly,  there  would  be  lefs  wicked- 
nefs  in  the  world.”  There  would  : but  this  does 
not  reach  the  point ; nor,  that  “ undifciplined 
children  contraft  bad  habits.”  I have  known 
wife  and  virtuous  parents,  who  did  earneilly  la- 
bour to  bring  up  their  children  virtuoufly  ; and 
difciplined  them  with  all  poflTble  care,  from  the 
very  firft  dawn  of  reafon.  Yet  thefe  very  chil- 
dren fhewed  bad  tempers  before  it  was  poflible 
they  fhould  “ contrafd  bad  habits."  They  daily- 
evidenced  the  zurong  fate  of  all  their  faculties, 
both  of  their  underflanding,  will  and  affeftions, 
juft  contrary  both  to  the  examples  and  inftr uni- 
ons of  all  that  were  round  about  them.  Here 
then  thefe  zvrong  tempers  were  not  owing  to 
“ the  fault  of  carelefs  or  ungodly  parents  : nor 
could  be  rationally  accounted  for,  but  by  fuppof- 
ing  thofe  children  to  have  a natural propenjity  to 
evil.  j 

It  is  indeed  a general  rule,  i Train  up  a child 
in'the  way  he  Jhould  go,  and  when  he  is  old  he  will 
not  depart  from  it : and  there  is  much  truth  in 
that  obfervation,  1 Foolijhnefs  is  bound  in  the 
heart  of  a- child-,  but  the  rod  of  correElion  fhall 
drive  it  far  from  him:  that  is,,  prudent  correc- 
tion is  the  moll  probable  means  which  you  can 
ufe  to  remove  that  foolr&nefs.  Yet  this  no  way 
contradi&s  what  is  matter  of  daily  experience, 
that  we  have  a natural  propenfity  to  evil.  Nay, 
the  latter  of  thefe  texts  ftronglyconfirms  it : for 
H 6 if 

f Ver.  33, 


■f  Prov.,xxii.  6. 


C 180  ] 

if  there  be  no  fuch  propenfity,  how  comes  jool- 
ijhnefs  (that  is  wickednefs,  in  the  language  of 
Solomon)  to  be  bound  in  the  heart  of  a child  ? 
Of  every  child,  of  children  in  general,  as  the 
phrafe  manifelily  imports.  It  is  not  from  edu- 
cation here:  it  is  fuppofed  to  be  antecedent  to 
education,  whether  good  or  bad.  “ Oh,  + fool- 
ilhnefs  means  only  frong  appetite .”  Yes,  flrong 
appetite  to  evil.  Otherwife  it  would  not  call  for 
the  rod  of  correBion,  or  need  to  be  driven  far 
from  him . 

“ Obj.  VI.  Might  not  Adtun’s  poflerity  be 
faid  to  fin  in  him , as  Levi  is  laid  to  1 pay  lythes 
in  Abraham  P” 

If  the  querift  means,  not  to  prove  a do&rine 
already  proved,  but  only  to  lUuJhale  one  expref- 
fion  by  another,  your  anfwer,  § “ That  it  is  a 
bold  figure,”  does  not  at  all  affeft  him.  It  is  fo  : 
but  fill  it  may  be  pertinently  cited  to  jllufirate  a 
f mtlar  expreflion. 

“ Gbj.  VII.  ||  But  there  is  a law  in  our  members 
which  wars  againjl  the  law  cf  cur  minds,  and 
brings  us  into  captivity  to  the  law  of  fin  and  death. 
And  does  not  this  prove,  that  we  come  into  the 
world  with  fnful  propenfities  ?” 

You  anfwer,  3.  “ llfwe  come  into  the  world 
with  them,  they  are  natural-,  but  if  natural,  ne- 
ccjfary  ; and  if  neceffary,  then  no  fin.” 

if  the  confequence  were  good,  with  regard  to 

what 

+ p*  193*  t Heb*  vii-  9-  h F-  *95- 
Uf*  199-  s p.200, 


I 


[ a*  ] 

what  isfo  natural  and  neceffary,  astob &irrtjijliblet 
yet  certainly  it  is  not  good,  with  regard  to  thofe 
propenfities,  which  we  may  both  refill  and  con- 
quer. 

You  anfwer,  2.  “ The  apollle  does  not  in 
this  chapter,  fpeak  of  any  man  as  he  comes  into 
the  world,  but  as  he  is  afterward  depraved  and 
corrupted  by  his  own  wicked  choice." 

Where  is  the  proof?  How  does  it  appear, 
that  he  does  not  fpeak  of  men  corrupted  both  by 
choice  and  by  nature  ? 

You  anfwer,  3.  “ He  does  fnot  fpeak  ofhim- 
felf,  or  any  regenerate  man,  but  of  a Jew  under 
the  power  of  find’  Nay,  your  argument  proves 
he  does  not  fpeak  of  any  Jew.  For  in  order  to 
prove,  “ the  apollle  does  not  fpeak  ofhimfelf,” 
you  fay,  “ the  perfons  of  whom  he  fpeaks,  were 
before  the  commandment  came , i.  e.  before  they 
came  under  the  law,  once  without  the  law.  But 
the  apollle  never  was  without  the  law.”  No,  nor 
any  Jew.  “ For  he  was  born,  and  continued 
under  the  law , till  he  was  a Chriftian.”  So  did 
all  the  Jews,  as  well  as  he — “ and  therefore  it 
cannot  be  true,  that  he”  or  any  Jew  whatever, 
11  was  without  the  law , before  he.  came  under 
it.”  So  yon  have  clearly  proved,  that  the  apof- 
tle  does  not  in  this  palfage  fpeak  of  any  Jew  at 
all. 

But  why  do  you  think  he  does  fpeak  of  Jews? 
Nay  of  them  only?  It  “ appears,  you  fay,  from 

ver. 


ip,  200, 


C ] 

^er.  i.  1 ’/peak  to  them  that  know  the  law.  For  the 
Gentiles  never  were  under  the  law”  Yes,  they 
were  : all  the  Gentiles  who  were  convinced  of 
Jin,  were  under  the  law  in  the  fenfe  here  fpoken 
of,  under  the  condemning  power  of  the  law  writ- 
ten in  then  hearts,  for  tranfgrefling  which  they 
were  under  the  wrath  of  God.  And  this  whole 
chapter,  from  the  feventh  to  the  twenty -fourth 
verfe,  defcribes  the  hate  of  all  thofe,  Jews  or 
Gentiles,,  who  faw  and  felt  the  wickednefs  both 
of  their  hearts  and  lives,  and  groaned  to  be  deli- 
vered from  it.' 

Many  paffages  in  your  paraphrafe  on  the  for- 
mer part  of  this  chapter,  are  liable  to  much 
exception ; but  as  they  do  not  immediately 
touch  the  point  in  queftion,  I pafs  on  to  the 
latter  part. 

Ver.  14.  f I am  carnal,  fold  under  fn.  “ He 
means  a willing  flavery.”  Quite  the  contrary, 
as  appears  from  the  ver)’  next  words,  For  that 
which  I do,  I allow  not  : for  what  I would,  l do 
not ; but  what  I hate,  that  I do-  What  I hate : 
Not  barely,  “ what  my  reafon  difapproves 
but  what  I really  detefl:  and  abhor,  yet  cannot 
help. 

Ver.  17.  Now  then,  it  is  no  more  1 that  do  it, 
but  fin  that  dwelleth  in  me.  “ It  is  J my  finful 
propenfities,  my  indulged  appetites  and  paflions.  ! 
True : but  thofe  propenfities  we re  antecedent  to 
that  indulgence.  _ 

“ Bub 

i p.  s.i£»  t p.  ixj. 


[ l83  ] 

“ Blit  the  apoflle  cannot  mean,  that  there  is 
lomething  in  man  which  makes  him  fin,  rvhetheif 
he  will  or  no.  For  then  it  would  not  be  fin  at 
all.”  Experience  explains  his  meaning.  I have 
felt  in  me  a thoufand  times,  fomething  which 
made  me  tranfgrefs  God's  law,,  whether  I would 
or  no.  Yet  I dare  not  lay,  that  tranfigrejfiion  of 
the  law  was- “"no  fin  at  all.  ’ 

Ver.  18.  For  I know,  that  in  me,  that  is,  in  my 
jlejh,  (not  my  “ flelhly  appetites’’  only,  but  my 
whole  nature  while  unrenewed)  dwelleth  no  good 
thing.  For  to  will  indeed  is  prefient  me  : not  barely 
“ that  natural  faculty,,  the  will,  " but  an  aflual  will 
to  do  good,  as  evidently  appearsffrom  the  follow- 
ing words,  But  how  to  perjorm  that  which  is  good, 
I find  not:  I have  the  defire,  but  not  the  power. 

Ver.  19.  For  the  good  that  I would,  that  I de-* 
fire  and  chufe,  I do  not : hut  the  evil  which  I 
would  not,  which  lhdlcythat  I do. 

Ver.  20.  Now  ij  I do  that'  I would  not,  it  is  no 
more  I,  but  fin  that  dwelleth  in>me : but  “ the  pre- 
valency f of  fenfual  affe&ions,”  yea  finful  tem- 
pers of  every  kind,  “ fettled  and  ruling  in  my 
heart,”  both  by,  nature  and  habit. 

Ver.  zi.  I find  then,  that  when  I would 'do- 
good,  when  I chufe  and  eameftly  defire  it,  I can- 
not: evil  is  prefient  with  me ; as  it  were  gets  in 
between*  . 

Ver.  22.  For  I delight  in  the  law  of  Gody  after 

iht= 


Ip.  ai8. 


[ «*4  1 

the  inward  man  : my  mind,  my  confcience  ap- 
proves it. 

V.  23.  But  I fee t another  law  in  my  members 
which  warreth  againfl  the  law  in  my  mind : “ Ano- 
ther principle  of  a&ion,  which  fights  againfl  my 
reafon”  and  confcience,  and  bringeth  me  into 
captivity  to  the  law  of  fin  which  is  in  ?ny  members  : 
which  “ captivates  and  in  (laves  me  to  the  prin- 
ciple of  wickednefs.”  (Strange  language  for  you 
to  ufe!)  “ Seated  in  the  lulls  of  the  flefh  : ' feat- 
ed  indeed  in  all  my  tempers,  paflions  and  ap- 
petites, which  are  the  feveral  members  of  the  old 
man. 

V.  24.  0 wretched  man  that  I am  : who 
Jhall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  the  death  t 
“ He  is  under  the  power  of  fuch  paflions,  as 
his  own  reafon  difapproves,  but  is  too  weak 
to  conquer  : and  N.  B.  being  a Jew,  he 
hands  condemned  to  eternal  death  by  the  law. 
How  fit  all  fuch  a wretched  Jew  be  delivered 
from  finful  lulls,  and  the  curfe  of  the  law  ?” 
Did  then  none  but  a Jew  ever  cry  out,  under 
the  burden  of  fin,  wretched  man  that  I am  ? Are 
none  but  Jews  “ under  the  powers  of  fuch  paf- 
fions,  as  their  own  reafon  difapproves,  but  is  too 
weak  to  conquer  ?”  And  does  the  law  of 
God  “ condemn  to  .eternal  death,”  no  finners 
befide  Jews  ? Do  not  Ckrijlians  alfo  (in  the  wide 
fenfe  of  the  word)  groan  to  be  delivered  from  the 
body  of  this  death?  With  what  truth,  with  what 

fenfe 


1 f-  *19. 


C 185  ] 

fenfe  can  you  refirain  this  paflage  to  a Jew,  any 
more  than  to  a Turk  ? 

I cannot  but  obferve  upon  the  whole,  the 
queftion  is,  “ Does  not  Rom.  vii.  23,  fhew  that 
we  come  into  the  world  with  finful  propenfities  1 
(This  is  all  that  is  pertinent  in  the  obje&ion  awk- 
wardly propofed,  p.  199.)  But  inflead  of  keep- 
ing to  this,  you  fpend  above  twenty  pages  in  prov- 
ing, that  this  chapter  does  not  defcribe  a rege- 
nerate perfon  ! It  may,  or  it  may  not : but  this 
does  not  touch  the  queftion.  “ Do  not  men  come 
into  the  world  with  finful  propenfities  ?” 

We  have  undoubtedly  an  additional  proof, 
that  they  do,  in  the  words  of  Jeremiah  cfi.  xvii. 
9.  The  hearti  is  deceitful  above  all  things , and  de- 
fperately  wicked:  Who  can  know  it?  On  this  you 
defcant  (one  inftance  of  a thoufand,  of  your 
artful  manner  of  declaiming,  in  order  to  foreftall 
the  readers  judgment,  and  deceive  the  hearts  of  the 
fimple j “ Chriftians  too  generally  negle&ing  the 
ftudy  of  the  feripture,  content  themfelves  with 
a few  feraps,  which  tho’  wrong  underftood, 
they  make  the  teft  of  truth,  in  contradiflion 
to  the  whole  tenor  of  revelation.  Thus  this 
text  has  been  mifapplied  to  prove,  that  every 
man’s  heart  is  fo  defperately  wicked,  that  no 
man  can  know  how  wicked  his  heart  is.”  O 
what  B-iScsjoAoyiac  perfwafivenefs  of  fpeech ! After 
reading  this,  I was  much  inclined  to  believe,  with- 
out going  aftep  further,  that  this  text  had  been 

“ generally 


tp;  224- 


[ i8 6 ] 

“generally  mifunderftood,”  I thought,  prebaUy 
it  has  been  mifapplied,  and  does  not  albert,  that 
every  man’s  heart  is  defperalely  n iched.  But  no 
fooner  did  I read  over  the  very  verfes  you  cite, 
than  the  clear  light  appeared  again,  v.  ,-j.  Cuf 
ed  be  the  man  that  trujleth  in  man , and  whofe  j 
heart  cleparteth  from  the  Lord.  That  man  whom 
we  are  not  to  truft  in,  means  man  in  general, 
cannot  be  denied.  After  repeating  the  inter- 
mediate verfes,  you  vourfelf  add,  “ He  fubjoins 
a reafon  v.  9.  which  demonftrates  the  eiror  of 
fruiting  in  man  : The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all 
things  and  defperalely  wicked-,  who  can  know  it? 
This  text  therefore  does  not  mean,  who  can 
know  his  own  heart,  but  another’s.”  Whether 
it  means  one  or  both,  it  pofitively  alferts,  that  1 
the  heart  of  man,  of  men  in  general,  of  every  1 
man,  is  dfpercrtely  wtcked.  Therefore  as  to  the 
main  point  contained  therein,  “ Chrihians  j'(  do 
not  underhand  it  wrong,”  neither mifapply  it  at 
all. 

When  I fay,  I feel,  I have  at  wicked  heart,”  \ 
another  thing  which  you  do  not  underhand,  I 
mean  this,  I feel  much  pride  remaining  in  my 
heart,  much  felf-wiU,  much  unbelief-  Now  I 
really  believe  pride  and  felf-will  and  unbelief  to 
be  ehentially  wicked  tempers.-  Therefore  in 
whatever  heart  they  remain,  (and  they  remain 
in  your  s as  well  as  mine)  that  is  a wicked  heart.  • 

After  a long  paufe,  you  return  to  the  7th  of  1 

the; 


1 


if 


+ p.  225. 


[ *8/  ] 

' the  Romans  and  affirm,  “We  + cannot  from 
l any  thing  in  that  chapter  infer,  that  we  came 
into  the  world  with  finfuldifpofitions  derivedfrora 
j Adam  ; for  the  apoitle  fays  nothing  about  Adam.' 
I He  had  faid  enough  in  the  jth  chapter  of  the 
i caufe.  Here  he  only  defcribes  the  effeft : the 

I date  of  tliofe,  who  are  now  bt  ought -to  the  birth  : 

but  there  is  not  yet  fir  ength  to  bring  forth. 

| “ Nor  can  we  infer  from  hence,  that  any  man 

I fins  through  a principle  which  it  was  never  in 
his  power  to  command.  For  then  it  would  be  no 
fin.”  Upon  this  I would  only  afk,  Are  you  af- 
fured,  that  no  man  tranfgreffes  God's  law,  (whe- 
ther you  will  call  it  fin,  or  not)  through  a prin- 
ciple which  it  was  never  in  his  power  to  com- 
mand ? At  leaf!  not  for  any  time  together  ? 
Every  paffionate  man  can  confute  you  in  this* 
He  has  lad  experience  of  the  contrary. 

To  tliofe  objections  which  you  have,  in  fame 
fort,  anfwered,  you  fubjoin  the  fallowing  .ques- 
tions.. 

Oiieji.  I.  “ Is  not  the  ao£trine  ± of  original 
Jin , neceffiny  to  account  for  the  being  of  fo 
much  wickednefs  in  the  world?” 

You  anfwer,  “ Adam’s  nature,  it  is  allowed; 
was  not  finful,  and  yet  he  finned.  Therefore 
this  doftrine  is  no  more  necefiary  to  account  for 
the  wickednefs  of  the  world  than  to  account  for 
Adam’s  fin.”  Yes,  it  is.  I can  account  for  one 
man’s  finning,  or  an  hundred,  or  even  half 

mankind,. 

t p.  22Q--  | p.  2 Jt, 


[ »88  ] 

mankind,  fuppofe  they  were  evenly  poifed  be- 
tween vice  and  virtue,  from  their  own  choice, 
which  might  turn  one  way  or  the  other.  But  I 
cannot  poflibly  on  this  fuppofition  account  for 
the  general  wickednefs  of  mankind  in  all  ages 
and  nations. 

Again.  “ If  t men  were  never  drawn  into  fin 
any  other  way,  than  as  Adam  was,  namely  by 
temptations  offered  from  without,  there  might  be 
fomething  in  this  anfwer.  But  there  are  number- 
lefs  inftances  of  men  finning,  though  no  tempta- 
tation  is  offered  from  without.  It  is  neceffary 
therefore  fome  other  account  fhould  be  given  of 
their  finning  than  of  Adam’s.  And  how  to  account 
for  the  univerfal  fpread  of  fin  over  the  whole 
world  without  one  exception,  if  there  were  no 
corruption  in  their  common  head,  would  be  an 
unfurmountable  difficulty.” 

Quejl.  II.  “ How  then  ± are  we  born  into  the 
world  ?” 

You  anfwer,  “ As  void  of  aflual  knowledge  as 
the  brutes  ?” 

And  can  you  really  imagine  that  text,  Job  xi. 
12.  Vain  man  would  be  wife  (evidently  fpoken  of 
man  in  general)  though  a man  be  born  like  a wild 
afs's  colt\  implies  no  more  than,  “ Men  are 
born  void  of  atlual  knowledge  ?”  * Do  we  need 
infpiration  to  make  this  difcovery,  that  a new- 
born child  has  no  aftual  knowledge  ? Is  man  com- 
pared to  a wild  afs , of  all  animals  the  mod  ftupid, 

to 

+ Vindication,  p.  3 to.  f p.  232, 


[ x89  ] - 

to  teach  us  no  more  than  this?  Yea,  a wild a/s’s 
colt  ? Does  not  this  intimate  any  thing  of  untrac- 
tablenefs,  fullennefs,  flubbornnefs,  perverfenefs  ? 

How  ||  keenly  is  the  companion  pointed? 
Like  the  afs,  an  animal  flupid  evenTo  a proverb  : 
like  the  a/s’s  colt , which  mull  be  Hill  more  egre- 
gioufiy  flupid  than  its  dam  : like  the  wild  a/s’s 
colt,  which  is  not  only  blockifh,  but  flubborn 
and  refraflory ; neither  has  valuable  qualities  by 
nature,  nor  will  ealily  receive  them  by  difcipline. 
1 he  image  in  the  original  is  yet  more  llrongly 
touched.  The  particle  like  is  not  in  the  Hebrew, 
Born  a wild  afs’ s colt ; or,  as  we  Ihould  fay  in 
Englifh,  a mere  wild  af’s  colt.”. 

Yes,  “We  are  born  with  many  fenfual  appe- 
tites and  paffions : but  every  one  of  thefe  are  in 
themfelves  good.”  I grant  all  the  appetites  and  paf- 
fions originally  implanted  in  our  nature,  were 
good  in  themfelves.  But  are  all  that  now  exilt  in 
us  good  ? “ If  not,  they  become  evil  only  by  ex- 
cefs  or  abufe.”  Firfl,  this  may  be  doubted.  I 
do  not  know,  that  love  of  praife,  of  power,  of 
money,  become  evil  only  by  abuf.  I am  afraid 
thefe  and  other  paffions  which  we  have  had  from 
our  infancy,  are  evil  in  themfelves.  But  be  that  as 
it  may,  in  how  few  do  we  find  even  the  more 
innocent  paffions  and  appetites,  clear  of  excefs 
or  abufe?  “ But  all  that  is  wrong  in  them  is  Tom 
habit.5’  This  cannot  be  allowed  as  univerfally 
true.  The  little  children  of  wife  and  pious  pa- 
rents, 


||  Theron  and  Afpafio,  Dial.  13. 


[ *9°  1 

rents,  have  not  yet  contra&ed  ill  habits.  Yet  be- 
fore they  can  go  alone,  they  ffiew  fuch  pafTions, 
as  are  palpably  exceffive,  if  not  evil  in  tliem- 
felves. 

But  whatever  they  are  in  themfelves,  here  is 
the  “ grand  difficulty,  of  which  you  give  us 
no  manner  of  folution,  whence  comes  it  to  pafs, 
that  thofe  appetites  and  paffions,  which  no 
doubt  were  at  fir!!  kindly  implanted  in  our  na- 
ture by  an  holy  God,  are  now  become  fo  excef- 
five  or  irregular,  that  no  one  man  from  the  be- 
ginning of  the  world  lias  fo  refilled  them,  as  to 
keep  himfelf  pure  and  innocent?” 

“ But  without  thefe  appetites  and  paffions, 
«ur  nature  would  be  defeftive,  fluggiffi  or  un- 
armed. Nor  is  there  any  one  of  them  which  we 
can  at  prefent  fpare.”  We  could  very-  well  fpare 
the  excefs  and  irregularity  of  them  all  : and  pof- 
fibly,  fome  of  the  paffions  themfelves,  as  love  of 
praife,  and  love  of  revenge.  The  love  of  God 
would  more  than  fupply  the  place  of  both  ; nei-  | 
tlier  does  it  fuffer  us  to  be  JluggiJh  or  inactive. 
Nor  does  calm,  Chriftian  fortitude  leave  us  un-  i 
armed  again!!  any  danger  which  can  occur.  ‘‘But 
hour  reafon  would  have  nothing  to  ftruggle 
with.”  O yes,  not  only  all  our  reafon,  but  all 
the  grace  we  have  received,  lias  enough  to  £rug- 
gle  with,  even  when  we  do  not  wreftle  with JleJh 
and  blood.  We  are  ft  ill  abundantly  “ exercifed’*  ] 

- V hy 


+ P-  233- 


[ *9‘  ] 


by  principalities  and  powers  and  fpiritual  wicked- 
nefs  in  high  places. 

“ On  the  other  hand,  we  are  born  with  rati- 
onal powers  which  grots'  gradually  capable  of  the 
mofl:  ufeful  knowledge.  And  we  under  the  gof- 
pel,  have  clear  ideas  of  the  divine  perfections  : 
we  fee  our  duty,  and  the  mofl  cogent  reafons  to 
perform  it.”  This  founds  well.  But  will  know- 
ledge balance  pajjian?  Or  are  rational  powers  a 
counterpoife  to  fcnfual  appetites  ? Will  clear 
ideas  deliver  men  from  lull  or  vanity?  Or feeing 
the  duty  to  love  our  enemies  enable  us  to  praftife 
it  ? What  are  cogent  reafons  oppofed  to  cove- 
toufnefs  or  ambition?  A thread  of  tow  that  has 
touched  the  fire.  “ But  the  Spirit  of  God  is  pro- 
mifed  for  our  alhrlance.”  Nay,  but  what  need 
of  him, . upon  your  fcheme  ? Man  is  fufficient 
for  himfelf.  He  that  glorieth  on  this  hypothefis, 
mud  glory  in  himfelf.  not  in  the  Lord. 

Quejl.  III.  “ How  far  is  our  t prefent  hate  the 
fame  with  .that  of  Adam  in  Paradife  ?” 

I Suppofe  “ our  mental  capacities  are  the 
fame  as  Adam’s,  only  that  fome  are  above,  fome 
belosv  his  flandard.  Probably  there  are  many  in 
the  world  much  below  Adam,  in  rational  endosvr- 
ments.  But  pofftbly  the  force  and  acutenefs  of 
underhand ing  was  much  greater,  in  our  Sir  Ifaac 
Newton  than  in  Adam.” 

I do  not  apprehend  this  requires  any  anfwer. 
He  that  can  believe  it,  let  him  believe  it. 

“ We 


+ P-  235- 


[ *92  ] 

u We  are  next  to  enquire,  upon  what  true 
grounds  thofe  parts  of  religion  hand,  which  the 
Schoolmen  have  founded  upon  the  doctrine  of  ori- 
ginal fin  : particularly  the  two  grand  articles  of 
Redemption  and  Regen  eratIon.” 

In  w’hat  century  did  the  fchoolmtn  write?  How 
long  before  St.  Auguftine,  (to  go  no  higher?)  A 
fad  fpecimen  this  of  “ the  honeffy  and  impar- 
tiality with  which  you  deliver  your  fentiments L” 

I.  Redemption. 

“ Our  fall,  corruption  and  apoflacy  in  Adam 
has  been  made  the  reafon  why  the  Son  of  God 
came  into  the  world  and  gave,  himfelf  a ranfom  for 
us.:’ 

And  undoubtedly  it  is  the  reafon.  Accordingly 
the  very  firfh  promife  of  the  Redeemer  was  given 
prefently  after  the  fall.  And  given  with  a manifefl; 
reference  to  thofe  evils  which  came  on  all  iren 
through  Adam’s  tranfgrefhon.  Nor  does  it  ap- 
pear from  any  feripture,  that  he  would  have  come 
into  the  world  at  all,  had  not  all  men  died  in 
Adam. 

You  yourfelf  allow,  “ the  apoflle  affirms,  £ j 
Rom.  v.  18,  ig.  That  by  the  nghteoufnefs  and 
obedience  of  Chrifl,  all  men  are  delivered  from  the 
condemnation  and  fentence  they  came  under 
through  Adam’s  difobedience : and  that  thus  far 

the 


+ p.  238. 


[ *93  ] 

the  redemption  by  Chriit  Rands  in  connection 
with  Adam’s  tranfgreffion.” 

“ But  the  redemption  by  Chrifl,  extends  far 
beyond  the  confequences  of  Adam’s  tranfgref- 
fiom”  It  does.  Men  receive  far  greater  bleffincrs 
by  Chrift,  than  thofc  the}"  lofl  by  Adam-.  But 
this  does  not  prove,  that  our  fall  in  Adam  is  not 
the  ground  of  our  redemption  by  Ghrift. 

Let  us  once  more  confider  the  text  itfelf, 
V.  15.  But  riot  as  the  offence,  fo  is  the  free- gift. 
For  if  through,  the  offence  of  one  many  be  dead , 
much  more  the  grace  of  God  and  the  gift  by  grace,  the 
ble fling  which  flows  from  the  mere  mercy  of  God, 
which  is  by  one • man,  Jefus  ChriJ},  hath  abounded 
unto  many , ver.  1 6.  For  not  as  it  was  by  one. that 
finned,  fo  is  the  gift : for  the  judgment  washy  one 
offence  to  condemnation ; but  the  free-gift  is  of 
many  offences  unto  juf  if  cation.  In  this  refpeft, 
firft,  the  free-gift  by  Chrift,  hath  abounded  muck 
more  than  the  lofs  by  Adam.  And  in  this,  fe- 
■condly,  ver.  17.  If  by  one  mads  offence , death 
fpiritual  and  temporal,  leading  to  death  eternal 
reigned  by  one  over  his  whole  poflerity,  muck 
more  they  who  receive  the  abundance  of  grace  and  of 
the  gift  of  righteoufnefs,  the  free-gilt  of  judifi ca- 
tion and  lanfiifi cation,  fiall  reign  in  life  cver- 
1 ailing  b\  one  Jefus  Chriff  Let  any  one  who 
calmly  and  impartially  reads  this  Palfage  judge, 
if  this  be  not  the  plain,  natural  meaning  ol  it. 

But  let  us  nowobferve  your  comment  upon  it, 
I “ Here 


C 194  ] 


“ Here  the  apoftle  § afferts  a grace  of  God, 
which  already  hath  abounded,  beyond  the  effects 
of:  Adam’s  fin  upon  us.”  It  has,  upon  them  that 
are  juflified  and  Sanctified ; but  not  upon  all  man- 
kind.  “ And  which  has  refpeft,  not  to  his  one 

offence' ’ Not  to  that  only, “ but  alfo  to  the 

many  offences  which  men  have  perfonally  com- 
mitted.— Not  to  the  death  which  rfigned 
by  him-” — Yes  verily  : but  over  and  above  the 
removal  of  this,  it  hath  alfo  refpeft  “ to  the  life 
in  which  they  who  receive  the  abounding  grace  fhall 
reign  with  him  for  ever.” 

Thus  far  you  have  proved  juft  nothing.  But 
you  go  on,  “ the  death  confequent  on  Adam’s  fin, 
is  reverfed  by  the  redemption  in  Chrift.  But 
this  is  not  the  whole  end  of  it  by  far.  The  grand 
reafon  and  end  of  redemption  is,  the  grace  of  God, 
and  the  gift  by  grace."  Infallibly  it  is;  but  this 
is  not  a different  thing,  but  precifely  the  fame 
with  the  free-gift.  Confequently  your  whole 
ftrufture  raifed  on  the  fuppofition  of  that  differ- 
ence, is  a mere  caflle  in  the  air.  But  if  the  gift  by 
grace,  and  the  free-gift  are  the  very  fame  thing, 
and  if  the  gift  by  grace  is  “ the  grand  reafon  and 
end  of  redemption  then  our  fall  in  Adam,  to 
which  you  allow  the  free-gift  directly  refers,  is 
“ the  reafon  of  Chrift’s  coming  into  the  world.” 

“ But  the  Scriptures  f of  the  New  Teftament 
^excepting  Rom.  ver.  12. — 19.  and  1 Cor.  xv.  21. 

22 ) 


h P-  239*  + P-  240' 


[ *95  3 

22)  always  aflign  the  aftual  wickednefs  of  mankind 
as  the  reafon  of  Chrift’s  coming  into  the  world.” 
They  generally  do  aflign  this,  their  outward  and 
inward  wickednefs.  But  this  does  not  exclude  the 
wickednefs  of  their  nature,  fpringing  from  their 
fall  in  Adam.  Rather  this,  which  is  expreffed  in 
thofe  two  places  at  leaft,  is  prefuppofed  in  all 
places.  Particularly  in  the  beginning  of  the  Epiftle 
; to  the  Romans,  where  he  defcribes  the  enormous 
wickednefs  both  of  the  Jews  and  Gentiles.  “ It 
is  true,  J he  begins  his  difcourfe  with  an  account 
of  the  adhial  tranfgre (lions  of  the  idolatrous  Gen- 
ii tiles.  Afterwards,  chap.  iii.  he  treats  of  tire  de- 
pravity and  corruption  of  all  mankind  : and  then 
proceeds,  chap.  v.  to  {hew,  that  we  are  all  made 
1 /inner s by  Adam , and  that  by  his  offence  judgment 
is  come  upon  all  men  to  condemnation.  The 
apoftle’s  method  is  clear  and  natural.  He  begins 
with  that  which  is  moll  obvious,  even  aftual  fin; 

! and  then  proceeds  to  fpeakof  original  fin,  as  the 
joint  caufe  of  the  necefiity  of  redemption  for  all 
men.  But  which  way  can  we  infer,  that  becaufe 
| he  begins  with  the  mention  of  afliial  fins,  in  or- 
der to  demonftrate  the  necefTity  of  redemption, 
therefore  he  excludes  original  out  of  the  account  ? 
Neither  can  we  infer,  that  becaufe  it  is  not  ex- 
prefly mentioned  in  § other  texts,  therefore  it  is 
not  implied. 

“ But  the  t Redeemer  himfelf  faith  not  one 
word  of  redeeming  us  from  the  corruption  of 
I 2 nature 

t Vindication,  p.  116,  &c.  ^ p.  241.  + p,  242, 


[ *96  ] 

nature  derived  from  Adam.  And  feeing  he  fpake 
exactly  according  to  the  commiffion  which  the 
Father  gave  him,  we  may  fafely  conclude,  it  was 
no  part  of  his  commiffion  to  preach  the  dodlrine 
of  original  fm.:’  “ Jufl  as  fafely  may  we  conclude, 
that  it  was  no  part  of  his  commiffion,  to  teach  and 
make  known  to  men,  the  man)  things  which,  he  had 
to  Jay  to  his  apoflles  before  his  death,  which  they 
could  not  then  bear,  John  xvi.  12.  but  which  ac- 
cording to  his  promife,  he  afterwards  taught 
them  by.  his  fpirit,  and  by  them  to  the  world.  It 
makes  no  difference  as  to  the  ground  of  our  faith, 
whether  a doftrme  was  delivered  by  C hr  iff  liirn- 
f'elf  or  by.  his  apoflles:  and  whether  it  be  written 
in  any  of  the  four  gofpels,  or  of  the  divine  epif- 
tles.  1 here  is  only  this  difference.  The  epiflles 
w.ere  wrote  after  the  refurrefiion  and  afcenfion 
of  Chrift.  Therefore  after  tire  full  commence- 
ment of  the  gofpel  difpenfation;  whereas  the 
difcourfesof  Chrilf  recorded  in  the  gofpels,  were 
delivered  before  the  gofpel  difpenfation  was  pro- 
perly begun.  1 here  fore  we  are  to  look  foe  the 
peculiar  doflrities  of  Chriil,  rather  in  the  epiflles 
than  in  the  gofpels.  However  Chrift  did  fpeak 
of  this,  and  referred  to  it  more  than  once,  during 
his  perfonal  minillry  : particularly  in  his  dif- 
courfe  with  Nicodenius,  and  Matt,  xxiii.  But 
it  is  not  furprifing,  that  he  did  not  fpeak  folargelv, 
of  redeeming  us  from  fin,  original  or  ac  tual,  by 
the  price  of  his  blood,  before  that  price  was 

actually 


L *97  ] 

actually  paid,  as  the  apoftles  did  afterward.  He 
confidered  the  littlenefs  of  their  knowledge,  with 
the  violence  of  their  prejudices.  Therefore  we 
have  no  caufe  to  be  furprifed,  that  no  more  is 
faid  on  this  head  in  thofe  difcourfes  which 
Chrift  delivered  belore  his  death.  But  to 
us  he  has  toiil  it  plainly,  and  we  do  find  the  doc- 
trines of  orioinal  fm  and  redemntion  from  it  by 
Jefus  Chrift,  difiinguijhed  emphatically  in  almoft 
every  page  of  the  infpired  epiftles.” 

T o fum  up  this  : 1 . Chrift  fpeaks  very  fparingly 
of  many  things,  whereof  his  apoftles  have  fpoken 
largely  : 2.  Yet  he  does  fpeak  of  the  corruption 
of  our  nature  (which  St.  Paul  exprefiv  tells  us  is 
derived  from  Adam)  particularly  in  the  23d  ol 
St.  Matthew  and  the  3d  of  St.  John.  3.  Where- 
ever  he  fpeaks  of fiaving  that  udiich  was  loft , he  in 
effect  fpeaks  of  this:  efpecially  Matth.  xviii.  11, 
where  he  mentions  little  children  as  loft  ; which 
could  not  be  by  afitual  fm:  4 There  was  the  lefs 
need  of  our  Lord’s  fpeaking  much  on  this  head, 
becaufe  it  was  fo  fully  declared  in  the  Old  Tefta- 
nrent,  and  -was  not  queftioned  by  any  of  thofe 
falfe  teachers,  againft  whom  he  teas  chiefly  con- 
cerned to  warn  his  difciples. 

Lou  add,  “ It  has  f been  delivered  as  a funda- 
mental truth;  that  no  man  will  come  to  Chrift, 
the  lecond  Adam,  who  is  not  firft  throughly  con- 
vinced of  the  feveral  things  he  loft  in  the  firft 
1 3 Adam.” 


tp.  243. 


[ 19S  ] 

Adam.”  This  is  a fundamental  truth  ; none  will 
come  to  Chrijl  as  a Redeemer,  ’till  he  is  throughly 
convinced,  he  wants  a Redeemer.  No  man  ever 
will  come  to  him  as  a Saviour,  ’till  he  knows  and 
feels  himfelf  a lofi  finner.  None. will  come  to 
the  Phyfician , but  they  that  arefick,  and  are  tho- 
roughly fenfible  of  it:  that  are  deeply  convinced 
of  their  finful  tempers,  as  well  as  finful  words  and 
adlions.  And  thefe  tempers  they  tvellknow  were 
antecedent  to  their  choice,  and  came  into  the 
world  with  them.  So  far  “ every  man  who  comes 
to  Chrift,  is  firft  convinced  of  the  feveral  things 
he  loft  by  Adam,”  though  he  may  not  clearly 
know  the  fource  of  that  corruption  which  he  fees 
and  feels  in  his  own  heart  and  life.  “ But  why 
does  our  Lord  never  mention  Adam,  or  the  cor- 
1 option  of  our  nature  through  him  ? He  does  men- 
tion this  corruption,  and  he  prefuppofes  it  in  all 
his  publick  difcourfes.  He  does  not  mention  it 
largely  and  explicitly,  for  the  reafons  above  re- 
cited. “ But  the  apoftles  are  ± wholly  filent  on  this 
bead,  in  their  fermons  recorded  in  the  Acts  : And 
in  their  epiftles  too.”  Are  they  wholly  filent  in 
their  epiftles?  This  is  a violent  miftake.  And 
as  to  their  fermons,  it  may  be  obferved.  1.  That 
We  have  not  one  whole  fermon  of  any  one  apoftle, 
recorded  in  the  Ads  : nor,  it  may  be,  the  twen- 
tieth part  of  one.  2.  That  it  was  not  needful  for 
them  to  prove,  what  none  of  their  hearers  de- 
nied No,  not  even  the  Heathens  : even  thefe  al- 
lotted 


t P-  243j  244« 


[ *99  1 

lowed  the  corruption  of  human  nature.  Even 
thefe  received  it  as  an  undeniable  faft. 

“ Vitiis  nemo  fine  na/citur.'’ 

Mo  man  is  born  without  vices. 

Thefe  acknowdedged  (as  Seneca  exprefles)  Omnia 
in  omnibus  vitia  funt : All  vices  are  in  ail  men. 
Thefe  faw,  there  were  hardly  any  good  men  to 
be  found  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  : and  openly 
teftified  it. 

Rari  quippe  boni,  numero  vix  funt  totidem  quoi 
Thebarum  portce , vel  divis  ojlia  Nili : 

The  good  lie  fcatter’d  in  this  barren  foil, 

Few  as  the  gates  of  Thebes,  or  mouths  of  Nile. 
They  had  alfo  among  them  fome  faint  account  of 
the  caufe  of  that  overflowing  corruption.  So 
Horace  immediately  after  he  had  afferted  the  fa£t, 
Audax  omnia  perpeti 
Gens  humana  ruit  per  vet  it  um  nefas: 

Lawlefs,  and  unreftrain’d  the  human  race, 
Rufhes  thro’  all  the  paths  of  daring  wicked- 
nefs : 

Glances  at  the  caufe  of  it,  in  their  fabulous  man- 
ner 

Audax  Japeti  genus 
Ignem  fraude  mala  gentibus  intulit : 

Pofl  ignem  atherea  domo 
SubduBum,  macies,  & nova  febrium 
Terris  incubuit  cohors : 

Somotiq ; prius  tarda  necejfitas 
Letki  corripuit  gradum 

u 


* Pro- 


C zo°  1 

* Prometheus  fir  ft  provok’d  the  heavenly  fine, 
Purloining  Jupiter’s  authentic  fire  : 

Evil,  from  hence  deriv’d,  and  brooding  pain, 
And  ftrange  difeafe  with  all  theghaftly  train. 
Pour’d  in  upon  the  wretched  fons  of  men  : 
While  hafty  Fate  quickened  the  lingring  pace  • 
Of  diftant  death,  unveiled  the  mender ’s  face, 
And  gave  into  hi3  hands  our  whole  devoted 
race. 

I obferve,  g.  It  was  neither  needful  nor  pro- 
per, for  an  apoftle  in  his  firft  fermonto  a congre- 
gation wholly  unawakened,  to  defcant  upon  ori- 
ginalJin.  No  man  of  common  fenfe  would  do  it 
now.  Were  I to  preach  to  a certain  congrega- 
tion at  Norwich,  I Ihould  not  fay  one  word  of 
Adam,  but  endeavour  to  fhew  them,  that  their 
lives,  and  therefore  their  hearts,  were  corrupt  and 
abominable  before  God. 

You  conclude  this  head,  “ Guilt  imputed,  is 
imaginary  guilt,  and  fo  no  obj ect  of  redemption .” 
I dare  not  fay  fo  as  to  my  own  particular.  1 pray 
God,  of  his  tender  mercy,  to  free  me  from  this 
and  all  other  guilt,  through  the  redemption  which 
is  in  Jelus  Chrift  ! 

II,  Regln  eratiox. 

“ Whv  t muft  we  be  horn  again  ?”  (You  fub- 
join  the  common,  bur,  as  you  fuppofe,  abfurd 
anfwer;)  <r  becaufe  we  are  horn  in  Jin  nature  is 
averfe  to  all  good  and  inclined  to  all  evil.  There- 
fore 


+ p.  245. 


[ 201  J 

fore  we  mull  be  born  again,  before  we  can  pleafe 
God.” 

In  order  to  confute  this,  you  aftert,  “ Then 
it  cannot  be  our  duty,  to  be  born  again;  nor  confe- 
quently  our  fault,  if  ire  are  not : becaufe  it  is  not 
vn.  our  power.”  It  is,  by  grace,  tho’  not  by  na- 
ture. By  this  ire  may  all  be  born  again.  There- 
fore it  is  our  duty  : and  if  ire  fall  fhort  herein,  it 
is  our  own  fault. 

“ But  being  + born  again  does  really  fignify, 
the  gaining  thofe  habits  of  virtue,  which  make 
us  children  of  God.”  Then  St.  Paul  ought  to 
have  faid.  Not  ye  are  all  the  children  of  God,  by 
faith  in  Chrijl  Jefus  : but  ye  are  all  the  children 
of  God,  by  gaining  habits  of  virtue  ! 

Nay,  but  according  to  the  wholetenor  of  fcrip- 
ture  the  being  born  again  does  really  fignify,  the 
being  inwardly  changed  by  the  Almighty  ope- 
ration of  the  Spirit  of  God;  changed  from  fin  to 
holinefs  : renewed  in  the  image  of  him  that  creat- 
ed us.  And  why  mu  ft  vre  be  fo  changed  ? Becaufe 
without  holinefs  no  man  fall  fee  the  Lord  : and 
becaufe  without  this  change,  all  our  endeavours 
after  holinefs  are  ineffeftuah.  God' hath  indeed 
“ endowed  us  with  underfunding,,  and  given 
us  abundant  means.”'  But  our  underftanding  Ls 
as  infufficient  for  that  end,  as  are  the  outward 
means,  if  not  attended’ with  inward  power. 

You  proceed  to  explain  yourfetf  at  large. 
“ Chrift  informs  us,  That  \ except  a man  be  born 
I 5 again  ^ 

+ E- 


<■  •>. 


[ 202  J 

again,  he  cannot  fee  the  kingdom  of  God ; and 
thereby  teaches  us. 

I.  “ ThatGod  hath  ierefted  a kingdom, united 
in  and  under  him,  for  his  glory,  and  mens  mutual 
happinefs.  ’ 

II.  “ He  + will  finally  admit  none  into  it, 
who  are  not  difpofed  to  relifli  and  promote  the 
happinefs  of  it.  ” 

(Both  thefe  propofitions  I willingly  allow] 

III.  “ All  wickednefs  is  quite  contrary  to  the 
nature  and  end  of  this  kingdom.  Therefore  no 
wicked  men  can  be  fit  members  of  it,  unlefs 
there  be  a full  perfuafion,  that  reverence,  love, 
and  obedience  are  duetoGod:  ’ I add,  andun- 
lefs  it  be  aftually  paid  him ; otherwife  that  per- 

Juiifton  but  increafes  our  condemnation)  “ Unlefs 
his  favour  is  preferred  before  all  other  enjoy- 
ments whatfoever : unlefs  there  be  a delight  in 
the  worfhip  of  God,  and  in  converfe  with  lnm: 
unlefs  every  appetite  be  brought  into  fubjettion 
to  reafon.’'  (add,  and  reafon  to  the  word  of  God) 
“ How  can  any  man  be  fit  to  dwell  with  God, 
Or  to  do  him  fervice  in  his  kingdom  3 ’ 

IV.  “ It  is  § one  thing  to  be  born  into  God  s 
creation,  another  to  be  born  into  his  peculiar 
kingdom.  In  order  to  an  admittance  into  his  pe- 
culiar kingdom,  it  is  not  enough  for  an  intelli- 
gent being  to  exifl.”  I do  not  know  that.  Per- 
haps  it  is  not  poffible,  for  God  to  create  an  in- 
telligent 

+ p.  247.  i p.  248.  $ p.  250,  25J, 


[ 203  ] 

telligent  being,  without  creating  it  duly  fubject 
to  himfeli,  that  is,  a fubjeft  of  his  peculiar  king- 
dom. It  is  highly  probable,  the  holy  angels  were 
fubjefls  of  his  peculiar  kingdom,  from-  the  firft 
moment  of  their  exiftence.  Therefore  the  fol- 
lowing. .peremptory  affertion,  and  all  of  the  hke 
kind,  are  wholly  groundlefs.  “ It  is  abfolut'ely 
necejfary,  before  any  creature  can  beta  fubjefl  oi 
this,  that  it  learn  to  employ  and  exercife  its 
powers,  fuitably  to  the  nature  of  them.  ’ It  is 
not  neceftary  at  all.  In  this  fenfe  finely,  God 
may  do.zuhat  he  will  with  his  own.  He  may  be- 
llow his  own  bleffings  as  he-plcafes.  Is  thine 
eye  evil,  hecaufe  he  is  good  ? 

The  premifes  then  being  gone,  what  becomes 
of  the  conclufion  ? “ So  that  the  being  born  into 
God's  peculiar  kingdom,  depends  upon  a right 
nfe  and  application  of  our  life  and  being;  and  is 
the  privilege  only  of  thofe  wile  whofe  fpirits 
attain  to  an  habit  of  true  holinefs.” 

This  Hands  without  any  proof  at  all.  At  be  ft 
therefore  it  is  extremely  doubtful.  But  it  mull 
appear  extremely  abfurd  to  thofe,  who  believe 
God  ean  create  fpirits,.  both  wife  and  holy  ; that 
he  can  ftamp  any  creature  with  what  meafure  of 
holinefs  he  fees  good,  at  the  firft  moment  of  its 
exiflence. 

Theroccafion  of  your  running  into  this  abfur- 
clity  feems  to  be,  that  you  Humbled  at  the  very 
threlhold.  In  the  text  under  confideration  our 
Lord  mentions  two  things,  the  new-birth  and  the 
1 _6  kingdom 


[ 204  J 

kingdom  of  God.  Thefe  two  your  imagination 
blended  into  one  : in  confequence  of  which  you 
run  on  with  “ born  into  his  kingdom’’  a phrafe 
never  ufed  by  our  Lord,,  not  any  of  his  apoftles 
and  an  heap  of  other  crude  exprcflions  of  the  fame 
kind : all  betraying  that  confufednefs  of  thought, 
which  alone  could  prevent  your  ufual  clearneL 
of  language. 

Juft  in  the  fame  manner  you  go  on.  “ Our 
firft  parents-  in  paradile  tv  ere  to  form  t their 
minds  to  an  habitual  fubjeftion  to  the  law  oi 
God,  without  which  they  could  not  be  received 
into  his  fpiritual  kingdom.  ’ This  runs  upon  the 
fame  miftaken  fuppofition,.  that  God  could  not 
create  them  hoi}-.  Certainly  he  could  and  did  : 
and  from  the  very  moment  that  they  were  created, 
their  minds  were  in.  funjeftion  to  the  law  oi  God, 
and  they  were  members,  of  his  fpiritual  kingdom. 

“ But  if  Adam  was  originally  peifeft  in  hoii- 
nefs,”  (fay,  perjcBly  holy, made  in  the  moral  image 
of  God)  “ what  occafion  was  there  for  any  far- 
ther trial  ?”  That  there  might  be  room  for  farther 
holinefs  and  happroefs  : entire  holincfs  does  net 
exclude  growth:  nor  did  tire  right  fate  of  all 
his  faculties  entitle  him  to  that  full  reward, 
which  would  have  followed  the  right  ujc  of 
them. 

* “ Upon  the  whole,  J regeneration,  or  gain- 
ing habits  of  holinefs,  takes  in  no  part  of  the 
dofirine  of  original  fin.’’  But  regeneration  is  not 

“-gaining 

+ p.  252,  253,  ? p.  253. 


[ 2o5  ] 

M gaining  habits  of  holinefs it  is  quite  a differ- 
ent thing.  It  is  not  a natural,  but  a fupernatura! 
change  ; and  is  juft  as  different  from  the  gradual 
“ gaining  habits,”  as  a child's  being  born  into  the 
world  is,  from  his  growing  up  into  a man.  The 
new-birth  is  not  (as  you  fuppofe)  the  progress 
or  the  whole  of  fan&i-fication,  but  th a beginning 
of  it : as  the  natural  birth  is  not  the  whole  of  life,, 
but  only  the  entrance  upon  it.  He  that  is  born 
of  a woman,-  then  begins  to  live  a natural  life  : he 
that  is  born  of  God,  then  begins  to  live-  a fpiri- 
fcual.  And  if  every  man  born  of  a woman  had 
fpiritual  life  already,,  he  would  not  need  to  be 
born  of  God . 

“ However,  i I allow  the  Spirit  of  God  afTiRs. 
our  endeavours.  But  this  does  not  fuppofe  any 
natural  pravity  of  our  minds.”  Does  not  his- 
quickening  then  fuppofe  we  were  dead?  His 
opening  our  eyes,  fuppofe  we  were  blind?  And  his- 
creating  us  anew  imply  fomething  more  than  the 
afjijling  our  endeavours?  How  very  ftender  a part- 
in  fan  ft  ideation  will  you  allow  to  the  Spirit  of 
God  ? You  feem  very  fearful  of  doing  him  too 
much  honour,  of  taking  from  man  the  glory  due 
to  his  name ! 

Accordingly  you  fay,  M His  aid's  are  fo  far 
from  fuppofing  the  previous  inaptitude  of  our 
minds”  (to  the  being  born  again ) “ that  our  pre- 
vious defire  of  the  Spirit’s  adiltance,  is- the  condi- 
tion of  "our  receiving  it.”  But  who  gave  ns  that 

defire  r 


1 P-  2-55» 


[ 20  6 ] 

defne?  Is  it  not  God  that  worketkin  us  to  will, 
to  defire,  as  well  as  to  do  ? His  grace  does  accom- 
pany and  follow  our  defires  : but  does  it  not  alfo 
prevent,  go  before  them  ? After  this,  we  may  afk 
and  feek  farther  affillance : and  if  we  do,  not 
otherwife,  it  is  given. 

I cannot  but  add  a few  words  from  Dr.  Jen- 
nings. “ § Dr.  Taylor  believes  the  influence  of 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  afif  our  fincere  endeavours, 
is  fpoken  of  in  the  go f pel,  but  never  as  fuppofmg  any 
natural  pravity  of  our  minds.  But  certain  it  is, 
that  Chrill  oppofeth  our  being  born  of  the  Spirit,  ' 
to  our  being  born  ||  of  the  fejh:  that  which  is  born 
of  the  fefh,  is  fefi ; and  that  which  is  born  of  the 
Spirit,  is fpint.  Therefore  the  influence  of  the 
Spirit  iu  regeneration,  fuppofeih  fomething  that 
we  are  born  with-,  which  makes  fuch  an  influence 
neceffary  to  our  being  born  again.  And  if  this 
be  not  fome  natural  pravity,  let  our  author  tell 
us  what  it  is.  It  is  plain,  it  is  not  any  ill  habit 
afterward  acquired  ; for  it  is  fomething  that  we 
are  born  with.  And  if  to  bo. born  of  the  flefk 
means  only  to  have-  the  pat  ts  and  powers  of  a man „• 
and  if  thefe -parts  and  powers  are  all  .pure  and 
uncorrupted , we  have  no  need  pf  any  fuch  in- 
fluence of  the  Spirit,  to  be  fuper-added  to  our 
natural  powers.  Without  this,  our  own  fincere 
endeavours  will  fuffice,  for  attaining  all  habits  of 
virtue.” 

* I proceed  to  your  conclufion,  “ Is  it  not  + 

highly 
+ p.  256, 


^ Vindication,  p,  125.  jj  John  iii.  6. 


[ 2o7  ] 

highly  injurious  to  the  God  of  our  nature,  whofe 
hands  have  formed  and  falhioned  us,  to  believe 
our  nature  is  originally  corrupted?"  It  is:  but 
the  charge  falls  not  on  in,  but  you,  We  do  not 
believe  “ our  nature  is  originally  corrupted It 
is  you  who  believe  this  : who  believe  our  nature 
to  be  in  the  fame  flate,  moral  and  intelle&ual,  as 
it  originally  was  ! Highly  injurious  indeed  is  this 
fuppofition  to  the  God  of  our  nature.  Did  he 
originally  give  us  fuch  a nature  as  this  ? So  like 
that  of  a wild  ajs s coll?  So  ftupid,  fo  llubborn, 
fo  intraftable ! So  prone  to  evil  ! Averfe  to 
good!  Did  his  hands  form  and  faf  non  us  thus  ? 
No  wifer  or  better  than  men  at  prefent  are  ? If  I 
believed  this,  that  men  were  originally  what  they 
are  now;,  if  you  could  once  convince  me  of  this3 
I could  not  go  fo  far  as  to  be  a Di&Jl : I mull  ei- 
ther be  a Manickee,  or  an  AthieJL  I muff  either 
believe,  there  was  an  evd  God,  or  that  there  was 
no  God  at  all, 

“ But  to  difparage  t our  nature  is  to  difparage 
the  work  and  gifts  of  God.”  True:  but  to  de- 
fcribe  the  corruption  ol  our  nature  as  it  is,  is  not 
difparaging  the  work  of  God.  For  that  corrup- 
tion is  not  his  work.  On  the  other  hand,  to  fay 
it  is,  to  fay  God  created  us  as  corrupt  as  we  are 
now,  with  as  weak  an  underftanding  and  as  per- 
verfe  a will : this  is  difparaging  the  work  of  Gods, 
and  God  himfelf  to  fome  purpofe  ! 

“ But  doth  not  this  doftrine  teach  you  to 

transfer 


+ p.  257- 


[ 208  ] 

transfer  your  wickednefs  and  fin  to  a wrong 
caufe  ? Whereas  § you  ought  to  blame  yourfelf 
alone,  you  lay  the  whole  blame  upon  Adam/’ 

I do  not.  I know  God  is  willing  to  fave  me 
from  all  fin,  both  original  and  aftual.  Therefore 
if  I am  not  faved,  I muff  lay  the  whole  blame 
upon  myfelf. 

“ But  what  good  end  does  this  doftrine  pro- 
mote?” The  doflrine,  that  we  are  by  nature, 
dead  in  fin , and  therefore  children  of  wrath,  pro- 
motes repentance,  a true  knowledge  of  ourfelves, 
and  thereby  leads  to  faith  in  Chrift,  to  a true 
knowledge  of  Chrift  crucified.  And  faith  work- 
eth  love  ; and  by  love,  all  holinefs  both  of  heart 
and  life.  Confequentlv,  this  do&rine  promotes 
(nay,  and  is  abfolutelv,  indifpenfablv  necefTary  to 
nromote)  the  whole  of  that  religion  which  the 
Son  of  God  lived  and  died  to  eftabliih. 

“ We  are  told  indeed,  that  it  promotes  humi- 
lity. But  neither  our  Lord,  nor  his-  apoftles, 
when  inculcating  humility,  fay  a word  about 
natural  corruption.  1 Suppofing  (not  granting) 
that  they  did  not,  yet  it  cannot  be,  in  the  very 
nature  of  the  thing,  that  anv  whofe  nature  is  cor- 
rupt fhould  be  humble,  fhould  know  himfelf, 
without  knowing  that  corruption. 

“ But  + what  can  be  more  definitive  to  virtue, 
than  to  reprefent  fin  as  altogether  unavoidable 
This  does  not  follow  from  the  doftrine.  Cor- 
rupt 


t O.  2c&. 


+ p 259- 


[ 2©£  ] 

rapt  as  we  are,  through  almighty  grace  tee  may 
avoid  all  fin. 

But  it  is  deftruftive  of  virtue.  For  “ if  we  be- 
lieve we  are  by  nature  worfe  than  the  brutes, 
what  wonder  if  we  aft  worfe  than  brutes?”  Yea, 
■if  we  are  fo,  -what  wonder  if  we  ati  fo  ? And 
this  it  is  abfolutely  certain  men  do,  whether  they 
believe  one  way  or  the  other.  For  they  who  do 
not  believe  this,  live  no  better  than  thofe  that 
do.  Therefore  if  “ the  generality  of  Chriftians 
have  been  the  moll  wicked,  lewd,  bloody  and 
treacherous  of  all  mankind,”  it  is  not  owing  to 
this  belief.  But  in  truth  they  have  not  been  fo  j 
neither  are  they  at  this  day.  The  generality  of 
-Chriftians,  fo  called,  are  perhaps  but  little  better,, 
yet  furely  they  are  no  worfe,  either  in  tempers  or 
aftions,  than  the  reft  of  mankind.  The  genera- 
lity of  Jews,  yea,  of  Turks  and  Pagans,  are 
full  as  “ lewd,  bloody  and  treacherous”  as 
they. 

You  go  on.  ^ “ It  is  furprifmg,  that  Chrifti- 
ans” (you  mean  thofe  of  them  who  believe  ori- 
ginal fin)  “ have  loft  even  a fenfe  of  the  benefi- 
cence of  God,  in  giving  them  a rational  nature.” 
Nay,  finely  Chriftians  have  loft  that  rational  na- 
ture itfelf,  or  they  retain  it  to  very  little  purpofe, 
if“  the  generality  of  them  are  the  molt  wicked, 
lewd,  bloody  and  treacherous  of  all  mankind!” 
They  ought  “ to  be  humbled,”  for  yielding  to 
thofe  evil  propenfities,  which  through  the  grace 

of 


| a6o. 


[ 210  ] 

of  God  they  may  conquer.  And  they  who  da 
conquer,  ought  to  be  continually  “ thanking 
God,”  for  this  and  all  his  benefits. 

With  great  decency  you  proceed,  “ Who  can 
believe  that  to  be  a revelation  from  God,  which 
teacheth  fo  abfurd  a doftrine?  I make  no  doubt 
this  with  other  like  principles,  have  filled  our . 
land  with  Infidels.”  However  the  gentlemen  who 
difclaim  thefe  abfurd  principles,  of  original  fin, 
redemption  and  regenera  ion , may  very  eafily  con- 
vert thofe  Infidels  : fince  there  is  fcarce  any 
room  for  contention  left  between  them. 

“ Is  not  this  do&rine  hurtful  to  + the  power  of 
godlinefs,  as  it  diverts  men  from  the  heavenly 
and  fubftantial  truths  of  religion?”  Juft  the  re-  \ 
verfe.  There  is  no  poftibility  of  the  power  of  1 
godlinefs  without  it.  The  power  of  godlinefs  j 
confifts  in  the  love  of  God  and  man:  this  is  hea- 
venly and  fubftantial  religion.  But  no  man  can 
poftibly  love  his  neighbour  as  himfelf,  till  he  loves 
God.  And  no  man  can  poftibly  love  God,  till  he 
truly  believes  in  Chrift.  And  no  man  truly  be- 
lieves in  Chrift,  till  he  is  deeply  convinced  of 
his  own  finfulnefs,  guiltinefs  and  helplefnefs. 
But  this  no  man  ever  wras,  neither  can  be,  who. 
does  not  know  he  has  a corrupt  nature. 

This  dodlrine  therefore  is  the  “ moft  proper” 
of  all  others,  “ to  be  inftilled  into  a child  : that  j 
it  is  by  nature  a child  of  wrath,  under  the  guilt 
and  under  the  power  of  fin : that  it  can  be  faved 

from 


+ p.  26s. 


[ 211  ] 

from  wrath,  only  by  the  merits,  and  fufferings, 
and  love  of  the  Son  of  God:  that  it  can  be  deli- 
vered from  the  power  of  fin,  only  by  the  infpi- 
ration  of  his  holy  Spirit:  but  that  by  his  grace 
it  may  be  renewed  in  the  image  of  God,  per- 
fected in  love,  and  made  meet  for  glory. 

But  “ mull  + it  not  lefien  the  due  love  of  pa- 
rents to  children,  to  believe  they  are  the  vileft 
creatures  in  the  world?”  Far  from  it;  if  they 
knowhow  God  loves  both  them  and  their’s,  vile 
and  finful  as  they  are.  And  it  is  a certain  faff, 
that  no  parents  love  their  children  more  tender- 
ly, than  thofe  who  firmly  believe  this  doftrine : 
and  that  none  are  more  careful  to  bring  them  up 
in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord. 

But  “ how  can  young  people  remember  their 
Creator  without  horror,  if  he  has  given  them  life 
under  fuch  deplorable  circumflances  ?”  They 
can  remember  him  with  pleafure,  with  earned: 
thankfulnefs,  when  they  refleft  out  <?/what  a pit 
he  hath  brought  them  up  : and  that  if  f in  abounded, 
both  by  nature  and  habit,  grace  did  much  more 
abound. 

You  conclude,  “ Why  ^ fhould  we  fubjeft  our 
confidences  to  tales  and  fables,  invented  by 
pnefs  and  monks?”  This  fable,  as  you  term  it, 
of  original  fin,  could  not  be  invented  by 
Romifh  priefts  or  monks : becaufie  it  is  by  many 
ages  older  than  either;  yea  than  Chriftianity 
itfelf. 


+ p.  262, 253. 


f p.  26 u 


I have 


[ 212  ] 


I have  now  weighed,,  as  my  leifure  would  per- 
mit all  the  arguments  advanced  in  your  three 
parts.  And  this  I have  done  with  continual 
prayer,  that  I might  know  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jtjus.  But  ftill  I fee  no  ground  to  alter  my  fen- 
timents,  touching  the  general  corruption  of  hu- 
man nature.  Nor  can  I find  an}'  better  or  any 
other  way,  of  accounting  for  that  general  wick- 
ednefs,  which  has  prevailed  in  all  nations,  and 
through  all  ages,  nearly  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world  to  this  day. 

Lewisham,  25,  1757. 


PART.  III. 


An  Anfwer  to  Dr.  Taylor’s  Supplement.  « 
OU  fubjoin  to  your  book  a very  large  fup- 


plement , in  anfwer  to  Dr.  Jennings  and 
Dr.  Watts.  All  that  they  have  advanced,  I am 
not  engaged  to  defend  ; but  fuch  parts  only  as 
affefi  the  merits  of  the  caufe. 


You  divide  this  part  of  your  work  into  eight 
feflions.  The  fu  ll  treats 


Of  Imputed  Guilt. 


AND  here  you  roundly  affirm,  “ No  t a chon 
is  faid  in  feripture  to  be  imputed  to  any 


perfon 


+ Supplement,  p.  7. 


[ 2I3  ] 

perfon  for  righteoufnefs  or  condemnation,  but 
die  proper  a£l  and  deed  of  that  perfon.''’ 

Were  then  the  iniquities  and  Jins  which  were 
put  upon  the  fcape-goat,  his  own  proper  adl  and 
deed?  You  anfwer,  “ Here  was  n-o  imputation  of 
fin  to  the  goat.  It  was  only  a figurative  way  of 
fignifying  the  removal  of  guilt.,  from  the  penitent 
Ifraelites,  by  the  goat’s  going  into  the  wildernefs.” 
But  how  could  it  be  a figure  of  any  fuch  thing, 
if  no  guilt  was  imputed,  -to  him  ? 

“ Aaron  is.  commanded,  + to  put  the  iniquities 
cj  ffr ael  upon  the  fcape  goat,  Lev.  xvk  21,  And 
this  goat  is  faid,  to  l/ear  the  iniquities  oj  the  people, 
■ver.  22.  This  was  plainly  an  imputation*  Yet  it 
■could  not  poflibly  be  an  imputation  of  any  done 
by  the  animal  itfelf.  The  effects- alfo  which  took 
place  upon  the  execution  of  the  ordinance  indi- 
cate a tranflation  of  guilt.  For  the  congregation 
was  cleanfedj  but  the  goat  was  polluted.  The 
■congregation  Jo  cleanjed,  that  their  iniquities 
were  borne  away,  2nd  to  be  found  no  more : 
the  goat  fo  polluted , that  it  communicated  defile- 
ment to  ihe  perfon  who  conducted  it  into  a land 
not  inhabited.” 

In  truth  the  fcape-  goat  was  a figure  of  him,  on 
whom  the  Lord  laid  the  iniquities  oj  us  all,  I fa.  - 
-iiii.  6.  lie  bore  our  iniquity,  ver.  11.  He  bare 
the  fin  of  many,  vex  12.  The  prophet  ufes  three 
different  words  in  the  original  : ol  which  the  firfl 
does  properly  fignify  the  meeting  together ; the 

laft, 


-+  Therein  and  Afpafio. 


[ 214  ] 

laft,  the  lifting  up  a weight  or  burden.  This  bur- 
den it  was  which  made  him  fweat  as  it  were  great 
drops  of  blood  falling  to  the  ground,  “ But  + ini- 
quity and  fin  fometimes  fignify  fujfering.”  Yes ; 
fuff ering for  fin , the  effeft  being  put  for  the  caufe. 
Accordingly  what  we  mean  by,  “ our  fins  were 
imputed  to  him,  is,  he  was  punifhed  for  them  : 
he  was  wounded  for  our  iranfgrejfons ; he  was 
bruifed  for  our  iniquities.  He  who  knew  no  fn, 
but  what  was  thus  imputed,  was  made  fin,  a fin- 
offering  for  us : “ It  pleafed  f the  Lord”  (your 
own  words)  “ to  bruife  him,  in  order  to  the  ex- 
piation of  our  fins.” 

But  with  regard  to  parents  and  their  pofte- 
rity,  God  affures  us,  children  Jhall  not  die  for 
the  iniquity  of  their  fathers .”  No,  not  eternally. 
I believe  none  ever  did  or  ever  will  die  eternal- 
ly, merely  for  the  fin  of  our  firft  father. 

“ But  the  fcripture  never  fpeaks  § of  imputing 
any  fin  to  any  perfon,  but  what  is  the  aft  of  that 
perfon.”  It  was  but  now  you  yourfelf  obferved, 
that  by  “ our  fins  were  imputed  to  Chrift,”  we 
mean,  “ He  f offered for  them.  ''  Our  fins  then  were 
imputed  to  Chrift.  And  yet  thefe  fins  were  not 
the  aft  of  the  perfon  that  fuffered.  He  did  not 
commit  the  fin  which  was  thus  imputed  to  him. 

But  “ no  juft  conftitution  can  ||  punifh  the  in- 
nocent.” This  is  undoubtedly  true.  Therefore 
God  does  not  look  upon  infants  as  innocent,  but 
as  involved  in  the  guilt  of  Adam’s  fin.  Other- 

wife 

+ P-8>9-  Ip-  10,  a.  <)  p,i3,  14.  [)p.  16, 


[ 215  ] 

wife  death,  the punijhment  denounced  againft  that 
fin,  could  not  be  infti&ed  upon  them. 

“ It  is  allowed  the  pofterity  of  Ham  and  Geha- 
zi,  and  the  children  of  Dathan  and  Abiram,  fuf- 
fered  for  the  fins  of  their  parent.”  It  is  enough. 
You  need  allow  no  more.  All  the  world  will 
fee,  if  they  fuffered  for  them,  then  they  were 
j punifhed  for  them.  Yet  we  do  not  “ confound 
punijhment  with  filtering,  as  if  to  fuffer  and  to  be 
punified,  were  the  fame  thing.”  P unijliment  is  ■ 
not  barely  fuffering,  but  filtering  for  fin : To 
fuffer  and  to  be  punified,  are  not  the  fame  thing. 
But  to  fuffer  for  fin,  and  to  be  punijhed  are  pre- 
cifely  the  fame. 

Iftherefore  the  children  ofDathan  and  Abiram 
Jnffered for  the  fins  of  their  parents,  which  no 
man  can  deny,  then  they  were  punifhed  for  them. 
Confequentiy  it  is  not  true,  that  “ in  the  in- 
ftances  + alledged,  the  parents  only  \\-ere  p unifi- 
ed by  the  fufferings  of  the  children.”  If  the 
children  fuffer ed  for  thofefins,  then  they  were 
punifhed  for  them.  Indeed  fometimes  the  parents 
too  were  punifhed,  by  the  fufferings  of  their 
children  ; which  is  all  that  your  heap  of  quota- 
tions proves  : and  fometimes  they  were  not. 
But  however  this  were  ; if  the  children  Juffered 
for  their  fins,  they  were  punifhed  for  them. 

It  is  not  therefore  “ evident,  i that  in  all 
thefe  cafes,  children  are  confidered  not  as  cri- 
minals, involved  in  guilt,  but  as  the  enjoyments 

of 

+ P-17)  18.  ip.  i8r 


[ ] 

of  their  parents  who  alone  are  punijhed  by  their 
fufferings.”  On  the  contrary  it  is  very  evident 
that  the  children  of  Canaan  were  pnmjhed  for 
the  fin  of  Ham  ; and  that  the  children  ofDathan 
and  Abiram  were  punifhed  with  death,  as  “ in- 
volved in  the  guilt  of  this  parents.” 

“ On  the  other  hand,  the  virtues  r.  of  an  an- 
ceflor  may  convey  great  advantages  to  his  pofle- 
rity.  But  no  man's  pofterity  can  be  rewarded  i 
for  their  anceftor’s  virtue.”  The  point  here  in  | 
difpute  between  Dr.  Watts  and  you,  is  whether  • 
the  thing,  concerning  which  you  are  agreed, 
fhouldbe  expreft  by  one  term  or  another  ? You-  1 
both  agree,  (and  no  man  in  his  fenfes  can  deny)  i 
that  in  all  ages,  God  has,  on  account  of  pious 
anceftors,  given  many  bleflings  to  their  offspring.* 
But  he  thinks,  thefe  bleflings  Ihould  be  termed 
rewards,  (and  fo  do  all  the  world;)  yo  u fay,  they 
Ihould  not.  The  fadl  is  plain  either  way;  God-  $ 
•does  continually,  and  did  in  all  ages,  give  num- 
berlefs  bleflings  to  the  children,  on  account  of 
the  piety  of  their  fathers.  And  it  is  certain, 
blej]in°s  given  on  account  of  virtue , have  been 
hitherto  termed  rewards  both  by  God  and  man. 

Yon  conclude  this  febtion,  “ T bus  ||  it  ap- 
pears, the  diflinction  between  perfonalftn  and 
imputed  guilt. , is  without  any  ground  in  fcrip- 
ture.”  Jufl  the  contrary  appears,  namely,  that 
guilt  was  imputed  to  the  fcane-goat,  to  the  chil- 
dren of  wicked  parents,  and  to  out  Llelfed 

Lord 


^ p.  ii. 


1!  p-  afl* 


[ **7  3 

Lord  himfelf,  without  any  perfonal  Jin.  The 
diffinftion  therefore  is  found  and  feripturah 


SECT.  II. 

OJ  the  nature  and  dejign  of  our  ajf.iihons  and 
mortality. 

THAT  God  defgns  to  bring  good  out  of  thefe 
is  certain.  But  does  this  prove,  they  have 
not  the  nature  of  punijhments  ? Did  Adam  him- 
felf buffer  any  affliction  ? Any  toil  or  pain  ? 
Doubtlefs  he  did,  long  before  he  returned  to 
dud.  And  can  we  doubt,  but  he  received  fpiri- 
tual  good  from  that  pain?  Yet  it  was  a pumfk- 
vient  {till  : as  really  fuch,  as  il  it  had  eonfigned 
him  over  to  everlafting  punifhment.  This  ar- 
gument therefore  is  of  no  weight : “ God  draws 
good  out  of  punifhments : therefore  they  are  no 
punifhments  at  all.”  However  then  the  bufferings 
wherein  Adam  s fin  has  involved  his  whole  pob- 
terity,  may  “ try  and  purify  us,  t in  order  to 
future  and  everlafling  happinefs,”  this  circum- 
flance  does  not  alter  their  nature  ; they  are  pu- 
nifiments  ftill. 

* Let  “ afflifilions,  ± calamities  and  death  itfelf 
he  means  of  improving  in  virture,”  of  healing  or 
Vol.  XXI.  K preventing 

+ p.  23’  • t P-  M- 


C 218  ] 

preventing  fin,  this  is  no  manner  of  proof,  that 
they  are  not  punifhments.  Was  not  God  able 
to  heal  or  prevent  fin,  without  either  pain  or 
death  ? Could  not  the  Almighty  have  done  this, 
as  eafily,  as  fpeedily  and  as  effectually,  without 
thefe  as  with  them  ? Why  then  did  he  not  ? 
Why  did  Adam’s  fm  bring  thefe  on  his  whole 
pofterity  ? Why  fhould  one  man  fuffer  for  ano- 
ther man’s  fault?  If  you  fay,  to  cure  his  own  ; 
Iafk  1.  What  neceffity  was  there  of  any  buffer- 
ing at  all  for  this  ? If  God  intended  only  to  cure 
his  fin,  he  could  have  done  that  without  any  fuffer- 
ing.  I afk  2.  Why  do  infants  fuffer?  What  fin 
have  they  to  be  cured  thereby  ? If  you  fay,  “ It  is 
to  heal  the  fin  of  their  parents,  who  fy  mpathize, 
and  fuffer  with  theme"  In  a thoufand  inflances 
this  has  no  place  : The  parents  are  not  the  better 
nor  any  way  likely  to  be  the  better  for  all  the 
bufferings  of  their  children.  Their  bufferings 
therefore,  yea  and  thofe  of  all  mankind  which 
are  entailed  upon  them  by  the  fin  of  Adam,  are 
not  the  refult  of  mere  mercy  but  of  jujlice  alfo. 
In  other  words  they  have  in  them  the  nature  of 
punifhments,  even  on  ns  and  on  our  children. 
Therefore  children  themfelves  are  not  innocent 
before  God.  They  fuffer,  therefore  they  cie- 
ferve  to  fuffer. 

* And  here  another  queflion  anfes,  what 
benefit  accrues  to  the  brute-creation,  from  the 
fufferings  wherein  their  whole  race  is  involved 
thro’  the  fin  of  the  firlt  man  ? The  faff  gannot  be 

denied, 


[ 9 ] 

denied,  daily  experience  attefts  what  we  read  in 
the  oracles  of  God,  that  the  whole  creation  groanetk 
together , and  travaileth  in  pain  to  this  'day , a con- 
fiderable  part  of  it  groans  to  God,  under  the  wan- 
tonnefs  or  cruelty  of  man.  Their  fufferings  are 
caufed,  or  at  lead  greatly  increafed,  by  o ur  lux- 
ury or  inhumanity  : nay,  and  by  our  diverf  on  s! 
W e draw  entertainment  from  the  pain,  the 
death  of  other  creatures  : not  to  mention  feve- 
ral  entire  fpecies,  which  at  prefent  have  fuch 
natural  qualities,  that  we  are  obliged  to  inflidt 
pain,  nay,  perhaps  death  upon  them,  purely  in 
our  own  defence.  And  even  thofe  fpecies  which 
are  out  of  the  reach  of  men,  are  not  out  of  the 
reach  of  buffering.  The  lions  do  lack  and  fujfer 
•hunger,  though  they  are  as  it  were  fovereigns  of 
the  plain.  Do  they  not  acknowledge  this,  when 
roaring  for  their  prey,  they  feck  their  meat  from 
■God?  And  what  fhall  we  fay  oi  their  helplefs 
prey  ? Is  not  their  lot  more  miferable  ftill  ? Now 
what  benefits,  I fay,  have  thefe  from  their  fuf- 
ferings ? Are  they  alfo  “ tried  and  purified 
thereby?”  Do  fufferings  “ correft  their  inordi- 
nate paffions,  and  difpofe  their  minds  to  fober 
refledlions  ?”  Do  they  “ give  them  opportunity 
-of  exercifing  kindnefs  and  compafiion,  in  reliev- 
ing each  other’s  diftreffes  ?”  That  I know  not  : 
hut  I know  by  this  and  a thoufand  proofs,  that 
when  man,  the  lord  of  the  vifible  creation, 
rebelled  againft  God,  every  part  of  the  creation, 
began  to  fujfer  on  account  of  his  fn.  And  to 
K 2 faring 


[ 220  ] 

en  account  of  fin  ; I can  give  no  properer  name 
than  that  of  puni/kment. 

' “'•It  was  to  reclaim  + offenders,  that  an  extra- 
ordinary power  was  exercifed,  either  immediately 
by  our  Lord  himfelf,  or  by  his  apoftles,  of  inflift- 
ing  bodily  dilfempers,  and  in  fome  cafes,  death 
itfelf.”  I do  not  remember  any  more  than  one 
fingle  cafe,  wherein  one  of  the  apoftles,  “ inflic- 
ted death.  ’ I remember  no  inftance  recorded  in 
fcripture,  of  their  “ inflicling  bodily  diftempers.” 
(The  blindnefs  inflicded  on  Elymas  cannot  be  fo 
termed,  without  great  impropriety)  and  certain  I 
am,  that  our  Lord  himfelf,  infli&ed  neither  one 
nor  the  other. 

The  citations  ^ in  the  next  page  prove  no  more 
than  that  we  may  reap  benefit  from  the  punfh- 
ments  of  others.  But  though  either  we  or  they 
reap  benefit  from  them,  yet  they  are  punijhments 

Bill. 

“ We  do  § not  here  confider  death  and  buffer- 
ing  as  they  Hand  in  the  threat ning  of  the  law.  ’ 
You  are  fenfible,  if  we  did,  all  mankind  muft  ac- 
knowledge them  to  be  punijhments.  And  this  is 
the  very  light  wherein  we  do  and  muft  confider 
them  in  the  prefent  queftion.  We  confider  death 
and  buffering,  as  they  Hand  in  that  threatning, 
thou  ) halt  furely  die.  That  this  was  denounced 
to  all  mankind  we  know,  becaufe  it  is  executed 
on  all.  Therefore  confidering  fuff  (ring  and  death 
as  fo  threatned  and  executed,  we  cannot  deny,  that 

they 

i p.  tj.  f p.  *6.  § p.  sy* 


[ 221  ] 

they  are  punifhments  : punifhments  not  on  Adam 
only,  but  on  all  that  in  faft  do  either  die  or 

/«#'• 

To  fum  up  this  point : although  the  wifdom 
and  mercy  of  God,  do  “ bring  good  out  of  evil.’’ 
Although  God  departs  to  extraft  bleRings  from 
punifhments,  and  does  it  in  numberlefs  inflances : 
yet  this  does  not  alter  the  nature  of  things,  but 
puniJJvnents  are  punijhments  Rill  : Rill  this  name 
properly  belongs  to  all  fujfenngs , which  are  in- 
filled on  account  of  fin  : and  confequently,  it  is 
an  evident  truth,  that  the  whole  animate  creation 
is  punifhed  for  Adam’s  Rn. 


SECT  III. 

The  argument  taken  from  the  calamities  and  fnful- 
nefs  of  mankind  confdered. 

“ r | ^ H E fubjefl  of  our  prefent  enquiry  is 
-*■  threefold,  1.  Whether  t mankind  be 
under  God’s  difpleafure,  antecedently  to  their 
aftual  fins  ? 2.  Whether  our  nature  be  corrupt, 
from  the  beginning  of  life  ? And  g.  Whether 
thefe  propofitions  can  be  proved  from  th ecalami~ 
ties  and  finfulnefs  of  mankind  ?” 

Whether  they  can  or  no,  they  have  been  fully 
proved  from  fcripture.  Let  us  now  enquire,  if 
K 3 they 

+ p-  3°i  3l* 


[ 222  ] 

the}'  may  not  be  proved  from  the  ftate  of  the 
world. 

But  you  think  Dr.  W atts,  “■  has  here  laid  too 
great  ftrefs  on  fuppofit-ion  and  imagination."  Irr 
proof  of  which,  you  cite  from  him  the  following 
words  : Can  we  fuppoje  t that  the  biffed  God , would 
place  his  innocent  creatures  in  Juch  a dangerous 
habitation  ? Can  we  fuppofe , that  among  the  roots, 
and  the  herbs,  and  the  trees  which  ate  good  for 
food,  the  great  God  v'ould  have  fuff  end  deadly  poi- 
fon  to  firing  up  here  and  there?  JVould  there  have 
been  any  fuck  creatures  in  our  world  as  bears  and 
tygers  ? Can  we  ever  imagine  the  great  and  good 
God  would  have  appointed  men  to  be  propagated  in 
fuck  a way,  as  would  necefamly  give  fuck  exquifite 
pain  and  anguifh  to  the  mothers  that  produce  them, 
if  they  had  been  all  accounted  in  his  eyes,  a race  of 
holy  and  fnlejs  beings  ? 

I anfwer,  It  is  not  true,  “ that  too  great  ftrefs,” 
or  any  ftrefs  at  all,  is  “ here  laid  on  mere  fuppo- 
fttion  and  imagination.”  Your  catching  at  thofe 
two  words  fuppof  and  imagine,  will  by  no  means 
prove  it.  For  the  meaning  of  them  is  plain. 
“ Can  vc  fuppoje,  the  blefled  God  would  do 
this?”  Is  manifeftly  the  fame  with,  “ How  can 
we  reconcile  it  with  his  elfential  attributes?”  In 
like  manner,  “ Can  we  ever  imagine?'"  Is 
plainly  equivalent  with,  “ Can  we  polTibly  con- 
ceive ?”  So  that  the  occafional  ufe  of  thefe 
words  does  not  infer  his  laying  any  ft  refs  on  fup- 

pofition 


+ p.  3*. 


L £23  ] 

pofition  and  imagination.  When  therefore  you 
add,  “ our  i fuppo/itions  and  imaginations  are  not 
a juft  ftandard  by  which  to  meafure  the  divine  dii- 
penfations.”  What  you  fay  is  abfolutely  true, 
but  abfolutely  foreign  to  the  point. 

Some  of  the  queftions  which  you  yourfelf  afk, 
to  expofe  his,  it  is  not  fo  eafy  to  anfwer,  “ wen. a 
innocent  creatures  have  been  thruftinto  the  world, 
in  fo  contemptible  circurn fiances  ? And  have 
been  doomed  to'grow  up  fo  flowly  to  maturity 
and  the  life  of  rcaf'on  ? Would  they  when  grown 
up  have  been  § conflrained  to  fpend  fo  much 
time  in  low  and  fervile  labour?  Would  millions 
have  been  obliged  to  Ipend  all  their  days,  from 
early  morn  ’till  evening,  in  hewing  flone,  faw- 
ing  wood,  heaving,  rubbing  or  beating,  the  limb 
of  an  oak,  or  a bar  of  iron?”  I really  think,  they 
would  not.  I believe  all  this  toil  as  well  as  the 
pain  and  anguilh  of  women  in  child-birth,  is  an 
evidence  of  the  fall  of  man,  of  the  fin  of  our  firfl 
parents,  and  part  ol  the  punijhment  denounced 
and  executed  firfl  on  them,  and  then  on  ail  their 
pofterity. 

You  add,  “ He  f doth  not  confider  this  world 
as  a flate  ol  dial,  but  as  if  it  ought  to  have  been 
a feat  of  happinefs.”  There  is  no  contrariety  be- 
tween thefe:  It  might  be  a flate  of  trial,  and  of 
happinefs  too.  And  fuch  it  certainly  was  to  Adam 
in  paradife : whether  he  was  holy  or  no,  lie  was 
undoubtedly  happy.  A flate  of  trial  therefore  does 
K 4 not 

h p-  33- 


i p-  33. 


+ p-  34.  35- 


[ ss4  J 


not  neceffary  imply  any  kind  or  degree  of  natural 
evil.  And  accordingly  the  Creator  himfelf  allures 
'us,  there  was  none  originally  in  his  creation, 
for  fo  I read  at  the  conclufion  of  it,  § And  God 
Jaw  every  thing  that  he  had  made,  and  behold,  it 
was  very  good. 

“ But  natural  evil  may  be  mixt  with  a flate  of 
trial.  Confequently  this  world  could  not  be  built 
for  a feat  of  happmefs.”  Admirable  drawing  of 
confequences  ! “ It  may  be:  therefore  it  could  not 
be  otherwife  whatever  may  be,  God  himfelf  here 
tells  us,  what  was.  And  from  his  own  declara- 
tion it  is  infallibly  certain,  there  was  no  natural 
evil  in  the  world,  ’till  it  entered  as  the  punifh- 
ment  of  fin. 

Neither  doth  he  take  a + future  flate  into  his 
reprefentation.”  No,  nor  is  there  any  need  he 
fhould,  when  he  is  reprefenting  the  prefent  flate 
of  the  world,  as  a punijnnent  of  Adam’s  fin. 
“ Nor  doth  he  1 take  into  his  argument  the  good- 
nefs  of  God.”  Not  into  this  argument:  that  is 
of  after  confideration.  So  the  texts  vou  have 
heaped  together  on  this  head  alfo,  are  very  good. 
But  what  do  they  prove  ? 

He  fuppofes  our  bufferings  to  be  mere  punijh- 
menls.”  I fuppofe,  they  are  punifhmcnts  mixt 
with  mercy.  Butftill  they  are  punifhmeuts : they 
are  evils  infliBed  on  account  of  fin. 

We  find  in  fa£l,  that  the  bef  of  men  § may  be 
made  very  unhappy,  by  calamities  and  oppref- 

fions. 

t Gen.  i.  31.  + p.  36.  ip.37«  §P*39> 


[ 225  ] 

fions.”  i._  cannot  be.  The  bef  of  ?nen  cannot 
be  made  unhappy  by  any  calamities  or  oppreftions 
whatfoever.  For  they  have  learned , in  every  pof- 
fible  fate  therewith  to  he  content.  In  fpite  of  all 
calamities,  they  rejoice  evermore , and  in  every 
thing  give  thanks. 

“ From  t punifhments  inflifted  on  particular 
perfons,  he  infers  that  all  men  are  under  the 
wrath  of  God.  But  to  infer  the  ftate  of  the  whole 
from  the  cafe  of  fome , is  not  a 'fair  way  of 
arguing.”  No.  The  punifhments  inflifted  on 
particular  perfons  prove  nothing,  but  with  regard 
to  thofe  on  whom  they  are  inflifted.  If  there- 
fore fome  men  only  buffer  and  die,  this  proves 
nothing  with  regard  to  the  reft.  But  if  the  whole 
of  mankind  buffer  and  die,  then  the  conclufion 
reaches  all  men. 

“ He  is  not  quite  juft,  in  pronouncing  the  pre- 
fer^ form  of  the  earth,  irregular , abrupt  mil  hor- 
rid ; and  afking  doth  it  not  bear  firongly  on  our 
fight , the  ideas  of  ruin  and  conjujion,  in  vaf- 
broken  mountains dreadfid  cliffs-  and  precipices , 
immenfc  ;t  extents  of  wafe  and  barren  ground  ? If 
this  be  the  cafe  how  can  the  invifthle  things  of  God, 
be  clearly  feen  from  fuch  a ruined  creation  ?” 
Perfectly  well.  His  eternal  power  and  God-head ) 
the  exiftence  of  a powerful  and  eternal  being  msY 
ftill  be  inferred  from  thefe  his  works,  grand  and. 
magnificent,  though  in  ruin.  Confequently,  thefe 
K g fefcva; 

+ R40..  J P, 


[ 22  6 ] 

leave  the  atheift  without  exiuf.  And  whatever 
objeftions  he  might  form  fas  Lucretius  actual];/ 
does)  fromthefe  palpable  blemifhesand  irregulari- 
ties of  the  terraqueous  globe : the  fcriptural  ac- 
count of  natural „ flowing  from  moral  evil,  will 
eafily  and  perfectly  folve  them.  All  which  is  well 
confiftent  with  the  words  of  the  Pfahnifl,  0 t 
Lord,  how  manifold  are  thy  wor/s ! In  v ifdom  hajl 
thou  made  them  all : the  earth  is  full  of  thy  richest 
So  undoubtedly  it  is,  though  it  bears  fo  viflble 
ilgns  of  ruin  and  devajlation. 

“ We  have  no  authority  from  feripture,  to  fay 
that  the  earth,  in  its  pre/ait  conjhlution,  is  at  alf 
different  from  what  it  was  at  its  firft  creation.”' 
Certainly  we  have,  if  the  feripture  afhrms,  that 
God  faid , after  Adam  finned.  Cur  fed  is  the  ground 
for  thy  fake  ; thorns  and  thiJILs  Jhall  it  bring  forth 
to  thee,  and,  that  the  earth  was  of  old,  f unding  out 
of  the  water,  and  in  the  water,  ;t  ill  God  deflroyed 
k for  the  fin  of  its  inhabitants. 

Yon  go  on.  “ I cannot  ± agree,  that  difeafe,  an- 
guijh  and  death,  have  entered  into  the  bowels  and 
veins  of  multitudes,  by  an  innocent  and  fatal  mif- 
take,  of pernicious  plants  and  fruits for  proper Jcodl 
Why  not?  Doubtlefs  multitudes  alfo  have  perifh- 
ed  hereby,  if  we  take  in  the  account  of  all  ages- 
and  nations : multitudes  alfo  have  been  the  living 
prey,  of  bears  and  tygers,  wolves,  and  lions',  and 
multitudes  have  had  their  flefh  and  bones  crufied 

and  churned  between  the- jaws  of  panthers  and  leo- 
pards, 

t ?• 


A p.  aa- 


E 227  J 

pards,  Jliarks  and  crocodiles.  And  would  thefe 
things  have  come  upon  mankind,  were  it  not  on 
account  of  Adam' s fin  ? 

Yet  you  think,  we  have  “now§  a more  exten- 
five  dominion  over  all  creatures,  than  Adam  had 
even  in  his  innocence  ; becaufe  we  have  the  li- 
berty of  eating  them ; which  Adam  never  had.” 
This  will  not  prove  the  point.  That  I have  the 
liberty  to  eat  a lamb,  does  not  prove  that  I have 
dominion  over  a lion.  Certainly  I have  not  do- 
minion over  any  creature  which  I can  neither  go-  - 
vern  nor  refjl\  yea,  and  if  the  dread  of  me  is 
on  every  btajl  and  fowl,  this  does  not  prove,  that 
I have  any  dominion  over  them.  I know,  on  the 
contrary,  that  not  only  a tyger  or  a bear,  but 
even  a dove  will  not  ftoop  to  my  dominion. 

“ However  we  have  + no  authority  to  fav,  man 
himfelf  was  curbed,  though  the  ground  was.” 
Yes,  we  have : the  authority  of  God  himfelf, 
Cur  fed  is  every  man  that  continue  th  not  in  all  things 
which  God  hath  commanded.  The  moment 
therefore  that  he  finned,  Adam  fell  under  this 
curfe.  And  whether  the  toil  and  death  to  which, 
he  and  his  poflerity  were  fentenced,  and.  the  + 
pain  of  childbirth  be  termed  curfes  or  no,  fure  it 
is  they  are  punifhments , and.  heavy  ones  too__ 
though  mercy  is -often  mixt  with  judgments. 

The  main,  argument  follows,  taken,  from  the 
ftate  of  mankind  in  general,  with  regard  to  reli- 
gion, But  you  fay  “ It  is  imp c [life le  § we  fhould 
K 6 makev 

5P.  44».  T p.  45|  •i6-  $ ?•  4&H5P- 


[ 228  ] 

make  a juft  eftimate  of  the  wickednefs  of  man- 
kind yes,  an  exatlly  juft  eftimate  of  the  precife 
degree  of  wickednefs  in  the  whole  world.  But 
it  is  very  poftible,  nay  very  eafy,  to  make  an 
eftimate  in  the  grofs,  with  fuch  a degree  of  juft- 
nefs  as  fuffices  for  the  prefent  queftion. 

Indeed  you  “ think  we  carry  our  cenftires  of 
the  heathens  too  far.”  I dare  not  carrv  them  fo 
far,  as  to  fay,  no  heathen  {hall  be  faved.  But 
this  I fay;  I never  knew  any  heathen  yet  (and  I 
hav'i  perfonally  known  many  out  of  various  na- 
tions) who  was  not  a flave  to  fome  grols  vice  or 
other.  Bad  therefore  as  nominal  chriftians  are, 
I cannot  yet  place  them  on  a level  with  the  hea- 
thens : not  even  with  the  mild,  courteous,  con- 
verfable  heathens,  who  border  on  Georgia  and 
Carolina.  Much  lefs  would  I fay,  “ poffibly  the 
heathens  may  be  If  vicious  than  the  chriflian 
world  in  general.”  If  I believed  this,  I fliould 
bid  adieu  to  Chriftianity  and  commence  heathen 
without  delay. 

“But  if  we  + allow  mankind  to  be  ever  fo  wick- 
ed, fuppofe  there  is  not  one  upon  earth,  who  is 
truly  righteous  ; it  will  not  follow  that  men  are 
naturally  corrupt : for  a finful  afiion  does  not  infer 
a ftnful  nature.  If  it  does,  then  Adam  brought 
a finful  nature. with  him  into  the  world.  But 
if  we  cannot  infer  from  Adam’s  fin,  that  his 
nature  was  originally  corrupt,  neither  can  ire 
infer  from  the  wickednefs  of  all  mankind,  be  it 
ever  fo  great  that  they  have  a finful  nature.” 

The 


+ P’  5*>  S3- 


u 

[ 22fi>'  J 

* The  confequence  is-  notgood.  “ If  one -man's 
committing  a fin  does  not  prove  that  he  was  na- 
turally inclined  to  evil,  then  the  wickecfnefs  of 
all  mankind  for  Fix  thoufand  years,  will  not  prove 
that  they  are  naturally  inclined  to  evil.'’  For 
we  may  erafily  account  for  one  man’s  committing 
fin,  though  he  was  not  naturally  inclined  to  evil : 
but  not  fib  eafilv,  for  all  fiefii  corrupting  them - 
pelves.,  for  the  wickednefs  of  -ill  mankind  in  all 
agesv  It  is  not  podible  rationally  to  account  for 
this,  for  the  general  wickednefs  of  mankind  ; for 
fuch.a  majority  of-  men  through  air  generations 
being  fo  corrupt,  bat  on  the  fuppofition  of  their 
having  a corrupt  nature.  Sin  in  one  or  a few 
cafes,  does  not  prove  a fmful  nature:  but  fm 
overfpreading  the  earth,  does.  Nor  is  + your 
argument  drawn  from  the  fin  of  the  angels,  of  any 
more  force  than  that  drawn  from  the  fin  of  Adam': 
unlefs  you  can  prove  that  as  great  a majority  of 
angels  as  ol  men,  have  rebelled  againll  their 
Creator. 

“ Again.  If  our  firff  parents  felt  feat  and 
Jliame , and  yet  their  nature  was  not  originally 
corrupt,  then  it  will  not  follow,  that  ours  is  fo 
liotwithfianditig  our. uneafy  and  unruly  paffions.” 
Empty  found  ! Had  any  one  faid  to  Adam, 
“ Your  nature  was  originally  corrupt,  for  you 
feel  uneafy  and' unruly  palhons would  he  not 
readily  have  anfwered,  but  thefe  began  at  fuch 
an  hour  ; till  then  my  nature  was  without  either 

palm 


•f-p-H’  55-* 


[ 23°  ] 

pain  or  corruption.  Apply  this  to  any  child  of 
Adam  : and  if  he  can  anfwer  in  like  manner, 
“tillfuch  an  hour  no  uneafy  or  unruly  paflion 
had  any  place  in  mybreaft:”  We  will  then  grant 
thefe  paffions  no  more  prove  a corrupt  nature  in 
the  Tons  than  in  their  firft  father.  But  no  man 
can  anfwer  thus.  You  and  I and  every  man 
mull  acknowledge,  that  uneafy  and  unruly  paf- 
fions,  are  coeval  with  our  undemanding  and 
memory  at  leaft,  if  not  with  our  very  being. 

“ Again.  Adam  by  his  fin  brought  fufferings 
on  himfelf  and  his  pcfferity.  Yet  it  does  not 
follow,  that  his  nature  was  corrupt.  Therefore, 
though  others-by  their  fins  bring  fufferings  on 
themfelves  and  their  pofterity,  it  will  not  follow 
that  their  nature  is  corrupt,  or  under  the  difplea-  \ 
fure  of  God."  Two  very  different  things  are 
here  blended  together.  The  corruption  of  their 
nature  is  one  thing,  the  difpleafure  of  God,  ano-J*‘] 
titer.  None  affirms,  that  thofe  fufferings  which 
men  by  their  fins  bring  on  themfelves  or  pofterity 
prove  that  their  nature  is  corrupt.  But  do  not 
the  various  fufferings  of  all  mankind,  prove  that 
they  are  under  the  difpleafure  of  God  ? It  is  cer- 
tain no  fuffering  came  upon  Adam,  till  he  was 
under  the  difpleafure  of  God. 

Again.  If  our  nrft  parents  by  their  fin  brought 
fuffering  both  on  themfelves  and  others-,  and  yen 
their  nature  was  not  originally  corrupt,  nor  under 
the  difpleafure  of  God;  it  clearly  follows,  that  the 

stature- 


C 23*  ] 

nature  ofthofe  who  fuffer  purely  inconfequence 
of  their  fin,  is  not  originally  corrupt,  nor  are  they 
under  God's  difpleafure.’7  This  argument  is  bad 
every  way..  For  l.atthe  timewhen  Adam  brought 
the  fentence  of  fuffering  both  on  himfelf  and' 
others,  his  nature  was  corrupt,  and  he  was  un- 
der the  aftual  difpleafure  of  God.  But  2.  Sup- 
pofe  it  were  otherwife,  all  you  could  poffibly  in- 
fer, with  regard  to  his  pofterity,  is,  that  their  fuf- 
fering does  not  prove  their  corruption,  or  their 
being  under  the  difpleafure  of  God.  How  could 
you  think,  their  fuffering  would  prove  them  not 
corrupt  ? Not  under  God's  difpleafure  ? There- 
fore neither  this  nor  the  preceding  argument,, 
(feeing  both  are  utterly  inconclufive)  “takeoff 
any  thing  that  Dr,  Watts  has  laid,"  touching  the 
prefect  hate  of  the  world,  as-  a proof  of  God's 
difpleafure,  and  the  natural  corruption  of  man. 
So  far  therefore  is  “ his-  argument  from  the  fin- 
fulnefs  and  mifery  of  mankind  from  being  alto- 
gether infufficient  in  every  part:”  that  it  isflrong 
and  conclufive,  any  thing  you  have  advanced 
to  the  contrary  notwithftanding, 

You  add,  “•  Suffering  may  happen  where 
there  is  no  fin,  a3  in  the  cafe  of  brutes  and  in- 
fants : or  where  there  is  the  mod  perfeft  inno- 
cence ; as  in  the  cafe  of  cur  bleffed  Lord.’*  Ab- 
folutely  true:  that  is- where  there  is  no perjonal 
Jin,  but  only  Jin  imputed.  There  was  no  perfonal 
Jin  in  our  bleffed  Lord  : there  can  be  none  ei- 
ther^ brutes  or  infants,  He  buffered  therefore 


[ 232  ] 

V 

for  the  fins  of  others,  which  were  thus  imputed 
to  him  : as  is  the  fin  of  Adam  to  infants,  who 
buffer  death  through  him,  and  in  feme  fenfe  to 
the  whole  creation  ; which  was  made  fubjeB  to 
vanity , not  willingly,  but  on  account  of  his  tranf-' 
greffion.  But  where  there  is  no  fin,  either 
perfonal  or  imputed,  there  can  be  no  fuffer- 
i-ng. 

“ I may  add,  from  the  prefent  ftate  of  things 
a direftly  oppofite  argument  may  be  taken: 
+ from  the  enjoyments  and  comforts,  the  good 
things  and  bleffings,  which  abound  in  the  world; 

I might  aflt,  are  thefe  creatures,  fo  well  provid- 
ed for,  under  God’s  difpleafure?  Are  they  not 
the  care  of  his  goodnefs  ? Does  he  not  love 
them,  and  delight  to  do  them  good  ?”  I anfwer, 
God  does  ftil!  give  us  manv  good  things,  many 
enjoyments,  comforts  and  bleffings.  But  all 
thefe  are  given  through  the  feed  of  the  woman  : 
they  are  all  the  purchafe  of  his  blood.  Through 
him  we  are  ftill  the  care  of  the  divine  goodnefs* 
and  God  does  delight  to  do  us  good.  But  this 
does  not  at  all  prove,  either  that  we  have  not  a 
finful  nature,  or  that  we  are  not,  while  finful, 
under  his  difpleafure. 


•f-  p.  j.8— 6i, 


SECT. 


[ 2 S3  j 


SECT.  IV. 

Some  confequences  of  the  do  Brine  of  original  Jin. 

“ TJ  Y this  + doffrine  fome  have  been  led  to 
-“J  maintain,  1.  That  men  havenotafuf- 
ficient  power  to  perform  their  duty.  But  if  fo, 
it  ceafes  to  be  their  duty.”  I maintain,  that  men 
have  not  this  power  by  nature.  But  they  have 
or  may  have  it  by  grace,  therefore  it  does  not 
ceafe  to  be  their  duty.  And  if  they  perform  it 
not,  they  are  without  excufe. 

“ Hence  fome  maintain,  2.  That  1 we  have 
no  reafon  to  thank  our  Creator  for  our  being.” 
He  that  will  maintain  it,  may.  But  it  does  by 
no  means  follow  from  this  doctrine : fmce  what- 
ever we  are  by  nature,  we  may  by  grace  be 
children  of  God,  and  heirs  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven. 

“ But  unthankfulnefs  is  a natural  § confe- 
quence  of  this  doftrtne,  which  greatly  dirni- 
niflies,  if  not  totally  excludes  the  goodnefs  anti 
mercy  of  God.”  St.  Paul  thought  otherwise. 
He  imagined  the  total  ungodlincfs  and  impotence 
of  our  nature,  to  be  the  very  thing  which  moft 
of  all  illuftrated  the  goodnefs  and  mercy  of  God. 

For 

t p.63—69.  f p.  70—7.3.  tp.  74- 


[ 23d  ] 

Tor  a good  man,  fays  he,  per  advenlur  c one  m ould 
oven  dare  lo  die.  But  God  commendeth , unfpeak- 
ably,  inconceivably,  beyond  all  human  prece- 
dent, his  love  to  us,  in  that  u hue  we  were  yet  with- 
out Jlrength  Chrijl  died  for  ike  ungodly.  Here 
is  the  ground,  the  real  and  the  only  ground 
for  true  Chrijlian  ihankfulnefs.  Chrijl  died  for 
the  ungodly  that  were  without  Jlrength  : fuch  as  is 
every  man  by  nature.  And  til!  a man  has  been 
deeply  fenfibie  of  it,  he  can  never  truly  thank 
God  for  his  redemption:  nor  confequently  for 
his  creation,  which  is  in  the  event  a blefling  to 
tliole  only  who  are  created  anew  in  Chrijl  Jefus.  - 
“ Hence  3.  Some  have  poured  great  contempt 
upon  human  nature:  whereas  God  himfeH  does 
not  defpife  mankind,  but  thinks  them  worthy  § 
of  his  higheft  regards.”  To  deferibe  human 
nature  as  deeply  fallen,  as  far  removed  both 
from  virtue  and  wifdom,  does  not  argue  that  we 
defpife  it.  We  know  by  feripture  as  well  as  by 
fad  experience,  that  men  are  now  unfpeakably 
foolifn  and  wicked.  And  fuch  the  Son  of  God 
knew  them  to  be,  when  he  laid  down  his  life 
for  them.  But  this  did  not  hinder  him  from 
•ovine  them,  no  more  than  it  does  anv  of  the 
children  of  God, 

You  next  confider  [[what  Dr.  Watts  obferves 
with  regard  to  infants.  Mankind , fays  he,  in  its 
younger  years , before  it  is  capable  of  proper  moral 
action,  clij'covers  the  principles  cf  iniquity  and  the 

feeds 

U p.  77-82. 


§P-  75- 


[ a35  1 

feeds  of  Jin.  What  young  ferments  of  fpifte  and 
j envy,  udut  native  malice  and  r age  are  found  in  the 
' little  hearts  of  infants , and  ffjntnlly  dijeovered 
h\  their  little  hands  and  eyes,  and  their  wrathful 
countenance  even  before  they  can  J peak f You  an- 
fwer,  “ Our  Lord  gave  us  different  ideas  of  them 
when  he  taught  his  apoftles  to  become  as  little 
children Not  at  all.  They  may  be  imitable 
in  fume  refpechs,  and  yet  have  all  the  tempers 
above  deferibed.  And  it  is  certain  they  have  ; 
as  any  impartial  obferver  will  be  convinced  by 
his  own  eyes.  Nor  is  this  any  way  contradicted 
bv  St.  Paul  s words,  § In  wickeduefs  [y.caAofj  be 
ye  children  : untaught,  unexperienced : or  by 
thofe  of  David , My  ||  foul  is  even  as  a weaned 
child. 

“ But  we  difeover  in  them  alfo  the  noble  prin- 
ciples of  reafon  and  underflanding,  with  feve- 
ral  tempers  which  are  capable  of  improvement 
whereby  they  may  be  trained  up  in  a good  way  : 
and  numbers  in  all  ages  of  the  world  have  rifers 
to  very  confiderable  degrees  of  excellence.”  All 
this  is  true  : but  it  is  not  at  all  inconfiftent  with 
the  account  of  them  given  above:  by  which  it 
dearly  appears,  that  they  are  ftrongly  inclined 
to  evil,  long  before  any  iff  habits  can  be  contract- 
ed. 


SECT, 


§ i Cor,  xiv.  at. 


|!  Pfal.  csxxi.  2, 


[ *3«  ] 


SEC  T.  V. 

A general  argument  taken  from  what  God  has 
dedai  ed  concerning  mankind,  at  the  rejl oration 
oj the  world  after  the  deluge. 

“ r I NHERE  are  three  pallagesT  from  which  di- 
vines  infer  the  excellency  of  Adam’s  date 
and  nature  above  our's  : I.  Gen.  i.  28.  And  God 
blejfed  them  and  / aid  unto  them,  be  fruitful  and 
multiply  and  replenifh  the  earth.”  With  this  I 
have  nothing  to  do  ; for  I infer  nothing  from  it, 
with  regard  to  the  prefent  queftion.  II.  “ Have 
dominion  over  the  fifi  of  the fea , and  over  the 
fowl  of  the  air,  and  over  every  living  thing  that 
moveth  upon  the  earth.  III.  Gen.  i.  27.  God  creat- 
ed man  in  his  own  image  ; in  the  image  of  God  cre- 
ated he  him.  From  ^ thefe  three  particulars  they 
deduce  the  fuperiority  of  Adam’s  nature  above 
our’s.  But  the  very  fame  marks  of  excellency 
are  more  expreflv  pronounced  by  God  upon  the 
human  nature,  when  the  race  of  mankind  was  to 
be  propagated  anew  from  N oah  and  his  fons. 

I.  Gen.  ix.  1.  And  God  bleffed  Noah  and  his 
Sons,  With  regard  to  this  whole  palfage  I muft 
obferve,  That  God  did  not  pronounce  any  blef- 
fin°'  at  all^  either  on  him  or  them,  till  Noah 

had 

+ p.  84.  i p. 


[ 237  ] 

Jiad  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord  and  had  offered 
burnt-offerings  on  the  altar.  Then  it  was  that 
the  Lord  fuelled  a fioeet favour  ; accepted  the 
facrifice  which  implied  faith  in  thepromifed  feed, 
and  for  his  fake  re  ft  bred  in  foine  meafure  the 
ble fling,  which  he  had  given  to  Adam  at  his 
creation.  And  faid  be fruitful  and  multiply , and 
replemjhthe  earth . On  this  I need  only  ob- 

serve, had  Adam  flood,  or  had  not  his  fall  affecl- 
edhis  pofleritv,  there  would  have  been  no  need 
•of  this  : for  they  would  have  multiplied  and  re - 
jj  plenijhed  the  earth , in  virtue  of  the  original  blef- 
fmg. 

II.  V.  2.  The  fear  of  you,  and  the  dread  of 
you Jhall  be  upon  every  beafl  of  the  earth , and  upon 
every  jowl  of  the  air , and  upon  dll  that  moveth  up- 
i on  the  earth  : into  your  hands  they  are  delivered : 
jj  every  moving  thing  t hat  lipeth \Jhall  be  meat  for  you , 
jj  even  as  the  green  herb  have  I given  you  all  things. 
On  this  likewife  I would  obferve,  What  need 
was  there  of  any  fuch  power  over  the  creatures 
to  be  given  to  man,  if  he  had  not  forfeited  his 
former,  power  ? Had  man  remained  fubjeft  to 
God,  the  creatures  would  have  remained  fubjefl 
■to  him,  by  virtue  of  God’s  original  conflitution. 
And  why  was  it,  but  becaufe  man  had  loft;  this 
power,  that  God  here  in  fome  degree  reftores 
■ft  ? 

But  hence  you  “ infer,  fthat  all  that  power 
is  reftored,  yea,  more  than  all  : that  we  have 

t p.  86. 

. x 


a more 


[ 233  ] 

Sl  more  extenfive  dominion,  granted  to  ns  over 
the  brutal  world,  than  was  originally  given  to 
Adam.”  It  has  been  commonly  thought,  that 
Adam  had  full  dominion  over  the  creatures  fub- 
jeft  to  him  by  a kind  of  inftinft  : whereas  we 
have  only  fo  far  power  over  them,  that  by  la- 
bour and  vigilance  we  may  ufe  or  fubdue  them. 
But  how  do  you  prove  that  we  have  a fuller  do- 
minion than  he  had  P By  thofe  words,  The  fear 
end  the  dread  of  you  fall  be  upon  all : into  your 
hands  they  are  delivered",  even  as  the  green  herb 
have  I given  you  all  things.  Nay*  the  fear  and  the 
■dread  of  you  fall  be  upon  them,  does  not  imply 
any  dominion  at  all.  A wolf  may  fear  me,  who 
yet  does  not  obey  me.  I dread  a viper,  but  I do 
not  obey  it.  And  thofe  words,  into  your  hands 
they  are  delivered,  are  plainly  equivalent  with  I 
havegiven  you  all  things,  even  as  the  green  herb  ; 
namely  for  food  ; you  may  feed  on  any  of  them. 
So  far  therefore  is  this  text  from  exprefly  pronounc- 
ing a more  extenfive  dominion  given  to  Noah 
over  the  brutal  world  than  was  originally  given  to 
Adam,  that  it  does  not  exprefs  any  proper  do- 
minion at  all. 

III.  V.  6.  Whofojheddetk  man  s blood  by  man 
Jhall  his  blood  be  fed.  For  in  the  image  of  God 
made  he  man,  namely  atthe  creation.  And  fome 
remains  of  the  natural  image  of  God,  as  we 
are  fpiritual  and  immortal  beings  are  even  now 
to  be  found  in  every  man,  fufficient  to  juftify 
♦he  putting  a murderer  to  death.  St.  James  al- 
ludes 


[ 239  1 

odes  to  the  fame  fcriptures,  when  he  fays,  There- 
■ with  blefs  we  God  and  curfe  men  who  were  made 
(m<;  ycyovGci'.  not  are  made)  after  the  fmilitude 
ofGod.’  + But  what  does  all  this  prove  ? That 
It  he  being  created  in  the  image  of  God,  “ is  more 
\experfly  expronounced  upon  Noah  and  his  fons, 
than  it  was  originally  on  Adam  ?”  I think  no  man 
of  fenfe  will  fay  this  in  cool  blood. 

Of  “ the  three  particulars,”  then  which  you 
brought  to  prove  the  fuperiority  of  Noah  over 
Adam  in  innocence,  the  firft  proves  no  more 
than  that  God  gave  to  both  the  bleffingof/rzn/- 
fulnefs  : the  fecond  far  from  proving  that  Noah 
had  a more  ext en five  dominion  over  the  (brute  crea- 
tion than  Adam,  hardly  prove  that  he  had  any 
■dominion  over  them  at  all : and  the  third  proves 
•only  this,  that  the  image  of  God  wherein  man 
was  made  at  firft,  is  not  totally  loft  now. 

Yet  you  fav,  w thefe  three  particulars  contain 
all  the  privileges-conferredonAdam  at  firft.  j And 
every  . one  of  thefe  is  exprelly  repeated,  and 
more  emphatically  and  cxtenfively  pronounced 
upon  man,  after  they udgmcnt  palfed  on  Adam 
i had  come  ”oon  his  poflerity.”  Exprefy?  More 
emphatically  ? More  extcnfively  ? Where  ? I 
am  fere  not  in  the  bible. 

However  you pompoufly  add  ( fcut  tiuisejl  mos ) 
“ This  is  to  me  a clear  and  undoubted  demonfir  a- 
Hicn . 

I.  **  That 

-t  James  iii.  9.  } P-  87^ 

I;  W ' •:  ~ f 


C 24°  3 

I.  “ That  the  judgment  which  came  upon  all 
men  to  condemnation , did  no  ways  alter  the  pri- 
mary relation  in  which  God  flood  to  man,  and 
man  to  God.'’  Certainly  it  was  altered  thus  far, 
God  was  a condemner , and  man  was  condemned. 
And  tho’  “ God  is  fl  ill  the  God  and  father 
of  mankind,”  yet  it  cannot  be  faid  that  he  is  fo 
to  unregenerate  men,  men  who  are  as  yet  dead  in 
Jin  and  children  oj  wrath , “ as  much”  or  in  the 

fame  fenfe  “ as  he  was  to  Adam  in  innocence.  ’ 
Adam  then  was  furely  the  [on  oj  God , as  no 
other  man  is,  till  born  of  the  Spirit.  The  power 
to  become  the  fons  of  God  is  now  given  to  none, 
till  they  believe  on  his  name. 

II.  “ That  the  love,  + regards  and  providence' 
of  God  toward  mankind  in  general,  are  flill  the 
very  fame  as  to  man  at  his  firft  formation.” 

His  providence  is  flill  over  all  his  works.  But  i 
he  cannot  regard  or  delight  in  fmful  man,  in  the  < 
very  fame  manner  wherein  he  delighted  in  him 
when  innocent. 

Ill  “ That  our  nature  as1  derived  from  Noah 
has  jufl  the  fame  endowments,  natural  and  moral,' 
with  which  Adam  was  created.”  This  does  not 
follow  from  any  thing  that  has  yet  been  faid.  If 
it  Hands  of  ltfelf,  it  may. 

IV.  “ That  whatever  came  upon  us  from  the 
judgment  to  condemnation,  came  no  farther  than 
was  confident  with  that  blefling,  pronounced 

upon 


+ p.  88. 


[ 24»  ] 

upon  Noah  as  well  as  Adam,  Be  fruitful  and  mul- 
tiplyThis  is  undoubtedly  true.  Otherwifethe 
human  fpecies  could  not  have  been  continued. 

<l  So  that  the  condemnation  which  came  upon  all 
men  cannot  infer  the  wrath  of  God  upon  man-  -- 
kind.” — It  may,  notwithflanding  that  they  in • 
creafe  and  multiply  : it  mujt,  if  they  are  by  nature 
children  of  wrath — “ but  only  as  fubjefting  us  to 
fucht  evils,  as  were  perfectly  confiflent  with  his 
blefling,  declared  to  Adam,  as  foon  as  he  came 
out  of  his  Maker’s  hands” — Namely  with  the 
blefling,  Increafe  and  multiply — “ And  confe- 
quently ! To  fuch  evils  as  God  might  juftly  have 
fubjefted  mankind  to,  before  Adam  finned.” — 
Whether  God  could  juftly  have  done  this,  or 
not,  what  a confequence  is  this  ? “ If  God  gave 
that  blefling,  Increafe  and  multiply,  to  men  in 
general,  as  well  as  he  did  to  Adam,  then  men 
in  general  are  not  children  of  wrath  now,  any 
more  than  Adam  was  at  his  creation.” 

V.  “ It  is  no  lefs  evident,  that  wheit  St.  Paul 
fays,  By  the  dijobedience  of  one , many  (or  all ) 
were  made  fnners , he  cannot  mean,  they  were 
made  fnners  in  any  fenfe  inconfillent  with  the 
blefling  pronounced  on  man  in  innocence.” 
True;  not  in  any  fenfe  inconfiftent  with  that 
blefling,  Increafe  and  multiply . But  this  blefling 
is  no  way  inconfiftent  with  their  being  by  nature 
children  of  wrath. 

Vol.  XXL  L “Prom 

t P.  89. 


[ 242  ] 

X N 

“ From  all  which  I conclude,  that  our  Hate 
with  regard  to  the  bleflingof  God,  and  the  dig- 
nity and  faculties  of  out  nature  funlefs  debafed  by 
our  own  fins)  is  not  + inferior  to  that  in  which 
Adam  was  created.”  Be  this  fo,  or  not,  it  cannot 
be  concluded  from  any  thing  that  has  gone  before. 
But  we  may  {fill  believe,  that  men  in  general 
are  fallen fhort  of  the  glory  o/^God,  are  deprived  of 
that  glorious  image  of  God,  wherein  man  was 
originally  created. 


SECT.  VI. 

The  notion  i of  Adam's-  being  a federal  head , or, 
reprefentative  of  in  ankind,  confidered. 

yTY  reafon  for  believing  he  was  fo  in  fome 
^ fenfe  is  this.  Cbrifi:  was  the  reprefen - 
tative  of  mankind,  when  God  laid  on  him  the  ini- 
quities of  us  all,  and  he  was  abounded  for  our  tranf 
grefjions.  But  Adam  was  a type  or  fgure  of 
Clirift.  Therefore  he  was  alfo  in  fome  fenfe 
our  reprefentatine.  In  confequence  of  which  all 
died  in  him,  asm  Chrijl  all Jhallbe  made  alive. 

But  as  neither  reprefentatine  nor  federal  head, 
are  fcriptu re- words,  it  is  not  worth  while  to 
contend  for  them.  The  thing  I mean  is  this  ; 

the  1 


t P.  50—93, 


t P-  94- 


' [ 243  ] 

the  ftate  of  all  mankind  did  fo  far  depend  on 
Adam,  that  by  his  fall  they  all  fall  into  borrow 
and  pain  and  death  fpiritual  and  temporal.  And 
all  this  is  no  ways  inconfiftent,  with  either  the 
juftice  orgoodnefs  of  God,  provided  all  may  re- 
cover through  the  fecond  Adam  whatever  they 
loft  through  the  nrft.  Nay,  and  recover  it  with 
unfpeakable  gain  : ftnce  every  additional  temp- 
tation they  feel,  by  that  corruption  ox  their 
nature,  which  is  antecedent  to  their  choice, 
will, ' if  conquered  by  grace,  be  a means  of  ad- 
ding to  that  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
gbry. 

* This  fingle  confideration  totally  removes  all 
refleftions  on  the  divine  juftice  or  mercy,  in 
making  the  ftate  of  all  mankind,  fo  dependent  on 
the  behaviour  of  their  common  parent.  For  not 
one  child  of  man  finally  lofes  thereby,  unlefs  by 
his  own  choice.  And  every  one  who  receives  the 
grace  of  God  in  Chrijl,  will  be  an  unfpeakable 
gainer.  Who  then  has  any  reafon  to  complain, 
even  of  having  a nature  inclined  to  evil  ? Seeing 
the  more  opportunities  he  has  of  fighting,  the 
more  of  conquering : and  feeing  the  greater  is 
the  difficulty  of  obtaining  the  vibfory,  the  brighter 
is  the  crown  of  glory. 

But  if  Adam  and  Chrift  did  not  Hand  or  fail, 
obey  and  fuffer  for  mankind,  how  can  the  death 
of  others  be  the  confequence  of  Adam’s  offence: 
the  life  of  others  the  confequence  of  Chrift’s 
obedience  ? How  could  all  men  be  in  any  fenfe 
L 2 conjlituted 


[ 244  ] 

conjlituted  finners  by  the  one,  or  conjiituted  righ- 
teous by  the  other  ? 

To  explain  this  a little  further  in  Mr.  Hervey’s 
words.  “ By  federal  head  or  reprejentative,  I 
mean  what  the  apoftle  teaches,  when  he  calls 
Chrift  the fecond  man,  t and  the  lajl  Adam.  The 
laft  ? How  ? Not  in  a numerical  fenfe  ; not  in 
order  of  time  : but  in  this  refpeft,  that  as  Adam 
was  a public  perfon,  and  a£ted  in  the  Head  of  all 
mankind,  fo  Chrift  likewife  was  a public  perfon, 
and  afted  in  behalf  of  all  his  people:  that  as 
Adam  was  the  firft  general  reprefentative  of 
mankind,  Chrift  was  the  fecond  and  the  laft: 
(there  never  was,  and  never  will  be  any  other ;) 
that  what  they  feverally  did  in  this  capacity,  was 
not  intended  to  terminate  in  themfelves,  but  to 
affeft  as  many  as  they  feverally  reprefented.” 

“ This  does  not  red  on  a fingle  text,  but  is  efta- 
blifhed  again  and  again  in  the  fame  chapter. 
The  divinely  wife  apoftie,  forefeeing  the  preju- 
dices which  men  would  entertain  againft  this 
doftrine,  as  lying  quite  out  of  the  road  ofreafon's 
refearches,  has  inculcated  and  re-inculcated  this 
momentous  point.  Through  the  offence  of  one , 
many  are  dead — the  judgment  was  by  one  to  con- 
demnation— by  one  man's  offence  death  reigned  by 
one — by  the  offence  of  one,  judgment  came  upon  all 
men  to  condemnation.  And  that  there  may  remain 
no  pollibility  of miflaking  his  meaning,  or  eluding 
his  argument,  he  adds,  By  one  mans  difobeaience 


i 1 Cor.  xv.  47.. 


many 


C s4  5 1 

many  were  made  Jinners.  All  thefe  exprellions 
demonflrate,  that  Adam  (as  well  as  Chrift)  was  a 
rep)  efentative  of  all  mankind.  And  that  what  he 
did  in  this  capacity,  did  not  terminate  in  himfelf, 
but  affebled  all  whom  he  reprefented.” 

After  vehemently  cavilling  at  the  terms,  you 
yourfelf  allow  the  thing.  You  fay,  “If  what  + 
was  loll  by  the  dijobedience  of  one  perfon,  might 
afterward  be  recovered  by  the  obedience  of  another, 
then  matters  would  have  flood  upon  an  equal 
footing:”  and  this  is  indeed  the  truth.  For  “ all 
that  was  loft  to  us  by  Adam’s  difobedicnce , is  fully 
recovered  by  Chi  ill’s  obedience:  however  we  de- 
nominate the  relation  in  which  the  one  or  the 
other  Hands  to  us.” 

In  this  we  agree  ; but  not  in  what  follows. 
“By  t law  in  the  5th  of  the  Romans,  as  in  fe- 
veral  other  places,  the  apoftle  does  not  mean 
barely  a rule  of  duty  ; but  fuch  a rule,  with  the 
penalty  of  death  threatened  to  every  tr  an fgr  efjion  of 
it.  Such  was  the  law  given  by  Mofes  that  is, 
“ a rule  to  every  tranfgreflion  of  which  the  pe- 
nalty of  death  was  threatened.”  Not  fo;  there 
were  a thoufand  tranfgreflions  of  it,  to  which 
death  wras  not  threatened.  Gbferve : by  death 
we  now  mean  temporal  death,  according  to  the 
whole  tenor  of  your  argument.  “ But  is  it  not  faid, 
CurJ'ed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things 
written  in  the  law  to  do  them?”  It  is.  But  what- 
ever this  curfe  implied,  it  did  not  imply  temporal 
L 3 death, 

t p.  113.  $ p.  114, 115. 


[.  24  6 ] 


death.  For  a man  might  negleft  to  do  many 
things  written  in  the  law,  and  yet  not  be  punifha- 
ble  with  death. 

Neither  can  I agree  with  your  interpretation 
of  Rom.  vii.  9.  “ I wc,s  alive  without  the  law  once:'' 
namely  § before  the  giving  of  the  lav/  at  mount 
Sinai.  The  Jew  was  then  alive  : that  is,  becaufe 
lie  was  not  then  under  the  law,  he  was  not  {lain  by 
his  fin.  His  fin  was  not  fo  imputed  to  him  as  to 
fubje&him  to  death.  But  when  the  commandment 
came,  with  the  penalty  of  death  annext;  fm  re- 
vived— acquired  full  life  and  vigour'' — (How  fo  ? 
One  would  have  expe&ed  juft  the  contrary !) 
“ and  [died,  that  is,  was  a dead  man  in  law,  upon 
the  firft  tranfgreftion  he  committed.”  Befide 
many  other  objedlions  to  this  ftrange  interpreta- 
tion, an  obvious  one  is  this.  It  fuppofes  every 
tranfgreftion  punifhable  with  death.  But  this  is  "a 
palpable  miflake.  Therefore  all  that  is  built  on 
this  foundation,  falls  to  the  ground  at  once. 

Upon  the  whole;  whatever  objeftions  may  lie 
againft  Dr.  Watts’s  method  of  explaining  it,  it 
appears  from  clear  fcripture  and  from  your  own 
words,  that  Adam  was  the  reprefentative  of  man- 
kind. 

I 

SECT. 


^ p.  116. 


C 247  ] 


SECT.  VII. 

+ Of  the  formation  of  our  nature  in  the  womb. 

BEFORE  I fay  anything  on  this  head,  I mull 
premife,  that  there  are  a thoufand  circum- 
ftances  relating  to  it,  concerning  which  I can 
form  no  conception  at  all,  but  am  utterly  in  the 
dark.  I know  not  how  my  body  was  fafhioned 
there  ; or  when  or  how  my  foul  was  united  to  it. 
And  it  is  far  eafier  in  fpeaking  on  fo  abftrufe  a 
fubjeft,  to  pull  down,  than  to  build  up.  I can  ea- 
fily  objeft  to  any  hypothefis  which  is  advanced  : 
but  I cannot  eafily  defend  any. 

And  if  you  afk  me,  How,  in  what  determinate 
manner  fin  is  propagated?  How  it  is  tranfmitted 
from  father  to  fon  ? I anfwer  plainly,  I cannot 
tell.  No  more  than  I can  tell,  how  man  is  pro- 
pagated ? How  a body  is  tranfmitted  from  father 
to  fon  ? I know  both  the  one  and  the  other  faff. 
But  I can  account  for  neither. 

Thus  much  however  is  plain,  that  “ God  t is 
the  maker  of  every  man  who  comes  into  the 
world.1’  For,  It  is  God  alone  who  gives  man 
power  to  propagate  his  fpecies.  Or  rather,  it  is 
Godhimfell  who  does  the  work,  by  man  as  an 
inftrument : man  (as  you  obferved  before)  hav- 
L 4 ing 

+ P-ia9'  Jp-138- 


[ ] 

ing  no  other  part  in  producing  man,  than  the 
oak  has  in  producing  an  acorn.  * God  is  really 
the  pioducer  of  every  man,  every  animal,  every 
vegetable  in  the  world : as  he  is  the  true  primum 
mobile , the  fpring  of  all  motion  through  the  uni- 
verfe.  So  far  we  agree.  But  when  you  fubfume, 
“ If  it  is  the  power  of  God  whereby  a finful 
fpecies  is  propagated,  whereby  a fnjul  father 
begets  a fnful  fon,  then  God  is  the  author  of  Jin; 
that  finfulnefs  is  chargeable  upon  him  •”  here  we 
divide ; I cannot  allow  the  confequence : be- 
cause the  fame  argument  would  make  God 
chargeable  with  all  the  fnjul  adions  of  men.  For 
it  is  the  power  of  God  whereby  the  murderer 
lifts  up  bis  arm,  whereby  the  adulterer  perpetrates 
his  wickednefs  ; full  as  much  as  it  is  his  power, 
whereby  an  acorn  produces  an  oak,  or  a father  a 
fon.  But  does  it  follow,  that  God  is  chargeable 
with  the  fin  ? You  know  it  does  not  follow.  The 
power  of  God,  vulgarly  termed  nature,  a£ls  from 
age  to  age,  under  its  fixt  rules.  Yet  he  who  this 
moment  fupplies  the  power,  by  which  a finful 
affion  is  committed,  is  not  chargeable  with  the 
finfulnefs  of  that  aftion.  In  like  manner,  it  is  the 
power  of  God  which  from  age  to  age  continues 
the  human  fpecies;  yet  he  wrho  this  moment 
fupplies  the  power  whereby  a finful  nature  is  pro- 
pagated (according  to  the  fixed  rules  eflabhfhed 
in  the  lower  world]  is  not  chargeable  with  the 
finfulnefs  of  that  nature.  This  diftindfion  you 
muff  allow,  as  was  obferved  before,  or  charge 

God 


[ 249  ] 

God  with  all  the  fin  committed  under  heaven. 
And  this  general  anfwer  may  fuffice  any  fmcere 
and  modell  enquirer,  without  entangling  himfelf 
in  thofe  minute  particulars,  which  are  beyond 
the  reach  of  human  underflanding. 

* “ But  does  not  God  create  the  nature  of 
every  man  that  comes  into  the  world  ?”  He  does 
not,  in  the  proper  fenfe  of  the  word  create.  The 
fcripture  plainly  affirms  the  contrary,  t On  the 
Jeventh  day  he  rejled  from  all  his  work  which  God 
created  and  made.  ^ The  works  v>hich  God  created 
zcere  finijhed  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.. 
And  as  foon  as  they  were  finiffied,  God ceafed from 
his  work , namely  from  his  work  of  creating.  He 
therefore  now  (not  creates , but)  produces  the 
body  of  every  man,  in  the  fame  manner  as  he 
produces  the  oak ; only  by  fupplying  the  power 
whereby  one  creature  begets  another,,  according 
to  what  we  term  the  laws  of  nature.  In  an  higher 
fenfe  he  is  the  Creator  of  all  fouls.  But  how  or 
when , he  does  or  did  create  them,  I cannot  tell. 
Neither  can  I give  any  account,  how  or  when  he 
unites  them  to  the  body.  Likewife  how  we  are  - 
conceived  in  fin,  I know  not:  but  I knew,  that 
we  are  fo  conceived.  God  hath  faid  it.  And  I 
know  he  will  be  jufifud  in  his  frying,  and  clear 
when  he  is  judged. 

It  is  certain,  that, God  is  the  maker  of  every 
man.  But  it  is  neither  certain  nor  true,  that 
he,  “ makes  every  man  in  the  womb,  both  foul 
* L.  g and . 

t Gen.  ii.2.  3.  J Heb.  iv.  3,  10,  . 


[ 25o  ] 

and  body,  as  immediately  as  lie  made  Adam  -and 
that  therefore  “ every  § man  comes  out  of  the 
hands  of  God,  as  properly  as  Adam  did.”  To  in- 
terpret any  fcriptures  as  affirming  this,  is  to  make 
them  flatly  contradict  other  fcriptures.  God  made 
Adam  by  immediate  creation".  He  does  not  fo 
make  every  man,  or  any  man  befide  him.  Adam 
cam e direflly  out  of  the  hands  of  God,  without 
the  intervention  of  any  creature.  Does  every  man 
thus  come  out  of  the  hands  of  God  ? Do  no  crea- 
tures now  intervene  ? 

“ But  if  God  produces  the  nature  of  every 
man  in  the  womb,  he  muff  produce  it  with  all  the 
qualities  which  belong  to  that  nature,  as  it  is  then 
and  fo  produced.”  So,  if  God  .produces  the 
adlion  of  every  man  in  the  world,  he  mult  pro- 
duce it  with  all  the  qualities  which  belong  to  that 
aftion,  as  it  is  then  and  fo  produced.  “ For  it 
is  impofhble  God  fhould  produce  our  nature , and 
not  produce  the  qualities  it  has  when  produced.” 
For  it  is  impofhble  God  fhould  produce  an  adlion, 
and  yet  not  produce  the  qualities  it  has  when  pro- 
duced. “ No  fubfiance  can  be  made  without 
fome  qualities.  And  it  mufl  necefTarilv,  as  foon 
as  it  is  made,  have  thofe  qualities  which  the  Ma- 
ker gives  it,  and  no  other.”  No  aElion  can  be 
produced,  without  fome  qualities.  And  it  mufl 
neceffarily  as  foon  as  it  is  produced,  have  thofe 
qualities  which  the  producer  gives  it,  and  no 

other. 


$ p- 140. 


n • 

[ 251  ] 

other.  You  fee  what  this  argument  would  prove, 
if  it  proved  any  thing  at  all. 

We  will  trace  it  a little  farther.  “ If  God 
produces  the  nature  of  every  man  in  the  womb, 
with  all  its  qualities,  then  whatever  thofe  quali- 
ties are,  they  are  the  will  and  the  work  of  God.” 
So  : if  God  produces  the  allion  of  every  man  in 
-the  world,  with  all  its  qualities,  then  whatever 
thofe  qualities  are,  they  are  the  will  and  the  work 
of  God.  Surely,  no.  God  does  (in  the  fenfe 
above  explained)  produce  the  allion  which  is 
finful.  And  yet  (whether  I can  account  for  it, 
or  no)  the  fnjulnefs  of  it  is  not  his  will  or  work. 
He  does  alfo  produce  the  nature  which  is  finful 
(he  fupplies  the  power  by  which  it  is  produced) 
and  yet  (whether  I can  account  for  this  or  no)  the 
finfulnefs  of  it  is  not  his  will  or  work.  I am  as  fure 
of  this,  as  I am  that  there  is  a God : and  yet  im- 
penetrable darknefs  reds  on  the  fubjeft.  Yet  I 
am  confcious  my  underdanding  can  no  more 
fathom  this  deep,  than  reconcile  man’s’  free-will 
with  the  fore-knowledge  of  God. 

“ Confequently  thofe  qualities  cannot  be 
finful .”  This  confequence  cannot  hold  in  one 
cafe,  unlefs  it  holds  in  both.  But  if  it  does,  there 
can  be  no  fin  in  the  univerfe. 

However  you  go  on.  “ It  is  highly  + difho- 
nourable  to  God,  to  fuppofe  he  is  difpleafed  at  us, 
for  what  he  himfelf  has  infufed  into  our  nature.” 
It  is  not  allowed  that  he  has  “ infufed  fin  into  our 
L 6 nature 


f p.  142» 


Z z5 2 ] 

nature:'’  no  more  than  that  he  irtfufes  fin  into 
our  aftions:  though  it  is  his  power  which  produces 
both  our  aftions  and  nature. 

I am  aware  of  the  diftinction,  that  man's  free- 
will is  concerned  in  the  one  cafe,  but  not  the 
other:  and  that  on  this  account,  God  cannot  be 
charged  with  the  finfulnefs  of  human  actions.  But 
this  does  by  no  means  remove  the  difficulty.  For 
l.  Does  not  God  know  what  the  murderer  or 
adulterer  is  about  to  do  ? What  ufe  he  will  make 
of  that  power  to  afl,  which  he  cannot  have  but 
from  God  ? 2.  Does  he  not  at  the  inflant  fupply 
him  with  that  power  whereby  the  Jinful  adion  is 
done  ? God  therefore  products  the  aclioi  which 
is  finful.  It  is  his  work , and  his  will,  (for  he 
works  nothing  but  what  he  wills.)  And  yet  the 
fnfulnefs  of  the  aftion  is  neither  his  work  nor 
will. 

“ But  can  thofe  paffions  or  propenfnies  be 
Jinful,  which  are  neither  caufed  nor  confented  to 
by  me  ?”  I anfwer,  fpite,  envy,  and  thofe  other 
paffions  and  tempers  which  are  manifeftly  dif- 
cernable  even  in  little  children,  are  certainly  not 
virtuous,  not  morally  good,  whether  you  term 
them  finful  or  not.  And  it  is  as  certain,  thefe 
exifi  before  they  are  confented  to,  much  lefs 
caufed  by  thofe  that  feel  them.  “ But  fin,  ^ if 
it  is  unavoidable  is  no  fin.”  Whether  you  term 
it  fin  or  not,  it  is  contrary  to  the  nature  of  God, 
and  a tranfgreffion  of  his  holy  and  good  law. 

“ But 


I P-  M3> 


[ 2 53  ] 

“ But  a natural-moral  evil  is  a contradiction  t 
for  if  it  be  natural , it  cannot  be  moral."  That 
tempers  contrary  to  the  nature  and  the  law  of 
God  are  natural,  is  a point  of  daily  experience. 
But  if  you  do  not  chufe  to  call  thefe  morally  evil , 
call  them  what  you  pleafe.  All  I aver  is,  that 
fuch  tempers  do  exill  in  us  antecedent  to  our 
. choice. 

“ But  if  the  adual Jins  of  men  § proceed  from 
a corrupt  nature,  they  are  unavoidable,  and  con- 
fequently  no  fins  at  all.”  Adual  Jins  may  pro- 
ceed from  a corrupt  nature,  and  yet  not  be  una- 
voidable. But  if  actions  contrary  to  the  nature  of 
God  were  unavoidable,,  it  would  not  follow,  that 
they  were  innocent. 

To  the  queftion,  How  t comes  it  to  pafs , that 
our  pajjions  and  appetites  are  now  fo  irregular 
and  Jirong,  that  not  one  perfon  has  refifled  them  fo 
as  to  keep  himftlf  pure  and  innocent?  You  anfwer 
by  another  queftion,  “ How  came  Adam  not  to 
keep  himfelf  pure  and  innocent  ?”  There  is  no 
parity  between  the  one  cafe  and  the  other.  1 can 
account  for  any  one  man’s  committing  fin,  fup. 
pofing  him  to  be  naturally  upright,  as  eafily  as 
for  Adam’s  committing  it.  Any  one  perfon,  as 
well  as  Adam,  though  naturally  inclined  to  nei- 
ther, might  chufe  either  good  or  evil.  And  on 
this  fuppofition  he  would  be  as  likely  to  chufe 
one  as  the  other.  But  the  cafe  is  extremely  dif- 
ferent, if  you  place  Adam  on  one  fide,  and  all' 

man- 

$ P 144.  + p,  145, 


[ 254  ] 

mankind  on  the  other.  It  is  true,  “ the  nature  of 
fin  is  not  altered  by  its  being  general.”  But  the 
cafe  is  very  widely  altered.  On  this  or  that  man 
it  may  “ come,  juft  as  it  came  upon  Adam,  by 
his  own  choice  and  compliance  with  temptation.” 
But  how  comes  it,  that  all  men  under  the  fun, 
fhould  chufe  evil  rather  than  good  ? How  came 
all  the  children  of  Adam  from  the  beginning  of 
the  world  till  now,  to  comply  with  temptation  ? 
How  is  it  that  in  all  ages,  the  fcale  has  turned 
the  wrong  way,  with  regard  to  every  man  born 
into  the  world  ? Can  you  fee  no  difficulty  in 
this  ? And  can  you  find  any  way  to  folvp  that 
difficulty,  but  to  fay  with  the  pfalmift,  see  were 
Jhapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  Jin  did  ouv  mothers  con- 
ceive us  ? 


SECT.  VIII. 

Of  original  righteoufnefs . 

“ RIGINALj  righteoufnefs  is  faid  to 
vA  be,  that  moral  re&itude  in  which  Adam 
ztias  created.  His  reafon  was  clear,  and  fenfe,  ap- 
petite and  paffion  were  fubjefl  to  it.  His  judgment 
yjas  uncorrupted,  and  his  will  had  a conflant  pro- 
per, fit\  to  holm  e/s.  He  had  a fupreme  love  to  h is 
Creator,  a fear  of  offending  him,  and  a readinefs 
to  d his  will.  When  Adam  finned,  he  loft  his 
moral  re&itude,  this  image  of  God  in  which  he 
was  created  : in  confequence  of  which  all  his  pof- 

terity 


t P-  >47;  >48;  >49* 


[ 2 55  ] 

terity  come  into  the  world  deftitute  of  that 
image.” 

In  order  to  remove  this  miflake,  you  reconfi- 
der’  fome  of  the  texts  on  which  it  is  grounded. 
Col.  iii.  9,  10.  Lie  notone  to  another,  feeing  ye 
have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds ; and  have 
put  on  the  new  man , which  is  renewed  in  knowledge , 
after  the  image  of  him  that  created  him.  Epk.  iv. 
22,  23,  24.  That  ye  put  off , concerning  the  for- 
mer converfation,  the  old  man  which  is  corrupt,  ac- 
' cording  to  the  deceitful  lujls,  and  be  renewed  in  the 
fpirit  of  your  mind,  and  put  on  the  new  man,  which 
after  God  is  created  in  righteoufnefs  and  true  lioli - 
nefs. 

On  this  you  affirm,  “ the  % old  and  new  man 
here  do  not  fignify  a courfe  of  life.  But  the  old 
man  fignifies  the  Heathen,  the  new  man , the  Chrif- 
tian  Profession. 

This  you  prove,  1.  From  Eph.  ii.  15.  Chrifl 
abo  lifted  the  enmity,  to  make  (or  create J in  himfelf 
of  twain  one  new  man.”  Does  this  only  mean  one 
new  profeffio'n  ? It  evidently  means,  one  church, 
both  of  Jews  and  Gentiles. 

You  prove  it,  2.  from  Col.  iii.  8 — 12.  where 
“ the  apoftle  tells  the  Coloffian  Chriflians,  that 
now  they  were  obliged  to  put  off  anger,  and  to  put 
on  bowels  of  mercies',  to  admit  the  Chriftian  fpirit 
into  their  hearts,  and  to  praftife  ChriSian  duties  ; 
for  this  reafon,  becaufe  they  had  put  off  the  old 
man,  and  had  put  on  the  new.  This  {hews  the  new 
man  was  fomething  they  might  have  put  on,  and 

yet 


§p.  1 50, 


[ 256  ] 

yet  be  defeRive  in  perfonal,  internal  holinefs.” 
True:  defeRive  fo  far,  as  {till  to  want  more: 
more  bowels  of  mercies , meeknefs,  longfuffering . 
But  this  does  not  (hew,  that  the  new  man  does 
not  mean,  the  principle  both  of  internal  and 
external  holinefs.  The  confcioufnefs  of  having 
received  this,  is  a ftrong  motive  both  to  depart 
from  evil,  and  to  labour  after  a continual  increale 
of  every  holy  and  heavenly  temper.  Therefore 
here  likewife,  the  putting  off  the  eld  and  the  putting 
on  the  new  man,  does  not  mean  an  outzvard  pro- 
feffion,  but  a real,  inward  change  : a renewal  of 
foul  in  rightecufnefs  and  true  holinefs. 

You  prove  it,  3.  from  F.ph.  iv.  22,  24.  Here 
you  fay,  “ He  confiders  the  putting  off  the  oldt 
and  putting  on  the  new  man,  as  a dutv.  They 
had  done  it  by  PROFESSION,  and  therefore  were 
obliged  to  do  it  effeRually ” They  had  done  it 
effeRually.  So  the  whole  tenor  of  the  apolYe  s 
words  implies.  Ye  i have  not  fo  learned  Chrifl : 
iffo  be  (ra.t\ier,  feeing  that)  ye  have  been  taught  by 
him, — That  ye  put  off  ike  old  man — And  be  renewed 
in  the  fpirit  of  your  mind-,  and  that  ye  put  on  the 
new  man,  which  after  God  is  created  in  righleouf 
nfs  and  true  holinefs.  The  apoille  here  mani- 
feilly  fpeaks  not  of  a leflon  they  had  not  learned y 
but  of  one  which  God  had  taught  them  already  : 
and  thence  exhorts  them  to  walk  worthy  of  the 
bleffing  they  had  received,  to  be  holy  in  ail  man- 
ner of  converfation. 

But  4.  “ The  putting  t on  the  new  man  is  one 
thine,  and  the  creating  him  is  another.  He 

° mutt 


tEph.iv.  2a — 24.  $ P- 15a‘ 


[ 2 <57  1 

mull  frjl  be  created,  and  then  put  on.”  No, 
He  is  created  and  put  on  at  the  fame  time : the 
former  word  more  direftly  referring  to  God  who 
creates,  the  latter  to  man  who  is  created.  “ But 
God,  you  fay,  created  the  new  man,  when  he 
erefted  the  gofpel-difpenfation  : as  appears  from 
Eph.  ii.  15,  19 — 22.”  Ianfwer,  1.  If  thole  latter 
verfes  are  explanatory  ol  that  expreffion  one  new 
man  in  the  15th,  thenitdoes  notmean,  one.  outward 
profejfvn,  but  the  one  church  of  living  believers  in 
Chrift:  2.  The  expreffion  in  the  15th  verfe,  is 
not  the  fame  with  that  we  are  now  confidering. 
Neither  is  the  meaning  of  that  and  this  expreffion 
the  fame : one  new  man  means  one  church  and  no- 
thing elfe : tke new  man  means  quite  another  thing ; 
the  work  of  God  in  every  individual  believer. 

You  fay,  5.  “ The  old  man  and  the  new , and  the 
new  mans  being  renewed  and  created,  and  the 
renewing  of  the  Ephefians,  all  refer  not  to  any 
corruption  of  nature,  but  to  their  late  § wicked 
life.”  What?  Does  their  being  renewed  in  the: 
fpirit  of  their  mind,  refer  only  to  their  wicked 
life?  If  you  had  not  affirmed  this,  I ffiould  really 
wonder  at  your  affirming  quickly  after,  “ In  all 
||  other  places  of  fcripture,  except  2 Cor.  iv.  16. 
renewing  relates  only  to  a vicious  courfe  of  life 
feeing  you  immediately  confute  yourfelf,  by 
both  the  following  citations,  f “ Be  not  con- 
formed to  this  world,  but  be  ye  transformed  by  the 
renewal  of  your  mind:’'  unlefs  the  mind  be  only 
another  expreffion  for  “ a vicious  courfe  of  life.” 

“ We 

§p.  *53*  + Rom.  xli.  a. 


[ 258  ] 

^ “ IVeourfelvesalfo  were  fame  times  foolifh,  disobe- 
dient, deceived,  ferving  diverfe  lufl.s  and  plecfures-, 
living  in  ihalice  and  envy,  hateful,  and  hating  one 
another Do  thefe  words  imply  nothing  but  “ a 
vicious'courfe  of  life?”  No  inward  corruption  at 
all  ? But  after  that  the  loving- kindnefs  and  love  of 
God  our  Saviour  toward  man  appeared — He  faced 
us  by  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghofi. — From 
what?  From  a vicious  courfe  of  life  only  ? Nay, 
but  from  foolifhnefs  of  heart  alfo,  from  error,  from 
malice,  hatred,  envy,  evil  defir e\  all  which  are 
inward  corruptions. 

You  add  “ from  all  this  we  may  gather,  that 
God's  creating  the  new  man  after  his  own  image  in 
righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs,  means  his  erecting 
the  Chrihian  church  with  a view  to  promote 
righteoufnefs  § and  holinefs  among  men.  For 
we  are  God’s  workmanfi 'iip,  created  in  Chnfl  Jef us 
unto  good  works."  Surely  you  do  not  cite  this 
verfe  alfo  to  prove,  that  the  renewing  of  our 
mind  implies  no  inward  change?  It  mull  be 
fomething  more  than  an  outward  profeffion,  or 
the  reforming  a vicious  courfe  of  life,  by  reafon 
of  which  we  are  faid  to  be  God’s  workmarfhip , 
created  anew  in  Chrif  Jfus. 

Thefe  texts  therefore  do  manifefllv  refer  to 
perfonal,  internal  holinefs,  and  clearly  prove,  that 
this  is  the  chief  part  of  that  image  of  God  in 
which  man  was  originally  created. 

The  other  text  which  ||  you  re-confider  is  Ec- 
1 - clef. 

J Tit.  iii.  3 — 5.  p.155.  Up.  156— 160. 


[ 259  ] 

clef.  vii.  29.  God  hath  made  vian  upright ; hut 
\ they  have  fought  out  many  inventions.  Bat  this, 
you  fay,  does  not  mean,  that  God  made  man 
righteous  : but  that  he  made  him  right , as  hav- 
ing thofe  powers,  means  and  encouragements,  by 
a due  ufe  of  which  he  may  become  righteous. 
In  order  to  prove  that  this  is  the  true  meaning  of 
the  words,  you  affirm,  1 . “ That  man  here  is  not 
to  be  underhood  of  Adam,  but  of  ail  mankind/’ 
This  cannot  be  granted  without  full  proof.  You 
affirm,  2.  “ This  appears  from  the  latter  part  of 
the  fentence  : they  fought  out  many  inventions 
Adam  and  Eve  did  fo,  in  and  after  their  fall. 
This  therefore  proves  nothing.  You  affirm,  g. 
The  word  jafhar  (which  we  tranflate  upright ) 
“ does  not  always  imply  upright ne/s  or  rigkleouf 
nefs.”  But  this  is  its  proper  meaning,  as  will  ap- 
pear to  any  who  ferioufly  confiders  the  follow- 
ing texts,  1.  Deut.  xii.  2 g.When  thou fialt  do  that 
which  is  right  in  thefght  of  the  Lord.  It  is  taken 
in  the  very  fame  fenfe  ver.  28,  chap.  xiii.  18. 
and  xxi.  9.  In  all  thefe  texts  it  undeniably  im- 
plies morally  good  or  righteous.  2.  Deut.  xxxii. 
4.  A God  of  truth  and  without  iniquity ; juf  and 
right  is  he.  Pfalm  xxv.  8.  Good  and  upright  is  the 
Lord.  3.  Pfalm  xxxiii.  4.  The  word  of  the  Lord 
is  right.  Hof.  xiv.  9.  The  ways  of  the  Lord  are 
right.  4.  Pfalm  xxxii.  11.  Be  glad  and  rejoice, 
ye  righteous.  Pfalm  xxxiii.  1.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord, 
0 ye  righteous.  In- the  very  fame  fenfe  it  occurs 
in  numberlefs  places.  As  the  word  is  therefore 
properly  applied  to  God  himfelf,  to  his  word,  his 

providences, 


[ 260  ] 

providences,  and  his  people  : in  all  which  cafes 
it  muft  neceftarily.  mean  righteous , we  cannot 
lightly  depart  from  this  its  proper  fignification. 

But  you  think,  there  is  anecefliry  oi  departing 
from  it  here  : becaufe,  “ to  fay,  God  created  Adam 
righteous , is  to  affirm  a contradiction,  + or  what  is 
inconftftent  with  the  very  nature  of  righteouf-  ■ 
nefs.  For  a righteoufnefs  wrought  in  him  with-  - 
out  his  knowledge  or  confent,  would  have  been  l 
no  righteoufnefs  at  all.”  You  may  call  it  by  any  ' 
name  you  like  better.  But  we  mull  ufe  the  old  I 
name  dill  : as  being  perfuaded,  that  the  love  of 
God,  governing  the  fenfes,  appetites  and  paffions,  , 
however  or  whenever  it  is  wrought  in  the  foul, 
is  true,  effential  righteoufnefs. 

* Nay,  “ Righteoufnefs  is  right  action Indeed 
it  is  not.  Heie  (as  we  faid  before)  is  your  fun- 
damental inillake.  It  is  a right  fate  of  mind , \ 
which  differs  from  right  adieu,  as  the  caufe  does 
from  the  effeCl.  Righteoufnefs  is  properly  and  i 
direftly,  a right  temper  or  difpoftion  of  mind , or  a 
complex  of  all  right  tempers. 

For  want  of  obferving  this,  you  fay,  “ Adam 
could  not  ati  before  he  was  created.  Therefore 
he  muft  exift,  and  ufe  his  intellectual  powers, 
before  he  could  be  righteous.”  “ But  according 
to  this  rea foiling,  as  Dr.  Jennings  obferves,  Chrifl 
could  not  be  righteous  at  his  birth.’’  "V  ou  anfwer, 

“ He  exifted  before  he  was  made  flefh.”  I re- 
ply, he  did,  as  God.  But  the  man  Chrift  Jefus 


+ p.  1.61, 


t =6*  ] 

did  not.  Neither  therefore  did  he  ufe  his  inteU 
leBual  powers.  According  to  your  reafoning 
then,  the  man  Chrift  Jefus  could  not  be  righteous 
at  his  birth. 

The  Dr.  adds,  “ Nay,  according  to  this  reafon- 
ins;,  God  t could  not  be  righteous  from  eternity  ; 
becaufe  he  mujl  exjl , before  he  was  righteous.' 
You  anfwer,  “ My  reafoning  would  hold  even 
with  refpetl  to  God,  were  it  true  that  he  ever 
did  begin  to  exift.  But  neither  the  exiftence 
mor  the  holinefs  of  God  was  prior  to  each  other.” 
Nay,  but  if  his  exiftence  was  not  prior  to  his  ho- 
linefs, if  he  did  not  exift  before  he  was  holy,  your 
•affertion,  that  every  being  mull  exijl  before  it  is 
righteous , is  not  true. 

Befides  (to  purfue  your  reafoning  a little  far- 
ther) if  “ Go  l did  always  exijl,"  yet  unlefs  you 
I can  prove,  that  he  always  ailed,  it  will  not  clear 
your  argument.  For  let  him  exift  millions  of 
ages,  he  could  not  be  righteous,  (according  to 

I your  maxiinj  before  he  acted  right. 

One  word  more  on  this  article.  You  fay, 
'**  My  reafoning  would  hold  good,  even  with  re- 
fpetl to  God,  were  it  true,  that  he  ever  did  begin 
to  exift.”  Then  I afk  concerning  the  Son  of 
God,  Did  he  ever  begin  to  exift  ? If  he  did  not, 
he  is  the  one,  eternal  God  : (for  there  cannot  be 
two  eternals)  if  he  did,  and  your  reafoning  hold 
good,  when  he  began  to  exift,  he  was  not  righ- 
teous. 

“ But 


+ p.  »6e. 


[ 262  J 

“ But  St.  John  faith,  He  that  doth  lighteouf- 
nefs  is  righteous."  Yes,  it  appears  he  is,  by  his 
doing  or  prabhfing  righlcoujnefs.  “ But  where 
doth  the  fcripture  fpeak  one  word  of  a righte- 
oufnefs  infufed  into  us  ?”  Where  it  fpeaks  of  the 
love  of  God  (the  effcnce  of  righteoufnels  1 JJud 
abroad  in  our  hearts. 

And  cannot  God,  by  his  almighty  power  infufe 
■any  good  tempers  into  us  ? Yot-  anfwer,  “ No. 
No  being  whatever  can  do  for  us,  that  which 
cannot  be  at  all , if  it  be  not  our  own  choice , and 
the  effect  of  our  own  indujlry  and  exercife.  But  j 
all  good  tempers  are  the  effeft  of  our  own  in-  I 
duftry  and  exercife.  Otherwife  they  cannot  be  I 
at  all." 

Nay  then,  it  is  certain,  they  cannot  be  at  all.  j 
For  neither  lowlinefs,  meeknefs,  long-fuffering,  I 
nor  any  other  good  temper,  can  ever  be  the  ] 
effect  of  my  own  indujlry  and  exercife.  But  I verily  I 
believe  they  may  be  the  effe£h  of  God's  Spirit,  I 
working  in  me  whatfoever  pleafeth  him.  See  j 
Ifa.  xxvi.  12. 

You  add,  “ The  thing  cannot  exift,  unlefs  we  1 
chufe,  becaufe  our  cku/ing  to  do  what  is  right,  is 
the  very  thing  which  is  to  exiff.”  No  : the 
thing  which  is  to  exift  is,  a right  / late  of  mind. 
And  it  is  certain  God  can  give  this  to  any  crea- 
ture, at  the  very  firth  moment  of  his  exiftence. 
Nay,  it  may  be  queftioned,  whether  God  can 
create  an  intelligent  being  in  any  other  ftate? 

“ But  an  habit . is  gained  by  repeated  a£is. 

Therefore 


[ 2%  •] 

Therefore  habits  of  righteoufnefs  could  not  be 
created  in  .man.”  Mere  playing  upon  words! 
He  could  be , he  was  created  lull  of  love.  Now, 
whether  you  call  this  an  habit  or  no,  it  is  the  fum 
of  all  righteoufnefs. 

“ But  this  love  is  either  under  the  govern- 
ment of  my  will,  or  it  is  not.”  It  is.  The 
love  of  God  which  Adam  enjoyed,  was  under 
the  government  of  his  will.  “ But  if  fo,  it  could 
be  righteous  t only  fo  far  as  applied  to  right  ac- 
tion in  heart  and  life.”  Stop  here.  The  love  of 
God  is  righteoufnefs , the  moment  it  exifts  in  any 
foul.  An-d  it  muft  exift  before  it, can  be  applied 
to  adlion.  Accordingly  it  was  righteoufnefs  in 
Adam  the  moment  he  was  created.  And  yet  he 
had  a power  either  to  follow  the  dictates  of  that 
love,  (in  which  cafe  his  righteoufnefs  would  have 
endured  for  ever)  or  to  aft  contrary  thereto  : 
but  love  was  righteoufnefs  flill ; though  it  was  not 
irrefiftible. 

“ I might  add,  j;  Adam’s  inclination  to  fin  (for 
he  could  nothin  without  a finful  inclination)  mull 
be  fo  lti;ong  as  to  overcome  his  (fuppofed)  inbred 
propenfity  to  holinefs : and  fo  malignant,  as  to 
expel  that  principle  at  once,  and  totally.  Con- 
fequently,  the  fuppofed  original  righteoufnefs, 
was  confiftent  with  a finful  propenfity,  vaflly 
ftronger  and  ynore  malignant  than  ever  was  or  can 
be  in  any  of  his  pojleriiy : who  cannot  fin  againft 
fuch  refiftance,  or  with  fuch  dreadful  confe- 

quences. 

t p.  164, 165.  % p*  166. 


C 264  ] 

quences.  Thus  original  righteoufnefs  in  Adam 
proves  far  worfe  than  original  fin  in  his  pofte- 
rity.” 

I have  fet  down  your  argument  at  large  that  it 
may  appear  in  its  full  ftrength.  Now  let  us  view 
it  more  clofely.  “ Adam  could  not  fin,  without 
a finful  inclination .”  The  fentence  is  ambiguous. 
Either  it  may  mean  “ Adam  could  not  chufe  ill, 
without  fome  finjul  temper  preceding and  in 
this  fenfe  it  is  falfe  : or  he  could  not  commit  out- 
ward  jin , without  firfl  inclining,  that  is,  chafing  fo 
to  do.  2.  “ This  his  jinfuful  inclination  (or  temper) 
was  fo  ftrong  as  to  overcome  his  inbred  propen- 
fity  to  holinefs.”  It  was  not  any  Jinful  inclination 
(in  this  fenfe)  which  overcame  his  propenfity  to 
holinefs  : But  ftrong  temptation  from  without : 
How  ftrong  we  know  not ; and  the  circumftances 
of  it,  we  know  not.  3.  “ That  his  finful  inclination 
was  fo  malignant,  as  to  expel  that  principle,  at 
once  and  totally.”  Not  by  any  finful  inclination , 
but  by  yielding  to  temptaion,  he  did  lofe  the  love 
and  image  of  God.  But  that  this  was  totalh  and 
at  once,  we  have  no  authority  to  affirm.  4 “ Con- 
fequently  original  righteoufnefs  in  Adam  was 
eonfiftent  with  a finful propenfitv,  vafily  Jtronger 
and  more  malignant,  than  ever  was  or  can  be  in 
anv  of  his  pojlerit\ .”  It  was  confident  with  no 
finful  proper) fit \ at  all,  but  barely  with  a power  of 
yielding  to  temptation.  It  declined  in  the  fame 
proportion,  and  by  the  fame  degrees,  as  he  did 
aflually  yield  to  this.  And  when  he  had  yielded 

entirely 


C s65  ] 

entirely  and  eaten  the  fruit,  original  righteoufnefs 
was  no  more.  Therefore  the  ,5th  propofition, 
“ Thus  original  righteoufnefs  proves  to  be  far 
worfe  than  original  Jin ,”  is  flourifh.  What  a 
figure  does  this  fair  argument  make,  now  it  is 
turned  infide  out  ? 

From  al!  this  it  may  appear,  that  tire  dofdrine 
of  original  righteoufnefs,  (as  well  as  that  of  original 
Jin ) hath  a firm  foundation  in  feripture,  as  well 
as  in  the  attributes  of  a wife,  holy  and  gracious 
God. 

As  you  do  not  offer  any  new  argument  in  your 
conclufion,  I need  not  fpend  any  time  upon  it. 

You  fubjoin  remarks  + on  Dr.  Watt’s  additions 
to  his  book.  Some  of  thefe  deferve  a ferious 
confideration. 

i Either  the  new-created  man  loved  Cod  fu- 
premelv.  or  not.  If  he  did  not , he  ruas  not  inno~- 
cent : face  the  very  law  and  light  of  nature  require 
fuch  a love  to  God.  If  he  did , he  flood  difpofecl  for 
every  afl  of  obedience.  And  this  is  true  holinefs  of 
heart. 

* You  anfwer  (in  many  words]  “ the  new-created 
man  did  not  love  God  fupremely.  For  before  he 
could  love  God,  the  powers  of  his  mind  mult 
have  been  quite  finifhed,  and  actually  exercifed.” 
And  doubtlefsthe  very  moment  he  was  created, 
they  were  quite  finifhed  and  aElually  exercifed 
too.  For  man  was  not  gradually  formed  by  God, 
,as  aftatue  is  by  an  human  artificer:  But  he  fpake 
Vol.  XXI.  M the 


t p.  186. 


[ 266  ] 

the  word , and  they  were  made  ; he  commanded  and 
they  were  created.  And  as  light  and  heat  were 
not  fubfequent  to  the  creation  of  the  fun,  but  be- 
gan to  exilt  with  it,  fo  that  the  moment  it  exifted 
it  Ihone  : fo  fpiritual  light  and  heat,  knowledge 
and  love  were  not  fubfequent  to  the  creation  of 
man  : but  they  began  to  exift  together  with  him. 
The  moment  he  exifted,  he  knew  and  loved. 

2.  If  the  new-made  creatin'  hadnotapropenj/t  > to 
love  and  obey  God,  hut  was  in  a Jtate  oj  mereindijftr- 
to  good  or  evil , then  his  being  put  into  Juck  an 
union  with  'jlejh  and  blood,  among  a thoujand  temp- 
tations, would  have  been  an  over-baliance  on  the  fide 
of  vice.  But  our  rcafon  can  never  Juppofe,  that 
God  ike  wife,  jujl  and  good,  would  have  placed  a 
new-made  creature  in  fuck  a ftuation. 

This  argument  cannot  be  anfwered,  unlfrfs  it 
can  be  {hewed,  either  1.  That  in  fuch  actuation, 
there  would  not  have  been  an  overb'allance,  on 
the  fide  of  vice,  or  2.  That  to  place  a.  new-made 
creature  in  a fituation  where  there  was  fuch  an 
over-batlance,  was  confident 'with'  the  wiidora, 
juftice  and  goodnefs  of  God. 

But  inftead  of  {hewing,  or  even  attempting  to 
{hew  this,  you  feebly  fav,  I do  not  + think  the 
reafon  of  man  by  anv  means  fufficient  to  hi  reft 
•God,  in  what  date  to  make  moral  agents. (O 
that  you  had  always  thought  fo!  How  much  vain, 
yea,  mifehievous  reafoning  had  then  been 
fbared  !]  “ But  however  Adam's  propenfities  and 

temp- 


t p.  187,  188. 


I s6;  ] 

temptations  were  balianced,  he  had  freedom  to 
chafe  evil  as  well  as  good.”  He  had.  But  this 
is  no  anfwer  to  the  argument,  which  like  the 
former,  remains  in  its  full  force.  How  could  a 
wife,  juft  and  good  God  place  his  creature  in 
fuch  a ftate  as  that  the  fcale  of  evil  fhould  pre- 
ponderate ? Although  it  be  allowed  heisftz  a mea- 
fure  free  ftill  : the  other  fcale  does  not  “ fly  up 
.and  kick  the  beam.” 

3.  Notwithftanding  all  the  cavils  which  have 
been  raifed , yet  if  thefe  two  texts  ( Epk.  iv.  24.  Col. 
iii.  10.)  are  coofidered  together,  their  obvious  mean- 
ing willjirike.  an  honejl  and  unbiaffed  reader , The 
new  man,  or  the  principle  of  true  religion  in  the 
heart , § is  created  by  God  after  his  moral  linage , m 
that  rigkteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs  wherein  man 
was  at  fir Jl  created. 

You  anfwer,  “ I have  endeavoured  to  prove 
the  contrary,  and  he  does  not  offer  to  point  out, 
any  one  miftake  in  my  interpretations.”  I have 
pointed  out  more  than  one. 

4.  If  tkefe  are  the  qualifications  with  "which  fuch 
a new-made  creature fhould  be  endued , and  thefe  the 
cir  cum  fiances,  wherein  from  the  wifdom , jufiice  and 
goodnefs  of  God  we fhould  expect 1 him  to  be  /limited: 
■then  by  a careful  furvey  of  what  man  is  now,  com- 
pared■ with  what  he  fhould  be,  we  may  ea/ily  deter- 
mine, whether  man  is  at  prefert t fuch  a creature,  as 
the  great  and  bleffed  God  made  him  at  firfi. 

You  anfwer  (in  abundance  of  words-,  the  fum 
of  which  is  this)  “ our  circumftances,  are,  on  the. 

M 2 _ whole 


§ p.189 


t p.  190. 


[ 268  ] 

whole,  far  better  than  Adam’s  were.  For  he  was 
under  that  fevere  law,  tranfgr ejs  and  + die He 
was  fo  : but  this  does  not  prove  the  point  {fill, 
ballancing  this  fingle  difadvantage  (if  fuch  it  was  ; 
for  even  that  may  be  difputed)  with  the  numer- 
ous advantages  he  was  poffeiTed  of,  with  the  holi- 
neis  and  happinefs  which  he  enjoyed,  and  might 
have  enjoyed  for  ever,  it  does  by  no  means  appear, 
that  the  prefen t circumftances  of  mankind  in  ge- 
neral are  better  than  Adam’s  were. 

5.  God  did  not  give  Noah  dominion  over  the 
brute  creatures,  in  Jb  ample  a manner  as 
he  did  to  Adam.  Fear  indeed  jell  on  the  brutes  : 
But  this  does  not  fiujficiently  preferve  man  from  their 
outrage.  In  the  innocent  flute,  no  man  would  have 
been  poifoned  or  tom  by  fer bents  or  lions  as  now. 

You  anfwer,  “ The  % fecond  grant  runs.  The 
fear  of  you  and  the  dread  of  you  Jhu/l  be  upon  every 
bea.fl  of  the  field,  and  upon  every  fowl  of  the  air, 
and  upon  alt  that  moves  on  the  earth,  and  upon  ull 
the  fifties  of  the fea : into  your  hands  they  are  deliver- 
ed. Every  moving  thing  that  liveth  fall  be  meat 
for  you  : even  as  the.  green  herb  I have  given  sou 
all  things.  Now  this  grant  is  more  extenfive 
than  the  firlh”  It  is,  as  to  food-,  but  not  as  to 
dominion.  The  liberty  of  eating  an  animal  does 
not  necelfarily  imply  any  dominion  over  :t  at  all. 
“ But  the  fear  and  dread  of  every  bealt  are  the 
effects  of  dominion  in  man,  and  the  fubjeftion 
in  brutes.”  Nay,  neither  does  fear  necelfarily 

imply 


+ p.  190. 


$ P*  19*1 


[ £<59  3 

imply  dominion.  I may  fear  what  has  not  domi- 
nion over  me,  and  what  1 am  not  fubjeSl  to.  And 
thofe  animals  may  fear  me,  over  which  never- 
thelefs  I have  not  dominion,  neither  are  they 
fubjeB  to  me.  I fear  every  viper,  yea,  every 
poifonous  fpider.  And  they  fear  me  : yet  nei- 
ther has  dominion  over  the  other.  Fear  there- 
fore and  dread  may  be  in  an  high  degree : and 
yet  no  dominion  at  all.  But  they  are  “ all  delivered 
into  our  hands'’  Yes,  for  meat-,  as  the  very  next 
words  explain  that  expreffion.  Whatever  there- 
fore it  may  “ import  in  other  fcriptures,”  the 
meaning  of  it  here  is  plain  and  certain. 

6.  Would  God  hare  expojed  the.  pure  and  inno- 
cent works  of  his  hands,  to  fuck  unavoidable  perils 
and  mifries , as  arife from  bears,  tygers , ferpents , 
precipices,  volcano's,  &c. 

You  anfwer,  “ he  did  i expofe  innocent  Adam 
to  a peril  and  mifery  grearer  than  all  thefe  put 
together,  even  to  a tempting  devil.”  I reply, 
i.  This  did  not  imply  any  unavoidable  mifery  at 
all:  g.  It  implied  no  more  peril  than  God  faw 
was  needful,  as  a tell  of  his  obedience.  There- 
fore this  is  no  parallel  cafe.  So  this  argument 
alfo  Hands  unanfwered. 

7.  It  has  been  faid  indeed,  If§  Adam fell  intofin 
though  he  was  innocent,  then  among  a million  of 
creatures  every  one  might  fin,  though  he  was  as  inno- 
cent as  Adam.  I anfwer , there  is  a pofibibity  of  the 
event  : but  the  improbability  of  it  is  as  a million  to 

M g one. 

X P-  19!j  '92.  § p.  194,  195. 


[ 2 7°  ] 

one.  I prove  il  thus.-  If  a million  of  crcaiurtr 
were  madey  in  an  equal  probability  tcfiand  or  fall ; 
and  if  all  the  numbers  from  one  to  one  million  inclu- 
Jively  were  Jet  in  a rank  : It  is  plainly  a million  to 
one , that  jujl  any  fugle  propefed  number  of  tins  mul- 
titude fiould fall.  A Toa>  the  total  turn  is  one  of  thtfe 
numbers , that  is,  the  lajl  oj  them.  Confeque  i:ly,  it  is  a 
million  to  one  a gain f the  fppofition,  that  the  whole 
number  of  men  fiould  fall.  And  this  argument  will 
grow  fill  ten  thoufand,  times  f ranger , if  we fuppoft 
ten  thoufand  millions  to  have  lived fince  the  creation. 

Your  argument  flood  thus.  “ If  we  cannot  infer 
from  Adam’s  tranfgreflion,  that  his  nature  was 
originally  corrput,  neither  can  we  infer  from  the 
tranfgreffions  of  all  mankind,  that  their  nature  is 
originally  corrupt.”  It  is  anfwered,  If  a million 
creatures  were  made  in  an  equal  probability  to Jland' 
or  fall,  it  is  a million  to  one  they  fiould  not  all  fall. 
You  reply,  “ This  is  +no  anfwer  to  my  argument.” 
Surely  it  is  : and  a direft  anfwer.  That  one  man 
finned,  does  not  prove  he  had  a corrupt  nature. 
Why  ? becaufe  (fuppofing  him  free  to  chufe 
good  or  evil)  it  was  as  probable  he  fhould  fin,  as 
not,  there  being  no  odds  on  one  fide  or  the  other. 
But  that  all  men  fhould  fin  does  prove  they  have  a 
corrupt  nature : becaufe  it  is  not  as  probable,  that 
all  men  fhould  fin,  as  that  one  man  fhould : the  odds 
againfl  itbeing  as  a million  or  rather  ten  thoufand 
millions  to  one.  Either  therefore  we  muft  allow, 
that  mankind  are  more  inclined  to  evil  then  to 

good* 


f p.  196. 


[ 27*  ] 

good,  or  we  rnuft  maintain  a fnppofition  fo  highly 
improbable,  as  comes  very  near  a flat  impoflibility. 

And  thus  much  you  yourfelf  cannot  but  allow: 
“The  rcafoning  may  hold  good,  where  all  cir- 
cumftances  agree,  to  make  the  probability  equal 
with  regard  to  every  individual  in  this  fuppoled 
million.”  And  how  can  the  probability  be  other 
than  equal,  if  every  individual  be  as  wife  and 
as  good  as  Adam  ? But  be  it  equal  or  no  you  fay, 
“ T he  cafe  is  not  to  be  eflimated  bv  the  laws  of 
equal  probability,  but  of  injedion.  For  when  fin 
is  once  entered  into  a body  of  men,  it  goes  on, 
not  according  to  the  laws  ot chance  f (is  this  pre- 
cifely  the  fame  with  equal  probability  ?)  “but  the 
laws  as  I may  fay,  of  injedion.”  But  how  came 
finto  eater  into  a body  of  men  ? That  is  the  very 
queftion.  Suppofing  firfla  body  of finer  s,  fin  “may 
affume  the  nature  of  a contagion.”  But  the 
difficulty  lies  againff  fuppafing  any  body  ofjinners 
at  all.  You  fay  indeed,  “ One  finner  produces 
another,  as  theferpent drew  in  Eve!  The  fink  fin 
and  finner  being  like  a little  leaven  which  leavens 
the  whole  lump All  this  I can  underhand,  fup- 
pofing  our  nature  is  inclined  to  evil.  But  if  not 
why  does  not  one  good  man  produce  another, 
as  naturally  as  one  finner  produces  another?  And 
why  does  not  righteoufnefs  fpread  as  fali  and  as 
wide  among  mankind  as  wickednefs  ? Why  does 
this  leaven  leaven  the  whole  lump,  as  frequently, 
as  readily,  and  as  throughly  as  the  other?  Thefe 
laws  of  infedion,  (fo  called)  will  therefore  hand 
M 4 you 


[ 272  ] 

Hand  you  m no  Head.  For  (to  bring  the  matter 
ftill  more  to  a pointj  ihppofe  Adain  and  Eve  new., 
I y ivfefted  bv  fin  : they  had  then  Hone  to  inf  eel, 
having  no  child.  Afterward  thev  repented  and 
found  mercy.  Then  Cain  was  born  : now 
furely  neither  Adam  nor  Eve  would  infect  him  ! 
Having  fullered  fo  feverely  for  their  own  fin  ; 
which  therefore  they  mult  needs  guard  him  a- 
gainft.  How  then  came  he  to  be  a finner  ? “ Oh, 
by  his  own  choice,  as  Seth  was  righteous.” 
Well:  afterwards  both  wicked  Cain  and  good 
Seth,  begat  fons  and  daughters.  Now  was  it  not 
juft  as  probable,  one  Ihould  infetl  his  children 
with  goodnefs,  as  the  other  with  wickednefs  ? 
How  came  then  Cain  to  tranfmit  vice  any  more 
than  Seth  to  tranfmit  virtue?  If  you  fay,  “ Seth 
did  tranlmit  virtue  : his  pofterity  was  virtuous 
’till  they  mixt  with  the  vicious  offspring  of  Cain.” 
I anfwer,  1.  How  does  that  appear  ? How  do 
you  prove,  that  all  the  pofterity  of  Seth  were 
virtuous  ? But  2.  If  they  were,  why  did  not  this 
mixture  amend  the  vicious,  rather  than  corrupt 
the  virtuous  ? If  otir  nature  is  equally  inclined 
to  virtue  and  vice,  vice  is  no  more  contagious  than 
virtue.  How  then  came  it  totally  to  prevail 
over  virtue,  fo  that  all  flejh  had  corrupted  them - 
Jelves  before  the  Lord?  Contagion  and  uif -lion  are 
nothing  to  the  purpofe  ; . feeing  they  might  pro- 
pagate good  as  well  as  evil. 

* Let  us  go  one  ftep  farther.  Eight  perfons 
only  were  laved  from  the  general  deluge.  We 

have 


C 273  ] 

have  reafon  to  believe,  that  four,  at  leaft,  of 
thefe  we re  prefons  truly  virtuous.  How  then 
came  vice  to  have  a majority  again,  among  the 
.new  inhabitants  of  the  earth?  Had  the  nature 
of  man  been  inclined  to  neither,  virtue  mud  cer- 
tainly have  had  as  many  votaries  as  vice.  Nay 
fuppofe  man  a reafonable  creature,  and  fuppof- 
ing  virtue  to  be  agreeable  to  the  higheft  reafos, 
according  to  all  the  rules  of  probability,  the  majo- 
rity of  mankind  mud  in  every  age  have  been  on 
the  fide  of  virtue. 

8.  Some  have  reckoned  up  a large  catalogue  of 
the  infances  of  divine  goodnefs , and  would  make 
this  as  evident  a proof  that  mankind fands  in  the 
favour  of  God , as  all  the  other  irfances  are,  of 
an  univerfal  degeneracy  of  man,  and  the  anger 
of  God  againjl  them.  But  Pis  eafy  to  reply.  The 
goodnefs  of  God  may  incline  him  to  befozo  a thoufand 
bounties  upon  criminals.  But  hisjufice  and  good- 
nefs will  not  fuff  or  him , to  infill  mifery  in  fuch 
an  univerfal  manner,  where  there  has  been  no 
fn  to  deferve  either  in  parents  or  children. 

You  anfwer,  “ There  is  more  than  enough 
fin  among  mankind,  to  deferve  all  the  bufferings 
God  inflicts  upon  them.  And  the  feriptures  re- 
prefent  thofe  bufferings  as  difeiplinary,  for  cor- 
rection and  reformation.”  What,  all  the  buffer- 
ings of  all  mankind?  This  can  in  no  wife  be  al- 
lowed. Where  do  the  feriptures  fay,  that  all  buf- 
ferings, thofe  of  infants  in  particular,  are  purely 
difeiplinary , and  intended  only  “ for  correction 

M $ 


[ 274  ] 

and  reformation  ?”  Neither  can  this  be  reconcil- 
ed to  matter  of  faCt.  How  did  the  fufferings  of 
Grecian  or  Roman  infants,  tend  to  their  correc- 
tion and  reformation  ? Neither  do  they  tend  to  the 
correction  or  reformation  of  their  parents,  or  of 
any  other  perfons  under  heaven.  And  even  as 
to  adults  : if  univerfal  fuffering  is  a proof  of  uni- 
verfal  fin  ; and  univerfal  fin  could  not  take  place, 
unlefs  men  were  naturally  prone  to  evil.  Then 
the  prefent  fufferings  of  mankind  are  a clear  and 
ftrong  evidence  that  their  nature  is  prone  to  evil. 

9.  Notwithflanding  all  God's  provifion  Jot  the 
good  oj  man,  Jill  the  fcripture  repre/ents  men, 
while  they  are  in  their  fallen  fate,  as  dejitute  of 
God's  favour,  and  without  hope. 

You  anfwer,  “ How  can  + men  be  dejitute  of 
God’s  favour,  when  he  has  vouchfafed  them  a 
Redeemer?11  By  djitute  of  God’s  favour,  we 
mean,  children  of  wrath,  objects  of  God's  dif- 
pleafure.  And  becaufe  they  were  fo,  the  Re- 
deemer was  given,  to  reconcile  them  to  God  by 
his  own  blood.  But  notwithstanding  this,  while 
we  and  they  were  in  our  fallen  Jate,  we  were  all 
objeCts  of  God’s  difpleafure, 

“ But  how  can  they  be  without  life,  when  he 
hath  given  them  thehope  of  eternal  life  ?”  All  men 
who  are  not  born  again,  born  of  God  are  with- 
out hope  at  this  day.  God  indeed  hath  given,  but 
they  have  not  accepted  the  hope  cf  eternal  life. 
Hence  the  bulk  of  mankind  are  ftill  as  void  of 
this  hope,  as  are  the  beafts  that  perifh.  And  fo  (the 

fcripture 


+ p.  207» 


[ 275  ] 

fcripture  declares)  are  all  men  by  nature , whatever 
differencegrace  may  make.  By  nature  all  are  chil- 
dren of  wrath,  without  hope,  without  God  in  the  world . 

io.  Doth  that  man  write  the  fincere fenfe  of  his 
own  mind  and  confcience,  who  charges  the  expref- 
fon,  “ Adam  was  on  trial for  us  all,”  zoith  this 
inference,  “ That  we  are  none  of  us  in  a ftate  of  trial 
now,  but  Adam  alone  was  upon  trialjor  us  all?'  ’ We 
have  owned  and  granted,  that  men  arenow  in  a fate 
of  trial : but  this  is  upon  the  foot  of  a new  covenant . 

You  anfwer,  “ what  j;  can  be  more  evident, 
than  that  according  to  this  fcheme  Adam  alone 
was  to  be  upon  trial  for  us  all,  and  that  none  of 
Adam’s  pofterity  are  upon  perfonal  trial  ?”  Do 
you  not  lee  the  ambiguity  in  the  word  alone?  Or 
do  you  fee  anddilfemble  it?  Dr.  Watts  fuppofes, 
that  Adam  alone,  that  is,  This fingle perfon  was  on 
trial  for  all  men.  Does  it  follow  from  hence, 
that  Adam  alone,  that  is,  no  other  perfon,  was 
ever  in  a Hate  of  trial?  Again:  if  no  perfon  but 
Adam  was  upon  trial  for  all  men,  will  it  follow, 
“ No  perfon  but  Adam  was  upon  trial  at  all?”  It 
is  really  hard  to  think,  that  you  here  “ fpeak  the 
fincere  fenfe  of  your  own  mind  and  confcience.’1 

You  go  on.  “ He  fuppofes  all  mankind  are 
Hill  under  the  original  covenant  with  Adam, 
according  to  which  he  alone  was  upon  trial  for 
us  all,  and  none  of  his  pofterity  are  upon  perfon- 
al trial.'’  He  does  not  fuppofe  any  man  to  be  lo 
under  that  covenant,  as  to  fuperfedehis  beingupon 
perfonal  trial.  Yourfelf  add,  “ I knew  he  owned, 
M 6 
t P-  209‘ 


we 


[ 276  ] 

we  are  upon  perfonal  trial,  and  that  all  mankind 
are  now  under  the  covenant  of  grace.  But  how  can 
either  of  thefe  confift  with  the  fcheme  ?”  Both  of 
them  confift  with  it  perfe&ly  well.  1.  Adam  alone 
or  Jingle  was,  in  fome  fenfe,  on  trial  for  all  man- 
kind, according  to  the  tenor  of  the  old  covenant, 
“ Do  this  and  live.”  2.  Adam  fell,  and  hereby 
the  fentence  of  death  came  on  him  and  all  his 
pofterity.  3.  The  new  covenant  was  given, 
whereby  all  mankind  were  put  into  aftate  of  per- 
fonal trial.  Yet  ftill,  4.  Death  the  penalty  of 
of  the  old  covenant,  came  (more  or  lefs)  on  all 
mankind.  Now  all  this  is  well  confident  with  it- 
fe If,  as  well  as  with  the  tenor  of  fcripture. 

11.  Mankind  is  reprefented  as  one  colleQive 
body  in  fever  al  verfes  of  the  5th  chapter  to  the  Ro- 
mans. 

You  anfwer,  St.  Paul  i always  diftinguifhes 
between  Adam,  and  all  men,  his  pofterity,  and 
does  notconfider  Adam  with  all  men,  as  one  crea- 
ture.” 

What  then  ? This  does  net  prove,  that  he  does 
not  reprefent  mankind  (Adam’s  pofterity,)  as  one 
colleElive  body. 

12.  All  that  is  contained  in  the  blefling  given  to 
Noah  is  confident  with  the  curfe  which  came  on  all 
men  by  the  frf  Jin.  But  that  curfe  is  not  conff 
ient  with  the  original  blefting  which  was  given  to 
Adam . 

You  anfwer,  “ The  blefting  given  (|  to  Noah, 

was 

% p.  Si  V.  p.  2 12- 


■ . 

C 277  ] 

was  the  very  fame  which  was  given  to  Adam- 
This  is  palpably  falfe.  The  blefling  which  was 
given  to  Adam  included  x.  Freedom  from  pain 
and  death.  2.  Dominion  over  the  whole  brute 
creation.  But  that  given  to  Noah  did  not  in- 
clude either.  Yet  you  affirm,  “ It  is  renewed  to 
Noah,  without  any  manner  of  alteration,,  after 
pain  and  death  were  introduced  into  the  world  ! 
And  do  pain  and  death  then  make  no  manner  cj 
r alteration  ? 

13.  The  dominion  over  the  brutes  given  to  Adam 
was  not  give  1 to  Noah * 

You  anfwer,  “ Our  Thirling  and  feeding  upon 
them  is  the  high  eft  inftance  of  dominion  over 
them.1’  ‘It  is  no  inrtance  of  it  at  all.  I may  fhoot 
a bear  and  then  eat  him  : yet  I have  no  domi- 
nion, unlefs  it  be  over  his  carcafe. 


PART  IV. 


Extra  ids  from  Dr.  Watts  and  Mr.  He  b den. 

J HAVE  now  confidered  what  is  material  in 
JL  your  “ DoSrine  of  original 'fin with  the fup~ 
piemen t and  reply  to  Dr*  Watts.  And  this  I pur- 
pofely  did  before  I read  the  do&or’s  book.  But 
bow  was  I furprized  on  reading  it,  to  ob- 

fcrve; 


+ p.  213.' 


[ 278  ] 

fervethe  manner  wherein  you  have  treated  it,  of 
which  I could  not  be  a judge  before  ! The  frame 
which  he  had  fo  beautifully  and  llrongly  connect- 
ed, you  have  disjointed  and  broken  in  pieces, 
and  given  us  nothing  but  mangled  fragments  of 
it,  from  which  it  is  impofTible  to  form  any  judg- 
ment of  the  whole.  In  order  therefore  to  do 
juftice  to  that  great  and  good  man,  as  well  as  to 
his  argument,  I fubjoin  an  extratt  of  fo  much  of 
that  work  as  direftly  affefts  the  main  quell  ion. 

I the  rather  fubjoin  this  and  the  following  ex- 
t rafts,  for  thefe  two  reafons,  1.  Becaufe  what 
has  gone  before  being  purely  argumentative,  is 
dry  and  lefs  profitable  to  the  generality  of  read- 
ers.. 2.  Becaufe  they  contain  one,  uniform,  con-  * 
nefted  fcheme  of  the  great  dofirine  which  I have 
been  hitherto  defending : and  which  after  the  j 
objections  have  been  removed  out  of  the  way,  j 
mav  be  more  clearly  underftood  and  firmly  em- 
braced. 

Introduction’. 

“ f Man  is  a creature  made  up  of  an  animal  : 
body  and  a rational  mind,  fo  united  as  to  act  in 
a mutual  correfpondence  according  to  certain 
laws  appointed  bv  his  Creator.  Now  fuppofe  the 
blefied  God,  who  is  perfect  in  wifdom  and 
power,  in  jultice  and  goodnefs,  were  to  iorm 
inch  a new  creature,  with  what  qualifications 

may 

+ Ruin  and  recovery  of  mankind,  p.  t. 


[ z79  ] 

may  we  conceive  fuch  a creature  would  he  en- 
dowed, by  a being  of  fuch  goodnefs,  juftice  and 
wifdom  ? 

“ I.  i We  cannot  but  conceive,  he  mail  have 
a pcrftBion  of  natural  pozvers,  both  of  body  anil 
/pint,  as  united  together,  fuited'  to  his  prefent 
circumftances. 

“ Not  that  we  need  conceive,  man  would  be 
made  fo  perfect  a bang  as  God  could  make  him. 
For  the  wifdom  of  God  plainly  defigned  to  dif- 
play  it  fell  in  the  different  ranks  and  orders  of  his 
i creation,  Ivor  is  it  reafonable  to  fuppofe,  man 
would  be  made  at  ffrff  with  fuch  fublime  perfec- 
tions, as  he  himfeff  might  afterwards  arrive  at, 
by  a wife  improvement  of  his  powers.  But  ftili 
the  creature  which  was  defigned  to  bear  the 
i neareft  likcnefs  of  his  Maker  in  this  lower  world, 

| muff  have  powers  perfectly  fufficient  for  his  pre- 
fent well-being,  and  afting  in  that  ftation  where- 
i in  God  had  placed  him.  § All  his  fenfes  muff:  be 
clear  and  ffrong,  his  limbs  vigorous  and  aftive, 
his  body  healthy  in  all  the  inward  and  outward 
parts  of  it,  and  every  natural  power  in  its  proper 
order.  For  God  would  furely  form  fuch  a crea- 
ture, in  a ftate  of  perfect  eafe,  without  any  ori- 
ginal maladv  of  nature,  to  give  him  pain  or  fol- 
low. ||  Nor  could  there  be  any  tendency  in  his 
body  to-pain  or  difeafe  while  he  remained  with- 
out fin. 

“ And 

i p- 2-  § P'  3-  Up 


[ 2 8o  ] 

“ And  as  the  powers  of  his  body  mull  be  thus 
perfect,  fo  the falcuilies  of  his foul  mull  have  their 
perfedhon  too. 

“ His  undt  fan  ding  mull  have  that  knowledge 
both  of  God  and  his  creatures,  which  was  need- 
ful for  his  happinefs.  Not  that  Ire  was  formed 
with  all  knowdedge  in  arts  and  fciences,  but  with 
fuch  as  was  requifite  to  his  peace  and  welfare. 
His  reafon  muft  be  clear,  his  judgment  uncor- 
rupted, and  his  confcience  upright  and  fenfible. 

ct  This  + leads  me  to  fpeak  of  his  moral  perfec- 
tion. A rational  creature  thus  made,  muff  not 
only  be  innocent,  as  a tree,  but  muft  be  formed  j 
holy.  His  will  muft  have  an  inward  bias  to  vir- 
tue : he  muft  have  an  inclination  to  pleafe  that 
God  who  made  him,  a fupreme  love  to  his  Crea- 
tor, a zeal  to  ferve  him,  and  a tender  fear  of  of- 
fending hirn. 

“ For  either  the  new  created  man  loved  God 
fupremely,  or  not.  If  he  did  not,  he  was  not 
innocent,  fince  the  law  of  nature  requires  a fu- 
preme love  to  God.  If  he  did  he  flood  ready  for 
every  a£l  of  obedience  : and  this  is  true  holinefs 
of  hearts  And  indeed  without  this,  how  could  a 
God  of  holinefs  love  the  work  of  his  own  hands  ? 

“ There  muft  be  alfo  in  this  creature  a regular 
fubjeftion  of  the  inferior  powers  to  the  fuperior. 
Sente  and  appetite  and  paflion  muft  be  fubjetl 
to  reafon.  The  mind  muft  have  a power  to  go- 
vern^ 


* p-  5- 


t a,  J 

vern  thefe  lower  faculties,  that  he  might  not  of- 
fend againd  the  law  of  his  creation. 

“ ^He  mull  alfo  have  his  heart  inlaid  with  love 
to  the  creatures,  efpecially  thofe  of  his  own  fpe- 
cies,  if  he  fhould  be  placed  among  them  : and 
with  a principle  of  honefty  and  truth  in  dealing 
with  them.  And  if  manv  of  thefe  creatures  were 

J 

made  at  once,  there  would  be  no  pride,  malice 
or  envy,  no  fallhood,  no  brawls,  or  contentions 
among  them,  but  all  harmony  and  love. 

“ This  univerfal  righteoufnefs,  which  is  the 
moral  image  of  God,  is  far  the  noblelt  part  of  that 
image  in  which  Mofes  reprefents  man  to  have 
been  originally  created.  The  fame  writer  allures 
us,  that  when  God  furveyed  all  his  works,  he 
pronounced  them  very  good ! Agreeably  to  what 
Solomon  § allures  us  that  God  made  man  upright. 

“ :Tis  true,  the  natural  image  of  God  in  which 
man  was  created,  confided  in  his  fpiritual,  intel- 
ligent and  immortal  nature : and  his  political 
image  (if  I may  fo  fpeak)  in  his  being  Lord  of  this 
lower  creation.  But  the  chief,  the  moral  part  of 
his  image,  we  learn  from  St.  Paul,  to  have  been 
the  reflitude  of  man’s  nature  : who  in  his  ||  epif- 
tle  to  the  Ephefians  fays,  that  the  image  of  God 
in  which  man  is  to  be  renewed , and  confequent- 
ly  in  which  he  was  made,  confids  in  righteoufnejs 
and  true  holinejs. 

“ IT.  From  the  judice  and  goodnefs  of  God  we 
may  infer,  that  though  man  was  mad o.  free  with  a 

power 

§p.7.  |Ch.  iv.24.. 


Jp.  6. 


[ 2§2  ] 

power  t to  chufe  cither  evil  or  good  that  he 
might  be  put  into  a date  of  probation,  yet  he  had 
JujJi.ciency  oj  power,  to  -preferve  himfelf  in 
love  and  obedience  to  his  Creator,,  and  to  guard  him* 
felf  again fl  every  temptation. 

“III.  5 i is  highly  \ probable,  from  the  good- 
nefs  ol  God,  that  fuch  a creature  would  be  made 
immortal.  ’I  is  true  the  great  God  as  fovereign 
Lord  of  his  creatures,  might  take  away  all  that  he  • 
had  given.  But  it  is  hard  to  fuppofe,  that  he 
ever  would  have  deftroyed  an  intelligent  cred-  j 
ture,  who  had  continued  to  ferve  and  pleafe 
him 

“ ’Tis  alfo  probable,  that  he  was  endued  with  I 
power  to  arrive  at  higher  degrees  of  excellency 
and  happinefs,  than  thofe  in  which  he  was  form- 
ed at  fil'd  : and  hereby  he  was  greatly  encourag- 
ed both  to  watch  againft  every  fin,  and  to  ufe  all 
zeal  and  diligence  in  improving  the  powers  he 
had  received. 

Ij  l 

“ IV.  We  j|  may  add,  that  the  habitation  in 
which  a God  of  infinite  goodnefs  would  place 
fuch  an  innocent  and  holy  creature,  would  be 
furnifhed  with  all  the  neccffaries  and  convenitncits 
of  life,  and  prepared  for  his  delight  as  well  as 
fafety.  And  fo  Mofes  tells  us,  that  the  fil'd  creat- 
ed pair  were  placed  in  Eden,  a garden  ol  plea- 
fure,  and  were  made  lords  of  all  therein,  of  all 
the  creatures,  animal  and  vegetable,  that  were  i 
round  about  them. 

“ Neither  ! 


+ p.  8, 


tp*9-  Up-  10- 


C 283  ] 

Neither  can  we  conceive  that  any  thing  de- 
Iruftive  or  hurtful  could  be  found  in  this  delight- 
ul  habitation,  but  what  man  would  have  fuffi- 
tient  notice  of  with  fufficient  power  to  oppofe 
rr  avoid  it. 

“ Y.  ||  And  if  this  creature  had  power  to  pro- 
pagate its  kind,  the  child  muff  be  innocent  and  i 
aolv,  and  equally  capable  of  perfevering  in  virtue 
and  happinefs. 

“ Now  if  we  may  judge  from  the  wifdom,  juf- 
tice  and  goodnefs  of  God,  that  tliefe  are  the  qua- 
lifications with  which  fitch  a new-made  creature 
would  be  endued,  thefe  the  circumftances  in  which 
he  would  be  fituated,  then  by  a careful  furvey  of 
what  mankind  is  now,  we  may  eafily  judge 
whether  man  is  now  fuch  a creature  as  the.  great 
and  bleiTed  God  made-  him  at  firft?  And  this  is 
the  fubjefif  of  the  enfuing  enquiry. 

QUESTION  I. 

“ Isi  man  in  his  prefent  circumftances  fuck  & 
creature  as  he  came  out  of  the  hands  of  God  his 
■ Creator  ? We  may  derive  a full  anfwer  to  this 
enquiry  from  the  following  confiderations. 

“ 1.  This  earth  which  was  defigned  for  the  ha- 
bitation of  man,  carries  evident  tokens  of  ruin 
and  defolation,  and  does  not  feem  to  be  ordain- 
ed in  its  prefent  form  and  circumflances,  for  the 
habitation  of  innocent  beings ; but  is  apparently 

fit 


II  P' 


+ p.  t-2. 


[ ^4  3 

fit  lor  the  dwelling-place  of  creatures  who  are  de 
generate  and  fallen  from  God. 

It  Is.  granted  that  the  beamy  and  order  o: 
this  lower  world,  even  in  its  prefent  conflitution 
and  the  wonderful  texture,  cornpofition  and  har- 
mony of  the  feveral  parts  of  it,  both  in  air,  earth 
and  fea,  do  Hill  illuftrioufly  difplay  X t-ie  pother, 
tvifdom  and  goodnefs  of  their  Creator.  Yet  it 
mult  be  confell  alfo,  that  there  are  glaring  proofs.; 
of  the  terrors  of  hisjuflice,  and  the  execution 
of  his  vengeance. 

* “ Is  not  the  prefent  fhape  of  our  earth,  in 
its  divifions  of  feas  and  fhores,  rude  and  irregu- 
lar, abrupt  and  horrid  ? Survey  a map  of  the' 
world,  and  fay.  Does  the  form  of  it  ftrike  our 
eyes  with  any  natural  beauty  and  harmony  ? Ra- 
ther does  it  not  ffrongly  bear  on  our  fight  the  ideas 
of  ruin  and  confufion  ? Travel  ever  the  countries 
of  this  globe,  or  vifit  feveral  parts  of  this  tlland.. 
What  various  appearances  of  a ruined  world  ? 
What  vaft  broken  mountains  hang  over  the 
heads  of  travellers  ? What  ftupendous  cliffs  and 
promontories  rife,  high  and  hideotis  to  behold  ? 
What  dreadful  precipices,  which  make  us  giddy 
to  look  down,  and  are  ready  to  betray  us  into 
deftruflion  ? What  immenfe  extents  are  there  in 
many  countries  of  wafle  and  barren  ground  ? 
What  vail  and  almoft  impafTable  deferts  ?+  What 
broad  and  faithlefs  moraffes,  which  are  made  at 
once  both  deaths  and  graves  to  unwary  travel- 
lers ? 

t P-  ‘3-  + P-  H- 


t 285  J 

'rs  ? What  huge  ruinous  caverns,  deep  and  wide, 
ig  enough  to  bury  whole  cities  ? 

“ What  refrftiefs  deluges  of  water,  in  a feafon 
f great  rains,  come  rolling  down  the  hills,  bear 
1 things  before  them,  and  fpread  fpacions  defo- 
.tion?  What  roaring  and  tremendous  water-falls 
l feveral  parts  of  the  globe?  What  burning 
tountains,  in  twhofe  caverns  are  lakes  of  liquid 
re  ready  to  burft  upon  the  lower  lands  ? Or 
ley  are  a mere  Ihell  of  earth,  covering  prodigi- 
us  cavities  of  fmoke,  and  furnaces  of  flame  : 

| nd  feem  to  wait  a divine  command,  to  break  in- 
ward and  bury  towns  and  provinces  in  fiery 
’ uin. 

• “ What  a/dive  treafures  of  wind  are  pent  up 
1 the  bowels  of  the  earth,  ready  to  break  out 
ito  wide  and  furprifing  mifchief  ? What  huge 
orrents  of  water  ru!h  and  roar  through  the  hol- 
jws  of  the  globe  we  tread  ? What  dreadful 
ounds  an  1 throating  appearances  from  the  region 
■f  meteors  in  the  air?  What  clouds  charged 
.vith  flame,  ready  to  burft  on  the  earth  and  dif- 
ompofe  and  terrify  all  nature? 

* “ Whenl  furvey  fuch  fcenes  as  t’nefe,  I can- 
lOtbnt  fay  within  myfelf,  “ furely  this  earth,  in 
hefe  rude  and  broken  appearances,  this  unfettled 
md  dangerous  ftate,  was  defigned  as  a dwelling 
or  forre  unhappy  inhabitants,  who  did  or  would 
ranfgrefs  the  laws  of  their  Maker,  and  merit  ^ 
lefolatiort  from  his  hand.  And  he  hath  here 

ftored 


+ P-  l5* 


+ p.  16. 


[ i86'.] 

Eored  up  his  magazines  of  divine  artillery  againf 
the  day  of  punifkment.” 

“ How  often  have  the  terrible  occurrences  o 
nature  in  the  air,  earth  and  fea,  and  the  calami, 
tous  incidents  in  feveral  countries,  given  a flronj 
confirmation  of  this  fentiment? 

14  What  definitive  {forms  have  we  and  ou 
fathers  feen  even  in  this  temperate  iflandofGrea 
Britain?  What  floods  of  water  and  violent  explo 
fions  of  fire  do  we  read  of  in  the  hiftorie 
of  the  world  ? What  fliocking  convulfions  o 
the  globe,  firetching  far  and  wide  under  the  af 
frighted  nations  ? What  huge  difruptions  of  tin 
caverns  of  the  earth,  with  tremendous  bellow- 
ing?, which  have  filled  its  inhabitants  with  terro- 
and  dfionifhment,  and  made  wide  devaftations 
Would  a good  and  gracious  being  have  originall' 
fo  formed  the  inanimate  i parts  of  this  lowe  ! 
world,  as  to  produce  fuch  deadly  eoncufTionsj 
therein, *and  fuch  defoliating  appearances,  hadh- 
not  defigned  it  for  the  habitation  of  fuch  crea 
tures,  as  he  forefaw  would  deferve  thefe  ftroke 
of  his  indignation  ? 

“ And  thus  both  Mofes  and  St.  Peter  fivppof 
God  to  have  laid  up  ffores  of  ruin  and  deflruc 
tion  within  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  that  hemigh 
break  open  his  r dreadful  treafures  of  flood  an- 
fire  at  proper  feafons,  to  drown  and  to  burn  th 
world  together  with  the  finful  inhabitants  thereo 
“ Now  the  great  God,  who  appointed  fuc 
prodigious  quantities  both  of  water  and  fire  to  b 

refervei 


ip. 17. 


§p.  18.  +p.  19- 


r 28;  ] 

reserved  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  among  the 
clouds  ol  heaven,  for  fuch  a foreieen  day  of  ge- 
meral  deftructiou,  did  alio  doubtlefs  prepare  the 
materials  of  all  the  lelfer  f liorms  and  hurricanes, 
earthquakes  and  floods,  and  convuliionsof  nature  ; 
and  trealmedup  for  thefe  purpofes  his  magazines 
of  .nd  and  flood  and  lire  in  the  earth.  And  is 
this  'ii  habitation  prepared  for  the  refidence  of 
pure  and  holy  a rings?  Is  this  fuch  a peaceful 
place  as  a kind  Creator  would  have  formed  for 
innocent  creatures  ? It  is  abfurd  to  imagine  this  of 
a <£od  fo  wife,  fo  righteous,  and  fo  merciful! 

“ 2.  Let  us  take  a furvey  of  the  vegetables 
which  grow  out  of  the  earth,  with  the  brute  ani- 
mals which  are  found  on  the  furface  of  it,  and 
we  (hall  find  more  reafons  to  conclude  that  man 
the  chief  inhabitant,  is  not  fuch  as  be  came  firft 
out  of  his  Maker's  hand. 

“ It  mud  be  granted  here  again,  that  the  wif- 
dom  and  goodness  of  the  Creator  are  amazingly  § 
difplayed,  in  the  animal  and  the  vegetable  world, 
beyond  the  utmoff  reach  of  our  thoughts  or  prai- 
fes.  But  it  ill  we  may  have  leave  to  enquire, 
whether  if  man  had  continued  innocent,  among 
the  numerous  herbs  and  flowers  fitted  for  his  fup- 
port  and  delight,  any  plants  or  fruits  of  a malig- 
nant, mortal  nature  would  have  grown  out  of  the 
earth,  without  fome  plain  mark  or  caution  fet 
upon  them  ? 

“ Can 

+ P*  "Oi  ^p.  21. 


[ 288  ^ 

Can  we  fuppofe  that  among  the  roots,  herb* 
and  trees  good  for  food,  the  great  God  would 
have  fuffered  mifchief,  malady  and  deadly  poi- 
fon,  to  fpring  up  here  and  there,  without  any 
iufficient  diflin&ion,  that  man  might  know  how 
to  avoid  them  ? This  is  the  cafe  in  our  prefent 
world  : difeafc,  anguifh  and  death,  have  entered 
into  the  bowels  and  veins  of  multitudes,  by  an  in- 
nocent and  fatal  milfake  of  thefe  pernicious 
things,  for  proper  food. 

“ There  was  indeed  the  tre e ofknovirclje  in  Pa- 
radife.  But  man  was  exprefly  cautioned  again#  i 
it.  And  certainly  had  he  continued  holv,  no  I 
poifonous  plant  t would  have  been  fuffered  to 
grow  on  the  earth,  without  either  feme  natural 
mark  fet  upon  it,  or  fome  divine  caution  to  avoid 
it. 

“ Proceed  to  the  animal  world.  There  are  many 
creatures  indeed,  which  ferve  the  uie  or  pleafure 
of  man.  But  are  there  not  many  other  forts,  i 
which  he  is  neither  able  to  govern,  ± nor  to  re- 
fifl?  And  by  which  all  his  race  are  expofed,  j 
whenever  they  meet  them,  to  wounds  andanguifli  f 
and  death  ? 

*“  If  man  had  not  finned  would  there  li3ve  been 
in  the  world  any  fuch  creatures  as  be.irs  and  ty- 
gers,  wolves  and  lions,  animated  with  fuch  fierce- 
nefs  and  rage,  and  armed  with  fuch  deilruftive  f| 
teeth  and  talons  ? W ould  the  innocent  children  j 
of  men,  have  ever  been  formed,  to  be  tlie  living 

prey 


+ p.  22. 


+ P-  S3* 


[ *89  ] 

vprey  of  thefe  devourers  ? Were  the  life  and  limbs 
of  holy  creatures,  made  to  become  heaps  of  ago- 
nizing carnage.  Or  would  their  flefh  and  bones 
have  been  given  up  to  be  crufhed  and  churned  be- 
; tween  the  jaws  of  panthers  and  leopards,  (harks  and 
crocodiles  ? Let  brutes  be  content  to  prey  on 
: their  fellow  brutes,  but  let  man  be  their  lord  and 

I ruler. 

■ “If  man  + were  not  fallen,  would  there  have 
been  fo  many  tribes  of  the  ferpent-kind,  armed 
with  deadly  venom  ? Would  fuch  fubtle  and  ac- 
tive mifchiefs  have  been  made  and  fent  to  dwell 
in  a world  of  innocents  ? And  would  the  race  of 
all  thefe  murderers  and  deftru&ive  animals,  have 
been  propagated  for  fix  thoufand  years,  in  any. 
province  of  God’s  dominion,  had  not  its  rational 
inhabitants  been  in  rebellion  againft  God? 

“ What  are  the  immenfe  flights  of  locufls 
which  darken  the  fky,  and  lay  the  fields  defolate  ? 
What  are  the  armies  of  hornets  or  mufcatoes, 
that  frequently  make  a pleafant  land  almoft  into- 
lerable ? If  they  are  found  in  the  heats  of  Afric, 
and  of  the  Eaft  and  Weft-Indies,  one  would 
think  they  fhould  not  infeft  the  Polar  regions,  if 
the  Creator  had  not  defio'ned  them  for  a fcoume 

O O 

to  the  nations  on  all  fides  of  the  globe. 

“ What  X are  the  innumerable  hoft  of  Cater- 
pillars but  fo  many  meftengers  of  the  anger  qf 
God  againft  a finful  race  ? And  fince  we  can 
neither  refill  nor  fubdue  them,  we  may  certainly 
Vol.  XXI.  N infer, 

+ p.  24.  $p.25. 


[ 29°  ] 

infer,  that  we  are  not  now  fuch  favourites  of  hea- 
ven, as  God  at  firft  made  us. 

“ The  troublefome  andjpertiicious  tribes  of  ani- 
mals, both  of  larger  and  fmaller  fize,  which  are 
fellow-commoners  with  us  on  this  great  globe, 
together  with  our  impotence  to  prevent  or 
■efcape  their  mifchiefs  is  a fufficient  proof,  that 
we  are  not  in  the  full  favour  and  love  of  the  God 
that  made  us,  and  that  he  has  quartered  his  ar- 
mies, his  legions  among  us,  as  princes  do  in  a 
rebellious  province. 

“ It  is  true  all  thefe  are  trials  for  man  during 
his  ftate  of  probation.  But  a + {late  of  proba- 
tion for  innocent  man  would  not  have  included 
death  ; much  lefs  a violent  and  bloody,  or  a lin- 
gering and  painful  death.  Accordingly  our  re- 
turn to  dud  is  mentioned  by  Mofes  as  a curfe  + of 
God  for  the  fin  of  man.  And  when  once  life  is 
forfeited  by  all  malikmd,  then  a painful  death 
may  properly  become  apart,  of  the  further  trial 
of  fuch  creatures  as  are  to  rife  again:  and  any 
pious  fufferers  may  be  rewarded  bv  a happy  re- 
furredlion.  But  a painful  death  could  never  be 
made  a part  of  the  trial  of  innocent  creatures, 
who  had  never  forfeited  life,  nor  were  ever  legally 
fubjefted  to  death. 

“ Upon  the  whole  therefore,  fuch  noxious 
§nd  deftruclive  plants  and  animals,  could  not 
be  made  to  vex  and  difturb,  topoifon  and  de- 
llroy,  a race  of  innocent,  intellectual  beings. 

»3.  The 

+ p.  26.  C}  p-  *7* 


C 291  ] 

g.  The  t manner  of  our  entrance  into  life  is 
another  proof  of  univerfal  fin.  Would  the  great 
and  good  God  have  appointed  intelle&ual  ani- 
mals, had  they  been  finlefs,  to  be  propagated  in 
fuch  a way  as  fhould  nece {Tardy  give  fuch  exqui- 
fite  pain  and  anguifh  to  the  mothers  who  bring 
them  forth  f And  if  the  contagion  had  net  been 
univerfal,  why  fhou'id  fuch  acute  pangs  attend 
almoft  every  female  parent  ? Are  not  the  multi- 
plied forrows  with  which  the  daughters  of  Eve 
bring  forth,  an  evident  token  that  they  are  not 
in  their  original  Hate  of  favour,  with  that  God 
who  created  them  and  pronounced  a blefiing 
upon  them  in  their  propagation  ? £ 

“ Mofes  ||  informs  us,  that  God  blelfed  the  firft 
pair,  and,  bid  them  be  fruitful  and  multiply  and  re - 
plenifh  the  earth  and  fnbdue  it : and  foon  after 
tells  us,  that  tkefe  multiplied  ferrows  in  child-birth 
are  a curfe  from  an  offended  God.  Surely  the 
curfeis  not  as  old  as  the  blefiing  : but  fin  and  bor- 
row came  in  together,  and  fpread  a wide  curfe 
over  the  birth  of  man,  which  before  flood  only 
under  a divine  benedi&ion.  Notthat.the  blefiing 
is  now  quite  taken  away,  tho’  the  pains  of  child- 
bearing are  added  to  ip  And  daily  experience 
N 2 proves, 

+ p 29. 

t “ The  author  has  been  cenfurcd  here  for  not  dropping  a tear 
ever  the  fair  fex  under  their  forrows  and  a<pite  pains.  But  he  ima- 
gines, he  has  been  dropping  tears  in  every  page,  and  that  over 
every  part  of  mankind.'”  Undoubtedly  he  has  : and  if  fo,  how 
unjaft,  how  cruel  is  that  cenfure  ? 

II  P-  »9- 


C 29'2  ] 

proves,  this  curfe  is  not  taken  away  by  the  blef- 
fing  repeated  to  Noah. 

“ 4.  Let  us  confider  in  the  next  place  how 
the  generality  of  mankind  are  preferved  in  life. 
Some  few  have  their  food  without  care  or  toil : 
but  millions  of  human  creatures,  in  all  the  nation 
of  the  earth,  are  conlirained  to  fupport  a wretch-  . 
ed  life  by  hard  labour.  + What  dreadful  rifques 
of  life  or  limbs,  do  multitudes  run,  to  purchafe 
their  necelfary  food  ? What  wafle  of  the  hours 
of  fweet  repofe,  what  long  and  flavifh  and  pain-  . 
ful  toils  by  day,  do  multitudes  fuftain  in  order  to  . 
procure  their  daily  nourifhment 5 :Tis  by  thejiocat ; 
oj  their  br oil's  they  obtain  their  bread  : "tis  hv  a 
continual  exhaufting  their  fpirits,  that  many  of 
them  are  are  forced  to  relieve  their  own  hunger, 
and  to  feed  their  helplefs  offspring. 

“ If  we  furvey  the  lower  ranks  of  mankind 
even  in  England,  in  a land  of  freedom  and 
plenty,  a climate  temperate  and  fertile,  which 
abounds  with  corn  and  fruits,  and  rich  variety  of 
food:  yet  what  a hard  fhift  do  ten  thoufand  fa- 
milies make  to  fupport  life  ? Their  whole  time 
is_  devoured  by  bodily  labour,  and  their  fouls 
almoft  eaten  up  with  gnawing  cares,  to  anfwer 
that  quefbon,  What  (hall  I eat,  and  what  fnall  I 
drink  ? Even  in  the  pooreft  and  coarfeft  manner  P 
But  if  we  fend  our  thoughts  to  the  fultn  t regions 
of  Afric,  the  froit  and  fnows  of  Norway,  the  rocks 


+ p.  3°* 


[ 293  J 

and  deferts  of  Lapland  and  northern  Tartary, 
what  a frightful  thing  is  human  life  ? How  is 
the  rational  nature  loft  in  flavery,  and  bruta- 
lity, and  incelfant  toils,  and  hardlhips  ? They 
are  treated  like  brutes  by  their  lords,  and  they 
live  like  dogs  and  affes,  among  labours  and  wants, 
hunger  and  wearinefs,  blows  and  burthens 
without  end.  Did  God  appoint  this  for  inno- 
cents ? 

“ Is  the  momentary  pleafure  of  eating  and 
drinkinga  recompence  for  incelfant  labour?  Does 
: it  bear  any  proportion  to  the  length  of  toil,  pain 
and  hazard,  wherewith  the  provifions  of  life  are 
procured  ? Mofes  thought  not.  When  he  + 
fpeaks  of  man’s  eating  bread  in  the  fweat  of  his 
brows,  he  acknowledges  this  to  be  another  of 
the  curfesof  God  for  the  fin  of  man. 

“ ’Tis  ftrange  that  any  man  fhould  fay,  In  this 
fentence  of  God,  no  curfe  is  pronounced  upon  either 
Adam  s body,  foul,  or  poflerity : that  the for  row  of 
child-bearing  is  not  infilled  as  a curfe : that  the 
labours  of  life  were  increafed,  but  not  as  a curfe : 
that  death  was  not  a curfe."  I would  fain  afk 
what  is  a curfe,  if  fome  natural  evil  pronounced 
and  executed  upon  a perfon,  or  thing,  be  not 
fo  ? Efpecially  when  it  is  pronounced  on  ac- 
count of  fin,  and  by  God  himfelf,  as  fupreme 
Governor  and  Judge  ? And  even  the  curfe  on 
the  ground  falls  properly  on  the  perfon  who 
tills  it. 

“Jt 


N 3 

+ p.  32. 


r 294  ] 

**  It  is  granted,  God  can  turn  curies  intoblef- 
lings.  Yet  thefe  evils  were  originally  pronounc- 
ed and  infli&ed  as  a curfe  or  pumjkmint  of  fin,  as 
it  is  written,  Curfed  is  every  one  v:ho  continuetk 
not  in  all  things.  And  that  death  was  defigned 
as  a curie  on  man  for  fin  is  evident ; for  Chriit 
Juffered  that  Gurfe  for  us. 

“ 5.  Confider  the  character  of  mankind  in  ge- 
neral with  regard  + to  religion  and  virtue,  and  it 
^'ill  be  hard  to  believe  they  bear  the  image  of 
their  common  father  in  knowledge  and  holinefs. 
Some  I grant,  are  renewed  in  his  image  : but  the 
bulk  of  the  world  are  of  another  ftamp  ; and  fuf- 
ficiently  fhew,  there  is  fome  fatal  contagion 
ipread  through  this  province  of  God's  dominion. 
So  St.  John  tells  us,  that  except  the  few  -who  are 
born  of  God,  the  world  lielh  in  wicked nefs. 

“ And  can  we  think  of  that  grofs  and  flupid 
ignorance  of  God,  which  reigns  through  vail 
trafls  oi  Alia,  Africa  and  America,  and  the 
thick  darknefs  which  buries  all  the  Heathen 
countries,*  and  reduces  them  almoft  to  brutes: 
can  we  think  oi  the  abominable  idolatries,  the 
fewd  and  cruel  rites  of  worfhip  which  have  been 
fpread  through  whole  nations;  the  impious  and 
ridiculous  fuperftitions  which  are  now  praflifed 
among  the  greateft  part  of  the  world  c and  r et 
believe  the  bleffed  God  would  put  fuch  wretched 
polluted  workmanfhip  out  of  his  pure  hands  ? 

“ Can  we  furvey  the  defperate  impiety  and 

profanenefs, 

+ p.  33*  t P- 


r 295‘  ] 

profancncfs,  the  fwearing  and  curfing  and  wild 
blafphemy,  that  is  praflifed,  day  and  night 
among  vail  multitudes  of  thofe  who  profefs  to 
know  the  true  God:  can  we  behold  that  almoft 
uni  verbal  neglecf  of  Gqd,  of  his  fear,  his  wor- 
fhip,  and  the  obedience  due  to  him,  which  is  found 
even  among  them  who  are  called  Chriftians  ; 
and  yet  imagine,  that  thefe  bear  that  image  of 
God  in  which  they  were  created  ? 

“ Nor  have  men  forgot  God  only,  but  they 
feem  alfo  to  have  abandoned  their  duties  to  their 
fellow-creatures  alfo.  Hence  the  perpetual  prac- 
tices of  fraud  and  villainy  in  the  commerce  of 
mankind,  the  innumerable  inftances  of  oppref- 
fion  and  cruelty  which  run  through  the  world  ; 
the  pride  + and  violence  of  the  great,  the  wrath, 
ambition  and  tyranny  of  princes,  and  the  end- 
lefs  iniquities  and  mifchiefs  that  arife,  from  ma- 
lice, envy  and  revenge  in  lower  people.  If  we 
add  to  thefe  the  impure  fcenes  of  lull  and  intem- 
perance, which  defy  the  day  and  pollute  the 
darknefs  : with  the  monltrous  barbarities  which 
are  continaally  committed  by  the  Heathen  fa- 
vages  in  Afric  and  America  (fome  of  whom  kill 
and  roaft  their  fellow-creatures,  and  eat  up  men 
as  they  eat  bread)  and  by  the  Chriflian  favages  in 
the  inquifition  eftablilhed  in  Afia,  as  well  as  in 
many  parts  of  Europe  : can  we  Hill  imagine, 
that  mankind  abide  in  that  Hate,  wherein  they 
came  from  the  hands  of  their  Maker  ? 

N 4 

+ P-  35- 


That 


r 296  ] 

w That  far  the  + greateji  number  of  men  are 
evil,  was  the  known  fentiment  of  the  wifer  Hea- 
thens. They  faw  and  bewailed  the  undeniable 
fa£t,  though  they  knew  not  how  to  account  for 
it.  'Ci  Tihuonq  Ketxsi'  Mojl  men  are  ztiicktd , was  a. 
common  obfervation  among  them.  Even  the 
poets  could  not  but  fee  this  obvious  truth.  So 
Vitgil  brings  in  Anchifes,  telling  his  fon,  few  are 
happy  in  the  other  world. 

Pauci  J lueta  arva  tenemus. 

And  in  this  life,  Horace  remarks  of  men  in  ge- 
neral, 

Nitimur  in  vetitum femper , cupimufp,  negata 
We  are  always  defiring  and  purfuing  forbidden 
things.  Nay  he  fays 

Vitiis  nemo  fine  nafcitur . No  man  is  born 
without  vices  : and  gives  this  character  of  young 
men  in  general, 

Cereus  in  vitium  JleEli ; monitoribus  afptr.  Se- 
neca fays  juft  the  fame, 

Ptjora  juvenes  facile  prxeepta  audiunt : 

Young  men  readily  hearken  to  evil  counfels ; 
they  are  foft  as  wax  to  be  moulded  into  vice,  but 
rough  and  rugged  to  their  belt  monitors. 

“ Juvenal  abounds  with  the  fame  accounts  of 
htiman  nature  : 

Quce  tamfejia  dies , lit  ceffet  prodere  furen  ? 

Ad  mores  nalura  recurrit 

Damnatos , fxa  £?  mutari  nefeia. 

Quifnam- 

tv.  37.  i p.  33- 


[ *97  ] 

Quifnam  ^ hominum  ejl,  quern  tu.  contentum 
videris  uno 

Flagitio  ? Bodies  imitandis 

Turpibus  13  pravis  omnes  fumus. 

“ 6.  And  t not  only  they  of  riper  age,  but 
even  tliofe  of  tender  years,  difcover  the  prin- 
ciples of  iniquity  and  feeds  of  fin.  What  young 
ferments  of  fpite  and  envy,  what  native  wrath 
and  rage,  are  found  in  the  little  hearts  of  infants, 
and  fufficientlv  difcovered  by  their  hands  and 
eyes  and  countenances,  before  they  can  fpeak 
or  know  good  from  evil ! What  additional  crimes 
of  lying  and  deceit,  obftinacy  and  perverfenefs 
proceed  to  blemifh  their  younger  years  ? 

“ How  j|  little  knowledge  or  thought  of  God, 
their  Creator  and  Governor,  is  found  in  children 
when  they  can  difiinguifh  good  and  evil  ? What 
an  utter  difregard  of  him  that  made  them,  and 
of  the  duties  thev  owe  to  him  ? And  when  they 
begin  § to  aft  according  to  their  childilh  age,  how 
little  fenfe  have  they  of  what  is  morally  right 
and  good  ? How  do  evil  paflions  or  irregular 
appetites  continually  prevail  in  them  ? Even 
from  their  fir  It  capacity  of  afting  as  moral  crea- 
tures, how  are  thev  led  away  to  praftife  falfhood 
and  injury  to  their  play-fellows,  perhaps  with 
cruelty  or  revenge  P How  often  are  they  engaged 
in  bold  difobedience  to  their  parents  or  teachers  ? 
And  whence  does  this  anfe  ? What  is  the  root, 
that  brings  forth  fuch  early  bitter  fruit  ? 

N 5 “ It 

i p.  4*'  i P-  i *• 


} P-  39- 


§ p-  43' 


[ 298  ] 

“ It  cannot  be  imputed  to  cuftom,  education 
or  example  ; for  many  of  thefe  things  appear  in 
children  before  they  can  take  any  notice-  of  ill 
examples,  or  are  capable  of  imitating  them.  And 
even  where  there  are  only  + good  examples  about 
them,  and  where  the  bell  and  earlieft  inftruftions 
are  given  them,  arrd  inculcated  with  the  utmoft  > 
care,  yet  their  hearts  run  affray  from  God.  The 
far  greateff  part  of  them  vifibly  follow  the  cor- 
rupt influences  of  fenfe,  appetite,  paflion,  and 
manifeft  very  early  the  evil  principles  of  ftubborn- 
nefs,  pride  and  difobedience. 

“ To  ± give  a ft  ill  fuller  confirmation  of  this 
truth,  that  mankind  have  a corrupt  nature  in  them, 
let  ft  be  obferved,  that  where  perfons  have  not 
only  had  all  poflible  helps  of  education  from  their 
parents*  but  have  themfelves  taken  a religious  1 
turn  betimes,  what  perpetual  hindrance  do  they 
find  within  themfelves  ? What  inward  oppcfi- 
tions  work  in  their  heart,,  and  perhaps  interrupt 
t heir  holy  courfe  of  life  ? What  vanity  of  mind,.  1 
what  irregular  appetities,  what  forgetfulnels  ol 
God,  what  evil  thoughts  and  tendencies  of  heart 
rife  up-  in.  contradiffion  to  their  belt  purpofes  ? J 
Infomuch  that  there  |]  is  not  a jufi.  man  upon  earthy.  1 
who  through  liis  whole  life,  doth  good  and Jinntth 
not. 

“ To  fum  up  the  three  laft  confiderations. 

If  the  bulk  ol  mankind  are  grofly  finful,  and. if 

every. 


t P-  } P-  45-  1!  P-  46- 


[ 299  3 

every  individual  without  exception  is  actually  a 
(inner  againft  the  law  of  his  Creator : if  fmful 
propenfities  appear  even  in  our  moft  tender 
years ; and  every  child  becomes  an  aftual  (inner 
almoft  as  foon  as  it  becomes  a moral  agent then 
we  have  juft  reafon  to  conclude,  that  there  is 
fome  original  taint  fpread  through  the  whole  race 
of  men  from  their  birth. 

It  has  been*  t faid  indeed,  that  “ if  the  firft 
“ man  fell  into  fin,  though  he  was  innocent  and 
“ perfeff,  then  among  a million  of  men,  every 
. “ one  might  fin,  though  he  was  as  innocent  and 
“ perfefl  as  Adam.” 

“ I anfwer,  There  is  a bare  poflibility  of  the 
event ; but  the  improbability  of  it  is  in  the  propor- 
tion of  a million  to  one. 

“ And  I prove  it  thus^  If  a million  of  crea-, 
tures  were  made  in- an  equal  probability  to  (land 
or  fall : and  if  all  the  numbers  from  one  to  one 
million  inclufively,  were  fet  in  a rank,,  it  is  a mil- 
lion to  one  that  juft  any  fingle  propofed  number, 
of  all  thefe  fhould  fall  by  fin.  Now  the  total  fum 
is  one  ol  thefe  numbers,,  that  is,  the  laft  of  them. 
Confequently  it  is  a million  to  one  againft  the 
fuppofition  that  the  whole  number  of  men  fhouIT 
fall. 

“ And  yet  farther,  if  they  were  ali'made  (as  the 
goodnefs  of  God  feems  to  require)  in  a greater 
probability  ol  Handing  than  falling,  then  it  is  abun- 
dantlymore  than X a million  to  one, that  all  Ihould 

N 6 fin, 

+ p. 


+ £•  47> 


[ 3°°  ] 

fm  without  exception.  And  the  argument  grows 
ftill  ten  thoufand  times  ftronger,  if  we  fuppofe 
ten  thoufand  millions  to  have  lived  fince  the 
creation. 

“ 8.  That  man  is  a fallen  creature,  appears 
farther  from  hence : no  man  is  able  by  his  prefent 
natural  powers  to  perform  § that  law  of  his  Crea- 
tor which  is  ftill  written  upon  his  heart. 

* “ Does  not  this  law  require  us  to  love  God 
with  all  our  heart,  to  do  to  others  as  we  would 
they  (hould  do  to  us,  and  to  govern  our  fenfes,  ap- 
petites and  pafiions;  by  the  rules  of  reafon  ? 
Does  it  not  require  thatthefe  things  whether  they 
regard  God,  ourfelves,  or  others,  lliould  be  done 
perfectly,  without  defect  ? Doth  it  not  demand, 
||  that  we  fhould  fear,  honour  and  truft  the  great 
God,  and  obey  all  his  will  in  a perfect  manner  ? 
Doth  it  not  prefcribe  conftant  juftice,  truth  and 
goodnefs,  toward  our  neighbour,  without  one 
covetous  wifli,  one  aft  of  the  will,  or  tongue 
or  hand,  contrary  to  truth  or  love?  Does  it  not 
demand,  that  every  fenfe,  appetite  and  paftion,. 
fhould  be  perfectly  fubjeft  to  reafon?  Now  is 
there  a man  on  earth,  who  can  fay,  “ I am  able  by 
“ my  natural  powers  to  do  this  ? ’ 

“ Even  the  t outward  temptations  to  which 
man  is  expofed,  are  evidently  too  ftrong,  to  be 
effeftually  and  conftantlv  refilled,  bv  his  now 
enfeebled  reafon  and  confcience ; while  at  the 
fame  time,  his  will,  his  appetites  and  paflions 

have 

S P-  49-  ■ II  P-  ifl.  + p-  5l- 


[ 3oi  ] 

have  a powerful  propenfity  to  comply  with 
them. 

“ t Now  would  a juft,  a wife  and  merciful  God 
have  formed  intellectual  creatures,  in  fuch  a 
wretched  ftate,  with  powers  and  capacities  fo 
much  below  their  duties,  that  they  break  his 
law  daily  and  continually,  and  are  not  able  to 
help  it  ? 

“ Should  it  be  faid,  “ God  cannot  require 
“ more  than  we  are  able  to  perform.'’  You  have 
an  anfwer  in  your  own  bofom.  For  you  know 
and  feel  God  does  require  this,  even  bv  the  law 
he  has  written  in  your  heart : yet  you  feel  you 
are  not  able  to  perform  it,  untie  or  cut  the  knot 
how  you  may. 

“ Should  it  be  faid  § again,  “ God  pities  and 
“ pardons  feeble  creatures,”  I anfwer,  1.  Accord- 
ing to  the  covenant  of  grace  he  does,  but  not 
according  to  the  law  of  creation.  *But  2.  did 
God  make  fome  of  his  noblefl  creature,  fo  feeble, 
in  their  original  date,  as  continually  to  offend,, 
raid  want  pardon  ? Did  he  give  them  fuch  a law 

fhould  never,  never  be  fulfilled  by  any  one  of 
them  ? Would  a God  who  adjufts  the  proportions' 
of  all  things  with  the  exa&eft  wifdom  give  a law 
to  his  creatures  fo  difproportionate  to  their  ori- 
ginal powers,  that  even  in  the  ftate  of  their  crea- 
tion, they  are  under  a neceffity  of  breaking  it, 
and  hand  in  need  of  daily  forgivenefs  ? Does  not 
this  fmgle  confideration  prove,  that  man  is  now 

atls- 


i p-52- 


§ P-  5 ** 


[ 302  1 

ti  degenerate  being,  and  not  fuch  as  lie  as  at  firft 
created,  by  the  wife,  the  righteous,  the  merciful 
God? 

“If  you  + who  are  moll  unwilling  to  acknow- 
ledge the  fall  of  man,  would  but  look  mtoyourfelf 
daily,  and  obferve  all  the  finful  and  irregular 
turns  of  your  own  heart : how  propenfe  you  arc 
to  folly,  in  greater  or  lefs  inflances,  how  foon 
appetite  and  paffion  oppofe  reafon  and  confci- 
ence:  how  frequently  you  fall  fhort  of  the  de- 
mand of  the  perfeft  law  of  God  : how  thought- 
lefs  and  forgetful  vou  are  of  your  Creator,  how 
cold  and  languifhing  your  affeftion  to  him  : how 
little  delight  you  have  in  virtue,  or  in  commu- 
nion with  God  : could  you  think  you  are  fuch  an 
innocent  and  holy  creature  as  God  at  hrlt  created 
you  ? And  that  you  have  been  fuch  even  from 
your  childhood  ? Surely  a more  accurate  obfer- 
vation  of  your  own  heart  muff  convince  you, 
that  you  yourfelf  are  degenerated- from  the  firit 
reflitudeof  your  nature. 

“ 9.  Another  I proof  of  the  degeneracy  of 
mankind  is  this,  they  are  evidently  under  the 
difpleafure  of  God,  which  could  not  be  in  their 
primaeval  flate.  As  ire  have  taken  a fhort  view 
of  the  fms  of  men,  let  us  alfo  briefly  furvey  the 
mifries  of  mankind , and  fee  how  thefe  confifl 
with  their  being  in  the  favour  of  God. 

* “ Think  on  the  thoufands  of  rational  crea- 


+ P- 55-  iP-5.6- 


turss 


C 3<>a  i 

tures  d’efc  ending  hourly  to'  the  grave  : a few,  by 
forae  hidden  broke  ; but  far  the  greater  part  by 
painful  and  flow  approaches.  The ’gravel  A 
dark  and  fhameful  prifon  f Which  would  never 
have  been  made  for  creatures  perfifting  in  inno- 
cence, and  abiding  in  the  favour  of  him  that  gave 
them  life  and  being.  Death  is  the  wages  of  fin  j 
and  from  this  punifhment  ol  fin,  none  of  man- 
kind can  claim  a difcharge.. 

* “ Had  they  flood,  can  we  think  any  of  them 
would  have  died  ? Much  lefs  every  one  of  them? 
And  efpecially  thac  half  the  human  race  fhonld 
have  been  doomed  to  die  before  feven  years  old? 
Before- i they  reach  the  tenth  part  of  the  prefeiU 
age  of  man,  or  have  done  any  thing  in  life  worth 
living  for  ? 

“ But  let  us  proceed  te>  other  miferies  that  at- 
tend 11s,  and  haflen  us  down  to  the  grave. 

* “ Think  next  of  the  multitudes  that  are 
racked  day  and  night  by  the  gout  and  ftone,  the 
cholic  and  rheumatifm,  and  all  manner  ol  acute 
and  painful  difeafes  : and  then  fay,  would  a mer- 
ciful God  have  contrived  thefe  torments  for  fin- 
1'efs  creatures  ? Think  ol  the  difmal  Icenes  of  war 
and  bloodfhed  that  have  by  times  overfpread  all 
nations  ? Call  your  thought  on  a field  ol  battle, 
where  thoufands  of  men  are  deflroyeA  § like 
brute  beads,  and  perifli  by  fharp  and  bloody 
ftrokes,  or  by  the  fatal  engines  of  death..  See 
thoufands  more  lie  on  the  cold  ground,  with 


$ P-53- 


[ 3°4  ] 


their  flefh  and  limbs  battered  and  torn,  wounded 
and  panting  in  extreme  anguifh,  till  the  murmur- 
ing foul  takes  its  flight.  Are  thefe  the  fignals  of 
their  Maker’s  love,  and  of  his  image  in  which 
they  were  created  ? 

“ ||  Think  of  the  numbers  that  are  fwallowed 
up  in  the  mighty  waters,  by  the  rage  of  ftormv 
winds  and  feas>  Review  the  multitudes  which 
have  been  fwept  away  by  the  peftilence,  or  con- 
fumed  by  the  tedious  agonies  of  famine.  Would 
famine  and  peftilence  with  all  the  train  of  linger- 
ing horrors  which  attend  them,  have  ever  been 
made  for  innocent  creatures,  to  have  fwept 
away  whole  nations  of  them  of  every  age  and 
fex,  men,  women  and  children,  without  diftinc- 
tion  ? 

“ Think  + yet  again  what  numbers  of  men 
have  been  crufhed  into  miferies  and  death,  and 
buried  by  earthquakes.  Or  have  had  their  bones 
broken,  their  limbs  disjointed,  and  their  flefh 
painfully  battered  by  tire  fall  of  houfes  : perhaps 
buried  alive  in  the  ruins,  of  entire  towns  or  vil- 
lages, while  their  neighbours  have  been  drowned 
in  multitudes,  bv  the  di  final  eruptions  of  water 
or  deflroyed  by  deluges  of  liquid  fire,  burfling 
out  of  the  earth.  Would  a God  of  goodnefs  and 
juftice  have  treated  innocent  creatures  in  this 
manner  ? 

“ Cam1  your  thoughts  to  the  countries  of  thofe 

favagev 


i P-59: 


+ p.  60. 


[ S °o  ] 

fevagcs,  where  thoufands  of  their  conquered  ene- 
mies, or  pnfoners  of  war,  are  offered  in  facrifice 
to  their  idols,  or  tortured  and  roafted  to  death  by 
flow  fires!  Add  this  to  all  the  former  miferi.es, 
and  then  let  calm  refleftion  fay,  whether  this 
world  does  not  look  like  a province  half  forfaken 
of  its  gracious  governor  ? 

“ Some  ± perhaps  will  fay,  it  is  but  a fmall 
part  of  mankind,  who  are  involved  in  thefe 
dreadful  calamities  : and  they  may  fuffer  peculiar 
affiiftions,  for  their  own  perfonal  iniquities. 

“ I anfwer,  take  a juft  furvey  of'hofe  who  have 
fuffered  thus,  and  there  is  not  the  leaft  reafon  to 
think  they  were  Tinners  above  others.  Do  not 
thefe  calamities  fpread  through  whole  countries 
and  involve  the  heft  and  the  worft  of  men  toge- 
ther? Whole  nations  fuffer  by  them  at  once. 
And  indeed  fuch  is  the  corruption  of  human  na- 
ture, that  wherever  they  come  they  find  none  in- 
nocent. And  it  is  the  general  fituation  of  man- 
kind, under  the  juft  difpleafure  of  God,  which 
expofes  them  to  fuch  deftruftion. 

“ But  to  proceed. § Think  of  the  innumerable 
common  misfortunes  that  attend  human  life  f 
What  multitudes  perifh  by  thefe  in  one  week  ? 
And  how  much  larger  a number  do  thefe  accidents 
injure  and  fill  their  lives  with  pain,  though  they 
are  not  brought  immediately  to  the  grave  ? 
Think  of  the  mifchiefs  which  one  part  of  mankind, 

ire 


t P 6l- 


f p.  6a. 


[ 3°6  J 

m every  place,  are  continually  contriving  ot 
p raft i Ting  againft  the  other.  Take  a view  of  thefe 
extenfive  and  reigning  evils,  and  then  fay  whe- 
ther this  world  be  not  a part  of  the  creation  of 
God,  which  bears  plain  marks  of  its  Creator’s  dil- 
pleafure  ? 

“ Much  is  addedtothe  heap  of  human  miferies 
by  the  forrowsthat  arife  from  the  daily  lofs  of  our 
deareft  comforts.  What  groans  and  wailings  of 
the  living furround  the  pillowsof  dving  friends  or 
relations?  What  + fymptoms  of  piercing  diftrefs. 
attend  the  remains  when  they  are  conveyed  to  the 
grave  ? By  fuch  lodes,  the  comforts  of  future 
life  lofe  their  relilh,  and  the  forrows  are  doubly 
embittered. 

“ In  the  civilized  parts  of  the  world,  there  is- 
ft. arte  one  pet'fon  Tick  or  in  pain,  mifecable  or 
dying,  but  feveral  others  fuftain  a confiderable 
(hare  of  mifery,  by  the  ftrong  ties  of  nature  or 
friendfliip.  This  diffufes  a perfonal  calamity 
through  whole  families.  'I  his  multiplies  human 
miferies  into  a new  and  cndlefs  number.  Add  to 
this,  not  only  the  unkindnefs  or  fajfhood  ofthofe 
from  whom  we  expended  the  tendered  affection, 
but  the  ± anguifh  which  fprings  from  all  our  own 
uneafy  and  unruly  paflions.  Bring  in  here  all 
the  wrath  and  refentment  in  the  hearts  of  men, 
all  the  envy  and  malice  that  burn  within,  all  the 
imaginary  fears,  and  the  real  terrors  of  future 
diftrefs  coming  upon  us,  all  the  rage  and  defpair 


+ p.63. 


r w j 

of  lok  bfeffrngs  that  were  once  within  our  hope?, 
arid  al!  the  ferments  of  animal  nature  which  tor- 
ment the  fpirit  all  day,  and  forbid  our  nightly 
repofe.  Would  mankind  be  in  fuch  a condition  as 
this  if  they  were  kill  in  the  favour  of  their  Maker  ? 

“ Yes,  men  may  make  miferies  for  themfelves, 
“ and  be  puniflied  by  them.  But  compare  the 
“ borrows  which  any  man  § neceffarily  buffers, 
“ with  the  comforts  he  enjoys,  and  the  one  will 
“ ballance  the  other.  Or  if  his  furrows  outweigh 
“ his  comforts  this  may  be  neceffary  in  a flate  of 
“ trial : and  God  will  reward  the  over-ballance 
“ of.fufferings  hereafter/’ 

“ I anfwer,  There  is  no  reafon  to  think  the 
far  greater  part  of  mankind  will  have  any  reward 
hereafter : and  if  not,  how  fhafl  we  account  for 
this  over-ballance  of  fufferintTs  with  regard  to 
them  ? Therefore  we  cannot  ||  reafonably  impute 
their  fuperior  forrows  merely  to  their  being  in  a 
ftate  of  probation  : but  rather  to  the  difplea- 
fure  of  tlie  righteous  Creator  and  Governor  of 
the  world. 

“ 10.  To  make  this  kill  clearer.  Not  only 
thofe  who  are  grown  up  in  the  praftice  of  ini- 
quity, -who  may  be  punifhed  for  their  own  fins, 
but  all  mankind  in  their  very  infancy  bear  the 
tokens  of  God’s  difpleafure. 

* 11  Before  children  are  capable  of  committing 
fin,  they  are  fuhjefl  to  a thoufand  miferies. 
What  t ariguifli  and  pain  are  they  frequently 

expofecl 

§ P-  6o-  1'rp  56,  f p.&j.  ^ 


[ 3»8  ] 

expoied  to,  even  as  they  are  coming  into  the 
world,  and  as  foon  as  they  are  entered  into  i'  ? 
What  agonies  await  their  birth?  What  numer- 
ous and  acute  maladies  are  ready  to  attack  them? 

nat  gripes,  what  convuhions,  what  inward 
torments  which  bring  forue  of  them  down  to 
death,  within  a few  hours  or  days  after  they 
have  begun  to  live  ? And  if  they  furvive  a few 
months,  what  torture  do  they  find  in  breeding 
their  teeth,  and  other  maladies  of  infancy,  which 
can  be  told  only  by  llirieks  and  tears,  and  that  for 
whole  days  and  nights  together  ? What  additi- 
onal pains  do  they  often  fuftain  by  the  negli- 
gence of  their  mothers,  or  cruelty  of  their 
nurfes?  Whereby  many  of  them  are  brought 
down  to  the  grave,  either  on  a fudden  or  bv  flow 
and  painful  degrees. 

“ And  i what  fhali  we  fay  of  whole  nations  in 
elder  times,  and  fome  even  at  this  day,  who 
when  they  cannot  or  will  not  maintain  them, 
expofe  their  children  in  the  woods  to  be  torn 
and  devoured  by  the  next  wild  bead  that  palfes 
bv  ? Add  to  this  the  common  calamities  in  which 
infants  are  involved  by  fire,  earthquake,  pefti- 
lence.  And  there  are  a thoufand  other  accidents 
which  attend  them,  wherebv  their  members, 
their  natural  powers  receive  difmal  injuries:  fo 
that  perhaps  they  drag  on  life  with  blindnefs, 
deafnefs,  lamenefs,  or  diftortion  of  body  or 
limbs.  Sometimes  they  languifh  on  to  manhood, 

or 

} p.  63. 


C 3 °9  ] 

ot  even  old  age,  under  fore  calamities,  which 
began  almoft  as  foon  as  their  being,  and  which 
are  only  ended  by  death. 

“ § Now  as  thefe  bufferings  cannot  be  fent 
upon  them  to  correft  their  perSanal  fins,  fo  nei- 
ther are  they  fent  as  a trial  of  their  virtue  ; for 
they  have  no  knowledge  of  good  or  evil.  Yet 
we  fee  multitudes  of  thefe  little,  miferable  be- 
ings. And  are  thefe  treated  as  innocent  crea- 
tures? Or  -rather  as  under  fome  general  curfe, 
involved  in  feme  general  punilhment  ? 

-“.But  jj  may  not  thefe  bufferings  of  children 
“ be  for  the  punilhment.  ol  the  fins  of  their  pa- 
“ rents  ?” 

“ Not  with  any  juftice  or  equity,  unlefs  the 
fins  of  the  parents  are  imputed  to  their  children. 
Befides,  .many  of  the  parents  of  thefe  buffering 
children  are  dead  or  abfen:,  fo  as  never  to  know 
it.  And  how  in  thefe  cafes  can  it  be  a punifh- 
ment  for  their  parents  fin,  any  otherwife  than 
as  it  is  a general  punilhment  for  the  fin  of  their 
firif  parent? 

But  God  recompenfes  them  for  thefe  fuffer- 
“ ings  hereafter.”  Yv  here  does  the  feripture 
affirm  this  ? Befides  many  of  them  grow  up  to 
manhood.  And  if  they  prove  wicked  and  are 
fent  to  hell  at  laft,  what  recompence  have  they 
for  their  infant  bufferings  ? Or  will  you  fay,  God 
punifhed  them  before  they  had  finned,  becaufe 
he  knew  before-hand  they  would  fin?  Yet  far- 
ther: 


<,  p.  6g. 


y p.  71. 


[ 3«>  ] 

trier : what  wife  or  good  defign  can  this  their 
punifhment  anfwer,  when  no  creature  can  know 
what  they  are  punilhed  for,  if  it  be  not  for  that 
which  affects  all  mankind  ? 

“ But  how  are  fuch  miferies  reigning  among 
“ his  creatures  c-onliftent  with  the  goodnefs  of 
“ God  ?”  Perfe£lly  well.;  if  + we  confider  man- 
kind as  a finful,  degenerate  part  of  God's  crea- 
tion. It  is  moft  abundant  goodnefs  that  they  have 
any  comforts  lelt,  and  that  their  miferies  are  not 
doubled.  Now  the  infpired  writers  do  confider 
mankind  as  fallen  from  God  ; and  fo  his  goodnefs 
is  -evident  in  a thoufand  inllances  : though  it 
mult  be  confeft  there  are  alfo  a thoufand  inftan- 
ces  of  his  juft  hatred  of  fin,  and  his  righteous 
punifnments  among  all  nations. 

■**  i i-  If  we  ^ put  together  a 1 thefe  feenes  of 
vice  and  mifery,  it  is  evident  that  creatures  lying 
in  fuch  deplorable  circumftances,  are  not^fuch  as 
they  came  out  of  the  hands  of  their  Creator,  who 
is  wife,  holy  and  good.  His  zviJJoin,  which  is  all 
harmony  and  order,  would  not  fnffer  him  to 
frame  a whole  race  of  beings,  under  fuch  wild 
and  innumerable  diforoers,  moral  as  well  as  na- 
tural. His  hohnefs  would  not  permit  him  to 
create  beings  with  innate  principles -of  iniquity; 
nor  his  goodnefs  to  produce  a whole  order  of 
creatures  in  fuch  circumftances  of  pain,  torment 
and  death. 

# “ \ Could  the  holy  and  blcffcd  God  origi- 
nally 

+ P*  73-  t p-  74*  S»-  75- 


t 311  ] 

Sally  defign  and  frame  a whole  world  of  intelli- 
gent creatures,  in  fuch  circumftances,  that  every 
one  of  them  coming  into  being,  according  to  the 
lawrs  of  nature,  in  a long  fucceffion  of  ages,  in 
different  climates,  of  different  conftitutions 
and  tempers,  and  in  ten  thoufand  different 
flations  and  conditions  of  life  : that  ever}"  one  of 
them  fhould  break  the  laws  of  reafo-n,  and  more 
-or  lefs  defile  themfelves  with  fin  ? That  every 
one  fhould  offend  his  Maker,  overy  one  be- 
come guilty  in  his  fight  ? Every  one  expofe  him- 
■felf  to  God’s  difpleafiire,  to  pain  and  mifery  and 
mortality  without  one  fingle  exception  ? If  men 
were  fuch  creatures  as  God  at  fir'll  made  them, 
would  not  one  man  among  fo 'many  millions  have 
made  a right  ufe  of  his  reafon  and  confcience, 
.and  fo  have  avoided  fin  and  death  ? Would  this 
have  been  the  nniverfal  confequent  of  their 
■original  confutation,  as  framed  by  tire  t hand  of 
a wife,  holy,  merciful  God  ? What  can  be 
-more  abfurd  to  imagine  than  this  ? Surely  God 
.made  man  upright  and  happy:  nor  could  all 
thefe  mifchiefs  have  come  directly  from  our 
"Creator’s  hand. 

4i  Is  it  obje&ed,  that  Hill  the  greater  part  of 

men  have  more  moral  good  than  evil  in  them 
“ and  have  more  pleafure  than  pain  : and  there- 
“ fore,  on  the  whole,  mankind  is  not  finjul  and 
“ miferable : and  that  even  the  beft  human  con- 
■“  ftitudons,  lay  fome  innocent  perfons,  under 

“ unavoidable 


+ p*  76* 


[ 312  ] 

«*  unavoidable  hardfhips.”  I anfwer  t 1.  In  or- 
der to  pronounce  a man  miftrable , he  muft  have 
more  pain  than  pleamre  : but  in  order  to  pro- 
nounce a man  a [inner,  there  is  no  need,  that  his 
moral  evil  (hould  exceed  his  good.  If  a man 
had  an  hundred  virtues,  one  vice  would  make 
him  a criminal  in  the  fight  of  God  : one  tranf- 
gre'iion  of  the  law  of  Iris  Creator,  would  lay  him 
under  his  juft  difpleafure.  He  that  keeps  the 
whole  law,  except  in  one  point,  affronts  that  au- 
thority  which  requires  all  obedience.  All  men 
therefore  are  under  this  condemnation  ; they  are 
f tuners  ez>erv  one  oj  them. 

“ As  to  mifer-v,  let  it  be  fuppofed  'though  by 
no  means  granted)  that  there  are  many  whofe  piea- 
fures  exceed  their  uneafmefs : vet  it  is  cert  ain,  there 
are  more,  whofe  pains  i and  uneafmefs  f ir  exceed 
their  pleafures.  And  it  is  hard  to  conceive,  how 
this  fhould  be,  if  all  men  were  innocent  and 
happy  by  nature. 

“ I anfwer,  e.  Men  are. not  able  to  frame  fuch 
conftitutions  in  every  cafe,  as  {ball  fecure  Itappi- 
nefs  to  all  the  innocent.  Their  narrow  views  of 
things  do  not  enable  them  to  provide  again!!  all 
future  inconveniences.  But  it  :s  not  tints  with 
the  Creator  and  Governor  of  all  things.  He 
views  at  once  all  poffibles  and  all  futures.  There- 
fore he  is  well  able  to  guard  againftany  inconve- 
nience that  might  befall  innocent  beings. 

“ I anfwer,  f 3.  Though  the  bulk  of  mankind 

were 


i P.  77.  f p.  78.  § P-  79’ 


C 3*a  ] 

were  happy  in  the  prefent  conftitution  of  things, 
this  gives  no  manner  of  fatisfa&ion  to  any  one  in- 
dividual, who  is  unhappy,  without  any  demerit: 
the  advantage  of  the  majority  is  no  reafon  at  all, 
why  any  one  innocent  fliould  fuffer.  If  any  one 
therefore,  man  or  child,  and  much  more,  if  num- 
bers of  them,  have  more  pain  than  pleafime, 
they  mull  be  involved  in  fome  guilt,  which  may 
give  juft  occafton  to  their  mifery. 

“ 12.  To  inforce  this,  + after  the  furvey  of 
thefe  pains  and  borrows,  let  us  confider  what  are 
the  pleafures  of  the  bulk  of  mankind.  Caft  a 
glance  at  the  fports  of  children , from  five  to 
fifteen  years  of  age.  What  toys  and  fooleries  are 
thefe  ? W ould  a race  of  wife  and  holv  beings, 
walte  fo  mantr  years  of  early  life  in  fuch  wretched 
trifles  ? And  as  for  our  manly  years,  what  are  the 
greateft  part  of  the  delights  of  men,  but  filly  and 
irrational,  if  not  grofly  finfal  ? What  are  the 
pleafures  even  of  the  rich  and  great , to  relieve 
them  under  the  common  borrows  of  life?  If  they 
be  not  luxury  and  intemperance,  are  they  not 
furniture  and  equipage,  finely  of  drefs  and  gay 
appearances  ? To  ^ fhine  in  filks  of  various  dye, 
and  blaze  in  the  fplendor  of  gold  and  jewels  ? 
Now  -would  wife  and  holy  creatures,  have  made 
this  the  matter  of  their  joy  and  pleafure,  my  coat 
is  gayer  than  yours,  and  I have  more  glittering 
things  about  me  than  you  have  ! 

“ Others  call  for  cards  or  dice,  to  divert  their 
Vol.  XXJ.  O trou- 


tf,  80. 


*P-8 1. 


[ 3*4  ] 

•trouble,  and  pafs  away  their  time.  How  incx- 
preffively  trifling  are  thefe  fports,  if  mere  diver* 
fion  be  fought  therefn?  But  if  the  defign  be  gain, 
how  is  the  game  mingled  with  uneafv  fears,  with 
the  working  of  various  paflions  P Which. in  cafe 
of  difappointment  and  lofs,  often  break  out  into 
•wrath  and  fury. 

“ Again,  § What  multitudes  drench  themddves 
in  grofs  fenfualilies,  as  their  chief  delight?  They 
make  a god  of  tiie-ir  belly,  till  they  overload  na- 
ture, and  make  hade  to  difeafe  and  death* 
Tltey  drown  their  cares  and  their  fenles  toge- 
ther: or  they  bury  them  in  fenfi  .l  imparities. 

“ Others  releafe  them  elves  from  the  troubles 
of  life,  by  gaddi-ng  abroad  and  mixing  with  im- 
pertinent company.  Some  delight  in  wanton 
jef’s,  in  fooliih  merriment,  in  mean  and  trifling 
converfation;  a little  above  the  chattering  of 
monkies  in  a wood,  or  the  cbirriping  of  crickets 
upon  a hearth.  Nay  perhaps  it  is  their  diverfion. 
to  rail  at  their  neighbours,  to  murder  t the  repu- 
tation of  the  abfent.  T his  is  their  mirtli  and  re* 
creation  ; thefe  their  reliefs  again!!  the  common 
miferies  of  human  life. 

“ But  would  a race  of  innocent  bangs  fly  to 
fnch  mean  and  fooliih,  or  criminal  refuges  from 
pain  as  thefe  ? Would  they  purfue  fnch  vain  or 
vile  delights?  Would  they  become  rivals  to  the 
beads  of  the  field  ? Or  fport  themfelves  as  devils 
do,  in  accufing  their  fellow  creatures?  Surely  if 

we 


S p-  82- 


+ p.  83. 


C 3'V5  ] 

Ve  furvey  the  very  pleafures , as  well  as  the  far- 
rows', of  the  bulk  of  mankind,  we  may  learn 
from  thence,  that  we  are  by  no  means  fuch  crea- 
tures as  we  were  originally  created. 

I need  add  but  one  more  proof  of  the  gene- 
ral ruin  of  human  nature.  We  are  all  t polting 
to  the  grave.  Every  one  of  us  are  fucceeding  our 
neighbours,  into  fome  unknown,  invifible  world. 
And  we  all  profefs  to  believe  this.  Yet  how  ex- 
ceeding few  are  felicitous  about  this  great  and 
awful  futurity  ? Though  we  are  expofed  to  fo 
many  fins  and  miferies  in  this  life,  and  are  hafien- 
ing  vifiblv  and  hourly  to  the  end  of  it,  yet  how 
few  are  there  that  make  any  careful  preperation 
for  a better  ffate  than  this  ? What  multitudes  are 
daily  running  down  into  darknefs,  fpeedin^  to 
an  enalefs  duration  in  an  unknown  country, 
without  any  earned  enquiries  about  the  manner 
of  exigence  there  ? They  walk  over  the  bufy 
flage  of  life,  they  toil  and  labour,  or  play  and 
trifle  awhile  here,  and  then  plunge  into  a flrange 
unfeen  world,  where  they  will  meet  with  a juft 
and  holy  God,  whole  wifdom  will  affign  them  a 
place  and  portion  fuited  to  their  own  charafler. 
Now  |j  were  men  indeed  wife  and  holy,  could 
they  remain  fo  ignorant  and  thoughtless  of  that 
ffate,  into  which  they  are  all  hafining?  Or  could 
a gracious  God  create  a race  of  beings,  in  fncli  a 
if upid  infenfibility  of  their  eternal  intereffs,  fo 
O2  unfuited 


1 p 8-4.  (i  p.  85. 


[ 3*  1 

unfuited  to  the  felicities  of  an  immortal  fpirit,  anl  ' 
fo  negligent  of  all  preparations  for  them  ? 

“ Upon  § this  whole  furvey,  reafon  mull  join 
in  this  mournful  confeflion,  that  there  mull  be 
fome  fp reading  poifon  which  has  tainted  our  na- 
ture, made  us  fo  finful  and  miferable,  fo  thought- 
Iefs  of  the  future,  and  unprepared  for  it.  There 
muft  have  been  fome  general  revolt  of  mankind, 
from  their  Creator,  whereby  they  have  ruined 
their  innocence  and  peace,  and  provoked  the  an- 
ger-of  their  Maker,  whereby  they  become  ex- 
pofed  to  fuch  wretched  circumflances,  even  in 
their  infancy  and  childhood,  as  well  as  when 
they  grow  to  years  of  ripe  underflanding. 

“ * And  t methinks  when  I take  a juft  furvey 
of  this  world,  with  all  the  inhabitants  of  it,  I can 
look  upon  it  no  otherwife,  than  as  a grand  and 
•magnificent  ftru&ure  in  ruins:  wherein  lie  mil- 
lions of  rebels  againft  their  Creator,  under  con- 
demnation to  mifery  and  death-,  who  are  at  the 
fame  time  fick  of  a mortal  diltemper,  and  difor- 
dered  in  their  minds  even  to  difirafticn.  Hence 
proceed  thofe  numberlefs  follies  and  vices  winch 
-are  practifed  here  ; and  the  righteous  ± anger  of 
an  olfended  God  viftble  in  ten  thoufand  infiances.  , J 
Yet  are  there  proclamations  of  divine  grace, 
health  and  life  founding  among  them  ; though 
very  few  take  any  notice  -thereof.  Only  here 
and  there  one  attends  to  the  call,  and  complies 
with  thepropofals  of  peace.  His  fins  are  pardoned 
and  healed.  And  though  his  body  goes  down  to 

the 

$ p.  86.  tp.  8g.  J {j.  go. 


[ 3*7  1 

the  dafl  lor  afeafon,  his  foul  is- happy  with  God: 
while  the  bulk  of  thofe  criminals,  defpifing  all 
the  offers  of  mercy,  perifh  in  their  own  wilful 
madnefs. 

“ What  § is  the  chief  temptation  that  leads 
fome  men  to  deny  fo  glaring  a truth?  Is  it  that 
they  cannot  give  a fat  is  faff  ory  account  of  fome 
of  the  difficulties  that  attend  it  ? Nay  many  even 
jof  the  heathen  philofophers  believed  it,  from 
their  own  experience,  and  their  daily  furvey  of 
mankind  : though  they  were  utterly  at  a lofs, 
how  to  account  for  it.  And  what  if  we  could 
not  affign  a fufficient  and  fatisfaffory  reafon  for 
it  ? Or  fhew  how  this  fpreading  degeneracy  be- 
gan, or  how  it  came  to  take  place  fo  univerfally  ? 
What  if  we  were  {fill  at  a lofs  to  explain 
how  all  this  guilt  and  mifery  came  upon  us  ? 
muff  we  therefore  deny  the  things  which  we  fee, 
and  hear,  and  feel  daily  ? 

“ Can  we  account  for  all  the  fecret  things  in 
the  creation  of  God  ? And  muff  we  deny  whate- 
ver we  cannot  account  for  ? Does  any  man  ||  re- 
fufe  to  believe,  that  the  infinite  variety  of  plants 
and  flowers,  in  all  their  beauteous  colours  and 
forms,  grow  out  of  the  fame  earth,  becaufe 
he  does  not  know  all  the  fprings  of  their  vegeta- 
tion? Do  men  dc^ubt  of  a loadlfone’s  drawnng 
iron  to  itfelf,  becaufe  they  cannot  find  out  the 
way  of  its  operation  ? Are  we  nor  fure  that  food 
nonrifhes  our  bodies,  and  medicines  relieve  our 
O 3 pains  ? 

$ P-9»* 


Up.  92. 


C 3>s  } 

pains?  Yet  we  know  not  all  the  ferments  anid 
motions  of  thofe  atoms,  by  which  we.  are  reliev- 
ed and  nourifhed,  Why  then  flu  uld  we  deny 
that  degeneracy  of  our  nature,  which  admits  of 
fo  full  and  various  proof,  though  we  are  not  able 
to  account  for  every  circumftance  relating  to  it, 
or  to  folve  every  difficulty  that  may  attend  it  ? 


QUESTION  IL 

Uow  + came  vice  and  mifery  to  overfipread mankind 
iii  all  nations,  and  in  all  ages? 

“ Y TEA THEN  philofofophers  eoull  never 
I -l  anfwer  this  r but  Chriftians  may  from 
the  oracles  of  God. 

Thefe  inform  us,  that  the  firft  man  was  a * 
common  head  and  reprefentative  of  all  mankind  : 
And  that  he  by  finning  againfl  his  Maker,  loft  his 
holinefs  and  happfnefs:  and  expofed  himfelf  and 
his  pofleritv  (whom  he  naturally  produced  and 
whom  he  legally  reprefented)  to  the  difpleafure 
of  his  Maker,  and  fo  fpread  (In  and  mifery 
through  his  'whole  offspring. 

So  St.  Paul , § As  by  one  man  fin  entered  into 
the  world  and  death  by  fin,  'even  fo  death  poffied 
upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  finned.  Alt  are 
efteemed  in  fome  fort  guilty  belore  God,  though 

they 


+ p.  94- 


p.t  t©2. 


K Rom.  v.  12. 


[ 219  J 

-they  did  not  fn:  after  thefimhtude  of  Adam’s  tranf- 
grejjion.  They  did  not  commit  aflual  perfonal 
fin  again  id  a known- law  as  Adam  did. 

“ This- may. more  fully  appear  from  the  follow- 
ing particulars. 

j . It  is  plainly  taught  us  in  fcirpture,  that 
God  at  firft  created  one  man  and  woman  called 
Adam  and  Eve  \ and  from  them  is  derived  the 
whole  race  of  mankind  : God  hath  made  oj  one 
blood , as  the  apfpftle  obferves,  all  nations  oj  men, 
to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth, 

“ 2.  God  created  man  at  firft  in  a holy 
and  happy  ftate,  in  his  own  likeriefs,  and  in  his 
favour.  And Ged /'aid  || let  us  make  man  in  cur  own 
image,  after  our  own  likenefs.  And  that  none 
of  the  brute  creation  might  moleft  him,  but  all 
of  them  be  for  his  fervice  he  faid,  Let  them,  have 
dominion  over  the  ffh  end  the  fowl  and  the  cattle 

So  God  created  man  in  Ins  own  image.  And 

what  this  image  conlifted  in,  belide  his  fpintual 
and  immortal  nature,-  and  his  dominion  over 
other  creaturs,  we  are  told  by  St.  Paul,  S where 
he  fpeaks  of  the  new  man,  which,  fays  he  after 
God,  that  is  after  the  likenefs  of  God,  is  creat- 
ed in  mghteoa/nefs  and  true  holinefs.  So  Solomon\ 
allures  us  God  made  man  u fright.  And  Mofes 
fays,  when  God  had  finilhed  all  his  creation, 
God  faw  every  thing  (hit  he  had  made,  and  behold 
it  was  very  good.  It  was  all  according  to  his  idea 
O 4 and 

* p.  160.  (j  Gen.  i.  26.  $ Eph.  iv.  24.  +p.  161. 


[ 32°  ] 

and  his  will,  and  well-pleafing  in  his  fight.  Man- 
the  lafl  of  his  creatures,  as  well  as  all  the  red, 
znas  very  good,  was  holy  and  happy. 

* “ g.  God  originally  appointed  that  Adam  when 
innocent  fhould  produce  an  offspring  in  his  own 
holy  image  : and  on  the  other  hand  that  if  he 
finned,  he  fhould  propagate  his  kind  in  his  own 
finful  image.  The  former  is  allowed.  The  latter 
may  be  gathered  from  Gen.  v.  1,  2,  3,  5.  In  the 
day  that  God  created  man,  in  the  hkenefs  of  God. 

made  he  him And  Adam  lived  an  hundred  and 

thirty  year  s after  Ins  lofs  of  the  image  of  God,. 
and  begat  a fort  in  his  own  hkenefs,  after  his  image y 
that  is  his  own  finful  and  mortal  image. 

“ It  t is  not  to  be  fuppofed,  that  Modes  in  this 
brief  hiftory  of  the  firft  generations  of  men, .fhould 
fo  particularly  repeat  the  image  and  hkenefs  of 
God  in  which  Adam  was  created,  unlefs  he  had 
defigned  to  fet  the  comparifon  in  a fair  light, 
between  Adam’s  begetting  a fon  in  his  own 
finful  and  mortal  image,  whereas  he  himfelf  was. 
created  in  God’s  holy  and  immortal  image. 

“ 4.  i God  was  pleafed  to  put  the  man  whom, 
he  had  made  upon  a tryal  of  his  obedience  for  a 
feafon.  He  placed  him  in  a garden  of  Eden  or 
pleafure)  and  gave  him  a free  ufe  of  all  the  crea- 
tures : only  forbidding  him  to  eat  of  the  fruit 
of  one  tree,  The  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil.  For  in  the  day  faid  he,  that  thou  eatefr  of 
it  thou Jhalt  furely  die.  In  which  threatning  were 

doubtlefi 


+ p.  162. 


J P l63- 


r 321  ] 

doubtlefs  included  all  evils  : death  fpiritual,  tem- 
poral, and  eternal. 

“ 5.  As  Adam  was  under  a law  : whofe  fanc- 
tion  threatned  death  upon  diiobedietice,  fo  doubi- 
lefs  God  favoured  him  with  a + covenant  of  hie, 
and  a promife  of  life  and  immortality  upon  hts 
obedience. 

“ 6.  i Adam  broke  the  law  of  his  maker,  loft 
his  image  and  his  favour,  forfeited  the  hope  of 
immortalitv,  and  expofed  himfelf  to  the  wrath  of 
God,  and  all  the  punifhment  which  he  had  threat- 
ned  : in  confeqaence  of  which  he  was  now 
painfully  afraid  of  him  in  whom  he  before  de- 
lighted : and  foolilhly  endeavoured  to  hide  himff. 
from  the  prefence.  of  the  Lord. 

“ 7.  §Adam  after  his  fin  propagated  his  kind  ac- 
cording to  the  law  of  nature:  not  in  the  moral 
image  or  likenefsof  God,  not  in  righteou fiefs  and 
true  hohnejs  : but  in  his  own  finful  likenefs, 
with  irregular  ||  paflions,  corrupt  appetities  and  in- 
clinations. To  this  degeneracy  Job  manifeflly  re- 
fers in  thofeexpreffions,  What  is  man  that  hejhould 
be  dean , or  the  fan  of  man  that  Jit  fhould  be  righte- 
ous ? Who  can  bring  a clean  thing  out  of  an  un~ 
dean?  Not  one . . And  David  fays  the  fame  thing. 
Behold  I was  fiapen  in  iniquity,  and  in  fin  did  my 
mother  conceive  me. 

“ This  is  not  an  hyperbolical  aggravation  of 
David’s  early  fins  and  propenfity  to  evil  from  his 
O 5 childhood. 

+ p.164.  $p.  168.  i2°»  DP-1?1* 


C 32'2  ] 

childhood.  But  the  text  is  firor.g  and  plain  in 
afTerting  fin  fome  way  to  belongto  his  very  con- 
ception, and  to  be  conveyed  from  his  natural 
parents  which  is  a different  idea  from  his  actual 
fins,  or  propenfity  to  fin  in  his  infancy.  It  {hews 
the  caufe  both  of  this  propenfity  and  of  his  actual 
fins,  which  operated  before  he  was  born.  So 
that  if  original  pravity  be  not  fo  conveyed  and 
derived  as  is  here  afferted,  the  words  are  not  aa 
exaggeration  of  what  is,  hut  a dozen-right  fiction  of 
zihat  is  not. 

“ 8.  As  + Adam  produced- his  offspring,  like 
himfelf,  deflitute  of  the  image  of  God,  fo  he  pro- 
duced them  j:  deflitue  of  the  favour  of  God,  un- 
der the  fame  condemnation  with  himfelf.  So  job : 
||  man  that  is  born  of  a-  woman  is  of  few  days  and 
full  of  trouble  : i.  e.  His  fhorthfe,  and  his  trou- 
bles proceed  from  his  very  birth  ; lr.s  propaga- 
tion from  finful  and  mortal  parents.  Otherwife 
God  would  not  have  appointed  his  nobleft  crea- 
ture in  this  world  to  have  been  born  to  trouble 
Yet  this  is  the  cafe.  § Man  is  born  to  trouble  as 
the Jp  arks  fly  upward.  Naturally:  for  it  is  ow- 
ing' to  his  birth  and  his  natural  derivation  from  a 
finful  flock.  We  are  a mifcrable  race,  fp ring- 
ing from  a corrupted  and  th  ing  root,  prone  to 
fin  and  liable  to  forrows  and  fufftnngs. 

“ In  + proof  of  this  fentence  of  condemna- 
tion and  death  coming  upon  all  mankind  for  the 
fin  of  Adam,  we  need  only  read  from  the  1 2th 

verfe 

tp  174.  + p.  175.  |1  Chap.  xiv.  1 . § Job  v.  7.  +p.  176* 


C 323  1 

verfe  of  the  5th  chap,  of  St.  Paul's  spittle  to  the. 
Romans : on  which  I obferve, 

“ t 1.  Here  Adam  and  Chrifc  are  fet  up  as 
diftinct  heads  or  reprefentatives,  of  their  feveral 
families.  Adam  was  the  head  of  all  mankind,; 
who  became  finfnl  and  mortal  through  his  fm: 
Chrill  was  the  head  of  all  believers,  who  obtain 
pardon  and  life  through  his  rigliteoufnefs.  To 
prove  this  headfhip  of  Adam,  the  ^apofile  fays, 
until  the  lazi',  that  is  from  the  creation  till  the, 
law  of  Mofes,  fm  was  in  tl.e  world  ;.  but  firt  is 
not  imputed  where  there  is  no  law.  That  is, 
where  f there  is  no  law  or  conllitution  of  duty 
or  penalty  at  all.  Yet  faith  he,  Death  reigned- - 
from  Adam  to  Mods:  yet  fm  was  imputed  and 
punifhed  bv  death,  even  upon  all  mankind,  both 
fmail  and  great,  before  the  law  given  bv  Mofes. 
1 he  in  fere  nee  is,  therefore  there  was  fome  law 
er  conftitution  during  all  the  time  from  Adam  to 
Mofes : in  virtue  ot  which,  fm  was  imputed  to 
mankind;  and  death  accordingly  executed  upon,' 
them.  Now  what  law  or  conllitution  could  this 
be,  be  fide  that  which  was  faid  to  Adam,  as  a re- 
prefentative  of  his  whole  pollerity,  in.  the.  day 
thou  finnef  thou  Jha.lt  ■ die.  f 

“ 2.  The  apofile  carries  his  argument  yet  far- 
ther, Sin  was  imputed , and  death  reigned , or  was 
executed  even  upon  ihoje  who  had  not  finned  after 
the fimilitude  oj  Adam’s  tranjgrefjion  : who  had- 
s.ot  broken  an  exprefs  command,  as  Adam  bad 

O 6 

$P- 1/3. 


? P-  *77- 


none,. 


[ 324  ] 

done.  This  manifeftly  refers  to  infants:  death 
reigned  over  them ; death  was  executed  upon 
them.  And  this  muff  be  by  fome  conftitution 
which  in  fome  fenfc  imputed  fin,  to  them  who 
had  not  committed  acfual  fin.  For  without  fucli 
a conftitution  fin  would  never  have  been  imputed, 
nor  death  executed  on  children. 

“ §Yet  3.  Death  did  not  come  upon  them  as. 
a mere  natural  effect  of  their  father  Adam's  fin 
and  death  : but  as  a proper  and  legal  punifhment 
of  fin  : for  ’tis  faid,  his  fin  brought  condemnation 
upon  all  men.  ||  Now  this  is  a legal  term  and 
fhews,  that  death  is  not  only  a natural,  but  a 
penal  evil,  and  comes  upon  infants  as  guilty  and 
condemned  • not  for  their  own  afhtal  fins;  for 
they  had  none  ; but  for  the  fin  of  Adam  their 
legal  head,  their  appointed  reprefentative. 

“ In  the  18th  verfe  the  expreffion  is  very  ftrong,. 
By  the  offence  of  one  judgment  c isne  i ‘.on  all  men 
to  condemnation.  All  the  ohildren  of  Adam  young 
and  old,  are  condemned  for  his  one  offence.  But 
farther. 

“ 4.  In  the  original  it  is  not,  By  the  offence 
of  one  ; but  By  one  offence.  By  the  fingle  of- 
fence of  Adam,  when  he  flood  as  the  head 
of  all  his  offspring,  and  brought  fin  and  death  up- 
on them  by  his  difobedience  ; as,  in  the  follow- 
ing verfe,  By  one  man  s difobedience  many  were 
made  or  conflituted [tuners,  that  is,  became  liable 
to  guilt  and  death.  And  fo  in  the  16th  verfe, 

one 

\ p.  179.  H Verfe  1 S'. 


[ 325  ] 

one  frngle  offence  is  reprefented  as  condemning 


thro1  Adam,  and  ftands  in  oppofition  to  the  many 
offences  which  are  pardoned  thro’  Chrift. 

“ 5.  § There  is  a yet  farther  proof  in  this 
chapter  that  Adam  conveyed  fin  and  death  to  his 
pofterity,  not  merely,  as  a natural  parent,  but  as 
a common  head  and  reprefentative  of  all  his  off- 
fpring.  As  Adam  and  Chrift  are  here  faid  to  be 
the  two  fprings  of  fin  and  righteoufnefs,  of  death 
and  life  to  mankind,  fo  the  one  is  reprefented  as 
a type  and.  figure  of  the  other.  In  this  very  re- 
fpeft  H Adam  was  a figure  or  type  of  Chrifi.  And 
for  this  very  reafon  Chrift  is  + called  the  ficond 
man,  the  lafi  Adam.  As  one  wasthefpring  of  life* 
fo  the  other  was  the  fpring  of  death,  to  all  his  feed 
or  offspring. 

“ Now  Chrift  is.  a fpring  of  life  not  only  as  he 
conveysfanflification  or  holinefs  to  his  feed,  but 
as  he  procures  for  them  juftification  and  eternal 
life  by  his  perfonal  obedience.  And'fo  Adam  is  a 
fpring  of  death,  not  only  as  he  conveys  an  unholy 
nature  to  his  feed,  to  all  men,  but  as  he  brings, 
condemnation  to  eternal  death  upon  them,  by 


his  perfonal  difobedience.  And  this  is  the  chief 
thing  which  the  apoftfe  feemsto  have  in  his  eye 
thro”ghout  the  latter  part  of  this  chapter : the 
conveyance  of  condemnation  and  death  to  the 
feed  of  Adam,  of  juftification.  and  eternal  life  to 
the  feed  of  Chrift,  by  the  means  of  what  their 
refpe&ive  heads  or  reprefentatives  had  done. 


[ 3s6  ] 

“ + Bat  fame  object,  “ail  the  bleffings  which 
God  gave  at  fir  ft  to  Adam,  confifted  in  thefe 
three  particulars,  1.  The  bleffing  of  propagation. 
— 2.  Dominion  over  tin  brutes^ — 3.  The  image,  of 
God.  But  all  thefe  three  are  more  exprefsly, 
and  emphatically  pronounced  to  Xoah  and  his. 
ions  than  to  Adam  in  paradifc/’ 

“ I anfwer,  i If  we  review  the  hiftory  and 
context,  ire  ihajl  find  the  ble'hng  of  Adam  and 
that  of  Noah,  very  widely  differ  from  each  oilier, 
in  all  the  three  particulars  mentioned. 

“ “ 1.  The  bleflmg  of  Adam  relating  to  propa- 
gation, was  Without  thole  multiplyed  pains  and 
borrows,  which  after  the  fir  ft  fin,  fell  upon  wo- 
men, in  bearing  children.  It  teas  allb  a bleffing 
of  fuftentation  or  nourifhment,  without  hard  toil 
and.  the  fweat  of  his  brow.  It  was  a blefting 
without  a curfe  on  the  ground,  to  LefTcn  or  de- 
ftroy  the  fruitfulnefs  thereof.  It  was  a i -!e  fling 
without  death,  without  returning  to  d.uft  : whereas 
the  blefling  of  Noah,  did  not  exclude  death,  no. 
nor  the  pains  of  child-birth^,  nor  the  earning  our 
biead  hv  the  fweat  of  our  brow. 

“ 2.  To  Adam  |[  was  given  domirion  over  the- 
brutes.  To  Noah  it  was  only  find,  The  fear  of 
you  and  the  dread  of  you  Jhall  be  upon  every  leaf}. 
But  notwithftandlng  this  fear  and  dread,  yet  they 
frequently  fling  men  to  death,  or  bite  and  tear 
them  in  pieces.  Whereas  no  fuch  calamity  could 

evec 


tp.  183. 


| p.  186. 


Ip-  187- 


C 327  ] ' 

ever  have  befallen  innocent  Adam  or  his  inno- 
cent offspring. 

g.  The  f image  of  God  in  which  Adam  was 
created,  confided  eminently  in  righteoufnefs. 
and  true  holinefs.  But  that  part  of  the  image  God. 
which  remained  after  the,  fall  and  remains  in  all 
men  to  this  day,  is  the  natural  image  of  God,  name^ 
ly  the  fpiritual  nature  and  immortality  of  th,e 
foul:  not  excluding  the  political  image  of  God, 
or  a degree  of  dominion  over  the  creatures  ft  ill 
remaining.  But  the  moral  image  of  God,  is  loft- 
and  defaced  : or  elfe  it  could  not  be  faid  to  be 
renewed.  § It  is  then  evident,  that  the  blefling 
i given  to  Adam  in  innocency,  and  that  given  10 
Noah  after  the  food,  differ  fo  widely,  that  the 
latter  was  confident  with  the  condemnation  or 
cuife  for  fin,  and.  the  former  was  not.  Confe- 
quently  mankind  does  not  now  Hand  in  the  fame- 
favour  of  God,  as  Adam  did  wlulehe  was  inho- 
; cent. 

“ Thus  it  appears,  that  the- holy,  fcripture  both, 
in  the-  old  and  new  Teftaments,  give  us  a plain 
I and  full  account,  of  the  conveyance  of  fin,  mifery 
and  death  from  the  firft  man  to  all  bis  off-- 
fpring. 

SECT 


\ p.  i88. 


h ?■  lS9’ 


[ 3^8  ] 


The  FIRST  ESSAY. 

Do  the  p ref ent  mi  [tries  cf  man  alone , prove  his 
apofacy  from  God ? 

SECT.  I. 

A ventral  furvey  of  thefollies  and miferies  of  mankind „ 

“ T TPON  + a juft  view  of  human  nature,  from 
V- ^ its  entrance  into  life,  ’till  it  retires  behind 
the  curtain  of  death,  one  would  be  ready  to  fay 
concerning  man,  “ Is  this  the  creature  that  is  fo 
“ fuperior  to  the  reft  of  the  i inhabitants  of  the 
“ globe,  as  to  require  the  peculiar  care  cf  the 
“ Creator  m forming  him  ? Does  he  deforce 
“ fucli  an  illuftrious  defeription,  as  even  the 
“ Heathen  poet  has  given  us  of  him  ?” 

Sa.ichus  hie  animal,  mentifq : capacius  Allot 
D<erat  adhuc,F3  quad  dominari  in  cater  a pcffd 
Natus  homo  ejl : five  hunc  divino femme  erdum 
llle  opifex  rerum  mitndi  me/iorts  ongo 
Finxit  in  Ejjigian  moderantum  cunclu  dear  urn. 
Pronaq : cum  fpeclent  ammaha  cater  a terrain 
Os  ho  mini fublimt  dedit,  caduyiq ; trier  i 
fujjit , ft?  ereQos  ad  fidera  tollere  vul/us. 

A creature  of  a more  exalted  kind, 

Was  wanting  yet,  and  then  was  man  dfigned : 
Confcious  of  thought,  of  more  capacious  breaft. 
For  empire  form'd  and  ft  to  rule  the  reft. 
Whether  with  particles  of  heavenly  fire. 

The  God  of  nature  did  his  foul  infpire. 

And 


■»  P-  359- 


p.  360. 


[ 3'29‘  ] 

And  moulding  up  a mafs  in  Jliape  like  oursr 
Form’d  a bright  image  of  th’  all-ruling  powers* 
And  while  the  mute  creation  downward  bend 
Their  fight,  and  to  their  earthy  mother  tend, 

Man  looks  aloft , and  with  erecled  eyes. 

Beholds  his  own  hereditary  fits. 

“ Now  § if  man  was  formed  in  the  image  of 
God,  certainly  he  was  a holy  and  a happy  being. 
But  what  is  there  like  holinefs  or  happinefs  now 
Found,  running  through  this  rank  of  creatures  ? 
kre  there  any  of  the  brutal  kind  that  do  not  more 
regularly  anfwer  the  defign  of  their  creation  ? Are 
there  any  brutes  that  we  ever  find  afting  fo  much 
below  their  original  character,  on  the  land,  in  the 
water,  or  the  air,  as  mankind  does  all  over  the 
earth  ? Or  are  there  any  tribes  among  them,, 
through  which  pain,  vexation,  andmifery,  are  lo 
plentifully  diflributed  as  they  are  among  the  chil- 
dren of  men  ? 

“ Were  t this  globe  of  earth  to  be  furveyed 
from  one  end  to  the  other,,  by  fome  fpirit  of  a 
fuperior  order,  it  would  be  found  fuch  a theatre 
of  folly  and  madnefs,  fuch  a maze  of  mingled 
vice  and  mifery,  as  would  move  the  compaffton 
of  his  refined  nature,  to  a painful  degree,  were 
it  not  tempered  by  a clear  fight  of  that  wife  and 
juft  providence,  which  ftrongly  and  fweetiy 
works  in  the  midft  of  all  ; and  will  in  the  end 
bring  good  out  of  all  evil,  and  j aflify  the  ways  of 
God  with  man. 

SECT 

§ p.  361.  t p.  362. 


C 33  1 


SECT  II. 

particular  t view  of  the  mifeiits  of  man. 

"Q  U1  to  wave  for  the  prefent  the  fins  and 
follies  of  mankind,  may  we  not  infer 
from  his  mile  lies  alone,  that  we  are  degenerate 
beings  bearing,  the  molt  evident  marks  of  the  dif- 
pleafure  of  our  maker  ? 

“ View  the  hillories  of  mankind,  arid  what  is 
almofl  all  hiftory,  but  'a  description  of  the 
wretchednefs  of  men,  under  the  mifchiefs  they, 
bring  upon  themfelves,  and  the  judgments  of  the 
Great  God  ? The  fcenes  of  happincfs  and  peace' 
are  very  thin  fet  among  all  the  nations  : and  they 
are  rather  a tranfient  § ghmpfe,  here  and  there, 
than  anv  thing  folid  and  durable.  But  if  we  look, 
over  the  univerfe,  what  public  defoliations  by 
plague  and  famine,  by  florins  and  earthquakes, 
by  wars  and  pellilence  ! What  fecret  mifchiefs 
reign  among  men,  which  pierce  and  torture  the 
foul  P What  fmarting  wounds  and  bruifes,  what  , 
pains  and  difeafes  attack  and  torment  the  animal 
frame  ? 

“ Where  ||  is  the  family  of  feven  or  eight  per* 
fons  wherein  there  is  not  one  or  more  afflicted 
with  forae  troublefome  malady,  or  tirefome  in- 
convenience? Thefe  indeed  are  often  concealed 
by  the  perfons  who  fuffer  them,  and  by  the  fami- 
lies 


t P-  363- 


§.p.  364. 


11' P-  36S- 


[ 33 1 ] 

lies  where  they  dwell.  But  were  they  all  brought 
together,  what  haf  ilals  or  injit marks  would  be 
able  to  contain  them  ? 

What  toils  and  hardships,  what  inward  anxie- 
ties and  borrows,  dilanpointments  and  calamities 
are  diffufed  through  every  age  and  country  ? Do 
not  ^ the  rich  feel  them  as  well  as  the 
poor?,  Are  they  not  all  teized  with  their  own  ap- 
petites, which  are  never  fatisfied  ? And  their  im- 
petuous paffions  give  them  no  red.  What  keen- 
anguifh  of  mind  arifes  from  pride,  and  envy, 
and  refeniment?  What  tortures  does  ambition,  or 
difappoiuted  love,  or  wild  jealoufy,  infufe  into 
their  bofoms?  Mean-while  the  poor,  together 
with  inward  vexations  and  corroding  maladi£3 
of  the  mind,  fufiain  li:;e wife  endlefs  drudgeries  in 
procuring  their  neceflary  fubfidence.  And  how 
many  of  them  cannot  after  all,  procure,  even 
food  to  eat  and  raiment  to  put  on  ? 

“ " Survey  man  through  every  ftage.  See  fir  11 
what  a figure  he  makes,  at  his  entrance  into  life  ! 
This  animal , fays  Pliny,  who  is  to  govern  the  rtjl  of 
the  creatures , how  he  lies  bound  hand  and  foot  all 
in  tears , and  begins  his  life  in  mifery  and  punifh- 
ment.  If  we  trace  the  education  of  the  human 
race,  from  the  cradle  to  mature  age,  efpecially 
among  the  poor,  who  are  the  bulk  of  all  nations, 
the  wretchednefs  of  mankind  will  farther  appear. 
How  are  they  every  where  dragged  up  § in  their 
tender  age,  through  a train  of  nonfenfe,  madnefs 

and 


i p-  366. 


§P-3e7- 


[ 332  ] 

giid  miferies  ? What  millions  of  imeafy  fenfations. 
do  they  endure  in  infancy  and  childhood  bv  rea- 
fon  of  thofe  preffrng  neceffuies,  which  for  fome 
years  they  can  tell  only  in  cries  and  groans,  and 
which  their  parents  either  are  fo  poor  they  can- 
not relieve,  or  fo  favage  and  brutifh  that  they  will 
not  ? How  wretchedly  are  thefe  young  genera- 
tions hurried  on  through  the  folly  and  weaknef* 
of  childhood,  ’till  new  calamities  arife  from  their 
own  ungoverned  appeuties  and  impetuous  paf- 
fions  ? As  youth  advances,  the  ferments  of  the 
blood  rife  higher,  and  the  appetites  and  paffions-  * 
grow  much  ftrongcr,  and  give  more  abundant 
vexation  to  the  race  ol  mankind,  than  they  do 
to  any  of  the  brutal  creation.  And  whereas  § the  , 
all-wife  God,  for  kind  reafons  has  limited  the  : 
gratification  of  thefe  appetites  by  rules  of  virtue 
perhaps  thefe  very  rules,  through  the  corruption 
of  our  nature  irritate  mankind  to  greater  exceffes. 

“ Would  the  affairs  ||  of  human  life  in  infancv, 
childhood  and  youth,  have  ever  been  in  fitch  a 
fore  and  painful  fituation,  if  man  had  been  fuch 
a being  as  God  at  firft  made  him,  and  had  con- 
tinued in  the  favour  ofhis  Maker  ? Could  divine 
wifdom  and  goodnefs  admit  ol  thefe  fcenes,  were 
there  not  a degeneracy  through  the  whole  race, 
which  by  the  juft  permiffion  of  God,  exerts  itfelf 
fome  way  or  other  in  every  flage  of  life  ? 

* “ Follow  mankind  to  the  age  of  public  ap- 
pearance upon  the  flage  of  the  world.  And  what 
O 4 fit  all 

§ p.  368; 


lip-370- 


[ 333  ] 

hall  we  find  there,  but  infinite  cares,  labours  and 
oil,  attended  with  fond  hopes  ahnoft  always  fruf- 
rated  with  endlcfs  erodes  and  difappointments, 
hrouo'h  ten  thoufand  accidents  that  are  every 
noment  flying  acrofs  this  mortal  ftage  ? As  for 
die  poor,  f Itow  does  the  faltry  toil  exhauft  their 
lives  in  funrmer,  and  what  flawing  wretchednefs 
do  they  feel  in  winter  ? How  is  a miferable  life 
fuftained  among  all  the  pains  and  fatigues  of  na- 
ture with  the  opprefiion,  cruelty  and  Icorn  of  the 
rich. 

“ Let  us  follow'  on  the  track  to  the  clofe  of 
life.  What  a feene  is  prefented  us  in  old  age? 
How  innumerable  and  how  lnexpreffible  are  the 
difafters  and  borrows,  the  pains  and  aches,  the 
groans  and  wretchednefs,  that  meet  man  on  the 
■borders  of  the  .grave,  before  they  plunge  him 
into  it  ? 

“ And  indeed  is  there  any  perfon  on  earth, 
'high  or  low7,  without  fuch  diffreffes  and  difficul- 
'ties,  fuch  croffing  accidents  and  perplexing 
-cares,  fucli  painful  infirmities  in  feme  or  other 
part  of  life,  as  mu  ft  pronounce  mankind  upon 
the  whole  a miferable  being  ? Whatever  feenes 
•of  happinefs  feem  to  attend  him,  in  any  fhining 
■hour,  a dark  cloud  foon  cafis  a gloom  over  them, 
and  the  pleafing  vifion  vanifhes  as  a dream. 

“ And  what  ate  the  t boafted  pleafures  which 
Tome  have  fuppofed  to  ballancc  the  borrows  of 
life  ? Are  not  moll  of  them  owing  in  a good  de- 

v grees 

1 p.371.  + p.  373- 


[ 334  ] 

gree,  to  fome  previous  uneafinefs  ? ’Tis  the  pain1 
of  hunger  which  makes  food  fo  relifhing  : the 
pain  of  wearinefs,  that  renders  fleep  fo  refrefh- 
ing.  And  as  for  the  bleffings  of  love  and  friend- 
fhip,  among  neighbours  and  kindred,  do  they 
not  often  produc  e as  much  vexation  as  fatisfaflion. 
Not  indeed  of  themfelves ; but  by  reafon  of  the 
endlefs  humours  and  follies,  errors  and  paffions 
of  mankind. 

“ Again.  Do  []  not  the  very  pleafures  of  the 
body,  prove  the  ruin  of  ten  thoufand  fouls? 
They  may  be  ufed  with  innocence  and  wifdom  : 
but  the  unruly  appetites  and  paffions  of  men,  con- 
tinually turn  into  a curfe,  what  God  originally 
defigned  for  a bleffing. 

* “ Think  again  how  fhort  and  tranfient  are 
the  pleafures  of  life  in  comparifon  of  the  pains 
of  it  ? How  vanifhing  the  fweeteff  fenfations  of 
delight  ? But  in  many  perfons  and  families,  how 
many  are  the  days,  the  months,  the  years,  of 
fatigue,  or  pain,  or  hitter  forruw  ? What  plea- 
fin  e of  the  animal  frame  is  either  as  lading,  or 
as  intcnfe  as  the  pain-'of  the  gout  or  flone  ? How 
fmall  is  the  proportion  of  fenfible  pleafure, 
that  of  pain  or  trouble,  or  uneafinefs  ? And  how 
faris.it  over-bal lanced  by  the  maladies  or  mi- 
feries,  the  fears  or  forrows  of  the  greateft  part  of 
mankind  ? 

“ As  for  intelleftual  pleafures,  how  few  are 
there  in  the  world,  ■who  have  any  capacity  for 

them  ? 


U P-  374* 


[ S3  5 5 

tfhem  P And  among  thofe  few,  how  many  dif- 
ferences and  contentions  ? How  many  eroding 
objeftions,  bewilder’d  enquiries,  and  unhappy 
miftakes  are  mingled  with  the  enjoyments  ? So 
that  he  who  increafeik  knowledge  increa/eth forrovy 
faith  the  wifeft  of  men,  and  upon  the  whole  com- 
mutation, he  writes  on  this  alfo,  Vanity  and  vexa- 
tion of Jpir  it. 

“ + To  talk  then  of  real  happinefs  to  be  en- 
joyed in  tins  life  (abftratded  from  the  foretafte  of 
.another)  is  contrary  to  all  the  common  fen fe  and 
-experience  of  every  thinking  man.  W ithou.t 
this  taf  e of  the  powers  of  the  zvorld  to  co??ie,  I 
' know  £ not  what  wife  man,  would  willingly 
come  into  thefe  feenes  of  mortality,  or. go  through 
.them  with  any  patience. 

* “ What,  to  be  trained  up  from  infancy, 
(Under  fo  many  unavoidable  follies,  prejudices 
and  wretched  delu Hons  through  the  power  of 
flelh  and  fenfe  P To  be  funk  into  fuch  grofs  iff- 

o O 

moraiite  both  of  our  fouls,  our  better  felves,  and 
-of  the  glorious  being  that  made  us  ? To  lie  un- 
-der  fuch  Iteayy  fhades  of  darknefs,  fuch  a world 
-of  miftakes  and  errors,  as  are  mingled  with  our 
little  faint  glimpfes,  and  low  notices  of  God  our 
'Creator?  What,  to  be  fo  far  difiant  from  God, 
.and  to  endure  fuch  along  eflrangement  from  the 
-wifeft  and  befl  of  beings,  in  this  foolifh  and  flefh- 
ly  ftate,  with  fo  few  and  (lender  communications 
with  or  Irom  him  ? 

“ What 

- • + P-  376.  f p.  377- 


L 336  ] 

<c  What,  to  feel  fo  many  powerful  ana  dil 
quieting  appetites,  fo  many  refllefs  and  unrul 
paffions,  which  want  the  perpetual  guard  of 
jealous  eye,  and  a ftrong  redraint  over  them 
Otherwife  they  will  be  ever  breaking  out  int< 
fome  new  mifchief. 

“ What  to  be  ever  fuiTounded  with  fucli-de 
lights  of  fenfe,  as  are  conftant  temmations  t<  - 
folly  and  fin  ? To  ? have  fcarce  anv  jot's,  bu 
what  we  are  liable  to  pay  dear  for,  by  an  excel 
five  or  irregular  indulgence  ? Can  this  be  a de  j 
firahle  date  ? For  any  wife  being  who  knows  whai 
happinefs  is,  to  be  united  to  fuch  a diforderl’B 
machine  offlcfh  and  blood  with  all  its  uneafy  am 
unruly  ferments  ? 

* “ And  to  this  another  train  of  inbred  mife 
ries  which  attend  this  animal  frame.  What  wifi 
fpirit  would  willingly  put  on  fuch  flelh  and  Moot  g 
as  ours,  with  all  the  fprings  of  fickncfs  and  pain  ■ 
antmilh  and  difeafc  in  it?  What  lobe  liable  tt  l 
the  racking  dil'quietudes  of  gout  and  done,  anc 
a thoufand  other  didempers  ? 'Fo  have  nature 
worn  out  by  flow  and  long  aches  and  infirmitie 
and  lie  lingering  rnanv  vears  on  the  borders  o 
death,  before  we  can  find  a grave  ? 

“ t Solomon  feems  to  be  much  of  this  mind 
•when  after  a furvev  of  the  whole  fcheme  of  hu- 
man life,  in  its  variety  of  feenes,  (without  the 
views  of  hereafter)  he  declares,  I ± prai/ed  th> 

da u 

5 p.  378.  + p.  380.  * Ecclcf.  iv.  2. 


C 337  ] 

dead  who  were  already  dead,  more  than  the  living 
who  were  yet  alive.  AncI  indeed  it  § appears  that 
the  miseries  of  life  are  fo  numerous  as  to  .over- 
[ ballance  all  its  real  comforts,  and  fufficiently  to 
drew,  that  mankind  now  lie  under  evident  marks 
ol  their  Maker’s  difpleafure  as  being  degenerated 
Irom  that  ftate  of  innocence,  wherein  they  were 
at  firlt  created. 


SECT.  Ill, 

Objections  anfwered \ 

“ UT  it  is  objected  “ If  human  life  in  genc- 

f “ ral  is  miserable;  how  is  it,  that  all  men 

“ are  fo  unwilling  to  die  ?”■ 

O ' - 

“ I atifwer,  1.  Becaufe  they  fear  to  meet  with 
moremifery  in  another  life  than  they  feel  in  this. 
See  our  Poet ; 


t The  weariejl  and  mojl  loathed  worldly  life , 
That  pain,  age,  penury  and  vnpnjoriment 
C'an  Jay  on  nature , ’ tis  a paradife 
To  what  we  fear  of  death. 

And  in  another  place, 

If  by  the Jleep  of  death  we  could  but  end 

Vo l.  XXL  ' P The. 


^p.  381. 


+ p-  383> 


t 338  ] 

The  heart-ache  and  the  thoufand  natural Jhocks 
That  JleJh  is  heir  to,  ’ (were  a confummation 
Devoutly  to  be  wifi  d.  0 U'ho  wou  d bear 
The  opprfor’s  wrongs,  the  poor  man  s contumely. 
The  infolence  of  office,  and  the  f pur  ns 
That  £ patient  merit,  of  th’  unworthy  takes, 

With  all  the  long  calamities  of  life ; 

When  he  himfelf  might  his  quietus  make 

With  a lai e bodkin?  Who  woud  bear  fall  burdens. 

And  groan  and  feat  under  a zueary  life. 

But  that  Nic  dread offomething  after  death. 

That  undifeover’d country,  from  whofe  border 
No  traveler  returns,  puzzles  the  will. 

And  makes  us  rather  bear  thofe  ills  we  have. 

Than  fly  to  others  which  are  all  unknown. 

“ § If  you  fav,  “ But  the  Heathens  knew  no<- 
thing  of  a future  life  : and  yet  they  too,  in  all 
their  generations  have  been  unwilling  to  die. 
Nor  would  they  put  an  end  to  their  own  life  j 
were  it  never  lo  miferable.”  I anfwer,  Molt  of 
the  antient  (as  well  as  the  modern)  Heathens, 
had  fome  notions  of  an  after-date,  and  feme 
fears  of  punifhment  in  another  life  for  fins  com- 
mitted in  this.  And  in  the  politer  nations  they 
generally  fuppofed  felf-murderers  in  particular 
would  be  punilhed  after  death. 

* Proximo  deinde  tenent  vuefli  loca,  qui  fill  Id  uni 
Infontes  psperere  manu,  lucemq ; per  of 

Projecere 

t §P-38j- 


C 339  1 

Projecere  unimas.  Quam  v client  adhere  in  alto 
Nunc  & pauperian  & duros  per far e labor es ! 

Fata  objlant : duraq\  pains  innabilis  undo, 

Al/igat,  & novies  Styx  interfufa  coerced 

The  next  in  place  and puniflment  are  they 
Who  prodigally  threw  their  lives  away. 

Fools , who  repining  at  their  wretched JlateK 
And  loathing  anxious  life  have  hurried  on  their fate . 
With  late  repentance  now  they  would  retrieve 
The  bodies  they  forfook,  and  wifi  to  lives 
AIl  pain  and  poverty  de/ue  to  bear , 

To  view  the  light  oj  heaven,  and  breathe  the  vital  air. 
But  fate  forbids  : the  Stygian floods  oppofe , 

And  with  nine  circling  Jlr-eams  the  captive  fouls, 
■indofe-. 

“ I anFwer  + 2.  Suppofe  this  love  of  life  and 
averfion  to  death  are  found,  even  where  there  is 
no  regard  to  a future  Hate,  this  will  not  prove 
that  mankind  is  happy  : but  only  that  the  God  of 
nature  hath  wrought  this  principle  into  the  fouls 
of  all  men,  in  order  to  preferve  the  work  of  his 
own  hands.  So  that  reluftance  againft  dying  is 
owing  to  the.  natural  principle  of  felf-prelerva- 
tion,  without  any  formed  and  ledate  judgment, 
whether  it  is  bell  to  continue  in  this  life  or  no, 
or  whether  life  has  more  happinefs  or  mifery. 

“ It  maybe  objected,  fecondly,  II brutes  i.  buf- 
fer nearly  the  fame  miferies  with  mankind,  find 
P 2 yet 

+ P-  386-  £ P-  3%’’ 


[ 34°  ] 

yet  have  not  finned,  how.  can  thefe  miferies 
prove  that  man  is  an  apoftate  being  ? 

“ I anfwer,  it  is  by  reafon  of  man’s  apoftafy, 
that  even  brute  animals  fuffer.  The  whole  cr  edi- 
tion groaneth  together  on  his  account , and  travail- 
eth  together  in  pain  to  this  day . For  the  brute 
creation  was'  made  fb]ecl  to  vanity,  to  abufe, 
pain,  corruption,  death,  not  willingly,  not  bv 
any  aft  of  its  own,  but  by  reafon  of  him  that  fub- 
jecled  it : of  God  who  in  confequence  of  Adam's 
fin,  whom  he  had  appointed  Lord  of  the  whole 
lower  world,  for  his  fake  pronounced  this  curfe 
(not  only  on  the  ground,  but)  on  all  which  was 
before  under  his  dominion. 

“ The  inifery  therefore  of  the  brute  creation, 
is  fo  far  from  being  an  pbjeftion  to  the  apoltafv 
of  man,  that  it  is  a vifible  handing  demonftra- 
tion  thereof.  If  beads  fuffer,  tlien  man  is  fallen. 


SECT.  IV. 

The  apojlafy  of  man  proved  by  feripture  and 
reafon. 

“ yh  UT  t whether  or  no  the  miferies  of  man- 
-O  kind  alone  will  prove  their  apoftafy  from 
God,  it  is  certain  thefe  together  with  the  fins  of 

men 


+ p.  409. 


[ 341  ] 

men  are  an  abundant  proof,  that  we  are  fallen 
creatures.  And  this  I flnall  now  endeavour  -to 
lhew,  both  from  the  exprejs  \lejlimovy  of  Jcrip- 
ture,  from  the  nece.fi ly  of  renewing  grace,  and 
from  a fitrvey  oj  the  Heathen  world. 

Firft,  The  feripture  te /lilies,  tliat  an  imiver- 
fal  degeneracy  and  corruption,  is  come  upon  all 
the  foils  and  daughters  of  Adiin.N  Every  imagi- 
nation of  the  thoughts  of  the  heart  cf  man  is  only 
evilcontinually  : yea  5 evil  from  his  youth,  t The 
Lord  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  the  children 
cf  men,  to  fee.  if  there  were  any  that  did  underfund 
and  Jeek  God.  They  are  gone  out  of  the  way  ; 
there  is  none  that  doth  good,  no  not  one.  \ Ther  e 
is  nut  ajuf  man  upon  earth,  who  doth  good  and 
finnethnot.  § All  we  hkejheep  have  gone  af  ray , 
we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way  : different 
wanderings,  but  all  wanderers.  ||  There,  is  none 
righteous,  no  not  one:  there  is  none  that  doth 
good,  no  not  one.  Every  mouth  is flopped,  and  all 
the  world  become  guilty  before  God.  All  are  fallen 
Jhort  of  the  glory  cf  God,  becaufe  all  have  finned. 
S If  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead  ; that  is 
fpiritually  dead,  dead  in  trefpaffes  and  fins. 

* “ Now  can  we  fuppofe,  that  all  God  s crea- 
tures wrould  umverfaliy  break  his  law,  run  into 
fin  and  death,  defile' and  dellroy  themfelves,  and 
that  without  any  one  exception,  if  it  had  not 
arifen  from  fome  root  of  bitternefs,  fome  ori<n- 
P 3 nal 

|]  p.  410.  (j  Gen.  vi.  5.  5 Ch.  viii.  21,  + Pfat  xiv.  2. 

% Ecclef.  vii.  20.  $ lia.  Ini.  6.  ||  Rom.  iii.  10,  12,  19,  23, 

S 2 Cor.  v.  14. 


C 342  1 

nal  iniquity,  which  was  diffufcd  through  them 
all,  from  their  very  entrance  into  the  world  ? 
It  is  utterly  incredible,  that  even-  fmgle  perfon, 
among  the  millions  of  mankind  fhould  be  born 
pure  and  innocent,  and  yet  fhould  all,  bv  free 
and  voluntary  choice,  every  one  for  himfelf,  for 
near  fix  thoufand  years  together,  rebel  againtl 
him  that  made  them,  if  there  were  not  fome  ori- 
ginal contagion  fpread  through  them  all  at  their 
entrance  into  life! 

Secondly,  The  fame  thing  appears  from  the 
fcriptural  doflrine  of  our  recovery  by  divine 
grace!  Let  u*  confider  what  manner  the  ferip- 
ture  reprefents  that  great  change  which  muft  be 
wrought  in  our  fouls,  in  order  to  our  obtaining 
the  favour  and  image  of  God,  and  future  happi- 
nefs.  t Except  ^ a man  he  born  again,  he  cannot 
fee  the  kingdom  of  God.  In  other  feriptures  it  is 
reprefented',  that  they  muft  be  born  of  the  Spiut; 
they  muft  be  born  oj  God.  § They  muft  be  creat- 
ed anew  in  Chrijl  Jefus  unto  gsod  works.  They 
muft  j|  be  quickened,  or  raifed  again  from  their 
death  in  trefpaJJ'es  and fins.  Tliey  mull  be  renew- 
ed in  their  Jpir  it,  or  created  after  the  image  of  God 
in  righteou/hefs  and  true  hohnefs.  They  muft  be 
reconciled  to  God  by  Jefus  Chrijl : they  mutt  be 
zo of  led from  their  f ms  in  his  blood.  Since  all  have 
Jinncd  and  come  Jhort  of  the  glory  cj  God,  there- 
fore if  ever  they  are  faxed,  they  mutt  bejuftifed 
freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in 

Chrijl 

+ ji.  413.  J John  iii.  3,  6,  8.  t Eph.  iL  10.  ]j  \ cr. 


[ 343  3 

Chrift  Jefus.  Now  5 can  any  one  fuppofe  God 
to  have  made  fo  many  millions  of  creatures,  as 
have  come  into  the  world  from  Adam  till  now, 
which  have  all  entered  the  world,  innocent  and 
holy,  and  yet  not  one  of  them  fhould  retain  his 
image  in  holinefs,  or  be  lit  for  his  favour,  with- 
out being  born  again , created,  anew,  raifedjiom 
the  dead,  redeemed,  not  with  corruptible  things, 
but  with  the  blood  cj  his  own  Jon  ? Do  not  all 
thefe  reprefentations  prove,  that  eveiy  man  is 
born  with  fome  original  contagion,  and  under 
fome  criminal  imputation  in  the  fight  of  God  ? 
Elfe  would  not  one  among  all  thefe  millions  be 
fit  to  be  made  a partaker  of  his  favour,  without 
fuch  amazing  purifications  as  require  the  blood 
of  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  almighty  operation 
of  his  Spirit  ? Do  not  all  thefe  things  fhewq  that 
mankind  in  their  prefent  generations,  are  not 
fuch  creatures  as  God  at  fir  ft  made  them  ? 

“ The  t fame  great  truth  we  may  learn,  third- 
ly, from  even  a flight  furvey  of  the  Heathen  na- 
tions. A few  days  ago  1 was  viewing,  in  the 
map  of  the  world,  the  vaft  Afiatic  empires  of 
Tartary  and  China,  and  a great  part  of  the  king 
dom  of  the  Mogul,  with  the  multitude  of  iflands 
in  the  E all-Indies.  I went  on  to  furvey  all  the 
fouthernpart  of  Afric,  with  the  favage  nations  of 
America.  I obferved  the  thoufands,  or  rather 
millions  who  dwell  on  this  globe,  and  walk  and 
trifle  and  live  and  die  there,  under  the  heavieft 
P 4 cloud 

£p.  414. 


+ ?.  415. 


[ 344  ] 


tloua  of  ignorance  and  darkncfs,  not  knowing' 

O 7 ry 

God,  nor  the  way  to  his  favour ; who  are  drench- 
ed in  grofs  impieties  and  fuperftitiofts,  -who  are 
continually  guilty  of  national  immoralities,  and 
practife  idolatry,  malice  and  lewd  nefs,  fraud  and 
falfhood,  with  fcarce  any  regret  of  reftraint. 

" “ Then  fi’ghing  within  rnyfeif  I faid,  Ids  not 
many  years  lince  thefe  were  all  infants ; and 
they  were  brought  + up  by  parents  who  knew 
net  God,  nor  the  path  that  leads  to  life  and  hap- 
pinefs.  Are  not  thefe  unhappy  children  born 
under  difficulties  almoft  unfulroountablc  ? Are 
they  not  laid  under  almoft  an  impoffibility,  of 
breaking  their  way  of  themfelves,  thro'  fo  much 
thick  darknefs,  to  the  knowledge,  the  fear  and 
the  love  of  him  that  made  them  P Dreadful  truth 
indeed  ! Yet,  fo  far  as  I can  fee,  certain  and  in- 
conteftable.  Such,  I fear,  is  the  cafe  of  thofe 
of  human  race  who  cover  at  prefent  the  far 
greateft  part  of  the  globe. 

* “ Then  I ran  back  in  my  thoughts  four  or 
or  five  thoufand  years,  ana  faid  within  myftlf, 
what  multitudes  in  every  .age  of  the  world,  have 
been  born  in  thefe  deplorable  ciruinftances  ? 
They  are  inured  from  their  birth  to  barbarous 
cuftoms  and  impious  prafiices  ; they  have  an 
image  of  the  life  of  brutes  and  devils  wrought  in 
them  by  their  early  education : they  have  had 
the  feeds  of  wretched  wickednefs,  fown,  planted 

and 


f p.  ,4l5. 


r 345  ] 

and  cultivated  in  them,  by  the  favage  in  frac- 
tions of  thofe  that  went  before  them.  And-their 
own  imitation  of  fuch  horrible  examples  has  con  - 
firmed  the  mifehief,  long  § before  they  kn-ew  or 
heard  of  the  true  God:  if  they  have  heard  of 
him  to  this  day.  Scarce  any  of  them  have  ad- 
mitted one  thoughtful  enquiry,  whether  they. 

; follow  the  rules  of  reafon,  or  whether  they  are 
in  the  way  ofhappinefs  and  peace,  any  more 
than  their  parents  before  them.  As  they  are  born 
in  this  grofs  darknefs,  fo  they  grow  up  in  the 
vile  idolatries,  and  all  the  fhameful  abominations 
of  their  country,  and  go  on  to  death  in  the  fame 
courfe.  Nor  have  they  light  enough,  either 
from  without  or  within  to.  make  them  afk  feri- 
o'ufly , Is  there  not  a^lie  in  my  right  hand?  Am  / 
not  in  the  way  of  deft  > uElion  ? 

“ St.  Peter  ||  fays  indeed,  That  in  every  nation  ■ 
he  that  fearelh.  God  and  worketh  rightcoufnefs  is 
accepted  of  him.  But  if  there  were  very  few  fa- 
mong  the  Jews)  who  feared  God,  very  few  in 
thofe  learned  nations  of  the  Gentiles,  how 
much  fewer,  may  we  fuppofe,  are  in  thofe  bar- 
Jbarous  countries,  which  have  no  knowledge, 
either  divine  or  human  ? 

*“  But  f would  this  have  been  the  cafe  of  thofe 
unhappy  nations,  both  of  the  parents  and  their 
children,  in  an  hundred  long  fucceffions,  had 
they  been  fuch  a race  of  creatures,  as  they  came  - 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  Creator  ? If  thofe  children,. 

P 5 had t 

Up.  4t9  > Tp.  42c. 


i 


[ 346  ] 


had  been  guiltlefsln  the  eye  of  God  could  this 
have  been  their  portion  ? In  (hort,  can  we  fup- 
pofe,  the  wife  gnd  righteous  and  merciful  God 
would  have  eflabhfhed  and  continued  fuch 
a conflitution  for  the  propagation  of  man- 
kind, which  fhould  naturally  place  fo  many  mil- 
lions of  them  fo  early  in  fuch  difinal  circum- 
ftances;  if  there  had  not  been  fome  dreadful  and 
univerfal  degeneracy  fpread  over  them  and  their 
fathers,  by  lome  original  crime,  which  met  and 
feized  them  at  the  very  entrance  into  life  ? 


The  SECOND  ESSAY. 


A plain  Explication  of  the  Dcftrine  of  Imputed  Sin 
and  Imputed  Righteoufnefs.  + 

HIS  doHrine  has  been  attended  with 


many  noify  controverftes  in  the  Chrif- 


<ian  world.  Let  us  try  whether  it  may  not  be  fet 
in  fo  fair  and  eafy  a light,  as  to  renconcile  the 
fentiments  of  the  contending  parties. 

“ ^ When  a man  has  broken  the  law  of  his 
country,  and  is  punilhed  for  fo  doing,  tis  plain 
that  fin  is  imputed  to  him.  ; his  uickednefs  is  up- 
on him ; he  bears  his  iniquity,  that  is,  he  is  re- 


* P-  427- 


f p. 


[ 347  ] 

puted  or  accounted  guilty  : he  is  condemned  and 
dealt  with  as  an  offender. 

“ On  the  other  hand  if  an  innocent  man, 
who  is  falfelv  accufed  is  acquitted  by  the  court, 
fin  is  not  imputed  to  him,  but  righteoufnefs  is 
I imputed  to  him  ; or  to  ufe  another  phrafe,  his 
righteoufnefs  is  upon  him. 

“ Or  if  a reward  be  given  a man  for  any  righ- 
teous aftion,  this  righteous  a£I  is  imputed  to 
him. 

“ Farther,  If  a man  has  committed  a crime, 
but  the  prince  pardons  t him,  then  he  is  juflifed 
from  it  ; and  his  fault  is  not  imputed  to  him. 

“ But  if  a man  having  committed  treafon, 
his  effate  is  taken  from  him  and  his  children, 
then  they  bear  the  iniquity  of  their  father , and 
his  fin  is  imputed  to  them  alfo. 

“ If  a man  lofe  his  life  and  effate  for  murder, 
and  his  children  thereby  become  vagabonds, 
then  the  blood  of  the  perfon  murdered  is  faid  to 
be  upon  the  murderer,  and  upon  his  children  alfo. 
So  the  Jews  : His  blood  boon  us  and  on  our  child- 
ren ; let  us  and  our  children  be  pumfhed  for 
it. 

“ Or  J if  a criminal  had  incurred,  the  panalty 
of  imprifonment,  and  the  ftate  were  to  permit  a 
friend  of  his  to  become  hisfurety,  and  to  be  con- 
fined in  his  room,  then, his  crime  is  faid  to  be 
imputed  to  his  fdrety  or  to  be  laid  upon  him  ; he 
hears  the  iniquity  u/his  friend,  by  fullering  for 

P 6 If  ift. 

429. 


i p-  433* 


[ 34*  ] 

him.  Meantime  the  crime  for  which  the  furetjr 
now  buffers,  is  not  imputed  to  the  real  offender. 

“ And  fhould  we  fuppofe  the  prince,  to 
permit  this  furety  to  exert  himfelf  in  fome  emi  • 
lient  fervice,  to  which  a reward  is  promifed,  and 
all  this  in  order  to  entitle  the  criminal  to  the  pro- 
mifed reward,  then  this  eminent  fervice  may  be 
faid  to  be  imputed  to  the  criminal,  that  is,  he  is 
rewarded  on  the  account  of  it.  So  in  this  cafe, 
both  what  his  friend  has  done  and  buffered,  is 
imputed  to  him. 

“ If  f a man  do  fome  eminent  fervice  to  his 
prince,  and  he  with  his  pofterity  are  dignified  on 
account  of  it  ; then  the  fervice  performed  by 
the  father  is  faid  to  be  imputed  to  the  children 
a!foS 

“ Now  if  among  the  hiftories  of  nations  we 
find  any  thing  of  this  kind,  do  we  not  eafily  un- 
derftand  what  the  writers  fay  ? Why  then  do  we 
judge  thefe  phrafes  when  they  are  found  in  the 
infpired  writers,  to  be  fohard  to  be  underftood  ? 

“ But  it  may  be  afked,  how  can  + the  a£ls  of 
the  parent’s  tr’eafon,  be  imputed  to  his  little  child? 
Since  thofe  a£ls  were  quite  out  of  the  reach  of 
an  infant,  nor  was  it  poffibie  for  him  to  com- 
mit them. 

“ Or  how  can  the  eminent  fervice  perform- 
ed by  a father,  be  imputed  to  his  child , who  is 
but  an  infant  ? 

“ I an~ 


s p.  4.31* 


f p*  43a* 


[ 349  ] 

“ I anfwer,i  1.  Thofe  afts  of  treafon  or  afts 
of  fervice,  are  by  a common  figure,  faid  to  be 
imputed,  to  the  children , when  they  fuffer  or  en- 
joy the  confequences  of  their  father's  treafon  or 
eminent  fervice  : though  the  particular  adhons  of 
of  treafon  or  fervice,  could  not  be  praftifed  by 
the  children.  This  would  eafily  be  underftcod 
fhould  it  occur  in  an  human  hiftcry.  And  why 
not,  when  it  occurs  in  the  facred  writings  ? 

“ I Anfwer  2.  Sin  is  taken  either  for  an  adl  of 

Idifobedience  to  a law,  or  for  the  legal  refill  of 
fiich  an  aft  ; that  is,  the  guilt r or  liablenefsto 
punifhment.  Now  when  we  fay,  the  fin  of  a. 
traitor  is  imputed  to  fis  children  we  do  not  mean, 
that  the  aft  of  the  father  is  charged  uporuhe 

I child':  but  that  -the  guilt  orliablenefs  to  punifh- 
ment is  fo  transferred  to  him  that  he  buffers  ba- 
nilhmentor  poverty  on  account  of  it. 

I “ In  like  manner  righteoufnefs  is  either,  parti- 
cular a£fs  of  obedience  to  a law,  or  the  legal refult 
of  thofe  aftions  that  is,  a right  to  the  reward, 
l!  annext  to  them. 

[ “ And  fo  when  we  fay.  The  righteoufnefs  of  him.- 

that  has  performed  fome  eminent  aft  of  obedi- 
ence, is  imputed  to  his  children , we  do  not  mean,, 
i that  the  particular  aft  of  the  father  is  charged  on 
: the  child,  as  if  he  had  done  it : but  that  the 
tight  to  reward,  which  is  the  refult  of  that  aft, 
is  transferred  to  his  children, 

“ Nova- 

$ E-  433-  § pi  434< 

' 


r 350  ] 

“ Now  { if  we  would  but  thus  explain  every 
text  of  fcripture  wherein  either  imputed  fin  or 
imputed  righteoufhcfs  is  mentioned,  (whether 
in  exprefs  words,  or  in  the  plain  meaning  of 
them)  we  fhould  find  them  all  eafy  and  intelli- 
gible. 

“ thus  ||  we  may  eafify  underhand,  how  the 
obedience  of  Chrift  is  imputed  to  all  his  feed  ; 
and  how  the  dijobedience  oj  Adam  is  imputed  to 
to  all  his  children. 

“ To  confirm  this,  I would  add  thefe  three 
remarks : 

“ 1.  There  are  fevcral  hihories  in  feripture, 
where  expreffions  of  the  fame  import  occur. 

“So.  Gen  xxii.  16.  Thy  feed fiaU  pffefs  the  gate 
qf  his  enemies , becaufe  thou  Itafi  obeyed  my  voice : ; 
Here  Abraham's  obedience,  that  is  the  refult  of 
it,  is  imputed  to  his  pofteritv. 

“ So  ? Numb.  xxv.  11 . God  gave  to  Phinehas 
and  his  feed  after  him  the  covenant  of  an  everlajhng 
priefihood,  becaufe.  he  was  zealous  for  Ins  God, 
and  flew  the  criminals  fn  Ifrael.  This  was  fo 
imputed  to  his  children  that  they  alfa  received  the 
reward  of  it. 

“ Tims  the  fin  of  Achan  was  fo  imputed  to 
his  children,  that  they  were  all  honed  on  account 
of  it,  John  vii.  24.  In  like  manner  the  covet- 
oufnefs  of  Gekazi  was  imputed  to  his  poherity 
(2  Kings  v.  27)  when  God  by  his  prophet  f 

pronounced 

435*  l P-436-  *?■  437-  + P-438* 


[ 35 1 J 

pronounced,  that  the  leprofy  Jhould  cleave  unto 
him  and  to  his  feed  j or  ever. 

“ 2.  The  fcriptures  both  of  the  Old  and  New 
Teflament,  ufe  the  words  fin  and  iniquity , (both 
in  Hebrew  and  Greek)  to  fignify  not  only  the  cri- 
minal aflions  themfelves,  but  alfo  the  re  full  and 
^ confequences  of  thofe  aft  ions,  that  is,  The  guilt 
or  iiablenefs  to  pumfiment : and  fometimes  the  pu- 
vifhmcnt  itfelf,  whether  it  fall  upon  the  original 
criminal,  or  upon  others,  on  his  account. 

“ In  the  fame  manner  the  fcriptures  ufe  tike 
word  righteou fiefs,  not  only  for  acts  of  obedi- 
ence, but  alfo  the  rejult  of  them,  that  is,  jufifi- 
caticn,  or  right  to  a reward.  A moderate  lludy 
of  fome  of  thofe  texts  where  thefe  words  are  uf- 
ed,  may  convince  us  of  this. 

“ So  Job  xxxiii.  26.  God  will  render  to-  a mfn 
his  righteou  fiefs  : that  is,  the  reward  of  it.  Hof. 
X.  12.  Sow  to  your  [elves  in  righteou  fiefs,  till  the 
Lord  come  and  rain  righteonjnejs  upon  sou  : that 
is,  till  he  pour  down  the  rewards  or  fruits  of  it 
upon  you. 

“ ||  I might  add  here,  that  in  feveral  places  of 
St.  Pauls  epilfles,  right  eon  fiefs  means  juf [ca- 
tion, in  the  pafhve  fenfe  of  the  word. 

“ So  Rom.  x.  4.  Chnjl  is  the  end  of  the  law 
for  righteoufnefs  to  every  one  that  believeth  : that 
is,  in  order  to  the  jollification  of  believers.  Rom. 
x.  10.  With  the  heart  of  man  believeth  unto  right . 
soufnefs ) that  is,  fo  as  to  obtain  juftification. 

Gak 


h P-  139* 


11  P- 


[ 35 2 ] 

Gal.  ii.  21.  If  righteoufnefs,  that  is,  j unification, 
come  by  the  law,  then  Chrijl  is  dtad  in  vain.  This 
particularly  holds,  where  the  word  Xoy'^oficn  or 
impute  is  joined  with  righteoufnefs.  As  Rom.  iv. 
3.  Abraham  believed  God , and  it  was  imputed  to 
him  for  righteoufnefs.  Rom.  iv.  g.  His  faith  is 
counted  to  him  for  righteoufnefs.  It  is  not  am  or 
virlffor,  or  injlead  of  righteoufnefs  : but  It* 
Stxxjpi Tvm’  in  order  to  juflif  cation  or  acceptance 
with  God. 

“ And  in  other  places  of  fcripture,  a work, 
whether  good  or  evil,  is  put  for  the  reward  of 
it.  Job  xxxiv.  11.  The  work  of  a man  will  he 
render  unto  him  ; that  is,  the  recompence  of  it.: 
So  St.  Paul  defires  Philemon,  to  impute  any 
wrong  he  had  received  from  Onefimus  to  him- 
ffelf : that  is,  not  the  evil  allion,  but  the  damage- 
he  had  fuftained. 

“ Indeed  when  fin  or  righteoufnefs  are  faid  to 
be  imputed  to  any  man,  on  account  of  what  him- 
felfhath  done,  the  words  ufuallv  denote  both  the 
good  or  evil  aftions  themfelves,  and  the  legal 
refult  of  them.  But  when  the  fin  or  righleouj- 
nefs  of  oneperfon  is  faid  to  be  imputed  to  another, 
then  generally  thofe  words  mean  only  the  refult 
thereof,  that  is  a liablenefs  to  punifhment  on 
the  one  hand,  and  to  reward  on  the  other. 

“ + But  let  us  fay  what  we  will,  to  confine  the 
fenfe  of  the  imputation  of  fin  and  righteoufnefs,  to 
the legal  refult,  the  reward  or  punifhment  of  good: 
. sn 


+ p.  444* 


[ 353  ] 

or  evil  aElions : let  us  ever  fo  explicitly  deny 
the- imputation  of  the  aElions  themfelves  to  others, 
ftillDr.Taylor  will  level  almoft  all  his  arguments, 
againft  the  imputation  of  the  aElions  themfelves, 
and  then  triumph  in  having  demolifhed  what  we 
never  built,  and  refutino-  what  we  never  aderted, 
i “ 3.  The  § fcripture  does  not,  that  I remem- 
ber, any  where  fay  in  exprefs  words,  That  t he  Jin 
oj Adam  is  imputed  to  his  children  ; or  that  the  fins 
of  believers  are  imputed  to  Chrift ; or,  that  the  right- 
eoufnefs  oj  Chrijl  is  imputed  to  believers . But  the 
true  meaning  of  all  thefe  expredions  is  fuffi- 
ciently  found  in  feveral  places  of  fcripture. 

“ ||  Yet  fmce  thefe  exprefs  words  and  phrafes, 
of  the  imputation  of  Adam’s  fin  to  us,  of  our 
fins  to  Chrift,  and  of  Chrift’s  righteoufncjs  to  us, 
are  not  plainly  written  in  fcripture  : we  fhould 
not  impofe  it  on  every  Chriftian,  to  ufe  thefe 
very  expredions.  Let  every  one  take  his  li- 
berty, either  of  condning  himfelfto  ftriftly  fcrip- 
tural  language  ; or  of  manifefting  his  fenfe  of 
thefe  plain  fcriptural  doctrines,  in  words  and 
phrafes  of  his  own. 

“ But  if  the  words  were  expredy  written  in 
the  bible,  they  could  not  reafonably  be  inter- 
preted in  any  other  fenfe,  than  this  which  I have 
explained  by  fo  many  examples,  both  in  fcripture, 
hiftory  and  in  common  life. 

“ I would  only  add,  If  it  were  allowed,  that 
the  very  adi  of  Adam’s  difobedience  was  imputed 

to 


S p-  4#  II  p.  447. 


[ 354  ] 

to  ali  his  poflerity  ; that  all  the  fame  fmful  ac- 
tions which  men  have  committed,  were  imputed 
to  Chrifl,  and  the  very  afrions  which  Chrifl  did  up- 
on earth,  were  imputed  to  bthtvers:  what  greater 
punifhments  would  the  poflerity  of  Adam  fuller  ? 
Or  what  greater  bleffings  could  believers  enjoy, 
beyond  what  Icripture  has  afhgned,  either  to  man- 
kind, as  therefult  of  the  fin  of  Adam  or  to  Chrifl 
as  the  refult  of  the  fins  of  men  ; or  to  believers , 
as  the  refult  of  the  righteoufnefs  of  Clirifl  ?” 


PART  V. 

The  dcBnne  of  original  fm. 

I Believe  every  impartial  reader  is  now  able  to 
judge,  whether  Dr. Taylor  has  folidly  anfwer- 
ed  Dr.  Watts  or  no.  But  there  is  another  not 
inconfiderable  writer  whom  I cannot  find  he 
has  anfwered  at  all,  tho'  he  has  publifhed  four 
feveral  tracts,  profeffedly  againfl  Dr.  Taylor: 
of  which  he  could  not  be  ignorant  becaufe  they 
are  mentioned  in  the  “ Ruin  and  recovery  of  hu- 
man nature . " I mean,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Sam.  Hebden, 
Miniftera^  TVrentham  in  Suffolk.  I think  it  there- 
fore highly  expedient,  to  fubjoin  a fliort  abflrafl 
of  thefe  alfo ; the  rather,  becaufe  the  trafts  them- 

felves 


elves  are  very  fcarce,  having  been  for  fome  time 
rut  of  print. 


Eccles.  vii.  29. 

Lo  this  only  have  I found , That  God  made  man 
■upright  ; but  they  have  Jo  light  out  many  inven- 
tions. 

“ TN  + the  preceding  verfe  Solomon  had  de- 
dared,  how  few  wife  and  good  perfons  he 
had  found  in  the  whole  courfe  of  his  life.  But 
left  any  flrould  blame  the  providence  of  God  for 
this,  he  here  obferves,  that  thefe  were  not  what 
God  made  man  at  firft  : and  that,  their  being 
what  they  were  not,  was  the  efTeft  of  a wretched 
apodafy  from  God.  The  original  words  Hand 

thus,  Only  fee  thou , I have  found 

“ \Only  ; This  word  lets  a mark  on  what  it  is 
prefixt  to,  as  a truth  of  great  certainty  and  im- 
portance. See,  obferve,  thou.  He  invites  every 
hearer  and  reader,  in  particular,  to  confider 
what  he  was  about  to  offer.  I have  found.  I have 
difcovered  this  certain  truth,  and  affert  it  oir  the 
fulled  evidence  ; That  God  made  man  upright  ; 
but  they  have  fought  out  many  inventions. 


“ The 


E 3 5$  ] 

“ The  Hebrew  word  which  we  render 
upright  is  properly  f oppofed  to  crooked,  irregu- 
lar, perverfe.  It  is  applied  to  things,  to  fignify  ■ 
their  being  Jlraight,  or  agreeable  to  rule.  But 
it  is  likewife  applied  both  to  God  and  man,  with 
the  words  and  works  of  both.  As  applied  to 
God,  the  ways  of  God,  the  word  of  God, 
it  is  joined  with  good,  Pfalm  xxv.  8.  with  right- 
eous, P/ahn  cxix.  137.  with  true  and  good,  Nek. 
ix.  13,  where  mention  is  made  of  right  judg • 
'meats,  true  laws,  good  Jiatates.  The  upiightnejs 
with  which  God  is  faid  to  viinijler  judgment  to 
the  people  anfwers  to  righteoufnefs.  In  a word, 
God’s  uprightnefs  is  the  moral  reHitude  of  his 
nature,  infinitely  wife  and  good,  juft  and  perfect. 
The  uprightnefs  of  man,  is  his  conformity,  of 
heart  and  life,  to  the  rule  he  is  under,  which  is 
the  law  or  will  of  God.  Accordingly  we  read 
of  uprightnefs  of  heart,  Pfdl.  xxxyi.  10.  Job. 
xxxiii.  3.  and  uprightnefs  of  way  or  converfation, 
If  xxxvii.  14.  and  often  el  few  here.  The  upright 
man  throughout  the  fcripture,  is  a truly  good 
man,  a man  of  integrity,  an  holy  perfon.i  In 
Job  i.  1,  8.  C.  ii.  3.  Upright  is  the  fame  with 
perfedl  (as  in  Pfal.  xxxvii.  37.  and  many  other 
places)  and  is  explained  by,  one  who  fearclh 
God  and  efcheweth  evil.  In  Job  viii.  6.  it  is 
joined,  and  is  the  fame  with,  pure.  In  the  fame 
fenfe  it  is  taken  (to  mention  but  a few  out  of 
many  texts  which  might  be  produced  Prov. 

x.  29.  ‘ 


+ P-5- 


t p.  6T 


[ 357  ] 


2g.  The  way  of  ihe  Lord  is  Jirength  to  the  up- 
right, but  dejlrutlion  Jhall  be  to  the  workers  vj 
niquity.  C.  xi.  g.  The  integrity  of  the  upright 
hall  guide  them  ; but  the  perver fiefs  of  tranfgr  ef- 
rors [hall  dejlroy  them . V.  6.  The  righteoufnefs  of 
die  upright  fiall  deliver  them;  but  tranjgrcjfors 
mail  be  taken  in  their  own  naughtinefs.  V.  11. 
By  the  bl effing  of  the  upright  the  city  is' exalted. 
C.xv.  8.  The  facrifice  of  the  tricked  is  an  abomina- 
tion to  the  Lord , but  the  prayer  of  the  upright  is  his 
delight.  C.  xxi.  29,  A wicked  man  hardnetk 
his  face , but  as  for  the  upright , he  direEleth  his  way. 
From  even  thefe  texts  it  manifeltly  appears, 
that  uprightnefs  as  applied  to  man,  is  the  verv 
fame  with  righteoufnefs , holme fs,  or  integrity  of 
of  heart  and  converfation. 

“ When  therefore  Solomon  fays,  God  made 
man  upright , the  plain,  undeniable  meaning  is, 
God  at  firft  formed  mant  righteous  or  holy  : al- 
tho’  they  have  fought  out  many  inventions.  They , — 
this  refers  to  Adam,  which  is  both  a lingular  and 
a plural  noun  : they  our  firft  parents,  and  with 
them  their  pofterity,  have  fought  out  many  inven- 
tions, many  contrivances,  to  offend  God  and  in- 
jure themfelves.  Thefe  many  inventions  are  op- 
pofed  to  the  uprightnefs,  the  fimplicity  of  heart 
and  integrity,  with  which  otw  firft  parents,  and 
mankind  in  them,  were  originally  made  by 
God. 

“ The 

t P-  7 • 


[ ] 

tl  The  doftrine  of  the  text  theta  is,  that  God 
at  his  creation  made  man  upright  or  righteous  ; 
not  only  rational  and  a free-agent,  but  holy. 
Therefore  ||  to  maintain,  that  “ iVlan  neither  was 
nor  could  be  formed  holy,  becaufe  none  can  be 
holy,  but  in  ccnfequence  of  his  own  choice  and 
endeavour,'’  is  bold  indeed  ! To  prove  the  con- 
trary, avid  juflify  Solomon’s  afFertion,  I offer  a 
few  plain  arguments. 

“ I.  Mofes  in  his  account  of  the  creation 
writes,  And  God  /aid,  Lei  us  make  man  in  our  own 
image.  Now  § that  righteoufnefs  or  holinefs  is 
the  principal  part  of  this  image  of  God,  appears 
from  Eph.  iv.  22,  2q,  and  Col.  iii.  9,  :0.  On 
which  palTages  I obferve,  1.  By  the  old  man  is 
not  meant  an  HealheniJJi  life,  or  an  ungodly  con- 
verfation.$  but  a corrupt  nature*  For  the  apof- 
tle  elfewhere  {peaks  of  our  old  man,  as  crucifed 
with  Chnjl ; and  here  diflinguifhes  from  it  their 
f ormer  converfation,  or  fmful  actions,  which  he 
calls  the  deeds  0) the  old  man.  2 By  the  new  man  is 
meant,  not  a new  ctsvrfe  <f  life , (as  the  Socinians 
interpretit)  but  a principle  of  grace,  called  by  St. 
Peter,  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart,  and  a divine 
nature.  3.  To  5 put  off  the  old  man  (the  fame  as 
to  crucify  th reflefh)  is  to  fubdue  and  mortify  our 
corrupt  nature  : to  put  on  the  new  man  is  to  flir  up 
and  cultivate  that  gracious  principle,  that  new 
nature.  This,  faith  the  apoftle,  is  created  after 
God , in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinefs.  It  is 

created: 


n p- 8- 


S?-  9- 


5 p. leu 


L 359  ] 

treated:  which  cannot  properly  be  fald,  of  a 
new  courfe  of  life  ; but  may,  of  a new  nature.  It 
is  created  after  God , -or  in  his  image  and  iikencfs 
mentioned  by  Moles.  But  \rhat  is  it  to  be  creat- 
ed after  God , or  in  his  image  ? It  is,  to  be  creat- 
ed in  righteoufnefs  and  true  holinejs : (termed 
knowledge. , the  practical  knowledge  of  God,  Col. 
iii.  10.)  But  if  to  be  created  after  God , or  in  his 
image  and  likens  ft,  is  to  be  created  in  righteoufnefs 
and  h ue  hohnefs,  and  if  that  principle  of  right* 
eoufnefs  and  holitiefs  by  which  weave  created  un- 
to good  works,  is  a nan  man,  a divine  nature  \ it 
is  eafy  to  infer,  that  man  was  at  fir  ft  created  right- 
•eous  or  koly. 

* “ II.  All  things,  as  at  find  made  by  God, 
wer  every  goad.  Noi  indeed  could  he  make  them 
otherwise.  Now  a rational  being  is  not  good , un- 
•Jefs  his  rational  powers  are  all  devoted  to  God. 
The  goodnefs  of  man,  as  a rational  being  mull 
lie  t in  a devotednefs  and  confecration  to  God. 
Confequently,  man  was  at  liril  thus  devoted  to 
God:  otherwife  he  was  not  good.  But  this  de- 
votednefs to  the  love  and  fervice  of  God  is  true 
righteoufnefs  or  holinefs.  This  righteoufnefs 
.then,  this  goodnefs,  or  uprightnefs,  this  regular 
and  due  Hate,  ordifpofition  of  the  human  mind, 
was  at  fid  11  natural  to  man.  It  was  wrought  into 
his  nature,  and  concreated  with-  his  rational 
powers.  A rational  creature,  as  Inch,  is  capable 
of  knowing,  loving,  ferving,  living  in  com- 
munion 


p.  12. 


I 36°  ] 

rnunion  with  the  Mott  Holy  One.  Adam  at  firfl 
either  did  or  did  not  ufe  this  capacity;  either  he 
knew  and  loved  God  or  he  did  not.  If  he  did 
not,  he  was  net  very  good , no,  nor  good  at  all ; 
if  he  did,  he  was  upright,  righteous,  holv. 

* “ III.  When  God  vetted  man  with  domi- 
nion over  the  other  creatures,  how  was  he  qua-  i 
lifted  for  exercifmg  that  dominion,  unlefshe  had  i 
in  himfelf  a principle  of  love  and  obedience  to 
the  fupreme  Governor  ? Did  not  God  form  *L 
the  creatures  obedient  to  man,  to  confirm  man  , 
in  his  loving  obedience  to  God?  Or  did  he 
create  them,  with  a difpofition  to  depend  on  and  | 
obey  man  as  their  lord,  and  not  create  man  j 
with  a difpofition  to  obey  and  live  dependent  on  J 
the  Lord  of  all  ? But  this  difpofition  is  upright-  I 
nefs.  Therefore  God  made  man  upright. 

“ IV.  Either  man  was  created  with  principles  I 
of  love  and  obedience,  or  he  was  create  1 an  ene- 
my to  God.  One  of  thefe  mutt  be  : for  as  all  the  ij 
duty  required  of  man,  as  a rational  being  is  fum- 
marily  co rriprifed  in  love,  a fupreme  love  to  God,  |i 
and  a fut-ordinate  love  to  others,  for  his  fake:  fo  k 
there  can be  no  medium  between  a rational  crea- 
tu re’s  loving  God,  and  not  loving,  which  is  ade- 
gree  o fenmUy  to  him.  Either,  O man,  thou  loveft  ■ 
God.  or  thou  dolt  not:  if  thou  doll,  thou  art  holy 
or  righteous  : if  thou  doft  not,  thou  art  indifpof-  c 
ed  to  ferve  him  in  fuch  a manner,  and  with  fuch 
a frame  of  fpirit  as  he  requires.  Then  thou  art  an 

enemy  M 


5 p.  13. 


Up.  14- 


[ 361  1 

§ enemy  to  God,  a rebel  againft  his  authority.  But 
God  could  not  create  man  in  fuch  a hate,  in  a 
Hate  of  enmity  againft  himfelf.  It  follows,  that 
man  was  created  a lover  of  God,  that  is  righteous 
and  holy. 

* “ In  a word.  ||  Can  you  prove,  either  that 
man  was  not  created  after  God,  or  that  this  does 
not  mean  being  created  in  righteoufnefs  and  true 
holinefs?  Was  not  man,  as  all  creatures,  good  in 
his  kind  ? And  is  a rational  creature  good,  unlefs 
all  its  powers  are  devoted  to  God?  Was  not 
man  duly  qualified  at  firft  to  exercife  dominion 
over  the  other  creatures  ? And  could  he  be  fo 
qualified  without  a principle  of  love  and  obedi- 

Ience  to  their  common  Lord?  Laftly,  Can  any 
man  prove,  either  that  man  could  be  innocent  if 
he  did  not  love  the  Lord  his  God  with  all  his 
heart  ? Or  that  fuch  a love  to  God  is  not  righte- 
oufnefs and  true  holinefs  ? 

“ + From  the  doftrine  of  man’s  original  righte- 
oufnefs  we  may  eafily  conclude  that  of  original 
fin;  \ For  this  reafon  it  is,  that  fome.fo  earneftly 
proteft  againft  original  rigkteoufnejs,  becaufe 
they  dread  looking  on  themfelves  as  by  nature 
fallen  creatures  and  children  of  wrath.  If  man 
was  not  holy  at  firft,  he  could  not  fall  from  a ftate 
of  holinefs  : and  confequently  the  firft  tranfgref- 
fion  expofed  him  and  his  pofterity  to  nothing  but 
temporal  death.  But  on  the  other  hand,  if  man 
was  made  upright  it  follows,  1.  That  man  when 
Vo l.  XXI.  Q he 

14.  Up.  15.  t p.  20.  J p.  21. 


[ 36z  ] 

'lie  TeH  loft  his  original  righteoufnefs,  and  there- 
with his  title  to  God's  favour  and  to  communion 
with  God.  2.  That  he  thereby  incurred  not  only 
temporal  but  fpintual  death.  He  became  dead 
in  fin  and  a child  of  wrath.  And  3.  That  all  his 
pofterity  are-born  with  fuch  a nature,  not  as  man 
had  at  firft,  but  as  he  contracted  by  his  fall. 


Gen',  ii.  16,  17. 

And  the  Lord  God  commanded  the  man,  faying.  Of 
every  tree  of  the  garden  thou  may)}  freely  eat : 
but  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil, 
thou  fia/t  not  eat  of  it.  For  in  the  day  that  then 
eatejl  thereof  thou  Jhalt  finely  die. 

" t OD  forbad  man  to  eat  of  this  tree,  in 
VJ"  token  of  his  fovereign  authority,  and 
for  the  exercife  of  man’s  love,  1 and  the  trial  of 
his  obedience.  The  words  added,  In  the  day 
thou- eatfl  thereof  theu f w.lt  furely  die,  or  literal!-.:. 
In  dying  ■ thou  fait  die,  mean,  not  only,  Thou 
fait  certainly  die,  but,  Thou  fait Jiiff er  every  kind 
of  death.  Thy  foul  as  well  as  thy  body  fhall  die. 
And  indeed  if  God  made  man  upright  or  holy: 
if  man  at  firft  enjoyed  the  life  cf  God, ' including 
fcolinefs  joined. with  bleftednefs : and  if  the  mi- 

fe  table 


+ p. 


n.  27. 


I 363  ] 


fcrabie  ftate  of  the  foul  (as  well  as  the  difiolution 
of  the  body)  is  in  fcripture  termed  death,  it 
plainly  follows,  that  the  original  threatning  in- 
cludes nothing  lefs  -than  a lofs  of  man's  original 
uprightnefs,  -of  his  title  to  God’s  favour,  and  a 
life  of  happy  communion  with  God. 

* “ The  words  mean  farther,  Thou  § fkalt  in- 
Jlandy  die.-,  as  foon  as  ever  thou  eat  eft.  And  fo 
he  did.  Ter  in  that  in.  ft  ant  his  original  righte- 
cufnefs,  title  te  Gods  favour,  [)  and  communion 
with  God  being  loft,  he  Was  fpiritually  dead, 
dead  in  fin,  his  foul  was  dead  to  God,  and  his 
body  liable  to  death,  temporal  and  eternal. 

“ And  as  there  is  a threatning  of  death  -ex- 
prefled  in  thefe  words,  fo  a protnife  of  life  is 
implied.  The  threatning  death,  only  in  cafe  of 
difobedience,  implied,  that  otherwife  he  fhould 
not  die.  And  even  t fmee  the  fall,  the  law  of 
God  promifes  life  to  obedience,  as  well  as 
threatens  death  to  difobedience : fince  the  tenor 
cf  it  is.  Do  this  and  live  : if  thou  ivilt  enter  into 
life,  keep  the  commandments. 

* “ f Notv  a law  given  by  God  with  a pro- 


mife  of  life  and  a threatning  of  death,  confented 
to  by  man,  is  evidently  a covenant . For  what  is 
a covenant?  But  a mutual  agreement  of  two  or 
more  parties  on  certain  terms  ? Now  in  this 
fenfe  God  covenanted  with  man,  and  man  cove- 
nanted with  God.  God  gave  a law,  promifing 


a* 


life 


hv-  28.  I p.  29. 

+ P-3°.  tp-3‘- 


L 364  ] 

life  in  cafe  of  obedience,  threatning  death  in 
cafe  of  difobedience.  And  man  accepted  of  the 
terms.  Here  therefore  was  areal  covenant. 

“ But  to  guard  this  againft  objeHions,  I add, 

1.  We  do  not  affirm,  that  God  vifibly  appear- 
ed, and  formally  treated  with  Adam,  as  one  man 
with  another.  Without  fo  formal  § a procedure, 
God  could  and  doubtlefs  did,  fignify  to  him,  on 
what  terms  he  was  to  expeft  life  or  death. 

“ 2.  We  do  not  affert,  that  God  promifed  to 
tranflate  him  to  heaven ; but  without  queftion  he 
made  Adam  fenfible,  that  if  he  continued  obe- 
dient he  fhould  continue  happy,  whether  in, 
paradife  or  fome  other  region. 

“ 3.  If  ||  one  greatly  fuperiorwill  freely  conde- 
fcend  to  treat  with  an  inferior,  this  does  not 
difannul  the  mutual  agreement,  or  hinder  its 
having  the  nature  of  a covenant.  So  God  entered 
into  a proper  covenant  with  Abraham  of  old, 
and  with  his  people  in  the  gofpel.  And  if  fo, 
much  more  might  he  do  fo  with  man,  when 
perfe&ly  upright  toward  God. 

“ And  this  covenant  was  made  with  Adam 
not  only  for  himfelf,  but  likewife  for  all  his  pof- 
terity.  This  appears 

“ 1.  t From  the  tenor  of  the  original  threat- 
ning, compared  with  the  prefent  flate  of  mankind. 
For  it  is  evident,  that  ever)'  one  of  his  pofterity 
is  born  liable  to  death  : that  the  death  to  which  all 
are  liable,  was  not  threatned  but  in  cafe  of  man’s 
• finning'. 

§ P-  32*  II  P-33*  I P-34- 


[ 3<55  ] 

fnning : that  man  was  not  liable  to  death  till  he 
finned , and  his  being  fo  was  the  xefult  of  the 
threatning ; and,  that  the  fcripture  conftantly 
points  at  fin  as  the  foie  caufe  of  death , and  of  all 
fujfering.  But  if  all  mankind  are  born  liable  to 
that  which  was  originally  threatned  only  to  fin, 
then  all  mankind  are  accounted  finners,  and  as 
fuch  are  concerned  in  the  original  threatning , 
and  confequently  in  the  original  promife. 

2.  ^ From  1 Cor.  xv.  22.  In  Adam  all  die. 
Here  the  apoftle  fpeaks  not  of  both  our  parents, 
but  of  Adam  fingly,  (as  alfo  Rom.  v.)  to  denote 
our  peculiar  relation  to  him.  The  ^//mentioned 
are  all  his  natural  defcendents,  who  all  die  in  or 
through  him , that  is,  are  liable  to  death  on  ac- 
count of  their  relation  to  him.  And  it  is  not 
only  a bodily  death  that  is  here  fpoken  of ; for  it 
hands  oppofed  not  to  a bare  revival  of  the  body, 
but  to  a happy  and  glorious  refurreftion,  fuch  as 
they  that  are  ChriJIs  will  partake  of  at  his  fecond 
coming.  For  of  this  refurreftion,  not  that  of  the 
ungodly,  the  apoftle  is  fpeaking  throughout  this 
chapter.  But  § they  could  not  die  in  Adam,  if 
they  did  not  in  fome  fenfe  fin  in  him , and  fall 
with  him:  if  the  covenant  had  not  been  made 
with  him,  not  for  himfelf  only  but  for  all  his 
pofterity. 

* 3.  From  verfe  45  and  47  of  the  fame  chapter. 
Th 2 firjl  man,  Adam,  and  the  fecond  man,  thelaf 
Adam  are  here  oppofed.  Now  why  is  Chrift, 
O q notwith- 

•v  U 

+ P-  35-  § P«  36. 


C 366  ] 

notwithftanding  the  millions  of  men  intervening 
between  Adam  and  him,  and  following  after  his- 
birth,  called  the fccond  man , and  the  lajl  Adam? 
We  have  an  anfwer  Rom.  v.  12,  14,  &c.  where 
Adam  is  faid  to  be  a figure  of  ChriJ} : and  the 
refemblance  between  them  is  fhewn  to  lie  in  this, 
that  as  fin  and  death  defeend  Irom  one,  lo  righ- 
teou fiefs  and  life  from  the  other.  Confequentlv 
whatChxill  is  with  regard  to  all  his  fpiritual  feed, 
that  Adam  is  with  regard  to  all  his  natural  de- 
feendents,  namely,  a public  perfon,  a federal 
head , a legal  reprefentatrve  : one  with  whom  the 
covenant  was  made  not  only  for  himfelf,.  but  alfo 
for  his  whole  polterity.:’ 


John  iii.  5,  6. 

Except  a man  be  born  of  water  and  of  ihe  Spirit,  he 
cannot  en'er  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 

That  which  is  born  of  the  fefi,  is  f.efn  : and  that 
which  is  born  of  the  Spirit,  is fpirit. 

<l  TN  this  text  we  have 

“ I.  The  New  Birth  deferibed ; 

“ II.  The  neceffity  of  it  infilled  on  ; 

“III.  The  original  corruption  of  every  child 


r &r  ] 

©f  Adam  obferved,  as  that  from  which  the  ne« 
ceffityof  fuch  a change  arifes.’*- 

* “ I.  The  New  Birth  is- here  defcribed. 
Whatever  this  implies,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  the 
foie  author  of  it.  He  does  not  help  a man  to 
regenerate  himfelf,  but  takes  the  work  into  his 
own  hands;  A child  ol  God,  as  fuch,  is  not 
born  of  blood ; does  not  become  fo  by  a defcent 
from  pious  parents.  He  is  not  born  of  the  will 
of  the  flefh,  is  not  renewed  by  the  power  of  his 
own  carnal  will  ; nor  - of  man , of  any  man 
whatfoever,  but  of  God:  by  the  foie  power  of  his 
Spirit. 

In  regeneration  the  holy  Spirit  mortifies  the 
aid  man,  corrupt  nature,  and  breathes  a principle 
of  life  into  the  foul  : a principle  of  faith,  of  fin- 
cere  love,  and  willing  obedience  to  God.  He 
who  was  dead  in  fin,  is  now  dead  to  fin,  and  alive 
to  God  through  Jefus  Chrijl.  God  has  created  in 
him  a clean  heart,  and  renewed  a right  fpirit 
within  him.  He  has  created  him  unto  good  works, 
and  written  his  law  in  his  heart.  But  if  the  Spirit 
of  God  is  the  foie  agent  in  the  work  of  regenera- 
tion : if  the  foul  of  man  has  no  aftive  interefl  or 
concern  in  his  being  born  again : if  man  was 
created  holy,  and  regeneration  re-inftamps  that 
holy  image  of  God  on  the  foul:  if  the  new  man 
is  created  after  God  in  righleoufnefs  and  true  holi- 
nejs  : if  the  corruption  of  nature  (termed  the  old 
man  or  fefi ) is  not  contracted  by  imitation  or 
_ Q 4 cuflom, 


C 368  ] 

cuftom,  but  is  an  inbred,  hereditary  diftemper, 
coeval  with  our  nature  : if  all  truly  good  works 
are  the  fruits  of  a good  heart,  a good  principle 
wrought  in  the  foul : it  plainly  follows,  that  the 
faith,  hope,  love,  fear,  which  diftinguifh  the 
children  of  God  from  others,  are  not  of  the  na- 
ture of  acquired , but  of  infufed  habits  or  princi- 
ples. To  fay  then,  “ That  all  holinefs  mull  be 
“ the  effeft  of  a man’s  own  choice  and  endea- 
“ vour,  and  that  by  a right  ufe  of  his  natural 
“ powers  every  man  may  and  muft  attain  an  habit 
“ of  holinefs,  that  is,  be  born  again  however 
pleafing  it  may  be  to  human  vanity,  is  contrary 
to  the  whole  tenor  of  fcripture. 

“ And  all  the  fcriptural  expreffions  on  this 
head  are  grounded  on  the  real  nature  of  things. 
Sin  is  of  the  nature  of  flth  and  corruption.  It 
pollutes  the  whole  man,  and  renders  him  as  an 
unclean  thing  in  the  fight  of  God.  When  there- 
fore the  .Spirit  of  God  removes  this,  he  is  faid  to 
create  a clean  heart,  to  purify  the  heart,  to  fprinklc 
clean  water  upon  us,  to  zvajh  us  from  omfilthinefs. 
And  this  cleanfing  efficacy  is  in  the  text  expreft 
by  being  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit. 

When  therefore  our  Lord  fpeaks  of  being 
born  of  the  Spirit,  his  plain  meaning  is,  there 
is  a fpiritual  cleanfing  you  muft  partake  of,  men- 
tioned in  thofe  promifes,  I will  Jprinkle  dean 
water  upon  you  and  ye  Jhall  be  clean,  from  all  your 
flthinefs  and  from  all  your  idols  will  I cleanfe  you. 

A new 


[ 369  1 


;| 


A new  heart  alfo  will  I give  you,  and  a new  /pint 
will  I put  within  you.  And  I will  take  away  the 
Jlony  heart,  and  I will  give  you  an  heart  of  fiefk. 
Thefe  promifes  give  us  a plain  defcription  of  the 
Spirit’s  regenerating  work:  without  experienc- 
ing which,  our  Hate  is  miferable  now,  and  will 
be  much  more  fo  hereafter. 

“ II.  For  this  fpiritual  renovation  of  the  foul, 
is  indifpenfably  neceffary.  Without  it  none  can 
enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  either  the  kingdom 
of  grace  or  of  glory. 

“ 1.  Except  a man  he  born  of  the  Spirit,  he  can- 
not enter  into  the  kingdom  of  grace  : he  cannot  be 
a loyal  fubjedl  of  Jefus  Chrift.  By  nature  wTe  are 
fubjedls  of  Satan  : and  fucli  we  muff  remain*, 
unlefs  renewing  grace  iranfate  us  into  the  king- 
dom of  God's  dear  Son. 

“ 2.  Confequently,  except  we  are  born  again, 
we  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  ok  glory.  In- 
deed, fuppofing  he  could  be  admitted  there,  what 
could  an  unregenerate  firmer  do  in  heaven  ? He 
could  not  poflibly  have  any  relifh  either  for  the: 
bufinefs,  the  company,  or  the  enjoyments  of  that 
world. 


“ Hh  Our  Lord  having  afferted  the  abfolute 
neceflity  of  the  New  Birth,  to  fhew  the  ground 
of  this  neceffity  adds,  That  which  is  lorn  of  the 
fefh,  is  fefi ; and  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit, 
is fpint.  Here  obferve 
0,5 


“ 1.  Our 


[ 37°  J 

“ 1.  Our  Lord  oppofes  JleJh  and  Spirit  to  each 
other,  which  oppofttion  we  often  meet  with. 
Whatever  therefore  is  meant  by  thefe  two,  they 
denote  things  oppofite. 

“2.  He  fpeaks  here  of  two  feveraf  bi/lhsr 
which  are  diflinctly  mentioned. 

“ 3.  The  former  of  thefe  two  is  fpoken  of  as 
that  which  renders  theother  fo  neceffary.  Becaufe 
that  which  is  horn  of  the  fejh,  is  JleJh,  therefore 
we  mujl  be  born  of  the  Spirit.  Therefore  this, 
great  change  muff  be  wrought  in  us,  or  we  can- 
not enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 

“ 4.  If  the  latter  of  thefe  is  made  neceffary  by 
the  former,  then  to  be  bornfefi  is  to  be  born  cor- 
rupt and  finful.  And  indeed,  the  word  flefi  is 
very  frequently  taken  for  the  corrupt  principle  in 
inan.  It  is  always  fo  taken  when  it  Hands 
oppofed  to  the  Jpirit,  or  to-  that  inwrought 
principle  of  obedience,  which  itfelf  aifo  : taking 
the  name  of  its  author]  is  fometimes  termed 
/pint. 

“ Now  in  the  text,  whatever  or  whoever  it 
bom  of  a man  fince  the  fall,  is  denominated  ffu 
And  that  flefi  is  here  put,  not  for  finlefs  frailty, 
but  finful  corruption  we  learn  from  its  being  op- 
pofed to  the  Jpirit.  Chrift  teas  born  frail,  as 
well  as  we,  and  in  this  fenrfe  teas  fejh:  yet  being 
without  fin  he  had  no  need  to  be  born  of  the  Spirit . 
This  is  not  made  neceffary  by  any  finlefs  infirmi- 
ties, but  by  a finful  nature  only.  This  alone  is 

oppofite 


C 37 1 ] 

oppofite  to  the  fpirit;  thus  therefore  we  mull  un- 
derhand it  here. 

“ But  Dr.  Taylor  fays,  “ To  be  born  of  the 
“ flefh  is  only  to  be  naturally  born  of  a woman.” 
I anfwer,  Is  not  fltjli  oppofed  to  fpirit  in  this 
verfe  ? Is  it  not  the  Spirit  of  God  which  is  fpoken 
of  in  the  latter  claufe,  together  with  the  principle 
of  grace,  which  is  in  every  regenerate  perfon  ? 
And  is  any  thing befide  finful  corruption  oppofite 
to  the  Spirit  pi  God  ? No  certainly  : but  if  fo, 
and  if  wherever  fejh  is  oppofed  to  the  Spirit,  it 
implies  finful  corruption,  then  it  is  evident  to  be 
born  of  the jlefi  is  to  be  the  finful  offspring  of  fin- 
ful parents,  fo  as  to  have  need  of  the  renewing 
influences  of  the  holy  Spirit,  on  that  account, 
even  from  our  birth. 

“ If  to  walk  after  the  Jlefi,  as  oppofed  to.  walkings 
after  the  Spirit,  is  to  follow  our  finful  inclinations  ^ 
if  to  be  in  the  fejh  oppofed  to  being  in  the  Spirit r 
is  to  be  in  a ftate  of  fin  ; if  the  ffi  and.  the  Spirit  - 
are  two  contrary  principles,  which  counter-aft 
each  other;  Gal.  v.  16,  17.  If  the  works  of  th * 
Jlefi  and  the  lufs  oj  the  flejh  are  oppofed  to  the 
Spirit  and  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  : then  to  be  born 
of  the  flefi  muff  fignify  more  tlian  barely  to  be 
born  of  a woman.  Had  Adam  tranfmitted  apure. . 
nature  to  his  defcendents>  ftill  each  of  therm, 
would  have  been  born  of  a woman , but  they 
would  have  had  no  neceffity  of  being  born  of  the 
Spirit,  or  renewed  by  the  HolyGhoff. 

“ But  what  is  that  corruption  of  nature  which 
O 6 the 


[ 372  ] 

the  fcripture  terms  JleJh  ? There  are  two  branches 
of  it ; 1.  A want  of  original  righteoufnefs,  2.  A 
natural  propenfity  to  fin. 

“ 1.  A want  of  original  righteoufnefs.  God 
created  man  righteous  ; holinefs  was  con-natural 
to  his  foul;  a principle  of  love  and  obedience  to 
God.  But  when  he  finned  he  loft  this  principle. 
And  every  man  is  now  born  totally  void  both  of 
the  knowledge  and  love  of  God. 

“ 2.  A natural  propenfity  to  fin  is  in  even'  man. 
And  this  is  infeparable  from  the  other.  If  man 
is  born  and  grows  up  without  the  knowledge  or 
loVe  of  God,  he  is  born  and  grows  up  propenfe 
to  fin  : which  includes  two  things,  an  avcrfion  to 
what  is  good,  and  an  inclination  to  what  is  evil. 

“ We  are  naturally  aver fe  to  what  is  good.  The. 
carnal  mind  is  enmity  againfl  God.  Nature  does 
not,  will  not,  cannot  fubmit  to  his  holy,  juft  and 
good  law.  Therefore  they  that  are  in  the  JleJh 
cannot  pleaft  God.  Being  averfe  to  the  will,  law 
and  ways  of  God,  they  are  utterly  indifpofed 
for  fuch  an  obedience,  as  the  relation  between 
God  and  man  indifpenfably  requires. 

“ And  as  we  arc  all  naturally  averfe  to  what  is 
good,  fo  we  are  naturally  inclined  to  what  is  evil. 
Even  young  children  of  themfelves  run  into  evil; 
but  are  with  difficulty  brought  to  pracHfe  what  is 
good.  No  fooner  do  they  difcovev  reafon,  than 
they  difcover  evil,  unreafonable  difpofitions. 
And  thefe  difcovering  themfelves  in  ever}'  one, 
even  from  his  early  childhood,  manifeflly  prove 

the 


[ 373  ] 

the  inbred  and  univerfal  corruption  of  human 
nature. 

“ But  why  is  this  corruption  termed Jlefli  ? Not 
becaufe  it  is  confined  to  the  body.  It  is  the  cor- 
- ruption  of  our  whole  nature,  and  is  therefore 
termed  the  old  man.  Not  becaufe  it  confids 
merely  in  a repugnance  of  the  fenfual  appetites 
to  reafon.  This  is  but  one  branch  of  that  corrup- 
tion ; the  whole  of  it  is  far  more  extend  ve.  Not 
becaufe  it  is  primarily  feated  in  the  body;  it  is 
primarily  feated  in  the  foul.  If fin  reigns  in  our 
mortal  bodies,  it  is  becaufe  the  finful  foul  ufes 
the  bodily  members  as  infruments  of  unrighteouf- 
nefs. 

“ Nay,  all  which  thofe  words,  That  vihich  is 
“ born  of  fefh  is  fefh,  mean,  is  this,  all  men 
“ being  defeended  of  frail  and  mortal  parents,  are 
“ like  them,  frail  and  mortal.  In  confequence 
“ of  Adam’s  fin  all  his  defeendent’s  die.” 

“ I anfwer,  1.  Though  this  is  true,  it  is  not 
the  whole  truth.  Nor  is  it  the  proper  truth  of  the 
text : which  fpeaks  of  our  being  born  of  the  fefh , 
as  the  reafon  why  we  mull  be  born  of  the  Spirit. 

!“  2.  It  is  not  confident  with  the  moral  perfec- 
tions of  God,  for  finlefs  creatures  to  be  born 
mortal.  Death  in  every  fenfe  of  the  word  is  the 
proper  wages  of  fin.  Sin  has  the  fame  cafual  in- 
fluence on  death,  as  the  obedience  of  Chrilt  has 
on  eternal  life. 

“ 3.  We  were  not  only  born  mortal,  but 

children 


f 374  J 

children  of  wrath-,  wc  who  are  now  regenerate  as 
well  as  others. 

“ 4-  The  fcripture  afcrifces  both  our  mortality 
and  corruption  to  our  relation  to  Adam.  In  him 
all  die:  through  the  offence  of  one,  many,  all 
mankind,  art  dead,  liable  to.  death.  Again:  By 
the  difobedience  of  one,  the  fame,  many  are  cortjii- 
tuied  f nners.  Therefore  when  our  Lord  fare. 
That  which  is  horn  of  the  flejli  is  fejh,  he  means 
not  only,  that  we  and  our  parents  are  mortal-, 
but  that  all  mankind  derive  /inritual  as  well  as 
temporal’ death,  from  their  firft  father. 


S CRIP  TUR  E DOCTRINE 

O Ft 

Imputed  Sin  and  Right eoujnejs* 


**  I.  O IN  f is  a tranfgrffion  of  the  law,  of  thar 
O 13V/  of  God  to  which  a rational  creature 


C 375  i 

is  fubjcft.  Righteoufiefs  is,  a fulfilment  of,  or 
conformity  to  that  lawn  This-  is.  the  proper  fcrip- 
tural  fenfe  of  the  wofdsJ"  But  as  fm  involves 
the  creature  in. guilt,  that  is  a liablenefs  to  punifii- 
meat,  the  fame  words  are  often  ufed  to  denote 
either itfelf,  or  guilt  and  puriifhment.  On  the 
other  hand,  righleoujnefs  denotes  not  only  a fulfil- 
ling of  the  law,,  but  alio  a freedom  from  guilt,  and 
punijhment.  Yea,,  and  fometimes  all  the  rewards 
\ of  righteoufnefs. 

“ ^Accordingly,  to  impute  fin  r is  either-  to  im, 
put  zfinitff,  ox  guilt  on  the  account  of  it.  To 
impute  fin  ifelj  to  a perfon,  is  to  account  him  a 
tranfgrelfor  of  the  law  : to  pronounce  him  fuch  • 
or  to  treat  him  as  a tranfgrelfor.  To  impute  guilt 
to  a perfon,  is  to  account  him  obnoxious  to  a 
thr earned  punifhment:  to  pronounce  him.  fo  - 
or  to  inllift.  that  punLfhment.  So,,  to -impute, 
righteoufnefs  properly  lo  called,  is.to  account  him 
a fulfiller  of  the  law  : to  pronounce  him  fs-to  be: 
and  to  treat  him  as  righteous.  And  to  impute 
righteoufnefs  as  oppofed  to  guilt,  is  to  account,  to 
pronounce,  and  to  treat  him  as  guiltlefs. 

“ Thus  much  is  agreed.  But  the  point  in  quef- 
tion  is,.  “ Does  God  impute- 1|  no  fin  or  righteouf 
nefs  but  what  is  perfonal  ?”  Dr.  Taylor  polxtive- 
ly  alferts,  he  does  not.  I undertake  to  prove, 
that  he  does  : that  he  imputes  Adam’s  firlh  fin, 
to,  all  mankind,  and  our  fins  to  Chrift. 

“ I.  God 

+ P-  2-  t p.  5.  d ?•  5.* 


[ 376  ] 

“ I.  God  imputes  Adam’s/?y?  fin  to  all  man- 
kind, I do  not  mean,  that  the  T aElual  commijfon 
of  it  was  imputed  to  any  befide  himfelf : (it  was 
impoffible,  it  fhould).  Nor  is  the  guilt  of  it  imput- 
ed to  any  of  his  dependents,  in  the  full  latitude 
of  it,  or  in  regard  to  its  attendant  circumftances. 
It  conftitutes  none  of  them  equally  guilty  with 
him.  Yet  both  that  fin  itfelf,  and  a degree  of 
guilt  on  account  of  it,  are  imputed  to  all  his  pof- 
terity : the  fin  itfelf  is  imputed  to  them,  as  includ- 
ed in  their  head.  And  on  this  account,  they  are 
reputed  guilty,  are  children  of  wrath,  liable  to 
the  threatned  punifhment.  And  this  cannot 
be  denied,  fuppofing  1.  Man's  original  rigkte- 
oufnefs  2.  Adam’s  being  the  federal  head  of  all 
mankind. 

“ 1.  Man’s  ^original  righteoufnefs  has  been 
largely  proved.  Let  me  add  only  an  § argument 
ad  hominem.  Suppofing  (not  granting)  that  the 
Son  of  God,  is  no  more  than  the  firft  of  crea- 
tures, either  he  was  originally  righteous , or  he 
was  not.  If  he  was  not,  then  time  was,  when 
he  was  not  the  holy  one  of  God  ; and  poffibly  he 
never  might  have  been  fuch,  no,  nor  righteous 
at  all : but  inftead  of  that,  as  ungodly,  guilty,  and 
wretched  as  the  devil  himfelf  is.  For  the  heft 
creature  is  (Dr.  Taylor  grants)  alterable  for  the 
worfe,  and  the  beft  when  corrupted  becomes  the 
worft.  Again  if  the  Son  of  God  was  a mere  crea- 
ture, and  as  fuch  made  without  righteoufuefs 

(which 

+ p.  6.  $ p.  7.  § p.  9- 


[ 377  ] 

(which  every  creatm-e  mud  be  according  to  Dr. 
Taylor)  then  he  was  not,  could  not  be  at  firft  as 
righteous,  as  like  God  as  the  holy  angels  are 
now,  yea,  or  as  any  holy  man  on  earth  is.  But 
if  thefe  fuppofitions  are  fhockingiv  abfurd,  if  the 
Son  of  God  could  not  have  become  as  bad  as  the 
devil,  if  he  never  was  unrighteous,  if  he  was 
not  originally  lefs  holy,  than  angels  and  men 
are  now  : then  the  affertion,  “ That  righteouf- 
•nefs  mull  be  the  effefl  of  a creature’s  antece- 
dent choice  and  endeavour,”  falls  to  the  ground. 

“ But  the  Hebrew  word  Jafher,  Dr.  Taylor 
fays  “ does  not  generally  fignify  a moral  cha- 
racter. ” This  is  one  of  the  numerous  critical  mif- 
takes  in  this  gentleman’s  books.  Of  the  more 
than  150  texts  in  which  Jafher  or  the  fubftantive 
Jofher  occurs,  there  are  very  few  which  do  not 
confirm  our  interpretation  of  Ecclef.  vii.  29. 
“ But  Jafher  is  applied  to  various  things  not  capa- 
ble of  moral  a£tion.”  It  is  and  whatthen  ? Many 
of  thefe  applications  are  neither  for  us,  nor  a- 
gainft  us.  Some  makeftrongly  for  us  ; as  when 
’tis  applied  to  the  words  or  ways  of  God  and  man. 
But  the  queflion[|  now  is,  what  it  fignifies, 
when  applied  to  God  or  to  moral  agents,  and 
that  by  way  of  oppofition  to  a vicious  character 
and  conduft?  Is  it  not  in  the  text  before  us, 
applied  to  man  as  a moral  agent,  and  by  way 
of  oppofition  to  a corrupt  charafter  and  conduft  ? 
No  man  can  deny  it.  Either  therefore  prove, 

That 


Up.  «. 


[ 3 7?  ] 

That  Jafhar,  when  oppofed,  as  here,  te  a eor^ 
fnpt  conduft  and  character,  does  not  fingif 'f 
righteous  or  acknowledge  the  truth,  that  God 
created  man  upright  or  righteous. 

“To  evade  the  argument  from  Eph.  iv.  24. 
Dr.  Taylor  fir  ft  fays,  “ The  o!d  man  means  an; 
healhenijh  life,  and  then  favs,  The  cld  and  new  mart 
do  not  fignify  a cotirfe  of  life.”  What  then  do 
they  fignify?  Why,  "The  old  man,  fays  he,  relates 
to  the  Gentile  date  : and  the  new  man  is  either 
the  Chriltian  date,  or  the  Chriftian  church,  body,  j 
fociety.”  But  for  all  this,  he  favs  again  a page  or 
two  after,  “ The  old  and  new  man,  and  the  new  I 
marts  being  renewed,  and  the  renewing  of  the  j 
Ephjtans  do  all  manifcftJy  refer  to  their  Gentile  8 
Jtate  and  wicked  conrft  of  life,  from  which  they  j 
were  lately  converted.” 

“ "When  then  the  apoftle  fays,  (Rom.  vi.  6.)  I 
Our  old  man  is  crucified  with  Chrift,  is  it  the  Gen-  2 
tile  Jlate  or  courfe  of  life  which  was  fo  crucified  ? 
No  : but  the  corrupt  nature,  the  body  of  Jin,  as  it 
is  termed  in  the  lame  verfe.  And  to  put  off 
the.  old  mani  is  [according  to  St.  Paul)  to  crucify  i> 
this  with  its  ajfeclions  and  de/ires.  On  the  other  {j 
hand,  To  put  on  the  new  man,  is  to -cultivate  i 
the  divine  principle,  which  is  formed  iathe  foul  ) 
of  every  believer,  by  the  Spirit  of  Cln  ifl.  It  is  i 
this  of  which  it  is  faid,  1.  It  is  created ; and  in  1 
regard  to  it  we  are  faid  to  be  i created  unto  good  \ 
works.  2.  It  is  renewed  ; for  it  is  indeed  no  other  jj 

than  I 


+ P'  13- 


+ r- 


L 379  ] 

tKan  original  right'coufnefs  reftored.  3.  It  is  after 
God,  after  his  image  and  lihenefs,  now  {lamp- 
ped  afreih  on  the  foul  : 4,  It  confifls  in  righte- 
oujaefs  and  hoitnejs  or  that  knowledge  which  corm 
prehends  both. 

“ Again,  to  that  argument,  “ Either  man 
at  firft  loved  God,  or  he  was- an  enemy  to  God/’ 
Dr.  Taylor  gives  only  this  flight,  fuperficial  an- 
fwer,  “ Man  could  not  love  God  before  he 
knew  him  c”  without  vouchfafing  the  leaft  no- 
tice of  the  arguments  which  prove,  that  man  was 
not  created  without  the  knowledge  ©f  Godw 
Let  him  attend  to  thole  proofs,,  and  either  ho- 
neftlv  yield  to  their  force,  or  if  he  is  able,  fairly 
confute  them. 

“Thedoffrine  of  original  fin  pre-fuppofes,. 

“ 2.  Adam’s  being;  the  federal  head  of  all  man- 
kind.  Several  proofs  of  this  having  been  given, 
already,  I need  not  produce  more  till  thofe  are 
anfwered. 

“ II.  God  imputes  our  fins  or  the  guilt  of  them 
to  Chrift.  He  confented  to  be  relponflble  for 
them,  to  buffer  the  punifhment  f due  for  them. 
This  fufficiently  appears  from  Ifa.  liii.  which  con- 
tains a.  fummary  of  the  feripture  doff  line  upon 
this  head!  He  hath  horn  ou-r  griefs  and  carried  our 
Jorrows.  The  4 word  Nafa  [borne)  fignifies,  1.T&. 
take  up  fomewhat,  as  on  one’s  fhoulders,  2.  To 
bear  or  carry  fomething  weightv,  as  a porter  does- 
a burden  ; 3.  To  take  away  : and  in  all  thefe 

fenfes 


i p.  16, 


1 Tv 


C 380  ] 

fenfes  it  is  here  applied  to  the  Son  of  God  : he 
carried  — as  a flrong  man  does  an  heavy  burden 
(the  dear,  indifputable  fenfe  of  the  other  word, 
Sabal)  our  for  rows\  the  fufferings  of  various  kinds, 
whidt  were  due  to  our  fins.  He  was  § wounded 
for  our  tranfgreflions,  and  bruifed  for  our  ini- 
quities. Wounds  and  bruifies  are  put  for  the 
whole  of  his  fufferings  ; as  his  death  and  blood 
frequently  are.  He  was  wounded  and  bruifed , not 
for  fins  of  his  own;  not  merely,  to  fhew  God’s 
hatred  of  fin,  not  chiefly , to  give  us  a pattern  of 
patience  ; but  for  our  fins,  as  the  proper,  im- 
pulfive  caufe.  Our  fins  were  the  procuring  caufe 
of  all  his  fufferings.  His  fufferings  were  the  pe- 
nal effeds  of  our  fins.  ||  The  chaflifement  of  our  peace 
the  punifhment  necefTary  to  procure  it,  was  laid 
on  him,  freely  fubmitting  thereto  : and  by  his 
fripes  (a  part  of  his  fufferings  again  put  for  the 
whole)  we  are  healed ; pardon,  fandification 
and  final  falvation,  are  all  purchafed  and  bellow- 
ed upon  us.  Every  chaflifement  is  for  fome  fault. 
That  laid  on  Chrift  was  not  for  his  own,  but 
ours  ; and  was  needful  to  reconcile  an  offended? 
law-giver,  and  offending  guilty  creatures  to  each 
other.  So  the  Lord  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us 
all,  that  is,  the  punifhment  due  to  our  ini- 
quity. 

“ f ’Tis  true,  as  Dr.  Taylor  fays,  “ Sin  and 
iniquity  often  fignifv  ajfli&ion  or fujfering.'  But 
why?  Becaufe  it  is  ufual  for  a caufe  to  give  ce- 

nomination 

^p.18.  ||p;  19.  ? p.  20.  +p.  21. 


[ 38*  3 

nomination  to  its  effeEt.  And  fo  the  confe- 
quences  of fin  are  called  by  the  | fame  name. 
But  this  rather  hurts  Dr.  Taylor’s  caufe  than  helps 
it.  For fujfenngs  could  with  no  propriety  be 
called  Jin , if  they  were  not  the  proper  effects  of 
it.  Man  in  innocence  washable  to  no fujfering 
or  forrow ; he  was  indeed  tried  ; but  not  by  Juf- 
fering.  All  forrow  was  introduced  by  fin  ; and 
if  man  is  born  to  trouble , it  is  becaufe  he  is  born 
in  fin.  God  indeed  does  afflid  his  children  for 
their  good ; and  turns  even  death  into  a blelfmg. 
Yet  as  it  is  the  effefl  of  fin , fo  is  it  in  itfelf  an 
enemy  to  all  mankind  : nor  would  any  man  have 
been  either  tried  or  correfled  by  ajJUSion , had 
it  not  been  for  fn. 

“ § The  Lord’s  laying  on  Chrift  the  iniquity  of 
us  all  was  eminently  typified  by  the  high-prieft, 
putting  all  the  iniquities  of  Ifrael  on  the  fcape- 
goat,  who  then  carried  them  away.  “ But  the 
||  goat,  fays  Dr.  Taylor,  was  to  fuffer  nothing.” 
This  is  a grofs  miftake.  It  was  a fin-offering , 
(V.  ,5.)  and  as  fuch  was  to  bear  upon  him  all  the 
iniquities  of  the  people  into  the  wildernefs,  and 
there  (as  the  Jewifh  doftors  unanimoufly  hold) 
to  fuffer  a violent  death,  by  way  of  punifhment , 
inftead  of  the  people,  for  their  fins  put  upon  him. 
Yet  Dr.  Taylor  fays,  “ Here  was  no  imputation 
of  fin.”  No  ! What  is  the  difference  between  im- 
puting fins  and  putting  them  upon  him  ? This  is 
juft  of  apiece  with  “ A jn-ojfering  that  buffered 

nothing.” 

$ p.  £2.  $ p.  23.  H p.  24- 


C ] 

■nothing;”  a creature  “ turned  loofe  into  a land 
the  propereft  -5  for  its  fubfiftence,”  while  bear - 
tng  upon  him  all  the  iniquities  -of  God's  people!” 

“ + Thus  Chrijl  redeemed  us  from  the  curfi  ef 
the  law  being  made  a curfe Jor  vs.  t Dr.  Taylor 
■when  he  wrote  his  late  books  was  not  a]>prired  of 
the  ufual  feripture-meaning  of  this  awful  word 
curfe.  !Tis  often  put  to  fignify  the  legal pumfi- 
ment  of  fin.  What  the  Jaw  of  God  threatens 
againft  tranfgreffors  or  tire  thr-eatning  itfe'lf  is  fre- 
quently called  by  this  name.  What  figmfies 
then  his  trifling  obfervation,  “ That  God  infix- 
ed no  curje  on  our  firft  parents,  Gen.  iii.  16, 
«7,  18.  That  i-s,  he  did  not  fav  in  fo  many 
words,  “ turfed  art  thou , O man,  or  O woman.” 
But  God's  cttrfng  the  ground  for  mans  fake,  was 
really  a curfe  pronounced  againfl  him ; and  what 
the  Lord  faid*to  the  woman  was  really  a curfe,  a 
penalty  legally  inflicted  on  her.  For  God  is  then 
faid  to  curfe,  when  he  eidier  threatens  to  punifh, 
or  actually  punifhes  his  creatures  ior  fin.  See 
Deut.  xxvii.  15,  & c.  ch.  xxviii.  10,  Ac-  Jer. 
xvii.  5.  Zech.  v.  3. 

,<!  To  conclude.  j|  lather  we  muff  allow  the 
imputation  of  Adam  s fin,  whatever  difficulties  at- 
tend it,  or  renounce j uflif cation  by  Chnjl,  sw\ fli- 
rtation through  the  merit  of  his  blood.  Accord- 
ingly the  Socinians  do  this.  W hether  Dr.  Tay- 
lor does,  let  every  thinking  man  judge,  after 
having  weighed  what  he  writes,  particularly  at 

p.  72 , 

-|  p.  80. 


5 p.25. 


+ F-39- 


[ 3^3  ] 

p,  72,73,  of  his  Scripture-doctrine.  “ The  worthi- 
nefs  of  Chrift  is  his  confummate  virtue.  It  is 
virtue  that  carrieth  every  catife  in  heaven.  Vir- 
tue is  the  only  price  which  purchafeth  'every 
tiling  with  God..  True  virtue,  or  the  right  exer- 
cife  of  reafon,  § is  true  worth,  and  the  only  va - 
1-uabU  ccii/ideralion , the  only  power  which  pre- 
vails wjth  God.”  Thefe  paifages  are  indeed 
connected  with  others,  which  carry  with  them  a 
Ihew  ol  aferibing  honour  to  Chrift  and  grace. 
But  the  fallacy  lies  open  to  every  careful,  intel- 
ligent, unprejudiced  -reader.  He  aferihes  to 
Chrifla  Angular  war  thine fs : but  'ti-s  nothing  more 
than  a fuperior  degree,  of  the  fame  kind  ol  wor- 
tlunefs  which  belongs  to  every  virtuous  man. 
He  talks  of  C brill -s  confummate  virtue,  or  his 
obedience  to  God,  and  good-will  to  man.  And 
to  this  virtue  of.  his,  as  imitated  by  us,  he  would 
teach. us  to  aferibe-our  acceptance  with  God: 
which  kdndeed  to  aferibe  it  to  ourfelves,  or  to 
cur- own  virtue  ; to  works  oj  rigkteoujnefs  done  by 
vs,  in  direfl  oppofition  to  the  whole  tenor  of 
thegofpel.  To- what  dangerous  lengths- are  men 
carried  by  an  ignorance  ol  God,  as  -infinitely 
holy  and  jufi;  by  a fond  conceit  ol  their  own 
abilities,  and  a refolved  oppofition  to  the  doc- 
trine of  original  fin  ! Rather  than  allow  this, 
they  renounce  Chrift,  as  the  meritorious  pro- 
curer of  falvatian  lor  finners.  They  vapt  /eem 
indeed  to  acknowledge  him  as  fuch,  and  talk  or 

“ Eternal 


S ?■ 


[ 384  ] 

“ Eternal  life  as  given  by  God  through  his  Son.” 
But  all  this  is  mere  fhew,  and  can  only  impofe 
on  the  ignorant  and  unwary.  They  dare  not 
profefs  in  plain  terms,  that  Chritl  has  merited 
falvation for  any  : neither  can  they  confiftent- 
ly  allow  this,  while  they  deny  original fin . 

“ Let  not  any  then  who’  regard  5 their  ever- 
lafting  interefts,  entertain  or  even  tamper  with 
doftrines,  which  how  plaufibly  foever  recom- 
mended, are  contrary  to  many  exprefs  texts,  nay  j 
to  the  whole  tenor  of  fcripture,  and  which  can- 
not be  embraced  without  renouncing  an  humble  , 
dependence  on  Chrifr,  and  rejefiing  the  gofpel-  I 
method  of  falvation. 

“ God  + grant  every  reader  of  this  plain  trea- 
tife,  may  not  only  be  convinced  of  the  truth  and  1 
importance,  of  the  fcripture-doHrines  maintained 
therein,  but  invincibly  confirmed  in  his  attach- 
ments to  them,  by  an  experimental  knowledge  ' 
of  their  happy  influence  on  faith,  holinefs  and 
comfort ! Then  fhall  we  gladly  fay,  We,  who 
are  made  Tinners  by  the  difobedience  of  Adam’, 
are  made  righteous  by  the  obedience  of  Chrifl. 
His  righteoufnefs  entitles  us  to  a far  better  in- 
heritance than  that  we  loft  in  Adam.  In  confe- 
quence  of  being  juftified  through  him,  we  fltall 
reign  in  life  with  him.  Unto  whom,  with  God 
the  Father,  and  the  fanftifying,  comforting  Spi- 
rit, be  afcribed  all  praifefor  ever!” 

THE 

II  p.  8s;  + p.  83. 


[ 3 *5  ] 


:-r:" 

. 

PAR  1'  VI, 

The  doctrine  of  Original  Sin,  explained,  and 
vindicated, 

u r - ’spj  £ phrafe,  original  fin , fo  far  as  we 
can  difcover,  was  fird  ufed  in  .the 
fourth  century.  The  fird  who  ufed  it  was  either 
St.  Chry  fodom,  or  Hilary,  fome  of  whole  words 
are  thefe  : “ Thepfalrmd  fays,  Behold  I mas  con- 
ceived in  iniquities , in  fins  did  my  mother  conceive 
vied  Pie  acknowledges,  that  he  was  born  under 
-^original  Jin,  and  the  law  of  fin.”  Soon  after 
Hilary’s  time,  St.  Augudine  and  other  Chrif- 
<tian  writers  brought  it  into  common  ufe.t 

“ The  fcriptural  doctrine  ol  original  fin  may 
•be  comprized  in  the  following  propofitions  :jj 

“ I.  Man  was  originally  made  righteous  or 
holy : 

“ II.  That  original  righteoufnefs  was  lod  by 
the  fird  fin : 

'‘III.  Thereby  man  incurred  death  of  every 
■kind:  for, 

Vol.  XXI.  R <(  IV.  Adam’s 


+ p.  2, 


+ P-  3- 


I 3*6  ] 

**  IV.  Adam’s  firft  fin  was  the  fin  of  a public 
ferfon,  one  whom  God  had  appointed  to  repre- 
fent  all  his  defcendent’s  : 

“ V.  Hence  all  thefe  are  from  their  birth 
children  of  wrath , void  of  all  righteoufnefs,  and 
propenfe  to  fin  of  all  forts. 

“ I add,  VI.  T his  is  not  only  a truth  agreeable 
to  fcripture  and  reafon,  but  a truth  of  the  utmoft 
importance,  and  one  to  which  the  churches 
of  Chrift  from  the- beginning,  have  bore  a clear 
teflimony. 

“ I.  Man  was  originally  made  righteous  or 
holy  : formed  with  fuch  a principle  of  love  and 
obedience  to  his  Maker,  as  dilpofed  and  enabled 
him  to  perform  the  whole  of  his  duty  with  eafe 
and  pleafure.  This  has  been  proved  already. 
And  this  wholly  overturns  Dr.  Taylor’s  funda- 
mental aphorifm,  “ Whatever  is  natural  is  ne- 
ceffarv,  and  what  is  neceffary  is  not  finful.” 
For  if  man  was  originally  righteous  or  holy,  we 
mav  amue  tints.  It  was  at  firft  natural  to  man 

O 

to  love  and  obey  his  Maker;;  yet  it  was  not  ne- 
ceffary : neither  as  neceffary  is  oppofed  to  volun- 
tary or  free-,  (for  die  both  loved  and  obeved 
freely  and  willingly)  nor,  as  neeffary  means 
unavoidable:  ^ihis  is  manifeft  by  the  event:)  no, 
nor  as  neceffary  is  oppofed  to  rcward'able.  For 
had  he  continued  to  love  and  obey  he  would  har  e 
been  rewarded  with  everlafting  happinefs. 
Therefore  that  aftertion,  “ whatever  is  natural  is 

“ nccejfaryf 


[ 3^7  J 

ntcejfary,'  is  palpably,  glaringly  falls.  Con- 
fequently,  what  is  natural  + as  well  as  what  is 
acquired,  may  be  good  or  evil,  rewardable  or 
punifhable. 

* “ II.  Man’s  original  righteoufnefs  was  loft, 
by  the  firft  fin.  Though  he  was  made  righteous 
he  was  not  made  immutable.  He  was  free  to 
Hand  or  fall.  And  he  loon  fell  and  loll  ± at  once 
both  the  favour  and  image  of  God.  This  fully 
appears,  1.  From  the  account  which  Mofes  gives 
of  our  firft  parents,  Gen.  iii.  where  we  read,  (1.) 
The  eyts  of  them  both  wer-e  opened,  and  they  knew 
that  itky  zvere  naked ; that  is  thev  were  confcious 
of  guilt,  and  touched  with  a pungent  fetife  of  their 
folly  and  wickednefs.  They  began  to  find  their 
nakednefs  irkfom  to  them,  and  to  reflect  on  it 
with  fin  fid  emotions  ol  foul.  (2.)  immediately  th®v 
were  indifpofed  for  communion  with  God,  and 
firuck-tvith  luch  a dread  of  him  as  could  not  con- 
fid  with  true  love,  ver.  8.  (3.)  When  queilioned 

bv  God  how  do  they  prevaricate  inllead  ot  con- 
feffing  their  fin,  and  humbly  imploring  forgive- 
nefs  P Which  proves  not  only  their  having  fin- 
ned, but  their  being  as  vet  wholly  impenitent. 
(4.)  The  judgment  paft  upon  them  was  a proof  of 
their  being  ^ guilty  in  the  fight  of  God.  Thus 
was  man's  original  righteoufnefs  loft.  Thus 
did  he  fall  both  from  the  lavour  and  i matte  of 
God. 

“ Tins  appears,  2.  From  the  guilt  which  infie- 
ld 2 parably 

+ p.  10.  X p.  14.  §p.  15. 


[ 388  ] 

J 

paraBly  attends  every  tranfgreffion  of  the  divine' 
law.  I fay,  every  tranfgreffion ; becaufe  every 
fin  virtually  contains  all  fin.  For  whofotvcr 
keepeth  the  whole  law  and  ojfendetli  in  one  point,  he 
is  guilty  of  all.  Every  tingle  offence  is  a virtual 
breach  of  all  the  commands  of  God.  There  is  in 
•every  particular  fin,  the  principle  of  all  fin  ; 
namely,  the  contempt  of  that  fovereign  authoritv, 
which  is  equally  flamped  upon  every  command. 
When  therefore  our  firfl  parents  ate  the  forbid- 
den fruit,  ||  they  not  only  violated  a particular 
precept  but  the  entire  law  of  God.  1 hey  could 
not  fin  in  one  mftance,  without  virtually  tranf- 
qrrefiitig  the  whole  law  of  their  creation  : which 
being  once  done,  their  title  to  God’s  favour  and 
their  original  right eoufnefs  were  both  loft. 

* “ This  appears,  3.  From  the  comprehenfive 
nature  and  aggravating  circumflances  of  the  firft 
tranfgreflion.  For  itimplied,  (1.)  Unbelief-,  man 
did  not  dare  to  break  the  divine  command  till  he  : 
was  brought  to  queftion  + tile  truth  of  the  divine  | 
threatning.  (2.)  Irreverence  of  God.  Reverence  j 
is  a mixture  of  love  and  fear.  And  had  they  com  | 
tinned  in  their  firft  love  and  filial  fear,  they  could  |j 
not  have  broken  through  the  foie  command  of  i 
God.  (3.)  Ingratitude.  For  what  a return  did  i 
they  hereby  make  to  their  Creator  for  all  his  | 
benefits!  (4.)  Pride  and  ambition.  Affecting  to  11 
be  as  gods,  knowing  good  and  evil.  (,5.  ■ Senfuahty. 
The  woman  looked  upon  the  fruit  with  an  irre-  ■ 

gular  I 


1!  P 


t p.  17. 


C 3*9  ] 

gular  appetite.  Here  the  conflift  between  rtafon- 
and  fenfe  began.  To  talk  of  fuch  a confliQ:  in 
man  before  he  fell,  is  to  reprefent  him  as  in  a 
degree  finful  and  guilty  even  while  innocent. 
For  conflicl  implies  oppofition.  And  an  oppofition 
of  appetite  to  re.ajon  is  nothing  elfe  than  a repug- 
nance to  the  law  of  God.  Bat  of  this  our  firft 
parents  were  no  way  guilty,  till  their  innocence 
was  impaired,  till  they  were  led  by  the  tempta- 
tion of  the  devil  to  defire  the  forbidden  fruit. 
(6.)  Robbery ; for  the  fruit  ^ was  none  of  theirs. 
They  had  no  manner  of  right  to  it.  Therefore 
their  taking  it  was  a flat  robbery  of  God,  which 
cannot  be  lefs  criminal  than  robbing  our  fellow- 
creatures.  So  comprehenfive  teas  the  nature,  fo  • 
•aggravated  the  circumftances  of  man's  firft  tranf- 
greffion. 

“ III.  Hereby  he  incurred  death  of  every 
kind  ; not  only  temporal,  but  alfo  fpiritual  and 
eternal.  By  lofmg  his  original  righteoufnefs,  he 
became  not  only  mortal  ?s  to  his  body,  but  alfo 
fpiritually  dead,  dead  to  God , dead  in  fin  : void 
of  that  principle  which  St.  Paul  terms  the  § life  of 
God , Eph.  iv.  18.  St.  John,  Eternal  life  abiding 
in  us,  1 John  iii.  15.  A creature  formed  with  a 
capacity  of  knowing,  loving,  and  ferving  God, 
mull  be  either  dead  in  fin , or  alive  to  God.  Adam 
in  his  primitive  Jlate  teas  alive  to  God-,  but 
R 3 after 


X p.  18. 


§ p.  20. 


L 39°  ] 

aftcf  he  had  finned,  dead  in  fin , as  well  as  dead  in 
/aw. 

“ But  Dr.  Taylor  is  fure  only  temporal  death- 
was  to  be  the  confequence  of  his  difobedience. 

“ For  death  is  the  lofs  of  life,  and  niuft  be  un- 
“ detftood  according  to  the  nature  of  the  life  j[  to 
“ which  it  is  oppofed.”  Moll  true:  and  the  life 
to  which  it  is  here  oppofed,  the  life  Adam  en- 
joyed till  loll  by  fin  was  not  only  bodi  y lifer  but 
that  principle  of  holinefs  which  the  feripture 
terms  the  lift  of  God.  Jt  was  alfo  a title  to  eternal 
life.  All  this  therefore  he  loft  by  fin.  And  that 
jufily  : for  death  is  the  due  wages  of  fin  ; death, 
both  temporal,  (puitual  and  eternal. 

“ IV.  Adam's  fir  ft  fin  was  the  fin  of  a public 
perfon,  one  whom  God  had  appointed,  to  repre- 
fent  all  his  defeendents. 

“ This  alfo  has  been  proved.  In  one  fenfe  in- 
deed + Adam’s  fin  u as  not  ours.  It  was  not  our 
perfonal  fault,  our  aflual  tranfgreflion.  But  in 
another  fenfe  it  was  ours ; it  was  the  fin  of  onr 
common  reprefentath  e.  And  as  fitch  St.  Paul 
fliews  it  is  imputed'  to  us  and  all  Iris  defeendents. 
Hence 

“ V.  All  thefe  are  from  their  birth  children  of  \ 
zvratli,  void  of  all  righteoufnefs,  and  propenfe  to 
fin  of  all  forts. 

“•  I11  order  to  clear  and  confirm  this  propofirion 
I intend, 

“ 1.  T» 

5 p.  2i.  + p.  25. 


[ 39 1 ] 

“ i.  To  confider  a text  which  proves  original 
fin  hr  the  full  extent  of  it : i 

“ 2.  To  explain  fonie  other  texts  which  relate 
either  to  the  guilt,  or  the  corruption  we  derive 
from  our  firft  parents: 

“3.  To  add  fome  arguments  which  Dr.  Tay- 
lor has  taken  no  notice  of,  or  touched  but  very 
{lightly : 

O J 

“ 4.  To  anfwer  ob;efHons. 

“ And  1.  To  confider  that  text,  Eph.  ii.  3, 
And  were  by  nature  children  of  wrath , even  as 
others.  In  the  beginning  of  the  chapter  St.  Paul 
puts  the  Ephefians  in  mind  of  what  God  had  done 
for  them.  This  led  him  to  obferve,  what  they 
had  been  before  their  converfion  to  God. 
They  had  been  dead  in  trfpaffes  and  fins , but 
were  now:  quickened , made  alive  to  God.  They 
had  walked  according  to  the  prince  of  the  power  of 
the  air , the  fbirit  that  worleth  with  energy  in  the 
children  of  difobedience.  Among  fuch,  faith  the 
apoftle,  we  all  had  our  ■ conversation  in  times  pafir 
the  whole  time  before  our  converfion,  fulfilling  § 
the  defires  of  the  fefi  and  of  the  mind,  and  were 
by  nature  children  of  wrath , even  as  others.  On 
this  I obferve 

“1.  The  perfons  fpoken  of  are  both  the  be-' 
lieving  Ephefians  and  the  apoftle  himfelf.  For 
he  fays  not,  ye  were,  fpeaking  in  the  fecond  per- 
fon-,  as  he  had  done  ver.  1,  2.  but  we  were, 
plainly  with  a defign  the  more  exprefly  to  in- 
R 4 elude 

* P-  26. 


*SP-  27. 


[ 392  ] 

elude  himfelf.  Indeed  had  he  frill  fpoken  in  the- 
fecond  perfon,  yet  what  is  here  affirmed  would 
have  been  true  of  him  as  well  as  them.  But  for 
the  fake  of  more  explicitly  including  himfelf,  he 
chofe  to  fay,  we  were : you,  Ephefians,  who 
were  defeended  of  Heathen  parents,  and  I who 
was  born  in  the  vifible  church. 

“ 2.1  he  wrath  here  fpoken  of  means,  either 
God’s  difpleafure  at  Tinners,  or  the  puniffiment^ 
which  he  tbre-  tens  and  infli&s  ||  for  fin. 

“ g.  Children  oj  wrath  is  an  Hebraifm,  and 
denotes  perfons  worthy  of,  or  liable  to  wrath- 
And  this  implies  the  being  finners;  feeing  fin 
only  expofes  us  to  God's  difpleafure  and  the 
dreadful  effects  of  it. 

“ 4.  This  charge  the  apoflle  fixes  on  himfelf 
and  them,  as  they  had  been  before  their  conver- 
fion.  He  does  not  fay,  we  are,  but  we  were  chil- 
dren of  wrath. t 

“ g.  He  fpeaks  of  himfelf  and  the  converted 
Ephefians,  as  having  been  fo  equally  with  others. 
There  is  an  emphafis  on  the  words,  even  as  others ; 
even  as  the  flubborn  Jews  and  idolatrous  Hea- 
thens : even  as  all  who  are  Bill  fir  angers  and 
enemies  to  Chrift  Thefe  are  Bill  children  of 
wrath.  But  whatever  difference  there  is  between 
us  and  them,  zve  were  once  what  they  are  now. 

* “ 6.  He  exprefly  fays,  we  were  children  of 
wratk  even  as  others,  by  nature,  or,  from  our 
birth.  He  does  not  fay,  we  became  fo  by  educa- 
tion, 

(1  p.  28.  + p.  2g< 


[ 393  ] 

lion,  or  by  imitation,  or  by  cujicm  in  finning. 
But  to  fliew  us  when  it  is  that  we  commence  Tin- 
ners, by  what  means  we  become  children  of  wrath, 
whence  it  is  that  we  are  Jo  pi  one  to  evil from  our 
infancy,  and  to  imitate  bad  rather  than  good  ex- 
amples, he  fays,  we  were  children  of  wrath  by 
nature,  we  were  born  fallen  creatures.  We 
came  into  the  world  Tinners,  and  as  fuch  liable  to 
wrath,  in  confequence  of  the  fall  of  our  firft 
father. 

“ But  it  is  affirmed,  i.  That  “ by-nature  means- 
“ by  habit  or  cujfom.”  I anfwer,  though  the  term. 
nature , with  Tome  qualifying  expreffion  annext, 
is  fometimes  taken  for  inveterate  cullom,  yet  it 
is  never  To  taken  when  put  fingly,.  without  any 
fuch  qualifying  expreffion.  When  therefore  the 
apollle  fays  abfolutely,  we  were.%  children  of  wrath 
by  nature,  this,  according  to  the  confiant  fenfe 
of  the  words,  muft  mean,  we  were  fo-  from  out- 
birth. 

“ It  is  affirmed,  2.  That  “ becaufe  the  original- 
words  fraud  thus  ny.va.  (pucti  opyr,: * dhilclr en  by  na  - 
ture of  wrath  ; therefore  children  by  nature  means 
only  truly  and  really  children  of  wrath.”  I an- 
fwer, The  confequence  is  good' for  nothing  : for 
let  the  words  hand  how  they  will,  it  is  evident, 
that  T-bna  ip^o-£i  are  children  by  birth,  or  fuch  as 
are  born  fo,  in  difnncticn  from  thofe  who  be- 
come fuch  afterward. 

“ It  is  affirmed,  3.  “ That  cphcs,  by  nature  fig- 
R 5 miles, 

t E-  a?*- 


[ 394  ] 

nifies  no  more  than  truly  or  really .”  I anfwer, 
(1.)  ’Tis  not  allowed,  that  any  good  Greek  wri*. 
ters  ever  ufe  the  word  in  this  fenfe.t  [2.)  What- 
ever others  do,  the  writers  of  the  New  Tefta- 
mentf  always  ufe  it  in  another  fenfe.  So  Gal. 
ii.  13.  We  u'ho  are  Jews  by  natui  e,  epbc-n  ’Isoaioi • 
That  is,  Wezuho ar e born  Jews,  m contradiflin&ion 
to  Profelytes.  Gal.  iv.  8.  Ye  did  jermceto  them 
which  by  nature,  are  no  Gods  ; fj.-o  pda-n  hr>  SloTc 
Perfons  or  things  which  are  partakers  of  no  di- 
vine nature.  Rom.  ii.  14.  The  Gentiles  do  by  na- 
ture the  things  contained  in  the  law;  that  is,  by 
their  own  natural  powers,  without  a written  law. 
Neither  here  nor  any  where  elfe  does  the  word 
(pio-si  fignify  no  more  than  really  or  truly. 

“ It  remains  then,  that  the  word  which  we 
render  by  nature , does  really  fo  fignify. 

“ And  yet  it  is  allowed,  we  are  not  fo  guilty 
by  nature,  as  a courfe  of  aftual  fin  afterward 
makes  us.  But  we  are  antecedent  to  that  courfe 
children  of  wrath,  liable  to  forne  degree  of  wrath 
and  punifhment.  Here  then  from,  a plain  text, f 
taken  in  its  obvious  fenfe,  we  have  a clear  evi- 
dence, both  of  what  divines  term  original  Jin  im- 
puted, and  of  original  f n inherent.  The  former 
is,  the  fin  of  Adam  fo  far  reckoned  ours,  as  to 
eonftitute  us  in  fome  degree  guilty  : the  latter,  a 
want  of  original  righteoufnefs,  and  a corruption 
of  nature  ; whence  it  is,  that  from  our  infancy 


tp.  32. 


+ P-  33' 


we- 


/ 


[ 3 95  ] 

we  are  averfe  to  what  is  good  and  propenfe  to 
what  is  evil. 

“ I am,  2.  To  explain  fome  other  texts  whic  li 
relate  either  to  the  giult  or  the  cor  ruption  which 
we  derive  from  our  fir  it  parents. 

“ Gen.  v.  3.  Here  the  image  of  Adam  i;r 
which  he  begat  a fan  after  his  fall,  hands  oppofed 
to  the  image  of  God,  in  which  man  was  at  firffc 
created..  Mo/cs  had  faid,  V.  3 . In  the  day  that. 
God  created  man,  , in  the  hkenefs  of  God  made  he 
him.  In  this,  (peaking  ol  Adam,  as  he  was  after  " 
the  fall,  he  does  not  fay,  he  begat  a fon  in  the 
hkenejs  of  God  ; but  he  begat  a fon  in  his  cum 
hkenefs,  after  his  image . Now  this  muff  refer 
to  Adam,. either  as  a man;  or  as  a good  man 
ox  as  a mortal.  Jinful  man.^  But  it  could  not  re- 
fer to  him  merely  as  a man.  The  infpired  writer 
could  uot  defign  to  inform  us,  that  Adam  begat 
a man,  not  alien,  or  an  horfe.  It  could  not- 
well  refer  to  him  as  a good  man . For  it  is  not 
faid,  Adam  begat  a fon,  who  at  length  became 
pious  like  himfelf : but  he  begat  a fon  in  his  own 
hkenefs.  It  refers  to  him  therefore  as  a mortal, 
fnjul  man  ; giving  us  to  know,  that  the  morta- 
lity and  corruption,  contracted  by  the  fall,  des- 
cended from  Adam  to  Iris  fon : Adam  a fmner, 
begat  a fmner  like  him  It  If.  And  if  Seth  was 
thus  a llnncr  by  nature , fo  is  every  other  de-» 
feendent  oi  Adara.§ 

R 6 “ Dr. 

Si  P-35*  l*-  3s* 


[ 39^  ] 

“ Dr.  TayTor  takes  no  notice  of  the  antithefis 
between  thelikenefs  of  God,  V.  l.  and  the  liU- 
nefs  of  Ada.ni,  V.  3.  On  the  other  hand,  he 
fpeaks  of  thefe  two  as  one  : as  if  Seth  had  been 
horn  in  the  very  fame  image  of  God,  wherein 
Adam  was  made . But  this  cannot  be  admitted  ; 
becaufe  Adam  had  now  loft  his  original  righte- 
oufnefs.  It  mull  therefore  be  the  lihenefs  fal- 
len, corrupted  Adam  which  is  here  intended. 

“ Gen.  vi.  fj.  And  God Jaw  that  the  wicked- 
nefs  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every 
imagination  of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only 
evil  continu  ally.  Here  Mofes  having  obferved, 
as  the  caufe  of  the  flood,  that  God  faw  that  the 
wickednefs  of  man  was  gr  eat , to  account  for  this 
general  wickednefs  adds,  Every  imagination  of 
the  thoughts  of  his  heart,  was  evil,  yea,  was  only 
evil,,  and  that  continually.  * The  heart  of  man. 
is  here  put  + for  his  foul.  This  God  had  formed 
with  a marvellous  thinking  power.  But  fo  is 
his  foul  debafed  that  every  imagination , figment, 
formation  of  the  thoughts  of  it,  is  roil,  only  evil,. 
continually  evil.  Whatever  it  forms  within  itfelf, 
as  a thinking  power,  is  an  evil formation.  This 
Mofes  fpoke  of  the  Antediluvians  : but  we  can- 
not confine  it  to  them.  If  all  their  affual  wick- 
ednefs. fprung  from  the  evil  formations  of  their 
corrupt  heart ; and  if  confequently  they  were 
finners  from-  the  birth,  fo  are  all  others  likewife. 

Gerw. 


+ P-  37* 


r 397  ] 

“ Gen.  viii.  21.  I will  not  again  cur  ft  tht 
ground  any  morefor  man  s fake.  ; for  the  imagina- 
tion of  man’ s heart  is  evil  from  his  youth-,  neither 
will  I aga-in  finite  any  more  every  living  thing.  I 
will  not  be  provoked  to  this  by  the  wickednefs- 
of  mankind;  for  they  are  inclined  to  fin  from 
their  childhood.  Was  1 therefore  to  do  this  as 
as  often  as  they  deferve,  Imuflbe  continually 
deftroying  the  earth.  The  word  “is*  imagina- 
tion (as  was  obferved  before)  includes  the 
thoughts,  affeftions,  inclinations,  with  every 
thing  which  the  foul,  as  a thinking  being,  forges, 
and  frames  within  itfelf.  And  the  word  tve  ren- 
der youth,  includes  childhood  and  infancy,  the 
earlieft  age  of  man  ; the  whole  time  from  his 
birth  ; or  (as  others  affirm)  from  his  formation  in 
the  womb. 

“ Indeed  Dr.  Taylor  would  tranflate  the  texts. 
Although  tm  imagination^  of  man  s heart  fiould  be 
evil  from  his  youth.  But  j,  Though  the  particle 
O fometimes  fignifies  although, yet  for  is  its  com- 
mon meaning.  And  we  are  not  to  recede  from 
the  ufual  fignification  of  a word  without  any  ne- 
ceffity.  2.  If  tve  read  although,  it  will  not  at  all 
invalidate  our  proof.  For  ftiil  the  plain  meaning 
of  the  words  would  be,  I will  not  fend  another 
general  flood,  although  every  figment  or  forma- 
tion of  the  heart  of  every  man  is  evil  from  his 
s arh eft  infancy. 

4i  Job 


■ip-  39» 


[ 398  ] 

“ Job  v.  6,  7.  Altko'  affliclion  cometh  not  forth 
cf  the  dujl,yet  man  is  born  to  trouble , as  the  [parks 
f y upward s.\  The  word  which  is  here  rendered 
affii  fction,  fometimes  (igtnfies  iniquity.  Forwhat 
reafon  but  to  fhew  that  tliefe  two,  fin  and  afflic- 
tion are  infeparable  ? Sin  is  the  caufe  of  affliction, 
and  affliction  of  whatever  kind,  is  the  genuine 
effeCt  of  fin.  Indeed  it  is  incompatible  with  the 
juffice  and  mercy  of  God,  to  appoint  afflictions 
of  any  kind  for  the  innocent.  If  Chrift  fuffered, 
it  wasbecaufe  the  fins  of  others  were  imputed  to 
him.  If  then  every  one  of  the  pofferity  of  Adam 
is.  born  to  trouble , it  mull  be  becaule,  he  is  borna 
(inner,  for  man  was  not  originally  made  to  fuffer. 
Nor  while  he  preferred  his  innocence  was  he  . 
liable  to  fuffer-ing  of  any  kind.  Are  the  angels,, 
or  any  pure,  frnlefs  creatures,  liable  to  any  bor- 
row or  affliction  ? Surely  no.  But  every  child 
of  Adam  is.  And  it  is  in  confequence  of  his 
fin,  that  the  prefentlifcof  man  is  Ihort  and  afflic- 
tive : of  which  the  very  Heathens  were  deeply 
fenfible.  They  alfo  faw,  that  giieat  travel  is  created 
for  eve/y  man,  and -an  heavy  yokels  upon  the  fons 
if  Adam,  from  the  day  that  they  go  out  of  their 
mothers  womb,  'till  the  day  they  return  to  the  mother 
of  all  things. 

“ job  xi.  32.  Vain  man  would  be  wife,  though 
man  be  born  like  a wild  afls's  colt  ; in  the  origi- 
nal,- though  man  be  born  (will  be  born  in  every 
age)  the  colt  oj a wild  afs.  Dr.  Taylor  owns,  “ We 

afc 


i p- 1°« 


f 399  1 

are  born  quite  ignorant."  ||  But  this  is  far  kom 
reaching  the  plain  import  of  the  text,  in  which 
man  as  born  into  the  world,  is  compared  to  an 
animal  mo  ft  remarkably  ft  up  id  and  intraflable.. 
And  fucli  all  the  fons  ot  Adam  naturally  are> 
particularly  with-  regard,  to  the-  things  of  God 
from  their  infancy  flow  to  learn  what  is  good,, 
tho’  impetuoufly  propenfe.  to  learn  and  praftife 
what  is  cvil.§ 

“ Job  xiv.  4.  and  x-v.  14.-I  join  thefe,  becaufe 
the  latter  confirms  the  former.  Who  can  bring, 
a clean  thing,  or  perfon,.  out  0)  an  unclean  ? Not 
one.  This  is  exprefs.  Job  had  been  refle&ing  on 
the  forrowful,  uncertain,  imperfeft  bate,  of  all 
Adam’s  children  in  the;  prefent  world,  V.  1,  2, 
g.  Then  he  carries  his  thoughts  to  the  fpring 
of  fucli  a date,  the  original  corruption  of  man. 
Who,,  what  creature,  can  make  an  innocent,  righ- 
teous perfon  proceed  from  a parent  defiled  by 
fin  ? Not  one.  Through  the  whole  fcripture  we 
may  obferve,  fin  is  defcribed'ais;  undi&wnefs,  and. 
a {inner  as  an  unclean  thing.  On  the  contrary 
holinefs  is  expreil  by  clean  nefs  of  heart  and  hands,, 
and  the  righteous  man  is  defcribed  as  clean. 
Agreeably  to  which,  the  text  affects  the  natural 
impoffibility  of  aijy  mans  being  bornclean,  guilt  - 
lefs  and  finlefs,  becaufe  he  proceeds  from  them 
who  are  unclean..;  guilty  and  defiled  with  fin. 

“ The  Septuagint  tranflate  the  text,  Who  Jhall 
be  clean  from  filth.  ? Not  one  : even  tho ’ his  life  on. 

earth 

1 P*  43*  S P*  44* 


[ 4°<>  1 

earth  be  a Jingle  day.  And  this  rendring,  tho’ 
not  according  to  the  Hebrew,  is  followed  by 
all  the  fathers : and  (hews  what  was  the  general 
belief  of  the  Jews,  before  Chrift  came  into  the 
world. 

“ But  fmce  the  heavens  and  Jlars  are  repre- 
fented  H as  not  dean  compared  to  God,  may  not 
man  alfo  be  here  termed  unclean,  only  as  com- 
pared with  him  ?”  I anfwer,  1.  The  heavens 
are  manifeflly  compared  with  God  : but  man  is 
not,  in  either  of  thefe  texts.  He  is  here  defcrib- 
ed,  not  as  he  is  in  comparifon  of  God,  but  as 
he  is  abfolutely  in  himfelf.  2.  When  the  heavens 
and  man  are  mentioned  in  the  fame  text,  and  man 
is  fet  forth  as  unclean,  his  uncleannefs  is  expreih 
by  his  being  unrighteous  ; and  that  always  means 
guilty  orfinful.  Nor  indeed  is  the  innocent  frail- 
ty of  mankind,!  ever  in  fcripture  termed  un- 
deannefs. 

“ Pfalm  li.  5.  Behold,  I was  fliapen  in  iniquity,  i 
and  in  [in  did  my  mother  conceive  me.  The  pfalmift 
here  confelfes,  bewails  and  condemns  himfelF 
for  his  natural  corruption  as  that  which  princi- 
pally gave  birth  to  the  horrid  fins  with  which  he- 
had  been  overtaken.  Beheld  / He  prefixes  this, 
to  render  his  confeffion  the  more  remarkable, 
and  to  Ihew  the  importance  of  the  truth  here 
declared  : I zcas Jhapcn  ; this  pafiive  verb  de- 
notes fomewhat  in  which  neither  David,  nor  his 
parents  had  any  aftive  concern  : in  or  with  ini- 
quity^. 

S p.  45.  + p.  46.  t p.  47- 


[ I 

quity,  andin  or  with,  fin-did  ?ny  mother  conceive  me ^ 
The  word  ||  which  we  render  conceive,  fignifies 
properly  to  warm , or  to  cherijh  by  warmth.  It 
does  not  therefore  fo  directly  refer  to  the  aft  of 
concaving  as  to  the  chem flung  what  is  conceived, 
’till  the  time  of  its  birth.  But  either  way  the 
proof  is  equally  i'crong,  for  the  corruption  of  man- 
kind from  their  fir  ft  exiftence. 

“ Pfal.  Iviii.  3,  4.  The  wicked  are  eft  ranged from 
the  womb  f they  go  ajlray  as  foon  as  they  are  born , 
Jpeaking  lies.  They  are  eflranged from  the  womb. 
Strangers  and  averfe  to  true,  practical  religion,, 
from  the  birth.  They  go  a fir  ay  as Joon  as  they 
are  born, fpeakng  lies.  Not  that  they  aftually  fpeak. 
lies  as  foon  as  they  are  born.  But  they  natural- 
ly incline  that  way,  and  difc  over  that  inclina- 
tion as  early  as  is  poffible.5 

“ Prov.  xxii..  ip.Foohfhnefsis  bound  in  the  heart 
of a child ; but  the  rod  of corrcftion  Jhall  drive  it  far 
from  him.  Chap.  xxix.  15.  The  rod  and  reproof 
give  wifdom  : but  a child  left  to  liimfelj  bmngetk  Ills 
mother  to  fhame.  Thefe  palfages  put  together  are 
a plain  teftimony  of  the  inbred  corruption  of 
young  children.  Foolifinefs,  in  the  former,  is  not 
barely  “ appetite,  or  a want  of  the  knowledge  at- 
tainable by  inftruftion.”  Neither  of  thefe  deferve 
that  lharp  correftion.  But  it  is  an  indifpofed- 
nefs  to  what  is-  good,  and  a ftrong  propen-- 
fity  to  evil.  This  foolifinefs  is  bound  in  tide  heart 
of  a child  ; ’tis  rooted  in  his  inmoft  nature.  It  is 

as- 

Up:  48.  <jp.  51*  ®p- 52. 


[ 4°2  ] 

as  it  were,  fafened  to  him  by 'Jlrcng  cords  ; fo  the 
original  word  figmfies.  Form  this  corruption  of 
heart  in  every  child  it  is,  that  the  rod  o / correc- 
tion is  neceflary  to  give  him  wifdom,  hence  it 
is  that  aefhild  left  to  kimfelf,  without  correction, 
brings  his  mother  to  Jhume.  If  a child  were  bora 
equally  inclined  to  virtue  ana  vice,  why  fhould 
the  wife  man  fpes.k  of  foohthnefs  or  wickednefs, 
as  faftened  fo  clofely  to  his  heart  ? And  why 
mould  the  rod  and  reproof  be  fo  necefTary  for 
him  ,J  Fhefe  texts  therefore  are  another  clear 
proof  of  the  corruption  ofhuman  nature. 

“ Matt.  xv.  18,  19.  Markvii.  so- — 23.  Thofe 
things  + which  proceed  out  of  the  mouth,. come  from 
the  hea  rt,and  they  defile  the  man.  do  'from  within  out 
of  the  heart,  proceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  mur- 
ders— all  thefe  things  come  from  within,  and  defile 
the  man.  Our  Lord  i here  teaches,  that  all  evil 
thoughts,  words  and  afdions  of  every  kind,  flow 
out  of  the  heart,  the  foul  oi  man,  as  being  now 
averfe  to  all  good,  and  inclined  to  all  evil, 

“ Rom.  v.  1 2 — 19.  Let  tire  reader  pleafe  to 
read  the  ||  whole  palfage  very  carefully.  The 
apoftle  here  difeourfesof  Adam  and  Chrift  as  two 
reprefentatives  or  public  perfons.  comparing  the 
fin  of  the  one,  with  the  nghteoufnefs  of  the 
other. 

“ On  this  I obferve,  1.  The  one  man  fpoken 
of  throughout,  is  Adam,  the  common  head  of 
mankind.  And  to  him  (not  to  the  devil  or  Eve) 

the 


+ P-  55- 


; p-  56* 


11  p.  66. 


[ 4°3  1 

the  apcflle  afcribes  the  introduction  of fin  and 
death.  The  devil  was  the  firft  firmer,  and  Eve 
feduced  by  him,  finned  before  her  hufband. 
Yet  the  apofde  faith,  By  one  man  fm  entered  into, 
the  world-,  through  the  offence  of  one,  many  are 
dead  ; the  judgment  mas  by  one  ^ condemnation ; 
death  reigned  by  one.  By  the  ojfence  of  o ne,-judg- 
merit  came  upon  all  men  ; by  one  man ' s difobtdience 
■many  were  made  firmer s.  Now  why  fhould  the 

apoltle  lay  all  this  on  Adam,  whofe  fin  was  pof- 
terior  both  to  the  devil’s  and  Eve's  : if  Adam  was 
not  appointed  by  God,  the  federal  head  of  man- 
kind? In  regard  to  which  the  apoille  points  at 
him  fingly,  as  the  type  or  figure  of  him  that  was 
to  come..  According  to  Dr.  Taylor’s  doftrine,  he 
fhould  rather  have  faid,  By  the  devil  fin  entered 
into  the  world-,  or,  though  the  dif obedience  of 
Eve,  many  were  made  fnners.  But  inftead  of 
this  lie  fixes  i on  our  firft  father  alone,  as  bring- 
ing fin  and  death  on  all  his  poflerity. 

* “ 2.  The  fn,  lr anfgrej/ton,  offence,  difubedi- 
ence  here  fpoken  of,  was  Adam's  eating  the  for- 
bidden fruit.  It  is  remarkable,  that  as  the  apof- 
tle  throughout  his  difeourfe,  arraigns  one  man 
only,  fo  he  afcribes  all  the  mifclnef  done  to  one 
fingte  offence,  of  that  one  man.  And  as  he  then 
Hood  in  that  fpecial  relation  of  federal,  as  well 
as  natural  head  to  his  defeendents,  fo  upon  his 
committing  that  one  fm,  this  fpecial  relation 
eeafed. 


p.  67.- 


“ 3*  The 


C 4<M  ] 

s 3.  The  all , V.  12,  18,  and  the  many,  V. 
15,  19,  are  all  the  natural  dependents  of  Adam 
equivalent  with  thetdprld V.  12.  which  means,, 
the  inhabitants  of  it.^ 

“ q.  The  eflefts  of  Adam's  fin  on  his  depen- 
dents the  apofile  reduces  to  two  heads,  fin  and 
death.  By  one  man  fin  entered,  into  the  world , and 
death  by  [in  ',  and  fo  death  pa/fed  on  all  men,  for 
that  all  have  finned.  Sin  fometimes  means  pu- 
nifhmtnt ; but  not  here  : fin  and  death  are  here 
plainly  diilinguifhed.  The  common  tranfiation 
is  therefore  right,  and  gives  us  the  true  meaning 
of  the  words.  Death  paffed  upon  all  men,  for 
that  all  have  finned , namely,  in  or  with  their 
firfl  father.  And  this-  agrees  with  the  context^ 
the  purport  of  which  is  : that  all  have  finned  and 
are  therefore  liable  to  the  death  originally  threat- 
ned,  is  evident  from  this,  that  until  the  law  fin 
•was  in  the  world:  in  the  ages  that  preceded  the 
law  of  Mofes,  all  men  were  finners  in  the  fight 
of  God.  But  fin  is  not  imputed,  where  there  is  no 
law:  none  can  be  finners  in  the  fight  of  God,  if 
they  are  not  tranfgrelTors  of  fome  law,  for  the 
tranfgrefiing.  of  which  they  are  reputed  guilty- 
Never  thelefs  death  refined  all  the  time  from  Adam 
to  Mofes,.  over  all  mankind.  Now  if  none  is 
liable  to  death,. hut  for  fin:  if  fin  is  not  imputed 
wlure there  is  no  law,  and  if notwithftandlng  this, 
all  mankind  in  all  ages  have  died ; infants  them- 
fslves,  who  cannot  aflually  fin,  not  excepted  r 

It? 


$ p.  6q» 


I 405  ] 

■it  is  undeniable,  that  guilt  is  imputed  to  all  for  the 
'fin  of  Adam.  Why  elfeare  they  liable  to  that 
•which  is  inflidled  on  none  but  for  fin? 

“ This  is  the  purport  of  the  apoftle's  arguing, 
ver.  12,  13,  14.  which  having 'led  him  to  men- 
tion Adam  as  a figure  of  Chrift,  he  then  draws 
a parallel  between  them.  The  fubftance  of  it  is 
this;  as  through  the  offence  of  yldam  many  are 
dead , as  by  the  difobedience. -orh'im  many  are  made 
ftnners ; fo  through  the  righteoufnefs  or  obedience 
of  C hr  iff,  many  are  made  righteous.  But  how  are 
many  dead,  ©r  made  finners  through  the  difobe- 
Aience  of  Adam  ? H4s  firft  fin  fo  far  affefls  + all. 
Jiis  defcendents  as  to  conftitute  them  guilty,  or 
liable  to  all  that  death  which  was  contained  in. the 
.original  threatning. 

“ But  Dr.  Taylor  avers,  “ To  be  made" finners 
means  only  to  heTubjefted  to  temporal  death.” 
“ I anfwer,  1.  Whatever  it  means,  the  difobe- 
dience of  Adam  had  a proper,  cafual  influence 
■upon. it;  juft  as  theobedience  of  Chrift  has  upon 
our.  being  made  righteous. 

2.  What  to  be  made  finners  means,  muft  be 
‘learnt  from  the  oppofite  to  it,  in  the  latter  part 
of  i the  verfe.  Now  allowing  the  apoflle  to  be 
his  own  interpreter,  being  made  righteous  is  the 
fame  with  jujlification,  ver.  r6.  Of  this  he  had 
treated  largely  before.  And  through  the  whole 
.of  his  difcourfe,  to  be  jujlifitd ,.  is,  to  be  acquitted 
•from  guilt,  and  accepted  of  God  as  righteous. 

Con- 


rp.  72. 


t?'  7 3- 


C 4°°  ] 

Confequentlv,  to  be  made  finners  is  to  be  con- 
demned of  God , or  to  be  children  of  wrath , and 
that  on  account  of  Adam’s  fin. 

“ i Cor.  xv.  21,  22.  By  man  came  death:  in 
Adam  all  die.%  Let  the  reader  pleafe  to-bear  in 
mind  the  whole  of  the  two  verfes  and  the  context. 
By  man  in  the  2 ill  verfe  is  meant  Adam.  The 
all  fpoken  of  are  all  his  natural  defcendents. 
Thele  a'l  die ; that  is,  as  his  defcendents,  are 
liable  to  death,  yea,  to  death  everlafti ng.  That 
this  is  the  meaning  appears  hence  : that  the  being 
made  alive,  to  which  this  dying  Hands  oppofed, 
is  not  a mere  recovery  of  life,  but  a blelled  re- 
furre&ion  to  a glorious  immortality.  Hence  I 
obferve,  i.  Man  was  originally  immortal  as  well 
as  righteous.  In  his  primitive  Hate  he  was  not 
liable  to  death.  2.  Death  § is  conflantly  afcribed 
to  fin,  as  the  foie  and  proper  caufe  of  it.  As  it 
■was  threatened  only  for  fin,  ||  fo  the  fentence 
was  not  pronounced  till  after  man  had  finned. 

3.  All  men  are  mortal  from  their  birth.  As  foon 
as  they  begin  to  live  they  are  liable  to  death,  the 
punifhment  denounced  againfi  fin,  and  fin  only. 

4.  This  is  the  genuine  effeft  ol  the  firfi  fin  of  our 
firfi  father.  The  apoille  does  not  attribute  it  to 
the  devil ; neither  does  he  fay,  in  Adam  and  Eve 
all  die.  But  here  alfo  he  mentions  Adam  fingly. 
Him  he  fpeaks  of  as  a figure  ofCknjl,  ver.  4c, 
47,  48.  And  here  as  the  foie  author  of  death  to 
all  his  natural  defcendents.  In  Adam , or  on  ac- 
count 

+ P*  74-  * h?-  7£*  II  P-  76. 


C 4°7  1 

count  of  Ills  fall,  all  of  mankind,  in  every -age, 
die.  Confequently,  in  him  ail fmned.  With  him 
all  fell  in  his  firft  tranfgreffion.  That  they  are 
all  born  liable  to  the  legal  punifhment  of  fin, 
.proves  him  the  federal  as  twell  as  natural  head  of 
mankind:  whofe  fin  is  fo  far  imputed  to  all  men, 
that  the}'  are  born  children  of  wrath  and  liable  to 
death. 

“ Thus  have  I confidered  a large  number  of 
texts,  which  teftify  of  original  Jin,  imputed  and 
inherent.  Some  are  more  exprefs  than  others,  of 
which  kind  are  Job  xiv.  4 Pfalm  li.  5.  lvi.  3. 
Rom.  v.  12,  &c.  1 Cor.  xv.  22.  Eph.  ii.  3.  That 
in  Ephefians  prefents  us  with  a dirett  proof  of 
the  entire  do&rine.  Thole  in  Romans  and  Co- 
rinthians relate  dircftly  to  original  Jin  imputed, 
and  are  but  confequ.ential  proofs  of  original 
corruption.  The  reft  refer  particular  to  this, 
and  are  but  confequential  . proofs  of  original  Jin 
imputed. 

,il  And  as  this  doctrine  Hands  impregnable  on 
♦the  bafis  of  fcripture,  io  it  is  perfectly  agreeable 
to  i found  reafon ; as  may  appear  from  a few 
plain  arguments  which  confirm  this  fcripture 
-doctrine. 

“ 1.  If  the  firll  man  was  by  God’s  appointment 
as  has  been  fhewn,  die  federal  head  of  all  his 
-defcendents ; it  follows,  that  when  Adam  finned 
. and  fell,  they  all  finned  in  him  and  fell  with  him. 

And 


+ ?•  77- 


+ P-  79' 


C 408  ] 

And  if  they  did,  they  mu  ft  come  into  the  world 
both  guilty  and  unclean. 

“ But  we  had  no  hand  in  Adam’s  fin,  and 
“ therefore  cannot  be  guilty  on  account  of  it.” 

“ This,  we  had  no  hand  in  it. , is  ambiguous.  1 
It  means  either,  “ we  did  not  actually  join  I 
“therein:”  which  no  one  denies:  or,  “we  j 
“ were  wholly  unconcerned  in  it:”  the  contraiy  j 
to  which  has  been  fully  proved. 

* “ 2.  Since  Adam’s  pollerity  are  born  liable  5 
to  death,  which  is  the  due  wages  of  fir;,  it  follows, 
that  they  are  born  finners.  No  art  can  fet  afide 
the  coiifequence. 

* “ 3.  Either  Chrift  is  the  Saviour  of  infants, 
or  he  is  not.  If  he  is  not,  how  is  he  the  Saviour  | 
of  all  men?  But  if  he  is,  then  infants  are  Tinners. 
For  he  buffered  death  for  finners  onlv.  He  came 
to  feek  and  fave  only  that  which  was  lojl  \ to  favt  j 
his  people  from  their  fins.  It  follows  that  infants 
are  finners  ; that  they  are  loft,  and  without  Chrift 
are  undone  for  ever. 

“ 4.  The  confequences  of  the  contrary  opi-  i 
nion  are  fhockingly  abfurd. 

“ (1.)  If  original  fin  is  not,  either  death  is  not 
the  wages  of  fin,  or  there  is  punifhment  without  I 
guilt:  God  + punilhes  innocent,  guiltlefs  crea- 
tures. To  fuppofe  which,  is  to  impute  iniquity  ' 
to  the  Moft  Holy. 

“ (2.)  If  we  are  not  finners  by  nature,  there 
are  finful  actions  without  a principle,  fruit  grow- 
ing 


+ p.  84. 


[ 4°9  ] 

mg  without  a root.  “No:  men  contract  fmful 
V habits  by  degrees,  and  then  commence  Tinners.” 
But  whence  is  it  that  they  contract  thofe  habits 
To  eafily  and  fpeedily  ? Whence  is  it,  that  as  Toon 
as  ever  we  difcover  reafon  we  difcover  fmful 
difpoTitions  ? The  early  difcoveries  of  reafon, 
prove  a principle  of  reafon  planted  in  our  nature. 
In  like  manner  the  early  difcoveries  of  fmful 
difpoTitions,  + prove  thofe  difpoTitions  planted 
therein. 

“ (3.)  If  we  were  not  ruined  by  the  firft  Adam, 
neither  are  we  recovered  by  the  fecond.  If  the 
fm  of  Adam  was  not  imputed  to  us,  neither  is 
the  righteoufnefs  of  Chrifl. 

“ (4.)  If  we  do  not  derive  a corrupt  nature 
from  Adam,  we  do  not  derive  a new  nature  from 
Chrift. 

“ (5.)  A denial  of  original  fin.  not  only  ren- 
ders baptifm  needlefs  with  regard  to  infants,  but 
reDrefents  a great  part  of  mankind  as  having  no 
need  of  Chrift,  or  the  grace  of  the  new  covenant. 
I now  fpeak  of  infants  in  particular,  who  if  not 
guilty  before  God,  no  more  need  the  merits  and 
grace  of  the  fecond  Adam  than  the  brutes  thern- 
felves. 

“ Laftly,  A denial  of  original  fin  contradifls 
the  main  defign  of  the  gofpel,  which  is  to  hum- 
ble vain  man,  and  to  afcribe  to  God's  j'ee-grace , 
not  man’s  free-will,  the  whole  of  his  falvation. 
Nor  indeed  can  we  let  this  do&rine  go  without 

Vol.  XXI.  S giving 

+ P*  ®S* 


i 


C 4*°  ] 

giving  up  at  the  fame  time  the  greateft  part,  if 
not  all,  of  the  effential  articles  of  the  Chriftian 
faith.  If  we  give  up  this,  we  cannot  defend 
•either  juflification  by  the  merits  of  Chrift,  or  the 
renewal  of  our  natures  by  his  Spirit.  Dr.  Tay- 
lor’s book  is  not  therefore  fubverfive  of  a parti- 
cular branch,  but  of  the  whole  fcheme  of  Chrif- 
tianity. 

“ VI.  The  doftrine  therefore  of  original  fin 
is  not  only  a truth  agreeable  to  fcripture  and  rea- 
son, but  a truth  of  the  utmofl  importance.  And 
it  is  a truth  to  which  the  churches  of  Chrift  from 
ithe  beginning  .have  borne  a clear  teflimony. 

“ Few  truths,  if  any,  are  more  necclfary  to 
die  known,  believed  and  throughly  confidered. 
For  if  we  are  not  acquainted  with  this,  we  do  not 
know  ourfelves.  And  if  we  do  know  ourfelves, 
•we  can  t rightly  know  Chrift  and  the  grace  of 
God.  And  on  this  knowledge  of  Chrift  and  the 
grace  of  God  depends  the  whole  of  our  falvation. 
St.  Auguftine  therefore  well  remarks,  “ Clirifti- 
anity  lies  properly  in  the  knowledge  of  what  con- 
cerns Adam  and  Chrift.”  For  certainly  il  we  do 
not  know  Chrift,  we  know  nothing  to  any  pur- 
pofe.  And  we  cannot  know  Chrift,  without  fome 
knowledge  of  what  relates  to  Adam,  who  was 
the  figure  of  him  that  was  to  come. 

“ But  if  this  doftrine  is  fo  important,  why  is 
fo  little  faid  ol  it  in  fcripture,  and  in  the  writ- 
ings of  the  antients  ?” 


This 


C 4“  ] 

u This  is  a grand  mi  flake.  We  totally  deny 
that  the  fcripture  fays  little  of  it.  Dr.  Taylor 
indeed  affirms,  “ There  are  but  five  “ paiTages 
of  fcripture  that  plainly  relate  to  the  effefts  of 
Adam's  fall.”  Not  do.  Many  fcriptures,  as  has 
been  (hewn,  plainly  and  direttlv  teach  us  this 
doflrine.  And  many  others  deliver  that  from 
which  it  may  be  rationally  and  eafilv  deduced. 
Indeedthe  whole  doftrine  of  falvation  by  Chrift 
and  divine  grace  implies  this  ; and  each  of  its 
main  branches,  juflification  and  regeneration  di- 
reflly  leads  to  it.  So  does  the  doftnue  of  man  s 
original  righteoufnefs,  t than  which  nothing  is 
more  clearlv  revealed. 

“ And  if  the  writers  before  St.  Augufline  fay 
little  concerning  it,  is  not  the  reafon  plain  ? The 
accafions  of  their  writing  did  notiead  them  to  en- 
large, on  what  none  had  ever  oppofed  or  de- 
nied. For  none  had  ever  oppofed  or  denied  tins 
doftrine.  “Who,  fays  / incentius  Lirinen/n,  before 
CelcJHus  denied  all  mankind  to  be  involved  in  the 
guilt  of  Adam’s  tranfgreffion  ? " Yet  they  are  not 
filent  concerning  it.  Jujhn  Martyr  fpeaks  of 
“ mankind,  as  fallen  under  death  and  the  deceit 
of  the  ferpent.”  (Dial.  wi:h  Trypho)  Of  “ all 
Adam’s  defcendents,  as  condemned  for  his 
fin,  and  all  that  are  Chrift’s,  asjuftifiedby  him.” 
In  fr  emeus  there  are  numerous,  (Irony,  exprefs 
teftimonies,  both  to  original  righteoufnefs  and 
original Jin  in  the  full  extent.  “ What  we  lofl  in 
S 2 Adam, 

i p.  t!8. 


[ 4 12  ] 

A'dam,  that  is,  a being  after  the  image  and  likenefs 
of  God,  this  we  recover  by  Chrift.”  (1.  3.  c.  20.) 
Again,  “ They  who  receive  the  ingrafted  word 
return  to  the  anticnt  nature  of  man,  that  by 
which  he  was  made  after  the  image  and 
likenefs  of  God T (1.  5.  c.  10.;  He  likewife 
fpeaks  of  our  “ finning  in  Adam  “ In 
the  firft  Adam,  fays  he,  we  offended  God4 
in  the  fecond  Adam  we  are  reconciled/’  And 
frequently,  of  “ man  s lofing  die  image  of  God 
by  the  fall,  and  recovering  it  bv  Chrift/’  Tertul- 
lian  fays,  “ Man  was  in  the  beginning  deceived, 
and  therefore  condemned  to  death  : upon  which 
his  whole  race  became  infedbedand  partaker  of  his 
condemnation.’’  (Be  trjhmonio  anima)  Cvprian 
is  exprefs  in  his  epiflle  to  t id  us.  Origen  fat  s, 
“ The  curfeof  A.dam  in  common  to  all.'  Again, 
“ Man  by  finning  loft  the  image  and  likenefs  of 
“ God/’  Andagain,  “No  one  is  clean  from  the  filth 
of  fin,  evemthough  he  is  not  above  a day  old.”  i 
“ The  whole  iof  me,  fays  Nazianzen,  has  need 
of  being  faved,  fince  the  whole  of  me  fell,  and 
was  condemned  for  the  difobedien.ee  of  my  firft 
father/’. Many  more  are  the  teftimonies  of  Atha- 
nafius,  Bafil,  Hilary  ; all  prior  to  St.  Auguftme. 
And  how  generally  fince  St.  Auguftme  this 
important  truth  has  been  affected,  is  well  known. 
Plain  it  is  therefore  that  the  churches  of  Chrift 
from  the  beginning,  have  borne  clear  teftimory 
:to  it. 


+ P-  S3- 


r 413  7 

“ fo  conclude.  1.  This  is  a fcripturaldoffrine. 
Many  plain  texts  dire&ly  teach  it. 

“ 2.  It  is  a rational  doflrine,  throughly  confif- 
tent  with  the  diftates  of  found  reafon  : and  this, 
notwithftanding  there  may  be  fome  circumftances 
relating  thereto,  which  human  reafon  cannot 
fathom. || 

- “3.  It  is  a practical  doflrine.  Ithasthe  clof- 
ell  connexion  with  the  life,  power  and  practice 
of  religion.  It  leads  man  to  the  foundation  of 
all  Chriftian  praflice,  the  knowledge  of  himfelf: 
and  hereby,  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  the 
knowledge  of  Chrift  crucified.  It  prepares  him 
for  and  confirms  him  in,  juft  conceptions  of  the 
'dependence  of  his  falvation,  on  the  merits  of 
■Chrift  for  juftification,  and  the  power  of  his 
Spirit  for  inward  and  outward  holinefs.  It  hum- 
bles the  natural  pride  of  man:  it  excludes  felf- 
applaufeand  boafting  : and  points  out  the  true 
and  only  way  whereby  we  may  fulfil  all  righte- 
oufnefs. 

“ 4.  It  is  an  experimental  dotfrine.  The  fin- 
cere  Chriftian  day  by  day  carries  the  proof  of  it 
in  hasownbofom:  experiencing  that  in  himfelf 
which  is  abundantly  fufiicient  to  convince  him, 
That  in  him  by  nature  dzvellclh  no  good  thing  ; 
but  that  it  is  God  alone  who  worketh  in  him,  both  to 
'will  and  to  do,  of  his  good  pleafure. 

Lewijham , March  23,  3757. 

S 2 
11  P-9»- 


I HAVE 


I HAVE  now  gone  thro’,  as  my'leifure  would 
perimt,  this  whole  complicated  quelHon  ; and 
'1  have  fpoken  on  each  branch  of  it  with  plain- 
nefs  and  opennefs,  according  to  the  bed  light 
I have  atprefent.  I have  only  a few  ivords  more 
to  add,  and  that  with  the  fame  opennefs  andfim- 
pliclty. 

What  I have  often  acknowledged,  I now  re- 
peat. Were  it  not  on  a point  of  fo  deep  im- 
portance, I would,  no  more  enter  the  lids  with 
^ Dr.  Taylor,  than  I would  lift  my  hand  againd 
a giant.  I acknowledge  your  abilities  of  every 
kind:  your  natural  and  acquired  endowments-; 
your  dxong  underdanding,  your  lively  and  fruit- 
ful imagination,  your  plain  and  eafv,  yet  ner- 
vous dile.  I make  no  doubt  of  your  having  du- 
elled the  original  fcriptures  for  many  years. 
And  I believe  you  have  moral  endowments, 
which  are  infinitely  more  valuable  and  more  a- 
miable  than  all  thefe~  For  (if  I am  not  greatly 
deceived)  your  bear  good-will  to  all  men.  And 
may  not  I add,  you  fear  God  P 

O what  might  not  you  do,  with  thefe  abili- 
ties ? What  would  be  too  great  for  you  to  at- 
tempt and  efifeft  ? Of  what  fervice  might  you 
be  not  only  to  your  own  countrymen,  but  to 
all  that  bear  the  Chridian  name  ? How  might 
you  advance  the  caufe  of  true,  primitive,  fcrip- 
tural  Chridianity  ? Of  folid,  rational  virtue  ? 
Of  the  deep,  holy,  happy,  fpiritual  religion, 
which  is  brought  to  ligh^by  thegofp'el  ? How  ca- 


£ V5  1 

pable  are  you  of  recommending,  not' barely  mora> 
liry  (the  duty  of  man  to  man)  but  piety,  the 
duty  of  man  to  God  ? Even,  the  zvorf upping 
him  in  J "pint  and  in  truth  ? How  well  qualified  are 
you,  to  explain,  inforce,  defend,  even  the  deep 
things  of  God  ? The  nature  of  the  kingdom  of 
God  uitliin  us?  Yea  the.  interior  a regm  dei  ? (I 
fpeak  on1  fuppofition  of  your  having  the  unc- 
tion of  the  Holy  One , added  to  your  other  qualifi- 
cations') And  are  you,  whom  God  has  fo  highly 
favoured,  among  thofe  who  ferve  the  oppofite 
eaufe  ? If  one  might  transfer  the  words  of  a man 
to  him,  might  not  one  conceive  him  to  fay> 
K ail  av  h lx.sni!ii'  x)  <7?,  Tty-vcii ; Are  you  differving 
the  eaufe  of  inward  religion  ? Labouring  to  de- 
ftroy  the  inward  kingdom  of  God,  ? Sapping  the 
foundation  of  all  Xxuzfpirit-ual  worjkip  ?'  Advanc- 
ing morality  on  the  ruins  of  piety  ? Are  you 
among  thofe  w’ho  are  overthrowing  the  very 
foundations  of ) primitive , fcriptural  Chrifianity? 
Which  certainly  can  have  no  ground  to  hand 
upon,  if  the  fcheme  lately  advanced  be  true. 
What  room  is  there  for  it,  till  men  repent  ? 
Know  themfelves  ? Without  this  can  they  know 
or  love  God  ? O why  fhould  you  block  up  the 
way  to  repentance  ? And  confequently,  to  the 
whole  religion  of  the  heart  ? Let  a man  be  a fool , 
fays  the  apoftle,  that  be  may  be  wife.  But  you  telf 
him,  he  is  wrife  already::  that  every  man  is  by 
nature,  as  wife  as  Adam  was  in  paradife.  He 
gladly  drinks  im  the  foothing  found,  and  fleeps  on 
S 4 and 


C 4<6  J 

and  takes  his  reft.  We  befeech  thofe  who  are 
mad  after  earthly  things,  to  take  knowledge  of 
the  dreadful  ftate  they  are  in.  To  return  to  their 
father,  and  beg  of  him  the  fpirit  of  love  and  oj  a 
found  mind.  You  tell  them,  they  are  of  a found 
•mind  already.  They  believe,  and  turn  to  their 
hulks  again.  Jefus  comes  to  feekanilfave  that 
which  is  lofl.  You  tell  the  men  of form  ftho’  as 
dead  to  God  as  a ftone)  that  they  are  not  loft  : 
that  (inafnauch  as  they  are  free  from  grofs-  fins) 
they  are  in  a good  way,  and  will  undoubtedly  be 
faved.  So  they  live  and  die,  without  the  know- 
ledge, love  or  image  of  God,  and  die  eternally  f 
* “ They  will  be  faved.”  But  are  they 
faved  already  ? We  know  all  real  Chriftians 
are.  If  they  are,  if  thefe  are  pofteft  of  the 
prefent  falvation  which  the  fcripture  fpeak  of, 
what  is  that  falvation  ? How  poor,  dry,  dull, 
fhallow,  fuperficial  a thing  ? Wherein  does  it 
excel  what  the  wifer  Heathens  taught,  nay,  and 
perhaps  experienced  ? What  poor  pitiable  crea- 
tures are  thofe  Chriftians,  fo  called,  who  have 
advanced  no  higher  than  this  ? You  fee  enough 
of  thefe  on  every  fide  : perhaps  even  in  your 
own  congregation.  What  knowledge  have  they 
of  the  things  of  God  P "What  love  to  God,  or 
to  Chrift?  What  heavenly-mindednefs  ? How 
much  of  the  mind  which  was  in  Chrijl  jefus  ? 
How  little  have  they  profited  by  all  your  inftruc- 
tions  ? How  few  are  wifer  and  bettei  than  \shen 
you  knew  them  firftP  O take  knowledge  of  the 

reafon 


[ 4 17  1 

reafon  why  they  are  not.  That  do&rine  will 
not  make  them  wife  unto  falvation > All  it  can 
pofliblv  do,  is  to  fhake  off  the  leaves.  It  does 
not  affect  the  branches  of  fin.  Unholy  tempers 
are  juft  as  they  were.  Much  lefs  does  it  flrike 
at  the  root : pride,  felf-will,  unbelief,  heart-ido- 
latry remain  undifturbed,  and  unfufpefted. 

I am  grieved  for  the  people  who  are  thus  feek- 
ing  death  in  the  error  of  their  life.  I am  griev- 
ed for  you , who  furely  defire  to  teach  them  the 
way  of  God  in  truth.  O Sir,  think  it  poffible, 
that  you  may  have  been  miftaken  ! That  you 
may  have  leaned  too  far,  to  what  you  thought 
the  better  extreme.  Be  perfuaded  once  more  to 
review  your  whole  caufe,  and  that  from  the  very 
foundation.  And  in  doing  fo,  you  will  not  dif- 
dain  to  defire  more  than  natural  light.  O that 
the  Father  of  glory  may  give  unto  you  the  Spirit  of 
wifdom  and  revelation ! May  he  inlighten  the  eyes 
of  your  underfanding , that  you  may  know  what  is 
the  hope  of  his  calling , and  what  the  riches  of  the 
glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  faints  l 

Lewifiam,  March  24.,  1757. 


PART  VII. 

The  Doclnne  of  Original  Sin „ 

TIE  CAUSE  of  the  unfpeakable  importance  of 
throughly  underftanding  this  grand  foun- 
S 5 dation. 


[ 4*8  ] 

elation  of  all  revealed  religion,  I fubjoin  one 
more  extraft,  relating  both  to  the  original  and 
the  prefent  ftate  of  man. 

“ God  made  man  upright. \ By  man  we  are  ter 
underhand  our  jirjl parents,  the  archetypal  pair, 
the  root  of  mankind.  This  man  was  made  right 
(agreeable  to  the  nature  of  God,  whofe  work 
is  perfeft)  without  any  imperfe&ion,  corruption, 
or  principle  of  corruption,  in  his  body  or  foul. 
He  was  made  upright,  that  is  freight  with  the  will 
and  law  of  God,  without  any  irregularity  in  his 
foul.  God  made  him  thus  ; he  did  not  firft  make 
him,  and  then  make  him  righteous  : but  in  the  very 
making  of  him  he  made  him  righteous  ; righte- 
oufnefs  was  concreated  with  him.  With  the 
feme  breath  that  God  breathed  in  him  a living 
foul,  he  breathed -in  him  a righteous  foul. 

“ This  righteoufnefs  'was  the  conformity  of 
all  the  faculties  and'  powers  of  his  foul  to  the 
moral  law : which  implied'  three  things. 

* “Firft,  his  underftanding  was  a Tamp  of  light. 
He  was  made  after  God’s  image,  and  confequer.t- 
ly  could  not  want  knowledge,  which  is  a part 
thereof.  And  a perfedl  knowledge  of  the  lazo 
was  necelfery  to  fit  him  for  univerfal  obedience,, 
feeing  no  obedience  can  be  according  to  the  law 
unlefs  it  proceed  from  a fenfe  ol  the  command 
of  God  requiring  ft.  T13  true  Adam  had  not 
the  law  writ  on  tables  of  ftone  ; but  it  was  writ- 
ten upon  his  mind.  God  impreft  it  upon  his 

foul, 

f Mr.  Bolton’s  four-fold  ftate  of  man. 


[ 4*9  ] 

foul,  and  made  him  a law  to  himfclf,  as  the  re- 
mainsof  it  even  among  the  Heathens  teftify.  And 
feeing  man  was  made  to  be  the  mouth  of  the  crea- 
tion, to  glorify  God  in  his  worts,  we  have 
ground  to  believe,  he  had  an  exquifite  knowledge 
oj  the  works  of  God-  We  have  a proof  of  this 
in  his  giving,  names. to  the  beads  of  the  field,  and 
the  fowls  ol  the  air,  and  tliefe  fucli  as  exprefs 
their  nature.  Whatfoever  Adam  called  every  living, 
thing,  that  was-  the  name  thereof.  And  the  domi- 
nion which  God  gave  him  over  the  creatures, 
foberly  to  ufe  them  according  to  his  will  (Hill  in 
fubordination  to  the  will  of  God)  implies  a know- 
ledge of  their  natures. 

“ Secondly,  His  will  lay  freight  with  the  will 
of  God.  There  was  no  corruption  in  his  will, 
no  bent  or  inclination  to  evil;  for  that  is  fin, 
properly  fo  called ; and  therefore  inconfiftenr 
with  that  uprightnefs  with  which  it. is  exprefly 
laid  he  was  endued  at  his  creation.  The  will  of 
man  was  then  naturally  inclined  to  God  and : 
goodnefs,  though  mutably.  It  was  difpofed  by  its  ■ 
original  make  to  follow  the  Creator’s  will,  as  the 
fhadow  does  the  body.  It  was  not  left  iaan 
equal  balance  to  good  and'evil  1 for  then  he  had 
not  been  upright,  .or  conform  to  the  law ; which 
no  more -can  allow  the  creature  not  to  be  inclined 
to  God  as  his ’end,'  than  it  can  allow  maa  to  be  a 
god  to  himfelf. 

“ Thirdly,  His  affeflions  were  regular,  pure 
and  holy.  AIL  his  pafiions,  yea  all  Iris  pen/itnre 
S 6.  s motions 


[ 42°  ] 

motions  and  inclinations  were  fubordinate  to  bis  * 
reafon  and  will,  which  lay  fir  eight  with  the  will  of 
God.  They  were  all  therefore  pure  from  all  defile- 
ment,free  from  all  diforder  or  diflemper;  becaufe 
all  their  motions  they  were  duly  fubjected  to  bis 
clear  reafon  and  his  holy  will.  He  had  alfo  an 
executive  power,  anfwerable  to  his  will : a power 
to  do  the  good  which  he  knew  fhould  be  done,  and 
which  he  inclined,  to  do  ; even  to  fulfil  the  whole 
law  of  God.  If  it  had  noj:  been  fo,  God  would 
not  have  required  perfe£f  obedience  of  him. 
For  to  fay  that  the  Lord  gathereth  where  he  hath 
not  Jlrewed , is  but  the  blafphemy  of  a flothful 
fervant. 

“ From  what  has  been  faid  itmav  be  gathered, 
that  man's  original  righteoufnefs  was  univerjal 
and  natural,  yet  mutable. 

* i.“  It  was univer-fal,  both  withrefpefl  to  the 
fubjeft  of  it,  the  whole  man,  and  the  objecl  of 
it,  the  whole  law  : it  was  diffufed  through  the 
whole  man  ; it  was  a blefled  leaven  that  leavened 
the  whole  lump.  Man  was  then  holy  in  foul, 
body  and  fpirit : while  the  foul  remained  un. 
tainted,  the  members  of  the  body  were  confe- 
crated  velTels  and  inftruments  of  righteoufnefs. 
A combat  between  reafon  and  appetite,  nay  the 
leaf!  inclination  to  fin,  was  utterly  inconfiftent 
with  this  uprightnejs  in  which  man  was  created' 
and  has  been  invented  to  veil  the  corruption  of 
man’s  nature,  and  to  obfeure  the  grace  of  God 
in  Chrift  Jefus.  And  as  this  righteoufnefs  fpread 

through 


through  the.  whole  man, To  it  refpefled  the  whole 
law.  There  was  nothing  in  the  law,  but  what 
was  agreeable  to  his  reafon  and  will.  His  foul 
was  Ihapen  out  in  length  and  breadth,  to  the 
command nunt,  though  exceeding  broad  ; fo  that 
his  original  righteoufnefs  was  not  only  perfeft  in 
parts  but  in  degrees. 

“ 2.  As  it  was  univerfal,  fo  it  was  natural  to 
him.  He  was  created  with  it.  And  it  was  ne- 
ceffary  to  the  perfection  of  man,  as  he  came  out 
of  the  hand  of  God  : neceffary  to  conllitute  him 
in  a Hate  of  integrity.  Yet 

“ 3.  It  was  mutable.  It  was  a righteoufnefs 
which  might  be  loft,  as  appears  from  the  fad 
event.  H;s  will  was  not  indifferent  to  good  and 
evil : God  fet  it  towards  good  only,  yet  did  not 
fofix  it,  that  it  could  not  alter;  it  was  moveable 
to  evil,  but  by  man  himfeli  only. 

“ Thus  was  marr  made  originally  righteous, 
.being  created  in  Godys  own  image,  (Gen.  i.  27.) 
which  confifls  in  knowledge,  righteoufnejs  and 
kohnefs,  (Col.  iii.  10.  Eph.  iv.  24.)  All  that  God 
made  was  very  good,  according  to  their  feveral 
natures,  Gen.  i.  31.  And  fo  man  was  morally 
good,  being  made  after  the  image  of  him  who  is 
good  and  upright,  Pfa.  xxv.  8.  Without  this  he 
could  not  have  anfwered  the  end  of  his  creation, 
which  was  to  know,  love  and  ferve  his  God. 
Nay,  he  could  not  be  created  otherwife.  For  he 
mu  ft  either  have  been  conform  to  the  law  in  his 

1 powers,  principles  and  inclinations,  or  not.  If 

he 


[ 4£-2  J 

he  was,  he  was  righteous  ; if  not,  he  was  a Jinner , 
which  is  abfurd  and  horrible  to  imagine. 

And  as  man  was  holy,  fo  he  was  happy.  He 
was  full  of  peace  as  well  as  of  love.  And  he  was. 
the  favourite  of  heaven.  He  bore  the  image  of 
God,  who  cannot  but  love  his  own  image.. 
While  he  was  alone  in  the  world  he  was  not; 
alone,  lor  he  had  free,  full  communion  with  God. 
As  yet  there  was  nothing  to  turn  away  the  face  of 
God-  from  the  work  of  his  own  hands  : feeing 
fin  had  not  as  j et  entered,  which  alone  could 
■make  the  breach. 

“ He  was  alfo  lord  of  the  world,  univerfal 
emperor  of  the  whole -earth.  His  Creator  gave 
him  dominion  over  the  ffi  of  the  fea,  the  fowl  of 
the  air,  and  every  thing  that  moveth  on  the  earths 
He  was  God's  deputy-governor  in  the  lower 
world  ; and  this  his  dominion  was  an  image  of 
God's  fovereignty.  Thus  was  man  crowned  with 
glory  and  honour,  having,  all  things  put  under  hi$ 
feet. 

“ Again,  as  he  had  perfeft  tranquility  in  his 
own  bread,  fo  he  had  a perfeB.  calm  without. 
His  heart  had  nothing  to  reproach  him  with,  and 
without  there  was  nothing  to  annoy  him.  Their 
beautiful  bodies  were  not  capable  of  injuries  from 
the  air.  They  were  liable  to  no  dif cafes  or  pains ; 
and  though  they  were  not  to  live,  idle,  yet  toil, 
wear  in  fs  and  fweat  of  the  trows , . were  .not  known 
in  this  flate. 

“ Laltly,  He  was  immortal.  He  would  never 

have 


[ 4*3  ] 

fiare  died  if  he  had  not  finned.  Death  was 
threatned  only  in  cafe  of  fin.  The  perfect  confti- 
tution  of  his  body,  which  came  out  of  God's  hand 
was  very  good,  and  the  righteoufnefs  of  his  foul 
removed  all  inward  caufes  of  death.  And  God’s 
fpecial  care  of  his  innocent  creature  fecured  him 
agrainft  outward  violence.  Such  were  the  holi- 

O 

nefs  and  the  happinefs  of  man  in  his  original  Hate. 

“ But  there  is  now  a fad  alteration  in  our  na- 
ture. It  is  now  entirely  corrupted.  Where  at 
fir  ft  there  was  nothing  evil,  there  is  now  nothing 
good:  I fiiall 

“ Firft,  Prove  this : 

“ Secondly,  Rcprefent  this  corruption  in  it3 
feveral  parts. 

“ Thirdly'',  Shew  how  man’s  nature  comes  to 
he  thus  corrupted1. 

“ Firft,  I fhall  prove  that  man's  nature  is  cor- 
rupted, both  by  God’s  word,,  and  by  mens  expe- 
rience and  obfervation. 

“ I.  For  proof  from  God’s  word,  let  us  con- 
fider, 

“ t.  How  it  takes  particular  notice  of  fallen 
Adam  is  communicating  his  image  to  his  pofterity. 
Gen.  v.  3.  Adam  begat  a fon  in  his  own  like  nefs, 
after  his  image*.  Compare  this  with  ver.  1.  In 
the  day  that  God  created  man , in  the  image  of  God 
made  he  him.  Behold  here,  how  the  image  after 
which  man  was  made , and  the  image  after  which 
he  is  begotten  are-oppofed.  Man  was  made  in 

the 


[ 424  ] 

the  likenefs  of  God  ; an  holy  and  righteous  God 
made  an  holy  and  righteous  creature;  hut  fallen 
Adam  begat  a fon,  not  in  the  likenefs  of  God, 
but  in  his  own  likenefs : corrupt,  finful  Adam, 
begat  a corrupt,  finful  foil.  For  as  the  image  of 
God  included  righteoufaefs  and  immortality , fo 
this  image  of  fallen  Adam,  included  corruption 
and  death.  Mofes  giving  us  in  this  chapter  the 
firfl  bill  of  mortality  that  ever  was  in  the  world, 
i! filers  it  in  with  this  obfervation,  that  d)  ing  Adam 
begat  mortals.  Having  finned  he  became  mortal r 
according  to  the  threatning.  And  fo  he  begat  a 
fon  in  his  own  likenefs , finful  and  therefore  mor- 
tal ; and  fo  fin  and  death  paffed  on  all. 

“ Let  us  confider,  2.  that  text,  Job  xiv.  4.  IVhtf 
can  bring  a dean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ? Not 
one.  Our  firft  parents  were  unclean ; how  then 
can  we  be  clean?  How  could  our  immediate 
parents  be  clean  ? Or  how  fhallour  children  be 
fo  ? The  uncleannefs  here  mentioned  is  a finful 
uncleannefs;  for  it  is  fuch  as  makes  man’s  davs 
full  of  trouble.  And  it  is  natural , being  derived, 
from  unclean  parents.  How  can  he  be  clean  that 
is  born  of  a woman  ? God  can  bring  a clean  thing 
out  of  an  unclean  ; and  did  fo  in  the  cafe  of  the 
man,  Chrift ; but  no  other  can.  Every  perfon 
then  that  is  born  according  to  the  courfe  of  na- 
ture is  born  unclean  : if  the  root  be  corrupt  fo 
are  the  branches.  * Neither  is  the  matter  mend- 
ed, though  the  parents  be  holy.  For  they  are 
fuch  by  grace,  not  by  nature  : and  they  beget 
their  children  as  men,  not  as  holy  men  ; where- 
fore 


[ 4'2<5'  ] 

fore  as  the  circumcifed  parent  begets  an  uncir- 
eumcifed  child,  fo  the  holieft  parents  beget  un- 
holy children,  and  cannot  communicate  their 
grace  to  them  as*  they  do  their  nature. 

“3.  Hear  our  Lord’s  determination  of  the  point; 
Johniii.  6.  That  which  is  born  of  the fefi  is  fleff. 
Behold,  the  corruption  of  all  mankind ; all  are 
Jlefh-  It  does  not  mean  all  are  frail  (though  that 
is  a fad  truth  too:  yea,  and  our  natural  frailty  is 
an  evidence  of  our  natural  corruption  :)  but,  all 
are  corrupt  and  firful,  and.  that  naturally. 
Hence  our  Lord  argues,  that  becaufe  they  are 
ffh,  therefore  they  mujl  be  bom  again,  or  they 
cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God',  ver.  3,  .5- 
And  as  the  corruption  of  our  nature  evidences  the 
neceffity  of  regtner  ation,  fo  the  neceflity  of  rege- 
neration proves  the  corruption  of  our  nature. 
For  why  fhould  a man  need. a fecond  birth  if  his 
nature  were  not  ruined  in  the  fir f birth?  Eveir 
infants  mull  be  born  again,  for  this  rule  admits 
of  no  exception.  And  therefore  they  were  cir- 
cumcifed under  the  Old  Teftament,  as  having 
the  body  of  the  fins  0 f the  f-ejh,.  (which  is  conveyed 
to  them  by  natural  generation)  the  whole  old 
man,  to  put  off.  (CoL  ii.  11.)  And  now  by  the 
appointment  of  Chi  ill,  they  are  to  be  baptized  ; 
which  {hews  they  are  unclean,  and  that  there  is 
no  falvation  for  them,  but  by  the  wafting  of  rege~ 
iteration,  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghofl. 

“ 4.  JVe  are  by  nature  children  of  wrath.  We 
are  worthy  of,  and  liable  to  the  wrath  of  God  t 

and 


[ 4*6  ] 

and  that  by  nature ; and  therefore  doabtlefs  we 
are-  by  nature  finful  creatures.  We  are  con- 
demned before  we  have  done  good  or  evil ; un- 
der tire  curfe  ere  we  know  what  it  is.  But  will  a 
Iron  roar  in  the  forejl  while  he  hath  no  prey  ? Will 
an  holy  and  juft  God  roar  in  his  wrath  againft 
man,,  if  he  be  not'  bv  his  fin  made  a prey  for 
wrath  ? No,  he  will  not,  he  cannot.  We  con- 
clude-then,  that  according  to  the  word  of  Godp 
man's  nature  is  a corrupt  nature- 

“ II.  If  we  confuft  experience,  and  obfervethe 
cafe  of  the  world,  in  the  things  that  are  obvious 
to  any  perfon,  we  lhall  by  its  fruits  eafily  difeo- 
ver  the  root  of  bitternefs.  I fhall  inflance  but  in 
a few. 

* “ 1.  Who  fees  not  a flood  of  mifenes  over- 
flowing the  world?  Every  one  at  home  and 
abroad,  in  citv  and  country,  in  palaces  and  cotta- 
ges, isgroaning  under  fome  unpleafing  circum- 
flance  or  other.  Some  are  oppreft  with  poverty 
or  want,  fome  challened  with  pam  or  ficknels:. 
fome  are  lamenting  their  Ioffes;  none  is  without 
a crofs  of  one  fort  or  another.  No  man  s condi- 
tion is  fo  foft  but  there  is  fome  thorn  of  uneafi- 
nefs  in  it.  And  at  length  death,  the  wages  of  Jin* 
comes  and  fweeps  all  away.  Now  what  but  firu 
has  opened  the  fluice  ? d here  is  not  a complaint- 
or  figh  heard  in  the  world,  or  a tear  that  falls 
from  our  eye,  but  it  is  an  evidence,  that  man  is 
fallen  as  a liar  from  heaven  dor  God  clijlributdh 


[ 427  ] 

rorrows  in  his  anger,  (Job  xxi.  17.)  This  is  a 
dain  proof  of  the  corruption  of  nature:  foraf- 
much 'as  thofe  that  have  not  actually  finned,  have 
their  Ihare  of  thefe  borrows  ; vea,  and  draw  their 
firfl  breath  weeping.  There  are  alfo  graves  of 
the  fmailefl:  as  well  as  the  large  11  (ize  : and  there 
are  never  wanting  fome  in  the  world,  who,  like 
Rachel,  are  weeping  for  their  children,  becanfe 
they  are  not. 

“ 2.  How  earlv  does  this  corruption  of  nature 
appear?  It  is  foon  difeerned  which  way  the  bias 
of  the  heart  lies.  Do  not  the  children  »of  fallen 
Adam,  before  they  can  go  alone,  follow  their 
fathers  foot-fteps  ? What  pride,  ambition,  cu- 
riolity,  vanity,  wilfulnefs  and  averfenefs  to  good 
appear  in  them  ? And  when  they  creep  out  of 
infancy,  there  is  a necelfitv  of  ufing  the  rod  of 
correlhon  to  drive  away  ihefoohjhnefs  that- is  bound 
in  their  heart. 

“ 3.1’ake  a view  of  the  out-breakings  of  fin  in 
the  world.  The  wickednefs  of  man  is  yet  great  in 
the  earth.  Behold  the  bitter  fruits  of  corrupt 
nature ! By  fu-earing  and  lying  and  hilling  and 
Jiealing  and  committing  adultery  they  break  cut 
(like  the  breaking  forth  of  waters)  and  blood 
toucheth  blood . The  world  infilled  with  all  man- 
ner of  filthinefs,  wickednefs  and  impiety.  And 
whence  is  this  deluge  of  fin  on  the  earth,  but 
from  the  breaking  up  of  the  fountains  of  the  great 
deep,  the  heart  of  man,  out  of  which  proceed 
adulteries,  fornications , murders,  thefts,  covets- 

oufnefs 


[ 4*8  ] 

ou fiefs , wickednefs.  Ye  may,  it  maybe,  thank 
God,  that  ye  are  not  in  t'nefe  refpetls,  like 
other  men.  And  you  have  reafon,  for  the  cor- 
ruption of  nature  is  the  very  fame  in  you  as  in 
them. 

“ 4.  Call  your  eye  upon  thofe  terrible  con- 
vulfions  the  world  is  thrown  into  by  the  wick- 
ednefs of  men.  Lions  prey  not  on  lions,  nor 
wolves' on  wolves  ; but  men  bite  and  devour  one 
another.  Upon  how  flight  occafions  will  men 
flieath  their  fwords  in  one  another's  bowels? 
Since  Cain  {bed  Abel’s  blood,  the  world  has  been 
turned  into  a flaughter-houfe.  And  the  chafe 
has  been  continued,  ever  fince  Nimrod  began 
his  hunting  : as  on  the  earth,  fo  in  the  feas,  the 
greater  dill  devouring  die  lelfer.  Now  when 
we  fee  the  world  in  fuch  a ferment,  every  one 
dabbing  another  with  words  or  fwords:  thefe 
violent  heats  among  the  foils  of  Adam,  fpeak 
the  whole  body  to  be  diflempered : the  whole- 
head  to  be  fief:,  and  [lie  whole  heart  faint. 

“ 5.  Confider  the  neceflitv  of  human  laws, 
fenced  with  terrors  and  fever  ides.  Man  was 
made  for  focietv  : and  God  hitnfelffaid  when  he 
created  him,  it  was  not  good  for  him  to  be  a- 
lone.  Yet  the  cafe  is  fetch  now,  that  in  focietv, 
he  muit  be  hedged  in  with  thorns.  And  that 
from  hence  ire  may  the  better  difeern  the  cor- 
ruption of  man’s  nature,  confider  1.  Every  man 
naturally  loves  to  be  at  full  liberty  hhnfelf ; ana 
were  he. to  follow  his  inclination,  would  vote 


- hi  .n  felt 


[ ~429  ] 

Tiimfelf  out  of  the  reach  of  all  laws,  divine  and 
human:  yet  2.  No  man  would  willingly  adven- 
ture to  live  in  a lawlefs  fcciety : and  therefore 
.even  pirates  and  robbers  iiave  laws  among  them- 
felves.  Thus  men  fh  ew  . they  are  eonfcious  of 
the  corruption  or  nature,  not  daring  to  trull 
.-one  another  but  upon  fecurity.  g.  How 
dangerous  foever  it  is  to  break  through  the 
hedge,  yet  many  will  do  n daily.  1 hey  will 
not  only  facrince  .their  confcience  and  credit, 
but  for  the  pleafure  of  a few  moments,  lay  them- 
felves  open  to  a violent  death,  by  the  laws  of  the 
•land  wherein  they  live.  4.  Laws  are  often  made 
to  yield  to  man’s  lulls.  Sometimes  whole  focie- 
- ties  break  oft  the  fetters,  arid  the  voice  of  laws 
•cannot  be  heard  for  the  noLfe  of  arms.  And  feb- 
dom  there  is  a time,  wherein  there  are  not  fome 
perfons  fo  great  and  daring,  that  the  laws  dare  not 
dook  them  in  the  face.  5.  Obferve  even  the  If- 
-raelites,  feparated  to  God  from  ali  the  nations  of 
the  earth.  Yet  what  horrible  conhi  lions  were 
among  them,  when  there  teas  no  king  in  Jjrael? 
How  hard  was  it  to  reform  them,  when  they  had 
■ the  bed  of  ma^i  11  rates  ? And  how  quickly  did  they 
turn  abide  again,  when  they  had  wicked  rulers? 
It  feems  one  grand  defign  of  that  facred  hiftory, 
was  to  difeover  the  corruption  of  man’s  nature. 
6.  Confider  the  remains  of  natural  corrup- 
tion even  in  them  that  believe.  1 ho’  grace  has 
entered,  corruption  is  not  expelled;  they  find  it 

witk 


I 43°  ] 

T.-ith  them  at  all  times  and  in  all  places.  If  a man' 
have  an  ill  neighbour  he  may  remove  : but  (hould 
he  go  into  a wildernefs,  or  pitch  his  tent  on  a 
remote  rock  in  the  fea,  there  it  will  be  with  him.  i 
I need  not  Hand  to  prove  fo  clear  a point.  But  1 
■confider  thefe  few  things  on  this  head.  1.  I fit  9 
be  thus  m the  green  tree,  how  muff  it  be  in  the  | 
dry  ? Does  fo  much  of  the  old  remain  even  in  i1 
"thole  who  have  received  a new  nature  ? How 
great  then  muff  that  corruption  be  in  thofe,  J 
where  it  is  unmixed  with  renewing  grace  ! 2.'  1 
d ho  natural  corruption  is  no  burden  to  a na-  i 
tural  man,  is  he  therefore  free  from  it  ? No,  no.  J 
■Only  he  is  dead,  and  feels  not  the  finking  j 
(weight.  Many  a groan  is  heard  from  a Tick-bed, 
hut  never  one  from  a grave.  3.  The  good  man  I 
-refills  the  old  nature  : he  ftrives  to  llarve  it;  yet  1 
it  remains.  How  mud  it  fpread  then  and  ftreng-  I 
then  ltfelf  in  the  foul,  where  it  is  not  ftarved, 
but  led,  as  in  unbelievers  P If  the  garden  of  the  1 
diligent  find  him  full  work,  in  cutting  off  and 
rooting  up,  furely  that  of  the  {laggard  muff  needs  j 
be  all  grown  over  with  thorns. 

i!  I ffiall  add  but  one  obfervation  more,  that  I 
in  every  man  naturally  the  image  of  fallen  Adam  j, 
appears  : to  evince  which,  I appeal  to  the  con-  ■ 
iciences  of  all,  in  the  following  particulars. 

“ 1.  If  God  by  his  holy  law  or  wife  providence 
put  a reftraint  upon  us,  to  keep  us  back  from 
any  thing,  does  not  that  reftraint  whet  the  edge 
of  our  natural  inclinations,  and  make  us  fo  much 

the 


[ 43 1 ] 

,the  keener  in  our  defires?  The  very  Heathens 
were  convinced,  that  there  is  this  fpirit  of  contra- 
didlion  in  us,  though  they  knew  not  the  fpring 
of  it.  How  often  do  men  give  themfelves  a look: 
in  thofe  things,  wherein  ir  God  had  left  them  at 
.liberty,  they  would  have  bound  up  themfelves  ? 
And  is  not  this  a repeating  of  our  father’s  folly, 
.that  men  will  rather  climb  for  forbidden  fruit, 
than  gather  what  providence  offers  to  fliem, 
when  they  have  God's  exprefs  allowance  for  it? 

* “ 2..  Is  it  not  natural  to  us,  to  care  for  the 
bod)-,  at  the  expence  of  the  foul  ? This  was  one 
ingredient  in  the  .fin  of  our  firft  parents,  (Gen.  iii. 
6.J  Oh  how  happy  might  we  be.  if  we  were 
but  at  half  the  pains  about  our  fouls,  which  we 
.bellow  upon  our  -bodies  ? If  that  queftio®,  IV hat 
mujt  I do  to  be  J lived , did  but  run  near  fo  oft 
■through  our  minds,  as  thofe,  What  Jhall  we  eat  ? 
What  Jhall  we  drink  ? Wherewithal Jhall  be  clothed  ? 

* “ 3.  Is  not  every  one  by  nature  difeontent 
with  his  prefent  lot,  or  with  feme  one  thing  or 
other  in  it  ? Some  one  thing  is  always  miffing; 
fo  that  man  is  a creature  given  to  change.  If  any 
doubt  of  this,  let  them  look  over  all  their  en- 
joyments, and  after  a review  of  them,  liflen  to 
their  own  hearts,  and  they  will  hear  a fecret  mur- 
muring, for -want  of  fometliiag.  Since  the  hearts 
.of  our  firft  parents  wandered  from  God,  their  pof- 
terity  have  a natural  difeafe,  which  Solomon  calls 
The  wandring  of  de/ire,  literally,  The  walking  of 
the  foul,  (Ecclef.  vi.  9.)  This"  is  a fort  of  diaboli- 
cal 


[ 43s  J 

•t:ai  trance,  wherein  the  foul  traverfeth  the  world, 
feeds  itfelf  with  a thoufandairy  nothings,  fnatch- 
•eth  at  this  and  the  other  imagined  excellency  j 
.goes  here  and  there  and  every  where,  except 
where  it  fhould  go.  And  the  foul  is  never  cured 
•of  this  difeafe,  till  it  takes  up  its  reft  in  God 
through  Chrift. 

“ 4-  Do  not  Adam’s  children  naturally  follow 
diis  fooifteps,  in  hiding  themfelves  from  the  pre- 
fence  of  the  Lord?  (Gen.  iii.  8.  We  are  juft -as 
blind  in  this  matter  a?  he  was,  who  thought  to 
Liide  himjef  from  the  prefence  of  the  Lord  among 
■the  trees  of  the  garden.  'We  promife  ourfelves 
more  fecurity  in  a fecret  fin,  than  in  one  that  is 
-openly  committed.  The  adulterer  faith.  No 
eye fiall feeme.  And  men  will  freely  do  that  in 
fecret,  which  they  would  be  afhamed  to  do  in 
the  prefence  ol  a clhld-t  as  it  darknefs  could  hide  - 
from  an  all-feeing  Ged.  Are  we  not  naturally 
carelefs  of  communion  with  God?  Nay,  and  aver  ft 
to  h ? Never  was  there  any  communion  between 
God  and  Adam's  children,  'where  God  himfelf 
had  'not  the  firft  word.  If  he  would  let  them 
alone,  they  would  never  enquire  after  him. 

“ 5.  How  loth  are  men  to  confefs  fin , to  take 
•guilt  and  lhame  to  themfelves  ? And  was  it  not 
thus  in  the  cafe  before  us?  Adam  conleffes  his 
nakednefs,  (which  indeed  he  could  not  deny) 
but  not  one  word  does  he  fav  about  his  fin.  It 
is  as  natural  for  us  to  hide  fin  as  to  commit  it. 
Many  iufiances  of  this  we  fee  daily  ; but  how 

many 


[ 433  ] 

many  will  there  be  in  that  day,  when  God  will 
judge  the  fecrets  of  men  ? Many  a foul  mouth  will 
then  be  feen,  which  is  now  wiped  and  faith , I 
have  done  no  wickednefs. 

“ Laftlv,  Is  it  not  natural  for  us  to  extenuate 
our  fm,  and  transfer  the  guilt  to  ctheTS  ? As 
Adam  laid  the  blame  of  his  fm  on  the  woman  : 
and  did  not  the  woman  lay  the  blame  on  the  fer- 
pent  ? Adam’s  children  need  not  lie  taught  this  ; 
lor  before  they  can  well  fpeak,  if  they  cannot 
den}',  they  lifp  out  fomething  to  leffen  their 
fault,  and  lay  the  blame  upon  another.  Nay  fo 
natural  is  this  to  men,  that  in  the’greateft  of  fins 
the}'  will  charge  the  fault  on  God  himfelf ; blas- 
pheming his  providence  under  the  name  of  ill- 
luck  or  misfortune , and  fo  laying  the  blame  of 
their  fin  at  heaven’s  door.  Thus  does  the  foolifn- 
nefs  of  man  pervert  his  ways  ; and  his  heart  fret- 
teth  againlt  the  Lord.  Let  us  then  call  Adam, 
father  : let  us  not  deny  the  relation,  feeing  we 
bear  his  image. 

“ I proceed  to  enquire  into  the  corruption  of 
nature  in  the  feveral  parts  of  it.  But  who  can 
take  the  exa 61  dimenfions  of  it,  in  its  breadth, 
length,  height  and  depth?  The  heart  is  deceitful 
above  all  things , and  defperately  wicked  : who  can 
know  it?  However  we  mav  quickly  perceive  fo 
much  of  it,  as  may  fhew  the  abfolute  neceflity  of 
regeneration.  Man  in  his  natural  ftate  is  altoge- 
ther corrupt,  through  all  the  faculties  of  his  foul : 

Vol.  XXL  T corrupt 


[ 434  ] 


corrupt  in  his  underftanding,  his  will,  his  affec- 
tions, his  confcience  and  his  memory. 

“ I.  The  underftanding  is  defpoiled  of  its  pri- 
mitive glory,  and  covered  over  with  confufion. 
We  are  fallen  into  the  hands  of  our  grand  adver- 
fary,  and  are  deprived  of  our  two  eyes.  There 
is  none  that  un'derjlandeth  ; the  very  mine/  andcon- 
Jcience  of  the  natural  man  are  dejiled  or  fpoiled. 
But  to  point  out  this  corruption  of  the  under- 
ffanding  more  particularly,  let  the  following 
things  be  confidered. 

“ Fir  ft.  There  is  a natural  weaknejs  in  the 
minds  of  men,  with  refpeeft  to  fpiritual  things. 
Plow  hard  is  it  to  teach  them  the  common  prin- 
ciples ol  religion,  to  make  truths  fo  plain,  that 
•they  may  underlland  them  ? Try  the  fame  per- 
fons  in  other  things,  fpeak  of  the  things  of  this 
world,  and  they  will  underftand  quickly  : but  it 
is  hard  to  make  them  know,  how  their  fouls  may 
be  faved,  or  how  their  hearts  may  find  reft  in 
Chrift.  Confider  even  thofe  who  have  many  ad- 
vantages above  the  common  run  of  mankind  : 
yet  how  fmall  is  their  knowledge  of  divine 
things ! What  confufion  ftill  remains  in  their 
minds?  How  often  are  they  mired,  and  fpeak  as 
a child,  even  in  the  matter  of  pra&ical  truths  ? It 
is  a pitiable  weaknejs , that  we  cannot  perceive 
the  tilings  which  God  has  revealed.  And  it  muft 
needs  be  a /inful  weaknefs , fince  the  law  of  God 
requires  us  to  know  and  believe  them. 

? “ Secondly 


C 435  ] 

* “ Secondly,  Man’s  underftanding  is  natural- 
ly overwhelmed  with  grofs  darkne/s  in  fpiritual 
things.  Man,  at  the  inftigation  of  the  devil,  at- 
tempting to  break  out  a new  light  in  his  mind, 
inftead  of  that,  "broke  up  the  doors  of  the  bot- 
tomlefs  pit,  by  the  fmoak  whereof  he  was  cover- 
ed with  darknefs.  When  God  at  firfh  made  man, 
his  mind  was  a lamp  of  light : but  fin  has  now 
turned  it  into  darknefs.  Sin  has  clofed  the  win- 
dow of  the  foul.  It  is  the  land  of  darknefs  and 
the  fhadow  of  death,  where  the  light  is  as  dark- 
nefs. The  prince  of  darknefs  reigns  therein,  and 
nothing  but  the  zvotks  of  darknffs  are  framed 
there.  Thityou  may  be  the  more  fully  convinc- 
ed of  this,  take  the  following  evidences  of  it. 

“ x.  The  darknefs  that  was  upon  the  face  of 
the  world  before,  and  at  the  time  that  Chrift 
came.  When  Adam  by  his  fin  had  loft  his  light, 
it  pleafed  God  to  reveal  to  him  the  way  of  falva- 
tion,  Gen.  hi.  lg.  This  was  handed  down  by 
holy  men  before  the  flood,  yet  the  natural  dark- 
nefs of  the  mind  of  man  fo  prevailed,  as  to  car- 
ry off  all  fenfe  <?f  true  religion  from  the  old 
world,  except  what  remained  in  Noah’s  fami- 
ly. After  the  flood,  as  men  increafed,  their  na- 
tural darknefs  of  mind  prevailed  ao-ain,  and  the 
light  deca'.  ed,  till  it  died  out  among  the  genera- 
lity of  mankind,  and  was  preferved  onlv  among 
the  pofterity  of  Shem.  And  even  with  them  it 
was  near  fettmg,  when  God  called  Abraham 
from  /Irving  other  gods,  Jofln.  xxiv.  ig.  God 
gave  him  a more  full  revelation,  which  he  com- 
T 2 municated 


[ 43«  ] 

municated  to  his  family  : Gen.  xviii.  tg.  Yet 
the  natural  darknefs  wore  it  out  at  length,  fave 
that  it  w'as  preferved  among  the  pofterity  of  Ja- 
cob. In  Egypt  that  darknefs  fo  prevailed  over 
them  alfo,  that  a new  revelation  was  neceffarv. 
And  many  a dark  cloud  got  above  that,  during 
the  time  from  Mofes  to  Chrift.  When  Chrift 
came,  nothing  was  to  be  feen  in  the  Gentile 
world,  but  darknefs  and  cruel  habitations.  They 
were  drowned  in  fuperllition  and  idolatrv  : 
and  whatever  wifdcm  was  among  their  phi- 
lofophers,  the  world  by  that  uifdom  knew  not 
God , but  became  more  and  more  vain  in  their 
imaginations.  Nor  were  the  Jews  much  wifer  : 
except  a few,  grofs  darknefs  covered  them  alfo. 
Their  traditions  were  multiplied  : but  the  know- 
ledge of  thofe  things  wherein  the  life  of  religion 
lies,  was  loft.  They  gloried  in  outward  ordi- 
nances, but  knew  nothing  of  worf lipping  God  in 
Spirit  and  in  truth. 

“ Now  what  but  the  natural  darknefs  of  mens 
minds,  could  ft  ill  thus  wear  out  the  light  of  ex- 
ternal revelation  ? Men  did  not  forget  the  way  of 
preferving  their  lives.:  but  how  quickly  did  they 
forget  the  way  of  faving  their  fouls  ? So  that  it 
was  neceffary  for  God  himfelf  to  reveal  it  again 
and  asain.  Yea,  and  a mere  external  revelation 
did  not  fuffice  to  remove  this  darknefs  ; no,  not 
when  it  was  bv  Chrift  in  perfon  : there  needed 
alfo  the  Holy  Ghoft  lent  down  from  heaven. 

Such 


[ 437  ] 

Such  is  the  natural  darknefs  of  our  minds,  that 
it  only  yields  to  the  blood  and  Spirit  g£  Chrifl. 

“ 2.  Eveiy  natural  man’s  heart,  how  refined 
foever  he  appear,  is  full  of  darknefs,  diforder 
and  confufion.  The  unrenewed  part  of  man- 
kind are  rambling  through  the  world,  like  fo 
many  blind  men,  who  will  neither  take  a guide, 
nor  can  guide  themfelves,  and  therefore  fall  over 
this  and  the  other  precipice  into  defiruftion. 
Some  are  running  after  their  covetoufnefs,  fome 
flicking  in  the  mire  of  fenfuality,  others  flafhing 
on  the  rock  of  pride  : every  one  Humbling  on 
one  ftone  of  Humbling  or  other,  as  their  unmor- 
tified paflions  drive  them.  And  while  fome  are 
lying  along  in  the  way,  others  are  coming  up 
and  falling  headlong  over  them.  Errors  fwarm  in 
the  world : * all  the  unregenerate  are  utterly 
miflaken  in  the  point  of  true  happinefs.  All  de- 
fire  to  be  happy  ; but  touching  the  way  to  hap- 
pinefs, there  are  almoft  as  many  opinions  as  there 
are  men.  They  are  like  the  bYmAfo  do  mites  about 
Lot’s  houfe,  all  keeking  to  find  the  door , but  in 
vain.  Look  into  thine  own  heart,  (if  thou  art 
not  born  again)  and  thou  wilt  fee.  all  turned  up- 
fide  down ; heaven  lying  under,  the  earth  a-top  : 
look  into  thy  life,  and  fee  how  thou  art  playing 
the  madman,  eagerly  flying  after  that  which  is 
not,  and  flighting  that  which  is,  and  will  be  for 
ever.  Thus  is  man’s  underflatiding  naturally 
overwhelmed  with  grofs  darknefs  in  fpiritual 
things. 

T g “ Thirdly, 


[ 43*  ] 

“ Thirdly,  th  ere  is  in  the  mind  of  man  a na- 
tural bias  to  evil : let  us  refleft  a little,  and  we 
(hall  find  inconfeftable  evidence  of  it. 

“ l.  Mens’  minds  have  a natural  dexterity  to 
do  mifchief : none  are  fo  fimple  as  to  want 
fkill  for  this.  None  needs  to  be  taught  it  ; but 
as  weeds  without  being  fown,  grow  up  of  their 
own  accord,  fo  does  this  earthly ,fenfual,  devilfh 
wifdom.,  naturally  grow  up  in  us. 

“ 2.  We  naturally  form  grofs  conceptions  of 
fpiritual  things,  as  if  the  foul  were  quite  immerf- 
ed  in  flefh  and  blood.  Let  men  but  look  into 
themfelves,  and  they  will  find  this  bias  in  their 
minds:  whereof  the  idolatry  which  flill  prevails 
fo  far  and  wide,  is  an  inconteftable  evidence. 
For  it  plainly  fhews,  men  would  have  a vifible 
deity  ; therefore  they  change  the  glory  of  the 
incorruptible  God  into  an  image.  Indeed  the  re- 
formation of  thefe  nations,  has  banifhed  grofs 
idolatry"  out  of  our  churches.  But  heart-reforma- 
tion alone  can  banifh  mental-idolatry",  fubtle  and 
refined  image-worfhip  out  of  our  minds. 

“ 3.  How  difficult  is  it,  to  detain  the  carnal 
mind  before  the  Lord  ? To  fix  it  in  the  medita- 
tion of  fpiritual  things  ? When  God  is  fpeaking 
to  man  by  his  word,  or  they  are  fpeaking  1 9 
him  in  prayer,  the  body  remains  before  God, 
l ut  the  world  fteals  away  the  heart.  Tho’  the 
eyes  be  clofed,  the  man  fees  a thou fand  vani- 
ties, and  the  mind  roves  hither  and  thither  : and 
many  times  the  man  fcarce  comes  to  himfelf,  till 

he 


[ 439  J 

he  is  gone  fro?n  the  prefence  of  the  Lord.  The 
worldly  man’s  mind  does  not  wander  when  he  is 
contriving  bufmefs,  calling  up  his  accounts,  or 
telling  his  money.  If  he  anfwers  you  not  at  firft, 
he  tells  you,  he  did  not  hear  you,  he  was  bulyv 
his  mind  was  fixed.  But  the  carnal  mind,  em- 
ployed about  fpiritual  things,  is  out  of  its  ele- 
ment, and  therefore  cannot  fix. 

“ 4.  Confider  how  the  carnal  imagination  fup- 
plies  the  want  of  real  objefils  to  the  corrupt 
heart.  The  unclean  perfon  is  filled  with  fpecula- 
tive  impurities,  having  eyes  full  of  adultery.  The 
covetous  man  fills  his  heart  with  the  world,  if  he 
cannot  get  his  hands  full  of  it.  The  malicious 
perfon  a£ls  his  revenge  in  his  own  brealt  r the 
envious,  within  his  own  narrow  foul,  fees  his 
neighbour  laid  low  enough  : and  fo  every  lull 
is  fed  by  the  imagination.  Thefe  things  may 
fuffice  to  convince  us,  of  the  natural  bias  of  the 
mind  to  evil. 

Fourthly,  there  is  in  the  carnal  mind  a noppof- 
tion  to  fpiritual  truths,  and  an  averfion  to  the  re- 
ceiving them.  God  has  revealed  to  finners  the 
way  of  falvation  ; he  has  given  his  word.  But 
do  natural  men  believe  it  ? Indeed  they  do  not. 
They  believe  not  the  promifes  of  the  word  : for 
they  who  receive  them  are  thereby  made  par- 
takers of  the  divine  nature.  They  believe  not  the 
word  : otherwife  they  could  not  live  as  they 
do.  I doubt  not  but  moll  if  not  all  of  you,  who 
are  in  a ftate  of  nature,  will  here  plead,  not  guil- 
T 4 , tv. 


L'  44°  ] 

ty.  But  tli.e  very  difficulty  you  find  in  affientmg 
to  this  truth  proves  the  unbelief  with  which  I 
charge  you.  Has  it  not  proceeded  fo  far  with 
forne,  that  it  has  fieeled  their  foreheads,  openly 
to  rejeft  all  revealed  religion  ? And-tho’  ye  fet 
not  your  mouths  as  they  do  againft  the  heavens, 
yet  the  fame  bitter  root  of  unbelief  is  in  you, 
and  reigns  and  will  reign  in  you  till  overcoming 
grace  captivate  your  minds  to  the  belief  of,  the 
truth.  To  convince  you  of  this 

“ Confider  1.  Howr  have  you  learned  thofe 
truths  which  you  think  you  believe  ? Is  it  not 
merely  bv  the  benefit  of  your  education,  and  of 
external  revelation  ? You  are  ftrangers  to  the  iri- 
° ward  work  of  the  holy  Spirit,  bearing  witnefs 
with  the  word  in  your  hearts:  and  therefore  ye 
are  ftill  unbelievers.  It  is  written  in  the  prophets, 
and.  they  Jho.U  be  all  taught  of  God.  Every  one 
therefore  that  hath  heard  and  learned  oj  the  father , 
faith  our  Lord,  cometh  unto  me.  But  ye  have  not 
come  to  Chrifl  : therefore  ye  have  not  been 
taught  of  "God.  Ye  have  not  been  fo  taught,  and 
.therefore  ye  have  not  come  : ye  believe  not, 

“ Confider,  2.  The  utter  incoufifiency  of 
moll  mens  lives  with  the  principles  which  they 
profefs.  They  profefs  to  believe  the  feripture: 
but  how  little  are  they  concerned  about  what  is  re- 
vealed therein  ? How  unconcerned  are  ye  even 
about  that  weighty  point,  whether  ye  be  born 
again,  or  not  ? Many  live  as  they  were  born  and 
are  like  to  die  as  they  live,  and  yet  live  in  peace. 

Do 


r 441  ] 

Do  fuch  believe  the  finfulnefs  of  a natural  (late. 
Do  they  believe  they  are  children  of  wrath  ? Do 
they  believe  there  is  no  falvation  rvithout  regene- 
ration ? And  no  regeneration  but  what  makes 

O 

man  a new  creature ? O no  ! If  ye  did,  ye  could 
not  live  in  your  fins,  live  out  of  Chrilt,  and  yet 
hope  for  mercy. 

“ Fifthly,  Man  is  naturally  high-minded.  Low- 
linefs  is  not  a flower  which  grows  in  the  field  of 
nature.  It  is  natural  to'  man  to  think  highly  of 
hunfelf  and  what  is  his  own . Vain  man  would  he 
wife-,  fo  he  accounts  himfelf,  and  fo  he  would 
be  accounted  by  others.  His  way  is  right  be- 
caufe  it  is  his  own-,  for  every  way  of  a man  is 
right  in  his  own  eyes.  He  is  alive  without  the  law-, 
and  therefore  his  hope  is  llrong,  and  his  confi- 
dence firm.  It  is  another  tower  of  Babel  : the 
word  batters  it,  yet  it  hands.  One  while  breaches 
are  made  in  it,  but  they  are  quickly  repaired. 
At  another  time,  it  is  all  made  to  fhake  ; but  it 
is  ftill  kept  up  ; till  God’s  fpirit  raifes  an  heart- 
quake  within  the  man,  which  tumbles  it  down, 
and  leaves  not  one  (lone  upon  another. 

“ Thus  much  of  the  corruption  of  the  under- 
handing.  Call  the  underhanding  ichahod:  for 
the  glory  is  departed  from  it.  Confider  this,  ye 
that  are  yet  in  the  hate  of  nature,  and  groan  ye 
out  vour  cafe  before  the  Lord,  that  the  fun  of 
righteoufnels  may  arife  upon  you,  before  ye  be 
fhut  up  in  everlahing  darknefs.  What  avails 
your  worldly  wifdom?  What  do  all  yourattain- 

T 5 merits 


[ 442  ] 

ments  in  religion  avail,  while  your  underdand- 
ing  lies  wrapt  up  in  darknefsandconfufion,  utter- 
ly void  of  the  light  of  life  ? 

“ II.  Nor  is  the  will  lefs  corrupted  than  the 
underdanding.  It  was  at  fil'd  faithful,  and  ruled 
with  God  : but  noiV  it  is  turned  traitor  againd 
God,  and  rules  with  and  for  the  devil.  To  open 
this  plague  of  the  heart,  let  the  following  things 
be  confidered. 

“Fird,  there  is  in  the  unrenewed  will  an  utter 
inability  for  what  is  truly  good  in  the  fight  of 
God.  Indeed  a natural  man  has  a power  to  chufe 
and  do  what  is  materially  good  : but  though  he 
can  will  what  is  good  and  right,  he  can  do  no- 
thing aright  and  zvell.  Without  me , that  is,  fe- 
parate  from  me,  ye  can  do  nothing-,  nothing  tru- 
ly and  fpiritually  good.  To  evidence  this,  con- 
fider 

“ 1.  How  often  do  men  fee  the  trood  they 
fhould  chufe,  and  the  evil  they  ihould  refufe  : 
and  yet  their  hearts  have  no  more  power  to  com- 
ply with  their  light,  than  if  they  were  arreded 
by  fome  invifible  hand  ? Their  confciences  tell 
them  the  right  way  : yet  cannot  their  will  be 
brought  up  to  it.  Elfe,  how  is  it,  that f the  clear 
arguments  on  the  fide  of  virtue,  do  not  bring 
men  over  to  that  fide  ? Although  heaven  and 
hell  were  but  a may  be,  even  ’this  would  deter- 
mine the  will  to  holinefs,  could  it  be  determined 
by  reafon.  Yet  fo  far  is  it  from  this,  that  men 

knowing 


C 443  ] 

knowing  the.  judgment  of  God,  that  they  who  do 
fuck  things  are  worthy  of  death,  not  only  do  the 
fame,  but  have pleafure  in  them  that  do  them. 

“ 2.  Let  thofe  who  have  been  truly  convinced 
of  the  fpirituality  of  the  law,  fpeak  and  tell  if 
they  then  found  themfelves  able  to  incline  their 
hearts  toward  it.  Nay,  the  more  that  light  fhone 
in  their  fouls,  did  they  not  find  their  hearts  more 
and  more  unable  to  comply  with  it  ? Yea,  there 
are  fome  who  are  yet  in  the  devil’s  camp  that  can 
tell  from  their  own  experience,  light  let  into  the 
mind  cannot  give  life  to  the  will,  or  enable  it  to 
comply  therewith. 

* “ Secondly,  There  is  in  the  unrenewed  will 
an  averfenefs  to  good.  Sin  is  the  natural  man’s 
element ; and  he  is  as  loth  to  part  with  it,  as  the 
fifhes  are  to  come  out  of  the  water.  He  is  fick; 
but  utterly  averfe  to  the  remedy ; he  loves  his 
difeafe,  fothat  he  loaths  the  phyfician.  He  is  a 
captive,  a prifoner  and  a Have  ; but  he  loves  his 
conqueror,  jailor  and  mafler : he  is  fond  of  his 
fetters,  prifon  and  drudgery,  and  has  no  liking  to 
his  liberty.  For  evidence  of  this  averfenefs  to 
good  in  the  will  of  man, 

* “ Confider,  i.  The  untowardnefs  of  children. 
How  averfe  are  they  to  reftraint  ? Are  thev  not 
as  bullocks  unaccujlomed  to  the  yoke?  Yea,  it  is 
far  eafier  to  tame  young  bullocks  to  the  yoke, 
than  to  bring  young  children  under  dificipfine. 
Every  man  may  fee  in  this  as  in  a glafs*  that  man 
is  naturally  wild  and  wilful;  that  according  to 

T 6 Zophar’s 


[ 444  ] 

Zophar’s  obfervation,  he  is  born  a wild  ajs' s 
colt.  What  can  be  faid  more  ? He  is  like  a colt, 
the  colt  ol  an  afs,  the  colt  of  a zvild  afs : a wild 
ajs  ijed  to  the  wildcrnefs , that fnvjfeth  up  the  wind 
at  her  pleajiire  : in  her  occafion  who  can  turn  her 
aw  a)  ? 

“ 2.  What  pain  and  diffictilty  do  men  find  in 
hinging  their  hearts  to  religious  duties?  And 
what  a talk  is  it  to  the  natural  man  to  abide  at 
them  ? To  leave  the  world  but  a little,  and  con- 
verfe  with  God  ? When  they  are  engaged  in 
worldly  bufinefs  or  company,  time  ftems  to  fly 
and  is  gone  before  they  are  aware.  Eut  how 
heavily  does  it  drive,  while  a prayer,  a fermon, 
or  a fabbath  lafts  ? With  mart  the  Lord's  dav  is 
the  longeft  day  in  the  week  : and  therefore  they 
mult  fieep  longer  that  morning,  and  go  fooner 
to  bed  that  night,  than  ordinarily  they  do,  that 
the  day  may  he  made  of  a tolerable  length.  And 
ll ill  their  hearts  fay,  When  will  the  fabbath  be 
pane  ? 

O 

“ 3.  Confidev  how  the  will  of  the  natural  man 
rebels  againjl  he  light.  Sometimes  he  is  not  able 
to  keep  it  out ; but  he  loves  darhnefs  rather  than 
light.  The  outer  door  of  the  underfianding  is 
broken  open,  but  the  inner  door  of  the  will  re- 
mains {hut.  Corruption  and  confcience  then 
encounter  ; till  confcience  is  forced  to  give  back : 
conviftions  are  murdered,  and  truth  is  made  and 
held  prifoner  in  u n righteo ufnefs. 

“ a.  When  the  Spirit  olthe  Lord  is  working  a 

deeper 


deeper  work,  yet  what  rcjijlance  does  the  foul 
make  ? When  he  comes,  he  finds  the  Jlrongman 
keeping  the  lioufe , while  the  foul  is  fall  afleep  in 
the  devil’s  arms:  till  the  Lord  awakens  in  the 
finner,  opens  his  eyes,  and  ftrikes  him  with  ter- 
ror, while  the  clouds  are  black  above  his  head, 
and  the  fword  of  vengeance  is  held  to  his  breaft. 
But  what  pains  is  he  at  to  put  a fair  face  on  a 
black  heart  ? To  fhake  off  his  fears,  or  make 
head  again  ft  them  ? Carnal  reafon  fuggefts,  if  it 
be  ill  with  him  it  will  be  ill  with,  many.  When 
he  is  beat  from  this,  and  fees  no  advantage  in 
going  to  hell  with  company,  he  refolves  to  leave 
his  fins ; but  cannot  think  of  breaking  off/3  foon> 
there  is  time  enough,  and  he  will  do  it  after- 
wards. When  at  length  he  is  conftrainedto  part 
with  Tome  fins,  others  are  kept  as  right-hands  or 
right-eyes.  Nay,  when  he  is  fo  preft,  that  he 
muft  needs  fay  before  the  Lord,  he  is  willing  to 


part  with  all  his  idols,  yet  how  long  will  his  heart 
give  the  lie  to  his  tongue,  and  prevent  the  exe- 
cution of  it  ? 

“ Thirdly,  There  is  in  the  will  of  man  a na- 
tural pronenefs  to  evil.  Men  are  naturally  bent 
| to  backjlicling  from  God : they  hang  (as  the  word 
is)  towards  backfliding.  Leave  the  unrenewed 
will  to  itfelf,  it  will  chufe  fin  and  rejeft  holinefs; 
and  that  as  certainly  as  water  poured  on  the  fide 


of  an  hill  will  run  downward  and  not  upward. 

“ 1-  Is  not  the  way  of  evil  the  firjl  way  wherein 
the  children  of  men  go  ? Do  not  their  inclinati- 


ons 


C 446  ] 

ons  plainly  appear  on  the  wrong  fide,  while  thcv 
have  not  cunning  to  hide  them  ? As  foon  as  it 
appears  we  are  reafonable  creatures,  it  appears 
we  are  finful  creatures.  Foolifhnefs  is  bound  in 
the  heart  of  a child , till  the  rod  of  correction 
drives  it  from  him.  It  is  bound  in  the  heart, 
woven  into  our  very  nature  ; nor  will  the  knots 
loofe  ; they  mull  be  broke  afunder  by  ftrokes. 
Words  will  not  do;  the  rod  mull  be  taken  to 
drive  it  away.  Not  that  the  rod  of  itfelf  will  do 
this  : the  fad  experience  of  many  parents  tefli- 
fies  the  contrary.  And  Solomon  himfelf  tells 
you,  Though  thou  Jhouldf  bray  a fool  in  a mortar , 
yet  luill  not  his  foolifhnefs  depart  from  him.  But 
the  rod  is  an  ordinance  of  God  appointed  for  that 
end  ; which,  like  the  word,  is  made  effe£lual, 
by  the  Spirit’s  accompanying  his  own  ordi- 
nance. 

“ 2.  How  eafily  men  are  led  into  fin!  Per- 
fuaded  to  evil,  though  not  to  good.  Thofe 
whom  the  word  cannot  draw  to  holinefs,  Satan 
leads  to  wickednefs  at  his  pleafure.  To  learn 
doing  ill,  is  always  eafy  to  the  unrenewed  man  : 
but  to  learn  to  do  good,  is  as  difficult  as  for  the 
Ethiopian  to  change  Ins  Jkin.  Were  the  will 
evenly  poifed  between  good  and  evil,  one  might 
be  embraced  with  as  much  eafe  as  the  other.  But 
experience  teflifies  it  is  not : yea,  the  experience 
of  all  ages.  How  often  did  the  Ifraelites  forfake 
the  almighty  God,  and  dote  upon  the  idols  of  the 
nations  ? But  did  ever  one  of  thofe  nations  for- 
fake 


[ 447  ] 

fake  their  idols,  and  grow  fond  of  the  God  of 
Ifrael  ? No,  no.  Though  man  is  naturally  given 
to  change,  it  is  but  from  evil  to  evil,  not  from 
evil  to  good.  Surely  then  the  will  of  man  hands 
not  in  equal  balance,  but  has  a calf  on  the  wrong 
fide. 

“ g.  Confider  how  men  go  on  ftill  in  the  way 
of  fin,  till  they  meet  with  a flop  from  another 
hand  than  their  own.  I hid  me,  and  he  went  on 
frowardly  in  the  way  of  his  own  heart.  If  God 
withdraws  his  reftraining  hand,  man  is  in  no 
doubt  which  way  to  chufe.  For  the  way  of  fin  is 
the  way  of  his  heart : his  heart  naturally  lies  that 
way.  As  long  as  God  fiiffereth  them,  all  nations, 
walk  in  their  own  -way.  The  natural  man  is  fo 
fixed  in  evil,  that  there  needs  no  more  to  fhew 
he  is  off  of  God’s  way,  than  to  fay,  he  is  upon 
his  own. 

“ Fourthly,  There  is  a natural  contrariety, 
a direft  oppofition  in  the  will  of  man  to  God 
himfelf.  The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  againjl 
God : it  is  not  fubjedl  to  ihe  law  of  God , neither 
can  be. 

“ I have  a charge  again  It  every  unregenerate 
man  and  woman,  to  be  proved  by  the  teflimony 
of  fcripture,  and  their  own  confcience  : namely, 
that  whether  they  have  the  form  of  religion  or  no, 
they  are  heart-enemies  to  God:  to  the  Son  of  God, 
to  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  to  the  law  of  God. 
Hear  this,  all  ye  carelefs  fouls,  that  live  at  eafe 
in  your  natural  flate. 


“ i.  Ye 


[ 4^8  ] 

“ i.  Ye  are  enemies  to  God  in  you.r  mind.  Ye 
are  not  as  yet  reconciled  to  him.  The  natural 
enmity  is  not  {lain,  though  perhaps  it  lies  hid, 
and  ye  do  not  perceive  it.  Every'  natural  man  is 
an  enemy  to  God,  as  he  is  revealed  in  his  word, 
to  an  infinitely  holy,  juft,  powerful  and  true  Being. 
In  effect,  men  are  naturally  halers  of  God:  and 
if  they  could,  they  would  certainly  make  him 
another  than  what  lie  is. 

“ To  convince  you  of  this,  let  me  propofe  a 
few  queries.  (1.)  How  are  your  hearts  affected 
to  the  infinite  holinefs  of  God  ? If  ye  are  not 
partakers  of  his  holinefs , ye  cannot  be  reconciled 
to  it.  The  Heathens  finding  they  were  not  like 
God  in  holinefs,  made  their  gods  like  themfelves 
in  filthinefs  and  thereby  difcovered  what  fort 
of  a god  the  natural  man  would  have.  God  is 
holy.  Can  an  unholy  creature  love  his  unfpotted 
holinefs  ? Nay,  it  is  the  righteous  only  that  can 
give  thanks  at  the  remembrance  of  his  holinefs. 
God  is  light : can  creatures  of  darknefs,  and  that 
walk  in  darknefs,  rejoice  therein?  Nay,  every 
one.  that  doth  evil  hateth  the  light.  For  what 
communion  hath  light  with  darknefs  ? (2.)  How 
are  your  hearts  afleEted  to  the  jufiice  of  God? 
There  is  not  a man  who  is  wedded  to  his  fins,  but 
would  be  content  with  the  blood  of  his  body,  to 
blot  that  letter  out  of  the  name  of  God.  Can  the 
malefa&or  love  his  condemning  judge  ? Or  an 
unjuftified  {inner  a juft  God?  No,  he  cannot. 
And  hence  fince  men  cannot  get  the  doEtrine  of 

his 


[ 449  ] 

his  juftice  blotted  out  of  the  bible,  yet  it  is  fuch 
an  eye-fore  to  them,  that  they  drive  to  blot  it 
out  of  their  minds  : they  ruin  themlelves  by 
prefuming  on  his  mercy,  faying  in  their  heart , 
the  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  he  do  evil . 
(3.)  How  are  ye  affefted  to  the  omnifcience  and 
omniprefence  of  God  ? Men  naturally  would 
rather  have  a blind  idol,  than  an  all-feeing  God, 
and  therefore  do  what  they  can,  as  Adam  did, 
to  hide  themfelves  from  the  prefence  of  the  Lord. 
They  no  more  love  an  omniprefent  God,  than 
the  thief  loves  to  have  the  judge  witnefs  to  his 
evil  deeds.  (4.)  How  are  ye  affefted  to  the 
truth  of  God  ? How  many  hope  that  God  will 
not  be  true  to  his  word?  There  are  thoufands 
that  hear  rhe  gofpel,  and  hope  to  be  faved,  who 
never  experienced  the  new  birth,  nor  do  at  all 
concern  themfelves  in  that  queflion,  whether 
they  are  born  again  or  not  ? Our  Lord’s  words 
are  plain  and  peremptory.  Except  a man  be  born 
again,  he  cannot  fee  the  kingdom  of  God.  What 
then  are  fuch  hopes,  but  real  hopes  that  God 
will  recall  his  word,  and  that  Chrifl  will  prove  a 
falfe  prophet?  (,5.)  How  are  they  affefted  to  tire 
power  of  God  ? None  but  new  creatures  can  love 
him  for  it.  Every  natural  man  would  contribute 
to  the  building  another  towTer  of  Babel,  to  hem 
it  in.  On  thefe  grounds  I declare  every  unre- 
newed man  an  enemy  to  God. 

“ 2.  Ye  are  enemies  to  the  Son  of  God,  that 
enmity  to  Chrifl  is  in  your  hearts,  which  would 

have 


[ 45°  } 

have  made  you  join  the  hufbandmen , who  killed 
the  heir , and  cafi  him  out  of  the  vineyard.  Am  I a 
dog,  ye  will  fay,  to  have  fo  treated  my  dear  Sa- 
viour? So  faid  Hazael,  in  another  cafe.  Yet 
how  did  he  a£l  ? Many  calls  him  dear  ; to 
whom  their  fins  are  ten  times  dearer  than  their 
Saviour.  He  is  no  otherwife  dear  to  them,  than 
as  they  abufe  his  death,  for  the  peaceable  enjoy- 
ment of  their  fins:  that  they  may -live  as  they 
lift  in  this  world  ; and  when  they  die  be  kept 
out  of  hell.  To  convince  you  of  this,  I will  lay 
before  you  the  enmity  of  your  hearts  againft 
Chrift  in  all  his  offices. 

“ I.  Every  unregenerate  man  is  an  enemy  to 
Chrift  in  his  prophetic  office.  For  evidence  of 
this  confider, 

“ i.  The  entertainment  he  meets  with,  when 
he  comes  to  teach  fouls  inwardly  by  his  Spirit. 
Men  do  what  they  can  to  flop  their  ears,  that 
they  may  not  hear  his  voice.  They  always  re- 
JiJl  the  Holy  Ghojl : they  defire  not  the  knowledge 
of  his  ways.  The  old  calu  mny  is  thrown  upon 
him  again,  He  is  mad : why  hear  ye  him  ? The 
fpirit  of  bondage  is  accounted  by  many  mere  dif- 
trafiion  and  melancholy:  men  thus  blafpheming 
God’s  work,  becaufe  they  themfelves  are  befide 
themfelves,  and  cannot  judge  of  tliofe  matters. 

“ 2.  Confiderthe  entertainment  he  meets  with 
when  he  comes  to  teach  men  outwardly  by  his 
word. 


fi.1  His 


[ 45 1 3 

“ (l.j  His  written  word  the  bible,  is  flighted. 
Many  layby  their bibles  with  their  funday  cloaths. 
Alas  ! The  dufl  about  your  bibles  is  a wit- 
nefs  of  the  enmity  of  your  hearts  again!!  Chrifl 
as  prophet.  And  of  thofe  who  read  them  oft- 
ner,  how  few  are  there  that  read  them  as  the 
word  of  the  Lord  to  their  fouls  in  particular,  fo 
as  to  keep  up  communion  with  God  therein  ? 
Hence  they  are  flrangers  to  the  folid  comfort 
of  the  fcriptures  ; and  if  at  anytime  they  are  de- 
je£led,  it  is  fomething  elfe,  and  not  the  word  of 
God,  which  revives  their  drooping  fpirits. 

“ (2.)  Chrift’s  word  preached  is  defpifed.  Men 
can  without  remorfe  make  to  themfelves  one  fi- 
lent  fabbath  after  another.  And  alas,  when  they 
tread  his  courts  how  little  reverence  and  awe  of 
God  appears  on  their  fpirits  ! Many  hand  as  bra- 
zen walls  before  the  word,  on  whom  it  makes  no 
breach  at  all.  Nay,  not  a few  are  growing  worfe 
and  worfe,  notwithflanding  precept  upon  precept. 
What  tears  of  blood  are  fufficient  to  lament  this? 
Remember,  we  are  but  the  Voice  of  one  crying. 
The  fpeaker  is  in  heaven.  Y et  ye  refufe  him 
that  fpeaketh,  and  prefer  the  prince  of  darknefs 
before  the  Prince  of  peace.  A difmal  darknefs 
overfpread  the  world  by  Adam’s  fall,  more  ter- 
rible than  if  the  fun  and  moon  had  been  extin- 
guifhed.  And  it  muff  have  covered  us  eternally 
had  not  the  grace  of  God  appeared  to  difpel  it. 
But  we  fly  from  it  and  like  the  wild  beaffs,  lay 
curfelves  down  in  our  dens.  Such  is  the  en- 
mity 


L 452  ] 

rriity  of  the  hearts  of  men,  againfl  Chrift  in  his 
prophetic  office. 

“ II.  The  natural  man  is  an  enemv  to  Chrift 

. . f J 

m his  prieftly  office.  He  is  appointed  of  the 
father  a pnejljor  ever  that  by  his  facrifice  and 
interceffion  alone,  finners  may  -have  accefs  to, 
and  peace  with  God.  But  Chrifl  crucified  is  ever 
a ftumbling-block  and  foolifhnefs  to  the  unre- 
generate part  of  mankind. 

“ None  of  Adam’s  children  naturally  incline 
to  receive  the  bleffing  in  borrowed  robes,  but 
would  always  climb  up  to  heaven  on  a thread 
fpun  out  of  their  own  bowels.  They  look  on 
God  as  a great  Matter,  and  themfelves  as  his 
fervants,  that  mutt  work  and  win  heaven  as  their 
wages.  Hence  when  confidence  awakes,  they 
think  that,  to  be  faved,  they  mutt  anfwer  the  de- 
mands of  the  law  ; ferve  God  us  well  as  they  can , 
and  pray  for  mercy  wherein  they  come  fhort. 
And  thus  many  come  to  duties,  that  never  come 
out  of  them  to  Chrift. 

“ Indeed  the  natural  man  going  to  God  in  du- 
ties, will  continually  be  found,  either  to  go  with- 
out a mediator,  or  with  more  mediators  than 
One.  Nature  is  blind  and  therefore  venturous : 
it  puts  men  on  going  immediately  to  God  with- 
out Chrift.  Converfe  with  many  hearers  of  the 
gofpel  on  their  hopes  of  falvation,  and  the  name 
of  Chrift  will  fiarcebe  heard  from  their  mouth. 
Afk  them,  how  they  think  to  find  the  pardon 
of  fin  ? They  lav,  they  look  for  mercy,  becaufe 

God 


[ 453  ] 

God  is  a merciful  God  : and  this  is  all  they 
have  to  truft  in.  Others  look  for  mercy  for 
Chrift’s  fake.  Rut  how  do  they  know  Chrift 
will  take  their  plea  in  hand  ? Why  they  pray, 
mourn,  confefs  and  have  great,  defires.”  So  they 
have  fomething  of  their  own  to  recommend  them 
to  him.  They  were  never  made  poor  in  fpirit , 
and  brought  empty-handed  to  God,  to  lay  the 
ftrefs  of  all  on  his  atoning  blood. 

“ III.  The  natural  man  is  an  enemy  to  Chrift, 
in  his  kingly  office. 

“ How  unwilling  are  natural  men  to  fubmit 
to  the  laws  and  difciplineof  his  kingdom  ! How- 
ever they  may  be  brought  to  fome  outward  fub- 
miffion  to  the  king  of  faints,  yet  fin  alway  retains 
its  throne  in  their  hearts,  and  they  are  fcrv- 
ing  divers  lujls  and  pleofures.  None  but  thofe  in 
whom  Chrift  is  formed,  do  really  put  the  crown 
on  his  head.  None  but  thefe  receive  the  king- 
dom  of  Chrift  within  them  and  let  him  fet  up 
and  put  down  in  their  fouls  as  he  will.  As  for 
others,  any  lord  fhall  fooner  have  the  rule  over 
them  than  the  Lord  of  glory.  They  kindly  en- 
tertain his  enemies,  and  will  never  abfolutely 
refign  themfelves  to  his  government.  Thus  you 
fee,  the  natural  man  is  an  enemy  to  Jefus  Chrift 
in  all  his  offices. 

“ 3.  Ye  are  enemies  to  the  Spirit  of  God;  he 
is  the  fpirit  of  holinefs.  The  natural  man  is  un- 
holy, and  loves  to  be  fo  : and  therefore  rejifs 
the  Holy  Ghojl.  The  work  of  the  fpirit  is  to  con- 
vince 


[ 454  ] 

vince  the  world,  of  fin,  righteoufnefs  and judgment. 
But  O ! how  do  men  ftriveto  ward  off  thefe  con- 
vidlions,  as  they  would  a b.low  that  threatened 
their  life  ! If  the  fpirit  dart  them  in  fo  that  they 
caunot  avoid  them,  does  not  the  heart  fay,  Hajl 
thou  found  me,  0 mine  enemy  ? And  indeed  they 
treat  him  as  an  enemy,  doing  their  utmoll  to 
ftifle  their  convidlions,  and  to  murder  thefe  har- 
bingers that  come  to  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord 
into  the  foul.  Some  fill  their  hands  with  bufi- 
nefs,  to  put  convictions  out  of  their  head,  as  Cain 
who  fell  to  building  a city.  Some  put  them 
offwit-h  fair  promifes,  as  Felix  did;  fom effort 
or  lleep  them  away.  And  how  can  it  be  other- 
wife?  For  it  is  the  work  of  the  holy  Spirit,  to 
fubdue  lulls  and  burn  up  corruption.  How 
then  can  he  whofiT  lulls  are  dear  as  his  life,  fail 
of  being  an  enemy  to  him  ? 

“ Lallly,  Ye  are  enemies  to  the  law  of  God. 
Tho’  the  natural  man  dejires  to  be  under  the  law, 
as  a covenant  of  works,  yet  as  it  is  a rule  of  life, 
he  is  not  fubjetl  to  it,  neither  indeed  can  be.  For  i. 
Every  natural  man  is  wedded  to  fomefin,  which 
he  cannot  part  with.  And  as  he  cannot  bring  up 
his  inclinations  to  the  law,  he  would  fain  bring 
down  the  law  to  his  inclinations.  And  this  is 
a plain,  Handing  evidence  of  the  enmity  oi  his 
heart  againll  it.  2.  The  law  fet  home  on  the 
awakened  confcience  in  its  fpirituality,  irritates 
corruption.  It  is  as  oil  to  the  fire,  which  in- 
ltead  of  quenching,  makes  it  flame  the  more. 

When 


C 455  J 

When  the  commandment  comes,  fin  revives.  What 
reafon  can  be  aftigned  for  this,  but  the  natural 
enmity  of  the  heart  againft  the  holy  law  ? We 
conclude  then,  that  the  unregenerate  are  heart- 
enemies  to  God,  his  Son,  his  Spirit,  and  his  law  : 
that  there  is  a natural  contrariety,  oppofition  and 
enmity  in  the  will  of  man,  to  God  himfelf  and 
his  holy  will. 

“ Fifthly,  The  unrenewed  will  is  wholly  per- 
verfe,  in  reference  to  the  end  of  man.  Man  is 
merely  a dependent  being  ; having  no  exiltence 
or  goodnefs  originally  from  himfelf:  but  all  he 
has  is  from  God,  as  thefirlt  caufe  and  fpring  of 
all  perfeftion,  natural  and  moral.  Dependence 
is  woven  into  his  very  nature  ; fo  that  fhould 
God  withdraw  from  him,  he  would  fmk  into 
nothing.  Since  then  whatever  man  is,  he 
is  of  him,  furely  whatever  he  is,  he  fhould  be  to 
him  ; as  the  waters  which  came  out  of  the  fea, 
return  thither  again.  And  thus  man  was  created 
looking  direftly  to  God,  as  his  laft  end  : but  fal- 
ling into  fin,  he  fell  off  from  God,  and  turned 
into  himfelf.  Now  this  infers  a total  apoftafy  and 
univerfal  corruption  in  man.  For  where  the  la  ft 
end  is  changed,  there  can  be  no  real  goodnefs. 
And  this  is  the  cafe  of  all  men  in  their  natural 
ftate  : they  feek  not  God  but  themfelves.  Hence 
though  many  fair  fhreds  of  morality  are  among 
them,  yet  there  is  none  that  doth  good,  no  not  one. 
For  though  fome  of  them  run  well,  they  are  ftill 
off  the  way ; they  never  aim  at  the  right  mark. 

Whither- 


[ 456  ] 

Whitlierfoever  they  move  they  cannot  move  be- 
yond the  circle  of  [elf.  They  feek  themfdves , 
they  aft  for  themfdves ; their  natural,  civil  and 
religious  aciions,  from  whatever  fpring  they 
come,  do  all  run  into,  and  meet  in  this  dead  fea. 

“ Moll  men  are  fo  far  from  making  God  their 
end  in  their  natural  and  civil  aflions,  that  he  is 
not  in  all  their  thoughts.  They  eat  and  drink 
lor  no  higher  end,  than  their  own  pleafure  or 
neceffity.  Nor  do  the  drops  of  fweetnefs  God 
has  put  into  the  creatures  raife  their  fouls  to- 
ward that  ocean  of  delights  that  are  in  the  Crea- 
tor. And  what  are  the  natural  man’s  civil  ac- 
tions, fuch  as  buying,  felling,  working,  but  fruit 
to  himfelff  Yea,  /elf  is  the  higheft  end  of  unrc- 
generate  men,  even  their  religious  actions. 
They  perform  duties  for  a name;  for  fome 
worldly  intereil : or,  at  bell,  in  order  to  efcape 
from  Hell.  They  feck  not  God  at  all,  but  for 
their  own  intereft  : fo  that  God  is  only  the  means, 
and  Jelf  their  end. 

“ Thus  have  I given  a rude  draught  of  man  s 
will  in  his  natural  flate,  drawn  from  fcripture 
and  our  own  experience.  Now  fince  all  mud 
be  wrong,  where  the  underftanding  and  will  are 
fo  corrupt,  1 fhall  briefly  difpatch  what  remains. 

* “ III.  The  affeBions  are  corrupted ; whol- 
ly difordered  and  diflempered.  They  are  like 
an  unruly  horfe,  that  either  will  not  receive,  or 
violentlv  runs  awav  with  the  rider.  Man  s heart 
is  naturally  a mother  of  abominations:  ¥ or  from 

within 


[ 457  ] 

within  out  of  the  heart  of  men , proceed  evil 
thoughts , adulteries,  fornications,  murders,  thefts, 
covetoufnefs.  The  natural  man’s  affections  are 
wholly  inifplaced  ; he  is  a Ipiritual  monfter.  His 
heart  is,  where  his feet  fhould  be,  fixed  on  earth : 
his  heels  are  lifted  up  againft  heaven,  which  his 
heart  fhould  be  fet  on  : his  face  is  toward  hell, 
his  back  toward  heaven.  He  loves  what  he 
fhould  hate,  and  hates  what  he  fhould  love; 
]oys  in  what  he  ought  to  mourn  for,  and 
mourns  for  what  he  fhould  rejoice  in  ; glories  in 
his  [home,  and  is  ajhamed  of  his  glory ; abhors 
what  he  fhould  defire,  and  de/ires  what  he  fhould 
abhor.  If  his  affections  are  fet  on  lawful  objects 
they  are  either  excefive  or  defetlive.  Thefe  ob* 
] efts  have  either  too  little  of  them  or  too  much. 
But  fpiritural  things  have  always  too  little. 

“ Here  is  athreefold  cord  againft  heaven,  not 
eafi'ly  broken,  a blind  mind,  a perverfe  will, 
diforded  affeftions.  The  mind  fwelled  with  pride, 
fays,  the  man  fhould  not  ftoop,  the  will  opo- 
fiteto'the  will  of  God,  fays,  he  will  not:  and 
the1  corrupt  affections,  rifing  againft  the  Lord, 
in  defence  of  the  corrupt  will,  fay,  he  fliall  not. 
And  thus  we  ftand  out  againft  God,  till  we  are 
created  anew  by  Chrift  Jefus. 

“IV.  * The  confcience  is  corrupt  and  defiled. 
It'  cannot  do  its  work,  but  according  to  the 
light  it  hath  to  work  by.  Wherefore  feeing 
The  natural  man' d if r efneth  not  fpintual  things , 
his  confcience  is  quite  ufelefs  in  that  point.  It 
Vol.  XXI.  U may 


C 453  ] 

may  indeed  check  for  grofier  fins,  but  fpirltual 
fins  it  difcerns  not.  Thus  it  will  fly  in  the  face 
of  many  for  drunkennefs  ; who  yet  have  a pro- 
found peace  tho’  they  live  in  unbelief,  and  are 
utter  ftrangei  s to  fpiritual  wcrjhip  and  the  life  of 
faith.  And  the  light  of  his  confluence  being  .faint 
and  languilhing,  even  in  the  things  which  it 
does  reach,  its  incitements  to  duty,  and  ftrug- 
gles  againfl  fin  are  very  remifs  and  eafilv  got 
over.  But  there  is  alfo'a  falfe  light  in  the  dark 
mind,  which  often  calls  evil  good  and  good  evil. 
And  fuch  a confluence  is  like  a blind  and  furious 
horfe,  which  violently  runs  down  all  that  comes 
in  his  way.  Indeed  whenever  confluence  is  a- 
wakened  by  the  fpirit  of  conviftion,  it  will  rage 
and  roar,  and  put  the  whole  man  in  a confterna- 
tion.  It  makes  the  ftifl  heart  to  tremble,  and 
the  knees  to  bow  ; fets  the  eyes  a weeping,  the 
tongue  a confefling.  But  flail  it  is  an  evil  conflu- 
ence, which  naturally  leads  only  to  defpair; 
and  will  do  it  effeftually,  unlefs  either  fin  pre- 
vailsoverit  to  lull  it  afleep,  as  in  the  cafe  of  Felix  : 
or  the  blood  of  Chrift  prevail  over  it,  fprinkling 
and  purging  it  from  dead  works. 

“ Thus  is  man  by  nature  wholly  corrupted. 
But  whence  came  this  total  corruption  of  our 
nature  ? That  man’s  nature  was  corrupt  the  very 
Heathens  perceived : but  how  fin  entered  they 
could  not  ^11.  But  the  fcripture  is  very  plain  in 
the  point.  By  one  man  Jin  entered  into  the  world. 
By  one  man's  difobediaice  many  (all)  zoere  made 

Ji niters. 


[ A59  ] 

finn°rs.  Adam’s  fin  corrupted  man’s  nature, 
and  leavened  the  whole  lump  of  mankind.  We 
putrified  in  Adam  as  our  root.  The  root  was 
poifoned,  and  fo  the  branches  were  invenomed. 
The  vine  turned  the  vine  of  Sodom,  and  fo  the 
grapes  became  grapes  ofi  gall.  Adam  by  his  fin 
became  not  only  guilty  but  corrupt,  and  fo 
tranfmits  guilt  and  corruption  to  his  pofterity. 
By  his  fin  he  ftripped  himfelf  of  his  original 
righteoufnefs  and  corrupted  himfelf.  We  were 
in  him  reprefentatively,  as  our  moral  head  : we 
were  in  him  feminally,  as  our  natural  head. 
Hence  we  fell  in  him  : (as  Levi  paid  tythes  when 
in  the  loins  of  Abraham J by  his  difobedience  we 
were  made finners  : his  firll  fin  is  imputed  to  us. 
And  we  are  left  -without  that  original  righteouf- 
nefs,  which  being  given  to  him  as  a common 
perfon,  he  call  off.  And  this  is  necefiarily  fol- 
lowed in  him  and  us,  by  the  corruption  of  our 
whole  nature:  righteoufnefs  and  corruption  be- 
ing two  contraries,  one  of  which  mull  always  be 
in  man.  And  Adam  our  common  father  being 
corrupt,  fo  are  we  : for  who  can  bring  a clean 
thing  out  of  an  unclean  ? 

“ It  remains  only  to  apply  this  doflrine.  And 
firll,  for  information.  Is  man’s  nature  wholly 
corrupted  ? Then  1.  No  wonder  the  grave  opens 
its  devouring  mouth  for  us  as  foon  as  the  womb 
has  call  us  forth.  For  we  are  all  in  a fpiritual 
fenfe  dead-born  : yea,  and  filthy  (Pfalm  xiv.  3.] 
noifom,  rank  and  flanking,  as  a lorrupt  thing  : 

U 2 (fo 

• * 


[ 46°  ] 

(fo  the  word  imports).  Let  us  not  complain  of 
the  miftrivs  we  are  expofed  to  at  our  entrance, 
or  during  our  continuance  in  the  world.  Here 
is  the  venom  that  has  poifoned  all  the  fprings  of 
earthly  enjoymenrs.  It  is  the  corruption  of 
human  nature,  which  brings  forth  all  the  naileries 
of  life. 

“ 2.  Behold  here  as  in  a glafs,  the  fpring  of 
all  the  wickednefs,  profanenefs  and  formality  in 
the  world.  Every  thing  a£Fs  agreeably  to  its 
own  nature  ; and  fo  corrupt  man  a£ls  corruptly. 
You  need  not  wonder  at  the  finfulnefs  of  your 
own  heart  and  life,  nor  at  the  finfulnefs  and  per- 
verfenefs  of  others.  If  a man  be  crooked,  he 
cannot  but  halt ; and  if  the  clock  be  fet  wrong, 
how  can  it  point  the  hour  right  ? 

“ 3.  See  here  why  fin  is  fo  pleajant,  and  reli- 
gion fuch  a bur  den  to  men:  fin  is  natural:,  holi- 
nefs  not  fo.  Oxen  cannot  feed  in  the  fea,  nor 
fifhes  in  the  fruitful  field.  A fwine  brought  into 
a palace  would  prefer  the  mire.  And  corrupt 
nature  tends  ever  to  impurity. 

“ 4.  Learn  from  hence  the  nature  and  necef- 
fity  of  regeneration.  Firft,  the  nature  : it  is  not 
a partial  but  a total  change.  Thy  whole  nature  is 
corrupted.  Therefore  the  whole  muff  be  re- 
newed. All  things  muff  become  new.  If  a man 
rvho  had  received  many  wounds,  were  cured  of 
all  but  one,  he  might  flill  bleed  to  death.  It  is 
not  a change  made  by  human  mduhry,  but  by 
the  almighty  Spirit  of  God.  A man  mull  be 

born 


r 461  ] 

born  of  ilie  Spirit.  Our  nature  is  corrupt,  and 
none  but  the  God  of  nature  can  change  it.  Man 
may  pin  a new  life  to  an  old  heart,  but  he  can 
never  change  the  heart.  Secondly,  the  necef- 
fity  : it  is  abfolutely  necelTary  in  order  to  Salva- 
tion. * Except  a man  be  born  again , he  cannot 
fee  the  kingdom  of  God.  No  unclean  thing  can 
enter  the  new  Jerufalem  ; but  thou  art  by  nature 
wholly  unclean.  Deceive  not  thyfelf:  no  mercy  of 
God,  no  blood  of  Chrift  will  bring  an  unregener- 
ate finner 'to  heaven.  For  God  will  never  open  a 
fountain  of  mercy  to  wadi  away  his  own  holinefs 
and  tiuth  : nor  did  Chrift  fired  his  precious 
blood  to  blot  out  the  truths  of  God.  Heaven! 
What  would  you  do  there,  who  are  not  born 
again?  An  holy  head,  and  corrupt  members! 
An  head  full  of  treafures  of  grace,  members 
filled  with  treafures  of  wickednefs  ! Fe  are  riq 
ways  adapted  to  the  Society  above,  more  than 
beafts  to  converfe  with  men.  Could  the  unre- 
newed man  go  to  heaven,  he  would  go  to  it  no 
otherwife  than  now  he  comes  to  the  duties  of 
holinefs,  that  is,  leaving  his  heart  behind  him. 

* “ We  may  apply  this  doftrine,  Secondly,  for 
lamentation.  Weil  may  we  lament  thy  cafe.  O 
natural  man,  for  it  is  the  faddeft  cafe  one  can  be 
in  out  of  hell.  It  is  time  to  lament  for  thee ; 
for  thou  art  dead  already,  dead  while  thou  liveft. 
Thou  carrieft  about  a dead  foul  in  a living  body; 
and  becaufe  thou  art  dead,  canft  not  lament  thy 
own  cafe.  Thou  haft  no  good  in  thee:  thy  foul 

• U 3 W 


[ 46z  ] 

is  a mafs  of  darknefs,  rebellion  and  vilenefs  be- 
fore God.  Thou  canfl  do  no  good : thou  canft 
do  nothing  but  fin.  For  thou  art  the  fervant  of 
fin , and  therefore  free  from  righteoufnefs  : thou 
dofi  not,  canfl:  not  meddle  with  it.  Thou  art 
under  the  dominion  of  fin,  a dominion  where 
righteoufnefs  can  have  no  place.  Thou  art  a 
child  and  a fervant  of  the  devil,  as  long  as  thou 
art  in  a ftate  of  nature.  But  to  prevent  any  mif- 
take,  confider  that  Satan  hath  two  kinds  of  fer- 
vants.  There  are  fome  employed,  as  it  were, 
in  coarfer  work.  Thefe  bear  the  devil's  mark 
in  their  foreheads  having  no  form  of  godlinefs, 
not  fo  much  as  performing  the  external  duties  of 
religion,  but  living  apparently  as  fons  of  earth, 
only  minding  earthly  things.  Whereas  others 
are  employed  in  more  refined  work,  who  carry 
his  mark  in  their  right-hand,  which  they  can  and 
do  hide  bv  a form  of  religion,  from  the  view  of 
the  world.  Thefe  facrifice  to  the  corrupt  mind, 
as  the  other  to  the  fejh.  Pride,  unbelief,  felf- 
pleafing,  and  tire  like  fpiritual  fins,  prey  on 
their  corrupted,  wholly  corrupted  fouls.  Both 
are  fervants  of  the  fame  houfe,  equally  void  oi 
righteoufnefs. 

“ Indeed  how  is  it  poffible  thou  fhouldft  be 
able  to  do  any  thing  good,  whofe  nature  is  wholly 
corrupt?  Can  an  evil  tree  bringforth  good fruit  f 
Do  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns  ? 11  then  thy  na- 
ture be  totally  evil,  all  thou  doft  is  certainly  fo 
too. 

“ Hear 


C 463  ] 

“ Hear,  O (inner,  what  is  thy  cafe,  innamer- 
able  fins  compafs  thee  about  : floods  of  impuri- 
ties overwhelm  thee.  Sins  of  ail  forts  roll 
up  and  down  in  the  dead  fea  of  thy  foul ; where 
no  good  can  breathe,  becaufe  of  the  corruption 
there.  Thy  lips  are  unclean : the  opening  of 
thy  mouth  is  as  the  opening  of  a grave,  full  of 
Itench  and  rottennefs.  Thy  natural  actions  are 
fin:  for  when  ye  did  eat,  and  when  ye  did  drink, 
did  not  ye  eat  for  your  [elves  and  drink  for  your- 
fives ? Zech.  vii.  6.  Thy  civil  aftions  are  fin. 
Prov.  xxi.  4.  The  plowing  oj  ike  wicked  is  fin . 
Thy  religious  aftions  are  fin.  The facrifce  of  the 
wicked  is  an  abomination  to  the  Lord.  The 
thoughts  and  imaginations  of  thv  heart  are  only  evil 
continually . A deed  may  be  (oon  done,  a word 
foon  fpoxen,  a thought  pafs  ; but  each  of  thefe  is 
an  item  in  thv  accounts.  O fad  reckoning  ! As 
many  thoughts,  words,  actions,  fo  many  fins: 
and  the  longer  thou  lived  thy  accounts  fwellthe 
more.  Should  a tear  be  droptior  every  fin,  thine 
eyes  mud  be  fountains  of  tears » For  nothing 
but  fin  comes  from  thee  : thy  heart  frames  no- 
thin? but  evil  imaginations  : there  is  nothing  in 
thy  life,  but  what  is  framed  by  thy  heart  : there- 
fore there  is  nothing  in  thy  heart  or  life  but 
evil. 

“ And  all  thy  religion,  if  thou  had  any,  is 
loft  labour,  if  thou  art  not  born  again,  truly 
then  thy  duties  are  fins.  Would  not  the  bed 
wine  be  loathfome  in  a foul  veflel  ? So  is  the 

religion 

© 


[ 4^4  ] 

religion  of  an  unregenerate  man.  Thy  duties 
cannot  make  thy  corrupt  foul  holy  ; but  thy  cor- 
rupt heart  makes  them  unclean.  Thou  waft  wont 
to  divide  thy  works  into  two  forts  ; to  count 
fome  good  and  fome  evil.  But  thou  muft  count 
again,  and  put'  all  under  one  head ; for  God 
writes  on  them  all,  Only  edit. 

“ And  thou  can  ft  not  help  thyfelf.  What 
canft  thou  do  to  take  away  thy  fin,  who  art  whol- 
ly corrupt  ? Will  mud  and  filth  wafh  our  filthi- 
nefs  ? And  wilt  thou  purge  out  fin  by  finning? 
Job  took  a potfiierd  to  fcrape  himfelf,  becaufe 
his  hands  were  as  full  of  boils  as  his  body. 
This  is  the  cafe  of  thy  corrupt  foul,  fo  long  as 
thou  art  in  a ftate  of  nature.  Thou  art  poor  in- 
deed, extremely  miferable  and  poor  ; thou  haft 
no  fhelter  but  a refuge  of  lies  : no  garment  for 
thy  foul,  huijilthy  rags,  nothing  to  nourifn  it, 
but  hufks  that  cannot  fatisfy.  More  than  that 
thou  haft  got  fuch  a bruife  in  the  loins  of  Adam, 
that  thou  art  without  Jlrength,  unable  to  do  any 
thing.  Nay,  more  than  all  this,  thou  canft  not 
fo  much  as  feek  aright,  but  Heft  helplefs,  as  an 
infant  expoled  in  the  open  field. 

“ O 4 hat  ye  would  believe  this  fad  truth. 
How  little  is  it  believed  in  the  world  ? Few  are 
concerned  to  have  their  evil  lives  reformed; 
but  fewer  far,  to  have  their  evil  nature  chang- 
ed. Moftmen  know  not  s\  hat  they  are  ; as  the 
eye.  which  feeing  many  things  never  fees  itfelf. 
But  until  ye  know  every  ore  the  plague  oj  ; 

own 


[ 465  ] 

own  heart,  there  is  no  hope  of  your  recovery. 
Why  will  ye  not  believe  the  plain  teftimony  of 
fcripture  ? Alas ! That  is  the  nature  of  your  dif- 
eafe.  Thou  knowejl  not  that  thou  art  wretched  and 
miferable  andpcor  and  blind  and  naked.  Lord  op- 
en their  eyes,  before  they  lift  them  up  in  hell, 
and  fee  what  they  will  not  fee  now  ! 

“ Mean  time  let  us  have  a fpecial  eye  upon 
the  corruption  and  fin  of  our  nature.  What 
avails  it  to  take  notice  of  other  fins,  while  this 
mother  fin  is  unnoticed?  This  is  a weighty 
point  ; in  fpeaking  to  which  I fhali 

“ 1.  Point  at  fome  evidences  of  men’s  over- 
looking the  fin  of  their  nature.  As(i.)  men’s  be- 
ing fo  confident  of  themfelves,  as  if  they  were  in 
no  danger  ofgrofs  fins.  Many  would  take  heinouf- 
ly  fuch  a caution  as  Chrift  gave  his  apoftles,  Take 
heed  of furfeiting  and  dr  unkcnnefs.  They  would 
be  ready  to  cry  out  am  I a dog  ? It  would  raife  the 
pride  of  their  heart,  not  their  fear  and  trembling 
And  all  this  is  a proof,  that  they  know  not  the 
corruption  of  their  own  nature.  (2.)  Untendernefs 
toward  them  that  fail.  Many  in  this  cafe  call  offall 
bowels  of  compaffion:  a plain  proof  that  they  do 
not  know  or  confider  themfelves,  left  they  alfo  be 
tempted.  Grace  indeed  does  make  men  zealous 
againft  fin,  in  others  as  well  as  in  themfelves. 
But  eyes  turned  inward  to  the  corruption  of 
nature,  clothe  them  with  pity  and  compaffion, 
and  fill  them  with  thankfulnefs,  that  they  rvere 
not  tne  perfons  left  to  be  fuch  fpeftacles  of  hu- 
man frailty,  (3.)  Men’s  venturing  fo  boldly  on 

temptation. 


[ 4«6  J 

temptation,  in  confidence  of  their  coming  off 
fairly.  Were  they  fenfible  of  the  corruption  of 
their  nature  they  would  beware  of  entring  on 
the  devil’s  ground  ; as  one  girt  about  with  bags 
of  gunpowder,  would  be  loth  to  walk  t here 
fparks  of  fire  were  flying. 

“ 2.  I {hall  mention  a few  thincc.  in  which 

O 7 

ye  fhould  have  a fpecial  eye  to  the  fin  of  your 
nature.  (l.)  In  your  application  to  (Thrift. 
When  you  are  with  the  phyfician,  O foyget  not 
this  difeafe.  1 hey  never  yet  knew  their  errand 
to  (Thrift,  who  rvent  not  to  him  for  the  fin  of 
their  nature  ; for  his  blood  to  take  away  the  guilt 
and  his  fpirit  to  break  the  power  of  it.  Though  ye 
fhould  lay  before  him  a catalogue  of  fins,  which 
might  reach  from  earth  to  heaven,  yet  if  you 
omit  this,  you  have  forgot  the  heft  part  of  the 
errand  a poor  finner  has  to  the  Phyfician  of  fouls. 
(2.)  Have  a fpecial  eye  to  it  in  your  repentance. 
If  you  would  repent  indeed,  let  the  ftreams  lead 
you  up  to  the  fountain,  and  mourn  over  your 
corrupt  nature,  as  the  caufe  of  all  fin,  in  heart, 
word  and  work.  Againfl  thee , thee  only  have  I 
finned \ and  done  this  evil  in  thy  fight.  Beheld  I 
was  fiapen  in  iniquity , and  in  fin  did  my  mother 
conceive  me.  (3.)  Have  a fpecial  eye  to  it  in 
your  mortification.  Crucify  the  fief  1 with  its  af- 
feElions  and  defires.  It  is  the  root  of  bitternefs 
'which  muft  be  ftruck  at;  elfe  we  labour  in  vain. 
In  vain  do  we  go  about  to  purge  the  ftreams,  if 
we  are  at  no  pains  about  the  muddv  fountain. 

M Ye 


[ 467  3 

(4-J  Ye  are  to  eye  this  in  your  daily  walk.  He 
that  would  walk  uprightly,  mull  have  one  eye 
upward  to  Jefus  Chrih,  another  inward  to  the 
corruption  of  his  own  nature. 

“ III.  I lhall  offer  fome  reafons,  why  we 
fltould  efpecially  obferve  the  fin  of  our  nature. 

“ 1.  Becaufe  of  all  fins  it  is  the  moll  extenfive  and 
dijfufive.  It  goes  through  the  whole  man  and’ 
fpoils  all.  Other  fins  mar  particular  parts  of  the 
image  of  God ; but  this  defaces  the  whole.  It  is 
the  poifon  of  the  old  ferpent  call  into  the  foun- 
tain, and  fo  infedts  every  adlion,  every  breath- 
ing of  the  foul. 

“ 2.  It  is  the  caufe  of  all  particular  fins,  both 
in  our  hearts  and  lives.  Out  of  the.  heart  of  man 
proceed  evil  thoughts,  adulteries,  and  all  other 
abominations.  It  is  the  bitter  fountain,  and 
particular  lulls  are  but  rivulets  running  from  it, 
which  bring  forth  into  the  life  a part  only,  not 
the  whole  of  what  is  within. 

“ 3.  It  is  virtually  aU  fins : for  it  is  the  feed 
of  all,  which  want  but  the  occafion  to  fet  up  their 
heads.  Hence  it  is  called  a body  of  death,  as 
confilling  of  the  feveral  members  which  conlti- 
tute  that  body  of  Jins  (Col.  ii.  1 1.)  whole  life  lies 
in  fpiritual  death.  It  js  the  curfed  ground,  fit  to 
bring  forth  all  manner  of  noxious  weeds.  Never 
did  every  fin  appear  in  the  converfation  of  the 
vileft  wretch  that  ever  lived.  But  look  into  thy 
nature,  and  thou  mayfl  fee  all  and  every  fin  in 
the  root  thereof.  There  is  a fulnefs  of  ali  un- 
righteoufnefs  there  : atheifin,  idolatry,  adultery, 

murder 


C 468  ] 

murder.  Perhaps  none  of  fhefe  appear  to  thee 
in  thy  heart:  but  there  is  more  in  that  unfathom- 
ble  dept  It  of  wickednefs.than  thou  knowefl. 

“ 4.  The  fm  of  our  nature  is  of  ail  fins  the 
moftjxt  and  abiding.  Sinful  actions  are  trailfi- 
ent,  though  the  guilt  and  {lain  of  them  'may  re- 
main. But  the  corruption  of  nature  p’afies  not 
away.  It  remains  in  its  full  power,  by  night  and 
by  day,  at  all  times,  till  nature  is  changed  by 
converting  grace. 

“ You  mav  obferve  three  things  in  the  corrupt 
heart.  (1.)  There  is  the1  corrupt  nature,  theevil 
bent  of  the  heart,  whereby  men  are  unapt  for  ail 
good,  and  fitted  for  all  evil  (2.)  There  are 
particular  luffs  or  difpofitions  of  that  corrupt  na- 
ture, fuch  as  pride,  pafiion,  covetoufnefs.  (3.) 
There  is  one,  of  thefe  ftronger  than  all  the  reft, 
The  Jin  which  doth  fo  eafily  befct  us.  So  that  the 
river  divides  into  many  ftreams,  whereof  one  is 
greater  than  the  reft.  The  corruption  of  nature 
is  the  river-head,  which  has  many  particular 
luffs  wherein  it  runs;  but  it  mainly  difburdens 
itfelf  into  that  which  we  call  the  predominant  fin. 
But  as  in  fome  rivers  the  main  flream  runs  not 
always  in  the  fame  channel,  fo  the  befetting  fin 
may  change,  as  luff  in  youth  may  be  fucceeded 
by  covetoufnefs  111  old  age.  Now  what  does  it 
avail,  to  reform  in  other  things,  while  the  reign- 
ing fin  retains  its  full  power  J Y.  hat  if  a parficu- 
lar  fin  be  gone  ? .If  the  fin  of  our  nature  keep  the  * 
throne,  it  will  fet  up  another  in  its  ftead  : as 
when  a water-couffe  is  ftout  in  one  place,  it  m ill 

break 


[ 4*9  1 

break  forth  in  another.  Thus  fomecaft  off  their 
prodigality  ; but  covetoufnefs  comes  in  its  dead. 
Some  quit  their  profanenefs ; but  the  fame  dream 
runs  in  the  other  channel  of  felf-righteoufnefs. 

“ That  you  may  have  a full  view  of  the  fin  of- 
your  nature,  I would  recommend  to  you  three 
things.  (1.)  Study  to  know  the  fpirituality  and 
extent  of  the  law  of  God  ; for  that  is  the  glafs 
wherein  you  may  fee  yourfelves.  (2.)  Obferve 
your  hearts  at  all  times;  but  efpecially  under 
temptation*  Temptation  is  a fire  that  brings  up 
the  fcum  of  the  unregenerate  heart.  (3.)  Go  to 
God  through  Jefus  Chrilt,  for  illumination  by 
his  Spirit.  Say  unto  him,  What  I know  not , 
teach  thou  me : and  be  willing  to  take  in  light, 
from  the  word.  It  is  by  the  word  the  fpirit 
teacheth ; but  unkffs  he  teach,  all  other  teach- 
ing is  to  little  purpofe.  You  will  never  fee  your- 
felf  aright,  till  he  light  his  candle  in  your  bread:. 
Neither  the  fulnefs  and  glory  of  Chrid,  nor  the 
corruption  and  vilenefs  of  our  nature,  ever  were 
or  can  be  rightly  learned,  but  where  the  Spirit 
of  Chrid  is  the  teacher. 

“ To  conclude:  let  the  confederation  of  what 
has  been  faid,  commend  Chrid  to  you  all.  Ye 
that  are  brought  out  of  your  natural  date,  be 
humble  ; diil  coming  to  Chrid,  dill  cleaving  to 
him,  for  the  purging  out  what  remains  of  your 
natural  corruption.  Ye  that  are  yet  in  your  na- 
tural date,  what  will  ye  do?  Ye  mud  die:  ve 
mud  dand  at  the  judgment  feat  of  God.  Will 
U 


you 


I 4 ?o  ] 

you  lie  dow  n,  and  fleep  another  night  at  eafe  in 
this  cafe  ? See,  ye  do  it  not.  Before  another 
day  you  may  be  fet  before  his  dreadful  tribunal, 
in  the  grave-cloaths  of  your  corrupt  ftate,  and 
your  vile  fouls  call;  into  the  pit  of  deftrudtion,  to 
be  for  ever  buried  out  of  God’s  fight.  For  I tef- 
tify  unto  you,  there  is  no  peace  with  God,  no 
pardon,  no  heaven  for  you  in  this  ftate.  There 
is  but  a ftep  betwixt  you  and  eternal  deftruftion 
from  the  prefence  of  the  Lord.  If  the  brittle 
thread  of  life,  which  may  be  broke  with  a touch, 
in  a moment,  or  ever  you  are  aware,  be  broken 
while  you  are  in  this  ftate,  you  are  ruined  for 
ever,  and  without  remedy.  But  come  ye  fpeedi- 
ly  to  Jefus  Chrift.  He  hath  cleanfed  as  vile 
fouls  as  yours.  Confejs  your  Jins ; and  he  will 
both  forgive  your  fins,  and  cleanfe  you  from  all 
tmrighteoufnefs. 

Brijlol,  Aug.  17,  1757. 


The  End  of  the  Twenty-frfl  Volume. 


THE 


CONTENTS 

Of  the  Twenty-Firjl  Volume. 


Page 

PART  I.  The  doctrine  of  originl Jin  — 3 

PART  II.  — — — 81 

PART  III.  An  anfwer  to  Dr.  Taylorh  fup- 
plement  — - — 21a 

Of  imputed  guilt  — — H, 

Seft.  II.  Of  the  nature  and  defign  of  our 
afflictions  and  mortality  — — 217 

Seft.  III.  The  arguments  taken  from  the 
calamities  and  fnfulnef's  of  mankind  confi- 
dered  — — — 221 

Seft.  IV.  The  confequence  of  the  do&rine  of 
original  Jin  — ~ 233 

Seft.  V.  A general  argument  taken  from  what 
God  has  declared  concerning  mankind,  at 
the  ref  oration  of  the  world  after  the  deluge  236 
VI.  The  notion  of  Adam’s  being  afederal 

head , 


CONTENTS. 


head,  or  representative  of  mankind , confi- 
dered  — — — 242 

S e£I.  VII.  Of  the  formation  of  our  nature  in 
the  womb  — — 247 

Se£i.  VIII.  Of  original  righteoufnefs  — 254 

PART  IV.  Extract  from  Dr.  Watts  and 
Air.  Hebden  — — 277 

PARTV.  — — — 354 

The  doSlrine.  of  imputed  fin  and  righteoufnefs  374 
PART  VI.  The  doBrine  of  original  fin 
explained  and  vindicated  — — 385 

PART  VII.  — — — 417 


Date  Due 

Demco  293-5 

V- 


s' 


