THE    LIBRARY

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  U:  IVERSITY

PROVO,  UTAH


THE  PEEACHER'S  COMMEITARY


ON   THE


BOOK  OF  LAMENTATIONS.


THE


|reacker*0  OTom^jlete  Somiletical

COMMENTARY


ON  THE


OLD    TESTAMENT

(ON  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN).


B¥


VARIOUS  AUTHORS.


Vim  'Forit

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY

London  and  Toronto

1S92


f'^^  t —  VV^  »     '


HOMILETIC     COMMENTARl'


T


ON  THE


BOOK  OF  LAMENTATIONS.


BY


RET.    GEO.    BAELOW,

AUTHOR  OF  "  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  BOOKS  OF  KINGS,"  ETC.


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY

London  &  Toronto

1892


'THE    LIDRARY
BRIGHAM  YOUNG  U:  IVZRSITY
PROVO,  UTAH


PREFACE.


Preachers  appear  to  have  shunned  the  Book  of  Lamentations,  as  if  it  lacked
suggestiveness  for  homiletic  purposes ;  and  there  are  comparatively  few  sermons
based  on  texts  selected  from  this  portion  of  Holy  Writ.  It  may  be  that  the
undertone  of  melancholy,  that  runs  so  sadly  through  the  five  elegies  of  which  the
book  is  composed,  has  created  the  impression  that  the  theme  is  too  monotonous
to  admit  of  the  freshness  and  variety  expected  from  the  pulpit  of  the  present  day.
A  little  patient  study  of  the  book  in  detail  will  correct  that  impression.  The
predominating  subject  is  indeed  a  story  of  desolation  and  sorrow ;  but  it  is  told
with  a  marvellous  versatility  of  poetic  imagery  and  with  exquisite  pathos.

The  Lamentations  are  more  than  the  lamentations  of  Jeremiah — more  than  the
lamentations  of  the  Jews,  who  were  the  immediate  and  principal  sufferers  in  the
disasters  narrated  :  they  are  typical  of  a  sorrow  that  is  as  universal  as  humanity.
Individuals  or  nations,  brooding  over  conscious  unfaithfulness  and  sin,  and
smitten  with  the  conviction  that  the  misery  in  which  they  are  whelmed  is  the
just  and  bitter  fruit  of  their  own  reckless  disobedience,  will  find  in  the  Lamenta-
tions, as  they  cannot  elsewhere,  the  most  appropriate  words  in  which  to  voice
their  grief.  We  cannot  conceive  of  any  possible  phase  of  human  misery  that
may  not  be  fittingly  expressed  in  some  portion  of  this  remarkable  book,  and  that
will  not  find  some  relief  in  being  thus  expressed.  Trouble  fills  a  large  space  in
our  experience  of  life,  and  the  homilete  will  find  in  the  study  of  this  tragic  poem
the  many  varied  forms  in  which  the  sufferer  may  give  utterance  to  his  distress,
whether  in  an  individual  or  a  collective  capacity.

This  Commentary  contains  161  outlines,  brief  or  more  extended,  of  which  136
are  original :  the  remaining  25  bear  the  names  of  their  respective  authors.

The  comprehensive  and  lucid  Introduction  to  this  work  is  written  by  the  Rev.
D.  G.  Watt,  M.A.  The  Exegetical  Notes  at  the  head  of  each  chapter  are  also
supplied  by  the  same  writer,  and  will  be  found  not  only  a  faithful  exposition  of
the  text,  but  also,  if  studied  in  connection  with  each  homiletic  paragraph,  a
suggestive  help  to  the  thoughtful  sermoniser.

Great  care  has  been  exercised  in  the  selection  of  the  262  Illustrations,  and
it  is  believed  that  these  will  be  regarded  as  not  the  least  valuable  feature  in  the
Commentary.

The  Book  of  Lamentations  is  not  the  poem  of  despair.  There  is  nothing  more
dismally  depressing  than  the  monotone  of  unmitigated  grief.  Throughout  the
eloquent  wail  of  the  Poet-Prophet  the  spiritualised  ear  detects  the  recurring  notes
of  a  growing  hope — timidly  expressed  at  first,  but  gradually  gaining  strength  and
confidence.  The  darkest  period  is  not  without  shimmerings  of  coming  light.
The  morning  of  rescue  dawns  :  despair  gives  place  to  hope,  and  defeat  is  followed
with  the  joy  of  triumph.

GEO.  BARLOW.

Kendal,  July  1891,


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2011  with  funding  from
Brigham  Young  University


http://www.archive.org/details/preacherscomplet18newy


HOMILETIO   COMMENTARY


ON


THE   LAMENTATIONS,


INTRODUCTION.

Name. — All  literatures — Hebrew,  English,  and  the  rest — bear  witness  to  the
forces  with  which  sorrowful  emotions  press  for  utterancef.  Hence  comes  the  ancient
and  widespread  custom  of  making  public  recognition  of  the  decease  of  famous  or
beloved  persons ;  of  the  disasters  of  cities  and  countries.  Speeches  or  orations
more  or  less  eloquent,  poems  more  or  less  deep-toned,  are  handed  along  the  cen-
turies, and  remind  the  readers  that  man's  state  in  every  land  is  shadowed  by
clouds  of  dark  and  mournful  hue.  The  Hebrew  people  were  exposed  to  many
such  sad  and  sunless  times,  perhaps  more  awful  than  have  overtaken  any  other
people,  and  the  "  almost  unalloyed  expression  of  unrestrained  anguish  and  utter
inconsolable  desolation  "  given  by  this  book  may  be  taken  as  proof  thereof.  No
wonder  that  it  is  commonly  called  ^^  The  Lamentations"  It  is  not  classified  in
ordinary  Hebrew  Bibles  by  this  term.  There  it  is  denominated  Aicah,  the
Hebrew  equivalent  to  "  How,"  which  is  the  first  word  of  the  book.  Rabbinical
writers  have  styled  it  Qinoth.  That  is  the  word  which  denotes  the  ode  com-
posed by  David  on  the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  (2  Sam.  i.  17),  as  also  similar
compositions  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  is  also  employed  in  2  Chron.
XXXV  25,  where  it  is  recorded,  And  Jeremiah  lamented  for  Josiah  ;  and  all  the
singing  men  and  singing  women  spake  of  Josiah  in  their  lamentations  (qinoth)
unto  this  day  ;  and  they  made  them  an  ordinance  in  Israel :  and^  behold  they  are
written  in  the  lamentations  (qinoth).  Some  expositors  hold  that  the  five  elegies
collected  in  this  book  are  those  lamentations  on  Josiah's  death.  Others,  seeing
the  unlikelihood  of  this,  aver  that  the  fourth  chapter  is  identical  with  the  dirges
of  Jeremiah.  Against  this  stands  the  fact  that  that  event,  instead  of  being  the
refrain  of  the  elegy,  receives  but  the  slightest  allusion,  if  it  is  an  allusion  at  all
(chap.  iv.  20).  It  seems  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  lamentations  of  the
prophet  and  singers  over  Josiah's  death  have  not  been  transmitted  to  us,  as  other
portions  of  ancient  Hebrew  literature  have  not.  For,  assuredly,  the  references  of
this  elegiac  collection  are  to  casualties  far  more  painful  and  depressing  than  the
removal  of  the  noblest  of  kings,  and  truly  fit  to  give  the  name  to  this  book  during
succeeding  centuries.

Form. — The  book  is  poetical  and  unusually  technical  in  its  framework.  In
other  Biblical  poetical  books  the  usual  division  into  chapters  and  verses  is  not
always  made  according  to  the  structure,  and  sometimes  even  breaks  into  the  sense  of
a  passage.  In  Lamentations  there  are  no  untoward  separations.  Its  five  chapters
are  five  distinct  odes  or  elegies,  and  each  ode  is  divided  into  twenty-two  parts
1  ▲


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS.


regulated  by  the  number  of  letters  in  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  the  verses  of  the  first
four  chapters  following,  on  the  whole,  the  order  of  the  alphabet.     Thus  : —

Chap.  i.  Each  verse,  while  beginning  with  a  word  which  has  a  letter  of  the
alphabet  in  its  grammatical  order,  is  constituted  of  three  double  clauses.

Chap.  ii.  Constructed  similarly  to  chap  i.,  except  that  the  letter  seventeenth  in
the  normal  order  is  placed  before  the  sixteenth — a  course  which  is  kept  up  in  the
two  succeeding  chapters.

Chap.  iii.  Differs  from  the  two  preceding  in  having  three  double  clauses,  each
of  which  is  made  a  verse  in  our  English  versions,  beginning  with  the  same  letter
of  the  alphabet.

Chap.  iv.  Takes  a  structure  like  that  of  chap,  ii.,  with  the  exception  of  having
only  two  double  clauses  in  every  verse.

Chap.  V.  Is  divided  as  the  others  into  twenty-two  verses,  but  the  verses  do  not
put  their  initial  words  in  the  order  of  the  alphabet.

No  satisfactory  explanation  has  been  suggested  for  the  variation  of  the  order  of
the  alphabet  in  chapters  ii.,  iii.,  and  iv.  Difference  from  that  order  is  found  also
in  Psahus  xxxiv.  and  cxlv.

The  technicality  or  artificiality  of  the  form  is  plain.  And  it  is  as  plain  that  it
would  be  next  to  impossible  to  present  that  formal  structure  in  a  translation,  and
at  the  same  time  do  justice  to  the  original.  Merely  as  an  illustration  of  the/orm
of  the  book,  the  first  two  .verses  of  chapter  iii.  are  appended  : —

1.  Affliction,  by  the  rod  of  His  wrath,  I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen.
And  He  hath  led  me,  caused  me  to  walk  in  darkness,  not  in  light.
Against  me  surely  He  turneth  His  hand,  again  and  again  all  the  day.

2.  Broken  my  bones  hath  He,  and  made  old  my  flesh  and  skin.
Builded  against  me  hath  He,  and  compassed  me  with  gall  and  travail.

By  dark  places  hath  He  made  me  to  dwell,  as  those  that  have  been  ever  dead.

Certain  suggestions  made  to  account  for  this  technical  form  are  hardly  to  be
entertained,  e.g.,  th;it  it  is  a  sign  of  a  simulated  grief :  a  product  of  later  and  de-
generated taste  or  of  a  declining  art :  the  resource  of  a  poet  who  is  inferior  in
spiritual  feeling  :  a  means  of  joining  in  sentences  thoughts  which  are  only  loosely
related  to  each  other.  Is  it  not  rather  the  token  that  a  grief,  which  had  benumbed
the  faculty  of  expression,  has  passed  the  emotional  stage  and  begins  to  traverse
the  reflective  1  There,  in  the  effort  to  express  itself  in  a  peculiar  form,  it  finds  a
counteractive  to  its  masterful  depression.  Why  should  we  ascribe  this  to  unreal
emotion,  or  to  decadence  of  art,  or  to  inferiority  of  faculty,  any  more  than  we
should  ascribe  the  peculiar  form  of  "In  Menioriam"  to  either  of  these  influences?
May  not  the  intensest  feelings  find  utterance  in  an  elegy  which  employs  the  order
of  an  alphabet  in  the  beginning  of  its  lines,  as  well  as  in  an  ode  of  Horace  which
uses  long  and  short  syllables  in  unvarying  succession,  or  as  in  a  sonnet  of
Shakspere  employing  words  of  the  same  sound  at  the  end  of  certain  lines  \
Surely  a  deep  sorrow  can  find  a  distraction  in  putting  its  phases  into  special
verbal  form,  whether  that  form  shows  itself  at  the  end  of  lines,  as  in  English,  or
all  through  the  lines,  as  in  Latin,  or  at  the  beginning  of  lines,  as  in  this  and  other
specimens  of  Hebrew  literature.  *' Tersely  and  vividly,  thought  after  thought
shaped  itself  round  each  letter  of  the  alphabet  in  order,  while  in  the  effort  the
writer  found  relief  for  his  anguish."

Contents. — The  Jewish  historian  Josephus  makes  the  statement  that  "  Jeremiah
composed  a  dir^n;  for  Josiah's  funeral,  which  remains  unto  this  day."  Does  this
prove  that  he  identified  that  dirge  with  this  series  of  dirges?  It  is,  to  say  the
least,  doubtful.  \i  it  is  a  valid  proof,  there  can  be  little  hesitation  in  regarding
Josephus  as  mistaken.  Each  chapter  of  the  Lamentations  might  be  adduced  in
evidence  that  it  was  penned  under  the  pressure  of  grief,  not  for  a  deceased
sovereign,  but  for  a  prostrated  kingdom — for  an  utterly  ruined  metropolis;  for  the


HOMTL  ETJC  COM  ME  NT  AR  Y:  LA  ME  XT  A  TTONS.


covenant  people  disgraced,  outraged,  captives,  in  despair.  Again  and  again  are  tiie
wretched  conditions  sketched  in  the  most  sombre  colours,  and,  to  the  eyes  ol  a
distant  age,  witli  a  sort  of  monotony  tending  to  irksomeness.  For  "sorrow  Ir
distasteful  to  those  who  are  not  suffering  it."  A  cursory  glance  at  the  several
chapters  is  all  that  is  needed  here.

In  the  first  the  lamentation  is  chiefly  over  the  desolated  city,  and  tlie  people
plundered,  starved,  and  carried  into  captivity  amid  the  taunts  and  brutality  of
the  enemy.

In  the  second  it  is  the  wrath  of  Jehovah,  taking  vengeance  upon  the  persistent
sins  of  His  people,  which  is  depicted.  Herein  the  sweeping  away  of  means  of
worship,  the  terrible  anguish  of  men  and  women,  mothers  and  their  little  children,
the  hopelessness  of  all  human  effort,  and  the  imperious  need  of  pleading  the  mercy
of  the  Lord,  are  pourtrayed.

In  the  third  the  form  of  the  subject-matter  is  diverse  from  that  of  the  other
chapters.  A  thoughtful  reader  will  notice  a  characteristic  feature,  the  bearing  of
which  he  will  desire  to  understand.  It  is  that  the  writer  seems  to  speak  largely
of  his  own  personal  experiences,  occasionally  sinking  his  own  under  those  of  others.
He  begins  with  the  outburst,  /  am  the  man  that  has  seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of
His  wi'ath,  and  continues  in  the  same  manner  to  the  verge  of  despair.  Then,  as
in  a  more  illustrious  case,  he  realises  that  when  he  is  weak  he  is  really  strong,
and  for  a  moment  there  is  hope,  and  a  vision  of  a  wider  area :  It  is  of  the  Lord's
mercies  that  we  are  not  consumed.  His  own  case  is  again  referred  to  (ver.  24),
only,  however,  as  a  momentary  step  towards  embracing  the  Israel  of  God  who
trust  on  Him  (vers.  26-39).  Here  the  impersonal  is  left,  and  again  (vers.  40-47)
the  associated  community  makes  known  its  aims  and  hardships :  Let  lis  search
and  try  our  ways.  Once  more,  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  it  is  the  individual  who
laments  and  implores  recompense.  How  is  this  interchange  of  persons  to  be
accounted  for,  here  as  also  in  certain  portions  of  other  poetical  parts  of  the  Scrip-
tures 1  Assuredly  by  the  supposition  that  the  consciousness  of  the  writer  testifies
to  him  that  his  sufferings  are  representative  of  his  nation's  sufferings,  or,  as  Cheyne
says,  *'of  those  of  the  pious  believers  who  formed  the  kernel  of  the  Israelitish
people."  Accepting  this  representativeness,  we  perceive  why  the  expressions  of
sadness  and  dismay  are  such  as  go  beyond  mere  individual  experience,  or  are  such
as  can  be  predicted  only  of  an  individual  who  felt  as  if  the  whole  burden  of  the
tribulation  was  laid  upon  himself.  It  is  ever  thus  with  hearts  that  are  sensitive
to  the  visitations  of  trouble  which  they  share  in  common  with  others,  and  it
becomes  hard  to  distinguish  the  personal  from  the  collective  sorrows  and  pains.

In  the  fourth  gruesome  details  of  the  calamities  which  had  overtaken  all  classes
— matrons  and  young  children,  princes  and  nobles,  prophets  and  priests — are  out-
lined :  outlines  which  show  the  hand  of  an  eyewitness.  It  concludes  with  an
appeal  to  and  a  denunciation  of  Edom,  the  age-long,  bitter  adversary  of  Judah.

The  fifth  begins  with  a  prayer,  and  then  proceeds  to  draw  up  something  like
a  list  of  the  errors  and  outrages  which  had  characterised  the  national  history.
It  closes  with  a  hesitating  call  upon  Jehovah  to  turn  the  people  to  Himself  and
restore  their  ancient  glory.

From  such  a  view  of  the  contents  Keil  suggests  one  may  "  readily  perceive  in
these  poems  a  well-cogitated  plan  in  the  treatment  of  the  material  common  to  the
whole,  and  a  distinct  progress  in  the  execution  of  this  plan."  This  may  be  open
to  doubts.  If  earlier  expositors  failed  to  affix  the  contents  of  the  different  elegies
to  the  different  leading  features  of  the  Chaldean  invasion — the  siege,  the  capture,
the  desolation  of  the  Temple,  city,  and  land — the  attempt  of  Keil,  or  any  other,
also  fails  to  make  clear  a  definite  plan  and  progression  moulding  the  whole.
Whatever  be  the  connection  of  one  chapter  with  another,  it  is  the  connection  of
a  common  subject  rather  than  a  connection  formed  by  the  order  of  thought.
Besides  that  there  seems  no  other  clue  needed  to  thread  our  way.     The  exposition

3


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


must  be  the  exposition  of  separate  poems ;  at  any  rate  not  of  a  drama  with  five
acts,  as  the  imagination  of  Ewald  makes  out  the  contents  to  form.

In  contrast  with  opinions  already  referred  to,  regarding  the  poetical  vigour  of
this  book,  that  of  one  who  cannot  be  ranked  as  a  poor  judge  of  poetry — the  late
Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  Milman — may  be  cited.  In  his  *'  History  of  the  Jews  '*  he
says,  "  Never  was  ruined  city  lamented  in  language  so  exquisitely  pathetic.
Jerusalem  is,  as  it  were,  personified,  and  bewailed  with  the  passionate  sorrow  of
private  and  domestic  attachment.  While  the  more  general  pictures  .  .  .  are
successively  drawn  with  all  the  life  and  reality  of  an  eyewitness."  It  may  be
interesting  to  present  a  specimen  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Dean  translates  the
original  (from  chap.  v.).

**  Remember,  Lord,  what  hath  befallen,

Look  down  on  our  reproach  :
Our  heritage  is  given  to  strangem,

Our  home  to  foreigners.
Our  water  have  we  drank  for  money ;

Our  fuel  hath  its  price.

Princes  were  hung  up  by  the  hand,

And  age  had  no  respect.
Young  men  are  grinding  at  the  mill,

Boys  faint  'neath  loads  of  wood.
The  elders  from  the  gate  have  ceased,

The  young  men  from  their  musia

The  crown  is  fallen  from  our  head,

Woe  !  woe  !  that  we  have  sinned.
'Tis  therefore  that  our  hearts  are  faint,

Therefore  our  eyes  are  dim,
For  Zion's  mountain  desolate  ;

Foxes  walk  on  it."

Atithor. — The  name  of  no  author  is  attached  to  the  book,  or  to  any  of  its

separate  elegies.  In  Hebrew  MSS.  and  Bibles  the  book  generally  appears  in  the
third  division  of  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old  Testament  called  K'thubim,
between  Ruth  and  Ecclesiastes.  This  is  no  criterion  as  to  its  authorship;  for
"  the  Lamentations,  as  being  lyrical  poetry,  are  classed,  not  with  prophecies,  but
with  the  Psalms  and  Proverbs,"  according  to  the  understood  arrangement  of  the
canon  by  the  Jews.  It  is  an  old  and  concurrent  tradition  to  name  the  prophet
Jeremiah  as  the  sole  author.  This  tradition  is  formulated  by  the  Septuagint
translator.  He  prefaces  the  book  with  words  which  are  not  found  in  any  extant
Hebrew  MS.,  And  it  came  to  pass,  after  Israel  had  been  carried  captive  and  Jeru-
salem was  desolated,  Jeremiah  sat  weeping,  and  lamented  with  this  lamentation  over
Jerusalem  and  said,  How,  &c.  Whatever  be  the  historical  worth  of  this  state-
ment, the  ascription  to  Jeremiah  is  backed  up  by  Josephus  and  the  Talmudical
writers.  Such  testimonies  have  been  accepted  by  subsequent  students  until  a
comparatively  recent  period.  Indeed,  it  is  only  within  the  present  century  that
anything  like  material  objections  have  been  made  to  the  traditional  belief.  The
gravity  of  these  objections  may  be  measured  by  the  consideration  that  it  is  prin-
cii.ally  derived  from  the  words  and  style  of  the  poems.  And  the  operations  of
such  attempts  are  far  from  uniform.  "The  absence  of  certain  specific  Jere-
mianic  peculiarities,"  which  Schrader  adduces,  is  counterbalanced  by  his  own
acknowledgment  of  its  affinity  in  contents,  spirit,  tone,  and  language  with  Jere-
" '  .1!  ^I^'^f 'f^^®^-  ^eil  represents  Naegelsbach,  in  Lange's  series,  as  having,
with  the  help  of  the  concordance,  prepared  a  table  of  those  words  and  forms  of
words  found  in  Lamentations,  but  not  occurring  in  the  prophecies  of  Jeremiah,"
and  so  concluding  against  the  authorship  of  the  prophet.  On  the  other  hand,  Dr
Homblower,  translator  of  Naegelsbach,  and  Keil  present  the  evidence  of  passages


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


in  contradiction  of  Naegelsbach's  conclusion.  Attributing  the  book  to  Ezekiel
may  be  looked  on  as  an  exhibition  of  ingenuity  and  not  of  convincing  effect.
Besides  this,  there  is  extreme  diversity  of  opinion  regarding  the  composition  of  the
separate  odes.  Ewald  maintains  that  "  every  competent  judge  will  ascribe  [these
five  poems]  to  only  one  poet."  Thenius  assures  us  that  chaps,  ii.  and  iv.  are
"  undeniably  from  Jeremiah,"  chaps,  i.  and  iii.  from  some  unknown  resident  in
Judaea,  and  chap.  v.  from  the  leader  of  a  band  of  wanderers  seeking  an  asylum.
Cheyne  is  sure  that  the  first,  second,  and  fourth  chapters  are  not  the  productions
of  Jeremiah ;  that  the  third  chapter  is  by  a  different  author  from  these,  probably
by  one  who  was  acquainted  with  Jeremiah's  prophecies ;  and  the  fifth  chapter
"very  certainly  not  by  the  author  of  any  of  the  foregoing  Lamentations,"  though
he  regards  it  as  probable  that  "Jeremiah  was  the  favourite  book  of  these  poets
(next  to  the  Psalter,  so  far  as  this  book  was  in  existence)."

To  pronouncements  on  such  precarious  evidence  there  can  be  but  one  fair  atti-
tude— that  of  suspense,  until  more  definite  contingents  than  those  represented  by
words  and  style  are  forthcoming.  For  this  sort  of  evidence  is  by  no  means  con-
clusive either  for  or  against  the  genuineness  of  any  writings.  It  may  or  may  not
be  important,  as  it  is  related  to  other  conditions.  It  may  betoken  different
authors,  or  it  may  be  the  same  author  in  altered  circumstances  of  thought  and
life.  His  age,  new  events,  the  limitations  of  his  subject,  his  purpose  in  writing
— each  one  of  these  will  be  a  modifying  element  in  his  choice  and  allocation  of
words.  It  is  therefore  unwise  and  hazardous  to  assert  positively  whether  Jere-
miah was  the  author  or  not,  unless  we  can  decide,  approximately  at  any  rate,  how
he  and  his  style  would  be  affected  by  the  points  just  referred  to.  This  has  not
been  done,  and,  until  something  of  this  kind  is  done,  the  tradition  that  Jeremiah
is  the  author  of  all  or  chief  part  of  the  Lamentations  is  entitled  to  preference.  It
is  indeed  little  matter  who  the  writer  or  writers  might  be  when  they  are  moved
by  the  Spirit  of  God.

There  is  one  topic  yet  unnoticed  which  may  be  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of  accept-
ing the  traditional  belief,  and  it  is  raised  by  that  artificial  form  of  the  Lamenta-
tions already  described.  Could  that  form  have  been  given  them  so  close  to  the
occurrence  of  the  fearful  calamities  as  Jeremiah  must  have  been?  Could  he,
with  his  intense  sensitiveness  to  the  sins  and  miseries  of  his  fellow-countrymen,
have  sat,  as  tradition  reports,  among  the  ruinous  heaps  of  Jerusalem,  and,  in  sight
of  the  fiery  ordeal  through  which  his  ill-treated  people  were  passing,  busied
himself  with  the  technicalities  of  poetic  art?  Must  not  the  condition  for  the
composition  of  such  poems  be  not  that  of  perturbation  but  of  reflectiveness  ?  Are
not  the  mitigations  of  time  requisite,  has  not  the  emotion  already  parted  with
its  overwhelming  vehemence,  before  downcast  men  will  care  to  express  their  grief
in  peculiar  forms  ?  "  We  are  recovering  from  love  or  grief  or  any  other  passion
when  we  are  able  to  rhyme  on  it  with  elegance"  {Daily  News,  in  review  of
"  Poems  of  Afghanistan ").  This  may  be  true ;  but  there  is  another  view.  In
poignant  trouble  a  short  time  may  appear  long,  and  the  words,  Wherefore  dost
thou  forsake  us  so  long  time  ?  (ch.  v.  20),  are  not  so  decisive  as  to  settle  the
question  whether  a  longer  or  shorter  period  had  intervened  between  the  desolation
of  Jerusalem  and  the  production  of  the  elegies.  "We  should  count  time  by
heart-throbs."  In  reference,  to  this  Cheyne  quotes  from  '*The  Dream  of
Gerontius  " : —

**.     .     ,    time  is  not  a  common  property  ;
But  what  is  long  is  short,  and  swift  is  slow,
And  near  is  distant  as  received  and  grasped
By  this  mind  and  by  that,  and  every  one
la  standard  of  his  own  chronology."

Thus  the  element  of  time  brings  no  ingredient  to  solve  the  riddle  of  authorship.
It  cannot  eliminate  the  claim  of  Jeremiah.    He  could  have  written  the  five  poems

5


irO.VILETTC  COMMEXTAUT:  LAMENTATIONS.


BO  far  as  his  intense  sorrow  was  concerned.  Tliere  is  ranch  force  in  a  remark
made  by  Riehm  :  "  In  lyric  poetry  proper  the  employment  of  this  artificial  form
is  naturally  and  intrinsically  justified  only  when  a  single  fundamental  strain,  that
fills  the  whole  soul  of  the  poet, — deep,  strong,  and  sustained — seeks  to  die  away
in  many  different  forms  of  chords."

Pate. — There  is  no  chronological  record  as  to  the  time  of  composition  except
that  which  is  involved  in  the  fact  that  the  awfnlness  of  the  desolation  was  fresh
in  the  writer's  mind.  And  if  he  was  not  Jeremiah,  he,  or  they  who  wrote,  may  be
supposed  to  have  written  under  the  impulse  of  "a  .?reat  lyric  movement,'*  which
Ewald  conceives  took  place  "among  the  conquered  Jews,  as  well  those  in  Babylon
as  those  who  remained  in  their  much-loved  home."  And  he  believes  the  Lamen-
tations came  into  their  existing  form  coincident  with  that  movement.  But  beyond
all  such  considerations  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  thought  which  the  writer
or  writers  wanted  to  present  was  in  no  sense  dependent  on  a  date.

The  structure  and  contents  of  the  Lamentations  are  seen  to  be  unique.  No  one
of  the  collection  of  documents  containing  record  of  the  unfolding  of  God's  will  to
His  servants  during  centuries  can  be  compared  with  it.  It  makes  infinitesimal
additions  to  history,  and  contributes  next  to  nothing  to  dogmatics.  It  is  at  the
apex  of  the  literature  of  sorrow,  and  reverberates  with  the  thought  that  sins  against
the  living  holy  Lord  bring  condign  punishment.  The  diverse  peculiarities  suggest
two  questions  which  are  not  irrelevant,  and  may  be  considered  briefly.

1.  Why  should  a  composition,  so  obviously  technical,  be  a  factor  in  the  revela-
tion of  God  and  His  will  ?  Or  it  may  be  put  thus,  Why  should  holy  men  of  God,
moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  trammel  or  order  their  emotions  by  the  demands  of  an
alphabet  and  metre?  It  was  an  old  Greek  and  Roman  belief  that,  "When  the
gods  spoke  they  spoke  in  verse"  (Hatch).  Why  should  not  the  only  true  God
make  use  of  men  who  were  born  poets  ?  If  the  susceptibility  to,  and  expression
in  poetic  forms  be  an  endowment  He  has  bestowed ;  if  there  are  abounding
materials  in  nature  and  the  life  of  humanity  fitted  for  such  forms ;  if  the  rudest
tribes  and  the  most  cultured  nations  appreciate  them,  as  affecting  the  mind  for
good  and  evil,  for  pleasure  and  pain,  is  it  to  be  credited  that  He  who  made  all
these  capacities  will  refuse  to  employ  them  as  a  vehicle  for  the  transmission  of  the
sublime  truths  of  eternal  righteousness  and  love?  Surely  the  presentation  of  the
data  requisite  to  poetic  form  will  solve  the  question  propounded.

Moreover,  poetry,  with  its  measured  rhythm,  is  more  likely  to  be  remembered
than  prosaic  expression.  With  reference  especially  to  the  Jewish  people  it  has
been  said,  "  The  obvious  advantages  of  the  poetic  style  and  of  a  metrical  struc-
ture are — the  adaptation  of  both  to  the  tastes  and  culture  of  the  people ;  and
especially  the  adaptation  of  the  latter  to  the  purpose  of  storing  those  compositions
in  the  memory  from  infancy  upward.  Thus  it  was  that  the  minds  of  this — indeed
favoured  though  afflicted — people  were  richly  furnished  with  religious  and  moral
sentiments,  and  thus  was  meditative  thought  nourished  and  suggested  and
directed,  and  was  made  conducive  to  the  momentous  purposes  of  the  individual
and  of  the  domestic  spiritual  life.  Too  little  do  we  now  take  account,  in  our
r>iblical  readings  and  criticisms,  of  this  deep-going  purpose  of  Hebrew  poetic
Scrijitures  which,  through  centuries  of  national  weal  and  woe,  have  nourished
millions  on  millions  of  souls  '  unto  life  eternal.'"     (Isaac  Taylor,)

2.  Cheyne  remarks,  "  We  cannot  fail  to  see  in  this  short  elegaic  book  that
peculiar  quality  which,  in  all  its  degrees  of  manifestation,  the  Jewish  Doctors
agree  with  us  in  describing  as  inspiration."  Granted.  But  are  not  inspiration  and
the  limitations  of  an  alphabet  and  definite  numbers  mutually  exclusive,  or  restrictive
at  least  ?  Was  the  soul  of  an  inspired  man  but  "  as  a  flute  through  which  the
breath  of  God  flowed  in  Divine  music  "  ?  Or  had  that  soul  power  over  itself,  and,
as  a  boat  whose  sails  are  filled  with  a  breeze,  could  take  any  course  except  dead
against  the  breath  of  God?      Various  solutions   of  the  perplexity  have  been

6


HOMIL  ETIC  COMMENT  A  RY  r  LAMENT  A  TIONS,


attempted,  but  no  one  altogether  satisfactory  has  been  formulated,  and  the  dis-
cussions still  carried  on  prove  that  the  premises  for  sufficient  conclusions  are  yet
unsettled.  It  would  help  to  the  acquisition  of  such  premises  if,  on  all  sides,
preconceived  ideas  of  inspiration  were  resolutely  thrown  off,  and  the  somewhat
obscure  indications  in  the  Bible  itself  were  cleared  up  and  harmonised  so  far  as
could  be.  How  did  the  Lord  speak  to  men  of  old  ?  How  was  it  that  a  prophet
could  know  that  it  was  His  word  which  was  in  his  heart,  as  it  were  a  burning  fire
shut  up  in  his  bones  f  What  is  it  to  speak  from  God,  being  moved  by  the  Holy
Spirit  ?  What  are  the  criteria  of  being  in  the  Spirit  ?  Such  inquiries  suggest
further  questions.  Was  the  realm  of  inspiration  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  so
closely  interlinked  with  the  region  of  His  operations  in  the  new  birth  that  it
could  not  be  known  whence  the  afflatus  came  or  whither  it  went  1  If  a  prophet
was  speaking  in  the  old  Church  of  Corinth,  and  one  sitting  by  the  speaker  had  a
revelation,  what  was  it  which  enabled  the  others  to  discriminate  that  a  fresh  inspira-
tion had  been  vouchsafed  and  the  first  speaker  was  to  keep  silence  ?  Is  that  dis-
criminating power  withdrawn  wholly?  Are  there  not  subtle  tokens  by  which
a  man  in  Christ  even  now  may  discern  inspiration  in  himself  and  in  another
brother?  The  answer  to  those  inquiries  may  never  be  definite,  there  is  so  much
unknown,  but  qualified  research  and  devout  patience  may  be  taught,  as  God  will,
to  see  some  undetected  aspects  of  inspiration,  even  if  it  be  impossible  to  embrace
in  one  formula  all  the  facts.  So  we  may  need  to  rest  contented  with  the  truth
that  to  one  member  of  the  body  of  Christ  is  given  the  discerning  of  spirits  in  the
one  Spirit^  but  also  be  convinced  that  there  is  a  wider  range  in  which  he  that  is
spiritual  Jydgeth  all  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  In  that  conviction  we  may
feel  that  the  "  quality "  of  inspiration  is  present  throughout  the  technical  con-
struction of  the  Lamentations,  as  also  we  can  find  in  the  form  of  a  servant,  Christ,
in  whom  are  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  hidden.

Purport. — The  elegies  issue  out  of  the  preceding  history  of  the  Jewish  people,
and  thus  stand  related  to  other  portions  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  even  if  the  points
of  contact  appear  to  us  under  a  haze.  They  are  resonant  with  chords  formed  by
the  claims  of  God,  who  makes  judgment  the  line  and  righteousness  the  plummet
in  His  dealings  with  men.  They  signify  that  moral  decadence  is  in  closest  alliance
with  religious  compromises  ;  that  rueful  calamities  seize  on  a  nation  which  swerves
from  its  normal  position ;  that  if  a  people  favoured  by  God,  Creator  and  King,
stand  in  the  way  of  the  knowledge  of  His  saving  health  among  all  nations,  down
that  people  must  go,  no  matter  what  it  has  been  in  His  procedure  hitherto.  This
result  would  be  promoted  by  the  repetitions  of  ideas  and  even  expressions  which
are  frequent  throughout  the  book.  Such  a  feature  certainly  detracts  from  its
literary  finish,  but  we  must  suppose  that  the  author  did  not  give  heed  to  that.
He  might  have  managed  to  improve  its  symmetry  if  he  had  tried.  Obviously  he
did  not  try.  He  had  an  end  in  view,  which  a  finished  literary  form  would  not
have  brought  him  to  so  well  as  the  redundant  form  he  has  adopted.  And,  if  we
dare  define  what  his  aim  was,  we  should  say  that  he  wanted  to  portray  an  im-
pressive picture  of  a  country,  people,  worship,  God-forsaken  because  God-forsaking.
The  unusual  structure  of  the  book  also  would  tend  to  deepen  this  impression.
Thus  an  enduring  symbol  was  erected  of  that  long  course  of  scatterings  and
wanderings,  of  insults  and  oppressions,  which  was  to  be  trod  by  the  Jewish  tribes.
At  any  rate  the  Great  Revealer  was  opening  up,  by  these  outbursts  of  grief,  some
fresh  aspect  of  His  character  and  purpose ;  intimating  that  He  had  brought  to
a  further  stage  the  discipline  and  development  of  Israel,  with  whom  He  had
entered  into  covenant,  and  was  forging  a  new  link,  into  which  another  link  in
due  course  would  be  welded,  so  as  to  extend  the  outstretch  of  that  chain  which
should  lift  the  world  into  a  wider  life.  Then,  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  came,
Jesus  Christ,  who  searched  the  Scriptures,  as  He  directed  others  to  do,  found  His
sympathy  stirred  in  unison  with  these  Lamentations :  When  He  saw  the  city  He

7


H0M7LETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


teept  over  it,  because  its  enemies  should  not  leave  one  stone  upon  another,  and
because  it  knew  not  the  time  of  its  visitation.

The  prophecies  of  Ezekiel,  not  a  few  of  which  must  have  been  contemporaneous
with  the  publication  of  the  Lamentations,  have  one  ever-recurring  refrain.  And
they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah.  Since  that  was  the  goal  towards  which  all
the  changes  of  that  time  were  leading  men,  and  as  this  book  pointed  in  the  same
direction,  we  may  have  a  valid  presentiment  that  it  helped  towards  the  formation
of  the  new  spirit  which  pervaded  the  Jews  when  the  Lord  turned  again  the  cap-
tivity of  Zion.  They  had  voiced  their  laments  here,  their  prayers  in  such  a  Psalm
as  the  seventy-fourth,  and  then  followed  their  praise  :  The  Lord  hath  done  great
things  for  i/s,  whereof  we  are  glad.

Liturgical  Use.— Jewish  synagogues  have  recognised  the  bearing  of  the  Lamen-
tations by  appointing  that  they  should  be  read  on  the  anniversary  day  commemo-
rating the  destruction  of  the  first  and  second  Temple.  In  the  Christian  Church
also  their  importance  has  been  regarded.  The  Roman  Catholic  Church  assigns
three  portions  of  the  book  to  be  read  as  part  of  the  ritual  of  each  of  the  three  last
days  of  Passion-week.  In  the  German  United  Evangelical  Church,  adaptations
are  made  for  liturgical  use.  In  the  revised  Praj^er  Book  of  the  Episcopal  Church
of  England,  "portions  are  ordered  to  be  read  on  the  Monday,  Tuesday,  and
Wednesday  in  Holy-week."  The  reasons  for  such  use  of  these  elegies  may  have
been  (1)  that  a  homeless  nation  and  desolated  city  suggested  the  condition  of
mankind  far  from  God,  and  of  a  soul  doomed  to  die  in  the  bondage  of  sin ;  and
(2)  that  the  sorrows  of  the  representative  of  the  sufiering  people  suggested  the
Lamb  of  God  who  bears  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  and  of  whom  we  cannot  but
think  as  enduring  a  sorrow  like  unto  no  other  sorrow.

What  one  and  another  portion  of  the  Lamentations  has  been  for  the  expression
of  emotion  to  the  tried  and  troubled  of  many  a  country  and  age,  none  but  God,
the  all -knowing,  can  declare.  Assuredly  they  still  will  be  so  used,  even  until  the
Lord  Jehovah  shall  wipe  away  the  tears  from  off  all  faces,  and  the  reproach  of  His
people  shall  He  take  away  from  off  all  the  earth,

Note. — In  the  translation  I  have  generally  adhered  to  the  Revised  Version
I  have  deviated  from  it  where  I  aimed  to  express  more  literally  what  I  consider
the  representation  of  the  Hebrew  original.     I  offer  no  apology  for  always  using
our  time-honoured  word  Jehovah  instead  of  the  pedantic  Yahveh.


D.  G.  W.


HOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,  CEAP.  i.


CHAPTEE  1.

The  Miseries  of  Jerusalem.

ExEGETlOAL  NoTES. — This  elegy  may  be  divided  into  two  chief  parts.  The  first,  rers.  1-11,
exhibits  the  mournful  condition  of  an  unnamed  city,  overtaken  by  various  calamities,  with  a
break,  at  vers.  9  and  11,  by  an  ejaculatory  appeal  to  Jehovah.  The  second,  vers.  12-22,  con-
tains a  bitter  complaint  from  the  city  herself,  or  rather  from  the  city  personified  by  a  sufferer.

Vers.  1  and  2  present  the  city  as  she  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  what  she  was,  and  as  an  object
of  deep  distress,  on  account  of  her  sins  and  their  penalties.  The  verses  have  a  pictorial  illus-
tration in  the  medal  struck  by  the  Roman  Emperor  Titus  in  commemoration  of  the  capture  of
Jerusalem  (A.D.  71).

(N)  Ver.  1.  How,  not  in  interrogation,  but  in  surprise  and  pain.  This  particle  is  unnecessarily
inserted  twice  in  the  Authorised  Version.  It  is  not  again  employed  in  the  Hebrew  of  the  book,
except  in  chaps,  ii.  1  and  iv.  1,  2,  sitteth  alone,  in  a  posture  of  overpowering  sorrow  rather  than
of  utter  isolation,  like  Nehemiah,  who,  when  he  heard  of  the  doleful  state  of  Jerusalem,  sat  down
and  wept  and  mowmed  (i.  4),  the  city  =  Jerusalem,  as  following  verses  prove.  The  fact  that
the  Chaldean  captain  left  of  the  poor  of  the  people,  which  had  nothing,  in  the  land  of  Jvdah  ( Jer.
xxxix.  10)  suggests  that  a  few  waifs  and  strays  might  be  still  hanging  round  the  ruined  city,
while  the  reference  (chap.  ii.  10)  to  the  elders  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  may  intimate  that  some
of  better  means  were  also  with  them  ;  that  was  full  of  people.  No  known  criterion  exists  by
which  to  estimate  the  population  of  ancient  Jerusalem.  An  approximate  guess  even  cannot  be
made  from  the  perfunctory  census  taken  in  David's  reign.  She  is  become  as  a  widow,  forsaken
and  under  the  reproach  of  widowhood,  seeing  that  she  is  not  in  communion  with  the  Lord,  her
Maker ;  but  still  she  is  not  quite  a  widow  ;  there  is  to  be  a  restoration,  because  for  a  small
moment  have  I  forsaken  thee  .  .  .  saith  the  Lord  thy  Redeemer  (Isaiah  liv.  6) ;  that  was  great
among  the  nations,  respected  and  powerful ;  a  princess  over  the  provinces.  The  dominion
centered  in  Jerusalem  is  illustrated  by  the  letter  of  Artaxerxes  to  his  subordinates.  There  have
been  mighty  kings  over  Jerusalem,  which  have  ruled  over  all  the  country  beyond  the  river ;  and
tribute,  custonif  and  toll  was  paid  unto  them  (Ezra  iv.  20).  This  jurisdiction  over  dependent
peoples  was  at  its  height  in  the  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon,  though  after  them  there  were
also  kings  whose  rule  embraced  others  beside  the  Jews.  In  sad  contrast  she  is  become  a
vassal,  generally  shown  by  taskwork,  not  so  often  by  money-payment,  and  expressing  entire
subservience.

(3)  Ver.  2.  Intense  grief  overwhelms  her,  She  weeps  bitterly  in  the  night ;  no  temporary
oblivion  comes  to  her  ;  the  silent  hours  pass  with  her  tears  on  her  cheeks.  For  her  there  is
no  comforter  among  all  her  lovers ;  all  her  friends,  or  neighbours,  have  dealt  treacherously
with  her.  The  Babylonians  and  all  the  Chaldeans,  Pekod  and  Shoa  and  Koa,  and  all  the
Assyrians  with  them  (Ezek.  xxiii.  23),  were  alienated  from  her,  while  Egypt,  Ammon,  Edom,
Moab,  disowned  their  alliance  with  her :  they  are  become  her  enemies,  and  gloat  over  her
downfall  (2  Kings  xxiv.  2).

(3)  Ver.  3.  Judah,  the  population  of  the  whole  territory,  with  that  of  Jerusalem,  is  taken
into  exile,  a  subjugated,  impoverished  remnant  being  left.  From  affliction,  the  same  expres-
sion occurs  in  Exod.  iii.  17  and  Ps.  cviii.  4,  and  from  much  servitude,  not,  as  might  seem  inti-
mated by  the  Authorised  Version  and  Revised  Version,  that  the  Jews  were  led  into  captivity
because  of  the  manumitted  Hebrew  servants  being  again  subjected  to  bondage  by  their  richer
brethren  {v.  Jer.  xxxiv.  8-12) ;  not  that  the  Jews  fled  as  voluntary  emigrants  to  escftpe  the
oppression  of  conquerors ;  but  that,  from  the  low  depth  of  misery  into  which  they  had  been
brought  by  the  invasions  and  exactions  of  foreign  powers,  from  months  of  faction  and  coercion
and  famine,  they  were  taken  into  the  lower  depth  of  being  made  captives.  In  Babylon,  in  the
centre  of  old  world  civilisation,  with  its  traflBc  and  magnificence,  she  has  not  found  rest.
Nebuchadnezzar  employed  "them  upon  those  large  works  of  irrigation  and  the  building  of
cities,  for  which  his  ambition  required  labourers,  just  where  they  were  forced  to  share  and  con-
tribute to  Babylonian  life."  Thou  didst  show  them  no  mercy;  upon  the  aged  hast  thou  very
heavily  laid  thy  yoke  (Isa.  xlviii.  6).  All  her  pursuers  have  overtaken  her  between  the
straits ;  they  laid  affliction  upon  her  when  she  was  already  pressed  in  by  trouble ;  hit  her  when
she  was  down.

(1)  Ver.  4  introdnces  another  view  personifying  the  religious  condition  :  not  the  banished
people,  not  the  fallen  city,  but  the  dwelling-place  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  is  forsaken  and
overthrown.  The  ways  of  Zion,  not  the  streets  in  Jerusalem  leading  up  to  the  Temple,  but
the  roads  from  all  quarters  of  the  land,  which  found  their  termini  in  the  Holy  hill,  are
mournful,  for  they  are  entirely  deserted  ;  being  without  those  who  go  to  a  solemn  assembly,
none  come  to  appear  before  the  Lord  in  His  courts  at  set  times,  as  He  had  enjoined  His  wor-
shippers to  do  ;  all  her  gates,  which  Jehovah  loveth,  are  desolate,  broken  down  ;  no  one  goes
up  to  or  hngers  about  them.  The  Temple  has  lost  its  sanctity  and  is  open  to  all  intruders.
The  gloiy  has  departed  from  it:  her  priests  are  sighing;  her  virgins  are  afflicted.  "The
reason  why  the  priests  and  the  virgins  are  here  conjoined  is  that  lamentation  is  made  over  tho

9


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


cessation  of  the  religious  feasts.  The  virgins  are  here  considered  as  those  who  enlivened  the
national  festivals  by  playing,  singing,  and  dancing  (Ps.  Ixviii.  26  ;  Jer.  xxxi.  13) "  (Keil).  And
she  is  in  bitterness  herself,  as  if  all  was  lost  religiously  as  well  as  politically.

(n)  Ver.  5.  Her  adversaries  are  become  the  head,  as  was  threatened  if  unfaithful  to  the
Lord  (Deut.  xxviii.  44) ;  her  enemies  prosper,  are  in  peace,  and  rest  secure,  knowing  that  all
resistance  is  over,  so  completely  has  she  been  crushed.  This  was  brought  about  not  by  their
might,  but  because  Jehovah  has  afflicted  her  for  the  greatness  of  her  transgressions ;  and
the  sufferings  befall  the  most  innocent  also  ;  her  young  children  have  gone  captives,  the  most
ominous  of  all  her  disasters,  driven  like  a  band  of  the  enslaved  in  Africa,  before  the  adversary.

())  Ver.  6.  She  has  not  only  been  harried  of  her  most  precious  and  tender  charges,  also  from
the  daughter  of  Zion  is  departed  all  her  beauty.  God  Himself,  whose  Shechinah  made  Zion
the  perfection  of  beauty,  no  longer  shined  there  ;  no  longer  was  there  a  worship  of  Him  in  the
beauty  of  holiness,  and  even  her  princes  are  become  like  harts  that  do  not  find  pasture ;
enfeebled  by  the  scanty  diet  of  the  close  siege,  they  have  lost  vigour,  and  go  without  strength
when  chased  before  the  pursuer,  so  as  to  be  easily  caught.  This  is  in  evident  allusion  to  the
flight  and  capture  of  the  King  and  his  men  of  war,  within  a  few  miles  from  Jerusalem,  when  it
was  besieged  by  the  Chaldean  army  (2  Kings  xxv.  3-5).

(T)  Ver.  7.  Again  a  change  of  aspect  is  presented.  Already  the  city  ruined,  the  people  exiled,
the  holy  mountain  desecrated  have  been  regarded.  Now  the  poet  gives  the  name  of  the  city,
which  he  shrank  from  pronouncing  before,  and  uses  it  as  a  generic,  all-embracing  term,  Jeru-
salem remembers,  adding  an  item  of  pungency  to  her  deep  sufferings,  in  the  days  of  her
affliction  and — a  probable  meaning  of  the  following  word  is  wanderings,  as  in  margin  of  Revised
Version  here.  In  chap.  iii.  19,  where  the  same  word  is  again  employed,  the  margin  gives  outcast
state  as  a  fresh  rendering.  That  of  the  Speaker's  Commentary  is  to  be  preferred — homelessness,
describing  the  state  of  the  Jews  cast  out  of  their  homes  and  driven  into  banishment ;  all  her
pleasant  things  which  were  from  the  days  of  old.  By  the  rivers  of  Babylon,  there  we  sat
doicn,  yea,  we  wept  when  ive  remembered  Zion.  "Sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering
happier  things."  When  her  people  fell  into  the  hand  of  the  adversary,  and  there  is  no
helper  to  her ;  the  adversaries  see  her,  they  sneer  at  her  cessations  {desolations  in  Revised
Version).  This  last  Hebrew  word  occurs  only  here.  Its  root  means  to  cease,  and  so  this
derivative  is  applied,  as  by  Plumptre,  to  "the  enforced  Sabbaths  of  untilled  land,  and  the
Sabbaths  conspicuous  for  the  absence  of  any  religious  rites."  This  seems  far-fetched,  except
as  to  the  latter  part,  and  this  should  be  considered  as  but  a  portion  of  the  Jewish  customs
which  had  been  discontinued.  If  Romans  derided  the  Jews  for  cessation  from  work  on  the
seventh  day  of  the  week,  Babylonians  would  not.  They  may  have  mocked  at  the  faith  of  Israel
in  the  supremacy  of  Jehovah,  seeing  they  regarded  Him  as  a  subjugated  national  deity ;  but
"it  was  no  subject  of  wonder  to  the  Babylonians  that  the  Jews  celebrated  a  weekly  day  of  rest,
as  they  had  one  of  their  own  (sahbatu)" — (Cheyne).

(n)  Ver.  8.  Jerusalem  has  sinned  a  sin,  has  broken  the  law  of  her  God  with  determinate
will,  and  bears  the  natural  penalty ;  therefore  she  is  become  as  an  unclean  one  j  not  as  one
who  has  been  removed  (Authorised  Version)  as  a  captive  from  her  native  place,  but  as  one  set
aside  because  of  impurity.  All  who  honoured  her  despise  her,  for  they  see  her  nakedness  ;  her
evil  is  laid  bare  ;  the  very  peoples  who  had  respected  her,  and  who  had  far  less  knowledge  of
what  was  right  and  true  than  she,  are  now  alive  to  the  real  character  of  her  procedure,  and
count  it  shamefully  bad.  Even  Nebuzar-adan,  captain  of  the  Babylonian  guard,  could  say,  after
her  overthrow,  Because  ye  have  sinned  against  Jehovah  and  have  not  obeyed  His  voice,  therefore
this  thing  is  come  upon  you  (Jer.  xl.  3).  There  was  still  a  sensitiveness  of  conscience  in  the
ideal  Jerusalem ;  Yea,  she  sighs  and  turns  backward,  moaning,  as  if  conscious  of  spectators
and  mortified  by  her  open  shame,  she  is  fain  to  screen  herself,  "  as  those  in  such  case  would  do
that  have  any  shamefacedness  or  spark  of  ingenuity  at  all  in  them."

(0)  Ver.  9.  Her  evil  is  very  obvious,  her  defilement  is  in  her  skirts,  not  below,  but  manifest
on  her  long  flowing  robe  ;  she  remembers  not  her  latter  end ;  as  she  continued  sinning,  she  paid
no  regard  to  the  issue  of  it  all,  and,  in  consequence  of  this  want  of  forethought,  she  is  come
down  wonderfully,  down  to  the  lowest  depth  of  misery,  an  astonishment  to  herself,  and  to  all
around  her ;  there  is  no  comforter  for  her.  Her  conviction  of  sin,  and  shame,  and  sorrow
impels  her  to  go  to  her  God,  and  she  cries,  See,  0  Jehovah,  my  affliction,  for  the  enemy  doth
magnify  himself,  the  appeal  is  supported  on  two  bases:  (1)  Her  humiliation;  and,  (2)  The


thy  right  hand  shall  save  me  (cxxxviii.  7).
(*)  Ver.  1 0.  His  hand  the  adversary  stretches  out  upon  all  her  pleasant  things,  treasures
of  all  sorts,  thus  described  by  Isaiah  (Ixiv.  11,  12),  Thy  holy  cities  are  become  a  wilderness,
Zton  M  become  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  desolation.  Our  holy  and  beautiful  house,  where  our
fathers  praised  thee,  is  burned  with  fire,  and  all  our  pleasant  things  are  laid  waste.  The  plunder-
ing of  the  Temple  was  the  most  aggravating  of  all,  for  she  has  seen  the  nations  enter  her
sanctuary,  whom  thou  didst  command  that  they  should  not  enter  into  thine  assembly;
heathens,  who  were  not  admissible  even  into  the  congregation  of  the  Lord— into  religious  com-
munion with  Israel—had  trod  the  courts  which  were  most  holy  to  Jewish  worshippers,  md


no  MILETIC  CO  MM  EXT  A  R  V :  LA  MENTA  TIONS.  CHAP.  I.


where  only  priests  could  legitimately  go,  and  they  had  pillaged  t/ie  pleasant  vessels  of  the  house
of  Jehovah,  therewith  to  adorn  the  shrines  of  their  idol  deities.

(D)  Ver.  11.  In  ver.  4  the  priests  sigh  ;  in  ver.  8  Jerusalem  sighs,  and  here  one  and  all,  because
in  addition  to  the  religious  collapse,  a  terrible  bodily  hunger  is  universally  felt,  so  all  her  people
are  sighing,  are  seeking  bread.  This  use  of  participles  signifies  that  both  the  past  and  present
condition  of  the  people  is  regarded  by  the  writer.  He  saw  that  the  scanty  meals  to  which  they
were  reduced  when  beleaguered  by  the  Chaldean  army  had  not  ended  after  the  Temple  had  been
desecrated  and  despoiled  ;  they  had  parted  and  were  parting  with  ornaments,  jewellery,  every
one  of  their  valuables,  merely  to  keep  body  and  soul  together  ;  they  give  their  pleasant  things
for  food ;  after  a  close  siege  of  eighteen  months,  preceded  by  the  overrunning  of  the  country,
food-supplies  must  have  been  all  but  exhausted  ;  to  restore  their  soul,  to  bring  back  life,  to
those  who  are  drawn  unto  death  (1  Kings  xvii.  21),  and  spiritually  to  restore  the  soul  (Ps.  xix.  8).
There  is  bread  of  which  if  any  man  eat  he  shall  live  for  ever,  given  by  Him  who  gave  His  flesh
for  the  life  of  the  world.  Was  there  any  undefinable  longing  for  such  bread  in  the  following
appeal,  similar  to  that  of  ver.  9,  but  somewhat  intensified  ?  See,  0  Jehovah,  and  behold,  for
I  am  become  despised !  Would  He  take  away  her  reproach  ?  Thus  a  transition  is  made  to
the  lamentation  and  supplication  of  Jerusalem  herself  in  the  following  half  of  this  elegy.

Vers.  12-22.  These  verses  form  the  second  section  of  the  poem.  The  city  is  represented  as
complaining  of  its  harassed  condition,  12-16,  and  then  as  acknowledging  her  persistent  sin  in
sight  of  her  righteous  Lord,  who  will  deal  out  justice  to  all  transgressors,  17-22.

(^)  Ver.  12.  The  curtness  of  the  opening  Hebrew  phrase  causes  doubt  as  to  its  proper
explanation.  Hence  by  some  it  is  taken  as  an  address  to  the  wayfarers,  and  is  paraphrased  in
words  like,  "  I  pray  all  you,"  or  "  Oh,  that  my  cry  might  reach  all  you."  By  others  it  is  taken
as  a  question,  and  more  reasonably  ;  so  they  explain  it  by  words  like,  "Does  not  my  misery
come  to  you  ? "  or  *'  Do  you  not  observe  what  has  befallen  me  ? "  In  either  case  it  conveys  a
call,  as  from  the  weeping,  solitary  woman,  sitting  on  the  ground,  to  all  travellers  to  consider
her  deplorable  state,  and  our  English  Versions  have  caught  the  right  tone.  Is  it  nothing  to
you,  all  ye  passers  by  the  way  ?  Is  there  nothing  in  my  conditicm  to  produce  seriousness  in
you  instead  of  indifference  or  levity  ?  Nothing  to  warn  you  ?  Nothing  to  call  forth  your
sympathy  ?  Behold  and  see  if  there  is  sorrow  like  my  sorrow.  The  feeling  of  a  troubled
present  tends  to  make  it  loom  before  the  sufferer  as  if  there  never  was  the  like  before,  which  is
done  to  me  whom  Jehovah  has  afflicted  in  the  day  of  the  heat  of  his  anger.

The  ascription,  in  religious  addresses,  which  has  been  often  made  of  this  verse  to  the
sufferings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  far  from  commendable.  In  a  very  real  sense  His
sorrows  were  unparalleled,  but  innocent  of  sin  though  He  was.  He  made  no  attempt  to  call
attention  to  Himself  as  peculiarly  afflicted.  His  thought  was  for  others'  sufferings.  Weep  not
for  me,  but  weep  for  yourselves  and  for  your  children.

(D)  Ver.  13.  Here  begin  references  to  various  events  which  had  contributed  to  her  unequalled
sorrow.  Fire,  a  net,  sickness  and  a  yoke  are  set  forth.  The  figure  presented  in  the  last  clause
of  the  preceding  verse  is  now  more  fully  traced.  From  on  high  he  sent  fire,  Ujyon  the  wicked
He  shaU  rain  fire  (Ps.  xi.  6),  into  my  bones,  where  pain  is  supposed  to  be  most  keenly  felt.
She  recognises  that  the  cause,  which  is  behind  all  visible  causes,  of  her  pain  is  in  the  spiritual
realm,  and  that  in  the  face  of  the  Eternal  Righteousness  her  bones  must  be  shrivelled  up  ;  and
it  overpowered  them.  The  next  figure  is,  He  spread  a  net  for  my  feet;  he  turned  me
back.  So  entangled,  she  could  not  go  away  and  escape  capture.  The  third  figure  is  sickness.
He  made  me  desolate,  all  the  day  faint.  The  light  of  her  life  was  quenched,  and  she  was
constantly  exhausted,

(i)  Ver.  14.  There  follows  a  figure  from  agricultural  pursuits.  A  yoke  [formed]  of  my
transgressions  is  bound  by  his  hand.  The  Hebrew  verb  here  is  of  uncertain  meaning,  and
there  is  no  rendering  preferable  to  that  which  is  given.  She  has  made  thongs  or  cords  for  the
yoke  with  her  sins  ;  they  are  twisted  together.  Her  misdoings  have  acted  and  reacted  that
they  are  knit  together,  so  as  to  constitute  a  thraldom  which  cannot  be  thrown  off ;  so  inter-
twined they  have  come  up  upon  my  neck.  A  consequence  of  this  enthralment  by  the  knotted
yoke  is,  it  has  made  my  strength  to  fail,  literally  to  stumble,  i.e.,  to  stagger  from  the  weakness
and  exhaustion  incident  to  such  a  fearful  yoke.  The  yoke  of  transgression  is  hard  ;  the  yoke
of  Christ  is  easy.  The  conviction  is  now  expressed  that  the  Divine  Ruler  is  at  work,  and  a  new
phase  rises  in  the  lamentation.  The  Lord  has  given  me  into  the  hands  [of  those  that  are
against  me].  I  am  not  able  to  stand  up.  She  can  do  nothing  but  yield.  Consciousness  of
transgression  paralyses  body  and  mind.  Note  that  it  is  the  general,  not  the  covenant  name  of
her  God  which  she  utters.  This  title  occurs  fourteen  times  by  itself  in  this  book,  while  in  the
Prophecies  of  Jeremiah  only  along  with  the  covenant  name.  The  reason  for  this  usage  of  Lord,
and  of  refraining  from  Jehovah  has  yet  to  be  found.  To  say  that  the  people,  in  their  punish-
ment, felt  the  Lordship  of  the  Deity  more,  and  His  covenant  love  to  them  less,  is  a  statement
which  is  not  confirmed  by  an  examination  of  the  passages  in  the  Lamentations  where  each  name
is  found.

(D)  Ver.  16.  Inability  to  resist  is  associated  with  other  fatal  experiences.  He  has  set  at
naught  all  my  strong  ones  ;  not  on  an  open  battlefield,  not  in  a  struggle  to  hold  an  important
post,  is  it  that  hor  able-bodied  men  are  counted  for  nothing  before  the  Chaldean  host ;  losses

11


CHAP.  I.  HO  MI  LET IC  COM  ME  NT AR  Y :  LA  MEN  TA  TIONS,


they  might  have  had,  "  the  bubble  reputation  "  attached  to  them,  but  not  when  cooped  up  in
the  city,  in  the  midst  of  me.  He  has  convoked  a  solemn  assembly  against  me ;  it  is  the
WDrd  used  of  the  annual  and  other  religions  festivals,  as  in  ver.  4,  and  intimates  that  to  the
enemies  of  Jerusalem  a  call  had  been  issued  to  gather  at  an  appointed  time  and  have  such  joy
as  might  be  found  in  the  ability  to  crush  my  young  men,  those  who  promised  to  be  the
strength  of  the  nation  in  the  generation  following.  And,  to  make  the  overthrow  complete,  the
maidens,  who  had  been  carefully  guarded  from  violence,  the  Lord  has  trodden  as  in  a  wine-
press the  virgin  daughter  of  Judah.  The  treading  of  the  grapes  in  a  wine-press,  as  illustra-
tive  of  the  execution  of  divine  judgment,  is  not  unusual  in  the  Scriptures  (Isa.  Ixiii.  5  ;  Rev,
xiv.  19),  and  signifies  both  suffering  and  good  results  from  suffering  rightly  borne —

"  Still  hope  and  trust,  it  sang  ;  the  rod
Must  fall,  the  wine-press  must  be  trod.'*

(V)  Ver.  16.  Having  shown  by  the  events  how  terrible  her  sorrow  could  not  but  be,  Jerusalem
reiterates  her  complaint  with  a  flood  of  tears.  Because  of  these  things  I  weep ;  mine  eye,
mine  eye  runs  down  with  water,  so  great  is  her  trouble  and  so  unalleviated,  for  far  from  me
is  the  comforter,  the  restorer  of  my  soul.  My  children  are  become  desolate,  and  cannot
cheer  me,  for  the  enemy  has  prevailed.

(D)  Ver.  17.  The  sobs  of  the  weeper  stifle  her  utterance.  In  the  pause  the  poet  himself
seems  to  take  up  the  word,  something  like  the  part  of  the  chorus  in  Greek  tragedies,  and
describes  the  state  of  the  three  personified  objects — the  Temple,  the  people,  the  city.  He  sees
that  Zion,  representing  the  house  of  'prayer  for  all  nations,  stretches  out  her  hands,  as  praying
in  a  land  where  no  water  is,  but  in  suspense  ;  there  is  no  comforter  for  her.  He  sees  that
Jehovah,  her  covenant  God,  has  commanded  concerning  Jacob,  representing  the  people  whom
He  chose  for  His  heritage,  that  those  round  about  him,  the  neighbouring  nations,  should  be
his  adversaries.  He  sees  that  Jerusalem,  representing  the  government  and  national  aspira-
tions, has  become  as  an  unclean  one  among  them  (ver.  8).

{)i)  Ver.  18.  During  her  pause  the  weeper  has  received  new  thoughts.  Like  the  younger
son  when  feeding  on  husks,  she  has  come  to  herself  so  far  that  she  is  ready  to  own  the  justice  of
Jehovah  in  her  sufferings.  He  is  righteous,  Jehovah,  for  I  have  disobeyed  his  voice,  rejected
the  words  of  His  mouth.  Yet  she  sorely  wants  human  pity,  and  cries  to  them,  Hear,  I  pray;
all  ye  peoples,  and  see  my  sorrow ;  the  flower  of  her  youth  has  gone  into  captivity.

(p)  Ver.  19.  She  addresses  Jehovah,  and  tells  how  her  appeals  to  the  friends  of  her  prosperous
days  have  proved  futile  ;  I  called  to  my  lovers  ;  they  have  deceived  me,  disappointed  my  hopes  ;
and  not  only  they  have  failed  ;  my  priests  and  my  elders  have  expired  in  the  city,  where  they
had  been  high  in  position,  the  medium  between  God  and  His  worshippers,  and  leaders  in  the
state,  when  they  sought  food  for  themselves  to  restore  their  souls,  they  were  starving,  like
the  common  people  in  the  closely  invested  city,  and  made  a  strenuous  quest  for  some  means  to
keep  themselves  alive  in  famine.

("I)  Ver.  20.  Again  she  refers  to  Jehovah  as  to  her  forlornness  and  aggravated  sin.  See,  O
Jehovah,  for  I  am  in  distress,  and  this  distress  is  felt :  (1)  Internally.  My  bowels  are  troubled,
my  heart  is  turned  within  me ;  agitation  and  anguish  excite  her,  even  her  vital  parts,  as  it
were,  change  their  position.  The  reason  therefor  is  not  ascribed  to  man's  neglect  and  in-
humanity to  her,  but,  (2)  to  her  disregard  of  God,  for,  she  confesses,  I  have  grievously  dis-
obeyed. The  penalty  she  undergoes  is  calamitous  indeed  ;  abroad  the  sword  bereaveth,  she
is  rendered  a  mourner  because  of  slaui,'hter  in  the  open  country  and  in  the  streets  ;  at  home  is
like  death,  as  if  nothing  but  the  dead  were  in  the  houses — so  overpowering  was  the  exhaustion
from  starvation  and  diseases.  This  somewhat  halting  explanation  may  be  compared  with  the
free  rendering  of  the  Septuagint  translator — at  least  there  is  no  extant  authority  in  the  Hebrew
for  an  equivalent  reading  —Outside  the  sword  made  me  childless  as  death  in  the  house.

(^)  Ver.  21.  A  transition  is  made  from  unfaithful  friends  to  open  enemies,  and  they  too  are
denounced.  The  sounds  of  her  grief  have  echoed  far  off  among  persons  unnamed,  they  have
heard  that  I  sigh  ;  again  the  refrain  of  this  chapter  is  repeated,  there  is  no  comforter  for  me.
The  frequent  allusions  to  a  personal  comforter,  vers.  2,  9, 16,  17,  21,  are  worthy  of  c>nsideration,
as  if  there  was  a  feeling  after  a  higher  gift  not  yet  distinctly  perceived.  All  my  enemies  have
heard  of  my  evil,  and  understand  souiething  of  the  unseen  influences  which  produced  it ;  they
rejoice  that  thou  hast  done  it.  From  Jer.  xl  2,  3,  it  appears  that  even  foes  recognised  that
the  calamitous  state  of  the  Jews  proceeded  from  their  disobedience  to  Jehovah,  though  their
joy  may  have  been  more  because  of  her  fall  than  for  the  confirmation  given  to  the  truth  of  the
Lord.  Nevertheless,  vengeance  for  their  misdeeds  was  coming  on.  The  Lord  has  announced
a  day  of  judgment  on  the  heathen  as  well  as  on  Judah,  and  the  cup  of  wrath  shall  be  drunk
from  ;  thou  bringest  the  day  thou  hast  announced,  and  they  shall  become  like  me  in  suffer-
ing their  penalties.

(n)  Ver.  22.  Jerusalem  further  formulates  the  wish  that  the  retribution  due  to  their  guilty

actions  should  not  be  put  aside  ;  Let  all  their  evil  come  before  thee,  and  do  unto  them  as

thou  hast  done  unto  me,  for  all  my  transgressions.     The  first  natural  cry  of  those  that  are

punished  is  for  justice  all  round.     "If  I  suffer  for  every  wrong,  make  every  other  wrongdoer

1 «


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  i.


suffer  equally  with  me ! "  In  this  desire  there  appears  the  consciousness  that  Jehovah  must
pass  judgment  upon  every  form  of  sin,  and  rightly,  for  He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity ;
and  also  a  grim  expectation  of  revenge,  under  which  Edom,  Moab,  Babylon,  &c.,  disappeared.
We  may  say  that  confession  of  her  own  transgressions  should  have  been  accompanied  with
sympathy  and  pity  for  other  sinners  ;  but  the  time  for  that  love  of  enemies  did  not  arrive  for
many  a  day.  Her  own  sad  state  again  moves  her,  For  my  sighs  are  many,  and  my  heart  is
faint.  So  Jeremiah  felt  (viii.  18).  *'With  these  words  the  sound  of  this  lamentation  dies
away."

HOMILETICS.

Grief  for  a  Euined  Oitt.

(Yerses  1,  2.)

There  is  a  fine  piece  of  statuary  representing  the  figure  of  a  Hebrew  female  in
a  sitting  posture,  the  head  and  shoulders  slightly  bent  forward,  the  hair  escaping
in  disordered  tresses  from  the  neatly  plaited  fillets,  the  arms,  carelessly  crossed
over  each  other,  resting  helplessly  in  her  lap,  the  eyes,  moistened  with  tears,  gazing
wistfully  on  the  ground,  and  the  face  expressing  in  every  feature  the  tenderest
pathos  of  sorrow.  The  whole  figure  seems  to  quiver  with  irrepressible  emotion.
Every  part  is  moulded  with  voluptuous  grace,  and  is  susceptible  of  the  deepest
passion,  but  it  is  the  passion  of  an  inconsolable  grief !  The  genius  of  the  artist
has  thus  sought  to  idealise  unhappy  Judah  weeping  amid  the  scattered  fragments
of  national  ruin.  It  is  a  reproduction,  by  the  art  of  the  nineteenth  century,  of
the  same  sad  image  that  appeared  on  the  well-known  medal  of  Titus,  struck  to
celebrate  his  triumph  over  Jerusalem — a  woman  sitting  weeping  beneath  a  palm-
tree,  and  below  is  inscribed  the  legend  Judea  capta.  It  is  startling  to  observe
how  exactly  the  heathen  conqueror  copied  the  poetic  description  by  Jeremiah  of
the  forlorn  condition  to  which  his  beloved  country  was  reduced.  These  words
describe  a  pathetic  picture  of  grief  for  a  ruined  city.

I.  Because  of  its  utter  desolation.  "  How  doth  the  city  sit  solitary  that  was
full  of  people  "  (ver.  1 )  There  is  a  tradition  that  Jeremiah  wrote  these  elegies  in
a  grotto  that  is  still  shown,  situated  in  the  face  of  a  rocky  hill  on  the  western  side
of  Jerusalem ;  and  there  is  a  freshness  and  versatility  in  the  images  employed,  as
if  every  time  he  glanced  at  the  ruins  of  the  ill-fated  city,  full  in  his  view,  he  was
unable  to  repress  a  new  outburst  of  grief.  He  had  seen  Jerusalem  in  prosperity,
its  Temple  thronged  with  worshippers,  its  commerce  flourishing,  its  people  content
and  joyous ;  but  now  all  is  changed  ;  the  market-place  is  empty,  the  streets  silent,
the  princes  and  people  in  exile,  and  the  Temple,  which  the  tfew  fondly  dreamed
invulnerable,  was  a  heap  of  ruins.  Such  desolation  was  unparalleled  in  the  history
of  the  nation  and  in  the  experience  of  the  prophet,  and  his  heart  was  riven  with
anguish.  "We  may  read  about  the  decay  of  great  cities  without  emotion ;  but  to
witness  the  demolition  of  our  own  city  is  a  different  matter.

II.  Because  of  the  loss  of  its  beloved  chief.  "How  is  she  become  as  a
widow  ! "  (ver.  1).  A  city  is  often  described  as  the  mother  of  its  inhabitants,  the
king  as  husband,  the  princes  as  children.  When  the  king  is  gone,  and  not  even
a  representative  is  left,  the  city  is  widowed  and  orphaned  indeed.  The  condition
of  an  Eastern  widow  is  pitiable.  Her  hair  is  cut  short,  she  strips  off  all  her
ornaments,  eats  the  coarsest  food,  fasts  often,  and  is  all  but  an  outcast  in  the
family  of  her  late  husband.  The  image  employed  by  the  prophet  would  therefore
be  painfully  suggestive  to  the  Jewish  mind.

III.  Because  of  its  humiliating  subjection.  "She  that  was  great  among  the
nations  and  princess  among  the  provinces,  how  is  she  become  tributary?"  (ver,  1).
The  older  meaning  of  the  word  tributary  refers  not  to  a  money-payment,  but  to
personal  labour  (Josh.  xvi.  10).  The  city  that  ruled  from  the  Nile  to  the
Euphrates  is  now  reduced  to  slavery,  and  the  few  inhabitants  who  are  left  must
render  bond-service  to  a  heathen  potentate.     It  is  galling  to  a  once  proud  and

13


CHAl*.    ,  HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS^

prosperous  people  to  be  thus  humiliated.    They  who  will  not  serve  God  faithfully
must  be  compelled  to  serve  their  enemies.

IV.  Because  of  its  being  cruelly  betrayed.  '*  Among  all  her  lovers  she  hath
none  to  comfort  her.  AH  her  friends  have  dealt  treacherously  with  her ;  they
have  become  her  enemies  "  (ver.  2).  Her  allies,  who  made  great  protestations  of
attachment  when  all  was  prosperous,  not  only  forsake  her  when  adversity  comes,
but  unite  with  her  enemies  in  completing  her  destruction.  It  is  a  bitter  irony  of
human  professions  when  love  turns  to  enmity  and  friendship  to  treachery.  "A
loose  tooth  and  a  fickle  friend  are  two  evils."  The  sooner  we  are  clear  of  them
the  better ;  but  who  likes  the  wrench  ?  If  we  lose  the  comfort  of  God,  we  are  not
likely  to  find  help  in  man.     We  can  trust  in  no  one  if  we  cannot  trust  in  God.

V.  Is  expressed  with  irresistible  pathos.  "  She  weepeth  sore  in  the  night,
and  her  tears  are  on  her  cheeks  "  (ver.  2).  It  was  a  fine  touch  of  poetic  genius
when  the  prophet  selected  a  sorrowful  woman  as  an  emblem  of  a  disconsolate  city.
"Woman  is  never  so  fascinating,  so  tender,  so  bewitchingly  irresistible  in  com-
manding sympathy  as  when  she  is  in  tears  !  The  hardest  heart  is  melted,  the
sternest  enemy  subdued.  The  sorrow  of  Judah  was  overwhelming  because  the
ruin  was  so  unexpected  and  unparalleled.  No  city  has  been  wept  over  like  Jeru-
salem. The  melancholy  wail  has  been  prolonged  through  the  centuries,  and  is
reproduced  to-day.  The  Lamentations  are  still  read  yearly  by  the  Jews  to  com-
memorate the  burning  of  the  Temple.  Every  Friday,  Israelites  young  and  old,  of
both  sexes,  gather  at  the  wailing-place  in  Jerusalem,  where  a  few  of  the  old  stones
of  the  Temple  still  remain  in  the  wall,  and,  amid  tears,  recite  these  sad  verses
and  suitable  psalms,  as  they  fervently  kiss  the  stones.  On  the  9th  of  the
month  Ab,  nearly  our  July,  this  dirge,  composed  about  600  years  before  Christ,
is  read  aloud  in  every  synagogue  over  the  world.  Weeping  is  not  repentance ;
but  the  tears  of  the  contrite  do  not  flow  in  vain.  They  are  noted  in  heaven,  and
God  will  help.

Lessons. — \.  The  ruin  of  a  once  prosperous  city  is  a  sad  and  suggestive
spectacle.  2.  TTie  miseries  of  others  should  rouse  our  compassion.  3.  The  greatest
grief  finds  relief  in  tears.

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.  1.  "How  doth  the  city  sit  soli-  reverses    of    fortune.      1.  The    ruler

tary  that  was  full  of  people."     A  popu-  becomes  the  ruled.     2.  The  free  are  the

lous  city.     \.  A  busy  scene  of  activity,  conquered.     3.   Wealth   exchanged  for

gaiety,    sin,    sorrow,    and    complicated  poverty.     4.  Life  dependent  on  abject

experiences.       2.  Produces    a    strange  submission  to  those  who  were  once  our

sensation  upon  the  belated  visitor  when  inferiors.

it  is  hushed  in  the  silence  of   sleep.  Ver.  2.   "She  weepeth   sore   in    the

3.  Its  ruin  a  subject  of  profound  sorrow  night,  and  her  tears  are  on  her  cheeks."

and  suggestive  reflections  to  one  who  The   pathos  of  tears.     1.  A   sublime

has  known  it  in  the  flood-tide  of  its  spectacle  in  the  ideal  woman.     2.   An

prosperity.  evidence  of  profound  sorrow.  3.  Gathers

—  "  How  has  she  become  as  a  widow,  its  significance  from  the  character  of
she  that  was  great  among  the  nations."  the  calamity  it  bewails.  4.  A  merciful
Widowhood.  L  Suggestive  of  loss —  relief  to  an  intensely  sensitive  nature,
loss  of  liappiness,  solace,  guardianship,  —  "  All  her  friends  have  dealt  trea-
affection.  2.  Implies  loneliness,  dejec-  cherously  with  her ;  they  are  become  her
tion,  sorrow.  3.  A  painful  experience  enemies."  The  fickleness  of  human
when  contrasted  with  a  former  state  of  friendships.  I.  Genuine  friends  are
aiiluence  and  grandeur.  rare.     They  may  usually  be  counted  on

—  "Princes  among  the  provinces, how  a  thumb  and  finger  ;  the  one  is  the  wife
is  she  become  tributary."     The  strange  or  husband,  the  other  is  the   raothe?,

1 4


no  MI  LET  10  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  I.


who  is  father,  mother,  and  a  great  deal
more.  There  is  no  folly  so  fanatical  as
that  which  flings  away  a  real  friend.
II.  Friends  are  plentiful  when  we  do  not
need  their  help.  They  depend  on  us
more  than  ever  we  had  occasion  to
depend  on  them.  While  we  can  help
them,  their  friendship  is  effusive  and
their  vows  of  fealty  emphatic.  When
our  power  declines,  so  does  their  attach-
ment :  when  our  circumstances  alter,  so
do  they.  They  are  swallow  friends,
fluttering  merrily  about  us  in  the  summer-
time of  prosperity,  but  suddenly  become
invisible  when  the  winter  of  adversity
sets  in.  III.  It  is  a  sad  proof  of  the
perversity  of  human  nature  lohen  a  friend
is  transformed  into  an  enemy.  The
enmity  is  often  the  more  rancorous
because  of  the  intimacy  of  a  former
friendship.  The  secrets  confided  in  a
moment  of  familiarity  are  used  against
us  with  a  studied  ingenuity  of  irritating
spitefulness.  It  is  a  painful  shock  to
an  unsophisticated  youth,  and  leaves  a
wound  that  time  cannot  heal,  when  he
discovers  for  the  first  time  the  base
treachery  of  a  pretended  friend.

Illustrations. — Mutual  sympathy
in  sorrow.  When  Henry  VII.  heard
of  the  sudden  death  of  his  son  Prince
Arthur  at  Ludlow  Castle  in  1502,  he
said,  "  Send  some  one  for  the  Queen ;
let  me  bear  this  grief  with  her."  She
came  and  did  her  best  to  comfort  him.
She  then  retired  to  her  own  room,  was
overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  and  swooned
away.  It  was  now  his  turn  to  cheer
and  comfort.  On  both  sides  it  was,
*'Let  me  bear  this  grief  with  her,"  and,
"Let  me  bear  this  grief  with  him."
And  thus  in  their  retreat  at  Green-
wich the  King  and  Queen  of  England
mourned  in  silence  for  the  loss  of  their
first-born  son.

—  It  is  the  weeping  cloud  that
blesses  the  earth.

Grief  useless  that  does  not  lead  to
active  help.  We  are  sorry  (for  the
English  are  a  kind-hearted  people)  for
the  victims  of  our  luxury  and  neglect ;
sorry  for  the  thousands  whom  we  let
die  every  year  by  preventible  diseases,
because  we  are  either  too  busy  or  too


comfortable  to  save  their  lives ;  sorry
for  the  savages  whom  \N'e  exterminate
by  no  deliberate  intent,  but  by  the
mere  weight  of  our  heavy  footstep ;
sorry  for  the  thousands  who  are  used
up  yearly  in  certain  trades  in  minister-
ing to  our  comfort,  even  to  our  very
luxuries  and  frivolities ;  sorry  for  the
Sheffield  grinders,  who  go  to  work  as
to  certain  death  ;  sorry  for  the  people
whose  lower  jaws  decay  away  in  lucifer-
match  factories  ;  sorry  for.  the  diseases
of  artificial  flower-makers ;  sorry  for
the  boys  working  in  glass-houses  whole
days  and  nights  on  end  without  rest,
"  labouring  in  the  very  fire,  and  weary-
ing themselves  with  weary  vanity."
We  are  sorry  for  them  all,  as  the  giant
is  for  the  worm  on  which  he  treads.
Alas  !  poor  worm.  But  the  giant
must  walk  on.  He  is  necessary  to  the
universe,  and  the  worm  is  not.  So  we
are  sorry,  for  half  an  hour,  and  glad  too
(for  we  are  a  kind-hearted  people)  to
hear  that  charitable  persons  or  the
Government  are  going  to  do  something
towards  alleviating  these  miseries.  And
then  we  return,  too  many  of  us,  each
to  his  own  ambition,  comforting  our-
selves with  the  thought  that  we  did  not
make  the  world,  and  we  are  not  re-
sponsible for  it. — C.  Kingsley.

The  AH- seeing  God  and  the  lonely.
God  sees  you  always.  There  is  no
moment  when  He  does  not  see  you,
night  or  day,  waking  or  sleeping,  alone
or  in  company.  It  is  told  of  Linnaeus,
the  famous  naturalist,  that  he  was
greatly  impressed  with  this  thought,
and  that  it  told  upon  his  conversation,
his  writings,  and  his  conduct.  He  felt
the  importance  of  this  so  much,  that  he
wrote  over  the  door  of  his  study  the
Latin  words,  Innocui  vivite ;  Numen
ad  est.    *'  Live  innocently  ;  God  is  here !"

Christianity  relieves  the  miseries
of  great  cities.  Look  at  those  noble
buildings  which  the  generosity  of  our
fellow-countrymen  have  erected  in  all
our  great  cities.  You  may  truly  find
in  them  sermons  in  stones ;  sermons
for  rich  and  poor  alike.  They  preach
to  the  rich,  these  hospitals,  that  the
sick-bed  levels  all  alike  ;  that  they  are
the  equals  and  brothers  of  the  poor  in

15


rnAP.  I.


HOMJLETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


the  terrible  liability  to  suffer.  They
preach  to  the  poor  that  they  are,  through
Christianity,  the  equals  of  the  rich  in
their  means  and  opportunities  of  cure.
Whether  the  founders  so  intended  or
not,  these  hospitals  bear  direct  witness
for  Christ.  They  do  this,  and  would
do  it  even  if — which  God  forbid  ! —
the  name  of  Christ  was  never  mentioned
within  their  walls.  That  may  seem  a
paradox,  but  it  is  none ;  for  it  is  a
historic  fact  that  hospitals  are  the  crea-
tion of  Christian  times  and  of  Christian
men.  The  heathen  knew  them  not.
In  the  great  city  of  ancient  Eome,  as
far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discover,
there  was  not  a  single  hospital,  not  even
a  single  charitable  institution.  Fearful
thought !  A  city  of  a  million  and  a
half  inhabitants,  the  centre  of  human
civilisation,  and  not  an  hospital  there !
The  Roman  Dives  paid  his  physician ;
the  Roman  Lazarus  literally  lay  at  his
gates  full  of  sores,  till  he  died  the
death  of  the  street  dogs  which  licked
those  sores,  and  was  carried  forth  to  be
thrust  under  ground  awhile,  till  the
same  dogs  came  to  quarrel  over  his
bones.  The  misery  and  helplessness  of
the  lower  classes  in  the  great  city  of  the
Roman  Empire,  till  the  Church  of  Christ
arose  literally  with  healing  in  its  wings,
cannot,  I  believe,  be  exaggerated. — 0.
Kingsley.

—  When  you  hear  a  man  praising
"  the  good  old  times,"  ask  him  how  the
peasantry  were  then  sheltered  and  fed.

The  power  of  tears.  A  young  lady
once  visited  a  lunatic  asylum,  and  was
led  into  a  room  where  there  was  but
one  patient,  a  young  girl  of  the  same
age  as  herself.  She  was  standing  in
the  corner  of  the  room,  her  face  almost
touching  the  wall.  In  stony  hopeless-
ness she  stood.  She  neither  looked  nor
•poke.     She  might  have  been  dead  but


that  she  still  stood  on.  It  was  a  pathetic
sight.  "  Will  you  speak  to  her?"  asked
the  doctor ;  "  we  can  do  nothing  with
her.  She  has  been  thus  for  days ;  but
one  like  yourself  might  move  her."
The  young  lady  stepped  forward,  and,
with  an  upward  cry  for  Divine  help,
laid  her  hand  gently  on  the  shoulder  of
the  listless  form,  and  with  tears  in  her
eyes  spoke  one  sentence  of  yearning
sympathy  and  compassion.  The  spell
was  broken.  The  poor  patient  turned,
gazed  for  a  moment  on  the  face  of  the
weeping  visitor,  and  then  burst  into
tears  !  The  doctor  exclaimed,  "  Thank
God,  she  may  now  be  saved ! "  The
visitor  could  never  recall  the  words  she
had  used ;  but,  with  the  voice  softened
with  tears,  they  had  done  their  work.
The  still  and  cold  indifference  of  the
patient  gave  way  before  the  warmth  of
a  pitying  heart  and  the  magic  touch  of
a  hand  stretched  out  to  help.  The  elo-
quence of  tears  is  irresistible.

The  friends  of  youth:  Where  are
they?

**  I  sought  you,  friends  of  youth,  in  sun  and
shade,
By  home  and  hearth ;  but  no  I  ye  were
not  there.
Where  are  ye  gone,  beloved  ones,  where  ?
I  said.
I  listened,  and  an  echo  answered,  Where  ?

Then  silence  fell  around  :  upon  a  tomb
I  sat  me  down,  dismayed  at  death,  and
wept;

Over  my  senses  fell  a  cloud  of  gloom  ;
They  sank  before  the  mystery,  and  I  slept.

I  slept,  and  then  before  my  eyes  there  pressed
Faces  that  showed  a  bliss  unknown  before  ;

The  loved  whom  I  in  life  had  once  possessed
Came  one  by  one,  till  all  were  there  once
more.

A  light  of  nobler  worlds  was  round  their

head  ;

A  glow  of  better  actions  made  them  fair.

*  The  dead  are  there,'  triumphantly  I  said  ;

Triumphantly  the  echo  answered, '  There' ! "

— Clive.


EOMILETICS.

The  Judgment  of  Oppressiok,

(Verse  3.)

I.  The  oppressor  is  in  turn  oppressed.     "  Judah  is  gone  into  captivity  because
of  affliction  and  because  of  great  servitude."     The  prophet  would  probably  have
16


EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,  OHAP.  I.

in  view  the  circnmRtances  narrated  in  Jer.  xxxiv.,  where  the  Jewish  princes  and
people  were  threatened  with  captivity,  because,  in  violation  of  the  law,  they  with-
drew the  grant  of  liberty  made  to  their  servants,  and  reduced  them  to  their  former
servitude,  aggravated  with  increased  exactions.  It  is  an  oft-repeated  charge  against
the  Jews  that  they  robbed  and  oppressed  their  own  countrymen  ;  and  the  day
came  when  they  were  robbed  and  oppressed  by  their  powerful  conquerors.  It  is
a  cruel  abuse  of  power  when  it  is  used  to  injure  the  helpless.  Every  act  of  wrong-
doing carries  within  it  the  germ  of  future  recompense.  The  boomerang  rebounds
towards  the  man  who  threw  it.

II.  The  judgment  is  constant.  "She  dwelleth  among  the  heathen ;  she  findeth
no  rest."  The  endless  and  impossible  tasks  imposed  on  others  are  now  allotted
to  the  oppressors.  There  is  no  prospect  of  release — they  divell  among  the  heathen  ;
no  prospect  of  abatement — they  find  no  rest.  Judgment  knows  nothing  of  pity  :
while  the  sinner  remains  obdurate,  its  mission  is  to  punish.  There  is  no  change
in  the  punishment  until  there  is  a  moral  change  in  the  offender.  Divine  mercy
alone  can  break  the  entail  of  suffering,  and  that  can  be  effected  only  by  satisfying
the  claims  of  justice,

III.  The  judgment  cannot  "be  evaded  by  flight.  "All  her  persecutors  over-
took her  between  the  straits."  Zedekiah  and  the  princes  of  Judah  strove  to  escape
from  besieged  Jerusalem,  but  the  wary  Chaldeans  pursued  and  captured  them
(Jer.  lii.  7,  8).  The  people  fled  to  the  mountain  passes,  but  they  were  there  con-
fronted by  the  enemy,  and  flight  was  impossible.  Like  hunted  deer,  whichever
way  they  turned,  they  found  themselves  within  the  toils  of  the  invaders.  The
conquerors  held  them  as  in  a  grip  of  steel.  The  day  came  when  the  Chaldeans
were  similarly  helpless  in  the  hands  of  a  superior  force.  Judgment  perpetually
dogs  the  heel  of  the  oppressor,  and  every  possible  avenue  of  escape  is  carefully
guarded.  Oppression  is  the  attempt  of  an  imperious  will  to  have  its  own  way,
and  it  does  not  answer.  '*  Not  thy  will  but  mine  be  done,"  changed  Paradise  into
a  desert.  "]N^ot  My  will  but  Thine  be  done,"  changed  the  desert  into  Paradise,
and  made  Gethsemane  the  gate  of  glory.

Lessons. — 1.  Oppression  is  a  short-sighted  policy,  2.  The  spoils  gained  by
oppression  are  worthless.     3.  The  law  of  retribution  is  always  at  work.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.  3.  "  Judah  is  gone  into  captivity  Illustrations. — The  oppressor  pun-

because  of  affliction  and  great  servitude."  ished.  There  is  an  Eastern  fable  that
A  time  of  trouble.  1.  Should  induce  a  wicked  and  oppressive  king  was  once
careful  self-examination.  2.  Should  kissed  on  either  shoulder  by  the  Evil
lead  us  to  reflect  whether  we  have  caused  One.  Immediately  there  sprang  there-
trouble  to  others.  3.  Is  a  call  to  re-  from  two  serpents,  who,  furious  with
pentance  and  moral  reform.  hunger,  attacked  the  man  and  strove  to

—  "  She  dwelleth  among  the  heathen,  eat  into  his  brain.  The  terrified  king
she  findeth  no  rest."  The  changes  of  tried  to  tear  them  away  and  cast  them
life.  L  Often  bring  us  into  the  midst  from  him,  when,  to  his  horror,  he  found
of  strange,  unfriendly  associations.  they  had  become  part  of  himself.  So
2.  Interfere  with  growth  in  personal  is  it  with  those  who  yield  to  anger  or
piety.     3.   Disturb  the  soul's  peace.  any  other  evil  passion.     The  man  who

—  "All  her  persecutors  overtook  her  tyrannises  over  others  becomes  by  and
between  the  straits."  The  spirit  of  by  the  victim  of  his  own  tyrannical
persecution.  1.  Instigated  by  hatred  temper,  and  all  eftbrts  to  deliver  hini-
to  the  good.  2.  Is  vigilaiit  and  active  self  are  in  vain ;  it  has  become  a  part
in  its  cruel  pursuits.  3.  Takes  advan-  of  himself.  Wrong-doing  carries  with
tage  of  the  helplessness  of  its  victims.  it  its  own  punishment.     In  its  earlier

17  B


CHAP.  I.


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENT ATTONS.


stages  we  fancy  it  will  be  easy  at  any
time  to  do  right ;  but  when  we  try,  we
are  helpless.

The  oppressor  a  selfish  man.

"  He  pours  no  ccjrdial  in  the  wounds  of  pain  ;
Unlocks  no  prison,  and  unclasps  no  chain.
His  heart  is  like  the  rock,  where  sun  nor  dew
Can  rear  one  plant,  or  flower  of  heavenly  hue.
No  thought  of  mercy  there  may  have  its  birth,
For  helpless  misery  or  suffering  worth.
The  end  of  all  his  life  is  paltry  pelf,
And  all  his  thoughts  are  centred  on  himself.
The  wretch  of  both  worlds  ;  for  so  mean  a  sum.
First  starved  in  this,  then  damned  in  that  to
come  !  "

A  time  of  trouble.  If  God  brings
us  into  difficulties,  we  may  be  sure  He
will  bring  us  out  again ;  but  no  such
confidence  should  be  ours  if  we  bring
ourselves  into  them.

Trouble  and  the  way  out.  An  ex-
pedition started  from  Buenos  Ayres  to
explore  the  Pilcomayo  Eiver,  South
America,  with  the  view  of  establishing
a  water  communication  between  the
Argentine  Republic  and  Bolivia.  For
the  first  fortnight  the  explorers  made
fair  progress,  but  after  that  the  naviga-
tion was  difficult  and  slow,  it  being
necessary  to  construct  dams  across  the
river  below  their  vessel  and  wait  till
the  water  accumulated  sufficiently  to
float  it.  At  length  they  could  proceed
no  farther,  and  remained  in  the  same
position  for  months.  Having  exhausted
all  their  provisions,  and  their  efforts
at  foraging  proving  unsuccessful,  they
daily  expected  the  arrival  of  a  relief
party,  and  were  daily  disappointed.
When  they  were  wasting  with  famine
and  had  given  up  all  hope,  they  were
surprised  one  morning  by  hearing  a
bugle  blast,  and  knew  they  were  saved.
Only  those  who  have  been  in  extremity
can  realise  how  exquisite  is  the  joy  of
sudden  and  unexpected  rescue. — The
Scoitish  Pulpit.

The  changes  of  life.  A  mill-owner
was  obliged  to  dismiss  several  of  his
hands.  Among  them  was  a  man  whose
faith  and  trust  in  God  always  led  him
to  say,  "The  Lord  will  provide."  One
day  when  he  had  eaten  his  last  morsel
of  food,  and  his  faith  was  tried  to  the
utmost,  some  street-boys,  opening  his
door,  flung  in  a  dead  raven,  shouting
18


mockingly,  '*  The  Lord  will  provide "
He  quietly  took  up  the  dead  bird  and
tenderly  stroked  its  plumage.  Suddenly
he  felt  something  hard  in  the  crop  of
the  bird,  and  wondering  what  it  was,
he  took  a  knife  and  opened  it.  To  his
amazement  he  found  there  a  gold  chain.
He  felt  here  was  God  providing  for  him
and  his  family.  He  went  straight  to  a
jeweller,  telling  his  story,  and  asked  if
he  would  buy  it.  The  jeweller  saw  it
to  be  a  chain  of  great  value,  with  initials
on  it,  and  said,  "  If  you  could  learn  the
name  of  the  owner,  would  you  return
HI"  " Certainly,"  replied  the  work-
man. "  Well  then,"  said  the  jeweller,
"  it  belongs  to  your  late  master."  Hear-
ing that,  the  man  set  off  without  delay
and  put  the  chain  into  his  master's
hands,  who  received  it  with  great  joy,
as  he  had  on  missing  it  accused  one  of
his  servants  of  theft.  Greatly  struck
with  his  workman's  honesty,  he  told
him  he  wished  him  to  return  to  his
employment,  as  he  could  not  part  with
so  honest  a  man.  In  the  most  trying
changes  of  life  it  is  best  to  do  what  is
right.

Persecution.  A  sensation  was  caused
in  Hungary  by  a  certain  Count,  a  large
landed  proprietor,  giving  orders  that
thenceforth  no  Protestant  was  to  be
engaged  in  the  service  of  his  estate,  and
that  Protestants  already  employed  were
disqualified  from  any  further  promotion.
Any  officials  who  married  Protestants
were  to  be  at  once  dismissed.  This
high-handed  procedure  was  the  more
remarkable  as  religious  toleration  was
recognised  as  a  supreme  political  and
social  principle,  there  being  already
eight  different  Christian  denominations.
Persecution  and  bigotry  are  weeds  diffi
cult  to  eradicate,  and  there  is  no  know-
ing into  what  eccentric  and  tyrannical
forms  they  may  develop. — The  Scottish
Pulpit.

God  the  Helper  of  the  persecuted.
Have  faith,  0  you  who  suffer  for  the
noble  cause,  the  apostles  of  a  truth
which  the  world  of  to-day  comprehends
not,  warriors  in  the  sacred  fight  whom
it  yet  stigmatises  with  the  name  of
rebels.  To-morrow  victory  will  bless
the  banner  of  your  crusade.     Walk  io


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  I.


faith  and  fear  not.  That  which  Christ
has  done,  humanity  may  do.  Believe,
and  you  will  conquer.  Action  is  the
word  of  God  ;  thought  alone  is  but  His
shadow.  They  who  disjoin  thought
and  action  seek  to  divide  Deity,  and
deny  the  Eternal  unity.  They  who  are
not  ready  to  bear  witness  to  their  faith
with  their  blood  are  no  true  believers.
From  your  cross  of  sorrow  and  persecu-
tion proclaim  the  religion  of  the  epoch.
Soon  shall  it  receive  the  consecration
of  faith.  From  our  cross  of  misery  and
persecution  we  men  of  exile,  the  repre-
sentatives of  heart  and  faith  of  the
enslaved  races,  of  millions  of  men  con-
strained to  silence,  will  respond  to  your
appeal,  and  say  to  our  brothers,  The
alliance  is  founded.  Answer  your  perse-
cutors with  the  formula,  God  and  the
people.  They  may  rebel  and  blaspheme
against  it  for  a  while,  but  it  will  be
accepted  and  worshipped  by  the  peoples.
— Mazzini.

The  spirit  of  persecution  inexorable.
A  poor  Anabaptist,  guilty  of  no  crime
but  his  fellowship  with  a  persecuted
sect,  had  been  condemned  to  death.
He  had  made  his  escape,  closely  pur-


sued by  an  officer  of  justice,  across  a
frozen  lake.  It  was  late  in  the  winter,
and  the  ice  had  become  unsound.  It
trembled  and  cracked  beneath  his  foot-
steps, but  he  reached  the  shore  in  safety
The  officer  was  not  so  fortunate.  The
ice  gave  way  beneath  him,  and  he  sank
into  the  lake  uttering  a  cry  for  succour.
There  were  none  to  hear  him  except  the
fugitive  whom  he  had  been  hunting.
Dirk  Willemzoon,  for  so  was  the  Ana-
baptist called,  instinctively  obeyed  the
dictates  of  a  generous  nature,  returned,
crossed  the  quaking  and  dangerous  ice
at  the  peril  of  his  life,  extended  his
hand  to  the  enemy,  and  saved  him
from  certain  death.  Unfortunately  for
human  nature,  it  cannot  be  added  that
the  generosity  of  the  action  was  met  by
a  corresponding  heroism.  The  officei
was  desirous,  it  is  true,  of  avoiding  the
responsibility  of  sacrificing  the  preserver
of  his  life,  but  the  burgomaster  of
Asperen  sternly  reminded  him  to  re-
member his  oath.  He  accordingly
arrested  the  fugitive,  who,  in  the  month
of  May  following,  was  burned  to  death
under  the  most  lingering  tortures. —
Motley's  '*  Dutch  RejpublicJ*


HOMILETIGS.
Lamentation  over  a  Forsaken  Sanctuary.

(Yerse  4.)

L  Because  its  thoroughfares  are  no  longer  thronged  with  worshippers.
"The  ways  of  Zion.do  mourn,  because  none  come  to  the  solemn  feasts  ;  all  her
gates  are  desolate."  Those  were  happy  days  when  the  roads  leading  up  to  Jeru-
salem were  crowded  with  eager  worshippers,  coming  to  the  three  great  annual
festivals — the  Passover,  Pentecost,  and  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  The  city  was
jubilant  in  song,  and  full  to  overflowing  with  life  and  movement.  Now  the  very
roads  are  represented  as  mourning,  as  if  they  missed  the  tread  of  the  pilgrims'
feet ;  and  the  gates  look  in  vain  for  the  travellers  they  had  so  often  welcomed.
"  All  her  gates  are  desolate."

It  is  a  dispiriting  spectacle  to  see  a  closed  sanctuary,  with  weeds  and  grasses
throwing  about  the  entrance  ;  the  more  so  when  we  have  seen  the  same  sanctuary
filled  with  delighted  worshippers.  When  men  forsake  the  house  of  God,  God
forsakes  it  too,  and  it  is  then  desolate  indeed.

II.  Because  the  of5.ce  of  the  ministry  is  obsolete.  "  Her  priests  sigh  " — sigh
not  only  for  want  of  bread,  because  the  off*erings,  which  were  their  means  of
livelihood,  fail ;  but  because  their  life-work  is  useless,  because  the  people  lapse
into  ignorance  and  sin,  because  the  worship  of  Jehovah  is  neglected  and  dis-
honoured. The  true  minister  is  wholly  consecrated  to  his  sacred  calling;  it  is
the  theme  of  his  earnest  prayers,  his  constant  study,  and  exercises  his  host  powers,

10


OHAP.  T,


HOMTL  ETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENT  A  TIONS.


Life  to  him  is  bereft  of  its  holiest  motive,  its  sweetest  relish,  when  it  is  baulked
of  its  loftiest  purpose.      '*  It  is  time  to  sigh  when  the  priests,  the  Lord's  ministers,

Bigl,."

III.  Because  the  training  of  the  young  is  neglected.  "Her  virgins  are
afflicted."  The  virgins  are  mentioned  because  they  took  a  prominent  part  in  all
religious  festivals  (Jer.  xxxi.  13;  Exod.  xv.  20;  Ps.  Ixviii.  25);  and  therefore
special  notice  is  taken  of  the  educative  loss  to  them  occasioned  by  disused  ordi-
nances. Neglect  in  the  religious  training  of  the  young  means  grave  peril  to  the
moral  stamina  of  the  community.  Religion  is  the  mightiest  force  in  the  formation
of  youthful  character.  The  men  and  women  of  the  future  will  be  what  the  Church
makes  them  in  their  younger  years.  It  has  been  said — ''People  fancy  that  we
cannot  become  wise  without  becoming  old  also  ;  but  in  truth,  as  years  accumulate,
it  is  hard  to  keep  as  wise  as  we  were.  Man  becomes,  in  the  different  stages  of
his  life,  a  different  being,  but  he  cannot  say  that  he  will  surely  be  better  as  he
grows  onwards.  In  certain  matters  he  is  as  likely  to  be  right  in  his  twentieth
as  in  his  sixtieth  year."  The  young  will  carry  with  them  through  life  the
influences  for  good  or  evil  that  have  been  brought  to  bear  upon  them  in  their
early  days.

IV.  Because  the  city  is  deprived  of  religious  ordinances.  "  And  she  is  in
bitterness."  It  is  a  beautiful  and  touching  conception  to  impersonate  the  metro-
polis of  Judah  as  a  disconsolate  female,  troubled  with  the  evident  cessation  of
Divine  worship  and  the  universal  neglect  of  religious  duties.  As  is  the  Church,
so  will  be  the  city  ;  as  is  the  state  of  religion,  so  will  be  the  people.  The  glory  of
a  city  is  gone  when  religious  ordinances  are  abandoned.  No  loss  should  be
lamented  more  bitterly  than  the  loss  of  religion.

Lessons. — 1.  A  closed  temple  anywhere  is  a  pitiable  sight.  2.  Where  religious
privileges  are  withdraion  the  people  suffer.  3.  Love  of  worship  will  always  crowd
the  sanctuary.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,


Yer.  4.  "  Her  priests  sigh,  her  vir-
gins are  afflicted."  A  dispirited  mini-
stry. 1.  Because  the  sanctuary  is
destroyed.  2.  Because  the  worshippers
are  scattered  and  uncared  for.  3.  Be-
cause its  maintenance  is  withdrawn.
4.  Because  the  joyous  song  of  the  young
is  turned  to  sorrow.  "  Her  virgins  are
afflicted."  5.  Because  of  conscious  im-
perfections and  unfaithfulness.

—  "  She  is  in  bitterness."  A  city  in
sorrow.  1.  Because  its  reputation  is
dishonoured.  2.  Because  its  resources
are  crippled,  its  people  dispersed,  its
commerce  interrupted,  its  institutions
destroyed.  3.  Because  the  public  wor-
ship of  God  is  abandoned.  4.  Because
its  future  seems  hopeless.

Illustrations.  —  Dead    and  dying

Churches.  A  barque  on  her  voyage
from  Hong-Kong  fell  in  with  a  British
ship,  the  "Guiding  Star,"  helplessly
floating  about  with  a  fever-stricken
20


crew.  When  found,  only  one  member
of  the  crew  was  able  to  work.  The
captain,  the  first  mate,  the  steward,
and  a  seaman  had  died.  Five  men
were  lying  helpless,  though  still  alive,
and  the  boatswain  had  gone  mad  from
the  want  of  proper  attention.  The
*'  Guiding  Star  "  was  towed  to  Batavia,
where  the  survivors  were  placed  under
medical  treatment.  Are  there  not
Churches  to-day  that  are  morally  in
a  similar  plight  —  drifting  hospitals,
officered  with  the  dead  and  dying  1  It
will  be  a  mercy  if  they  are  spiritually
rescued  before  they  become  sepulchres,
entombing  the  hopelessly  dead. — The
Scottish  Pulpit,

The  true  man  superior  to  his  sur-
roundings.— The  scientist,  while  ad-
mitting the  influence  of  geographical
surroundings  in  shaping  the  history  and
character  of  nations,  admits  that  nothing
would  be  more  erroneous  than  to  sup-
pose that  Nature  alone  acts  in  determin-


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  I.


ing  the  conditions  of  life  and  of  races.
Man's  activity  must  be  associated  with
Nature.  A  country  may  be  prominent
and  fertile,  and  yot  occupied  by  a  race
of  men  utterly  unfit  to  develop  its  re-
sources. After  all,  man  is  greater  than
Nature,  and  it  is  his  lofty  mission  to
subdue  it.  The  energy  of  the  Nether-
lands turned  a  swamp  into  a  garden,
while  their  Spanish  oppressors,  witli
inexhaustible  resources  in  soil  and
mineral,  sank  into  decay.  We  are  apt
to  lay  too  much  stress  upon  the  opera-
tion of  the  law  of  environment,  and  to
ignore  individual  responsibility.  Plant
within  man  the  vital  principles  of  Chris-
tianity, and  he  will  soon  change  his  en-
vironment.— The  Scottish  Pulpit.

Ministers  not  only  finger-posts,  but
guides.  There  ought  to  be  no  hiatus
between  our  declarations  and  our  spiri-
tual conduct.  We  must  not  only  be
finger-posts,  but  guides,  "Lest  having
preached  to  others,  we  ourselves  become
castaways."

"  The  love  of  Christ  and  His  Apostles  twelve
He  taught,  but  first  he  followed  it  himself."

If  we  are  the  channels  of  good  to  our
fellows,  it  behoves  us  to  clear  away  all
that  might  impede  the  flowing,  and
defile  the  purity,  of  the  stream  of  truth
from  God.

Youth  needs  instruction.  Narcissus,
a  beautiful  youth,  though  he  would  not
love  them  that  loved  him,  yet  after-
wards fell  in  love  with  his  own  shadow.
Ah !  how  many  young  men  in  these
days,  who  were  once  lovely  and  hopeful,
are  now  fallen  in  love  with  their  own
and  others'  shadows,  with  high,  empty,
airy  notions,  and  with  strange,  mon-
strous speculations,  to  their  own  dam-
nation. A  youth  deprived  of  instruc-
tion and  left  to  his  natural  development
is  a  pitial)le  object,  and  is  menaced  by
many  perils.

Work  a  remedy  for  misery.  Nothing
is  more  remarkable  in  the  Apostles  than
their  unbroken  mental  health.  The
histories  of  religious  communities  are
full  of  instances  of  ecstasies  and  hys-
terical delusions ;  but  never  do  we  find
among  our  Lord's  followers  anything
approaching  to  a  spiritual  craze.     This


health  of  theirs  came  in  great  measure
from  their  being  constantly  employed
about  matters  of  which  their  hearts
were  full.  The  busy  man  has  neither
time  nor  inclination  to  nurse  delusive
fancies.  Hard,  honest,  practical  work
is  a  panacea  for  many  ills.  Underneath
a  fresco  of  the  13th  century  discovered
at  Cortona,  in  Italy,  is  inscribed  the
motto.  Sum  misero  nisi  teneam  ligonem
— I  am  miserable  unless  I  hold  a  spade.
— Tlie  Scottish  Pulpit.
The  uses  of  suffering.

"Through  long  days  did  Anguish,
And  sad  nights  did  Pain
Forge  my  shield,  Endurance,
Bright  and  free  from  stain.

Doubt  in  misty  caverns,
'Mid  dark  horrors  soughti

Till  my  peerless  jewel,
Faith,  to  me  she  brought

Sorrow  that  I  wearied

Should  remain  so  long,
Wreathed  my  starry  glory,

The  bright  crown  of  song.

Strife,  that  racked  my  spirit

Without  hope  or  rest,
Left  the  blooming  flower,

Patience,  in  my  breast."

— Proctor,

Love  in  sorrow.  Always  through
the  darkest  part  of  every  life  there  runs,
though  we  may  sometimes  fail  to  see  it,
the  golden  thread  of  love,  so  that  even
the  worst  man  on  earth  is  not  wholly
cut  off  from  God,  since  He  will,  by
some  means  or  other,  eternally  try  to
draw  him  out  of  death  into  life.  We
are  astounded  now  and  then  to  read
that  some  cold-blooded  murderer,  some
man  guilty  of  a  hideous  crime,  will  ask
in  his  last  moments  to  see  a  child  who
loved  him  devotedly,  and  whom  he  also
loved.  We  are  astonished  just  because
we  do  not  understand  the  untiring  heart
of  the  Almighty  Father,  who  in  His
goodness  often  gives  to  the  vilest  sinner
the  love  of  a  pure-hearted  woman  or
child.  So  true  is  the  beautiful  old
Latin  saying,  Mergere  nos  patitur,  sed
nan  submergere  Christum — Christ  lets
us  sink,  may  be,  but  not  drown. — Edna
Lyall.

A  city  in  sorrow.  In  1576  Antwerp
was  stormed  by  the  Spaniards  with  fire
and  sword.     Never  was  there  a  more

21


OHAP.  T.


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


monstrous  massacre,  even  in  the  blood-
stained annals  of  the  Netherlands.  In
the  course  of  three  days  eight  thousand
Imman  beings  were  murdered.  The
Spaniards  seemed  to  cast  off  even  the
vizard  of  liumanity.  Hell  seemed
emptied  of  its  fiends.  Night  fell  upon
the  scene  before  the  soldiers  were
masters  of  the  city;  but  worse  horrors
began  after  the  contest  was  ended.
This  army  of  brigands  had  come  thither
with  a  definite,  practical  purpose,  for  it
was  not  blood  thirst,  nor  lust,  nor  re-
venge which  impelled  them,  but  greedi-
ness for  gold.     Torture  was  employed


to  discover  hidden  treasure  ;  and,  after
all  had  been  given,  if  the  sum  seemed
too  little,  the  proprietors  were  brutally
punished  for  their  poverty  or  their  sup-
posed dissimulation.  Women,  children,
and  old  men  were  killed  in  countless
numbers,  and  still,  through  all  this
havoc,  directly  over  the  heads  of  the
struggling  throng,  suspended  in  mid-air
above  the  din  and  smoke  of  the  conflict,
there  sounded,  every  half-quarter  of
every  hour,  as  if  in  gentle  mockery,
from  the  belfry  of  the  cathedral,  the
tender  and  melodious  chimes. — Motley*8
"  Dutch  Republic**


EOMILETICS.
The  Tantalising  Indifference  of  the  Enemies  of  the  Chuech.

(Verses  5-7.)

I.  They  contentedly  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their  conquest.  "  Her  adversaries
are  the  chief;  her  enemies  prosper."  Her  foes  have  become  her  masters;  her
enemies  enjoy  quiet  prosperity — Geikie  (ver.  5).  Judea  has  become  so  utterly
crushed  that  her  conquerors  revel  in  their  spoils  without  fear  of  resistance,  or  any
attempt  at  reprisals  on  the  part  of  the  vanquished.  If  we  allow  our  vices  to
become  our  masters,  we  have  the  chagrin  of  seeing  them  rioting  in  indulgence
while  we  are  powerless  to  interpose.

II.  They  have  no  concern  to  know  the  cause  of  the  Church's  calamities.
"  For  the  Lord  hath  afflicted  her  for  the  multitude  of  her  transgressions  "  (ver.  6).
What  of  that  ?  It  is  no  concern  of  theirs  to  pry  into  moral  causes.  The  in-
vaders wish  to  strike  a  blow  at  imperious  Egypt.  Judah  stands  in  the  way,  and,
becoming  troublesome,  must  be  crushed.  They  knew  not,  nor  did  they  care  to
know,  that  they  were  but  instruments  in  the  hands  of  a  Higher  Power  to  punish  a
nation  for  its  sins.  It  was  brought  home  to  Judah  that  her  disasters  were  pro-
voked by  her  manifold  transgressions,  and  it  was  an  aggravation  of  her  sufferings
that  her  enemies  were  utterly  regardless  and  apparently  ignorant  of  all  this.  Had
they  understood  it,  they  might  have  shown  more  pity.

III.  They  are  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  they  inflict.  **  Her  children  are
gone  into  captivity.  Her  princes  have  become  like  harts  .  .  .  without  strength
before  the  pursuer"  (vers.  5,  6).  The  young  children  are  driven  before  the  adver-
sary, not  as  a  flock  of  lambs  which  follow  the  shepherd,  but  for  sale  as  slaves.
The  princes  are  hunted  down  to  exhaustion.  In  the  ancient  sculptures  nothing  is
more  affecting  than  the  mournful  processions  so  often  depicted  of  tender  women
and  young  children  driven  in  gangs  as  captives  before  their  heartless  conquerors.
In  olden  times  the  treatment  of  prisoners  of  war  was  characterised  by  the  most
brutal  cruelty.  They  were  regarded  as  an  encumbrance,  and  were  often  butchered
wholesale  to  save  further  trouble.  They  were  subjected  to  degradations  from
which  death  would  have  been  a  merciful  relief.

IV.  They  make  no  allowance  for  the  feelings  of  the  conquered  regarding
their  losses.  "  From  the  daughter  of  Zion  all  her  beauty  is  departed.  Jerusalem
remembered  all  her  pleasant  things  that  she  had  in  the  days  of  old  "  (vers.  6,  7).
In  the  midst  of  her  distress  Jerusalem  remembered  the  happiness  of  former  days,

22


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  1.


when  the  Temple  stood  out  in  all  the  beauty  of  its  architecture,  and  as  the  symbol
of  holiest  worship ;  wlieii  the  throne  was  the  centre  of  imperial  power  and  mag-
nificence; when  the  land  was  prosperous,  and  the  people  united  and  content.
Kow  the  Temple  is  shattered  past  recognition,  the  most  distinguished  citizens  are
in  exile,  the  land  is  desolate,  and  the  people  plunged  in  misery.  But  all  this  is
nothing  to  her  enemies  ;  they  heed  not  what  their  victims  have  lost ;  they  are
more  interested  in  what  their  conquests  have  gained.

V.  They  make  sport  of  the  Church's  utter  discomfiture.  "  The  adversaries
saw  her,  and  did  mock  at  her  Sabbaths,"  her  calamities,  her  ruined  circumstances
(Geikie  ;  Henderson).  The  more  literal  meaning  is  her  Sahhatisms.  Foreigners
ridiculed  the  custom  of  the  Jews  in  ceasing  from  labour  every  seventh  day,  and
attributed  their  ruin  to  what  appeared  to  them  a  strange,  fanatical  practice.  Oh,
had  those  Sabbaths  been  as  faithfully  observed  in  spirit  as  they  were  in  form,
how  different  would  have  been  the  career  of  Judah  !  The  Church  is  familiar  with
the  scoffs  of  unbelievers.  While  she  is  true  to  God,  they  are  powerless  to  harm.
It  is  when  she  is  conscious  of  unfaithfulness  that  they  begin  to  irritate.

Lessons. — 1.  It  is  a  hard  time  for  the  Church  ichen  her  enemies  triumph.  2.
God  is  the  refuge  of  the  Church  in  time  of  trouble.  He  is  never  indifferent  to  her
8uJ}ei'ings.     3.  The  Church  should  learn  to  make  the  best  of  prosperous  times.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Ver.  6.  "  Her  adversaries  are  the
chief ;  her  enemies  prosper."  New
masters :  1.  Soon  make  evident  their
newly-acquired  superiority.  2.  Rule
with  severity  when  actuated  by  a  .-spirit
of  enmity.  3.  Enjoy  without  com-
punction the  prosperity  secured  by  the
ruin  of  others.

—  *'  The  Lord  afflicted  her  for  the
multitude  of  her  transgressions."  Sin  :
L  Is  a  transgression  of  the  law  of  God.

2.  Has  a  tendency  to  multiply  itself.

3.  Is  a  prolific  source  of  trouble.  4.
Is  punished  by  the  Being  against  whom
it  is  committed.

Yers.  5,  6.  National  disaster.  I.  In-
volves the  suffering  of  innocent  children.
*'  Her  children  are  gone  into  captivity
before  the  enemy  "  (ver.  5).  II.
Quenches  the  splendour  of  its  repida-
tion.  "  From  the  daughter  of  Zion  all
her  beauty  is  departed  "  (ver.  6).  TIL
Degrades  and  harasses  its  most  illus-
trious rulers.  "  Her  princes  are  be-
come like  harts  that  find  no  pasture,
and  they  are  gone  without  strength  be-
fore the  pursuer"  (ver.  6).

Yer.  7.  Sad  memories.  \.  When  con-
trasting present  miseries  with  former
joys.  2.  When  reflecting  on  the  sud-
denness and  completeness  of  our  cala-
mities.     3.  When   mingled   with   the


heartless  mockery  of  the  authors  of  our
misfortunes.

Illustrations. — Lessons  from  the
world's  treatment.  Three  men  are  my
friends,  He  that  loves  me,  he  that  hates
me,  and  he  that  is  indifferent  to  me.
Who  loves  me  teaches  me  tenderness  ;
who  hates  me  teaches  me  caution  ;  who
is  indifferent  to  me  teaches  me  self-
reliance.

Loose  talk  leads  to  loose  conduct.
Indulgence  in  verbal  vices  soon  en-
courages corresponding  vices  in  conduct.
Let  any  one  talk  about  any  mean  or
vile  practice  with  familiar  tone,  and  do
you  suppose,  when  ^the  opportunity
occurs  for  committing  the  mean  or  vile
act,  he  will  be  as  strong  against  it  as
before  1  It  is  by  no  means  an  unknown
thing  that  men  of  correct  lives  talk
themselves  into  sensuality,  crime,  and
perdition.  Bad  language  easily  runs
into  bad  deeds.  Select  any  iniquity
you  please,  suffer  yourself  to  converse
in  its  dialect,  to  use  its  slang,  to  speak
in  the  character  of  one  who  relishes  it,
and  I  need  not  tell  you  how  soon  your
moral  sense  will  lower  down  to  its  level.
Becoming  intimate  with  it,  you  lose
your  horror  of  it.  To  be  too  much  with
bad  men  and  in  bad  places  is  not  only

23


CHAP.  L


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


unwholesome  to  man's  morality,  but
unfavourable  to  his  faith  and  trust  in
God.  It  is  not  every  man  who  could
live  as  Lot  did  in  Sodom,  and  then  be
fit  to  go  out  of  it  under  God's  convoy. —
The  Chridian  Commonioealth.

New  masters :  Tyranny  not  perma-
nent. By  the  volcanic  eruption  among
the  Tonga  group  in  1885,  a  new  island
was  formed.  When  it  was  visited  a
few  years  after,  the  soil  below  the
surface  was  still  hot,  the  temperature
at  a  depth  of  seven  feet  being  100*
Fahr.,  while  at  the  surface  it  was  only
74".  With  the  exception  of  two  young
cocoa-nut  trees,  which  seemed  not  very
hardy,  there  was  no  vegetation  but  a
few  bunches  of  grass,  and  a  moth  and
small  sandpiper  constituted  the  animal
population.  It  is  thought  the  island
will  disappear  in  a  few  years,  as  the
waves  are  rapidly  wearing  the  shore-line
away.  Such  has  been  the  history  of
many  a  vaunted  human  tyranny.  Its
policy  was  inaugurated  with  noise  and
heat,  and  threatened  to  revolutionise
the  existing  order.  But  when  it  had
spent  its  force  and  cooled  down,  it
revealed  its  barrenness,  and,  worn  away
with  the  ever- active  waves  of  time,  it
at  length  disappeared. — The  Scottish
Pulpit.

Sin  a  poison.  What  poison  one  fang
of  the  old  serpent  will  throw  into  our
moral  system  !  Look  around  and  see
how  many  have  been  poisoned  with  the
desire  for  strong  drink,  with  lust,  with
avarice,  with  pride,  with  anger,  with
unbelief.  Fiery  serpents  are  among  us,
and  many  die  of  their  venom.  If  we
tolerate  the  least  sin,  it  is  a  burning  drop
in  the  veins  of  the  soul.  One  touch  of
the  fangs  of  this  serpent  will  work  im-
measurable sorrow,  even  if  the  soul  be
saved  from  death.  It  is  only  the  power
of  God  that  keeps  us  from  being  de-
stroyed by  this  viper.  Had  he  his  will,
he  is  a  s])irit  so  malignant  that  no  heir
of  heaven  would  survive.  O  God,  keep
Thine  own  !  Deliver  us  from  the  evil
one  ! —  G.  II.  Spurgeon.

Sin  defies  law.     A  woman   named

Guerin,  in  a  rage  of  jealousy,  murdered

her  unfaithful  husband.     Going  to  a

villa  where  she  learnt  he  was  living

24


with  another  woman,  she  stood  at  the
door  and  called  his  name.  Hearing
her  voice,  he  went  out  to  speak  to  her,
and  had  scarcely  crossed  the  threshold
when  she  stabbed  him  in  the  abdomen.
He  staggered  back  into  the  house,  and
after  a  few  minutes  crawled  to  the
window  and  said  in  a  feeble  voice,
* '  Kiss  our  child,  for  all  is  over."  The
recital  of  this  incident  in  the  court  in
Paris,  told  as  a  woman  could  tell  it,
and  she  a  principal  actor  in  the  scene,
and  the  evidence  adduced  that  Madame
Guerin  had  borne  an  irreproachable
character  and  was  an  excellent  mother,
so  moved  the  jury  that  they  acquitted
her  without  a  moment's  hesitation,  amid
a  storm  of  applause  from  the  public  in
court.  A  gush  of  sentiment  disarmed
the  rigour  of  the  law  and  choked  the
voice  of  vengeance.  One  wrong  does
not  justify  another.  But  sin  defies
law  and  justice,  and  spreads  con-
fusion wherever  it  reigns. — The  Scottish
Pulpit.

Avoid  the  example  of  the  bad.  I
would  desire  all  young  men  often  to
remember  the  saying  of  Lactantius,
"  He  who  imitates  the  bad  cannot  be
good."  Young  men,  in  these  professing
times,  stand  between  good  and  bad
examples,  as  Hercules  in  his  dream
stood  between  virtue  and  vice,  solicited
by  both.  Choose  you  must  who  to
follow.  Oh,  that  you  were  all  so  wise
as  to  follow  the  best !  Life,  heaven,
happiness,  eternity,  hang  upon  it.

Sad  memories.  A  small  boat  was
picked  up  one  morning  on  the  north
shore  at  Troon.  It  had  the  appearance
of  having  broken  away  from  a  vessel
during  a  great  gale  in  the  Clyde.  It  is
a  dangerous  moment  when  a  young  man
breaks  away  from  the  happy  associa-
tions of  his  early  life,  whether  in  church
or  home.  Chafing  under  restraint,  he
plunges  heedlessly  into  the  wide  world
in  search  of  a  larger  liberty.  Unac-
customed to  self-control,  he  is  swayed
by  every  varying  current,  drifts  out
to  sea,  and  is  ultimately  picked  up  a
partial  wreck  on  some  far-off  shore.
Then  it  is  that  he  is  tormented  with
painful  memories ;  he  sees  his  folly,  and
laments    his    reckless    severance   from


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  L


the  moral  restrictions  of  a  happier  time.
"It  is  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear
the  yoke  in  his  youth." — The  Scottish
Pulpit

Memory  and  music.  Music  touclies
every  key  of  memory,  and  stirs  all  the
hidden  springs  of  sorrow  and  joy.  We
love  it  for  what  it  makes  us  forget,  and
for  what  it  makes  us  remember.

Beware  of  melancholy.  Never  give
way  to  melancholy ;  resist  it  steadily,
for  the  habit  will  encroach.  A  lady
was  once  given  two-and-twenty  recipes


against  melancholy.  One  was  a  bright
fire,  another  to  remember  all  the  plea^
sant  things  said  to  her,  another  to  keep
a  box  of  plums  on  the  mantelpiece  and
a  kettle  simmering  on  the  hob.  She
thought  this  mere  trifling  at  the  moment,
but  did  in  after  life  discover  how  true
it  is  that  these  little  pleasures  often
banish  melancholy  better  than  higher
and  more  exalted  objects,  and  that  no
means  ought  to  be  thought  too  trifling
which  can  oppose  it  either  in  ourselves
or  others


HOMILETIOS.
The  Terrible  Havoc  of  Sin.

(Verses  8-11.)

I.  In  its  revolting  defilement.  "  Jerusalem  hath  grievously  sinned,  therefore
she  is  removed.  Her  filthiness  is  in  her  skirts"  (vers.  8,  9).  The  expression
"grievously  sinned"  gives  the  idea  of  persistent  continuance  in  wickedness.
This  condition  is  not  reached  all  at  once.  It  began  in  trifling  with  the  first
enticements  to  evil.  The  entrance  to  the  pathway  of  sin  is  gaily  decked  with
flowers,  but  they  are  flowers  that  wither  as  soon  as  they  are  plucked.  It  is  over-
hung with  tempting  fruits,  but  they  are  fruits  that  turn  to  bitter  ashes  between
the  teeth.  It  is  sprinkled  with  subtle  and  delicious  perfumes,  but  they  are  per-
fumes that  distil  the  poison  of  the  deadliest  drug.  The  air  around  palpitates  with
strains  of  bewitching  music,  but  it  is  music  that  lures  its  charmed  victim  down
the  dizzy  slopes  of  irreparable  ruin.  The  allurement  may  be  presented  in  the
shape  of  a  book,  a  picture,  or  a  whispered  word,  that  suggests  more  of  evil  than
it  actually  expresses,  and  the  soul  is  blotted  with  a  moral  stain  that  rivers  of  tears
cannot  wash  away.  Every  act  of  sin  increases  the  defilement,  and  it  becomes
the  more  exposed.

II.  In  sinking  the  soul  to  a  state  of  abject  degradation.  "Therefore  she
came  down  Avonderfully ;  she  had  no  comforter"  (ver.  9).  You  have  seen  the
little  snowflakes  flutter  about  the  railway  track  like  lovely  bits  of  down  shook
from  angelic  wings,  and  you  have  seen  with  what  ease  the  proud  locomotive
scatters  the  fleecy  morsels  in  the  early  stages  of  the  storm  ;  but  the  falling  atoms
increase  with  such  rapidity  and  accumulative  force,  that  the  panting  engine  is  at
length  completely  mastered,  and,  utterly  exhausted,  lies  buried  fathoms  deep
beneath  the  crystal  drift.  So  in  the  early  stages  of  transgression,  the  soul  deems
itself  capable  of  throwing  off  every  little  temptation  that  beguiles,  and,  when  it
is  too  late,  discovers  itself  so  completely  bound  in  their  toils  that  all  efi'orts  to
escape  are  inefi'ectual.  1.  Sin  dishonours  the  soul  in  the  estimation  of  others.
"All  that  honoured  her  despise  her,  because  they  have  seen  her  nakedness"  (ver.
8).  The  first  step  downwards  is  to  sink  in  the  estimation  of  others.  Their
commendation  sustained  us  and  helped  us  to  keep  up  to  a  certain  standard  of
conduct.  Others  may  see  the  tendency  of  our  sins  before  we  see  it  ourselves.
When  others  show  their  disapproval  and  despise  us  for  our  folly,  it  is  time  to
pause  and  reflect.  2.  Sin  dishonours  the  soul  in  its  own  estimation.  "  Yea,  she
sigheth  and  turneth  backward"  (ver.  8).  It  is  a  lower  depth  when  a  man  sinks
in  his  own  estimation,  when  he  cannot  courageously  confront  others,  or  even  face
up  his  better  self.     Sin  saps  the  strength  of  our  manhood.     To  be  conscious  of

26


OHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.

sin  and  ashamed  of  it  are  the  first  hopeful  signs  of  repentance ;  but  if  the  repent-
ance is  not  prompt  and  genuine,  the  soul  is  in  danger  of  becoming  more  thoroughly
demoralised.     Such  a  critical  moment  comes  in  most  men's  lives  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  2).

III.  In  rendering  the  soul  reckless  as  to  consequences.  "  She  remembereth
not  her  last  end  " — had  not  thought  of  the  sure  end  of  her  sins  (ver.  9).  The
down  grade  is  steep,  and  every  step  increases  the  momentum  of  the  terrible
descent.  One  sin  leads  to  another,  and  that  to  another  in  darker  and  deeper
gradations,  until  the  light  of  hope  is  quenched,  and  the  helpless  victim  gropes
about  aimlessly  in  the  ever-deepening  gloom  of  despair.  The  soul  is  now  and
then  haunted  with  the  shadow  of  a  coming  reckoning  day  ;  but  it  seems  a  great
way  off,  and  may  never  come.     The  reckoning  day  does  come.

IV.  In  its  desecration  of  sacred  things  (ver.  lo).  Even  the  Jew  was  pro-
hibited from  entering  the  innermost  sanctuary,  and  now  the  prophet  laments  that
the  heathen  conquerors  force  their  way  into  the  holy  place  and  plunder  Jehovah's
Temple,  that  they  may  adorn  with  its  sacred  vessels  the  shrines  of  their  false
deities.  It  was  desecration  to  enter  the  sanctuary,  and  high  sacrilege  to  rob  it  of
its  "pleasant  things."  Sin  knows  no  respect  of  persons  or  places.  It  obtrudes
with  shameless  effrontery  into  the  holiest  place,  and  is  callous  as  to  the  havoc  it
works.

Y.  In  reducing  a  people  to  distress  and  want,  "  All  her  people  sigh ;  they
seek  bread ;  they  have  given  their  pleasant  things  for  meat  to  relieve  the  soul "
(ver.  11).  Famine  follows  in  the  train  of  war.  A  siege  lasting  a  year  and  a  half
exhausted  the  surrounding  country,  and  the  Chaldean  army  would  have  difficulty
in  supplying  its  own  commissariat.  In  the  hope  that  the  present  scarcity  will
pass  away,  the  people  dispose  of  the  wealth  and  precious  jewels  that  remain  to
them  for  the  merest  trifles  of  food.  Sin  is  the  prolific  cause  of  war,  famine,  and
the  acutest  forms  of  personal  and  national  suffering.  Money  is  valueless  when  it
can  purchase  nothing  in  exchange — it  cannot  prolong  the  life  of  the  starving.
The  best  things  are  capable  of  the  worst  abuse.  The  very  abuse  may  test  the
value.

VI.  Compels  the  soul  to  appeal  to  the  Divine  compassion.  '*0  Lord,
behold  my  affiiction,  for  the  enemy  hath  magnified  himself"  (ver.  9).  "See,  0
Lord,  and  consider,  for  I  am  become  vile."  I  am  despised  -(ver.  11).  It  is  not
our  vileness  that  can  form  a  ground  of  appeal  to  the  Divine  consideration,  but
the  abject  misery  into  which  our  vileness  has  brought  us.  God  does  not  pity  our
sins,  but  He  does  pity  the  distress  they  occasion,  though  that  distress  is  the  direct
result  of  our  obstinate  violation  of  His  laws  and  disregard  of  His  repeated  warn-
ings. Suffering  is  a  severe  teacher.  It  is  a  mercy  when  the  eyes  of  the  sinner
are  at  length  opened,  and,  seeing  that  his  sins  are  the  cause  of  his  trouble,  he
cries  to  God  for  help.  Long  and  patiently  does  God  wait  for  such  a  cry ;  and
then  with  what  gracious  speed  does  He  hasten  to  our  rescue  !

Lessons. — 1.  Sin  demoralises  wherever  it  reigns.  2.  Is  the  occasion  of  un-
speaJcable  suffering.     3.   Can  be  cured  only  hy  Divine  remedies.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.   8.    "  She  sigheth  and    turneth  lusive    in    its   beginning.     2.    Hardens

backward."       Conscious    sin  :     1.     A  the  transgressor  into  reckless    indiffer-

painful  humiliation.      2.   The  first  step  ence.      3.   Is  certain  to  endin  ruin,

in  genuine  repentance.     3.   Should  in-  —  Sin  an  implacable  foe.      I.  Drags

duce  the  soul  to  seek  immediate   de-  down    the   soul   to   comfortless   depths.

liverance.  "  Wherefore  she   came  down    wonder-

Ver.  9.   "She  remembereth  not  her  fully;    she    had    no    comforter."      IL

last  end."     The  course  of  sin :  1.  De-  Exults  over  the  misery  of  its  victims.


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


OHAP.  t.


"The  enemy  hath  magnified  himself."
See  how  proudly  the  foe  deals  with  me
(Geikie).  III.  Convinces  the  soul  that
its  only  resource  is  in  the  Divine  pity.
"0  Lord,  behold  my  affliction."

Yer.  10.  Heathenism  a  moral  obli-
quity. I.  Sees  no  sin  in  theft.  *'The
adversary  hath  spread  out  his  hand
upon  all  her  pleasant  things."  II.  Has
no  scruples  in  desecrating  the  holiest
place.  "  The  heathen  entered  into  her
sanctuary."  III.  Disregards  the  Divine
laws.  "Thou  didst  command  that
they  should  not  ent&r  into  Thy  congre-
gation."

Ver.  11.  The  extremities  of  famine.

I.  A  sorrowful  craving  for  food.  "All
her    peo[)le    sigh  ;    they    seek    bread."

II.  Desperate  efforts  made  to  retain
life.  "To  relieve  the  soul" — to  keep
tliem  alive.  III.  The  dearest  treasures
readily  sacrificed.  "  They  have  given
their  pleasant  things  for  meat."

Illustrations. — Sin  the  danger  of
great  cities.  The  spiritual  destitution
of  London  is  something  appalling.
There  are  10,000  prostitutes — a  pro-
cession a  mile  long,  walking  double  file
— all  somebody's  daugl iters.  There  are
20,000  thieves — two  miles  more  of  that
dread  proc(  ssion,  and  there  are  100,000
uncared  for  children,  making  the  pro-
cession ten  miles  in  length.  These  are
what  John  Bright  called  the  residuum,
and  Dr.  Chalmers  the  lapsed  classes.
In  their  abodes  every  breath  is  poison ;
they  are  so  crowded  together  that
morality  is  impossible.  Such  a  glimpse
of  spiritual  destitution  ought  to  arouse
the  heart,  not  only  of  every  Christian,
but  of  every  patriot.

Sin  stupifies.  Oh,  how  difficult  it  is
to  awake  some  men  to  a  sense  of  danger
or  duty.  Happening  to  be  lounging  in
the  market-place  of  a  little  seaport  town
in  France,  I  saw  with  some  surprise
several  men  in  a  cafe  inhaling  the
fumes  of  opium  through  a  tobacco-pipe.
By-and-by  the  vvife  of  one  of  these  men
called  for  her  husband  to  return  home
in  their  little  market-cart.  But  he,
being  in  a  poisoned  slumber,  was  un-
conscious of  her  existence,  and  oblivious
of  things  about  him.     She  lifted  him


up  and  shook  him,  but  he  would  not
awake  till  the  honied-trance  stupor  was
ended.  So  some  of  us  are  steeped  in
the  opium-lethargy  of  sin,  and  will  not
awake.  It  is  not  that  we  cannot :  we
will  not.

Sin  a  disease.  A  minister  once  met
a  man  in  the  street  who  was  afflicted
with  heart-disease,  and  said  he  could
not  sleep,  and  that  the  doctor  could
do  nothing  for  him.  "  Ah  !  "  said  the
minister,  "  the  worst  form  of  heart-
disease  is  sin.  Yet  people  go  about
with  the  disease ;  they  do  not  know  it,
and  they  sleep  quite  soundly.  Now,  it
is  my  business  to  tell  them  how  matters
stand,  and  to  try  to  disturb  their  sleep,
for  I  can  tell  them  of  a  pliysician  who
can  cure  them.  Have  ycu  been  to
Christ  with  your  sins  1 "  The  man  was
silent,  but  went  away  deeply  impressed.

Sin  and  individuality.  I  remember
as  though  it  were  yesterday  the  moment
when  the  idea  of  individual  identity
dawned  upon  my  boyish  mind.  The
thought  appalled  me,  for  I  had  been
looking  at  a  wretched  little  beggar- boy
with  a  crutch,  a  dirty  face,  and  miser-
able rags  for  garments,  and  it  had  just
occurred  to  me  that  he  was  not  to  him-
self merely  an  unpleasant  object,  to  be
sent  away  out  of  sight  with  some  dole
of  pennies  or  broken  fragments  of  food,
but  just  the  I  that  I  was  to  myself,  as
precious,  as  important;  and  I  grew  cold
from  head  to  foot,  and  felt  as  though  I
must  do  something  to  alter  it  all.  After
all  these  years  the  horror  abides  with
me  yet.  I  do  not  know  whether  others
feel  it  as  keenly,  but  it  is  to  me  worse
than  any  ghost  could  be  to  remember
the  wretched  people  of  the  world — the
prisoners  in  their  cells,  convicts  in  theii
chains,  men  doomed  to  die  upon  the
gallows  at  dawn,  women  who  sell  their
souls  for  bread  or  jewels,  beggars  gnaw-
ing their  crusts  by  the  roadsides,  suf-
ferers whose  every  breath  is  agony,
wives  whose  hearts  are  broken  by  the
cruelty  of  the  husbands  who  were  once
their  lovers,  men  who  are  plotting  mur-
der and  men  who  are  committing  it,
lepers  in  the  cities  of  lepers  holding  out
their  mouldering  hands  for  alms  as
strangers   flee  by  their  gates.     To  re-

27


CHAP.  I.


ffOMJLETlC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


member  these,  and  many,  many  more,
wicked  or  accursed,  crushed  beneath
loads  of  crime  and  sorrow  too  heavy  to
be  borne,  and  to  know  when  we  clasp
our  hands  or  drop  a  tear,  and  say  with
a  shudder,  as  we  sometimes  do,  "And
it  might  have  been  I :  that  it  actually
is  I  to  some  one  ! "  It  is  a  terrible
thouglit,  and  yet  we  should  not  set  it
aside.  Surely  nothing  could  prompt  us
so  strongly  to  do  all  we  can  for  those
who  sin  or  suffer.

Sin  a  double  defect.  The  verb  used
oftenest  in  the  New  Testament,  sin,
means  literally  to  miss  the  mark.  The
corresponding  nouns  have,  of  course,
similar  meanings.  The  idea  conveyed
is  deviation  from  a  standard  at  which
men  ought  to  aim,  and  which  they  ought
to  reach.  They  may  miss  it  by  going
beyond,  as  well  as  by  falling  short.  The
moral  idea  is  the  same  as  that  of  omis-
sion and  transgression. — The  Scottish
Pulpit.

The  course  of  sin.

"  We  are  not  worst  at  once.     The  course  of

evil

Begins  so  slowly  and  from  such  slight  source,

An  infant's  hand  might  stem  its  breach  with
clay  ;

But  let  the  stream  get  deeper,  and  philo-
sophy shall  strive  in  vain

To  turn  the  headlong  current."

Sin  a  foe,  but  not  invincible.     It  is

said  that  the  late  Lord  Ampthill,  when
on  diplomatic  service  in  Rome,  possessed
a  boa-constrictor,  and  interested  him-
self in  watching  its  habits.  One  day
the  monster  escaped  from  the  box  where
he  supposed  it  was  asleep,  quietly
wound  itself  around  his  body,  and  be-
gan gradually  to  tighten  its  folds.  His
position  became  extremely  perilous ;
but  the  consummate  coolness  and  self-
possession  which  had  enabled  him  to
win  many  a  diplomatic  triumph  be-
friended him  in  this  dangerous  emer-
gency. He  remembered  there  was  a
bone  in  the  throat  of  the  serpent  which,
if  he  could  find  and  break,  he  would
Bave  himself.  He  was  aware  that  either
he  or  the  snake  must  perish.  Not  a
moment  must  be  lost  in  hesitation.  He
deliberately  seized  the  head  of  the  ser-
pent, thrust  his  hand  down  its  throat,
28


and  smashed  the  vital  bone.  The  coils
were  relaxed,  the  victim  fell  dead  at
his  feet,  and  he  was  free !  So  in  all
wickedness  there  is  weakness,  and  it  is
a  grand  thing  to  discern  the  vulnerable
spot,  and  be  ready  with  the  exact  truth,
fact,  or  promise  which  deals  death  to
the  foe.  This  insight  and  power  are
given  to  all  who  prayerfully  study  God's
Word.

Heathen  worship  a  performance.
Marcus  Varro,  the  great  Roman  anti-
quarian, wrote  forty-one  books  on  the
Pagan  cultus.  He  speaks  of  three
orders  of  gods — the  certain  gods,  the
uncertain  gods,  and  the  chief  and  select
gods.  Referring  to  the  worship  offered
to  these  various  deities,  he  arranges  iiis
material  under  four  divisions — who  per-
form, where  they  perform,  when  they
perform,  what  they  perform.  How
true  it  is  that,  apart  from  genuine
spiritual  religion,  all  worship,  and  espe-
cially heathen  worship,  is  but  a  scenic,
pantomimic  performance!

Light  for  heathen  darkness.  The
simile  "dark  as  a  coal-pit"  will  soon
lose  its  meaning  and  become  obsolete.
A  colliery  company  has  abolished  the
miner's  lamp  and  lit  up  one  of  their
pits  with  electric  lamps,  placed  at  inter-
vals of  fifteen  yards  apart.  Indeed,  the
depths  of  earth  and  sea  are  now  to  be
illuminated.  One  of  the  difficulties  of
the  deep-sea  diver  has  been  the  com-
parative darkness  in  which  he  has  had
to  go  about  his  work  at  the  bottom
of  the  ocean.  Now  a  French  engineer
has  constructed  a  lamp,  supplied  with
petroleum,  which  burns  as  well  under
water  as  in  the  open  air.  By  an  in-
genious contrivance  it  can  be  lighted  at
the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  with  the  aid
of  its  friendly  light  the  diver  is  enabled
to  discover  his  greatest  treasures.  So
the  earnest  missionary  penetrates  the
dark  depths  of  heathenism,  holding  the
lamp  of  Divine  truth,  flaming  with  the
burning  love  of  the  world's  Redeemer,
and  picks  up  the  most  degraded  victims
of  idolatry,  who,  penetrated  and  refined
by  the  same  Divine  light  that  first  found
them  out,  shall  shine  with  the  lustre  of
the  finest  jewels. — The  Scottish  Pulpit.

The  horrors  of  famine.  The  beeieged


HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  OHAP.  L


city  of  Leyden  was  at   its   last  gasp.  living  herb  was  converted  into  human

Bread,   malt-cake,  horse-flesh,  had  en-  food,   but  these    expedients  could  not

tirely  disappeared ;  dogs,  cats,  rats,  and  avert  starvation.     The  daily  mortality

other  vermin  were   esteemed  luxuries.  was  frightful — infants  starved  to  death

A  small  number  of  cows,  kept  as  long  on  the  maternal  breasts  which  famine

as  possible  for  their  milk,  still  remained  ;  had    parched    and    withered,    mothers

but  a  few  w6re  killed  from  day  to  day,  dropped  dead  in  the  streets  with  their

and  distributed  in  minute  proportions,  dead   children  in   their  arms.     A  dis-

hardly  sufficient  to  support  life  among  order   called  the   plague,  naturally  en-

the    famishing    population.       Starving  gendered  of  hardship  and  famine,  now

wretches    swarmed    daily   around    the  came,  as  if  in  kindness,  to  abridge  the

shambles  where  these  cattle  were  slaugh-  agony   of  the  people.     The    pestilence

tered,  contending  for  any  morsel  which  stalked  at  noonday   through   the   city,

might   fall,    and   eagerly    lapping    the  and  the  doomed   inhabitants  fell  like

blood   as   it   ran  along  the  pavement,  grass  beneath  its  scythe.     From  six  to

while  the  hides,    chopped  and  boiled,  eight  thousand  human  beings  sank  be-

were  greedily  devoured.     Women  and  fore  this  scourge  alone ;  yet  the  people

children  all  day  long  were  seen  search-  resolutely  held  out,   women  and   men

ing  gutters  and  dunghills  for  morsels  of  mutually    encouraging   each    other    to

food  which  they  disputed  fiercely  with  resist  the  entrance  of  their  foreign  foe

the  famishing  dogs.     The  green  leaves  — an  evil  more   horrible   than   pest  or

were   stripped   from    the   trees,    every  famine. — Motley's  "  Dutch  RepuUicJ'*


EOMILETICS,

A  Distressed  Nation.

(Verses  12-17.)

I.  Utters  a  piteous  appeal  for  sympathy.  "  Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that
pass  by  ?  Behold  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow,"  &c.  (ver.
12).  Sorrow  craves  sympathy.  A  crumb,  an  atom,  however  trifling,  is  eagerly
seized  and  fondly  cherished.  It  matters  not  from  what  source  it  comes.  It  is
welcome  from  any  casual  passer-by,  from  anybody,  from  anything.  The  despair-
ing find  comfort  in  a  flower  as  it  gracefully  bends  towards  them  ;  in  the  mute
sympathy  of  a  favourite  dog.  as  it  caressingly  thrusts  its  nose  into  the  limp  hands.
It  is  easy  to  exaggerate  our  troubles  and  imagine  there  is  no  sorrow  like  our  own ;
but  a  wider  knowledge  of  the  world's  ills  helps  us  to  correct  our  magnified  esti-
mate. There  is  only  One — the  world's  Redeemer — whose  sufi'erings  are  unique
and  unparalleled.

II.  Painfully  conscious  of  the  overwhelming  nature  of  its  sufferings  (ver.
13-15).  1.  In  their  fierceness.  "From  above  hath  He  sent  fire  into  my  bones,
and  it  prevaileth  against  them" — subdues  them  (ver.  13).  It  is  no  earthly,  but
heavenly  fire  which  burns  in  the  bones  of  Jerusalem  (SpeaJcer^s  Commentary).
It  is  a  fact  well  estaljlished  in  osteology  that  inflammation  in  the  bones  is  not
only  extremely  painful,  but  dries  them  up  and  renders  them  brittle  and  useless
(Henderson).  2.  All  attempts  to  escape  from  them  are  futile.  "He  hath  spread
a  net  for  my  feet.  He  hath  turned  me  back  :  He  hath  made  me  desolate  and  faint
all  the  day*'  (ver.  13).  Judea,  like  a  hunted  animal,  endeavours  to  escape,  but
finds  every  outlet  blocked  with  nets,  and  recoils  from  them  in  terror,  and  a  sense
of  utter  hopelessness  and  exhaustion.  The  only  thing  to  flee  from  is  sin ;  the
only  refuge  to  flee  to  is  God.  There  is  no  relief  from  sufi'ering  till  we  are  divested
of  the  coils  of  our  sin.  3.  They  are  an  unmistakable  consequence  of  sin.  *'  The
yoke  of  my  transgressions  is  bound  by  His  hand :  they  are  wreathed  and  come
up  upon  my  neck,"  &c.  (ver.  14).     The  metaphor  is  taken  from  agricultural  life.

29


CHAP.:.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


As  the  ploughman  binds  the  yoke  with  cords  so  knotted  and  twined  together  that
they  form  a  bunch  upon  the  neck  of  the  oxen  impossible  to  shake  off,  so  does
God  compel  Judah  to  bear  the  punishment  of  her  sins.  The  yoke  thus  imposed
by  the  hand  of  God,  and  securely  knotted  around  the  neck  of  Judah  by  the
entangled  bonds  of  her  own  sins,  bows  down  her  strength  by  its  weight,  and
makes  her  totter  and  stumble  beneath  it.  "  He  hath  made  my  strength  to  fall "
— to  stumble  {Speaker's  Commentary).  Sin  by  and  by  becomes  an  intolerable
burden,  and  is  constantly  reasserting  its  power  over  us.  There  is  a  lake  in
Switzerland,  shut  in  by  high  mountains,  a  solitary,  lonely  place,  which  few
travellers  visit,  and  where  few  care  to  linger,  so  desolate  and  homeless  is  the  spot.
Here,  an  old  legend  says,  every  night  at  midnight  the  watcher  may  see  the  ghost
of  Pilate  come  to  the  shore  and  try  with  piteous  lamentations  to  wash  from  his
hands  some  red  stains  that  are  upon  them — the  marks  of  the  blood  of  Jesus.  But
as  fast  as  he  washes  them  off  they  reappear.  So  is  it  with  all  our  sins,  small  and
great.  4.  They  are  an  evidence  of  contemptuous  and  crushing  defeat.  "  The
Lord  hath  trodden  under  foot  all  my  mighty  men  in  the  midst  of  me,"  &c.  (ver.
15).  Tliey  had  not  fallen  gloriously  in  the  battlefield,  but  remained  ignominiously
in  the  city,  confessing  their  inability  to  fight.  Irving  once  said,  "  With  every
exertion,  the  best  of  men  can  do  but  a  moderate  amount  of  good,  but  it  seems  in
the  power  of  the  most  contemptible  individual  to  do  incalculable  mischief."  The
governor-general  of  a  Russian  province  was  once  mildly  remonstrated  with  by  his
secretary  regarding  a  high-handed  proceeding,  producing  at  the  same  time  a  para-
graph from  a  state  volume  proving  the  illegality  of  the  action.  The  angry  governor
seized  the  book  and  sat  upon  it,  shouting,  "  Where  is  the  law  now  ^ "  He  then
pointed  to  his  decorated  breast,  and  continued  in  a  pompous  strain,  "  Here  it  is ;
I  am  the  law  ! "  and  the  secretary  had  to  beat  a  prudent  retreat.  It  is  very
humiliating  to  be  in  the  grip  of  tyranny  like  this.

III.  The  most  passionate  expression  of  sorrow  brings  no  relief.  "  For  these
things  I  weep,  &c.  Zion  spreadeth  forth  her  hands,  and  there  is  none  to  comfort
her,"  &c.  (vers.  16,  17).  Spreading  out  the  hands  is  a  token  of  the  deepest  dis-
tress. There  is  no  one  to  comfort — not  God,  for  He  is  chastening ;  nor  man,  for
all  the  neighbouring  nations  have  become  enemies  (ver.  2).  Tears  are  a  sign  of
weakness  and  helplessness.  To  give  way  to  grief  is  not  the  way  to  conquer  it.
God  is  the  only  refuge  in  distress,  and  His  help,  if  sincerely  sought,  is  not  in  vain.
The  common  cry  of  the  Breton  mariner  is,  "My  God,  protect  me !  my  bark  is  so
small  and  Thy  ocean  so  vast."

**  I  am  so  weak,  dear  Lord,  I  cannot  stand

One  moment  without  Thee  :
But  oh  !  the  tenderness  of  Thine  enfolding: ;
And  oh  !  the  faithfulness  of  Thine  upholding;
And  oh  1  the  strength  of  Thy  right  hand ;

That  strength  is  enough  for  me.

I  am  so  needy,  Lord,  and  yet  I  know

All  fulness  dwells  in  Thee  ;
And  hour  by  hour  that  never-failing  treasure
Supplies  and  fills,  in  overflowing  measure,
My  least,  my  greatest  need  ;  and  so

Thy  grace  is  enough  for  me."

\

Lessons. — 1.  It  is  painful  to  ivitness  distress  we  are  helpless  to  relieve.  2.
National  distress  is  the  fruit  of  national  crime.  3.  National  suffering  should
purify  the  national  life.

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.     12.     The    sufferings    of    the      classesof  the  human  family.     2.  Unique
world's   Redeemer:    1.  Appeal  to  all      in   their   character   and    purpose.      3.
,30


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  I.


Aggravated  by  the  mysterious  manifes-
tation of  the  Divine  wrath.  4.  The
basis  of  the  world's  salvation,  5.
Should  arrest  the  attention  and  engage
the  prayerful  thought  of  the  sinner.

—  Is  it  nothing  to  you  ?  I.  The
sufferings  of  Christ  upon  the  Cross  were
unparalleled.  1.  Because  of  the  dignity
of  His  person.  2.  Because  of  the  per-
fect innocence  of  His  character.  3.
Because  there  was  such  a  conjunction
of  griefs.  4.  Because  they  were  volun-
tarily undertaken  and  continued  in.  5.
Because  those  for  whom  He  died  thus
voluntarily  were  His  enemies.  6.  Be-
cause tliey  were  expiatory.  II.  TJte
sufferings  of  Christ  have  had  a  deep
interest  in  them  for  many.  1.  Mul-
titudes have  found  in  them  a  cure
for  despair.  2.  In  others  they  have
wrought  a  complete  transformation  of
their  lives.  3.  Had  power  on  men's
minds  to  gird  them  to  heroic  deeds.  4.
Men  who  love  the  suffering  Saviour  be-
come patient  in  their  every-day  suffer-
ings. 5.  They  learn  to  hate  sin  by
seeing  the  agonies  by  which  redemption
was  obtained.  III.  What  have  you
to  do  with  Christ  ?  Write  down  your
decision  whether  you  will  have  Christ
or  not.  A  poor,  suffering  girl,  who  had
long  loved  the  Saviour,  under  a  feeling
of  depression,  confessed  to  her  minister
that  she  had  deceived  herself,  and  did
not  love  Him.  The  minister  walked
to  the  window  and  wrote  on  a  piece  of
paper,  "  I  do  not  love  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ,"  and  said,  "Susan,  here  is  a
pencil.  Just  put  your  name  to  that."
"No,  sir,"  she  said,  "I  could  not  sign
that."  "Why  not?"  "I  would  be
torn  to  pieces  before  I  would  sign  it,
sir."  "But  why  not  sign  it  if  it  is
true?"  "Ah!  sir,"  she  said,  "I  hope
it  is  not  true.  I  think  I  do  love  Him." —
C.  H.  Spurgeon.

—  Our  duty  towards  the  Jewish
people.  I.  The  facts  on  ivhich  the  appeal
is  founded.  The  unparalleled  sorrow  and
sufferings  of  the  Jewish  people.  Where
is  the  nation  that  has  been  subject  to
such  universal  contempt  ?  All  mankind
seems  to  have  conspired  to  despise  the
Jews.  They  seem  under  the  curse  of
Heaven.     II.  The  appeal  itself.     "  Is  it


nothing  to  you?"  That  the  world
should  pass  by  we  cannot  wonder.
That  the  heathen  or  Mohammedan
should  neglect  the  Jew  can  excite  no
surprise.  That  the  mere  self-loving
nominal  Christian  should  heed  him  not,
is  all  natural ;  but  that  the  follower  of
Christ  should  pass  by  may  well  excite
astonishment.  It  is  an  error  to  suppose
we  need  not  care  to  labour  among  the
Jews  because  the  Gospel  is  a  Gentile
dispensation,  and  that  the  Jews  are
shut  out  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles
be  come  in.  The  Gospel  is  as  much  a
Jewish  dispensation  as  was  the  Law.
To  them  it  was  promised ;  to  them  it
was  given.  By  them  it  was  proclaimed
to  the  Gentiles,  and  theirs  it  still  is.
Zeal  for  the  honour  of  Christ  should
lead  us  to  direct  our  first  endeavours  to
the  Jewish  people. — M'Caul.

Ver.  13.  Divine  punishment.  I.
Marked  by  great  severity.  "  From
above  hath  He  sent  fire  into  my  bones,
and  it  prevaileth  against  them."  II.
Admits  of  no  escape  from  its  toils.  "  He
hath  spread  a  net  for  my  feet ;  He  hath
turned  me  back."  III.  Thoroughly
subdues  the  sufferer.  "  He  hath  made
me  desolate  and  faint  all  the  day."

Ver.  14.  The  galling  tyranny  of
sin.  I.  Oppressive.  "  The  yoke  of  my
transgressions  is  bound  by  His  hand;
they  are  wreathed  and  come  up  upon
my  neck."  II.  Exhausting.  "  He
hath  made  my  strength  to  fall."  III.
Reduces  the  soul  to  helplessness.  "The
Lord  hath  delivered  me  into  their
hands,  from  whom  I  am  not  able  to
rise  up."

—  The  misery  of  the  penitent.  1.
When  conscious  of  the  burden  of  sin.
2.  When  realising  his  increasing  help-
lessness. III.  When  abandoned  to
reap  the  consequences  of  his  transgres-
sions. 4.  Can  be  relieved  only  by  the
pitifulness  of  the  Divine  mercy.

Ver.  15.  Inglorious  defeat.  I.  The
veteran  warriors  are  captured  in  the
midst  of  the  city  from  which  they  had
not  courage  to  issue  forth  and  defend.
"  Tiie  Lord  hath  trodden  under  foot  all
my  mighty  men  in  the  midst  of  me."
11.  The  combinations  of  the  foe  were  too
powerful  for  the  bravery  of  the  young  to

31


CHAP.  I.


nOMJ  LET  TO  CO  MM  ENTARY :  LA  ME  NT  A  TIO  NS.


resist.  "  He  hath  called  an  assembly
against  me  to  crush  my  young  men."
III.  The  defeat  of  the  nation  is  abject
and  complete.  "The  Lord  hath  trodden
the  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Judah,  as
in  a  wine -press."

Vers.  16,  17.  The  helplessness  of
despair.  I.  Tears  and  entreaties  are
in  vain.  "  For  these  things  I  weep ;
mine  eye,  mine  eye  runneth  down  with
water.  Zion  spreadeth  forth  her  hands,
and  there  is  none  to  comfort  her  "  (vers.
16,  17).  II.  Sin  debases  a  people  in
the  estimation  of  God  and  man.  "  Jeru-
salem is  as  a  menstruous  woman  " — hath
become  a  loathing — "among  them"
(ver.  17).  III.  There  is  no  hope  of  escape.
"  My  children  are  desolate  because  the
enemy  prevailed"  (ver.  16).  "The
Lord  hath  commanded  concerning
Jacob  that  his  adversaries  should  be
round  about  him"  (ver.  17).

Illustrations.  —  A  distressed  na-
tion: the  havoc  of  war.  When  the
French  army  invaded  Russia  in  1812,
and  penetrated  as  far  as  Moscow,  Count
Rostopchin,  the  governor,  thinking  it
more  glorious  to  destroy  the  ancient
capital  of  the  Czars  than  suffer  it  to
harbour  and  protect  an  enemy,  caused
it  to  be  burned  to  the  ground.  The
most  heartrending  scenes  were  wit-
nessed. The  people,  hastily  snatching
up  their  most  precious  effects,  fled  be-
fore the  flames.  Others,  actuated  by
the  general  feelings  of  nature,  saved
only  their  parents  or  their  infants,  who
were  closely  clasped  in  their  arms.
They  were  followed  by  their  other
children,  running  as  fast  as  their  little
strength  would  permit,  and,  with  all  the
wildness  of  childish  terror,  vociferating
the  beloved  name  of  mother !  The  old
people,  borne  down  by  grief  more  than
by  age,  had  not  sufficient  power  to
follow  their  families,  and  expired  near
the  houses  in  which  they  were  born.
No  cry,  no  complaint  was  heard.  Both
the  conqueror  and  the  conquered  were
equally  hardened.  The  fire,  whose
ravages  could  not  be  restrained,  soon
reached  the  finest  parts  of  the  city.
The  palaces  were  enveloped  in  flames.
Their  magnificent  fronts,  ornamented
32


with  bas-reliefs  and  statues,  fell  with  a
dreadful  crash.  The  churches,  with
their  steeples  resplendent  with  gold  and
silver,  were  destroyed.  The  hospitals,
containing  more  than  12,000  wounded,
began  to  burn,  and  almost  all  the  in-
mates perished.  A  few  who  still  lin-
gered were  seen  crawling  half  burnt
amongst  the  smoking  ruins,  and  others,
groaning  under  heaps  of  dead  bodies,
endeavoured  in  vain  to  extricate  them-
selves from  the  horrible  destruction
which  surrounded  them.  From  what-
ever side  viewed,  nothing  was  seen  but
ruin  and  flames.  The  fire  raged  as  if
it  were  fanned  by  some  invisible  power.
The  most  extensive  range  of  buildings
seemed  to  kindle,  to  burn,  and  to  dis-
appear in  an  instant.  The  wild  pil-
lagers precipitated  themselves  into  the
midst  of  the  flames.  They  waded  in
blood,  treading  on  dead  bodies  without
remorse,  while  the  burning  ruins  fell
on  their  murderous  hands.  The  signal
patriotism  of  sacrificing  the  city  in  order
to  subdue  the  enemy  actuated  all  ranks.

Affliction  reveals  our  sins.  So  long
as  leaves  are  on  the  trees  and  bushes,
you  cannot  see  the  bird's  nests ;  but  in
the  winter,  when  all  the  leaves  are  off,
then  you  see  them  plainly.  And  so
long  as  men  are  in  prosperity  and  have
their  leaves  on,  they  do  not  see  what
nests  of  sin  and  lust  are  in  their  hearts
and  fives ;  but  when  all  their  leaves  are
off,  in  the  day  of  their  afflictions,  then
they  see  them,  and  say,  "  I  did  not
think  I  had  had  such  nests  of  sins  and
lusts  in  my  soul  and  life." — Bridge.

Whose  sorrows  are  like  unto  mine  ?
O  thou  erring  mortal,  repine  not.  Our
Father  has  some  great  and  wise  purpose
in  thus  afflicting  thee,  and  wilt  thou
dare  murmur  against  Him  when  He
removed  the  idol  that  He  alone  may
reign  ?  Pause  and  reflect.  Examine
well  thy  conscience,  and  see  if  there
were  not  earthly  attractions  clinging  to
thy  soul  and  leading  thee  to  forget  the
Creator  in  thy  love  for  the  creature.
Raise  not  thy  feeble  voice  against  the
Most  High,  lest  He  send  upon  thee  a
still  greater  trial  in  order  to  teach  thee
submission.  Behold  His  noble  example
when   persecuted   by   a   whole   world.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  I.


Imagine  Him,  tlie  God  of  the  universe,
standing  before  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin,
condemned,  butfeted,  spit  upon  !  One
blazing  look  of  wrathful  indignation
would  have  annihilated  that  rude
rabble  ;  but,  with  all  the  beauty  and
grace  of  self-abnegation,  He  bowed  His
head  and  prayed,  "  Father,  forgive
them  ;  they  know  not  what  they  do."
Wouldst  thou  find  relief  for  tliy  suffer-
ings? Contemplate  the  life  of  Him
who  spake  as  never  man  spake.  Fol-
low Him  through  all  those  years  of  toil
and  suffering.  Witness  His  deeds  of
mercy  and  love,  and  then — go  thou  and
do  likewise. — German  Reformed  Mes-
senger.

Self-sacrifice.  An  extraordinary  ex-
ample of  self-sacrifice  was  witnessed  at
Chicago.  A  member  of  the  brother-
hood of  Knight-Templars  was  operated
upon  for  cancer,  and  a  wound  nearly  a
foot  square  was  left.  The  surgeon  de-
clared that  if  the  patient  was  to  recover,
the  wound  must  be  covered  with  new
human  skin.  At  once  132  members  of
the  brotherhood  volunteered  to  allow  a
small  strip  of  skin  to  be  cut  from  their
arms,  so  that  the  pieces  thus  obtained
might  be  transferred  to  the  wound  of
their  comrade.  The  operation  was  per-
formed. Several  of  the  brave  fellows
fainted,  but  the  majority  bore  the  in-
cision of  the  surgeon's  knife  without
flinching.  It  is  inspiriting  to  hear  of
such  heroic  self-sacrifice.  Much  of  the
su fieri ng  of  the  Christian  worker  is
vicarious ;  but  no  number  of  acts  of
suffering  on  behalf  of  others  can  equal
the  sublime  sacrifice  of  Him  who
suffered  and  died  for  the  whole  race.— ^
The  Scottish  Pulpit.

Divine  punishment  and  pessimism.
Noah  was  a  pessimist  to  the  antedilu-
vian world ;  Moses  was  a  pessimist  to
Pharaoh  in  Egypt ;  Samuel  was  a  pes-
simist, and  his  very  first  prediction
foretold  the  downfall  of  the  aged  Eli
and  his  godless  family.  Jeremiah  was
a  pessimist,  constantly  foretelling  evil
and  danger ;  Jonah  was  a  pessimist,  who
disturbed  the  peace  of  the  city,  crying,
"Yet  forty  days  and  Nineveh  shall  be
overthrown."  Nahum  was  a  pessimist,
crying,  "  Woe  to  the  bloody  city ! "
33


Micaiah  was  a  pessimist  when  he  fore-
told the  overthrow  of  Ahab,  the  guilty
king,  who  complained  that  he  never  pro-
phesied any  good  of  him.  The  Saviour
was  a  pessimist,  for  He  foretold  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  cala-
mities that  were  to  come  upon  the
world.  The  Apostles  Peter,  James,
John,  Jude  were  all  pessimists,  for  they
were  continually  foretelling  perilous
times,  departure  from  the  faith,  and
the  coming  judgment  upon  the  godless
world.  The  great  preachers  and  poets
of  the  ages  have  been  pessimists,  for
they  were  ever  warning  men  of  present
evil  and  coming  wrath,  of  predicted
calamities  and  judgments  overhanging
the  godless  and  profane.  —  Christian
RepositorT/.
Sin  a  slavery.

"  There  is  a  bondage  which  is  worse  to  bear
Than  his  who  breathes,  by  roof  and  floor

and  wall
Pent  in,  a  tyrant's  solitary  thrall :
'Tis  his  who  walks  about  in  the  open  air,
One  of  a  nation  who  henceforth  must  wear
Their  fetters  in  their  souls."

—  Wordsworth.

Discovery  of  the  destructive  work
of  sin.  The  steeple  of  the  Church  of
St.  Bride,  London,  originally  built  by
Christopher  Wren,  was  struck  by  light-
ning in  1764,  and  the  upper  part  had
to  be  rebuilt,  when  it  was  lowered  eight
feet.  It  was  then  discovered  that  an
old  hawk  had  inhabited  the  two  upper
circles,  the  open  arcades  of  which  were
filled  with  masses  of  birds'  bones,  chiefly
those  of  the  city  pigeons  upon  which  it
had  preyed.  It  would  be  well  if  more
frequent  discovery  could  be  made  of
those  wily  hawks  of  society  who  prey
with  such  merciless  and  ingenious  greed
upon  the  simple  and  unsuspecting.
Their  discovery  is  all  the  more  difficult
when  they  make  the  Church  of  Christ
their  hiding-place,  and  the  clean-picked
relics  of  their  numerous  victims  are  all
the  more  sad  to  contemplate  when  one
at  length  finds  out  that  the  work  of
plunder  has  been  carried  on  under  the
sacred  garb  of  religion.

The  misery  of  the  penitent;  how
cured.  Eive  persons  were  studying
what  were  the  best  means  for  mortifying

c


CflAP.  t.


tlOMlLEfTC  COMMENTARt:  LAMENTATIONS.


sin.  One  said,  to  meditate  on  death  ;
the  second,  to  meditate  on  judg-
ment ;  the  third,  to  meditate  on  the
joys  of  heaven  ;  the  fourth,  to  medi-
tate on  the  torments  of  hell ;  the  fifth,
to  meditate  on  the  blood  and  suffer-
ings of  Christ;  and  certainly  the  last
is  the  choicest  and  strongest  motive
of  all.  If  ever  we  would  cast  off  our
despairing  thoughts,  we  must  dwell  and
muse  much  upon  and  apply  this  precious
blood  to  our  own  souls ;  so  shall  sorrow
and  mourning  flee  slw ay.— ^Brooks.

Remorse.  Remorse  may  disturb  the
slumbers  of  a  man  who  is  dabbling  with
his  first  experiences  of  wrong;  and
when  the  pleasure  has  been  tasted  and
is  gone,  and  nothing  is  left  of  the  crime
but  the  ruin  which  it  has  wrought,  then
the  Furies  take  their  seats  upon  the
midnight  pillow.  But  the  meridian  of
evil  is  for  the  most  part  left  unvexed ;
and  when  a  man  has  chosen  his  road,
he  is  left  alone  to  follow  it  to  the  end.
— Froude.

Inglorious  defeat — The  retreat  from
Moscow.  The  annals  of  ancient  and
modern  warfare,  in  the  vast  catalogue
of  woes  which  they  record,  do  not  pre-
sent a  parallel  to  the  sufferings  of  the
French  on  the  retreat  from  Moscow —
sufferings  neither  cheered  by  hope  nor
mitigated  by  the  slightest  relief.  The
army  in  its  retreat  had  to  encamp  on
the  bare  snow  in  the  midst  of  the
severest  winter  that  even  Russia  ever
experienced.  The  soldiers,  without
shoes  and  almost  without  clothes,  were
enfeebled  by  fatigue  and  famine.  Sit-
ting on  their  knapsacks,  the  cold  buried
some  in  a  temporary,  but  more  in  an
eternal  sleep.  Those  who  were  able  to
rise  from  this  benumbing  posture,  only
did  it  to  broil  some  slices  of  horse-flesh,
perhaps  cut  from  their  favourite  charger,
or  to  melt  a  few  morsels  of  ice.  In  the
march  it  was  impossible  to  keep  them
in  order,  as  imperious  hunger  seduced
them  from  their  colours,  and  threw  their
columns  into  confusion.  Many  of  the
French  women  accompanied  the  army
on  foot,  with  shoes  of  stuff  little  calcu-
lated to  defend  them  from  the  frozen
enow,  and  clad  in  old  robes  of  silk  or
the  thinnest  muslin;  and  they  were
34


glad  to  cover  themselves  with  tattered
pieces  of  military  cloaks,  torn  from  the
dead  bodies  of  the  soldiers.  The  cold
was  so  severe  that  men  were  frozen  to
death  in  the  ranks,  and  at  every  step
were  seen  the  dead  bodies  of  the  soldiers
stretched  on  the  snow.  Of  four  hundred
thousand  warriors  who  had  crossed  the
Niemen  at  the  opening  of  the  campaign,
scarcely  twenty  thousand  repa?sed  it.
Such  was  the  dreadful  havoc  which  a
Russian  winter  caused  to  the  finest,
best-appointed,  and  most  powerful  army
that  ever  took  the  field.

Christianity  addresses  the  despair-
ing. Throughout  all  the  ages  which
have  followed  Christ's  word,  Christ's
message  has  rung  in  with  power  upon
men's  lives  just  in  proportion  to  their
dejection  and  despair.  One  of  the
earliest  attacks  upon  Christianity  was
the  censure  that  it  was  a  word  to  the
miserable.  Such  indeed  it  is.  If  it
is  censurable  to  move  among  men  when
they  are  dispirited,  when  they  have
come  to  the  end  of  a  civilisation,  when
nothing  but  blank  hopelessness  and
no  remedy  lies  in  front  of  them,  then
Christianity  is  censurable,  Christ's  mes-
sage is  open  to  reproach.  If  that  be
a  fault,  it  is  not  faultless.  It  stands
condemned.  If  too  you  deem  it  blame-
worthy to  go  to  the  individual  when  he
has  sinned,  when  he  has  flung  away  his
life  madly,  wickedly,  passionately,  to
stand  beside  him,  nay,  to  bend  over
him  with  affectionate  interest,  when  he
is  lying  ragged,  beaten,  hungry,  and
filthy  in  the  far  country  into  which  he
has  gone,  then  neither  Christianity  nor
Christ  can  escape  your  blame.  They
stand  convicted  of  the  crime  of  re-
ceiving sinners  and  eating  with  them,
of  laying  their  hands  on  lepers  who
are  unclean,  of  seeking  the  society  of
the  demented  and  insane. — Rev.  H,
Itoss.

Crying  to  God.  Several  children  of
a  family  were  once  playing  in  a  garden
when  one  fell  into  a  tank.  When  the
fatlier  heard  of  it,  he  asked  what  means
they  thouglit  of  to  rescue  their  brother
from  his  perilous  situation.  Inquiring
of  the  youngest,  he  said,  "John,  what
did  you  do  to  rescue  your  brother  I**


nOMJLEftC  COMMESfAllY:  LAMEl^TATtONS.  cKap.  t.


The  boy  answered,  "Father,  what  cried  as  loud  as  T  could."  If  we  cannot
should  I  do?  I  am  so  young  that  I  bring  a  ladder  or  rope,  all  can  cry,  all
could  not  do  anything,  but  I  stood  and      can  plead  with  God.


EOMILETICS,

The  Bitter  Fruits  of  Eebellion.

(Verses  18-22.)

I.  That  rebellion  is  the  violation  of  the  law  of  a  righteous  God.     "The

Lord  is  righteous,  for  I  have  rebelled  against  His  commandment"  (ver.  18).  "I
have  grievously  rebelled "  (ver.  20).  A  man  may  fight  against  God's  will  and
exalt  his  own ;  but  he  cannot  fight  against  the  law  by  which  obedience  brings
peace,  harmony,  and  joy  to  the  soul,  and  disobedience  brings  unrest,  pain,  and
deadness.  All  things  in  God's  universe  proclaim  the  folly  of  the  man  who  thinks
to  oppose  his  will  to  the  Infinite.  He  may  to  some  extent  succeed  in  thwarting
the  Divine  will ;  but  he  cannot  prosper.  What  may  seem  success  will  turn  into
shame  and  rain.  The  violation  of  law  puts  us  out  of  harmony  with  God,  Nature,
and  man.

II.  That  rebellion  is  the  occasion  of  great  national  disasters.  1.  The  young
are  enslaved.  "  My  virgins  and  my  young  men  are  gone  into  captivity  '*  (ver.  18).
There  is  little  hope  for  the  future  of  a  nation  when  its  young  people  are  in
degrading  bondage.  Christianity  has  created  a  just  aj^preciation  of  the  worth  of
young  life.  A  Japanese  woman  once  came  to  a  Christian  lady  in  Japan  with  a
girl-baby  which  had  been  thrown  into  a  ditch  by  its  father,  as  thousands  were,
because  it  was  "  only  a  girl."  In  begging  the  Christian  lady  to  take  care  of  the
naked  child,  covered  with  mud,  the  poor  woman  said,  *'  Please  do  take  little  baby.
Your  God  is  the  only  God  that  teaches  to  be  good  to  little  children."  2.  Friend-
ships are  demoralised.  "  I  called  for  my  lovers,  but  they  deceived  me  "  (ver.  19).
The  confusion  that  springs  out  of  rebellion  is  a  severe  strain  on  the  fidelity  of
professed  friends.  Promises  made  with  the  utmost  solemnity  are  little  regarded.
One  brave  and  truthful  action  tells  more  than  a  million  utterances  of  the  mouth.
Genuine  friendship  is  ever  frank  and  true.  Simplicity  is  not  the  absence  of
intricacy,  but  its  solution.  The  true  friend,  however  much  misunderstood  in  a
time  of  disorder,  comes  out  scatheless.  3.  The  nation  is  ravaged  hy  war,  famine,
and  death.  "  Abroad  the  sword  bereaveth,  at  home  there  is  as  death  "  (ver.  20).
"  My  priests  and  mine  elders  gave  up  the  ghost  in  the  city,  while  they  sought
their  meat  to  relieve  their  souls  "  (ver.  29).  Those  who  should  have  advised  and
comforted  the  people  were  disabled  by  starvation,  or  were  lying  dead  among  the
slain.  4.  The  sufferings  of  the  people  are  distressingly  acute.  "  I  am  in  distress ;
my  bowels  are  troubled  ;  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me  "  (ver.  20).  My  heart
is  so  violently  agitated  that  it  seems  to  have  changed  its  position — to  be  over-
turned. It  is  difficult  to  conceive  words  that  could  more  pathetically  describe
the  extremity  of  grief.  Much  of  our  trouble  is  intensified  by  forebodings  as  to  the
future.  God  gives  us  strength  to  bear  each  day's  burden  as  it  comes.  When  we
stagger  and  fall  because  our  burden  has  become  too  heavy,  it  is  because  we  have
added  of  our  own  accord  something  of  the  future's  weight  to  that  of  the  present.
5.  The  enemies  gloat  over  the  national  troubles.  "  They  have  heard  that  I  sigh  ;
there  is  none  to  comfort  me.  All  mine  enemies  have  heard  of  my  trouble.  They
are  glad  that  thou  hast  done  it"  (ver.  21).  It  is  the  acme  of  cruelty  and  obduracy
of  heart  to  chuckle  over  the  miseries  of  the  fallen.  How  different  is  the  true
Christian  spirit.  Lord  Shaftesbury  earned  the  title  of  "  the  good  Earl "  by  his
philanthropic  endeavours  to  raise  the  most  depraved.  A  costermonger  who  had
been  a  most  notorious  sinner  was  once  asked,  "  What  did  his  Lordship  say  to  you

35


CHAP.  I.


HOMIL  ETTC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  LAMENT  A  TIONS,


tliat  made  you  a  reformed  man?"  "Oh,  he  didn't  say  mncli,"  was  the  reply.
"  He  just  sat  down  by  my  side  and  said,  'Jack,  we  will  make  a  man  of  you  yet.'"
It  was  the  upward  gravitation  of  Christian  manhood  that  helped  Jack,  and  many
like  him.

III.  That  every  nation  that  rebels  against  God  will  he  certainly  punished.
"Thou  wilt  bring  the  day  that  Thou  liast  called,  and  they  shall  be  like  unto  me.
Do  unto  them  as  Thou  hast  done  unto  me,"  &c.  (ver.  21,  22).  The  prophet,  in
terms  that  seem  dictated  by  a  spirit  of  retaliation,  is  but  expressing  in  prophecy
what  actually  happened  in  the  capture  of  Babylon — the  destruction  of  the  Chaldean
empire  and  of  the  neighbouring  states  by  which  the  Jews  had  been  ill-used.  He
also  expressed  the  general  truth,  so  often  exemplified  in  history,  that  the  nations
that  ignore  God  come  to  nought.

Lessons. — 1.  The  greatest  troubles  of  a  nation  are  the  result  of  rebellion.  2.  God
is  not  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  of  a  nation  under  'punishment.  3.  Obedience  to
God  is  the  only  guarantee  of  national  prosperity.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Ver.  18.  "The  Lord  is  righteous,  for
I  have  rebelled  against  His  command-
ment." Divine  justice  :  1.  Is  publicly
acknowledged.  2.  Must  punish  rebel-
lion.    3,  Is  ever  mingled  with  mercy.

—  "  Hear,  I  pray  you,  all  people,  and
behold  my  sorrow."  The  voice  of  sor-
row :  1.  Has  a  lesson  for  all  classes.
2.  Cannot  express  all  that  is  felt.  3.
Excites  sympathy  among  the  most  in-
different. 4.  Should  lead  to  inquiry
as  to  its  cause.

—  *'  My  virgins  and  my  young  men
are  gone  into  captivity."  Young  life  :
1.  The  hope  and  strength  of  a  nation.  2.
Should  be  placed  in  the  most  favourable
circumstances  for  development  and  cul-
ture. 3.  Is  crushed  by  the  degradation
of  slavery.

Ver.  19.  "I  called  for  my  lovers,
but  they  deceived  me."  Human  fickle-
ness :  1.  A  bitter  disappointment  when
shown  by  those  we  love,  and  who  have
professed  to  love  us.  2.  Cannot  bear
the  strain  of  a  great  trial.  Fails  us
when  we  most  need  help.  3.  A  pure,
unselfish,  faithful  affection  a  rarity.  4.
Should  teach  us  to  trust  alone  in  God.

Ver.  20.  Sincere  penitence :  I.
Shown  in  a  frank  and  full  confession  of
tin.  "  I  have  grievously  sinned."  II.
Experiences  the  most  pungent  sorrow  for
sin.  "  I  am  in  distress  :  my  bowels  are
troubled :  mine  heart  is  turned  within
me."  III.  Appeals  to  God  alone  for
mercy.  "  I^hold,  O  Lord."
.30


Ver.  21.  A  spirit  of  enmity:   I.  Is

coldly  indifferent  to  the  troubles  of  others,
though  cognisant  of  them.  "All  mine
enemies    have    heard    of    my   trouble."

II.  Exhibits  a  refinement  of  cruelty  in
rejoicing  over  the  distresses  of  its  victims.
"They   are   glad   thou   hast  done  it.''

III.  Will  meet  with  a  day  of  retribu-
tion. "Thou  wilt  bring  the  day  that
Thou  hast  called,  and  they  shall  be  like
unto  me."

Ver.  22.  The  punishment  of  Judah
a  type  of  the  punishment  of  all  un-
faithful nations.  I.  Their  sins  are
fully  known  to  God.  "Let  all  their
wickedness  come  before  Thee."  II.
They  will  be  punished  according  to  their
actual  sins.  "  Do  unto  them  as  Thou
hast  done  unto  me  for  all  my  trans-
gressions." III.  They  shall  knoiD  what
it  is  to  endure  sorrow  and  exhaustion.
"For  my  sighs  are  many,  and  my  heart
is  faint."

Illustrations.  —  Bebellion  —  Dead
Sea  fruit. — If  Satan  ever  knows  plea-
sure at  all,  it  is  of  the  foulest  and  most
unsatisfactory  kind.  Dust  is  his  meat.
There  is  nothing  satisfying  in  the  plea-
sures of  rebellion.  He  remains  a  dis-
appointed, restless  being.  The  most
cunning  error  which  he  invents  and
sustains  by  philosophy  is  no  more  than
dust.  His  whole  cause,  for  which  he
has  laboured  these  thousands  of  years
witii  a  horrible  perseverance,  will  dis-


HOM I  LET  I C  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  LA  M  ENTA  TIONS.


CHAP.  L


solve  into  dust,  and  be  blown  away  as
smoke.  Still  doth  he  feed  himself  on
dust.  Let  those  who  are  servants  of
Satan  know  assuredly  that  as  they  are
living  in  sin  they  will  have  to  eat  at
their  father's  table  and  learn  the  empti-
ness of  all  the  pleasures  of  sin,  and  the
worthlessness  of  all  the  treasures  of
evil.  Everything  tliat  sin  can  bring
you  is  just  so  much  dust — foul  eating,
insufficient,  clogging,  killing.  Though
you  hoard  up  wealth,  gold  is  nothing
but  dust  to  a  dying  man.  Though  you
gain  all  earthly  honour,  it  too  dissolves
into  dust.  This  is  the  misery  of  that
great  spirit  who  is  called  the  Prince  of
Darkness,  that  he  must  eat  dust  all  his
days.  But  what  misery  it  must  be  to
be  only  some  poor  subject  in  that  unhal-
lowed kingdom,  and  still  to  be  doomed
to  the  same  loathsome  fare !  Dust
siialt  thou  eat  all  the  days  of  thy  life.
Note  that  right  well ;  and  may  God
deliver  you  from  such  feeding  ! — Spur-
geon.

Fomenting  rebellion,  a  ruinous
policy.  The  rebellion  in  the  Nether-
lands had  already  been  an  expensive
matter  to  the  crown.  The  Spanish
army  numbered  more  than  sixty-two
thousand  men.  Forty  millions  of  dol-
lars had  already  been  sunk,  and  it
seemed  probable  that  it  would  require
nearly  the  whole  annual  produce  of  the
American  mines  to  sustain  the  war.
The  Transatlantic  gold  and  silver,  dis-
interred from  the  depths  where  they
had  been  buried  for  acjes,  were  em-
ployed  not  to  expand  the  current  of  a
healthy,  life-giving  commerce,  but  to  be
melted  into  blood.  The  sweat  and  tor-
tures of  the  king's  pagan  subjects  in
the  primeval  forests  of  the  New  World
were  made  subsidiary  to  the  extermina-
tion of  his  Netherland  people  and  the
destruction  of  an  ancient  civilisation.
To  this  end  had  Columbus  discovered  a
hemisphere  for  Castile  and  Aragon,
and  the  new  Indies  revealed  their  hid-
den treasures.  The  military  expenses
alone  of  the  Netherlands  were  more
than  seven  million  dollars  yearly,  and
tiie  nnnes  of  the  New  World  produced
an  annual  average  of  only  eleven.
There  was  not  a  stiver  left  in  the  ex-


chequer, nor  tlie  means  of  raising  one.
Such  was  tlie  condition  to  which  th«
unrelenting  tyranny  and  financial  ex-
periments of  Alva  had  reduced  the
country. — Motley's  ^^ Dutch  Republic"

Sorrow  does  not  regenerate.  On  a
May  day  in  the  French  Revolution  of
1848,  a  wretched-locking  man  was  seen
dragging  himself  along  by  the  help  of
a  stick,  fleeing  fr<>m  the  excited  and
rushing  crowd,  till  he  entered  a  hall  in
the  Louvre,  where  was  an  exquisite
piece  of  sculpture,  the  Venus  of  Milos.
Before  this  statue  the  man  broke  down,
and  bitter  tears  streamed  over  his  face.
That  man  v>as  Heinrich  Heine,  the
scoffing  Israelite.  This  one  moment
disclosed  a  whole  world  of  heartache.
"Deepest  misery,  thy  name  is  Heine  !"
was  the  passionate  cry  that  escaped  his
lips.  The  source  of  this  misery  was
the  pleasure  of  the  world.  The  goddess
before  whom  he  lay  prostrate  entwined
the  poet  with  the  glowing  arms  of  sense.
He  had  sacrificed  all  to  her — body,  soul,
conscience,  reason,  heart,  and  harp.
"  Once,"  he  groaned,  "  I  fancied,  with
Hegel,  I  was  a  god ;  now  I  know  I  am
a  sick,  forgotten  Jew."  Sixteen  years,
filled  with  unexampled  pains,  followed,
but  it  was  only  a  transitory  glance  of
faith  to  which  the  poet  attained.  On
the  whole,  affliction  only  excited  him
to  new  blasphemies. — Otto  Fancke.

Justice  and  mercy.  Terror  is  sub-
servient to  love.  As  a  skilful  painter
fills  the  background  of  his  picture  with
his  darker  colours,  so  God  introduces
the  black  thunder-clouds  of  Sinai  to
give  brighter  prominence  to  Jesus,  the
Cross  of  Calvary,  and  His  love  to  the
chief  of  sinners. — Guthrie.

Youth.  Youth  and  white  paper  take
any  impression.  The  young  are  the
divinely-appointed  heirs  of  the  great
past,  and  the  fathers  of  the  sublime
future.

—  Perhaps  as  the  Creator  looks  down
on  this  world,  whose  wondrous  beauty
beams  on  us  more  and  more  in  propor-
tion as  our  science  would  take  it  from
poetry  into  law,  He  beholds  nothing  so
beautiful  as  the  pure  heart  of  a  simple,
loving  child. — Lytton.

Human  fickleness  a  disappointment.

37


CHAP.  I.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


Astronomers  tell  us  that  temporary  stars
attain  their  maximum  brightness  only
once  and  for  all.  They  burst  into
brilliance  suddenly,  come  to  a  point,
continue  at  that  point  only  for  a  short
time,  and  then  vanish,  either  by  ex-
ploding or  by  coming  into  collision  with
another  body.  It  is  difficult  to  see  the
reason  for  their  existence  at  all,  except
to  show  that  the  steady,  dependable
light  of  the  permanent  star  is  of  more
service  in  the  heavens  than  the  flashing
brilliance  that  dazzles  only  to  confuse
and  mislead.  It  is  dangerous  to  be
star  of  any  kind,  whether  pulpit  star,
political  star,  or  social  star;  but  to  be
a  temporary  star  is  the  most  provoking
and  disappointing  of  all. — The  Scottish
Pulpit.

Human  fickleness  and  its  contrast.
At  a  trial  in  Anglesey  the  heroic  devo-
tion of  a  wife  and  the  base  fickleness
and  savagery  of  a  husband  were  pain-
fully illustrated.  The  prisoner  savod
his  neck  through  the  self-forgetful  de-
votion of  his  wife,  who  sat  at  his  side,
pale  and  suffering,  through  the  trial.  If
it  had  been  known  that  the  third  bullet
fired  from  his  pistol  was  even  then
lodging  in  the  body  of  his  faithful  wife,
nothing  would  have  saved  his  life.  It
was  only  after  the  miserable  man  had
been  convicted  of  murder  in  a  minor
degree  that  did  not  involve  hanging
that  she  applied  to  a  doctor,  confessed
that  her  husband  had  shot  her,  and
that  the  bullet  was  still  in  her  hip.
Who  can  fathom  a  woman's  love  and
'^evotion?  It  is  often  strangely  lavished
'^n  those  who  deserve  it  least. — Ibid.

Penitence  involves  confession  of  sin.
Sometimes  a  prisoner  is  advised  to  plead
not  guilty  because  his  advocate  has  dis-
covered a  flaw  in  the  indictment,  or  a
weak  place  in  the  chain  of  evidence,
and  he  may  get  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.
Not  so  in  the  case  of  the  sinner ;  there
can  be  no  doubt.  The  evidence  is
cumulative.  He  is  caught  red-handed
in  the  act  of  sin.  His  only  hope  for
mercy  is  in  a  full  and  frank  confes-
Bion.

How     enmity     is     manufactured.
"Right  must  right  remain,"  says  the
farmer,  and  goes  to  law  with  his  neigh-
3S


hour  about  a  strip  of  pasture-land  a
quarter  of  a  yard  wide,  and  enmity  and
hatred  exist  between  the  two  families
for  whole  decades,  while  a  thousand
times  the  value  of  the  disputed  strip  is
lost  over  it.  But  no  matter  ;  "  Right
must  right  remain."  Nor  is  it  only
among  farmers,  but  among  all  kinds  of
people  that  such  foolish  and  unhappy
litigation  takes  place,  just  because  no
one  chooses  to  give  way  ;  nay,  not  even
to  submit  to  the  judgment  of  an  um-
pire. "  Right  must  right  remain,"  says
A,  and  passionately  disputes  in  a  large
party  with  B  as  to  whether  the  train

which  ran  two  years  ago  to  H in

the  evening  was  an  ordinary  or  an  ex
press  train ;  and  this  wretched  stub-
bornness in  disputing  about  trifles
destroys  the  sociability  of  men  who
ought  to  have  brought  light  and  salt  to
each  other.  *'  Right  must  right  remain,"
says  this  respectable  man.  He  was
offended  by  the  harsh  words  of  another,
and  has  now  passed  him  coldly  by  for
years.  "He  must  first  apologise,"  he
says,  instead  of  saying,  "  Don't  let  us
please  the  devil  by  hating  one  another ;
here  is  my  hand ;  we  are  brethren  and
heirs  of  one  heaven."  No !  "  Right
must  right  remain." — Otto  Funcke.

Retribution.  The  certainty  that  un-
repentant wickedness  will  be  punished
may  be  argued — 1.  From  the  principle
of  moral  causation.  God  has  established
such  a  connection  between  character
and  condition  that  misery  must  ever
spring  from  sin,  and  blessedness  from
virtue.  Our  present  grows  out  of  the
past,  hence  our  sins  must  find  us  out.
What  we  morally  sowed  yesterday  we
reap  in  experience  to-day,  and  so  on  for
ever.  2.  From  the  operation  of  moral
memory.  Memory  recalls  sins,  places
them  before  the  eye  of  conscience,  and
sets  the  soul  aflame.  3.  From  the
declarations  of  Scripture.  "  The  wicked
shall  not  go  unpunished.  The  wicked
shall  be  turned  into  hell,  with  all  the
nations  that  forget  God."  4.  From  the
history  of  mankind.  Nations  are  an
example  —  the  Antediluvians,  the
Sodomites,  the  Jews.  Individuals  are
an  example. — Moses,  David,  Judas. —
D.  Thomas,  D.D.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  n.

CHAPTEK  II.

The  Punishment  of  National  Sin.

In  this  second  elegy  the  poet  has  his  attention  fixed  on  something  that  is  beyond  Chaldean
and  Jew.  He  sees,  what  the  eyes  of  the  world  do  not  see,  that  the  hand  of  the  invisible  Governor
of  all  nations  is  directing  both  oppressor  and  oppressed,  and  is  at  work  to  show  that  no  force
and  no  victory,  no  disaster  and  no  shame,  were  aimless  happenings.  He  is  to  be  regarded  as
the  real  agent  in  producing  the  various  events  referred  to.  His  righteous  judgments  are  not
deferred  to  a  future  state  :  they  are  issued  in  tliis  life  against  all  unrighteousness  of  men,  and  from
Him  alone  can  relief  and  instruction  be  obtained.  So  throughout  the  song  is  heard  the  refrain
that  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  supreme  over  all  the  forces  of  the  world,  and  over  all  that  those  forces
seem  to  accomplish.  In  face  of  the  great  Babylonian  power,  boastful  of  its  victories  and  material
grandeur,  deeming  itself  at  liberty  to  harry,  enslave,  kill  for  its  own  selfish  interests  ;  in  face
of  his  ruined  city  and  desecrated  Temple,  of  starving  children  and  slaughtered  chiefs,  the  writer
holds  up  the  fact  that  these  are  not  independent  potentates  fixing  their  own  terms  ;  that  they
are  but  messengers  of  the  Lord,  who  doeth  according  to  Bis  will,  in  the  army  of  heaven  and  among
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  and  who  is  preparing  ways  for  the  triumph  of  His  free  mercy  and
unstained  holiness.  "  This  Hebrew  was  saved  from  the  terrible  conclusion  that  the  selfish,  cruel
force,  which  in  his  day  carried  all  before  it,  was  the  highest  power  in  life,  simply  by  believing
righteousness  to  be  more  exalted  still."  (Smith).  Every  nerve  may  tingle  with  pain,  everything
dear  may  be  cut  down,  every  step  onward  may  seem  to  add  another  misery,  but  God's  righteous
and  loving  will  shall  make  all  things  work  together  for  "  the  far-off  divine  "  eventualties  towards
**  which  the  whole  creation  "  is  impelled.

Two  principal  divisions  mark  off  the  poem.  The  first,  ver.  1-10,  describes  the  palpable
effects  of  the  subjugation  on  things  and  persons.  Ascribing  these  to  the  Lord,  he  passes,  in
the  second  section,  to  mournful  utterances  over  the  obvious  desolations — harping,  as  grief  is
prone  to  do,  on  the  same  note — and  concludes  with  a  call  for  prayer  to  the  Lord,  and  the  form
which  that  prayer  would  take  in  such  dire  straits.

(X)  Ver.  1.  The  poet  sees  nature  as  if  it  were  in  commotion.  A  storm-cloud  piles  up  over
Jerusalem,  shrouding  with  its  gloom  even  the  most  commanding  summit.  But  it  is  not  the
swirls  of  an  inanimate  force  which  he  perceives,  nor  yet  the  rush  of  human  passion  in  an  army
of  cruel  men,  it  is  the  Supreme  Ruler  who  hath  His  wai/  in  the  whirhvind,  and  the  storm  of  anger
and  strife,  and  the  clouds  of  disaster  are  the  dust  of  His  feet.  How  doth  the  Lord  in  His  anger ;
anger  is  the  acting  quality  which  impresses  its  aspect  on  the  writer's  mind,  as  is  shown  by  his
frequent  references  to  it — twice  here,  and  in  vers.  3,  6,  21,  22,  cf.  ver.  2  :  cover  with  a  cloud
the  daughtei  of  Zion.  Under  this  expression,  and  the  similar  ones  which  follow,  daughter  of
Judah,  daughter  of  Jerusalem,  is  included  inhabitants  of  all  classes  ;  no  principle  but  that  of
poetic  license  apparently  regulating  the  employment  of  either  name.  The  storm-cloud  has  swept
across  the  land  which  was  called  the  glory  of  all  lands,  and  He  has  cast  down  from  heaven
those  arrow-like  lightnings  which  have  scathed,  discomfited,  and  overthrown  unto  the  earth
the  glory  of  Israel.  The  election  of  Israel  to  be  the  covenant  people  of  the  living  God  had
given  it  a  position  as  high  above  that  of  all  other  peoples  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,
and  this  position  was  represented  by  a  visible  shrine — the  Temple.  It  was  the  holy  and  beauti-
ful house  where  our  fathers  praised  Thee,  and  now  it  was  bu/rned  up  with  fire.  Nor  did  He  recall
any  past  manifestations  of  His  presence  to  stay  His  hand  from  working  :  He  has  not  remem*
bered  His  footstool ;  the  footstool  of  our  God  is  closely  associated  with  the  ark  of  the  covenant
(1  Chron.  xxviii.  2  ;  Ps.  xcix.  1,  5).  The  Cherubim  stood  over  the  cover  of  the  ark.  the  mercy-
seat,  and  as  Ood  sitteth  between  the  Cherubim,  His  feet  would  be  on  the  ark,  yet  He  let  this  holiest
of  holy  things  be  destroyed  in  the  day  of  His  anger — the  day  which  broke  amid  the  sounds  of
Divine  justice  going  to  punish  evil — iAe  r/rm^  c]?a// o/ /e^ora^,  which  Zephaniah  predicted  ...  a
day  of  wrath  ...  a  day  of  wasteness  and  desolation  ...  a  day  of  clouds  and  thick  darkness.
The  poet  "  could  not  have  better  expressed  to  the  people  the  heinousness  of  their  sins  than  by
laying  before  them  this  fact,  that  God  remembered  not  His  footstool  in  the  day  of  His  anger"
(Calvin).

(2)  Ver.  2.  Faint  adumbrations  of  the  concomitants  of  a  storm  still  flit  across  the  field  of
vision.  As  a  sweeping  torrent  the  Lord  has  swallowed  up,  and  has  not  spared,  all  the  habita-
tions of  Jacob,  including  all  sorts  of  country  residences,  and  pasture-lands  where  men  like
Jacob  may  dwell  in  tents  and  feed  flocks  ;  all  unfortified  and  unprotected  places,  as  distinguished
from  fortresses  in  following  parallel  line:  He  has  thrown  down  in  His  wrath  the  strongholds
of  the  daughter  of  Judah  ;  the  whole  military  power  has  gone  under,  also  the  governing  power
he  has  cast  to  the  earth,  thus  making  them  lick  the  dust  and  be  trod  upon  by  passers-by ;  He
has  profaned  the  kingdom,  the  loyal  house,  and  its  princes  :  similarly  it  is  said  (Ps.  Ixxxix.
^9),  Thou  hast  profaned  His  crown  {casting  if]  to  the  ground — the  crown  of  His  anointed,  whom
he  had  ca^t  off  and  rejected  (ver.  3"S).  The  tenor  of  Bible-teaching  is  to  the  effect  that  men  by
sin  affect  the  materials  which  they  use,  and  so  not  only  the  sinners  themselves,  but  their
dwellings,  their  goods,  their  plots  of  ground,  their  munitions,  their  governments,  are  scourged

39


CHAP.  11.  HO  MIL  ETIO  GO  MM  EN  TA  R  Y  :  LA  MENTA  TIONS.


by  the  wrath  of  God,  in  order  to  purify  them  from  the  pollution  which  has  been  infiltrated  into
them  by  human  guilt.

(H)  Ver.  3.  Three  forms  of  disaster  are  specified.  He  has  cut  off  in  fierce  anger  every
horn  of  Israel  :  the  horn  being  used  as  a  symbol  of  strength  or  power,  then  all  that  was  regarded
as  a  strength  to  the  life  of  Israel,  whether  warlike  men  or  arsenals  of  ofiFensive  and  defensive
weapons,  has  perished,  Pcnver  of  resistance  is  removed.  He  has  drawn  back  His  right  hand
from  the  face  of  the  enemy  ;  He  does  not  fluck  it  out  of  His  bosom  to  help  His  people,  and  to
impede  and  rout  the  foes  in  their  attacks.  Aid  is  withheld.  And  He  has  burned  in  Jacob  like
a  blazing  fire,  devouring  round  about :  His  anger,  as  it  were,  kindled  a  conflagration  which
has  consumed  all  it  touched.  Consequent  on  strength  gone  and  help  refused,  there  is  blank
devastation.

(T)  Ver  4.  If  a  human  enemy  has  wreaked  his  vengeance  on  Israel,  the  Lord  Himself  has
turned  to  be  their  enemy,  and  fought  against  them  as  an  armed  man.  He  has  bent  His  bow  as
an  enemy  standing,  [as  to]  His  right  hand,  as  an  adversary.  This  ambiguous  phrase  seems
to  convey  the  idea  that  the  Lord,  like  a  man  of  war ^  had  taken  a  hostile  attitude  and  operation,
so  that  He  has  slain  all  that  was  pleasant  to  the  eye,  everything  esteemed  was  deprived  of
their  qualities  to  please.  On  the  tent  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  He  has  poured  out  as  fire  His
fury.  Jerusalem  as  the  dwelling-place  of  its  inhabitants  has  been  searched  and  scorched  with
the  spirit  of  justice  and  spirit  of  burning.

The  pieceding  highly  metuphorical  expressions  are  suggestive  ;  they  show  that  the  poet  saw,
what  the  men  of  his  day,  what  the  men  of  later  days  have  failed  to  see  aright,  that  the  course
of  human  life  is  ai^low  with  the  devouring  fire  of  the  holiness  of  God.  T'he  light  of  Israel  is  for  a
fire  and  his  Holy  One  for  aflame.  Jews  might  have  felt  that  the  Chaldeans  and  others  had  made
their  land  as  a  desolate  wilderness ;  we  might  feel  that,  when  we  are  worsted  in  "  the  struggle
for  life,"  our  "environment"  has  been  unfavourable  to  us.  Our  eyes  are  holden,  and  we  do  not
perceive  that  the  righteousness  of  God  is  the  grand  factor  in  all  defeats,  all  crashes,  all  panics,
all  losses  ;  using  bad  things,  as  fuel  is  used,  to  produce  a  fierce  heat  which  shall  eat  away  all
that  is  burnable.  Not  only  on  the  other  side  of  death  is  the  unquenchable  fire  scorching  sin  ;
that  fire  is  kindled  and  burning  here  and  now.  No  screen  can  ward  off  the  indignation  of  the
just  and  holy  Lord  ;  the  ashes  of  ruined  fortunes,  reputations,  impurities,  self-seekings,  prove
that  the  breath  of  the  Lord  has  Hndled  afire  to  run  through  human  society  as  intense,  as  over-
whelming as  a  stream  of  liquid  lava.     For  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.

(H)  Ver,  5.  Hostilities  were  continued  in  other  methods.  The  Lord  has  become  as  an
enemy,  has  swallowed  up  Israel ;  the  national  is  submerged.  This  is  indicated  by  material
evidence  ;  He  has  swallowed  up  all  her  palaces,  the  great  houses  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  ;  He
has  destroyed  all  His  strongholds,  the  fortified  places  which  had  been  garrisoned  by  the  people,
and  He  has  multiplied  in  the  daughter  of  Judah  moaning  and  bemoaning.  Two  words,
which  are  derived  from  the  same  Hebrew  root,  and  similar  in  sound,  express  the  manifold  and
intense  sorrows  which  had  been  experienced,

{))  Ver.  6.  The  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah  on  Mount  Zion,  which  He  claims  as  His  own
possession,  with  all  its  appointed  services,  has  shared  in  the  tribulations.  He  has  treated
violently,  as  a  garden.  His  booth.  The  references  in  vers.  6  and  7  being  to  the  methods  of
Divine  worship,  the  reference  here  will  be  to  the  Temple.  He  forsook  tl-e  tabernacle  of  Shiloh,
the  tent  which  He  placed  among  men,  and  instead  of  this,  in  Salem  was  His  tabernacle  — hoot\\,
but  it  also  had  come  to  be  only  a  temporary  habitation  for  the  mighty  God:  that  which  He  had
sanctified  had  been  profaned  by  the  inroads  of  unsanctified  men.  As  a  booth  in  a  vineyard  is
dismantled  when  the  vintage  is  ingathered,  so  the  stately  Temple  was  contumeliously  broken
down.  The  Septuagint  reading,  He  tore  up  His  tabernacle  as  a  vine,  harmonises  with  the  idea  of
the  Hebrew  phrase,  viz,,  that  the  House  of  the  Lord  was  laid  waste.  Consequeiit  on  this.  He
has  destroyed  his  [place  of]  solemn  assembly,  where  He  met  with  His  people  and  blessed
them  ;  following  this  came  awful  manifestations  of  indifference  even  to  the  helps  to  serving  the
Lord.  The  covenant  God  Jehovah  has  caused  to  be  forgotten  in  Zion  solemn  assembly  and
sabbath ;  the  annual  and  weekly  ser\  ices  were  no  longer  in  the  minds  of  His  professed  people.
The  old  ritual  was  unavailable.  Communion  with  one  another  and  communion  with  God  through
established  religious  forms  were  altogether  in  abeyance.  They  had  to  be  taught  that  that  ^vhich
dccayet/i  and  wax<tli  aged  is  to  be  replaced  by  a  new  covenant  in  which  the  service  of  men,  and
the  service  of  God  would  not  be  by  ordered  rules,  but  by  love  in  the  spirit.  The  persons  al>o
who  had  been  officially  prominent  in  Temple-services  were  swept  off  the  stage  ;  He  has  despised,
set  no  store  by,  in  the  vehemence  of  His  anger,  king  and  priest.  The  priesthood  was  indis-
pensable to  the  Temple- Worship  till  there  ariscth  another  Priest,  made  not  after  fhe  low  of  a  carnal
commandment,  but  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life.  The  connection  of  royalty  with  the  Temple
is  thus  explained  by  Oehler  :  "The  Israelitish  kingdom,  especially  in  David  and  Solomon,
bears  a  certain  sacerdotal  character,  inasmuch  as  the  king,  at  the  head  of  the  people  and  in  their
name,  pays  homage  to  God  and  brings  back  again  to  the  people  the  blessings  of  God."  This,
however,  is  defective  in  statement.  What  was  done  by  the  king  was  not  done  in  any  priestly
capacity,  but  as  being  the  chief  member  of  the  sacerdotal  people.  They  were  a  kingdom  of
priests  vnto  Jehovah.  Besides,  it  was  done  as  representative  of  the  Davidic  monarchy,  with
wh  ch  the  building  and  continuance  of  services  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  were  closely  linked
40


HO  MI  LET  IC  COMMENT  A  RY :  LA  MENTA  TIONS.  CHAP,  n*


(Jer.  xxxiii.  21).  Viewed  in  this  light,  the  lamentation  is,  that  Jehovah  has  rejected  both  the
royal  family  of  David  and  the  Levitical  priesthood.

(T)  Ver.  7.  There  has  been  entire  desecration  of  the  holy  places.  The  Lord  has  cast  off
his  altar,  the  appointed  erection  on  which  burnt-offerings  and  sacrifices  were  presented  to  Him,
and  wiiich  should  come  up  with  acceptance  there.  There  was  no  standing  for  such  action  now.
He  had  abandoned  it — its  fires  were  quenched  and  cold  :  he  has  abhorred  his  sanctuary,  the
whole  enclosure  of  the  holy  places.  But  there  all  is  not  still  ;  He  has  put  into  the  hand  of  her
enemy  the  walls  of  her  palaces,  the  crowning  buildings  of  Mount  Zion  have  been  delivered
up  to  hostile  people,  and  they  have  given  voice  in  the  house  of  the  Lord ;  a  victorious  multi-
tude made  within  the  glory-hallowed  precincts  such  a  jubilant  noise  as  [in]  a  day  of  a  solemn
assembly,  but  the  clamour  was  the  clamimr  of  ruthless  conquerors,  not  of  rejoicing  worshippers.

(H)  Ver.  8.  Jeremiah  relates  (chap,  lii,  14)  that  all  the  army  of  the  Ch  ddenns,  that  were
with  the  captain  of  the  guard,  brake  down  all  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  round  about.  This  was  from
no  mere  chance  of  warfare,  no  shrewd  decision  of  the  commander  of  the  invaders  ;  it  was  from
the  predetermination  of  the  God  of  Israel.  Jehovah  has  purposed  to  destroy  the  wall  of  the
daughter  of  Zion.  It  was  carried  out  according  as  He  incited  or  restrained  the  agents  of  its
accomplishment ;  he  has  stretched  out  the  [measuring]  line,  and  until  His  limitations  were
reached  he  has  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  overthrowing  Every  division  of  the  fortifica-
tions has  suffered,  and  he  has  made  the  rampart  and  the  wall  to  lament ;  they  languish
together.  All  calamities  have  their  methods  and  boundaries  fixed  by  the  All- wise.  They  do
not  form  a  chaos,  brought  about  by  natural  forces  or  human  power.  They  are  in  an  exact  order,
and  proceed  to  a  verge  which  He  h:is  appointed.     They  are  pregnant  with  gigantic  issues.

(b)  Ver.  9.  Traces  of  the  best  ctmstructed  part  of  the  wall  have  dit;appeared,  covered
with  debris.  Her  gates  have  sunk  into  the  earth;  the  very  means  of  fastening  them  are  in
fragments  ;  he  has  destroyed  and  broken  her  bars.  Like  that  had  befallen  the  political  and
religifius  barriers  which  separated  her  from  other  peoples.  Her  king  and  princes  are  among
the  nations,  swept  away  into  exile.  With  the  removal  of  civil  authorities  self-seeking  and
anarchy  had  supervened.  God's  rule  of  life,  which  required  Temple  and  altar  for  its  material
symbol,  exists  no  more  for  the  people  ;  there  is  no  law.  Still  more  sad,  the  proofs  of  the  Lord's
guidance  had  been  withheld  ;  even  her  prophets  find  no  vision  from  Jehovah  to  bring  help  and
comfort.  There  might  be  prophets,  but  they  received  no  burden  of  the  Lord.  He  will  pub
aside  for  a  time  His  means  of  grace,  if  they  cease  to  answer  Divine  ends.

(^)  Ver.  10.  Two  classes,  who  were  exponents  of  the  intelligence  and  joy  of  the  people,
prostrated  like  the  rest,  are  no  longer  capable  of  acting  their  parts.  They  sit  on  the  ground,
are  silent,  the  elders  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  ;  they  exhibit  other  profound  tokens  of  over-
whelming sufferings.  "Small  griefs  are  eloquent — great  ones  are  dumb."  Also  among  the
ruins  they  hang  down  their  heads  to  the  ground,  the  virgins  of  Jerusalem  ;  the  song,  the
timbrel,  the  dance,  have  all  been  abandoned  as  vain  things.

The  retrospect  of  the  poet,  which  had  brought  before  him  one  sad  scene  after  another  in  the
destruction  of  the  Jewish  state,  and  the  desperate  lot  of  various  classes  of  its  people,  produced
a  turmoil  of  emotions  in  himself,  and  appeals  to  men  and  God  to  join  in  his  lamentations.

(D)  Ver.  n.  So  exasperating  is  his  misery  that  be  feels  as  if  organic  parts  of  his  body  were
dismembered.  My  eyes  fail  with  tears,  my  bowels  are  troubled,  my  liver  is  poured  upon
the  ground — an  effect  of  terrible  grief,  showing  how  body  and  soul  are  sympathetic  with  each
other  over  the  breach  of  the  daughter  of  my  people.  This  shattered  condition  was  replete
with  the  harrowing  details  of  suffering,  as  when  the  young  children  and  the  sucklings  faint
in  the  streets  of  the  city.

(^)  Ver.  12.  His  ears  heard  their  piteous  cravings,  while  to  their  mothers  they  are  saying,
Where  is  corn  and  wine,  solid  and  liquid  nourishment.  Even  when  listening,  his  eyes  saw  the
older  children  faint  as  the  wounded  in  the  streets  of  the  city,  and  infants  in  arms  poured
their  souls  into  their  mother's  bosom,  which  could  supply  no  aliment.

(O)  Ver.  13.  He  is  ready,  as  a  servant  of  the  All-merciful  and  All- wise,  to  speak  on  His
behalf,  so  as  to  alleviate  the  clamant  wretchedness  ;  but  he  feels  unable.  What  shall  I  testify
to  thee?  No  message  is  given  to  him  from  the  Most  High,  and  no  resemblance  to  her  condi-
tion is  perceptible  on  the  broad  surface  of  past  or  present  human  life.  What  liken  to  thee,  O
daughter  of  Jerusalem?  The  case  is  unparalleled,  and  there  are  no  lessons  applicable.  What
shall  I  compare  to  thee  and  comfort  thee  [with],  0  virgin  daughter  of  Zion  ?  For  great  is
thy  breach  like  the  sea.  Who  will  heal  thee  ?  Ruin  had  extended  as  far  as  to  the  horizon
of  the  people's  existence,  and  to  the  deep  springs  of  thought.  True,  there  had  not  been  wanting
men  who  professed  to  be  commissioned  by  Jehovah  to  declare  that  all  would  be  well.  They
healed  the  hurt — the  word  here  translated  breach — of  the  daughter  of  my  people  lightly,  saying^
Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace.

(3)  Ver.  14.  The  Book  of  Jeremiah  contains  ample  evidence  as  to  who  those  miserable  com'
forters  were.  It  shows  that,  during  the  period  just  preceding  the  overthrow  of  Judiea.  there
were  a  number  of  persons  who  were  accustomed  glibly  to  say.  The  burden  of  Jehovah,  but  who
were  mere  pretenders  to  divine  visions,  who  gave  chaff  and  not  wheat.  The  reason  lay  in  the
character  of  the  people,  that  formed  its  own  instruments  in  politics  and  religion.  If  a  people
prefer  to  have  sensational  statesmen,  such  statesmen  will  appey,r,     If  prophets  prophecy  falsely,

^^  41


CHAP.  IL  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


it  is  because  the  people  love  to  have  it  so.  They  say  unto  the  prophets,  Prophesy  not  unto  us  right
things,  speak  unto  us  smooth  things,  prophesy  deceits.  They  got  what  they  wanted.  Thy  prophets
have  seen  for  thee,  and  the  result  is  vanity  and  foolishness,  unreal  and  unreasonable  things.
They  did  not  make  known  the  will  of  God  so  as  to  expose  the  evil  ways  and  doings  of  the  people,
and  prepare  for  amendment.  They  have  not  uncovered  thine  iniquity  to  turn  away  thy
captivity.  Instead  of  that,  their  boasted  visions  tended  to  produce  burdens  of  vanity  and
causes  of  banishment.  They  prophesy  a  lie  unto  you,  to  remove  you  far  from  your  land,  and
that  I  should  drive  you  out.

(D)  Ver.  15.  Casual  strangers  on  their  travels  felt  glad  at  sight  of  desolated  Jerusalem.
They  clap  their  hands  at  thee,  all  who  pass  by  the  way,  and  add  scorn  to  gladness  ;  they
hiss  and  wag  their  head.  They  use  sarcasm,  Is  this  the  city  which  they  called  the  perfec-
tion of  beauty,  a  joy  to  the  whole  earth?  So  the  glorying  of  the  Jews  is  turned  into  a
reproach  and  shame.

(Q)  Ver.  16.  A  similar  but  wider  view  is  presented  than  in  the  preceding  verse.  Not
strangers,  but  all  thine  enemies,  filled  with  mockery  and  exultation,  have  opened  their  mouth
against  thee.  There  is  testimony  in  the  Psalms  as  to  how  Orientals  can  helch  out  with  their
mouth.  Abrupt  utterances  follow,  and  intimate  how  excited  and  impassioned  they  were.  We
have  swallowed  up.  Hah !  this  is  the  day  which  we  have  expected,  have  found,  have  seen.
Now  at  length  we  see  what  we  sought,  get  what  we  wanted.

{V)  Ver.  17.  Whatever  are  the  calamitie8  suffered,  whatever  the  taunts  to  which  the  people
are  exposed  in  their  ruined  condition,  they  have  not  come  from  the  onslaught  of  ruthless  foes,
but  from  God,  their  own  God.  That  was  the  final  fact  of  the  catastrophe  which  had  over-
whelmed them.  It  is  not  the  generalisations,  called  "  laws,"  which  make  history  what  it  is,
but  the  will  of  "the  living  Lord."  He  controls  all  existences,  and  His  methods  with  them  are
always  definite  and  consistent.  Not  one  failtth.  Jehovah  has  done  that  which  he  purposed ;
he  has  fulfilled  his  word  which  he  commanded  from  the  days  of  old.  Compare  Lev.  xxvi.
14  ff  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  15  ff.  He  keeps  His  word.  His  order  has  been  faithfully  carried  out  in  the
overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  and,  giving  entire  power  to  boasting  destroyers,  he  has  exalted  the
horn  of  thine  adversaries.

(V)  Ver.  18.  Their  heart  cried  unto  the  Lord.  The  cry  is  not  to  the  God  in  covenant
with  Israel,  but  to  the  ruler  over  all  nations  and  all  matter.  Yet  the  pronoun  their  cannot
refer  to  the  persons  last  spoken  of.  The  adversaries  were  not  likely  to  change  their  vaunts
into  profound  sympathy.  It  is  appropriate  to  suppose  that  there  was  a  part,  at  any  rate,  of  the
downtrodden  who  would  tell  their  heart-aches  to  the  only  Helper,  and  could  not  subdue  the
longing  to  see  all  things  around  them  express  the  tokens  of  keenest  sorrow.  O  wall  of  the
daughter  of  Zion,  let  tears  run  down  like  a  torrent  day  and  night.  Bold  appeals  to  inani-
mate objects  for  signs  of  interest  in  human  affairs  are  not  strange  to  prophets  of  Israel,  and
the  call  upon  the  shattered  wall  of  Jerusalem  seems  grounded  on  the  idea  that  it  was  regarded
as  a  mother  embracing  in  its  arms  the  city  with  its  blighted  hopes.  It  was  not  to  be  stemmed
and  have  respite  ;  let  not  the  pupil  [Heb.  daughter]  of  the  eye  cease  from  shedding  tears.

(p)  Ver.  19.  Sleep  is  to  be  interrupted  in  order  to  weep.  Arise,  cry  loud  in  the  night,  and
as  its  hours  pass  on,  rouse  up  at  the  beginning  of  the  watches  into  which  the  night  is  divided.
Hearts  that  cried  are  to  cast  away  all  reserve  before  the  Lord.  They  will  have  gone  a  long
way  towards  receiving  help  when  they  recognise  that  He  who  "is  strong  to  smite  is  also  strong
to  save."  They  will  take  the  attitude  of  prayer.  Lift  up  thy  hands  to  Him,  and  the  first
matter  to  request  will  be  the  life  of  thy  young  children,  whose  sad  case  is  again  mentioned,
faint  for  hunger  at  the  top  of  every  street.  Dying  and  dead  little  ones  at  every  turn.  A
sight  f(»r  the  Cr<  ator  to  consider

(*1)  Ver.  20.  The  prayer  is  put  into  words  correspondent  with  the  circumstances.  See,
Jehovah,  and  behold  to  whom  thou  hast  done  this,  to  the  city  called  thine,  to  the  people
whom  thou  hast  chosen  to  be  a  name  and  praise  to  thee.  How  shocking  are  the  ccmsequences  !
See  if  women  eat  their  fruit,  the  children  whom  they  carried.  The  last  word  relates  to
that  which  is  spread — as  infants  on  the  knees  or  arms.  The  Revised  Version  translates  it
dandled  in  the  hands,  which,  if  expressing  the  idea,  is  too  special.  The  awful  incident  was  a
punishment  threatened  (Deut.  xxviii,  56,  57  ;  Jer,  xix.  9).  See  if  there  are  slain  in  the  sanc-
tuary of  the  Lord  priest  and  prophet.  His  own  holy  place  defiled  with  blood.  If  such
spectacles  were  comnwrn,  as  they  were,  will  God  not  stay  His  hand  ?

{^)  Ver.  21.  From  the  massacre  in  the  Temple  to  the  general  slaughter  of  all  ages  and
both  sexes  is  another  step  in  the  dismal  recital.  The  youth  and  the  old  man  .  .  .  my  virgins
and  choice  young  men,  were  killed.  It  was  clear  that  they  had  to  bear  the  anger  of  Jehovah
— that  He  was  not  only  full  of  compassion,  but  in  righteousness  he  doth  judge  and  make  war
upon  evil.

(n)  Ver.  22.  Thou  hast  called  as  in  a  day  of  solemn  assembly,  summoning,  as  by
trumpet,  all  kinds  of  terrifying  agencies — men,  famine,  fire,  sword — my  terrors  on  every  side,
and  there  was  none  that  escaped  or  remained  in  the  day  of  Jehovah's  anger.  Then,  in
motherly  anguish,  she  laments  again  over  the  children  she  had  carried  and  brought  up,  whom
the  enemv  had  cruelly  consumed.  So  "the  poem  concludes,  like  the  first,  with  deep  sorrow,
regardmg  which  all  attempts  at  comfort  are  quite  unavailing."

42


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  ii.

HO  MILE  TICS.

The  Fierceness  of  the  Divine  Anger.

(Verses  1-5.)

How  wierd  and  sad  is  the  lonely  wail  of  the  night-wind !  How  depressing
the  monotony  of  the  sobbing  sea  !  How  heart-rending  the  ceaseless  moan  of  the
helpless  sufferer  !  All  the  varying  cadences  of  melancholy  seem  gathered  up  and
interpreted  in  the  sorrowful  monody  of  the  tender-hearted  prophet.  It  is  still  the^
voice  of  lamentation  that  we  hear :  the  strain,  like  the  theme,  is  the  same.  From
his  elevated  rocky  grotto  Jeremiah  overlooked  the  ruined  city,  and  it  seemed  im-
possible for  him  to  turn  away  his  gaze  from  the  scene  of  destruction  that  fascinated
while  it  distressed  him.  In  this  chapter  he  describes,  with  vivid  realism,  the
harrowing  circumstances  connected  with  the  siege  and  taking  of  the  city.  By  a
lofty  flight  of  prophetic  imagination  he  descries  the  awful  form  of  the  Almighty
hovering  over  Jerusalem,  wreaking  vengeance  on  the  obstinate  and  rebellious
citizens.     In  this  paragraph  we  learn  that  the  fierceness  of  the  Divine  anger —

I.  Is  a  terrifying  reality.  "  The  Lord  covered  the  daughter  of  Zion  with  a
cloud  in  his  anger,  and  cast  down  the  beauty  of  Israel"  (ver.  1).  The  darkening
cloud  that  portends  the  approaching  storm  fills  the  stoutest  heart  with  alarm,  and
all  nature  cowers  with  fear  under  the  crash  of  the  dreadful  thunder.  The  prophet
sees  tlie  Divine  anger  settling  upon  Jerusalem  like  a  dark  thunder-cloud,  and
breaking  in  a  tempest,  by  which  the  Temple  is  levelled  to  the  ground.  It  is  not
the  cloud  that  led  the  Israelites  from  bondage  to  freedom,  but  a  cloud  of  wrath
sent  to  punish  for  the  aggravated  abuse  of  that  freedom.  The  cloud  no  longer
guides  and  protects  ;  it  is  now  charged  wnth  the  thunilerbolt  of  retribution.  The
anger  of  God  is  all  the  more  terrible  when  manifested  towards  those  who  once
enjoyed  His  favour  and  compassion.

II.  Is  irresistible  in  its  destructiveness  (vers.  1-5).  The  beauty  of  Israel  is
deformed,  her  pride  humbled,  her  strength  paralysed,  her  city  reduced  to  ashes,
and  her  strongholds  and  inhabitants  are  remorselessly  swept  away  Nothing  can
withstand  the  Divine  power,  and  when  that  power  is  exerted  in  anger,  it  makes
short  work  of  the  most  formidable  opposition.  Storm,  earthquake,  fire,  war,  and
all  the  forces  of  the  universe,  obey  the  bidding  of  the  Divine  Word.  The  enemies
of  God  will  be  completely  overthrown  by  the  fierceness  of  His  anger  (Exod.  xv.  7  ;
Ps.  ii.  2-5,  xxi.  8-10,  Ixxix.  6;  Isa.  x.  6;  Jer.  x.  25;  Nah.  i.  2;  1  Thess.  ii.  16).

III.  Intensifies  the  misery  of  its  victims.  "He  hath  increased  in  the
daughter  of  Judah  mourning  and  lamentation"  (ver.  5).  When  our  miseries
come  upon  us  from  our  enemies,  we  are  not  surprised ;  it  is  M'hat  we  expected.
When  we  can  trace  them  as  the  direct  result  of  our  own  folly  and  sin,  we  know
they  are  deserved,  and  we  strengthen  ourselves  to  endure  them  as  philosophically
as  we  can  ;  but  when  the  truth  dawns  upon  us  that  God  is  against  us,  and  it  is
His  hand  that  smites  us,  we  are  startled  at  the  discovery,  and  our  distress  is  un-
speakably increased.  It  is  a  bitter  ingredient  in  the  sufferings  of  the  disobedient
to  know  that  he  has  provoked  the  anger  of  the  God  of  love.  The  sufi'ering  Christ
turns  away  for  us  the  fierceness  of  the  Divine  anger.

Lessons. — 1.  Persistency  in  wrong-doing  rouses  the  Divine  anger.  2.  When
the  Divine  anger  is  manifested^  it  works  teirible  havoc.  3.  Timely  repentance  averts
the  worst  consequences  of  the  Divine  anger.

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES

Vers.  1,  2.  The  storm  of  the  Divine  the  Lord  covered  the  daughter  of  Zion
wrath:  I.  Overshadows  the  city  wnose  with  a  cloud  in  his  anger"  (ver.  1).
sins  call  for  vengeance.      "  How  hath      II.  Shatters  the  sanctuary  luhere  wor-

43


CHAP.  II.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


ship  has  been  profaned.  *' Cast  down
from  heaven  unto  the  earth  the  beauty
of  Israel,  and  remembered  not  his  foot-
stool in  the  day  of  his  auger"  (ver.  1).
III.  Destroys  the  hornesteads  and  for-
tresses of  a  rebellious  people.  "The
Lord  hath  swallowed  up  all  the  habi-
tations of  Jacob.  He  hath  thrown
down  in  his  wrath  the  strongholds  of
the  daughter  of  Judah  "  (ver.  2).  lY.
Dishonours  the  government  that  ignores
the  claims  of  righteousness.  "  He  hath
polluted  (profaned,  made  it  common  or
unclean)  the  kingdom  and  the  princes
thereof  "  (ver.  2).

Ver.  3.  The  defences  of  a  nation:
I.  Exposed  to  the  ravages  of  the  enemy
when  the  Divine  protection  is  ivithdrawn.
"  He  hath  drawn  back  his  right  hand
from  before  the  enemy."  II.  Deprived
of  their  strength  when  assailed  by  the
Divine  anger.  "He  hath  cut  off  in
his  fierce  anger  all  the  horn  of  Israel.
III.  Utterly  destroyed  by  the  wrath
evoked  by  national  sins.  "He  burned
against  Jacob  like  a  flaming  fire,  which
devoureth  round  about."

Vers.  4,  5.  Jehovah  as  an  enemy:

I.  Formidable  to  all  who  obstinately
resist  him.  "  He  hath  bent  his  bow
like  an  enemy.  He  stood  with  his
right  hand  as  an  adversary "  (ver.  4).

II.  Works  terrible  destruction.  "  Slew
all  that  were  pleasant  to  the  eye.  He
poured  out  his  fury  like  fire.  He  hath
swallowed  up  Israel "  (ver.  4,  5).  III.
Means  augmented  distress  to  those  he
punishes.  "He  hath  increased  in  the
daughter  of  Judah  mourning  and  lamen-
tation" (ver.  5).

Illustrations.  —  Neglect  incurs
wrath.  As  the  mariner  takes  the  first
wind  to  sail,  the  merchant  the  first
opportunity  of  buying  and  selling,  and
the  husbandman  the  first  opportunity
of  sowing  and  reaping,  so  should  young
men  take  the  present  season,  the  pre-
sent day,  which  is  their  day,  to  be
good  towards  the  Lord,  to  seek  Him
and  serve  Him,  and  not  to  put  off  the
present  season,  for  they  know  not  what
another  day,  another  hour,  another
moment  may  bring  forth.  That  door
of  grace  that  is  open  to-day  may  be
44


shut  to-morrow  ;  that  golden  sceptre  of
mercy  that  is  held  forth  in  the  Gospel
this  day  may  be  taken  in  the  next  day  ;
that  love,  that  this  hour  is  upon  the
bare  knee,  entreating  and  beseeching
young  men  to  break  off  their  sins  by
repentance,  to  return  to  the  Lord,  to
lay  hold  on  His  strength  and  be  at
peace  with  Him,  may  the  next  hour  be
turned  into  wrath. — Brooks.

—  Plutarch  writes  of  Hannibal,  that
when  he  could  have  taken  Eome  he
would  not,  and  when  he  would  have
taken  Eome  he  could  not.  Many  in
their  youthful  days,  when  they  might
have  mercy,  Christ,  pardon,  peace,
heaven,  will  not ;  and  when  old  age
comes  on  they  cannot,  they  may  not.
God  seems  to  say,  as  Theseus  once  said,
"  Go  and  tell  Creon,  Theseus  offers  thee
a  gracious  offer.  Yet  I  am  pleased  to  be
friends  if  thou  wilt  submit — this  is  my
first  message  ;  but  if  this  offer  prevail
not,  look  for  me  to  be  up  in  arms."

—  Whatever  account  you  have  to
settle  with  God,  settle  it  now.  There
are  two  "  nows "  in  Scripture  which
should  never  be  separated.  One  stands
out  in  the  brightest  rays,  the  other
retires  into  deep  shadows.  "  Noio  is
the  accepted  time."  "Now  they  are
hid  from  Thine  eyes." — Vaughan.

Judgment  a  surprise.  There  are
sometimes  some  sad  awakenings  from
sleep  in  tins  world.  It  is  very  sad  to
dream  by  night  of  vanished  joys,  to
revisit  old  scenes  and  dwell  once  more
among  the  unforgotten  forms  of  our
loved  and  lost ;  to  see  in  the  dreamland
the  old  familiar  look,  and  to  hear  the
well-remembered  tones  of  a  voice  long
hushed  and  still,  and  then  to  awake
with  the  morning  light  to  the  aching
sense  of  our  loneliness  again.  It  were
very  sad  for  the  poor  criminal  to  wake
from  sweet  dreams  of  other  and  happier
days— daj's  of  innocence,  hope,  and
peace,  when  kind  friends  and  a  happy
home  and  an  honoured  or  unstained
name  were  his ;  to  wake  in  his  cell  on
the  morning  of  his  execution  to  the
horrible  recollection  that  all  is  gone
for  ever,  and  that  to-day  he  must  die
a  felon's  death.  But  inconceivably
more  awful  than  any  awakening  which


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


CTTAP.  TT.


earthly  dayLreak  has  ever  bronp;lit
shall  be  the  awakening  of  the  self-
deluded  soul  when  it  is  roused  in
horror  and  surprise  from  the  dream
of  life  to  meet  Almighty  God  in  judg-
ment ! — /.  Caird.

Temporary  storms.  It  is  a  dark
and  cloudy  day  for  you.  A  storm  has
burst  upon  you  j  but  you  remember
how,  after  the  storm,  the  bow  is  set  in
the  cloud  for  all  who  look  above  to  the
Hand  that  smites  them.  The  storm  has
come,  and  now  \ve  must  look  up  and
wait  and  watch  in  prayer  and  faith  for
the  rainbow  of  promise  and  comfort. —
Ministering  Children.

Prolonged  misery.  When  water
takes  its  first  leap  from  the  top,  it  is
cool,  collected,  uninteresting,  mathe-
matical ;  but  it  is  when  it  finds  that  it
has  got  into  a  scrape,  and  has  further  to
go  than  it  thought  for,  that  its  character
conies  out ;  it  is  then  that  it  begins  to
writhe  and  twist,  and  sweep  out  zone
after  zone  in  wilder  stretchings  as  it  falls,
and  to  send  down  the  rocket-like,  lance-
pointed,  whizzing  shafts  at  its  sides,
sounding  for  the  bottom. — Ruslcin.

There  is  mercy  in  every  storm.
Every  stroke  of  the  rod  is  but  the
muffled  voice  of  love ;  every  billow
bears  on  its  bosom,  and  every  tempest
on  its  wing,  some  new^and  rich  blessing
from  the  better  land.  If  the  Lord  were
to  roll  the  Red  Sea  before  us  and  mar-
shal the  Egyptians  behind  us,  and  thus,
hemming  us  in  on  every  side,  should
yet  bid  us  advance,  it  would  be  the
duty  and  the  privilege  of  faith  instantly
to  obey,  believing  that,  ere  our  feet
touched  the  water,  God  in  our  ex-
tremity would  divide  the  sea  and  take
us  dryshod  over  it.  If  for  a  moment
we  leave  the  path,  difficulties  throng
around  us,  troubles  multiply,  the  smallest
trials  become  heavy  crosses,  the  heart
will  sicken  at  disappointment,  the
Spirit  be  grieved,  and  God  disappointed.
—  Wiiisloio.

Goodness  a  nation's  defence.  Abi-
jah's  goodness  was  towards  the  Lord ;
his  goodness  faced  the  Lord ;  it  looked
towards  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  It  is
recorded  of  the  Catanenses  that  they
made  a  stately  monument  to  two  sons


who  took  their  aged  parents  upon  their
backs  and  carried  them  through  the  fire
when  their  father's  house  was  all  in  a
flame.  These  young  men  were  good
towards  their  parents ;  but  what  is  this
to  Abijah's  goodness  towards  the  Lord  ]
He  was  good  in  the  house  of  Jeroboam,
who  made  all  Israel  to  sin  ;  yet  Abijah,
as  the  fishes  which  live  in  the  salt  sea
are  fresh,  so,  though  he  lived  in  a  sea
of  wickedness,  he  retained  his  goodness
towards  the  Lord.  They  say  roses
grow  the  sweeter  when  planted  by
garlic.  They  are  sweet  and  rare  Chris-
tians indeed  who  hold  their  goodness
and  grow  in  goodness  where  wicked-
ness sits  on  the  throne.  To  be  wheat
among  tares,  corn  among  chaff,  and  roses
among  thorns,  is  excellent.  To  be  a
Jonathan  in  Saul's  court,  an  Obadiah  in
Ahab's  court,  an  Obedmelech  in  Zede-
kiah's  court,  and  an  Abijah  in  Jero-
boam's court,  is  a  wonder,  a  miracle.  To
be  a  Lot  in  Sodom,  an  Abraham  in  Chal-
dea,  a  Daniel  in  Babylon,  a  Nehemiah
in  Damascus,  and  a  Job  in  the  land  of
Uz,  is  to  be  a  saint  among  devils.  The
poets  affirm  that  Venus  never  appeared
so  beautiful  as  when  she  sat  by  black
Vulcan's  side.  Gracious  souls  shine
most  clear  when  they  are  set  by  black-
conditioned  people.  Stephen's  face
never  shone  so  angelically,  so  gloriously
in  the  church  where  all  were  virtuous,
as  before  the  council  where  all  were  very
vicious  and  malicious.  So  Abijah  was
a  bright  star,  a  shining  sun  in  Jero-
boam's court,  which  for  profaneness  and
wickedness  was  a  very  hell.

—  A  substantial  fence  has  been
erected  enclosing  the  relic  of  the  Coven-
anter's stone  on  the  summit  of  Duns
Law.  On  this  historic  spot  the  stan-
dard of  the  Covenanting  army  under
General  Leslie  was  planted,  and  on  the
stone  a  copy  of  the  National  League
and  Covenant  signed  by  the  resolute
leaders  on  the  6th  June  1639.  At  one
time  the  stone  was  prominently  seen,
but  it  is  now  so  much  reduced  by
the  chipping  and  hacking  of  Vandalic
visitors  as  to  be  scarcely  visible  above
the  green  sward.  Scotland  has  good
reason  to  be  proud  of  the  brave  exploits
of   its   ancestors,  who,  whatever   their

45


CHAP.  II.  HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  LAMENT  A  TIONS.


failings,  were  men  of  earnest  purpose,  is  to  ruin  the  souls  of  men,  and  that  he
and  fought  for  those  principles  of  right  does  it  in  a  deliberate,  calm,  systematic
and  justice  which  helped  to  make  pos-  way.  He  walks  about  observing  times,
sible  the  national  life  of  to-day.  The  places,  circumstances,  characters — all
records  and  memorials  of  their  deeds  with  a  view  to  devour.  He  does  as  a
should  be  a  constant  stimulus  to  imi-  lion,  to  whom  he  is  compared.  Observe
tate  their  noblest  qualities.  "  Remove  his  gentle  tread,  his  fiery,  searching
not  the  ancient  landmarks  which  thy  eye,  his  subtle  plans,  his  secret  am-
fathers  have  set." — The  Scottish  Pulpit,  bushes,  his  hidden  schemes,  his  con-
Satan  an  enemy  :  but  what  of  cealed  name,  nature,  and  character ;  and
Jehovah  ?  Satan  is  the  enemy  of  every  when  he  spies  one  of  whom  he  can
saint,  and  he  is  an  indefatigable  enemy.  take  advantage,  see  how  the  lion-nature
He  never  tires  in  his  temptations  to  is  developed  in  the  rush,  the  pounce,
ensnare  souls  to  destroy  them.  He  the  seizure,  the  tearing,  the  destruction.
*'  walketh  about  seeking  whom  he  may  But  what  must  it  be  to  the  sinner  to
devour."     This  denotes  his  main  object  find  an  enemy  in  Jehovah  %


EO  MILE  TICS,

The  Wreck  of  Religious  Ordinances.

(Verses  6-9.)

I.  The  Temple  is  completely  demolished  (vers.  6-8).  In  a  city  where  there
are  many  temples  the  destruction  of  one  creates  only  a  temporary  inconvenience.
Jerusalem,  and  indeed  the  Jewish  nation,  had  but  one  temple,  and  it  had  the
special  distinction  of  being  the  only  temple  in  the  world  dedicated  to  the  worship
of  Jehovah.  It  was  always  in  the  past,  and  is  to  this  day,  reverently  referred  to
as  the  Temple.  It  was  idolised  by  the  Jew,  and  was  regarded  as  beyond  the
reach  of  possible  injury.  It  was  encircled  with  the  rampart  of  Omnipotence.
When  menaced  by  the  enemy,  the  people  rallied  round  the  sacred  fane,  prepared
to  sacrifice  everything  ii*  its  defence.  Here  they  made  their  last  stand,  and  fought
with  the  fury  of  fanatics.  But  their  zeal,  bravery,  and  strategy  were  all  in  vain.
In  their  blind  infatuation  they  saw  not  that  the  only  invincible  defence,  the  pre-
sence of  Jehovah,  was  withdrawn.  The  Temple  was  doomed,  and  was  reduced  to
ruin  with  the  same  reckless  indiff'erence  as  a  man  would  tear  down  a  temporary
shelter  in  his  garden  (ver.  6).  The  gates,  walls,  palaces,  altar,  sanctuary,  were
abandoned  to  utter  destruction  (vers.  7-9).  The  wreckage  of  such  a  temple  was
not  only  a  metropolitan,  but  a  national  calamity.  Everything  was  gone  when  the
Temple  was  gone.

II.  The  religious  services,  formerly  observed  with  uninterrupted  regularity,
are  now  utterly  neglected.  *'The  Lord  hath  caused  the  solemn  feasts  and  Sab-
baths to  be  forgotten  in  Zion  "  (ver.  6).  The  annual  and  the  weekly  festivals  are
no  longer  observed.  "  There  is  an  intensive  force  in  its  being  no  longer  Adonai,
but  Jehovah,  who  lets  them  pass  into  oblivion.  He  had  once  instituted  them  for
His  own  honour,  now  He  lets  them  lie  forgotten."  When  religion  is  neglected,
all  days  are  alike ;  there  is  nothing  to  mark  off  Sabbath-days  from  week-days,
sacred  days  from  common  days.  Life  is  reduced  to  the  dead  level  of  dull  mono-
tony, and  the  days  drag  on  in  the  weary  routine  of  comfortless  and  aimless  labour.

"He  liveth  long  who  liveth  well —
All  else  is  being  flung  away  ;
He  liveth  longest  who  can  tell

Of  true  things  truly  done  each  day.**

Intellectual  pursuits  and  activity  are  a  poor  substitute  for  genuine  religion.
Education  not  founded  on  religion  is  only  a  varnisli.     Abolish  the  Sabbath  and
46


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS.  chap,  it


the  decay  of  religion  begins.     A  pout  calls  the  Sabbath  "  Heaven  once  a  week."
Day  of  rest,  of  days  the  best.

III.  The  principal  worshippers  are  in  exile.  "  Her  king  and  her  princes  are
among  the  Gentiles  "  (ver.  9).  The  prophet  has  been  principally  occupied  with
the  buildings  of  the  city  and  Temple.  Now  he  turns  to  the  people,  and  beginning
with  their  temporary  rulers,  he  laments  the  sad  fate  of  the  king  and  princes  who,
no  longer  seen  taking  their  part  in  the  Temple  service,  were,  like  many  of  their
people,  captives  in  the  hands  of  the  heathen.  With  the  best  external  aids  it  is
difficult  to  maintain  the  spirituality  of  worship ;  but  that  difficulty  is  increased
when  all  external  accessories  are  withdrawn,  and  man  is  placed  in  the  midst  of
irreligious  heathenism.  If  he  does  not  strive  to  propagate  what  religion  he  has,
he  will  lose  it.  To  love  and  worship  God  we  must  know  Him,  and  this  we  can-
not do  till  He  graciously  reveals  Himself.  The  astronomer  seeking  to  observe  a
star,  can  do  nothing  till  he  directs  his  telescope  towards  the  star.  The  dim  light
of  evening  is  with  him,  and  by  it  he  sets  the  telescope  and  guides  it  to  the  proper
point  in  the  heavens.  But  when  he  has  pointed  it  to  the  star,  the  light  of  the
star  streams  into  the  telescope,  lighting  it  up  with  a  new  and  brighter  illumina-
tion. The  soul  of  man  is  a  telescope  by  which  he  is  seeking  to  see  and  know  God.
The  general  illumination  of  the  heart  is  in  the  world.  All  pagans  have  it.  But
when  man  has  adjusted  the  lenses  of  the  soul,  God  flashes  down  it,  and  produces
an  image  of  Himself  in  the  poor  earthly  tube.

IV.  The  Law  and  the  Prophets  are  discredited.  "  The  law  is  no  more ;  her
prophets  also  find  no  vision  from  the  Lord "  (ver.  9).  The  Jewish  law,  the
Torah,  came  to  an  end  when  it  had  no  longer  a  local  habitation.  Its  enactments
were  essentially  those,  not  of  a  catholic,  but  of  a  national  religion,  and  the  restora-
tion of  the  nation  with  a  material  temple  was  indispensable  to  its  continued  exist-
ence. It  was  only  when  elevated  to  be  a  catholic  religion  by  being  made  spiritual
that  it  could  do  without  ark,  temple,  and  a  separate  people  (Jer.  iii.  16,  xxxi.
31-34).  With  the  Torah  the  special  gift  of  prophecy  also  ceased,  since  both  were
peculiar  to  the  theocracy  ;  but  it  was  not  till  the  establishment  of  Christianity  that
they  were  finally  withdrawn,  or  rather  merged  in  higher  developments  of  grace.
Jeremiah  now  laments  over  the  temporary  removal  of  Judah's  special  privileges
before  they  had  accomplished  their  office.  At  the  return  from  exile  they  were
for  the  time  restored. — Speaker^s  Comm.

It  is  a  grave  calamity  to  church  or  nation  to  be  deprived  of  men  of  insight  and
inspiration.  These  men  give  direction  and  character  to  the  best  work  we  are
capable  of  doing.  Much  of  the  work  of  the  world  is  done  in  a  perfunctory  man-
ner— done  to  get  through  with  it,  done  to  get  it  oflf  one's  mind,  done  to  secure  the
return  which  it  promises.  It  is  done  without  enthusiasm,  originality,  or  con-
tagious zeal.  The  men  who  give  their  work  character,  distinction,  perfection,  are
the  men  whose  spirit  is  behind  their  hands,  giving  them  a  new  dexterity.  There
is  no  kind  of  work,  from  the  merest  routine  to  the  highest  creative  activity,  which
does  not  receive  all  that  gives  it  quality  from  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  done  or
fashioned.  The  highest  and  best  work  is  done  when  the  soul  receives  its  *'  vision
from  the  Lord  "  and  is  animated  by  His  inspiration.

Lessons. — 1.  Religion  seeks  practical  expression  in  worship  and  service.  2.
The  loss  of  religious  ordinances  is  a  national  calamity.  3.  The  abuse  oj  religious
opportunities  is  punished  by  their  withdrawal.

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.  6.*  *  He  hath  violently  taken  away  Is  but  a  temporary  structure,  however
his  tabernacle,  as  if  it  were  of  a  garden  ;  elaborately  built.  2.  Is  desecrated
He  hath  destroyed  His  places  of  the  when  a  false  worship  is  offered.  3.
assembly."      The  earthly  temple  :    1.      When  defiled,   is   suddenly  destroyed,

il


CHAP.  n.


EOMTLETIC  COM}fEKTAliY:  LAMENTATIONS.


as  a  man  may  tear  down  in  a  few  mo-
ments a  fragile  hut  erected  for  his  tem-
porary pleasure  in  a  garden.  4.  Its
destruction  suggests  reflections  on  man's
unfaithfulness  and  God's  anger.

—  Perverted  worship :  I.  Involves  the
loss  of  stated  privileges.  "The  Lord
hath  caused  the  solemn  feasts  and  Sab-
baths to  be  forgotten  in  Zion."  II.
Rouses  the  Divine  displeasure.  "  The
indignation  of  His  anger."  III.  Entails
regal  and  ecclesiastical  dishonour.  "  And
hath  despised  the  king  and  the  priest."

Ver.  7.  A  despised  sanctuary:  I.
Its  holiest  places  rejected  with  disdain
by  an  offended  Deity.  "The  Lord  hath
cut  off  his  altar;  he  hath  abhorred  his
sanctuary,"  II.  Completely  abandoned
to  destruction.  "  He  hath  given  up
into  the  hand  of  the  enemy  the  walls  of
her  palaces."  III.  The  wild  shouts  of
its  destroyers  a  strange  contrcLst  to  the
exultant  joy  of  former  worshippers.
*'  They  have  made  a  noise  in  the  house
of  the  Lord,  as  in  the  day  of  a  solemn
feast."

Ver.   8.  The  implacable  destroyer:

I.  Works  in  harmony  loith  a  fixed  deter-
mination. *'  The  Lord  hath  purposed
to  destroy  the  wall  of  the  daughter
of  Zion."  II.  Carries  out  his  purpose
with  systematic  thoroughness.  "  He
liath  stretched  out  a  line ;  he  hath
not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  de-
stroying." III.  Lays  the  strongest  de-
fences in  lamejitable  ruin.  "  Therefore
he  hath  made  the  rampart  and  the  wall
to  lament ;  they  languished  together."

Ver.  9.  National  ruin  complete:  I.
When  all  public  buildings  are  destroyed.
"  Her  gates  are  sunk  into  the  ground  ;
he  hath  destroyed  and  broken  her  bars."

II.  Wlten  tlie  rulers  are  in  exile.  "  Her
king  and  her  princes  are  among  the
Gentiles."  III.  When  religious  ordin-
ances are  suspended.  "The  law  is  no
more."  IV.  When  religious  teachers
are  deprived  of  Divine  inspiration.
"  Her  prophets  also  find  no  vision  from
the  Lord."

Illustrations.  —  Undercurrents
cause  wrecks.  A  ship  was  stranded  on
the  island  of  Sanda,  in  the  Orkneys.  It
was  a  mystery  k)  the  captain  how  the

48


vessel  got  there.  Being  foggy  at  the
time,  he  carefully  consulted  his  chart,
and  both  he  and  the  mate  worked  up
the  position,  their  reckonings  exactly
agreeing  as  to  latitude,  but  differing
slightly  in  longitude.  The  captain  had
navigated  the  ship  for  ten  years  with-
out any  misfortune.  He  attributed  the
accident  to  the  force  of  an  undercurrent
which  carried  him  unknowingly  out  of
his  course,  and  learnt  afterwards  from
fishermen  in  the  locality  that  a  current
was  frequently  felt  in  that  sea  as  far
as  sixty  miles  from  land.  The  sea  of
life  is  intersected  with  dangerous  under-
currents, and  the  watchful  student  will
be  careful  to  watch  their  tendency  and
strength.  While  on  the  fringe  of  the
current,  it  is  comparatively  easy  to
escape,  but  if  we  drift  into  the  midst
of  the  irresistible  swirl,  we  shall  be
hurried  on  to  inevitable  disaster.  You
have  seen  the  tiny  snowflakes  flutter
about  the  railway  track,  like  lovely  bits
of  down  shook  from  angelic  wings,  and
you  have  seen  with  M'hat  ease  the  proud
locomotive  scatters  the  fleecy  morsels
in  the  early  stages  of  the  storm  ;  but
the  falling  atoms  increase  with  such
persistent  rapidity  and  accumulative
force,  that  the  panting  engine  is  at
length  completely  strangled,  and,  utterly
exhausted,  lies  buried  fathoms  deep
beneath  the  crystal  mound. — The  Scot-
tish Pulpit.

Ordinances  help  religious  life.  Grace
is  like  a  spark  in  wet  wood,  that  needs
continual  blowing.  Would  you  have
and  keep  up  ardent  desires  ^  Do  as
they  that  would  keep  in  the  fire ;  cherish
the  sparks  and  blow  them  up  to  a  flame.
There  is  no  man  lives  under  the  means
of  grace  and  under  the  discoveries  of
God  and  religion  but  has  his  good
moods  and  lively  motions.  The  waters
are  stirred  many  times ;  take  hold  of
this  advantage.  Strengthen  the  things
that  remain  and  are  ready  to  die,  and
blow  up  these  sparks  into  a  flame.  God
has  left  us  enkindling  means — prayer,
meditation,  and  the  Word.  Observe
where  the  bellows  blow  hardest,  and  ply
that  course.  The  more  supernatural
things  are,  there  needs  more  diligence


to    preserve   them.      A


strange


plant


HOMtLETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  II.


needs  more  care  tlian  a  native  of  the
soil.  Worldly  desires,  like  a  nettle,
breed  of  their  own  accord,  but  spiritual
desires  need  a  great  deal  of  cultivating.
— Manton.

—  The  Christian  is  compared  to  a
merchantman  who  trades  for  rich  pearls;
he  is  to  go  to  ordinances  as  the  mer-
chant sails  from  port  to  port,  not  to  see
places,  but  to  take  in  his  lading,  some
here,  some  there.  A  Christian  should
be  as  much  ashamed  to  return  empty
from  his  traffic  with  ordinances  as  the
merchant  to  come  home  without  his
lading.  But,  alas  !  how  little  is  this
looked  after  by  many  that  pass  for
great  professors,  who  are  like  some  idle
persons,  that  come  to  the  market  not  to
buy  provision  and  carry  home  what
they  want,  but  to  gaze  and  look  upon
what  is  there  to  be  sold,  to  no  purpose  !
O  my  brethren,  take  heed  of  this ! —
Gurnall.

The  earthly  temple  and  perverted
worship.  There  is  a  great  difference
between  religiousness  and  religion.
Man  is  a  religious  animal,  he  must  and
will  worship  something.  But  the  reli-
gion which  the  Bible  teaches  is  a  total
change  of  the  heart,  and  of  the  aim  and
purpose  of  life. — Calthrop.

—  Believers  are  in  danger  of  seduc-
tion into  the  sin  and  falsehood  of  the
world.  The  world  threatens  believers
not  only  with  its  enmity,  but  evermore
with  its  temptations.  Believers  must
be  warned  to  shun  the  idols  the  world
worships,  and  they  are  warned  against
love  to  the  world,  because  love  in  that
way  very  easily  gets  associated  with
sinful  lusts,  which  are  common  in  the
world.  In  false  prophecy  it  is  shown
that  the  devil,  who  was  a  murderer  and
liar  from  the  beginning,  threatens  the
Church,  not  only  with  the  deadly
enmity  of  the  world,  but  also  with  its
eoul-destroying  lies.  We  cannot  show
brotherly  love  to  false  teachers  without
running  the  risk  of  making  ourselves
partakers  in  their  sins. —  Weiss.

—  Means — the  table  of  the  Lord,  the
pulpit,  the  pages  of  the  Bible,  the  family
altar,  the  closet  oratory — are  of  no  value
unless  as  putting  us  in  communication
with  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  used  as  the

id


kite  which  the  philosopher  sends  up  to
draw  down  the  lightnings  of  the  skies,
or  the  bucket  which  the  cottager  sends
down  to  draw  up  water  from  the  well.
Then,  powerless  as  they  are  in  them-
selves, they  become  the  blessed  and
mighty  instrument  of  spiritual  good  ;
the  sails  that  catch  the  wind  and  impel
the  vessel  on  ;  the  concave  mirror  that,
placed  before  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,
gathers  His  beams  into  its  burning  focus
to  warm  the  coldest  and  melt  the  hardest
heart ;  eagle-wings  to  raise  our  souls  to
heaven  ;  conduits,  like  the  pipes  that
bring  water  to  our  city  from  these  Pent-
land  Hills,  to  convey  streams  of  grace,
peace,  and  purity  from  their  fountain
in  heaven  to  our  souls  on  earth. —
Guthrie.

A  despised  sanctuary.  Those  that
turn  their  backs  on  God's  ordinances
and,  in  rebellion  to  His  commandments,
live  in  sins  against  conscience,  can  they
wonder  that  He  hides  His  face  from
them  when  they  turn  their  backs  on
Him  "i  When  we  sin,  we  turn  our  backs
upon  God  and  our  face  to  the  devil,
the  world,  and  pleasure ;  and  can  men
wonder  that  God  suffers  them  to  melt
and  pine  away  1  Let  us  do  as  the
flowers  do,  turn  themselves  to  the  sun.
Let  us  turn  ourselves  to  God  in  medita-
tion and  prayer,  striving  and  wrestling
with  Him.  Look  to  Him,  eye  Him  in
His  ordinances  and  promises,  and  have
communion  with  Him  all  the  ways  we
can.  Let  our  souls  open  and  shut  with
Him.  When  He  hides  His  face,  let
us  droop  as  the  flowers  do  till  the  sun
comes  again.  So,  when  we  have  not
daily  comfort  of  the  Spirit  in  peace  of
conscience,  let  us  never  rest  seeking
God's  face  in  His  ordinances  and  by
prayer,  and  that  will  cheer  a  drooping
soul  as  the  sunbeams  do  the  flagging
flowers.  — Sihhes.

Retribution  implacable.  Fatalism
and  Atheism  are  preached  constantly
amidst  the  plaudits  of  ignorant  English-
men. How  many  politicians  deem  the
matter  a  thing  of  the  slightest  conse-
quence !  Hume  would  never  have  set
cities  on  fire,  beheaded  or  hacked  to
pieces  human  beings,  least  of  all  the
refined,  the  noble,  the  educated ;  but


CHAi>.  11.


liOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  LaMENTaTWNS.


he  must  be  reckoned  among  those  who
sneeringly  scattered  smouldering  embers
and  bequeathed  to  others  death  by  the
inevitable  conflagration.  Seldom  has
the  logic  of  events  been  more  complete
than  in  the  great  French  Revolution. —
Bampton  Lecture.

—  What  a  diabolical  invention  was
the  "  Virgin's  Kiss,"  once  used  by  the
fathers  of  the  Inquisition  !  The  victim
was  pushed  forward  to  kiss  the  image,
when,  lo !  its  arms  embraced  him  in  a
deadly  embrace,  piercing  his  body  with
a  hundred  hidden  knives.  The  tempt-
ing pleasures  of  sin  offer  to  the  unwary
just  such  a  virgin's  kiss.  The  sinful
joys  of  the  flesh  lead,  even  in  this  world,
to  results  most  terrible,  while  in  the
world  to  come  the  dafj^srers  of  remorse
and  despair  will  cut  and  wound  beyond
all  remedy. — Spurgeon.

—  Crime  and  punishment  grow  out
of  one  stem.  Punishment  is  a  fruit
that  unsuspected  ripens  within  the
flower  of  the  pleasure  that  concealed
it. — Emerson.

National  ruin.  The  whole  history
of  Christianity  shows  that  she  is  in
far  greater  danger  of  being  corrupted
by  the  alliance  of  power  than  of  being
crushed  by  its  opposition.  Those  who
thrust  temporal  sovereignty  upon  her


treat  her  as  her  prototypes  treated  her
Author.  They  bow  the  knee,  and  spit
upon  her ;  they  cry,  "  Hail ! "  and
smite  her  on  the  cheek ;  they  put  a
scei>tre  in  her  hand,  but  it  is  a  fragile
reed ;  they  crown  her,  but  it  is  with
thorns ;  they  cover  with  purple  the
wounds  which  their  own  hands  have
inflicted,  and  inscribe  magnificent  let-
ters over  the  cross  on  which  they  have
fixed  her,  to  perish  in  ignominy  and
pain. — Macaulay.

—  Human  society  reposes  on  religion.
Civilisation  without  it  would  be  like
the  lights  that  play  in  the  northern
sky — a  momentary  flash  on  the  face  of
darkness  ere  it  again  settled  into  eter-
nal night.  Wit  and  wisdom,  sublime
poetry  and  lofty  philosophy,  cannot  save
a  nation,  else  ancient  Greece  had  never
perished.  Valour,  law,  ambition,  can-
not preserve  a  people,  else  Rome  had
still  been  mistress  of  the  world.  The
nation  that  loses  faith  in  God  and  man
loses  not  only  its  most  precious  jewel,
but  its  most  unifying  and  conserving
force  ;  has  before  it  a

'*  Stygian  cave  forlorn
Where  brooding  Darkness  spreads  his  jealoui

wings,
And  the  night-raven  sings."

— Fairbaim,


H0MILETIC8.
Voiceless  Woe.

(Verse  10.)

I.  Too  deep  for  words.  "  The  elders  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  sit  upon  the
ground  and  keep  silence."  A  graphic  description  of  sympathy  and  sorrow.  The
judges  and  magistrates,  accustomed  to  occupy  with  dignity  the  judgment-seats,
the  thrones  of  the  house  of  David,  and  to  discourse  eloquently  on  important  points
of  law,  now  sit  dejectedly  upon  the  ground,  without  uttering  a  word.  It  was
thus  that  the  friends  of  the  afflicted  Job  silently  expressed  their  sympathy  (Job
ii.  13).  There  is  a  moment  in  the  swing  of  a  great  sorrow  when  speech  seems
impossible — when  words,  if  spokeUj  would  grate  upon  the  ear  as  a  harsh  intrusion.
We  prefer  to  be  left  alone  and  undisturbed  till  the  pressure  of  the  trial  is  relieved.
We  are  distraught,  stunned,  and  want  time  to  come  to  ourselves.  The  most
delicate  and  effectual  way  in  which  our  kindest  friends  can  help  us  is  to  be  silent.
No  words  can  express  our  sorrow.  Small  griefs  are  eloquent  enough,  but  great
ones  are  dumb.

II.  Expressed  in  abject  humiliation.  "They  have  cast  up  dust  upon  their
heads ;  they  have  girded  themselves  with  sackcloth."  They  are  stripped  of  their
robes  of  state,  and  all  their  judicial  dignities  and  prestige.     They  have  lost  their

50


JSvMlLrnC  COMMHSTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  il

offices  and  their  wealth.  Greatness  and  prosperity  are  exchanged  for  sackcloth
and  ashes.  The  loss  of  worldly  goods  brings  sorrow  to  many.  An  old  Latin
proverb  says,  "  Genuine  are  the  tears  shed  over  lost  property."  Those  who  have
boasted  most  about  their  possessions,  and  carried  their  heads  high  in  times  of
plenty,  feel  most  keenly  the  humiliating  straits  of  poverty.  But  how  crushing
is  the  humiliation  when  we  realise  we  have  lost  all — our  wealth,  our  friends,  our
national  status,  our  religion,  our  God  !     Such  a  woe  is  voiceless  indeed.

III.  Overwhelms  the  soul  with  conscious  shame.  "  The  virgins  of  Jerusalem
hang  down  their  heads  to  the  ground."  Time  was  when  the  haughty  daughters
of  Zion  courted  public  admiration  as  they  tripped  mincingly  along  the  streets  of
Jerusalem,  decked  in  richest  apparel,  and  their  every  movement  musical  with
tinkling  ornaments  (Isa.  iii.  16);  but  now  their  pride  is  humbled,  and  they  are
bowed  to  the  earth  with  conscious  shame.  And  yet  it  is  from  this  broken  and
dejected  condition  we  trace  the  beginning  of  better  things.  It  is  on  crushed
grain  that  man  is  fed  ;  it  is  by  bruised  plants  that  he  is  restored  to  health.  It
was  by  broken  pitchers  that  Gideon  triumphed ;  on  broken  pieces  of  the  ship  that
Paul  and  his  companions  were  saved.  It  was  by  the  bruised  and  torn  bodies  of
the  saints  that  the  truth  was  made  to  triumph.  When  we  examine  the  process
of  moral  reform  in  nations  and  individuals,  we  observe  how  effectually  God  has
used  many  broken  things  in  the  rebuilding  of  a  shattered  character — broken
earthly  hopes,  broken  bodily  health,  broken  fortunes,  broken  hearts.  "  A  broken
and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise*'  (Ps.  li.  17,  xxxiv.  18).

Lessons. — 1.  The  greatest  sorrow  is  speechless.  2.  A  sense  of  sin  is  a  sense  of
personal  helplessness.  3.  27ie  grace  of  God  can  change  the  greatest  woe  into  hope
and  gladness.


Illustrations.-  -The  loneliness  of  seldom  happens  that  a  man,  in  conse-
woe.  You  are  tried  alone,  alone  you  quence  of  a  single  severe  stroke,  makes
must  pass  into  the  desert,  alone  you  a  sudden  leap  from  his  natural  state  of
must  be  sifted  by  the  world ;  there  are  security  into  a  state  of  despair,  be  it
moments,  known  only  to  a  man's  own  that  he  has  lost  a  beloved  human  being,
self,  when  he  sits  by  the  poisoned  springs  or  his  means,  or  in  any  other  misfor-
of  existence,  "  yearning  for  a  morrow  tune.  Against  this  form  of  despair
which  shall  free  him  from  the  strife."  even  heathenism  had  a  remedy — re-
Let  life  be  a  life  of  faith ;  do  not  go  signation,  submission  to  the  inevitable,
timorously  about  inquiring  what  others  But  the  deepest  despair  is  when  a  man
think,  what  others  believe,  and  what  gives  up  hope,  not  merely  for  this  or
others  say.  God  is  near  you.  Throw  that  which  he  called  his  own,  but  for
yourself  fearlessly  on  Him.  Trembling  himself  as  a  moral  being.  There  is  one
mortal !  there  is  an  unknown  might  sustaining  and  saving  power — faith  in
within  your  soul  which  will  wake  when  God.  Despair  may  and  should  become
you  command  it.  Every  son  of  man  the  transition  to  salvation,  if  the  man
who  would  attain  the  true  end  of  his  only  despairs  of  himself,  but  does  not
being  must  be  baptized  with  fire. — F.  give  up  his  God.  In  the  expression  of
W.  Jiobertson.  entire  inability,  of  deepest  helplessness

Dejection  and  despair.     The   more  — "  O  wretched  man  that  I  am  " — there

sin  and  corruption  grow,  and  the  man  is  latent  a  hope  of  redemption,  the  hope

becomes  fully  conscious  of  it,  the  more  that  what  is  impossible   with  man  is

does    dejection    grow    also,    and    this  possible  with  God. — Martensen.

changes  at  last  into  despair,  which  is  a  The  ravages  of  suffering.     After  the

state  of  entire  hopelessness,  where  all  relief  of  the  city  of  Paris,  the  strain

possibilities    have    vanished,    all    gates      and  fatigue  through  which  M. had

and  ways  are  closed  to  a  man.     There  gone    told    seriously  upon   his   health,

is  a  despair  for  a  hard  fate,  and  it  not  He  could  not  forget  the  horrors  he  had

51


CHAP.  n.  HOMJIKTW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


witnessed.  His  face  began  to  look  worn.  is  he  amidst  his  lovely  family  !  I  won-
His  hair  became  greyer.  He  looked  der  whether  he  has  a  coffin  in  any  cup-
depressed.        His    usual    cheerful    and  board."

buoyant   energy   disappeared,    and    he  Solitude  oppressive.   When  Thomas,

became  listless,  self-absorbed,  and  mel-  the  missionary   to   India,  reached  Cal-

anclioly.  cutta,  he  was  oppressed  with  a  sense  of

Depression.        Just    before    George  loneliness.      He    put  an  advertisement

Moore's  entrance  into  his  palatial  house  in  the  newspapers  asking  if  there  was

in    Cumberland,  his    wife   died.     This  another  Christian  in  the  country,  and

brought  an  almost  intolerable  sense  of  begging  for  an  interview.     But  there

loneliness.     One  day,  going  to  see  an  was  no  answer  1
intimate  friend,  he  said,  "  How  blessed


HOMILETICS.

The  Utter  Exhaustion  of  Grief.

(Verses  11,  12.)

I.  Because  of  the  hopelessness  of  the  desolation  endured.  "  For  the  destruc-
tion of  the  daughter  of  my  people"  (ver.  11).  The  desolation  is  complete.  Every-
thing is  destroyed — Temple,  home,  army,  nation,  wealth,  food,  and  the  very
capacity  to  rouse  themselves  from  the  torpor  of  despair.  When  the  light  of  hope
is  quenched  it  is  impossible  to  put  forth  effort.     Paralysis  is  destruction.

II.  Because  of  the  heart-rending  spectacle  of  little  children  fainting  in  the
streets  and  dying  in  their  mothers'  arms,  while  they  vainly  moan  for  food.
"  Because  the  children  and  the  sucklings  swoon  in  the  streets.  They  say  to  their
mothers,  '  Where  is  corn  and  wine  % '  when  their  soul  was  poured  out  into  their
mother's  bosom"  (vers.  11,  12).  The  harrowing  details  here  given  are  the  most
affecting  that  have  yet  been  depicted  by  the  graphic  and  versatile  pen  of  the  pro-
phet. The  cry — an  oft-repeated  cry,  as  the  tense  means — of  the  children  for
food,  which  the  mothers  were  powerless  to  supply,  only  added  to  the  tortures  they
already  suffered.  So  completely  prostrate  were  they  with  their  misery,  that  they
saw  their  children  die  with  indifference,  and  could  not  conceal  an  unnatural  relief
when  they  heard  their  last  sob.  Excessive  grief  blunts  the  edge  of  the  finest
natural  instincts.

III.  Because  all  the  powers  for  expressing  emotion  are  completely  spent.
"  Mine  eyes  do  fail  with  tears,  my  bowels  are  troubled,  my  liver  is  poured  upon
the  earth"  (ver.  11).  Jeremiah  employs  the  terms  in  ordinary  use,  and  as  they
were  popularly  understood.  As  the  heart  was  regarded  by  the  Jews  as  the  seat
of  the  intellect,  so  the  liver,  as  the  chief  of  the  large  viscera  classed  together  under
the  name  of  bowels^  was  supposed  to  be  the  seat  of  the  emotions.  By  the  pouring
out,  therefore,  of  the  liver  upon  the  ground  was  meant  that  his  feelings  had
entirely  given  way  under  the  acuteness  of  his  sorrow,  and  he  could  no  longer
restrain  them. — Speaker^s  Comm.  The  agony  of  grief  was  passed.  It  was  quelled
by  sheer  exhaustion.  He  wept  till  he  could  weep  no  more.  He  grieved  till  he
was  incapable  of  feeling  his  grief.  A  tearless  sorrow  is  the  most  dangerous,  and
the  most  difficult  to  cure.

Lessons. — 1.  There  is  a  limit  to  the  greatest  human  sorrow.  2.  There  is  a
moment  in  tlie  experience  of  the  sufferer  when  death  itself  is  welcome,  3.  The
greatest  sorrow  is  a  painful  testimony  to  the  desolating  power  of  sin.


52


HOMJLEriC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  II.


Illustrations.  — Grief    prostrating.

Late  in  the  afternoon  of  a  summer  day
I  entered  a  quiet  graveyard  where  slept
one  of  my  dearest  friends.  It  occupied
the  hrow  of  a  hill,  which,  with  many,  a
kuoil  and  graceful  undulation,  sloped  to
the  green  meadow,  watered  by  a  wind-
ing stream,  now  catching,  at  its  repeated
curves,  the  rays  of  the  setting  sun.  On
the  left  was  a  pleasant  wood,  where  the
bturdy  pine  and  fruit-bearing  beech
concealed  narrow  paths  to  cool  caves
and  mossy  banks.  White  birches  and
the  trembling  aspen,  with  the  sweet-
scented  willow,  grew  upon  the  right,
and  from  beyond  rose  the  curling  smoke
from  the  cottage-houses.  A  robin  sang
its  song  of  love  and  praise,  a  sparrow
passed  me  bearing  food  to  its  little
progeny,  and  the  chirp  of  the  merry
grasshopper  mingled  with  the  hum  of
hundreds  of  flitting  insects.  But  for
this  peace-breathing  scene  I  had  no
greeting.  The  wild  storm,  thunder,
rain,  and  darkness  had  been  more  wel-
come. Yielding  utterly  to  my  grief,
I  threw  myself  upon  the  sod,  and  took
no  heed  of  time.  There  came  over  me
a  sense  of  utter  and  hopeless  desolation  ;
an  a^i-ony  like  that  of  death  turned  to
bitterness  the  blessings  of  my  lot.

—  Grief  is  a  flower  as  delicate  and
prompt  to  fade  as  happiness.  Still  it
does  not  wholly  die.  Like  the  magic
rose,  dried  and  unrecognisable,  a  warm
air  breathed  on  it  will  suffice  to  renew
its  bloom. — De  Gasparin.

Misery  makes  indelible  impressions.
The  rapidity  with  which  ideas  grow  old
in  our  memories  is  in  a  direct  ratio  to
tlie  squares  of  their  importance.  Their
apparent  age  runs  up  miraculously,  like
the  value  of  diamonds,  as  they  increase
in  magnitude.  A  great  calamity,  for
instance,  is  as  old  as  the  trilobites  an
hour  after  it  has  ha])pened.  It  stains
backward  through  all  the  leaves  we
have  turned  over  in  the  book  of  life
before  its  blot  of  tears  or  of  blood  is
diy  on  the  page  we  are  turning.  Did
you  ever  happen  to  see  that  most  soft-
spoken  and  velvet-handed  steam-engine
at  the  Mint*?  The  smooth  piston  slides
backwards  and  forwards  as  a  lady  might
slip  her  delicate  finger  in  and  out  of  a


ring.  The  engine  lays  one  of  its  fingers
calmly  but  firmly  upon  a  bit  of  metal;
it  is  a  coin  now,  and  will  remember  that
touch,  and  tell  a  new  race  about  it,
when  the  date  upon  it  is  crusted  over
with  twenty  centuries.  So  it  is  that
a  great  silent  moving  misery  puts  a  new
stamp  on  us  in  an  hour  or  a  moment —
as  sharp  an  impression  as  if  it  had
taken  half  a  lifetime  to  engrave  it. —
Holmes.

Distress  exhausting.  Distress  is
trouble  of  a  mental  kind,  tending  to
despair.  Tribulation  may  be  described
as  the  "fighting  without,"  whilst  dis-
tress may  be  described  as  the  "  fears
within."  That  kind  of  trouble  is  in-
dicated which  comes  upon  a  wrestler
when  his  antagonist  has  succeeded  in
throwing  him  after  a  long  struggle,
has  got  his  foot  on  him,  is  holding
him  down,  and  all  seems  to  be  up  with
him.  liefore,  when  wrestling,  he  was
troubled,  now  he  is  distressed.  Thus
we  see  that  the  afflictions  contemplated
by  the  terms  tribulation  and  distress
are  no  light  ones  ;  and  it  is  little  wonder
that,  under  the  strain  of  such  untoward
circumstances  of  outward  and  inward
trouble,  the  Christian  should  lose  heart
and  fear  the  worst.

Grief  excessively  indulged.  Ebenezer
Adams,  an  eminent  member  of  the
Society  of  Friends,  on  visiting  a  lady
of  rank,  whom  he  found,  six  months
after  the  death  of  her  husband,  seated
on  a  sofa  covered  with  black  cloth  and
in  all  the  dignity  of  woe,  approached  her
with  great  solemnity,  and  gently  taking
her  by  the  hand,  thus  addressed  her :
"  So,  friend,  I  .*ee,  then,  thou  hast  not
yet  forgiven  God  Almighty."  This
reproof  had  so  great  an  effect  on  the
lady,  that  slie  immediately  laid  aside
her  violent  grief,  and  again  entered  on
the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  life.

The  cure  of  excessive  sorrow.  A
pale  mourner  stood  bending  over  the
tomb,  and  his  tears  fell  fast  and  often.
As  he  laised  his  humid  eyes  to  heaven,
he  cried,  "My  br^Alier  !  0  my  brother."
A  sage  })assed  that  way  and  said,  "For
whom  dost  thou  mourn?"  "One,"
replied  he,  "  whom  I  did  not  sufficiently
love  while  living,  but  whose  inestimable

53


CHAP.  II.  IWMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,

worth  I  now  feel."     "  What   wouklst  tunnelled    Alps    from    the  dark,   cold,

thou  do  if  he  were  restored  to  thee?"  stifling  air,  emerging  on  the  broad  light-

The    mourner    replied    that    he    would  flooded  plains  of  Lombardy,  it  is  often

never  offend  him   by  an  unkind  word,  by  a  way  which  they  know  not,  gloomy

but  would  take  every  occasion  to  show  and  underground,   that  the  convoy  ia

his  friendship,  if  he   could  but  come  carried  which  God's  Spirit  is  bringing

back    to   his   fond   embrace.     "  Then,  to  the  wealthy  place  ;  and  your  present

waste   not   thy  time   in  useless  grief,"  grief  you  will  have  no  reason  to  regret

said  the  sage  ;  "  but  if  thou  hast  friends,  if  it  introduce  you  to  God's  friendship

go  and  cherish  the  living,  remembering  and  to  joys  which  do  not  perish  in  the

that  they  will  one  day  be  dead  also."  using.     Affliction  is  God's  message.^

—  Like  the  passengers  through  the  Hamilton.


EOMILETICS.

Inexpressible  Euin.

(Verse  13.)

I.  Is  incomparable  with  any  ordinary  calamity.  "  What  thing  shall  I  take
to  witness  for  thee  %  What  thing  shall  I  liken  to  thee  ?  What  shall  I  equal  to
thee  1 "  Great  as  may  be  our  distress,  it  is  some  comfort,  slight  though  it  be,  to
know  there  are  others  more  or  less  unfortunate.  But  in  this  case,  the  prophet
has  no  message  from  Jehovah  to  afflicted  Judah,  nor  can  he  offer  the  ordinary
human  consolation  of  saying  that  others  have  had  equal  or  worse  sorrow  to  bear.
The  lamentable  condition  of  Jerusalem  was  unparalleled ;  there  had  been  nothing
like  it.  No  city  had  been  so  highly  privileged  with  Divine  honours :  no  city
had  been  so  signally  punished.  *'  Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like
unto  my  sorrow"  (chap.  i.  12).  Jeremiah  had  exhausted  all  his  powers  of
description.  Desperate  indeed  must  be  the  state  of  Judah  when  such  a  master
of  similes  had  to  confess  his  inability  to  coin  an  adequate  comparison.

II.  Is  measureless  as  the  illimitable  ocean.  *'  For  thy  breach  is  great  like
the  sea."  In  his  extremity  to  find  some  comparison,  the  prophet  mentions  the  sea,
which,  on  account  of  its  vast  dimensions,  its  illimitable  depth  and  breadth,  could
alone  furnish  a  fitting  emblem  of  the  magnitude  of  the  devastation  effected  by
the  Chaldeans.  The  indefiniteness  of  the  figure  thus  used  reveals  at  once  the
straits  to  which  the  writer  was  reduced,  and  the  utter  ruin  in  which  Judah  was
overwhelmed.  Thou  hast  a  flood  of  afflictions,  a  sea  of  troubles,  an  ocean  of
miseries.

III.  Is  beyond  the  power  of  human  consolation  and  repair.  "  What  shall
I  equal  to  thee,  that  I  may  comfort  thee,  0  virgin  daughter  of  Zion?  who  can
heal  thee  ? "  Human  words  fail ;  human  help  is  powerless.  There  is  no  comfort
in  man,  or  in  any  number  of  men.  If  there  is  to  be  any  relief  or  restoration,
it  must  come  from  God.  He  alone  can  change  ruin  into  prosperity,  misery  into
joy,  darkness  into  light.  A  traveller  in  Madeira  set  off  one  morning  to  climb  the
summit  of  a  lofty  mountain  to  gaze  upon  the  distant  scene  and  enjoy  the  balmy
air.  He  had  a  guide,  and  they  had  with  difficulty  ascended  some  two  thousand
feet,  when  a  thick  mist  was  seen  descending  upon  them,  obscuring  the  heavens.
The  traveller  thought  there  was  no  hope  left  but  to  retrace  their  steps  or  be  lost.
But  as  the  cloud  came  nearer  and  darkness  enveloped  them,  the  guide  stepped  on
before,  penetrating  the  mist,  calling  out  every  now  and  then,  "  Press  on,  master,
press  on ;  there's  liglit  beyond  ! "  They  did  press  on,  and  in  a  few  minutes,
emerging  from  the  thick  mist,  found  themselves  gazing  upon  a  scene  of  tran-
scendent beauty.  Above,  the  sky  was  bright  and  cloudless ;  below,  the  almost
level  cloud  through  which  they  had  passed  was  silvered  with  the  rays  of  the  sun,


no  M ILETIC  t  OMMENTA  RY :  LA  MEN  TA  TIONS.


CHAP.  II.


like  a  field  of  untrodden  snow.  In  the  darkest  experiences,  if  we  will  but  listen,
we  may  hear  the  voice  of  our  Divine  Guide  exclaiming,  "  Press  on,  press  on ;
there  is  light  beyond  !  "

Lessons. — 1.  Great  indeed  is  the  calamity  that  baffles  human  ingenuity  to
describe.  2.  The  nation  is  utterly  undone  when  smitten  by  the  hand  of  God.
3.  God  alone  can  repair  the  damage  His  righteous  anger  has  inflicted.


Illustrations.  —  Drifting  to  ruin.

Two  or  three  miles  above  the  falls  of
Niagara  an  Indian  canoe  was  one  day
observed  floating  quietly  along,  with
its  paddle  on  its  side.  At  first  it  was
supposed  to  be  empty.  No  one  could
imagine  a  man  would  expose  himself
to  such  well-known  danger ;  but  a  turn
of  the  current  revealed  an  Indian  lying
asleep  at  the  bottom.  The  spectators
were  shocked,  and  shouted  to  rouse
him,  but  in  vain.  It  seemed  more  like
death  than  sleep  which  held  him.  All
hope  of  rescue  was  gone,  and  they  hur-
ried along  the  shore  in  alarm  to  see  the
end.  It  soon  came,  for  the  torrent  was
now  rolling  so  rapidly  that  they  could
scarcely  keep  pace  with  the  object  of
their  interest.  At  length  the  roar  of  the
water,  which  had  been  hitherto  almost
buried  within  the  high  banks  below,
by  a  sudden  change  of  the  wind  broke
upon  them  with  double  violence.  This
dreadful  noise,  with  which  the  Indian
ear  was  so  familiar,  did  at  last  arouse
him.  He  was  seen  to  start  up  and
snatch  his  paddle.  But  it  was  too  late.
The  same  dinning  sound  which  had
roused  him  from  insensibility  told  him
at  the  same  time  that  it  was  in  vain  to
seek  safety  now  by  paddling,  nor  indeed
had  he  time  to  try.  Upright  as  he  stood
he  was  swept  over  the  awful  precipice,
and  the  boat  and  its  occupant  were  seen
no  more.

Ruin  and  responsibility.  Julian  the
Apostate  had  for  his  coat  of  arms  on  his
escutcheon  an  eagle  struck  through  the
heart  with  a  shaft  feathered  from  her
own  wing,  with  the  motto,  "Our  death
flies  to  us  with  our  own  feathers,  and
our  wings  pierce  us  to  the  very  heart."
The  moral  is,  that  if  a  man  receives
injury,  he  alone  has  caused  it,  and  is
alone  to  blame.

Unutterable  ruin.     Every  man  feels,


and  not  strangely,  that  there  never  were
such  experiences  of  life  as  his  own.  No
joy  was  ever  like  our  joy,  no  sorrow
ever  like  our  sorrow.  Indeed,  there  is
a  kind  of  indignation  excited  in  us
when  one  likens  our  grief  to  his  own.
The  soul  is  jealous  of  its  experiences,
and  does  not  like  pride  to  be  humbled
by  the  thought  that  they  are  common.
For  though  we  know  that  the  world
groans  and  travails  in  pain,  and  has
done  so  for  ages,  yet  a  groan  heard  by
our  ear  is  a  very  different  thing  from
a  groan  uttered  by  our  mouth.  The
sorrows  of  other  men  seem  to  us  like
clouds  of  rain  that  empty  themselves  in
the  distance,  and  whose  long-travelling
thunder  comes  to  us  mellowed  and  sub-
dued; but  our  own  troubles  are  like  a
storm  bursting  right  overhead  and  send-
ing down  its  bolts  upon  us  with  direct
plunge. — Beecher.

Ruin  the  punishment  for  sin.  Fear-
ful it  is  to  consider  that  sin  does  not
only  drive  us  into  calamity,  but  it
makes  us  also  impatient,  and  embitters
our  spirit  in  the  sufferance :  it.  cries
aloud  for  vengeance,  and  so  torments
men  before  the  time  with  such  fearful
outcries  and  horrid  alarms,  that  their
hell  begins  before  the  fire  is  kindled.
It  hinders  our  prayers,  and  consequently
makes  us  hopeless  and  helpless.  It
perpetually  affrights  the  conscience,  un-
less by  its  frequent  stripes  it  brings
a  callousness  and  an  insensible  damna-
tion upon  it.  It  makes  us  lose  all  that
Christ  purchased  for  us — all  the  bless-
ings of  His  providence,  the  comforts  of
His  Spirit,  the  aids  of  His  grace,  the
light  of  His  countenance,  the  hopes  of
His  glory. — Jeremy  Taylor.

—  The  pain,  the  disappointment,  the
dissatisfaction  that  wait  on  an  evil
course,  show  that  the  soul  was  not
made  to  be  the  instrument  of  sin,  but

55


CHAP.  II.  EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


its  lofty  avenger.  The  desolated  afFee-  ever  taught  how  helplessness  begets
tions,  tlie  haggard  countenance,  the  affection  in  the  very  measure  and  pro-
pallid  and  sunken  cheek,  the  sighiiigs  portion  of  itself,  when  he  burst  into
of  grief,  proclaim  that  these  are  ruins  a  fit  of  sorrow,  and,  speaking  of  his
indeed  ;  hut  they  proclaim  that  some-  beautiful  boys  and  blooming  girls,  said,
thing  noble  has  fallen  into  ruin,  pro-  "  If  it  had  been  God's  will,  I  would
claim  it  by  signs  mournful  yet  venerable,  have  parted  with  any  of  them  rather
like  the  desolation  of  an  ancient  temple,  than  her." — GufJwie.
like  its  broken  walls  and  fallen  columns,  No  hope  but  in  God.  The  ninth
and  the  hollow  sounds  of  decay  that  capital  in  the  Ducal  Palace  at  Venice
sink  down  heavily  among  its  deserted  is  decorated  with  figures  of  the  eight
recesses. — Deivey.  virtues — Faith,  Hope,  Charity,  Justice,
Helpless  ruin  appeals  to  our  sym-  Temperance,  Prudence,  Humility,  and
pathy.  Helplessness  appealing  to  our  Fortitude.  The  virtues  of  the  fourteenth
pity  begets  affection.  In  one  of  the  century  are  somewhat  hard-featured,
cottages  of  my  country  parish  dwelt  a  with  vivid  and  living  expression,  and
poor  idiot  child,  horrible  to  all  eyes  plain  everyday  clothes  of  the  time,
but  her  parents,  and  so  helpless  that.  Charity  has  her  lap  full  of  apples,  and
though  older  than  sisters  just  blooming  is  giving  one  to  a  little  child,  who
into  womanhood,  she  lay,  unable  either  stretches  his  arm  for  it  across  a  gap
to  walk  or  speak,  a  burden  on  her  in  the  leafage  of  the  capital.  Fortitude
mother's  lap  almost  the  whole  day  long  tears  open  a  lion's  jaws  ;  Faith  lays  her
— a  heavy  handful  to  one  who  had  the  hand  on  her  breast  as  she  beholds  the
cares  of  a  family,  and  was  the  wife  of  cross;  and  Hope  is  praying,  while  above
a  hard-working  man,  and  a  most  ])ain-  is  a  hand  seen  emerging  from  sunbeams
ful  contrast  to  the  very  roses  that  flung  — the  hand  of  God,  and  the  inscription
their  bright  clusters  over  the  cottage  above  is  Spes  optima  in  Deo.  This  de-
window,  as  well  as  to  the  lark  that,  sign  is  rudely  imitated  hy  the  fifteenth
pleased  with  a  grassy  turf,  carolled  century  workmen  :  the  virtues  have  lost
within  its  cage.  Death,  in  most  in-  their  hard  features  and  living  expres-
stanccs  an  unwelcome  visitor,  came  at  sion  ;  they  have  now  all  got  Roman
length — to  her  and  to  their  relief.  Re-  noses,  and  have  had  their  hair  curled,
lief  !  so  I  thought ;  and  when  the  father  Their  actions  and  emblems  are,  how-
came  with  an  invitation  to  the  funeral,  ever,  preserved  until  we  come  to  Hope
so  I  said.  Though  not  roughly,  but  in-  — she  is  still  praising,  but  she  is  prais-
advertently  spoken,  the  word  jarred  on  ing  to  the  sun  only  :  the  hand  of  God
a  tender  chord;  and  I  was  more  than  is  gone! — Ruskin,


HOMILETICS.

False  Pkophets.

(Verse  14.)

I.  Are  self-deluded.  "Thy  prophets  have  seen  vain  and  foolish  things  for
thee."  Tliy  ])rophets — they  were  certainly  not  God's  prophets.  Their  authority
was  self-assumed,  and  they  ingratiated  themselves  into  the  favour  of  the  people  by
prophesying  only  what  was  agreeable  to  their  hearers.  They  indulged  so  lavishly
in  lies  and  deceit,  that  they  almost  persuaded  themselves  that  what  they  uttered
was  truth.  But  they  were  deluded,  and  their  delusion  was  self-induced.  An
inveterate  habit  of  lying  vitiates  the  moral  sense ;  it  becomes  difficult  to  appre-
ciate what  is  true.  A  lie  poisons  the  atmosphere  wherever  it  circulates.  It  has
no  legs  and  cannot  stand,  but  it  has  wings  and  can  fly  far  and  wide.

II.  Have  no  insight  into  the  real  cause  of  national  calamities,  and  their
teaching   is   powerless  to   prevent   them.     "They  have  not  discovered    thine

56  •


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  n.


iniquity,  to  turn  away  thy  captivity."  The  Syria c  renders  the  words  thus  :  They
have  not  disclosed  to  thee  thy  sins,  that  so  thou  mir/lifest  repent,  and  I  might  have
turned  away  thy  captivity.  They  were  so  deiuoialised  by  the  habitual  practice  of
falseliood,  that  they  were  incompetent  to  judge  the  cause  and  drift  of  the  national
troubles.  They  could  not  see  that  disobedience  to  God  was  at  the  root  of  the
general  distress ;  or,  if  they  did,  tliey  saw  so  little  evil  in  it,  or  danger  from  it,
that  they  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to  alarm  the  peoj^le  by  any  words  of  warning.
Had  tliey  been  able  to  read  the  signs  of  the  times  and  to  act  with  promptness
and  fidelity  in  urging  the  people  to  repentance,  Israel's  chastisement  might  have
been  averted.  When  responsible  leaders  are  unfaithful,  and  abuse  their  trust  by
deceiving  others,  the  misguided  nation  rushes  on  to  its  doom.

III.  Invent  messages  full  of  deceit.  "  But  have  seen  for  thee  false  burdens
and  causes  of  banishment."  The  word  burdens  does  not  mean  here  prophecies
of  a  minatory  character,  for  evidently  the  false  prophets  assured  the  people  of
prosperity  and  deliverance.  The  word  is  used  in  a  contemptuous  sense.  The
burdens,  so  different  from  the  Divine  message  'laid  as  a  burden  on  the  conscience
of  the  genuine  prophet,  were,  in  this  case,  mere  pretence,  false,  empty,  and  utterly
inadequate  to  remove  "the  causes  of  banishment."  The  false  prophets,  in  their
attempt  to  account  for  the  captivity,  invented  any  cause  but  the  real  one — the
apostasy  of  the  people.  Deceit  produces  darker  shades  of  deceit.  One  lie  must
be  quickly  thatched  with  another,  or  it  will  soon  rain  through.  The  way  of  false-
hood is  tortuous.  A  deaf  and  duml)  boy  being  asked,  "  What  is  truth  ? "  replied  by
thrusting  his  finger  forward  in  a  straight  line.  When  asked,  "  What  is  falsehood  1 "
he  made  a  zigzag  motion  with  his  finger.  The  result  of  false  teaching  is  disinte-
gration, banishment,  a  driving  out  Every  lie,  great  or  small,  is  the  brink  of  a
precipice,  the  depth  of  which  nothing  but  Omniscience  can  fathom.  The  poet
Campbell  calls  it,  "The  torrent's  smoothness,  ere  it  dash  below."

Lessons. — 1.   The  true  prophet  receives  his  commission  directly  from   God.

2.  While  the  prophet  is  faithful  to  his  Dioine  calling  he  is  preserved  from  error.

3.  The  false  pn'ophet  deceives  himself  as  well  as  others.


Illustrations. — A  false  prophet.  at  a  village  chapel,  and  endeavoured  to

••  The  bigot  theologian,  in  minute  convince  a  large  congregation  that  there

Distinctions  skilled,  and  doctrines  unreduced  is  no  punishment  after  death.      At   the

To  practice  ;  in  debate  bow  loud  !  how  long  !  close  of  the  discourse   he   informed   the

How  dexterous  !  in  Christian  love,  how  cold  !  v^/^^,^^^v  \^r^  ,Tr^,,M    ,^i.^,.^V.    t'U^^^    ^^«,'^  ,'^

Tj.       .  •<  i.u  J       1  people  ne  would  preacn  tnere  ajjain  in

His  vam  conceits  were  orthodox  alone.  r  ^        -p  J.^  •  i      i        a

The  immutable  and  heavenly  truth  revealed  ^^^^  weeks,  if  they  Wished.      A  respect-

By  God  was  nought  to  him  ;  he  had  an  art,  able  merchant  rose  and  said,   "  Sir,  if

.  A  kind  of  hellish  charm,  that  made  the  lips  your  doctrine   is   true,  we  do  not  need

Of   truth    speak   falsehood  ;    to    his   liking  ^^^^      ^^^  -^  ^^  -^  f^jg      ^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^

turned  "        ],  '

The  meaning  of  the  text ;  made  trifles  seem  J^^^-

The  marrow  of  salvation ;  False    teaching    dangerous    when

Proved  still  his  reasoning  best,  and  his  belief,  nilxed  with  truth.      Falsehood  is  never

^^"^  men-nrrams''"  ^^°'''^'  ^'^"^  ^'  '^^^'  ^^  successful    as    when    she  baits    her

Most^rltiona'Cnos't  Scriptural,  most  sound  ;  ^^^^^^  ^ith  truth.     No  opinions  SO  fatally

With  mortal  heresy  denouncing  all  mislead  US  as  those  that  are  not  wholly

Who  in  his  arguments  could  see  no  force.  wronc^,    as    no    watches     SO    effectually

^^  ^fmmd  ^^^  '''"^^'^'  ^^^'^  ^""^  ^'^  '''^"'  ^""^  deceive  the  wearer  as  those  that   are

At   irsThis  own  most   false— most   false,  sometimes  right.— (7o/^07l.

because  —  Error  is  never   so    dangerous  as

He  spent  his  time  to  prove  all  others  so."  when   it   is   the  alloy   of  truth.     Pure

Pollok.  error  would  be  rejected  ;  but  error  mixed

False    doctrine.       A   man    holding  with  truth  makes  use  of  the  truth  as  a

false  and  pernicious  doctrines  preached  pioneer    for  it,    and  gets    introduction

57


OHAP.  II.


IWMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


where  otherwise  it  would  have  none.
Poison  is  never  so  danf^t^rous  as  wlien
mixed  up  with  food  ;  error  is  never  so
likely  to  do  mischief  as  wlien  it  comes
to  us  under  the  pretensions  and  patron-
age of  that  whicii  is  true. — Gumming.

Faith  in  falsehood  disastrous. —
When  the  Euglisii  army  under  Harold,
and  the  Norman  under  William  the
Conqueror,  were  set  in  array  for  that
fearful  conflict  which  decided  the  fate
of  the  two  armies  and  the  political  des-
tinies of  Great  l>ritain,  William,  per-
ceiving that  he  could  not  by  a  fair
attack  move  the  solid  columns  of  the
English  ranks,  had  recourse  to  a  false
movement  in  order  to  gain  the  victor3^
He  gave  orders  that  one  flank  of  his
army  should  feign  to  be  flying  from  the
field  in  disorder.  The  officers  of  the
English  army  believed  the  falsehood,
pursued  them,  and  were  cut  off.  A
second  time  a  false  movement  was  made
in  another  part  of  the  field.  The  Eng-
lish again  believed,  pursued,  and  were


cut  off.  By  these  movements  the  for-
tunes of  the  day  were  determined.
Although  the  English  had  the  evidence
of  their  senses,  yet  they  were  led  to
believe  a  falsehood.  They  acted  in
view  of  it.  The  consequence  was  the
destruction  of  a  great  part  of  their
army,  and  the  establishment  of  the
Norman  power  in  England.  It  is  an
incontrovertible  fact  that  the  whole
heathen  world,  ancient  and  modern,
have  believed  in  and  worshipped  un-
holy beings  as  gods.  In  consequence
of  believing  falsehood  concerning  the
character  of  God,  all  heathendom  at  the
present  hour  is  filled  with  ignorance,
impurity,  and  crime. — /.  B.  Walker,
Falsehood.

**  I  scorn  this  hated  scene

Of  masking  and  disguise,
Where  men  on  men  still  gleam

With  falseness  in  their  eyes :
Where  all  is  counterfeit,

And  truth  hath  never  say  ;
Where  hearts  themselves  do  cheat,

Concealing  hope's  decay." — MotherwdL


HOMILETICS,
The  Heartless  Triumph  of  the  Scorner.

(Verses  15-17.)

I.  Expressed  in  aggravated  taunts  (ver.  15).  The  conquerors  heap  insult
upon  insult  on  the  fallen  city.  They  employ  all  the  familiar  signs  expressive  of
contempt  and  derision.  They  clap  their  hands,  they  hiss,  they  wag  their  heads,
and  with  a  scornful  curl  of  the  lip  they  ask,  "  Is  this  the  city  that  men  call  the
perfection  of  beauty,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  ? "  Jerusalem  had  acquired  a
world-wide  renown.  It  was  the  pride  of  the  Jew,  the  dread  of  its  subject  tribes,
the  envy  of  surrounding  nations.  No  city  had  been  so  signally  honoured  of
Heaven  ;  and  now  that  it  was  prone  in  the  dust,  its  foes  united  in  a  wild  chorus
of  fiendish  jubilation.  How  vividly  does  this  verse  remind  us  of  the  scene  around
the  cross  of  the  world's  Redeemer  !  ^(Matt.  xxvii.  39-44  ;  Mark  xv.  29-32  ;  Luke
xxiii.  35-37).  It  is  heartless  and  wicked  to  make  sport  of  the  miseries  of  others,
and  is  a  cruel  aggravation  of  those  miseries.  The  triumph  of  the  wicked  is  short.
Their  hollow-ringing  laughter  is  as  "  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot."  Their
taunts  and  gibes  fall  back  upon  themselves.  Our  unkind  words  come  home
to  roost.

II.  Savagely  exults  in  the  havoc  that  has  been  ardently  desired  (ver.  16).
The  intensity  of  the  enemy's  exultation  is  shown  by  the  heaping  up  of  unconnected
words,  with  each  of  which  its  own  proper  object  must  be  supplied.  We  have
found  what  we  sought,  have  seen  what  we  looked  for ;  our  hopes  and  longings  are
all  fulfilled. — Speaker's  Commentary.  The  enemies  of  Zion  eagerly  watched  for
her  downfall,  they  earnestly  desired  it,  they  maliciously  helped  to  bring  it  about ;
and  now  it  had  come,  their  maddened  hilarity  and  scorn  knew  no  bounds.  The
truly  brave  never  exult  over  the  defeat  of  their  worst  foes.     Thev  have  often  been

58


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  n.


known  to  weep  over  the  devastation  they  have  themselves  created.  It  is  inhuman
to  chuckle  over  the  sufferings  of  others.  It  is  a  depth  of  demoralisation  reached
only  hy  the  cowardly  and  craven-hearted.

III.  The  fulfilment  of  Divine  threatenings  against  national  unfaithfulness
(ver.  17).  The  ruin  of  Jerusalem,  over  which  her  adversaries  so  savagely  rejoiced,
was  no  accidental  or  unforeseen  event.  It  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine
purpose,  of  which  Israel  had  been  so  often  forewarned  from  the  days  of  old.  It
was  distinctly  foretold  that  if  Israel  forsook  Jehovah  and  lapsed  into  idolatry,
they  would  be  punished  with  all  the  miseries  of  a  siege,  ending  in  national  over-
throw (Lev.  xxvi.  14-39;  Deut.  xxviii.  15-68).  The  contemptuous  scorn  of
their  enemies  emphasised  their  punishment,  and  testified  to  the  exactness  with
which  the  Divine  threatenings  against  disobedience  had  been  fulfilled.  The
Divine  word,  whether  in  threat  or  promise,  never  fails.  God  is  unchangeably
faithful  both  in  mercy  and  in  judgment.

Lessons. — 1.  The  wicked  ever  gloat  over  the  downfall  of  the  good.  2.  The  gibes
of  the  scorner  are  a  hitter  ingredient  in  the  punishment  of  the  unfaithful.  3.  The
taunts  of  the  wicked  have  no  power  to  injure  the  truly  righteous.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  15,  16.  The  world's  treatment
of  its  suffering  Redeemer  :  1.  A  wild
tempest  of  unreasoning  scorn,  hatred,
and  exultation.  2.  A  mournful  evi-
dence of  the  intense  acrimony  of  sin.
3.  Does  not  prevent  the  unselfish  work-
ing out  of  its  sublime  redemption.

Ver.  17.  The  Divine  threatenings  of
judgment  :  I.  Unaffected  hy  the  lapse
of  time.  "  He  hath  fulfilled  His  word
that  He  had  commanded  in  the  days  of
old."  II.  Are  carried  out  with  relent-
less certainty.  "  He  hath  thrown  down
and  hath  not  pitied."  III.  Always  finds
agents  willing  to  execute  them.  "He
hath  caused  thine  enemy  to  rejoice  over
thee  ;  He  hath  set  up  the  horn  of  thine
adversaries."

Illustrations.  —  Triumph  prema-
ture. During  the  reign  of  Henry
YIIL,  tlie  Pope,  angry  at  the  English
monarch's  resistance,  called  a  council
in  Rome,  at  which  it  was  resolved  that
the  Emperor  of  Germany  should  invade
Englami,  and  that  Henry  should  be
deposed.  So  rejoiced  was  the  Papal
party,  that  they  illuminated  Rome ;
cannons  were  fired,  bonfires  lighted,
and  great  bodies  of  men  paraded  the
streets  shouting,  "  The  Empire  and
Spain."  Already,  in  their  eager  expec-
tation, England  was  a  second  Nether-
lands,  a  captured  province  under  the


regency  of  Catherine  or  Mary.     How
bitterly  these  expectations   were   over-
thrown history  too  well  declares.
Scorn,  not  to  be  dreaded.

**  Ridicule  is  a  weak  weapon  when  levelled  at
a  strong  mind ;

But  common  men  are  cowards,  and  dread
an  empty  laugh.

Betray  mean  terror  of  ridicule,  thou  shalt
find  fools  enough  to  mock  thee  ;

But  answer  thou  their  laughter  with  con-
tempt,

And  the  scoffers  will  lick  thy  feet."

— Tupper.

A  scoffer  nonplussed.  On  a  certain
occasion,  in  the  presence  of  a  vast  and
brilliant  assemblage,  a  person  more
noted  for  his  self-esteem  than  for  his
learning  was  speaking  against  the  Chris-
tian religion  in  terms  of  the  severest
scorn  and  derision.  The  celebrated  Dr.
Belknap,  overhearing  the  orator,  stepped
up  to  him  and  asked,  "  Well,  sir,  have
you  found  a  religion  that  is  better?"
The  scoffer,  considerably  abashed  by
this  unlooked-for  question,  was  forced
to  acknowledge  that  thus  far  he  had
not.  "  Well,"  responded  the  Doctor,
"  when  you  have,  let  me  know,  and  I
will  join  you  in  adopting  it."  The
rebuke  was  as  wise  as  it  was  just.

Sarcasm  destroys  friendship.  Life
is  full  of  paradoxes.  There  are  some
slight  causes  which  will  destroy  tlie
strongest  friendship.     Great  causes  will

59


CHAP.  TI.


HOMILETTC  COMMENT  ART:  LAMENTATIONS.


not  always  impair  it.  A  sarca^^tic  and
disparaging  speech  made  by  a  friend
concerning  his  friend  in  his  absence,
and  repeated  by  some  mischief-maker,
will  invariably  disturb  friendship;  while
an  angry  altercation,  or  some  injury  to
person  or  to  property,  will  often  leave
friendship  unharmed.  When  aliena-
tion begins,  it  increases  at  a  very  rapid
rate.  The  rust  spot  multiplies  apace.
The  mildew  spreads  quickly.  The  rift
in  the  lute  becomes  longer  and  longer.
— aS^.  Martin.

The  Redeemer's  sufferings  uniciue.
Did  Christ  then  merely  suffer  as  any
other  man  has  done?  Suffering  is  a
question  of  nature.  The  educated  man
suffers  more  than  the  uneducated  man ;
the  poet  probably  suffers  more  than  the
mathematician ;  the  commanding  officer
suffers  more  in  a  defeat  than  the  com-
mon soldier.  The  more  life  the  more
suffering,  the  billows  of  sorrow  being
in  proportion  to  the  volume  of  our
manhood.  Now  Jesus  Christ  was  not
merely  a  man.  He  was  man,  and  by
the  very  compass  of  His  manhood  He
suffered  more  than  any  mortal  can  en-
dure. The  storm  may  pass  as  fiercely
over  the  shallow  lake  as  over  the  At-


lantic, but  by  its  very  volume  the  latter
is  more  terribly  shaken.  No  other  man
had  come  with  Christ's  ideas ;  in  no
other  man  was  the  element  of  self  so
entirely  abnegated ;  no  other  man  had
offered  such  opposition  to  diabolical
'rule.  All  these  circumstances  combine
to  render  Christ's  sufferings  unique,  yet
not  one  of  tliem  puts  Christ  so  far  away
as  to  prevent  us  finding  in  His  suffering
unfailing  solace  and  strength.  —  Dr,
Parker.

Divine  punishment  certain.  Those
who  made  light  of  the  invitation  to  the
supper  mentioned  in  the  Gospel  were
shut  out.  The  sceptical  Pilate  ended  a
miserable,  hopeless  life  by  suicide.  T)ie
rich  man  went  on  living  splendidly,
giving  banquets,  pampering  his  body,
until  one  day  he  died  and  was  buiied,
and  awoke  in  torment  to  know  its
reality  at  last.  The  people  in  Noah's
days  lived  securely  and  indifferent,
"  until  the  flood  came  and  took  them
all  away."  On  the  inhabitants  of
Sodom  the  sun  was  shining  when  Lot
went  out  of  the  city  ;  but  the  same  day
it  rained  fire  and  brimstone,  and  de-
stroyed them  alL


HOMILETICS.

A  Call  to  Prayer.

(Yerses  18,  19.)

L  Addressed  to  a  city  suffering  the  miseries  of  a  desolating  siege.     "  Their

heart  cried  unto  the  Lord,  0  wall  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  !  "  (ver.  18).  It  sounds
strange  thus  to  appeal  to  the  wall  of  Zion — to  pray  so  passionately  that  tears  may
run  down  like  a  river.  But  this  is  quite  after  the  manner  of  Jeremiah  and  other
sacred  writers  (comp.  ver,  8;  Isa.  xiv  31  ;  Jer.  xxii.  29  ;  Hab.  ii.  11  ;  Luke  xix.
40).  Carried  away  with  an  outburst  of  sorrow,  "tlie  prophet  suddenly  addresses
the  wall,  which  had  so  long  been  their  shelter  and  defence,  and  bids  it,  as  the
representative  of  the  people  who  had  dwelt  secure  under  its  protection,  to  shed
floods  of  tears  on  their  behalf.  Broken  up  by  the  enemy,  it  could  be  their  guar-
dian no  longer,  but  by  its  ruins  it  might  still  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their  behalf."
However  great  may  be  our  distress,  it  is  always  wise  to  promptly  obey  the  sum-
mons to  pray.     Prayer  brings  moral  strength  and  brightens  the  hope  of  rescue.

XL  To  be  mingled  with  much  weeping.  "  Let  tears  run  down  like  a  river
day  and  night ;  give  thyself  no  rest ;  let  not  the  apple  of  thine  eye  cease  "  (ver.
18).  Like  a  river,  a  brook,  or  torrent,  rushing  along  furiously  at  one  time  and
afterwards  dried  up.  In  the  nature  of  things  weeping  cannot  be  incessant.  Like
a  torrent,  it  gushes  out  in  floods  of  tears,  and,  though  ceasing  at  intervals,  it  is  in
this  instance  to  be  often  repeated.  Keasons  for  frequent  weeping  will  be  found
60


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  n.


in  the  prolonged  continuance  of  the  misery.  Suffering  is  apt  to  stupify  and
harden,  if  the  heart  is  not  softened  with  tears.  Prayer  is  the  more  genuine  when
accompanied  with  godly  sorrow.

III.  To  be  expressed  with  loud  cries  throughout  the  night-watches.
"Arise,  cry  out  in  the  night;  in  the  beginning  of  the  watches  pour  out  thine
heart  like  water  before  the  face  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  19).  At  the  beginning  of
each  night- w^atch  means  all  the  night  through.  There  are  crises  in  life,  times  of
trouble  and  peril,  when  the  time  usually  devoted  to  sleep  may  be  fitly  employed
in  earnest,  agonising  prayer.  Such  a  time  had  come  in  the  history  of  Judah  ;
such  a  time  comes  to  most.  There  is  a  pathetic  tenderness  of  sorrow  in  the
night-moanings  and  cries  of  the  soul,  and  it  is  then  we  are  often  conscious  of  the
special  nearness  of  Divine  help.

"Hours  spent  with  pain  and  Thee
Lost  hours  have  never  seemed  ;
No  !  those  are  lost  which  but  might  be
From  earth  for  heaven  redeemed.

For  weeping,  wakeful  eyea

Instinctive  look  above,
And  catch,  through  openings  in  the  skies,

Thy  beams,  unslumbering  Love  !  "

IV.  To  be  offered  especially  on  behalf  of  perishing  children.  "  Lift  up  thy
hands  towards  Him  for  the  life  of  thy  young  children  that  faint  for  hunger  at  the
top  of  every  street"  (ver.  19).  Among  the  most  heart-rending  miseries  of  the
siege  was  the  spectacle  of  little  children  prostrate  in  the  streets  slowly  dying  of
starvation.  You  cannot  enter  a  street  in  any  part  of  the  city  but  this  sad  sight
meets  the  eye.  The  lifting  up  of  the  hands  is  not  only  the  attitude  and  symbol
of  prayer,  but  indicates  earnestness  in  supplication.  The  sufferings  of  helpless
children  appeal  to  the  hardest  heart,  and  when  it  is  impossible  to  render  any
other  help,  we  are  called  upon  to  pray  for  them.  When  our  children  are  in  ex-
tremity, so  are  we.  Prayer  is  the  only  refuge,  apart  from  which  there  is  nothing
but  wretchedness  and  despair.

Lessons. — 1.  Our  daily  necessities  are  a  constant  call  to  prayer.  2.  Misery
finds  relief  in  prayer.     3.  The  young  should  ever  be  the  subject  of  earnest  prayer.

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.    19.    A  night   of  prayer;    1.  yoke  in  his  youth;"  and  they  forget

Necessary  in  circumstances  of   special  that   that    "yoke   is    easy"   and    that

peril.      2.  Often  characterised    by    in-  "burden  is  light.'*    God  hears  children,

tense  earnestness.    3.  Familiar  to  many  He  called  Samuel  when  he  was  but  a

an    anxious    mother   pleading   for  the  child.     We  have  had  our  Josiahs,  we

salvation  of  her  child.  have  had  our  Timothys  ;  we  have  seen

—  Watch-Night  service.      I.   It  is  those  in  early  youth    brought   to  the

never  too  soon  to  pray.      There  is  no  Saviour.       Young  man,   it  is  not  too

reason   why  you  should   delay  to   the  soon.     II.  It  is  not  too  late  to  cry  to

morning  light.     "  In  the  beginning  of  the  Lord.     If  the  sun  be  set  and  the

the  night-watches  pour  out  thine  heart  watches  of  the  night  have  commenced

like  water  before  the  face  of  the  Lord."  their   round,   the   mercy-seat   is   open.

How  many  young  persons  imagine  that  No  shop  is  open  so  late  as  the  House  of

religion  is  a  thing  for  age,  or  at  least  Mercy.     The  devil  has  two  tricks  with

for  maturity  !     They  do  not  want  their  men.     Sometimes  he  puts  their  clock  a

young  shoulders   galled   with  an  early  little  backward,  and  says,  "  Stop  !  there

burden ;   they  do  not  think  it  is  true  is  time  enough  yet ; "    and  when  that

that  **  it  is  good  for  a  man  to  bear  the  does  not  answer,  he  turns  the  hands  on,

61


CHAP,  IT.


HOMILKTTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


and  cries  out,  "  Too  late  !  too  late  ! "
Within  another  fifteen  minutes  another
year  shall  have  come ;  hut  if  the  Spirit
of  God  calls  you  this  year,  He  will  not
call  you  too  late  in  the  year.  If  to  the
last  second  you  should  live,  if  God  the
Holy  Ghost  calls  you  then,  He  will  not
have  called  you  too  late.  The  darkness
of  night  is  gathering ;  it  is  coming  on,
and  you  are  near  death.  Arise,  sleeper,
arise  I  Thou  art  now  taking  the  last
nap  of  death.  III.  We  caniiot  pray
too  vehemently.  '*  Cry  out  in  the  night."
God  loves  earnest  prayers.  He  loves
impetuous  prayers,  vehement  prayers.
Let  a  man  preach,  if  he  dare,  coldly
and  slowly,  but  never  let  him  pray  so.
Those  who  cry  with  weak  voices,  who
do  not  cry  aloud,  must  not  expect
to  get  a  blessing.  When  you  go  to
Mercy's  gate,  do  not  give  a  gentle  tap
like  a  lady,  do  not  give  a  single  knock
like  a  beggar,  but  take  the  knocker  and
rap  hard  till  the  very  door  seems  to
shake.  Rap  with  all  your  might,  and
recollect  tliat  God  loveth  those  who
knock  hard  at  Mercy's  gate.  IV.  We
cannot  pray  too  sim)>ly.  *'  Pour  out
your  hearts  before  Him."  Not  pour
out  your  fine  words,  not  pour  out  your
beautiful  periods,  but  pour  out  your
hearts.  "  I  dare  not,"  says  one  ;  "  there
is  black  stuff  in  my  heart."  Out  with
it,  then;  it  is  better  out  than  in.  "I
cannot  pray  as  I  could  wish,"  says
another ;  *'  my  crying  out  is  a  feeble
one."  When  you  pour  out  water,  it
does  not  make  much  noise.  So  you
can  "  pour  out  your  lieart  like  water,"
and  it  will  run  away,  and  you  can
scarcely  know  it.  There  is  many  a
prayer  uttered  in  a  garret,  down  in  a
cellar,  or  in  some  lonely  place  where
the  cobbler  sits  mending  his  shoes  be-
neath a  window,  which  the  world  does
not  hear,  but  the  Lord  hears  it.  Pour
out  your  heart  like  water  by  confessing
your  sins,  by  begging  the  Lord  to  have
mercy  on  you  for  Christ's  sake.  And
when  it  is  all  poured  out,  He  will  come
and  fill  it  again.  Listen  for  one  mo-
ment to  tlie  ticking  of  that  clock.  It
is  the  beating  of  the  pulse  of  eternity ;
it  is  the  footstep  of  death  pursuing  you.
Time  is  precious,  and  when  we  have
62


little  of  it,  it  is  more  precious.  You
will  soon  enter  another  year.  This
year  will  have  gone  in  a  few  seconds.
Where  will  the  next  year  be  spent  ? —
G.  H.  Spurgeon.

Illustrations. — A  mute  summons
to  prayer.  Venice  may  well  call  upon
us  to  note  with  reverence,  that  of  all
the  towers  which  are  still  seen  risinjr
like  a  branchless  forest  from  her  islands,
there  is  but  one  whose  ofhce  was  other
than  that  of  summoning  to  prayer,  and
that  one  was  a  watch-tower  only. —
— Ruskin.

Tearful  intercession  irresistible.
Miss  Gratz — supposed  to  have  been  the
original  of  Rebecca  in  "  Ivanhoe  " — was
nursing  her  grandfather  in  his  last  ill-
ness. Calling  her  to  him  one  day,  he
said,  "  What  can  I  do  for  you,  my  dear
child?"  Turning  upon  him  her  beau-
tiful eyes  filled  with  tears,  she  said  in
a  tone  of  earnest  entreaty,  "  Grand-
father, forgive  Aunt  Shinah."  This
was  a  daughter  who  had  been  long
estranged  because  of  her  marriage  with
a  Gentile.  The  old  man  sought  his
grand- daughter's  hand,  pressed  it,  and,
after  a  silence,  said  in  a  broken  voice,
"  Send  for  her."  In  due  course  the
lady  came,  received  her  father's  forgive-
ness and  blessing,  and  when,  a  few
days  later,  he  breathed  his  last,  the
arms  of  his  long-estranged  child  were
about  him,  while  Rebecca  Gratz  sat
silently  at  his  side.

Prayer  necessary  for  service.  Bees
suffer  sadly  ivoxn  famine  during  the
dry  years  which  occasionally  occur  in
the  southern  and  middle  portions  of
California.  If  the  rainfall  amounts
only  to  three  or  four  inches,  instead  of
from  twelve  to  twenty,  as  in  ordinary
seasons,  then  sheep  and  cattle  die  in
thousands,  and  so  do  these  small  winged
cattle,  unless  they  are  carefully  fed  or
removed  to  other  pastures.  No  flowers,
no  honey  ;  no  rain,  no  food.  They  who
teach  others  must  themselves  feed  on
the  truths  they  declare.  Failure  to
commune  with  God  will  give  the
poverty-stroke  to  our  endeavours  to
bless  man.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.   II.


Sorrow  daves  men  to  prayer.

**  *  There  is  no  God,'  the  foolish  saith,
But  none  *  There  is  no  sorrow  ; '
And  Nature  oft  the  cry  of  faith

In  bitter  need  will  borrow  :
Eyes  which  the  preacher  could  not  school,

By  wayside  graves  are  raised,
And  lips  say  '  God  be  pitiful, '

Who  ne'er  said  '  God  be  praised  ! '
Be  pitiful,  O  God  ! "

— Mrs.  Browning,

**  Jesus,  pitying  Saviour,  hear  me  ;
Draw  Thou  near  me  ;
Turn  Thee,  Lord,  in  grace  to  me  ;

For  Thou  knowest  all  my  sorrow  ;
Night  and  morrow

Doth  my  cry  go  up  to  Thee.

Peace  I  cannot  find  :  O  take  me,

Lord,  and  make  me
From  the  yoke  of  evil  free  ;

Calm  this  longing  never-sleeping,
Still  my  weeping,

Grant  me  hope  once  more  in  Thee."
— Tersteegen.

Sympathy  with  youth.  George
Moore,  merchant  and  philanthropist,
was  the  constant  resort  of  young  men
wanting  situations.  If  he  could  not
provide  for  them  in  his  owm  warehouse,
he  endeavoured  to  find  situations  for
them  amongst  his  friends.  He  took
no  end  of  trouble  about  this  business.
After  his  young  friends  had  obtained
employment,  he  continued  to  look  after
them.  He  took  down  their  names  and
addresses  in  a  special  red  book  kept
for  the  purpose,  and  repeatedly  asked
them  to  dine  with  him  on  Sunday  after-
noons. He  usually  requested  that  they
should  go  to  some  church  or  chapel  in
the  evening.


A  mother's  prayer.  After  Augus-
tine had  lost  faith  in  Manichgeism,  he
found  himself  in  the  same  situation  as
he  was  ten  years  before.  There  was
the  same  longing  after  truth,  but  linked
now  with  a  feeling  of  desolation,  a
bitter  sense  of  deception,  and  a  large
measure  of  scepticism.  He  was  no
longer  at  ease  in  Carthage,  and  resolved
on  a  journey  to  Rome,  where  he  ven-
tured to  hope  for  a  more  brilliant  and
profitable  career  as  a  rhetorician.  His
mother  wished  either  to  prevent  his
going,  or  to  go  with  him.  While  she
spent  a  night  in  the  Church  of  the
Martyr,  praying  and  wrestling  with
God  in  tears  to  prevent  the  voyage,
Augustine  sailed  for  the  coast  of  Italy,
and  his  deceived  mother  found  herself
the  next  morning  alone  on  the  sea-shore.
She  had  learned,  however,  the  heavenly
art  of  forgiving,  and  believing  also
where  she  could  not  see.  In  quiet
resignation  she  returned  to  the  city,  and
continued  to  pray  for  the  salvation  of
her  son.  Though  meaning  well,  she
this  time  erred  in  her  prayer,  for  the
journey  of  Augustine  was  the  means
of  his  salvation.  The  denial  of  the
prayer  was,  in  fact,  the  answering  of  it.
Instead  of  the  husk,  God  granted  rather
the  substance  of  her  petition  in  the  con-
version of  her  son.  "  Therefore,"  says
he,  "  hadst  Thou,  O  God,  regard  to  the
aim  and  essence  of  her  desires,  and
didst  not  do  what  she  then  prayed  for,
that  Thou  mightest  do  for  me  what  she
continually  implored." — Schaff,


HOMILETICS.
A  Prayer  for  Divine  Compassion.
(Verses  20-22.)

I.  Reminding  Jehovah  of  His  former  favour  to  the  sufferers.  "Behold,  0
Lord,  and  consider  to  whom  Thou  hast  done  this  "  (ver.  20).  The  prophet  seems
to  feel  that  if  God  would  only  look  and  recall  to  mind  who  they  were  who  were
sufi'ering,  He  would  surely  have  pity.  They  are  not  the  heathen,  but  His  own
people,  the  seed  of  Abraham,  whom  He  raised  from  obscurity  and  endowed  with
unexampled  blessings.  Their  present  misery  was  all  the  more  painful  to  endure
when  contrasted  with  their  former  affluence  and  power,  and  would  surely  move
the  compassion  of  Him  who  had  so  often  interposed  on  their  behalf.  It  is  a  great
help  in  prayer  to  remind  God  of  His  former  loving-kindness.  Every  blessing  we
receive  from  God  increases  His  interest  in  our  welfare.  Every  act  of  disobedience
is  a  sin  against  Infinite  Love.

63


CHAP.  II.  HOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS.


II.  Uttered  from  the  midst  of  appalling  distress  (vers.  20,  21).  In  these
verses  we  have  a  vivid  description  of  the  sutferiiig  and  desolation  occasioned  by
the  siege.  In  the  extreme  exigencies  of  famine  the  most  horrible  cannibaUsm
was  practised :  the  pangs  of  hunger  devoured  maternal  affection,  and  mothers
devoured  their  newly-born  infants.  Even  this  had  been  predicted  as  the  fruit  of
disobedience  (Deut.  xxviii.  53).  How  little  do  we  appreciate  the  great  goodness
of  God  in  providing  daily  food  for  ourselves  and  our  children  !  Everywhere  in
the  city  were  visible  the  most  ghastly  scenes  of  indiscriminate  massacre — **  priest
and  prophet,  young  and  old,  virgins  and  young  men,"  lay  in  promiscuous  heaps
of  the  slain.  If  prayer  can  reach  heaven,  it  must  surely  be  when  ascending  from
the  midst  of  anguish  like  this.  The  greater  the  distress  we  are  in,  the  more  urgent
and  importunate  should  be  our  prayers.

III.  Wrung  from  a  people  terrified  with  startling  proofs  of  the  Divine
anger.  "  Tliou  hast  called  as  in  a  solemn  day  my  terrors  round  about,  so  that  in
the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  none  escaped  or  remained  "  (ver.  22).  Jeremiah  had
often  threatened  the  terrors  of  God's  wrath  in  the  destruction  of  the  nation,  if  the
people  persisted  in  idolatry  ;  but  they  heeded  not.  They  made  jests  of  his  warn-
ings, and  their  earnest  repetition  only  increased  their  ridicule.  But  when  they  saw
Jerusalem  hemmed  round  by  the  victorious  Chaldeans,  and  the  utter  ruin  that
followed,  they  then  saw  the  portentous  meaning  of  "  the  terrors  "  that  had  been
so  often  threatened  and  so  recklessly  despised.  The  anger  of  the  Lord  became
to  them  a  solemn  reality,  and,  overwhelmed  with  confusion  and  fear,  they  cry  for
help.  Whatever  impels  the  soul  to  pray  is  a  blessing.  The  beginning  of  prayer
may  rise  from  our  fears ;  but  as  we  persevere,  it  will  be  actuated  by  nobler  motives.
All  that  prayer  can  do  is  to  bring  our  case  before  God.  We  must  then  leave  it
there  with  Him,  and  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done."

Lessons. — 1.  The  final  appeal  of  the  helpless  is  to  God.  2.  When  distress
induces  prayer,  deliverance  is  at  hand.  3.  Jehovah  is  graciously  moved  to  help  by
human  entreaty,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.  20.   "Behold,  O  Lord,  and  con-  soaring  eagle  mounting  upward  in  its

sider  to  whom  Thou  hast  done  this."  flight,  and  with  steady  gaze  pursuing

The   Divine   pity  :    1.    Earnestly   im-  the  track  till  lost  to  all  below.     It  is

plored   by  a   suffering  people.     2.  In-  the  roving  wanderer  looking   towards

voked  on  the  ground  of  former  kind-  his   abiding-place,    where    are   all    his

nesses,  which,  it  is  acknowledged,  have  treasures   and    his    gold.       It    is    the

been  abused.     3.  Is  never  appealed  to  prisoner  pleading  for  release.     It  is  the

in  vain.  mariner  of  a  dangerous  sea,  upon  the

Ver.  22.  The  tyranny  of  fear :   I.  reeling  topmast,    descrying  the    broad

Realised    when    beset    by    a    powerful  and  quiet  haven  of  repose.     It  is  the

enemy.     2.  When  the  enemy  is  sum-  soul,    oppressed    by    earthly   soarings,

moned  and  directed  by  One  whom  we  escaping  to  a  broader  and  purer  si)here,

have    consciously  offended.     3.   When  and  bathing  its  plumes  in  the  ethereal

we  are   witnesses  of   cruelties  we   are  and  eternal. —  Wells.

powerless  to  prevent.  Yearning  for  God. — When  my  blood

flows  like  wine,  when  all  is  ease  and

Illustrations. — Prayer.    It  is  help-  prosperity,  when  the  sky  is  blue  and

lessness    casting  itself   on    power.      It  birds  sing   and   flowers   blossom,    and

is  infirmity  leaning   on   strength,   and  my  life  is  an  anthem  moving  in  time

misery  wooing  bliss.     It  is  the  flight  of  and   tune,    then  this  world's  joy  and

the  soul  to  the  bosom  of  God,  and  the  aff'ection  suffice.     But  when  a  change

spirit    soaring   upward    and    claiming  comes,  when  I  am  weary  and  disap-

nativity   beyond   the   stars.     It  is  the  pointed,  when  the  skies  lower  into  a
64


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  II,


somLre  niglit,  when  there  is  no  ?ong  of
bird,  and  the  perfume  of  flowers  is  but
their  dying  breath,  when  all  is  sun-
setting  and  autumn,  then  I  yearn  for
Him  who  sits  with  the  summer  of  love
in  His  soul,  and  feel  that  all  earthly
affection  is  but  a  glow-worm  light  com-
pared to  that  which  blazes  with  such
effulgence  in  the  heart  of  God.  —
Beeclier.

Divine  compassion.  ^Ye  often  suffer
more  on  account  of  other's  troubles  than
they  themselves  do  in  those  troubles,
for  both  love  and  sorrow  take  their
measure  as  much  from  the  capacity  of
the  nature  that  experiences  them  as
from  the  power  of  the  externally  ex-
citing cause.  How  much  one  suffers
with  or  for  another  does  not  depend
altogether  upon  how  much  that  other
is  suffering,  but  upon  how  much  that
nature  which  sympathises  has  with
which  to  suffer.  God  feels  with  us,
so  that  our  experiences  throw  their
waves  upon  the  shore  of  His  soul.  He
carries  us  so  near  to  His  heart  that  all
our  feelings  which  are  of  any  moment
produce  their  effects  in  some  degree  in
His  bosom.  It  seems  very  strange  that
the  Maker  of  all  the  earth  should  per-
mit Himself  to  be  a  participant  in  all
the  petty  experiences  that  belong  to  any
human  life.  No  man  would  have  dared
to  conceive  such  an  idea  of  God,  and  to
have  believed  any  such  thing  as  that,
if  it  had  not  been  revealed  in  unequi-
vocal terms.

The  compassion  of  Jesus.  Luther
said,  "I  would  run  into  the  arms  of
Christ  if  He  stood  with  a  drawn  sword
in  His  hands."  John  Butterworth,
reading  this,  resolved  to  do  likewise,
and  found,  as  every  venturing  sinner
does,  no  sword  in  the  hands  of  Jesus,
but  open  arms  and  a  hearty  welcome.
Christ's  proclamation,  for  ever  sounding
forth  to  every  burdened  heart,  is  "  Come
unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."
He  demonstrated  His  marvellous  com-
passion by  dying  for  us.  He  will  not
now  repulse  the  approach  or  disregard
the  cry  of  the  needy.

The  influence  of  fear.  There  is  a
virtuous  fear,  which  is  the  effect  of
65


faith  ;  and  there  is  a  vicious  fear,  which
is  the  product  of  doubt.  The  former
leads  to  hope,  as  relying  on  God,  in
whom  we  believe  ;  the  latter  inclines
to  despair,  as  not  relying  on  God,  in
whom  we  do  not  believe.  Persons  of
the  one  character  fear  to  lose  God  ;  ])er-
sons  of  the  other  character  fear  to  find
Him.  — Pascal.

Slavish  and  filial  fear.  There  are
two  kinds  of  fear — one  full  of  suspicious
watchfulness,  of  anxious  apprehension,
of  trepidation,  terror,  and  dismay ;  the
other  such  as  can  dwell  in  the  same
heart  with  confidence  and  love,  and  is
but  another  form  of  reverence.  Filial
fear  of  God  is  a  duty ;  slavish  and  ser-
vile dread  of  Him  is  a  sin.  Filial  fear
shrinks  from  sin ;  servile  fear  only  from
the  smart  of  punishment.  Filial  fear
keeps  men  from  departing  from  the
living  God,  servile  fear  drives  them
from  Him.  By  filial  fear  men  are  made
like  the  man  Christ  Jesus ;  by  servile
fear  they  may  be  scared  from  iniquity,
as  the  wolf  from  the  sheepfold  by  the
shepherd's  gun  ;  but  it  does  no  more  to
make  them  holy  than  the  fright  does
to  destroy  the  wolfs  ferocity.  Filial
fear  animates  us  to  avoid  whatever
would  be  offensive  to  our  Heavenly
Father,  and,  if  the  expression  may  be
allowed,  to  consult  His  feelings  and
desires ;  but  servile  fear,  as  it  springs
from  selfishness,  causes  us  only  to  care
for  ourselves,  and  at  best  makes  us  not
better,  but  only  a  little  more  prudent
than  the  devil. — Bertram.

The  greatest  fear.  When  a  city  is
compassed  round  about  with  a  wall  that
is  impregnable,  it  will  be  opened  still
towards  heaven,  and  therefore  cannot
be  out  of  danger  if  God  be  an  enemy.
For  all  their  walls  and  bars,  God  could
rain  fire  and  brimstone  upon  the  Sodo-
mites out  of  heaven.  Alexander  asked
the  Scythians  what  they  were  most
afraid  of,  thinking  they  would  say  of
himself,  who  was  so  victorious  every-
where. But  they  answered  scoffingly
they  were  most  afraid  lest  heaven  should
fall  upon  them.  We,  indeed,  need  not
fear  anything  hut  this  only,  lest  the
heaven  should  fall  upon  us,  lest  God
should  be  our  enemy. — J.  Stonnliton.


CHAf.  m.  IIOMtLETlC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.

CHAPTER  III.
An  Ideal  Representation  of  National  Sorrow.

The  middle  elegy  is,  not  only  in  structure  but  also  in  tone,  readily  distinguished  from  the
»ther  four.  An  element  of  personality  is  manifest  in  it  which  is  not  in  them.  The  poet  con-
centrates in  himself  all  forms  of  the  calamities  which  he  laments.  Some  of  these  seem  too
sharp  and  heavy  to  be  experienced  by  a  single  individual,  and  the  doubt  is  turned  into  a  cer-
tainty when  he  associates  himself  once  and  again  with  others.  He  is  a  member  of  a  body.  In
this  feature  a  significant  proof  is  indicated  of  that  unfolding  form  of  prophecy  in  which  the
whole  community  of  Israel,  or  an  undefined  part  of  it,  is  regarded  as  represented  by  a  special
person — the  Servant  whose  experiences  are  hardly  so  much  his  own  as  those  of  his  people.  He
stands  apart  from  them  by  the  peculiarities  of  his  condition,  but  he  draws  to  himself  all  their
sorrows  and  pains,  and  that  burden  impels  him  to  act  as  an  advocate  on  their  behalf  before
Jehovah.  As  we  read  such  things  we  are  reminded  of  the  resemblance  which  they  bear  to  the
course  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah.  He  was  "separated  "  from  his  nation,  but  became  a  partici-
pant of  the  terrible  doom  he  announced.  He  would  not  stand  off  from  his  people  when  he
might  have  gone  with  the  Babylonian  Captain  of  the  Guard.  It  was  his  pure  conscience  and
sensitive  heart  which  realised  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  against  the  sins  which  had  corrupted
the  con.science  and  heart  of  his  fellow-countrymen.  It  was  for  their  sakes,  he  said,  My  heart  is
faint  within  me.  .  .  .  For  the  hurt  of  the  daughter  of  my  people  am  I  hurt ;  I  am  black.  His
position  was  a  forecast  of  that  mightier  Servant  who  came  not  to  he  served  but  to  serve,  and  to
give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many.

The  progress  of  the  poem  presents  a  strange  tumult  of  thought.  There  is  arraignment  of
God's  dealings  and  acknowledgment  of  His  mercies  ;  impatience  at  his  sufferings,  which  does
not  crowd  out  his  patience  ;  wonder  why  the  Lord  should  send  such  punishments,  and  confes-
sion of  sins  with  little  hope  that  it  would  pave  the  way  for  pardon.  Yet  is  not  this  a  true
portrait  of  each  soul  that  is  striving  against  sin  in  himself  and  others  ?  Without  fighting ,  within
fears.

The  first  part  of  the  chapter  sets  forth  the  soul-sufferings  of  the  godly  in  their  cheerless
and  hopeless  misery  (vers.  1-18) ;  then  it  ascends  to  hope  by  meditation  on  the  compassion  of
God  (vers.  19-39)  ;  next  is  the  recognition  of  God's  justice  in  the  punishment,  but  the  intensity
of  which,  through  the  malice  of  enemies,  the  Lord  cannot  pass  by  (vers.  40-54) ;  and  last,
prayer  that  He  would  send  help  and  take  vengeance  on  the  enemy  (vers.  55-66).

(&<)  Ver.  1.  The  author  writes  as  if  his  own  person  was  the  object  on  which  all  the  troubles
had  been  inflicted.  I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of  his  wrath.  The
repression  of  the  name  of  the  wielder  of  the  rod  is  remarkable  in  view  of  its  reiteration  in
Chapter  II.  That  here  it  was  of  set  purpose  seems  proved  by  the  persistent  omission  till  ver.
18,  and  is  probably  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  poet's  wish  to  indicate  a  sort  of  climax  to  a  soul-
struggle  in  which  he  could  not  take  the  name  of  Jehovah  till  all  appeared  lost.  The  rod  signifies
the  means  b}  which  the  affliction  was  produced,  and  is  illustrated  by  the  phrase,  2%e  Assyrian
is  the  rod  of  mine  anger  (Isa.  x.  5).

Ver.  2.  The  unnamed  had  accumulated  affliction.  He  has  led  and  caused  me  to  walk  in
darkness  and  not  in  light,  in  perplexity  as  well  as  misery.

Ver.  3.  And  it  was  continuously  carried  on.  Surely  against  me  he  turns  his  hand  again
and  again  all  the  day.

(3)  Ver.  4.  Details  as  to  how  the  writer  suffered.  My  flesh  and  my  skin  he  has  worn  out,
he  has  broken  my  bones.     Bodily  exhaustion  and  racking  pains  consume  the  vital  forces.

Ver.  5.  Obstruction  is  placed  so  that  I  may  not  find  a  change.  He  has  builded  against  me,
shut  me  in  as  if  He  was  besieging  me  behind  and  before  with  hurting  and  wearying  obstacles,
gall  and  travail.

Ver.  6.  Darkness  was  added.  He  has  made  me  to  dwell  in  dark  places,  dismal  and  with-
out hope,  as  those  in  which  lay  the  for  ever  dead,  those  who  had  gone  into  Sheol,  and  for
whom  there  is  no  way  of  return.

(3)  Ver.  7.  Freedom  is  taken  away  by  close  confinement  and  a  heavy  chain.

Ver.  8.  Prisoner  though  I  am,  I  can  make  entreaties  for  relief.  I  cry  and  call  for  help,
but  no  response  is  given  ;  he  shutteth  out  my  prayer  ;  he  had  used  means  to  prevent  the  peti-
tions reaching  him,  as  if  the  barriers  were  not  fabricated  by  the  sins  of  the  petitioner  !

Ver.  9.  As  a  traveller,  I  am  brought  to  a  standstill.  He  has  fenced  up  my  ways  with  hewn
stone,  and  there  is  a  necessity  to  turn  aside  to  crooked  paths,  which  lead  to  and  fro  without
purpose.

(1)  Ver.  10.  Difficulties  had  been  embarrassing,  but  dangers  were  also  added.  In  the  crooked
paths  the  bear  and  the  lion  lurked,  and  he  is  there,  like  them,  lying  in  wait  for  me.

Ver.  11.  I  wandered  aimlessly.  He  has  led  me  astray  and  then  he  has  tom  me  in  piocoai
has  made  me  desolate,  left  me  mangled  and  alone.

Ver.  12.   Not  only  such  rending  as  that  by  beasts  of  prey  has  distressed  me,  but  ftlso  mal*

66


HO  MIL^TIC  CO  MMI^NTA  R  Y :  LA  MENTA  TTONS.  chap.  lit.


treatment  by  men.  I  have  been  treated  as  the  quarry  of  a  hunter.  He  set  me  as  a  mark  for
the  arrow.

(H)  Ver.  13.  There  is  no  miss  when  God  aims  at  a  mark.  He  has  made  the  sons  of  hia
quiver  to  enter  into  my  reins  ;  the  central  points  of  vital  action  were  sore  wounded.

Ver.  14.  The  figure  is  hardly  changed.  Perhaps  a  laughing-stock  to  all  my  people,  their
song  all  the  day,  may  be  regarded  as  the  shaft  which  went  to  the  quick.  Jeremiah  calls  a
deceiving  tongue  a  deadly  arrow  (ix.  8).  They  who  should  have  stood  by  him,  as  partaking  of
the  aame  afldictions,  hurled  at  him  bolts  of  ridicule  in  jaunty  songs.  Another  reading  ascribes
the  mocking  to  aU  peoples,  not  to  his  fellow-countrymen.

Ver.  15.  The  nutriment  and  comfort  which  I  needed  were  replaced  by  adversities  which  I
endured  to  the  uttnost  extent  bearable.  He  has  filled  me  v?ith  bitternesses — dififerent  kinds
of  sufferings — and  sated  me  with  wormwood.

(1)  Ver.  16.  In  i-espect  to  means  of  nourishment,  I  have  been  still  further  exasperated.  Also
he  has  broken  my  teeth  with  gravel ;  either  that  which  was  chewed  was  full  of  gritty  sand,
ov  for  bread  he  had  stones  given  him.  A  strange  work  for  the  Father  1  He  has  covered  ma
with  ashes,  I  am  one  who  mourneth  in  bitterness.

Ver.  17.  Notwithstanding  all  my  afflictions,  I  rni<fht  have  been  calm  and  hopeful,  but  the
culminating  point  of  all  I  have  to  sustain  is  the  conviction  that  I  am  put  far  from  God.  Is  it
not  a  piteous  condition  which  may  extort  complaint  of  Thyself  ?  Thou  hast  cast  oflF  my  SOUl
from  peace.  So  dense  is  this  outer  darkness,  that  any  recollection  of  ever  being  in  comfort  has
faded  away,  I  forget  good.

Ver.  18.  This  reads  like  an  account  of  the  climax  to  the  trials  undergone.  I  said,  as  if
talking  to  myself,  My  strength  is  perished,  and  my  expectation  from  Jehovah.  The  future
is  void  of  good.  I  am  unable  to  look  for  anything  from  Him.  In  J  ah  Jehovah  is  everlasting
strem^th,  but  I  do  not  perceive  it.     I  have  lost  the  direction  towards  Him.

This  recalling  of  the  name  at  last  seems  to  turn  the  current  of  thctught.  I  must  not  let  go
trust  in  Him.      I  must  tell  Him  the  desires  of  my  heart.

The  sorrow  according  to  God  is  a  product  of  His  wisdom  and  love.  "Sorrow  is  God's  last
message  to  man  ;  it  is  God  speaking  in  emphasis.  He  who  abuses  it  shows  that  he  can  shut
his  ears  when  God  speaks  loudest.  Therefore  heartlessness  or  impenitence  after  sorrow  is  more
dangerous  than  intemperance  in  joy ;  its  results  are  always  more  tragic.  .  .  .  God's  wrath  is
an  ennobling,  not  a  stupefying  doctrine  "  {Smith).  Nor  is  it  discouraging  to  leal-hearted  men,
though  menacing.

(T)  Vers.  19-21.  The  name  of  Jehovah  is  as  a  rallying-call  to  reject  the  rash  expression  of
despair  just  heard,  and  stirs  up  thoughts  of  what  God's  character  is.  The  author  begins  to  feel
that  he  can  have  recourse  to  a  prayer  to  be  remembered,  and  so  these  verses  mark  the  passage
from  hopeless  baflBings  with  no  sm(dl  storm  to  the  hopeful  sound  of  a  favouring  breeze.

Ver.  19.  Remember  my  affliction  and  my  homelessness,  the  wormwood  and  the  gall;
a  reminiscence  of  salient  points  in  the  sufferings  he  had  passed  through,  and  which  might  evoke
the  compassion  and  power  of  the  All-merciful.

Ver.  20.  The  correct  translation  of  this  verse  is  uncertain,  and  preference  is  given  to  this.
Remembering,  thou  wilt  remember  all  those  things ;  also  [that]  my  soul  is  cast  down  in
me.  I  am  heavy  laden.  I  have  no  might.  Either  I  shall  be  overwhelmed  and  sink  into  deep
mire  where  there  is  no  standing,  or  else  out  of  weakness  be  made  strong  by  Thee.  It  would  be
like  Thee  to  make  haste  to  help  me.

Ver.  21.  This  I  will  bring  back  to  my  heart,  this  thought,  that  Thou  wilt  not  be  always
wroth,  for  the  spirit  would  fail  before  Thee  and  the  souls  which  thou  hast  made,  has  taken  full
possession  of  my  inner  man ;  therefore  I  will  hope.  There  must  be  a  blessing  in  store,  for
God  pities  and  God  rules  in  exhaustless  grace.  Out  of  the  darkest  depression  He  can  lift  to  a
light  in  which  I  may  walk  and  never  be  ashamed  of  my  hope.

(n)  Ver.  22.  The  hopefulness  which  had  begun  to  lift  a  desponding  soul  points  to  the
ground  on  which  it  may  become  secure.  Its  hazy  outlook  is  seeming  to  clear,  and,  as  in  all
true  ideas  of  human  relationship  to  God,  that  which  is  felt  as  a  privilege  for  the  individual  is
regarded  to  be  a  privilege  for  all  souls  also  who  seek  the  Lord.  One  voices  the  confession  of
the  remnant  of  Israel  tlius  :  Jehovah's  mercies,  not  in  one  form,  but  in  many  forms  they
affect  men,  and,  whether  shown  to  individuals  or  communities,  they  counteract  the  wasting
tendencies  of  evil.  A  striking  proof  of  His  varied  graciousness  is  manifest  in  that  we  are  not
consumed.  More  will  follow.  His  continuous  action  is  a  token  that  His  nature  and  name  is
the  All-gracious  ;  for  his  compassions  fail  not.

Ver.  23.  Every  day  sees  S(»me  renewal  of  them  ;  there  is  "daily  help  for  daily  needs,"  as
great  is  thy  faithfulness.     God  is  faithful  to  all  that  He  has  promised  in  creation  and  grace.

Ver.  24.  This  perception  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  pitying,  and  trustworthy,  leads  on,  not
merely  to  verbal  profession  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  but  to  an  acceptance  of  Himself  as  the
dear  and  only  treasure  of  the  heart.  My  portion  is  Jehovah.  None  in  heaven  for  Him  ;  none
on  earth  desired  with  Him.

(ID)  Ver.  2.5.  Such  an  acceptance  suggests  more  knowledge.  Good  is  Jehovah  to  them
that  wait  for  him,  to  a  soul  that  seeks  him.  He  is  ready  to  respond  to  those  who  feel  need
of  Him  and  foster  longings  after  Himself.

67


CHAP.  in.  EOMJLBTTC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


Ver.  26.  So  when  the  gracionsness  of  the  Lord  is  perceived,  and  its  proflFers  yielded  to,  blessed-
ness is  not  far  off.  Good  it  is  both  to  wait  and  be  silent  for  the  salvation  of  Jehovah.  There
is  to  be  no  striving,  nor  crying,  uor  causing  the  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street.  Confidence  in
His  power  tt)  save  hushes  fears  and  doubts,  and  enables  us  calmly  to  meet  the  events  of  life.  Ht
will  in  no  wise  leave  or  forsake  those  who  wait  for  Him.

Ver.  27.  Good  is  it  for  a  man  to  bear  a  yoke,  that  is,  anything  by  which  he  will  be  trained
for  his  Owner,  and  to  do  his  Owner's  work.  Teaching  may  do  so  ;  affliction  may  do  so.  Both
the  one  and  the  other  show  to  a  man  what  he  is — ignorant,  weak,  with  more  that  is  bad  than
he  had  believed  he  had.  God  speaks  in  both  methods  as  issues  of  His  love,  and  to  obtain
vessels  unto  honour,  sanctified,  meet  for  the  Master  s  use.  The  jihrase  in  his  youth  does  not
mean  that  the  poet  was  still  a  young  man.  He  might  be  an  aged  man.  looking  back  on  the
experiences  of  his  life,  and  conscious  of  the  value  of  the  discipline  he  had  been  subjected  to
when  the  dew  of  youth  was  upon  him.  He  is  blessed  who,  in  earlier  years,  has  been  drawn  or
driven  to  look  into  the  face  of  realities,  and  to  learn  something  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ
before  he  has  been  in  grip  with  temptations  from  the  clamant  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  of  the
mind.

(>)  Ver.  28.  A  yoke  is  not  of  itself  beneficial ;  it  must  be  borne  ahmg  with  desires  and
eflforts  to  reach  to  its  purpose.  "  Since  it  is  good  for  man  that  he  should  learn  to  endure  suffer-
ing, let  him  sit  still  and  bear  it  patiently  ;  ...  let  him  sit  solitary,  as  becomes  those  in  sorrow,
and  be  silent  without  murmuring  when  God  puts  such  a  burden  on  him." — Keil.  The  fogs  of
the  world,  if  a  man  enters  into  them,  may  veil  the  waymarks  of  God.

Ver.  29.  Let  him  put  his  mouth  in  the  dust — significant  of  being  humbled  under  the
mighty  hand  of  Ood — indulging  in  no  whimpers,  framing  no  self-excuses,  making  no  boasts,
only  waiting  to  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak,  and  by  no  means  despairing  of  help  for
every  time  of  need.     It  may  be  there  is  hope.

Ver.  30.  Let  him  give  his  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth  him,  as  was  similarly  enforced  in  the
Sermon  on  the  Mount  (Matt.  v.  39).  and  involving  the  wider  applicatitm,  when  reviled  not  to
revile  again.  Exemplified  by  Job,  by  the  prophetic  Servant  of  Jehovah,  by  the  greatest  of  all
Sufferers.  The  gradation  is  perceptible.  "  The  sitting  alone  and  in  silence  is  comparatively
the  easiest.  It  is  harder  to  place  the  mouth  in  the  dust  and  yet  cling  to  hope ;  it  is  most
difficult  of  all  to  give  the  cheek  to  the  smiter,  and  to  satiate  oneself  with  dishonour"  {Naegd.),
be  filled  full  with  reproaches.

(D)  Ver.  31.  For  tiiis  silent  waiting  on  the  Lord,  amid  humiliations  and  scorn,  there  is  all-
sufficient  strength.  It  is  in  the  Lord  Himself,  in  the  belief  that  He  is  at  work  ;  that,  what-
ever our  tribulations  are,  however  bitter  ingredients  we  must  drain  out  of  our  cup,  whatever
the  moral  conflicts  and  self-condemnations  we  must  pass  through,  He  will  not  put  us  away.
The  Lord  will  not  cast  off  for  ever  ;  there  will  be  an  end  of  tears  and  isolation  on  account  of
the  absent  Friend.

Ver.  32.  His  providences  may  distress  us.  Physical  pains,  social  straits,  national  demoralisa-
tion, and  inward  unrest,  blame,  forebodings,  may  overwhelm  us.  These  are  goads  by  which
He  is  thrusting  us  from  a  wrong  way  into  a  right,  but  "it  is  love  that  bruises  us."  Yet  hd
will  have  compassion  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  mercies.

Ver.  33.  He  would  rather  not  produce  suffering.  His  heart  is  not  in  doing  so.  He  has  a
distinct  end  in  view  to  be  reached  through  tribulation.  For  he  afflicts  not  willingly,  nor
grieves  the  children  of  men.  Child  and  adult,  Israelite  and  heathen,  will  meet  trouble,
but  not  one  is  outside  the  sympathy  of  God.  We  can  supplement  this  from  a  later  teacher,
who  tells  us  that  our  Father  chastises  for  our  profit,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  His  holiness.

(p)  Vers.  34-36.  The  Lord  does  not  afflict  willingly,  yet  He  is  not  indifferent  to  the  injustice
of  man  to  man.  All  the  details  of  human  procedure  are  regarded  by  Him,  and  he  would  have
men  to  know  that  He  is  on  the  throne  judging  right,  that  they  may  trust  Him  entirely,  and
that  there  is  no  evil  needing  to  be  grieved  over  but  sin.  Such  is  the  intimation  in  this  triad
of  verses,  the  three  parts  of  which  depend  on  the  last  clause :  To  trample  under  his  feet —
the  feet  of  the  oppressor — all  prisoners  of  the  earth ;  an  allusion  to  the  cruelties  of  the
Chaldeans.  Jews  in  exile,  Jews  in  prisons,  yes,  and  outraged  captives  every  where,  are  referred
to.  He  hears  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner.  To  turn  aside  the  right  of  a  man,  that  which  is
grounded  in  the  far-reaching  nature  of  things  formed  by  the  Righteous  One,  before  the  face  of
the  Most  High.  This  phrase  is  illustrated  by  the  wilderness  legislation  as  to  matters  of  tres-
pass, 'J  he  cause  of  both  parties  shall  com£  before  [Godl  Elohim,  he  whom  Elohim  shall  condemn^
&c.  (Exod.  xxii.  9).  The  phraseology  obviously  designates  judges  as  acting  in  place  of  the
Judge  of  all  the  earthy  and  is  found  used  in  later  times  (Fs.  Ixxxii.  6).  To  subvert  a  man  in
his  cause,  to  act  unfairly  towards  another  in  the  ordinary  pursuits  of  life,  the  Lord  approveth
not.  Questioning  this  translation,  Keil  renders,  Doth  not  the  Lord  look  [to  such  doings  as
these]  ?

(D)  Ver.  37.  The  reason  for  not  mentioning  any  name  of  God,  as  in  vers.  1-17,  is  now
wholly  dispensed  with,  and  He  is  presented  as  conditionating  all  events.  He  observes  man's
dealings  with  his  neighbours.  He  provides  that  every  transgression  and  disobedience  receive  a
just  recompense  o/"  reward.  No  injustice  is  permissible.  If  a  man  or  nation  could  devise  and
carry  out  their  own  commands,  then  evil  or  good  would  come  in  spite  of  God.     But  who  Si  hO

68


HOMILETIC  COMMtlNTARY:  LAMENfATlONS.  chap.  m.


that  saith  and  it  comes  to  pass,  unless  the  Lord  has  commanded  [it]  ?  His  will  is  supreme.
So  it  follows  : —

Yer.  88.  From  the  mouth  of  the  Most  High  does  not  the  evil  and  the  good  come  ?  It  is
a  terra  of  the  age-lasting  problem.  He  lets  evil  be  done  and  punishes  the  evil-doer.  He  must
work  out  His  will,  for  He  works  within  us  to  will  and  do  that  which  is  good.  In  both  good
and  evil  we  are  in  close  contiguity  with  God.

Ver.  89.  The  right  interpretation  partly  depends  on  whether  or  not  we  read  this  verse  as
one  question.  Both  the  Authorised  Version  and  the  Revised  Version  take  the  former  course.
The  Hebrew  renders  this  doubtful.  It  would  warrant  a  division.  For  what  should  a  living
man,  one  in  life's  school,  and  with  all  the  possibilities  of  the  education  he  is  receiving  from  the
Lord,  complain?  Let  everyone  come  to  a  more  manly  position,  and  they  would  see  it  needful
to  sigh  over  their  sins.  Sin  brings  on  men  the  evils  really  to  be  lamented,  and  the  space  given
should  be  tilled  up  with  repentance.

(3)  Ver.  40.  Tlie  remnant,  who  were  referred  to  in  ver.  22,  carry  out  here  the  suggestion
just  made,  that  sighing,  not  over  sufferings  but  over  sins,  is  the  becoming  utterance  for  every
one.  The  sorrows  and  pains  endured  were  resultants  from  tlie  sins  of  all  the  people,  and  thus
a  joint  resolve  and  confession  is  made.  Only  as  men  see  that  they  have  strayed  like  lost  sheep
will  they  truly  say,  Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways,  yet  not  delay  in  that  effort,  however
genuine  it  may  be,  but  let  US  return  unto  Jehovah,  the  whole  way  back,  with  no  halt  half- way,
with  no  reserves  for  self.

Ver.  41.  Such  a  return  merges  into  soul-moving  prayer — prayer  that  is  not  only  "the  motion
of  a  hidden  fire  trembling  in  the  breast "  or  **  the  upward  glancing  of  an  eye,"  but  also  mani«
fests  itself  by  some  outwardness.  The  emotion  is  the  chief  element  in  any  suitable  external
gesture.  Let  us  lift  up  our  hearts  with  our  hands  unto  God  in  the  heavens,  satisfied  that
our  help  is  not  sent  from  any  earthly  sanctuary,  but  from  within  the  veil.

Ver.  42.  A  vision  of  God  throws  a  white  light  upon  the  dark  records  of  past  life.  In  that
light  men  are  forced  to  pass  God's  judgment  on  themselves.  /  have  brought  up  children,  and
they  have  rebelled  against  me.  God's  rule  and  man's  treason  are  confronted,  and  man  is  con-
demned to  suffer.  As  for  us.  We  have  transgressed  and  rebelled ;  as  for  Thee,  Thou  hast
not  pardoned ;  a  phrase  which  intimates  that  He  would  scourge  into  the  way  of  righteousness,
if  no  other  method  avails,  and  that  Israel  was  then  under  His  chastising  rod.  He  is  ready  to
pardon,  and  the  withholding  pardon  is  not  His  desire,  but  a  "  natural  sequence "  of  baffled
instructions  and  warnings — of  a  deadened  spiritual  faculty  which  turns  His  grace  into  a
penalty.

(D)  Ver.  43.  Thou  hast  covered  with  anger,  whether  Himself  or  us  is  not  clear,  but  as
the  next  clause,  and  pursued  us,  mentions  the  latter,  it  may  be  preferable  to  regard  the  people
as  wrapped  round  with  a  garment  woven  in  the  loom  of  wrath,  and  which  marked  them  out  as
the  objects  to  be  chased  for  punishment.

Ver.  44.  There  had  been  cries  for  relief  (ver.  41),  but  unavailing,  for  Thou  hast  covered
Thyself  with  a  cloud ;  clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  Him  when  He  displays  His  royal
righteousness  and  judgment  in  burning  up  His  adversaries  (Ps.  xcvii.  2,  3).  That  cloud  is  a
barrier  [preventing]  prayer  from  passing  through  to  His  mercy-seat.

Ver.  45.  Troubles  are  accumulated  upon  the  nation.  Rejected  prayers  signify  condemnation
of  their  religiousness.  It  is  not  the  act,  but  the  motive  and  purpose  which  determine  the  rela-
tion of  the  worshipper  to  the  Worshipped.  Ritual  may  be  punctiliously  carried  out,  and  hide
God  instead  of  helping  to  reveal  Him.  When  He  hides  His  face,  they  are  troubled,  and,  as  if
He  would  exhibit  a  striking  illustration  before  the  world  of  what  will  result  from  disobedience
to  His  will,  Thou  hast  made  us  the  offscouring  and  refuse  in  the  midst  of  the  peoples.
Treated  as  worthless,  like  Paul  and  his  brethren  in  Christ  (1  Cor.  iv.  13),  but  these  were  more
than  conquerors  through  Him  who  loved  them.

(Q)  Vers.  46-48  present  significant  intimations  of  their  base  condition.  Enemies  making
sport  of  them,  fear  and  pitfalls  surrounding  them,  and  the  oft-recurring  feeling  of  utter
destruction  instigating  tears  shed  as  copiously  as  rivers  of  water.

{V)  Ver.  49.  The  excessive  weeping  is  continuous.  Mine  eye  poureth  down  tears, and  that
without  interruption.  Nor  will  the  sound  of  weeping  be  stanched,  except  when  his  under-
current of  hope  reaches  its  terminus.

Ver.  50.  Till  Jehovah  looks  down  and  beholds  from  heaven.  When  He  sees  the  bearing
and  result  of  afflictions  on  His  Name's  glory,  then  He  hears  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner.  For
lie  will  not  contend  for  ever,  neither  will  He  be  always  wroth.

Ver.  51.  Beyond  what  the  eye  shows  externally  it  exerts  influence  upon  the  inward  part.
Mine  eye  hurts  my  soul:  not  in  the  rather  jejune  sense  that  the  flood  of  tears  had  made  the
eye  painful,  and  that  pain  was  felt  in  the  soul ;  but  the  soul  was  pained  because  of  the  eye
beholding  the  sad  lot  of  the  more  delicate  and  defenceless  part  of  the  population,  the  daughters
of  my  city.

(V)  Ver.  52.  They  have  hunted  me  down  like  a  bird  is  hunted  when  pursued  with  the
eagerness  of  those  who  are  my  enemies  without  cause,  and  who  will  not  relax  efforts  till  they
catch  the  quarry.

Ver.  53.  He  was  haled  to  prison  by  them.    They  have  cut  off  my  life  in  the  pit.    Shut  in

69


CHAP.  ITL  BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


from  all  activities  and  society,  he  was  as  a  man  dead,  as  in  a  tomb  over  which  they  have  cast  a
stone  on  me.  Taking  such  illustrations  to  be  chiefly  figurative,  yet  here  the  first  clause  is  a
probable  allusion  to  the  treatment  of  Jeremiah  (chap,  xxxviii.  6),  and  the  second  may  refer  to  an
unmentioned  incident  of  the  same  time,  for  which  corroboration  may  be  found  in  the  case  of
Daniel  (chap.  vi.  17.)

Ver.  54.  The  peril  was  aggravated  by  waters  that  flowed  over  my  head  ;  the  plural
perhaps  indicating  the  influx  of  a  spring  and  the  condensation  of  vapour  in  the  closeness  of  a
pit.  In  a  state  so  desperate  to  the  eyes  of  flesh,  I  said,  I  am  cut  off  as  a  man  that  has  no  help
(Ps.  Ixxxviii.  4),  as  He  was  who  became  sin  for  us  (Isa.  liii.  8).

The  remaining  verses  of  the  chapter  take  the  form  of  prayer,  as  at  the  close  of  Chapters  I.
and  II.  In  it  there  are  thanksgivings  for  relief  (vers.  55-58),  an  appeal  because  of  the  evil
which  enemies  had  done  and  were  doing  (vers.  59-63),  and  a  call  for  recompense  therefor  (vers.
64-66).

(p)  Ver.  55.  I  called  upon  thy  name,  0  Jehovah,  asking  with  some  true  idea  of  what  the
words  and  works  of  the  liod  of  Israel  revealed  concerning  Himself,  suggestive,  too,  of  the
manner  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  would  have  His  friends  to  pray — Ask  the  Fatlier  in  My  name
— out  of  the  depths  of  the  pit  into  which  he  had  been  thrown.

Ver.  56.  A  more  true  position  is  secured  than  that  which  was  held  previously  (vers.  8  and
44).  My  voice  thou  heardest  at  that  time  when  I  besought  thee  with  my  spirit  and  voice,
Hide  not — close  not — thine  ear  at  my  breathing — my  sighing  for  relief — at  my  cry.  It  is
questionable  if  the  rendering.  Hide  not  thine  ear  for  m,ij  cry  for  reliefs  is  not  rather  an  explana-
tion than  a  fair  version.

Ver.  57.  Thou  drewest  near  in  the  day  I  called  upon  thee.  Only  spiritual  apprehension
of  God  as  He  who  is  behind  all  events  and  plenteous  in  mercy  can  bring  a  conviction  of  accepted
prayer.     The  heart  is  then  in  a  state  to  hear  His  comforting  words,  Thou  saidst,  Fear  not.

(1)  Ver.  58.  There  were  rights  to  be  maintained,  wrongs  to  be  redressed,  and  in  both  help
was  received  from  a  present  God.  Thou,  O  Jehovah,  hast  pleaded — contended  for — the
causes  of  my  soul.  One  thing  had  hurt  his  soul  (ver.  51).  but  others  also  saddened  and
weakened  thought  and  effort,  and  the  Lord  had  counteracted  them.  He  had  also  interfered
when  hope  of  living  was  cut  off,  Thou  hast  redeemed  my  life  by  Thy  power  over  all.

Ver.  59.  Trials  are  not  things  of  the  past  only.  Under  their  continuous  pressure  endurance
is  sought  for  in  the  truth  that  the  eye  and  ear  of  the  Lord  are  ever  open  for  all  sights  and
sounds.  Thou,  0  Jehovah,  hast  seen  my  wrong,  that  which  is  done  to  me,  and  that  sight
forms  a  plea  for  the  righteous  sentence  of  Him  who  sitteth  on  the  throne  j  a  dying  right.

Ver.  60.  There  was  the  keenest  of  vengeance  in  the  treatment  to  which  the  Lord's  servant
was  subjected,  and  there  were  devices  against  me  ;  but  it  was  a  certain  fact  that  the  All-
seeing  One  had  observed  every  secret  or  open  scheme.

{^)  Ver.  61.  The  revengeful,  bad  feeling  expressed  itself  in  reviling  words.  Thou  hast
heard  their  reproach,  0  Jehovah,  and  all  the  evil  machinations  they  framed  against  me.

Ver.  62  is  a  variant  expression  of  the  idea  of  the  former  verse,  Thou  hast  heard  the  words
of  the  lips  of  those  that  rose  up  against  me,  and  their  meditation,  which  occupied  their
minds  all  the  day.

Ver.  63.  Their  downsitting  and  their  uprising  behold  thou,  all  their  proceedings  when  at
rest,  and  when  they  get  up  to  do  what  they  resolve.  In  hilarious  and  scornful  mood  they  taunt
and  deride  me  ;  I  am  their  song.  It  was  not  a  momentary  outburst  of  passion,  not  one  hour's
lapse  into  jocoseness,  but  the  tenor  of  the  life  which  was  manifested.

(n)  Ver.  64.  The  evil  life  cannot  pass  without  condemnation.  Thou  wilt  render  a  recom-
pense to  them,  O  Jehovah.  A  man  may  pray  that  revilings  and  machinations  may  be
thwarted,  not  from  a  desire  for  personal  revenge,  but  from  the  knowledge  that  stHving  with  the
Maker  incurs  guilt  and  fixes  the  destiny  of  the  striver  according  to  the  work  of  their  hands,
reaping  what  they  sow  (2  Tim.  iv.  14).

Ver.  65.  Thou  wilt  give  them  blindness  [Heb.  a  covering]  of  heart,  that  which  is  turned
into  a  veil  (2  Cor.  iii.  14)  by  their  not  becoming  sons  of  the  light,  by  their  walking  in  darkness
into  the  ditch.     Thy  curse  to  them.     Cursed  be  the  man  who  maketh  flesh  his  arm.

Ver.  66.  Evil  shall  slay  the  wicked.  Thou  wilt  pursue  them  in  anger  and  destroy  them,  so
that  the  wicked  may  be  no  more  in  Thy  dominion  under  the  heavens  of  Jehovah.  So  let  thine
enemies  perisJif  0  Jehovah^  and  thy  will  be  done,  as  in  heaven  so  on  earth.


HOMILETICS,
The  Man  of  Affliction.

(Verses  1-3.)

It  is  given  to  some  men  to  catch  and  idealise  the  poetic  instinct  of  a  nation,
to  gather  to  a  focus  the  ideas  that  have  been  dimly  floating  in  the  national  mind,
70


HO  M I  LET W  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  LA  ME  NT  A  TIONS.  chap.  m.


and,  in  words  of  burning  passion,  to  express  what  all  have  been  vaguely  feeling,
but  none  have  been  able  hitherto  to  clothe  in  fitting  speech.  Another  class  of
men  represent  the  chivahic  and  military  characteristics  of  a  nation;  another  the
judicial  and  ruling  types.  Jeremiah,  distinguished  as  poet,  prophet,  and  patriot,
acquired  immortal  distinction  in  the  annals  of  the  Hebrew  nation  as  the  Man  of
Sorrow.  In  him  the  unparalleled  sufferings  of  Judea  seemed  concentrated  and
individualised.  His  mournful  dirge,  sung  in  the  minor  key,  gave  voice,  with
lavish  variety  of  imagery  and  felicity  of  phrase,  to  the  overwhelming  anguish  of  a
distracted  and  ruined  people.  In  this  sublime  elegy  the  poet-prophet  touches  the
deepest  woe  of  the  sufferer  in  all  ages,  and  provides  it  with  adequate  expression.
Ewald  justly  remarks  :  "  Very  probably  the  prophet  draws  much  of  what  he  says
from  his  own  experience,  but  the  whole  that  he  sets  forth  is  more  than  his  own
personality  ;  it  is  the  type  and  pattern  of  every  individual.  And  here,  therefore,
is  the  summit  and  turning-point  of  the  whole  Book  of  Lamentations."  When  the
soul  finds  words  in  Avhich  to  breathe  out  its  sorrow,  the  oppression  is  already  re-
lieved.    The  hope  of  deliverance  begins  to  dawn.     Observe  in  this  paragraph —

I.  That  the  man  of  affliction  regards  his  sufferings  as  the  result  of  the
Divine  anger.  "  I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of  His  wrath  "
(ver.  1).  It  is  the  rod  of  His  anger  to  chastise  and  correct,  not  the  sword  to
utterly  destroy.  Even  in  the  manifestation  of  His  wrath  God  seeks  to  restore  the
Binner.  The  last  stroke  of  His  anger  must  be  painful,  alarming,  crushing;  the
more  so  that  it  is  felt  to  be  so  just.  Behind  the  dark  frown  of  the  Almighty  the
light  of  mercy  shines.  "  He  doth  not  afflict  willingly,  nor  grieve  the  children  of
men."  The  most  hopeful  feature  of  affliction  is  the  moment  when  the  sufferer
recognises  the  hand  of  God  in  it ;  when  he  acknowledges  it  as  the  fruit  of  personal
sin.  Then  it  is  that  wrath  gives  place  to  mercy  :  j)unishment  is  disarmed  by
pardon.  Sin  is  antagonism  to  God,  and  merits  nothing  but  wrath.  A  genuine
repentance  is  the  open  door  of  escape.

II.  That  the  man  of  affliction  is  plunged  into  bewildering  gloom.  "He
hath  led  me  and  brought  me  into  darkness,  but  not  into  light "  (ver.  2).  The
darkness  of  suffering  had  a  realistic  meaning  for  Jeremiah,  as  he  remembered  the
miseries  of  his  incarceration  in  the  dungeon  (Jer.  xxxvii.  15,  16 ;  xxxviii.  6,  10-
13).  But  the  language  is  a  metaphorical  description  of  afflictions  in  general,  and
is  frequently  employed  in  Scripture.  In  the  most  graphic  and  explicit  terms  the
prophet  foretold  the  experience  he  here  describes  (Jer.  xiii.  15,  16).  Suffering
is  a  dark  enigma  that  baffles  the  wisest  to  solve.  It  is  an  aggravation  of  suffering
when  it  has  to  be  endured  in  darkness.  We  have  heard  of  a  strong  man  who  had
braved  all  kinds  of  dangers  by  land  and  sea,  who  was  absolutely  afraid  of  being
alone  in  the  dark  :  he  had  no  fear  of  anything  he  could  see,  but  was  in  mortal
dread  of  the  unseen.  Darkness  overawes  the  most  volatile.  A  party  of  courtiers
of  Louis  XV.  were  once  gathered  round  Cassini  to  witness  an  eclipse  from  the
terrace  of  the  Paris  observatory,  and  were  laughing  at  the  populace,  whose  cries
were  heard  as  the  light  began  to  fade,  when,  as  the  unnatural  gloom  came  quickly
on,  silence  fell  on  them  too,  the  panic-terror  striking  through  their  laughter.  There
is  nothing  so  distressing,  so  oppressive,  so  bewildering,  so  hopeless  to  contend
with,  as  darkness.

III.  That  the  man  of  affliction  is  smitten  with  repeated  strokes  of  the  Divine
Hand.  "  Surely  against  me  is  He  turned  ;  He  turneth  His  hand  against  me  all
the  day"  (ver.  3).  It  is  not  one  stroke  of  affliction,  but  many,  and  these
frequently  repeated.  Trouble  never  comes  alone ;  it  is  often  attended  with  a
crowd  of  ills.  Before  we  can  recover  from  one  calamity  we  are  stricken  with
another.  It  may  be  difficult  to  find  the  kind  heart  behind  the  strong  hand ;  but
it  is  there.  Not  one  blow  more  than  is  necessary  will  be  permitted  to  fall.
The  most  prolonged  and  reiterated  suffering  will  cease  as  soon  as  its  purpose  is
answered.     While  it  continues  there  should  be  prayerful  searchings  of  heart

71


CHAP.  III.


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


Lessons. — 1.  TJie  fact  of  suffering  testifies  to  the  fact  of  sin.  2.  Much  of  our
suffering  occasioned  Iry  witnessing  the  sufferings  of  others.  3.  Suffering  is  a  hless'
ing  when  it  brings  us  nearer  to  God,


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,


Ver.  1.  Ecce  homo.  I.  Consider
the  generality  of  affliction  in  the  nature
thereof  We  met  all  generally  in  the
first  treason  against  ourselves  in  Adam's
rebellion  ;  and  we  met  all,  too,  in  the
second  treason — the  treason  against
Jesus  Christ.  All  our  sins  were  upon
His  shoulders.  All  the  evils  and  mis-
chiefs of  life  come  for  the  most  part
from  this — that  we  think  to  enjoy  those
things  which  God  hath  given  us  only
to  use.  III.  Consider  affliction  as  bear-
ing on  man.  "  I  am  the  man  that  hath
seen  affliction."  It  was  that  man  that  is
denoted  and  signified  in  that  name  that
hath  lain  under  affliction,  and  therefore
no  kind  of  man  was  likely  to  escape.
Man  carries  the  spawn  and  seed  and
eggs  of  affliction  in  his  own  flesh,  and
his  own  thoughts  make  haste  to  hatch
them  and  bring  them  up.  We  mid^e
all  our  worms  snakes,  all  our  snakes
vipers,  all  our  vipers  dragons  by  our
murmuring.  III.  Consider  affliction  in
its  special  application  to  one  man.  That
man  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  one  of  the
best  of  men.  As  he  was  submitted  to
these  extraordinary  afflictions,  we  see
that  no  man  is  so  necessary  to  God  as
that  God  cannot  come  to  His  ends  with-
out that  man.  God  can  lack  and  leave
out  any  man  in  His  service.  The  best
of  our  wages  is  adversity,  because  that
gives  us  a  true  fast,  and  a  right  value
of  our  prosperity.  Jeremy  had  it ;  the
best  of  his  rank  must.  No  man  is  ex-
cused of  subsequent  afflictions  by  prece-
dent, nor  of  falling  into  more  by  having
borne  some  already.  Our  afflictions
are  as  beggars  ;  they  tell  others,  and
send  more  after  them.  W^hen  the  hand
of  God  was  upon  Jeremiah  he  declared
God's  handwriting  ;  not  only  to  his  own
conscience  by  acknowledging  that  all
these  afflictions  were  for  his  own  sins,
but  by  acknowledging  to  the  world  that
God  had  laid  such  and  such  afflictions
upon  him.  St.  Ambrose,  in  a  journey
from  Milan  to  Rome,  passed  some  time
72


one  evening  with  his  host,  who  bragged
he  had  never  had  any  cross  in  his  life.
Aml)rose  at  once  removed  to  another
house,  protesting  that  either  the  man
was  very  unthankful  to  God  that  would
not  take  knowledge  of  His  corrections,
or  that  God's  measure  was  by  this  time
full,  and  would  surely,  soundly,  and
suddenly  pour  down  all  together.  IV.
Consider  the  weight  and  vehemence  of
afflictions.  1.  They  are  aggravated  in
that  they  are  the  Lord's.  They  are  in-
evitable ;  they  cannot  be  avoided  ;  they
are  just,  and  cannot  be  pleaded  against ;
nor  can  we  ease  ourselves  with  any  ima-
gination of  our  innocency,  as  though
they  were  undeserved.  2.  They  are  in
His  rod.  Our  murmuring  makes  a  rod
a  staff,  and  a  staff  a  sword,  and  that
which  God  presented  for  physic,  poison.
3.  They  are  inflicted  by  the  rod  of  His
wrath.  Though  there  be  properly  no
anger  in  God,  yet  God  is  said  to  do  a
thing  in  anger  when  He  does  it  so  as
an  angry  man  would  do  it.  It  is  the
highest  extent  of  affliction  that  we  take
God  to  be  angrier  than  He  is.  V.
Consider  the  comforts  we  have  in  afflic-
tions. "  I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen
affliction."  L  That  we  see  our  afflic-
tions, we  understand,  consider  them.
We  see  that  affliction  comes  from  God,
and  that  it  is  sent  that  we  may  see  and
taste  the  goodness  of  God.  2.  That,
though  afflicted,  we  still  retain  our
manhood.  God  may  mend  thee  in
marring  thee  ;  He  may  build  thee  up  in
dejecting  thee  ;  He  may  infuse  another
manhood  into  thee,  so  that  thou  canst
say,  "  I  am  that  Christian  man ;  I  am
the  man  that  cannot  despair  since
Christ  is  the  remedy."  3.  That  the  rod
of  God's  wrath  is  also  the  rod  of  His
comfort  and  strength  (Micah  vii.  14 ;
Ps.  xlv.  6 ;  Ps.  xxiii.  4). — Donne.

—  God  and  human  suffering  :  L
Often  brought  into  strange  relationship,
2.  Suffering  is  a  significant  revelation
of  how  God  views  human  sin.     3.  Suf-


ttOMtLETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


cHAp.  Hi.


fering  may  draw  man  nearer  to,  or  drive
him  farther  from,  God.

Vers.  2,  3.  The  mystery  of  suffer-
ing. 1.  Impossible  to  solve  by  human
speculations.  "Into  darkness,  but  not
into  light."  II.  Increased  hy  the  diffi-
culty of  accounting  for  the  part  God
takes  in  it.  "  He  hath  led  me  and
brought  me  into  darkness,  but  not
into  light"  (ver.  2).  III.  Intensified  hy
the  apparent  persistency  of  the  Divine
severity.  "  Surely  against  me  is  He
turned ;  He  turneth  His  hand  against
me  all  the  day  "  (ver.  3).

Illustrations. — God's  anger  man's
heaviest  afliiction.  God's  anger  exerts
itself  by  embittering  afiflictions  Every
affliction  is  of  itself  a  grievance,  and  a
breach  made  upon  our  happiness  ;  but
there  is  sometimes  a  secret  energy  that
so  edges  and  quickens  its  afflictive  opera-
tion that  a  blow  levelled  at  the  body
shall  enter  into  the  very  soul.  What
is  the  reason  that  David  is  sometimes
so  courageous  that  "  though  he  walks
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of
death,  he  fears  no  evil;"  and,  at  another
time,  God  no  sooner  "hides  His  face,
but  he  is  troubled  "  ?  What  is  the  cause
that  a  man  sometimes  breaks  through  a
greater  calamity,  and  at  another  time
the  same  person  fails  and  desponds  under
a  loss  of  the  same  nature  1  Whence  can
this  be,  but  that  God  infuses  some  more
grains  of  His  wrath  into  the  one  than
into  the  other  ^ — South.

—  The  Divine  anger.  Anger  is  the
whetstone  of  strength ;  in  an  equality
of  other  terms,  it  will  make  a  man  pre-
vail. Nothing  is  able  to  "stand  before
a  fire  which  is  once  enraged ;  so  is  it
when  the  fire  of  the  Lord's  revenge
breaks  forth  upon  the  enemies  of  His
Son.  Add  hereunto  our  disposition  and
preparedness  for  the  wrath  of  God.  Far
easier  is  it  to  make  a  print  in  wax  than
in  an  adamant;  to  kindle  a  fire  in  dry
stubble  than  in  green  wood.  Wicked
men  have  fitted  themselves  for  wrath,
and  are  procurers  and  artificers  of  their
own  destruction. — Bishop  Reynolds.

Darkness  and  danger.  Sailing  once
along  a  coast  where  a  friend  had  suffered
shipwreck,  the  scene  which  recalled  his


danger  filled  Us  with  no  fear ;  because,
while  his  ship,  on  the  night  she  ran
ashore,  was  cutting  her  way  through
the  densest  fog,  we  were  ploughing  thd
waters  of  a  silver  sea,  where  noble  head-
lands, pillared  cliffs,  scattered  islands,
and  surf-beaten  reefs  stood  })athed  in
the  brightest  moonshine.  There  was
no  danger  just  because  there  was  no
darkness. —  Guthrie.

Darkness  precedes  light.  The  Lord
ofttimes  makes  everything  as  dark  as  it
can  become,  just  that  presently  the  light
may  shine  more  brilliantly.  L>hmael
faints  before  Hagar  finds  the  well.
Joseph  is  left  in  prison  and  oblivion
before  being  raised  to  dignity.  The
Assyrian  host  surrounds  Jerusalem  ere
they  are  smitten  by  the  angel.  Jere-
miah sinks  into  the  pit  before  he  is
placed  on  a  rock.  Violent  persecution
of  the  Christians  preceded  the  triumph
of  the  Gospel.  Mediaeval  darkness  pre-
ceded the  dawn  of  the  Reformation. —
Oosterzee.

Afliiction  ripens  character.  There
is  a  certain  mellowness  which  affliction
sheds  upon  the  character,  a  softening
that  it  effects  of  all  the  rougher  and
more  repulsive  asperities  of  our  nature,
a  delicacy  of  temperament  into  which  it
often  melts  and  refines  the  most  un-
gainly spirit.  It  is  not  the  pride  of
aspiring  talent  that  we  carry  to  heaven
with  us ;  it  is  not  the  lustre  of  a  super-
iority which  dazzles  and  commands  that
we  bear  with  us  there.  It  is  not  the
eminence  of  any  public  distinction  or
the  fame  of  lofty  and  successful  enter-
prise ;  and  should  these  give  undue  con-
fidence to  man  or  throw  an  aspect  of
conscious  and  complacent  energy  over
him,  he  wears  not  yet  the  complexion
of  Paradise  ;  and  should  God  select  him
as  His  own,  He  will  send  some  special
affliction  that  may  chasten  him  out  of
all  which  is  uncongenial  with  the  place
of  blessedness,  and  at  length  reduce  him
to  its  unmingled  love  and  its  adoring
humility.  The  character  is  purified  by
the  simple  process  of  passing  through
the  fire.  "  And  when  He  has  tried  me,
I  shall  come  forth  as  gold." — Chalmers.

Suflfering  a  mystery.  As  the  Egyp-
tian who  c^r4e4  SQoiething  wound  up

73


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


in  his  napkin  answered  him  who  de-  pose  kept  from  us,  to  the  end  that  we

manded  what  it  was,  that  he  covered  it  should   not   be  too  curious  to  inquire

to  the  end  that  no  man  should  see  it ;  after   it ;  that  it  is   far   better   to   be

BO  likewise  must  we  learn  that  if  there  utterly  ignorant  herein  than  to  have  alJ

be  anything  hidden  and  laid  up  in  the  the  knowledge  thereof  that  may  be.—

works  and  dealings  of  God,  it  is  of  pur-  Cawdray,


HOMILETICS.

The  Bewilderment  of  Grief.

(Verses  4-9.)

L  Is  accompanied  with  intense  physical  suffering.  "  My  flesh  and  my  skin
hath  He  made  old ;  He  hath  broken  my  bones  "  (ver.  4).  The  skin  is  wrinkled
and  worn,  in  this  case  not  with  age,  but  with  excessive  grief;  and  the  suffering
which  in  the  preceding  verses  was  represented  as  a  slow  wasting  of  strength,  has
now  reached  the  stage  of  acute  pain,  such  as  is  caused  by  the  breaking  of  bones.
It  is  a  pitiable  sight  to  see  a  nation  or  an  individual  growing  prematurely  old.
This  is  not  done  by  hard,  honest,  healthy  work,  but  by  sorrow  and  suffering.
The  strongest  and  most  beautiful  physical  form  rapidly  shrinks  and  withers  under
the  stroke  of  a  great  and  overwhelming  grief.  A  sudden  calamity  has  been  known
to  turn  the  hair  grey  in  a  single  night,  and  to  impose  the  wreck  of  years  on  the
bewildered  and  moaning  sufferer.

II.  Is  as  of  one  immured  in  prison,  from  which  all  efforts  to  escape  are
futile  (vers.  5,  7,  9).  The  prisoner  is  enclosed  and  fenced  in  with  a  solid  wall  as
of  hewn  stone,  but  it  is  a  wall  of  bitterness  and  weariness.  There  are  paths,  dark
and  tortuous,  and  as  he  gropes  along  them  with  the  dim  hope  of  finding  an  outlet,
he  finds  himself  in  a  maze  which  brings  him  back,  after  long  and  weary  wandering,
to  the  place  whence  he  started.     Like  Byron's  Prisoner  of  Chillon—

"  It  was  liberty  to  stride
Along  my  cell  from  side  to  side,
And  up  and  down,  and  then  athwart|
And  tread  it  over  every  part ;
And  round  the  pillars  one  by  one,
Returning  where  my  walk  begun."

Grief  fetters  the  soul  as  with  a  heavy  chain.  It  may  chafe  and  fret  and  tug  to
very  weariness  in  the  efi"ort  to  obtain  release ;  but  in  vain  :  the  bondage  remains.
If  we  walk  in  the  crooked  paths  of  sin,  we  shall  ultimately  find  ourselves  enclosed
within  the  crooked  paths  of  sorrow,  from  w^hich  we  shall  be  powerless  to  escajjc.

III.  Is  as  of  one  buried  in  a  dismal  sepulchre.  "  He  hath  set  me  in  dark
places,  as  they  that  be  dead  of  old  "  (ver.  6).  Grief  has  worn  down  the  sufferer  to
the  semblance  of  a  skeleton,  and  he  regards  himself  as  a  corpse  laid  in  the  dark
chambers  of  the  grave — dead,  buried,  and  forgotten.

••  For  all  was  blank  and  bleak  and  gray,
It  was  not  night,  it  was  not  day,
It  was  not  even  the  dungeon-light,
So  hateful  to  my  heavy  sight,
But  vacancy  absorbing  space,
And  fixedness  without  a  place  ;
There  were  no  stars,  no  earth,  no  time,
No  check,  no  chanj^e,  no  good,  no  crim«  {
But  silence  and  a  stirless  breath,
Which  neither  was  of  life  nor  death  ;
A  sea  of  stagnant  idleness,
Blind,  boundless,  mute,  and  motionless  ! " — Byr<HL

74


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  ill.


Excessive  grief  darkens  and  dulls  every  faculty,  and  robs  life  of  all  its  charm.
There  are  some  sorrows  from  which  death  is  a  merciful  release.

IV.  The  loudest  calls  for  help  are  disregarded.  "Also  when  I  cry  and
shout,  he  shutteth  out  my  prayer"  (ver.  8).  The  walls  of  his  prison  are  so  thick
that  the  loudest  cries  cannot  pierce  them ;  they  are  unheard  and  unheeded.  It
intensifies  the  bewilderment  of  grief  when  the  most  earnest  cries  for  help  bring
no  relief.  A  short  time  ago  the  dead  body  of  a  stalwart  Scotch  shepherd  was
found  buried  in  the  snow  on  the  Ayrshire  hills,  within  a  short  distance  of  his
own  home.  Two  days  before,  when  walking  homewards,  he  was  overtaken  with
a  snowstorm,  and  it  is  supposed  must  have  been  dazed  by  the  fury  of  the  tempest,
and  lost  his  way.  It  is  distressing  to  think  of  his  desperate  struggles  for  life  and
his  exhausting  shouts  for  help,  but  all  in  vain.  It  is  a  painful  phase  in  the
mystery  of  suffering  when  God  seems  so  indifferent  to  our  prayers,  and  so  slow  to
help.  But  even  in  this  we  are  led  by-and-bye  to  recognise  the  Divine  justice  and
mercy.

Lessons. — 1.  The  body  sympathises  with  the  sufferings  of  the  soul.  2.  Mv^h
of  the  suffering  of  life  must  be  borne  alone,  3.  It  is  the  bitterest  ingredient  in
suffering  when  there  is  no  prospect  of  relief

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  4-6.  The  ravages  of  sorrow :  we  had   secretly  deposited   our  worst

I.  Destroy  the  freshness  and  bloom  of  indulgences.     The  clouds  that  intercept

youth.     "  My  flesh  and  my  skin  hath  the  heavens  from  us  come  not  from  the

He  made  old."    II.  Inflict  acutest  pain.  heavens,  but  from  the  earth. — Landor.

**IIe  hath  broken  my  bones"  (ver.  4).  A  great  sorrow.     Henry  I.,  on  his

III.   Oppress  the  soul  with  bitterness  and  return    from    Normandy,    was    accom-

toil.     "He    hath    builded   against  me.  panied  by  a   crowd  of  nobles  and  his

and  compassed  me  with  gall  and  travel "  son  William.    The  White  Ship,  in  which

(ver.  5).    IV.  Overshadow  the  individual  the  prince  embarked,  lingered   behind

life  icith  the  gloom  of  the  grave.     "  He  the  rest  of  the  royal  fleet,  while  the

hath  set  me  in  dark  places,  as  they  that  young  nobles,  excited  with  wine,  hung

be  dead  of  old"  (ver.  6).  over  the  ship's  side  taunting  the  priest

Vers.  7-9.  A  baffled  sufferer :  I.  who  came  to  give  the  customary  bene-
He  is  enclosed  and  fettered.  "He  hath  diction.  At  last  the  guards  of  the
hedged  me  about  that  I  cannot  get  out ;  king's  treasure  pressed  the  vessel's  de-
He  hath  made  my  chain  heavy "  (ver.  parture,  and,  driven  by  the  arms  of
7).  II.  His  cries  for  help  are  unavail-  fifty  rowers,  it  swept  swiftly  out  to  sea.
ing.  "  Also  when  I  cry  and  shout,  He  All  at  once  the  ship's  side  struck  on  a
shutteth  out  my  prayer  "  (ver.  8).  III.  rock  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  and
He  is  in  a  maze  of  tortuous  paths,  from  in  an  instant  it  sank  beneath  the  waves.
which  there  is  no  outlet.  "  He  hath  in-  One  terrible  cry,  ringing  through  the
closed  my  ways  with  hewn  stone.  He  stillness  of  the  night,  was  heard  by  the
hath  made  my  paths  crooked  "  (ver.  9).  royal  fleet,  but  it  was  not  till  the  morn-
ing that  the   fatal   news   reached   the

Illustrations.  —  Causes    of   grief,  king.      He    fell    unconscious    to    the

We  fancy  that  all   our  afflictions  are  ground,  and  rose  never  to  smile  again  I

sent  us  directly  from  above  ;  sometimes  Secret  grief.     If  the  internal  griefs

we  think  it  in  piety  and  contrition,  but  of  every  man  could  be  read,  written  on

oftener  in  moroseness  and  discontent.  his  forehead,  how  many  who  now  excite

It  would  be  well,  however,  if  we  at-  envy    would    appear  to    be   objects  of

tempted  to  trace  the  causes  of  them ;  pity  ! — Metastoaio.

we  should  probably  find   their  origin  Grief  irksome,  but  needful.   A  friend

in  some  region  of  the  heart  which  we  was  asked  concerning  a  beautiful  horse

never  had  well  explored,  or  in  which  feeding  on  the  pasture  with  a  clog  on

75


OHAP.  iiL  BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


its  foot,   "Why  do    you  clog   such   a  prophets,  evangelists,  confessors,  Christ

noble  animal?"      The  reply  was,    "I  Himself,  have  found  rugged  and  bloody  !

would  a  great  deal  sooner  clog  him  than  Away    with   this    self-love,    and  come

lose  him ;  he  is  given  to  leap  hedges."  down,  you  ambitious  sons  of  Zebedee,

That  is  why  God  clogs  His  people.    He  and,  ere  you  think  of  sitting  near  the

would  rather  clog  them  than  lose  them  ;  throne,  be  content  to  be  called  unto  the

for  if  He  did  not,  they  would  leap  and  cross.     Now   is  your   trial.     Let  your

be  gone. — Spurgeon,  Saviour  see  how  much  of  His   bitter

The  sufferer  baffled  by  temptation,  portion   you  can  pledge.      Then  shall

A  time  of  affliction  is  a  time  of  tempta-  you  see  how  much  of  His  glory  He  can

tion.      Satan  will  not  be  wanting  in  afiford  you.     Be  content  to  drink  of  His

any  opportunity  or  advantage  of  setting  vinegar  and  gall,  and  you  shall  drink

upon  the  soul.     "When  Pharaoh  heard  new  wine  with  Him  in  His  kingdom. —

that  the  people  were  entangled  in  the  BisJiop  Hall.

wilderness,    he    pursued    them  ;    and  —  As    snow    is   of   itself   cold,   yet

when  Satan  sees  a  soul  entangled  with  warms  and  refreshes  the  earth,  so  afflic-

its  distresses  and  troubles,  he  thinks  it  tions,  though  in  themselves   grievous,

his  time  and  hour  to  assault  it.     He  yet  keep  the  soul  of  the  Christian  warm

seeks  to  winnow,  and  comes  when  the  and  make  it  fruitful.      Let  the  most

corn  is  under  -the  flail.     Reckon,  there-  afflicted  know  and  remember  that  it  is

fore,  that,   when  trouble   cometh,   the  better  to  be  preserved  in  brine  than  to

prince  of  this  world  cometh  also.    Then  rot  in  honey. — Salter.

is  the  time  to  take  the  shield  of  faith,  —  After    a    forest    fire    has    raged

that  we  may  be  able  to  quench  his  fiery  furiously,  it  has  been  found  that  many

darts.     If  they  be  neglected,  they  will  pine  cones  have  had  their  seeds  released

inflame  the  soul. — John  Owen.  by    the  heat,   which  ordinarily  would

Grief,  its  uses.     What !  would  you  have   remained  unsown.      The   future

choose  that  you  alone  may  fare  better  forest  sprang   from  the    ashes   of   the

than  all  God's  saints  ?  that  God  should  former.     Some  Christian  graces,  such  as

strew  carpets  for  your  nice  feet  only,  to  humility,  patience,  sympathy,  have  been

walk  into  your  heaven,  and  make  that  evolved  from  the  sufi'erings  of  the  saints,

way  smooth  for  you  which  all  patriarchs.  The  furnace  has  been  used  to  fructify.


BOMILETICS.

Jehovah  as  a  Foe,

(Verses  10-13.)

I.  Is  aware  of  every  effort  to  escape  out  of  His  power.     "He  was  unto  me

as  a  bear  lying  in  wait,  and  as  a  lion  in  secret  places"  (ver.  10).  The  afflicted
one  compares  himself  to  a  fugitive  striving  to  escape  from  Ids  miseries,  but  baffled
at  every  turn.  Finding  his  way  blocked  up  by  a  solid  wall,  he  plunges  into  the
uncertain  paths  of  the  forest,  only  to  find  himself  exposed  to  the  rapacity  of  beasts
of  prey.  In  every  direction  he  is  menaced  with  enemies ;  to  turn  back  is  as
dangerous  as  to  press  forward.  Exhausted  and  bewildered,  he  is  ready  to  sink
with  terror  and  despair.  Woe  to  the  man  who  has  made  an  enemy  of  Jehovah !
His  most  frantic  efforts  to  escape  are  in  vain.  He  is  everywhere  threatened  by
the  law  he  has  violated,  and  its  penalties  lie  about  his  path  like  wild  beasts,  ready
to  seize  him  as  their  victim.

II.  Alarms  by  the  suddenness  and  violence  of  His  attack.  "He  hath
turned  aside  my  ways,  and  pulled  me  in  pieces.  He  hath  made  me  desolate "
(ver.  11).  The  figure  of  the  lion  is  still  maintained.  Aware  of  its  presence,  the
startled  fugitive  turns  aside,  only  to  find  himself  suddenly  pounced  upon  and  torn
in  pieces,  so  that,  stupified  with  terror  and  pain,  he  is  powerless  to  flee.     *' He

76


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  m.


hath  made  me  desolate"  a  favourite  word  with  Jeremiah,  occurring  more  than  forty
times  in  his  Prophecy,  and  five  times  in  Lamentations  (ch.  i.  4,  13,  16;  iv.  5;  v.
18).  The  root  meaning  of  the  word  is  appalled,  asLonied,  stupified,  struck
dumb  with  terror.  The  impenitent  wicked  are  every  moment  in  imminent  peril.
The  doom  of  destruction  is  already  declared  against  the  workers  of  iniquity,  and
that  destruction  shall  come  '*  unawares,  as  a  whirlwind,  suddenly  and  swiftly"  (c/.
Ps.  XXXV.  8;  Prov.  i.  27,  x.  29,  xxi.  15;  1  Thess.  v.  3 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  1).  Christ
is  the  refuge  of  the  sinner,  immediately  accessible,  and  in  Him  there  is  invulner-
able security.

III.  Is  an  unerring  marksman.  "He  hath  bent  His  bow,  and  set  me  as  a
mark  for  the  arrow"  (ver.  12).  The  simile  of  the  lion  naturally  suggests  that  of
the  hunter.  AVhen  the  smitten  fugitive  is  under  the  paw  of  the  lion,  the  hunter
comes,  but  not  to  deliver  him.  It  is  not  the  beast  of  prey,  but  the  poor  mangled
victim  which  is  the  mark  for  his  arrows.  The  Mohammedan  Caliph  Aaly  was
once  asked,  "If  the  heavens  were  a  bow  and  the  earth  the  cord  thereof,  if  cala-
mities were  arrows,  man  the  butt  for  those  arrows,  and  the  holy  blessed  God  the
unerring  marksman,  where  could  the  sons  of  Adam  flee  for  succour  V  The  Caliph
replied,  "The  children  of  Adam  must  flee  unto  the  Lord."  This  was  the  state  of
unhappy  Judah ;  this  is  the  state  of  the  man  who  wickedly  defies  God  There  is
no  escape  but  by  a  penitent  return  to  Him  whose  bow  is  already  bent  to  punish,
and  whose  arrow  reaches  its  mark  with  unerring  precision.

IV.  Can  inflict  acutest  pain.  "  He  hath  caused  the  arrows  of  His  quiver  to
enter  into  my  reins" — my  heart  (ver.  13).  God  has  many  arrows;  they  are  swift
in  their  passage,  unerring  in  their  aim,  and  pierce  deep.  None  can  wound  as  God
can.  In  the  region  where  the  greatest  sin  against  Him  has  been  committed — in
the  heart — there  the  arrows  of  His  judgment  penetrate  and  produce  the  keenest
anguish.  *'  These  immediate  blows  of  God  upon  the  soul  seem  to  be  those  things
called  in  Psalm  xxxviii.  2  God's  arrows ;  they  are  strange,  sudden,  invincible
amazements  upon  the  spirit,  leaving  such  a  damp  upon  it  as  defies  the  faint  and
weak  cordials  of  all  creature  enjoyments.  The  wounds  which  God  Himself  makes
none  but  God  Himself  can  cure."

Lessons. — 1.  It  is  vain  for  the  sinner  to  defy  Jehovah.  2.  Sin  cannot  evade
either  detection  or  punishment.  3.  The  only  hope  of  the  sinner  is  to  penitently
implore  the  mercy  of  Jehovah,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  10,  11.  The  dangers  of  a  sinful  arrows  of  His  quiver  to  enter  into  my

life.     I.  The  agents  of  punishment  are  reins  "  (ver.  13).
always  at  hand.     * '  He  was  unto  me  as

a  bear  lying  in  wait,  and  as  a  lion  in  Illustrations. — Jehovah  a  foe   to

secret  places  "  (ver.  10).     II.  There  is  all  sin.     God  Himself,  we  have  always

no    escape  from  punishment  for    sin.  understood,  hates  sin  with  a  most  au-

*'  He  hath  turned  aside  my  ways  and  thentic,  celestial,  and  eternal  hatred — a

pulled  me  in  pieces"  (ver.   11).      III.  hatred,  a  hostility  inexorable,  unappeas-

The  punishment  for  sin  is  sudden  and  able,  which  blasts  the  scoundrel,  and  all

appalling.     '*  He  hath  made  me  deso-  scoundi  els  ultimately,  into  black  anni-

late  "  (ver.  1 1 ).  hilation    and   disappearance   from    the

Vers.  12,  13.  The  certainty  of  punish-  sum  of  things.     The  path  of  it  is  the

ment.     I.  Because  God  is  just.     II.  Be-  path  of  a  flaming  sword.     He  that  has

cause  God  is  unerring  in  His  treatment  eyes  may  see   it   walking,    inexorable,

of  sin.     "  He  hath  bent  His  bow  and  divinely  beautiful  and  divinely  terrible,

set  me  as  a  mark  for  the  arrow"  (ver.  through  the  chaotic  gulf  of  human  his-

12).    III.  The  punishment  will  he  pain-  tory,  and  everywhere  burning,  as  with

fvlly  realised.     "He  hath  caused  the  unquenchable  fire,   the  false  and  the

77


OHAP.  IIL


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS.


deadworthy  from  the  true  and  life-
worthy,  making  all  human  history  and
the  biography  of  every  man  a  God's
cosmos  in  place  of  a  devil's  chaos.  So
it  is  in  the  end ;  even  so  to  every  man
who  is  a  man,  and  not  a  mutinous  beast,
and  has  eyes  to  see. — Carlyle,

The  dangers  of  sin.  The  favourite
sport  of  Canada  in  winter  is  tobogan-
ning.  Some  of  the  slides  are  very  steep
and  look  very  dangerous,  and  the  sensa-
tion of  rushing  down  the  hill  on  the
thin  strips  of  basswood  is  one  never  to
be  forgotten.  *'  How  do  you  like  it  ? "
asked  a  Canadian  girl  of  an  American
visitor,  whom  she  had  steered  down
the  steepest  slide.  *'  Oh,  I  would  not
have  missed  it  for  a  hundred  dollars ! "
"  You'll  try  it  again,  won't  you  V*  "  Not
for  a  thousand  dollars  !  "

—  Mr.  Ruskin  speaks  in  his  "  Love's
Meinie  "  of  the  little  crake,  a  bird  which
lays  her  eggs  on  an  in  artificially  con-
structed platform  of  decayed  leaves
or  stalks  of  marsh  plants,  slightly  ele-
vated above  the  water.  "  How  ele-
vated I  cannot  find  proper  account ;
that  is  to  say,  M'hether  it  is  hung
to  the  stems  of  growing  reeds  or  built
on  hillocks  of  soil ;  but  the  bird  is
always  liable  to  have  its  nest  overflown
by  floods."

The  degradation  of  sin.  When  the
followers  of  Ulysses  degraded  them-
selves by  the  misuse  of  pleasures  until
they  fell  to  the  level  of  the  brutes,  it  is
said  that  Circe,  touching  them  with  her
wand,  turned  them  into   swine.     She


brought  to  the  surface  the  inner  ugliness,
revealed  the  animal  that  ruled  within.

The  bitterness  of  sin.  There  is
more  bitterness  following  upon  sin's  end-
ing than  ever  there  was  sweetness  flow-
ing from  sin's  acting.  You  that  see
nothing  but  well  in  its  commission  will
suffer  nothing  but  woe  in  its  conclusion.
You  that  sin  for  your  profits  will  never
profit  by  your  sins. — Dyer.

Divine  judgment  a  painful  reality.
That  which  comes  immediately  from
God  has  most  of  God  in  it.  As  the
sun  when  he  darts  his  beams  in  a  direct
perpendicular  line  does  it  most  forcibly
because  most  immediately,  there  are
terrors  upon  the  mind  which  flow  im-
mediately from  God,  and  are  not  weak-
ened or  refracted  by  passing  through
the  instrumental  conveyance  of  a  second
cause,  for  that  which  passes  through  a
thing  is  contracted  according  to  the
narrowness  of  its  passage.  The  terrors
here  spoken  of,  not  being  inflicted  by
the  intermediate  help  of  anything,  but
being  darted  forth  from  God  Himself,
are  by  this  incomparably  more  strong
and  piercing.  When  God  wounds  a
man  by  the  loss  of  an  estate,  of  his
health,  of  a  relation,  the  smart  is  but
commensurate  to  the  thing  which  is
lost,  poor  and  finite.  But  when  He
Himself  employs  His  whole  omnipo-
tence, and  is  Himself  both  the  archer
and  the  arrow,  there  is  as  much  differ-
ence between  this  and  the  former  as
when  a  house  lets  fall  a  cobweb  and
when  it  falls  itself  upon  a  man. — South.


EOMILETICS.
Complex  Phases  of  Distress.
(Verses  14-17.)

L  The  sufferer  is  the  subject  of  ridicule.     "  I  was  a  derision  to  all  my

people,  and  their  song  all  the  day  "  (ver.  14).  Dropping  the  use  of  metaphor  for
the  nonce,  the  prophet  plainly  indicates  in  these  words  what  the  arrows  wore  that
pierced  him  to  the  quick.  They  were  the  darts  of  ridicule,  sharpened  with  envy
and  poisoned  with  rancour — a  ridicule  all  the  keener  as  coming  from  his  own
})eople,  and  revealing  the  base  treachery  that  had  been  all  along  cherished  under
the  mask  of  professed  friendship.  It  is  a  deep  wound  to  a  sensitive  heart  to
discover  the  fickleness  of  perverse  human  nature.  The  very  people  who  smile
upon  and  flatter  us  in  our  prosperity  are  the  first  to  curl  the  lip  of  scorn  and  to
join  those  who  make  sport  over  our  misfortunes.  The  idol  of  the  crowd  to-day
79


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,  OHAp.  m.


may  be  the  execration  of  the  crowd  to-morrow.  It  is  a  part  of  the  suffering  of
the  unfaitliful  to  have  to  endure  the  contempt  of  God  and  man,  and  the  sting  of
the  distress  is  the  consciousness  that  it  is  self-induced  and  richly  deserved.
Where  shall  he  look  for  sympatliy  and  help?  Not  from  man.  His  only  refuge
is  in  God.

II.  The  sufferer  is  satiated  with  pain  and  sunk  in  abject  humiliation.
"  He  hath  filled  me  with  bitterness,  He  hath  made  me  drunken  with  wormwood.
He  hath  also  broken  my  teeth  with  gravel  stones,  He  hath  covered  me  with
ashes"  (vers.  15,  16).  He  is  as  one  glutted  wuth  bitter  food  and  stupified  with
nauseous  drinks.  An  Arabic  poet  describes  a  man  grievously  afflicted  as  '*  a
pounder  of  wormwood."  His  food  is  so  mingled  with  the  grit  of  the  ashes  in
which  it  is  baked  that  his  teeth  are  broken  in  eating  it,  and  he  is  himself  smothered
with  the  ashes  into  the  midst  of  which  he  has  been  thrown  down.  To  the
Oriental  mind  this  is  a  graphic  description  of  acute  suffering  and  shame.  Vanity,
pride,  and  disobedience  end  in  humiliation  and  trouble.  "  It  seems  appointed,"
says  Lange,  "  that  much  of  the  highest  instruction  should  come  to  us,  even  in  the
Bible,  through  the  sufferings  and  struggles  of  individual  men."  The  anguish  of
the  prophet  was  a  type  of  the  sufferings  of  a  rebellious  nation.

III.  The  sufferer  is  robbed  of  happiness.  "  Thou  hast  removed  my  soul  far
off  from  peace  "  (ver.  17).  Peace  in  Hebrew  has  the  wider  signification  of  wel-
fare, happiness.  Hence  it  was  their  salutation  in  life,  "  Peace  be  to  thee,'*  and
in  death  was  engraved  upon  their  sepulchres,  *'  In  peace."  Peace  with  God  is  the
source  of  permanent  and  overflowing  happiness,  and  its  possession  is  conditioned
on  the  obedience  of  faith,  for  *'  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God,
and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God."  How  great  is  the  loss  when  our  peace
is  gone  and  our  happiness  takes  wing !  It  is  the  loss  of  that  we  most  highly
prize  and  diligently  seek  after,  for  happiness  is  the  object  of  universal  search.
Rob  a  man  of  his  peace,  and  what  is  there  left  to  live  for  ?  The  soul,  unloosed
from  her  old  moorings,  is  tossed  about  like  a  helpless  ship  in  the  troubled  sea
which  cannot  rest.  Life  is  an  intolerable  burden,  and,  swung  in  a  whirl  of  black
despair,  the  soul  cries  out  with  the  distracted  patriarch,  "  Oh,  that  I  might  have
my  request,"  &c.  (Job  vi.  8-10).

IV.  The  sufferer  loses  the  very  idea  of  good.  "  I  forgot  prosperity "
(ver.  17).  I  forgot  what  good  is,  lost  the  very  idea  of  what  it  means.  There  is
no  enjoyment  in  the  present ;  there  is  no  hope  in  the  future.  It  is  impossible  to
conceive  a  more  pitiable  and  forlorn  condition.  The  prophet  has  surely  reached
the  bottom  of  his  despair;  there  is  no  lower  depth.  This  is  the  fate  of  the  man
who  tries  to  live  without  God.  His  views  of  right  and  wrong,  of  liberty  and
bondage,  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  are  utterly  confounded.  It  is  a  dangerous
experiment  for  any  man  to  try.  Christ  is  the  Hope  of  humanity.  To  be  without
Him  is  to  be  without  God,  and  to  be  in  the  condition  of  the  Ephesians  of  a  former
age,  "  Having  no  hope  and  without  God  in  the  world  "  (Eph.  ii.  12).

Lessons. — 1.  It  is  a  painful  experience  to  meet  with  scorn  where  we  expected
sympathy.  2.  There  is  always  something  to  modify  the  happiness  of  life.  3.  It
is  one  of  the  saddest  results  of  suffering  when  the  soul  loses  faith  in  goodness,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  14,  15.  Ridicule:  1.  Is  hard  Ver.  17.  The  loss  of  happiness:  L
to  bear  when  coming  from  our  enemies.  Is  the  loss  of  peace.  II.  Is  the  loss  of
II.  Has  a  special  aggravation  when  it  is  true  notions  of  goodness.  III.  Is  the
exultingly  employed  against  us  by  those  fate  of  the  obstinately  unbelieving,
we  had  loved  and  trusted.  III.  Over-
whelms its  victim  by  its  bitterness  and  Illustrations. — Triumph  over  ridl-
ceaseless  outflow.  cule.      A  pious   poor  man  was  much

79


CHAP.  III.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


ridiculed  on  account  of  his  religion.
Being  asked  if  these  daily  persecutions
did  not  make  him  ready  to  give  up
his  profession,  he  replied,  "  No  !  Our
minister  once  said  in  his  sermon  that  if
we  were  so  foolish  as  to  permit  such
people  to  laugh  us  out  of  religion  till  at
last  we  dropped  into  hell,  they  could
not  laugh  us  out  again."

—  What  would  the  nightingale  care
if  the  toad  despised  her  singing?  She
would  still  sing  on,  and  leave  the  cold
toad  to  his  dank  shadows.  And  what
care  I  for  the  sneers  of  men  who  grovel
upon  earth?  I  will  still  sing  on  in  the
ear  and  bosom  of  God. — Beecher.

Treachery  has  no  pity.  Sir  Anthony
Kingston,  the  provost-mnrshal  of  the
Protector,  the  Earl  of  Hertford,  sent
word  to  the  mayor  of  Bodmin  that  he
would  dine  with  him.  He  had  a  man
to  hang  too,  he  said,  and  a  stout  gallows
must  be  ready.  The  dinner  was  duly
eaten  and  the  gallows  prepared.  "  Think
you,"  said  Kingston  as  they  stood  look-
ing at  it,  *'  think  you  is  it  strong
enough  1 "  '*  Yea,  sir,"  quoth  the  mayor,
"  it  is."  "  Well,  then,"  said  Sir  An-
thony, "get  up;  it  is  for  you."  The
mayor,  greatly  abashed,  exclaimed  and
protested.  "  Sir,"  said  Kingston,
^*  there  is  no  remedy ;  ye  have  been  a
busy  rebel,  and  this  is  appointed  for
your  reward  ; "  and  so,  without  respite
or  stay,  the  mayor  was  hanged.

Suffering  and  its  compensations.
Should  the  Empress  determine  to  banish
me,  let  her  banish  me;  "The  earth  is
the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof."  If
she  will  cast  me  into  the  sea,  let  her
cast  me  into  the  sea ;  I  will  remember
Jonah.     If  she  will  throw  me  into  a


burning  fiery  furnace,  the  three  children
were  there  before  me.  If  she  will  throw
me  to  the  wild  beasts,  I  will  remember
that  Daniel  was  in  the  den  of  lions.  If
she  will  condemn  me  to  be  stoned,  I
shall  be  an  associate  of  Stephen,  the
proto-martyr.  If  she  will  have  me  be-
headed, the  Baptist  has  submitted  to
the  same  punishment.  If  she  will  take
away  my  substance,  "  naked  came  I  out
of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall
I  return  to  it." — Chrysostom.

The  best  work  conies  out  of  distress.
The  people  of  Verona,  when  they  saw
Dante  in  the  streets,  used  to  say,  "  See,
there  is  the  man  that  was  in  hell ! "
Ah  yes  !  he  had  been  in  hell — in  hell
enough,  in  long  severe  sorrow  and
struggle,  as  the  like  of  him  is  pretty
sure  to  have  been.  Commedias  that
come  out  divine  are  not  accomplished
otherwise.  Thought,  true  labour  of
any  kind,  highest  virtue  itself,  is  it
not  the  daughter  of  pain  ?  Born  as  out
of  the  black  whirlwind  ;  true  effort,  in
fact,  as  of  a  captive  struggling  to  free
himself  :  that  is  thought.  In  all  ways
we  are  to  become  perfect  through
suffering. — Carlyle.

Happiness  depends  on  God.  Solon
said,  "  No  man  ought  to  be  called  happy
till  he  dies,  because  he  knows  not  what
his  life  is  to  be."  But  the  Christian
may  always  call  himself  happy  here
because  wherever  his  tent  is  carried,  he
need  never  pitch  it  where  the  cloud
does  not  move  and  where  he  is  not
surrounded  by  a  wall  of  fire.  "  I  will
be  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  them,  and
their  glory  in  the  midst. "  They  cannot
dwell  where  God  is  not  householder,
warder,  and  bulwark  of  salvation.


E0MILETIC8.

The  Dawn  of  Hope.
(Verses  18-21.)
I.  Begins  to  appear  when  the  soul  has  reached  the  verge  of  despair.


"I


said.  My  strength  and  my  hope  is  perished  from  the  Lord  "  (ver.  18).  When  things
get  to  the  worst  they  begin  to  mend.  For  some  time  the  affairs  of  the  prophet
had  been  sinking  into  ever-deepening  gloom.  His  peace  and  happiness  had  departed,
the  memory  that  they  ever  existed  had  perished,  and  now  dark  doubts  about  the
Divine  goodness  had  finished  the  degenerating  process.  It  was  a  critical  moment.
80


H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  m.


The  soul  oscillated  between  utter  collapse  and  the  beginning  of  recovery.  It  is  a
mercy  the  soul  is  not  left  to  itself  in  its  weakest  moments.  Help  was  at  hand,
and  hope  began  to  dawn.  All  the  time  tlie  soul  was  expressing  the  utmost
despondency,  it  was  strugij:ling  against  despair,  and  feeling  for  some  ground  of  con-
fidence and  hope.  It  begins  to  appear  that,  after  all,  trouble  is  God's  method  of
making  known  His  righteousness  and  love.     A  way  out  of  the  dungeon  is  opening.

II.  Indicated  by  the  prayer  of  the  soul  for  the  Divine  pity.  "  Kemem-
bering  mine  affliction  and  my  misery,  the  wormwood  and  the  gall"  (ver.  19).
Remember.  It  is  a  prayer  to  Jehovah,  beseeching  compassion  for  the  soul  that
lias  supped  its  fill  of  misery,  which  it  has  found  as  bitter  as  wormwood  and  gall.
There  is  hope  for  man,  for  the  worst  of  men,  when  he  begins  to  pray.  It  is  the
first  step  upward  in  the  pathway  of  deliverance.  It  may  seem  a  cry  of  despair,
but  it  is  a  cry  that  appeals  to  the  Divine  pity,  and  not  in  vain.  The  powers  of
Omnipotence  are  put  into  operation  for  the  soul's  rescue.

III.  Evident  by  the  fact  of  the  soul's  voluntary  humiliation.  "My  soul
hath  them  still  in  remembrance  and  is  humbled  in  me  "  (ver.  20).  It  is  borne  in
upon  the  suHerer  that  his  extraordinary  afflictions  are  the  consequences  of  sin.
The  mind  oppressed  and  crippled  by  a  morbid  contemplation  of  its  miseries  is  now
transferred  to  a  consideration  of  their  cause,  and  reflection  upon  its  transgressions
bows  the  soul  in  conscious  shame.  A  change  of  theme  is  a  relief  to  the  mentally
distressed.  The  moment  the  soul  becomes  concerned  about  its  sins,  it  becomes
anxious  about  their  removal.     This  anxiety  is  the  dawn  of  hope.

IV.  Strengthened  by  the  recollection  that  prayer  and  penitence  are  the
conditions  of  deliverance.  '*This  I  recall  to  my  mind,  therefore  have  I  hope"
(ver.  21).  He  has  seen  his  error  in  murmuring  against  the  bitterness  of  his
adversity.  Complaints  only  increased  his  misery,  but  did  nothing  towards  remov-
ing it.  He  now  recalls  how  a  sight  of  his  sins  had  humbled  him,  and  led  him  to
pray  for  mercy,  and  knowing  that  God  hears  the  cry  of  the  sincerely  penitent,  he
begins  to  cherish  the  hope  of  pardon  and  deliverance.  It  is  in  this  way  that  God
deals  with  the  sinners  of  to-day.  While  men  concentrate  their  thoughts  upon
their  misfortunes,  and  rail  against  the  Providence  whose  laws  they  have  so  reck-
lessly broken,  they  shut  themselves  off  from  God  and  from  hope ;  but  when  they
acknowledge  and  grieve  over  their  sins,  and  pray  to  God  for  the  mercy  provided
for  all  men  in  Christ  Jesus,  they  receive  not  only  the  hope,  but  the  assurance  of
salvation.

Lessons. — 1.  Hope  is  the  last  link  between  sanity  and  utter  mental  collapse.
2.  The  greatest  sujfferer  is  never  wholly  without  hope.     3.  All  true  reform  must


begin  in  hope.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  18, 19.  Lost  hope  restored.    I.  hope.     Memory  is  very  often  the  ser-

Hope  has  its  highest  realisation  in  God.  vant  of  despondency.     She  stands  like

II.   When  sin  divorces  the  soul  from  a    handmaiden,    clothed   in    sackcloth,

God,  its  hope  perishes.   III.  Only  as  the  presenting    to   her    master    a    cup   of

soul  returns  to  God  is  its  hope  restored.  mingled    gall    and    wormwood.     Like

Vers.  20,  21.   The  office  of  memory:  Mercury,  she  hastes  with  winged  heel

I.  Plays  an  important  part  in  our  men-  to  gather  fresh  thorns  with  which  to  fill

tal  and  spiritual  history.     II.  Helps  us  the  uneasy  pillow,   and  to  bind  fresh

to  realise  the  nature  and  aggravation  of  rods  with  which  to  scourge  the  already

our  sins.      III.    Should   lead  us  to  a  bleeding  heart.     There  is,  however,  no

wi?e  and  timely  humiliation  on  account  necessity  for  this.     Wisdom  will  trans-

of  sin.     IV.  Prepares   the    way  for  a  form  memory  into  an  angel  of  comfort,

brighter  and  more  hopeful  future.  She  need  not  wear  a  crown  of  iron  ;  she

Ver.  21.  Memory,  the  handmaid  of  mav  encircle  her  brow  with  a  fillet  of

81  "                                           W


ciiAp.  m.


MOMlLETtO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


gold,  all  spangled  with  stars.  We  lay
it  down  as  a  general  principle,  that  if
we  would  exercise  our  memories  we
might,  in  our  darkest  distress,  strike
a  match  which  would  instantaneously
kindle  the  lamp  of  comfort.  I.  Apply
this  principle  to  the  believer  in  deep
trouble.  The  chapter  contains  a  list
of  matters  the  recollection  of  which
brought  comfort  to  Jeremiah.  1.  The
fact  that,  hoioever  deep  our  affliction,  it  is
of  the  Lord\  mercy  we  are  not  consumed.
When  you  are  kindling  your  household
fire,  before  which  you  hope  to  sit  down
with  comfort,  you  do  not  expect  first  to
kindle  the  lumps  of  coal,  but  you  set
some  lighter  fuel  in  a  blaze,  and  soon
the  more  solid  material  yields  a  genial
glow  ;  so  this  thought,  which  may  seem
so  light  to  you,  may  be  as  the  kindling
of  a  heavenly  fire  of  comfort  to  you  who
are  now  shivering  in  your  grief.  2.
His  compassions  fail  not.  This  again  is
not  a  very  high  step,  but  still  it  is  a
little  in  advance  of  the  other,  and  the
weakest  may  readily  reach  it.  3.
The  Lord  is  my  portion.  One  of  our
kings,  high  and  haughty  in  temper,  had
a  quarrel  with  the  citizens  of  London,
and  thought  to  alarm  them  by  a  dread-
ful threat  that  would  cow  the  spirits  of
the  bold  burghers,  for  if  they  did  not
mind  what  they  were  at,  he  would  remove
his  court  from  Westminster.  Where-
upon the  doughty  Lord  Mayor  begged
to  inquire  whether  his  Majesty  meant
to  take  the  Thames  away,  for  so  long
as  the  river  remained,  his  majesty  might
take  himself  where  he  pleased.  Even
so  the  world  warns  us,  you  cannot  hold
out,  you  cannot  rejoice ;  this  trouble
shall  come  and  that  adversity  shall  be-
fall. We  reply,  So  long  as  you  cannot
take  our  Lord  away,  we  will  not  com-
plain. We  have  now  advanced  to  some
degree  of  hope,  but  there  are  other  steps
to  ascend.  4.  The  Lord  is  good  unto
them  that  loait  for  Him,  to  the  soul  that
seeketh  Him.  Let  Him  smite  never
so  hard,  yet  if  we  can  maintain  the
heavenly  posture  of  prayer,  we  may
rest  assured  that  He  will  turn  from
blows  to  kisses  yet.  Bunyan  tells
us  that  when  the  city  of  Mansoul
was  besieged,  it  was  the  depth  of
82


winter  and  the  roads  were  very  bad ;
but  even  then  prayer  could  travel  them.
No  enemy  can  barricade  the  road  to  the
King.  We  are  getting  into  deeper
water  of  joy  ;  let  us  take  another  step.

5.  It  is  good  that  a  man  should  bear  the
yoke  in  his  youth.  Why  should  I  dread
to  descend  the  shaft  of  affliction  if  it
leads  me  to  the  gold  mine  of  spiritual
experienced  Why  should  1  cry  out  if
the  sun  of  my  prosperity  goes  down,  if
in  the  darkness  of  my  adversity  I  shall
be  the  better  able  to  count  the  starry
promises  with  which  my  faithful  God
has  been  pleased  to  gem  the  sky.  Many
a  promise  is  written  in  sympathetic
ink,  which  you  cannot  read  till  the
fire  of  trouble  brings  out  the  charac-
ters. One  step  more,  and  surely  we
shall  then  have  good  ground  to  rejoice.

6.  The  Lord  will  not  cast  off  for  ever.
Who  told  thee  that  the  night  would
never  end  in  day  ?  Who  told  thee  that
the  sea  would  ebb  out  till  there  should
be  nothing  left  but  a  vast  tract  of  mud
and  sand?  Who  told  thee  that  the
winter  would  proceed  from  frost  to  frost,
from  snow,  and  ice,  and  hail,  to  deeper
snow  and  yet  more  heavy  tempest  t
Knowest  thou  not  that  day  follows
night,  that  flood  comes  after  ebb,  the
spring  and  summer  succeed  to  winter  1
Hope  thou  then !  Hope  thou  ever,  for
God  fails  thee  not.  Thus  memory  may
be,  as  Coleridge  calls  it,  "  the  bosom-
spring  of  joy."  IL  To  the  doubting
Christian  who  has  lost  his  evidences
of  salvation:  1.  Call  to  remembrance
matters  of  the  past.  At  the  south  of
Africa  the  sea  was  generally  so  stormy
when  the  frail  barks  of  the  Portuguese
went  sailing  south  that  they  named  it
the  Cape  of  Storms ;  but  after  that  cape
had  been  well  rounded  by  bolder  navi-
gators, they  named  it  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope.  In  your  experience  you  had
many  a  Cape  of  Storms,  but  you  have
weathered  them  all,  and  now  let  them
be  a  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  you.  2.
Recall  the  fact  that  others  have  found  the
Lord  true  to  them.  3.  Remember  thai
if  you  look  within  you  will  see  some  faint
traces  of  the  Holy  Spirits  hand.  The
complete  picture  of  Christ  is  not  there,
but  cannot  you  see  the  crayon  sketchy


noMlLETtC  COMMBNTAHY:  lamentations.  chap.  111.


the  outline,  the  charcoal  marks  ^  "Where  nice  for  you  to  be  up  there  basking  in
God  the  Holy  Ghost  has  done  as  much  the  cloudless  sunshine  and  drinking  in
48  that,  He  will  do  more.  4.  Recollect  the  melody  of  the  ascending  lark  as  it
that  Jesus  ChHst  came  into  the  icorld  to  ripples  up  the  heights  ;  and  I  like  you
save  sinners.  If  I  am  not  a  saint,  I  am  to  be  there.  I  could  never  get  there
a  sinner ;  and  if  I  may  not  go  to  the  myself ;  and  you  tell  me  of  things  I
throne  of  grace  as  a  child,  I  will  go  as  should  never  otherwise  know,  and  they
a  sinner.  III.  A  few  words  to  seekers.  do  me  good.  But  remember,  I  cannot
Oh,  that  I  had  a  voice  like  the  trumpet  let  you  go.  We  are  necessary  to  each
of  God  that  shall  wake  the  dead  at  last  1  other,  and  cannot  do  without  each  other.
If  I  might  only  liave  it  to  utter  one  If  you  were  to  break  away  from  me,  you
sentence,  it  would  be  this  one,  "In  would  vanish  like  vapour  into  space,  and
Christ  is  your  help  found."  As  for  I  should  be  left  forlorn  and  powerless."
you,  there  never  can  be  found  anything  Hope  clings  to  us  to  the  last.  When
hopeful  in  your  human  nature.  It  is  John  Knox  lay  dying,  one  of  the  friends
death  itself,  it  is  rottenness  and  corrup-  around  his  death-bed  asked  the  ques-
tion. Turn,  turn  away  your  eyes  from  tion,  "  Hast  thou  hope  ?  "  The  veteran
this  despairing  mass  of  black  depravity  reformer  was  too  weak  to  speak — the
and  look  to  Christ. — G.  II.  Spurgeon.  moment  for  speech  was  gone  ;  but  the

expiring   saint   raised   his   finger    and

Illustrations. — The  misery  of  hope-  pointed  upwards,  and  so  passed  triumph-
lessness.  Abraham  Lincoln,  when  a  antly  to  the  skies,
young  man,  was  subject  to  terrible  fits  Prayer  a  preparation  for  conflict.
of  depression.  In  one  of  his  letters  he  A  soldier  in  the  Confederate  army  was
writes  :  "  I  am  now  the  most  miser-  once  asked  what  was  the  secret  of  Stone-
able  being  living.  If  what  I  feel  were  wall  Jackson's  influence  over  his  men.
equally  distributed  to  the  whole  human  "  Does  your  general  abuse  you,  swear
family,  there  would  not  be  one  cheerful  at  you  to  make  you  march  ] "  "  Swear  !  "
face  on  earth.  Whether  I  shall  ever  answered  the  soldier.  "  No ;  Ewell
be  better  I  cannot  tell ;  I  awfully  for-  does  the  swearing ;  Stonewall  does  the
bode  I  shall  not.  To  remain  as  I  am  praying  !  When  Stonewall  wants  us  to
is  impossible  ;  I  must  die  or  be  better."  march,  he  looks  at  us  soberly,  just  as  if

Hope  presupposes  faith.     They  can-  he  were  sorry  for  us,  and  says,  *  Men,

not  exist  apart.     Hope  is  the  balloon  of  we've  got  to  make  a  long  march.'     We

the  soul,  soaring  majestically  into  the  always  know  when  there  is  going  to  be

heavens,  scanning  scenes  of  beauty  and  a  long  march  and  right  smart  fighting,

grandeur   never  beheld  by  our  earth-  for  old  Jack  is  powerful  on  prayer  just

bound  senses,  and  faithfully  reporting  before  a  big  fight."

to  the  soul  the  state  of  affairs  in  the  Memory  of  victory  inspiring.     Dur-

skies ;  but  it  is  a  captive  balloon,  and  ing  the  last  days  of  William  IV.  the

the  connecting  cords  are  firmly  held  in  anniversary  of  the   battle  of  Waterloo

the  hand  of  faith.     The  loftiest  flights  occurred.      Rousing   himself   upon  re-

and  the  swing  of  what  may  seem  the  membrance    of    it,    the    dying    King

most   eccentric  gyrations  of   hope  are  requested    that   some   of    the    French

held  in  check  by  the  friendly,  the  sym-  standards  taken  there  should  be  brought

pathetic,  and  unswerving  grasp  of  faith.  to  him,  which  when  he  looked  at  and

**  My  dear  Hope,"  says  Faith,  "  it  is  very  handled  he  said,  "  I  feel  much  better."


EOMILETICS.
The  Divine  FAiTHFULNEsa
(Vers.  22-24.)

L  Evidenced  in  our  preservation  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  affllctionfl.   "  It
Ib  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  consumed  "  (ver.  22).     The  same  Divine

-      83


CITAP.  m.       .        nOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.

power  that  called  us  into  being  is  exerted  every  moment  to  sustain  that  being.
The  enemies  of  our  life  threaten  us  every  moment.  We  walk  in  the  midst  of
secret  and  unsuspected  dangers.  A  whiff  of  subtle  and  mysterious  vapour,  and
the  throb  of  life  is  for  ever  stilled ;  the  crumbling  of  a  few  inches  of  shale
beneath  our  feet,  and  we  are  precipitated  into  the  abyss  of  death ;  the  slightest
overbalance  on  the  slippery  deck,  and  we  are  immersed  in  a  watery  grave  ;  the
accidental  divergence  of  the  knife  or  firing  of  the  rifle,  and  we  receive  our  death-
wound  :  the  horse  stumbles,  and  the  rider  lies  dead  at  its  feet ;  the  lightning
flashes,  and  the  unsuspecting  passer-by  is  stricken  into  a  livid  corpse  ;  the  careering
locomotive  leaves  the  metals,  and  many  homes  are  darkened  with  desolation  and
sorrow  ;  the  volcano  opens  its  treacherous  side,  and  thousands  are  swallowed  into
the  depths  of  its  burning  lava.  How  unfathomable  is  the  mercy  and  how  un-
deviating  the  faithfulness  that  have  spared  us  to  this  hour  I  "  One  shall  be  taken
and  another  left;"  but  how  is  it  that  others  are  taken  and  we  are  left?  How  is
it  that  we  have  been  to  so  many  funerals,  and  no  one  has  yet  been  to  ours  ?

II.  Revealed  in  its  greatness  by  the  daily  renewal  of  the  Divine  mercies.
"They  are  new  every  morning;  great  is  thy  faithfulness"  (ver.  23).  Our  wants
are  constant ;  so  is  the  Divine  provision.  The  arrest  in  the  outflow  of  Divine
mercies  for  a  single  day  would  mean  unspeakalde  suffering  to  millions.  The
Divine  supply  is  ever  ahead  of  our  daily  needs.  Every  Divine  blessing  has  the
freshness  and  the  fragrance  of  the  morning  about  it.  "They  are  new  every
morning " — unfailing  as  the  morning  dawn,  bright  and  joyous  as  the  morning
sunshine,  brilliant  and  sparkling  as  the  morning  dew,  sweet  and  invigorating  as
the  morning  air.  Every  new  day,  as  it  pours  its  cornucopia  of  gifts  upon  the
world,  is  an  infallible  witness  to  the  Divine  faithfulness.

III.  Is  the  assured  foundation  of  the  soul's  hope.  "  The  Lord  is  my  portion,
therefore  will  I  hope  in  Him  "  (ver.  24).  The  hope  of  the  prophet  began  to  dawn
amidst  the  deepest  gloom  when  he  remembered  that  God  answered  prayer  (ver.
21) ;  but  now  it  is  strengthened  and  confirmed  when  he  is  assured  of  the  con-
stancy of  the  Divine  mercy.  Israel's  hope  of  help  from  Egypt,  or  from  any  of
her  professed  allies,  was  shattered,  that  she  might  be  taught  to  seek  refuge  alone
in  God.  Amid  the  wreckage  of  all  earthly  hopes  the  soul  finds  a  sure  foundation
for  hope  and  confidence  in  the  unchangeable  mercy  and  faithfulness  of  God.

Lessons. —  1.  Affliction  which  reveals  the  fickleness  of  earthly  things  also  reveals
the  unchanging  faithfulness  of  God.  2.  Daily  mercies  are  constant  reminders  of
tJie  Divine  faithfulness,  3.  The  Divine  faithfulness  is  at  once  the  hope  and  satis-
faction of  the  soul,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  22,  23.     The  views  of  a  saint  But   for  the   daily  renewal  of  God's

in  his  afflictions.     He  contemplates —  mercy  to  His  people  they  would  have

1.  The  lightness  of  his  affliction  in  been  utterly  cut  off.     His  faithfulness
comparison  of  his  deserts.  to  the  covenant  was  great  beyond  all

2.  The  multitude  of  the  mercies  yet  human   parallel.     No  new  day  would
continued  to  him.  ever  brighten  and  glow  over  the  cowed,

3.  The  unchangedbleness  of  God  under  comfortless,   half- relenting  remnant  of
all  His  dispensations.  the  holy  seed,  but  for  God's  readiness

4.  The  beauty  of  religion  as  displayed  to   forgive.      They   had   sinned   away
in  these  vieijos^  their   covenant   birthright,    but   God's

They  compose  the  mind,  elevate  the  compassion  hovered  near  to  restore  it

soul,  and  honour  God. — Simeon.  again.     And    is   it   not   ever  so   with

Ver.    23.    Dayspring    mercies.      I.  God's  people?      In  times  of   chastise-

These  words  seem  to  speak  of  the  inr  ment  and  in  times  of  prosperity  alike

exhaustible  wealth  of  God^s  forgiveness.  they  need  to  be  ever  encircled  by  God's
84


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  III.


forgiving  grace.  Close  by  one  of  the
great  cities  of  the  East  there  is  a  large
stretch  of  grass  that  is  always  green.
Sometimes  the  showers  are  rare  and
scanty,  and  the  thermometer  mounts  to
an  appalling  height,  and  one  wonders
to  see  the  grass  green  and  lush  as
though  it  were  growing  in  some  English
meadow.  It  is  kept  so  by  a  heavy  dew
til  at  never  fails  to  fall  in  the  night-
time. And  so  with  our  life  of  conse-
cration. There  is  no  dawn  without
the  dew  of  abounding  love  and  com-
passion descending  to  keep  it  green.
IL  These  words  seem  to  suggest  the
resourcefulness  of  Divine  Providence.
The  mercy  that  is  ever  fresh  to  pardon
is  ever  fresh  to  guide  and  shape  the
circumstances  in  the  midst  of  which
the  pardoned  life  is  spent.  Tlie  text  is
in  direct  conflict  with  the  clock-work
theory  of  the  universe.  Providence
glories  in  freshness  and  originality — it
abhors  unintelligent  routine.  The  tied-
up  helm  and  the  sail  square-set  to  the
wind  are  no  types  of  God's  providential
methods  of  dealing  with  us.  Life  is
full  of  bends  and  rapids  and  shallows
and  whirlpools,  and  an  automatic  pro-
vidence will  not  meet  the  terrific  emer-
gencies of  its  swiftly  passing  moments.
Sail  and  helm  alike  are  in  His  hand,
and  answer  to  His  touch  through  every
flashiuGr  second.  Astronomers  at  one
time  puzzled  themselves  over  a  problem
in  solar  physics.  How  was  the  heat  of
the  sun  maintained?  It  seemed  a
natural  inference  that,  as  it  was  always
giving  off  heat  in  stupendous  volumes,
ultimate  exhaustion  must  one  day  come.
Within  recent  times  the  suggestion  has
found  wide  acceptance  that  the  sun  is
constantly  drawing  meteors,  asteroids,
and  comets  to  itself,  and  that  the  heat
is  maintained  by  the  impact  of  these
bodies  as  they  fall  into  the  sun.  Things
come  to  us  from  time  to  time  that  seem
out  of  all  accord  with  the  harmonies
around  us.  Strange  difficulties,  stum-
bling-blocks, tribulations,  start  up  in
the  path  of  our  daily  life.  These  things
are  drawn  into  the  circle  of  God's  con-
trol and  government  for  their  solution,
and  it  is  in  this  way  chat  the  very
glory  of  God's  providence  is  maintained.


III.  These  words  seem  to  suggest  the
unfailing  truth  and  faithfulness  of  God
in  His  relation  to  His  people.  God's
renewed  mercies  are  linked  with  the
morning  because  the  return  of  the  day
is  one  of  the  most  perfect  and  intel-
ligible symbols  of  constancy  to  be  found
in  the  economy  of  Nature.  The  rains
may  come  and  go  upon  a  system  to
which  science  has  found  no  clue.
Winter  sometimes  pushes  itself  far  on
into  the  spring.  A  late  spring  and  an
early  autumn  may  squeeze  out  the  sum-
mer. A  flood  may  quite  change  the
face  of  a  country.  Islands  have  been
known  to  disappear  in  some  of  the  con-
vulsions of  Nature.  The  mariner  has
looked  for  his  landmark,  and  it  is  gone.
Empires  may  rise  and  perish  with  no
hope  of  a  resurrection  other  than  an
ignoble  disinterment  at  the  hands  of
the  archaeologist.  But  no  ill  chance  can
befall  the  day-spring.  And  as  infallibly
as  the  welcome  day-dawn  steals  at  its
own  hour  into  our  homes,  so  infallibly
do  the  Divine  compassions  arise  upon
the  lowly  and  the  contrite.  God
reflects  the  benignity  of  His  own  face
into  the  flush  of  dawn,  and  makes  it
the  parable  of  a  faithfulness  upon  which
you  can  always  count.  IV.  These
words  suggest  the  unfailing  promptness
of  God's  ministrations.  *'  His  mercies
are  new  every  morning ; "  that  is,  just
as  soon  as,  or  even  before,  we  begin  to
need  them.  We  receive  our  salvation,
guidance,  and  defence,  not  of  our  own
work,  but  of  His  free  love.  If  it  were
of  our  own  work,  we  must  needs  wait
for  the  nightfall  before  we  could  receive
any  recompense.  Wages  are  paid  at
sunset.  But  it  is  all  His  gift.  So  the
mercy  in  which  we  rejoice  comes  to  us
with  the  dawn,  before  we  have  done  a
solitary  stroke  of  work.  The  regula-
tions of  the  court  at  Pekin  are  so  framed
as  to  give  to  the  Chinese  Empire  an
example  of  promptness  and  despatch.
The  emperor  always  receives  his  cabinet
ministers  and  councillors  at  three  or
four  o'clock  in  the  morning — long  before
day-dawn.  And  so  God  awaits  His
servants  with  new  pardons,  new  coun-
sels, new  honours  in  Plis  kingdom,
long   before   the   day-dawn.      An    in-

85


CHAP.  III.


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


genioiis  botanist,  by  watching  the  hours
at  which  certain  flowers  opened,  hit
upon  the  pretty  conceit  of  constructing
what  he  called  a  flower-clock.  God's
matchless  mercies,  like  circles  of  thick-
set bloom  that  break  into  splendour
with  a  rhythm  that  never  halts,  are
measuring  out  the  successive  hours  of
our  life.  No  winter  comes  to  blast  the
flowers,  and  the  clock  is  never  behind
time.  V.  These  words  suggest  the  per-
petual freshness  of  the  Divine  Nature.
God's  compassions  are  unceasingly  new
because  they  well,  pure  and  fair,  out
of  the  stainless  and  infinite  depths  of
His  Fatherhood.  They  have  the  ever-
renewed  and  living  sweetness  of  His
own  spring-like  nature  in  them.  His
daily  mercies  come  to  us  clothed  with
the  enkindled  grace  of  His  own  match-
less smile,  and  full  of  the  light  of  an
immortal  May-time.  He  cannot  give
or  do  without  putting  the  buoyancy  of
His  own  untiring  and  eternal  youth
into  each  boon  and  act. — T.  G.  Selhy.

Ver.  24.  (Compared  with  Deut.
xxxii.  9).  Choice  portions.  I.  The
Lord's  portion  is  His  people.  1.  The
Church  of  God  is  the  Lord^sovm peculiar
and  special  property.  As  a  king  may
have  ample  possessions,  to  all  of  which
he  has  undoubted  right,  but  still  has
royal  demesnes  and  crown-lands  which
are  in  a  very  special  sense  his  own,  so
hath  the  Lord  of  all  a  peculiar  interest
in  His  saints.  They  are  His  by  sove-
reign choice,  by  purchase  and  by  con-
quest. 2.  The  saints  are  the  objects  of
the  Lord's  especial  care.  The  Lord  is
the  eternal  watcher  of  the  universe  and
never  sleeps ;  yet  in  a  very  distinct
sense  He  is  the  guardian  of  His  Church.
3.  The  Church  is  the  object  of  the  Lord's
special  joy.  I  do  not  read  that  God
delighteth  in  the  cloud-capped  moun-
tains or  in  the  sparkling  stars,  but  I  do
read  that  He  delighteth  in  the  habitable
parts  of  the  earth,  and  His  delights  are
with  the  sons  of  men.  4.  God's  people
are  His  everlasting  possession.  He  will
never  sell  His  people  at  any  price,  nor,
if  He  could  have  better  people  instead,
would  He  change  them.  They  are  His
for  ever.  II.  The  Lord  is  my  portion.
\.  True  believers  have  the  Lord  as  fli^ir
66


sole  portion.  St.  Augustine  was  wont
very  often  to  pray,  ''Lord,  Give  me
thyself."  A  less  portion  than  this
would  be  unsatisfactory.  2.  As  God  is
our  only  portion  ^  so  He  is  our  own  por-
tion. l3o  not  be  satisfied  with  generals ;
come  to  particulars.  Men  go  to  hell
in  bundles,  but  they  go  to  heaven
separately.  3.  The  Lord  is  to  His
people  an  inherited  portion.  We  owe
it  to  the  fact  of  our  birth — a  child  of
God  by  being  born  in  the  image  of  His
son,  4.  This  heritage  is  ours  by  choice.
We  have  chosen  God  to  be  our  portion.
Better  to  have  Christ  and  a  fiery  faggot
than  to  lose  Him  and  wear  a  royal
robe.  5.  God  is  His  people^s  settled
portion.  The  covenant  of  day  and
night  may  be  broken,  the  waters  may
again  cover  the  earth,  sooner  than  the
decrees  of  grace  be  frustrated.  The
Lord  is  my  all-sufficietit  portion.  God
fills  Himself.  If  He  is  all-sufficient  in
Himself,  He  must  be  all-sufficient  for
us. — C,  H.  Spurgeon.

Illustrations.  —  Divine  faithful-
ness. Visiting  a  dying  Christian
woman,  Dr.  John  Brown  once  said
to  her,  "What  would  you  say,  Janet,
if,  after  God  has  done  so  much  for
you.  He  should  let  you  drop  into  hell  ?  **
She  calmly  replied,  "E'en  as  He  likes;
but  He'll  lose  more  than  I  will."

—  You  may  be  faint  and  weary,  but
my  God  cannot.  I  may  fluctuate  and
alter  as  to  my  frames  and  feelings,  but
my  Redeemer  is  unchangeably  the  same.
I  might  utterly  fail  and  come  to  nothing
if  left  to  myself;  but  I  cannot  be  so
left  to  myself,  for  the  Spirit  of  Truth
hath  said,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor
forsake  thee."  He  will  renew  my
strength,  either  by  changing  my  weak-
ness into  strength,  or  by  enduing  me
with  His  own  power.  He  is  wise  to
foresee  and  provide  for  all  my  dangers.
He  is  rich  to  relieve  and  succour  me  in
all  my  wants.  He  is  faithful  to  perfect
and  perform  all  His  promises. — Ambrose
3erle.

Divine  Providence.  It  is  the  fault
of  the  present  day  to  think  and  to  act
as  if  mail  could  do  everything,  and  to
forget  God's  special  providencG.    Hence


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  m.


that  busybodiness  which  distinguishes
the  religious  world,  and  prevents  that
depth  of  piety  which  is  the  result  of
sober,  calm  reflection,  and  which  shows
itself  in  doing  calmly  and  unostenta-
tiously, not  what  seems  likely  to  be
attended  with  the  greatest  results,  but
simply  the  duty  our  hand  findeth  to
do. — Dean  Hook.

—  Those  believers  who  watch  provi-
dences will  never  lack  providences  to
watch.  — Flavell.

Divine  supply  in  emergencies.  St.
Cuthbert  of  Lindisfarne  was  often  in
great  poverty  and  pinched  for  food.
"Never  did  man  die  of  hunger  who


served  God  faithfully,"  he  would  say
when  night  found  them  supperless  in
the  waste.  "  Look  at  the  eagle  over-
head !  God  can  feed  us  through  him,
if  He  will ! " — and  once,  at  least,  he
owed  his  meal  to  a  large  fish  that  the
scared  bird  let  fall.

Want  anticipated.  The  wood-
piercing  bee  will  make  a  tunnel  in  a
tree-trunk  twelve  or  fifteen  inches  long
and  half  an  inch  wide,  which  is  divided
into  ten  or  twelve  cells.  An  egg  with
a  store  of  pollen  and  honey  is  deposited
in  each  cell,  so  that  as  soon  as  the
young  bee  is  born  it  has  its  dinner
awaiting  it ! — Ritskin,


HOMILETICS.

Three  Grades  of  Goodness,

(Vers.  25-27.)

I.  There  is  the  goodness  of  Jehovah  to  those  who  cling  to  Him.  "The
Lord  is  good  unto  them  that  wait  for  Him,  to  the  soul  that  seeketh  Him  "  (ver.
25).  God  is  absolutely  and  supremely  good — good  in  Himself,  good  in  all  things,
good  at  all  times.  If  He  is  good  to  all,  then  He  must  be  especially  so  to  those
who  wait  on  Him  in  conscious  dependence  and  earnestly  supplicate  His  help.
There  are  mysteries  about  the  Divine  procedure  which  we  cannot  fathom,  and
we  are  sometimes  tempted  to  question  the  goodness  of  God.  But  clearer  light
dispels  our  doubts,  and  the  more  completely  we  trust  in  Him  the  more  real  and
tender  and  potent  does  His  goodness  become.  We  never  know  God  aright  till  we
trust  Him  fully.

II.  There  is  the  goodness  of  patient  and  uncomplaining  waiting  for  God's
time  of  deliverance.  *'  It  is  good  that  a  man  should  both  hope  and  quietly  wait
for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord "  (ver.  26).  To  indulge  in  querulous  complaints
only  increases  the  irritation  of  our  sufferings.  Murmuring  begets  murmuring,
and  we  are  apt  to  blame  every  one  but  ourselves.  The  more  we  grumble,  the
farther  are  we  away  from  goodness.  It  is  only  when  we  are  silent  and  abstain
from  complaining  that  we  begin  to  see  that  our  deliverance  must  come  from  God,
and  that  it  is  our  wisdom  to  bide  His  time  and  humbly  submit  to  His  method.
The  soul  attains  goodness  by  exercising  an  active  and  larger  faith  in  the  Divine
goodness.  A  clearer  apprehension  of  goodness  in  God  begets  a  corresponding
goodness  in  the  soul  that  sees  it.

III.  There  is  the  goodness  of  being  accustomed  to  the  burden  of  suffering
early  in  life.  "  It  is  good  for  a  man  that  he  b?ar  tlie  yoke  in  his  youth  "  (ver.
27).  Youth  is  the  period  of  enjoyment,  and  it  has  a  pleasure  all  its  own,  with
its  bright  and  gay  romancing,  its  poetic  dreams  of  beauty  and  delight,  its  relish-
able  love  of  work,  its  daring  enterprise  and  bold  ambitions,  its  soaring  hopes  and
confident  prophecies,  its  sparkling  wit  and  brimming  fun — brilliant  and  harmless
as  tropical  lightning;  buoyant,  radiant,  joyous  youth-time,  when  every  sense  is
steeped  in  the  intoxicating  nectar  of  innocent  rapture,  when  the  whole  world
shines  with  the  golden  glorj  of  perpetual  summer,  and  when  life  is  one  long,
sweet  poem,  set  to  the  enchanting  movements  of  exquisite  music.     But  youth  has

87


CHAP.  IT  I.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


also  its  burdens  and  responsibilities,  and  its  happiness  is  not  destroyed  but  inten-
sified when  it  learns  to  bear  with  bravery  the  disappointments  and  afflictions  of
life.  The  youth  who  has  known  little  of  suffering  is  ill  prepared  for  the  stern
realities  of  ordinary  life.  Early  sorrow  brings  early  comfort  and  peace  and
strength.     The  best  that  is  in  man  is  tested  and  perfected  by  misfortune.

Lessons. — 1.  God  is  good  in  Himself  inherently  and  essentially.  2.  Man  is
good  only  in  the  degree  in  which  he  receives  Divine  grace  and  submits  to  the  Divine
discipline.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,


Ver.  25.  The  Divine  goodness.     1.

A  grand  reality.  2.  Continually  mani-
fested. 3.  Specially  revealed  to  the
earnest  seeker.

Ver.  26.  The  advantages  of  a  state
of  expectation.  1.  It  seems  implied
that  our  incapacity  of  looking  into  the
future  has  much  to  do  with  the  produc-
tion of  disquietude  and  unhappiness.
2.  And  yet  the  possession  of  this  power
of  anticipating  the  future  would  be  in-
calculably more  detrimental.  3.  Our
ignorance  of  what  shall  happen  stimu-
lates exertion.  We  are  so  constituted
that  to  deprive  us  of  hope  would  be  to
make  us  inactive  and  wretched.  4.  It
is  for  our  advantage  that  salvation,  in-
stead of  being  a  thing  of  certainty  and
present  possession,  must  be  hoped  and
quietly  waited  for.  6.  If  true  believers
were  withdrawn  from  earth  at  the  mo-
ment of  their  becoming  such,  the  in-
fluences of  piety  which  now  make
themselves  felt  through  the  mass  of  a
population  would  be  altogether  de-
stroyed, and  the  world  deprived  of
that  salt  which  alone  preserves  it  from
total  decomposition.  6.  No  fair  ex-
planation can  be  given  of  the  text
unless  you  bring  into  the  account  the
difference  in  the  portions  to  be  assigned
hereafter  to  the  righteous.  7.  The
continuance  of  the  justified  on  earth
affords  them  opportunity  of  rising
higher  in  the  scale  of  future  blessed-
ness. 8.  Being  compelled  to  hope  and
to  wait  is  a  good  moral  discipline,  so
that  the  exercises  prescribed  are  cal-
culated to  promote  holiness  and  ensure
happiness.  9.  It  is  good  as  affording
time  in  which  to  glorify  God.  10.
Religion  gives  a  character  to  hope  of
which  otherwise  it  is  altogether  desti-
tute. Hope  is  a  beautiful  meteor ;  but
88


nevertheless  this  meteor,  like  the  rain-
bow, is  not  only  lovely  because  of  its
seven  rich  and  radiant  stripes ;  it  is  the
memorial  of  a  covenant  between  man
and  his  Maker,  telling  us  that  we  are
born  for  immortality,  destined,  unless
we  sepulchre  our  greatness,  to  the
highest  honour  and  noblest  happiness.
— Henry  Melville.

Hope  and  patience.  I.  What  is
meant  by  the  salvation  of  the  Lord?
God's  salvation  is  used  very  frequently
in  the  Bible  for  His  interposition  to
save  the  soul  of  man  from  sin.  It  is
not  this  salvation  which  is  here  spoke i
of,  for  though  a  man  may  be  encouraged
to  hope,  he  cannot  be  urged  quietly  to
wait  for  it.  Tlie  language  of  the  chapter
is  not  that  of  a  man  ignorant  of  God.
It  is  the  salvation  which  a  man  needs
in  any  crisis  of  life,  where  he  suffers
under  trial,  or  is  threatened  with  it.
Our  strength  and  resources,  all  possible
expedients,  have  been  brought  into
exercise.  The  last  reserve  has  been
thrown  into  the  battle,  and  yet  it  goes
against  us.  It  is  then  the  case  rises
distinctly  into  the  salvation  of  the  Lord.
A  man  who  has  faith  only  in  worldly
resources  is  powerless  here.  He  must
give  up  in  despair,  or  cast  himself  on  a
blind  chance.  But,  for  a  believing
man,  there  is  still  a  duty  and  a  stay.
When  he  cannot  take  a  step  farther  in
human  effort,  there  is  a  pathway  to  the
skies,  and  his  heart  can  travel  it.  11.
What  is  meant  by  these  exercises  of  the
soul  towards  God's  salvation — to  hope
and  quietly  wait  ?  1.  The  foundation
of  hope  lies  in  desire.  But  desire  may
pursue  things  that  can  never  be  objects
of  hope  to  us.  We  can  only  hope  for
that  which  is  felt  to  be  possible  and
reasonable.     The  next  element  i&  faith*


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  m.


But  we  believe  in  many  thinp^s  in
regard  to  which  we  do  not  hoj^e.  Hope
is  faith  with  desire  pointing  out  the
objects.  A  third  element  to  make  our
hope  strong  is  imagination.  While  sin
lias  made  this  world  a  charnel-house  of
corruption  or  a  storehouse  of  vanities,
purity  can  fill  its  treasury  with  divine
aspirations  which  are  as  grand  as  they
are  tran  seen  den  tly  real.  II.  Quiet  wait-
ing. It  is  termed  in  the  'BihlQ  i^atience.
It  is  the  part  of  hope  to  seek  the
future ;  it  is  the  duty  of  patience  to
re?t  calmly  in  the  present,  exercising
faith,  and  giving  calm  attention  to
duties.  The  tamest  and  most  insignifi-
cant of  daily  duties  may  be  made  noble
and  divine  when  the  thought  of  God
and  the  will  of  Christ  are  carried  into
them.  III.  Consider  the  benefit  of  unit-
ing these — both  to  hope  and  quietly  wait.
1.  The  one  is  needful  to  save  the  otlier
from  sinking  into  sin.  2.  To  raise  the
other  to  its  full  strenerth.  3.  It  is  orood
now  in  the  depth  of  the  soul,  in  the
conscious  assurance  that  it  is  better  to
rest  in  the  hardest  of  God's  ways  than
to  wander  at  will  in  our  own.  4.  It  is
good  in  the  enhancement  of  every  bles-
sing for  which  we  have  to  wait.  Be-
tween your  use  of  the  means  and  the
result  which  you  desire  there  is  «till  a
gulf  of  separation,  on  the  brink  of
which  Patience  must  sit  and  look
across,  waiting  God's  time  and  way  to
pass  it. — John  Ker,  D.D.

Ver.  27.  Youth  the  proper  season  of
discipline.  I.  In  the  principles  of
true  religion.  II.  In  the  arts  of  honest
industry.  — Berriman.

The  best  burden  for  young  shoul-
ders. The  bullocks  have  to  bear  the
yoke.  They  go  in  pairs,  and  the  yoke
is  borne  upon  their  shoulders.  If  the
bullock  is  not  broken  in  when  young,
it  will  never  make  a  good  ploughing
ox.  So  it  is  good  for  us  when  young
to  learn  obedience,  to  acquire  know-
ledge, and  to  encounter  difficulties  and
troubles.  I.  It  is  good  to  be  a  Christian
while  you  are  young.  1.  The  man  whose
heart  is  conquered  by  Divine  grace
early  is  made  happy  soon,  2.  Is  saved
from  a  thousand  snares.  3.  Is  saved  from
Having   his   shoulders  galled  with  the


devil's  yoke.  4.  Gives  him  longer  time
in  which  to  serve  God.  5.  Enables
him  to  be  well  established  in  Divine
things.  II.  It  is  good  for  young  Chris-
tians that  ihey  bear  tlie  yoke  of  Jesus.
1.  They  render  to  Jesus  complete  obe-
dience from  the  very  first.  2.  They
attain  clear  instruction  in  Divine  truth.
3.  They  serve  Christ  early.  4.  It  is
good  to  meet  with  difficulties  and  per-
secution in  youth.  III.  Practically  toe
are  all  of  us  in  our  youth.  1.  Bearing
the  yoke,  the  old  Adam  is  kept  in
check.  2.  We  are  helpful  to  others
wlio  have  known  affliction.  3.  Will
make  heaven  all  the  sweeter. — Spurgeon,

Illustrations.  —  The  goodness  of
God  experienced.  A  German  just  con-
verted was  greatly  surprised  at  the
goodness  of  God  to  him,  which  he  now
realised.  One  day  he  was  overheard  in
prayer  saying,  "O  Lord  Jesus!  I  did
not  know  Thou  wert  so  good  !  '*  How
general  is  this  ignorance  !

Patience  conctuers.  Twenty  -  five
years  ago  the  founder  of  a  college  for
negroes  in  America  was  hunted  like  a
wild  beast  through  the  region  where
his  name  is  now  spoken  by  men  of  all
parties  with  reverence.  Lloyd  Garrison
was  nearly  murdered  by  an  infuriated
mob  for  championing  the  emancipation
of  the  slaves,  and  years  afterwards,  in
the  same  city,  was  made  the  recipient
of  its  highest  honours.  Time  fights
against  every  tyranny,  and  in  favour
of  the  tyrannised.  To  endure  is  to
conquer.

Fellow-suffering  silences  complaints.
During  one  of  the  campaigns  in  the
American  civil  war,  when  the  winter
weather  was  very  severe,  some  of  Stone-
wall Jackson's  men,  having  crawled
out  in  the  morning  from  their  snow-
laden  blankets,  half-frozen,  began  to
abuse  him  as  the  cause  of  their  suffer-
ings. He  lay  close  by  under  a  tree,
himself  covered  with  snow,  and  heard
all  this ;  but,  without  noticing  it,  pre-
sently crawled  out  too,  and,  shaking
off  the  snow,  made  some  jocular  remark
to  the  nearest  men,  who  had  no  idea
he  had  ridden  up  in  the  night  and  lain
down    amongst   them !      The  incident

89


CHAP.  in.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


ran  through  the  army  in  a  few  hours,  so   boldly,    insomuch  that  they  would

and  reconciled  his  followers  to  all  the  sometimes  from  the  walls  beseech  the

hardships  of  the  expedition,  and  fully  Achaeans  to  retire  for  a  while  and  be

re-established  his  popularity.  quiet  spectators  of  their  fight  with  the

Skill  acquired  in  youth.     Livy  says  Roman  guards,

that  at  the  siege  of  Sam6  one  hundred  A  brave  youth.     William  Hunter,  a

slingers   were    brought   from    ^Egeum,  London  apprentice,  was  in  1555  ordered

Patrae,  and  Dymse.     These  men,  accord-  by  a  priest  to  attend  mass.    He  refused,

ing  to  the  practice  of  that  nation,  were  and   one   day    was  found  reading  the

exercised  from  their  childhood  in  throw-  Bible  in  Brentwood  Church.     He  fled,

ing  with  a  sling  into  the  open  sea  the  His  father  was  seized,  and  to  release

round  pebbles  which  strew  the  shore.  him  the  boy  returned  and  surrendered.

Being  accustomed  to  drive  their  missiles  He   was  imprisoned  for  nine   months,

through  circular  marks  of  small  circum-  then  offered  a  bribe  by  Bishop  Bonner

ference  placed  at  a  great  distance,  they  if  he  would  recant.     To  all  he  opposed

not  only   hit  the   enemy's  heads,   but  a  courageous  resistance,  and  was  burned

any  part  of  their  faces  they  aimed  at.  at  the  stake  in  his  native  village,   re-

These  slings  checked  the  Sameans  from  taining  to  the  last  his  religious  sturdi-

sallying   out    either   so   frequently   or  ness  and  bravery.


HOMILETICS.
Resignation.
(Vers.  28-30.)

I.  Should  be  borne  in  silence,  recognising  the  hand  of  God  in  affliction.

"  He  sitteth  alone  and  keepeth  silence,  because  He  hath  borne  it  upon  Him "
(ver.  28).  It  is  difficult  for  an  active  spirit  to  settle  down  contentedly  and  in
silence  in  any  kind  of  circumstances.  We  cannot  rid  ourselves  of  the  idea  that
something  is  to  be  done,  and  we  must  do  it.  If  our  misfortunes  come  as  the
result  of  our  own  folly,  we  feel  we  must  do  something  to  repair  the  damage,  little
dreaming  how  utterly  useless  are  all  our  endeavours.  When  at  length  the  truth
dawns  upon  us  that  God  is  at  work  in  connection  with  our  sufferings,  the  seal  is
at  once  subdued  into  silence  and  patiently  waits  the  issue.  Something  like  this
was  once  the  experience  of  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  xxxix.  9).

II.  Should  be  borne  with  reverential  humility,  knowing  there  is  hope  of
deliverance.  "He  putteth  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  if  so  be  there  may  be  hope"
(ver.  29).  The  putting  the  mouth  in  the  dust  indicates  how  completely  the  soul
is  prostrated  before  God  in  humility  and  reverential  silence.  The  soul  can  bear
any  burden  when  it  knows  that  the  hand  of  God  imposes  it,  and  that  He  has  still
hold  of  it.  While  we  are  conscious  God  is  in  touch  with  our  burden,  there  is
always  hope  of  its  removal.  It  is  when  God  leaves  us  to  our  fate  that  hope
dies.  Resignation  is  no  evidence  of  hopelessness,  but  rather  an  evidence  how
firmly  our  hope  is  grounded.  We  could  not  so  completely  cease  from  all  personal
effort  were  we  not  so  fully  assured  of  Divine  deliverance.

III.  Should  be  borne  without  resentment,  not  shrinking  from  the  bitterest
dregs  of  the  cup.  **  He  giveth  his  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth  him ;  he  is  filled
full  with  reproach "  (ver.  30).  We  are  to  be  resigned,  but  not  insensible ;  sub-
missive, but  not  apathetic.  We  are  keenly  alive  to  the  reproaches  heaped  upon
us  by  our  enemies.  Our  very  resignation  is  offensive  to  them,  and  is  made  a
handle  of  scorn.  It  is  hard  to  bear  the  jeers  of  others  without  retaliation.  When
our  sufferings  come  through  our  fellow-men,  it  is  but  human  to  resent  their  attacks
with  indignation — to  meet  scorn  with  scorn.  But  when  we  are  sensible  our
troubles  come  from  God,  we  can  more  readily  submit,  and  we  have  grace  given  to

90


BOMfiETfc  coMMnyfAnr :  lamentations.


OHA^.  Itl,


bear,  without  resentment,  all  that  it  may  please  Him  to  impose  upon  us.     Behind
the  divine  severity  there  is  unspeakable  gentleness.

Lessons. — 1.  The  greatest  sorrow  must  he  borne  alone  and  in  silence.  2.  Mur-
muring and  resentment  will  increase^  Init  not  relieve  our  sufferings,  3.  A  spirit  of
humble  resignation  secures  the  Divine  compassion  and  help.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.    28-30,    Silent   suffering.     I.

Not  the  less  acute  because  endured  in
silence  (ver.  28).  11.  Is  bearable  when
the  soul  has  a  glimmering  of  hope  (ver.
29).  III.  Shows  that  the  sufferer  has
exhausted  every  possible  ground  for
complaint  (ver.  30).

Ver.  28.  Retirement  and  silence.

"What  then  should  be  a  sinner's  course?
Silence  to  all  save  himself  and  his  God.

And  so  also  our  Lord  *  became  dumb  ; '
He  still  waited  upon  his  Father  ;

He  made  as  if  He  had  nothing  to  say.
How  much  more  should  we  be  silent  in  our
guilt  I
Thou  hast  sinned  in  company,
Learn  to  do  without  company  at  all.

Thou  hast  dealt  rudely  with  thy  God,
Be  content  to  be  rudely  dealt  with.

Thou  hast  forsaken  Him,
Be  content  to  be  forsaken.

Thou  bast  sinned  in  talk.
Be  content  to  keep  silence.

Thou  hast  sinned  in  selti.sh  ways.
Be  content,  nay  be  glad,  to  ba  overlooked,

To  be  disappointed — forgotten.
The  less  thou  art  able  to  retire  at  fixed  times,
Be  the  more  watchful  to  do  so  at  occasional
times.
Thou  hast  sinned  in  boasting,
Be  sometimes  silent,  even  from  good  words.

Thou  hast  sinned  by  cowardice.
Force  thyself  to  speak — in  truthfulness  to

confess.
Accept  bereavements,  separations,  estrange-
ments.
As  opportunities  of  penance  assigned   by
Him.
That  He  may  open  thy  mouth  at  last.

To  shew  forth  His  praise.
And  nothing  but  His  praise."

— KeUe,

Illustrations. — Resignation  to  the
wiU  of  God.  A  remarkable  instance  of
Christian  resignation  was  discovered  on
one  particular  occasion  in  the  conduct
of  Archbishop  Fen^lon.  When  his
illustrious  and  hopeful  pupil,  the  Duke
of  Burgundy,  lay  dead  in  his  coffin,  and
the  nobles  of  his  court,  in  all  the  pomp
of   silent    sadness,    stood   around,    the


Archbishop  came  into  the  apartment,
and  having  fixed  his  eyes  for  some  time
on  the  corpse,  broke  out  at  length  in
words  to  this  effect — "There  lies  my
beloved  prince,  for  whom  my  affections
were  equal  to  the  tenderest  regard  of
the  tenderest  parents.  Nor  were  my
affections  lost ;  he  loved  me  in  return
with  all  the  ardour  of  a  son.  There  he
lies,  and  all  my  worldly  happiness  lies
dead  with  him.  But  if  the  turning  of
a  straw  would  call  him  back  to  life,  I
would  not  for  ten  thousand  worlds  be
the  turner  of  that  straw  in  opposition
to  the  will  of  God."

Soul-growth  aided  by  silence.  Som  e
of  the  best  and  most  beautiful  works
are  perfected  in  silence.  In  the  making
of  plate-glass  the  process  of  pouring  the
melted  material  is  so  delicate,  requiring
such  care  and  steadiness,  that  the  men,
impressed  with  the  great  danger  of
carelessness,  usually  preserve  silence
during  tlie  process.

Humility  a  help  to  knowledge.
When  the  recent  military  expedition
went  to  Lower  Egypt,  it  was  found  that
only  the  smallest  boats  could  go  great
distances  up  the  Nile.  There  are  some
truths  that  are  only  revealed  to  those
who  grow  in  loneliness  and  self-for-
getfulness — secret  teachings  which  are
reserved  for  those  who  are  intensely
childlike  in  spirit.  "Blessed  are  the
poor  in  spirit."

Heroic  endurance.  One  of  the
secrets  of  Victor  Hugo's  power  over  the
French  people  was  their  memory  of  the
following.  When  the  disasters  of  the
Franco-German  war  were  falling  thickly,
and  the  iron  band  was  closing  round
Paris,  word  came  that  Victor  Hugo  was
coming  to  the  city.  He  came  at  the
very  moment  that  the  investment  was
complete,  with  the  last  train,  the  last
breath  of  free  air.     On  the  way  he  had

91


CWAP.   tTt.


ttOMlLETIC  COMMENT  Any. ■  LAMMNTATtONS.


Been  the  Bavarians,  seen  villages  burned
with  petroleum,  and  he  caine  to  im-
prison himself  in  Fails.     A  memorable


ovation  was  given  him  by  the  people,
and  they  never  forgot  his  voluntaiy
sharing  of  their  sufferingSi


HOMILETIGS.

The  Tenderness  of  God.

(Vers.  31-33.)

I.  Seen  in  the  limitation  of  punishment.     '*  For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  oflf

for  ever"  (ver.  31).  God  has  no  delight  in  inflicting  punishment.  His  righteous-
ness imposes  on  Him  the  necessity  of  punishing  sin.  But  punishment  has  its
limits ;  and  when'  those  limits  are  exceeded,  justice  degenerates  into  cruelty.
The  tenderness  of  God  is  a  universal  safeguard  against  unduly  prolonged  punish-
ment (Ps.  Ixxvii.  7-9).

II.  Seen  in  the  abundant  manifestation  of  mercy.  "  But  though  He  cause
grief,  yet  will  He  have  compassion  according  to  the  multitude  of  His  mercies"
(ver.  32).  Even  in  chastisement  mercy  triumphs  over  justice.  Mercy  provides
a  means  of  escape,  not  from  justice,  but  from  the  worst  consequences  of  trans-
gression. "  All  the  souls  that  were,  were  forfeit  once  ;  and  He  that  might  the
vantage  best  have  took  found  out  the  remedy,"  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,"
is  the  leading  idea  of  inscriptions  on  thousands  of  gravestones  in  the  stately
cathedral  and  the  village  churchyard,  and  bear  silent  testimony  to  the  deepest
convictions  of  mankind.  The  mercy  of  God  will  be  conspicuous  to  the  universe,
and  the  theme  of  endless  adoration.

III.  Seen  in  the  reluctance  with  which  He  inflicts  chastisement.  "For
He  doth  not  afflict  willingly  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men "  (ver.  33).  God
never  afflicts  willingly — lit., /rom  his  heart.  The  heart  of  God  is  love,  and  love
has  no  pleasure  in  the  sufferings  of  others,  and  is  not  eager  to  impose  suff'ering.
That  God  afflicts  at  all,  and  that  He  does  it  with  so  much  reluctance,  should
intensify  the  conviction  that,  not  only  is  chastisement  necessary,  but  that  it  is
evidently  intended  to  lead  to  a  greater  good.  The  prophet  dwells  on  the  tender-
ness of  God  to  enforce  complete  resignation  to  the  Divine  arrangements.

Lessons. — 1.  God  never  punishes  beyond  the  absolute  necessity  of  the  case,
2.  He  sympathises  with  the  sufferer  His  justice  compels  Him  to  chastise,  3.  He
is  ever  slow  to  wrath.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  31-36.  Comfort  for  the  sor-
rowful. I.  A  cheering  assurance  given.
1.  That  God's  abandonment  of  His
people  is  only  temporary.  "  For  the
Lord  will  not  cast  off  for  ever."  2.
That  the  favour  with  which  He  will
visit  them  will  be  signal  and  abundant.
"  But  though  He  cause  grief,  yet  will
He  have  compassion  according  to  the
multitude  of  His  mercies."  II.  An
important  reason  adduced.  "For  He
doth  not  afflict  willingly."  This  may
be  inferred:  1.  From  His  character.  He
is  a  God  of  love.  2.  From  the  relation-
92


ship  He  sustains  to  His  people.  He  is
their  father.  An  earthly  parent  has  to
chastise  his  off'spring,  but  He  does  it
with  reluctance.  3.  Their  suff'erings
are  attended  with  many  alleviations.
Had  He  any  pleasure  in  punishing  us,
so  much  mercy  would  not  be  mingled
with  judgment.  4.  The  object  He  has
in  view  in  afflicting  His  children :  it
is  for  their  profit,  that  they  may  be
partakers  of  His  holiness.  5.  His
readiness  to  remove  His  chastening
hand  when  the  visitation  has  answered
the  end  intended.      IIL    A    graoiom


BOMILETtO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


oHAP.  tn.


limitation  subjoined.  Whenever  God
afflicts,  it  is :  1.  Within  tlie  hounds  of
moderation.  To  "crush"  expresses
what  is  extreme  and  destructive  (Isa.
xxvii.  8 ;  Jer.  x.  24,  xlvi.  28).  2.  Never
in  violation  of  the  principles  of  equity.
*'To  subvert  a  man  in  his  cause  the
Lord  approveth  not."  He  is  the
righteous  Lord,  who  loveth  righteous-
ness, and  all  He  doeth  is  in  accordance
therewith.  — Expository  Outlines.

Vers.  31-33.  Afflictions  not  acci-
dental. This  apparent  contradiction
between  the  Divine  compassion  and
our  human  griefs,  between  what  we
desire  and  need  and  what  we  feel  to  be
real,  is  to-day  what  it  has  been  from
the  beginning,  the  standing  problem,
the  bitter  tragedy  of  human  life.  It
has  but  one  solution.  There  is  a  mis-
chief in  man's  nature  producing  discord
in  his  condition,  begetting  the  necessity
and  the  mercy  of  a  Divine  chastening ;
and  this,  both  in  the  end  it  contem-
plates and  in  the  methods  it  employs,
is  a  providence  of  compassion.  I.  The
fact  that  grief  is  the  heritage  of  man.
Life  is  still  the  natural  history  of  sor-
row— man's  life  the  bitterest  of  all.
There  are  troubles  that  belong  to  the
lot  of  individual  man,  and  in  this  form
they  are  the  impartial  inheritance  of
the  race.  There  are  troubles  which
afflict  the  community,  which  fall  upon
the  mass  in  its  aggregation  of  families,
neighbourhoods,  communities,  and  na-
tions. The  great  and  good,  the  beau-
tiful and  the  wise,  the  aged  and  the
young,  all  races  and  all  conditions  of
men,  have  gone  down  under  this  terrible
Euroclydon  of  grief.  These  facts  are  a
difficulty  to  the  Christian  philosopher,
but  they  are  equally  so  to  the  sceptic.
II.  Divine  compassion  in  its  relation  to
suffering.  1.  All  human  suffering  comes
within  the  foreknowledge  and  is  under
the  control  of  God.  2.  Many  of  our
troubles,  probably  most  of  them,  have
their  causes  in  ourselves.  3.  There  are
troubles  and  afflictions,  and  these  not
few,  which  we  must  consider  only  as
the  punishment  of  sin.  Strife  is
the  essence  of  sin.  It  is  self-will
pitted  in  avowed  antagonism  to  God.
God  will   not  vacate  His  sovereignty


because  man  rebels.  He  cannot  be  de-
feated or  bribed,  or  bought  off  from  His
purpose,  even  by  prayer.  The  bitter,
bitter  cup  must  be  drunk ;  the  chas-
tisement must  come.  But  with  all  this,
there  comes  also  the  presence  of  an
infinite  compassion.  He  succours  His
children  while  the  law  oppresses  them.
He  delivers  them  speedily  when  its
mission  is  accomplished. — J.  Burton.

Vers.  32,  33.  Grod  the  consolation
of  the  afflicted.  I.  A  revealed  fact.
"  God  doth  not  willingly  afflict  the
children  of  men."  This  fact  rests  upon
another  fact — the  teaching  of  Scripture
regarding  the  providence  of  God.  A
particular  and  special  providence  is  the
sole  ground  of  prayer ;  prayer  being  the
basis  of  all  true  religion.  When  the
mind  dwells  upon  the  special  providence
of  God,  it  learns  the  more  difficult  task
of  submitting  to  all  afflictive  dispensa-
tions with  thanksgiving.  11.  The  pas-
sage appears  to  stand  opposed  to  the
omnipotence  of  God.  God  is  Almighty,
but  He  has  willed  to  set  limits  to  the
exercise  of  His  omnipotence.  He  abides
by  the  laws  He  has  himself  enacted.
The  law  connects  life  and  happiness
with  obedience.  But  the  law  would
cease  to  exist  if  life  and  happiness  were
dispensed  also  to  the  disobedient.  The
law  was  magnified  when  God  Himself,
in  the  person  of  His  Son,  yielded
obedience  to  it.  God  will  not  by  His
omnipotence  overrule  or  supersede  the
freedom  of  the  human  will.  If  we  be
not  true  to  ourselves,  He  will  at  length,
after  trial,  leave  us  to  our  own  devices.
It  is  an  awful  thought  that  a  man  may
outlive  the  day  of  grace.  He  may  re-
main a  thing  upon  earth  to  subserve
some  purpose  in  the  providence  of  God,
but  as  a  person  his  trial  may  have  ceased.
If  one  of  the  purposes  of  affliction  is  to
correct  and  amend  us,  one  of  the  means
of  avoiding  affliction  must  be  to  en-
deavour to  shape  our  lives  according  to
the  law  of  God.  When  afflictions  do
come,  it  is  an  ineffable  consolation  to
be  assured  all  things  are  ordered  by
God  for  our  good.  III.  The  histories
of  good  men  illustrate  the  truth  of  the
text.  We  learn  why  afflictions  were
imposed  upon  them.     Study  the  lives

93


onkP.  Ttt.  nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


of  Jacob,    Joseph,    David,    Job,    and  Psalms  he  could  never  understand  till

Christ. —  W.  F.  Hook,  D.D.  he    had    been    afflicted.       Rutherford

declared  he  had  got  a  new  Bible  through

Illustrations.  —  Chastisement      a  the  furnace.     Hard  weather  tries  what

proof  of  God's  tenderness.     It  is  true  health  we  have ;    afflictions  try   what

to  be  struck  once  in  anger  is  fearful,  sap    we    have,    what    grace   we   have.

God's   displeasure   is    more   than    His  Withered  leaves  soon  fall  off  in  windy

blow.     Fear  not ;  these  stripes  are  the  weather ;  rotten  boughs  quickly  break

tokens  of  His  love.     He  is  no  son  that  with  heavy  weights.

is  not  beaten,  yea,  till  he  smart  and  cry,  Afflictions   overmled.     Artists   and

if  not  till  he  bleed.     No  parent  corrects  composers  have  often  been  helped  in

another's    child ;   and   he  is    no   good  their   studies   by  their   physical  infir-

parent  that  corrects  not  his  own.  0  rod  mities.     Bach's  blindness,  Beethoven's

worthy  to  be  kissed,  that  assures  us  of  deafness,    making    society   and    social

His  love,  of  our  adoption  ! — Bp.  Hall.  distractions   almost    impossible,   drove

"Heaven    is    not   always   angry  when  He  them  in  upon  their  own  genius,  and

strikes,  compelled  them  to  listen  to  the  voice

But  most  chastises  those  whom  most  He  ^f  Qq^  within   them.     Some  beauties

1  as.  —  omfret.  ^^  character  and  achievement  can  only

Affliction  God's  messenger.     Luther  be  secured  by  retirement  and  solitude,

used  to  say  there  were  many  of  the  and  affliction  often  compels  to  this.


HOMILETICB,

God  and  Human  Wrong.

(Vers.  34-36.)

I.  God  approves  not  wanton  cruelty  towards  prisoners  of  war.    "  To  crush

under  His  feet  all  the  prisoners  of  the  earth  "  (ver.  34).  Jeremiah  was  probably
a  daily  witness  of  cruelties  suffered  by  the  captives.  One  of  the  greatest  horrors
of  ancient  warfare  was  the  inhuman  treatment  of  prisoners.  Any  exception  to
this,  history  does  not  fail  to  record  as  a  remarkable  example  of  clemency  and
forbearance.  Few  men  can  be  trusted  with  unrestricted  power.  Where  there  is
no  fear  of  immediate  consequences  to  himself,  man  rapidly  develops  into  a
monster  of  cruelty.  The  helplessness  of  captives  appeals  to  the  pity  of  the
tyrant.  Every  act  of  inhumanity  God  not  only  disapproves,  but  will  certainly
punish.

II.  God  approves  not  the  base  attempt  to  procure  an  unjust  sentence
before  any  legal  tribunal.  **To  turn  aside  the  right  of  a  man  before  the  face  of
the  Most  High  "  (ver.  35),  of  a  superior,  or  before  a  legal  tribunal  aoting  in  the
name  of  God  (Exod.  xxi.  6 ;  xxii.  8,  9).  An  oppressor  who  would  hesitate  to
commit  an  act  of  cruelty  in  public  does  not  scruple  to  stoop  to  the  basest  arts  in
secret  to  pervert  the  course  of  justice.  Happy  is  the  nation  where  the  judgment-
seat  is  beyond  the  reach  of  corruption.

III.  God  approves  not  the  perversion  of  justice  in  any  case,  or  in  any
degree.  "To  subvert  a  man  in  his  cause,  the  Lord  approveth  not"  (ver.  36).
No  act  of  wrong,  whether  open  or  secret,  can  escape  the  All-seeing  Jehovah,  nor
can  it  escape  punishment.  Tyranny  is  not  supreme,  and  its  reign  is  always  short-
lived. God  is  the  implacable  foe  of  all  injustice ;  and  the  oppressed  everywhere
are  sure  to  be  relieved  and  vindicated.

Lessons. — 1.  Man's  inhumanity  to  man  makes  countless  thousands  mourn.
2.   God  is  not  an  indifferent  spectator  of  the  wrong  inflicted  by  one  man  upon
another.     3.   God  will  certainly  interfere  to  redress  all  human  wrongam
94


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  ni.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,


Vers.  34-36.  The  Divine  character.
1.  Gives  dignity  and  significance  to
every  legal  tribunal.  2.  Is  a  perpetual
protest  against  every  act  of  cruelty  and
injustice.  3.  Is  a  guarantee  that  justice
will  be  ultimately  triumphant.

Illustrations. — The  beginning  of
wrong.  An  old  writer  says,  "A  man
who  goes  to  law  finds  the  court  full  of
invisible  hooks.  First  his  cloak,  then
the  skirts  of  his  coat,  then  his  sleeves,
till  everything  is  torn  from  him,  and,
like  a  gypsy,  he  escapes  because  there
is  no  further  hold  upon  him."  The
youth  who  crosses  the  threshold  of  the
court  of  vice  will  find  those  invisible
hooks  sharper  and  in  greater  abundance
than  in  courts  of  law.  Once  caught,
he  will  be  hooked  in  every  direction.
One  tempter  will  succeed  another,  each
handing  him  over  to  the  next.  Thus
snared  and  dragged  from  vice  to  vice,
until  denuded  of  every  virtue,  he  will
at  last,  in  all  probability,  perish  in  un-
utterable woe. — Dr.  Wise.

Justice  expedited.  Juvenalis,  a
widow,  complained  to  Theodoric,  king
of  the  Romans,  that  a  suit  of  hers  had
been  in  court  three  years.  The  king
being  informed  who  were  her  judges,
gave  orders  that  they  should  give  all
expedition  to  the  poor  woman's  cause,
and  in  two  days  it  was  decided  to  her
satisfaction.  Theodoric  then  sum-
moned the  judges  before  him,  and  in-
quired how  it  was  that  they  had  done


in  two  days  what  they  had  delayed  for
three  years.  *'  When  I  put  you  in
office,"  said  the  king,  "  did  J  not  con-
sign all  pleas  and  proceedings  to  you  ?
You  deserve  death  for  having  delayed
that  justice  for  three  years  which  two
days  could  accomplish."  He  commanded
them  to  be  beheaded.

Injustice  and  anger.  There  is  an
anger  that  is  damnable :  it  is  the  anger
of  selfishness.  There  is  an  anger  that
is  majestic  as  the  frown  of  Jehovah's
brow  :  it  is  the  anger  of  truth  and  love.
If  man  meets  with  injustice,  it  is  not
required  tliat  he  shall  not  be  roused  to
meet  it ;  but  if  he  is  angry  after  he  has
had  time  to  think  upon  it,  that  is  sin-
ful. The  flame  is  not  wrong,  but  the
coals  are. — Beecher.

Suffering  preferred  to  injustice.
While  Athens  was  ruled  by  the  thirty
tyrants,  Socrates  was  summoned  to  the
senate-house  and  ordered  to  go  with
some  other  persons  to  seize  one  Leon,
a  man  of  rank  and  fortune,  whom  they
determined  to  put  out  of  the  way  that
they  might  enjoy  his  estate.  The  com-
mission Socrates  flatly  refused,  and,  not
satisfied  therewith,  added  also  bis
reasons  for  such  refusal.  "  I  will  never
willingly,"  said  he,  *'  assist  in  an  un-
just act."  Cherides  sharply  replied,
"Dost  thou  think,  Socrates,  to  talk
always  in  this  style  and  not  to  sufier?"
*Tar  from  it,"  added  he,  "  I  expect  to
suffer  a  thousand  ills,  but  none  so  great
as  to  do  unjustly,"


HOMILETICS.

The  Divine  Eule  Absolute  and  UNiVERsiik

(Vers.  37-39.)

L  That  nothing  happens  without  the  Divine  knowledge  and  sanction.

"  Who  is  he  that  saith  and  it  cometh  to  pass  when  the  Lord  commandeth  it  not  ? "
(ver.  37).  The  curse  causeless  does  not  come.  Somehow,  somewhere,  and  for
some  purpose,  there  is  running  all  through  the  seetliing  mass  of  what  appears  to
us  little  else  than  a  complex  of  sorrowful  accidents,  the  activity  of  a  prescient
foreknowledge,  a  permissive  providence,  a  governing  will.  *'  We  see  only  results.
To  God,  the  beginning,  with  its  antecedents  all  hidden  and  remote,  is  a  presence,
flje  wildest  freaks  of  chance,  as  they  seem,  the  most  exorbitant  anomalies  in


CHAP.  m.  BOMIJ.ETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,

nature,  the  slightest  incidents  in  the  constitution  of  mind  or  matter,  st'^rm.
earthquake  and  fires,  the  shoot  of  an  avalanche,  the  dropping  of  a  leaf,  the
wanderings  of  a  comet,  the  birth,  life,  history,  and  death  of  a  man,  all  come
within  the  foreknowledge  and  are  beneath  the  sovereign  sweep  of  the  purposes
of  God."

II.  That  the  mingling  of  adversity  and  prosperity  is  in  harmony  with  the
administration  of  infinite  wisdom.  "Out  of  the  mouth  of  tlie  Most  High
proceedeth  not  evil  and  good?"  (ver.  38).  If  the  life  of  man  was  an  uninter-
rupted series  of  calamities,  we  might  gravely  question  the  wisdom  and  goodness
of  the  Great  Ruier ;  but  the  evil  and  the  good  are  so  nicely  balanced  one  over
against  the  other,  that  when  God  has  finished  His  work  there  shall  be  no  just
ground  for  complaint  (Eccles.  vii  14).  The  old  divines  used  to  say,  "God  is  too
wise  to  err,  too  good  to  be  unkind."

III.  That,  while  life  is  continued,  man  should  not  murmur  over  his
punishment,  but  repent  of  the  sins  wliich  made  that  punishment  necessary.
"Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain,  a  man  for  the  punishment  of  his  sins?"
(ver.  39).  The  word  living  is  emphatic,  and  implies  that  while  God  spares  man's
life  he  has  no  room  to  murmur.  Life  is  a  boon  that  transcends  in  significance
any  amount  of  temporary  sufi'ering.  Life  is  a  grand  opportunity  for  repentance,
reform,  and  the  accomplishment  of  noblest  purposes.  Every  moment  in  life
spent  in  complaining  is  worse  than  wasted.  When  we  understand  how  com-
pletely the  Divine  mind  is  governing  everything,  we  begin  to  grasp  the  true
significance  of  life.

Lessons. — 1.  The  government  of  the  world  is  in  the  hands  of  a  taise  and
loving  God.  2.  Affliction  when  used  aright  may  be  an  unspeakable  blessing.  3.
Life  is  a  gift  fraught  with  great  moral  issuer


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSJLii.

Ver.  39.  Complaint  under  affliction.  Illustrations.  —  Spiritual   insight

1.  Some  complaints  allowable.  1.  It  is  into  the  Divine  rule.  There  seems  to
lawful  to  express  what  we  feel  and  be  in  religious  men  a  prophetic  faculty
suffer  ii  those  ways  Nature  prompts  us.  of  insight   into   the    true    bearings   of

2.  May  complain  to  friends,  relations,  outward  things — an  insight  which  puts
and  acquaintances.  3.  To  God  as  well  to  shame  the  sagacity  of  statesmen,  and
as  to  men.  II.  Complaints  prompted  claims  for  the  sons  of  God,  and  only
by  impatience  with  God's  dealings  con-  for  them,  the  wisdom  even  of  the
demned.  1.  It  is  long  before  God  takes  world.  Those  only  read  the  world's
the  rod  in  hand  to  correct.  2.  He  is  future  truly  who  have  faith  in  principle
soon  prevailed  with  to  lay  it  aside.  3.  as  opposed  to  faith  in  human  dexterity;
He  lays  no  more  on  us  than  our  sins  who  feel  that  in  human  things  there
deserve.  4.  We  enjoy  many  mercies  lies  truly  and  really  a  spiritual  nature,  a
in  the  meantime  by  which  the  bitter-  spiritual  connection,  a  spiritual  tendency,
ness  of  affliction  is  allayed.  5.  God  which  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  cannot
has  a  sovereignty  of  power  and  do-  alter  and  scarcely  can  affect. — Froude.
minion  to  deal  with  us  as  He  pleaseth.  Submission  to  God's  will.  Stone-
III.  Complaints  may  he  silenced:  1.  wall  Jackson  was  once  asked,  "Sup-
By  keeping  alive  in  your  heart  a  sense  pose,  in  addition  to  blindness,  you  were
of  God's  love  in  every  dispensation.  condemned  to  be  bedridden  and  racked
2.  By  labouring  to  have  a  fresh  re-  with  pain  for  life ;  you  would  hardly
luembrance  of  your  sins.  3.  By  con-  call  yourself  happy  then  ? "  He  paused,
sidering  the  extreme  danger  of  quar-  and  said  with  great  deliberateness,
railing  with  and  opposing  God. —  "  Ygs,  I  think  I  could.  My  faith  in
Conant.  the  Almighty  wisdom  is  absolute,  imd

96


nOMIL  ETIC  COM  ME  NT  AR  Y:  LA  MENTA  TIONS.  chap.  iit.


why  should  this  accident  change  it?"  A  life  well  lived.  Tjmdale's  work
Touching  him  upon  a  tender  point —  was  done.  He  lived  to  see  the  Bible
his  impatience  of  anything  bordering  no  longer  carried  by  stealth  into  his
on  dependence — the  test  was  pushed  country,  where  the  possession  of  it  was
further.  "Jf,  in  addition  to  blindness  a  crime,  but  borne  in  by  the  solemn
and  incurable  infirmity  and  pain,  you  will  of  the  king — solemnly  recognised
had  to  receive  grudging  charity  from  as  the  Word  of  the  Most  High  God.
those  on  whom  you  had  no  claim,  what  And  then  his  occupation  in  this  earth
then?"  There  was  a  strange  reverence  was  gone.  His  eyes  saw  the  salvation
in  his  lifted  eye,  and  an  exalted  ex-  for  which  he  had  longed,  and  he  might
pression  over  his  whole  face,  as  he  depart  to  his  place.  He  was  denounced
replied  with  slow  deliberateness,  *'If  to  the  Regent  of  Flanders;  he  was  en-
it  was  God's  will,  I  think  I  could  lie  ticed  by  the  suborned  treachery  of  a
there  content  a  hundred  years !"  miserable  English  fanatic  beyond  the
Evil  overruled.  Henry  the  Eighth's  town  under  whose  liberties  he  had  been
divorce  of  Queen  Catherine,  and  the  secured;  and,  with  the  reward  which
refusal  of  the  Pope  to  sanction  it,  led  has  been  held  fitting  by  human  justice
indirectly  to  the  English  Reformation  for  the  earth's  great  ones,  he  passed
and  to  the  flinging  off  of  the  Papal  away  in  smoke  and  flame  to  his  rest,
temporal  ecclesiastical  power,  — Froude.


EOMILETIGS.
Repentance.
(Vers.  40-42.)

I.  Begins  in  strict  self-examination.  ''Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways"
(ver.  40).  The  discovery  of  ourselves  is  the  discovery  of  sin.  We  never  know
how  sinful  we  are  till  we  thoroughly  investigate  our  own  hearts.  The  more  we
search,  the  more  we  see,  and  the  conviction  of  our  sin  becomes  an  intolerable
reality.

II.  Involves  a  turning  to  God.  "  And  turn  again  to  the  Lord "  (ver.  40).
The  preposition  is  forcible,  implying  "Let  us  go  back;  not  half  way,  but  the
whole."  A  repentance  that  spends  itself  in  emotions  and  tears  is  ineffective.
Sorrow  for  sin  is  but  a  symptom  of  repentance.  Genuine  repentance  prompts  to
immediate  and  active  moral  reformation.  Sin  drives  us  from  God :  repentance
brings  us  back  to  Him.

III.  Is  accompanied  with  earnest  prayer.  **Let  us  lift  up  our  heart  with
our  hands  unto  God  in  the  heavens"  (ver.  41).  In  real  prayer  the  outward  form
is  the  expression  of  the  feeling  of  the  heart.  The  heart  lifts  up  tlie  hands,  and
then  with  them  rises  in  prayer  to  God.  Deep  emotion  will  find  its  own  way  of
expression.  Repentance  reveals  the  need  of  help  and  forgiveness,  and  prayer  is
the  expression  of  that  need.

IV.  Includes  confession  of  sin.  "  We  have  transgressed  and  have  rebelled  "
(ver.  42).  Tlie  spell  of  hardness  with  which  the  soul  was  bound  is  broken  when
it  is  brought  to  the  point  of  full  and  free  confession  of  sin.  There  is  often  much
humbling  to  be  done  before  this  point  is  reached.  Confession  of  sin  is  an
important  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  repentance,  especially  when  attended  with
the  other  signs  referred  to.

V.  Must  be  genuine  and  complete  to  secure  forgiveness.  "  Thou  hast  not
pardoned  "  (ver.  42).  Why  ?  Not  because  God  is  not  merciful ;  not  because  He
is  unwilling  to  forgive  ;  not  because  the  oppoitunity  is  inappropriate  :  but  because
there  is  a  lack  of  reality  and  sincerity  in  the  penitent.  The  prescription  of
repentance  is  a  revelation  of  forcjiveness.     God  does  not  mock   the  sinner  by

97  ^  G


OTTAP.   ITl.


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


urging  to  repentance  and  then  withholding  forgiveness.  If  there  is  no  eagernesa
for  forgiveness,  it  is  because  there  is  something  radically  defective  in  the
repentance.

Lessons. — 1.  Suffering  should  lead  to  reflection.  2.  No  amount  of  repentance
can  merit  forgiveness.  3.  God  j^ardons  only  the  penitent ,  not  because  of  their
penitence,  hut  for  His  mercy's  sake.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Ver.  40.  The  duty  of  self-reflec-
tion. I.  Its  usefulness.  1.  Teaches
us  to  know  ourselves.  2.  We  discover
our  sins.  3.  Provides  good  company
and  comfortable  employment.  II.  Its
neglect  mischievous.  1.  Hardens  the
heart.  2.  A  daily  increase  of  sin.  3.
Renders  a  man  the  more  unwilling  to
reckon  with  himself.  III.  Demands
ddigence.  1.  There  is  a  natural  reluc-
tance to  attend  to  the  duty.  2.  Many
sins  not  easily  discovered,  unless  dili-
gent search  is  made.  3.  A  convenient
time  should  be  set  apart  for  the  work.

4.  Affliction  a  time  for  heart-searching.

5.  Let  not  the  difficulty  of  the  work
discourage  you.  6.  A  work  that  must
be  often  repeated.  IV.  Leads  to  re-
pentance. "Turn  again  to  the  Lord."
Sin  is  an  aversion  and  turning  away
from  God  ;  repentance  is  a  returning  to
Him.  L  Repentance  must  be  speedy.
2.  Thorough.  3.  Resolute  and  stead-
fast.— Conant.

Ver.  41.  The  sublimity  of  devotion.
The  finest  and  most  sublime  sensations
of  which  the  soul  is  susceptible  are  con-
nected with  the  principle  of  devotion.
I.  T^e  suhlimest  hooks  existing  are  those
from  which  we  learn  our  faith.  The
writings  of  the  inspired  penmen  abound
with  passages  for  which  no  parallel
can  be  found  in  the  productions  of
mere  genius.  Rousseau  once  exclaimed,
"  The  majesty  of  the  Scriptures  fills
me  with  astonishment ;  the  holiness  of
the  Gospel  speaks  to  my  very  heart.
Behold  the  books  of  the  philosophers,
with  all  their  pomp,  how  little  are  they
in  comparison  !  Is  it  possible  that  a
book  at  once  so  wise  and  so  sublime
should  have  been  the  production  of
mere  men  ? "  II.  Some  of  the  situations
of  real  life  prove  the  intimate  connection
heticecn  devotion  and  the  sources  of  .su'f-
lime  feeling.  1.  In  studying  the  char-
98'


acter  of  God  and  ILt;  works  of  Nature.
2.  In   the   changing   circumstances  of

life,  in  adversity  or  f  ^perity,  the  pro-
per operation  of  religious  thought  is  to
call  up  sublime  and  fervent  feelings.
III.  Consider  the  subject  of  adoration —
God^  whether  fc^r shipped  in  private  or
in  /public.  If  it  be  objected  that  in
such  an  account  of  the  effects  of  devout
feeling,  we  place  religion  too  much
under  the  dominion  of  the  imagination,
it  may  be  answered  that  though  the
abuse  of  a  thing  is  dangerous,  we  are
not  therefore  to  relinquish  its  use.  It
is  the  soul  that  truly  feels  ;  imagination
is  the  effort  of  the  soul  to  rise  above
mortality.  Imagination  as  well  as
reason  is  frequently  appealed  to  in
Scripture.  — Nares.

Illustrations.  —  Repentance    and
confession.

Father,  I  scarcely  dare  to  pray,

So  clear  I  see,  now  it  is  done,
That  I  have  wasted  half  my  day,

And  left  my  work  but  just  begun  i

So  clear  I  see  that  th.'ugf''  I  thought
Were  right  or  harmless  were  a  sin  }

So  clear  I  see  that  I  have  sought,
Unconscious,  selfish  ainui  to  win :

So  clear  I  see  that  I  have  hurt

The  souls  I  might  have  helped  to  save  ;

That  I  have  slothful  been,  inert,
Deaf  to  the  calls  Thy  leaders  gave.

In  outskirts  of  Thy  kingdom  vast,
Father,  the  humblest  spot  give  me

Set  me  the  lowliest  task  Thou  hast.
Let  me,  repentant,  work  for  Thee.

Repentance  and    forgiveness.     No

repentance  is  acceptable  with  God,  but
what  is  built  or  leans  on  the  faith  of
forgiveness.  We  have  a  cloud  of  wit-
nesses to  this  truth  in  the  Scripture.
Many  there  have  been,  many  are  re-
corded, who  have  been  convinced  of
sin,    perplexed  about   it,  sorry  for  it.


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  LAMENT  A  TIONS,  chap.  ID.


who  have  mnde  open  confession  and  never  yielded  to  his  threats  or  caresses
acknowledgement  of  it,  who,  under  the  — the  brave  Savonarola.  Lorenzo  con-
present  sense  of  it,  have  cried  out  even  fesses  that  he  has  heavy  on  his  soul
to  God  for  deliverance,  and  have  yet  three  crimes — the  cruel  sack  of  Vol  terra,
come  short  of  mercy,  pardon,  and  ac-  the  theft  of  the  public  dower  of  young
ccptance  witli  God.  The  cases  of  Cain,  girls,  by  which  many  were  driven  to  a
Pharaoh,  Saul,  Ahab,  Judas,  and  others  wicked  life,  and  the  blood  shed  after
might  be  insisted  upon. — John  Owen.  the  conspiracy  of  Pazzi.     He  is  greatly

Death  bed  repentance.    The  English  agitated,  and  Savonarola,  to  keep  him

proverb  says,  "  The  river  past  and  God  quiet,  keeps  repeating,  "  God  is  merci-

forgotten,"  to  express  with  how  mourn-  ful,"  "  God  is  good."    "  But,"  he  added,

ful   a   frequency  He    whose   assistance  '*  there  is  need  of  three  things."    *' And

was   invoked — it  may  have  been  ear-  what  are  they,  father  ? "     "  First,  you

nestly — in  the  moment  of  peril,  is  re-  must  have  a  great  and  living  faith  in

membered  no  more,  so  soon  as  by  His  the  mercy  of  God."     "This  I  have,  the

help  the  danger  has  been  surmounted.  greatest.'*     **  Second,  you  must  restore

And   the   Italian  form  of  it  sounds  a  that  which  you  have  wrongfully  taken,

still  greater  depth  of  ingratitude  :  "  The  or  require  your  children  to  restore  it  for

peril    past,    the    saint    mocked " — the  you."      Lorenzo    looks    surprised    and

vows  made  to  him  in  peril  remaining  troubled  ;  but  he  forces  himself  to  com-

unperformed  in  safety. — Trench.  pliance,  and  nods  his  head  in  sign  of

—  There    is  one   case  of   death-bed  assent.  Then  Savonarola  rises  to  his  feet,

repentance  recorded,  that  no  one  should  and  stands  over  the  dying  prince.   "Last,

despair,  and  only  one,  that  none  should  you  must  give  back  their  liberties  to

presume. — Augustine.  the  people  of  Florence."    Lorenzo,  sum-

Eepentance  must  be  sincere.     Lor-  moning  up  all  his  remaining  strength,

enzo  de'  Medici  lies  dying  in  the  city  disdainfully  turns  his  back,  and,  with-

of  Florence  ;  in  the  tenors  of  death  he  out  uttering  another  word,  Savonarola

has  sent  for  the  one   man   who   had  departs  without  giving  him  absolution.


EOMILETICS.

The  Tension  of  Prolonged  Suffering.

(Verses  43-47.)

I.  Fosters  exaggerated  views  of  God's  unpitying  anger.  "Thou  hast
covered  with  anger  and  persecuted  us  ;  Thou  hast  slain.  Thou  hast  not  pitied  "
(ver.  43).  The  people  had  acknowledged  their  sin  and  repented;  but  no  relief
came.  Not  only  were  they  not  pardoned,  but  it  seemed  as  if  the  Divine  wrath
was  more  relentless  than  ever.  Tlie  Chaldeans  are  still  wrecking  the  holy  city,
and  the  citizens  are  being  ignominiously  dragged  into  captivity.  The  cloud  of
the  Divine  anger,  instead  of  vanishing,  thickens  into  darker  threatenings  of  ven-
geance. This  is  one  of  the  unvarying  phases  of  continued  suffering — every  afflic-
tion is  magnified  into  disproportionate  dimensions.

II.  Induces  the  hasty  conclusion  that  prayer  is  useless.  *'Thou  hast
covered  Thyself  with  a  cloud,  that  our  prayer  should  not  pass  through  "  (ver.  44).
A  deity  so  densely  veiled  is  unapproachable.  The  veil  is  a  cloud  of  wrath,  and
the  suffering  suppliant  is  stricken  with  terror  and  dismay.  Prayer  can  never
pierce  so  dense  a  cloud,  and  it  is  useless  to  try.  The  tension  of  prolonged  suffer-
ing is  apt  to  sliake  one's  confidence  in  the  utility  of  prayer,  and  suggest  the  doubt
whether  God  is  after  all  a  prayer-liearing  God.  It  is  a  great  calamity  when  the
soul  restrains  prayer.

III.  Creates  the  impression  that  the  sufferer  is  utterly  despised  and
QCorned-     *'  Thou  hast  made  us  as  the  off-scouring  and  refuse  in  the  midst  of  the

99


CHAP,  TIT.


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  I.AMENTATIONS,


people.  All  our  enemies  have  opened  their  mouths  against  us  '*  (vers.  45,  46).
There  is  nothing  so  depressing  as  suffering,  and  the  sufferer  is  often  the  prey  of
self-depreciation  and  false  imaginings,  haunted  with  the  idea  that  he  is  the  sport
and  laughing-stock  of  others.  It  is  the  effect  of  sin  to  lower  us  in  our  own
estimation,  and  it  is  a  part  of  its  punishment  that  we  sink  in  the  estimation  of
others.

IV.  Intensifies  the  feeling  of  hopeless  ruin.  "  Fear  and  a  snare  is  come  upon
us,  desolation  and  destruction  "  (ver.  47).  The  light  of  hope,  that  flickered  for  a
moment  (ver,  21),  is  extinguished,  and  the  sufferer  relapses  into  dull,  dead  hope-
lessness (ver,  11).  The  enemy  has  completely  hemmed  in  the  city  with  his  forces  ;
his  grip  tightens,  strategy  and  bravery  succeed,  the  city  falls,  and  is  abandoned
to  riot  and  destruction.  The  protection  of  Jehovah  is  withdrawn,  and,  what  is
the  most  disheartening  revelation  of  all,  He  now  appears  as  an  angry  foe.  Hope
perishes  when  we  discover  that  God  is  against  us.

Lessons. — 1.  Excessive  suffering  is  apt  to  impair  the  moral  vision.  2.  It  is  a
calamity  to  lose  faith  in  prayer  when  we  most  need  its  solace.  3.  TJie  outlook  is
not  always  so  desperate  as  it  appears  to  the  despondent  sufferer.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  43-47.  The  pitilessness  of  the
Divine  anger  :  I.  As  it  appears  to  the
abject  sufferer  (ver.  47).  II.  Seen  in
its  relentless  persecution  (ver.  43).  III.
In  its  apparent  indifference  to  human
entreaty  (ver.  44).  IV.  In  abandoning
its  victims  to  the  contempt  and  derision
of  others  (vers.  45,  46).

Illustrations. — Anger  restrained
more  terrible.  Writing  upon  the
symbolical  carvings  of  the  ducal  palace
at  Venice,  Mr.  Ruskin  remarks  that
there  is  a  figure  of  Anger  represented
by  a  woman  tearing  open  her  dress  at
her  breast.  Giotto  represents  this  vice
under  the  same  symbol,  but  it  is  the
weakest  of  all  the  figures  in  the  Arena
Chapel.  The  Wratli  of  Spencer  rides
upon  a  lion,  brandishing  a  firebrand,  his
garments  stained  with  blood.  Rage,  or
Furor,  occurs  subordinately  in  other
places.  It  occurs  to  me  very  strange
that  neither  Giotto  nor  Spencer  should
have  given  any  representation  of  the
restrained  anger  which  is  infinitely  the
most  terrible ;  both  of  them  make  him
violent.  God's  forbearance  of  sin  is
restrained  anger — not  therefore  less,
but  more  terrible.  The  future  retribu-
tion is  not  less,  but  more  awful,  since
it  is  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb.  Anger
now  restrained  will  be  direr  when  once
revealed.  Long-suffering  is  a  sign  of
suppressed  indignation.
100


Perverted  views  of  suffering.  That
extraordinary  suffering.s  indicated  extra-
ordinary sins  was  contradicted  by  the
Book  of  Job.  So  also  consistent  Phari-
saism saw  in  the  lowliness  of  Jesus  His
unworthiness,  in  His  defencelessness
His  guilt,  and  after  having  crucified
Him,  in  His  cross  His  curse ;  whilst
Jesus  recognises  therein  His  own  glori-
fication and  the  salvation  of  the  world.
The  clouds  that  are  the  precursors  of  a
storm  do  not  appear  so  black  to  us
when  they  hang  immediately  over  our
heads  as  when  we  see  tliem  rising  up
at  the  edge  of  the  horizon.  It  is  easier
to  know  the  worst  tlian  to  dread  the
worst.  All  misfortunes  appear  more
formidable  at  a  distance  than  when  we
actually  come  to  grapple  with  them.

Unjustifiable  depression.  In  a  fit
of  dejection  Dean  Hook  once  wrote —
"My  life  has  been  a  failure.  I  have
done  many  things  tolerably,  but  no-
thing well.  As  a  parish  priest,  as  a
preacher,  and  now  as  a  writer,  I  am
quite  aware  that  I  have  failed,  and  the
more  so  because  my  friends  contradict
the  assertion."

God  does  hear  prayer.  There  is  no
such  thing  in  the  long  history  of  God's
kingdom  as  an  unanswered  prayer.
Every  true  desire  from  a  child's  heart
finds  some  true  answer  in  the  heart  of
God.  Most  certain  it  is  that  the  prayer
of  the  Church  of  God  since  creation  has


HOMJLETIG  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  in.


not  been  the  cry  of  orphans  in  an  empty  He  spoken  in  ignorance  of  God  or  of

home  without  a  Father  to  hear  or  an-  His  brethren  when  He  says,  "Ask  and

swer.     Jesus  Christ  did    not    pray    in  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  fulL" —

Tain  or  to  an  unknown  God,  nor  has  Gorman  MacleocL


EOMILETIGS.

A  Sympathetic  Natuiul

(Verses  48-51.)

I.  Is  pained  by  the  evidences  of  national  distress  eversrw^here  visible.

"  Mine  eye  affecteth  mine  heart  because  of  all  the  daughters  of  my  city  "  (ver.
61).  What  I  see  I  feel.  I  see  nothing  but  misery,  and  I  feel  nothing  but  pain.
Amid  the  general  suffering,  the  tender  heart  of  the  prophet  mourned  over  the  cruel
fate  of  the  Jewish  maidens.  This  is  a  subject  to  which  he  often  refers  (ch.  i.  4,
18;  ii.  10,  21 ;  v,  11).  '*  Jeremiah  suffered  not  in  his  own  person,  being  under
the  protection  of  the  Divine  Being ;  but  though  he  dwelt  securely  from  the  hand
of  mortality,  yet  he  was  filled  with  the  bowels  of  sympathy.  Though  he  wrote
of  the  Jews'  desolations,  yet  he  named  them  Jeremiah's  Lamentations.*'

II.  Is  aggravated  in  its  grief  because  God,  who  sees  the  calamity,  does  not
at  once  remove  it.  *'  Till  the  Lord  look  down  and  behold  from  heaven  "  (ver.
50).  While  the  Lord  looks  down.  He  sees  all  this  suffering ;  every  feature  of
it  is  fully  known  to  Him.  Why  does  He  not  interfere  1  How  can  He  be  so  in-
different to  the  agonies  of  His  people  ?  The  prophet's  heart  is  breaking,  and  it  is
a  mystery  and  an  addition  to  his  pain  that  Jehovah  does  not  haste  to  the  rescue.
Sympathy  is  not  always  wise.  Our  emotions  are  apt  to  swamp  our  judgment.
God  knows  infallibly  how  much  suffering  is  necessary,  and  when  the  right  moment
is  come  for  Him  to  interpose.

III.  Expresses  its  sorrow  in  a  copious  outflow  of  tears.  *^  Mine  eye  runneth
down  with  rivers  of  water,  without  any  intermission  "  (vers.  48,  49).  The  measure
of  our  being  is  our  capacity  for  sorrow  or  joy.  A  certain  traveller  states  that  the
shadow  cast  by  Mount  Hernion  at  some  periods  is  as  much  as  seventy  miles  long.
A  sensitive  nature  is  susceptible  of  great  sorrow,  and  has  manifold  ways  of  express-
ing the  same.  While  the  cause  of  sorrow  remains,  the  sympathetic  heart  will
mourn.

Lessons. — 1.  Callous  indeed  is  the  heart  that  can  witness  suffering  without
emotion.  2.  The  heart  that  loves  intensely  suffers  intensely.  3.  A  syrnpathetic
nature  finds  a  merciful  relief  in  tears.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Ver.  51.  Sin  the  cause  of  suffering:
I.  To  the  patriot,  as  he  sees  its  effect
upon  the  nation.  IL  To  the  philan-
thropist, as  he  observes  the  mischief
it  works  in  the  world.  III.  To  the  in-
dividual believer,  as  he  is  conscious  of
its  presence  in  his  own  heart.

Illustrations. — The  power  of  sym-
pathy. Happy  is  the  man  who  has
that  in  bis  soul  which  acts  upon  the
dejected  as  April  airs  upon  violet  roots,


Gifts  from  the  hand  are  silver  and  gold ;
but  the  heart  gives  that  which  neither
silver  nor  gold  can  buy.  To  be  full  of
goodness,  full  of  cheerfulness,  full  of
sympathy,  full  of  helpful  hope,  causes  a
man  to  carry  blessings  of  which  he  is
himself  as  unconscious  as  a  lamp  of  its
own  shining.  Such  an  one  moves  on
human  life  as  stars  move  on  dark  seas
to  bewildered  mariners ;  as  the  sun
wheels,  bringing  all  the  seasons  with
him  from  the  south. — Beecher.


CHAP.  IX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMEXTATIONS.


Grief  leaves  its  mark.     Sir  Walter  *'  Had  I  been   there   with   my   brave

Scott  says  of  himself  after  a  sore  be-  Franks,    I    would    have   avenged   Hia

reavement,  "I  was  broken-hearted  for  wrongs."

two   years  ;    and   though    handsomely  The  relief  of  tears.     A  maniac  while

pieced  again,  the  crack  will  remain  to  listening  to  a  thrilling  recital  was  moved

my  dying  dcV  "  to  tears.     Lifting   her  withered   finger

Practical    sympathy.       When    St.  she  exclaimed,  "  Do  you  see  that  tear  t

Remy  was  ]ireaching  before  King  Clovis  It  is   the  first  tear  that  I  have  shed

of  France,  telling  with  passionate  pathos  for    seven    years,    and    it  will    relieve

the  story  of  Christ's  suffering  and  death,  my  poor  burning  head.     I  have  often

the  monarch  suddenly  sprang  from  his  wished  that  I  could  weep,  but  I  could

throne,  and,  grasping  his  spear,  cried,  not."

HOMILETICS,

A  Faithful  Pkophet  in  Trouble.

(Verses  52-58.)

I.  Cruelly  treated  by  Ms  enemies.  ^'  Mine  enemies  chased  me  sore  like  a
bird,  without  cau^e  :  I  am  cut  off"  (vers.  52-54).  In  these  verses,  and  to  the
end  of  the  chapter,  Jeremiah  deals  with  his  own  personal  afflictions.  Without
the  least  provocation,  he  was  treated  with  the  most  malignant  enmity.  He  was
harassed,  as  a  bird  is  tired  out,  and  at  length  run  down  by  continuous  pursuit.
He  is  overwhelmed  with  trouble,  and  is  as  one  imprisoned  in  a  dungeon,  shut  oflf
from  the  current  of  active  life.  He  acknowledged  the  righteousness  of  the  Divine
dealings,  but  he  was  keenly  alive  to  the  unrighteousness  and  undeserved  cruelty
of  his  persecutors.  Had  he  been  the  aggressor,  he  might  have  expected  retalia-
tion, but  he  was  oppressed  without  cause.  His  enemies  were  actuated  by  sheer
hatred.  His  only  fault  was  his  faithfulness  to  God  and  to  his  own  conscience.
Simple  goodness  often  rouses  the  wanton  animosity  of  the  wicked.

II.  Seeks  refuge  in  prayer.  "I  called  upon  Thy  name,  0  Lord;  hide  not
Thine  ear  at  my  cry  "  (vers.  55,  56).  It  is  a  relief  to  turn  from  the  cruelty  of
man  to  the  compassion  and  power  of  God.  The  soul  is  never  so  helpless  but  that
it  can  pray.  When  we  can  do  nothing  else,  we  can  pray.  Prayer  is  the  language
of  need,  and  we  are  comforted  with  the  assurance  that  God  will  hear,  and  not  only
hear  but  help.  It  seemed  at  one  time  that  prayer  was  useless  (ver.  44) ;  but  better
thoughts  prevailed,  and  the  soul  discovered  tliat  the  cry  for  help  was  not  in  vain.
"  Prayer  is  the  breath  of  the  new  man,  sucking  in  the  air  of  mercy  in  petitions
and  returning  it  in  praises ;  it  is  both  the  evidence  and  the  maintenance  of  the
spiritual  life."

III.  Rescued  by  Divine  aid.  "  Thou  drewest  near  in  the  day  that  I  called
upon  Thee  ;  Thou  saidst,  Fear  not.  0  Lord,  Thou  hast  pleaded  the  causes  of  my
soul ;  Thou  has  redeemed  my  life  "  (vers.  57,  58).  When  we  draw  near  to  God
in  prayer,  He  draws  near  to  us.  Our  troubles  are  overwhelming  when  God  is
absent  and  we  are  left  to  ourselves.  With  His  manifested  presence  our  troubles
vanish,  and  we  are  inspired  with  strength  to  endure  and  to  triumph.

Lessons. — 1.  Fidelity  makes  many  enemies.  2.  The  nation  that  ill-uses  its
best  men  courts  its  own  ruin.     3.   The  Lord  is  ever  on  the  side  of  thefaithfvl,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  54-57.  The  efficacy  of  prayer,  spondency.     II.  The   remedy  open  to

I.  Tliese  words  show  to  what  a  state  them.        Prayer    expressed     in     cries,

God's  most  favoured  servants  may  be  groans,    breathings,    sighs.       III.    The

reduced — extreme    suffering,  tears,  de-  efficacy  of  that  remedy  whenever  it  \9

103


HOMfLETW  COMMESTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,  ottAP.  m.


applied.  "Thou  d  re  west  near  in  the
day  that  I  called  upon  Thee ;  Thou
eaidst,  Fear  not."  In  these  words  we
hear  the  consolatory  voice  of  God.
Marvellous  condescension  ;  certainty  of
help  and  deliverance. — Simeon.

Ver.  67.  A  wonder  explained  by
greater  wonders.  1.  An  explanation
of  this  wonder.  God  doth  draw  near
to  men.  1.  Men  have  ever  been  in  the
thoughts  of  God.  2.  God  came  tenderly
near  in  nature.  3.  The  Lord  Jesus  was
specially  near  in  the  days  of  His  life  on
earth.  4.  He  came  still  nearer  to  us
in  His  death.  6.  In  heaven  He  is  per-
petually near  us.  6.  Jesus  may  well
come  near  to  His  people,  for  there  is  a
mystical  union  which  ensures  it.  II.
Consider  the  wonder  itself.  1.  By  no
means  is  this  wonder  at  all  contrary  to
expectation.  2.  God  draws  near  by
strengthening  us  to  bear  up  under  pres-
sure. 3.  By  vouchsafing  a  doubly
vivid  sense  of  His  love.  4.  By  grant-
ing a  sensible  assurance  of  His  sym-
pathy. 5.  By  speedy  and  remarkable
deliverance  out  of  trouble.  6.  The
text  indicates  surprise  concerning  the
memorable  graciousness  of  God.  7.  The
promptness  of  God.  8.  The  extreme
tenderness  of  God. — 0.  H.  Spurgeon.

Ver.  58.  God  pleading  for  saints
and  saints  pleading  for  God.  I.  The
Divine  pleading.  1.  The  Lord  pleads
our  cause  in  the  court  of  Providence  by
silencing  enemies  and  by  raising  up
friends  for  His  people.  2.  He  pleads
for  them  in  tlie  court  of  Divine  law.
3.  In  the  court  of  conscience.  4.  In
the  court  of  heaven.  5.  And  at  the
last  great  day  of  judgment.  II.  If
the  Lord  hath  pleaded  the  causes  of  our
souly  we  should  plead  His  cause  while  we
have  breath  to  pray.  1.  This  is  the
life-work  of  the  Christian.  2.  Should
be  done  in  witnessing  for  Christ  by  our
consistency  of  conduct.  3.  We  can  all
plead  for  Christ  in  a  private  way.  Be
it  mine  to  weep  for  the  sins  of  the
time  and  prophesy  against  them.  Be
it  yours  in  your  own  private  walk  and
conversation  to  rebuke  private  sin,  and
by  your  loving  earnestness  to  make
Jesus  Christ  dear  to  many  souls  ! — C.
ff.  Spurgeon.


Illustrations.  —  Faithfulness  in
service.  If  you  and  I  show  that  we
attach  importance  to  the  solemn  per-
formance of  even  the  slightest  duty
connected  with-K)ur  dear  Master's  ser-
vice ;  that  we  consider  even  the  office
of  doorkeeper  in  His  house  an  office  of
honour;  that,  convinced  of  His  pre-
sence, we  are  as  devout  in  ofifering  the
prayers  when  only  two  or  three  are
present  as  when  there  are  two  or  three
hundred — we  shall  find  His  blessing  at-
tending us,  and  we  shall  be  the  means
of  converting  others. — Dean  Hook.

—  A  carpenter  was  once  asked,
Why  he  troubled  to  finish  off  a  certain
magistrate's  bench  so  carefully  1  His
reply  was,  "  I  can't  do  otherwise  ;  be-
sides, I  may  have  to  sit  on  it  one  of
these  days.'*

Faithful  to  death.  When  Commo-
dore Joseph  Smith  saw  by  the  first
despatch  that  reached  Washington  from
Fortress  Monroe  that  the  Congress^  on
which  his  son  was  commander,  had
shown  the  white  flag,  he  said,  *'  Then
Joe's  dead."     It  was  so.

Prayer  an  ever- open  refuge.  St.
Cuthbert  was  once  in  a  snowstorm  that
drove  his  boat  on  the  coast  of  Fife.
"  The  snowstorm  closes  the  road  along
the  shore,"  mourned  his  comrades ;
"  the  storm  bars  our  way  over  the  sea."
"  There  is  still  the  way  of  heaven  ;  that
lies  open,''  said  the  devoted  saint.

Divine  aid  works  a  marvellous
change.  Probably  there  is  nowhere  on
the  globe  so  marked  a  climatic  boun-
dary as  that  of  the  Cascade  Mountains  in
both  Washington  Territory  and  Oregon.
West  of  this  boundary  the  winters
are  mild  and  the  summers  cool  and
showery ;  east  of  it  the  winters  are
sharp  and  dry  and  the  summers  very
hot.  On  one  side  are  gigantic  firs  and
cedars,  while  on  the  other  all  are  of
poor  size  and  condition.  Even  the
flowers  are  of  new  species,  and  all  the
atmospheric  conditions  are  changed.
The  line  that  lies  between  the  unsaved
and  the  saved,  once  crossed,what  changes
are  manifest!  **If  any  man  be  in
Jesus  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creation  ;  old
things  have  passed  away ;  lo,  all  things
have  become  new.*'

103


CttAf.  ttr.  BOMllKTlC  COMMENT  A  tt  Y .-  t  AMENTA  TI0N8.


HOMILETICS.
A  Confident  Appeal  to  Divinb  Justios.

(Verses  59-66.)

I.  That  Jehovah  recognises  the  wrongs  suffered  by  His  servants.    "  0  Lord,

Thou  has  seen  my  wrong;  judge  Thou  my  cause"  (ver.  69).  It  seemed  at  times
as  if  the  chosen  people  were  forgotten  and  left  to  the  mercy  of  their  oppressors.
Years  passed  away,  and  still  there  was  no  prospect  of  rescue.  The  valiant  stand
made  by  the  prophet  involved  him  in  great  and  unjust  suffering,  and  it  seemed  as
if  Heaven  was  indifferent  to  the  issue.  But  things  are  not  what  they  seem.  All
the  time  the  eye  of  Jehovah  was  watching  the  struggle  and  noting  every  act  of
injustice  and  wrong.  Every  pang  of  suffering  is  faithfully  registered.  When  the
soul  is  conscious  that  Jehovah  is  cognisant  of  its  distress,  it  is  nerved  with  courage
and  patiently  waits  God's  time  of  tieiiverance.

II.  That  Jehovah  infallibly  observes  the  cruel  plottings  and  malicious
reproaches  of  His  people's  enemies.  "  Thou  hast  seen  all  their  vengeance.  Thou
hast  heard  their  reproach,  0  Lord,  and  all  their  imaginations  against  me,"  &c.
(vers.  60-63).  Not  a  single  movement,  not  a  word  of  scorn  of  His  enemies
escapes  the  eye  and  the  ear  of  Jehovah.  How  vain  and  foolish  their  opposition
appears  to  Him !  Their  cleverest  combinations  are  but  the  work  of  helpless
imbecility  ;  their  wildest  rage  is  but  a  momentary  flash  of  aimless  malignity.  In
a  moment  their  schemes  are  shattered  and  their  revilings  for  ever  silenced.  God
is  so  strong  in  conscious  righteousness  that  He  can  aff'ord  to  bide  His  time.  It  is
a  mistake  to  regard  His  long-sulfering  patience  as  a  sign  of  apathy,

III.  That  Jehovah  will  vindicate  the  wrongs  of  His  servants  by  punishing
their  oppressors.  "  Render  unto  them  a  recompense,  0  Lord,  according  to  the
work  of  their  hands,"  &c.  (vers.  64-66).  The  imprecatory  form  of  these  words
are  uttered  by  Jeremiah  in  his  prophetical  character.  He  calls  for  the  vengeance
upon  his  enemies  which  their  iniquities  have  deserved,  and  which  Divine  Justice
is  certain  to  render.  The  versions  and  the  Targum  all  render  these  verses  not  as
imperatives,  but  as  futures — Thou  shalt  render  unto  them  a  recompensBy  Sfc,  It
is  an  unalterable  principle  of  the  Divine  government  to  punish  all  evil-doers.
The  suff'erings  they  have  inflicted  on  others  shall  be  meted  out  to  them  with  swift
and  terrible  retribution.  "  Under  the  heavens  of  the  Lord  "  there  is  no  place  of
escape  for  the  workers  of  iniquity.  The  wrongs  of  God's  servants  shall  be  re-
dressed, and  His  honour  and  justice  universally  vindicated.

Lessons. — 1.  The  Divine  patience  with  evil-doers  must  not  he  construed  as
meaning  indifference,  2.  It  is  an  aggravation  of  suffering  when  we  knmv  it  is
unjust  3.  Vengeance  against  all  workers  of  iniquity  may  be  safely  left  in  the
hands  of  God,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,

Vers.  59-63.  The  Divine  slowness  with  God.  A  pure  manhood  is  in  har-
to  punish.  I.  Does  not  arise  from  in-  mony  with  all  that  is  Godlike  in  thought
difference  to  human  wrongs.  '*Thou  and  sentiment,  and  with  all  that  is
has  seen  my  wrong "  (ver.  59).  II.  Is  Christly  in  character  and  work.  It  is
not  from  want  of  knowledge  of  all  the  in  harmony  with  the  works  of  God,  with
actions  of  the  wicked  (vers.  60-63).  all  that  is  beautiful  in  nature.  It  is
III.  Indicates  that  God  is  so  strong  in  harmony  with  the  providence  of  God,
and  man  is  so  weak.  IV.  Affords  every  with  all  that  is  happy  or  sad  in  the
opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  mercy  to  discipline  of  life  ;  and  supremely  it  is
the  truly  penitent.  in  harmony  with  the  inspired  truth  of

Ver.  63.  A  godly  life  the  music  of     God  as  revealed  in  hisiiory,  character,
society.     I.   Like  musicy  a  godly    life      and  precept.     2.  It  is  in  harmony  with
is  harmonious.     1.    It  is  in  harmony      itself.     All  the  truer  sympathies  of  a
104


BOMlLnrW  COMMENfAkY:  LAMENTAftom.


OSAt.  tit


devout  heart,  all  the  higher  faculties  of
a  pure  mind  exist  in  a  condition  of  self-
harmony.  Living  in  communiun  with
the  Supreme  Being,  the  good  man  ol>
tains  true  concord  in  the  exercise  of
prayer.  And  thus  attuned  by  devo-
tion, every  power  of  his  soul  joins
in  the  hymn  of  life.  3.  It  is  in  har-
mony with  the  highest  good  of  the
race.  A  godly  man  is  ever  the  foremost
to  aid  any  philanthropic  enterprise
for  the  real  welfare  of  others.  All
the  strongest  impulses  of  his  nature
prompt  him  to  sympathetic  action  for
the  unfortunate.  Consequently  his
time,  money,  and  influence  are  made  sub-
servient to  the  common  good  of  men.
II.  Like  mtisiCj  a  godly  life  is  cheer-
ing. When  we  have  been  oppressed
with  care,  when  the  great  mystery  of
life  has  come  heavily  upon  our  souls,
what  hope  and  comfort  have  been  im-
parted by  contact  with  a  happy,  pious
spirit.  III.  Like  music,  a  godly  life
is  inspiring.  When  men  would  have
given  up  the  conflict  of  life  in  despair,
how  often  has  the  word  and  life  of  a
Christian  filled  them  with  new  courage ;
and  how  frequently  are  careless  souls
awakened  to  a  sense  of  duty  by  the
moral  earnestness  of  the  godly  around
them.  IV.  Like  music,  a  godly  life  is
calming.  What  a  quieting  influence
has  the  life  of  a  good  man  upon
those  around  him.  His  presence  sub-
dues anger;  by  his  smile  the  deepest
unrest  is  removed.  He  calms  the
passions  of  the  unholy  and  soothes  the
sorrow  of  the  troubled.  V.  Are  our
lives  morally  musical?  Are  they  in
harmony  with  God  and  all  His  works  ^
Are  our  dispositions  in  the  home,  in
business,  and  in  the  varied  scenes  of  life
kindly  t  If  so,  then  are  we  the  joy,  the
inspiration,  and  the  quietude  of  many
lives  around  us  that  might  otherwise  be
sad,  monotonous,  and  unpeaceful. — The
Lay  Preacher.

Vers.  64-66.  Divine  punishment :
I.  Is  proportioned  to  human  sin.  "A
recompense  according  to  the  work  of
their  hands  "  (ver.  64).  II.  Afflicts  the
chief  instrument  of  human  sin.  "  Give
them  sorrow  of  heart  "  (ver.  65) — blind-
ness   of     heart,     obstinacy,    hardness.


III.  Is  an  appalling  reality.     "  Perse-
cute and  destroy  them  in  anger  "  (ver.

Ver.  65.  God  can  entangle  the  head
that  thinks  itself  clearest,  and  sink  the
heart  that  thinks  itself  stoutest.

Illustrations. — It  is  best  always
to  do  justly.  Writing  on  the  question
of  just  treatment  between  the  Southern
and  Northern  States  of  America,  and
especially  of  the  black  race,  G.  W.  Cable
said  :  "  But  it  is  sometimes  said.  Will  not
this  tend  eventually  to  amalgamation  ?
Idle  question  !  Will  it  help  the  matter
to  withhold  men'smanifest rights?  What
can  we  do  better  for  the  remotest  future
than  to  be  just  in  the  present,  and  leave
the  rest  to  the  Divine  Rewarder  of
nations  that  walk  uprightly  1 "

Justice  between  man  and  man.  The
doctrine  which  bases  all  the  relations  of
employer  and  employed  upon  self-in-
terest is  a  doctrine  of  the  pit;  it  has
been  bringing  hell  to  earth  in  large  in-
stalments for  a  great  many  years.  You
can  have  hell  in  your  factory,  or  you  can
have  heaven  there,  just  as  you  please.
If  it  is  hell  that  you  want,  build  your
business  on  the  law  of  hell,  which  is —
Every  man  for  himself  and  the  devil
take  the  hindmost.  Out  of  that  will
come  fightings  perennial  and  unrelent-
ing. If  it  is  heaven  that  you  want,
then  build  your  business  on  the  law
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  is —
Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself.
That  will  put  you  in  the  path  of  peace.

Religion  and  justice.  In  the  year
813  the  Doge  Angelo  Participazio  took
vigorous  means  for  the  enlargement  of
the  small  group  of  buildings  which  were
to  be  the  nucleus  of  the  future  Venice.
For  the  offices  of  religion  he  built  the
church  of  St.  Mark,  and  on  or  near  the
spot  where  the  Ducal  Palace  now  stands
he  built  a  palace  for  the  administration
of  justice.  Observe  that  piety  towards
God  and  justice  towards  man  have  been
at  least  the  nominal  purposes  of  every
act  and  institution  of  ancient  Venice.
— Ruskin.

Wrong- doing  brings  its  own  retri-
bution. Cosimo  I.,  of  Florence,  was  a
ferocious,  cruel   tyrant,   murdering  his

105


cfiAr.  nt.


ItOMJLETW  COMMBNTAltr :  LAMENTATION'S.


own  son  in  the  presence  of  his  mother.
After  a  few  years  he  married  a  wicked
but  beautiful  woman,  who  had  been
a  former  partner  in  sin  with  him,
and  in  his  last  days,  broken  with
decrepitude,  was  helpless  in  her  des-
potic hands.  For  two  years  after
the  palsy  had  deprived  him  of  speech
or  movement,  he  lay  dying,  bereft  of
everything  but  a  torturing  memory  of
his  cruelty  and  wickedness.

—  The  Jews  have  a  tradition  that
Cain  was  doomed  to  carry  AbePs  corpse
for  a  hundred  years.

The  just  and  the  unjust.  Such
being  our  unjust  man,  let  us  place  by
his  side  a  man  of  true  simplicity  and
nobleness,  resolved,  as  ^Eschylus  says,
not  to  seem,  but  to  be  good.  We  must
certainly  take  away  the  seeming ;  for
if  he  be  thought  to  be  a  just  man,  he
will  have  honours  and  gifts  on  the
strength  of  this  reputation,  so  that  it
will  be  uncertain  whether  it  is  for  jus-
tice's sake  or  for  the  sake  of  the  gifts
and  honours  that  he  is  what  he  is.
Yes,  we  must  strip  him  hare  of  every-
thing but  justice,  and  make  his  case
the  reverse  of  the  former.  Without
being  guilty  of  one  unjust  act,  let  him
have  the  worst  reputation  for  injustice,
so  that  his  virtue  may  be  thoroughly
tested  and  shown  to  be  proof  against
infamy  and  all  its  consequences ;  and
let  him  go  on  to  the  day  of  his  death
steadfast  in  his  justice,  but  with  a  life-


long reputation  for  injustice.  They
who  prefer  injustice  above  justice  will
say  that  in  such  a  situation  the  just
man  will  be  scourged,  racked,  fettered,
will  have  his  eyes  burnt  out,  and  at
last,  after  suffering  every  kind  of  tor-
ture, will  be  crucified ;  and  thus  learn
that  it  is  best  to  resolve,  not  to  be,  but
to  seem  just. — Plato's  Republic.

Injustice  not  to  be  hastily  resented.
When  Aristides,  the  Atlienian  general,
sat  to  arbitrate  a  difference  between  two
persons,  one  of  them  said,  '*  This  fellow
accused  thee  at  such  a  time."  To  whom
Aristides  answered,  "  I  sit  not  to  hear
what  he  has  done  against  me,  but
against  thee."  That  was  a  noble  reply
of  Philip  the  Good  when  urged  by  his
courtiers  to  punish  a  prelate  who  had
done  him  great  injustice,  he  declined,
saying,  "It  is  a  fine  thing  to  have
revenge  in  one's  power ;  but  it  is  a  finer
thing  not  to  use  it."

God  frustrates  the  schemes  of  the
wicked.  All  the  plots  and  contrivances
of  wicked  men,  all  their  turning  of
things  upside  down,  are  treated  as  the
potter's  clay  ;  for  when  they  think  they
have  brought  all  to  maturity,  ripeness,
and  perfection,  when  they  look  upon
their  business  as  good  as  done,  on  a
sudden  all  their  labour  is  lost ;  for  God,
who  stands  by  all  the  while  and  looks
on,  will,  with  one  small  touch,  with  the
least  breath  of  His  mouth,  blast  and
break  all  in  pieces. — Edlin.


106


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENT  At  IONS,  oaAP.  it.


CHAPTER  IV.

Zion's  Pitiful  Estate.

The  first  half  of  thii  chapter  is  occupied  with  details  connected  with  the  ruthlen  overthrow
and  harrowing  incidents  in  the  conquest  of  Jerusalem.  Distinct  and  viijorGus  expression  is
thereafter  given  to  the  intense  conviction  that  the  terrific  disasters  were  traceable  to  the
iniquities  of  the  people,  and  especially  of  the  ruling  classes.  They  suffered  from  the  anger  of
the  Lord  ;  but  He  would  not  contend  iov  ever.  There  is  hope  that,  after  meting  out  justice
to  oppressors.  He  would  arise  and  have  mercy  upon  Z ion,  for  the  time  to  favour  her:  yea,  the
set  time  had  com,e.  The  shadows  of  the  night  were  very  dense,  but  streaks  across  them  betokt^n
to  the  spiritual  eye  that  day  is  breaking,  the  day  of  restoration.

(K)  Ver.  1.  How  is  the  gold  dimmed.  Not  a  mere  diminution  of  its  brightness,  but  a  tarnish-
ing which  lowered  the  estimate  of  the  ore.  The  most  pure  gold  changed ;  something  more
than  an  alteration  in  the  appearance  of  the  purified  metal  is  observed.  The  alteration  is  not  in
its  substance,  but  in  its  depreciated  value.  The  stones  of  the  sanctuary — not  only  were
precious  stones  worn  on  the  garments  of  the  High  Priest,  but  the  Temple  also  was  garnished  for
beauty  with  them — are  poured  out  at  the  head  of  every  street.  If  this  is  regarded  as  having
reference  to  the  costly  stones  of  the  House  of  the  Lord,  the  objection  naturally  arises  that  no
enemy  would  be  so  reckless  as  to  strew  such  precious  material  all  over  the  city.  Rather  the
whole  verse  is  to  be  considered  as  a  figurative  representation  of  the  sad  lot  of  Jerusalem,  not  of
its, buildings  but  of  its  inhabitants,  which  will  be  told  of  in  some  verses  following.  A  similar
comparison  is  made  by  the  prophet  Zechariah,  who  foretells  that  the  sons  of  Zion  shall  be  at  the
stones  of  a  crown,  only  not  cast  down,  as  here,  but  lifted  on  high  (Zech.  ix.  16).

(3).  Ver.  2  defines  the  objects  of  which  the  preceding  verse  was  an  illustration.  The
precious  sons  of  Zion,  grouping  all  the  people  together,  a  kingdom,  of  priests,  an  holy  nation,
comparable  to,  weighed  in  one  scale  against  fine  gold  in  the  other,  he  is  astonished  to  see  as
in  utter  contrast  with  what  they  were.  Three  varieties  of  gold  are  mentioned — gold,  pure  gold,
fine  gold — as  if  the  sons  of  Zion  were  precious  beyond  the  most  precious  things  ;  but  the  contrast
between  the  high  estimate  and  the  degraded  reality,  between  what  the  Lord  formed  them  to  be
and  foes  had  reduced  them  to,  forces  out  the  cry,  How  are  they  reckoned  as  earthen  pitchers,
made  from  ignoble  materials  by  human  hands,  and  easily  broken  to  pieces  (Jer.  xix.  11).

Their  humiliating  condition  is  evidenced  in  children,  adults,  nobles,  and  mothers.

(3).  Ver.  3.  Beasts  of  prey  show  affection  for  their  brood.  Even  the  jackals  draw  out —
prt'sent — the  breast ;  a  familiar  fact.,  testifying  that  they  were  true  to  their  instincts,  they
suckle  their  whelps ;  but  in  miserable  contrariety  to  this,  the  daughter  of  my  people  has
become  otherwise  ;  unwilling  to  give  nourishment  to  their  babes,  they  show  themselves  cruel,
like  ostriches  in  the  desert.  This  arraignment  of  the  wild  birds  is  according  to  ideas  current
at  the  time,  and  reported  in  the  Book  of  Job.  She  leaveth  her  eggs  on  the  earth  .  .  .  she  is
hardened  against  her  young  ones,  as  if  they  were  not  hers  (cliap.  xxxix.  14,  16).  Later  observa-
tions require  some  modification  of  this  account  of  the  habits  of  the  ostrich ;  but  the  writers
of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  had  not  a  knowledge  of  Nature  beyond  their  times.

This  fearful,  unnatural  result  of  the  extreme  trials  of  the  Israelites  had  its  correlated  feature.

O).  Ver.  4.  The  tongue  of  the  sucking  child  cleaveth  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth,  because
of  getting  no  milk.  The  young  children  ask  bread,  and  no  one  divides  to  them  the  cakes  in
which  form  it  was  made.

(n)  Ver.  5.  Adults  also  are  distressed  They  that  did  feed  delicately,  in  the  fastidiousness
of  luxury,  are  desolate  in  the  streets,  with  no  one  to  serve  them,  with  no  meant  to  satisfy
hunger,  perishing.  They  that  were  brought  up  in  scarlet,  those  of  the  wealthy  classes,
accustomed  to  use  the  most  expensive  cloth,  lay  themselves,  in  sheer  despair,  on  the  dirt-heaps
which  have  accumulated  in  the  ruined  city.  Like  Dives,  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  faring
sumptuously  every  day,  they  too  are  in  darkness — only  they  in  the  visible,  he  in  the  invisible
world.

(1)  Ver.  6.  Those  awful  distresses  were  due  to  the  way  in  which  the  people  had  lived.  The
crying  wickedness  of  Sodom  is  again  and  again  denounced  by  prophets  as  a  warning  to  the
Israelites.  Here  that  wickedness  is  minified,  and,  from  the  long  drawn  out  sufferings  of  the
latter,  it  is  implied  that  the  iniquity — not  the  punishment  of  the  iniquity,  a  translation  which
has  not  been  establi.shed  from  the  usage  of  the  two  corresponding  Hebrew  words  elsewhere — of
the  daughter  of  my  people  is  greater  than  the  sin  of  Sodom.  The  Cities  of  the  Plain  had
not  the  advantage  which  the  Jews  had,  who  were  intrusted  with  the  oracles  of  God,  and  their  guilt
was  less.  The  supreme  authority  of  Jesus  Christ  stands  behind  the  declaration  that  it  would
be  more  tolerable  for  l^odom  and  Oomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  those  who  refused
the  light  of  life.  Moreover,  Sodom  was  destroyed  by  a  sudden  stroke — no  protracted  sufferings,
no  starved,  wailing  children,  no  mothers  eating  their  own  infants,  overthrown  as  in  a  moment,
and  by  forces  in  which  no  human  agency  had  any  part ;  hands  did  not  encircle  her.  No
enemies  brandished  their  swords  against  her  inhabitants,  investing  her  on  every  side.  God
can  paralyse  all  industries  and  destroy  a  community  without  man's  aid.     The  ground  of  this


CHAP.  IV.  nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


preference  of  Sodom  is  that  a  trouble  direct  from  God  is  more  bearable  than  one  inflicted  by
man,  and  was  expressed  by  King  David,  Let  me  fall  into  the  hand  of  Jehovah  .  ,  .  let  me  not
fail  into  the  hand  of  man  (1  Chron.  xxi.  1'6).

(])  Ver.  7.  Men  under  religious  vows  could  not  have  been  so  numerous  as  to  form  a  con^
spicuous  eleine^nt  in  the  population.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  to  suppose  that  they  were  noted
for  a  line  physique.  Besides,  the  Hebrew  word  is  not  confined  to  those  who  are  professed
Nazarites,  but  applies  to  such  as  were  distinguished  from  others.  So  Joseph,  in  Jacob's  dying
forecasts,  is  described  as  him  that  was  nazin,  separate  from  [marg.  that  is  prince  among]  his
brethren  (Gen.  xlix.  26).  Her  nobles  were  purer  than  snow,  &c.  Still  another  feature  char-
acteristd  them,  they  were  more  ruddy  in  body  than  rubies.  "  The  white  and  red  are  to  be
understood  as  mixed,  and  shading  into  one  another,  as  our  popular  poetry  speaks  of  cheeks
which  '  like  milk  and  purple  shine '  "  (Delitzsch) ;  My  beloved  is  white  and  ruddy  (Cant.  v.  10) ;
"My  love  is  like  the  red,  red  rose"  (Scottish  song).  Sapphire  was  their  polishing  [lit.
figure].  The  comparison,  however,  can  only  be  with  the  brilliancy  of  the  gem,  not  with  ita
shape.  The  appearance  of  the  nobles,  as  here  described,  indicates  that  their  faces  were  not
bronzed  and  seamed  by  exposure  to  all  kinds  of  weather ;  uo  engrained  dust  from  toiling  day
after  day  darkened  their  complexion.  They  looked  as  those  who  live  delicately  in  king's  courts.
But  now —

(n)  Ver.  8.  Darker  than  blackness  is  their  visage;  they  are  not  recognised  in  the
streets  as  members  of  the  aristocracy  ;  nothing  marks  them  off  from  the  labouring  classes.
Their  skin  cleaveth  to  their  bones,  they  are  emaciated  and  shrivelled  through  hunger  and
anguish,  and  the  skin  is  become  dry  as  wood.

(D)  Ver.  9.  One  melancholy  contrast  suggests  another,  i.e.,  between  those  who  are  dead  and
those  who  are  tortured  by  want.  Better  are  the  slain  by  the  sword  than  the  slain  by  hunger.
The  next  clause  is  more  descriptive  of  the  condition  of  the  former  than  of  the  latter.  The
advantage  of  less  prolonged  and  gnawing  pains  is  with  those  who  pine  away  [lit.  flow  away,
as  sinking  from  loss  of  blood  gushing  from  ghastly  wounds],  pierced  through  at  a  time  when
there  was  no  lack  of  food  from  the  fruits  of  the  field.

(*)  Ver.  10.  A  more  dreadful  fact  is  related  in  regard  to  the  little  ones  than  that  in  vers.
3  and  4.  The  hands  of  tender-hearted  women — not  servants  or  hirelings,  but  themselves —
have  boiled  their  own  children ;  they  became  meat  for  them  in  that  climax  of  sufferings,  the
destruction  of  the  daughter  of  my  people.  Moral  duty  is  sacrificed,  and  unnatural  crimes
coiumitted  at  the  shrine  of  physical  cravings.

(D)  Ver.  11  is  a  conclusion  from  the  immediately  preceding  verses,  as  ver.  6  is  from  those  pre-
ceding it.  Jehovah  has  accomplished,  i.e.,  has  put  forth  a  full  measure  of.  His  fury  ;  has  poured
out  the  fierceness  of  His  anger,  and  one  method  of  its  action  is  He  has  kindled  a  fire  in  Zion,
and  has  devoured  her  foundations.  The  scenes  of  horror  which  have  been  depicted  show  the
meeting-place  of  Zion's  guilt  and  its  Divine  punisher.  God's  fierce  wrath  is  the  blast  which
consumes  flagrant  iniquities.  The  entire  demolition  of  the  former  principles  dominating  the
Israelites  is  thus  symbolised,  and  so  signifies  that  loom  is  made  for  the  new  spirit  which  shall
possess  the  restored  captivity  when  they  lay  again  the  foundations  of  the  House  of  the  Lord.

A  change  of  features  is  to  be  presented  now  by  sketching,  not  so  much  the  disasters  on
classes  of  the  people,  as  the  causes  by  which  they  were  produced,  and  the  baffled  hopes  ensuing.

(^)  Ver.  12.  The  kings  of  the  earth — men  who  might  be  considered  experts — believed  not,
neither  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world — men  who  were  moved  by  appearances  and  common
hearsay — that  an  adversary  .  .  .  should  enter  into  the  gates  of  Jerusalem.  This  belief
caimot  be  merely  "a  deep  subjective  conviction."  Whether  or  not  the  city  was  previously
taken  is  a  matter  of  no  importance.  What  is  stated  is  a  general  opinion.  The  unverified  belief
would  be  grounded  on  the  knowledge  of  the  strong  situation  and  careful  fortifications  of
Jerusalem,  which,  with  the  means  of  siege  then  at  command,  might  be  considered  almost  im-
possible of  capture.  It  was  invested  a  year  and  a  half  before  capture  by  the  greatest  warrior
of  the  age.  Besides  this,  there  may  well  have  been,  since  the  remarkable  repulse  of  Sennacherib,
a  wide-spread  supposition,  as  when  the  tribes  emerged  from  the  desert,  that  the  God  of  Israel
was  very  mighty  in  the  defence  of  His  worshippers,  and  would  not  let  His  sacred  city  be
subjugated.

(D)  Ver.  13.  It  is  needful  to  connect  this  verse  with  the  last  by  words  like.  This  incredible
thing  came  to  pass,  because  of  the  sins  of  her  prophets,  the  iniquities  of  her  priests— the
position  which  these  two  classes  assumed  in  the  polity  of  Jerusalem  is  indicated  in  various
strong  terms  by  Jeremiah,  the  prophet  of  this  period,  and  especially  in  his  references  to  the
treatmeni,  which  he  himself  received  at  their  hands  (chap,  xxvi.) — who  shed  in  her  midst  the
blood  of  the  righteous.  They  are  branded  as  instigators  and  leaders  of  the  evil,  and,  like
other  occupiers  of  usurped  power,  their  jealousy  and  anger  at  those  who  crossed  them  in  any
way  urge  them  to  the  extreme  measure  of  dooming  to  death  the  faithful  witnesses  for  God.  In
thus  declaring  the  causes  of  the  calamity  to  Judah,  there  is  once  more  uplifted  the  moral  stan-
dard which  has  made  the  Bible  to  be  the  impulse  to  all  ethical  revivals,  the  rebuker  of  wrong
by  whomsoever  committed,  the  unswerving  asserter  of  the  rights  of  God  in  the  face  of  man'a
injury  to  man.

\J  D)  Vers.  14  and  15  seem  applicable  to  the  condition  of  prophets  and  priests  after  the  city

108


HOMILETW  OOMMEiYTAJiY:  LAMENTATIONS,  ohap.  IV.


had  been  taken.  They  were  panicstricken.  They  staggered  [as]  blind  men  in  the  streets  ;  an
effect  accounted  for  in  other  parts  of  Scripture  as  a  punishment  of  sin.  T/ieymake  haste  to  shed
innocent  blood  .  .  .  therefore  ire  grope  for  the  wall  like  the  blind,  yea,  we  grope  as  they  that  have
no  eyes  (Isa.  lix.  7  and  10).  Tht  ir  sin  found  them  out ;  its  marks  were  palpable  ;  they  wer#
defiled  with  blood  when  the  eomrnand  to  go  into  exile  arrested  them.  So  they  were  avoided  ;
[men]  could  not  touch  their  garments.  lu  their  blood-stained  aspect  they  were  met  with  the
shout  which  was  enji>ined  upon  leprous  persons.  That  it  was  the  leper  who  was  to  cry  unclean
is  of  little  consequence  where  "poetical  license"  is  exercised.  Away  unclean  one  [men],  cried
to  them,  away,  away ;  and  so  such  as  had,  in  spiritual  pride,  said,  Come  not  near  me,  I  am
holier  than  thou,  are  abhorred  by  the  people  they  contemned.  The  just  judgment  of  God  was
manifest,  so  that,  as  proscribed  offenders,  When  they  fled  away  and  staggered  blindly  aa  before
in  the  city,  they  found  that,  even  in  other  places  where  they  sought  ease  and  rest  for  the  soles  of
their  feet,  the  natives  would  not  allow  them  to  stay ;  [men]  said  among  the  nations,  They
shall  no  longer  sojourn  [among  us].  These  references,  in  all  probability,  are  made  to  real
occurrences.  ,

(D)  Ver.  16.  The  circumstances  of  those  fugitives  are  ascribable  to  Jehovah.  Wherever  they
went,  the  face  of  Jehovah  had  not  disappeared  ;  in  anger,  not  in  grace,  lifted  up  upon  them,  it
has  scattered  them,  and  will  no  more  regard  them.  This  fact  was  verified  on  their  treat-
ment by  the  peoples  to  whom  they  had  gone.  There  no  respect  was  paid,  no  favour  shown,  on
account  of  office,  occupation,  or  age.

(y)  Ver.  17  refers  to  the  persons  remaining  in  the  city,  who,  notwithstanding  that  God's
righteous  judgments  had  so  afflicted  prophets  and  priests,  yet  thought  longingly  of  human
defences  ;  Still  our  eyes  failed  [looking]  for  vain  help  This  is  explained  in  the  succeeding
clause.  We  eagerly  watched  for  a  nation  that  could  not  save,  trusting  that  Egypt,  that  broken
reed,  or  perhaps  some  other  equally  unsatisfactory  auxiliary,  would  appear  to  rescue  them.

()i)  Ver.  18.  Whatever  their  expectations  might  be,  they  were  under  constant  pressure  from
the  besieging  army.  They  hunted  our  steps ;  every  movement  was  closely  watched,  so  that
we  could  not  go  in  our  streets,  there,  liable  to  be  laid  hold  on  at  every  turn,  all  seemed  to  be
over.  The  final  cessation  of  their  independence  was  but  the  question  of  an  hour,  our  end  is
come,  our  national  life  extinguished.

(P)  Ver.  19.  Flight  from  the  city  was  of  no  benefit.  Fugitives  were  promptly  and  hotly
ft»llowed,  whether  they  betook  themselves  to  the  cavernous  retreats  of  the  everlasting  hills,  or  to
wj\ste  and  lonely  places.  Swifter  were  our  pursuers  than  the  eagles  of  heaven;  on  the
mountains  they  chased  us,  in  the  desert  they  laid  wait  for  us.  So  the  deportation  to  Babylon
IS  prepared  for,  and  proof  given  of  the  complete  break-up  of  the  organised  community  of  Israel.

("))  Ver.  20.  The  crowning  evidence  of  the  collapse  was  the  seizure  of  the  head  of  the  State,
who  is  considered  to  have  been,  not  King  Josiah  but  Zedekiah,  by  most  commentators.  The
breath  of  our  nostrils,  the  token  of  our  life,  is  the  monarch.  An  idea  like  this  was  prevalent
among  ancient  peoples,  and  a  noticeable  confirmation  of  it  is  quoted  from  Seneca,  De  dementia:
•'  He  (the  sovereign)  is  the  vital  breath  which  so  many  thousands  (of  citizens)  draw."  In  hia
life  the  nation  views  the  representative  of  its  life.  "God  made  David  king,  and  his  posterity,
for  this  end  that  the  life  of  the  people  might,  in  a  manner,  reside  in  him  ;"  and  so  long  as  he
was  among  them,  there  seemed  to  be  a  pledge  of  the  favour  of  God,  and  so  of  their  continued
existence  as  a  separated  nation.  Zedekiah  might  be  irresolute  and  weak,  but  it  is  not  personal
character,  it  is  office  which  is  regarded — the  anointed  of  Jehovah.  "We  must  observe  that
these  high  terms  properly  belong  to  Christ  only,  for  David  was  not  the  life  of  the  people  except
as  he  was  a  type  of  and  represented  His  person  .  .  .  and  hence  we  learn  that  the  Church  is
dead  when  separated  from  its  Head"  (Calvin).  The  representative  of  this  earthly  life  of  the
nation  had  disappeared,  was  taken,  "like  a  wild  animal  driven  into  a  pitfall,"  in  their  pits.
His  capture  by  the  hostile  forces  is  related  in  Jer.  lii.  7-11,  and  was  achieved  about  a  month
prior  to  the  sack  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  the  prelude  to  the  conviction  that  their  last  hopes  were
being  crushed.  Of  whom  we  said.  Under  his  shadow  we  will  live  among  the  nations.  As  a
captive  to  Babylon,  there  was  not  the  ghost  of  a  chance  to  rally  round  him,  and  no  sort  of  pro-
spect of  existing  as  a  semi-independent  people  in  any  foreign  land.     The  end  had  come.

(K^)  Ver.  21.  The  children  of  Edom  had  exulted  over  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and
urgently  called  for  its  completeness.  They  said.  Rase  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  fov/ndations
thereof  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7).  Now  they  are  addressed  in  bitter  irony,  Rejoice  and  be  glad,
daughter  of  Edom,  take  a  full  measure  of  your  malicious  joy,  but  with  all  that  your  triumphing
will  be  short ;  you  cannot  escape  pungent  woes,  however  extended  your  territory  may  be,  that
dwellest  in  the  land  of  Uz,  a  district  of  country  bordering  on  Edom's  land,  and  which  seems
to  have  been  overrun  by  Edomites.  To  thee  also  shall  the  cup  pass,  the  cup  of  the  wine  of  the
wrath  of  God  which  is  mingled  in  His  anger.

The  strong  feelings  of  indignation,  which  were  almost  hereditary  among  the  Israelites,
against  the  Edomites,  may  be  partly  accounted  for  from  the  idea  that  variance  with  one's  own
kith  and  kin  is  often  expressed  by  more  bitter  terms  than  variance  with  strangers,  and  partly
by  the  consciousness  which  Israel  had  of  its  spiritual  calling  which  the  "profane"  nature  of
Esau's  descendants  tended  to  render  inoperative.

(H)  Ver.  22.  No  hint  marks  the  transition  from  the  grim  scenes  of  calamity  in  which  the

109


eiiAP.  iV.  HOMtLKTIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


Jews  had  been  involved  to  this  glimpse  of  light  and  renewal.  The  abruptness  must  be  due  to
the  conviction  that,  as  Israel  is  the  people  with  whom  Jehovah  has  entered  into  covenant,  all
cannot  be  over  with  them,  however  they  are  pressed  down  by  adversity.  If  they  forsake  Him,
they  will  be  chastised  till  they  acknowledge  and  repent  of  their  apostasy.  Then  He  will  have
pity  for  His  name's  sake.  Punishment  will  come  to  a  termination  ;  Ended  is  thine  iniquity,
daughter  of  Zion.  The  consequences  following  an  evil  procedure  would,  as  it  were,  drain  to
the  dregs  the  cup  of  wrath  and  grace  would  begin  to  appear.  "A  Messianic  hope  "  is  created,
He  will  no  more  carry  thee  into  captivity,  by  the  Chaldeans,  at  any  rate.  This  promise  is
dependent  for  its  fulfilment  upon  the  righteous  state  of  Israel.  Avoiding  the  sins  which  had
brought  the  present  term  of  punishment,  they  would  not  be  subjected  to  such  punishment
again.  The  exiles  who  returned  from  Babylon  were  greatly  purified  and  elevated  by  the  trials
which  had  been  passed  through,  and  if  there  had  been  due  progress  in  spiritual  things,  as  the
prophet  Malachi  declares  there  was  n(H,  no  further  casting  out  of  the  land  of  promise  would
have  taken  place.  But  tliey  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory.  Their  house  is  left  unto  them  desolate^
and  they  are  scattered  over  the  earth  till  they  turn  again  to  the  Lord.  The  allotment  to  Edom
is  a  contrast ;  He  visits  thine  iniquities,  daughter  of  Edom  ;  He  discovers  thy  sins.  He  sees
they  are  persisted  in,  and  shame  and  woe  follow  the  exposure.  *'  God  covers  sin  when  He
forgives  it  (Ps.  xxxii.  1-5).  He  discovers  or  reveals  it  when  He  punishes  it "  (Job  xx.  27).
The  safety  of  God's  people  connotes  the  destruction  of  His  enemies  (Rev.  xxix.  and  xx.).


EOMILETICS.

Moral  Degradation.

(Verses  1,  2.)

The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  an  event  so  unexpected,  so  unparalleled,  so
astounding,  that  it  seemed  as  if  it  could  not  be  sufficiently  lamented.  The  grief  of
the  prophet  is  not  yet  exhausted.  Once  more  he  looks  upon  the  fated  city  as  it
gradually  but  inevitably  collapses  in  the  tightening  grasp  of  the  relentless  besiegers,
and  as  he  sees  the  miseries  of  his  countrymen  in  their  direful  extremity,  he  renews
his  doleful  elegy.  He  reiterates  the  doctrine  that  the  sufferings  of  Judah  are  the
just  punishment  of  her  sins,  and  not  until  the  chastisement  has  had  its  proper
effect  is  there  any  hope  of  her  restoration.  These  verses  describe  the  moral
degradation  and  wretchedness  of  the  sufferers,  and  suggest  the  following  re-
flections.

I.  That  moral  degradation  is  the  more  evident  when  compared  with  a
former  condition  of  superior  excellence.  The  people  of  God  are  called  "the
precious  sons  of  Zion,'*  and  their  moral  excellence  is  compared  to  "the  most  fine
gold,"  and  to  the  hallowed  "  stones  of  the  sanctuary."  Judah  was  a  chosen  and
consecrated  nation,  and  enjoyed  unexampled  privileges.  She  was  raised  not  only
into  temporal  affluence  and  splendour,  but  was  intended  to  represent  the  lofty
type  of  a  moral  and  spiritual  commonwealth.  She  was  the  custodian  and  teacher
of  spiritual  blessings  that  were  to  enrich  the  world.  She  was  the  medium  through
which  Jehovah  sought  to  express  His  gracious  purpose  of  salvation  to  the  whole
human  race.  No  nation  had  been  so  exalted  and  so  honoured.  Wliile  she
remained  faithful  to  her  calling,  Judah  was  supreme  and  invulnerable  among  the
nations.  She  shone  with  the  lustre  of  the  most  fine  gold,  and  her  position  was  as
secure  as  that  of  an  impres^nable  fortress.  But  when  she  sinned  she  fell,  and
her  fall  was  the  more  notable  when  contrasted  with  her  former  greatness  and
grandeur.

II.  That  moral  degradation  is  a  loss  of  character  and  stability.  The  moral
reputation  of  Judah  was  tarnished — the  gold  was  dimmed,  the  most  fine  gold
changed.  Three  kinds  of  gold  are  mentioned  in  these  ver^-es — gold,  most  fine
gold,  and  fine  (or  solid)  gold.  The  precious  metal  not  only  lost  its  brilliancy  but
also  its  massiveness  :  it  became  thin  and  hollow.  The  religious  character  of  God's
people,  which  was  compact  and  strong  as  the  solid  building  of  the  sanctuary,  is
shattered,  and  lies  in  a  heap  of  ruins,  like  the  stones  of  the  demolished  Temple

no


BOM  I  LET  TC  COMMl.NTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  TV,


that  now  block  the  streets  of  Jerusalem.  Its  moral  value  is  destroyed.  It  ia
now  of  no  more  worth  than  a  piece  of  brittle  earthenware,  which  the  swift  hands
of  the  potter  can  easily  put  together  and  as  easily  break.  Sin  is  a  great  dis-
integrator of  character.  The  external  form  may  appear  uncliaiigcd  long  after
decay  has  set  in ;  but  the  mischief  is  slowly  and  surely  working,  and  the  final
collapse  is  inevitable.  Nothing  is  safe  where  righteousness  is  ignored,  whether
in  individuals  or  in  nations.

III.  That  moral  degradation  is  the  occasion  of  painful  lamentation.  *'  How
is  the  gold  become  dim  !  How  is  the  most  hne  gold  changed  !  How  are  they
esteemed  as  earthen  pitchers"  (vers.  1,  2).  Even  the  most  callous  are  sometimes
moved  to  pity  as  they  witness  the  downfall  of  excellence  which  they  often  envied
and  could  not  reach.  Misfortune  softens  the  hard-hearted.  But  who  can  sound
the  depths  of  anguish  of  the  soul  that  realises  the  greatness  of  the  disaster  occa-
sioned by  the  fall  of  morality  and  religion  !  It  is  the  loss  of  personal  righteous-
ness, happiness,  and  peace ;  the  loss  of  national  prestige ;  the  loss  of  all  the
safeguards  of  social  life ;  the  loss  of  untold  blessing  to  the  world ;  and,  greatest
of  all,  the  loss  of  the  favour  and  smile  of  God  !  In  the  midst  of  moral  wreckage
and  ruin,  it  is  a  hopeful  sign  when  even  one  is  left  who  sincerely  mourns  and
laments  the  catastrophe.  The  tears  of  such  an  one  shine  with  the  lustre  of  the
goodness  whose  loss  he  deplores.

Lessons. — 1.  Religion  only  can  make  a  nation  truly  illustrious.  2.  When
religion  declines^  the  glory  of  the  nation  is  obscured.  3.  The  loss  of  religion  should
he  not  only  lamented^  but  should  lead  to  diligent  search  after  its  recovery.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  1,  2.  Moral  character:  I.  Is
the  basis  of  individual  worth.  IL  Gives
reputation  and  stability  to  individual
life.    III.  Needs  to  be  carefully  guarded.

Illustrations.  —  Lack  of  moral
sense.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  assert
that  Napoleon  I.,  strangely  called  the
Great,  had  no  moral  sense.  Carlyle
tells  the  story  of  a  German  emperor
who,  when  corrected  for  a  mistake  he
made  in  Latin,  replied,  "I  am  King
of  the  Romans,  and  above  grammar."
Napoleon's  arrog'uice  was  infinitely
greater.  He  thought  himself  above
morality,  and  really  seems  to  have  be-
lieved that  he  had  a  perfect  right  to
commit  any  crime,  political  or  personal,
that  would  advance  his  interests  by  an
iota ;  and  indeed  he  did  commit  so  many
it  is  almost  impossible  to  recount  them.

Moral  degradation  affects  work.
The  corrupted  Papacy  of  the  fifteenth
century  so  injuriously  afiected  the  art
world,  that  from  that  time  there  was  a
serious  decline  in  all  the  arts  of  paint-
ing, sculpture,  and  architecture.  The
degradation  of  religion  first  touched
public  morality,  and  tU^U  spread  to  all


the  arts.  Character  tells  on  skill.
Where  the  heart  declines,  the  hand
will  soon  disclose  it.  The  "work  of
our  hands  "  is  only  established  as  "the
beauty  of  the  Lord  is  upon  us." — Ruskin.

Degeneration.  In  the  Central  Park
Museum,  at  New  York,  there  is  the
skeleton  of  a  huge  bird,  now  extinct.
It  is  14  feet  in  height ;  and  by  its  side
is  a  stuffed  specimen  of  another  bird
not  more  than  14  inches.  The  latter
is  the  nearest  living  representative  of
the  former,  which  once  abounded  in
New  Zealand.

Degeneration  of  character.  Rarely
does  a  successful  merchant  who  comes
to  New  Orleans  as  a  young  man  from
the  cooler  latitudes  leave  a  son  who
inherits  the  father's  energy.  One  gene-
ration is  enough  to  change  character.
A  city  that  lies  below  the  level  of  the
river  which  washes  its  wharves,  and
only  a  few  feet  above  the  poisonous
swamps  surrounding  it,  and  which  has
six  sweltering  summer  months,  must
always  continue  to  draw  upon  the
north  for  new  men  to  carry  on  its
larger  business  activities. — Smalley.

TMioral  degradation  of  drink.     It  i^

lU


CHAP.  TV.


EOMILETW  COM  M  EXT  A  R  Y    LAMENT  A  TI0N8,


in  the  spiritual  realm  that  the  ravages
of  strong  drink  are  most  terrible.  Many
a  mother  observes,  with  a  heart  that
grows  heavier  day  by  day,  the  signs  of
moral  decay  in  tiie  character  of  her  son.
It  is  not  the  flushed  face  and  heavy
eyes  that  trouble  her  the  most ;  it  is
the  evidence  that  his  mind  is  becoming
duller  and  fouler,  his  sensibilities  less
acute,  his  sense  of  honour  less  com-
manding. She  discovers  that  his  loyalty
to  truth  is  somewhat  impaired,  tliat  he
deceives  her  frequently  without  com-
punction. Coupled  with  this  loss  of
truthfulness  is  the  weakening  of  the
will,  which  always  accompatiies  chronic
alcoholism.  Then  comes  the  loss  of  self-
respect,  the  lowering  of  ambition,  and
the  fading  out  of  hope.  It  is  a  mourn-
ful spectacle — that  of  the  brave,  the
ingenuous,  high-spirited  man  sinking
steadily  down  to  the  degradation  of
inebriety ;  but  how  many  such  spec-
tacles are  visible  all  over  the  land  !

A  good  character  a  blessing.    When
Peter  Cooper,  the  New  York  Philan-


thropist, held  a  reception  at  the  "Women's
Art  School  shortly  before  his  death,  a
most  impressive  testimony  was  given  of
the  high  regard  in  which  his  character
was  held.  It  was  interesting  to  note
the  various  manners  of  the  crowd  who
approached  him.  "Mr.  Cooper,  we
must  put  our  little  boy's  hand  in
yours,"  said  a  young  couple,  with  a
child  five  or  six  years  old  at  their  side.
Then  a  group  of  boys  would  come  along
and  stand  curiously  regarding  him  from
a  short  distance.  "  That's  Mr.  Cooper,"
they  whispered  in  an  undertone.  And
so  the  evening  wore  away,  and  ten
thousand  people  had  come  and  gone
through  the  great  bright  halls  and
schoolrooms,  and  Mr.  Cooper's  presence
had  put  a  good  thought  or  feeling  into
everybody's  heart.  I  can  see  him  now,
with  his  smiling  face  and  interested,
look,  and  his  soft  white  hair  waving
over  his  shoulders,  amid  flowers,  lights,
and  cheerful  music,  whilst  his  presence
brooded  like  a  benediction  over  the
swaying  and  surging  crowd.


HOMILETICS.

The  Extremity  of  Sufferino.

(Verses  3-10.)

I.  Deadens  natural  affection  (vers.  3,  4).    Maternal  instincts  are  demoralised

in  the  straitness  of  the  siege.  Little  children  are  left  to  perish,  without  any
effort  to  relieve  their  wants  or  soothe  their  sufferings.  In  vain  they  ask  for
bread  ;  no  attempt  is  made  to  allay  their  hunger  and  thirst.  Absorbed  in  their
own  intolerable  miseries,  the  wretched  mothers  sink  below  the  instincts  of  the
wild  beasts,  for  even  the  jackals  suckle  their  young.  They  are  become  like  the
cruel  crocodile,  which,  after  laying  its  eggs  in  the  sand,  abandons  them  without
further  care.  The  infants  pine  to  death,  unheeded  and  unmourned.  Excessive
suffering  denaturalises  man  and  woman.

II.  Drags  down  all  classes  to  one  level  (ver.  5).  The  wealthy  are  now  even
as  the  poor.  They  who  fared  sumptuously,  and  whose  tastes  were  pampered  with
the  most  delicate  viands,  are  now  sullenly  starving  to  death  with  the  crowd.
They  who  were  clothed  in  scarlet,  and  accustomed  to  every  refinement  from  their
infancy,  are  now  content  to  stretch  themselves  on  the  dirt-heaps  of  the  city,  and
eager  to  devour  any  offal  they  may  pick  up  amid  the  general  scramble  for  food.
All  men  find  a  universal  communism  in  suffering.  Human  extremity  knows  no
distinction  in  ranks  and  titles.     Hunger  drags  every  one  to  the  same  level.

III.  Prefers  a  swift  to  a  lingering  punishment  (ver.  6).     The  destruction  of
Sodom,  which   filled    a   large   space  in  the  Jewish  mind  as  an  example  of  the
terrible  judgment  of  Heaven  on  extreme  iniquity,  was  regarded   as  light  com
pared  with  the  suffering's  of  Jerusalem.    The  punishment  of  Sodom  was  sudden,  and
came  direct  from  God  ;    but  the  punishment  of  Judah  was  by  the  hands  of  the

\n


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  nr.


Chaldeans,  and  was  slow  and  lingpring.  David  preferred  to  be  dealt  with
directly  from  God,  and  chose  pestilence  rather  than  injuries  inflicted  by  human
hands  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14).  Bub  the  iniquity  of  Judah  was  greater  than  the  sin  of
Sodom,  and  the  punishment  was  therefore  more  severe.  There  is  a  point  in
suffering  when  we  yearn  for  a  speedy  release;  when  death  is  welcome.

IV.  Reduces  the  healthiest  from  beauty  to  hideousness  (vers.  7,  8).  The
Nazarites,  because  of  their  temperance,  were  remarkable  for  health  and  personal
beauty,  and  were  held  in  veneration  because  of  their  religious  devotion  (comp.
Num.  vi.).  Their  complexion  was  ruddy  as  coral,  and  the  beauty  of  their  physical
form  was  as  exact  and  faultless  as  is  the  cutting  of  a  sapphire.  But  the  most
distinguished  of  the  population,  whether  Nazarites  or  of  the  aristocracy,  are
involved  in  the  general  calamity,  and  suHer  with  the  rest.  Their  rosebud  com-
plexion is  turned  to  blackness,  their  frame  is  shrunk  and  distorted,  and  their  skin
is  shrivelled  and  dry.  Famine  plays  havoc  with  beauty,  and  brings  the  strongest
down  to  helplessness.

V.  Recoils  not  from  the  most  horrible  means  of  appeasing  the  irresistible
pangs  of  hunger  (vers.  9,  10).  Such  were  the  sufferings  of  the  famished,  that  they
who  were  slain  with  the  sword  were  deemed  happier  t  lan  those  who  were  pierced
with  the  dart  of  unappeased  hunger.  So  extreme  was  the  famine,  that  cannibalism
became  common,  and  women  who  were  known  as  tender-hearted  mothers  actually
boiled  and  ate  their  own  children  (comp.  2  Kings  vi.  28,  29  ;  Lev.  xxvi.  29 ;
Deut.  xxviii.  56,  57  ;  Josephus's  "  Wars,"  cap.  x.  9).  It  is  a  fearful  experience
when  the  animal  in  human  nature  gains  the  mastery  over  every  other  instinct.

Lessons. — 1.  Extremity  makes  strange  revelations  of  human  nature.  2.  The
restraints  of  civilisation  are  very  superficial.  3.  Sin  acquaints  the  soul  with  the
lowest  depths  of  degradation.

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.   3-10.    The  rigour    of   war.  souls  of  beasts,  mortal  and  corruptible

I.  Demoralises  maternal  affection  (ver.  with  their  bodies  ? — Hooker,
1).    IL  Involves  innocent  children  in  There  have  been  those —

suffering    (ver.    2).     IIL    Reduces    all  "  who,  in  the  dark  dissolving  human  heart,
classes  to  poverty  and  distress  (vers.  5,  And  hallowed  secrets  of  this  microcosm,

7,8).      IV.    Prolongs  the   misery  of  its  Dabbling,  with  shameless  jest,  a  shameful

victims  (ver.  6).     V.   Is  attended  with  ^     band,  .  .    „

.1  1  ^l      £  j:       ■       /  niA\  Encarnalised  their  spirits,

the  worst  results  of  lamine  (vers.  9,  10).  *^

Ver.  6.  Graduated  punishment.    I.         Importance   of  food.     Temperature

Is   proportioned  to   the   character  and  has  less  influence  in  inciting  the  migra-

degree  of  the  sin  committed.     II.  Its  tion  of  birds  tlian  failure  of  food;  for  a

severity  implies  the    enormity  of    the  few  even  of  the  regular  migrants  will

offence.     III.  Cannot  be  charged  with  linger  throughout  the  winter  at  sheltered

injustice.  localities,  where  food  remains  accessible,

Vers.  7-10.  The  horrors  of  famine,  safely  daring  the  severest  cold.    Hunger

I.  Changes  strength  into  feebleness  and  means    loss    of    heat   and    life,   and   it

beauty  into  deformity  (vers.  7,  8).     II.  is   this   the   birds    primarily  flee.     No

Is  more  cruel  than  the  sword  (ver.  9).  attraction   to    Christians    like   spiritual

IIL   Debases  the  most  refined  into  can-  footl.      "Tie  them  up  by  the  teeth,"  as

nibals  (v.  10).  Mr.  Spurgeon  says.

Necessity  a  teacher.      "Life  and

Illustrations. — Degradation.    Is  it  the  necessities  of  life  are  the  best  philo-

not  wonderful  that  base  desires  should  sophers,  if  we  will  only  listen  honestly

80  extinguish  in  men  the  sense  of  their  to  what  they  say  to  us ;  and  dislike  the

own  excellency,  as  to  make  them  willing  lesson  as  we  may,  it  is  cowardice  which

that  their  souls  should  be  like  to  the  refuses  to  bear  it." — Fronds.

113  a


fJHAP.  IV.  ffOMTlETia  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS.

—  The  wife  of  a  certain  chieftain  who  Many  must  have  died  had  not  a  large

had  fallen  upon  idle  habits,  one  day  sliip  filled  with  produce  been  wrecked

lifted  the  dish-cover  at  dinner,  and  re-  off  Coffin    Island.      The  news  spread

vealed  a  pair  of  spurs ;  a  sign  that  he  like  wildfire.     The  population   turned

must  ride  and  hunt  for  his  next  meal.  out,  and  from  the  cargo  of  a  shipwrecked

Help  in  extremity.    In  the  Magdalen  vessel  drew  a  new  lease  of  life.

Islands,  off  the  Newfoundland  coast,  the  Man's   extremity    is    God's   oppor-

means  of  livelihood  is  almost  entirely  tunity.     It  is  a  current  saying,  "  That

found  in  the  fisheries,  and  if  these  fail,  the  darkest  cloud  precedes  the  dawn,"

life    becomes   a   burden.      In    1883  a  and  that  "  Every  dark  cloud  has  a  silver

famine  occurred  which  came  near   to  lining."     Early  risers  tell  us  that  the

decimating  the  population.     The  fish-  lowest    temperature   immediately   pre-

eries  failed  ;    the  ship  which  was  ex-  cedes  the  sun-rising.    These  things  serve

pected    to   bring    the   winter's   supply  to  illustrate  God's  kingdom  of  grace,

before  the  ice  formed  foundered  in  a  "Before  honour  is  humility."     "Thou

storm.     By  the  time  spring  came,  star-  has  lifted  me  up  and  cast  me  down."

vation  stared  the  people  in  the  face.  "How  long,  0  Lord,  how  long f


HOMILETICS.

The  Destruction  of  Zion.

(Verses  11,  12.)

I.  Was  thorough  and  complete.  "The  Lord  kindled  a  fire  in  Zion,  and  it
devoured  the  foundations  thereof"  (ver.  11).  The  holy  city,  the  pride  of  the
Jews  and  the  envy  of  their  enemies,  was  utterly  overthrown.  Not  only  were  its
walls,  towers,  palaces,  and  Temple  demolished,  but  its  very  foundations  were  dug
up  and  scattered  :  one  stone  was  not  left  upon  another.  It  was  degraded  and
spurned  by  the  resolute  destroyers  as  a  heap  of  useless  rubbish.  It  was  im-
possible for  the  rage  of  man  to  make  a  more  complete  ruin.  In  the  intention  of
the  irate  Chaldeans  it  was  destroyed  for  ever.  And  yet  the  Divine  Guardian  of
the  holy  city  allowed  all  this  !

II.  Was  undeniable  evidence  of  the  reality  of  the  Divine  anger.  "  The
Lord  hath  accomplished  His  fury  :  He  hath  poured  out  His  fierce  anger"  (ver.  11).
There  was  more  of  the  righteous  anger  of  Jehovah  against  the  obstinate  sin  of  His
people  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  than  there  were  skill  and  ferocity  in  the
Chaldean  army.  The  enemy  would  have  been  powerless  to  pierce  the  city  bul-
warks if  the  people  had  remained  true  to  Jehovah,  and  sheltered  themselves  in
humble  trust  beneath  His  all-powerful  defence.  But  the  wrath  of  God  was
provoked  beyond  the  limit  of  further  endurance,  and  the  Chaldeans  were  used  as
the  instruments  of  His  vengeance.  Surely  the  eyes  of  the  sufifering  people  were
at  last  opened  to  see  in  the  utter  destruction  of  their  beloved  city  that  Jehovah
was  indeed  angry  with  them.

IIL  Was  a  result  deemed  incredihle  hy  the  nations.  "The  kings  of  the
earth,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  would  not  have  believed  that  the
adversary  should  have  entered  into  the  gates  of  Jerusalem"  (ver.  12).  Jerusalem
was  so  strongly  fortified,  not  only  by  massive  walls  and  bulwarks,  but  by  the
strength  and  heroism  of  its  inhabitants,  that  it  was  deemed  impregnable  to  all
warlike  forces  of  that  day.  Moreover,  it  was  regarded  as  the  dwelling-place  of
the  Great  King,  who  had  hitherto  baffled  all  attempts  to  capture  it.  The  recent
defeat  of  Sennacherib,  one  of  the  greatest  warriors  of  the  age,  was  fresh  in  the
memory  of  the  people.  The  belief  gained  general  currency  that  the  city  could
not  be  taken.  It  was  invested  for  a  year  and  a  half  by  the  Chaldean  forces,
furnislied  with  the  most  powerfi^(  ^ngine8  of  ^ssaujt.  b§f9re  it  Wfts  fictuall]^

lU      '  ~    f    ••    •■  8


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  !▼.


captured.  Its  fall  was  the  amazement  of  the  world.  What  was  believed
impossible  had  come  to  pass.  Others  saw,  what  the  Jews  were  slow  to  acknow-
ledge, tliat  their  God  had  deserted  them  and  given  them  up  to  the  destroyer.

Lessons. — 1.  The  holiest  place  may  he  j)olluted  by  sin.  2.  Persistent  sin
p'ovokes  Divine  vengeance.  3.  Divine  wrath  is  not  poured  out  till  every  oppor-
tunity is  given  for  repentance.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,


Ver.  11.  The  Divine  anger.  1.  Will
accomplish  all  it  threatens.  2.  Is  ter-
rible in  its  active  manifestation.  3.
May  well  be  dreaded  by  the  impenitent.

Ver.  12.  A  world's  wonder.  1.
That  a  divinely  guarded  city  should
fall.  2.  That  it  should  fall  by  the
hands  of  the  godless.  3.  That  some
great  sin  must  have  been  committed  to
make  such  a  catastrophe  possible.

Illustrations. — Terrible  destruc-
tion. One  of  the  officers  at  Fredericks-
burg says  : — "  Howard,  who  was  with
me,  says  I  exclaimed,  *  Oh,  great  God,
see  how  our  men,  our  poor  fellows,  are
falling  I '  I  remember  that  tlie  whole
plain  was  covered  with  men  prostrate
and  falling.  I  had  never  before  seen
fighting  like  that — nothing  approaching
it  in  terrible  uproar  and  destruction.
As  they  charged,  the  artillery  fire  would
break  up  their  formation,  and  they
would  get  mixed ;  then  they  would
close  up,  go  forward,  receive  the  wither-
ing infantry  fire,  and  those  who  were
able  would  run  to  their  houses  and  do
all  they  could  ;  then  the  next  brigade
coming  up  in  succession  would  do  their
duty,  and  melt.  It  was  like  the  snow
coming  down  and  melting  on  warm
ground."

Ooncentration  of  power  destroys.


In  the  eighteenth  century  an  immense
burning-glass  was  constructed  in  France,
in  which  all  the  heat  falling  on  a  great
lens  was  then  concentrated  on  a  smaller
one,  till  at  the  focus  such  was  the  heat
that  iron,  gold,  and  other  metals  ran
like  melted  butter.  Another  one,  made
in  England  by  Parker,  fused  the  most
refractory  substances,  and  diamonds
were  by  it  reduced  to  vapour.

The  Divine  sovereignty.  *'God  is
free  because  no  causes  external  to  Him-
self have  power  over  Him ;  and  as
good  men  are  most  free  when  most  a
law  to  themselves,  so  it  is  no  infringe-
ment on  God's  freedom  to  say  that  He
must  have  acted  as  He  acted  ;  but  rather
He  is  absolutely  free  because  absolutely
a  law  Himself  to  Himself.'* — Fronde.

The  curse  of  sin.  It  is  the  Trojan
horse ;  it  hath  sword  and  famine  and
pestilence  in  the  belly  of  it.  Sin  is  a
coal  that  not  only  blacks,  but  burns.
Sin  creates  all  our  troubles ;  it  puts
gravel  in  our  bread,  wormwood  in  our
cup.  Sin  rots  the  name,  consumes  the
estates,  buries  relations.  Sin  shoots
the  flying  roll  of  God's  curses  into  a
family  and  kingdom  (Zech.  v.  4).  It
is  reported  of  Phocas,  having  built  a
wall  of  mighty  strength  about  his  city,
there  was  a  voice  heard,  "  Sin  is  in  the
city,  and  that  will  throw  down  the  wall."


HOMILETICS.

Unfaithful  Keligious  Leaders,

(Verses  13-16.)

I.  Ignore  the  sacred  duties  of  their  high  ofl5.ce.  "  The  sins  of  her  prophets
and  the  iniquities  of  her  piiests"  (ver.  13).  The  leaders,  whose  first  duty  it  was
to  explain  and  enforce  the  Word  of  God,  were  the  prime  movers  in  the  attempt  to
silence  that  Word.  Their  utter  dereliction  of  duty,  and  the  bitter  rancour  with
which  they '^ere  actuated,  were  evident  in  tl^eir  repeated  efforts  to  put  Jeremiah  to

115


CTTAP.  TV.  HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMEXTATIONS.

death,  the  only  man  who  had  the  courage  to  lift  np  his  voice  for  Jehovah  amid
the  general  defection.  Had  they  rallied  round  the  faithful  prophet  and  round  their
king,  who  was  more  weak  than  vicious,  they  might  have  saved  the  city  and  the
nation  from  ruin.  When  the  servants  of  the  Lord  and  the  religious  guides  of  the
people  are  false  to  their  sacred  vows,  the  nation  is  grievously  misled,  and  disaster
will  follow.

II.  Become  intoxicated  with  slaughter.  "That  have  shed  the  hlood  of  the
just  in  the  midst  of  her ;  they  have  wandered  (reeled)  as  blind  men  in  the  streets ;
they  have  polluted  themselves  with  blood  "  (ver.  13,  14).  They  have  lost  the  art
of  persuasion,  even  to  do  wrong,  and,  like  all  baffled  tyrants,  adopt  the  bloody
policy  of  the  sword.  The  people  are  coerced  into  rebellion  against  God  and  their
best  interests  by  brute  force.  Having  once  tasted  blood,  they  revel  in  it,  and  reel
through  the  city  blinded  by  their  insatiable  lust  of  slaughter.  They  who  ought
to  be  holy,  as  God's  ministers  consecrated  to  His  service,  are  defiled  with  blood,
and  that  the  blood  not  of  enemies,  but  of  their  own  countrymen.  There  is  no
fury  so  maddening  and  ungovernable  as  the  thirst  for  blood.

III.  Are  shunned  and  abhorred  by  God  and  man  (vers.  15,  16).  They  are
denounced  by  the  people  they  had  oppressed,  and  hounded  out  of  the  city  only  to
find  themselves  abhorred  by  the  heathen  to  whom  they  fled  for  shelter.  They
were  hated  at  home  and  abroad.  "The  anger  of  the  Lord  divided  them,"  scat-
tered them,  and  wherever  they  wandered,  the  people  despised  and  shunned  them.
They  were  outcasts  of  God  and  men.  They  had  sown  to  the  wind,  and  they
reaped  the  whirlwind.  Such  is  the  fate  of  the  faithless  and  cruel  There  is  no
punishment  too  severe  for  unfaithful  ministers  of  God's  Word.

Lessons. — 1.  False  teachers  are  the  curse  of  any  community,  2.  They  are
utterly  recMess  both  as  to  what  they  say  and  do,  3.  They  involve  the  people  in
mtich  suffering,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.    13-16.    False    ministers    of  an  unknown  Spirit,  and  preach  a  state

God.      1.  Are  the  authors  of  the  vilest  of  holiness  and  fellowship  with  Christ,

sins  (ver.  13).     2.  Are  capable  of  the  and  a  glory  and  a  blessedness  which  are

most  revolting  cruelty  in  accomplishing  wholly  unknown  to  them,  and  perhaps

their  wicked  ends  (vers.   13,   14).     3.  will  remain  unknown  through  all  eter-

Are  the  execration  of  the  people  they  nity.     He  must  indeed  be  a  heartless

oppress  (ver.  15).     4.  Are  divinely  pun-  preacher  who  has  not  himself   in  his

ished  (ver.  16).  own  heart  the  Christ  and  the  grace  that

Vers.    15,    16.     The  tactics  of   the  he  declares.     Alas !  that  all  scholars  in

wicked.       1.    Recoil  upon  themselves.  our  universities  might  well  ponder  this.
2.   Render  them  the  abhorrence  of  all    '  — Baxter.

classes.     3.  Are  defeated  and  punished         Unbelief    and     ministerial     ineffi-

by  the  vengeance  of  Heaven.  ciency.      There  are  dangerous  signs  at

the  present  day  of  a  relaxation  of  moral

Illustrations.  —  Unqualified  tone  in  the  literature  of  free-thinking,

ministers.     It  is  the  great  wide-spread  There   is  a   tendency    to    palliate    the

evil  of  the  Church  that  it  lias  unrenewed  offences   of   vicious   characters   and   to

and    inexperienced    pastors  ;    that    so  treat  every  sin  as  atoned  for  by  intel-

many  become  preachers  before  they  be-  lectual  brilliancy.     But  it  would  be  in

come  Christians,  and  are  consecrated  as  the  highest  degree  unjust  to  throw  the

priests  at  the  altar  of  God  before  they  whole   blame   of  his  error  upon  every

are  made  holy  to  Christ  by  the  offering  individual  who  may  happen  to  be  the

of   the  heart  to  Him  ;  and   thus  they  victim  of  unbelief.     We  are  all  bound

worsliip  fill  unknown  God  and  proclaim  up    together  in   this   matter;  and    the

an  unknown  Christ,  and  prav  through  vsius,    the    unfaithfulness,   the    lack  ol

m


BOM  I  LET IC  C  MMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  IV.


moral  energy  among  Christians  them-
eelves  contribute,  to  a  great  extent,  to
weaken  the  testimony  to  our  faith.
The  ministers  of  God's  Word  must  bear
their  shaie  in  this  responsibility.  So
far  as  they  fail  to  exhibit  the  moral
truth  and  spiritual  force  of  that  Word,
so  far  as  they  harden  it,  or  obscure  it,
or  misrepresent  it,  they  contribute  to
weaken  its  appeal  to  the  hearts  and  con-
sciences of  their  fellows,  and  the  result
is  seen  in  many  an  indirect  and  distant
injury  to  faith.  It  is  the  mission  of
the  Church  and  its. ministers  to  carry
on  the  work  of  the  Apostles  by  bearing
witness  to  certain  truths  and  revela-
tions ;  and  if  that  witness  be  in  any
instance  unworthily  delivered,  the  force
with  which  the  truth  appeals  to  the
soul  of  man  is  proportionately  weakened.
Wace :  Bampton  Lectures.

Priestcraft.  The  whole  system  is
one  of  Church  instead  of  Christ ;  priest
instead  of  Gospel ;  concealment  of  truth
instead  of  manifestation  of  truth  ;  igno-
rant superstition  instead  of  enlightened
faith  ;  bondage  where  we  are  promised
liberty — all  tending  to  load  us  with
whatever  is  odious  in  the  worst  meaning
of  priestcraft,  instead  of  the  free,  affec-


tionate, enlarging,  elevating,  and  cheer-
ful liberty  of  the  children  of  God.
Bishop  M''Ilwaine.

Penalty  of  murder.  Thales  Milesius,
one  of  the  wise  men  of  Greece,  being
asked  what  was  the  most  difficult  thing  in
life,  answered,  "Fora  tyrant  tolive  to  old
age,"  The  application  may  be  extended
to  the  cruel,  bloodthirsty, and  murderers.

The  triumph  of  the  wicked.  The
triumph  of  the  wicked  is  always  short.
When  they  feel  themselves  secure  from
evil  and  begin  to  boast  of  their  triumph,
then  judgment  overwhelms  them.  So
it  was  with  Belshazzar,  Herod,  and  the
fool  of  the  Gospel.  How  soon  AbeFs
blood  called  for  vengeance  of  Cain !
W^e  cannot  sin  so  quickly  but  God  seeth
us  as  quickly.  How  many  have  been
stricken  while  the  oath  had  been  in
their  mouths,  as  Jeroboam  was  stricken
while  he  spoke,  that  they  might  see  they
were  stricken.  Though  a  man  sin  often,
and  steal  his  sins  as  it  were  without
punishment,  yet  at  last  he  is  taken  nap-
ping, even  while  the  wickedness  is  in  his
hand,  and  his  day  is  set  when  he  shall
pay  for  all,  whether  it  be  twelve  months
or  twelve  years.  "When  it  cometh,  it
will  be  soon,"


HOMILETIGS,

The  Last  Hours  of  a  Doomed  People.

(Verses  17-20.)

I.  Every  hope  of  rescue  is  disappointed.  "Our  eyes  failed  for  our  vain
help  :  we  have  watched  for  a  nation  that  could  not  save  us  "  (ver.  17).  Israel
had  been  prone  to  rely  on  the  help  of  Egypt,  and  was  often  bitterly  deceived.  In
this  instance  the  deluded  inhabitants  looked  eagerly,  till  their  eyes  were  weary,  for
the  coming  of  a  relief  force  from  Egypt,  but  in  vain.  Tliat  treacherous  kingdom,
which  had  failed  them  so  often  before,  again  failed  them  in  their  extremity.
Wliatever  aid  they  might  expect  from  the  neighbouring  kingdoms  with  which
Judah  had  been  in  friendly  alliance,  it  did  not  come.  When  the  soul  is  alienated
from  God,  every  reliable  source  of  help  is  cut  off.  When  God  will  not  help  us,
man  cannot.

II.  Every  avenue  of  escape  is  closely  guarded.  "  They  hunt  our  steps,  that
we  cannot  go  in  our  streets.  Our  persecutors  are  swifter  than  the  eagles  ;  they
pursued  us,  tliey  laid  wait  for  us"  (vers.  18,  19).  The  enemy  was  drawing  his
lilies  more  tirmly  round  the  city  ;  the  investment  was  complete,  and  slowly  but
surely  he  was  gaining  the  mastery  over  the  city.  Impatient  with  the  little  pro-
gress made  and  enraged  with  the  stubborn  resistance  of  the  l)esieged,  the  Chaldeans
Ciisged  no  opportunity  to  4o  damage.     Every  stray  wanderer  in  the  streets  was  a


CHAP.  IV.  HOMTIETTC  COMMENTARY'.  LAMENTATIONS,


mark  for  their  arrows,  and  those  who  attempted  to  escape  from  the  festering  city
were  at  once  seized.

III.  There  is  a  deepening  conviction  that  the  end  is  near.  "  Our  end  is
near;  our  days  are  fiiltiiled,  for  our  end  is  come"  (ver.  18).  The  sight  of  the
towers  erected  by  the  besiegers  advancing  in  height  filled  the  citizens  with  terror.
Weakened  with  famine  and  disease,  distracted  with  divisions  among  themselves,
and  alarmed  with  the  steady  encroachments  of  the  enemy,  they  felt  that  further
resistance  was  useless  ;  they  waited  in  sullen  helplessness  for  the  end.  The  end
soon  came.

IV.  The  last  vestige  of  hope  is  destroyed  in  the  capture  of  their  king.
"  The  anointed  of  the  Lord  was  taken  in  their  pits  "  (ver.  20).  Feeble  as  Zedekiah
was,  he  was  still  their  king,  "the  anointed  of  the  Lord."  "And  now  that  the
state  was  falling,  he  was  the  very  breath  of  life  to  the  fugitives,  who  would  have
no  rallying-point  without  him  ;  whereas  if  he  escaped,  they  might  with  him
have  found  a  refuge  among  some  of  the  neighbouring  nations,  and  as  long  as  they
had  a  king  of  David's  line  all  hope  of  prolonging  their  national  existence  would
not  seem  lost."  But  the  seizure  of  Zedekiah  in  his  desperate  attempt  to  escape,
and  the  cruelty  of  his  infuriated  captors  in  putting  out  both  his  eyes,  quenched
the  last  lingering  hope  of  the  doomed  people.  Their  king  was  a  sightless,  helpless
prisoner,  and  all  was  over.  The  national  life  was  extinguished.  We  cannot  but
admire  the  dogged  bravery  of  the  people  in  their  resolute  defence  of  king  and
country ;  but  it  was  the  bravery  of  desperation  and  despair.  The  fiat  of  destruc-
tion had  gone  forth,  and  it  was  now  fulfilled  in  every  detail.

Lessons. — 1.  I'he  nation  that  rebels  against  God  is  defenceless.  2.  The
threatenings  of  God  against  disobedience  are  not  meaningless.  3.  Between  the
threatening  of  doom  and  its  accomplishment  there  is  ample  oppoHunity  for  repent"
ance  and  reform,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.   17.    The   weary  watcher.     1.  for  many  years  a  desire  to  see  that  city.

Eagerly   longs   for   much-needed    help.  In  the  city  of  Genoa  he  was  seized  with

2.    Impairs   his  eyesight  with  the  in-  paralysis,  was  unable  to  proceed  farther,

tensity  of  his  vigil.     3.  Is  bitterly  dis-  and  died  there,   never  having   looked

appointed  when  he  looks  for  help  in  upon  the  longed-for  sight,
vain.  A   clever   escape.      When   Mazzini

Vers.  18,  19.   The  helplessly  baffled.  fled  from  France,  he  had  to  risk  being

I.  Are  everywhere  menaced  vdth  danger.  seized  by   the   French  police  at  Mar-

"  They  hunt  our  steps,  that  we  cannot  seilles.     He  refused  to  be  hidden  as  a

go  in  our  streets"  (ver.  18).     IL  Re-  stowaway,  and  when  they  came  to  look

treat  is  cut  off  in  every  direction.  "  Our  for  him,  they  passed  without  notice  a

persecutors  are  swifter  than  the  eagles"  man  in  his  shirt-sleeves  coolly  washing

(ver.  19).     III.  Sullenly  submit  to  the  bottles  in  the  cook's  kitchen.
inevitable.     "  Our  days  are  fulfilled,  for  A  sad  end.     Cardinal  Pole,  suspected

our  end  is  come  "  (ver.  18).  even  by  Queen  Mary,  whom  he  had

Ver.  20.  Royalty.     1.  Is  the  symbol  liked  to  serve,  was  on  his  death-bed

of  government  and   protection.     2.  Is  when  she  died.    Among  the  last  sounds

the  representative  of  national  life  and  that  fell  on  his  ears  must  have  been  the

character.     3.   Its  degradation  involves  bells  of  Westminster  ringing  the  knell

national  disaster.  of  the  cause  to  which  he  had  sacrificed

his  life  ;  and  before  the  evening  he  too

Illustrations.  —  Disappointment,  had   passed  away,  a  blighted,  broken-

When  Daniel  O'Connell,  on  account  of  hearted  man,  detested  by  those  whom

his  ill-liealth,  was  ordered  to  leave  Eng-  lie    had   laboured    Wps^   anj^iously   fco

Jand,  he  started  for  Kome,  Imving  had  serye,


BOMthETtC  COMMENTA/iT:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  IV.


Attachment  stronger  than  death.

On  the  IStli  t>f  December  1851,  Turner
the  painter  died  in  the  front  room  of
119  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  fronting
the  Thame.s.  To  an  upper  window,  no
longer  able  to  paint,  too  feeble  to  walk,
he  had  been  wheeled  every  morning
during  those  last  days,  that  he  might
lose  no  liglit  of  the  December  sun  on
his  beloved  Thames.

The  last  parting.

*•  How  shall  we  know  it  is  the  last  good-bye  ?
The  skies  will  nut  be  darkened  in  that  hour,
No   sudden   blight   will   fall   on   leaf   and

flower,
No  single  bird  will  hush  its  careless  cry,
And  you  will  hold  my  hands,  and  smile  or

sigh
Just  as  before.    Perchance  the  sudden  tears
In  your  dear  eyes  will  answer  to  my  fears  ;
But  there  will  come  no  voice  of  prophecy  ;
No  voice  to  whisper,  *  Now,  and  not  again,
Space  for  last  words,  last  kisses,  and  last

prayer,
For  all  the  wild  unmitigated  pain
Of  those  who,  parting,  clasp  hands  with

despair.'
•  Who  knows  ? '  we  say  ;  but  doubt  and  fear

remain.
Would  any  choose  to  part  thus  unaware  ? "

A  good  king  a  blessing.     Speaking
of  the  reign  of  Leopold  L  of  Tuscany,


as  compared  with  the  despotism  of  the
Medicis,  Mr.  Howells  says  ; — "  I  con-
fess that  it  has  a  great  charm  for  my
fancy.  It  is  like  a  long  stretch  of  sun-
light in  that  lurid,  war-clouded  landscape
of  history,  full  of  repose  and  genial,
beneficent  growth.  For  twenty-six
years,  apparently,  the  good  prince  got
up  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  and
dried  the  tears  of  his  people.  In  hia
time,  ten  years  passed  in  which  no  drop
of  blood  was  shed  on  the  scaffold.  The
hospitals  that  he  founded,  the  order  and
propriety  in  which  he  kept  them,  justly
entitled  him  to  the  name  of  Father  of
the  Poor.  He  was  happy  because  he
saw  his  people  were  happy.  He  be-
lieved in  God."

Uncertainty  of  royal  favours.

"  Vain  pomp  and  glory  of  this  world,  I  hate  ye  ;
I  feel   my  heart  new  opened.      Oh,   how

wretched
la  that  poor  man  that  hangs  on  prince's

favours  !
There    is   betwixt   that   smile   we   should

aspire  to,
That  sweet  aspect  of  princes,  and  their  ruin,
More  pangs  and  fears  than  wars  or  women

have  ;
And  when  he  falls,  he  falls  like  Lucifer,
Never  to  hope  again."  — Shakespeare.


HOMILETIGS.
The  Fate  of  the  Malevolent.

(Verses  21,  22.)

I.  Their  malicions  joy  over  the  unfortunate  is  brief.     "Eejoice  and  be  glad,

O  daughter  of  Edom  "  (ver.  21).  Edom,  though  related  to  Judali,  was  her  most
relentless  enemy.  It  was  the  enmity  of  inveterate  envy.  Judah  had  outdistanced
Edom,  and  rose  to  superior  greatness  and  power.  This  was  the  offence  Edom  could
never  forgive.  She  watched  the  downfall  of  Judah  with  a  savage  delight,  and  when
the  catastrophe  came,  which  she  did  her  best  to  accelerate,  she  gloated  over  it  with
a  fiendish  joy  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7  ;  Jer.  xlix.  7-22).  The  prophet  now  ironically  calls
upon  Edom  to  take  her  fill  of  her  unnatural  merriment,  for  it  would  soon  be  silenced
and  changed  into  a  song  with  a  different  tune.  Having  made  common  cause  with
the  enemies  of  God's  people  and  become  their  aiders  and  abettors  in  oppression,  Edom
must  share  in  the  calamities  that  overwhelmed  them.  Edom  is  the  type  of  the  ene-
mies of  the  Church  in  all  ages,  who,  instigated  with  "  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and  all
uncharitableness,"  exult  in  the  misfortunes  of  God's  people.  What  a  revelation  is
this  of  the  possible  wickedness  of  the  human  heart !  Well  might  Vianny  write,
"The  heart  of  the  wicked  swarms  with  sins  like  an  anthill  with  ants.  It  is  like  a
piece  of  bad  meat — full  of  worms."     But  the  triumph  of  the  morally  bad  is  short.

II.  They  will  be  certainly  punished  for  their  wickedness.  1.  It  will  he
a  punishment  involving  suffering  and  dUgrare.  "The  cup  also  shall  pass  through
unto  thee:   thou  shalt  be  drunken,  and  shalt  make  thyself  naked"  (ver.   21).

119


mtAMr.  tfOM } t, KT 10  COMMENT AUY:  LAMENTATWNS.

^^Thou,  too,  slialt  be  drunk  mith  the  shame  of  ruin:  thou,  too,  shdlt  expose  thysetj
to  contempt.'' — Geikie.  Tlie  wine-cup  of  the  Divine  wrath  will  by-and-bye  be
placed  in  the  hands  of  His  enemies,  and  they  must  drink  it — drink  it  till  they  are
infatuated  with  the  intoxicatini^  ih-aught,  and  commit  follies  and  sins  that  sink
them  into  utter  contempt.  Now  they  know  something  of  the  bitterness  of  the
suffering  over  which  they  had  gloated  when  others  were  the  victims.  2.  It  will
he  a  rig} I teous  punishment.  **  He  will  visit  thine  iniquity,  O  daughter  of  Edom  ;
He  wid  discover  thy  sins"  (ver.  22).  To  uncover  and  expose  sins  is  equivalent
to  punishing  them.  Edom  was  punished  not  arbitrarily  and  from  caprice,  but
because  of  her  iniquity.  The  Divine  chastisements  are  in  harmony  with  the  law
of  universal  righteousness.  God  knows  exactly  the  time  and  the  measure  of  pun-
ishment. The  cup  of  His  wrath  is  not  passed  on  to  either  individual  or  nation
until  it  is  full.     The  wicked  cannot  escape.

III.  Their  punishment  will  be  intensified  by  the  deliverance  of  the  people
whose  miseries  they  ridiculed.  "The  punishment  of  thine  iniquity  is  accom-
plished, O  daugliter  of  Zion  :  He  will  no  more  carry  thee  away  into  captivity  "
(ver.  22).  Judah  shall  not  be  exiled  again  for  the  iniquity,  the  guilt  of  which  is
now  expiated.  It  would  be  unjust  to  punish  twice  for  the  same  offence.  She
has  borne  the  punishment :  it  is  finished  ;  and  she  is  now  free — free  to  enter  upon
a  course  of  obedience  which  will  secure  promised  blessing.  The  tables  are  now
turned.  Judah  is  free  :  Edom  is  the  sufferer ;  and  it  adds  sharpness  to  the  thorns
that  now  distress  her  to  know  that  her  hated  rival  is  delivered  and  is  again  in  the
ascendant.     Envy  gives  the  soul  no  rest,  and  deteriorates  its  capacity  for  nobler

feelings.

**  The  cankering  rust  corrodes  the  brightest  steel ;
The  moth  frets  out  your  garment,  and  the  worm
Eats  its  slow  way  into  the  solid  oak  :
But  Envy,  of  all  evil  things  the  worst,
The  same  to-day,  to-morrow,  and  for  ever,
Saps  and  consumes  the  heart  in  which  it  works.** — Cumberland,

We  should  be  careful  not  to  exult  over  the  miseries  of  others,  as  we  know  not
how  soon  we  may  be  in  the  same  plight,  and  the  memory  of  our  inhuman  conduct
will  increase  our  own  suffering.

Lessons. — 1.  Only  the  wilfully  malicious  can  rejoice  over  the  distresses  of
others.  2.  Inveterate  wickedness  is  sure  to  receive  its  just  recompense,  3.  Punishr
ment  is  concerned  only  with  tlie  guilt  already  incurred.

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  21,  22.  Two  kinds  of  joy.  the  contents  of  its  mingled  cup.  "Thou
I.  The  joy  of  the  envious.  "  Rejoice  shalt  be  drunken,  and  shalt  make  thy-
and  be  glad,  0  daughter  of  Edom"  self  naked"  (ver.  21).  III.  Is  sure  to
(ver.  21).  1.  Is  full  of  malice.  2.  Is  overtake  the  transgressor.  "The  cup
cruel.  3.  Is  unreal — the  dry  chuckle  also  shall  pass  through  unto  thee  *'  (ver.
of  the  scornful.  II.  The  joy  of  the  21).  IV.  Does  not  cease  till  its  mis-
free.  "The  punishment  of  thine  ini-  sion  is  fidjilled.  ** The  punishment  of
quity  is  accomplished,  O  daughter  of  thine  iniquity  is  accomplished,  O
Zion"  (ver.  22).  1.  Indicates  relief  daughter  of  Zion "  (ver.  22).
from  suffering.  2.  Despair  has  given  Ver.  22.  A  message  from  God  to
place  to  hope.  3.  Has  the  ring  of  thee.  I.  Our  first  message  is  one  of
grateful  reality.  comfort.  1.  A  joyous  fact.  *' The  pun-
Punishment.  I.  Discovers  and  ex-  ishment  of  thine  iniquity  is  accom-
poses  sin.  "  He  will  visit  thine  ini-  plished."  Christ  hath  for  His  people
quity,  O  daughter  of  Edom  ;  He  will  borne  all  the  punishment  which  they
discover  thy  sins "  .  (ver.  22).  II.  deserved.  2.  To  whom  this  message  is
Stupifies  and  degrades  the  victim  with  sent.  To  the  sinner  conscious  of  his
120


HUM  I  LET  W  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


CflAP.  IV.


sin.  3.  A  precious  promise.  "  I  will
no  more  carry  thee  away  into  captivity."
Thou  art  in  captivity  now,  sorrowing
on  account  of  sin  ;  but  it  is  the  last
thou  shalt  ever  have.  In  the  world  to
come  there  is  no  captivity  for  thee.
II.  A  burden  of  woe.  "  He  will  visit
thine  iniquity,  O  daughter  of  Edom."
1.  The  daughter  of  Edom  dwelt  care-
lessly in  the  land  of  Uz,  as  if  secure  from
danger.  2.  Made  merriment  over  the
sorrows  of  others.  3.  Cherished  a
vain  hope,  a  self-sufficient  confidence,
4.  Was  very  proud.  III.  Why  are
there  these  different  messages  ?  1 .  The
reason  of  the  message  of  mercy  is  sove-
reign. 2.  Of  the  message  of  woe,
Divine  justice.  IV.  What  claim  have
these  messages  on  our  faith  ?  To  be
devoutly  believed,  because  both  mes-
sages are  plainly  revealed  in  the  Word
of  God. — C.  H.  Spurgeon.

Illustrations.  — Malice.

"  For  malice  will  with  joy  the  lie  receive,
Report,  and  what  it  wishes  true,  believe.**

—  Yalden.

Reproof  of  malice.  St.  Augustine  is
said  to  have  had  these  two  lines  in-
scribed on  his  table  to  remind  his
guests  of  his  wishes —

"  Whoever  loves  an  absent  friend  to  jeer,
May  hence  depart,  no  room  is  for  him  here."

A  malevolent  tongue.  The  tongue
of  the  slanderer  is  a  devouring  fire,
which  tarnishes  everything  it  touches  ;
which  exercises  its  fury  on  the  good  grain
equally  as  on  the  chaff,  on  the  profane
as  well  as  on  the  sacred ;  which,  wher-
ever it  passes,  leaves  only  desolation
and  ruin  ;  digs  even  into  the  bowels
of  the  earth  and  fixes  itself  on  things
the  most  hidden ;  turns  into  vile  ashes
what  only  a  moment  before  had  ap-
peared to  us  so  precious  and  brilliant ;
acts  with  more  violence  and  danger  than
ever  in  the  time  when  it  was  apparently
smothered  up  and  almost  extinct;
which  blackens  what  it  cannot  con-
sume, and  sometimes  sparkles  and  de-
lights before  it  destroys. — Massillon.

Wickedness.  There  have  been  men
splendidly  wicked  whose  endowments
threw  a  brightness  on  their  crimes,  and


whom  scarce  any  villainy  made  per-
fectly detestable,  because  they  never
could  be  wholly  divested  of  their  ex-
cellences ;  but  such  have  been  in  all
ages  the  corrupters  of  the  world,  and
their  resemblance  ought  no  more  to  be
preserved  than  the  art  of  murdering
without  pain.

—  I  have  seen  men  who,  I  thought,
ought  to  have  a  whole  conversion  for
each  one  of  their  faculties.  Their  natures
were  so  unmitigatedly  wicked  that  it
cost  more  for  them  to  be  decent  than
for  other  men  to  be  saints. — Beecher.

Sin  will  find  you  out.  Men's  sins
often  find  them  out,  though  no  visible
sign  or  token  may  betray  this  fact  to
the  world.  All  may  outwardly  stand
fair ;  there  may  be  no  breach  in  the
worldly  prosperity ;  nay,  this  may  be
ampler,  more  strongly  established  than
ever ;  while  yet  there  may  be  that
within  which  forbids  to  rejoice,  which
takes  all  the  joy  and  gladness  out  of
life — the  memory  of  that  sin  which  was
nothing  when  committed,  but  which
now  darkens  all — the  deadly  arrow
poisoning  the  springs  of  life,  which  will
not  drop  from  the  side,  which  no  force,
no  art  of  man's  device  can  withdraw.
To  such  Dr.  Trench's  advice  is,  to  turn
the  tables  on  our  sins,  to  find  them  out,
and  to  take  them  all  to  God  to  be  con-
demned, pardoned,  and  subdued  ;  "con-
demned by  Thy  righteous  judgments,  O
Father  ;  pardoned  by  the  precious  blood
of  Thy  dear  Son,  and  subdued  by  the
mighty  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost."
This  is  the  good,  old-fashioned  preach-
ing of  Apostles  and  preachers  of  the
very  oldest  times.

The  downward  career  of  evil.  In
the  Rabbinical  books  of  the  Jews  they
have  a  curious  tradition  about  the
growth  of  leprosy,  that  it  began  with
the  walls  of  a  man's  house  ;  then,  if  he
did  not  repent,  entered  his  garments,
till  at  last  the  disease  covered  his  whole
body.  And  thus  it  is  with  the  growth
of  sin.  It  begins  with  neglect  of  duty  ;
it  may  be  of  prayer,  or  the  warn-
ing voice  of  conscience  is  unheeded.
Habits  of  sin  are  formed,  till  at  last  the
soul  that  lets  God  alone  is  let  alone  by
God.  — Pilkington,

121


CHAP.  V.  JWMirETlC  COMMENTAUt:  LAMENTATIONS,

CHAPTER  V.
Recapitulation  of  Zion's  Calamities  and  Prayer.

The  versea  of  this  chapter  are  not  arranged  according  to  the  order  of  the  alphabet,  yet  their
number  corresponds  to  its  number.  More  distinctly  than  the  preceding  chapters  this  one  showa
the  "  parallelism  "  of  Hebrew  poetry,  in  which  one  clause  of  a  verse  is  closely  related  by  senti-
ment and  construction  to  the  other.  The  contents  suggest  that  the  circumstances  of  the  writer
impelled  him  to  take  a  retrospect  of  what  had  befallen  his  fellow-countrymen,  and  to  found,  on
the  variety  and  intensity  of  their  sorrows,  a  hope  that  their  iniquities  would  be  pardoned,  and
that  they  would  receive  from  the  Lord's  hand  tokens  of  His  restored  favour,  according  to  the
days  wherein  He  had  afflicted  them.

Ver.  1.  Remember,  O  Jehovah,  what  has  happened  to  us — an  application  not  to  one  who
had  forgotten,  but  to  One  who  could  consider  their  ajliction  and  pain  with  a  view  to  forgive  all
their  sins  and  redeem  Israel  out  of  all  his  troubles;  a  prayer  which  is  not  so  much  an  utterance
concurrent  with  the  nature  of  God,  as  concurrent  with  the  partial  knowledge  and  felt  needs  of
the  worshipper ;  behold,  and  see  our  reproach,  the  reproach  of  Thy  servants  .  .  .  wherewith
Thine  enemies  have  reproached,  0  Jehovah,  the  footsteps  of  Thine  anointed.

Ver.  2  begins  to  describe  the  substance  of  the  reproaches.  Our  inheritance,  the  land  which
was  promised  to  Abraham,  and  of  which  his  descendants  had  held  possession  for  generations,
is  turned  over  unto  strangers.  Indeed,  all  their  property  had  passed  into  other  hands  ;
our  houses  unto  aliens.  Even  if  any  small  houses  were  left  standing,  after  the  Chaldeans  had
destroyed  every  important  building  in  Jerusalem,  besides  breaking  down  the  city  walls,  they
were  at  the  disposal  of  those  foreigners.

Ver.  3.  No  recondite  application  of  the  terms  of  this  verse — as  that,  "  We  are  abandoned  by
Thee,  our  Father " — need  be  considered.  The  note  of  a  Targum  suflSciently  defines  them,
*'  We  are  like  the  most  desolate  of  beings."  We  have  become  orphans,  without  a  father.  A
devastating  war,  a  merciless  capture  of  Jerusalem,  a  banishment  to  a  far  country  of  thousands
of  the  population,  must  have  caused  reports  of  many  among  the  "  bread-winners  "  being  dead
or  missing  ;  hence  it  could  be  said  virtually,  if  not  really.  Our  mothers  [are]  like  widows,  the
words  being  true  of  other  families  as  well  as  of  those  whose  head  had  perished.

Ver.  4.  Not  only  are  they  orphaned  and  desolate,  but  they  are  cruelly  mulcted.  Our  water
for  money  we  have  drunken.  The  bitterness  of  the  act  was  that  water,  perhaps  from  their
own  wells  and  cisterns,  had  to  be  paid  for,  and  similarly  to  that,  Our  wood  has  come  for  a
price.  Held  in  such  durance  that  they  could  not  get  the  requisites  for  personal  and  domestic
comfort,  to  which  they  had  free  access  formerly,  unless  by  bribing  their  custodians.

Ver.  5.  It  is  best  to  suppose  that  the  phrase.  On  our  necks  we  are  pursued,  means,  our
pursuers  keep  so  close  as  to  be,  as  it  were,  holding  our  necks ;  yet,  tired  out  by  such  persecu-
tion, no  rest  is  for  us.

Ver.  6.  Judaea  was  on  the  verge  of  famine  through  the  foragings  of  the  invaders,  and,  under
the  ominous  shadow  of  starvation.  To  Egypt  we  have  given  the  hand,  i.e.,  imploring  supplies
of  food,  as  is  signified  by  the  parallel  clause,  to  Assyria  to  be  satisfied  with  bread.  The
people  appealed  to  a  supposed  friendly  and  to  an  openly  hostile  government ;  for  the  Babylonian
empire,  even  in  the  height  of  its  power,  was  occasionally  spoken  of  as  Assyria  (Jer.  it  18),  into
whose  dominion  it  had  entered.

Ver.  7.  Our  fathers  have  sinned ;  they  are  not  in  the  land  of  the  living.  The  hour  of
punishment  had  not  come  in  their  time.  The  measure  of  iniquity  was  not  yet  full  ;  but  the
consequences  of  their  doings,  which  were  not  good,  had  not  been  buried  with  them.  The  dis-
ruption of  civil  and  religious  order,  by  which  we  have  so  fearfully  suffered,  results  from  the
guilt  which  was  incurred  by  preceding  generations.  We  have  borne  their  iniquities.  This
truth  is  stated  again  and  again  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  (Exod.  xx.  5  ;  Num.  xiv.  18  ;  2
Kings  xxiii.  25,  26) ;  it  is,  however,  only  half  a  truth,  and  becomes  an  error  if  understood  to  say
that  the  descendants  were  not  also  guilty.  This  other  half  was  beginning  to  dawn  upon  Israel.
It  is  noted  in  ver.  16,  and  was  boldly  announced  by  the  prophets  of  this  period,  Jeremiah  (chap,
xxxi.  29,  30)  and  Ezekiel  (chap,  xviii.).  Yet  God  strikes  the  sins  of  forefathers  with  penal
judgments  on  their  children  only  when  the  children  persist  in  sin,  as  their  predecessors  did.
But  such  vicarious  suffering  placed  them  in  a  position  like  sin-bearers,  and  becomes  ground  of
appeal  for  the  exercise  of  Divine  compassion,

Ver.  8.  Servants  have  ruled  over  us.  Who  they  were  may  be  uncertain.  It  is  a  far-
fetched supposition  that  they  were  the  conquering  chiefs,  because  '*  the  Babylonians  in  general
might  be  called  slaves  in  comparison  with  the  kingdom  of  priests  and  sows  of  Jehovah."  The
suggestion  rather  is  that  th'^  galling  yoke  was  made  doubly  galling  V)y  the  insolence  and  brutality
of  menials,  "dressed  in  the  brief  authority  of  office,"  slaves  in  Oriental  countries  often  rising  to
places  of  power.  A  parallel  is  mentioned  by  Nehemiah,  who  says  (chap.  v.  5),  Even  their  {i.e.,
the  governor  s)  servants  bare  rule  over  thfvi  :  there  was  no  deliverer  from  their  hands.

Ver.  9.  With  our  lives  we  get  our  bread — they  jeopardised  their  lives  when  going  to  gather
a  scanty  harvest,  or  to  take  from  provisions  which   iiad  been  stowed   away — because  of  th©

122


BOM  I  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  r.


sword  of  the  desert,  wielded  by  the  predatory  Bedawin,  who  would  plunder  and  even  kill
those  who  were  in  possession  of  food.  So  Gideon  had  to  get  his  wheat  in  secret,  lest  th«
Midianites  should  seize  it  (Judges  vi.  11)  ;  and  the  ten  men  who  bought  their  lives  from  the
robbers  and  murderers  of  Gedaliah  (Jer.  xli.  8)  drew  from  concealed  stores  of  victuals.

Ver.  10.  The  bread,  which  was  obtained  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  was  not  enough  in  quantity
to  nourish  tliem.  Our  skin  is  hot  like  an  oven ;  the  feverishness  is  because  of  th«»,  burning
heat  of  hunger.  "  Hunger  dries  up  the  pores  of  the  skin,  so  that  it  becomes  like  as  if  it  had
been  exposed  to  the  burning  heat  of  the  simoom."

We  must  not  fancy  that  the  several  distressing  things  alluded  to  befell  every  one  of  all
classes.  We  should  rather  believe  that  some  troubles  were  felt  by  one  portion,  while  another
portion  had  to  bear  different  troubles.  So  the  author  proceeds  to  record  what  suflferings  wera
endured  by  particular  divisions  of  the  population.

Ver.  12.  The  most  gentle  were  outraged,  and  princes  were  hanged  up  by  their  hand— not
the  hand  of  the  foe  is  referred  to,  though  by  him  the  cruel  deed  was  perpetrated  ;  still  less  is
the  reference  to  compulsory  suicide,  as  Calvin  surmises ;  but  the  hand  of  the  princes  was  the
leverage  by  which  their  bodies  were  lifted  up.  Whether  they  were  first  killed  and  then  sus-
pended, or  were  tortured  by  such  suspension  when  every  nerve  and  muscle  was  vibrating  with
life's  waves,  is  a  question  to  which  no  sure  reply  can  be  given  ;  but  probably  the  latter  is  hinted
at.  The  bodies  of  Saul  and  his  sons  were  fastened  to  the  wall  of  Beth-shan  (1  Sam.  xxxi.
10-12);  and  more  recent  commentators  refer  to  "Records  of  the  Past,"  i.  38,  in  which  an  in-
scription of  Sennacherib  is  quoted  as  saying  of  the  people  of  Ekron,  "  The  chief  priests  and
noblemen  I  put  to  death  ;  on  stakes  all  round  the  city  I  hung  their  bodies  ; "  and  the  practice
seems  to  have  been  not  uncommon  among  Assyrians  and  Babylonians.  Still,  impalement  after
death  does  not  correspond  distinctly  to  the  atrocity  mentioned  here.  The  faces — persons  —  of
elders  were  not  honoured.  Not  only  men  high  in  rank,  but  also  those  who  held  responsible
positions  among  the  people — aged  persons  are  spoken  of  after  this — were  treated  with  indignity
in  the  insolence  of  conquest.

Ver.  13.  The  choice  portion  of  the  nation  were  forced  to  be  nothing  but  mere  burden-
bearers.  Young  men  bare  the  mill.  They  had  to  carry  about,  and  no  doubt  to  turn,  the
band-mills  to  grind  corn  for  their  military  masters,  thus  doing  the  work  of  women  or  of  slaves ;
while  the  fuel,  for  cooking  and  other  purposes,  was  laid  on  shoulders  ill  able  to  bear  a  load.
Boys  stumbled  [under]  a  burden  of  wood-

Ver.  14.  Entire  collapse  of  interest  in  the  common  ways  of  life  was  shown  by  the  abandon-
ment of  public  meetings  and  social  pastimes.  The  elders  ceased  from  [frequenting]  the  gate.
They  had  gone  thither  as  to  the  usual  gathering-place  ;  they  adjudicated,  advised,  had  general
intercourse,  and  received  the  marks  of  respect  suggested  by  the  law — Thou  shall  rise  up  hefort
the  hoary  head  and  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man  (Lev.  xix.  32)  ;  but  that  resort  was  no  longer
theirs.  Moreover,  the  buoyancy  of  youthful  spirits  was  crushed  down.  Young  men  ceased
from  their  music,  accompanied  by  instruments.

Ver.  15.  The  iron  had  entered  the  soul.  Ceased  is  the  joy  of  Our  heart,  and  past  pleasures
had  become  a  pain  ;  turned  into  mourning  our  dance.

Ver.  16.  Fallen  is  the  crown  from  our  head.  That  which  was  their  honour  has  gone — the
crown  with  which  the  Lord  Jehovah  hnd  decked  His  chosen  nation.  I  fut  ...  a  beautiful
crown  upon  thine  head  .  .  .  and  thy  renown  went  forth  among  the  nations  for  thy  beauty  ;  for  it
was  perfect  through  my  majesty,  which  I  had  put  upon  thee  (Ezek.  xvi.  12  and  14).  Now  it  is
in  the  dust,  set  at  nought  by  all  those  who  had  admired  it.  So,  as  if  in  irrepressible  acknow-
ledgment that  they  themselves  were  responsible  for  the  dismal  change,  the  exclamation  bursts
forth.  Woe  unto  us !  for  we  have  sinned — sinned  not  against  a  ritual  or  a  code  of  law,  but
against  a  living  Person — Maker,  Monarch,  Father.  This  second  clause  is  in  correlation  with
ver.  7,  and  expresses  the  share  which  their  own  iniquities  had  in  the  guilt  which  had  drawn
down  such  condign  suffering  as  they  were  subjected  to.  Like  their  fathers,  they  had  disowned
truth  and  righteousness,  and  addicted  themselves  to  false  and  unholy  practices.  This  view  of
themselves,  and  confession  of  its  evil  nature,  opens  the  eyes  of  the  heart  to  look  for  the  throne
of  grace.

Ver.  17.  How  depressing  is  the  conviction  of  personal  sin.  For  this  our  heart  has  become
faint.  Many  sorrows  had  surged  over  them  and  exhausted  the  faculty  of  external  and  mental
vision.    For  these  things  our  eyes  are  darkened.

Ver.  18.  The  depression  of  heart  meets  its  most  striking  symbol  in  that  which,  once  the
glory  of  the  land,  is  now  its  reproach.  As  to  Mount  Zion — regarded  as  embracing  both  the
dwelling-place  of  Jehovah  and  the  precincts  of  the  sacred  city,  which  is  desolate  ;  jackals
roam  in  it.  These  animals  live  in  waste  places,  and  avoid  man's  presence,  so  their  wandering
upon  Zion  proves  that  it  has  become  a  ruinous  area,  without  inhabitant.  The  place  of  the
tabernacle  of  thy  glory,  the  hill  and  the  watch-tower,  are  turned  into  dens  for  wild  beasts.

Ver.  19.  Nevertheless,  whatever  be  the  low  estate  of  His  sanctuary  and  people,  the  living
God  is  and  reigns.  Thou,  0  Jehovah,  abidest  for  ever.  Not  only  is  His  continual  existence
denoted,  but  also  that  Jehovah  sitteth  as  king  for  ever  (Ps.  xxix.  10),  the  same  verb  being  used
in  this  clause  as  in  the  Psalm  quoted,  and  the  next  clause  carries  on  the  thought.  Thy  throne
from  generation  to  generation.     Enemies  may  destroy  the  temple  made  with  liands ;  they

123


CHAP.v.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


are  powerless  to  injure  the  kingdom  of  Him  who  inhabits  eferniti/.  Generations  come  and  go
with  their  rises  and  falls,  but  2'hou  art  the  same,  <ind  Thy  years  shaU  not  fail.

Ver.  20.  The  perpetuity  of  God's  rule,  amid  all  earthly  changes,  frames  an  appealing  prayer.
Reigning  supreme  over  the  army  of  heaven,  it  is  impossible  that  He  can  renounce  authority
over  the  things  of  earth  and  man  ;  then,  Why  dost  Thou  forget  us  for  ever,  forsakest  us  for
so  long?  Is  it  not  time  for  Thee  to  pluck  Thy  right  hnnd  out  of  Thy  bosom  and  bring  relief  in
the  lifetime  even  of  this  generation  ?  How  bluntly  petitioners  address  God  when  troubles  press
upon  them  !  How  ready  to  suppose  His  thoughts  and  ways  must  be  like  their  own  !  How
prone  to  fancy  that,  because  their  observation  does  not  perceive  His  working,  God  can  hardly
care  so  much  for  His  kingdom's  honour  as  they  do  !

Ver.  21.  Turn  us,  O  Jehovah,  unto  Thee,  and  we  shall  be  turned  ;  a  prayer  which  proves
that  a  new  heart  has  been  given  to  those  in  whose  name  the  writer  speaks.  Affliction  has  been
a  means  of  showing  the  blunders  and  sins  of  the  past,  and  that  the  tjnly  remedy  for  them  is  in
Jehovah  Himself.  They  see  that  the  reconciling  power  does  not  r)rigiiiate  with  themselves,  but
with  Him ;  that  He  must  draw  them  by  a  continual  influence  if  they  are  to  walk  in  the  liy/it  of
His  countenance.  We  do  not  consider  this  request  as  merely  for  the  restoration  of  their  native
land  ;  we  need  to  put  a  deeper  meaning  into  it,  which  will,  at  least,  indicate  that  they  wanted
to  become  true  worshippers  of  the  Lord  God  of  their  deliverances.  The  succeeding  clause,
however,  seems  to  imply  that  they  did  not  expect  to  attain  to  their  desires  unless  they  were
repossessed  with  their  former  national  organisation.  Renew  our  days  as  of  old;  re-establish
the  gracious  relations  in  which  thou  stoodest  to  us  ;  let  us  again  have  country,  city,  and  temple,
priest,  prophet,  and  king.  Cause  every  man  to  sit  v/nder  his  vine  and  under  his  fig-tree,  and  none
make  them  afraid.

Ver.  22.  The  two  initial  Hebrew  particles  of  this  verse  signify  that  it  is  not  a  fact  which  is
stated,  but  the  elements  of  a  hope,  and  may  be  introduced  with,  This  will  come  to  pass,  unless
Thou  hast  utterly  rejected  us  ;  art  wroth  against  us  exceedingly.  The  under-thought  is,
But  this  cannot  be  the  case.  Thou  wouhist  not  so  disgrace  the  throne  of  Thy  glory.  Thou
wouldst  not  so  falsify  the  promises  made  to  our  fathers.  Thou  wouldst  not  always  give  occasion
for  the  mocking  heathen  to  say,  Wlierc  is  now  your  God?

"This  conclusion  entirely  agrees  with  tlie  character  of  the  Lamentations,  in  which  com-
plaint and  supplication  continue  to  the  end,  not  without  an  element  of  hope,  which,  as  Gerlach
says,  *  merely  glimmers  from  afar,  like  the  morning  star  through  the  clouds,  which  does  not
indeed  itself  dispel  the  shadows  of  the  night,  though  it  announces  that  the  rising  of  the  sun  is
near,  and  that  it  shall  obtain  the  victory  '  "  {Keil).

HOMILETICS,
A  Piteous  Appeal  to  Jehovah.

(Verse  1.)

Once  more,  and  for  the  last  time,  the  prophet  returns  to  his  sorrowful  theme.
There  is  a  fascination  in  it  he  cannot  resist.  Grief,  unduly  indulged,  is  apt  to
make  us  selfish,  and  so  to  accustom  us  to  a  grievance  that  we  never  wish  to  be
without  one  :  we  coax  and  caress  our  troubles  rather  than  seek  to  be  rid  of  them.
But  the  sorrow  of  the  prophet  arose  from  no  mere  personal  distress.  He  was  the
mouthpiece  to  express  the  lamentations  of  the  best  spirits  of  liis  day  over  a  national
and  world-wide  disaster.  His  poetic  and  prophetic  insight  fitted  him  the  more
clearly  to  grasp  and  weigh  the  magnitude  of  the  calamity.  The  profound  and
})assionate  grief  with  which  he  recited  the  leading  incidents  in  the  national  catas-
trophe tended  to  stamp  them  with  indelible  distinctness  upon  his  memory.  He
could  never  forget  them,  and  it  would  seem  as  if  he  could  not  cease  talking  about
them.  As  if  with  a  clinging  fondness  for  the  theme  and  loathe  to  dismiss  it,  he
passes  in  slow  and  final  review  the  chief  features  of  the  siege  and  capture  of  Jeru-
salem. "Thus  wailed  the  genius  of  Hebrew  poetry  over  the  desolation  of  Judah
and  Jerusalem  !  Other  cities  and  countries  have  had  their  minstrels  to  lament
tlieir  public  sorrows,  but  the  national  elegies  of  the  Jew  alone  have  spread  among
all  races  of  the  earth,  and  remain  fresh  after  twenty-five  centuries.  Nor  are  they
even  yet  without  deep  and  practical  interest,  recording  as  they  do  the  catastrophe
that  awaits  any  community,  however  highly  favoured,  which  forgets  that  public
and  private  righteousness  alone  secures  permanent  prosperity  "  (Geikie).  This
fifth  and  last  elegy  begins  and  ends  in  prayer  It  is  a  hopeful  sign  when  trouble
124


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  y.


brings  us  to  our  knees.  We  are  then  in  the  way  of  receiving  comfort  and  deliver-
ing help.     This  verse  is  a  piteous  appeal  to  Jehovah.

I.  Rising  from  the  hearts  of  a  suffering  people.  "  Remember,  0  Lord,  what
is  come  upon  us."  The  trouble  is  not  simply  threatened  and  approaching  :  it  is
upon  us ;  we  are  now  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  cannot  be  in  a  worse  plight  than  we
are  in  already.  Our  nation  ruined,  our  city  gone,  our  Temple  gone,  and  the  spiked
heel  of  the  oppressor  even  now  presses  us  in  the  dust.  If  Thou  canst  do  anything
for  us,  0  Lord,  do  it  now.  The  cry  of  real  suffering  has  an  irresistible  pathos
about  it :  there  is  the  sound  of  tears  in  it.  Such  a  cry  never  fails  to  reach  the
ears  of  Jehovah,  and  His  pitying  heart  yearns  to  help  the  suppliant.

IL  Is  expressed  by  a  people  who  regard  their  sufferings  as  a  reproach.
"  Behold  our  reproach."  We  are  sunk  from  dignity  and  greatness  to  abject  humi-
liation and  shame,  from  affluence  to  poverty.  We  are  the  people  of  Jehovah,
chosen  by  Him  and  publicly  acknowledged  by  Him  before  the  world.  He  has
wrought  miracles  of  power  on  our  behalf,  and  we  thought  we  were  lifted  above  the
possibility  of  change  and  decay  to  which  other  nations  were  liable.  But  now  we
are  abandoned  by  our  Divine  Protector,  and  have  become  objects  of  scorn  by  our
oppressors.  Our  calamities  reflect  upon  the  name  and  honour  of  Him  who  has
done  so  much  for  us  :  our  reproach  is  His  reproach.  So  they  thought ;  and  so
think  the  privileged  in  all  ages  when  trouble  overtakes  them.  They  are  apt  to
blame  any  one  but  themselves,  and  are  slow  to  see  that  their  distresses  are  the
fruits  of  their  own  sins.

III.  Is  uttered  with  the  confidence  that  His  help  will  be  graciously  afforded.
**  Bemember,  consider,  behold."  Remember  what  is  past,  the  sufferings  we  have
had  ;  and  behold  and  consider  the  present,  the  sufferings  under  which  we  at  this
moment  writhe.  Is  this  nothing  to  Thee,  0  God  of  our  fathers?  Is  it  a  matter
of  indifference  to  Thee  that  Thine  own  children  are  in  such  abject  woe  ?  It  cannot
be.  Our  fathers  sinned  and  so  have  we  ;  but  we  repent.  We  are  still  the  heirs
of  the  promises.  Lord  have  mercy,  and  fulfil  Thy  word  unto  Thy  servants.  It  is
a  great  help  to  prayer  to  believe  that  God  not  only  sees  and  commiserates  our
miseries,  but  that  He  is  able  and  willing  to  help  us.

Lessons. — 1.  God  is  not  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  of  His  people.  2.  The
suffering  heart  finds  relief  in  prayer.  3.  Prayer  is  the  first  stage  in  ike  process  of
religious  reform.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


The  hopefulness  of  prayer.  1 .  When
it  is  the  cry  of  distress.  2.  When  it
encourages  a  humble  and  reverential
familiarity  with  God.  3.  When  it  is
an  earnest  appeal  from  the  weak  to  the
strong.  4.  When  it  is  based  on  the
assurance  that  God  knows  all  about  our
case  and  is  willing  to  succour.

Illustrations.  — The  need  of  prayer.

**  When  prayer  delights  the  least,  then  learn

to  sa}',
Soul,  now  is  greatest  need  that  thou  shouMst

pray.
Say  what  is  prayer,  when  it  is  prayer  indeed  ?
The  mighty  utterance  of  a  mighty  deed.
The  man   is  praying  who  doth  press  with

might
Out  of  his  darkness  into  God's  own  light.


All  things  that  live  from  God  their  sus-
tenance wait,
And  sun  and  moon  are  beggars  at  His  gate."

— Trench,

Prayer  in  trouhle.  Sinking  times
are  praying  times  with  the  Lord's  ser-
vants. Peter  neglected  prayer  at  start-
ing upon  his  adventurous  journey,  but
when  he  began  to  sink,  his  danger  made
him  a  suppliant,  and  his  cry,  though
late,  was  not  too  late.  In  our  hours  of
bodily  pain  and  mental  anguish  we  find
ourselves  as  naturally  driven  to  prayer
as  the  wreck  is  driven  upon  the  shore
by  the  waves.  The  fox  hies  to  his  hole
for  protection,  the  bird  flies  to  the  wood
for  shelter,  and  even  so  the  tried  be-
liever   hastens    to    the    mercy-seat   for

125


CHAP.  V.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS.


safety.  Heaven's  great  harbour  of
refuge  is  All-prayer.  Thousands  of
weather-beaten  vessels  have  found  a
haven  there,  and  the  moment  a  storm
comes  on  it  is  wise  for  us  to  make  for
it  with  all  sail. — Spurgeon.

Prayer  should  be  importunate.
Prayer  pulls  the  rope  below,  and  the
great  bell  riu'^^s  above  in  the  ears  of
God.  Some  scarcely  stir  the  bell,  for  they
pray  so  languidly  ;  others  give  but  an
occasional  pluck  at  the  rope  ;  but  he  who
wins  with  Heaven  is  the  man  who  grasps
the  rope  boldly,  and  pulls  continuously
with  all  his  might. — Biblical  Treasury,

God  answers  prayer.  I  once  saw  a
grand  procession  in  which  an  Oriental
monarch,  surrounded  by  a  thousand
life-guards,  moved  to  the  sound  of  all
kinds  of  music.  Some  unknown  sub-
ject had  a  request  to  urge.  He  knew
the  utter  impossibility  of  ever  break-
ing through  the  guards  that  day  and
night  surrounded  his  majesty.  That
humble  person  perhaps  had  some  dear
friend  in  prison,  who,  according  to
Oriental  custom,  could  never  be  tried  or
freed  while  the  prosecutor's  malice  or
purse  held  out.  They  have  no  Habeas
Corpus  law  among  nations  without  the
Bible.  This  poor  creature  took  the  only
possible  way  known  to  one  unable  to
bribe  the  officers,  and  flung  his  petition
over  the  heads  of  the  guards,  and  it  fell


at  the  feet  of  the  sovereign.  In  a
moment  one  of  the  life-guards  pierced
it  with  his  bayonet  and  flung  it  back
into  the  crowd.  Alas!  the  proud,
pleasure  -  loving  monarch,  amid  the
luxuriant  splendours  of  his  court,
palace,  army,  and  plans  of  reaping  re-
nown, never  so  much  as  dreamed  of
noticing  the  prayer  of  that  broken
heart  and  crushed  spirit.  Not  thus
does  the  King  of  kings  treat  the  hum-
blest suppliant  who  seeks  His  help. —
Van  Doren.

—  I  never  was  deeply  interested  in
any  object,  I  never  prayed  sincerely
and  earnestly  for  anything,  but  it  came  ;
at  some  time,  no  matter  how  distant  a
day,  in  some  shape,  probably  the  last
I  should  have  devised,  it  came. — Adoni-
ram  Jwhon.

Prayer  brings  deliverance.  Prayer
procures  deliverance  from  trouble  just
as  Naaman's  dipping  himself  seven
times  in  Jordan  procured  him  a  deliver-
ance from  his  leprosy ;  not  by  any
virtue  in  itself  adequate  to  so  great  an
efi'ect,  you  may  be  sure,  but  from  this,
that  it  was  appointed  by  God  as  the
condition  of  his  recovery,  and  so  obliged
the  power  of  Him  who  appointed  it  to
give  force  and  virtue  to  His  own  insti-
tutions beyond  what  the  nature  of  the
thing  itself  could  otherwise  have  raised
it  to. — South,


EOMILETICS.
The  Miseries  of  the  Disinherited.
(Verses  2-5.)

I.  To  see  their  possessions  enjoyed  by  foreigners.  "Our  inheritance  is
turned  to  strangers,  our  houses  to  aliens  "  (ver.  2).  The  land  of  Canaan  was  God's
gift  to  the  Jews.  It  was  promised  to  them  long  before  they  entered  into  posses-
sion. There  was  a  time  when  it  seemed  they  would  not  be  permitted  even  to  look
upon  their  Beulah-land.  But  God  kept  His  word,  and,  after  long  wandering  and
many  disappointments,  the  tribes  received  their  allotted  inheritance.  In  beauty
and  fruitfulness  they  found  the  land  all  that  it  had  been  represented.  For  many
happy  years  they  sat  under  their  own  vine  and  fig-tree,  none  daring  to  make  them
afraid.  It  was  a  bitter  disappointment  to  find  themselves  violently  ejected,  and
their  loved  inheritance  occupied  by  their  enemies.  The  possessions  of  earth  are
liable  to  strange  and  sudden  changes  ;  but  the  heavenly  inheritance  is  indefeasible,
and  can  never  be  wrested  from  the  faithful.

II.  To  be  reduced  to  the  condition  of  widows  and  orphans.     "We  are
orphans  and  fatherless  ;  our  mothers  are  as  widows"  (ver.  3).     Their  misery  was

126


EOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  ▼.


comparable  to  the  sad  aiul  lonely  desolation  of  fatlieilcvss  orphans  and  wives  just
bereaved  of  their  husbands.  Tiie  guardian,  guide,  and  support  of  family  life  is
taken  away,  and  they  are  left  to  battle  with  the  cold,  unpitying  world,  surrounded
with  heartless  and  cruel  enemies.  It  is  a  painful  experience  for  any  family  to  be
reduced  by  a  single  stroke  froni  affluence  to  penury  and  friendlessness.  If  God
did  not  help  the  widows  and  the  fatherless,  their  condition  would  be  unbearable.
The  competition  of  life  is  keen  enough  to  the  most  favoured  ;  but  it  is  a  terrible
struggle  to  the  lonely  and  friendless.  The  luxury  of  former  years  unfits  many  for
the  fierceness  of  life's  conflict,  and  thousands  go  down  into  untimely  oblivion.

III.  To  be  compelled  to  pay  for  the  food  and  fuel  produced  on  their  own
property.  "  We  have  drunken  our  water  for  money  ;  our  wood  is  sold  unto  us  '*
(ver.  4).  The  bitterness  of  the  complaint  is  intensified  in  not  merely  that  they
must  pay  for  the  necessaries  of  life,  but  that  it  is  their  own  property  which  they
have  to  purchase.  The  water  in  their  own  house  cisterns  is  taxed ;  the  wood  in
their  own  forests  must  be  paid  for — and  they  paid  dearly  for  every  fa^^ot.  "  The
captives  were  doubtless  closely  watched,  and  not  allowed  to  stray  from  the  place
where  they  were  detained  in  preparation  for  their  removal  to  Babylon,  and  thus
could  obtain  wood  and  water  only  by  paying  for  them  "  {Speaker^ s  Gommervtary).
How  would  they  long  now  for  the  sticks  their  little  children  used  to  gather  for  the
fires  in  which  they  idolatrously  baked  cakes  for  the  queen  of  heaven  !  (Jer.  vii.
18).  It  is  in  the  hardships  of  life  that  we  lament  the  wanton  waste  of  more  pros-
perous times.

IV.  To  be  harassed  by  incessant  toil.  "  Our  necks  are  under  persecution  :
we  labour  and  have  no  rest "  (ver.  5).  We  were  pursued  so  actively  that  our  ene-
mies seemed  ever  so  close  upon  us  as  to  be  leaning  over  our  necks  ready  at  once
to  seize  us.  We  were  tired  out  with  being  thus  chased  incessantly,  and  no  oppor-
tunity was  allowed  us  of  refreshing  our  weary  frames  {Speaker's  Commentary).
Labour  is  necessary  for  health,  for  sustenance,  for  happiness.  There  is  nothing
servile  in  honest  and  necessary  work,  whether  by  hand  or  brain.  Abraham  fed  his
own  flocks.  Moses  kept  sheep  in  the  desert.  Paul  stitched  canvas  tents  while
labouring  as  a  pioneer  among  the  Gentiles.  The  fathers  of  the  Roman  Republic
ploughed  their  own  fields,  sowed  the  seed,  and  reaped  their  harvests  with  their  own
hands.  But  there  is  neither  nobility  nor  pleasure  in  forced  labour,  especially  in
labour  unrelieved  by  necessary  rest.  Life  becomes  one  long,  weary,  monotonous,
and  depressing  grind.     And  this  is  often  the  fate  of  the  disinherited.

Lessons. — 1.  It  is  a  great  hardship  to  see  our  rightful  inheritance  violently
transferred  to  strangers.  2.  The  loss  of  worldly  property  is  not  always  the  greatest
calamity.  3.  The  truly  good  have  an  inheritance  that  is  incorruptible^  undefiled,
and  that  fadeth  not  aicay.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES


Vers.  2-5.  The  sudden  reverses  of
fortune.  1.  From  wealth  to  poverty
(ver.  2).  2.  From  social  happiness  to
loneliness  (ver.  3).  3.  From  freedom
to  galling  exactions  (ver.  4).  4.  From
ease  to  excessive  toil  (ver.  5).

Ver.  2.  Property.  1.  Knows  nothing
of  absolute  ownership.  2.  Is  constantly
changing  hands.  3.  Its  loss  by  robbery
and  pillage  a  great  hardship.  4.  Its
fickle  tenure  contrasts  with  the  im-
perishable character  of  spiritual  posses-
sions.


Ver.  3.     Bereavement.     1.   One  of

the  great  curses  of  war.  2.  The  inevit-
able lot  of  humanity.  3.  Brings  pun-
gent sorrow  to  somebody.

Vers.  4,  5.  The  loss  of  liberty.  I.
Is  painfully  realised  by  the  imposition
of  unjust  exactions.  "  We  have  drunken
our  water  for  money  ;  our  wood  is  sold
unto  us"  (ver.  4).  II.  Is  followed  by
oppression.  *'  Our  necks  are  under  per-
secution" (ver.  5).  III.  Subjects  to  the
slavery  of  incessant  labour.  *'  We  labour
and  have  no  rest "  (ver.  5).

127


CHAP.  V.


EOMUETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS,


Illustrations.  —  The  sadness  of
national  decline.  '•  Since  first  the
dominion  of  men  was  asserted  over  the
ocean,  three  thrones,  of  mark  beyond
all  others,  have  been  set  upon  its  sands
— the  thrones  of  Tyre,  Venice,  and
England.  Of  the  first  of  these  great
powers  only  the  memory  remains ;  of
the  second,  the  ruin ;  the  third,  which
inherits  their  greatness,  if  it  forget  their
example,  may  be  led,  through  prouder
eminence,  to  less  pitied  destruction.
The  exultation,  the  sin,  and  the  punish-
ment of  Tyre  have  been  recorded  for
us  in  perhaps  the  most  touching  words
ever  uttered  by  the  prophets  of  Israel
against  the  cities  of  the  stranger.  Her
successor,  like  her  in  perfection  of
beauty,  though  less  in  endurance  of
dominion,  is  still  left  for  our  beholding
in  the  final  period  of  her  decline,  a
ghost  upon  the  sands  of  the  sea,  so
weak,  so  quiet,  so  bereft  of  all  but  her
loveliness,  that  we  might  well  doubt,
as  we  watched  her  faint  reflection  in
the  mirage  of  the  lagoon,  which  was
the  city  and  which  the  shadow." —
Ruskin.

Bereavement  has  its  consolations.
A  little  boy  once  went  out  in  the  early
morn,  and  was  greatly  delighted  with
the  little  globes  formed  by  the  dew  on
the  brambles.  He  hastened  back,  and
led  his  father  out  to  see  these  miniature
worlds ;  but  when  the  father  and  son
arrived,  the  sun  was  up,  and  had  drawn
up  in  vapour  the  globes  that  had  hung
on  the  brambles,  and  so  displeased  the
child.  The  child  cried,  and  said,  "  The
angry  sun  has  taken  them  all  up."  The
father  looked  up  and  saw  the  beautiful
rainbow  on  the  bosom  of  the  cloud,  and
said,  "There,  my  child,  the  sun  has
taken  up  the  bramble  globes,  and  they
help  to  form  that  beautiful  bow  on  the
cloud."  Ah  !  my  friends,  God  has  taken
up  some  of  our  friends,  and  have  we
not  murmured^     But  where  are  they?


Ah !  do  they  not  form  the  beautiful
bow  round  the  throne  of  God?

Industry  secures  independence.  He
that  hath  a  trade  hath  an  estate,  and  he
that  hath  a  calling  hath  an  office  of
profit  and  honour ;  but  then  the  trade
must  be  worked  at  and  the  calling
followed.  If  we  are  industrious,  we
shall  never  starve,  for  at  the  working
man's  house  hunger  looks  in  but  dares
not  enter.  Nor  will  the  bailiff  or  the
constable  enter,  for  industry  pays
debts  while  despair  increaseth  them. —
Franklin.

Compassion  for  the  needy.  King
Oswald  of  Northumbria  accompanied
the  monk  Aidan  in  his  long  missionary
journeys  as  interpreter.  One  day,  as
he  feasted  with  the  monk  by  his  side,
the  thegn,  a  noble  of  his  war-band,
whom  he  had  set  to  give  alms  to  the
poor  at  his  gate,  told  him  of  a  multi-
tude that  still  waited  fasting  without.
The  king  at  once  bade  the  untasted
meat  before  him  be  carried  to  the  poor,
and  his  silver  dish  he  divided  piece-
meal among  them.  Aidan  seized  the
royal  hand  and  blessed  it.  '*  May  this
hand,"  he  cried,  "  never  grow  old.'*

Persecution  defeats  itself.  The
cruelty  of  Mary's  reign  and  the  lurid
fires  of  Sraithfield  had  only  worked  in
Londoners  a  fiercer  conviction  of  the
error  and  falsity  of  the  Roman  Catholic
religion,  and  when  Elizabeth  came  to
the  throne,  the  people  thronged  the
streets  and  greeted  her  with  acclama-
tion, as  though  her  coming  were  as  the
rising  of  the  sun.

—  Speaking  of  the  persecutions  and
martyrdoms  in  the  time  of  Queen  Mary,
Mr.  Froude  says,  "  Every  martyr's  trial
was  a  battle ;  every  constant  death  was
a  defeat  of  the  common  enemy ;  and
the  instinctive  consciousness  that  truth
was  asserting  itself  in  suffering  con-
verted the  natural  emotion  of  horroi
into  admiring  pride,'*


HOMILETICS,
Humiliating  Subjection.

(Verses  6-9.)

I.  Personal  liberty  is  surrendered  for  a  livelihooa.     "  We  have  given  the

hand  to  the  Egyptian  and  to  the  Assyrians,  to  be  satisfied  with  bread"  (ver.  6).
128


BOM  1  LET  10  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,  chap.  v.


Absolutely  it  was  Babylon  that  had  just  destroyed  their  national  existence,  but
Jeremiah  means  that  all  feelings  of  patriotism  were  crushed,  and  the  sole  care
that  remained  was  the  selfish  desire  for  personal  preservation.  To  secure  this  the
people  would  readily  have  submitted  to  the  yoke  either  of  Egypt  or  Assyria,  the
great  powers  from  which  in  their  past  history  they  had  so  often  suffered  [Speaker's
Commentary).  Life  is  sweet,  and  it  is  appalling  to  think  how  many  there  are
ready  to  sell  their  conscience,  their  souls,  their  friends,  their  country  for  bread  !
The  sting  of  want  demoralises  the  soul.  It  is  matter  for  unspeakable  thankfulness
when  men  are  lifted  above  the  degrading  temptations  of  poverty.

II.  The  penalty  of  continuance  in  sin.  '*  Our  fathers  have  sinned,  and  are
not;  and  we  have  borne  their  iniquities"  (ver.  7).  It  is  a  frequent  practice  of  the
unfortunate  to  blame  the  past.  Here  the  sufferers  complain  that  their  predeces-
sors, who  commenced  the  national  apostasy,  had  died  before  the  punishment  began,
and  that  they  are  left  to  bear  alone  the  fatal  consequences  wliich  previous  trans-
gressors had  escaped.  It  was  some  time  before  the  truth  dawned  upon  their  minds
that  they  had  adopted  and  continued  with  aggravated  obstinacy  the  sins  of  their
forefathers,  and  that  there  was  quite  sufficient  guilt  in  their  own  iniquity  to  merit
tlie  chastisement  they  suffered.  The  course  of  sin  is  downward,  ever  downward,
and  plunges  its  victims  into  the  most  humiliating  subjection.

III.  A  painful  experience  to  a  high-spirited  people  when  domineered  over
by  inferiors.  "Servants  have  ruled  over  us :  there  is  none  that  doth  deliver  us
out  of  their  hands  "  (ver.  8).  Among  the  things  for  which  "  the  earth  is  dis-
quieted and  which  it  cannot  bear,"  the  proverb  saith,  "  For  a  servant  when  he
reignetli "  (Prov.  xxx.  21,  22).  In  Oriental  countries  slaves  often  rose  to  high
office,  and  there  were  no  doubt  such  in  the  Chaldean  army.  The  rule  of  such  is
often  maintained  with  unnecessary  rigour.  They  seem  to  think  that  they  can  gain
respect  and  reverence  only  by  severity.  The  Jews  fretted  and  chafed  under  the
petty  tyranny  of  men  whom  they  regarded  as  in  every  respect  their  inferiors  except
in  their  cruel  bondage.      Virgil  has  said —

'*  Since  slaves  so  insolent  are  grown.
What  may  not  masters  do?  "

The  Jews  had  rebelled  against  the  wise  and  gentle  rule  of  Jehovah  and  His  servants
the  prophets.  Now  they  are  ruled  by  the  tyranny  of  their  enemies  and  of  their
slaves.    The  sinner  cannot  escape  the  operation  of  law.    He  only  exchanges  rulers.

IV.  The  victims  are  compelled  to  snatch  their  food  at  the  peril  of  their
lives.  "  We  gat  our  bread  at  the  peril  of  our  lives,  because  of  the  sword  of  the
wilderness "  (ver.  9).  Though  they  were  willing  to  surrender  their  liberty  for
food,  its  supply  was  very  uncertain  and  precarious.  "  This  verse  apparently  refers
to  those  who  were  left  as  del  vers  and  vine-dressers  in  the  land,  and  who,  in  gather-
ing in  such  fruits  as  remained,  were  exposed  to  incursions  of  the  Bedaween,  here
called  the  sword  of  the  desert."  Every  morsel  of  food  they  ate  was  snatched  as
from  the  mouths  of  wild  beasts.  The  next  forage  for  food  may  cost  them,  not
only  their  independence,  but  their  lives.  They  had  indeed  to  eat  their  bread  with
quaking  and  carefulness,  as  it  had  been  predicted  (Ezek.  xii.  18,  19).  There  is
no  advantage  in  selling  our  souls  for  bread ;  it  is  a  bad  bargain.  Honour  is  more
precious  than  food,  or  than  life  itself.

Lessons. — 1.  War  imposes  great  degradations  on  the  conquered.  2.  Sin  is  at
the  root  of  all  humiliation  and  suffering,  3.  Subjection  is  irUolerable  to  those  who
have  tasted  the  siveets  of  freedom,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  6,  8,  9.  The  intense  love  of      freedom  for  food  (ver.  6).     2.  Subjects
life:    1.  Tempts    men    to    barter    iheir      to  the  oppressive  tyranny  of  inferiors
129  I


6HAP.  V.


tlOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


(ver.  8).     3.  "Will   nm   great  risks   in
the  struggle  for  maintenance  (ver.  9).

Ver.  7.  Sin  and  punishment :  1.  Are
closely  linked  together.  2.  The  sins,
like  the  virtues,  of  one  generation  pass
on  in  their  consequence  to  the  next.
3.  Suffering  on  account  of  others  is
taken  into  account  in  God's  dealing
with  individuals  and  with  nations.  4.
Every  offender  is  punished  only  accord-
ing to  his  own  sin.

Illustrations. — Mistaken  views  of
life.  Two  old  men,  amateur  naturalists,
who  had  devoted  their  whole  lives,  one
to  ferns  and  the  other  to  orcliids,  tra-
velled together  for  many  hours.  At
the  end  of  their  journey  he  who  had
cultivated  ferns  said  to  his  companion
with  a  sigh,  "I  have  wasted  my  life  :
if  I  had  it  to  live  over  again,  I  should
devote  it  to  orchids."

Life  divinely  ordered.  Our  life  is
a  web  woven  by  the  hand  of  God,  the
thread  reaching  from  our  birth  to  our
death.  The  woof  is  trouble,  but  still
runs  with  it  a  weft  of  interwoven  com-
forts.— Adams.

Sin  in  man.  In  man  there  will  be
a  layer  of  fierce  hyena  or  of  timid  deer
running  through  the  nature  in  the  most
uncertain  and  tortuous  manner.     Kero


is  sensitive  to  poetry  and  music,  but  not
to  human  suffering.  Marcus  Aurelius
is  tolerant  and  good  to  all  men  but
Christians.  The  Tlascalans  of  Mexico
loved,  and  even  worshipped  flowers,  but
they  were  cruel  to  excess,  and  sacrificed
human  victims  with  savage  delight.
The  good  and  the  evil  lie  close  together,
the  virtues  and  the  vices  alternate,  so
is  human  power  accumulated  ;  alter-
nately the  metal  and  the  rags,  a  terrible
voltaic  pile.  In  the  well-bred  animal
the  claw  is  nicely  cushioned ;  the  old
Adam  is  presentable. — A.  F.  RtisselL

Humiliation.  It  is  with  us  as  with
the  reeds  which  grow  by  the  river-side  ;
when  the  waters  overflow,  the  reed  bows
its  head  and  bends  down,  and  the  flood
passes  over  without  breaking  it ;  after
which  it  uplifts  its  head  and  stands
erect  in  all  its  vigour,  rejoicing  in  re-
newed life.  So  is  it  with  us  ;  we  also
must  sometimes  be  bowed  down  to  the
earth  and  humbled,  and  then  arise  with
renewed  joy  and  trust.

Submission.  Let  us  not  charge  God
over- hastily  with  the  untoward  inci-
dents of  life.  In  the  main  we  are  the
manufacturers  of  our  own  life -material.
If  you  give  the  weaver  none  but  dark
threads,  he  can  only  fashion  a  sombre
pattern. — Halsey,


H0MILETIC8.

The  Galling  Tyranny  of  Conquest.

(Verses  10-13.)

I.  There  is  the  physical  suffering  occasioned  by  starvation.     **  Our  skin  is

black  like  an  oven  because  of  the  terrible  famine  "  (ver.  10).  The  human  body
can  bear  a  great  deal,  but  it  cannot  resist,  nor  can  it  survive,  the  ravages  of  famine.
The  bloom  of  health  fades  from  the  cheek,  the  eyes  shine  with  an  unnatural  lustre,
and  then  lose  all  expression ;  the  flesh  is  dried  and  parched,  the  skin  becomes
"fiery  red  like  an  oven, 'because  of  the  fever-blast"  of  famine,  and  the  whole
frame  becomes  skeletonised.  During  one  of  the  famines  in  Ireland  there  was  a
form  of  face  which  came  upon  the  sufferers  when  their  state  of  misery  was  far
advanced,  and  which  was  a  sure  signal  that  their  last  stage  of  misery  was  nearly
run.  The  mouth  would  fall  and  seem  to  hang,  the  lips  at  the  two  ends  of  the
mouth  would  be  dragged  down,  and  the  lower  parts  of  the  cheeks  would  fall,  as
though  they  had  been  dragged  and  pulled.  There  were  no  signs  of  acute  agony,
none  of  the  horrid  symptoms  of  gnawing  hunger.  The  look  was  one  of  apathy,
desolation,  and  death.      The  agony  of  want  was  past.     Nothing  could  save.

II.  Social  purity  is  outraged.     "  They  humbled  the  women  in  Zion,  and  the
maids  in  the  city  of  Judah  "  (ver.  11).    History  records  revolting  examples  of  the

130


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LA MENTA TI0N8,  chap.  ▼.

excesses  committed  by  a  brutal  soldiery  in  the  mad  delirium  of  conquest.  War
brings  in  its  train  worse  consequences  than  wounds  and  death.  There  is  a  fouler
lust  than  the  lust  of  military  glory.  The  pure  and  unoffending  are  dishonoured.
The  sanctity  of  social  life  is  invaded,  and  its  sacred  laws  violated.

III.  Rank  and  age  are  treated  with  indignity.  "  Princes  are  hanged  up  by
their  hand  :  the  faces  of  elders  were  not  honoured "  (ver.  1 2).  See  exegetical
notes  on  this  verse.  It  was  a  barbarity  of  ancient  warfare  that  the  conqueror  paid
so  little  regard  to  the  feelings  of  the  conquered.  To  the  humiliation  of  defeat  was
added  whatever  could  pain  and  degrade  the  vanquished.  The  princes  of  the  royal
blood  and  magistrates  who  had  grown  old  in  their  lengthened  term  of  office  were
treated  with  scant  courtesy.  The  conqueror  seemed  to  glory  in  parading  the  most
illu^'trious  of  his  captives  under  the  most  ignominious  conditions.  There  were
noble  exceptions  to  this  rule,  but  they  were  so  rare  that  history  has  not  failed  to
chronicle  them,

IV.  Young  men  and  children  are  forced  into  the  performance  of  the  most
menial  and  exhausting  tasks.  '*They  took  the  young  men  to  grind,  and  the
children  fell  under  the  wood"  (ver.  13).  To  grind  the  corn  in  the  hand-mill  was
the  work  of  female  slaves.  It  was  a  great  blow  to  the  self-respect  and  ambition
of  the  young  men  who  were  of  legal  age  for  military  service  to  be  condemned  to
this  menial  work.  The  little  Jewish  children,  whose  tender  years  should  have
been  a  sufficient  protection  against  such  cruelty,  staggered  under  the  loads  of  fire-
wood they  were  compelled  to  carry  for  the  Chaldean  soldiers,  who  indulged  in
inhuman  sport  at  the  brave  little  fellows  as  they  fell  exhausted  under  their  crush-
ing burdens.  Many  of  the  children  would  be  crippled  for  life.  It  is  one  of  the
praiseworthy  features  of  nineteenth-century  civilisation  that  so  much  care  is  shown
in  the  protection  and  healthy  development  of  child-life.

Lessons — 1.  Woe  to  the  people  loho  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  heartless  con-
qtieror  I  2.  There  are  worse  sufferings  than  the  sense  of  being  vanquished.  3.  The
tyrant  conqueror  has  no  respect  for  seXy  or  rank,  or  age.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,

Ver.  10.  The  sufferings  of  famine,  thrive  in  their  shadow,  kept  the  ground

1.  Apparent  in  their  ghastly  physical  open,  and  held  the  water  in  countless

reiults.     2.  Reduce  all  ranks  to  a  com-  natural  wells  for  the  use  of  the  soil  in

mon  level.     3.  Are  intensified  by  con-  droughts.      But  all   the   undergrowth

scious  defeat  and  humiliation.  dying  when  its  protecting  forests  were

Vers.  11-13.    The  atrocities  of  war.  felled,  the  scanty  showers   percolated

1.  The  pure  and  defenceless  are  defiled  into  the  streams  at  once,  causing  rare

(ver.  11).     2.  Princes  and  aged  coun-  floods    and    frequent    droughts.     The

sellors  are  treated  with  contempt  and  droughts  yielded  no  harvests,  and  no

cruelty  (ver.  12).     3.  The  spirit  of  the  harvests  were  followed  by  famine,  pcs-

young   is   crushed  with   overpowering  tilence,  and  death.

burdens  (ver.  13).  The  fascination  of  lust.     You  will

go  on  in  your  lust  and  your  sins,  de-

Illustrations. — The  cause  of  famine,  spite   warnings,    despite  advice,   until

For  unknown  years  the  Persians  have  you  perish  in  your  guilt.     How  worse

been  cutting  off  their  trees,  and  dimi-  than  children  are  grown-up  men  !    The

nishing  their  rainfall  thereby.      Nay,  child  who  goes  for  a  merry  slide  upon

not  only  has  the  removal  of  the  forests  a  pond,  if  he  be  told  that  the  ice  will

decreased  the  supply,  but  it  has  wasted  not  bear  him,  starts  back  affrighted,  or,

whatever  rain  fell.      For  the  roots  of  if  he  daringly  creeps  upon  it,  how  soon

the  trees  and  of  all  the  innumerable  he  leaves  it  if  he  hears  but  a  crack  upon

shrubs,   bushes,    vines  and  ferns   that  the  slender  covering  of  the  water  I    But

131


CJHAP.  V.  HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


you  men  have  conscience,  which  tells  eyes,  some  dying,  and  these  reduced  to

yoa  that  your  sins  are  vile,  and  that  ghastly   skeletons  ;    but   none  of  these

they  will  be  your  ruin.      You  hear  the  moved   him  to  peril   his  own  life  for

crack  of  sin  as  its  thin  sheet  of  pleasure  theirs.     The  object  of  his  noble  and  not

gives  way  beneath  your  feet ;  ay!  and  unrewarded  generosity — foras  if  Heaven

some  of  you  have  seen  your  comrades  had  sent  it  on  purpose  to  reward  the

sink  in  the  fl()od  and  lost,  and  yet  you  act,  a  sail  speedily  hove  in  sight— was

go  sliding   on.      Worse  than   childish,  a  gentle  boy,  that,  with  his  face  turned

worse   tlian    mad,    are    you,   thus  pre-  on  hers,  lay  dying  in  a  mother's  arms,

sumptuously  to  play  with  your  ever-  and  between  whose  teeth  the  famished

lasting  state. — Spurgeon.  man  put  his  own  last  precious  morsel.

— Guthrie.

Age  dishonoured.  The  atrocities  of  war.     I  look  on

•*  I  have  lived  long  enough.    My  way  of  life  war  with  a  horror  which  no  words  can

Is  fallen  into  the  sere  and  yellow  leaf :  express.     I  have  long  wanted  patience

And  that  which  should  accompany  old  age,  ^^    ^^^^    ^f    battles.      The    thought    of

As  honour,  love,  obedience,  troops  of  friends,  r^    ^,      •             l  i      vu     v    ^  v       a

I  must  not  look  to  have."-5Jtoi.care.  ^^n,  God's  immortal  child,  butchered

by  his  brother,  the  thought  of  sea  and

Helplessness   appeals  to   our  pity,  land    stained   with    human   blood   by

Thus  was  the  heart  of  the  rough  sailor  human  hands,  of  women  and  children

touched  when,  tossing  with  other  cast-  buried  under  the  ruins  of  besieged  cities,

a  ways  in  an  open  boat  on  the  open  sea,  of  the   resources   of  empires  and   the

he  parted  with  a  morsel  of  food,  which,  mighty  powers  of  nature  all  turned  by

hidden  with  more  care  than  misers  hide  man's  malignity  into  engines  of  torture

their  gold,  he  had  reserved  for  his  own  and  destruction — this  thought  gives  to

last  extremity.     Around  him  lay  men  earth  the  semblance  of  hell.     I  shudder

and  women,  some   dead,   with   glassy  as  among  demons. — Channing,


EOMILETICS.
Business  and  Recreation.

(Verses  14,  15.)

L  Are  necessary  in  all  organised  communities.  Commercial  activity  and
prosperity  lead  to  a  more  highly  organised  condition  of  social  life.  To  prevent
the  clashing  and  confusion  of  the  multiplicity  of  interests  generated  by  an  increas-
ing commerce,  certain  rules  are  laid  down  for  general  observance.  It  is  only  thus
that  law  and  order  can  be  maintained.  It  is  soon  recognised  that  business  and
pleasure  must  be  judiciously  combined  in  order  to  develop  a  healthy  and  vigorous
people.  Incessant  labour  would  grind  down  and  destroy  the  force  of  the  national
character,  and  an  uninterrupted  round  of  pleasure  would  weaken  and  dissipate  its
enterprise  and  energy.  The  happy  medium  in  promoting  what  is  best  in  both
individual  and  national  life  is  found  in  the  wise  alternation  of  work  and  recreation.

**  Run  if  you  will,  but  try  to  keep  your  breath  ;
Work  like  a  man,  but  don't  be  worked  to  death."

II.  Are  evidences  of  a  happy  and  contented  people.  The  gate  of  an  Eastern
city  is  the  common  rendezvous  of  the  citizens  for  both  business  and  recreation.
There  the  venerable  counsellors  sit  in  repose  and  dignity  to  discuss  and  settle  dis-
putes. There  the  traders  vend  their  wares.  There  the  young  life  of  the  city  ex-
presses its  exuberant  joy  in  song  and  dance.  Here  we  have  a  picture  of  prosperity,
peace,  and  happiness.  No  people  will  be  long  content  where  there  is  not  a  thriv-
ing commerce,  a  reverence  for  law  and  age,  ample  employment  and  food,  and  the
opportunity  for  innocent  recreation.
132


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAnY:  LAMENTATIONS,


CHAP.  V.


III.  Their  absence  a  pathetic  sign  of  general  desolation.  "  The  elders  have
ceased  from  the  gate,  the  young  men  from  their  music.  The  joy  of  our  heart  is
ceased  ;  our  dance  is  turned  into  mourning"  (vers.  14,  15).  The  aged  magistrates
no  lonorer  frequent  the  gate,  the  bazaars  of  the  merchants  are  deserted,  the  busy
murmur  of  buying  and  selling  is  hushed,  the  instruments  of  music  are  laid  aside
unstrung,  the  voice  of  singing  is  no  longer  heard,  and  the  spirits  of  the  youtliful
dancers  are  crushed.  Business  and  pleasure  alike  are  abandoned.  The  joy  of
happier  times  is  turned  into  mourning.  The  prophet  could  give  no  more  graphic
a  picture  of  the  desolation  and  ruin  that  had  settled  down  upon  the  land.

Lessons. — 1.  The  chararfer  and  condition  of  a  nation  may  he  read  in  its
commerce  and  recreations.  2.  Work  and  play  are  alike  necessary  in  the  develojy-
ment  of  national  life^  3.  When  the  spring  of  enterprise  is  broken^  a  nation  sinks
into  decay,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  14,  15.  The  extinction  of
national  life :  1.  When  the  wise  and
aged  are  no  longer  interested  in  public
affairs.  2.  When  the  voice  of  mirth  is
hushed.  3.  When  youth  has  lost  its
elasticity  and  hope.

iLLusTRATioNa  —  The  dignity  of
labour.  It  is  time  that  the  opprobrium
of  toil  were  done  away.  Ashamed  of
toil,  art  thou  ?  Ashamed  of  thy  dingy
workshop  or  dusty  labour-field,  of  thy
hard  hand,  scarred  with  service  more
honourable  than  that  of  war,  of  thy
soiled  and  weather-stained  garments,  on
which  Mother  Nature  has  embroidered,
amidst  sun  and  rain,  amidst  smoke  and
steam,  her  own  heraldic  honours?
Ashamed  of  these  tokens  and  titles,  and
envious  of  the  flaunting  robes  of  im-
becile idleness  and  vanity  1  It  is  treason
to  Nature,  it  is  impiety  to  Heaven.  Toil
— toil  either  of  the  brain,  of  the  heart,
or  of  the  hand — is  true  nobility.

Business  not  to  absorb  all  our  time.
Who  gave  thee  leave.  Christian,  to  over-
lade  thyself  with  the  encumbrances  of
life  ?  Is  not  God  the  Lord  of  thy  time,
as  of  everything  else  1  He  does  indeed
allow  thee  a  fair  portion  for  the  lower
employments  of  the  body,  but  did  He
ever  intend  to  turn  Himself  out  of  alH
This  is  as  if  the  sailors,  who  are  allowed
by  the  merchant  some  small  adventure
for  themselves,  should  fill  the  ship,  and
leave  no  stowage  for  his  goods  ;  or  as  if
a  servant  should  excuse  himself  to  his
master,  when  reproved  for  neglecting
his  duty,  by  saying  he  could  not  do  it
because  he  was  drunk. — Gurnall.


Business  and  religion.  Piety  does
not  retreat  from  business,  but  it  seizes
business,  sanctifies  it,  and  makes  it
sacred.  If  I  understand  religion,  it  is
to  open  a  shop,  it  is  to  freight  ships,  it
is  to  keep  accounts,  it  is  to  write  up
your  ledgers,  it  is  to  wear  an  apron  till
it  be  as  holy  as  a  bishop's  sleeve,  and
to  wield  a  spade  as  responsibly  and
devoutly  as  a  monarch  sways  a  sceptre.
The  true  characteristic  of  religion  is  to
go  down  into  everything,  rise  up  to  the
highest,  till,  like  the  atmosphere,  it  em-
braces all  in  its  beneficent  and  beautiful
folds.  — Cumming.

Recreation.  Lute-strings  sound  all
the  sweeter  for  being  sometimes  let
down ;  and  fields  sowed  every  year  be-
come barren.  So  it  is  with  body  and
mind.

—  A  primitive  Christian  playing  with
birds  vindicated  his  conduct  by  com-
parison with  the  bow,  which,  if  con-
stantly bent,  becomes  useless.  Recrea-
tion is  a  second  creation.

Pleasure  itself  unsatisfying.  George
Moore,  when  a  wealthy  man,  wrote  in
his  diary — "After  this  we  kept  a  great
deal  of  company.  The  house  was  looked
upon  as  a  work  of  art.  All  our  friends
expected  to  be  invited  to  see  it  and
partake  of  our  hospitality.  We  accord-
ingly gave  a  large  dinner  weekly,  until
we  had  exhausted  our  numerous  friends
and  acquaintances.  But  happiness  does
not  flow  in  such  a  channel.  Promiscuous
company  takes  one's  mind  away  from
God  and  His  dealings  with  men ;  and
there  is  no  lasting  pleasure  in  the  ex-
citement."

133


OTA?  V.  HOMllETfC  COMMSyTARr:  LAMENTATIONS.


HOMILETICS.
The  Loss  of  Honour.

(Verse  16.)

I.  Honour  is  the  crown  of  individual  character.     Honour  is  moral  rectitude,
tlie  crown  and  dignity  of  the  true  man.

"Say  what  is  honour?     'Tis  the  finest  sense
Of  justice  which  the  human  mind  can  frame,
Intent  each  lurking  frailty  to  disclaim,
And  guard  the  way  of  life  from  all  offence
Suffered  or  done." — Wordsrvorth,

Moral  rectitude  is  not  a  natural  possession ;  it  is  the  gift  of  Divine  grace.  It
must  be  humbly  and  penitently  sought,  gratefully  received,  and  strengthened  and
increased  by  incessant  exercise.  It  is  all  of  grace,  and  this  grace  sheds  a  glory
and  lustre  upon  the  soul.  As  the  diamond  in  the  ring,  so  is  grace  to  the  souL  A
heart  beautified  with  grace  has  the  picture  of  the  King  of  heaven  hung  in  it.  It
is  dignified  witli  the  reflected  splendour  of  the  Divine  majesty.

II.  When  honour  is  lost,  man  is  discrowned.  "  The  crown  is  fallen  from  our
head."  Israel  not  only  lost  their  national  king,  and  with  him  their  national
independence,  but  they  lost  their  moral  kingship,  their  personal  righteousness ;
and  this  they  lost  before  they  were  deprived  of  their  earthly  king.  All  that  had
given  them  rank  and  honour  was  tumbled  in  the  dust.

"  Better  to  die  ten  thousand  deaths
Than  wound  my  honour."

"  Mine  honour  is  my  life ;  both  grow  in  one ;
Take  honour  from  me,  and  my  life  is  done."

III.  Honour  is  lost  when  righteousness  is  abandoned.  "  Woe  unto  us  that  we
have  sinned."  Afflicted  Judah  is  getting  clearer  light.  In  the  seventh  verse  they
still  cling  to  the  idea  that  their  national  calamities  were  to  be  ascribed  to  the  sins
of  their  ancestors.  Now  they  see  the  enormity  of  their  own  sins,  and  acknow-
ledge that  they  deserved  chastisement.  Man  is  invulnerable  to  the  assaults  of  the
enemy  and  to  the  heaviest  blows  of  misfortune  and  suffering  while  he  retains  his
integrity.  He  is  fenced  round  with  the  unconquerable  protection  of  the  God  in
whom  he  trusts.  It  is  when  he  is  untrue  to  himself,  to  his  highest  sense  of
honour,  that  he  is  untrue  to  Grod,  and,  falling  away  frcm  righteousness,  he  becomes
discrowned,  and  sinks  into  disgrace  and  misery.

Lessons.  —  1.  Righteousness  confers  dignity.  2.  That  man  suffers  unspeakable
loss  who  does  not  act  up  to  his  holiest  impulses,  3.  When  a  man  loses  a  sense
of  honour^  he  may  sink  to  any  depth  of  infamy.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.  16.    The  degradation   of  sin :  abhorrence.     3.  The  third  woe  is  God's

1.  Begins   in  personal  unfaithfulness.  leaving  us.     4.  The  fourth  woe  is  all

2.  It   is   undignified   to  sin.     3.  The  kinds  of  punishment — an  Iliad  of  evils,
course  of   sin  ends   in  misery  and   in  — Bishop  Ussher.

woe.

A  series  of  woes.     "  Woe  unto  us  Illustrations. — True  dignity.

that  we   have   sinned."     1.    The  first  ,..«       j.     -^    .                •    j  i.     i

.    ^,           1,    ,.          -   ,,             IV-  **  True  dignity  18  never  gamed  by  place,

woe  IS  the  polluting  of  the  soul  by  sin.  ^nd   never  lost  when   honours  are  with-

2.  The  second  woe  is  God*s  hatred  and  drawn." — Ma$singer.
134


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


OHAt  ▼.


**  Ye  proud,  ye  selfish,  ye  severe,
How  vain  your  mask  of  state  ;
The  good  alone  have  joy  sincere,

The  good  alone  are  great." — Beattie.

Fallen  greatness.

*'  I  have  ventured,
Like  little  wanton  boys  that  swim  on  bladders,
This  many  summers  in  a  sea  of  glory,
But  far  beyond  my  depth  :  my  high-blown  pride
At  length  broke  under  me  ;  and  now  has  left

me,
Weary  and  old  with  service,  to  the  mercy
Of  a  rude  stream,  that  must  for  ever  hide  me.
Vain  pomp  and  glory  of  this  world,  I  hate  ye  !  "

—  Wolsey.

Degradation.  That  which  renders
men  so  unwilling  to  believe  themselves
capable  of  union  with  God  is  but  the
sense  of  their  own  degradation.  I
would  gladly  be  informed  whence
this  creature,  who  acknowledges  him-
self so  weak,  obtains  the  right  to
measure  and  limit  the  Divine  mercy  as
his  own  fancy  suggests.     Man  under-


stands so  little  the  nature  of  God  that
he  understands  not  himself ;  and  yet,
troubled  by  the  contemplation  of  his
own  condition,  he  boldly  pronounces
that  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  God
to  qualify  him  for  this  connection, —
Pascal.

The  agony  of  dishonour.  The  most
terrible  blow  that  General  Grant  ever
knew  was  when  the  bank  in  which  he
was  a  partner  had  suspended  payment.
Not  only  was  he  ruined,  his  sons  and
daughters  penniless  by  reason  of  all  their
savings  invested  in  it  being  lost ;  but
after  a  few  days  there  came  out  a
horrible  story  of  craft  and  guile,  and  it
was  seen  that  his  honoured  name  had
been  used  to  entice  and  decoy  hosts  of
friends,  to  their  own  injury  and  Grant's
discredit  Imputations  were  even  cast
on  the  fame  that  belonged  to  the  coun-
try, and  this  blow  was  worst  of  all :  the
shock  of  battle  was  less  tremendous^
his  physical  agonies  less  acute.


EOMILETIGS.

Religious  Declension.

(Verses  17,  18.)

I.  Evident  in  the  desolation  of  the  sanctuary.  "The  mountain  of  Zion,
which  is  desolate,  the  foxes  walk  upon  it"  (ver.  18).  The  foxes  or  jackals  were
very  likely  attracted  to  the  ruinous  site  of  Zion  by  the  bodies  of  the  slain,  which
they  devoured  for  food  and,  finding  how  completely  the  place  was  deserted,  they
remained  in  undisturbed  possession.  How  diflferent  from  the  time  when  the
Temple  services  were  in  full  swing  and  the  city  crowded  with  happy  worshippers  !
Eeligion  is  at  a  low  ebb  when  the  house  of  God  is  neglected  and  its  services  dis-
regarded ;  it  is  lower  still  when  the  sanctuary  is  closed  and  its  mouldering  stones
are  covered  with  mosses  and  lichens  ;  but  it  has  got  to  the  lowest  depth  when  the
building  is  demolished  and  scattered  in  ruins.  To  this  pass  had  all  the  pretentious
religionism  of  Judah  now  come.

II.  Is  a  reason  for  depression  and  sorrow.  "For  this  our  heart  is  faint ;  for
these  things  our  eyes  are  dim  "  (ver.  17).  The  Jews  of  all  ranks  and  classes  would
lament  the  national  disasters — the  loss  of  national  honour  in  the  fall  of  their  king,
the  loss  of  wealth  and  influence,  the  loss  of  independence  and  liberty  ;  but  the
pious  Jews  would  lament  most  of  all  the  loss  of  religion.  They  sorrowed  till  their
hearts  became  faint  and  their  eyes  grew  dim  with  tears.  We  may  well  grieve
over  the  loss  of  property  and  friends,  of  worldly  comforts  and  necessities,  but
the  devout  heart  sorrows  most  of  all  over  the  decline  of  religion  and  the  cessa-
tion of  the  worship  of  God.

III.  Should  lead  to  much  heart-searching  as  to  its  cause.  '*  For  this — for
these  things — because  of  Zion  which  is  desolate"  (vers.  17,  18).  To  the  Jewish
mind  the  Temple  was  the  residence  and  throne  of  Jehovah,  the  symbol  of  worship,
the  embodiment  of  the  national  religious  life.     The  destruction  of  the  Temple

135


CHAP.  ▼.


HOMILETW  COMMKNTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


carried  with  it  the  doom  of  religion  :  no  Temple,  no  religion.  It  is  true  that
genuine  religion  is  independent  of  temples  and  buildings,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact
it  does  not  exist  long  without  them.  Individual  piety  may  flourish  M'ithout  a
material  temple,  but  collective  and  organised  religion  can  be  maintained  only  by
continued  association  and  intercourse,  and  the  sanctuary  l)ecomes  a  necessity  of
associated  religious  life.  Those  who  talk  so  grandiosely  about  worshipping  God
in  the  temple  of  Nature  rarely  worship  Him  at  all  anywhere.  Where  there  is  no
recognised  sanctuary  there  is  no  rally-point  for  worshippers,  and  religion  is  dis-
organised and  depressed.  The  same  result  ensues  when  the  hou-e  of  God  is
habitually  neglected.

Lessons. — 1.  Religioue  declension  is  at  the  root  of  national  decay.  2.  The
people  of  God  should  be  always  deeply  concerned  in  religious  extension.  3.  Religious
declension  is  sincerely  lamented  by  the  good.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  17,  18.  The  disasters  of  the
Church :  1.  Create  profound  concern
in  the  hearts  of  the  good.  2.  Should
be  deplored  by  every  member  of  the
commonwealth.  3.  Mean  that  there
has  been  gross  unfaithfulness  some-
where.

Ver.    18.    A    deserted    sanctuary:
1.  A  pathetic  and  suggestive  sight.      2.
An   evidence   of   indifference   and   sin
3.  A  reproach  that  should  be  promptly
wiped  away.

Illustrations.  —  Religious  declen-
sion. The  consequences  which  Moses
foretold  (Deut.  xxix.  24,  25)  as  the
result  of  the  religious  defection  of  the
people  were  such  as  no  human  wisdom
could  foresee  or  experience  suggest.
The  practice  of  idolatry  did  not  prevent
the  aggrandisement  of  ancient  Rome,
nor  any  mere  statesman  ensure  the  ac-
complishment of  a  prophecy  that  mili-
tary success  should  always  attend  the
worship  of  the  one  true  God,  and  that
military  discomfiture  should  always
follow  idolatry.  It  is  evident  that
Moses  derived  his  accurate  knowledge
of  futurity  from  immediate  inspiration
of  God.

Religious  sham.  A  religion  that
does  not  take  hold  of  the  life  that  now
is,  is  like  a  cloud  that  does  not  rain.
A  cloud  may  roll  in  grandeur  and  be  an
object  of  admiration,  but  if  it  does  not
rain,  it  is  of  little  account  so  far  as
utility  is  concerned.  And  a  religion
tliat  consists  in  the  observance  of  mag-
nificent ceromonies,  but  does  not  touch
136


the  duties  of  daily  life,  is  a  religion  of
show  and  of  sham.

Church-going  not  the  end  of  religion.
I  fear  there  are  some  who  imagine  that
church-going  is  in  itself  the  aim  and
end  of  all  religion.  No  mistake  can  be
more  deplorable  or  pernicious.  It  is  a
blunder  as  egregious  as  it  would  be  for
a  visitor  to  a  manufactory  to  suppose
that  the  machinery  was  all  set  in  motion
merely  to  be  gazed  at,  and  to  keep  em-
ployed the  people  who  are  engaged  in
tending  it.  The  manufacturer  who  lays
out  his  capital  in  such  costly  apparatus
would  find  but  an  unsatisfactory  return
at  the  end  of  the  year  if  there  had  not
been  a  given  quantity  of  finished  goods
for  profitable  sale  in  the  market.  So  it
is  with  church-going.  It  is  wretched
work  if  the  worship  of  the  house  of
God  begins  and  ends  with  the  prayers
uttered  there. — Hooper.

Mercenary  religion.  One  of  the
causes  that  led  to  the  overthrow  of
religion  in  Ephesus  was  the  growing
wealth  attached  to  the  Temple  of  Diana.
The  priesthood  established  deposit
banks.  Kings  and  private  individuals
intrusted  their  money  to  the  care  of
the  goddess,  and  the  priests  reinvested
this  for  a  profit.  But  gradually  the
idea  of  religious  sanctity  gave  place  to
that  of  commercial  enterprise,  and  the
temple  became  fair  game  for  attack  and
robbery.

Decay  of  religion.  The  most  curious
phenomenon  in  all  Venetian  history
is  the  vitality  of  religion  in  private
life,  and  its  deadness  in  public  policy.


HOMTLETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  ▼


Amidst   the    enthusiasm,    chivalry,    or  commerce.     She  calculated  the  glory  of

fanaticism  of  the  other  States  of  Europe,  her  conquests  by  their  value,  and  esti-

Venice  stands  from  first  to  last  like  a  mated   their  justice    by  their    facility,

masked    statue;    her  coldness  impene-  While  all  Europe  around  her  was  wasted

trable,    her    exertion    only  aroused  by  by  the  fire  of  its  devotion,  she  first  cal-

the  touches  of  a   secret  spring.     That  culated  the  highest  price  she  could  exact

spring  was  her  commercial   interests—  from  its  piety  for  the  armament  she  fur-

this  the  one  motive  of  all  her  important  nished,  and  then,  for  the  advancement

political  acts  or  enduring  national  ani-  of  her  own  private  interests,  at   once

mosities.     She  could  forgive  insults  to  broke  her  faith  and  betrayed  her  re-

her  honour,  but  never  rivalship  in  her  ligion. — Ituskin.

EOMILETICS.

An  Earnest  Prayer  for  Restoration.

(Verses  19-22.)

I.  Acknowledges  the  eternal  sovereignty  of  Jehovah.  "Thou,  0  Lord,
remainest  for  ever;  Thy  throne  from  generation  to  generation  "  (ver.  19).  The
throne  of  Judah  is  fallen,  but  not  so  the  throne  of  God.  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylon,
Israel,  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  may  rise  and  fall,  but  God  is  unchanged.
The  fact  of  the  perpetuity  of  the  Divine  government  of  the  world  forms  the  basis
of  a  hope  that,  however  desperate  may  be  the  condition  of  His  people,  God  can
restore  them.  If  the  throne  of  God  was  like  the  fickle  governments  of  earth,
there  would  be  no  prospect  of  recovery.  All  true  prayer  has  the  assurance  of
being  heard  and  answered  in  the  fact  of  the  ri^^diteousness  of  an  unchangeable  God.

II.  Deprecates  the  continued  absence  of  the  Divine  favour.  "  Wherefore
dost  Thou  forget  us  for  ever,  and  forsake  us  so  long  time?"  (ver.  20).  If  Thy
government  is  continuous,  why  are  we  forgotten  and  abandoned  ?  If  Thy
throne  in  heaven  is  immovable,  why  is  Thy  throne  in  our  earthly  Zion  over-
thrown? Thou  didst  once  care  for  us  and  love  us,  and  the  memory  of  that
happy  time  still  keeps  our  hope  alive.  Thy  favour  was  the  joy  and  the  sunshine
of  our  lives  ;  its  absence  is  at  the  root  of  all  our  misery.  Low  as  we  have  sunk,
it  cannot  be  that  Thou  hast  utterly  and  for  ever  given  us  up.  Cast  us  not  away
from  Thy  presence,  and  take  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  us.  Restore  unto  us  the
joy  of  Thy  salvation.  The  soul  that  yearns  in  prayer  for  the  Divine  favour  is  on
the  brink  of  a  f^dorious  vision.

III.  Supplicates  the  grace  of  genuine  repentance.  "  Turn  Thou  us  unto
Thee,  O  Lord,  and  we  shall  be  turned;  renew  our  days  as  of  old  "  (ver.  21).  Repent-
ance is  a  turning  about.  For  some  time  the  course  of  Judah  had  been  in  one
direction — wandering  from  God,  and  sinking  into  ever  lower  depths  of  sin  and
misery.  Now  there  is  a  thoughtful  pause,  an  arrest  of  the  downward  career.
What  has  brought  this  about?  Prayer;  and  that  prayer  becomes  more  eager  and
earnest  as  it  becomes  more  evident  that  rescue  is  at  hand.  True  prayer  recognises
that  God  alone  can  give  repentance  and  renew  the  glory  of  the  golden  days  of
old.  When  the  heart  is  changed,  our  outward  circumstances  soon  alter  for  the
better.  When  Judah  regained  the  favour  of  God,  she  also  regained  lost  temporal
blessings.

IV.  Is  urged  with  the  assurance  that  God  cannot  utterly  reject  the  truly
penitent.  "  But  Thou  hast  utterly  rejected  ns ;  Thou  art  very  wroth  against  us."
Unless  Thou  hast  utterly  rejected  us,  unless  Thou  art  very  wroth  against  us.  This
is  stated  as  a  virtual  impossibility.  Geikie  translates  the  verse,  "Thou  wilt  noi.
surely  wholly  forget  us?  Thou  wilt  not  be  angry  with  us  beyond  measure?'"
The  miserable  results  of  their  repudiation  by  Jehovah  become  the  ground  of  a

137


CHAP.  V.


IJOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,


confident  appeal  to  Him.  He  heard  the  prayer,  and  at  the  end  of  seventy  years
the  Jews  were  restored  to  their  own  land.  The  Book  of  Lamentations  ends,  as  it
begins,  with  a  wail;  but  the  conchiding  wail,  unlike  the  first,  has  in  it  a  joyous
strain  of  hope.  In  many  ancient  MSS.  the  twenty-first  verse  is  repeated  after
the  twenty-second,  to  make  a  more  agreeable  finish  when  the  book  was  read  in
the  Synagogue ;  but  Jeremiah  did  not  think  this  arrangement  necessary.  He
concludes  with  the  refrain  of  what  had  been  the  burden  of  his  sorrowful  mono-
logue, because  he  is  so  confident  of  help  and  restoration.  **  The  message  of  God
to  the  soul,  even  in  threatenings,  is  ever  in  truth  one  of  comfort."  The  darkest
night  of  sufi"ering  and  sorrow  is  followed  by  the  tranquillising  hope  of  the  golden
daybreak.

Lessons. — \.  When  the  Church  begins  to  pray  there  is  hope  of  revival,  2.
True  praijer  is  ever  accompanied  with  repentance.  3.  God  not  only  hears,  but
answers  the  prayer  of  the  contrite.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  19,  20.  The  unchangeable
God.  I.  His  government  is  in  perpetual
activity.  "Thou  remainest  for  ever.
Thy  throne  from  generation  to  genera-
tion" (ver.  19).  II.  He  cannot  forget
His  people.  "  Wherefore  dost  Thou
forget  us  for  everl"  (ver.  20).  III.  He
will  not  for  evei'  stand  aloof  from  His
people.  "  Wherefore  dost  Thou  forsake
us  for  so  long  time  ? "  (ver.  20).

Vers.  21,  22.  A  prayer  for  repent-
ance. I.  Recognises  that  repentance  is
a  Divine  act.  "Turn  Thou  us  unto
Thee,  O  Lord ;  renew  our  days  as  of
old"  (ver.  21).  II.  When  God  gives
repentance  it  is  effectual.  "And  we
shall  be  turned"  (ver.  21).  Ill  When
God  gives  repentance  it  is  evident  His
wrath  is  withdraicn,  and  He  again  ac-
cepts us.  "Unless  Thou  hast  utterly
rejected  us ;  unless  Thou  art  very  wroth
against  us"  (ver.  22).  But  this  cannot
be,  for  He  gives  repentance.  He  "  re-
news our  days  as  of  old."

Illustrations.  —  The  eternity  of
God.  Would  you  gain  some  idea  of
tlie  eternity  past  of  God's  existence  ?
Go  to  the  astronomer  and  bid  him  lead
you  with  him  in  one  of  his  walks
through  space ;  and  as  he  sweeps  out-
ward from  object  to  object,  from  uni-
verse to  universe,  remember  that  the
light  from  those  filmy  stains  on  the
deep  pure  blue  of  heaven  now  falling
on  your  eye  has  been  travelling  space
for  a  million  of  years. — Mitchell,
138


Prayer  the  melody  of  misery.

"Oh,  hearts  that  break  and  give  no  sign,
Save  whitening  lip  and  fading  tresses,
Till  death  pours  out  his  cordial  wine,

Slow  -  dropped    from    misery's    crushing
presses  :
If  singing  breath  or  echoing  chord

To  every  hidden  pain  were  given,
What  endless  melodies  were  poured,
As  sad  as  earth,  as  sweet  as  heaven  !  **
—0.  W,  Holmes.

Suffering  prompts  prayer.  Afflic-
tions make  us  most  frequent  and  fer-
vent in  pouring  forth  our  supplications
unto  God.  In  our  prosperity  we  either
utterly  neglect  this  duty,  or  perform  it
carelessly  and  slothfully  ;  but  when  we
are  brought  into  calamities,  we  flee  to
Him  by  earnest  prayer,  craving  His  aid
and  help.  And  as  the  child,  fearing
nothing,  is  so  fond  of  his  play  that  he
strays  and  wanders  from  his  mother,
not  so  much  as  thinking  of  her,  but  if
he  be  scared  or  frighted  with  the  sight
or  apprehension  of  some  apparent  or
approaching  danger,  presently  runs  to
her,  casts  himself  into  her  arms,  and
cries  out  to  be  saved  and  shielded  by
her,  so  we,  securely  enjoying  the
childish  sports  of  worldly  prosperity,
do  so  fondly  dote  on  them  that  we
scarce  think  of  our  Heavenly  Father;
but  when  perils  approach  and  are  ready
to  seize  upon  us,  then  we  flee  to  Him  and
cast  ourselves  into  the  arms  of  His  pro-
tection, crying  to  Him  by  earnest  prayer
for  help  in  our  extremity. — Downame.

The  value  of  prayer.     If  the  whole


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.


CHAP.  ▼.


world  in  wliic^  we  live  is  but  a  con-
tinual temptation,  if  all  around  appears
to  agree  with  our  inward  corruptions  to
weaken  and  seduce  us,  if  riches  bribe
and  indigence  sours,  if  prosperity  ele-
vates and  afflictions  abase  us,  if  busi-
ness dissipates  and  rest  enervate*  ii
the  sciences  exalt  and  ignorance  be-
wilders us,  if  commerce  exposes  us  too
much  and  solitude  leaves  us  too  much
to  ourselves,  if  pleasure  seduce  us  and
holy  works  make  us  proud,  if  health
awakens  the  passions  and  sickness  pro-
duces murmurings — in  a  word,  if  since
the  fall  of  man  all  that  surrounds  us
and  all  that  is  in  us  is  perilous,  in  so
deplorable  a  situation,  0  my  God,  what
hope  of  salvation  remains  for  us^  If
our  sighs  do  not  incessantly  ascend
from  the  depth  of  our  misery  towards
the  throne  of  Thy  mercy,  until  Thou


(leignest  to  assist  us  and  to  rescue  us
from  our  fallen  state. — Massillon.

God  answers  prayer.  When  poor
men  make  requests  to  us,  we  usually
answer  them  as  the  echo  does  the
voice — the  answer  cuts  off  half  the
petition.  We  shall  seldom  find  among
men  Jael's  courtesy,  giving  milk  to
those  that  ask  water,  except  it  be  as
this  was,  an  entangling  benefit,  the
better  to  introduce  a  mischief.  There
are  not  many  Naaraans  among  us  that,
when  you  beg  of  them  one  talent,  will
force  you  to  take  two.  But  God's
answer  to  our  prayers  is  like  a  multi-
plying glass,  which  renders  the  request
much  greater  in  the  answer  than  it  was
in  the  prayer. — Bishop  Reynolds.

"  More  things  are  wrought  by  prayer
Than  the  world  dreams  of."

— Tennyson


139


INDEX  TO  HOMILETICS.


Advantaobs  of  a  state  of  expectatiou,  88
Aflflicted,  God  the  consolatiou  of  the,  93
AflBiction,  the  man  of,  70
Afflictions,  views  of  a  saint  in  his,  84

not  accidental,  93

Anger,  the  Divine,  115

the  fierceness  of  the  Divine,  43

the  pitilessness  of  the  Divine,  100

Appeal  to  Jehovah,  a  piteous,  124
to  Divine  justice,  104

Baffled,  the  helplessly,  118
Bereavement,  127
Bewilderment  of  grief,  74
Burden  for  young  shoulders,  89
Business  and  recreation,  132

Call  to  prayer,  60
Character,  moral,  111

the  Divine,  95

Choice  portions,  86

Church,  the  disasters  of  the,  136

indifference  of  the  enemies  of  the,  22

City  in  sorrow,  20

a  populous,  14

grief  for  a  ruined,  13

Comfort  for  the  sorrowful,  92
Complaint  under  affliction,  9Q
Conquest,  the  galling  tyranny  of,  130

Dangebs  of  a  sinful  life,  77
Dawn  of  hojje,  80
Dayspring  mercies,  84
Declension,  religious,  135
Defeat,  inglorious,  31
Defences  of  a  nation,  44
Degradation,  moral,  110
Despair,  the  helplessness  of,  32
Destroyer,  the  implacable,  48
Destruction  of  Zion,  114
Devotion,  the  sublimity  of,  98
Disinherited,  the  miseries  of  the,  126
Distress,  complex  phases  of,  78
Diviue  anger,  the,  115

the  fierceness  of  the,  43

the  pitilessness  of  the,  100

character,  the,  95

compassion,  a  prayer  for  the,  63

faithfulness,  83

goodness,  88

justice,  36

a  confident  appeal  to,  104

pity,  64

punishment,  31,  105

rule  absolute  and  universal,  95

•  slowness  to  punish,  104

threatenings  of  judgment,  69

wrath,  the  storm  of  the,  43

140


Duty  of  self-reflection,  98
to  the  Jewish  people,  31

EcoE  Homo,  72
Enemies  of  the  church,  22
Enemy,  Jehovah  as  an,  44
Enmity,  a  spirit  of,  36
Expectation,  advantages  of,  88
Extremity  of  suffering,  112

Faithful  prophet  in  trouble,  a,  102
Faithfulness,  the  Divine.  Sli
False  ministers  of  God,  116
Famine,  the  extremities  of,  27
■         the  horrors  of,  113

the  sufferings  of,  131

Fate  of  the  malevolent,  119

Fear,  the  tyranny  of,  64

Fickleness,  human,  36

Foe,  Jehovah  as  a,  76

Fortune,  the  strange  reverses  of,  14,  127

Friendship,  the  fickleness  of  human,  14

God  and  human  suffering,  72
'■  wrong,  94

pleading  for  saints,  103

the  tenderness  of,  92

the  unchangeable,  138

Godly  life  the  music  of  society,  a,  104
Goodness,  the  Divine,  88

three  grades  of,  87

Grief  for  a  ruined  city,  13

the  bewilderment  of,  74

the  utter  exhaustion  of,  52

Happiness,  the  loss  of,  79
Heathenism  a  moral  obliquity,  27
Hope,  the  dawn  of,  80

and  patience,  88

Honour,  the  loss  of,  134
Humiliating  subjection,  128

Indipference  of  the  enemies  of  the  Church,  22
Is  it  nothing  to  you?  31

Jehovah,  a  piteous  appeal  to,  124

as  a  foe,  44,  76

Jewish  people,  our  duty  towards  the,  31
Joy,  two  kinds  of,  120
Judgment  of  oppression,  16

the  Divine  tlireatenings  of,  59

Justice,  Divine,  36

a  confident  appeal  to,  104

Lamentation  over  a  forsaken  s;inctuary,  19
Leaders,  unfaithful  religious,  115
Liberty,  the  loss  of,  127
Life,  the  intense  iove  of,  12U
the  changes  of,  17


INDEX  TO  HOMILETICS,


Life,  the  dangers  of  a  sinful,  77

young,  36

Loss  of  happiness,  79

of  honour,  134

Lost  hope  restored,  81

Malevolent,  the  fate  of  the,  119
Man  of  afiSiction,  the,  70
Masters,  new,  23
Memories,  sad,  23
Memory,  the  oflBce  of,  81

the  handmaid  of  hope,  81

Mercies,  dayspring,  84
Message  from  God  to  thee,  120
Ministry,  a  dispirited,  20
Miseries  of  the  disinherited,  126
Misery  of  the  penitent,  31
Moral  degradation,  110

Nation,  a  distressed,  29

the  defences  of  a,  44

National  disaster,  23

life,  the  extinction  of,  133

ruin,  complete,  48

Night  of  prayer,  61

Oppression,  the  judgment  of,  16
Ordinances,  the  wreck  of  religious,  46

Patience,  hope  and,  88
Penitence,  sincere,  36
Penitent,  the  misery  of  the,  31
People,  last  hours  of  a  doomed,  117
Persecution,  the  spirit  of,  17
Pity,  the  Divine,  64
Prayer,  a  call  to,  60

a  night  of,  61

for  Divine  compassion,  63

the  hopefulness  of,  125

for  repentance,  138

the  efficacy  of,  102

Property,  127
Prophets,  false,  56
Punishment,  Divine,  81,  105

of  Judah  a  type,  36

the  certainty  of,  77

graduated,  113,  120

sin  and,  130

Rebellion,  the  bitter  fruits  of,  36
Recreation,  business  and,  132
Redeemer,  the  sufferings  of  the  world's,  30
Religious  declension,  135

ordinances,  the  wreck  of,  46

Repentance,  a  prayer  for,  97,  138

Resignation,  90

Restoration,  an  earnest  prayer  for,  137

Reverses  of  fortune,  the  strange,  14

Ridicule,  79

Royalty,  118

Ruin,  inexpressible,  54

Rule,  the  Divine,  95

Sanotuary,  lamentation  oTer  «  forsaken,  19
•  despised,  48


Sanctuary,  a  deserted,  136

Saints  pleading  for  God,  103

Scorner,  the  heartless  triuni{>h  of  the,  58

Self-reflection,  the  duty  of,  96

Service,  watch-night.  61

Silent  suffering,  91

Silence,  retirement  and,  91

Sin  an  implacable  foe,  26

the  cause  of  suflFering,  101

conscious,  26

the  course  of,  26

the  degradation  of,  134

the  galling  tyranny  of,  31

and  punishment,  130

the  terrible  havoc  of,  25

Society,  a  godly  life  the  music  of,  104
Sorrow,  a  city  in,  20

the  voice  of,  36

the  ravages  of,  75

Spirit  of  persecution,  17

of  enmity,  36

Subjection,  humiliating,  128
Sufferer,  a  baflfled,  75
Suffering,  God  and  human,  72

the  mystery  of,  73

the  extremity  of,  112

the  tension  of  prolonged,  99

Sufferings  of  the  world's  Redeemer,  30
Sympathetic  nature,  a,  101

Tears,  the  pathos  of,  14

Tenderness  of  God,  the,  92

Tension  of  prolonged  suffering,  the,  99

Temple,  the  earthly,  47

Trouble,  a  faithful  prophet  in,  102

a  time  of,  17

Tyranny  of  sin,  31
of  conquest,  130

Unfaithful  religious  leaders,  115

Views  of  a  saint  in  his  afflictions,  84
Voice  of  sorrow,  36
Voiceless  woe,  50

"War,  the  atrocities  of,  131
"Watcher,  the  weary,  118
Watch-night  service,  61

the  rigour  of,  113

Wicked,  the  tactics  of  the,  116

Widowhood,  14

Woe,  voiceless,  50

Woes,  a  series  of,  134

Wonder  explained  by  greater  wonders,  103

World's  wonder,  a,  115

treatment  of  its  suffering  Redeemer,  59

Worship,  perverted,  48
Wrath,  the  storm  of  the  Divine,  43
Wreck  of  religious  ordinances,  46
Wrong,  God  and  human,  94

Young  life,  36

Youth  the  season  of  discipline,  89

ZiOM,  the  destruction  of,  114


141


INDEX  TO  ILLUSTRATIONS.


Affliction  reveals  our  sId,  32

ripens  character,  73

God's  messenger,  94

Afflictions  overruled,  94
Age  dishonoured,  132
Anger,  the  Divine,  73

injustice  and,  95

restrained,  more  terrible,  100

Attachment  stronger  than  death,  119

Bad,  avoid  the  example  of  the,  24
Bereavement  has  its  consolations,  128
Best  always  to  do  justly,  105
Bitterness  of  sin,  78
Business  not  to  absorb  all  our  time,  133
——  and  religion,  133

Chastisement  a  proof  of  God's  tenderness,  94
Christianity  addresses  the  despairing,  34
— —  relieves  the  miseries  of  great  cities,  15
Church-going  not  the  end  of  religion,  136
Churches,  dead  and  dying,  20
City  in  sorrow,  a,  21
Cities,  sin  and  danger  of  great,  27
Compassion,  Divine,  65

of  Jesus,  65

for  the  needy,  128

Concentration  of  power  destroys,  115
Conduct,  loose  talk  leads  to  loose,  23
Crying  to  God,  34
Curse  of  sin,  the,  115

Dangers  of  sin,  78
Darkness  and  danger,  73

precedes  light,  73

Death-bed  repentance,  99
Decay  of  religion,  136
Defeat,  inglorious,  34
Defence,  goodness  a  nation's,  45
Degeneration,  111

of  character.  111

Degradation,  113,  135

of  sin,  78

Dejection  and  despair,  51
Depression,  52

unjustifiable,  100

Despairing,  Christianity  addressee  the,  34
Dignity,  true,  134
Disappointment,  118
Dishonour,  the  agony  of,  135
Distress  exhausting,  53

the  best  work  comes  out  of,  80

Divine  aid  works  a  marvellous  change,  103

anger,  the,  73

■         compassion,  65

faithfulness,  86

— —  judgment  a  painful  reality,  78
—      pro^  i'if  ace,  86

142


Divine  punishment  certain,  60
— — —  and  pessimism,  33

supply  in  emergencies,  87

Doctrine,  false,  57

Drink,  moral  degradation  of.  111

End,  a  sad,  118

Enmity,  how  manufactured,  38

Escape,  a  clever,  118

Example  of  the  bad,  avoid  the,  24

Evil,  the  downward  career  of,  121

overruled,  97

Faith  in  falsehood  disastrous,  58
Faithful  to  death,  103
Faithfulness,  Divine,  86

in  service,  103

Falsehood,  58

Famine,  the  horrors  of,  28

the  cause  of,  131

Fear,  the  influence  of,  65

slavish  and  filial,  65

the  greatest,  65

Fellow-suffering  silences  complaint,  89
Fickleness  a  disappointment,  37

and  its  contrast,  38

Food,  importance  of,  113

Friends  of  youth,  where  are  they?  16

Friendship,  sarcasm  destroys,  59

God  the  helper  of  the  persecuted,  18

yearning  for,  64

the  eternity  of,  138

answers  prayer,  139

does  hear  prayer,  100

frustrates  the  schemes  of  the  wicked,  106

God's  anger  man's  heaviest  aflflictiou,  73
Good  character  a  blessing,  112

king  a  blessing,  119

Goodness  a  nation's  defence,  45

of  God  experienced,  89

Greatness,  fallen,  135
Grief,  causes  of,  75

excessively  indulged,  53

irksome  but  needful,  76

its  uses,  76

leaves  its  mark,  102

secret,  75

useless  that  does  not  lead  to  help,  15

prostrating,  53

Happiness  depends  on  God,  80
HeathcTj  worship  a  ])erformance,  28

tiarknees,  light  for,  28

Help  in  extremity,  114
Helplessness  appeals  to  our  pity,  133
Heroic  endurance,  91
Hope  presupposes  faith,  83


INDBK  TO  ILLUSTRATIONS,


Hope  clings  to  as  to  the  last,  83

none  but  in  God,  56

Horrors  of  famine,  28

Humiliation,  130

Humility  a  help  to  knowledge,  91

INDIVIDDALITT,  sln  and,  27
Industry  secures  independence,  128
Injustice,  suffering  preferred  to,  95

and  anther,  95

not  to  be  hastily  resented,  106

Intercession  irresistible,  62

Jehovah  a  foe  to  all  sin,  77
Judgment  a  surprise,  44

a  painful  reality,  78

Jast  and  the  unjust,  the,  106
Justice  and  mercy,  37

expedited,  95

between  man  and  man,  105

Labodb,  the  dignity  of,  133
Life  divinely  ordered,  130

the  changes  of,  18

mistaken  views  of,  130

ordinances  help  religious,  48

well  lived,  97

Lonely,  the  All-seeing  God  and  the,  16

Love  and  sorrow,  21

Lust,  the  fascination  of,  1^

Malice,  121

reproof  of,  121

Man  superior  to  his  surroundings,  20

Man's  extremity  God's  opportunity,  114

IMelancholy,  beware  of,  25

Memory  and  music,  25

Memories,  sad,  24

Mercenary  religion,  136

Mercy,  justice  and,  37

in  every  storm,  45

Ministers  not  only  finger-posts  but  guides,  21
— —  unqualified,  116
Misery,  work  a  remedy  for,  21

prolonged,  45.

makes  indelible  impressions,  63

of  hopelessness,  83

Moral  sense,  lack  of.  111

degradation  affects  work.  111

Moscow,  the  retreat  from,  34
Mother's  prayer,  a,  63
Murder,  penalty  of,  117

Nation,  a  distressed,  82

National  decline,  the  sadneu  of,  128

ruin,  50

Necessity  a  teacher,  113
Neglect  incurs  wrath,  44

Oppbbssob  a  selfish  man,  18

punished,  17

Ordinances  help  religloua  life,  48

Pa  THENCE  conquers,  89

Parting,  the  last,  119

Penitence  involves  confession  of  sin,  38

Penitent,  misery  of,  how  eared,  S3

Persecution,  18

— —  inexorable,  the  spirit  of,  19

—  defeats  itself,  128

Persecuted,  God  the  helper  of  the,  18

Pleasure  itself  unsatisfying,  183

Practical  sympathy,  102

Prayer,  64

— —  a  preparation  for  oonflict,  83


Prayer,  a  mother's,  63

a  mute  summons  to,  62

an  ever-open  refuge,  103

brings  deliverance,  126

God  answers,  126

in  trouble,  125

necessary  for  service,  62

should  be  importunate,  126

sorrow  drives  men  to,  63

the  need  of,  125

the  melody  of  misery,  138

Priestcraft,  117
Prophet,  a  false,  57
Providence,  Divine,  86
Punishment  and  pessimism,  S3
certain,  60

Rebellion,  36

fomenting,  37

Recreation,  133

Redeemer's  sufferings  unique,  the,  00

Religion  and  justice,  105

Religious  declension,  136

sham,  136

Remorse,  34

Repentance  and  confession,  98

and  forgiveness,  98

must  be  sincere,  99

Resignation  to  the  will  of  God,  91
Retribution,  38

implacable,  49

Ridicule,  triumph  over,  79
Ruin  appeals  to  our  sympathy,  66

and  responsibility,  55

drifting  to,  56

— — -  the  punishment  for  sin,  55

unutterable,  55

Rale,  spiritual  insight  into  the  Divine,  96

Sanotuabt,  a  despised,  49
Sarcasm  destroys  friendship,  59
Satan  an  enemy,  46
Scoffer,  nonplussed,  a,  59
Scorn  not  to  be  dreaded,  69
Self-sacrifice,  33
Selfish  man,  the  oppressor  a,  18
Sin  a  disease,  27

a  double  effect,  28

'——  and  individuality,  27

a  foe,  28

a  poison,  24

— —  a  slavery,  33
— —  defies  law,  24

discovery  of,  33

^—'  in  man,  130

— —  stupifies,  27

— —  the  danger  of  great  cities,  27

— —  the  bitterness  of,  78

— —  the  course  of,  28

— —  the  dangers  of,  78

—  the  degradation  of,  78

— —  will  find  you  out,  121

Skill  acquired  in  youth,  90

Solitude  oppressive,  62

Sorrow,  a  great,  75

a  city  in,  21

— —  does  not  regenerate,  37

— —  drives  men  to  prayer,  6S

— —  love  in,  21

■'        the  cure  of  excessive,  53

Sorrows,  whose  like  unto  mine?  3S

Soul-growth  aided  by  silence,  91

Sovereignty,  the  Divine,  115

Spirit  of  persecution  inexorable,  the,  19

143


mDEX  TO  ILLUSTRATIONS,


Storms,  temporary,  45

UNBELlir  and  ministerial  inefficiency,  116

Submission,  130

Uncertainty  of  royal  favours,  119

to  God's  will,  96

Undercurrents  cause  wrecks,  48

Sufferer  baffled  by  temptation,  75

Suffering  a  mystery,  73

Value  of  prayer,  188

and  its  compensations,  80

Victory,  memory  of,  inspiring,  83

perverted  views  of,  100

prompts  to  prayer,  138

"Want  anticipated,  87

the  ravages  of,  61

War,  the  atrocities  of,  133

the  uses  of,  21  ^

the  havoc  of,  32

Supply  in  emergencies,  87

Wicked,  the  triumph  of,  117

Sympathy  in  sorrow,  16

Wickedness,  121

the  power  of,  101

Woe,  the  loneliness  of,  61

with  youth,  63

Work  a  remedy  for  misery,  21

World's  treatment,  lessons  from  the,  23

Worship,  the  earthly  temple  and  perverted,  49

Tears,  the  power  of,  16

Wrath,  neglect  incurs,  44

the  relief  of,  102

Wrecks,  undercurrents  cause,  48

Temple  and  perverted  worship,  49

Wrong,  the  beginning  of,  95

Terrible  destruction,  115

Wrong-doing  brings  retribution,  105

Tongue,  a  malevolent,  121

Treachery  has  no  pity,  80

Yearning  for  God,  64

Triumph  premature,  59

Youth,  37

over  ridicule,  79

■         a  brave,  90

Trouble,  a  time  of,  18

needs  instruction,  21

Truth,  false  teaching  dangerous  when  mixed

skill  acquired  in,  90

with,  57
Tyranny  not  permanent,  24

svmpathy  with,  63

the  friends  of,  16

144


APPENDIX


INDEX  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LAMENTATIONS.


Afflicted,  God  the  Oonsolation  of  the
Affliction

Complaint  under    ...

The  Man  of  ...

Afflictions —

Not  Accidental      ...         ...         .*<

Saint,  His  views  in  .^

Anger —

Divine,  Fierceness  of  the  ...         .^

„     ,  Pitifulness  of  the

„     ,  X ne  ...  •*«  •••

Baffled,  The  Helplessly  .«

Bereavement -

Business  and  Recreation

Call  to  Prayer,  A

Character —

Divine,  The  •••

Moral  ...         .M

Choice  Portions  ^

Christianity —

Addresses  the  Despairing ...

Relieves  the  Miseries  of  Great  Cities

Church,  Disasters  of  the

City—

In  Sorrow,  A  (Antwerp)

Ruined,  Grief  for  a

Comfort  for  the  Sorrowful

Compassion,  Divine

Complaint  under  Affliction  ...
Conquest,  Galling  Tyranny  of  .-

Dangers  of  a  Sinful  Life,  The  •««

Darkness,  Light  for  Heathen

Dawn  of  Hope,  The

Declension,  Religious

Defeat,  Inglorious

Degradation,  Moral

Dejection  and  Despair  .«.         .-

Despair,  Helplessness  of

Despairing,  Christianity  Addresses  the
Destroyer,  The  Implacable  ...
Discipline,  Youth  the  Proper  Season  of
Disinherited,  Miseries  of  the
Distress,  Complex  Phases  of
Divine —

Anger,  Fierceness  of  the

„     ,  PitilessnesB  of  the ...

„    ,  xne  •••         •••         •*.

Character,  The

Compassion,  A  Prayer  for  .-

Faithfulness,  The

Goodness,  The       ...         ...         ...

Justice,  A  Confident  Appeal  to  ...

Pity,  The

Punishment

„  Certain

Rule,  Absolute  and  Universal     ...

Slowness  to  Punish,  The

Wrath,  The  Storm  of  the


PAOK

94

72,73
96
70

93
84

43
100

115
118
127

132
60

95

III

86

34

15

136

21

13

92

63.65

96

130

77
28
80

135

31

no

SI
32
34
48

89
126

78

43

100

"5

95

63

83

88
104

64
31, 105

60

95

104

43


Duty—

Of  Self -reflection.  The     .'..

Our,  towards  the  Jewish  People  ...

Ecce  Homo       ...

Enemies  of  the  Church,  their  Tantalis-
ing Indifference  ...

Enmity,  A  Spirit  of

Expectation,  Advantages  of  a  State
of

Faithfulness,  The  Divine

False  Prophets...         ...         ...         •••

Famine-
Horrors  of  ...         .«

Sufferings  of  ...         ,^         ...

Fate  of  the  Malevolent,  The  .«

Fear,  The  Tyranny  of

Fickleness,  Human  .«        ...        ,«

Foe,  Jehovah  as  a        •••

Fortune-
Strange  Reverses  of

Sudden  Reverses  of.  The  ...

Friendship,  Sarcasm  Destroys

Friendships,  Fickleness  of  Human

God—

And  Human  Suffering

„  „       Wrong         ...      ^  ...

Pleading    for   Saints,   and   Saints

Pleading  for  God

Tenderness,  His

The  Consolation  of  the  Afflicted  ...

Unchangeable,  The  .^

Goodness,  Three  Grades  of

Grief-
Bewilderment  of ^

Useless   that  Does    not   Lead  to

Active  Help
Utter  Exhaustion  of

Happiness,  The  Loss  of       «•

Honour,  The  Loss  of  .••

Hope—

And  Patience         ...         «m
Dawn  of.  The         ...         .»

Lost,  Restored        ...         ...

Memory  the  Handmaid  of

Indifference,    Tantalising,    of    the
Enemies  of  the  Church,..

Jehovah —

As  a  Foe     ...         »«         •••         ...

„  an  Enemy         ...         •••         ...

Piteous  Appeal  to,  A

Joy,  Two  Kinds  of

Judah,  Punishment  of,  a  Type  of  the
Punishment  of  all  Unfaithful  Nations

Judgment  of  Oppression,  The

Justice,  Divine,  A  Confident  Appeal
to...

Lamentation  over  a  Forsaken  Sanc-
tuary


146


APPENDIX,


Lamentations,  The  Book  of —

Introduction

Author

Contents

Date •••

Form -

Liturgical  Uses  .••

Name •,

Purport
Leaders,  Unfaithful  Religions

Liberty,  The  Loss  of

Life-
Changes  of  ...

Godly,  the  Music  of  Society,  A

Intense  Love  of

National,  Extinction  of     ...

Sinful,  Dangers  of  a
Lig'ht  for  Heathen  Darkness ...
Love  in  Sorrow
Malevolent,  Fate  of  the      .^
Man  of  Affliction,  The
Memory-
Handmaid  of  Hope,  The  ...

Office  of,  The

Mercies,  Dayspring

Ministers,  False,  of  God  .».
Moral  Degradation  ...  ,.,
Nation —

A  Distressed

„  „         :  Havoc  of  War

National   Sorrow,  An   Ideal  Repre-
sentation...
Nature,  A  Sympathetic
Oppression,  Judgment  of,  The
Oppressor  Punished,  The
Ordinances —

Help  Religious  Life

Religious,  The  Wreck  of  ...

Patience  and  Hope

Penitence,  Sincere

Penitent,  Misery  of  the
People —

Doomed,  Last  Hours  of  a  ...

Jewish,  Our  Duty  towards  the

Persecution

Pity,  Divine

Portions,  Choice

Prayer —

Call  to,  A

Earnest,  for  Restoration  ...

Efficacy  of  ...         ...         ,^

For  Divine  Compassion    .^
„     Repentance,  A  ...

Hopefulness  of
Property

Prophet,Faithful,  in  Trouble,  AjJeremiah

Prophets,  False

Punishment ^

Certainty  of,  The

Divine         ^

Graduated

Sin  and        ...         ...         ...         .^

Rebellion        .^

Bitter  Fruits,  Its

Recreation,  Business  and
Redeemer,The  Sufferings  of  the  World's
Relig-ious —

D  clension

Ordinances,  The  Wreck  of

Remorse

Repentance


PAOK

I

4

2

6
I

8
I

7

"5
127

18
104
129

133

77

28

21
119

70

81
81

84
116
no

29
32

66

lOI

16
17

48
46
88
36
31

117

31

18,  19

64
86

60

137
102

63

138

125
127
102
56
120

77
105

113
130

36

35
132

30

135

47
34
Q7


Repentance,  Prayer  for

Resignation.

to  the  Will  of  God      ...
Restoration,  Earnest  Prayer  for,  An

Retribution

Ridicule

Royalty  ...        ..,

Ruin —

Inexpressible

National,  Complete
Rule,  Divine,  Absolute  and  Universal
Saint  in  his  Afflictions,  The  Views  of  a
Saints    Pleading  for   God,   and   God

Pleading  for  Saints
Sanctuary —

Deserted,  A

Despised,  A

Forsaken,  Lamentation  over  a
Sarcasm  Destroys  Friendship
Scorner,  Heartless  Triumph  of  the,The

Self-reflection,  Duty  of

Self-sacrifice...

Service,  Watch-night ...         .^

Silence  and  Retirement

Sin—

And  Punishment    ...

Degradation  of        ...  ...          ...

Galling  Tyranny  of  .„

National,  Its  Punishment,

Terrible  Havoc  of  .. .

The  Cause  of  Suffering
Slowness,  Divine,  to  Punish,  The   ...
Society,  Godly  Life  the  Music  of,  A
SorroMT —

Cure  for  Excessive

National,  An  Ideal  Representation  of

Ravages  of,  The
Subjection,  Humiliating

Suffcirer,  A  Baffled

Suffering —

Extremity  of.  The

Human,  God  and  ...

Mystery  of  ...         ...         ...

Silent

Tension  of  Prolonged,  The
Sufferings  of  theWorld's  Redeemer, The
Tears,  The  Povirer  of    ...         .„

Temple,  The  Earthly

Tenderness  of  God,  The

War-
Atrocities  of  ...         •».         ...

Rigour  of.  The        ...  »,         ...

Watch-night  Service

Watcher,  Weary,  The

Wicked,  Tactics  of  the

Widowhood ^

Woe,  A  Voiceless
Woes,  A  Series  of

Wonder  Explained  by  Greater  Won-
ders, A  (iii.  57)  ...

World's  Wonder,  A

Worship,  Perverted

Wrong,  Human,  God  and

Youth-
Needs  Instruction, .. .

The  Proper  Season  of  Discipline  ...
Zion —

Calamition  and  Prayer,  Recapitula-
tion of  its

Destruction  of         ...  ,,,          ,,,

Its  Pitiful  EsHte


138
90

91

137
38,50
78.79

118

54
48

95
84

103

136
48,49

19

59

58

98

33
61

91

130

134
31
39

25

lOI

104
105

53
66

75
128

75

112

72

73

91

99

30
16

47
92

131
113

61
118
116

14

50
134

103

"5
48
94

21

89


122
114
107


A


IIOMILETIC     COMMENTARY


ON  THE   BOOK   OF   THE   PROPHET


E  Z  E  K  I  E  L.


CHAPTERS    I.— XI.
By  the  REV.  D,  G.    WAT2]  M.A,

CHAPTERS    XII.— XXIX.
By  the  REV,  T.  H.  LEALE,

CHAPTERS    XXX.— XLVIII.
By  the  REV,  GEO,  BARLOW.


FUNK   &   WAGNALLS   COMPANY

London  &  Toronto

1892


PREIACE.


This  Commentary  i.^  the  work  of  three  different  authors.  The  portion  chapters
i.-xi.  is  written  by  the  Rev.  D.  G-.  Watt,  M.A,;  xil-xxix.  by  the  Rev.  T.  H.
Lealu  ;  xxx.-xlviii.  by  the  Rev.  G.  Barlow.

The  Exegetical  Notes  contain,  in  a  condensed  form,  the  results  of  recent
Biblical  criticism,  and  will  be  found  a  valuable  help  in  the  interpretation  of  the
text  and  in  furnishing  facts  of  contemporaneous  history  to  elucidate  the  pro-
phecies. The  Vision  of  the  Temple  (chapters  xl.-xlviiL)  is  treated  in  its  ideal
aspect,  and,  viewed  in  this  light,  it  becomes  full  of  suggestiveness  to  the
practised  homilete.

Every  available  work  on  this  confessedly  difficult  book  has  been  diligently
consulted,  and  the  choicest  and  most  helpful  passages  of  the  best  authors  are
condensed  in  the  body  of  this  Commentary.  Of  the  390  HomUetic  Outlines  all
are  original,  except  those  which  bear  the  names  of  their  respective  authors.

Among  other  works,  the  following  writers  on  the  Prophecies  of  Ezekiel
have  been  carefully  scanned  : — W.  Greenhill,  E.  Henderson,  Patrick  Fairbairn,
Hengstenberg,  Keil,  M'Farlan,  Archbishop  Newcombe,  Bishop  Horsley,  Dean
Stanley,  Eatto,  Dr.  Frazer's  *'  Synoptical  Lectures,"  Geikie's  "  Hours  with  the
Bible,"  PooPs  "Annotations,"  Lightfoot  on  "The  Temple,"  F.  D.  Maurice's
"  Prophets  and  Kings,"  Guthrie's  "  Gospel  in  Ezekiel,"  and  the  following  Com-
mentaries— ^The  Speaker's,  Lange's,  A,  Clarke's,  Benson's,  Sutcliffe's,  Matthew
Henry's,  Trapp's,  and  Fausset's.

Amid  the  wealth  of  imagery  in  the  use  of  which  Ezekiel  is  so  lavish,  and
the  dry  facts  of  history,  the  aim  throughout  has  been  to  detect  and  develop  the
great  moral  truths  of  which  the  thoughtful  sermoniser  Li  in  constant  search  is
his  anxious  study  of  the  Word  of  God.

Sheffield,  A¥gud  189<X


HOMILETIO    COMMENTARY


ON  THB


BOOK  OF  EZEKIEL.


INTRODUCTION.

No  prophetical  book  sets  the  writer,  the  dates,  the  places  of  its  contents  so
distinctly  forth  as  that  of  Ezekiel  does.  It  is  not  only  a  record  of  what  the
Lord  spoke  by  His  prophet,  it  is  also  a  record  of  personal  experiences  during
the  period  in  which  he  was  an  organ  for  special  divine  impulses.  The  one  is
as  instructive  as  the  other.

The  book  shows  that  Ezekiel  was  the  child  of  a  priestly  family,  and  had
been  taken  into  captivity  when  the  king  of  Babylon  carried  away  the  wealth,
the  strength,  the  skilled  industry  of  Jerusalem,  No  direct  information  is  com-
municated as  to  his  life  before  the  captivity,  or  as  to  the  first  five  years  of  his
enforced  exile.  We  cannot  say  that  he  had  ever  officiated  as  a  priest  in  the
Temple  of  Jerusalem,  though  his  movements  show  apparent  familiarity  with
its  compartments  (chap.  viii.).  He  was  one  of  a  colony  of  his  fellow-exiles  who
had  been  settled — why,  he  does  not  say — by  the  Chebar,  somewhere  among
"  the  rivers  of  Babylon,"  and  had  established  a  characteristic  organisation  for
themselves.  "  The  elders ''  once  and  again  took  counsel  with  Ezekiel  in  his
own  house;  for  he  was  a  householder  and  married  to  a  woman  whom  he
warmly  loved.  He  starts  his  narration  from  the  fifth  day  of  the  fourth  month
of  the  fifth  year,  when  the  distinguished  episode  in  his  life,  by  which  he  became
known,  was  commenced  with  his  first  vision  of  God,

That  revelation  aff'ected  his  constitution  in  a  remarkable  manner.  Mental
conditions,  of  course,  would  be  altered  thereby;  but  bodily  affections  were
still  more  palpably  influenced.  The  sensation  of  eating  the  roll  of  writing,  of
being  lifted  up  and  carried  away,  of  the  strong  hand  of  the  Lord  laid  upon  him ;
the  sitting  **  astonished" — stunned — seven  days,  the  lengthened  duress,  the  loss
of  power  of  speech,  except  when  authorised  by  the  Lord  to  utter  His  messages,
and  other  physical  phenomena,  betoken  at  once  the  action  of  God  and  of  a
disorder  in  EzekiePs  health.  Perhaps  his  nervous  system  was  one  of  that  highly
sensitive  kind  whose  conditions  under  excitement  cannot  be  foreseen  ;  and
that  it  should  have  been  upset  could  not  be  regarded  as  an  unlikely  thing.
God's  instruments  are  not  always  such  as  man  would  employ.  He  chose,  for
an  apostle,  Paul,  whose  *' bodily  presence  was  weak;"  is  it  impossible  that  He
would  choose,  for  a  prophet,  a  man  of  a  peculiarly  nervous  temperament  t     If

▲  1


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


the  "  abundance  of  revelations  "  given  to  the  former  affected  his  bodily  frame,
why  should  similar  revelations  not  have  affected  Ezekiel's  physical  constitution?

The  symptoms  did  not  disappear  at  once.  Though  he  had  recovered  the
power  of  walking  (xii.  3-7),  yet  the  statement  that  the  elders  were  accustomed
to  go  to  his  house  to  hear  his  words  (viii.  1,  xiv.  1,  xx.  1),  indicates  that  weak-
ness and  physical  disability  clung  to  him  for  a  considerable  time — perhaps  to
the  tenth  month  of  the  ninth  year  (xxiv.  1).  At  that  date  he  was  confronted
with  something  more  than  physical  ailment.  He  endured  the  chastisement
whereof  all  sons  are  partakers,  and  learned  how  *'  deep  calleth  unto  deep  "  as
they  cross  the  sea  of  life.  The  wife  whom  his  eyes  liked  to  rest  upon  was
cast  down  at  his  side  by  a  sudden  stroke.  No  open  cry  of  anguish  broke
from  his  lips.  Every  sign  of  sorrow  and  mourning  was  sternly  repressed ;  yet
the  pathetic  reference  to  what  she  had  been  to  him  suffices  to  prove  how
hard  it  must  have  been  to  say  **  Thy  will  be  done."

(Jnder  the  dark  shadow  of  this  sad  event  his  last  prophecy  concerning  the
state  of  undestroyed  Jerusalem  was  uttered.  Then  for  about  three  years  he
remained  dumb,  as  if  his  bereavement  had  aggravated  his  previous  disordered
bodily  symptoms.  Only  when  the  first  part  of  his  commission  was  fulfilled,
when  his  position,  as  the  sign  of  troubles  impending  over  the  Holy  City,  was
no  longer  tenable,  the  turning-point  of  his  afiliction  was  reached.  The  news  of
the  capture  of  Jerusalem  became  the  signal  for  recovery  of  the  free  use  of  his
organs  of  speech  (xxxiii.  22),  and  no  mention  is  made  of  any  bodily  infirmities
when  executing  the  second  part  of  his  commission.  Thus  he  passes  from  view.
Like  Moses,  like  prophets  and  apostles,  *'  he  was  buried,  and  no  man  knoweth
of  his  sepulchre  unto  this  day."  Is  this  significant  of  a  principle  of  the  divine
government,  intimating  that  true  conduct  not  outward  appearances,  that  life
not  death,  are  to  be  perpetuated  in  the  thoughts  of  men  ?

Ezekiel  was  profoundly  conscious  of  the  dates  when  he  spoke  by  the  Spirit,
and  might  be  said  to  keep  a  journal  of  them.  For  him  "inspiration*'  was  not
merely  an  ecstasy  of  his  own  mind.  From  the  fifth  to  the  twenty-seventh  year
of  his  residence  in  Chaldea  he  knew  that  he  was  an  organ  which  the  Lord  used
to  sound  forth  the  notes  of  judgment  and  mercy.

The  sphere  of  his  prophetic  activity  was  not  only  the  captives,  but  also  the
Jews  still  remaining  in  Judea.  Between  the  two  portions  there  was  no  cor-
diality, and  we  might  fancy  that  the  property  of  the  exiles  had  been  some-
what dishonestly  or  forcibly  appropriated  by  the  others  (xi.  16).  The  task  of
Ezekiel  was  hard.  He  saw  that  both  divisions  were  oppressed  and  depressed,
and  open  to  the  glitter  of  flattering  prospects  presented  by  unworthy  men.
He  had  to  dispel  vivid  illusions,  to  expose  clamant  evils,  to  render  patient
under  the  hard  tacts  of  punishment,  to  urge  unpalatable  truths  which  were  no
more  agreeable  to  them  than  to  other  people.  More  than  other  prophets  he
was  ordered  to  watch  for  souls  ;  more  than  to  others  the  modelling  of  the  future
Israel  was  intiusted  to  him.  The  last  fortress  of  Judaism  as  it  had  been  is  to
be  trodden  under  the  feet  of  the  heathen,  but  out  of  its  ruins  anew  one  is  to  be
raised,  and  he  has  to  make  a  sketch  of  it.  More  magnificent  and  moving  symbols
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  than  had  been  given  in  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem  came
to  the  exile  by  the  Chebar,  and  testified  that  He  could  preserve  there  a  people
for  Hiuiselfc  His  gifts  and  calling  are  without  repentance,  yet  he  means  to
2


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


brino"  the  people  to  perceive  their  unfaithfulness,  that  they  had  to  do  with  the
living  God,  that  the  eternal  holiness  is  unchangeable,  and  that  each  soul  is
responsible  for  its  own  sins.  Buried  seed  does  not  rot  though  ungenial  weather
may  prevent  it  sprouting  for  many  a  day,  and  out  of  this  period  of  banishment
were  to  spring  forces  for  the  creation  of  a  new  Judaism  to  which  idols  and  idol-
worship  would  be  altogether  abhorrent.  A  new  theocracy  would  be  constituted,
and  Ezekiel  is  the  pioneer  of  this  new  phase  of  divine  education.  He  "  was  to
point  to  an  inauguration  of  divine  worship  far  more  solemn  than  was  to  be
secured  by  the  reconstruction  of  the  city  or  Temple  on  its  original  site  in  its
original  form ;  to  point,  in  fact,  to  that  dispensation  which  Temple,  city,  and
nation  were  intended  to  foreshadow  and  introduce  "  (Speaker's  Com.).  Tims  was
he  given  one  of  the  highest  places  among  the  men  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is
not  absurd  to  make  a  comparison  between  Moses  and  this  prophet.  Moses  had
visions  of  God  and  instructed  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  build  a  sanctuary  according
to  the  pattern  shown  to  him ;  he  gave  details  of  the  services  to  be  rendered
therein  ;  he  set  before  the  congregation  life  and  death  ;  "  he  heard  the  voice  of
One  speaking  unto  him  from  off  the  mercy-seat,  .  .  .  from  between  the  two
cherubims."  Did  not  Ezekiel  hear  a  voice  from  above  the  cherubim  ?  Did  he
not  stand  between  the  people  and  the  Lord  ?  Did  he  not  prepare  them  to
sanctify  God,  and  so  to  be  fitted  for  the  future  position  they  were  to  occupy  in
their  own  land  and  before  all  nations?  Did  he  not  appear  like  a  lawgiver,
who,  in  chaps,  xl.-xlviii.,  was  authorised  to  prescribe  Temple  and  worship  for
future  times,  and  so  place  the  crown  upon  his  prophetic  service?

The  manner  in  which  he  carried  out  his  service  is  instructive  and  stimulating.
All  his  faculties  are  put  at  the  call  of  the  Lord— his  eyes,  ears,  feet,  tongue.  He
sets  forth  plainly  and  amply  that  which  he  has  been  inspired  to  do  and  teach.
He  goes  on  to  the  appointed  duty,  unheeding  what  its  consequences  to  himself
may  be.  He  will  bear  any  burden,  expose  himself  to  any  risks,  confront  any  fear
or  the  dislike  and  hatred  of  his  own  people,  if  thus  he  may  promote  their  welfare
or  be  exculpated  from  their  woe.  If  his  forehead  is  •*  as  an  adamant,  harder
than  flint,"  it  is  not  from  indifference  to  the  moral  conduct  and  disastrous  fate
of  his  countrymen,  it  is  from  a  burning  wish  that  the  divine  word  should  find  a
faithful  and  adequate  representation  (iii.  9,  10).  He  is  "a  spiritual  Samson,"
**  of  undaunted  and  audacious  courage,"  one  of

•*  The  dead,  but  sceptered  sovereigns,  who  still  rule
Our  spirits  from  their  urns."

There  is  another  side  of  his  service.  He  is  the  most  practical  of  prophets ;
he  can  cook,  draw,  dig,  calculate,  and  measure.  He  is  not  a  recluse ;  he  sits
among  his  captive  countrymen  for  days  and  freely  receives  them  into  his
house.  He  is  informed  as  to  the  history  and  state  of  his  own  nation,  and
as  to  the  religions,  the  politics,  the  trade  of  other  nations  too.  Had  he
watched  the  sea  and  its  sailors ;  looked  upon  the  many  articles  of  commerce
that  were  found  in  the  busy  marts  of  ancient  Tyre  ?  Each  of  his  features
assures  us  that  he  was  fitted  to  point  the  way  into  a  new  position  in  which
men  should  be  required  to  reconsider  and  rearrange  the  practice  of  their
forefathers.

The  style  of  Ezekiel  is  clear  enough  on  the  whole.     At  times  "  a  sublimity,

3


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


tenderness,  beauty,  melody  wholly  his  own"  distinguish  it.  "Strange  com-
binations and  grotesque  forms  are  resorted  to,  when  by  means  of  them  he  can
add  to  the  graphic  power  and  moral  force  of  his  delineations,  and  invest  his
imagery  with  such  specific  and  minute  details  as  are  naturally  connected  with
a  felt  and  present  reality"  (Fairbairn),  The  stir  and  pomp  of  Babylonian  life
are  within  his  scope,  and  some  of  its  colossal  symbolic  figures,  which  have  been
unearthed  to  the  wonder  of  our  generation,  show  how  his  thoughts  had  been
coloured.  His  parables,  proverbs,  pictures  are  all  used  to  present  and  impress
the  truths  he  had  to  deliver,  and  in  this  view  he  freely  repeats  himself,  so  as  to
produce  sometimes  the  feeling  that  he  is  too  prolix.  (Comp.  chap.  i.  with
viii.-xi. ;  iii.  16-21  withxxxiii.  1-9  ;  vi.  with  xxxvi. ;  xvi.  with  xxii.  and  xxiii. ;
xviii.  with  xxxiil  10-20.)  He  has  favourite  and  peculiar  expressions :  "  The
word  of  the  Lord  came,"  "  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  me,"  "  Thou  son
of  man,"  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God ; "  and  a  tendency  to  sum  up  with,  "  So  shall
ye,  or  they,  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  Individuality  and  unity  mark  his
whole  work,  and  help  us  to  perceive  what  he  was  whom  the  Lord  moulded  into
a  vessel  fit  for  that  juncture  of  affairs  in  which  he  lived  and  acted  as  a
spiritual  force.

A  considerable  likeness  of  phraseology  is  to  be  noticed  between  Ezekiel  and
Jeremiah,  and  is  an  indication,  not  that  one  borrowed  from  the  other,  but  that
a  similar  mission  had  made  for  itself  a  similar  verbal  garment.  A  much  more
remarkable  parallelism,  however,  is  found  between  Lev.  xvii.-xxvi.  and  the
early  portion  of  EzekiePs  prophecies.  To  account  for  this  by  saying  that
Ezekiel  wrote  both,  or  that  some  scamp  interpolated  Ezekiel's  words  into  the
book  of  the  law  in  order  to  give  the  former  or  the  latter  a  factitious  authority,
is  an  explanation  quite  worthy  of  those  who  can  tell  to  a  line  what  Isaiah
wrote  or  did  not  write ;  or  who  can  clear  out  of  the  Four  Gospels  the  many
words  which  Jesus  of  Nazareth  did  not  speak,  and  actions  which  He  did  not
do !  1  have  no  skill  for  such  legerdemain.  I  can  do  no  more  than  suppose
that  Ezekiel  had  so  closely  studied  the  condition  of  affairs  described  in  Leviticus
that  he,  perhaps  unconsciously,  adopted  its  expressions  in  reference  to  a  rebel-
lious and  gainsaying  people.

Scanty  justice  has  been  meted  out  to  Ezekiel  and  his  work.  Not  only  was
he  treated  harshly  at  the  outset  of  his  prophesying,  but  the  Jews  of  later  times,
we  are  told,  at  the  last  revision  of  the  Hebrew  canon,  disputed  as  to  whether
the  Book  of  Ezekiel  should  be  included  therein,  and  in  after-days  forbad  that
it  should  be  read  until  thirty  years  of  age  had  been  passed.  If  it  has  not  fared
quite  so  badly  among  Christians,  yet  Jerome,  1500  years  ago,  applied  epithets
to  it  which  are  re-echoed  by  unnumbered  commentators,  and  do  not  encourage
its  study — Scripturarum  oceanus  et  mysteriorum  Dei  lahyrinthus,  A  certain  class
of  moderns  are  still  less  respectful,  and  therefore  less  likely  than  Jerome  to
find  the  spiritual  power  of  the  prophet.  Preachers  of  our  day  say  that  they
have  never  taken  a  text  out  of  it,  or  but  three  or  four  times  during  the  course
of  a  lengthened  ministry.  Reuss  suggests,  as  a  ground  for  this  neglect,  that
"  Christian  commentators  have  found  less  in  him  than  in  others  of  what  they
sought  for,  viz.,  Hebrew  texts,  direct  relations,  true  or  pretended,  with  the
facts  and  ideas  of  the  gospel."  Still  there  are  testimonies  of  another  kind.
Hengst('nberg  writes,  "  Whoever  penetrates  into  Ezekiel  will  be  deeply  stirred
4


HOMJIETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTBL.


by  his  earnestness,  and  ...  if  it  please  God  to  bring  great  sifting  judgments
upon  us,  to  pull  down  what  He  has  built  up,  and  to  root  out  what  He  has
planted,  we  may  gain  from  him  an  immovable  confidence  in  the  final  victory
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  who  kills  and  makes  alive,  who  wounds  and  heals,  and
who,  after  He  has  sent  the  darkest  cloud,  at  length  remembers  His  covenant
and  displays  His  shining  bow."  "  What  things  were  written  aforetime  were
written  for  our  learning,  that  we  through  comfort  and  patience  of  the  Scriptures
might  have  hope."

The  book  is  divided  into  two  halves,  which  have  striking  parallelisms  with
one  another.  In  the  first  the  carnal  confidence  of  Israel  in  Jerusalem  is  buried,
in  the  second  a  new  Temple  is  built  up.  The  first  part  embraces  chaps.  i.-xxiv.,
and  treats  of  the  obstinate  wickedness  of  the  people  and  the  approaching
overthrow  of  Jerusalem.  The  second  part  embraces  chaps,  xxxiii.-xlviii.,  and
treats  of  the  new  life  to  the  people  and  the  future  modified  Temple  and  its
worship.  Between  these  two  parts  stand  chaps,  xxv.-xxxii,  which  treat  of
seven  neighbouring  heathen  peoples.  They  are  warned  of  the  righteous  judg-
ment of  God  against  them,  and  their  number,  seven,  probably  conveys  the
intimation  that  the  principles  applied  to  them  are  applicable  to  all  the  ungodly
nations.


THE   PROPHECIES   OF   EZEKIEL.


FIRST  MAIN  DIVISION.

Chapters  I.-XXIV.

L— THE  DIVINE  GALL  OF  EZEKIEL.    Chaps  L-III.  15.


1.  The  Designation  of  the  Prophet  to  his  Work  (Chap.  i.  1-3).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.  the  father  of  Nebuchadnezzar  as  the
"Now,"  the  usual  Hebrew  connective  commencement  of  the  Chaldean  domi-
particle,  united  to  a  tense  which  signi-  nion,  or  from  the  birth  of  the  prophet —
fies  an  action  associated  with  something  such  are  the  suggestions  made  by  various
which  has  already  transpired.  It  seems  expositors.  The  first  and  the  last  are
to  have  place  here,  neither  because  the  the  most  improbable ;  still,  it  would  be
Book  of  Ezekiel  is  a  continuation  of  that  misapplied  labour  to  discuss  whether  the
of  Jeremiaii,  nor  because  a  preceding  third  or  the  fourth  is  the  more  likely,
portion  of  Ezekiel's  prophecies  has  been  There  is  no  part  of  the  prophecies  de-
lost,  but  rather  because  of  thoughts  pending  for  illustration  upon  a  settle-
which  were  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  ment  of  the  point  from  which  Ezekiel
and  in  succession  to  which  his  call  came,  reckons.  No  doubt  it  had  some  bearing
**  In  the  thirtieth  year."  No  note  is  upon  him  and  his  contemporaries ;  it
given  to  define  the  point  from  which  seems  to  have  none  upon  us.  "In
this  date  takes  its  origin.  It  was  the  the  fourth" — month  is  omitted  in  the
thirtieth  from  the  last  jubilee  year,  or  Hebrew,  as  frequently  with  Ezekiel.
from  the  finding  of  the  Book  of  the  The  fourth  month  of  the  ecclesiastical
Law  in  the  reign  of  King  Josiah  (2  year  corresponds  to  our  June-July,  when
Kings  yxii.  8),  or  from  the  era  fixed  by  nature  is  prolific  with  storms.     **  In  the

6


CJflAl'.  1.


IIOMILETIC  COMMl-NTAUY:  EZEKtSL,


fifth  day  of  the  month" — was  this  a
babbathl  So  it  has  been  affirmed  be-
cause seven  days  after  he  received  a  fur-
ther commission  (iii.  16).  This  is  too
precarious  a  footing  from  which  to  trace
a  parallel  to  the  case  of  the  banished
John  (Rev.  i.  10).  "As  I  was  among
the  captives  " — literally,  "  ami  I  in  the
midst  of  the  captivity.*'  He  has  not  yet
mentioned  who  he  is,  so  by  this  silence
he  calls  special  attention  to  his  en-
vironment. He  sets  forth  that  he  was
amongst,  and  was  one  of  those  Jews
who  liad  been  carried  away  from  their
ancestral  land,  and  subjected  to  the
shame  and  pain  of  captivity.  He  was  a
troubled  man  along  with  other  troubled
mil).  Not  that  he  was  under  enforced
servile  labour,  as  the  Israelites  were  in
Egypt,  "  the  house  of  bondage  ; "  he
had  a  considerable  amount  ©f  personal
liberty;  but  he  was  far  from  the  land
of  promise,  and  oppressed  with  a  sense
of  his  exile.  "  By  the  river  of  Chehar."
It  is  not  at  all  certain  to-day  where  thi«
river  was.  It  is  not  necessary  to  sup
pose  that  Ezekiel  was  beside  it,  because
the  murmur  of  the  water  might  dispose
to  quietude,  and  prepare  his  mind  for
openness  to  God.  Something  less  senti-
mental than  that  took  him  thither.  He
had  been  located  in  the  district,  through
which  the  water  flowed,  by  the  para-
mount power  as  a  district  which  could
be  easily  superintended,  and  in  which
there  was  need  of  population.  Such
wars  as  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  on,  like
the  wars  which  modern  Turks  have
waged,  could  not  but  have  been  the
occasion  for  large  parts  of  his  dominions
to  fall  out  of  cultivation.  It  would  be
politic  to  settle  an  industrial  people  like
the  Jews  in  such  places,  and  grant  them
full  permission  "  to  build  houses  and
dwell  in  them,  and  plant  gardens,  and
eat  the  fruit  of  them."  Abundance  of
water  was  needed  for  such  operations.
So  the  captive  Jews  were  by  a  river.
All  was  not  pleasant  there.  Just  as  the
later  Jews  were  confined  to  the  slums
of  Rome  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tiber,
and  satirised  as  Transtiberini,  so  was
•corn  heaped  upon  the  earlier  captives
by  "  the  rivers  of  Babylon."  There  they
were    teased    and    tormented.      "  They


that  carried  us  away  captive  required  of
us  a  song,  saying.  Sing  us  one  of  the
S()ii<:s  of  Zion."  A  somewhat  truculent
temper  was  engendered ;  but  God  did
not  forsake  them,  and  even  there  did
exceeding  abundantly  above  what  tliey
thought.  *'  The  heavens  were  opened."
The  exile  perceived  the  sky  cleft  open.
Perhaps  it  was  not  materially  so,  but
only  to  the  eye  of  faith.  Yet  as  he
speaks  of  it  as  an  actual  fact,  it  is  pre-
ferable to  consider  the  appearance  to
have  been  shown  to  *'  eyes  open,"  as  was
that  to  John  the  Baptist,  to  Stephen,  to
Peter.  "  I  saw  visions  of  God  " — phe-
nomena produced  by  God  and  relating
to  His  Godhead  ;  He  was  at  once  the
author  and  the  object  of  them.  They
were  somewhat  differently  presented
from  those  which  Ezekiel  received  after-
wards, which  were  *'  in  visions  "  (chapcL
viii.  3,  xi.  24,  xl.  2).

Ver.  2.  "The  fifth  year  of  King
Jehoiachin's  captivity."  Jehoiachin
had  been  placed  on  the  throne  of  Judea
b  Nebuchadnezzar  ;  but,  following  ad-
vice from  the  partisans  of  an  Egyptian
alliance,  and  in  defiance  of  the  protesta-
tions and  threatenings  of  Jeremiah,  he
had  pursued  a  procedure  at  variance
with  the  interests  of  the  Babylonian
empire.  Nebuchadnezzar  soon  trampled
down  the  feeble  revolt,  and,  in  little
more  than  three  months  of  kingship,
Jehoiachin  was  made  captive  and  carried
away  to  Babylon  with  the  prophetic  de
nunciation  ringing  in  his  ears  that  he
would  "die  childless" — the  last  of  the
line  of  David  which  was  traced  through
Solomon.  His  captivity  was  rigorous
for  years.  He  was  kept  in  confinement
and  clothed  in  prison  garments,  and  that,
with  their  own  troubles,  must  have  made
the  thousands  of  Jews  who  had  been
transported  with  him  to  regard  the  date
of  their  exile  as  deeply  significant.  So
Ezekiel  says  to  them — his  contemporaries
and  hearers — that  four  years  of  their
captivity  had  gone  by,  and  then  he  was
made  cognisant  of  manifestations  of  God,
This  mode  of  dating  he  adheres  to  in  his
succeeding  prophecies,  never  again  refer-
ring to  the  thirtieth  year  of  verse  1.

Ver.  3.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord."
Appearances  were  fortified,  as  so  ofteo


BOMtLETlC  COMMENT AUT:  nZEKIV.l.


&Bik9.  L


In  God's  revelations,  by  words  beard.
"Came  expressly."  Ezekiel  uses  here
a  form  of  Hebrew  emphasis,  i.e.,  repeat-
ing the  same  verb.  Such  a  repetition,
in  this  connection,  can  scarcely  mean
that  the  word  came  directly  to  him,  but
rather  that  it  was  certainly,  verily,
really  a  divine  word  which  in  "  coming
came  to  him."  It  needed  a  special
attestation,  and  that  was  given  to  it.
The  same  authenticating  feature  is  ex-
hibited in  the  frequent  reiterations  and
assertions  by  Ezekiel  that  he  was  acting
under  divine  impulse  and  authority.
"Ezekiel  the  priest,  the  son  of  Buzi."
The  order  in  the  Hebrew,  is,  '*  Ezekiel,
the  son  of  Buzi  the  priest."  Of  course
Ezekiel  was  a  priest  by  descent;  but
this  order  of  the  Hebrew  may  be  in-
tended to  signify  that,  being  in  captivity,
he  had  never  fulfilled  any  specific  priestly
functions.  His  name,  as  usual  among
the  Jews,  has  a  meaning,  and  is  to  be
translated  either  "  God  is  strong,"  or
**  God  will  strengthen."  Hengstenberg
decides  for  the  former,  and  says  it  is  to
be  explained  that  "Ezekiel  was  he  in
relation  to  whom  God  is  strong."  Baura-
garten  chooses  the  latter,  and  says  it
signifies  *'  he  whose  character  is  a  special
confirmation  of  the  strength  of  God."
The  idea  insisted  on  by  Hengstenberg,
following  an  older  commentator,  that  it


*'is  not  a  name  he  had  borne  from  his
youth,  but  an  oflicial  name  which  he  had
assumed  at  the  beginning  of  his  calling,"
appears  to  be  groundless.  It  is  true  of
all  the  prophets,  both  that  God  is  strong
to  fulfil  His  purpose,  and  that  He  will
give  strength  to  His  servants  for  that
part  of  His  work  which  He  has  assigned
them.  "  In  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans."
This  topographical  addition  seems  to  be
intended  for  a  further  attestation  that  it
was  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  really
came  to  Ezekiel.  The  Chaldee  version
interpolates  thus,  "In  the  land  [of  Israel,
and  again  a  second  time  He  spake  to
him  in  the  land]  of  the  Chaldeans."  It
is  believed  that  *'  the  Jews  had  a  notion
that  the  Shechinah  could  not  overshadow
a  prophet  out  of  the  Holy  Land."  Per-
haps a  strain  of  this  notion  is  to  be
heard  in  the  wail  of  the  captives  **  by
the  rivers  of  Babylon  "  when  they  ask,
*'  How  can  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a
strange  land  ?  "  The  notion  was  to  be
eradicated.  God  could  endue  a  man
with  prophetic  power  even  in  Chaldea,
and  that  is  further  witnessed  to  by  the
words  ^^  was  there  upon  him."  "The
hand  of  the  Lord  "  is  a  frequent  Scrip-
tural expression,  and  indicates  that  the
thing  which  was  to  be  done  was  done
in  submission  to  the  restraining  or  the
impelling  energy  of  the  Lord.


HOMILETICS,


(1.)  General  Conditions  of  the  Designation.

I.  The  time  to  receive  fuller  knowledge  of  the  Lord  is  uncertain.     Who

can  tell  why  the  call  to  Ezekiel  came  in  the  fifth  year,  and  not  in  the  first,  second,
<kc.  ?  The  pain  and  pressure  of  exile  galled,  no  doubt,  as  deeply  in  the  earlier  years
as  in  the  later,  yet  Ezekiel  had  not  seen  "the  heavens  opened."  Wliat  is  uncertain
to  men  is  fixed  with  God.  He  is  "  the  only  wise  God."  He  sees  the  end  from
the  beginning  of  all  lives.  He  alone  knows  where  it  is  best  to  lead  "the  brook"
across  the  way  of  His  people,  by  drinking  of  which  they  "will  lift  up  their  heads."
Though  uncertain,  men  are  not  to  he  unconcerned.  Having  no  criterion  as  to  the
appropriate  time  for  special  unfolding  of  the  will  of  God,  that  does  not  sanction  an
utter  indifference  as  to  what  they  would  have  Him  do.  Tliey  must  "wait  on  the
Lord  and  keep  His  way,"  ever  hoping  that  He  will  "exalt"  them  to  see  what  they
do  not  yet  see  of  the  glorious  majesty  of  His  kingdom.  Though  uncertain,  men
should  always  he  on  the  alert.  Waiting  for  blessing  is  not  real  and  valid  waiting,
except  they  who  wait  are  sensitive  to  the  approach  of  the  Lord.  His  word  comes
to  comfort,  strengthen,  open  up  a  duty,  and  those  are  the  good  and  faithful  ser-
vants who  honour  Him  by  receiving  it,  no  matter  at  what  time,  convenient  or
inconvenient  to  them,  He  may  vouchsafe  it.     Though  uncertain  men  must  never


CHAP.  1.  BOMILLTW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKtEL.


lose  faith.  However  long  it  be  ere  a  word  comes — one  year  or  five  years — they
must  believe  in  God.  He  has  not  forgotten  His  people.  Let  them  trust  that  in
some  month  He  will  bestow  favour  on  them  and  His  depressed  interests.

II.  The  place  is  undistinguished.  It  has  no  memorable  associations.  The  land
of  the  Chaldeans  was  devoid  of  that  instructive  relation  to  the  Jews  which  both
Egypt  and  the  mountains  of  Sinai  had.  The  river  of  Chebar  could  not  stir  their
thoughts  as  the  Jordan  could.  But  God  can  produce  in  an  obscure  or  obnoxious
place  that  which  will  be  a  hallowed  memory.  He  can  make  communications  in  a
garden  as  to  Adam,  in  an  outlying  district  of  Luz  as  to  Jacob,  in  a  cave  of  the
desert  as  to  P^lijah,  in  exile  as  to  Ezekiel.  He  may  manifest  Himself  anywhere —
in  ship  or  customhouse,  by  road  or  rail,  in  a  family  or  alone.  It  has  no  recog-
nised religious  privileges.  The  captives  could  not  make  yearly  pilgrimages  to  the
City  of  the  Great  King ;  they  could  not  approach  to  the  place  where  His  honour
dwelt.  For  them  there  was  no  treading  of  His  courts,  no  appearing  before  Hira,
no  burnt- offerings  and  sacrifices  to  offer  for  His  acceptance.  Their  hearts  might
thirst  and  faint  for  His  altars,  but  they  could  not  be  relieved.  As  Nathanael  in
after  times,  they  might  have  put  a  question  expressive  of  contempt  and  unbelief,
Can  iiny  good  thing  be  obtained  by  the  rivers  of  Babylon  ?  They  had  not  yet
learned  by  experience  that  the  Lord  would  make  "  a  little  sanctuary  "  for  them  in
the  place  to  which  He  had  driven  them,  and  there  reveal  His  justice  and  His
grace.  So  when  Ezekiel  was  constituted  an  organ  of  new  revelations,  they  were
blessed  where  they  did  not  look  for  blessing.  Happy  is  it  that  the  help  of  God  is
for  the  feeble  who  cannot,  for  the  charged  with  duty  who  must  not,  for  the  wan-
derers who  may  not  enter  into  the  assemblies  of  worshippers,  as  well  as  for  those
who  have  all  means  of  grace  at  their  command.  *'  In  all  places  where  I  record  my
name  I  will  come  unto  thee,  and  I  will  bless  thee."  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world."

in.  The  person  is  inconspicuous.  So  far  as  is  known,  there  was  nothing  to
give  prominence  to  Ezekiel  over  other  members  of  priestly  families,  or  the  general
body  of  his  fellow-captives.  "  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God."  He
does  not  limit  His  manifestations  by  any  classifications  which  men  may  make.
"Base  things  of  the  world,  and  things  which  are  despised,  hath  God  chosen."  The
boy  with  a  good  education  or  the  boy  without  it,  children  who  are  taught  by
their  parents  the  truth  in  Jesus  from  their  earliest  days,  or  children  who  have
learned  no  more  than  they  learned  in  a  Sunday-school,  may  equally  obtain  from
God  an  entrance  into  "the  secret  of  His  covenant."

This  designation  of  Ezekiel  furthermore  suggests — God  can  provide  Jit  agents  in
unexpected  circumstances.  He  only  knows  when  and  where  it  is  required  that  He
should  make  special  additions  to  men's  knowledge  of  Him  and  His  ways,  and  He
has  the  wisdom  and  the  power  to  select  the  persons  to  whom  that  knowledge  can
be  given.  So  He  finds  Enoch  amid  gigantic  iniquities,  Moses  in  the  palace  of
Pharaoh,  Ezekiel  among  the  captives  of  Babylon,  Paul  (Saul)  among  the  fiercest
of  persecutors,  Luther  in  a  monastery.  Lowly  places  or  prominent  places  cannot
be  obstacles  in  His  path  of  goodness  and  mercy.  He  proves  that  "  His  strength
is  made  perfect  in  weakness."

Goil  can  bestow  great  booris  on  the  person  He  may  call.  An  exile  amongst  exiles,
with  none  of  the  appointed  external  means  of  worship,  in  the  face  of  political  dis-
abilities, pressed  upon  by  social  troubles,  allied  to  men  who  had  no  heart  to  help
him,  yet  Ezekiel  not  only  found  God  near,  but,  moreover,  saw  heavenly  things,  and
was  touched  by  a  hand  which  made  him  one  of  the  forces  of  the  world.  It  tells  us
that  not  any  circumstances  of  life,  not  any  conditions  of  body  need  to  prevent  us
from  being  dignified  by  a  faith  in  the  unseen,  and  sitting  in  heavenly  places  in
Christ  Jesus.

God  can  increase  His  servants  power  by  connecting  him  with  an  organisation,
Roijinson  Crusoe,  alone  on  Juan  Fernandez,  might  have  received  large  favours  from
8


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  L


God,  but  he  could  not  use  those  favours  for  the  welfare  of  neighbours.  Power  with
men  depends  more  or  less  upon  the  links  which  bind  us  to  them.  There  is  influ-
ence from  a  family.  When  the  solitary  are  set  in  families  it  is  that  they  may  give
and  find  help  which  could  not  have  been  otherwise  secured.  Each  member  has  a
power  to  affect  the  rest  who  are  within  the  same  circle.  There  is  influence  from  a
caste.  Commercial,  social,  intellectual,  religious  interests  bind  men  to  one  another,
and  that  bond  enables  them  to  carry  out  schemes  which  could  not  have  been  ac-
complished individually,  e.g.^  guilds,  trades'  unions,  companies,  an  aristocracy,  an
army,  a  priesthood,  a  denomination  of  Christians.  There  is  influence  from  a  nation.
The  members  of  a  small  nation  are  not  so  powerfully  backed  as  those  of  a  large.
Civis  Romanus  sum  was  a  phrase  which  gave,  to  the  person  who  could  employ  it,
greater  consideration  and  security  than  were  given  to  the  citizens  of  any  other  state
contemporary  with  the  Roman.  The  phrase,  **  I  am  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews," —
however  the  speaker  of  it  might  have  been  counted  as  *'  the  offscouring  of  all
things," — was  pregnant  with  mightier  influences  than  have  been  wielded  by  the
nationalities  of  those  wlio  derided  him.  The  use  of  a  nation's  influence  cannot  be
indiff'erent  to  God  who  loveth  righteousness ;  and  in  Ezekiel  He  designated  a  man
who  had  received  a  certain  education  and  status  on  account  of  his  ])riestly  origin,
and  who,  because  he  was  a  Jew  and  could  contribute  to  Hebrew  literature,  has
obtained  a  position  which  commands  the  suffrages  of  the  world.  "  This  also  is  of
the  Lord  of  hosts,  who  is  wonderful  in  counsel  and  excellent  in  working."  Organi-
sations may  be  hurtful  by  checking  the  fair  development  of  personal  life,  but  they
can  also  add  to  personal  power,

(2.)  Preliminary  Steps  to  the  Designation.

L  "  Ezekiel,  the  son  of  Buzi  the  priest "  (ver.  3).

It  is  sometimes  argued  that  Ezekiel  was  trammelled  by  his  connection  with  the
priestly  organisation,  that  his  lineage  induced  him  to  weave  a  sacerdotal  element
into  his  prophecies,  that  he  presents  *'  a  Levitical  turn  of  mind,  in  virtue  of  which
he  sets  a  high  value  upon  sacred  customs."  Attempts  to  prove  this  do  not  appear
eminently  successful.  When  commentators  say  that  his  sacerdotalism  is  shown  'in
tlie  demands  he  makes  for  obedience  to  the  requisitions  of  the  Law,  we  seem  to  atnu
in  that  statement,  not  a  simple  reading  of  the  prophecies,  but  a  reading  with  inter-
polations from  fancy  or  prepossession.  Isaiah,  Jeremiah  make  the  same  G%fCiancis.
and,  taking  account  of  the  different  circumstances  of  Ezekiel,  he  exhibic*  no  more
of  a  sacerdotal  tendency  than  they  do.  It  would  have  been  an  odd  pi&cts  in  which
to  manifest  "  a  genuine  priestly  turn  of  mind  " — whatever  that  may  mean — the
place  where  he  could  not  by  any  means  fulfil  the  special  functions  of  the  priest-
hood ;  but  a  very  suitable  place  in  which  to  endeavour  to  .impTe?«5  the  captives
with  the  conviction  that  they  were  still  "under  the  law  to  God, '  even  though  far
from  the  Temple  of  Jehovah.  It  would  be  as  hard  to  signify  whore  Ezekiel  exhibits
"a  strong  priestly  feeling,"  marking  him  off  from  other  propliets,  as  it  would  be  to
exhibit  a  strong  pastoral  and  fruit-gathering  feeling  in  Amos  (chap.  vii.  14).  Yet
Fairbairn  writes,  "  In  Ezekiel  alone  of  the  later  prophets  does  the  priestly  element
become  so  peculiarly  prominent  and  prevailing  as  to  give  a  tone  and  impress  to
the  general  character  of  his  ministrations,  and  to  render  even  his  prophetical
labours  a  kind  of  priestly  service  "  (p.  8).  We  see — what  we  expect  to  see  !  God
chooses  prophets  not  to  unfold  their  own  ancestral  or  technical  habits,  but  His
true  and  broad  righteousness  and  love.  That  Ezekiel,  when  acting  in  accordance
with  this,  should  employ  imagery  borrowed  from  the  Law  and  worship  of  Israel
was  natural.  He  did  it,  however,  not  as  one  who  would  exalt  whatever  the  priests
had  to  carry  out,  but  as  one  who  had  been  taught  that  against  the  degrading  ten-
dencies of  Israel  there  was  no  barrier,  against  heathenism  there  was  no  power,  in
Temple,  offerings,  or  priests.  He  was  taught  that  there  W93  no  preservative  in  the
§vil  days  of  dire  captivity  save  in  the  latent  energy  anri  iufcrinsic  truth  of  '*the


CHAP.  T.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL.


lively  oracles"  given  by  Moses.  So  he  sets  himself,  not  to  do  a  service  for  priest-
liness,  but  for  the  Law.  As  a  priest  he  was  doubtless  one  of  that  kind  whose  lips
kept  knowledge,  and  as  an  enforcer  of  the  Law  was  "the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of
hosts"  (Mai.  ii.  7).

II.  *'  Now  I  was  among  the  captives  "  (ver.  1).

Ezekiel  had  been,  apparently,  by  himself.  His  mind  had  been  exercised  upon
the  sad  days  that  were  passing  over  him  and  his  people.  He  had  been  laying
himself  open  to  thoughts  of  the  Lord,  and  then  he  was  called  into  a  nearer
communion  than  he  had  ever  experienced.  Unconsciously  he  was  stepping  for-
ward to  receive  competency  to  do  actions  for  God.  He  does  not  tell  liow  he  had
been  moving — only  that,  while  so  employed,  "  it  came  to  pass  "  that  God  spoke
to  him.  They  who  would  learn  of  Christ  must:  \,  Go  alone  with  Him,  Things
pass  in  secret  from  Him  which  no  stranger  need  intermeddle  with,  and  no  personal
insufficiency  need  intercept.  2.  Go  with  all  cares.  Outer  circumstances  may  be
harassing,  associates  may  be  lukewarm  or  ungodly,  prospects  may  seem  utterly
blank,  but  neither  ignore  them  nor  make  light  of  them  before  Him,  for  "  He
careth  for  you."  3.  Go  in  hope  that  He  will  manifest  Himself.  Unlooked-for
light  may  be  lifted  up  on  you,  strength  may  be  infused,  faith  be  increased,  and  new
scenes  in  your  history  be  entered  on ;  for  "  He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly
beyond  what  you  think."

III.  *'  The  heavens  were  opened  "  (ver.  1).

1.  Men  have  faculties  for  realising  what  is  beyond  the  earth.  We  dwell  on  the
borders  of  the  unknown,  and  can  take  interest  in  noticing  the  traces  of  what  may
be  therein.  God's  hands  have  made  us  and  fashioned  us  so  that  this  is  possible.
To  use  only  animal  functions,  to  develop  only  earthly  aims,  and  to  present  a  muti
lated  nature  to  all  the  influences  which  play  upon  us,  is  a  spectacle  darkened  with
criminality  in  reference  to  ourselves  and  our  Maker,  But  to  use  our  faculties  for
looking  at  '*  the  things  unseen  and  eternal,"  that  is  the  part  of  full  and  true  man-
hood— a  token  that  our  life  is  a  life  worth  living.

2.  God  adopts  methods  for  acting  on  those  faculties.  As  light  is  made  to  suit  the
organ  of  sight,  and  sound  the  organ  of  hearing,  so  His  Spirit  is  able  to  operate
upon  us  in  order  that  we  may  discern  spiritual  things.  The  person  who  sees  light
or  hears  a  sound  cannot  prove  to  another  person  that  he  sees  or  hears.  He  can  only
affirm,  witness.  So  a  person,  who  has  "  the  eyes  of  his  heart  enlightened  to  know  "
what  is  his  inheritance  in  the  heavens,  cannot  give  any  demonstration  of  the
change  which  he  is  conscious  of,  he  can  only  affirm,  witness,  that  he  does  know
what  he  did  not  know.  "  Wliereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see,"  is  as  applicable  to
heavenly  as  to  earthly  things.  All  men  do  not  receive  the  benefit  of  God's  methods.
Some  deny  their  operation,  and  some  their  validity.  Some  acknowledge  them  only
to  neglect  them,  and  some  hope  that  they  will  see  the  heavens  opened  though  they
do  not  go  to  the  only  door  thereinto.  But  whatever  the  reason  be  for  their
deficiency,  the  light  has  been  opened  up  to  the  world,  and  men  are  judged  for  not
believing  in  it.  The  Son  of  God  has  come  from  heaven  and  has  again  ascended  to
His  Father :  through  Him  heaven  is  always  open,  and  open  to  every  one  who  will.
"  Set  your  afilections  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth."

IV.  "I  saw  visions  of  God"  (ver.  1).

More  is  meant  than  that  Ezekiel  saw  grand  and  vast  visions.  His  expression
is  not  to  be  limited  to  visions  given  by  the  action  of  God,  or  to  visions  notifying
the  will  of  God,  but  embraces  also  the  marvellousness  of  revelations  of  God.  He
was  made  a  seer  of  God  in  order  to  be  a  prophet  for  God.     Observe —

1.  Thouglits  of  heaven  must  receive  their  character  from  views  of  God,  If
we  could  see  into  heaven  and  did  not  see  signs  of  God  there,  we  should  remain  in
spiritual  darkness.  We  must  pass  into  the  house  to  perceive  the  householder.
We  are  vagrants  still,  as  to  all  moral  progress  and  undertakings,  if  we  do  not  find
Omb  who  can  enlighten  and  guide  and  strengthen  ns.  All  beliefs  of  our  interest  iu
10


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  ohaf.  l


the  heavens  will  be  blighted  unless  they  are  steps  on  our  way  to  know  we  have  a
living,  almighty,  perfect  Fiiend.

2.  All  true  views  of  God  are  given  hy  God.  **  He  dwelleth  in  light,  which  no
man  can  approach  unto ;  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  see."  Human  power
cannot  make  Him  manifest  Himself.  The  highest  knowledge  which  men  of  them-
selves can  reach  does  not  embrace  one  of  the  secrets  of  His  being.  He  alone  opens
the  inward  ej^es  and  presents  the  aspects  He  wants  to  reveal.  He  may  open  them
through  some  outward  impulse,  or  by  action  on  the  heart,  but  in  either  case  the
ripple  of  sensational  life  is  hushed  by  the  flow  of  a  grander  life,  and  the  reasoning
faculty  stands  still,  waiting  to  know  what  it  shall  receive.  Then,  as  the  light  air
comes  to  a  hanging  leaf  and  stirs  it,  as  a  father's  love  and  wisdom  come  to  an
erring  child  and  [)rompt  to  confession,  so  the  subject  of  visions  of  God  knows  that
God  has  aflfected  him — that  God  alone  could  accomplish  that  which  has  happened
to  him.  The  visions  are  real.  The  prophet  did  see  some  appearances  of  God  ;  and,
whether  it  were  by  an  external  operation  or  by  his  own  inward  rapt  attention,  he
was  prepared  to  avouch  it  as  confidently  as  he  would  a  vision  obvious  merely  to
his  physical  sight.  How  many  He  gives  !  Is  there  a  week,  a  day  passing  in  which
He  does  not  set  forth  something  of  His  glory  1

3.  Visions  of  God  require  a  conscious  apprehension  hy  men.  Men  can  look
upwards  or  downwards,  outward  or  inward ;  but  they  may  shut  their  eyes.  So
they  decide  whether  they  will  see  the  things  of  God  or  not — whether  they  will
accept  the  fuller  manifestations  of  God  or  not.  And  the  bowed  in  heart,  the
seeker  for  the  truth  learns  that,  back  of  the  material  world  and  its  forces,  is  He
whom  they  all  obey,  and  whom  hearts  should  believe  in.  They  yield  themselves
up,  not  by  the  push  of  a  blind  necessity,  but  according  to  the  laws  of  their  own
freedom,  and  yet  they  are  elevated,  guarded,  and  assured  of  the  reality  of  their
visions  by  the  supreme  Spirit  operating.

4.  Various  aspects  of  God  are  presented.  No  man  can  see  God,  and  all  that  is
perceived  by  the  most  favoured  seer  is  but  the  back  parts  of  His  goodness  and  glory.
Parts  of  His  ways  are  recognised ;  "  but  how  little  a  portion  is  heard  of  Him  1  but
the  thunder  of  His  power  who  can  understand  ? "  He  is  working  in  the  earth
which  He  has  filled  with  good ;  in  the  heavens  which  declare  His  glory ;  in  the
movements  of  men's  spirits  which  accuse  themselves,  repent,  trust,  love  ;  in  the
prosperous  or  depressed  trade  of  nations,  in  their  freedom  from  or  subjection  to
calamities ;  in  the  birth,  life,  death,  resurrection,  and  exaltation  of  the  Son  of  His
love  who  hath  declared  Him.  Wonderful  in  number  and  variety  are  the  views
which  God  has  provided  for  willing  hearts.  "They  are  new  every  morning."  It
is  a  sign  of  no  reverence  or  true  knowledge  when  some  assume  to  tell  just  what
God  must  show  of  Himself,  just  what  God  must  do.  They  forget  that  He  gives
no  account  of  His  matters — that  '*He  dwells  in  the  thick  darkness."  It  is  for  men
to  be  humble  before  Him,  even  though  He  may  let  them  see  many  a  token  of  His
will.  They  are  to  look  and  wait.  "  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch,  and  set  me  upon
the  tower,  and  will  watch  to  see  what  He  will  say  unto  nie.  For  the  vision  is  yet
for  an  appointed  time,  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak  and  not  lie"  (Hab.  ii.  1-3).

V.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  expressly  "  (ver.  3).

This  is  an  evidence  of  the  fact  that  the  vision  and  the  word  were  closely  allied
in  prophetical  phenomena.  Isaiah  ^^  saw  the  word  which  he  received  concerning
Judah  and  Jerusalem."  Amos  begins  his  book  thus,  "  The  words  of  Amos  which
he  saw  concerning  Israel."  Daniel  was  overwhelmed  by  a  great  vision,  "yet  heard
the  voice  of  his  words."  Paul  had  "  visions  and  revelations  of  the  Lord."  John  in
Patmos  saw  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  man,  and  then  listened  to  what  He  said.
So  was  it  with  Ezekiel  now.

Notice  :  1.  "  God  is  His  own  interpreter."  Symbols  and  scenes  are  less  capable
of  definite  explanation  than  words.  It  is  hazardous  to  take  impressions,  feelings,
&c.,  as  intimating  the  will  of  God,  in  the  absence  of  His  Word  or  of  principles

U


CH.p.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


which  His  AVord  embraces.  So  He  "  spake  in  time  past  in  the  prophets,**  and  "in
these  last  days  in  His  Son."  He  can  make  His  visions,  manifestations,  plain,  and
no  one  who  wants  to  know  His  will  in  sincerity  can  live  without  having  some  signs
of  wliat  that  will  really  is.

2.  There  are  tests  for  learning  '^what  God  the  Lord  doth  speak"  It  has  often
perplexed  men's  minds  how  to  discern  between  a  suggestion  from  God  and  a  sug-
gestion from  some  other  source.  There  is  no  short  and  easy  method  applicable
to  all  cases.  Not  the  strength  of  the  impression,  not  mere  unhesitating  con-
fidence in  its  divineness,  noi  its  api)arent  conformity  to  what  has  been  done,  not
the  memory  of  words  of  Scripture  which  seem  to  sanction  it,  can  decide  the  doubt.
Conscience,  though  willing  to  do  only  the  will  of  God,  may  give  different  prompt-
ings from  those  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  We  are  left  without  any  infallible  guide  ;  but
surely  no  one  who  wants  to  order  his  conduct  aright  will  fail  to  discern,  sooner  or
later,  what  is  of  God  or  of  man.  It  may  be  there  was  for  His  prophets  a  special
light  in  which  they  saw  that  they  were  addressed  by  God,  and  so  were  both  made
sure  and  warranted  to  say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God ; "  but  it  is  not  likely  that
they  could  have  given  any  explicit  information  on  the  point.  They  knew  His
voice,  as  the  sheep  of  the  Good  Shepherd  know  His,  yet  are  unable  to  explain  how
they  do  so.  Let  it  be  believed  that  God  is  our  Father,  and  we  shall  find  little
difficulty  in  granting  that  He  can  make  His  children  know  He  is  speaking  to  them
and  that  they  are  not  deceived.

3.  God^s  servants  must  teach  according  to  the  Word  of  God.  They  cannot  make
truth  ;  they  must  receive  it  *'from  above."  Their  souls  should  be  as  a  mirror  on
which  He  casts  His  rays,  and  which  send  forth  a  faithful  reflection.  They  are  to
be  as  a  channel  through  which  the  water  of  life  may  flow  unimpeded.  Each  one
may  exhibit  his  own  characteristic  qualities  of  mind,  as  water  takes  the  tint  of  the
rocky  bed  over  which  it  runs.  No  prophet  is  a  reproduction  of  any  other  prophet.
No  apostle  is  a  copy  of  another  apostle.  No  believing  man  or  woman  is  exactly
like  to  any  one  else  among  "  the  saints  of  the  Most  High."  The  Lord  of  all  makes
each  seed  to  have  its  own  body,  and  envelops  therein  some  property  which  is  of
use  to  other  existences,  so  has  He  constituted  each  soul  distinct,  and  each  is  capable
of  acting  in  behalf  of  the  King  of  Truth.  Therefore  should  every  one  strive  to  grow
by  feeding  on  His  Word.  Only  thus  can  they  teach  to  profit — only  thus  can  they
expect  "the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit" — when  not  the  words  of  man's  wisdom
but  the  words  of  the  only  wise  God  are  declared.

4.  We  can  have  access  to  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  not  now  a  gift  bestowed  upon
a  few  selected  individuals ;  it  is  the  endowment  of  mankind.  "  The  Word  was
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God,  .  .  .  and  the  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt
among  us,  .  .  .  full  of  grace  and  truth."  We  can  come  to  the  Light  and  Life,
and  hear  Him  at  all  times.  All  the  history,  all  the  psalms,  all  the  prophecies  of
the  Old  Testament  have  some  more  or  less  portion  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus.
** Search  the  Scriptures,  for  they  testify  of"  Him.  Come  to  Him,  for  "whosoever
will  may  come."  We  are  in  a  more  lofty  position  than  Ezekiel  was,  and  can  see
and  hear  more  fully  from  God  and  of  God  than  he  did.  What  manner  of  persons
ought  we  to  be  !  *'  Obeying  the  truth  through  the  Spirit,"  abiding  in  Christ,  and
the  word  of  Christ  abiding  in  us.      "  Take  heed  how  ye  hear."

VL  "  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  there  upon  him  "  (ver.  3).

**  Hand  is  equivalent  to  sovereignty  in  its  fullest  meaning,  and  sovereignty  in
that  meaning  does  not  admit  of  degrees  "  (The  Aryan  Household).  It  is  a  symbol
in  Scripture  of  impulse,  power,  <fec.,  and  capable  not  only  of  laying  the  foundation
of  the  earth  and  of  spanning  the  heavens,  but  also  of  being  laid  gently  on  the  heads
of  little  children  as  well  as  on  sorrowing,  awestruck  men.  Its  touch  prepared  for
another  stage  in  Ezekiel's  development.  It  infused  strength  for  seeing  and  acting
in  his  new  vocation.  It  sanctified  him,  set  him  apart,  so  that  he  was  constituted
a  true  and  capable  prophet  to  Israel.  Observe — ■
12


IIUMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  I.


1.  llie  real  poirer  in  serving  the  Lord.  It  is  contact  with  Him.  Daniel  could
not  hear  tlie  divine  messages  till  a  hand  touched  Him  (Dan.  x.  10).  J^lm  could
receive  the  revelation  after  tlie  right  hand  of  the  Glorified  had  been  laid  on
him  (Rev.  i.  17).  Every  disciple  must  be  strengthened  by  the  Spirit  in  the  inner
man  (Eph.  iii.  16),  in  order  "to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure."  Obstacles
lie  in  man's  heart  which  have  to  be  overcome,  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  presses
them  down  or  sweeps  them  away.  When  it  is  laid  on  us,  then  we  can  do  all
things;  then,  whatever  may  be  accomplished,  with  money,  with  words,  with  deeds
for  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  world,  owes  its  success  to  His  giving  His  hand  to
it.  "Severed  from  me,  ye  can  do  nothing."  We  must  have  the  word  of  Christ,
and  also  Christ  Himself  to  dwell  in  us,  else  we  shall  fail  in  fulfilling  the  word  of
the  truth  of  the  gospel.  Prayer,  reading  and  hearing  the  Word,  teaching  and
preaching  it,  are  "as  tinkling  cymbals"  if  the  power  of  Christ  do  not  rest
on  us.

2.  Be  at  the  disposal  of  the  Lord.  (1.)  Implicitly.  Let  there  be  no  obstruc-
tions, no  reserves.  The  creature  has  no  claim  except  in  corres[)ondence  to  that  of
his  Creator,  the  bondsman  no  choice  but  that  of  his  lord,  the  ransomed  no  half-
heartedness  towards  his  deliverer.  Whosoever  is  touched  so  that  he  is  impelled  to
say  "  It  is  the  Lord,"  then  no  hesitancy,  no  trouble  should  be  regarded  by  him  in
any  light  but  that  of  a  temptation  out  of  which  a  way  of  escape  is  to  be  found.
(2.)  On  the  spot.  In  our  own  houses  or  lodgings,  in  business  or  worship,  in  health
<»r  ailments,  in  agreeable  conditions  or  disagreeable,  begin  to  obey  the  pressure  of
God's  hand  there.  "  The  one  secret  of  life  and  development  is  not  to  devise  and
plan,  but  to  fall  in  with  the  forces  at  work,  to  do  every  moment's  duty  aright,
that  being  the  part  of  the  process  allotted  to  us ;  and  let  come,  not  what  will,  for
there  is  no  such  thing,  but  what  the  Eternal  thought  wills  for  each  of  us.  has
intended  for  each  of  us  from  the  first "  (G.  Macdonald).  (3.)  Confidingly  Dark-
ness may  fall,  weakness  may  be  experienced,  opponents  may  bar  the  way,  fear  not.
He  upholds  by  the  right  hand  of  His  righteousness.  Maintain  the  thought  of  a
present  Lord,  in  contact  with  your  spirit,  putting  you  forth  but  also  going  before
you,  and  you  will  find  a  force  which  will  more  than  conquer  all  against  you.  It
is  no  dream,  no  cunningly  devised  fable,  that  Christ  Jesus  is  with  us.

3.  Trust  to  receive  impulses  from  the  Lord.  The  life  of  God  in  the  soul  is  not
%  constantly  equal  force.  It  is  sometimes  hardly  distinguishable  from  the  life  of
sense,  and  at  other  times  it  is  as  if  it  was  more  than  conqueror  over  the  world  and
the  flesh.  Prayer  is  now  easy,  but  then  it  is  a  drag.  Here  we  walk  in  darkness,
and  have  no  light  on  the  ways  of  the  Lord ;  and  there  we  seem  enabled  to  "mount
up  on  wings  as  eagles,  run  and  not  be  weary,  walk  and  not  faint."  The  God  of
all  grace  will  stablish,  strengthen,  perfect,  .^ettle.  From  ordinary  earthly  sur-
roundings He  can  lead  so  that  we  shall,  first,  be  made  to  feel  that  another  world
affects  us  ;  then,  that  God  manifests  Himself  to  us ;  and  afterwards,  that  He  imparts
to  us  of  His  own  strength.     Thus  may  we  be  filled  with  the  Spirit.

4.  Our  ordinary  places  of  sojourn  may  he  made  memorable:  Not  only  nations
remember  places  where  events  historically  important  to  them  have  occurred;  not
only  cities  and  towns  keep  up  memories  of  persons  and  actions  interesting  to  their
inhabitants ;  but  also  individual  believers  in  God  can  record  of  one  spot  or  another
that  the  Lord  met  them  there.  How  precious  a  thought  it  is  that  there  is  no
place  whatever  but  may  become  a  Bethel — a  house  of  God — to  any  traveller
towards  eternity  !  A  private  room,  a  church,  a  prison,  a  street,  a  hillside,  a  river-
bank  will  be  sacred,  as  no  other  place  can  be  sacred,  if  they  have  witnessed  a
stimulating  manifestation  of  what  God  can  do.  Be  we  where  we  may,  we  may  be
there  with  the  unseen  Christ,  and  He  will  be  its  glory.

Thus  Ezt  kiel  was  designated.  He  was  not  consecrated  by  any  enactment  of
the  law  of  Moses.  No  oil  of  anointment  was  poured  upon  his  head  to  authorise
him  to  prophesy.     No  hands  of  predecessors  were  laid  upon  him.     He  is  chosen

13


CHAF.  1.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


and  set  apart  by  the  Lord  alone,  and  he,  with  all  true  prophets,  is  a  type  of  the
coming  time  when  the  children  should  be  all  taught  of  the  Lord,  for  tlie  Spirit
would  be  poured  out  upon  us  from  on  higli.  We  are  under  this  dispensation.
We  must  guard  against  supposing  that  human  appointments  to  ministry  for  the
Lord  are  valid  if  He  has  not  called  to  it.  There  is  no  true  ordination  but  that  of
the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  there  is  no  true  service  but  tliat  which  opens  out  to
more  service.  Vague  longings  for  God  may  be  turned  into  real  manifestations;
visions  of  God  may  prepare  for  feeling  the  hand  of  God.  Such  are  the  ways  of
"  the  God  of  Israel,  who  giveth  strength  and  power  to  His  people :  blessed  be
God  1 "     "  Of  His  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace."

"I  saw  visions  of  God.*'
The  Sources  of  Religious  Sensibility.

1.  Man  must  consider  himself.  Let  him  examine  his  own  nature,  look  at  the
wonderful  mechanism  which  is  going  on  in  his  own  breast,  and  he  will  surely  awake
to  a  sense  of  the  high  and  exalted  relations  which  his  existence  sustains.  But  he
lives  in  the  world.  Material  objects  engross  and  enthral  his  mind.  He  converses
not  with  his  own  spirit.  He  considers  not  what  manner  of  being  he  is.  Let  this
thoughtlessness  be  laid  aside,  and  it  will  not  be  strange  if  he  come  to  a  living  con-
ception of  that  mighty  Being  from  whom  we  all  spring,  and  by  whom  we  all
subsist.

2.  He  must  consider  the  wonderful  works  external  to  himself.  The  green  earth
and  its  diversities  of  scenery,  the  canopy  above  it,  bright  with  stars  and  burning
suns,  show  visions  of  power,  wisdom,  goodness  transcending  his  utmost  ability  to
measure  and  fathom.  Let  him  think  of  these,  and  will  he  not  feel  how  awful  and
stupendous  the  Author  of  such  prodigies  must  be  1

3.  He  must  consider  how  different  man  is  from  what  he  might  have  been  expe-ted
to  he.  With  eyes  to  see  visions  of  God,  he  bends  them  to  the  eurth.  He  does  not
realise  the  purposes  for  which  he  is  made,  the  character  he  is  to  acquire,  the  de.stiny
placed  within  his  reach.  How  much  is  there  in  the  course  of  human  affairs  to
trouble  and  perplex?  Ignorance  and  superstition  brood  over  a  large  portion  of
the  habitable  globe.  In  Christian  countries  how  little  is  seen  of  that  purity,  faith,
and  piety  which  Christ  enjoins.  But  all  that  need  not  destroy  the  conviction  that
we  are  under  a  wise  and  merciful  God — that  it  is  impossible  for  Him  who  has  dis-
played in  the  frame  of  man,  in  the  constitution  of  the  outer  world,  in  the  gospel
of  Christ,  such  tokens  of  wisdom  and  love,  to  exercise  other  than  a  government  of
perfect  benevolence.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  we,  who  are  but  of  yesterday,
should  be  able  to  interpret  the  many  mysterious  and  inscrutable  events  in  human
affairs,  though  all  will  be  clear  when  the  day  shall  dispel  the  midnight  vapours.

4.  He  must  consider  how  God  has  been  trvsted  in.  We  know  (»f  men  who  have
been  subjected  to  heavy  assaults  because  they  believed  in  the  Word  of  God — of
Jesus  Christ,  in  despisal  and  rejection,  upheld  by  communings  with  His  Father;
and  we  learn  that  in  duties,  harassments,  weariness,  death,  our  safety,  strength,
consolation  will  be  obtained  in  those  retirements  of  the  soul  where  our  eyes  are
opened  to  see  visions  of  God. — Madge  {condensed).

ILLUSTRATIONS.

Dates. — The  Jews,  if  there  is  any  trutli  in  their  history  at  all,  were  a  journalising  people.

,  .  .  The  prophets  keep  u  diary  of  tiieir  visions.  Everywhere  do  they  record  the  <iate8,  the
year,  the  day  of  the  montl),  the  attending  chronological  circumstances  of  the  hurdens  and
messages  witii  which,  as  tliey  allege,  they  have  been  commissioned  by  the  Lord.  If  these  dates
are  put  in  by  compilers,  long  after  the  times  of  the  prophetic  visions,  then^there  is  no  reason
for  it,  no  meaning  in  it.  .  .  It  is  an  easier  tlieory  that  every  word  of  the  prophetic  writings
bad  been  forged.  There  is  but  one  other  supposition  :  the  dates  and  the  visions  are  from  the
tame  persons,  and  these  are  the  prophets  themselves  writing  and  speaking  ai  the  times  they

u


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  ohaf.  L


profees  to  write  and  speak,  and  in  relation  to  actual  existing  events  that  form  the  subjects  of
their  warning.  The  seers,  the  times,  the  nation,  the  national  life,  it  is  all  one  true  picture —
iniU parts  most  truthful  and  natural ;  in  its  whole  suggestive  of  an  extraordinary  and  difficult
problem.  Let  any  man  attempt  to  explain  its  natural  without  bringing  in  its  supernatural,
or  some  other  supernatural — if  he  can. — Taylor  Levns.

Names. — What  is  the  real  historical  significance  of  the  deeply  religious  character  of  Jewish
names,  their  strong  theistic  or  rather  monotheistic  aspect,  their  continual  expression  of  faith
and  hope,  their  so  frequent  allusions  to  the  ideas  of  covenant  and  redemption  ?  And  why  too,
may  we  ask,  do  so  many  of  these  appellations  end  in  El  and  Jah,  ever  calling  up  the  two  great
divine  names  with  their  most  holy  ideas  ?  Let  the  reader  ponder  well  the  fact,  and  see  if  he
can  find  any  other  reason  for  this  national  seal^  this  naming  after  the  Lord,  as  we  may  call  it,
than  the  great  all-explaining  fact  that  they  were  indeed  *'a  chosen  people,"  "an  elect
people,"  whom  for  high  and  world-wide  reasons  God  had  taken  at  His  own  "  when  he
separated  the  sons  of  Adam  and  gave  the  nations  their  inheritance."  It  is  a  standing  memorial,
handed  down  from  generation  to  generation,  that  "this  was  the  people  whose  God,"  whose  El
or  Mighty  One,  was  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  Covenant,  who  had  been  their  fathers'  God,  and
who  had  given  them  those  glorious  promises,  ineffaceable  by  the  bondage  of  generations,  that
in  them  and  in  their  seed  ail  the  nations  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed." — Taylor  Lewis.

Visions. — Thankfulness  for  being  made  capable  of  seeing  this  "burning  west"  [glorious  vision
of  Arran],  and  of  being  so  affected  by  its  beauty,  gave  place  to  thankfulness  for  the  spiritual
eye  opened  in  me,  by  which  I  saw  the  Eternal  Light  and  the  Eternal  Beauty ;  thankfulness
that  was  much  mingled  with  self-condemnation,  as  I  reflected  that .  .  .  that  which  my  spiritual
eye  saw  is  an  ever-present  glory,  to  be  seen  wherever  the  eye  opens  on  it ;  and  yet  my  memories
of  it  were  of  what  had  been  seen  only  at  long  intervals  ...  in  a  solemn  sense  of  choice.  I
Bay  in  a  sense  of  choice,  because  I  do  not  feel  in  reality  that  the  opening  of  the  eye  that  sees
the  spiritual,  so  that  the  spirit  is  flooded  with  its  proper  light,  is  so  simple  a  matter,  or  so
absolutely  to  be  determined  by  a  mere  volition,  as  the  opening  of  the  bodily  eye.  That  "glory
of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ"  we  do  not  see  in  its  brightness  simply  by  turning  to  it.
For  such  vision  beyond  habitual  faith  we  wait  on  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  have  it  not  in  our  own
hand.     But  still  we  know  that  he  that  soweth  bountifully  reaps  bountifully. — MacLeod  Campbell.

Power. — The  distinction  is  always  assuming  more  and  more  importance  to  my  mind,  viz.,
that  between  the  special  acting  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  the  revelation  of  truth  not  previously
revealed  to  men,  and  His  acting  in  enabling  us  to  apprehend  that  truth,  and  to  advance  in  its
light  and  the  life  which  it  feeds.  .  .  .  No  explanation  seems  adequate  which  admits  not — rather,
assumes  not — that  God  can,  and  when  it  seemeth  good  to  Him  does  give  the  human  spirit  to
know  His  own  presence,  and  His  own  touch,  otherwise  than  in  that  highest  way  which  is  com-
munion with  Himself  in  the  light  of  life.  This  .  .  .  the  whole  record  of  Revelation  seems  to
me  to  teach  as  to  those  great  events  in  the  history  of  intercourse  between  God  and  men  which
we  have  been  accustomed  to  receive  as  **  Divine  Revelation,"  viz.,  a  knowledge  of  being  spoken
to  by  the  living  God  which  was  not  an  inference  from  the  nature  of  that  which  God  spake —
a  knowledge  common  to  Balaam  and  Jonah  with  Moses  and  Samuel,  and  distinct  from  all
communion  in  the  word  that  came  to  them.  What  this  was  I  know  not,  and  may  never
know.  .  .  .  What  we  seek  to  know  is,  surely,  the  actual  fact  as  to  what  God  does  in  the  earth,
of  which  we  may  not  make  our  own  experience  the  measure  ;  while  we  cannot  be  too  thankful
for  that  clear  consciousness  of  seeing  light  in  God's  light  which  may  be  our  temptation  to  do
80. — MacLeod  Campbell.

Experience  of  God. — Now  and  then  a  great  experience  comes  unexpected  and  unsought.
It  touches  the  greater  chords  of  the  soul,  and  lifts  it  above  the  common  level  of  emotion,  out-
runs all  former  knowledge.  .  .  .  But  what  other  experience  is  like  that  of  the  personal  disclosure
of  God  in  the  soul.  .  .  .  There  comes  an  hour  to  some,  to  many,  of  transfiguration.  It  may
be  in  grief;  it  may  be  in  joy;  it  may  be  the  opening  of  the  door  of  sickness;  it  may  be  in
active  duty  ;  it  may  be  under  the  roof  or  under  the  sky,  where  God  draws  near  with  such
reality,  glory,  and  power  that  the  soul  is  filled,  amazed,  transported.  All  before  was  nothing ;
all  afterwards  will  be  but  a  souvenir.  That  single  vision,  that  one  hour,  is  worth  the  whole
of  life,  and  throws  back  a  light  on  all  that  went  before.  It  .  ,  ,  gives  to  the  soul  some  such
certainty  of  invisible,  spiritual  truths  as  one  has  of  his  own  personal  identity.  When  one  has
had  this  hour  of  divine  disclosure,  of  full  and  entrancing  vision,  it  never  can  be  retracted,  or
effaced,  or  reasoned  against,  or  forgotten. —  Ward  Beecher.

2.  The  View  given  to  Ezekiel  of  ^^the  Likeness  of  the  Glory

OF  THE  Lord  "  (Chap.  i.  4-28).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  4.  (ii.  11),  "came  out  of  the  north,**  the
The  storm-cloud.  "A  whirlwind,"  a  region  from  which  the  Chaldean  forces
tempest  such  as  Job  pen^eived  (xxxviii.  proceeded,  and,  in  general,  to  the  Jews,
I)  or  like  tliat  \vbiQh  Jonah  encountered      "the    region    pregnant   with    destiny"

16


CHAP.  L


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL,


(HengsL).     **  A  great  cloud,  and  a  fire
infolding  itself."     Fire  in  volumes  wus
mixed   up  with  the  cluiul,   und  (Exod.
ix.     24)     flashed    hither    und     thither,
circling  round.       "  A   brightness  was
about  it,"  the  ckmd,  "and  out  of  the
midst  thereof,"  of   the  fire,   "as  the
colour   of  amber,"   or   as   the  eye  of
chasmal.     The  appearance  was  such  as
gave  tints,  shone,  burned  like  chasmal.
The  mild  colour  of  amber  does  not  seem
to  express  the  meaning  of  this  uncertain
word.     There  was  a  look  like  that  of  ore
glowing  from  "  the  midst  of  the  fire."
Vers.   5-14.    The   living  creatures.
Ver.  5.   Out  of  this  same  fire  came  '^the
likeness  of  four  living  creatures,"  re-
presenting all  beings  with  life  (Rev.  iv.
6) ;  and,   as  the  best  representative  of
vital  energies,  each  of  the  four  had  "the
likeness  of  a  man."     But  not  entirely
so.      Ver.   7.    "  Their  feet,"  including
knee  and  thigh,  were  of  the  nature  of
"  a  straight  foot ; "  they  were  upright,
not  bent,  and  that  part  which  was  next
the  ground  was  "like  the  sole  of  a
calf's  foot,  and  they  sparkled  like  the
'I'Olour,"  the   eye,  the  gleam   "  of  bur-
nished," or  shining,  "brass"  (Rev.   i.
15).     Their  wings  proceeded  from  their
shoulders,  for  (ver.  8)  "they  had  the
hands  of  a  man  under  their  wings,"
one   hand   under   each  of   "their  four
sides."     Ver.  9.  Two  "wings"  of  each
"were  joined"  to  a  wing  of  each  of  its
nearest  neighbours,  and  as  each  had  four
faces,  one   of  which   looked   towards  a
distinct    quarter    of    the    sky,    "they
turned   not  when  they  went."      So
"they  went  every  one  straight  for-
ward" in  the  direction  in  which  any
one  of  their  faces  looked,  and  as  a  con-
junct  whole.      Ver.    10.     Of    the    four


faces,  one  was  like  that  of  "a  man,"
another  like  that  of  "a  lion,"  another
of  "  an  ox,"  and  the  fourth  of  "  an
eagle."  Ver.  11.  "Thus  were  their
faces,  and  their  wings  were  stretched
upward ; "  rather,  a7id  their  faces  and
their  wings  were  separated  from  abovCy
i,e,f  it  could  be  seen  that  their  heads
were  distinct  and  their  wings  were  dis-
tinct, though  two  wings  of  one  were
in  contact  with  two  wings  of  others.
Ver.  12.  They  were  moved  by  an  irre-
sistible impulse,  and,  separated  as  they
were  from  one  another,  yet  they  were
animated  by  one  life-breath.  "Whither
the  spirit  was  to  go,  they  went."
Ver.  13.  "Their  appearance  was  like
burning  coals  of  fire,  like  the  appear-
ance of  lamps,"  torches  ;  "  it,"  the  fire,
was  separate  from,  and  "went  up  and
down  among  the  living  creatures."
Ver.  14.  The  creatures  had  a  motion
which  made  the  impression  as  of  a
"  flash "  of  a  meteor,  or  "  the  zigzag
course  "  of  "lightning."  •

Vers.  15-21.  The  wheels.  Ver.  15.
"Behold  one  wheel  upon  the  earth
by  the  living  creatures,  with  his  four
faces."  Ezekiel  saw  wheels  upon  the
ground,  one  in  close  proximity  to  each
of  the  four  creatures,  and  lower  than
they.  Ver.  16.  "They  four"  wheels
"  had  one  likeness  ; "  each  consisted  of
two  wheels  really,  "  as  it  were  a  wheel
in  the  middle  of  a  wheel,"  set  in  the
other  at  right  angles.  Ver.  17.  "They
went  upon  their  four  sides;"  they
could  go  in  any  direction  without  turn-
ing round.  Ver.  18.  "As  for  their
rings,"  circumference  or  felloes,  "they
were  so  high  that  they  were  dreadful,"
they  had  both  height  and  terribleness,and
"  full  of  eyes  round  about."     Ver.  20,


•  The  cherubims  in  Tabernacle  and  Temple  had  each  one  face  ;  those  of  Ezekiel  have  four
faces.  We  work  up  in  dreams  a  mixture  of  things  which  we  have  come  across  in  different
places.  Did  Ezekiel,  in  his  ecstasy,  make  up  his  representations  of  the  living  creatures  witn
objects  familiar  to  tliose  who  sojourned  in  Assyria,  the  land  of  his  exile?  **The  approaches  to
the  hall  at  Nimroud  were  guarded  by  pairs  of  colossal  figures.  At  the  chief  entrance  were
human-headed  winged  lions,  the  human  shape  being  continued  down  to  the  waist,  and  furnished
with  arms.  .  .  .  Expanded  wings  spring  from  the  shoulders  and  spread  over  the  back.  .  .  .  The
entrance  on  the  south  was  guarded  by  human-headed  winged  bulls,  whilst  the  two  doorways  on
the  nonh  were  both  iruarded  by  winued  lions  with  the  heads  of  men  and  with  human  arms.  .  .  .
It  will  be  observed  that  the  four  forms  (and  those  only)  chosen  by  Ezekiel  to  illustrate  his
description — the  man,  the  lion,  the  bull,  and  the  eagle — are  precisely  those  which  are  con-
stantly found  on  Assyrian  monuments.  .  .  .  They  could  find  no  better  type  of  intellect  and
knowledge  tiian  the  head  of  the  man  ;  of  strength  than  the  body  of  the  lion^  of  rapidity  of
motion  than  the  wings  of  a  bird." — Layar4»


BOMTLETW  COMMENTART:  tZEKini,


OtA>.  t


"  The  spirit  of  the  living  creature  was
In  the  wheels."  The  same  energy  which
actuated  the  former  actuated  the  latter
also,  and  they  were  one  in  standing,
going,  or  rising  upwards.

Vers.  22-28.  The  throned  one.  Ver.
22.  Above  "the  heads  of  the  liv-
ing creatures "  Ezekiel  saw  an  expanse
extended,  having  a  colour  like  that  "  of
the  terrible  crystal,"  exciting  fear  by
its  purity  and  splendour.  Ver.  23.
"  Under  the  firmament,"  or  expanse,
which  therefore  came  between  the  throne
and  the  living  creatures,  "were  their
wings  straight,  the  one  toward  the
other,"  joined  to  one  another,  as  ver.
11,  "and  every  one  had  two  which
covered;"  there  was  a  wing  for  each  side
of  "  their  bodies."  Ver.  24.  When  the
living  creatures  were  in  movement  "  the
noise  of  their  wings  was  like  .  .  .  the
voice  of  speech,"  rather,  "  the  noise  of
tumult,  as  the  noise  of  an  host."  The
sounds  were  heard  only  when  they  were
in  motion,  for  "  when  they  stood  they
let  down  their  wings."  Ver.  25.  Their
movement  or  rest  was  not  self-directed,
but  was  instigated  or  checked  by  "  a
voice  from  the  firmament  that  was
over  their  heads,"  from  Him  who  was
on  the  throne,  since,  ver.  26,  "  above
the  firmament  was  the  likeness  of  a
throne,  as  the  appearance  of"  tlie  pale-
blue  "  sapphire  stone,  and  upon  the
likeness  of  the  throne,"  not  the  distin-
guishable form  of  a  man,  but  "the like-
ness as  the  appearance  of  a  man.''
"No  man  hath  seen  God  at  anytime.*'
This  manifestation  had  three  aspects —
ver.  27.  (1.)  Over  the  dim  form  was  shed
shining  light  like  to  glowing  ore,  and
the  same  as  in  ver.  4,  which  radiated
''  from  the  appearance  of  his  loins
even  upward  "  (chap.  viii.  2).  (2.)  Upon
the  lower  part,  "  from  the  appearance
of  his  loins  even  downward  was  as  it
were  the  appearance  of  fire."  (3.)  All
round  was  a  sliining  light  (ver.  28),  "  as
the  appearance  of  the  bow  that  is  in
the  cloud  in  the  day  of  rain."  Those
three  aspects  were  united  to  frame  "  the


appearance  of  the  likeness  of  the  glory
of  the  Lord."  The  visions  of  God  over-
powered Ezekiel,  "  I  fell  upon  my  face  "
(Rev.  i.  17).

The  details  of  this  wondrous  vision
may  be  summarised.  A  furious  storm
from  the  north  is  seen  driving  a  vast
cloud,  pervaded  and  glowing  with  rest-
less fires,  and  surrounded  with  radiance.
From  this  fiery  cloud  four  living  beings
appear,  whose  general  aspect  was  that  of
man.  Each  had  four  different  faces  and
four  wings,  and  two  of  the  wings  were
stretched  out  in  juxtaposition  to  the
wings  of  others.  One  spiritual  energy
stirred  in  the  living  creatures,  and  under
its  impulse  they  moved  like  meteors
shooting  across  the  field  of  vision  and
shining  with  the  brightness  of  fire.  By
the  side  of  each  creature  was  a  gigantic
double  wheel,  not  needing  to  turn  \Nhen
it  changed  from  one  direction  to  another.
Eyes  were  set  round  the  outer  rims,
and,  possessed  by  the  same  energy  as  the
living  creatures,  the  wheels  made  all  move-
ments perfectly  simultaneous  with  theirs.
Above  all  was  an  expanse  of  awful  pure-
ness,  and  on  which  was  the  likeness  of
an  azure  throne.  Some  one  in  the  figure
of  a  man  was  seated  on  this  throne —
the  upper  half  of  his  body  shining  like
glowing  metal,  the  lower  half  like  fire,
while,  girdling  round  the  throne,  the  hues
of  a  bright  rainbow  were  displayed.  A
voice  proceeded  from  this  throne-crowned
expanse,  at  the  sound  of  which  the  living
creatures  let  down  their  wings  in  lowly
reverence  and  silence.  Ezekiel  also  heard
himself  addressed  by  an  unseen  speaker.

The  appearances  which  accompanied
the  designation  of  Ezekiel,  and  also  the
repetition  of  their  prominent  aspects  at
other  turns  of  his  service,  indicate  the  fact
of  a  special  meaning  adhering  to  them  in
view  of  what  was  appointed  him.*

1.  The  storm^  the  cloudy  the  fire,  signify
the  wrath  of  God  and  the  sufferings
which  may  proceed  therefrom.  "  The
Lord  bath  His  way  in  the  whirlwind
and  in  the  storm,  and  the  clouds  are  the
dust  of  His  feet "  (Nah,  i.  3).    Of  Israel


•  "  If  any  one  asks  whether  the  vision  is  lucid,  I  confess  its  obscurity,  and  that  I  can  scarcely

understand  it ;  but  yet  into  what  God  has  set  before  us,  it  is  not  only  lawful  and  useful,  but
necessary  to  inquire.  We  shall  perhaps  but  skim  the  surface  of  what  God  wills,  yet  this  is  of
no  small  moment." — Calvin.


1?


GBAt.h


BOMfL^TJC  COMMENTAnt:  EZBKISL.


it  is  said,  "  The  Lord  thy  God  is  a  con-
suming fire,  even  a  jealous  God"  (Deut.
iv.  24).  Ezekiel  is  to  prepare  himself
to  carry  a  message  of  judgment  and  woe
to  his  people ;  he  is  to  be  invested  with
authority  and  then  to  inspire  them  with
terror.  But  not  unmitigated.  **  TLe
brightness  round  about,"  which  vers.
27  and  28  signify  to  be  that  of  the
rainbow,  warrants  the  belief  that  pity
and  grace  will  surround  all  inflictions.
The  false  prophets  spoke  of  deliverance
without  punishment  and  without  re-
pentance; Ezekiel  has  to  bear  down  all
such  fancies,  and  proclaim  that  there  will
be  scathing  trials,  but  afterwards  a  new
heart  and  the  outpoured  Spirit.

2.  The  cherubim.  In  chap.  x.  20,
Ezekiel  intimates  that  the  living  creature
which  he  saw  by  the  Chebar  he  was  led
to  recognise  as  the  cherubims.  An  im-
portant part  is  assigned  to  them  in  the
Bible.  They  were  placed  at  the  east  of
the  garden  of  Eden  ;  they  stood  over
the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  in  Tabernacle
and  Temple.  In  each  case  they  signified
the  divine  presence.  Hence  the  familiar
expressions,  *'  He  dwelleth  between  the
cherubims,"  *'  He  sitteth  between  the
cherubims."  Their  outstretched  wings
form  "  the  chariot  of  the  cherubims."
While  it  is  also  said,  *'He  rode  upon
a  cherub,"  as  a  token  that  He  rules  all
movements  among  the  forces  of  nature.
It  was  an  obvious  reflection  of  cherubic
forms  which  John  saw,  in  his  Revela-
tion, "  in  the  midst  of  the  throne."
What  did  they  signify  ?  In  all  cases
they  signify  that  God  is  present,  and
belong  to  His  manifestation  in  living,
organised  creatures,  in  all  quarters  of
the  world.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the
faces  of  a  man,  a  lion,  an  ox,  and  an
eagle  on  each  are  emblematical  of  the
fulness  and  power  of  life.  The  fact
that  they  were,  in  Ezekiel,  double  in
number  and  more  complex  in  form  than
those  found  in  Tabernacle  or  Temple,  is
a  fact  which  goes  to  prove  that  they
were  not  real  beings,  not  even  angelic,
but  symbolical,  and  they  "at  one  and
the  same  time  proclaim  and  veil  His
presence.  When  He  is  honoured  as  He
who  is  enthroned  above  the  cherubim.
He  is  acknowledged  as  the  God  who
18


rules  the  world  on  all  sides,  in  power,
wisdom,  and  omniscience."  They  re-
present not  God  Himself,  except  as  He
is  absolute  Life,  working  in  living
creatures  and  moving  them  to  the  ends
which  He  prescribes.  In  accordance
with  those  ends,  the  cherubims  had  the
appearance  which  bright  burning  coals
of  fire  have,  yet  the  fire  was  separate
from  them.  Thus  was  indicated  that
all  living  creatures  could  be  made  to
carry  out  the  righteous  judgment  of
God  with  ominous  rapidity.  So  Ezekiel
was  prepared  to  testify  that  all  hopes  of
earthly  help  which  Israel  might  cherish
would  be  speedily  falsified.

3.  The  wheels.  In  the  Buddhist,  and
partially  in  the  Hindu  religion,  a  wheel
'*  is  the  symbol  of  supreme  power  in  the
hands  of  certain  monarchs,  who  are  held
to  have  exercised  universal  dominion,
and  who  are,  for  this  reason,  termed
turners  of  the  wheel."  A  similar  idea
is  conveyed  here.  The  wheels  represent
the  forces  of  nature  as  distinct  from,  but
in  working  harmony  with,  living  beings.
This  distinction  appears  from  chap,  x,  13,
where  the  right  interpretation  seems  to
be  that  the  wheels  were  called  Galgal^
*' whirlwind ;"  and  from  chap.  x.  6,  where
fire  was  taken  from  between  them.  Those
natural  energies  revolve,  along  with  the
cherubim,  under  obedience  to  one  and
the  same  inworking  impulse.  They  are
used  when  the  Spirit  wUl,  and  go  to  any
quarter  of  the  heaven  that  He  wills.
One  wheel  is  within  another ;  changes
are  complicated,  and  not  in  one  direc-
tion only.  They  are  full  of  eyes  :  *'  the
symbol  of  intelligent  life;  the  living
Spirit's  most  peculiar  organ  and  index.*'
*'  Space  is  everywhere  equally  present
to  them."  They  do  not  move  blindly  ;
they  can  perceive  that  which  is  opposed
to  the  interests  of  God  in  any  quarter ;
they  can  follow  up  all  traces  of  His
enemies,  and  carry  His  terrors  wherever
they  should  strike.  Ezekiel  must  ex-
pect to  speak  of  various  trials  hanging
over  all  classes  in  Israel,  and  certainty
in  their  infliction.

4.  The  appearance  of  a  throned  man.

**  Whose  faith  has  centre  everywhere,
Nor  cares  to  fix  itself  to  form."

This  portion  oi  the  vision  is  seen  upon


ffOMlLETtC  COMMMTAkY:  EZEKtEL  cttAf.  t


a  firmament   which    presents    *'  visible  the  same  as  in  the  Temple,  yet  with
poetry,  gloriously  embossed,  and  whose  differences.     He  was  about  to  work  in
psalms  are  writ  in  the  rhythm  of  mo-  new  methods,  and  would  make  known
tion."     It  intimates  that  "the  heavens  to  exiled  Israel,  through  Ezekiel,  that
do  rule,"  that  all  forms  of  animate  and  if  their  covenant  was  to  "  vanish  away,"
inanimate  existence  are  under  the  will  He  would  not  go.     He  would  rule  the
of  the  God  of  glory.*     Besides,  He  is  heathen  as  well  as  His  chosen  seed,  and
in  a  human  form,  which  cannot  be  ade-  one  day  evoke   from    all  quarters   the
quately  seen,  while  the  appearance  of  glorious  cry,  "  Hallelujah  !  for  the  Lord
brightness  and  fire,  and  a  rainbow,  in-  God  omnipotent  reigneth ! "
dicates  the   holiness  and   righteousness  «  One  God,  one  law,  one  element,
and  grace  which  make  a  glorious  unity  And  one  far-oflf  Divine  event,
in  Him,  and  are  possessed  in  absolute  To  which  the  whole  creation  moves."
perfection—a   type    of    the    glory    and  —Tennyson,
grace  of  Him  who  was  made  flesh  and  **  There  was  nothing  accidental  or  capri-
dwelt  among  us.     "  God  is  the  unrepre-  cious  about  this  vision ;  all  was  wisely
sentable  One.      He  has  no  similitude ;  adjusted  and  arranged,  so  as  to  convey
and  yet,  without  any  misgiving  or  sense  beforehand  suitable  impressions  of  that
of  inconsistency,  there  are  ascribed  to  work  of  God  to  which  Ezekiel  was  now
Him  acts  and  appearances  which,  with-  called  to  devote  himself.     It  was  sub-
out  the  conceptive  or  imaging  faculty,  stantially  an    exhibition   by   means   of
can  have  for  us  neither  force  nor  mean-  emblematical  appearances  and  actions,
ing"   {Lewis).     The  mighty  voice  and  of  the  same  views  of  the   Divine  char-
the    movements    with    the    cherubims  acter  and  government,  which  were  to  be
point  to  the  truth  that  He  punishes  His  unfolded  in  the  successive  communica-
enemies  and  comforts  His  friends.   Thus,  tions  made  by  Ezekiel  to  the  covenant-


sitting  above  the  cherubims,  He  does      people "  (Fairbairn),

HOMILETICS.
(1.)  The  Vision  is  Suggestive  Regarding  the  Government  of  God.

L  As  to  its  resources.

1.  They  are  manifold.  Wind  and  fire,  thunder  and  lightning,  the  wisdom  of
man,  brute  force,  patient  labour,  swift  movements  are  significant  portions  of  the
materials  which  He  can  gather  to  execute  His  purposes.  Men  live  in  perpetual
contact  with  forces  which  may  aflfect  their  organs  of  sight,  hearing,  taste,  touch,
and  which  can  be  marshalled  in  any  number,  in  any  strength,  and  at  any  moment.
We  see  wrongly  if  we  do  not  see  that  the  uniform  of  God's  servants  is  worn  by  all
animate  and  inanimate  creatures.

2.  They  are  mutable.  They  are  restrained  and  again  in  motion,  now  in  the
darkness  and  then  in  the  light,  here  as  a  glow  and  there  as  a  meteoric  flash,  acting
inertly  at  one  time  and  intensely  after  that.  Changes  continually  come  up.  How
remarkable  are  the  vicissitudes  in  nations,  churches,  families.  We  are  settled  in
nothing — in  nothing  but  in  God.

3.  They  are  inscrutable.  "  We  are  but  of  yesterday  and  know  nothing."  We
see  little  else  than  an  item  on  the  outside  of  a  few  of  His  resources.  "His  judg-
ments are  a  great  deep."  "His  providence  walks  and  works,  darkly,  deeply,
changeably,  wheels  about  so  that  mortals  cannot  tell  what  conclusions  to  make  "  aa
to  all  the  causes  which  bring  about  changes,  or  as  to  all  the  consequences  which

♦  "The  cherubim  with  the  living  wheels  form,  so  to  speak,  the  chariot,  the  base  for  th«
living  God.  All  this  is  the  mere  forecourt  of  the  divine  sphere ;  the  innermost  circle  is  re-
served for  God  as  living  Spirit.  If  we  approach  from  the  side  of  the  world,  this  heavenly
fulness  of  life  may  already  appear  to  be  the  Godhead  or  God.  But  when  we  are  in  possession
of  the  Divine  Personality,  that  fulness  will  be  a  predicate  of  God,  a  mere  substratum,  so  to
•ay,  of  His  Personality." — Donur,

1%


CHAP.  I.  iiOMlLKTlC  COMMMNTAJiy.-  MEKlEL,


shall  follow.     "  His  ways  are  high  above,  out  of  our  siglit,"  with  nations,  councik,
churches,  individuals — in  panics,  wars,  demoralisations.

4.  They  are  subordinated  to  one  pervading  ivipulse.  Living  or  non-living,  one
and  the  same  miglity  Spirit  works  in  all.  The  Spirit  which  brooded  over  a
chaotic  creation  "  renews  the  face  of  the  earth  "  year  by  year.  The  Spirit  of
understanding  and  of  love  is  the  "Spirit  of  judgment  and  of  burning."  He
divides  to  each  thing  severally  as  He  will ;  but  there  is  no  division  in  their  camp.
They  do  not  fall  out  by  the  way.  They  work  together  to  fulfil  His  word.  There
is  no  crookedness  in  their  goings  when  He  commands  to  go  "  straight  forward."
They  run  very  swiftly  in  accordance  with  the  might  by  which  He  energises  them.
No  bullet  goes  so  fairly  or  rapidly  to  the  target  as  do  the  manifold  resources  of
God  when  stirred  by  the  Spirit  of  life.  Why  should  men  resist  Him?  Why  do
they  yield  to  a  spirit  of  error,  of  lying,  and  of  whoredoms,  except  on  the  ground
that  they  rebel  and  vex  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  When  will  that  kingdom  which  is
righteousness,  peace,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  permanent  on  earth  %  But  what-
ever discord  may  be  introduced  by  men,  the  Spirit  will  not  be  baulked  in  His
aims.  "  He  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him,"  and  He  will  avenge  the
dishonour  done  to  His  righteousness  and  grace  by  means  of  the  pliant  resources  at
His  command.  They  do  not  look  back,  that  would  have  denoted  unwillingness ;
nor  turn  aside,  that  would  have  intimated  self-will;  nor  suspend  their  movements
before  their  course  is  completed,  that  would  have  spoken  of  weariness.  So  should
men  follow  obediently,  unswervingly,  persistently  Him  who  guides  wanderers  into
the  way  of  life,  and  sustains  them  therein.

5.  They  inflict  chastisement.  Gales,  fire,  lightning,  are  disastrous  in  various
ways  to  men.  The  doors  of  Lebanon  open  that  the  fire  may  devour  its  cedars.
Snares,  fire  and  brimstone,  and  an  horrible  tempest  rain  upon  the  wicked,  and
Ezekiel  saw  such  agencies  in  action  as  ominous  of  calamities  which  he  was  to
declare  would  befall  his  people.  Thus,  above  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  desolating
army  ;  above  losses,  pains,  bereavements ;  above  wars,  depression  of  trade,  lower-
ing of  health,  we  must  observe  the  signs  of  the  Lord  condemning  untruthfulness,
unrighteousness,  formality,  pride,  selfishness.  **  Who  can  stand  before  Him  when
once  He  is  angry  ?  "  Is  there  not  a  warning  to  *'  cease  to  do  evil,  to  learn  to
do  well"?

6.  They  may  he  hrotLght  from  any  quarter.  Out  of  the  north,  as  the  Assyrians ;
out  of  the  east,  as  the  plague  of  locusts  in  Egypt;  out  of  the  north-east,  as  the
Euroclydon  in  Paul's  sea  passage  to  Rome,  God's  resources  can  be  drawn.  Men
may  boast  of  their  soldiery  or  navy,  of  their  preparedness  for  any  war,  of  their
civilization  or  religiousness,  of  their  worship  or  their  benevolence ;  but  they  lay
themselves  open  to  the  menacing  word,  "  I  the  Lord  do  blow  upon  it."  In  front,
in  flank,  or  in  rear  assailants  may  fall  upon  them.  "  Political  changes  and  revolu-
tions are,  after  all,  only  the  moving  of  the  shadow  on  the  earthly  dial-plate,  that
marks  the  mightier  motions  going  forward  in  the  heavens." — Moore.

7.  They  radiate  with  mercy.  His  resources  are  not  only  for  punishment.  They
are  *neant  to  show  to  men  their  evil  and  their  need  of  repentance  ;  to  show  that
God  is  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repent-
ance." Judgment  is  His  *'  strange  act."  He  wants  to  purify  the  world,  though
the  process  be  slow,  just  as  He  is  separating  the  dross  from  the  heart  of  every
believer  in  His  Son.  Even  if  a  deluge  of  wrath  is  sent  forth  in  order  to  sweep  off
evil  habits  from  a  people,  after  the  floods  have  lifted  up  their  voice  the  rainbow
will  appear.  The  covenant  of  the  Lord  is  sure  in  faithfulness  and  mercy.  "  Once
in  the  end  of  the  world  hath  He  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Him-
self."    "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself."

n.  As  to  the  representation  of  the  divine.

1.  It  is  supreme.     All  things  are  under  His  feet.     He  is  a  Prince  upon  His
throne.     Nothing  stirs  or  rests,  nothing  develops  or  degenerates,  nothing  pain.«  oi
20


BOM  I  LET  1 0  COMMENTAUY:  EZEKISL.  chap,  l


lootbes  apart  from  His  control.  It  is  not  a  niccbanical  force  which  operates  the
changes  of  all  creatures.  It  is  One  who  possesses  power,  wisdom,  righteousness,
love — ''  who  does  His  will  among  the  armies  of  heaven  and  the  inhabitants  of  this
earth."  What  can  stand  if  He  will  overthrow  ]  Who  hinder  if  He  will  open  the
gates  to  anxiety,  sorrow,  shame,  death  1

2.  It  is  closely  allied  to  man.  Ezekiel  saw  **tbe  likeness  of  the  appearance  of
a  man."  We  must  not  say  that  God  is  corporeal  and  has  the  figure  of  a  man,  but
we  can  say  that  He  has  some  striking  affinities  with  human  nature — "For  we  are
also  His  offspring" — and  these  foreshadow  the  mystery  to  be  presented  in  the  end
of  the  world,  and  in  which  Paul  grandly  exults.  God  *'  was  manifest  in  the  flesh."
Therefore  was  it  possible  for  the  Son  of  God  to  pray  '*  That  they  all  may  be  one;
as  Thou,  Father,  art  in  me  and  I  in  Thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us."

3.  It  is  beyond  our  hioivledye.  '*  He  dwells  in  the  light  which  no  man  hath
seen  or  can  see."  He  dees  condescend  to  our  faculties,  and  by  means  of  the  hiero-
glyphics of  undefined  forms,  of  clouds,  fire,  living  beings,  revolutions,  He  shows  us
what  His  power  and  resources  are.  Our  thoughts  of  Him  suggest  more  riddles
than  they  can  solve.  No  research  can  define  Him.  There  is  a  glory  excelling
that  which  men  have  beheld.  He  has  never  appeared  as  He  really  exists;  but
"  He  has  so  appeared  as  to  leave  no  doubt  on  the  minds  of  His  servants  as  to  their
knowing  that  they  have  seen  God."  If  in  certain  as[)ects  He  is  "  unknowable,"
yet  all  doubts  as  to  His  character  pass  away  when  Jesus  reveals  Him.  "  He  that
hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."

IIL  As  to  the  preparation  of  a  human  servant.

1.  Reverence.  A  deep  feeling  pervades  Ezekiel  of  the  holy  supremacy  of  God.
He  who  is  glorious  produces  another  state  of  mind  than  that  which  springs  from  a
gratified  curiosity  or  an  increased  knowledge,  and  the  man  who  is  not  "  moved
with  fear"  before  the  manifested  will  of  the  Almighty  is  a  man  who  will  never  serve
Him  aright.  The  sight  of  Christ  Jesus,  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father,  will  lay  us
at  His  feet,  utterly  self-emptied  by  a  sense  of  His  spotless  glory  and  our  un worthi-
ness, and  will  be  a  prelude  to  His  touch  and  restoration.

2.  Weakness.  Ezekiel  cannot  act  of  himself  in  co-operation  with  this  all-ruling
God.  He  has  no  strength  to  carry  out  such  arduous  duties  as  are  justly  required.
But  this  weakness  is  his  stepping-stone  to  light  and  power.  When  he  is  weak  then
is  he  strong,  for  God  will  bestow  sufficient  grace.  Trust  in  self  is  gone  that  God
may  work.     Wisdom,  energy,  faithfulness  not  his  own  are  open  to  him.

3.  Called.  Ezekiel  is  thrilled  by  the  voice  which  addresses  him.  He  could  not
serve  at  all  till  that  call  of  God  was  heard.  Men  cannot  act  for  His  kingdom  by
their  own  impulses  and  preparations.  It  is  not  colleges  or  ordination  by  man  which
make  fit,  but,  hearing  the  voice  of  the  Lord  within,  they  can  take  up  any  service
pointed  out,  in  face  of  their  other  occupations,  of  fears,  of  reluctance.  Before
Him  all  events,  however  solemn,  all  duties,  however  untried,  become  dwarfed  and
feasible.  "  In  Christ  strengthening  me  I  can  do  all  things."  Between  His  voice
and  yours  let  no  other  voice  come.  You  will  know  the  mark  to  aim  at,  and  reach
"  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."  If  we  teach  or  preach
about  His  kingdom  without  knowing  we  are  warranted  by  Him,  it  is  rather  sin
than  service.     His  must  be  the  impulse  and  sustainment,

4.  Susceptible,  Ezekiel  hears ;  for  it  is  little  matter  to  have  the  call  of  God  if
we  have  not  ears  to  hear.  We  must  let  that  mind  be  in  us  which  will  desire  to
recognise  and  apprehend  whatever  He  will  say  to  us.  "  If  men  did  consult  with
Christ,  and  do  all  upon  His  warrants,  they  should  never  miscarry  in  their  ways,  but
proceed  farther  in  the  paths  of  godliness  in  a  few  weeks  than  they  did  before  in
many  years." — Greenhill.  "  Though  you  have  no  visions  of  God,  unwavering
fealty  to  His  law  will  secure  that  He  will  guide  you  by  His  counsel,  and  afterwards
receive  you  to  glory." — Goulty.  When  the  suggestions  and  motions  of  God's  Spirit
come  on  a  receptive  heart,  they  subdue  carnal  reasonings,  stubbornness  of  will,  all

21


dUf.t  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


shifts  and  pretences,  and  frame  *'  a  vessel  unto  honour,  sanctified  and  meet  for  the
Master*8  use,"  such  as  Ezekiel  became.

"  It  is  of  much  concernment  for  ministers  to  see  that  they  have  a  good  and  clear
call  to  their  ministry.  If  they  can  clear  it  up  that  God  hath  sent  them,  they  may
expect  His  assistance,  His  blessing,  His  protection,  and  success  in  their  labours.
However  things  prove,  this  will  be  their  comfort  in  the  midst  of  opposition,
reproach,  persecution,  hazard  of  liberty  and  lives ;  I  was  called  of  God,  I  am  in
His  work,  in  His  way.  He  brought  me  into  His  vineyard,  He  will  stand  by  me,
I  will  go  on,  let  Him  do  with  me  what  He  pleaseth.^' — GreenhUl,

^   ILLUSTRATIONS.

God  the  life  of  all  things. — Nothing  exists,  subsists,  is  acted  upon  or  moved
by  itself,  but  by  some  other  being  or  agent ;  whence  it  follows  that  everything  exists,
subsists,  is  acted  upon,  and  is  moved  by  the  First  Being,  who  has  no  origin  from  another,  but
is  in  Himself  the  force  which  is  life. — Swedenborg.  God  has  a  world  of  real  forces  in  Himself.
He  bears  within  Him  an  inexhaustible  spring,  by  virtue  of  which  He  is  the  Life  eternally
streaming  forth,  but,  also  eternally  streaming  back  into  Himself.  He  neither  empties  nor
loses  Himself  in  His  vital  activity.  He  is  a  sea  of  self-revolving  Life  ;  an  infinite  fulness  of
forces  moves,  so  to  speak,  and  undulates  therein. — Dorner.  In  this  communication  of  life,  God
gives  Himself  so  unreservedly  tiiat  creation  feels  Him  as  her  own,  His  joy  as  her  joy,  His  peace
as  her  peace,  His  strength  as  her  strength.  His  personality  and  independence  as  her  personality
and  independence. — W.  White.

Foreknowledge. — The  divine  foreknowledge  has  put  a  stamp  of  that  which  was  coming
upon  that  which  went  before.  This  stamp  is  the  basis  of  figurative  language,  of  analogy,
of  typology,  of  prophecy,  yea,  of  all  knowledge.  Every  lower  thing  is  a  figure,  a  type,  or
prophecy  of  a  higher  thing  ;  evtry  present  thing  contains  a  representation  of  a  coming  thing,
and  every  visible  thing  is  more  or  less  the  image  of  things  invisible.  God's  foreknowledge  thui
becomes  the  great  highway  of  knowledge  to  man,  by  whicii  he  can  traverse  not  only  the  earth,
but  the  universe  so  far  as  it  is  accessible  to  his  inspection. —  W.  Wliite.

Clouds. — Those  war-clouds  that  gather  on  the  horizon,  dragon-crested,  tongued  with
fire  ; — how  is  their  barbed  strength  bridled  ?  What  bits  are  these  they  are  champing  with
their  vaporous  lips;  flinging  off  flakes  of  black  foam?  Leagued  leviathans  of  the  sea  of
heaven,  out  of  their  nostrils  goeth  smoke,  and  their  eyes  are  like  the  eyelids  of  the  morning.
.  .  .  Where  ride  the  captains  of  their  armies?  Where  are  set  the  measures  of  their  march?
Fierce  murmurers,  answering  each  other  from  morning  until  evening — what  rebuke  is  this
which  has  awed  them  into  peace  ?  What  hand  has  reined  them  back  by  the  way  by  which  they
came  ?  *'  The  wondrous  works  of  Him  which  is  perfect  in  knowledge  ?"  We  have  too  great
veneration  for  clotidlessness, —  Rushin.

Human  ignorance. — There  has  never  been  a  weak  deity  worshipped,  and  it  is  safe  to
say  there  never  will  be  one.  Man  is  too  strong  himself  not  to  admire  strength,  and  looks  with
pity  or  contempt  upon  weakness.  And  no  deity  can  be  pitied  or  despised  and  hold  his
sovereignty  over  men's  minds.  The  heavens  must  be  braced  beyond  the  possibility  of  fall,  or
they  who  live  beneath  the  dome  could  never  gaze  with  awe  into  the  overhanging  spaces.  ...  I
do  not  expect  that  any  of  mortal  kind  have  a  correct  idea  of  God.  .  .  .  How  little  do  we  know
even  yet  of  the  qualities  and  uses  of  material  and  finite  Nature  !  For  Nature  is  yet  a  mystery.
She  sits  like  the  veiled  prophet  in  the  inner  temple  of  her  abode,  whose  outer  walls  we  in  our
groping  have  at  last  stumbled  against,  and  upon  the  panels  of  whose  mighty  gates  a  few  of  our
most  ambitious  scientists  are  beginning  to  rap.  If,  then,  so  little  is  known  of  Nature,  how
little  indeed  must  we  know  of  the  Invisible  Spirit,  who  is  so  removed  from  our  senses  that  no
man  could  look  upon  His  face  and  live.  How  flippantly  men  talk  of  God  !  As  if  they  could
understand  the  measureless  reality  whose  reflection  they  only  behold  I  The  men  who  say  God
must  be  this  or  that,  must  do  this  or  that,  are  for  the  most  part  men  who  have  great  intellectual
vanity  and  great  spiritual  ignorance.  The  bowed  head,  the  closed  eye,  the  hand  on  the  mouth
and  the  mouth  in  the  dust, — these  are  the  evidences  of  piety,  and,  I  may  say,  of  spiritual
knowledge  also.  —  W.  H.  Murray.

An  infinite  unknown. — We  are  separated  from  it,  not  by  any  anger  of  storm,  not  by
any  vain  and  fading  vapour,  but  only  by  the  deep  infinity  of  the  thing  itself. — Rtishin,
Capable  are  we  of  God,  i)Oth  by  understanding  and  will  ;  by  understanding,  as  He  is  that
sovereign  truth  which  com-^rehends  the  rich  treasures  of  all  wisdom;  by  will,  as  He  is  that
sea  of  goodness  whereof  whoso  tasteth  shall  thirst  no  more. — Hooker.

A  Seer. — The  more  I  think  of  it,  the  more  I  find  this  conclusion  impressed  upon  me —
that  the  greatest  thing  a  human  soul  ever  does  in  this  world  is  to  see  something,  and  tell  what
it  saw  in  a  plain  way.  Hundreds  of  people  can  talk  for  one  who  can  think,  but  thousands
can  think  for  one  who  can  see.  To  see  clearly  is  poetry,  prophecy,  and  religion — ^all  in
one. — RiisJdn.

Law  in  the  spiritual. — Laws  are  operant  m  the  things  of  the  Spirit  as  truly  as  in  tho
22


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL,  <mi.P.  f.


things  of  matter.  The  forces  there  are  not  disorderly,  nor  do  the  movements  which  they
generate  start  haphazard.  They  are  not  Impulsive,  freakful,  and  fickle.  They  who  suppose
that  the  coming  of  the  Spirit  to  human  consciousness  is  the  result  of  arbitrary  sending  and  of
periodical  ordering,  and  not  tiie  result  of  a  ceaseless  and  ceaselessly  expressed  benevolence,
doubtless  mistake.  .  .  .  The  anarchy  must  be  reduced  to  order ;  the  chaos  taught  the  use  and
made  to  feel  the  force  of  law ;  the  imperfect  organisations  of  society  be  supplanted  by  the
perfect.  .  .  .  The  Spirit,  through  change  of  custom,  law,  and  habit,  and  by  a  gradual  transition
of  the  world  from  old  to  new,  can,  at  last,  after  ages  of  revolution  and  growth,  accomplish
another  structure. —  W.  H,  Murray.

God  manifested. — He  the  Creator,  the  Governor,  became  a  presence  clear  and  plain
before  men's  hearts.  He,  by  tlie  marvellous  method  of  the  Incarnation,  showed  Himself  to
man.  He  stood  beside  man's  work.  He  towered  above,  and  folded  Himself  about,  man's  life.
And  what  tiien  ?  God  in  the  world  must  be  the  standard  of  the  world.  Greatness  meant
something  different  when  men  had  seen  how  great  He  was.  Just  suppose  that  suddenly  Omni-
science towered  up  above  our  knowledge,  and  Omnipotence  above  our  strength,  and  the  Infinite
Wisdom  stood  piercing  out  of  the  sight  of  our  ignorant  and  baffled  skill.  Must  it  not  crush
the  man  with  an  utter  insignificance  ?  .  .  .  He  would  be  brought  face  to  face  with  facts.  He
would  measure  himself  against  the  eternal  pillars  of  the  universe.  He  would  learn  the  blessed
lesson  of  his  own  littleness  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  always  learnt  most  blessedly — by  learning
the  largeness  of  larger  things.  ...  If  you  could  only  see  God  for  ever  present  in  your  life,
and  Jesus  dying  for  your  soul,  and  your  soul  worth  Jesus  dying  for,  and  the  souls  of  your
brethren  precious  in  His  sight,  and  the  whole  universe  teeming  with  work  for  Him,  then  must
come  the  humility  of  the  Christian. — Brooks.

In  the  divinity  of  His  p' rson  there  is  laid  an  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  ground
for  the  most  unbounded  confidence.  If  He  were  a  being  possessed  of  nothing  higher  than  the
highest  possible  endowments  of  humanity,  we  might  well  scruple  to  place  in  such  an  one  a  con-
fidence stretching  through  eternity.  But  being  God,  in  trusting  in  Him  we  rely  upon  a  power
that  cannot  be  withstood,  upon  a  wisdom  which  hath  no  limits,  upon  a  truth  that  is  infallible,
upon  a  love  that  is  unehan>:eat'le,  upon  a  fidelity  that  cannot  fail.  —  W.  White.

The  enduring-  Word  of  God. — We  are  not  more  unworldly  than  the  patriarchs,  more
spiritual  than  tiie  prophets,  more  heavenly-minded  than  tiie  apostles;  we  are  not  nearer  the
great  celestial  verities  than  men  of  the  olden  time — at  least  by  any  philosophy,  or  science,  or
culture  of  our  own  that  is  independent  of  the  study  and  the  grace  of  the  Scriptures  ;  we  are  not
beyond  the  Bible  either  in  its  letter  or  its  thought.  There  are  ideas  there  tiie  world  has  not
yet  fathomed  ;  there  are  words  and  figures  there  whose  rich  significance  interpretation  has  not
yet  exhausted.  The  scriptural  style  and  the  scriptural  language  are  not  meant  for  one  age,
but  for  all  ages.  Its  Orientalisms  will  grow  in  the  West ;  its  archaisms  will  be  found  still  young
in  the  nineteenth  century.  Science  is  ever  changing,  as  it  is  ever  unfinished  ;  its  language  is
ever  becoming  obsolete,  as  it  is  ever  superseded;  philosophy  is  continually  presenting  some
new  phase  of  its  ever-revolving  cycles;  the  political  world  is  ever  a  dissolving  view  ;  literature
becomes  efi*ete,  and  art  decays  ;  "but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever."  Not  so  sure
are  the  types  of  nature  as  even  the  form  and  feature  of  this  written  word,  if  it  be  indeed  the
word  of  God,  uttered  in  humanity,  breathed  into  human  souls,  informing  human  emotions,
conceived  in  human  thoughts,  made  outward  in  human  images,  andindissolubly  bound,  as  the
wondrous  narrative  of  the  supernatural,  in  the  long  chain  of  human  history. — T.  Lewis.

Changes. — We  are  apt  to  fret  and  murmur  at  the  motions  of  the  wheels  when  they  cross
our  hopes  and  interests;  but  if  the  Spirit  of  God  be  in  the  wheels  and  acts  them  according  to
His  own  pleasure,  then  all  our  impatience  is  groundless  and  sinful.  We  should  stay  and  quiet
our  minds  under  all  turns  and  ciianges  in  a  world  for  discipline,  rebuke,  threatening,  lamenta-
tion, calling. — M.  Mtade.

XJnity. — The  prophet,  cast  into  the  wide  world  and  feeling  himself  lost  in  it,  was  led  by
the  Divine  Teacher  into  a  region  of  thought  to  wh  oh  tiie  Israelite  had  been  hitherto  compara-
tively a  stranger — was  led  to  see  how  each  part  of  the  universe,  which  must  have  often  seemed
to  him  a  storehouse  of  divided  material  idols,  was  pointing  when  seen  by  the  divine  light  to  a
spiritual  unity,  as  its  explanation  and  its  centre.  ...  It  is  Spirit  only  which  distinguishes  and
unites,  wl)ich  brings  each  thing  forth  in  its  clearness  and  fulness,  and  brings  all  into  harmony,
.  .  .  a  Spirit  which  had  come  from  some  higher  region.  There  is  One,  human  and  divine,
from  whom  this  Spirit  has  proceeded,  in  whom  it  dwells  perfectly. — Maurice.

3.  The  Commission  to  Ezekiel  (Chaps,  ii.-iii.  1-15).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.  captivity,  the  title  must  have  been  con-
"  Son  of  man."  This  is  the  customary  ditioned  by  that  fact,  and  would  signify
form  of  address  to  Ezekiel,  and  is  used  to  the  exiled  prophets,  away  from  the
only  of  him  and  Daniel  among  all  the  city  which  God  had  chosen  to  place  His
prophets.     As  both  were  prophesying  in      name   there,  that  above  them   He  was

23


CHAP.L  BO^ILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


who  was  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  unconscious  and  his  spirit  came  to  him

flesh,  who  would  communicate  with  the  again  ;  nor  scarcely  the  Holy  Spirit,  as

souls  He  owned,   and  supply  all  that  operative  in  prophetic  revelation  ]  but

would  make  up  for  absence  from  the  the  Spirit  which  was  in  the  living  crea-

land   of   promise   and    covenant.      The  tures,  and    which,    no  doubt,   was  the

title  hardly  could  intimate,  as  is  said  by  Spirit  of  God.

commentators,  that  Ezekiel  was  in  need  Ver.  3.  "The  children  of  Israel."  The

of  a  continual  reminder  of  his  human  most  common  expression  used  by  Ezekiel

origin  and  frailty  and  unworthiness,  or  for  his  people,  perhaps  significant  of  an

that   he   was    to   watch    against    being  amalgamation  already  begun  of  the  Jews

puffed  up  by  his  visions,  or  that  he  was  with  the  remnants  of  the  ten  tribes  for-

spoken  to  familiarly  as  a  special  friend  merly  gone  into  captivity.      "  To  a  re-

of  God.     We  may  listen  to  the  phrase  bellious  nation,"  or  to  the  nationsy  the

us  expressing  both  a  contrast  and  a  con-  rebels.      They  who  were  children  of  him

nection   between    the   speaker  and    the  who  wrestled  with  the  angel  are  dete-

hearer.  riorated,  not  to  the  level  of  a  heathen

Ver.  2.  "The  Spirit."     Not  the  spirit  nation,  as  in  Isaiah  L  4,  but  to  that  of

of  Ezekiel,  as  if  he  had  been  altogether  heathen  nations.

HOMILETICS.

(1.)  Requisites  for  Executing  the  Commission  (ii.  1-8).

I.  Lively  attention.  Ezekiel  must  no  longer  lie  upon  his  face ;  he  must  stand
upon  his  feet  if  he  is  rightly  to  hear  the  voice  of  him  that  speaks.  The  call  of
God  demands  of  our  human  faculties  a  readiness  for  action.  They  may  be  dead
in  sins  or  stunned  by  some  masterful  emotion,  and  the  first  thing  needed  is  that
they  should  be  raised  from  such  a  state;  then  they  will  be  fitted  to  hear  and  to
obey.  To  be  in  a  condition  to  do  the  work  of  the  Lord,  so  far  as  that  condition
is  dependent  on  a  man  himself,  is  to  be  in  an  attentive  attitude  regarding  Him.
Are  we  watching  so  that  the  moment  in  which  the  Master  of  the  house  comes  we
will  open  to  Him  ?

IL  Impulses  to  secure  apprehension.  The  Lord  acts  in  nature.  He  pledged
Himself  of  old  that  the  seasons  should  not  cease  while  the  earth  remaineth,  and  He
sends  forth  His  Spirit  in  spring  and  reneweth  the  face  of  the  earth.  He  works
thus  on  man.  Spiritual  power,  understanding,  and  love  are  wrought  in  their
hearts  by  Him.  Supplies  suited  to  all  the  duties  He  may  impose  are  forthcoming.
He  will  bring  persons  who  may  be  unconscious  into  consciousness,  in  darkness
into  light,  and  the  hardest  position  in  His  kingdom  can  be  occupied  when  the
Spirit  of  the  living  God  has  entered  into  the  occupant  and  the  words  of  the
Almighty  Speaker  are  heard.  Until  he  is  fitted  by  the  Spirit  to  hear  the  voice,
words  would  be  spoken  in  vain,  however  adapted  to  the  sins,  or  weakness,  or
ignorance  of  his  soul.  But  he  is  quickened.  The  Spirit  enters  into  him,  and  the
words  which  follow  profit  him.  So  two  factors  develop  our  apprehension  of  God's
will — His  Spirit  in  us  and  His  words  to  us.  Tiie  efficacy  of  the  words  proceeds
from  the  Spirit ;  the  words  are  the  means  by  which  the  Spirit  energises  us.  Read
the  Word  of  the  Lord,  preach  it,  spread  it,  but  never  be  forgetful  that  the  grasping
it  by  the  understanding  and  obeying  it  with  the  will  come  from  the  Spirit  whom
Christ  sends  from  the  Father.

m.  A  clear  defining  of  the  evil  to  be  engaged  with.  God  practises  no  con-
cealment to  His  servant.  He  urges  him  to  count  the  cost,  and  look,  by  His  light,
on  the  materials  he  has  to  deal  with.  He  is  to  regard  them  as  God  directs.  He
is  to  submerge  any  tendency  to  make  excuses  for  his  people,  and  also  his  wishes
for  peace,  comfort,  honour,  remuneration,  and  hold  up  to  view  the  solemn  and  deep-
searching  decisions  of  the  Lord.

1.  'rhe  evil  is  contraritty  to  God.  Israel  had  forsaken  Him  to  serve  idols.  To
24


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  ii.


leave  Him,  to  pervert  His  ordinances,  or  the  mixing  up  devices  of  their  own  with
these  is  a  renunciation  of  His  authority — is  rebellion.  Departing  from  the  Lord
was  the  root  which  sent  its  sap  into  each  branch,  twig,  leaf  of  their  conduct  before
His  sight,  and  gave  character  to  every  false,  unjust,  selfish,  impure  thought,  word,
or  action,  with  which  they  were  chargeable.  In  dealing  with  men  on  God's  behalf,
His  servants  must  never  blink  the  fact  that  it  is  not  mere  mistakes,  mere  misfor-
tune, they  have  to  contend  with  ;  but  it  is  with  "  the  minding  of  the  flesh,  which  is
enmity  against  God."  Yet  they  will  not  refrain  from  urging  His  claims  to  implicit
submission,  and  will  desire  to  execute  their  service  in  the  knowledge  that  they  are
** earthen  vessels,"  and  "the  excellency  of  the  power"  is  with  God  alone.

2.  The  evil  is  hereditary/.  It  does  not  die  out  when  a  generation  is  dead.  It
was  operative  in  the  Israel  who  dwelt  in  Canaan,  and  it  is  operative  in  the  Israel
captive  in  Babylon.  As  the  fathers  resisted  the  Holy  Ghost  so  did  the  descendants.
Parents  should  learn  not  to  continue  in  sin  against  God  for  their  children's  sake,
and  children  learn  that  a  father's  example  is  not  a  binding  rule  as  to  what  to
worship.  Not  from  parentage,  not  from  ancestors,  not  from  mere  antiquity  must
we  learn  our  duty,  but  always  try  our  procedure  by  the  revealed  will  of  God.

3.  7^he  evil  of  eats  both  the  inner  and  the  outer  life.  The  heart  is  at  one  with
the  conduct.  No  chasm,  no  rotted  bridge  lies  between  them  and  prevents  them
from  uniting  their  forces  against  God.  No  regrets  within  hamper  tlie  words  and
deeds  which  offend  Him,  and  the  sinning  men  go  with  unblushing  faces  in  their
own  ways.  Such  is  the  evil  to  be  dealt  with,  and  "  who  is  sufficient  for  these
things'?*'  It  is  not  merely  perplexing  to  human  strength  and  wisdom;  it  is  im-
possible for  men  to  encounter  it  effectively,  except  the  Spirit  is  given  them  from
above  to  know  what  God  is,  and  what  God  purposes  for  salvation.

IV.  Support  from  the  authority  of  God.  Any  attempts  to  destroy  such
rooted  impiety  could  bring  nothing  but  reproaches,  repulses,  and  defeats,  if  not
under  the  authorisation  of  the  Lord  the  Spirit.     That  is  provided —

1.  By  positive  appointment:  *' I  send  thee."  Ezekiel  has  good  ground  for  the
stand  he  is  required  to  take.  He  is  an  ambassador  of  the  great  king — sufficient
warrant  for  any  message  of  woe  or  of  comfort,  and  a  pledge  that  all  needs  will  be
supplied.  The  secret  place  for  receiving  true  power,  knowledge,  wisdom,  and
adaptation  to  a  service  is  here.  I  do  not  go  to  it  of  myself.  I  do  not  seek  my
own  things  but  the  things  which  are  Jesus  Christ's.  I  have  behind  me  all  forces,
for  He  is  with  me  who  has  "  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth."

2.  By  a  full  title  to  use  His  name.  He  deputes  Ezekiel  to  stand  in  His  stead.
All  that  he  is  to  say,  so  standing,  will  express  the  true  state  of  the  relations  between
God  and  the  people,  and  will  all  hold  good.  His  servants  are  prompted  to  learn
thoroughly  and  to  utter  plainly  that  which  God  has  revealed.  If  they  are  not
able  to  appeal  to  any  special  vision  or  ordination  of  the  Lord,  they  can  lie  open  to
His  Spirit,  be  led  into  all  the  truth,  and  declare  it  with  no  hesitancy  of  accent.
They  "  preach  not  themselves  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  *'  Their  word  is  with
power."

V.  Persevered  in  through  all  circumstances.

1.  Because  fitted  for  men.  A  divine  message  is  not  dependent  for  its  truth  on
any  earthly  position  in  which  it  may  be  uttered,  or  on  any  treatment  which  it  may
receive.  Accepted  or  rejected,  it  retains  its  authority  and  adaptation.  Farmers
must  prosecute  operations  in  their  fields  whatever  the  appearance  of  the  clouds
may  be,  sure  that  vivifying  rays  of  the  sun  will  act.  So  they  who  are  sent  with
the  truth  of  God  must  affirm  its  declarations,  even  if  to  do  so  be  both  arduous  and
unproductive.  Their  encouragement  and  their  constancy  are  to  be  taken  from  God,
not  from  the  results  which  might  gratify  the  mind  of  the  flesh.

2.  Because  it  will  not  he  altogether  vain.  Should  no  success,  such  as  teachers
are  eager  to  see,  ever  come,  and  people  maintain  their  attitude  of  disobedience  to
Oudj  some  ei;d,  which  He  has  proposed,  shall  be  sure  of  accomplishment.      He  will

?5


CHAP.  m.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


vindicate  His  righteonsness  and  love  somehow,  and  present  the  way  of  truth  so
that  men  will  not  be  able  to  plead  ignorance  of  His  appeal  to  them.  They  shall
know,  even  though  they  persist  in  stubbornness  and  rebellion,  that  a  prophet — a
man  with  words  of  rebuke  and  impulse — has  been  among  them.  "The  light  is
come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  the  light."

3.  Becatise  obstacles  are  not  bound  to  paralyse  efforts.  Men  who  have  God  on
their  side  are  stronger  than  all  that  can  be  against  them.  His  kingdom  never  has
attempted  an  advance  except  in  face  of  chiding,  and  adverse  reports,  and  sullen
looks.  His  servants  are  not  to  count  such  trials  as  strange  things,  but  set  their
faces  as  a  flint  and  urge  His  warnings  and  entreaties  unwaveringly.  When  the
Lord  is  on  their  side  they  need  not  fear  men's  procedure.  Like  their  perfect
Exampler,  they  should  be  warranted  to  say,  '*  When  I  would  have  gathered  you,
ye  would  not."

VL  Demands  implicit  submission.  To  stand  before  the  Lord  of  hosts,  like
Elijah,  and  be  empowered  to  bear  His  messages,  what  stronger  force  can  there  be
than  that  to  constrain  men,  who  are  loyal  to  God,  to  do  whatsoever  He  wishes  1
"What  if  their  preaching  and  teaching  seem  to  be  addressed  as  to  a  blank  wall  ?  That
will  not  prompt  them  to  falter,  to  blunt  the  edge  of  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  or  to
compromise  the  claims  of  any  truth.  *'  It  is  required  of  stewards  that  a  man  be
found  faithful"  They  are  not  so  to  the  interests  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  they  who
are  unwilling  to  meet  evil  reports  or  good  reports ;  to  stand  in  the  midst  of
calumnies,  threats,  oppressions ;  to  find  in  the  very  obstinacy  of  their  hearers  that
which  develops  a  deepening  regard  for  God  and  a  deepening  sympathy  for  men.
For  all  true-hearted  men  will  be  anxious  not  to  be  rebellious  as  others  whom  they
see  to  be  rebellious,  being  sure  of  this,  nobody  but  himself  can  make  him  a  rebel.
Above  all,  should  preachers  and  teachers  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus,  so  that  they  shall
speak  what  He  bids  them,  and  never  be  disheartened  by  the  indifference,  the  levity,
the  contempt,  the  resistance  shown  by  those  who  do  not  take  heed  how  they  hear.

(2.)  Conscious  Acceptance  of  the  Commission  (Chaps,  ii.  8 — iii.  3).

EXEGETICAL    NOTES.— Ver.    9.  eat  and  fill  thy  bowels  with  this  roll."

"  Sent  unto  me  ; "  rather,  put  forth  unto  So  the  eating  could  not  be  corporeal ;  it,

me  (as  ill  cliap.  viii.  3).    Ver.  10.  "Writ-  too,  was  happening  in  the  visions,  and

ten  within  and  without,"  as  indicat-  enjoined  Ezekiel  to  take  whatever  would

ing  the  number  of  overwhelming  afflic-  be  spoken  to  him  into  his  inner  man,

tions  which  were  to  fall  upon  the  rebel-  there   to   be   assimilated   with   his   own

lious.  feelings,  thoughts,  will,  and  then  to  bo

Chap,  ill  ver.  3.  "  Cause  thy  belly  to  declared  to  the  people.

HOMILETICS.
Duty  Accepted  for  Reasons.

L  As  the  commission  issues  from  a  divine  source.     This  is  signified —

1.  Ihj  its  direction.  A  hand  carried  the  symbolic  medium  of  the  commission,
and  Ezekiel  recognised  that  hand  to  be  His  whose  mighty  voice  he  heard.  God  often
appoints  to  duties  by  figures  which  are  not  unfamiliar  to  men.  Moses  saw  a  bush
burning,  Isaiah  had  a  live  coal  laid  upon  his  lips,  Jeremiah's  mouth  was  touched
by  a  hand,  and  Ezekiel  is  shown  a  book.  And  now,  -when  men  hear  of  the  cross,
the  tomb,  the  throne,  they  are  told  of  that  which  is  not  revealed  by  flesh  and  blood,
but  by  our  Father  in  heaven.  Thus  the  Christ,  who  is  always  with  us,  directs  to
hearts  tlie  truth  He  would  have  them  believe  and  obey,  and  what  we  ought  to  desire
is  not  vision  but  faith.      "  We  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight.'*

2.  By  its  plainness  to  the  imder standing.     Ezekiel  could  not  have  made  anything
36


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  ohap.  nr.


out  of  the  book  unless  its  Holder  had  unrolled  it  and  showed  its  contents.  Then
lie  gets  a  glimpse  of  the  persons  to  whom  be  has  to  go,  and  of  the  prominence  he
is  to  give  to  threats  of  coming  woes.  The  Lord  would  let  His  servant  clearly  see
■what  he  has  to  do.  He  wishes  no  vagueness  or  obscurity  to  be  in  any  mind  as  to
the  certain  retribution  for  sin.  He  wants  to  convince  our  intelligence.  Mysteries
there  cannot  but  be  in  His  procedure,  but  He  sanctions  no  blind  faith.  He  gives
us  as  much  light  as  we  can  bear  for  the  time,  and  more  will  be  added.  *'  He  opens
the  understanding  to  understand  the  Scriptures."  "  He  gives  seed  to  the  sower
and  bread  to  the  eater."  The  boldest  of  all  followers  of  Christ  the  Way  will  be
those  who  most  clearly  see  that  He  is  the  Light,  and  that  *'  whoso  believes  in  Him
shall  not  abide  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  They  have  the  witness
in  themselves.     Lighten  our  darkness,  O  Lord !

3.  By  its  announcing  tribulations  to  come,  God  only  can  tell  the  sorrows,  pains,
and  harassment  which  will  be  imposed  on  any  sinners  ;  and  Ezekiel  may  see  written
on  tire  roll  those  future  sufferings  which  men  could  not  foresee.  The  Israelites
did  suffer  in  their  native  land,  and  if  sin  had  been  its  own  punishment,  the  punish-
ment would  assuredly  have  ended  there.  But  it  did  not,  and  they  were  deported
into  foreign  countries  in  order  to  be  visited  there  also  for  their  rebelliousness.  Sin
is  not  its  own  avenger.  The  evils  which  follow  it  are  signs  of  God's  rule.  He
manifests  His  righteous  character,  and  His  determination  to  govern  the  world  in
righteousness.  In  due  places  and  at  fit  times  He  will  make  His  utter  abhorrence
of  wrong  to  appear.  He  is  never  at  a  loss  where  to  strike,  or  whom.  "  We  are
sure  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  according  to  truth,"  and  that  all  suffering  among
the  peoples  of  the  world  to-day  are  in  accordance  with  His  purposes  of  old.  He
is  fulfilling  them  before  our  eyes,  though  we  cannot  compare  them  with  predic-
tions of  them,  as  Ezekiel  and  Israel  could.  "The  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  people
tremble."

XL  As  the  commission  is  accompanied  with  power  to  fulfil  it.  The  book-
roll  was  not  handed  to  Ezekiel  with-  the  guarantee  of  priests  or  church,  nor  from
the  archives  of  the  Temple.  It  was  from  the  Lord  Himself.  Ezekiel  may  gather
from  this  fact —

L  Tlcat  there  would  be  new  revealings  of  the  rule  of  the  Lord,  He  had  not
exhausted  all  methods  for  characterising  the  proceedings  and  the  destinies  of  men.
Fresh  conditions,  such  as  those  in  which  His  chosen  people  were  found,  opened  up
the  occasion  by  which  He  could  unfold  distincter  views  of  His  just  and  good  will.
It  might  be  said  that  all  He  can  show  must  be  already  indicated;  but  Israel  would
not,  or  could  not,  read  the  logical  conclusions  implied  in  the  law  and  the  prophets.
They  needed  further  teaching,  and  God  is  no  miser  with  His  knowledge  and
wisdom.  He  freely  would  impart  to  all;  He  never  binds  Himself  to  use  only
established  institutions,  and  thus  does  He  the  more  thoroughly  bring  His  word  to
the  platform  from  which  all  classes  hear.  We  expect  more  light,  even  with  a
knowledge  of  His  will  far  beyond  that  which  Ezekiel  could  receive;  and  in  pre-
sence of  novel  conditions  of  science,  politics,  ecclesiastical  developments,  we  should
be  on  the  outlook  for  further  manifestations  of  Christ,  '*  who  is  the  power  of  God
and  the  wisdom  of  God."  If  it  be  said  that  the  Book  of  Revelation  is  closed  now,
it  should  not  be  said  that  wider  and  distincter  views  of  Revelation  are  also  shut
out.     We  must  welcome  the  better  things  which  the  Lord  will  spread  before  us.

2.  That  there  would  be  sensitiveness  to  receive  fuller  knowledge.  Nature  had  pre-
Bented  to  Ezekiel  its  storms  and  lights  and  animal  forms  actuated  by  one  controlling
force,  and  he  had  been  deeply  moved  ;  but  no  special  message  was  there  of  which  lie
could  say,  *'  This  is  for  me  alone."  Now  there  is,  not  Ezekiel's  case  only,  but  myriads
of  other  cases  attest  that  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  does  speak  to  human  consciences
with  the  old  appeal,  "Thou  art  the  man  !"  He  will  ivot  let  His  Word  miss  its
opportunities.  He  singles  out  one  and  another  on  the  ground  of  their  competence
to  obey  Him;  and  if  there  be  *•  single  person  who  has  no  sense  of  God  being  woslx


CHAP.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


and  bringing  something  to  him  personally,  it  is  because  he  or  she  is  shutting  the
ear  "lest  they  should  hear  with  their  ears  and  understand  with  their  hearts."  For
"the  word  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth  and  in  thy  heart."  God  opens  the
door  of  faith,  and  men  may  enter  in  and  receive  that  which  flesh  and  blood  could
not  give,  but  which  He  can.

3.  That  this  knowledge  would  he  assimilated  to  his  thoughts  and  ways.  Ezekiel
has  to  eat  the  book.  It  is  not  that  he  is  merely  to  learn  its  meaning,  but  it  is
that  he  is  to  make  all  its  words  his  own.  He  is  to  "inwardly  digest"  them,  that
they  may  obtain  a  form  suitable  to  his  character  and  environment.  The  Lord
imparts  them  so  that  they  shall  be  turned  into  bone  and  muscle  for  prophetic
tasks.  Thus  they  will  be  psychologically  the  prophet's  own  representation,  and
yet  prepared  by  divine  energy  to  convey  an  adequate  idea  of  what  the  people  must
hear  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  This  power  to  take  and  eat  the  book  symbolises
the  truth  that,  without  having  thus  assimilated  the  words  of  God,  no  one  ought  to
teach  and  preach.  "  Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  tlie  mouth  speaketh."
Certainly  no  one  will  live  for  ever  who  does  not  eat  of  the  bread  of  life  which
Christ  gives.  The  word  of  hearing  does  not  profit  if  not  mixed  with  faith,  but
when  with  the  heart  man  believeth,  then  will  fruit  be  borne.  God  knows  our  need  ;
He  gives  power  to  the  faint,  and  "in  Christ  strengthening  we  can  do  all  things."
This  is  "true  inspiration.  The  divine  does  not  remain  as  a  strange  element  in  the
man ;  it  becomes  his  own  feeling  thoroughly,  penetrates  him  entirely,  just  as  food
becomes  a  part  of  his  bodily  frame  "  ( Umbreit).

in.  As  the  commission  produces  satisfaction  with  itself.  Ezekiel  had  the
sweet  experience  that  he  was  called  by  God  to  serve  Him,  and  found  it  eminently
pleasant  to  "know  no  will  but  His."  This  experience  follows  on  complete  sub-
mission to  all  that  He  gives  us  to  know  of  Himself.  Once  taught  of  God,  we
should  have  no  doubts  and  no  reserves.  Men's  commissions  often  disappoint,
because  power  to  carry  them  out  is  not  welded  into  them.  God  never  lets  His
workers  go  on  their  own  charges  ]  He  is  prepared  to  su[)ply  all  their  need.  Let
them  but  be  consecrated  to  Him,  present  their  bodies  as  a  living  sacrifice,  take
all  the  strength  and  love  which  Jesus  has  for  them,  and  they  will  be  enabled  to
exclaim,  "  I  take  pleasure  in  infirmities,  in  reproaches,  in  necessities,  for  Christ's
sake."  To  be  used  for  the  Lord  will  be  a  sweeter  experience  than  we  shall  find
elsewhere.  Even  if  we  have  to  tell  of  painful  atid  woful  things,  we  shall  do  so,
knowing  that  we  are  not  acting  on  the  promptings  of  our  own  temper,  not  serving
our  own  desires,  but  obeying  "  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God  merciful  and  gracious,  who
will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  Come  what  may  in  our  life-service,  a  little  or
a  great  duty,  one  to  which  we  run  or  one  from  which  we  shrink,  we  shall  surely  be
able  to  say,  as  Jeremiah  did,  "  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them ;  and  thy
word  was  unto  me  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  mine  heart;  for  I  am  called  by  Thy
name,  0  Lord  God  of  hosts."

(3.)  Ratifications  of  the  Commission  (Chap.  iii.  4-15).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  5, 6.  contracted.     He  will  be  able  to  give  his

"  Of  a  strange  speech  and  of  an  hard  whole  attention  to  the  meaning  rather

language."     The  marginal  reading,  deep  than  to  the  vocal  sounds  of  the  words

of  lip  and    heavy  of  tongue^   indicates  in  which  he  declares  the  messages  of  the

that  nothing   is  referred   to  here  about  Lord,  and  must  aim  that  his  people  tho-

the  characteristics  of  national  languages.  roughly  understand  the  words  he  uses.

It  is  the  obscurity  and  embarrassment  *"  They  would  have  hearkened  to  thee."

of  a  foreign  speech,  to  a  nuin  who  cannot  The  obstacle  meeting  the  prophet,  if  he

employ  them,  which  are  brought  to  view.  spoke  in  the  words  of  the  Lord  to  the

Ezekiel  is  to  speak  no  tongue  but  that  heathen,  would  be  their  language.   When

9i  Isiael.     His  sphere  is  definite  and  be  speaks  tg  the  Israelites,  it  is  their
28


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY :  EZBKIEL,


OHAP.  III.


hardness  of  heart.  Familiarity  with  reli-
gious words  often  counteracts  their  [jower.

Ver.  9.  "As  an  adamant."  A  very
hard  stone  of  some  kind.  We  may
doubt  if  it  be  a  diamond,  as  in  Jer.
xvii.  1 ;  but  it  signified  to  Ezekiel  that
he  would  be  made  more  than  a  match
for  the  contumacy  of  Israel.  He  would
be  neitlier  shamed,  nor  terrified,  nor
put  down  before  his  rebellious  people.

Ver.  12.  "  The  Spirit,"  the  same  which
moved  in  the  living  creatures,  "took
me  up,"  or,  as  in  ver.  14,  "  lifted  me
up."  He  had  been  standing  on  his  feet,
but  now  there  came  a  feeling  as  if  he
were  raised  from  the  ground  and  about
to  be  removed  from  the  spot  at  which
he  had  seen  ^^  visions  of  God.^'  Just
as  he  was  turned,  *'I  heard  behind  me
a  voice  of  a  great  rushing  " — a  sound
of  loud  and  commingled  noises,  but
not  that,  as  in  our  Bible,  they  only
conveyed  the  cry,  "  Blessed  be  the  glory
of  the  Lord  from  his  place."  The  ap-
pearance of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was
to  be  withdrawn  for  a  season  from  the
iight  of  Ezekiel,  but  wherever  it  might
be,  resting  or  moving,  he  was  to  know
that  matter  for  praise  and  honour  must
belong  to  it.  It  is  not  said  who  gave
forth  tliis  doxology ;  but  as  the  only
articulate  voice  mentioned  is  (chap.  i.
28)  that  of  Him  who  is  on  the  sapphire
throne,  the  voice  would  appear  to  have
proceeded  from  thence,  and  so  clearly
that  it  could  be  distinguished  from  the
other  accompanying  sounds,  which  Eze-
kiel goes  on  to  specify.  Ver.  13.  The
sound  of  great  rushing  was  caused  also
by  "the  noise  of  the  wings  of  the
living  creatures"  —  when  flying,  the
wings  touched  one  the  other,  as  was
intimated  chap.  i.  24 — ''and  the  noise
of  the  wheels."

Ver.  14.  "I  went  in  bitterness,  in
the  heat  of  my  spirit."  He  was  de-
pressed and  also  excited.  He  felt  his
own  insuflficiency,  and  \\\  a  glow  of  indig-
nation regarding  the  work  he  had  to  do.
He  went  straight  to  it,  for  he  was  mas-
tered by  the  mighty  hand.  His  state
was  akin  to  that  of  Paul  (1  Cor.  ii.  3,
4),  **  I  was  with  you  in  weakness,  and


in  fear,  and  in  much  trembling;  and
my  speech  and  my  preaching  was  not
with  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,
but  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and
of  power."  Under  the  hand  of  the
Lord  Ezekiel  went  into  society.

Ver.  15.  Tel-ahib,  the  place  near
which,  probably,  Ezekiel's  home  was ;
but  instead  of  living  in  comparative
seclusion,  he  was  required  to  lay  himself
open  to  his  fellow-exiles.  *'  And  I  sat
where  they  sat."  There  is  a  difficulty
in  the  Hebrew  of  this  clause.  The  way
of  solving  it  which  is  taken  by  the  Eng
lish  Bible  is  that  suggested  by  ancient
Jewish  critics.  The  Septuagint  has  an
other  way,  by  leaving  out  "  and,"  and
rendering  the  other  words,  *'  those  who
were  there,"  Some  later  commentators
prefer  a  slightly  different  Hebrew  punc-
tuation, and  translate,  *"*  and  I  saw  them
dwelling  there;"  while  others  give  this
version,  "  and  where  they  were  dwelling
there  " — a  version  perhaps  the  least  open
to  objections — "I  remained  astonished  "
— stunned.  Ezra  ix.  3,  4,  indicates  that
Ezekiel's  posture  was  that  of  a  man
who  does  not  move  by  reason  of  his
emotion  and  infirmity.  There  follows
continuous  silence  for  "  seven  days,"
not  as  a  fixed  time  for  mourning,  but  as  a
period  of  purification  and  probation  for
appointed  services  (Lev.  viii.  33).

This  paragraph  conveys  to  Ezekiel
the  purport  of  the  order  he  had  carried
out  in  eating  the  roll.  There  are  repe-
titions of  matters  which  had  already
been  communicated  to  him,  but  they  are
applied  to  a  somewhat  altered  condition.
The  sight  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  the
summons  to  serve  this  God  of  Glory,
the  consent  to  do  as  he  was  instructed,
are  followed  up  by  the  command  to  go
and  do  the  service  in  the  allotted  sphere.
Thus  in  later  days  Andrew,  Peter,  Philip
followed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  before  they
were  called  by  Him  to  become  fishers  of
men.  And  in  our  days  it  is  not  enough
to  look  to  Christ  and  feel  inclination  to
take  up  a  portion  of  work  for  Him  ;  men
and  women  need  to  get  the  opportunity
which  is  furnished  by  the  Lord  opening
a  door.    By  this  He  ratifies  His  own  call.


29


CHAP.  III.  HOMTLEriC  COMMRyTARY  :  EZKKIEL.


HOMILETICS.

L  The  adaptedness  of  God's  messages  (vers.  4-6).

1.  They  are  transmissible  hy  meidis  of  words.  Man's  language  and  thoiiglit  are
bound  to  each  other  by  coherent  links.  Given  words  will  suggest  ideas  correspon-
dent to  them,  and  so  men  can  understand  what  the  purport  of  a  message  is.  The
fact  that  God  is  on  another  plane  than  His  creatures  is  not  an  obstacle  to  His  com-
municating with  them,  if  He  choose  to  do  so.  But  it  is  impossible  for  tliem  to
perceive  His  method  of  doing  so.  Yet  it  carries  a  self-evidencing  power,  and  true
men  can  unhesitatingly  say,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  Mysteriousness  does  not  in-
validate consciousnes:^.  We  may  eat  the  fruit  though  we  cannot  tell  how  the
tree  produced  it  from  soil  and  atmosphere.

2.  They  are  translatable  into  every  tongue  of  men.  It  may  be  rude  or  culti-
vated, that  of  Israel  or  of  a  heathen  nation,  no  matter  which,  all  men  are  His  off-
spring and  capable  of  receiving  what  God  wishes  to  let  them  know.  His  children,
scattered  abroad  over  the  earth — Cretans  and  Arabs,  Indians  and  Negroes — hear  in
their  own  tongues  wherein  they  were  born  the  wonderful  works  of  God.  "  He
will  have  all  men  to  be  saved  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."

3.  They  suppose  competent  messengers.  A  fit  messenger  will  speak  in  the
language  of  the  people  to  whom  he  conveys  the  words  of  God.  To  repeat  them  in
a  dead  language,  or  in  a  foreign  language,  or  in  the  hard,  unusual  terms  of  a  ver-
nacular, is  to  go  against  the  desire  of  God  that  all  people  should  understand  His
wilL  Preachers  and  teachers  should  aim  to  employ  language  which  will  produce
the  clearest  and  most  widespread  impression  of  what  God  has  given  for  their
hearers.  It  was  a  characteristic  of  our  perfect  Exampler  that  "the  common  people
heard  Him  gladly."  He  should  be  copied  in  this,  if  possible,  by  all  who  would
speak  for  the  Father.

4.  They  do  not  compel  acceptance.  It  may  be  no  discredit  to  one  who  is  endea-
vouring to  do  spiritual  good  to  men  that  he  is  not  attended  to.  He  may  speak
precious  truths  in  vain,  and  that  not  because  of  the  unsuitableness  of  his  message,
but  because  of  the  state  of  those  who  hear.  Like  his  Lord,  he  may  feel  grieved
because  of  the  hardness  of  their  hearts.  He  makes  his  appeal  to  those  whose
eyes  the  god  of  this  world  has  blinded — "  who  love  the  darkness  rather  than  the
light " — who  are  as  free  to  reject  as  to  accept  the  words  of  the  Lord.  But  while  be-
lieving this,  let  all  who  speak  His  words  be  sure  that  they  state  them  as  they  ought,
and  then,  if  they  are  not  hearkened  to,  they  will  be  free  from  blame  for  their  unsuc-
cess — they  will  sorrow  over  the  sad  fact  that  it  is  God  who  is  not  hearkened  to.

5.  They  are  partial  in  their  diffusion.  There  are  tribes  and  nations  which
have  not  received  any  special  messages  regarding  the  glory  and  grace  of  the  God
and  Father  of  their  spirits.  "  His  ways  are  past  finding  out."  It  is  sometimes
said  that  if  the  servants  of  God  had  been  more  devout  and  enterprising,  such  a
condition  of  ignorance  as  to  the  true  God  would  not  have  remained.  There  is  a
certain  amount  of  truth  in  this  representation ;  but  it  would  be  an  error  if  we  let
that  aspect  alone  be  regarded.  We  have  this  also  to  notice,  that  behind  it  there  is
the  mightier  and  more  mysterious  fact  that  God  has  not  commissioned  messengers
to  go  to  certain  peoples,  who  yet,  if  He  had  done  so,  would  have  embraced  His
messages!  **Even  so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight."  We  are
dumb  with  silence.     We  caji  only  wait,  believing  that  "He  doeth  all  things  well."

IL  Sufficient  grace  proflfered  (vers.  7-11).

1.  To  meet  foreshadowed  difficulties.  The  Lord  is  wishful  that  His  servants
should  not  be  surprised  at  hindrances.  Their  first  impression  generally  is,  that,
having  become  obedient  to  the  Almighty  One,  He  will  make  a  clear  way  for  them
to  walk  in.  That  impression  is  not  caused  by  anything  He  has  said  or  omitted  to
say.  He  knows  how  the  consciences  of  men  will  deal  with  His  righteous  claims  and
turn  themselves  away  from  hearing  the  law  j  so  He  urges  His  people  to  count  the


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  in.


eost  of  serving  Hira,  to  expect  rebuffs  and  disappointments.  Then,  if  they  fail  to
win  men,  God  will  have  prepared  them  for  just  such  an  event.  They  need  not  be
cast  down,  however  painful  their  trials;  they  must  act  on  His  authority,  though
they  have  to  make  a  h;ird,  determined  advance.

2.  To  enable  to  stand  firm.  For  all  such  failures  God  will  bestow  surpassing
strength.  If  the  rejecters  are  obstinate,  He  will  make  His  servants  more  tenacious
than  they.  He  will  "give  a  mouth  and  wisdom,  that  all  their  adversaries  will  not
be  able  to  gainsay  or  resist."  They  go  forth  with  precious  promises  from  '*a
faithful  Creator."  He  does  not  pledge  Himself  to  give  them  comforts  or  converts
— He  does  pledge  Himself  to  give  "mercy  to  the  faithful."  Jeremiah  heard  Him
say,  "  They  shall  fight  against  thee,  but  they  shall  not  prevail  against  thee,  for  I
am  with  thee  to  deliver  thee."  Suspicious  and  angry  looks  may  confront  us,  but
they  will  not  dismay  us,  for  the  Lord  is  at  our  right  hand.  "  God  so  wishes  some-
times His  servants  to  acquiesce  in  His  government  that  they  should  labour  even
without  any  hope  of  fruit.  Therefore  let  us  learn  to  leave  the  event  in  the  hand
of  God  when  He  enjoins  anything  upon  us.  It  ought  to  suffice  us  that  our  obedi-
ence is  pleasing  to  Him." — Calvin.

3.  To  maintain  unbroken  communion.  His  words  remain  with  His  people.  His
Spirit  is  ever  bringing  to  their  remembrance  the  things  He  hath  spoken.  Ready
to  receive  Him,  they  find  a  spring  opened  on  every  parched  pathway — something
fitted  to  sustain  them  in  all  duties  and  discouragements.  It  will  be  from  their
own  negligence,  or  fear,  or  unbelief,  that  they  will  lose  the  light  of  His  countenance.
"  The  same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth  and  is  no  lie ;  and
even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in  Him."

4.  To  promote  conduct  correspondent  to  His  assurances.  "  He  giveth  grace  upon
grace."  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given  ; "  and  intimation  is  made  to  Ezekiel
that  He  expects:  (1.)  Acknowledgment  of  His  authority.  From  Him  alone  is  it
derived.  No  man,  no  ordinance,  no  institution  can  convey  the  power  to  receive
God's  words  to  any  person.  Every  claim  to  possessing  such  power  is  baseless,  since
He  claims  that  it  belongs  to  His  own  inworking,  and  is  communicated  to  whomso-
ever He  chooses.  Men  can  truly  speak  with  a  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  but  it  is
because  they  have  been  "called"  of  God,  and  have  bowed  to  that  call.  Such  men
may  preach  boldly,  for  they  will  be  warranted  to  believe  that  they  do  so  through
the  power  of  Christ  speaking  in  them.  (2.)  Unwavering  adherence  to  His  word  of
truth.  There  must  be  no  compromises  with  selfish  and  worldly  thoughts.  Whether
the  truth  is  listened  to  approvingly  or  carelessly,  whether  it  is  acquiesced  in  or
utterly  rejected,  no  part  of  it  is  to  be  concealed — "all  my  words" — no  part  is  to
be  mutilated,  for  He  who  speaks  is  "the  Lord  God."  The  rain  conieth  down  from
heaven  and  falls  on  soil  which  absorbs  it,  or  on  flinty  rocks  which  throw  it  off,  so
is  the  word  which  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  "  We  preach  not
ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."

in.  Appointment  to  labour  for  God  (vers.  12-15).

1.  By  the  emrgy  of  the  Spirit  He*^  knoweth  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  is
able  to  show  where,  when,  and  how  His  servants  must  go  to  speak  from  His
mouth.  It  cannot  be  an  impossible  duty  to  be  "  filled  with  the  Spirit :"  it  cannot
be  a  special  duty  for  a  few  amongst  those  who  obey  the  Lord  :  one  in  the  lowliest
sphere  may  receive  this  "unspeakable  gift"  as  assuredly  as  one  in  the  most
conspicuous  sphere ;  and,  supplied  with  the  Spirit,  all  believers  in  Jesus  will  hear
His  voice  calling  them  into  His  footprints,  and  act  for  His  glory  in  all  ways.
They  will  learn  to  prosecute  His  interests,  and  not  their  own,  wherever  He  leads
them.  Not  by  desire  for  a  position  amongst  men,  not  for  "  filthy  lucre,"  not  for
success  will  they  be  led  amongst  acquaintances  or  strangers.  They  will  go  to  be
**a  sweet  savour  of  Christ  in  them  that  are  saved  and  in  them  that  perish."
Sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  will  speak  in  His  mighty  power.

2.  In  the  face,  of  soul-reluctances,     The  circumstances  into  which  the  Spirit  lift§

31


CHAP.  TIT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  .  EZEKIEL.


the  children  of  God  are  not  always  agreeable  to  them.  Nothing  promising  may
appear,  their  opportunities  may  be  few  and  contracted,  or  the  people  may  be
apathetic  and  scornful.  Not  despondency  only,  but  chagrin  may  infest  the  hearts  of
those  whom  He  has  "chosen  for  Himself,  that  they  might  show  forth  His  praise."
They  are  disposed  to  murmur  that  they  are  not  kindly  treated  by  being  appointed
to  such  a  work,  or  are  not  qualified  to  face  the  diflUculties,  and,  with  more  pity  for
themselves  than  trust  in  the  Lord,  to  exclaim,  "Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things'?"
Alas  !  in  such  "  bitterness  of  spirit"  there  may  be  the  result  of  misapprehension  of
the  ways  of  God  and  irritation  against  them.  Our  only  security  against  mistakes
and  disobedience  is  in  obtaining  the  gift  of  power — in  the  iiand  of  the  Lord  being
strong  upon  us.  Under  it  we  may  have  a  masterful  experience  like  that  of  Paul,
"  I  have  great  heaviuess  and  continual  sorrow  in  my  heart.  For  I  could  wish  that
myself  were  accursed  from  Christ,  for  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen  according  to  the
flesh."  We  shall  bear  the  strain,  however  we  may  feel  as  if  we  could  cry,  "  Send
by  whom  Thou  wilt  send,  but  not  by  me."

3.  WitJi,  suffi'ient  upholding.  "  All  the  need  "  of  those  who  have  given  them-
selves up  to  the  rule  of  God  has  a  guaranteed  supply.  Their  weakness,  fear,  and
much  trembling  do  not  exhaust  it.  They  will  not  long  falter,  and  will  not  retreat,
because  they  "  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  God."  They  will  bear  the  heat  and
burden  of  their  day  of  labour,  because  "  greater  is  He  that  is  for  them  than  all  that
can  be  against  them."

4.  Affected  hy  strange  hindrances.  A  wide  door  and  effectual  was  opened  before
Ezekiel,  but  disablement  and  silence  formed  his  first  experiences  upon  entrance
thereunto.  Peter  is  to  be  converted  before  he  can  strengthen  his  brethren.  Paul
has  to  go  into  Arabia  before  he  is  fit  to  be  a  chosen  vessel  unto  the  Lord.  Many  a
later  Christian  has  found  unexpected  obstacles  interfering  with  the  service  to  which
he  believed  himself  called  by  his  Master.  Weak  health,  uncertainty  what  first  to
do,  severe  temptations  and  doubts  have  appeared  obstructing  his  devotedness.
Sometimes  he  is  inclined  to  give  up  or  let  despondency  unman  him.  But  no  :  he
has  to  hope  in  God,  for  he  will  yet  praise  Him  for  the  help  of  His  countenance.
He  must  sow  the  good  seed  of  the  kingdoni,  if  he  can  ;  if  he  cannot,  he  must  wait
till  God  tells  him  to  go  and  work  in  the  field.  All  delay,  all  pain,  all  inability  to
do  what  we  hoped  to  do  have  purposes  which  will  not  really  hinder  "  the  end  of'
the  Lord."  "All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God"  and  to
the  interests  of  His  righteousness  and  salvation  amongst  men,

^    ILLUSTRATIONS.

Comxuiinication  from  God. — He  can  have  His  infinite  and,  at  the  same  time,  His  finite
gide  of  being.  He  has  His  own  eternal  thought,  and  can  also  think,  and  does  constantly  think,
the  thoughts  of  time.  He  is  all-knowing,  and,  therefore,  more  intimately  present  in  our  souls,
yea,  spiritually  nearer  to  us,  we  may  say,  than  we  are  to  ourselves.  He  knows  us  not  by
media,  by  signals  outward  or  interior,  not  by  induction  from  effects  or  by  foreknowledge
from  causes,  but  by  direct  and  immediate  presence,  even  by  spirit-pervading,  interpenetrating
spirit.  Jle  can  think  our  thoughts  as  we  think  them,  feel  our  feelings  as  we  feel  them,  know
our  knowledge  as  we  know  it;  if  He  catinot  do  this,  then  are  there  deep  places  in  His  universe
of  soul  unknown  to  Him  as  they  truly  are.  If  He  can  do  this,  then  he  can  make  a  revelation
in  language,  in  any  language,  in  any  actions,  signals,  symbols,  in  any  outward  representations,
in  any  inward  affections  of  the  soul,  in  any  finite  way.  If  God  thus  comes  down  to  us,  we  see
reason  why  He  should  adopt  that  style  of  speech  which  is  the  most  outward,  the  most  pheno-
menal, and,  therefore,  the  most  universal.  It  is  the  language  of  the  Infinite  speaking  through
media  to  the  human  mind,  even  as  one  unseen  iiuman  soul  speaks  to  another  human  soul
through  the  outward  undulations  of  the  air.  The  words  and  images  are  specially  selected  and
specially  arranged  with  reference  to  the  wants  of  our  human  race  in  their  peculiar  moral  history.
The  words  are  not  outwardly  spoken  to  the  prophet's  ears  or  telegraphically  signalled  to  his
imagining  sensorium.  They  are,  psychologically,  the  prophet's  words,  the  prophet's  images,
yet  still  none  the  less  specially  designed  through  the  linked  media  of  revelation,  as  the  very
best  possible  words,  the  best  possible  imagery  through  which  such  an  approximate  communica-
tion of  the  ineffable  could  be  made  to  human  minds.  Let  us  be  thankful  for  every  type,  for
^very  metaphor^  for  eyer^'  impassioned  appeal,  for  ever^  instj^nce  Qf  th§  4ivi^e  90ftcl?8C««8iQU

3^


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZElttEL  cukv,  m.


in  coining  down  to  us,  taking  the  scale  of  our  thoughts,  and  speaking  to  us  in  our  own  human
emotions,  our  own  human  conceptions,  as  well  as  in  our  own  human  words. — Lewis.  No
man  by  searching  could  ever  comprehend  the  glories  of  a  sunrise.  Only  as  the  sun,  coming
up  from  behind  the  hills  of  the  morning,  reveals  himself,  could  we  know  what  morning
is.  And  80  only  as  God,  moving  up  by  a  law  of  motion  inherent  and  undiscoverable,  lifts
Himself  into  the  horizon  of  man's  ol)servation,  can  man  know  what  God  is.  All  we  know  of
God,  therefore,  we  know  because  of  revelation  made  of  Himself  by  Himself. — Mun'ay.
Nearer  than  "the  next  street,"  even  nigh  to  our  spirits  within,  and  yet  above  us  high  as
heaven  is  above  the  earth,  is  God  felt  to  be  when  the  words  of  [prophets  and]  apostles  address
themselves  "to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God."  While  not  rejecting  the  thought
of  exceptional  dealings  amounting  to  the  miraculous,  my  faith  acknowledges  as  normal,  and
underlying  all  hope  in  preaching  as  all  responsibility  in  hearing,  a  true  inward  divine  teaching
in  the  Spirit,  enabling  him  who  is  yielded  to  i  ,  and  in  the  measure  in  which  he  is  yielded  to  it,
to  understand  and  welcome  revelation. — Macleod  Campbell.

The  evil  religious  condition. — In  the  national  spirit  and  character  prevalent  in  any
age,  every  member  ot  the  nation  without  exception  has  a  share.  Every  one  contributes  to  this
spirit,  not  only  when  ms  a  child  of  the  age  he  is  infected,  if  not  by  all,  yet  by  one  or  other  of
the  sins  universally  diHused  ;  but  also  when,  through  neglect  of  energetic  protest,  admonition,
correction,  and  punishment,  he  does  not  meet  it  with  opposition  sufficiently  decided.  But
sinful  acts,  manifold  and  widely  ramified,  point  back  to  sinful  tendencies,  of  which  they  are
manifestations.  There  is  nothing  external  without  an  internal  counterpart.  At  the  root  of
illegal  acts  lies  the  illegal  condition.  .  .  .  God's  eye  pierces  to  the  heart,  and  His  lips  of
truth  describe  the  sinful  tendency  as  already  a  sinful  act,  a  transgression  of  that  law  of  His
which  requires  obedience  of  heart  and  inclination. — Philippi.

Submission. — What  we  can  help  and  what  we  cannot  help  are  on  two  sides  of  a  line
which  separates  the  sphere  of  human  responsibility  from  that  of  the  Being  who  has  arranged
and  controlled  the  order  of  things.  The  divine  foreknowledge  is  no  more  in  the  way  of  dele-
gated choice  than  the  divine  omnipotence  is  in  the  way  of  delegated  power.  The  Infinite  can
surely  slip  the  cable  of  the  finite  if  it  choose  to  do  so. — Holmes.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that,
in  activity  as  in  rest,  you  should  not  only  support  the  idea  of  God,  but  that  it  should  be
welcome  to  you ;  that  you  should  feel  the  need  to  blend  it  with  everything ;  that  it  should  not
disturb  but  complete  your  life.  If  it  were  not  so,  God  would  not  be  to  you  what  He  ought
to  be,  nor  would  you  be  to  Him  what  you  ought ;  in  both  cases  your  life  would  be  mutilated,
false,  absurd. —  Vinet.  Every  time  Jesus  had  to  act  or  speak  He  first  effaced  Himself,  then
left  it  to  the  Father  to  will,  to  think,  to  act,  to  be  everything  in  Him.  Similarly,  when  we
act  or  speak,  we  must  first  efface  ourselves  in  presence  of  Jesus;  and  after  having  suppressed
in  ourselves,  by  vi  act  of  will,  every  wish,  every  thought,  every  act  of  our  own  self,  we  are
to  leave  it  to  Jesus  to  manifest  in  us  His  will,  His  wisdom,  His  power.  With  Jesus  the  believer
holds  direct  communication,  and  through  Him  alone  we  find  and  can  possess  the  living
Father. — Godet.

Receptiveness  to  truth.. — ^I  must  have  my  spirit  brought  into  contact  with  the  quality
and  character  and  reality  of  truth,  so  as  to  be  affected  by  it  in  accordance  with  its  proper  nature.
All  spiritual  truth  is  addressed  to  the  conscience  in  man,  and  is  understood  only  by  the  con-
science ;  and  if  the  conscience  is  not  in  action,  the  truth  is  to  him  like  light  grasped  by  the
hand  instead  of  received  by  the  eye.  A  grammarian  or  logician  is  apt  to  forget  that  there  may
be  meaning  in  the  words  or  reasonings  which  require  the  co-operation  of  another  faculty.  All
spiritual  truth  is  of  inspiration,  and  speaks  to  what  is  of  the  nature  of  inspiration  within  man.
AH  that  God  speaks  to  us  through  others,  or  from  without,  is  intended  to  make  us  better
apprehend  what  He  ia  speaking  to  each  in  the  secret  of  His  being. — Erskine.

Prescience  of  God. — It  cannot  but  seem  to  us  a  higher  perfection  to  know  all  thinsrs  at
once  than  gradually  to  arrive  to  the  knowledge  of  one  thing  after  another,  and  so  proceed  from
the  ignorance  of  some  things  to  the  knowledge  of  them  ;  and  that  nothing  is  more  certain
than  that  all  possible  perfection  must  agree  to  God  :  so  we  find  His  own  word  asserting  to  Him
that  most  perfect  knowledge  which  seems  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  increase.  It  is  not
impossible  to  assign  particular  instances  of  some  or  other  most  confessedly  wicked  actions,
against  which  God  had  directed  those  ordinary  means  of  counselling  and  dehorting  men,  and
which  yet  it  is  most  certain  He  did  foreknow  they  would  do  ;  as  Ezekiel  was  directed  to  speak
to  the  revolted  Israelites  with  God's  own  words  to  warn  and  dehort  them  from  their  wicked
ways. — Howe.

Differing  results  from  truth. — It  is  from  no  fault  inherent  in  the  earth  that  it
enables  the  upas-tree  poison  to  be  eliminated  from  the  same  soil  that  gives  us  the  bread  of
life.  The  tree  elaborates  deadly  essences  through  an  organism  and  chemistry  of  its  own — a
devil  in  the  tree — so  the  heart  of  man  misuses  the  good  things  of  God. —  W.  M.  W,

Independence. — Warm  your  body  by  healthful  exercise,  not  by  cowering  over  a  stove.
Warm  your  spirit  by  performing  independently  noble  deeds,  not  by  ignobly  seeking  the  sym-
pathy of  your  fellows. — Thoreau.

To  feel,  to  think,  to  do  only  the  holy  right.

To  yield  no  step  in  the  awful  race,  no  blow  in  the  fearful  fight. — Anon.

o  33


08AP.  itl.  HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL.


There  is  tonic  in  the  things  that  men  do  not  love  to  hear,  and  there  is  damnation  in  the
things  that  wicked  men  love  to  hear.  Free  speech  is  to  a  great  people  what  winds  are  to  oceans
and  malarial  regions,  which  waft  away  the  elements  of  disease  and  bring  new  elements  of
health;  and  whe*e  free  speech  is  slopped,  miasma  is  bred  an(t  death  comes  fast. — Beecher.
Find,  in  every  stress  of  spiritual  fortune,  in  every  hour  of  supreme  exposure  to  evil,  in  every
time  of  assault  from  wickedness,  find  your  resources  within  yourselves  ;  not  o/yourselves,  but
within  yourselves.  Too  many  people  have  an  outside  God.  What  they  need,  what  the  world
needs,  is,  as  Paul  said,  **  Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory." — Murray.

Inspiration. — As  the  water  with  which  we  water  the  seed  sown  in  the  ground  does  not
create  the  plant  which  grows  out  of  it,  but  stimulates  the  development  of  the  organs  which  had
previously  been  formed  in  the  germ  and  sets  their  power  in  action,  so  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not
substitute  Himself  for  the  individuality  of  the  sacred  author.  He  awakens  his  faculties,  He
groups  his  experiences.  He  places  him  in  immediate  contact  with  salvation,  and  by  that  means
confers  upon  him  a  special  gift — the  distinct  intuition  of  that  aspect  of  gospel  truth  which
answers  most  specially  to  his  own  cliaracter  and  needs.  The  pole  which  attracted  the  sentiment
or  intelligence  of  each  writer  was  not  situated  for  all  at  the  same  point  on  the  sphere  of
revelation. — Godet.

Moral  government. — Who  shall  not  aim  at  the  same  end  at  which  God  aims  in  revealing
the  gospel — that  end  to  which  creation,  providence,  laws,  precepts,  ordinances,  grace,  reason,
conscience,  revelation,  everything  else  is  subservient — right  moral  action  in  principle  and
practice  ?  Who  shall  not  use  the  same  means  for  this  end  which  God  uses — that  truth  or
system  of  truth  which  is  imbedded  in  His  perfect  moral  government — which  ever  places  man  in
the  attitude  of  an  agent,  teaching  his  dependence  on  God  only  as  a  reason  for  acting  and  doing  f
Who  shall  not  aim  to  make  the  same  impression  on  the  human  mind  which  God  aims  to  make
by  His  commands  to  act,  His  exhortations  to  act,  His  invitations.  His  entreaties  to  act,  thus
throwing  every  iota  of  responsibility  for  the  issues  of  eternity  on  man  as  an  agent — for  what  he
does,  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body  ?  God's  revealed  moral  government,  the  glorious  gospel
of  the  blessed  God,  is  by  Him  designed  and  fitted,  not  to  hold  a  world  of  moral  beings  like  this
in  the  slumbers  of  spiritual  death,  but  to  rouse  and  move  and  stir  them  to  the  instant,  the
ceaseless,  the  joyous  activities  of  that  spiritual  life  which  is  the  only  and  absolute  perfection  of
a  spiritual  being. — Taylor.

Spirit  and  matter. — All  life,  individual  as  well  as  universal,  has,  as  its  ground  of  origina-
tion and  subsistence,  as  its  root  and  its  link,  God's  Xoryos  and  God's  irvevfia.  Everything  lives
and  moves  and  subsists,  closely  united  and  reciprocally  attracted  in  one  element — in  Him.
"  As  an  army  is  organised  by  its  general,  and  is  arranged  according  to  his  plan  of  battle,  even
so  are  banded  together  the  starry  hosts  and  the  groups  of  atoms  according  to  the  will  of  one
Eternal  Spirit.  This  creating  and  ordaining  Spirit  pervades  every  cell,  generates  and  regulates
the  flight  of  every  working  bee,  according  to  the  eternal  purpose  of  the  whole.  .  .  .  That  which
generates  the  galvanic  current  in  the  most  opposed  elements  of  the  voltaic  pile  ;  that  which
gives  the  living  weapon  of  defence  to  the  electric  eel,  by  the  contact  of  moist  heterogeneous
parts  ;  that  which  inclines  the  magnetic  needle  to  the  north — precisely  the  same  creative  prin-
ciple orders  and  controls  the  whole  fabric  of  the  world,  creates  and  vitalises  the  organic  cell,
arranges  the  intercourse  between  spirit  and  matter.*'  Above  the  material  stands  the  power  as
the  material  of  materials;  above  the  power  stands  life  as  the  power  of  powers;  above  life
stands  the  spirit  as  the  life  of  life;  above  all  spirits  stands  God  as  the  Spirit  of  spirits,  and
there  is  no  solution  for  the  enigma  of  the  reciprocal  action  of  all  things  but  this  all-eflfecting
and  pervading  chief  monad,  which  unites  all  contraries  in  itself  and  through  itself. — Delitzsch.
Self-sacrifice. — The  completest  self-sacrifice  gives  the  com pletest  self-possession  ;  only  the
captive  soul  which  has  flung  her  rights  away  has  all  her  powers  free;  simply  to  serve,  under
instant  orders  of  the  living  God,  is  the  highest  qualification  for  command.  This  is  the  mean-
ing of  that  great  saying  of  Cromwell's,  "One  never  mounts  so  high  as  when  one  knows  not
whither  one  is  going" — a  saying  which  the  wise  and  prudent  scorned  as  a  confession  of  blind-
ness, but  which  reveals  to  simpler  minds  the  deepest  truth. — Martineau.

Waiting. — God  has  so  arranged  the  chronometrv  of  our  spirits  that  there  shall  be  thousands
of  silent  moments  between  the  striking  hours. — Martineau.  She  accepted  it  all  absolutely,
unconditionally.  The  past  never  confused  the  present  :  her  life  went  on  from  moment  to
moment,  from  step  to  step,  as  naturally  as  plants  grow  and  flower.  She  said,  V  I  think
there  are  lighthouses  all  along  our  lives,  and  God  knows  when  it  is  time  to  light  the  lamps."—
Anon,

Let  tongue  rest  and  quiet  thy  quill  be  I

Earth  is  earth  and  not  heaven,  and  never  will  bti

Man's  work  is  to  labour  and  leaven —

As  best  he  may — earth  here  with  heaven.

'Tis  work  for  work's  sake  that  he  is  needing;

Let  him  work  on  and  on  as  if  speeding

Work's  end,  but  not  dream  of  succeeding;

Because  if  success  were  intended,

Why,  heaven  would  begin  ere  earth  ended. — Brtmnh^

84


HOMtLETIC  OOMMUNTAJtT:  EZEKISL


eHAp.  m.


IL— THE  ENTRANCE  BY  EZEKIEL  ON  THE  EXECUTION  OF  HIS
COMMISSION.     Chaps.  III.  16~VII.


Ezekiel  bad  been  fully  accredited,  but  did  not  begin  his  work  as  a  messenger
of  the  Lord  when  he  was  sent  among  the  people.  He  remained  in  their  midst,
silent  and  astonied — stunned — for  a  season.  Then  came  instructions,  conveying
distinct  intimation  of  the  responsibilities  of  his  position,  of  the  thraldom  in  which
he  would  be  held,  and  thereto  the  first  communications  for  the  people  followed.

1.  Responsibilities  Illustrated  (Chap.  iii.  16-21).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  Ver.  16.
**  At  the  end  of  seven  days  the  word
of  the  Lord  came."  The  power  to
prophesy  is  not  inherent  in  man.  It  is
not  produced  by  his  agency.  It  comes
and  goes  according  to  occult  influences
which  do  not  obliterate  the  mental  con-
dition of  the  recipient.  Rather  they
enter  into  such  correlation  with  him  as
to  enhance  his  susceptibility  for  what  is
divine,  and  are  always  in  a  certain  cor-
respondence with  constitutional  ability,
circumstances,  acquirements  of  the  per-
son on  whom  they  operate.

Ver.  17.  **I  have  made" — given —
"thee  a  watchman."     This  shows  to
Ezekiel  how  he  is  to  think  of  himself  in
the  work  appointed.     He  is,  as  it  were,
to  cover  with  his  eyes  the  objects  placed
under  his  view,  and  to  take  action  in
correspondence  with  their  appearances.
He  is  to  look,  search,  announce  or  de-
nounce.    The  watchman  is  thus  closely
allied  to  the  seer — only  this  is  the  pas-
sive state  of   which  the  former  is  the
active.     "Unto  the  house  of  Israel."
Not  as  an  organic  unity,  but  as  made  up
of  individuals,  part  of  whom  are  wicked
and  part  righteous,  and  the  prophet  is
to  inspect  carefully  the  marks  which  are
traceable  on  each  so  as  to  impart  appro-
priate warnings.     "Hear  the  word  at
my  mouth."     He  is  not  to  produce  his
own  opinions,  or  to  state  that  which  may
agree  with  the  opinions  of  the  people ;
he  is  to  stand  in  the  light  of  pure  truth
and  goodness  and  tell  its  manifestations.
"Give  them  warning."     Be  not  a  lec-
turer on  history  or  business ;  do  not  sit
M  a  professor  to  set  forth  the  doctrines
that   are   to   be   accepted  as   credible;
tpend  not  your  time  in  making  up  com-


plaints for  the  people  about  their  dis-
tresses as  captives  in  a  foreign  land.
Show  that  the  real  evil  is  in  themselves,
not  in  their  environment;  rouse  up  a
conviction  of  danger  to  them  so  long  as
they  cherish  any  delusion  as  to  external
relationship  to  the  Lord  God,  if  they
are  disregarding  His  laws.  The  future
is  ominous  with  storms,  and  they  will
be  struck  down  if  they  follow  the  ways
of  their  own  heart.  "From  me."  It
is  I  who  warn.  I  speak  to  thee  and  use
thy  capabilities.  Take  a  fearless  mes-
sage, for  I  am  with  thee.  Do  not  tra-
vesty the  sketch  I  intrust  thee  with  by
inserting  colours  which  I  warn  thee  not
to  put  there.

Ver.  18.  "When  I  say  unto  the
wicked."  God  comes  into  personal  com-
munication with  transgressors  when  His
servant  delivers  His  message  faithfully.
"  Thou  Shalt  surely  die. "  The  identical
threat  against  the  first  sinner  (Gen.  ii.
17)  is  valid  throughout  all  generations.
In  every  world  sin  is  death  as  contrasted
with  life.  "  Nor  speakest  to  warn  the
wicked  from  his  wicked  way."  Once
to  give  warning  is  not  to  fulfil  the
charge  devolving  on  the  prophet.  There
are  to  be  repetitions  and  perhaps  private
appeals.  The  representations  are  to
be  made,  moreover,  against  both  the
man  and  his  doings ;  for  there  are  sin
and  sins — an  evil  disposition  and  exhibi-
tions thereof.  "To save  his  life."  The
purpose  of  the  Lord  in  speaking  to  the
wicked  man  is  to  bestow  life  upon  him
— not  merely  to  put  a  stop  to  iniquity.
He  hath  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of
the  wicked.  If  life  is  not  secured  he
**  shall  die  in  his  iniquity,"  in  the  sins
he  has  committed ;  so  he  will  bring  the

35


OBAl».  til.


BOMtLKTlC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKISL,


penalty  upon  himself ;  "  but  his  blood
will  I  require  at  thine  hand."  His
blood  is  typical  of  bis  life,  and  He,
whose  are  all  souls,  will  take  a  reckon-
ing for  that  life  towards  the  loss  of  which
a  guilty  negligence  has  contributed.

Ver.  19.  "Yet  if  ...  he  turn  not
from  his  wickedness,  nor  from  his
wicked  way;"  if  he  do  not  repent —
change  his  mind  and  conduct ;  "  thou
hast  delivered  thy  soul:"  thou  wilt
stand  clear  of  any  accusations  of  having
dealt  unfaithfully  in  thy  office.  In
later  times  Paul  was  able  to  say,  "  I  am
pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men/'

Ver.  20.  A  parallel  case  to  that  of  the
wicked  is  now  illustrated,  but  having
reference  to  a  righteous  man.  It  is  sup-
posed that  "  a  righteous  man  doth  turn
from  his  righteousness."  He  does  not
show  a  simple  weakness  in  obeying,  but
a  disposition  to  evil.  He  yields  his
members  to  "commit  iniquity,  and  I
lay — give — a  stumblingblock  before
hiuL*'  God  tempteth  not  any  man,  but
He  arranges  the  circumstances  of  men
so  that  an  evil  heart  finds  occasion  to
assert  its  power,  and  to  draw  from  the
paths  of  righteousness  into  the  ways  of
sin.  Thus  gold  and  silver  (chap,  vil
19),  and  a  regard  for  sensuous  worship)
(chap.  xiv.  4,  7),  affected  the  Israelites
80  that  they  stumbled.     Pharaoh  is  an


illustration  of  an  individual,  under  pro-
vidential events,  becoming  hardened
against  the  good  and  holy  will  of  the
Lord  (Exod.  vii.  3,  22,  viii.  15).  *'  Be-
cause thou  hast  not  given  him  warn-
ing, he  shall  die  in  his  sin."  The
watchman  will  be  counted  guilty  of
negligence,  but  his  neglect  will  not
excuse  the  sin  of  the  wanderer  from
righteousness.  That  will  bring  death,
"  And  his  righteousness,"  his  external
habits  and  actions,  which,  "  touching  the
righteousness  which  is  in  the  law,"  were
blameless,  "  shall  not  he  remembered,"
they  shall  be  regarded  as  if  they  had
never  been.

Ver.  21.  On  the  other  hand,  "  if  thou
warn  the  righteous  man  that  the
righteous  sin  not ; "  or,  if  tJiou  warn
the  righteous  not  to  sin  as  a  righteous
man,  i.e.,  as  professing  to  have  a  charac-
ter which  is  unspotted  by  iniquity,  and
he  is  confirmed  in  his  right  standing  by
your  words,  *'  thou  hast  delivered  thy
souL"

Thus  Ezekiel  learns  the  principles  by
which  he  is  to  be  moved  in  carrying  on
the  office  of  a  watchman.  Incidentally
the  procedure  of  the  divine  government,
in  lespect  to  moral  character,  is  indi-
cated, but  that  is  a  subject  deferred  to
chaps,  xviii.  and  xxxiii.  more  especi-
ally.


HOMILETICS.

God's  call  to  service  is  a  trust  (vers.  16,  17).

Such  a  call  may  be  special  and  capable  of  being  distinctly  realised,  as  by  Ezekiel;
or  it  may  be  general  and  only  its  principles  appreciated,  as  by  those  on  whom
wishes  to  do  good,  vague  aspirations,  dreams,  impressive  events  have  been  operating;
but  whatever  be  the  method  in  which  the  call  is  made,  its  character  as  a  trust  is
never  altered.

I  Its  features  as  relating  to  God  show  this.

1.  The  call  is  conveyed  hy  God.  He  can  act  on  the  human  will  through  any
one  of  the  faculties  which  afi'ect  it.  Prepared  eyes  can  see  visions  of  God,  as  did
Ezekiel,  Paul  and  others ;  sensitive  ears  can  perceive  the  sounds  of  His  voice,  as
did  Isaiah,  John,  and  others.  He  uses  the  means  for  producing  clear  views  of  duty,
more  or  less  definite  desires  and  purposes,  firm  resolves ;  and  whether  these  tend
towards  prophesying,  preaching,  teaching  in  families  or  schools,  directing  the  sickly
or  dying,  they  who  experience  them  should  receive  them  as  coming  from  the  Father
of  Lights,  the  Ruler  of  ail  events.  They  may  be  recognised,  so  far  as  they  issue
from  Him,  as  sejit  by  Him,  though  the  recipients  should  not  have  "  heard  His
voice  at  any  time  or  seen  His  shape."  The  labourers  go  to  work  in  His  vineyard
at  the  hour  in  which  He  finds  them  ^dle.  The  child  of  a  godly  mother  responds
36


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY ;  EZEKIEL,  chap.  in.

to  His  impulse  with,  "0  Lord,  truly  I  am  thy  servant."     An  apostle  affirms,  "A
dispensation  of  the  gospel  is  committed  to  me.*'

2.  It  is  concerned  with  the  truth  of  God.  His  truth  contains  knowledge  for  the
wayfaring  man,  guidance  for  the  lovst,  bread  for  the  hungry,  healing  for  the  wounded,
life  for  the  dead  in  sins — who  will  dare  to  smother  its  virtue  1  Let  the  methods
of  the  call  be  what  they  may,  the  work  is  to  be  begun  and  continued  in  simple
acquiescence  to  that  which  He  reveals.  He  will  not  allow  another  standard.  No
herald,  soldier,  minister  should  think  of  modifying  the  terms  in  which  a  govern-
ment made  a  declaration  of  war  or  a  proffer  of  peace  to  another  government.  Less
reasonable  is  it  to  aflfect  to  modify  the  terms  which  the  mighty  God  may  instruct  His
servants  to  bear.  *'The  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men."  His  words  are
perfectly  and  always  true.  One  man's  mind  may  apprehend  them  somewhat
differently  from  that  of  another  man,  one  speaker  proclaim  them  less  vigorously
than  another;  but,  in  any  case,  the  truth  in  Jesus  must  not  be  departed  from,  must
not  be  tampered  with ;  it  must  be  set  forth  as  His.

3.  Its  contents  are  meant  for  all  hearers.  Ezekiel  is  appointed  watchman,  not
for  some  individuals  or  for  some  sections  of  his  people,  but  for  the  whole  house  of
Israel.  The  Lord  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  has  teachings  for  the  young  and  adult,
for  poor  and  rich,  for  wicked  and  righteous,  and  it  is  not  for  those  whom  He  calls
to  be  His  messengers  to  alter  or  prescribe  limitations  to  the  reach  of  His  words.
He  may  endow  one  with  a  gift  suited  for  children,  and  another  with  that  adapted
to  the  rough  or  the  cultured,  and  a  third  with  that  fitted  for  the  unconverted  or
believers ;  each  is  to  use  his  gift  in  the  distinct  understanding  that  the  truth  of
God  is  applied  to  specific  conditions.  Underlying  this  conviction  of  the  adaptation
of  God's  word  to  each  person  should  be  the  strong  living  thought  that  the  whole
world  lies  within  the  scope  of  the  divine  holiness  and  love.  In  our  own  houses,
or  outside  of  them,  there  are  those  for  whom  His  food  is  prepared,  and  are  we  not
to  distribute  it  1  "I  am  debtor  both  to  the  Greeks  and  to  the  barbarians,  both
to  the  wise  and  to  the  unwise."

IL  Its  features  in  those  who  are  called  show  this.

1.  In  reference  to  the  messages  they  receive^  there  is  to  be:  (1.)  A  consistent
impressibleness  to  their  power.  His  servants  must  stand  in  living  and  persistent
regard  to  God.  Creeds,  catechisms,  systems,  churches,  and  ecclesiastical  assemblies
of  all  kinds,  are  as  likely  to  interfere  now  between  Him  and  the  single- mindedness
of  those  whom  He  sends  forth,  as  was  manifested  by  the  old  priesthood,  of  whom  it
was  said,  "  Ye  have  caused  many  to  stumble  at  the  law."  We  need  to  abide  with
the  Holy  Spirit,  so  that  the  truths  already  learned  of  Christ  should  retain  as  fresh
a  divine  power  over  us  as  truths  which  may  have  been  newly  given  to  us ;  we
should  seek  for  the  ability  to  link  on  the  one  to  the  other,  so  as  to  be  **  perfect  and
complete  in  all  the  will  of  God  '*  whensoever  we  speak  for  Him.  (2.)  A  readinesb
to  accept  more.  Ezekiel  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  been  lifted  up  by  the
Spirit,  but  he  is  to  expect  further  revelations.  None  have  such  abundance  of  light
and  impulse  for  service  that  they  need  no  more.  They  have  not  yet  attained.
The  glory  and  grace  of  the  Only-begotten  cannot  be  comprehended  in  a  lifetime.
Our  minds  must  receive  the  mould  which  is  suited  to  our  Lord's  own  promise,
"  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given."

2.  In  reference  to  the  responsibility/  imposed  on  the  messengers.  They  are  required  :
(1.)  To  look  at  things  in  the  light  of  God.  It  is  sometimes  an  object  of  desire  to
see  the  truth  of  things  just  as  God  sees  them.  Such  desire  is  worse  than  foolish,
whether  it  relate  to  our  sins  or  duties.  But  to  ask  that  we  may  rightly  perceive
how  either  sin  or  duty  stands  in  view  of  the  Holy  One  is  wise,  and  fitted  to  move
us  toward  conformity  to  the  mind  of  Clirist.  Many  a  sailor  can  satisfactorily  tell
what  he  must  do  with  his  vessel  in  a  storm,  and  yet  is  unable  to  measure  the  pres-
sure or  the  velocity  of  the  wind.  And  the  simplest  servants  of  the  Lord  may  so
learn  His  thoughts  and  ways  as  that  they  shall  be  practically  agreed  with  God,  and

37


CHAP.  HL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


yet  be  still  far  from  complete  knowledge  of  Him.  Nevertheless,  practical  walking
in  the  light  of  His  countenance  is  to  be  maintained  continually.  (2.)  To  tell
others  what  is  shown  of  God.  The  spiritual  eye  and  the  heart  sensitive  to  His
presentations  respecting  man's  procedure  and  what  man  should  do  are  not  to  be
unused.  They  are  to  be  made  means  of  convincing  all  and  judging  of  all  ungodly
deeds  and  righteous  efforts.  Plainness  and  faithfulness  must  be  brought  to  the
front.  Evasion  or  compromises  are  out  of  place  in  tlie  service  of  Him  who  seeth
not  as  man  seeth.  The  message  is  from  Him,  and  will  be  associated  with  His
gracious  power  working  in  us  to  will  and  do.  "  If  a  watchman  want  eyes  and
knowledge,  how  can  he  discern  danger,  instruct  the  ignorant,  heal  the  wounded,
reduce  the  straying,  lift  up  the  fallen,  feed  the  hungry,  comfort  the  feeble,  resolve
conscience,  and  compare  things  past  with  things  present  and  future  1 " — GreenhilL

Postulates  for  an  effective  ■watchman  (vers.  18-21).

1.  Discrimination  in  addressing  the  people.  He  has  to  act  for  all,  but  the
wicked  are  to  be  spoken  to  as  wicked  and  the  righteous  as  righteous.  Human
intelligence  may  not  be  capable  of  distinguishing  the  inward  moral  character  of
persons ;  that  inability  must  not  lead  to  the  confounding  of  wickedness  with  right-
eousness. The  warning  has  to  be  uttered  with  all  plainness,  in  reference  to  dispo-
sition or  action.  The  application  must  be  somewhat  personal — like  that  of  Nathan
to  David,  "  Thou  art  the  man !  "  The  forms  of  application  may  be  indefinitely
varied,  but  the  gist  of  it  will  ever  define  the  separation  which  discriminates  "the
precious  from  the  vile."  The  fear  or  the  gentleness  which  prevents  a  follower  of
Christ  from  making  it  clear  that  sin  is  death — no  matter  whether  the  sinning  one
be  poor  or  rich,  a  so-called  worldly  man  or  a  so-called  Christian — must  be  counter-
acted by  the  remembrance  that  "  God  cannot  be  mocked ;  for  whatsoever  a  man
soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap."  Preachers  and  teachers  of  the  gospel  may  be
deficient  in  some  valuable  qualifications ;  they  must  not  be  deficient  in  determina-
tion to  avoid  whatever  will  lead  into  a  mistake  as  to  moral  conduct.  They  have
nothing  to  learn  from  the  maxim,  "Live  and  let  live."  They  have  to  hold  forth
the  word  of  life  to  those  who  may  be  dead  in  sins,  and  to  those  who  may  have
been  freed  from  sin  but  been  tempted  to  go  back  to  their  former  master,  so  that
they  may  know  they  have  not  life.

2.  Singleness  of  aim.  The  purpose  of  God,  in  calling  men  to  receive  and
promulgate  His  messages,  is  to  save  from  death.  He  does  not  want  the  soul  to
revise  its  past  records  but  to  make  new  records.  He  does  not  care  so  much  to
avert  punishment  as  to  repress  the  tendencies  to  punishable  conduct — to  turn  from
wickedness  and  wicked  ways  to  righteousness  and  righteous  ways,  from  death  to
life.  There  may  be  many  pleasant  results  following  our  religious  efforts,  yet  the
labourer  must  not  aim  at  less  than  saving  the  souls  alive  of  those  for  whom  he  acta.
He  is  intrusted  with  that  on  which  depends,  not  the  mere  pleasure  or  comfort  or
happiness  of  men,  but  their  lives,  and  no  consideration  should  be  allowed  to  divert
the  directness  of  the  aim  he  is  appointed  to  take.

3.  Certainty  of  influence.  He  who  brings  the  word  of  the  Lord  does  not  work
in  vain.  It  may  be  that  he  does  see  results  such  as  he  wishes  to  see,  or  results
such  as  he  most  earnestly  deprecates  should  not  occur ;  but  the  Master  sees  that
he  sheds  "  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death."  Still  it  can  never  ba
matter  of  indifference  to  learn  what  is  the  influence  which  is  exerted.  "  When  Jesus
beheld  the  city  He  wept  over  it."  "  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of
God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  "What  is  our  hope  or  joy  or  crown  of  rejoic-
ing? Are  not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  His  coming?"
How  needful  to  abide  under  the  seriousness  of  the  conviction  that  we  are  affecting,
for  weal  or  for  woe,  thobe  with  whom,  as  Christ's  servants,  we  have  intercourse,  and
seek  '*  by  all  means  to  save  some."  "  Let  us  throw  the  net  oft,  we  may  catch  fish
in  a  dead  sea.*
38


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  iil.


4.  Subordination  to  God.  He  retains  in  His  own  power  all  decisions  as  to
death  and  life,  and  His  messengers  are  but  instruments  for  declaring  the  principles
on  which  He  grounds  His  procedure.  He  calls  them  to  *'  be  not  weary  in  well-
doing " — to  be  "  instant  in  season,  out  of  season  ; "  but  to  not  one  of  them  does  He
give  a  title  to  pronounce,  over  the  wicked  or  righteous  man,  the  sentence,  "I  con-
demn thee  to  die.  I  absolve  thee  from  thy  sins.'  "  Who  art  thou  that  jiidgest
another?"  It  is  arrogancv  and  boldness  to  step  into  Christ's  place,  and  impose
any  laws,  decrees,  or  inventions  of  men  upon  the  consciences  of  others,  or  to  judge
the  conditions  of  men,  without  warrant  from  Christ  and  His  Word.  Prophets  may
not  do  it,  much  less  others.  That  power  is  not  transferred;  the  power  which  He
does  confer  is  to  declare  that  God  Himself  denounces  death  on  the  impenitent,  that
He  gives  life  to  those  who  turn  to  His  ways.  He  who  teaches  otherwise  does  not
stand  to  his  appointment  as  a  watchman  and  travesties  the  authority  which  he
might  rightly  wield.

5.  Award  according  to  faithfulness.  Office  in  the  kingdom  of  God  does  not
screen  its  holder  from  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  if  he  is  negligent  in  duties.
He  will  reckon  with  them,  both  for  what  has  been  let  alone  or  unfaithfully  carried
out,  and  for  what  has  been  attended  to  and  faithfully  fulfilled.  The  day  will  come
when  He  will  announce  the  reward  or  woe.  Omission  of  duty  may  be  as  fatal  as
commission  of  evil — the  negligence  which  does  not  exti»»guish  a  spark  may  occasion
a  conflagration  as  destructive  as  that  which  intentional  malice  may  cause.  How
earnestly  is  the  question  to  be  pondered  :  Do  we  watch  for  souls  as  they  that  must
give  account,  that  we  may  do  it  with  joy  and  not  with  grief  ?

Laws  forjudging  moral  conduct  (vers.  18-21).

1.  Impartiality  mill  he  dealt  out.  "  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God.**
The  righteous  man,  if  he  turn  to  evil,  is  condemned  equally  with  the  wicked  man.
and  a  wicked  man,  if  he  turn  to  righteousness,  is  saved  equally  with  a  righteous
man.  They  who  have  served  the  Lord  cannot  expect  that  He  will  wink  at,  or  take
no  account  of  their  transgressions  of  His  law,  on  the  ground  that  they  have  been
serving  Him,  just  as  they  whose  hearts  have  been  stout  against  Him  are  not  to
suppose  that  He  will  be  indifferent  to  the  repent! ngs  which  are  kindled  in  them.
They  who  have  begun  wrong  may  turn  to  righteousness  and  will  be  treated  as
righteous  doers,  while  they  who  have  done  right  may  turn  into  a  wrong  way  and
will  be  treated  as  wrong.  This  rule  for  moral  life  has  to  be  looked  at  without
blinking — I  am  to  have  sentence  passed  upon  me  by  the  holy  God  not  for  what  I
profess  to  be,  but  for  what  I  do.

2.  Judgments  proceed  according  to  the  direction  of  conduct.  One  step  aside  does
not  of  itself  proclaim  that  a  man  has  left  the  way  in  which  he  has  been  walking.
His  fixed  departure  is  known  by  the  steps  which  succeed  to  the  first.  Those  suc-
cessive steps  will  result  from  the  disposition  of  the  traveller,  and  God  alone  can
judge  of  that.  We  can  see,  however,  that  a  first  stumble  out  of  the  way  of  right-
eousness may  be  the  commencement  of  a  new  course,  which,  if  followed  on,  will
bring  to  the  way  of  wickedness.  The  man,  as  he  verges  away,  may  still  wear  some
of  the  habits  he  has  used  hitherto,  and  may  speak  in  an  idiom  often  different  from
that  of  the  country  whose  frontiers  he  has  crossed  over;  but  he  has  changed  his
direction — the  light  falls  upon  his  back,  and  his  face  is  becoming  more  suffused  with
the  darkness  towards  which  he  is  tending.  His  case  calls  for  the  warning  that  he
has  left  the  right  way,  and  that  the  end  of  his  movement  is  death  —  no  matter  if  he
does  retain  some  resemblance  of  his  former  gait.  A  wicked  man  abides  in  death
not  because  of  one  sin,  or  one  class  of  sins,  so  much  as  because  he  goeth  on  still  in
his  trespasses — because  he  "  hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his
deeds  should  be  reproved."

3.  Guiltiness  is  not  transferable.  One's  wicked  or  righteous  doing  is  from
himself.     No  scheme  is  possible  to  be  devised  by  which  we  can  transfer  our  moral

39


CHAP.  m.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIBL,


conduct  so  that  it  shall  be  no  longer  ours.  There  is  no  escape  from  the  righteous
judgment  of  God.  Circumstances,  tempters,  preachers  can  never  bear  tlie  blame  of
that  which  has  been  perpetrated  by  our  own  hearts.  We  may  not  have  been
advised  or  warned  by  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  advise  or  warn  us  ;  their  failure
does  not,  in  any  degree,  alter  the  character  of  the  direction  we  have  taken.  "  Every
man  must  bear  his  own  burden."  Ignorance  may  be  a  ground  for  inflicting  few
stripes  upon  a  disobedient  servant,  but  cannot  destroy  his  obligation  to  the  master.
"  I  never  was  told  '*  will  never  be  a  lever  by  which  we  can  lift  off  from  ourselves
the  unrighteousness  and  the  death  which  is  by  sin.

ILLUSTRATIONS.

Readiness  to  serve. — It  is  infinitely  sweet  and  lovely  to  be  the  organ  and  spokesman
of  the  Most  High.  The  most  painful  divine  truths  have  for  the  spiritual  man  a  gladdening
and  quickening  side. — H.

To  my  Master  I  stand  or  I  fall ;  what  to  me  is  the  world's  acclaim f

I  hear  not  its  loud  applause,  I  heed  not  its  bitter  blame.

I  am  not  bound  by  the  laws  of  Herod's  judgment-hall,

When  it  praiseth  me,  it  hath  cause ;

Yet  what  it  seeth  for  flaws

It  seeth,  nor  seeth  it  all. — GreenweU.

He  shall  die. — Christ  died  to  save  the  world  from  the  curse  of  death  nnder  which  it  ig;
not  a  future  dealii  of  misery,  but  an  actual  death  of  worse  than  misery,  a  death  which  involves
our  liking  that  which  is  evil.  It  does  not  occur  to  us  that  to  like  to  be  wicked  is  to  be  damned.
We  say  that  mere  wickedness,  mere  self-indulgence,  merely  being  alienated  from  God,  is  not
worthy  to  be  called  death  unless  there  be  misery  conjoined  with  it — that  suffering  is  more  to
be  feared  than  sinning.  In  that  speaks  the  death  of  man.  That  is  death  which  fears  suffering
more  than  sinning.  A  sinful  state  is  the  ciiief  of  evils  ;  sinning  is  damnation  :  self-indulgence
is  to  be  cast  into  hell ;  tlie  worm  that  dieth  not  and  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched  are  unbridled
passions.  To  be  damned  is  not  to  be  miserable  but  to  be  bad,  and  Christ  is  spoken  of  as
saving  us  from  sin,  from  corruption,  from  vain  conversation,  from  this  evil  world,  never  from
pain.  It  is  hard  to  believe  that  damnation  can  be  a  thing  that  men  like.  Corruption  is  cor-
ruption in  man's  view,  though  worms  like  it.  Is  damnation  less  damnation  in  God's  view,
though  men  like  it?  To  be  loved  by  a  man  whom  we  treat  as  an  enemy  is  to  have  coals  of  fire
heaped  upon  our  head.  To  he  loved  as  God  loves  us,  we  being  such  as  we  are,  is  to  be  cast  into
a  lake  of  fire.  The  love  of  Christ,  the  sight  of  God  as  He  truly  is,  must  have  power  to  save
men  from  sin.     They  learn  that  sin  is  damnation  and  understand  their  Maker. — Hinton,

A  wrong  direction  fatal. —

The  painful  warrior,  famoused  for  fight,

After  a  thousand  victories  once  foiled,  >.

Is  from  the  books  of  honour  razed  quite,

And  all  the  rest  forgot  for  which  he  toiled. — Shahegpeart.

2.   Prophetic  Thraldom  (vers.  22—27).

EXEGETICAL    NOTES.— A   fresh  to  go  to  them,  now  impels  him  to  go

impulse  from  the  Lord  impresses  upon  from  theni,  "  into  the  plain,"  or,  better,

Ezekiel    another    characteristic    of    his  valley ,  as  in  chap,  xxxvii.   1 — probably

mission.     By   eating   the   roll    he    was  the  same  depression  of  ground  as  this

taught  tiiat  his  words   should  be  those  near  Tel-abib.

of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  by  being  a  watch-  Ver.  23.  *'And  behold  the  glory  of

man,  that   he   must   s[)eak    boldly  and  the    Lord    stood    there."     The    same

without  fear  of  consequences.     Now  he  manifestation    of    majesty,   which    had

is   to   learn   that  there   is  a  time  to  he  commissioned    him,    again    appears    to

silent  as   well  as  a  time  to  speak,  and  warrant  him  to  hear,  speak,  act  as  His

tliat    both    are    appointed    by    God. —  messenger.

Speaker's  Com.  Ver,  24.  *'  Then  the  Spirit  entered

Ver.  22.   "  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  into  me,"  as  the  power  which  enables

there  upon  me."     The  people  amongst  men  to  accept  communications  from  the

whom  Ezekiel  sat  had  not  been  altered  Lord,  and  which  fulfilled  the  pledge  of

by  seeing  his  strange  condition,  and  the  ver.  22.     "  And  he  spake  with  me,  an<l

divine  power,  which  had  impelled  him  said  unto  me,  Go,  Shut  thyself  within
40


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  in.


thine  house."  Ezekiel  was  to  be  a  sign
unto  the  people,  and  here  is  commanded
to  do  that  which  would  be  a  symbol  to
teach  them.  In  ver.  15  he  had  sat
"  astonished  among  them  seven  days,"
but  he  is  not  to  do  so  again.  They  are
to  be  taught  by  the  fact  that  he  had
withdrawn  into  the  privacy  of  his  own
house.  Thus  isolated  he  preaches  to
them  through  their  eyes  at  any  rate.

Ver.  25.  "They  shall  put  bands  upon
thee."  This  shows  that  the  people  had
access  to  the  prophet  within  his  house ;
but  it  is  not  to  be  taken  literally.  If
the  "  they  "  refer  to  the  captives,  the
phrase  will  express  the  idea  that  their
rebelliousness  would  interfere  with  the
prophet's  mission  and  hinder  its  develop-
ment— as  was  illustrated  in  after-times
with  respect  to  the  mission  of  One  greater
than  Ezekiel:  "He  did  not  many  mighty
works  there  because  of  their  unbelief."
But  the  reference  is  probably  to  the  pro-
cedure of  the  Lord  Himself,  since  in  chap,
iv.  8  it  is  said,  "I  will  lay  bands  upon
thee."  Of  what  efficacy  they  will  be  is
indicated  in  the  words,  "and  thou  shalt
not  go  out  among  them."  This  is  not
merely  a  result  from  the  binding  ,  it  is
rather  a  command  of  the  Lord.  Ezekiel
is  not  to  consider  himself  free  to  do  as
he  likes.  He  must  confine  himself  strictly
to  his  house ;  on  no  account  to  sit  where
his  people  sit,  for  to  do  so  would  be  to
obliterate  the  lesson  given  by  his  isolation.

Ver.  26.  This  lesson  is  further  incul-
cated by  enforced  silence.    **  Thou  shalt


not  he  to  them  a  reprover,"  a  man  who
will  endeavour  to  convict  them  of  their
sins,  except  so  far  as  and  how  I  direct
thee.  They  are  not  always  in  a  state  fit
to  hear  rebukes,  "  for  they  are  a  rebel-
lious house,"  and  nothing  effective  can
be  accomplished  as  yet.

Ver.  27.  "When  I  speak  with  thee
I  will  open  thy  mouth."  The  time  to
declare  the  Lord's  mind  will  come,  and
then  Ezekiel  must  openly  and  boldly
announce  what  he  receives  from  Him  to
communicate.  It  does  not  seem  that
this  temporary  restraint  hindered  verbal
statements  about  ordinary  matters,  but
only  those  which  came  to  him  in  the
word  of  the  Lord,  His  silence  or  his
utterance  of  the  divine  message  was  to
be  dependent  on  the  express  sanction  of
his  Lord.  Thus  when  his  tongue  cleaves
to  the  roof  of  his  mouth,  when  he  cannot
speak  the  words  given  him  by  God,  if
his  mouth  is  opened  the  words  he  utters
will  appear  the  more  distinctly  divine.
"  The  divine  injunction  extends  over
the  whole  period  which  ends  in  the  ful-
filment of  the  prophecies  of  threatening
by  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  This
appears  especially  from  this,  that  in
xxiv.  27  and  xxxiii.  22  there  is  an  un-
deniable reference  to  the  silence  imposed
upon  him  in  our  verse,  and  with  reference
to  which  it  is  said,  that  when  the  mes-
senger should  bring  back  the  news  of
the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  his  mouth  should
be  opened  and  he  should  be  no  longer
dumb." — Keil,


EOMILETICS,
Restraints  in  Serving  the  Lord,

I.  They  are  often  experienced.  The  whole  course  of  the  history  of  the  king-
dom of  God,  as  traced  in  the  Old  Testament,  may  be  pointed  to  as  showing  that
the  godly,  whose  service  is  outlined  therein,  met  with  recurring  impediments  to
their  efforts.  The  like  feature  is  observed  in  the  New  Testament.  Every  true
life  for  Christ,  at  one  step  or  another,  verifies  the  expression  of  Paul,  '*  Without  are
fightings,  within  are  fears."

1.  The  restraints  may  he  in  the  servants.  They  may  be  ready  to  spread  the
gospel,  but  are  forbidden  to  enter  the  door  which  is  apparently  opened,  or  are
afflicted  with  disease  and  unable  to  enter,  or  are  prostrated  in  their  energies  by
some  domestic  event  and  unfit  to  enter.  In  such  and  similar  cases  they  must  not
conclude  that  they  have  off'ended  the  Lord  because  silence  is  imposed  on  them;
they  are  not  to  write  bitter  things  against  themselves ;  they  are  to  bow  in  acquies-
cence and  wait  till  God  open  their  lips.

41


CHAP. III.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


2.  The  restraints  may  be  from  those  for  ivhom  the  service  is  required,  (1.)  Thei/
may  become  violent  uijainst  the  persons  who  stand  up  for  the  rights  of  God,  A
pruphet  like  Jereiiiiali  was  "cursed"  by  every  one,  and  cast  into  a  miry  dungeon;
an  apostle  like  Paul  was  mobbed,  beaten  and  imprisoned,  and  unnumbered  injuries
have  been  committed  against  less-known  followers  of  Him  who  was  crucified  by
wicked  hands.  (2.)  Or  the  people  may  be  rebellious  in  heart.  It  was  because  of
this  their  state  that  Ezekiel  was  shut  up  and  trammelled.  The  soil,  into  which  the
seed  of  the  kingdom  was  to  be  cast,  had  not  those  elements  in  it  which  would  act
upon  and  vitalise  the  germs.  The  gospel  is  unproductive  in  many  a  sphere,  not
because  it  is  not  plainly  and  faithfully  set  forth,  but  because  men  are  irresponsive
and  unimpressed.  They  reject  the  medicine  which  would  bring  them  health  and
cure.  Such  sad  conditions  should  not  prevent  further  efforts  for  the  redemption
of  souls,  though  former  ones  have  been  made  apparently  in  vain.  We  must  not
repress  our  longings  for  a  change.  We  must  watch  as  servants  who  wait  for
the  Lord.

II.  The  restraints  are  under  the  direction  of  the  Lord.  He  concerns  Him-
self with  every  matter  relating  to  His  kingdom  amongst  men.  The  enforced
silence  and  disablement  of  the  prophet  and  the  "  gross "  heart  of  the  people  are
controlled  for  His  righteous  and  good  ends.

1.  Traces  of  His  working  are  perceptible.  Restraints  are  felt  teaching  His  suf-
fering servants  to  be  patient,  vigilant  for  Him,  and  so  qualifying  for  future  action
and  future  reward.  "If  we  sutler  with  Him  we  are  glorified  together."  Also  by
those  restraints  the  evil  which  lies  in  hearts  is  disclosed.  Their  enmity  to  God  is
elicited.  Their  hardness  becomes  more  intense.  Blinded  thus,  they  lead  the
blind  and  "provoke''  God  to  send  a  famine  of  His  Word.  What  more  deplorable
state  can  a  lost  traveller  be  in  than  that  in  which  he  can  be  no  longer  tracked  by
the  guides  who  go  in  search  of  himi  What  more  painful  illustration  of  their  state
can  there  be  than  when  the  wicked  and  the  righteous  hear  warnings  no  more?

2.  Hopes  of  His  working  may  be  entertained.  When  men  make  void  His  law,
that  is  a  time  to  ask  God  to  do  special  work.  The  restraints  which  lie  in  the
prophet's  disablement  or  the  people's  sin  will  not  always  continue  to  press.  God
will  not  be  served  only  by  silence.  He  will  open  a  door  of  utterance,  and  again
send  forth  His  words  to  the  people  that  He  may  prove  whether  there  is  yet  a  heart
in  them  which  will  take  heed  how  they  hear.

III.  Restraints  may  be  associated  with  communion  between  the  Lord  and
His  servants.

This  fact  is  brought  to  pass —

1.  By  afresh  consciousness  of  God  in  His  service.  When  His  faithful  followers
are  "  troubled  on  every  side,"  they  often  realise  the  power  of  God  and  the  precious-
ness  of  Christ :  when  they  are  weak,  then  are  they  strong  through  His  grace.  He
seems  to  come  nearer  to  them,  and  they  say,  "  Thou  boldest  me  by  my  right  band."

2.  By  a  deepened  conviction  that  He  who  has  led  them  is  the  same  for  ever,
Ezekiel  is  not  left  to  remember  that  he  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  Lord;  it  is
shown  to  him  again.  He  learns  that  God  is  all  that  He  was.  The  glory  of
Christ  which  we  see  when  He  is  first  revealed  in  us,  the  glory  which  moved  us  to
consecrate  our  lives  to  Him  and  His  work  on  earth,  that  glory  will  be  shown
again  and  again,  if  we  wait  for  Him.  It  is  not  the  memory  of  a  first  love  which
is  to  sustain  us  in  suffering  and  duty  ;  it  is  a  renewed  sight,  **  day  by  day."  We
are  prostrated  before  His  glory,  but  we,  beholding  that  glory,  shall  be  changed
into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory — from  the  glory  of  suffering  for  Christ
to  the  glory  of  reigning  with  Christ.

3.  By  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  He  is  given  to  dwell  in  our  body  as  His
temple.  He  takes  the  things  that  are  Christ's  and  shows  them  to  us.  He  teaches
to  profit,  and  we  receive  power,  love,  and  a  sound  mind.  The  efficacy  of  all  true
ministry  depends  on  His  energy.     It  is  as  the  servants  of  the  Lord  live  in  the

42


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  IT.


Spirit  and  walk  in  the  Spirit  that  they  adequately  fulfil  the  mission  to  which  they
are  called.  And  since  He  is  freely  and  fully  promised  for  the  asking — as  the  gift
of  a  father  to  his  children — what  sorrow  and  shame  may  not  affect  us  who  might
have  received  so  much  of  His  power  and  yet  have  been  satisfied  with  so  little  1
"Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ?     Are  these  His  doings?"


8.  First  Instructions  by  Signs  and  their  Interpretation

(Chaps,  iv.  1-v.  17).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ezekiel  is
ordered  to  carry  out  certain  specified
processes.  Their  purport  is  expressed
by  the  words  (iv.  3),  "  This  shall  be  a
sign  to  the  house  of  Israel."  The  use
of  such  signs  is  i)artly  to  be  accounted
for  by  the  circumstances  of  a  prophet
whose  dwelling  was  in  a  country  in
which  symbolical  figures  were  striking
and  not  unusual ;  partly  by  the  psycho-
logical fact  that  his  actings  were  to
educate  the  people  while  as  yet  his
tongue  cleaved  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth.
It  is  a  mootpoint  with  students  of  pro-
phecy whether  to  regard  all  actings  of
this  sort  as  internal  sensations  vividly
realised,  or  as  taking  form  externally.
"  No  general  principle  can  be  laid  down
by  which  to  determine  how  far  such
actions  pertain  to  the  province  of  tlie
external  or  internal" — Oehler.  To  say,
that  all  that  was  commanded  to  Ezekiel
is  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  vividness
of  his  mental  view,  seems  to  contravene
such  statements  as  that  he  sat  astonied
seven  days ;  that  he  removed  his  goods
from  one  place  to  another  in  sight  of  his
people ;  that  he  made  no  mourning  for
his  deceased  wife.  To  say,  on  the  other
hand,  that  all  are  to  be  taken  literally
seems  to  land  us  amid  insurmountable
difficulties,  such  as  that  he  lay  three
hundred  and  ninety  days  without  turn-
ing, while  he  is  during  that  period  to
make  and  bake  cakes  of  unprecedented
ingredients ;  and  also  that  he  was  to
burn  a  third  portion  of  his  shaved  hair
in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,  though  he
was  in  Tel-abib.  We  need  not  be
troubled  at  failing  to  find  a  satisfactory
decision  on  this  matter.  What  is  of
paramount  interest  is  to  find  the  mean-
ing involved  in  each  symbolical  act.
That  that  meaning  will  not  be  agreed  in
by  every  one  cannot  surprise  us.      A


large  element  of  indefiniteness  exists  in
all  symbolism,  and  men  of  different  dis-
positions will  create  images  of  unlike
contour  through  the  haze  of  the  inde-
finiteness. Nevertheless,  thoughts  may
be  expanded,  and  desires  for  light  and
guidance  excited  and  heightened,  as  well
as  deadened,  by  the  very  uncertainty.
Act-symbolism  exists  under  similar  con-
ditions as  word-symbolism.  "  To  you  it
is  given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the
kingdom  of  heaven,  but  to  others  in
parables."  "  By  hearing  ye  shall  hear
and  shall  not  understand,  and  seeing  ye
shall  see  and  shall  not  perceive."  With
inwrought  modesty,  and  prayers  for  the
opening  of  our  understanding  by  the
Holy  Si)irit,  should  all  Scripture-symbols
be  co!isidered.

The  four  symbolical  processes,  which
Ezekiel  is  here  required  to  employ,  form
parts  of  one  whole  presented  in  varying
phases.  That  whole  is,  Israel  given  up
to  punishment  for  sins.  The  coincidence
of  this  section  with  Lev.  xxvi.  is  note-
worthy. The  most  probable  explanation
thereof  is  that  Ezekiel  had  thoroughly
studied  the  picture  drawn  in  the  law
and  reproduced  its  salient  features
freely.

The  siege  of  Jerusalem  symbolised  (iv.
1-3).

Ver.  1.  *'  Take  thee  a  tile,"  or  a  brick,
shaped  in  clay  and  afterwards  dried
by  the  sun  or  burnt  in  a  fire.  Multi-
tudinous specimens,  of  the  kind  which
Ezekiel  was  to  use,  may  be  seen,  in
the  British  Museum,  with  letters  and
also  warlike  scenes  depicted  on  them.
"  And  pourtray  upon  it  the  city,"  or
rather  a  city,  which  is  immediately
specified  as  the  one  least  likely,  *'  Jeru-
salem."

Ver.  2.  "Build  a  fort  against  it."  An
instrument  of  ancient  warfare,  so  con-

43


CHAP.  IT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIBL,


structed  as  to  overtop  the  walls  of  the
besieged  place,  and  so  to  give  oppor-
tunity for  the  besiegers  to  reach  the
defenders  with  their  weapons.  "  And
cast  a  mount  against  it."  Raise  an
embankment  from  wliich  to  attack
advantageously.  "And  set  battering-
rams  against  it  round  about."  Beams
suspended  so  as  to  be  readily  driven
against  the  walls.  "At  Kouynijik  there
is  the  monument  of  the  siege  of  an  im-
portant city  in  which  no  less  than  seven
battering-rams  are  employed." — Layard.
The  prophet  is  to  regard  himself  as  doing
that  which  he  pourtrays  on  the  tile.
He  acts  under  commission  from  God,
and  so  it  is  the  Lord  Himself  who
is  to  be  viewed  as  operating  against
Jerusalem  by  means  of  the  Chaldean
army.

Ver.  3.  *'  Take  unto  thee  an  iron  pan.**
A  common  utensil  for  cooking  in  the
East.  It  was  to  be  fixed  perpendicularly,
as  "  a  wall  of  iron  between  thee  and
the  city.''  A  separation  was  thus  made
between  the  prophet  and  the  city,  and
the  iron  pan  symbolised  the  barrier
which  had  been  produced  between  the
Lord  and  His  unfaithful  people.  "  The
decree  and  the  sentence  of  God  asjainst
them  would  be  rigidly  carried  out,  and
God  would  not  hear  their  prayers  and
complaints  and  bend  to  them  in  mercy.
How  far  they  must  have  degenerated
for  Him  to  deal  thus!*'  "And  thou
Shalt  lay  siege  against  it."  The  siege
would  be  in  Ezekiel's  lifetime,  and  by
him  as  acting  for  the  Lord.  So  it  is
declared  that  "this  shall  be  a  sign  to  the
house  of  Israel,"  Le.^  to  the  twelve  tribes
scattered  abroad,  both  those  in  captivity
and  the  remnant  still  in  their  native
land.  In  the  time  of  Ezekiel  the  dis-
tinction between  the  ten  tribes  and  the
two  tribes  was  fast  disappearing.  A
trace  of  its  existence  is  still  seen  in  vers.
5  and  6,  but  rather  as  a  relic  irom  the
past  than  a  reality  of  the  present.  When
the  ten  tribes  were  led  into  captivity
Judah  represented  all  Israel,  and  in  the
course  of  time  the  remainders  of  the
several  tribes  were  amalgamated  with
Judah.  This  event  is  not  dimly  pre-
dicted in  Jeremiah's  words,  "  The  house
of  Judah  shall  walk  with  the  house  of
44


Israel,  and  they  shall  come  together  out
of  the  land  of  the  north  to  the  land  that
I  have  given  for  an  inheritance  unto
your  fathers"  (iii.  18).  All  attempts  to
show  that  the  lost  ten  tribes  have  been
found,  or  hopes  that  they  may  be,  must
be  dismissed  as  based  on  untenable  sur-
mises.

The  period  of  punishment  symbolised
(iv.  4-8).

Ver.  4.  "  Lie  thou  also  upon  thy  left
side."  The  posture  which  Ezekiel  has
to  assume  of  lying  continuously  for  a
lengthened  time  on  the  same  side  is  a
picture  of  the  low  condition  of  the
people,  not  only  throughout  the  siege  of
Jerusalem,  but  in  the  whole  period  of
chastisement.  The  prophet  becomes
their  representative  here,  not,  as  in  vers.
1-3,  that  of  the  Lord.  In  taking  that
unshifting  posture,  he  must  be  open  to
no  slight  suffering,  **  and,"  so  it  is  added,
"  lay  the  inictuity  of  the  house  of  Israel
upon  it."  He  is  one  of  them,  and  shares
the  punishment  of  their  guilty  conduct
for  the  allotted  time — a  symbol  of  penalty,
not  of  expiation.  Thus,  too,  "  thou  shalt
bear  their  iniquity,"  is  not  to  be  ex-
plained as  meaning  that  his  action  was
to  signify  the  forbearance  of  God  while
the  people  were  sinning,  but  the  inflic-
tion of  chastisement  because  of  sins  they
had  committed.

Ver.  5.  "  For  I  have  laid  upon,"  or
I  have  given,  "  thee  the  years  of  their
iniquity  according  to  the  number  of  the
days."  The  Lord  had  defined  the  limit
of  time  beyond  which  the  punishment
of  Israel  would  not  go,  and  He  required
the  prophet  to  be  subject  to  the  con-
straint of  lying  on  his  left  side  for  the
number  of  days  corresponding  to  the
years  during  which  Israel  would  bear
their  iniquity.  A  similar  posture  was
to  be  taken  for  Judah.

Ver.  6.  "  Lie  again  on  thy  right  side,
and  thou  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of  the
house  of  Judah  forty  days."  Any  ex-
planations, referring  the  three  hundred
and  ninety  and  the  forty  days  to  events
which  took  place  before  the  degradation
of  the  Israelitish  people  from  their
national  position,  are  forbidden  by  the
fact  that  Ezekiel  is  to  exhibit  what  ia
to    happen.      The  children  are  to  bear


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


ohaf.  it.


stripes  for  the  unfaithfulness  of  thefr
fathers.  The  duration  of  the  punish-
ment threatened — four  hundred  and
thirty  years — is  obviously  related  to  the
bondage  of  the  chosen  people  in  Egypt
and  their  wanderings  in  the  wilderness.
The  condition  into  which  they  would
fall  would  involve  a  suffering  for  their
sins  comparable  to  that  '*  hardship  and
discipline  which  had  of  old  been  laid
upon  their  fathers,"  and  illustrative  of
the  Deuteronomic  prediction,  "  The  Lord
shall  bring  thee  into  Egypt  again,"  &c.
(Deut.  xxviii.  68).  Moreover,  as  the
ten  tribes  had  forsaken  the  worship
appointed  by  their  God,  in  a  way  that
Judah  had  not,  the  period  of  suffering
to  the  former  is  prolonged  far  beyond
that  designated  to  the  latter.  But  no
satisfactory  elucidation  of  the  two  dates,
as  exact  points  of  chronology,  is  forth-
coming. It  is  best,  perhaps,  to  regard
both  as  symbolical  of  a  lengtliened  time
of  punishment  such  as  might  be  paral-
leled by  the  servitude  in  Egypt,  and  also
of  a  brief  term  of  punishment  such  as
might  be  compared  with  the  trials  of  the
sojourn  in  the  desert.  And  while  the
sojourn  in  the  desert  was  the  passage
from  slavishness  to  freedom,  from  igno-
rance to  knowledge  of  God*s  laws,  so  the
privations  and  calamities  befalling  Judah
for  forty  years  would  be  an  education
out  of  which  hope  and  peace  would
come.  The  captive  Israelites  would  thus
be  taught  that  only  in  association  with
the  captive  Jews  could  they  look  for
shortened  suffering  and  following  bless-
ing. *'  I  have  appointed  thee  each  day
for  a  year."  A  reference  to  the  judg-
ment passed  upon  the  tribes  of  Israel
for  their  murmurings  on  account  of  the
report  of  the  spies.  "After  the  number
of  the  days  in  which  ye  searched  the
land,  even  forty  days,  each  day  for  a
year,  shall  ye  bear  your  iniquities,  even
forty  years "  (Num.  xiv.  34).  Thus
past  history  is  used  to  represent  the
future — what  God  has  done  in  respect
to  sins  God  will  do.

Ver.  7.  "Thine  arm  shall  be  un-
covered." The  meaning  of  this  figure,
drawn  from  ancient  habits  in  war,  may
be  taken  to  be  that  action  was  to  be  pro-
ceeded with — that  the  allotted  penalties


were  to  be  now  begun.  By  this  gesture
and  the  preceding  actions  "  thou  shalt
prophesy  against  it,"  ie.,  Jerusalem,
as  representative  of  the  whole  house  of
Israel.

Ver.  8.  "Behold  I  will  lay  bands
upon  thee  "  (of.  iii.  25).  It  was  the  Lord
who  put  Ezekiel  under  constraint,  and
he  could  not  act  as  a  reprover  till  his
mouth  was  opened  by  divine  sanction.
Was  his  constraint  embodied  in  some
form  of  disease,  first  in  his  left  side  and
then  in  his  right  ?  Was  it,  like  Paulas
thorn  in  the  flesh,  an  "infirmity"  which
the  Lord  would  not  cause  to  depart?
"And,"  so  it  is  said,  "thou  shalt  not
turn  thee  from  one  side  to  another."
There  will  be  no  averting  of  the  punish-
ment and  no  relaxation  of  it,  "  till  thou
hast  ended  the  days  of  thy  siege,"
accomplished  the  full  time  of  being  a
sign  to  Israel,

This  paragraph  exhibits  one  of  the
characteristics  of  Ezekiel  as  a  prophet,
viz.,  his  tendency  to  describe  surround-
ing and  future  circumstances  by  terms
and  events  found  in  the  byegone  course
of  the  Lord's  people.  The  fact  of  his
exile,  and  apparently  cast  out  of  the
covenant  which  carried  the  destinies  of
Israel,  moved  him  to  dwell  upon  the
past  dealings  of  God  to  such  a  degree
that  he  thought  and  felt  about  all  the
matters  which  came  before  him  in  the
light  and  forms  of  preceding  times.  But
this  tendency  does  not  warrant  us  to  be-
lieve that  the  present  and  future  should
go  on  in  the  very  grooves  in  which  the
past  had  left  its  traces :  rather  it  helps
us  to  see  that  He  who  had  begun  His
wise  and  good  work  for  Israel  would
carry  it  on  without  change  of  direction.
Ezekiel  is  to  show  that  the  austere  and
stern  aspects  of  God  had  not  been  oblite-
rated by  the  years  in  which  He  had
borne  the  sins  of  His  people  patiently,
and  that  the  light  of  His  countenance
had  not  been  forever  withdrawn  because
of  their  failures  in  obedience  to  His
will.  The  commentator  who  would  treat
EzekiePs  prophecies  as  if  they  must  be
expounded  literally  and  not  with  great
freedom,  is  least  of  all  likely  to  unfold
their  true  interpretation.  "  The  eye
that  can  look  through  the  shell  into  the

46


CHAP.  IT.  BOMtLETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


kernel  may  see  the  future  things  of  image  of  what  is  to  be,  yet  its  essential
God's  administration  mirrored  in  the  character  and  necessary  result." — Fair-
past — not,  indeed,  the  exact  copy  and      bairn,

HOMILETIGS.
GoD*s  Action  against  Iniquities  in  a  People.

L  It  is  carried  on  by  various  agencies.     The  cloud,  the  fire,  the  implements,

the  composite  beings  of  Ezekiel's  inaugurating  vision,  are  all  ruled  from  the
sapphire  throne,  and  Ezekiel  is  made  as  a  central  figure  round  which  their
operations  proceed.  By  him  and  in  him  the  Lord  shows  that  pains  and  disabilities,
soldiers  and  military  materials,  carry  out  His  will  and  visit  for  iniquities.  People
professing  His  name  must  know  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  chance,  accident,
human  ambition,  or  forces  apart  from  His  directing  word.  The  operator  at  the
telegraph  clock  transmits  the  message  which  another  person  hands  to  him ;  so
Ezekiel  or  the  army  of  Nebuchadnezzar  carries  out  what  the  righteous  God  has
decided  on.  Whether  the  earth  rejoices  or  trembles,  everything  that  produces  the
one  state  or  the  other  is  "  created  "  by  the  Lord  who  reigneth.  For  every  sin  there
is  not  only  an  adapted  penalty  but  a  suitable  agency  for  inflicting  the  penalty.
How  many  a  trouble,  in  State  or  Church  or  individuals,  would  lose  its  aspect  of
incomprehensibleness,  if  faith  would  but  say,  "The  Lord  is  there  and  He  is  too  wise
to  mistake."

II.  It  is  resolute.  No  secondary  agent  which  He  employs  will  fail  in  execut-
ing that  whereto  He  has  sent  it.  Ezekiel  is  laid  under  unrelaxing  bands  till  he
has  fulfilled  the  time  appointed,  and  the  Chaldean  forces  will  be  kept  persistently
besieging  Jerusalem  till  the  sacred  city  is  subjugated.  The  Lord  will  not  be  turned
aside.  He  will  not  stop  halfway  to  what  He  has  purposed  to  effect.  "  Because
sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  men's  hearts  are  fully  set  in
them  to  do  evil;"  and  should  God  refrain  to  strike  when  His  righteousness  and
mercy  have  been  set  at  nought,  what  would  happen  but.  that  His  people  would
become  incredulous  as  to  His  sincerity  in  denouncing  sin,  and  be  uninstructed  as
to  its  real  heiiiousness  in  His  view?  He  does  not  spare  the  rod  because  of  the
mere  crying  of  His  children,  since  His  hatred  to  sin  and  regard  to  holiness  never
change — change  what  else  may.  Whatsoever  His  hand  and  His  counsel  deter-
mined before  to  be  done  against  His  holy  child,  Jesus,  He  will  accomplish,  even
though  it  be  by  wicked  hands.     God  is  faithful.

III.  It  is  impartial.  All  who  are  involved  in  the  common  sin  are  the  objects
of  suffering — rich  and  poor,  free  and  bond,  priest  and  prophet.  Israel  was  His
chosen  people,  Jerusalem  the  place  where  His  honour  dwelt ;  but  great  religious
privileges  did  not  shelter  them  from  God's  "  vengeance  "  when  they  neglected  and
rejected  His  ways.  From  the  Churches  of  Christ,  from  the  families  of  the  godly,
from  private  rooms  and  bended  knees  men  have  gone  into  paths  of  sin,  and  shall
they  escape  ?  No  ;  they  shall  be  overtaken  by  suffering  and  woe  in  some  form  or
other,  as  certainly,  if  not  more  so,  than  men  who  never  heard  of  the  Christ  of  God.
Boast  of  being  perfect  in  love,  of  divine  right  on  your  side,  if  you  will ;  but  be
sure  that  no  persuasion  of  sanctity  or  superiority  will  avert  from  you  the  messen-
gers appointed  by  God  to  chastise  you  for  evil  yielded  to.

IV.  It  is  according  to  established  order.  Every  generation  of  His  children
must  learn  that  the  evil  He  has  hated  He  will  always  hate.  What  God  has  done
God  will  do  again  when  the  same  moral  procedure  is  maintained  by  men.  Our
days  of  levity  and  hardness  of  heart  and  backslidings  take  us  on  to  days  of  dead-
ness  and  dishonour  as  indubitably  as  days  of  heat  lead  on  to  days  of  cold.  We
may  see  the  consequences  which  shall  follow  our  pride,  our  wrong  companionships,
our  neglect  of  the  ways  of  Christ,  in  the  bitter  griefs  and  pangs  which  befell  Israel ;

46


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


CHAP,  IT.


the  scenery  in  which  we  suffer,  and  the  agencies  which  act  there  may  be  utterly
unlike  those  of  ancient  Judea  or  Clialdea,  but  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  is  our  Holy
One.  In  the  old  centuries  the  judgment  of  God  was  according  to  truth:  it  is  so
in  modern  centuries.  **  Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever;  a  sceptre  of
righteousness  is  the  sceptre  of  Thy  kingdom."

V.  It  is  proportionate.  It  is  the  action  of  the  Just  One,  and  takes  steps  in
proportion  to  the  nature  and  persistence  of  the  offences  against  Him.  Light
neglected  or  misused  prepares  for  the  greater  condemnation.  Sodom  is  under  an
easier  punishment  than  Chorazin,  Judah  than  Israel.  Ezekiel  could  not  appor-
tion the  just  time  of  tribulation — that  is  ever  the  prerogative  of  the  Almighty
King — but  Ezekiel  could  be  made  to  state  and  display  His  holy  sentences.  No
doubt  He  allows  excuses  where  they  can  be  legitimately  made ;  but  that  is  only
another  form  of  saying  that  He  weighs  the  doings  of  His  people  in  scales  in  which
no  undue  element  is  present.  Then  He  gives  forth  His  decision  for  hundreds  of
years  or  for  tens — for  half  a  lifetime  or  for  a  few  weeks.  Not  a  day  beyond  what
is  right  and  fair  will  any  transgressor  be  afflicted.  What  trust  and  submission
#hould  not  be  given  to  the  God  of  all  spirits  I


Scanty  means  of  subsistence  symbolising  punishment  (chap.  iv.  9—17).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  9.
The  several  sorts  of  vegetable  food — the
richest  and  the  poorest  in  nutritive  ele-
ments— being  placed  "  in  one  vessel,"
signified  that  all  classes  of  the  popula-
tion would  be  obliged  to  gather  every
particle  they  could,  and  then  find  it
difficult  to  obtain  suflScient  provisions.
The  "  bread  "  from  such  a  mixture  was
to  be  made  by  Ezekiel  in  a  quantity
corresponding  to  *' the  number  of  the
days  that  thou  shalt  be  on  thy  side,
three  hundred  and  ninety  days."  This
is  the  period  of  Israel's  punishment  as
referred  to  in  ver.  5.  It  is  a  sign  of  the
time  during  which  the  ten  tribes  should
remain  in  captivity  among  the  Gentiles,
and  of  the  low  estate  in  which  they
would  be  there.

Ver.  10.  Of  the  prescribed  food  Eze-
kiel was  to  "  eat  by  weight  twenty
shekels  a  day,"  somewhere  about  ten
ounces  of  English  measure,  and  a  very
scanty  portion  for  ordinary  healthful
nourishment ;  but,  as  in  instances  of
shipwreck  and  sieges,  meant  to  maintain
life  as  long  as  possible — "too  much  for
dying,  too  little  for  living."  *'  From
time  to  time  shalt  thou  eat  it : "  not
to  make  one  poor  meal,  but  to  take  a
*'  ration  "  at  stated  intervals.

Ver.  11.  So  also  "  thou  shalt  drink
water  by  measure,  the  sixth  part  of  a
hin" — about  a  pint,  and  sadly  insufficient
for  a  climate  like  that  of  Central  Asia.


Ver.  12.  The  food  was  to  be  eaten,  as
common  "  barley  cakes  "  still  are  in  the
East,  after  having  been  baked  in  hot
ashes ;  but  with  a  strange  peculiarity,
*'  thou  shalt  bake  it  with  dung  that
Cometh  out  of  man  "  {cf.  Isa.  xxxii.  12).
The  dung  was  not  to  be  used  as  an
ingredient  of  the  cakes,  as  has  been
strangely  supposed,  but  of  the  fuel.
The  use  of  human  ordure  in  fuel  was
not  practised,  and  the  order  to  employ  it
was  meant  to  indicate  "  in  their  sight"
— for  clear  and  deep  impression — that
which  is  stated  in

Ver.  13.  "The  Lord  said.  Even  thus
shall  the  children  of  Israel  eat  their
defiled  bread  among  the  Gentiles."
The  children  of  Israel  would  find  them-
selves, during  the  period  of  their  cap-
tivity, in  such  a  condition  that  the  laws
of  Moses  in  reference  to  foods  could
hardly  be  kept.  They  would  have  to
eat  their  bread  defiled — what  their  soula
might  loathe — and  so  would  become  al-
most as  the  heathen.  They  would  not
be  able  to  boast  of  their  special  separate-
ness.

Ver.  14.  Ezekiel  had  submissively
accepted  the  divine  appointments  hither-
to—  he  makes  a  protest  now.  "Then  said
I,  Ah  Lord  God!  behold,  my  soul  hath
not  been  polluted;"  and  he  goes  on  to
specify  certain  kinds  of  forbidden  food
from  which  he  had  rigidly  abstained.
The  rigidness  was  all  the  more  appro-

47


CHAP.  IT.


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


priate  in  tliat  Ezekiel  was  dwelling  in  a
heathen  country.  By  means  of  adhering
to  all  ritual  observances  a  fence  was
planted  round  Israel  against  the  en-
croachment of  conquering  heathendom,
and  the  prophet  was  a  rallying-point  for
strength  to  the  exiled  people  when  they
strove  to  live  not  as  did  the  heathens.
The  observance  of  legal  institutions  that
could  be  observed  outside  of  the  Holy
Land  was  consistently  maintained  by
Ezekiel,  and  he  argues  from  the  particular
commands  in  reference  to  foods  to  the
general  obligation  which  he  acknowledged
in  reference  to  everything  by  which  he
would  have  been  consciously  defiled.  It
is  the  appeal  of  a  servant  who  has  gone
far  beyond  obedience  to  the  mere  letter —
who  is  sensitively  alive  to  being  clean  in
heart  as  well  as  in  act — who  would  shun
the  appearance  of  evil.  For  he  could
not  plead  any  commandment  prohibiting
the  use  of  the  prescribed  fuel ;  he  could
make  a  plea  only  from  his  own  disgust,
which  was  not  simply  that  of  his  senses,
but  also  of  his  moral  feelings.  It  is  no
sign  of  priestism  in  Ezekiel.  Peter  the
apostle,  who  was  not  a  priest,  showed
something  of  the  same  spirit.  But  the
case  of  Peter  (Acts  x.  14),  who  was  not
a  captive,  is  not  altogether  parallel  to
this.  The  only  point  of  similarity  is  that
Peter  had  "  not  eaten  anything  common
or  unclean."

Ver.  15.  The  answer  to  EzekiePs  pro-
test is  a  relaxation  of  the  original  order.
''Then  he  said  unto  me,  Lo  I  have
given  thee  cow's  dung  for  man's  dung."
Nothing  is  more  usual  in  those  parts  of
the  East  than  to  observe  cow's  dung,
mixed  with  grass,  straw,  <fec.,  made  up
into  fuel  for  cooking.  It  is  not  likely
that  Ezekiel,  any  more  than  his  neigh-


bours, would  consider  himself  polluted
by  eating  cakes  baked  with  this  inodorous
material,  and  so  he  makes  no  objection
to  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt  prepare
thy  bread  therewith."

Ver.  16.  "I  will  break  the  staff  of
bread  in  Jerusalem."  This  alludes  to
the  forty  days  during  which  Ezekiel  was
to  lie  on  his  right  side,  and  signified
that,  in  the  period  of  Judah's  sufferings
corresponding  thereto,  a  lack  of  sufficient
nourishment  to  sustain  activities  with
energy  would  be  experienced.  The  bread
would  not  be  polluted,  as  the  bread  given
in  the  wilderness  was  not  polluted,  by
the  place ;  but  as  the  natural  supply
found  there  was  not  sufficient  for  the
wants  of  a  multitude,  so  the  supplies
for  Judah  would  be  marked  by  scanti-
ness :  still  the  punishment  would  not
be  so  severe  or  so  continuous  as  that  of
Israel.  It  was  that  of  a  remnanty  and
would  be  "  cut  short  in  righteousness."
In  the  besieged  city  "they  shall  eat
bread  by  weight  and  with  care,'*  aa
those  who  are  hard  put  to  and  anxious ;
"  they  shall  drink  water  by  measure
and  with  astonishment,"  as  in  perplexed
wonder  whether  and  when  the  sources
would  run  dry.

Ver.  17.  The  Lord  had  reason  for
this  procedure.  His  broken  covenant
necessitated  that  they  should  feel  a
deficiency  of  "bread  and  water,  and
be  astonied,"  be  in  perplexity  and
wonder,  "  one  with  another,"  each  and
all,  "and  consume  away,"  become
gaunt  and  offensive,  "for  their  ini-
(luity."  Hunger  and  thirst,  sorrow
and  dismay,  would  fall  upon  the  sinners
in  Zion,  as  the  ancient  book  of  the  law
had  threatened  (Lev.  zzvi.  89).


HOMILETICS.
God's  Action  against  Iniquities  Affecting  His  Servants.

1.  Servants  who  know  the  LorcVs  will  and  do  it  not  sink  into  destitution  and  perih
similar  to  theirs  icho  sit  in  darkness  and  have  no  light  This  aggravation  of  the
misery  cannot  but  be  experienced,  viz.,  contrast  with  the  blessings  which  they  have
forfeited  by  misuse.  Israel  had  rejected  its  God,  had  chosen  the  way  of  the  heathen,
and  having  thus  broken  the  conditions  of  its  covenant  with  God,  nothing  remained
but  that  it  should  be  treated  as  the  heathen.  The  son  has  left  his  father's  house,
wasted  his  substance,  fallen  into  want,  and  is  on  the  verge  of  perishing  with  hunger,
48


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  it.


Not  the  worthiness  of  godly  friends,  not  the  calling  ourselves  Christians,  not  obser-
Tance  of  the  external  rites  of  worship  can  hinder  from  entering  into  the  state  of
those  "who  live  as  without  God  in  the  world.  A  professedly  Christian  nation  may
be  largely  affected  by  commercial  depression,  sorrow,  despondency,  doubt,  and  dark
fears  for  the  future,  if  it  is  not  true  to  God.  The  statement  is  sometimes  made
that  Christian  nations  are  no  better  than  heathen  nations,  and  the  grounds  for  it,
if  we  could  see  clearly,  might  be  perceived  in  some  indifference,  neglect,  antagonism
to  the  holy,  just,  and  good  law  of  Gt)d.  All  evil  tilings  which  transpire  prove
that  He  will  not  be  mocked ;  least  of  all  by  those  to  whom  He  has  manifested  His
righteousness  and  love.  They  must  bear  the  fate  of  the  heathen,  whatever  be  their
surprise  and  repugnance  at  what  is  undergone.

2.  Servants  who  do  His  will  are  subjected  to  trials  in  common  with  those  hy  whom
they  are  surrounded.  The  bands  which  bind  men  into  society  are  not  forged  so
as  to  allow  an  escape,  from  evils  which  are  rife  in  the  community,  for  one  of  its
constituent  parts.  They  who  fear  the  Lord  fall  into  straitness,  hunger,  become
weakly,  if  the  circumstances  in  which  they  dwell  are  replete  with  the  influences
which  produce  such  effects.  Innocent  children  suffer  from  famine  as  well  as  men
whose  actions  have  contributed  to  the  intensity  of  the  famine ;  so  does  the  man
who  humbly  prays  for  relief  as  well  as  the  man  who  curses  the  hardships  he  has  to
put  up  with.  It  is  not  in  freedom  from  the  troubles  which  stir  in  their  environ-
ment that  the  sons  of  God  are  to  find  their  comfort ;  it  is  in  the  conviction  that  they
have  not  gone  with  a  multitude  to  do  evil,  and  that  God  writes  their  names  in  His
book  of  remembrance.  If  they  receive  good  in  society  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord,
■hall  they  not  receive  evil  also  ?

Every  one  who  wants  to  be  where  the  Supreme  Will  directs  him  to  be,  and  to
help  the  brothers  who  are  within  his  power  to  reach,  must  be  ready  to  encounter
pinchings,  disgusts,  wearying  hopes,  anguish  as  well  as  suflScient  grace.  The  Christ
must  needs  "  suffer  many  things  "  by  coming  amongst  men,  and  His  servants  who
would  walk  in  His  spirit  may  look  for  trials  which,  in  a  sense,  they  do  not  deserve.
Let  them  see  in  Ezekiel  one  who,  like  themselves,  had  neither  the  mission  nor  the
resources  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  be  instructed  to  take  up  and  endure  galling  burdens
for  the  welfare  of  the  people  in  whose  sufferings  they  are  associated.  Not  in  vain
shall  they  suffer  according  to  the  will  of  God.

"  Those  i)eriods  of  tribulation  and  chastisement,  which  the  prophet  here  repre-
sents, have  they  not  a  voice  for  other  times  1  .  .  .  The  lukewarm  and  fruitless
professor — so  long  as  he  cleaves  to  the  way  of  iniquity,  and  refuses  to  yield  a
hearty  surrender  to  the  will  of  God — is  in  bondage  to  the  elements  of  the  world,
and  therefore  can  have  no  part  in  that  good  land  which  floweth  with  milk  and
honey.  The  doom  of  Heaven's  condemnation  bangs  suspended  over  his  head  ;  and
if  not  averted  by  a  timely  submission  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  a  cordial
entrance  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant,  he  shall  infallibly  perish  in  the  wilderness
of  sin  and  death." — Fairhairn.

Sensitiveness  to  Spiritual  Evil  (Chap,  iv.  1215).

Burden-bearing  with  others,  and  to  any  extent  for  them,  may  expose  to  unplea-
sant associations  and  proceedings.  Past  habits  nnd  confirmed  tastes  may  receive
shocks  which  are  hard  to  withstand.  Yet  the  duty  has  to  be  done  for  the  Lord.
In  such  difficulties  against  service  we  must  not  accept  their  darkest  aspects.  We
must  learn  to  apply  our  natural  shrinking  from  what  is  unpleasant  to  the  case  before
us,  and  proceed  according  to  the  light  which  may  be  given  to  us.  Our  sensitive-
ness to  atiy thing  that  we  feel  unbecoming  should  inform  us —

1.  That  we  have  to  maintain  past  faithfulness  to  duty.  Ezekiel  did  not  like  the
thought  of  turning  out  of  the  way  in  which  he  had  hitherto  walked  and  kept  him-
self pure.     It  was  no  ignoble  consistency  he  was  desirous  to  preserve.     Consistency

D  49


CHAP.  IV.  HO  Ml  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


may  be  a  fault  when  it  weds  us  to  what  is  unwise  and  not  truly  kind.  It  is  a  grand
thing  when  it  impresses  the  need  of  being  able  to  hold  ourselves  in  self-respect  by
being  obedient  to  what  we  regard  as  right  and  sacred.  What  more  honourable  in  a
young  man  than  that  he  will  say,  "  I  have  not  been  discredited  by  low  and  offensive
habits,  and  I  shrink  from  them  with  loathing"?  Or  for  a  man,  who  is  known  to
profess  allegiance  to  Christ  the  King,  to  say,  "I  have  not  been  contracting  the
taints  of  the  spirit  of  the  world  ;  I  have  not  been  a  cause  of  reproach  to  the  Blessed
Name  by  my  cold  disregard  of  the  interests  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  I  shudder
at  the  idea  of  doing  anything  which  will  seem  contrary  to  my  past  conduct'"?
Yet  there  may  be  something  more.  There  may  be  such  a  susceptibility  to  the
appearance  of  evil  that  men  will  deprecate  being  taken  into  a  course  on  which
they  may  have  to  touch  that  which  is  not  morally  wrong,  but  which  offends  their
taste  for  what  is  spiritually  pure.  It  is  bad  to  have  one  string  out  of  tune.  In
seeking  our  own  improvement,  a  book  whose  suggestions  are  not  altogether  true  and
holy  could  be  read  ;  in  seeking  the  best  way  of  helping  others  we  might  see  unclean
courts  and  houses,  and  contact  with  smutty  persons  might  appear  in  view.  What
man  or  woman,  sensitive  to  the  continuance  of  their  pureness  of  thought  and  con-
duct, would  not  rise  up  with  the  cry,  *'  O  my  soul !  come  not  thou  into  their  secrets;
unto  their  assembly,  mine  honour,  be  not  thou  united"?  Bypast  separateness  from
evil  becomes  a  ground  from  which  to  act  against  approaching,  apparently  defiling
influences.  The  man  who  has  lived  "unspotted  from  the  world"  will  not  readily
reconcile  himself  to  step  into  a  place  where  his  garments  may  become  soiled.  His
faithfulness  heretofore  to  the  requirements  of  the  holy  law  will  impel  him  to  repu-
diate what  might  seem  to  defile  him  now.

How  blessed  would  this  earth  be  if  the  hearts  of  all  people  deprecated  every-
thing which  would  lower  the  standard  of  moral  taste  or  shake  confidence  in  the
prosecution  of  the  high  prize  of  a  stainless  life  !

2.   That  we  should  regard  our  inward  feelings  as  well  as  the  external  act  in
respect  to  what  is  required  of  us.    The  inward  is  not  to  he  sullied.     The  Master's  deci-
sion has  for  ever  placed  the  state  of  men's  hearts  in  a  more  important  position  than
that  of  their  words  and  deeds.     That  which  comes  out  of  the  heart  is  that  which
defiles,  and  every  one  who  would  be  as  his  Master  must  endeavour  to  keep  the  heart
so  clean  as  that  no  pollution  shall  mingle  in  its  movements.     It  is  a  true  stimulus  to
struggling  believers  to  hear,  from  the  lips  of  one  of  ancient  days,  such  an  appeal  as
this  of  the  burdened  prophet.    How  it  may  urge  us  to  guard  our  acquired  sensitiveness
to  defiling  acts,  to  keep  that  which  we  have  already  attained,  and  long  to  be  pre-
vented from  all  filthiness  of  the  spirit,  so  as  to  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord !
The  outward  is  not  to  he  accepted  without  appeal.      The   hard   and   irksome
processes  ap[)ointed  for  Ezekiel  might  be  entered  into  by  him,  but  he  wanted  part
of  them  to  be  less  unpleasant  and  trying  to  his  tender  conscience.     So  he  sought
for  an  alteration  in  the  requirement.     Thus  it  seems  that  what  is  the  present  will
of  God  may  not  be  followed  by  immediate  acquiescence.     An  attack  of  disease
does  not  compel  the  patient  to  say,  "  I  must  submit,  without  an  effort  to  get  rid
of  it."     The  disobedient  act  of  a  child,  which  must  be  punished,  does  not  demand
the  parent  to  inflict  that  kind  of  punisliment  against  which  the  child  revolts.     The
contents  of  that  cup,  in   which  the  venom  of  the  world's  sins  was  concentrated,
could  not  be  drank,  by  Him  who  came  on  purpose  to  drink  it,  without  a  cry  of
aversion   towards  the   awful   task  of  love.     And  we   are   bound  to  make  every
attempt  at  extrication  from  external  proceedings  with  which  we  have  to  do,  if  we
are  likely  to  suffer  any  moral  defilement  by  them.     **It  were  better  for  me  to  die
than  that  any  man  should  make  my  glorying  void."     But  no  outer  event  can  hurt
our  souls  unless  our  souls  turn  it  to  evil.

3.   That  alleviation  to  our  souls  will  he  granted  h//  God,     No  command  of  God
to  His  servants  can  have  an  element  in  it  which  will  really  deprave  their  souls.
Still  that  fact  does  not  dim  His  fatherly  pity  so  that  He  cannot  see  their  shrink-
50


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


CHAP.  V.


ings.  Let  a  change  not  disparage  His  justice,  holiness,  truth,  and  He  is  willing
to  alter  the  conditions  of  His  instructions,  and  make  them  less  dreadful  to  the
moral  fastidiousness  of  His  own.  He  has  a  respect  even  for  their  exaggerated
feelings,  and  in  His  wisdom  and  love  mitigates  that  which  pains  them.  He  pities
them  "like  a  father."  He  does  not  desire  to  impose  one  unnecessary  pang  upon
them.  They  may  ask  Him  for  whatsoever  alleviation  might  ease  their  trouble
and  revulsions,  in  the  hope  that  He  will  relax  the  stringency  of  His  demands,  if
He  does  not  renounce  them.  We  have  to  do  with  God,  who  has  tender  compassion
for  every  one  who  wants  to  be  pure  in  heart.  He  does  not  quench  the  smoking  flax.
"  Let  it  teach  us  not  to  be  rigid  and  stick  to  our  wills,  and  think  it  disparage-
ment to  abate  of  our  wills  and  right,  and  yield  to  others,  when  God,  who  is  infi-
nitely above  us,  can  yield  to  us,  and  doth  so  daily,  bearing  our  infirmities." —
GreenhilU


The  last  methods  of  punishment  symbolised  and  interpreted  (chap.  v.  1—17).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  — The  re-
quirements made  of  Ezekiel  still  pro-
ceed in  his  house.  Already  he  has  been
a  sign  that  Jerusalem  would  undergo  a
thorougii  siege ;  that  specified  periods
of  stringent  suffering  should  be  allotted
to  both  portions  of  the  house  of  Israel ;
that  hunger,  anxiety,  and  defilement
would  be  encountered;  and  furthermore,
he  is  to  be  a  sign  of  the  various  forms
of  penalty  which  should  be  incurred  as
the  closing  manifestations  of  the  Lord's
dealing  justly  with  iniquities.  In  this
case,  as  in  the  preceding  three,  we  ap-
pear necessitated,  by  the  very  conditions
of  the  requirement,  to  suppose  that
Ezekiel  could  not  be  expected  to  carry
on  literally  the  processes  assigned  to
him.  How  could  he,  in  the  disabled
state  to  which  he  must  have  been  re-
duced if  he  had  externally  obeyed  the
previous  requirements,  shave  his  head
and  beard  with  a  sword,  or  burn  the
appointed  part  of  hair  in  Jerusalem
itself?  Even  if  it  were  certain  that  he
could  do  so,  it  would  be  unbecoming  to
believe  that  the  Lord  Himself  literally
drew  a  sword  after  the  third  part  of
hair  which  was  scattered  to  the  wind.
Notwithstanding  these  difficulties,  we
are  sure  that  the  actuality  of  the  things
signified  was  somehow  conveyed  to  the
minds  of  his  captive  countrymen — the
method  of  doing  so  being  unknown.

Ver.  1.  "And  thou,  son  of  man,
take  thee  a  sharp  knife" — rather  sword^
as  in  the  end  of  ver.  2.  He  was  not,
besides  the  sword,  to  "take  a  barber's
razor, "  but  he  was  to  use  the  sword  as  a


barber's  razor.  A  closer  rendering  of
the  Hebrew  warrants  this  explanation.
"  A  razor  of  barbers  thou  shalt  take  it " —
i.e.,  the  sword,  as  the  gender  intimates —
"^0  thee ;^'  "and  cause  it  to  pass
npon  thine  head  and  thy  beard."  In
the  hands  of  an  earlier  prophet  the  use
of  a  razor  had  already  been  made  signi-
ficant of  punishnjent  by  the  Lord.  "  In
the  same  day  shall  the  Lord  shave  with
a  razor  that  is  hired  .  .  .  the  head  and
the  hair  of  the  feet ;  and  it  shall  also
consume  the  beard  "  (Isa.  vii.  20).
Moreover,  in  accordance  with  biblical
representations,  shaving  off  the  hair  of
the  head  and  beard  was  one  of  the  signs
of  mourning  and  reproach,  and,  besides,
it  was  forbidden  to  priests  (Lev.  xxi.  5).
God,  enjoining  a  priest  to  reverse  his
own  ritual  observance,  would  give  addi-
tional emphasis  to  the  keenness  of  the
calamity  shadowed  forth:  "then  take
thee  balances  to  weigh  and  divide"
(lit.)  "them,"  i.e.,  the  hair.  An  ap-
portionment of  distinct  sufferings  is  to
be  carefully  measured  out,  so  that  all
may  feel  "  the  judiciary  providence  of
God."  We  modify  the  words  of  an
old  Latin  commentator,  and  say,  "  The
sword  or  razor  sis^nifies  divine  ven-
geance,  the  head  the  city,  the  balances
its  equity,  and  the  hair  the  people  to
whom  punishments  shall  be  distributed."
Or,  as  Theodoret  says,  "The  sword  in-
dicates avenging  power,  the  sliaving  of
the  beard  the  removal  of  grace  and
glory,  the  scales  and  weights  the  deter-
mination of  divine  justice."

Ver.    2.    Ezekiel   is  commanded   to

61


OHAF.  T.


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


arrange  the  hair  iu  proportionate  parts,
and  to  dispose  of  each.  "  Thou  shalt
burn  with  fire" — in  a  flame — "  a  third
part  in  the  midst  of  the  city  " — in  the
midst  of  the  model  of  the  besieged  city
which  lay  before  him — "  when  the  days
of  the  siege  are  fulfilled" — when  the
days  for  his  symbolical  completion  of
the  siege  had  come  to  an  end ;  "  and
thou  shalt  take  a  third  part  and
smite  about  it" — i.e.,  the  city — *'with
a  knife,"  or  sword,  as  ver.  1 ;  '*  and  a
third  part  thou  shalt  scatter  in  the
wind."  The  rest  of  the  people  have
perished ;  this  third  alone  survives.  It
must,  therefore,  include  within  itself
both  the  poor,  who  might  be  left  un-
settled in  Jadea,  as  well  as  the  numbers
who  had  been  dispersed  among  otlier
countries.  And  there  seems  no  valid
objection  against  considering  that  it  in-
cluded the  people  of  a  more  distant
future  than  that  which  would  be  passed
through  by  the  living  generation.  The
lot  of  the  nation,  as  a  nation,  is  involved
in  the  action  of  the  Lord.  The  next
words  show  the  symbol  passing  into  a
reality,  while  an  intimation  of  sufferings
in  the  land  of  exile  is  made:  "and  I
will  draw  out  a  sword  after  them."
They  shall  not  escape  because  of  change
of  locality.  By  this  procedure  of  Ezekiel
three  kinds  of  punishment  are  set  forth.
One  part  of  the  people  dies  in  flames —
ver.  12  interprets  this  of  famine  and
disease ;  a  second  part  dies  in  flight,
sallies,  battles ;  the  surviving  part  be-
comes "  tribe  of  the  wandering  foot  and
weary  breast."  But  the  people  will  not
be  absorbed  or  obliterated.

Ver.  3.  ''  Thou  shalt  also  take
thereof" — from  that  scattered  portion
— *'  a  few  in  number,  and  bind  them  "
— this  "very  small  remnant"  of  hairs —
"in  thy  skirts,"  ends  of  his  garment.
God  has  to  fulfil  His  covenant  of  mercy;
seed  must  be  preserved  as  the  instru-
ments of  His  purposes ;  and  Ezekiel  is
required  to  signify,  by  caring  for  the
safety  of  a  few,  the  eternal  purpose  of
God.  But  even  of  this  few  not  all
would  be  delivered.

Ver.  4.   "  Then  take  of  them  again,
and  cast  them  into  the  midst  of  the
fire" — a  different  word  from  that  of  ver.
52


2,  and  signifying  a  somewhat  diverse
mode  of  suffering  about  to  befall  the
reduced  number  of  people.  They  were
not  all  right  in  heart,  the  best  were
tainted  and  needed  a  purgation,  a  proof
of  how  deplorable  was  the  spiritual  con-
dition of  the  surviving  people.  This
infliction  would  not  be  confined  to  the
unfaithful  among  the  gathered  ones  :
"thereof" — from  this  consuming  fire —
"shall  a  fire  come  forth  into  all  the
house  of  Israel :  "  the  doom  of  the  few
involves  the  doom  of  the  whole  people
as  such.  "  Judgment  must  begin  at  the
house  of  God,  and  what  shall  the  end
be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of
God  ? "  A  striking  parallel  to  this  de-
claration to  Ezekiel  is  found  in  Isaiah.
"  And  if  there  should  yet  be  a  tenth  in
it,  this  shall  again  be  consumed ;  (yet),
as  the  terebinth  and  the  oak,  though
cut  down,  have  their  stock  remaining,
(even  so)  a  sacred  seed  (shall  be)  the
stock  thereof"  (vi.  13). — Cheyne,

A  divine  interpretation  of  his  sym-
bolical action  is  given  to  Ezekiel.  He
hears  words  describing  the  guilt  of  and
the  judgments  which  shall  fall  upon
Jerusalem  and  his  people ;  and,  first  of
all,  there  is  conveyed  a  meaning  which
is  to  be  attached  to  Jerusalem,

Ver.  5.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God;
This  Jerusalem  " — it  is  unnecessary  to
supply  is — "I  have  set  it"  her,  "in  the
midst  of  the  nations  and  countries
that  are  round  about  her."  It  has
been  commtJU  for  nations,  whose  means
of  locomotion  are  neither  convenient  nor
rapid,  to  consider  their  country  the  cen-
tral point  around  which  other  countries
are  clustered.  Such  a  notion  might  have
been  accepted  by  the  Jews  in  reference
to  Judea ;  but  it  is  not  with  such  a
reference  that  the  situation  of  Jerusalem
is  specified  here.  In  explaining  this
reference  it  is  not  requisite  to  point  out
how  the  Holy  Land  stands  in  relation
to  Egypt  and  Syria,  to  Assyria  and  the
Isles  of  the  Gentiles.  We  decline  the
merely  local  limitations  as  not  expres-
sive of  the  fact  i;itimated,  while  we  still
perceive,  in  the  then  active  influences  of
the  world,  certain  advantages  adhering
to  the  site  which  Jerusalem  occupied.
The   true    interpretation    is    elsewherOi


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  T.


It  is  thus  stated  by  Keil :  *'  Jerusalem
is  described  as  forming  the  central  point
of  the  eartli,  neither  in  an  external,
geographical,  nor  in  a  purely  typical
sense,  as  the  city  that  is  blessed  more
than  any  other,  but  in  a  historical  sense,
in  so  far  as  '  God's  people  and  city  actu-
ally stand  in  the  central  point  of  the
God-directed  world-development  and  its
movements;'  or,  in  relation  to  the  his-
tory of  salvation,  as  the  city  in  which
God  hath  set  up  His  throne  of  grace,
from  which  shall  go  forth  the  law  and
the  statutes  for  all  nations,  in  order  that
the  salvation  of  the  whole  world  may  be
accomplished."

Ver.  6.  **  And  she  hath  changed" —
the  ordinary  usage  of  the  word  changed
refers  to  murmuring,  opposing,  rebelling
against,  or  some  such  action,  and  often
with  a  statement  of  the  object,  as  here,
against  which  the  act  ojjerates  —  she
rebelled  against  "my  judgments" —
though  they  were  known,  yet  were  they
so  disregarded  as  to  incur  the  crime  of
turning  them  *'into  wickedness  more
than  the  nations  " — to  a  degree  of  evil
which  even  the  heathen  could  not  be
charged  with,  "and"  she  rebelled  against
"  my  statutes  more  than  the  countries
that  are  round  about  her;  for  they" —
of  this  Jerusalem — "have  refused  my
judgments  " — with  a  kind  of  disdain —
"and  my  statutes  they  have  not
walked  in  them."  The  penalty  of  such
a  course  follows.

Ver.  7.  "Therefore  thus  saith  the
Lord  God  ;"  but  before  announcing  the
doom  an  emphatic  presentation  of  their
unhallowed  conduct  is  made;  "Because
ye  multiplied" — a  somewhat  infelicitous
rendering  of  a  difficult  term,  for  which
a  translation  like  "  ye  raged  "  is  better,
i.e.,  made  a  turmoil  in  acting  as  rebels —
"  more  than  the  nations  that  are  round
about  you,"  and  "  have  not  walked  in
my  statutes,  neither  have  kept  my
judgments,  neither  have  done  accord-
ing to  the  judgments" — laws  and  ways
of  living  and  worshipping — "of  the
nations  that"  are  "round  about  you."
Further  on  (chap.  xi.  12)  Ezekiel  accuses
the  people  thus,  "  Ye  have  done  after
the  manners  (lit.  judgments)  of  the
heathen   that   are   round    about  you,"


There  is  no  real  contradiction  between
the  two  representations.  The  heathen
pursued  courses  which  were  opposed  to
God's  will,  and  Israel  did  the  same ;  but
the  former  showed  also  that  the  word
of  the  law  was  written  in  their  heart,
and,  so  far  as  they  had  obeyed  that
transcript,  they  had  done  that  which
Israel  had  not  done.  Israel  had  resisted
both  revealed  and  natural  obligations.

Ver.  8.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  the
Lord  God" — the  suspended  threatening
is  now  pronounced — "Behold  I,  even  I,
am  against  thee  " — a  solemn  assevera-
tion that  the  covenanted  relationship  to
the  Lord,  however  boasted  of,  would  not
shield  from  the  punishment  due  to  Israel
for  their  violation  of  the  covenant.  He
would  prove  that  He  was  not  a  dead
God — a  mere  name  of  power  and  holi-
ness— "  and  will  execute  judgments  in
the  midst  of  them" — the  means  of
punishment  shall  be  forthcoming  and
effective  "in  the  sight  of  the"  heathen
"  nations."  Thus  one  aspect  of  retribu-
tive justice  is  unfolded — it  will  be  public :
the  heathen  shall  know  that  He  is  Lord
by  the  judgment  which  He  executeth.
Another  is  presented — it  is  exceptional.

Ver.  9.  "  And  I  will  do  in  thee  that
which  I  have  not  done,  and  whereunto
I  will  not  do  any  more  the  like" —
there  would  be  peculiarities  in  the  woes
which  should  befall  Israel  that  would  be
marked  as  unique  throughout  all  time.
If  acts  as  shocking  as  those  referred  to
in  next  verse  are  observed  in  the  dis-
tressed periods  of  other  nations,  we  must
remember  that  when  a  wife  or  child  is
expelled  from  the  home,  the  calamity,
though  similar,  is  far  worse  than  when  a
guest  or  servant  is  expelled.  Such  was
the  relation  of  Israel  to  God  that  their
punishment  had  elements  of  horror  in  it
which  the  same  suffering  happening  to
another  people  had  not.  The  primary
reference  of  the  threatening  is  clearly  to
the  then  existing  Israel,  but  seems  to  be
applied  by  the  Lord  Jesus  to  that  genera-
tion of  the  Jews  who  were  suV)jected  to
terrible  calamities  when  Jerusalem  was
besieged  and  destroyed  by  the  Romans.
"  Then  the  tribulation  shall  be  such  as
was  not  since  the  beginning  of  the  world,
nor  ever  shall  be  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  21) —

63


CHAP.  ▼.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


**  because  of  all  thine  abominations  " —
a  frequently  used  word,  expressing  actions
and  habits  which,  however  conimon  and
palliated,  were  such  as  the  Lord  could  not
endure  to  hear  and  see  in  His  professed
people — each  sin  had  done  harm  and
each  would  be  reckoned  in.

Ver.  10.  The  punishment  will  be
characterised  by  such  intensity  of  suiOfer-
ing  that  family  ties  will  be  ruthlessly
disrupted.  ^*  The  fathers  shall  eat  the
sons,"  as  had  been  predicted  should
come  to  pass  if  they  would  not  hearken
to  the  Lord,  but  walked  contrary  to
Him  (Lev.  xxvi.  29),  "and  the  sons
shall  eat  their  fathers,"  and  all  who
survive  "  will  I  scatter  into  all  the
winds."

Ver.  11.   From  this  verse  to  the  end

of  the  chapter  the  punishment  is  more

fully  announced  as  from  the  Lord.     The

emphatic  "therefore"  (Heb.),  which  is

prefixed  to   several   of  the  declarations

of  this  chapter,  is  here  followed  by  the

solemn  oath,  "As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord

God."  I,  the  Living  One,  shall  die  if  these

judgments  are  not  executed.     This  oath

is  sustained  by  His  self-existence — that

which  is  the  basis  of  all  truth  and  reality,

and  a  guarantee  that  there  will  be  no

revocation,  no  reversion:  "  He  can  swear

by  no  greater."     "  Surely  because  thou

hast  defiled  my  sanctuary."    They  had

entered  into  the  place  where  His  honour

tabernacled,  and   taken   a  course  there

which  proved  how  completely  they  had

cast  off  His  supremacy.     They  had  not

been    restrained    by   any    reverence    or

attachment.   They  had  occupied  it  '*  with

all  thy  detestable  things  and  with

all  thine  abominations" — wickedness

of  all  kinds  had  been  practised,  and  the

way  in  which  it  was  carried  on  is  shown

in  chap.  viii.      We   shall   mistake  this

accusation   if    we    confine  its   reference

solely  to  the  employment  of  the  Temple

for  idolatrous  proceedings.    The  Temple

was   the   ideal   heart   of  the   theocracy.

All  spiritual  ener^  proceeded  from  it ;

all  objects  of  that  energy  reacted  on  it.

So  that  if  the  people  indulged  in  evil

elsewhere,  and  came  impenitent  into  the

courts  of  the  Lord's  house,  they  defiled

the  sanctuary,  and  their  ears  were  made

to  tingle  with  the  indignant  remonstrance

54


of  Isaiah,  "Who  bath  required  this  at
your  hands  to  tread  my  courts  % "  or
with  that  of  Ezekiel  afterwards,  "  Should
I  be  inquired  of  at  all  by  them  ? "  The
glory  due  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord
had  been  polluted,  and  He  will  take
steps  to  clear  it.  "I  will  also  dimi-
nish," our  English  version  supplies  thee.
In  comparing  Deut.  iv.  2,  where  this
same  Hebrew  word  is  employed,  "  Ye
shall  not  add  to  this  word  which  I  com-
mand you  and  ye  shall  not  diminish
from  it,"  the  expression  seems  sufficient
without  adding  thee.  As  the  Israelites
had  taken  away  from  the  rights  of  God
to  His  sanctuary,  so  He  will  diminish
the  benefits  He  had  hitherto  bestowed
on  them.

Ver.  12.  An  explanation  is  now  given
of  the  symbolical  actions  prescribed  in
ver.  2.  From  this  it  is  made  clear  that
the  fire  there  is  to  represent  disease
and  starvation  as  among  the  destructive
agencies  affecting  the  sinful  people.

Ver,  13.  The  menaced  penalties  being
carried  out,  "mine  anger  shall  be  ao-
complished;"  its  full  force  will  be  brought
to  act  so  as  to  inflict  every  item  of  the
penalties  due  to  such  transgressors.
"And  I  will  cause  my  fury  to  rest
upon  them;"  it  will  find  its  goal  in  those
who  suffer  from  it,  and  there  come  to  an
end  :  it  will  have  finished  "  His  strange
work."  "And  I  will  be  comforted."
We  might  translate,  in  accordance  with
another  signification  of  the  Hebrew,  /
repent  mijself.  It  is  preferable  to  retain
the  translation  of  our  version,  as  better
expressing  the  idea  that  the  old  has
ended  and  that  the  ground  for  a  new
procedure  will  be  laid.  {Vide  Isa.  x.
24-27,  in  reference  to  Assyria.)  This
betokens  one  mode  of  the  divine  life.
It  is  a  highly  figurative,  and,  of  course,
imperfect  token ;  but,  so  far  as  we  can
explain,  it  shows  that  the  Lord  receives
satisfaction  in  vengeance  accomplished,
since  the  violators  of  His  honour  are
fairly  punished  and  His  rights  are  fully
vindicated.  A  God  who  could  not  assert
and  maintain,  at  any  cost,  His  own  just
and  perfect  authority,  would  be  only
an  idol-god.  Nor  is  it  Himself  alone
whom  the  finished  punishment  concerns,
"They,"  the  next  verse  is  proof  that  it  is


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKJBL,  chap.  t.


other  nations  who  ''shall  know  that  I  here  are  those  "of  famine,"  which  shall

the  Lord  have  spoken  in  my  zeal,"  and  be  bitter  and  destructive  and  accumu-

nut  the  prophet  in  over-eagerness  or  fac-  lative  in  its  horrors  :  "  I  will  increase

tiousness.    The  words  are  again  repeated  the  famine ; "  hunger  upon  hunger  will

in  vers.  15  and  17,  and  show  that  Ezekiel  come  "  upon  you."

was  speaking  by  direction  of  the  living  Ver.  17.  Another  element  of  terror  is

God  of  Israel,  who  would  not  allow  His  mentioned    for    the    first    time,    "  evil

righteous  laws  tobe  trampled  under  men's  beasts."     We   may  suppose  that   they

feet.     History  has  become  a  guarantee  are  to  be  taken  literally ;  but  it  is  diffi-

for  the  divine  origin  of  the  threaten-  cult  to  see  how  they  could  be  a  notice-

iiigs,  able  ingredient  in  the   cup   of   misery

Ver.  14  is  a  further  statement  of  the  which  was  to  be  drank  by  a  beleaguered

penalty  which  was  to  be  executed  on  city,  and  Hengstenberg  is  probably  right

the  devoted  city.     "  Waste  and  a  re-  in  referring  the  phrase  to  the  heathen,

proach,"  a  reproach  "among  the  nations  on  the  ground  that  the  designation  of

that  are  round  about,"  and  w(ute  *'in  brutalised   men,    who   have   no   breath

the  sight  of  all  that  pass  by."  from  God,  as  beasts  is  deeply  rooted  in

Ver.  15.  "So it" — Jerusalem — "shall  the  Scriptures.     "And  pestilence  and

be  a  reproach," &c.     Inferences  of  seve-  blood" — some  terrific  diseases — "shall

ral  kinds  will  be  drawn  from  the  sad  pass  through  thee."     A  solemn  appeal

and  ruined  state  of  the  punished  people,  to  the  certainty  of  the  accomplishment

and  lessons  of  moral  worth  become  dis-  comes  in,  as  already,  on  the  ground  of

tincter.  the  Lord  being  the  speaker  in  reality.

Ver.    16.    According  to  the  ground-  Repetition  of  the  same  expression  is  a

text,  Dent,  xxxii.  23,  "  the  evil  arrows  "  characteristic  of  EzekieFs  style.

^     HOMILETICS.

Where  Much  is  Given,  Much  is  Required  (vers.  5—17).

As  each  stage  of  a  physical  process  manifests  another  condition  of  the  materials
which  are  under  the  action  of  forces,  so  each  stage  in  national  affairs  expresses  a
changed  aspect  of  the  relations  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature,  the  great
King  and  His  subjects,  the  Holy  and  the  unholy.  If  the  punitive  treatment  of  the
Jews  was  painfully  startling,  the  presentation  of  it,  which  the  prophet  is  com-
missioned to  make,  is  meant  to  unfold,  to  the  existing  and  other  generations,  a
fresh  development  of  the  thoughts  and  ways  of  God.  These  verses  may  be  held  to
show  that  the  sorest  penalties  will  be  a  consequence  of  privileges  set  at  naught.
In  them  observe —

L  The  advantages  conferred.

1.  A  favourable  position :  "  Set  in  the  midst  of  the  nations.**  It  is  obvious  that
certain  countries,  certain  cities,  are  distinguished  above  others  by  climate,  materials
for  traffic,  openings  to  surrounding  people.  In  some  such  beneficial  conditions  the
ancient  Jerusalem  was  situated ;  but  above  them,  and  of  greater  importance  still,
was  the  fact  that  there  was  His  sanctuary — the  place  where  His  honour  dwelt.
Both  temporal  and  spiritual  benefits  come  from  God,  and  each  advantage  should  be
regarded  as  enforcing  a  higher  obligation.

2.  The  personal  interest  of  God.  It  is  He  who  condescends  to  speak  to
them,  to  punish  them  Himself.  He  did  not  treat  them  on  the  same  lines  as
He  did  the  other  tribes  of  men.  No  nation  had  God  so  nigh  it  as  this  people.
They  were  the  children  of  Abraham,  His  friend.  He  bare  them  and  carried  them
all  the  days  of  old.  Whosoever  touched  them  touched  the  apple  of  His  eye.  Their
offences  we^-e  offences  against  Him — ^not  against  some  vague  '*  accusation  "  of  their
own  consciences.  It  is  well  to  come  to  that  position  from  which  we  see  that  God
ia  with  us  in  a  wider  sense  than  Israel  surmised,  that  in  Christ  He  reconciles  the

55


OHAP.  T.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


world  unto  Himself,  that  we  stand  amid  the  light  of  that  life  which  is  given  to
*'  whosoever  will."

3.  Opportunity  for  influencing  others.  To  fancy  that  this  Jewish  people  was
chosen  simply  to  be  the  worshippers  of  the  only  true  God  is  to  suppose  that  which
would  not  accord  with  other  manifestations  in  His  realm.  His  sun  exhales  vapour
from  water,  the  vapour  is  turned  into  showers,  the  showers  fall  upon  the  earth  and
make  it  bring  forth  and  bud.  So  is  it  that  every  person  is  to  contribute  to  the
good  of  others,  and  so  His  chosen  nation  was  to  be  instrumental  in  making  known
His  way  and  saving  health  among  the  people  sitting  in  darkness.  His  purposes  to
bless  that  we  may  be  blessings  aie  not  changed.  He  works  to  form  vessels  fit  for
His  use,  and  one  of  the  most  potent  intiuences,  with  souls  which  have  been  made
alive  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  should  be  this — the  Lord  my  God  supplies  me
with  grace,  and  I  should  live  so  as  to  promote  His  holy  and  good  claims  over  men,
Alas  !  so  many  do  not  realise  their  position  as  stewards  of  God,  and  many,  like  the
Jews,  cause  His  name  to  be  blasphemed  instead  of  honoured.  Yet  much  has  been
given,

II.  The  unhallowed  disposition  cherished  by  the  advantaged.  That  they
who  have  known  the  true  God  should  **  change  His  judgments  into  wickedness
and  should  not  walk  in  His  statutes,"  evidences  their  disposition  to  be —

1.  Marked  with  contempt  for  God,  Their  own  judgments  are  preferred  to  His.
And  even  where  there  might  be  a  formal  agreement  with  His  revealed  will,  it  is,
on  their  part,  no  submission  to  Him,  but  a  carrying  out  of  their  own  desires.  They
act  as  if  God  were  of  less  consideration  than  themselves.  They  will  not  have  Him
to  reign  over  them.  They  feel  at  liberty  to  make  that  which  He  intended  for  good
into  a  means  for  doing  wickedly.  Prayers  will  be  repeated,  public  worship  will  be
patronised,  and  still  the  heart  will  continue  to  cherish  its  selfish,  worldly  pursuits,
as  if  God  could  be  mocked  and  overcome.

2.  More  guilty  than  that  of  the  heathen.  The  Jews  gloated  over  the  ignorance
and  low  hopes  of  the  uncovenanted  peoples,  and  yet  the  latter  had  been  more
faithful  to  their  streaks  of  light  than  the  Jews  to  their  dayspring.  There  is  no
monopoly  by  the  Jewish  people  of  this  inconsistency.  Not  a  few  among  Christians
take  pleasure  in  telling  of  the  cruelties,  falsehoods,  lusts  which  are  observed  among
the  tribes  and  people  who  are  not  Christian,  and  turn  such  sad  aspects  into  a  means
of  setting  off  how  much  purer  and  better  a  state  is  their  own.  The  comparison  is
often  very  unfairly  made.  And  even  if  it  were  not — if  the  sins  of  heathendom
were  gross  and  numerous  beyond  those  of  Christendom — the  rules  of  Christ  are
too  often  toned  down  and  laid  aside,  both  in  the  practice  of  Churches  and  the  con-
duct of  individuals.  Their  guilt  in  tampering  with  duty  is  far  more  offensive  than
that  of  the  heathen  can  be.     "  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin  !  woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaida  ! "

III.  The  severe  punishment  which  manifests  the  guiltiness  of  those  who
have  received  much.  When  favoured  children  go  out  of  the  ways  of  their  Holy
Father,  they  walk  upon  hard,  thorny,  desolate  tracts,  where  they  perish.

1.  In  those  troubles  they  are  treated  hy  the  Lord  Himself.  *'  Behold  I,  even  I,
am  against  thee."  Secondary  agents  will  be  employed,  but  in  poverty  or  losses,
diseases  or  hostile  actions  by  other  people,  are  to  be  recognised  weapons  wielded
by  the  Lord  against  whom  we  have  sinned.  He  does  not  abdicate  His  authority
to  things  which  cause  pain  and  ruin,  so  that  they  do  their  will.  We  receive  evil
from  His  hand  as  well  as  good.  And  emphatically  so  if  we  have  been  living  in
open  sins  against  Him.  It  is  always  a  difficult  matter  to  say  what  the  sins  are
which  bring  about  special  stripes  from  the  Lord  ;  but  there  need  be  no  difficulty
in  acknowledging  that  He  "  will  execute  judgments  in  anger  and  in  fury  and  in
furious  rebukes,"  and  that  those  judgments  need  not  be  the  same  for  the  same  sins.
Dishonesties,  untruths,  intemperance,  will  produce  misery  sooner  or  later,  but  the
misery  which  comes  in  consequence  of  such  transgressions  is  very  different  in  its
actions  upon  the  individual  sinners  and  their  families.      God  knows  how  to  deal

06


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  V.


out  in  perfect  wisdom  the  sufferings  appropriate  to  the  several  cases,  and  the
keenest  pang  of  their  suffering  ought  to  be  this,  "  My  King,  my  Father,  has  be-
come mine  enemy,  and  fights  against  me."

2.  The  punishment  is  intense,  *'  I  will  do  that  which  I  have  not  done,  and
whereunto  I  will  not  do  any  more  the  like.  Neither  shall  mine  eye  spare,  neither
will  I  have  any  pity."  There  will  not  be  a  grain  of  excessiveness  in  the  punish-
ment :  it  will  be  balanced  to  a  hair's  weight  by  the  amount  of  sin.  The  perfect
Judge  alone  can  so  accurately  poise  the  scales ;  but  none  who  know  the  right  will
fail  to  see  that,  however  unparalleled  the  severity  may  seem,  it  is  altogether  pro-
portioned to  the  offences,  and  will  exhibit  the  magnitude  of  the  guilt  incurred.

3.  The  lesson  is  intended  to  be  widely/  taught  The  Lord  will  not  do  *'  His
strange  work"  in  secret.  Other  souls  must  be  made  to  hear  and  fear,  and  His
judgments  shall  be  shown  to  "the  nations  round  about  in  the  sight  of  all  that
pass  by."  They  will  be  differently  affected  by  the  lesson.  Some  will  utter  re-
proaches, others  will  frame  taunts,  and  others  will  be  instructed ;  but  in  some  sort
of  dim  form  those  proceedings  against  sin  will  make  their  principle  enter  into  the
thoughts  of  men,  and  contribute  to  the  shaping  of  that  unwritten  law,  with  its
penalty  for  wrong-doing,  which  has  become  established  among  nations  who  have
lived  in  different  spheres  of  growth.  Where  do  we  not  find  the  maxim,  that  the
heavier  the  punishment,  the  greater  the  guilt  ?

IV.  The  continued  maintenance  of  the  justice  of  God's  rule.  "  I  the  Lord
have  spoken  it " — however  unlike  it  may  appear  that  He  should  punish  so,  how-
ever awful  the  sufferings  inflicted  may  be.  "  The  divine  righteousness  remains
always  equally  energetic." — Hcng.  Ezekiel  is  a  medium  for  conveying  the  denun-
ciations, but  below  those  denunciations  it  is  to  be  believed  that  righteousness  and
truth  stand.  They  will  not  be  moved  by  the  assaults  of  men,  let  men  beat  against
them  as  they  will.  And  the  prophet  is  a  pattern  from  whom  all  preachers  and
teachers  may  learn  to  let  the  thoughts  of  God  so  enter  into  them,  that  when  they  do
tell,  as  tell  they  must  if  they  will  be  faithful  servants,  of  the  "  weeping  and  wailing
and  gnashing  of  teeth  "  which  shall  be  endured  by  those  who  make  light  of  the
Son  of  God,  they  should  do  it,  not  with  extravagance  or  with  mitigation,  but  with
the  strictest  adherence  to  the  manifestation  made  of  the  terror  of  the  Lord.  The
gospel  enters .  into  no  terms  with  those  who  forsake  the  Lord ;  it  insists  on  repent-
ance or  destruction.  If  He  is  *'  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,"  He  would
sooner  see  them  perishing  than  that  they  should  continue  persistently  to  defile  His
holy  presence.  In  Churches  and  out  of  them  the  solemn  asseveration  holds  sway,
**  He  that  despised  Moses'  law  died  without  mercy  under  two  or  three  witnesses ;
of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought  worthy  who  hath
trodden  underfoot  the  Son  of  God,  and  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant,
wherewith  he  was  sanctified,  an  unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite  to  the  Spirit
of  grace  1 "

God's  Comfort  in  Punishment  Achieved.

**/  will  cattse  mi/ fury  to  rest  upon  them,  and  I  will  be  comforted**  (ver.  13).

There  are  conventional  ideas  about  God,  just  as  there  are  about  what  is  proper
procedure  in  society.  Conventionalisms  cannot  hold  their  ground  in  the  latter
when  a  strong,  clear  impulse  from  the  realities  of  life  breaks  upon  them;  and,  in
the  former,  superficial  conceptions  regarding  divine  procedure  will  be  tested  and
remodelled  when  men,  who  see  visions  of  God,  set  forth  their  impressions  of  Him
*'  who  ruleth  by  His  power  for  ever."  Their  utterances  may  sound  as  if  bordering
on  what  is  harsh  and  untenable,  or  as  if  altogether  too  familiar;  but  they  will  lay
open  aspects  of  the  Almighty  which,  from  one  cause  or  other,  have  been  dimmed
and  disturbed.  Thus  it  might  happen  that  deep  convictions  of  the  pity  of  the
Lord  for  suffering,  and  His  patience  with  wrong-doers,  would  foster  a  mode  of

67


cn AP.  V.  HOMJL ETIC  COMMBNTAR  Y :  EZEKIBL,


speaking  of  His  dealings  with  people  whom  He  had  favoured,  as  if  He  could  be
nothing  but  soft  and  soothing  and  pleading,  as  if  in  His  nature  there  were  no
materials  for  an  unflinching  resolution  to  see  right  done,  even  though  the  punish-
ment of  the  wrong-doers  was  unexampled.  Then  a  holy  man  will  exclaim,  in  the
word  of  the  Lord,  "I  will  laugh  at  your  calamity,  I  will  mock  when  your  fejir
Cometh;"  or,  "  Ah  !  I  will  ease  me  of  mine  adversaries."  Lax  notions  are  shaken
off,  and  we  learn  to  think  that  "our  God  is  a  consuming  fire,"  who  is  comforted
when  His  fury  has  found  a  resting-place.  Making  allowance  for  the  somewhat
figurative  turn  of  these  words,  we  can  perceive  in  them —

I.  All  punishments  are  measured.  He  that  maketh  the  stormy  wind  to  fulfil
His  word,  that  says  to  the  sea,  *'  Hitherto  thou  shalt  come  and  no  further,"  He
says  to  every  consequence  of  sin,  '*  Thou  shalt  not  put  a  hair's  weight  of  distress
more  than  I  appoint."  Men  may  talk  of  the  germs  of  disease  which  settle  upon  a
vine  as  if  they  will  increase  so  as  to  destroy  it,  unless  checked  by  human  appli-
ances ;  politicians  may  speak  of  armies  invading  a  country  as  if  they  would  ravage
it  till  it  was  made  waste,  unless  human  diplomacy  intervene.  It  is  not  often  con-
sidered that  behind  every  disease  and  every  army  the  Divine  Will  means  to  control
each,  and  exactly  fix  what  it  shall  do.  We  are  under  a  Lawgiver  whose  preroga-
tive can  never  be  contravened,  and  who  claims  to  define  every  event  by  His  hidden
or  revealed  decree.  Every  sufferer  may  believe  that  he  bears  just  what  and  just
as  is  suitable  to  perfect  righteousness  and  wisdom.

II.  Right  is  vindicated.  When  the  evil  ways  of  men  have  taken  them  into
woe  then  the  Judge  of  the  earth  is  satisfied,  for  they  have  received  the  due  reward
of  their  deeds.  This  means  more  than  is  often  understood  by  the  expression,  "  Sin
is  its  own  punishment."  If  that  were  all  the  punishment,  then  every  prosperous
tyrant,  every  unconfessing  murderer,  every  successful  mercantile  swindler,  every
unabashed  liar  would  have  endured  all  possible  suffering.  The  sin,  the  very  thing
which  stands  out  as  the  worst  of  evils  to  a  holy  mind,  being  regarded  as  an  advan-
tageous proceeding  by  the  unholy,  could  hardly  be  punished  in  the  actor,  since  he
delights  in  it  or  is  unimpressed  by  its  vileness.  Thus  viewed  there  would  be  little
in  sin  to  fear;  it  could  be  made  a  subject  for  despisal ;  and  the  moral  order  would
be  abandoned.  It  is  not,  however.  God's  rule  is  not  so  feeble  and  uncertain  in  its
operation  as  to  let  it  be.  "  He  sitteth  on  the  throne  judging  right,"  and  He  executes
punishments  which  prove  that  there  are  retributions  attached  to  the  committal  of  sin
entirely  inde{)endent  of  the  thoughts  of  sinners  about  their  conduct.  These  retri-
butions will  find  out  their  appropriate  objects,  as  a  resting-place  is  found,  and  will
remain  till  the  just  award  has  been  measured  off.  It  is  an  awful  fact  for  tliose
who  have  sinned  and  have  not  repented.  To  neglect  its  bearing,  to  refuse  to  face  its
reality  may  be  common,  but  the  sentence  against  evil  will  not  be  annulled.  Let  those
who  reject  Christ  Jesus  realise  the  solemn  contents  of  the  words,  "  He  that  believeth
not,  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him" — His  fury  rests  upon  them.  Then,  when
bitter  wrong  has  been  righted,  when  vengeance  has  placed  its  nmrks  upon  the
rebellious,  when  the  hideous  past  has  been  swept  over  by  an  obliterating  storm  of
justice,  then  the  Holy  One  sees  that  right  has  proved  its  power  to  crush  wrong  and
maintain  its  supremacy,  and  He  is  comforted.

IIL  The  ground  is  cleared  for  a  new  movement.  The  Lord  is  not  comforted
merely  because  He  sees  the  flaunting  edifices  of  wrong  utterly  in  ruins.  Withered,
scattered  leaves  form  materials  for  the  growth  of  a  coming  spring  \  the  refuse  of
fallen  buildings  becomes  a  location  in  which  plants  and  insects  make  a  honie,  and
the  desolation  of  a  country  or  the  depression  of  a  people  gives  an  opening  through
which  stirring  influences  may  enter.  Gibbon's  statement  in  *' The  Decline  and
Fall" — that  when  "the  fierce  giants  of  the  North  broke  in  "  upon  an  enervated
people  who  were  but  "  a  race  of  pigmies,"  they  "mended  the  puny  brood" — asserts
this  principle.  By  Ezekiel's  time  the  Israelites  had  become  boasters,  sensual,  hypo-
crites; the  covenant  God  made  with  their  fathers  had  been  shivered  into  fragments ;

5d


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


CtfAP.  VI.


what  good  could  accrue  from  the  continuance  of  such  a  state  of  things  ?  Abolish
it  or  suspend  it,  and  a  way  will  be  opened  for  operating  in  new  methods  of  right-
eousness, wisdom,  and  grace.  That  opening  is  a  conifort  to  the  Lord.  He  will
enter  upon  a  course  from  which  higher  and  better  results  will  be  attained.  The
old  has  vanished,  the  new  will  arrive.  So  tbe  Lord  Jesus  refers  to  Jerusalem  and
says,  "  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate" — that  is  the  close  of  the  bad
past — and  He  goes  on  to  add,  "Ye  shall  not  see  Me  henceforth  till  ye  shall  say.
Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  " — that  is  the  pledge  of  better
movements.

L  "  The  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  people  tremble.'^  He  "  will  execute  judgment
upon  all,  and  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they
have  ungodly  committed."

2.  "  The  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  earth  rejoiced*  However  long  His  will  may  be
disobeyed,  yet  a  King  shall  reign  in  righteousness.  "  Also  unto  Thee,  0  Lord,
belongeth  mercy,  for  Thou  renderest  to  every  man  according  to  his  work."  Judg-
ment and  mercy  shall  complete  the  purposes  of  Him  who  inhabiteth  eternity,  whose
name  is  Holy.

4.  Further  Instructions  as  to  the  Consequences  of  Israel's

Conduct  (Chap,  vi.)


EXEGETICAL  '^OT^^.—The  judg-
ment on  places  of  idolatry  and  the  wor-
shippers (ver.  1-7).  After  asserting,  in
ver.  1,  his  renewed  consciousness  that
he  was  to  speak  from  the  in  working
power  of  tbe  Lord,  Ezekiel  unfolds  the
procedure  which  will  be  taken.  Here
he  has  special  reference  to  the  whole
country,  as  in  chaps,  iv.  and  v.  the  city
Jerusalem  was  chiefly  in  view.

Ver.  2.  "  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face,"
a  frequent  command  given  to  the  pro-
phet, and  intended  to  impress  him  with
a  vivid  sense  of  the  objects  he  was  to
address ;  "  towards  the  mountains  of
Israel  and  prophesy  against  them."
The  Lord  has  a  controversy  with  the
mountains  and  their  prominent  physical
features,  as  if  they  had  ears  and  faculties
for  understanding.  He,  as  it  were,
directs  His  admonitions  through  them
to  the  men  who  had  disordered  those
features  by  setting  up  forbidden  idols
and  paying  open  dishonour  to  His  holy
name.

Ver.  3.  ''And  say  .  .  .  Thus  saith
the  Lord  God  to  the  mountains  and
to  the  hills,  to  the  rivers" — the  last
word  is  used  of  the  beds  or  channels  in
which  waters  run,  and  should  be  trans-
lated here  by  gorges  or  ravines  ;  it  thus
forms  a  more  exact  parallelism  *'to  the
valleys."  "  They  sacrifice  upon  the
tops  of  the  mountains,  and  burn  incense


upon  the  hills,  under  oaks  and  poplars
and  elms,  because  the  shadow  thereof  is
good  "  (Hosea  iv.  13).  Cf.  ver.  13  below.
"  Behold  I,  even  I,  will  bring  a  sword
upon  you,  and  I  will  destroy  your  high
places."  The  Hebrew  word  for  high
places  is  occasionally  employed  simply
to  signify  elevated  spots,  but  more  com-
monly refers  to  them  as  the  shrines  for
worship  habitually  carried  on.  The
worship  in  such  places  was  part  of  that
nature-worship  which  has  prevailed  in
many  regions  of  the  world,  and  in  which
Baal,  the  sun -god,  had  a  prondnent
share  (Num.  xxii.  41,  Josh.  xiii.  17).
From  what  quarter  the  Israelites  were
influenced  towards  Baal-worship  is  doubt-
ful, but  they  had  yielded  to  it,  and
crowned  the  high  places,  which  lay  ex-
posed to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  with
figures  of  some  sort.  How  far  that
worship  was  alien  to  the  mind  of  the
living  God  is  illustrated  by  what  the
reforming  King  Josiah  did  in  his  zeal
for  the  Lord  (2  Kings  xxiii.),  and  in
what  Ezekiel  adds.

Ver.  4.  All  the  apparatus  belonging
to  this  idol-worship  is  doomed  to  destruc-
tion, "your  altars  shall  be  desolate,"
not  fit  to  be  resorted  to,  "  and  your
images,"  in  margi^i,  sun  -images^  but
probably  figures  of  some  kind  represent-
ing Baal,  the  god  of  the  sun,  and  Astarte,
goddess  of  the  moon,  "  shall  he  broken,

58


CHAP.  TL


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL.


and,"  directing  the  address  to  the  people,
*'  I  will  cast  down  your  slain  before
your  idols."  This  is  a  reference  to  Lev.
xxvi.  30,  though  this  special  word  for
idols  is  found  chiefly  in  Ezekiel.  It  is
probably  connected  with  a  root  which
signifies  filth,  and  is  a  contemptuous
description  of  them — they  are  dung,  or
refuse-gods»

Ver.  5.  **  And  I  will  lay  the  dead
carcases  of  the  children  of  Israel  be-
fore their  refuse-gods  " — the  gods  they
cried  to  could  not  defend  from  death,
and,  their  nothingness  having  been
proved,  they  would  be  defiled  by  the
corpses  of  their  unhel[)ed  devotees ;
"  and  I  will  scatter  your  bones  round
about  your  altars" — the  utmost  igno-
miny would  be  cast  upon  idolatry  by
this  utter  desecration  of  its  materials
for  worship.

Ver.  6.  The  declaration  is  made  that,
beside  the  destruction  in  the  high  places,
<fec.,  extreme  desolation  would  be  pro-
duced wherever  population  had  gathered.
The  ground  of  this  extension  of  punish-
ment is  indicated  in  Isaiah's  words,
"  According  to  the  number  of  thy  cities
so  are  thy  gods,"  and  the  end  aimed  at
is  to  sweep  away  every  trace  of  idol-
service,  "  that  your  altars  may  be  laid
waste  and  made  desolate."  The  Hebrew
word  in  the  preceding  portion  of  this
verse  and  translated  desolate  is  different


from  this  one,  which  more  appropriately
should  be  translated  he  guilty.  The
altars  are  regarded  as  participating  in,
and  so  held  guilty  of  the  sin  which  they
were  used  to  carry  out.  A  similar  sen-
tence was  passed  by  the  prophet  sent  to
Jeroboam  in  the  word  of  the  Lord.
When  the  king  "  stood  by  the  altar  to
burn  incense "  the  prophet  cried,  *'  O
altar,  altar,  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Behold
.  .  .  upon  thee  shall  Josiah  offer  the
priests  of  the  high  places  that  burn
incense  upon  thee,  and  men's  bones
shall  be  burnt  upon  thee."  The  refuse-
idols  should  be  done  away  with  and  the
sun-pillars  be  hewn  down  and  a  complete
abrogation  ensue  of  all  that  had  been
unfaithfully  done.  "And  your  works"
— *'  whatever  can  be  ascribed  to  men
which  they  have  not  taken  from  the
mouth  of  God  and  the  commands  of  His
law  " — "  may  be  abolished."

Ver.  7.  "And  the  slain" — a  word  in
the  singular,  as  if  to  show  that  one  mind
had  animated  the  mass  of  the  slain  in
practising  idolatry — "shall  fall  in  the
midst  of  you."  There  will  be  survivors
to  see  the  slaughtered  idolaters,  and  the
eye  will  affect  their  heart  so  that  they
shall  recoo-nise  the  action  of  the  al-
mighty,  righteous  One,  "and  ye  shall
know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  Tims  a
ground  is  laid  for  the  following  pro-
mise.


HOMILETICS.
Creation's  Materials  Instructing  Men  (vi.  1-7),

It  is  common  enough  for  men  of  all  countries,  when  under  the  influence  of
strong  emotions,  to  appeal  to  inanimate  objects  as  if  they  were  animated.  It  is  a
natural  form  of  speech,  proceeding  from  the  formative  hand.  "  He  that  formed
the  ear  shall  He  not  hear?"  There  is  a  likeness  of  the  Creator  in  the  creature;
and  when  the  impulse  of  feeling  moves  us  to  speak  to  sun  or  stars,  to  mountains  or
glens,  as  if  they  could  comprehend  our  meaning,  we  are  imitating  Him  who  made  all
things  and  knows  to  what  uses  He  can  put  them  all.  In  His  Word  prophets  and
poets  apostrophise  created  objects  as  witnesses  of  the  Lord's  doings.  Thus  Ezekiel
does,  and  here  we  may  consider —

L  There  is  a  life  in  created  objects.  "  Prophesy  against  the  mountains."
This  susceptibility  in  creation  was  signified  to  Ezekiel  in  his  "  visions  of  God  : "
this  is  signified  by  Apostle  Paul  in  the  words:,  "  All  things  have  been  created  for
Christ,  and  in  Him  all  things  consist" — have  their  continuance  and  order.
Each  has  its  post  and  its  purpose  in  the  administration  of  God ;  and  because  it
helps  to  accomplish  His  far-reaching  will,  it  may  be  truly  regarded  as  having  a
portion  in  that  life  with  which  H«  fills  all  things.  All  things  may  not  be  called
60


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  oHap.  Ti,


living,  but  they  are  sustained  by  that  life  which  is  present  everywhere.  They
suffer  in  man's  bondage  to  corruption — "  The  whole  creation  groaneth  and  travaileth
in  pain  together."  They  are  abashed  and  silent  when  ordered  to  be  so  by  the  Son
of  Man — "  He  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea,  and  there  was  a  great  calm,"  Not
as  a  freak  of  fancy,  but  as  a  suggestive  and  awful  fact,  we  may  look  at  the  materials
of  nature  and  find  tokens  of  the  living  God,  observant  of  us  and  interested  in  us
and  our  ways.  In  view  of  mountains  and  hills,  girded  by  ravines  and  valleys,
we  may  exclaim,  "  Thou  hast  beset  me  behind  and  before,  and  laid  Thine  hand
upon  me  ! "

IL  There  is  a  perversion  of  created  objects.  Men  who  look  at  and  act  upon
nature  colour  it  and  swathe  it  with  their  own  thoughts  and  aims.  Advantages  of
position,  capabilities  for  the  application  of  human  strength  and  skill  to  material
things,  are  turned  into  means  of  doing  that  which  pleases  men  and  displeases  the
Lord.  Mountains  and  valleys,  heaps  of  stones  and  carved  pillars,  are  thus  associ-
ated with  man  in  man's  sins.  They  are  placed  under  a  sentence  of  condemnation,
and  marked  with  signs  of  disorder  and  destruction.  What  though  they  have  no
consciousness  of  good  and  evil,  what  though  they  have  no  power  of  action  against
the  will  of  man,  they  are  made  into  his  instruments  for  evil,  and  must  be  broken
when  he  is  broken.  For  God  does  not  abandon  His  claim  over  them.  Every
creature  of  His  is  good,  only  the  dark  shadow  has  fallen  on  them ;  their  glory  is
tarnished ;  their  tribute  to  the  Maker's  praise  is  obstructed ;  their  pollution  is  as
"  a  smoke  in  His  nose,"  and  He  "  will  make  them  desolate."  But  man  is  the  cause
of  all  the  evil  It  is  his  procedure  with  the  forms  of  things  which  depraves  them ;
the  mountain  is  occupied  with  the  worship  of  the  created  sun,  the  shade  of  trees
becomes  the  haunt  for  immoralities  under  the  sanction  of  the  gods.  Thus  are  the
creatures  perverted.  In  olden  times,  altars  were  polluted,  oblations  were  vain,
incense  was  an  abomination;  in  modern  times,  our  buildings  for  public  worship,
with  their  decorations,  our  church  music,  with  its  display  or  its  listlessness,  may  be
perverted  so  as  to  be  a  condemnation  of  the  worshippers.  What  need  is  there  to
serve  the  Lord  in  the  beauty,  not  of  any  outward  appearance,  but  of  holiness  !

IIL  There  are  tokens  of  doom  on  created  objects.

1.  In  their  desolation.  "  I  will  bring  a  sword  upon  you  [mountains],  and  will
destroy  your  high  places."  The  ruins  and  the  dreariness  of  spots,  in  which  people
were  accustomed  to  serve  their  gods,  suggest  to  inspecting  eyes  that  the  supremacy
and  sanctity  of  the  Most  High  had  been  invaded  there,  and  the  invasion  had  been
repelled  with  unsparing  vehemence.  Judgments  were  executed  upon  them,  not
because  they  could  be  held  guilty,  but  because  they  had  been  the  scenes  of  human
wrong-doing.  We  are  taught  the  needed  lesson  that  sin  is  to  be  abhorred,  not
only  because  it  defiles  the  sinner,  but  also  because  it  draws  the  trail  of  the  serpent
over  all  he  uses  in  his  sin.  *'  Every  prospect "  does  not  "  please  "  where  "  man  is
vile."

2.  In  the  human  sufferings  they  are  made  witnesses  of,  "  I  will  lay  the  dead
carcases  .  .  .  before  their  idols."  The  very  places  to  which  they  would  flee  for
shelter  will  be  turned  into  shambles ;  the  reed  they  leaned  on  shall  pierce  their
hand.  So  deserted  would  the  districts  become  that  the  bodies  would  lie  unburied,
be  made  into  ghastly  skeletons,  be  bleached  and  crumble  into  pieces;  their  "bones
would  be  scattered  round  about  their  altais."  The  fields  of  battle,  the  shores  of
surging  seas,  the  ruins  of  earthquakes,  with  more  or  less  distinct  utterance,  declare
in  Reason's  ear.  We  are  witnesses  of  the  pains  and  death  inflicted  on  a  world  over
whose  physical  features  the  dishonour  done  to  God  has  been  imprinted,  and  we
tell  back  to  hearing  ears  that  that  God  is  holy  in  all  His  ways,  cannot  look  upon
Bin,  and  will  make  good  His  title  to  supreme  power  and  righteousness."


01


OBaP.  Tl.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKtEL.


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.   8-

10.  A  gleam  of  comfort.  Ezekiel  hns
told  how  bitter  ruin  and  slaughter
should  teach  the  children  of  Israel  that
"  God  ruleth  in  Jacob  unto  the  ends  of
the  earth,"  and  now  he  will  tell  that
that  same  truth  would  be  learned  in
another  way.  Some  of  those  who  have
survived  and  been  taken  into  captivity
shall  be  moved,  by  the  hard  conditions
of  their  lives,  to  acknowledge  that  they
have  done  very  wickedly,  and  that  God
has  done  righteously.

Ver.  8.  *'Yet  will  I  leave  a  rem-
nant that  ye  may,"  or,  in  that  ye  shall,
''have  some,"  because  they  have  been
preserved  so  as  to  "escape  the  sword
among  the  nations,"  and  who  will  be
found  amongst  their  fellow-countrymen
"scattered  through  the  countries."

Ver.  9.  In  the  privations  and  sorrows
of  exile,  like  the  prodigal  son  in  feeding
on  husks,  they  would  come  to  them-
selves, and  recall  what  they  bad  been
and  done,  "  They  that  escape  of  you
shall  remember  me."  The  thought  of
God  Himself  would  be  brought  dis-
tinctly into  their  hearts,  and  that  would
alter  their  convictions  as  to  their  by-
gone life.  They  would  perceive  that
against  Him,  Him  only,  they  had  sinned;
"because  I  am  broken  with  their
whorish  heart."  The  "Speaker's  Com-
mentary," in  agreement  with  others,  pro-
poses to  translate  thus :  Because  I  have
broken  their  whorish  heart,  which  hath
departed  from  Me^  and  their  eyes,  &c.
Hengstenberg,  with  others  also,  says,
"  The  word  properly  means,  *  I  was
broken  :  *  this  stands  for,  *  I  have
broken  for  myself/'*  a  translation  which
is  equivalent  to  the  former.   Both  signify


that  it  was  not  what  their  whorish  heart
did  to  Him,  but  what  He  did  to  it,  that
is  set  forth.  We  cannot  acquiesce  in
this  opinion.  The  remnant,  who  re-
membered the  Lord,  perceived  also  that
by  various  methods  He  had  shown  how
grieved  and  provoked  and  wounded  He
was  by  the  people  turning  away  from
His  worship — that  He  was  broken  by
their  unfaithfulness.  The  expiession  is
peculiar — is  it  more  so  than  others  in
reference  to  the  Lord  1  "I  also  will
laugh  at  your  calamity,  I  will  mock,"
(fcc.  (Prov.  i.  26).  "Wilt  thou  be  alto-
gether unto  me  as  a  liar,  and  as  waters
that  faiH"  (Jer.  xv.  18).  "Behold  I
am  pressed  under  you,  as  a  cart  is
pressed  that  is  full  of  sheaves"  (Amoa
ii.  13).  This  pain  to  God  was  occa-
sioned, not  by  the  inward  only,  but  also
by  the  outward  proceedings  of  Israel,
"  with  their  eyes,  which  go  a  whoring
after  their  refuse-idols :  and,"  in  con-
sequence of  this  remembrance  of  "  the
Lord  and  the  words  of  His  holiness,"
"they  shall  loathe  themselves,"  will
look  into  the  face  of  their  past  con-
duct with  deepest  aversion,  "because
of  all  the  evils,"  <fec.

Ver.  10  should  be  read,  "And  they
shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  not
said  in  vain  that  I  would  do  this  evil
unto  them."  The  words  do  not  assert
that  the  remnant  should  know  He  was
the  living  God,  but  that  He  was  true
to  all  His  warnings  about  the  evil
things  which  had  come  to  pass  among
"a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people."
"By  the  correspondence  of  utterance
and  event,  they  know  that  He  who
spoke  by  the  son  of  man  is  Jehovah
— is  God  in  the  fullest  sense.'*


HOMILETICS.
Conditions  op  Spiritual  Knowledge  (vers.  8-10).

Among  those  indicated  by  the  verses  are —

L  A  specialising  action  of  the  Lord.  "  I  will  leave  a  remnant."  Out  of  the
idolatrous  people;  out  of  their  broken-down  trust  in  their  land,  their  Temple,  their
covenant  with  God ;  out  of  their  ranks  as  they  were  living  amidst  heathenism,  what
hope  could  there  be  that  one  even  would  receive  a  new  life  in  his  spirit?  For
men  it  might  be  impossible,  but  not  for  God.  It  is  His  spontaneous  action.  They
would  not  have  sought  Him.  They  would  have  continued  in  sin  and  sorrow  unless
a  power  external  to  themselves  had  moved  upon  them.  "  Except  the  Lord  of
62


HO  Ml  LET W  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  ti.


hosts  had  left  us  a  very  small  remnant,"  <fec,  "We  love  Him  because  He  first"
loved  us."  It  is  an  action  superior  to  circumstances.  Sins  may  be  still  prevailing,
judgments  in  course  of  execution,  the  moral  atmosphere  of  the  places  in  which  the
sinners  live  apparently  repulsive  to  spiritual  health,  yet  the  Lord  is  able  to  work
there  upon  whom  He  will.  He  can  make  His  mercy  as  well  as  His  fury  rest  where
all  circumstances  seem  unfavourable.  He  can  deliver  a  soul  in  Babylon  as  well  as
in  Zion.  It  is  a  mysterious  action.  We  may  try  to  conjure  up  suppositions  about
reasons  why  God  does  not  at  once  do  all  the  evil  which  He  threatens,  or  why  He
bestows  on  some  that  which  He  does  not  bestow  on  others ;  but  a  duly  reverent
heart  will  rather  repeat  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  Even  so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good
in  Thy  sight,"  For  not  in  ourselves  can  we  discover  fitness.  The  acknowledgment
of  every  sin-conscious  soul  must  be,  "  I  shall  perish  if  He  does  not  save  me."  It  is
a  comforting  action.  It  tells  that  greater  is  He  that  is  for  us  than  all  that  can  be
against  us ;  that  He  is  able  to  redeem  souls  from  death  j  that  however  low  His
cause  may  have  fallen,  as  if  it  were  even  destroyed,  its  preservation  is  with  Him.
He  will  not  let  it  disappear.     He  will  revive  it  in  many  or  in  few.

IL  The  pressure  of  tribulations.  They  did  not  serve  the  Lord  when  they
were  in  their  native  land,  when  the  Temple  and  its  ordinances  were  accessible,
when  early  and  late  prophets  were  addressing  them  in  the  Word  of  the  Lord ;  but
they  do  so  when  they  are  scattered  among  the  nations,  when  they  have  seen  death
mowing  down  numbers  of  their  friends,  when  they  are  in  heaviness  because  of  the
loss  of  so  much  which  they  had  formerly  possessed.  The  gods  they  had  trusted
in  had  utterly  failed  to  protect  them,  and  they  were  made  to  feel  that  their  own  folly
and  wickedness  had  brought  all  the  evil  to  pass,  and  they  judged  themselves,  their
lu>.ts,  their  corruptions,  their  unfaithfulness  to  the  Lord.  "  When  He  slew  them,
then  they  sought  Him."  Tribulations  we  may  have,  but  Christ  can  give  His  peace.
We  may  not  have  relief  from  them,  and  yet  be  taught  of  God.  Cast  into  beds  of
affliction,  surrounded  by  those  who  regard  not  the  Lord,  deprived  of  the  means  of
grace,  we  may  find  spiritual  blessings  which  a  state  of  worldly  comfort  had  not
brought  to  us.  *'  I  have  cbosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction,"  and  reconciliation
to  God  makes  up  for  all  trouble  in  earthly  things,

IIL  A  consciousness  of  God.  "  Thei/  shall  remember  me"  They  will  recall
His  doings,  and  see  how  utterly  He  is  different  from  the  creatures  they  had  wor-
shipped ;  how  they  had  been  fed  by  His  bounty ;  how  they  had  heard  His  words ;
how  patiently  He  had  borne  with  their  offences  ;  how  just  He  is  in  punishing;  how
good  in  preserving  them  from  famine,  pestilence,  and  the  sword  ;  how  full  of  gracious
love  in  acting  upon  their  long-shut  hearts.  They  set  the  Lord  Himself  before  their
faces.  We  may  desire  to  be  at  peace  with  an  armed  man  who  is  stronger  than  \\  e,
and  yet  not  care  to  live  with  him ;  but  let  penitence  kindle  at  the  remembrance  of
the  strong  Lord,  and  we  do  not  want  to  think  about  His  pardon  only,  we  want  to
live  and  walk  in  His  presence.  '*  Because  I  am  broken  with  their  whorish  hearts"  &c.
They  learn  truly  of  God,  not  because  they  were  under  the  stripes  of  His  wrath,  and
said  as  Cain,  '*  My  punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear,"  but  because  they  had
produced  disappointment  and  pain  to  Him.  In  His  light  they  see  light.  The
thought  that  His  heart  was  broken  breaks  theirs.  They  are  humbled  before  His
wonderful  pity.     His  goodness  leads  them  to  repentance.

IV.  A  deep  sense  of  personal  unworthiness.  "  They  shall  loathe  themselves
for  the  evils,"  &c.     We  find  in  this —

1.  I^hat  their  hearts  were  affected.  The  effect  of  a  consciousness  of  God  was,  as
it  was  with  Job,  to  make  them  abhor  themselves  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes.
No  more  palliation  of  their  idolatry,  no  attempting  to  lessen  the  blamableness  of
their  conduct,  could  be  entertained.  From  the  depths  of  their  souls  they  heaved
sighs  and  groans  of  shame.  It  was  sorrow  according  to  God,  and  it  wrought
revenge,  &c.

2.  Thai  they  understood  the  controversy  of  God  against  them.     They  did  not

6a


CHAP.  Yl.  BOMILETW  COMMENTARr:  BZEKIEL.


loathe  themselves  because  of  their  banishment,  their  poverty,  tlieir  bereavements,
the  contempt  of  the  heathen,  but  because  they  had  done  evil.  They  had  left  Him,
the  fountain  of  living  waters,  and  hewed  out  broken  cisterns  that  could  hold  no
water;  they  had  treated  their  Lord  unkindly,  and  wounded  Him  by  offending  against
His  majesty  and  grace.  They  saw  that  He  had  brought  them  into  grievous  sufferings  ;
but  it  was  when  they  sa,w  that  they  had  in  sin  disobeyed  their  God  that  they  took
right  views  of  themselves  and  justified  Him.  Ah  !  we  shall  not  escape  condem-
nation because  we  have  never  worshipped  an  idol,  never  perpetrated  any  open
transgression.  Worldliness  of  temper,  unkindness  to  a  brother,  formality  in  the
worship  of  God,  are  bitter  and  abominable  things  before  the  Heart-searcher,  and
which  He  rebukes  sternly.  For  such  evils  He  will  not  need  to  condemn  us ;  we
shall  condemn  ourselves.

3.  That  they  made  not  one  reserve.  "  The  evils  committed  in  all  their  abomi-
nations." They  would  not  defend  any  course  they  had  taken.  Sins  in  any  place  or
with  any  person,  sins  in  business  or  religion,  sins  in  secret  or  in  the  railway,  sins
meant  to  be  done  or  not  looked  on  as  sins,  will  form  part  of  our  confession  of  the
unworthy  conduct  for  which  we  loathe  ourselves.

Look  on  your  ways,  look  into  your  hearts,  let  the  light  of  Christ  shine  on  them,
and  shall  ye  not  be  ashamed  and  confounded  for  all  ye  have  done?  No  door
of  hope  for  men  can  be  opened  other  than  that  which  brings  us  to  God.  With
Him  we  should  be  blessed  with  spiritual  blessings,  and  we  should  act  as  heralds
to  make  known  His  coming  to  save  and  reign.  '*  When  I  am  weak,  then  am
I  strong."

The  Power  of  the  Word  of  God  (ver.  10).

I.  Before  men  are  afflicted  and  humbled  for  tlieir  sin,  they  refuse  and
slight  the  Word  of  God.  Let  prophets  preach  powerfully,  and  lay  God's  judgments
before  the  evildoers ;  they  do  not  pay  heed,  but  they  shall  know  that  their  hearts
were  stout  against  God  and  His  truth.

II.  A  heart  under  affliction,  loathing  itself  for  its  sins,  will  give  due  honour
to  the  Word  of  God.  "  Then  shall  they  know."  Blows  beget  brains,  and  ingrati-
tude and  abuse  of  the  threatenings  and  promises  which  the  Lord  had  made  known
will  be  acknowledged.  The  truest  penitent  doth  most  abhor  himself,  and  the
more  of  that  self-abhorrence,  the  more  complacency  in  the  faithfulness  of  God  in
His  word  and  His  infinite  love  in  Christ.

III.  The  Lord  will  not  let  His  Word  be  unaccomplished.  "  I  have  not  said
in  vain  that  I  would  do  this.  A  word  is  in  vain  when  it  is  not  fulfilled,  ineflica-
ciously  fulfilled,  or  unseasonably  fulfilled  ;  but  none  of  these  befall  the  Word  of
the  Lord.  It  shall  accomplish  that  wliich  He  pleases,  and  prosper  in  the  thing
whereto  He  sent  it." — Greenhill  {abridged).

EXEGETICALNOTES.— Vers.  11-  Ver.  11.    "Smite  with  thine  hand

14.   The  doom  assured.     Tlie  break  in  and   stamp   with   thy   foot."      These

the  dark  threatening  clouds  is  but  for  a  gestures  do  not  signify  derision  of  the

moment.     The  time  is  not  yet  for  the  unhelping   refuse -idols    or    their    wor-

prophet  to  unfold   the  bright  sunshine  shipj)ers ;  or  pain  at  the  sufferings  or

of  rich   mercy.      He   has  pointed  to  a  revulsion  at  the  iniquities  of  the  people,

blessing  amcmg  penitent  exiles,  but  cala-  A  sharp,  almost  unconscious,  clapping

mities  are  nearer  than  that  is,  and  once  of  the  hand  and  stamping  with  the  foot

more  he  recurs  to  the  sombre  and  painful  is  occasionally  seen  when  a  thing  has

scene  which   must  be  the  precursor  of  turned  out  badly,  and  all   hope  of  ac-

blessings.      It  is,  with  a  few  additional  complishing  anything  by  it  is  at  an  end.

touches  of  colour,  a  repetition  of  former  This  is  the  idea  which  has  been  wrapped

words.  up  in  similar  gestures,  o!»   the  part  of
64


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  EZEKIEL,  chap.  VI.


God  or  man,  which  are  recorded  in  the  where  they  did  oflfer  sweet  savour  to

Scriptures  (chaps,  xxi.  14,  17,  xxii.  13,  all  their  refuse-idols."     They  were  as

XXV.  6 ;  Num.  xxiv.  10 ;  Job  xxvii.  23).  eager  to  gratify,  if  they  could,  the  in-

The  gestures  are  consequent  on  the  be-  animate  idols  as  true  worshippers  were

lief  that  the  last  scene  of  the  observed  to  offer  what  would  be  acceptable  to  the

proceedings  is  played  out.     To  his  ges-  holy  God ;  as  Noah  when  he  presented

tures  the  prophet  adds  the  exclamation,  burnt-offerings  for  the  first  time  on  the

**Ah!"  and  affirms  its  reference  "to  all  renovated  land  (Gen.  viii.  21).
the  evil  abominations  of  the  house  of         Ver.  14.  *'  And  I  will  stretch  out  my

Israel ;  for,"  because  of  tlie  evils,  '*  they  hand  against  them ; "  they  had  placed

shall  fall   by  the  sword,"  &c.      The  idols  all  over  the  country,  and  He,  too,

three   great   means  of  punishment  for-  would  exert  His  power  so  as  to  "  make

merly  threatened  to  the  city  (chap.  iv.  the  land  desolate  utterly,  more  deso-

2,  12)  shall  be  applied  to  the  country  late  than  the  wilderness  toward  Dib-

also.  lath  ; "  an  obscure  reference,  but  prob-

Ver.   12.  "He  that  is  far  off,"  out  ably  applicable  to  the  Moabitish  double

of  the  range  of  the  invading  Chaldeans,  city  of  Diblathaim  (Num.  xxxiii.  46),

"shall  die  of  the  pestilence,  and  he  which  lay  westward  from  the  Arabian

that  remaineth,  and   he   that  is  be-  desert.     A  name,  closely  allied  to  this,

sieged,"  or  rather  he  that  is  preserved —  is  found  on  the  lately  discovered  Moab-

as    in   Isa.    xlix.    6,    "To    restore   the  itish  stone  as  the  name  of  some  place.

preserved   of    Israel " — from    pestilence  The  thought  is  expressed  that  this  deso-

and  sword,  "shall  die  by  the  famine,''  lation  would  be  "in  all  their  habita-

<fec.  tions."     No  dwelling-house  would  exist

Ver.  13  (comp.  vers.  3,  6,  7).  A  fuller  where  the  sense  of  wasteness  and  loneli-

characterisation  of  the  localities  in  which  ness  should  not  be  felt.     This  verse  is

the   people    had    reared    idol-shrines  is  ended,  as  ver,  13  had  been  begun,  with  a

here  given,  and  shows  that  "the  land  declaration  that  by  such  inflictions  there

was  full  of  idols,"  and  that  there  should  would  be  impressed  on    the  people   a

be  an  utter  desecration  of  each  "  place  knowledge  of  the  Eternal,  Holy  One.

HOMILETICS.
Some  Conclusions  as  to  Sin  (vers.  11-14).

1  That  its  results  will  be  a  manifest  wonder  and  pain  to  servants  of  the
Lord.  They  will  not  merely  "  muse  "  upon  the  evils  which  are  presented  to  them  ;
they  will  at  times  give  way  to  external  expression  of  feeling.  They  will  clap
with  their  hands,  &c. ;  rivers  of  water  will  run  down  their  eyes ;  they  could  wish
themselves  accursed  from  Christ.  Nowhere  should  there  be  such  intense  interest
in  watching  the  development  of  individual  and  national  procedure  as  among  those
who  believe  in  God  who  is  light  and  love.

n.  That  all  sins  are  considered  in  the  judgments  of  the  Lord.  "  All  the
evil  abominations."  And  with  reason.  An  inner  or  outward  evil  is  a  violation  of
law,  and  exerts  a  certain  influence  in  contrariety  to  the  will  of  God.  Each  is  taken
into  His  estimate  of  what  He  must  do  when  He  visits  for  transgressions.

in.  That  various  forms  of  penalty  against  sin  shall  be  inflicted.  Through
disease,  violence,  hunger,  or  some  other  method,  every  sinner  shall  become  an
object  on  which  holy  wrath  will  fall  in  greater  or  less  heaviness.  What  if  we  do
not  understand  the  meaning  of  the  manifold  variety  of  griefs,  pains,  hardships,
which  beset  men  on  their  way  to  death,  is  our  ignorance  a  measure  by  which  to
judge  of  the  knowledge  and  justice  of  the  Lord,  or  not  rather  a  ground  for  making
us  dumb,  not  opening  our  mouth,  because  He  has  done  it  ]  Multiform  sufferings
betoken  multiform  sins.

XV.  That  the  punishment  has  a  correspondence  to  the  sin.     It  was  declared

s  6^


CHAP.  fi.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  EZEKIEL,

to  the  Israelites,  Acknowledge  the  supremacy  of  idols,  and  your  carcases  will  defile
the  places  in  which  you  have  worshipped.  It  is  declared  to  those  who  may  never
have  kissed  their  hands  to  any  images,  Indulge  your  appetites  in  an  illegitimate
way,  and  your  bodies  will  be  infected  by  the  virus  of  the  lust  which  is  specially
gratified  j  be  insincere  or  dishonest  or  proud,  and  your  souls  will  be  cowed  and
stagger  before  the  flashes  of  truth ;  be  a  professing  worshipper  of  God  whose  heart
has  not  taken  the  way  to  the  Father  by  Christ,  and  to  you  the  perfect  peace  which
He  gives  shall  be  altogether  a  stranger  True,  it  is  rarely  possible  for  men  to
say  why  one  person  should  be  laid  under  a  different  kind  of  affliction  from  that
which  another  bears;  but  could  we  see  the  invisible  links  which  bind  the  sin  and
its  own  penalty,  should  we  not  learn  the  true  source  of  many  sufferings  which  are
now  wholly  inexplicable  ?  The  Lord's  judgments  are  a  great  deep,  but  in  that
deep  uniform  forces  are  ever  at  work.

V.  That  God  alone  deals  with  sin.  Germs  of  disease,  invading  bands  of  men,
unpropitious  seasons,  irreverence  and  neglect  of  the  means  of  grace  apparently
occasion  pains,  bereavements,  struggles  for  life,  a  God  who  does  no  mighty  work ;
but  the  apparent  factors  are  His  methods  of  acting.  Behind  the  laws  of  nature
and  the  forces  which  operate  through  social  man,  and  which  are  operating  in
punishing  wrong-doing,  a  spiritual  mind  will  perceive  the  Lord's  hand.  Judgment
and  mercy  come  from  Him.  Understanding  this,  Jesus  Christ,  "  bearing  our  sins
in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,"  will  be  accepted  and  adored  as  the  Son  of  God  who
came  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  deviL

The  Judiciary  Administration  of  God  (vers.  1-14).

God  connected  Himself  with  Israel  in  a  manner  He  never  had  done  with
any  nation  before,  nor  would  with  any  other  again.  In  their  case  the  actual
experience  of  suffering  on  account  of  sin  must  have  a  certain  singularity  in  it,
so  that  it  is  possible  to  trace  the  execution  of  His  judgments  upon  them.  Still
there  is  no  caprice  in  His  dealings ;  whensoever  Israel's  guilt  is  incurred,  there  will
infallibly  be  a  renewal  of  Israel's  doom.  The  gospel  has  brought  no  suspension  of
God's  justice,  and  only  after  it  had  been  sent  and  put  from  them  did  the  wrath
fall  upon  the  Jews  to  the  uttermost,  as  it  will  upon  similar  transgressors.  The
reasonableness  of  the  severity  exercised  may  be  perceived  by  glancing  at  the  guilt
and  the  punishment.

1.  The  peculiar  calling  of  Israel.  They  were  placed  in  a  region  that  afforded
obvious  and  varied  facilities  for  exerting  a  beneficial  and  commanding  influence  on
the  mind  of  ancient  heathendom.  They  were  to  take  advantage  of  this  position
so  as  to  make  known  the  character  and  extend  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  Thus
Moses  declared,  "  All  the  people  of  the  earth  should  see  that  the  Lord  had  estab-
lished them  to  be  a  holy  people  to  Himself  and  called  them  by  His  name."  They
were  settled  on  a  high  vantage-ground  for  acting  the  part  of  the  world's  benefactors.
This  calling  of  Israel  in  respect  to  the  nations  now  rests  upon  the  Christian  Church ;
only  owing  to  dispensational  changes  the  impulse  is  communicated  individually,  not
nationally.  Besides,  the  Jewish  religion  was  predominantly  of  a  symbolical  char-
acter, and  outward  prosperity  had  to  play  an  essential  part  in  its  propagation.  Now
tlie  great  element  of  power  lies  in  the  truth  itself  and  in  its  influence  exhibited  by  the
lives  of  God's  people.  With  differences  as  to  method  of  working,  the  obligation
remains  substantially  the  same.  The  possession  of  the  world  is  Christ's  by  right,
and  He  commits  it  to  His  people  to  make  good  the  title.  Happy  if  they  do  so ;  but
if  not,  heavy  must  be  their  condemnation.

2.  The  condemnation  of  Israel.  They  did  not  extend  the  knowledge  of  the
glory  of  the  Lord,  but  adopted  the  corrupt  worships  of  surrounding  nations,  and
did  worse  than  they.  In  the  face  of  all  remonstrances  and  warnings  the}?  fell  in  with
Gentile  superstitions.    They  did  so  because  of  their  prevailing  carnality  and  corrap

60


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  TIL


tion  of  heart,  whicli  the  nature-religions  of  heathenism  did  nothing  to  check,  but
rather  fostered.  In  those  religions  every  god  had  its  represeutation  in  a  visible
idol,  but  the  gods  themselves  were  such  as  the  natural  heart  desires  —  gods
"  whose  attributes  were  pride,  revenge,  and  lust ; "  while  in  Judaism  there  was,  in
the  bosom  of  every  service,  a  spiritual  and  holy  God  as  the  sole  object  of  venera-
tion, and  conformity  to  His  will  the  one  great  end  to  be  aimed  at.  With  the  loss  of
a  spirit  of  piety  they  became  unfit  for  the  duties  of  a  pure  service  and  ashamed  of
its  sanctity,  and  accepted  from  their  neighbours  a  more  palatable  religion.  The
same  perversity  lives  in  the  Christian  Churcli,  and  in  every  country  in  Christendom
Israel's  folly  is  perpetually  repeating  itself  What  is  Popery  but  an  accommodation
of  the  pure  spirit  of  the  gospel  to  the  grovelling  tendencies  of  the  flesh  %  And  in
Protestant  lands  the  thoughts  and  maxims  of  the  world  are  mixed  up  with  those  of
the  gospel,  so  that  a  compound  is  formed  which  the  natural  man  does  not  quarrel
with  or  blush  for.  Hence  the  spiritual  languor,  the  worldly  mindedness,  the
numberless  forms  of  vanity  and  pollution,  which  are  so  commonly  seen  going  hand
in  hand  with  a  religious  profession,  and  which  rob  the  Church  of  her  power  to  con-
quer and  bless  the  world.  Nor  can  she  fulfil  her  destiny  or  be  safe  from  the  rod
of  chastisement  and  rebuke  till  the  foul  admixtures  are  purged  out,  and  in  reliance
on  the  Divine  Word,  and  in  unswerving  adherence  to  righteousness  and  truth,  she
goes  forth  to  resist  and  put  down  whatever  is  opposed  to  the  will  of  Heaven. —
Fairhairn  {ah'idged).


5.  Lamentation  over  the  Desolated  Land  (Chap,  vii.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— In  this
chapter  we  have  not  so  much  an  addi-
tional prophecy  as  a  re-statement  of  prin-
ciples and  denunciations  which  had  been
already  formulated.  It  affords  abundant
illustration  of  the  tendency  of  Ezekiel
to  repeat  his  messages,  and  to  use  even
the  same  forms  of  expression.  But  some
of  the  repetition  here  must  be,  moreover,
accounted  for  by  the  highly  excited  emo-
tions under  w  hose  influence  he  wrote.
That  these  emotions  should  take  poetical
modes — abrupt  utterances,  rhythmical
combinations, refrains, and  demand  again
and  again  an  avowal,  these  are  matters
which  may  receive  many  confirmations
from  ancient  and  modern,  from  biblical
and  secular  literatures.  Especially  might
a  prophet,  who  was  abiding  under  the
shadow  of  God  and  was  sufiering  in  the
sufferings  of  His  people,  give  forth  the
sij^ns  of  strong  feeling  in  his  words,  and
they  with  appropriateness  present  hints
of  the  mighty  power  which  constrained
him — of  the  divine  voice  which  sounded
in  the  chambers  of  his  heart.  We  shall
miss  one  purport  of  the  message  if  we
do  not  find  it  apprising  us  of  visions
suggesting  the  nature  of  the  living  and
revealing  Lord.


Vers,  1-4.  The  imminence  of  the  lancTa
doom.

Ver.  2.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God
unto  the  land  of  Israel,  An  end."     It

seems  preferable  to  read,  "  Thtis  saith
the  Lord  God,  Unto  the  country  of  Israel
an  end"  By  this  reading  it  is  more
apparent  that  the  prophet  was  not  to
address  the  country,  but  give  a  message
respecting  its  impending  downfall  as  a
territory.  This  end  was  to  be  no  minor
end,  but  one  in  which  many  a  past
penalty  culminated  :  "the  end  is  come
upon  the  four  corners  of  the  land."
Events  in  our  own  generation  have  shown
that  invading  armies  give  birth  to  out-
rages on  persons,  waste  of  stores  of
food,  outbreaks  of  pestilent  diseases.
The  unearthed  Assyrian  sculptures  may
be  taken  as  proofs  that  all  such  calami-
ties were  still  more  hideously  evolved
by  the  armies  of  Chaldea.  Once  and
again  that  "  bitter  and  hasty  nation "
had  launched  its  hordes  across  the  land
of  Israel.  They  would  not  spare  age
or  sex ;  they  would  burn  up  crops  and
destroy  grain  which  they  could  not  carry
away ;  they  would  leave  behind  them,
where  they  did  leave  any,  a  depressed,
impoverished  population,  amongst  whouj

67


CHAP.  Til.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,

pestilence  would  find  a  wide  field  for  its  Ver.  4.  The  three  chief  clauses  have
ravages.  Every  quarter  of  the  region  been  stated  before.  The  first  agrees
of  Israel  would  have,  as  it  were,  come  with  chap.  v.  11  ;  the  second  with  ver.
to  its  end  when  the  Chaldean  soldiers  3,  except  that  the  threatenings  here  in-
had  made  their  last  inroad,  and  there  timate  a  closer  connection  between  the
would  be  nothing  more  of  a  monarchy  painful  consequences  to  the  people  and
filled  by  the  house  of  David.  their  doings  ;  "  I  will  lay  upon  thee
Ver.  3.  "Now  the  end  is  upon  thy  ways,"  is  put  for  judging  them
thee;*'  it  is  just  at  hand,  and  the  har-  according  to  their  ways;  and  instead  of
vest  for  which  that  and  preceding  laying  on  them  all  their  ahominationSj
generations  has  been  sowing  will  be  us  a  burden  external  to  them,  "  thine
immediately  reaped.  Iniquity  was  full,  abominations  shall  be  in  the  midst  of
and  no  more  space  for  confessions  and  thee,"  affecting  from  within  as  well  as
promises  of  amendment  would  be  given.  from  without.  The  third  clause  is  an-
The  end  would  come  through  the  opera-  other  repetitit)n  of  the  purpose  with
tions  of  the  Lord :  *'  I  will  send  " — "  I  which  this  terrible  end  as  well  as  other
will  judge"  .  .  .  "Iwillrecompense"  moral  punishments  was  carried  out,
— give,  or  lay,  <fec. ;  but  His  operations  "  Ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the
would  be  instigated  by  the  "ways'*  Lord."
and  "  abominations  "  of  the  people.

IIOMILETICS.
Some  Aspects  of  God's  Government  over  Men.

Ezekiel,  like  the  Hebrew  prophets  in  general,  saw  the  working  of  other  than
material  forces  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  and  that  with  a  clearness
which  cannot  be  paralleled  in  any  nation's  records.  In  this  short  paragraph  the
traces  of  such  insight  are  perceived  to  be  set  in  no  ambiguous  phraseology.

I.  There  is  progressive  spiritual  development  in  human  history.  The  whole
Bible,  when  rightly  considered,  is  a  witness  to  this.  Each  part  of  it  is  laid  as  an
organic  accretion  on  that  part  which  went  before.  Nor  is  this  conclusion  to  be
referred  only  to  events :  it  is  as  certain  in  regard  to  principles  and  truths.  Moral
and  religious  ideas  and  practices  contained  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  are  seen  to  be
vaguely  and  inadequately  appreciated  before  they  are  clearly  and  more  fully  per-
ceived. And  not  a  thing  of  His  is  stationary.  It  will,  doubtless,  take  new  forms
in  the  mind  of  every  believer  as  he  passes  through  the  normal  stages  of  growth.
He  is  first  a  babe  using  milk,  and  he  has  to  go  on  unto  the  stature  of  a  perfect
man.  As  it  is  with  individuals,  so  is  it  with  a  nation  and  with  the  race.  They
will  learn  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  obligation  of  holiness,  not  by  a  sudden  catastrophe
and  revelation,  but  by  slowly  evolving  processes  of  loss  and  pain,  of  yearning  and
hope.  The  development  may  seem  ver^  often  retarded,  **  the  divine  event,"  in
which  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,
may  be  far  off,  nevertheless  the  end  shall  come,  for  which  other  ends  have  been
arrived  at — the  end  at  which  all  things  shall  be  seen  subjected  to  Him  who  is  all
in  all.

II.  There  is  a  signal  doom  for  progressive  phases  of  wrongdoing.  The
Israelites  had  been  again  and  jigain  afflicted  '*  very  sore  "  because  of  their  iniquities,
but  they  had  continued  to  possess  something  like  a  national  life  throughout  those
calamities.  Their  chastisement  had  produced  no  true  amendment,  however,  and
that  judgment  which  should  include  in  its  operation  the  consequences  of  all  their
unrighteousness  would  entirely  alter  the  aspects  of  the  chosen  people.  They  had
been  moving  on  to  this  catastrophe,  and  Ezekiel  was  enlightened  to  see  its  near
approach.  He  understood  the  signs  of  his  times  ;  he  interpreted  their  meaning,
and  pressed  upon  the  understanding  and  consciences  of  the  people  the  awful  guilt

09


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  viL


in  which  they  were  involved,  by  the  sins  of  their  fathers  as  by  their  own  sins.  Ho
declared  tiiat  there  would  be  no  suspension  now  ;  the  end  of  Israel  as  a  society,
organised  according  to  forces  which  had  been  existing  for  generations,  was  reached.
Whatever  may  be  its  influence  in  the  world  hereafter,  it  will  be  exerted  under
different  conditions  from  that  of  its  past.  The  lines  over  which  its  future  will
move  must  be  projected  into  new  scenery.  In  signifying  this  fact  the  prophet  may
be  held  to  propose  two  principles —

1.  All  calamities  are  hound  up  in  preceding  events  and  tendencies.  An  effect
is  nothing  but  tiie  sequence  of  causes.  However  different  it  appears  from  ihem,
not  one  thing  is  in  it  which  is  not  the  product  of  that  which  has  gone  before.
There  was  no  weight  pressing  the  Jewish  peo[)le  into  the  dust  which  they  had  not
lifted  upon  themselves ;  there  was  no  stripe  inflicted  but  was  drawn  down  by  a  dis-
obedience. The  punishment  was  only  another  form  of  the  abomination  indulged  in,
as  the  slag  is  but  another  form  of  ingredients  in  metals  which  have  been  exposed
to  fire.  We  are  what  we  are,  we  suffer  what  we  suffer,  not  by  any  chance,  but  by
reason  of  what  has  already  happened  to  us.  There  is  judgment  and  mercy  in
this.  We  learn  what  our  disposition  and  conduct  lead  to.  We  shall  bear  our  own
burden,  whatever  it  be,  because  we  have  first  put  our  shoulder  under  the  yoke
which  makes  that  burden.

2.  Calamities  are  specially  painful  in  the  last  stage  of  critical  changes.  Israel
had  grossly  belied  its  God,  had  practised  debasing  superstitions,  had  walked  andd
the  festering  swamps  of  what  was  lowest  and  vilest.  Tuere  was  no  remedy  unless
it  miglit  come  through  a  judgment  which  would  fill  them  with  terror  and  anguish.
By  sword,  famine,  pestilence,  the  land  would  be  harried.  Yet  the  terribleness
of  the  inflicted  evil  was  but  the  incoming  of  wicked  ways  and  defiling  abominations
to  roost

*'  The  wise  gods  seal  our  eyes
In  our  own  filth,  drop  our  clear  judgments,  make  ns
Adore  our  errors,  laugh  at  us  as  we  strut
To  our  confusion."

The  effort  to  turn  unfair  privileges  into  fairness  for  all,  or  to  make  bad  laws
into  good,  is  never  easy.  Tiie  discomfiture  of  interests  which  are  hurtful  to  the
moral  welfare  of  a  people  cannot  be  brought  about  without  serious  conflict  and
losses.  The  attempt  to  promulgate  new  land  laws  for  Ireland,  the  struggle  with
the  slave-power  in  the  United  States,  the  shattering  of  the  ancien  regime  of
France,  the  perilous  turmoil  of  the  Reformation,  the  destruction  of  feudalism
throughout  Europe,  are  witnesses  that  no  revolution  of  thought  or  practice  is  pain-
less.     In  a  sense  it  is  sin  finding  out  the  sinners,  as  in  this  end  of  Israel.

Such  an  end,  however,  introduces  a  new  process.  The  old  passes  away  never
to  reappear.  The  suffering  which  characterises  the  transition  prepares  for  another
condition  in  which  trouble  and  pain  may  still  be,  but  which  is  the  foretoken  of
richer  blessings  in  coming  days.

in.  There  is  a  divine  will  shaping  events.  Natural  or  social  forces  cannot,
when  regarded  simply  as  natural  agents,  light  upon  the  persons  who  have  donc>
wickedly.  They  are  weapi>ns  held  in  the  hands  of  the  righteous  Lord.  They
strike  where  He  directs  them  to,  and  with  the  weight  which  He  chooses  to  employ.
It  is  the  tendency  of  our  modern  thinking  to  set  forth  the  external  phenomena  as
all  that  requires  attention — as  if  we  were  to  be  concerned  with  the  powder  which
exph)ded,  and  not  with  the  person  who  had  laid  it  and  lighted  the  match.  But  it
is  the  living  Ruler  who,  in  the  operation  of  moral  laws,  gives  to  them  their  power
to  punish  and  to  im])rove.  Individuals  and  nations  are  not  atoms  vibrating  under
unconscious  forces  and  sequences  ;  they  are  sinners  judged  for  their  sins,  and
judged  if  so  be  they  will  learn  righteousness  and  turn  to  Him  who  smites  them.
When  He  destroys  one  house  it  is  that  He  may  build  another.  When  He  buries  the
worm-pierced  shell,  it  is  that  by  its  decomposition  a  more  fertile  soil  may  be  formed.

69


CHAP.  VII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL.


It  is  thus  tbrougliout  all  generations.  The  Eternal  God  manifests  no  change  in
His  judgments  on  right  and  wrong.  All  events  convey  indications  of  His  judg-
ment and  of  the  winding  up  of  earth's  chequered  story  on  the  last  day  ;  and  they
also  convey  indications  of  His  gracious  pui-i)ose  to  make  "the  knowledge  of  the
Lord  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  How  the  judgment  and  the
mercy  will  be  worked  into  the  changing  thoughts  of  the  world  is  too  deep  a  pro-
blem for  us  to  solve.  But  nevertheless  we  may  hold  unwaveringly  to  the  principle
that  "  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  ever,  the  thoughts  of  His  heart  to  all
generations."


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  5-9.

No  necessity  exists  for  supposing  that
the  text  of  this  strophe,  on  account  of
its  close  resemblance  to  the  preceding
verges,  is  corrupt.  A  better  interpreta-
tion would  make  us  believe  that  the
deep  feeling  of  the  prophet's  Lord  seeks
again  to  utter  itself  through  the  feeling
of  the  prophet.  It  is  natural  to  repeat
a  cry  of  anguish  or  a  complaint  under
the  pressure  of  that  which  distresses  us.

Ver.  5.  "An  evil,"  which  is  placed  in
a  specially  distinct  light  by  the  epithet
added,  "  an  only  evil,  behold,  is  come."
The  calamity  about  to  befall  Israel
would  be  of  a  singular  kind,  for  which
no  parallel  could  be  found  (chap.  v.  9).
"  The  Lord  will  make  an  utter  end  ;
trouble  shall  not  rise  up  the  second
time  "  (Nah.  i.  9).

Ver.  6.  This  unique  evil  would  be  folded
up  in  "an  end"  of  Israel's  state,  which,
now  inevitable,  "  is  come."  It  had  been
slumbering,  but  "  the  end  watcheth  for
thee."  It  is  wakeful  and  observant.  It
is,  as  a  pent-up  flood,  held  back  by  a
sole  remaining  obstacle,  and  that  also
showing  signs  of  giving  way.  The
measure  of  iniquity  is  full  and  the  con-
demnation will  no  more  linger,  "Be-
hold, it  is  come,"  and  includes  in  itself
the  completion  of  all  that  is  embraced
in  the  divine,  righteous  judgments.

Ver.  7.  "The  morning."  The  Heb-
rew word  thus  translated  is  of  uncer-
tain import.  Besides  here  and  ver.  10,
the  only  other  place  in  whicli  it  occurs
is  Isa.  xxviii.  5,  and  there  it  is  trans-
lated by  diadem.  That  meaning  cannot
be  accepted  for  this  chapter.  A  prophe-
tical morning  is  generally  applied  to  the
breaking  forth  of  light,  deliverance,  (fee,
yet  an  explanation  seems  requisite  that
is  not  in  accordance  with  such  an  idea.
The  most  favoured  conclusion  is  that
70


which  connects  the  word  with  an  allied
root  indicating  that  the  word  here  means
something  v\hich  makes  a  round  or  circle,
and  is  metaphorically  interpreted  of  that
which  the  revolution  ot"  tune  promotes:
the  turn,  the  fate,  that  which  is  destined
"is  come  unto  thee  .  .  .  the  day  of
trouble  is  near."  The  laws  of  Het.rew
parallelism  suggest  that  the  word  trans-
lated trouble  is  in  a  relation  of  contrast
to  the  next  clause  of  the  verse,  "and
not  the  sounding  again  of  the  moun-
tains." This,  as  it  stands,  is  somewhat
unmeaning.  To  say  that  the  phrase
alludes  to  the  joyous  shoutings  at
vintage-time,  and  to  understand  it  as
intimating  that  there  would  be  no  more
the  exuberant  joy  of  harvest  upon  the
mountains,  appears  to  be  rather  far-
fetched. More  probable  is  it  that  the
allusion  is  to  idolatrous  festivities  upon
the  mountains  of  Israel,  as  was  illus-
trated by  the  prophets  of  Baal  when,
^sacrificing  to  their  god  upon  Mount
Carmel,  they  made  loud  and  prolonged
sounds.  We  prefer  to  translate  thus :
The  day  is  near;  a  tumult — as  in  a
panic  of  fugitives  from  ihe  sword  and
famine  (cf.  vi.  4-6) — and  not  shouts  of
idolaters  when  worshi[)])ing  ujyon  the
mountains.  The  silence  of  death  would
fall  upon  the  scenes  where  dishonour
was  done  to  the  living  God.

Ver.  8.  The  end  cannot  be  retarded,
"Now will  I  shortly  " — immediately —
"  pour  out  my  fury  upon  thee."  His
judgment  will  not  linger  any  more.  The
course  of  evil  will  take  Israel  into  the
woes  and  horrors  produced  by  their  own
sins.  The  following^  clauses  have  been
already  presented,  with  slight  verbal
differences  ,  in  ver.  3,  and  ver.  9  is  a
similar  re[)etition  of  ver.  4.  "The
abominations  stand  in  Israel's  midst  not
in  their  alluring,   seductive   form,  but


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohaf.  vil


with  all  tlie  woe  which  comes  in  their  Eternal  Holy  King  who  was  inflicting
train  "  (Haev).  The  point  of  definite-  the  punishment  and  claiming  recognition
ness  which  is  to  be  recognised  is  the  un-  and  submission.  The  Lord  "  the  life-
changing  purpose  of  all  the  Lord's  deal-  giver,  who  would  die  to  preserve  His
ings.°  "  Ye  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  children,  but  would  rather  slay  them
smite."  The  people  were  to  realise  that  than  they  should  live  the  servants  of
it  was  really  not  the  Chaldeans,  but  their  evil"

HOMILETICS,

Trouble  on  Trouble  for  Sin  (vers.  5-9).

Human  experiences  have  caused  the  formulating  of  such  proverbs  as  **It  never
rains  but  it  pours,"  *'  Misfortunes  never  come  alone."  If  many  who  use  such
worils  make  no  reference,  when  another  weight  of  suffering  is  laid  upon  one  already
imposed,  to  the  primal  power  which  maintains  this  course  of  affairs,  there  was  no
omission  in  respect  to  that  power  among  the  statements  of  Hebrew  prophets.
They  discerned  the  shadowy  movements  of  a  righteous  Rnler,  producing  not  only
an  isolated  trouble,  but  also  clusters  of  troubles.  They  were  well  aware  that  truth,
if  unpalatable,  required  to  be  enforced  again  and  again,  and  that  a  true  lesson,
■which  might  not  be  learned  under  the  infliction  of  one  pain,  might  be  learned
when  pain  was  followed  by  pain.  The  same  method  was  observed  in  Him  who
"  spake  as  never  man  spake."  The  stern  repetition  of  "  woe  unto  you,"  which
Jesus  deemed  it  fitting  to  emit,  must  have  made  the  ears  of  scribes  and  Pharisees
to  tingle ;  even  to-day  the  awe  and  dread  survive  when  they  are  read.  It  seems
established  as  a  principle  of  divine  procedure  that  transgressors  may  learn
righteousness  by  reiterated  judgments.  We  may  receive  directions  as  to  a  becom-
ing way  of  regarding  repeated  trials  from  our  |>ro|>het.      He  suggests —

I.  That  sufferings  for  sins  will  be  completed.  An  evil  first  comes,  and  after-
wards an  evil  which  will  make  a  singularly  deep  impression, — "an  only  evil."  The
end  which  utterly  condemns  the  sin  is  not  brought  about  at  once.  Stages  of  pro-
gress towards  it  are  taken.  Some  of  the  sinners  may  repent,  or  may  die  before
the  last  point  is  reached,  but  they  who  do  arrive  there  have  passed  other  stages
previously.  The  suffering  may  be  so  slight  that  the  individuals  or  nations  affected
can  afford  to  make  light  of  it  and  go  on  their  usual  way.  It  may  be  so  serious
that  they  stand  for  days  or  months  in  a  sort  of  fear  of  doing  wrong,  then  their
goodness,  like  the  morning  cloud  or  early  dew,  vanishes  away.  The  end  of  inflict-
ing the  various  sufferings  will,  nevertheless,  come.  The  house  whose  foundation
has  been  laid  in  sand  will  be  touched  in  successive  years  by  casual  floods,  but  not
till  the  fatal  year,  when  a  dire  flood  will  descend,  shall  the  house  be  overthrown.
A  nation  may  continue  for  one  century  or  more  to  indulge  in  luxuri(ms  living  and
to  practise  ungodly  conduct;  but  the  blows  of  truth  and  right  will  be  repeated
until  the  old  evil  state  falls  down.  "Their  feet  will  slide  in  due  time,**  They  will
reap  what  they  have  sown  and  the  end  of  justice  will  be  attained,

II.  That  sufferings  for  sins  are  of  varying  degrees.  Similar  sins  may  be
chargeable  against  different  individuals,  but  sinu.ar  sufferings  are  not  endured  in
consequence.  It  is  a  perplexity  in  modern  days,  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Job,
and  as  insoluble  to  us  as  it  was  to  him  and  his  fiiends.  The  messages  of  Ezekiel
threw  a  streak  of  light  into  our  perplexity.  They  indicate  that  the  utmost  suffer-
ing— that  which  will  be  recognised  as  greater  than  any  other — comes  as  a  result
of  loosening  the  ties  which  should  hold  men  to  God.  Let  there  be  disregard  to
divine  rights,  and  sooner  or  later  there  will  be  disregard  to  human  rights.  And
when  bt)th  God  and  our  brethren  are  sinned  against,  the  penalty  for  the  misdeeds
may  well  be  felt  as  singular  in  its  intensity,  and  evoke  comments  in  marts  of
business  as  well  as  in  meetings  for  religious  objects.     Thus  the  observant  eye  is

71


CHAP.  VII.  HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


trained  to  see  striking  differences  in  the  inflictions  befalling  men  wlio  go  in  wrong
courses.

IIL  That  sufferings  for  sin  may  be  rapidly  accelerated  in  their  final  stage.

The  Babylonian  army  kept  hovering  over  Judea  and  now  and  then  swooping  down
upon  it  ]  but  at  length,  when  that  watchful  foe  came  in  aggravated  wrath,  the  ruin
of  Jerusalem  was  speedily  consummated,  and  the  Jewish  nationality  was  crumpled  up
as  by  a  sudden  blight.  The  Babylonian  Empire  in  its  turn,  after  resisting  various
shockti,  fell  to  pieces  as  in  a  moment :  "  In  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the  king  of
the  Chaldeans  slain,  and  Darius  the  Mede  took  the  kingdom"  (Dan.  v.  30,  31).
Our  generation  has  seen,  in  the  war  between  France  and  Germany,  how  the  Empire
which  had  been  raised  by  "  gunpowder  and  glory  "  collapsed  with  startling  abrupt-
ness. This  event  need  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  French  Empire  was  deluding
and  wicked  beyond  all  other  governments  \  yet  at  least  it  may  be  taken  to  mean
that  "a  short  work  on  the  earth"  may  be  made  with  communities  which  allow
themselves  to  be  misled  by  interested  and  pretentious  designs.  They  will  not
use  time  to  repent  till  confusion  seizes  them.  Whether  that  confusion  will
become  ruinous,  as  was  the  case  with  Babylonia,  or  whether  it  will  prepare  for
new  conditions  of  national  existence,  as  was  the  case  with  Israel,  cannot  be  foretold
by  merely  human  perspicacity.  Any  way  the  contingency  is  instructive  in  showing
tliat  it  is  not  wise  to  make  light  of  troubles  which  are  regarded  as  inconsiderable.
The  moans  of  the  forest-trees  presage  an  approaching  hurricane:  slight  pains  prog-
nosticate the  attack  of  a  virulent  fever ;  and  the  temporal  and  mental  sufferings
which  come  in  consequence  of  sins  should  ever  be  taken  as  warning  of  an  end
that  may  be  destruction.  What  though  you  can  bear  the  uneasiness  or  disregard
it,  yet  remind  yourselves  that  that  brings  no  pledge  of  safety  from  a  sad  and
fearful  aggravation  of  trouble  some  day.  "How  are  they  brought  into  a  desolation
as  in  a  moment  !  they  are  utterly  consumed  with  terrors."

1.  It  becomes  peoples  and  persons  to  be  earnest  in  learning  the  lessons  which
are  given  by  repeated  disappointments,  checks,  pains,  sorrows,  lest  evil  come  upon
them  from  which  they  shall  not  escape.

2.  It  becomes  them  to  stand  in  awe  of  the  Invisible  Worker  whose  varying  pro-
cesses manifest  His  will  to  restrain  and  to  deliver  from  sin.

Eenewed  Assertion  of  the  Approach  of  the  Calamity  (vers.  10-18).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  10.  their  phenomena  were  already  deter-
"  Behold  the  day,  behold  it  is  come."  mined.  "The  [morning]  destiny  goes
It  is  remarkable  ^;vith  what  unity  the  forth,  the  rod  blossoms,  pride  buddeth."
various  prophets  speak  of  the  troubles  The  reference  of  these  words  is  not  to  an
which  they  threatened  as  culminating  in  evil  which  germinated  within  the  terri-
a  day.  It  seems  as  if  they  saw  in  tory  of  Israel,  but  to  an  evil  external  to
calamities  an  ever-recurring  omen  of  it,  which  was  springing  up  and  would
that  day  in  which  earth's  story  would  become  an  instrument  of  execution,
be  judged  of  as  a  whole.  If  that  final  The  rod  is  the  rod  of  the  Lord's  anger
ji:dument  could  not  distinctly  loom  — the  rod  of  the  oppressor,  repre-
before  their  gaze,  it  cast  its  dark  and  sented  in  the  Babylonian  Nebuchad-
troubled  shadows  across  the  scene  in  nezzar.  Like  a  shoot  his  power  was
respect  to  which  *hey  had  to  utter  the  growing,  giving  signs  of  vigorous  vita-
burden  of  the  Lord.  To  us,  as  to  them,  lity,  rapidly  taking  the  form  which  would
all  sufferings  for  wickedness  are  fore-  render  it  fit  to  strike  hard,  and  to  do
tokens  of  the  last  great  day,  when  the  so  with  a  will  energised  by  boasting
fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  and  con-  pride.

sume  all  that  is  not  fit  to  abide  in  a  Ver.    11.    "Violence    rises    into   a

renovated  world  wherein  dwelleth  right-  rod  for  wickedliess."     The  cruelty  and

eousness.      Those    recurring    days    and  outrages  of  the  Chaldeans,  against  which
72


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


CHAP.  vn.


the  prophets  Habakkuk  and  Jeremiah
deal  out  strong  invectives,  woul(i  be  me-
thods for  punishing  the  wicked  doings  of
Israel.  At  the  sight  Ezekiel  becomes  too
deeply  affected  to  fill  up  with  verbs  the
four  following  brief  sentences,  and  he
merely  prefixes  to  each  a  negative.  We
might  render  them  literally,  in  terms  of
the  English  version,  "not  from  them,  and
not  from  their  multitude,  and  not  from
themof  them,  and  not  wailing  in  them."
The  compression  and  uncertain  allu-
sions make  the  sense  somewhat  doubtful.
Besides,  the  meanings  assigned  to  the
several  words  are  not  generally  accepted,
as  marginal  readings  testify.  The  inter-
pretation given  in  the  Speaker's  Com-
mentary is;  "The  furious  Chaldean  has
become  an  instrument  of  God's  wrath,
endued  with  power  emanating  not  from
the  Jews,  or  from  the  multitude  of  the
Jews,  or  from  any  of  their  children  or
peojde ;  nay,  the  destruction  shall  be  so
complete  that  none  shall  be  left  to  make
lamentation  over  them."  Though  this
comment  scarcely  satisfies  the  demands
of  linguistic  accuracy,  it  sufficiently
shows  the  bearing  of  the  prophet's  utter-
ances. The  catastrophe  would  be  such
that  no  one  would  be  left  to  resist.
"  Stroke  will  so  come  upon  stroke  that
lamentation  will  be  forgotten  in  despair.
It  is  the  highest  degree  of  pain  when  the
capacity  to  complain  expires"  (Heng.)
The  weight  of  scholarship,  however,  as
to  the  last  clause,  gives  for  its  transla-
tion, and  there  is  no  attractiveness  in
them  ;  all  that  beauty  of  the  Lord  their
God  which  had  been  upon  them  shall
be  consumed  away  and  utterly  disap-
pear.

Ver.  12.  In  that  state  of  affairs,  pro-
perty, upon  which  such  hidi  value  is
set,  would  produce  no  courfort.  "Let
not  the  buyer  rejoice,  nor  the  seller
mourn/'  "  It  is  natural  for  the  buyer
to  rejoice  and  for  the  seller  to  lament,"
but  no  ground  of  joy  should  be  found  in
that  which  might  seem  to  be  a  good
purchase,  because  it  will  turn  out  to  be
a  source  of  trouble  and  pain.  There
would  be  as  little  ground  for  grief  in
parting  with  property.  The  enemy
would  seize  it  all,  taking  goods,  cattle,
houses,  land,  without  distinction  of  per-


sons. "  When  slavery  and  captivity
stare  you  in  the  face,  rejoicing  and
mourning  are  equally  absurd"  (Jerome).
And  no  one  should  be  passed  by,  "be-
cause wrath  is  upon  all  its  multitude;"
upon  all  who  dwell  in  the  territory  of
Israel  whose  "  end  "  is  pronounced.

Ver.  13  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  de-
velopment of  what  was  just  said  con-
cerning the  universality  of  wrath.  "The
seller  "  is  not  to  mourn,  for  he  "  shall
not  return  to  that  which  is  sold."  He
may  have  become  an  exile;  the  fall  in
the  value  of  property  may  have  made  it
burdensome  to  hold ;  there  may  have
been  forced  sales  of  substance  which  had
been  prized  by  the  seller — he  need  not
allow  one  regret.  He  will  never  find  an
opportunity  to  get  back  what  he  had
thus  let  go  :  not  "  although  they  were
yet  alive,"  i.e.,  whoever  of  the  sellers
might  be  counted  among  the  living  were
not  to  cherish  any  hope  that  in  time
they  should  recover  the  property  which
they  had  sold.  As  parts  of  the  surviv-
ing remnant  they  would  be  in  a  captive
state  from  which  they  would  have  no
restoration,  or  the  waves  of  Chaldean
rapine  would  so  beat  upon  the  whole
territoiy  as  to  obliterate  every  trace  of
former  arrangements.  Life  would  not
bring  back  again  past  enjoyments.
Again  Ezekiel  emphasises  the  indiscri-
minateness  of  the  punishment;  "for
the  vision  "  which  he  has  described  as
shadowing  forth  the  imminent  evil  "is
upon,"  has  reference  to,  "  all  its  multi-
tude." In  the  words  which  immediately
follow,  the  prophet  does  not  intimate  a
possible  event  happening  to  the  multi-
tude, but  repeats  that  w^hich  had  been
already  said  of  the  seller — "  he  shall
not  return."  Yet  should  any  one  sup-
pose that,  by  fraud,  violence,  or  other
immoral  way,  he  would  be  able  to  re-
assert his  title  to  the  possessions  he  once
had,  he  must  disabuse  his  mind  of  the
folly,  "neither  shall  any  strengthen
themselves  in  the  iniquity  of  his  life ; "
or,  to  put  it  literally,  and  a  mari  in  the  ini-
quity of  his  life — they  shall  not  strengthen
themselves.  The  same  movement,  viz.,
from  a  single  representative  to  all  the
individuals,  which  we  see  in  the  first
half  of  the  verse,  is  repeated  in  this  last

73


OHAP.  VII.


OMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL.


clause,  and  scope  is  given  for  varit  ty  of
translation.  Keil's  is,  and  no  one  ivdl
strengthen  himself  as  to  his  life  through
his  iniquity.  But  whatever  order  the
words  may  be  put  into,  the  meaning  is
conveyed  that  no  one  whosoever,  so  long
as  he  is  alive,  will  have  any  ease  by  his
iniquity ;  he  will  be  weak  and  crippled
still,  unable  to  escape  the  doom  of
wrath.

Many  commentators  find  in  these
two  verses  distinct  references  to  the
continued  vigorous  usages  of  the  law
foT  the  jubilee  year,  according  to  which
land  and  houses  reverted  to  their
original  owners.  It  is,  to  say  the  least,
doubtful  if  this  idea  can  be  sustained.
That  the  phrases  of  the  prophet  are
moulded  by  principles  inherent  in  the
law  of  jubilee  is  not  at  all  unlikely,
but  that  his  popular  phraseology  should
be  held  to  intimate  that  the  processes
incident  to  that  law  were  validly  main-
tained is  more  than  can  be  granted.  It
is  very  questionable  whether  the  law
was  observed  at  all  in  the  later  periods
of  Jewish  history,  if  in  the  earlier.
The  remarkable  omission  of  any  satis-
factory indication  of  its  operation,  of
course,  cannot  be  pleaded  as  a  proof
♦".hat  the  enactment  had  become  alto-
gether obsolete  ;  but  it  may  be  taken  to
show  that,  like  the  community  of  goods
in  the  primitive  Jerusalem  Church,  the
plan  became  unworkable  in  a  society
fermenting  with  the  elements  of  social
changes.  With  the  exception  of  a  very
few  indecisive  expressions  in  Isaiah  and
Jeremiah,  as  well  as  this  one  here,  not
a  single  prophet  has  condemned  neglect
of  jubilee  enactments  or  acknowledged
their  fulfilment.  Perhaps  it  should  be
regarded  as  a  collateral  proof  of  the  law
of  jubilee  being  in  abeyance,  that  that
section  of  the  law,  which  required
Hebrew  bond-servants  to  be  set  free  in
the  jubilee  year,  was  certainly  disre-
garded in  practice.  Jeremiah  (chap.
xxxiv.)  shows  that  there  had  been  a
momentary  reaction  towards  obedience
to  the  aforesaid  section ;  but  that  un-
brotherliness  and  greed  had  soon  brought
a  return  of  the  prohibited  oppression.
Man's  failure  to  carry  out  such  a  law
is  not  a  sign  that  its  principles  are
74


unsound  or  its  practice  impossible  in
human  societies.  Both  it  and  the
having  all  things  C(mimon  in  Christian
Churches  have  these  characterising
features,  that  God's  authority  is  placed
over  all  things,  and  that  all  men  are
brethren.  We  look  for  an  age  in  which
these  shall  be  supremely  prominent —
the  good  time  coming,  when  love  shall
reign  over  all  the  earth.  Ezekiel  men-
tions the  development  of  the  slighted
principles  of  those  old  decrees  as  sure  to
appear  in  that  new  theocracy,  whose
details  he  will  afterwards  set  forth
(chap.  xlvi.  16-18).

Vers.  14,  15.  A  more  disastrous  re-
sult than  the  depreciation  and  aban-
donment of  property  would  be  evident
in  the  unhinged  and  demoralised  spirit
of  the  people.  The  biblical  history  of
the  Jews  goes  to  prove  that  on  the
whole  they  were  brave  and  courageous,
ready  both  to  defend  themselves  and
attack  others.  This  characteristic  would
be  lost  in  the  grievous  period  of  the  end
so  close  at  hand.  "  They  have  blown
the  trumpet,  and,"  with  the  view  "to
make  all  ready  " — a  call  to  all  capable
of  bearing  arms  is  sounded,  and  they
are  summoned  to  stand  equipped  in
every  particular  for  meeting  the  foe.
It  is  in  vain ;  there  is  no  martial  re-
sponse. It  is  not  for  want  of  men,
money,  weapons.  Besides  country,  pro-
perty, religion,  life  are  at  stake,  '*bllt
none  goeth  forth  to  the  battle."  The
consciousness  of  lying  under  divine  pun-
ishment unmans  them  :  "  for  my  wrath
is  upon  all  the  multitude  thereof."
This  would  be  shown  in  the  fatal
sufferings  which  they  would  endure.
They  would  be  cut  down  in  the  open
by  the  sword  of  the  enemy.  They
would  perish  in  pent-up  streets  or  closed
houses  by  hunger  and  disease.  "  The
issues  of  death "  would  fatally  work
upon  them.

Ver.  16.  Yet  the  door  of  mercy
will  not  be  utterly  walled  up ;  some
fugitives  will  reach  safety  through  it,
though  they  may  be  few.  For  them  it  is
provided,  and  they  "shall  escape,  and
shall  be  on  the  mountains  like  doves
of  the  valleys."  Those  survivors  will
seek  refuge  in  elevated,  retired  districts,


ROM  I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  VII.


actins  on  the  idea  which  was  enunciated
at  a  later  day  by  Jesus  of  Nazareth,
"  Let  them  which  are  in  Judea  flee  to
the  niountains."  In  such  a  condilioii  of
hardship  they  will  keep  together — be
like  flocks  of  pigeons  which  have  been
disturbed  in  their  resorts  on  the  lower
ground,  and  maintaui  a  continual  cooing
among  the  rocky  heights  up  to  wliich
they  have  flown  for  safety — ''  all  of
them  mourning."  Similar  expressions
useti  by  other  prophets  indicate  that  the
sound  natural  to  doves  was  regarded  by
the  Hebrews  as  suggestive  of  sorrow.
Ewald  says,  "The  Arabian  poets  still
find  in  cooing  the  sounds  of  lamenta-
tion, as  if  the  bird's  notes  came  from  a
feeling  of  pain."  In  English  poetry  we
find—

**  The  stockdove  only  through  the  forest  coos,
Mournfully  hoarse."

This  mourning,  on  the  part  of  all
those  who  had  escaped  from  the  terrors
of  death,  would  be  aggravated  by  an
element  for  which  there  was  no  alleviat-
ing counteractive  in  earthly  means ;
"every  one  for  his  iniquity."  Each
sees  not  only  that  sin  had  been  no
defence,  but  also  that  it  brings  bitter
regrets,  and  he  could  complain  of  its
deceitful ness.  This  recoil  from  iniquity
was  not  an  unusual  course  for  the  Israel-
ites. Successive  eras  of  their  national
history  furnish  illustration  of  those  words
of  Isaiah,  "  In  trouble  have  they  visited
Thee  ;  they  poured  out  a  prayer  when
Tny  chastening  was  upon  them."  They
could  perceive,  in  the  evils  which  befell
them,  tokens  of  the  wrongs  they  had
been  guilty  of,  as  no  other  people  con-
temporary with  them,  and  perhaps  no
])eople  of  any  period  whatever,  could  do.
The  rights  of  God  over  them  were  again
and  again  brought  into  distinctness  after
seasons  of  efi'acement.     They  then    re-


cognised that  relief  was  to  be  sought
nowhere  save  in  God  alone,  and  they
afflicted  their  souls  before  Him.  Too
often,  with  the  majority,  it  was  not  with
godly  sorrow,  but  with  the  sorrow  of
the  world.  They  grieved  over  the  hard
consequences  of  sin  rather  than  over
its  dishonouring  of  the  Father.  They
longed  for  the  removal  of  its  punishment
rather  than  for  deliverance  from  its
po^^er  and  guilt.

Vers.  17,  18.  The  weakness  and  gen-
eral helplessness  of  the  fugitives  are
depicted  in  strong  figurative  terms,
"  AH  hands,  all  knees,"  as  inadequate
for  their  functions  as  if  their  strength
had  wholly  sli^jped  away — a  repetition  of
the  scene  in  the  wilderness,  when  the  chil-
dren of  Israel  were  smitten  by  the  men
of  Ai  and  "the  hearts  of  the  people
melted  and  became  as  water  "  (Josh.  vii.
5).  In  addition  to  this,  demonstrative
expressions  of  defence! essness  would  be
displayed.  The  conspicuous  parts  of
their  bodies  would  be  visibly  made  to
show  their  utter  abandonment  to  fear
and  grief.  "Sackcloth  "  would  "  gird  "
them ;  "  trembling  "  would  "  cover  "
them;  the  "shame"  of  vexation  and
punishment  would  sufifuse  itself  over
their  countenances,  and  "baldness"
overrun  their  "  hkads."  The  baldness
might  be  self-inflicted  in  the  manner
narrated  by  Ezra  (ix.  3),  when  he  was
overwhelmed  with  horror  for  the  trans-
gression of  his  people.  It  has  been
often  said  that  such  baldness  was  pro-
hibited to  Israel,  but  the  reference  usually
made  for  that  statement  (Deut.  xiv.  1)
does  not  prove  it.  That  verse  speaks  of
taking  hair  from  a  certain  part  of  the
head  only.  At  any  rate,  allusions  in
Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Amos,  Micah  signify
that  depriving  the  head  of  its  hair  was
not  an  uncommon  procedure  in  seasons
of  deep  grief,


HOMILETICS.

How  Man's  Destiny  is  Brought  About.

**  The  destiny  goes  forth^  the  rod  blossomSj  pride  buddeth,  violence  rises  into  a  rod
for  wickedness"  (vers.  10,  11).

These  words  allude  to   the  Babylonian  monarchy  as    growing   in  power,  and
having  in  it  the  destiny  to  shatter  the  Jewish  state  for  its  persistent  wrong  courses

u


cfiAP.  VIT.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTAllY :  EZEKIEL,

towards  its  covenanted  Lord.  "We  read  them  and  see  how,  "  to  the  sprouting  of
power  which  can,  corresponds  the  blossoming  of  pride  which  will^^  be  a  terror  and
destruction.  We  are  furnished  with  a  representation  in  outline  of  the  methods  by
which  straying  souls  are  recompensed  according  to  their  ways  and  abominations.

I.  Their  destiny  is  not  a  fortuitous  event.  It  is  a  growth — a  product  of,  it
may  ))e,  hidden  and  manifold  causes.  Generally,  we  cannot  tell  how  we  had
become  liable  to  a  cold,  a  fever,  a  face-ache  or  heart-palpitation  ;  but  our  inability
to  trace  the  movements  which  culminated  in  the  attack  does  not  make  us  hesitate
to  say  that  we  had  come  under  influences  sufficient  to  produce  the  indisposition.
It  was  not  a  random  blow.  We  have  reason  to  take  the  same  position  in  reference  to
all  personal,  to  ail  national  fear.-^,  losses,  defeats.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  accident,
chance  in  human  affairs.  If  we  have  to  pass  through  fire  and  through  water,  they
were  in  our  way.  If  men  ride  over  our  heads,  they  were  mounted  on  horses  spurred
to  do  so.

IL  Destiny  is  not  from  the  mere  fiat  of  God.  He  works  by  law.  He  begins  to
act  because  of  righteousness  and  truth.  He  continues  to  act  for  righteousness  and
truth.  The  nature  of  things  moves  towards  the  punishing  of  evil  by  operations
which  may  be  said  to  be  outside  of  God,  that  is,  by  using  forces  which  the  Almighty
One  has  called  into  existence.  Every  decree  of  His  is  therefore  adapted  to  antece-
dent conditions.  Violence  rises  up  into  a  rod  by  no  arbitrary  will.  The  moral
government  of  God  may  tend  to  an  inevitable  fate,  but  it  is  a  reasonable  one.

III.  Destiny  is  accomplished  by  fitting  instruments.  I  said,  in  agreement
with  the  phraseology  of  the  prophet,  that  destiny  is  a  growth.  Each  kind  of  tree  in
growing  appropriates  those  elements  in  the  atmosphere  and  soil  which  are  suited
to  its  nature.  The  bread-fruit  tree  prepares  to  support  the  life  of  man,  and  the
upas-tree  to  poison  him.  And  in  the  moral  realm  tlie  elaboration  of  good  things
to  save  man  and  of  evil  things  to  destroy  him  is  always  proceeding.  When  the
time  is  ripe  they  arrive  at  their  suitableness  for  use,  and  are  capable  of  carrying
out  the  destined  event.  But  "  the  rod  of  the  wicked  shall  not  rest  upon  the  lot  of
the  righteous."  Pride  will  smite  pride,  violent  dealing  will  be  crushed  by  violence.
"When  men  sin  they  set  briers  and  thorns  against  the  Lord  who  is  in  conflict  with
them ;  but  it  is  only  to  see  that  He  goes  through  them,  that  He  burns  them  up
together.  He  never  stands  perplexed  because  He  has  no  instrument  at  hand  to
execute  His  holy  law,

I'V.  Destiny  is  the  summing  up  of  previous  actions.  "We  say  that  violets
are  gathered  for  their  sweet  perfume  and  wheat  for  its  nutritious  qualities,  and  we
mean  that  the  difi'erent  lots  which  befall  them  is  due  to  those  antecedent  chemical
operations  which  form  their  properties.  "We  should  say  the  same  of  every  indivi-
dual and  every  nation  on  whom  scares,  and  pains,  and  loss,  and  ruin  spread  their
blight.  They  took  a  course  in  which  they  gathered  up  certain  materials.  "Whether
those  materials  were  drawn  from  the  external  or  the  internal  world,  both  sorts
became  the  means  of  bruising,  tearing,  killing  those  who  had  gathend  them.
**  Hast  thou  not  procured  this  unto  thyself  ?  .  .  .  Thine  own  wickedness  shall  correct
thee  and  thy  backslidings  shall  reprove  thee"  (Jer.  ii.  17,  19).  It  is  foolish  to
speak  of  an  evil  destiny  except  as  a  consequence  of  foregoing  faults.

1.  Punishment  for  sin  comes  slowly.  It  is  not  the  result  of  a  force  which  appears
suddenly  on  the  stage  of  life.  It  is  no  hasty  stroke  for  which  there  was  not  suffi-
cient justification,  and  the  incidence  of  which  might  cause  valid  regrets.  It  is  a
growth.  The  evil-doers  may  escape  for  a  season,  but  in  due  season,  sooner  or  later,
according  to  the  nature  of  the  sin,  they  shall  receive  the  just  award  on  their  deeds.
Let  not  your  hearts  be  set  towards  evil  because  the  sentence  against  it  is  not  exe-
cuted speedily.     Use  the  space  given  for  repentance.

2.  Punishment  for  sin  comes  surely.  Human  strength,  wisdom,  sympathy  cannot
stay  the  reproductive  powers  of  nature,  and  they  cannot  annihilate  the  accumulat-
ing energies  of  moral  evil.     The  cotton  which  will  form  the  shroud  for  some  of  you

76


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  chap.  vii.


who  are  enjoying  good  health  is  to  be  plucked  off  sun-lit  fields.  The  weather  which
will  bring  famine  to  you,  prodigals,  has  begun  its  action  upon  the  scenery  begirding
you.  The  disease  which  will  render  offensive  the  debauchee  is  finding  nourishment
in  him  for  its  germs.  The  death  which  will  destroy  those  who  are  ungodly  is  on
their  foot-tracks,  and  will  not  miss  its  aim.  Inevitable  is  the  woe  which  will  fall
upon  the  head  of  the  wicked.  Nothing  can  interfere  ;  nothing  can  save — nothing
except  a  change  of  mind  ;  nothing  except  submission  to  the  love  and  power  of  God
manifested  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  !

Weak  Points  in  Human  Life  (vers.  11-18).

Nature  in  its  various  forms — in  himself  and  in  what  is  external  to  himself — occu-
pies man's  interest  and  efforts.  He  is  disposed  to  rest  in  its  use.  He  does  not
"look  through  nature  up  to  nature's  God."  But  nature  is  from  God,  and  man
nmst  be  taught  that  in  every  one  of  its  characteristics  it  is  subjected  to  the  autho-
rity of  God's  laws.  If  used  according  to  His  will,  it  is  glorified  :  if  contrary  to  His
will,  it  nmst  be  made  to  appear  weak  as  a  prop  for  life  on  earth.  Observe  this
weakness —

I.  In  the  common  fate  of  men.  There  is  no  abidhig.  We  must  needs  die.
The  place  that  knows  us  now  shall  soon  know  us  no  more.  Our  beauty  will  con-
Bume  away.  Where  is  "  populous  No  "?  What  has  become  of  the  Israelites  of  all
generations  1  Whatever  be  the  power  of  the  forces  which  hold  the  activities  of  a
single  life,  or  whatever  be  the  forces  which  go  to  constitute  the  life  of  a  puissant
nation,  in  either  case  the  power  is  hel[)less  to  safeguard  its  subjects  when  they  do
wickedly.  Iniquity,  that  is  the  poison  which  destroys  strength,  that  the  traitor
which  opens  to  the  lod  which  brings  death.  The  nature  of  man  succumbs  before
the  righteous  fiat  of  God.

II.  In  the  precariousness  of  property.  Men  make  gold  their  hope,  which  is
digged  out  of  nature's  reservoirs.  They  pride  themselves  when  their  goods  are
increased.  They  call  their  lands  by  their  own  names.  Many  are  willing  to  sacri-
fice truth,  honesty,  peace,  so  as  to  get  unrighteous  g;iin  in  buying  and  selling.  But
no  products  of  nature,  however  largely  estimated  and  depended  on  as  a  security,
can  be  retained  in  use.  A  time  comes  when  they  may  be  counted  a  burden  and
sorrow,  and  buyers  and  sellers  be  equally  conscious  that  the  possession  of  them  is
untenable,  that  they  are  too  evanescent  to  give  help  in  danger,  and  must  take  rank
with  the  weak  things  of  the  world.

III.  In  the  failure  of  courage.  Human  nature  can  furnish  proofs  of  courage
which  dignify  it,  but  fears  of  injury  or  death  can  cause  the  stoutest  to  lose  their
presence  of  mind,  and  panics  fall  upon  individuals  and  bodies  of  men.  Appeals  to
honour  and  })atriotism  and  care  for  property  are  vain.  The  stirring  notes  of  the
trumpet  are  altogether  powerless  to  incite  to  cimflict.  "  None  goeth  to  the  battle."
Before  the  wrath  of  God  the  multitude  has  no  spirit  left  in  it.

IV.  In  the  insecurity  of  a  retreat.  The  fugitive  Israelites  who  had  escaped
sought  a  safe  hiding-place,  and  that  brought  experiences  which  were  almost  worse
than  death.  Our  bodily  nature  cannot  be  hardened  or  protected  against  increasing
troubles,  nor  does  one  kind  of  calamity  guarantee  us  freedom  from  every  other  kind.
Life  may  be  preserved  from  extinction  by  sword  or  famine  or  pestilence,  but  the
circumstances  into  which  it  is  thrown  may  be  full  of  fear  and  grief  and  torment.
Ah  !  if  men  could  only  get  away  from  all  tribulation  by  fleeing  from  one  form  of
it,  how  different  would  our  natural  life  appear !  But  the  pains  which  follow  sii:
are  not  voided  by  any  temporary  punishment.  Our  wrongdoing  may  be  seen  and
regretted  ;  that  does  not  avert  sure  penalty.  Youth  spent  in  sensual  pleasures
may  be  deeply  and  sincerely  lamented,  but  the  *'  wild  oats  "  then  sown  leave  seeds
on  the  heart's  soil  which  are  not  eradicated  even  after  many  a  ploughing  and  harrow-
ing.    A  ticket-of-leave  convict  finds  his  crime,  however  he  may  stand  clear  from

77


OBAP.  VII.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  EZEKIEL,


it  now,  will  prevent  any  confidential  employment.  And  when  God  rises  up  to
punish,  "mourning,  sackcloth,  horror,  shame,"  go  to  show  that  the  stripes  needed,
therefore  just  and  suitable,  will  be  inflicted  "to  the  utmost  lash."  None  can  hide
so  as  that  God  will  be  deceived.

What  repentings  should  be  kindled  when  we  see  the  helpless  character  of  the
things  we  are  so  prone  to  trust !  What  fear  lest  God  should  be  neglected  and  dis-
obeyed !

It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  next  verse  should  be  connected  with  the  pre-
ceding or  the  following  verses.  Though  the  casting  away  of  all  valuables  would
be  a  natural  act  in  those  who  were  fleeing  for  their  lives,  yet  it  is  as  natural  in
those  who  were  exposed  to  death  by  famine  in  the  siege.  However,  as  reference  is
made  hereafter  to  other  precious  things  which  had  been  employed  as  instruments
of  evil,  it  is  preferable  to  consider  that  a  change  occurs  here  in  the  line  of  the
prophet's  thought.  If  the  change  seems  abrupt,  that  is  far  from  being  out  of  har-
mony with  the  features  of  this  chapter.


EXEGETICAL  NOTES. —Ver.
19.  Valuable  things  will  be  rejected.
"They  shall  cast  their  silver  in  the
streets."  Retaining  it  in  their  houses
would  present  inducements  to  the  greed
and  cruelty  of  the  foemen,  and  expose
their  persons  to  outrage  :  it  will  be  put
away:  "and  their  gold  shall  be  dis-
carded, treated  as  an  unclean ness  and
not  to  be  touched — more  precious  than
silver,  it  will  be  more  vilely  cast  away.
It  is  probable  that  their  idols  are  included
in  this  rejection  if  we  take  an  illustration
from  Isaiah:  "Ye  shall  defile  also  the
covering  of  thy  graven  images  of  silver,
and  the  ornament  of  thy  molten  images
of  gold  \  thou  shalt  cast  them  away  as  a
menstruous  cloth ;  thou  shalt  say  unto
it.  Get  thee  hence"  (xxx.  22).  This
utter  repudiation  of  things  so  highly
prized  is  grounded  on  the  fact  that  no
amount  or  form  of  the  precious  metals
will  help  to  safety,  or  protect  from  pain,
fears,  destruction  :  "  their  silver  and
their  gold  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver
them  in  the  day  of  the  wrath  of  the
Lord ;  they  shall  not  satisfy  their  souls,
neither  fill  their  bowels."  Neither
mental  ease  nor  sufficient  food  would  be
attainable  in  those  closing  days  of  tribu-
lation— "  because  it  is  the  stumbling-
block  of  their  iniquity."  They  so  ap-
plied the  substantial  wealth  entrusted  to
them  as  to  gratify  their  lusts  ;  they  made
it  into  a  means  of  sin,  and  fell  over  it
into  fearful  woes.

It  is  questionable  whether  the  words
"silver  and  gold,"  when  associated  in
this  manner,  are  ever  applied  in  the
78


Old  Testament  to  money  only.  We
must  not  read  into  its  usage  a  modern
idea.  It  refers  them  to  money,  and
also  to  plate,  ornaments,  idol-in)ages.
And  this  is  an  indication  that  Ezekiel
must  refer  to  some  other  object  than
the  precious  metals  in  the  following
verse.

Ver.  20.  Another  feature  of  their
guilt  comes  into  view,  "As  for  the
beauty  of  his  ornament,  he  set  it  for
pride."  We  do  not  see  in  these  expres-
sions anything  but  the  signs  of  wealth
made  into  a  matter  for  boasting.  That
people  boast  themselves  in  the  multitude
of  riches  is  true ;  but  if  the  Jews  had
some  special  glory,  it  is  far  more  likely
that  they  would  pride  themselves  in  that.
And  they  had.  If  Canaan  was  "  the
glory  of  all  lands,"  assuredly  the  Temple
at  Jerusalem  was  the  summit  of  that
glory.  Ezekiel  himself  might  be  quoted
to  establish  thisap[)licationof  the  words,
"I  will  profane  my  sanctuary,  the  ex-
cellency of  your  strength  "  (xxiv.  21).
The  thing  which  was  the  most  glorious
feature  in  Israel  had  been  made  into  a
thing  for  mere  brag  !  "  and  the  images
of  their  abominations,  of  their  detest-
able things  they  made  therein."  Ex-
amples  of  this  degradation  and  abjuration
of  their  most  eminent  privilege  are  found
in  the  next  chapter,  "  therefore  I  give
it  to  them  as  an  unclean  thing,"  the
glory  of  their  ornament  is  changed  into
that  which  is  repulsive  and  unfit  for
the  Lord.

Ver.  21.  "And  I  give  it  into  the
hands  of  the  strangers  for  a  prey,  <fec.,


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL.  ohap.  vii.


and  they  shall  profane  it."   The  heathen  evil  ones  of  the  nations  to  come,"  the

shall   take   possession  of    the   city,   the  worst  of  the  heathen,  those  wlio  were

outward  tokens  of  God's  special  dwelling  most     notorious     among     surrounding

with   Israel  be  desecrated,  and  its  glory  peoples  for  their  evil  tempers  and  waysL

be  obliterated.  The    expression    is    similar    to    that    in

Ver.  22.  "And  I  turn  away  my  face  ver.  21,  ^Uhe  wicked  of  the  earth*'  and
from  them  " — from  the  people  of  Jeru-  gives  an  indication  of  the  strong  and
salem  probably,  though  reference  may  bitter  feelings  engendered  amongst  the
be  to  the  foreigners,  for  whose  doings  Hebrews  towards  the  Chaldeans,  in-
He  would  seem  not  to  care, — "and  stances  of  which  are  found  in  other
they  profane  my  secret."  It  is  unneces-  prophetical  books  also.  Ewald  regards
sary  to  supply  place  to  the  last  word,  such  expressions  as  signifying  that  at
whose  meaning  must  be  that  which  had  this  time  the  Babylonian  Empire  con-
been  guarded  by  the  Lord  as  His  and  tained  in  it  an  element  of  rude,  rough,
fenced  against  all  intruders.  Hengsten-  and  uncultivated  warriors,  while,  at  the
berg  understands  it  of  their  treasures,  same  time,  there  must  have  been  a
*'  the  means  of  Israel,  which  are,  as  it  highly  civilised  population  long  settled
weie,  the  treasure  of  the  Lord  ;  "  but  it  in  Nineveh  or  Babylon;  "and  they
is,  surely,  more  appropriately  to  be  shall  possess  their  houses,"  a  justifica-
understood  of  the  Temple  with  its  Holy  tion  of  the  counsels  given  in  vers.  12  and
of  Holies  :  "and"  this  shall  be  brought  13  ;  "  and  I  make  the  pride  of  the
about  when  "  the  rohhers,"  lit.  those  strong  to  cease."  If  it  is  felt  that  it
making  hreachesy  '* enter  into  it" — the  would  hardly  do  to  regard  the  Jews  as
city — "  and  profane  it."  The  repeated  meriting  this  description  "  the  strong,"
references  to  the  profanation  of  what  the  reading  of  the  Septuagint,  which
had  been  holy  to  the  Lord  signify  how  finds  a  confirmation  in  chap,  xxxiii.  28,
completely  Israel  had  been  estranged  suggests  an  explanation,  the  pride  of
from  Him,  and  how  all  places,  even  the  their  strength.  This  is  neither  to  be
holiest,  would  be  open  to  the  unhallowed  transmuted  into  strong  pride  nor  into
presence  of  the  ungodly  nations.  proud   splendour^  but   to  be   taken    as

Ver.  23.    Ezekiel  is  addressed.     The  intimating  that  there  was  that  belong-

Lord,   as   it    were,    "  indignant   at   the  ing  to  them  which  they  esteemed  their

profanation,  commands  him  to  put  an  special  strength  as  a  people.     That  that

end   to   the   doings   of  the  enemy    by  was  their  relation  to  the  Lord  God  is

the  deportation  of  those  who  were  left  confirmed    by   such    phrases   as    these :

behind  "  (Haev.)     "  Make  the  chain,"  "Thou  art  the  glory  of  their  strength  ;  "

that   which  was   the  badge  of  subjuga-  **  The  Lord  shall  send  the  rod  of  thy

tion  and   with   which   the   exiled  Jews  strength  out  of  Zion."     That  men  may

were   fettered.     Jeremiah    records    how  take  pride  in  Him  whom  they  do  not

he  was   let  go  by  Nebuzar-adan  from  obey  is  testified  by  the  words  of  Jesus,

**  being  bound  in  chains  among  all  that  *'  Why  call  ye  me  Lord,  Lord,  and  do

were  carried  away  captive  from  Jerusalem  not  the   things  which  I  say  "?  "     Their

and  Judah  "  (xl.  1).     City  and  land  had  pride  in  that  would  fail,  "and  their  holy

brought  the  evil  upon  themselves,  "for  places  shall  be  profaned ;  "  ^/i^2:V,asif  He

the  land  is  full  of  deeds  of  blood,"  not  would   not  acknowledge   them   as  His

applied  to  acts  of  murder  only,  but  to  even  nominally.

all  acts  which  were  counted  as  mortal  "In  these  verses  a  threefold  example

sins,  "and  the  city  is  full  of  violence."  is  given  of  the  divine  lex  ialionis.  .  .  .

The  prophet   Micah  had  declared  that  The  people  have  abused  their  wealth  by

Zion  should  be  ploughed  as  afield  because  making  idols  of  gold  and  silver,  and  all

the   Lord  withdrew   His  presence,  and  manner  of   ornaments    for   vainglorious

among  the  causes  of  that  desolation  he  display,    so   that   it    has    become   "  the

puts,  "  They  build  up  Zion  with  blood  stumbling-block  of  their  iniquity ;"  now

and  Jerusalem  with  iniquity  "  (iii.  10).  it  was  to  be  seized  as  a  spoil  by  the

Ver.  24.    "And  I  will  cause  the  enemy,  and,  in  respect  to  their  deliver-

79


CHAP.  VII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.


aiice,  should  be  found  worthless  as  the
mire  of  the  streets.  They  have  carried
their  abominations  into  God's  sanctuary
and  defiled  the  secret  place  of  the  Most
High  ;  now  the  whole  is  to  be  laid  open
to  tiie  unhallowed  feet  of  the  stran"er,
and  robbers  are  to  be  sent  to  walk  at
liberty  where  saints  only  should  have
been  permitted  to  enter.  They,  by  their
daring  wickedness,  have  made  the  land
full  of  violence  and  blood,  therefore
shall  they  themselves  be  bound  with  a
chain  by  the  ungodly  heathen,  and  their
best  possessions  be  turned  into  the  prey
of  the  lawless  and  the  profane.  '  Their
holy  places  shall  be  dtfiled,'  as  they
have  already  defiled  miiie." — Fairhairn,

Ver,  25.  On  the  existence  of  the
Temple  depended  that  of  the  Levitical
priesthood,  and  when  the  former  was
desecrated,  the  means  of  expiation,
which  by  that  was  connected  with  the
priesthood,  were  withdrawn  from  Israel.
So  we  read  *'  destruction  comes,"  lit.
a  cutting  off  comes.  We  might  trans-
late, with  Fairbairn,  a  close  comes,  or
with  Hengstenberg,  who  says,  "  properly
contraction,  in  contrast  witli  the  expan-
sion that  is  connected  witli  all  joyful
prosperity — the  state  of  restriction  and
diminution  :  "  "  and  they  shall  seek
peace,  and  it  is  not."  Peace — hardly
with  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  that  which
could  be  attained  by  the  methods  re-
ferred to  in  the  next  verses.

Ver.  26.  The  condition  will  be  one
of  constant  uncertainty  and  disappoint-
ment. "  Mischief  shall  come  upon
mischief,  and  rumour  shall  be  upon
rumour."  '*  Stroke  upon  stroke  does
the  ruin  come,  and  it  is  intensified
by  reports,  alarming  accounts,  which
crowd  together  and  increase  the  terror  "
(Keil)  ;  "  and  they  shall  seek  a  vision
from  the  prophet."  They  are  at  their
wits*  end ;  they  do  not  wait  on  the
Lord,  but  endeavour  to  make  solace
or  encouragement  come  from  prophets
such  as  had  spoken  to  them  visions  out


of  their  own  heart ;  but  the  prophets
are  either  dumb,  or,  if  they  were  told
"  Speak  unto  us  smooth  things,  pro-
phesy deceits,"  thoy  failed  to  present
the  visions  that  were  sought  for  :  *'and
the  law  shall  perish  from  the  priest."
The  prophet  Malaclii  makes  it  appear
as  an  understood  thing  that  the  people
"  should  seek  the  law  at  the  priest's
mouth."  It  is  an  inadequate  interpre-
tation which  would  confine  "  the  law  "
which  was  sought  from  the  priest  simply
to  his  reading  out  of  that  of  Moses.  He
was  to  have  reference  made  to  him  for
his  judgments  on  the  rules  which  were
given  to  be  guides  to  right  conduct  and
worship.  Thus  Deut.  xvii.  10,  "Thou
shalt  do  according  to  the  sentence
\\hich  they  shall  declare  unto  thee  from
th.it  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose."
The  {)rie.sts  gave  decisions,  by  oracle  or
otherwise,  in  the  sanctuary  as  to  what
was  intended  by  the  law.  However,
that  function  of  the  priesthood  would
altogether  pass  from  it :  "  and  counsel
from  the  elders  "  shall  also  perish  ;  wis-
dom and  experience  would  not  avail  for
giving  suitable  advice.

Ver.  27.  All  the  population  in  its
three  classes  would  be  dealt  with  in
judgment.  *'The  king  shall  mourn,  and
the  prince  " — the  chiefs  of  the  tribes  and
heads  of  families — "shall  be  clothed
with  desolation,  and  the  hands  of  the
people  of  the  land,"  i.e.,  the  common-
alty as  distinguished  from  the  rulers,
"  shall  he  troubled.  I  will  do  to  them
after  their  way,"  lit.  from  their  way,
i.e.,  the  Lord  will  take  the  cue  for  what
He  will  do  from  what  they  have  done ;
"  and  with  their  judgments  I  will
judge  them,  and  they  shall  know  that
I  am  the  Lord."  By  sufferings  which
flow  from  their  own  decisions  they  will
be  forced  to  acknowledo;e  Him  as  Lord.
*'  With  these  words,  recurring  in  Ezekiel
like  a  refrain,  the  first  cycle  of  his
prophecies  closes. " — Hengstenberg,


HOMILETICS,

The  Withdrawal  of  the  Lord's  Presence,

To  walk  with  God  is  man's  highe  t  privilege,  to  be  forsaken  by  God  is  man's
deepest  woe  ;  his  history  furnishes  abundant  evidence  that  he  has  been  the  subject
80


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  VU.


of  botli  contingencies.  Yet  a  people  professing  to  serve  the  living  God  should  not
allow  it  to  be  doubtful  what  kind  of  answer  must  be  returned  to  the  questions,
Is  the  Lord  among  us  or  not?  Are  we  conducting  ourselves  so  that  He  lifts  up
the  light  of  His  countenance  upon  us,  or  so  that  He  hides  His  face  from  us  1  For
the  response  does  not  relate  merely  to  our  comfort  or  the  reverse  ;  it  relates  to  the
feelings  of  God  and  the  rights  due  to  God  from  every  faculty  and  condition  of  men.
A  help  to  indicate  the  position  at  which  a  true  answer  may  be  received  is  sug-
gested by  tliese  closing  sentences  of  Ezekiel's  dirge  upon  downfallen  IsraeL
I.  We  learn  what  provokes  the  withdrawal  of  God's  presence.

1.  It  is  not  any  arhitrariness  on  His  part.  Deep  experiences  in  spiritual
things — experiences  which  it  is  to  be  feared  are  not  so  common  now  as  then — led
former  generations  of  God's  servants  to  coin  this  phrase,  "  The  sovreign  withdrawal
of  God's  countenance."  It  has  been  handed  on  to  us  among  the  traditions  received
from  our  fathers,  but  it  is  a  phrase  we  should  be  very  loath  to  employ.  They
indeed  explained  it  with  provisos  which  sometimes  shaded  its  objectionable
features,  but  they  left  enongh  of  it  in  view  to  make  us  feel  that  it  cannot  depict
a  true  idea  of  God's  action.  To  say  that  there  are  occasions  when  we  cannot
surmise  the  reasons  why  He  should  make  us  walk  in  darkness  and  have  no  light,  is
a  very  different  statement  from  that  which  intimates  that  there  is  no  call  in  our
proceedings  for  His  righteousness  and  love  to  rise  up  against  us.  "Thou  art  clear
when  thou  judgest."  In  ourselves,  in  the  conditions  of  His  kingdom,  will  always
be  the  latent  if  not  obvious  causes  for  the  hiding  of  His  face — never  in  any  divine
waywardness.

2.  It  is  incited  hy  unholy  demeanour.  There  were  iniquities  among  the  Israelites
of  Ezekiel's  time  of  no  insignificant  character.  We  might  be  disposed  to  ask,
How  could  they  fancy  that,  while  doing  such  things,  they  would  still  be  in  the
light  of  God  ?  The  answer  comes  to  us  from  the  true  Judge  of  human  ways,
"  They  come  not  to  the  light  lest  their  deeds  should  be  reproved."  But  we  do  not
need  to  inquire  of  Ezekiel's  people  respecting  this  inconsistency.  Similar  facts  are
manifest  among  our  own  people.  (1. )  There  is  excessive  appreciation  of  wealth.  Before
it  the  truth  and  purity  of  many  promising  young  persons  go  down  into  darkness.
The  honourableness  and  the  attachment  to  Christian  causes  of  maturer  as^e  have
been  discarded.  Reports  of  proceedings  in  law-courts,  less  public  reports  of
dealings  in  offices,  warehouses,  shops,  go  to  prove  that  silver  and  gold,  in  some  of
their  forms  of  value,  lead  into  not  a  few  "  pernicious  ways."  When  Mammon  is
loved  and  held  to,  what  must  be  done  with  God  ?  (2.)  There  is  immorality.  Sins
which  are  liable  to  capital  punishment,  sins  which  seduce  others,  sins  which  stir  up
wearied  hearts  to  cry  to  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth,  "  Do  me  justice  on  my  adver-
sary," are  narrated  day  by  day  in  our  newspapers.  How  many  more  never  find  a
record  in  earthly  pages  !  When  deeds  of  violence  are  rife  they  prove  that  the
whole  condition  of  a  people  is  demoralised.  Wlien  they  may  not  be  rife,  but  when
the  guiltless  do  not  condemn  unequivocally  such  as  do  take  place,  do  not  wage
continual  war  against  them,  lest  they  should  get  themselves  into  trouble  or  soil  their
hands  by  the  pitch  of  wickedness,  then  too  is  the  condition  unwholesome  and  the
words  come  true,  "  Your  iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and  your  God,  and
your  sins  have  hid  His  face  from  you  "    (Is;i.  lix.  2).

3.  It  is  brought  about  by  trifling  ivith  religious  belief.  (1.)  For  people  to  set  it
as  a  matter  for  pride  is  to  trifle  with  it.  They  treat  it  as  a  thing  which  adds  to
their  im[)ortance  or  self-conceit ;  they  do  not  humble  themselves  to  it  as  to  their
master  ;  they  drive  it  from  its  rightful  position,  however  beautiful  they  esteem  it
to  be  as  an  ornament.  Hear  the  numbers  who  boast  that  they  are  Christian  and
not  heathen,  Roman  Catholics  and  not  Protestants,  Church  of  England  and  not
Nonconformists,  Church-goers  and  not  Sunday-excursionists,  and  their  boast  carries
with  it  this  undertone,  "  We  do  not  understand  the  rights  of  God."  The  lonely
glory  of  His  service — presenting  aspects  which  make  it  excel  all  other  objects  of

w  81


CHAP.  YIU  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


thought — is  veiled  and  made  comparatively  trivial  when  regarded  as  a  matter
for  self-glorification.  (2.)  To  adopt  unauthorised  observances  is  to  trifle  with  it,
Tlie  Israelites  did  not  tuin  the  Lord  out  of  His  Temple.  They  did  abandon
acknowledgment  of  Him  as  their  God  above  all.  "  They  served  the  Lord  and  Baal."
They  made  images  of  abominations  and  detestable  things  in  the  Lord's  house.  Such
a  course  betokened  that  they  could  not  seriously  accept  that  which  was  their  dis-
tinguishing knowledge,  that  the  Lord  was  the  only  God.  They  ignored  the  truth,
that  to  pay  the  semblance  of  worship  to  idols  was  rebellion  against  His  claims  which
He  could  not  condone  by  His  presence  remaining  among  them.  Isaiah  represents
His  decision  thus,  "  When  ye  spread  forth  your  hands  I  will  hide  mine  eyes  from
you  ;  yea,  when  ye  make  many  prayers  I  will  not  hear"  (i.  15).  He  did  not  want
"  vain  oblations"  then,  and  He  does  not  want  them  now.  If  we  use  prayers,  sacra-
ments, special  rites  and  services  which  private  or  churchly  judgments  institute  as
an  indispensable  addition  to  the  faith  on  which  we  act  for  acceptance  with  God,
we  may  not  erect  an  idol-shrine  in  church  or  chamber,  but  we  ascribe  to  the  created
a  seat  of  honour  along  with  the  Creator,  we  show  that  we  do  not  desire  really  to
know  what  is  His  due,  and  our  wilfulness  becomes  an  offence  which  impels  His  with-
drawal. In  our  days,  as  in  former  years.  His  S[)irit  is  grieved,  vexed,  quenched
by  the  provoking  of  those  sons  and  daughters,  '*  who  have  a  name  to  live  and  they
are  dead,"  who  have  *'  a  form  of  godliness  and  deny  the  power  thereof."  Truly
they  are  triflers  with  what  is  most  sacred  and  walk  in  darkness.

IL  We  learn  what  follows  the  withdrawal  of  God's  presence.  Ezekiel
depicts  the  consequences  as  developed  in  body,  temple,  minds.  Tiiey  cannot  be
literally  applied  to  other  and  Christian  people,  but  they  hint  sufficiently  at  results
which  are  likely  to  happen.

1.  Temporal  distress.  Because  God  has  turned  away  His  face,  money  may  be
felt  as  a  burden,  houses  be  lost,  prostration  of  physical  health  or  courage  unman
us.  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  body  ;  He  is  the  ruler  of  weather,  germs,  gases,  trade,
and  certainly  amongst  us,  as  amongst  men  of  old,  temporal  sufferings  are  made  a
means  of  showing  that  we  have  offended  Him.  Not  that  all  such  troubles  are
signs  that  He  has  withdrawn  from  us — Paul's  thorn  in  the  flesh  is  a  proof  of  some-
thing else — but  a  painful  experience  of  the  first  Church  in  Corinth  had  its  source
in  trifling  with  God's  presence.  "  For  this  cause  many  among  you  are  weak  and
sickly,  and  not  a  few  sleep.'*  "  Thou  didst  hide  Thy  face  and  I  was  troubled.'*
What  the  weight  and  the  extension  of  the  distress  may  be  time  only  will  manifest;
but  the  fact  that  Israel  was  shaken  by  panics,  obliterated  as  a  nation,  the  survivors
bound  with  chains  and  taken  into  a  strange  land,  is  a  solemn  warning  as  to  the
dire  consequences  which  come  from  a  withdrawal  of  God's  gracious  presence.

2.  Religious  degradations.  (1.)  The  worshippers  will  he  counted  unworthy  to  come
before  the  Lord.  The  sense  of  His  presence  being  deadened,  their  hearts  must
become  disqualified  for  His  holy  service.  They  may  still  give  thanks  at  meals,
they  may  still  enter  into  a  place  for  worship,  they  niay  still  name  themselves  by
the  name  of  Christ,  but  they  have  lost  faith,  love,  joy,  peace,  if  ever  they  had  one
or  other.  The  duty  which  might  have  been  pervaded  with  the  holiness  of  God  is
nothing  but  an  engagement  carried  out  really  for  the  doers  alone — theirs  now,  if
formerly  His.  And  what  can  be  a  man's  religion  when  God  is  left  out  of  it?  What
but  "a  delusion  and  a  snare  to  men — what  but  a  grief  and  offence  to  Him?  Peace,
they  may  say,  but  there  is  none.  Woe  be  to  us  when  our  sanctuaries  are  nothing
but  our  sanctuaries  ! "  (2.)  Corrupting  and  destructive  influences  will  dominate  them.
**  The  wicked  of  the  earth,  the  robbers  enter  in  and  profane"  the  place  where  His
honour  dwelt.  "  The  profanation  by  the  enemy  is,  alas  !  always  preceded  by  the
profanation  on  the  part  of  the  friends."  And  so  has  it  happened  in  the  Christian
centuries.  Churches  abounded  in  Western  Asia — enemies  possess  their  heritage.
Old  creeds  for  whose  truth  men  were  once  content  to  suffer  and  die  are  sneered  at
and  ueglected.     "An  unknown  God"  is  not  dignified  with  an  altar,  but  coolly

82


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKlEL.  chaj».  vit


relegated  to  an  uiiapproacliable  cloudlaud.  Men  who  wear  the  uniform  of  Christ's
service  decline  to  [Jace  themselves  on  the  hill  where  His  standard  waves,  and  even
supply  ammunition  to  the  op[)()sing  host.  Thus  do  "  those  who  make  breaches  "
pass  into  the  domain  where  God  iiad  professedly  reigned.  His  ostensible  religion
is  discredited  and  covered  with  shame.  Holy  things  are  profaned  because  He  ia
displeased  and  hides  His  face.

3.  Collapse  of  social  helpfulness.  Secular  and  spiritual  persons  will  be  useless  to
one  another.  We  naturally  betake  ourselves  to  those  persons  whom  we  consider
superior  when  we  are  in  perplexity,  sorrow,  pain,  accumulating  difficulties.  Such
resort  will  be  in  vain  if  "  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus "  is  not  beheld.
Then  religious  intuition  will  fail  to  grasp  any  inspiration  ;  theologians  be  unable  to
communicate  real  instruction,  and  men  of  experience  suffer  a  stagnation  of  thought.
Preachers,  teachers,  and  tried  believers  are  weak  in  themselves  and  powerless  upon
others  so  far  as  relates  to  the  growth  of  the  divine  kingdom  when  they  do  not
walk  in  the  light.  So  it  comes  to  pass  that  that  which  should  be  the  religion  of
God  is  trodden  under  foot  of  men.

(1.)  We  should  he  impressed  with  fear  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  Lord.  When  Jesus
is  not  with  His  professed  people  they  are  in  dreary  scenery.  It  is  a  dry  and  thirsty
land  where  no  water  is.  It  is  the  desert  in  which  rest  may  be  sought  for  but  can-
not be  fcmnd  by  those  who  have  had  deliverance  from  some  unclean  s[)irit,  and  out
of  which  place  they  come  to  take  up  with  seven  other  evil  spirits,  and  so  the  last
state  becometh  worse  than  the  first.     There  is  cause  for  fear.

(2.)  We  should,  become  very  watchful.  If  we  perceive  little  or  nothing  of  the
anguish  of  our  Shepherd  as  He  prays  for  the  lost  sheep ;  if  we  are  so  cold  or  luke-
warm in  our  affections  as  hardly  ever  sacrificing  for  Christ  an  earthly  pleasure,  or
an  hour  of  business,  or  a  sum  of  money,  then  it  is  time  for  us  to  listen  to  the
tender  and  poignant  rebuke,  '*  What,  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour  ?  Watch
and  pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation."

Wealth  Unserviceable  (ver.  19).

I.  The  creatures  which  promise  the  most  help  and  raise  expectations  highest,
in  times  of  trouble  can  do  little  or  nothing  for  us.  Judas's  thirty  pieces  of  silver
could  not  still  one  throb  of  his  conscience.  Herod's  royal  robes,  sceptre,  crown,
greatness  could  not  protect  him  from  the  teeth  of  a  few  feeble  worms.  Not  all
your  wealth  can  keep  the  plague  out  of  the  city,  or  secure  your  lives  when  it
is  come.

II.  Men  tainted  with  covetousness  lay  up  for  they  know  not  whom — for
their  enemies.  The  Jews  had  vexed  their  heads,  hearts,  and  hands  to  get  houses
and  vineyards,  silver  and  gold,  and  now  strangers,  men  their  sonls  hated,  must
possess  their  treasures.  This  misery  is  upon  all  accumulators,  that  they  niay  spend
twenty  or  thirty  years  in  gathering  that  which  a  Babylonian,  a  bitter  enemy  to
God  and  His  people,  may  possess  in  an  hour.

III.  Abuse  of  our  estates  defiles  them  and  brings  the  wrath  of  God  upon  them.
When  silver  and  gold  maintain  pride,  lusts,  and  other  ends  than  God  hath  appointed
them,  they  are  wronged  and  imboudaged,  and  are  as  an  unclean  thing.  Therefore
is  the  curse  brought  upon  all. — Greenldll.

Increase  of  Evil  Eealised  (ver.  26).

L  When  a  people  is  under  divine  displeasure  there  is  a  succession  of  evils
for  them.  Saul  and  Pharaoh  were  so  treated,  and  the  misery  of  the  wicked  is
that  they  shall  perish  rather  a  hundred  times  over  than  go  uni)unished.

11.  God  proceeds  by  degrees  and  steps  to  severity  gf  judgments.  First  come
drops,  then  sor:.e  little  streams,  after  that  the  strength,     ^'  Jle  did  not  stir  up  all

S3


OHAP.vilL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


His  wrath;"  but  if  sin  grow  God's  anger  grows.  He  begins  with  a  little  finger,
if  that  do  good  He  will  fetop ;  if  not,  you  shall  feel  His  hand,  His  arm,  and  weight
of  His  loins.

III.  Truths  are  not  confined  to  any  sort  of  men.  Truths  are  not  the  inherit-
ance of  priests,  piopht ts,  popes,  councils.  The  Lord  is  not  tied  to  any  rank,  but  is
free  to  be  where  He  pleases,  to  impart  truth  to  whi)ni  He  pleases,  and  to  as  few  as
He  pleases.  Ubi  ires  sunt,  ecclesia  est,  said  Tertullian,  and  they  may  have  truth
among  theui  and  more  given  to  them.

IV.  God  gives  and  takes  away  vision,  law,  counsel  He  creates  light  and
darkness.  If  you  spurn  at  any  ligbt,  any  truths  of  God,  you  may  lose  them  all.
He  sends  "  strong  delusions,"  but  He  says  also,  "  Come  ye,  and  let  us  walk  in  the
light  of  the  Lord."

V.  Those  who  will  not  do  what  they  know  shall  not  know  what  to  do.
Adam,  Saul,  and  others.  Jeremiah  bade  Zedekiah  and  the  rest  go  forth  and  yield
themselves,  but  they  did  it  nor,  and  quickly  after  no  vision,  no  law,  no  counsel,
and  they  knew  not  which  way  to  turn.

VL  They  that  will  not  know  God  in  the  way  of  His  mercies  shall  know
Him  in  the  way  of  His  Judgments. — Greenhill.


IIL— FURTHER  PROPHETIC  ACTION  IMPOSED  ON  EZEKIEL.

Chaps.  VIII.— XIX.

Ezekiel  has  recorded  the  circumstances  in  which  he  received  his  call  to  be  a
prophet,  and  then  the  signs  and  words  by  which  he  was  to  signify  the  doom  that
awaited  the  whole  of  his  people,  because  of  their  clamant  iniquities.  Fourteen
months  pass  over  him,  and  no  other  communication  from  the  Lord  is  related.  At
the  end  of  that  time  the  power  of  God  once  more  affects  him,  and  imparts  to  him
a  succession  of  experiences,  which  are  all  ranged  under  one  date.  As  in  the  pre-
ceding, so  in  this  cycle  of  his  prophecies  he  begins  with  a  vision  and  ends  with  a
dirge.  *'  Here  also  he  strives  against  political  drearns,  represents  the  destruction
as  inevitable,  and  points  to  repentance  as  the  only  way  of  safety." — Hengstenherg,

1.  Vision  of  the  Sins  and  Judgment  of  Jerusalem  (Chaps,  viii.-xi.)

Here  we  find  not  only  a  symbolical  representation  of  the  supreme  glory  and
power  of  the  God  of  Israel,  but  also  of  the  procedure  of  the  people.  This  is
accom[)lis}ied  by  putting  Ezekiel  in  a  kind  of  ctmstraint,  and  that  in  the  presence
of  onlook"  rs.  Did  this  visit  of  the  elders  cause  an  excitement  in  the  sensitive
propliet,  and  so  prepare  his  mind  for  impressions  from  the  Divine  ?  Their  visit
is  a  significant  fact.  It  shows  that  Ezekiel  was  no  mere  cipher  among  the  units  of
banished  Jews.  Whatever  had  been  their  words  and  their  looks  respecting  him,  he
became  too  much  of  a  power  amongst  them  to  be  insulted  only.  He  was  observed,
and  his  confinement  to  his  house  was  considered  not  as  a  result  of  ailment  merely,
biit  as  a  condition  demanding  general  interest.  Whether  the  people  realised  that
lie  was  "  a  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,"  and  the  elders  came  sincerely  to
inquire  "  what  saith  the  Lord  %  "  may  be  doubted  ;  but  that  this  was  the  case  after
a  few  years  is  certified  (chap,  xxxiii.  30).

The  constraint  imposed  on  Kzekiel  by  the  action  of  the  Lord  was  that  in
■which  the  external  senses  are  apparently  cast  into  an  unsusceptible  state.  He  waa
thus  witlidrawn  from  the  relation  to  his  hoiise  and  the  elders  in  which  he  seemed
to  be,  and  was  rendered  capable  of  receiving  impressions  of  things  far  remote  from
his  physical  environment.  Involuntary  on  his  part  though  his  state  might  be,
there  was  no  abeyance  in  the  action  of  his  chief  faculties.  He  could  internally  see,
hear,  speak ;  his  spirit  is  liberated  and  strengthened  instead  of  clogged.  The
84


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEIu


CHAR  VUL


overrulinc^  force  directs  his  attention  to  the  Jews  who  had  not  been  deported,  and
especially  to  the  procedure  of  the  dwellers  in  Jerusalem.

No  indication  is  given  of  the  length  of  time  passed  in  his  ecstasy.  The  elders
may  not  have  remained  so  long  as  his  perception  of  external  things  was  in  sus-
pense ;  but  they  may,  as  visional  events  proceed  more  rapidly  than  external.  They
would  have  seen  a  rigid  and  isudden  prostration  of  the  prophet's  body,  and  heard
his  ominous  cry  (chaps,  ix.  8,  xi.  13),  and  the  phraseology  of  chap.  xi.  25,  may
be  understood  to  mean  that  on  his  return  to  consciousness  he  described  to  them,  as
representing  "  them  of  the  captivity,"  all  that  had  been  shown  to  him.  "  The
supernatural  being  once  recognised  as  having  a  place  in  the  dealing  of  God  with
man,  we  ought  to  be  open  to  evidence  as  to  facts  in  every  individual  case "
(Campbell),  and  abide  in  the  light  of  the  messages.

(1.)  A  Survey  of  the  Four  Abominations  in  Jerusalem  (Chap,  viii.)

This  experience  of  Ezekiel  could  be  only  an  internal  one,  and  was  intended  to
make  him  perceptive  of  the  ungodly  ways  of  his  contemporaries  who  were  left  in
Judea.

Prelude  to  a  view  of  the  abominations  (vers.  1—4).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.-Ver.  1.
•*And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  sixth
year,  in  the  sixth  month,  in  the  fifth
day  of  the  month."  Since  his  first
vision,  Ezekiel's  time  had  been  divided
into  7  days,  390  days,  and  40  days,  in
all  437  days.  Reckoning  up  to  the
date  here  given,  14  months  had  passed,
and,  as  lunar  months,  they  would  make
413  days.  Were  we  to  consider  that
the  prophet  lay  on  his  sides  for  390  +  40
days  in  external  appearance,  we  should
be  at  a  loss  to  ex})lain  the  discrepancy
between  413  and  430,  or  else  we  should
conclude  that  this  ecstasy  happened  to
Ezekiel  while  he  lay  upon  his  right  side
for  Judah  ;  i.e.,  he  would  be  disturl  ed  in
the  process  of  executing  one  conmiis-
sion  by  the  interruption  of  another.  As
this  seems  improbable,  we  suppose  that
he  had  fulfilled  his  appointment  in  some
form,  but  not  literally.  The  next  ex-
pression supports  that  opinion.  "  I  sat
in  my  house,"  as  he  Lad  been  com-
manded (chap.  iii.  24).  Keil  says  that
the  verb  is  *'  used  in  the  more  general
sense  of  staying  or  jiving  in  the  house."
We  keep  to  the  more  restricted  meaning,
because  the  same  verb  is  employed  in
reference  to  the  elders.  He  and  they
were  in  the  same  posture  in  Ids  house.
He  was  not  on  his  side  ;  and  thougli  in
seclusion,  yet  it  was  a  seclusion  which
did  not  prevent  his  neighbours  from
observing  him  or  conversing  with  him ;


"and  ths  elders  of  Judah  were  sit-
ting before  me ;"  the  civil  organisation,
which  existed  from  the  primitive  times
of  Israel,  was  kept  up  among  the  cap-
tive Jews.  The  Babylonian  government
did  not  imperil  its  own  quietness  by
nullifying  the  authority  of  the  elders.
That  was  allowed — no  doubt  to  the  ad-
vantage of  captor  and  captive.  Some
special  motive  must  have  induced  these
head  men  of  Judah  to  wait  seated  in
the  i)rophet's  house.  Its  nature  is  not
mentioned  ;  but  the  communications  he
makes  to  them  ofier  the  probable  clue  ;
"  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  fell
there  upon  me  :  "  a  sudden  and  pal-
pable change  in  Ezekiel's  aspect  is
intimated  by  the  word  fell — it  is  not
used  in  the  other  two  cases  (chap.  i.  3,
iii.  22) — one  of  those  sympt(  nis  which
are  chiefly  observed  in  persons  of  a
high-strung,  nervous  temperament.  He
was  rapt  out  of  control  of  himself.
Under  this  influence  the  people  of  Jeru-
salem chiefly  became  the  objects  of  his
study,  and  he  afterwards  communicated
his  descriptions  and  denunciations  to
the  elders  of  the  captives.  It  would
seem  that  tidings  of  the  prophecies  of
Ezekiel  had  reached  the  city,  and  pro-
duced in  the  minds  of  its  inhabitants
a  despisal  of  those  who  were  in  exile.
*'  They  were  separated  from  the  privi-
leges of  worship  in  the  Holy  Temple ;
they  must  bear  their  troubles  and  not

85


CHAP.  vm.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


look  for  a  return  to  their  confiscated
property;  they  should  know  that  pos-
session of  the  hind  was  secured  to  the
people  remaining  in  Jerusalem,  who
were,  in  their  own  esteem,  the  favoured
of  the  Lord"  (chap.  xi.  15).  Reports
of  some  such  words  had  come  to  the
ears  of  the  captives.  They  felt  aggrieved,
and  they  presented  themselves  before
the  prophet  to  learn  what  he  had  to  say
in  reference  to  that  consequence  of  his
prophecies,  and  also  the  course  which
should  be  taken  in  regard  to  this  cyni-
cal treatment  by  their  brethren.  The
answer  is  conveyed  in  the  vision  which
Ezekiel  narrates.

Ver.  2.  "And  I  beheld,  and,  lo,
a  likeness  as  the  appearance  of  fire,"
&c.  The  Sept.  reads  man  instead  of
fire.  It  is  a  correction  which  is  un-
necessary, and  may  be  regarded  as  a
mistake.  The  earlier  manifestation
(chap.  i.  26,  27)  showed  indeed  the
appearance  of  a  man  upon  the  throne.
That  was  not  visible  now.  What  was
visible  was  that  part  which  displayed
the  fire  of  the  lower  members  and  the
brightness  of  the  upper  glowing  like  ore.
Thus  Ezekiel  sees  at  first,  "  below,  to-
wards the  earth,  the  person  on  the
throne  appeared  in  the  glowing  ire  of
His  function  as  judge  and  avenger,
above  in  the  pure  splendour  of  His
calm,  untroubled  heavenly  majesty." —
Ziillig.

Ver.  3.  "And  He  put  forth  the
form  of  a  hand."  He  whose  glory  was
present  to  the  prophet  was  not  materi-
ally acting — His  hand  was  visionary  ;
"  and  He  took  me  by  the  front  hair  of
my  head,"  as  if  to  give  an  nnimpeded
view  to  him  by  holding  him  so  as  to
make  him  look  straight  before  him.  It
was  not  to  carry  him :  another  agency
does  that ;  "  and  a  spirit  lifted  me
up  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven  f
or,  a  wind  lifted  me  wp^  an  interpreta-
tion which  may  be  defended  on  the
ground  that  the  Hebrew  word,  which
signifies  both  wind  and  spirit,  is  used
with  a  distinction  when  Ezekiel  tells  of
the  cessation  of  his  ecstasy  (chap.  xL  24).
Like  Paul,  he  could  not  tell  whether  he
was  out  of  the  body,  or  in  the  body.
He  knew  this,  that  the  power  of  the
86


Mighty  One  was  investing  him  with
marvellous  capabilities  which  needed  no
physical  forces  to  sustain  them.  It  13
interesting  to  note  that  while  Matthew
reports  our  Lord  as  saying,  "  If  I  by
the  Spirit  of  God  cast  out  devils,  then
is  the  kingdom  of  God  come  upon  you,*'
Luke  reports  Him  as  saying,  "If  I  by
the  finger  of  God  cast  out,"  (kc,  thus
illustrating,  as  here,  the  varying  aspects
of  spiritual  influence.  That  spiritual
domination  over  Ezekiel  placed  him
not  at  his  own  point  of  view  but  at
that  of  the  Lord.  He  saw  the  evils  of
his  people,  not  by  the  insight  of  his
own  nature,  but  by  the  revealing  light
of  God,  and  he  condemned  them  as
from  His  righteous  sentences:  *'and
brought  me  to  Jerusalem  in  visions  of
God ;"  in  this  rapt  condition  he  seemed
taken  to  the  Temple,  and  "to  the
opening  of  the  gate  of  the  inner
(court)  that  looks  toward  the  north."
He  was  on  the  northern  face  of  the
Temple,  and  at  that  opening  which
made  a  communication  between  the
outer  court,  that  of  the  people,  and  the
inner  court,  that  of  the  priests.  That
entrance  to  the  more  sacred  part  of  the
building  was  in  the  face  of  *' where  is
the  seat  of  the  image  of  jealousy  :"
this  is  meant  to  define  Ezekiel's  stand-
ing-place, not  to  define  the  worshipped
object.  The  reference  to  it  follows  in
ver.  5.  The  position  at  the  north  side
is  indicative  of  the  quarter  from  which
both  the  sin  and  punishment  of  Jeru-
salem were  chiefly  derived,  "which  pro-
voketh  to  jealousy."  Idols  are  an
ofi'ence  to  "  the  jealous,  energetic  God,
who,  as  such,  gives  not  His  honour  to
another,  and  calls  forth  His  reaction
against  the  wrong  done  to  His  honour"
{Heng.).  He  cannot  renounce  His
rights,  and  shows  that  He  will  not.

Ver.  4.  In  the  place  He  is  disho-
noured He  gives  tokens  of  His  power
and  glory:  "and,  behold,  there  was
the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel,  like
the  vision  that  I  saw  in  the  valley."
The  appearance  of  lire  which  Ezekiel
saw  in  his  house  seems  not  to  have
shown  throne  or  cherubim  or  wheels.
Now  that  he  is  in  the  Temple,  the  com-
plete glory  becomes  manifest  to  him  as


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OHAP.  YUL


he  had  already  seen  it  in  the  valley
near  Tel-Abib.  Its  presence  is  a  sign
that  the  God  of  Israel  will  search  into
all  the  secrets  of  His  people's  worship,
and  that  whatever  is  inconsistent  with
the  glory  of  His  power,  wisdom,  holiness,
love,  among  those  who  are  left  in  Judea,
will  be  laid  bare  and  denounced.  It
cannot  be  said  that  the  practices  which
were  thus  unveiled  must  have  been  con-
fined to  the  precincts  of  the  Temple.
Those  various  forms  of  unhallowed  wor-
ship could  hardly  be  going  on  at  tiie
same  time  and  within  its  comparatively
limited  space  ;  and  it  may  be  questioned
if  certain  of  them  were  ever  transacted
therein.  The  vision  is  symbolical.
The  mere  eye  of  flesh  did  not  see  what
was  done,  but  a  spiritual  imagination


did.  It  recognised  the  Temple  as  the
centre  of  the  national  life — the  natural
meeting-place  for  all  Israelitish  religious
thought,  and  a  focus  for  the  abomina-
tions which  were  committed  in  the  land.
This  idea  is  supported  by  the  words  of
Jeremiah  (vii.  10),  **Ye  come  and  stand
before  me  in  this  house,  which  is  called
by  my  name,  and  say,  We  are  delivered
to  do  all  these  abominations."  And  yet
he  writes  (ver.  17)  as  if  they  com-
mitted them  elsewhere :  "  Seest  thou
not  what  they  do  in  the  cities  of
Judah,  and  in  the  streets  of  Jeru-
salem 1"  Ezekiel's  vision  includes  the
four  chief  manifestations  of  evil  among
the  people,  in  public  and  in  the  dark,
and  becomes  a  striking  picture  of  the
apostasy  of  the  house  of  IsraeL


First  abomination  (vers.  6  and  6).


EXEGETICAL    NOTES.— Ver.    5.

The  prophet,  standing  by  the  gate  of
the  inner  court,  is  commanded,  by  a
voice  from  the  glorious  appearance,  to
consider  the  idolatrous  fignre  confront-
ing him.  "  And  I  lifted  up  my  eyes
.  .  .  and  behold  northward  of  the
gate  of  the  altar,"  standing  in  the
outer  court  so  that  it  was  in  the  way  of
all  who  came  in  view  of,  or  passed
through  that  gate  which  was  called  the
gate  of  the  altar,  probably  because  it
led  to  the  spot  where  sacrificial  animals
were  slain,  this  image  of  jealousy  at
the  entrance.  Various  conjectures  are
made  as  to  the  special  object  repre-
sented by  this  image — Baal,  Moh)ch,
Astarte.  It  is  preferable  to  regard  it
as  a  figure  which  embodied  in  its  shape
the  ever-working  tendency  to  associate
the  worship  of  idols  with  that  of  the


Lord  God,  and  thus  to  idealise  the
opposition  which  was  perceived  by  Him
among  those  who  trod  His  courts.

Ver.  6.  '*  Seest  thou  .  .  .  the  great
abominations  which  the  house  of
Israel  are  committing  here,"  they  seem
to  pay  divine  homage  to  images  as  often
as  they  pay  it  to  me.  They  may  not
purpose  the  certain  result  of  such  pro-
cedure, but  it  cannot  fail  to  happen,
and  that  is  "in  order  to  be  far  off  from
my  sanctuary."  Who  is  meant — the
people  or  the  Lord  ?  Not  the  former,
but,  what  is  unspeakably  more  terrific,
the  latter,  as  was  illustrated  at  the  close
of  this  manifestation  (chap.  xi.  23).
**My  glory  I  will  not  give  to  another;"
therefore  He  writes  ''  Ichabod  "  on  His
Temple  in  Jerusalem  :  "  and  turn  again,
thou  shalt  see  great  abominations."


HOMILETICS.
God's  Ways  made  Known  (vers.  1-4),

The  methods  by  which  the  Father  of  spirits  communicates  with  human  hearts
are  wrapt  in  symbol  and  mystery.  We  do  not  know  how  the  life  in  plants  concurs
in  their  growth;  we  know  that  it  does  by  the  effects  on  them.  And  a  man  may
not  be  able  to  explain  hi>w  he  has  obtained  a  consciousness  of  God,  yet  unhesitat-
ingly premise  that  he  has  the  witness  in  himself  that  God  has  come  to  him  and
given  him  power.

L  He  receives  this  power  amid  the  ordinary  conditions  of  life ;  within  tha

97


CHAP.  VIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


walls  of  his  own  house,  a  sufferer  under  ailments,  with  a  few  companions,  he
realises  that  the  Lord  has  visited  him.  *'  He  besets  us  behind  and  before,  and
lays  His  hand  upon  us  "  wheresoever  He  will.  The  idea  that  He  may  affect  us  is
sometimes  a  source  of  fear  and  repulsion.  This  is  to  discredit  God.  Wliy  should
not  the  possibility  of  His  power  manifesting  itself  to  us,  anywhere  and  at  any  time,
be  esteemed  as  one  of  the  highest  privileges  of  our  life  ?     His  visits  may  be  made  :

1.  In  seasons  of  trouble.  The  elders  and  exiles,  flouted  by  their  unbanished
brethren,  received  good  from  the  Lord  by  means  of  His  word  to  Ezekiel.  They
learned  that  though  far  from  their  sacred  Temple  they  were  not  forgotten  by  its
Lord  ;  that  though  despised  as  outcasts,  they  knew  that  His  prophet  was  among
them  ;  that  their  iniquities  had  not  taken  away  His  truth  and  mercy  from  them.
The  needy  cried  to  Him,  and  He  sent  from  above  to  alleviate  their  need  just  where
they  felt  it.

2.  In  personal  associations.  The  power  that  came  to  Ezekiel  and  the  elders
came  in  private.  It  seems  to  be  the  usual  course.  Prophets  and  apostles  were
specially  influenced  by  the  Lord  when  they  were  away  from  ordinary  stated
worship.  This  was  not  meant  to  disparage  assemblies  for  public  religious  services;
it  was  rather  to  signify  that,  if  we  are  to  learn  eff'ectively  that  Christ  is  the  power
of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God,  we  must  be  alone,  or  \\'n\i  two  or  three  gathered
in  His  name.  God  honours  not  the  service  but  the  servants,  and  while  public
means  have  their  own  place  among  the  ordinances  of  His  kingdom,  they  must  not
be  supposed  to  secure  for  us  ''power  from  on  high."  From  the  Lord  we  must
expect  "  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need  " — not  from  any  mere  means  even  though
called  sacred.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  heareth  me,  watching  daily  at  my  gates,  wait-
ing at  the  posts  of  my  doors."

IL  The  Divine  Spirit  produces  new  experiences.

\,  There  are  fresh  impulses.  The  common  routine  of  thought  is  broken
through.  The  feeling  of  a  new  presence  touching  our  inner  man  becomes  definite.
A  prophet  sees  the  brightness  of  a  radiating  glory  ;  apostles  behold  "  the  glory  as
of  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father ;"  any  man  who  calls  Jesus  Lord  has  a  reve-
lation within  of  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  His  glory.  All  of  them  feel  and
know  that  they  are  brought  into  contact  with  a  strength  that  is  made  perfect  in
weakness — the  impelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

2.  There  is  an  exaltation  of  heart.  Ezekiel  felt  lifted  above  the  ground  by  a
spirit.  '*  Between  earth  and  heaven  "  he  sees  wider  views.  He  moves  amidst  rays
from  God.  When  we  have  a  plainer  and  ampler  sight  given  to  us  of  the  gospel  of
the  glory  of  the  blessed  God,  how  difi'erently  we  look  upon  our  own  needs  and  the
needs  of  other  men.  We  may  sigh,  we  may  lift  up  longing  eyes,  we  may  bend
our  heads  and  knees,  but  we  do  so  because  our  hearts  testify  that  they  have  "the
Presence  infinite  "  which  makes  its  creatures  blessed.  Self  and  the  world  keep  our
spiritual  life  down  ;  but  the  uplifting  of  the  Holy  Spirit  enables  us  to  '*  mount  up
with  wings  as  eagles,  to  run  and  not  be  weary,  to  walk  and  nut  faint."  Evermore
give  us  this  power.

3.  There  is  a  clearer  understanding  of  the  religious  condition  of  a  people.  The
prophet  saw  the  abominations  which  the  house  of  Israel  committed,  by  the  pene-
trating power  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  Temple.  Nothing  like  a  display  of  the
character  of  God  to  make  sin  appear,  and  to  make  it  appear  "  exceeding  sinful."
Even  if  we  be  not  addicted  to  the  same  iniquities  as  other  men  may  be,  our  stand-
ing in  the  light  of  God's  countenance  will  enable  us  to  discover  their  sins,  and  so
to  speak  of  them  that  they  shall  be  convicted  in  their  own  consciences  that  we
speak  the  truth,  that  the  evils  which  we  poitray  are  their  evils.  So  a  motive
may  be  given  ft)r  repentance  towards  God.      We  learn  to  cherish  :

I.  A  certitude  that  God  will  teach  I  J  is  ways.  Faithfulness  in  little  opens  a  way
for  the  reception  of  much  which  will  demand  faithfulness.  Obedience  to  many
commandments  of  Christ  prepares  for  learning  commandments  that  are  yet  unrecog-


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  viii.

nised.  They  wlio  grow  in  grace  grow  in  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  variety
of  forms  wliich  His  teaching  takes  does  not  weaken  but  strengthens  the  conviction
that  He  will  teach.  So  it  conies  to  i»ass  that  multitudes  of  persons  can  avow  that
He  who  was  once  an  unknown  God  is  now  honoured  as  a  Father;  that  the  Christ
who  was  once  admired  is  now  adored  as  a  Saviour  and  King ;  that  the  persons
with  whom  they  are  brought  into  association  are  regarded  with  a  heightened  and
distinctive  sympathy.  They  have  learned  from  Him  who  gives  rest  to  their  soul,
and  they  trust  to  Him  to  teach  them  still.  Whereas  they  were  blind  now  they
see,  and  they  are  sure  that  He  who  has  opened  their  eyes  will  point  out  their  way
and  inform  them  of  all  its  dangers  and  its  provisions.

2.  A  hope  of  special  teaching.  Unlooked-for  changes,  perplexities,  difficulties
appear.  Does  one  revelation,  does  a  series  of  instructions  for  one's  common  way
of  life,  exhaust  His  supplies'!  No  ;  "all  tilings  work  together  for  good."  Let  all
things  be  against  us,  that  does  not  show  that  God  is  unable  to  take  us  through
them  aU.  It  only  shows  that  we  must  not  lose  heart  and  hope;  that  we  must
wait  for  Him  when  He  is  not  in  view  ;  that  we  must  trust  that  the  all-sufficiency
of  heavenly  power  and  love  is  acting  with  steady  force,  though  impalpable  for  a
time.  "  Now  we  see  in  a  mirror  darkly,"  but  enough  to  satisfy  us  that  all  needed
light  will  be  shed,  that  human  sins  will  not  prevail  against  the  rule  of  God.

Vain  Worship  (vers.  5  and  6).

The  spirit  and  truth  which  are  needful  in  serving  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  are
often  absint  from  those  who  profess  to  worship  Him.  Individual  worship  and
common  worship  are  equally  faulty  as  to  this,  and  call  forth  the  stern  appeal  from
the  great  King,  "  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations ;  incense  is  an  abomination  to  me.'*
He  thus  repels  the  worship  because —

I.  It  is  divided.  The  worshippers  set  up  an  image  in  His  courts.  They
acknowledged  Him,  but  He  was  not  the  only  one  regarded.  They  mingled  up  in
what  they  did  for  Him  a  reference  to  some  custom  of  other  people,  or  some  misap-
prehension of  their  own  mind.  They  did  not  submit  themselves  to  the  inalienable
rights  of  God.  The  rite  or  ceremony  may  be  very  attractive  to  the  eye  or  ear,
generation  after  generation  may  have  found  it  agreeable,  but  the  condemnation
stamped  on  it  is  "  God  alone  is  not  here  !"  Many  prayers  which  seem  earnest  are
not  answered  because  they  supplicate  for  gratification  to  some  lust  of  the  flesh  or
mind.  Many  a  religious  meeting  dissolves  as  a  vapour  wherein  no  appearance  of
God  is  traceable,  because  they  have  not  come  to  the  Father  only  by  Christ.  Get
a  single  eye,  purify  hearts  by  faith,  search  out  all  doublemindedness  in  private  or
public  means  of  worship,  lest  God  go  far  off,  refusing  to  accept  and  hear.  "  Beside
Him  there  is  no  God,"  and  a  divided  worship  is  worthless.

II.  It  belies  His  character.  He  is  supreme.  It  is  impossible  for  any  created
thing  to  share  His  sovereign  authority,  and  any  kind  of  worship  which  reverences
an  idol,  or  a  form,  or  an  idea  of  man's  heart,  must,  by  its  very  nature,  be  repu-
diated as  an  aboniiTiation.  Who  dare  presume  to  ascend  the  throne  of  the
Almighty  !  He  is  righteous.  Jealousy  amongst  men  is  tainted  to  a  greater  or  less
degree  by  selfish  elements.  We  cannot  bear  a  thing  because  it  somehow  shadows
our  contracted  range  of  view,  does  not  let  us  step  easily  on  to  our  own  comfort.
In  God's  jeahmsy  there  is  no  element  but  what  is  true,  and  holy,  and  kind.  He
cannot  give  up  such  principles  if  He  is  to  continue  to  govern  the  world.  He  main-
tains '*  the  integrity  and  dignity  of  His  own  position  in  the  face  of  every  free  being."
It  is  the  rights  of  God  and  with  them  the  rights  of  every  moral  being  which  vibrate
in  the  words,  "  The  Lord  shall  be  jealous  for  His  great  name  ;"  and  that  He  should
be  provoked  by  honour  given  to  another  is  to  be  true  to  the  claims  which  human
nature  makes  upon  Him  who  formed  it  to  be  good.  He  is  accessible.  The  image
of  jealousy  stood  in  the  very  face  of  the  Lord's  altar,  as  if  He  were  to  be  served

89


CHAP.  viii.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.

only  after  an  idol  had  been  acknowledged  ;  as  if  the  first  step  towards  Him  must  be
taken  by  the  help  of  that  which  is  not  God.  In  Christian  service  we  too  fre-
quently fancy  that  if  we  first  pray,  or  read  the  Scriptures,  or  fast,  we  sliall  find  the
Lord  easier  of  access.  Alas  for  us  !  if  we  do  not  learn  that  He  is  nigh  to  all  that
call  upon  Him,  that  between  the  High-priestly  Son  and  them  nothing  should  inter-
vene, that  to  use  any  other  mediator  is  to  make  a  movement  which  tends  to  put
Him  far  off.  Not  that  He  does  not  see,  does  not  care  for  the  worshippers  He  may
forsake ;  but  tliat  they  may  learn  that  they  have  treated  Him  as  if  He  were  a
retired  or  an  absent  God.  Forms  of  worship  thus  become  a  mere  ceremonial.
Darkness  and  deadness  cover  the  heart,  and  He  cannot  but  count  vain  that  which
by  act  takes  from  His  cliaracter  its  authority,  justice,  and  immediate  presence.

III.  It  is  made  obvious  to  God-fearing  men.  "  Son  of  man,  seest  thou  what
they  do?"  Dare  he  consider  the  abominations?  Yes;  if  in  obedience  to  the  Lord.
Ezekiel  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  see  the  abonn nations,  not  because  he  wanted  to  look
on  evil,  or  because  he  thought  his  soul  strong  enough  to  venture  without  harm
"among  serpents  ;  "  but  because  the  Lord  told  him  to  do  so.  We  may  look  upon
things  which  offend  God — bad  books,  besotted  men  and  women,  unscriptural
practices  in  worship — but  we  need  to  beware  of  the  danger  in  such  procedure.
Many  a  youth  has  committed  evil  because  he  wanted  to  see  what  it  was  like.
Many  a  worshipper  has  gone  to  look  at  forms  of  worship  with  which  he  was  not
familiar,  and  lost  his  power  to  distinguish  between  that  mode  of  service  which
leads  to  Christ  and  that  which  draws  away  from  Him — between  a  fruitful  worship
and  a  vain.  And  if  at  times  there  does  not  appear  sufficient  ground  for  judging
whether  or  not  a  certain  worship  veils  the  glory  of  Christ,  the  true  way  in  which
it  can  be  made  clear  is  to  give  honest  answer  to  the  question.  Shall  I  be  obeying
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  attending  on  this  thing?  The  weak  conscience  is  defiled,
the  strong  in  the  Lord  is  made  able  to  stand.  One  goes  into  the  lion's  den  and
is  safe,  for  Cod  sends  him  ;  many  go  and  are  torn  in  pieces,  for  their  own  will
moves  them.  We  touch  a  great  principle  for  our  guidance  in  worship  when  we  say
that  wrong  against  God  is  plain  to  those  who  fear  His  great  name.  Yes;  if  he
is  to  he  fit  to  act  as  a  watchman,  Ezekiel  looked  at  the  image  of  jealousy,  but  it
was  that  he  might  say,  "  God  will  withdraw  if  that  is  honoured."  Jesus  ate  with
publicans  and  siiniers,  but  it  was  that  He  might  call  them  to  repentance.  And  if
we  be  disposed  to  ob.serve  any  unholy  thing,  it  must  be  with  the  desire  so  to  know
it  that  we  shall  see  its  offensiveness  to  God,  and  shall  warn  the  men  who  sanction
it  that  they  are  sinning  against  the  only  true  God.

God's  Disclosure  of  Sin  (vers.  6,  13,  15).

The  disclosure  shows —

I.  There  are  degrees  of  wickedness — *'  greater  abominations.**  The  longer  we
look  the  more  we  see.  There  is  a  sin  of  ignorance  like  Paul's — **I  did  it  igno-
rantly  in  unbelief" — and  sins  of  knowledge  like  those  who  "sin  wilfully  after  that
we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  Some  sins  withhold  the  honour
which  is  due  the  Lord  in  worship  ;  other  sins  act  against  His  laws  of  conduct,
and  prostitute  the  powers  of  manhood  and  womanhood  in  brutal  license.

IL  Knowledge  of  the  degrees  of  wickedness  is  not  acquired  all  at  once.
"  Thou  shalt  see  greater."  The  first  conscious  sin  is  no  evidence  of  other  sins  which
will  be  committed  by  an  individual.  He  begins  to  court  the  will  to  be  rich,  and
then  comes  the  will  to  lie,  cheat,  steal ;  or  the  desire  for  power,  and  then  come
deeds  of  injustice,  oppression,  murder;  or  neglected  worship,  and  then  "they
crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  Him  to  an  open  shame."
The  evils  in  churches  are  gradually  recognised.  They  may  be  indulged  in  by
many,  and  who  discovers  at  once  that  the  stream  is  tending  to  the  wrong  quarter  t
They  may  be  kept  from  honest  probing,  and  how  can  we  test  their  danger  %  They
00


HOMtLETiC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


cHap.  vm.


may  be  undetected  because  we  have  been  accustomed  always  to  see  them,  and
where  is  the  power  to  show  their  ofifensiveness  to  the  Lord  ?  Once  brought  to  see
one  aHowed  course  in  its  sinfulness,  we  may  be  brought  to  see  others  also.  We
need  to  have  eyes  opened  tliat  we  may  see,  and  we  shall  find  that  **  in  the  lowest
deep  there  is  a  lower  deep  still  threatening  to  devour."

III.  The  light  of  God  alone  unveils  the  amount  of  wickedness.  He  has  a
time  and  ways  of  discovering  what  is  in  our  hearts,  what  in  our  societies.  We
must  look  by  it,  walk  in  it  if  we  are  to  remember  whence  we  are  fallen  and  not
have  our  candlestick  moved  out  of  its  place.  Let  us  wait  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
that  in  His  light  we  may  see  the  light  for  our  own  state  and  the  state  of  others.
"  It  is  time  for  Thee  to  work,  fot  men  have  made  void  Thy  law."


Second  abomination  (vers.  7-12).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vei.  7.
The  pro[)het  having  turned,  he  says,
*'  He  brought  me  to  the  opening  of  the
court;"  his  position  being  changed,  he
must  have  been  taken  to  some  other
door  than  that  mentioned  in  ver.  3,
most  probably  to  the  opening  which  led
from  the  outer  court  into  un walled
space ;  the  worshippers  would  thus  be
less  exposed  to  observation  than  if  they
had  to  cross  the  court  to  the  inner  gate.
*'  and  I  saw  and,  behold,  a  hole  in  the
wall,"  but  too  small  for  him  to  pass
through,  and  a  mode  of  ingress  must
be  made.

Ver.  8.  At  the  command  of  the  Lord
he  dug  out  part  of  the  wall,  as  Eastern
robbers  do,  and,  entering  by  the  breach,
*' behold  an  opening"  which  the  wall
concealed,  and  so  was  known  to  the  ini-
tiated alone.  The  seer  has  the  key
whici)  opens  it — the  word  of  the  Lord.

Ver.  9.  "  Come  and  see  the  wicked
abominations  which  they  are  doing
here."  Ezekiel  was  moving  in  the
region  of  symbols.  The  hole  -,  the  door
wnlled  in ;  a  secret  worship  by  elders ;  a
large  room,  within  the  Temple-precincts,
having  its  walls  covered  with  the  figures
of  various  animals  representing  the  visi-
ble powers  of  nature,  are  all  tokens
that  it  was  not  a  real  sight  he  was  look-
ing on — that  it  was  a  representation  of
the  masked  and  wide-spread  guilt  of
the  mass  of  the  people.

Ver.  10.  "And  I  came  and  saw;
and.  behold,  every  form  of  reptiles
and  cattle,  abomination,  and,"  besides
those  animal  figures,  there  were  repre-
sentatives "  of  all  the  refuse  idols  of
the  house  of  Israel   portrayed  upon


the  wall  round  about."  Ancient  writers,
and  tombs  opened  in  recent  times,  show
how  common  was  the  practice  in  Egypt
of  decorating  their  walls  with  painted
figures,  while  the  worship  of  animals  in
that  country  was  long  the  popular  form
of  worship.  It  seems  as  if  this  promi-
nence given  to  Egyptian  habits  had
reference  to  the  leanings  towards  that
government  of  many  among  the  leading
men  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  their  efforts  to
bring  about  an  alliance  offensive  and
defensive.  Allusions,  in  the  larger  pro-
phetical books  especially,  prove  that
there  was  a  political  party  among  the
Jews  whose  cry  was,  "Let  us  go  down
to  Egypt  for  help  I "  Now  that  the
Babylonian  power  was  in  the  ascendancy,
that  party  was  obliged  to  resort  to  un-
derhand schemes,  to  secret  meetings  and
proceedings,  with  the  hope,  no  doubt,
that  they  might  contrive,  with  the  aid
of  Egypt,  to  get  rid  of  the  Chaldean
yoke.  The  Jewish  people  were  not  con-
tented with  their  compromises  with
Egypt,  they  also  adopted  other  varieties
of  idol-worship.  The  new  forms  did  not
prevail  so  as  to  extirpate  the  old,  and
overwhelming  superstition  spread  over
the  covenanted  land.  Thus  did  created
things  become  an  abomination.  Good
in  themselves,  they  were  placed  by  the
people  alongside  of  the  Lord  God,  if  not
above  Him,  and  became  objects  of  His
loathing.

Ver.  11.  "And  seventy  men  of  the
elders  of  the  house  of  Israel."  The
number  is  historical  (Exod.  xxiv.  1 ;
Num.  xi.  16).  It  is  not  to  be  under-
stood here  of  a  standing  council  of  the
people,  but  of   an  ideal  representation

91


efiAt.  VIII.


QOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL,


of  them  as  a  whole.  The  contrast  be-
tween the  present  provocation  of  the
Lord  and  the  honour  paid  to  Him  for-
merly by  the  seventy  is  also  to  be  con-
sidered. "  To  render  the  contrast  still
more  {»alpable  between  what  was  and
what  should  have  been,"  it  is  added,
"  and  Jaazaniah  the  son  of  Shaphan
standing  in  their  midst ;"  why  he  was
so  cimspiciious  is  unknown.  He  was
one  of  a  family  of  Jewish  statesmen.
His  father  was  the  patriotic  and  God-
fearing scribe — chancellor  —  of  King
Josiali  during  bis  reforming  reign
(2  Kings  xxii.  3,  ff,).  Another  son
was  Ahikani,  who,  as  also  his  son  Ge-
daliah,  nobly  stood  for  Jeremiah  (Jer.
xxvi.  24,  xxxix.  14).  Jaazaniah  had
apparently  deserted  the  purer  traditions
of  his  family  and  become  prominent
among  the  idolatrous  and  Egyptian
party.  It  is  a  sad  but  not  an  isolated
spectacle.  Righteousness  does  not  run
by  a  law  of  heredity.  "  were  standing
before  them,*  i.e.,  before  the  figures
drawn  on  the  walls,  "  and  each  man
with  his  censer  in  his  hand,"  thus
assuming  a  prerogative  of  priesthood,
and  in  the  posture  of  performing  an  act
of  worship  of  the  highest  kind.  "  and
a  prayer  of  the  cloud  of  incense  was
going  up."  The  A.  V.  has  "a  thick
cloud."  The  only  other  place  where
the  Hebrew  word  is  found  gives  in  its
translation  "  suppliants  "  (Zech.  iii.  10).
In  \)iblical  language,  the  ascending  in-
cense is  symbolic  of  prayer — "the
twenty-four  elders  having  each  one
goldeji  bowl  full  of  incense  which  are
the  prayers  of  the  saints"  (Rev.  v.  8).
On  these  grounds  we  prefer  to  read  here
"  prayer."

Ver.  12.  The  interpretation  comes.
"Hast  thou  seen,  son  of  man,  what
the  elders  of  the  house  of  Israel  are
doing  in  the  dark  :"  that  this  abomina-
tion was  to    be  sought    for  in  such  a


secrecy,  while  the  others  were  seen  in
the    open   daylight,   supports    the    idea
that  the  former  was  maintained  for  the
furtherance    of   occult   political    aspira-
tions— aspirations  which  the  Providence
of  God  would  not  sanction  :  "  each  man
in  the  chambers  of  his  imagery  1 " —
rooms  in  which  images  were  delineated.
Each  of  the  seventy  had  such  a  chamber
for    himself — a  place  in  which    he  in-
stalled his  own  special  favourite  objects
of  worship.     It  is  indicative  of  the  ad-
diction in  private  houses  to  the  unhal-
lowed   ceremonies    which    the    ]irophet
beheld  in  the  light  of  God.     Proceed-
ings like  these  gave  ])racti('al  expression
to  the  thought,  "  the  Lord  does  not  see
us ;  the  Lord  has  forsaken  the  land."
They  did  not  deny  the  Lord's  existence,
they  used  His  name  ;  but  their  conduct
was  tantamount  to  reducing  Him  to  a
nonentity  in  the  world,  for    it    denied
His  knowledge  and  mercy.     To  put  a
fact  into  the  terms  of  a  popular  saying
is  one  of  the  features  of  Ezekiel's  style,
and  is  a  mode  of  intimating  that  the
thoughts  so  embodied   in   speech  were
not  mere    hasty  and    transient  impres-
sions, but  were  the  outcome  of  habitual
choosing  their  own  ways  and  forsaking
those  of  the  Lord.     When  such  notions
about    Him    were    cherished,    apostasy
from  Him  was,  not  probable  oidy,  but
certain.     Men  might  live  as  they  liked,
they   might    despise    God,    they   might
tempt  and  deceive  their  fellowmen,  no
account  would  be  demanded.     God  saw
not.     They  may  degrade  the  worship  of
a  people,  they  may  corrupt  the  moral  at-
mosphere of  a  city,  they  may  strive  to
promote  political  ends,  both  at  home  and
abroad,  which  shall  be  unworthy   of  a
high-minded    people.      They    allow    no
scrupulous  afterthoughts  to  hold  them
back.     God    has  forsaken   the  land — a
nation  has  no  God,   no  eternally  righ-
teous law  to  obey  1


nOMILETICS.

Corruption  of  True  Worship.

Account  for  it  as  philosophers  may,  the  fact  is  patent  that  most  men  will
worship.     They  are  in  the  abyss  of  savagery,  or  they  plume   themselves  on  the
92


BOMtLETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKtEL,  OHa?.  vm.


Bumniit  of  the  highest  civilisation  of  centuries,  and  at  not  one  stage,  from  the
lowest  to  the  liighest  point  of  the  long  slope,  is  there  a  belt  of  which  it  can  be  said,
**  Worship  was  never  made  within  its  limits."  The  object  of  such  worship  as  is
rendered  may  be  a  fetish,  or  a  Spirit  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable ;  but  in
each  variation  there  is  understood  to  be  the  existence  of  something  in  which  power
resides.  The  tendency  thus  universally  observed,  like  all  human  tendencies,  is
susceptible  to  change  of  direction.  As  certain  elements  in  nutritious  food  are
adapted  to  build  up  a  healthy  body,  so  there  are  certain  elements  required  in  wor-
ship to  meet  the  wants  of  a  human  being  as  he  stands  related  to  the  Power  which
made  him  and  fashioned  him.  As  food  may  be  used  lavishly  or  sparingly  and  pro-
duce diseases  incident  to  over-indulgence  or  insufficiency  ;  or  as  good  food  may
be  refused  and  hurtful  taken  instead,  so  worship  may  be  carried  out  to  strengthen
or  weaken,  to  elevate  or  degrade  the  soul;  or  that  worship  which  is  right  and  true
be  forsaken  for  that  which  is  false  and  destructive.  The  features  of  the  latter  deli-
neated here  are —

L  It  takes  a  place  among  purer  forms.  The  Jewish  elders,  burning  incense
before  animal  figures  and  other  objects,  stood  within  the  area  of  the  Temple  dedi-
cated to  the  honour  of  the  only  living  and  true  God.  They  practised  their  dark
rites  under  the  shadow  of  a  holy  fane.  The  craving  for  worship  seeks  its  appease-
ment not  only  in  the  pure  and  true,  and  a  past  enlightenment  does  not  guarantee  it
against  a  present  error.  In  all  the  ages  during  which  men  have  walked  among  the
revelations  of  God,  some  amongst  them  "have  forsaken  the  fountain  of  living
waters  and  hewn  out  for  themselves  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no  water."  The
churches,  taught  by  men  who  had  been  with  Jesus  and  had  seen  "  the  power  of
His  resurrection,"  included  persons  who  held  the  teaching  of  Balaam,  ate  things
sacrificed  to  idols,  and  committed  fornication.  The  present  Church  of  Rome  boasts
of  its  unbroken  succession  from  the  simple  primitive  Church,  yet  the  walls  of  its
buildings  are  often  covered  with  pictures,  lights  are  burned  at  the  shrines  of  saints,
Mary  is  worshipped  more  than  Jesus,  and  a  frail  man  is  revered  as  infallible  !
Where,  too,  there  has  been  a  practical  protest  against  Papal  departures  from  purer
worship,  who  dare  to  say  that  no  heed  is  paid  to  seducing  spirits,  no  "  departure
from  the  faith"  has  occurred  1  Called  Christians,  counted  among  those  who
profess  belief  in  Jesus,  how  many  have  only  a  name  to  live  !  How  many  use  their
position  to  do  that  which  is  not  seemly  !  And  spiritual  worship  is  made  to  pro-
vide a  room  for  that  which  is  earthly  and  sensual.

II.  It  needs  a  close  search  to  perceive  its  obliauity.  The  hole  in  the  wall
could  excite  only  suspicion,  but  an  investigation  made  by  the  breaking  through
could  expose  the  coriuption  which  was  festering.  It  is  a  suggestive  omen  for
those  who  would  discern  the  times,  and  learn  the  judgment  of  truth  respecting
them.  We  must  wait  and  watch  in  the  light  which  Jesus  sheds,  follow  up  the
questions  which  the  Holy  Spirit  may  prompt  in  regard  to  the  meaning  of  our
forms  of  worship.  There  are  "depths  of  Satan"  into  which  no  sounding  line  will
be  let  down  without  some  impulse ;  there  is  a  hating  of  the  light  t)f  which  no
estimate  can  be  made  till  the  Divine  word  measures  it.  The  external  worship  of  a
church  may  be  associated  with  for  years,  and  not  a  fear  startle  the  soul  lest  there
should  not  be  spirit  and  truth  in  its  observance.  The  forms  may  be  appropriate  ;
but  beneath  them  there  may  be  no  loyalty  to  the  Christ,  only  a  care  for  personal
satisfaction  and  comfort.  The  pens  may  be  filled,  and  filled  with  anything  but
sheep  !  Only  He  who  holds  the  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand  knows  and  can
reveal  the  lurking  sins  which  offend  Him  and  hinder  the  Gospel  of  His  Son.  What
right  hearted  man  will  not  pray,  often  and  expectingly,  "  Lead  me  to  where  I  can
Bee,  open  mine  eyes  that  I  may  see  that  which  impinges  against  Thy  truth  and
holiness  and  love,  no  matter  by  whom  or  by  what  numbers  the  evil  thing  is  com-
mitted "  ?

ni.  It  manifests  a  voracious  appetite.     Several  animals  do  not  satisfy,  idols

93


CBAP.  vilL  HOMILETIC  COMMENT AHY:  EZEKlEL.

m . _ . t^

of  other  kinds  are  accepted  as  objects  for  worship.  As  in  Jerusalem,  so  it  was  in
the  days  of  imperial  Rome — a  niche  was  provided  for  the  gods  of  all  nations.
Corruption  spreads  by  its  own  nature.  One  step  is  not  much  out  of  the  narrow
way,  but  the  line  which  tliat  step  begins  to  trace  will  take  to  far-off  regions.  The
mystery  of  lawlessness,  with  its  power  and  signs  and  lying  wonders,  and  with  all
deceit  of  unrighteousness,  started  on  its  career  from  the  bosom  of  apostolic  churches ;
and  the  warning-note,  needed  by  all  seekers  for  God's  will,  is,  *'Be  not  moved  away
from  the  true  worship,  lest  you  go  from  bad  to  worse,  and  weary  the  Lord."

IV.  It  exercises  varied  influences.     Over  the  higher  ranks  of  society.     Their
position  and  their  intelligence  do  not  act  as  a  safeguard  against  a  deteriorated
religiousness.     They  are  most  under  the  claims  of  worldly  fashion,  and  a  fashion
in  worship  is  most  likely  to  be  potent  amongst  them.     At  any  rate,  church  history
may  be  adduced  to  show  that  it  is  not  the  common  people  but  the  aristocracy  of  a
country  from  whom  a  change  from  a  simple  to  a  complex  and  sensuous  ritual  finds
its  chief  support.     Over  the  aged.     The  elders  of  the  house  of  Israel  corrupted  the
statutes    of   the   Lord.     The   lapse  of  years  brings  trial  and  failures.     Men  get
weary  of  the  God  whose  command  is,  "  Be  ye  holy  for  I  am  holy,"  who  allows  no
illegitimate  indulgence  to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  mind,  and  they  go  into  self-
pleasing  causes  after  a  lifetime  of  hearing  a  voice  behind  them  continually  say,
"  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it"     "  Tliere  is  no  fool  like  an  old  fool !"     Over
family  associations.     The  chief  among  the  abettors  of  corrupted  worship  was  a  man
of  whom  it  would  have  been  said,  "  The  influences  of  his  family  will  prevent  him
from  going  amongst  the  secret  worshippers  of  idols."     But  this  saying  is  superficial
and  inconsistent  with  facts.     Our  generation  has  seen  not  a  few  out  of  the  families
of  evangelical  Protestants  become  enthusiastic  Roman  Catholics  or  Ritualists —
ready  to  stand  among  them  as  leaders.      They  who  should  have   been    barriers
against  turning  out  of  the  way  of  the  Lord  go  at  the  head  of  those  who  turn  from
it.     They  whose  experience  should  have  ccmtirmed  the  younger  in  truth,  encourage
them  to  believe  in  lies.     And  this  lesson  is  written  clear  to  view,  that  subjects  of
the  most  religious  instruction  and  the  most  patriotic  procedure  will  not  always
be  found  to  obey  the  will  of  God.     Thus  influential  is  the  corruption  of    true
worship.

V.  It  becomes  paramount  with  its  adherents.  They  overcome  all  scrupulosity
in  regard  to  the  Lord's  Temple,  and  prostitute  it  to  their  debasing  ceremonies.  They
expend  money  and  time  in  maintaining  them.  They  at  length  treat  the  living  and
holy  God  as  if  He  paid  no  concern  to  what  they  did,  and,  having  forsaken  Him,
speak  as  if  He  had  forsaken  tliem.  They  impute  to  Him  an  ignorance  and  a
heartlessness  which,  if  they  did  exist,  would  utterly  disqualify  Him  from  being  God.
So  they  are  subjected  to  their  own  devices  ;  they  are  filled  with  their  own  ways.

How  strange  it  seems  to  leave  the  right  way  for  the  wrong  !  How  unreason-
able and  unlikely  it  looks  !  But  yet  how  familiar  the  case  is  !  And  it  is  so
because  men  "  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge."  "  They  have  gone
away  backward."  No  eyes  but  God's  can  detect  the  many  forms  of  this  apostasy,
and  point  out  the  hole  in  the  wall  of  religious  profession  which  leads  to  abomina-
tions within  hearts  and  within  churches.  His  ears  alone  can  catch  the  meaning  of
those  who  serve  divers  lusts  and  pleasures,  who  say  virtually,  "  The  Lord  seeth
us  not."     "  I  say  unto  you,  Fear  Him."

Chambers  of  Imagery.

"  Then  said  He  unto  me^  Son  of  man,  hast  thou  seen  wJiat  the  ancients  of  Israel
do  in  the  dark,  every  man  in  the  chambers  of  his  imagery  ?  For  they  say.  The  Lord
aeeth  us  not ;  the  Lord  hath  forsaken  the  earth  "  (chap.  viii.  1 2).

A  hall  of  imagery  I     No  phrase  could  better  describe  the  mind  of  man,  and
memory  the  painter.     In  colours  bright  or  dark,  in  the  very  lineaments  of  joy  or
94


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZERIBL,  chap,  via

'  fihame  or  grief,  she  paints  every  struggle  of  the  soul ;  our  very  wishes  and
purposes,  though  unacted,  are  all  there.  We  behold  all  the  scenes  of  the  past
fixed  immovably  on  the  walls  and  silently  smiling  or  frowning  upon  us.

What  is  upon  the  walls]  Some  spaces  are  blank,  condemning  our  profitless
days.  Some,  like  the  dark  catacombs  of  Home,  have  scenes  of  decay  and  death
portrayed.  Here  the  innocence  of  childhood  is  slowly  dying ;  there  honesty  is
bartered  away  for  gain,  or  virtue  for  pleasure.  It  may  be  there  are  chambers  in
which  are  beheld  a  virtuous  youth,  a  devout  age,  a  divine  faith  triumphing  over
the  powers  of  the  world.  But  at  the  best  there  is  only  a  mingled  series  of  pictures.
Each  soul  is  a  temple,  each  heart  an  altar,  and  often  the  unhallowed  rites  of  another
worship  than  that  of  the  Lord  of  heaven  are  practised  there.

We  are  apt  to  feel  as  if  what  was  done  in  those  chambers  was  unmarked.    Dark-
•  ness  and  thick  walls  gave  concealment  to  the  ancients  of  the  house  of  Judah  :  "The
Lord  seeth  us  not.**     Yet  the  angels  were  looking  in  ;  and  to  the  prophet,  his  eyes
touched  with  spiritual  light,  all  became  visible.

In  our  chambers  of  imagery  there  may  be  other  witnesses  than  we  think.
Surely  it  is  not  a  vain  or  unreasonable  thouglit,  that  round  us  are  spiritual  beings
to  whose  spiritual  eyes  the  mind  lies  open  as  the  scenes  of  the  world  lie  open  to  the
bodily  eye.  Happy  if  we  suffer  to  abide  in  our  mind  only  those  thoughts  and
purposes  which  these  spiritual  beings  may  gladly  look  upon!

But  if  there  be  no  other,  tliere  is  one  eye  that  looks  through  an  the  veils  of  time
and  sense.  In  the  sight  of  God  the  mind  is  the  seat  and  source  of  all  good  and
evil.  The  purpose  clothes  the  act  with  its  own  goodness  or  guilt.  The  same  act
may  be  disinterested  or  selfish  ;  the  same  forms  of  worship  a  mockery  or  ;  devo-
tion, according  to  the  purpose.  In  those  chambers  is  the  real  life  of  man,  and  the
imaginations  we  indulge  in  take  shape,  and  the  hopes  we  cherish  are  audible
prayers  before  the  Lord  who  seeth,  and  who  has  not  forsaken  the  earth.

We  may  enter  those  chambers  of  imagery  for  correction  and  improvement.
The  time  comes  when  we  must  enter  them  for  judgment.  In  that  dread  hour  'the
memory  must  take  a  conspicuous  part.  In  the  midst  of  the  awful  congregation  of
the  risen  dead  again  must  we  pass  through  the  halls  of  imagery.  The  silent  walls
shall  need  no  voice — memory  and  conscience  shall  affirm  the  righteous  judgment
of  God.  For  that  day,  when  the  strong  shall  bow  and  the  most  devout  tremble,
may  we  in  mercy  be  prepared  I

Our  life  is  founded  on  what  is  past,  and  every  year  we  live  the  past  becomes
more  important  in  its  steady  influence ;  we  live  in  the  midst  of  its  memorials.  It
is  the  home  which  we  build  around  us  day  by  day,  and  according  to  what  we  make
it  will  tliere  be  liberty  or  imprisonment.  Each  day  let  your  deeds  and  your  pur-
poses be  such  that  a  new  picture  shall  take  a  place  on  the  walls  that  you  will  be
glad  to  see.  The  past  is  fixed  on  the  walls,  we  cannot  take  it  down,  but  we  may
correct  an<l  alter.  The  picture  of  the  prodigal's  departure  has  added  to  it  the
picture  of  his  return  and  the  father's  enduring  love.  Over  scenes  of  guilt  there
may  be  arched  the  rainbow  of  the  Divine  mercy.  Repentance  may  not  efface  the
past,  but  it  transfigures  it.  While  bygone  sins  remind  us  of  our  weakness,  they
bring  us  nearer  to  Him  whose  strength  saves  and  whose  mercy  forgives. — Feahody
(aWidged),

Third  and  fourth  abomination  (vers.  13-18).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES. — Vers.  13,  to  the  inner  court  as  in  the  former  case,

14.     The  seer   is  led   from  the   secret  "  and,  behold,  the  women  weeping  for

chamber  back  to  the  point  at  which  he  Tammuz  were  sitting  there."  Whether

had  first  approached  to  the  precincts  of  they  were  without  or  within  the  Temple

the  Temple  (ver.  3).     He  stands  now  at  walls  is  not  stateil,  but  they  were  in  the

its  northern  entrance,  not  at  the  entrance  attitude  of  mourners.     Jeremiah  bears

96


cm  A  p.  VITI.


HO  M I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


witness  (Jer.  vii.  11,  xliv.  17)  to  the
activity  of  women  at  this  period  in  the
service  of  idolatry,  though  he  does  not
mention  their  devotion  to  Tainmuz.
Nor  is  it  mentioned  anywhere  else,  and
no  satisfactory  ex})lanation  has  been
given  of  it.  Conjectures  are  abundant
— often  wide  of  the  mark.  They  have
too  readily  accepted  this  weeping  and
that  of  the  Syrians,  Greeks,  <fec.,  for
Adonis,  or  the  Egyptians  for  Osiris,  as
standing  on  the  same  ground.  It
might  be  no  forceful  objection  against
such  comparison  to  say  that  the  rites  in
those  countries  involved  rejoicings  as
well  as  lamentations,  and  that  they  were
accompanied  with  '*  unbridled  license
and  excess."  But  surely  we  may  be-
lieve that  if  the  women  of  Jerusalem
indulged  in  the  gross  orgies  com-
mon to  Adoniac  worship,  Jeremiah  was
not  the  man  to  have  shunned  all  refer-
ence to  their  wickedness.  Whether  the
*'  Babylonian  legend,"  deciphered  from
an  ancient  tablet,  and  which  tells  of  "a
goddess,  imdow  of  Duzi,  the  *  Son  of
Life/  descending  through  the  seven
circles  'of  the  land  of  invisibility,*  and
reascending  after  various  vicissitudes,"
indicates  the  quarter  from  which  the
weeping  for  Tammuz  was  derived,  is  of
no  consequence  as  yet.  "  The  Speaker's
Commentary,"  while  mentioning  the
legend,  acknowledges  that  its  purport
and  its  influence  are  utterly  obscure.
The  habit  of  the  Jewish  women,  some-
how or  another,  must  have  demoralised
themselves  and  those  related  to  them,
and  so  was  regarded  as  an  **  abomina-
tion."

Ver.  15.  The  seer  had  to  observe
great  abominations  (ver.  6),  then  great
abominations  they  were  doing  (ver.  13),
and  now  greater  abominations  than
these  he  had  already  seen.  His  view
had  gone  from  general  idol-worship  to
secret  worship  among  the  magnates  of
Jerusalem,  afterwards  from  open  de-
basement of  the  women  to  utter  defi-
ance of  God  in  the  priestly  portion  of
the  Temple.  The  climax  of  evil  in  war-
fare is  reached  when  the  soldiers  become
rebels,  when  works  of  darkness  are  sub-
Btituted  for  the  whole  attire  of  light.

Ver.  16.    Again  Ezekiel  is  taken  fur-
96


ther,  to  a  point  from  which  he  can
inspect  the  spot  "between  the  porch
and  the  altar,"  a  sacred  place  in  the
inner  court  where  the  priests  gathered
together  apparently  only  in  seasons  of
extraordinary  interest,  such  as  a  national
fast  (Joel  ii.  17).  On  that  hallowed
ground  he  saw  "  as  it  were  twenty-five
men."  Fairbairn  calls  them  men  "  of
priestly  rank,  the  princes  of  the  sanc-
tuary," and  considers  the  number  was
made  up  of  the  High  Priest  and  the
twenty-four  heads  of  the  courses  of  the
priests  which  had  been  arranged  by
David.  He  takes  them  as  representing
"  the  whole  priesthood."  Is  it  not
better  to  regard  the  number,  as  the
Seventy  was,  as  a  historical  number,
and  intended  to  show  nothing  more
than  that  the  priesthood  even  was  not
wholly  loyal  to  God  ?  Consecrated  for
His  worship  in  the  place  where  He  had
chosen  to  put  His  name,  they  were  seen
"with  their  backs  towards  the  tem-
ple of  the  Lord,  and  their  faces  to  the
east,  and  they  worshipped  the  sun
toward  the  east."  The  worship  of
the  sun,  so  common  in  many  countries,
had  already  been  practised  in  Judea,
and  was  put  down  in  Josiah's  reforming
reign  (2  Kings  xxiii.  5,  11).  It  was
too  deeply  rooted  and  too  attractive  to
be  overturned  by  a  transient  revival  of
purer  worship ;  and  here  it  is  seen  to
have  seduced  the  guardians  of  that  wor-
ship.

Ver.  17.  The  scenes  which  had  been
unfolded  in  the  seer's  vision  were  in
palpable  contrariety  to  the  worship  of
the  Lord,  but  the  forms  of  apostasy  he
had  observed  were  of  little  account,  "  a
light  thing  to  the  house  of  Judah : "
they  would  disregard  God  if  they  dis-
regarded the  riglits  of  their  brethren,
"for  they  filled  the  land  with  vio-
lence, and  returned,"  i.e.y  gone  back
again  and  again  to  their  evil  doings,
"  to  provoke  me  to  anger,  and,"  some-
thing especially  offensive  is  singled  out
for  mention,  "  lo,  they  put  the  branch
to  their  nose."  The  explanations  of
this  obscure  phrase,  which  refer  it  to  a
rite  of  heathen  worship  in  which  a  branch
was  carried  in  the  hand,  or  raised  to  the
mouth,   do  not  agree  with    the  words:


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  VIIL


Moreover,  tbe  context  has  left  the  sphere
of  religion  for  that  of  morals,  and  would
suggest  some  action  not  directly  religious
— at  any  rate,  some  very  gratuitous  evil
deed.  But  there  is  no  tolerable  account-
ing for  the  words,  and  the  conclusion  to
which  Fnirbairn  comes  seems  reasonable  :
"  One  would  expect  the  clause  to  denote
something  that  rendered  their  sinful
ways  peculiarly  obnoxious  to  God,  and
nothing  would  more  readily  do  this  than


feelings  of  fancied  security  and  insolent
scorn."  So  he  surmises  that  it  must
have  reference  to  some  insulting  kind  of
proceedings.  The  result  would  be  a
correspondence  between  their  conduct
and  the  position  which  the  Lord  was
driven  to  take — urgent  prayers  but  no
reply  (ver.  18).  *'  I  will  show  them  the
back,  and  not  the  face,  in  the  day  of
their  calamity"  (Jer.  xviii.  17).


HOMILETICS.

Emotional  Worship  (ver.  14).

This  abomination  in  worship  is  not  described  by  Ezekiel,  as  it  has  been  by  many
interpreters,  as  gross  and  licentious.  And  though,  probably,  it  deserved  such
epithets,  yet  the  one  term  which  he  employs,  "  weeping,"  suggests  a  course  that
leads  far  from  holiness  and  love.  We  see  the  dominance  of  the  emotions  in  wor-
ship—

I.  In  sensuous  procedure.  Weeping  at  one  time,  shouting  at  another,  pro-
cessions and  extravagant  gestures,  are  specimens  of  the  actions  to  which  the
indulged  emotions  prompt.  That  those  manifestations  might  appear  when  any
feeling  is  casually  and  strongly  moved  need  not  surprise ;  but  that  they  shcaild  be
made  a  regular  part  of  the  service  throws  doubt  on  their  genuineness,  and  brands
them  as  unworthy  of  the  God  who  is  Spirit  and  Truth.  If  the  spirit  of  the  pro-
phets is  subject  to  the  prophets,  why  should  not  the  emotions  also  be]

II.  In  the  persons  chiefly  affected.  More  readily  than  men,  women  are  stirred
on  the  emotional  side  of  their  nature.  Let  that  side  be  controlled  so  as  to  stand
in  due  proportion  to  the  other  sides,  and  it  will  help  to  fill  worship  with  the  tone
befitting  One  who  is  loved  for  His  love.  But  when  it  is  unduly  fostered,  when
it  is  fascinated  to  extravagant  assertion  of  itself,  a  deteriorating  effect  must  follow.
For  then  the  influence  of  womanly  emotion,  which  should  keep  clear  our  family
life  and  purify  it  when  muddied,  not  only  loses  its  efficacy,  but  tends  to  render  it
turbid  and  malarious.  Women  stand  in  a  perilous  position  when  they  allow  free
scope  to  their  emotions  in  worship.  They  make  it  an  offence  to  God,  however
devoted  and  continuous  it  may  be.

III.  In  a  wrong  estimate  of  the  objects.  Legends  which  have  no  truth,  or
so  scanty  an  item  of  it  that  prehistoric  studies  and  mythological  suggestions  are
needed  to  find  it;  imaginary  evils;  a  morbid  craving  for  some  excitement  to  break
into  the  idleness  of  life,  or  into  the  trials  which  seek  for  the  relief  of  change,  these
**  beguile  women  of  her  tears,"  and  draw  into  sentimental  and  fantastic  expressions
of  devotion.  True,  the  gross  aspects  of  emotional  worship  may  be  little  manifested
in  modern  Christendom;  but  emotions  still  count  for  something  in  worship  ;  and
we  do  well  to  remind  ourselves  that  however  deeply  we  feel  awe  in  what  are  called
sacred  or  holy  places,  however  moved  by  a  dim  religious  light  or  music,  by  prayer
or  pathetic  preaching,  that  the  worship  engendered  from  such  feelings  does  no
more  in  the  perfect  will  of  God  than  idol  images  or  clouds  of  incense.  We  need
truth  to  originate  and  regulate  emotions,

"  Let  Christian  women,  instead  of  wasting  in  sickly  and  carnal  sentimentality
the  tender  and  susceptible  natures  which  God  has  given  them,  weep  with  them
that  weep,  heal  the  bruises  of  the  suffering  members  of  the  Church,  and  minister
to  those  who  need  temporal  or  spiritual  help.  Let  them,  instead  of  weeping  over
fictitious  tales  of  morbid  love  and  carnal  sorrows,  consecrate  their  fine  sensibilitiea

o  &7


CHAP.  VIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.


to  the  active  promotion  of  the  glory  of  Him  who  is  altogether  lovely,  and  whose
bitter  sufferings  for  us  should  call  forth  our  tears  of  gratitude  and  glowing  love.
Let  them  try  to  resemble  Mary,  who,  in  her  devotion,  when  all  others  were  gone,
stood  at  the  sepulchre  of  her  crucified  Lord  weeping,  and  so  had  her  tears  dried  up
by  the  risen  Saviour  Himself." — FausseL

Wilful  Worship  (ver.  16).

All  forms  of  worship  are  not  equally  dishonouring  to  the  only  Lord.  However
foolish,  corrupted,  or  exaggerated  some  of  them  may  be,  the  climax  in  evil  is
assigned  to  that  which  springs  from  the  determination  of  men  to  turn  their  backs
upon  Him  who  has  revealed  Himself  to  them.     Their  worship  is —

I.  Against  knowledge.  The  spot  at  which  the  twenty-five  men  carried  on
their  worship  indicated  a  priestly  ofiice.  Of  that  office  it  was  said,  "  The  priest's
lips  should  keep  knowledge,  and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth,  for  he  is
the  messenojer  of  the  Lord  of  hosts."  But  here  were  men  disowning  their  hiiihest
functions,  doing  despite  to  the  law  they  were  appointed  to  observe,  who  "loved
darkness  rather  than  the  light,"  and  fell  under  the  condemnation  passed  upon  those
who  forsake  their  own  mercies.  It  is  hard  on  a  father  that  he  should  be  disobeyed
by  his  child,  and  the  hardest  point  of  such  disobedience  is  when  it  is  done  not-
withstanding clear  knowledge  of  his  commands.

IL  In  desecration  of  the  temple.  Sun-worship  would  have  been  sinful  any-
where ;  this  had  its  aggravation  in  that  it  was  conducted  in  the  place  where  God's
honour  dwelt.  They  provoked  Him  to  His  face.  They  deliberately  polluted  with
their  abominations  that  which  He  ordained  to  be  holy.  And  though  there  be  no
such  sjicred  place  now,  yet  may  we  learn  that  if  we  take  our  self-pleasings  in  wliere
we  and  others  worship,  we  erect  barriers  between  us  and  our  Lord.  We  sin  against
Him  and  sin  against  our  brethren.

III.  In  preference  of  the  creature  to  the  Creator.  The  altar  was  the  spot
on  which  God  received  the  signs  of  homage  due  to  Him.  They  turned  their  backs
on  it  and  insulted  Him  by  rendering  homage  to  the  sun.  The  ea.st  was  more  to
them  than  the  threat  or  the  promise  of  the  God  of  their  fathers ;  the  seen  more
reverenced  than  the  unseen ;  a  dead  object  chosen  rather  than  the  living  God.
Thus  they  were  guilty  of  treason,  and  under  the  aw^ful  ban  of  those  who  are  with-
out excuse  !  Alas  !  a  similar  procedure  may  be  found  still  under  the  shadow  of
the  Cross.  *'  If  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the
truth" — how  could  professing  Christians  regard  these  words  as  true  if  it  were  not
for  sad  examples  to  illustrate  them  ?  How  many  preach  for  self  or  the  world  !
How  many  enter  into  places  of  worship  rather  to  be  considered  respectable,  to
please  a  patron,  to  acknowledge  an  unknown  God,  than  to  "  rejoice  in  God  through
Jesus  Christ  the  Lord  ! "  Surely  we  all  need  to  try  our  ways  in  worship,  to  realise
the  Light  which  is  ever  searching  our  services,  not  that  it  may  find  fault,  but  that
it  may  show  our  faults,  so  that  we  shall  repent  of  our  errors  and  form  a  pure  and
steadfast  regard  to  the  Lord  alone.  Then,  when  we  cease  from  the  creature,  we
shall  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  seeking  not  our  own  glory,  but  the
glory  of  Him  who  is  greatly  to  be  feared  and  had  in  reverence.

Religion  and  Morality  (ver.  17).

The  "  abominations  "  were  meant  to  make  a  deep  impression  upon  the  seer  as
to  the  religious  condition  of  his  people  in  their  own  metropolis.  But  more  was  to
be  observed.  The  evils  which  were  seen  in  the  Temple  were  surpassed  throughout
the  land  ;  and  he  is  asked  to  institute  a  comparison  between  worship  and  conduct,
religion  and  morality.  Among  the  elements  which  bring  religion  and  morality  into
comparison  are  these —
98


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  vill.


I.  Tliey  are  distinguished  from  each  other.  Religiun  has  reference  to  visible
and  invisible  objects  in  which  some  kind  of  force  is  .supposed  to  reside,  and  which
are  rarely  men.  When  they  are  human  beings,  real  or  imaginary,  they  have
ascribed  to  them  certain  attributes  which  separate  them  from  ordinary  men.
Morality  has  reference  to  the  men  whom  we  think  of,  speak  to,  act  with  or  on.
This  dibtinction,  however,  does  not  imply  separation  of  the  two  spheres.

IL  They  are  intimately  associated.  Keligion  and  morality  niay  be  separated
in  thought ;  they  cannot  be  in  practice.  This  is  not  to  be  understood  to  say  that
a  religious  man  cannot  exist  without  some  kind  of  moral  conduct,  or  a  moral  man
without  some  friendly  or  unfriendly  attitude  towards  religion.  It  is  to  say  that
a  man's  religious  sentiments  have  always  some  influence  upon  his  social  actions,
even  if  image  or  sun  worship  could  be  shown  never  to  have  let  their  rill  of  religions
thought  flow  into  the  stream  of  moral  requirements.  It  may  be  that  a  man  who
worships  an  idol,  or  says  there  is  no  God,  is  irreproachable  in  his  morals.  Allowing
that  there  might  be  no  question  as  to  the  reality  of  individual  cases,  yet  are  they
rare.  They  are  exceptions  to  the  general  rule  that  a  high  morality  depends  upon
a  true  religion.  This  is  manifest  where  the  God  of  Israel,  the  only  true  God,  is
served  or  disobeyed.  His  religion  is  inextricably  mingled  up  with  morality.  Who-
soever gives  due  honour  to  tlie  Lord  God  accepts  every  moral  obligation.  The
love  of  God  and  the  righteousness  of  God  produce  love  and  rectitude  in  all  rela-
tions. And  should  it  be  said  that  His  professed  worship[)ers  are  often  unfaithful,
dishonourable,  impure,  self-seeking  in  regard  to  man,  it  can  be  replied  that  such
persons  do  not  possess  the  religion  pure  and  undefiled  before  God  and  the  Father.
If  they  went  out  from  it,  they  were  not  of  it.  They  never  knew  Jesus  the  Holy
One  or  His  Father.  They  swell  the  instances  which  show  that  an  irreligious  class
or  nation  must  be,  on  the  whole,  immoral — a  moral  class  or  nation,  on  the  whole,
religious.

III.  They  are  unfairly  estimated.  The  bearing  of  the  question  put  to  the
prophet  defines  not  only  a  set  of  opinions  which  held  that  it  was  not  an  evil  thing
to  resort  to  idol-worship,  but  also  that  it  was  even  a  lighter  evil  to  commit  flagrant
injustice  towards  each  other.  Both  religion  and  morality  were  under-estimated;  and
such  a  course  implied  that  if  a  man  kept  up  forms  of  worship,  he  might  be  a  tyrant,
a  cheat,  or  seducer,  and  be  at  ease  !  Against  the  notion  that  morality  is  of  less  con-
sequence than  religion,  this  appeal  to  Ezekiel  takes  an  unfaltering  stand.  It
signifies  that  men  who  supposed  that  acts  of  worship  allowed  them  liberty  to  set  at
nought  the  rights  of  the  poor  and  needy  provoked  the  Lord  deeply.  It  signifies
that  by  the  former  course  they  had  put  God  far  away,  had  removed  the  great
restraint  against  wrong-doings,  and  in  the  latter  sent  violent  dealings  into  every
circle  of  social  life  in  which  they  could  press  their  selfish  interest.  It  signifies  that
men  who  were  more  careful  to  pay  their  idolatrous  worship  than  to  do  justly  and
love  mercy  were  preparing  for  themselves  a  fearful  doom.  Whether  religion  is  to
be  more  highly  valued  than  morality  is  a  vain  question.  The  doctrine  of  God
our  Saviour  insists  on  their  interfusion  as  parts  of  doing  His  will.  When  sects,
churches,  societies,  speak  lightly  of  a  man's  bad  conduct  because  he  is  a  recognised
member ;  when  it  is  judged  more  expedient  to  bend  the  head  or  knees,  to  wave
incense,  to  weep  over  fancies  or  pictures,  to  say  the  words  of  a  creed,  to  make  reve-
rence towards  the  east,  to  have  a  form  of  godliness,  than  it  is  to  keep  evil  thoughts
down,  or  to  do  fairly  to  every  man,  or  to  live  unspotted  from  the  world  ;  when
there  is  an  attempt  to  palliate  covetousness,  misrepresentations,  unkindness,  on  the
ground  that  they  belong  to  the  reign  of  "  mere  morality" — then  the  standard  of  God
must  be  lifted  up,  **  Neither  fornicators,  nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effemi-
nate, nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  railers,  nor  extortioners  shall
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  On  the  other  hand,  when  it  is  maintained  that
religion  is  of  no  force  to  form  a  moral  life  ;  when  palliation  is  made  for  worldly
and  unrighteous  conduct  on  the  ground  that  the  doers  make  no  profession  of  faith

99


OHAP.  IX.


nOMlLETlG  COMMENTARY  •  EZEKIEL.


Ill  the  Christian's  God,  then  we  must  aflBrm  that  the  religion  of  Christ  is  a  religion
of  righteousness,  and  that  they  who  make  light  of  Him  will  go  on  in  darkness,  and
80  will  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  ways.


(2.)  The  Judgment  upon  the  Inhabitants  of  Jerusalem

(Chap,  ix.)

1.   The  guards  of  the  city  and  their  work  (vers.  1—7).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— This
chapter  is  closely  connected  with  the
preceding,  and  carries  expressly  the
threatening  of  ver.  18  into  immediate
action.  Ministers  of  the  Lord,  waiting
on  Him,  are  summoned  to  execute  His
purposes.

Ver.  1.  The  prophet  is  made  a  hearer
of  the  summons.  "  And  He  called  in
mine  ears  with  a  loud  voice ; "  the
mode  of  speaking  is  a  copy  of  that  in
viii.  18.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  God
treats  men  as  they  treat  Him:  '*A8  I
cried  and  they  would  not  hear,  so  they
oi-ied  and  I  would  not  hear."  Moreover,
the  minute  details  as  to  the  ears  and
pitch  of  voice  are  significant  of  the  real-
istic character  of  the  vision.  It  was  not
it  marvellous  but  shadowy  experience
through  which  Ezekiel  was  passing.  He
accents  the  fact  that  the  smallest  as  the
greatest  items  were  well  defined ;  while
the  loudness  of  the  voice  is  a  token
both  of  the  strong  emotion  of  the  Lord
and  the  importance  to  be  attached  to
the  events  about  to  happen.  *'  Saying,
Come  near,  ye  that  have  charge  of  the
city."  The  phrase,  ye  that  have  charge,
is  a  translation  of  a  Hebrew  word  ren-
dered elsewhere  ofice,  visitation,  over-
sight, and  those  holding  office,  offi^cers
(Isa.  Ix.  17).  Accepting  this  last  ren-
dering as  applicable  here,  we  have  to
think  of  overseers,  watchers,  guards
(Dan.  iv.  13,  x.  20),  who  attend  to  the
execution  of  the  sentences  of  God.
They  were  armed,  "each  man  with  his
instrument  of  destruction  in  his  hand."
"No  common  earthly  weapon  is  suitable
to  the  hands  of  such  an  host." — Haev.

Ver.  2.  At  the  summons,  "six  men
came "  from  the  same  quarter  as  the
glory  (chap.  i.  4),  and  from  which  the
earthly  armies  were  to  proceed  as  instru-
ments of  the  heavenly  powers.  The
weapon  of  each  is  nam^.d  differently
100


from  the  name  in  ver.  1  ;  here  it  is  "  an
instrument  of  demolition."  Interpre-
tation of  the  number  six — parts  of  the
city,  military  Chaldean  divisions,  &c. —
is  superfluous.  It  is  immediately  shown
that  the  number  of  watchers  was  the
sacred,  perfect  number.  "  And  one
man  in  their  midst  clothed  with  linen."
He  was  not  one  of  the  six,  but  a  seventh
man  and  superior  to  the  others.  They
go  after  him ;  he  marks  before  they
strike  (ver.  5).  The  material  which
clothes  him  is  like  that  of  the  various
parts  of  the  high  })riest's  dress  (Lev.
xvi.  4),  and  is  supposed  by  many  to
signify  that  this  seventh  man  had  a
higli-[)riestly  function.  This  is  doubt-
ful, Jind  all  that  we  need  ascribe  to  the
texture  of  his  garments  is  that  it  repre-
sented a  heavenly  messenger  of  tlie  Lord
specially  commissioned.  So  it  is  set  forth
in  Daniel  (x.  5  and  xii.  6),  and  it  may
be  that  the  idea  symbolised  by  linen  had
by  this  time  attributed  to  it  a  wider
application,  pre[)aring  for  that  universal
application  which  the  New  Testament
ratifies.  **  The  armies  which  are  in
heaven  followed,  clothed  in  fine  linen,
white  and  pure."  "It  was  given  unto
her  that  she  should  array  herself  in  fine
linen,  bright  and  pure."  The  seventh
had  not  a  destroying  weapon  :  he  is  to
carry  out  another  procedure  besides  that
of  slaughter ;  so  he  had  "  an  inkhorn
upon  his  loins."  *'It  is  still  customary
in  the  East  to  wear  the  inkhorn  in  the
girdle.  Scribes  wear  them  constantly  in
their  girdles,  and  ministers  of  state  wear
them  in  the  same  manner,  as  symbols
of  their  office." — Kitto.  The  purport  of
these  writing  materials  is,  in  accordance
with  the  custom  of  registering  the  names
of  the  Israelites  in  public  rolls,  that  he
may  write  certain  names  in  the  book  of
life — the  names  of  those  on  whom  he  is
to  place  a  mark.     Who  is  this  distin-


HOMILETJC  OOMMBNTARY:  EZEKIEL.


ofiAF.  il:.


guished  watcher!     "In  Dan.  x.  5  we

Lave  the  appearance  of  a  man  clothed
in  linerif  who  is  manifestly  the  same  as
He  wliom  John  describes  as  the  Son  of
man  clot/ted  with  a  garment  down  to  his
feet  (Rev.  i.  1 3).  This  One  man,  then,
was  the  angel  of  the  covenant,  the  great
High  Priest,  superior  to  those  by  whom
He  was  surrounded,  receiving  direct
communication  from  the  Lord,  taking
the  coals  of  vengeance  from  between  the
cherubim  (x.  2),  but  coming  with  mercy
to  the  contrite  as  well  as  with  vengeance
to  the  impenitent ;  who  took  upon  Him
the  form  of  a  man  ,  .  .  who  came  to  send
fire  upon  the  earth,  but  also  to  call  sin-
ners to  repentance ;  who  shall  lose  none
of  those  whom  the  Father  hath  given
Him.^^ — Speaker* s  Com.  *'  And  they
came  and  stood  beside  the  brazen
altar ; "  they  were  waiting  in  reverence
and  readiness  in  the  very  spot  where  sin
had  readied  its  worst  form  (viii.  16),  to
fulfil  that  which  would  be  commanded.

It  is  by  no  means  to  be  understood
•*  that  there  is  a  band  of  seven  angels
whose  special  vocation  it  is  to  be  the
watchmen  and  guardians  of  Jerusalem.
For  the  number  seven  is  here,  as  else-
where in  the  Old  Testament,  the  sign
that  a  divine  operation  is  being  com-
pleted— in  this  passage  the  divine  judg-
ment, now  advancing  to  its  close — and
there  is  no  necessity  for  having  recourse
to  the  seven  planet  gods  of  the  Baby-
lonians, <ka  .  .  .  The  seventh  angel,  of
special  dignity,  corresponds  to  the
horseman  who,  in  the  vision  of  Zech.  i.
8,  stands  among  the  myrtle  trees  which
symbolise  the  covenant  people,  and  is
evidently  the  chief  over  those  who  run
to  and  fro  through  the  earth.  It  is  very
remarkable  that,  as  Baumgarten  very
justly  observes,  this  angel,  in  whom  is
the  name  of  Jehovah,  withdraws  from
the  history  of  revelation  so  long  as  Israel
is  under  a  visible  ruler  of  the  house  of
David ;  but  now,  when  this  visible  rule
is  abrogated,  an  invisible  Ruler  again
appears,  and  attains  a  more  concrete
form,  combined  with  personal  agency,
though  at  the  same  time  hypostatically
distinguished  from  God." — Oehler,

Ver.  3.  An  ominoas  symbol  appears,
"  And  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel


rose  up  from  the  cherub  upon  which
it  was."  The  cherub,  corresponding  to
living  creature  (chap.  i.  20),  is  used  for
cherubim.  These  forms  over  the  mercy-
seat  constituted  the  throne  of  the  glory,
the  place  where  His  honour  dwelt ;  but
the  Temple  having  been  made  a  scene
on  which  His  glory  was  given  to  idols.
He  retires  "to  the  threshold."  He
rises  up  to  scatter  His  enemies,  and  at
the  place  of  egress  from  the  Temple  to
open  ground,  He  issues  His  commands
for  the  seven  guards  in  reference  to  His
sentences  on  the  people,

Ver.  4.  A  command  is  given  to  the
leader,  so  that  mercy  should  precede
judgment,  ''And  the  Lord  said  to
him.  Go  through  the  midst  of  the  city
.  ,  .  and  mark  a  mark."  Such  a  mark-
ing, as  a  religious  and  separating  sign,
has  been  customary  in  various  countries,
and  is  especially  conspicuous  upon  the
foreheads  of  the  Hindus.  The  mark
may  be  an  honour  or  a  dishonour,  accord-
ing as  it  separates  for  the  living  God  or
from  God.  Here  it  is  a  token  of  the
former.  The  word  translated  **  mark  "
is  the  name-word  of  the  last  letter  of  the
Hebrew  alphabet,  tau.  The  oldest  form
of  this  letter  is  said  to  be  that  of  a
cross, "P;  and  from  this  statement  sun-
dry of  the  fathers  and  others  have  drawn,
very  unnecessarily,  recondite  meanings
and  pious  conclusions.  That  the  mark
would  be  a  definite  one  is  obvious — how
else  could  the  six  smiters  know  whom
to  pass  by? — but  what  its  shape  was
who  can  specify  ?  It  was  '*  not  a  mark
to  be  actually  imprinted  and  seen  upon
their  persons,  but  was  an  indication  of
the  place  they  held  in  the  watchful  over-
sight and  directing  agency  of  God." —
Fair  bairn.  **  upon  the  foreheads  of  the
men  ; "  there  it  would  be  distinctly  seen
and  betoken  the  character  before  God.
It  separated  from  the  mass  of  the
people.  In  Egypt  a  mark  of  blood  was
made  on  the  doorposts  of  the  Israelites
— their  deliverance  was  that  of  families;
here  the  mark  was  on  the  forehead — the
salvation  is  that  of  individuals.  The
difference  is  one  of  the  proofs,  which
Ezekiel  elsewhere  incidentally  presents,
that  a  new  principle  of  God's  dealings
was  on  the  way  to  establishment.     The

101


OUAF.  h.


ttOMtlETtC  COMMENTAttr:  £^£JtlEL


individual  and  not  the  nation  was  to  be
the  point  of  His  operations  in  the  latter
days.  In  relation  to  this  **  mark,"  the
"  Speaker's  Commentary  "  says,  "  The
sign  of  the  cross  in  baptism  is  an  out-
ward sign  of  the  designation  of  God's
elect,  who  at  the  last  day  shall  be  ex-
empted from  the  destruction  of  the  un-
godly (Matt.  xxiv.  22,  31)."  Patristic
legends  are  apparently  not  yet  extinct !
How  different  from  this  inept  comment
is  that  which  Keil  gives,  though  he
translates  tau  by  cross  :  "  There  is  some-
thing remarkable  in  this  coincidence  to
the  thoughtful  observer  of  the  ways  of
God,  whose  counsel  has  carefully  consi-
dered all  beforehand,  especially  when
we  bear  in  mind  that,  in  the  counterpart
to  this  passage  (Rev.  vii.  3),  the  seal
of  the  living  God  is  stamped  u[)on  the
foreheads  of  the  servants  of  God  who
are  to  be  exempted  from  the  judgment,
and  that  according  to  R-v.  xiv.  1,  they
had  the  name  of  God  written  upon  their
foreheads."  Very  different  indeed  from
"  the  sign  of  the  cross  ! "  "  that  sigh
and  that  cry  for  all  the  abominations
that  are  done  in  the  midst  thereof."
This  is  the  criterion  by  which  the  writer
will  know  those  whom  he  has  to  mark.
In  secret  and  in  public  they  grieve  over
the  evils  which  are  rife  in  the  land.

Vers.  5,  6.  A  command  is  given  to
the  six,  '*  Go  in  the  city  after  him  and
smite,"  so  as  to  make  an  utter  end,
sparing  neither  age  nor  sex.  One  spe-
cial exception  is  made.  No  other  class
is  recognised  but  two.  In  a  testing  time
like  this  there  is  no  possibility  of  hold-
ing the  place  of  neutrals ;  "  and  every
man  upon  whom  is  the  mark  touch
not ; "  their  tears,  and  words  of  prayer
and  reproof  because  of  sin,  show  that
they  are  on  the  Lord's  side.  He  is
pledged  to  preserve  His  own  ;  "  He  that
toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  His
eye."  There  is  here  no  guarantee
against  all  kinds  of  sorrow  and  suffer-
ings. Lot  is  rescued  from  Sodom,  but
he  has  to  incur  loss  and  the  pain  of  dis-
severed family  tiea  Jeremiah  had  to
pass  through  deep  waters  of  affliction
102


during  the  period  in  which  the  six
watchers  were  cutting  down  the  un-
worthy. The  exemption  of  the  marked
ones  must  be  considered  as  referring
only  to  direct  strokes  of  punishment.
"  The  marking  secures  not  against  any
share  in  the  divine  judgments ;  this
would  not  correspond  with  the  nature
of  the  divine  righteousness,  as  even  the
elect  are  in  many  ways  affected  with  the
prevailing  corruption  (comp.  Isa.  vi.  5) :
it  secures  only  against  being  swept
away  with  the  wicked,  against  an  evil
death,  and  all  that  would  stand  in  con-
tradiction with  the  rule,  *  that  all  things
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love
God.'" — Hengstenherg.  "and  begin  at
my  sanctuary,"  in  it  the  abominations
had  found  their  normal  expression.  The
head  and  front  of  the  offence  against
the  holy  God  was  exhibited  there.  It
had  lost  the  reality  and  must  be  de-
prived of  the  semblance  of  holiness.
The  watchers  inflict  their  first  strokes
in  it  and  beat  down  the  men  who  stood
with  backs  to  the  altar  while  worship-
ping the  creature;  "they  began  with
the  men,  the  elders  who  were  before
the  house ; "  they  were  not  called  elders
(chap.  viii.  16),  but  their  representative
position  may  suggest  that  they  were  so ;
and  *'  before  the  house ''  will  refer  not
to  the  whole  Temple,  but  to  that  portion
which  constituted  its  germ,  as  seems
intimated  in  what  follows.

Ver.  7.  *'And  He  said  unto  them,
Defile  the  house,"  by  the  bodies  of  the
slain.  If  to  touch  a  corpse  and  to  wor-
ship without  being  sprinkled  with  the
water  of  separation  was  to  defile  the
tabernacle  of  the  Lord  (Num.  xix.  13),
much  more  would  blood  and  corpses  do
so.  But  the  execution  of  judgment  was
to  extend  beyond  the  inner  place  where
the  altar  stood :  "  and  fill  the  courts
with  slain."  Scarcely  is  the  edict  issued
when  it  is  obeyed,  and  the  further  order
is  added,  "go  forth."  "  The  expression
has  the  air  of  military  abruptness,"  and
despatches  at  once  from  the  desecrated
temple:  "and  they  went  forth  and
slew  in  the  city."


HOMILBTIO  COMMMfAltr :  EZEKtEL  OflAF.  ix.


HOMILETICS.
Features  of  Divine  Disciplinary  Government.

Over  all  the  conditions  in  which  persons  or  peoples  act  their  parts  God  is
King  and  Judge.  Whether  they  worship  Him  or  pay  adoration  to  created  things,
whether  they  act  in  brotherliness  or  selfishness,  He  tests  their  character  and
passes  sentences  from  which  they  may  learn  to  do  righteousness  and  hate  iniquity.
That  they  do  not  always  learn  is  no  more  a  proof  against  the  discipline  of  God,
than  the  belief  of  numberless  men  that  the  sun  moves  round  the  earth  is  a  proof
against  the  science  of  the  works  of  God.  And  just  as  in  the  case  of  astronomy.
He  "  waited  six  thousand  years  for  an  observer,"  and,  even  since  Kepler  lived,
myriads  have  not  known  the  real  position  of  the  sun ;  so  in  the  case  of  moral  dis-
cipline, He  has  been  giving  here  a  little  and  there  a  little,  and  still  His  moral
government  is  unrecognised  by  multitudes  who  are  subjected  to  it.  He  is  in  no
hurry  on  this  account.  He  waits  with  patience,  teaching  as  He  waits  and  giving
indications  of  the  modes  in  which  He  deals  with  moral  beings,  as  in  this  manifes-
tation before  Ezekiel.

L  Divine  moral  discipline  involves  the  action  of  latent  forces.  Such  forces
exist.  The  seer  is  not  aware  of  the  contiguousness  of  the  guards  of  the  city.
They  are  not  within  the  field  of  his  sight  before  the  call  to  them  is  uttered.  What
they  are,  where  they  are,  how  they  will  act  when  they  appear,  are  questions  which
can  be  answered  only  by  the  event.  There  are  forces  suitable  for  disciplinary  ends
in  air,  or  earth,  or  sea,  or  the  regions  beyond,  and  the  Lord  can  make  them  attend
to  His  word.  Storms,  earthquakes,  epidemics,  armies  may  be  poured  forth,  as
soldiers  from  a  fortress,  to  ravage  a  land  and  its  people,  and  they  will  come  from
any  quarter  in  which  their  germs  have  been  stored,  and  will  spread  under  the
direction  of  spiritual  powers  who  obey  the  God  of  glory.  At  the  due  moment  He
will  summon  them  though  He  may  have  long  time  holden  His  peace.

2%ep  are  multifold.  At  one  time  fiery  flying  serpents  destroy  the  wandering
Israelites  and  the  plague  at  another.  David  is  required  to  make  choice  of  one  out
of  three  punishments  for  his  sin  in  numbering  the  people.  Ezekiel  sees  six  men
preparing  to  visit  the  city,  and  a  seventh  in  their  midst  having  another  duty  than
theirs  to  fulfil  in  it.  One  angel  may  minister  to  the  suffering  Jesus,  but  He  could
have  twelve  legions  of  them  for  the  asking.  We  are  open  at  every  pore  to  the
action  of  the  Lord  who  lias  made  us,  and  He  has  a  messenger  in  some  occult
garrison  who  is  fitted  to  enter  into  the  pore  He  would  affect  us  by.  Almightiness
calls  just  the  kind  and  number  needed  to  execute  His  will  There  is  never  one
too  few  or  one  too  many.

They  wait  at  command.  The  seven  watchers  of  the  city  appeared  from  out
their  concealment  and  stood  beside  the  brazen  altar.  They  are  ready  to  receive
and  to  execute  the  orders  of  Him  to  whose  honour  the  sacrifices  offered  on  the
altar  were  to  be  consecrated.  And  when  such  divine  forces  operate,  no  interven
tion  can  prevent  the  mark  of  approbation  which  the  Lord  would  give  to  His
faithful  friends  from  being  impressed  on  them,  as  no  shield  is  broad  enough  and
strong  enough  to  ward  off  the  penalty  which  a  course  of  rebellion  ensures  to
those  who  forget  God.  You  are  secure  if  you  have  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ
Jesus ;  you  are  exposed  to  incalculable  anguish  if  you  make  light  of  Him  and  go
your  way.

They  are  varied  in  capability.  The  weapons  and  the  inkhorn  are  emblems  of
the  differing  influences  which  condemn  and  praise  human  thoughts  and  conduct.
There  are  numberless  producers  of  suffering  to  mankind.  Onlookers  cannot  tell
whether  the  trouble  causing  sin  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  sufferers  or  their  parents;
but  no  believer  in  a  righteous  Father  can  doubt  that  every  suffering  is  due.     It  ia

103


ofiAf.  II.  MOMlLETta  COMMENTARY:  SZEKtBL.


a  just  measure,  in  view  of  what  men  need,  that  they  may  learn  there  is  a  holy  God,
Influences,  moreover,  proceed  from  appeals  to  the  mind.  Books  and  letters,  ser-
mons and  conversations,  have  induced  many  souls  to  grieve  over  sin  and  to  long
for  the  grace  of  God — have  brought  many  into  sliame  and  also  into  peace.  Who
can  imagine  the  various  features  of  God's  action  upon  men  ?  Who  can  tell  from
whence  that  action  will  proceed  ?  It  is  our  comfort  to  know  that  He  has  sovereign
authority  everywhere;  that  no  influence  acts  casually,  but  each  one  in  due  subor-
dination to  Him  ;  that  the  upshot  of  all  the  summonses  He  sends  forth  will  be  to
prove  that  He  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good  ;  and  that  men  have  bein  treated  with
the  end  of  saving  them  from  sin  and  making  them  partakers  of  His  holiness.

IL  It  grounds  its  procedure  upon  marked  differences  in  human  character.
In  God's  moral  discipline  precedence  is  given  to  His  saving  will.  The  man  clothed
in  linen  first  made  the  mark  of  deliverance  from  death,  and  then  the  other  six
followed  with  the  blows  of  their  fatal  weapons.  The  righteous  are  not  treated  as
the  wicked.     Mercy  is  honoured  before  judgment  is  executed.

Safety  is  apportioned  to  those  who  are  of  one  heart  with  God.  They  are  seen  to
be  loyal  to  His  rule.  They  hate  what  He  hates.  They  deplore  the  abominations
which  cast  a  slur  upon  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  They  are  seen  to  have  sympathy
for  men.  They  do  not  neglect,  despise,  denounce  the  unworthy  lives  of  their
fellow-citizens  ;  they  grieve  deeply  because  of  them,  knowing  their  own  natural
feebleness  in  the  assaults  of  temptations ;  they  dare  not  assume  the  airs  of  them
that  are  at  ease  and  the  contenjpt  of  those  that  are  proud.  At  the  same  time  they
profess  no  maudlin  charity,  and  so  excuse  the  sins  which  are  openly  committed  or
secretly  practised  in  chambers  of  imagery.  It  may  be  that  they  are  comparatively
few — six  men  to  punish  and  one  only  to  seal  with  the  mark  of  safety — but  they
are  not  ruled  by  the  popular  fashions.  They  are  to  serve  God  and  not  men.  Their
love  to  God  teaches  them  to  love  their  brother  also,  and  they  are  conformed  to  the
image  of  Him  who,  on  a  later  day,  wept  over  Jerusalem.  This  was  the  character
which  secured  the  sealing  on  the  forehead — this  the  kind  of  character  which  has
the  sealing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise.  For  the  mark  is  not  what  they  see,  but
rather  what  others  see  on  them.  It  is  not  some  suggestion  which  they  suppose  is
made  to  themselves,  however  vivid  that  suggestion  may  seem  to  be.  That  is  no
valid  assurance  of  our  being  sons  of  God.  Our  assurance  must  come,  not  from  an
inward  suggestion,  but  from  proof,  evidence,  witness,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  a
work  of  the  Spirit  on  the  soul.  What  more  effectual,  as  such  a  testimony,  than  a
character  which  exhibits  loyalty  to  God  and  sympathy  for  sinners  1  which  is  like
that  of  Clirist  Jesus]  "This  is  the  highest  sort  of  witness  which  it  is  possible  the
soul  should  be  the  subject  of  :  if  there  were  any  such  thing  as  a  witness  of  the
Spirit  by  immediate  suggestion  or  revelation,  this  would  be  vastly  more  noble  and
excellent,  and  as  much  above  that  as  the  heaven  is  above  the  earth. ^' — Edwards.
We  who  hear  the  Gos[)el  may  truly  understand  that  the  sealer  to  our  safety  is  the
Son,  to  whom  all  judgment  is  committed  ;  whom  the  armies  of  heaven  follow  ;
who  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  He  knows  His  sheep  by  name.  His
care  for  them  is  the  care  of  prayer  and  self-sacrifice.  He  does  not  go  into  churches
and  mark  crowds  by  water  of  baptism.  He  does  not  pass  over  one  house  and  into
another  so  that  He  may  mark  a  household  on  their  foreheads.  He  acts  upon
individuals  and  on  their  hearts.  He  washes  away  their  sins  by  His  own  blood.
He  renews  their  wills.  He  induces  them  to  follow  His  example.  And  because
they  are  quickened  by  His  Spirit  and  walk  in  newness  of  life.  He  secures  them,  and
they  shall  never  perish.  Christ  does  not  guarantee  His  followers  against  all  tribu-
lation, but  He  does  their  safety  from  destruction  by  calamity.  The  Chaldeans
might  cause  distress  to,  but  could  not  slay,  the  sorrowing  citizens.  The  enticements
of  sinful  lusts  may  harass  you  again  and  again;  disease  may  keep  you  bodily  and
spiritually  low ;  you  may  be  bereaved  of  friends  whom  you  greatly  miss ;  you  may
be  injured  by  the  conduct  of  those  with  whom  you  come  into  association;  your
104


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  ix.


iighs  and  tears  may  be  apparently  fruitless;  you  may  see  the  evils  still  in  full  force
around  you  as  if  you  never  had  prayed,  never  had  stood  up  for  God  against  the
workers  of  iniquity  ;  yet  the  mighty  power  of  God  preserves  you,  and  the  time  will
come  when  you  will  be  removed  from  the  furnace  purified  like  gold,  and  you  will
receive  the  crown  of  righteousness  which  fadeth  not  away.  "  The  divine  faithful-
ness still  abides  sure  to  the  true  children  of  the  covenant.  .  .  .  Let  such,  there-
fore, trust  in  the  Lord  at  all  times,  and  fear  not  that  it  shall  be  well  with  the
righteous. " — Fairhairn.

Death  is  appointed  to  those  who  continue  in  trespasses.  The  Lord  has  no  plea-
sure in  the  death  of  the  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  turn  from  his  wicked  way.
Only,  if  he  will  not  turn,  what  remains'?  He  is  dead  in  sins,  and  a  worse  fate  there
cannot  be.  The  guilt  of  it  should  produce  unbounded  fear,  and  be  a  signal  to  arise
from  the  dead  that  Christ  may  give  light.  Let  all  attempts  directed  by  a  merciful
God  have  failed  to  rouse,  then  the  heavy  judgment  must  fall  on  the  head  of  every
one  thus  guilty  of  hardening  their  hearts  against  the  Lord.  No  place  is  so  sacred
as  to  prevent  the  execution  of  the  sentence.  Let  it  be  temple  or  church,  called
holy  ©r  sacred,  sin  is  damnation  anywhere.  The  waters  of  wrath  shall  sweep  into
all  hiding-places.  The  very  place  in  which  sin  is  committed  may  be  the  place
for  punishing  sin.  No  leader  is  so  great  as  to  have  immunity  from  the  sentence.
"  The  more  aged  and  venerable  portion  of  the  worshippers,  and  those  who  might
naturally  be  regarded  as  occupying  the  foremost  rank  among  the  people  at  large,'*
were  slain  with  impartial  severity.  They  whose  Godward  privileges  are  greatest,
when  they  defile  His  worship,  incur  the  penalty  of  those  who  are  chief  in  wicked-
ness. "  So  far  is  the  possession  of  means  of  grace  from  saving  men  from  wrath,
that  He  abhors  sin  most  in  those  from  whom,  by  reason  of  their  spiritual  oppor-
tunities, most  good  was  to  have  been  expected." — Fausset.  As  formerly,  so  now,
the  appeal  is  to  be  seriously  listened  to,  "Beware,  therefore,  lest  that  come  upon  you,
which  is  spoken  in  the  prophets;  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and  perish."
God  rules  in  righteousness.

Mourning  for  Other  Men's  Sins  (ver.  4).

Lamenting  the  sins  of  the  times  and  places  wherein  we  live  is —

I.  A  duty  incumbent  on  us.  Our  affections  of  grief  and  anger  cannot  be
better  employed  than  for  the  interest,  nor  better  bestowed  than  for  the  service,  of
Him  who  implanted  those  passions  in  us.  Our  natural  motions  should  be  ordered
for  the  God  of  nature,  and  spiritual  ordered  for  the  God  of  grace.  (L)  This  was
the  practice  of  believers  in  all  ages.  (2.)  It  was  our  Saviour's  practice.  (3.)
Angels,  as  far  as  they  are  capable,  have  their  grief  for  the  sins  of  men.

IL  It  is  an  acceptable  duty  to  God.  (1.)  It  is  a  fulfilling  of  the  whole  law
consisting  of  love  to  God  and  love  to  our  neighbours.  (2.)  It  is  an  imitating
return  for  God's  affection.  (3.)  This  temper  justifies  God  and  His  justice.  (4.)  It
is  a  sign  of  such  a  temper  God  hath  evidenced  Himself  in  Scripture  much  affected
with.     It  is  both  our  duty  and  God's  pleasure.

Ill  It  is  a  means  of  preservation  from  public  judgments.  (1.)  Sincerity
escapes  best  in  common  judgments,  and  this  mourning  for  public  sins  is  its  greatest
note.  (2.)  This  frame  clears  us  from  the  guilt  of  common  sins.  (3.)  It  is  an
endeavour  to  repair  the  honour  God  has  lost.  (4.)  Mourners  in  Zion  are  humble,
and  humility  is  preventive  of  judgments.  (5.)  They  keep  covenant  with  God  ;  and
(6.)  fear  His  judgments,  which  is  a  means  of  preventing  them.

1.  We  may  be  reproved  if  we  make  sport  of  sin  ;  if  we  use  mere  invectives
against  it ;  if  we  look  on  it  rather  as  a  hurt  to  ourselves  than  as  injury  to  God  ;
if  we  do  not  truly  mourn  for  our  own  sins.

2.  We  may  be  comforted.  God  doth  not  strike  at  random,  and  they  who  are
St?imped  with  Cliri«t's  mark  have  His  wiscjom  to  guard  them  against  folly,  His

105


CHIP.  O.  BOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  EZEKIEL.


power  against  weakness,  the  Everlasting  Father  against  man,  whose  breath  is  in  his
nostrils.

The  Lord  seems  to  be  upon  the  threshold  of  the  tem{)le,  come  down  already
from  the  cherubim,  and  is  it  not  time  to  bewail  our  own  sins  and  the  common
abominations  that  have  so  polluted  the  place  of  His  habitation  %  Doth  not  the
Holy  Spirit  grieve  for  the  sins  of  those  who  play  the  wantons  with  the  grace  of
God  (Eph.  iv.  30)  ?  Shall  we  refuse  mourning  for  that  which  goes  to  the  heart  of
the  Holy  Ghost  ]  Let  us  sorrow  for  the  sins  of  the  time  and  place  in  which  we
live.  — Ghamock,

The  Mark  of  Deliverance  (vers.  4-6).

When  God  visits  the  world,  or  any  part  of  it,  with  His  desolating  judgments,
He  usually  sets  a  mark  of  deliverance  on  such  as  are  suitably  affected  with  the  sins
of  their  fellow-creatures.

L  What  is  implied  in  being  suitably  affected  with  the  sins  of  our
fellow-creatures  ?  If  our  fellow-creatures  infringe  none  of  our  real  or  supposed
rights,  and  abstain  from  such  gross  vices  as  evidently  disturb  the  peace  of  society,
we  usually  feel  little  concern  respecting  their  sins  against  God.  Our  nearest
neighbours  may  be  of  a  character  remote  from  that  of  a  Christian,  and  we  show  no
uneasiness  respecting  their  dangerous  condition.  There  may  indeed  be  a  kind  of
pleasure  when  we  contrast  their  vices  and  our  virtues,  and  we  are  encouraged  to
hope  for  impunity  in  sin.  Nor  is  this  surprising.  We  naturally  think  little  of  our
own  souls  or  of  our  own  sins,  and  he  who  takes  no  care  to  save  himself  is  not  likely
to  feel  concern  for  the  salvation  of  others.  Evidently  a  great  change  must  take
place  in  our  views  and  feelings  if  the  conduct  of  the  persons  mentioned  in  our  text
is  suitable  for  us.  Though  they  lived  in  an  evil  day,  when  the  judgments  of  God
were  falling  heavily  upon  their  nation,  they  appear  to  have  felt  more  poignant
grief  for  prevailing  sins  than  for  the  desolating  judgments  which  they  occasioned.
To  be  rightly  affected —

Firsty  We  must  fear  sin  more  than  the  punishment  of  sin ;  be  more  grieved  to
see  God  dishonoured,  His  Son  neglected,  and  immortal  souls  ruined,  than  to  see
our  commerce  interrupted,  our  fellow-citizens  divided,  and  our  country  invaded.

Second,  We  must  use  diligent  exertions,  by  every  means  in  our  power,  to
reform  the  sinners.  There  are  many  who  will  readily  allow  that  sins  prevail
among  us,  and  confess  it  is  a  very  melancholy  thing,  but  still  they  use  no  means  to
counteract  or  repress  the  evils  which  they  profess  to  lament.  As  it  is  not  sufficient
to  confess  our  own  sins  without  renouncing  them,  so  it  is  not  sufficient  to  mourn  for
the  sins  of  others  without  attempting  their  reformation.  This  attempt  must  be
made —

1.  By  example.  As  the  force  of  example  is  inconceivably  great,  every  person
is  sacredly  bound,  in  times  of  prevailing  degeneracy,  to  act  an  open,  firm,  and
decided  part  in  favour  of  virtue  and  religion — avoiding  the  very  appearance  of
those  evils  which  are  prevalent  around  him.

2.  By  exertions  to  suppress  vice  and  impiety.  When  the  interests  of  virtue  and
religion  are  fenced  round  by  wholesome  laws,  every  individual  is  bound  to  see  them
faithfully  executed.  By  conniving  at  the  sins  of  others  we  make  them  our  own.
"  To  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin."  A  righteous
God  will  not  hold  us  guiltless  if  we  do  not  prevent  evil  which  we  could  have  pre-
vented. "If  thou  forbear  to  deliver,"  <fec.  Those  who  neither  fear  God  nor
regard  man  must  be  taught  by  their  apprehensions  not  to  stalk  their  vicious  pro-
pensities in  open  day.  The  task  may  be  disagreeable.  Many  will  mourn  in  their
closets,  but  use  !io  exertion  in  public,  pretending  that  others  may  more  properly
engage  in  it.  We  are  willing  that  God  should  take  care  of  our  honour  and
interests,  but  too  often  we  suffer  His  laws  to  be  violated   with   impunity.     We

lOG


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY  :  EZEKIEL,  chap.  W.


can  thus  have  no  claim  to  the  character  mentioned  in  our  text.  God  will  set  no
mark  on  us  unless  we  appear  openly  and  decidedly  against  the  prevalence  of  sin.

3.  By  prayers,  A  regard  to  order  or  some  similar  principle  induces  to  the
suppression  of  vice ;  but  this  is  presumptuous  and  tempting  God  if  we  neglect
prayer  for  divine  influence.

Thirdy  We  must  be  deeply  affected  with  our  own  sins.  We  shall  acknowledge
that  our  sins  have  assisted  in  forming  the  mass  of  national  guilt.  If  not  guilty  of
the  same  vice  as  others,  it  is  because  of  the  restraints  of  grace,  and  we  shall  temper
all  exertions  with  pity  for  the  offender  while  abhorring  the  offence.  He  who  is
most  affected  by  the  sins  of  others  will  mourn  most  sincerely  for  his  own.  Thus
have  all  the  good  men  mentioned  in  the  Bible  done.

n.  That  on  such  as  are  thus  affected  God  will  set  a  mark  of  deliverance
when  those  around  them  are  destroyed  by  His  desolating  judgments.  This  is
inferred —

1.  From  the  justice  of  God.  They  do  not  share  in  the  national  sins  ;  they
mourn  for  and  oppose  them,  and  justice  requires  a  mark  of  separation  for  them.
True,  such  persons  have  violated  the  law  of  God  as  individuals ;  but  they  have
not  done  the  wickedness  which  is  chargeable  on  the  community,  and  they  are
spared.

2.  From  God's  holiness.  Such  characters  love  God.  It  is  their  love  to  God
which  causes  them  to  mourn  over  and  oppose  iniquity.  His  cause,  His  honour,
they  consider  as  their  own.      Wliile  God  loves  holiness  He  cannot  but  love  them.

3.  From  His  faithfulness.  None  more  highly  honour  Him  than  those  who  appear
openly  on  His  side  in  opposition  to  sin,  and  He  will  h(mour  them  by  placing  some
mark  of  distinction  on  them.  Like  their  Father  and  their  Redeemer  they  are
grieved  with  the  sins  of  man,  and  a  strong  refuge  is  provided  by  Him.

4.  From  the  facts  of  Scripture.  Noah,  Job,  Elijah,  Jeremiah,  &c.  Will  it  be
said  that  facts  do  not  always  justify  the  statement  of  deliverance  ]  We  allow  that
they  do  not.  But  may  the  professed  mourners  not  partake  in  common  sin,  or  be
entangled  in  policy  so  as  not  to  bear  a  testimony  against  the  prevailing  evil?  And
if  many  righteous  have  been  put  to  death,  the  mark  of  God  was  on  them.  Stephen,
Paul,  and  Silas,  martyrs.  However  this  may  be,  the  Son  of  God,  clothed  in  the
linen  garments  of  His  priestly  office,  has  sprinkled  them  with  His  blood,  sealed
them  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  written  their  names  in  the  book  of  life,  and  they  will
have  His  Father's  name  written  in  their  forehead.

If  God  should  send  a  messenger  to  set  a  mark  on  all  who  are  suitably  affected,
would  it  appear  on  thee  % — Payson  {abridged).


2.  The  Prophet  Interceding  in  Vain  (vers.  8-11),

EXEGETICAL    NOTES.— Ver.    8.  mouth  in  the  dust  he  burst  forth  Into

Ezekiel  recovers    from    a    passing    sur-  an  appeal  for  forbearance — speaking  not

prise  while  the  slaughter  in  the  city  was  in  name  of  the  exiles,  but  in  name  of

proceeding,   and   then  realises   his   soli-  the    inhabitants  of  Judea,   "and  said,

tariness.    "  And  remained  I,"  the  fre-  Ah !  Lord  God,  destroyest   Thou  all

quenters  of   the  Temple  all   dead,  the  the  remnant  of  Israel,"  as  would  be

only  one  spared  alive  there,  his  perturbed  done,    *' in  the  pouring  out  Thy  fury

mind  was  found  in  a  temporary  oblivion  upon   Jerusalem  ?  "     The    captive    sin

of  what  he  had  heard  in  reference  to  such  Assyria   and    Babylon    are    undergoing

as  were  to  be  marked,  and  then  loomed  their    punishment :  all    that    is    left    of

before  him  the  obliteration  even  of  the  Israel  as  a  nation  is  here,  and  therefore

promised   remnant.      In    intense    sym-  Ezekiel's  cry  is  to  the  Lord  God  for  the

pathy  for  the  people  ;  in  fear  and  sor-  latter.

row,  "  I  fell  upon  my  face ; "  with  his  Ver,  9.  The  answer  to  his  appeal  is

107


CHAP.  IX.


no  MI  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


decisive.  "And  He  said  unto  me,
The  iniquity  of  the  house  of  Israel
and  Judah  is  great  exceedingly."     The

criminality  was  not  all  of  the  same
character  :  in  the  landward  parts,  crimes
of  "blood-shedding"  were  most  com-
mon ;  in  the  city,  crimes  of  "  pervert-
ing rights."  Religious  declension  and
rebelliousness  are  not  mentioned  here,
but  moral  corruption  is,  as  constituting
the  evil  which  is  to  be  severely  punished.
And  the  terms  in  which  the  people  form
an  excuse  for  their  sins  correspond  with
the  predominance  of  the  moral  element :
"for  they  say,  The  Lord  hath  for-
saken the  earth,  and  the  Lord  seeth
not."  The  difference  between  this  id
that  in  chap.  viii.  12,  where  the  reli-
gious aspect  was  prominent,  lies  here  :
the  latter  verse  puts  "  seeth  us  not "
first — religion  is  primarily  a  matter  be-
tween God  and  man.  The  verse  now
before  us  puts  *'  hath  forsaken  the  earth  "
first — as  if  the  Lord  had  gone  away
from  all  regard  of  the  conduct  of  men
to  men.  They  imagine  they  have  free
scope  to  act  as  they  choose  towards  each
other,  no  one  is  takinor  oversif]jht  of
them.  "  The  source  of  all  transgression
is  denial  of  the  providence  of  God."
Ver.  10.  The  people  had   taken  the


position  that  they  only  had  rights,  and
yet  that  position  is  commanded  by
another.  "And  I  also,  my  eye  shall
not  spare  .  .  .  their  way  I  put  {give)
upon  their  head."  The  path  of  life
which  they  are  walking  on  turns  up
to  smite  their  head  with  punishment.
Ezekiel's  appealing  question  is  not  di-
rectly answered.  The  Lord  "  merely  vin-
dicates His  justice  by  showing  that,
whatever  amount  of  vengeance  He
might  inflict,  it  did  not  exceed  their
sin.  He  would  have  us  humbly  acqui-
esce in  His  judgments,  and  wait  and
trust "  (Fausset).  The  propliet  sees
that  a  people  laden  with  iniquity  go  to
meet  their  doom,  and  he  makes  no
further  cry  for  consideration  of  their
case.

Ver.  11.  Scarcely  had  the  answer  of
the  Lord  been  received  when  "behold
the  man  clothed  in  linen,"  the  chief
of  the  guardians  of  the  city,  appearing
by  himself  seemingly,  "  brought  word,
saying,  I  have  done  as  Thou  hast  com-
manded me."  The  marks  have  been
affixed  on  as  many  as  and  in  the  manner
in  which  he  had  been  commissioned.
Probably  the  other  six  were  still  carry-
ing on  their  work  (chap.  xi.  13).  "  The
counsel  of  the  Lord,  it  shall  stand.''


HOMILETICS.
Unsatisfied  Prayers  (vers.  8-11).

When  God  spaies  His  servants  at  a  time  during  which  calamity  overtakes  others,
or  saves  them  when  many  go  on  in  the  broad  way  to  destruction,  they  deeply
grieve  and  earnestly  pray  for  those  who  are  thus  overtaken.  What  they  ask  for
seems  not  to  be  assured.  They  have  prayed  and  wept  in  vain,  they  suppose,  and
a  sore  heart-trouble  is  produced.  They  wonder  if  the  Lord  has  shut  up  His  com-
passions ;  if  prayer  is  nothing  but  a  cry.  They  doubt  if  they  have  prayed  aright  j
if  they  have  misconceived  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  To  such  questions  Ezekiel's  case
here  may  suggest  direction  and  solace  about  unsatisfied  prayers.

L  Such  prayers  may  come  from  true  sympathy  with  misery.  Men,  who
have  learned  to  love  their  fellowmen  because  of  love  to  their  Father,  do  not  take
precautions  merely  for  their  own  safety  in  the  face  of  impending  suffering.  If  they
are  secure  themselves  they  cannot  be  at  ease  while  their  neighbours  are  in  danger
of  being  swept  away  as  with  a  flood.  The  sins,  sorrows,  deaths  of  others  cast  a
heavy  burden  upon  their  souls,  and  they  bow  down  in  utter  self-abandonment
before  God  to  beseech  Him  to  take  pity  on  the  impenitent  and  doomed.  They
place  themselves  between  the  living  One  and  the  condemned  to  death,  and  put
forth  the  energies  which  love  can  command  into  their  supplications.  They  weep
with  them  that  need  to  be  wept  for.

It  Such  prayers  may  use  the  most  effective  grounds  of  ?!.ppeaL    They  appeql


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chip.  IX.

to  God  as  Go(L  "Ah,  Lord  God  !"  They  have  no  cure  in  such  need.  They  can
help  only  by  prayers,  and  they  present  them  to  Him  who  hears  prayer  iis  to  Him
who  alone  is  able  to  do  what  they  long  for.  In  weakness  and  in  conscious  self-
unworthiness  they  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace  and  plead,  ''Wilt  Thou
act  in  such  severity,  Thou  who  hast  made  us  and  fashioned  us,  and  who  knowest
our  frame  %  Wilt  Thou  forget  the  work  of  Thine  own  hands  and  let  it  perish  %
Wilt  Thou  not  show  thyself  to  be  the  Lord  mighty  to  save  ]  "  They  appeal  to  His
promises,  *'  Israel," — that  was  a  name  to  touch  the  heart  of  God.  For  He  had
chosen  the  people,  had  nourished  and  brought  them  up  as  children,  and  in  them
meant  to  bless  all  the  families  of  the  earth.  Were,  then,  all  to  be  cut  off — men
women,  and  children  ?  The  remnant,  to  which  so  much  has  been  pledged,  would
it  too  be  discarded?  Would  He  thus  suffer  His  faithfulness  and  truth  to  fail?
They  appeal  to  His  interests.  '*  Jerusalem," — those  who  have  stood  in  the  area  of
His  manifested  glory,  who  have  been  hearers  of  His  word,  who  are  the  chief  repre-
sentatives of  His  people  in  covenant,  who  seem  best  adapted  to  maintain  His  way
upon  earth, — if  tliey  are  sent  down  to  darkness  and  death,  where  will  He  find  a
people  to  show  forth  His  praise  and  saving  health  1  His  nature,  His  truth.  His
kingdom  are  grounds  of  prayer  in  which  man's  selfish  pleas  have  no  part.  "  Do
not  disgrace  the  throne  of  Thy  glory  ! "

III.  Such  prayers  may  be  presented  in  suhmissiveness.  "  I  fell  upon  my
face."  God's  ways  are  beyond  even  a  prophet's  comprehension.  They  trend  too
high  and  also  too  deep  for  us.  We  are  disposed  to  count  that  to  be  confused
which  is  only  farther  off  than  we  can  define,  or  to  charge  that  with  hardness  which
is  only  covered  with  a  thin  crust.  Thus  when  deprecating  the  sufferings  which
befall  our  persons,  our  churches,  the  nations,  we  may  take  to  questioning  God,  if
not  dictating  to  Him,  Wilt  Thou  not  take  other  steps?  Wilt  Thou  not  have  regard
to  the  prayers  of  the  destitute?  Wilt  Thou  not  have  respect  to  Thy  great  name
whose  glory  is  dearer  to  Thee  than  it  can  be  to  us  %  We  are  but  of  "  yesterday  and
know  nothing."

IV.  And  such  prayers  may  he  based  on  misconceptions  of  God.  As  to  His
mercy.  Sympathising  friends  think  they  would  show  pity,  they  would  spare,  when
God  does  not,  and  their  tendency  is  to  count  Him  severe.  This  conclusion  is  un-
reasonable. When  once  we  grasp  the  idea  that  He  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of
the  wicked,  we  learn  that  they  do  not  take  in  all  the  elements  involved  in  divine
mercy  who  surmise  that  the  mercy  of  God  is  limited  to  the  surveys  of  sense.  We
must  rise  beyond  the  range  of  the  earthly  for  an  ampler  view  of  His  rule.  For
Him,  as  righteous  ruler,  to  spare  those  who  reject  His  authority,  who  will  not  turn
to  Him  in  spite  of  all  His  endeavours,  would  be  to  connive  at  His  own  eternal
dishonour.  They  would  go  on  adding  sin  to  sin.  They  would  produce  influences
which  would  shake  the  loyalty  of  those  who  had  been  faithful  to  Him.  There
could  be  no  mercy  in  a  course  which  would  cause  such  results.

As  to  His  patience.  We  would  have  Him  check  the  process  of  degeneracy  in
individuals,  in  churches,  in  states,  at  the  very  outset.  We  would  have  Him  strike
down  the  man  who  was  leading  others  into  evil  as  soon  as  he  acquired  a  bad  pre-
eminence. We  would  not  have  Him  wait  till  sin  is  excessive.  Therefore  do  we  fancy
He  has  been  too  patient,  and  yet,  with  strange  inconsistency,  when  He  is  punishing,
we  fall  down  and  urgently  ask  if  He  will  not  stay  His  hand  !  We  cannot  measure
out  His  patience  thus.  Both  the  deferring  of  punishment  and  the  execution  of
punishment  are  ordered  in  wisdom  and  love.  They  must  be,  for  the  Lord  reigneth,
and  we  should  stay  on  Him,  let  the  darkness  about  Him  be  what  it  may.

As  to  means  of  carrying  out  His  will.  We  acknowledge  that  the  law  which
binds  penalty  to  guilt  is  just  and  good,  and  can  be  nothing  if  it  is  not  irrefragable.
We  grant  that  the  doom  should  somehow  be  in  correspondence  with  the  sin.  But
what  will  bo  the  wisest  and  most  impressive  way  of  manifesting  the  connection
wi^icU  thus  subsists?     We  are  utterly  unable  to  tell^  and  our  prayers  might  be


OHAF.  nc.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY    EZEKIEI.


offered  against  the  very  method  which  we  would  assent  to  as  right  and  best,  if  we
knew  all.  But  assuming  that  there  are  two  chief  classes  of  sins  to  provide  against
— inhumanity  and  denial  of  God's  interference  witli  the  doings  of  men — we  should
look  for  a  wonderful  variety  of  treatment  according  to  men's  circmnstances  and
place  in  the  world's  development.  It  is  for  us  not  only  to  pray  for  the  mercy  we
wish  for  troubled  souls,  but  also  to  wait  on  the  Lord  so  as  to  see  His  eoino^s.
"Those  who  take  heed  to  the  signs  of  the  times  Ciui  hardly  but  observe  the  ten-
dency of  our  age  to  ignore  the  God  of  special  providence,  saying,  '  Where  is  the
promise  of  His  coming?"*  Nor  can  we  fail  to  mark  a  prevalence  of  dishonesty,
brutality,  self-pleasing,  which  indicate  sad  disregard  of  love  to  man.  What  may
follow  we  leave  with  God  while  we  cry  for  His  grace.  Only  we  do  well  to  remem-
ber that  judgment  will  begin  at  the  house  of  God,  and  that  the  sufferings  of
unfaithful  Christians  will  be  more  awful  than  those  of  rebellious  Jews.  *'  What
manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  all  holy  living  and  godliness  ! "

V.  Yet  such  prayers  are  answered,  but  otherwise  than  directly.  We  are
too  disposed  to  conclude  that  many  of  our  prayers  are  not  granted — prayeis  in
which  we  had  not  regard  to  iniquity  but  to  Christ.  It  may  be,  it  is  true  that
often  they  are  not  granted  in  accordance  with  the  express  form  which  we  had
hoped  for,  and  we  become  like  thoughtless  children  who  complain  that  their  wishes
for  good  are  not  attended  to  because  their  father  does  not  give  them  the  very  thing
they  want  and  at  the  time  they  ask  it.  We  ought  to  have  more  confidence  in
our  Heavenly  Father  than  that  complaint  implies.  He  who  says,  "  Call  upon  me
and  I  will  answer  thee,"  **  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name  that  will  I  do,"  is
true  and  faithful.  What  He  has  said  He  will  do,  only  it  lies  with  Him  to  settle
both  the  form  and  the  season  of  the  answer.  He  brought  the  man  who  had  been
setting  a  mark  upon  the  mourners  in  Zion  in  view  of  Ezekiel,  and  that  appearance
told  Ezekiel  that  his  prayer  was  really  answered.  He  said  to  Paul,  in  response  to
his  thrice- told  entreaty,  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ;  for  my  power  is  made
perfect  in  weakness;"  and  though  that  was  not  what  the  Apostle  besought  for —
the  removal  of  the  thorn  in  the  flesh — it  was  tantamount  to  that,  as  the  promise
secured  him  against  being  overcome  by  his  infliction.  Were  we  able  to  see  better,
we  might  come  to  say  of  many  of  our  apparently  unsatisfied  prayers,  "Verily  God
hath  heard  me;  He  hath  attended  to  the  voice  of  my  prayer."

Wait  for  the  unfolding  of  the  sealed  book,  and  then  will  many  rejoice  to  learn
that  they  had  not  ^rrayed  in  vain  when  they  besought  that  God  would  glorify
Hin»self  by  saving  men.  They  died  in  the  sorrow  of  hopes  disappointed ;  they
live  in  the  joy  of  better  things  than  they  could  conceive.  Let  us  learn  to  trust
God  as  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  His  Son,  and  endeavour  to  observe  more  closely
how  He  responds  to  our  prayers.

Faithfulness  in  Stewardship  (ver.  11).

In  fulfilling  any  work  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Lord's  will —
L  There  should  he  regard  to  the  Lord  who  appoints  it.  A  j»osition  in  His
service  is  wished  for  sometimes  because  it  is  counted  honourable  and  respectable,
or  because  it  is  i)rofitable,  or  because  it  is  best  to  take  it  even  if  we  have  no  inteiest
in  its  duties.  All  such  motives  are  condemned.  The  only  one  which  can  stand
in  the  light  is  that  which  prompts  us  to  act  because  we  have  been  directed  by
considerations  of  His  will,  and  are  desirous  to  please  Him  to  the  ntuiost.  *'  He  that
regardeth  the  day  regardeth  it  unto  the  Lord."  This  is  capable  of  being  an  ever-
present  motive  to  faithfulness.  It  may  influence  us  everywhere,  whether  weeat  or  drink,
buy  or  sell,  worship  alojie  or  with  others.  He  is  always  at  our  right  hand  where
we  are  and  where  we  are  called  to  serve,  and  we  can  do  whatever  we  do  as  before
Him.  An  elastic  motive.  When  we  need  much  power  we  are  moved  towards  the
treasures  of  Almightiness ;  when  we  need  little,  we  come  to  the  same  Mighty  One
who  is  wise  to  measure  out  the  adequate  supply.  He  will  furnish  us  for  a  gentle
110


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL.  chap.  t.


or  a  stern  service,  for  presenting  a  reward  or  a  threat,  for  expressing  a  sentence  of
mercy  or  of  condemnation.  We  serve  not  onrselvea  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,
— that  will  regulate  us  in  our  "  daily  round,"  and  in  dying  for  Him  if  need  be.

II.  Regard  to  the  manner  of  obeying.  "  As  Tiiou  hast  commanded."  Faith-
fulness is  shown  not  in  doing  the  appointed  service  with  slovenliness,  as  if  any
way  of  fulfilling  it  would  be  sufficient  -,  not  in  self-regard,  as  if  the  way  we  would
like  to  do  it  would  be  satisfactory ;  not  with  deference  to  the  opinions  and  habits
of  any  men,  as  if  they  had  authority  to  curtail  or  enlarge  the  commands  of  God ;
not  with  limitations,  as  if  we  could  stop  at  any  point  but  the  point  which  the  Holy
One  has  defined.  No ;  the  work  of  the  watcher  is  not  done  till  he  has  reached,
taught,  comforted,  saved  all  whom  the  Lord  has  characterised.  "  He  will  have  all
men  to  be  saved  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."

III.  Regard  to  the  account  to  be  rendered.  No  faithful  servant  need  go  in
fear  to  the  tribunal  of  the  Great  King.  They  who  obtain  mercy  to  be  faithful  have
boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment,  are  not  ashamed  before  Christ  at  His  coming,
give  in  their  account  with  joy,  and  are  enabled  to  say,  in  reference  to  the  charge
which  had  been  committed  to  them,  "  Lord,  it  is  done  as  Thou  hast  commanded."
He  is  the  pattern  of  perfect  faithfulness  who  did  always  that  which  was  pleas-
ing to  the  Father ;  who  could  say  at  the  close  of  the  day  in  which  he  did  His  work,
**  I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth,  I  have  finished  the  work  Thou  gavest  me  to
do,"  and  who  will  meet  the  consummation  of  all  things  with  the  words,  '*  Of  all
that  Thou  hast  given  me  I  have  lost  nothing."  Let  us  imitate  Christ  Jesus  in
doing  the  will  of  our  Father,  not  negligently,  or  equivocally,  or  incompletely,  but
so  as  "  to  be  counted  worthy  of  that  world,  and  to  stand  before  the  Son  of  Man."
Let  us,  in  all  we  do,  for  the  glory  of  Christ's  name,  follow  His  example,  and  report
every  matter  to  our  God  in  prayer  and  supplication,

(3.)  The  Setting  Fire  to  Jerusalem,  with  the  Withdrawal  from

THE  Temple  (Chap,  x.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  1-  to  the  presentation  in  the  plain  of  Che-
8.  The  sealing  of  the  remnant  ha«  bar,  yet  shows  a  few  diflferences  in  form
proved  the  faithfulness  of  the  Lord  and  procedure.  "  And,  to  make  it  more
to  His  covenant ;  the  conflagration  manifest  that  the  judgment  is  in  vindi
of  the  city  will  prove  His  justice  cation  of  His  injured  holiness  and  on
by  the  punishment  of  the  violators  account  of  the  sins  which  had  been  com-
of  His  covenant.  But  before  the  mitted  against  His  covenant,  the  scene
sentence  is  executed  the  prophet  is  of  the  judicial  action  is  laid  in  the
again  made  specially  cognisant  of  the  Temple  itself"  (Fair,)  Reading  vers,
truth  that  the  heavens  do  rule — that  1-3,  6,  7,  13,  15a,  18,  19,  we  get  the
not  only  was  he  commissioned  by  the  account  of  what  took  place;  the  re-
God  of  Israel,  but  also  that  he  must  be  maining  verses  give  elucidations  of  the
imbued  with    the   profound  conviction  scene.

that  every  calamity  which   befalls  the  Ver.  1.  When  the  watcher  ceased  to

guilty  city  proceeds  from  the  agencies  speak,  Ezekiel's  attention  was  directed

which  underlie  the  sapphire  throne  of  to    the    change    of    scenery.     "  And  I

the  everlasting  King.     *'  Four  potencies  saw,  and,  behold,  upon  the  firmament

are  engaged  in  the  destruction  of  the  which  was  over  the  head  of  the  che-

city — He  who  sits  on   the  throne,  the  rubim,"  though  the    prophet    had    not

man  clothed  in  linen,  the  fire,  and  the  recognised  this  special  organisation  till

cherub  who  hands  it  to  the  angel.     The  later  on  (ver.  20),  yet  he  keeps  to  the

former  two   are  absolutely  ruling,   the  designation   throughout    this    vision   as

latter      two     absolutely      ministering "  he   did  to   that  of  "  living    creatures* '

(Heng.)    The  divine  glory  is  manifested  throughout  his  first  vision,  the  reason

in  changing  aspects,  and,  while  similar  for  the  change  of  words  probably  beii  g


CHAP.  Z.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


the  presence  of  cherubic  representation
in  the  Temple ;  *'  as  it  were  a  sapphire
stone)  as  the  appearance  of  the  like-
ness of  a  throne ; "  no  rainbow  appears
now.  Mercy,  in  a  sense,  is  past — the
marking  of  the  spared  ones  is  com-
pleted, and  there  is  scope  for  woe  only.
Besides,  the  appearance  of  the  likeness
of  a  man  is  not  noticed  here,  but  it  is
indicated  by  the  issuing  of  a  voice.
The  King  was  on  the  tlirone,  though
invisible  to  His  servant.

Ver.  2.  **  And  he  said  unto  the  man
clothed  with  linen,  Go  between  the
wheels,  to  below  the  cherub  ; "  to  the
space  where,  not  material  fire,  but  the
symbol  of  destruction,  which  was  in  its
consequences  to  make  Jerusalem  like
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  had  been  seen
(chap.  i.  13)  ;  and  he  had  a  direct  act
to  do  there,  ''  fill  thy  hands  with  coals
of  fire,"  putting  his  two  hands  together
so  as  to  make  a  hollow  space,  "  and
scatter  over  the  city;"  the  fiery  coals
were  to  destroy  Jerusalem,  as  is  illus-
trated by  the  words  of  Isaiah  (xxxiii.  12,
14),  "  And  the  people  shall  be  as  the
burnings  of  lime ;  as  thorns  cut  up
shall  they  be  burned  in  the  fire  .  .  .
The  sinners  in  Zion  are  afraid ;  fearful-
ness  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites.  Who
among  us  shall  dwell  with  the  devouring
fire  %  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with
everlasting  burnings  %  "  "  And  he  came
before  my  eyes."  It  is  noteworthy  that
the  man  who  had  put  the  saving  mark
on  the  foreheads  is  now  commissioned  to
be  the  agent  by  whom  the  desolation
of  Jerusalem  is  accomplished.  '*  God
has  no  class  of  servants  too  holy  or
sacred  to  act,  if  need  be,  in  the  execution
of  righteous  judgments."  Guilt  and
fiery  doom  must  be  proclaimed  as  well
as  forgiveness  and  blessedness :  yet
punishment  will  pave  the  way  for  sal-
vation. When  the  Lord  washes  away
the  defilement  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,
and  purges  the  blood  from  Jerusalem
by  the  spirit  of  judgment  and  the  spirit
of  burning,  then  shall  be  a  place  of
refuge,  and  a  covert  from  storm  and
rain  (Isa.  iv.)

Ver.  3.  The  man*s  commission  is  not
performed  until  the  position  which  is
taken  by  the  divine  glory  and  its  accom-

Wi


panying  phenomena  is  d<'fined.  Eze-
kiel  observes  that  "  the  cherubim  were
standing  at  the  right  of  the  house
when  the  man  came,"  i.e.,  they  were
on  the  south  side,  readv  for  moving
away  from  the  Temple.  The  avengers
had  come  from  the  north ;  they  began
to  slay  at  the  sanctuary  ;  the  city,  which
was  about  to  be  laid  in  ashes,  was  built
southwards  of  the  temple,  and  at  that
quarter  the  glory  was  impelled  to  depart
from  its  chosen  place ;  "  and  the  cloud
filled  the  inner  court ; "  as  in  the  Reve-
lation (chap.  XV.  8),  *'  The  Temple  was
filled  with  smoke  from  the  glory  of  God
and  from  His  power,"  and  wrath  was
going  forth  from  the  sacred  place.

Ver.  4.  "  And  the  glory  of  the  Lord
rose,  from  over  the  cherub,  over  the
threshold  of  the  house" — asimilar  move-
ment to  that  in  chap.  ix.  3,  but  with  the
signification  here  that  its  departure  was
now  taking  place.  He  leaves  a  shadow
behind  and  casts  a  light  before  Him :
^'and  the  house  was  filled  with  the
cloud  " — with  the  vehicle  for  the  divine
glory,  which,  as  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  to
the  Egyptians,  had  a  dark  aspect  in  the
house  5  so  we  conclude  from  the  con-
text, ''  and  the  court  was  filled  with
the  brightness  of  the  glory  of  the
Lord."  Conjectural  assertions  as  to
what  the  cloud  portended,  and  what  the
brightness,  do  not  seem  to  be  fruitful
as  explanations.  All  that  appears  clear
is  that  the  protection  and  guidance,
which  were  associated  with  the  presence
of  the  glory,  would  no  longer  be  granted
to  Jerusalem.

Ver.  5.  The  movement  of  the  glory  of
the  Lord  was  accompanied  by  the  move-
ment of  the  cherubim.  "  And  the  sound
of  the  wings  of  the  cherubim  was  heard
to  the  outer  court,"  into  which  we  must
suppose  Ezekiel  bad  gone  from  the  inner,
and  from  which  he  could  see  what  took
place.  It  was  a  thunderous  sound  (Ps.
xxix.  3),  as  in  the  former  vision,  expres-
sive of  the  force  with  which  the  strokes
of  the  wings  were  propelled,  but  con-
veying more  than  Hengstenberg  suggests,
'*  If  the  cherub  is  the  concentration  of
all  created  life  on  earth,  then  its  sound  is
the  concentration  of  all  sound  on  earth."

Ver,    6,  Now  Ezekiel  returns  to  th©


BOMllETtC  COMMBXTARY:  BZEKISL  ofiAP.  X.


point  he  had  reached  at  ver.  2.  The  intervene.  The  latter  seems  most  pro-
command  to  the  man  is  again  rehearsed,  bable.  The  burning  lies  beyond  the
and  it  is  added,  "he  came  and  stood  next  chapter,  where  the  glory  goes  away,
beside  the  wheel"  (Sing.);  not  some  and  Ezekiel  ce«ises  to  see  the  vision  of
8pecially-ap|)ointed  wheel,  but  that  one  Jerusalem.  An  explanatory  remark  is
which  happened  to  be  nearest  as  he  made  as  to  the  instrument  of  action  in
went  for  the  fire.  the  cherubim  :  "  the  likeness  of  the
Vers.  7  and  8.  "  And  the  cherub,"  hand  of  a  man  under  their  wings  : "
the  one  next  to  the  wheel  beside  which  the  symbol  of  human  agency  and  acti-
the  man  was,  "  stretched  forth  his  vity  is  associated  with  that  part  of  tlieir
hand  from  between  the  cherubim  unto  bodies  by  which  they  could  be  swift  in
the  fire  that  was  between  the  cherubim,  fulfilling  their  prescribed  work,  and
and  lifted  and  gave  into  the  hands  of  whose  movements  were  heard  far  off.
the  man  clothed  in  linen,  and  he  took  The  hand  *'  may  be  naturally  regarded
and  went  out  "  towards  the  doomed  as  indicating  that  human  agents  should
city,  not  now  as  the  mediator  of  salva-  not  be  wanting,  at  the  proper  time,  to
tion,  but  as  an  executor  of  judgment.  carry  into  etTect  the  judgment  written  **
It  is  not  stated  that  he  scattered  the  fire  {Fair.)  *'  Those  who  burned  the  city
then.  Either  Ezekiel's  vision  was  filled  were  immediately  the  Chaldeans,  who
with  some  other  sight,  so  that  he  did  not  are  included  under  the  cherubim  ;  but
observe  the  incidence  of  the  destruction,  behind  them  stood  another"  (Heng,)
or  else  a  space  of  time  was  allowed  to

HOMILETICS.
Unestimated  Influences  on  Human  Life.

A  new  departure  in  the  development  of  God's  people  was  taking  effect.  Their
exile  and  slaughter,  with  the  desecration  of  the  most  holy  place,  were  events  which
did  not  result  merely  from  Chaldean  forces  or  natural  elements,  but  really  from
Him  who  directs  all  living  and  inanimate  things.  To  bring  the  Israelites  out  of
the  notion  that  they  were  secured  against  evil  because  of  past  favours  received  on
past  obedience  rendered ;  to  impress  on  them  the  latent  truth  that  the  Lord  did
not  rule  His  procedure  by  the  external  words  or  acts  of  men,  but  by  the  spirit
which  breathed  in  tliem;  to  give  indications  of  a  time  when  He  would  be  to  all
people  that  which  He  had  been  to  one,  these  seem  to  be  the  grounds  for  the  mani-
festations of  this  section.     In  reference  to  them  there  is  signified —

I.  An  invisible  governor.  The  spirit  of  Ezekiel  sees  tints  of  the  Eternal
Majesty,  and  becomes  aware  of  words  spoken  by  Him  whom  he  does  not  name.
In  his  state  is  a  representation  of  that  which  has  been  experienced  by  multitudes.
They  know  that  God  is  within  range  of  their  susceptibilities,  that  He  coins  im-
pressions from  which  thought  and  feeling  proceed.  They  are  sure  that,  whatever
be  the  persons  or  things  by  which  they  are  affected.  He  is  King  over  each  and  all.
If  any  wonder  or  even  mock  at  the  confidence  they  profess  to  have  in  an  unseen
Ruler,  they  reply,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed  ; "  for  beneath  all  that  is  pal-
pable they  believe  in  God  who  is  a  Spirit,  and  who  is  King  for  ever  and  ever.
"  They  walk  by  faitli,  not  by  sight."

XL  Manifold  agents.  In  their  diversity.  A  half-unconscious  tendency  dis-
poses us  to  refer  every  good  thing  to  the  action  of  God,  every  hard,  ruinous  thing
to  the  action  of  some  law.  It  is  a  trick  of  our  minds.  If  painful  and  disastrous
Ihings  come  out  of  broken  laws,  pleasant  and  helpful  things  come  out  of  obeyed
laws.  And  the  truth  symbolised  in  man,  in  cherubim,  and  in  fire,  is,  that  all  effects,
brought  about  by  multitudinous  agencies,  are  but  the  phenomenal  forms  of  the
purposes  of  the  perfect  will.  The  Son  of  God,  the  angels  of  God,  men  who  hurt,
men  who  suiier,  coals  of  fire,  hailstones  and  frost,  execute  a  comndssion  given  by

B  113


.  OSap.  i.  BOMtlEttC  OOMMENfART:  MUMkini.


the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Whatever  the  variety  of  influences  which
affect  us,  we  are  still  with  God.

In  their  versatility.  The  fire  that  comforts  can  destroy ;  living  beings  may
fulfil  their  ends  by  running,  flying,  standing,  making  sounds,  or  carrying  from  place
to  [)lace  :  the  Lord  Jesus  says,  "  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  me,"  and  He  also  says,
"  Depart  from  me  ;  I  never  knew  you."  All  changed  conditions,  in  the  action  of
natural  and  spiritual  agencies,  depend  upon  changes  in  the  objects  acted  upon.
The  ministry  of  wrath  follows  the  movements  of  wrong.  They  shall  dwell  with
the  devouring  fire  who  sin  and  do  not  repent  of  their  ungodliness.  They  "  shall
be  salted  with  fire  "  who  walk  righteously  and  speak  uprightly.

In  their  concurrence.  In  the  order  of  nature  forces  are  correlated,  and  in  the
moral  order  joy  and  ease  may  be  transmuted  into  sorrow  and  pains,  privileges  into
penalties,  the  honour  of  God's  dwelling-place  into  the  uncleanness  of  foul  orgies.
Pray,  wait,  obey,  and  you  will  become  an  organ  of  the  Lord  where  He  will  and
how  He  will ;  do  evil,  and  His  face  will  be  set  against  you — ^the  light  which  is  in
you  will  become  darkness.

m  Repeated  warnings  of  danger.  The  glory  moving  to  the  threshold  told
of  the  rupture  of  the  ties  which  had  bound  God  to  His  people,  while  the  sound  of
the  wings  and  the  taking  of  fire  intimated  that  the  doom  of  Jerusalem  was  on  the
point  of  being  inflicted.  Penalty  is  preceded  by  witness-bearing  and  sentences.
If  men  neglect  the  immutable  principles  of  right,  if  they  find  in  their  own  ways  the
pleasure  and  service  which  they  ought  to  find  in  His,  He  does  not  go  on  at  once  to
destroy  them.  He  has  given  them  faculties  by  which  they  may  discern  the  signs
of  the  sky  that  portend  a  storm,  so  has  He  qualified  them  to  notice  coming  evils
in  appearances  which  are  passing  before  their  eyes.  He  lingers  that  He  may  correct
them  with  the  words  of  His  mouth  and  tlie  events  of  their  lives.  Thus  does  He
warn  them,  and  from  the  manner  in  which  the  Bible,  prayer,  sanctuaries  are
regarded,  a  Christian  people  can  conclude  whether  the  glory  has  gone  from  their
midst,  and  the  light  and  truth  are  about  to  consume  all  despisers.  He  does  not
always  force  those  coming  tribulations  upon  our  notice.  "  The  works  of  God  are
done  by  hidden  and  secret  means,  by  ways  unthought  of,  by  hands  under  wings.
Invisible  virtue  hath  done  more  than  all  visible  instruments,"  Yet,  latent  as  they
are,  it  is  demanded  from  us  that  we  watch  and  be  sober  under  influences  which
seem  to  threaten  our  welfare,  that  so  we  may  escape  all  those  things  that  shall  come
to  pass,  and  stand  before  the  Son  of  Man.

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers,  associate  Himself  with  the  temple-wor-
9-22.  The  description  of  the  cherubim  ship  as  in  days  of  old.  All  the  energies
and  of  their  movements  is  similar  to,  but  of  creation  fitted  to  carry  out  the  deter-
independent  of,  that  given  in  chap.  i.  minate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of
Ezekiel  is  not  prostrated  as  at  first,  and  God  were  ready  to  be  put  in  operation,
seems  to  see  the  subordinate  details  of  Vers.  9—12.  These  four  wheels  were
the  vision  more  distinctly.  On  this  so  arranged  as  that  one  should  be  beside
occasion  the  appearances  were  to  be  each  cherub,  *'and  the  appearance  of
closely  observed,  being  of  great  signi-  the  wheels  was  as  the  colour  of  Tar-
ficance  to  the  whole  house  of  Israel.  shish  stone."  Ver.  11.  *'When  they
He  has  to  connect  that  which  he  saw  went  they  went  toward  their  four
in  the  land  of  exile  with  this  in  the  sides" — to  that  one  of  the  four  quarters
temple.  He  has  thus  a  proof  that  he  towards  which  each  wheel  was  severally
is  no  self-constituted  messenger  of  the  placed — "  for  to  the  place  to  which  the
Lord  to  His  people,  that  the  divine  head  turned,  after  it  they  went,"  this
glory  shed  its  lights  and  shadows  over  was  noticeable  that,  though  they  might
the  captives  as  well  as  in  Jerusalem,  that  go  in  any  direction,  yet  they  alv\  ays
a  change  in  the  procedure  of  God  was  moved  forward.  They  did  so  in  accord-
taking  effect,  and  He  would  never  again  ance  with  the  movement^  not  of  a  special
lU


MOMILM'W  (JOMMMNTAkf:  M^EKlEl.


O^A^.  t.


wheel  which  was  chief  over  the  other
three,  but  of  that  one  of  the  wheels
which  happened  to  face  the  direction
in  which  all  were  to  roll,  and  ever  in
harmony  with  the  cherubim.  Ver.  12.
"And  all  their  flesh,  and  their  backs,
and  their  hands,  and  their  wings,  and
their  wheels  were  full  of  eyes  round
about;"  obviously  the  cherubim  are
included  in  this  feature  as  well  as  the
wheels,  and  correspond  to  the  aspect  of
the  living  creatures  as  seen  by  John
(Rev.  iv.  6).  This  interruption  of  the
description  of  the  wheels,  by  a  reference
to  the  clierubim,  may  have  been  made
to  show  how  all  forces  were  gifted  with
certain  similar  capabilities,  and  because
the  cherubim — the  vital  forces — were  the
more  important :  *'to  the  four  of  them
their  wheels  "  is  the  literal  rendering.
If  the  Hebrew  text  is  not  corrupt,  the
phrase  can  only  mean  that  to  cherubim
and  wheels  eyes  were  furnished  all  over.

Ver,  13.  Any  perplexity  found  in  this
verse  may  be  dissipated  by  regarding  it
as  an  address  to  the  wheels  to  get  into
motion.  "  To  the  wheels — to  them
was  cried  in  my  ears,  Whirl,"  or  the
whirling.  There  are  two  Hebrew  words
used  which  are  both  rendered  in  A.  V.
by  wheel.  The  distinction  between  them
can  only  be  maintained  by  some  such
translation  as  is  given  here.  It  is
something  like  the  distinction  between
"  wheels  "  and  **  the  entire  machinery
of  wheel-work,  wheel  within  wheel,  as
visible  to  Ezekiel  and  capable  of  quick,
whirlwind-like  movements."  The  cry
which  the  prophet  heard,  which  was  to
impress  on  him  the  truth  that  the  Lord
was  controlling  all  actions  affecting  Israel,
signified  that  the  wheels  were  to  verify
their  nature  by  revolving.  The  result  of
this  call  to  them  is  noted  in  ver.  15.

Ver.  14.  The  aspect  of  the  cherubim
is  defined  preparatory  to  their  rising  up.
"  And  four  faces  were  to  every  one."
Ezekiel  goes  on  to  mention,  not  each  of
the  four  faces,  but  that  face  of  each
which  confronted  him  :  "  the  face  of
the  first  was  the  face  of  the  cherub."
This  defines  nothing,  though  the  suc-
ceeding clauses  do  define  the  face  of  a
man,  of  a  lion,  of  an  eagle.  Some
commentators    hold   that   the    Hebrew


word  should  be  altered  into  that  foF
"  ox."  This  is  not  to  be  thought  ol
It  would  be  understood  to  be  that  by
reference  to  the  former  vision  (chap.  L
10).  The  definite  article  prefixed  does
not  mean  that  the  face  of  this  cherub
was  the  only  cherubic  face,  but  rather,
as  Fairbairn  suggests,  that  Ezekiel  saw
the  whole  features  of  the  cherub  which
happened  to  be  nearest  to  him  and  had
given  the  fire  to  the  watcher,  while  in
the  cases  of  the  other  three  he  saw  one
face  only.

Vers.  15—17.  The  command  to  w'  iil
is  obeyed  by  the  cherubim  ascending,
and  by  the  revolution  of  the  wheels  in
harmony  with  their  movements.  "  And
when  the  cherubim  went,  the  wheels
went  beside  them  .  .  .  when  these
stood  they  stood,  and  when  these
rose  up  they  rose  up  with  them."
They  move  together  if  they  move  at
all,  and  in  perfect  unison.  All  created
energies,  whether  apparently  quiescent
or  active,  are  imbued  with  the  spirit  of
life.

Vers.  18,  19.  Another  movement  of
deepest  significance  was  observed.  "  And
the  glory  of  the  Lord  went  forth  from
above  the  threshold,"  to  which  it  had
gone  a  short  time  previously  (ver.  4),
"  and  stood  above  the  cherubim ;"  this
return  is  a  stage  towards  the  entire  de-
parture of  the  Lord  from  His  temple,
and  indicates  that  the  people  might
observe  it,  if  they  would  not  close  their
eyes.  Having  received  the  glory,  "the
cherubim  lifted  up  their  wings,  and
rose  up  from  the  earth  before  my  eyes
in  their  going  forth,  and  the  wheels
beside  them,  and  it,"  the  whole  appear-
ance— the  glory,  the  cherubim,  and  the
wheels — "stood  at  the  opening  of  the
gate  of  the  Lord's  house,  the  eastern  ; "
by  this  entrance  the  covenanted  God
would,  in  symbol,  leave  the  temple,  and
by  it,  at  a  future  period,  He  would
come  again  (chap,  xliii.  2—4).

Vers.  20—22.  Now  that  the  impending
departure  is  on  the  verge  of  becoming
an  accomplished  fact,  that  becomes  de-
finite to  the  prophet  which  he  had  stated
already  (ver.  16)  in  a  parenthetical  way.
He  has  a  fuller  revelation  than  before,
and  realises  the  import  of  the  former

115


oaAf.  i.  MOMILETW  00MM£NTARY  :  EZEKIEL,


vision  which  had  been  granted  to  him  between  whom  the  Lord  dwelleth,  and

at  the  Cliebar.      "This  was  the  living  they  expressly  appeared  to  him  in  the

creature  which  I  saw  under  the  God  land  of  exile.    Thus  is  Ezekiel  assured  by

of  Israel,  and  I  knew  that  they  were  the  God  of  Israel  that,  if  He  abandons

cherubim."    We  may  be  hardly  justified  His  chosen  seat,  tie  does  not  abandon

to  say  that  he  had  doubted  whether  they  His  people — that   He   is  with  them  in

were  the  cherubim  which  he  had  seen,  their  captivity  to   show  His  ways  and

but,  at  any  rate,  he  is  certain  now  of  teach    His    paths.       This    assurance    of

the    identity    of    appearances    in    both  likeness    is  reiterated  :    "  they  are  the

visions.    The  Glory  which  has  enthroned  same  faces  which  I  saw  by  the  river

itself   over  the  living  four  and  hovers  Chebar — their  appearances  and  them-

at  the  gate  of  the  temple,  if  not  in  all  selves."       Not    merely    their    external

points  the  same  in  form  as  the  cherubim  aspect,    but   their   substance    had    one

over  the  mercy-seat,  are  the  cherubim  common  resemblance,

EOMILETICS.
God  in  Human  Activity  (ver.  10).

In  this  vision,  the  wings  and  hands,  the  wheels  and  eyes,  are  parts  of  a
mystery  dark  \\ith  excess  of  light.  Just  as  to  one  who  knows  not  the  plan  of
a  battle,  the  noise,  the  clouds  of  smoke,  and  the  movements  of  armies  confuse
and  confound.  Yet  the  clause  which  tells  of  a  wheel  within  a  wheel,  the  activity
of  a  hidden  power,  may  bring  a  lesson  to  our  bosom  and  business.  The  thought
suggested  here  is  this,  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent  thrusts  forth  silently  and  success-
fully His  hand  into  the  being  and  working  of  every  man.  Reason  and  the  king-
dom of  God  will  prevail,  and  not  the  devil  and  those  who  do  devilish  work.  The
wrath  of  man  shall  praise  God.  He,  like  the  engineer  with  hand  on  lever,  holds
the  forces  of  the  world.

By  a  wheel  within  a  wheel  God  governs  and  makes  all  things  work  together  for
good  to  those  who  love  Him  :  all  pleasant  and  all  painful  things  ;  all  that  is  mean,
contemptible,  slanderous,  all  that  vexes  and  annoys.  So  we  may  put  on  gladness,
knowing  that  He  overrules  each  event  of  life,  and  while  we  work  He  worketh  in
us  according  to  His  good  pleasure.

I  The  Scriptures  affirm  this  truth.  They  are  as  full  of  the  evidences  of  it  as
the  daily  press  is  full  of  the  records  of  man's  working  in  individual  and  national
life.  Take  the  wings  of  the  morning  and  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the
earth,  God  is  there  ;  or  descend  into  hell,  and  He  is  there.  The  devil  is  wheeled
about  by  Him  there.

The  broad  wheel  of  an  evil  destiny  seemed  once  to  crush  Joseph,  but  he
devoutly  and  magnanimously  said  to  his  brothers,  "  Ye  thought  evil,  Gk)d  meant
it  for  good."  Tliere  was  also  a  wheel  at  work  in  the  life  of  Jacob,  to  whom  in  a
dark  hour  celestial  comfort  came — angels  on  the  ladder  ;  in  the  peril  of  Daniel  in
the  den,  whose  heroic  fidelity  led  a  pagan  king  to  say,  "  There  is  no  God  like  the
God  of  Daniel ; "  in  the  case  of  David  who,  in  his  loss  of  Absalom,  found  it  good
to  be  afflicted  ;  in  the  alarm  of  the  servant  at  Dothan,  and  in  the  weeping  of  Peter.
Eyes  see  clearer  washed  with  tears.  Paul  could  glory  in  his  infirmities,  for  he  saw
even  in  them  that  the  power  of  Christ  was  made  glorious.  In  all  the  pains  and
penalties,  the  joys  and  griefs,  the  thoughts,  and  imaginations  of  life,  God  is  busy,
out  of  evil  still  educing  good.

IL  History  proves  this.  Never  did  men  meet  behind  closed  doors  as  in
Masonic  secrecy  without  God  seeing  them.  Every  plot  and  conspiracy  is  known
to  Him.  The  Gunpowder  Plot,  the  Spanish  Armada,  the  American  Rebellion,
were  carefully  planned,  but  God  overthrew  them  all.  There  was  a  wheel  within  a
wheel.  The  Jews  were  persecuted  and  peeled,  they  were  ever  an  easy  prey  to  the
116


BOMILETIC  COMMENTAttY .-  E2,EKlUh,  oMap.  x.


spoiler,  nowthey  are  the  bankers  Jind  the  traders  of  tlie  world,  and  hold  seats  of  power
among  the  nations.  The  Puritans  were  persecuted,  and  you  know  the  result.  The
thing  you  intend  to  accomplish  carries  with  it  a  score  of  things  you  did  not  intend
to  do.  Luther  and  Columbus  accomplished  more  than  ever  they  dreamed  of  doing,
because  God  was  in  their  movements.  A  poor  man  said  to  me,  *' Fve  failed,  I
never  was  in  such  a  stninge,  unique  position."  Ah  !  what  is  failure?  Was  ever
there  such  a  failure,  appaiently,  as  that  which  Christ  made  1  All  men  forsook
Him  and  fled.  What  is  failure  1  I  think  of  God's  slaughtered  saints  "on  Alpine
summits  cold;"  of  the  thousands  who  have  perished  in  the  Inquisition  ;  of  Jonaii
hurled  into  the  sea  to  save  the  ship  ;  of  many  who  fall  in  battle,  while  victory
crowns  the  survivors,  and  I  ask  what  is  failure  %  God's  word  says  that,  "though
hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished."  Even  *'  the  stars  in  their
courses  fought  against  Sisera."     Yes —

IIL  The  laws  of  nature  illustrate  this.  Say  to  the  righteous  it  shall  be  well
with  them,  and  to  the  wicked  tliat  the  wheel  of  God  is  working  against  them.  The
thunderstorm  is  His  scavenger,  driving  off  ujalaria  and  noxious  vapour.  The
biting  frost,  that  bent  low  my  flowers,  drove  the  plague  from  one  of  our  cities.  The
earthquake  is  a  safety-valve  by  which  imprisoned  gases  are  set  free.  Weeds,  thistles,
insects  are  made  to  work  out  some  good.     As  Shakespeare  says-^

"  There  is  some  sort  of  goodness  in  things  evil.
Would  men  observingly  distil  it  out."

Remark :

1.  We  cannot  get  along  without  God.  If  we  choose  to  rebel  against  His  working.
He  will  curse  and  overthrow  us.  If  we  lead  selfish,  prayerless,  cruel  lives,  He  will
thwart  and  destroy.  God  has  punished  nations  who  forgot  Him.  Go  to  their
graves  to-day.  0  Judea,  whose  poets,  prophets,  and  priests  were  the  admiration  of
thy  nation,  why  art  thou  peeled  and  conquered  ?  *'  We  rejected  the  Holy  One  and
would  not  obey  Him."  O  fair  Greece,  the  home  of  orators  and  philosophers  !  and
thou,  O  stately  Rome  on  thy  seven  hills  !  why  is  Ichabod  written  on  thy  temples,
and  thy  palaces  in  dust,  with  men  digging  among  thy  ruins  ?  "  We  forgot  justice,
oppressed  the  poor,  and  listened  not  to  the  truth."  It  may  be  said  to  this  land  in
time  to  come,  0  great  country,  why  hast  thou  fallen  ?  **  We  hasted  to  be  rich
and  turned  away  from  God,  our  lips  being  filled  with  lying  and  our  lives  with
injustice."  Men  and  nations  in  prosperity  often  forget  God,  and,  proud  of  their
might,  go  forth  as  Samson  did  to  shake  himself  when  **  he  wist  not  that  the  Lord
had  departed  from  him."  We  live  and  move  in  God,  and  it  is  true  that  He  lives
and  moves  in  us.     Our  prayer  should  be,  "  Guide  me,  0  Thou  great  Jehovah  !  **

2.  Nothing  happens  which  does  not  help  him  who  loves  God.  Losses,  crosses,
abuse,  injury,  lead  to  the  growth  of  patience,  watchfulness,  and  the  silent  bearing
of  sorrow.  Burn  your  own  smoke  and  go  on.  It  is  often  darkest  before  dawn.
Our  trials  help  to  build  up  character.

3.  The  love  of  God  is  emphasised  by  the  truth  before  us.  All  the  verses  of  the
Bible  end  here — in  the  love  of  God.  He  reigns — not  sin,  not  sorrow,  not  death.
He  wipes  away  every  tear.  He  destroys  the  last  enemy.  His  Hand  guides  the
course  of  nations.  Not  Victoria,  not  Kaiser  William,  not  the  president  of  a  republic
is  at  the  helm.  God  is  Governor  among  the  people.  Trust  in  Him.  Bejoice  in
Him.     He  will  lead  us,  and  will  lead  the  world  even  to  the  end. — OcUlaher,

The  Perfect  Order  (ver.  13).

We  see  a  subordination  of  causes,  one  to  another,  and  all  under  one  Supreme.

L  The  supreme  cause.  He  has  the  appearance  as  of  a  man.  He  speaks  as
with  man's  voice.  There  is  a  prefiguration  of  the  incarnation,  of  the  Mediator
ruling  His  providential  kingdom.     Infinite  power  and  wisdom  are  His.     If  He

117


dHAt.  X.  BOMtLETiC  COMMENTARY.  EZERlJ^L.


will  pull  down,  who  can  hold  up  ?  If  He  will  suspend  His  action,  who  can  impel
the  curbed  forces  to  move  1  His  ways  are  high  above,  out  of  our  sight.  We  may
see  the  hand  outside,  we  cannot  see  the  living  Spirit  within.  We  are  in  a  world
of  changes,  in  which  nothing  happens  by  chance,  but  each  change  is  subordinated
to  the  will  of  Christ.

IL  The  subordinate  causes.  Wheels  are  all  things  that  are  moved.  They
are  absolutely  acted  on  by  the  word  of  the  Lord.  He  alone  can  make  them  exe-
cute the  objects  for  which  they  are  created,  and  at  the  seasons  which  He  knows  to
be  most  fitted  for  the  good  and  the  true  amongst  men.  They  rise  up  to  the
highest,  they  descend  to  the  inferior  influences  which  operate  in  human  societies.
They  go  straight  on  to  the  points  to  which  they  are  directed,  and  turn  not  from  the
execution  of  their  commission.

He  reigns  over  all  things  and  persons.  His  voice  fixes  the  destinies  of  earth.
He  will  guide  us  by  His  counsel.  So  all  impatience  with  the  dealings  of  God  is
groundless  ;  all  murnuiring  is  sinful,  and  we  should  learn  to  listen  to  His  voice,  to
be  diligent  and  persevering  in  doing  His  work,  to  long  that  one  duty  or  trial  should
fit  us  for  the  next  duty  or  trial. — M,

Feet  and  Wings.

"  When  they  stood,  these  stood  ;  and  when  they  were  lifted  up,  these  lifted
up  themselves  also  "  (x.  17).     [Refer  to  chap.  i.  24.]

Flying  creatures  have  wings  for  the  air  and  feet  for  the  ground.  This  touch
of  nature  is  put  on  God's  cherubim.  The  prophet  intends  no  special  religious
lesson  here,  but  the  fact  he  cites  may  be  used  to  convey  such.

L  The  subject  of  Christian  experience,  what  it  is  and  how  to  be  main-
tained. We  have  faculties  of  locomotion,  feeding,  sense,  perception,  <fec.,  by
which  we  act  our  parts  on  foot  as  it  were.  We  have  attributes  of  faith-perception,
love-appropriation,  spiritual  imagination,  in  which  we  become  aerial  creatures,
resting  suspensively  in  things  above  the  world.  This  uplifting  produces  the  tran-
scendent mystery  of  experience  in  Christian  conversion.  We  rise  by  trust  in  God —
admitting  the  full  revelation  of  His  truth  and  friendship.  When  we  rest  ourselves,
our  life  and  life-character  on  God,  we  prove  Him,  and  have  the  sense  of  Him
revealed  to  our  immediate  knowledge.  This  faith  is  not  in  something  about  God.
It  is  the  man's  new,  self-committing  act,  by  which  he  puts  himself  out  on  trust
and  begins  to  live  on  God.  It  is  a  sublime  act  of  migration  upward  into  the  range
of  spirit,  and  all  things  are  new.

Can  the  soul  thus  lifted  stay  in  that  serene  element  ?  It  has  gravitations  which
pull  it  all  the  while  downward,  and  settle  it  on  its  feet,  as  the  flying  creatures  fold
their  wings  when  they  settle.  Let  us  trace  some  of  the  instances  and  ways  in
which  it  ceases  to  live  by  faith.

When  a  man  of  enterprise  thinks  of  independence,  how  easily,  how  insensibly
he  ceases  to  hang  on  Providence  as  he  did.  His  prayers  lose  their  fervour.  God
is  far  less  dear  and  less  consciously  present ;  and  how  long  will  he  have  the  con-
sciousness of  His  presence  at  all  1

When  there  is  overdoing  the  search  after  evidences  of  faith.  What  is  the
,  evidence  of  faith  but  faith  itself,  as  we  get  evidence  of  warmth  by  heat  which  we
cannot  find  through  any  inspection  %  And  if  evidence  to  a  man  is  made  up,  he  has
made  good  his  proofs.     He  is  down  on  his  feet.

When  the  disciple  who  is  on  the  ground  thinks  to  recover  himself  by  his  will
instead  of  going  back  to  faith.  God  is  forgotten,  and  the  harder  throes  he  makes
the  deeper  he  sinks.

When  disciples  subside  into  a  mere  routine  practice,  or  observance  of  times.
It  is  n(i  longer  a  service  of  impulse  and  liberty.  They  hope  there  may  be  some
118


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZBKlBL,  cAap.  JL


good  in  it,  only  of  a  duller  sort  than  it  should  be.  How  much  better  if  their
faith  had  but  a  one- wing  power  ;  it  would  lift  them  a  few  feet  upward  now
and  then.

When  a  disciple  shortens  the  distance  between  himself  and  the  world  that  he
may  shorten  the  distance  between  the  world  and  himself.  There  is  the  possibility
of  an  over-austere  practice  ;  but  the  study  of  conformities  is  one  in  which  none  but
a  man  of  inflexible  tenacity  should  ever  dare  to  indulge,  and  only  he  when  he  is
high  enough  lifted  by  his  faith  in  God  to  sufi"er  no  bent  downward.  Cultivating
the  conformities  is  a  plausible  way  of  being  mixed  in  them.  Whoever  undertakes  to
grade  and  gauge  a  ground-surface  road  will  not  be  ascending  into  faith  at  all.

When  a  disciple  thinks  to  fortify  faith  by  practised  investigation  and  deeper
studies  in  matters  of  opinion.  Benefits  may  thus  be  gained ;  but  he  is  likely  to  seek
his  light  in  questions  of  the  understanding  and  not  by  faith  ;  then  he  is  down  upon
the  levels  of  mere  nature.  We  think  we  touch  bottom.  We  are  going  to  be
floated  no  more.  But  our  solidity  turns  out  to  be  a  living  on  deductions,  not  on
the  uplifting  grace  of  God's  inspirations.  We  thus  settle  out  of  grace  into  formu-
lations of  grace,  when,  of  course,  our  wings  are  down.

Our  conclusion  is,  that  the  moment  any  disciple  touches  ground  with  but  the
tip  of  his  foot,  and  begins  to  rest  on  earthly  props,  a  mortal  weakness  takes  him,
and  he  goes  down.  Only  a  calm  and  loving  return  to  his  trust  will  recover  him,
and  God  is  faithful  enough  to  be  trusted  at  all  times.  Let  there  be  this  rest  by
faith,  and  he  will  cany  himself  more  steadily  in  studies,  toils,  or  engagements.
Sometimes  obscurations  n)ay  occur,  but  he  has  only  to  believe  the  more  strongly
and  wait  till  they  be  cleared.

II.  Many  persons  miss  ever  going  above  a  service  on  foot,  by  not  conceiv-
ing at  all  the  more  ethereal  range  of  experience,  into  which  true  faith  would  lift
them.  Sometimes  they  become  reformers  or  philanthropists.  They  mean  business
m  their  religion,  caring  little  for  the  fervours  that  are  not  fervours  of  work.  The
combining  and  rolling  up  of  great  masses  of  opinion  are  the  means  by  which  they
expect  to  carry  their  projects.  Censure  and  storm  and  fiery  denunciation  are  close
at  hand.  They,  many  times,  do  not  conceive  that  they  are  disciples  because  of
their  repentances,  or  their  prayers,  or  sensing  of  God  by  their  faith,  or  any  other
grace  that  separates  them  from  the  world.  They  have  much  to  say  of  love,  but
they  visibly  hate  more  strongly  than  they  love.  They  never  go  above  to  descend
upon  the  reform  by  inspirations  there  kindled ;  they  keep  on  their  feet,  and  war
with  the  evils  on  the  same  level  with  them.

Sometimes  they  attempt  self-culture  in  the  name  of  religion.  They  could
mend  defects,  chasten  faults,  put  themselves  in  the  charities  they  have  learned
from  Christ,  perhaps,  to  admire ;  but  the  work  is  a  far  more  hopeless  one  than  they
imagine,  if  there  is  no  uplifting  help  from  gracious  inspirations.  Besides,  the  work
keeps  to  a  continual  self-contemplation  which  is  selfish.  Old  faults  will  come  back,
and  they  will  have  to  fight  all  over  again.  Vexed,  soured,  discouraged,  the  whole
undertaking  may  be  given  up.  Oh,  if  they  would  go  up  to  Christ,  or  to  God  in  a
true  faith-culture,  faults  would  fall  off",  as  blasted  flowers  from  a  tree,  by  the  life-
principle  therein.  No  man  finishes  a  character  who  does  not  go  above  himself,
and  take  the  culture  of  God's  own  Spirit.

Sometimes  they  settle  down  to  ritualism.  We  all  begin,  almost  unwittingly,
to  have  a  religion  that  is  manipulated  by  our  senses  and  sensuous  tastes.  We  are
caught  by  the  forms.  All  the  better  that  they  are  so  nearly  level  with  our  natural
faculties,  and  just  as  easy  to  be  used  without  faith  as  with  !  How  convenient  to
have  a  religion  that  lets  the  faiths  and  the  fervours  take  care  of  themselves  1
Saying  prayers,  too — how  much  easier  than  to  pray  and  find  how  to  be  heard.
Thus  a  sufficient  religion  is  got  below ;  but  the  sad  thing  is,  t{iat  instead  of  giving
the  disciple  free  wing,  it  keeps  him  down ;  so  that  if  he  becomes  more  earnest  in
it,  it  is  turned  into  a  superstition.

119


OBAP.  It  tiOMlLETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKJEL,


Sometimes  tliey  suppose  tliey  are  religious  because  of  a  certain  patronage  they
give  to  the  Cliurch  and  the  word.  Not  being  in  the  gift  of  spiritual  discernment,
their  tastes  will  be  the  better;  and  as  there  are  always  a  great  many  reasons  why
a  thing  should  not  be  done  to  any  single  reason  why  it  should,  they  assume  te
be  specially  qualified  critics.  They  contribute  these  critical  powers,  while  others,
less  gifted,  may  contribute  their  prayers !  Such  negatives  do  not  belong  to  the
range  of  the  Spirit,  but  to  the  nether  world  of  fashion,  or  opinion,  or  custom.
The  critics  have  feet  but  no  wings.  If  they  could  give  themselves  over  in  trust
to  the  Saviour,  instead  of  giving  their  opinions  and  tastes,  their  contributions
would  be  of  worthier  significance.

Sometimes  they  distrust  experiences  in  religion,  divine  monitions,  answers  to
prayer,  calls  to  particular  duties  and  works.  They  like  the  level  of  nature.  All
supernatural  upliftings  and  fervours  are  fantasies  that  had  best  be  avoided.  Inspira-
tions are  nothing ;  judgments  everything.  What  shall  we  say  of  that  story  which
the  Apostle  Paul  tells  the  Corinthians  ]  It  was  his  way  to  be  going  up  into  high
regions,  so  that  he  was  not  sure,  at  times,  whether  he  had  a  thing  by  revelation
or  not.  People  called  him  "  mad,"  because  he  did  not  stay  on  foot,  in  their  level
of  sanity.  But  was  there  ever  a  soul  more  massive  and  sublimely  steady  in  its
equilibrium  than  his?

What  is  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter?  That  the  Christian  idea  of
religion  is  not  any  mere  playing  out  of  nature  as  its  own  level ;  but  is  the  lifting
up  of  the  man  above  himself  in  a  transformation  that  makes  him  new.  In  so  far
as  he  is  a  Christian,  he  becomes  the  citizen  of  another  kingdom.  Whatever  dis-
respect he  may  encounter,  he  will  have  evidences  in  himself  that  ask  no  certifica-
tion. He  will  have  learned  that  the  only  safe  way  of  living  is  the  highest.  Here
his  internal  jars  and  discords  are  laid  and  a  glorious  serenity  is  established.  The
earth  is  not  his  mother ;  if  he  descends  to  the  ground  his  strength  vanishes.

If  we  are  to  make  an  ascent  into  this  higher  plane  of  experience,  the  ties  which
hold  our  feet  must  be  effectually  cut  by  habitual  self-renunciations.  Selfishness
and  self-induJgence  are  no  more  for  us.  We  must  lift  up  everything  we  do  in
the  world  and  hope  from  it,  into  that  pure  life  of  sacrifice  and  trust  in  which  we
abide  with  the  Master.  We  must  be  as  Noah  when  the  Lord  shut  him  in  the
ark,  and  be  severed  from  every  natural  trust.  Our  expectation  must  be  rested
on  God,  not  on  pillars  of  any  kind  below — ^pillars  are  not  wanted  under  wings. —
Bushnelly  abridged.

(4.)  The  Calamity  Threatened  to  Jerusalem  (Chap.  xi.  1-13).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES. —The  move-  power  at  the  gate  of  the  temple-court,

ments  of  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  are  inter-  under  the  Glory,  "and,  behold,  in  the

mitted  for  a  time.    During  that  interval  opening  of  the  gate  twenty-five  men."

a  new  condition  is  entered  into  by  Eze-  This    number    makes    us   think   of   the

kieL     Hitherto,  notwithstanding  the  un-  twenty-five  men  mentioned  in  chap,  viii

folding  of  so  many  abominations  before  16;  but   we  cannot  suppose  them,  as

his  eyes,  and  by  which  his  heart  must  some  do,  to  be  the  same.     Tliey  were

have    been   greatly   distressed,   his   lips  worshipping    the    sun,   and  we    should

have  been  sealed  in  regard  to  any  de-  conclude  that   they   were  slain   by  the

uunciation   of  them.     Now,   when    the  watchers  with   the   weapon  of  destruc-

cherubic    throne    is    hovering   over   the  tion.      Besides,    the    standing-place    of

east  gate,  he  is  led  to  that  spot  and  is  the  twenty-five  of  chap.  viii.  indicated

empowered   to    utter    a    severe    rebuke  that    they   were    priests.     That   is    not

against  the  representatives  of  Jerusalem,  indicated   here,   and   we  are  rather  led

and   also   to    declare    promises    to    the  to    believe,    from    the    position    of    the

elders  who  represented  the  exiled.  present    twenty-five,    and    from    their

Ver.  1.  Ezekiel  is  placed  by  the  spirit-  characterisation  (ver.  3),  that  they  re-
120


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEL.


CHAP.  XI.


present  civil  authorities  who  were  con-
Bulting  with  one  another  on  matters
of  state ;  **  and  I  saw  in  their  midst
Jaazaniah  the  son  of  Azur,"  therefore
not  the  elders  of  Israel  he  had  previously
seen  (chap.  viii.  11),  "andPelatiah  the
son  of  Benaiah,  princes  of  the  people."
It  is  most  likely  that  the  two  princes
named  were  living  in  Jerusalem  at  that
time,  and  noted  as  being  leaders  among
t?he  dominant  party.  Or  they  may  i*ave
been  singled  out  in  order  to  point  to  the
inconsistency  between  their  names  and
the  course  they  advocated.  The  Lord
who  hears  (Jaazaniah)  and  who  helps
(Azur) :  the  Lord  who  delivers  (Pela-
tiah)  and  builds  up  (Benaiah) ;  and  they
were  departing  from  the  Lord  !

Vers.  2, 3.  "  These  are  the  men  that
devise  mischief  and  give  evil  counsel
in  this  city ; "  they  set  up  an  opposition
to  God's  messages,  and  provoke  His
wrath.  The  gist  of  their  o{)position  is
stated;  but  the  Hebrew  construction  does
not  favour  the  translation  of  the  A.  V.
The  curtness  of  the  phraseology  renders
the  meaning  obscure.  "Who  say,  Not
in  nearness  [is]  the  building  of  houses,
it  [is]  the  caldron  and  we  [are]  the
flesh."  Any  interpretation  must  take
account  of  this  as  the  evil  counsel,  and
tkat  it  was  held  to  be  audaciously
iniquitous.  It  obviously  refers  to  some
circumstances  of  that  period,  and  we
may  find  them  indicated  in  that  pro-
phecy of  Jeremiah  in  which  he  instructed
the  captive  Jews  to  build  houses,  (kc.
(chap.  xxix.  5).  These  princes  scoffed
at  that  message  thus,  "  Those  who  are
far  off,  in  a  land  of  exile,  may  take,  if
they  please,  the  prophet's  advice  and
buid  houses  for  themselves  there.  That
does  not  concern  us  here — it  is  too
remote  a  district  from  ours.  Let  Jeru-
salem be  a  pot,  which  Jeremiah  (chap.
i.  13)  declares  is  to  smoke  and  boil  by
the  fury  of  a  hostile  invasion  from  the
north,  then  we  shall  be  the  flesh  within
it ;  its  strong  fortifications  and  sure
defences  shall  preserve  us  against  any
flame  of  war  that  may  kindle  jiround
us.  We  have  no  occasion  to  be  terrified
or  succumb  to  warnings."  So  they  re-
jected the  ways  of  the  Lord  and  trusted
ti>  their  own  devices  j  and  would  such  a


defiant  spirit,  on  the  part  of  those  who
were  called  to  honour  Him,  be  met  by
the  Lord  1

Ver.  5.  The  impelling  might  of  the
Spirit  moves  Ezekiel  to  an  utterance,
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  So  ye  say,  0
house  of  Israel,  and  what  riseth  up  in
your  spirit,  I  know  it."  Not  only  is
He  cognisant  of  their  overt  won^s  and
several  plottings,  but  also  of  the  real
aims  and  wishes  which  underlie  their
proceedings,  and  holds  them  responsible
(ver.  6)  for  the  consequences  resulting
therefrom.

Ver.  7.  **  Therefore  thus  saith  the
Lord  Jehovah,  Your  slain,  whom  ye
have  placed  in  the  midst  of  it,  they
are  the  flesh  and  it  is  the  caldron."
Tour  slain  are  those  who  had  been
cut  down  through  the  outrages  of  the
princes  themselves  (see  chap,  xxiv.),  and
also  those  who  perished  because  of  the
wicked  counsels  whose  effect  had  been
to  bring  the  Chaldean  army  against
Jerusalem.  **  Ezekiel  gives  them  back
their  own  words,  as  containing  an  un-
doubted truth,  but  in  a  different  sense
from  that  in  which  they  had  used  them."
There  will  be  flesh  protected  in  the
caldron  from  the  fiire,  but  it  will  repre-
sent those  who  are  slain.  A  grim  satire  :
The  dead  are  the  safe  !  ''And  one
shall  bring  you  forth  from  its  midst ; "
the  princes  and  their  abettors  should
not  be  defended  in  the  city.  They
should  be  taken  out  of  it  to  answer  for
their  crimes.

Ver.  9.  *'A  sword  ye  have  feared,
and  a  sword  will  I  make  to  come
upon  you,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah."
They  were  in  apprehension  of  the
war  which  had  been  pressed  on  by
the  king  of  Babylon,  and,  contrary  to
the  urgent  representations  of  Jeremiah,
made  a  coalition  with  Egypt  ;  yet,  not-
withstanding their  schemings,  "  th©
hand  of  strangers,"  the  Chaldean
forces,  would  perpetrate  violent  deeds
under  the  impact  of  divine  impulses.

Vers.  11,  12.  The  supposed  security
would  be  invaded  :  the  city  would  not
be  a  caldron  for  them ;  taken  away  from
it,  "on  the  frontier  of  Israel  will  I
judge  you;"  they  would  be  ca[)tives,
and  taken  to  the  extremity  of  their  laud

MX


OHAP.  XI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


to  undergo  punishment.  Jeremiah  nar-
rates (chap,  xxxix.  4,  5)  how  this  tbreat
was  fulfilled  in  the  bloody  scenes  at
Ribla  in  Hamath  on  the  northern
border  of  Israel,  and  where,  as  an
Assyrian  tablet  in  the  British  Museum
tells,  the  headquarters  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar were  on  this  expedition.  Like
all  other  tribulations,  this  had  for  its
ulterior  end  to  work  the  conviction  that
the  Lord  was  their  only  real  king,  "in
whose  statutes  ye  walked  not,  and
whose  judgments  ye  did  not ;  but  ye
did  according  to  the  judgments  of  the
nations  round  about  you : "  a  diifer-
ence  from  what  was  stated  in  chap.  v.
7,  as  to  surrounding  nations ;  but  evi-
dently referring  here  to  such  corrupt
practices  of  their  neighbours  as  they
copied.  The  materials,  out  of  which
proceeded  the  destruction  of  the  then
existing  Jewish  government,  are  thus  set
forth,  and,  that  destruction  being  so
distinctly  predicted,  the  people  should
learn  that  it  was  with  the  most  perfect
reason  that  God  claimed  for  Himself
the  honour  of  supreme  ruler.  "  It  is
lamentable  if  we  must  gain  the  know-


ledge of  God  by  our  own  destruction,—
if  He,  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and
are,  is  first  recognised  by  the  strokes
which  break  our  own  head  "  {Heng.)

Ver.  13.  A  portentous  event  im-
presses the  prophetic  words.  '*  And
it  came  to  pass  that  as  I  was  pro-
phesying Pelatiah,  the  son  of  Benaiah,
died."  Though  this  incident  is  still
part  of  Ezekiel's  ecstasy,  it  is  probable
that  one  of  the  chief  advisers  of  Jeru-
sjilein  died  about  the  time  in  some  such
awfully  sudden  manner  and  when  sur-
rounded by  his  fellows  in  the  temple.
The  effect  on  the  sensitive  Seer  is  great,
and  suggests  bitter  and  painful  thoughts
as  to  the  slaughter  of  his  people  as  hap-
pened previously  (chap.  ix.  8) :  "  and
I  fell  on  my  face,  and  cried  with  a
loud  voice,  and  said.  Ah  Lord  Je^
hovah,  dost  Thou  make  an  utter  end
of  the  remnant  of  Israel  ? "  He  speaks
as  if  he  had  forgotten  all  grounds  of
hope,  and  as  if  the  people  in  the  capital
were  the  real  representatives  of  Israel
in  whose  mournful  fate  all  Israel  would
be  overwhelmed  and  lost.  He  will  learu
that  it  is  otherwise.


\


ffOMILETICS,


Eefuges  of  Lies  broken  up.

Under  the  boastings  of  its  leading  men  the  people  of  Jerusalem  were  living  in
fancied  security.  They  had  heard  from  Jeremiah  the  prophet  announcements  of
coming  woes  ;  but  they  put  far  from  themselves  the  evil  day,  and  buoyed  them-
selves up  with  the  ex[)ectation  that,  even  if  it  did  come,  they  would  escape  its
troubles.  Theirs  is  a  common  state  of  mind  in  respect  to  the  truths  of  God  which
are  wished  not  to  be  true,  and  we  need  to  stand  in  His  light  that  we  may  be
disabused  of  our  hurtful  errors.  He  aims  to  help  us  thereto  by  a  procedure  such
as  is  disclosed  in  this  paragra[)h.     He  shows  that  self-constituted  refuges —  .

L  Are  based  on  miscalculations.  Men  calculate  that  there  is  no  necessity
immediately  to  renounce  past  courses  :  the  judge  is  not  standing  before  the  door ;
the  call  to  watch  for  the  Master's  coming  can  be  trifled  with  for  a  while.  Thus
many  vaguely  feel,  if  they  do  not  positively  present  excuses  as  to  the  incidence  of
a  season  of  searching  and  decisive  trial.  They  may  walk  on  in  darkness  till  that
day  overtakes  them  as  a  thief.  For,  as  all  events  are  uncertain,  to  risk  the  present
space  given  for  repentance  is,  it  may  be,  to  risk  the  building  of  a  house  without
means  to  finish  it,  the  being  overwhelmed  by  ruin  from  which  there  will  be  no
opportunity  to  escape.     We  can  use  "  now  "  but  not  "  then  "  to  flee.

II.  They  are  abortive  before  G-od.  He  knows  all  that  comes  into  the  heart,
the  mouth,  the  hands,  and  so  is  able  to  test  the  real  character  of  each.  The  stand
made  by  men  in  self-defence  is  untenaV)le.  Fancies  will  not  shut  out  afflictions,
Bprin»  up  when  they  may.  No  causes,  no  secret  purposes  can  be  so  encrusted
that  they  will  elude  tiie  penetration  of  the  eyes  that  are  as  a  flame  of  tire.  To
122


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  XL


cherish  hopes,  apart  from  Christ,  that  we  sliall  be  preserved  from  future  evils,  is
to  cherish  hopes  on  a  quicksand  over  wliicli  the  tid.il  wave  is  beginning  to  rise.
Sins  make  culprits,  and  the  righteous  Lord  will  not  let  one  elude  His  sentence,
whatever  the  rank,  the  numbers,  the  religious  privileges  be.  Search  lest  thy
refuge  lie  open  to  the  flood  of  divine  condemnation.

in.  They  are  open  to  dislocations.  One  is  from  the  word  of  the  Lord,  It
came  by  prophets.  It  has  come,  in  these  last  days,  by  a  Son.  We  read,  we  hear
what  He  hath  spoken,  and  learn  that  the  entire  bearing  of  that  word  of  the  living
God  is  to  convict  of  sin  and  to  bring  to  immediate  faitli  in  the  Saviour  from  sin.
Again  and  again  were  men  urged  to  *'  Hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord  ;"  again  and
again  are  we  urged  now,  "  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit
saith  unto  the  churches."

Another  is  from  the  action  of  human  influences.  The  sword,  captivity,  spoiling
of  goods  affected  the  contemporaries  of  Ezekiel :  an  ailment,  an  emigration,  a
pecuniary  loss  operate  upon  us.  We  shall  miss  the  true  reasons  for  such  shakings
of  our  usual  afi'airs,  if  we  do  not  trace  in  them  the  will  of  the  righteous  and  loving
Lord,  who  would  show  to  us  that  we  have  been  trusting  in  that  which  is  of  the
flesh,  who  would  draw  us  to  plant  our  feet  upon  the  Rock  of  ages.  **  I  will
search  Jerusalem  with  lamps,  and  punish  the  men  that  are  settled  on  their  lees  :
that  say  in  their  hearts,  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  He  do  evil  "
(Zeph.  i.  12).

Thus  are  records  made  that  the  Lord  sets  His  face  against  our  doings  that  are
not  good,  and  that,  whether  they  are  to  be  classed  under  unfaithfulness  to  Him  or
unbrotherliness  to  men,  He  will  expose  them  to  utter  collapse.  No  schemes,  no
confidences  will  be  capable  of  resisting  Him.  "The  Lord  is  known  by  the  judg-
ment that  He  executeth."

Who  will  accept  the  decisions  of  the  Holy  One  as  to  their  hopes  of  safety  in
coming  storms'?  Who  will  forsake  all  and  follow  Christ?  **  If  you  would  not  be
broken  by  His  judgment,  do  not  break  His  statutes  j  if  you  would  secure  your
lives,  walk  in  His  laws."

A  Vision  of  Sudden  Death  (ver.  13).

Painful  associations  were  linked  in  with  the  sudden  end  of  PelatiaVs  counsel
and  boastings.  While  the  consensus  of  human  testimony  proves  that  such  an
immediate  cessation  of  the  activities  of  life  is  not  considered  as  always  stamped
with  the  brand  of  punishment,  it  is  always  regarded  as  more  or  less  of  a  calamity.
Even  they  who  know  that  the  hand  of  the  Good  Shepherd  is  leading  them  into
the  unseen  world,  yet  shrink  from  this  manner  of  exit  from  the  present  world.
The  feeling  is  to  be  accounted  for  because  of —

L  The  general  mysteriousness.  There  are  no  precise  premonitions,  no
apparently  gradual  preparations.  For  though  such  a  death  must  have  been  pre-
ceded by  causes  adequate  to  produce  it,  those  causes,  whether  physical  or  mental,
have  not  been  credited  with  the  deadly  force  which  they  exert.  The  death  appears
to  be  the  bursting  forth  of  a  new  and  poignant  energy,  and  our  hearts  are  awed
by  the  sad  and  startling  memento  which  marks  its  route.  Besides,  the  selection
is  utterly  incomprehensible.  Two  men  are  given  equal  prominence  in  the  course
taken  by  Jerusalem,  yet  one  expires  in  a  moment,  and  the  other  still  breathes  the
vital  air.  One  of  a  family  goes  in  an  instant  down  to  the  grave,  but  all  the  other
members  go  more  or  less  slowly.  We  may  be  surprised  at  the  falling  of  the  lot,
but  we  have  no  light  as  to  its  movements.  Only  this  can  we  be  sure  of,  that  He
who  gave  life  takes  it  away  in  a  method  that  is  at  once  wise  and  good.  "  Blessed
be  the  name  of  the  Lord  ! "

n.  The  utter  helplessness.  N"o  nursing,  no  skill  can  be  made  the  least  use
of.     We  may  cry  for  a  pai  ting  word,  a  pressure,  a  look ;  but  we  cry  with  no

123


CBAP.  XL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


result.  We  see  the  living  now,  in  a  moment  we  see  they  are  not,  and  we  can  do
nothing  for  them,  we  can  only  look.  They  pass  altogether  beyond  our  aid.  They
seem  still  beside  us,  but  they  have  gone — where  1

III.  An  indescribable  contiguity  of  solemn  spiritual  conditions.  Pelatiah
is  hearing  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Ezekiel,  and  in  the  very  sound  thereof  hears
the  command  of  the  King  of  terrors.  Mercy  and  judgment  stand  hand  in  hand.
The  hearer  becomes  at  once  a  dweller  in  "  the  silent  land."  What  will  be  learned
there  1  The  judgment  of  the  All  Holy,  unaflfected  by  any  ignorance,  misconcep-
tion, shrinking  !  What  if  he  be  imjienitent  1  What  if  his  tongue  be  still  vibrating
with  words  in  which  he  gave  counsel  against  good  1  What  if  he  has  not  cleansed
his  hands  from  the  filth  of  dishonest  gain  or  the  blood  of  those  he  has  injured  1
He  is  struck  powerless.  He  is  in  face  of  iniquity  at  this  step,  he  is  confronted
with  its  penalty  at  the  next.

IV.  A  shock  to  natural  feelings.  Fear  for  oneself  and  pity  for  another
cannot  be  restrained.  Surprise  and  awe  might  have  affected  Pelatiah's  fellow-
counsellors  for  a  time.  The  effect  was  transient.  They  persisted  in  their  wicked
devices  in  the  city ;  they  acted  in  fatal  correspondence  thereto.  Their  seasonable
impressions,  like  the  morning  cloud  and  early  dew,  soon  vanished  away.  On  the
other  hand  men,  with  the  love  to  God  and  man  which  stirred  Ezekiel,  pray  that
such  a  sudden  stroke  may  not  cut  down  those  who  are  still  in  their  trespasses ;
they  ask  for  sparing  mercy  that  such  persons  may  be  moved  to  work  the  works  of
God  before  the  night  cometh  in  which  no  man  can  work.  How  vain  is  prayer
when  the  sinners  prayed  for  will  go  on  in  evil  ways  !  "  How  sad  it  is  that  the
godly  should  be  concerned  for  the  coming  doom  of  transgressors,  and  yet  the
transgressors  themselves  remain  unmoved.  Let  believers  imitate  Ezekiel,  and
when  judgments  descend  on  some,  '  lift  up  their  prayer  for  the  remnant  that  is
Mt'"  {Fausset),

Wert  thou  this  moment  to  go  through  the  gates  of  death,  wouldst  thou  go  as
one  who  had  walked  or  had  not  walked  thereto  in  the  footprints  of  Jesus  ]  *'  Watch,
for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  in  which  the  Son  of  Man  cometh."


(5.)  Mercy  Promised  to  the  Exiles,  and  Conclusion  of  the  Vision

(vers.  14-25).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  14-
21.  Ezekiel  receives,  for  answer  to  his
urgent  appeal,  an  intimation  that  the
doom  of  Jerusalem  is  irrevocable,  but
that  the  Lord's  people  will  not  be  for-
saken. Amongst  the  exiles,  who  are
contemptuously  treated  by  dwellers  in
the  capital,  are  found  tokens  of  the
broken,  contrite  heart  which  He  does
not  despise.  He  will  put  an  end  to
their  captivity,  and  settle  them  again
in  the  land  of  their  fathers.

Ver.  15.  The  utterance  of  the  Lord
nmst  have  been  unex[)ected.  The  pro-
phet supposed  that  they  who  remained
in  Jerusalem  were  the  real  representa-
tives of  Israel,  and  his  yearning  for  their
deliverance  was  thus  intensified.  His
mistake  springs  from  a  common  ten-
dency in  regard  to  the  kingdom  of  God,
134


Men  look  at  its  externalities.  Those
who  have  antiquity  and  ritual  on  their
side  aie  counted  the  chosen  to  good,
while  they  who  suffer  and  are  decried
are  regarded  as  of  no  account.  Yet  in
the  latter  are  the  germs  of  mercy  from
God  laid  :  "  thy  brethren,  thy  breth-
ren," the  twice-told  designation  empha-
tically indicating  that  Ezekiel  is  to  find
his  true  relations  in  those  with  whom
he  is  connected  as  an  exile,  however
unfavourable  their  condition:  '^ men  of
thy  kindred" — a  translation  which  ap-
pareiiLly  causes  a  tautology,  for  brethren
are  kindred ;  but  is  grounded  on  the
f;ict  that  the  Hebrew  word  refers  to  the
duties  of  the  goely — the  blood-relation
who  took  up  the  responsibilities,  po-
verty, injuries  of  his  kindred  (Lev.  xxv.
g5,  48),     ^ome  propose  to  employ  th«


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XI.


primary  meaning,  and  translate  the
phrase,  men  of  thy  redemption,  those
whom  thou  art  bound  to  ransom,  or
intercede  for  to  deliver  from  evil.  The
ascription  of  the  duties  of  goel  to
Ezekiel  seems  far-fetched  and  forced ;
but  is  defended  for  the  reason  that  it
conveys  "  a  peculiar  reproach  to  the
proud  Jews  who  have  been  so  ready  to
cast  off  the  claims  of  blood-relationship,
and  at  the  same  time  a  hope  of  restora-
tion to  those  who  have  been  unduly
thrown  aside  '*  (Speaker^ s  Com.)  The
reading  of  the  LXX  is,  the  men  of  thy
captivity,  obviously  translating  the  same
Hebrew  word  that  is  found  in  ver.  24,
and  which  differs  from  that  read  here
by  a  single  letter:  "and  all  the  house
of  Israel,  all  of  it,"  including  in  this
title  all  Israel  wheresoever  tliey  were
scattered  abroad,  and  who  by  the  phrase
seem  counted  by  God  as  those  who
constituted  the  whole  house  of  Israel,
"to  whom  the  inhabitants  of  Jeru-
salem say,  Remove  far  off  from  the
land  ;  to  us  the  land  is  given  for  a
possession."  Captivity,  in  the  eyes  of
the  Jerusalemites,  was  a  cutting  off
from  the  covenants  and  promises  ;  but
their  residence  in  the  city  was  a  par-
ticipation in  them.  They  concluded
that  Israel  was  to  be  known  by  external
signs.  "  Thereby  they  show  how  in-
experienced they  are  in  the  ways  of
God,  how  far  they  are  from  having  the
heart  of  true  Israelites,  how  little  they
deserve  that  the  prophet  should  take  an
interest  in  them"  {Heng.)

Ver.  16.  "Therefore,"  seeing  that
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  treat  the
captives  as  thrust  out  from  the  Lord,
He  causes  His  prophet  to  refer  to  this
despisal  and  say,  "Though  I  have  re-
moved them  far  off  among  the  na-
tions, and  though  I  have  scattered
them  in  the  lands,"  that  which  their
depieciators  say  is  so  far  true ;  but  the
exile  is  not  comfortless  and  irreversible,
"yet  I  will  be  to  them  a  sanctuary
for  a  little  while  :  "  they  are  deprived
of  that  which  was  once  My  sanctuary,
where  I  manifested  My  presence,  but
they  shall  have  one  notwithstanding.
I  Myself  will  be  with  them  for  a  season.
The  AfV.,  by  its  translation  a  Httle  sanc-


tuary,  makes   it  seem  as  if  the  Lord

would  give  to  the  captives,  in  some  minor
degree,  what  He  had  given  in  the  tem-
ple. No  doubt  this  was  the  case.  But
there  is  more  involved.  The  exiles
would  be  comforted  with  the  promise
of  a  far  greater  boon  than  that  of  enter-
ing within  the  walls  of  an  earthly  tem-
ple, and  also  with  the  assurance  that
the  duration  of  their  banishment  from
the  temple  would  be  limited.  "  Canaan
was  still  the  land  of  the  covenant ;  and
the  presence  of  the  Lord  among  His
people,  at  a  distance  from  that  land,
could  be  only  a  temporary  thing."  But
by  this  dealing  with  them  the  captives
were  prepared  to  give  weight  to  the
eternal  truth  that  God  dwells  not  in
temples  made  with  hands,  that  they
could  worship  Him  acceptably  any-
where, and  so  new  advances  were  taken
towards  the  coming  of  Him  in  whose
resurrection-body  was  seen  the  temple
not  made  with  hands,  and  through
whom  all  men  may  come  to  the  Father,

"  In  what  way  did  the  Lord  prove
Himself  to  be  the  sanctuary  of  the  peo-
ple in  their  captivity  1  First  of  all  by
sending  the  prophet  himself,  .  .  ,  a
l)reacher  of  repentance  and  salvation,
and  one  so  richly  endowed.  .  .  ,  That
which  made  the  temple  itself  into  a
temple,  the  presence  of  God,  dwelt  in
him.  Again,  He  proved  this  by  the
outward  protection  which  He  afforded
them,  ...  by  inward  consolations,  <kc.
Every  event  that  transpired, — the  ele-
vation of  Daniel,  the  fall  of  the  Baby-
lonian and  rise  of  the  Persian  power, —
pointed  to  this  end.  How  different  was
the  Babylonian  exile  from  that  of  the
present  day  !  In  the  latter  there  are
no  signs  of  the  presence  of  God.  The
nation  can  do  nothing  but  celebrate
memorial  feasts  and  dream  of  the
future  "  {Heng,)

"  The  dispersion,  besides  being  a
just  chastisement  on  account  of  sin,  and
a  salutary  discipline  to  lead  the  heart  of
the  people  back  to  God,  had  an  impor-
tant end  to  accomplish  as  a  preparatory
movement  in  providence  for  opening
the  way  for  Messiah's  kingdom.  It  was
very  far  irom  being  an  unmixed  evil.
It   wa«j  of  great    service    in  diffusing

135


CBkT.  ZI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL.


the  knowledge  of  God,  and  providing
materials  for  the  first  foundations  of  the
Christian  Church.  But  it  was  still  more
important  and  necessary  in  spiritualising
the  views  of  the  Jews,  and  training  to
the  knowledge  and  service  of  God
witliout  the  help  of  a  material  temple.
The  devout  worshipper  at  Babylon,
Alexandria,  Rome,  found  himself  a  par-
taker of  God's  presence  and  blessing.
What  a  mighty  advance  did  the  king-
dom of  God  thus  make  toward  the  pos-
session of  the  world  !  And  the  Lord
manifested  His  power  to  overrule  a
present  evil  for  the  accomplishment  of
an  ultimate  good  "  (Fairbairn),

Vers.  17,  18.  A  reply  to  the  asser-
tion of  men  of  Jerusalem  that  the  land
was  their  exclusive  possession.  *'  There-
fore say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah,
and,"  besides  being  a  sanctuary,  "  I
will  gather  you  and  give  to  you  the
territory  of  Israel ;  but  the  restoration
will  not  be  to  the  state  of  things  which
existed  prior  to  the  exile  ;  "  and  they,"
whom  the  Lord  thus  favours,  '*  come
thither  and  take  away  all  its  detest-
able things  and  all  its  abominations
therefrom ; "  first  of  all  they  cease  to
do  the  evil  things  which  had  provoked
their  Almighty  King ;  they  no  longer
halt  between  the  Lord  and  Baalim.
But  "  that  they  have  eschewed  idolatry
ever  since  their  return  from  Babylon,*'
is  a  statement  to  be  qualified  by  the
remarks  of  Hengstenberg.  "  That  Satan
should  drive  out  Satan,  or  a  refined
system  of  idolatry  (even  Jehovah  can
become  an  idol)  make  war  upon  one  of
a  grosser  kind,  is  a  matter  of  no  reli-
gious importance.  It  is  also  evident
that  the  outward  removal  of  idols,  in
the  period  immediately  following  the
restoration  and  in  the  time  of^  the  Mac-
cabees, is  included  in  the  propliecy  only
BO  far  as  God  Himself  was  the  princi-
pium  moveiis  on  those  occasions.  But
this  can  be  regarded  as  only  a  very
small  beginning.  If  the  idols  had  all
been  bani^-hed  from  the  country  along
with  the  idolatrous  images,  the  people
would  have  had  some  ground  for  charg-
ing God  with  unfaithfulness  in  not
performing  His  promises.  The  external
removal  of  the  things,  by  which  tlie
126


land  of  the  Lord  had  been  defiled,  was
thought  of  by  the  prophet  only  so  far
as  it  was  the  result  of  the  unconditional
surrender  of  the  heart  to  the  Lord."

Vers.  19,  20.  "  And  I  give  them  one
heart,"  a  heart  in  which  will,  thought,
feeling  are  in  unison,  and  which  finds
itself  in  harmony  with  other  hearts.
The  method  by  which  this  grace  will  be
brought  about  is  the  Lord's  ;  "  and  a
new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you,*'
'*  the  same  for  substance,  but  altered
in  the  frame,  renewed  in  the  qualities
thereof"  (Trapp) ;  "and  I  will  take
away  the  heart  of  stone  from  their
flesh,  and  give  them  an  heart  of
flesh."  "  There  is  generally  more  said
than  ought  to  be  said  according  to  God's
word,  that  *  in  its  natural  state  man's
heart '  is  *  hard  as  a  stone.'  It  becomes
the  heart  of  stone  only  by  hardening.  By
nature  it  is  rather  *  an  heart  of  flesh,'
which  grace  confronts  with  spirit  of
Spirit  (John  iii.  6).  With  the  fleshy  state
of  the  heart  manifold  gifts  of  God  are  con-
ceivable, as  was  the  case  of  Israel  from
their  fathers  (hereditary  blessings).  The
New  Testament  interpretation  must  not,
as  a  matter  of  course,  be  put  upon  vers,
19  and  20.  In  comparison  with  the  stony
heart  which  God's  judgments  broke  in
pieces,  this  was  to  be  an  heart  of  flesh  ;
but  yet  it  was  merely  an  heart  of  flesh.
The  heart  of  stone  stands  in  relation  to
the  idols,  so  the  heart  of  flesh,  the  new
spirit,  the  one  heart,  stands  in  relation
to  the  only  true  God.  The  keeping
apart  of  flesh  and  stone  is  as  important
as  that  of  flesh  and  spirit "  (Lange),
Israel  had  gone  into  a  position  that  was
unnatural  to  it,  but  was  to  return,  by
divine  working,  into  that  which  was
natural,  "  that  they  may  walk  in  My
statutes,  and  keep  My  judgments,  and
do  them,"  <fec.

Ver.  21.  The  promise  is  accompanied
with  a  dark  shadow.  Whosoever  there
be  '*  whose  heart  goes  after  the  heart
of  their  detestable  things  and  their
abominations,"  who  continue  a  devotion
full  of  interest  in  the  idols  which  their
evil  hearts  attach  themselves  to,  they
shall  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  ways.
If  the  idols  represent  merely  illusions,
yet  they  exercise  a  mastering  sway  over


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  zi.


individuals,  while  the  full  nature  of  sin
is  manifested  by  tlieir  worship.  **  What
power  has  Mammon  now,  as  a  national
god,  over  Jewish  niinds,  although  he  is
in  himself  a  mere  shadow  ! "  {Heng.)
*'  The  moral  bearings  of  the  Lord's  state-
ment fasten  on  every  man  his  own  re-
sponsibility for  his  own  conduct.  Mercy
to  a  people  does  not  shut  off  personal
agency."  *'  The  promise  of  a  return  to
Canaan  was  not  given  to  the  exiles  as
an  absolute  and  unconditional  good.
And  comparing  the  promise  of  what
should  have  been,  with  the  record  of


what  actually  was,  we  find  that  the
word  received  but  a  partial  fulfilment,
and  Canaan  as  occupied  by  the  restored
remnant  was  not  a  region  of  holiness.
Still  the  promise  did  not  fail ;  the  Lord
did  provide  for  Himself  a  spiritual
offspring  from  the  captivity,  and  plant
them  anew  as  a  seed  of  blessing  in  the
land  of  their  fathers — enough  to  furnish
a  pledge  that  the  sum  of  all  promise,
the  work  of  rec(mciliation  in  Christ,
would,  in  due  time,  be  brought  to  com-
pletion "  (Fairhairn),


HOMILETICS,
The  Appeal  of  Keligion  to  the  Feelings.

There  had  been  a  general  deterioration  in  the  life  of  the  Jewish  people.
Religion  was  corrupted  into  superstition,  and  all  that  was  purifying  and  rightening
in  it  got  rid  of.  Then,  as  a  matter  of  course,  their  morals  became  depraved,  and
then  came  political  degradation  and  national  ruin.  In  their  hopeless  plight  as
exiles,  what  was  it  that  they  really  needed  ]

The  answer  cannot  be  far  to  seek.  The  spirit  of  revolt  had  been  stirred  up
against  the  power  which  dominated  them.  Of  what  use  had  that  been  ?  If  God
should  intervene  by  some  wonderful  "providence,"  and  with  a  strong  arm  bring
them  out  of  Chaldea  and  restore  them  to  their  own  land,  of  what  avail  could  even
that  be  1  If  the  same  people,  animated  by  the  same  spirit,  had  been  all  reinstated
in  their  properties  possessed  before,  what  would  have  been  gained  1  The  one
essential  thing  of  all  was  for  the  men  and  women,  the  young  men  and  maidens,  to
love  and  choose  right  and  good — be  obedient  to  God,  and  righteous  and  loving
toward  one  another ;  for,  if  the  inmost  character  of  the  people  remained
unchanged,  the  same  wretched  consequences  would  once  more  follow.  To  try
this  experiment  over  again  would  simply  have  been  waste  of  time  and  waste  of
ever}  thing.  A  corrupt  and  bad  nation  can  never  be  for  long  a  prosperous  nation.
Evil  still  clings  to  it,  and  will  produce  its  own  fruits  of  course.  So  it  would  have
been  utterly  vain  to  have  shown  a  false  compassion  to  them  and  brought  them
back  from  captivity  just  as  they  were.

The  promise  of  renewed  prosperity  is  here  made  dependent  on  renewed  right-
ness.  The  religious  promise  is  the  grand  and  basal  one  (ver.  20).  The  people
must  become  a  right  people,  must  have  a  right  heart  and  a  new  spirit,  or  pros-
perity is  out  of  the  question.  The  national  character  is  the  main  thing  to  be
looked  to  if  a  people  would  enjoy  national  welfare.  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a
nation."  If  the  love  of  righteousness  be  general  and  strong,  that  will  purge  the
eyesight  of  a  people,  and  they  will  see  what  they  ought  to  do.  All  those
members  of  a  nation  who  sap  the  robust  rignteousness  of  the  people ;  all  those
who  countenance  and  promote  the  neglect  of  religion,  who  weaken  the  faith  of
others  in  God,  who  lessen  reverence  and  piety,  by  word  or  deed  or  by  the  power
of  example,  are  helping  to  undermine  the  national  well-being.  While  all  who
help  righteousness,  truth,  goodness,  the  fear  of  God,  and  the  love  of  men,  are  doing
best  for  their  country's  stability  and  progress.  In  order  to  the  accomplishment
of  such  a  result,  there  must  be  a  heart  renovated  by  religion.  And  so  we  learn
that  the  very  core  of  this  true  religion  is  a  power  over  the  heart.     As  the  heart

127


CHAP.  XI.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.

stands  principally  for  the  feelings,  we  may  say  that  religion  is  chiefly  having  the
feelings  right.

Religion  is  made  by  many  a  quite  outward  affair,  one  of  rites  and  ceremonies
and  observances.  Witii  others  a  correct  religious  creed  is  everything,  and  not  a
few  weed  tlieir  creed  of  all  positive  statements  and  reduce  it  to  negatives — to
denying  this,  and  contradicting  that,  and  arguing  against  the  other.  These  are  in
great  danger  of  making  religion  consist  in  notions,  i.e.,  chiefly  a  matter  of  intellect.

The  intellect  and  the  feelings  are  often  put  in  opposition  ;  but  it  ought  not  to
be  so.  The  use  of  the  intellect  in  religion  is  to  help  the  heart.  We  want  both
brought  into  the  highest  condition  of  health  and  vigour.  It  is  ever  bad  to  divorce
them,  and  undesirable  to  cultivate  one  at  the  expense  of  the  other.  But  if  we
were  obliged  to  confine  ourselves,  then  there  is  no  question  the  heart,  the  feeling,
must  have  the  vast  pre-eminence.  The  understanding  is  addressed  in  Scripture  as
the  way  to  the  conscience  and  the  heart.  Right  knowledge  is  good  even  for  its
own  sake  ;  but  if  it  be  alone,  a  man  may  be  a  devil.  Intellect  without  love  is  one
definition  of  the  devil.

Why  are  the  feelings  of  this  importance  in  religion  ?

I.  Because  they  govern  the  man.  A  man  may  love  to  flatter  himself  that  he
is  governed  by  his  intellect,  by  pure  reason.  In  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a
hundred  he  is  governed  by  his  feelings,  bv  his  inclinations,  by  his  likings,  and
then  he  calls  in  reason  !  He  employs  his  intellect  to  find  him  useful  arguments
by  which  he  may  vindicate  himself  to  himself  and  to  others  I

"  The  afterthoughts
Which  reason  coins  to  justify  excess
And  passion's  disappointuient.'*

It  was  the  feelings  which  impelled  John  and  Peter,  Martha  and  Mary,  to  Christ;
which  made  Annas  and  Cainphas  seek  His  death;  it  was  a  certain  class  of  feel-
ings which  urged  Judas  to  betray  Him.  So  now.  Some  men  love  the  Revealer
.and  believe  in  Him  ;  they  find  the  evidences  which  they  ask  for  satisfactory,  and
may  be  able  to  give  a  reason  to  others.  Some  do  not  love  that  Life  which  claims
to  be  divine,  it  rebukes  their  life  too  much;  they  scan  the  evidences  and  find
them  insufficient,  and  are  glad  to  be  able  to  say  so.  The  feelings  are  seen  to  be
supreme  as  the  active  power  in  human  life.  Hence  God  seeks  to  enlist  them  on
the  side  of  righteousness,  and  has  so  put  Truth — embodied  it  in  a  person — as  to
make  right  affections  possible  and  easy.  Therefore,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy
God."  &c.     '*  Lovest  thou  M^  ?  "

II.  Because  the  feelings  form  a  ground  common  to  all  men  on  which  religion
can  act.  With  many  the  intellect  is  very  feeble,  and  only  the  fewest  can  have  a
well-furnished  and  well-disciplined  intellect.  But  all  can  have  strong  feelings,
strotig  likings  and  dislikings.  Ought  not  religion  to  be  an  affair  of  that  on  which
all  classes  can  stand  on  pretty  equal  terms  1  The  feelings  enlisted,  what  is  too
hard  in  any  rank  of  life  1

III.  Because  the  feelings  decide  the  character.  A  man  is  what  his  chief
love  or  liking  is,  what  his  allowed  and  cherished  feelings  are.  As  he  thinketh  in
his  heart,  so  is  he.  And  Christ  is  the  supreme  test.  For  there  is,  in  happiest
proportions,  all  goodness  embodied' in  His  life  which  has  special  claims  on  men.
If  the  feelings  towards  Him  are  those  of  indifference,  unconcern,  to  say  nothing
of  ojipositicm,  then  is  the  heart  a  heart  of  stone  indeed ;  and  the  one  first  and
great  need  for  such  a  man  is  to  get  rid  of  his  heart  of  stone  and  acquire  a  heart
of  flesh.

We  see  how  wisely  God  has  made  religion  to  be  primarily  an  affair  of  the  heart

and  not  of  the  intellect.     We  recognise  the  pains  He  hath  taken  to  win  the  heart

for  the  right,  to  awaken  and  stimulate  and  direct  the  feelings.      This  is  to  a  great

extent  the  radomk  of  the  G^'spel,  the  logic  of  Christianity.     We  are  interested  to

'128


JTOUILETIC  COMMESTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  XI.


see  how  the  promise  of  one  heart  was  fulfilled  to  the  captives  as  represented  in  the
books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  Important  also  to  see  how  the  matter  bears  on  us
(2  Cor.  vi.  17,  vii.  1).

Counsel  and  promise  meet  here.  We  are  to  get  the  heart  of  flesh  of  ourselves ;
God  will  give  it  to  us.  Both  needed.  He  will  give ;  we  must  concur.  If  we
prize  the  promise,  we  shall  do  all  we  can  to  get  rid  of  one  kind  of  heart  and  to
obtain  the  other.  How  many  means  are  found  to  be  provided ;  how  many  things,
habits,  (fee,  to  be  sedulously  avoided,  and  others  to  be  sedulously  observed.  If
you  will  try  honestly  to  make  you  a  heart  of  flesh,  God  will  command  success,  will
secure  the  result. — U,  H,  D,


God  the  Sanctuaky  of  the  Afflicted  (ver.  16).

There  is  a  tendency  in  nature  and  providence  to  keep  things  in  a  kind  of
equality.  There  are  compensations.  In  what  condition  can  we  be  found  that
possesses  no  advantages  1     Let  ns  consider  from  this  verse —

L  The  calamity.     ''  I  have  cast  them  off,"  &c.     The  event  serves  to  display —

1.  Tke  agency  of  God.  He  asserts  His  dominion  and  influence  over  all  the
•ufierings  of  nations,  families,  and  individuals.  An  irreligious  mind  is  detained
from  God  by  the  persons  or  events  which  injure  Him.  A  pious  man  can  say,  **It
ia  the  Lord."  He  acts  by  the  intervention  of  means.  He  did  not  carry  away  the
Jews  by  miracle,  but  by  the  effect  of  war ;  and  we  are  not  to  conclude  that  God
has  nothing  to  do  in  any  work  because  of  the  vileness  of  those  who  are  engaged
in  it.     He  makes  the  very  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him.

2.  Displays  the  truth  of  God.  The  evil  had  been  foretold  and  threatened  by
successive  prophets,  and  the  calamity  was  identified  with  the  Divine  veracity —
**  Hath  He  spoken,  and  shall  He  not  make  it  good  ?  "

3.  Displays  the  holiness  of  God.  The  off'ences  of  this  people  were  aggravated  by
their  privileges.  Sin  is  not  to  be  judged  of  by  its  grossness,  but  by  its  guilt.  No
wonder  that  He  punished  the  Jews.

4.  Displays  the  vdsdom  of  God.  By  their  dispersion  they  were  in  "  the  midst
of  many  people  as  a  dew  from  the  Lord."

5.  Displays  His  goodness.  He  punished  not  to  destroy,  but  reform.  Their
captivity  was  limited  in  duration,  and  He  did  not  leave  them  comfortless  in  the
meantime.

II.  The  alleviation.  "  Yet  will  I  be  to  them,'*  <kc.  He  engages  to  be  to  them
a  temple,  so  that  He  should  be  found  of  them,  and  they  would  see  His  power  and
glory.  He  compensates  them  for  the  want  of  those  very  things  which  seem  essen-
tial to  their  welfare.

1.  In  the  loss  of  outward  comforts.  He  does  not  require  us  to  be  indifferent  to
substance,  health,  friends  ;  but  as  He  is  the  unchangeable  and  all-sufficient,  we
have  a  security  independent  of  the  world,  diseases,  associates.  At  first  we  may
murmur  when  affliction  comes,  but  it  is  to  wean  us  from  creatures  and  draw  to
trust  in  the  living  God.  How  many  can  bear  witness  that  He  has  made  that
condition  comfortable  which  they  once  deemed  insupportable,  and  that  the  joy  of
salvation  and  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  effectual  substitutes  for  every
deficiency  in  creature  good  !

2.  In  the  want  of  gracious  ordinances.  God  will  never  countenance  the  neglect
of  the  means  of  grace  ;  but  He  will  make  up  for  the  want  of  them.  When  we
cannot  follow  Him,  He  can  follow  us.  The  superstitious  should  remember  this  as
well  as  the  afflicted.  He  can  meet  with  His  people  in  any  place,  and  wherever  He
holds  communion  with  them  the  place  becomes  sacred.

What  a  place,  then,  is  heaven  !  What  a  natural  world  must  that  be  where  there
is  needed  no  light  of  the  sun  !     What  a  moral  world,  where  we  can  disj)ense  with

1  129


OHAJP.  It  QOMILETIG  COMMENT  All  Y .  EZEKIEL.

Sabbaths,  with  preaching,  with  temples  1  Even  religion  will  cease  there,  and  only

the  dispositions  it  formed  and  the  state  to  which  it  led  remain.

What  a  being,  then,  is  God  !  He  enables  us  to  live  a  life  of  dependence  npon
Him  and  communicm  with  Him.  No  want  but  He  can  relieve,  no  hope  but  He
can  accomplish.  He  is  accessible  by  Christ.  Let  us  come  to  Him,  and  say,  "  I
am  continually  with  Thee,"  &c. — (Jay,  abridged.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES. — Vers,  manner  the  quickening  and  awaken-

22,    23.     With  the  promise   of  good  ing  power  of  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  on

to  the  exiled  Jews  the  vision  imme-  the  whole  people  (see  xxxvii.)     In  a

diately  draws  to  its  close.    Tlie  cheru-  similar  way  Jesus,  in  whom  the  divine

bim  and  their  associated  wheels  (chap,  glory  resides  bodily,  withdraws  Him-

X.  16,  17)  underneath  the  divine  glory  self  from  the  Jews  (John  viii.   21);

prepare  to   move  away.      "  And  the  but   His   standing  on  the   Mount  of

glory  of  the  Lord  rose  up  from  the  Olives,  on  the  east  side  of  Jerusalem,

midst  of  the  city :  '*  it  had  been  rest-  is  a  sign  that,  though  invisible.  He  is

ing  at  the  gate  opening  to  the  city  still  near  to  bless  them  (Acts  iii.  26).

(chap.   X.    4) — considered    to   be    its  — Baumgarten,

central  point — now  it  will  leave  en-  Vers.  24  and  25.     The  same  force

tirely  the  temple  and  its  precincts,  as  which  had  rapt  the  seer  away  brings

also   the   city,    *'  and  make  a  stand  him  back  to  a  consciousness  of  the

over  the  mount,  which  is  to  the  east  presence  of  the  elders  in  his  house  in

of  the  city" — the  Mount  of  Olives,  Chaldea.    " And  I  spake  to  the  exiles

commanding  an  outlook  over  all  Jeru-  all  the  words  of  the  Lord  which  He

salem.      There  it  waited,  betokening  had  made  me  see."     The  elders  did

that  the  city  was  no  longer  defended  not  see  the  visionary  journey  on  which

by  the  Lord — a  defence  was  no  more  Ezekiel  had  been  taken ;  but  probably

upon  all  the  glory — and  when  Ezekiel  they  had  observed   an  "  astonished  "

had    traced  thus   far   its  movements,  appearance,  as  if  he  were  absent  in

he  felt  himself  withdrawn  from  any  mind,  and  so  they  were  the  more  sus-

further   sight   of    it.      "  The   rabbis,  ceptible  to  the  report  he  gave  of  the

commenting  on  this  passage,  said  that  revelation  in  a  vision,  not  of  his  own

the  Shechinah  retired  eastward  to  the  heart,  but  in  a  striking  degree  from

Mount  of  Olives,  and  there  for  three  Him  with  whom  all  words  are  acts,

years  called  in  vain  to  the  people  with  Ezekiel  had  been  called  to  be  a  prophet

human  voice  that  they  should  repent"  to  the  exiles  (chap.  ii.  5),  urged  to  be

(Speaker's  Com.)     On  this  mount  Jesus  an  instructor  as  to  right  and  wrong

wept,  and  predicted  the  second  over-  (iii.  17),  and  under  poignant  feelings

throw    of    Jerusalem    (see   xix.    21  ;  had   taken   the  place   of  a   mediator

Matt.  xxiv.  3);   from  it  He  went  up  (xi.  15).     These  several  positions  had

into  heaven  (see  xxiv.  5 ;  Acts  i.  12) ;  been  defined  by  visions  of  a  glory  in-

and  Zecharian  prophesied  (chap.  xiv.  4)  finitely  surpassing  all  Levitical  sym-

that  on  it  the  Lord  shall  stand  to  fight  bols,  and  which  assured  him  that  the

against  hostile  nations,  and  bring  bless-  Lord  was  not  confined  to  the  locality

ings  to  His  own.     What  Ezekiel  saw  of  the  temple,  or  worshipped  only  by

"  was  a  withdrawal  of  the  divine  glory,  its  forms.     Thus,  though  he  could  not

and   yet   a   continuance   of  it  in  the  serve  as  priest  in  the  ritual  of  the

neighbourhood."      Jehovah's  external  temple  at  Jerusalem,  he  could  do  that

protection  and  blessing  may  have  been  which  was  more  than  an  equivalent ;

withdrawn,  but  still  the  invisible  power  he  could  be  the  medium  of  declaring

of  the  Spirit  will  remain  near  them,  to  the  banished  Jews  that  the  Holiest

and  probably  manifest  itself  the  more  would  be  present  with  them ;  maintain

gloriously   on    that    account.      It    is  intercourse  with  them  without  the  in-

Ezekiel  who  has  discerned,  set  forth,  stituted    sacrifices  and   offerings,  not-

and  described  in  the  most  touching  withstanding  that  they  were  in  "the
130


ROM! LET  to  COMMENTARY:  eZeKIEL,  mt^.  M.

wilderness  of  the  nations,"  and  were  as  to  accomplish  the  original  and  pro-

sometimes  proud  and  reviling,  sorae-  spective  vocation  of  Israel.    The  exiles,

times  cast  down  and  despairing  ;  and  however,  needed  much  teaching  before

prepare  them  for  the  future  constitu-  they  could  be  fit  for  their  destiny,  and

tion  of  their  life  as  a  community  in  in  that  teaching  the  further  prophesy-

the  land  promised  to  their  fathers,  so  ing  of  Ezekiel  will  hold  no  little  share,

EOMILETIGS,
A  Departing  God  (vers.  22,  23).

The  movement  of  the  appearance  which  Ezekiel  had  the  eyes  of  his  under-
standing opened  to  see  signifies —

L  That  God  is  not  bound  to  any  place  or  form  of  worship.  He  would
remove  from  the  sacred  city  to  the  idolatrous  Chaldea ;  from  the  prescribed
forms  of  Levitical  service  to  the  free  forms  of  hearts  prompted  by  need.  There
is  no  land,  no  denomination,  no  single  church,  which  has  a  monopoly  of  His
power  and  grace.  He  may  have  dwelt  amongst  them  so  that  they  beheld  His
glory ;  but  if  they  forsake  His  laws  they  forfeit  His  presence.  They  may  retain
the  name  of  Christian,  keep  up  cathedrals  and  chapels,  use  prayer-book  and
hymn-book,  acknowledge  articles,  confessions,  declarations,  and  the  glory  and
power  have  gone  from  them  all ;  and,  alas  1  many  of  the  people  never  suspect
that  so  it  is.

n.  That  He  does  not  remove  all  at  once.  He  may  go  with  His  power  and
glory  to  another  land,  denomination,  church,  regarded  as  poor  and  despised,  but
in  which  souls  humble  themselves  under  His  mighty  hand,  and  spread  His  great
goodness.  Yet  He  does  not  hastily  leave  the  scene  where  once  He  had  mani-
fested Himself.  He  goes  to  the  threshold  before  going  out,  and  when  He  goes
out.  He  does  not  go  out  of  sight.  He  waits  near,  within  reach  of  a  cry,  if  so
be  that  before  the  night  falls,  which  results  from  His  departure,  men  may  call
and  He  will  answer  them.

When  God  has  departed,  formality,  temptation  to  go  into  deeper  darkness,
reproach  to  His  name,  all  follow ;  and  what  shall  the  end  of  these  things  be  1
**  Let  us  see  that  we  do  not,  by  a  careless  and  inconsistent  walk,  provoke  Him
to  withdraw  His  invisible  and  spiritual  presence  from  us,"  In  fear  of  such  a
state  let  us  say —

**  Take  anything  Thou  wilt  away.
But  go  not  Thou  away  1 "

Returning  from  the  Presence  (vers.  24,  25).

"The  vision  that  I  had  seen  went  up  from  me.*'  "Jacob  seeth  a  ladder
reaching  up  to  heaven,  angels  ascending  and  descending,  and  the  Lord  at  the
top  of  the  ladder,  but  this  was  only  for  a  night ;  Moses  saw  the  Lord  in  the
burning  bush,  but  the  sight  lasted  not ;  Peter,  James,  and  John  saw  the  trans-
figuration of  Christ,  but  the  vision  went  up  from  them."  They  who  strive  faith-
fully to  follow  Jesus  come  into  seasons  of  a  clear  shining  of  His  face.  They
may  not  have  gone  back  from  His  footprints,  they  may  not  have  lost  a  sense  of
their  dependence  on  Him,  and  have  not  failed  to  recognise  His  abiding  near-
ness ;  but  seasons  arrive  in  which  the  vapour  and  dust  hanging  over  their  daily
pathway  thin  exceedingly.  More  vivid  is  their  consciousness  of  the  grace  and
glory  and  truth  manifested  in  God  in  Christ.  Fresh  hope,  joy,  peace,  vigour,
enter ;  they  realise  that  there  are  possibilities  of  insight  for  their  spiritual  life
transcending  all  they  ask  or  think.  They  would  not  care  to  say,  "  My  willing
soul  would  stay  in  such  a  frame  as  this,"  &c  They  do  wish  to  understand  the
lessons  of  such  upliftings.

131


etiAt.  ii.  UoMlLETW  aOMMMiM'AR'r :  KiEKikL


I.  They  find  them  variable.  The  visions  are  diverse.  Always  pervaded  by
Christ,  sometimes  one  of  His  aspects,  sometimes  another,  is  most  impressive,  yet
His  glory  illuminates  one  and  all.

They  are  transitory.  They  are  drinks  from  the  brook  in  the  way.  The
sparkle  and  coolness  go,  transmuted  into  recruited  strength  and  hope.  We  may
often  regret  that  such  experiences  pass  away.  Perhaps  we  charge  ourselves
with  a  fault  as  having  occasioned  their  disappearance.  But  that  may  be  an
error.  For  our  hearts  are  not  framed  so  as  to  sustain  a  prolonged  unchanging
feeling.  That  would  be  insanity.  We  must  calculate  on  "  frames  and  feelings  "
reviving  and  decaying,  on  our  turning  from  communion  with  the  Father  and  His
Son  Jesus  Christ  to  communing,  it  may  be,  with  elders  or  juniors,  with  fellow-
sufferers  in  the  conflicts  of  life,  and  still,  through  all  our  moods,  have  our  feet
set  upon  a  rock  and  our  goings  established.

n.  They  find  they  have  furthered  insight.  "  In  Thy  light  we  see  light.*'
The  sense  of  God  deepened  the  sense  of  sin.  The  chief  who,  in  days  before  Christ,
exclaimed,  '*  I  have  heard  of  Thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye
seeth  Thee,  wherefore  I  abhor  myself; "  the  apostle  who,  in  the  presence  of  Christ,
cried,  *'  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord ; "  the  seer  who,  in  days
after  Christ,  fell  as  one  dead  at  the  feet  of  the  manifested  living  Lord,  are
examples  of  the  effect  of  the  realised  presence  of  the  All  Holy  upon  the  heart
of  mankind.  We  hear  then  what  we  had  not  expected  to  hear  about  evil  We
see  then  the  irrefragable  penalty  inflicted  on  persistent  unrighteousness.

The  sense  of  God  inspires  hope.  His  Word  declares  that  He  is  full  of  compas-
sion and  gracious,  that  He  looks  to  the  man  who  is  of  a  poor  and  contrite  spirit
and  trembles  at  His  word,  that  a  Deliverer  comes  from  Him  to  turn  from
ungodliness,  and  that  after  we  have  suffered  for  a  while  we  shall  be  established,
strengthened,  settled.  A  nearer  fellowship  with  the  Unseen  thus  affecting  us,
we  come  away  lowlier  than  before,  but  more  confident  that  God  has  prepared
things  unspeakable  for  them  that  love  Him.

III.  They  find  themselves  emboldened  to  act  for  God.  Men  lifted  by  the
Spirit  of  God  see  and  believe  in  His  thoughts  and  ways.  Then,  when  their
souls  are  irradiated  and  strengthened,  they  are  enabled  to  tell  the  things  of
death  and  life  without  fear  and  without  reserving  one  needed  truth.  Such  men
will  never  be  feeble  servants  to  their  fellow-men.  The  kind  of  saplessness
manifested  by  certain  professed  Christians,  and  which  has  given  force  to  the
somewhat  cynical  term  "  goodiness,"  rises  out  of  faulty  ways  of  hearing  the
voice  of  the  Son  of  God.  Let  us  be  bold  for  the  truth  and  love  of  Jesus,  and
we  shall  be  known  as  having  been  "  with  Jesus."  If  truth  and  love  impel  us
to  shatter  the  hopes  of  a  life,  to  fling  the  solemn  accusation,  *'  Thou  art  the  man,"
to  affirm,  when  the  storms  of  trial  are  beating  down  and  washing  over  the
sailors  on  life's  heaving  sea,  that  there  is  nothing  to  fear,  nothing  really  evil
where  Christ  manifests  Himself  to  be  with  us,  then  we  must  seek  grace  for  each
diverse  duty  from  a  clearer  sight  of  the  glory  and  grace  of  the  Christ  of  God.
He  will  enable  us  for  whatever  ministry  He  calls  us  to,  we  shall  declare  all  that
He  shows  to  us  for  others,  adding  nought,  subtracting  nought,  and  be  qualified
by  His  presence  in  a  way  which  no  rules  and  no  resolutions  are  capable  of
accomplishing.

Let  Christians  be  ready  for  every  approach  of  the  Spirit  to  carry  them  to  a
more  conscious  apprehension  of  "  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus ; "  then
they  will  make,  and  only  then,  good  and  faithful  servants.  They  will  returzk
from  His  presence  *'  strengthened  with  all  might  in  the  inner  man,"


132


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XIL


2.  Fuller  Details  relating  to  the  Sins  of  the  People  and  their

Punishment  (Chaps.  xii.-xix).

Intercourse  with  their  countrymen  in  Jerusalem  deeply  affected  the  views
and  hopes  of  the  exiled  Jews,  as  the  feelings  and  expectations  in  British
colonies  are  affected  hy  the  discussions  and  decisions  in  the  mother-country.
The  kingdom  of  Judah  still  maintained  its  existence,  notwithstanding  the  pro-
phetic threatenings  of  Jeremiah.  That  gave  apparent  denial  to  his  dismal
prediction,  and  a  bold,  defiant  attitude  was  assumed  respecting  them.  The
captivity  took  the  cue  from  this,  and  the  vision  of  the  Holy  City,  its  abomina-
tions and  departed  glory,  by  which  Ezekiel  had  intimated  to  his  hearers  the
utter  ruin  of  the  Jewish  state,  found  no  belief  among  tht*m.  The  training
through  which  God  was  taking  them  required  that  this  state  of  mind  should
be  mastered.  A  true  view  of  tlieir  guilt  and  their  dependence  on  the  Law
could  not  be  arrived  at  except  as  illusions  were  dissipated.  Ezekiel  is  therefore
entrusted  with  further,  messages,  both  for  Judah  and  the  captivity,  exposing
the  fatuity  of  all  suppositions  that  the  calamity  denounced  could  be  averted.
**  The  prophet  is  inexhaustible  in  the  announcement  of  this,  as  the  false  patriotism
was  inexhaustible  in  its  announcements  of  salvation." — Heng,

(1.)  Symbol  and  Interpretation  of"  the  King's  Flight

(Chap,  xii,  1-16).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.
1-3.  Ezekiel  has  to  do  that  which
must  excite  public  attention  at  Tel-
Abib,  but  the  primary  application  of
his  action  is  to  Jerusalem,  and  so
secondarily  to  the  captives.  He  is  not
to  scruple  to  carry  out  palpable  and
strange  movements  or  to  refrain  from
prophesying  as  he  has  done  before,  be-
cause he  has  to  speak  to  a  people  v/ho,
with  capacities  for  learning,  are  too  per-
verse to  learn  (ver.  3).  "  And  thou,  son
of  man,  make  thee  utensils  of  capti-
vity," a  phrase  found  in  Jer.  xlvi.  19
(marginal  rendering),  and  there  and
here  signifying  such  few  things  as  could
be  taken  into  the  unfriendly  and  hard
conditions  of  exile.  '*And  remove
[as  a  captive]  by  day  before  their
eyes."  In  broad  dayliglit  he  was  to
gather  his  articles  and  carry  them  out
of  his  house,  thus  making  secure  of
the  observation  of  his  neighbours.
"And  thou  shalt  remove  [as  a  cap-
tive] from  thy  place  to  another  place
before  their  eyes,  perhaps  they  will
see,"  but  it  is  not  likely :  their  dis-
position evokes  the  refrain,  "for  they
are  an  house  of  rebelliousness."

Vers.  4-6.  Though  the  articles  were
brought  out,  they  were  left  while  day-
light  lasted.     At   its   departure,    but


before  total  darkness  came  on,  Ezekiel
was  to  act  again ;  "  and  thou  shalt
go  forth  in  the  evening  before  their
eyes;"  in  some  way  which  would
clearly  appear  to  be  that  of  a  captive,
"  as  the  goings  forth  of  a  captivity."
He  was  to  proceed  furtively,  while
they  were  looking  on.  "Before  their
eyes  dig  through  the  wall,  and  go
forth  by  it" — by  the  opening  thus
made  (ver.  6).  In  full  view  of  the
people,  "upon  thy  shoulder  shalt
thou  lift;"  but  by  the  time  he  had
digged  through  night  had  fallen,  such
as  fell  over  Abrara  (Gen.  xv.  17,  cf.  12),
and  so  "in  the  darkness  thou  shalt
go  forth ;  thy  face  thou  shalt  cover,"
as  one  who  does  not  wish  to  be  recoir-
nised,  "  and  not  see  the  earth."  These
proceedings  were  intended  to  repi-e
sent  very  ominous  incidents,  "  for  a
wonder  sign  I  give  thee  to  the  house  of
Israel."  There  was  nothing  in  Ezekiel's
own  surroundings  which  required  this
course  of  action,  but  it  was  typical  of
the  fate  of  King  Zedekiah.  As  yet  pros-
perous, the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem
rashly  assumed  that  his  kingdom  would
continue ;  but  events  were  preparing
which  would  prove  the  utter  futility
of  trusting  such  a  shaken  reed.

Vers,    7-1  e,      Ezekiel    fuitilled   his

133


CHAP.  XII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.

instructions  to  the  letter,  and  on  the  would  explain  that  it  was  not  weak-

following  morning  received,  in  plain  ness  on  the  part  of  the  God  of  Israel

terms,  an  explanation  of  what  he  had  which  had  occasioned  tlie  distress  and\

been  doing.     He  was  thus  put  in   a  subjection    of   His   people,    but   their

position  to  answer  the  curiosity  of  the  offences  ngainst  His  holy  laws.     His

people  as  to  what  was  meant,  and  with  unfaltering    purpose    is    that    *'they

painful  distinctness  describes  the  dis-  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."     Human

asters  which  were  to  befall  the  realm  foresi^fht    miirlit    have    sijjnified    that

(ver.  10).     "  Say  thou  unto  them,  The  the   king   and    people    of    Jerusalem

prince  is  this  lifting  up  in  Jerusalem,'*  would  be  mastered  by  the  Chaldeans,

i.e.,  this  taking  up  on  my  shoulder  is  but  that  the  king  should  flt-e  from  the

a  lesson,  the  prophetic  burden  which  city  by  night,  be  caught  in  his  attempt,

refers  to  him  who  occupies  the  throne  be   taken  to  Babylon   after   his    eyes

in  Jerusalem — he  must   remove   as  a  had  been  put  out,  could  not  have  been

captive.     It  refers  also   "to    all   the  forecast  by  any  mere   human  intelli-

house  of  Israel  that  are  among  them  ; "  gence,  except  as  the  intelligence  was

both  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and  enlightened  by  the  God  who  seeth  all

the  members  of  the  ten  tribes  who  events  that  are  to  come,

have  joined  themselves  to  their  breth-  Joseph  us  (Aniiq.  x.  7)  reports  that

ren    the   Jews   will    be    involved    in  an  account  of  this  prophetic  action  and

the  same  calamity.     By  this  sign  also  its  explanation  was  sent  to  Ztdekiah,

the  exiled  were  informed  that  if  they  but  that  he,  on  comparing  it  with  the

were  envious  of  the  lot  of  those  who  danger  which   Jeremiah   had  warned

still  remained  in  Judea   that  was   a  him  of,  found  that  the  latter  said  that

groundless  feeling,  because  the  latter  he  should  be  carried  to  Babylon,  while

also    would    suffer    exile    (ver.     13).  Ezekiel  said  that  he  should  not  see  it.

Further  details  than   those  found  in  The  discrepancy  was  so  glaring  in  the

the  symbolic  action  are  given.     **  And  king's   view   that   he    concluded,  not

I  spread  my  net  over  him ; "  the  Lord  that  one  was  right  and  the  other  wrong,

will,  by  means  of  the  Chaldean  army,  but  that  both  were  false  !     "  In  this

catch  the  prince  in  meshes,  and  his  he  but  showed  the  captious  disposition

escape   will   be   prevented;    "And   I  of  superficial   inquirers   and    shallow
will  bring  him  to  Babylon,  to  the  .    unbelievers  of  all  ages,  who  no  sooner

land  of  the  Chaldeans;"   yet,  in   a  discover  some  obvious  difficulties   on

manner    which    the    event    alone    can  the  surface   of   Revelation  than  they

explain,  "he  shall  not  see  it  though  conclude  the  whole  to  be  a  cunningly

he  shall  die  there  "  (2  Kings  xxr.  1-7,  devised  fable,  or  treat  it  as  unworthy

and  Jer.  lii.  1-11).     Ver.  14.     All  his  of  their  serious  consideration.     Would

friends,  all  his  forces,  "I  will  scatter  they  but  search  a  little   deeper,  and

toward  every  wind  of  heaven,  and  a  survey,  in  a  spirit  of  impartiality,  the

sword  I  draw  out  after  them."     They  entire  fitdd  of  Revelation,  they  would

would  not  all  perish  ;  "  I  leave  over  of  find    that    the    things  which    at    first

them  men  of  number,"  men  who  can  stagger  their  belief  disappear  on  closer

be  easily  counted  ;  and   it  is  done  to  ins})ection,  or  remain  only  as  difficul-

this  end,  "that  they  may  declare  all  ties  inseparable  from  communications

their  abominations  among  the  heathen  which  bear  respect   to   the  character

among  whom  they  come ; "  their  recit  als  and  purposes  of  Godhead." — Fairbaim,

HOMILETICS.

Some  Aspects  under  which  God  Communicates  with  Men

(vers.  1-16).

Taking  for  granted — that  which  both  human  history  and  experience  bea/
witness  to — not  only  that  God  is  able  to  communicate  with  man,  but  also  that
134


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xn.

man  is  capable  of  receiving  His  communications,  we  are  presented  here  with
certain  features  of  that  process.

I.  It  is  carried  on  with  a  clear  view  of  all  human  conditions.  It  could
not  be  otherwise,  because  He  is  God  and  not  man.  He  has  respect  (1.)  to  all
with  whom  He  may  enter  into  communication.  The  king  is  not  too  exalted  for  His
message ;  nor  are  the  princes.  Soldiers  are  open  to  Him  and  every  member
of  a  quiet  habitation.  It  can  be  said,  "I  am  poor  and  needy,  yet  the  Lord
thinketh  upon  me."  (2.)  To  their  preparedness  for  His  communications.  They
have  faculties  to  apprehend  all  truth  that  He  may  impart.  Eyes  have  they  to
see,  and  ears  have  they  to  hear,  and  He  wants  to  bring  the  faculties  for  seeing
and  hearing  into  use.  He  well  knows  that  eyes  may  be  used  for  selfish  interests,
and  not  for  the  things  that  are  unseen  and  eternal ,  that  ears  hear  the  entice-
ments of  the  flesh  and  lies  of  deceiving  prophets,  but  do  not  listen  to  the  just
and  holy  and  good  commandment,  giving  knowledge  of  sin  and  need  of  the
righteousness  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  Thus  He  estimates  the  power
of  all  forces  that  are  favourable  or  opposed  to  His  aims.  (3.)  To  the  possibility
of  mastering  men^s  indisposition.  Whatever  may  be  the  blindness  or  deafness
exhibited  in  regard  to  the  wisdom  and  truth  and  love  of  God's  w^ords,  He
still  acts  in  hope  of  a  change.  *'  It  may  be  they  will  consider  though  they  be
a  rebellious  house."  His  graciousness  is  a  perennial  spring  for  parched  and
hardened  hearts.  In  New  Testament  as  in  Old  Testament  times,  with  us  as
with  the  Jews,  He  is  "  long-suffering,  not  M'illing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that
all  should  come  to  repentance."  The  Israelites  of  Ezekiel's  day  are  illustrations
of  what  the  Word  of  the  Lord  encounters  in  most  of  those  to  whom  it  is  sent;
they  are  its  hearers  but  not  its  doers,  and  punishment  is  impending  over  them.
The  Lord's  treatment  of  them  is  a  type  of  His  riches  of  mercy,  which  leaves  no
means  untried,  and  would  hope  against  hope.  "  The  mirror  of  human  per-
versity is  at  the  same  time  the  mirror  of  divine  grace."

IL  It  proceeds  hy  stages.  (1.)  They  are  varied  in  appearance.  Actions  are
alone  at  one  time;  at  another  they  are  followed  by  w^ords.  Common  and
uncommon  things  are  summoned  in  order  to  impress  His  thoughts  and  ways.
It  would  be  quite  unfair  to  argue  from  these  grotesque  proceedings  of  Ezekiel,
that  any  methods,  however  outlandish,  may  be  pursued  in  order  to  secure
men's  attention  to  spiritual  facts.  The  method  should  be  such  as  will  imj)ress  a
truth,  not  such  as  may  excite  little  else  but  wonder  or  amusement  or  sympathy.
Under  such  a  restriction  and  by  the  pressure  of  divine  leading,  symbolical
actions  may  first  be  used,  and  instruction  follow  after  them;  but  it  ought  ever
to  be  realised  that  no  action,  even  though  it  may  be  apparently  impressive,  is
of  any  worth  in  God's  judgment  unless  it  end  in  making  men  know  that  He  is
Lord.  (2.)  Constant  in  progress.  So  it  seems  to  us,  and  so  it  is,  only  we  some-
times conclude  that  God  is  in  a  hurry  when  He  is  not.  The  suffering  which
looks  as  if  it  had  burst  suddenly  upon  a  people  or  an  individual  is  the  result
of  preceding  events  which  may  have  been  occurring  through  some,  it  may
be  many,  years.  The  destruction  of  the  plain  of  Sodom  in  a  morning  was
physically  the  outcome  of  material  forces  w^iich  had  been  long  in  gathering
and  pent  up,  and  was,  morally,  the  final  consequence  of  lengthened  and  high-
handed wickedness.  This  incident  in  Ezekiel's  history  shows  how  God  lets
the  minds  of  prophet  and  people  simmer  till  morning  over  the  odd  conduct
of  the  prophet  on  the  day  and  night  before.  Then  He  explained  what  was
in  prospect;  but  the  event,  which  the  action  referred  to,  was  not  brought  to
pass  till  about  six  years  had  gone  away.  God  gives  line  upon  line,  precept
upon  precept,  before  the  guilty  fall  backward  and  are  broken  and  are  snared
and  taken.  The  apostle  who  "  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one  night  and  day
with  tears  "  was  a  pupil  of  God,  who  is  full  of  compassion.  Does  His  goodness
and  forbearance  lead  us  to  repentance?     Have  we  the  love  which  suffers  long

135


CHAP.  XII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


and  is  kind  ?  (2.)  Culminating  in  acknowledgment  of  Him.  As  Ruler  over  all  He
makes  the  end  of  His  revelations  of  Himself  to  be  tliat  ''  all  shoulil  know  the
Lord,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest."  He  has  the  right  to  supreme  homage,  and
He  will  arrange  to  spare  some  of  those  who  have  felt  the  consequences  of  with-
holding that  homage,  so  that  they  shall  speak  of  what  He  has  done.  They  will
make  known  His  deeds  among  t^e  people,  and  the  heathen  shall  fear  His  great
and  terrible  name.  Tims  shall  His  way  be  known  upon  earth ;  His  saving
health  among  all  nations.

The  Time  of  God's  Communication  is  Worthy  to  be  Noted

(ver.  8).

I.  Because  the  coming  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  to  us  is  an  important  event
in  our  history.  (1.)  Sometimes  it  produces  terror  and  conviction  of  evil.  Moses  on
Sinai,  Job  under  the  whirlwind,  Saul  near  to  Damascus.  We  are  to  be  brought
to  see  our  need.  (2.)  Sometimes  it  is  attractive  and  tender.  As  to  Samuel  when
a  youth,  and  to  Lydia  when  Paul  preached.  (3.)  Sometimes  it  is  for  consolation.
As  the  still  small  voice  to  Elijah  when  he  was  cast  down,  with  its,  "  What  doest
thou  here,  Elijah]"  And  as  Christ  came  to  the  disciples  on  the  lake  with
His,  *'  It  is  1."  (4.)  Sometimes  to  unfold  and  urge  to  duty.  As  to  Ezekiel  here,
and  as  to  Paul  when  he  was  praying  in  the  temple  in  a  trance.

II.  Because  it  comes  at  a  noticeable  season.  "In  the  morning."  God
regards  the  time  we  hav*  Wen  under  His  teachings,  what  our  attitude  to  Him
has  been,  and  how  we  have  profited,  or  the  reverse.  "  Have  I  been  so  long
time  with  you,  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me  T'  (1.)  The  word  may  come  in
the  morning,  literally.  Give  God  your  first  thoughts,  meditate  early  on  His
ways;  "My  voice  shalt  thou  hear  in  the  morning,  0  Lord,"  and  let  us  say,  "I
will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak."  (2.)  In  the  period  of  youth.  Samuel,
Josiah,  Timothy.  Good  to  begin  well,  in  hope  of  ending  well.  "  Wilt  Thou  not
cry  unto  me,  My  Father,  Thou  art  the  guide  of  my  youth  ? "  (3.)  Affer  a  period
of  anxiety  and  suffering.  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  in
the  morning."  Martha  said  to  Mary,  "  The  Master  is  come,  and  calleth  for
thee."  "  Pay  thy  vows."  *'  Arise,  go  to  Bethel,  and  make  there  an  altar  unto
God,'  that  appeared  to  thee  when  thou  fleddest  from  the  face  of  Esau  thy
brother."

Let  us  look  for  the  day  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of
God  and  come  forth  from  their  graves.


(2.)  The  Symbol  from  Bread  and  Water  (vers.  17-20).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  pro-
phet is  commanded  to  take  his  ordi-
nary meals  as  a  man  under  great
apprehensions.  It  is  not,  as  in  chap.
iv.  16,  that  he  is  thus  to  indicate
a  dreadful  scarcity  ai)proaching,  but
rather  the  felt  pressure  of  that  cala-
mity, as  if  the  evil  threatened  would
take  away  all  relish  for  sustenance  to
tne  body  (ver.  18).  Ezekiel  speaks  in
the  Word  of  the  Lord  "  of  the  inhabi-
136


tants  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  country  of
Israel ;  "  a  message  is  to  be  forwarded
to  the  people  who  had  not  been  carried
into  captivity,  to  declare  that  they
should  be  affected  with  anxiety  and
surprise,  "because  its  land,"  i.e.,  feru-
salenis,  *•  becomes  desolate  from  its
fulness;"  where  once  were  life  and
plenty,  the  supply  of  population,
animals,  grain,  &c.,  would  be  griev-
ously and  surprisingly  diminished.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  EZEKIEL.  chap,  xil


HOMILETICS.
(Vers.  17-20.)

When  the  evil  consequences  of  sins  have  to  be  encountered  then  there  may
be  trouble.

I.  On  men.  1.  An  apparently  foolish  course  may  be  appointed  by  the  Lord,
but  *'  the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men."  2.  Hard  service  may  have  to
be  undertaken  for  the  gracious  Master,  but  '*  most  gladly  will  I  glory  in  infir-
mities if  the  power  of  Christ  rest  upon  me."

II.  On  the  necessaries  of  life.  Supplies  for  the  body  may  become  not  sources
of  comfort  but  of  suffering.  Food  and  drink  shall  cause  a  strain  and  pain.  The
bread  be  bread  of  affliction.

in.  On  population,  agriculture,  commerce.  Depression  and  decrease  ensue.
A  nation  no  more  than  an  individual  can  escape  from  the  due  reward  of  its
deeds.

(3.)  The  Foolish  Proverb  (vers.  21-28).

EXEGETICAL    NOTES.— The  utterly  dislodge  the  former,  *'For  I,

hearts  of  the  Jerusalem  people  would  the  Lord,  will  speak  whatever  word

evade  any  fair  application  of  the  omin-  I  will  speak,  and  it  shall  come   to

ous  action  of  Ezekiel,  and  he  is   in-  pass,"  not  in  some  far-off  future,  but

cited  to  aim  a  blow  at  the  evasion,  "in  your  days,  0  house  of  rebellion."

which  took  form  in  a  proverbial  say-  On   the  generation    of  his  contempo-

ing,  ver.  22,  "  The  days  are  prolonged,  raries  would   come   both   tlie    earlier

and  every  vision  perisheth,"  time  is  and  the  later  effects  which  had  been

going  by,  and  not  one  forecast  of  good  declared  certain.

or  evil  has  come  to  pass ;  it  has  been  Vers.  26-28.  An  emphatic  assertion
a  deluding  of  us.  Ver.  23.  Against  of  the  impending  accomplishment  of
this  sentiment  the  communication  from  Ezekiel's  own  prophetic  utterances  is
the  Lord  is,  "The  days  are  near,  and  made  against  the  temporising  of  "the
the  word  of  every  vision,"  the  passing  house  of  Israel,  who  say  the  vision
days  are  inevitably  bringing  on  the  that  he  seeth  is  for  many  days,  and
speedy  fulfilment  of  every  word  folded  for  far  off  times  he  prophesieth."
in  the  imagery  which  has  been  per-  They  believed  his  words  would  come
ceived  by  the  spiritual  vision  of  the  true,  but  not  in  their  experience  at
prophets.  Ver.  25.  Over  against  the  any  rate.  To  meet  that  idea  of  post-
merely  human  prophecies,  which  had  ponement  the  Lord  said,  "None  of  my
largely  contributed  to  the  formation  words  shall  he  delayed  any  more ;
of  the  condemned  proverb,  the  divine  whatever  word  I  shall  speak,  it  shall
truthfulness  would  be  manifested,  and  come  to  pass."

EOMILETIGB.

Men's  Evasion  of  the  Divine  Interference  in  Events.

God  does  not  only  begin.  He  goes  along  with  the  whole  development  of  the
world's  history.  He  can  foretell  any  portion  of  that  history.  By  special  com-
munication or  general  providence  He  proves  that  all  its  "government  is  upon
His  shoulders  ;  "  that  "He  sitteth  on  the  throne  judging  right,"  and  working  so
that  men  should  cease  to  do  evil  and  learn  to  do  well.  There  is  that  in  human
nature  which  reaches  a  point  at  which  it  resiles  from  the  idea  of  this  imman-
ence, where  it  finds  the  absolute  rights  of  God  unwelcome  to  itself.  In  this
state  we  observe —

1S7


CHAP.  XII.  nOMlLETlC  COMMENT AR  Y  .■  EZEKIEL.


I.  The  power  exerted  by  what  is  visible.  "  Prophets  and  preachers  are
men  like  yourselves.  Why  should  you  yield  up  your  souls  that  they  may  ride
over  them  with  what  they  assert  are  messa;;es  from  an  invisible  mighty  Being  ?
What  palpable  proofs  can  they  give  that  He  communicates  with  them,  though
He  never  does  with  you  %  You  might  accept  their  statements  did  you  see  any
clear  fulfilment  of  the  threats  of  punishment  whicli  they  plentifully  cast  forth  ;
but  in  failure  of  such  evidence  you  have  reason  to  make  light  of  the  claims
whicli  they  advance  for  the  recognition  of  the  truth  of  what  they  say.'*  How
shall  these  difficulties  be  overcome  1  ''Let  what  is  righteous  and  true  and  holy
and  good  get  an  honest  hearing  in  your  consciences.  Let  the  operation  of  prin-
ciples, which  is  so  much  more  slow  to  become  obvious  than  the  operation  of  the
physical  forces,  have  due  time  accorded;  you  will  be  brought  to  see  that  your
craving  for  what  is  sensible  is  i^  depreciation  of  that  nobler  part  of  your  nature
which  feels  after  higher  things  ilian  it  sees.  You  may  be  convinced  if  what  is
spiritual  commends  itself  by  its  close  adherence  to  rectitude,  you  are  wrong  in
ignoring  or  postponing  its  indications. "  How  many  hearers  of  the  Word  of  God
will  not  accept  Jesus  Christ  as  Lord,  because  they  expect  some  more  palpable
influences  to  be  brought  into  action !  Do  not  portions  of  modern  society  indi-
cate doubt  and  even  aversion  to  the  demands  of  the  Bible,  because  they  do  not
place  themselves  in  the  light  of  what  is  sinless  and  just  and  unbending  to
worldly  pleasures  1  Thus  space  given  for  repentance  is  too  often  turned  into
space  for  hardening  the  heart  against  the  Unseen  and  Eternal.

II.  Doubts  of  the  efficiency  of  God.  They  may  acknowledge  Him  as  Maker
of  the  undeveloped  world,  but  decline  to  acknowledge  the  signs  that  He  is  act-
ing in  it  now.  They  see  force  of  one  kind  or  other,  and  as  these  forces  always
act  in  uniform  lines,  what  place  is  there  for  a  holy  will  behind  and  before  and
upon  men  in  every  event  ?  So  the  thought  is,  There  is  no  God  in  the  common
acceptation  of  the  term.  There  may  be  a  power  that  is  unique,  but  it  does  not
interfere  in  human  affairs  as  prophets  and  preachers  maintain.  There  is  no
reality  expressed  by  the  words.  The  God  of  Abraham  and  of  Israel,  of  Jesus
Christ  and  His  Church.  Is  it  forgotten  by  such  thinkers  that  the  nature  of
God  must  be  expressed  in  words  and  acts  corresponding  to  itself;  that  He  must
abide  and  must  operate  age  after  age  ;  that  whatever  be  the  superficial  sameness
of  society  and  slumbering  of  retributions,  He  has  not  forgotten  the  work  of  His
hands?     "I  say  the  word  and  will  perform  it."

III.  Discredit  cast  upon  personal  application  of  divine  messages.  In  this
class  it  is  not  said.  There  is  no  prospect  of  the  evil  threatened  ever  coming  near ;
but  rather,  There  is  no  likelihood  of  it  touching  us.  '*  When  the  overflowing
scourge  shall  pass  through,  it  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  us."  Men  who  have
committed  iniquity  for  years  do  so  with  impunity,  nations  which  have  been
selfish  and  oppressive  have  not  been  subjected  to  penalties,  notwithstanding
what  men  speaking  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  say.  We  may  believe  that  not  in
our  days  are  their  words  to  be  practically  illustrated.  Thus  is 'produced  a  feeling
of  security  J  if  not  of  unbelief.  The  heart  is  set  towards  putting  far  off  the  evil
day.  It  is  a  token  of  deepest  immersion  in  spiritual  darkness  when  men  take
the  apparent  absence  of  a  frowning  face  as  proof  that  God's  servants  are  not
justified  in  saying  that  it  is  there.  It  would  be  seen  if  darkness  did  not  blind  the
eyes.  The  feeling  is  widespxad.  The  darkness  covered  the  mass  of  Israel.  It
affects  and  will  affect  multitudes  in  these  later  days.  "  When  the  Son  of  Man
Cometh,  shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth  ?  '*  What  need  to  question  all  our
spiritual  security  to  see  whether  it  results  from  trust  in  God,  or  from  a  vague
idea  that  we  shall  escape  portending  ill,  that  if  others  are  to  be  sufferers  for  sin
we  shall  not  be  !

1.  Common  sayings  are  not  always  true  sayings.     They  may  pasg  current
in  houses,  shops,  meetings,  but  when  they  have  to  stand  a  cross-examination
138


HOMimTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL.  chap.  xin.

•
how  many  utterly  break  down  and  show  themselves  to  be  bubbles — baseless  and
hollow.

2.  God's  sayings  are  certain.  He  has  spoken  them  in  the  constitution  of
man  and  that  of  the  world,  as  well  as  also  by  holy  men  commissioned  to  declare
His  will.  However  prolonged  the  working  out  of  His  institutes  be,  they  must
develop  fully  and  finally.  He  has  eternity  to  act  in.  See  that  faitli  is  placed
in  Christ  Jesus,  who  gives  insight  of  the  thoughts  and  ways — the  love  and  the
wrath  of  God  the  Holy  and  True.  We  receive  "a  kingdom  that  cannot  be
moved,  and  serve  God  acceptably  with  reverence  and  godly  fear."

3.  The  preference  of  man's  sayings  may  hasten  the  manifestation  of  the  truth
of  God's  sayings.  The  boldness  and  mockery  of  deniers  of  God's  claims  may
make  Him  to  become  a  swift  witness  for  His  veracity  and  against  men's  despisal
of  it.  Men  who  taunt  Him  to  "make  speed,  hasten  His  word  that  we  may  see
it,"  may  find,  in  the  midst  of  sorrows,  that  they  have  brought  upon  themselves
swift  destruction.  Repentance  may  prevent  judgment ;  hardening  of  heart  aggra-
vates and  expedites  it.  In  the  Lord  alone  is  there  sufficient  to  assure  us  that  He
will  not  forget,  delay,  change.

(4.)  Of  False  Prophets  and  Prophetesses  (Chap,  xiii.)

Condemnation  of  the  Prophets  (vers.  1-16).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  de-  representations  of  God  are  powerful

claration   in  xii.   24  was  that  unsub-  He  will   raise  up  a  standard  against

stantiated      and     delusive     prophecy  them.

should  cease  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  Ver.  3.  They  are  threatened.    *'Woe

true,  and  in  this  chapter  a  description  to  the  prophets,  fools,"  not  merely  in

and  denunciation  of  the  former   are  going  where  they  were  not  sent,  but

given.    The  men  and  women  who  had  actually  godless  men  (Ps.  xiv.  1),  and

taken  upon  themselves   to   announce  consequently  '*who  walk  after  their

*'  salvation  without  repentance,  grace  own  spirit,  and  that  which  they  have

without  judgment,"  were  found  both  not  seen."     Not  by  the  insight  which

in  Judea  and  among  the  captive  Jews.  the  Lord  gives  (Rev.  i.  2,  11,  &c.)     A

The  utterance  of  Ezekiel  is    akin   to  twofold  aspect  of  a  revelation  of  God

that  of  Jeremiah  (chap,  xxiii.).     Both  is   presented.      Its   starting -point.      It

indicate  that  the  wishes  of  the  people  begins  in  an  impression  made   on   a

framed  a  mould  for  conclusions  as  to  man's  spirit,  and  is  not  originated  by

the  will  of  the  Lord.     They  made  the  his   own  thoughts   and   fancies.      Its

prophets  they  believed  in.  goal.     The  statement  of  truth  accor-

Vers.  1-7  describe  the  characteristics  dant    with    God's    justice   and   love.

of  the  unauthorised  prophets.    Ver.  2.  The  light  of  the  face  of  God,  not  the

Ezekiel   is  enjoined  to  prophecy  "  to  man's  inner  light,  is  to  satisfy  the  calls

the   prophets   of  Israel ; "    they  had  for   guidance  in  right  thoughts   and

popular    sympathy    and     acceptance,  ways.    Christ,  and  not  humanity,  must

The    spirit    of   the    age    approved    of  be  our  test  of  truth,
them,  although  they  were  ''prophets         Ver.  4.  " As  foxes  among  ruins  thy

out    of   their    own    hearts."      They  prophets,   0   Israel,    are."      Deserted

might  sincerely  hold  what  they  said  places  are  a  favourite  resort  of  foxes.

as  true,  but  their  words  were  nothing  *' Because    of   the  mountain    of  Zion

except  the  products  of  their  imagina-  which    is    desolate,    the    foxes    walk

tions ;    anything  but  the  communica-  upon  it"   (Lam.    v.    18).     And  those

tions  of  God.    *' Hear  the  word  of  the  who  were  counted  messensjers  of  the

Lord."      That   which    they   had   not  Lord  found  their  sphere  of  profit  in

within  they  shall  obtain  from  with-  the  omens  of  the  desolation  of  Jeru-

out,    and    to   their   shame.      If   false  sal  em.

139


CtlAP,   XlTI.


nOMlLETlC  COMMENT  AMY :  EZEKIEL.


Ver.  6.  Israel  by  sins  had  become
exposed  to  the  assaults  of  divine
penalties ;  but  its  favoured  prophets
had  acted  like  unpatriotic  cowards  in
the  crisis  of  danger.  **Ye  have  not
gone  up  into  the  breaches,  nor  made
up  a  wall  about  the  house  of  Israel  to
stand  in  the  battle  in  the  day  of  the
Lord."  The  moral  and  spiritual  evils
of  the  people  were  as  gaps  in  the  wall
of  Jerusalem ;  but  the  prophets  had
done  nothing  by  reproof  and  personal
conduct  to  urge  to  repentance  and  re-
formation. They  had  nothing  of  that
self-humiliation  and  intercession  for  the
guilty  which  was  manifested  by  Abra-
ham (Gen.  xviii.  23-33),  Moses  (Ex.
xxxii.  11-13),  Paul  (Rom.  ix.  3).

Ver.  6.  All  pseudo-prophets  might
not  be  deceiving,  but  though  **the
Lord  had  not  sent  them,"  yet  "  they
hoped  to  establish  the  word,"  i.e.,  they
tried  to  persuade  the  people  that  the
unsu})ported  promises  made  to  them
would  be  fully  realised,  with  this
result  alone,  that  the  falsity  would
be  all  the  more  painfully  broiigbt
home.

Vers.  8-16.  Announce  the  conse-
quences of  prophesying  without  divine
impulse.  Ver.  8  states  that  the  Lord
is  against  the  prophets;  and  ver.  9
intimates  three  calamities  which  shall
befall  them  in  relation  to  the  new
theocratic  regime.  They  shall  neither
be  numbered  "in  the  council  of  my
people,"  they  will  not  be  members  of
the  influential  and  ruling  circle ;  nor
**be  written  in  the  register  of  the
house  of  Israel,"  they  Mill  not  be
struck  out  of  that  roll  which  has  given


them  a  name  and  place  among  the
citizens  of  Israel,  but  they  will  not
be  entered  into  the  roll  of  the  Israel
Mdiich  shall  arise  from  the  faithful
remnant ;  and  the  portion  which  is  in
exile  "shall  not  come  into  the  land
of  Israel"  (ver.  10).  Tlie  erring  pro-
phets had  brought  condemnatioii  upon
themselves,  and  produced  such  a  state
that  "it,"  the  people,  "built  a  wall>
and  behold,  they,"  the  prophets,  "  coat
it  with  plaster"  (or  whitewash,  Fair.,
who  refers  to  Paul's  indignant  charge
on  the  high  priest,  "Thou  whited
wall ! "  Acts  xxiii.  3) ;  ministering
to  the  deceptive  hopes  of  the  people
instead  of  exposing  their  worthlessness.
The  deluding  of  the  prophets  would
not  last  (ver.  11).  "It,"  the  wall,
daubed  "with  whited  plaster,  shall
fall"  by  means  of  agencies  controlled
by  God  the  Lord:  the  "rain,"  "hail-
stones," and  "storm,"  which  should
be  launched  against  it.  Ver.  14  applies
the  figure  to  the  reality,  and  threatens
the  destruction  of  those  who  believed
a  lie.  "I  cast  it  to  the  ground,  and  its
foundation  is  laid  bare  and  it  falls,
and  ye  are  consumed  in  the  midst
of  it,"  i.e.  of  Jerusalem  (comp.  Matt,
vii.  24-27).  Ver.  15.  Both  deceived
and  deceivers  would  be  overwhelmed :
"  And  I  will  say  unto  you.  The  wall
is  not,  and  they  who  coated  it  are
not."  Ver.  16.  Ezekiel  rounds  off  this
portion  of  his  utterance  with  a  thrust
at  "the  prophets  of  Israel"  who
affirmed  that  they  saw  "a  vision  of
peace  for  her,"  Jerusalem,  "  and  there
is  no  peace."


H0MILETIC8.
Misleading  Hopes  of  Freedom  feom  Future  Evils.

The  Jews  entertained  delusive  hopes  regarding  the  future  welfare  of  their
city  and  land,  and  observation  proves  that,  where  the  Gospel  is  preached  in
town  or  country,  many  hearers  indulge  in  ungrounded  trust  as  to  their  escape
from  the  judgment  of  God  against  their  doings.  The  reasons  which  are  at
work  to  produce  this  mistake  are  similar  in  the  present  age  to  those  which
operated  in  the  past.     They  are —

I.  Slighting  notions  as  to  the  evil  of  sin.  People  may  neglect  to  follow  a
prescribed  course  of  obedience,  or  may  openly  take  the  course  wiiich  cuts  across
it ;  but  they  are  not  humbled  for  so  doing.  They  make  ud  eaccuses.  "  I  am
140


BOMILETW  COMMENTAUY :  EZEKTEL,  chap.  xni.


not  like  this  publican."  **I  have  a  good  heart."  '*I  liave  not  done  thinga
worthy  to  suffer  destruction."  At  tb.e  base  of  all  wrong  thoughts,  at  the  base
of  all  erroneous  teachings  as  to  man*s  position  before  G-od,  lies  a  misconceptiou
of  the  guilt  of  secret  or  presumptuous  sins.  All  unrighteousness  is  sin  and  a
gap  through  which  unknown  penalty  rushes  on  the  guilty.

II.  Listening  to  one's  own  wishes.  We  do  not  wish  to  count  ourselves
really  *' miserable  sinners,"  or  to  look  at  the  signs  which  show  that  we  are
moving  down  the  hellward  slopes  of  sin  ;  so  we  evade  the  accusations  which
the  true  and  faithful  witness  brings  against  us.  His  voice  is  not  heard,  or,  if
we  cannot  ignore  it,  we  easily  suppose  that  its  warnings  must  be  m^ant  for
others,  not  for  us.  How  needful  to  arm  ourselves  with  the  mind  which  will
ask,  Am  I  regulating  my  convictions  by  what  I  wish  or  by  what  the  Lord
wishes  ]  Are  the  teachings  to  which  I  listen  such  as  I  like  to  have,  or  are  they
based  upon  the  truth  and  holiness  of  God  ?

III.  Influenced  by  misguiding  teachers.  This  influence  is  exerted  by  self-
originated  doctrines.  They  speak  from  their  own  heart.  They  proj^ound  and
defend  opinions  grounded  on  their  views  of  things,  and  not  on  the  reality.
They  can  evolve  worlds,  form  conscience,  do  away  with  all  necessity  of  a  living
God.  They  promise  smooth  things  to  a  people  who  have  a  form  of  godliness.
They  hide  the  present  damnation  of  sin  un<ier  statements  which  excuse  defec-
tive and  immoral  conduct,  and  its  future  under  explanations  which  impugn
eternal  justice.  By  plausible  help.  They  covered  over  ugly  and  dangerous
inlets  of  evil,  and  they  seemed  safe ;  but  the  covering  was  of  too  flimsy  a  kind.
It  did  not  show  lives  lived  differently  from  those  of  the  transgressors.  It  did
not  indicate  effectual  prayer  for  the  people.  It  did  not  denounce  sin  and  warn
of  its  impending  punishment:  or  it  did  so  in  such  general  terms  that  none  are
convinced  that  they  are  the  evildoers  who  are  doomed  to  the  overwhelming
wrath  of  Him  before  whom  evil  cannot  stand.  By  their  professed  authorimtion.
They  prophesied  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  though  He  knew  them  not.  They
had  so  far  regard  to  God  as  to  believe  that  they  ought  to  say  only  what  He
commanded.  They  may  speak  what  they  think ;  sincerely  suppose  that  they
have  right  on  their  side ;  but  they  are  deceived.  They  see  that  which  might  be
perceived  to  be  a  lie,  thus  they  buoy  up  their  hearers  with  false  hopes  and  do
untold  harm  to  bodies  and  souls  by  their  errors.

"  Some  teach  men  to  expect  safety  from  a  comparative  decency  of  moral
character ;  some  on  account  of  formal  and  superstitious  observances  ;  some
because  they  belong  to  an  orthodox  part  of  the  Church  and  have  got  some
notions  of  certain  important  doctrines ;  some  because  of  their  impressions  and
enthusiastic  reveries ;  and  others  even  by  a  direct  abuse  of  the  gospel  and
making  Christ  the  minister  of  sin.  .  .  .  All  are  alike  distant  from  Christ  the
true  foundation  :  they  build  not  on  Him  by  a  penitent  faith  that  worketh  by
love,  and  produceth  obedience ;  they  either  leave  out  His  merits  and  atonement,
or  the  work  of  His  new-creating  Spirit,  or  the  substantial  fruits  of  righteous-
ness ;  and  in  different  ways  endeavour  to  varnish,  paint  and  repair  the  old
building,  instead  of  erecting  a  new  one  on  a  new  foundation,  for  *an  habitation
of  God  through  the  Spirit.'"— W.  F.

1.  Judgment  will  come  notwithstanding  hopes  of  escaping  it.  Nothing  of  man
can  avail  to  resist  it.  The  daubed  wall  sliall  fall  and  overwhelm  misleaders
and  misled.

2.  Beware  lest  thou  flatter  with  a  trust  to  hopes  of  safety  which  are  not  draion
from  God*s  will  revealed  in  Christ,  Thou  hast  the  knowledge  given  of  Him.  Bo
true  and  faithful  to  Him  only.


141


CHAP.  XIII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


Condemnation  of  the  Prophetesses  (vers.  17-23).

EXEGETICAL    NOTES. — A    dis-  security,    they    entered    on    practices

position  to  prophecy  was  in  the  air ;  intended  to  persuade  the  Israelites  to

so  women  as   well  as  men,   in  Jeru-  the  same  confidence,  while  destruction

salem  and  among  the  exiles,  were  in-  only  would  result  to  them,

fluenced  by  it.     Naturally  it  assumed  Ver.  19.  "And  will  ye  profane  me

different  forms  in  the  one  from  what  among  my  people,"  by  prophesying  in

it  did  in  the  other.     Men  daub  walls,  my  name,  for  handfuls  of  barley  and

women   sew,    make   veils,   &c.     Both  for  pieces  of  bread,  offerings  such  as

are  deceiving,  and  shall  certainly  be  were  brought  when  consulting  a  seer

set  at  nought.     There  seems  no  weight  (1  Sam.  ix.  7,  8 ;  1  Kings  xiv.  3  ;  cf.

to  be  accorded  to  the  suggestion  that  Mic.  iii.  5) ;  and  by  declaring  that  ye

the  existence  of  these  prophetesses  was  speak  the  words  of   the  Lord   when

proof  of  *'  a  fresh  instance  of  declen-  they  are  not,  the  result  of  such  pro-

sion  into  heathen  usages."     The  gift  faning  the  Lord  being  "to  slay  souls

of  true  prophecy  came  to  holy  women  whicli  should  not  die  and  to  keep  alive

in  the  earlier  history  of  Israel  before  souls  which  should  not  live,  by  your

Christ  and  also  in  the  later,  and  might  lying  to  my  people,  hearers  of  lying,

be  pretended  to.  Ver.  20.   Punishment  of  the  women.

Ver.  18.    Ignorance  of  the  practices  "  Behold  I  [come]  to  your  coverings

alluded  to  here  stands  in  the  way  of  with  which  ye  hunt  souls  as  [if  they

clearing  up  the  meaning  of  this  verse,  were]  flying  [birds],  and  I  tear  them

We  can  decide  only  by  probabilities,  off  your  arms."     Their  snares  shall  be

"Woe    unto    the  women    who    sew  spread  in  vain,  *I  set  free  the  souls

coverings    on    every   joint    of     the  which  ye  hunt,  the  souls "  which  ye

hands."    Whether  these  coverings  were  deal  with   "as  flying  [birds]."     Ver.

cushions  or  amulets  or  other  objects,  21.  "  And  I  tear  your  veils  and  deliver

their  use  seems  to  have  been  to  make  my   people    from    your   hand."      Ye

an  appearance  which  would  impress  seduce  them  by  your  various  artifices,

the  people.     So   with    the   following,  so  as    to    destroy   the  people,   and   I

"And  who  make  veils  on  the  head  would  expose  your  pretences  so  as  to

of  every  stature ; "  under  the  envelop-  save  them.     Ver.  22.   Because  the  pro-

ment  of  clothing  on  the  head  adapted  phetesses    have   acted    so    that    false

to  their  varying  size — figure,  age,  con-  impressions  of  God  are  produced  on

dition — they  fitted  themselves  to  act  the  mind  of  the  righteous  and  wicked,

upon  their  hearers,  "  to  hunt  [as  bird-  disheartening  the  former  in  good  and

catcher's]    souls,"    and    thus    ensnare  confirming    the    latter   in    evil    ways,

to   their  ruin.     The  verse  condemns  "Therefore  ye  shall  not  see  vanity

sensational  methods  of  divination  re-  and  shall  not  divine  divinations  any

sorted  to  by  the  prophetesses,  whether  more,  and  I  will  deliver  my  people

the  method  was  by  gesture  or  dress  out  of  your  hand."     It  is  with  God

or  word.     Hence  the  question  of  sur-  they   are   in    conflict,   and   the    utter

prise  at  the  infatuation  which  would  failure    of    their    prophecies    will   so

use  such  means.     "  The  souls  of  my  appear  that  "  ye  shall  know  that  I  am

people  will  ye  hunt   and  the   souls  the  Lord : "  knowledge  of  God  is  for

of  yourselves  will  ye  keep  alive  % "  the  guilty  a  doom,  for  the  righteous  a

Persuading  themselves  of  their  own  security.

EOMILETIGS,

Women  in  Keligious  Movements.

Serious  events  were  about  to  occur  in  Israel.     The  shadow  of  them  was
cast  over  women  as  well  as  men.     Spiritual  influence  knows  no  sex.     Women
142


HOMILETIC  GOMMENTARY:  EZEKlEL.  chap.  xiv.

•'show  piety  at  home,"  in  the  more  retired  ways  along  which  the  little  ones,
the  weak,  the  downcast  of  the  world  make  their  journey,  hut  the  groundswell
of  religious  emotion  rolling  over  a  people  impels  some  of  its  women  into  open
and  even  audacious  appearances.

I.  The  women  assume  deceptive  methods.  By  dresses,  or  gestures,  or  other
devices  they  pander  to  the  senses  so  as  to  attract  and  impress  those  who  hear
them.  If  women  are  naturally  more  disposed  to  such  methods  than  men,  yet
the  warning  is  of  unrestricted  interest,  that  external  representations  in  religion
are  of  uncertain  tendency ;  strong  to  promote  error,  they  are  poor  allies  in
advancing  truth.

II.  Women  are  induced  to  act  from  unworthy  motives.  There  is  desire  for
'power.  They  strive  to  move  and  control  souls,  and  thus,  as  in  later  days,  to
"  glory  in  the  flesh  "  with  their  adherents.  There  is  self-regard.  They  persuade
themselves  that  things  will  turn  out  so  as  to  bring  security  for  themselves,  to  save
their  own  souls,  even  though  they  shrink  from  the  narrow  way  of  life  and  endure
no  hardness.  There  is  greed,  A  very  trifling  present  gets  them  to  say  that  all
is  well  wlien  all  is  not  well ;  that  that  is  right  which  is  wrong  before  God.

XXL  They  are  held  responsible  for  their  procedure.  They  hide  the  threaten-
ings  of  the  Lord,  or  pare  down  their  awful  meaning.  They  comfort  souls  in
sin  ;  distress  souls  seeking  God.  The  painful  result  of  their  lies  is  that  they
hunt  into  peril  those  whom  God  would  rescue;  seize  and  kill  souls  whom  God
would  save.  Standing  thus  against  God's  love  and  grace,  they  are  counted  out
for  condemnation,  as  the  false  prophets  were.     She  who  sins  must  suffer  loss.

Error  Preached  (ver.  22).

I.  The  painful  effects  of  erroneous  teachings.  The  good  are  disheartened
by  scruples,  perplexities,  fears,  and  weakened  to  pursue  their  journey  in  the
ways  of  the  Lord :  the  evil  are  emboldened  to  go  on  the  broad  road  by  opiates
to  conscience  and  confirmation  to  unbelief.

n.  The  contrariety  to  God  in  them.  He  is  the  God  of  all  comfort  to  those
that  fear  His  name ;  but  tliis  teaching  breaks  the  inflow  of  His  promises.  He
would  make  the  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  to  live  through  faith  in  Christ  the
Truth ;  but  this  teaching  prevents  faith,  and  He  can  do  no  mighty  work  of
salvation.

IIL  The  valid  test  for  thent  When  high  pretensions,  dogmatic  operations,
fascinating  profi'ers  act  so  as  to  relax  supreme  regard  to  truth,  righteousness,
purity,  and  a  true  follower  of  Christ  is  depressed  ;  or  when  hopes  are  produced
in  the  mind  of  those  who  are  not  yielding  themselves  unto  God  that  they  will
live,  then  each  class  may  know  that  the  words  they  hear  are  opposed  to  those
of  Him  who  is  the  true  and  living  One,  and  are  condemned  by  Him.

1.  A  people  professing  to  know  the  Lord  are  not  unaffected  by  the  popular  erroneous
teaching  of  their  day.  2.  They  may  hope  for  His  interference  in  their  behalf  for  He
lays  their  real  interest  deeply  to  heart,

Jehovah's  Eefusal  to  allow  Idolaters  to  enquire  of  Him:  the
certainty  of  the  Judgments  denounced  against  them  (Chap,
xiv.)

EXEGETIC  AL    NOTES.— The  They  make  an  appeal  to  God's  mercy,

visit  of  the  elders  of  the  people  to  the  but  are  silent  concerning  the  greatness

prophet  was  the  occasion  of  this  word  of  their  sin  or  any  purpose  of  repent-

of  God.  ^   They  were  alarmed  by  the  ance.     These  elders  were  not  the  re-

threatenings    which   the   prophet   ut-  presentatives  of  the  majority  of  the

tered,  but  they  yet  hoped  to  obtain  exiles  who  practised  the   most  open

from  him  a  more  favourable  answer,  and   the   boldest   forms   of  idolatry ;

143


CHAP.  XIV.


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTAnY:  EZEKIEL,


but  rather  of  those  wlio,  thongli  they  answertotheirinquiry  extends  to  verse
outwardly  feared  God,  yet  inwardly  11.  The  latter  part  of  the  chapter  de-
served the  world  and  tlie  spirit  of  the  clares  that  the  coming  judgments  on
a«;e.     "These  men  have  set  up  idols      Jerusalem  will  not  be  averted  even  for

the  sake  of  the  righteous  few  therein.


in  their  heart "  (ver.  3).    The  prophet's


The  Lord  gives  no  Answer  to  the  Idolaters  (vers.  1-11).


Ver.    1.     "The   elders   of   Israel."

'*  These  men  were  not  deputies  from
the  Israelites  in  Palestine,  but  elders
of  the  exiles  among  whom  Ezekiel  had
been  labouring"  (Keil).  Their  olject
in  this  visit  is  not  distinctly  stated,
but  probably  it  was  that  they  might
know  something  further  concerning
the  duration  of  the  captivity,  or  the
fate  of  Jerusalem.  Unlike  the  elders
in  chap.  xx.  1,  they  had  not  come
with  the  definite  purpose  of  inquiring
of  the  Lord.

Vers.  2  and  3.  "These  men  have
set  up  their  idols  in  their  heart."
They  w^ere  not  given  to  the  grosser
forms  of  idolatry,  but  they  were
strangers  to  the  true  worshi[)  of  God.
/They  had  setup  someobject  of  their  own
|Creation,  which  they  put  in  the  place  of
IGod.  They  allowed  their  minds  to  be
^deluded  by  phantoms.  In  heart  and
^pirit  they  were  one  with  the  worst
Idolaters  around  them.  "  And  put
the  stumhling-hlock  of  their  iniq.mty
before  their  face."  They  even  refused
to  put  away  idols  from  their  presence.
They  sought  not  to  flee  from  tempta-
tion by  removing  what  would  be  an
occasion  and  reminder  of  sin.  "  Should
I  be  enoLuired  of  at  all  by  them  ?  "
This  question  implies  a  strong  negation.

Ver.  4.  "I  the  Lord  will  answer
him  that  cometh  according  to  the
multitude  of  his  idols."  The  form
of  the  verb  to  "  answer "  gives  the
meaning,  "I  the  Lord  will  answer
him  by  myself,"  instead  of  by  the
prophet.  The  manner  in  which  the
Lord  will  answer  the  idolatry  is  set
forth  in  ver.  8.  They  are  to  be  treated
as  all  idols  should  be  treated.

Ver.  5.  "  That  I  may  take  the
house  of  Israel  in  their  heart."  The
Lord  will  reach  the  very  seat  of  idola-
try, touch  their  conscience,  and  bring
down  their  heart  by  judgments.  '
144


Vers.  6-8.  Repetition  of  the  threat
already  uttered,  and  also  of  the  sum
mons  to  repentance.  ''  Repent,  and
turn  yourselves  from  your  idols  ;  and
turn  away  your  faces  from  all  your
abominations."  "  We  have  here  a
combination  of  the  Kal  and  Hiphil
conjugations  for  the  sake  of  emphasis.
Return  unreservedly  from  your  abom-
inable idolatries.  Be  no  longer  es-
tranged from  me,  either  in  heart  or
practice.  They  were  neither  to  han-
ker after  in  desire,  nor  look  towards
the  accursed  thing  "  (Henderson).
"Every  one  of  the  house  of  Israel,
or  of  the  stranger  that  sojourneth  in
Israel."  All  who  hypociitically  ap-
plied to  the  prophet,  whether  pro-
selytes or  native  Jews,  were  liable  to
the  same  judgments.  Strangers  were
only  permitted  to  dwell  in  the  land  of
Israel  on  condition  of  forsaking  all
idolatry  and  all  moral  abominations,
and  worshipping  Jehovah  alone  (Lev.
XX.  2,  xviii.  26,  xvii.  10;  Ex.  xii.
19).  "And  will  make  him  a  sign
and  a  proverb."  '*The  expression  is
a  pregnant  one ;  I  make  him  desolate,
so  that  he  becomes  a  sign  and  pro-
verb "  (Keil).  "  An  exemplary  punish-
ment" (Heng.)

Vers.  9-11.  No  prophet  is  to  give
any  other  answer.  "And  if  the  pro-
phet be  deceived  when  he  hath
spoken  a  thing,  I  the  Lord  have
deceived  that  prophet."  He  who
delivers  any  other  message,  though
he  may  think  that  he  speaks  the  word
of  the  Lord,  is  not  a  true  prophet.
When  God  is  represented  as  deceiving
such  a  prophet,  we  are  to  understand
something  more  than  merely  a  per-
missive sense,  as  if  God  allowed  it
and  did  not  interfere  to  prevent  the
deception.  It  was  Jehovah  who  sent
the  lying  spirit  into  the  prophets  of
Ahab,  and  for  this  very  purpose,  that


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKTEL.


OHAP.  XIV.


by  predicting  success  to  the  king  they
might  secure  his  fall  (1  Kings  xxii.
20,  (fea)  "This  persuading  of  the  pro-
phets to  the  utterance  of  self-willed
words,  which  have  not  been  inspired
by  God,  only  takes  place  in  persons
who  admit  evil  into  themselves,  and  is
designed  to  tempt  them  and  lead  them
to  decide  whether  they  will  endeavour
to  resist  and  conquer  the  sinful  inclina-
tions of  their  hearts,  or  will  allow  them
to  sliape  themselves  into  outward
deeds,  in  which  case  they  will  become
ripe  for  judgment.  It  is  in  this  sense
that  God  persuades  such  a  prophet,
in  order  that  He  may  then  cut  him
off  out  of  His  people  "  {Keil).  « If
matters  should  turn  out  differently
from  what  the  prophet  expected  and
foretold,  I  have  so  ordered  them  in
the  course  of  my  providence  as  to
issue  in  such  a  result.  It  is  the  pre-
rogative of  Deity  to  control  the  sinful
operations  of  created  minds,  without
interfering  with  free  agency"  {Hen-
derson). "  The  punishment  of  the
prophet  shall  be  even  as  the  punish-
ment of  him  that  seeketh  unto  him."
The  false  prophets  and  those  who  in-
quire of  them  are  both  alike  guilty,


and  come  into  the  same  condemna-
tion. Neither  in  one  nor  in  the  other
was  there  any  desire  to  learn  the
truth,  but  rather  to  seek  excuse  for
their  sins  and  errors  even  by  the  dar-
ing im[)iety  of  demanding  for  them
the  sanctions  of  relidon.  "That  the
house  of  Israel  may  no  more  go  astray
from  me,  neither  be  polluted  any  more
with  all  their  transgressions."  "It
serves  to  purify  the  people  of  God
For  the  particular  sinful  generation  it
flows  from  the  principle  of  retribution  ;
but  for  the  whole  community  of  God
a  purpose  of  mercy  lies  at  the  ground
of  the  exercise  of  this  retribution.
The  prophet  here  clearly  opens  up
the  view  to  the  light  which  shines
behind  the  darkness."  (Ileng,)  "It
was  to  this  end  that,  in  the  last  times
of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  God  allowed
false  prophecy  to  prevail  so  mightily,
— namely,  that  it  might  accelerate  the
process  of  distinguishing  between  the
righteous  and  the  wicked ;  and  then,
by  means  of  the  judgment  which  de-
stroyed the  wicked,  purify  His  nation
and  lead  it  on  to  the  great  end  of  its
calling  "  (Keil).


EOMILETIGS.
Hypocritical  Inquirers  after  God.

These  elders  had  come  as  a  deputation  from  among  the  exiles  in  order  to
consult  Ezekiel  as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord.  They  had  come  from  a  distance,  and
are  to  be  distinguished  from  those  mentioned  in  chap.  viii.  1  who  were  already
with  the  prophet.  We  are  not  told  expressly  what  their  purpose  was.  They
may  have  sought  guidance  concerning  some  question  which  they  felt  to  be  a
difficulty.  They  may  have  simply  waited  to  hear  what  seasonable  truth  the
prophet  had  still  to  utter.  But  from  ver.  3  we  learn  that  they  certainly  did
come  in  the  character  of  inquirers.  And  the  answer  which  the  Lord  gives
through  theprophet  shows  that  they  were  not  sincere,  but  hypocritical  inquirers.
We  have  here  the  great  features  of  all  such.

L  They  closely  imitate  the  conduct  of  real  inquirers.  Hypocrites  are
generally  described  as  those  who  deceive  others  by  making  an  outward  show  of
piety.  But  the  sacred  writers  call  those  hypocrites  not  only  who  deceived  others,
but  deceived  even  themselves.  These  closely  imitate  the  religious  actions  of
the  pious,  but  they  are  ignorant  of  those  deep  spiritual  principles  upon  which
such  conduct  is  founded.  These  have  no  true  knowledge  of  God.  They  only
know  Him  by  tradition  and  the  customs  of  religious  service  and  worship.  These
elders  had  some  of  the  qualities  of  real  inquirers  after  the  mind  and  will  of  God,
1.  They  were  already  stirred  by  the  message  of  the  prophet.  They  took  alarm  at  his
threatenings.      They  were  afraid  at  God's  judgments.      2.    They  come  to  ths


CHAP.  XIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


prophet,  as  an  inspired  messenger  of  God^  for  further  counsel  They  were  the  sub-
jects of  religious  awakening,  and  professed  themselves  ready  to  learn  all  the  will
of  God.  Men  may  go  as  far  as  this  without  any  true  and  essential  knowledge
of  the  realities  of  religion.

II.  They  lack  the  proper  characteristics  of  real  inquirers.  1.  They  apply  to
religious  teachers,  not  to  be  instructed  in  God^s  will,  but  la  be  confirmed  in  their  own
super stitions  and  errors.  They  were  ready  to  bear  and  obey  the  pro])het  so  long
as  he  prophesied  after  their  own  heart.  While  religion  did  not  interfere  with
their  cherished  convictions  and  prospects  they  were  ready  to  obey  its  precepts
and  ordinances.  They  did  not  really  believe  that  the  threatened  judgments
would  come  to  pass,  and  they  desired  a  prophet  who  would  confirm  them  in  their
false  hopes.  Such  men  feel  a  certain  satisfaction  in  heaping  to  themselves
teachers.  In  some  way  they  feel  the  necessity  of  obtaining  the  sanctions  of
religion.  But  they  come  to  the  prophet  not  to  learn,  but  to  be  confirmed  in  the
purpose  of  their  evil  heart.  They  have  not  learned  what  it  is  to  surrender  the
mind  as  well  as  the  heart  and  will  to  God.  2.  They  retain  sin  in  their  heart,
though  they  avoid  the  outward  manifestation  of  it.  They  aV)stained  from  the  gross
forms  of  idolatry  which  were  practised  by  their  countrymen,  but  "  they  set  up
their  idols  in  their  heart"  (ver.  3).  The  real  root-principle  of  idolatry  was  still
in  them.  3.  They  take  no  steps  to  remove  the  occasions  of  sin.  '*  They  put  the
stumbling-block  of  their  iniquity  before  their  face"  (ver.  3).  While  these  out-
ward temptations  and  means  of  sin  are  suflfered  to  remain,  it  is  of  no  use  to  seek
first  to  cleanse  the  heart.  Images  must  first  be  destroyed,  else  there  is  little
})rospect  of  rooting  out  idolatry  from  the  land.  Religious  teachers  should  testify
against  both  outward  and  inward  idolatry.  If  idols  are  not  removed  from  the  eyes
of  men  the  temptation  to  worship  them  will  remain,  however  faithful  the  teaching
may  be  against  the  sin  of  it.  The  outward  forms  of  superstition  should  first  be
destroyed,  else  there  is  little  hope  of  promoting  the  pure  worship  of  the  heart.

Ill  They  are  exposed  to  terrible  judgments.  Even  though  they  inquire  of
a  true  prophet  and  cannot  be  charged  witli  open  transgression.  1.  They  cannot
hope  to  deceive  God,  who  sees  and  knows  the  heart.  God  can  see  into  the  depths  of
the  heart,  which  is  the  real  man.  It  is  the  sinful  heart  within  which  makes  the
outward  temptations  of  the  world  dangerous.  2.  They  are  left  to  the  action  of  the
law  of  retribution.  Retribution  in  Jcind^  "  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  idols  "
(ver.  4).  They  trusted  in  idols ;  let  them  have  them  now.  Let  them  see  what
their  own  refuges  can  do  for  them.  God  refuses  to  be  inquired  of  them.  *'  He
heareth  not  sinners"  (John  ix.  31).  The  Word  of  God  is  taken  away  from  the
despisers  of  the  truth  (Acts  xiii.  46),  There  is  a  time  when  God  gives  an
answer,  but  not  as  men  desire,  and  there  is  also  a  time  when  He  refuses  to
answer.  In  both  these  modes  of  treatment  He  shows  His  righteous  indignation.
Sinners  are  left  without  answer  or  help  in  order  that  they  might  come  to  the
true  knowdedsre  of  their  sin.

rV.  Their  only  hope  for  escape  is  by  a  thorough  repentance.  1.  The  heart
must  he  turned  to  God.  "  Repent  and  turn  yourselves  from  your  idols  "  (ver.  6).
The  Lord  will  not  share  His  glory  with  another.  The  heart  must  be  entirely
given  up  to  the  service  and  worship  of  the  only  God.  2.  The  outward  occasions
of  sin  must  be  removed.  **  Turn  your  faces  from  all  your  abominations  "  (ver.  6).
They  must  avoid  the  outward  forms  of  idolatry  lest  they  should  become  again  a
temptation  and  a  snare.  Their  repentance  must  be  a  complete  reformation  both
of  the  outer  and  of  the  inner  life.

Idolatry  in  the  Heart  (ver.  3),

Idolatry  is  an  old  sin.    The  worship  of  the  true  God  is  older  ;  but  it  was  soon
corrupted,  for  men  "  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge  "  (Rom.  i.  28).
i4(>


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xiv.

There  may  be  idolatry  in  the  heart  even  when  idols  are  abolished  from  external
worship.  God's  commandment  is  "  exceeding  broad."  Idols  have  long  been
banished  from  our  land,  and  therefore  the  second  commandment  has  in  one  sense
become  obsolete.  But  all  that  is  essential  to  the  sin  of  worshipping  them  may
still  be  found  even  in  Christian  lands.  Everything  that  stands  between  a  man's
soul  and  heaven  is  an  idol, — it  is  that  which  he  trusts  in  with  his  whole  heart.
For  the  root-principle  of  idolatry  is  the  tendency  to  put  something  in  the  placie
of  God,  to  allow  the  mind  to  be  deluded  by  phantoms.  Idols  of  all  kinds  are
mere  phantoms,  they  are  (as  St.  Paul  tells  us)  nothing  in  the  world  ;  there  is  no
reality  in  them.  When  God  is  not  cruly  known  to  the  soul  within,  the  man  of
necessity  becomes  an  idolater.  Whatever  hinders  the  true  knowledge  of  God  is
idolatry.  Bacon,  the  father  of  modern  science,  has  distinguished  certain  idols
or  phantoms  which  interfere  with  human  knowledge.  These  idols  he  represents
as  certain  false  notions  which  possess  the  mind,  and  which  must  be  dislodged
if  men  would  attain  to  the  truth  concerning  the  knowledge  of  man  and  nature.
There  are  "idols  of  the  trihe^^  "of  the  cavg,"  "of  the  market-place^^  "of  the
theatre,*^  It  will  be  found  that  idolatries  in  religion  spring  from  similar  sources.
I.  Idols  of  the  tribe.  By  which  Bacon  means,  those  errors  and  false  concep-
tions which  have  their  origin  in  human  nature  itself.  He  says  that  "  the  human
mind  is  like  a  false  mirror,  which,  receiving  rays  irregularly,  distorts  and  dis-
colours the  nature  of  things  by  mingling  its  own  nature  withit."  Does  not  this
speak  to  us  of  our  natural  ignorance  of  God,  which  distorts  all  the  indications
He  has  given  us  of  His  character  and  will  ?  It  may  assume  the  form  of  gross
idolatry,  of  atheism,  of  indifference,  or  of  the  various  forms  of  superstition  where
ignorant  fear  is  substituted  for  the  worship  of  Him  who  alone  is  to  be  feared.

IL  Idols  of  the  cave.  Bacon  describes  these  as  the  sources  of  eiror  which
belong  to  individual  men.  These  may  arise  from  the  peculiar  constitution  of  our
mind,  from  our  early  habits  and  education,  from  all  those  influences  which  form
our  individual  characters.  "Each  man,"  says  Bacon,  "has  a  den  or  cave  of  his
own."  Sometimes  it  is  dark  and  comfortless,  shutting  out  the  light  of  heaven,
full  of  doleful  things  and  gloomy  fears.  Each  man  has  some  infirmity  of  mind
or  temper  which  leads  him  to  judge  wrongly  of  God  and  of  duty.  Each  man
has  his  besetting  sin,  and  must  bear  his  own  burden,  fight  against  his  own
enemies,  and  seek  peace  for  his  own  soul.

IIL  Idols  of  the  market-place.  These  are  described  as  false  notions  or  con-
ceptions, which  arise  from  the  intercourse  of  men  with  each  other.  It  may  be  that  each
man  in  his  own  cave — in  himself  as  an  individual — is  ashamed  of  the  customs
and  notions  of  which  men  as  communities  approve.  But  these  are  often  deemed
respectable  and  right  if  only  they  are  adopted  by  good  society,  or  by  common
usage,  or  by  the  laws  and  customs  of  that  particular  business  or  profession  to
which  the  man  belongs.

IV.  Idols  of  the  theatre.  By  which  are  meant  those  hindrances  to  the  know-
ledge of  the  truth  which  have  been  imported  into  men's  minds  from  the  various  dogmas
of  human  philosophies.  It  is  certainly  a  hindrance  in  all  intellectual  pursuits  that
many  ingenious  men  have  gone  wrong  before  us.  Hence  knowledge  is  retarded.
Mental  power  is  wasted,  for  some  wiser  man  must  arise  to  clear  away  those
errors  to  which  great  men  of  former  times  have  given  currency.  We  have  such
idols  of  the  theatre  in  religion, — each  successive  system  of  infidel  philosophy,
rationalism,  every  device  lor  setting  aside  the  revelation  which  God  has  given
of  Himself  to  man  in  Jesus  Christ,  every  attempt  to  get  rid  of  the  supernatural
and  divine  element  in  the  Scriptures  of  God.  All  these  have  hidden  God  from
many  human  souls.  They  are  the  peculiar  temptations  of  intellectual  men,  of
speculative  minds.  Such  are  often  free  from  vulgar  temptations,  and  it  would
seem  as  if  in  this  way  their  proper  measure  of  the  difficulties  of  probation  is
filled  up  to  them.     And  all  idols,  whether  they  spring  irom  that  nature  \a  hich  is


OHAi*.  XIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


common  to  mankind,  or  from  each  man's  peculiarities  of  temper  and  disposition,
or  from  the  customs  of  human  business  and  conventional  moralities,  or  from
those  ingenious  speculations  which  we  find  in  books, — all  these  are  only  to  be
overcome  by  the  recognition  of  God  in  Christ.  They  are  all  mere  phantoms,
they  hide  God  from  the  soul,  they  lead  us  astray,  they  have  no  power  to  teach
us,  they  cannot  bring  us  nearer  heaven.  But  God  has  not  left  us  to  wander  in
uncertainty.  He  has  given  us  the  true  Liglit.  dir  blessed  Lord  said,  "  He
that  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father,"  "I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the
life."  He  gives  the  invitation,  "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  He  will  give  us  rest  from  the  pursuit  of
vanities  of  all  kinds,  from  empty  speculations  which  weary  the  soul  for  no  profit.
If  we  have  found  the  true  we  cannot  worship  the  false.  If  we  are  true  wor-
shippers of  Christ  we  must  put  away  all  our  idols,  for  He  will  not  share  His  love
and  worship  with  another.  Christ  gives  us  the  true  idea  of  God.  The  sin  of
idolatry  is  not  now  impossible  though  idols  are  removed  from  the  eyes  of  men.
The  Second  Commandment  may  be  dead  as  concerns  the  letter  of  it,  but  the
spirit  of  it  is  as  potent  as  ever  to  convince  men  of  sin.  How  many  professed
worshippers  in  the  Christian  Church  set  up  their  idols  in  their  heart  and  then
come  to  inquire  of  God  !  There  is  a  tendency  to  worship  something  which  is
not  God,  to  deny  Him  the  full  devotion  of  our  hearts.  Even  when  men  will
scarcely  dare  entirely  to  leave  His  service,  they  still  strive  to  serve  two  masters.
All  who  love  pleasure,  earthly  honours  and  distinctions,  more  than  they  love
God,  are  idolaters.  In  short,  all  are  involved  in  this  sin  who  seek  the  world
first  before  the  kingdom  of  God  and  His  righteousness.

The  Inquirers  of  False  Prophets  (vers.  9-11).

L  They  hope  to  ohtain  a  more  favourable  answer.  The  true  prophets  do
not  speak  that  which  they  would  like  to  hear,  so  they  seek  teachers  after  their
own  minds.  They  will  undertake  to  decide  for  themselves  what  prophets  are
true  or  false  by  the  correspondence  of  the  message  with  their  own  corrupt
wishes.     They  are  willingly  deceived.

II  They  do  not  thereby  escape  God's  judgments.  1.  Even  false  prophets
are  by  the  will  of  God.  "  I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet "  (ver.  9).
God  permits  such  men  to  preach  error,  as  He  permits  all  other  evils  to  prevail
in  the  world.  He  does  not  sup[)ress  them  by  an  act  of  power.  He  allows
the  tares  and  the  wheat  to  grow  together  until  the  appointed  time  of  judgment.
And  we  must  learn  from  God's  dealincjs  with  mankind  the  lesson  of  tolera-
tion.  If  we  attempt  to  pluck  up  the  tares  we  run  the  risk  of  rooting  out  the
wheat  also.  No  man  has  knowled2;e  or  skill  enough  which  will  serve  him  to
anticipate  God's  final  judgment.  He  who  attempts  this  may,  indeed,  do  some
good,  but  he  will  ct-rtainly  do  much  harm,  2.  God  uses  and  controls  evil  for  the
working  out  of  His  purposes.  It  i.s  true  that  *'  God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,
neither  tempteth  He  any  man"  (James  i.  13).  But  God  makes  use  of  the  sins
of  men  in  working  out  His  great  designs.  Thus  He  allows  men  to  fall  into
one  sin  as  a  [)unishment  for  another.  These  exiles  loved  to  be  deceived,  and
they  were  deceived.  They  loved  darkness,  and  they  were  allowed  to  wander
into  greater  darkness.  A  man  must  either  repent,  or  he  must  continue  in  the
sinful  path  towards  his  punishment.  It  is  by  God's  law  that  even  the  germs
of  sin  are  permitted  to  be  planted,  to  be  fostered,  and  to  grow,  so  that  sin  shall
attain  to  its  full  maturity  and  bring  on  its  own  punishment.  God's  Providence
80  orders  the  course  of  events  that  men  who  will  not  have  the  truth  shall  be
brought  to  ruin  by  a  lie.

III.  These  judgments  arf  intended  for  the  benefit  of  God's  people.  1.  To
148


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xiv.


p-eserve  them  from  transgression  (ver.  11).  2.  To  test  their  faith.  By  the  flourish-
ing of  false  prophets  their  own  fidelity  and  steadfastness  would  be  tried.
The  prevalence  of  error  makes  manifest  the  tried  and  approved  children  of
truth  (1  Cor.  xi.  19).  3.  To  confirm  their  faith.  By  witnessing  the  judgments
of  God  fulfilled  upon  others.  4.  To  teach  them  to  realise  their  relationship  to  God,
"That  they  may  be  my  people,  and  I  may  be  their  God"  (ver.  11).  We  can
have  no  true  peace  until  we  know  that  the  Lord  is  our  God.  The  essence  of
reli<4ion  consists  in  the  appropriation  of  God  by  the  soul.  5.  To  separate  between
the  righteous  and  the  ungodly.  God  may  use  even  sin  and  error  to  contribute  to
this  final  purpose  of  His  judgment  (2  Thess.  ii.  10,  11).

(Ver.  9.)

False  prophets  were  both  in  Judea  and  in  Babylon,  and  the  people  had
often  recourse  unto  them.  They  spake  pleasing  things.  They  told  them  who
were  in  Judea  that  Nebuchadnezzar  should  never  subdue  and  carry  them
captives;  yea,  they  told  them  that  those  in  Babylon  should  shortly  return.
These  were  vain,  false,  and  deceitful  prophecies,  and  Divine  Providence  ordered
it  so.     We  have  here —

I.  A  supposition.  "  If  the  prophet  be  deceived  when  he  hath  spoken  a
thing."  The  false  prophets  were  deceived  in  what  they  spake  to  the  people.
Zedekiah  and  the  rest  of  the  prophets  which  bade  Ahab  to  go  up  to  Ramoth-
Gilead  and  prosper,  were  deceived  (1  Kings  xxii).  Hananiah  and  Shelemiah
made  that  people  trust  in  a  lie  (Jer.  xxviii.  15,  xxxix.  31).  They  were
deceived  in  their  prophets,  and  deceive  others.

n.  An  assertion.  "  I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet."  These  words
sound  very  harsh,  and  no  man  durst  have  attributed  them  unto  the  Lord,  had
not  He  Himself  said  so.  The  words,  "I  have  deceived"  are  to  be  taken  as
a  judicial  act  of  God,  who,  dealing  with  them  as  delinquents,  punisheth  them
with  this  special  judgment  of  seduction  ;  they  were  idolatrous  and  hypocritical,
and  God  punished  those  sins  with  others,  and  so  accidentally  was  the  efficient
cause  of  their  deception.  God  finding  those  men  false  and  forward  to  deceive,
hearkening  to  their  own  hearts,  and  following  their  own  spirits  (Ez.  xiii.  2,  3),
He  gave  them  up  and  over  to  vain  visions  and  lying  divinations,  which  was
one  punishment,  and  to  perdition,  which  was  another  punishment  following
thereupon.  Have  you  a  mind  to  be  prophets,  to  prophesy  lies  1  Ye  shall  be
so.  In  Isa.  Ixiii.  17,  we  read,  "0  Lord,  why  hast  thou  made  us  to  err  from
thy  ways,  and  hardened  our  heart  from  thy  fear  ?"  God  did  this  in  judgment
to  the  people  who  affected  false  prophets,  and  chose  their  own  ways  (Isa.  Ixvi.
3),  and  delighted  in  their  abominations.  He  in  judgment  gave  them  up  to
their  own  ways,  and  to  hardness  of  heart  (Ps.  Ixxi.  11,  12).

III.  A  threatening.  "I  will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  him."  God  would
put  forth  His  power  to  punish  such  a  prophet.  But  if  God  deceived  him,
how  can  He  in  justice  punish  or  destroy  that  prophet  1  We  answer,  1.  The
false  prophet  did  whatever  he  did  freely.  He  was  not  forced  by  any  power  or  act
of  God.  His  seduction  was  principally  from  himself;  and  it  was  his  own  fault
that  he  was  deceived,  that  he  deceived  others.  2.  A  man  may  serve  Providence^
and  yet  sin  against  the  law  of  God.  The  secret  Providence  had  ordered  it  that
this  people  should  be  seduced  by  false  prophets,  yet  God  in  His  word  had  for-
bidden such  (Deut.  xiii).  And  because  men  are  to  look  at  what  is  written,  not
what  is  secret  and  hidden,  therefore  if  they  violate  the  law,  God  may  justly
punish  thereupon  (Acts  iv.  27,  28).  Herod,  Pilate,  Judas,  and  the  Jews,  they
did  to  Christ  whatsoever  God  had  determined  to  be  done,  yet  they  were  not
without  sin,  nor  without  punishment,  because  they  transgressea  the  rule  given
them.     We  make  two  observations, — (1.)  The  Lord,  in  His  irifinUe  wisdom  and

149


CHAP.  XIV.


no  Ml  LET  TO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


justice^  doth  make  a  punishment  of  sm^  and  punish  one  sin  with  another.  Besides
corporal  judgments  He  hath  spiritual  ;  if  the  prophet  be  deceived,  "I  the  Lord
have  deceived  him,"  I  have  hiid  this  jucigment  upon  him,  that  he  should  be
deceived,  led  into  errors,  and  deceive  others  ;  this  he  hath  deserved  at  my
hands,  and  this  punishment  in  just  judgment  I  inflict  upon  him.  The  Scrip-
tures hold  out  frequently  this  way  of  God's  proceedings  with  sinners,  His
punishment  of  one  sin  with  another;  (2  Chron.  xxv.  17-20  ;  Jer.  iv.  10  ;  Rom.
i.  25,  26;  2  Thess.  ii.  10,  11).  (2.)  God  will  deal  severely  with  false  prophets.  "I
will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  him."  He  would  be  made  an  example  to  all,  as
were  Hananiah  and  Shemaiah  (Jer.  xxviii.  15,  16;  xxix.  31,  32. — Greenhill).

"The  great  sophister  and  prince  of  darkness  (God  permitting  him)  can
strangely  blindfold  our  reason  and  muffle  our  understanding ;  and,  no  doubt,
the  chiefest  cause  that  most  of  .the  obstinate,  besotted  sinners  of  the  world  are
not  sensible  that  the  devil  blinds  and  abuses  them  is,  that  he  has  indeed
actually  done  so  already.  For  how  dreadfully  did  God  consign  over  the
heathen  world  to  a  perpetual  slavery  to  Satan's  deceits  1  They  worshipped
him,  they  consulted  with  him,  and  so  absolutely  were  they  sealed  up  under  the
ruling  cheat,  that  they  took  all  his  tricks  and  impostures  for  Oracle  and  Instruc-
tion. And  the  truth  is,  when  men  under  the  powerful  preaching  of  the  Gospel
will  grow  heathens  in  the  viciousness  of  their  practices,  it  is  but  just  with  God
to  suffer  them  (by  a  very  natural  transition)  to  grow  heathens,  too,  in  the
grossness  of  their  delusions." — South,

JuDAH  AND  Jerusalem  cannot  claim  Exemption  from  Judgments

BECAUSE   OF   THE  PtlGHTEOUS  FEW  THEREIN   (vers.  12-23).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.
12,  13.  *^When  the  land  sinneth
against  me  by  trespassing  grievously."
Their  sin  is  more  particularly  defined
as  "trespass,"  the  literal  expression
being  "to  trespass  a  trespass,"  i.e.  to
commit  a  very  great  trespass.  The
first  signification  of  the  Hebrew  word
is  "to  cover,"  and  therefore  it  is  used
to  denote  acting  in  any  secret  or
treacherous  manner,  especially  towards
Jehovah,  either  by  outward  or  inward
idolatry  or  by  withholding  what  is
due  to  Him.  Here  the  treachery
specially  pointed  out  is  that  of  apos-
tasy from  God  by  idolatry.

Ver.  14.  "Though these  three  men,
Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  were  in  it.
These  men  are  named  as  well-knoM'n
examples  of  true  righteousness  of  life.
They  were  just  in  their  generation,
living  that  life  of  obedience  which
springs  from  faith  in  God,  Noah  is
80  described  in  Gen.  vi.  9  ]  and  Job,
in  the  Book  of  Job  i.  1 ;  and  Daniel,
in  like  manner,  is  classed  with  these
ancient  men  as  one  who  confessed  a  true
faith  by  a  righteous  life.  "  The  fact
that  Daniel  is  named  before  Job  does
150


not  warrant  the  conjecture  that  some
other  older  Daniel  is  meant,  of  whom
nothing  is  said  in  the  history,  and
whose  existence  is  merely  postulated.
For  the  enumeration  is  not  intended
to  be  chronological,  but  is  arranged
according  to  the  subject-matter;  the
order  being  determined  by  the  nature
of  the  deliverance  experienced  by
these  men  for  their  righteousness  in
the  midst  of  great  judgments.  Haver-
nick  shows  we  have  a  climax  here :
Noah  saved  his  family  along  with
himself;  Daniel  was  able  to  save  his
friends  (Dan.  ii.  17,  18);  but  Job,
with  his  righteousness,  was  not  even
able  to  save  his  children"  (Keil).

Ver.  15.  "  If  I  cause  noisome  beasts
to  pass  through  the  land."  "  Beasts  "
in  the  usual  sense,  or  in  human  form
(ver.  17.)"  {Hengstenherg\  comp.  Ez.
V.  17;  Lev.  xxvi.  22;  2  Kings  xvii.
25.

Ver.  1 6.  "  They  shall  deliver  neither
sons  nor  daughters."  "In  the  first
instance,  it  is  simply  stated  that  Noah,
Daniel,  and  Job  would  save  their
soul,  i,e.  their  life,  by  their  righteous-
ness;  M'hereus,  m  the  three  others,  it


ROM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XIV.


is  declared  that  as  truly  as  the  Lord
liveth  they  would  not  save  either  sons
or  daughters,  but  they  alone  would
be  delivered.  The  difference  is  not
merely  a  rhetorical  climax  or  progress
in  the  address  by  means  of  assevera-
tion and  antithesis,  but  indicates  a
distinction  in  the  thought.  The  first
case  is  only  intended  to  teach  that  in
the  approaching  judgment  the  right-
eous would  save  their  lives,  i.e.  that
God  would  not  sweep  away  the  riglit-
eous  with  the  ungodly.  The  three
cases  which  follow  are  intended,  on
the  other  hand,  to  exemplify  the  truth
that  the  riojhteousness  of  the  riirhteous
will  be  of  no  avail  to  the  idolaters  and
apostates ;  since  even  such  patterns  of
righteousness  as  Noah,  Daniel,  and
Job  would  only  be  able  to  save  their
own  lives,  and  would  not  be  able  to
save  the  lives  of  others  also.  This
tallies  with  the  omission  of  the  assevera-
tion in  ver.  14.  The  first  declaration,
that  God  would  deliver  the  righteous
in  the  coming  judgments,  needed  no
asseveration,  inasmuch  as  this  truth
was  not  called  in  question  ;  but  it  was
required  in  the  case  of  the  declaration
that  the  riofhteousness  of  the  righteous
would  bring  no  deliverance  to  the  sin-
ful nation,  since  this  was  the  hope
which  the  ungodly  cherished,  and  it
was  this  hope  which  was  to  be  taken
from  them  "  (Keil).

Vers.  17-20.  Two  more  great  judg-
ments are  threatened.  **The  four  visi-
tations of  God,  each  introduced  with
an  iff  should  actually  come,  as  had
been  repeatedly  predicted,  unitedly
upon  the  degenerate  covenant  people,
upon  the  desecrated  land  of  the  Lord.
The  transition  from  the  merely  hy})0-
thetical  to  the  actual  follows  in  ver.  21.
The /or  at  the  beginning  points  to  the
ground  of  the  discussion  instituted,
shows  that  it  is  no  mere  idle  common
place"  (Heng.)

Ver.  21.  ''How  much  more  when  I
send  my  four  sore  judgments  upon
Jerusalem."  "How  much  more  must
the  general  standard  of  the  Divine
judgments  manifest  itself  before  all


in  the  servant,  who  knows  his  master's
will,  and  yet  does  what  is  worthy  of
stripes!  'You  only  have  I  known  of
all  the  families  of  the  earth  ;  therefore
I  will  visit  upon  you  all  your  iniquities,'
says  Amos  "  (Ileng.)  "  The  sword,
and  the  famine,  and  the  noisome
beast,  and  the  pestilence."  "  The
number  four  may  possibly  symbolise
the  completeness  of  the  judgment,  as
one  on  all  sides.  Formerly  famine
was  first;  here  it  is  the  sword,  because
the  calamity  of  war  lay  immediately
before  them.  In  consequence  of  it
the  other  three  judgments  came  one
after  another.       War     brinsrs    famine

o

into  the  cities ;  corpses  outside,  which
attract  the  beasts ;  and  from  all  these
follows  the  pestilence"  (Lange),

Ver.  22.  "  Therein  shall  be  left  a
remnant  that  shall  be  brought  forth."
"A  remnant,"  i,e.,  persons  who  have
escaped  destruction.  These  shall  be
brought  forth,  i.e.,  led  out  of  Jerusalem
*'  unto  you."  They  shall  join  those
who  are  already  in  exile  in  Babylon.
*'Sons  and  daughters."  "These  are
called  sons  and  daughters,  with  an
allusion  to  vers.  16,  18,  and  20;  and
consequently  we  must  not  take  these
words  as  referring  to  the  younger
generation  in  contrast  to  the  older "
(Keil).  "Ye  shall  be  comforted  con-
cerning the  evil  that  I  have  brought
upon  Jerusalem."  They  shall  be  com-
forted in  seeing  the  justification  of  the
ways  of  God.

Ver.  23.  "Their  ways  and  their
doings."  "  Not  tliose  ways  ))y  which
they  had  provoked  the  Lord  to  punish
the  nation,  but  the  fruits  of  righteous-
ness— the  good  works  to  the  practice
of  which  they  had  been  recovered  by
the  severe  discipline  through  the  course
of  which  they  had  been  brought.  While
they  justified  God  in  all  the  calamities
which  He  had  inflicted  upon  them,
their  being  spared  was  a  proof  of  His
great  mercy,  and  a  pledge  that,  if  their
brethren  in  the  captivity  followed  their
example  by  renouncing  idolatry,  they
also  should  be  dealt  with  in  mercy"
{Rend,)


161


CHAP.  XIV.  II 0  MI  LET  I C  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


HOMILETICS,

The  Judgments  of  God  upon  Nations.

I  They  usually  take  the  shape  of  great  public  calamities.  1.  The  sources
of  the  national  wealth  are  undermined.  "  I  will  break  ihe  staff  of  the  bread  thereof,
and  will  sen^^  famine  upon  it"  (ver.  13).  Bread,  tlie  chief  food  of  man,  may-
well  be  called  "the  staff  of  life."  It  is  the  prop  which  supports  man's  physical
nature,  and  when  it  is  taken  away  he  sinks  exhausted  to  the  ground.  Famine
is  one  of  God's  sore  judgments,  for  it  seizes  upon  what  is  man's  greatest  treasure,
his  life.  Man  and  beast  fail ;  the  means  of  useful  labour  and  food  are  cut  off.
The  very  foundations  of  life  are  destroyed.  2.  The  invasion  of  enemies.  "If  I
cause  noisome  beasts  to  pass  through  the  land"  (ver.  15).  Man  was  invested
with  dominion  over  the  beasts  of  the  earth.  By  virtue  of  the  power  of  his  mind,
and  not  merely  by  physical  force,  he  retains  his  sovereignty  over  them.  And
God's  providence  wonder'ully  preserves  the  balance  of  power  between  man  and
the  lower  animals.  He  sets  a  watch  over  all  His  creatures,  so  that  they  shall  not
pass  His  commandment,  but  fulfil  His  purpose  in  [)lacing  man  head  overall  here
below.  But  sin  interferes  with  man's  complete  dominion  ;  and  it  is,  after  all,
but  a  broken  sceptre  that  he  holds  in  his  hand.  God,  for  purposes  of  judgment,
allows  beasts  to  overcome  man.  Another  enemy  to  nations  is  the  sword,  God
says,  "Sword,  go  through  the  land"  (ver.  17).  War  is  one  of  the  scourges
which  God  uses  to  punish  wicked  nations.  All  the  evils  mentioned  in  this
section — devouring  beasts,  pestilence,  and  famine — follow  in  its  track.  3.  Pesti-
lence. "Or,  if  I  send  a  pestilence  into  that  land"  (ver,  19).  In  famine  and
other  calamities  men  of  wealth  may  be  able  to  keep  the  enemy  for  a  long  while
at  bay,  or  even  to  hold  out  to  the  end.  But  they  have  no  defence  against
pestilence.  Then  does  the  Angel  of  Death  walk  through  the  land  with  impartial
step,  sparing  no  age  or  condition.

IL  Though  they  may  be  traced  to  natural  causes  they  are  still  the  work  of
God.  War,  pestilence,  and  firjine,  are  due  to  the  operation  of  natural  laws.
But  it  is  also  true  that  God  sends  them ;  for  He  is  behind  all  nature,  and  behind
all  human  history,  whether  in  justice  or  in  the  mysterious  march  of  its  events.
The  calamities  that  fall  upon  nations  have  deep  moral  causes,  and  ultimately
resolve  themselves  into  the  righteous  will  of  God  in  His  manifest  indignation
against  human  sin.  1.  Nations^  as  such,  are  under  moral  law.  This  law  expresses
the  will  of  God  in  regard  to  human  conduct.  2.  The  transgression  of  those  laws
involves  penalty.  History  has  many  sad  examples  which  show  how  the  moral
corruption  of  a  nation  may  become  so  great  as  to  bring  about  its  destruction.
Nations  can  only  be  judged  in  this  life,  for  as  such  they  do  not  exist  in  another
world.  When  a  land  sins  against  God  by  "  trespassing  grievously,"  the  calamities
which  are  visited  upon  it  are  seen  to  come  from  God  by  all  who  believe  that
there  is  a  moral  Governor  of  the  world.

III.  They  cannot  always  he  averted  by  pleading  the  righteousness  of  the
few  therein.  Abraham's  intercession  for  Sodom  establishes  that  principle  of
God's  government  by  which  whole  nations  are  spared  great  judgments  for  the
sake  of  the  few  righteous  among  them.  The  faithful  few  among  many  faithless
are  as  the  salt  which  preserves  the  whole  community  from  corruption.  We  are
exhorted  and  encouraged  to  pray  for  others,  and  even  to  be  so  bold  as  to  ask
that  the  hand  of  justice  might  be  stayed  when  it  is  lifted  against  the  ungodly.
But  there  are  limits  to  intercession.  Even  the  prayers  of  Abraham  could  not
save  the  devoted  cities  of  the  plain.  In  lik(i  manner  the  iniquity  of  Jerusalem
had  grown  so  great  that  the  prayers  and  godly  influence  of  men  of  such  famous
righteousness  as  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  could  not  save  it  from  the  threatened
153


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xtv.


doom.  The  Jews  placed  great  reliance  upon  the  intercession  of  the  saints,  and
counted  upon  it  as  a  refuge  from  judgment.  They  are  now  told  that  this  is  a
vain  hope,  that  God's  righteous  law  Tnust  take  its  course,  and  that  the  most  holy
men  can  but  save  themselves  (vers.  14,  16,  18,  20).

IV.  The  righteousness  of  God  therein  will  appear  unto  His  people.  "  And
ye  shall  be  comforted"  (ver.  22).  This  comfort  would  arise  from  clearly  seeing
the  justification  of  God's  ways  (ver.  23).  There  was  a  sufficient  cause  for  all
the  evil  which  was  coming  upon  Jerusalem,  and  faithful  souls  should  see  how
that  the  ways  of  the  Lord  were  just.  However  severe  God's  judgments  may  be
in  His  dealings  with  mankind,  it  is  a  comfort  when  we  know  and  believe  that
they  are  righteous.  What  a  lesson  for  Christian  nations  !  They  are  governed
by  the  same  great  moral  principles,  but  with  added  light  their  responsibilities
are  greater.

(Ver.  14.)

From  this  passage  we  may  infer  two  things —

L  That  there  are  seasons  when  even  the  intercession  of  the  most  eminent
will  not  avail.  There  are  seasons  in  which  it  is  unalterably  determined  to
infl.ct  punishment.

II.  That  these  are  so  rare  and  so  extraordinary  that  to  declare  He  will
not  turn  away  for  intercession  is  the  strongest  token  of  His  fierce  indigna-
tion. (1.)  If  God  delights  to  hear  prayer  it  is  most  reasonable  to  believe  He  will
favourably  regard  intercessory  prayer ;  for  then  the  supplicant  is  exercising  two
most  important  virtues  at  once,  piety  and  benevolence.  He  is  then  employed
in  fulfilling  the  whole  law,  and  makes  the  nearest  approach  to  the  divine  nature.
(2  )  Examples  of  its  success — Abraham,  Moses,  and  Job. — B,  Hall,

"Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job."

Some  make  great  inquiry  why  these  three  men  should  be  mentioned  rather
than  others,  and  they  give  in  their  answer : — 1.  It  is  thought  that  they  are
named,  for  that  they  could  not  divert  God's  wrath  by  their  holiness  and  prayers
from  the  people  of  their  times.  Noah  could  not  keep  off  the  flood,  nor  Job  the
sad  things  which  befel  him  and  his,  nor  Daniel  the  captivity.  2.  Others  think
tliey  are  named  because  they  freed  others  in  imminent  danger  in  their  times.
Noah  saved  his  family  from  the  flood  ;  Job  prayed  for  his  friends,  and  they  were
spared ;  Daniel  preserved  the  magicians  and  wise  men.  But  rather  they  are
named,  because  they  were  men  of  great  holiness,  exercised  with  great  trials,  and
so  the  more  fervent  in  prayer.  And  what  if  tliese  men,  who  were  so  acceptable
to  me,  had  so  much  interest  in  me  and  often  prevailed  with  me,  should  pray  for
you,  yet  they  should  do  nothing  for  your  deliverance  by  their  prayers.  These
were  men  in  great  afflictions,  and  affliction  is  the  whetstone  of  prayer,  the
bellows  to  blow  up  that  fire.  —  Greenhill.

(Vers.  22,  23.)

1.  When  God's  judgments  are  sorest,  yet  then  He  shows  mercy  to  some.
2.  The  Lord  will  satisfy  and  comfort  the  hearts  of  His  people  against  the  evil
and  scandal  that  comes  by  any  of  His  judgments.  When  Jerusalem  was
destroyed,  the  Jews  rooted  out  and  carried  to  Babylon,  what  joy  was  there  in
the  nations  !  what  reproachiugs  of  the  Jews!  Where  is  now  their  God?  At
these  things  the  Jews'  hearts  in  Babylon  were  grieved,  offended ;  therefore  the
Lord  tells  them,  they  "  shall  be  comforted  concerning  all  the  evil  He  hath  brought
upon  Jerusalem."  They  shall  know  the  greatness  of  their  sins  which  moved
Him  to  do  so.     3.  That  the  Lord  is  righteous  and  just  in  His  judgments.     "  I

153


CHAP.  XV.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


have  not  done  without  cause  all  that  I  have  done  in  Jerusalem/'  It  is  the  devil's
design  to  hurt  without  cause  ;  therefore  saith  God,  "  Thou  niovedst  me  against
him,  to  destroy  him  without  cause"  (Job  ii.  3).  But  God  would  not  do  it;
whatever  He  doth  He  hath  great  cause  for.  He  is  the  only  and  infinitely  wise
God,  and  doth  all  things  upon  the  height  of  reason.  Their  sins  were  such  as  im-
peached His  honour,  corrupted  His  worship,  broke  the  covenant,  questioned  His
providence,  violated  justice,  and  conformed  them  to  the  heathen.  He  had  cause
enough  to  do  what  He  did,  namely,  to  vindicate  His  honour,  worship,  covenant,
providence,  justice,  and  to  show  that  His  people,  if  they  will  sin  with  the  world,
must  suffer  grevious  things  for  it.  4.  Men  shall  know  in  due  time  the  equity
of  God's  judgments.  They  are  a  great  depth.  Men  cannot  sound  or  measure
them  (Ps.  xxxvi.  6).  The  causes  of  them  are  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  most.
Job's  friends  mistook  the  cause  of  God's  dealing  so  sharply  with  him,  but  after-
wards they  understood  it.  They  in  Babylon,  and  others,  were  astonished  at  the
sore  judgments  of  God,  but  God  let  them  know  the  cause  of  it,  and  so  they  were
brought  to  justify  God  (1  Kings  ix.  7-9),  God  proclaims  the  cause  of  His  severe
judgments,  so  that  men  may  see  the  equity  of  them,  that  *'  He  is  righteous  in
all  His  ways,  and  holy  in  all  His  works"  (Ps.  cxlv.  17). — Greenhill,


Israel  Compared  to  the  Useless  Wood  of  a  Wild  Vine  (Chap,  xv.)

EXEGETICAL    NOTES.— In    the  Ver.    3.    Shall  the  wood  be  taken

last    chapter    the    propliet    had    an-  thereof  to  do  any  work  ?    It  is  useless

nounced   that  God   would    not   spare  as  a  material  for  making  any  instru-

Jerusalem    for   the   sake   of   the    few  ment.       "  For  use  its  diameter  even

BJghteous  therein.     In  this  chapter  he  unfits  it;  while  its  appearance  is  too

destroys  another  refuge  in  which  they  paltry  for  ornament,  and  it  is  too  weak

trusted.     He  shows  how   His  people  to  bear  anything  except  fruit "  (Lange).

Israel  have  no  native  superiority  over  Ver.  4.   ''  Behold,  it  is  cast  into  the

otlier  nations,  no  such  intrinsic  value  fire  for  fuel;  the  fire  devoureth  both

as  would  entitle  them  to  be  considered  the  ends  of  it,  and  the  midst  of  it  is

as   a   special  case.      They   may  have  burned.     Is  it  meet  for  any  work  ? "

rested    secure   in    the    thought    that  The  answer  to  this  question  is  given

Israel    is   compared    to    a   vine    (Ps.  in  the  next  verse,  the  force  of  which

Ixxx.),  that  they  could  not  be  rejected  is  this, — If  in  its  perfect  state  it  can-

and  punished  because  of  their  election,  not  be  put  to  any  useful  purpose,  how

The  prophet's  answer  to  this  false  con-  much  less  when  it  is  partially  scorched

fidence  is,  that  Israel  is  no  longer  a  and  consumed  !

true  vine,  but  mere  wood,  yea,  even  Ver.  6.  '*  So  will  I  give  the  inhabi-

the  most  useless  of  all  wood,  and  only  tants    of    Jerusalem."      *'  The   Jews

fit  to  serve  as  fuel  for  the  fire.      In  having   utterly   failed    to  answer  the

vers.  1-5  the  figure  is  worked  out  in  divine  purpose  in   selecting    them  to

the  shape  of  a  parable.     In  vers.  6-8  be  witnesses  for  Jehovah  in  the  midst

we  have  the  application  of  the  parable,  of  the  heathen,  they  were  to  be  com-

God  will  deal  with  Jerusalem  as  men  pletely  broken   up  as  a   nation,   and

deal  with  the  wood  of  the  forest  vine,  punished  by  severe  and  fiery  trials  in

the  worthless  remains  of  a  barren  tree.  succession,  till  the  dross  of  their  idola-

Vers.  1  and  2.  "What  is  the  vine  try  was  purged  away.  When  a  pro-
tree  more  than  any  tree  ?  "  It  was  fessing  people  act  unworthily  of  their
a  standing  fii^ure  with  the  prophets  calling,  they  are  only  fit  to  be  rejected"
to  compare  Israel  to  a  vine  or  vine-  (Matt.  iii.  10,  v.  13)  (Henderson).
yard  (Isa.  v.;  Hos.  x.  ;  Jer.  ii.  21),  Ver.  7.  "They  shall  go  out  from
and  always,  with  the  exception  of  one  fire,  and  another  fire  shall  devour
Ps.  Ixxx.,  to  point  out  its  degeneracy,  them."  "Out  of  a  fire  one  must  come
154


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xv.


either  burned  or  scorched.     Israel  has  is  now  about  to  be  given  up  altogether

been  in  the  fire  already.     It  resembles  to  the  fire"  (Keil).

a  wild  vine  which  has  been  consumed  Ver.  8.  "And  I  will  make  the  land

at  both   ends  by   the   fire,  while  the  desolate."      Repeating  the   threat   of

middle  has  been  scorched,  and  which  chap.  xiv.  13,  15.

EOMILETICS,
The  End  of  Man's  Existence  (ver.  2).

The  vine-tree  is  weaker  than  most  trees,  so  as  to  be  unfit  for  any  work,  and
would  therefore  be  very  contemptible  but  for  that  property  it  possesses  of  bring-
ing forth  a  valuable  and  delicious  fruit.  On  this  account  it  is  highly  prized  and
diligently  cultivated.  But  if  it  fail  of  producing  fruit,  the  only  purpose  to  which
it  can  be  applied  is  to  turn  it  to  fuel.  Such  is  the  figurative  representation
which  the  prophet  gives  us  in  this  passage  of  man,  considered  especially  as  the
object  of  divine  care  and  culture.  He  is  naturally  capable  of  yielding  a  precious
fruit;  in  this  consists  his  sole  excellency;  this  is  the  sole  end  of  his  existence;
and  if  he  fails  in  this  he  is  of  no  use  but  to  be  destroyed.

I.  Man  is  naturally  capable  of  yielding  a  most  precious  fruit :  this  fruit
consists  in  living  to  God.  1.  He  is  possessed  of  all  the  natural  powers  which  are
requisite  for  that  purpose.  He  is  endowed  with  reason  and  understanding,  enab-
ling him  to  perceive  the  proofs  of  the  being  of  God,  and  to  entertain  just,  though
inadequate,  conceptions  of  the  principal  attributes  of  His  nature  :  His  self-
existence,  His  absolute  perfection,  His  power,  His  wisdom.  His  all-sufficiency,
His  omnipresence.  His  holiness,  justice,  and  goodness.  Inferior  animals  do  not ;
on  which  account  He  is  the  vine-tree  amongst  the  trees  of  the  wood,  inferior  in
many  properties  to  some  of  them,  but  superior  in  those  particulars  which  fit
him  for  this  end,  and  on  that  account  incomparably  more  valuable.  2.  As  ive
are  possessed  of  natural  powers  fitting  us  for  the  service  of  God,  so  He  has  bestowed
upon  us  much  care  and  culture,  with  an  express  view  to  this  end.  The  religious
instruction  He  gave  to  His  ancient  people  is  frequently  compared  in  Scripture
t^  the  cultivation  which  men  bestow  upon  vines.  "  My  beloved  hath  a  vine-
yard in  a  very  fruitful  hill"  (Isa.  v.  1).  "For  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts
is  the  house  of  Israel,  and  the  men  of  Jndah  His  pleasant  plant"  (Isa.  v.  7).
He  gave  them  His  will,  His  ordinances,  His  prophets,  and  separated  them  from
all  nations  by  peculiar  rites,  that  they  might  be  to  Him  for  a  name  and  a  praise
and  a  peculiar  treasure  above  all  nations.  He  has  done  much  more  for  us  under
the  Gospel.  None  can  be  ignorant  of  the  intention  of  God  in  all  these  pro-
visions. *'  Yet  I  had  planted  thee  a  noble  vine,  wholly  a  right  seed ;  how,  then,
art  thou  now  turned  into  the  degenerate  plant  of  a  strange  vine  unto  me  1 "  (Jer.
ii  21).

IL  This  is  the  only  end  for  which  mankind  are  formed  and  preserved.
This  is  the  proper  fruit  of  human  nature,  which  admits  of  nothing  being  sub-
stituted in  its  room.  1.  A  mere  selfish,  voluptuous  life,  cannot  he  supposed  to  he  the
proper  fruit  of  human  nature.  He  who  lives  to  himself  is  universally  despised-
and  condemned.  "  Israel  is  an  empty  vine,  he  bringeth  forth  fruit  to  him-
self" (Hos.  X.  1).  "For  their  vine  is  of  the  vine  of  Sodom,  and  of  the  fields  of
Gomorrah;  their  grapes  are  grapes  of  gall,  their  clusters  are  bitter"  (Deut.
xxxii.  32).  2.  A  life  of  social  henevolence,  in  which  the  public  good  is  preserved,
without  a  supreme  regard  to  God,  cannot  be  this  fruit.  Can  such  persons  be  said  to
neglect  the  end  of  their  existence  1  Undoubtedly,  for  the  following  reasons:
(1.)  To  do  good  to  our  fellow-creatures,  without  regard  to  God,  is  to  forget  the  principal
relation  in  which  we  stand,  and,  consequently,  to  neglect  the  principal  duty.  A  right
behaviour  to  each  other  is  no  proper  compensation  for  the  want  of  obedient

155


ChAt.  iv.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.

regards  to  God  (instanced  in  pirates  and  rebels).  A  regard  to  God  is  the  root
and  origin  of  all  real  virtue.  (2.)  The  end  of  man^s  existence  cannot,  with  any  pro-
priety,  be  considered  as  confined  to  this  ivorld.  But  the  proper  end  accomplished
by  mere  social  virtues  is  eiitii-ely  confined  to  the  pi'esent  state.  (3.)  No  collective
number  of  men  caii  be  independent  of  God,  more  than  a  single  individual ;  therefoi'e
710  such  collective  body  has  a  right  to  consult  their  common  interest^  to  the  neglect  of
Gody  any  more  titan  a  single  individual  to  pursue  his  individucd  interest.  The  aggre-
gate of  mankind  appears  something  great  and  imposing  in  the  eyes  of  men,  in
consequence  of  which  a  peculiar  im[)ortance  is  attached  to  those  actions  which
tend  to  the  public  good.  The  magnitude  of  the  general  interest  imposes  a  value
on  those  actions  which  are  adapted  to  advance  so  great  an  object.  But,  in  the
sight  of  God,  all  nations  are  as  the  "drop  of  a  bucket;"  "He  taketh  up  the
isles  as  a  very  little  thing."  Suppose  all  the  subjects  of  a  lawful  prince  were  to
agree  to  stand  by  each  other,  and  to  promote  each  other's  interests  to  the  utmost,
would  this  be  allowed  by  the  prince  as  any  atonement  for  a  great  and  persever-
ing rebellion  1  Or  suppose  a  single  individual  so  disposed,  would  not  the  result
be  the  same  ?     No  other  can  be  substituted  for  this.

III.  He  who  answers  not  the  end  of  his  existence  is  only  fit  to  be
destroyed.  He  is  like  a  vessel  marred  in  the  hands  of  the  potter,  proper  only
to  be  broken.  The  barren  vine  may  be  useful  as  fuel,  and  to  this  purpose  it  is
much  applied  in  eastern  countries.  Thus  wicked  men  may  be  useful  with  a  sub-
ordinate kind  of  usefulness,  by  their  destruction.  1.  They  may  thereby  become
edifying  examples  of  the  just  vengeance  of  God,  in  order  to  deter  others.  That  this
will  be  one  of  the  ends  answered  by  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  seems  inti-
mated in  several  passages  of  Scripture,  as  well  as  is  sup})orted  by  its  analogy  to
human  government.  "And  they  shall  go  forth  and  look  upon  the  carcases  of
the  men  that  have  transgressed  against  me  ;  for  their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither
shall  their  fire  be  quenched,  and  they  shall  be  an  abhorring  unto  all  flesh  "  (Tsa.
Ixvi.  24).  2.  They  will  serve  to  manifest  those  attributes  of  the  great  Supreme  which
their  conduct  disowned^  and  which  it  seemed  virtually  to  call  in  question.  "  What  if
God,  willing  to  show  His  wrath,  and  to  make  His  power  known,  endured  with
niucli  long-suffering  the  vessels  of  w^ath  fitted  to  destruction^"  (Rom.  ix.  22).
This  is  a  subordinate  use,  not  a  primary  end.  It  is  that  for  which  men  fit  them-
selves by  their  presumptuous  and  impenitent  neglect  of  God.  (1.)  What  total
blindness  attaches  to  those  who  live  in  the  total  neglect  of  God  and  religion !
(2.)  What  little  room  is  there  for  that  confidence  which  many  place  in  correct-
ness of  deportment  towards  their  fellow-creatures,  while  religion  is  no*",  even
pretended  to  be  the  governing  principle  of  their  lives  !  (3.)  What  need  have
we  all  to  examitie  ourselves,  and  seriously  to  inquire  whether  we  are  yielding
that  fruit  unto  God  on  which  we  have  been  insisting  !  (4.)  How  ought  those
to  be  alarmed  when  the  result  of  such  examination  is  that  they  have  been
hitherto  utterly  without  fruit !  How  strong  the  obligations  on  such,  after  con-
sidering their  w^ays,  to  turn  unto  the  Lord.  And  thankful  should  they  be  that
space  is  afforded  them  for  repentance  and  salvation. — R.  Hall.

The  Church  is  not  to  be  a  wilderness,  but  a  vineyard;  it  is  not  to  bear
flowers  only,  or  leaves  and  twigs  merely,  but  fruit.  She  is  not  an  apple-tree  or
fig-tree,  but  a  vine.  Wine  cheers,  inspirits,  enlivens.  Outw^ardly  insignificant,
there  is  the  noblest  power  within.  The  grace  of  Christ  working  through  poor
apostles. — A  Lapide,

^  (Ver.  1.)

The  Jews,  wno  were  the  Church  of  God,  resembled  the  vine.     1.  Vines  are
few  in  respect  of  other  trees,  so  were  the  Jews  in  respect  of  other  people  (Deut.
156


IIOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL,  chap.  XV.


vii.  7).  They  were  the  "  fewest  of  all  people."  2.  Vines  are  planted  by  hillsides,
by  houses,  in  gardens,  orcliarils,  &c.,  and  the  Jews  were  planted  in  the  choicest
land;  "in  a  pleasant  place"  (Hos.  ix.  13),  "in  a  very  fruitful  hill"  (Isa.  v.  1).
The  vine  was  brought  out  of  Egypt ;  it  was  a  chosen  vine,  and  it  was  planted
(Ps.  Ixxx.  8),  but  where  %  in  "  a  good  land,"  even  a  land  of  brooks,  fountain?,
springs,  valleys,  hills  ;  in  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  the  glory  of  all
lands  (Deut.  viii.  7  ;  Ezek.  xx.  6).  Therefore  called  a  branch  of  His  own  plant-
ing, planted  with  His  right  hand  (Isa.  Ix.  21  ;  Ps.  Ixxx.  15).  3.  Vines  are  weak,
must  have  props  and  supports  to  uphold  them.  God  dealt  so  by  the  Jews.
"  In  the  wilderness  the  Lord  thy  God  bare  thee  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  son,  in
all  the  way  that  ye  wont "  (Deut.  i.  31).  Children  are  weak,  and  must  be  carried
in  the  arms ;  and  so  God  did  carry  them  (Deut.  xxxiii.  27).  4.  Fruitful ;  no
tree  so  fruitful  as  the  vine.  It  is  called  the  *'  fruitful  vine,"  it  is  fruitful  in
branches,  and  fruitful  in  clusters.  The  Jews  were  a  fruitful  nation.  *'Thy
fathers  went  down  into  Egypt  with  threescore  and  ten  persons,  and  now  the
Lord  thy  God  hath  made  thee  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multitude "  (Deut.
X.  32).  5.  It  spreads  much  ;  so  the  Jews,  who  were  God's  vine  (Ps.  Ixxx.  9-11).
The  psalmist  saith  there  of  this  vine,  that  it  filled  the  land,  covered  the  hills
with  its  shadow,  sent  out  her  boughs  unto  the  sea,  and  her  brandies  unto  the
river,  and  they  spread  far.  6.  It  is  pleasant  and  delightful ;  such  were  the  Jews
(Isa.  V.  7).  7.  Most  pains  required  about  vines  of  any  plants  or  trees ;  much
digging,  dressing,  pruning,  supporting,  fencing  is  needful.  The  Jews  had  much
pains  or  cost  bestowed  upon  them  (Isa.  v.  4).  Other  trees  are  little  looked  after,
but  the  vine  must  have  special  care  (John  xv.  2).  The  husbandman  observes
every  branch,  the  fruitful  and  unfruitful  (Amos  iii.  2). — Greenhill.

The  Keal  Security  of  Christians.

God*s  Church  is  still  the  same  though  the  outward  form  of  it  be  changed.
It  is  governed  by  the  same  principles,  exposed  to  the  same  sources  of  danger,
and  only  safe  in  the  same  refuge.  The  Christian  Church  is  God's  Vine,  and  the
reason  of  its  existence,  of  its  continuance,  is  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  case  of
His  Church  of  old.     What  is  the  real  security  of  Christians'?     Consider —

L  What  it  is  not.  1.  Not  in  their  high  calling.  God  called  the  Jews  of  old
from  amongst  the  heathen  to  be  a  separate  people,  a  holy  nation.  He  calls  His
Church  now  out  of  the  world.  Yet  this  is  only  means  to  an  end,  and  not  the
end  itself.  He  has  called  His  people  for  a  purpose,  and  if  they  fail  to  answer
it  they  only  fall  from  a  higher  elevation,  and  therefore  into  a  worse  destruction
than  others.  2.  Not  in  their  great  gifts  and  endowments.  They  have  the  gifts
of  the  Spirit,  the  means  of  grace,  prophets  and  teachers,  the  written  Word.
With  them  lies  the  sacred  deposit  of  God's  truth.  But  these  are  only  the
means  and  appliances  of  spiritual  education.  They  are  not  in  themselves
knowledge,  for  in  spiritual  things  knowledge  comes  of  doing  the  will  of  God.
Unless  God  is  seen  by  the  eye  of  the  soul,  and  enjoyed  as  a  real  possession
within,  the  doctrines  and  ordinances  of  religion  become  to  us  but  barren  tradi-
tions, and  outward  privileges  only  a  temptation  for  resting  in  false  security.  3.
Not  in  what  God  has  already  done.  God  has  cultivated  His  vine,  the  Church,
with  great  care.  But  if  any  of  her  members  stop  short,  and  so  fail  to  reach  the
end  of  God's  gracious  design,  the  good  which  He  hath  wrought  for  them  will  be
forfeited  and  will  only  increase  their  judgment.  From  each  who  hath  not  any
solid  results  to  show  shall  be  taken  away  what  has  already  been  given,  **  even
that  which  he  hath."

IL  What  it  is.  The  real  security  of  the  Christian  Church  is  its  fruitful-
ness.  God  planted  it  for  this  very  purpose.  1.  God's  honour  is  concerned  in  the
Church's  fruitfulness.     The  husbandman  likes  to  see  and  to  show  the  fruit  of  hia

157


CHAP.  xei.  HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,

labours.  They  are  his  reward,  and  tliey  commend  to  others  his  dih'gence  and
care  (St.  John  xv.  8 ;  St.  Matt.  v.  16).  2.  It  is  not  what  we  receive^  but  what
springs  up  from  us  into  the  fruit  of  good  living^  that  determines  our  spiritual  condition.
God's  gifts  are  a  power  entrusted  to  us  to  be  used  for  His  glory.  They  are
the  seed  which  is  sown  in  our  hearts ;  but  they  are  entirely  wasted  if  the  fruit
does  not  appear.  3.  The  end  decides  the  matter.  It  is  in  vain  to  rejoice  at
beginning  well,  and  then  imagine  that  all  is  done.  The  end  alone  determines
our  state  before  God.  We  were  made  for  God's  glory,  and  if  we  have  not
reached  that  we  have  failed.  4.  We  must  not  boast  of  God's  gifts  of  grace  as  if
they  were  products  of  our  own  nature.  No  ground  for  boasting  at  all,  for  we  have
literally  nothing  which  we  have  not  received.  How  much  more  is  this  true  of
God's  gifts  of  grace !  5.  JVe  must  not  turn  God's  benefits  into  an  excuse  for  sin.
Our  true  security  lies  not  in  our  privileges,  but  in  the  good  use  which  we  make
of  them.

(Ver.  8.)

The  sins  of  the  inhabitants  bring  desolation  upon  a  land.  Canaan  was  a
pleasant  and  fruitful  land,  a  very  paradise,  but  because  they  committed  a  tres-
pass, corrupted  God's  worship  and  oppressed  the  people,  therefore  God  laid
waste  the  land,  even  His  own  vineyard ;  He  plucked  away  the  fence,  broke
down  the  wall,  and  let  in  those  wild  beasts,  bears,  boars,  and  foxes,  the
Babylonians,  who  tore  the  vine  in  pieces,  and  rooted  it  wholly  up,  and  laid  all
desolate.  Before  they  came,  the  land  was  as  the  garden  of  Eden,  but  they
left  it  a  desolate  wilderness ;  and  where  the  vines  grew,  tliere  were  briars  and
thorns  (Isa.  vii.  23,  24;  Ps.  cvii.  3,  4).  If  we  would  therefore  prevent  this,
let  us  hearken  to  what  is  said,  Jer.  v.  7. — GreenhUl,

Israel's  Ingratitude,  Punishment,  and,  in  the  End,  Forgiveness.

(Chap,  xvi.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  pro-  loveliness.     But  in  their  ingratitude

phet  surveys  the  entire   development  they  sinned  grievously  against  Him.

of  the  nation,  past  and  future.     Their  They  might  rest  in  their  position  as

original  condition  was  most  wretched,  the  chosen  vine  and  think  themselves

like  that  of  a  miserable  infant  at  its  secure,  but  they  are  here  assured  that

birth  utterly  neglected  and   deprived  they  are  no  better  than  other  nations,

of  proper  attention   and   care.     God  and   are   liable   to   be    punished   and

had  brought  them  out  of  this  lowly  judged  as  the  heathen  around  them,

estate,  had  saved  them  from  destrac-  Yet,  in  the  end,  God  will  be  mindful

tion,  and  had  fostered  them  with  His  of  His  covenant,  grant  them  His  for-

constant  love  and  care  until  they  had  giveness,  and  restore  them  to  favour,
reached  to  a  maturity  of  vigour  and

Israel's  Past  Condition,  Helpless,  Unclean,  and  about  to  Perish.

(Vers.  1,  2.)

Vers.  1,  2.    "Cause  Jerusalem  to  people.     The  main  end  of  this  chapter

know  her  abominations."     Jerusalem  is  to  declare  these  abominations.
is  used  as  the  symbolical  representa-         Ver.  3.  "  Thy  birth  and  thy  nativity

tive  of  the  whole  Jewish  people.     Her  is  in  the  land  of  Canaan ;  thy  father

sins  were  greater  than  those  of  other  was  an  Amorite,  and  thy  mother  an

nations ;   they  were    "  abominations,"  Hittite."    "  Kegarded  merely  as  a  city,

for  they  were  the  sins  of  the  covenant  Jerusalem  was  neither  of  Amoritish
158


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  BZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XVI.


nor  Hittite  origin,  but  simply  a  Jebn-
site  city.  And  it  is  too  obvious  to
need  any  proof  that  the  prophetic
word  does  not  refer  to  the  city  as  a
city,  but  that  Jerusalem  represents
the  people  of  Israel,  or  the  covenant
nation.  It  was  not  the  mass  of  houses,
but  the  population — which  was  the
foundling  —  that  excited  Jehovah's
compassion,  and  which  He  multiplied
into  myriads  (ver.  7),  clothed  in
splendour,  and  chose  as  the  bride
with  whom  He  concluded  a  marriage
covenant.  The  descent  and  birth
referred  to  are  not  physical,  but  spiri-
tual descent.  Spiritually,  Israel  sprang
from  the  land  of  the  Canaanites ;  and
its  father  was  an  Amorite  and  its
mother  a  Hittite,  in  the  same  sense
in  which  Jesus  said  to  the  Jews,  *  Ye
are  of  your  father  the  devil'  (St.
John  viii.  44).  The  iniquity  of  the
Amorites  was  great  even  in  Abraham's
time,  through  not  yet  full  or  ripe  for
destruction  (Gen.  xv.  1 6) ;  and  the
daughters  of  Heth,  whom  Esau  married,
caused  Rebekah  great  bitterness  of
spirit  (Gen.  xxvii.  46)  "  (Keil).

Ver.  4.  "Thy  navel  was  not  cut,
neither  wast  thou  washed  in  water
to  supple  thee."  The  cutting  of  the
navel-string  is  necessary  for  the  inde-
pendent life  of  the  child,  and  the
washinsr  with  water  to  cleanse  it  from
the  impurities  attaching  to  it.  If
these  necessary  offices  are  neglected,
the  infant  must  perish.


"  Thou  wast  not  salted  at  all,  nor
swaddled  at  all."  "  After  the  washing,
the  bofly  was  rubbed  with  salt,  accord-
ing to  a  custom  very  widely  spread  in
ancient  times,  and  still  met  with  here
and  there  in  the  East;  and  that  not
merely  for  making  the  skin  drier  and
firmer,  or  of  cleansing  it  more  tho-
roughly, but  probably  from  regard  to
the  virtue  of  salt  as  a  protection  from
putrefaction.  And,  finally,  it  was
bound  with  swaddlinsr-clothes.  Not
one  of  these  things,  so  indispensable
to  the  preservation  and  strengthening
of  the  child,  was  performed  in  the
case  of  Israel  at  the  time  of  its  birth
from  any  feeling  of  compassionate
love ;  but  it  was  cast  into  the  field,
i.e.  exposed,  in  order  that  it  might
perish.  The  day  of  the  birth  of  Jeru-
salem, i.e.  of  Israel,  was  the  period  of
its  sojourn  in  Egypt,  where  Israel  as
a  nation  was  born,  the  sons  of  Jacob
who  went  down  to  Egypt  having
multiplied  into  a  nation  "  (Keil).

Ver.  5.  "  None  eye  pitied  thee,  to
do  any  of  these  things  unto  thee."
"  Those  who  had  looked  up  to  Joseph
did  not  even  look  down  with  com-
passion on  thee  "  (Lange).  Israel  in
Egypt  was  an  object  of  contempt.
The  neglect  into  which  it  had  fallen
might  well  be  compared  to  the  cruel
desertion  of  an  infant ;  for  Moses,  the
type  of  his  people,  was  actually  ex-
posed, and  afterwards  delivered  from
threatened  death  by  God's  providence.


HOMILETIGS,
Moral  Corruption  in  the  Church.

The  prophet  is  speaking  to  those  who  had  been  brought  into  covenant  with
God,  and  called  to  serve  Him  as  His  people.  He  is  not  speaking  of  the  sins  of
mankind  generally,  but  of  those  of  the  Church.  Of  this  moral  corruption  we
are  here  taught —

I.  That  it  ought  to  he  thoroughly  brought  home  to  all  concerned.  No  half
measures,  or  delicate  hints,  will  suffice.  Jerusalem  must  "know  her  abomina-
tions" (ver.  2).  1.  The  knowledge  of  sin  is,  before  all  things^  necessary  to  salvation.
It  is  not  sufficient  to  make  a  general  admission  of  our  heritas^e  in  the  sin  which
is  natural  to  our  race.  There  must  be  a  real,  heart-felt  knowledge  of  sin  as
committed  by  ourselves  against  God.  The  sad  wounds  of  our  soul  must  be
probed  to  the  very  bottom,  a  painful  yet  salutary  process.  2.  The  knowledge  of
sin  cannot  he  arrived  at  by  our  own  unaided  powers.  However  we  may  lament  the
sin  that  is  in  the  world,  we  are  naturally  blind  to  our  own  real  state.     Even  the

159


CHAP.  XVI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


engaging  in  the  outward  services  of  religion  may  tend  still  more  to  blind  us,  for
we  are  tempted  to  rest  satisfied  with  them,  and,  it  may  be,  to  regard  them  as  an
atonement  for  our  faults  and  transgressions.  And  rehgious  people  are  liable
also  to  the  temptation  of  pleading  the  motive  of  a  good  intention  and  purpose
as  a  defence  for  what  is  clearly  wrong.  They  use  the  light  which  is  given  them,
not  to  shine  on  the  path  of  duty,  but  to  aid  their  own  wilfulness.  The  real
knowledge  of  sin  must  be  brought  to  suth  from  without.  It  is  necessary  that
the  inspired  prophet  should  speak.  It  is  the  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  con-
vince  of  sin.

IL  It  ought  to  be  revealed  in  all  its  enormity.  1.  As  sin  against  the  light.
Those  who  have  church  privileges,  and  yet  live  ungodly  lives,  are  regarded  as
the  heathen  in  the  sight  of  God  (Matt,  xviii.  17).  2.  As  sin  which  brings  to  a
most  miserable  condition.  Such  may  be  compared  to  an  abandoned  infant,  ready
to  perish  (vers.  4,  5).

(Ver.  2.)

1.  A  people  may  be  guilty  of  abominations,  and  not  know  nor  acknowledge
them.  "They  know  not  to  do  right"  (Amos  iii.  10).  When  men  know  not
what  is  right,  how  can  they  know  what  is  wrong]  They  stored  up  violence
and  robbery  in  their  palaces,  they  got  wealth  by  injustice,  oppression,  laid  it  up,
and  thought  it  well  gotten.  They  know  not  God  (Jer.  ix.  3).  ''They  know
not  the  way  of  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  v.  4) ;  therefore  their  own  ways  seem  good  in
their  eyes.  They  were  blinded,  and  as  they  knew  not  their  abominations,  so
they  acknowledged  them  not  (Hos.  v.  15).  They  are,  therefore,  urged  to  lay
their  sin  to  heart  and  confess  it.  2.  There  is  an  unwillingness  in  sinners  to
hear  of  their  sins.  *'  Cause  Jerusalem  to  know,"  &c. ;  she  is  against  it,  but  make
her  to  know  them.  This  people  were  always  averse  to  hear  of  their  sins  or
duty  (Zech  vii.  11,  12;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  16).  When  Stephen  told  them  of  their
practices  (Acts  vii.  51,  52)  what  followed  upon  it?  "They  were  cut  to  the
heart,  and  they  gnashed  upon  him  with  their  teeth."  And  when  Christ  told
them  of  their  sins  they  derided  Him  (Luke  xvi.  14),  told  Him  that  He  had  **a
devil"  (John  viii.  48).  And  not  only  wicked  men  are  unwilling  to  hear  of  their
sins,  but  even  good  men  also.  When  God  reproved  Jonah,  "  Doest  thou  well  to
be  angry?"  his  reply  was,  "I  do  well  to  be  angry,  even  to  death."  He  thought
God  did  evil  in  reproving  him,  that  he  had  more  cause  to  be  angry  than  God
had  to  chide  him  for  his  anger.  Paul  was  become  an  enemy  to  the  Galatians,
because  he  told  them  the  tiuth,  he  told  them  of  their  sins.  Good  men  do  not
easily  endure  to  hear  of  their  faults.  3.  What  God  commands  the  prophets  and
ministers  to  do,  it  matters  not  how  it  is  taken  by  the  people,  they  are  to  do  it.
It  was  not  for  Ezekiel  to  excuse  himself  from  tliis  service,  to  object  against  it,
to  say  they  will  mock  me,  despise  me,  misuse  me,  hate  me,  seek  my  hurt.  God
commanded,  and  it  was  his  duty  to  do  it  carefully,  conscientiously,  and  faith-
fully. He  must  make  known  their  sins  to  themselves,  to  the  world,  let  the  event
be  what  it  will  (Isa.  Iviii.  1).  The  prophet  must  not  whisper,  but  cry,  and  that
aloud ;  it  matters  not  who  hears,  he  must  lift  up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet.  When
men  blow  trumpets  they  do  it  with  all  their  strength,  and  the  sound  of  it  goeth
far ;  so  must  the  prophets  utter  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  show  them  their
transgressions.  (1.)  That  others  may  take  warning,  and  not  do  as  they  have
done  (1  Tim.  v.  20).  (2.)  That  they  may  bring  the  parties  to  repentance  (Jer.
xxxiii.  22).  How  shall  sinners  come  to  repentance  if  they  hear  not  of  their  sins,
if  they  be  not  convinced  of  the  sinfulness  of  them  by  the  prophets  and  ministers
of  God  ?  The  false  prophets  hid  their  sins  from  them.  (3. )  That  they  may
deliver  their  own  souls  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  8,  9).  4.  The  sins  of  people  are  abomina-
tions in  God's  account.  Sins  are  works,  but  works  of  iniquity,  abominable  works,
And  abominable  iniquity  (Ps.  xiv.  1,  liii.  1). — Ch'eenhill.
160


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.  chap.  xvi.


Israel's  Salvation  from  her  Shame  and  Misery  is  due  to  the  Lord

ALONE  (vers.  6-14).

Ver.  6.      "And  when  I  passed  bv  Lord    endowed    Israel    and  made  it

thee,  and  saw  thee  polluted  in  thine  glorious,  after  he  had  adopted  it  as

own  blood."     Some  render,  "  and  saw  the  people  of  his  possession  in  Egypt,

thee  trampled  in  thy  blood."   Israel  in  Israel  was  living  in  a  state  of  nature,

Egypt   was  a  people   trampled  upon,  destitute  of  the   gracious  revelations

utterly  despised.      ** I  said  unto  thee,  of  God." — {Keil)
when  thou  wast  in  thy  blood,  Live."

It  was  sad  to  be  despised,  but   the  Ver.  8.    "  Behold  thy  time  was  the

chief  danger  was  that  Z//^  was  seriously  time  of  love."     This  is  not  intended

threatened.     From  the  mouth  of  God,  n»erely  to  convey  the  idea  that  she

the  word  "Live"  was  a  word  of  power,  had  arrived  at  a  marriageable  age,  but

and  was  visibly  fulfilled  in  the  extra-  also  the  further  thought  that  slie  had

ordinary     multiplication     of     Israel.  become    an    object    of    affection.     "I

"  Jehovah  here  represents  Himself  as  a  SDiead  my  skirt  over  thee  and  covered

traveller  who,  on  passing  by,  discovers  thy  nakedness."     "The  spreading  of

the  unsightly  and  pitiable  object  which  the  corner  of  the  upper  garment  and

had  just  been  described,  and  interposes  the  covering  of  the  nakedness  symbo-

for  its  rescue.      Notwithstanding  its  lize  in   general,   that    He    took    the

pollution,  He  takes  compassion  upon  miserable,    helpless    one    under    His

it,  and  saves  its  life.    In  this  miserable  protection,  interested  Himself  in  her;

and  helpless  condition  Jehovah  found  specially,  however,  with  the  thought

the  Hebrews  in  the  land  of  bondage,  of  conferring  the  honour  of  betrothal.

Extending  the  principle   involved   in  marriage  (Kuth  iii.  9).     This  thought

the  figure  beyond  the  direct  teaching  is  solemnly  carried  out  in  the  swearing

of  the  text,  it  is  strikingly  descriptive  and  entering  into  covenant,  by  means

of  the  condition  of  sinners  previous  to  of  which  Israel,  grown  into  a  nation,

conversion." — {Henderson.)  now   became  the   peculiar   people   of

Jehovah  (Ez.  xx.  5,  6 ;  Ex.  xix.,  xx.  2,

Ver.  7.  "I  have  caused  thee  to  mul-  5 ;  Deut.  v.  2  ;  Eph.  v.  32." — {Lange.)
tiply  as  the  bird  of  the  field."  Ac-  '*  There  was  nothing  in  Israel  that  was
cording  to  the  promise  (Ex.  i.  7,  12).  lovely.  It  was  all  pure  affection  on
"Thou  art  come  to  excellent  orna-  the  part  of  Jehovah.  The  advance  in
ments."  Heb., "  Ornament  of  cheeks,"  the  allegory  is  now  to  that  of  the
describing  youthful  freshness  and  espousals." — {Henderson.)  "I  sware
beauty  of  face.  **  Thy  breasts  are  unto  thee,  and  entered  into  a  covenant
fashioned,  and  thine  hair  is  grown."  with  thee."  "  An  obvious  reference
The  Heb.  word  when  applied  to  the  to  the  solemn  transactions  at  Sinai,
breasts  means  to  expand,  lit.  to  raise  when  Jehovah  entered  into  covenant
oneself  up.  "The  metaphor  is  still  with  the  Hebrews,  thereby  contract-
continued,  representing  the  infant  ing  as  it  were  a  conjugal  relation,
growing  up  to  womanhood,  and  exhi-  by  which  He  pledged  Himself  to
biting  unmistakeable  signs  of  puberty."  love,  provide  for,  and  protect  them;
— {Henderson.)  "  Whereas  thou  v^^ast  while  they  came  under  an  obligation
naked  and  bare."  "Naked  and  bare  to  love,  worship,  and  obey  Him  to  the
are  figurative  expressions  for  still  exclusion  of  every  rival  god.  Hence
destitute  of  either  clothing  or  orna-  as  it  follows  in  the  sequel,  and  so  fre-
ments.  This  implies  something  more  quently  in  the  Old  Testament,  idolatry
than  the  poverty  of  the  people  in  the  is  represented  as  spiritual  adultery,
wilderness  attached  to  Egypt.  Naked-  the  nation  thereby  being  guilty  of  a
ness  represents  deprivation  of  all  the  breach  of  the  marriage  covenant/  —
blessings  of  salvation  with  which  the  {Henderson.)

L  161


CBAP.  XVI.


EOMJLETW  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


Ver.  9.  "  Then  washed  I  thee  ;;«;  ith
water ;  yea,  I  thoroughly  washed  away
thy  blood  from  thee,  and  I  annointed
thee  with  oil."  Preparations  for  the
marriage  ceremony,  consisting  of  puri-
fication, the  putting  on  of  ornaments,
and  annointing  with  oil  were  customary
in  the  East  (Esther  ii.  9-12).  Before
the  Israelites  were  permitted  to  enter
into  covenant  with  God  they  had  to
undergo  a  thorough  purification  (Ex.
xix.  14  ;  Jer.  ii.  2,  3).  "The  anoint-
ing with  oil  indicates  the  powers  of  the
Spirit  of  God,  which  flowed  to  Israel
from  the  divine  covenant  of  grace." —
{Keil)

Ver.  10.     "Broidered  work."    Rich

garments  of  many  colours,  adorned  with
figures  wrouglit  in  silver  and  gold.
With  such  costly  garments  queens
were  accustomed  to  clothe  theniselves
(Psa.  xlv.  15).  "And  shod  thee  with
badger's  skin."  **  This  was  a  kind  of
skin  used  by  the  Hebrews  to  make  an
over-covering  to  the  tabernacle  (Ex.
xxvi.  14)  ;  and,  as  appears  from  the
present  verse,  used  also  lor  shoes  ;  but
of  what  particular  animal,  has  been
disputed.  The  most  probable  opinion
is,  that  the  seal  is  intended."  —
{Henderson.)  "And  I  girded  thee
about  with  fine  linen,  and  I  covered
thee  with  silk.'*  "  The  girding  with
fine  linen  refers  to  the  head-band
(Ez,  xxiv.  17  ;  Ex.  xxix.  9  ;  Lev.
viii.  13),  and  is  applied  by  the  Targum
to  the  headdress  of  the  priests." —
{Henderson.)

Ver.  12.  "And  I  pat  a  jewel  on
thy  forehead."  The  Hebrew  word
here  rendered,  "jewel"  properly
means  a  "  ring,"  and  the  word
rendered  "  forehead  "  (though  some-
tinies  used  to  denote  the  countenance
or  face  in  general)  signifies  strictly
and  properly  the  nose*    *'  The  jewellery


included  not  only  armlets,  nose-rings,
and  earrings,  which  the  daughters  of
Israel  were  generally  accustomed  to
wear,  but  also  necklaces  and  a  crown,
as  ornaments  worn  by  princesses  and
queens." — {Keil.)

Ver.  13.  "Thus  wast  thou  decked
with  gold  and  silver."  This  verse
sums  up  the  contents  of  verses  9-12.
"Thou  didst  eat  fine  flour,  and  honey,
and  oil;  and  thou  wast  exceeding
beautiful,  and  thou  didst  prosper  into
a  kingdom."  "  The  food  is  referred  to
once  more;  and  the  result  of  the
whole  is  said  to  have  been,  that  Jeru-
salem became  exceedingly  beautiful,
and  flourished  even  to  royal  dignity.
The  latter  cannot  be  taken  as  referring
simply  to  the  establishment  of  the
monarchy  under  David,  any  more
than  merely  to  the  spiritual  sovereignty
for  which  Israel  was  chosen  from  the
very  beginning  (Ex.  xix.  5,  6).  The
expression  includes  both,  viz.,  the  call
of  Israel  to  be  a  kingdom  of  priests,
and  the  historical  realisation  of  this
call  through  the  Davidic  sovereiafutv  "
{Keil)

Ver.  14.  **And  thy  renown  went
forth  among  the  heathen  for  thy
beauty."  "  As  a  kingdom  theirs  was
distinguishingly  flourishing  in  the  days
of  David  and  Solomon,  the  former  of
which  monarchs  greatly  extended  its
boundaries  and  enriched  it  with  the
spoils  of  his  victories.  The  theocracy
tlien  reached  its  highest  point  of  glory,
and  was  of  great  celebrity  among  the
surrounding  nations  (1  Kings  x.).  Still
they  are  reminded  that  their  prosperity
and  glory  were  not  owing  to  any  merit
of  their  own.  It  was  a  'comeliness*
which  Jehovah  their  covenant-God  had
put  upon  them.  To  His  unmerited
bountytliey  owedall  that  they  enjoyed"
{Henderson),


HOMILETICS.

Salvation  is  of  the  Lord,

The  salvation  and  advancement  of  Israel  to  position  and  renown  among  the
nations  has  its  parallel  in  the  salvation  and  exaltation  of  believers.    Consider —
162


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xvi.


I.  The  grace  of  tMs  salvation.  Israel  is  described  under  the  figure  of  a
miserable  infant  neglected  at  its  birth,  and  even  cast  out  and  left  to  perish.
This  people  on  whom  God  bestowed  His  grace,  were  lying  in  their  own
pollutions,  and  fast  sinking  into  moral  death.  They  were  destitute  of  every
ornament  and  beauty  of  goodness  (vers.  6,  7).  There  was  nothing  in  them
to  win  the  love  of  admiration  or  affection,  but  everything  to  excite  loathing
and  disgust.  When  we  consider  the  condition  from  which  Israel  was  called,  we
must  feel  that  the  salvation  of  the  people  was  by  grace  aloiie.  And  what  does
God  see  in  man  as  a  sinner  but  all  that  is  abhorrent  to  His  own  holy  nature  !
If  God  comes  to  the  help  of  such  it  must  be  by  the  impulse  of  a  grace  which  is
all  His  own.

II.  The  glory  of  this  salvation.  The  glory  of  it  lies  in  the  fact  that  it  is
grace  manifested  in  the  most  wonderful  and  excellent  way.  1.  It  had  its  source
in  the  love  of  pity  and  compassion.  There  was  nothing  in  the  original  condition
of  Israel  to  win  the  love  ot  admiration.  It  was  the  love  of  pity  and  compassion
that  saved  them.  Such  a  love  is  worthy  of  the  broad  free  benevolence  of  God.
It  is  a  love  which  cannot  be  overtasked  by  the  worst  condition  of  human  sin  and
misery.  The  grace  of  God  meets  the  case  of  the  guilty,  and  His  mercy  that  of
the  miserable  ;  and  the  glory  of  it  lies  in  the  fact,  that  it  springs  from  pure  pity
without  any  merit  or  claim  whatever  on  the  part  of  its  object.  2.  It  was  a
manifestation  of  that  love  which  desires  to  give  and  bless.  These  are  the  essential
characteristics  of  all  love  which  is  worthy  of  that  sacred  name.  *'  It  is  more
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  and  that  blessedness  first  and  above  all  belongs
to  God.  He  is  the  only  blessed  One,  for  He  alone  is  ever  giving  and
never  receiving.  And  what  is  Creation  but  the  love  of  God  expressing
itself  in  manifold  gifts;  and  what  is  Redemption  but  the  love  of  God,  as  it
brings  the  undeserved  gifts  of  salvation  to  the  souls  of  men  ?  God's  love  gave
to  ancient  Israel  a  restored  life  ;  '*  I  said  unto  thee  when  thou  wast  in  thy
blood.  Live  " — gave  them  an  energy  of  growth  and  improvement — invested
them  with  ornaments  and  beauty  (ver.  7j.  They  also  had  bestowed  upon
them  by  an  extraordinary  grace  the  favours  of  God's  love,  for  they  were  taken
into  intimate  union  with  Himself  (ver.  8).  And  further,  God  also  gave  them
influence  among  the  nations  of  the  earth  (ver.  14) — that  influence  which  comes
from  righteousness.  They  had  thus  bestowed  upon  them  that  love  which  both
gives  and  blesses.  But  in  this  process  by  which  they  were  raised  from  sin  to
holiness,  the  order  is,  first — forgiveness  ;  and  then  the  other  gifts  and  blessings
of  grace.  They  are  first  purified  from  their  pollution,  and  then  are  anointed
(ver.  9).  For  God  must  pardon  before  He  can  heal ;  and  men  must  be  justified
before  they  can  be  sanctiKed.  God  loves  the  sinner  though  vile  and  miserable
but  His  favour  is  only  reserved  for  those  who  are  washed  and  sanctified.

The  first  lesson  of  this  passage  is,  that  the  infinite  love  and  pity  of  the  heart
of  God  is  the  spring  and  origin  of  our  salvation.  Therefore  there  is  no  room
for  pride  or  boasting  on  our  part.  In  this  matter  of  salvation,  above  all  things,
we  must  give  the  glory  to  God  alone.

(Ver.  6.)

I.  There  is  nothing  in  the  creature  to  move  God  to  show  mercy.  God
saw  nothing  to  incline  or  move  Him  to  do  aught,  or  bestow  aught  upon  this
infant.  But  there  are  several  things  which  move  men.  1.  Birth  and  progeny.
Royal  and  noble  births  have  affected  many  ;  David  was  taken  with  Saul's
daughter  (1  Sam.  xviii.  17,  18).  This  moves  not  God,  Hepoureth  contempt  upon
princes  (Job  xii.  21).  He  chooseth  the  poor  to  be  rich  in  faith  (James  ii.  5).
Believers  are  said  to  be  ''  born  not  of  blood  "  (John  i.  13),  which  some  refer  to
families  of  noble  and  royal  blood.     "  Not  many  noble  are  called"  (1  Cor.  i.  26).

163


CHAP.  xvr.  UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


2.  Beauty.  Jacob  was  affected  with  the  beauty  of  Rachel ;  Ahasuerus  with  the
beauty  of  Vashti  (Esth.  i.  11).  God  is  not  iiiMved  with  beauty  ;  if  we  had  it,
there  is  nothing  in  man  to  affect  His  eye  (Psa.  xiv.  3).  We  are  altogether  filthy,
and  God  saw  them  in  their  blood.  3.  Natural  parts  prevail  with  men.
Abithopliel's  counsel  took  much  with  David  and  Absalom  ;  Joseph,  Daniel,  had
excellent  spirits,  great  wisdom,  and  they  were  advanced  thereupon.  Learning
is  persuasive,  and  conquers  many,  but  parts  and  learning  can  do  nothing  with
God  (1  Cor.  i.  26  ;  Matt.  xi.  25).  4.  Profitableness,  serviceableness.  So  Paul
]>ersuades  Philemon  to  take  Onesimus,  because  he  would  be  profitable  unto  him.
Men  are  taken  with  men,  because  they  bring  in  gain  unto  them.  But  the  Lord
is  not  profited  by  the  righteousness  of  men  (Job.  xxxv.  7)  ;  He  receives  nothing
at  man's  hands,  and  when  we  have  done  all,  we  are  unprofitable  servants.
5  Necessity  moves  men  mightily.  It  caused  Abiathar  to  give  the  shew-bread
to  David  (1  Sam.  xxi.  6)  ;  the  neces-sity  of  the  Church  moved  the  rich  to  sell  their
lands  and  goods  to  distribute  unto  every  man  as  they  had  need  (Acts  ii.  45).
This  is  no  motive  unto  Divine  Majesty.  6.  Uope  of  proving  well  draws  forth  men
to  do  much.  Men  do  much  for  others  with  the  hope  that  they  may  become  instru-
ments of  good.  But  God  will  give  the  gifts  of  Christ  for  the  rebellious,  and  dwell
among  them  (Psa.  Ixviii.  18).  How  rebellious  was  Manasseh  !  How  did  he  sin
against  heaven  and  earth,  yet  God  had  a  gift  of  life  for  him.  To  Mary  Magda-
lene and  to  Zaccheus,  Christ  said,  live,  when  they  were  in  their  Wood.  He
showed  mercy  to  Paul,  and  bade  him  live,  when  he  was  a  persecutor  and  an
injurious  person.  7.  Nothing  in  the  godly  moves  God,  all  theij  do  is  debt
(Luke  xvii.  10).     The  will  and  deed  are  of  the  Lord  (Phil.  ii.  13).

II.  The  Lord  shows  mercy  to  men  when  they  are  in  de-perate  conditions-
When  this  infant  was  cast  out,  and  lay  bleeding  to  death,  God  said  ''Live."
When  Moses,  and  other  Hebrew  children  were  to  be  drowned,  the  Lord  delivered
them.  When  in  Babylon,  all  the  necks  of  the  Jews  were  upon  the  block  by
Haman's  plot  and  power,  the  Lord  showed  them  mercy,  and  said,  "  Live/'  The
thief  upon  the  cross  met  with  life  in  the  gates  of  death.

III.  When  sinners  look  not  after  God,  He  is  pleased  to  look  after  and  find
out  them.  God  found  out  and  sought  the  Jews,  when  they  neither  sought  nor
called  ;  so  it  is  with  the  Gentiles  (Isa.  Ixv.  1).  Both  Gentile  and  Jew  had
preventing  grace,  and  were  sought  out  of  God  before  ever  they  sought  God.
Hence  Jerusalem  had  that  promise  or  title,  thou  shalt  be  called,  "Sought  out"
(Isa.  Ivii.  12).

IV.  God  hath  no  need  of  any  people.  He  passed  by,  like  some  great  man,
that  riding  forth,  finds  a  poor  distressed  infant,  and  out  of  compassion  takes  it
into  his  family  ;  not  because  he  needs  it,  but  he  will  show  kindness  to  it  of  his
own  good  pleasure.  If  He  needed  people  or  nations  He  could  create  them,  raise
them  up  from  the  stones.  The  Samaritan  had  no  need  of  the  wounded  man,
but  he  needed  the  Samaritan's  wine  and  oil.

V.  In  bestowing^  mercies,  God  is  real  'J'his  appears  from  the  doubling  of
the  word — "  Live,"  "  Live."  When  there  is  a  doubling  of  the  same  word,  there
the  intention,  reality,  and  earnestness  of  the  author  speaking  is  held  out
(Ez.  V.  8 ;  xxxvii.  5,  6  ;  Isa.  xl.  1).

VI.  When  God  hath  done  much  for  a  people,  and  they  are  degenerate  and
ungrateful,  the  Lord's  way  of  dealing  with  them  is  to  set  before  them  their
original  condition  and  his  kindness  unto  them  (Micah  vi.  2-5  :  Deut  zxxii.  6)-
(Greenhill).

164


HOMILETIC  COMMMNTARY:    EZEKIEL.  chap.  xvt.


Israel's  Apostact  from  God  (vers.  15-34).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  Its  origin  burning  them.  "  The  passing  through
and  nature  (yers.  15-22)  ;  its  magni-  was  the  mode  of  slaying,  and  the  de-
lude and  extent  (vers.  23-34).  vouring  was   the    consequence   of  it.

The  idols  were  thou<^lit  to  be  present

Ver.  15.     The  apostacy  of  Israel  is  in  the  fire." — (ffengstenberg.)
described  under  the  image  of  whore-
dom and  adultery.     *'  Thou  didst  trust         Vers.  23-27.     **  An  eminent  place."

in  thine  own  beauty,"     The  gifts  of  The  Heb.  may  be  rendered  a  brothel,

God,  when  they  ceased  to  be  recognised  or  place   of  prostitution.     The   word

as    such,    became    a    snare.       Israel  was  so  understood  by  the  LXX.     Thus

prostituted   them    in    the    service   of  figuratively  the  prophet  describes  their

idolatry.       Because  ot  thy    renown,  unholy  passion  for  idol-worship.  "The

*' Teaching  that  the  Jews  had  employed  natural   heights  are   too  far  for   the

the  renown,  which  through  the  Divine  people  hungering  after  idols.      They

goodness    they    had    acquired,    as    a  wish    to    plant   idolatry   in  the   city

means  of  seducing  neiglibouring  nations  thoroughfare,  and  so  build  for  them-

to    commit    spiritual    fornication." —  selves  artificial  heights.     We  must  dis-

( Henderson),  tinguish  between  the  thought  and  its

clothing.      The  thought  is,  that  the

Ver.  16.  The  "high  places"  were  objects  of  idolatry  became  the  prime
temples  erected  upon  heights  by  the  impulse  of  the  popular  life,  by  which
side  of  altars  (1  Kings  xiii.  32  ;  2  is  to  be  understood  much  less  reliirious
Kings  xvii.  29).  In  2  Kings  xxiii.  7,  than  political  adultery,  though  both
the  Jewish  women  are  described  as  went  hand  in  hand." — {Hengstenherg.)
wearing  hangings  to  adorn  the  temples  "And  h^st  made  thy  beauty  to  be
of  Astarte.  The  latter  part  of  the  abhorred."  The  Heb.  verb  in  the  Piel
verse  expresses  the  idea  that  such  ^ross  conjugation  signifies  to  abhor,  never  to
abominations  in  Israel  were  altogether  cause  to  be  abhorred.  To  prostitute
unparalleled  in  the  past,  as  they  would  their  beauty  was  to  show  their  con-
be  in  the  future.  tempt  for  it.     By  forsaking  God  and

His  Holy  worship  they  showed   how

Vers.  17-19.  **  Images  of  Men."  little  esteem  they  had  for  the  national
Heb.  **  Of  a  male."  This  may  de-  honour.  '*  And  hast  opened  thy  feet  to
scribe  idolatry  in  general,  and  thus  the  every  one  that  passed  by."  "At  an
word  "male"  would  be  used  as  cor-  earlier  period  Israel  stood,  by  the  situa-
responding  with  the  description  of  tion  of  their  country,  which  admitted
Israel  as  an  adultere.ss.  But  some  no  isolttion,  in  manifold  intercourse
expositors  think  that  a  reference  is  with  the  world  ;  but  in  the  time  which
made  here  to  a  certain  abominable  the  prophet  has  in  view  they  lay  in
form  of  idolatry.  "  Scholz  and  Haver-  the  middle  of  the  contending  world-
nick  understand  what  were  worshipped  powers — the  Asiatic  and  the  African —
in  the  idolatrous  service  of  phallus,  or  and  were  thus  in  their  intervening
the  membrum  virile,  which  tiie  Egyp-  territory  tempted  by  the  force  of  cir-
tians  regarded  as  the  emblem  of  fecun-  cumstances  to  adultery  with  powerful
dity,  and  which  is  still  licentiously  neighbours.*' — {Hengstenherg,)  "The
worshipped  by  the  Hindoos  under  the  Egyptians,  thy  neighbours,  great  of
name  of  lingam" — {Henderson),  flesh."     Heb.     **The  Sons  of  Egypt."

An  euphemism  to  denote  the  licentious

Vers.    20-22.     *'  To  cause  them  to  character  of    the    Egyptian   worship,

pass  through  the  fire."     A  clear  re-  "  The  sons  of  Egypt  are  not  its  god?,

ference  to   Moloch-worship   in   which  and    therefore    the     reference    is    to

children  were  sacrihced  to  the  idol  by  political  whoredom.     Let  it  be  remem-

165


CHAP.  XVI.  BOMlLETiC  COMMmTARY:    E^EKlEL.


bered  how  in  express  terms  intercourse  amalgamation  of  all  the  different  forma
with  Egypt  was  forbidden  to  Israel,  which  obtained  in  the  countries  around
how  return  thither  is  threatened  them  them." — {Henderson).  "How  weak  is
rather  as  the  worst  punishment  (Deut.  thine  heart,"  Some  render  it,  "Yet
xxviii.  68)  ;  and  let  one  compare  from  how  languishing  is  thine  lieart."  In
the  days  of  Solomon  onwards  (1  Kings  this  sense  we  are  to  understand  that
iii.  1,  ix.  16,  X.  28  ;  2  Kings  xviii. ;  sickly  craving  of  lustful  desire,  which
Isa.  XXX.  xxxi.  1,  xxxvi.  6  ;  Jer.  xxxvii.  had  grown  into  a  disease.  Ewald
5,  7). — {Lange).  '*  The  daughters  of  the  designates  the  expression  as  **  a  biting
Philistines  which  are  ashamed  of  thy  sarcasm  ;  how  great  must  be  the  Ian-
lewd  ways."  **  The  daughters  of  the  guishing  of  love  !"  Others  understand
Philistians  are  the  Philistian  states,  it  more  generally  of  the  tendency  of
corresponding  to  the  representation  of  oft-repeated  sin  to  weaken  our  moral
Israel  as  an  adulterous  wife.  The  nature.  **  The  influence  of  sin  on  the
Philistians  are  mentioned  as  the  prin-  soul  is  to  render  it  morally  impotent,
cipal  foes,  because  Israel  fell  completely  Though  it  may  not  deprive  it  of  the
into  their  power  at  the  end  of  the  powers  which  are  requisite  to  consti-
period  of  the  Judges  (Judges  xiii. ;  tute  man  a  responsible  agent,  it  weakens
1  Sam.  iv.)  ;  and  they  are  referred  to  his  principle  of  action,  takes  possession
here,  for  the  deeper  humiliation  of  of  those  powers,  and  forms  itself  into
Israel,  as  having  been  ashamed  of  the  habits  which  the  individual  allows  to
licentious  conduct  of  the  Israelites,  grow  upon  him,  so  that  he  becomes  at
because  they  adhered  to  their  gods,  last  insensible  to  the  operation  of  the
and  did  not  exchange  them  for  others  strongest  moral  motives." — {Hender-
as  Israel  had  done  (Jer.  ii.  10,  11). —  son).  "And  the  contrary  is  in  thee  from
{Keil).  other  women  in  thy  whoredoms."  Israel

gave  presents  to  its  lovers,  contrary  to

Vers.  28-34.  "  Thou  hast  played  the  the  practice  of  prostitutes  in  general,

whore  also  with  the  Assyrians,  because  The  Jews  practised  idolatry  not  from

thou  wast  unsatiable."     "  Having  got  the  mere  love  of  gain,  but  from  the

no   satisfaction  in   the   African,  they  gratification   they  found  in  that  sin.

betake  themselves  now  to  the  Asiatic  They  had  arrived  at  that  lowest  stage

world-power.     They  long  after  it,  and  of  depravity  when  sin  is  loved  merely

find    no    satisfaction   even    when   the  for  its  own  sake.     **  Ezekiel  has  thus

longing  is  realized." — {Lange).    "  Not  fulfilled    the   task   appointed   him   in

satisfied  with  adopting  the  idolatories  ver.  2,  to  charge  Jerusalem  with  her

of  Egypt,  the  Jews  practised  those  of  abominations.     The  address  now  turns

the  more  distant  Assyrians  and  Baby-  to  an  announcement  of  the  punish-

lonians.    They  were  perfectly  insatiable  ment." — {Keil),
in  their  lust.     Their  idolatry  was  an


EOMILETICS.

Israel's  Apostacy  :  An  Example  op  Monstrous  Iniquity.

I.  It  was  the  prostitution  of  God's  best  gifts.  *'  Thou  didst  trust  in  thine
own  beauty,  and  playedst  the  harlot  because  of  thy  renown"  (ver.  15).  They
ceased  to  recognise  their  superior  endowments  as  the  free  and  undeserved  gifts
of  God's  great  favour,  and  therefore  the-e  became  a  snare  to  them  and  the
occasion  of  falling.  Their  iniquity  was  beyond  that  of  other  nations,  because
theirs  was  the  sin  of  a  people  taken  into  special  covenant}  with  God.  It  is
more  than  common  iniquity — it  is  monstrous  to  turn  God's  gifts  into  the  means
of  siu  f  Jude  iv.).  The  sins  against  the  clearest  light  are  the  greatest  of  all.
166


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEFCrFL  ciuP.  xvt.


II.  It  took  the  worst  possible  forms.  1.  77ie2/  devoted  all  God's  gifts  to
idols.  (1.)  7/ie  common  gifts  of  i'rovidence.  Food  of  various  kinds,  represented
by  "  fine  flour,  and  oil,  and  honey "  (ver.  19).  (2.)  Luxuries.  "  Jewels  uf
gold  and  silver."  With  these  they  made  images  to  be  employed  in  the
most  degrading  forms  of  idolatry.  (3.)  liven  their  own  children.  They  gave
them  up  to  Moloch-worship,  caused  them  "  to  pa^s  through  the  fire "
(ver.  21).  Such  was  their  infatuation  with  this  idolatry,  that  they  silenced
the  common  instincts  of  nature,  and  gave  up  their  own  children  to  the
most  cruel  forms  of  death.  The  prophet  speaks  of  their  great  sins  with
the  utmost  force  of  language  when  he  calls  them  "abominations."  2.  7 hey
took  special  pains  to  spread  idolatry.  Tliey  built  idol  temples  close  to  the
dwellings  of  the  worshippers,  so  that  they  might  not  have  to  seek  them  in
distant  places.  They  tempted  others  witli  all  the  wiles  and  artifices  of  wicked-
ness, **Thou  hast  opened  tliy  feet  to  every  one  that  passed  by"  (ver.  25).'
With  a  zeal  worthy  of  a  better  cause  they  sought  out  the  worst  forms  of  idolatry
among  the  nations  of  the  earth — The  Egyptians  (ver.  26),  the  Assyrians  (ver.
28),  the  Chaldeans  (ver.  29).  They  seemed  bent  not  merely  upon  imitating,
but  even  surpassing  the  worst  abominations  of  the  heathen  around  them.
3.  Their  lust  of  idolatry  was  insatiable.  When  they  had  gained  their  desire,
they  refused  to  be  satisfied,  and  still  cried  out  for  more  (vers.  28,  29).  "  How
weak  is  thine  heart,  saith  the  Lord  God  1 "  (ver.  30).  Their  lust  was  glutted
until  they  could  feel  only  the  sickly  laui^uishing  of  "  an  imperious  whorish
woman."  4.  They  loved  the  sin  of  idolatry  Jor  its  own  sake.  Not  for  gain,  bub
because  they  had  a  delight  in  it  (vers.  33,  34).  5.  They  sinned  thus  grievously
after  due  chastisement.  God  compares  himself  to  a  husband  who  endeavours  by
means  of  chastisement  to  induce  his  faithless  wife  to  return.  The  supply  of
food,  clothing,  and  of  all  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of  a  wife  are  diminished.
She  is  even  delivered  over  unto  the  will  of  them  that  hate  her  (ver.  27).  Such
was  the  discipline  by  which  the  Lord  sought  to  bring  His  ancient  people  to  a
sense  of  their  folly,  and  to  restore  to  them  the  privileges  of  the  faithful.  He
did  not  suffer  Israel  to  attain  to  that  glory  and  power  which  was  their  sure
portion  had  they  continued  to  serve  the  Lord  with  a  perfect  heart.  He  allowed
their  enemies  to  triumph  over  them,  so  that  they  had  not  the  undisturbed
possession  of  Canaan.  To  remain  unimproved  under  the  chastisements  of  God,
and  not  even  to  feel  them,  shows  a  heart  in  the  last  stage  of  hardening.  "  Thou
hast  stricken  them,  but  they  have  not  grieved  "  (Jer.  v.  3).

(Vers.  15-19.)

I.  Where  God  bestows  choice  mercies  upon  a  people,  He  looks  for  answerable
returns  from  them.  He  gave  life  to  the  Israelitish  state  (ver.  6).  He  multiplied
it  as  the  bud  of  the  field  (ver.  7).  He  loved  this  people,  entered  into  covenant
with  them,  married  them  unto  Himself  (ver.  8).  He  washed  away  their  blood,
and  anointed  them  with  oil  (ver.  9).  He  gave  them  costly  apparel,  fine  flour,
lioney  and  oil,  royal  dignity,  special  beauty,  great  fame  and  glory  (vers.  10-14)  ;
and  now  expected  that  they  should  have  lived  to  Him,  and  improved  all  for  the
honour  of  His  name.  ''  But  thou  didst  trust  in  thine  own  beauty,"  etc.  I
looked  not  for  this  at  thy  hands  ;  I  looked  that  thou  shouldst  have  been  faithful
and  fruitful  in  all  good  works,  and  been  as  exemplary  for  holiness  and  justice  to
other  nations,  as  I  was  exemplary  in  my  mercies  towards  thee  above  other
nations  (Isa.  v.  2).

II.  Ingratitude  in  God's  people  is  a  provoking  sin,  and  canses  God  to  upbraid
them  for  it.  From  the  beginning  of  verse  6,  to  the  end  of  verse  14,  which  are
but  nine  verses,  there  is  "  I"  seventeen  times,  and  every  mention  of  it  is  a
matter  for  upbraiding  unto  them.     When  God  had  made  Adam  after  His  image,

167


oiiAi,  xvt.  UOMILETW  COMMMTARY:   EZEKlEL.


planted  liim  in  Paradise,  given  him  dominion  over  all  the  creatures,  for  him
not  to  obey  one  little  command  was  gross  ingratitude,  provoked  the  Lord  to
upbraid  him  and  punish  him  for  it  (Gen.  iii.)  Christ  upbraids  Chorazin,
Bethsaida,  and  Capernaum  where  His  mighty  works  were  done,  because  they
,  brought  not  forth  fruits  answerable,  but  were  impenitent  and  ungrateful
(Matt,  xi.)

III.  We  are  very  apt  to  trust  in,  and  be  proud  of,  the  mercies  God  bestows

upon  us.  "  Thou  did'st  trust  in  thine  own  beauty."  Those  things  that  I  gave
thee  to  make  thee  beautiful,  tliou  hast  abused  and  put  too  much  confidence  in.
The  heart  of  man  is  ready  to  idolize  every  mercy  God  gives.  There  are  several
mercies  we  are  apt  to  trust  in.  1.  In  riches.  The  rich  man  confides  in  wealth
as  citizens  do  in  a  walled,  well  fortified,  and  well  built  city  (Prov.  x.  15  ;
Psa.  Hi.  7  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17).  2.  In  princes  and  great  ones  (Psa.  cxlvi.  3  ;
Isa.  ii.  22  ;  Jer.  xvii.  5  :  Isa.  xxx.  3).  3.  In  your  own  natural  excellencies.
*'  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom,"  etc.  (Jer.  ix.  23).  "  He  that
trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool "  (Prov.  xxviii.  26)  ;  the  heart  is  the  most
excellent  part  of  man  (See  also  Prov.  iii.  5).  4.  Jn  the  ordinances  and  means
of  grace  (Jer.  vii.  4,  14,  15.

IV.  Great  renown,  through  man's  corruption,  oft  proves  a  snare,  occasions
great  sins.  God  made  this  people  above  all  nations,  in  praise,  in  name,  in
honour,  that  they  might  be  a  holy  people  unto  Him  (Deut.  xxvi.  19).  Their
renown  should  have  encouraged  them  unto  holiness,  and  it  was  an  incentive  unto
looseness.  Solomon  had  great  renown  abroad  in  the  nations  (1  Kings  iv.  31) ;
that  drew  the  princes  to  bestow  their  daughters  upon  him.  His  name  made
way  for  unlawful  marriages,  and  they  made  way  for  unlawful  gods.

V.  The  most  beautiful  and  renowned  church  may  degenerate,  apostatise,
and  become  corrupt.  Thi^j  Israelitish  woman  was  the  only  spouse  of  God.  He
entered  into  covenant  with  her,  she  became  His ;  He  put  more  spiritual  beauty
and  comeliness  upon  her  than  upon  all  the  nations,  and  made  her  renowned
throughout  all  the  world ;  yet  she  forsook  God,  played  the  harlot,  prostituted
herself  to  every  idol  and  idolater.  And  now  where  was  the  Church  of  God  ?
She  "  played  tlie  harlot  with  many  lovers  "  (Jer.  iii.  1).  Here  was  visible  apos-
tacy,  visible  idolatry,  but  no  true  visible  Church.  Neither  was  God  without  a
true  Church  at  this  time.  There  were  some  godly  ones  in  secret,  who  mourned
for  the  abominations  done  in  the  city,  temple,  and  everywhere  (Ezek.  ix.  4).
But  these  lay  hid,  and  durst  not  appear  in  the  ways  of  worship  then  amongst
them.  So  in  Elijah's  days.  He  complained,  "  The  children  of  Israel  have
forsaken  thy  covenant,"  etc.  (1  Kings  xix.  10)  ;  but  God  had  then  seven
thousand  in  secret  (ver.  18).  The  true  Church  may  be  brought  to  such  a
paucity,  such  a  lowness,  that  there  may  be  no  public  meetings,  or  view  thereof.
The  papists  say  their  Church  cannot  err,  especially  in  things  necessary  to
salvation  ;  and  why?  because  it  is  the  spouse  of  Christ.  Was  not  this  Israelitish
Churcli  the  spouse  of  God  ?  And  did  it  not  err  in  the  great  and  weighty  things
of  salvation  ?  Did  it  not  leave  God  and  fall  into  idolatry,  such  practices  as
exclude  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ?  What  privilege  hath  the  Roman  Church
more  than  this  had  ?  Whatever  papists  say  or  write,  their  Church  hath  trusted
in  her  beauty,  been  proud  of  her  renown,  and  played  the  harlot  as  notoriously
as  ever  Jerusalem  did. — (Greenhill.)

Israel's  Punishment  will  Correspond  with  Her  Sins,  (vers  35-42).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  35,  brass  has   been   lavished."      Brass  is

36.       "Because   thy   filthiness   was  used   here  to  signify  money.      Israel

poured  out."      Heb.      *'  Because  thy  had  spent  the  wealth  which  God  had
168


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


CHAT.  XVT.


given  lier  in  the  servise  of  idolatry,
"  That  the  Jews,  at  least  those  in  the
exile,  as  well  as  classic  antiquity,  had
copper  money,  follows  even  from  our
pa.^sage,  and  is  confirmed  by  Matt.  x.
9,  Mark  xii,  41,  where  brass  occurs
directly  for  money.  The  paramours
are,  according  to  what  foliows,  pre-
eminently the  world-powers  tlioinselves.
Along  with  them  are  named  the  hea-
then gods,  whose  worship  was  a  con-
sequence of  political  dependence. —
{Hengstenherg.)  *'  And  by  the  blood
of  thy  children  which  thou  didst  give
unto  them,"  They  were  also  guilty  of
murder  in  sacrificing  their  children  to
Moloch  (ver.  20.)

Ver.  37.  **  I  will  gather  all  thy
lovers."  Chiefly  those  of  Assyria  and
Babylon.  *"With  all  them  thatthou  hast
hated."  These  were  the  surrounding
nations  who  werealwayslying  in  wait  for
an  occasion  against  Israel.  God  would
gather  friend  and  foe  against  Jerusalem
and  use  them  as  instruments  to  execute
His  judgments.  Israel  is  to  be
punished  in  kind.  She  had  cultivated
friendship  with  the  heathen  and  par-
taken of  their  iniquities,  and  now  she
shall  be  given  up  altogether  into  their
power.  *'I  will  even  gather  them
round  about  against  thee,  and  will
discover  thy  nakedness  unto  them,
that  they  may  see  all  thy  nakedness."
"  The  public  judgment.  First  of  all,
the  assembling  of  the  lovers  as  wit-
nesses. She  who  has  dishonoured  and
brought  herself  to  shame  becomes  now,
by  the  interposition  of  God,  to  tlie  one
party  an  object  of  loathing,  to  the
other  an  object  of  mockery.  The  last
attraction,  and  what  might  still  have
been  an  object  of  regard,  vanishes.
Havornick  refers  to  the  procedure  in
the  case  of  a  married  woman  suspected
of  adultery  (Num.  v.  18)." — {Lange.)

Ver.  38.  *'  And  I  will  judge  thee,
as  women  that  break  wedlock  and
shed  blood  are  judged."  This  is  the
explanation  of  the  figurative  languai^e
employed  in  the  last  verse.  Israel  was
to  be  punished  with  the  punishment
of  adulterers  and  murderers.    "And


I  will  give  thee  blood  in  fury  and
jealousy."  "  Thou  shalt  be  turned
into  blood,  so  that  nothing  but  blood
may  be  left  of  thee,  and  that  the  blood
of  fury  and  jealousy,  as  the  working
of  the  wrath  and  jealousy  of  God
(compare  verse  42).  To  this  end  the
heathen  will  destroy  all  the  objects  of
idolatry,  then  take  from  the  harlot
both  clothes  and  jewellery,  and  leave
her  naked,  i.e.  plunder  Jerusalem  and
lay  it  waste,  and,  lastly,  execute  u[)on
her  the  punishment  of  death  by  stoning
and  by  sword  ;  in  other  words,  destroy
both  city  and  kingdom." — (Keil.J

'  Ver.  39.  **  And  leave  thee  naked
and  bare."  "  As  thou  wast  before
the  Lord  had  mercy  on  thee  (ver.  7).
The  unfaithful  use  of  the  gifts  of  God
inevitably  brings  on  their  loss.  God
cannot  be  mocked." — (Hengstenherg.)

Ver.  40.  *'They  shall  also  bring
up  a  company  against  thee."  "  This
may  be  explained  from  the  ancient
mode  of  administering  justice,  accord-
ing to  which  the  popular  assembly
(Fro v.  v.  14)  sat  in  judgment  on  cases
of  adultery  and  capital  crimes,  and
executed  the  sentence,  as  the  law  for
stoning  expressly  enjoins  (Lev.  xx.  2  ;
Num.  XV.  86;  Deut.  xxii.  21).  But
they  are  also  applicable  to  the  foes,
who  would  march  against  Jerusalem  "
(Keil).  ''And  they  shall  stone  thee
with  stones."  The  usual  mode  of
capital  punishment  under  the  Mosaic
law,  and  which  was  inflicted  for  the
crimes  of  idolatry,  adultery,  and
murder.  This  doom  pronounced  upon
Jerusalem  was  accomplished  literally,
for  she  was  **  stoned  "  before  she  was
burned  (Jer.  xxxiii.  4).  "With  their
swords."  Slaying  with  the  sword  was
a  mode  of  punishment  adopted  when
there  were  many  criminals  to  be  pub
to  death.  It  was  also  the  doom  of
those  who  seduced  men  to  apostacy
(Deut.  xiii.  12-15).

Ver.  41.  **  And  execute  judgments
upon  thee  in  the  sight  of  many  women."
*'  The  many  women  are  the  many
heathen    nations,    according    to    tho

109


OHAP.  XVI.  EOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


description  of  Jerusalem  or  Israel  as  an         Ver.  42.     "  So  will  I  make  my  fury

unfaithful  wife." — {Keil.)     "As  it  is  toward  thee  to  rest,  and  mv  jealousy

the  greatest  punishment  to  an  adulte-  shalldspart  from  thee."  "Tiiejealousy

rous  woman  to  be  exposed  in  her  sin  ceases  because  it  has  found  its  satisfac-

before  the  eyes  of  other  women  ;  so  will  tion  in  their  punishment, and  exhausted

the  severest  portion  of  Israel's  punish-  itself  therein,  as  the  fire  ceases  when  it

iiient  be,  that  it  will  stand  exposed  in  has  consumed   its  fuel." — {Hengsten-

its  sin  before  the  eyes  of  all  other  na-  berg.)      '*  The  Divine  justice  comes  to

tions."—  {Klieforth.)     Concerning  the  an  end  in  its  character  of  jealousy — in

burning  of  the  houses  of  Jerusalem  with  other  words,  as  the  injured  faithfulness

fire,  see  2  Kings  XXV.  8,  9.     **  And  thou  and    love  of  Israel's  husband.      The

also  shalt  give  no  hire  any  more."  departing  of  the  jealousy  might,  per-

"  Because  thou  wilt    have    no    more  haps,  by  comparison  with  Isaiah  xi.  13,

lovers  ;  vvilt,  on  the  whole,  after  the  show  grace  in  the  background  ;  but  the

dissolution  of   thy  national   indepen-  connection  with  what  follows  requires

dance,  be  no  more  in  a  condition  which  rather  a  thought  like  Hos.  ii.  4.   Jeho-

admits  of  impure  intercourse  with  the  vah  gives  up  the  adulterous  whorish

world-powers." — (Bengstenberg.)  wife." — {Lange.)

HOMILETICS.

The  Punishment  of  A  post  act.

I.  The  loathsome  nature  of  the  sin  is  made  manifest.     The  sin  which  the

children  of  Israel  had  committed  by  their  idolatry  is  called  by  its  right  name.
It  was  the  breaking  of  the  sacred  marriage-covenant  into  which  God  had  entered
with  His  people.  All  what  whoredom  and  adultery  is  in  the  social  state,  all
what  filthiness  is  in  the  morals  and  manners  of  a  people,  such  was  their  sin  in
the  sii^ht  of  God  (ver.  38).  Israel  was  guilty  of  unfaithfulness  of  the  worst  kind.
God  had  given  the  nation  the  privileges  of  an  espoused  wife,  but  she  sinned
with  many  lovers,  thus  despising  the  great  grace  which  had  called  her  to  such
distinction  and  honour.  God's  punishments  sometimes  begin  by  revealing  our
sin  to  us  in  all  its  real  vileness.  The  very  conviction  of  sin  is  a  painful  wound —
the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  within  our  spirit.

II.  The  very  objects  of  sinful  desire  are  turned  into  the  instruments  of
punishment.  *'  I  will  gather  all  thy  lovers  with  whom  thou  hast  taken  pleasure,
and  all  them  that  thou  hast  loved,  with  all  them  that  thou  hast  hated  ;  I  will
even  gather  them  round  about  against  thee,  and  will  discover  thy  nakedness
unto  them,  that  they  may  see  all  thy  nakedness"  (ver.  37).  Those  who  con-
tributed to  her  sin  shall  be  made  the  instruments  of  her  punishment.  Sinful
love,  sooner  or  later,  changes  into  hate.  The  boon  companions  of  the  profligate
turn  out  to  be  his  bitterest  enemies.  They  thus  become  a  scourge  in  the  hands
of  God  to  chastise  him  for  his  iniquity.  There  is  no  true  honour  amongst
transgressors,  for  their  life  is  founded  upon  a  falsehood.  And  as  God  employed
as  a  scourge  for  His  ])eople  those  who  once  were  friends,  He  will  also  employ  for
chastisement  those  who  were  always  enemies.  "  And  with  them  that  thou  hast
hated."  Those  with  whom  the  children  of  Israel  sinned  would  make  common
cause  with  their  enemies  for  their  punishment.

III.  The  punishment  will  correspond  with  the  sin.  1.  In  degree  They
were  to  be  punished  as  murderers  and  adulterers,  for  they  had  sinned  "as
women  that  break  wedlock  and  shed  blood "  (ver.  38).  Stoning  was  the
])unishment  of  adultery,  and  this  threat  was  literally  fulfiilled  upon  Jerusalem,
for  she  was  stoned  before  she  was  burned  (Jer.  xxxiii.  4).  Their  sin  was  great,
and  therefore  their  punishment,  so  great  that  even  God's  fury  is  represented  as

170


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKTEL.  chap.  xvf.


being  satisfied  upon  them,  and  quite  brought  to  a  pause  (ver.  42).  They  could
no  further  go  in  iniquity,  and  so  God's  fury  is  represented  as  ceasing  ;  by  which
we  are  to  understand  that  it  rested  upon  them.  He  left  them  to  their  fate.
God  can  bring  it  about  that  we  shall  be  able  to  sin  no  further.  2.  In  kind.
Their  sin  was  public,  and  so  their  shame  and  their  judgment  were  public.  Their
sin  was  unfaithfulness  towards  God,  and  they  are  punished  by  the  unfaithfulness
of  men.  They  cast  God  off,  and  men  cast  them  off.  That  law  which  is  true  of
individual  man  is  true  also  of  nations,  that  the  very  things  which  they  sow  they
shall  also  reap.

(Vers.  39-42).

1.  God^s  hatred  is  so  great  against  idolatry  and  idolaters  that  He  will  not

endure  the  places  where  they  have  used  idolatrous  worship.  The  places  where
they  sinned  must  be  destroyed,  broken,  utterly  razed  and  ruined.  Hezekiah  is
commended  for  four  things  ;  and  the  first  is  for  removing  the  high  places  ;  then
for  breaking  the  images,  cutting  down  the  groves,  and  breaking  the  brazen
serpent.  2.  When  we  abuse  the  mercies  of  God,  ive  give  Him  cause  to  take  them
away.  They  decked  their  high  places  with  their  garments  (ver.  16) ;  they
made  images  of  their  jewels  (ver.  17).  Here  God  threatens  to  take  away  both
the  one  and  the  other.  He  would  give  them  into  their  hands  who  should  rob
them  of  their  fair  jewels,  and  strip  them  of  all  their  clothes  (Isa.  xlii.  22).
*' And  leave  thee  naked  and  bare."  Before,  in  ver.  8,  it  is  said,  that  God
covered  her  nakedness.  He  found  her  naked,  and  now  He  would  leave  her
naked  and  bare.  3.  When  God  hath  showed  much  kindness  to  a  people,  and
they  ham  been  ungrateful.  He  will  reduce  them  to  their  former  condition.  God
did  much  for  Ephraim,  yet  he  was  uni^rateful,  forgot  God,  went  out  to  other
lovers  (Hos.  ii.  2,  3).  God  had  spread  His  skirt  over  this  Jewish  woman,  clothed
her  with  embroidered  silk  and  fine  linen,  decked  her  with  choice  ornaments  and
jewels,  put  His  comeliness  upon  her ;  but  she  abused  all  His  bounty  and  love,
proved  ungrateful  and  whorish,  and  therefore  He  would  put  her  into  her  first
condition,  strip  her  of  all,  and  leave  her  naked.  She  came  out  of  captivity,  she
should  now  go  into  captivity  ;  she  was  cast  out,  and  now  she  should  be  cast  out
again  ;  she  was  poor,  beggarly,  and  had  nothing,  and  should  be  made  so  again.
4.  W hen  judgments  are  executed  upon  a  backsliding  people,  then  God  is  at  rest
and  is  satisfied.  When  this  woman,  this  Jewish  state,  fell  into  the  hands  of
enemies,  was  plundered  and  spoiled,  and  all  her  glory  laid  in  the  dust  ;  then
God  caused  His  fury  to  rest.  His  jealousy  to  depart,  then  He  was  quiet,  and
angry  no  more.  Before  judgment  be  thoroughly  executed,  God  is  troubled  and
restless  ;  but  when  it  is  done,  He  is  pacified,  comforted,  as  it  is  in  Ezek.  v.  13.
Before  Jonah  had  judgment  passed  upon  him,  there  was  a  great  wind,  and  a
mighty  tempest  in  the  sea.  The  Lord's  anger  was  let  out.  But  when  Jonah
was  sent,  and  cast  into  the  sea— justice  done — it  is  said  the  sea  ceased  from
her  raging.  The  Lord  first  ceased  from  His  fury.  He  was  pacified,  and  mani-
fested it  by  stilling  of  the  seas.  God  would  bring  the  Assyrians  upon  the  Jews  ;
and  what  then  ?  **  The  indignation  shall  cease,  and  mine  anger  in  their
destruction  "  (Isa.  x.  25). — (Greenhill.)

This  dire  judgment  is  just;  for  Israel  has  not  only  forgotten  God's  unde-
served favour  to  her  in  her  election,  but  has  even  surpassed  both  Samaria
and  Sodom  in  her  abominations.

(Vers.  43-52).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  43.      ties  as  the  just  punishment  of  their

**  Hast  fretted  Me  in  ali  these  things."     sin,  they  raged  against  the  Lord.    The

Instead  of  regarding  their  calama-     judgments   that   ought    to   have   led

171


CHAP.  XVL


HO  Ml  LET W  COMMENTARY :   EZEKIEL,


them  to  repentance  only  served  to
make  them  desperate,  and  to  plunge
them  into  still  greater  depths  of  apos-
tacy.  *'And  thou  shalt  not  commit
this  lewdness  ahove  all  thine  abomina-
tions." "Lewdness  and  abomination
are  not  in  themselves  different  :  the
thought  is,  that  the  measure  of  the
lewdness  and  abomination  is  now  full —
that  it  is  time  for  the  punishment  to
enter  into  the  place  of  sin." — {Heng-
stenherg.)  "  We  must  explain  the
words  from  Lev.  xix.  29,  where  the
toleration  by  a  father  of  the  whoredDui
of  a  daughter  is  designated  as  Zimmdh.
If  we  adopt  this  interpretation,  Jeho-
vah says  that  He  has  punished  the
spiritual  whoredom  of  Israel,  in  order
that  He  may  not  add  another  act  of
wrong  to  the  abominations  of  Israel,  by
allowing  such  immorality  to  go  un-
punished. If  he  did  not  punish,  He
would  commit  Zimmdh  Himself, — in
other  words,  would  make  himself  ac-
cessory to  the  sins  of  Israel." — {Keil.)

Ver.  44.  **  Behold  every  one  that
useth  proverbs  shall  use  tnis  proverb
against  thee,  saying,  as  is  the  mother,
so  is  her  daughter."  '*  Her  abominable
life  is  so  conspicuous,  that  it  strikes
every  one,  and  furnishes  occasion  for
proverbial  sayings.  The  daughter  is
of  course  Jerusalem,  as  the  representa-
tive of  Israel.  The  mother  is  the
Canaanitish  race  of  Hittites  and  Amo-
rites,  whose  immoral  nature  had  been
adopted  by  Israel." — {Keil.)

Ver.  45.  *'  Thou  art  thy  mother's
daughter  thatloveth  her  husband  and
her  children ;  and  thou  art  the  sister
of  thy  sisters,  which  loveth  their  hus-
bands, and  their  children ;  your  mother
was  an  Hittite,  and  your  father  an
Amorite."  Here  Jehovah  is  represented
as  the  husband,  not  only  of  Israel,  but
also  of  the  other  nations.  In  their  case,
also,  idolatry  was  apostacy  from  God
who  first  gave  theuj  that  knowledge  of
Himself  which  they  were  not  willing  to
retain.  Keil  notes  that  Theodoret  has
explained  it  correctly  in  this  way :  "  He
shows  by  this,  that  He  is  not  the  God
of  Jews  only,  but  of  Gentiles  also  ;  for
\V4


God  once  gave  oracles  to  them,  before
they  chose  the  abominations  of  idolatry.
Therefore  he  says  that  they  also  put
away  both  the  husband  and  the  chil-
dren by  denying  God,  and  slaying  the
children  to  demons."

Ver.  46.  **  Thine  elder  sister  is
Samaria  •  .  .  thy  younger  sister  is
Sodom."  "  Samaria  and  Sodom  are
called  sisters  of  Jerusalem,  not  because
both  cities  belonged  to  the  same
mother-14nd  of  Canaan,  tor  the  origin
of  the  cities  does  not  come  into  con-
sideration here  at  all,  and  the  cities
represent  the  kingdoms,  as  the  addi-
tional words,  "  her  daughters,  "  that
is  to  say,  the  cities  of  a  land  or  king-
dom dependent  upon  the  capital,  clearly
prove.  Samaria  and  Sodom,  with  the
daughter  cities  belonging  to  them,  are
sisters  of  Jerusalem  in  a  spiritual
sense,  as  animated  by  the  same
spirit  of  idolatry.  The  Heb.  ought
to  be  rendered,  **Thy  great  sister
is  Samaria  ....  and  thy  sister,
who  is  smaller  than  thou,  is  Sodom.'*
Samaria  is  called  the  greater  sister
of  Jerusalem,  and  Sodom  the  smaller
sister.  This  is  not  equivalent  to  the
older  and  the  younger,  for  Samaria
was  not  more  deeply  sunk  in  idolatry
than  Sodom,  nor  was  her  idolatry  more
ancient  than  that  of  Sodom  "  (Keil).
The  expressions  '*  left  hand,"  **  right
hand  "  are  employed,  because  the
Orientals  regarded  the  East  as  the
principal  point  of  the  heavens.  Hence
the  left  would  designate  the  North,
and  the  right  the  South,  the  direction
in  which  Sodom  had  lain.

Ver.  47.  '*  Thou  wast  corrupted
more  thai  they  in  all  thy  ways."  Jeru-
salem had  greater  guilt,  because  she
was  distinguished  by  greater  religious
privileges  than  these  cities.  She  had
the  temple,  the  sacrifices,  Divinely
a})pointed  priests,  and  the  law.  In  her
midst  God  was  worshipped  once  in  the
beauty  of  holiness.

Ver.  48.  "  Sodom,  thy  sister  hath
not  done  ....  as  thou  hast  done."
Compare  Sam.  iv.  6  j  Matt.  xi.  ^4.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.  chap  xvi.


Ver.  49.     **  Pride,  fulness  of  bread  to  make  them    appear   comiiaratively

and   abundance   of  idleness   was   in  innoceut  by  the  side  of  otlur.s,  acconi-

her."    Prosperity  proves  dangerous  to  panied   with  much    more  agyravating

virtue,  idleness  lea<ls  to  temptation  and  circumstances." — (Henderson.)    Jeru-

to  every  sin.      Moses  had  forwarned  salem    had  a  longer   probation    than

Israel  against  these  dangers  (Deut.  vi.  Samaria,  and    had    been    warned    by

11,  12  ;  compare  Hos.  xiii.  6).    Idleness  the    example    of    Samaria's     punish-

predisposes  men  to  infidelity  (Is.  xxxii.  ment.      Yet    she     committed     worse

9,  11  ;  Jer.  xxii.  21).      *' Neither  did  crimes  than  those  which  prevailed  in

she  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  poor  Samaria   after   Jehu   had   suppressed

and  needy."     The  "cry"  of  the  op-  Baal-worship,
pressed  in  Sodom  was  the  great  reason

for  her  destruction.     Such  a  cry  had  Ver.  52.  **  Be  thou  confounded  also,

also  come  forth  from  Jerusalem.  and  bear  thy  shame,  in  that  thou  bast

justified  thy  sisters."      '*Judah  had

Ver.  50.     "Therefore  I  took  them  concurred  from  the  heart  in  the  Divine

away  as  I  saw  good."      Heb.,  "  Ac-  judgment  on  Sodom  and  Samaria,  and

cording    to    what    I    saw."        ''This  exalted   herself  above    them    on  this

points  to  Gen.  xyiii.  21.      God    con-  account,  as  the  Pharisee  in  the  Gospel,

ducts  the  inspection    by  His  angels."  In  the  condemnation  of  her  sisters  she

— {Hengstenherg.)  had  condemned  herself   (Rom.  ii.  1).

Jerusalem  has  **  justified  "  her  sisters,

Ver.  51.     "  And  hadst  justified  thy  inasmuch  as  she  has   behaved    worse

sisters    in   all  thine   abominations."  than  they,  and  so  retributive  punish-

"  To   justify  the  crimes   of  others  is  ment    must    overtake    her    also."  —

a  Hebrew  mode  of  speech,  denoting,  (Hengstenherg),


HOMILETICS.

God's  Judgments  upon  Israel  Justified.

God's  judgments  for  sin  will  at  last  be  acknowledged  as  just  even  by  sinners
themselves.  But  even  in  this  world  we  can  see  enough  of  God's  righteous
dealings  to  assure  us  that  He  will  be  clear  when  He  judges.  The  prophets  of
Israel  were  concerned  that  men  should  know  tliat  God's  ways  are  equal — that
His  punishments  were  not  arbitrary,  but  just.  His  judgments  upon  Israel  could
be  clearly  justified.

I.  They  sinned  against  a  great  and  extraordinary  grace.  The  Lord  had  been
with  this  nation  from  its  youth  up.  He  had  adopted  this  people,  had  made
known  Himself  to  them,  had  distinguished  them  above  all  others  by  gifts  of
knowledge  and  of  privilege.  Tlie  duties  and  customs  of  the  pure  worship  of
Jehovah  were  made  known  to  them,  'i  hey  had  every  reason  to  worship  God
alone,  for  they  were  in  possession  of  the  purest  form  of  religion  known  to  man-
kind, and  they  ought  to  liave  been  superior  to  every  temptation  to  forsake  that
religion  for  the  debasing  forms  of  idolatry  around  them.  But  they  forgot  their
liigh  calling.  "  Thou  hast  not  remembered  the  days  of  thy  youth  "  (ver.  43).
'I'hey  had  displeased  a  personal  God  who  could  feel  the  wrongs  done  to  Him  by
His  creatures.     "  Thou  hast  fretted  me  in  all  these  things."

II.  They  surpassed  other  nations  in  iniquity.  Samaria  and  Sodom  were
punished,  and  they  had  not  sinned  against  such  great  light  and  privilege.
**  Thou  wast  corrupted  more  than  they  in  all  thy  ways  "  (ver.  47).  The  people
of  Israel  would  reckon  themselves  as  saints  when  compared  with  Sodom  and

173


CHAP.  XVL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL.


Samaria,  but  how  different  was  God's  judgment !  They  had  been  warned
against  the  sins  of  Sodom  ;  yet  they  had  done  worse,  for  more  was  given  to  them
and  more  would  be  required  (Deut.  vi.  11,  12 ;  comp.  llos.  xiii.  6).

III.  They  are  condemned  out  of  their  own  mouth.  *'  Thou  also  which  hast
judged  thy  sisters,  bear  thine  own  shame  for  thy  sins  that  thou  hast  committed
more  abominable  than  they  ;  they  are  more  righteous  than  thou  :  yea,  be  thou
confounded  also,  and  bear  thy  shame,  in  that  thou  hast  justified  thy  sisters  "
(ver.  52).  In  the  condemnation  of  her  sisters  slie  had  C(m(lemned  herself.
Israel  had  nothing  to  answer  ;  for  the  same  judgments  upon  others,  which  thev
regarded  as  just,  were  now  visited  upon  themselves  with  equal  justice  (Rom.  ii.  1).
Every  sinner  will  be  brought,  at  last,  to  admit  the  justice  of  God  in  liis  condem-
nation. He  will  be  confounded, — have  literally  nothing  to  answer.  When  men
see  the  awful  reality  of  things  they  are  forced  into  the  terrible  silence  of
conviction.

(Ver.  49.)

I.  When  a  man  is  said  to  be  idle.  1.  When  he  doth  nothing ^  is  unemployed
(Matt.  XX.  3).  The  Greek  word  for  "idle"  means  a  man  without  work.
Solomon's  sluggard  would  not  plough  by  reason  of  the  cold  (Prov.  xx.  4).
2.  When  they  do  not  what  they  shotdd  do.  He  is  idle  who  does  not  do  God's
work.  There  is  a  work  of  God's  appointment  for  the  day,  which  you  ought  to
take  notice  of,  and  do.  "Tliere  are  some  among  you  which  work  not  at  all,
but  are  busy-bodies  "  (2  Thess.  iii.  11),  doing  no  work,  yet  working  about  every-
where. 3.  When  they  do  not  so  much  as  they  ought  to  do,  but  are  lazy  in  doing
little.  When  men  put  not  forth  themselves  to  do  wliat  they  ought  to  do  in
conscience,  and  according  to  right  reason,  they  are  justly  said  to  be  idle  (Ron),
xii.  11 ;  Eccl.  ix.  10;  Prov.  xviii.  9).

II.  The  evil  of  this  sin.  1.  It  is  agai?ist  the  end  of  mans  creation.  God
made  man  for  labour  when  he  was  in  a  state  of  innocency  (Gen.  ii.  15).  He
must  not  be  idle  there,  taking  his  pleasure  in  a  paradise.  And  after  the  Fall,
in  the  sweat  of  his  face  he  was  to  eat  bread.  It  is  the  end  of  man's  creation
and  birth  to  be  doing.  2.  It  is  a  sin  against  the  light  of  nature,  which  puts
every  thing  upon  motion.  The  heavens,  with  the  glorious  lights  thereof,  move
and  are  constant  in  their  motions  (Psa.  xix.  5).  The  ant  is  a  very  little
creature,  but  exceedingly  laborious.  So  the  bee  is  little  in  bulk,  but  great  in
employment,  and  wonderfully  busy.  These  creatures,  with  many  others,  con-
fute the  sluggard  daily,  preach  down  idleness  and  call  for  action.  3.  It  puts
God's  family  out  of  order.  The  world  is  God's  family,  and  he  hath  appointed
men  unto  some  employment  in  it.  As  a  wise  artist  makes  no  wheel  in  a  clock,
but  to  move  and  help  on  the  general  work  ;  and  if  one  wheel  stands,  it  is  out  of
order  and  hinders  all  tiie  rest.  Idle  persons  are  disorderly  persons  (1  Thess.  v.
14).  4.  J t  sets  a  man  among  the  dead.  An  idle  man  is  both  unsavoury  and
inactive.  The  ])Oorest  and  meanest  man  in  the  world  that  follows  a  calling,  and
is  laborious  in  it,  is  better  than  the  most  eminent  that  doth  nothing.  One  is
living,  and  the  other  a  dead  man.  5.  Idleness  exposes  a  man  to  variety  of
temptations.  It  lays  him  open  to  Satan,  for  a  man  unem})loyed  is  like  a  city
without  walls  and  gates  whither  any  enemy  may  easily  have  entrance  (Ez.
xxxviii.  11).  An  idle  man  is  like  a  vessel  wliich  is  eni})ty,  any  one  that  comes
to  it  ujay  put  in  what  he  will  ;  so  Satan  pours  into  idle  persons  what  liquor  he
pleases.  Those  who  are  out  of  God's  work  are  most  exercised  with  the  devil's.
6.  Idleness  is  the  mother  and  nurse  of  our  7uost  dangerous  enemies,  viz. :  lusts.
Standing  waters  corrupt  soonest.  Among  the  Sodomites  was  abundance  of
idleness,  and  abundance  of  lusts,  which  fight  and  war  against  the  souL     And

174


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.  chap.  xvi.


what  madness  is  it  for  a  man  to  harbour  and  feed  the  enemies  that  seek
his  life.  In  doing  nothing  men  learn  to  do  ill.  7.  Poverty  and  beggary  are
the  issues  of  idleness.  Solomon  tells  the  sluggard  that  his  "  poverty  shall  come
as  one  that  travelleth,  and  his  want  as  an  armed  man  "  (Prov.  vi.  11).  He  lieth
Btill,  bat  poverty  is  up  and  marching  towards  him.  He  is  without  defence,  but
that  comes  armed.  The  meaning  is,  poverty  will  come  upon  an  idle  and  slothful
person  suddenly  and  irresistibly.  *'  Drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man  with  rags  "
(Prov.  xxiii.  21).  8.  Idleness  is  such  a  sin  as  exempts  a  man  from  the  protection
of  the  angels.  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy
ways"  (Psa.  xci.  11).  What  ways?  Those  which  are  according  to  His  will,
which  His  providence  leads  unto,  not  in  the  ways  of  sin.  A  man  that  is  idle  is
in  the  devil's  way,  not  in  God's  way.  Idle  persons  that  have  no  calling  go  out
from  God  and  the  guard  of  His  angels.  If  these  feared  God,  they  would  walk  in
a  calling,  and  the  angels  of  God  would  be  about  them  (Psa.  xxxiv.  7).  Faith  is
a  working  grace,  witness  Heb.  xi. ;  1  Tim.  v.  8.  9.  Idle  persons  are  burden-
some creatures.  The  fig-tree  was  a  burden  to  the  ground  where  it  stood  (Luke
xiii.  7).  It  was  a  burden  to  the  garden,  to  the  gardener,  to  the  other  trees,  to
the  lord  and  master  of  all.  "  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  ?  You  do  no
good  to  ourselves,  none  to  your  neighbours,  none  to  the  public,  none  to  posterity,
nor  bring  any  glory  to  God."  10.  It  is  a  wasting  of  precious  time,  a  liiding  of
our  talent.  Time,  that  is  given  us  to  get  grace,  to  work  out  our  salvation,  to
glorify  God.  This  the  idle  person  squanders  away.  Such  are  not  minding  the
apostolical  rule,  *'  See  that  ye  walk  circumspectly,  not  as  fools,  but  as  wise,
redeeming  the  time  "  (Eph.  v.  15,  16).  The  man  who  had  one  talent  would  not
use  it,  but  hid  it  in  the  earth.  "  Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant  "  (Matt.  xxv.
25,  26).  Thus  wickedness  and  sloth  go  together.  When  Joseph's  brethren  came
into  Egypt,  and  were  before  Pharaoh,  the  first  question  he  asked  them  was,
"What  is  your  occupation?"  (Gen.  xlvii.  3).  This  was  a  good  question  of  a
king,  when  strangers  were  to  come  and  dwell  in  his  land,  to  know  whether  they
had  any  calling,  could  get  their  livings,  and  not  be  burdensome  to  his  kingdom
and  subjects. — (Greenhill.)

But  these  terrible  punishments  are  not  to  be  the  end  of  the  Lord.  He  will
remember  His  ancient  Covenant,  and  bring"  His  people  out  of  misery,  so  that
they  shall  attain  to  the  glory  which  He  had  promised  them.  They  must
however,  reach  this  through  humility  for  the  restoration  of  Sodom  and
Samaria  are  also  announced.  Hence  all  boasting  on  the  part  of  Israel  is
excluded.

(Vers.  53-63.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  53.  restored  to  favour,  in  order  that  she

"When   I   shall  bring    again  their  may  bear  her  disgrace,  and  be  ashamed

captivity,  the  captivity  of  Sodom  and  of  her  sins  (ver.  54)  ;  that  is  to  say,

her  daughters,  and  the  captivity  of  not  because  Sodom  and  Samaria  have

Samaria  and  her  daughters,  then  will  borne  their  punishment  for  a  longer

I  bring   again   the   captivity  of  thy  time,  but  to  the  deeper  shaming,  the

captives  in  the  midst  of  them."    "The  more  complete  humiliation  of  Jerusa-

promise  commences  with  an  announce-  lem.     The  Hebrew  expression  means,

nient  of  the  restoration,  not  of  Jerusa-  **  to  turn  the  captivity,"  not  *'  to  bring

lem,  but  of  Sodom  and  Samaria.     The  back  the  captives ; "  and  it  is  here  used

two  kingdoms,  or  peoples,  upon  which  in  a  figurative  sense  for  restitutio  in

judgment  first  fell,  shall   also  be  the  statum  integritatis.    No  carrying  away

first  to  receive  mercy ;  and  it  will  not  took  place  in  the  case  of  Sodom." —

be  till  after  then  that  Jerusalem,  with  (Keil.)
the  other  cities  of  Judah  will  also  b§

175


CHAP.  XVL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKJEL.


Ver.  54.  "In  that  thou  art  a
comfort  unto  them."  "  By  bearing
dis;^race,  i.e.,  by  its  endurance  of  well-
merited  and  disgraceful  punishment,
Jerusalem  consoles  her  sisters.  Samaria
and  Sodom  ;  and  that  not  merely  by
fellowship  in  misfortune,  but  by  the
iact  that  from  the  punishment  en-
dured by  Jerusalem,  both  Samaria
and  Sodom  can  discern  the  righteous-
ness of  the  ways  of  God,  and  find
therein  a  foundation  for  their  hope,
that  the  righteous  God  will  bring  to
an  end  the  merited  punishment  as
soon  as  its  object  has  been  attained.'*
(Keil)

Ver.  55.  **  When  thy  sisters,  Ssdom
and  her  daughters  shall  return  to
their  former  estate.'*  "  If  Jerusalem,
Samaria,  and  Sodom,  are  to  be  viewed
as  symbolical  of  the  surrounding
people  whose  centre  they  formed,  or
with  whom  they  stood  connected,  no
difficulty  will  arise  relative  to  the
restoration  of  Sodom.  If  we  regard
her  as  the  representative  of  the  Am-
mcmites  and  Moabites,  the  descendants
of  Lot,  we  shall  here  have  only  a  parallel
prediction  to  Jer.  xlviii.  47  ;  xlix.  6.
However  obscure  the  lights  of  history
relative  either  to  the  captivity  or  the
restoration  of  the  nations  beyond  the
Dead  Sea,  there  can  be  little  doubt
that  they  participated  more  or  less
in  the  fate  of  the  Jews,  to  whose
country  they  lay  contiguous.  That
most  of  the  ten  tribes  of  which  Sa'niaria
had  been  the  capital  were  restored
under  Cyrus,  is  now  generally  admitted.
The  restoration  of  all  the  three  classes
of  people  is  here  predicted  to  take  place
at  the  same  time." — (Henderson. )

Ver.  56.  *'For  thy  sister  Sodom
wa^  not  mentioned  by  thy  mouth  in
the  day  of  thy  pride."  They  took
no  heed  of  the  warning  of  Sodom's
example.  Boasting  themselves  as  "The
Temple  of  the  Lord,"  they  thought
that  they  needed  it  not  (Jer.  vii.  4J.

Ver.   57.      *'  As  at  the  time  of  thy
reproach  of  the  daughters  of  Syria.'*
"  By  the  reproach  of  the  cities  of  Syria,
17^


was  not  meant  anything  derogatory  to
the  character  of  those  cities  nationally
considered,  but  the  indignity  offered
by  the  Syrians  to  the  Jews,  when,
under  Rezin,  they  invaded  the  land  of
Judah  (2  Kings  xv.  37  ;  Is.  vii.  1-9).
That  this  is  the  construction  to  be
put  upon  the  words  is  evident  from
the  parallelism,  in  the  corresponding
member  of  which  the  manner  in  which
the  Jews  had  been  treated  by  the  Philis-
tines is  mentioned.  Compare  for  the
insults  offered  by  both.  Is.  ix.  11,  12.
— {Henderson.)

Ver.  58.  "Thou  hast  borne  thy
lewdness  and  thine  abominations."
Jerusalem  would  bear  the  guilt  of  these
iniquities,  and  would  know  how  great
that  burden  was  when  she  would  be
called  upon  to  atone  for  her  wrong-
doing.

Ver.  59.  '*  I  will  even  deal  with
thee  as  thou  hast  done."  In  mercy
Jehovah  would  "  walk  contrary  unto
them,'*  so  that  they  might  be  humbled
and  thus  brought  to  repentance.
**  Which  hast  despised  the  oath  in
breaking  the  covenant."  "  Despising
the  oath  points  back  to  Deut.  xxix.
11,  12,  where  the  renewal  of  the
covenant  concluded  at  Sinai  is  de-
scribed as  an  entrance  into  the  covenant
and  oath  which  the  Lord  then  made
with  His  people.  But  even  if  Israel
has  faithlessly  broken  the  covenant,
and  must  bear  the  consequent  punish-
ment, the.  unfaithfulness  of  man  can
never  alter  the  faithfulness  of  God.
This  is  the  link  of  connection  between
the  resumption  and  further  expansion
of  the  promise  in  ver.  60  and  the
closing  words  of  ver.  59.  The  re-
membrance of  His  covenant  is  men-
tioned in  Lev.  xxvi.  42-45  as  the  only
motive  that  will  induce  God  to  restore
Israel  to  favour  again,  when  the
humiliation  effected  by  the  endurance
of  punishment  has  brought  it  to  a  cop-
fession  of  its  sins." — {Keil.)

Ver.  60.  "  Nevertheless  I  will  re-
member My  covenant  with  thee  in  the
days  of  thy  youth,  an4  I  will  establish


BOMJLETW  COMM^NTAUY:    EZEKIEL.  ohai».  xvl.


unto  thee  an  everlasting  covenant."  the  enjoyment  of  the  same  blessini^s.

*'  The  covenant  which  God  concluded  **  I   virill    give   them   unto   thee   for

with  Israel  in  the  day  of  its  youth,  i.e.y  daughters,  but  not  by  thy  covenant.*'

when  he  led  it  out  of  Egypt,  He  will  The  covenant  to  which  they  assented

establish  as  an  everlasting  covenant,  at  Horeb  excluded  all  other  nations

Consequently  it  is  not  an  entirely  new  from  its  benefits  (Ex.  xxiv.  7).     The

covenant,  but  simply  the  perfecting  the  blessings  which  were  to  come  upon  all

old  one  for  everlasting  duration.     For  nations  would   flow   from   the   earlier

the  fact  itself,  compare  Isa.  Iv.  3,  where  promise  which  God  made  to  Abraham

the  making  of  the  everlasting  covenant  (Gal.  iii.  13,  14).
is  described  as  granting  the  steadfast

mercies  of  David,  i.e.y  as  the  fulfilment         Ver.  62.     "  And  I  will  establsh  My

of  the  promise  given  to  David  (2  Sam.  covenant  with  thee."     This   was   the

vii).     This  promise  is  called  by  David  old    covenant    made   with   Abraham,

himself  an  everlasting  covenant,  whicii  wherein  Christ  was  promised,  who  was

God  had  made  with  him  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  to  bless  all  nations.     That  was  a  cove-

5).  And  the  assurance  of  its  everlasting  nant  purely  of  blessing,   and  in    the

duration  was  to  be  found  in  the  fact  form     of     it    entirely    unconditional

that  this  covenant   did  not  rest  upon  (Gal.  iii.  17).
the  fulfilment  of  the  law,  but  simply

upon  the  forgiving  grace  of  God  (com-         Ver.  63.      "  And  never  open  thy

pare  ver.  63  with  Jer.  xxxi.  31-34)."  mouth  because  of  thy  shame."     This

• — {Keil),  would  be  the  shame  of  the  penitent,

who  is  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of

Ver.  61.     "  Then  shalt  thou  remem-  God's  extraordinary  goodness,  and  of

ber  thy  ways  and  be  ashamed."   They  his  own  foolishness   ^nd    ingratitude

would  be  ashamed  when  they  saw  the  (Rom.  iii.  19).
other  nations  associated  with  them  in


H0MILET1C8.

God's  Purpose  op  Mercy  towards  Israel.

T.  It  would  not  be  defeated  by  the  greatness  of  their  sin,  Israel  had  sinned
against  the  clearest  light,  and  in  spite  of  great  gifts  and  priviliges.  Their  sin
was  greater  than  the  common  iniquity  of  the  nations  around  them,  for  it  was
ingratitude  and  rebellion  against  the  living  God.  Yet  this  did  not  overtask
God's  infinite  mercy,  or  close  the  door  of  hope  against  them  for  ever.  With
Him  there  is  plenteous  redemption.  The  gospel  offers  salvation  to  the  worst  of
sinners,  even  to  those  who  like  Israel,  have  sinned  against  the  greatest  light.

II.  Its  strength  lay  in  God's  ancient  covenant  with  them.    It  was  the  old

covenant  which  God  would  now  call  to  miud,  that  whicli  He  made  with  them
when  He  fiirst  chose  them  as  a  people  destined  to  accomplish  His  purpose  of
salvation  for  the  world.  In  tlie  meantime  they  were  punished  according  to
their  works,  which  was  justice.  But,  in  the  end.  His  grace  would  deal  with
them  according  to  His  mercy  secured  by  His  old  covenant  (ver.  60).  Faith  in
God's  unchanging  goodness  was  David's  comfort  when  he  uttered  his  "  last
words."  He  remembered  many  failures,  and  how  he  and  his  house  had  fallen
far  short  of  their  high  calling,  but  his  soul  stood  firmly  upon  this  rock,  **  Yet
He  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure  :
for  this  is  all  my  salvation,  and  all  my  desire,  although  He  make  it  not  to  grow  "
(2  Sam.  xxiii.  5).  Thus  David  confessed  that  his  house  was  no  suitable  home
for  Israel's  Great  Ruler,  but  he  had  strong  faith  that  grace  would  prevail  over

If  177


<?itAf.  tn.  trOMILETW  OOMMmTARt:   HZERtSt.


all  this  unworthiness.  And  now  grace  begins  the  work  of  reconciliation,  of
re-establisliment.  God  had  not  broken  His  covenant,  and  now  He  will  make
the  first  advance  towards  its  renewal  and  fulfilment.  All  would  be  seen  to  be
of  grace,  and  not  of  merit ;  and,  therefore,  there  can  be  no  ground  of  boasting
on  the  part  of  Israel.  God's  puri)ose  of  mercy  towards  mankind,  in  Jesus  Christ,
is  intended  to  prevail  over  all  their  sin.  The  grace  displayed  in  redemption  is
sufficient  for  the  largest  designs  of  mercy.

III.  It  would  be  accomplished  through  their  humiliation.  1.  They  would
he  brought  to  see  their  own  sin  in  all  its  magnitude.  They  would  remember
the  past  with  shanie,  and  the  sense  of  God's  infinite  mercy  displayed  in  their
foroiveness  would  close  their  mouths  in  utter  astonishment.  They  would  be
both  ashamed  and  confounded  (vers.  61-63).  2.  They  would  he  put  to  shamehy
God's  dealings  with  other  nations.  The  restoration  of  Sodom  and  Samaria  was
also  promised  (vers.  53,  54).  Nations  which  they  thought  were  for  ever  beyond
the  reach  of  Divine  mercy  were  about  to  be  blessed.  This  great  purpose  of
re>toration  is  fully  accomplished  in  the  Gospel  dispensation.  God  chose  from
His  people,  Israel,  the  apostles  who  were  to  preach  the  Gospel,  "Salvation  is
of  the  Jews."  They  were  the  people  appointed  to  spread  the  glad  tidings  of
salvation  to  the  heathen.  The  old  Covenant  would  expand  into  the  large  and
unchangeable  purpose  of  God's  mercy  in  the  Gospel.  From  Jerusalem  is  to  go
forth  the  word  of  mercy  that  is  to  save  the  world.  Thus  in  the  end,  it  will  be
seen  that  God's  love  is  not  partial,  but  contemplates  the  larger  purpose  of
bringing  the  means  of  salvation  within  the  reach  of  all.

(Vers.  53,  54).

But  how  could  a  restoration  of  Sodom  and  her  daughters  (Gomorrah,  etc.)

be  predicted,  when  the  destruction  of  these  cities  was  accompanied  by  the
sweeping  away  of  all  their  inhabitants  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth  ?  Many  of
the  commentators  have  attempted  to  remove  the  difficulty  by  assuming  that
Sodom  here  stands  for  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites,  who  were  descendants  of
Lot,  who  escaped  from  Sodom.  But  the  untenableness  of  such  an  explanation
is  obvious,  from  the  simple  fact  that  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites  were  no  more
Sodomites  than  Lot  himself  And  the  view  expressed  by  Origen  and  Jerome,
that  Sodom  is  a  typical  name,  denoting  heathenism  generally,  is  also  unsatis-
factory. The  way  in  which  Sodom  is  classed  with  Samaria  and  Jerusalem,  and
the  special  reference  to  the  judgment  that  fell  upon  Sodom  (vers.  49,  50),  point
undeniably  to  the  real  Sodom.  The  heathen  world  comes  into  consideration
only  so  far  as  this,  that  the  pardon  of  a  heathen  city,  so  deeply  degraded  as
Sodom,  carries  with  it  the  assurance  that  mercy  will  be  extended  to  all  heathen
nations.  We  must  therefore  take  the  words  as  referring  to  the  literal  Sodom.
Yet  we  certainly  cannot  for  a  moment  think  of  any  earthly  restoration  of
Sodom.  For  even  if  we  could  conceive  of  a  restoration  of  the  cities  that  were
destroyed  by  fire,  and  sunk  into  the  depths  of  the  Dead  Sea,  it  is  impossible  to
form  any  conception  of  an  earthly  and  corporeal  restoration  of  the  inhabitants
of  those  cities,  who  were  destroyed  at  the  same  time  ;  and  in  this  connection  it
is  chiefly  to  them  that  the  words  refer.  This  does  not  by  any  means  prove  that
the  thing  itself  is  impossible,  but  simply  that  the  realization  of  the  prophecy
must  be  sought  for  beyond  the  present  order  of  things,  in  one  that  extends  into
the  life  everlasting. — (Keil).

Sodom  represents  the  collective  heathen  world  standing  in  like  relations  witli
her.  That  great  crushing  judgments  will  fall  upon  the  whole  heathen  world  no
less  than  on  Sodom  itself  is  the  uniform  announcement  of  the  prophets,  also  of
Ez.,  in  ch.  xxv.  and  xxvi ;  so  that  tlie  remark,  that  "  Sodom  is  not  a  type  of
heathendom  on  this  account,  because  heathendom  does  not  need  to  be  restored/*
178


mMlLETiC  COMMENTARt:  EZBKlEL,  OHAt.  Xin.


is  not  to  the  point.  The  representative  character  of  Sodom  lies  in  the  nature
of  the  thing.  If  God  pities  the  most  notorious  sinners  among  the  heathen,  how
should  He  not  pity  all  ?  And  it  is  confirmed  by  ch.  xlvii.  18,  where  the  sea
introduced  in  place  of  Sodom  is  a  symbol  of  the  world  dead  in  sins.  Sodom
also  stands  frequently  elsewhere  in  the  O.T.  as  a  representative  of  deep  corrup-
tion (Deut.  xxxii.  32  ;  Isa.  i.  10  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  14).  But  all  doubt  is  excluded  by
ver.  61.  There  the  representative  character  of  Sodom  is  expressly  affirmed,
^et  we  may  not  exclude  even  Sodom  itself  from  salvation.  I'he  special
references  to  it  are  too  strong  for  this  (comp.  vers.  49,  50)  Michaelis  says  :—
"  As  Samaria  and  Jerusalem,  so  must  Sodom  also,  it  appears,  be  taken  literally."
As  a  restoration  of  the  city  is  not  to  be  thought  of,  its  inhabitants  swept  away
by  the  judgment  can  only  be  the  object  of  salvation  ;  and  we  have  here  an
allusion  to  a  continuance  of  the  arrangements  of  grace  after  death  for  those  for
whom  on  earth  salvation  did  not  attain  to  its  highest  completion,  the  0.  T.
basis  for  1  Pet.  iii.  20,  21 ;  iv.  6,  especially  for  the  latter  passage  ;  also  for
Matt.  xii.  41,  42,  a  passage  that  indeed  only  indirectly  leads  to  the  same  result.
— {Hengstenberg)»

(Ver.  62).

"I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  thee."  Men  once  sensible  of  breach
with  God  are  not  easily  induced  to  believe  that  God  will  bestow  great  mercies
upon  them.  The  Lord,  therefore,  out  of  Ilis  abundant  kindness,  douhles  the
promise  of  making  and  establishing  His  covenant  with  Jerusalem,  so  that  her
fears  and  disputes  may  cease,  and  she  be  ascertained  thereof.  *'  Thou  shalt
know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  The  Heb.  word  signifies  to  know,  to  acknowledge,
to  understand,  to  be  certain,  and  properly  refers  to  the  mind  and  understanding.
The  knowledge  here  meant  is  a  saving  knowledge ;  for  He  speaks  not  of  that
knowledge  which  arises  from  afflictions  and  judgments,  of  which  He  had  oft  spoken
before.  Thirteen  times  the  Lord  saith,  that  they  should  know  that  He  was  the
Lord.  But  this  was  by  His  judgments.  Here  He  speaks  of  such  knowledge  as
springs  from  a  fountain  and  foundation  of  mercy.  "  Thou  shalt  know  Me,"  i.e,
in  another  manner  than  thou  didst  before  ;  thou  shalt  know  Me  spiritually,
with  a  knowledge  of  faith  and  salvation  (John  vii.  17  ;  x.  4).  This  differs  from
a  legal  and  literal  knowlege,  for — 1.  It  is  a  more  distinct  knowledge  of  God,
Human  knowledge  is  more  mixed,  dark,  and  confused.  Every  ungodly  man's
light  is  darkness  (Job  x.  22).  But  he  who  hath  light  from  God  in  covenant,  his
light  is  clear.  "  The  light  of  the  righteous  rejoiceth "  (Prov.  xiii.  9).  If
it  were  confused  and  obscure,  it  would  not  rejoice.  '*  The  wisdom  from
above  is  pure "  (James  iii.  17) ;  and  the  more  pure,  the  more  clear,  the
more  distinct.  2.  It  is  a  savoury,  relishing  knowledge,  the  soul  is  affected  with
it.  "Taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good."  The  true  knowledge  and  taste  of
God  is  as  sweet  as  any  gain,  as  ever  manna  was.  "  His  fruit  was  sweet  to  my
taste."  His  knowledge  hath  a  savour  in  it  (2  Cor.  ii.  14).  3.  It  is  a  deep-
rooted  and  well-settled  knowledge.  The  Lord  puts  wisdom  in  the  inward  parts,
and  gives  understanding  to  the  hearts  of  those  with  whom  He  strikes  His
covenant  (Job  xxxviii.  36).  "  God  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of
darkness  hath  shined  in  our  hearts  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  Not  in  our  heads  only,
not  on  our  hearts  only,  but  in  our  henrts.  God  puts  and  writes  His  law  in  the
hearts  of  His  people  (Jer.  xxxi.  33).  Wicked  men  have  knowledge  and  light
in  their  heads,  but  darkness  in  their  hearts.  4.  It  is  distinguishable  from  other
kinds  of  knowledge  by  the  effects  (1.)  It  is  peaceable.  It  causeth  men  to  live
peaceably  (James  iii.  17  ;  Isa.  xi.  9).  When  men  know  God  savingly,  they  love
peace,  and  pursue  peace  ;  but  when  knowledge  is  literal,  they  are  contentious
and  bitter.     (2.)  Jt  humbleth  much.     The  more  men  know  God  in  His  holiness,

179


CMAf.  xvt.  HOMTLtlTlC  COMMENTARy:    EZEKJEL.


ploiy,  and  goodness,  the  more  humble  they  will  be  (Ezek.  xx.  42,  43).  When
Job  had  a  clear  and  spiritual  siglit  of  God,  he  abhorred  himself  in  dust  and
ashes  (Job  xlii.  5,  6).  In  like  manner  the  prophet  lsai;di  and  Paul  (Isa.  vi.  5  ;
1  Cor.  XV.  8,  9).  (3.)  It  is  working  and  powerjul.  Like  fire,  it  consumes  the
lusts  of  men'y  hearts,  and  separates  the  dross  of  their  spirits.  The  truth  purifies
the  soul  (1  Pet.  i.  22).  Divine  knowledge  keeps  under  what  hinders  practice,
and  leads  out  the  soul  to  action  (Psa.  cix.  34).  Men  have  not  the  true  know-
ledge of  God  when  their  lusts  overpower  them,  and  make  them  disobedient.
(4.)  'I rust  and  confidence  in  the  Lord.  The  knowledge  we  speak  of  hath
certainty  in  it,  and  causeth  venturing  (Psa.  ix  10).  They  that  know  God
spiritually,  His  truths  and  promises,  covenant,  faithfulness,  will  resign  up  them-
selves to  Him  and  lean  upon  Him.  "In  the  Lord,  Jehovah,  is  everlasting
strength  "  (Isa.  xxvi.  4).  When  a  man  hath  the  true,  real,  and  clear  knowledge
of  this  he  will  trust  in  God.  David  had  the  right  knowledge  of  God  when  he
said,  "He  is  my  refuge  and  my  fortress;  my  God,  in  Him  will  I  trust"
(Psa.  xci.  2). — (GreenhilL)

(Ver.  63).

1.  Godly  sorrow  and  shame  for  sin  arises  Jrom  a  right  knowledge  of  God  in
the  covenant  of  grace.  If  the  knowledge  be  spiritual  and  evangelical,  the  fruit
of  the  covenant,  men's  repentance  will  be  suitable  ;  sanctified  knowledge  will
produce  sanctified  shame,  sorrow,  and  tears  (Zech.  xii.  10).  When  men  are  in
covenant  with  God,  and  have  the  spiritual  knowledge  of  His  love  and  bounty,
in  giving  Christ  to  take  away  sin,  and  look  upon  Him  in  His  piercings  and
sufferings  for  their  sins,  then  they  will  mourn  with  a  great  but  spiritual
mourning,  which  is  the  most  kindly  and  acceptable.  2.  Those  who  rightly  know
God  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  will  not  murmur  against  Him  for  any  of  His
dealings  with  them.  They  will  be  silent  and  submissive  before  Him.  They
know  God  is  infinitely  wise,  just,  and  holy  ;  that  all  their  afflictions  and  chas-
tisements are  exceeding  short  of  what  they  deserve  ;  that  nothing  comes  to
pass  without  His  Providence ;  that  He  can  wrong  none ;  that  He  can
use  unholy  instruments  holily,  and  hath  holy  ends  in  all  His  ways.  Job
met  with  very  hard  things  ;  but  knowing  God  the  right  way,  he  opened
not  his  mouth  against  Him  but  for  Him.  So  David,  "  I  was  dumb ;  I
opened  not  my  mouth,  because  Thou  didst  it"  (Psa.xxxix.  9).  He  was
silent,  and  patiently  submitted  unto  the  hand  of  God ;  he  neither  ac-
cused Ilim,  nor  excused  himself.  If  I  be  reproached,  persecuted,  afflicted
any  way,  I  know  it  is  Thy  doing,  and  I  will  be  dumb.  Those  who  have
spiritual  knowledge  of  God,  and  spiritual  sorrow  for  their  sins  are  most
silent.  In  whatsoever  condition  they  be  cast,  they  will  say  with  the  Church,
"  We  will  bear  the  indignation  of  the  Lord,  because  we  have  sinned  against
Him  "  (Micah  vii  9).  3.  Sin  is  such  an  evil  as  provokes  God.  "  When  I  am
pacified  towards  thee."  If  there  were  not  off'ence,  no  place  would  be  found  for
pacification,  for  where  this  has  to  be  made  provocation  hath  gone  before.  Sin
provokes  God  bitterly,  and  makes  him  angry  every  day  (Hos.  xii.  14  ;  Psa  vii.
11).  To  kindle  His  anger,  even  but  a  little,  is  a  dangerous  thing  (Psa  ii.  12).
Paul  knew  it  when  he  said,  "  Do  we  provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy  ;  are
we  stronger  than  He  ? "  (1  Cor.  x.  22).  4.  Though  sin  do  provoke  God
greatly  and  bitterly,  yet  He  is  to  he  pacified.  He  is  not  implacable.
"  He  will  not  keep  His  anger  for  ever."  His  mercy  endures  for  ever,
but  not  His  anger  ;  His  wrath  is  momentary,  but  His  kindness  is  everlasting
(l.^a.  liv.  8).  Aaron  made  an  atonement  for  the  people  (Num.  xvi.  46).
Phineas  turned  away  his  wrath  (Num.  xxv.  11).  Moses  prevailed  with  God,  and
pacified  Him  when  he  was  very  angry  (Ex.  xxxii.  14).  And  when  the  people
180


BOM  J  LETW  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL,  cttAP.  xVil.


were  full  of  sin,  had  greatly  trespassed, "  He  being  full  of  compassion,  forgave
tlieir  iniquity,  and  destroyed  them  not  :  yea  many  a  time  turned  He  His  anger
away,  and  did  not  stir  up  all  His  wrath  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  38).  5.  God  being  paci-
fied toward  a  people  is  a  great  mercy.  This  appears  in  two  things  :  (1.)  All
that  hath  offended  is  passed  by  and  forgiven.  "For  all  that  ihon  hast  done."
Not  for  one,  or  two,  or  a  hundred  things  done,  but  for  all  done  ;  the  idolatry,
oppression,  pride,  fulness  of  bread,  idleness,  neglect  of  the  poor,  injustice,  pru-
faneness,  etc.  Here  is  the  greatness  of  Divine  grace  ;  be  sins  never  so  ^reat,
old,  many,  they  are  all  done  away.  (2.)  He  is  so  pacified,  that  He  will  not  be
angry  with  them  again  for  those  evil  deeds,  'i'iie  Heb  word  denotes  such  a
covering  of  their  sins,  so  that  they  cannot  be  easily  seen  again  ;  an  expiation,  a
bhjtting  out  (Isa.  xliii.  25).  "  The  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  sought  for,  and
there  shall  be  none,  and  the  sins  of  Judah,  and  they  shall  not  be  found  "  (Jer.
1.  20).— {Gree?ihill).

The  Humiliation  and  Exaltation  of  the  House  op  David  (Chap  xvii).

EXEGETIUAL  NOTES.— The  word  Israel.     The  prophet  shows  that  these

of  prophecy  in  this   chapter  is  intro-  hopes  are  vain.      They  thought  that

duced  in    the  way  of  a  riddle  and  a  God  could  not  fail    towards  the  king

parable  (ver.  2).      The  parable  itself  without  reversing  the  promises  which

is  told  in  vers.  1-10.     In  vers.  11-21,  He  had  made  to  the  house  of  David.

we  have  the  interpretation  of  it  and  The  prophet  announces  that  Zedekiah

its  application  to  King  Zedekiah.     In  will  meet  with  the  due  reward  of  his

vers.  22-24,  we  have  the  prophecy  of  deeds;  and  yet,  in  a  wonderful  manner,

the  exaltation  of  David's  house  and  its  God  will  fulfil  His  ancient  promise  to

necessary  connection  with    the    glory  the  chosen  people,  though  to  human

of  Messiah's  kingdom.    By  the  alliance  observation  all  seems  to  be  lost.     The

of  Zedekiah  with    Egypt,  the   people  kingdom  of  David   will    assuredly  be

hoped  to  regain  the  ancient  glory  of  exalted  in  the  latter  days.

The  Parable,  Kepresentinq  the  Emptiness  of  a^l  the  Nation's  JtiAKniLv

Hopes  of  the  Future  (vers.  1-10)'.

Vers.  1,2.    "Put  forth  a  riddle,  and  tenable  ground.      The  figure  of  the

speak  a  parable  unto  the  house  of  eagle,  or  bird  of  prey,  applied  to  a

Israel."    **  The  parable  m^sh^l,  corre-  conqueror  making  a  rapid  descent  upon

spending  exactly  to  the  N.T.  irapalSoXrj  a  country,  has  as  little  in  it  of  a  speci-

is  called  ckidhdh,  a  riddle,  because  of  fically   Babylonian   character    as    the

the  deeper  meaning  l>'ing  beneath  the  comparison  of  the  royal  family  to  a

parabolic  shell. — (Keil.)     As  far  as  it  cedar  or  vine.     Not  only  is  Nebuchad-

described  the  future  of  the  house  of  nezzar  comi)ared  to  an  eagle  in  Jer.

Israel,  it  was  teaching  by  analogy,  and  xlviii  40  ;  xlix  22,  as  Cyrus  is  to  a

may,   therefore,   be  regarded   in    the  bird  of  prey  in  Isa.  xlvi.  11  ;  but  even

light  of  a  parable.     In  its  immediate  Moses    has    described    the    paternal

bearing  upon  the  fate  of  Zedekiah,  it  watchfulness    of    God   over   His  own

may  be  regarded  as  a  riddle.  people  as  bearing  them  upon  eagle's

wings  (Ex.  xix.   4  ;   Deut.  xxxii  11).

Ver.  3.     **  A  great  eagle  with  great  The  cedar  of  Lebanon  and  the  vine

wings.'*      *' The    symbolism    of   this  are  genuine  Isra^litish  figures.      The

parable  has  been  traced  by  some  to  great  eagle   is  the   King  Nebuchad-

Babylonian   influences    working   upon  nezzar    (compare    ver.    12)" — {Keil.)

the  prophet's  mind,  but  without  any  The  "great  wings  "are  a  symbol  of

181


CHAt».  xvri.


HOMILETTG  COMMENTARY:    EZEKtEL


the  vastness  of  Nebucliadnezzar^s  do-
niinion.  "Long-wing-ed,  full  of  fea-
thers, which  had  divers  colours."  The
long  piiiioijs  signify  his  large  and  well-
disciplined  armies  ;  the  abundant
"  feathers  "  the  numerous  pO[)ulations
over  which  he  reigned,  and  the  ''  divers
colours"  the  variety  of  races,  lan-
guages, etc.,  which  were  found  in  his
empire.  "  Come  unto  Lebanon."  This
is  not  a  symbol  of  the  Israelitish
land,  but  of  Jerusalem,  with  its
royal  palace  so  rich  in  cedar  wood.
This  was  the  place  where  the  cedar
was  planted  (ver.  12).  "And  took
the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar."
The  cedar  is  the  Davidic  family,  and
the  "  highest  branch  "  of  it  is  King
Jehoiachin  (2  Kings  xxiv.  12).

Ver.  4.  '*The  top  of  his  young
twigs"  "The  youngest  and  most
tender  member  of  that  family.  Jehoia-
chin, to  whom  reference  is  here  sym-
bolically made,  was  only  eighteen  years
of  age  when  he  assumed  the  rems  of
government "  (2  Kings  xxiv.  8).  —
(Henderson.)  "Carried  it  into  a
land  of  traffick;  he  set  it  in  a  city
of  merchants*"  **  Not  only  was  the
country  of  Babylon  famous  for  its
transport  traffic  by  means  of  the
Euphrates,  but  the  city  itself  was
famous  for  its  manufacturing  and
mercantile  establislimeats.  From  the
connection  of  Babylon  with  the  Persian
Gulf,  the  commerce  carried  on  between
that  city  and  India  must  have  been  im-
mense."— {IJ enderso7i.)  "  That  which
is  intended  is  rather  the  Chaldean  di-
plomacy, the  policy  of  the  interests
that  were  thus  pursued,  just  as  we
speak  of  political  negotiations  and
international  intrigues.  From  this
policy  originated  the  removal  of
Jehoiachin  to  Babylon.  Self-interest
is  the  point  of  comparison  between
])olitics  and  trade.  This  community
of  principle  also  explains  how  both
politics  and  trade  are  represented  in
►Scripture  under  the  fii^ure  of  adultery,
the  self-seeking,  that  conceals  itself
under  the  appearance  of  love  (Rev.
xiv.  8 ;  xvii.  2)  ;  the  self-seeking
policy  (Nah.  iii.  4)  \  the  trade  (Isa.
182


xxiii.  15,  etc.).  It  was,  as  it  were,
a  profitable  stroke  of  business,  that
Jehoiachin,  who  was  favourable  to
Egypt,  should  be  removed  to  Babylon,
and  a  creature  of  the  King  of  Babylon
set  up  in  his  stead,  whose  fidelity  he
might  count  upon,  because  he  had  the
legitimate  sovereign  in  his  custody,
and  could  make  use  of  him  according
to  circumstances. — (Hengstenherg.)

Ver.   5.     '*The  seed  of  the  land.

This  expression  signifies  what  we  mean
by  "  a  son  of  the  soil,"  as  distinguished
from  a  foreigner.  The  Chaldeans  ap-
pointed Zedekiah,  who  was  of  the  old
native  roj^al  family  (2  Kings  xxiv.  17).
"  He  placed  it  by  great  waters."  Heb.
**  Many  waters."  The  idea  is  that  of
a  fertile  situation.  Though,  politi-
cally, Zedekiah  was  in  a  dependent
position,  yet  he  had  abundant  oppor-
tunity for  exercising  his  gifts  and
power  as  a  ruler.  *'  Set  it  as  a  willow
tree."  This  tree  is  low,  and  grows  near
streams  (Isa.  xliv.  4).  "  Tliis  means,
that  he  treated  it  as  a  willow  tree,
inasmuch  as  he  took  it  to  many  waters,
set  it  in  a  well-watered  soil,  i.e.  in  a
suitable  place." — (Keil).

Ver.  6.  **  A  spreading  vine  of  low
stature,  whose  branches  turned  to-
wards him,  and  the  roots  thereof  were
under  him."  **  This  figure  of  the  vine
is  not  here  in  contradiction  with  that
of  the  willow.  The  two  figures  present
different  aspects.  The  new  king  isavine,
not  a  cedar,  as  the  earlier  independent
family  of  David.  'Spreading,'  so  that
it  grew  luxuriantly  indeed,  but  iu
breadth,  not  in  height,  which  is  still
more  definitely  shown  by  the  addition
*  of  low  stature.'  Its  (Zedekiah's)  roots
should  be  under  him — should  not  be
withdrawn  from  dependence  on  the
king  of  Babylon."  —  {Hengstenherg),
"  The  subjection  of  Zedekiah  to  Nebu-
chadnezzar is  significantly  expressed  by
his  being  turned  towards  him  ;  while
he  continued  faithful  as  his  vassal,
though  he  never  rose  to  any  elevation,
yet  the  afi'airs  of  the  kingdom  went  on
peaceably,  and  the  subjects  increased
rather  than  diminished." — {Henderson)


nOMTlETIC  OOMMENTAttY:   BZEKIEL,  chap  xvii.


Ver.  7.    **  Another  great  eagle  with         Ver.  9.     *'  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,

great    wings    and    many    feathers."  shall  it  prosper?"     "The  subject  is

Tliis    second    eagle    lacks    the    long  the  King  of  Babylon.     The  roots  sig-

pinions  and  divers  colours  of  the  first,  nify  the  national  existence,  the  fruit

It  represents  the  King  of  Egypt,  who,  the  produce  of  the  land,  or  the  collec-

^hough  he  ruled  over  a  widely-spread  tive  gain.     The  vine  becomes  dry  in

and   powerful   kingdom,   was  yet   in-  all  its  sprouting  leaves.     These  signify

ferior    to    the    King   of    Babylon    in  all  that  by  which  a  prosperous  national

imperial    grandeur    and     disciplined  life  is  displayed.     '  Not  by  a  great  arm

armies.      "This  vine    did  bend  her  or  many  people  will  it  he  taken  away

roots  toward  him,  and  shot  forth  her  with  its  roots.'       Accordin^^    to   Jer.

branches  toward  him,  that  he  might  xxxiv.,  Nebuchadnezzar  led  a  numerous

water  it  by  the  furrows  of  her  plan-  army  to  Jerusalem,  but  there  was  no

tation."     This  vine  had  water  enough  need  of  so  great  preparations.      If  a

already,  so  that  there  was  no  occasion  nation  have  God  for  its   enemy,  one

for  her  to  stretch  out  her   branches  can  chase  a  thousand  of  them,  and  two

towards  the  other  eagle.     Hereby  the  can  put  ten  thousand  to  flight  (Dent,

conduct   of    Zedekiah   is   condemned,  xxxii  30).     The  Egyptians  were  quite

who,  wearied  with  subjection  to  the  passive  (comp.  ver.   17).     The  taking

King  of  Babylon,  applied  to  the  King  away  with  the  roots  signified  the  total

of  Egypt  for  help,  hoping  that  by  this  abolition  of  the  national  existence." —

means  he  might  establish  the  indepen-  {Hengstenherg.)
dence  of  his  throne.

Ver.    10.       *' Shall  it  not  utterly
wither  when  the  east  wind  toucheth

Ver.  8.     **  It  was  planted  in  a  good  it? "     *'  The  east  wind  proving  noxious

soil  by  great  waters,   that  it  might  to  vegetation  in  Palestine,  is  here  fitly

bring   forth   branches,    and    that    it  emiJoyed  as  a  symbol  of  the  Chaldean

might  bear  fruit,  that  it  might  be  a  army,  which  came  from  that  quarter,

goodly  vine."     "  If  Zedekiah  had  re-  It   was  only   necessary  to   bring  that

maiued  quiet  under  Nebuchadnezzar,  army  into  contact  with  the  Jewisli  state

as   a   hanging   vine,    his   government  in  order  to  effect  its  ruin." — {Hender-

might  have  continued  and  prospered."  son.)     The  east  wind  is  the  searching

— (KeiL)  wind  of  God's  anger  (Jonah  iv.  8)

HOMILETIGS.

Teaching  by  Parables.

1.  The  form  of  the  discourse  here,  just  as  in  the  case  of  our  Lord,  who  has
developed  the  parable  into  one  of  His  ordinary  modes  of  teaching,  is  to  be  ex-
plained chiefly  from  the  object  in  view, — partly  as  it  was  designed  for  a  circle  of
iiearers,  or  rather  of  readers,  which,  although  mixed  up  in  all  sorts  of  ways  with
liiiiher  interests,  is  yet  to  be  thought  of  as  living  mainly  in  the  world  of  sense,
and  especially  as  bound  fast  in  the  misery  of  the  exile,  and  sympathising  in  the
false  and  faithless  policy  prevailing  at  the  time  in  Jerusalem  ;  partly  as  it  might
recommend  itself  to  the  prophet  in  the  political  circumstances  by  which  he  was
surrounded.  The  mashal  before  us  in  Ezekiel  goes,  therefore,  far  beyond  mere
popular  illustration.  Still  less  is  it  to  be  explained  away  from  the  aesthetic
stand  point,  as  merely  another  rhetorical  garb  for  the  thought.  2.  As  in  the
parable  the  emblematic  form  preponderates  over  the  thought,  so  also  here.
What  the  prophet  is  to  say  to  Israel  is  said  by  the  whole  of  that  mighty  array
of  figurative  expression,  for  which  the  animal  and  vegetable  worlds  furnish  the
figures.     But  the  eagle  does  what  eagles  otherwise  never  do  ;  and  what  is  planted

18a


CHAP.  xvir.


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.


as  a  willow  grows  into  a  vine  ;  and  the  vine  "  is  represented  as  falling  in  love
with  the  other  eagle." — {J.  1).  Mich.)  The  contradictory  character  of  such
a  representation,  and  the  fact  that  in  the  difficulties  to  be  solved  (vers.  9,  10  etc.)
the  comparison  conies  to  a  stand,  and  the  closing  Messianic  portion  in  which  the
whole  culniinatf  s,  convert  the  parable  into  a  "  riddle."  A  trace  of  irony  and
the  moral  tendency,  such  as  belong  to  the  fable,  are  not  wanting. — {Lange,)


The  Interpretation  of  the  Parable  (vers.  11-21).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— From
vers.  12-17  we  have  the  formal  inter-
pretation of  the  parable.  In  vers.
19-21,  the  threat  contained  in  the
parable  is  confirmed  and  still  further
expanded.

Ver.  12.  ''  Behold  the  king  of  Baby-
lon is  come  to  Jerusalem,  and  hath
taken  the  king  thereof.'*  Tlie  account
of  the  carrying  away  of  the  king,  i.e.y
Jehoiachin,  and  his  princes  into  Baby-
ion  is  related  in  2  Kings  xxiv.  11,  etc. ;
Jer.  xxiv,  1,  and  xxix.  2.

Ver.  13.  **And  hath  taken  of  the
king's  seed,  and  made  a  covenant
with  Him,  and  hath  taken  an  oath  of
Him.'*  "  The  king's  seed  is  Jehoia-
chin's  uncle  Mattaniah,  whom  Nebu-
chadnezzar made  king  under  the  name
of  Zedekiah  (2  Kings  xxiv.  17),  and
from  whom  he  took  an  oath  of  fealty"
(2  Chron.  xxxvi.  13).—(Keil.)

Ver.  14.  **That  the  kingdom  might
be  base,  that  might  not  lift  itself  up,
but  that  by  keeping  of  his  covenant
it  might  stand."  The  design  of  Nebu-
chadnezzar was  to  weaken  the  kingdom
60  that  it  could  not  revolt  against  his
authority,  but,  at  the  same  time,  to
protect  them  if  they  continued  loyal.

Ver.  15.  "But  he  rebelled  against
Him  in  sending  his  ambassadors  into
Egypt,  that  they  might  give  him
horses  and  much  people."  •'  Though
we  have  no  account  of  this  mission  to
the  King  of  Egypt  anywhere  else  in
the  Jewish  records  we  may  rest  satis-
fied with  the  testimony  of  Ezekiel,  who
was  a  contemporary.  Egypt  was  cele-
brated in  ancient  times  for  its  herd  of
horses.  According  to  Diod.  Sic.  i.  45,
184


the  whole  region  from  Thebes  to
Memphis  was  filled  with  royal  stalls,
and  such  was  the  abundance  of  horses,
that  no  fewer  than  twenty  thousand
chariots,  each  having  two,  could  be
furnished  in  time  of  war.  It  was,
therefore,  natural  for  Zedekiah  to
turn  to  that  quarter  for  aid,  and
considering  the  hostile  attitude  of
the  two  great  empires,  he  might
reasonably  expect  that  his  applica-
tion would  not  be  made  in  vain." —
(Henderson.)  **  Shall  he  escape  that
doeth  such  things  ?  or  shall  he  break
the  covenant,  and  be  delivered?"
"  Such  things," — perjury — breach  of
covenant.  Even  Pagan  nations  had
great  reverence  for  an  oath,  and
looked  upon  these  as  among  the
highest  crimes.  When  one  enquired
of  the  Delphic  oracle  whether  he
might  break  his  oath,  he  was  told
that  for  putting  so  impious  a  question
he  should  be  punished  by  the  untimely
death  of  his  children.

Ver.  17.  "Make  for  him  in  the
war."  Heb.,  "  Act  with  him  in  war,"
i.e.f  be  of  service  to  him.  "  Pharaoh
will  not  render  him  the  expected
powerful  aid  against  the  Chaldeans  ;
he  will  leave  his  proteg^  in  the  lurch
when  he  is  hard  pressed  by  his  enemies.
That  the  Chaldeans  need  no  great
military  force  against  Jerusalem,  is
manifest  here  from  this,  that  the
Egyptians,  against  whom  alone  it
could  be  necessary,  come  not  to  its  aid
with  any  force.  Egypt  was  already  at  that
time  worm-eaten,  which  the  Spirit  of
God  showed  to  his  prophets,  while
the  world  went  no  further  than  the
surface." — ( llengsteiiberg.)

Ver.  18.    **  He  had  given  his  hand."


E0M1LETIC  CO^niEyTARY:   EZEKIEL,  chap.  xvii.


*' To  give  the  hand,"  is  still  in   the  Zedekiah  was  carried  away  captive  to

East  a  pledge  of  agreement,  or  fidelity  Babylon,    where    he    died    in    prison

(2  Kings  X.  ]5 ;  Ezra  x.  19  ;  Jer.  i.  15).  (Jer.  lii.  8-11).
Zedekiah    proved    faithless    to    God,

because  in  pledging  his  fealty  to  the         Ver.  21.     **And  all  his    fugitives

King  of  Babylon  he  made  a  solemn  with  all  his  bands  shall  fall  by  the

appeal  to  the  God  of  the  Jews  (2  Chron.  sword,  and  they  that  remain  shall  be

xxxvi.  13).    The  oath  which  Zedekiah  scattered  to  all   winds."     Instead  of

swore  to  the  King  of  Babylon  is  desig-  fugitives  the  Chaldee  reads,  "  chosen

Tuited  in  ver.   19  as  Jehovah's  oath,  ones,"  **  his  brave  men,"  or  *'  heroes."

and  the  covenant  made  with  him  as  But    the    ordinary  reading   yields  a

Jehovah's  covenant.  suitable  sense,  and  is  the  one  adopted

by  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate.     "  The

Ver.  20.     **  And  I  will  spread  my  mention  of  some  who  remain,  and  who

net  upon  him,  and  he  shall  be  taken  are  to  be  scattered  towards  all    the

in  my  snare,  and  I  will   bring  him  winds,   is   not  at   variance  with    the

to  Babylon."    *'  My  net  "  (ch.  xii.  13).  statement  that  all  the  fugitives  in  the

Nebuchadnezzar  was  God's  instrument  wings  of  the  army  are  to  fall  by  the

to  punish  this  rebellious  king.    *'And  sword.  Thelatter  threat  simply  declares

will  plead   with  him  there  for  his  that  no  one  will  escape  deatli  by  flight.

trespass."     To    "plead"    with    him  But  there  is  no  necessity  to  take  those

signifies  to  bring  him  to  submission,  who  remain  as   being  simply  fighting

to  work  conviction  in  him  by  means  of  men  ;  and  the  word  '*all  "  must   not

suffering  (ch.  xx.  36).     This  prophecy  be  taken  too  literally." — {Keil).
was  ful^led  five  years  afterwards,  when

HOMILETICB.

(Vers.  17-21.)

1.  Men  look  for  help  from  an  arm  of  flesh  when  in  straits.  Zedekiah  ex-
pected that  Pharoah's  mighty  army,  and  great  company,  his  chariots  and  horses,
should  make  for  him.  We  are  prone  to  look  unto  second  causes  and  creature
help  more  tlian  God's.  Asa,  being  in  distress,  did  so,  "he  relied,"  saith  the
text,  "  on  the  king  of  Syria,  and  not  on  the  Lord  his  God,"  (2  Chron.  xvi.  7) ;
and  *'  in  his  disease  he  sought  not  to  the  Lord,  but  to  the  physicians  "  (ver.  12).
Confidence  in  man  is  a  common  practice  of  the  sons  of  men.  Epliraim,  when
he  saw  his  sickness,  went  to  the  Assyrian  and  sent  to  Jareb  (Hos.  v.  13).
Men's  spirits  look  any  way,  turn  any  whither,  for  relief,  rather  than  to
God.  The  arm  of  flesh  is  more  to  them  than  the  arm  of  God.  "  Some
trust  in  chariots,  and  some  in  horses ; "  Some  in  riches  (Psa.  lii.  7)  ;
some  in  falsehood  (Jer.  xxiii.  25) ;  some  in  strongjiolds  (Zech.  ix.  3)  ;
some  in  men  (Isa.  ii.  22).  But  it  argues  atheism,  ignorance,  pride,  unbelief,  that
men  look  not  unto  God  at  such  tinjes  ;  yea,  it  proclaims  the  baseness  of  our
spirits,  that  we  fall  upon  what  is  visible,  weak,  unfaithful,  at  a  distance,  and
neglect  God,  who  is  strong,  all-sufficient,  near  ;  and  all  because  invisible,  not
seen  of  us.  2.  Divine  Providence  overrules  and  orders  thirigs  so,  that  wicked
men  are  frustrated  and  dissappointed  of  their  hopes  and  expectations.  Zedekiah
hoped  and  expected  that  Pharaoh  with  his  great  forces,  should  make  much  for  him  ;
but  "  neither  shall  Pharaoh  with  his  uiighty  army  and  great  company  make  for
him."  It  is  not  kings,  armies,  counsellors,  and  counsels,  will  do  it.  Pharaoh's  army
came  forth  of  Egypt,  raised  the  seige  when  Nebuchadnezzar  was  before  Jerusalem
(Jer.  xxxvii.  11)  ;  yet  it  did  not  make  for  him.  The  Chaldeans  returned  again,
8(ft  4yvYi|  b^foi'O  the  city,  took  it,  Zedekiah,  the  prjnc^s  and  olh(^.rs.      VbsaloiQ

IH5


CHAP.  xvn.  H0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,


expected  mncli  from  the  counsel  and  advice  of  Abithophel,  but  God  turned  it
into  foolishness  (2  Sam  xvii.  14)  ;  and  all  the  strength  he  had  made  not  for  him
(2  Sam.  xviii).     He  disappointeth  the  devices  of  the  crafty,  so  that  their  hands
cannot  perform  their  enterprise"  (Job.  v.   12).     Haman  could  not  perform  his
enterpnze.  Herod  could  not  accomplish  his  design  to  murder  Christ  when  he  slew
the  infants  (Matt.  ii).   Kings  and  people  imagine  vain  things,  and  the  Lord  lauglis
them  to  scorn  (Psa.  ii.  1,  4).  He  brings  "the  counsel  of  the  heathen  to  nought.  He
nmketh  the  devices  of  the  iieople,"  princes,  armies,  '*  of  none  effect,"  and  estab-
lisheth  His  own  thoughts  and  counsels,  and  that  toall  generations  (Psa.  xxxiii.  10,
11).  God  served  His  own  will  upon  Pharoah  and  his  army.  Zedekiah  was  frustrated
— he  looked  for  light  and  met  with  darkness.     He  leaned  upon   Pharoah,  a
broken  reed,  that  ran  into  his  hand  and  pierced  him  (2  Kings  xviii.  21).     God's
providence  works  in  all,  by  all,  and  overrules  all ;  and  He  brings  to  pass  His
own  sacred  purposes  by  kings'  armies,  by  men's  wits,  wills,  policies,  and  powers.
3.   The  Lord  takes  notice  of  the  circumstances  and  aggravations  of  mens  sins,
espscially  kings'.     ''  He  despised  the  oath  by  breaking  the  covenant,  when,  lo  !
he  had  given  his  hand  "  (ver.  18).     I  saw  him,  saith  God,  reach  out  his  hand,  give
it  as  a  pawn  and  pledge  of  his  fidelity  to  Nebuchadnezzar  ;  he  engaged  himself
thereby    to    be    subject    and    tributary    to    him.      This    aggravated    his    sin
much.     It  was  against  the  light  of  nature,  special  mercy.     It  was  against  his
superior,  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  greatest  king  tlien  on  earth.     It  was  against  the
good  of  the  whole  Jewish  state,  for  it  brought  war,  famine,  plague,  captivity
upon  them  all  :  yea,  more  than  all  these,  it  was  a  high  offence  against  God  and
His  attributes,  and  therefore  the  Lord  saith,  "he  trespassed  against  me."     God
minds  with  what  circumstances  men's  sins  are  clothed.     Solomon's  sin  had  the
aggravation  nailed  to  it,  "  His  heart  was  turned  from  the  Lord  God,  which  had
appeared  unto  him  twice  "  (1  Kings  xi.  9).     4.    Oaths  and  covenants  made  with
men  are  divine   things,   and,  not  to  be  slighted.      "Mine  oath  that  he  hatli
des])ised,   and  my  covenant  that  he   hath    broken  "(ver.    19).     It   was  made
with  a  heathen  Idng,    an  idolater,    yet  God  owns    it  as  made    with  Himself,
because   His   sacred  and    dreadful   name   was   used    therein,  and   judges  the
breach   and   violation    thereof    as    bad    as    if   it    had    been   formally   made
with   Himself     Oaths  made  between   man  and  man  are  called  in  Scripture
the  "  oaths  of  God  "  (Eccles.  viii.  2)  ;  and  the  covenant  made  between  Jonathan
and  David  is  called  "  the  Lord's  oath  "  (2  Sam.  xxi,  7).    Let  not  man,  therefore,
slight  covenants  and  oaths  they  have  made  with  men,  but  remember  they  have
tj  do   with   God,   who   is  faithful,  performing  what   He  swears,   and  keeping
covenant  for  ever.    5.  The  Lord  hath  nets  and  snares  to  catch  and  take  perfidious
princes  and  people  in.     "  I  will  spread  my  net  upon  liim,  and  he  shall  be  taken
in  my  snare  "  (ver.  20).     There  is  no  evasion  when  God  seeks  after  sinners.     If
He  throw  the  net,  it  shall  encompass  the  greatest  leviathan  ;  if  He  set  the
snare,   it  shall  take   the   stoutest   lion.      God   had   a   net   for   Pharaoh,  and
caught  that  great  leviathan   in   the  sea.      An  oak  was  the  net   He  caught
Absalom  in  (2  Sam.  xviii.  9).     The  earth  was  his  net  to  take  Korah,  Datham,
and  Abiram.     A  heap  of  stones  was  His  net  thrown  upon  Achan.     A  cave  was
the  snare  He  took  five  kings  in  (Josh.  x.  lG-18).     The  kings  of  Sodom  and  Go-
morrah were  snared  in  slime  pits  (Gen.  xiv.  10).     Herod  could  not  escape  the
worms,  they  were  (iod's  net  and  snare  to  catch  him.     The  Babylonish  armies
were  His  nets  and  snares  to  take  Hoshea  (2  Kings  xvii)  ;  Manasseh  (2  Chroc.
xxxiii)  ;  Jehoiakim,  Jehoiachin,  and  Zedekiah,  who  were  all  kings  (2  Chron.
xxxv).      Zedekiah   had   thoughts  he  should   escape,    but   he   did   not   escape
besieging,    taking,    carrying   into   Babylon.       When    the   city   was   taken,   he
fled    by   night    (Jer.    xxxix.    4)  ;     but   God    spread    His   net   so,    that   it  fell
iil)on    him   and  all   with    him.     Let    men    take    heed   of  offending   the   great
(jjud   of   Heaven   and   earth,   for   He    hath    nets  and    snares   to   take  thinj
186


EOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.  chap.  YViL


with.  If  once  He  throws  His  net  and  set  His  snare,  He  will  take
them  ;  and  being  taken,  you  may  struggle,  but  shall  never  get  out.  Nets  and
snares  are  hidden  things,  tliey  catch  suddenly,  and  hold  certainly. — (Greenhill.)
Ver.  17.  The  help  of  man  is  of  no  avail  when  God  means  to  destroy.  God's
help,  on  the  other  hand,  avails  even  against  man's  help.  Zedckiah  with  Egypt,
Nebuchadnezzar  with  Jehovah.  Look  at  the  co-partneries  for  thyself,  and
bestow  thy  confidence  accordingly.  The  latter  firm  is  the  more  reliable.  Cursed
is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man  (Jer.  xvii.).  Men  promise,  and  break  their
promise  ;  God  promises,  and  does  not  break  His.  (Ver.  19).  God's  oath  as
against  Zedekiah's  perjury.  God  does  not  swear,  and  then  fail  to  keep  His  oath  :
that  shall  be  learned  by  experience  by  those  who  swear  falsely,  or  who  do  not
keep  their  oath.  If  thou  appealest  to  God  as  a  witness,  thou  suuimonest  Him
also  as  a  judge,  as  an  avenger  !  We  have  never  to  do  with  men  alone.  (Ver.
20,  etc.).  No  one  can  escape  God.  The  enemies'  sword  is  sharp  ;  God's  sword
is  sharper  still.  God's  judgments  are  always  meant  to  lead  to  the  knowledge  of
Himself  as  well,  and  not  merely  of  ourselves. — (Lange),

The  Restoration  of  David's  House  (vers.  22-24).

EXEGETICAL  NOTjES.— The  dire  ference  to  Jerusalem,  which    at  the

judgments    of  God   which    had    been  time  of  the  Messiah's  advent  was  to

foretold  will  do  their  awful  work.    But  be  what  it  had  been,  the  centre  of  all

beyond  them,    the  prophet  sees  God's  the  tribes,  who,  restored  to  their  land,

merciful  purpose  to  restore  the  fallen  would  go  up  again  to  the  festivals,  as

House  of  David,  in  the  person  of  His  they  had  done  before  the  revolt.     It

Messiah.     The  true  twig  of  the  stem  derived  its  chief  glory,  however,  from

of  David  will  spring  up  and  flourish,  its  being  destined  to  become  the  spot

under  whose  shadow  the  whole  family  where  the  spiritual  kingdom  was  to  be

of  man  may  dwell  in  safety.  established,   and    whence    it    was    to

extend   its   blessings  throughout   the

Ver.  22.     "I  also  will  take  of  the  whole  world." — (Henderson).
highest  branch  of  the  highest  cedar,

and  will  set  it."    The  cedar,  as  before,         Ver.  23.    **  In  the  mountain  of  the

is  the  House  of  David.    That  sprout  of  height  of  Israel."     This  was  Mount

the  House   of   David,    Zedekiah,    on  Zion  regarded  as  to  its  spiritual  sig-

account  of  his  rebellion,  would  lose  his  nificance.     In  actual  height,  it  was  far

sovereignty  and  bring  destruction  upon  behind  Lebanon  ;  but  it  was  a  symbol

the  kingdom  of  Judah,  but  God's  king-  of  the  kingdom   of  God,   the   centre

dom  would  still  be  secure.     He  would  from  which  salvation  should  go  forth

fulfil  the  promise  which  He  had  made  (Psa.  xlviii.  3  ;  Ixviii.  17).     This  pro-

to  the  seed  of  David.     **I  willcrop  olF  phecy  reaches  it  complete  fulfilment

from  the  top  of  his  young   twigs  a  in   tjfie   times  of   the    Messiah    (Isa.

tender  one,  and  will  plant  it  upon  a  ii.  2).     The  kingdom  of  God  is  to  be

high  mountain  and  eminent."     "As  raised  to  a  supremacy  above  all  the

the  highest  branch   was  the  furthest  kingdoms    of    the   world.     *'And  be

from  the  roots,  the  reference  is  to  the  a  goodly  cedar ;   and  under  it  shall

remote  descendants  of  the  royal  family,  dwell  all  fowl  of  every  wing  ;  in  the

and   the  tender  one  beautifully  sym-  shadow  of  the  branches  thereof  shall

bolizes  the  Messiah  as  the  shoot  and  they  dwell"      "The   Messiah  grows  1

the  sprout,  predicted  (Isa.  xi.  1).    The  into  a  cedar  in  the  kingdom  founded

'Miigh  and    eminent   mountain"  was  by  Him,  in  which  all  the  inhabitants

Zion  (Psa.  ii.  6).     It  is  here  described  of  the  earth  will  find  both  food  (from

as   the  mountain   of    the     height    of  the  fruits  of  the  tree)  and  protection    \

Israel,    us    at   chap.   xx.  40,   in    re-  (under  its  shadow).    For  this  figure^  ^

187


CHAP.  XVT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


compare  Dan.  iv.  8,  9.     Birds  of  every  of  the  cedars  embraces  tlie  idea  of  the

kind  of  phimage  is  derived  from  Gen.  kingdom,  so  that  the  trees  of  the  field

vii.  14,  where  birds  of  every  kind  find  denote  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  to-

sheher  in   Noah's  ark.     The  allusion  gether   with    their    kings." — (Keil.)

is  to  men  from  every  kind  of  people  **  And  have  made  the   dry  tree  to

and  tribe." — {Keil)  flourish."     The  stem  of  Judah  was  dry

as   regards    spiritual    promise.       The

Ver.  24.   **  I  the  Lord  have  brought  genealogy  of  the   Messiah    is  traced

('own  the  high  tree,  have  exalted  the  through  such  names  as  Tamar,  Rahab,

lew  tree."    "By  this  all  the  trees  of  Ruth,  and  Bathsheba.      "How    des-

the  field  learn  that   God   lowers   the  picable  soever  the  kingdom  of  Christ

lofty  and  lifts  up  the  lowly.     As  the  may  appear  to  a  worldly  mind,  and

cedar  represents   the   royal  house  of  however  small  it  was  at  its  commence-

David,    the    trees    of  the    field    can  ment,  it  is  truly  prolific ;  and  while  all

only   be    the    other    kings    or    royal  the  glory  of  earthly  kingdoms  fades

families  of  the  earth,  not  the  nations  and  perishes,   it    affords    refuge    and

outside  the  limits  of  the  covenant.    At  nourishment  to  man  of  every  colour  and

the  same  time,  the  nations  are  not  to  every  clime." — (Henderson,)
be  entirely  excluded  because  the  figure

H0MILETIC8.

The  Glory  of  Messiah's  Kinqdom.

I.  It  is  to  be  erected  upon  the  ruin  of  the  world's  hopes.      The  prophet

had  hitherto  spoken  only  of  judgments  which  were  to  fall  upon  nations  for
their  sins,  and  chiefly  against  Israel  for  her  sin  against  greater  light  and
privilege.  David's  crown  is  cast  to  the  ground,  the  kingdom  of  Judah  is  undone,
all  human  ho])e  gone.  But  the  prophet  now  has  a  brighter  vision.  He  sees
the  storm-cloud  of  judgment  pass  away,  and  the  rainbow  of  mercy  shows
itself.  From  the  ruins  of  the  kingdom  the  family  of  David  is  to  be  revived
in  the  person  of  the  Messiah.  It  was  necessary  that  there  should  be  a
long  time  of  chastisement,  affliction,  and  sorrow,  in  order  to  prepare  the
chu  en  nation  for  the  purpose  of  God.  And  the  same  preparation  for
the  coming  of  Messiah's  kingdom  was  equally  necessary  for  the  rest  of
mankind.  Christ  was  to  come  in  "the  fulness  of  time,"  when  events  were  ripe
for  His  coming.  It  was  necessary  that  the  world  should  have  sufficient  time  to
make  experiments  in  order  to  discover  whether  men  could  find  all  help  in  them-
selves. The  world's  pride  and  confidence  had  to  be  broken,  so  that,  in  the  end,
it  might  humble  itself  under  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  therein  behold  the  power
and  the  wisdom  of  God.  7  wo  great  experiments  had  to  he  carried  out.  The  Jew
liad  to  find  out  whether  righteousness  could  come  by  the  law,  whether  the  law  could
give  life,  sanctify,  and  save ;  or,  whether  there  was  not  some  intractable  perversity
in  man's  nature  which  would  baffle  all  such  attempts.  The  same  kind  of  process
hail  to  be  carried  on  in  the  Jewish  nation,  which  was  accomplished  in  the  life  of
the  individual  when  Saul,  the  persecutor,  was  transformed  into  Paul,  the  Apostle.
He  had  tried  all  that  the  law  could  do  for  him,  and  from  his  failure,  from  the
wneck  of  all  his  hopes  he  passed  into  the  kingdom  of  the  grace  of  God.  The
(J entile  had  to  make  his  experiment  in  order  to  discover,  whether  man  could  un-
fold his  own  blessedness  out  of  himself;  whether  art,  or  philosophy,  or  political
institutions  could  completely  satisfy  all  the  yearnings  of  his  spiritual  nature.
The  heathen  world  had  time  enough,  and  opportunity  allowed  for  this  experi-
ment. God  had  raised  up  among  them  men  of  great  parts,  and  gifts  ;  and
Mrength  of  will  who  could  attem})t  this  problem,  and  solve  it,  had  they  been
l^ble.  l^  the  world  could  hnyc  been  redeemed  by  shcIi  means,  th^s^  men  9ou|4
188  ■  '■ '  '"


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.  chap.  xvil.


have  accomplished  its  redemption.  But  all  had  failed.  The  histories  of  the  great
nations  of  old  furnish  a  sad  illustration  of  the  truth,  that  **  the  paths  of  glory  lead
but  to  the  grave  " — the  grave  of  political,  intellectual,  moral  conquests  and  hopes.
The  prodigal  child,  far  away  from  his  true  home,  had  come  to  the  husks.  The
soul  of  man  was  still  hungry.  All  had  failed  to  satisfy.  This  was  that
emptiness  of  which  Christ's  kingdom  of  grace  was  the  answering  fulness.  Out
of  the  wrecks  and  fragments  of  the  old  world  was  to  be  built  up  the  new.

11.  It  is  to  be  an  omnipotent  kingdom.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  ;  I  will
also  take  of  the  highest  branch  of  the  high  cedar,  and  will  set  it."  I,  who  am
mightier  than  the  royal  eagle  of  Babylon  ;  I,  who  bore  Israel  from  Egypt  as
upon  eagle's  wings.  I  will  lay  hold  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  raise  up  my
Messiah  from  thence  and  establish  His  kingdom.  That  kingdom  should,  indeed,
advance  from  weak  beginnings,  "  I  will  crop  off  from  the  top  of  his  young  twigs,
a  tender  one."  But  the  tree  was  the  planting  of  the  Lord,  l^'^'^  omnipotence
would  uphold  it,  and  it  must  stand  for  ever.  Christ  is  to  "fill  all  things."
And  His  Church  is  to  be  "  the  fulness  of  Him  who  filleth  all  in  all "  (Eph.  i.  23).

III.  Its  rule  is  to  be  marked  by  tenderness."  '*  The  high  cedar."  "  A
tender  one."  The  glory  of  Lebanon  is  to  be  added  to  the  lowly  but  fruitful
vine.  Majesty  wedded  to  meekness ;  a  kingdom  of  immortal  strength,  but
founded  upon  patience  (Rev.  i.  9).  Its  victories  were  to  be  the  victories  of  the
Lamb,  l^he  omnipotence  and  the  love  of  God  were  to  join  hands  in  the  religion
of  mercy  which  was  to  be  founded  upon  Calvary  (Matt.  xii.  19-21).

IV.  It  is  to  be  a  wide  kingdom.  A  large  fellowship.  Under  the  shadow
of  this  goodly  cedar  shall  dwell  all  fowl  of  every  wing.  None  are  to  be  left  out.
It  is  written  of  Zion's  King  that  "  He  shall  be  favourable  to  the  simple  and
needy,  and  preserve  the  souls  of  the  poor."  His  kingdom  shall  embrace  heaven
and  earth,  reconciling  all  things.  Christianity  alone  has  the  proper  qualities  of
an  universal  religion.

V.  It  is  to  be  an  eternal  kingdom.  Being  planted  by  God  Himself,  this
kingdom  could  have  in  it  no  seeds  of  decay.  It  can  never  be  moved,  but  must
stand  as  long  as  the  sun  and  mo(5n  endure,  and  of  the  increase  of  it  there  shall
be  no  end.

VI.  It  is  to  bring  abasement  to  all  human  pride-  "  And  all  the  trees  of  the
field  shall  know  that  I,  the  Lord,  have  brought  down  the  high  tree,  have
exalted  the  low  tree,  have  dried  up  the  green  tree,  and  have  made  the
dry  tree  to  flourish."  Such  has  ever  been  the  process  and  the  end  of  the  Lord
in  His  dealings  with  men  (1  Sam.  ii.  7,  8).  The  rich  tree,  boasting  and  promising
so  much,  is  withered  (Psa.  xxxvii.  35,  36).  The  sapless  stem  shall  be  revived
(Is.  Ixi.  3).  It  was  one  of  the  praises  by  which  the  world's  salvation  was
greeted.  *' He  hath  put  down  the  mighty  from  their  seats,  and  hath  exalted
the  humble  and  meek."  The  conquests  of  David,  and  the  magnificence  of
Solomon  ended  in  the  humiliation  and  shame  of  Zedekiah's  reign.  But  that  royal
I'amily  was  raised  up  again  in  Christ ;  and  from  it  sprang  Messiah,  the  King,
whose  kingdom  was  destined  to  put  an  end  to  all  those  of  the  world  which  were
founded  upon  force,  error,  and  fraud.  The  kingdom  founded  upon  love  would
exalt  the  good  and  the  true,  though  in  lowly  condition  ;  and  debase  the  proud,
though  surrounded  by  all  the  glory  which  the  world  could  give.

The  Tree  Christ,  which  God  has  prepared  for  us.

1.  As  to  its  nature.  2.  As  to  its  destiny.  Summer  and  winter  the  cedar  is
green,  and  never  loses  its  leave.^  or  its  verdure.     ^X\\^  everlastingly  green  Tree

m


CHAP.  xvn.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


of  Life  is  Christ.  No  wood  is  more  durable  ;  so  Clirist  is  the  indestructible
foundation  for  our  hopes,  etc.  We  are  the  branches  in  the  cedar  of  God.  Our
fruits  are  Christ's,  who  produces  them  in  us  and  by  us.  John  and  Peter,  Paul
and  James,  what  boughs  in  that  Cedar  !  and  the  fathers  and  the  Reformers,
and  all  believers  since.  What  a  Tree  !  A\  hat  a  green,  flourishing,  fruit-laden
array  of  branches  that  which  sways  around  it !  Wha.t  a  mighty,  densely-foliaged,
far-shadowing-crown  !  and  in  the  crown  what  gales,  and  zephyrs,  and  rustlings
of  holy  life  and  divine  love  !  Here  there  is  promised  to  Christ  and  His  cause
nothing  less  than  final  triumph  over  the  whole  world — the  pompous  glory  of
Babylon,  Egypt,  Rome,  and  Athens,  where  is  it  to  be  found  ? — (Krummacher.)

1.  After  grievous  judgments  threatened,  God  comforts  His  people.  When
God  should  root  out  Zedekiah  and  his  people  the  kingdom  w^ould  be  laid  waste  ;
the  faithful  should  suffer  much,  lose  estates,  friends,  liberty,  country,  temple,
ordinances,  and  worship  of  God.  Now  for  comfort  ai^ainst  all  these  evils,  he
tells  them  of  the  Messiah.  The  stem  of  Jesse  seemed  to  be  cut  down,  and  the
root  of  Jesse  to  be  pulled  up  ;  but  the  Lord  preserved  the  root  and  stem,  out
of  which  he  brought  a  rod  and  a  branch  for  the  comfort  of  the  faithful,  suffering
Jews.  This  promise  of  the  Branch  is  often  mentioned  for  the  purpose  of  comfort
(Jer.  xxiii.  5,  6  ;  xxxiii.  15,  16  ;  Zech.  iii.  8  ;  vi.  12,  13).

2.  The  Lord  Christ  descended  from  the  highest.  "  I  will  take  of  the  highest
branch,"  etc.  He  came  from  the  loins  of  Jeconiah,  who  was  King  of  Judah,
and  from  fourteen  kings  before  him  (Matt.  i.).  He  was  the  son  of  nobles,  and
born  a  king  (Matt.  ii.  12).  He  was  the  first-born  of  the  kings  of  Judah,  the
right  heir  to  the  kingdom  which  Herod  at  that  time  usurped.

3.  The  beginnings  of  Christ  were  mean  and  low.  "  I  will  crop  off  from  the
top  of  his  young  twigs  a  tender  one."  Christ,  at  first,  was  as  a  little  tender  shoot
of  a  tree  set  in  the  earth  ;  and  how  weak,  mean,  low,  and  inconsiderable  is  such
a  thing.  Such  were  the  beginnings  of  Christ.  He  took  flesh  of  a  poor  virgin,
the  wife  of  a  carpenter.  He  was  born  in  a  poor  village  (Mic.  v.  2)  ;  in  a  stable,
laid  in  a  manger  (Luke  ii.  7).  He  was  subject  to  his  parents  (Luke  ii.  51).
He  lay  in  the  dark  till  thirty  years  of  age  (Luke  iii.  23)  ;  and  then  He
began  with  two  or  tliree  poor  fishermen  (Matt.  iii.  18-22)  ;  then  some  others  to
the  number  of  twelve  ;  and  even  now,  when  He  seemed  to  be  somebody.  He  had
not  a  house  or  Ijed  for  Himself  or  for  them  (Luke  ix.  58).  And  for  His  main-
tenance, it  was  at  the  good  will  of  others  (Luke  viii.  3).

4.  The  Lord  Christ  is  planted  in  the  Church,  and  becomes  a  fruitful  and
goodly  cedar  therein.  "  1  wnll  plant  it  upon  a  high  mountain,"  etc.  Christ  was
planted  in  Zion,  there  He  grew,  there  He  brought  forth  fruit.  With  the  timber
of  this  cedar  was  the  Church  built,  with  the  fruit  of  this  cedar  it  is  maintained
(Isa.  iv.  2).  The  branch  was  Christ,  and  He  should  be  for  beauty  and  glory  to
the  Church,  and  the  fruit  that  should  come  from  Him  should  be  excellent.  The
Church  saith,  *'  His  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste."  Wisdom,  righteousness,  re-
demption, and  sanctification  are  the  fruits  of  this  cedar  (1  Cor.  i.  30) ;  the  life  of
the  world  (John  vi.  33) ;  tlie  ordinances  of  the  Gospel  (Matt,  xxviii.  19  ;  1  Cor.
i.  23)  ;  "exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  ;"  reconciliation  (Col.  i.  20)  ;
the  gift  of  the  comforter  (John  xvi.  7)  ;  revelation  of  the  counsels  of  God  (John
XV.  15)  ;  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  (John  xiv.  9  ;  1  John  i.  B) ;
"eternal  life"  (John  x.  28).  Such  was  the  fruit  this  cedar  bore.  In  the  midst
of  the  Church  He  was  planted,  fruitful,  and  sang  praise  to  God  (Heb  ii.  12).
And  so  high  is  this  cedar  grown,  that  it  is  now  in  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of
God  (Eph.  i.  20,  21).  The  mountain  of  the  Lord  is  on  the  top  of  all  mountains,
and  this  cedar  on  the  top  of  that  mountain.

5.  7 here  is  safetij  under  Christ,  lie  will  protect  His  people  from  all  harms,
"Under  it  shall  tliey  dwell."  Men  will  not  dwell  where  there  is  no  safety.
Those  who  come  under  Christ's  shadow,  His  power  and  government,  shall  dwell

in


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,  CHAP.  xvm.


tliere  in  safety.  He  will  protect  His  Church,  and  tread  down  the  enemies  there-
of, whatever  their  power,  politics,  and  pretences  are.  He  is  a  cedar  in  wisdom
(Col.  ii.  3)  ;  a  ced.ir  in  |)ower  (Matt,  xxviii.  18)  ;  a  cedar  in  His  providence  and
vigilance  (Isa.  xxviii.  3)  ;  hence  saith  the  Chnrch,  "  I  sat  under  His  shadow
with  grrat  delight"  (Cant.  ii.  3).  It  is  Christ  secures  from  sin,  from  the  wisdom
of  the  flesh,  the  storms  of  the  world,  temptations  of  hell,  and  whatever  is
dangerous  Tlsa.  xxv.  4).  If  you  be  under  the  shadow  of  this  cedar,  thongh  the
winds  blow  hard,  the  floods  beat  sore,  and  rain  fall  with  strength,  yet  you  shall
be  as  safe  as  the  house  built  upon  the  rock  (Matt.  vii.  24,  25).

6.  Princes  that  are  haughty  and  proud,  God  will  bring  them  down  though
they  be  in  flourishing  conditions.  "  I  have  brought  down  the  high  tree,"  etc.
Zedekiah  was  a  high  tree ;  the  king  of  Judah,  and  his  spirit  was  high  ;  he
hearkened  not  to  the  God  of  Israel,  nor  to  His  prophets ;  he  would  not  keep
covenant  and  promise  with  the  king  of  Babylon.  But  God  laid  the  axe  to  the
root  of  this  tree  and  hewed  it  down.  No  trees  are  so  high,  but  the  Lord  who  is
higher  than  they,  can  lay  them  low.  Let  them  be  green  with  boughs,  branches,
leaves  ;  let  them  have  many  soldiers,  many  counsellors,  many  kingdoms,  all  can-
not preserve  them  from  ruin.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  a  high  tree,  his  top  reached
to  heaven  (Dan.  iv.  11) ;  but,  "  A  watcher  and  a  holy  one  came  down  from
heaven,  cried  aloud  and  said.  Hew  down  the  tree,  cut  off  his  branches,"  etc.
(Oan.  iv.  13,  14).  There  is  a  watcher  who  observes  the  plots  and  practices
of  kings,  and  hews  them  down  at  His  pleasure.  Pharaoh  was  a  high  tree,  the
highest  in  all  Egypt  ;  he  said,  "  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the
spoil  ;  my  lust  shall  be  satisfied  upon  them  ;  I  will  draw  my  sword,  my  hand
shall  destroy  them."  Here  was  pride  and  cruelty,  whicli  usually  go  together  ;
and  what  followed  hereupon  ?  "  Thou  did'st  blow  with  thy  wind,  the  sea
covered  them  ;  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters  (Ex.  xv.  9,  10.)  Saul
was  a  goodly  man,  a  higli  tree  in  Israel ;  he  was  proud,  cruel,  false,  disobedient
to  God  ;  and  He  rejected  him,  and  cut  him  down  by  the  Philistines  and  his  own
sword  (1  Sam.  xxxi).  So  Ahab(I  Kings  xxii)  ;  Herod  (Actsxii.  23);  Belshazzar
(Dan.  V.  5,  22,  23,  30).  The  Lord  hath  days  and  times  to  reckon  with  the  high
andhauglity  ones  (Isa.  x.  33,  34  ;  ii.  12-17).

7.  How  low  soever  the  conditions  of  hingdoms,  families,  or  persons  are,  God
is  able  to  raise  them.  *'  I  have  exalted  the  low  tree,"  etc.  The  kingdom  of
Judah,  the  house  of  David,  the  person  of  Jeconiah,  w^ere  very  low  in  Babylon,
like  low  shrnbs,  dry  trees.  But  God  exalted  tliem,  and  brought  a  glorious
kingdom  and  a  churcli  out  of  those  low  beginnings.  Was  not  Christ  like  a  low
and  dry  tree,  when  He  lay  in  the  loins  of  Jeconiah,  a  prisoner,  a  captive  ;  when
He  lay  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  ;  hewed  timber,  made  houses  for  His  living  ;
especially  when  He  was  cut  down  and  laid  in  the  heart  of  the  earth  ?  Was  He
not  a  dry  tree  then  ?  But  God  exalted  Him,  set  Him  at  His  right  hand  ;  and
Peter  proclaimed  it  (Acts  ii.  33,  36).

8.  God  will  do  all  these  things  so  eminently  that  the  world  shall  take  notice,
and  be  filled  with  the  glory  thereof.  "  And  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know
that  I,  the  Lord,"  etc.  Not  only  the  orchard  trees,  but  the  field  trees,  not
domestic  alone,  but  wild  ones.  Men  shall  fear  and  hide  themselves,  "  for  the
glory  of  His  Majesty,  when  He  ariseth  to  shake  terribly  the  earth"  (Isa.  ii.  19).
— (jGreenhill.)

The  Equity  of  the  Divine  Justice  (chap,  xviii.).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  judg-  ance.  But  this  salutary  purpose  was
nients  announced  in  chaps,  viii,  xi,  frustrated  by  the  manner  in  which  these
were  iil tended  to  bfiug  Israel  to  recent-     judgments  wereinterpreted.  ThepeoplQ

191


CHAP,  xviir.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


considered  themselves  as  innocent  cliil-  have  to  bear  the  puiiisliment  of  his  own

dren  suffering  for  the  iniquity  of  their  sin.      That  punishment  can   only  be

fathers,  and  that,  therefore,  repentance  averted  by  repentance  (vers.   21-29).

was  useless.    Tlie  prophet  destroys  this  Thus  the  rule  of  God's  judgments  was

refuge  by  declaring  that  each  man  shall  equity.


The  Ungodly  Proverb,  and  the  Declaration  that  it  shall  be  no

MORE   HEARD  IN   ISRAEL   (VcrS.    1-4).


Vers.  1,2.  "  The  fathers  have  eaten
sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth
are  set  on  edge."  The  same  proverb
is  quoted  in  Jer.  xxxi  29,  30,  where  it
is  also  condemned  as  an  error.  The
meaninpf  of  it  is  sufficiently  clear.  The
sour  grapes  which  the  fathers  eat  are
their  own  personal  sins  which  they
commit ;  the  setting  of  the  children's
teeth  on  edge  is  the  suffering  conse-
quent upon  these  sins,  and  which  is
visited  upon  the  children.

Ver.  8.  "Ye  shall  not  have  occa-
sion any  more  to  use  this  proverb  in
Israel."  Eeh.  "  It  shall  not  be  to
}0\\."  The  meaning  is,  that  it  shall
be  no  longer  morally  possible  for  them
to  use  this  proverb  ;  for  they  would  be
convinced  of  the  justice  of  God's  ways,
not  only  by  the  reason  of  the  thing
itself,  but  also  by  the  judgments  which
would  be  sent  upon  them.  The  equity
of  God's  dealings  would  be  vindicated
in  so  clear  a  manner,  that  none  would
be  bold  enough  to  call  it  in  question.

Ver.  4.  "  All  souls  are  Mine ;  as
the  soul  of  the  father,  so  also  the
soul  of  the  son  is  Mine."  They  are
His  by  right  of  creation.  They  have
come  from  Him,  tlie  Fountain  of  Life,
the  Father  of  Spirits.  "  God  would
surrender  His  property  if  He  permitted


souls,  whether  individuals  or  whole
generations,  to  suffer  punishment  for
the  guilt  of  others.  In  the  likeness
of  God,  on  which  the  sentence  "  All
souls  are  Mine  "  rests,  lies  the  principle
that  souls  cannot  be  degraded  into
servile  instrume.its — that  each  can  only
be  treated  according  to  His  works. "^
(Hengstenherg).  "  In  this  verse  God
asserts  His  universal  propriety  in  His
rational  creation.  All  the  soulsy  i.e,,
persons — the  noblest  part  of  the  con-
stituent elements  of  the  human  subject
being  put  for  the  whole.  He  had
created  them  all,  and  having  endowed
them  with  those  powers  and  faculties
which  are  necessary  to  constitute  them
subjects  of  moral  government,  He  had
a  sovereign  and  indisputable  right  to
deal  with  them  in  equity  according  to
their  deserts.  In  punishing  the  guilty,
He  acts  without  respect  of  persons.
The  individual  culprit  is  dealt  with  on
the  ground  of  his  own  personal  deserts."
—{Henderson).  "The  soul  that  sin-
neth,  it  shall  die."  ''  Die,  the  end  of
a  process, — the  separation  of  the  soul
from  its  life-source,  the  Spirit  of  God
(Deut.  XXX.  25  ;  Jer.  xxi.  8  ;  Prov.  xi.
19).  This  cannot  hai)pen  without  an
act  of  God's  retributive  justice,  so  that
the  punishment  inflicted  by  God  must
correspond  to  man's  guilt." — {Lange),


EOMILKTICS.

(Ver.  2).

Two  things  are  to  be  considered  concerning  this  proverb—

1.  The  meaning  of  it.  By  "  sour  grapes,"  the  Jews  understand  sin,  not  sin
simply,  but  such  sins  as  bring  heavy  judgments  of  God  upon  a  land  or  peojjle,
^  idolatr\-,  murder,  onprc-^.^ioM.  druul^euue^?-  profaueu^ss.  et^.      Th§  urojjiiQd


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,  cttAP.  xvlli.


Isaiah  warrants  this  sense  of  sour  grapes,  when  he  calls  the  sins  of  Jiidah
*'  wild  grapes"  (Isa.  v.  24).  God  looked  that  His  vineyard  should  bring  forth
grapes,  good  fruit,  justice,  righteousness,  truth  ;  and  it  brought  forth  wild
orapes,  oppiession,  a  cry,  covetousness,  lasciviousness,  drunkenness,  pride.  Such
SHiri  are  called  sour  or  wild  grapes,  because  they  wound  conscience,  are  burden-
some unto  others,  are  as  distasteful  unto  God  as  such  grapes  are  to  us.  They
provoke  Hiui  to  lay  waste  the  vine  that  bears  such  fruit.  By  this  proverb  thus
much  is  signified,  that  the  fathers  had  sinned,  and  the  children  suffered  for
their  sin  ;  the  fathers  did  that  which  was  very  offensive  unto  God,  and  the
children  were  punished  for  it ;  they  did  eat  the  sour  grapes,  brought  forth  the
bitter  fruit,  and  these  smarted  for  it ;  the  children's  teeth  were  set  on  edge,
they  were  punished  for  what  their  fathers  had  done.  They  thought  and  said
that  their  fathers  were  the  cause  of  all  the  evils  which  befell  them.  Like  unto
this  proverb  are  these  :  *'  Kings  sin,  and  the  people  suffer."  "  The  child
offends,  and  the  servant  is  beaten."  5-^^  i;.   -//?t*f  •/  *  r--'^

II.  The  occasion.  The  princes  and  people  going  on  in  the  wicked  ways  of
their  fathers,  the  prophets  did  threaten  them  with  destruction  of  their  temple,
city  and  estate.  Thereupon  they  said,  ''  Our  fathers  did  as  we  do,  and  they
were  spared ;  why  should  we  suffer  "  ?  And  when  the  prophets  pressed  the  sins  of
Manasseh,  as  Jer.  xv.  3,  4,  "  I  will  appoint  over  them  four  kinds,  saith  the  Lord  ;
the  sword  to  slay,  the  dogs  to  tear,  the  fowls  of  heaven,  the  beasts  of  the  earth,
to  devour  and  destroy  :  and  I  will  cause  them  to  be  removed  into  all  kingdoms
of  the  earth,  because  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah,  for  that
which  he  did  in  Jerusalem."  When  God  stirred  the  prophets  to  tell  them  that
for  the  sins  of  this  king  he  would  lay  Jerusalem  waste,  as  he  had  the  ten  tribes
for  Jeroboam's  sins,  they  then  took  up  this  proverb,  and  said,  "  The  fathers  have
eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  childrens'  teeth  are  set  on  edge."  Ahaz,  Manasseh,
Amon,  and  others  of  our  forefathers,  have  sinned,  and  we  must  suffer !  Or  thus  :
Zedekiah  and  his  counsellors  had  perfidiously  broken  covenant  with  Nebuchad-
nezzar, for  which  the  prophets  threatened  utter  ruin  to  all :  hereupon  the  people
said,  "  Our  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,"  etc.  ;  the  kings  and  nobles  have
transgressed,  and  we  shall  be  ruined  for  it !  This  proverb  was  grown  common
amonust  them,  both  in  Babylon  and  in  Zion,  it  was  tossed  up  and  down  and  spread.
Ezekiel  tells  them  of  it  in  Babylon,  and  Jeremiah  in  Zion  (Jer.  xxxi.  29).  The
evil  of  this  proverb  was  great,  for  besides  their  charging  God  with  injustice  and
impartiality,  hereby — (1).  They  discovered  their  father's  sins  and  nakedness,  and
that  without  sorrow  or  repentance  for  them.  (2).  Made  light  of  anything  the
prophets  threatened  against  them.  (3).  Obotructed  the  way  against  future
repentance,  or  profiting  by  the  judgments  of  God  which  should  come  upon  them.
For  being  persuaded  and  possessed  with  this  opinion,  that  they  suffered  unjustly
for  their  father's  sins,  not  their  own,  they  would  never  submit,  mourn,  condemn,
but  justify  themselves. — {Greenhill).

The  cause  of  the  cessation  of  this  proverb  is  the  severity  of  the  Divine  judg-
ments. When  these  appear,  the  fig-leaves  fall  off,  the  slumbering  conscience
awakens  and  cries  out.  "  It  is  I  and  my  sins  ! "  There  is  a  multitude  of
theorems  and  theological  dogmas  which  are  possible  only  in  certain  times,  and
slink  away  abashed  when  the  thunders  of  Divine  judgment  begin  to  roll. —
{Hengstenberg) .

Either  a  man  recognises  in  judgment — in  the  self-judgment  of  a  believing
repentance — his  guilt  before  God,  or  God  makes  the  whole  world  recognise  it
in  us,  through  the  judgment  which  overtakes  us,  even  when  we  would  deny  our
guilt.  God  swears  by  His  life  ;  for  where  His  righteousness  is  called  in  question,
His  life  in  this  world  of  sin  and  death  is  assailed. — (Lange.)

V  193


tniAr.  xvm.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTAHY:   EZEKIEL


(Ver.  4).

'*  The  sonl   tliat  sinneth,  it  shall  die."     Hence — 1.    God  may  lay  what

pnnishtnent  IJe  pleases  upon  the  soul  that  sins.  "  All  souls  are  Mine,"  and  the
soul  that  siunetli  shall  suffer  whatever  1  see  good,  accoidin^  to  the  nature  of
its  sin.  However  the  words  seem  to  impart  an  equal  punishment  for  all  sins,
yet  it  is  otlierv\ise  ;  according  to  the  intrinsical  nature,  circumstances,  and
demerit  of  the  sin,  shall  be  the  death.  God  will  proportion  the  one  unto  the
other ;  as  He  rewards  men  according  to  their  works,  so  He  will  punish  them
according  to  their  sins.  God  liath  variety  of  deaths,  and  various  degrees  of  those
deaths,  variety  of  afflictions,  and  various  degrees  of  the  same  ;  He  lays  on  which
and  in  what  measure  He  pleases.  If  states  think  good  to  inflict  upon  delinquents
several  punishments,  and  in  high  degree  as  they  find  men  guilty,  how  much
more  may  God.  He  smote  Jehoram  with  incurable  and  sore  diseases  (2  Chron.
xxi.  18,  19).  He  sent  fire  and  brimstone  upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (Gen.  xix).
He  did  that  in  Jerusalem  which  He  never  did  before,  nor  ever  would  do  the
like  (Ez.  V.  9,  10).  Neither  these  nor  any  that  suffer  in  what  kind  soever,  do
suffer  unjustly ;  men  may  pretend  innocency,  but  if  they  suffer,  and  that  severely,
God  is  not  cruel,  they  are  not  guiltless.  2.  Sin  is  a  deadly  thing  *'  The  soul
that  sinneth  shall  die.  Sin  is  the  great  murderer,  it  let  death  into  the  world,
and  keei)S  death  alive.  If  there  were  no  sin  there  would  be  no  death,  no
punishment,  but  if  men  sin  they  must  suffer.  The  old  world  sinned  and  died
for  it ;  Sodomites  sinned  and  died  for  it ;  the  Bethshemites  sinned  by  looking
into  the  ark,  and  fifty  thousand  of  them  died  for  it  :  Jerusalem  sins  and  is  burnt
for  it,  and  her  children  buried  in  a  Babylonish  grave  ;  Ananias  and  Sapphira  die
for  their  dissimulation.  **  The  wages  of  sin  is  death"  (Rom.  vi.  23).  Let  us
then  take  heed  of  sin,  whereby  we  offend  that  God  who  hath  said,  **  The  soul
that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  He  is  a  dreadful  Majesty  and  ought  greatly  to  be
feared.  "  Who  would  not  fear  Thee,  0  King  of  nations?  for  to  Thee  doth  it
appertain  "  (Jer.  x.  7).  Fear  is  God's  due,  and  your  duty  ;  "  Stand  in  awe,"
then,  "  and  sin  not "  (Psa.  iv.  4).  If  you  sin,  you  must  die  ;  death  is  the
king  of  fears,  and  God  is  the  King  of  death  ;  He  can  command  it  to  seize  upon
you  in  a  moment. — (Greenhill).

HOMILETICS.

The  Individuality  of  the  Souito
(Ver.  4).

These  idolatrous  Israelites  complained  that  they  were  unjustly  punished  for
the  sins  of  their  fathers.  The  innocent  suffered  instead  of  the  guilty.  "  The
fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge."  By
nature's  law  the  man  who  eats  sour  grapes,  and  he  alone,  will  feel  the
un])leasant  sensation  of  the  acid  on  his  own  teeth.  They  complain  that  the
dealings  of  Providence,  as  expounded  by  the  prophet,  are  contrary  to  the  equity
and  justice  of  nature.  And  this  complaint  is,  to  a  very  large  extent,  founded
upon  a  truth.  Under  God's  moral  government  the  innocent  do  suffer  for  the
guilty.  All  iienerations  of  men  are  subject  to  the  stern  law  of  inheritance,  so
that  the  entail  of  sin  and  suffering  falls  to  the  lot  of  those  who  are  innocent  of
the  original  transgression.  But  the  prophet  assures  his  countrymen  that,
despite  all  appearances  to  the  contrary,  God's  ways  are  equal.  There  is  no
injustice  done  to  any  man  on  account  of  any  complication  of  his  history  with
194


tJOMlLt:TtC  COMMENTAHY:    mEKlEL.  cHAf.  xvm.


that  of  another,  or  with  that  of  the  human  race.  "As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord
God,  ye  shall  not  have  occasion  any  more  to  use  this  proverb  in  Israel."  And
the  reason  given  is  this  : — *'  Behold  all  souls  are  mine ;  as  the  soul  of  the
father,  so  also  the  soul  of  the  son  is  mine  :  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."
Each  individual  soul  conies  from  God,  who  is  the  fountain  of  life,  is  accountable
ultimately  to  Him  alone,  and  each  man  will  be  treated  in  sole  regard  to  himself
without  reference  to  any  other  man.  He  who  continues  in  sin  will  incur  the
penalty  of  death  ;  which  will  be  visited  upon  him  for  his  own  sins,  and  not  for
those  of  his  forefathers.  This  death  of  the  soul  is  not  the  loss  of  existence,  but
such  death  as  the  soul  can  suii'er,  i.e.^  moral  and  spiritual  death,  exclusion  from
God's  light  and  love.  Such  a  man  is  dead  while  he  liveth.  His  portion  is  a
living  death.  This  passage  speaks  to  us  of  the  origin,  and  of  the  individuality
of  the  human  soul.

I.  The  origin  of  the  human  soul.  "All  souls  are  mine."  They  are  God's
hy  right  of  creation^  which  is  the  strongest  title  of  ownership.  And  God  said,
"  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness  "  (Gen.  i.  26).  "  The  Lord
God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the
breath  of  life  ;  and  man  became  a  living  soul "  (Gen.  ii.  7).  God  is  the
"  Father  of  spirits,"  and  *' we  are  also  His  offspring."  '*Man  \s>  from  God  as
well  as  to  God.  He  is  of  the  blood-royal  of  heaven.  The  Bible  itself,  what  is  it
but  a  biography  of  the  soulV  Its  noble  and  illustrious  birth,  beautiful  childhood,
and  its  terrible  fall ;  its  long  and  painful  discipline  of  sorrow  through  the  ages
of  history  ;  the  grace  of  God  towards  it  in  the  gifts  of  salvation,  the  provisions
for  its  perfect  restoration  through  a  Divine  Redeemer,  a  paradise  won  for  it
beyond  the  grave — these  great  facts  concerning  the  soul  are  the  main  burden  of
the  Bible.  To  know,  as  a  deep  and  heart  felt  conviction,  the  origin  and  worth
of  the  noul  is  to  be  a  religious  man  :  to  live  a  life  founded  on  that  conviction  is
to  be  a  Christian.

II.  The  individuality  of  the  soul.  Each  soul  of  man  has  a  separate  existence
in  eternity  as  well  as  in  time.  When  we  die  we  do  not  become  an  unconscious
portion  of  the  universal  life.  We  are  not  absorbed  into  God,  like  a  drop
which  falls  into  the  ocean.  We  do  not  perish  by  infinite  diffusion.  Such
is  the  teaching  of  the  Bible.  But — 1.  It  is  very  difficult  for  us  to  realise
this  truth.  The  truth  we  have  to  consider  is — that  each  and  every  one  of
all  who  now  live,  or  who  have  ever  lived,  is  a  distinct  and  independent
being.  There  are  certain  facts  and  circumstances  of  human  life  which
render  it  difficult  for  us  to  realise  this  truth.  Take  the  case  of  the  commander
of  a  large  army.  Does  such  a  man  realise  this  truth  fully  when  he  sends  a  large
body  of  men  on  some  dangerous  service  ?  Or,  does  he  not  rather  regard  each
man  as  one  of  the  springs  or  wheels  of  a  vast  machine  ?  To  the  whole  collection
of  separate  powers  ministering  to  one  end  he  assigns  individuality.  The  only
fact  is  not  present  vividly  before  him,  that  the  real  individuality  is  that  of  each
single  soul.  And  all  men  are  liable,  more  or  less,  to  make  this  false  estimate.
We  are  prone  to  class  men  in  masses,  and  to  regard  them  as  we  do  the  stones  of
a  building  which  derives  unity  only  from  its  form  and  from  the  disposition  of
all  its  pnrts  to  the  general  effect.  We  deal  only  with  great  unities ;  the
separate  portions  do  not  enter  into  our  thouj[>ht.  We  have  a  tendency  to  treat
abstractions  of  our  own  creation  as  real  things.  Thus  we  speak  of  national
greatness.  And  what  does  this  mean  ?  It  means  that  multitudes  of  men  who
happen  to  be  living  together  at  one  time,  and  in  the  same  country,  are  able  to
act  upon  each  other  and  upon  the  world  at  large  in  such  a  way  as  to  gain  im-
portance, power,  wealth,  and  eminence.  We  regard  these  multitudes  as  one  great
body,  and  when  one  and  another  dies  we  do  not  consider  it  as  the  passage  of  a  soul
into  the  unseen  state.     Their  places  are  supplied  by  others  :  the  individual

195


cijAr.  xvitt.


tWMtLETiC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKlEt.


perishes,  the  nation  remains.  We  tliink  of  the  nation  as  still  the  same  in  its
vast  and  energetic  life,  but  we  are  apt  to  forget  that  it  is  only  the  component  parts
that  are  the  true  realities.  Consider  again,  the  multitudes  of  a  great  city.
We  gain  an  idea  of  human  energy,  of  the  splendour  and  magnificence  of  man's
works.  But  what  is  the  real  truth  ?  Why,  tliat  each  man  in  that  city  is  his
own  centre,  and  all  things  about  him  are  but  mere  shades  among  which
he  walks,  as  "in  a  vain  shadow  and  disquieteth  himself  in  vain."  Nothing
outside  of  him  can  touch  his  soul  or  quench  his  immortality.  He  must  live
with  himself  for  ever.  Pie  has  an  unfathomable  depth  within  him,  and  an
infinite  abyss  of  existence.  2.  We  should  make  an  effort  to  realise  this  truth.
The  truth,  that  all  who  have  ever  lived  here  and  have  seen  the  sun  successively
are  alive  now,  each  one  in  his  own  person  ;  all  those  who  lived  before  the  Flood
and  in  the  ages  since,  all  who  have  gained  a  name  in  the  world,  or  who  have  died
without  fame — the  good,  the  bad,  the  wise,  the  ignorant ;  all  those  whose  names
we  see  written  in  churches  or  churchyards,  great  writers  who-e  works  we  see
in  our  libraries,  the  workmen  who  have  raised  those  great  buildings  and  monu-
ments which  are  the  wonder  of  the  world  :  they  are  all  in  God's  remembrance,
and  before  His  eye — they  still  live.  To  see  a  human  being,  even  by  a  mere
passing  glance,  is  an  act  which,  in  its  deep  significance,  is  unlike  all  other
occurrences  in  nature.  The  rain  falls,  the  wind  blows  ;  but  showers  and  storms
have  no  existence  beyond  the  time  when  they  happened.  They  are  gone,  and
are  nothing  in  themselves.  But  when  we  have  seen  a  child  of  Adam,  we  Lave
seen  the  temple  of  an  immortal  soul.  It  lives  on  ;  and  when  here  on  earth  it
is  seen  no  more,  it  is  still  somewhere  awaiting  God.  3.  It  is  as  individual
souls  that  we  shall  return  to  God.  We  must  all  take  that  solemn  journey
which  will  bring  us  face  to  face  with  God.  We  cannot  pass  on  one  side  of  Him,
or  in  any  way  avoid  Him,  but  must  go  straight  into  His  presence.  Each  man
will  feel  that  he  is  himself,  and  not  another,  and  that  the  eye  of  God  is  upon
him.  When  a  few  more  years  have  come  and  gone,  there  will  be  no  need  of
any  effort  of  mind  on  our  part,  in  order  to  realise  the  individuality  of  the  soul.
No  need  of  any  effort  to  realise  the  nothingness  of  this  vain  world  when  the
world  has  for  us  vanished  away  and  we  are  left  alone  with  God.  Ti»ere  is  one
Being  to  whom  alone  we  are  ultimately  accountable.  Strive  to  say  at  last  in
faith  and  hope,  "  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit."  "  Lord,  Jesus,
receive  my  spirit"


(Vers.  5-9.)


EXEGETICAL    NOTES.  —  True

righteousness  is  described  as  the  ful-
filment of  the  commandments  of  God.
Through  such  righteousness  the  right-
eous shall  live.

Ver.  5.  "That  which  is  lawful
and  right"  (Heb.)  "  Judgment  and
righteousness."  'I  he  deeds  must  con-
iovm.  to  the  rule  of  right,  and  the
motive  must  be  the  love  of  right.
"The  first  a))plication  of  the  i)rinc'i[)le
is  made  to  the  righteous  man.  He  is
described  according  to  Being  and
Doing, — essonlially  and  nclunlly  ;  in
particular,  doing  judgment,  in  general,
righteousness  :  His  doing  is  then  more
196


precisely  depicted,  not  without  a  ten-
dency to  antithesis." — Lange,

Ver.  6.  **  Hath  not  eaten  upon  the
mountains.'*  Mountains  where  idol
festivals  were  held  (Ezek.  vi.  13).
Eating  that  which  was  offered  in
sacrifice  to  an  idol  was  supposed  to
secure  the  favour  of  that  deity  (1  Cor.
X.  20,  21).  "  Neither  hath  lifted  up
his  eyes  to  the  idols  of  the  house  oi
Israel."  The  "lifting  up  of  the  eyes"
denotes  the  expectation  of  help
(Psa.  cxxi.  1).  '*  Neither  hath  come
near  to  a  menstruous  woman."  Con-
jugal intercourse  with  a  wife  while
she  was  set  apart  for  her  uncleanness


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.  chap,  xviii.


/  was  forbidden  by  the  law  of  Israel  on  Jews  from  taking  any  interest  from

pain  of  death.     It  was  a  defilement  of  their  brethren,  but  permitted  them  to

the  marriage  relation.     (Lev.  xviii.  19,  do  so  from  a  foreigner  (Ex.  xxii.  25  ;

XX.  18).     "  The  prohibition  of  impuri-  Deut.  xxiii.   19,  20).     ''Increase*'  is

ties  in  the  married  state  is  included,  another  term  expressive  of  interest  or

which  is   directed    against  unbridled  usury,   denoting    riches   obtained    by

lust  that  bows  not  to  the  ordinance  lending  money  at  high  interest,  or  by

of  God." — (ffengstenberg,)  making    exorbitant    charges    on    the

natural   productions   of    the    soil."-^

Ver.  7.     "  Restored  to  the  debtor  (Henderson).      The    taking    of   "  in-

liis  pledge."      This    restoration    was  crease "  on  a  loan  of  the  necessaries

commanded  by  the  law,  as  the  things  of  life  was  forbidden  to  the  Israelite

taken  in  pledge  were  considered  as  (Lev.  xxv.  36,  37).     *'  Hath  executed

necessary  to  the  existence  of  the  poor  truejudgment  between  man  and  man."

man   (Ex.   xxii.   25 ;    Deut.  xxiv.    6,  In  the  special  capacity  of  a  judge  or

10,  etc.).     **  His  bread  to  the  hungry."  arbiter.
Not  regarding  it  as  his;   not  saying

with  Nabal,  "Shall  I  take  my  bread  Ver.  9.     "He  is  just."    Really  such

and  give  it  away?"  (1  Sam.  — righteousness  as  contra-distinguished

xxv.  11).  from  its  semblance.     *'He  shall  surely

live."     He  shall  save  his  soul — shall

Ver.  8.     *  Given  forth  upon  usury,  live  in  the  fullest,  deepest  sense  of  the

neither  hath   taken    any  increase."  word.     "  The  man  who  was  blameless

The  Hebrew  word  for  usury  is  very  with  respect   to   all   the  points   here

expressive.    It  litemWy  signifies  biting,  specified  was   accounted   righteous  in

and  must  have  originated  in  the  prac-  the  eye  of  the  law,  and  entitled  to

tice  of  taking  exorbitant  interest.    The  enjoy  the  life  which  the  law  secured."

law  of  Moses  absolutely  prohibited  the  — (Henderson.)

HOMILETICS.
A  Picture  of  Righteousness  (vers.  5-9),

The  whole  of  this  paragraph  is  an  expansion  of  the  words,  "  If  a  man  be  just'
and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right  "  (ver.  5).  Righteousness  consists  in  the
fulfilment  of  the  commandments  of  God's  law.  It  is  conformity  to  a  standard
which  is  not  arbitrary,  but  founded  upon  the  nature  of  God  Himself  and  His
relations  to  mankind.     But  more  particularly,  righteousness  consists —

I.  In  the  proper  discharge  of  religious  duties.  Those  duties  which  more
nearly  concern  God  and  His  worship.  They  are  laid  down  in  the  first  Table  of
the  Law.  In  this  passnge,  they  are  described  negatively  as  consisting,  in  general,
in  the  avoidance  of  idolatry.  (1)  Li  its  grosser  forms.  Such  as,  "eating  unon
the  mountains  "  (ver.  6),  i.e.^  observing  the  sacrificial  festivals  of  the  heathen
gods  and,  therefore,  sacrificing  to  idols  (Deut.  xii.  2,  etc.).  This  was  the  chief
transgression  by  outward  acts  against  the  law  of  Divine  worship.  There  can  be
no  true  righteousness  unless  God  is  worshipped  in  i)Uiity  and  sincerity.  But
idolatry  is  also  to  be  avoided, — (2.)  In  its  more  refined  forms.  Some  of  the
prophet's  countrymen  could  not  degiade  themselves  so  far  as  to  join  in  outward
acts  of  idolatrous  worship.  But  the  essential  spirit  of  idolatry  was  in  them.
They  "  lifted  up  their  eyes  to  the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel  "  in  the  expectation
of  help  from  them,  thus  offering  supplication  to  them  and  making  them  an
object  of  trust.  Israel  had  done  this  in  times  past,  and  was  doing  so  still
(Deut.  iv.  19  ;  Ezek.  vi.  13).     God  will  have  no  compromises  or  accommodations

197


CEAF.  xvm.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


in  the  matter  of  His  worship.  He  regards  the  direction  of  the  heart,  and  we
cannot  escape  His  condemnation  by  merely  avoiding  the  grosser  forms  of  sin
while  we  retain  the  abominable  thing  itself.

II.    In  the  proper  discharge  of  moral  duties.    Those  which  are  concerned

with  the  relations  of  men  to  one  another.     Tlie  moral  law  is  the  foundation  of
the  peace  and  welfare  of  society — the  bond  which  holds  it  together.      The
following  principles  underlie  the  moral  duties  insisted  on  here.     1.  2  he  principle
of  purity.     That  purity  which  consists  in  the  proper  control  of  the  lusts  of  the
flesh.   ^  **  Neither  hath  defiled  his  neighbour's  wife  "  (ver.  6).     The  marriage  re-
lation is  to  be  held  sacred.     Sins  against  it  tend  to  destroy  the  very  foundations
of  society,  make  havoc  of  the  peace  of  families,  and  are  a  fruitful  source  of  many
crimes  and  disorders.     Sins  of  impurity  pollute  the  mind,  extinguish  the  better
instincts  of  the  mind  and  heart,  and  tend  more  than  any  other  to  drag  a  man
down  to  the  level  of  the  brute.    This  principle  of  purity  is  to  be  observed  within
the  marriage  relation  itself,  "  Neither  hath  come  near  to  a  menstruous  woman  **
(ver.  6).      Conjugal  intercourse  with  a  wife  during  menstruation  was  forbidden
by  the  law  as  a  defilement  of  the  marriage  relation  (Lev.  xviii.  19 ;  xx.  18).
Marriage  was  not  to  be  regarded  as  giving  the  right  to  an  unbridled  licence  of
indulgence,  but  it  was  to  be  under  the  control  of  wholesome  moral  laws.    2.  The
principle  of  kindness.     The  righteous  man  is  to  abstain  from  all  oppression,  to
spoil  none  by  violence,  to  withhold  the  hand  from  every  iniquity  done  against
another  (vers.  7,  8).     But  there  must  be  also  active  goodness.    "  Hath  given  his
bread  to  the  hungry,  and  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a  garment "  (ver.  7).
kindness  is  to  be  shown  towards  the  unhappy  and  the  unfortunate.     We  may
claim  the  right  to  do  what  we  like  with  our  own,  and  the  law  of  our  nation
may  uphold  us  therein.     But  there  is  another  law — the  law  of  kindness  within
our  hearts — that  bids  us  spend  our  treasure  for  the  good  of  our  fellow  men.
We  are  just  as  much  bound  to  do  good  to  others  as  not  to  rob  them,  to  reach
forth   the    hand    to   help    them    as    not    to    smite    them    with   the  fist  of
wickedness.     God  uses  the  righteous  man  as  the  means  by  which  He  manifests
His  own  loving  kindness  to  those  who  are  in  distress.    And  especially  is  kindness
to  be  shown  towards  brethren — those  who  are  of  the  same  commonwealth  and
religion  as  ourselves.     The  Israelites  were  forbidden  to  take  usury  from  their
brethren  on  a  loan  of  money,  or  "  increase  "  on  a  loan  of  the  necessaries  of  life
(Lev.  XXV.  36,  37).     They  were  forbidden  to  exercise  their  full  rights,  even
when  a  brother  through  poverty  had  sold  himself  into  slavery.     "  Thou  shalt
not  rule  over  him  with  rigour,  but  shalt  fear  thy  God"   (Lev.    xxv.    43).
3.  The  principle  of  mercy.     The  proper  objects  of  kindness  and  pity  are  the
unhappy  and  unfortunate  :  but  the  objects  of  mercy  are   the  undeserving.
Meicy  is  shown  towards  those  who  have  no  claim  upon  us.     "  Hath  restored  to
the  debtor  his  pledge  "  (ver.  7).     The  godly  man  will  not  stand  upon  his  rights
to  the  real  injury  of  another.      The  debtor  has  no  claim  upon  us,  and  is,
therefore,  a  proper  object  of  our  mercy.     4.   The  principle  of  justice.     **  Hath
executed  true  judgment  between   man  and  man  "  (ver.  8).     In  every  dispute
the  righteous  man,  when  appealed  to,  will  give  a  judgment  which  is  according
to  truth.     "  To  deal  truly,"  lit.  "  to  do  truth,"  i.e.,  to  act  with  uprightness  and
sincerity  (Psa.  li.  0 ;  1  Cor.  v.  8 ;  Eph.  iv.  21).

til.  In  the  practical  recognition  of  the  truth  that  all  duties  have  reference  to
God.  The  Bible  knows  nothing  of  "independent  morality."  "  My  statutes,"
"  My  judgments  "  (ver.  9).  We  are  to  practise  all  religious  and  moral  duties
because  they  are  pleasing  to  God  ;  they  are  according  to  His  will.  This  doctrine
eaves  religion  from  being  degraded  into  a  mere  sentiment.  True  religion  is
devotion  to  a  Living  Person,  obedience  to  a  Living  Will.    It  also  saves  morality

193


HOMILETIO  COMMENT  A  R  Y :    EZEKIEL.  chap,  xvil

from  being  regarded  as  founded  solely  upon  utilitarianism.     We  are  to  love  meu
and  do  our  duty  towards  them  for  God's  sake.

(Ver.  7).

I.  Wherein  this  oppression  consists.  1.  In  outreacMng  men  in  buying  or
selling.  Men  must  neither  sell  too  dear,  nor  buy  too  cheap ;  which  is  contrary
to  tlie  practice  of  the  world  (Lev,  xxv.  14).  (1.)  [t  is  oppression  when  the
buyer  will  wring  a  commodity  out  of  h'S  neighbour  s  or  brother  s  handy  which
he  is  unwilling  to  part  withal.  Ahab  will  have  Naboth's  vineyard  (1  Kings
xxii.)  (2.)  When  he  makes  advantarje  of  the  seller  s  necessity.  And  so  many
monied  men  will  furnish  sellers  and  needy  men  with  money,  upon  condition
they  may  have  such  wares,  such  a  house,  such  land,  at  an  easier  rate.
Such  advantage  they  made  of  them  who  were  necessitated  to  mortga'^e  their
lands,  vineyards,  and  houses  for  money  to  buy  corn  (Neh.  v.  3).  (3.)  When  he
disparageth  the  commodities  of  the  seller  (Prov.  xx.  14).  2.  In  withholding
that  which  is  right  and  due  to  others  (St.  James  v.  4  ;  St.  Luke  x.  7  ;
Lev.  xix.  13  ;  Mai.  iii.  5).  If  any  withhold  the  portion  of  orphans,
legacies  given  to  the  poor,  the  estates  and  rights  of  widows,  they  will
lie  under  the  censure  of  being  oppressors.  3.  In  laying  too  heaoy  burdens  and
tasks  upon  others.  The  Egyptians  oppressed  the  Israelites  (Ex.  iii.  7).  And
many  lay  more  upon  their  servants  than  they  can  well  perform.  They  must  be
up  early,  fare  hard,  work  hard,  and  be  worn  out  before  their  time.  And  what
is  this  but  oppression  in  a  high  degree  ?  Whereas  the  rule  is,  "  Masters,  give
unto  your  servants  that  which  is  just  and  equal  ;  knowing  that  ye  also  have
a  Master  in  heaven  "  (Col.  iv.  1).  4.  In  preventing  and  delaying  of  justice
and  judgment.  In  this  way  the  petitions  and  causes  of  widows,  orphans  and
poor  people  cannot  be  heard  (Isa.  i.  23).  The  fatherless  and  widows  had  no
gifts,  no  bribes  to  give  tliem  ;  the  rich  had,  and  by  that  means  justice  was
perverted,  and  judgment  delayed  (Amos  vi.  12J.  And  this  sin  is  reckoned
auiongst  the  mi;;hty  ones  (Amos  v.  12).  5.  In  imposing  upon  mens  consciences
those  things  which  are  doubtful  and  disputable.  When  doctrines,  worship,
disciplines  are  imposed  upon  men's  consciences,  which  cannot  clearly  be  made
out  to  them,  it  is  the  height  of  oppression,  and  the  ground-work  of  persecution.
The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  taught  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men  (St.
Matt.  XV.  9)  ;  they  laid  grievous  burdens  upon  men's  shoulders  and  hearts  (St.
Matt,  xxiii.  4).     Whatever  is  done  with  doubting  is  of  sin  (Rom.  xiv.  23).

II.  The  evil  of  oppressing.  1.  It  is  an  unnatural  evil.  No  creatures  do
oppress  those  of  their  own  kind.  But  men  most  unnaturally  prey  upon  one
another  ;  one  man  is  a  wolf  to  another  (Ezek.  xxii.  27).  Lions  have  spared  men
(Dan.  vi.)  ;  ravens  fed  men  (1  Kings  xvii.)  ;  and  yet  one  man  seeks  to  eat  up
and  devour  another.  2.  There  is  little  fear  of  God  in  the  hearts  of
those  who  oppress  others.  *'  Ye  shall  not  oppress  one  another  ;  but
thou  shalt  fear  thy  God"  (Lev.  xxv.  17).  It  is  here  intimated  that,
if  they  o})press,  they  do  not  fear  God ;  if  they  fear  God,  they  will  not
oppress ;  for  "  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  depart  from  evil "  (Prov.
xvi.  6).  The  Jews  oppressing  one  another  is  attributed  to  their  not  fearing
God  (Neh.  v.  9).  3.  It  is  against  that  great  and  common  rule  of  equity
(St.  Matt.  vii.  12).  St.  Jerome  calls  this  sentence  of  Christ  '*  the  summary  of
justice."  4.  It  is  a  sin  which  greatly  provokes  God.  Dreadful  woes  are
denounced  against  it,  and  dreadful  judgments  upon  those  who  are  guilty  of  it
(Micah  ii.  12  ;  Ilab.  ii.  12  ;  Zeph.  iii.  1  ;  Jer.  xxii.  13;  Isa.  x.  1-3  ;  Ex.  xxii.
21-24).  *'  But  hath  restored  to  the  debtor  his  pledge,"  etc.  The  Lord  gave  them

199


OHAF.  xvm.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


laws  concerning  this  (Ex.  xxii.  26).  They  mii;ht  not  take  the  upper  millstone,
nor  a  widow's  garment,  for  pledges;  and  what  they  did  take  they  were  faithfully
and  speedily  to  return.  Job  complains  of  the  wicked  that  they  took  the  widow's
ox  for  a  pledge,  and  the  garments  of  the  poor  (Job.  xxiv.  3,  9).  "  Hath  spoiled
none  by  violence."  Wicked  men  are  said  to  **  drink  the  wine  of  violence."
"  They  sleep  not  except  they  cause  some  to  fall "  (Prov.  iv.  16,  17).  "  He  hath
piven  his  bread  to  the  hungry,  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a  garment."  This
IS  the  exercise  of  faith  (Eccles.  xi.  1).  It  makes  a  man  to  he  of  good  report
(Psa.  cxii.  9).  It  is  the  special  distinction  of  a  good  man  (Psa.  cxii.  1,  9).  It  is
feeding  of  Christ  (St.  Matt.  xxv.  35,  40).  It  is  an  honour  to  religion
(St.  James  i.  27).  It  procures  many  a  praijer  and  blessing  (2  Cor.  ix.  10  ;
Job  xxix.  13  ;  2  Tim.  i.  16).  It  makes  like  unto  God  (St.  Luke  vi.  36).  lk>  is
lending  to  the  Lord  (Prov.  xix.  17).  It  is  pleasing  and  acceptable  to  God
(Acts  X. ;  Heb.  xiii.  16). — GreenhilL


(Vers.  10-20).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Two  cases
are  here  supposed  :  (1).  That  of  a
righteous  father  who  begets  an  un-
righteous son.  (2).  That  of  a  righteous
son  who  refuses  to  copy  the  evil
example  of  his  father.  And  the
prophet  affirms  that,  in  the  former
case,  the  righteousness  of  the  father
will  not  avail  to  save  the  son  ;  and  in
the  latter,  that  the  son  shall  not  suffer
for  the  unrighteousness  of  his  father.
One  shall  not  die  for  the  iniquity  of
the  other.  Each  man  shall  save  his
own  soul  by  his  righteousness.

Vers.  10-13.  "  We  have  here  the
case  of  an  impious  son,  who,  instead
of  following  the  good  example  of  his
pious  parent,  adopts  a  course  directly
the  reverse,  and  unscrupulously  in-
dulges in  crimes  condemned  by  the
law.  Upon  him  an  unmitigated  sen-
tence is  pronounced.  In  the  language
of  the  Orientals,  the  blood  which  a
murderer  has  shed  is  said  to  be  upon


liira,  till  it  be  avenged  by  his  punish-
ment."— {Henderson),

Vers.  14-18.  **  This  case  is  likewise
that  of  a  son,  not,  like  the  former,  of  a
righteous  man,  but  of  the  unrighteous
person  whose  character  has  just  been
depicted.  This  son  is  supposed  to  be
shocked  at  the  sight  of  his  father's
depravity,  and  to  be  influenced,  by  a
due  regard  to  the  consequences,  to
avoid  the  sins  which  his  parent  had
committed.  It  is  expressly  declared
that  he  should  not  be  punished  for
tlie  crimes  of  his  father,  but  that  the
father  only,  being  the  guilty  party,
should  suffer." — {Henderson),

Ver.  17.  **Hath  taken  off  His  hand
from  the  poor,''  This  is  to  be  under-
stood in  a  good  sense — to  turn  back
the  hand,  i.e.^  from  oppressing  the  poor.
He  withdraws  the  hand  that  was
tempted  to  exact  the  full  legal  claim.


The  Law  of  the  Unrighteous  and  of  the  Righteous  Son  (vers.  10-20).


The  two  cases  here  supposed  show  that —

L  The  best  examples  of  righteousness  may  fail  of  their  proper  effects.    The

righteous  father  may  have  an  unrighteous  son.  The  life  of  such  a  father  must
have  a  native  power  and  influence  for  good  He  would  study  to  bring  u])  his
son  in  the  way  of  righteousness.  Yet  his  example  and  instruction  may  altogether
fail.  The  religious  histories  of  the  families  of  good  men  afford  many  a  sad
illustration  of  the  truth  that  grace  does  not  run  in  the  blood.  The  power  of
evil  may  be  stronger  than  the  best  influences  on  the  side  of  good.
200


nOMlLETlC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKTEL,  ohap.  xviii.


II.  An  evil  example  may  be  effectual  as  a  warning^.  Where  a  good  example
fails,  an  evil  example  may  succeed  in  turning  another  to  righteousness.  But  for
this  salutary  effect  it  is  necessary — 1.  That  the  real  evil  of  the  example  may
he  recognised.  "  A.  son  that  seeth  all  his  father's  sins  which  he  hath  done  "
(ver.  14)  sees  them  in  their  vile  nature,  in  their  evil  consequences,  and  as  sins
against  God.  Then  such  evil  examples  become  like  a  beacon  to  the  voyager.
They  act  as  a  warning.  The  evil  of  sin  must  be  seen  as  such  in  order  to  be
dreaded  and  avoided.  It  is  also  necessary — 2.  That  the  sight  of  evil  examples
should  produce  serious  thought.  "  And  considereth  and  dueth  not  such  like  "
(ver.  14)  In  most  cases,  evil  examples  act  like  a  contagion.  But  if  we  seriously
consider,  they  reveal  to  us  the  sad  effects  of  sin,  and  we  turn  our  feet  to  God's
testimonies.  We  learn  not  to  do  such  like  things.  Thus  the  sin  of  another
may  instruct  us  in  righteousness.

III.  That  righteousness  is  a  matter  of  personal  responsibility.  The  righteous
son  shall  not  be  punished  for  the  unrighteousness  of  his  father,  nor  the  righteous
father  for  the  unrighteousness  of  his  son  (ver.  20).  Righteousness  is  not  like
pr()perty,  family  name  or  title,  the  secure  and  necessary  heritage  of  clnldren.  It
is  a  matter  between  the  individual  soul  and  God.  'Ike  exceptions  to  this  law  of
God's  righteous  dealing  are  only  apparent.  Godly  men  share  in  the  general
calamities  sent  upon  nations,  children  suffer  many  evils  from  the  iniquity  of
their  fatiiers  ;  but  none  of  these  are  on  that  account  deprived  of  God's  favour.
These  judgments  in  the  case  of  the  righteous  act  as  a  discipline  of  piety.  Such
afflictions  are  turned  into  blessings.

V   (Ver.  14).

I.  The  nature  of  consideration.  1.  It  is  an  exercise  of  the  understanding,
mind,  and  heart.  These  are  at  work  in  consideration  (Psa.  cxix.  59).  This  is
called  communing  with  a  man's  own  heart  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  6).  2.  Serious.  It  is
not  a  slight  general  thinking  of  a  thing,  but  a  serious,  settled  minding  of  a
thing  ;  it  notes  the  sinking  down  of  a  thing  into  our  minds.  "  I  considered  in
my  heart "  (Eccl.  ix.  1) ;  Hebrew  is,  I  set  it  to  my  heart.  Consideration  is  as
setting  the  heart  to  a  thing,  or  upon  a  thing,  as  a  bee  sets  upon  a  flower,  and
sets  her  strength  to  it  to  draw  out  the  sweet  in  it.  3.  It  is  about  things  to  be
done,  or  not  to  be  done.  Contemplation  looks  upon  things  as  the  eye  upon  the
object.  Judgment  discerns  the  things  whetlier  good  or  bad,  right  or  wrong,  and
there  leaves  them,  having  pronounced  them  so.  Meditation  is  a  further
inquisition  into  truth,  and  comes  up  nearest  to  consideration  which  is  in  order
to  doing  or  not  doing.  Men  intend  this  and  that,  and  oft  fall  upon  things
rashly  to  their  prejudice,  because  they  consider  not ;  now  consideration  reflects
upon  things  intended.  The  two  sons  in  the  Gospel,  one  said,  I  will  go,  and
went  not ;  the  other  said,  I  will  not  go,  and  went.  The  one's  purpose  was  to  go,
the  other's  not  to  go  ;  but  this  last,  considering  of  his  sinful  purpose,  intention,
and  resolution,  repented,  and  went  (St.  Matt,  xxi.j  It  is  taken  up  about  doing,
or  not  doing  (Prov.  xxiii.  1,  2  ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  17  ;  Judg.  xviii.  14).  David
considered  his  ways,  and,  not  finding  them  good,  he  ceased  from  walking  any
longer  in  them  ;  and  seeing  God's  ways  the  only  good  ways,  he  turned  about,
stepped  into,  and  walked  in  them.

II.  Wherein  the  strength  of  it  lieth.  1.  In  searching  out  the  causes,  effects,
rising,  progress,  continuance,  and  issue  of  a  thing.  2.  Jn  comparing  things
together  and  so  draiving  up  that  which  may  be  most  useful.  When  all  things
are  laid  together,  weighed,  scanned  over  again  and  again,  a  man  takes  that
which  is  most  necessary,  seasonable  suitable,  and  useful.    3.  In  pressing  to  and

201


CHAP,  xviii  "  HOMILETIC  COMMENTAnY:  EZEKIEL.


assisting  the  soul  in  acting.  When  consideration  liatli  drawn  up  wliat  is  to  be
(ione,  or  not  to  be  done,  then  it  puts  upon  the  conscience  as  sinful,  if  not
followed,  and  directs  in  tlie  execution,  (consideration  lays  an  injunction  upon
men's  wills  and  consciences  to  be  doing.  Did  men  in  these  days  wisely  consider
the  Lord's  doings,  they  would  fear,  and  declare  the  work  of  the  Lord.

III.  The  excellency  of  it.  1.  It  is  that  which  God  Himself  doth  (Prov.xxiv.  12).
The  Lord  considers,  ponders,  and  weighs  things,  according  to  the  language  of
Scripture  (Ex.  xxxiii.  13  ;    Prov.  v.  21  ;    Deur.  xxxii.  26,  27  ;  Hos.  xi.  8,  9).

2.  Jt  differeth  a  man  from  brutes.  They  are  led  by  sense,  and  cannot  dis-
tinguish whether  an  action  ought  to  be  done  or  not.  This  is  man's  privilege
and  power.  But  some  are  guided  only  by  their  senses.  "  Every  man  is  brutish
in  his  knowledge  "  (Jer.  x.  14).  Men  do  not  reflect  upon  their  actions  and
consider  them  ;  if  they  did,  they  would  not  be  so  sensual,  so  sinful  (Isa.  i.  3).

3.  It  enables  the  understanding,  completes  a  man,  makes  him  wist  and
prudential  (Prov.  xvii.  27).  He  who  considers  what  advantage  may  be  made  of
words,  and  therefore  is  sparing  in  speaking,  shows  the  more  understanding  and
excellency  of  spirit.  Consideration  looks  inward,  looks  over  the  same  thing
again  and  again.  We  say,  second  thoughts  are  best,  which  implies  that  con-
sideration ripens  and  perfects  the  man  and  his  actions.  4.  It  puts  life  into
those  principles  and  talents  God  hath  given  a  man.  Like  a  drum  in  an  army,
that  when  it  beats  all  stir  and  march  ;  hke  a  spring  in  a  watch,  when  that  goes
all  the  wheels  go.  Did  men  consider  what  graces  and  gifts  God  hath  given
them,  they  would  not  let  them  lie  still  and  fallow,  but  improve  them.  Con-
sideration will  set  other's  graces  on  work,  and  much  more  a  man's  own
(Heb.  X.  2i).^{Greenhill.)

(Vers.  21-26.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  ways  evil  and  choosing  good,  t.^.,  He  deals

of  life  and  death  are  here  for  all  set  with  each  individual  as  a  moral  being,
forth.    A  man's  own  sins  even,  provided

they  are  forsaken,  will  not  exclude  him  Ver.  22.  '*They  shall  not  be  men-
from  salvation.  **  The  proof  that  every  tioned  unto  Him."  They  shall  not  be
one  must  bear  his  sin  did  not  contain  remembered  against  him  ( Jer. xxxi. 34).
an  exhaustive  reply  to  the  question —  The  guilt  is  blotted  out  of  remem-
in  what  relation  the  righteousness  of  brance,  though  for  the  purposes  of  a
God  stood  to  the  sin  of  man  ?  For  the  salutary  discipline  the  chastisements
cases  supposed  in  vers.  5-20  took  for  of  God  may  be  allowed  to  continue
granted  that  there  was  a  constant  (Heb.  xii.  10 ;  2  Sam.  xii.  13,  14),
persistence  in  the  course  once  taken,  **In  his  righteousness  that  he  hath
and  overlooked  the  instances,  which  done  he  shall  live.**  Not,  /or  his
are  by  no  means  rare,  when  a  man's  righteousness,  as  if  that  is  to  be  re-
course of  life  is  entirely  changed.  It  garded  as  the  procuring  cause  of  his
still  remained,  therefore,  to  take  notice  acceptance  ;  but  in  it,  righteousness
of  such  cases  as  these,  and  they  are  being  regarded  as  the  fruit  of  his  true
handled  in  vers.  21-26.  The  ungodly  conversion  (Ezek.  xx.  11).
man  who  repents  and  turns,  shall  live;

and  the  righteous  man,  who  turns  to  Ver.  23.     ''Have  I  any  pleasure  at

the  way  of  sin,  shall  die." — (Keil.J  all    that  the  wicked  should  die?**

God  had  declared  even  that  concem-

Ver.  21.     "But  if  the  wicked  will  ing   the  sacrificial  victims  He   "had

turn."    This  was  the  real  point  of  the  no  pleasure  in    them."     (Psa.  xl.  6).

controversy.    God  deals  with  each  man  He  had  no  absolute  and  final  pleasure

as  one  who  is  capable  of  renouncing  in  them,  for  they  were  ordained  only

202


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL,  ohap.  xvnr.


to  shadow  fortli  the  one  sacrifice  for  ring  to  his  present  condition,  which

sin.     The  providing  of  that  sacrifice  determines  his  real  state.     He  *'hath

would  be  the  highest  proof  that  God  trespassed,"  and  is  therefore  still  "  in

willed   not   the   death   of  the  sinner,  his  trespass."
"  The  motive  for  the  pardon  of  the  re-

penting  sinner  is  here  given,  in  the  yg^.  25.     "  Yet  ye  say.  the  way  of

dec  aration  that  God  has  no  pleasure  the  Lord  is  not  equal."   They  affirmed

in  the  death  of  the  wicked  inan,  but  4,^^^  ^^^  „^^1^  J  ^    ^^  ^^^^1^^  ^^^

desires  his, conversion,  that   he  pay  „„iform  law  or  method.     TlTey  repeat

live.     God  IS  therefore  not  only  just,  i.i,^  />;...,.  ,^  ,-..  ,,^v,  o  ^^      i  •  •      K\    i.

1    ,          -f  1      J         •            J        •  I  t^®  charge  in  ver,  2,  complaiuinar  that

but  merciinl  and  gracious,  and  punishes  o^rv.^  ,.«^  ..„».,•  v^^;i     i,-i       ^.i,

.,1    1     .1  1  ,  ,,    '       I       -^i.  ^omQ  were  punished  while  others  were

none  with  death  but  those  who  either  ol^o,./^,l    o,^  J  i.^.  ^^  ^.i  ^             a  ^  ^.x.

•  ,,  i.  J  •  i.  r  -1  -n  i.  spared,  and  nence  they  regarded  the
will  not  desist  from  evil,  or  will  not  ,„„„  ^f  n^^  «.  ,.  i  ^  u  •  j
.  ,,  /.  t/.  ,  way  01  boa  as  marked  by  caprice  and
persevere  in  the  way  or  His  command-  ^^i  xu^  v^oMif  ^*'  «  ,• ,  <-  i  /  i  •
tl  i.  n  4.1  i-i,  1  •  i.  not  tiie  result  01  a  just  law  01  working,
ments.  Consequently  the  complaint,  "Vmn.  woTre "  nn  \  l  •
.^  .  ,1  /.I  1  A  '  u-  ^^^^  ways.  Ihe  prophet  is  con-
that  the  way  of  the  Lord,  i.e.,  His  con-     +• n     ,  „  •       i  •    i        -^    i.        n    .

1,,         y           .        i.-ij'  tinually  urging  his  hearers  to  reflect

duct  toward  men,  is  not  weighed,  te.,  ^„^  J^^^^^.  ^^^^  ..                 .,  ^^^

s  not  just  and  right    is  altogether  ^^.  g^           ^g            j  3  J      ^

unfounded,    and    recoils    upon  those  '              '                 '
who  make  it.     It  is  not  God's  vrays,

but  the  sinner's  that  are  wrong." —  Ver.  26.  "  And  dieth  in  them."  Heb.

{Keil),  "Dieth  upon  them."      They  are  the

footing  upon  which  he  stands  when  he

Ver.  24.  "  In  Ms  trespass.**    Refer-  is  called  to  appear  before  God.

HOMILETICS.

The  Equity  of  God's  Government.

The  unbelievers  still  imprudently  contended  that  God's  ways  were  not
equal,  though  the  contrary  had  been  declared  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet.
The  equity  of  God's  dealings  is  re-asserted,  and  fresh  instances  and  considera-
tions are  given  by  way  of  proof.

I.  The  case  of  the  repentant  sinner.  He  is  dealt  with  not  on  the  score  of  n\a
past  transgressions,  but  on  the  ground  of  his  new  obedience.  When  the  sinner
forsakes  his  way,  the  mercy  of  God  steps  in  and  accepts  his  repentance.
1.  Repentance^  of  itself,  has  no  efficacy  to  procure  pardon.  Whatever  it
might  do  to  set  us  right  in  the  future,  it  could  not  possibly  undo  the  past.
For  that  we  should  still  have  to  reckon.  2.  Repentance  is  accepted  through  the
mercy  of  God.  God  is  willing  to  forget  the  past  and  to  receive  the  sinner.
The  pardon  of  sin  is  a  special  revelation,  for  nature  teaches  no  doctrine  of
the  forgiveness  of  sins.  We  transgress  her  laws  and  we  are  punished.  We
are  not  excused  on  the  ground  of  ignorance.  But  God  in  His  mercy  accepts  a
genuine  repentance.  He  will  not  punish  the  righteous  man  for  his  father's  sins ;
and  will  not  even  remember  against  a  man  his  own  sins,  if  he  repents.  *'  Scrip-
ture represents  forgiveness  as  the  result,  not  of  repentance,  but  of  the  death  of
Christ,  *  in  whom  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  even  the  forgiveness
of  our  sins,'  repentance  being  essential,  not  to  the  efficacy  of  His  death,  but  to
the  appropriation  of  the  benefits  secured  by  it.  Even  if  repentance,  however,
could  save  us,  natural  religion  is  unable  to  produce  it.  It  is,  in  the  evangelical
true  meaning  of  the  term,  such  sorrow  for  sin  as  flows  from  a  sense  of  the  love
and  reverence  due  to  God,  and  of  the  heinousness  of  sin  against  Him.  The
sorrow  of  the  world  is  no  such  feeling.     It  is,  on  the  contrary,  blended  with  fears

203


CHAP.  xvm.  B0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


and  impressions  which  make  it  impossible  to  love  God  or  draw  near  to  Him/*—
{Angus).

II.  The  case  of  the  man,  once  righteous,  who  abandons  his  righteons  course.

Such  a  man  in  his  backsliding  will  not  be  supported  by  his  early  righteousness.
It  can  have  no  merit  to  vveigli  against  bis  faults.  The  integrity  of  the  past
cannot  save  him.  Each  man  will  be  judged  by  himself,  and  in  that  state  in
which  he  is  found.

III.  God's  motive  in  granting  pardon  to  the  repentant  transgressor.    "  Have

I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  tlie  wicked  should  die  ?  saith  the  Lord  God,  and  not
that  he  should  return  from  his  ways,  and  live  ?  "  (ver.  23).  It  is  the  pleasure
of  God  that  man  should  live  and  not  die.  God  is  not  only  just,  but  also
merciful  and  gracious.  He  punishes  none  with  death  but  those  who  will
not  abandon  their  sins,  or  who  will  not  persevere  in  the  way  of  His  command-
ments.

IV.  God  only  requires  from  man  what  is  just  and  reasonable.  It  is  surely
just  to  render  Him  obedience,  and  to  repent  of  our  sin  when  we  have  wronged
Him.  We  ought  to  be  ready  to  accept  what  is  offered  to  us  through  His
mercy.  Thus  the  complaint  of  these  sinners  against  God  was  altogether
unfounded,  and  only  recoiled  upon  their  own  heads.  And  it  is  only  just  that
repentance  should  be  thorough.  The  unrighteous  man  must  forsake  "  all "
his  sins  (ver.  21),  making  no  reservation  in  favour  of  "heart-idols"  (Ez.  xiv.  4).
The  will  must  be  subdued  "  if  the  wicked  man  will  turn  from  all  his  sins,"  etc.
Thus  it  is  not  God's  ways,  but  the  sinner's,  that  are  wrong,  for  God  shows,  in
all  His  dealings  with  man,  His  abhorrence  of  sin  and  His  love  of  righteousness.

Repentance  not  EFFicACioua  ^

We  do  not  know  what  the  whole  natural  or  appointed  consequences  of  vice
are  ;  nor  in  what  way  they  would  follow,  if  not  prevented,  and  therefore  can  in
no  sort  say,  whether  we  could  do  anything  which  would  be  sufficient  to  prevent
them.      Our  ignorance  being  thus  manifest,  let  us  recollect  the  analogy  of
Nature  or  Providence.     For  though  this  may  be  but  a  slight  ground  to  raise  a
positive  opinion  in  this  matter,  yet  it  is  sufficient  to  answer  a  mere  arbitrary
assertion,  without  any  kind  of  evidence,  urged  by  way  of  objection  against  a
doctrine,  the  proof  of  which  is  not  reason,  but  revelation.     Consider  then :
people  ruin  their  fortunes  by  extravagance  ;  they  bring  diseases  upon  themselves
by  excess  ;  they  incur  the  penalties  of  civil  laws  ;  and  surely  civil  government  is
natural  ;  will  sorrow  for  these  follies  past,  and  behaving  well  for  the  future,  alone
and  of  itself,  prevent  the  natural  consequences  of  them?    On  the  contrary,  men's
natural  abilities  of  helping  themselves  are  often  impaired  ;  or  if  not,  yet  they
are  forced  to  be  beholden  to  the  assistance  of  others,  upon  several  accounts,
and  in  diifprent  ways  ;  assistance  which  they  would  have  no  occasion  for,  had  it
not  been  for  their  misconduct ;  but  which,  in  the  disadvantageous  condition
they  have  reduced  themselves  to,  is  absolutely  necessary  to  their  recovery,  and
retrieving   their  affairs.      Now,  since   this  is  our  case,  considering  ourselves
merely  as  inhabitants  of  this  world,  and  as  having  a  temporal  interest  here,
under  the  natural  government  of  God,  which,  however,  has  a  great  deal  moral
in  it  ;  why  is  it  not  suppos.ible  that  this  may  be  our  case  also  ;  in  our  more
impintant  capacity,  as  under  His  perfect  moral  government,  and  having  a  more
general  and  future  interest  depending  ?     If  we  have  misbehaved  in  this  higher
capacity,  and  rendered  ourselves  obnoxious  to  the  future  punishment  which  God
has  annexed  to  vice,  it  is  plainly  credible  that,  behaving  well  for  the  time  to
204


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :    EZEKIEL.  CHAP.  xviiL


come  may  be — not  useless  ;  God  forbid  ! — but  wholly  insufficient,  alone  and
of  itself,  to  prevent  that  punishment ;  or  to  put  us  in  the  condition  which
we  should  have  been  in  had  we  preserved  our  innocence.  And  though  the
efficacy  of  repentance  itself  alone,  to  prevent  what  mankind  had  rendered
themselves  obnoxious  to,  and  recover  what  they  had  forfeited,  is  now
insisted  upon,  in  opposition  to  Christianity  ;  yet,  by  the  general  prevalence
of  propitiatory  sacrifices  over  the  heathen  world,  this  notion  of  repentance  '
alone  being  sufficient  to  expiate  guilt,  appears  to  be  contrary  to  the  general
sense  of  mankind.  The  great  doctrines  of  a  future  state,  the  danger  of  a
coarse  of  wickedness,  and  the  efficacy  of  repentance,  are  not  only  confirmed
in  the  Gospel,  but  are  taught — especially  the  last  is — with  a  degree  of  light
to  which  that  of  nature  is  but  darkness. — Butlers  Analogy*

(Ver.  25.)

Some  may  fancy,  from  some  expressions  used  in  this  chapter,  that  the
prophet  is  laying  down  a  new  law  of  God's  dealings,  as  though  the  Almighty
had  been  acting  up  to  that  time  upon  a  certain  principle,  and  now,  hence-
forward, He  were  about  to  act  upon  a  new  and  different  principle.     It  is  easy
to  put  the  subject  in  such  a  light  that  all  difficulty  will  vanish.     This  is  one
end  I  have  in  view.     But  I  have  the  further  end  of  drawing  from  the  subject
some  useful  thoughts  with  respect  to  God's  government  in  the  world  in  these
our  days,  and  our  own  duties  as  creatures  living  under  a  government  which  at
present  we  cannot  wholly  understand.     The  Jews  complained  of  the  law  under
which  they  lived  as  unjust ;  because  it  spoke  of  the  sins  of  the  father  being
visited  upon  the  children :  they  used  this  proverb,  "  that  the  fathers  have  eaten
sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge."     The  punishment  which
ought  to  have  fallen  upon  the  father  fell  upon  his  guiltless  children.     They
complained  that  God's  ways  were  not  equal,  not  fair,  not  righteous.     It  was  not
as  a  mere  piece  of  philosophical  speculation   that   they   held  this  language.
There  was   a  practical   consequence   belonging  to  the  spread  of  the  proverb
of    the  sour  grapes,    which   was   of    the   liighest   importance.     It  was  not  a
few  unbelieving,  acute,   clever  students  of   the  law,   who  had  detected  this
injustice  in  it.      Had  it  been   so,  probably   the  prophet  Ezekiel   would   not
have  made  the  discovery  the  subject  of  a  general  address  ;  no,  the  thing  had
passed  into  a  proverb,  it  was  in  the  mouth  of  the  people  at  large,  and  the
practical  consequence  was  that  it  held  back  the  people  from  thinking  of  their
sins  which  had  brought  them  into  trouble  ;  and  from  repenting  of  those  sins.
Instead  of  this  they  would  look  upon  themselves  as  victims  of  an  unjust  law —
as  persecuted  rather  than   punished.      The  good  effect  of  any  punishment
depends  very  much  upon  the  criminal  himBelf  feeling  and  admitting  that  he  is
punished  justly.    Let  a  man  feel  this,  and  he  may  be  led  to  sorrow  and  good
resolutions  for  the  time  to  come.     But  if  he  fancies  that  the  law  is  in  fault
and  not  himself,  that  he  is  an  injured  man — the  victim  of  cruel  legislation —
then  punishment  may  make  him  sullen  and  obstinate,  but  it  can  never  make
him  sorry  for  his  fault.      This  was  just  the  case  with  the  Jews.     They  were
punished  for  not  keeping  God's  law.     Ezekiel  would  have  them  see  in  their
punishment  the  result  of  their  own  sins  ;  would  endeavour  to  lead  them  to  that
**  Godly  sorrow  "  which  works  repentance  :  but  the  devil,  and  those  amongst
men  who  did  the  devil's  work,  had  a  different  version  of  the  history.    According
to  them,  the  law  which  the  priests  and  prophets  would  fasten  upon  them  was
an  unjust  law,  one  which  did  not  deserve  their  obedience.     They  would  argue
that  from  its  own  principles  the  people  were  not  in  need  of  repentance,  for  the
law  spoke  of  children  suffering  for  their  father's  sins,  and  who  could  say  but

205


CHAF.  xvm.  HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKltlL.


that  this  very  cliastisement  might  be  the  punishment  of  sins  committed  long
ago  ?  Who  could  say  but  that  their  teeth  were  being  set  on  edge,  because
their  fathers  had  eaten  sour  grapes  many  years  before  ?

It  is  clear  tliat  the  proverb  had  a  very  direct  bearing  upon  the  conduct  of
the  people.  If  the  proverb  generally  found  favour  in  their  eyes,  then  it  was  of
no  use  that  Ezekiel  should  talk  of  sin  and  its  punishment,  and  the  need  of
repentance.  Therefore  Ezekiel  protested  against  the  proverb  as  wicked  and
profane  ;  and  he  lays  down  the  great  truth  which  should  destroy  the  efifect  of
the  lying  proverb,  that  of  the  necessary  punishment  of  sin  :  *'  the  soul  that
sinneth  it  shall  die."  That  was  the  truth  which  God  had  told  man  when  He
first  made  him,  and  the  truth  of  all  religion  in  all  times.

Let  us  see  what  ground  the  Jews  had  to  stand  upon  their  proverb.  It  is
evident  that  there  was  something  which  gave  it  colour  and  likelihood.  Satan,
as  we  know,  can  quote  Scripture  for  his  purpose,  and  Satan  might  have  made  a
very  good  Scriptural  defence  of  this  proverb  of  the  sour  grapes.  "  I  the  Lord
thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  and  visit  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children
unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  Me,  and  shew  mercy
unto  thousands  in  them  that  love  Me  and  keep  My  commandments."
Now,  the  Jews  might  say  that  their  proverb  only  expressed  as  much  as
this  passage.  And  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  passage  sets  forth
the  mercy  of  God,  because  the  three  or  four  generations  over  which  His  curse
extends  are  contrasted  with  tiie  thousands  to  which  He  shews  His  love.  The
Jews  might  answer  that  still  it  did  contain  the  principle  of  children  suffering
for  sins  which  they  had  not  committed,  that  this  was  unjust,  and  that  it  was  no
qualification  of  the  injustice  to  say  that  in  a  vast  number  of  instances  children
received  rewards  for  good  deeds  which  not  they  but  their  fathers  had  done.
Now,  how  is  this  to  be  met  ?  It  is  quite  clear  that  the  commandment  does
recognise  the  principle  of  the  proverb,  and  that  the  people  were  smarting  under
it.  The  punishment  which  fell  upon  them  was  the  result  of  a  long  course  of
national  wickedness  and  idolatry,  not  the  consequence  of  sins  committed  in
their  time  only.     How  can  we  meet  the  objection  and  vindicate  God's  ways  ?

There  were  two  mistakes  in  the  view  which  the  Jews  took  when  they  used  the
proverb.  (1.)  They  took  the  expressions  of  God's  law  to  mean,  not  that  the  character
of  sin  was  such  that  it  sometimes  extended  beyond  the  actual  doer  of  it,  and
brought  grief  upon  others  besides  himself,  but  that  it  brought  grief  upon  others
instead  of  himself ;  as  though  when  Adam  sinned  he  had  not  brought  death  upon
himself  and  his  posterity,  but  had  brought  it  upon  his  posterity  and  not  upon
himself  They  would  have  it  that  the  children  alone  suffered  for  what  their
fathers  had  done.  (2.)  The  other  error  was  this,  that  they  seemed  to
have  taken  for  granted  that  they  were  fair  judges  as  to  who  was  punished
and  who  not.  They  assumed  that  the  fathers  had  not  suffered  for  the
sour  grapes  which  they  had  eaten  ;  whereas  they  were  manifestly  not  sufficient
judges  as  to  what  amount  of  punishment  had  been  meted  out,  or  would  be
meted  out  to  different  men.  The  apparent  prosperity  of  vice,  and  the  apparent
suffering  of  goodness  and  virtue,  have  always  been  difficult  to  understand.
David  found  the  difficulty  in  his  day,  and  could  not  overcome  it  until  he  went
into  the  sanctuary  of  God.  Then  it  was  that  he  was  able  to  take  a  higher  view
of  God's  dealings  with  mankind,  and  so  to  understand  the  end  of  those  men
whose  prosperity  had  so  much  astonished  him.  Ezekiel  did  not  meet  the
proverb  by  telling  the  Jews  that  in  future  things  should  be  ordered  differently.
He  asserts  the  justice  of  God's  ways,  but  he  gives  them  a  new  truth  to  reflect
upon,  a  truth  not  inconsistent  with  the  priiicij)le  asserted  in  the  Second  Com-
mandment, but  which  must  needs  be  borne  in  mind  to  guard  against  the  perver-
sion of  that  principle.  Ezekiel  asserts  the  truth  which  God  spoke  to  Adam  in
the  days  of  his  purity — "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thou  shalt  die  I  "  That
206


HOMTIETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,  cnUF.  ZTIII.


was  the  great  practical  truth  upon  which  every  human  soul  stood  before  God.
God  sends  us  all  into  the  world  with  a  conscience  to  tell  us  what  is  right  and
what  is  wrong,  with  certain  coniniands  to  keep,  a  certain  path  to  walk  in ;  and
He  says  to  us  all,  **  do  these  things  that  your  soul  may  live."  He  may  say  to
us  at  the  same  time,  do  these  things  that  it  may  be  well  with  you,  and  with
your  children  after  you  ;  but  whether  this  be  said  or  not,  still  the  responsibility
for  his  own  actions  lies  on  the  head  of  each  man  :  if  he  sins,  he  dies  ;  and  no
wrath  which  he  may  bring  upon  his  children  can  save  him  from  the  consequences
of  his  own  sin.  God  did  not  say  to  Adam,  if  you  disobey  you  will  bring  death
upon  your  children  ;  He  only  said — "  In  the  day  that  thou  sinnest,  thou  shalt
die."  Yet,  though  the  consequence  was  not  threatened  the  consequence
came,  and  Adam's  sin,  which  was  to  bring  death  to  himself,  brought  death  to  his
posterity  besides.  Ezeldel  was  not  introducing  any  new  principle  of  government,
he  was  only  asserting  a  principle  as  old  as  the  creation.  What  he  wished  the
people  to  believe  was  this — that  although  it  had  been  held  out  as  a  warning
against  disobedience  and  an  encouragement  to  obedience,  that  those  who  sinned
were  bringing  in  a  curse  which  would  affect  others  besides  themselves,  and  that
contrariwise  those  who  were  holy  and  good  were  bringing  a  blessing  down  upon
their  children,  still  this  was  not  suppo>ed  to  be  in  opposition  to  the  great  law  of
every  man  standing  or  falling  by  his  own  deeds,  being  ''judged  by  the  things  done
in  the  body,  whether  good  or  bad."  There  followed  at  once  this  practical
consequence,  that  when  they  found  themselves  suffering  under  God's  judgments
they  were  not  to  speculate  as  to  what  sin  it  was  of  their  fathers  which  had
brought  this  grief  upon  them,  but  they  were  to  look  into  their  own  hearts  and
examine  tlieir  own  conduct.  Ezekiel  would  say  to  them,  "Do  not  look
to  your  fathers,  but  look  to  yourselves  :  you  say  that  they  sinned,  and  you  are
suffering  for  it ;  well,  but  think  whether  you  do  not  deserve  to  suffer  ?  Are
you  really  better  than  your  fathers  ?  Have  you  no  sins  to  repent  of,  no  idolatry
to  forsake,  no  ungodliness  to  make  you  ashamed  ?"  "  Indeed,"  he  might  go  on
to  say,  "  is  not  this  itself  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  wicked  state  of  your  hearts,
that  you  venture  to  attribute  unrighteousness  to  God  ?  You  say  that  the
ways  of  the  Lord  are  not  equal,  but  may  it  not  be  that  His  ways  seem  unequal
just  because  your  own  are  not  equal  themselves  ?  The  ways  of  God  seem  to
you  dark  and  confused,  but  may  not  the  defect  be  in  your  own  eyes?"  He
would  assure  them  that,  whatever  unworthy  thoughts  Satan  might  put  in  their
minds,  yet  certainly  God  loved  them  and  had  no  pleasure  in  their  death.
"  Make  you  a  new  heart,  and  a  new  spirit :  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of
Israel  ?  For  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  saith  the  Lord
God,  w^herefore  turn  yourselves  and  live  ye."  These  words  would  cut  through  all
the  speculative  doubts  of  God's  justice  which  the  devil  had  raised  ;  they  would
put  religion  upon  the  true  practical  ground  of  trusting  iu  God's  love,  and
therefore  obeying  His  commands ;  and  they  would  encourage  men  to  walk  in
the  narrow  path  of  duty,  leaving  all  difficulties  to  be  solved  by  those  wise  words
of  Abraham,  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "

There  is  something  repugnant  to  our  idea  of  justice  in  the  law  that  the  sins
of  the  fathers  should  be  visited  upon  the  children.  But  this  principle  was  not
all  peculiar  to  the  Jewish  law.  It  is  manifestly  the  principle  upon  which  the
world  is  governed.  We  see  numberless  instances  in  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,
the  son  does  suffer  for  what  the  father  has  done  amiss.  We  say,  "Of  course
it  is  so,  it  cannot  be  otherwise.'*  Yes  ;  but  why  of  course  t  Why  must  it  be
so  ?  Why  cannot  it  be  otherwise  ?  And  how  comes  it  that  we  are  linked
together  in  such  a  mysterious  manner,  that  we  cannot  help  being  affected  by
those  over  whom  we  have  no  control?  Do  you  not  see  that  this  is  God's  doing?
We  may  call  it  natural,  or  necessary,  but  after  all  it  is  the  Lord's  doing,  however
wonderful  it  may  be  in  our  eyes.    And  yet,  when  we  see  this  law  of  God's

207


CHAP.  xvm.  nOMTlETIC  COUyfENTARY :     EZEKTEL.


government  we  see  nothing  to  surprise  us,  because  we  cannot  imagine  it  other-
wise. And  we  do  not  find  that  persons  have  any  difficulty  in  practice  because
they  suffer  for  their  parent's  faults.  No  one  thinks  it  necessary  to  be  idle  and
to  starve,  because  his  father  was  idle  before  him.  No  one  doubts  but  that  he
has  his  own  work  to  do,  his  own  food  to  seek,  his  own  soul  to  save,  and  that  if
his  father  forgot  his  duty,  that  is  the  very  best  warning  to  him  not  to  do
the  like.  And  what  follows  ?  why  this  :  that  the  same  way  of  looking  upon  our
condition  here  is  to  be  applied  in  all  cases.  God  did  not  put  us  here  to  explain
difficulties,  but  to  work  out  our  salvation.  God  does  not  require  us  to  shew  how
all  His  doings  are  the  best  and  wisest  that  could  be,  but  He  requires  us  to  do
His  will.  Of  all  things  that  we  have  to  learn,  this  is  one  of  the  chief  and
greatest,  that  our  life  here  is  to  be  a  scene  of  active  work.  We  are  encompassed
with  mystery,  above,  below,  and  around  us,  and  there  is  much  in  this  world
which  our  philosophy  can  never  reach.  God's  ways  are  too  deep  to  fathom,  too
large  to  measure.  And  who  does  not  conclude  that  in  the  meanwhile  he  has
great  positive  duties  to  fulfil,  which  no  speculative  difficulties  can  prevent  him
from  fulfilling  ?  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die,"  though  it  was  proved  by
the  fall  of  Adam,  was  still  more  strikingly  proved  by  the  death  of  the  spotless
Lamb  of  God,  the  great  offering  for  sin  ;  and  the  truth  that  God  wills  not  the
death  of  a  sinner  was  then  proved  in  the  most  wonderful  manner  when  God
spared  not  His  only  Son  that  He  might  be  able  to  pardon  tliose  who  repent  of
their  sins.  The  Old  Testament  denunciation,  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  has
this  New  Testament  addition  made  to  it,  "but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life,
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." — Goodwins  " Parish  Sermons**

(Vers.  27-32.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  29.         Ver.  30.    "Therefore  I  will  judge

"^  re  not  your  ways  unequal?"   "They  you."    '' Theref  )re,  because  my  way,

asserted  (ver.  25)  that   the   ways  of  and  not  yours,  is  right,  I  will  judge

God    were    not   right — properly,   not  you,  every  one  according  to  his  way,

weighed  in  the  balance  of  rignteousness  Repent,  therefore,  if  ye  would  escape

(Job.xxi.  6) — but  regulated  by  caprice,  from  death  and  destruction." — Keil.
This  assertion  proceeded  from  defective

consciousness  of  sin,  that  could  find         Ver.  31.    *'  Make  you  a  new  heart

no  other  key  to  suffering  than  this,  and  a  new  spirit."     "  A  man  cannot,

that  it  was  decreed  unrighteously,  on  indeed,  create  either  of  these  by  his

account   of    the   sins  of  the  fathers,  own  power  ;  God  alone  can  give  them

The  prophet  points  to  this,  that  the  (Ezek.  xi.  19).      But  a  man  can  and

guilt  lies  on  their  side.     If  they  only  should  come  to  God  to  receive  them  :

sincerely  return  to  God,  they  will  no  in  other  words,  he  can  turn  to  God,

more  have  cause  to  complain  of  Him."  and   let   both    heart    and    spirit    be

— Hengstenberg,  renewed  by  the  spirit  of  God." — Keil,


HOMILETICS.

An  Earnest  Call  to  Repentance  (vers.  27-32).

The  prophet  would  not  content  himself  merely  with  vindicating  the  ways  of
God,  and  thus  silencing  his  adversaries.     His  design  was  not  to  refute,  but  to
save  them.     Hence  he  renews  the  call  to  repentance,  and  strengthens  that  call
by  several  considerations.
208


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,  CHAP,  xvill.


I.  A  genuine  repentance  will  be  accepted.  When  a  man  considers  and
tums  from  his  e\il  ways,  and  practises  righteousness,  God  promises  him  life
(ver.  27).  But — 1.  The  repentance  must  he  complete.  Mere  outward  reforma-
tion will  not  suffice.  There  must  be  no  retaining  of  a  few  cherished  sins.  "  All
your  transgressions  "  (ver.  3).  2.  liepentance  must  have  special  regard  to  their
chief  sins.  Tliey  are  to  "  cast  away  "  all  their  transgressions.  This  expression
is  used  because  their  chief  sin  was  the  worship  of  idols.  When  the  chief  sin
is  conquered,  the  victory  over  the  rest  is  easy.

II.  God's  judgment  against  impenitent  sinners  is  sure.  God  will  not
change,  and  therefore  man  must,  if  he  would  escape  destruction.  It  is  men's
ways  that  are  unequal.  The  prophet  cuts  short  the  controversy  with  a  "  there-
fore." For  the  rule  of  (i!od  is  invariable,  and,  therefore,  they  must  decide
whether  it  shall  operate  for,  or  against  them.  The  sinner  who  persists  in  his
impenitence  is  sure  to  be  brought  to  ruin  (ver.  30).

III.  God  would  supply  them  with  the  necessary  strength  for  the  life  of
righteousness.  *'  Make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit  "  (ver.  31).  Such  a
command  to  change  themselves  into  a  new  nature,  coming,  as  it  does,  from  God,
carries  the  gift  of  a  new  power.  For  God  does  not  give  to  man  impossible
commands.  There  is  something  still  for  us  to  do,  but  the  provisions  and
strength  for  our  duty  are  supplied  to  us.  The  new  man  is  '*  created  after  God's
likeness,"  but  believers  are  commanded  to  "  put  it  on  "  (Eph.  iv.  24).  When
Jesus  called  on  the  paralytic  man  to  "  arise  and  walk  ; "  and  said  to  the  deaf
man,  "  Be  thou  opened,"  with  the  command  He  gave  the  power  to  perform  it.

IV.  God's  will  and  purpose  are  on  the  side  of  the  repentant  sinner.  God  is
not  a  mere  judge  or  monarch  whose  only  care  is  to  see  that  the  law  is  out-
wardly obeyed,  and  that  transgressors  are  punished.  He  is  a  loving  Father,
who  mourns  over  the  transgressions  of*  His  children  and  longs  for  their  return
to  the  privileges  of  their  true  home.  He  has  no  pleasure  in  their  death.  The
sinner  must  charge  himself  with  his  own  ruin.  Surely  the  voice  of  the  tenderest
compasssion  is  in  the  question,  "  For  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ?  "


(Ver.  31).

If  anyone  feels — I  am  fallen  very  low  in  the  world — here  all  has  been  so
much  against  me — my  parents  were  the  ruin  of  me — let  him  remember  this  one
word  of  Ezekiel,  ''Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  should  die?
saith  the  Lord  God  :  and  not  that  he  should  return  from  his  ways  and  live  ?  "
Let  him  turn  from  his  father's  evil  ways,  and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,
and  then  he  can  say  with  the  Prophet,  in  answer  to  all  the  strokes  of  fortune
and  the  miseries  of  circumstance,  "  Rejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy;  when
I  fall  I  shall  arise."  Provided  he  will  remember  that  God  requires  of  all  men
something,  which  is.  to  be  as  good  as  they  can  be  ;  then  he  may  remember  also
that  our  Lord  Himself  says,  '*  Unto  to  wliomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall
much  be  required."  God's  ways  are  not  unequal.  He  has  one  equal,  fair,  and
just  rule  for  every  human  being  ;  and  that  is  perfect  understanding,  perfect
sympathy,  perfect  goodwill,  and  therefore  perfect  justice  and  perfect  love.  And
if  any  one  answers  in  his  heart — these  are  good  words,  and  all  very  well,  but
they  come  too  late.  I  am  too  far  gone.  I  ate  the  sour  grapes  in  my  youth,
and  my  teeth  must  be  set  on  edge  for  ever  and  ever.  I  have  been  a
bad  man,  or  I  liave  been  a  foolish  woman  too  many  years  to  mend
now.  I  am  down,  and  down  I  must  be.  I  have  made  my  bed,  and  I
must  lie  on  it,  and  die  on  it,  too.     Whoever  you  are  who  says  that,  unsay

O  209


CHAP,  xvm,  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


it  again,  for  it  is  not  true.     Ezekiel  tells  you  that  it  is  not  true,  and  one
greater  than  Ezekiel — Jesus  Christ,  your  Saviour,  your  Lord,  your  God,  tells
you  that  it  is  not  true.     For  what  happens,  by  God's  eternal  and  unchangeable
laws  of  retribution,  to  a  whole  nation,  or  a  whole  family,  may  happen  to  you
— to  each  individual  man.     They  fall  by  sin ;  they  rise  again  by  repentance
and  amendment.     They  niay  rise  punished  by  their  sins,  and  punished  for  a
long    time,     heavily     weighted    by    the    consequences    of  their   own   folly,
and     heavily    weighted    lor     a    long    time.       But    they    rise — they  enter
into     their     own     new     life     weak     and     wounded     from    their    own  fault.
But  they  enter  in.     And  from  that  day  things  begin  to  mend — the  weather
begins    to    clear,    the    soil    be^iins    to    yield    again  —  punishment   gradually
ceases  when  it  has  done  its  work,  the  weight  lightens,  the  wounds  heal,  the
weakness  strengthens,  and  by  God's  grace  within  them,  and  by  God's  providence
outside  them,  they  are  made  men  of  again,  and  saved.     So  you  will  surely  find
it  in  the  experience  of  life.     No  doubt,  in  general,  in  most  cases,  "  the  child  ia
father  of  the  man  "  for  good  and  evil.     A  pious  and  virtuous  youth  helps,  by
sure  laws  of  God,  towards  a  pious  and  virtuous  old  age.     And  on  the  other
hand,  an  ungodly  and   profligate   youth   leads,   by   the   same   laws,   toward
an    ungodly    and    profitable    old    age.      That   is    the    law.      But    there    is
another    law    which    may    stop  that    law — just  as    the  stone  falls    to   the
gi'ound   by   the   natural   law   of  weight ;    and  yet  you   may  stop   that  law
by  using  the  law  of  bodily  strength,  and  holding  it  up  in  your  hand.     And
what  is  the  gracious  law,  which  will  save  you  from  the  terrible  law  which  will
make  you  go  on  from  worse?     It  is  this — **  When  the  wicked  man  turnetii  away
from  his  wickedness  that  he  hath  conjmitted,  and  doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and
right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive."      It  is  not  said  that  his  soul  shall  come  in  a
moment  to  perfect  health  and  strength.     No.     There  are  old,  bad  habits  to  be
got  rid  of,  old  ties  to  be  broken,  old  debts  (often  worse  debts  than  any  money
debts)  to  be  paid.     But  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive.     His  soul  shall  not  die  of
its  disease.     It  shall  be  saved.     It  shall  come  to  life,  and  gradually  mend  and
be  cured,  and  grow  from  strength  to  strength,  as  a  sick  man  mends  day-by-day,
after  a  deadly   illness — slowly  it  may   be,   but  surely :     for  how   can    you
fail  of   being    cured    if  your   physician    is   none    other   than    Jesus    Christ
your  Lord  and  your  God.      If  you  will    but  recollect    that   last  word,  you
will    never    despair.      How    dare    any    man    say — Bad    I    am,   and    bad    I
must  remain — while  the  God  who  made  heaven  and  earth  offers  to  make  you
good  ?     Who  dare  say,  I  cannot  amend,  when  God  Himself  offers  to  amend
you  ?     Who  dare  say,  I  have  no  strength  to  amend,  when  God  offers  to  give
you  strength,  strength  of  His  strength,  and  life  of  His  life,  even  His  Holy
Spirit  ?     Who  dare  say,  God  has  given  me  up  ;  He  has  a  grudge  against  me
which  He  will  not  lay  by,  an  anger  against  me  which  cannot  be  appeased,  a
score  against  me  which  will  never  be  wiped  out  of  His  book  ?     Oh  foolish  and
faint-hearted  soul.     Look,  look  at  Christ  hanging  on  His  cross,  and  see  there
what  God's  grudge,  God's  anger,  God's  score  of  your  sins  is  like.     Love,  love
unspeakable,  and  nothing  else.    To  wash  out  your  sins,  He  spared  not  His  only-
begotten  Son,  but  freely  gave  Him  for  you,  to  show  you  that  God,   so   far
from  hating  you,  has  loved  you  ;    that  so  far   from  being   your   enemy.  He
was  your  father;  that  so  far  from  willing  the  death  of  a  sinner,  He  willed  that
you  and  every  sinner  should  turn  from  his  wickedness  and  live.     Now,  even  if
you  suffer  somewhat  in  this  life  for  your  sins,  that  suffering  is  not  punishment,
but  wholesome  chastisement ;  as  when  a  father  chastens  the  son  in  whom  he
delighteth.     Say  not — I  must  be  as  I  am — when  Christ  died  that  you  should
not  be  as  you  are.      Say  not — there  is  no  hope — when  Christ  died  and  rose
again,  and  reigns  for  ever,  to  give  hope  to  you  and  all  mankind,  that  when  the
wicked  man  turns  away  from  the  wickedness  that  he  hath  committed,  and  doeth
210


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EZEKIBL.  chap.  xvra.


that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive,  and  all  his  trans-
gressions shall  not  be  meutioned  unto  him,  but  in  his  righteousness  that  he  hath
done  shall  he  live. — {''All  ISaint's  Day  and  other  Sermons"  by  G,  Kingsley,)

Lamentation  fob  the  Miserable  Fate  awaiting  the  Princes  and  People

OF  Israel  (Chap,  xix.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  1-9.  them  when  she  took  her  place  in  the

The  prophet  foresees  the  capture  and  family  of  nations  (2  Sam.  vii.  9).  **  She

exile  of  the  Princes  into  Egypt  and  nourished  her  whelps  amon^  young

Babylon.     This  judgment  to  come  on  lions."     *'  The  whelps  of  the  mother

Israel  is  described  under  the  parable  are  the  sons  of  tlie  King  of  Israel.    The  '^

of  lion's  whelps  taken  in  a  pit.  bringing  up  of  these  among  lions  points

to  the  fact  that  the  kingdom  of  Israel    '

Ver.  1.   "A  lamentation."  **  A  dirge  was  of  equal  birth  with   the  mighty

or  elegy  :  a  species  of  Hebrew  poetry  kingdoms  of   the  heathen   world." —

characteristic  of  the  melancholy  fate  of  {Hengstenberg).
those  who  are  the  subject  of  it,  and

the  doleful  feelings  to  whicii  it  gives  Ver.  3.     "It  learned  to  catch  the

utterance.    Sometimes,  as  in  that  over  prey ;     it    devoured    men,"      "  The

Saul  and  Jonathan,  it  is  exquisitely  ignoble  side  of  the  lion-nature  is  here

tender  and  pathetic.     The  royal  per-  brouglit  to  view.     The  distance,  how-

sonages  here  referred   to,  designated  ever,  is   not    wery   great :    there  is  a

princes  of  Israel,  were  in  reality  those  close  connection  between  the  two  sides,

uf  the  kingdom  of  Judah.     They  are  By  the  constitution  of  human  nature,

so  called  because  they  were  the  only  arrogance  is  inseparably  connected  with

legitimate  rulers  of  the  Hebrew  people,  high  rank,  and  therewith  a  rude  bar-

Tiiose  who  had  reigned  over  the  ten  barity  towards  all   who  stand   in  the

tribes  were,  so  far  as  the  theocracy  is  way  of  self-will.     He  only  who  walks

concerned,  merely   usurpers." — (Hen-  with  God  can  escape  this  natural  con-

derson.)  sequence  ;  and  the  walk  of  faith  is  not

the    attainment    of    every  man.      It

Ver.  2.    **  Thy  mother."  The  mother  should,  however,  be  the  attainment  of

of  the  people  is  Jerusalem  (Ezek.  xxi.  every  man  among  the  people  of  God  ;

20 ;  Gal.  iv.  25).     **  A  lioness.*'    "The  and  where  it   fails,  and   the  corrupt

people    appear    as   a   lioness   on   the  nature  unfolds  itself  without  resistance,

ground  of  Gen.  xlix.  9,  to  which  pas-  there    the   vengeance    of    God    takes

sage  the  couching  in  particular  refers  effect.     Jehoahaz  proved  to  be  a  bar-

(comp.  Num.   xxiii.  24,  xxiv.  9;  Isa.  barons  tyrant  toward  his  own  subjects;

xxix.  1),  because  it  was  a  royal  people,  whereas,  according  to  its  constitution,

of  equal  birth  with  other  independent  the  kingdom  of  Israel  should  exhibit

and  powerful   nations,   as    this  royal  a  heroic  power  against  the  enemies  of

nature  was  liistorically  displayed,  espe-  the  people  of  God.     For  this  reason

cially  in    the    times    of    David    and  he    was    punished."    (Hengstenberg).

Solomon.      The  highest  development  "  The  thought  is  the  following  : — Why

of  this  lion-nature,  the  true  verifica-  has  Israel  put  itself  upon  a  level  with

tion  of  Gen.  xlix.  9,  10,  first  came  to  the  heathen  nations,  and  adopted  the

pass  in  the  future,  in  the  appearance  ra])acious  and  tyrannical  nature  of  the

of  the  Messiah,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  powers  of  the  world  ?     The  question

of  Judah"  (Rev.  v.  5). — Hengstenberg.  involves  the  reproof  that   Israel  has

*|  She  lay  down  among  lions."    These  struck  out  a  course  opposed  to    its

hons  are  the  other  kingdoms  of  the  divine  calling,  and  will  now  have  to

world,  the  Gentile  nations.    Jerusalem  taste  the  bitter  fruits  of  this  assump-

— the  people  of  Israel— lay  down  among  tion  of  heathen  ways."— (iT^e*/).

211


OHAP.  XIX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEl,


Ver.   4.      " And  they  brought  him  waste  their  cities**     " The  knowing

with  chains  unto  the  land  of  Egypt."  denotes  the  practising  of  brutalities.

The  Heb.  word  means  properly  hooksy  His,  that  is,  the  king's  widows,  are

or  rings,  which  were  fastened  in  the  the  widows   whom   he,    as   king,  was

noses  of  wild  beasts,  to  which  a  chain  bound    to   protect.     His  widows   are

or  cord  was  attached  in  order  to  drag  at  the  same  time  their,  the  people's,

them    about   (Ezek.   xxix.   4).     This  widows,  the   wretched  and   sufFering.

describes  the  fate  of  Jehoahaz,  which  The  subject  is   the  king  as  a   lion,

is  related  in  2  Kings  xxiii.  31,  etc.  as  a  haid  and  cruel  man.     There  is

The  fetters  which  were  fastened  upon  an  abridged  comparison  here :  he  acts

him  correspond  to  the  ring  by  which  towards  the  wretched,  whom  he  was

wild  beasts  were  led  about  against  their  called    on   to    protect,    as    one    who

will  (2  Kings  xix.  28).  injures  a  widow  confided  to  his  pro-
tection.    The  fulness  of  the  land  is

Ver.  5.     "  Now  when  she  saw  that  that  which    lives    and  moves  in  it.

she  hadwaited,andher  hope  was  lost."  The  lion  roars  when   he  is  about  to

*'  While  circumstances  seemed  to  hold  rend  ;  and  this  rending  is  to  be  added

out  some  promise  of  the  restoration  of  to  the   roar,  as  only  thus  the  effect

Jehoahaz,  the  Jewish  people  cherished  ascribed    to    the   roar  is  explained."

some  hope,    but  having  been   disap-  {llengstenherg),     "As  in  Isa.  xiii.  22,

pointed,  their  hope  at  last  expired." —  the  word  in  question  is  used  poetically

{Henderson).    **  Then  she  took  another  of  widowed  palaces,  i.e,,  forsaken  of

of  her  whelps,  and  made  him  a  young  their  inhabitants,  so  here  ironically."

lion.'*    This  was  Jehoiachin  (2  Kings  {Lange).
xxiv.  8,  etc.

Ver.   8.    "The  provinces."     "The

Ver.  6.  "And  he  went  np  and  down  provincesare  the  surroundingcountries,
among  the  lions."  Jehoiachin  affected  as  parts  of  the  Chaldean  empire ;  comp.
great  magnificence  amonor  the  kings  of  2  Kings  xxiv.  2,  accordnig  to  which
the  earth.  He  was  ambitious  to  be  the  Syrians,  Ammonites,  and  Moabites
numbered  among  the  great  lions  of  were  summoned. against  Jehoiakim,  the
Kthe  nations  (Jer.  xxii.  14-15).  "And  fatherof Jehoiachin." — {Hengstenherg),
learned  to  catch  the  prey,  and  de-
voured men."  Jehoiachin,  to  gratify  Ver.  9.  "Brought  him  to  the  king
his  ambition  was  guilty  of  oppression  of  Babylon."  Jehoiachin  was  carried
and  bloodshed  (Jer.  xxii.  13-17).  captive  to  Babylon,  where,  though  a

prisoner,  he  was  treated  with  kindness

Ver.  7.   "And  he  knew  their  deso-  by     Evil-Merodach     (2    Kinga    jtxv.

late  palaces."  Some  adopt  the  reading,  27-30).
**  and  he  knew  his  widows  and  laid


HOMILETICS.

Lamentation  oveb  Israel's  fallen  Rotaltt.

This  lamentation  is  in  the  poetical  form.  Poetry  is  the  natural  companion
of  man's  spirit  through  all  the  heights  and  depths  of  life  and  feeling.  The
greatest  sorrows  and  joys  must  find  their  truest  and  highest  expression  in
poetry.  Hence  the  Book  of  Psalms  retains  its  place  as  the  hand-book  of
devotion  for  the  Ciuirch  of  God.

I.  Israel's  kings  had  a  noble  origin  (Gen.  xlix.,  9.)    Their  mother  was
Jerusalem — the  city  of  God.     *'  Slie  lay  down  amongst  the  lions,"  she  took  her
place  among  the  family  of  nations.    In  King  David,  God  made  of  Israel  a  great
212


BOMILETW  COMMEMARY:    EZEKIEL,  OHAP.  xix.

name,  like  unto  the  name  of  the  great  men  that  are  in  the  earth  (2  Sam.  vii.  9).
Had  the  chosen  nation  continued  faithful  they  would  have  remained  in  peace
and  prosperity.  The  greatness  of  the  eminence  to  which  they  had  been  raised
by  the  providence  of  God,  gives  a  depth  of  sadness  to  this  lamentation  now
made  over  them.

II.  Israel's  kings  were  corrupted  by  evil  examples.  The  society  of  the
great  of  the  earth  corrupted  them  in  religion  and  morals  (vers.  6,  7).  They
learned  the  worst  vices  of  kings.  Monarchs  have  special  temptations  arising
from  their  position.  They  have  opportunity  to  inflict  the  greatest  wrongs  upon
mankind  ;  such  as  tyranny,  oppression,  etc.  They  learn  to  "  prey  "  upon  men,
yea,  to  "  devour  "  them.  Men  are  "  devoured  *'  when  they  are  bereft  of  liberty
and  of  life  by  tyrants.

III.  The  violence  and  cunning  of  Israel's  kings  provoked  the  same  in
others.  The  lion  had  learned  to  catch  the  prey,  and  to  affright  the  nations  by
the  noise  of  his  roaring.  But  he  was  nob  victorious.  He  only  stirred  up
among  the  nations  the  same  feelings  which  raged  within  himself,  and  provoked
revenge  (ver.  8).  Tlie  most  powerful  tyrants  must  reap  the  reward  of  their  own
doings.     The  measure  they  mete  shall  surely  be  measured  to  them  again,

IV.  The  evil  examples  of  Israel's  kings  failed  to  teach  the  people  wisdom.
When  they  saw  that  their  hope  was  gone  they  elected  another  king.  This  new
king  walked  after  the  manner  of  the  rest  (vers.  5-7).  The  nation  suffered  also
under  hnn  as  they  must  do  under  all  bad  kings.  His  projects  were  wicked,
violent,  and  wild,  fitly  represented  by  the  roaring  of  the  lion.  Nations  some
times  become  so  maddened  that  they  repeat  those  mistakes  which,  as  they  ought
to  know,  must  plunge  them  in  ruin.

V.  God  has  ways  to  punish  the  most  powerful  princes.  God  uses  the  passions
and  inventions  of  men  to  punish  those  who  commit  wickedness  in  high  places.
He  has  chains,  pits,  hunters,  nets,  and  cages  for  wicked  kings.  Often  by  court
intrigues  and  by  the  jealousies  of  nations  He  brings  them  to  judgment.  His
judgments  upon  such  may  be  long  delayed,  but  they  are  sure  to  come  in  the
end,

**  Though  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small ;
Though  with  patience  He  stands  waiting,  with  exactness  grinds  He  aU."

God  will  bring  tyrants  to  an  end.  At  last  the  lions'  roaring  on  the  mountains
dies  away  (ver.  9),     Sooner  or  later,  ''  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling.**

(Ver.  9.)

1.  The  hopes  of  the  vncked  are  not  long-lived.  They  are  soon  dashed  and
disappointed.  "  The  hope  of  unjust  men  perisheth,  *  and  that  easily  and
speedily  (Prov.  xi.  7).  It  is  likened  to  a  spider's  web  or  house,  a  little  thing  ;
a  besom  sweeps  away  the  house  and  inhabitant  together,  and  that  in  a  moment:
such  is  the  hope  of  wicked  men,  it  is  suddenly  and  easily  ruined.  There  is  a
difference  between  the  hopes  of  the  righteous  and  those  of  the  wicked  :  "  The
hope  of  the  righteous  shall  be  gladness  :  but  the  expectation  of  the  wicked  shall
perish  "  (Prov.  x.  28).  2.  Corrupt  states  are  so  addicted  to  their  princes  that
they  will  set  them  up  to  rule  over  them,  though  it  he  to  their  own  7'uin.
Jerusalem,  the  lioness,  sets  "  up  another  of  her  whelps,  and  makes  it  a  young
lion."  She  put  this  whelp  into  the  royal  seat,  and  stirred  him  up  to  do  lion-
like, such  things  as  did  unto  himself  and  Jerusalem  also.  She  learned
nothing  by  the  loss  of  her  former  whelp,  but  proceeds  in  her  old  way,  and  would
have  lions,  tyrants  to  be  over  her,  she,  being  a  lioness,  very  corrupt  and  wicked,
couples  with  that  Egyptian  lion,-Phar()ah,  and  brings  forth,  advances  a  lion  like
themselves.  The  men  of  Shechem  made  Abimelech  king,  but  he  proved  not
only  a  bramble  to  scratch  them,  but  a  fierce  and  fiery  lion  to  consume  them.

213


CHAP.  XIX.  BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


States  had  better  consider  whom  they  set  over  them,  lest  they  become  lions
unto  them.  3.  ISucli  as  men  live  amongst  and  converse  withal^  such  they  prove,
*'  He  went  up  and  down  among  the  lions,  and  became  a  lion.  Those  lions  he
conversed  with  talked  of  making  themselves  great,  of  having  their  wills,
of  ruling  by  prerogative,  and  these  things,  and  such  like,  were  soon
learned  by  this  whelp.  When  Nebuchadnezzar  was  among  beasts,  he
became  brutish,  and  did  as  they  did.  Ill  company  is  the  Delilah  that
bewitches,  defiles,  and  ruins  many  in  their  estates,  bodies,  and  souls.  David
knew  this,  therefore  he  said,  "Depart  from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity "
(Psa.  vi.  8)  ;  and  **I  am  a  companion  of  them  that  fear  thee  "  (Psa.  cxix.  63).
4.  Ihey  who  converse  with  wicked  ones  do  not  only  become  wicked,  bat  many  times
they  prove  eminently  wicked.  They  exceed  their  teachers.  Jehoiachin,  by  his
converse  with  lions,  became  not  only  a  lion  to  catch  the  prey,  but  such  an  one
as  devoured  men,  defiled  widows,  made  desolate  palaces,  laid  waste  cities,
and  the  land  also.  He  went  beyond  other  tyrants,  he  was  an  inventor
of  wickedness,  and  profited  above  others  in  his  way,  and  came  to  a  perfection
of  iniquity.  It  is  incident  to  man's  nature  to  outstrip  one  the  other,  if
not  in  good,  yet  especially  in  evil.  5.  Tyranny  is  hateful  unto  heathens,
"  Then  the  nations  set  against  him  on  every  side."  Jehoiachin  was
such  a  roaring  lion  that  the  heathens  would  not  endure  him.  Doubtless
the  princes  of  the  nations  were  tyrannous  themselves,  yet  this  man  exceeded  so
in  his  tyrannical  practices  that  he  incurred  the  displeasure  and  hatred  of  them
all.  Tyrants  cease  to  be  men,  and  become  beasts ;  therefore  here  are  called
lions,  and  are  ranked  among  wild  savage  creatures ;  which  none  can  endure.
When  there  are  wild  beasts  in  a  land,  all  are  against  them,  and  often  there  is
a  mutual  agreement  and  concurrence  to  destroy  them.  The  nations  agreed  to
hunt  and  take  this  lion.  6.  God  hath  times,  means,  ways  to  catch  lions,  to
deal  with  covetous  and  cruel  men.  When  Jehoiachin  made  desolate  the
palaces,  and  wasted  the  cities  and  the  land  ;  then  the  Lord  stirred  up  the
nations.  They  were  His  net.  His  pit,  His  instruments  to  take  this  lion
withal.  God  wants  not  means  to  take  them ;  He  hath  nations  at  command,
and  can  call  them  forth  and  set  them  to  hunt  lions  when  he  pleases  (Jer  1.
7.  Tyrannical  princes  are  not  of  long  continuance-  They  are  usually  short-
lived ;  either  they  lose  their  power,  or  their  power  and  lives  both.  Jehoiachin
roared  and  played  the  lion  eleven  years,  and  then  he  was  taken  in  the  pit  of  the
nations  and  lost  his  power.  So  Jehoahaz  before  him.  He  tyrannized
months,  and  then  was  taken.  When  potentates  oppress  and  tyrannize,  their  ruin
is  at  hand.  God  hath  said,  "  Bloody  men  shall  not  live  out  half  their  days  '*
(Psa.  Iv.  23).  And  He  makes  it  good.  '*  He  cuts  off  the  spirit  of  princes,  and
is  terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth "  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  12).  8.  God  takes  away
wicked  and  tyrannical  princes  that  it  may  be  well  with  His  people,  that  Zion
may  have  the  benefit  of  it.  Jehoiachin  was  taken,  chained,  carried  to  Babylon,
ana  put  in  strongholds,  and  why  ? — *'  that  his  voice  should  be  heard  no  more
upon  the  mountains  of  Israel ;  "  that  the  people  of  God  might  not  be  terrrified
with  his  roarings,  nor  torn  with  his  teeth,  but  might  enjoy  freedom  and  safety.
God,  for  the  good  of  His  people,  destroys  or  drives  out  the  wild  beasts.  **  JNo
lion  shall  be  there"  (Isa.  xxxv.  9). — (Greenhill),

EXEGETICAL   NOTES.— Vers.  The  royal  vine  of  Judah  was  torn  up

10-14.     The  prophet  laments  for  the  when   Jehoiachin  was  carried  captive

destruction  of  the  kingdom,  and  ban-  to  Babylon.     That  vine  was  planted

ishment    of    the    people,    under    the  afresh  in  the  person  of  Zedekiah,  so

parable  of  a  wasted  vine.  that  the  life  of  the  whole  plant  de-
pended upon  him.      The  very  sap  of

Ver.  10.  '*  Like  a  vine  in  tliy  blood."  that  royal  tree  was  his  blood    Some
214


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEL,  chap.  xix.

render,  "  in  thy  likeness  ;  "  but  this  is  Ver.  13.     **  And  now  she  is  planted

forced,  and  gives  no  suitable  meaning,  in  the  wilderness."     Figuratively  de-
scribes  the    captivity,   when    David's

Ver.   1 1.     **  Strong  rods."    **  These  stock  was  transplanted  into  the  ''  wilder-

represent  princes  of  the  royal  house,  ness "of  Babylonia  (Ezek.  xx.  35).
In  her  prosperous   state,  the  Jewish

kingdom,  so  far  from  resembling  one  of  Ver.  14.     '*  And  fire  is  gone  out  of

those   vines   which    creep    upon    the  a  rod  of  her  hranches.  which  hath

ground,  was  comparable  to  one  trained  devoured  her  fruit."     Zedekiah  was

up  by  the  side  of  a  wall,  or  supported  tlie    vain-glorious  rod  of  this    vine,

by  a  tree.     Some  of  these  are  carried  'I'he  very  rod  itself  supplied  the  fire

to  a  great  height,  such  as  that  men-  which  burned  up  the  whole  tree.     '*  It

tioned  by  Schulz,  the  stem  of  which  was  his  revolt   from  Nebuchadnezzar

was  a  foot  and  a-half  in  diameter,  and  which  caused  that  monarch  to  march

about    thirty    feet    high,    while    its  his  army  into  Judea,  take  Jerusalem,

branches  formed  a   tent  of  upwards  and  carry  the  Jews  captive  to  Babylon,

of  fifty   feet    square." — (Henderson.)  Thus  an  end  was  put  to  the  vine  and

**  Thick  branches."     The  branches  of  its   branches — a  consummation  which

forest  trees.    The  once  lowly  vine  now  every  Jewish  patriot  must  deeply  have

appears  towering  above  oaks  and  cedars,  bewailed." — (  Henderson.)      **  This   is

yet  is  still  without  fruit  (Ezek.  xv.  6).  for  a  lamentation,  and  shall  be  for  a

lamentation."     "  The  lamentation   is

Ver.  12,     **  But  she  was  plucked  up  (properly  was,  with  prophetic  anticipa-

in  fury,  she  was  cast  down  to  the  tion  of  the  future)  for  a  lamentation :

ground-"     "Without  the  intervention  it  is  not  the  fancy  of  a  gloomy  seer,

of  anything  further,  there  follows  its  but  the  prediction  of  a  lamentation,

splendid  growth,  like  a  lightning  flash  which  will  actually  flow  in  a  thousand

from  the  clear  heavens,  the  complete  voices  from  the  mouth  of  the  people,

overthrow  of  the  vine,  e.^.  of  Jerusalem  What   Ezekiel   here  pronounces,    the

— Judah,  the  birth-place  of  kings,  and  people  will  too  soon  be  compelled  to

therewith  the  Davidic  kingdom.  While  repeat  after  him.     His  lamentation  is,

vers.  2-9  bewailed  the  existing  kings,  as  it  were,  the  sowing,  out  of  which  a

both  as  bearers  of  the  Davidic  royalty,  rich    harvest    of   lamentation    grows,

and  at  the  same  time  as  suggestive,  by  At  present  the  sky  is  full  of  joyous

their  fate,  to  the  actual  king  ;    now  music  to  the  people  ;  but  very  soon  it

Zedekiah,  as  he  with  whom  the  Davidic  will  be  said  :  **  My  harp  is  turned  to

kingdom  is  subverted,  becomes  the  sub-  mourning,  and  my  flute  to  the  voice  of

ject  of  the  lament,  just  as  if  everything  weeping," — (Hengstenherg,)
had  already  happened." — {Lange),

*     HOMILETICS.

Lamentation  for  the  Kingdom  of  Judah.

Two  things  concerning  the  fate  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  most  of  all,  sorely
touched  the  prophet's  mind  and  heart.

I.  It  was  fallen  from  a  high  estate.  Judah  was  once  a  goodly  vine,  and
blest  above  all  others.  She  was  the  planting  of  the  Lord.  Her  elevation  to
the  greatest  privileges  serves  sadly  to  reveal  the  depth  of  her  fall.

II.  It  was  doomed  to  destruction.  The  destruction  was  sudden  and  over-
whelming. For  immediately  before  she  was  full  of  happiness  and  splendour,
great  among  the  nations,  and  wielding  the  rod  of  power.     Their  destruction

215


CHAP.  XIX.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEL.


was  brought  about  by  the  wrath  of  God.  "  SLe  was  plucked  up  iu  fury  "
(ver.  12).  When  nations  cease  to  acknowledge  God,  He  turns  the  glory  and
growth  of  centuries  into  a  desert.  National  sins  spread  like  fire,  and  wrap
whole  kingdoms  in  the  flames  of  destruction.  'J'he  end  of  sin  is  "lamentation" —
for  individuals,  for  nations.  Judah's  kingdom  fell,  like  others  before  and  after
it,  because  it  failed  to  maintain  righteousness.  There  is  only  one  king  who
can  deliver  the  nations  and  reign  over  them  for  ever  and  ever.  "The  Messianic
hope  was  bound  up  with  the  Davidic  kingdom,  whose  subversion  is  here
illustrated,  and  its  fulfilment  is  shown  in  this,  that  He  who  appeared  in  the
world,  declared,  not  without  reference  to  this  chapter,  *  I  am  the  true  vine '  "
{Lange),

(Vers.  10,  11.)

1.  States  and  hingdoms,  ruined  in  times  of  war  and  trouble,  flourish  again  in
times  oj  quiet  and  silence.  Tyranny,  oppression,  wars,  pull  down,  root  up,
destroy  ;  but  when  there  is  peace  and  rest,  it  is  otherwise.  "  They  built  and
prospered,"  and  why  ?  they  had  *'  rest  on  every  side."  Wlien  roaring  lions  are
taken  away,  and  men  of  peaceable  and  quiet  spirits  succeed,  then  the  vine  grows,
then  the  land  prospers,  then  breaches  are  repaired.  2.  It  is  through  the  goodness
and  blessing  of  God  that  wasted  kingdoms  do  become  as  vines^  and  flourish  again,
"  Thy  mother  is  like  a  vine,  fruitful  and  full  of  branches  by  reason  of  many
waters."  God  watered  the  kingdom  with  blessings ;  He  gave  peace.  He  gave
the  poor  strength  to  labour.  He  rained  upon  tliem,  and  gave  sap  to  the
vine,  that  she  was  fruitful.  When  God  lays  waste  his  vineyards,  then
He  commands  **  the  clouds  that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it  "  (Isa.  v.  6)  ;
but  when  He  causes  it  to  flourish,  then  He  calls  forth  the  rain.  He
moistens  the  spirits  of  men  of  all  sorts,  to  contribute  their  help,  thoughts
and  counsels  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom.  He  stirs  up  the  spirits  of
men  to  be  doing  for  the  public  ;  He  gives  people  planted  by  Him  many
waters,  many  blessings.  3.  When  mercies  are  multiplied,  men  are  apt
to  abuse  them,  and  swell  with  the  enjoyment  of  them.  This  metaphysical  vine,
the  kingdom  of  Judah,  had  "strong  rods  her  stature  was  exalted  among  the
thick  branches,  and  she  appeared  in  her  height  with  the  multitude  of  her
branches."  She  grew  up  again  to  a  height,  greatness.  She  liad  a  multitude
of  branches,  variety  of  mercies,  and  these  swelled  her  so,  that  she  became  proud,
insolent,  and  despised  others.  Prosperity  is  a  dangerous  thing,  and  hath  hazarded
many.  The  Babylonian  kingdom  was  so  rich,  great,  populous,  and  plentiful  that
it  was  called  "the  lady  of  kingdoms,"  and  she  herself  said,  "I  shall  be  a  lady
for  ever."  She  prided  herself  in  her  prosperity  (Isa.  xlvii.  5,  7),  so  spiritual
Babylon  (Rev.  xviii.  7).  "  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am"  no  widow,  and  shall  see  no
sorrow."  After  Hezekiah  had  received  many  mercies,  "  his  heart  was  lifted  up  "
(2  Chron.  xxxii.  23-25).  Rehoboam,  when  he  was  strengthend  in  the  kingdom,
"  forsook  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  all  Israel  with  him  ;  "  here  was  a  sad  eftecb  of
prosperity  (2  Chron.  xii.  i).  This  people  were  seldom  the  better  for  mercies
and  blessings  bestowed  upon  them  ;  "  I  spoke  unto  tiiee  in  thy  prosperity,  but
thou  saidst,  I  will  not  hear.  This  hath  been  thy  manner  from  thy  youth,  that
thou  obeyest  not  my  voice  "  (Jer.  xxii.  21).  She  had  forgotten  the  caution  the
Lord  gave  her  in  the  days  of  her  infancy  (Deut.  viii.  11-14). — (Greenhill).

(Ver.  13).

"And  now  she  is  planted  in  the  wilderness."    This  wilderness  was  Babylon,
which  was  a  fruitful,  pleasant,  and  well- watered  country  ;  the  city    and  land
21^


ffOM  I  LET  JC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIBL,  OHAP.  xix.


were  the  "glory  of  kiDgdoms  (Isa.  xiii.  19).  It  had  variety  of  rivers  (Psa.
cxxxvii.  I).  I^ow  if  this  were  the  nature  of  the  country,  how  is  it  here  called
a  wilderness  ?  It  is  so  called,  not  in  respect  of  itself,  but  in  reference  to  the
Jews,  who  being  captives  therein,  were  as  in  a  wilderness.  In  a  wilderness,  a  man
is  destitute  of  all  comforts  and  exposed  to  many  dangers;  so  were  the  Jews  in
Babylon.  1.  They  were  destitute  of  comforts.  They  came  naked  into  Babylon,
where  they  were  amongst  a  people  of  a  barbarous  and  unknown  tongue,  that
knew  nothing  of  (jod  ;  there  tliey  had  no  form  of  a  Church  or  State  ;  they  had
no  life,  but  were  as  dry  bones  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  1 1).  There  they  were  captives  ;
Babylon  was  a  prison  unto  them,  and  prisons  of  what  kind  soever  are  not  pleasing.
Prisoners  endure  much  hunger  and  thirst,  and  doubtless  so  did  the  Jews  in
Babylon.  Though  there  were  plenty,  yet  they  had  little  enough,  and  therefore
it  was  a  "dry  and  thirsty  land"  to  them.  2.  Ihey  were  escposed  to  many
dangers.  They  were  amongst  those  that  mocked  and  hated  them.  The  Baby-
lonians were  "  bitter  and  hasty,  terrible  and  dreadful "  (Hab.  i.  6,  7).  They
were  like  wild  beasts  in  the  wilderness,  and  sought,  upon  all  occasions,  to  make
a  prey  of  the  poor  captive  Jews.  They  got  the  three  children  into  the  fiery
furnace,  Daniel  into  the  lion's  den,  and  Haman  attempted  the  total  ruin  of
them.  "  She  is  planted."  Before  (ver.  12),  it  is  said,  "  the  fire  consumed
them."  What  is  consumed  in  the  fire  is  burnt  to  ashes,  and  how  can  that  be
planted  ?  He  doth  not  say  the  whole  vine  was  burnt,  but  her  "  strong  rods  "
were  broken  off  and  burnt ;  some  were  burnt  and  consumed  by  famine,  some  by
the  plague,  some  by  the  sword  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  17).  **  The  king  of  the  Chaldees
slew  their  young  men  with  the  sword  ; "  but  "  they  that  escaped  the  sword  he
carried  away  to  Babylon,  where  they  were  servants  to  him  and  his  sons  "
(ver.  20).  If  it  should  be  granted  that  the  whole  vine  was  dried  up,  withered,
and  burnt  to  ashes,  yet  these  words  may  bear  a  good  and  sound  sense,  viz.,
thus  : — they  may  be  understood  of  Jehoiachin  and  those  that  were  with  him  'n\
Babylon  at  that  time  when  they  were  spoken  ;  for  the  words  run  in  the  present
tense,  "  she  is  planted,"  not,  she  shall  be  planted,  for  Zedekiah  and  those  that
escaped  the  sword  were  carried  after  this  prophecy  to  Babylon. — ifireenhilL)

The  Past,  Present,  and  Future  of  Israel  (Chap,  xx.)

EXEGETICAL    NOTES.   —    The  of  Wandering  "  was  passed  (Num.  xi v.

date  given  in  ver.    1  applies  also  to  29).     It  is  remarkable  that  this  was

chap,  xx-xxiii.  (compare  chap.  xxiv.  1).  also  the  same  day  on  which  the  Temple

These  four  chapters  are  bound  together  was  burnt  both  by  the  Chaldeans  (Jer.

by  their  contents  into  one  group  of  lii.  12,  13),  and  according  to  the  testi-

connected  words  of  God,  and  also  by  mony   of  Josephus,   by   the  Komans.

the  threefold  repetition  of  the  expres-  Tliis  chapter  (in  which  Num.  xiv.  is

sion,  "  wilt  thou  judge  ?"  (chap,  xx.  4;  several  times  referred  to)  announces  a

xxii.  2  ;    xxiii.  36j.      The  prophet  is  new  and  a  far  heavier  "  Sentence  of

appointed  to  judge  the  people,  i.^.,  to  Wandering"   (vers.    35-38).     *' If  we

make  manifest  their  sin  to  them,  and  compare  the  date  given  in  ver.  1  with

to  predict  the  punishment.     In  vers.  chap.   viii.    1,  we  shall  find  that  this

1-4,  we  have  the  date,  occasion,  and  word  of  God  was  uttered  only  eleven

subject  of  the  prophetical  discuurse.  months  and  five  days  after  the  one  in

chap.  viii.  ;  two  years,  one  month,  and

Ver.   1.      *'In  the  seventh  year,  in  five  days  after  ilie  call  of  Ezekiel  to  be

the  fifth  month,  the  tenth  day  of  the  a  propliet  (chap.  i.  2) ;  and  two  years

month."     There  is  a  Jewish  tradition  and  five  months  before  the  blockading

that  the  tenth  day  of  the  fifth  month  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans  (chap,

was  the  day  on  which  the  "  Sentence  xxiv.  1).     Consequently  it  falls  almost

217


CHAP.  IX.  HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,


in  the  middle  of  the  first  section  of  to  pronounce  jndgment.  "The  Hebrew

Ezekiel's    prophetic    work."  —  (Keil).  word  signifies,  not  merely  to  judge,  but

**To  enquire  of  the  Lord,"    Heb.  **  to  also  frequently,  as  here,  to  conduct  a

seek  Jehovah/'  i,e.,  to  ask,  a  revelation  cause  before  a  tribunal  by  adducing  or

from  Him.  hearing  such  evidence  as  bears  upon

it,  and  si i all  lead  to  the  delivery   of

Ver.  3.     "Asllive,  saith the  Lord  a  righteous    sentence."   (Henderson.)

God,  I  will  not  be  enquired  of  by  you.*'  "The  question    is    repeated    in  the

"  The  Lord's  answer  is  similar  to  that  liveliness  of  emotion.    It  is  a  question

in  chap.  xiv.  3.     Instead  of  giving  a  of  impatience,  to  which  things  go  too

revelation      concerning     the    future,  slowly,  and  show  how  little  right  tliey

especially  with    regard  to  the    termi-  have  to  look  for  grace,  or  expect  a

nation  of  the  penal  sufferings,  which  pleasing    answer.      The   son   of    man

the   elders  had,   no    doubt,   come  to  cannot  go  soon  enough  for  the  Lord

solicit,     the    prophet    is    to     judge  to  the  work  of  judgment  and  punish-

them,   i.e.,   as    the    following    clause  ment   for  sin,   which  is    here    alone

explains,    not    only    in    the    passage  announced,  and  is  to  be  executed  in

before  us,  but  also  in  chap.  xxii.  3,  and  his  name.     Those  who  wish  to  have

xxiii.  36,  to  hold  up  before  them  the  another  answer,  must  repent  before-

sins  and  abominations  of  Israel.     It  is  hand.     The  summons  to  make  known

in  anticipation  of  the  following  picture  to  them  the  sins  of  their  fathers,  points

of  the  apostacy  of  the  nation  from  time  to  this,  that  the  evil  is  deep-seated,  and

immemorial  that  the  sins  of  the  fathers  a  radical  cure  is  to  be  desired,  which

are  mentioned  here." — {Keil).     "No  can  only  be  effected  by   a  judgment

reply   is    given    to    the  sinners,  but  of  inflexible  rigour." — {Fhngstenberg.)

chiding  for  their  sins ;  and  He  adds  *'  Cause  them  to  know  the  abomina-

the  oath,  *As  1  live,'  that  the  sentence  tions  of  their  fathers."      The    evil

of  refusal  may  be  all  the  stronger." —  which  called  for  judgment  had  entered

{Jerome),      When  Saul  "enquired  of  the   very   life   of  the   nation.     They

the  Lord,"  we  are  told  that  "the  Lord  inherited  it  like  a  disease — like  a  bad

answered  him  not "  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  6).  name.      But    the    prophet    not   only

mentions  the  sins  of  their  fathers  in

Ver.  4.    **  Wilt    thou  judge  them,  order  to  show  the  magnitude  of  their

son  of  man  wilt  thou  judge  them?"  guilt,  but  also  that  they  might  see  how

The  repeated  question  has  the  force  great  ^  was    the    patience    and    long-

of  a  connnand,  yea,  even  implies  that  suffering  of  the  Lord.
a  necessity  is  laid   upon  the  prophet

HOMILETICS.

The  Elders  before  Ezekiel.

This  is  a  very  different  result  from  that  which  we  might  have  expected.  We
might  have  been  inclined  to  say  of  the  elders,  that  they  could  not  have  inquired
of  the  Lord  once,  but  they  have  learned  wisdom  from  adversity,  and  they  are
come  to  enquire  now.  And  so  Ezekiel  would  also  have  said  to  these  elders  had
they  come  in  the  right  spirit  and  temper  of  mind  ;  as  penitents,  with  sorrow  and
contrition  of  heart,  bemoaning  their  past  obstinacy  and  rebellion,  and  beseeching
God  to  receive  their  cries  of  earnest  sorrow  and  their  promises  to  do  better  things
in  the  future.  Had  they  so  come  they  would  have  been  well  received.  That
prophet  who  was  commissioned  to  say,  "When  the  wicked  man  turneth  away
from  his  wickedness  that  he  hath  committed,  and  doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and
right  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive,"  and  again,  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have
no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,"  and  the  like— the  prophet  who  was
218


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.  chap.  xx.


charged  with  such  messages  as  these  could  never  have  been  commissioned  to
drive  away  with  hard  reproachful  words  any  true  penitent,  who  came  to  enquire
of  the  Lord  by  him.

This  is  the  point  in  which  the  elders  failed.  There  is  no  evidence  of  their
penitence.  They  came  to  enquire  of  the  Lord  without  first  repenting  and
bringing  forth  works  meet  for  repentance.  Look  at  ver.  35,  and  the  great
reason  will  be  seen  why  the  enquirers  were  rebuffed,  **  When  ye  offer  your  gifts,
when  ye  make  your  sons  to  pass  through  the  fire,  ye  pollute  yourselves  with  all
your  idols,  "  even  unto  this  day  " — even  to  this  day  ;  you  perceive  that  their
sins  were  not  events  of  the  past,  but  things  going  on  in  full  vigour  up  to  this
very  time.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  these  unrepented  sins  that  they  were  come
to  enquire  of  the  Lord  ;  "and  shall  I  be  enquired  of  by  you,  0  house  of
Israel  ?" — so  the  verse  continues — *  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  not  be
enquired  of  by  you."  Here  you  have  the  repetition  of  the  words  of  the  text.
The  prophet  is  then  commissioned  to  make  known  the  abominations  of  their
fathers.  He  shows  them  that  they  were  as  guilty  as  their  fathers,  and  more
guilty,  because  they  had  more  teaching,  more  experience,  more  examples.  And
yet  without  any  repentance,  they  expect  that  they  are  to  be  permitted  to
enquire  of  the  Lord  acceptably,  but  no — God  will  not  be  mocked  ;  He  will  hear
the  penitent,  but  not  the  self-satisfied  sinner.

There  was  nothing  harsh  and  unreasonable  in  the  answer  which  Ezekiel  gave
to  the  elders.  He  did  not  send  the  hungry  empty  away,  but  only  as  God's
ambassador  refused  to  answer  those  who  w^ould  not  leave  their  sins  behind  them
when  they  entered  into  the  Temple  of  God.  These  elders  wished  to  make  a
mere  convenience  of  the  oracle  of  God.  They  might  have  enquired  of  God
continually^  but  they  did  nothing  of  the  kind.  But  when  they  found  themselves
in  distress,  and  knew  not  which  way  to  turn,  then  they  presented  themselves
before  God's  prophet.  They  were  brought  to  enquire  of  God  not  by  love,  not
by  a  sense  of  duty,  not  even  by  habit,  but  merely  by  a  desire  to  find  their  way
out  of  difficulties  from  which  they  were  unable  to  discover  any  human  means  of
escape.

We  see,  in  the  first  place,  that  they  were  not  hardly  dealt  with;  and,  secondly,
that  the  whole  story  may  he  useful  by  way  of  parable  to  teach  people  how  they
must  enquire  of  God  if  they  would  enquire  aright.  It  is  well  that  we  should
look  into  this  matter  carefully  ;  for  we  are  apt  to  give  an  unlimited  interpreta-
tion to  what  we  read  of  God's  mercy  in  hearing  prayer,  that  we  perhaps  forget
that  there  are  very  important  limitations,  and  that  a  prayer  may  sometimes
obtain  no  answer  because  there  is  something  amiss  in  him  who  makes  it.  The
parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  the  Publican  is  an  instance.  The  Pharisee  who
went  up  to  the  Temple  to  pray  was  a  very  respectable  elder  apparently,  some-
thing much  more  than  respectable  if  we  attend  to  his  own  account  of  himself,
— yet  this  Pharisee  received  no  answer,  was  not  justified  as  the  Gospel  has  it.
God  would  not  be  enquired  of  by  such.  This  is  an  instance  of  unsuccessful
prayer.     Let  us  consider  what  the  true  conditions  of  successful  prayer  are—

I.  True  religion  is  emphatically  a  walking  with  God.  It  is  not  a  mere
occasional  coming  to  Him.  A  certain  amount  of  reproach  seems  to  be  implied
in  the  manner  in  which  the  day  of  tlie  visit  of  the  elders  is  accurately  set  down;
it  was  **in  the  seventh  year,  in  the  fifth  month,  the  tenth  day  of  the  month."
These  visits  of  the  elders  were  few  and  far  between,  there  was  no  danger  of
confounding  one  with  another.  In  chap,  viii.,  we  read,  that**  in  the  sixth  year,
in  the  sixth  month,  in  the  fifth  day  of  the  month,"  there  was  a  similar  visit  to
the  prophet,  and  there  appears  to  have  been  none  between;  so  that  nearly  a
year  separated  the  one  visit  from  the  other.  The  precise  manner  in  which  the
date  is  given  may  be  taken  as  conveying  a  reproof  to  those  who,  instead  of

219


CHAP.  XX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


making  it  their  constant  business  to  know  God's  will,  were  contented  to  let  a
year  elapse  between  two  successive  visits  to  the  prophet.  Walking  with  God
is  the  scripture  phrase  which  well  describes  that  constant  nearness  to  God,  that
affinity  of  heart  and  affections,  which  the  really  religious  man  strives  for.  The
notion  of  lifej  too,  expresses  the  same  thing.  Religion  is  a  lifej  by  which  word
we  intend  to  express,  that  it  is  not  a  series  of  irregular  spasmodic  efforts,  not  an
enquiry  of  God  now  and  then,  not  a  coming  to  His  prophet  in  the  sixth  year  and
the  sixth  month,  and  again  in  the  seventh  year  and  the  fifth  month,  but  an
enquiry  in  all  years  and  all  months  and  all  days,  a  habit  of  opening  our  hearts
and  consciences  to  Him,  and  of  guiding  our  conduct  by  the  answers  which  we
are  able  to  obtain.

II.  We  must  leave  our  sins  behind  us  when  we  come  to  enquire  of  God*
The  severe  answer  which  the  elders  received  was  due  to  the  fact  that  they  came
without  first  repenting.  As  a  further  illustration  of  this  we  find,  that  in  their
former  visit,  their  presence  at  once  brought  upon  the  prophet  a  vision  of  the
sins  of  the  people.  The  prophet's  eyes  wandered  in  spirit  to  Jerusalem,  and
there  he  saw  all  the  abominations  of  the  house  of  Israel ;  there  were  men  offering
their  incense  to  idols,  and  saying,  "  The  Lord  seeth  us  not ;  "  there  were  women
weeping  for  Tammuz ;  worse  than  all,  there  were  men  bowing  down  in  worship
to  the  sun  of  the  creation,  not  the  Creator.  These  visions  rose  to  Ezekiel's
prophetic  eye  when  the  elders  came  and  sat  before  him  ;  and  because  they
contained  precisely  the  explanation  of  all  the  misery  under  which  the  people
groaned.  The  elders  may  come  and  sit  before  the  prophet  and  bemoan  their
captivity,  but  of  what  profit  will  that  be  ?  That  will  not  cure  the  disease.
The  disease  is  unrepented  sin,  and  without  a  change  here  there  can  be  no
acceptance,  no  answer  to  prayer.  Self-examination,  earnest  efforts  to  forsake
the  evil  and  to  do  the  good,  must  ever  be  the  preparations  for  successful  inquiry
of  God.  Prayer  is  not  a  thing  which  is  at  our  command  at  any  moment.
dinners  can  come  to  Christ,  but  they  must  leave  their  sins.  John  the  Baptist
came  as  the  herald  of  Christ,  and  because  he  did  so,  his  chief  text  was  :  "  Eepent
ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  No  other  way  is  sure  but  this  ;  nothing
else  can  save  us  from  the  possibility  of  such  a  rebuke  as  that  in  the  text,  "  As
I  live,"  etc.     The  history  brings  before  us  this  lesson  also,  that —

III.  Prayer,  or  coming  to  God  in  any  way,  must  not  be  made  a  mere
matter  of  convenience,  but  must  be  regarded  as  a  matter  of  constant  spiritual
necessity.  These  elders  came  when  they  thought  it  would  answer  their  purpose.
They  f  )rgot  God  when  all  went  well,  they  sought  Him  when  they  were  at  their
wit's  end;  they  did  not  look  upon  communion  with  God  as  the  one  great
spiritual  need  of  their  souls.  They  were  a  type  of  the  mass  of  mankind.  Large
numbers  of  our  fellow  creatures  do  live  in  utter  neglect  of  God.  They  live
without  prayer,  and  without  the  Scriptures — pas.^ing  a  quiet,  animal  kind  of
life,  with  no  cares  except  those  of  getting  daily  bread.  And  yet  many  of  these
persons  will  cry  to  the  Lord  in  trouble;  put  them  upon  a  sick-bed,  and  they
will  say  their  prayers,  for  the  most  part,  vigorously  enough.  This  is  no  right
use  of  prayer,  but  a  most  unchristian  abuse.  It  was  never  intended  that  man  should
be  careless  while  in  health,  and  religious  in  sickness  ;  never  intended  that  young
men  should  be  dissipated  and  only  old  men  sober  and  chaste  ;  never  intendL-d
that  the  best  of  a  Ciiristian's  life  and  strength  should  be  given  to  the  world,  the
flesh,  and  the  devil,  and  only  the  dross  and  refuse  to  Him  who  made  him  and
redeemed  him.  Prayer  was  never  intended  to  be  made  use  of  as  a  convenience
when  earthly  aid  fails,  but  to  be  the  medium  of  communication  with  God,  the
means  of  gaining  continual  aid  and  daily  blessing  from  Him.  "Pray  without
ceasing  "  is  the  best  text  to  enforce  our  duty.  These  did  not  **  pray  without
ceasing."     It  was  but  an  occasional  work,  a  remedy  resorted  to  in  the  last

220


no  MIL  ETTC  COMMmXTA  Tl  Y :    tJZEKTEL.  citap.  xx.


extremity,  a  death-bed  cry  for  help.  If  we  were  independent  creatures  and
lived  by  our  own  strength  and  enorgy,  then  we  might  be  content  to  make
our  approaches  to  Him  rare  and  exceptional,  and  only  necessary  when  called  for
by  special  circumstances.  But  what  a  false  view  would  this  be  of  our  relation
to  Him  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  who  alone  is  able  to
help  us,  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal !  And  how  comforting,  how  satisfying  is
that  view  which  represents  God  as  a  Father  ever  ready  to  bless  us,  and  to  whom,
therefore,  if  we  pray  at  all,  we  can  scarcely  fail  to  pray  without  ceasing ! —
{Goodwins  " Parish  Sermons")

Ver.  1.  It  is  enough  to  say  merely  that  they  came  to  inquire,  for  from  the
prophet's  mode  of  answering  them  we  see  that  they  made  no  inquiry  as  to
deliverance  and  the  way  of  salvation  ;  they  were  troubled  as  to  political  things,
the  duration  of  the  exile,  the  end  of  the  Babylonish  power,  the  issue  of
Zedekiah's  faithlessness.  We,  too,  ask.  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ?  rather
than,  How  shall  I  find  grace  ?  Why  are  we  so  concerned  about  the  future  ?  It
will  be  like  our  past.  We  should  be  deeply  concerned  on  account  of  our  past.
In  our  approaches  to  God,  humility  and  reverence  should  be  combined  with  a
strong  and  assured  faith,  which  must  acquiesce  in  the  authority  of  the  one  God,
and  yet  must  not  object  to  hear  God  speak  through  his  servants.  Summon
thyself  to  the  study  of  the  prophets  and  apostles  through  whom  God  has  spoken !
God  will  be  inquired  of,  but  still  more  sliould  His  will,  which  is  sufficiently
known  to  us,  be  done.  To  call  on  God,  and  yet  not  to  obey  Him  is  an  abomina-
tion in  His  sight.  "  He  heareth  not  sinners"  (John  ix.  31  ;  Isa.  i.  15).  Vers.
2,  3.  God's  suggestive  silence,  and  His  more  suggestive  answer.  God  in  the
mouth,  and  idols  in  the  heart,  a  most  critical  condition.  God  speaks  not  the
smallest  word  of  comfort  to  hypocrites.  For  hypocrites  there  is  in  the
heart  of  God,  and  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  no  other  counsel  but  to  sincere
repentance  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  Thus  these  elders  were  not  in  a  condition  to  hear  God's
word.  God  hides  Himself  from  those  who  hear  His  word  with  their  gaze  fixed
only  on  their  idols.     They  have  no  part  in  God's  word. — (Lange),

(Ver.  1.)

1.  The  Lord  keeps  an  exact  account  of  his  peoples  sufferings.  Be  the  time  long
or  short,  He  observes,  ''In  the  seventh  year,  fifth  month,  and  tenth  day ;"  that  was
of  their  captivity.  The  Lord  f  )rgot  not  how  long  they  had  been  in  Babylon,  He
notes  how  the  time  of  their  trouble  passes.  They  were  captives  in  Babylon,  suffered
hard  things  ;  but  God  took  notice  of  the  time,  and  how  the  years  ran  out.  It  is
not  said  only  that  the  woman  had  a  spirit  of  infirmity,  but  the  time  is  recorded
also,  she  had  it  eighteen  years  (Luke  xiii.  11).  Also  in  John  v.  5,  not  only  the  man
and  his  infirmity  is  mentioned,  but  the  time  also  how  long,  thirty-eight  years.  God
tells  the  years,  months,  and  days  that  His  people  endure  adversity.  Seventy
years  were  determined  that  they  should  be  in  Babylon  (Jer.  xxix.  10,  11),  and
God  gave  them  to  see  ;  He  observed  as  well,  yea,  better  than  they,  how  they
passed.  2.  1  he  time  of  mens  doiag  some  things  is  specially  noted  by  the  Lord.
The  time  of  these  elders  comitig  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  is  recorded.  See  how
the  actions  of  Josiah  are  observed  (2  Chr<»n.  xx^iv.  3).  When  Jeroboam  feasted
and  sacrificed  to  the  calves  he  had  made,  God  took  notice  of  the  month  and  day
(1  Kings  xii.  32).  When  the  persecution  of  the  Church  was,  God  took  notice
of  it;  "at  that  time"  (Acts  viii.  1).  3.  llypocrnsy  is  a  close  sin,  and  is
in  those  ofttimes  we  little  think.  It  is  found  where  it  was  not  expected,
"  in  the  elders  of  Israel  : "  those  who  here  came  to  Ezekiel,  pretending  piety,
sat  before  him,  as  if  they  would  hearken  to  whatsoever  the  Lord  should
say,  and  do  it ;  yet  they  intended  no  such  thing,  but  were  resolved  to  go
on  in  their  own  ways,  and  to  be  as  the  Babylonians  and  heathens  (ver.  32),  so
that  they  might    enjoy   peace  and  safety.      So   those  who  came  to    Christ

221


c»AP.  XX.  BOMTLETW  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


(Matt.  xxii.  16-18),  they  carried  a  foul  business  very  smoothly.  There  are  many
who  will  be  found  hypocrites  at  last,  who  now  frequent  tlie  assemblies  and  come
to  hear  the  word  of  God,  but  do  it  not.  4.  To  inquire  and  ask  counsel  of  the
prophets  and  man  of  God,  is  of  ancient  standing  and  warrantable.  Their
coming  was  not  unlawful,  but  their  coming  sinfully.  It  was  a  frequent
practice  of  old  to  consult  with  the  prophets  (1  Sam.  ix.  9  ;  1  Kings  xxii.  15  ;
2  Kings  viii.  8  ;  Jer.  xxi.  2  ;  xxxvii.  7)  ;  and  their  coming  to  them  was
coming  to  the  Lord.  What  though,  now  there  are  no  prophets  nor  apostles
immediately  inspired  and  infallible  to  consult  withal,  yet  there  are
pastors  and  teachers  with  whom  Christ  hath  promised  to  be  to  the  end
of  the  world.  5.  The  prophets  were  to  give  out  the  Lord's  mind  in  His
name  and  words.  "Speak  unto  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  say,  thus  saith  the
Lord  God."  He  must  not  say,  thus  saith  Ezekiel,  but,  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."
That  which  is  from  the  Lord  hath  a  divine  stamp  upon  it,  a  divine  power  in  it ;
but  that  which  is  man's  is  like  himself,  frail  and  feeble.  6.  When  men  come  to
God  or  His  ordinances  with  hypocritical  hearts,  they  get  nothing  of  Him.
**  Come  ye  to  inquire  of  me  ?  as  1  live,  I  will  not  be  inquired  of  by  you."  Job,
speaking  of  a  hypocrite,  saith,  "Will  God  hear  his  cry  when  trouble  cometh  upon
him  ?"  (Job  xxxii.  9).  If  men's  hearts  be  not  upright,  sincere,  let  them  pray  and
cry  in  prayer,  let  them  come  to  a  prophet  and  ask  counsel  and  wait,  God  respects
them  not,  will  not  answer  them.  "  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  strength  to  the
upright "  (Prov.  x.  29).  What  is  the  way  of  the  Lord  ?  Prayer,  hearing  of  the
word,  asking  counsel  of  His  prophets  and  servants,  are  the  ways  of  the  Lord.
In  these  He  appears,  is  found,  lets  out  strength  ;  but  it  is  when  men  are  upright,
not  hypocritical.  7,  Hypocrites  may  deceive  the  prophets  and  servants  of  God.
Ezekiel  thought  that  they  were  good  men,  and  worthy  of  a  better  entertain-
ment at  the  hands  of  God,  but  he  was  deceived.  Simon  Magus  demeaned  him-
self so  that  he  begat  a  good  esteem  in  the  heart  of  Philip,  and  was  admitted  to
baptism  (Acts  viii.  13).  False  apostles  had  got  into  the  church  at  Ephesus,
and  had  for  a  time  gained  too  much  upon  the  angel  thereof  (Rev.  ii.  2).
7.  Hypocrites  are  not  to  he  pleaded  for.  "  Wilt  thou  judge  them,  son  of
man,  wilt  thou  judge  them  ?  God  would  not  have  the  prophet  to  plead
for  or  excuse  them.  Hypocrites  are  not  always  the  greatest  of  sinners,  but  they
are  ever  the  worst  of  sinners.  The  devil  is  never  more  devil  than  when  he
transforms  himself  into  an  angel  of  light.  The  Jews  were  "  a  hypocritical
nation  "  (Isa.  x.  6 ;  Jer.  vii.  9,  10)  ;  and,  therefore,  God  forbids  Jeremiah  to
pray  for  them  (Jer.  xiv.  11).  And  what  if  they  should  pray  themselves?  You
have  an  answer  in  Job.  xiii.  16  ;  God  tells  you  that  "  an  hypocrite  shall  not
come  before  Him,"  that  is  to  have  acceptance  of  His  person,  or  hear  any  com-
fortable answer  from  Him.  9.  The  prophets  and  servants  of  God,  when  they
are  inquired  of  by  men,  must  not  proceed  according  to  their  desires,  hut  they
must  wait  for  the  mind  of  God  and  do  answerahly  thereunto.  "  Wilt  thou
judge  them,  son  of  man  ?  Cause  them  to  know  the  abominations  of  their
fathers?"  They  would  have  thee  inquire  of  Me  for  them,  but  I  will  not  be
inquired  of,  they  shall  not  have  their  desires.  Go  thy  ways,  lay  before  them  the
abominable  things  their  fathers  have  done.  Not  the  people's  desires,  nor  the
prophet's  fancies,  must  be  his  direction,  when  he  is  to  make  answer  to  tho~e
that  inquire;  but  the  will  of  God  made  known  by  His  word  and  Spirit. —
{Grcenhill.)

(Vers.  5-9.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  elec-  their  God.  Israel's  ingratitude,  though

tion  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  where  God  made  the  Lord  brought  them  out  of  Egypt

Himself  known   to  them   by  wonders  into   a   land   flowing   with   milk   and

and  signs,   and  promised  to  become  honey.
222


rroMTinTTC  commentary:  ezektel.


CHAP.  XX.


Ver.   5.    "When  I   chose  Israel.'*

God  chose  them  for  high  purposes,  of
His  own  free  grace,  and  not  for  any
deserving  on  their  part  (Dent.  vii.  6,  7  ;
X.  15  ;  viv.  2).  *'  Lifted  up  mine  hand
unto  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Jacob.*'
The  reference  is  plainly  to  the  lifting
up  of  the  hands,  as  in  the  act  of
swearing  (Gen.  xiv.  22).  **  I  am  the
Lord  your  God."  This  was  God's
ancient  promise  renewed  to  Moses
(Ex.  vi.  6-8).

Ver.  6.  "Had  espied."  "God,  as
it  were,  spied  out  this  land  for  tliein,
sought  it  out  with  the  greatest  care  as
the  hest."^(Hengstenberg).  *'  The
glory  of  all  lands."  It  was  a  "  goodly
land "  (Deut.  viii.  7-9),  even  in  its
physical  characteristics :  but  emin-
ently ** glorious"  (Dan.  xi.  16,  41,45),
because  it  was  the  scene  where  the
glories  of  the  Son  of  God  were  dis-
played. It  was  the  land  from  which
the  streams  of  salvation  should  flow
all  over  the  earth.

Ver.  7.    "  The  abominations  of  His

eyes."  The  worship  of  visible  objects
which  Israel  had  substituted  for  the
invisible  God.  "  Defile  not  yourselves
with  the  idols  of  Egypt."  ''  The  elec-
tion of  the  Israelites  to  be  the  people
of  Jehovah,  contained  eo  ipso  the  com-
mand to  give  up  the  idols  of  Egpyt,
although  it  was  at  Sinai  that  the
worship  of  other  gods  was  for  the  first
time  expressly  prohibited  (Ezek.  xx.  3),
and  Egyptian  idolatry  is  only  men-
tioned in  Lev.  xvii.  1" — (Keil)»

Ver.  8.  "Neither  did  they  forsake
the  idols  of  Egypt."  "  History  does
not  expressly  mention  such  a  revolt
of  the  people  in  Egypt ;  yet  we  are  led
indirectly  to  this  by  the  statements  of
the  books  of  Moses  concerning  the
perpetual  tendency  of  the  people  in  the
wilderness  to  the  customs  of  Egypt.
To  this  belongs,  e.g,,  the  making  of
the  golden  calf,  in  which  there  is  an
imitation  of  the  Egyptian  worship  of
the  brute;  further  (Lev.  xvii.  17),
according  to  which  Israel  in  the  wilder-
ue;ss  served  he-goats.     The  worship  of


a  deity  under  the  form  of  a  he-goat
was  peculiar  to  Egypt  (Lev.  xviii.  3),
when  the  people  are  admonished ;
"After  the  doings  of  the  land  of
Eg)rpt,  wherein  ye  dwelt,  shall  ye  not
do."  That  the  Israelites  generally
served  idols  in  Egypt  is  attested  by
Josh.  xxiv.  14  ;  and  this  being  so,  it
is  to  be  expected  beforehand  that  this
inclination  would  not  immediately
cease  after  the  true  God  had  made
Hinjself  known  to  them.  The  mur-
muring also  of  the  people  in  Egypt
again  Moses  and  Aaron  (Ex.  v.  21),
implies  an  under-current  of  Egyptian
tendencies."  —  (Hengstenberg).  The
evidence  furnished  by  Josh.  xxiv.  14).
established  the  fact  that  the  Israelites
practised  idolatry  in  Egypt.  Israel
had  to  be  redeemed,  not  so  much  from
the  bondage  of  Pharaoh  as  from  "  the
gods  of  Egypt"  (Ex.  xii.  12),  whom
Pliaraoh  and  his  magicians  served.
The  whole  controversy  with  Pharaoh
turned  on  the  question,  would  he  allow
Israel  to  serve  the  Lord  f

Ver.  9.  "  But  I  wrought  for  thy
name's  sake,  that  it  should  not  he
polluted  before  the  heathen  among
whom  they  were."  "  The  missing  ob-
ject explaining  what  He  did,  namely,
abstain  from  pouring  out  His  wrath,
is  to  be  gathered  from  what  follows  :

*  for  my  name's  sake,  that  it  should
not  be  polluted  before  the  heathen.'
This  would  have  taken  place  if  God
had  destroyed  Israel  by  pouring  out
His  wrath ;  in  other  words,  have
allowed  them  to  be  destroyed  by  the
Egyptians.  The  heathen  might  then
have  said  that  Jehovah  had  been  un-
able to  liberate  His  people  from  their
hand  and  power  (Num.  xiv.  16  ;
Ex.  xxxii.  V2")--(Keil).  "  Not  only
the  miserable  circumstances  of  their
external  condition,  but  still  more  the
state  of  spiritual  degradation  into
which  the  Hebrews  had  sunk,  in-
finitely magnified  the  Divine  mercy
which  interposed  for  their  deliverance.

*  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much
more  abound.'  The  glory  of  this,  as
well  as  of  the  other  attributes  of
Jehovah,  was  the  ultimate  end  which

223


CHAP.  XX.  nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    EZEKTEL.


Tie  had  in  view  in  bringing  them  forth  The  preservation  of  that  name  from

from  the  house  of  bondage.     This  is  desecration  is  repeatedly  spoken  of

d'sciibod  as  His  name,  i.e.,  the  sum-  this    chapter    (vers.    14,    22,    39).—

total  of  Flis  known  perroc-tions  (Rom.  (Henderson  '
ix.  17  ;  2  Saiji.  vii.  23  ;  Lsa.  Ixiii.  12).


ROMILETWa.

Israel's  Election.

I.  It  was  of  God's  free  choice.     "  In  the  day  when  I  chose  Israel "  (ver.  5).

This  choice  had  no  reference  to  their  merit  or  special  fitness.  They  were
selected  to  carry  out  the  special  purposes  of  redemption,  because  such  was  the
will  of  God,  who  is  not  obliged  to  give  any  account  to  men  of  His  matters.  We
must,  however,  avoid  the  error  of  attributing  any  caprice  to  God.  He  works
not  according  to  mere  will,  but  "after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will "  (Eph.  i.  11).

II.  It  implied  His  willingness  to  be  their  God.  "  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  '*
(ver.  5).  This  includes  all  that  the  Creator  can  give  to  the  creature — every
blessing  for  time  and  eternity.  Several  stages  were  necessary  for  the  realisation
of  this  gift.  1.  God  revealed  Himself  to  them.  "  And  made  myself  known
unto  them  in  the  land  of  Egypt."  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  soul
should  know  Him  whom  it  is  to  serve,  and  from  whom  it  is  to  expect  every
blessing.  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  He  is,  and  that  He  is  a
rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  Him "  (Heb.  xi.  6).  But  how  can
we  come  to  God  and  have  faith  in  Him  unless  He  makes  Himself  known  to  us
as  an  object  worthy  of  our  trust  and  reverence?  We  cannot  ^novf  2^. person
except  he  speaks  and  we  cannot  know  God  unless  He  reveals  Himself  in
an  intelligible  voice.  Therefore  it  is  that  ''  faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and
hearing  by  the  word  of  God"  (Rom.  x.  17).  2.  God  entered  into  covenant
with  them.  "And  lifted  up  thine  hand  unto  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Jacob"
(ver.  5).  God's  communication  to  His  people  was  a  covenant  wherein  He  bound
Himself  to  bless  them,  binding  them  at  tiie  same  time  to  certain  conditions.
3.  God  engaged  to  lead  them.  '*  To  bring  them  forth  t)f  the  land  of  Egyj)t  "
(ver.  6).  He  sought  out  and  prepared  for  them  a  jJace  of  habitation,  had  espied
for  them  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  which  is  the  glory  of  all  lands.
Thus  when  God  promises  His  people  to  be  their  God,  this  promise  implies  all
that  is  meant  by  godliness  and  its  reward  —  revelation,  covenant  blessing;*,
discipline  and  guidance,  the  peace  and  rest  of  the  lot  of  the  conquered
inheritance.

III.  It  demanded  corresponding^  duties.    By  every  revelation  of  Himself,  by

every  gift  of  God,  man  comes  under  obligation.  It  was  the  duty  of  Israel  1.  To
forsake  all  Jalse  objects  of  worship  (ver.  7).  But  instead  of  this  they  defiled
themselves  with  the  idols  of  Egj'pt.  2.  To  yield  obedience  to  God's  commands.
But  instead  of  this,  they  rebelled  against  Him.  God  chooses  nion  not  for  evil,
but  that  He  might  redeem  and  save  them.  But  they  cannot  be  saved  unless
they  are  obedient  to  God's  way  of  salvation.  The  children  of  Israel  were  dis-
obedient. They  did  the  very  things  which  were  contrary  to  the  purpose  for
which  they  were  elected.  They  were  infected  by  the  idolatry  of  Egypt.  Though
they  were  called  out  of  the  world  to  be  a  peculiar  people,  yet  the  influence  of
the  world  overcame  them.  They  wished  to  stand  well  with  Egypt,  which  was
then  t])e  world-power.

224  :


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.  chap.  xx.


IV.  It  heightened  Israel's  ingratitude.  When  they  sinned  against  their
h\!j\\  calling  their  sin  was  all  the  jireater.  1.  I'he  anger  of  God  was  provoked.
"  I  will  pour  out  my  fury  upon  them  to  accomplish  my  anger  against  them."
The  Egyptians  were  the  instruments  of  this  vengeance.  It  was,  *  in  the  midst
of  the  land  of  Egypt "  that  God  would  accomplish  His  anger.  They  were
punished  by  the  very  people  whom  they  sought  to  propitiate.  Thus  God
chastises  men  by  those  things  in  which  they  most  delight.  2.  hven  in  the
punishment  of  His  people y  God  has  regard  to  the  honour  of  His  name.  *'  But
I  wrought  for  my  name's  sake  that  it  should  not  be  polluted  before  the  heathen
among  whom  they  were,  in  whose  sight  I  made  Myself  known  to  them,  in  bring-
ing them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt"  (ver.  9).  "  But  the  revelation  which  I  had
given  of  Myself  before  the  eyes  of  the  heathen  among  whom  they  were  was  not  to
be  desecrated  before  these  same  eyes,  especially  before  the  Egyptians,  as  if  to
wish  well  to  My  name  were  present  with  Ale,  but  not  the  power  of  performance
(regard  being  had  at  the  same  time  to  the  heathen,  as  Israel  was  placed  in  a
peculiar  position  in  regard  to  humanity  as  a  whole)  Comp.  Num.  xiv.  13,
etc. ;  Ex.  xxxii.  12  ;  Num.  xxiii.  19." — (Lange),


(Ver.  6).

1,  Old  mercies  should  be  remembered.  Not  only  by  those  they  were  first
bestowed  upon,  but  also  by  their  posterity.  In  this,  and  in  the  former  verse,
God  reminds  them  of  old  mercies,  His  choice  of  them.  His  professing  to  be  their
God,  His  bringing  them  out  of  Egypt,  which  were  some  eight  or  nine  hundred
years  before,  and  His  espying  out  a  land  for  them,  which  was  four  hundred  years
before  that ;  for  it  was  in  Abraham's  days  that  God  took  notice  of  that  land
(Gen.  xii.  1,  7).  These  old  mercies  God  would  have  them  to  mind,  though  they
were  in  Babylon,  and  deprived  of  the  good  land  God  had  given  them.  Let  men
be  in  what  condition  they  will,  old  mercies  should  not  be  forgotten  (Psa.  xliv.  1,2;
Judg.  vi.  13).  And  because  men  are  apt  to  forget  former  mercies,  when  they
grow  old  they  grow  out  of  mind,  the  Lord  laid  a  charge  upon  the  Jews  that
they  should  not  forget  them  fDeut.  vi.  10-12).  2.  Countries  and  habitations  of
people  are  appointed  by  the  Lord.  He  distributes  lands  and  habitations  to  whom
He  thinks  meet.  **The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof"  (Psa.  xxiv.  1).
He  is  the  sole  owner,  the  true  Lord  of  the  soil,  and  all  it  brings  forth,  and
He  hath  **  given  it  to  the  children  of  men  "  (Psa.  cxv.  16).  He  hath  assigned
them  their  several  portions  (Dent,  xxxii.  8).  The  most  high  God,  being  Lord
paramount,  would  not  have  the  sons  of  Adam  to  live  all  in  one  country,  but
appointed  them  several  lai)ds  to  dwell  in,  and  set  their  bounds  and  limits.
After  the  flood,  at  the  building  of  Babel,  God  confounded  the  languages,  and
dispersed  the  posterity  of  Noah  into  divers  lands,  and  set  them  their  bounds
(Gen.  xi.  9).  And  so,  when  He  brought  the  Israelites  into  the  land  of  Canaan,
He  gave  them  their  bounds  (P^a.  Ixxviii.  55).  3.  The  Lord  provides  and  bestows
the  choicest  mercies  upon  His  own  people.  If  there  be  a  land  in  the  world  that
flows  with  milk  and  honey,  that  exceeds  all  other  lands  for  plenty  and  pleasantness,
His  people  shall  have  it.  When  God  carried  Jacob  and  his  family  into  Egypt,
He  provided  the  good  and  fat  of  that  land  for  them  (Gen.  xlv.  18j  ;  yea,  they
were  placed  in  "  the  best  of  the  land  "  (Gen.  xlvii.  11).  God  fed  and  filled  His
people  with  *'  the  finest  of  the  wheat "  (Psa.  cxlvii.  14).  Moses  mentions  seven
things  together  in  Deut.  xxxii.  13-15,  as  "honey  out  of  the  rock,  oil  out  of
the  flinty  rock,  butter  of  kine,  milk  of  sheep,  fat  of  Iambs,  and  rams  of  the
breed  of  Bashan,  and  goats,  fat  of  kidneys  of  wheat,  the  pure  blood  of  the
grape  ; "  these  the  Lord  provided  for  His  people,  and  they  had  all  an  excellency
in  them.    God  bestowed  choice  mercies  upon  this  people  (Ezek.  xvi.  10-13).

r  225


CHAP.  XX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


David  acknowledges  that  lie  had  a  "  goodly  heritage,"  even  a  "  wealthy  place."
Daniel  and  the  three  children  were  set  in  eminent  places  (Dan.  ii. ;  iii.).  4.
Spiritual  mercies  make  a  land  glorious.  Canaan  was  the  glory  of  all  lands,  not  so
much  for  its  great  plenty  as  for  the  spiritual  mercies  it  enjoyed.  There  was
the  Lord's  presence,  His  prophets,  His  worship,  His  oracles,  and  His  ordinances,
and  these  made  it  glorious,  yea,  more  than  all  the  nations  far  or  near.  '*  In
Judah  is  God  known  :  His  name  is  great  in  Israel.  In  Salem  also  is  His
tabernacle,  and  His  dwelling-place  in  Zion  "  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  1,  2).  God  was  not
known  in  Babylon,  in  Egypt,  in  other  nations ;  His  tabernacle  and  dwelling-
place  was  not  amongst  them,  therefore  they  were  not  glorious.  **  Thou  art
more  glorious  than  the  mountains  of  prey  " ;  thou  Judah,  thou  Israel,  thou
Salem,  thou  Zion,  that  hast  spiritual  mercies  and  blessings,  art  more  glorious
than  they,  whatever  their  glory  be.  Have  the  nations  abroad  goodly  towers  ?
thou  hast  the  temple.  Have  they  stately  cities  ?  thou  hast  Jerusalem,  the  city
of  God.  Have  they  wise  men  ?  thou  hast  the  prophets.  Have  they  gods  of
gold,  silver,  and  stones  ?  thou  hast  the  true  living  God,  Jehovah,  to  be  thy  God.
Have  they  human  laws  that  are  good  ?  thou  hast-  divine  laws  that  excel.  Have
they  temporal  excellencies  ?  thou  hast  spiritual.  Have  they  the  glory  of  the
world  ?  thou  hast  the  glory  of  heaven.  "  Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty,
God  hath  shined  "  (Psa.  1.  1,  2).  What  made  Zion  so  glorious  and  beautiful  ?
It  was  the  presence  of  God  ;  if  He  had  not  been  there,  Zion  had  been  like  other
mountains,  and  Canaan  like  other  nations  ;  but  His  presence  was  like  the  sun,
darting  out  His  beams,  and  making  all  glorious  and  beautiful.  Spiritual
mercies  are  beams  and  rays  of  that  God  who  is  brighter  than  the  sun  ;  by  these
He  shined  in  Zion  and  made  it  the  perfection  of  beauty.  By  these  He
shined  out  of  Zion,  and  darkened  all  the  glory  of  the  nations.  Where
God  and  His  ordinances  are,  there  is  glory ;  and  where  these  are  not,
there  is  no  glory,  but  Egyptian  darkness — a  land  without  the  sun.  In
Canaan  was  spiritual  light  and  glory.  There  were  glorious  appearances  of
God,  glorious  praisings  of  God,  glorious  conversions  of  sinners  unto  God,
glorious  sabbaths  and  assemblies,  and  glorious  beauties  of  holiness,  glorious
types  of  Christ,  and  people  who  were  the  glory  of  God  (Isa.  iv.  5).  There  were
glorious  truths,  ordinances,  and  dispensations  of  God.  Plenty  of  outward  things
do  not  make  a  land  glorious  as  spiritual  mercies  do.  If  God,  Christ,  Gospel,
and  the  ordinances  of  it  be  in  a  land  they  make  it  glorious  above  all  other
nations.  Let  us  learn  to  know  our  true  glory,  even  spiritual  mercies,  and  prize
them  highly,  though  loathed  by  some,  like  the  manna  of  old,  and  pray  that  such
glory  may  ever  dwell  in  our  land. — (Greenhill.)

(Ver.  9).

God's  name  is  polluted.  (1).  When  it  is  not  hallowed.  Not  acknowledged,
or  esteemed  to  be  holy  and  honourable.  (2).  When  it  is  slighted,  and  not  used
reverently.  God's  name  is  great,  glorious,  excellent,  holy,  and  ought  to  be
reverenced  (Psa.  cxi.  9).  (3).  When  occasion  is  given  to  the  wicked  to  speak
evil  of  God  and  His  ways.  David  by  his  sins  gave  great  occasion  to  the  enemies
of  God  to  blaspheme  (2  Sam.  xii.  14).  The  Jews  by  their  sinful  carriage  caused
the  name  of  God  to  be  profaned  among  the  heathen.  Had  the  Lord,  then,
destroyed  this  people  in  Egypt,  according  as  He  purposed,  the  Egyptians  and
other  nations  would  have  slighted  Him,  spoken  evil  of  His  doings,  blasphemed
His  name,  and  wounded  His  honour.  Therefore,  though  this  people  deserved
to  die  in  the  way  of  justice,  yet  God  spared  them  in  the  way  of  mercy  for  the
honour  of  His  name.  "  Before  the  heathen."  The  Hebrew  is,  "  in  the  eyes  of
the  heathen."  God  would  not  have  them  to  see  or  behold  anything  which  might
226


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL,  OHAF.  xx.


occasion  them  to  dishonour  Him.  He  would  not  slay  His  people  in  their
sight,  but  made  Himself  known  by  His  word  and  mighty  works  unto  the  Jews,
in  the  sight  of  the  heatlien,  so  that  hereby  He  was  known  unto  both.  1.  TJie
Lord  spares  and  saves  sinners  deserving  death,  even  for  Ills  names  sake,  God's
honour  and  glory  are  strong  arguments  to  move  Him  to  show  mercy  to  His
])eople.  This  the  servants  of  God  have  known,  and  made  use  of,  in  their  straits.
When  Jerusalem  was  in  a  manner  laid  desolate,  and  the  jealousy  of  God  burned
like  fire,  what  argument  did  the  Church  use  then  to  move  God  to  show  mercy
but  His  "name,"  and  the  glory  of  it?  (Psa.  Ixxix.  9).  What  hurt  would  it
be  to  God's  name  if  He  did  it  not  ?  It  would  not  be  glorious,  but  dishonoured  ;
for  in  the  next  verse  it  is  said,  "  Wherefore  should  the  heathen  say,  Where  is
their  God  ?  "  They  trusted  in  their  God,  and  He  is  a  non-helping  God,  a  non-
delivering  God.  This  was  the  argument  Joshua  used  when  Israel  fell  before
their  enemies,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  do  unto  Thy  great  name  ?  "  When  the
people  forgot  the  multitude  of  great  mercies  they  had  in  Egypt,  and  provoked
Him  at  the  sea,  even  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  deserved  to  be  drowned  in  it,
what  saith  the  text  ?  "  Nevertheless,  He  saved  them  for  His  name's  sake."
(Psa.  cvi.  8).  2.  God's  sparing  of  His  people  is  an  honouring  and  sanctifying
of  His  name.  God  deals  with  His  people  sometimes,  not  after  the  ordinary
rule  and  course  of  His  proceedings,  but  in  a  prerogative  way  ;  He  spares  them,
though  their  sins  be  great,  because  their  enemies  would  be  proud,  arrogant,  and
blasphemous.     (Deut.  xxxii.  26,  27.)

3.  That  notwithstanding  the  sins  of  God*s  people,  He  shows  them  kindness
openly,  and  in  the  face  of  their  enemies.  Though  the  Jews  had  rebelled  against
God,  and  the  Egyptians  would  have  rejoiced  in  their  ruin,  yet,  in  their  sight,
God  made  Himself  known  unto  them,  in  bringing  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of
Egypt.  God  would  have  the  Egyptians  see  that  He  could  be  kind  to  His
people,  though  they  were  disobedient  unto  Him. — {GreenhilL)

(Vers.  10-17).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  — The  sin  the  wilderness  served   to  test  their

of  the  first  generation  of  Israelites  in  obedience.
the  wilderness  :  yet  the  Lord  did  not

make  an  end  of  them.  Ver.  12.  "I  gave  them  my  Sab-
baths." "  God  concludes  the  direc-
Ver.  11.  "And  I  gave  them  My  tions  for  His  worship  by  urging  upon
statutes,  and  showed  them  My  judg-  the  people  in  the  most  solemn  manner
ments.'*  This  was  a  general  expression  the  observance  of  His  Sabbaths,  and
for  the  law  which  was  delivered  to  thereby  pronounces  the  keeping  of  the
them.  "God  gave  laws  at  Sinai  to  Sabbath  as  the  kernel  of  all  divine
the  people  whom  He  had  brought  out  worship.  And,  as  in  that  passage
of  Egypt,  through  which  they  were  (Ex.  xxxi.  13),  we  are  to  understand
sanctified  as  His  own  people,  that  by  the  Sabbaths  the  actual  weekly
they  might  live  before  God." — {Keil.)  Sabbaths,  and  not  the  institutions  of
''  Which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  even  worship  as  a  whole,  so  here  we  must  re-
live in  them,"  He  who  obeyed  God's  tain  the  literal  signification  of  the  word,
laws  would  find  them  tend  "unto  life"  It  is  only  of  the  Sabbaths  occurring
(Rom.  vii.  10;  x.  5).  The  life  which  every  week,  and  not  of  all  the  fasts,
comes  of  obedience  was  not  mere  exist-  that  it  could  be  said  that  it  was  a  sign
ence,  but  prosperity  and  blessedness,  between  Jehovah  and  Israel.  It  was
both  bodily  and  spiritual,  temporal  and  a  sign,  not  as  a  token,  that  they  who
eternal  (Deut.  iv.  1  ;  Matt.  xix.  17  ;  observed  it  were  Israelites,  but  that
Ex.  XX.  12,  etc.).  The  leading  through  they  might  know   that  Jehovah  was

227


OHAF.  XX.


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEL.


sanctifying  them,  namely,  by  the
Sabbath  rest — as  a  refreshing  and
elevation  of  the  mind,  in  which  Israel
was  to  have  a  foretaste  of  that  blessed
resting  from  all  works  to  which  the
people  of  God  was  ultimately  to  attain.
It  is  from  this  deeper  signification  of
the  Sabbath  that  the  prominence  given
to  the  Sabbaths  here  is  to  be  explained,
and  not  from  the  outward  circumstance
that  in  exile,  when  the  sacrificial
worship  was  necessarily  suspended,
the  keeping  of  the  Sabbath  was  the
only  bond  which  united  the  Israelites,
so  far  as  the  worship  of  God  was  con-
cerned."— (Keif).  The  weekly  pause
in  the  midst  of  earthly  labour  was  a
"sign"  of  the  spiritual  work  which  God
was  performing  among  His  obedient
people  ;  a  "  sign  "  also  that  they  were
sanctified,  were  set  apart  from  all
other  nations,  as  that  day  was  from
the  rest  of  the  week.

Ver.  13.  *'  They  walked  not  in  My
statutes,  and  they  despised  My  judg-
ments." Historical  examples  of  Israel's
rebellion  against  God's  commandments
in  the  wilderness  are  given  in  Ex.
xxxii.  1-6  ;  Num.  xxv.  1-3  ;  and  of
the  desecration  of  the  Sabbath  in  Ex.
xvi.  27  ;  Num.  xv.  32.  *'  My  Sabbaths
they  greatly  polluted."  **  History  re-
cords nothing  of  an  external  violation
of  the  Sabbath  during  the  journey
through  the  wilderness.  Num.  xv.  32,
where  the  man  who  gathered  wood  on
the  Sabbath  was  brought  before  the
congregation,  and  stoned  by  them  after
formal  sentence,  is  rather  a  proof  that
in  this  respect  they  were  not  wanting
in  zeal.  But  the  prophet,  in  accord-
ance with  Isa.  Iviii.  13,  14,  and  with
Moses  himself,  who  commanded  to
sanctify  the  Sabbath,  to  consecrate  it
in  every  respect  to  God,  and  withdraw
it  wholly  from  the  regiim  of  self-
interest,  of  personal  sinful  inclination,
according  to  which  the  festival  cannot
possibly  be  observed  with  indolent
repose,   forms  a   deeper   and    more


spiritual  idea  of  the  Sabbath.  *  Thou
shalt  cease  from  thy  doing,  that  God
may  have  His  work  in  thee,'  in  this
sense  the  truly  God-fearing  only  can
celebrate  the  Sabbath ;  so  that  all  that
in  the  books  of  Moses  attests  the  want
of  true  godliness  among  the  people  in
the  wilderness,  involves  at  the  same
time  the  charge  of  desecrating  the
Sabbath." — {Ilengstenherg).

Ver.  14.  **  But  I  wrought  for  My
name's  sake."  '*For  His  name's  sake
God  destroys  not  the  people  ;  but  He
excludes  the  present  generation  from
the  possession  of  Canaan,  in  just  re-
tribution for  that  which  they  have
practised  against  Him.  To  this  just
retribution  points  the — *  And  I  also  '
(ver.  15).  It  depends  on  the  will  of
every  one  what  position  he  will  take
towards  God ;  but  he  must  be  prepared
for  this,  that  his  act  will  be  attended
with  a  corresponding  Divine  act." —
(Hengstenherg,)

Ver.  15.  **Yet,  also,  I  lifted  up
My  hand  unto  them  in  the  wilderness."
The  lifting  up  of  God's  hand  signifies
the  Divine  oath  (Num.  xiv.  28-30  ;
Psa.  ovi.  26).

Ver.  16.  "Their  heart  went  after
their  idols."  The  idolatries  of  the
children  of  Israel  during  their  wander-
ings in  the  desert  are  referred  to  by
the  prophet  Amos,  and  in  St.  Stephen's
speech  (Amos  v.  25,  26 ;  Acts  vii.
42,  43).

Ver.  17.  "Mine  eye  spared  them
from  destroying  them,  neither  did  I
make  an  end  of  them  in  the  wilder-
ness." Though  the  generation  that
sinned  in  the  desert  perished,  yet  God
did  not  give  the  whole  of  the  people
over  to  the  destruction  which  they
deserved.  The  **  hand  "  of  righteous
anger  was  lifted  to  smite,  but  the
"  eye  "  of  gracious  pity  restrained  it.


229


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,  chap.  xx.


HOMlLhJTlGS.

The  Sin  of  the  first  generation  of  the  Children  op  Israel  in  the

Wilderness  (Vers.  10-1 7 J.

I.  It  was  a  sin  aggravated  in  its  character.  1.  They  sinned  after  a  great
deliverance.  In  Egypt  they  were  persecuted  and  held  in  cruel  bondage,  l^hey
learned  to  worship  the  gods  of  the  nation  which  ruled  over  them  (Josh.  xxiv.  14),
But  tiiey  were  brought  out  of  that  land  by  the  manifest  power  of  God,  and  were
thus  delivered  both  from  bo'lily  and  spiritual  slavery.  2  They  sinned  after
special  means  had  been  used  to  preserve  their  spiritual  character  as  the
elect  of  God.  (1).  'J hey  had  a  clear  revelation  of  God's  law.  GoH  had
given  them  His  "statutes,"  and  showed  them  His  "judgnients."  The  observ-
ance of  these  would  have  been  their  peace,  happiness,  and  salvation.  (Ver.  11.)
For  the  law  of  God  tends  to  "  life"  (Rom.  vii.  20.)  It  is  true  that  the  law
would  give  the  knowledge  of  sin  (Rom.  iii.  20),  yet  that  knowledge  ought  to
have  brought  them  to  confess  their  sins  and  to  seek  forgiveness  through  the
blood  of  the  atonement.  They  had  to  render  obedience  not  to  a  blind  power,
making  in  some  way  for  righteousness,  but  to  a  living  will, — to  the  one  true
God  who  was  merciful  and  desired  their  salvation.  (2.)  They  were  placed  in
circumstances  favourable  to  the  spiritual  life.  God  had  brought  them  out  from
the  bondage  and  seductive  civilization  of  Egypt  and  had  led  them  into  the
wilderness  (ver.  10).  The  seclusion  of  the  desert  was  favourable  to  contempla-
tion,— to  seriousness  of  character.  They  would  have  a  time  to  reflect  upon
God's  loving  kindness  in  redemption.  Obedience  would  have  given  them  the
means  of  making  a  great  history  (Ex.  xix.  3-9).  Placed  in  such  outward  con-
ditions as  would  naturally  have  the  effect  of  leading  them  to  cast  themselves
upon  God's  care  and  governance,  and  delivered  from  the  corrupting  influences
of  the  world,  they  had  the  most  favourable  opportunity  for  becominfr  a  spiritual
people.  (3.)  They  had  the  ordinance  of  th§  Sabbath.  The  Sabbath  was  given
to  them  as  a  **  sign  "  and  to  promote  the  holiness  of  the  nation  (ver.  12).  For
this  intermission  of  earthly  work  was  a  pledge  of  that  work  which  God  was  carrying
on  amongst  His  obedient  people  (Ex.  xxxi.  13).  It  was  a  sign  that  God
sanctified  the  people,  that  He  separated  them  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  and
that  He  would  bring  them,  at  last,  to  their  quiet  inheritance  of  rest.  To  keep
the  Sabbath  with  due  regard  to  its  spiritual  significance  was  truly  to  fear  and
to  serve  God.  But  they  rebelled  against  God  in  the  wilderness,  they  polluted
His  Sabbaths  (ver.  13).  In  the  pollution  of  the  Sabbath  there  was  a  special
danger  to  their  religious  life.  For  if  that  sacred  day  was  not  piously  observed,
it  only  exposed  them  the  more  to  strong  temptation.  If  it  was  not  occupied
with  thoughts  of  God,  it  laid  their  souls  open  to  the  incursions  of  every  evil
thought.  Some  of  the  early  Christian  writers  charge  the  Jews  of  their  time
with  spending  their  Sabbaths  in  licentiousness.  Thus  Israel  h.ul  su})erior
religious  advantages  in  the  wilderness,  but  idolatry  was  in  the  heart  of  the
people.     The  corruptions  of  Egypt  clung  to  them  (ver.  16).

II.  It  was  a  sin  which  was  visited  with  a  fitting  punishment.  A  punish-
ment, not  only  in  degree,  but  also  in  kind.  They  polluted  God's  Sabbaths,  and
He  would  not  bring  them  to  the  land  of  rest.  His  plan  concerning  them  was
to  lead  them  to  the  land  of  their  inheritance,  where  they  might  dwell  in  peace
and  safety.  But  all  revolt  from  God  must  be  followed  by  darkness  and  disorder,
by  a  disarrangement  of  all  those  good  things  which  He  has  prepared  for  us.

III.  Their  sin  did  not  altogether  shut  out  God's  mercy.  They  were  not  all
destroyed  in  the  wilderness  as  they  deserved.  God  has  an  "  eye  "  of  pity  which
arrests  His  *'  hand  "  of  righteous  anger.

229


CHAP.  XX.  IIOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKTEL.


(Vers.  15-17).

Here  a  difficulty  ariseth.  In  ver.  6  it  is  said  tliat  God  had  lifted  up  His  hand,
and  so  sworn  to  bring  them  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  into  the  land  of  Canaan  ;
and  liere  it  is  said  lie  hath  lifted  up  His  hand  to  the  contrary.  It  seems  that
liere  is  one  oatli  against  another.  And  in  Num.  xiv.  34,  (jod  acknowledges  His
breach  of  promise,  for  He  saith,  "  Ye  shall  know  my  breacii  of  promise."  I  have
promised  and  sworn  to  bring  you  into  tlie  land  of  Canaan,  but  you  have  so
sinned  against  and  provoked  Me  that  I  will  not  do  it,  yea,  liave  sworn  you  shall
not  enter  into  my  rest  (Psa.  xcv.  11).  This  difficulty  is  removed  by  considering
that  God  did  not  make  His  promise  or  swear  to  those  indiviilnal  men  that  were
kept  out  of  Canaan,  that  they  should  be  brought  into  it,  for  if  it  had  been  so
God  had  forsworn  Himself;  but  His  promise  and  oath  was  that  the  seed
of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  should  be  brought  into  it  (Gen.  xii.  17  ;  xiii.  15  ;
XV.  18  ;  xxiv.  4  ;  1.  24  ;  Deut.  xxxiv.  4)  ;  and  their  seed  was  brought  into  the
promised  land  (Josh.  i.  2  ;  iv,  1  ;  xiv,  1  ;  xxiv.  13)  ;  and  so  God's  promise
and  oath  were  kept.  Those  He  swore  against  were  those  that  murmure  1
against  Him,  even  all  from  twenty  years  old  and  upwards,  except  Caleb  and
Joshua,  whose  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness  (Josh.  v.  6).  As  for  Num.  xiv.  34,
God's  breach  of  promise  is,  in  the  ov'v^xMdl,  by  frustration :  you  looked  certainly
to  have  entered  into  Canaan,  but  for  your  murmuring  and  unbelief  I  have
frustrated  your  expectations.  Or  thus,  you  think  My  oath  cannot  be  true,
because  of  a  former  oath,  and  that  the  words  I  have  uttered  will  prove  false  ;
but  you  shall  know  whether  my  words  and  oath  be  false  or  not.  [The  Revised
Version  (1885)  has,  "  And  ye  shall  know  my  alienation,"  with  the  rendering  in
the  margin.     "  'Ike  revoking  of  my  promised]

"  Flowing  with  milk  and  lioney,  which  is  the  glory  of  all  lands/*  Of  these
words  hath  been  spoken  largely  in  ver.  6.  They  are  repeated  here  to  show  the
ingratitude  of  the  people,  that  were  not  affected  with  this  land,  which  wr.s  a
second  Paradise,  but  despised  it,  and  raised  an  ill-rei)ort  upon  it ;  as  al.-^o  to
show  what  they  lost  in  being  kept  out  of  it,  and  their  folly  in  preferring  Egypt
before  it.

1.  Men's  sins  disappoint  them  of  choice  mercies.  Yea,  mercies  promised,
expected,  and  near  at  hand.  God  had  promised  them  Canaan,  they  were  near
unto  it  (Num.  xiii.),  expected  to  go  in  and  possess  it ;  but  God  would  not  bring
them  into  the  land  because  they  despised  His  judgments,  walked  not  in  His
statutes,  but  polluted  His  sabbaths.

In  Heb.  ii.  19,  it  is  said,  "They  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief;"
and  Psa.  cvi.  24,  "  they  despised  the  pleasant  land,  they  believed  not  His
word."  It  was  their  sins  kept  them  back  from  so  great,  so  near,  so  longed-for^
a  mercy.  Such  is  the  malignity  of  sin  that  it  drives  mercies  back  when  they
are  at  the  door,  and  blocks  up  the  passage,  that  none  tor  the  future  may  issue
fwrth  towards  us.  God  can  hear  and  help  ;  "  but  your  initjuities  have  separated
bet  ween  you  and  your  God,  and  your  sins  have  hid  His  face  from  you,  that  He
will  not  hear"  (Isa.  lix.  1,2);  your  sins  stand  like  a  trap-wall,  a  mighty
mountain,  between  Him  and  you  ;  they  have  cramped  Ilis  will,  so  that  though
He  can,  yet  He  will  neither  hear  your  prayers  nor  help  your  persons.  It  is
sin  that  keeps  mercy  from  us.     (Jer.  v.  25).

2.  When  the  heart  is  carried  out  after  unlawful  thingSy  then  the  ways  and
ordinances  of  God  are  neglected,  slighted^  and  profaned  (ver.  16).  Their  idols
had  stolen  away  their  hearts  from  God.  They  had  whorish  hearts,  and  whorish
eyes  which  went  after  their  idols,  and  made  them  depart  from  God.  David
advised  men  not  to  set  their  hearts  upon  riches  (Psa.  Ixii.  10)  ;  they  will  then
be  their  idols,  and  make  them  forget  God  and  His  ways,  and  do  those  things

230


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XX.


which  will  profane  His  ordinaDces.     Look  well  to  your  hearts,  and  let  not  them
carry  you  away  (Job  xv.  12).

3.  When  sinners  provoke  God  into  ways  of  destruction ^  lie  doth  not  utterly
dei^troy  them,  but  shows  some  pity  and  mercy.  *'  IXevertheless  mine  eye  spared
them  from  destroying."  God  did  destroy  many  of  them  in  the  wilderness  ;
three  thousand  upon  their  making  the  calf  (Ex.  xxxii.  28)  ;  twenty-four
thousand  upon  their  committing  whoredom  with  the  daughters  of  Moab  (Num.
XXV.  9)  ;  much  people  by  fiery  serpents  upon  their  murmuring  (Num.  xxi.  6)  ;
Koral),  Dathan,  and  Abiram  were  swallowed  up  of  the  earth,  and  all  theirs,
and  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  that  offered  incense  were  consumed  by
fire  (Num.  xvi.  32-35) ;  fourteen  thousand  seven  hundn  d  were  destroyed  by
the  plague  (ver.  49)  ;  and  many  by  the  Amorites  in  Seir  (Deut.  i.  44).  Yet  all
were  not  destroyed  ;  God  did  not  make  an  end  of  them  in  the  wilderness.  He
did  not  consummate  and  perfect  His  wrath  upon  them.  Though  men  liave
sinned  much,  yet  God  liath  an  eye  to  spare  and  a  heart  to  pity.  If  He  should
punish  and  destroy  none,  He  would  be  thought  to  be  like  unto  sinners
(Psa.  1.  21)  ;  if  He  should  de.-troy  all.  He  would  be  thought  to  be  cruel ;  to
bliow,  therefore,  that  He  is  a  just  God,  He  cuts  off  some;  and  to  show  He  is  a
merciful  God,  he  spares  some. — (Greenhill.)


Ver.  18-26.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The
prophet  describes  the  sins  of  the
generation  that  grew  up  in  the  desert.

Ver.  18.  "Bat  I  said  unto  their
children."  The  second  generation  of
the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness.
**  To  the  *  children '  belongs,  among
other  things,  the  whole  second  law-
giving, with  its  impressive  admonitions,
as  it  was  promulgated  in  Arboth-Moab,
and  is  recorded  in  Deuteronomy "
{Bengstenherg).  **  Walk  ye  not  in  the
statutes  of  your  fathers."  *'  The
*  fathers '  in  question  are  represented
in  their  constant  disobedience  to  the
laws  which  Jehovah  gave  (which  even
necessitated  their  repetition  and
renewal  in  Deuteronomy),  as  in  some
sore  law-givers  according  to  their  own
ideas  and  on  their  own  authority." —
(Lange.)

Ver.  21.  "  Notwithstanding  the
children  rebelled  against  Me."  "  The
son-s  acted  like  their  fathers  in  the
wilderness.  Historical  proofs  of  this
are  furnished  by  the  accounts  of  the
Sabbath-breaker  (Num.  xv.  32,  etc.),
of  the  rebellion  of  the  company  of
Korah,  and  of  the  murmuring  of  the
whole  congregation  against  Moses  and


Aaron  after  the  destrnction  of  Korah's
company  (Num.  xvi.  and  xvii.).  In
the  last  two  cases  God  threatened  that
He  would  destroy  the  whole  congrega-
tion (Num.  xvi.  21  ;  xvii.  9,  10),  and
on  both  occasions  the  Lord  drew  ba
His  hand  at  the  intercession  of  Mose^
and  his  actual  intervention  (Num.  xv^*
22  ;  xvii.  11),  and  did  not  destroy  the
whole  nation  for  His  name's  sake.
The  statements  in  vers.  21,  22  rest
upon  these  facts  "  (Keil.)  God's
justice  was  slow  to  punish  ;  for  from
the  murmuring  at  Kadesh  (b.c.  1453)
to  the  date  of  this  chapter  (b.c.  593)
was  860  years  ;  being  two  cycles  of
430  years.

Ver.  23.  "Scatter  them  among  the
heathen."  Dispersion  among  the
heathen  is  threatened  to  apostate
Israel  (Lev.  xxvi.  33 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  64).
Nearly  nine  centuries  had  elapsed  be-
fore this  penalty  was  actually  inflicted.

Ver.  24.      "Their  father's    idols."

They  had  been  warned  against  these
(ver.  18).  The  vain  traditions  of  their
fathers  had  more  authority  with  them
ihan  God's  own  word  (1  Pet.  i.  18.)

Ver.  25.    "Wherefore  I  gave  them

231


CHAP.  XX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


also  Statutes  that  were  not  good,  and  heathen   to   His   holy  and   righteous

judgments  whereby  they  should  not  ordinances,  they  experienced  not  only

live."     Tliis  was  a  second  retribution,  that  they  were  not  good,  but,  as  the

We  may  compare   here   Rom.   i.    24,  language  by  meiosis  imports,  that  they

according  to  which  God,  in  just  retri-  were  most  pernicious." — {Henderson.)
bution  for  their  revolt,  gave  over  the

heathen  to  vile  affections  ;  Acts  vii.  42,  Ver.  26.    "  And  I  polluted  them  in

where  it  is  traced  back  to  God,  tliat  their  own  gifts."     "  The  language  of

the  heathen  served  the  host  of  heaven  ;  this  verse  is  quite  in  accordance  with

and  2  Thess.  ii.  11,  where  God  sends  that  of  the  preceding.     The  Holy  One

the  apostates  strong  delusions.    Grotius  did  not  actually  pollute   the  people;

writes  :  *'  I  have  taken  from  them  the  He  only  permitted  them    to  pollute

understanding,  that  in   despising   my  themselves,     and     pronounced     them

laws  they  may  make  for  themselves  hard  polluted     when    they    had    rendered

and  death-bearing  laws."     (Hengsten-  themselves  such.     In  the  language  of

berg.)     '*  Various  attempts  have  been  the  Hebrews,  and  of  the  Orientials  in

made  to  get  rid  of  the  apparent  incon-  general,  God  is  frequently  said  to  do

gruity  of  the  language  here  employed  that  which  He  permits  to  be  done." —

by   the   Divine   Being.     Taken  abso-  {Henderson,)     **They  caused  to  pass

lately  it  would  be  flatly  contradictory  through  the  fire  all  that  openeth  the

of   the   purity  and  rectitude  of   His  womb."      They  followed  the   custom

character,  as  well  as  that  of  the  laws  of  the  Canaanites  in  sacrificing  their

which  He  actually  gave  to  the  Israel-  children  to    Moloch,    in    whose    fiery

ites  (Deut.  iv.  8  ;    Neh.  ix.  13  ;  Rom.  arms  they  were  destroyed.      This  was

vii.  12).    The  solution  of  the  difficulty  an    awful    perversion    of    God's    law

proposed  by  Manesseh  Ben  Israel,  that  which  bade  them  consecrate  their  first-

the  words  should  be  read  interrogatively,  born  to   Him    as    "living  sacrifices"

is  altogether  unsupported  by  thestruc-  (Ex.  xiii.  2),  so  that  the  whole  nation

ture  of  the  sentence,  and  is  otherwise  might   thereby   be    hallowed.       They

not  borne  out   by  Hebrew  usage.      I  preferred  to  serve  an  imaginary  malig-

agree  with  those  interpreters  who  are  nant    deity,    whose    commands    were

of  opinion  that  the  reference  is  to  the  unnatural  and  cruel,  to  the  one  true

idolatrous  enactments  of  the  heathen,  God  who  gave  them  a  righteous  law.

and  that  the    language    may  be  best  This  was  a  sin  which  brought  its  own

illustrated    by   comparison    with    Ps.  punishment  in  doing  violence  to  the

Ixxxi.  12  ;  Hos.  viii.  11  ;  Acts  vii.  42  ;  most  sacred  feelings  of  human   nature.

Rom.  i.  24  ;  2  Thess.  ii.  11.     Because  The  repeated  prohibition  against  off"er<.

the  Hebrews  cherished  a  propensity  to  ing  children  through  the  fire  to  Moloch

indulge  in  idolatrous  practices,  God  in  is  an  evidence  that  this  custom  made

His  holy  providence  brought  them  into  its    way   among   the   Israelites   (Lev.

circumstances  in  which  this  propensity  xviii.  21  ;  Deut.  xviii.  10).      "To  the

might  be  fully  gratified,  without  His  end  that  they  might  know  that  I  am

in  any  way  imposing  upon  them  the  the  Lord."      "  By  which    they  might

statutes  of  the  Pagan  ritual.     On  the  learn  that  their  paternal  God,  whom

contrary,  He  did  all  that  was  calculated  they  set  at  nought,  is  God  in  the  full

in  the  way  of  moral  influence  to  deter  sense,  whom  to  forsake  is  at  once  to

them  from  idolatry.     Preferring,  how-  fall  into  misery." — {Hengstenherg.)
ever,  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the

HOMILETICS.

The  Sin  op  thtj  Second  Generation  of  thb   Children  of  Israel  in  the

Wilderness.  (Vers.  18-26.)

I.  They  sinned  after  many  warning  examples.    Their  fathers  had  forsaken

God's  ordinances  and  turned  to  their  idols.     The  children  are  warned  against
232


BOMIL^TIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.  chap.  XX


tlieir  evil  example  (ver.  18)  ;  yet  though  they  saw  the  sad  effects  of  transgressioa
against  God,  they  sinned  after  the  same  manner.  They  rebelled  at  Kadesh
(Num.  XX.  2)  ;  by  the  Gulf  of  Akaba  (Num.  xxi.  5) ;  and  at  Shittim,
(Num.  XXV.  2,  3).  They  had  seen  by  sad  experiment  how  rebellion  against
God  must  end,  and  yet  they  persisted  in  eating  the  grapes  which  had
already  set  their  father's  teeth  on  edge.  They  disregarded  the  lessons  of
liistory.     Thus  there  was  less  excuse  for  them  than  for  the  first  generation.

II.  They  sinned  after  renewed  precepts.  1.  Their  relation  to  God  was
restated.  '*  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  "  (ver.  19).  2.  Obedience  was  again
commanded.  They  were  ordered  to  walk  in  God's  statutes,  to  keep  His  judg-
ments, and  to  observe  the  ordinance  of  the  Sabbaths  (ver.  19).

III.  Their  punishment.  They  were  to  be  scattered  among  the  heathen,  and
dispersed  through  the  countries  (ver.  23).  A  retributive  providence  was  at
work  to  bring  this  terrible  infliction  upon  them.  1.  God  abandoned  them  to
their  own  devices,  *'  Wherefore  I  gave  them  statutes  that  were  not  good,  and
judgments  whereby  they  should  not  live  "  (ver.  25).  These  were  the  statutes
of  their  fathers  (ver.  18).  The  meaning  is,  tliat  God  withdrew  His  providential
restraint  and  permitted  them  to  have  what  they  were  bent  upon  (Psa.  Ixxi.  12 ;
Acts  vii.  42 ;  Rom.  i.  24).  The  parable  of  the  prodigal  son  teaches  us,  that
if  a  man  thinks  he  can  better  himself  elsewhere,  God  allows  him  to  make  the
choice.  It  is  a  sad  evil  when  the  sinner  is  left  to  his  own  devices,  when  he
casts  off  the  authority  of  God  and  becomes  his  own  master  ;  "Lord  of  himself,
that  heritage  of  woe."  2.  God  allowed  their  inward  corruption  to  show  itself.
"And  I  polluted  them'in  their  own  gifts"  (ver.  26).  They  felt  that  they  must  offer
gifts  to  some  invisible  Power  of  which  they  were  afraid.'  For  they  were  conscious  of
impurity  within  ;  they  felt  the  burden  of  sin,  but  they  sought  relief  in  will-
worship  until  they  became  the  victims  of  that  awful  infatuation  which  led  them
to  offer  up  the  fruit  of  their  body  for  the  sin  of  their  soul  (Mic.  vi.  16).  It  is
tlie  .^addest  punishment  when  a  man's  inward  corruption  is  allowed  to  spread  and
grow  unchecked.  3.  Yet  there  was  mercy  in  their  punishment : — 1. — It  was  long
delayed.  In  order  that  they  might  have  space  for  repentance.  They  had  been
threatened  long  before  with  dispersion  among  the  heathen  (Lev.  xxvi.  33),  but
nearly  nine  centuries  had  elapsed  before  that  sentence  was  actually  inflicted.
2— It  was  for  a  gracious  end.  "  To  the  end  tiiat  they  might  know  that  I  am  the
Lord  "  (ver.  26).  In  the  worst  punishments  of  sinners  God  has  a  gracious  end
in  view.     Mercy,  at  length,  rejoices  over  judgment.

IV.  The  lessons  to  be  derived  from  their  sin  and  punishment.  1.  That  the
standard  to  which  we  ought  to  conform  our  lives  should  be  the  Word  of  God.
This  second  generation  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  forsook  the  direct  commands
of  God  and  followed  the  vain  traditions  of  their  fathers.  They  received  for
doctrines  the  commandments  of  men.  The  truly  righteous  man  looks  to  his
God  alone,  and  is  governed  not  by  human  opinion,  or  by  ancient  custom,  but  by
the  revealed  Word  (Psa.  cxix.  105).  2.  That  even  Godlessness  may  become  a
law  unto  men.  They  had  "  statutes  that  were  not  good,  and  judgments  whereby
they  should  not  live  "  (ver.  25).  Thus  the  world  and  the  devil  have  also  their
statutes  and  ordinances.  3.  That  God  punishes  men  through  the  very  instru-
ments of  their  sin.  They  had  copied  the  heathen  around  them,  had  followed
man's  doctrine,  and  it  had  brought  them  no  rest  or  peace,  nothing  but  sorrow
and  death.  4.  That  even  the  very  errors  of  the  heathen  show  mans  need  of  a
religion.  The  fact  that  Israel  sacrificed  their  children  to  a  malignant  deity
shows  that  they  felt  the  burden  of  sin  and  the  need  of  forgiveness.  5.  That
the  true  reform  of  the  Church  of  God  must  begin  with  youth.     The  law  of  God

233


CHAP.  XX.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKTEL.


as  to  His  statutes  and  ordinances  was  repeated  unto  '*  their  children  in  the
wilderness"  fver.  18).  When  the  Church  is  greatly  polluted  the  ouly  hope  lies
in  the  careful  instruction  of  the  younger  generation.


(Verses  27-29).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  -  Israel
continued  to  commit  these  sins  in
Canaan  also,  and  still  refuses  to  give
them  up.

Ver.  27.  "  Yet  in  this  your  fathers
have  blasphemed  Me,  in  that  they
have  committed  a  trespass  against
Me"  The  prophet  is  addressing  the
people  of  his  own  time,  and  boldly
charges  them  with  committing  the
same  sins  as  their  fathers  in  the
land  of  Canaan.  The  sin  of  the
children  of  Israel  in  Canaan  took  a
worse  form  than  their  sin  in  the
wilderness.  Ic  was  a  more  open
affront  to  God,  for  they  deliberately
"  blasphemed  "  His  name.  They  re-
jected Him  contemptuously  when
they  left  that  one  place  which  He
selected  "to  put  his  name  there,"
and  chose  places  of  their  own,  offering
sacrifice  "  on  every  high  hill."  They
did  dishonour  to  the  Holy  Place."

Ver.  28.  "They  saw  every  high
hill,  and  all  the  thick  trees,  and  they
offered  there  their  sacrifices,  and  there
they  presented  the  provocation  of  their
offering:  there  also  they  made  their
sweet  savour,  and  poured  out  there
their  drink  offerings."  The  stricter
designation  of  blasphemy  follows  in
this  verse,  after  it  w^as  designated  in
general  at  the  close  of  ver.  27.     "The


provocation  of  their  offering "  the
offerings  to  idols,  whereby  they  pro-
voked the  anger  of  God  ;  comp.  Deut.
xxxii.  16,  17,  "  They  provoked  Him  to
jealousy  with  strange  (gods)  ;  with
abominations  they  made  Him  indig-
nant. They  sacrificed  to  lords  which
were  not  God,  to  gods  whom  they  knew
not."  God  says  to  them  in  the  tone
of  reproach  (1  Kings  ix.  13),  "What
is  the  high  place  whereunto  ye  ^o  ? "
(ver.  29) :  How  can  ye,  instead  of
seeking  Me  in  My  true  sanctuary,  turn
to  these  miserable  places,  witli  their
miserable  gods  ?  And  yet  these  are
named  high  places  unto  this  day,  in
the  sense  of  sanctuaries,  and  with  the
notion  that  they  have  something  pecu-
liar about  them." — Hengstenherg.  The
repetition  of  the  word  "  there "  three
times  'seems  to  be  an  echo  of  Deut.  xii.
5-7,  "  Unto  His  habitation  ....
thither  ....  thither  ....  "there"
(ver.  40).

Ver.  29.  *'  And  the  name  thereof
is  called  Bamah  unto  this  day.**
"  Bamah,"  a  Hebrew  word,  signifying
High-Place.  The  tops  of  high  hills
were  used  by  the  heathen  for  idolatrous
worship  ;  and,  in  consequence,  Moses
interdicted  the  use  of  them  even  for
the  worship  of  the  true  God  (Deut.
xii.  1-5).


H0MILET1C8,


(Vers.  27-29.)


I.  The  nature  of  the  sin  of  blasphemy.     "

Me"  (ver.  27).  This  was  the  "trespass"
Jehovah.  The  essence  of  blasphemy  consists
rately  disobeying  His  commands,  especially  as
the  absolute  right  to  lay  down  the  manner  in
served,  and  adored.  He  appointed  the  Holy
234


Your  fathers  have  blasphemed
wliich  they  committed  against
in  contempt  of  God ;  in  delibe-
to  worship.  For  surely  God  has
which  He  shall  be  approached
Place  for  His  worship,  but  Israel


HOMJLKTIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKTEL.  chap.  xx.


served  tlieir  own  Gods  fa  iJaces  of  tlieir   own    appointing.     When   once  God
has  spoken  clearly,  all  mere  will- worship  is  ol*  the  nature  of  blasphemy.

II  Blasphemy  is  ever  the  sin  of  the  unregenerate  heart.  We  speak  espe-
cially of  those  who  have  the  advantages  of  a  Divine  revelation,  and  who  have
means  therefore  for  knowing  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  Those  who  have  no
means  of  knowing  God  cannot  consciously  blaspheme  Him  1.  The  unregenerate
heart  may  recognise  the  idea  of  God,  and  the  duty  of  worship.  The  Israelites
of  the  prophet's  time  felt  that  they  must  worship  some  divinity.  They  must
have  a  reli;:ion.  But  2.  llie  unregenerate  heart,  though  it  pretends  to  a
religion,  leaves  out  the  true  essentials  of  it.  And  what  are  these  ?  A  recogni-
tion of  God's  supreme  authority  as  a  righteous  Ruler,  a  Saviour  from  sin,  and  a
Sanctifier.  Such  men  are  ready  to  "  recognize  the  idea  of  God,"  but  under  the
pretence  of  a  lofty  philosoi)hical  relii,non  they  practically  deny  God's  authority,
they  destroy  the  foundations  of  all  truth  in  belief  and  worship.  Sinful  man,
even  when  he  holds  by  some  prime  necessity  of  religion,  is  ever  prone  to  exalt
his  own  mind  and  will.  3.  The  unregenerate  heart  has  a  natural  preference
for  a  burdensome  and  difficult  religion.  Israel  was  not  satisfied  with
worshipping  God  in  His  holy  temple,  but  preferred  travelling  great  distances
,and  cliuibing  the  high  hills.  Man  is  ever  ready  to  *' do  some  great  thing."
God's  way  is  too  simple  for  him.  There  is  something  in  human  nature  which
is  flattered  by  difficult  demands.

III.  The  sin  of  blasphemy  especially  interferes  with  God's  gracious  pur-
poses for  mankind.  God  chose  His  ancient  people  that  through  them  all  the
fjiiiiilies  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed.  Salvation  is  of  the  Jews.  Israel  was
becoming  like  the  heathen,  whereas  it  was  God's  purpose  that  the  heathen
should  become  like  Israel.  Thus  by  their  idolatry,  and  even  blasphemy,  the
chosen  people  were  working  against  the  gracious  purposes  of  the  Most  High.
All  manner  of  blasphemy  against  God,  whether  arising  from  intellectual  pride,
or  supers lition,  or  will- worship  hinders  the  progress  of  His  kingdom.

(Ver.  27).

"Have  blasphemed  Me."  The  Hebrew  word  signifies,  to  revile  with  words,
to  rejjroach,  and  blaspheme.  To  blaspheme  is  to  hurt  the  name  or  fame  of  any,
and  is  a  kind  of  evil  speaking,  derogating  from  the  glory  of  God.  God's  glory
or  name  in  itself  is  inviolable,  but  blasphemy  doth  what  it  can  to  violate  if
B  :is))hemy  consists — 1.  In  attributing  to  God  what  is  not  congruous  to  Him.
As  to  say,  He  is  the  author  of  sin  ;  He  sees  not.  He  hath  forsaken  the  earth
(l']zek.  viii.  12)  ;  He  is  like  unto  man  (Psa.  1.  21).  2.  In  detracting  from  Him
what  belongs  unto  Uim.  As  to  deny  His  providence,  His  omniscience,  His
omnipotence,  as,  ''can  He  provide  a  table  in  the  wihlerness?"  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  19) ;
If  He  should  make  windows  in  heaven  could  this  thing  be  ?  (2  Kings  vii.  2).
3.  The  doing  of  such  things  as  cause  God's  name  to  he  blasphemed.  As,  "The
name  of  God  is  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  through  you."  As  tliere  is
practical  atheism,  so  there  is  practical  blasphemy  (Tit.  i.  16).  "In  that  they
have  committed  a  trespass  against  Me."  The  doubling  of  the  word  in  the
Hebrew  notes  the  greatness  of  their  sin,  and  progress  in  their  wickedness.  They
sinned  not  ignorantly,  or  of  common  infirmity,  but  with  a  ii^h  hand.  They
spake  against  the  true  worship  of  God,  and  practised  contrary  thereunto.  Wilful
sinning  is  a  reproaching  of  God,  and  provokes  Him  greatly.  "  They  have  com-
mitted a  tres})ass  against  Me."  They  have  spoken  against  My  worship,  and
rur>  out  to  other  ways  which  I  forbade  them.  Other  sins  they  have  committed
which  I  could  have  winked  at,  but  when  they  sin  wilfully,  despising  Me,  My

235


cttvp.  XX.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIBL,


laws,  My  worsliip,  they  reproach,  hlaspheme,  provoke  Me  so,  that  they  shall
hear  of  it.  Son  of  man,  go  and  speak  to  the  house  of  Israel  ;  go  and  tell  them
how  they  have  dealt  with  Me,  and  how  I  take  it.  Such  sins  deserve  death
(Num.  XV.  30).  '^  The  soul  that  doeth  oug'it  presumptuously,  whether  he  be
born  in  the  land,  or  a  stranger,  the  same  reproacheth  the  Lord."  The  Hebrew
word  here  rendered  "  reproacheth  "  is  the  same  as  that  rendered  *'  blasphemed"
in  Ez.  XX.  27.  For  he  that  reproacheth  the  Lord  blasphemes  Him,  and  he  that
blasphemes  Him  reproacheth  Him  :  they  are  joined  together  (2  Kings  xix.  22).
There  was  no  mercy  for  those  who  sinned  in  that  manner  (Heb.  x.  26,  27).
Many  commit  such  trespasses  in  these  days,  by  speaking  against  providence,
ordinances,  Scriptures,  angels,  Christ,  God  himself;  and  so  sin  away  mercy
and  their  own  souls  at  once.  David  prayed  that  God  would  keep  him  back
from  "presumptuous  sins"  (Psa.  xix.  13)  ;  and  we  have  need  to  do  it,  for  there
is  that  in  our  natures  which  carries  us  on  strongly  towards  them.  Solomon
saith,  "  Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  always  ;  but  he  that  hardeneth  his
heart " — that  presnmeth,  that  is  wilful,  pertinacious — "  shall  fall  into  mis-
chief," into  mischievous  sins,  into  mischievous  judgments. — {Greenhill),

(Verses  30-38.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  pro-  them.     "  Here  we  have  the  announce-

phet   addresses   the   men   of  his  day,  ment  of  their  continued  punishment,

sliowing   that  they  are  equally  guilty  The  heathen  stood  under   the   divine

with  their  fathers.    They  are  to  receive  long-suffering  (Rom.  iii.  25);   not  so

just   retribution,   and    to  be   purified  Israel,  to  whom  God  had  so  gloriously

among  the  heathen.  made   Himself  known.     Wherein   the

heathen    may    prosper,  therein  Israel

Ver.  30.    "  Are  ye    polluted   after  must  decline.     The  designation  of  the

the   manner   of   your    fathers?    and  heathen  gods  as  wood  and  stone,  alone

commit    ye     whoredom,    after    their  sufficient  to    counteract    the   strange

abominations  ?     These    interrogations  notion  which  attributed  a  real  existence

are  intended  to  imply  a  strong  affirma-  to  the   heathen    gods,  is   taken    from

tive.  Deut.  iv.  28  ;  xxviii.  36." — {Hengsten-

berg.)

Ver.  31.    "Even  nnto  this    day.'*

"  The  note  struck  in  the  question  of  Ver.  33.      Surely    with  a  mighty

Ver.  29  is  still  maintained,  not  merely  hand,  and  with  a  stretched-out  arm,

to  express  astonishment,  but  still  more  and  with  fury  poured  out,  will  I  rule

to  compel  self-reflection.      I  ask,  what  over  you."    "  Their  thought  was,  that

further     communication    you     would  they  should  become  like  the  heathen  in

have  ?  " — {Lange.)  the  lands  of  the  earth,  to  serve  wood

and   stone ;    that  is   to   say,   we   will

Ver.    32.      **  We    will    be    as    the  become  idolators  like  the  heathen,  pass

heathen."    They   flattered   themselves  into  heathenism.     This  shall  not  take

that  the  heavy  judgments  which  the  place  ;  on  the  contrary,  God  will  rule

prophets  had  threatened  would  not  be  over  them  as  King  with  strong  arm

inflicted  ;  that  they  could  accept  with-  and  fury.    The  words,  "  with  a  mighty

out    molestation     the     state    of     the  hand,  and  with  a  stretched-out  arm,"

heathen,  and  the  resiwnsibility  of  the  are  a  standing  expression  in  the  Penta-

heathen.      '*  That  which  cometh  into  teuch  for  the  mighty  acts  by  which

your  mind  shall  not  he  at  all."    That  Jehovah  liberated  His  people  from  the

wish  is  declared  to  be  impossible,  for  power  of  the  Egyptians,  and  led  them

they  stood  before  God  on  a  different  out  of  Egypt  (Ex.  vi.  1,  6  ;  Deut.  ir.

foundation   from   the  heathen  around  34,  v.  15,  vii.  19,  etc.).     By  the  intro-
236


nOMTLEflC  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEL.


CttAP.  XX.


duction  of  the  clause,  "with  fnryponred
out,"  tlie  niaiiifestation  of  the  omnipo-
tence of  God  which  Israel  experienced
in  its  dispersioD,  and  wliich  it  was  still
to  experience  among  the  heatlien,  is
described  as  an  emanation  of  the  divine
wrath,  a  severe  and  wrathful  judg-
ment.— {Keil).  "  For  the  friendly  and
gracious  government  of  God  they  have
given  Him  little  thanks,  and  have
wickedly  withdrawn  from  Him.  As
God,  however,  must  come  to  His
sovereign  rights,  so  His  sovereignty
now  assumes  a  terrible  form.** — {Ueng-
st en  berg.)

Ver.  34.  "  And  will  gather  you  out
of  the  countries  wherein  ye  are  scat-
tered." "  Although  Keil  explains  the
*  leading  out '  as  neither  local  nor
material,  yet  we  do  not  understand  it
with  him  of  a  spiritual  separation  from
the  heathen  world  (to  which  they  are
immediately  brought,  ver.  35),  *  lest
they  should  be  absorbed  in  it/  etc.,
but  of  an  aggravation  of  their  exiled
condition,  a  s])iritual  experience  of  it,
so  that  they  should  know  and  feel  that
they  as  the  i^eople  of  God  were  once
more  in  the  wilderness,  but  not  at  all
in  the  same  sense  as  before  (Deut.  viii.
15,  xxxii.  10)." — (Lange.)

Ver.  35.  "  The  wilderness  of  the
people."  In  ancient  time,  Israel  had
been  trained  and  disciplined  in  the
literal  wilderness  (Deut.  viii.  15,  16)  ;
now  God  was  about  to  send  them  to
a  new  school  of  affliction,  among  the
busy,  populous  world.  There  they
would  be  made  to  feel  their  isolation
severely.  "  The  wilderness  is  desig-
nated as  'the  wilderness  of  the  peoples',
in  contradistinction  to  the  former  wil-
derness, where  was  oidy  the  howling  of
wild  beasts  (Deut.  xxxii.  lOj,  lions,
serpents,  and  the  like  (Deut.  viii.  15  ;
Isa.  xxx.  6).  The  new  wilderness
is  one  in  which  Israel  is  in  the
midst  of  the  peoples,  and  can
therefore  be  no  ordinary  wilderness,
for  wilderness  and  pe<»ples  exclude  one
another.  It  must  rather  be  a  sym-
bolic or  typical  designation  of  the
Btate  of  punishment  and  purification.


The  interchange  of  type  and  thing
is  in  verse  36  separated.  From  the
defect  of  historical  notices  concerning
the  state  of  the  exiles,  we  cannot  show
the  fulfilment  of  this  prophetic  an-
nouncement. It  is  natural,  however,
to  suppose  that  the  part  taken  by  the
exiles  in  the  political  intrigues  of"  the
home  country  brought  upon  them
also  severe  sufferings." — (lleiigsteri'
berg.)  "There  will  I  plead  with  you
face  to  face."  "  Jehovah  threatens  to
deal  with  them  as  in  open  court  by
clearing  those  who  had  repented  of
their  wickedness,  and  punishing  the
obstinate  as  He  had  done  their  fathers
of  old." — {Henderson).

Ver.  36.  **  Like  as  I  pleaded  with
your  fathers  in  the  wilderness  of  the
land  of  Fgypt."  "  They  were  not  led
into  the  wilderness  of  the  peoples  as  a
punishment  ;  although  on  account  of
their  disobedience  it  often  became  a
place  of  punishment ;  but  the  divine
intention  was  to  try  them,  to  prove
them  (Deut.  viii.  2,  etc.),  from  which
resulted  separation  of  individuals,
purification,  which  was  so  stron<^ly
urged  upon  them  in  reference  to
Egypt,  whither  they  were  always
looking  back  (Num.  xx.  5  ;  xxi.  5).'*
— {Lange).

Ver.  37.  "  And  I  will  cause  you  to
pass  under  the  rod  *'  The  reference  is
to  the  rod  of  a  shepherd  counting  his
sheep  (Lev.  xxvii.  32).  "  A  shepherd
lets  his  sheep  pass  through  under  the
rod  for  the  purpose  of  counting  them,
and  seeing  whether  they  are  in  g(^od
condition  or  not  (Jer.  xxxiii.  13).  The
figure  is  here  ap])lied  to  God.  Like  a
shepherd.  He  will  cause  His  flock,  the
Israelites,  to  pass  through  under  His
rod,  i.e.y  to  take  them  into  His  special
care." — (Keil.)  "  And  I  will  bring  you
into  the  bond  of  the  covenant."  ''  By
this  we  are  not  merely  to  under-
stand covenant  punishments,  but  the
covenant  promises  must  also  be  in-
cluded. For  not  only  the  threats  of
the  covenant,  but  also  its  promises,
are  bonds  by  which  God  trains  His
people.    The  Hebrew  word  is  not  only

237


CHAP.  XX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKTEL,


ap])lled  to   bmdeiisoine  Jind  crushinf?  send  t1iem  to  wander  in  the  world's

fetters,  bnt  to  the  bonds  of  love  as  well  wilderness.       'J'hrough    nnfMitlifulnoss

(Cant.  vii.  16)." — {KeiL)  The  ''bonds"  they  were  unable  to  enter  "  into  God's

of  God's    covenant    are  those  of  love  rest"  (Ps.   xcv.   11),  that  rest  which

(Hos.  xi.  4).  ,  reraaineth  only  for  those  whose  God  Is

the  Lord  (Heb.  iv.  9).  "  The  langu.ige
Ver.  38.  *'  The  rebels."  Those  who  here  implies  that  the  great  body  of  the
would  not  have  the  Lord  for  their  king  nation  should  be  recovered  from  idola-
(St.  LuKe  xix.  14,  27).  "  I  will  hring  try,  and  return  to  theirnative  land,  and
them  fo  th  out  of  the  country  where  that  only  a  portion  would  continue  in  a
they  sojourn,  and  they  shall  not  enter  state  of  rebellion  against  Jehovah,  and
into  the  land  of  Israel."  Canaan  was  consequen tly remain  in  exile" /^//^?zn^^r-
called  "the  land  of  their  pilgrimage"  soi2.)  "  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am
(Ex.  vi.  4).  They  had  debased  the  the  Lord."  "  This  is  the  painful  ex-
land  which  God  gave  them  to  dwell  in  perience  that  will  sooner  or  later  force
by  their  idolatries,  and  so  it  became  to  itself  upon  all  those  who  despise  salva-
them  the  hind  of  bondage.  Therefore  tion." — (llengstenberg,)
God  would  bring  them  out  of  it,  and


UOMILETICS.

(Vers.  30-32.)

God  hiding  Himself  from  Israel  professing  to  seek  Him.

The  Elders  professed  that  they  had  come  "  to  inquire  of  the  Lord."  But  they
came  insincerely.  That  High-])lace  still  reniainod  ns  a  witness  to  their  idolatries
(ver.  29).  In  spite  of  the  reformations  under  Ilezekiah  and  Josiah,  and  the
frequent  warning's  of  the  prophets,  they  worshipj)ed  false  ^ods  even  in  front  of
the  Lord's  Temj)le  (1  Kings  xi.  7).  Hence  God's  final  refusal,  through  His
l)r()phet,  "I  will  not  be  enquired  of  by  you"  (ver.  31).  Why  did  God  hide
Himself  from  His  people,  who,  through  these  Elders,  were  professing  to
seek  Him  ?

I.  Because  of  their  continuance  in  the  sin  of  idolatry.  They  were  polluted
after  the  manner  of  their  fathers  (Vers.  30,  31).  God  encourages  all  who  seek
the  truth  in  sincerity,  even  though  it  be  through  ignorance  and  superstition.
But  when  the  truth  we  seek  is  a  delusion,  which  we  wilfuliy  follow — a  mere  idol,
God  hides  His  face  from  us.  1.  Idolatry  obscures  man's  natural  knowl  dge  of
God.  It  leads  the  religious  instinct  astray,  and  into  all  that  is  debasing  and
vile.  Though  it  may  call  in  the  aid  of  beauty  and  refinement,  yet  it  has  ever  a
degrading  and  downward  tendency.  2.  Idolatrij  in  the  chosen  people  iras
the  rankest  transgression.  They  were  God's  people  by  vocation,  by  covenant,
by  special  providence.  This  sin  was,  therefore,  the  worst  that  Israel  could
possibly  commit.  And  it  shewed  iurther, — (1.)  17ie  power  of  bad  ecrample.
The  corrupting  influences  of  the  idolatries  around  then).  (2.)  I  he  perils  of  all
pomp  and  glaring  externals  in  religion.  They  were  attracted  by  the  outward
and  the  sensual,  which  were  the  characteristics  of  heathen  worship.

II.  Because  of  the  impossibility  of  their  becoming  in  all  respects  like  the
heathen.  They  might  imitate  their  customs,  worship  their  idols,  and  sink
down  into  their  degraded  condition  ;  yet  they  could  not  be  made  to  stand  on
the  same  fooling  before  God.  1.  1  hey  could  not  get  rid  of  their  responsi-
hility.    God  had  made  Himself  known  unto  them  by  revelation.    Therefore  they

238


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEL.  dHAt.  xx.


could  not  be  judged  as  the  heatlien,  but  by  a  different  standard.  Men  will  be
judged  by  the  highest  stan<]ard  revealed  to  them,  and  not  by  the  lowest,  which
they  have  chosen  in  their  sin  and  folly.  2.  God's  long- suffering  towards  the
heathen  did  not  apply  to  Israel.  The  patience  which  God  showed  towards  the
lieathen  could  not  be  expected  towards  those  who  had  higher  religious  advan-
tages. 3,  It  is  impossible  so  to  obliterate  the  past  as  though  it  had  never
been.  The  memory  of  the  past  makes  our  whole  life  one.  We  cannot  part
from  our  former  selves.  However  Israel  might  have  sunk  into  idolatry,  the
fact  of  their  glorious  privileges  in  the  past  still  remained.  None  of  those  who
dwell  in  a  land  visited  by  the  light  of  God's  Revelation  can  become,  in  all
respects,  like  the  heathen.  We  may  choose  the  sins  of  heathenism,  but  we
must  be  judged  as  those  who  have  had  opportunity  for  the  knowledge  of  God.

(Vers.  37,  38).

1.  The  Lord  doth  distinguish  His  people  from  others.  "  I  will  cause  you
to  pass  under  the  r»jd."  I  will  examine  which  are  sheep,  and  which  are  goats,
and  will  sever  the  one  from  the  other.  Christ  knew  His  sheep.  His  little  flock,
from  all  the  goats  of  the  mountains.  When  the  men  appeared  with  weapons
of  slauirhter  in  their  hands,  and  execution  was  to  be  upon  Jerusalem,  the  Lord
made  His  people  to  *' pass  under  the  rod."  He  numbered  them,  and  set  His
mark  upon  them,  that  they  might  not  perish  in  the  common  calamity  (Ezek.  ix).

2.  1  hough  God's  people  do  go  out  from  Him,  and  violate  the  covenant,  yet  He
will  not  let  them  so  go,  but  will  bring  them  under  His  power.  These  had
transgressed  the  covenant,  broken  the  bonds,  cast  off  the  ways  of  God,  thought
to  exempt  themselves  from  His  rule  over  them,  but,  saith  the  Lord,  "  I  will
bring  you  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant  :"  you  shall  be  under  my  power  and
law.  Though  I  suffer  Babylonians  and  other  nations  to  be  at  their  own
disposal,  yet  it  shall  not  be  so  with  you  who  are  my  people  with  whom  I  am
in  covenant,  and  to  whom  I  must  be  faithful  whatever  you  are  to  me,  and  will
be  known  to  be  your  God  and  Sovereign.  I  will  have  account  of  you,  and
make  you   know   that  you  are  under  my  bonds,   and   not  Babylonish   ones.

3.  God' s  dealings  with  His  people  is  very  different.  He  brings  them  "into  the
bonds  of  the  covenant,"  to  see  what  they  are ;  if  they  be  goats,  wicked.  He
punishes  them  and  purges  them  out ;  if  they  be  sheep,  though  they  have  gone
astray,  He  pardons  them  and  enables  them  to  yield  to  covenant  obedience.  He
purged  out  the  wicked  by  judgments  and  death,  and  preserved  the  others.  The
righteous  were  jewels,  and  therefore  spared ;  the  wicked  were  stubble,  and
therefore  destroyed.  4.  Though  the  wicked  be  among  the  godly  yet  they  shall  not
always  be  so.  "  I  will  purge  out  from  among  you  the  rebels,  and  them  that
transgress  against  me."  It  is  God's  method,  even  here  in  this  world,  ofttimes  to
separate  the  wicked  from  the  godly,  to  fan  out  the  chaff  from  the  wheat.
5.  Whatever  mans  thoughts  are  oj  the  world,  they  are  but  sojourners  therein.
"  1  will  bring  them  out  of  the  land  of  their  sojournings,"  were  it  Canaan  or
Babylon,  they  were  no  more  than  "  sojourners."  Wicked  men  think  they  are
heirs  to,  owners  and  lords  of  the  earth  (Psa.  xlix.  11).  David,  though  king  in
Israel,  yet  acknowledgeth  himself  a  sojourner,  as  all  his  fathers  were.  They
spent  a  few  days  therein,  and  so  passed  away,  and  this  was  his  condition.  Let
us  look  so  upon  ourselves,  and  **  pass  the  time  of  our  sojourning  here  in  fear"
(1  Pet.  i.  17)  ;  and  mind  that  city  which  hath  foundations,  out  of  which,  if  we
be  once  possessed,  we  sliall  never  be  removed.  6.  When  God  brings  His  people
into  Canaan,  He  will  shut  out  the  wicked,  they  shall  not  enter  into  the  land  of
Jsrael.  Others  shall  be  brought  in,  but  as  for  those  who  would  be  as  the
world,  as  the  heathen,  as  Babylonians,  they  shall  never  come    into  Canaan,

239


CRAP.  XX.  HOMILETIC  COMMmTART:    tIZEKTEL.


Canaan  was  the  type  of  heaven,  and  this  exchision  of  these  wicked  ones,
represents  the  exclusion  of  ungodly  ones  out  of  heaven.  However,  good
and  bad  are  mingled  together  in  this  world,  and  oft  in  the  church,  yet  when  God
brings  His  ]ieople  to  the  heavenly  Canaan,  no  unclean  thing  shall  enter  there
(Rev.  xxi.  7  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9).  7.  Mercies  and  judgments  make  God  known
experimentally.  **  Ye  shall  know  that  I  aui  the  Lord."  God  would  purge  out
the  rebels  from  the  obedient ;  there  was  mercy.  Keep  them  out  of  the  land  of
Israel  ;  there  was  judgment.  The  rebels  should  know  and  acknowledge  Him  to
be  Jehovah,  being  convinced  with  the  equity  of  His  judgments,  and  affected
with  the  severity  of  them,  'i'he  godly  should  do  it,  being  convinced  and
affected  with  the  nature,  greatness,  needfulness,  and  freeness  of  that  mercy.
Judgment  upon  these  rebels  was  mercy  to  the  gf^dly  ;  and  mercy  to  the  godly
was  mercy  to  the  rebels  ;  and  both  were  brought  to  acknowledge  the  Lord.
Mercies  and  judirments  work  most  affectionately  and  effectually  upon  the  godly  ;
for  it  is  said,  "  Ye  shall  know,"  ye  that  are  purged,  ye  that  shall  come  to  the
land  of  Israel. — (Greenhill.)

(Ver.  35).

**  And  I  will  bring  you  into  the  wilderness  of  the  people,  and  there  will  I
plead  with  you  face  to  face."  The  history  of  the  Jews  is  a  surprising  but  most
instructive  history.  These  men  have  been  the  moral  benefactors  of  the  world
by  what  they  have  said,  by  what  they  have  done,  by  vvliat  they  have  suffered.
Men  have  been  blessed  in  them,  and  all  generations  have  reason  to  call  them
blessed.  In  their  prosperity  they  were  the  lights  of  the  world  ;  in  their
adversity  they  have  been  the  instructors  of  it  also.

The  situation  of  Judea  was  remarkably  adapted  to  the  moral  purposes  God
had  in  view.  Placed  in  the  centre  of  those  great  continents  of  the  ancient
world,  at  the  head  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  suirounderl  by  those  empires  and
dynasties  which  contended  for  the  soverei<;nty  of  the  East,  they  were  happily
so  situated  as  to  convey  the  light  of  truth  in  different  directions.  They  were
in  the  direct  line  of  intercourse  between  the  Assyrians  and  Egyptians,  and
a  prominent  object  of  attention  to  the  Grecians  and  Romans.  It  was  a  place
of  great  resort  though  little  engaged  in  commerce.  Frequent  embassies  were
exchanged  by  the  Jewish  government  and  foreign  nations,  which  rendered  their
laws  and  customs,  and,  above  all,  their  Scriptures  known.

But,  strange  to  say,  in  their  adversity  they  have  been  quite  as  useful  as  in
their  prosperity.  In  prosperity  they  held  the  lamp  of  truth  to  the  view  of  the
nations  ;  in  adversity  they  carried  it  wheresoever  they  wandered  ;  a  striking
proof  that  if  we  will  not  voluntarily  honour  God  in  our  enjoyments.  He  can
make  us  honour  Him  in  our  distresses.  In  their  very  captivities  they  were
made  a  blessing.  They  were  scattered  for  their  own  sins,  but  God  brought  a
revenue  of  glory  to  Himself  and  a  harvest  of  blessing  to  the  world  from  that
very  event.  God  brought  them,  as  the  text  says,  into  the  wilderness  of  the
nations.  They  were  scattered  into  all  lands, — many  of  them  never  returned,
and  the  ten  tribes  still  are  mixed  with  the  nations.

The  subject  arising  from  the  text  is,  The  mixed  character  of  Divine
dispensations.  Not  all  judgment,  lest  we  despair ;  nor  all  mercy,  lest  we
presume.     Affliction  is  here  traced  in  its  causes,  design^  consolations.

I.  The  causes  of  affiiction.     These  are  to  be  traced  to  human  sinfulness.

Israel's  sorrows  are  here   traced  to  Israel's  sins.      Though  the  righteous  and

wicked  are  both  involved  in  the  same  calamities,  yet  God  has  different  ends  in

the  same  dispensation.     That  which  hardens  the  one,  softens  and  sanctifies  tKa

240


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.  chap.  xx.


other.  The  two  chief  sins  of  the  Jews  were — 1.  The  abuse  of  mercies
(vers.  5-26  ;  Hosea  ii.  8).  Teachin^^  that  sins  under  or  after  peculiar  mercies
are  greatly  offensive  to  God.  Jesus  said,  "  Go  thy  way,  sin  no  more,  lest  a
worse  thing  come  upon  thee."  It  is  a  remark  respecting  Solomon's  idolatries
that  he  fell  into  them  *'  after  the  Lord  had  appeared  unto  him  twice."  The
aggravations  of  David's  sin  (2  Sam.  xiii.  7).  Sins  under  or  after  special  mercies
wdl  meet  wiih  a  severe  rebuke.  Nothing  more  distresses  the  conscience  than
the  remembrance,  in  darkness,  of  abused  light ;  in  desertions,  of  neglected  love.
Great  opportunities  of  service  neglected,  and  great  gifts  unimproved,  involve
guilt.  2.  7 he  abase  of  trials.  This  involves  guilt,  and  calls  down  heavier
afflictions.  'Jliis  constitutes  the  peculiar  instruction  of  their  history.  They
were  now  in  ciptivity.  The  elders  of  Israel  came  to  Ezekiel  in  the  most
hypocritical  manner.  They  proposed  to  consult  God  about  their  joining  the
people  of  the  country,  abandoning  their  religious  peculiarities,  and  conforming
to  the  customs  of  the  heathen.  God  would  not  be  consulted,  but  instructs
Ezekiel  to  detect  and  expose  their  hypocrisy.  It  seems  they  had  not  openly
expressed  the  sentiment,  but  it  was  "  in  their  mind  "  to  say,  "  we  will  be  as  the
heathen  to  serve  wood  and  stone.'*  This  calls  down  the  threatening  of  the
text  (vers.  32-35).     Religion  is  the  best  armour,  but  not  the  best  cloak.

Guard  against  taking  occasion  from  your  afflictions  of  plunging  into  greater
guilt.  Many  fail  to  improve  their  afflictions,  but  it  is  awful  indeed  to  be  the
worse  for  them  like  Ahaz,  who,  in  his  distress,  siimed  yet  more.  It  is  a  fearful
thing  to  have  hard  hearts  under  softening  providences,  and  to  have  proud
hearts  under  humbling  ones.  We  may  say  of  affliction  as  Paul  said  of  the  Law,
"That  which  was  ordained  to  life,  I  found  to  be  unto  death."  Men's  hearts
are  of  an  anvil  temper,  made  harder  by  affliction,  and  reverberate  the  blow.
Guard  against  goini;  farther  from  God  under  trials,  against  having  recourse  to
sinful  means  and  worldly  appliances  to  extricate  yourself  from  calamity,  against
despising  **  the  chastening  of  the  Lord,  or  faintinu^  when  thou  art  rebuked  of
Him."  This  course  will  either  call  down  greater  judgments,  or  provoke  God  to
withhold  chastisement  altogether  :  which  is  the  greatest  of  all  judgments.  The
wrath  of  God  is  then  suffered  to  accumulate,  till  it  breaks  down  all  the  fences
and  barriers  that  restrained  it,  and  then  comes  upon  us  to  the  uttermost.  They
that  will  not  fear  shall  feel  the  wrath  of  heaven.  The  rods  shall  be  changed
into  scorpions.  "  God  shall  wound  the  head  of  His  enemies,  and  the  hairy
scalp  of  such  an  one  as  goeth  on  still  in  his  trespasses  "  (Psa.  Ixviii.  21.)  The
chapter  closes  with  solemn  threatening  (Ver.  47.)

II.  The  design  of  affliction.  God  has  designs  of  love  in  bringing  them  into
the  wilderness.  "  Then  will  I  plead  with  you  face  to  face."  He  pleads  with
them,  not  against  them.  \.  With  convincing  power.  He  will  be  justified
when  lie  speaketh.  Job  complained  agninst  his  friends,  but  not  against  God.
David  was  *'  dumb  with  silence"  when  the  hand  of  God  was  upon  him.  2.  With
comimssionate  tenderness  (Hosea  ii.  14,  15,  19-23).  3.  With  long  forbearance
and  condescension.

III.  The  consolations  of  which  this  state  is  susceptible.  1.  From  the  A  uthor
of  affliction  consolation  is  derived.  God  brings  us  into  the  wilderness  ;  He  neither
drives  us  there  nor  leaves  us  there.  Affliction  is  not  casual,  but  designed  by
Him  who  knows  us  better  than  we  know  ourselves.  It  "  springeth  not  from
the  dust."  God  pleads  with  us  there.  Better  to  hear  His  voice  in  thunder
than  to  be  deserted  by  him  altogether.  Better  for  Adam  to  be  called  from  his
hiding  place  by  a  voice  of  terror  than  to  be  allowed  for  ever  to  separate  himself
from  God.  It  is  rebuke,  not  destruction  ;  mercy,  not  judgment ;  life,  not
death.  It  is  the  death  of  the  sin,  not  the  death  of  the  soul.  God  says,  "  I
will  allure  her."    2.  From  its  design.     The  design  of  affliction  is  to  embitter

^  241


CHAP.  XX.  HOM I LETIC  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEL.

sin,  to  separate  the  sin  that  God  hates  from  the  soul  that  He  loves,  to  improve
the  character,  to  promote  spirituality,  to  prevent  greater  sufferings,  to  inspire
sympathy,  to  further  usefulness,  to  prepare  for  higher  enjoyments.  God  says,
**  I  withheld  thee  from  sinuing  against  Me  "  (Gen.  xx.  6).  Paul  was  kept  from
pride,  how  ?  by  the  thorn  in  the  flesh.  God  prevents  us  by  the  blessings  of  his
goodness.  By  affliction,  God  promotes  self-knowledge,  humbles  us  and  proves
us  to  know  what  is  in  our  heart.  *'  1  litile  thought,"  says  one,  "that  I  was  so
proud  till  I  was  called  to  stoop  ;  or  so  impatient  till  required  to  wait ;  or  so
easily  provoked  till  I  met  with  such  an  offence  ;  or  so  rooted  to  earth  till  so
much  force  was  required  to  detacli  me  from  it.  3.  I'rom  its  promised  sujyport.
"  I  will  be  with  thee  in  trouble."  "  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."
4.  From  its  ascertained  issue.

IV.  There  are  some  special  lessons  to  be  learned.  1.  Take  heed  that  you
do  not  plunge  yourself  into  a  wilderness.  By  careless,  sinful,  inconsistent  con-
duct. Self-made  troubles  are  hard  to  bear.  2.  If  you  are  in  scenes  of  difficulty,
he  anxious  to  converse  with  Him  who  brought  you  there.  TIioul;!!  He  "  plead
with  you  face  to  face,"  do  not  shun  the  intercourse,  but  submit,  say,  *'Show  me
wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me."  3.  Pray  for  those  who  are  in  the  wilder-
ness without  a  shepherd,  and  without  a  hope.  The  heathen,  the  Jews,  the
ungodly,  etc.  4.  llejoice  that  the  permanent  home  of  God's  people  is  not  the
wilderness.  They  are  there  but  for  a  short  time  on  their  way  to  a  better
country.

{From  31 SS.  /Sermons  by  the  Rev.  S,  Thodey,)

(Vers.  39-44.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  pro-  Not  the  former   rebellious  hou^•e  of

phet  now  declares  the  pron)ise  for  the  Israel  (ver.  39),  but  the  people  now

future.    Israel  is  to  be  gathered  again,  restored  to  the  ])ractice  of  true  religion,

and  to  be  converted  to  the  Lord.  They   should    all    congn-gate    at   the

appointed  festivals  as  of  old,  at  Jeru-

Ver.  39.  '*Go  ye,  serve  ye  every  salem.     'There  will  I  accept  them,

one  his  idols,  and  hereafter  also  if  and  there  will  I  require  your  offerings

ye    will    not    hearken    unto    Me."  and  the  firstfruits  of  your  oblations,

"  Jehovah    here    utterly   disowns   all  with   all    your    holy   things."      The

relationship  with  the  rebels.    He  would  Lord    will    tlien    accept    them    with

have  idolatrous  worship  severed  from  delight,  and  all  their  sacrificial  gifts

all  connexion  with   His  name.      The  and  offerings.     This  promise   implies

tone  in  which  they  are  addressed  is  one  the  bringing  back  of  Israel  from  its

of  the  keenest  irony.     Compare  Rev.  banishment,
xxii.    11.     It  is  as  much   as  to  say,

Well,  since  you  will  not  listen  to  Me  Ver.  41.  *'  Your  sweet  savour.'*
and  return  to  My  service,  you  may  Heb.,  Odour  of  satisfaction.  "  This  is
take  your  own  course ;  we  henceforth  the  technical  expression  for  the  cheer-
part  company.  The  expression  "  and  ful  (well-pleased)  acceptance  of  the
afterwards  "  is  intended  to  give  em-  sacrifice,  or  rather  of  the  feelinus  of
phasis  to  the  address,  and  anticipates  the  worshipper  presenting  the  sacrifice,
tlie  continued  apostacy  of  the  rebels."  which  ascends  to  God  in  the  sacrificial
—{Henderson.)  odour  (Gen.   viii.   21).     The  thought

therefore  is  the  following  :   When  God

Ver.  40.  **In  the  mountain  of  the  shall  eventually  gather  His  people  out

height   of  Israel."      Moutit   Moriah.  of    their   dispersion,    He   will    accept

"There  shall  all  the  house  of  Israel,  them    as   a   sacrifice   well-pleasing   to

all  of  them  in  the  land^  serve  Me."  Him,  and  direct  all  His  good  pleasure

242


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.  Chap.  xx.


towards  them." — {Keil.)  "And I  will  scribed  ;  here  we  have  that  inner  con-
be  sanctified  in  you  before  the  dition  of  s})irit,  that  heart  of  repent-
heathen."  *' The  restoration  of  the  ance,  which  alone  can  make  snch  acts
Hebrews  from  tlie  captivity,  and  the  acceptable  to  God.
re-establishment  of  their  religious  ser-
vices, would  have  the  double  effect  of  Ver.  44.  "And  ye  shall  know  that
procuring  honour  to  Jehovah  from  the  I  am  the  Lord,  when  I  have  wrought
surrounding  nations,  and  attesting  in  with  you  for  My  name's  sake"  "  Tlie
their  own  experience  the  happiness  gathering  of  Israel  from  among  the
springing  out  of  the  true  knowledge  of  heathen  will  be  fulfilled  in  its  cimver-
the  Divine  character. — (Henderson.)  sion  to  Christ,  and  hitherto  it  has  only

taken  place  in  very  small  beginnings.
Ver.   43.     *'And  there  shall  ye  re-  The  principal  fulfilment  is  still  to  come,
member  your  ways."     In  ver.  40  the  when  Israel,  as  a  nation,  shall  be  con-
outward  acts  of  the  religion  are  de-  verted  to  Clirist." — (Keil.)


HOMILETICS.

Israel's  Conversion  to  the  Lord.

L  The  divine  method  in  their  conversion.  1.  They  ivere  urged  to  decision.
"Go  ye,  serve  ye  every  one  his  idols"  (ver.  39).  Make  your  choice,  at  once  ;
let  there  be  no  doul)le-heartedness.  Make  lull  proof  of  the  idols  ye  have
chosen,  "  If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  Him;  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him'*
(1  Kings,  xviii.  21).  This  would  have  the  effect  of  detecting  hypocrites,  and
bringing  the  true  servants  of  the  Lord  to  a  full  determination.  2.  Ihey  are
broaglit  to  contrition.  Contrition  for  past  sins  always  accompanies  true  con-
version. Such  a  condition  is  produced  (1)  By  a  remembrance  of  sin  as  a  trans-
gression against  God.  "  Ye  shall  remember  your  ways,  and  all  your  doings
wherein  ye  have  been  defiled  "  ver.  43.  Ye  shall  think  of  your  sins  as  having
defiled  your  souls,  and  therefore  were  contiary  to  the  nature  and  will  of  a  God
who  is  holy,  and  whose  commandment  is  holy,  just,  and  good.  (2.)  By  self-
loathing.  "  Ye  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight  for  all  your  evils
which  ye  have  done."  The  conviction  of  sin,  when  brought  home  to  a  man,
makes  him  to  see  himself  in  the  true  light.

II.  The  results  of  their  conversion.  1.  They  should  be  in  reality  what  they
had  hitherto  been  only  in  name.  In  ver.  39,  they  are  addressed  as,  the  "  House
of  Israel,"  though  they  went  after  their  idols.  The  name  was  but  a  hollow
unreality.  They  are  now  the  true  "  House  of  Israel  "  (ver.  40).  They  should
fctill  worship  on  the  height,  but  that  w(mld  be  on  God's  holy  mountain  and  with  a
pure  worship  (ver.  28).  2.  lliey  should  render  an  acceptable  worship  (ver.  41).
As  they  were  in  a  right  state  of  heart,  their  service  of  worship  and  offerings
w(mld  be  well-pleasing  unto  the  Lord.  The  principle  of  Divine  worship,  in
both  Testaments,  is  the  same, — "  In  spirit  and  in  truth."  3.  The  penalty  of  their
sin  should  be  7 emitted.  For  their  sins  they  were  scattered  ;  now  they  are  to  be
restored  (ver.  42).  4.  Ihey  should  give  God  all  the  glory.  His  forbearing  mercy.
His  forgiving  mercy.  His  mercy  so  great  as  not  to  be  restrained  by  all  their
sins  from  granting  the  greatest  gifts.  5.  Iheir  conversion  would  promote  the
true  knowledge  of  God.  (1)  Among  the  nations  around  them.  *' I  will  be
sanctified  in  you  before  the  heathen."  (ver.  41).  The  heathen  would  see  that
the  God  of  Israel  was  holy,  just  in  all  His  ways  ;  yet  merciful,  and  faithful  to
His  covenant  promises.  (2)  Among  themselves,  "  And  ye  shall  know  that  I
am  the  Lord."  (ver.  44).     And  there  is  a  knowledge  pf  God  which  we  can  gain

243


CHAP.  XX.  UOMILETW  COMMLWTARY:  EZEKIEL.


from  the  history  of  His  dealings  with  His  ancient  people.  We  see  that  God
brings  His  purposes  to  pass  amidst  all  human  opposition  and  rebellion.  We
know  that,  in  the  worst  times,  there  has  always  been  an  elect  remnant  of
faithful  men  to  glorify  Him.  And  the  history  of  the  past  assures  U3  that  it
will  be  thus  in  the  future,

(Ver.  41).

"  /  will  accept  you  with  your  sweet  savour"  The  spirit  of  the  Gospel  is
observal»le  under  the  law.  There  can  be  but  one  way  to  heaven.  David,
Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Daniel  were  sinners  s  ived  by  grace  as  much  as  Paul,  and
Peter,  and  John.  And  they  were  saved  by  the  i^ame  Mediator.  Let  us  consider
the  blessings  promised  in  the  text,  and  then  we  shall  give  some  directions  for  the
attainment  and  preservation  of  the  enjoyment  it  reveals.

I.  Some  remarks  upon  the  blessing  promised-  These  are  acceptance  with
God  through  a  Redeemer,  through  His  grace  and  righteousness.  His  sacritice
is  as  a  sweet  smelling  savour,  and  the  worship  of  His  people  is  as  incense
acceptable  to  Him.  Acceptance  stands  opposed  to  condemnation,  and  is  enjoyed
through  faith  in  Christ.  1.  7 /lis  blessing  is  the  grand  discovery  of  the  gospel.
It  is  the  design  and  end  of  all  God's  communications  with  men — "  God  in  Christ
reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself."  2.  Jt  is  alwai/s  the  result  of  an  ejoperience
oj  the  work  of  grace  upon  the  soul.  It  puts  the  life  of  hope  into  obedience.
Our  persons  must  be  accepted  before  our  works.  3.  It  secures  the  true  and  right
enjoyment  of  all  temporal  blessings.  To  a  man  who  has  no  sense  of  God's
friendship,  the  best  earthly  enjoyments  lose  their  charm  ;  and  to  a  man  who  has
hope  of  pardon  through  L'hrist,  all  outward  trials  lose  their  sting.  4.  It  is
essential  to  a  victory  over  death  and  a  joyful  eternity.

II.  Some  directions  for  the  attainment  and  enjoyment  of  this  blessing'

1.  Look  carefully  to  the  fact  of  your  own  acceptance  of  Christy  and  to  the
sincerity  of  your  hearts  in  their  covenant  closure  with  Christ.  See  that  you
take  him,  with  the  happiness  He  has  promised,  for  your  All.  Take  heed  of
looking  after  another  felicity,  or  cherishing  other  ho[)es  than  those  of  which  He
is  the  Author  and  ol)j.^^ct.  Christ  is  the  great  promise  made  to  faith  ;  and
faith  is  the  S()urs  acceptance  of  Ciirist  as  lie  is  freely  promised.  To  present
Clirist  before  us  with  all  his  gifts  and  blessings  is  the  design  of  the  Gospel  ;  and
to  rest  in  Christ  as  the  fountain  of  all  our  hope  and  joys  is  the  first  act  of  a
believer,  (iod  prays  yon  to  accept  Clirist  :  as  though  God  did  beseech  you  by
us,  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead  be  ye  rec  uiciled  to  God.  2.  Cherish  habitual
and  confiding  thoughts  of  the  freeness  and  riches  of  God's  grace  through  a
Redeemer.  This  will  greatly  kindle  that  love  which  brings  its  own  evidence  of
its  truth.  This  will  make  God  appear  more  amiable  in  your  eyes,  and  then
you  will  love  iiim  more  abundantly  ;  and  as  your  conscious  love  to  Him  increases
your  doubts  and  apprehensions  will  give  way.  So  much  love,  so  much  comfort.
'J'hose  right  apprehensions  of  God  also  will  do  much  to  drive  away  those  terrors
which  arise  from  false  apprehensions  of  Him.  Delightful  objects  draw  the  heart
after  them  as  the  loadstone  draws  iron.  In  Christ  you  see  goodness  and  mercy
in  its  condescension,  and  brought  nearer  to  you  than  the  Divina
iiaiuie  or'-i'i.illy  was.  In  Christ  God  is  come  down  into  our  nature,
and  so  Infinite  Goodness  is  become  incarnate.  3.  Every  day  renew
your  apprehensions  oJ  the  truth  and  value  of  the  promised  felicity.
Consider  the  end  of  your  faith,  in  oider  to  see  the  vain  and  delusive  character
of  tilings  below.  Let  not  lieaven  lose  with  you  its  attractive  force  through  >our
fur^etfnlnessor  unbelief.  Pie  is  the  best  Chrisliau  who  knows  best  why  he  is  a
244


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,  chap.  xx.


Christian.  Look  upon  all  present  actions  and  conditions  with  a  remembrance
of  their  end.  Value  not  earthly  things  beyond  their  true  worth.  Be  not
ambitious  of  that  honour  which  must  end  in  confusion,  nor  of  the  favour  of
those  whom  God  will  call  His  enemies.  4.  Guard  against  those  snares  and
temptations  which  you  know  to  he  most  hurtful  to  the  life  of  religion  in  the  soul.
5.  Gather  up  and  improve  your  own  past  experience  of  God's  mercy  towards
you  and  others.  We  do  God  and  ourselves  ^reat  wrong  by  forgetting,  or  not
improving,  our  experience  of  His  goodness.  God  does  not  give  His  mercies  only
for  present  use,  but  for  the  future  also.  What  a  wrong  it  is  to  God  in  your
next  trial  to  forget  His  last  deliverance !  Have  not  mercies  come  so  un-
expectedly, and  in  such  a  wonderful  manner,  that  you  have  (as  it  were)  the
name  of  God  written  on  them  ?  (Judg.  xiii.  23).  "  All  my  bones  shall  say,  who
is  like  unto  thee."  You  may  make  great  use  also  of  the  experience  of  others.
{From  MfSS,  Sermons  hy  the  Bev,  S,  Thodey),

(Ver.  43.)

1.  Sense  of  mercies,  rather  than  of  judgments,  makes  sin  bitter,  and  leads
unto  repentance.     Their  captivity,  and  the  sad  things  they  suffered  therein,  did
not  embitter  their  sin  unto  them,  and  break  their  hearts  ;  but  God's  kindness
in  bringing  them  out  of  Babylon  into  the  hind  of  Israel,  that  prevaileth  with
them  ;  when  they  Imd  received  marvellous  kindness  from  God,  then  they  were
marvellously  affected,  greatly  ashamed  of  their  ways,  and  loathed  themselves.
Mercies  in  Zion  produced  that  which  judgments  in  Babylon  did  not.     Great
mercies  bestowed  upon  great  sinners,  do  preach  the  doctrine  of  repentance  most
effectually,   convincing  them  strongly  of  their  unworthy  and  vile  carriages
towards  the  Lord.     David's  kindness  brake  the  heart  of  Saul,  and  made  him  to
weep  and  say,  "  Thou  art  more  righteous  than  I ;  for  thou  hast  rewarded  me
good,  whereas  I  have  rewarded  thee  evil "  (1  Sam.  xxiv.)     If  human  favour
hath  such  influence  into  a  sinful  heart,  what  hath  Divine?      Moses,  by  his
strokes,  fetched  water  out  of  a  rock  ;    David,  by  his  kindness.      God  some-
times by  His  judgments  humbles   men,  and  brings  them  to  repentance,    but
mostly  by  His   mercies.      The   swtet   influences  of  the  Gospel  have  pierced
deeper  into  sinner.s'  hearts  than  the  terrors  of  t!ie  law.      2.    Wheii  the  Lord
gathers  up  His  people  out  oj  the  world,  and  brings  them  into  nearer  relation  to
Himself,  into  Canaan,  and  Church  order,  He  looks  that  they  should  review  their
former   ways  and  he  much  affected  with  them,  and  thoroughlii  repent  for  them.
When  brought  into  Canaan,  they  were  not  (mly  to  eat  the  milk  and  honey,  to
behold  the  glory  thereof,  but  they  were  to  remember  days  of  old,  their  sins  in
Babylon,  how  they  had  polluted  themselves  and  provoked  the   Lord  ;     and
thereupon  to  mourn  kindly  for  their  unkindnesses  to  Him,  who  hath  showed
such  marvellous  loving-kindness  unto  them.     When  God  brings  man  out  of  the
world  now  unto  Zion,  gives  them  the  milk  and  honey  of  the  gospel,  shows  them
the  glory  thereof,  then  they  look  back  wonder  at  their  wickedness,  and  loathe
themselves  for  it,  saying.  Who  is  like  unto  us  in  sin  and  wickedness,  and  who
is  like  unto  our  God  in  grace  and   goodness,    in    pardon    and    forgiveness  ?
(Micah  vii.    18).     When   it  shall  please  God  to  bring  the  Jews  out  of  that
Babylon  they  are  now  in,  unto  the  true  Canaan,  the  Church  of  Christ,  they
will  remember  their  iniquities,  their  bitter  and  bloody  doings  against  Christ,
mourn  and  loathe  themselves  for  the  same  (Zech.  xii.  10  ;  Kev.  i.  7).)     3.  When
repentance  springs  from  sense  of  love  and  kindness,  as  it  is  real  and  deep,
so  it  is  secret  and  universal.     They  should,  being  brought  into  Canaan,  not
only  remember  their  sins,  but  they  should  loathe  themselves,  be  displeased  so
with  themselves,  that  they  should  smite  and  abhor  themselves,  and  that  in  their

245


CHAP.  XX.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


own  sight,  and  for  all  the  evils  they  had  committed  ;  when  no  eye  saw  them,

they  would  spread  all  their  sins  before  them,  and  in  the  sight  and  sense  of  them
be  vile  in  their  own  eyes. — {Greenhill.)

(Vers.  39-44).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.     The  de-  is  intended.     Ezekiel  here  declares  the

struction  of  Jerusalem  under  the  image  doom    uf    the  Southern   kingdom,   as

of  a  forest  devoured  by  fire.  Amos  had  declared  the  doom  of  the

A  comparison  of  these  verses  with  Northern     kingdom      (Amos    vii.    9,

Ch.  xxi.  2-5,  shows  that  they  belong  11,  17).
properly  to  Ch.  xxi.     They  form  the

commencement  of  that  chapter  in  the  Ver.  47.    **Every  green  tree  in  thee,

Hebrew  Bible.  and  every  dry  tree."     Tlie  righteous

and  the  wicked  (Ch.  xxi.  3,  4).     Our

Ver.  46.  **  Set  thy  face  towards  the  Lord  probaldy  refers  to  this  passage  in

south."     "There  are  three  words  in  St.  Luke  xxiii.  31.    '*  The  flaming  fire

the  Hebrew  text  of  this  verse  to  em-  shall  not  be  quenched."     The  fierce

press  south.     They   are   merely    used  flame  of  God's  jealousy  (Cant.  viii.  6).

as  synonyms  for  the  sake  of  varying  "  All  faces."     "  Every  single  thing  in

the  expression.     The  first  signifies  to  the  forest,  which  is  caught  at  once  by

be  on  the  right,  honoured  with  refer-  the  flame.     From  south  to  north,  i.e.,

ence  to  the  position  of  the  quarter  of  through  the  whole  length  of  the  land,

the  heavens  when  facing  the  enst.  The  From  the  terrible  fierceness  of  the  fire,

word  is  used  both  for  the  right  hand  which   cannot  be  extinguished,  every

and  the  south.     The  second  word  is  of  one  will  know  that  God  has  kindled  it,

less  frequent  occurrence,  and  besides  that  it  has  been  sent  iu  judgment." —

in  our  prophet,  and  once  in  the  Penta-  {Keil)
teuch,  is  found  only  in  Job  and  Eccle-

siastes.  The  third  word  signifies  to  be  Ver.  49.  **They  say  of  Me,  doth  he
dry,  dried  up  :  hence  the  south,  where  not  speak  parables?"  They  wish  to
the  heat  of  the  sun  is  most  severely  get  rid  of  the  application  of  the  pro-
felt.  All  the  three  terms  specially  phecy  to  themselves  by  describing  it
apply  here  to  the  southern  division  of  as  obscure.  They  pretend  not  to
the  Holy  Land,  of  which  at  the  time  understand  it.  "  At  the  same  time,  it
Jerusalem  was  the  capital." — {Bender-  contains  within  itself  a  request  that
sou).  *'  Drop  thy  word."  "  A  very  they  may  be  explained.  This  request
common  expression  for  prophetic  dis-  is  granted  ;  and  the  simile  is  first  of
course  (Deut.  xxxii.  2).  It  is  suggested  all  interpreted  in  Ch.  xxi.  1-7  ;  and
by  the  rain  or  the  dew,  and  points  to  then  still  further  explained  in  verses  8,
the  place  of  its  origin, — above,  and  etc." — {Keil.)  *'  The  riddle  is  easy  to
also  to  the  beneficial  influence  which  solve,  and  the  prophet  has  to  do  with
it  is  intended  to  exert,  and  is  used  a  sharp-witted  people  ;  but  the  hearers
even  when  the  discourse  does  not  will  not  understand,  because  the  truth
contain  promises  merely,  but  also  is  unpleasant  to  them,  and  retire  with
threatening  and  judgment,  as  is  the  a  certain  irony  behind  the  difficulty  of
case  here  exclusively,  and  to  a  large  the  forni,  and  make  as  if  they  did  not
extent  also  in  Deut.  xxxii.  May  it  understand.  To  take  away  this  mi ser-
not  also  hint  at  the  concise,  abrupt  able  excuse  from  them,  to  punish  them
style  of  composition  adopted  in  this  for  their  ironical  hardness  of  hearing,
chapter?" — {Lange).  ** The  forest  of  he  expresses  the  same  in  clear  and
the  south  field."  Forest  is  used  figura-  plain  terms  in  the  following  passage."
tively  to  denote  dense  masses  of  people.  — (Bengstenberg.)
The  densely  populated  country  of  Judea
246


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,  chap.  xx.

HOMILETIGS.
(Ver.  46.)

'*  Drop  thy  word  towards  the  south."  Heb.  Drop  towards  the  south.  The
word  properly  signifies  the  dropping  of  the  clouds,  or  rain,  and  is  metaphorically
put  for  prophesying  and  preaching.  These  are  likened  unto  rain  or  the
droppings  thereof.  1.  In  respect  of  the  flowing  and  succession  of  one  drop
after  another.  "The  heavens  dropped,  the  clouds  also  dropped  water"
(Judg.  V.  4).  So  in  prophesying,  there  is  one  word,  one  truth  after  another.
2.  In  respect  to  the  influence  thereof  The  drops  soak  into  the  earth  ;  so  words
have  influence  into  men's  ears  and  hearts  (Deut.  xxxii.  2).  As  the  rains  and
dews  insinuate  themselves  into  the  grass  and  ground,  so  do  words  into  the
heads  and  hearts  of  men  (Psa  cxix.  130)."  3.  In  respect  to  the  trouble  and  hurt
that  oft  rains  and  droppings  produce.  "  A  continual  dropping  in  a  very  rainy
day  and  a  contentious  woman  are  alike "  (Prov.  xxvii.  15),  alike  grievous,
troublesome,  wasting,  and  wearying  ;  so  prophesying  of  judgments  and  destruc-
tion is  grievous  and  troubles  much  ;  it  is  like  great  rains  and  drops  (2  Chron.
xxxiv.  25).  The  Hebrew  is,  "  shall  drop  upon  this  place."  There  should  be  a
storm,  and  such  great  drops  of  God's  wrath  as  should  consume  it.    {Greenhill.)

The  word  of  God  is  rightly  likened  to  rain.  Like  rain,  it  descends  from
above,  and  not  according  to  man's  will ;  it  is  also,  like  it,  useful  and  beneficial  ;
as  rain  flows  down  from  rocks  upon  the  fields,  so  the  word  of  God  upon  the
godless,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  into  pious  hearts  ;  and,  like  the  raiu,  it  is  not
equally  acceptable  to  all.     (Fessel.)

The  Pkophecy  of  Jerusalem's  Destruction.

(Vers.  45-49.)

Consider  this  prophecy —

I.  As  to  its  form.  This  prophecy  is  uttered  in  a  poetical  form,  most  wild
and  rugged.  The  awful  and  the  terrible,  as  well  as  the  beautiful  and  tender,
find  their  expression  in  poetry.  The  imagery  here  is  that  of  a  forest  on  fire,
and  its  devouring  flame  raging  beyond  the  control  of  man.  The  boldness  of  the
image  will  account  for  the  strange  and  wild  forms  of  the  expre>^sions  used,  and
the  rapid  transitions  from  one  thought  to  another.  We  can  only  understand
the  style  of  the  Bible,  in  its  prophetic  writings,  when  we  consider  the  intensity
and  depth  of  those  feelings  which  possessed  the  minds  of  the  prophets.

II.  As  to  its  substance.  The  "  forests"  signify  multitudes — the  great  masses
of  the  population  upon  whom  terrible  judgments  are  about  to  fall.  1.  The
judgments  are  irresistible.  The  power  of  God,  which  is  a  righteous  power,
would  be  at  work  in  them.  The  storms  of  the  Almighty  rush  over  the  forest,
and  the  trees  must  bend.  Moreover,  God  sends  fire,  against  which  nothing  can
prevail.  *'  The  flaming  fire  shall  not  be  quenched."  2.  7 he  judgments  fall
even  upon  the  righteous.  ''  And  it  shall  devour  every  green  tree  in  thee,  and
every  dry  tree."  The  "dry  tree"  would  be  fuel  for  the  flame,  but  so  great
would  be  the  destruction  that  even  the  ** green  tree"  could  not  escape.
Judgment  would  come  even  upon  the  house  of  God.  Even  the  people  of  God
have  sins  enough  to  bring  upon  them  great  calamities.  '*  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in
thee/'  in  Jerusalem,  the  centre  of  religious  life,  of  Church  privileges.  Like  a
raging  fire,  God's  judgments  devour  all  before  them.  3.  1  he  ungodly  are
admonished  by  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous.      The  prophet  Zechariah  warns

247


CHAP.  XX.  nOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


the  people  that,  when  the  great  and  noble  among  their  countrymen
fall,  they  cannot  possibly  escape,  "  Howl,  fir  tree,  for  the  cedar  is
fallen  "  (Zech.  xi.  2.)  This  is  but  another  form  of  the  Apostle's  state-
ment ;  "  If  judgment  first  begin  at  the  house  of  Gud,  what  shall
the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of  Christ  ? "  It  is  the
very  truth  which  the  same  apostle  puts  in  the  form  of  a  question,  '*  If  the
righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?  "
When  our  Lord  bids  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  to  weep  for  themselves  for  the
destruction  which  was  about  to  oome  upon  their  devoted  city,  He  adds,  "  For
if  they  do  these  things  in  the  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  tlie  dry?"
(St.  Luke  xxiii.  31).  When  the  green  tree  cannot  stand  before  the  flame,  how
can  the  dry  tree  hope  to  escape  !  Ciirist  was  righteous,  yet  He  did  not  escape
the  judgments  of  sin.  He  suffered  for  sin.  "  It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise
Him  and  to  put  Him  to  grief."  **  He  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors."
We  can  see  how  real  a  thing  sin  is,  and  how  hateful  in  the  sight  of  God,  when
we  reflect  how  terribly  the  effects  of  it  were  visited  upon  Jesus  Christ,  the
Righteous.  And  God  employs  judgments  to  purify  His  people  ;  yet,  even  in
their  case,  these  are  truly  chastisements.  God  is  specially  severe  in  His
judgments  upon  the  chosen  people,  "  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families
of  the  earth ;  therefore  will  I  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  His  very
iniimacy  with  them  is  put  forward  as  a  reason  for  leaving  no  iniquity
unpunished.  In  all  His  dealings  with  His  chosen,  God  has  ever  acted  upon
this  principle.  Witness  the  wanderings  and  sufferings  of  the  patriarchs — the
dispersions  and  captivities  of  Israel — the  untimely  death  of  Moses  and  of  Aaron
— the  troubles  of  Eli — the  sorrows  of  David — the  present  afflictions  of  the
righteous.     If  the  green  trees  thus  suffer,  the  dry  cannot  be  spared.

Ill,  As  to  its  reception.  The  prophecy  is  objected  to  as  obscure,  as  a  dark
and  mysterious  saying.  "  Then  said  I,  Ah,  Lord  God  !  they  say  of  me.  Doth
he  not  speak  parables  ? "  As  if  they  said,  "  He  is  a  speaker  of  parables,  a
mere  utterer  of  dark  sayings."  There  is  probably  a  vein  of  irony  in  these
words  with  which  the  hearers  received  the  prophet's  message ;  as  if  they  would
thus  speak,  *'  It  is  a  clever  saying  of  things  which  sound  very  terrible,  if  we
could  (mly  understand  it."  Sinners  never  want  excuses  for  neglecting  the
prophet's  message.  Either  the  message  is  too  dark  and  mysterious,  or  else  it
is  too  simple.  If  the  prophet  announces  unwelcome  truths,  and  touches  their
conscience,  they  cry  out  against  him.  If  he  threatens  God's  judgments,  he  is
not  to  their  mind.  They  will  have  none  but  those  who  prophesy  smooth
things.  Ihus  men  find  fault  7iow  with  God's  revelation.  If  He  says  whut
we  already  know,  we  think  it  is  superfluous  :  we  do  not  want  a  revelation
to  teach  us  that.  If  He  says  one  word  beyond  what  nature  or  reason
niiiiht  have  taught  us,  we  say  it  is  irrational.  One  plain  declaration  of  tlie
Bible  \Ye  pronounce  as  inconsistent  with  probability,  another  as  inconsistent  with
some  human  authority,  another  as  inconsistent  with  God's  justice,  and  another
as  inconsistent  with  Christian  charity.  And  in  the  same  way  men  treat  the
proofs  and  evidences  of  religion.  One  does  not  like  miracles,  and  another
objects  to  the  very  idea  of  prophecy.  The  one  saying,  that  it  is  altogether
unworthy  of  God  to  suspend  His  own  laws  ;  and  the  other,  that  it  is  unworthy
of  God  to  dignify  human  persons  by  the  prediction  of  their  names  and  deeds.
Another  will  hear  of  nothing  but  the  internal  evidence  of  the  truth,  the  good-
ness of  the  word  spoken,  the  comfort  conveyed  to  his  own  heart.  And  what
each  man  does  not  personally  like,  he  casts  aside  as  of  no  value.  Objections  of
this  kind  are  often  but  mere  excuses.  The  real  repugi.nnce  is  to  the  idea  of
being  taught  anything  from  God  or  His  pro})hets.  Neither  the  ministry  of  John
the  Baptist  nor  even  of  Christ  Himself  could  please  the  evil  generation  of  their
day.  "  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children."
248


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,


CHAP.  XXI.


The  Firb  and  Sword  of  Divine  Justice  go  forth  against  Heathenised

Jerusalem.     (Chap  xxi.).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  people
liad  turoed  all  their  hopes  towards  the
mother  country, — the  city  and  king-
dom. The  prophet  shows  this  to  be  a
delusion.  The  sword  of  the  Lord  will
cut  oif  Jerusalem  and  the  land  of
Israel,  both  righteous  and  wicked.
(ver.  1-17).  The  instrument  to  be
used  is  the  king  of  Babylon,  who  will
draw  his  sword  against  Jerusalem  and
the  children  of  Ammon,  first  putting
an  end  to  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  and
then  destroying  the  Ammonites  (vers.
lS-23).  The  design  is,  to  withdraw
the  people  from  their  delusions,  and
to  teach  them  that  they  must  trust
no  longer  in  human  policy  but  rather
in  repentance  towards  God.

Vers.  1-7.  The  sword  of  tlie  Lord
is  to  be  drawn  against  Jerusalem,  in
which  the  people  placed  all  their  con-
fiilence.

Ver.  2.  "The  holy  places."  *'Heb.
sanctuaries.  These  include  not  only
the  temple  with  its  holy  jilace^,  but
also  the  other  edifices  appropriated  in
purer  times  to  Divine  worship,  and
afterwards  called  synagogues"  (Psa.
lxxiii.17) — {Henderson).  Hengstenberg
refers  the  plural  to  the  glory  of  the
one  sanctuary,  and  understands  it  of
"  the  spiritual  abode  of  the  people."
Others  account  for  the  plural  form  of
the  word  by  understanding  it  of  the
individual  buildings  of  the  temple,  its
two  or  three  parts."  "The  land  of
Israel."  Equivalent  to  "the  forest
of  the  south  held."     (Ezek.  xx.  46).

Ver.  3.  *' My  sword."  "The  fire
kindled  by  the  Lord  is  interpreted  as
being  the  sword  of  the  Lord.  It  is
true  that  this  is  a  figurative  expression  ;
but  it  is  commonly  used  for  war,  which
brings  with  it  devastation  and  death,
and  would  be  generally  intelligible." —
(Keil)  "Out  of  his  sheatb."  The
sword  of  God  had  rested  in  its  sheath
for  above  400  years.  In  the  days  of
David  it  was  suspended  over  Jerusalem ;


but  the  arm  of  the  Destroying  Angel
was  then  "  stayed."  David  by  God's
direction  offered  burnt-offerings  on  the
very  |»]ace  where  the  temple  was  after-
wards built ;  and  the  destroying  sword
was  returned  "  into  the  sheath  thereof"
(1  Chron.  xxi.  16,  27  ;  xxii.  1).  God's
forbearance  was  the  sheath  in  which  it
rested  so  long.  INow  Israel  had  become
heathenized,  the  vile  profanation  of
God's  altar  was  no  longer  to  be  endured,
and  the  sword  must  again  leave  its
scabbard.  *'The  righteous  and  the
wicked."  '*This  is  not  in  contradic-
tion with  Ch.  ix.  4,  according  to
which  the  righteous,  amidst  the  im-
pending catastrophe,  are  the  object  of
the  [irotecting  and  sustaining  activity
of  God.  For  if  two  suffer  the  same,
yet  it  is  not  the  same.  To  those  who
love  God  must  all  things  be  for  the
best"  (Rom.  viii.  28). — (Hengstenberg.)
*'  There  is  no  real  contradiction  between
the  doctrine  taught  in  this  passage,  and
that  vindicated  ch.  xviii.  Though
removed  from  their  native  land  along
with  the  wicked,  inasmuch  as  they
were  nationally  connected  with  them,
yet  the  righteous  were  to  be  regarded
oidy  as  the  subjects  of  corrective  disci-
pline, whereas  to  the  idolatrous  Jews
the  sufferings  were  unmitigated  punish-
ment."— (Henderson,)

Ver.  4.  "From  the  south  to  the
north."  The  whole  extent  of  the
country,  from  Dan  to  Beersheba.

Ver.  5.  *'It  shall  not  return  any
more."  It  shall  go  on  to  make  a  full
end.  The  same  idea  as  in  ch.  xx.  48,
where  it  is  stated  that  the  fire  of  God's
judgments  shall  not  be  quenched.

Ver.  6.  "  Sigh,  therefore,  thou  son
of  man,  with  the  breaking  of  thy
loins."  The  loins  are  said  to  be  broken
when  acute  pain  robs  a  man  of  all
power  and  strength  (Deut.  xxxiii.  11).
"  The  more  deeply  to  affect  his  country-
men with  a  sense  of  the  dire  calamities
which  were  so  soon  to  overtake  them,

24D


CHAP.  XXI.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL,


the  prophet  is  commanded  openly  to  heard'  wliich  is  passin<^  into  fnlfilnient;

assume  the  appearance  of  a  person  in  therefore  his  pain.     But  they  shall  be

deep  distress,  clasping  his  loins  with  compelled  to  experience  in  themselves

his   hands,   as    sadly    bruised ;     and,  what  they  perceive  in  him.      In  all,

i  giving  utterance  to  piteous  groans  in  courage  gives  place  to  terror,  activity

the   bitterness   of  his  spirit,   he   was  to  prostration,  counsel  to  perplexity.

to    present   himself    before   them." —  No    one    holds    out    any    longer." —

{Henderson.)  {Lange.)     '*A11  knees  shall  be  weak

as  water."     They  become  like  water  in

Ver.  7.     "  For  the  tiding^s,  because  laxity  and  incoherence.    Their  strength

it  Cometh.*'     "That  which  to  others  is,  as  it  were,  dissolved,  flows  away  and

is  merely   tidings,  is  to  the   prophet  is  scattered  in  all  directioug.
already  coming,  or  it  is  to  him  a  'thing


HOMILETICS.

(Vers.  6,  7.)

Such  fear  should  possess  them  upon  the  tidings  of  the  Babylonish  army's
approaching,  as  should  make  their  rocky  hearts  melt  as  snow  before  the  sun,  or
fat  of  lambs  before  the  fire  ;  and  the  hands,  spirits,  and  knees  of  their  stoutest
man  to  be  feeble,  faint,  and  we.ik  ;  so  that  they  should  be  inept  unto  all
services,  especially  military  (mes.  1.  God  will  have  the  prophet  to  see  what
prophetical  signs  will  do,  when  prophetical  threats  did  nothing.  "  Sigh,  son  of
man,  with  the  breaking  of  thy  loins,"  &c.  These  were  prophetical  sighs,  repre-
senting unto  them  the  great  evils  which  were  coming  upon  them  ;  that  so  they
might  consider,  sigh  in  like  manner  for  their  sins,  and  prevent  their
destruction,  or  else  certainly  expect  the  same.  God  laid  a  heavy  burden  upon
the  prophet  when  he  is  called  so  to  sigh.  2.  Ill  tidings  sink  the  hearts  and  spirits
of  hypocrites  and  wicked  ones.  When  they  hear  of  wars  and  great  forces
coming  against  them,  not  only  dotli  their  mirth  cease,  but  their  hearts,  hands,
spirits,  kiiees  fail  them.  When  Nebuchadnezzar  came  their  hands  were  upon
tlieir  loins,  they  knew  not  what  to  do,  whither  to  go,  where  to  hide  themselves.
But  in  Psa.  cxii.  7,  it  is  said  of  a  godly  man,  "  He  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil
tidings  ;  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord." — (Greenhill.)

(Ver.  1-7.)
God's  Sword  of  Vengeance  against  Jerusalem.

The  parabolic  character  of  vers.  45-49  in  the  last  chapter  is  continued.  Then
the  destruction  by  fire  was  threatened  ;  now  it  is  the  sword.  Of  this  sword  of
vengeance  against  Israel  for  their  sins  we  learn  : —

I.  It  was  lifted  against  those  things  in  which  t^^e  people  trusted  most.
**  Toward  Jerusalem,  the  holy  places,  the  land  of  Israel  "  (ver.  2).  The  Jews
turned  their  faces  towards  Jerusalem  when  they  prayed  in  war,  or  in  a  foreign
land.  The  sword  of  the  Lord  was  to  be  drawn  aj^ainst  all  those  glories  of  their
country  in  which  they  most  prided  themselves.  The  candlestick  will  be  removed
from  unfaithful  churches.

II.  It  was  manifestly  the  Sword  of  the  Lord.  "  My  sword "  (ver.  3).
Human  instruments  were  to  be  used,  human  passions ;  yet  behind  all  these,

250


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.  chap.  xxi.


and  directing  tliem,  God  was  working  out  his  own  purposes.  The  swords  were
His,  though  men  bare  them.  This  will  teacli  us  to  judge  rightly  of  war,  wherein
the  ennjities  of  nations  are  so  controlled  by  Providence  that  they  are  made  to
minister  to  the  moral  and  intellectual  welfare  of  the  human  race.  God
'*  niaketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him,"  and  the  '*  remainder "  of  that
wrath,  which  might  work  but  unmixed  evil,  He  restrains  from  so  futile  a
purpose.  He  can  punish  by  wiiatever  instrument  He  pleases.  And  because
this  judgment  coming  upon  Jerusalem  and  the  land  of  Israel  is  described  as
the  sword  of  God,  it  follows  that  that  judgment  is  a  reality.  The  prophet  is
to  drop  his  word  of  prophecy  toward  Jerusalem.  That  *'word"  was  not  a
mere  sound  ;  but  a  sword,  a  real  calamity.  With  God,  words  stand  for
things  which  have  a  real  existence.  The  threatenings  against  sinners,  however
they  may  be  disregarded  in  the  present,  will  in  the  future  have  a  terribly  real
meaning.

III.  It  was  long  tlireatened  before  it  was  drawn  to  smite.  "  And  will  draw
forth  My  sword  out  of  his  sheath  "  (ver.  3).  It  had  lain  in  the  sheath  for  400
years,  during  all  their  wanderings  and  rebellions.  The  sheath  in  which  God*s
sword  of  vengeance  lies  unused  is  His  forbearance.

IV.  It  still  hangs  over  unrighteous  nations.  ''  It  shall  not  return  any
more,"  but  "go  forth  against  all  flesh  "  (vers  4,  5).  This  was  the  sword  of
the  Chaldeans  :  it  was  followed  by  the  sword  of  the  Romans.  And  so  the
sword  of  God  will  rest  not  until  the  last  Antichrist  and  his  desolation.  Israel
fell  beneath  the  stroke  of  God  for  her  sins,  and  who  then  can  escape  ?  Whole
nations  have  perished  for  lack  of  righteousness.

V.  The  thought  of  it  should  produce  the  greatest  terror  and  alarm.      1.  In

the  prophet  who  utters  the  threat  of  it.  "Sigh  therefore,  thou  son  of  man"
(ver.  6).  The  sigh  is  the  momentary  failure  of  the  heart  when  suddenly  over-
come by  the  thought  of  sorrow.  It  answers  to  the  tongue  dumb  with  silence
at  the  tidings  of  some  overwhelming  calamity.  The  prophet  charged  with
the  message  is  to  sigh,  as  if  completely  overcome.  Even  God's  people
may  well  tremble  when  they  think  of  His  judgments  (Dan.  ix.  4,  etc.).
Christ  wept  over  Jerusalem  at  the  thought  of  her  doom,  and  as  if  unwilling
to  abandon  her  to  her  enemies.  It  is  with  reluctance  that  the  Almighty  Judge
pronounces  sentence.  Judgment  is  God's  "  strange  work."  The  preacher  who
wishes  to  affect  the  feelings  of  others  must  feel  himself.  The  thought  of  God's
sword  of  vengeance  should  produce  the  greatest  terror  and  alarm, — 2.  In  the
people  to  whom  his  message  is  delioered.  If  the  prophet  who  simply  announces
tlie  jndgments  is  bidden  to  sigh,  what  must  they  do  on  whom  the  judgments
are  to  fall  1  The  prophet  is  to  sigh  for  the  tidings,  "because  it  cometh."  He
knows  that  they  shall  be  fulfilled  in  grim  reality.  Therefore  he  announces  that
as  concerning  the  people,  "  Every  heart  shall  melt,  and  all  hands  shall  be  feeble,
and  every  spirit  shall  faint,  and  all  knees  shall  be  weak  as  water"  (ver.  17).
They  refused  to  hear,  now  they  shall  be  made  to  feel.  Those  who  were  so
insolent  in  prosperity,  and  defied  God,  become,  when  His  judgments  fall  upon
them,  faint-hearted  and  desolate.  "  Weak  as  water :"  the  strength  of  the
most  daring  sinners  melts  away  before  the  righteous  anger  of  God.

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.       (Verses         Ver.  9.    **  And  also  furbished."    As

8-17.)  The  sword  is  sharpened  for  if  the  sword  so  long  unused  had  rusted
slaying.  As  they  are  a  people  who  in  its  sheath.  ''  The  repetition — a
refuse  to  understand,  the  judgment  is  sword,  a  sword,  is  not  without  effect —
announced  in  the  plainest  terms.  definitely  pointing  to  the  destructive

251


CHAP.  XXI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEU


weapon  to  be  employed  in  the  war.
To  augment  the  terror  which  the
announcement  was  calculated  to  in-
spire, the  sword  is  described  as
sharpened,  prepared  to  do  execution,
and  aho  polished.  The  glittering  of  a
highly-polished  sword,  wielded  in  the
sun,  is  truly  terrific  (Dent,  xxxii.  41  ;
Job  XX.  25"). — (Henderson.)

Ver.  10.  It  is  sharpened  to  make  a
sore  slaughter.  Heb.  77iat  slaying  it
may  slay.  It  is  made  ready  not  for
display,  but  for  its  terrible  work  of
judgment.  It  is  furbished  that  it
may  glitter.  Heb.  Have  lightning y
Comp.  ver.  28.  This  is  the  sword
spoken  of  in  Deut.  xxxii.  41,  where
the  exi)ression,  "  My  glittering  sword  "
is  literally  **  the  lightning  of  My
sword."  Such  also  is  the  sword  wielded
by  the  Cherubim  (Ezek.  i.  13,  14),  and
by  those  who  were  the  avengers  of
God's  broken  Law.  (Exod.  xix.  16).
*' Should  we  then  make  mirth?"
Nothing  could  be  worse-timed  than  to
make  light  of  these  judgments.  *'  It
contemneth  the  rod  of  My  son,  as
every  tree."  '«  My  son,"  is  the  same
as  "  My  people,"  in  ver.  12.  The
expression,  the  rod  of  My  son,  is  the
genitive  of  object — i  e.,  the  instru-
ment employed  in  punishing  My  son.
In  accordance  with  this  is  the  render-
ing of  the  Revised  Version,  *'The  rod
of  My  son,  it  contemneth  every  tree."
The  sword  of  Nebuchadnezzar  was  the
rod  which  punished  God's  people,  and
that  rod  of  the  universal  conqueror
set  at  nought  all  others.

Ver.  11.  '  *  And  He  hath  given  it  to
be  furbished  that  it  may  be  handled."
"  He  hath  given,"  used  impersonally
for  and  it  is  given,  according  to  an
idiom  common  in  Hebrew.  "  The
instrument  of  destruction  was  quite
prepared,  and  only  required  to  be  em-
ployed by  Jehovah  against  His  apostate
people." — (Henderson.)

Ver.  12.     "  For  it  shall  he  upon  My

people  "    The  object  of  the  Chaldean

expedition  is  here  clearly  pointed  out.

The  Jews  were  not  to  delude  them-

252


selves  with  the  idea  that  it  was  Egypt
or  any  other  neighbouring  nation  that
was  to  come  under  the  judgment  of
God's  avenging  sword.  The  punish-
ment would  fall  upon  themselves.

Ver.  13.     "Because  it  is  a  trial."

"These  words  point  with  the  utmost
brevity  to  the  character  of  the  impend-
ing time,  which  |)resente<l  irself  in  rosy
hues  to  the  politically  excited  people.
Trial  is   a  terrible  word  to  a  people
that    suffers   the    deepest    calamities.
When  the  trial  comes,  nothing  remains
undisclosed,  nothing  unrequited;  every
varnish    disappears,    and    all     glitter
vanishes."  — (Hengstenherg).      **  And
what  if  the  sword  contemn  even  the
rod?  it  shall  be  no  more,  saith  the
Lord  God."     "  With    a   view   to   the
sanguine  imaginations   by   which    the
people  sought  to  banish  the  thought
of  the  hardness  of  the  times,  the  pro-
phet then  asks,  *  And  how  ?  should  the
despising    rod    (the   punishment   that
far  outstrips  all    other  punishments,
ver.  10)  not  be  ?  *     And  the  answer  to
this  question  he  gives  in  the  names
of  God,    which   utter  a   loud    no  to
these  illusions." — (Hengstenherg.)    "If
Nebuchadnezzar  should  really  despise
the    resistance   made   by   the  Jewish
state,  which  i>e  did  (ver.   10) — what
was  to  be  expected  as  the  consequence?
That  state  must  necessarily  come  to
an  end,  it  shall  not  be.   Such  I  regard  as
themeaning  of  this  mostdifficult  verse."
— (Henderson.)   The  general  idea  of  the
text  is,  what  if,  under  this  terrible  judg-
ment,   Judah's    temporal    power   and
royalty  shall  cease  to  exist  ?     And  in
ver.  27,  we  are  told  that  this  result
shall  certainly  come  to  pass.     But  the
kingdom     shall  be  restored    by   One
whose  sceptre  of  righteousness  despises
every  earthly  power.

Ver.  14.  ''And  let  the  sword  be
doubled  the  third  time."  "  These  words
are  designed  to  express  the  tremendous
size  and  power  of  the  sword  to  be  em-
ployed. It  was  no  ordinary  foe  that
was  to  attack  the  Jews.  All  hopes  of
escape  were  vain.  It  was  a  sword  that
had  been  well  tried,  and  proved  sue-


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAItY:    EZEKTSL.  oHap.  xxi.


cessfiil  in  many  a  battle, — the  suwrd  "  left "  show    how  wide    is    the  area

of  the  slain." — (Henderson.)   'Which  over   which   God   shall    execute    His

entereth  into  their  privy  chambers.'*  judgments  ;  so  wide  that  it  embraces

It  will   invade  tlie   sanctity  of  their  not  only  Judea,  but  a  whole  group  of

houses  (Deut.  xxxii.  25).     There  may  peoples.     The  word  '*  whithersoever  "

be   some  reference   Jilso   to  its  pene-  seems  to  imply  the  idea  of  direction

trating  into  their  secret  *' chambers  of  by   the   "living  creatures"   (Ezek.  i.

imagery"  (Ezek.  viii.  12).  9.  12).

Ver.  15.    *'I  have  set  the  point  of         Ver.  17.     "I  will  also  smite  Mine

the  sword  again  t  all  their  gates."  hands    together."       "  By    a    strong

The   gates   of    their    city   are    to   be  anthropo}>athy   Jehovah   declares    He

besieged  by  the  naked  sword.    "And  will  do  what  He  had  commanded  the

their  ruins  be  multipliei."  Heb.,  And  prophet  to  do  (ver.  14).     Smiting  the

the  fallen  be  numerous  in  all  their  gates,  hands   together   is   an    indication    of

"Wrapped    up    for    the    slaughter."  violent  grief.     "  I  will  cause  My  fury

Rather,  made  keen,  or  sharpened,  for  to  rest"  signifies,  not  the  forbearing

the  slaughter.  to  pour  it  out  in  judgment,  but  the

full  and  permanent  infliction   of  it "

Ver.  16.  **  Go  thee  one  way  or  other,  {Henderson).     The  fury  of  God  is  said

either  on  the  right  hand  or  on  the  to  "  rest "  when  it  reaches  its  object,

left,  whithersoever  thy  face  is  set."  thus  abiding  upon  it.     "  Jehovah  will

The  address  is  to  the  sword,  as  if  it  smite  His  hands  together  and  cool  His

were   an   army.    The    "  right "    and  wrath  upon  them "  {Keil).


H0MILETIC8.

The  Sacred,  terrible  sword-sonq.

The  prophets  doubtless  treated  politics  both  on  their  outward  and  inward  side,
but  only  the  politics  of  the  kingdom  of  God  (ver.  9).  God  shows  us  the  sword,
and  waves  it  over  our  heads,  so  that  we  should  be  duly  and  profitably  alarmed.
He  can  use  every  creature  as  His  sword ;  it  is  always  prepared  to  execute  His
command.  War  as  a  divine  judgment,  therefore,  for  the  punishment  of  evil
doers  ;  but  it  is  also  a  preaching  of  repentance,  when  God  sharpens  the  sword
and  makes  it  glitter.  He  who  will  not  submit  to  the  sword  of  God's  word
(Heb.  iv.  12)  will  be  overtaken  by  the  sword  of  the  enemy.  God  Himself  takes
the  offering  which  men  will  not  give  Him  voluntarily  (ver.  10).  There  can  be
joy  amid  the  deepest  sufferings,  but  not  over  another's  suffering,  especially
when  it  is  punishment  for  sin.  The  sin  of  the  people  presses  the  sword  into
the  hand  for  war  (ver.  11).  Sin  was  also  interwoven  with  the  conquering
chapletsof  the  victors,  as  the  dew  upon  these  chaplets  was  innumerable  tears  and
drops  of  blood.  This  must  ever  be  remembered  amid  songs  of  triumph !  Fortune
of  war,  as  men  call  it,  what  a  sad  fortune  1  God  is  the  judge  behind  and  in  the  con-
queror. "  Upon  all  the  princes  of  Israel"  (ver.  12.)  Even  the  great  have  no  privi-
lege to  sin.  Trial  is  a  terrible  word  to  a  people  that  suffers  the  deepest  calamities.
A  tried  sword  is  a  dreadful  thing  when  it  turns  against  a  people  whom  God  has
given  up  to  judgment.  One  day  an  end  will  be  made  of  all  despisers  of  God
and  man.  The  history  of  the  world  as  the  fulfiment  of  prophecy  (ver.  14).
Symbolical  prophecy — the  emblems  of  punishment.  Some  must  prophesy
judgment  who  would  so  willingly  speak  of  redemption,  and  redemption  alone  ;
laen  will  not  have  the  blessing,  and  therefore  the  curse  must  be  exhibited*

263


THAP.  XXI.  BOM ILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKTEL.


God's  sword  draws  not  back  from  luiman  elevation  ;  it  reaches  the  dwellers
in  the  valley,  and  those  also  who  sit  on  lofty  seats.  No  earthly  throne  is  a
protection  from  the  sword  of  God  ;  the  history  of  the  world  is  filled  with  proofs
of  this.  The  last  mighty  pierced-through  one  is  Antichrist.  Alas,  who  can
hide  from  the  wrath  of  God ! — (Lange.)


(Ver.  13).

** Because  it  is  a  trial*'  We  may  consider  vers,  12,  13  as  thus  understood:
There  is  cause  thou  shouldst  cry,  howl,  smite  upon  thy  thigh,  because  the  sword
shall  be  a  trial ;  and  what  also  if  it  shall  not  be  a  despising  rod  ?  If  it  be  a
trying  rod,  there  is  cause  enough  to  mourn,  but  it  shall  be  a  despising  rod,
and  so  there  is  more  cause  to  mourn.  If  this  rod  make  them  not  try  their
ways,  repent,  and  turn,  it  shall  be  a  rod  to  despise  the  stoutest  of  them  and
to  destroy  them.  1.  77mt  the  judgments  of  God  are  trials.  They  discover  and
make  known  what  people  are.  The  fire  tries  the  metals,  and  declares  what  is
good  silver,  good  gold  and  what  is  reprobate.  God  kept  the  children  of
Israel  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  to  prove  them,  and  know  what  was  in
their  hearts  (Deut.  viii.  8).  The  hard  things  they  met  with  there  discovered
some  to  be  murmurers,  some  idolaters,  some  fornicators,  some  backsliders.
*'  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  when  they  shall  be  hungry,  they  shall  fret
themselves,  and  curse  their  king  and  their  God "  (Isa.  viii.  21).  When
evil  was  upon  them,  then  their  wickedness  appeared.  So  Jehoram  said,
**  This  evil  is  of  the  Lord,  why  should  I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  longer?  "  His
vileness  came  out  in  the  time  of  his  distress.  When  great  winds  are  abroad,
they  discover  what  trees  are  sound  or  rotten.  2.  God  tries  before  he  destroys.
Rods  of  trial  came  before  rods  of  destruction.  When  the  sword  is  drawn,  fur-
bished, and  whet,  the  Lord  tries  men  thereby,  whether  they  will  consider  their
ways,  repent  and  turn  to  Him,  before  He  cut  and  destroy  therewith.  Tidings
and  terrors  of  the  sword  precede  the  strokes  of  it.  God  tries  His  people  by
threatenings,  by  bringing  judij^ments  near  unto  them,  by  inflicting  lesser
judgments  upon  them,  before  He  makes  an  utter  destruction  of  them  ;  that
they  may  learn  righteousness,  humble  themselves,  and  so  either  prevent  the
judgments,  or  have  them  turned  into  mercies.  3  When  rods  of  trial  do  us  no
good,  then  follow  rods  of  destruciion.  When  the  trying  rod  hath  been  despised,
then  comes  the  rod  that  will  not  regard  high  or  low,  ])rince  or  people.  At  first
God  did  lightly  afflict  Zebulun  and  Napthali,  but  that  being  in  vain,  afterwards
He  afflicts  tliem  more  grievously  (Isa.  ix.  \).  When  Dimon  profited  not  by  her
first  strokes,  God  laid  more  upon  her  (Isa.  xv.  9).  When  smiting  the  lintel  of
the  door,  and  shaking  the  posts,  did  not  prevail,  then  did  the  Lord  cut  and
slay  with  the  sword  (Amos  ix.  1).  If  fear  work  not,  He  hath  a  pit ;  if  that  do
it  not.  He  hath  a  snare  (Isa.  xxiv.  17,  18).  When  paternal  chastisements  profit
not,  God  hath  destroying  judgments.  He  will  deal  then  with  men,  not  as  erring
children,  but  as  open  enemies. — {Greenhill.)

EXEGETI C  AL  N  OTES.— (Vers.  ''  appoint,"  is  to  draw  a  symbolic  sketch,

18-22).      The  sword  of   the  king   of  to    give     an     ocular     demonstration.

Babylon  will  smite  Jerusalem,  and  then  Ezekiel  is  to  draw  on  a  table  or  tablet

the  Ammonites.  a  sketch  of  the   siege  of  Jerusalem.

The  Hebrew  word  rendered  "  choose  "

Ver.  19.    "Appoint  thee  two  ways,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  has  the

that  the  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon  primary  meaning  of  to  cut,  and  points

may  come  "     The  force  of  this  word,  to  the  cutting  or  engraving  of  a  repre-

254


ffOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XXI.


sentation.  *'Botli  twain  shall  come
forth  out  of  one  land."  Or,  "  the  land
of  one,  i.e.,  the  land  of  the  Babyloui.-^h
king,  from  which  both  ways  shall
proceed.  "  Cboose  thou  a  place,  choose
it  at  the  head  of  the  way  to  the  city,"
"  The  '  one  land  '  whence  the  two  ways
proceeded  was  that  ol  Babylon,  and  the
ways  ran  in  a  westerly  direction  ;  the
more  northerly  by  Riblah  in  S3  ria;  and
the  more  southerly  by  Tadmor,  or
Palmyra,  in  the  desert.  The  former  was
that  usually  taken  from  Babylon  to
Jerusalem  ;  the  latter  from  the  same
city  to  Rabbah  on  the  east  of  the
Jordan,  The  prophet  is  directed
to  choose  a  place  at  the  head  of
the  way,  or  as  it  is  literally,  to  cut
a  hand  (Heb.  yod^  a  hand  or  a
sign),  a  sign  pointing  to  the  direction
in  which  the  Chaldean  army  was  to
proceed.  This  he  was  to  place  at  the
head  or  commencement  of  the  way,
where  the  two  roads  separated,  each
taking  its  own  course  ;  while  we  are
necessarily  to  understand  its  being
made  to  point  towards  that  which  the
King  of  Babylon  was  to  select,  as  we
are  taught  in  ver.  21.  Our  authorised
translators  have  adopted  the  secondary
signification  of  the  word  to  cut,  by
rendering  it  choose.  That  the  hand  is
not  supposed  to  have  been  formed  by
sculpture,  would  appear  from  the
circumstance  that,  in  case  it  had  been
so,  a  different  Hebrew  verb  would
have  been  employed.  It  may  have
been  made  of  wood,  just  like  our
finger-posts,  with  the  representation
of  a  city  cut  in  it.  The  word  city  is
purposely  indefinite,  the  Article  being
left  to  be  supplied  by  the  consciences
of  those  whom  the  prophet  addressed."
— Henderson.)

Ver.  20.  "That  the  sword  may
come  to  Rahbah  of  the  Ammonites."
"  It  mny  at  first  sight  appear  inap-
propriate that  llahbah,  the  metropolis
of  ihe  country  of  the  Ammonites,
should  be  mentioned  before  Jerusalem,
the  guilty  city  against  which  the
|)ro})het  was  especially  commissioned
to  denounce  the  Divine  judgments  ;
but,  considering  to  what  an  extent  the


Jews  had  adopted  the  idols  of  the
Ammonites,  there  was  a  singular  pro-
priety in  first  taking  up  the  heathen
city,  to  intimate  that  as  the  Jews  had
participated  in  its  crimes  so  they  might
expect  to  share  in  its  punishment.
Rabhah  oj  the  children  of  Ammon,  so
called  to  distinguish  it  from  a  city  of
the  same  name  in  the  tribe  of  Judah.
It  was  built  on  the  banks  of  the  river
31  ot^et- Amman,  which  empties  itself
into  the  Jabbok."  {Henderson.)  "Judah
in  Jerusalem  the  defenced."  The
royal  house  of  Judah  was  the  special
object  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  indigna-
tion. "The  defenced";  same  word
as  in  Deut.  xxviii.  52,  "thy  high  and
fenced  walls,  wherein  thou  trustedst."
It  was  Zedv  kiah's  trust  in  the  strong
fortifications  of  Jerusalem  that  led
him  to  break  faith  with  his  sovereign.
"  Instead  of  simply  expressing  the
name  of  Jerusalem,  the  other  metro-
polis, that  of  the  inhabitants  is  prefixed,
to  mark  them  as  the  guilty  objects  of
the  Divine  indignation.  The  reason  why
Jerusalem  is  here  said  to  be  defenced
would  seem  to  be  to  intimate  the  vain
confidence  which  the  Jews  reposed  in
their  fortifications,"     {Henderson.)

Ver.  21.  "The  King  of  Babylon
stood  at  the  parting  of  the  way,  at  the
head  of  the  two  ways,  to  use  divina-
tion; he  made  his  arrows  bright,  he
consulted  with  images,  he  looked  in
the  liver."  "  Nebuchadnezzar  is  sup-
posed to  have  marched  his  army  to  a
certain  point  to  the  west  of  Babylon,
where  the  road  branched  off  into  the
two  referred  to.  The  *  parting  *
(Heb.  the  mother  of  the  way),  so-
called,  not  as  generally  supposed,
because  there  the  road  divided,  for
that  is  immediately  afterwards  de-
scribed as  the  head  of  the  two  waySy
but  because  it  was  the  principal  road.
Here  the  monarch  is  represented  as
having  been  at  a  loss  to  determine
which  of  the  routes  he  should  take  ;
and,  in  order  to  decide,  as  having  re-
course to  divination.  Of  this  as  prac-
tised by  the  ancients  there  were  dif-
ferent kinds,  some  of  which  are  here
mentioned.  '  Made  his  arrows  bright  ;*

255


enAf.  xxr.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.


Ileb.  he  shook  the  arrows — i.e.y  tlie
lielmet,  quiver,  or  whatever  else  they
were  put  into.  It  is  most  probable
that  he  caused  the  name  Jerusalem  to
be  inscribed  on  one  arrow,  and
Rabbah  on  another,  and  mixing  them
with  others,  determined  to  march
against  the  city  whose  name  was  first
drawn  out.  This  mode  of  divining  by
arrows  was  practised  by  the  Arabs  till
the  time  of  Mohammed,  who  strictly
prohibited  it  in  the  Koran.  Another
species  of  divination  to  which  the
King  of  Babylon  had  recourse,  was
that  of  looking  into  the  liver  or  the
entrails  of  a  newly-killed  sacrifice,  and
judging  that  any  undertaking  would
be  prosperous  or  otherwise  according
as  they  were  found  in  a  healthy  or  un-
healthy state.  This  art  is  mentioned
by  Diodorus  as  practised  among  the
Chaldeans.  Not  satisfied  with  the
use  of  these  two  species  of  divina-
tion, Nebuchadnezzar  consulted  the
leraphim,,  which  appear  to  have  been
penates  or  family  gods,  from  whom  it
was  thought  possible  to  obtain  infor-
mation relative  to  future  events
(Gen.  xxxi.  19,  34  ;  Judges  xvii.  5  ;
xviii.  1^)"— {Henderson.)

Ver.  22.  At  his  right  hand  was  the
divination  for  Jerusalem."  The  king
with  his  right  hand  draws  out  the  arrow
on  which  was  marked  the  name  Jeru-
salem. The  omen  decides  for  him,  and
he  is  represented  as  holding  up  the
arrow  to  encourage  his  army  in  their
march  ajzainst  Jerusalem.  "To  open
the  mouth  in  the  slaughter."  "  This
expression  cannot  well  be  taken  in  its
usual  signification  of  murder,  but  must
be  understood,  as  Gesenius  explains,
«s  an  outbreak  of  the  voice  ;  both
terms  thus  energeticall).  expressing  the
horrihle  war-shout  of  the  Chaldean
soldiers  when  commencing  the  attack."
— {Henderson.)  "  The  slaughter-cry
of  the  besiegers  is  called  slaughter,
because  the  slaughter  is  virtually  con-
tained in  it." — {Hengstenherg).

EXEGETICAL   NOTES.— Vers.
23-27.     Though  this  announcement  of
God's  judgments  will  appear  to  the
256


people  of  Judea  as  a  deceptive  divina-
tion, yet  it  will  surely  come  to  ])ass.
The  prophet,  however,  sees  beyond  all
these  evils  the  hope  of  redemption.
The  Messiah  is  promised,  who  is  to  be
the  founder  and  restorer  of  perfect
right  on  earth  (ver.  27).  See  also,
Psa.  Ixii.  ;  Isa.  ix.  6  ;  xlii.  1  ;  Jer.
xxiii.  5  ;  xxxiii.  17.

Ver.  23.  "  And  it  shall  be  unto  them
as  a  false  divination  in  their  sight,  to
them  that  have  sworn  oaths ,  but  He
will  call  to  remembrance  the  iniquity,
that  they  may  be  taken."  **  Though
the  Jews  were  prone  themselves  to
believe  in  divination,  yet  they  affect
to  despise  it  when  it  tells  against
them.  The  second  *  to  them  '  may
be  understood  to  refer  to  the  Jews,  as
they  had  come  under  solemn  engage-
ments to  be  subject  to  the  Babylonians,
but  those  engagements  they  had
violated  ;  and  for  this,  as  well  as  their
other  sins,  they  were  now  to  be
punished.  The  oaths  were  those  the
Jews  had  taken  to  the  King  of
Babylon.  '  He  will  call  to  remem-
brance,' refers  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  to
whom  the  Jews  had  proved  faithless,
and  who  now  should  recall  to  their
mind  the  crime  of  perjury,  of  which
they  had  been  guilty." — {Henderson),

Ver.  24.  "  So  that  in  all  your  doings
your  sins  do  appear."  They  dragged
their  old  sins  into  light  again  by  the
new  enormities  which  they  committed.
Their  rebellion  against  God  is  here
spoken  of  as  ''your  iniquity,"  "trans-
gressions," "sins."  These  words  are
the  same  as  those  mentioned  in  con-
nection with  the  offerings  on  the  day
of  Atonement,  when  "  a  remembrance
was  made  of  sins "  (Lev.  xvi ;  Heb.
X.  3).  Then  the  people  confessed  their
sins  and  were  forgiven  ;  but  now  they
refuse  to  acknowledge  their  guilt
(Ezek.  xviii.  2),  and  so  their  sin  is
"  discovered,"  it  stands  over  for  punish-
ment.

Ver.  25.  **  Andthon,  profane  wicked
prince  of  Israel."  Zedekiah  is  pointed
out    by   name  as   the    prince  whose


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XXL


wickedness  had  desecrated  his  charac-
ter as  the  Lord's  anointed.  '*  When
iniquity  shall  have  an  end."  Heb.,
In  the  time  of  final  iniquity.  Tlieir
iniquity  was  now  full,  when  justice  can
no  longer  stay  her  hand  (Gen.  xv.  16).
It  was  the  treachery  of  Zedekiah
towards  Nebuchadnezzar  that  brought
their  national  affairs  to  the  crisis,  to
the  time  of  judgment.  In  the  person
oT  that  wicked  prince  the  temporal
sovereignty  of  David's  house  received
a  wound  from  which  it  never  recovered.
He  brought  complete  destruction  upon
the  Jewish  state.

Ver.  26.  "Remove  the  diadem."
More  accurately,  "  the  mitre."  Besides
this  passage,  the  word  is  found  only  in
Exod.  xxviii.,  xxix,  xxxix  ;  Lev.  viii.,
xvi.  ;  and  it  is  always  used  of  the
High  Priest's  mitre.  'The  crown."
The  regal  crown.  This  word  occurs  in
the  books  of  Samuel,  Kings,  and
Chronicles,  but  only  in  the  history  of
David's  conquest  of  Rabbah  (2  Sam.
xii.  30)  ;  1  Ohron.  xx.  2).  **  Ideally
regarded,  the  kin^^  bears,  as  the  repre-
sentative of  the  whole  people,  along
with  the  crown,  the  head  band,  or
priestly  cap.  The  two  are  closely  con-
nected. The  crown  without  the  band
is  an  empty  show.  The  forgiveness  of
sins,  which  was  secured  by  the  media-
tion of  the  high  priest,  whose  dignity
was  overthrown  with  the  fall  of  the
sanctuary  forms  the  foundation  of  all
the  royal  blessings  of  God.  In  the
Me."isiah,  in  whom  the  kingdom  at-
tained to  its  full  reality,  a  real  union
of  the  kingly  and  priestly  offices  is  to
take  place  (Zecth  vi.),  which  were
practically  divided  under  the  Old
Testament  on  account  of  human  weak-
ness."— ( llengi^tenberg).  "This  shall
not  be  the  same."  (Heb.)  This  is  not
this.  The  meaning  is  that  there  shall
be  a  complete  revolution  in  the
existing  state  of  things.  By  a  sad
reversal,  the  hallowed  nation  is  un-
holy ;  the  mitre  which  had  written  on
it,  "Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  is  profaned,
the  regal  crown  disgraced  by  such
wickedness  is  laid  in  the  dust.     All


things,  hitherto  sacred,  have  now  be-
come unreal,  and  must  be  swept  away
by  a  righteous  judgment.  ''Exalt  him
that  is  low,  and  abase  him  that  is
high."  "  In  a  general  overthrow  the
low  is  exalted  even  by  the  fact  that  it
becomes  like  the  high,  who  arc  involved
in  the  same  downfall.  The  peopl  i
have  in  their  procedure  turned  the
lowest  into  the  highest,  and  in  just
retribution  the  same  takes  ])la'e
in  their  experience.  All  is  levelled."
— (Hengstenherg).  "This  is  not  to
be  taken  as  the  enunciation  of  a
general  truth,  but  it  is  to  be  under-
stood specifically  of  the  Messiah  and
of  Zedekiah.  There  is  a  direct
reference  to  the  Messiah  in  the  f  )11(jw-
ing  verse.  The  two  are  here  placed
in  the  strongest  contrast : — the  root
out  of  the  dry  ground  (Isa.  liii.  2),
whom  the  prophet  sees  in  the  future,
and  the  haugiity  monarch  immediately
present  to  his  view  upon  the  royal
Jewish  throne.  The  commands  given
in  this  verse  are  a  strong  mode  of
declaring  prophetically  that  the  things
should  be  done." — (Henderson),

Ver.  27.  "I  will  overturn,  over-
turn, overturn  it "  (Heb.)  An  over-
throw ^  ocerthrow,  overthrow,  will  I
make  it.  The  threefold  repetition  is
intensive,  conveying  the  idea  that
there  shall  be  overthrow  upon  over-
throw. **And  it  shall  be  no  more. "
The  words  can  be  rendered,  eoen  this
is  no  more.  The  kingdom,  though
constituted  by  God  HimseU',  should
perish,  as  though  it  had  never  been.
•'Until  He  come,  whose  right  it  is;
and  I  will  give  it  Him."  There  is  an
evident  reference  here  to  Gen.  xlix.  10.
.Tudah's  royalty  is  taken  away,  but  not
for  ever.  His  inherent  dignity  persists
through  all  the  wreck  of  his  fortunes
and  hopes,  until  it  is  assumed  by  the
Messiah,  who  has  both  the  right  and
the  power  to  rule.  The  outwird
r()yalty  and  priesthood  must  pass
away,  but  the  true  King  of  Israel  is
coming,  who  is  also  a  "Priest  upon
His  throne."  (Zech.  vi.  13 ;  Acts  iii.
14;     Heb.    vii.    26;    Zech.    ix.    9).

R  257


CHAP.  XXI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


"Kouhcre  is  there  rest,  nowhere  tlian  of  the  regal  dignity  at  the  tim^
security,  all  things  are  in  a  state  of  specified ;  it  was  but  a  shadow  of  the
flux,  till  tlie  coming  of  the  Great  original  glory.  For  there  was  no
Restorer  and  Prince  of  Peace.  He  to  longer  the  distinctive  prerogative  of
u  liom  tliis  right  belongs,  and  to  whom  the  Urim  and  Thummim,  nor  the  ark
God  will  give  it,  is  the  Messiah,  of  of  the  covenant,  nor  the  glory  over-
wiiom  the  i»rophets  from  the  times  of  shadowing  the  mercy-seat ;  all  was  in
David  onwards  have  prophesied  as  the  a  depressed  and  mutilated  condition,
founder  and  restorer  ol  pirleot  right  and  even  that  subject  to  many  inter-
on  earth  (Psa.  Ixxii.  ;  Isa.  ix.  6  ;  xlii.  ftrences  from  the  encroachments  of
1  ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5  ;  xxxiii.  17)." — (Keil).  foreign  powers.  So  much  only  was
*' It  is  not  expressly  said  what  was  to  given,  both  in  respect  to  the  prie>thood
be  given  Him,  and  should  stand  and  the  kingdom,  as  to  show  that  the
waitnig  for  its  proper  possessor  till  He  Lord  had  not  forsaken  His  people,  and
should  come ;  but  the  context  forbids  to  serve  as  a  pledge  of  the  coming
us  to  understand  anything  less  than  glory.  But  it  was  to  the  still  pro-
what  was  taken  away — the  things  re-  spective,  rather  than  the  present  state
presented  by  the  priestly  mitre  and  of  things,  that  the  eye  of  faith  was
the  royal  crown.  The  true  priestly  still  directed  to  look  for  the  proper
dignity,  and  the  proper  regal  glory,  restoration.  And  lest  any  should  ex-
were  to  be  gone  for  a  time  into  pect  otherwise,  the  prophet  Zechariah,
aleyance;  some  partial,  temporary  and  after  the  return  from  Babylon,  took
fluctuating  possession  of  them  mi^ht  up  the  matter,  as  it  were,  where
be  regained,  but  nothing  more ;  the  Ezekiel  had  left  it,  and  intimated  in
adequate  and  permanent  realization  the  plainest  manner,  that  what  was
was  only  to  be  found  in  the  person  of  then  accomplished  was  scarcely  worth
Messiah,  because  in  Him  alone  was  taking  into  account ;  it  was,  at  the
there  to  be  a  fitting  representation  of  most,  but  doing  in  a  figure  what  could
the  Divine  righteousness.  It  is  true  only  find  its  real  accomplishment  in
that  there  was  something  like  a  the  person  and  work  of  Messiah  (Zech.
rest(>ration  of  the  standing  and  vi.  14).  Thus  the  mitre  and  the
honour  of  the  priesthood  after  the  crown  were  both  to  meet  in  Him,  and
return  from  the  Babylonian  exile  ;  and  the  temple  in  its  noblest  verse  be  built
if  the  ideas  curiently  entertained  upon  and  the  glory  be  obtained,  such  as  be-
the  subject  were  con ect,  there  might  came  the  Lord's  Anointed  to  possess.
appear  in  that  a  fiiilure  of  the  Meanwhile,  all  was  but  preparatory
prophecy.  But  there  was  no  right  and  imperfect." — (Fairbairn),
restoration  of  the  priestly,  any  more

HOMILETICS.

(Ver.  27.)

The  word  "  overturn  "  is  trebled,  to  show  not  only  the  certainty  and  evidence
of  the  thing,  but  the  gradation  and  continuance  of  it  ;  for  the  kingdom  of
Jndali  by  certain  degrees  fell  frouj  its  height.  After  that  Zedekiah  was  deposed,
there  was  no  crown  nor  king  more  in  Judah.  After  the  captivity  there  were  no
kings,  but  governors,  captains,  rulers  ;  after  them  the  high  priests  had  the  power,
in  whose  liands  it  continued,  even  to  Hyrcanus,  who  usurping  kingly  authority
was  miserably  s^ain — Herod,  a  strajif]:er,  succeeding.  "Until  He  come  whnse
righ"  it  is."  The  crown  sliall  neither  fit,  nor  be  fastened  to  any  head,  till  He
Come  that  hath  the  right  to  it  ;  and  that  is  neither  Nebuchadnezzar  nor
Zerublahel;    nor  Aristobulus,  Alexander,  or  Hyrcanus,  who  assumed  kingly

258


HOMILETIC  COMMEyTARY :  EZEKIEL.  CHAP.  xxi.


dignity  to  tlieinselves,  in  time  of  the  Maccab  es  ;  but  Christ  the  Messiah,  who
is  the  true  Heir  and  Successor  of  David,  when  He  comes,  shall  raise  up  the
kiuL^dora  of  Judah,  being  miserably  afflicted,  destitute,  and  lost  to  the  eye  of
the  world  ;  He  changing  it  into  a  s[)iritual  kingdom,  shall  restore  it  to  a
higher  ^lory  than  ever  it  had.  The  crown  here  was  reserved  and  laid  up  for
the  Lord  Christ,  who  was  born  King  of  the  Jews  (Matt.  ii.  2)  ;  to  whom  the
angel  told  Mary  that  the  Lord  should  give  the  throne  of  His  father  David,  and
that  He  should  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever  (Luke  i.  32,  33).
Nathaniel  called  Him  "the  King  of  Israel"  (Jolm  i.  40).  The  Father  hath
appointed  Christ  to  be  king  of  Israel,  gave  Him  power  (Is.  ix.  6  ;  Micah  v.  2).
Christ  claimed  to  be  such  Himself  (John  v.  22).  "And  I  will  give  it  Him."
Christ,  when  He  comes,  shall  not  be  kept  off  from  His  rights.  Though  He
come  in  a  mean  and  low  way,  yet  He  shall  be  king  and  reign.

I.  The  Lord  doth  lay  the  glory  of  crowns  and  sceptres  in  the  dust  when  He
pleases.  "  I  will  overturn."  There  is  no  crown  so  sure  to  any  mortal's  head,
no  kingdom  so  stable,  but  the  L<>rd  can  pluck  away  the  crown,  shake  the
kingdom  to  pieces,  throw  out  the  possessors,  and  dispossess  their  heirs.  Some-
times the  Lord  doth  suddenly  overturn  empires  and  kingdoms  (Dan.  v.  30,  31)  ;
sometimes  He  proceeds  gradually  as  with  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judah.
"I  will  be  unto  Ephraim  as  a  moth,  and  to  the  house  of  Judah  as  rottenness.
A  moth  eats  up  a  garment  by  degrees,  now  it  makes  one  hole  in  it,  and  anon
another  ;  so  rottenness  enters  by  de-rees  into  a  tree,  first  into  one  branch,  then
another,  after  into  the  body  and  root.  So  God,  by  degrees,  wasted  and
consumed  these  kingdoms.  Be  it  suddenly  or  gradually,  He  overturns  them
when  He  pleases.  He  breaks  the  staves  of  the  wicked,  and  the  sceptres  of  the
rulers  (Isa.  xiv.  5).

II.  When  God  overturns  crowns  and  kingdoms  He  keeps  those  in
such  a  condition  while  he  pleases.  ''And  it  shall  be  no  more,  until  He
come,  whose  right  it  is."  This  was  near  500  years  ;  for  from  Zedekiah's  deposal
to  the  birth  of  Christ  were  492  years,  which  was  a  long  season  for  His  crown  and
kingdom  to  lie  in  darkness,  and  a  desolate  condition.  Hosea  told  us  long  since
that  the  children  of  Israel  should  "abide  many  days  without  a  king  and
without  a  prince  "  (Hosea  iii.  4).  The  kingdom  of  Israel  was  overturned  by
the  hand  of  God  above  a  hundred  years  before  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  and  lies
overturned  to  this  day  ;  and  so  hath  been  above  two  thousand  years  in  a  sad,
dark,  distressed  condition.  Their  sins  were  great,  which  caused  the  Lord  to
overturn  them,  and  He  lets  them  lie  under  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity
many  years.  When  kingdoms  are  down,  many  may  strive  to  lift  them  up  to
their  former  dignity,  but  it  cannot  be  till  the  Lord's  time  come.

III.  The  Lord  Christ ;  the  promised  Messiah,  was  the  true  King  of  Judah,
and  Prince  of  Zion.  *'  Until  He  comes  whose  right  it  is,  and  I  will  give  it
Him."  The  Father  had  appointed  Him  to  be  King,  given  Him  the  kingdom,
and  made  it  known  long  before  His  coming  in  the  flesh.  He  was  the  Shiloh,
the  Prosperer,  unto  whom  the  gathering  of  the  people  should  be  ;  He  gathered
Jews  and  Gentiles  together.  He  was  spoken  of  as  the  "Star  of  Jacob,"  and
the ''Sceptre"  who  "  should  rise  out  of  Israel  "  (Num.  xxiv.  17).  In  many
other  places  of  Scripture,  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  His  right  thereunto,  and
the  Father's  donation  thereof  unto  Him  are  spoken  of.  The  people's  hearts
were  towards  Him,  and  they  would  have  made  Him  a  king  (John  vi.  15).
However  He  appeared  to  the  world,  the  Apostles  beheld  glory  and  majesty
in  Him  (John  i.  14  ;  2  Pet.  i.  16) ;  and  Pilate  wrote  over  His  head,  '*  This  is
Jesus,  the  King  of  the  Jews  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  37).     Christ  was  born  a  king,  died

B  2  259


CHAP.  XXI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.

a  king,  He  lives  and  reigns  at  this  day  King  of  Zion,  and  of   all  saints
(Rev.  XV.  3).

IV.  The  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Lord  towards  His  people,  that  when
He  tells  them  of  the  severest  judgment,  He  mingles  some  mercy.  Thougli
He  threatens  tlieir  Church  and  State  for  a  long  time,  yet  He  tells  them  of  the
coming  of  Christ  who  should  be  their  king,  wear  the  crown,  and  raise  up  tlie
kingdom  again.  This  was  a  great  mercy,  in  the  depth  of  misery  ;  if  they  lost
an  earthly  kingdom,  they  should  have  a  spiritual  one  ;  if  they  lost  a
profane  and  temporal  king,  they  should  have  a  king  of  righteousness,  an
eternal  king  It  is  the  method  ot  the  Lord,  when  He  is  bringing  in  dreadful
jtidgments  upim  His  people,  that  have  provoked  Him  bitterly,  to  lay  in  sonie-
thing  that  may  support  and  comfort  tho-e  who  have  served  Him  faithfully
(Amos  ix.  8-11).     Here  is  goodness  with  severity.

V.  That  how  contrary  soever  God's  actings  appear,  yet  He  will  make  good
His  promises.  The  Lord  had  promised  to  set  up  His  son  Christ  to  be  King  in
Zion,  the  hill  of  His  holiness  (Psa.  ii.  6)  ;  that  the  Government  should  be
npon  His  shoulder  (Isa.  ix.  6)  ;  that  He  would  "cause  a  Branch  of  righteous-
i»ess  to  grow  up  unto  David,  and  He  shall  execute  judgment  and  righteousness
in  the  land  (.Jer.  xxxiii.  15).  What  likeliiiood  was  there  that  these  things
should  be,  when  the  Lord  overturns  the  land,  jducks  up  all  by  the  roots,  and
lays  all  in  a  dead  condition,  and  that  for  many  da\'s  and  years?  They  nnght
have  thought  and  said,  Surely,  this  death  of  the  crown,  of  Church  and  State,
will  be  the  death  of  all  those  and  other  promises  ;  hut  it  was  not  so.  'i'liouiih
a  sentence  of  death  was  upon  the  land,  upon  the  .Tews,  yet  the  living  Go  I
kept  life  in  the  promises,  He  remembered  them,  and  said,  I  will  give  it  to  Him,
He  shall  have  this  land,  the  kingdom  and  the  crown,  Hp  shall  sit  upon  Zion,
reign  and  execute  judgment.  The  actings  of  God  sometimes  are  such,  that
to  man's  apprehensions  they  will  make  void  the  ])romities  of  God.  In
Psa.  Ixxvii.  7,  8;  saith  Asaph,  "Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for  ever?  And  will
He  be  favourable  no  more?  Is  His  mercy  clean  gone  for  ever?  Doth  His
promise  fail  for  evermore  ?  God's  hand  was  heavy  upon  him,  his  soul  was
greatly  afflicted  so  that  he  questioned  the  truth  of  God's  promises,  and  was
ready  to  despair.  But  what  saith  he  in  the  tenth  verse,  **  This  was  my
intirmity."  There  was  no  infirmity  in  God  ;  He  had  not  forgotten  His  promise,
it  was  not  out  of  His  sight,  though  out  of  Asaph's.  Man's  faith  may  fail  hirn
sometimes,  but  God's  faithfulness  never  fails  Him  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  33).  God's
operations  may  have  an  aspect  that  way  ;  the  devil's  temptations  and  our
unbelieving  hearts  may  not  only  make  us  think  so,  but  persuade  us  it  is  so  ;
whereas  it  cannot  be  so,  for  the  Lord  will  not  suffer  it,  He  will  not  make  a  lie
in  His  truth  or  faithfulness  ;  so  the  Hebrew  is  :  He  is  Truth,  and  not  one  of
His  promises  can  fail.  Tl)is  must  afford  strong  consolation  unto  all  that  are
under  any  promise  of  God. — Greenhill.

(Vers.  18-27.)

Jerusalem's  Fall  and  Risinq.

The  prophet  announces  the  fall  of  the  temporal  sovereignty  of  David's  house
in  the  person  of  Zedekiah.  He  declares  his  message  as  the  word  of  the  Lord,
"Exalt  him  that  is  low,  and  abase  him  that  is  high"  (ver.  26).  This  may  be
considered  as  the  principle  upon  which  God  acts  in  His  government  of  mankind
throughout  all  ages.     When  the  mother  of  our  Lord  thought  of  the  honour

260


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  i  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xxi.


which  had  been  bestowed  upon  her,  that  one  so  obscure  and  lowly  should  be
chosen  to  bring  forth  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  she  broke  forth  into  a  song  of
praise,  saying,  '*  He  hath  put  down  the  miglity  from  their  seats,  and  exalted
them  of  low  degree"  (Luke  i.  52).  Ciirist  taught  the  general  principle,
"Everyone  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased,  and  he  that  humbleth  himself
shall  be  exalted"  (Luke  xvii.  14).  Even  the  great  French  sceptic,  Bayle,  says
of  these  words,  that  they  contain  "the  abridgment  of  all  human  history."
Such  is  the  law  of  God*s  kingdom.  Jerusalem  is  to  fall,  but  in  due  time  to  be
raised  to  a  better  and  nobler  condition.  Her  true  King  will  come  unto  her  in
the  person  of  the  Messiah,     Her  fall  is  to  be  unto  rising  (ver.  27).

L  Jerusalem's  fall.  1.  It  is  portrayed  by  an  enigmatic  representation.  The
event  is  now  near  and  the  prophet  is  bidden  to  portray  the  judgments  which  are
to  fall  upon  Jerusalem.  He  draws  a  symbolic  sketch  of  the  siege  of  the  city,
representing  the  advance  of  Nebuchadnezzar  towards  it  from  his  own  country.
The  King  of  Babylon  is  seen  standing  on  the  highway,  at  a  point  from  which
two  roads  diverge,  one  leading  to  Jerusalem,  the  other  to  Kabbah.  Which  road
shall  he  take  ?  He  determines  his  course  by  augury  in  three  of  its  branches,
employing  divination  by  arrows,  by  images,  and  by  the  appearance  of  the
entrails  of  a  newly  killed  sacrifice.  The  omens  all  point  to  Jerusalem  as  the
first  object  of  attack.  Thus  Providence  so  ordered  it  that  judgment  must  begin
at  the  house  of  God.  2.  The  threat  of  it  is  received  with  irreverent  credulity.
When  the  Jews  hear  that  the  King  of  Babylon  is  advancing  against  Jerusalem
they  make  light  of  it.  They  say  that  the  king  has  been  misled  by  a  false
divination  (ver.  23).  They  forget  that  they  themselves  were  deluded  by  vain
divinations  and  lying  prophets  (Ezek.  xxi.  29  ;  Ex.  xiii.  6,  7  ;  xxii.  28).  They
despise  augury  when  it  is  against  themselves.  In  their  infatuation  they
cannot  read  the  signs  of  the  times,  nor  see  that  their  judgment  is  nigh  at  hand.
They  readily  take  refuge  in  any  interpretation  of  events  which  can  lend  some
support  to  their  vain  hope.  They  are  blind  to  the  sad  facts  of  their  own
spiritual  condition,  which  must  inevitably  draw  these  judgments  upon  them.
They  have  the  worst  omens  against  them,  their  iniquities,  transgressions,
sins  (ver.*  24)  ;  and,  more  particularly,  their  treason  and  perjury  (ver.  23).
And  all  this  was  "discovered"  sin,  it  affected  the  social  and  political  life
of  the  nation  ;  it  appeared  before  the  eyes  of  all  men  (ver.  24).  3.  The
instrument  which  was  to  bring  it  about  was  chosen  of  God.  'i^he  human
instrument  who  was  to  compass  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  was  the  King  of
Babylon,  who,  in  this  instance,  was  God's  servant  for  judgment.  Though  an
heathen  king,  and  one  who  consulted  augury,  he  was  truly  an  instrument  in
the  hands  of  God  for  the  correction  of  His  people  and  for  working  out  His
purposes  towards  mankind.  God  can  guide  even  men's  appeals  to  chance,  and
overrule  them  for  His  own  purpose  (Prov.  xvi.  33).  The  Magi,  who  were
worshippers  of  the  hosts  of  heaven,  and  who  thought  that  they  could  read  in
them  the  destinies  of  nations,  were  yet  led  to  Christ  by  a  star.  Apart  from  all
his  consultation  of  omens,  the  King  of  Babylon  had  justice  on  his  side.  He
was  truly  a  chosen  vessel  to  accomplish  God's  righteous  will  concerning
Jerusalem.  4.  The  blame  must  be  charged  upon  the  Jews  themselves.  "  Because
ye  have  made  your  iniquity  to  be  remembered"  (ver.  24).  The  King  of
Babylon  must  not  be  charged  with  their  disasters,  nor  his  resorting  to  divina-
tion, but  to  their  own  treason  and  perjury  they  must  impute  the  blame.  It
was  not  their  father's  sins  but  their  own  that  brought  destruction  upon  them.
5.  Judgment  was  inevitable.  "Jerusalem  the  defenced"  (ver.  20)  must  fall.
The  measure  of  her  iniquity  was  full.  Justice  could  forbear  no  longer.  In
Zedekiah  the  iniquity  of  the  nation  culminated  (ver,  25).  In  him  the
sovereignty  of  David's  house  came  to  an  end.

261


CHAP.  XXL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


II.  Jerusalem's  rising.  In  one  man  Jerusalem  fell,  but  a  greater  Man  shall
1  estore  it.  The  sovereignty  of  David's  house  came  to  an  end  in  Zedekiah,  but
not  for  ever.  Jerusalem  has  a  future.  She  shall  rise  from  her  ruins  in  a  far
more  glorious  form  than  that  in  which  she  was  lost,  even  as  the  '*  Jerusalem
which  is  above,  the  mother  of  us  all  "  (Gal.  iv.  26).  1.  The  rising  is  to  come
through  the  Messiah.  It  is  not  by  a  doctiine,  or  a  truth,  but  by  a,  person  that
God  will  deliver  His  people.  Zedekiah  rei)reseiited  the  nation  in  its  fall ;  Christ
in  its  rising.  The  Messiah  is  the  rightful  sovereign  of  men  (ver.  27).  He  is
the  true  priest,  and  the  true  king.  All  others  are  but  shadows  of  Him.  He
alone  has  the  supreme  right  and  power.  Among  the  Israelites  the  offices  of
priest  and  king  were  jealously  separated  ;  but  in  Christ  they  can  be  united  with
perfect  safety,  for  He  is  both  holy  and  just.  2.  77ie  deliverance  through  the
Messiah  only  comes  after  the  complete  wreck  of  the  nations  fortunes.  "  I  will
overturn,  overturn,  overturn  it ;  and  it  shall  be  no  more "  (ver.  24).  This
complete  destruction  issued  in  that  fulness  of  time  in  which  the  Son  of  Man
should  come.  The  Messiah  appeared  upon  the  wreck  of  the  world's  hopes.
Judah's  royalty  had  long  been  laid  in  the  dust,  Greece  had  long  ago  fallen,  and
Rome  was  fast  sinking  into  decay,  when  God  sent  His  Son  to  redeem  the  world.
Men  were  permitted  to  make  the  sad  experiment  of  trying  to  live  without  God,
in  order  that  they  might  learn  their  need  of  a  Redeemer  who  was  the  "  Desire
of  all  nations."

EXEGETICAL      NOTES.  —  Vers,  the  Chaldeans,  and  so  it  was  natural

28-32.       The     overthrow     of     the  to  exemplify  in  him  the  general  truth.

Ammonites.      Israel  is   to   rise  after  the  more  natural   because  the    ven-

judgment,  but  Ammun  is  to  be  utterly  geance   was   first    to    fall  on   Judah,

destroyed.  while  Ammon  api)eared  to  come  out

of   the   affair  with   high  shoes,   and

Ver.  28.  "Concerning^  the  Am-  mocked  Judah,  who  had  to  pay  the
inonites,and  concerning  their  reproach  score.  "  Their  reproval " — the  insults
even  say  ihou,  the  sword,  the  sword  which  they  heaped  upon  Judah.  Tlie
is  drawn.'*  "Lest  it  should  be  sup-  prophet  forsees  that  the  Ammonites,
posed  that  because  Nebuchadnezzar  on  the  approach  of  danger,  will  with-
had  taken  the  route  to  Jerusalem,  and  draw  from  the  coalition  (Lam.  i.  2),
not  that  to  Rabbah,  therefore  the  and  on  the  catastrophe  of  Jerusalem,
Ammonites  should  escape  being  in-  give  free  course  to  their  ancient  hatred
vaded  by  his  army,  the  prophet  is  against  Judah.  Judah  exchanges  the
instructed  to  denounce  jud<,^ment  prophecy  that  was  unfavourable  to
against  them  also.  The  reproach  him  for  the  divination  (ver.  23),  and
with  which  the  Ammonites  are  here  by  this  fatal  exchange,  falls ;  Ammon
charged,  was  their  opprobrious  and  exchanges  (ver.  29)  the  divination
insulting  treatment  of  the  Hebrews  favourable  to  him,  for  the  prophecy,  and
at  different  periods  of  their  history,  thereby  prepares  himself  at  all  events,
and  especially  when  Jerusalem  was  for  the  downfall." — (Hengstenherg).
taken  by  the  Chaldeans." — (Hender-
son). *'The  children  of  Ammon  Ver.  29.  **  Whiles  they  see  vanity
represents  the  world — power  hostile  unto  thee,  whiles  they  divine  a  lie
to  the  kingdom  of  God.  Yet  the  unto  thee."  (Heb).  Ihey  have  seen
representative  is  not  taken  acci-  falsehood  for  thee,  they  have  divined
dentally  out  of  the  multitude  of  the  for  thee  a  lie.  The  Ammonites  also
heathen  peoples  hostile  to  the  kingdom  had  those  among  them  who  practised
of  God  ;  but  the  prophet  takes  divination.  But  these  had  divined  a
occasion  from  the  circumstances  of  the  "  lie  "  for  them,  promising  them  peace
time.  Ammon  had  at  that  time,  no  and  safety  when  judgment  was  hard
less  than  Judah,  incurred  the  anger  of  ^t  hand,    **To  bring  thee  upon  the

262


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  CHAP.  xxL


necks  of  them  that  are  slain."      The  is  an  unnatural  figure — but  rather  a

Ammonites  are  to  be  involved  in  one  blowing  which  increases  the  intensity

common  ruin  with  the  Jews.  of  the  flame.      *  Brutish  men,   and

skilful  to  destroy,"     **  The  word  must

Ver.  30.     **  I  will  judge   thee  in  be    explained     from    Psalm    xcii.    7,

the  place  where  thou  wast  croited."  *  brutish/  foolish,  always   bearing  in

"  The  Ammonites   were    not    to    be  mind  that  the  Hebrew  associated  the

carried  away  captives,  like  the  Jews  to  idea  of    Godlessness    with   folly,  and

Babylon,  but  were  to  periah  in  their  that  cruelty  naturally   follows   in  its

own  land.     While  the  Jews  were  to  be  train.'* — (Keil)
restored  after  the  captivity  had  cured

them    of    idolatry,    the    Ammonitish  Ver.  32.     "Thou  shalt  be  no  more

kingdom  was  to  cease  for  ever.     The  remembered."     Ammon  was  to  perish

prophecy  was  fulfilled  five  years  after  utterly.      For  her  there  was  no  hope

the    destruction    of    Jerusalem.*' —  of  restoration,  like   that  held  out  to

(Henderson.)  Israel  in  ver.  27.     "  From  the  times  of

the  Maccabees,  the   Ammonites  and

Ver.  31.     **  I   will  blow   against  Moabites  have  quite  disappeared  out

thee  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath."  The  of  history." — (Hengstenberg,)
idea  is  not  to  blow  with  fire — which


E0MILETIC8.

(Vers.  28,  29).

1.  When  God  brings  judgments  upon  His  people  for  their  iniquities,  then
their  enemies  take  advantage  and  revile  them.  The  Ammonites  were  glad  that
the  calamity  of  Jerusalem  was  at  hand.  They  were  neighbours  of  the  Jews,
brethren  also  as  coming  from  the  brother  of  Abraham  ;  yet  they  reproached  the
Jews  and  added  affliction  to  affliction  (Zeph.  ii.  8).  The  rabbies  say,  that  when
the  Chaldeans  carried  the  Jews  captive,  through  the  land  of  the  Ammonites  and
Moabites,  the  Jews  wept,  and  they  reproached  them  saying,  why  do  ye  afflict
yourselves  ?  Why  do  you  weep  ?  Are  you  not  going  to  your  father's  house  ?
They  meant  Chaldea,  which  was  Abraham's  country  and  habitation.  These  and
many  other  reproachful  speeches  they  used  against  the  Jews,  when  they  were
spoiled  and  led  into  capitivity,  and  "magnified  themselves  against  their  border."
They  said,  now  their  border — their  land — should  become  theirs.  Thus  they
reproached  and  wronged  the  Jews.  So  likewise  did  the  Edomites  in  "the  day
of  Jerusalem"  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7),  that  was  in  the  day  when  Nebuchadnezzar's
force  took  and  plundered  it.  They  cried,  "  Rase  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the
foundation."  The  adversaries  saw  Jerusalem,  and  did  mock  at  her  Sabbaths  ;
they  scoffed  at  all  her  festivals,  religion,  and  worship.  Where  is  your  God,
whose  days  you  have  so  religiously  ob  erved  ?  Why  did  He  not  defend  you
from  this  day  of  your  sufferings?  Either  He  was  infirm,  and  could  not,  or
unfaithful,  and  would  not.  2.  The  Lord  takes  notice  of  the  enemies  reproaching
Ills  people.  He  tells  the  prophet  of  the  reproachings  of  the  Ammonites.
Ezekiel  was  in  Babylon,  and  knew  nothing  of  it,  but  God  heard  and  observed  it
(Zeph.  ii.  H).  God  saith  in  His  indignation  unto  Moab,  "  Was  not  Israel  a
derision  unto  Thee?  "  Deny  it,  if  thou  darest.  I  saw  it ;  I  heard  it.  This  is
some  comfort  to  the  Church  and  people  of  God,  that  He  observes  nob  only  the
wrongs  wicked  men  do  unto  His  people,  but  also  the  reproaching  speeches  they
utter  against  them  (Lam.  iii.  6.)  3.  Reproaching  and  reviling  God's  people,
when  they  are  in  affliction,  draws  judgments  upon  the  reproachers  and  revilers.

263


CHAP.  XXII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


The  Ammonites  reproached  the  Jews  when  the  Babylonish  sword  came  npnn
them,  and  here  the  prophet  must  tell  them  the  sword  is  drawn  and  furbished
for  slaugliter.  Reproach  of  this  kind  is  a  provoking  sin  ;  God's  name,  truth,
ordinances,  suffer  when  His  people  are  reproached  for  His  correcting  hand  upon
them  for  their  iniquities.  Moab  for  reproaching  should  be  reproached  ;  yea,
grievously  afflicted,  yea,  utterly  destroyed.  4.  When  the  Lord  threatens  sinful
nations  with  sore  judgments  J  they  have  those  amongst  them  which  divert  them
from  the  truth,  possess  them  with  delusions,  and  put  them  upon  destructive
practices.  The  Ammonites  were  threatened  here  with  the  Babylonish  sword,
but  they  neither  believed  Ezekiel  nor  Jeremiah,  who  told  them  the  same  thing.
Their  false  prophets,  their  diviners,  beat  them  off  from  it,  possessed  them  with
vanities  and  lies,  put  them  upon  insulting  over  the  Jews  when  the  hand  of  the
Lord  was  most  heavy  upon  them,  and  so  brought  them  to  suffer  by  the  same
sword  the  Jews  did.  It  is  just  with  God  to  give  men  and  nations  over  to
believe  lies  and  lying  prophets,  which  shall  lead  them  to  destruction,  when  they
have  stopped  their  ears  against  the  true  prophets.  Ahab  would  not  believe
Micaiah,  but  the  false  prophets  who  spake  words  according  to  his  mind  ;  but
they  were  vanity,  lies  and  he  smarted  for  it  (1  Kings  xxii.)  5.  Though  the
Lord  bears  long  with  sinful  nations,  yet  He  hath  His  days  and  times  of  reckon-
ing with  them.  The  day  of  the  Jews  was  come,  and  their  iniquity  had  an  end.
The  day  of  the  Ammonites  came,  and  their  iniquity  had  an  end.  God  punished
ihem  severely  for  their  sins  (Ezekiel  xxv.)  Babylon  and  its  king  had  a  time  to
sin  and  a  time  to  suffer.  God  stayed  many  days,  yet  had  His  day,  and  came
at  the  day  appointed  (Jer.  1.  31  ;  li.  13).  Babylon  was  insatiably  covetous,
robbing  the  nations  of  their  riches,  but  all  her  wealth  could  not  purchase  one
day's  respite  from  the  wrath  of  God,  nor  all  her  waters  preserve  her  from  the
fire  of  His  indignation  The  fire  God  sent  in  His  day  burnt  up  their  habita-
tions, and  licked  up  the  water  of  Euphrates  whereon  Babylon  sat.  God  bare
long  with  us,  and  the  nations  about  us,  but  His  day  is  come.  He  is  visiting  ;
we,  they,  have  had  our  times  of  sinning,  and  must  now  have  our  times  of
suffering. — (Greenhill.)

The    Sins   or   Jerusalem   anb    Israel  :    The    General    Corruption   of
Prophets,  Priests,  Princes,  and  People  (Chap,  xxii.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— We  have  This  chapter  may  be  considered  as

here   another  description  of  the  sins  standing  in  contrast  with  Chap.  xx.

of  Jerusalem  and  Israel;  and  thus  the  In    this  latter,  the  whole  of  Israel's

judgments  predicted  in  the  last  chapter  history  was  reviewed  as   revealing   a

are  clearly  justified.     Three  words  of  growing    corruption    which    must    of

God  are  here,  closely  connected  together  necessity  bring  down  God's  judgments

in  their  substance   and   design,  viz.:  upon  the  people.     The  present  chapter

(1)  The  blood-guiltiness  and  idolatry  descriles    the    existing    condition    of

of  Jerusalem  hastening  the  coming  of  Jerusalem.      In  one  case  the  jirophet

the  day  of  retribution,  when  the  city  was  commanded   to   "  Make  them  to

will  be  an  object  of  scorn  to  all  nations  know  the  abominations  of  theirfatheis"

(vers.  1-16).     (2)  The  house  of  Israel  (ch.  xx.  4)  ;  in  the  other,  he  is  com-

has  become  dross,  and  is  doomed  to  be  manded  concerning  Jerusalem  to ''Make

melted  in  the  fire  of  God's  righteous  her  to  know  her  abominations"  (ver.  2).
anger  (vers.  17-22).     (3)  All  ranks  of

the  kingdom— prophets,  priests,  princes  Ver.  2.  ''Wilt  thou  judge  the  bloody

aid  people  have  become  utterly  corrupt,  city?"      The  same  expression  as  in

and    therefore   the   threatened   judg-  chap.  xx.  4, denoting  that  the  prophet's

ments  are  inevitable.  reproof  still  continues.     The  question
261


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


f'HAP,  XXll.


implies  the  idea  that  judgment  can
wait  no  longer,  and  the  prophet  must
be  wakened  up  to  realise  fully  the
fifreat  iniquity  of  his  nation.

Ver.  3.  "The  city  sheddeth  blood
in  the  midst  of  it."  '*  On  account  of
the  murders  committed  in  Jerusalem
and  the  offering  of  children  in  sacri-
ficejp  Moloch,  she  might  well  be  de-
nominated *  the  bloody  city/  In  this
respect  she  rivalled  Nineveh  (Nah.
iii.  1),  and  might  justly  anticipate  the
same  doom.  Instead  of  deriving  any
advantage  from  their  idolatries,  they
were  only  involved  thereby  in  ruin  "
{Henderson).  "  That  her  time  may
come."  The  limit  of  her  probation —
tlie  crisis  of  judgment  (Isa.  xiii.  22  ;
Ezek.  XXX.  3).  "  Maketh  idols  against
herself  to  defile  herself."  By  her  per-
sistence in  iniquity  still  heaping  upon
herself  moral  defilement  with  all  its
consequences.

Ver.  4.  "  Thou  hast  caused  thy
days  to  draw  near,  and  art  come  even
unto  thy  years."  The  full  term  of
days  and  years  when  the  limit  of
Divine  patience  shall  be  reached.
"  The  Jewish  commentators  distinguish
between  the  *  days  '  and  the  *  years  '
here  mentioned,  interpreting  the  former
of  the  siege  and  destruction  of  Jeru-
salem, and  the  latter  of  the  captivity  in
Babylon  "  (Henderson).  "  A  reproach
unto  the  heathen,  and  a  mocking  to
all  countries,"  "  Defiled,  unclean  with
regard  to  the  name,  i.e.  having  forfeited
the  name  of  a  holy  city  through  capital
crimes  and  other  sinful  abominations."
--(Keil)

Ver.  5.  "  Those  that  be  near "
(Heb.).  "The  women  that  be  near."
The  cities  of  the  nations  are  personified ;
as  in  Ezek.  xxiii.  48.  "  Infamous  and
much  vexed"  (Heb.).  ''Polluted  in
name,  much  in  vexation."  Her  ancient
renown  had  now  descended  to  the  dust.
She  that  had  been  once  "  great  among
nations"  (Lam.  i.  1)  had  now  only
a  pre-eminence  in  calamity  and  dis-
grace. "  Formerly  Jerusalem  had  been
renowned  afi  *  the  holy  city.'    Now  it


had  been  defiled  by  every  kind  of
crime.  It  was  also  tumultuous,  great
of  confusion,  from  the  seditions  and
violence  which  obtained  among  the
inhabitants.  To  all,  both  far  and  near,
the  Jewish  metropolis  was  to  be  an
object  of  derision." — (Henderson.)

Ver.  6.     "To  their  power."   Pleb.
"  To  his  own  arm."    Each  man  adopted
the  principle  that   might  was  right.
With  each  man  the   strength   of  his
own   arm  was  his  god.     "Instead  of
reigning  according  to  law  and  justice,
the  princes   of   Judah,   in   the   most
despotic    manner,   crushing    by    the
strong  arm  of  power  all  who  were  the
objects  of  their  personal  displeasure."
—-(Henderson).      "  To    shed   blood.*'
"By  the  repetition  of  the  refrain,  to
shed  blood   (vers.  6,  9  and   12),  the
enumeration    is    divided    into    three
groups  of  sins,  which  are  placed  in  the
category   of   blood-guiltiness    by  the
fact  that  they  are  preceded  by  this
sentence  and  the  repetition  of  it  after
the  form  of  a  refrain.     ^Phe  first  group
(vers.   6-8)  embraces  sins  which  are
committed  in  daring  opposition  to  all
the  laws  of  morality.     By  the  princes
of  Israel  we  are  to   understand   pri-
marily the  profligate  kings  who  caused
innocent  persons  to  be  put  to  death,
such  for  example,  Jehoiakim  (2  Kings
xxiv.  4),  Manasseh  (2  Kings  xxi.  16),
and    others.      In    the    second    group
(verses      9-11),      in      addition      to
slander   and   idolatry,   the   crimes   of
lewdness  and  incest  are  the  principal
sins  for  which  the  people  are  reproved,
and   here  the  allusion  to  Lev.  xviii.
and  xix.  is  very  obvious.     The  third
group  (ver.  12)  is  composed  of  sins  of
covetousness.      For    the  first  clause,
compare  the  prohibition  in  Ex.  xxiii.
2  ;    for    the    second,    Ezekiel    xviii.,
8,  13.     The  reproof  finishes  with  for-
getfulness  of  God,    which   is    closely
allied  to  covetousness. — (Keil).

Ver.  9.  "  Men  that  carry  tales  to
shed  blood."  Heb.  "  Men  of  traffic."
Describing  those  who  travelled  about
for  the  purposes  of  trade,  such  as  ped-
lars or  wandering  merchants.     Men  of

265


CHAP.  xxn.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL


this  kind  would  be  likely  to  become
Lotorious  for  carrying  reports  from
place  to  place.  Hence  the  phrase
came  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of  tale-
hearers.  In  the  present  instance,  the
reference  is  plainly  to  a  class  of  men
whom,  in  the  present  day,  we  should
call  informers.  *'  They  eat  upon  the
mountains."  See  "Exegetical  Notes,"
(ch.  xviii.  6.)


Ver.  10.  "  Discovered  their  father's
nakedness."  Mother,  or  step-mother ;
{('oiup.  Lev.  xviii.  7,  8;  xx.  11;  1  Cor.
ver.  1.)  "  Set  apart  for  pollution."
*'  This  suggests  the  idea  of  a  female
devoted  to  prostitution,  whereas  all
that  the  Hebrew  expresses  is  one  that
is  unclean  by  reason  of  the  menstrual
discharge.  The  character  of  the  Jews,
as  here  described,  is  aptly  given  by
Tacitus:  'projectissinia  ad  libidinem
gens,  alienarum  concubitu  abstinent,
inter  se  nihil  illicitum '  (Hist.  lib.  v.
cap.  5) "  {Henderson.)


Ver.  11.  "And  one  hath  commit*
ted  abomination  with  his  neighbour's
wife:  and  another  ,  .  .  and  another,
&c."  "  There  were  such  cases  !  Im-
purity in  every  form.  A  specimen  of
the  moral  atmosphere  as  a  wliole  (Ezek.
xviii.  6 ;  Lev.  xviii.  15  ;  mc  12  ;  2
Sam.  xiii.  12." — (Lange.)


Ver.  12.  "Taken  gifts  to  shed
blood."  "Gifts,"— the  word  is  here
used  in  the  sense  of  bribes.  "Hast
forgotten  Me,  saith  the  Lord  God."
"The  crowning  sin  with  which  the  Jews
are  charged,  and  that  which  is  strictly
speaking  the  source  of  all  sin,  is  for-
getfulness  of  Go  1.  It  is  only  as  God
is  kept  out  of  view  as  the  omnipresent,
omniscient,  holy  and  righteous  Governor
of  the  world,  that  sin  can  be  indulged
in  "  (Henderson.)  Two  of  their  pro-
pliets  describe  forgetfulness  of  God  as
the  root  of  all  their  evil  (Deut.  xxxii.
18  ;  Jer.  iii.  21.
266


Ver.  13.  "I  have  smitten  Mine
hand  at  thy  dishonest  gain."  A
gesture  figuratively  describing  God*s
wrathful  indignation.  "  This  verse  is
closely  connected  with  the  preceding.
This  serves  to  explain  the  fact  that
the  only  sins  mentioned  as  exciting
the  wrath  of  God  are  coveteousness  and
blood-guiltiness  "  {Keil).

Ver.  14.  "  Can  thine  heart  endure,
or  can  thine  hands  be  strong,  in  the
days  that  I  shall  deal  with  thee?"
The  courage  of  sinners  must  fail  when
the  judgment  of  God  reckons  with
them.

Ver.  15.  "And  will  consume  thy
filthiness  out  of  thee."  "  The  removal
of  the  uncleanness  of  Jerusalem  is
effected  by  the  extirpation  of  the  sinful
inhabitants  "  (Hengstenherg),  "  The
object  to  be  attained  by  the  dispersion
of  the  Jews  was  their  recovery  from
idolatry  and  from  the  polluting  in-
fluences which  followed  in  its  train." —
{Henderson),

Ver.  16.  "  Thou  shalt  take  thine  in-
heritance in  thyself  in  the  sight  of  the
heathen."  "  The  only  translation  of
these  words,  which  suits  the  connection,
is  that  given  in  the  margin  of  the  com-
mon version  :  and  thou  shalt  he  pro-
faned  in  thyself.  The  meaning  appears
to  be  :  thou  shalt  be  inwardly  conscious
of  thy  polluted  condition,  and  shalt
loathe  thyself  on  account  of  thy  sins.
There,  among  the  heathen,  thou  shalt
learn  to  appreciate  my  character  as  a
God  of  holiness,  righteousness,  and
truth  "  (Henderson).  "  Jerusalem  has
desecrated  the  sanctuaries  of  the  Lord
(ver.  8) ;  therefore  shall  it  also  be
desecrated  for  a  requital  (ver.  16).  It
has  wickedly  insulted  the  dignity  of
God  ;  for  this  it  must  suffer  the  loss  of
its  own  dignity.  *In  thee,'  so  that
thou  must  experience  in  thyself  the
desecration  ;  whereas  before  thou  didst
send  it  forth  from  thee.  Such  things
always  return  to  him  from  whom  they
proceed." — (Hengstenherg),


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap,  xxtt

H0MILETIC8.

The  Catalogue  of  Jerusalem's  Sins,

1.  Consider  the  sins  in  detail.  The  prophet  is  not  now  speaking  of  the  sins
of  their  forefathers,  but  of  those  of  his  own  day.  They  were  all  "  abominations  "
in  the  sight  of  God  (ver.  2),  corrupting  and  daring  sins  which  bring  down  God's
judgment  swiftly  upon  nations.  1.  Blood  guiltiness.  Jerusalem  is  called  "  The
bloody  city"  (vers.  3, 4,  6,  9, 12).  To  be  guilty  of  another's  blood  is  the  highest
offence  which  a  man  can  commit  against  his  fellow.  When  this  crime  becomes
the  characteristic  of  a  nation,  that  nation  sinks  into  a  savage  and  degraded
condition.  2.  Idolatry.  *'Maketh  idols  against  herself  to  defile  herself"
(ver.  3).  In  foisaking  the  worship  of  the  true  God  they  taxed  their  own  powers
of  invention,  and  this  was  a  greater  wickedness  tlian  merely  adopting  the  errors
and  superstitions  wliich  had  been  handed  down  to  them.  3.  Destruction  of  the
fundamental  idea  of  justice.  "  To  their  power  to  shed  blood"  (ver.  6).  As  the
Heb.  has  it,  to  his  own  arm,  i.e.,  each  man  made  his  own  strength  the  rule  of
right,  made  of  his  arm  a  god.  The  notion  that  might  is  right  destroys  the
very  foundations  of  justice.  3.  Disregard  of  parental  authority  (ver.  7).  The
Family  is  tlie  oldest  institution,  the  most  changeless,  and  it  will  outlast  all
others.  When  the  essential  laws  of  the  Family  are  disregarded,  the  Nation
must  decay  and  perisfj.  4.  Oppression  of  the  suffering  and  defenceless.  The
stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow  (ver.  7).  5.  Profanation  of  God's
ordinances.  They  profaned  the  sanctuary  and  the  Sabbath  (ver.  8).  6.  Bear-
ing  false  witness.  "  Men  that  carry  tales  to  shed  blood "  (ver  9).  Base
informers  and  slanderers  who  scrupled  not  for  their  own  wicked  ends  to  swear
men's  lives  away.  The  fact  that  there  were  such  men  in  considerable  numbers
suggests  that  there  must  also  have  been  wicked  rulers  and  judges  who  encou-
raged such  men.  7.  Impurity  (ver.  10-11).  The  individual  was  corrupted,
then  the  family,  and,  last  of  all,  the  state.  God  sees  such  sins  when  man  sees
them  not.  Vices  of  this  kind  impair  the  physical  energy  of  nations,  and  if
unchecked  must  bring  them  to  destruction.  8.  Covetousness.  This  spirit  of
covetousness  led  them  to  take  bribes,  to  become  usurers,  and  extortioners.
Tiius  those  in  authority  became  corrupted,  and  the  evd  spread  fast  throughout
tlie  whole  nation.  Jewish  tradition  ascribes  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  to
covetousness,  that  being  regarded  as  the  root  of  all  evil.

II.  Consider  these  sins  in  their  root-principles.  1.  Forgetfulness  of  God.
"  And  hast  forgotten  Me,  saith  the  Lord  God  "  (ver.  12).  Former  prophets  had
reminded  them  that  this  forgetfulness  of  God  was  the  bitter  root  out  of  which
all  their  evils  grew  (Deut,  xxxii.  18  ;  Jer.  iii.  21).  Whatever  was  good  or  great
in  this  people  arose  from  their  connection  with  God,  so  that  by  forsaking  His
worship  and  service  they  cut  themselves  off  from  a  glorious  past.  They  v\ho
forsake  God  are  bound  to  follow  evil.  The  morality  of  a  nation  cannot  be
preserved,  even  by  the  best  rules  and  resolutions,  if  the  truths  of  God  and
immortality  are  rejected.

**  Truth  for  truth  and  good  for  good  !    Be  good.    The  true,  the  pure,  the  just —
Take  the  charm  for  ever  from  them  and  they  crumble  into  dust."
(Tennyson :    "  Locksley  Hall  Sixty  Years  After.")

2.  Selfishness.  Having  cast  off  God,  each  man  made  himself  the  centre  of
all  interest,  the  rule  of  all  duty.  Hence  covetousness,  leading  to  extortion,
oppression,  and  the  taking  of  bribes,  the  consequent  perversion  of  justice  to  the
injury  of  the  poor  and  defenceless.  Hence  the  deification  of  force — the
doctrine  that  might  was  right.     In  such  a  condition  of  things  each  man  will

267


OHAP.  xxiL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


regard  that  which  is  a  benefit  to  himself  as  right  and  good.  Whatever  a  man
could  get  by  force  would  be  his,  and  he  would  have  no  right  to  it  longer  than
he  had  strength  to  defend  it.  Such  a  doctrine  as  this  would  destroy  the
foundations  of  morality.  3.  Sensuality.  This  was  another  root-principle  of  the
nation's  evil.  The  animal  nature  was  let  loose  without  restraint,  and  sins  were
committed  which  sank  men  lower  than  the  beast.  These  sins  are  described
(ver.  10)  by  such  words  as  "abomination,"  "lewdness,"  "defiling"  and  "humbling"
those  whose  chastity  they  were  bound  in  honour  to  respect.

III.  Consider  these  sins  in  their  punishment.  "  I  will  scatter  thee  among
the  heathen,  and  disperse  thee  in  the  countries  "  (ver.  15).  This  punishment
included  many  afflictions.  1.  The  sorrows  and  dangers  of  exile.  They  had  to
leave  their  beautiful  country  with  all  its  hallowed  asssociations,  their  homes,
their  kindred,  their  reh'gious  privileges  which  had  made  them  great.  They
would  learn  to  realize  the  worth  of  these  when  once  they  had  lost  them.  2.
Abandonment  of  their  own  evil  principles.  They  were  permitted  to  carry  out
their  own  evil  principles.  They  had  acted  like  the  heathen,  and  now  they  shall
learn  what  heathenism  means,  in  its  own  proper  home.  God  allows  men  to  work
out  such  experiments  for  themselves  ;  if  haply  they  may  come,  at  length,  to  the
knowledge  of  their  own  helplessness.  The  discipline  of  failure  prepares  the  way
for  the  glory  of  God's  salvation.  The  prodigal  in  the  parable  thought  that  he
could  better  himself  elsewhere.  He  is  allowed  to  make  the  trial,  he  gets  his
portion  and  departs.  By  the  smart  of  the  experiment  he  is  brought  to  a  better
mind.  Hard  experience  taught  him  those  lessons  which  the  sober  convictions  of
duty  failed  to  teach.  Those  who  refuse  to  learn  by  God's  precepts  shall  learn  by
His  judgments.  3.  They  would  be  a  reproach  among  the  heathen.  The  heathen
could  only  despise  them  for  their  folly  and  inconsistency.  They  would  be  "  a
mocking  to  all  countries  "  (ver.  4.)  They  would  witness  how  great  her  fall  from
ancient  renown,  and  point  at  her  the  finger  of  scorn  when  she  had  now  only  the
pre-eminence  in  calamity.  3.  The  judgments  would  be  severe  and  effectual.
"And  will  consume  thy  filthiness  out  of  thee"  (ver.  16).  The  trial  by  fire  is  the
hardest  and  most  searching  of  all  trials.  We  can,  therefore,  only  understand  this
threatening  to  mean  the  extinction  of  Jerusalem's  polluted  inhabitants.  The
ungodly  are  to  be  separated  from  the  righteous.  What  a  suggestion  of  the
final  judgment!  4.  No  human  power  could  avert  the  judgment^  or  courage
resist  it.  "  Can  thine  heart  endure,  or  can  thine  hands  be  strong,  in  the  days
that  I  shall  deal  with  thee  ? "  (ver  14).  When  sin  is  committed  men  imagine
themselves  strong  and  full  of  courage,  but  how  different  their  bearing  when  the
time  of  judgment  comes  !  When  God  once  rises  up  in  judgment  against  sinners,
heart  and  hand,  courage  and  strength  fail.  There  was  now  no  way  of  escape  for
the  guilty.  He  against  whom  they  had  sinned  had  uttered  His  word,  and  it
must  be  fulfilled  to  the  utmost  in  dire  judgment ;  "  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,
and  will  do  it  "  (ver.  14).  5.  The  agency  of  man  in  the  judgment.  "Son  of
man,  wilt  thou  judge  the  bloody  city  ?  "  (ver.  2).  The  prophets  of  old  judged
the  world  through  the  word  of  the  Lord,  the  apostles  through  the  Holy  Spirit
convincing  the  world  of  sin.  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  "the  saints  shall  judge  the
world  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  2)  ;  by  which  we  are  to  understand,  not  that  they  shall  sit
upon  the  judgment  seat,  but  rather  that  they  by  their  righteousness  shall  con-
demn those  who  having  the  same  opportunities  yet  resisted  the  grace  of  God.

(Vers.  14-16).

1.  Sinners  are  apt  to  confide  in  their  wisdom^  strength^  power,  riches,  or

friends.    Jerusalem  thought  that  she  had  wherewith  to  keep  off  all  judgments,

or  sufficient  to  enable  her  to  wrestle  with  them  if  they  came.     "Can  thine  heart

endure,  or  can  thine  hands  be  strong  ? "    Jerusalem  thought  so,  had  confidence

268


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL  chap.  xxii.


that  way,  else  the  Lord  would  not  have  put  these  questions  to  her.  "  Thou
didst  trust  in  thy  beauty  "  (Ezek.  xvi.  15) ;  in  thy  wealth,  in  tliy  walls,  in  thy
soldiers,  in  thy  counsellors,  in  thy  temple,  in  thy  mountains,  which  were  thy
beauty.  In  Jeremiah's  days  it  is  evident  that  the  wise,  the  rich,  and  strong
men  in  Jerusalem  did  too  much  confide  and  glory  in  their  wisdom,  their  riches,
and  strength  (Jer.  ix.  23).  Her  confidence  was  in  falsehood  (Jer.  xiii.  25)  ;  that
was  in  things  which  proved  false  and  deceitful  :  one  of  this  kind  was  the
Egyptian  strength  (Isa.  xxx.  2  ;  Ezek.  xvii.  17).  It  is  not  good  to  lean  on  our
own  wisdom,  to  rest  upon  our  own  strength,  or  strength  of  others ;  whoever
makes  flesh  within,  or  flesh  without,  his  arm,  lies  under  a  curse  (Jer.  xvii.  5)  ;
but  he  that  trusts  in  the  Lord,  and  in  Him  only,  he  hath  the  blessing  (Jer.
xvii.  7).  2.  God  hath  His  times  to  reckon  with  sinners.  To  make  them  smart
for  their  evil  doings.  *'  In  the  days  that  I  shall  deal  with  thee."  God  had  His
day  to  deal  with  Egypt  (Ezek.  xxx.  9),  with  the  Midianites  (Isa.  ix.  4).  Ahab
had  his  day  to  do  wickedly,  and  God  had  His  day  to  deal  with  him  (1  Kings  xxii.
34,  35).  Men  sin,  and  think  to  hear  no  more  of  their  sins,  but  God  remembers
them,  and  hath  His  days  to  visit  for  them  (Rom.  ii.  6,  9).  3.  God's  judgments
discover  the  vanity  and  rottenness  of  human  confidences.  **  Can  thine  heart
endure?  can  thine  hands  be  strong  ?"  In  the  days  when  I  shall  deal  with  thee,
when  I  shall  bring  the  sword,  plague  and  famine,  thy  heart  will  be  faint  and  thy
hands  feeble.  God's  judgments  are  fires  which  consume  man's  confidences,  and
make  them  see  their  own  weakness.  If  footmen,  horsemen,  and  the  swellings  of
Jordan  weary  and  sink  men,  what  will  the  Lord  of  Hosts  do  (Jer.  xii.  5)  ?  If
they  cannot  bear  the  lesser  judgments,  how  will  they  bear  the  greater?  If
briars  and  thorns  conceit  themselves  to  be  oaks  and  cedars,  can  they  endure  the
fire  ?  They  will  be  burnt  to  ashes  (Isa.  xxvii.  4).  4.  The  word  of  the  Lord
shall  take  place^  whatever  mens  thoughts  are.  They  thought  Nebuchadnezzar
would  not  come,  or  if  he  did,  that  they  and  the  Egyptians  should  be  able  to
deal  with  them,  and  prevent  those  evils  which  were  threatened  by  the
prophets ;  but  "  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,  and  will  do  it."  Neither  will  the
Lord  revoke  what  He  hath  said,  and  so  prevent  judgments  intended  :  *'  He  is
wise,  and  will  bring  evil,  and  will  not  call  back  His  words"  (Isa.  xxxi.  2).
Men  often  speak,  threaten,  and  then  after  eat  their  words,  call  back  their
threatenings,  saying  they  were  uttered  in  passion,  inconsiderately,  and  so  show
their  folly  ;  but  God  when  He  speaks,  it  is  in  wisdom.  His  words  shall  stand,
and  not  be  removed  or  called  back  (Amos  vi.  1 1).  Hence  it  is  that  the  Lord
saith,  **  They  shall  know  whose  word  shall  stand,  mine  or  theirs  "  (Jer.  xliv.  28).

5.  The  Lord  hy  His  judgment  doth  purge  out  of  cities  and  nations  the  wicked,
and  makes  them  and  their  wickedness  to  cease,  "  I  will  consume  thy  filthiness
out  of  thee,"  i.e.,  thy  filthy  ones.  God  brought  the  sword,  famine,  and  pesti-
lence upon  Jerusalem,  and  by  these  did  cut  off  and  consume  the  filthy  ones
there  (Jer.  xiv.  15  ;  xvi.  4 ;  Ezek.  viii.  14).  By  His  judgments  the  Lord  con-
sumes the  filthy  out  of  the  city  and  land,  and  filthiness  out  of  the  saints.

6.  The  wickedness  of  God's  people  doth  disinterest  them  in  God ;  it  makes  God
disown  thern,  and  leave  them  to  themselves.  They  might  think  and  say  they
were  still  the  people,  the  "  inheritance  "  of  God,  that  they  had  an  interest  in
Him ;  but  '*  thou  shalt  take  thine  inheritance  in  thyself ; "  I  disclaim  thee,
I  cast  thee  off  as  profane,  and  look  upon  thee  no  otherwise  than  I  do  upon
heathens.  Israel  had  cast  off  the  thing  that  was  good,  viz.,  the  worship  of  God
(Hos.  viii.  3) ;  and,  therefore,  the  prophet  said,  **  Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,  hath  cast
thee  off"  (Hos.  viii.  5);  that  is,  thy  false  worship  hath  made  Me  to  cast  thee  off,
to  declare  thee  to  be  none  of  my  city,  and  thy  people  to  be  none  of  mine.  The
prophet  Jeremiah  tells  us,  that  the  Jews  were  once  very  dear  to  God,  even  as  dear
as  a  wife  can  be  to  a  husband  ;  but  because,  like  lions,  they  carried  it  stoutly
against  God,  and  cried  out  against  Him  and  His  prophets,  therefore  He  forsook

269


OHAP.  xxn;


EOMILETIC  COMMENTAUY:  EZEKIEL.


them,  and  gave  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Babylonians  ;  and  because  Jerusalem
was  as  a  "  speckled  bird  "  in  the  eye  of  God,  througli  her  variety  of  gods,  altars,
superstitions  and  idolatries,  therefore  God  caused  the  birds  of  ail  the  nations  to
hoot  at  and  hate  her,  even  as  birds  do  a  speckled  bird,  inviting  tbem  and  all  the
beasts  of  the  field  to  come  and  devour  her.  An  1  all  this  because  tbey  dealt
treacherously,  they  were  hypocritical,  they  were  wicked  (Jer.  xii.  1,  2,  4,  7-9).
The  Jews  had  been  a  people  precious  in  the  si<^ht  of  God,  and  honourable
(Isa.  xliii.  4)  ;  Jerusalem  His  habitation,  and  the  people  of  it  His  inheritance
and  His  glory,  whom  He  protected  (Isa.  iv.  5)  ;  yet,  by  their  sins  they  provoked
God,  so  that  He  gave  "  His  strength  into  captivity,  and  His  glory  into  the
enemy's  hand"  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  61).  7.  That  God's  judgments  bring  people  to  the
knowledge  of  God,  God  would  scatter  them,  consume  them,  cast  tliem  off,
leave  them  to  themselves,  and  they  should  know  that  he  is  the  Lord.  "  The
Lord  is  known  by  executing  judgments  "  (Psa.  ix.  16) ;  His  power,  His  justice,
and  sovereignty  are  known  thereby,  and  so  men  are  made  to  fear  and  stand  in
awe  of  Him.  When  God  is  silent,  and  speaks  not  by  His  judgments,  men  think
He  is  like  themselves  (Psa.  1.  21) ;  and  are  emboldened  to  sin  (Eccl.  viii,  11)  ;
but  when  God  thunders  by  His  judgments,  they  have  other  apprehensions  of
Him  (1  Sam.  vi.  19,  20).—(Greenhill).


(Vers.  17-22.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Jerusa-
lem besieged  by  her  enemies  is  the
furnace  in  which  God  will  refine  His
people  Israel.

Ver.  17.  "  The  word  of  the  lord
came  unto  me."  "  This  second  word
of  God  rests,  no  doubt,  upon  the  figure
in  ver.  15,  of  the  unclean  ness  or  dirt
of  sin ;  bat  it  is  not  an  exposition  of
the  removal  of  the  dirt  as  predicted
there.  For  that  was  to  be  effected
through  the  dispersion  of  Israel  among
the  nations,  whereas  the  word  of  God,
from  ver.  17  onwards,  represents  the
siege  awaiting  Jerusalem  as  a  melt-
ing process,  through  whicli  God  will
separate  the  'silver  ore  contained  in
Israel  from  the  baser  metals  mingled
with  it."— (Keil.)

Ver.  18.  "  The  house  of  Israel  is
to  Me  hecome  dross ;  all  they  are
brass,  and  tin,  and  iron,  and  lead,
in  the  midst  of  the  furnace ;  they  are
even  the  dross  of  silver."  Some  kinds
of  silver  ore  contain  a  large  amount  of
copper,  iron,  and  lead,  with  other
impurities.  The  inhabitants  of  Judea
are  described  as  a  mass  of  the  baser
metals  intermixed  with  the  impure
residue  of  silver.  The  good  silver  had
been  drained  out  of  Judah  by  death
270


or  exile,  and  those  who  remained
had  altogether  become  a  compound  of
wickedness.

Ver.  20.  ''  So  will  I  g^ather  yon  in
Mine  anger  and  in  My  fury,  and  I
will  leave  you  there,  and  melt  you."
"  The  smelting  is  treated  here  simply
as  a  figurative  representation  of  punish-
ment, and  consequently  the  result  of
the  smelting,  namel}^,  the  refining  of
the  silver  by  the  removal  of  the  baser
ingredients,  is  not  referred  to  any
further,  as  is  the  case  in  Isa.  i.  22,  25;
Jer.  yi.  27-30  ;  MaL  iii.  2,  3.  This
smelting  process  was  experienced  by
Israel  in  the  last  sieo^e  of  Jerusalem  by
the  Chaldeans."— I'Z'^?'/;.  "In  the
spiritual  department,  the  silver  may
become  altogether  dross.  The/urnace
is  Jerusalem,  according  to  its  destina-
tion to  serve  for  a  smelting  pot.  Dross
of  silver  is  silver  that  has  become
dross.  They  are  all  gathered  into
Jerusalem  (ver.  19),  as  the  people  far
and  wide,  under  the  pressure  of  the
foe,  seek  refuge  in  the  fortified  city.
In  the  whole  section  the  judgment  is
regarded  not  in  the  light  of  purifica-
tion, but  in  that  of  destruction,  as
Ezekiel  usually  considers  the  population
of  Jerusalem  as  an  ungodly  multi-
tude doonied  to  be  extirpated." —
(Ilengstenberg).


ffOMTLF/nC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chup.  xxii.


Ver.  22.     "As  silver  is  melted  in  and  silver,  can  resist  the  scorifying

the   midst    of   the    furnace."      "  In  influence.    In  Jer.  vi.  28-30,  we  have

modern  metallurgy,  lead  is  employed  a  perfect   description  of  this  process,

for   the   purpose   of    purifying    silver  If  we  take  silver  having  the  impurities

from    other    mineral    products.     The  in  it  described  in   the  text,  namely,

alloy  is  mixed  with  lead  exposed  to  iron,  copper  and  tin,  and  mix  it  with

fusion  upon  an   earthen  vessel,   and  lead,  and  place  it  in  the  fire  upon  a

submitted  to  a  blast  of  air.     By  this  cupell,  it  soon  melts ;   the  lead  will

means  the   dross  is  consumed.     This  oxidize  and  form  a  thick,  coarse  crust

process  is  called  the  cupelling  opera-  upon  the  surface  and  thus  consume

tion,   with   which   the   description   in  away,     but     effecting     no     purifying

Ezek.  xxii.  18-22  accurately  coincides,  influence.     The  alloy  remains,  if  any-

The   vessel   containing    the    alloy    is  thing,  worse  than  before.     The  silver

surrounded  by  the  fire,  or  placed  in  is  not  refined   because    *the  bellows

the  midst  of  it,  and  the  blowing  is  not  were   burned,'   there   existed   nothing

applied  to  the  fire  but  to  the  fused  to  blow  upon  it." — (Smith's  Diet,  of

metals.      And    when    this    is    done,  the  BicUi  art,  "  Lead").
nothing  but  the  perfect  metals,  gold

HOMILETICS.

God  has  a  threefold  smelting  furnace.  1.  Of  sin.  In  which  one  can  become
dross.  2.  Of  trial.  In  whicli  furnace  the  silver  is  tested.  3.  Of  judgment.
In  which  even  the  dross  is  consumed. — Lange.

1.  Churches  and  states  may  degenerate  from  their  preciousness  and  purity,
into  vileness  and  profaneness.  ''  It  was  full  of  judgment,  and  righteousness
lodged  in  it "  (Lsa.  i.  21-23),  but  instead  of  these,  now  there  was  oppression  and
murder.  "  Tliy  silver  is  become  dross,  thy  wine  is  mixed  with  water."  Thy
money  is  counterfeit,  and  thy  wine  corrupt.  Whatever  was  pure  in  thee  is  now
corrupted,  the  law  is  corrupted  with  false  expositions,  the  worship  is  corrupted
with  idols  and  human  traditions,  justice  is  corrupted  with  bribery  and  cruel
oppressions,  chastity  and  sobriety  are  corrupted  with  lewd  and  unclean  practices.
Eonie  was  once  a  golden  city  for  her  faith  and  holiness  (Rom.  i.  8  ;  xvi.  19)  ;
but  now  is  so  corrupt  in  doctrine,  worship,  and  manners,  that  she  is  become
"  the  mother  of  harlots  and  abominations  "  (Rev.  xvii.  5).  The  Seven  Churches
were  once  golden  candlesticks,  but  through  their  corruptions  and  weaknesses,
they  soon  degenerated  into  dross.  2.  Men  professing  godliness^  and  living
ungodlily^  are  not  acceptable  to  God,  nor  fit  materials  of  a  church.  "  The  house
of  Israel  is  to  Me  become  dross  ;  "  they  profess  My  name,  and  so  judge  them-
selves good  silver  ;  but  they  live  wickedly,  and  to  Me  they  are  no  better  than  dross,
than  brass,  tin,  iron  and  lead,  too  base  materials  to  make  a  temple  for  Me  to  dwell
in,  or  a  candlestick  for  Me  to  set  a  prophetical  light  in.  Whatever  profession  they
make,  whatever  parts  or  privileges  they  have,  they  are  no  silver,  but  the  dross,  the
excrements  of  silver,  which  defile,  disgrace  the  name,  the  Church,  the  ordinances  of
God,  and  must  be  separated  from  the  gold  and  silver  (2  Cor.  vi.  17).  Many  that
appear  silver  unto  men  will  be  found  dross  unto  God.  Hypocrites  and  wicked  ones
are  dross  ;  only  hypocrites  are  the  "  dross  of  silver."  3.  lyie  greatest  part  of
professorSy  when  they  come  to  the  trial,  will  he  found  corrupt  and  naught.
"  AH  they  are  brass,  and  tin,  and  iron,  and  lead,  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace."
The  furnace  discovered  them  to  be  base  metal.  The  number  of  sincere  and
silver-like  Christians  will  be  few.  4.  Those  who  degenerate  from  God  and  His
mays  shall  meet  with  fury  and  fire  from  the  Lord  (ver.  21).  Wiien  the  church
of  Ephesus  decayed  in  her  first  love,  that  of  Pergamos  turned  aside  to  the

271


CHAP   xxiL  ITOMTLETIC  COMMENTAnr  :  FZI-KIEL.

doctrines  of  Balaam  and  the  Nicolaitanes,  that  of  Thyatira  to  the  teachings
and  seductions  of  Jezebel ;  when  Sardis  abated  in  her  zeal,  and  Laodicea
became  lukewarm,  the  Lord  threatened  them  severely,  an<i  at  last  brake  the
candlesticks,  and  put  out  the  lights  (Rev.  ii.  iii.).  God  will  put  away  all  the
wicked  of  the  earth  from  Him  like  dross  (Psa.  cxix.  119).  5.  Melting  and
consuming  judgments  upon  a  people  are  the  wrath  of  God,  whoever  he  the
executioners  thereof.  Nebuchadnezzar  should  besiege  Jerus.iletn,  and  make  it
like  a  furnace  to  melt  and  consume  the  Jews,  and  this  the  Lord  owns  to  be  His
doing  (ver.  22).  The  enemies  of  Jerusalem  were  but  the  vials  or  vessels  by
which  the  fury  of  God  was  poured  out. — [GreenhilL)

(Vers.  23-31.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  cor-  conspiring  against  Him.     They  were

rupt  condition  of  all  ranks  of  the  people  His  enemies,  even  as  roaring  lions  are

as  the  immediate  cause  of  the  destruc-  the  enemies  of  their  prey.     *'  The  false

tion  of  the  kingdom.  prophets  are  first  singled  out ;  on  ac-
count of  the  greater  influence  which

Ver.  24.  "Thou  art  the  land  that  is  they  exerted  in  seducing  the  people  by

not  cleansed."  ^\\q priests^  whose  office  their  impious  teachings.     Not  satisfied

it  was  to  keep  the  land  free  from  moral  with  each  propagating  error  within  his

and ceremonialdefilementhaH  neglected  own  sphere,  they  had  formed  a  complot

their  duty  (Lev.  xvi.  19).     The  whole  to  oppose  the  messages  of  the  servants

land  had  become  corrupt,  but  Jerusalem  of  the  Lord.     Thus  forming  a  powerful

was  to  be  regarded  as  a  concentration  body,  they  resemhled  a  roaring  lion,

of  the   iniquity  of  the    whole    land,  tearing  in    pieces   his   prey.     Uncon-

'Nor  rained  upon  in  the  dayof  indig-  cerned  about  the  welfare  of  the  souls

nation  "  Heb.  "  that  hath  not  her  rain."  of  whom    they   professedly    had    the

The  rain  which  was  her  proper  portion  cure,  and  intent  only  upon  their  own

which  ought  to  have  fallen  upon  her.  gain,  they  had  occasioned  the  death

By  this  rain  is  signified,  the  gentle,  of  those  who  perished  in  the  war  with

sanctifying  showers   of  the  prophetic  the  Chaldeans,  and  thus  increased  the

word  (Deut.  xxxii.  2).     The  blame  of  number  of  widows  " — (Henderson.)
this  desolate  state  of  things  is  imputed

to  the  prophets  who  were  utterers  of  Ver.  26    "  Her  priests  have  violated

vain  speeches  and  lying  visions  (ver.  My  law,  and  have  profaned  Mine  holy

28).     "  A  land  that  has  no  rain  in  the  things."     The  priest's  lips  sliould  keep

day  of  indignation,  is  a  land  that  in  the  knowledge,  and  ^ive  it  out  as  from  a

outburst  of  the  divine  judgment  finds  pure  fountain  (Mai.  ii.  7).     But  these

no  grace,  and  simply,  as  the  connection  did  violence  to   God's  law,  both   by

shows,  because  its  impurity  is  not  re-  breaking  it  themselves  and  making  it

moved.     Ti)e  rain  in  tlie  day  of  indig-  void  to  others  by  false  interpretations,

nation  would  be  a  benefit.     It  would  '*They  have  put  no  difference  between

quench  the  flame  of  the  divine  indig-  the  holy  and  profane."   The  priests  also

nation.     To  the  indignation,  the  full  knowingly  admitted  persons  to  God's

energy  of  which  is  here  called  forth  by  sacred  ordinances,  without  any  regard

the  uncleanness,  may  be  applied  that  or  discrimination  as  to  their  moral  or

which   is  said  in  the   Song  of  Songs  spiritual  fitne.^s  for  partaking  of  them,

(viii.  7)  of  the  fire  of  love.     *  Many  They  showed  utter  indifference  to  all

waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither  can  moral  distinctions — right  and   wrong,

the  rivers  drown  it.'" — (Hengstenherg).  pure  and  impure.     Upon  them  lies  the

woe  pronounced  upon  those  who  call

Ver.  25.      "  A  conspiracy  of  her  evil  good,  and  good  evil  (Isa.  v.  20).
prophets."     These  professed  to  be  the  "  Have  hid  th^^ir  eyes  from  My  Sab-
messengers    of  God,    but    they    were  baths."      They    neither  observe    the
272


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xxn.


Sabbath  themselves,  and  shut  their  coalition.  The  false  prophets  daubed
eyes  to  the  desecration  of  it  by  others,  this  wall ;  they  gave  to  the  impious
Thus  they  failed  to  carry  out  the  chief  and  the  ungodly  movement  of  the
command  and  reason  of  their  office,  people,  that  was  condemned  by  the
which  (as  laid  down  by  Moses)  was  "  to  word  of  the  true  prophets,  the  appear-
teach  the  children  of  I-rael  all  the  ance  of  a  higher  sanction,  and  con-
statutes  which  the  Lord  had  spoken  firmed  them  in  it.  The  wall  is  a
unto  them."  (Lev.  x.  11).  **  The  law  spiritual  one,  and  so  the  absurdity
of  the  Sabbath  is  given  as  an  example,  suits  it  as  a  spiritual  mortar.  The
This  they  rob  ot  its  deep  spiritual  attempt  to  put,  instead  of  the  spiritual,
import,  and  limit  it  to  the  external  a  material  mortar,  has  arisen  only  from
rest,  as  if  it  were  given  for  animals,  the  want  of  capacity  in  expositors
and  not  for  men,  who  are  to  serve  God  to  understand  the  interchange  of
in  spirit.  Because  they  thus  let  down  fignre  and  reality.  Nothing  can  be
the  commandments  of  God  to  the  level  more  absurd  than  to  announce  safety
of  man,  and  make  them  minister  to  to  a  people  living  in  sin,  and  to  promise
human  inclination,  God  Himself  is  success  to  counsels  that  are  in  open
desecrated  by  them.  "I  am  profaned  contradiction  to  the  revealed  counsels
among  them."  In  place  of  the  dread  of  God  "  (Hengstenberg),  These  false
and  holy  God,  who  visits  the  iniquity  prophets  assured  the  princes  that  the
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  ap-  King  of  Babylon  would  not  take
pears  a  lax  and  sin-favouring  god,  who  Jerusalem,  in  direct  contradiction  to
creates  no  one,  and  is  glad  if  any  one  the  Word  of  God.
will   only  acknowledge    him,   and    is

^^^-VZZTelbia)  '''"*  ''  ""^  ^  V«^-  29-    "  The  people  of  the  land."

*        ^           ^^'  "  As  placed  here  immediately  after  the

classification  of  persons  holding  office,
Ver.  27.  "  Her  princes  •  •  •  •  •  ^®  ^r®  *^  understand  the  inhabitants
like  wolves  ravening  the  prey."  *  The  generally  without  distinction  of  rank
term  "princes"  is  applied  generallv  or  office  Corruption  had  spread  down-
to  all  the  political  authorities  and  wards  through  the  whole  mass  of  the
officials.  These,  in  their  rapacity  are  community  (Jer.  v  1-4).  Ihey  vexed
compared  to  wolves,  which  are  noted  ^^^e  poor  and  needy  they  oppressed
for  their  fierceness  and  cruelty.  *lie  stranger  wrongfully.      So  far  frona

encouraging,    by   their  kindness  and
holy  example,    those   foreigners   who

Ver.  28.   'Her  prophets  have  daubed  sojourned  among  them  to  devote  them-

them     with     untempered     morter."  geives  in  spirit  and  truth  to  the  service

"Them,"  e.^.,  the  princes.    These  were  of  Jehovah,  the  Jews  did  everything

prophets   who  meddled  with   political  that  was  calculated  to  alienate  them

niatters,  and  upheld  the  princes  in  their  from  His  worship,"— (Henderson,)
iniquity.     "  The  false  prophets  recur
here   once  more,   as  abettors   of  the

nobles,  to  whom  they  hold  out  deliver-  Ver.  30.      "  I   sought  for  a  man

ance,   and   thereby   confirm   them   in  among  them  ...  but  I  found  none."

their  shameful  course,  instead  of  ve-  "  Jeremiah,  by  his  powerful  preaching

hemently  testifying  against  their  sins,  of    repentance,   presented   himself   as

and  setting  before  them  the  judgments  such   a   public    deliverer  ;    but  ^  they

of  God.     In  ch.  xiii.   10  we  have  an  despised  him,  and  he  could  gain  no

example  of  the  manner  in  which  the  position.     The  man  alone  is  nothing,

prophets  daubed  with  this  untempered  The  position  must  be  added,  and  the

mortar.     The  building  of  the  wall  by  people   must  gather  around  him." —

the  people  denotes   the  political  ac-  (lleugstenberg.)    It  was  expressly  for-

tivity  whereby  they  sought   to  raise  oidden  to  Jeremiah  to  intercede  for

themselves  up — the  effort  made  by  the  them  (Jer.  xi.  14).

8  273


CHAP.  xxiL  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


Ver.  31.  "  Their  own  way  have  I  filled.  They  are  punished  for  their
recompensed  npon  their  heads."  Thus  own  personal  transgressions,  and  not
the  words  of  Ezek.  xviii.  30  are  ful-     for  those  of  their  fathers.

HOMILETIGS,
The  Corruption  of  the  Nation,

I.  It  was  spread  through  all  ranks  and  classes.  1.  Prophets.  "They  have
devoured  souls  ;  they  have  taken  the  treasnre  and  precious  things ;  they  have
made  her  many  widows  in  the  midst  thereof"  (ver.  25).  They  were  the  enemies
of  God  and  of  the  souls  which  He  had  made.  By  their  lying  prophecies  they
brought  the  judgment  of  the  sword  upon  the  city,  so  that  she  was  rifled  of  her
treasure  and  her  widows  were  multiplied.  2.  Priests.  Her  priests  violated
God's  law ;  not  only  by  breaking  it  themselves,  but  by  putting  false  interpreta-
tions on  it  for  the  purpose  of  their  own  selfish  ends.  They  were  ordained  to
promote  holiness,  but  they  put  no  difference  between  the  holy  and  the  profane,
between  the  unclean  and  the  clean.  They  destroyed  the  very  foundations  of
religion  and  morality.  They  profaned  the  blessed  ordinance  of  the  sabbath,
which  God  had  given  to  men  for  rest  and  worship,  and  which  was  wonderfully
suited  to  nourish  the  growth  of  religion  by  promoting  serious  thought  and
meditation  (ver.  26).  3.  Rulers*  These  no  longer  ruled  by  righteousness,  but
shed  blood  and  destroyed  souls  to  get  dishonest  gain.  And  the  prophets  were
linked  with  them,  upholding  them  in  their  iniquity  (ver.  27,  28).  4.  People.
These  could  not  be  expected  to  be  better  than  their  guides.  There  was  not
a  man  to  be  found  among  them  to  stand  in  the  gap,  and  to  save  the  land  by
his  righteousness  (ver.  30).  We  are  reminded  how  when  God  sent  His  son.
He  was  rejected  by  all  these  classes  in  succession, — by  the  religious  teachers,
then  by  the  rulers,  and,  last  of  all,  by  the  people.

II.  We  can  trace  the  cause  and  progress  of  it.  The  prophets  were  utterers
of  lying  visions  and  spurious  oracles.  Their  object  was  only  to  flatter  the  civil
authorities  for  their  own  selfish  purposes.  The  priests  had  lost  all  sense  of
sacredness.  1.  The  deciy  of  a  nations  life  begins  when  false  doctrines  are
promulgated.  The  history  of  the  children  of  Israel  was  the  history  of  religion.
They  were  what  they  were  because  of  certain  doctrines  and  ordinances  con-
cerning God,  and  His  service,  and  human  duty.  These  were  revealed  to  them
from  heaven.  They  were  bound  by  solemn  obligations  to  obey  them.  And
God's  law  is  violated  just  as  much  by  putting  false  interpretations  upon  it  as  by
actual  transgression.  False  doctrines  are  not  immaterial.  They  are  not  mere
errors  of  the  head, — harmless  speculations  having  no  real  influence  upon  life
and  duty.  For  it  will  be  found  that  what  is  wrong  in  doctrine  springs  from
the  fountain  of  an  evil  heart.  False  doctrines  are  on  the  side  of  the  passions.
They  are  human  inventions  to  justify  the  errors  of  heart  and  life.  A  right  life
must  have  right  principles  for  its  foundation.  If  we  examine  the  errors  of
Popery,  we  find  that  they  have  their  origin  in  corrupt  human  nature.  They
have  an  eye  to  political  ascendancy,  to  the  supremacy  of  a  priestly  class,  to
gain,  to  worldly  ambitions,  and  to  salve  the  consciences  of  men  by  easy
and  convenient  methods  of  dealing  with  sin.  True  teaching  concerning  God  and
human  duty  can  alone  promote  holiness  of  heart  and  life,  which  is  the  salt  of
nations  to  preserve  them  from  corruption  and  decay.  2.  The  decay  of  a
nations  life  also  sets  in  when  its  rulers  are  no  longer  governed  by  conscience.
When  they  set  aside  God's  law  of  righteousness,  and  are  intent  only  upon
dishonest  gain,  then  they  become  oppressors  of  the  poor  and  defenceless,  and
scruple  not  to  shed  innocent  blood.     3.  The  decay  of  a  nation^ s  life  is  imminent

274


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  CHAP.  xxn.


when  priests  become  mere  courtiers.  When  they  flatter  those  in  power,  with
the  view  only  of  advancing  themselves.  Corruptions  of  this  kind  soon  followed
when  Eome  embraced  the  Christian  religion  under  Constantino,  by  which  the
clergy  acquired  political  importance.  The  temptation  to  worldly  ambition  was
strong,  and  they  yielded  to  it.  They  sought  to  please  princes  in  order  to  promote
the  temporal  interests  of  the  Church  and  their  own  wealth  and  grandeur.  And
when  princes  and  priests  are  corrupted  it  is  no  marvel  that  the  evil  influence  at
length  aff'ects  public  opinion.  Wiien  the  reigning  powers  and  public  opinion
are  on  the  side  of  tyranny  and  wrong,  corruption  must  find  its  way  even  to
the  seat  of  justice.  Instead  of  equity  we  have  caprice  and  irrational  and
unjust  maxims  and  practices.  And  corruption  in  all  these  departments  soon
spreads  into  family  life,  and  thus  the  last  retreat  of  a  nation's  strength  and
purity  is  invaded.

III.  It  brought  sure  judgment.  The  dire  judgments  which  fell  upon  the  people
were  inevitable.  They  happened  by  a  moral  necessity  God  had  done  every-
thing for  His  vineyard  that  could  be  done  in  it,  and  there  remained  nothing
more  to  be  tried.  1.  The  ministry  of  the  true  prophets  had  failed.  The  people
had  been  instructed  and  warned.  When  Goii's  teaching  by  the  mouth  of  His
holy  prophets  does  no  good,  then  have  the  people  judged  themselves.  When
Jerusalem  killed  the  prophets,  and  stoned  them  that  were  sent  unto  her,  then
her  house  was  left  unto  her  desolate.  "  Your  house,"  said  our  Lord,  as  much
as  to  say.  My  house  no  longer.  They  had  profaned  it,  and  God  departed  from
His  temple.  2.  No  righteous  men  were\  to  he  found  amongst  them  (ver.  30).
Abraham's  intercession  for  Sodom  teaches  us  that  the  presence  of  a  few  righteous
among  a  people  stays  tlie  hand  of  justice.  When  those  who  fear  God  decline  in
a  land,  judgment  is  coming.  3.  In  these  judgments  God  was  treating  them  on
their  own  terms.  Tliey  had  punishment  in  kind  as  well  as  in  necessary  degree.
The  priests  had  made  no  distinction  between  the  holy  and  the  profane.  And
thus,  by  their  own  admission,  they  were  not  "  a  holy  nation."  Let  it  be  so,
then  ;  let  them  be  profaned  by  being  treated  as  such.  Holiness  was  the  very
reason  of  their  existence  as  a  nation,  and  wanting  that,  there  remained  only  a
looking  for  judgment.  The  foundation  of  their  national  privileges  was  thus
destroyed.  They  profaned  the  sanctuary,  and  they  were  themselves  profaned
among  the  heathen.  They  despised  God,  and  they  were  "  liglitly  esteemed  "
(1  Sam.  ii.  30).  "  Their  own  way  have  I  recompensed  upon  their  heads  saith
the  Lord  God  "  (ver.  31).

(Ver.  28).

1.  There  are  prophets  who  will  flatter  wiched  princes  and  rulers  in  their  evil
ways.  The  princes  were  ravening  wolves,  shed  blood,  destroyed  souls,  to  get
dishonest  gain,  and  Jerusalem's  prophets  daubed  them  with  untempered
mortar.  They  applauded  their  pr.ictices,  justified  their  doings,  and  told  them
that  God  did  approve  of  their  ways.  It  was  not  the  nobles,  citizens,  but  the
prophets  of  Jerusalem  which  did  this.  Princes  and  great  ones  want  not  false
and  lying  prophets  to  bolster  them  up,  and  to  bear  them  out  in  their  vile  and
detestable  courses.  Ahab  was  a  wicked  king,  and  he  had  a  multitude  of  flatter-
ing daubing  prophets  (2  Chron.  xviii.  10,  11).  There  were  "flattering  divina-
tions "  among  the  false  prophets  (Ezek.  xii.  2  t) ;  and  with  these  they  bedaubed
the  wicked  princes,  and  strengthened  the  h.mds  of  evil-doers  (Jer.  xxiii.  14).
Flattery  is  evil  in  any,  but  worst  of  all  in  prophets,  atid  especially  when  they
have  to  do  with  wicked  princes,  whom  they  harden  in  their  wickedness  thereby,
and  ripen  for  destruction.  Reproof  is  a  precious  balm  (Psa.  cxli.  5)  ;  but
flattery  is  a  destructive  net  (Prov.  xxix.  5).  Let  the  true  prophets  abhor  it ;
and  BO  speak  the  truth,  that  they  may  appeal  to  the  consciences  of  great  and

b2  275


CHAP.  xxiL  EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


small,  as  Paul  doth  (1  Thess.  ii.  5).  2.  What  false  prophets  give  out  is  «w-
savoury,  and  unsouiid,  weak,  and  useless.  It  is  uu tempered  mortar  :  it  may
stick  in  men's  heads  a  little,  to  strengthen  them  to  do  wickedly  ;  but  it  will
not  stick  in  their  hearts,  to  strengthen  them  against  the  day  of  evil,  and  to  justify
their  doings.  What  is  there  in  vanity  and  lies  which  can  establish  ?  It  is  truth,
and  divine  truth,  which  establisheth  (2  Pet.  i.  19) ;  the  vain  and  lying  imagina-
tions of  men,  do  deceive  and  disappoint.  Paslmr  prophesied  lies,  the  things  of
his  own  heart  and  spirit,  which  himself  and  others  trusted  in  ;  but  see  how  lie
and  they  who  believed  him,  were  deceived  and  disappointed  (Jer.  xx.  6).  The
scornful  rulers  which  made  lies  their  refuge,  and  hid  themselves  under  falsehood
saying,  "  the  over-flowing  scourge  shall  not  come  unto  us"  (Isa.  xxviii.  14,  15).
But,  see  what  the  Lord  saith  (ver  17).  The  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of
lies,  and  the  waters  shall  overflow  the  hiding-place.  False  prophecies,  false
opinions,  false  confidences  are  all  untempered  mortar.  3.  The  subtlety  and
impudence  of  false  prophets  makes  way  for  their  vanity  and  lies.  They  say,
*'  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,"  there  is  their  cunning  ;  and  to  make  God  author  of
their  vanities  and  lies,  there  is  their  impudency.  They  knew  that  their  dreams,
visions,  vanities,  and  lies  would  not  take  with  princes  or  people  if  not  presented
unto  them  as  from  God.  They  did  not  only  abuse  men,  but  they  greatly  abused
God.  "  They  have  belied  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  v,  12),  and  made  that  to  be  the  word
of  God  which  was  not ;  they  walked  in  lies  and  strengthened  the  hands  of  evil-
doers ;  which  provoked  God  so  bitterly  against  them,  that  He  saith  He  would
"feed  them  with  wormwood  and  make  them  drink  the  water  of  gall"  (Jer.  xxiii.
14,  15).  Many  prophets  amongst  us  have  belied  the  Lord,  in  making  some
Scriptures  speak  that  to  maintain  their  opinions  and  tenets  which  never  was  the
mind  of  God. — (Greenhill),

(Vers.  30.)

1.  GocPs  protection  of  them.  He  had  a  special  care  of  them,  being  His
Church  and  people,  above  all  others  ;  as  the  city  Jerusalem  had  a  wall  about  it
(Neh.  i.  3),  so  God  was  a  wall  to  the  citizens  thereof, ''  a  wall  of  fire  round  about
them  "  (Zech.  ii.  5  ;  Cant.  iv.  12).  Lest  any  should  hurt  His  vineyard.  He  kept
it  night  and  day,  watched  over  it  and  preserved  it.

2.  Consider  those  things  which  God  had  given  them  to  he  a  hedge  or  wall  unto
them.  (1.)  Sound  doctrine.  This  was  a  "  hedge  "  to  keep  out  all  errors,  corrupt
and  heathenish  opinions,  which  they  were  in  danger  of,  having  the  nations  round
about  them.  But  God  had  given  them  good  doctrine  (Prov.  iv.  2) ;  risfht
words  (Psa.  xxxiii.  4)  ;  lively  oracles  (Acts  vii.  38)  ;  faithful  commands  (Psa.
cxix.  86) ;  sure  testimonies  (Ps.  xciii.  5)  ;  such  as  they  were  to  try  all  doctrines
and  opinions  by  (Isa.  viii.  20).  (2.)  Pure  worship.  This  was  a  hedge  between
them  and  the  heathen  (Deut.  vi.  13,  14).  God  had  appointed  them  a  pure  way
of  worship,  which  hedged  them  in  from  all  false  ways  of  worsliip,  from  bringing
in  aught  of  their  own  or  of  others.  (3.)  Good  laws.  No  nation  under  heaven
had  such  laws  to  be  governed  by  as  the  Jews  had,  and  those  laws  were  hedges
against  all  injustice ;  they  might  not  wrong  one  another,  nor  strangers.
(4.)  God  had  given  them  good  prophets,  priests,  and  princes.  The  prophets  were
to  preserve  the  doctrine  sound,  the  priests  to  keep  the  worship  pure,  and  the
princes  to  see  justice  impartially  executed.  Elijah,  a  good  prophet,  was  the
horsemen  and  chariot  of  Israel  (2  Kings  ii.  12  ;  xiii.  14)  ;  the  priests  were
mediators  between  God  and  the  people  (Joel  ii.  17) ;  the  princes  were  the
strength  of  the  land  (Prov.  xxix.  4).  And  more  briefly,  it  was  the  covenant  made
between  God  and  this  people  ;  He  had  promised  to  be  their  God  and  to  protect
them  ;  they  had  promised  to  be  His  people,  and  to  walk  ia  His  ways.    But—

276


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xxu.


3.  The  "  hedge  "  which  God  had  given  them  was  broken,  and  gaps  were  made
in  it,  (1).  The  doctrine  was  corrupted.  There  was  much  chaff  mingled  with
the  wheat  (Jer.  xxiii.  28)  ;  false  prophets  gave  in  that  to  be  divine,  which  was
from  their  own  hearts  and  heads  (Ezek.  xiii.  2,  3)  ;  they  prophesied  lies  (Jer.
xiv.  14)  ;  the  providence  of  God  was  denied,  His  justice  and  omnipresence
(Ezek.  viii.  12  ;  xviii.  2,  25).  They  taught  the  people  to  swear  by  a  false  God,
even  by  Baal  (Jer.  xii.  16).  (2).  llie  worship  was  greatly  corrupted.  Tlie
sanctuary  was  defiled  with  detestable  things  (Ezek.  v.  11).  They  had  brought
images  and  idols  into  the  temple  (Ezek.  viii),  they  had  high  places  and  altars  in
every  street  (Ezek.  xvi.)  The  statutes  of  Omri  were  kept,  and  the  works  of  the
house  of  Ahab  (Micah  vi.  16)  ;  and  the  fear  or  worship  of  God  was  taught  by
the  precepts  of  men  (Isa.  xxix.  13).  (3).  The  laws  were  wrested  and  perverted,
so  that  there  was  no  justice.  They  abhor  judgment,  and  pervert  all  equity
(Micah  iii.  9).  Accordiug  to  Isaiah,  judgment  was  turned  away  backward,  and
justice  stood  afar  off ;  they  thrust  them  out  of  doors,  out  of  their  gates  and
cities,  and  when  they  pressed  hard  to  come  in  there  was  no  admission,  the  doors
and  gates  were  locked  and  bolted  upon  them,  equity  could  not  enter  (Isa.  lix.
14) ;  only  oppression  was  let  in  (Isa.  v.  7).  (4).  The  men  who  should  have  been
as  strong  stakes  to  keep  up  the  '^  hedge  "  were  rotten.  The  prophets  were  *' lions"
(Jer.  xxiii.  14)  ;  the  priests  corrupters  and  wicked  (Lam.  iv.  13)  ;  the  princes
were  rebellious,  and  companions  of  thieves  (Isa.  i.  23) ;  and  all  of  them  make
covenant  with  God  (Ezek.  xvi.  59).

4.  How  was  the  **  hedge "  to  be  made  up  ?  (1.)  In  public  opposing  those
corruptions  which  were  crept  in,  and  practised  amongst  them.  When  of  old  the
Jews  had  broken  down  the  "  hedi^e  "  by  making  a  calf,  Moses  appeared  for  God
against  this  wickedess ;  he  seized  upon  the  calf,  burnt  it,  and  ground  it  into
powder  (Ex.  xxxii.).  When  the  sons  of  Levi  came  to  him,  he  commissioned
them  to  slay  the  idolators;  and  this  was  the  beginning  of  making  up  the  breach.
So  when  Josiah  began  to  purge  Judah  and  Jerusalem  from  the  high  places,  the
groves,  images,  and  altars  that  were  therein,  then  was  the  "  hedge  "  making  up
which  they  had  broken  down  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3,  4).  In  Nehemiah's  days,  when
the  "  hedge  "  was  new-made  about  them,  there  were  some  who  began  to  tread
down  the  *'  hedge  "  and  to  make  a  "  gap  "  therein,  by  doing  unlawful  things  on
the  Lord's  day.  The  zeal  of  Nehemiah  was  kindled,  so  that  he  contended  with
the  nobles  of  Judah,  who  countenanced  them,  and  did  violence  to  the  Sabbath
themselves  (Neh.  xiii.  15-18).  (2.)  In  mourning  for  such  breaches^  and
deprecating  the  wrath  and  judgments  due  for  the  same,  Moses  was  affected
much  with  what  the  people  had  done,  and  prays  and  intercedes  for  them
(Ex  xxxii.  10).  This  act  was  standing  in  the  breach,  and  making  up  the
**  hedge  "  (Psa.  cvi.  23) ;  it  kept  out  the  fury  of  the  Lord  from  breaking  in
upon  them.  The  intercession  of  God's  servants  is  a  strong  "  hedge  "  and  wall
to  prevent  judgments.  Therefore,  when  the  Lord  was  resolved  upon  the
destruction  of  the  Jews,  He  forbade  Jeremiah  to  pray  for  them  (Jer.  vii.  16).
(3.)  In  putting  things  into  their  primitim  condition.  When  Josiah  caused  the
house  of  the  Lord  to  be  repaired,  the  covenant  with  God  to  be  renewed,  the  law
to  be  read,  and  the  Passover  to  be  kept  according  to  the  institution,  and  all
things  were  brought  to  their  primitive  condition  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  ;  xxxv.),  then
was  the  ''hedge"  made  up — then  was  there  a  man  stood  in  the  gap  before  the
Lord.  So,  when  Jehoshaphat  brought  back  the  people  from  false  doctrine,  and
false  worship,  to  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers,  then  was  the  "  hedge  "  made  up,
and  God  protected  them  against  their  enemies.

5.  None  were  found  to  make  up  the  "  hedge."  Were  there  not  Jeremiah  and
Ezekiel,  who  interceded  with  God  for  this  people  ?  Were  there  not  many  that
mourned  for  the  abominations  that  were  among  them?  (Jer.  ix.  1  ;  xiv.  11  ;
Ezek.  ix.  4,  8).     It  is  true  Jeremiah  did  appear  for  God  :  he  opposed  the  false

277


CHAP.  xxiL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


prophets,  the  pervertiug  of  justice,  the  iniquities  of  priests,  princes,  and  people ;
but  they  would  not  hearken  to  him  (Jer.  xliv.  16).  'J'hey  sought  to  put  him
to  death,  and  to  cast  him  into  prison.  And  three  times  God  had  forbidden
him  to  pray  for  them.  He  could  prevail  with  none  of  them  towards  making
up  the  *' hedge."  As  for  Ezekiel,  he  was  in  Bab}  Ion,  and  the  Lord  looked  for
a  man  amongst  them  in  Jerusalem.  "  I  looked  for  a  man  among  them,"  not
among  you.  For  the  sighers  and  mourners  that  were  in  Jerusalem  they  did  it
in  secret.  They  had  not  spirits  to  contradict  the  wicked  prophets,  priests,  and
princes ;  or,  if  they  had,  yet  they  saw  there  was  no  good  to  be  done.  The
times  were  exceedingly  and  desperately  wicked  ;  a  man  was  made  an  offender
for  a  word,  and  a  snare  was  laid  for  him  that  reproved  in  the  gate  (Isa.  xxix.  21).
It  was  an  evil  time,  and  the  time  for  the  prudent  to  keep  silence  (i\mos  v.
12,  13).  From  this  subject  we  learn — (1)  That  sin  makes  breaches  and  gaps.
Their  sins  brake  down  the  hedge  and  made  those  gaps  (Isa.  xxx.  13).  Solomon's
sins  made  such  a  breach  therein  that  ten  tribes  were  rent  therefrom  and  given
to  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xi.  31).  Sin  made  the  breach  between  them  and  other
nations,  the  breach  between  God  and  them.  Sin  makes  breaches  in  churches
(1  Cor.  i.  11,  12),  in  cities  (Luke  xix.  14),  in  families  (Ezek.  xvi.  38),  in  men's
names  (Prov.  vi.  33),  in  men's  estates  (Deut.  xxviii.  15, 16),  in  men's  consciences
(Matt,  xxvii.  3,  4  ;  Prov.  xviii.  14,  xv.  4),  and  between  the  chiefest  friends
(Prov.  xvi.  28).  There  are  some  sins  which  make  such  breaches  as  shake  the
foundations  (Psa.  Ixxxii.  5).  The  laws  were  their  foundations,  but  the  iniquity
of  the  judges  moved  those  foundations  out  of  place,  and  the  state  was  like  a
bowing  wall  and  a  tottering  fence  (Psa.  Ixii.  3).  (2).  When  breaches  and  gaps
are  made  by  sin,  the  Lord  lets  in  His  judgments  thereby.  When  they  made
breaches  upon  the  worship,  statutes,  and  Sabbaths  of  the  Lord,  He
resolved  to  pour  out  his  fury  upon  them  and  consume  them  (Isa.  i.
23,  24).  Such  is  the  lesson  of  the  parable  (Isa.  v.  6).  (3).  When
the  hedge  is  down,  and  gaps  are  made,  the  Lord  looks  for  some
one  to  appear,  so  as  to  prevent  thos6  judgments,  *'  I  sought  for  a  man  to
make  up  the  hedge,"  &c.  God  expected  that  they  should  have  repented,  and
some  at  least  to  have  said,  What  have  I  done?  God  was  displea.^ed,  and  now
He  looked  that  one  or  other  should  have  showed  a  public  spirit,  opposed  the
sinful  practices,  and  deprecated  judgments.  He  looks  in  all  the  gaps  round
about,  and  "  He  saw  that  there  was  no  man,  and  wondered  that  there  was  no
intercessor  "  (Isa.  Ixx.  16),  none  to  meet  God,  to  set  upon  Him  by  prayer  and
strong  arguments  to  withliold  His  judgments.  (4)  Making  up  the  hedge,  and
standing  in  the  gap,  is  the  way  to  save  a  land  from  destr-uction.  Let  man  oppose
the  sinful  practices  in  a  land  and  deprecate  the  judgments  of  God,  then  the
Lord  will  spare  a  sinful  nation,  a  guilty  city  (Jer.  v.  i.)  In  such  a  case  one
man  may  do  much.  Moses  stood  in  the  gap,  and  diverted  the  wrath  of  God
(Psa.  cvi.  22)  ;  Aaron,  also  (Num.  xvi.  47,  48).  We,  through  infinite  mercy,
have  had  some  like  Moses  and  Aaron,  to  make  up  our  hedges,  raise  up  our
foundations,  to  stop  some  gaps ;  but  all  our  gaps  are  not  yet  stopped.  Are
there  not  gaps  in  the  hedge  of  doctrine  ?  If  it  were  not  so,  how  came  in  such
erroneous,  blasphemous,  and  wild  opinions  amongst  us  ?  Are  there  not  gaps  iu
the  worship  of  God  ?  Do  not  many  tread  down  all  churches,  all  ordinances  ;
yea,  the  very  Scriptures?  Are  there  not  gaps  in  the  hedge  of  justice,  through
which  the  bulls  ot  Bashan  enter,  which  oppress  the  poor,  and  crush  the  needy
(Amos  iv.  1)  ?  Are  there  not  gaps  in  the  hedge  of  love  ;  is  not  that  bond  of
perfection  broken  ?  Are  there  not  gaps  in  the  hedge  of  conscience  ?  Is  not
the  peace  broken  between  God  and  your  souls  ?  Doth  not  Satan  come  in  often
at  the  gap  and  disturb  you  ?  (5)  In  times  of  general  corruption  in  Church  and
State,  it  is  hard  to  find  a  man  of  public  spirit  to  oppose  those  corruptions,  and
to  lurestle  with  God  for  mercy.  The  Lord  **  sought  for  a  man  amongst  them,"
S78


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OHAP.  xxni.


The  judges  and  great  ones  did  oppress  the  people,  and  none  appeared  publicly
for  them,  to  plead  their  cause  and  to  reprove  their  oppressors.  Many  disliked
the  carriage  of  things,  but  they  had  no  spirit  to  oppose  ;  they  were  "  not
valiant  for  the  truth,"  as  Jeremiah  saith  (Jer.  ix.  3).  God  doth  not  say  that
there  were  "none,"  but  '*none  to  help,  none  to  uphold."  In  common  corrup-
tions and  calamities  few  have  hearts  to  appear  for  the  public  good,  against
overspreading  evils.  Sinful  prudence,  or  fear  of  crushing,  makes  them  silent
and  lie  hid  (Eccles.  iv.  1).  The  oppressions  under  the  sun  were  great,  the  tears
of  the  oppressed  many,  but  there  was  no  comforter,  none  pitied  them,  none
used  any  means  to  relieve  them  (Greenhill).


The  Sins  op  Israel  and  Judah  represented  under  the  figure  op  Two

Harlots.     (Chap  xxiii.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES-Samaria
and  Jerusalem  are  the  capitals  and
representations  of  the  two  kingdoms
Israel  and  Judah.  These  two  cities
are  presented  under  the  allegory  of
two  harlots  who  are  sisters,  and  who
have  practiced  whoredom  from  the
days  of  Egypt  onwards.     (Vers.  2-4.)

Vers.  1-4.  The  two  harlot  sisters
are  briefly  described.

Ver.  2.  "  Two  women,  the  daughters
of  one  mother.'*  "  These  two  cities
had  a  common  mother — the  Hebrew
pedpteT;  regard  being  had  to  what  they
had  become  in  the  possession  of  that
people. " — (Henderson),

Ver.  3.  **They  committed  whore-
doms in  Egypt ;  they  committed
whoredoms  in  their  youth-**  The
prophet  regards  this  two-fold  divisions
of  the  people  as  dating  long  before
the  time  of  the  separation  of  the
kingdoms.  The  two  kingdoms  existed
virtually  in  Egypt  in  the  tribes  of
Ephraim  and  Judah.  The  origin  of
their  idolatry  is  to  be  traced  to  Egypt,
where  all  the  tribes  alike  fell  into  that
sin.  It  was  in  the  very  '*  youth "  of
the  people  that  they  had  become
alienated  from  God.  '*  There  they
bruised  the  teats  of  their  virginity  "
"  At  that  time  Israel  was  still  unmar-
ried. The  marriage  with  Jehovah
took  place  when  the  covenant  was
made  at  Sinai.  But  she  was  even  at
that  time  betrothed.  This  is  proved
by  what  God  had  done  to  the  Patri-


archs, and  by  the  circumcision  to
which  they  had  submitted  ;  and  hence
their  unchaste  conduct  fell  under  the
judgment  of  (Deut.  xxii.  23,  &c.).
Their  business  v**«  to  prepare  them-
selves as  a  pure  virgin  for  marriage."
— ( Hengstenberg).  "On  account  of
the  legitimate  relation  in  which  the
nation  stood  to  God  from  its  very
origin,  namely,  of  a  marriage  covenant,
the  political  and  religious  departure  ot
both  kingdoms  from  the  principles  laid
down  in  the  law,  appears  as  wanton-
ness (Ezek.  xvi.  15).  Egypt  was  the
means  of  exciting  the  first  carnal  im-
pulses of  the  youthful  people  to  a
heathenish  mode  of  feeling  and  action,
whereby  they  were  robbed  of  their
virgin  purity.** — (Lange.)

Ver.  4.  "  Aholah  the  elder.**  This
name  signifies.  Her  own  tent.  Thus  it
is  implied  that  the  worship  of  the
Samaritans  was  of  their  own  invention
and  was  never  appointed  of  Jehovah.
Tlie  northern  kingdom  had  erected  an
altar  of  her  own  will  (1  Kings  xii.  31-
33).  "  Aholibah  her  sister."  The
meaning  of  this  name  is.  My  tent  is
in  her.  Jehovah  had  ordained  the
temple-worship  at  Jerusalem.  He  had
chosen  Zion  for  an  habita'ion  to  set
His  name  there  (Psa.  cxxxii.  13,  14).
**  And  they  were  Mine."  *'  Previous
to  the  apostasy  under  Jeroboam,
Samaria,  equally  witii  Jerusalem,
worshipped  the  true  God.  Their
inhabitants  were  sons  and  daughters
of  the  Lord  Almighty.  He  never
renounced  His  right  to  the  Israelites

279


CHAP.  xxiiL  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.

as  subjects  of  theocracy,  but  sent  nortliern  kingdom  was  the  sphere  of
prophets  to  disclose  His  will  to  them  the  special  labours  of  Elijah  and
and  warn  them  against  idolatry.     The      Elisha." — (Henderson),

HOMILETICS,

Spiritual  Adultery.

I.  It  consists  in  forsaking  the  Creator  to  love  and  serve  the  creature.    The

children  of  Israel  committed  whoredoms  in  Egypt  by  worshipping  its  idols.  They
forsook  their  God,  who  had  called  them  to  love  and  serve  Himself,  and  to  forsake
all  other.  Idolatry  is  the  perversion  of  a  true  religious  instinct,  as  lust  is  the
perversion  of  a  passion  which  should  inspire  the  devotion  of  love  and  self  sacri-
fice. The  worship  and  service  of  the  creature  is  unauthorised.  And  it  also
debases.

II.  The  sin  of  it  is  manifest  from  the  nature  of  the  relations  in  which  we
stand  to  God.  **  There  were  two  women,  the  daughters  of  one  mother."  God
was  a  Father  unto  Israel.  The  people  were  His  own  peculiar  heritage.  By
their  idolatry  they  were  bringing  dishonour  upon  the  name  of  God.  Duties
arise  out  of  our  relation  to  God  which  cannot  be  set  aside  without  bringing  upon
ourselves  the  stain  and  the  consequences  of  transgression.

III.  In  the  youth  of  a  people  they  are  especially  exposed  to  this  sin
**  They  committed  whoredoms  in  their  youth."  The  allurements  of  Egyptian
idolatry  soon  corrupted  Israel  in  the  days  of  her  youth.  Their  feelings  were
fresh,  their  experience  small,  and  the  pleasures  of  Egypt  were  novel  and  strange.
Young  societies  are  greatly  exposed  to  the  dangerous  fascinations  of  those  by
whom  they  are  surrounded.  So  the  early  Christian  Church  was  soon  corrupted
by  false  philosophy ;  and  in  a  later  age,  by  the  seductions  of  wordly  power  and
grandeur.  Mso,  in  the  youth  of  human  life,  the  lusts  and  pleasures  of  the
world  are  most  powerful  to  seduce.

IV.  This  sin  may  be  prevalent  amidst  all  the  refinements  of  civilization.

The  Israelites  found  in  Egypt  an  advanced  civilization.  Yet  amidst  all  this  were
to  be  found  the  coarsest  and  most  debasing  forms  of  idolatry.  How  much
grovelling  and  degrading  superstition  is  still  to  be  found  in  the  midst  of  the
highest  civilization  !

V.  This  sin  should  be  denounced  in  plain  terms.  The  fleshly  sins,  which
are  here  used  as  a  figure  of  spiritual  sins,  are  described  in  plain  language.
They  are  set  forth  in  all  their  naked  deformity  ;  spoken  of  exactly  as  they  are.
Those  who  counsel  such  sins  would  like  (if  they  hear  of  them  at  all)  to  have
their  loathsomeness  hidden  under  the  veil  of  elegant  speech.  "  Plain  speaking
is  not  attractive  ;  flowery  ambiguities  are  of  the  devil  " — {Lange).  Those  who
blame  the  prophet  for  his  great  plainness  of  speech  should  rather  concern
themselves  with  the  thought  of  the  baseness  of  those  sins  which  demanded  so
faithful  a  narration  and  exposure.  The  whole  of  this  pa  age  teaches  us  that
true  religion  leads  to  fellowship  with  God,  His  love  and  service.  And  all  love
and  service  inconsistent  with  this  belongs  to  a  class  of  sins  which  can  best  be
described  under  the  images  of  the  worst  and  most  degrading  of  fleshly  lusts.


1.  The  Lord  takes  notice  where  and  when  those  who  are  in  relation  to  Him

do  sin.     "In  Egypt,  and  in  their  youth."     They  sinned  amidst  the  grand  and

bitter  enemies  of  God,  among  Egyptians,  and  then  when  they  were  growing  up

to  be  a  people.    They  should  have  considered  what  enemies  the  Egyptians  were

380


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  oha?.  xxtii.

to  their  God  and  His  worship,  how  odious  their  ways  and  worship  were  to  Him.
They  should  have  walked  circumspectly,  so  that  they  might  have  kept  His  name
from  being  polluted  ;  and  likewise  they,  being  in  their  youth  under  bondages,
should  have  minded  God's  kindnesses  in  preserving  them,  and  making  them  to
prosper.  When  God  is  beginning  to  show  kindness  to  a  people  in  misery,  and
raising  them  up  to  some  height  and  greatness,  and  then  for  them  to  turn  aside  to
lewdness,  to  superstitions,  idolatrous,  and  heathenish  practices,  this  God  observes
in  a  special  manner,  and  it  provokes  Him  greatly  (Psa.  cvi.  7).  When  states,
cities,  families,  degenerate  in  their  youth,  it  sorely  displeases  God.  2.  Where-
soever  a  devised  worship  is  brought  in,  there  mans  tabernacle  is  set  up  ;  where
true  worship  is  advanced,  there  is  God's  tabernacle.  The  ten  tribes  had  a
worship  of  Jereboam's  devising,  like  unto  the  worship  of  Jerusalem  in  many
things ;  but  this  was  Aholah,  their  own  tabernacle.  God  owned  it  not,  He  was
not  in  their  assemblies,  He  accepted  not  their  sacrifices,  their  incense  was  a
stink  in  His  nostrils.  But  Jerusalem  was  Aholibah,  My  tabernacle,  there  God's
own  worship  was  set  up,  and  so  long:  as  His  worship  was  there,  He  acknow-
ledged His  tabernacle  to  be  in  her.  Where  His  worship  is,  there  He  dwells
(Psa.  Ixviii.  16);  and  is  to  be  seen  and  enquired  of  (Psa.  xxvii.  4). — GreenhilL

(Vers.  5-10).

EXEGETICAL   NOTES.  — The  The  adultery  has  been  not  so  much  a

spiritual    adultery    of    Samaria    with  religious  as  a   political   import.     The

Assyria.  Theinstrument  of  her  puni-h-  paramour,   on   whose    account    Israel

ment  is  that  very  people  which  she  forsakes  his  God,  is  Assyria  itself,  not

had   made  the  object  of  her  impure  its  god,  though  they  endeavoured,  no

love.  doubt  from  fear  of  the  people,  to  make

friends   of  its    gods   also."      (Heng-

Ver.  5.    The  Assyrians  her  neig^h-  stenberg).
hours.    The  word  refers  rather  to  kins-
men, rather  than   to  those  dwelling         Ver.     8.      "Neither  left  she  her

near.   Asshur  was  brother  to  Arphaxad,  whoredoms    brought    from    Egypt.'*

Abraham's  ancestor  (Gen,  x.  22,  24 ;  This  was   the  Apis-worship   of  which

xi.  16-26).  Israel   was    guilty   while    in    Horeb.

Jeroboam  instituted  it,  thus  reviving

Ver.  6.    Clothed  with  blue,  captains  the  former  iniquity  of  the  nation.    The

and    rulers,    all    of   them    desirable  people  never  wholly  got  rid  of  this

young  men,   horsemen    riding    upon  source  of  unfaithfulness  brought  from

horses.    *'  This  description  given  of  the  Egypt.      Even     Jehu     tolerated     it

Assyrians  contains  the  thought    that  (2  Kings  x.  31).
Israel,  dazzled  by  Assyria's  splendour,

and  overpowered  by  the  might  of  that         Ver.  10.      "These  discovered    her

kingdom,  had  been  drawn  into  inter-  nakedness."     *'  This  denotes  the  igno-

course  with  the  Assyrians,  which  led  minious  treatment  which  Israel  must

her  astray  into  idolatry.  The  predicate,  suffer  from  Assyria,  as  a  punishment  for

clothed  in  purple,  points  to  the  splen-  her  revolt  to   Egypt.     Aholah  is  slain

dour  and  glory  of  this  imperial  power  ;  with  the  sword  :  the  proper  substance

the  other  predicates,  to  the  magnitude  of  the  people,  the  men  tit  for  service,

of  its   mihtary   force."     (Keil),     We  fell  in  the  war,  while  the  weaker  portion

have  here  the  ground  which   tempted  was  carried  into  exile."  {Hengstenberg.)

Aholah   to  become  unfaithful  to  her  "Famous  among  women."     "  She  was

God.     It  lay  in   this,   that  the  para-  rendered  as  notorious  by  her  punish-

mour  Assyria  came  into  her  neighbour-  ment  as  she  had  been  by  her  crimes,

hood,  and  placed  his  grandeur  before  Slie  was  made  an  example  to  which  an

her.     Tlierein  lay  the  temptation  to  appeal  could  be  made  by  other  states  "

sue  for  his  favour  to  ward  off  injury.  Henderson,

281


CHAP.  xXTii.  nOMIlETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


HOMILICTIGS,
The  Sin  of  Samaria.

I.  It  showed  the  basest  ingratitude.    *'  Played  the  harlot  when  she  was  Mine."

God  had  united  her  to  Himself,  she  was  in  living  and  tender  relationship  with
Him  when  she  basely  deserted  His  worship  and  service.  She  was  taught  the
true  doctrine,  and  the  riglit  way  of  duty,  and  was  supplied  with  means  to  observe
both.     Yet  she  sinned  against  light  and  privilege.

II.  It  showed  the  dangerous  power  of  the  imagination.  The  military  organiza-
tion of  Assyria  dazzled  their  imagination.  The  glory  of  the  world  seduces  the
worldly  mind.  "  Clothed  with  blue,  captains  and  rulers,  all  of  them  desirable
young  men,  horsemen  riding  upon  horses."  Such  was  the  power  and  grandeur
of  Assyria.  In  accordance  with  the  figure  employed,  those  things  are  named
which  would  be  likely  to  strike  the  eye  of  a  wordly  minded  young  woman.
Israel  admired  the  political  and  worldly  grandeur  of  the  Assyrians,  and  so  were
seduced  into  idolatry.  They  first  worshipped  the  power  and  magnificence  of  the
nation,  and  then  it  was  an  easy  matter  to  adopt  the  worship  of  their  gods.  The
fascinations  of  the  world  is  still  the  standing  danger  to  purity  in  doctrine  and
worship.  In  all  sensuous  forms  of  religious  worship  there  lurks  this  great  danger,
that  men  through  admiration  of  the  outward  are  led  to  adopt  the  false  doctrines
of  which  it  is  the  vehicle.

III.  It  showed  how  inveterate  are  old  evils.  "  Brought  from  Egypt "  (ver.
8).  The  old  idolatry  which  they  had  learned  in  Egypt  clung  to  the  nation,
every  now  and  then  breaking  out.  The  nation  was  never  clearly  delivered  from
it  till  after  their  captivity  in  Babylon.

IV.  It  was  visited  with  exemplary  punishment.  1.  Those  who  had  seduced
fitr  by  their  power  and  grandeur  were  made  the  very  instruments  of  her  punish-
ment. Slie  had  doted  on  the  Assyrians,  and  she  was  delivered  into  their  hands
(ver.  9).  2.  l^he  was  made  a  warning  example  to  all.  "  Famous  among
women."  An  example  to  all  the  other  nations.  They  would  talk  of  her  ;  some
of  her  abominable  wickedness,  others  of  her  miseries,  previous  judgments,  and
calamities.


1.  When  people  embrace  false  worship  they  are  violent  and  strong  in  their
affections  towards  it.  Aholah  doted  upon  her  lovers,  her  heart  was  tired  with
Babylonish  gods,  and  confidences  in  them,  2.  What  evil  persons  have  practised
in  their  youth  that  they  affect  in  their  age.  Aholah  had  loved  the  Egyptian
idols  in  her  minority,  and  after  she  was  grown  up,  those  idols  were  not  out  of
her  thoughts.  Her  Egyptian  lovers  were  still  in  her  mind,  like  harlots  that
mind  their  former  lovers  long  after  they  are  married.  What  corruption  gets  in
youth,  grows  up  and  abides  ;  an  unclean,  idolatrous  heart  in  youth,  will  be  so
in  at^e.  3.  Idolatry  may  continue  long  in  a  nation^  but  shall  at  least  be  severely
punished  by  the  Lord.  Aholah  had  been  an  idolatress  from  her  youth,  and  when
she  was  grown  up  to  some  greatness,  then  she  broke  out  into  gross,  notorious
idolatry  (1  Kings  xii.)  ;  in  which  she  continued  for  upwards  of  two  hundred  and
sixty  years,  and  then  the  Lord  planned,  yea,  dehtroyed  her,  her  sons  and
daugliters.  It  is  wisdom  to  cleave  to  the  Lord  and  His  worship,  not  to  follow
or  confide  in  other  nations,  or  their  ways.  4.  God  makes  places  and  persons
remarkable  by  thejuagments  He  executeth  upon  them.  Aholah  was  made  famous
among  wonien  by  those  judgments  He  brought  upon  her.  Aholah  was  Samaria,
which  Shalmaneser  besieged  three  years,  and  then  took  it ;  and  afterwards  burnt
it  (2  Kings  xvii.  5,  6). — GreenhilL
282


nOMlLETW  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEl,


CHAP.  XXltt.


(Vers.  11-21.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.-The
spiritual  adultery  of  Judah  with
Assyria,  in  which  she  surpasses
Samaria  in  her  ioiquity.

Ver.  11.  "She  was  more  corrupt
in  her  inordinate  love."  *' Judahwent
much  further  than  Samaria.  It  not
only  indulged  in  sinful  intercourse  with
Assyria,  which  led  on  to  id(»]atry  as  the
latter  had  done,  but  it  also  allowed
itself  to  be  led  astray  by  the  splendour
of  Chaldea  to  form  alliances  with  that
imperial  power,  and  to  defile  itself
with  her  idolatry.  And  when  it
became  tired  of  the  Chaldeans  it  formed
impure  connections  with  the  Egyptians
as  it  had  done  once  before  during  its
sojourn  in  Egypt "  (Keil).

Ver.  12.  **  Doted  upon  the  Assyrians,
her  neighbours.*'  "  The  reference  here
is  to  the  application  made  by  Ahaz  to
Tiglath-pileser  for  his  assistance  against
the  Syrians  and  Israelites  (recorded
2  Kings  xvi.  7-9j,  which  led  to  the
idolatrous  transaction  at  Damascus,
and  the  introduction  of  the  Syrian
idolatry  into  Jerusalem  (2  Chron.
xxviii.  16)'*  {Henderson),  ''Clothed
most  gorgeously."  The  word  means
perfection y  and  the  thought  intended
is,  perfect  beauty  of  clothing.  "  The
costume  of  the  Assyrian  cavalry  may
be  seen  in  the  sculptures  brought  by
Layard  from  Nineveh,  which  di.splay
all  the  magnificence  of  Oriental
finery  "  {Henderson),

Ver.  14.  "  She  saw  men  portrayed
upon  the  wall,  the  images  of  the
Chaldeans  portrayed  with  vermilion."
"  In  regard  to  the  Chaldeans,  the
relation  to  them  was  brought  about  by
means  of  likenesses^  which  Judah  saw.
The  word  means,  something  engraven
or  sketched^  painted.  These  were,  pro-
haV)ly,  coloured  bas-reliefs, in  vermilion,
which  would  be  all  the  more  appropriate
for  warriors.  The  representation  here
may  probably  be  the  mere  drapery  of  the
thought,  that  the  bare  report  of  the
military  prowess  of  the  Chaldeans  had


inflamed  the  imagination  and  the  senses
of  Judah.  Owing  to  the  undeniable
intercourse  between  nations  in  the  Old
World,  which  certainly  obtained  be-
tween Palestine  and  Babylon,  it  is  not
in  itself  unimaginable  that  such  wall-
pictures  of  representatives  of  foreign
nations  may  have  existed  in  the  royal
palaces  of  Judah." — (Lange).

Ver.  15.  "  Exceeding  in  dyed  attire
upon  their  heads."  The  reference  is
to  the  lofty  turbans,  such  as  may  be
seen  on  the  monuments  of  ancient
Nineveh,

Ver.  18.    "  My  mind  was  alienated
from  her."  **Thethoughtin  these  verses
(vers.    16-18)   is   the  following  : — the
acquaintance  made  by  Israel  (Judah)
with    the   imperial   splendour  of    the
Chaldeans,  as  exhibited  in  the  sculp-
tures of  their  palaces,  incited  Judah  to
cultivate  political  and  mercantile  inter-
course with  this  imperial  power,  which
led  to  its  becoming  entangled  in  the
heathen  ways  and  idolatry  of  the  Chal-
deans. The  Chaldeans  themselves  came
and  laid  the  foundation  for  an  inter-
course which  led  to  the  pollution  of
Judah  with  heathenism,  and  afterwards
filled  it  with  disgust,  because  it  was
brought  thereby  into  dependence  upon
the  Chaldeans.     The  consequence  of
all  this  was,  that   the   Lord   became
tired  of  Judah.     For  instead  of  return-
ing to  the  Lord,  Judah  turned  to  the
other  power  of  the  world,  namely,  to
Egypt ;  and  in  the  time  of  Zedekiah
renewed  its  ancient  coquetry  with  that
nation."    (Keil),

Ver.  19.  "In  calling  to  remem-
brance the  days  of  her  youth."  She
had  grown  disgusted  with  Babylon  ;
yet  she  repented  not,  but  turned  back
again  to  the  old  ways  which  she  had
learned  in  Egypt  (2  Kings  xxiii.  29-35).

Ver.  20.  *'  Whose  flesh  is  as  the
flesh  of  asses,  and  whose  issue  is  like
the  issue  of  horses."  ''This  representa-
tion is  sufiiciently  explained  by  the

283


cliAt.  xxiit  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.


particularly  lecherous  character  of  the  is  paid  to  that  which  aught  to  be  hated

animals  mentioned,  and  describes  the  and  avoided.     The  words,   '  When   a

obscene   character  of    the    Egyptians  man  of  Egypt  handled/  etc.,  refer  to

(Ezek.  xvi.  26)." — (Lange.)  the  attempt  of  the  Egyptians  to  draw

the  people   in   their  first   beginnings

Ver.  21.    "  Calledst  to  remembrance  into  the  Egyptian   unity,  and  so  to

the  lewdness  of  thy  youth  "  (Heb,).  nationalize  them — an  attempt  to  which

"  And  thou  didst  visit  the  lewdness  of  the  youth  of  the  people  furnished  the

thy  youth."     '*  The  falling  back  into  occasion." — (Hengstenberg,)
the  old  sin  is,  as  it  were,  a  visit  which

EOMILETICS.
The  Sin  of  Judah.

The  sin  of  Judah  was  one  of  special  aggravation.  Her  sin  surpassed  that
of  Samaria.  "  She  was  more  corrupt  in  lier  inordinate  love  than  she,  and  in
her  whoredoms  more  than  her  sister  in  her  whoredoms."  1.  She  had  greater
privileges.  A  purer  knowledge  of  the  true  way  of  worship.  Greater  grace  to
resist  temptation,  and  to  keep  in  the  right  way.  2.  She  had  the  warning
example  of  Samaria  s  punishment.  She  saw  how  God  punished  them  by  the
very  instruments  of  their  inordinate  love,  and  yet  took  not  warning.  "They
both  took  one  way,"  not  reflecting  that  they  who  take  the  same  way  also  reach
the  same  end.  3.  She  used  special  devices  to  increase  her  sinful  desires,  "  She
increased  her  whoredoms."  She  stimulated  her  lustful  imagination  by  pictures
and  representations  of  forbidden  objects.  The  sight  of  these  would  set  her
longing  after  the  seductive  idolatry  of  the  nations,  and  draw  her  away  from  her
lawful  love  and  home.  The  lust  of  the  eye  is  one  of  the  great  dangers  of  the
world.  She  also  suffered  herself  to  be  ensnared  by  the  memory  of  her  old  sins
(vers.  19,  21).  It  is  sad  when  nations  and  individuals  go  back  again  to  the
sins  of  their  early  life.  4.  She  brought  sad  judgment  upon  herself  yet  repented
not.  When  she  had  obtained  her  desire  and  embraced  the  idolatry  of  Babylon,
she  was  still  unsatisfied  and  even  learned  to  loathe  that  which  she  once  so
eagerly  sought.  "  Her  mind  was  alienated  from  them."  Israel  could  not  find
rest  in  the  idolatry  of  the  nations,  for  she  still  retained  some  memory  of  better
things.  The  people  could  not  become  as  the  heathen  in  all  respects,  for  their
glorious  past  was  still  a  fact  and  could  not  be  separated  from  their  history.
The  idolatry  of  Babylon  could  not  satisfy  the  sinful  longings  of  the  chosen
people.  All  impure  lust,  when  it  has  spent  its  passion,  becomes  hatred.  For
all  such  lust  is  selfish  and  will  turn,  at  length,  into  aversion  to  its  object.
Fellowship  with  sin  must  only  be  of  short  duration.  There  is  no  true  binding
principle  in  it.  But  it  was  the  shame  and  misery  of  Israel  that  the  judgments
of  God,  and  her  disgust  of  Babylon,  failed  to  bring  her  to  repentance.

1.  WJien  God  executes  severe  judgments  upon  cities  He  looks  that  others  should
take  warning  thereby.  God  destroyed  Samaria  for  her  idolatry  and  confederating
with  heathenish  nations.  When  Jerusalem  saw  this  she  reformed  not,  but  was
more  corrupt.  God  expected  that  Jerusalem  should  hereupon  have  purged  out
all  idolatry,  and  cleaved  wholly  to  Him,  so  that  she  might  have  been  spared,
but  she  made  no  good  use  of  His  dealings  with  Samaria.  2.  Progress  in
the  same  sins,  after  judgments  executed  upon  others  is  a  fearful  aggravation  of
sin.  "  When  she  saw  this  she  was  more  corrupt."  When  God's  hand  is  lifted,
judgment  executed,  men  should  fear  and  learn  righteousness  ;  but  to  go  on  in
wickedness  is  a  horrible  slighting,  yea,  despising  of  God  and  His  judgments.
3.  Sinful  cities  usually  grow  worse  whatever  'judgments  they  see  executed  upon
284


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xxm.


others,  Jerusalem  was  more  corrupt  than  Samaria.  So  corrupt  is  the  nature
of  man  that  it  is  not  only  worse  after  mercies  but  even  after  judgments.
4.  The  eyes  are  instruments  and  occasions  of  great  evil,.  When  she  saw  th(;
images  of  the  Chaldeans  in  their  dresses,  with  their  belts  and  aspects,  she  was  taken
with  them.  The  images  affected  her  eyes,  and  they  conveyed  corruption  to  her
heart,  or  that  which  stirred  the  corruption  pre-existent  in  her  heart.  Adultery  and
idolatry  have  their  chief  entrance  by  the  eye,  and  many  other  sins  likewise.
What  a  sad  thing  was  it,  that  Jerusalem's  eyes  should  be  taken  with  the  painted
images  of  Babylonians  I  Some  confess  there  is  danger  by  gazing  upon  living
objects,  the  beauties  of  men  and  women,  but  they  fear  none  from  dead  objects  ;
but  Achan  saw  a  wedge  of  gold  and  a  Babylonish  garment,  and  they  snared
him  ;  Aholibah  here  saw  Babylonish  pictures,  and  they  ensnared  him.  5.  For
GotTs  people  to  admit  any  part  of  Babylonish  worship  is  to  defile  the  bed  of  love,
God  is  a  jealous  God,  His  worship  must  be  pure,  and  the  heart  must  be  pure.
If  the  worship  be  mixed,  or  heart  lean  upon  an  arm  of  flesh,  the  bed  of  love  is
defiled.  In  His  worship  and  ordinances  God  lets  out  His  love  to  the  soul.
When  they  are  pure,  by  the  heart  being  pure  and  confiding  in  God,  He  lets  out
Himself  and  His  love.  Let  us  look  to  our  hearts,  that  they  may  be  disengaged
from  all  creature  confidences,  and  to  our  worship  that  it  be  according  to  God,
and  then  we  shall  have  communion  with  and  comfort  from  our  Beloved.
6.  Wickedness  is  inconstant.  "H^r  mind  was  alienated  from  them."  She  was
taken  with  the  very  images  of  the  Bah}  lonians  ;  now  slie  cares  not  for  the  men
themselves,  her  soul  is  disjointed  from  them  ;  but  it  was  to  fall  in  with  some
others,  and  they  were  the  Egyptians  (ver.  19).  But  she  held  not  there  long  ;
which  made  the  Lord  to  say,  "  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  change  thy
way  ?  thou  also  shalt  be  ashamed  of  Egypt,  as  thou  wert  ashamed  of  Assyria  "
(Jer.  ii.  36).  7.  TmpudeTwe  and  open  shining  cause  God  to  disown  and  renounce
them  that  do  so.  Aholibah  discovered  her  whoredoms  and  nakedness  ;  she  talked
openly  what  she  had  done  with  the  Babylonians, she  set  up  altars  and  idols  in  every
street,  was  openly  and  impudently  wicked,  prostituting  herself  to  aU  in  the  streets.
Now  it  being  so,  saith  the  Lord,  "then my  mind  was  alienated  from  her," seeing
she  is  become  so  audaciou'^ly  wicked,  I  can  affect  her  no  longer.  Jerusalem's
wickedness  alienated  God's  heart  from  her,  made  Him  renounce  her  lor  a  harlot.
It  is  sad  when  God  renounces  (Hos.  i.  9).  If  we  would  not  have  God's  heart
alienated  from  us,  and  so  be  disowned,  renounced  by  Him,  let  us  take  heed  of  all
sins,  especially  of  impudency  in  any  sin.  8.  Fresh  sins  bring  to  mind  former  old
sins,  Aholibah's  latter  trucking  with  the  Egyptians  minded  God  of  her  primitive
whoredoms  and  abominations,  when  she  lived  in  Ei,fypt,  which  was  one  thousand
years  before  :  there  she  had  her  lovers;  there  she  defiled  herself  "  with  the  idols
of  Egypt  "  (Exek.xx.  17);  and  her  affection  now  to  Egypt,  and  Egypt's  paramours,
caused  God  to  mind  those  sins  of  her  youth.  He  had  no  pleasure  in  doing  so,
but  Aholibah  called  them  to  remenibrance,  by  acting  the  same  or  the  like  things
again,  she  called  them  out  of  darkness,  and  presented  them  to  the  view  of  God.
(Greenhill),  .  i

(Verses  22-35.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  —  The  Chaldeans,  and  Assyrians,  and  further
transgression  of  Jerusalem  is  followed  that  Pekod  is  used  by  Jeremiah  (ch.  1.
by  her  punishment.  21)  as  a  descriptive  name  of  Babylon,

it  may  be  inferred  that  all  three  are  to

Ver.   23.     "Pekod,  and  Shea,  and     be  so  interpreted  in  this  place.     No

Koa."     **  From  the  circumstance  that     such  geographical  names  as  Shoa  and

these  names  occur  in  immediate  con-      Koa  occur  either  in  sacred  or  profane

nection    with    the    Babylonians,    the     writers.     The  former,  however,  signify-

285


CHAP,  xxiir.


EOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:   EZEKlEt.


ing  wealth  or  opulence,  and  the  latter,
%>rincely,  noble,  are  aptly  descriptive  of
the  state  of  Babylon  in  the  days  of  her
prosperity,  as  Pekod,  is  of  her  antici-
pated punishment."  {Henderson).

Ver.  24.  "Buckler,  and  shield,  and
helmet."  These  are  all  defensive  ar-
mour. The  Chaldeans  had  only  to
lay  siege  to  the  city  and  bide  their
time.  God*s  arrows  would  do  the
rest.  **And  they  shall  judge  thee
according  to  their  judgments, '  Israel
was  to  be  judged  on  the  ground  of
natural  justice.  The  unfaithful  city
was  condemned  by  man  for  an  offence
against  human  law.  Their  judgments
were  brought  about  by  God's  righteous
law  of  retribution,  though  Nebuchad-
nezzar was  the  instrument  raised  up  to
administer  it.

Ver.  25.  '*They  shall  take  away
thy  nose  and  thine  ears."  "  What
nose  and  ears  are  for  a  woman,  that
for  a  people  is  their  military  strength,
the  bloom  of  the  nation.  Wlien  this
is  annihilated,  a  people  has  lost  its
beauty.  That  the  words  must  refer  to
this  is  shown  by  those  immediately
adjoining,  and  giving  the  explanation,
"  Thy  remnant  shall  fall  by  the  sword."
Zion  has  various  forms  of  existence,
and,  therefore,  a  manifold  remnant.
The  first  remnant  refers  to  the  fighting
men,  who,  so  to  speak,  shall  fall  by  the
sword  to  the  last  man — the  falling  of
the  remnant  pre-supposes  the  falling
of  all  the  rest ;  the  second  remnant
refers  to  Zion  as  a  city,  the  houses,  all
of  which  shall  be  destroyed  by  fire  "
f\Hengstenherg),  "  Punishment  by
cutting  off  the  nose  and  ears  was
inflicted  for  adultery,  not  only  the
Chaldeans,  but  also  among  the
Egyptians,  Greeks,  and  Romans.  It
was,  therefore,  to  represent  that
which  adulterous  Judah  was  to  suffer
under  the  image  of  such  ignominious
and  cruel  treatment.  They  were  also
to  be  stripped  of  what  lewd  females
set  moat  value  upon — their  rich  dresses
and  costly  jewels,  by  which  they  attract
the  notice  of  their  paramours"  (ver.  26).
"—Henderson,
206


Ver.  27.  **Thus  will  I  make  thy
lewdness  to  cease  from  thee."    The

punishment  inflicted  by  the  Chaldeans
would  be  eff'ectual  in  curing  them  of
idolatry.  After  the  captivity  the  Jews
never  fell  again  into  this  sin.

Ver.  29.  **  Shall  take  away  all  thy
labour."  They  were  to  be  deprived  of
the  fruits  of  their  labours.  *' The  naked-
ness of  thy  whoredoms  shall  be  dis-
covered." *' As  long  as  all  went  well
this  nakedness  was  covered.  The
shamefulness  of  her  conduct  did  not
come  to  the  light.  In  that  which  she
suffers,  what  she  has  done  will  be  mani-
fest to  all  the  world." — Hengstenberg,

Ver.  32.  *'Thou  shalt  drink  of  thy
sister  s  cup  deep  and  large."  **  This
cup  is  the  figure  of  the  destiny.  The
mockery  of  large  measure  corresponds
to  the  cup  of  wide  compass,  the  great-
ness of  the  mockery  to  the  greatness  of
the  calamity,  that  called  forth  the
mockery  so  much  the  more,  the  greater
the  pretensions  of  the  Jews,  who  con-
ducted themselves  as  the  people  to
whom  was  secured  the  universal  supre-
macy, who  had  always  in  their  mouth
the  saying,  '  My  enemies  shall  fall,  but
I  shall  tread  on  their  high  places.'"
— {Hengstenberg).  **  By  a  change  of
metaphor  the  judgments  to  be  inflicted
upon  Judah  are  represented  as  the  con-
tents of  a  cup  which  she  was  to  drink.
This  metaphor  is  of  frequent  occurrence
both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments
(Pi- a.  Ixxv.  8 ;  Jer.  xxv.  15 ;  Rev.  xiv.  10;
xvi.  19  ;  xviii.  6.)  The  force  of  the
metaphor  lies  in  the  idea  that  the  in-
gredientswere nauseous  and  deleterious.
Judah  was  to  be  treated  as  Israel  had
been,  only  more  severely  in  proportion
to  the  greater  guilt  she  had  contracted.
— {Henderson),

Ver.  34.  "  And  thou  shalt  break  the
sherds  thereof,  and  pluck  off  thine
own  breasts  "  This  expresses  most
forcibly  the  desperation  to  which  the
Jews  should  be  reduced,  when  com-
pelled to  undergo  the  extreme  inflic-
tion of  their  punishment.  By  a  bold
hyperbole,   not  satisfied  with  having


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:   BZEKIEU  oha?.  xxm.


sucked  out  the  last  drop  that  was  in  means  of  the  sherd-fragments.     Or  it

the    cup,    they    are    represented    as  may  have  been  done  in  frenzy  by  her

crunching  the  very  sherds  of  it  with  own  nails.     We  find  a  historical  illus-

their  teeth,  and  tearing  their  breasts  tration  of  tliis  in  the  treatnoent  they

which  they  had  prostituted  in  adul-  gave  Gedaliah,  the  Chaldean  governor,

tery"  {Henderson).     ** The  tearing  of  for   which    they    were    compelled   to

the  breasts  is  placed  beside  the  break-  suffer  (Jer.  xli.)"  {Lange).
ing  of  the  sherds  as  if  it  were  done  by

H0MILETI08.
(Verses  22-35.)

The  Punishment  of  Jerusalem,

I.  The  people  are  to  be  punished  by  those  with  whom  they  sinned.  "  Be-
hold I  will  raise  up  thy  lovers  against  thee"  (ver.  22).  Those  with  whom
she  had  pleasurable  sin,  by  a  natural  retribution  become  the  instruments  of
her  chastisement.  Thus  sinners  are  punished  by  means  of  other  sinners.  What-
ever pleasures  may  have  been  found  in  sin  when  it  was  followed,  the  memory  of
it,  at  last,  will  bear  a  sting.

II.  The  people  are  to  be  punished  in  the  ordinary  course  of  human  justice.
**  And  they  shall  judge  thee  according  to  their  judgments"  (ver.  24).  They  had
offended  against  the  sense  of  natural  justice  which  was  found  among  the  nations.
And  they  are  punished  by  men  for  an  offence  against  human  law.  Yet,  though
men  were  the  instruments,  they  were  punished  by  God.  The  punishment  of  siti
in  human  society  is  natural,  yet  it  is  surely  the  moral  law  of  God  taking  effect
as  far  as  is  possible  in  this  present  life.  "  From  the  natural  course  of  things,
vicious  actions  are,  to  a  great  degree,  actually  punished  as  mischievous  to  society;
and  besides  punishment  actually  inflicted  upon  this  account,  there  is  also  the
fear  and  apprehension  of  it  in  those  persons  whose  crimes  have  rendered  them
obnoxious  to  it,  in  case  of  a  discovery  ;  this  state  of  fear  itself  often  a  very
considerable  punishment.  The  natural  fear  and  apprehension  of  it,  too,  which
restrains  from  such  crimes,  is  a  declaration  of  Nature  against  them.  It  is
necessary  to  the  very  being  of  society,  that  vices  destructive  to  it  should
be  punished  as  being  so;  the  vices  of  falsehood,  injustice,  cruelty:  which
punishment  therefore  is  as  natural  as  society  ;  and  so  is  an  instance  of
a  kind  of  moral  government,  naturally  established,  and  actually  taking
place.  And,  since  the  certain  n  itural  course  of  things  is  the  conduct  of
Providence  or  the  government  of  God,  though  carried  on  by  the  instrumentality
of  men ;  the  observation  here  made  amounts  to  this,  that  mankind  find  them-
selves placed  by  him  in  such  circumstances,  as  that  they  are  unavoidably
accountable  lor  their  behaviour,  and  are  often  punished,  and  sometimes
rewarded  under  his  government,  in  the  view  of  their  being  mischievous,  or
eminently  beneficial  to  society.  The  Author  of  Nature  has  as  truly  direct*  d
that  vicious  actions,  considered  as  mischievous  to  society,  should  be  punished,
and  put  mankind  under  a  necessity  of  thus  punishing  them  ;  as  He  has  directed
and  necessitated  us  to  preserve  our  lives  by  food  "  {Butler  s  Analogy y  Part  I,
Chap.  III).  The  goodness  and  patience  of  God  had  failed  to  bring  Jerusalem
to  repentance,  and  the  people,  therefore,  were  given  up  to  punishment  by  means
of  man.

III.  The  people  are  to  be  punished  by  the  violent  taking  away  of  that
which  led  them  into  the  snares  of  sin.  *'  They  shall  deal  furiously  with  thee:
they  shall  take  away  thy  nose  and  thine  ears "  (ver.  25).     **  They  shall  also

2S7


CHAP.  xxiiL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEL.


strip  tliee  of  thy  clothes,  and  take  away  thy  fair  jewels"  (ver.  26).  Personal
attractions,  beautiful  garments,  adornments  and  jewellery  make  lewd  women
attractive,  and  lead  them  into  snares.  God  will  remove  from  His  people,  even
by  means  of  the  wrath  of  a  strange  nation,  all  those  things  which  tempted
their  hearts  from  Him.  They  had  left  their  first  and  lawful  love,  and  they
are  to  have  the  punishment  of  adulterers.

IV.  The  punishment  was  to  be  terrible.  1.  A  complete  exposure  of  their
iniquity.  "Tlie  nakeduess  of  thy  whoredoms  shall  be  discovered,  both  thy
lewdness  and  thy  whoredoms*'  (ver.  29).  Punishment  exposes.  Their  moral
loathesomeness  would  be  laid  bare  before  the  sight  of  aU.  2.  The  rich  heritage
of  the  past  was  to  he  wasted.  "'  They  shall  deal  with  thee  hatefully,  and  shall
take  away  all  thy  labour  "  (ver.  29).  All  the  results  of  their  labour  in  the  past
under  the  guidance  of  God.  How  often,  among  nations,  is  destroyed,  as  in  a
moment,  the  slow  work  of  long  ages, — the  precious  heritage  of  the  past !  "  The
city  where  David  dwelt "  (Isa.  xxix.  1),  and  all  which  in  their  history  led  up  to
David  and  from  him,  is  doomed  to  be  destroyed.  3.  They  would  have  to  drink  of  a
hitter  cup.  Their  cup  was  to  be  **  filled  with  drunkeness  and  sorrow,"  the  "  cup  of
astonishment  and  desolation"  (ver.  33).  And  the  very  greatness  of  their  sorrow,
their  abject  humiliation  would  occasion  derision  among  their  enemies,  *'Thou
shalt  be  laughed  to  scorn,  and  had  in  derision ;  it  containeth  much  "  (ver.  32).
The  nations  would  look  upon  them  swallowing  the  nauseous  draught,  and  make
merriment  over  their  sorrow.  They  would  have  to  drain  this  cup  of  sorrow
to  the  last  drop,  "  Thou  shalt  even  drink  of  it  and  suck  it  out,  and
thou  shalt  break  the  sherds  thereof"  (ver.  34).  4.  They  would  he  driven  to  the
frenzy  of  madness.  "And  pluck  off  thine  own  breasts"  (ver.  34).  Jerusalem
is  represented  as  a  woman  seized  with  madness  in  her  great  suffering,  who
gnaws  the  very  sherds  of  the  earthen  cup  and  tears  out  her  own  breasts.  Her
insatiable  lust,  which  had  gone  to  the  length  of  mad  desire,  is  now  met  by  a
punishment  which  is  furious,  and  which  drives  her  to  madness.  How  often  are
sinners  punished  in  those  members  of  the  body  in  which  they  have  sinned !

V.  This  punislmient  would  prove  an  effectual  remedy  for  their  sin.  "  Thus
will  I  make  thy  lewdness  to  cease  from  thee,  and  thy  whoredom  brought  from
the  land  of  Egypt  "  (ver.  27).  By  the  afflictions  which  they  suffered  in  Babylon
they  were  completely  cured  of  idolatry.  They  never  fell  into  that  evil  after
the  Captivity.  This  was  an  old-rooted  sin,  but  it  was  entirely  plucked  from
them.  So  God  educates  nations,  and  brings  home  to  theiu,  at  last,  the  lessons
of  His  providence  and  grace.  And  it  is  often  necessary  that,  as  with  individual
men,  they  should  be  educated  through  punishment.  It  took  a  long  time  to
deliver  Israel  entirely  from  Egypt,  their  house  of  bondage.  Their  physical
slavery  was  soon  destroyed,  but  their  spiritual  slavery  still  held  them  to  Egypt
thiough  many  ages  of  their  history.


1.  God  makes  them  instruments  of  woe  and  misery  with  whom  we  have  sinned.
The  Babylonians,  Chaldeans,  the  Assyrians,  her  lovers,  were  to  be  brought
jigainst  her.  Jerusalem  had  doted  upon  and  trusted  in  them,  and  by  them
would  God  plague  Jerusalem.  She  had  often  sinned  by  her  confidence  in
Kgvpt  (Isa.  XXX.  2 ;  xxxi.  1) ;  and  God  by  the  Egyptians  scourged  her
(2  Cliron.  xxxvi.  3).  Parents  dote  upon  their  children,  and  oft  God  makes
them  rods  to  whip  them,  yea,  clubs  to  break  their  hearts  and  bones.  2.  When
people  go  from  God  to  false  worship ^  and  put  coniidence  in  arms  of  fleshy  God
will  deal  severely  hy  them.  God  would  put  Aholihah  into  the  Babylonian
hands.  He  would  set  His  jealousy  against  her,  thrust  her  out  of  doors  ;  and
what  then  ?  The  Babylonian  would  deal  furiously  with  her,  abuse  her  body,
destroy  her  children,  burn  her  habitation,  strip  her  of  her  vestments  and  jewels,
take  away  all  she  had  gotten,  lay  open  her  shame,  and  do  hatefully  by  her;
268


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL,  chap,  xxiii.


she  sliould  be  punished  with  the  same  punishments  Aholah  was.  3.  Judgments
and  afflictions  are  cups  which  the  Lord  gives  nniiers  to  drink  of^  some  more
some  less.  Sometimes  God's  judgments  are  called  a  "cup  of  trembling"
(Isa.  li.  22);  sometimes  a  *'  cup  of  fury  "  (Jer.  xxv.  15),  and  sometimes  "a  cup  of
astonishment," as  here.  And  Aholibah  had  all  these  cups  given  her  to  drink ;  they
were  "  deep,  large,"  containing  much,  and  she  was  made  to  drink  them  all  off,
yea  to  the  very  dregs.  As  men  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  sins,  so  God  fills  up
the  cups  of  His  judgments.  **  Fill  to  her  double  "  (Rev.  xviii.  6).  Babylon's  sins
were  come  to  the  full,  and  the  cup  of  the  Lord's  fury  was  full.  4.  Neglect  and
contempt  of  God,  and  His  word,  causes  liim  to  execute  judgment,  "Because
thou  hast  forgotten  Me,  and  cast  Me  behind  thy  back."  Thou  hast  made  Me
bear  thy  sins,  and  thou  shalt  bear  My  punishments.  As  the  fear  of  God  is
the  beginning  of  wisdom,  so  the  forgetting  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  folly  and
all  evil.  Then  God  is  out  of  siglit,  behind  the  back  ;  and  what  will  not  men
do  when  no  awe  of  God  or  His  word  is  upon  them  ?  Then,  like  Abalibah,  they
will  commit  any  lewdness.  God  had  done  much  for  Abolibah,  dealt  by  her  like
a  loving  husband  ;  but  she  slighted  Him,  went  out  a  whoring  from  Him,  did
those  things  which  greatly  dishonoured  Him,  and  so  provoked  Him  to  mind
her  that  forgot  Him.  He  fell  upon  her  with  His  judgments,  and  destroyed  her.
And  so  will  the  Lord  do  by  all  that  forget  Him  (Psa.  ix.  17).  Whatever  sins
the  nations  commit,  they  are  comprehended  in  their  forgetting  God,  that  is  the
root  of  all  evil. — (Greenhill),

(Vers.  36-49).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  —  Judah  the  true  God  in  connection  with  their
and  Samaria  are  considered  as  joined  idols.  Thus  they  placed  Jehovah  on
together  in  their  sin  and  punishment,     a  par  with  Moloch.

Ver.   37.   *'  They  have  committed  Ver.  40.  "  Ye  have  sent  for  men  to

adultery,  and  blood  is  in  their  hands."  come    from  far."     The    Heb.    verb

"  The  actual  subject  matter  of  these  being  in  the  imperfect  tense  shows

verses  is  closely  connected  with  ver.  16,  that  the  action  was  continuous.     Not

more  especially  in  the  designation  of  that  they  merely  sent  once  and  again,

the  sins   as  adultery  and   bloodshed  but  that  they  were   wont  to  do  so.

(compare  vers.   37  and  45  with  Ch.  "  For  whom  thou  didst  wash  thyself,

xvi.  38).     They  committed  adultery  paintedst  thy  eyes,  and  deckedst  thy-

with  the  idols,  thus  placing  the  idols  self  with  ornaments."    "  They  spread

on  a  par  with  Jehovah  as  the  husband  fine  paint  of  a  .black  colour  on  the

of  Israel  (compare  Jer,  iii.  8  and  ii.  27.  eyelids    so    as    to    produce    a  black

For  the  Moloch-worship  compare  Ch.  margin,  and  thus  make  the  white  of

xvi.  20,  21,  and  Ch.  xx.  31  "). — Keil.  the    eye    look    more    beautiful    and

seducing.    It  is  a  custom  still  practised

Ver.  39.  "Then  they  came  the  same  by    Oriental    females.     Jerusalem    is

day  into  My  sanctuary  to  profane  it."  represented  as  so  doing  to  entice  her

"  So  callous  and  daring  were  the  Jews  lovers.     She  left  nothing  untried  by

in  their  idolatry  that  on  the  very  day  which  this  might  be  effected  "  {Hen-

on    which    they    had    burned    their  derson).  *'  The  eyelashes  and  eyebrows

c^iildren  to  Moloch  in  the  valley  of  were  stained  with  a  powder,  so  as  to

Geiienna,  they  hypocritically  presented  make   the  glance   of    the  eye    more

themselves  as  worshippers  in  the  temple  brilliant." — Lange.
of  Jehovah.     Compare  Jer.  vii.  9, 10."

{Henderson).    The   profanation    con-  Ver.  41.     "Satest  upon   a  stately

sisted,    not    simply    in     idol- worship  bed,  and  a  table  prepared  before  it-'

considered  by  itself,  but  in  worshipping  *'  She  seated  herself  upon  a  cushion  (not

f  289


CHAP.  xxm.


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARF:  EZEKIEL,


lay  down  upon  a  bed),  and  in  front  of
this  there  was  a  table,   spread  with
different  kinds  of  food,  upon  which
she  placed  incense  and  oil." — (Keil.)
"  The  board  or  table  is  furnished  with
meats  and  drinks.     Eating  and  drink-
ing play  an  important  part  in  adultery,
either  in  the  usual  or  in  the  spiritual
sense."  —  (Hengstenherg),      "  Where-
upon thou  hast  set  Mine  incense  and
Mine  oil."    Tlie  force  of  this  charge
lies  in  the  fact  that  she  devoted  the
offerings  which  belonged  to  Jehovah
to    the    gratification    of   her    lovers.
"  Religious  ceremonies  are  not  here
spoken  of.    We  find  ourselves  in  the
region  of  political  idolatry,  which   in
the  latest  times  of  the  people,  from
the  days  of  Ahaz  and  Hezekiah,  far
outweighed  that  of  religion.     The  cor-
responding reality  consists  in  the  rich
gifts  by  which  Judah  endeavoured  to
purchase  the  favour  of  the  heathen
sovereigns    (Isa.    xxx.    6)." — ( Hengs-
tenherg.)    Some  understand  this  pass-
age as  describing  the  lascivious  worship
of  the  Babylonish  Mylitta.     The  wan-
ton  Israel  is  described  as  preparing
herself  for  one  of  the  high  festivals  of
this  goddess,  and  as  abandoning  her-
self to  strangers  like  the  young  women
of  Babylon.

Ver.  42.  "  A  voice  of  a  multitude
being  at  ease  was  with  her."  They  are
at  ease,  in  careless,  undisturbed  pros-
perity. "Sabeans  from  the  Wilder-
ness." "  Instead  of  receiving  the
warnings  given  them  by  the  prophets,
and  humbling  themselves  on  account
of  their  idolatries,  the  inhabitants  of
Jerusalem  indulged  in  rioting  and
drunkenness — bringing  even  the  vulgar
Arabs  from  the  desert  to  keep  them
company." — (Henderson.)  The  phrase
**  from  the  desert,"  cannot  indicate  the
home  of  these  men,  but  simply  the
place  from  which  they  came  to  Judah,
namely,  from  the  desert  of  Syria  and
Arabia,  which  separated  Palestine  from
Babylon.  These  peoples  decorated  the
arms  of  the  harlots  with  clasps,  and
their  heads  with  splendid  wreaths
(crowns).  The  thought  is  simply  that
Samaria  and  Judah  had  attained  to
290


wealth  and  earthly  glory  through  their
intercourse  wi^h  these  nations;  the
very  gifts  with  which,  according  to
Ch.  xvi.  11,  &c.,  Jehovah  Himself  had
adorned  His  people." — (Keil )

Ver.  43.  "  Old  in  adulteries."  Lit,
who  was  debilitated  for  adultery.
**  The  Heb.  word  does  not  indicate  the
means  by  which  the  strength  has  been
exhausted,  but  is  an  accusation  of
direction  or  reference,  debilitated  with
regard  to  adultery,  so  as  no  longer  to
be  capable  of  practising  it." — (Keil.)
**  Will  they  now,  commit  whoredoms
with  her  ?  '*  **  Disgusting  as  was  her
character  as  an  old  adulteress,  Jerusa-
lem found  those  who  encouraged  her
in  her  wickedness.  Taken  in  connec-
tion with  the  next  verse,  the  two
sisters  are  again  presented  to  view,
though  Aholibah  is  specially  singled
out,  being  the  more  guilty  of  the
two." — (Henderson.)

Ver.  45.  **The  righteous  men.'*
Men  who  had  the  right  on  their  side.
Such  were  the  Chaldeans,  who  were
the  instruments  of  God's  righteous
anger.  "  The  Chaldeans  are  righteous
according  to  their  mission  as  ministers
of  the  Divine  vengeance.  The  heathen
tyrant  also,  in  Isa.  xlix.  24,  is  desig-
nated as  righteous." — (Hengstenberg.)
"  A  moral  comparison  between  the
Chaldeans  and  the  Jews  is  not  in-
tended, nor  are  prophets  and  righteous
men  among  the  people  themselves  to
be  imagined." — (Lange.)

Ver.  46.  "I  willbring  up  a  company
upon  them."  "  Here  the  prophet  is
first  addressed.  What  shall  happen  is,
as  it  were,wrouglit  by  him,  as  the  power
which  gave  the  prophecy  produces  also
the  fulfilment ;  in  the  prophecy  also,
ideally  considered,  the  fulfilment  is
already  present.  The  community  de-
notes usually  the  congregation  of
Israel.  As  this  has  failed  to  do  its
duty,  reacting  against  the  crime,  as
once  happened  in  the  war  against
Benjamin  (Judg.  xx.),  so  stands  here
the  community  of  the  heathen,  which
God  summons  to  execute  His  ven-
geance. " — (Hengstenberg.)


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  chap,  xxiit.


Ver.  48.      "  AH  women.**    All  the  are  represented  as  being  sisters  of  one

nations,  to  whom  Israel  would  serve  as  mother  ;  and  it  may  also  be  defended

a  warning  and  deterring  example.  on  the  ground  that  the  approaching

destruction    of    Jerusalem    and    the

Ver.  49.     "  They  shall  recompense  kingdom  of  Judah  affected  the  rem-

your  lewdness    upon    you."      "  The  nants  of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes,

punishment  is  announced  to  both  the  which  were  still  to  be  found  in  Pales-

women,  Israel  and  Judah,  as  still  in  tine ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the

the  future,  although  Aholah  (Samaria)  judgment  was   not   restricted  to  the

liad  been  overtaken  by  the  judgment  destruction  of  the  two  kingdoms,  but

a  considerable  time  before.     The  ex-  also  embraced   the   latter  judgments

planation  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  which  fell  upon  the  entire  nation."—

allegory  itself,  in  which  both  kingdoms  (KeiL)

HOMILETICS.
Another  Summary  of  the  Sins  and  Punishment  op  Judah  and  Samaria

I.  Their  Sins.  1.  Idolatry,  "  With  their  idols  have  they  committed
adultery  "  (ver.  37).  Jehovah  was  to  Israel  as  a  husband.  To  serve  other  gods
was  to  forsake  and  forfeit  His  favour  and  protection.  It  was  a  fearful  crime,
such  as  adultery  would  be  in  the  judgment  of  all  nations.  2.  Cruelty.
"  Blood  is  in  their  hands."  They  offered  their  children  to  the  cruelties  of
Moloch  worship.  Idolatry  leads  to  perverted  and  unnatural  views  of  human
duty  and  of  the  requirements  of  religion.  Hence  the  cruelty  of  its  rites.
3.  Impurity.  She  sought  to  make  herself  attractive  to  her  lovers,  using  every
art  to  pander  to  her  lust  (ver,  41,  42).  Israel  made  herself  attractive  to  the
surrounding  nations,  "  For  whom  thou  didst  wash  thyself,  paintedst  thy  eyes,
and  deckedst  thyself  with  ornaments."  They  washed  themselves  before  men,
but  were  unclean  before  God — the  way  of  hypocrites.  Israel  sought  for
occasions  of  sin.  "Ye  have  sent  for  men"  (ver.  40).  They  tried  to  excite  a
jaded  appetite  (ver.  43).  They  were  old  and  worn  out  in  the  service  of  sin,
but  tried  hard  to  awaken  the  impulses  of  it,  to  stir  up  the  embers  of  a
smouldering  fire.  Even  in  Christian  lands,  how  many  serve  such  impure  and
cruel  gods  and  even  use  infamous  arts  to  plunge  into  the  lowest  depths  of
iniquity  I  "  He  who  serves  Venus  and  Bacchus  offers  to  them  also  his
children." — (flange).  And  how  many,  also,  become  more  shameless  as  they
grow  old  in  sin  !  4.  Profanity.  They  profaned  the  Sabbath  and  the  sanctury
(ver.  38).  They  employed  in  the  service  of  idolatry  the  "  incense  "  and  "  oil,"
God's  own  property,  which  He  had  reserved  for  sacred  uses  (Exod.  xxx.  23-33).
More  than  this,  they  dared  to  combine  the  service  of  Jehovah  with  that  of
idols,  thus  adding  to  their  sins  the  boldest  and  most  wicked  hypocracy.  After
they  had  indulged  in  the  most  cruel  rites  of  idolatry,  they  came  **  in  the  same
day "  into  God's  sanctuary  to  defile  it.  **  To  run  from  the  harlot-house  to
God's  house,  from  murder  to  the  place  of  prayer,  from  sin  to  sinning,  is  not
pleasing  to  God." — Lange.

II.  Their  punishmont-  1.  It  would  he  felt  to  he  just  even  hy  the  heathen
nation  who  inflicted  it.  *'And  the  righteous  men,  they  shall  judge  them."
(ver.  45).  The  Chaldeans  had  right  on  their  side.  They  were  the  righteous
instruments  of  God  to  execute  His  vengeance.  Even  heathen  nations  looked
upon  perjury  and  breach  of  covenant  as  fearful  crimes.  (Ezek.  xvii.  15,  16).
2.  It  would  he  a  severe^  and  yet  a  most  fitting  punishment,  (vers.  46,  47).  The
Judgment  hour  had  come,  and  God's  army  was  ready.     "  They  shall  stone

T  2  291


OHAP  xxin,  HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


them  with  stones," — the  punishment  of  those  who  commit  adultery  and  shed
blood  (St.  John  viii.  5).  3.  It  would  be  effectual.  The  punishment  would
completely  cure  the  evil  (ver.  48).  It  would  be  a  warning  example  to  all
(ver.  48).  It  would  bring  them  to  the  true  knowledge  of  God  (ver.  49).  The
whole  of  this  chapter  illustrates  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  that  "  the  Law  entered
that  the  offence  might  abound"  (Rom.  v.  20).  It  would  seem  as  if  the
presence  of  God's  holy  Law  served  to  stir  up  the  proud  will  of  the  chosen
people  to  more  desperate  self-assertion.  They  sought  those  sinful  alliances
with  the  powers  of  the  world,  which  seemed  to  have  all  the  more  attraction
because  they  were  forbidden.  "  Ye  adulterers  and  adulteresses,  know  ye  not
that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God  ?  whosoever  therefore  will
be  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God."    (St.  James  iv.  4).


(Verses  36-44.)

1,  Sinners  make  little  or  no  conscience  of  horrible  sins,  or  holy  duties ;  they
pass  from  one  to  the  other  immediately,  Wheu  they  had  slain  their  children
to  their  idols,  that  same  day  they  came  iuto  the  Sanctuary.  From  shedding  of
blood  and  sacrificing  to  idols,  they  step  into  the  temple  and  worship  of  God.
Had  not  their  consciences  been  seared,  they  would  have  accused  them  and  told
them  that  they  were  unclean,  not  fit  to  meddle  with  holy  things.  But  they
go  boldly  and  impudently  into  God's  presence.  So  Jeremiah  tells  us,  they  did
steal,  murder,  commit  adultery,  swear  falsely,  burn  incense  to  Baal,  walk  after
other  gods,  and  then  come  presently  and  stand  before  Him  in  His  house,  and
say :  "  We  are  delivered.'*  (Jer.  vii.  9,  10.)  They  passed  from  wicked  practices
to  holy  duties,  making  no  conscience  of  the  one  or  the  other.  2.  The  Lord
takes  notice  how  men  draw  near  to  Him  in  the  duties  of  His  worship.  They
thrust  themselves  into  the  temple  worship  and  into  the  presence  of  God,  as  if
they  had  been  innocent  and  as  acceptable  to  God  as  any.  Men  may  deceive
others  and  themselves,  but  they  cannot  deceive  the  Lord.  He  sees  their  spirits,
and  whether  they  come  unprepared  in  the  guilt  of  former  or.  present  sins.  3.
Profaning  of  holy  things  is  wronging  God,  **  This  have  they  done  unto  Me.
Lo,  thus  have  they  done  in  the  midst  of  Mine  house."  God  had
instituted  their  worship,  and  had  stamped  holiness  upon  them  ;  and
therefore  the  defiling  and  profaning  of  them  He  counted  the  defiling  and
profaning  of  His  name  and  of  Himself.  Three  ways,  especially,  are  holy
things  defiled,  profaned  :  (1.)  When  men  come  in  their  sins,  without  purging
themselves.  (St.  James,  iv.  8.)  If  men  draw  near  to  God  without  cleansing
their  hands,  and  purifying  their  hearts,  God  will  not  draw  near  them.  He  will  not
touch  unclean  things.  (2.)  When  we  mingle  aught  of  us  therewith.  Additions  of
human  things  are  pollutions  of  divine  things.  When  they  brought  aught  into  the
Temple  which  God  appointed  not,  then  was  God's  worship  defiled.  When
Nadab  and  Abihu  put  strange  fire  into  the  censers,  they  defiled  God's  worship
and  provoked  Him  to  their  destruction  (Lev.  x.)  ;  and  when  they  set  their
threshold  with  God's  threshold,  they  defiled  His  name  and  worship  (E2ek.  xliii.
7,  8).  3.  When  holy  things  are  handled  irreverently.  The  Betlishemites  in
a  rude  manner  peeped  into  the  ark  and  profaned  it,  which  caused  the  Lord  to
smite  them  with  sudden  death  (1  Sam.  vi.  19).  Solomon  gives  counsel  that
men  should  keep  their  feet  when  they  go  into  the  house  of  God  (Eccl.  v.  1).
For  if  they  look  not  well  to  their  affections,  they  will  play  the  fool,  and  profane
those  holy  things,  and  procure  a  curse  instead  of  a  blessing.  4.  Sinners  will
show  great  activity  in  drawing  others  to  themselves  and  their  wicked  ways.
These  harlots  sent  to  Assyria,  to  E^ypt,  and  to  others  to  come  unto  them.
They  trimmed  and  decked  themselves,  they  spared  not  for  any  cost  whereby
292


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xxiv.


they  might  please  and  satisfy  them.  Thus  did  the  harlot  (Prov.  vii.).  She
perfumes  her  bed,  trims  up  herself,  goes  forth,  aud  diligeutly  seeks,  finds,  and
brings  in  the  prey.  Some  compass  sea  and  laud  to  make  proselytes.  Shall
wicked  ones  and  wickedness  be  active,  expensive  to  draw  and  ruin  others,  and
shall  not  godly  ones  and  godliness  be  as  active  and  expensive  to  win  and  savo
sinners?  5.  Those  who  are  given  to  corporeal  or  spiritual  uncleatmess  are
seldom  recovered,  but  go  on  and  grow  old  in  those  sins.  'J'iiese  women  had
many  reproofs  and  threatenings,  but  none  prevailed  (ver.  44).  Such  sins  are
bewitching,  and  hold  men  captive.  "  None  that  go  unto  her  return  again  "  (Prov.
ii.  19).  6.  The  Lord  takes  notice  of  sinners,  as  to  the  beginning,  progress,  and
continuance  of  their  sin.  He  observed  when  Aholah  began  her  wlioredom-?,
when  the  calves  were  set  up  at  Dan  and  Bethel,  how  she  grew  up  and  grew  old
in  adulteries.  God's  eye  goes  along  with  sinners,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.
7.  God*s  judgments  are  teaching  things.  He  brought  these  judgments  upon
the  two  harlots,  that  all  women  might  be  taught  thereby.  Gideon  by  thorns
and  briars  taught  the  men  of  Succoth  (Judg.  viii.  16).  'J'here  is  no  judgjnent
of  God  upon  any  city,  nation,  or  people,  but  it  speaks  and  teaches  :  "  Hear  ye
the  rod  "  (Micah.  vi.  9) ;  it  hath  a  voice,  a  teaching  voice.  1.  It  teaches  all
who  are  guilty  of  the  same  sins,  and  not  visited  with  the  same  judgments  to
admire  the  goodness  and  long  suffering  of  God  towards  them.  2.  It  teaches
those  who  are  guilty  of  such  sins  to  repent  and  turn  to  the  Lord,  lest  the  Lord,
being  now  in  the  way  of  judgment,  should  break  out  also  upon  them,  and  make
them  examples  of  His  justice.  3.  It  teaches  others  to  fear  and  to  flee  from  such
practices,  as  being  such  destructive  judgments.  When  Samaria  and  Jerusalem
shall  be  destroyed  for  their  confidence  in  the  arm  of  flesh,  will  not  every  other
city  learn  what  is  the  reward  of  wickedness,  and  fear  to  do  the  like  ?  8.  God's
ways  with  sinners  in  judging  them  righteously  brings  them  to  acknowledge  the
equity  of  His  dealing  with  them.  When  the  just  punishment  of  your  lewdness
and  idolatry  shall  be  upon  you,  *'  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,"  who
observed  all  your  ways,  who  waited  long  for  your  repentance,  who  have  dealt
justly  with  you  in  all  the  evils  I  have  brought  upon  you ;  you  cannot  but
justify  Me,  and  condemn  yourselves. — (Greenhill),


The  Complete  Destruction  of  Jerusalem  predicted,  both  in  Pabablb

AND  BY  Sign  (Chap.  xxiv).

(Vers.  1,  2).

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.—"  On  the  to  them  that  what  he  was  doing  was

day  on  which  the  King  of  Babylon  symbolical  of  the  way  in  which  th*^-y

commenced  the  siege  and  blockade  of  were  to  act  when  Jerusalem  fell  (vers.

Jerusalem,  this  event  was  revealed  by  15 — 24).    The  fall  would  be  anm  mi  need

God  to  Ezekiel  on  the  Cliaboras  (vers,  to  the  prophet  by  a  fugitive,  and  then

1.   2)  ;  .and   he   was   commanded   to  he  would  no  longer  remain  mute,  but

predict  to  the  people    thruugh    the  would  speak  to  the  people  again  (vers,

medium  of  a  parable  the  fate  of  the  25 — 27).     Apart,  therefore,  from  the

city  and  its  inhabitants  (vers.  3 — 14).  last  three  verses,  this  chapter  contaiiis

God  then  foretold  to  him  the  death  of  the  words  of  God,  the  first  of  which

his  own  wife,  and  commanded  him  to  unfolds  in  a  parable  the  approaching

show  no  sign  of  mourning  on  account  calainities,  and  the  result  of  the  siege

of  it.     His  wife    died   the   following  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans  (vers,

evening,  and  he  did  as  he  was  com-  1 — 14)  ;  whilst  the  second  typifies  by

manded.     When  he  was  asked  by  the  means  of  a  sign  the  pain  and  mourn-

people  the  reason  of  this  he  explained  ing  of  Israel,  namely,  of  the  exiles  at

293


OHAF.  xxnr.


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEU


the  destruction  of  the  city  with  its
sanctuary  and  its  inhabitants.  These
two  words  of  God,  being  connected
tDgether  by  their  contents,  were  ad-
dressed to  the  prophet  on  the  same
(lay,  and  that,  as  the  introduction
(vers.  1,  2)  expressly  observes,  the  day
on  which  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the
King  of  Babylon  began." — (Keil.)

Ver.  1.  "  The  ninth  year/'  The
date  is  taken  from  the  commencement  of
of  Jehoiachin's  captivity,  which  would
fix  the  time  when  the  word  of  the
Lord  came  to  the  prophet  as  b.c.  590.'*
*  In  the  tenth  month,  in  the  tenth  day
of  the  month."  This  day  was  after-
wards kept  as  a  fast,  and  is  still
observed  as  such  by  the  synagogue.

Ver.  2.  "Write  thee  the  name  of
the  day.*'  "  The  prophet  is  to  write
down  the  day,  as  a  man  does  with
remarkable  days,  in  order  not  to
forget  the  date.  The  object,  to  make
use  of  this  afterwards  in  proof  of  his
prophetic  ofl&ce,  needed  to  be  more
definitely  noticed." — (Hengstenberg).
"  The  prophet  is  specially  charged  to


write  down  the  particular  day  on
which  he  delivered  his  message,  and
to  announce  it  as  that  on  which
Nebuchadnezzar  had  commenced  his
attack  on  Jerusalem.  As  he  was  at
the  time  at  the  distance  of  n  ore  than
four  hundred  miles  from  that  city,
it  was  not  to  be  supposed  that  the
intelligence  could  have  reached  him
by  any  human  means.  When,  there-
fore, the  captives  aftervxards  received
the  information,  they  had,  on  com-
paring the  dates,  an  infallible  proof  of
the  Divine  inspiration  of  the  ])r()pliet."
— (Henderson).  "  Set  himself  agalL  st
Jerusalem."  The  Hebrew  word  sijni-
fies  to  lie  hard  upon  (Psa.  Ixxxvii.  7).
It  is  sometimes  u^ed  to  de.-ciibe  the
investing  of  a  city  with  an  army.  In
the  afil  ctions  of  the  righteous  God
is  sad  to  lay  on  a  heavy  hand
(Psa.  xxxii.  4).  The  sacrificer  laid
his  hand  upon  the  victim  (Exodus
xxix.  19) ;  and  the  witnesses  were
ordered  to  lay  their  hand  on  a
blasphemer  before  he  was  stoned
(Lev.  xxlv.  4),  so  in  great  judgments
God  lays  on  His  hand.


H0MILETIC8.


Thb  Last  Warning  of  Judgment.


Ezekiel  had  uttered  many  warnings  before,  and  he  still  goes  on  speaking  up
to  the  very  moment  of  judgment.     This  illustrates  ; —

I.  The  Prophet's  faithfulness.  Amidst  every  discouragement  he  is  still
resolved  to  deliver  the  message  of  God.  He  will  utter  God's  last  word,
though  it  comes  too  late  to  arrest  judgment.  The  true  prophet  must  speak
the  word  which  is  given  him,  and  leave  the  results  with  Him  who  sent  him,

II.  The  Prophet's  inspiration.  Ezekiel  was  four  hundred  miles  from
Jerusalem,  and  yet  he  tells  his  fellow-captives  that  the  siege  was  begun  at
that  very  moment  at  which  he  was  speakiig.  This  was  a  clear  proof  that
the  prophet's  mind  was  eulightemd  by  that  Sovereign  Intelligence  which  sees
and  knows  all  things.  He  could  not  possibly  know  this  event  by  human  means.
Therefore  his  assertion,  that  the  siege  was  then  commencing  while  he  was
speaking,  must  have  been  the  result  of  supernatural  knowledge.  If  any  one
ujaintains  that  this  was  a  pro})hecy  after  the  event,  he  must  be  prepared  to
accept  the  conclusion  that  both  Ezekiel's  prophetic  and  moral  characters  fall  to
the  ground.

"^94


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xxit.


III.  The  solemnity  of  the  prophet's  last  word.  In  this  chapter  he  takes
his  farewell  of  his  nation.  We  are  reminded  of  Our  Lord's  parting  words  to
Jerusalem,  "  Behold  your  house  is  lefc  unto  you  desolate  "  (St.  Matt,  xxiii.  38).
Wlien  the  prophets  of  God  speak  no  more  to  nations,  or  to  individual  men,
then  the  day  of  their  visitation  is  over  and  the  time  of  judgment  has  come.

IV.  The  solemn  import^ince  of  God's  notes  of  time,  in  the  life  of  nationst
and  of  men-  There  are  times  and  events  in  the  lives  of  nations  which  historians
may  note  down  as  the  most  important.  But  what  different  rates  of  importance
are  to  be  assigned  to  these  as  God  views  them  !  And  so  it  is  in  regard  to  the
lives  of  individual  men.  How  different  would  be  the  calendar  of  our  lives  if
we  marked  the  times  and  events  of  it  at  God's  bidding  !  "  We  are  generally
ignorant  of  the  real  significance  of  events,  which  we  think  we  understand.
Almost  every  person  can  recollect  one  or  more  instances,  where  the  whole  after-
current of  his  life  was  turned  by  some  single  word,  or  some  incident  so  trivial
as  scarcely  to  fix  his  notice  at  the  time.  On  the  other  hand,  many  great  crises
of  danger,  many  high  and  stirring  occasions,  in  which,  at  the  time,  his  total
being  was  absorbed,  have  passed  by,  leaving  no  trace  of  effect  on  his  permanent
interests,  and  have  wellnigh  vanished  from  his  memory.  The  conversation  of
the  stage-coach  is  often  preparing  results  which  the  solemn  assembly  and  the
most  imposing  and  eloquent  rites  will  fail  to  produce.  What  countryman,
knowing  the  dairyman's  daughter,  could  have  suspected  that  she  was  livinsj  to
a  mightier  purpose  and  result  than  almost  any  person  in  the  church  of  God,
however  eminent  ?  The  outward  of  occasions  and  duties  is,  in  fact,  almost  no
index  of  their  importance  ;  and  our  judgments  concerning  what  is  great  and
small  are  without  any  certain  validity.  These  terms,  as  we  use  them,  are,  in
fact,  only  words  of  outward  desciiption,  not  words  of  definite  measurement." —
{Bushwell).

1.  The  Lord  can  malce  known  what  men  do,  to  whom  TJe  pleases  and  at
what  distance  soever.  Nebuchadnezzir  and  iiis  forces  were  in  Judea,  sitting
down  before  Jerusalem,  and  this  the  Lord  revealed  to  Ezekiel,  being  in  Babylon.
It  was  declared  to  Elisha,  whither  the  king  of  Syria  would  march,  and  where
he  would  pitch  his  camp.  (2  Kings,  vi.  9,  10.)  The  death  of  Herod,  in  Judea,
was  discovered  to  Joseph,  being  in  Egypt.  (St.  Matt.  ii.  19,  20.)  And  when
Moses  was  in  Midian,  the  Lord  told  him  that  all  the  men  were  dead  in  Egypt,
which  sought  his  life.  (Exod.  iv.  19.)  2.  There  are  some  things  and  times
the  Lord  would  hace  his  people  take  special  notice  of ^  and  keep  the  chronology
thtreof.  Ezekiel  must  write  the  year,  the  month,  and  day  of  Jerusalem's
beseiging.  When  God  hath  been  upon  executing  great  judgments,  or  showing
great  mercies,  the  days  and  months  have  been  recorded.  The  day  and  month
of  Noah's  entrance  into  the  ark,  and  of  his  coming  out  again,  are  mentioned.
(Gen.  vii.  11  ,  viii.  14,  16.)  The  time  of  the  Jews  going  out  of  Egypt  you  have
punctually  set  down.  (Exod.  xii.  41,  42)  ;  so  the  time  of  their  passing  over
Jordan  (Josh.  iv.  19)  ;  of  Solomon's  building  the  temple  (2  Chron.  iii.  2) ;  of
Raman's  plot  to  destroy  the  Jews  (Esth.  iii.  8,  13.)  This  shows  that  these
events  were  not  casual,  that  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  were  interested  in
tliem,  whoever  were  the  instruments." — (GreenhilL)

(Verses  3-14.)

EXEGETICAL      NOTES.  —  The  therein   choice  pieces  of  meat  (vers,

prophet  illustrates  the  destrnctiou  of  3-5)        Then     he    follows    with    an

Jeiusalem  by  the  allegory  of  a  cauldron  application    of  the   allegory  to  Jem-

which  he  was  to  set   on  the  lire,  and  sal-Mii,   as   describing    her  irrevocable

having  put   water    into    it,  to    boil  doom.  295


ORAP.  XXIV.


HOMILETIO  COMMENTART:  BZEKJEL.


Ver.  3.  '*  Utter  a  parable."   "The

contents  of  these  verses  are  called  a
proverb  or  parable.  It  follows  from
tliis  that  the  ensuing  act  which  the
prophet  is  commanded  to  perform  is
not  to  be  regarded  as  a  symbolical  act
which  he  really  carried  out,  but  that
the  act  forms  the  substance  of  the
parable — in  other  words,  belongs  to
the  parable  itself ;  consequently  the
interpretation  of  the  parable  (ver.
10,  etc.)  is  clothed  in  the  form  of  a
thing  actually  done"  iKeil.)  "Set
on  a  pot  .  .  .  pour  water  into  it."
The  repeated  demand  expresses  urgent
liaste.  The  pot  is  Jerusalem,  which
had  become  so  foul  as  to  poison  all
meats  which  were  put  into  it.

Ver.  4.  *'  The  pieces-'*  The  pieces
represent  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.
By  the  "thigh,  the  shoulder,  choice
bones,"  we  are  to  understand  the
wealthy,  the  nobles,  and  chiefs  of  the
people.

Ver.  5.  "Burn  also  the  bones
under  it,  and  make  it  boil  well."

*'  The  bones  that  had  been  stripped  of
their  flesh  were  to  be  used  for  fuel :
those  to  which  it  still  adhered  were
to  be  thrown  into  the  pot,  that  it
might  be  boiled  "  {Henderson).  "  The
fire  with  which  they  are  boiled  is  the
fire  of  war,  and  the  setting  of  the  pot
upon  the  fire  is  the  commencement  of
the  siege,  by  which  the  population  of
the  city  is  to  be  boiled  away  like  the
flesh  and  bones  in  a  pot." — KeiL

Ver.  6.  "  Whose  scum  is  therein."
"We  are  not  to  understand  such  scum
as  gathers  on  the  surface  of  the  con-
tents of  a  pot,  but  the  rust  or  verdigris
contracted  by  copper.  The  moral
impurity  of  the  city  is  intended.  The
propliet  begins  here  to  give  the
explanation  of  the  parable.  The  Jews,
indeed,  could  be  at  little  loss  to  know
what  was  intended  by  it.  They  had
already  themselves  bandied  the
metaphor  about  as  a  taunt,  boasting
that  they  should  dwell  secuiely  in
Jerusalem." — (Henderson).  *'  Piece  by
piece."  The  pieces  were  the  various
296


members  of  the  body  corporate.  They
were  all  to  be  brought  out,  no  favour
was  to  be  shown,  but  all  without  dis-
crimination were  to  be  put  into  the
cauldron.  *  Let  no  lot  fall  upon  it"
No  lot  was  to  be  cast  m  order  to
decide  what  part  should  be  taken,  and
what  should  be  spared  (Nahum  iii.  10).
All  are  doomed  to  be  carried  off",  by
death  or  by  captivity,

Ver.  7.  **  She  set  it  upon  the  top  of
a  rock."  "  Here  we  have  the  cause  of
this  judgment :  deeds  of  murder  are
done  in  Jerusalem  boldly  and  without-
abhorrence,  by  which  we  are  to  under
stand  the  numerous  judicial  murders
which  were  perpetrated  by  the  party
who  had  at  that  time  seized  the  helm
of  the  state,  the  party  of  the  external
alliances,  against  which  all  were
indignant,  who  in  the  name  of  the
God  of  Israel  raised  a  protest  against
this  adulterous  movement.  An  example
of  such  judicial  murder  is  the  prophet
Urijah  (Jer.  xxvi.  20.  &c.)"  (Eeng-
stenherg).  **  Poured  it  not  upon  the
ground.''  It  was  commanded  in  the
Law,  that  the  blood  of  animals  slain
for  food  should  be  poured  on  the  earth
and  covered  up  with  dust  (Lev.  xvii.
13).  Idolatrous  Jerusalem  recklessly
poured  out  even  human  blood  under
the  open  sky,  and  covered  it  not  up.
She  sinned  shamelessly,  and  before  the
face  of  all.  Therefore  the  Lord  will
not  cover  up  her  sin,  but  her  blood
shall  be  ruthlessly  poured  out  in  the
sight  of  all  nations.

Ver.  8.    '*  Upon  the  top  of  a  rock."

**  The  Hebrew  word  signifies  a  sunny
rock,  the  highest  part  of  a  bare  rock
exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  sun.  In
just  retribution,  Jehovah  declares  that
He  would  expose  them  with  equal
publicity,  that  the  blood  might  call
for  vengeance." — (Henderson),

Ver.  10.  **  Spice  it  well."  "There
are  differences  of  opinion  as  to  the
meaning  of  this  word.  The  rendering
sometimes  given,  namely  *  to  spice,'
is  at  all  events  unsuitable,  and  can-
not   be    sustained   by   the  usage  of


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  EZEKIEL,  chap,  xxit


language.     It  is  true  tliat  in  Ex.  xxx.  Thus  God*s  judgments  fell  not  upon

25,  &c.,  the  verb  is  used  for  the  pre-  men  only,butalsouponcities  and  lands,
paration  of  the  anointing  oil,  but  it  is

not  the  mixing  of  the  different  in-  Ver.  12.  **  She  wearied  herself
gredients  that  is  referred  to,  but  in  all  with  lies."  The  idea  is,  that  the  pot
probalility  the  thorough  boiling  of  the  wearied  and  exhausted  men  in  their
spices,  for  the  purpose  of  extracting  exertions  to  cleanse  it.  All  the
their  essence,  so  that  '  thorough  labours  spent  upon  the  devoted  city-
boiling  '  is  no  doubt  the  true  meaning  were  of  no  avail,
of  the  word."— (^^2*0.

Ver.  14.      **I  will  not  g^o  back,

Ver.  11.    "  That  the  fill  thine  ss  of  it  neither  will  I  spare,  neither  will  I

may  he  molten  in  it-"     The  unclean-  repent."     '*  The  impurity  of  the  in-

ness  of  the  pot  is  the  rust  upon  it  habitants   of  Jerusalem    was    of   the

Tlie^  Impurity   and   rust  of  the    pot  most    atrocious    character.       It    was

itself  must  be  consumed  by  the  fire,  crime,  ^e\\hQY?LiQ  wickedness.    Jehovah

Thus  when  the  guilty  inhabitants  are  had   used   a   variety  of  means,  both

slain,  the  city  itself  will  be  destroyed,  physical  and  moral,  to  restore   them

In   the   Old   Testament,   impurity  is  to  purity,  but  they  had  produced  no

considered  as  being  attached  to  things  efft  ct.     It  remained  now  only  for  the

as    well    as  persons  (Lev.    xviii.  25  ;  Chaldeans    to   do   their  work.      The

xxvii.  28).     Leprosy  not  only  polluted  decree  was  irrevocable,  and  the  execu-

men,  but  clothes    also  and    houses,  tion  inevitable." — (Henderson),


HOMILETI08.

The  Final  Judgments  of  God  upon  Jerusalem.

1-  They  would  he  severe.  The  judgments  coming  upon  Jerusalem  are  set
forth  under  the  parable  of  a  loiliiig  pot,  filled  with  fle^h  and  bones  and  set  over
a  fierce  fiie.  Not  only  are  the  contents  to  I  e  com})letely  destroyed  by  fire,  but
also  the  rust  of  the  pot  itself.  This  declares  that  God's  purpose  is  to  destroy
Jerusalem  itself  as  well  as  the  guilty  inhabitants  (ver.  11).  They  are  to  be
burred  well  until  the  whole  is  consumed  (ver.  10).  The  blood  Jerusalem  had
shed  must  now  be  avenged  upon  her  before  the  eyes  of  all  nations  (ver.  8).

II.  They  would  be  a  just  retribution-  For  corruption  had  spread  to  all
ranks  and  conditions  of  the  people  (ver.  4).  Sin,  like  rust,  had  eaten  into  the
very  substance  of  the  nation.  The  "  scum  "  had  cleaved  to  the  vessel  (ver.  6).
So  universal  was  the  corruption  that  there  was  no  need  for  the  "lot"  to  be  cast  in
order  to  decide  what  part  should  be  taken  for  destruction,  and  what  spared.  A II
were  doomed  to  be  carried  off, by  death, or  by  captivity.  Nor  were  these  judgments
a  sudden  thought,  or  expedient — a  desperate  remedy  applied  at  the  last  moment.
They  had  often  been  warned  and  corrected  before.  God  by  the  ministry  of  His
prophets  had  effected  some  reformations,  but  the  eflect  of  these  soon  wore  off
and  the  nation  refused  to  be  purged  of  her  iniquity  (ver.  13).  Holy  men  were
wearied  with  toil  to  cleanse  the  sinful  city,  but  their  labours  were  in  vain
(ver.  12).  She  had  sinned  in  the  most  open  and  shamless  manner,  had  done
nothing  to  cover  her  sin,  had  shown  no  signs  of  repentance,  and  had  resisted
all  the  instruments  which  God  had  used  to  restore  her.  There  was  nothing
arbitrary  or  vindictive  in  her  punishment,  which  was  but  a  just  recompense  for
her  sin.  The  city  with  her  sinful  population  were  left  to  share  the  inevitable
consequences  which  arise  from  the  persistent  breach  of  moral  laws.     "Accord-

297


CHAP.  XXIV.  BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL.


ing  to  thy  ways,  and  according  to  thy  doings,  shall  they  judge  thee,  saith  the
Lord  God  "  (ver.  14).  The  judgments  were  to  fall  upon  the  city  itself  as  well  as
upon  the  inhabitants.  The  works  of  man  are  turned  by  his  sin  into  the  instru-
ments of  his  punishment.  The  blood  of  Christ  was  shed  at  Jerusalem,  and
retribution  came,  at  length,  when  Titus  burned  the  city.  Divine  grace  abused
will  bring  sure  vengeance.  Sin  must  be  put  away  out  of  God's  sight,  either
by  cleansing  it  away,  or  by  overwhelming  it  under  His  dire  judgments.
When  G)d  Himself  has  done  all  that  could  be  done,  consistent  with  man's
moral  liberty,  then  judgment  must  take  it  course.  "Thus  also  it  was  not
cleansed  by  Christ,  who  had  wearied  Himself  in  labours  for  Jerusalem  even
to  hot  tears." — {Jerome),

III.  They  would  be  irrevocable.    The   Lord  had  spoken,  and   He  would
not  repent  of  His  word  (ver.  14).     Their  time  of  grace  had  run  out.


"As  to  the  princi]ile  of  dealing,   there  is  no  essential  difference  between
what  G')d  did  then  with  Israel,  and  what  He  still  does  wiih  those  who  stand  in
a  similar  relation  to  Him,  and  pursue  a  similar  course.      Where  there  is  the
profession  of  a  belief  in  God's  word,  and  a  regard  to  God's  authority,  though
intermingled  with  much  that  is  false  in  sentiment,  or  unrighteous  in  conduct,
tliere  mast  still  be  dealings  of  severity  and  rebuke,  to  bring  the  professor,  if
possible,  to  a  sense  of  his  sinfulness,  and  lead  him  to  renounce  it ;  but,  failing
this,  to  vindicate  concerning  him  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  leave  him
without  excuse  if  iniquity  should  prove  his  ruin.     In  the  case  of  sincere,  God-
fearing people,  the  severity  exercised  will  always  be  attended  with  salutary
results  ;  for  they  have  the  root  of  the  matter  in  them,  and  are  sure  to  profit  by
the  chastening  of  the  Lord.      But  with  those  who  have  the  profession  only,
without  the  principle  of  true  godliness,  the  iniquity  is  clung  to  in  spite  of  all
the  severity  that  is  exercised,  until  the  wrath  falls  on  them  to  the  uttermost.
There  may  be  signs  of  the  Divine  displeasure  sufficient  to  startle  the  tender
conscience,  and  call  for  deep  humiliation  of  spirit,  while  nothing  appears  out-
wardly wrong,  and  all  may  even  wear  a  smiling  aspect  as  far  as  regards  social
and  public  relations.     Should  there  be  a  restraining  of  Divine  grace  within,  an
absence  of  spiritual  refreshment,  a  felt  discomfort  of  mind,  or  an  obvious  with-
drawal of  spiritual  privileges,  there  is  beyond  doubt  the  commence  ment  of  a
work  of  judgment  ;  and  if  such  marks  of  God's  displeasure  are  slighted,  others
of  a  more  severe  and  alarming  kind  may  assuredly  be  looked  for.    But  as  men's
tempers  and  circumstances  in  life  are  infinitely  varied,  so  there  is  a  correspond-
ing variety  in  the  methods  employed  by  God  to  check  the  risings  of  sin,  and
expel  its  poison  from  the  heart.     And  it  is  the  part  of  spiritual  wisdom  to  seek
for  the  wakelul  ear  and  the  discerning  eye,  which  may  enable  one  to  catch  even
the  earliest  intimations  of  God's  displeasure,  and  so  improve  these  as  to  render
unnecessary  the  heavier  visitations  of  wrath." — {l^ airbairn.)

(Vers.  15-27.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES—"  With  a  loved  wife  was  to  be  effected  hy  a  stroke,

view  to  affect  more  deeply  the  minds  ^.^.,  in  so  sudden  and  striking  a  manntr

of  his  fellow-captives  Ezekiel  had  an-  as  to  show  that  it  was  an  immediate

iiounced    to   him  the  disseverance  of  visitation  of  God.     Distressing,  how-

the  tenderest  of  all  earthly  ties — the  ever,  as    this   event    would    be,^  the

removal  of  her  on  whom  lie  had  ever  prophet  is  commanded  to  exhibit  no

been  accustomed  to  look  with  affection  tokens  of    grief  on  the  occasion," —

and  delight.     This  removal  of  his  be-  (Henderson.)
298


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


OHAP.  XXIV.


Ver.  16.  **  The  desire  of  thine  eyes.*'
Heb.  '*  The  delight  of  thine  eyes,"—
til  US  describing  the  prophet's  wife.  A
stroke.  A  sudden  death  inflicted  by
God.  The  word  is  the  same  as  that
which  is  rendered  "plague"  (Num.
xiv.  37  ;  xvii.  13  ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  21,  25).

Ver.  17.  **  Forbear  to  cry."  Ileb.
"Be  silent."  The  prophet  was  to
clkck  the  emotions  which  he  would
naturally  feel.  They  are  to  be  re-
pressed by  a  solemn  sense  o^  God's
liaviiig  interposed  (Lev.  x  7  ;  xxi.  10,
12  ;  Psa.  xxxix.  9).  *'  Make  no  mourn-
ing for  the  dead."  "  Though  the
Jli-h  Priest  was  interdicted  uiourninsj
for  any  person  whatever  (Lev.  xxi.  10),
the  ordinary  priests  were  permitted  to
mourn  for  near  relatives  (Lev.  xxi.  2,
3).  Ezekiel,  therefore,  though  of
]  riestly  descent,  would  have  been
under  no  restriction  in  this  respect.
He  was,  however,  on  the  present  occa-
sion, tliough  of  the  most  trying  nature,
to  appear  as  usual,  not  laying  aside
his  turban  and  in.vtea<i  of  it  casting
ashes  on  his  head,  nor  going  barefooted,
nor  covering  the  upper  lip  together
with  its  moustachio  (Lev.  xiii.  45  ;
Mic.  iii.  7).  Neither  was  he  to  par-
t  ake  of  the  food  which  it  was  customary
for  friends  to  bring  in  token  of  their
sympathy  with  the  mourners.  This
in  the  original  is  called  bread  of  men,
i.e.,  what  men  usually  furnish  on  such
occasions." — (f fender  son.)  **  By  the
bread  of  men  is  meant  that  bread
which  the  people  were  accustomed  to
Send  to  the  house  of  mourning  in  cases
of  death,  to  manifest  their  sympathy
andtoconsoleand  refresh  the  mourners,
a  custom  which  gave  rise  in  the  course
of  time  to  that  of  formal  funeral  meals.
These  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Old
Testament  ;  hut  the  sending  of  bread
or  food  to  the  house  of  mourning  is
clearly  referred  tx>  in  Drut.  xxvi.  14  ;
lios.  ix  4;  Jer.  xvi.  7. — (Keil.)

Ver.  18.  '*I  did  in  the  morning  as
I  was  commanded."  On  the  nioining
following  the  death  of  his  wife.

Ver.     21.     "I    will    profane    My


sanctuary.**  The  profanation  of  the
temple  would  be  accomplished  by
its  destruction,.  '*  The  excellency  of
your  strength."  "Israel  based  its
might  and  strength  upon  the  temple
as  the  scene  of  the  gracious  presence
of  God,  living  in  the  hope  that  the
Lord  would  not  give  up  his  sanctuary
to  the  heathen  to  be  destroyed,  but
would  defend  the  temple,  and  there-
with Jerusalem  and  its  inhabitants
(Jer.  vii.  4) "  (Keil).  "  Your  sons  and
your  daughters."  **Many  parents
might,  when  they  were  carried  away
from  Jerusalem,  have  been  under  the
necessity  of  leaving  their  children  of
tender  age  behind  them.  These  the
Chaldeans  should  mercilessly  put  to
the  sword." — Henderson,

Ver.  23.  "Ye  shall  pine  away  for
your  iniquities."  The  thought  of
their  personal  guilt  would  swallow  up
all  the  sorrows  of  bereavement.  They
would  be  made  to  feel  that  their  own
sins  had  brought  all  this  overwhelming
trouble  upon  them.  "Mourn  one
toward  another."  "Though  prevented,
by  the  circumstances  in  which  they
were  placed  in  the  land  of  their
conquerors,  from  making  any  public
manifestation  of  their  sorrow,  they
would  privately  one  to  another  give
expression  to  their  feelings  of  grief."
— Henderson,

Ver.  24.  "  Thus  Ezekiel  is  a  sign
unto  you.'*  "  It  is  not  an  unexampled
thing  for  the  sacred  writers  to  intro-
duce their  own  names  into  their
?roductions  (Ex.  ii.  11  ;  Num.  xii.  3  ;
s.  XX.  3  ;  Dan.  viii.  27).  Ezekiel  was
a  sign  or  significant  typical  representa-
tion, foreshadowing  what  was  to  take
place  in  the  experience  of  his  country-
men. When  the  thing  signified  should
happen,  it  would  be  an  indubitable
proof  that  Jehovah  had  revealed  the
event  beforehand  to  his  servant." —
(Henderson).

Ver.  25.  Their  strength-  The
word  means  lather  "stronghold"  or
"fortress."      This  was  the  temple  in

299


CHAP.  xxTV.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY  :  EZEKIEL.


which    they  trusfed,  forge' ting   their     on  which  the  fugitive  arrived  at  the
true  "fortress-rock"  (Is.  xvii.  10).  Chebar  with   the    melancholy    news.

From  the  time  of  the  temple's  actual
Ver.  26.  "  In  that  day."  This,  like  destruction  until  this  messenger  should
the  exptession  **in  tlie  day,"  in  ver.  25,  arrive  the  prophet  ceased  from  his
refers  to  that  day  in  which  the  temple  ]tublic  labours,  meanwhile  leaving  his
was  destroyed  and  the  fugitive  made  predictions  to  produce  their  natural
his  escape.  effect ;  but  then  he  was  agam  to  stand

forth,    and    pointedly   appeal   to  the
Ver.  27.     "In  that  day  shall  thy     issue   in    proof    of   his   divine    corn-
mouth  be  opened  to  him  which  is     mission." — (Henderson),
escaped.*'      "The  dav  is  reterred  to

HOMILETIGS.
Jerusalem's  Destruction  typified  by  the  Death  of  Ezekiel's  "Wife.

Ezekiel  himself  is  now  to  be  a  "sign  "  unto  them  by  his  personal  calamities
and  sorrows.  He  was  a  highly  gifted  man,  and  called  to  an  honi^urable  office,
but  corresponding  to  this  heiglit  of  privilege  is  a  depth  of  sorrow.  The  chosen
symbol  of  Jerusalem's  destruction  was  to  be  the  occasion  of  pain  and  grief  to
him.  But  he  is  taught  to  set  the  claims  of  his  duty  and  of  his  office  higher
than  those  of  natural  affection.  His  bereavement  is  here  regarded  rather  in
its  bearing  on  public  utility  than  on  his  domestic  happiness.  It  is  as  a  man  of
borrows  that  he  shall  accomplish  his  prophetic  mission.  In  his  deepest  afflictions
he  shall  be  powerful,  as  never  before,  to  arouse  the  people  to  repentance.  His
ministry,  like  that  of  a  greater  Prophet,  exemplifies  the  power  of  the  Cross.
The  death  of  Ezekiel's  wife  is  here  regarded  as  a  type  ot  the  destruction  of
the  city,

J.  It  would  be  a  manifest  visitation  of  God.  "Son  of  man,  behold  I  take
away  from  thee  the  desire  of  thine  eyes  with  a  stroke  "  (ver.  16.)  The  hand
of  God  was  to  be  specially  evident.  "A  stroke,"  implying  an  action  directed
by  an  intelligent  will  ;  a  calamity  also  sudden,  like  that  of  the  pestilence  which
walketh  in  darkness.  "In  the  day"  (ver.  25),  the  time  of  judgment  was
fixed.  The  destruction  of  the  devoted  city  would  be  brought  about,  not  by
the  accidents  of  history  as  men  count  them,  but  by  the  evident  working  of
God's  will.  The  prophet  had  long  known  of  the  Divine  purpose.  For  five
years  he  had  prophesied  in  dumb  show,  by  parable,  and  by  allegory  of  the  final
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Everything  possible  had  been  done  to  show  the
hand  of  God  plainly  revealed  in  this  solemn  work  of  judgment.  Thus  all  will
be  forced  at  length  to  acknowledge  the  prophet's  Divine  mission.

II.  It  would  be  an  overwhelming  sorrow.  "  Neither  shalt  thou  mourn  nor
weep,  neither  shall  thy  tears  run  down"  (ver.  16).  The  prophet  is  also
forbidden  to  observe  the  sad  customs  of  the  house  of  mourning  (ver.  17).  The
"sign"  was  to  be  the  most  solemn  and  expressive  of  all, — the  sign  of  a  silent
sorrow.  The  grief  would  prove  too  deep  tor  tears,  too  serious  for  the  outward
trappings  of  woe.  It  is  a  common  saying,  that  "there  is  no  sorrow  like  a  dry
sorrow."  It  is  saddest  of  all  when  the  burden  of  the  heart  can  find  no  relief
in  tears.

II.     It  would  bring  home  to  them  the  grealness  of  their  sin.    The  prophet's
silent  sorrow  was  a  type  of  the  fact  that  his  guilty  nation  would  be  brought
^'      300


nOMTLETtC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xxtv.


solemnly  to  acknowledge  that  God  bad  interposed.  When  His  hand  is  made
^bare  in  judgment,  the  confession  muat  be,  "  I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my
mouth  ;  because  Thou  didst  it "  (Psa.  xxxix.  9).  The  inhabitants  of  the  city
would  be  overcome  with  such  a  sense  of  guilt  that  it  would  swallow  up  every
thought  of  bereavement  (ver.  23).  They  would  now  begin  to  receive  the
pT0i)het*8  message  seriously,  asking  the  question  in  solemn  earnestness,  **Wilt
thou  not  tell  us  what  these  things  are  to  us  ?  "  (ver.  19).  They  now  begin  to
learn  that  the  prophet  is  a  "  sign  "  unto  them.  Not  only  his  words,  but  the
stern  realities  of  his  life  bear  witness  for  God.  The  ruin  of  their  city,  now
plainly  seen  to  be  a  just  judgment  of  God,  would  be  an  all-absorbing  topic  of
conversation.  They  would  be  able  to  talk  of  nothing  else,  but  '*  mourn  one
towards  another  "  (ver.  23).  They  would  believe  a  human  messenger  when  he
comes  to  tell  them  a  disastrous  piece  of  news  (ver.  26).  Thus  they  are
compelled  by  stern  fjicts  to  accept  the  prophet's  message,  though  they  had  long
refused  to  believe  him.

IV.  It  would  brings  them  to  the  true  knowledge  of  God  (ver.  27).  The
prophet  had  revealed  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  but  he  was  not  believed.  Now
he  shall  speak  with  a  power  of  instant  conviction,  for  the  messenger  of  evil
tiHiiifTs  has  arrived  with  news  of  the  judgmetits  which  he  had  so  long  threatened
in  vain.  He  had  laid  before  tlu'm  the  principles  of  righteousness,  but  now
these  are  wrought  out  in  ^Xerw  facts  to  which  they  must  list*  n.  His  words  are
n'»w  corroborated  by  a  human  messenger  (ver.  27).  Thus  the  solemn  realities
of  things,  the  solemnities  of  judgment  must,  sooner  or  later,  be  brought  home
to  impenitent  sinners,  "  Thou  shalt  be  a  sign  unto  them,  and  they  shall  know
that  I  am  the  Lord."

(Vers.  19—24.)

1.  The  resting  in  holy  things ,  causes  God  to  remove  them,  how  dear  soever
they  he  unto  us.  "  1  will  profane  My  sanctuary."  You  confide  in  the  outward
means,  you  are  taken  with  the  outward  splendour  of  the  ceremonies  and  pomp
of  the  Temple,  but  the  spiritual  true  worship  ye  mind  not.  The  temple,  city
and  bta*e  are  dearer  to  you  than  I  am.  Why  is  the  Temple,  and  not  My  elf,
*'  the  excellency  of  your  strength  ?  "  Why  is  that  "  the  desire  of  your  eyes,'*
and  not  Myself,  who  fill  the  Temple  with  My  glory  ?  Why  are  you  troubled
that  it  should  be  laid  in  the  dust,  and  care  not  that  My  honour.  My  glory,  Mv
name  are  profaned  amongst  you  !  2.  Men's  sins  sometimes  bring  them  into  such
straits  that  though  they  have  lost  their  dearest  comfortSy  yet  they  dare  not
outwardly  manifest  sorrow  for  them.  It  was  sad  to  lose  their  dearest  comtoris,
and  more  sad  that  they  might  not  ease  their  hearts  by  tears  or  sighings,  ami
most  sad  that  they  must  show  no  respect  to  their  dead  friends  by  any  funeral
rites.  Jeremiah  had  predicted  this  sad  condition  (Jer.  xvi.  6,  7).  3.  God  may
put  Uis  own  faithful  servants  upon  hard  and  unwonted  things,  thereby  to  declare
what  shall  be  the  condition  of  the  wicked,  '*  Thus  Ezekiel  is  unto  you  a  sign."
He  hath  not  been  suffered  to  mourn  or  weep ;  and  why  so  ?  that  he  may  be  a
sign  unto  you.  You  would  not  be  taught  by  his  doctrine,  now  you  must  be  taught
by  his  exam)»le  ;  "  according  to  all  that  he  hath  done  shall  ye  do."  The  things
are  har.>h  and  unnatural  that  I  (Ezekiel)  have  done,  but  it  is  for  your  sakes
that  I  am  put  u]>on  them  ;  and  ye  shall  do  as  I  have  done.  Thus  Isaiah  was
a  sign  (Isa.  xx.  3).  4.  Signs  acd-mplished  convince  men  of  the  truth  and  just
proceedings  of  God.  By  the  fulfilling  of  this  sign  foretold,  ye  shall  be  so
convinced  as  to  acknowledge  Ez-kiel  was  a  true  sign,  made  so  by  Me,  and  that
I  have  dealt  justly  with  you  for  your  iniquities,  in  bringing  you  into  such
straits,  as  not  to  dare  to  mourn  openly  for  your  miseries.     If  Ezekiel  have

301


CHAP.  XXV.  EOM I LETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


not] ling  to  Object  agunst  Me,  from  whom,  being  innocent,  I  took  away  the
desire  of  his  eyes,  and  forbade  him  to  mourn  for  her  ;  what  can  you  ohject
against  Me,  being  so  guilty  as  none  more,  if  I  send  away  your  desirable  things,
and  hem  you  ab  »ut  with  my  judgments  and  enemies,  that  you  shall  not  dare
to  mourn  ? — GreenhiU,


PftEDICTIONS  OF  JUDGMENTS  UPON  THE  AMMONITES,    MOABITES,   EdOMITES,  AND

Philistines.  (Chap,  xxv.)

EXEGETICAL    NOTES. — In  chs.  selects  seven  nations  and  utters  seven

xxv.-xxxii,  we  come  to  a  new  group  words  of  God  concerning  the  principal

of  prophecies.    They  are  predictions  of  nation,   namely    Egypt,  he  evidently

judgment  upon  the  heathen  nations.  intends  to  indicate  thereby  that  the

"  While  the   prophet's  mouth   was  judgment  predicted  will  be  executed

to  be  mute  to  Israel,  the  Lord  directed  and    completed    upon    the     heathen

him    to    speak    against   the   heathen  world   and    its    peoples   throui^h    the

nations,  and  to  foretell  to  them  the  word  and  acts  ol"  God." — (Keil),
judgment   of   destruction,    that  they

mi^ht  not  be  lifted  up  by  the  fall  of  (Vers   1-17)

the  people  and  kiny^dom  of  God,  but  v        •  /•

might  recognise  in  the  judgment  ufion  Ver.  3.    "  The  Ammonites    •    .    .

Israel  a  work  of  the  Omnipotence  and  Because  thou  !:aidst,  Aha,  against  My

righteousness  of  the  Lord,  the  Judge  of  sanctuary,  when  it  was  profaned,"  etc-

the    whole   earth.      There  are  seven  "They  were  the  descendants  of  Lot,

heathen    nations    whose    destruction  and  occupied  the  territory  to  the  east

Ezekiel  foretells  in  this  section  of  his  of  the  Jordan,  beyond  that  pertaining

book,  viz.,  (1)  Ammon  ;  (2)  Moab  ;  (3)  to   the   tribes  of  JR,euben    and   Gad.

Edom  ;    (4)  the  Philistines  (ch.  xxv)  ;  They  formed  one  of  the  most  powerful

(5)  Tyre  ;  (6)  Sidon  (ch.  xxvi.-xxviii);  of    the    minor    neighbouring    states,

and  (7)  Egypt  (ch.  xxix.-xxxii).  These  and  were   frequently  at  war  with  the

prophecies  are  divided  into  thirteen  Hebrews.      They  were  gross  idolaters,

words    of    God   by    the   introductory  and  had  for  their  nati  »nal  God  Moloch

formula,  *  the  word  of  Jehovah  came  or  Milcom.     On  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,

to  me,' the  utterances  against  Ammon,  to   which   as  auxiliaries  they  contri-

Moab,     Edom,    and    the    Philistines,  buted,  and  the  transportation  of  the

being  all  comprehended  in  one  word  inhabitants  of  Judea  to  Babylon,  they

of  God  whereas  there  are  four  separate  insolently   triumphed   over   them,  on

words  of   God  directed  against  Tyre,  which  account  the  present  threaten-

one  against  Sidon,  and  seven  against  ing   is  denounced    against    them." —

Egypt.        In      the     seven      nations  — (Henderson).
and  the  seven  words  of  God  directed

against  Egypt  we  cannot  fail  to  dis-         Ver.  4.    "  I  will  deliver  thee  to  the

cover  an  allusion  to   the  symbolical  men  ofthe  East  for  a  possession."  "The

significance  of  the  number.      And  in  men  ofthe  East  are  the  inhabitants  of

order  to  make  it  the  more  apparent  Arabia  Deserta,  east  of  the  territories

that  the  number  has  been  chosen  on  immediately  bordering  on  the  Jordan

account   of    its    significance,   Ezekiel  and  the  Dead  Sea.  On  the  destruction

divides     his     announcement     of    the  of  the  Jewish  state  by  Nebuchadnezzar,

judgment    upon  the   seventh    people  the  country  was  to  be  taken  possession

into   seven  words    of  God.       On  the  of  by  the  nomadic  tribes,  who  should

basis  of  Gen.  i.,  seven  is  the  number  there  form   their    encampments   and

denoting  the  completion  of  the  works  dwell  in  their  tents,  leading  the  same

of    God.       When    therefore,    Ezekiel  pastoral    life    to     which    they     had
302


noyniETW  comment  a  r  y  .-  ezekiel.


CHAP.  XXT.


been  accnstnmed."  —  (Henderson.)
>  "_Pa-acss."  The  Heb.  word  never
means  '*  palaces,"  but  ODly  '*  villages,'*
or ^^*  folds."  These  were  nomadic
oncampments,  surrounded  by  mud
walls,  as  is  common  in  the  East.
**^hy  fruit  ...  thy  milk.'*  Besides
the  produce  of  the  soil,  the  milk  is
also  mentioned  as  one  of  the  products
of  a  pastoral  life,  and  the  principal
food  of  nomads.

Ver.  5.  "  Habbah."  This  was  the
metropolis  of  the  Ammonites.  It  is
elsewhere  called  B,abbah  of  Ammon
to  distin^ruish  it  from  a  city  of  that
name  in  the  tribe  of  Judah.  Ptolemy
rel^uilfc  it  and  gave  it  the  name  of
Hiiladelphia.  "A  stable  for  camels."
The  city  rebuilt  by  Ptolemy  was  in
ruins  in  the  fourteenth  century.  These
have  been  visited  by  modern  travellers,
who  have  found  remains  of  a  palace,  a
mausoleum,  an  ampitheatre,  a  temple,
a  church,  and  a  castle,  but  they  could
not  discover  a  single  inhabited  dwell-
ing. Burckhardt  found  a  party  of
Arabs  there,  who  had  stabled  their
camels  among  the  ruins.

Ver.  7.  "  I  will  cause  thee  to  perish
out  of  the  countries:  I  will  destroy
thee."  "Tliis  desolate  state  of  Rabbah
must  be  referred  to  the  three  hundred
years  which  intervened  between  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  time
of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  after  which
it  became  celebrated  among  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  by  whom,  no
doubt,  the  splendid  buildings,  tiie  ruins
of  which  still  remain,  were  erected."
— (Henderson.)

Ver.  8.  "Moab  and  Seir  do  say,
Behold  the  house  of  Judah  is  like  unto
all  the  heathen."  They  had  forgotten
that  nine  centuries  before  this  a  king
of  Moab  had  been  told  by  a  Gentile
se^r,  that  Israel  should  ** dwell  alone,
and  not  be  reckoned  among  the
nations."     (Num.  xxiii.  9.)

Ver.  9.  **I  will  open  the  side  of
Moab'"  The  mountain  passes  would  be
sleared,  which  were  otherwise  closed  and


fortified.    Thus  the  enemy  could  easily
enter  the  country  and  take  possession.

Ver.  12.  "Revenged himself  upon
them."  "  The  old  spirit  of  revenge,
in  which  he  had  acted  from  the  olden
time,  still  keeps  by  his  side.  While
in  the  more  distant  relationship  of
Ammon  and  Moab,  malignant  joy  is
the  expression  of  hostile  feeling,  with
Edom,  in  his  much  nearer  relationship,
the  same  feeling  vents  itself  in  actions
of  revenge.  Hence  the  charge  of
sinful  procedure  as  the  incurring  of
guilt." — (Lange.)

Ver.  15.  "Because  the  Philistines
have  dealt  by  revenge-"  '*  The  Phil-
istines are  in  ver.  15  joined  by  Edom
on  the  side  of  their  doing  (ver.  12,  &c.) ;
to  Ammon-Moab  on  account  of  their
contempt  of  the  people  of  God.  The
latter  was  the  inmost  feeling,  hostility
the  impelling  force,  wherein  the  dis-
tinction from  Edom  lay.  "  To  destroy
it  for  the  old  hatred."  This  is  tlie
design,  the  abiding  tendency.  The
everlasting  enmity  reached  back  to
the  earliest  days.  A  perpetually  en-
during war  is  the  standing  feature  of
the  relation,  while  fixed  hostility  was
the  root  of  it." — (Lange,)

Ver.  16.  "  I  will  cut  off  the  Chere-
thims."  *'  The  name  Philistines  sig-
nifies probably  the  emigrants,  in
accordance  with  the  accounts  of  the
books  of  Moses  concerning  their  mi-
gration from  the  regions  on  the  Black
Sea.  By  the  side  of  this  name  goes,
of  substantially  like  signification  for
the  same  people,  Kerethim,  extirpa'ed
— those  who  were  forced  to  leave  their
native  land.  These  Kerethim  are  now
become  Kerethim  a  second  time  ;  their
name  shall  verify  itself  anew.^  Tlie
destruction  of  the  remnant  points  to
this,  that  they  shall  be  destroyed  to
the  last  man,  as  in  fact  the  Philistines
have  utterly  disappeared.  It  is  the
great  privilege  of  the  people  of  God,
that  how  heavy  soever  the  judgments
of  God  may  be  upon  them,  never  will
it  be  said  of  them,  I  will  destroy  the
remjia,iitJ'—(  Hengstenherg.)

303


CHAP.  XXV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKTFL.

BOMILETICS.

The  Prophecies  against  Heathen  Nations.

I,    Heathen  nations   formed  the  dark  background  to   Israel.       In    the

spiritual  darkuess  in  which  they  dwelt,  we  may  trace  different  shades.  Ammon,
Moab,  Edom,  in  their  order,  represent  increa^in;?  blackness  of  darkness,
until  we  come  to  the  full  depths  of  it  in  the  Philistines.  These  heathen
nations  were  a  source  of  continual  danger  to  the  people  of  God.  The  Church
of  God  is  ever  surrounded  by  the  world  ;  a  world  which  exhibits  every  grada-
tion of  evil,  coarse,  refined  ;  the  devil  rough  and  blustering,  or  as  an  angel  of
light.  In  the  case  of  the  three  first  nations  mentioned  by  the  prophet,  their
guilt  was  enhanced  by  their  relationship  to  Israel.  *'  The  people  of  God  must
undergo  the  experience  which  the  man  of  Gi)d  undergoes  (Matt.  x.  36,  Mic.
vii.  6).  Out  of  his  blood-relationships  there  springs  a  hostility  even  to  blood.
While  this  revolves  around  the  Spirit  that  wrought  in  Israel,  it  could  not  but
finally  array  itself  against  the  Messiah,  as  He  has  Himself  said  that  we  shall  be
hated  for  His  name's  sake." — ( Lange),

IL  Heathen  nations  had  sinned  against  Israel-  ^mmow,  by  profane  mock-
ing at  their  calamities  (vers.  3-6).  Moaby  hy  a  false  estimate  of  Israel's
spiritual  position.  **  The  house  of  Israel  is  like  unto  all  the  heathen  "  (ver.  8).
They  could  not  understand  that  it  was  impossible  that  Israel  should  ever
become  as  the  heathen  (Ez.  xx,  32).  Israel  would  have  more  r  sponsibility
than  the  rest  of  the  nations,  as  she  would  sin  against  the  light.  Edom^  **  by
taking  vengeance"  (ver.  12).  Ihe  PhiUstineSy  by  an  old  and  deeply -rooted
hatred  towards  Israel  (ver  15).

III.  Heathen  nations  have  responsibilities  towards  God.  They  were  not
held  so  strictly  responsible  as  those  who  had  more  light  and  privilege,  yet  they
were  not  in  such  total  and  unrelieved  darkness  as  to  render  them  inexcusable.
1.  They  were  capable  of  hearing  and  receiving  Gods  message.  "Hear  the  word
of  the  Lord"  (ver.  3).  They  had  some  knowledge  of  what  righteousness  was.
They  had  a  conscience  to  which  an  aj)peal  might  be  made.  2.  They  were
capable  of  forming  judgments  on  the  subject  of  religion.  We  mean  religion  in
the  sense  of  Godliness,  and  including  all  diitv.  The  heathen  nations  knew  that
Israel  was  punished  for  her  sins  against  God.  They  rejoiced  over  her  fall
(ver.  3).  They  thought  that  all  these  calamities  disproved  their  claim  to  be
the  people  of  God.  A  Gentile  seer  (probably  ofEdomite  extraction)  was,  long
ago,  struck  with  the  conviction  that  the  nation  was  holy  (Num.  xxiii.  10).
The  surrounding  heathen  nations  felt  that  they  were  not  as  Israel  when  Israel
was  right  with  God.  3.  1  hey  were  capable  of  the  knowledge  of  God.  "  And
they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  "  (ver.  17).  Tliey  would  be  made  to  know
God  through  His  manifest  judgments.

IV.  God*s  treatment  of  heathen  nations  shows  His  purpose  of  salvation
concerning  all  mankind.  It  was  no  true  victory  that  the  heathen  nations
obtained  over  Israel.  Though  to  all  outward  seeming  Israel  was  about  to  be
numbered  with  dead  empires,  yet  she  would  rise  again  in  a  more  glorious  form,
and  become  the  life  and  light  of  the  nations.  Her  disasters  and  failures  would
serve  but  to  prepare  the  way  for  God's  kingdom.  The  Gentile  nations  would,
in  the  course  of  Providence,  be  made  to  see  that  the  chosen  people  were
preserved  for  ihe  salvation  of  the  world,
304


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL  ohap.  xxvi.


The  Fall  of  Tyre.     (Chap,  xxvi.)

EXEGETICALNOTES.— ^'Infour         Ver.  4.     "I  will   also  scrape  the

sections,  coujmeiicing  with  the  formula,  dust  from  her."      "The    destructiou

'Thus  saith  the  Lord,'  Tyre,  the  mis-  here    referred    to    was    that   of    the

tress   of  the  sea  is   threatened  with  towers,     walls,    and     other    edifices,

destruction.       In    the    first    strophe  destroyed   by   the  besiegers.      Not  a

(vers.  2-6)  there  is  a  general  threac  of  vestige  was  to  remain.      In  phice  of

its  destruction  by  a  host  of  nations,  splendid     edifices     and    impregnab'e

In  the  second  (vers.  7-14),  the  enemy  bulwarks  nothing  was  to  be  seen  but

is  mentioned  by  name,  and  designated  tare  rocks,  fit  only  for  fishermen  to

as  a  powerful  one  ;  and  the  conquest  spread  their  nets  on." — (Henderson.)
and  destruction  emanating  from  him

are  circumstantially  described.    In  the         Ver.  5.     "  The  spreading  of  nets-T  ^

third    (vers.    15-18),    the    impression  According     to     Dr.     Robinson,     the

which  this  event  would  produce  upon  southern  side  of  the  rock  of  Tyre  is

the    inhabitants   of    the   islands   and  still  used  by  fishermen  for  this  pur-    J

coast  lands  is  depicted.      And  in  the  pose,
fourth    (vers.    19-21),    the    threat    is

repeated  in  an  energetic  manner,  and         Ver.    6.      "Her  daughters-"     Her

the  prophecy  is  thereby  rounded  off."  daughter-cities,  such  as  Gebal,  Bey-

— (KeilJ.  rout,  &c.     ''  By  the  '  field  '  we  are  to

understand  the  open  country,  i.e.,  the

Ver.  1.     "  In  the  eleventh  year,  in  towns  and  villages  dependent  upon

the   first  day  of  the  month."     The  her  and  lying  back  from  and  along

year  is  that  of  Jerusalem's  capture,  the  coast.     These  were  to  be  involved

B.C.  588.     The  month  is  not  named,  in    the    same    catastrophe    with  the

Probably  it  was  the  woeful  *' fourth"  mother-city,  their  fate  was  bound  up

month  (2  Kings  xxv.  3  ;  Ezek.  iii.  15).  in  hers." — (Henderson.)

Ver.  2.    "  The  gates  of  the  people."         Ver.  8.    "  The  buckler."  "  Here  ob-

The  plural  noun  denotes  one  gate,  as  viously  denotes  the  testudoj  or  vaulted

the  verb  is  in  the  singular.    Jerusalem  roofoflarg^;  united  shields  employed

was  named  "the  gate  of  the  peoples  "  by  an  attacking  enemy  for  protection

oh  account  of  the  many  nations  which  in  siege-operations." — Henderson,
would  flow  into  it  (ls;i.  ii.  2  ;  Mic.  iv.

1).     Jerusalem  was  also  to  Tyre  the         Ver.  11.    "  Strong  garrisons."    The^i

gate  of  communication  with  the  East,  proper  meaning  of  the  word  is  "pillars,"

"She  is  turned  unto  me."     The  ren-  such  as  were  erected  in  honour  of  the

dering  should  be,  "  it  is  turned  unto  idol-gods.     In  the  temple  of  Melkarth

me,"   Le,,   the  gate  of    the   peoples.  atTyre,  there  were  two  famous  pillars;

"  Tyre  considers  herself  the  heiress  of  one  of  topaz,  the  other  of  emerald.
Jerusalem      The  fall  of  the  spiritual

centre  presents  to  view  the  enhanced         Ver.  14.     "Thou  shalt  be  built  no

importance  of  the  secular." — (Heng-  more-"     "Tliis  was  literally  fulfilled

stenberg.)  witli  respect  to  the  continental  city.

That   part    which   lay  on  the   island

Ver.  3.     "As  the  sea  causeth  his  recovered    itself  after    the    lapse    of

waves."     Tyre  suffered  from  succes-  seventy  years,   as   predicted   by   the

sive  waves  of  invasion,  chiefly   those  prophet  Isaiah  (Ch.  xxiii.  17,  18),  and

of  Nebuchadnezzar  and  Alexander,  the  was  in  a  veryflourishingcondition  in  the

Crusaders  and  the  Saracens.     It  was  time  of  Alexander,  by  whom  a  causeway

not  finally  overthrown  till  the  thir-  was  constructed  between  the  shore  and

teenth  century,  yet  it  never  recovered  it,  by  means  of  which  he  reached  the

from    the    blow   which   the   King   of  city,  and  took  it  by  storm  after  a  siege

Babylon  inflicted  upon  it.  of  seven  months." — Henderson.

U  305


CHAP    XXVIi


nOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


^  Ver.  15.  "The  isles."  "This  term
is  frequently  UfeS'l  so  as  to  embrace
the  coast  lauds  of  the  Mediterranean
Sea  ;  we  have  therefore  to  understand
it  here  as  applied  to  the  Phoenician
colonies  on  the  islands  and  coasts  of
that  sea." — {Keil),  Her  numerous
maritime  colonies  looked  up  to  Tyre
as  the  mother  city.  Even  Carthage
sent  her  a  yearly  offering,

Ver.  16.  "  The  princes  of  the  sea.**
"  These  are  not  kings  of  the  islands,
but,  according  to  Isa.  xxiii.  8,  the
merchants  presiding  over  the  colonies
of  Tyre,  who  resembled  princes.
*  Their  thrones,'  not  royal  thrones,
bub  chairs,  as  in  1  Sam.  iv.  13,  etc.
The  picture  of  their  mourning  recalls
the  description  in  Jonah  iii.  6.  Tiie
antithesis  introduced  isa  very  striking
one  :  clothing  themselves  in  terrors,
putting  on  terrors  in  the  place  of  the
robes  of  state  which  they  have  laid
aside.  Tlie  thought  is  rendered  still
more  forcible  by  the  closing  sentences
of  the  verse.  They  tremble  *  by
moments,'  ^.^.,  as  the  moments
return  —  actually,  therefore,  *  every
moment*  (Isa.  xxvii.  3)." — (Keil).

Ver.  17.  "Strong  in  the  sea."
"  This  feature  of  the  description  must
be  referred  to  the  insular  part  of  the
city,  which  had  been  strongly  fortified
as  the  port  for  the  protection  of  the


warehouses  and  the  shipping.  The
concluding  clause  is  descriptive  of  the
desi)otic  rule  which  the  merchant-
princes  of  Tyre  exercised  over  the
inhabitants,  whether  regular  citizens
or  those  who  were  there  tempoiarily
on  business." — Henderson,

Ver.  20.  "  With  them  that  descend
into  the  pit."  *'  The  disappearance
of  Tyre  is  compared  to  that  of  the
dead,  who,  placed  in  their  sepulchre,
are  no  more  seen  among  the  living.
While  this  was  to  be  the  fate  of  that
renowned  city,  Jehovah  promises  to
set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living.
Some  refer  this  to  the  restoration
of  the  Jewish  polity.  And  if  this  is
meant  to  include  the  Messiah  and
His  spiritual  kingdom,  for  whose
introduction  that  restoration  was
designed  to  be  preparatory,  the  inter-
pretation may  readily  be  admitted." —
Henderson,

Ver.  21.  "I  will  make  thee  a  terror,
and  thou  shalt  be  no  more."  *'  Tlie
desolation  of  Tyre  was  to  be  so  com-
plete that  it  should  be  an  object  of
terror  to  all  who  approached  the  spot
where  it  had  stood.  Not  a  vestige  of  it
was  to  remain  :  a  prophecy  which  was
literally  fulfilled,  for  though  insular
Tyre  afterwards  rose  into  notice,  the
ancient  continental  city  neverrecovered
from  her  ruin." — Henderson,


H0MILETIG8.

Tyre  threatened  with  Judgment,

Tyre  rose  to  her  greatest  eminence  under  the  reign  of  Hiram,  the  friend- of
David  and  of  Solomon.  The  time,  therefore,  of  her  highest  prosperity  cor-
responded with  that  of  Jerusalem.  If  each  of  these  two  cities  had  been  faith-
ful to  its  high  calling,  the  issue  would  have  been  gh>rious.  Tiie  Bride  of  the
Messiah  would  have  been  worthy  of  her  Lord,  and  the  daughter  of  Tyre  would
have  brought  her  gifts  sincere  and  acceptable.  But  both  cities  fell,  Jerusalem
by  aspiring  after  worldly  splendour,  and  Tyre  by  pride  gendered  by  her  com-
mercial greatness.  In  this  Chapter,  the  overthrow  of  Tyre  is  foretold,  and  in
the  two  following  chapters,  her  world-wide  commerce  and  the  nature  of  her  sin
are  more  particularly  described.     As  de.^cribed  in  this  chapter,  we  consider  : —

1.     Her  crowning  sin-     The  judgment  of  Tyre  was  the  result  of  many  forms
of  sin,  but  there  were  two  leading  sins  on  which  the  prophet  here  dwells.     1.  I'he
306


nOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  EZEKlEl,  chap.  xxrt.


sin  of  insulting  the  chosen  people.  Tyre  rejoiced  over  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,
instead  of  reri( ling  the  lessons  of  a  warning  example.  2.  The  sin  of  intense
Siljishness.  Tyre  glories  in  the  prospect  of  becoming  great  through  tlie  down-
fVill  of  Jerusalem,  *'I  shall  be  replenished,  now  she  is  laid  waste  "  (verse  2).  To
ft-ast  upon  the  prospect  of  becoming  rich  through  the  ruin  of  others,  is  the
vilest  form  of  selfishness.

II.    Her  judgment.     God  was  against  Tyre  (ver.  3),  and  whatsoever  He
opposes  must  come  to  nought.     Mark  the  special  features  of  her  judgment.

1.  iShe  is  taken  at  her  own  word.  Tyre  expected  that  the  nations  would  come
to  her,  now  that  the  gateway  of  her  communication  with  the  East  is  thrown
open.  But  they  shall,  indeed,  come  to  her,  yet  in  a  way  rn  which  she  least
expected.     **  I  will  cause  many  nations  to  come  up  against  thee  "  (ver.  3).

2.  That  in  which  she  most  trusted  becomes  the  chief  source  of  her  terror.  The
sea  was  the  great  source  of  her  wealth,  and  to  it  she  looked  for  her  future
stability  and  prosperity.  Yet  on  the  sea  would  God  work  His  wonders  of
judgment  for  her  destruction  (vers.  5,  14).  3.  The  judgment  on  her
would  he  awful  in  its  completeness.  Tyre  would  become  like  the  bare
rock  upon  which  nothing  was  left  (vers.  4,  5),  like  dead  cities  and  nations
of  the  earth  (ver.  20).  She  was  to  be  "no  more,"  but  the  memory  of  her
would  be  a  *' terror"  to  after  ages  (ver.  21).  Her  destruction  would  not  be
the  work  of  one  sharp  moment,  but  would  be  Hke  the  successive  waves  of
the  sea,  slow  but  irresistible,  which  would  be  a  lengthening  of  her  calamity
(ver.  3).  Tyre  had  mocked  Jerusalem,  but  she  herself  shall  be  mocked  in
turn  (ver.  17).  God's  retribution  is  visited  often  in  kind  as  well  as  in  degree.
Her  goods  are  to  be  destroyed,  and  her  pleasures,  and  all  her  glory  laid  in  the
dust  (vers.  12,  13).  What  a  picture  of  the  end  of  all  things  on  earth  !  The
believer  has  the  enduring  substance,  which  cannot  %q  taken  by  the  spoiler
nor  corroded  by  the  tooth  of  time.  4.  The  instrument  of  the  judgment.
Nebuchadnezzar,  who  for  this  purpose  was  the  servant  of  God.  And  God  can
use  what  instruments  He  plea  es  in  His  works  of  judgment  or  of  mercy.
5.  Yet  God  would  bring  glory  out  of  the  judgment.  **I  shall  set  glory  in
the  land  of  the  living  "  (ver.  20).  The  "beauty"  ^f  Tyre  should  disappear
like  that  of  Moab  (Ezek.  xxv.  9),  like  that  of  ancient  Israel  (Ezek.  xx.  6,  15),
like  that  of  Babylon  (Isa.  xiii.  19)  ;  yet  from  their  ashes  a  higher  and  a  better
life  should  spring.  The  Redeemer  of  the  world  came  upon  the  wreck  of  the
Ivorld's  hopes.  Human  history  is  a  continued  example  of  growth  out  of
corruption  and  decay.  When  pagan  Rome  was  destroyed,  then  Christian
Rome  arose  ;  and  when  Christian  Rome  became  corrupt,  then  God  raised  His
church  out  of  it,  once  more  investing  her  with  the  glorjf  of  that  liberty
wherewith  Christ  hath  made  her  free-


(Vers.  15-21.)

1.  Gody  by  His  destructive  judgments  upon  great  states  makes  others  to
tremble  that  were  secure.  When  the  Lord  drowned  the  Egyptians  in  the  Red
Sea,  it  caused  the  nations  to  fear.  (Ex.  xv.  14).  And  when  he  brought
destruction  upon  Babylon,  it  made  all  hearts  melt,  and  they  were  full  of  fears
and  pains,  as  a  woman  in  travail.  (Isa.  xiii.  6-8.)  2.  Great  cities  have  their
periods,  they  abide  not  for  ever.  As  they  iiave  a  time  to  come  into  the  wcrld,
so  a  time  to  go  out  of  it ;  as  they  have  a  time  to  get  up  on  high,  so  a  time  to
descend  low.  Tyre  had  her  day  to  fall,  her  day  of  departure  (ver.  18),  she
descended  into  the  pit  with  the  people  of  old  time  (ver.  20.)  Babylon  h.id
its  time  to  begin  (Gen.  xi.  8),  and  its  time  to  Qe^iso  (Isa,  xiv.  4.)      You  may

U  2  307


CHAP.  XXVII.  IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


read  of  Nineveh's  raising  (Gen.  x.  11.),  and  of  her  desolation  (Nah.  iii.  7  ;
Zeph.  ii.  13.)  Hence  we  may  see  the  instability  of  human  things.  Learn  not
to  trust  in  strong  holds,  neither  think  it  any  great  privilege  to  be  citizen?,
of  such  perishing  cities,  but  labour  to  be  citizens  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,
which  is  the  city  prepared  of  God,  and  hatli  foundations  which  shall  never  be
razed  (Heb.  xi.  10 — 16).  3.  God's  people  are  glorious,  and  the  glory  of  the
land.  They  are  His  glory  (Isa.  iv.  5  ;  Z^*ch.  ii.  8).  The  godly  ones  were  the
glory  of  Ziou  (La.  vi.  13).  The  saints  are  a  holy  seed,  the  substance  and  the
glory  of  any  nation.  4.  2 here  is  a  d't^erence  of  lands  in  the  worldy  all  are  not
alike.  There  is  *  the  land  of  the  living."  In  Canaan  there  were  the  living
waters,  the  ordinances  and  means  of  grace  and  salvation  which  other  lands  had
not.  David  judged  himself  even  among  the  dead  when  he  was  shut  out  from
the  people,  the  worship,  and  the  ordinances  of  God  ;  his  soul  fainted  and  he
was  almost  gone  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  2).  5.  God's  people  may  he  deprived  of  their
privileges  and  comforts  for  a  season ^  hut  lie  will  in  due  time  restore  them  to
the  enjoyment  of  the  same.  "  I  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living."
God's  glory.  His  people  were  in  Babylon,  but  He  would  noc  lose  nor  leave  His
glory  there,  He  brought  them  back  again,  and  '*  set  them  in  the  land  of  the
living."  He  gave  them  another  temple,  all  those  ordinances  and  privileges
they  had  before.  "I  will  place  salvation  in  Ziou  for  Israel  my  glory"  (Isa.
xlvi.  13),—(GreenhilLJ


Tyre's  Former  Greatness,  suGGESTiNa  a  Lamentation  ovbb  Heb

Sad  Downfall  (Chap,  xxvii.).

EXEGETICAL     NOTES.  —  "  The  porium   of  the  peoples  of  many  sea

lamentation  commences  with  a  ])icture  coasts,  both  from  the  East  and  from

of  the  glory  of  the  city  of  Tyre,  its  the  West.     Thus  Isaiah  describes  her

situation,  its  architectural  beautv,  its  as,  "a  mart  of  nations"  (Isa.  xxiii.  3).
military  strength  and  defences  (vers.

3-11),  and  its  wide  comnjercial  rela-  y^^  5     "They  have  made  all  thy

tions  (vers.  12-25);   and  then  pisses  ship  boards  of  fir  trees."     In  vers.  4-8,

into   mournful  lamentation  over   the  ^yre  is  described  as  a  stately  ship  built

rum  of  all  this  glory  (vers.  26-36).  —  ^f  ^1,^  best  material,  manned  with  tho

^^^^'  best  marines  and  most  skilful  pilots.

^y.         .  ^^      T  ,     1      .            1  J  The  allegory  is  broken  off  in  the  middle

Vers.  1-11.     Introduction  and  des-  ^f  ^^^  9^  ^ut  it  is  resumed  in  ver.  26,

cription   of  the  glory  and  might  of  where  this  noble  ship  so  well  furnished

^y^^'  and  managed  by  able  hands  is  at  last

TT      ->      ti  Aj.  ^^.       ^       i.  at.          .f  wrecked  in  tempestuous  seas.
Ver.  3.       At  the  entry  of  the  sea.'

This  should   be  rendered,    *' bv    the  ,-      «,    ,,  x»    -j      3        i  »»  t\     •

entrances  of  the  sea."    The  description  Ver.  7.  "  Broidered  work.    Pev.ces

is  that  of  insular  Tyre  with  her  two  ^^re  worked  m  the  sads,  so  that  thev

harbours,  one  on  the  north  and  the  served  also  for  the  purpose  of  ensigns,
other  on  the  south.     Tlie  former  was

Cidled  the  Sidoidan  harbour,  because  Ver.  10.  "  They  set  forth  thy  come-

it  was  on  the  Sidonian  side  ;  and  the  liness."     The  meaning  is,  that  Tyre

latter   the   Egyptian,  because   of  the  must  feel  herself  honoured  in  having

direction   in    wliich    it   pointed.     "A  so   many  nations  to  supply  her  with

merchaQt  of  the  people  for  many  isles-"  hired  soldiers.    The  commercial  great-

Ratber,  "  the  peoples  unto."     Tyre  is  ness  of  the  city  rested  upon  a  military

thus  described  as  the  mercantile  em-  basia.
308


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY',  EZEKIEL,


CHAP.  iXVIl.


Vers.  12-25.  A  description  of  the
commerce  of  Tyre  with  all  nations
who  delivered  their  productions  in
the  market  of  this  metropolis  of  the
commerce  of  the  world,  and  received
the  wares  and  manufactures  of  this
city  in  return.

Ver.  12.  "Tarshish."  This  was
"Tartessus,"  in  Spain,  famed  for  its
various  nietal^s,  which  were  mostly
exported  to  Tyre.  It  is  probable  that
most  of  the  **  tin  "  was  ccmveyed  by
the  Phoenicians  from  Cornwall  to
Tarshish.  "  The  ennmeration  of  the
different  peoples,  lands,  and  cities
which  carried  on  trade  wiih  Tyre
commences  with  Tarshish  in  the
extreme  west,  then  turns  to  the  north,
passes  through  the  different  lands  of
Anterior  Asia  and  the  Mediterranean
to  the  remotest  north-east,  and  ends
by  mentioning  Tarshish  again,  to
round  off  the  list." — KeiL

Ver.  13.  "Traded  in  the  persons
of  men."  They  were  addicted  to  the
slave-trade.  To  this  day  the  Turkish
harems  are  supplied  with  female  slaves
from  Circassia  and  Georgia,  such  being
remarkable  for  their  beauty.  Com-
pare Joel.  iii.  6.

Ver.  14.  "House  of  Togarmah.'*
"The  northern  Armenians,  who  call
themselves  the  house  of  Torgoniy  and
claim  Torgom,  or  Togarmah,  the  son
of  Gomer,  as  their  founder.  (Gen.
X.  3;  I.  Chron.  i.  6.)  They  inhabit
the  rough  mountainous  regions  on  the
south  side  of  the  Caucasus.  The
country  was  celebrated  for  its  breed
of  horsas,  which  were  in  great  request
by  the  Persian  kings." — {Henderson).

Ver.  15.  "Denda."  "An  island.
or  commercial  town  in  the  Persian
Gulf,  established  by  the  Tyriaus  to
secure  the  trade  of  India,  which
.abounded  in  ivory.  The  tusks  re-
sembling horns  will  account  for  the
term  being  here  employed."  "  Ebony."
"  Geseuius  thinks  tlie  reason  why  this
word  is  plural  in  the  Hebrew,  is  that


it  was  obtained  only  in  planks  split
into  pieces  for  transportation.  Its
great  hardness  made  it  an  article  of
value. " — (Henderson,)

Ver.  25.  "  The  ships  of  Tarshish."
"The  pro|>het  now  returns  from  his
enumeration  of  the  various  articles  of
commerce  with  which  Tyre  enriched
herself,  and  the  various  countries  with
which  she  traded,  to  commemorate
her  fall.  But  just  before  entering
upon  that  part  of  his  subject,  he
stops  for  a  moment  to  advert  to  her
navy,  by  which  her  wares  were  con-
veyed to  Spain  and  other  coasts  of
the  Mediterranean.  The  ships  of
Tarshish  were,  comparatively  speak-
ing, like  our  old  Indiamen.  They  are
called  the  walls  of  Tyre,  for  the  same
reason  that  we  speak  of  our  ships  of
war  as  the  wooden  walls  of  Old
England.  They  were  the  glory
and  defence  of  the  merchant  city."
— (Henderson),

Ver.  26.  "The  east  wind  hath
broken  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  seas-'*

This  wind,  blowing  from  the  direction^
of  Lebanon,  is  the  most  violent  of  all
in  tlie  Mediterranean  (Psa.  xlviii.  8)
Nebuchadnezzar  is  represented  under  i
this  figure.

Ver.  31.  "They  shall  make  them-
selves utterly  bald  for  thee."  Alluding
to  the  Phoenician  custom  in  mourning,
which,  on  account  of  its  connection
with  lieatlieni>h  superstitions,  was  for-
bidden to  Israel  (Dent.  xiv.  1).

Ver.  32.  "  In  the  midst  of  the  sea"
Thus  showing  that  the  prophecy  is  to
be  understood  of  insular  Tyre.

Ver.  33.  "  Thou  didst  enrich  the
kings  of  the  earth-"  The  custom
dues  levied  on  her  wares  were  a
source  of  wealth  to  the  surrounding
nations.

Ver.  36.     "  The  people  shall  hiss  at
thee."    With  the  hiss  of  astonishment,
as  in  1  Kings  ix.  8.
u 309


CHAP.  XXVII.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


HOMILETICS.

(Vers.  1-10).

When  Tyre  rejoices  over  Jerusalem,  then  the  prophet  rejoices  over  Tyre  :
this  is  the  recompense  of  the  pious.  If  we  must  not  repay  evil  with  evil,  there
still  is  with  God  a  recompensing  of  evil  with  evil.  All  human  and  earthly
things  go  out  at  last  in  lamentation.  This  is  the  lamentation  of  the  spirit,  that
the  world  sows  to  the  flesh,  and  of  ihe  flesh  reaps  corruption.  With  kettle-
drums and  flutes  the  world  begins,  but  it  ends  with  wailing  and  misery.  '*  We
must  profoundly  know  the  gloria  mundi,  if  we  are  to  take  to  heart  the  sic
transit  gloria  mundi." — (Hengsteuherg).  Let  no  one  boast  of  his  strength  or
worldly  elevation  ;  how  soon  can  the  Lord,  if  His  judgment  should  break  forth,
bring  alf  to  the  dust  of  desolation  !  (Vers.  3,  4  ;  Jer.  ix.  23,  25).  There  is
a*  perfection  of  beauty  which  is  nothing  else  thau  ripeness  for  judgment.
Beauty  is  a  transient  splendour,  but  the  knowle<'ge  of  the  eternal,  leads
from  glory  to  glory.  In  boasting  one  sees  what  things  the  heart  is  full  of.
Mark  the  contrast  between  Tyre  and  the  daughter  of  the  king,  who  is  all
beautiful  within  (Psa.  xlv.).  The  security  is  very  different  :  one  is  of  faith,
since  we  know  that  we  are  reconciled  through  Christ,  and,  even  if  the  world
should  fall  in  ruin,  can  remain  in  peace ;  the  other  proceeds  from  unbelief,
which  has  respect  to  men,  walls,  etc.,  and  relies  upon  these.  Tiie  buildings  of
men,  and  the  building  of  God,  namely.  His  church,  against  which  not  even  the
gates  of  hell  can  prevail.  When  people  once  surrender  themselves  to  pride,
pomp,  and  dissipation,  they  can  hardly  lay  them  aside  again  ;  nay,  they  often
know  not,  from  inconsideration  and  wantonness,  what  they  should  do  (Dent.
xxxii.  15,  etc.).  Every  land  has  its  peculiar  gift  from  God,  and  the  gifts  of
God  must  thus  shamefully  minister  to  the  vanity  of  men.  It  is  quite  right  to
take  into  one's  service  and  pay  qualified  persons,  but  woe  to  him  who  makes
flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart  departs  from  the  Lord  I

(Vers.  12-25).

Men  run  through  the  wide  world  for  the  sake  of  merchandise,  while  the  word
of  God,  which  makes  rich  without  trouble,  and  imparts  treasure  which  neither
moth  nor  rust  corrupts,  nor  can  thieves  steal,  is  so  near  us  !  The  one  pearl  of
great  price  Tyre  did  not  make  an  article  of  traffic.  What  advantages  it  to  gain
the  whole  world  if  the  soul  suff^ers  damage.  Oh,  how  many  gifts  of  God  are  in
the  service  of  sin  ?  Great  merchant-cities,  great  cities  of  sin.  How  often,  and
how  many  ways  are  men's  souls  the  objects  of  buying  and  selling  (ver.  13).
With  things  perfectly  beautiful  man  was  certainly  to  occupy  himself.  But
where  are  they  to  be  found  in  the  earthly  sphere  ?  (Col.  iii.  2).  That  Tyre  was
so  full  and  honoured,  while  Zion  became  always  poorer  and  poorer,  and  sunk
miserable — this  formed  a  stumbling-block  to  the  people  of  God,  But  what  has
become  of  all  the  fulness  and  glory  of  Tyre  ?  Zion,  on  the  other  hand,  has
gloriously  blossomed  anew.

(Vers.  26-36).

The  glory  of  the  earth  shall  become  dust  and  ashes.     The  higher  we  reach,  so

much  the  more  precipitous,  and  so  much  the  deeper  will  be  the  fall.     The

element  of  our  security  can  so  easily  become  the  element  of  our  misery  :  here

the  sea,  elsewhere  gold,  one's  position,  &c.     A  person  of  high  estate  when  cast

310


HOMJLETIC  COMMEMARY :  EZEKIEL,


OUAF.  XXVIIL


down  is  lower  than  one  who  lias  always  been  in  a  humble  position.  The  wind
does  not  always  fill  our  sails;  it  often  also,  and  suddenly,  tears  them  short  and
small.  In  prosperity  men  so  rarely  consider  how  vain  it  is,  that  in  adversity
they  cry  out  the  more  loudly ;  but,  alas  !  only  upon  the  vanity  of  earthly
things,  and  not  upon  the  vanity  of  their  earthly  hearts.  Kemember  that  thou
art  dust,  and  bethink  thyself  that  thou  hast  a  soul.  Fear  is  salutary,  but  there
»o  also  a  fear  which  we  again  shake  off,  and  which  we  do  not  suffer  to  warn  us.
The  loss  of  earthly  things  gives  such  trouble  and  for  the  loss  of  heavenly  things
men  will  laugh  !  A  Christian  should  not  so  mourn,  but  should  smite  his  brea.t>t
alike  in  prosperity  and  in  adversit}'.  Michael  and  Tyre  (ver.  32).  Who  is  as
thou  ?  This  it  is  proper  to  say  only  of  God  in  rtfeitnce  to  glory.  In  respect
to  nothingness,  on  the  other  hand,  one  of  us  is  as  another.  Mournful  times
should  be  times  of  repentance. — The  holy  sense  of  the  nil  mirarL  From  ver.
34  we  learn,  the  end  of  earihly  things,  their  scale  value,  and  true  estimation.
All  this  world  is  nothing  ;  how  surely  must  there  be  what  is  something  !  But
faith  cries  out  of  the  depths  to  God.  Contrast  the  ^lory  of  the  children  of  Ggd
with  the  world's  glory. — (LauyeJ.


Prophetical  Dirge   on   the  King  of  Tyre,  as  the  Embodiment  of  the

Spirit  of  Carnal  Pi  ide  and  Self-Sufficikncy  of  the  whole  State.    The

Fall   of   Zidon,    ti  e    Mother- City.      The  Restoration  of    Israel  in

Contkast  with  Tyre  and  Zidon  (Chap  xxviii.).


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— *' In  thia
chapter  we  have  a  sublime  threnody
on  the  prince  of  Tyre,  couched  in
language  of  the  keenest  irony.  His
fall  is  first  of  all  traced  to  his  in-
sufferable pride,  which  is  described  in
the  most  glowing  terms  (vers.  2-6J.
His  merited  punishment  is  next
announced  (7-10).  The  prophet,  in
obedience  to  the  divine  command,
then  proceeds  to  deliver  the  funeral
dirge,  exaggerating  the  dignity  and
magnificence  of  the  fallen  monarch,
with  which  he  contrasts  his  utter
degradation  (11-19).  Then  follows  a
prediction  announcing  the  fall  of  the
mother-city,  Zidon  (20-23).  And  the
chapter  concludes  with  promises  of
deliverance  to  the  Jews,  and  their
restoration  to  prosperity  in  their  own
land." — Henderson,

Ver.  2.  "The  prince  of  Tyrus-*'
The  monarch  of  Tyre,  at  the  time  of
Eztkiel's  prophecy,  was  Ithbaal  II.
The  latter  part  of  this  compound
name  implies  his  close  connection  with
Baal,  the  Phoenician  supreme  God,
whose  representitive  he  was.  "I  am
a  God,  I  sit  in  the  seat  of  God."    "  The


seat  of  God  is  a  seat  which,  in  its
absolute  inaccessibleness,  is  like  the
seat  of  God  in  heaven.  He  sets  or
makes  his  mind  like  the  mind  of  God  ;
he  has  so  pushed  himself  into  the
height  that  in  his  folly  he  arrogates
to  himself  what  God  claims  to  Himself
by  right.  It  belongs  to  the  nature  of
God,  to  be  and  to  have  all  from  Him-
self ;  to  the  nature  of  man,  to  derive
all  from  the  fulness  of  God.  If  m.in
imagines  himself  to  subsist  as  God  in
himself,  this  is  the  greatest  of  all
perversities,  which  cannot  remain  un-
punished, because  God  does  not  give
His  glory  to  another.  The  funda-
mental passage  is  Isa.  xiv.  14,  where
the  king  of  Babylon  compares  liimself
with  the  M.).st  High.  The  general
divine  name,  Elohim,  the  Godhead,
stands  as  usual,  where  there  is  a  con-
trast of  man  and  God,  of  earth  and
heaven . " — ( Ilengstenberg.)

Ver.   3.      "Wiser    than    Daniel."

Daniel  had,  at  this  time  (B.C.  588),
been  chief  of  the  wise  men  of  Babylon
for  about  fourteen  years.  **  Daniel's
wisdom  must  have  been  generally
known   and  acknowledged,   especially

311


CHAP.  XiVIII.


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


among  the  Jews  in  the  Chaldean  exile  ;
for  Ezekiel  presupposes  that  the  King
of  Tyre  knew  of  Daniel,  and  certainly
as  one  whom  no  other  but  himself
excelled  in  wisdom  ;  so  that  Daniel
can  be  no  mere  Jewish  celebrity,  but
must  have  proved  his  wisdom  on  the
theatre  of  the  world.  To  Daniel  is
ascribed  not  merely  wisdom,  but  even
a  special  kind  of  it,  that  to  which
nothing  hidden  was  dark.  The  King
of  Babylon  says  of  Daniel  in  ch.  iv.
6,  "  I  know  that  the  spirit  of  the  holy
gods  is  in  thee,  and  no  secret  troubleth
thee."  Daniel  had  appeared  as  one
from  whom  no  secret  was  hidden  in  the
very  beginning  of  his  career,  and
thereby  laid  the  foundation  of  his
prominentposition."— ^^^w^5^^w&^r^.^

Ver.  7.  "The  terrible  of  the
nations-"  The  foreigners,  barbarians,
the  terrible  ones  of  the  nations.  These
Were  the  Chaldean  foreigners,  noted  for
their  ferocity  (Isa.  i.  11,  xxv.  2  ;  Ezek.
xxxi.  12).

Ver.  8.  '*  Thou  shalt  die  the
deaths."  "  Deaths,  a  peculiar  form  in
the  plural,  to  indicate  emphatically
jhe  most  violent  death.  The  death  of
the  king  of  Tyre  is  compared  to  that
of  those  slain  in  a  sea-engagement,
and  cast  into  the  deep." — (Henderson).
**  The  plural  here  and  Jer.  xvi.  4.  is  a
pluralis  exaggerativus,  a  death  so
paitiliil  as  to  be  equivalent  to  dying
many  times." — (Keil),

Ver.  12.  "Thou  sealest  up  the
BUm."  The  litenJ  rendering  is,  "  Thou
art  the  one  sealing  the  sun  of  perfec-
tion." Seals  were  used  for  the  purpose
of  authenticating  or  securing  anything.
Wlien  it  is  said,  therefore,  that  the
King  was  the  seal  of  perfection,  the
ineaning  is,  that  he  could  not  be  sur-
])assed  in  riches,  splendour,  or  power.
The  sum-total  of  all  that  was  il-
lustrious concentrated  in  him.  He
vindicated  to  himself  all  that  mortal
could  pretend  to." — (Henderson).

Ver.  13.  "  Thou  hast  been  in  Eden,
the  garden  of  God."     "  The   prophet
312


places  the  monarch  in  the  primitive
abode  of  man,  with  which  was  associated
every  idea  of  pleasure  and  delight.
It  is  quite  a  lowering  of  the  subject
to  suggest  with  Michaelis  that  he
might  have  had  a  summer  residence
in  the  beautiful  valley  of  the  cedars
of  Lebanon,  whither  he  retired  during
the  hot  season  of  the  year.  Eden
was  called  the  garden  of  God  because
it  was  of  His  plantation,  and  formed
the  delightful  scene  of  His  Divine
manifestations  to  the  first  pair  To
have  been  there  conveys  the  ideet  of
the  most  distinguished  honour  and
felicity.  Taking  occasion  from  his
reference  to  Eden,  with  which  the
Bible  history  connects  the  existence
of  bdellium  and  onyx-stones,  Ezekiel,
with  his  usual  minuteness,  gives  a
detailed  account  of  the  precious  gems
which  adorned  the  regal  state.  The
nine  precious  stones  here  specified
correspond  to  those  with  the  same
names  in  the  description  of  the  high
priest's  breastplate  (Ex.xxxix.  10-13)."
— Henderson,

Ver.  14.  "The  anointed  cherub
that  covereth.*'  Ezekiel,  as  a  priest,
employs  imagery  drawn  from  the
Jewish  temple.  Like  the  cherubim
overshadowing  the  mercy  seat,  the
King  of  Tyre — a  demi-god  in  his  own
esteem — spread  his  protecting  wings
over  his  dominions.  "The  holy
mountain  of  God."  ''To  this  his
illimitable  ambition  aspired.  In
imagination  he  occupied  Mount  Zion,
tlie  dwelling  place  of  the  Most  High."
— (Henderson).  "Thou  hast  walked
up  and  down."  As  priest  (1  Sam.
ii.  80,  36).

Ver.  15.  "Thou  wast  perfect  in  thy
ways  .  .  .  till  iniquity  was  found
in  thee."  "  The  rectitude  with  which  ^
the  monarch  commenced  his  reign
may  be  illustrated  by  a  reference  to
the  history  of  Hiram  (1  Kings  v.  7) ;
but  having  in  process  of  time  become
corrupt  through  the  uninterrupted
commercial  prosperity  of  the  Tyrian
state,  he  indulged  in  unscrupulous
acts    of    injustice    and    cruelty,    on


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  chap,  xxvht.


account  of  which  merite(i  ])unis]inient  stadia  to  the  north  of  Tyre.    Favoured

is  here  denounced." — (Henderson).  by    its   position   on   the  coast  of  the

Mediterranean,       it     early      became

Ver.  18,  "Thy  sanctuaries."  The  celebrated  for  its  commerce.  In  the
king  is  said  to  possess  sanctuaries  in  time  of  Jacob,  it  is  mentioned  in  con-
regard  to  the  ideal  position  ascribed  to  nexion  with  shipping  (Gen.  xlix.  13);
him  (ver.  14).  '*Any  greatness  con-  and  in  that  of  Joshua,  it  is  celebrated
secrated  by  God,  any  j^lory  imparted  as  a  'Great' city  (Josh.  xi.  8;  xix.  28).
by  Him,  may  be  regarded  as  a  sane-  It  lay  within  the  boundary  of  the  land
tuary,  the  desecration  of  which  by  the  assigned  to  the  tribe  of  Asher  ;  but  was
foeffee  is  followed  by  desecration  by  never  conquered  by  the  Israelites
the  feudal  lord.  The  idea  of  the  (Judg.  i.  31).  At  the  present  day,  the
sanctuary  is  that  of  se})aration  from  town  of  Saida,  a  little  to  the  west ;
the  world,  which  exerts  all  its  de^truc-  occupies  its  site.  It  has  a  fine  ohl
tive  powers  in  vain  against  the  gift  ruined  tower  projecting  far  into  tho
imparted  by  God,  so  long  as  the  sea,  with  a  bridge  of  many  arches  that
possessor  remains  in  the  right  posi-  was  built  to  reach  it.  In  Matt.  xi.  22,
tion  towards  God." — ( llengstenberg.)  Tyre  and  Zidon  are  coupled  together."
"  From  the  midst  of  thee."  The  king  (Henderson),
is  here  regarded  as  comprehending  in

himself  the  city  and  the  people.  Ver.  24.  "  A  pricking."    The  word

occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Lev.  xiii.  51,

Ver.  20.   "  Against  Zidon."    **  Zidon  52;    xiv.    44,    and    is    used   of    the

was  a  very   ancient   Phoenician   city,  '''fretting    leprosy."      The    Sidonian

otherwise  famous  for  its  fishery,  (hence  briar  had  wounded  Israel,
its   name   from   Ziid   Mo  fish'),   and

afterwards  for  its  extended  ai  id  flourish-  Ver.  25.     "And  shall  be  sanctified

inw  commerce  both  by  sea  and  land,  in  them  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen."

It  became  so  noted  for  the  manufacture  *'  Tliese  cities,  which  had  been  a  con-

of  glass  and  other  articles  of  luxury,  stant   source   of  annoyance   to   their

that  the  epithet  Sidonia  ars  was  u.sed  neighbours,  and  to  none  more  than  to

by  the  ancients  to  denote  whatever  was  the  Jews,    being  rendered  powerless,

elegant  or  magnificent.     According  to  the    people    of    God,    restored    fn^m

Strabo,  the  Zidonians  were  celebrated  Babylon    to  their    own   land,  should

for  their  skill  in  astronomy,  philosophy,  enjoy  all  their  ancient  privileges,  and

navigation,  and   all   the   liberal   arts,  all    around    them    be    compt-lled   to

Zidon  was  founded  by  the  first-born  of  ascribe  to  Jehovah,  as  their  covenant

Canaan  (Gen.  x.  15);  and  wassituatt  d,  God,  the  glory  due  to  His  name."—

according    to    Straoo,    two    hundred  (Henderson,)


HOMILETIGS.

Ver.  1-19.

The  King  of  Tyrb.

Consider  the  prophet's  drscription  of  this  King.

I.  As  the  incar?  ation  of  earthly  pride  and  self-sufficiency.  The  pride  and  vain

glory  of  the  nation,  the  history  of  its  prosperity  and  of  the  corruptions  that
led  to  its  fall,  are,  by  the  imagination  of  the  prophet,  supposed  to  be  embodied
in  an  ideal  Prince  of  Tyre.  This  prince  is  regarded  as  the  incarnation  of  the
carnal  pride,  self -sufficiency,  and  wickedness  of  the  whole  state.  He  is  the  sum-
total  of  the  wickedness  of  the  entire  nation,  but  his  chief  offence  is  pride  j  or


CHAP,  xxviii.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKlEL.


rather  pride  is  the  spring  and  fountain  of  all  his  iniquities.     His  pride  mani-
fested itself  in  two  forms  : — 1.  In  assuming  to  be  God.     *'  Thou  hast  said,  I  am
God,  1  sit  in  the  seat  of  God"  (ver.  2).     Bevoud  this,  it  is  not  possible  for
human  arrogance  to  go.     Not  content  with  adopting  the  title  of  G  )d,  he  must
needs  seize  upon  the  functions  of  the  Divine  government.     Many  vpill  not  state
this  pretence  in  words,  but  they  act  as  if  neither  God  nor  man  had  a  right  to
sav  anything  to  them.     Not  to  acknowledge  God's  rights  over  us  is  to  throw
off  His  authority,  and  to  become  a  God  unto  ourselves.     In  such  a  spirit  as
this   to  sit  in  judgment  on    His    dealings,  as  if  we  could   correct  Him,  is
to  commit  a  daring  iniquity.     It  is  "to  snatch  from  His  hand  the  balance  and
the  rod."  His  pride  also  showed  itself : — 2.    In  the  conceit  of  wisdom,    (ver.  3).
As  he  thought  that  he  possessed  all  wisdom  in  liimself,  so  he  would  pray  for
none.     In  his  own  imagination  he  was  wiser  than  Daniel,  who  was  the  wisest
man  of  whose  fame  he  had  heard.     The  Chaldeans  confessed  Daniel's  wisdom
(Dan.   ii.    10,    11).     He   had  done  what  they  admitted  was  beyond  human
power.     He  stood  upon  the  highest  stage  of  wisdom  attainable  by  man.     For
this  prince  to  declare  himself  wiser  than  Daniel  was  to  tianscend  the  stage
of  humanity,  and    to    make    himself  equal  with  God.     And  further,  Daniel
had  predicted  the  coming  of  God's  universal   kingdom   (Dan.  ii.  44).     This
prince  proudly  thoaght  that  he  could  convict  Daniel  of  error,  seeing  he  had
established  himself  as  the  God  of  this  world.     The  prophet  ascribes  to  Daniel
a  special  kind  of  wisdom, — that  to  which  nothing  was  dark  or  hidden  (Dan.  iv.  9).
**  There  is  no  secret  that  they  can  hide  from  thee,"  says  the  prophet  when
interpreting  the  thoughts  of  this  proud  prince  (ver.  3).     The  prince  of  Tyre
also    boasted    of   his  wisdom  to  get  riches, — of  that  practical  wisdom  which
can  show  material  results  that  d;izzle  and  impress  the  minds  of  men  (vers.  5,  6).
And  Danifl  also  was  remarkable  for  this  kind  of    wisdom.     He  was  a  great
public  man,  and  not  merely  a  solitary  thinker.     He  was  the  statesman  among
the  prophets.     But  we  are  not  to    regard   the   prophet  as  merely  making  a
comparison  between  one  wise  man  and  another,  as  this  world  counts  wisdom.
Daniel  ascribed  all  his  wisdom  to  God  above.     Therefore  the  wisdom  of  these
two  men  could  not  be  compared  by  the  same  scale  (Dan.  ii.  20,  28,  29,  30,  46).

II.    His  punishment.      1.  Great  humiliation.      The   Chaldean   foreigners,
noted  for  their  great  ferocity,  would  descend  upon  the  nation  (ver.  7).     All  the
beautiful  possessions   acquired    by   this  prince's   boasted   wisdom    would    be
spoiled.     The  oblivion  and  dishonour  of  the  grave  would  be  the  fittest  natural
image  of  his  humiliation.     "They  shall  britig  thee  down  to  the  pit"  (ver.  8).
He  would  die  many  "deaths,"  lor  as  the  king  he  would  die  in  each  of  his  slain
snbjects.     2.    His  great  pretentions  would  not  save  him  from  destruction.
"  Wilt  thou  yet  say  before  him  that  slayeth  thee,  I  am  God?  "  (ver.  9).     The
hope  that  he  cherished  in  the  day  ot  his  prosperity  will  fail  him  before  the
enemy.     Then  will  it  be  manifest  that  he  is  man  and  not  God.     In  the  day  of
adversity  he  shall  have  to  learn  another  language.     3.  He  shall  have  punish-
ment in  kind.     He  defiled  the  nation  by  his  pride,  and  now  he  is  desecrated  in
turn.     His  " brightness  "  was  to  be  "defiled,"  his  person  to  be  profaned  (ver.  9).
[The  second  "slayeth  "  in  this  verse  shonhl  be  rendered  "  profaneth."]     4    His
punishment  demands  a  sad  lamentation.     Consider  what  he  once  was.     He  was
highly  endowed  (ver  12).    He  enjoyed  as  it  were,  a  glory  like  unto  the  first  man
in  Paradise  (ver.  13).     He  once  ha(l  the  beauty  of  youth,  and  was  in  a  state  ot
comparative  innocence   (ver.  15).     Nations  degenerate  towards  their  old  age.
Now  he  had  gone  the  way  of  old- world  nations,  who  were  all  wrecked  by  pride
(ver.  17).     It  was  sad  to  think  of  all  his  labours  and  pains  coming  to  nought.
AH  that  exalts  itself  against  God  is  nothing,  and  will  come  to  nothing.     Ho
only  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever.
314


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :  EZEKIEL,  ohap.  xxviii.


Consider  this  Prince  of  Tyre  : —

III.  As  a  prelude  of  Antichrist*  Antichrist  is  one  who  being  only  man
claims  to  be  God.  The  King  of  Tyre  was  a  type  of  this  man  of  sin
(2  Tlies.  ii.  3,  4).  In  our  own  age  there  are  various  forms  of  this  spirit
of  Antichrist.  1.  'Ihe  spirit  of  lawlessness.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  this  in
2  Thess.  7,  8,  where  **  the  mystery  of  iniquity  "  is  literally  "  the  mystery  of
lawlessness,"  and  "that  Wicked,"  that  lawless  one.  The  growing  spirit  ol
disregard  to  all  authority,  human  and  divine,  is  an  instance  of  this  apostacy.
It  is  a  state  of  things  in  which  every  man  is  a  law  unto  himself.  2.  **  The
religion  of  humanity"  This  age  in  its  pride  of  knowledge  has  produced
some  bold  enough  to  make  the  blasphemous  assertion  that  there  is  no  God
f^ave  humanity.  And  Unitarianism  also  has  a  natural  tendency  to  drift  into
the  same  form  of  blasphemy.  It  shrinks  from  saying  **  Christ  is  God,"  yet
cannot  rest  in  this  denial,  but  boldly  says  **Man  is  God."  3.  Popery.
When  men  lost  the'r  faith  in  Christ  as  the  real,  though  invisible  Head  of
His  Church  ;  when  the  God-man,  because  he  could  be  no  longer  seen  or
touched  or  handled,  apj  eared  to  be  far  off,  they  yearned  for  a  substitute.
They  lent  questionable  honours  and  ambiguous  titles  to  a  Pope.  They
invested  with  the  powers  of  Christ  the  man  who  had  placed  himself  in  the
seat  of  Chri.-t.  All  such  blasphemies  as  these  spring  from  one  bitter  root  in
human  nature — the  tendency  in  man  to  yield  to  the  tyranny  of  the  visible.
Tlie  truth  is  forgotten,  that  "the  Head  of  every  man  is  Christ."  Wherever
by  the  speculations  or  actions  of  men  Christ  is  dethroned,  there  will  not
fail  many  to  arise  to  claim  the  vacant  seat.


(Verses  20-23.)

The  Prophecy  against  Zidoh.

1.  God's  aim  in  His  judgmetits.  It  is  to  make  Himself  known  what  a
dreadful,  jrn^t,  and  holy  God  He  is,  and  that  He  may  be  declared  by  men  to  be
so.  God  would  destroy  Zidon  by  pestilence  and  war,  that  He  might  be
glorified  and  sanctified  in  her.  She  would  not  give  glory  to  God  before  ;  the
Lord  would  therefore  fetch  His  glory  out  of  her  by  His  judgments,  and  make
others  see  the  «ame,  so  that  they  might  confess  Him  to  be  a  God  of  power,
jufetice,  and  holiness.  (Ps.  ix.  16.)  2.  It  is  the  Lord  that  sends  judgments
upon  cities  and  persons.  "  I  will  send  into  her  pestilence,  and  blood  into  her
streets."  It  is  the  Lord  gives  commissions  as  to  the  prophets  to  prophecy
judgments  against  a  city,  so  to  the  judgments  themselves,  to  come  to  and  upon
them.  Let  none  stumble  by  looking  at  the  instruments,  they  are  the  sword  in
God's  hand,  He  causes  it  to  wound  and  to  kill. — (GreenhilL)


(Ver.  24).

I.  Some  general  observations  from  hence,  that  wicked  men  are  thorns.
1.  Their  acquaintance  is  not  desirable.  Familiarity  with  them  is  dangerous
(Prov.  xxiv.  1).  They  may  be  honourable  or  eminent,  yet  we  should  neither
envy  them  nor  affect  their  company  :  and  why  ?  "  For  their  heart  studieth
destruction,  and  their  lips  talk  of  mischief."  They  are  the  "seed  of  the
serpent,"   and  cannot  cordially  close  with  the  *'  seed  of  the  woman."     There  is

315


CHAP.  xxvUL  HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


enmity  between  their  seeds.  "  Tl  e  best  of  thrm  is  as  a  briar;  tlie  most  upri«^ht
is  sharper  than  a  thorn  hedge."  2.  Answerable  fruit  is  to  be  expected  from
them.  Thorns  and  briers  must  bring  forth  fiuit  suitable  for  their  natures.  A
corrupt  tree  cannot  bring  forth  good  fruit.  Wickediirss  proceeds  from  the
wicked,  it  is  natural  to  them  to  do  wickedly,  and  notliing  f  Ise  :  fire  comes  out
of  brambles,  and  devours  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  (Jud.  ix.  15).  The  Lord's
servants  should  see  to  it,  that  briers  and  hrami  les  overrun  not  all  the  field  and
vineyard  of  God.  'J'hey  do  grow  hiijh,  gnat,  spread,  and  are  like  to  endanger
much  if  they  be  not  dealt  with.  There  are  thorns  and  briers  in  all  places;
there  are  state  brambles,  city  thorns,  and  church  briers  :  such  were  in  the  church
of  Galatia,  which  Paul  wisheth  were  cut  off  (Gal.  v.  12),  because  they  scratched
and  troubled  them  :  and  David's  resolution  was,  to  thrust  away  as  thorns  all
the  sons  of  Belial  who  troubled  the  state  and  city  of  Jerui^alem  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  6).
And  in  Psa.  ci.  8,  he  saith,  "  I  will  early  destroy  all  the  wicked  of  the  Land  ;
that  1  may  cut  off  all  wicked  doers  from  the  city  of  the  Lord."  Here  was  a
man  after  God's  own  heart,  that  would  not  suffer  pricking  thorns  and  grieving
briers.

II.  Some  more  general  observations  from  the  words  of  the  verse.  1.  The
church  and  people  of  God  live  amongst  thorns.  The  church  is  a  lily  among
thorns  (Cant.  ii.  2j.  Jerusalem  was  amidst  heathenish  nations.  Christ  and
His  apostles  were  among  scribes  and  Pharisees,  whose  spirits  were  thorn}'.
Hence  we  ought  to  infer — (1.)  That  God's  people  ought  to  take  heed  how  they
walk.  Men  who  live  and  walk  among  briers  and  thorns  had  need  have  their
eyes  in  their  heads ;  they  may  otherwise  be  entangled  in  the  briers  and
miserably  scratched.  (2.)  Then  it  is  not  strange  if  God' s  people  be  scratchtd
sometimes  by  wicked  men  They  will  tear  and  rend  their  names,  states,
comforts,  peace,  privileges.  (3.)  I  hen  see  a  redson  why  God's  people  cannot
carry  on  His  w&rk  with  more  speed.  When  thorns  are  in  the  way,  things
move  slowly.  When  good  seed  was  sown,  the  thorns  hindered  the  growth
of  it.  When  Joshua  went  about  taking  Ai,  there  was  Achan,  a  great  thorn,
in  the  way  ;  when  Nehemiah  was  in  the  work  of  the  Temi)le,  Tobias  and
Sanballat  were  thorns  in  the  way.  2.  The  church  and  people  of  God  shall  not
always  be  among  briers  and  thorns.  They  shall  have  a  time  of  freedom.
"There  shall  be  no  more  a  pricking  brier  and  a  piercing  thorn."  This  was
made  good  to  the  Jews  in  the  letter  after  their  return.  The  nations  which
had  been  thorns  to  them  the  Lord  destroyed.  This  promise  refers  also  to  the
Gospel  times  ;  the  Lord  is  making  way  for  it  now.  This  should  draw  out  our
s]'irits  in  prayer  unto  the  Lord  to  hasten  the  time,  and  that  He  would  make
g'od  what  lie  hath  promised  (Isa.  Iv.  13).  3.  H'icked  men  have  ill  thoughts
of  God*s  people.  They  slight  them.  The  briers  and  thorns  round  about  the
house  of  Israel  despised  them  and  scorned  them  (Ps.  Ixxiz.  4). — Greenhill.


(Ver.  25).

The  Jews  were  scattered  into  the  Eastern  countries,  over  several  provinces  of
the  King  of  Babylon,  and  here  the  Lord  promiseth  to  gather  them  out  thereof,
and  to  return  them  to  their  own  land.  1.  God's  people  have  no  fixedy  certain
habitation  in  this  world,  but  are  subject  to  scatterings.  The  Church  was  "scat-
tered throughout  all  the  regions  of  Jud(\a  and  Samaria"  (Acts  viii.  1  ;  Heb.
xi.  37).  2.  God  hatha  care  of  His  scattered  people^  He  will  sanctify  His
name  in  bringing  them  into  a  safe  and  happy  condition.  They  shall  be  brought
into  Canaan,  that  is  into  the  Church,  which  Canaan  represents.  As  the  Jews
were  gathered  out  of  Babylon,  and  the  provinces  thereof,  into  their  own  land,
316


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEl,


CHAP.  XXTX.


SO  >Iiull  all  the  elect  be  broiij]jht  into  the  Church  of  God,  where  is  peace,  safety,
and  confidence,  where  they  shall  fiiid  God  a  liabitHtion  a  vineyard.  (Isa.  xi.  10).
Tne  Lord  Christ  was  3.  great  gatherer  (Luke  xi.  23;  xiv.  IG,  17,  21,  23).  3.
God's  end  in  gathering  His p'Ople.  That  they  may  sanctify  Him,  and  that  He
may  be  >aDctitied  by  tht  m.  God's  power,  faith  fill  nes  and  goodness,  appear  in
His  gathering  them  and  bringing  them  out  of  their  enemies*  hands;  and  so
way  is  made  for  His  praise  and  honour,  and  that  before  their  enemies. —
{Greenhill),

(Vers.  24-26.)

God's  judgments  on  the  unjrodly  tend  to  the  good  of  His  Church.  God
sets  His  own  free  at  length.  The  promise  lias  been  fully  made  good  through
Christ,  as  Ztcliarias  says,  tiiat  we  are  **  redeemed  from  the  hand  of  our  enemies
to  serve  Him  without  fear."  (Luke  i.  74.)  Then  do  believers  first  come  to
their  true  and  perfect  rest,  when  all  their  bodily  and  spiritual  enemies  have
been  rooted  out.  This  prophecy  is  fulfilled  io  the  Cnristian  Church,  which  is
the  true  seed  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Those  born  under  the  Old
Ct)Votiant  were  in  bondage,  while  believers  under  the  New  Testament  are  free,
—(Lange,)


The  First  op  Four  Chapters  Directed  Against  Egypt  (Chap,  xxix.^


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  —
*'  Pliaraoh,  a  monarch  with  whom
the  Hebrews  were  frequently  in  con-
tact, is  represented  as  vaunting  in  the
security  of  his  position,  when  the
prophet  is  commissioned  to  announce
the  Divine  interposition  to  effect  the
desolation  of  his  country  throughout
its  whole  extent  (vers.  1-12).  Though
after  the  lapse  of  forty  years  the
Eijyptian  people  were  to  be  restored
to  their  country,  the  kingdom  was
never  to  emerge  from  that  state  of
degradation  to  which  it  should  be  re-
duced (13-16).  Tlie  following  verses
(17-20),  distinctly  announce  the
conquest  of  the  country  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar; and  the  chapter  concludes
with  a  promise  of  future  prosperity  to
the  Jews  (ver.  21)  "—( Henderson).

Ver.  3.  **  Pharaoh  ....  the  great
dragon."  "  Pharaoh  was  a  general
name  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  down  to
the  time  of  the  Persian  conquest.  A
more  appropriate  emblem  of  these
kings  could  not  have  been  selected
than  that  of  the  IJeb.  word  tanijn,  by
which  we  are  to  understand  the
crocodile,  the  terrible  sea-monster  in-
habiting the  Nile,  whose  usual  size  is
about    eighteen    or    twenty   feet    in


length,  but  sometimes  from  thirty  to
forty.  This  animal  occurs  on  Roman
coins  as  emblematical  of  Egypt.  The
*  rivers  '  were  the  branches  into  which
the  Nde  was  divided,  and  to  which
the  country  was  indebted  for  its  fer-
tility."— (Henderson.)

Ver.  4.  "  I  will  put  hooks  in  thy
'liws."  According  to  Herodotus  croco-
diles were  taken  with  hooks  (Job  xii.
1,  2).  In  the  Assyrian  sculptures
prisoners  are  represented  with  a  hook
in  the  under  lip,  and  a  cord  from  it
held  by  the  king.  **^11  the  fish  of
thy  rivers  shall  stick  unto  thy  scales."
**  U  the  Nile  denotes  the  prosperity  of
Egypt,  the  fish  are  its  inhabitants
living  in  prosperity,  that  feel  them-
selves as  fish  when  they  are  in  the
water,  but  now  are  placed  on  the  dry
ground.  They  are  drawn  out  with
the  dragon  ;  the  subjects  fall  with  the
king,  and  in  consequence  of  his  falh"^
Hengstenberg.

Ver.  5.     "  I  will  have  thee  thrown  A
into  the  wilderness."     "The  wilder^y^
ness,     in     contrast    with    the    Nile/
denotes  the  s  ate  of  weakness  without
help  or  means.     The  contrast  is  takea

317


cttAP.  XXIX.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


from  the  natural  conditions  of  Egypt,  There  would  be  no  settled  inhabitants,

where    the    waste,    awful    wilderness  If  this  period  began  the  year  after  the

borders  on  the  fertile  banks  of  the  Nile,  capture  of  Tyre,  B.C.  572,  it  would

The 'field*  is  the  open  field,  in  con-  end  in  thefifth  year  of  Cyrus  (B.  C.  532)

trast  with  the  splendid  mausoleums  in  Jerome  remarks,  the  number  forty  is

which    the   Egyptian   Pharaohs    were  one  often  connected  with  affliction  and

buried  in  the  times  of  their  glory.  He  judgment.     The  rain«  of  the  Flood  in

comes  down  so  low,  that  he  does  not  forty  days  brought  destruction  on  the

even   receive  an    honourable    burial,  world.     Moses,  Ellas,  and  the  Saviour

Who  would  trust  in  a  deliverer,  and  fasted  forty  da)  s.  Ttie  interval  between

make  him  an  idol,  who  cannot  provide  Egypt's  overthrow  by  Nebuchadnezzar,

this  fur  himself,  who  is  destined  to  feed  and  the  deliverance  by  Cyrus,  was  about

the   ravens,   and   will  very  soon    be  forty  3  ears.     This  prophecy  is  not  to  be

carrion  !     The  king  is,  so  to  speak,  an  understood  to  mean  that  literally  no

ideal  person,  who  comprises  in  himself  foot  of  man    nor    beast    should   pass

a  great  numerical  multiplicity.     Thus  through    the     land.       The     meaning

the  statement  is  appropriate  :  *  Thou  rather  is,  that  for  forty  years  the  land

shalt  not  be  brought    together,    nor  would    be    in    the     wilderness -state

gathered.*    Each  of  his  deceased  sub-  of   social    and    political    degradation

jects  was,  as  it  were,  a  part  of  Pharaoh,  (Isa.  xix.  2,  11).
as  in  the  retreat  from  Moscow  Napoleon

was  seen  in  every  dead  Frenchman.'*  Ver.  14.    "  Pathros."   Upper  Egypt,

— {Hengstenherg.)  being  the  oldest  part  of  Egypt,  and

from  whence  civilization  and  the  arts
Ver.  6.  "A  staff  of  reed  to  the  had  sprung.  "  A  base  kingdom."  It
house  of  Israel-"  There  is  an  allusion  was  to  remain  in  a  state  ot  vassalage,
to  the  reeds  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile,  Amasismade  it  dependent  on  Babylon,
which  broke  if  one  attempted  to  lean  and  under  Cambyses  it  was  humbled
upon  them.  (Isa.  xxxvi.  6.)  Israel  still  more,
had  trusted  in  Egypt,  in  many  alli-
ances, but  found  to  her  sorrow  that  Ver.  16.  "Which  bringetli  their
she  had  leaned  upon  a  breken  reed.  iniquity     to     remembrance."       The

offered  help  of  Egypt  was  a  tempta-

Ver.  7.  *'Atastand."  This  describes  tion  which  developed  the  iniquity  of

the  contraction  of  the  muscles  by  the  Israel,   and   made  it  manifest  before

sudden   pain.     "It    pierced    through  the  world.     "  Whosoever  beguiles  into

their  shoulders,  and  made  these,  hy  iniquity,  brings    iniquity   to   remem-

injuring  their  muscles,  ligaments,  and  brance,  or  to  the  knowledge  of  Lim  to

jniuts,   stiff  and   rigid,  so  that  they  whom  the  iniquity  refers.    For  existing

could  hut  stand  and  move  no  more.  iniquity  cannot  remain  unmarked  or

So  fared  it  with  the  kingdom  of  the  unpunished  by  the  'Judge  of  all  the

ten  tribes  under  liosea  in  connection  earth.'  *' — ( lJengstenberg7)
with   Egypt,  and    likewise    with  the

kingdom  of  Judah  under  Zedekiah." —  Ver.  17.     "  In  the  seven  and  twen-

Lange.  tieth  year.'*    There  is  a  departure  here

from  strict  chronogical  order.     ThiaJs

Ver.  10.  ''From  the  tower  of  Syene.**  the  last  of  Ezekiel's  prophecies,  and  is

Some    translate,    "  From    Mjgdol    to  dated  two  years  later  than  the  vision

Syene."    Migdol  signifies  a  "  fortress,"  in  Ch.  xl.     It  would  thus  appear  that

and  was  the  name  of  a  city  lying  to  the  prophecies  concerning  foreign  na-

the  north  of  Su  z.  Syene  was  situated  tions  are  grouped  together  in  order  to

in  the  remote  south.  secure  greater  unity  of  subject,

Ver.  11.   "  No  foot  of  man ...  neither  Ver.  18.    **  Every  head  was  made

shall  it  be  inhabited  forty  years-'*  bald,  and  ever  shoulder  was  peeled-**
31b


nOMILETIO COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xxix.


With  carrying  baskets  of  eartli  and  mafle  liimself  master    of   the  whole

stones  for  the  siege-works.     **  Yet  had  land." — (Henderson),

he  no  wages  *'    He  failed  to  secure  ,^       ^^      ,,^     -^    »    -^r  ^     11

results  in  proportion  to  the  time  and  V«^-   20.        For  Me.       Nebuchad-

labour  which  he  expended  on  the  siege  ^^.^^ar  was  the  servant  of  G  .d,  uncon-

of  Tyre.      The   Tyrians  had  carried  sciously  carrying  out  the  purposes  of

away  the  greater  part  of  their  treasures  ^^^  ^^^ine  will  (Jer.  xxv.  9).

in  ships,  so  that  little  was  left  for  the  Yqv.   21.      "  The  opening    of  the

invader.      The  siege  lasted  thirteen  mouthin  the  midst  of  them."  "While

y^^^^*  Egypt  was  subj  ct  to  eastern  rule,  the

Jews  were  to  be  restored  to  their  own
Ver.  19.  "It  shall  be  the  wages  land,  and  full  liberty  was  to  be  given
for  his  army."  **  Jehovah,  whose  work  to  the  prophet  to  exercise  his  ministry-
he  had  performed,  here  promises  to  among  them.  Sacred  history  is  silent
recompense  him  with  the  conquest  of  relative  to  the  last  daysof  Ezekiel,  but
Egypt.  On  breaking  up  from  Tyre  he  there  is  nothing  that  militates  against
proceeded  to  that  country,  which  he  the  supi)osition  that  he  returned  with  '
found  so  distracted  by  internal  com-  his  fellow-countrymen  from  Babylon  "
motions,  that  he  easily  devastated  and  — (Henderson.)


E0MILETI08.

(Vers.  17—20.)

1.  Men  in  misery  keep  account  exactly  of  their  silverings.  Ezekiel  was  in
captivity,  and  many  otlier  Jews,  who  diligently  heeded  how  the  years  passed.
"  In  the  seven  and  twentieth  year,"  that  was  of  the  captivity.  Men  are  best
chronologers  in  adversity.  2.  When  God  is  about  to  do  great  things,  He  usually
makes  His  purpose  known  unto  some  of  His  servants.  When  He  was  upon
destroying  Sodom,  He  made  it  known  unto  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  17)  ;  when
about  to  destroy  Eli's  house,  He  revealed  it  to  Samuel  (1  Sam.  iii.  11,  12)  ;
the  strange  things  which  befel  the  King  of  Babylon  were  revealed  to  Daniel
(Dan.  iv.) ;  and  the  Lord  showed  John  thing:^  to  come  (Rev.  i.  1).  And  here
He  hides  not  His  purpose  from  Ezekiel.  Tliis  was  so  frequent  of  old,  that
Amos  said,  **  Surely  the  Lord  will  do  nothing,  but  He  revealeth  His  secret  to
His  servants  the  prophets"  (Amos  iii.  17).  3.  Heathenish  soldiers  have
hazarded  their  lives  to  please  their  heathenish  commanders^  and  all  for  a
temporal  reward.  The  King  of  Babylon's  army  served  a  great  service  thirteen
3  ears  together  ;  to  lie  before  a  city  was  hard,  their  heads  were  made  bald,  their
shoulders  were  peeled,  they  laboured  hard,  carried  heavy  burdens,  they
watched,  tliey  suffered  heat  and  cold,  and  all  this  f  )r  hope  of  good  plunder  in
Tyre.  If  heathens  would  do  and  endure  so  much  for  their  commander,  who
was  an  idolator,  an  enemy  to  God  and  His  people,  how  much  more  should*
Christians  do  and  endure  anything  for  Christ,  their  King,  and  heavenly
Commander.  If  He  say  Go,  we  should  go  ;  if  Come,  we  should  come.  If  He
calls  us  to  endure  affliction,  and  suder  hard  things,  w3  should  not  stick  at  them,
no,  though  it  be  the  jeoparding  of  our  lives,  knowing  He  hath  a  spiritual  and
eternal  reward  for  us.  4.  Armies  may  serve  long  ani  suffer  hard  things,  and
after  all  be  disappointed  of  their  ex fe^'tations.  Ihe  King  of  Babylon  and  his
army  had  no  "  wages."  They  expected  great  matters  in  Tyrus,  which  was  so
rich,  and  full  ot  all  sorts  of  commodities,  but  found  nothing  considerable,
nothing  answering  their  expectation,  or  sufHcient  to  recompense  their  charge
and  sutfering.    6*  Nations,  lands,  kingdoms,  are  the  Lord^s,  and  lie  disposes  of

did


CHAF.  XXIX.  nOMlLETIC  COMMENTAJiY :  EZEKlKl.


them  to  whom  He  pleases.     "I  will  gi\e  ihij  land  of  Egypt,"  et-.  (ver.  19;.
He  would  take  it  from  Pharaoh  and  give  it  t  >  another.     Neither  did  ihe  Lord
'  o  any  wrong  unto  Pharaoh,  because  he  v\as  tenant  at  will,  and  held  upon  these
terms  to  be  king  while  he  carried  hinnelf  well  ;    but  he  grew  proud,  insolent.
and  like  a  dragon  lay  in  the  midst  of  his  rivers,  saying,  "  My  river  is  mine,  and
I    have   made   it   for  myself."     God  therefore  took  his  kingdom  from   him.
6.  Godf  in  His  hohi  and  wise  providence,  makes  use  of  ami  instruments  to  do
His  work.     The  King  of  Babylon  and  his  army  were  working  for  God.     They
were  His  servants,  though  they  knew  it  not.     God  can  make  use  of  the  worst
of  men  as  well  as  of  the  best.     He  can  promote  his  interests  by  an  army  of
heathens,  as  well  as  by  an  army  of  Christians.     It  is  good,  therefore,  not  to
stick  upon  the  instruments  which  work  ;  but  to  consider  in  whose  hands  they
are,  and  who  regulates  them.     7.   The  Lord  suffers  not  any  to  labour  for  Him
in  vain.     No'   even  heathens  and  infidels.     He  gave  the  land  of  Egypt  to
Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  army,  who  were  the  worst  of  the  heathen  (Ez.  vii.  24),.
because  they  served  and  wrought  for  Him.     When  the  midwives  would  not
destroy  the  male  children  of  the  Jews,  but  save  them  alive,  because  they  feared
God,  He  dealt  with  them  and  gave  them  houses  (Ex.  i.  17 — 21).     Jehu  was
wicked,  yet  because  he  did  the  work  of  the  Lord  in  rooting  out  Ahab's  family,
in  destroying  Baal  with  all  his  priests  and  temple,  therefore  the  Lord  largely
rewarded  him  (2  Kings,  x.  30).     If  heathens  shall  not  labour  for  God  in  vain,
much  less  shall  Christians,  who  know  how  to  act  from  a  right  principle,  in  a
right  manner,  and  for  a  right  end.     If  they  meet  with  hardship  in  His  service,
He  will  remember  and  reward  it  fully,  not  with  a  temporal  kingdom,  but  with
an  eternal.    The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  shall  be  given  to  them  (Luke  xii.  32).    A
cup  of  cold  water,  two  mites  cast  into  the  treasury,  a  sigh,  a  te^r,  laid  out  for
God  and  His  interest  shall  not  he  forgotten.     He  deals  bountifully  with  His
servants  j(Psa.  cvi.  7. — (Greenhill.)

(Ver.  21).

"  I  will  give  thee  the  opening  of  the  mouth  in  the  midst  of  them."  Ezekiel
had  been  silent  and  dumb  twice  before  (Ez,  iii.  24  ;  xxiv.  27).  And  here,  God
would  give  Him  the  opening  of  the  mouth  ;  by  wliich  we  are  to  understand. —
1.  Freedom  of  speech.  Thou  speakest  things  darkly  now,  with  a  trembling
voice,  but  when  these  prophecies  are  fulfilled,  and  the  horn  of  the  house  of  Israel
begins  to  bud,  then  shalt  thou  have  more  freedom  of  speech,  and  be  troubled
no  more  with  the  false  prophets,  which  sought  to  disparage  thee.  2.  Matter  of
speaking.  When  Jeconiah,  or  Jehoiachin,  should  have  his  prison  garments
changed,  and  be  set  above  other  princes,  some  freedom  granted  to  the  Jews  ;
here  would  be  matter  for  praise  and  rejoicing.  3.  Opportunity  for  speaking.
When  an  occasion  is  given  unto  man  to  speak,  the  rabbins  call  that  the  opening
of  the  mouth.  Thou  shalt  come  openly  into  the  assemblies,  having  matter,
.freedom,  and  opportunity  to  praise  Me.  '*  They  shall  know  that  I  am  the
Lord."  "  They  "  refers  not  only  to  the  house  of  Israel,  but  to  the  Babylonians
also  ;  when  they  should  see  the  things  prophesied  come  to  pass,  then  they
should  acknowledge  the  Lord.  The  horn  of  Israel  budded  in  the  midst  of  the
Babylonians,  and  the  prophet's  mouth  was  opened  in  the  midst  of  them.
Therefore  they  should  know  the  Lord  as  well  as  the  Jews.  (1.)  How  low,  weak,
afflicted  soever  the  Church  he,  God  is  able  to  raise  it  up  and  to  bring  it  to  a
flourishing  condition.  The  house  of  Israel  was  low,  the  horn  of  it  weak  and
hardly  visible  ;  yet  God  caused  the  horn  thereof  bud.  When  we  look  upon
some  beasts,  they  have  no  horns  ;  but  in  a  short  time  their  heads  do  bud  and
bring  forth  horns,  which  are  their  strength  ;  so  God  in  a  little  time  would  cause
320


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


CHAP.  XXX.


Israel  to  put  forth  strength  and  be  once  more  prosperous.  (2.)  However
much  the  Church  suffers  from  the  calumny  of  other s^  God  can  raise  up  efficient
advocates  from  the  midst  of  His  own  people,  Israel  shall  not  be  for  ever  crushed
by  the  heel  of  the  oppressor,  or  lashed  by  the  tongue  of  the  slanderer.  She
shall  have  power  to  plead  her  own  cause.  The  sense  of  former  injustice  from
her  enemies  and  the  knowledge  that  God  is  helping  her  will  fill  her  mouth
with  eloquence.  God  opens  the  mouths  of  His  servants  that  they  may  comfort
His  people,  give  praise  to  His  name,  and  make  Him  known  to  the  nations.


The  Doom  of  Egypt.    (Chap,  xxx.)


V


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  —  This
chapter  contains  two  distinct  mes-
sages :  vers.  1-19  being  an  extension,
with  more  life-like  detail,  of  the  pro-
phecy announced  in  chap.  xxix.  1-16
relating  to  Egypt;  the  second  mes-
sage, vers.  20-26,  referring  directly  to
Pharaoh  and  the  downfall  of  his
dynasty.

Ver.    1.    "Woe  worth  the  day!"

Alas  for  the  day  !

Ver.  2.  "The  time  of  the  heathen."

Wherein  they  shall  be  punished.  The
judgment  on  Egypt  is  the  beginning
of  a  world-wide  judgment  on  all  the
heathen  enemies  of  God  (Joel  i.  15 ;
il  1,  2;  iii.  ;  Obad.  15).

Ver.  4.  "Her  foundations  shall  be
broken  down."  Referring  to  the  state
under  the  figure  of  a  house  destroyed
from  the  foundation  —  government,
laws,  strongholds,  and  all  the  defences
of  the  commonwealth.

Ver.  5.  "Ethiopia,  Libya,  and  Lydia."

Gush,  Phut,  and  Lud,  allies  of  the
Egyptians  mentioned  Jer.  xlvi.  9.
"  The  mingled  people."  Hired  soldiers
of  variiTas  nationalities.  "Chub."  This
is~lhe  only  phice  in  the  Old  Testament
where  this  people  is  named.  Sup-
posed to  be  the  Kufa  mentioned  on
the  monuments — a  nation  nortii  of
Palestine.  "  Men  of  the  land  in
league."  Not  only  the  Jews  —  the
people  of  the  covenant — resident  in
Egypt,  but  all  the  confederates  who
entered  into  a  league  with  the  Egyp-
tian king.


Ver.  9.  "  Messengers  go  forth  from
Me  in  ships  to  make  the  careless
Ethiopians  afraid."  The  cataracts  on
the  Nile  interposing  between  them  and
Egypt  shall  be  no  barrier.  Ill  news
travels  fast  when  the  feet  of  the  mes-
sengers are  quickened  with  the  fear  of
Divinely  outpoured  vengeance.

Ver.  13.  "I  will  destroy  the  idols  of
Noph."  Memphis,  the  capital  of  Middle
Egypt  and  the  chief  seat  of  idol-wor-
ship. "  Pathros  " — Upper  Egypt,  with
No,  or  Thebes,  its  capital,  famed  for  its
magnificent  buildings,  of  which  colos-
snl  ruins  still  remain,  in  antithesis  to
Zoan,  or  Tanis,  a  chief  city  in  Lower
Egypt  within  the  Delta.

Ver.  15.  "Sin,  the  strength  of
Egypt."  Pelusium,  the  frontier  for-
tress on  the  north-east,  called  by
Hirtius  the  Lock  of  Egypt,  and  by
Suidas  the  Key  of  Egypt.

Ver.  17.  "Aven" — meaningvam/yor
iniquity.  The  famous  Heliopolis,  or
City  of  the  Sun — the  religious  centre,
the  spiritual  capital.  "  Fhi-beseth  " —
Bubastis  in  Lower  Egypt,  near  the
Pelusiac  branch  of  the  Nile,  a  chief
place  of  idolatry,  and  notorious  for  the
Cat-worship  established  there.

Ver.  18.  "Tehaphnehes."  The  same
as  Daphne,  near  Pelusium,  a  royal  re-
sidence of  the  Pharaohs  (Jer.  xliii.  7,
9).  Called  Hanes  (Isa.  xxx.  4).  It
was  said  that  with  its  capture  the  pride
or  glory  of  Egypt's  strength  would
cease.  "  The  yokes  of  Egypt."  The
X  321


CHAP.  XXX.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


sceptres  — -  the  tyrannical  supremacy
exercised  over  other  nations.  Nebu-
chadnezzar broke  the  sceptre  of  Egypt
when  he  confirmed  the  kingdom  to
Amasis,  who  rebelled  against  Apries
( Pharaoh-Hophra).

Ver.  21.  "I  have  broken  the  arm  of
Pharaoh."  Alluding  to  the  defeat  of
Pharaoh-Hophra  at  Carchemish.  By
tHTs^  battle  the  fate  of  Egypt  was  de-
cided for  ever.  It  never  rallied  from
the  defeat  there  sustained :  it  was  the
beginning  of  the  end.  The  practical
design  of  the  prophecy  was  to  extin-
guish all  hope  of  any  aid  from  Egypt,
and  to  direct  the  expectation  of  the
exiles  to  God  alone  for  succour.

Yer.  22.  "And  will  break  his  arms,
the  strong,  and  that  which  was
broken."  The  military  and  govern-
mental power  of  Pharaoh  shall  be
shattered.  The  one  arm  of  Egypt
already  broken  was  all  the  region  from
the  Nile  to  the  Euphrates  which  Ne-
buchadnezzar had  already  taken  from


him  (2  Kings  xxiv.  7);  the  arm  still
strong,  but  soon  to  be  broken,  was
Egypt  proper,  over  which  he  still  held
a  resemblance  of  aiitliority.

Ver.  25.  "I  will  strengthen  the  arms
of  the  king  of  Babylon."  The  Lord
seizes  the  arms  of  tiie  king  of  Babylon,
and  they  are  thereby  kept  strong,  as
it  is  said  of  Joseph  in  Gen.  xlix.  24,
"  Strong  are  the  arms  of  his  hands  by
the  hands  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob,"
while  the  arms  of  the  king  of  Egypt,
left  to  himself,  hang  down  powerless.

Ver.  26.  **  I  will  scatter  the  Egyp-
tians." Several  fled  with  Apries  to
Upper  Egypt,  and  when  Nebuchad-
nezzar wasted  the  country  he  carried
many  of  them  to  Babylon.  As  Israel
and  Judah  had  been  scattered  among
the  nations,  owing  to  the  corrupting
influence  of  Egypt,  which  brought  God's
wrath  upon  the  elect  nation,  so  the
Egyptians  themselves,  in  righteous  re-
tribution, were  to  be  scattered  among
the  nations.


HOMILETICS.
The  Overthrow  of  a  Great  Nation,


(Vers.  1-19.)

There  is  a  fine  piece  of  military  music  that  represents  the  movements  of  a

battalion  in  the  distance  ;  faintly  but  unmistakably  the  strains  fall  upon  the  ear,
growing  more  distinct  and  loud  in  the  steady  advance,  until,  having  reached  the
scene  of  action  and  begun  operations,  the  music  breaks  into  a  crash  of  wild,
stirring  melody,  that  strangely  mingles  with  the  noise  and  confusion  of  the
dreadful  conflict.  Similar  to  this  is  the  voice  of  the  prophet  which,  in  the  pre-
ceding chapter  faintly  indicates  the  approach  of  calamity,  rises  in  the  present
chapter  into  shrill,  piercing  tones  of  agony,  as  if  already  in  the  midst  of  the
destruction  he  prophesies.  In  this  paragraph  we  learn  that  the  overthrow  of  a
great  nation —

1.  Is  the  occasion  of  widespread  suffering  and  sorrow  (vers.  1-4).  Egypt,
which  had  grown  into  the  magnificence  of  a  first-rate  power  and  become  renowned
in  commerce,  art,  literature,  and  science,  was  doomed  to  fall.  It  was  to  experi-
ence the  crushing  vengeance  of  the  Divine  power  it  had  so  often  resisted  and
defied,  and  to  suff*er  for  its  cruel  treatment  of  the  people  of  Jehovah,  whom  it
had  so  often  deceived  and  oppressed.  Great  was  the  consternation  of  its  proud
rulers,  and  loud  and  heartrending  the  wails  of  its  stricken  people,  as  the
sword  of  the  destroyer  passed  tiirough  the  land.  It  was  indeed  *'  a  cloudy
day;"  the  dreariness  of  havoc  and  desolation  was  intensified  by  the  darkness

322


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  cuia.  ixx.


of  despair  that  filled  the  minds  of  the  routed  sufferers.  It  was  worse  than  that
night  of  horror  in  the  past  history  of  Egypt  when  ihe  first-born  were  slain  and
when  "  there  was  not  a  house  where  there  was  not  one  dead."  It  is  a  painful
humiliation  to  a  great  people  to  see  how  suddenly  their  })Ov\'er  is  crushed,
government  disorganised,  institutions  scattered,  buildings,  the  slow  growth  of
generations,  prone  in  ruins,  and  the  unsuspecting  citizens  one  day  lulled  into  a
false  security,  the  next  paralysed  with  fear.  The  refinement  and  luxury  to
which  they  were  accustomed  render  their  privations  and  distresses  the  more
acute.

II.  Involves  the  ruin  of  its  allies  and  abettors  (vers.  5-9.)  '*  Ethiopia,
Libya,  Lydia,  all  the  mingle.  1  people,  and  Chub,"  represented  smaller  nation-
alities who  had  been  either  conquered  by  Egypt,  or  who,  while  retaining  their
nationality  and  a  certain  degree  of  autonomy,  linked  their  fortunes  with  Egypt
and  contributed  to  her  advancement  and  aggrandistineut.  In  return  for  tlieir
support  they  claimed  the  protection  of  the  overshadowing  power.  But  when
Egypt  fell,  they  fell.  When  the  volcano  shatters  the  mountain,  all  tlie  little
knolls  and  rocks  that  cling  to  it  are  buried  in  the  general  ruin.  When  the  hurricane
uproots  the  giant  tree,  the  parasites  that  fed  and  lived  upon  it  are  hurled  to
the  dust.  The  adulators  who  fan  the  national  pride  with  their  fulsome  flattery,
and  the  shameless  debauchees  who  employ  their  vilest  ingenuities  in  augment-
ing the  national  wickedness,  will  be  inevitably  involved  in  the  righteous  judg-
ment which  is  sure  to  come.

III.  Is  accomplished  by  an  agent  specially  equipped  for  the  work  (vers.
10-12).  The  power  that  was  to  crush  Egypt  was  already  hovering  over  the
fated  nation.  The  vast  populations  of  the  Nile  were  to  be  opposed  by  a  multi-
tude of  strangers  whose  warlike  exploits  liad  made  them  "  the  terrible  of  the
nations ; "  the  military  genius  of  Pharaoh-Hophra  was  to  come  into  conflict
with  Nebuchadnezzar,  a  still  more  able  and  victorious  warrior.  It  was  not  the
first  time  the  great  Babylonish  monarch  had  come  in  contact  with  the  arms  of
Egypt.  Before  his  accession,  while  Crown  Prince,  he  had  fought  the  great
battle  of  Carchemish,  which  expelled  Pharaoh-Necho  from  Western  Asia.
During  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  he  had  been  disturbed  by  the  attempt  of
Pharaoh-Necho  to  relieve  that  city,  and  during  the  siege  of  Troy,  Egypt  again
interfered  to  help  the  Phoenicians.  Nebuchadnezzar  chafed  under  these  annoy-
ances ;  the  proud  prestige  and  pretensions  of  Egypt  roused  his  envy  and  wrath,
and  he  vowed  to  be  revenged.  All  the  time  Jehovah  was  preparing  him  to  be
the  agent  to  punish  Egypt,  and  a  rebellion  against  Pharaoh-Hophra  by  Amasis,
one  of  his  officers,  presented  a  favourable  opportunity.  Gathering  his  army  of
veterans,  inured  to  warfare  and  flushed  with  recent  victories,  Nebuchadnezzar
invaded  Egypt  and  utterly  subdued  it  from  Migdol  to  Syene,  the  extreme
frontiers  of  the  kingdom,  creating  a  horrible  devastation,  from  which  it  did  not
recover  for  forty  years.  The  Babylonish  king  knew  not  that  he  was  simply
the  instrument  of  Jehovah  in  inflicting  well-merited  punishment,  and  thus
fulfilling  the  words  of  the  Divinely -insi)ired  prophet.  Whenever  a  nation
reaches  the  crisis  of  its  infamy.  Divine  justice  fails  not  to  provide  the  means  of
adequate  retribution.

IV.  May  be  traced  to  the  enervating  influence  of  its  idolatry  (vers.  13-18).
The  prime  ofi"ence  of  Egypt  was  its  idolatry.  This  was  the  ground  of  its
indictment  before  High  Heaven.  Not  only  had  it  debased  its  own  people,  but
it  had  invaded  the  land  of  the  chosen  people  and  destroyed  their  loyalty  to
Jehovah  by  the  introduction  of  idolatrous  rites.  Idolatry  is  not  only  a  foe  to
virtue,  but  a  supreme  insult  to  the  One  only  true  God,  whose  nature  cannot

323


CHAP.  XXX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEL.


tolerate  a  rival.  Where  idolatry  predominates  the  formation  of  a  robust  moral
character  is  impossible;  it  is  tlie  canker  at  the  root  of  national  life,  and  can
only  end  in  disintegration  aiivi  decay.  It  is  significant  that  the  places  men-
tioned in  these  verses — Noph,  Pathros,  Zoan,  No,  Sin,  Tehaphnehes — the  cities
where  idolatry  was  most  gross  and  rampant,  are  especially  singled  out  for
punishment.  No  nation  can  maintain  itself  in  the  front  rank  where  God  is
persistently  ignored.

V.  Is  the  expression  of  the  Divine  judgment  on  its  iniquities.     "  Thus  will

I  execute  judgments,  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord"  (ver.  19).  The
history  of  the  downfall  of  great  nations  is  the  voice  of  God  speaking  to  the
nations  of  to-day,  and  saying  that  sin  shall  not  go  unpunished.  "The  time  of
the  lieathen  "  (ver.  3)  plainly  indicates  that  a  period  comes  in  the  history  of
sinful  nations  when  the  forbearance  of  God  is  withdrawn  and  wrong-doing  is
allowed  to  reap  its  legitimate  harvest.  Hardened  indeed  is  the  heait  that
is  insensible  to  the  enormity  of  sin  until  it  is  smitten  with  the  thunderbolt  of
Divine  wrath.  It  is  wise,  before  it  be  too  late,  to  turn  in  penitence  to  Him
who  "  retaineth  not  His  anger  for  ever,  because  He  delighteth  in  mercy."

Lessons. — 1.  National  grea'ness  is  an  opporhinity  for  maintaining  the  right.
2.  The  greatest  nation,  if  unfaithful  to  Godf  is  doomed  to  fall,  3.  The  destiny  of
all  nations  is  in  the  hands  of  God.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.  2.  "Woe  worth  the  day!"  unerring  certainty.  3.  Will  fill  the
A  Pathetic  Lament,  as  uttered — 1.  By  victims  with  terror  and  dismay — "a
one  who  foresees  the  nearness  and  cloudy  day — the  day  shall  be  dark-
awful  ness  of  the  calamity.  2.  By  the  ened"(vers.  3,  18).  4.  Will  be  com-
patriot distressed  for  the  humiliation  plete  and  universal  (compare  Ps.  Ixxix.
and  ruin  of  his  country.  3.  By  the  with  exegetical  note  on  this  verse).
sufferers  themselves  in  the  wild  tumult

of  their  agony.      4.  By  neighbouring  Vers.  4-18.  The  Horrors  of  War.   L

nations  left  defenceless  by  the  fall  of  Revolting  scenes  of  human  carnage.  "The

their  powerful  patron.      6.  By  those  sword  tehall  take  away  her  multitude  "

who   have   obstinately   neglected    the  (ver.    4^;    "All   helpers   destroyed"

day  of  salvation.  (ver.    8);    "Fill    the    land    with    the

slain"  (ver.  11).    IL  Unspeakable physi-

Ver.  3.  "The  day  is  near."  "In  some  cal  and  mental  suffering,     "  Great  pain

two  years  you  shall  be  miserably  routed  — distresses  daily"  (vers.    4,   9,   16);

in  the  deserts  of  Libya ;  immediately  "  To  make  the  careless  afraid — I  will

after,  the   civil   war  for  eleven  years  put  fear  in   the  land"  (vers.  9,   13).

together   shall   waste  you,   and   then  III.    Reckless    waste     and    destruction.

Nebuchadnezzar's  forces  will  be  upon  "  Countries   desolate — cities   wasted  "

you.     So  that,  whereas  there  maybe  (ver.  7)  ;  "A  fire  in  Egypt — all  helpers

sixteen  or  eighteen  years  between  the  destroyed"  (vers.  8,  14,  16);  "I  will

prophecy  and  its  fulfilling,   here  are  make  rivers  dry  and  the  land  waste "

thirteen   or  fourteen   of  them   taken  (ver.   12).       IV.  Loss  and  degradation

up  with  sorrows  and  afflictions,  fore-  of  youthful   life.      "The   young   men

runners  of  the  rest." — Matthew  Pool.  tall  by  tlie  sword — daughters  go  into

—" The  time  of  the  heathen."    Ven-  captivity"    (vers.    17,    18).      V.   The

geance  on  idolatry.     1.  Is  mercifully  overthrow     of    established    governrMiU.

delayed  to  give  space  for  repentance  "Her   foundations    shall    be    broken

and  reform.    2.  Will  be  inflicted  witli  down  "  (ver.  4) ;  "  There  shall  be  no

324


/♦


HO  Mi  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


CHAP.  XXZ.


more  a  prince  of  the  land  "  (ver.  13) ;
*'  I  shall  break  the  yokes  (sceptres)  of
Egypt"  (ver.  18).  Lessons. — War.
1.  Unjustifiable  when  it  is  a  merejhirst
for  conquest.  2.  May  be  a  scourge  to
punish  national  sins.  3.  Arouses  the
worst  human  passions.

Ver.  5.   Unholy  Confederacies.    1.

May  seem  formidable  in  numbers  and
strength.  2.  Have  no  principle  of
cohesion  to  ensure  permanency.  3.
Are  involved  in  general  ruin.  4.  Their
fate  a  beacon-warning  to  the  good.

Ver.  6.  "  See  the  justice  of  God :
Egypt  pretended  to  uphold  Jerusalem
when  that  was  tottering,  but  proved  a
deceitful  reed ;  and  now  they  that  pre-
tend to  uphold  Egypt  shall  prove  no
better.  Those  that  deceive  others  are
commonly  paid  in  their  own  coin ;  they
are  themselves  deceived." — M.  Henry.

Ver.  8.  ''As  sinners  perversely  re-
fuse to  know  God  as  a  God  of  love,
they  shall  know  Him  as  a  God  that
hates  sin  and  takes  vengeance  on  the
sinner  for  all  unatoned  guilt.  Severe
as  were  the  temporal  judgments  on
Pharaoh  and  his  people,  what  are  they
when  compared  with  the  eternal  judg-
ments which  shall  descend  on  the
lost  ? " — Fausset.

Vers.  10-12.  "God  punishes  one
knave  by  the  other,  who  does  not
escape  His  judgment,  but  is  only  re-
served for  the  same ;  as  in  Jer.  xxv.,
the  king  of  Babylon  has  no  other
advantage  over  those  punished  by  him
but  this,  that  he  drinks  last.  Wicked-
ness and  judgment  go  hand  in  hand.
Power  can  only  be  given  to  the  wicked
for  a  short  time." — Hengstenherg.

Vers.  11,  12.  "They  are  the  terrible
of  the  nations  both  in  respect  of  force
and  of  fierceness,  and  being  terrible,
shall  make  terrible  work.  They  are
the  wickedj  who  will  not  be  restrained
by  reason  and  conscience,  the  laws  of
nature,  or  the  laws  of  nations,  for  they
are  without  law.  They  are  strangers^
who  therefore  shall  show  no  compas-


sion for  old-acquaintance'  sake." — M.
Henry.

Ver.  13.  The  Delusiveness  of  Idola-
try. 1.  Its  temples  and  worship  a
standing  insult  to  the  only  true  God.
2.  Debases  its  votaries.  3.  Powerless
to  help  in  the  day  of  trouble.

—  "The  wrath  of  God  is  especially
directed  against  the  idols  of  a  land,
of  whatever  kind  they  be,  whether
they  be  images  directly  worshipped
as  gods,  or  riches  which  steal  away
from  God  the  hearts  of  those  who
would  repudiate  the  charge  of  idola-
try, though  guilty  of  it  before  the
God  who  calls  covetousness  idola-
try. As  the  Egyptian  On,  the  seat
of  the  idolatrous  sun-worship,  was
doomed  by  God  to  become  Aven,  or
vanity y  so  all  creature-confidences  shall
at  last  prove  vain  to  those  who  have
trusted  in  them  rather  than  in  God.*' —
Fausset,

—  "  There  shall  be  no  more  a
prince  of  the  land  of  Egypt". —  no
native  or  independent  prince,  ruling
the  whole  country.  The  dynasties  of
Egypt  had  subsisted  from  Menes,  her
first  king,  who  is  said  to  have  reigned
in  the  year  of  the  world  2251,  to  the
destruction  of  the  Pharaohs  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar, which  terminated  the  reign
of  the  Egyptian  princes,  and  showed
the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  and  the
judgments  of  God  upon  the  oppressors
of  His  people.

Ver.  19. :  comp.  ver.  8,  "  And  they
shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  God
revealed  in  Judgment.  1.  When  all
other  modes  of  revelation  are  per-
sistently ignored.  2.  Shows  He  is
not  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  of  the
oppressed.  3.  Cruelty  and  injustice
shall  not  go  unpunished.  4.  The  im-
partial justice  of  the  Divine  procedures
shall  be  universally  acknowledged  and
adored.

—  "  The  true  God,  whom  they  do
not  mean  to  worship  willingly,  must
come  to  His  rights  in  the  punishment
inflicted  on  them.  This  is  not  merely
an  alarming  but  also  a  comforting
point  of  view.     The  most  comfortless


CHAP.  XXX.  EOMILETIC  GOMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


of  all  thoughts  is  to  have  no  part  in  sword  in  the  conviction  that  by  the
God.  How  many  transgressors  have  punishment  they  come  to  have  a  part
joyfully    devoted   themselves   to   the     in  God  ! " — Hengstenberg.

HOMILETIGS.

A  Proud  Monarch  Humbleix

(Vers.  20-26.)

Pharaoh-Hophra,  the  king  of  Egypt   referred  to  in  this  paragraph,  was

a  man  of  considerable  capacity  and  enterprise.  He  displayed  great  military
genius  and  activity.  During  the  first  years  of  his  reigm  he  subdued  the  island
of  Cyprus,  besieged  the  city  of  Sidon  by  land  and  sea,  and  took  it  and  made
himself  master  of  Phoenicia  and  Palestine.  Elated  with  success,  his  pride  knew
no  bounds,  and  he  insanely  boasted  that  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  the  gods  to
dethrone  him.  His  illusions  were  destined  to  receive  a  rude  awakening.  Libya,
harassed  by  the  Greeks,  appealed  to  Hophra  for  assistance.  He  despatched
an  army  for  their  deliverance,  but  the  Egyptians  were  disastrously  defeated,
and  very  few  of  the  soldiers  returned  to  their  native  land.  The  sight  of  the
straggling  and  wretched  survivors  filled  the  land  with  mourning,  and  indigna-
tion against  Hophra  was  loud  and  threatening.  It  was  whispered  he  had  sent
the  Egyptian  army  into  Libya  to  destroy  it,  and  by  surrounding  himself  with
Greek  mercenaries,  for  whom  he  showed  great  partiality,  he  was  seeking  to  rule
Egypt  as  a  tyrant.  His  subjects  rose  in  rebellion.  Hophra  sent  Amasis,  one
of  his  officers,  to  quell  the  revolt ;  but  the  soldiers  crowned  him  with  a  helmet
and  made  him  king.  He  accepted  the  honour,  and  made  common  cause  with
the  mutineers.  Exasperated  with  the  news,  Hophra  sent  Patarbemis,  another
of  his  great  officers  and  one  of  the  principal  lords  of  his  court,  to  arrest  Amasis  ;
and  returning  unsuccessful,  the  angry  king  caused  the  nose  and  ears  of  Patar-
bemis to  be  cut  off.  So  barbarous  an  outrage,  committed  upon  a  person  of
such  high  distinction, 'roused  the  Egyptians  into  more  violent  opposition,  and
the  insurrection  became  general.  Hophra  was  compelled  to  retire  into  Upper
Egypt,  where  he  defended  himself  for  some  years,  and  Amasis  made  himself
master  of  the  rest  of  his  dominions.  The  army  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  taking
advantage  of  these  intestine  troubles,  swept  down  upon  Egypt  and  wrecked  it
from  end  to  end.  Egypt  was  made  tributary  to  Babylon,  and  Nebuchadnezzar,
having  appointed  Amasis  as  his  viceroy,  returned  to  his  capital  laden  with  the
spoils  of  victory.  As  soon  as  the  great  king  had  departed  Hophra  emerged
from  his  obscurity,  and  gathering  an  army  of  30,000  mercenaries,  made  war
against  Amasis.  The  royal  army  was  routed,  Hophra  taken  prisoner,  and  shut
up  in  his  royal  palace  at  Sais.  This,  however,  would  not  satisfy  the  excited
populace.  They  clamoured  for  the  unfortunate  king  to  be  given  up  to  them,
and  gaining  their  wish,  they  immediately  strangled  him.  In  this  paragraph
the  prophet  presents  us  with  a  graphic  description  of  2^jproud  monarch  humbled — ■

I.  By  the  partial  loss  of  his  dominion.  "  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  Pharaoh."
(ver.  21).  The  loss  of  distant  dependencies  is  often  the  precursor  of  national
downfall :  it  is  a  sign  of  weakness  at  the  centre  of  power.  It  is  a  loss  of
prestige  and  influence.  It  is  a  deep  wound  to  a  proud  monarch  deluded  with
the  notion  that  he  is  everywhere  invincible.  The  bitterness  of  his  resentment
blinds  him  to  the  lessons  that  the  curtailment  of  his  Empire  should  suggest.

II.  By  provoking  tlie  active  opposition  of  Jehovah.  *'  Thus  saith  the  Lord
God,  Behold,  I  am  against  PliaraoJi.     But  I  will  strengthen  the  arms  of  the

330


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xxx.


king  of  Babylon  "  (vers.  22,  25).  Behind  the  might  of  Nebuchadnezzar  was
the  invincible  power  of  Jehovah,  who  had  determined  to  punish  Pharaoh  for
his  iniquity.  The  strongest  monarch  is  powerless  before  the  vengeance  of
Heaven  ;  the  justice  he  lias  outraged  ensures  his  humiliation  and  pain.  In
Retzch's  illustrations  of  Goethe's  "Faust"  is  one  plate  where  angels  are  repre-
sented as  dropping  roses  upon  the  demons  who  are  contending  for  the  soul  of
Faust.  Every  rose  falls  like  molten  metal,  burning  and  blistering  where  it  touches.
So  is  it  that  justice  acts  upon  those  who  have  wilfully  abused  its  claims.  It
bewilders  where  it  ought  to  guide  ;  it  scorches  where  it  ought  to  soothe  and
comfort.     When  God  is  against  us  we  must  be  prepared  for  the  worst.

III.  By  shattering  his  military  strength.  *'  And  will  break  his  arms,  the
strong" — the  poition  of  the  army  still  remaining  faithful  to  him — "and  that
which  was  broken"  —  the  portion  already  in  revolt.  "And  the  arms  of
Pharaoh  shall  fall  down  " — he  shall  be  deprived  of  the  resources  for  making
war  (vers.  22,  25).  Pharaoh  had  boasted  of  his  army  and  exulted  in  its
brave  exploits.  Now  he  is  cast  down  by  the  power  in  which  he  had  trusted.
Shorn  of  his  military  aggrandisement  he  is  utterly  defenceless  and  weak.  "  All
they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword"  (Matt.  xxvi.  52).  No
nation  is  secure  when  the  military  is  in  the  ascendant.  Gibbon  traces  one  of
the  potent  causes  for  the  decline  of  the  Roman  Empire  to  the  overwhelming
influence  of  the  army.

IV.  By  the  total  dismemberment  of  his  kingdom.  "I  will  scatter  the
Egyptians  among  the  nations,  and  disperse  them  through  the  countries  "  (vers.
23,  26).  The  kingdom  was  torn  in  pieces  by  civil  war,  and  though  Hophra
made  a  brave  and  resolute  stand  for  some  years,  he  was  compelled  to  yield,  and
he  himself  perished  by  the  hands  of  his  enraged  subjects.  The  process  of
humbling  a  proud  spirit  is  sometimes  slow,  but  every  successive  defeat  intensi-
fies the  suffering,  until  there  is  nothing  left  but  the  wild  helplessness  of  mad
despair.

V.  By  making  him  utterly  dispirited.  "  He  shall  groan  with  the  groan-
ings  of  a  deadly  wounded  man"  (ver.  24).  There  is  a  defeat  that  involves  no
loss  of  dignity  and  may  be  borne  with  fortitude.  In  the  Franco-German  war,
after  the  loss  of  Sedan,  a  French  oflS.cer  came  up  to  the  then  Crown  Prince  and
exclaimed,  "Ah,  sir!  what  a  defeat  1  what  a  misfortune!  I  am  ashamed  of
being  a  prisoner.  I  have  lost  everything."  **  No,  indeed,"  was  the  magnani-
mous reply ;  *'  after  you  have  fought  like  a  brave  soldier,  you  have  not  lost
your  honour."  But  there  is  a  defeat  that  is  wholly  ignoble  and  demoralis-
ing. It  has  been  courted  by  a  proud  self-confidence  and  precipitated  by  an
unreasoning  recklessness.  Self-induced,  it  is  the  bitterest  drop  in  the  cup  of
the  vanquished  that  the  ruin  in  the  midst  of  which  he  moans  is  his  own  rash
handiwork.  *'  The  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity,  but  a  wounded
spirit  who  can  bearl"  (Prov.  xviii.  14).

Lessons. — 1.  Pride  is  the  sure  precursor  of  a  fall.  2.  Military  genius  and  the
strength  of  armies  are  impotent  when  opposed  to  Divine  vengeance,  3.  Humble  trust
in  God  gives  dignity  and  strength  to  the  kingly  office  even  in  disaster.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,

Ver.  21.   The  Lessons  of  Suffering,  ^our  suff'ering  has  been  brought  on  by
1.  Should  lead  us  to  reflect  how  far/  our  wilful  sinfulness.    2.  Should  induce

327


CHAP.  XXXI.  BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


us  to  examine  the  principles  on  which  3,  Can  do  no  more  than  he  is   per-

our  conduct  has  been  based.     3.  May  mitted.     4.  May  himself  become  the

lead  to  salutary  repentance.  4.  Are  un-  victim  of  a  similar  vengeance,
noticed  by  the  soul  blinded  with  pride.

—  "  It  is  in  vain  that  men  try  to  Ver.  24.   "  He  shall  groan  with  the

bind  up  and  heal  the  wound  that  God  groanings  of  a  deadly  wounded  man."

inflicts.     Stroke  shall  fall  upon  stroke  The  Moan   of  the   Defeated.      1.    A

in  rapid  succession  whensoever  God  is  familiar  experience   of  baffled  huma-

against  men.     The  very   weakest  in-  uity.    2.  Those  who  are  most  elated  in

struments  are  sufficient,  when  strength-  the  pride  of  prosperity  are  most  abject

ened  by  Him,  to  execute  God's  ven-  and  disheartened  in  adversity.    3.  Ap-

geance  ;  and  He  has  at  His  disposal  all  peals  to  the  compassion  of  the  sternest

the   powers   that  are   in  heaven   and  conqueror,
earth.    How  foolish,  then,  it  is  for  any

to  remain  in  a  state  of  enmity  with  Ver.  26.  "The  true  God,  despised

God  1 " — Fausset,  by  Egypt  from  ancient  times,  is  thereby

to  come  by  His  rights  regarding  them.

Ver.  22.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  If  He  be  the  true  Jehovah,  the  per-

Behold,  I  am  against  Pharaoh."    The  sonal  Being,  the  absolute  Essence,  He

Opposition  of  Jehovah.     1.  Is  terribly  must  necessarily  be  glorified,  if  not  by

real   and   active.      2.    Must   convince  their  action,  yet  by  their  passion," —

us  we  are  wrong,   and  that  we  must  Hengstenherg,

change  our  attitude  towards  Him.     3.  —  "  They  would  hardly  believe  it,

Cannot  be  successfully  resisted  by  the  and  therefore  are  so  oft  assured  it"  (cf.

mightiest  human  combinations.  4.  Can  ver.  23). — Trapp.

be  propitiated  only  by  humble   and  —  "We   are    here  struck  with  the

penitent  submission.  exact  accomplishment  of  the  prophecies

against  Egypt,  against  its  cities  and  its

Vers.  23,  26.    National  Unity.      1.  princes,  by  the  wars  of  Assyria  and  sur-

Unreal  when    based    only  on    kingly  rounding  nations.    When  the  measure

and  military  supremacy.     2.   Must  be  was  full  the  visitation  came.    Therefore

founded  in  the  righteousness   of  the  Isaiah,   Nahum,   Jeremiah,   and   Eze-

individual   life.      3.     Is   broken   into  kiel  must  have  been  inspired  by  Him

fragments  and  scattered  when  God  is  to  whom  futurity  is  without  a  veih

ignored  and  openly  defied.  What   instruction,    then,    should   the

ruins  of  ancient  cities,  where  powerful

Vers.  24,  25.   '*  I  will  strengthen  the  kings   once   reigned,   suggest   to    the

arms  of  the  king  of  Babylon."      The  flourishing  cities  of  Europe  who  imi-

Agent  of  Divine  Vengeance.  1.  Is  pre-  tate   them  in  every  species  of  crime

pared  and  strengthened  for  the  work.  and  forget  the  Lord,  who  does  what

2.  May  be  unconscious  of  the  signifi-  He  pleases  in  the  heavens  above  and

cance   of  the  punishment   he  inflicts,  in  the  earth  below  ? '' — Sutcliffe.


The  Destruction  of  Assyria  a  Type  of  the  Destruction  of

Egypt.    (Chap,  xxxi.)

(Vers.  1-18.)

EXEGETICAL  notes.— Ver.    1.  greatness?"  The  already  accomplished  ^

"In  the  eleventh  year,  in  the  third  fall  of  Assyria  is  held  before  the  eyes    i

month."     Two  months  later  than  the  of  the  king  of  Egypt  as  a  mirror  of  his  J;

prophecy  delivered  in  chap.  xxx.  20.  iuture.     Twenty-four  years  before  the     1

delivery  of  this  prophecy  the  Assyrian     j

Ver.  2.  "  Whom  art  thou  like  in  thy  Empire  was  destroyed  by  Nebuchad-  /
328


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEU


OHAP.  ZXZI.


nezzar,  who  twenty  years  later  was  to
conquer  Egypt.  The  practical  purpose
is^the  same  as  in  previous  prophecies,
to  quench  any  lingering  hope  in  Judah
of  help  from  doomed  Egypt.

Ver.  3.  "  Behold  the  Assyrian  was
a  cedar  in  Lebanon."  Ewald  translates
the  word  Asshur  as  meaning  the  high-
est cedar  ;  but  Hitzig  shows  that  this
is  a  mistake,  and  that  the  prophet
speaks  of  Assyria.  Smend  and  M^Far-
lan  apply  the  passage  to  Egypt,  but
without  sufficient  grounds.  The  total
destruction  of  Assyria  depicted  in  this
chapter  was  not  true  with  regard  to
Egypt.  The  phrase  is  an  answer  to
the  question  in  ver.  2,  "Whom  art
thou  like  in  thy  greatness  1"  Thou
arL  like  the  haughty  king  of  Assyria.
The  cedar  in  Lebanon  was  often  eighty
feet  high,  and  the  diameter  of  the  space
covered  by  its  boughs  still  greater,  the
symmetry  perfect  (cf.the  similar  image,
chap.  xvii.  3  ;  Dan.  iv.  20-22).  "His
top  was  among  the  thick  boughs"
— "  among  the  clouds  "  (Hengstenherg).
*'The  top,  or  topmost  shoot,  represents
the  king;  the  thick  boughs  the  large
resources  of  the  empire." — Fausset.

Ver.  4.  "The waters  made  him  great"

— the  deep  sent  out  her  little  rivers.  "The
Tigris,  with  its  branches  and  rivulets,  or
conduits  for  irrigation,  was  the  source
of  Assyria's  fertility.  The  deep  is  the
overflowing  water,  never  dry.  Meta-
phorically, for  Assyria's  resources,  as  the
conduits  are  her  colonies." — Fausset.

Ver.  8.  "  The  cedars  in  the  garden
of  God  could  not  hide  him  " — could  not
out-top  him.  "  No  other  king  eclipsed
him.  The  total  of  the  great  men  of
the  earth  Ezekiel  denotes  as  the  gar-
den of  God,  in  which  he  regards  them
as  the  counterpart  of  the  garden  which
God  once  planted  in  Eden — of  Paradise
with  its  glorious  trees.  The  compari-
son is  the  more  suitable  because,  as
Paradise  was  planted  by  God,  so  all
human  greatness  has  its  origin  from
God." — Henijitenherg.

Ver.  10.  "  Because  thou  hast  lifted


up  thyself  in  height."  The  greatnesa
bestowed  by  God,  being  abused,  is  the
cause  of  his  fall.

Ver.  11.  "  He  shall  surely  deal  with
him" — according  to  his  own  pleasure
and  according  to  the  Assyrian's  desert.
"  The  last  Assyrian  king  has  been  ascer-
tained by  the  inscriptions  to  have  been
Asshur-ebid-ilut,  the  second  in  succes-
sion from  Sennacherib's  son  Esar-had-
dou,  who  planted  the  settlement  in
Samaria  from  Babylon,  Cuthah,  Ava,
Hamath,  and  Sepharvaim  (2  Kings
xvii.  24).  The  final  destruction  of
Nineveh  was  by  the  Medo-Babylonian
army  under  Cyaxeres  and  Nabopolas-
sar.    To  either  of  these  the  expression

*  the  mighty  one  of  the  heathen '  refers.
The   destroyer   of  Nineveh  is  ^called

*  the  mighty  one '  (El,  a  name  of  God),
because  lie  was  God's  representative  and
instrument  of  judgment."  —  Fausset,
"  For  his  wickedness  " — the  pride  and
the  conduct  flowing  from  it.  "Where
pride  has  first  occupied  the  heart,
there  all  divine  and  human  rights  are
trampled  under  foot." — Hengstenherg,

Ver.  12.  "All  the  people  are  gone
down  under  his  shadow."  They  had
formerly,  like  birds,  perclied  upon  the
branches  of  the  tree  in  its  shade
(ver.  5).

Ver.  13.  "Upon  his  ruin."  "The  ruin
stands  for  the  fallen  tree,  as  if  it  were
a  living  ruin.  The  fowls  of  heaven
and  the  beasts  of  the  field,  the  wild
beasts  that  formerly  sought  protection
under  this  tree,  assemble  now  for  an-
other object — to  peck  and  gnaw  and
take  what  they  please  of  its  fruits." —
Hengstenherg.

Ver.  14.  "That  none  of  the  trees
exalt  themselves" — that  the  nations
should  not  proudly  be  elated  because
of  their  greatness  and  abundant  re-
sources. "  Neither  their  trees  stand  up
in  their  height,  all  that  drink  water  "
— "that  no  drinkers  of  water  may  stand
upon  their  own  greatness"  (Fairhairn),
"Fortheyare  all  delivered  unto  death"
— "  those  proud  trees,  the  grandees  of

329


OITAP.  XXXI.  HOMIL  ETIC  COMM  ENTA  R  Y :  EZ  EKIEL,


the  earth,  who  were  tempted  to  haugh-  solation  to  the  wretched  to  hare  com-

tiuess  by  their  greatness,  go  down  into  panious  in  misery." — FausseU
the  kingdom  of  the  dead,  where  they

are  nothing  else  than  ordinary  sons  of  Ver.  17.  "They  that  were  his  arm"

men  (cf.  Job.  iii.  9)." — Rengstenherg,  — ^his  auxiliaries,  the  helpers  or  tools

of  his  tyranny.

Ver.  15.   "I  caused  a  mourning.'*

The  deep  was  darkened,  the  babble  of  Ver.  18.    "Thou    shalt   lie  in   the

the  streams  was  hushed,  Lebanon  was  midst  of  the  uncircumcised."   "As  cir-

saddened,  and  the   trees  of  the  field  cumcision  was  an  object  of  mocking  to

were  faintness  itself.      In  the  fall  of  thee,  thou  shalt  lie  in  the  midst  of  the

Assyria  the   former  grandees   of  the  uncircumcised,  slain  by  their  sword.'* —

earth   once   more   went   through   the  Gi'otius.     "This  is  Pharaoh."     *'Pha-

sorrow  of  their  own  fall.  raoh's  end  shall  be  the  same  humiliatinor

one  as  I  have  depicted  the  Assyrian's

Ver.  16.  "I  cast  him  down  to  heir*  to  have  been.  This  is  demonstrative,
— Sheol,  or  Hades,  the  unseen  world.  as  if  he  were  pointing  with  the  finger
I  cast  him  into  oblivion  (cf.  Isa.  xiv.  to  Pharaoh  lying  prostrate,  a  spectacle
9-11).  "  All  the  trees  of  Eden  shall  to  aW'—Fausset,  "And  all  his  multi-
be  comforted" — because  so  great  a  king  tude."  His  tumult — the  noisy  mur-
as  the  Assyrian  is  brought  down  to  a  mur  of  multitudinous  life  is  for  ever
level  with  them,    "  It  is  a  kind  of  con-  stilled.


HOMILETICS.

National  Greatness  no  Guarantee  of  Permanence,

(Vers.  1-18.)

In  this  chapter  we  have  an  example  of  the  dramatic  genius  of  Ezekiel,  the
^schylus  of  the  Hebrews,  and  of  the  luxuriousness  of  his  poetic  fancy.  Seizing
upon  the  similitude  of  the  cedar,  in  its  stately  magnificence,  its  many  resources,
its  pre-eminence  in  stature  and  beauty  over  all  other  trees,  and  the  calamity
occasioned  by  its  fall,  the  prophet  describes  the  overshadowing  greatness  and
ignominious  downfall  of  Assyria,  and  with  one  vivid  master-stroke  applies  the
whole  to  the  fate  of  Egypt.     From  the  whole  prophecy  we  learn —

I.  The  prominent  features  of  national  greatness  (vers.  1-9.)  1.  Pre-
eminence over  all  other  nations.  ''  Of  an  high  stature — exalted  above  all  the  trees
of  the  field  "  (vers.  3,  5.)  Assyria,  though  more  recent  in  civilisation  and  more
rapid  in  its  growth,  yet  outstrip [)ed  Egypt  in  extent  of  dominion  and  brilliance
of  career.  Ninas,  its  most  illustrious  monarch,  subdued  Media,  Babylonia,  and
several  other  kingdoms,  and  united  them  under  one  sceptre.  Nineveh,  its
capital,  built  on  the  banks  of  the  Tigris,  was  one  of  the  most  celebrated  cities
of  antiquity.  In  the  height  of  its  {>rosperity  Assyria  overshadowed  in  greatness
and  power  every  other  contemporary  nation,  as  the  cedar  overtopped  every
other  tree  of  the  forest.  2.  Enormous  resources.  "  The  waters  made  him  great
— his  root  was  by  great  waters"  (vers.  4,  5,  7).  Its  argosies  and  war-boats
crowded  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  wealth  flowed  into  its  coffers  in  a  perpetual
stream,  trade  and  commerce  assumed  gigantic  proportions,  its  mineral  and
agricultural  products  were  illimitable,  its  public  works  were  on  a  scale  of  un-
suri)assed  grandeur,  its  arms  were  everywhere  triumphant.  3.  The  strengih  and
protection  of  other  nations,  *'  His  top  was  among  the  thick  boughs — all  the  fowls
of  heaven  made  their  nests  in  his  boughs — under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great
330


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  ohap.  XXXI.


nations  "  (vers.  3-6.)  The  nations  conquered  by  Assyria  dreaded  while  they
hated  its  power,  and  neighbouring  kingdoms  were  proud  to  be  its  allies.  They
felt  secure  under  the  guardianship  of  its  shield,  and  shone  in  the  reflected
splendour  of  its  greatness  and  prestige.  4.  The  envy  of  less  favoured  nations.
"  The  cedars  in  the  garden  of  God  could  not  hide  him — all  the  trees  envied
him  *'  (ver.  8,  9.)  For  warlike  courage  and  prowess,  for  majesty  of  bearing,  for
vigour  of  government,  for  symmetry  and  beauty  of  national  unity,  for  opulence
and  display,  Assyria  was  the  admiration  and  envy  of  all  nationalities.  It  out-
distanced all  competitors ;  it  stood  alone  in  the  shining  brilliance  of  its  own
star-like  splendour.

II.  The  tmmistakable  symptoms  of  national  decay  (vers.  10-17).  1.
Vaunting  pride.  "  Because  thou  hast  lifted  up  thyselt  "  (ver.  10).  It  is  difficult
to  be  at  once  great  and  humble,  and  yet  greatness  is  stable  only  as  it  rests  on  a
firm  foundation  of  humility.  "  The  greatest  man,"  says  Seneca,  "  is  he  who
chooses  right  with  the  most  invincible  resolution,  who  resists  the  sorest  temp-
tations from  within  and  without,  who  bears  the  heaviest  burdens  cheerfully,
who  is  calmest  in  storms  and  most  fearless  under  menaces  and  frowns,  whose
reliance  on  truth,  on  virtue,  and  on  God  is  most  unfaltering."  Prosperity
breeds  self-confidence,  self-confidence  pride,  pride  recklessness,  and  recklessness
ruin.  The  greatest  peril  to  the  individual  or  the  nation  is  found  at  the  highest
point  in  the  delirium  of  success.  When  pride  overleaps  sound  judgment  just
government  receives  its  death-blow,  decay  sets  in,  and  the  end  is  not  far  off.
2.  Prevailing  vice.  *'I  have  driven  him  out  for  his  wickedness"  (ver.  11).
The  ancient  monarchies — Sodom,  the  Hittites,  Canaanites,  Amalekites,  &c. —
were  ruined  by  their  iniquities.  So  was  it  with  Assyria.  Amid  the  glitter  of  a
refined  civilisation  we  detect  the  dark  destructive  elements  of  immorality  and
vice.  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation  ;  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people  "
(Prov.  xiv.  34).  "The  seeds  of  our  own  puiiishnient,"  says  Hesiod,  "are  sown
at  the  same  time  we  commit  sin."  3.  Loss  of  allegiance  and  territory.  ''  Strangers
have  cut  him  off — upon  the  mountains  and  in  the  valleys  his  branches  are
fallen — the  people  have  left  him"  (vers.  12,  13,  17).  The  break-up  of  a
great  empire  may  be  gradual,  but  it  is  not  less  evident  and  certain.  Distant
dependencies  are  quick  to  discover  the  weakening  of  the  power  that  so  long
overawed  them,  and  eagerly  watch  for  the  opportunity  to  fling  off  their  allegi-
ance. The  rebellion  of  one  province  is  the  signal  for  a  general  revolt,  and  the
mighty  empire  that  has  filled  so  large  a  space  in  the  history  of  the  world
crumbles  into  ruins.  4.  Sorrow  and  consternation.  **  In  the  day  he  went  down  I
caused  a  mourning — the  nations  shake  at  the  sound  of  his  fall"  (vers.  15,  16).
The  struggle  for  freedom  of  revolted  states  and  the  desperate  eff'orts  of  the
ruling  power  to  retain  the  broken  remnants  of  authority  is  the  occasion  of
wide  suffering  and  misery.  The  fall  of  a  throne  that  seemed  impregnable  fills
neighbouring  nations  with  grief  and  alarm.  If  the  mighty  Assyria  is  over-
thrown, what  throne  can  be  secure  ?  The  foundations  of  national  life  are
upheaved,  and  the  confidence  of  the  most  astute  rulers  is  shaken.

III.  That  national  greatness  is  no  guarantee  of  permanence  (vers.  2, 14, 18).

This  was  the  solemn  and  emphatic  lesson  the  prophet  sought  to  enforce.  If
Assyria,  the  magnificent,  was  destroyed,  there  was  no  hope  that  Egypt  would
escape  a  similar  fate.  After  having  ruled  for  more  than  600  years,  with  great
tyranny  and  violence,  from  the  Caucasus  and  the  Caspian  to  the  Persian  Gulf,
and  from  beyond  the  Tigris  to  Asia  Minor  and  Egypt,  the  Assyrian  Empire
vanished  like  a  dream,  and  the  very  site  of  its  vast  capital  was  a  doubtful
question  for  twenty-four  centuries.  There  have  been  greater  nations  than
Assyria,  but  their  greatness  did  not  save  them  from  extinction.     They  have

331


CHAP.  XXXL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


been  overbalanced  and  crushed  by  tlie  weight  of  their  own  immensity.  Cen-
turies slowly  crept  along,  and  it  seemed  as  if  they  would  endure  for  ever;
but  the  catastrophe  came,  and  filled  the  world  with  horrified  wonder.  The
mightiest  and  proudest  nation  has  no  room  to  boast.  The  loftier  its  eminence
the  more  ignominious  its  fall.  The  true  greatness  of  a  nation  consists  not  in
material  })rosperity,  but  in  the  virtue  and  uprightness  of  its  people.  Genuine
religion  alone  can  give  permanence  to  a  throne,  and  only  so  long  as  its  genuine-
ness is  maintained.

Lessons. — 1.  The  rise  and  fall  of  nations  a  suggestive  study.  2.  Moral  great-
ness not  always  commensurate  with  material  prosjperity.  3.  Kingly  authority  may  be
abused  to  a  nation's  ruin.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.  2.  "  Whom  art  thou  like  in  thy  Vers.  4,  7.  "  The  waters  made  him

greatness?"     The  Perils  of  Greatness,  great — his  root  was  by  great  waters."

1.  Apt   to   breed   a   proud,   self-sufli-  The  River  the  natural  source  of  Em-

ciency.    2.  May  use  power  tyrannically,  pire.     1.   Aff"ording  a  bulwark  of  pro-

3.  Under-estimates  the  significance  of  tection.    2.  A  necessary  element  of  sus-

events   which  threaten  to  undermine  tenance.    3.  An  important  highway  of

the  foundation  on  which  it  rests.     4.  commerce.     4.  Giving  fertility  to  the

May  grow  beyond  the  control  of  the  soil.     6.  Favourable  for  the   massing

most  successful  together  of  great  populations.

Vers.  3,  6.  "  His  top  was  among  the  .  ^^^'  ^'  "I^^^tle  rivers."  "Beneficence,

thick   boughs  — the  fowls  of  heaven  justice,     protection,     encouragements

made  their  nests  in  his  boughs— under  ^^at  subjects  need  and  good  princes

his  shadow  dwelt  all  great  nations."  disperse  among  them.     So  the  deep

The  Inter-dependence  of  Nations.  1.  A  ^^^^^  ^his  king,  and  he  sent  out  his

great  nation  protects  the  lesser,  and  streams  to  all  his  subjects  in  his  kmg-

they  in  turn  strengthen  and  increase  dom.       root,

their  protector.     2.   A  strong  nation  y^^.  9   <* Envy  has  an  aspect  in  which

is  an  amalgam  of  many  nationalities,  j^  j^^y  be  regarded  as  a  good  for  him

3.  Nations   help   each   other,  not  by  ^^^^^  j^  affects.     Let  us  only  reflect

jealousies  and  strife,  but  by  commerce  ^^  ^he  proverb,  '  Better  envied  than

and  friendly  intercourse.    4.  No  nation  ^m^^J'^—Hengstenberg.

can  long  remain  independent  that  does  _  **The  tallest  trees  are  weakest

not  cultivate  the  patriotic  spirit.  -^^  the  tops,  and  envy  always  aimeth

XT      «       Tx        !.«.            ,              .  at  the  highest." — Travp,
Ver.  6.   "  How  different  the  security

afforded    by   the    Gospel-tree!      The  Vers.  10-15.  Fallen  Greatness.  LOc-

Gospel-kingdom  gathers  all  under  its  casioned  by  the  indulgence  of  an  arrogant
saving  covert  for  their  present  and  spirit.  "  Because  thou  hast  lifted  up
eternal  good,  and  for  the  glory  of  God,  thyself  in  height"  (ver.  10).  2.  The
and  not  for  self-aggrandisement  and  to  inevitable  result  of  a  life  of  iniquity.  "  I
the  hurt  of  men,  as  is  the  way  of  the  have  driven  him  out  for  his  wicked-
kingdoms  cf  this  world.  Therefore  it  ness"  (ver.  11).  3.  The  victim  of  forces
shall  never  fall,  nor  shall  those  who  trust  whose  growing  power  was  unnoticed  or
in  its  shadow  (chap.  xvii.  23 ;  Matt,  despised.  "  1  have  delivered  him  into
xiii.  32)  ever  be  confounded,  for  it  is  a  the  hand  of  the  mighty  one  of  the
kingdom  that  is  established  on  the  ever-  heathen — strangers,  the  terrible  of  the
lasting  principles  of  the  Divine  truth,  nations,  have  cut  him  off"  (vers.  11,12).
righteousness,  and  love." — Fausset,  4.  Abandoned  alike  by  allies  and  depen-
332


HO  M I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  OHAP.  XXJCI.


dents,    "  All  the  people  of  the  earth  are  torian,  as  to  manifest  the  just  judg-

gone  down  from  his  shadow,  and  have  ment  of  God  against  the  arrogant  folly

left  him*'  (ver.  12).      5.  An  object  of  of  the  proud." — Trapp,
insulting  ridicule  by  those  who  had  been

benefited  in  better  days.      "Upon  his  Ver.  14.  "To  the  end  that  none  of

ruin  shall  all  the  fowls  of  the  heaven  all  the  trees."     '*  This  is  the  use  men

remain,  and  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  should  make  of  God's  heavy  judgments

shall  be  upon  his  branches  "  (ver.  13,  upon  others.     This  man's  forefather,

compared  with  vers.  6,  18).     6.  A  sug-  Sennacherib,  had  a  statue  set  up  in

gestive  warning  to  the  jproud  of  all  nations.  Egypt,  says  Herodotus,  with  this  in-

"  To  the  end  that  none  of  all  th«  trees  inscription,  'Let  him  that  looketh  upon

exalt    themselves   for    their    height "  my  misery  learn  to  be  modest  and  to

(ver.  14,  com  p.  ver.  16).     7.  A  subject  fear  God.'" — Trapp.

for  profound  and  widespread  grief     "I  —  "Genuine  humility  brings  to  ele-

caused  a  mourning — covered  the  deep  vation  its  only  corrective.    It  fixes  the

— all  the  trees  fainted  for  him  "(ver.  15.)  eye  on  the  lowliness  which  in  all  human

greatness  is  present  with  the  great-

Ver.  11.  "  He  shall  surely  deal  with  ness." — Hengstenberg,
him."     "  Heb.,  *  In  doing  he  shall  do

for  him — he  shall  do  what  he  list  with  Ver.    18.    "  Thou   shalt  lie   in   the

him,'  as  Tamerlane  since  did  with  Ba-  midst  of  the  uncircumcised."    Death —

jazet,  whom  he  carried  about  in  an  iron  1.  Reduces  all  ranks  to  the  same  level,

cage,  using  him  on  festival  days  for  a  2.  Is  indifi'erent  to  the  contempt  of

footstool,  and  feeding  him  like  a  dog  fancied   superiority.      3.   Reveals   the

with   crumbs    fallen   from   his   table,  artificiality  of  social  distinctions.     4.

All  which  Tamerlane  did,  not  so  much  Its  uncertainty  should  lead  to  a  moral

for  hatred  to  the  man,  says  the  his-  preparedness.


"  Transferred  to  the  king  of  Assyria,  whom  the  cedar  represented,  this  para-
bolical history  tells  us  in  the  first  instance  of  his  unparalleled  greatness.  He
was  the  head  and  centre  of  a  vast  monarchy  which  was  fed  by  the  tributary
streams  of  surrounding  nations,  and  gathered  within  its  ample  bosom  the
resources  of  the  civilised  world.  But  its  peerless  grandeur  proved  the  occasion
of  its  overthrow,  for  it  only  served  to  nurse  into  fatal  maturity  that  pride  which
goeth  before  a  fall.  How  thoroughly  the  loftiness  of  spirit  in  the  head  of  that
monarchy  kept  pace  with  the  growth  and  magnitude  of  his  dominion  may  be
seen  from  the  Heaven-daring  language  of  Sennacherib  to  Hezekiah,  when,
before  the  gates  of  Jerusalem,  his  servants  openly  blasphemed  and  defied  the
God  of  Israel.  Most  truly  was  his  heart  lifted  up  in  his  greatness,  and  the
hand  of  a  righteous  God  must  cast  him  down.  In  an  amazingly  brief  period
the  mighty  fabric  of  Assyrian  glory  fell,  an  irrevocable  ruin.  It  was  a  lesson,
on  a  gigantic  scale,  to  the  world  that  then  was,  how  God  in  His  providence
abases  the  proud  and  scatters  the  mighty  from  their  seats ;  how  all  power  and
glory  that  is  of  the  world  is  destined  to  vanish  away  as  a  dream  of  the  night.
And  connected  as  it  here  is  with  the  guilt  and  the  doom  of  Pharaoh,  it  was
to  him,  and  to  those  who  knew  the  will  of  God  concerning  him,  an  instructive
warning  and  example  of  that  which  certainly  awaited  him  ! " — Fairbairn.

"  How  dreadfully  do  the  wicked  scourge  one  another !  Israel  must  be  the  first
to  fall;  then  Egypt,  her  ally;  then  Babylon,  then  Persia,  then  Greece,  and
lastly  the  iron  power  of  Rome.  These  empires  sank  in  succession,  like  the
mighty  swells  of  the  ocean,  and  but  faintly  left  their  traces  behind.  They  fell
by  the  overflowing  scourge  which  came  suddenly  upon  them  and  involved  the
rich  and  the  poor  in  one  common  ruin.     But  the  poor  who  may  survive  have

333


OHAP.  xxxn.


nOMTLETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEL,


some  resources  in  the  labour  of  their  hands.  Lay  not  up,  then,  0  my  soul,
thy  treasures  in  earthly  banks ;  build  not  thy  mansion  on  the  sand.  Blessed
is  the  man  who  has  the  Lord  for  his  rock  and  trusts  alone  in  His  salvation." —
Sutcliffe.

Prophetic  Dirges  over  Egypt's  Fall.    (Chap,  xxzii.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  L
"  In  the  twelfth  year  " — in  the  twelfth
year  from  the  carrying  away  of  Jehoia-
kin :  Jerusalem  was  by  this  time  over-
thrown, and  Amasis  was  beginning  to
revolt  against  Pharaoh-Hophra.

Ver.  2.  "  Like  a  young  lion  and  as
a  whale  " — any  monster  of  the  waters  :
here  the  crocodile  of  the  Nile.  As  a
lion  on  dry  land  and  a  crocodile  in  the
waters,  Pharaoh  is  terrible  alike  by
land  and  sea.

Ver.  3.  "  I  will  spread  my  net " —

the  Chaldeans  (chap.  xxix.  3,  4 ;  Hos.
vii.  12.)  ''  Jehovah  spreads  His  net  in
the  congregation  of  many  nations,  and
gives  it  over  to  them  that  they  may
draw  it  out." — Hengstenherg,

Ver.  4.  "  Then  I  will  leave  thee
upon  the  land  " — it  will  fare  no  better
with  thee  than  with  a  fish,  which  must
perish  miserably  because  it  is  taken
out  of  its  element.

Ver.  5.  "  I  will  fill  the  valleys  with
thy  height " — "  thy  hugeness  "  (Fair-
bairn).  "  The  multitude  of  thy  forces,
on  which  thou  pridest  thyself,  shall
only  be  a  great  heap  of  corpses  to  fill
the  valleys  up  to  the  sides  of  the
moun  tains. " — Fausset

Vers.  7,  8.  "I  wUl  put  thee  out  "—

extinguish  thy  light  in  the  political  sky.
IrT  great  political  catastrophes  and
the  endless  woe  connected  with  them,
the  heavenly  luminaries  appear  to  be
extinguished  (Isa.  xiii.  10;  Amos  viii.
9,  10 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  29  ;  Rev.  vi.  12).

Ver.  9.  "When  I  shall  bring  thy
destruction  among  the  nations  " —
*'the  tidings  of  thy  destruction  {break-
age) carried  by  captive  and  dispersed
Egyptians  among  the  nations"  {Grotvas);
334


or,  "  When  I  bring  thy  ruins  among
the  nations — thy  broken  people,  re-
sembling one  great  fracture,  the  ruins
of  what  they  had  been." — Fairbairn.

Ver.  14.  "Then  will  I  make  their
waters  deep  " — "  to  subside  into  the
deep,  to  sink,  or  decrease  "  (Fairbairn).
*'  To  settle  and  grow  clear.  The  Nile
fertilises  Egypt  by  its  black  mud,
whence  it  is  called  *  the  black.'  Eze-
kiel  poetically  saw  it  become  a  clear-
flowing  stream  in  the  Messianic  times."
— Geikie.  "  Their  rivers  to  run  like
oil" — their  canals  flow  like  oil — em-
blem of  quietness,  or  sluggish  action.

Ver.  16.  "This  is  the  lamentation
wherewith  they  shall  lament  her  " —

frequently  repeated.  "  Tliis  is  a  pro-
phetical lamentation  ;  yet  so  shall  it
come  to  pass." — Gi'otius,

Ver.  18.  "The  daughters  of  the
famous  nations  " — the  glorious  nations
themselves,  some  of  whom  are  enume-
rated in  the  succeeding  verses.  They
were  as  virgins,  or  daughters,  once
splendid  in  the  bloom  of  youth,  lovely
to  behold.

Ver.  19.  "  Whom  dost  thou  pass  in
beauty  ?  "  "  Beyond  whom  ait  thou
lovely  ?  " — Hengstenberg. — "  Art  thou
any  fairer  than  others  ? " — Geikie.  "  Go
down" — to  Sheol,  the  under- world,
where  all  beauty  is  speedily  marred.

Ver.  20.  "Draw  her  and  all  her
multitudes"  —  to  the  shades  of  the
grave,  ye  powers  of  the  under-world.
As  if  addressing  her  executioners —
drag  her  forth  to  death.

Ver.  21.  "The  strong  among  the
mighty  shall  speak  to  him  " — with  a
taunting  welcome,  as  now  one  of  them-
selves.


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


OHAP.  XXXtL


I


Ver.  22.  "Asshur  is  there,  and  all
her  company — his  graves  are  about
him."  "  Tiie  abrupt  change  of  gender
is  because  Ezekiel  has  in  view  at  one
time  the  kingdom  (feminine),  at  an-
other the  monarch.  Assyria  is  placed
first  in  punishment  as  being  first  in
guilt." — Fausset.  "The  brightest  ex-
ample of  greatness  going  to  destruc-
tion. " — Hengstenberg,

Ver.  23.  "  Whose  graves  are  set  in
the  sides  of  the  pit."  ''  In  the  depths
otSheol." — Geikie,  "Deepest  in  guilt,
they  occupy  the  lowest  depths." — Fair-
bairn.  "The  grave  is  deep  even  if,
materially  taken,  it  be  only  a  few  feet,
as  a  stream  is  very  deep  if  it  be  only
six  feet.  The  grave  is  deep  enough  to
cjDver  all  glory." — Hengstenberg.

Ver.  24.  "  There  is  Elam."    "  Placed

next  as  having  been  the  auxiliary  of
Assyria.  Its  territory  lay  in  Persia.
In  Abraham's  time  an  independent
kingdom  (Gen.  xiv.  1).  Famous  for
its  bowmen  (Isa.  xxii.  6)." — Fausset.

Ver.  25.  "Slain  by  the  sword."  The
very  monotony  of  the  same  phraseo-
logy so  often  repeated  gives  to  the
dirge  an  awe-inspiring  effect.

Ver.  26.  "  Meshech,  Tubal,  and  her
multitude  " — the  Moschi  and  Tibareni
on  tiie  Pontic  Mountains,  between  the
Black  and  Caspian  Seas.

Ver.  27.  "With  their  weapons  of
,war."  "  The  custom,  regarded  as  signi-
ficant by  the  prophet,  prevailed  among
them,  to  bury  their  fallen  warriors
with  their  death- weapons,  in  which
they  have  their  misdeeds  with  them,
so  that  guilt  and  punishment  are  united
in  the  grave." — Hengstenberg.  "  But
their  iniquities  shall  be  upon  their
bones."  "Their  iniquities  shall  come
upon  their  very  bones." — Geikie.  Their
swords  buried  with  them  bear  witness


of  their  violence,  and  of  the  retribu-
tive cause  of  their  own  humiliation.

Ver.  29.  "  Edom  and  all  her  princes."
Edom  was  not  only  governed  by  kings,
but  by  subordinate  princes  or  dukes
(Gen.  xxxvii.  40).  This  people  had
shown  a  malicious  joy  in  the  downfall
of  Judah.  ' '  They  shall  lie  with  the  un-
circumcised."  Though  Edom  was  cir-
cumcised, being  descended  from  Isaac,
he  shall  lie  with  the  un circumcised.

Ver.  30.  "There  be  the  princes  of
the  north."  "Syria,  which  is  still
called  by  the  Arabs  the  north ;  or  the
Tyrians,  north  of  Palestine,  conquered
by  Nebuchadnezzar  (chaps,  xxvi.-
xxviii.)  " — Grotius.  "And  all  the  Zi-
donians  " — who  shared  the  fate  of  Tyre
(chap,  xxviii.  21).

Ver.  31.  "Pharaoh  shall  be  com-
forted." "  He  sighs,  is  troubled.  Others
explain.  He  comforts  himself.  But
Pharaoh  could  so  much  the  less  derive
comfort  from  the  view  of  the  others,  as
they  had  been  not  his  foes  but  his  con-
federates on  earth,  and  their  defeat
was  at  the  same  time  his  own." —
Hengstenberg.  Pharaoh's  comfort  was
but  a  sigh.

Ver.  32.  "  I  have  caused  my  terrors."

Pharaoh  was  a  long  time  terrible,  not
by  his  own  power,  but  by  the  opera-
tion of  God,  who  made  use  of  him  as
His  instrument.  The  terror  he  had
been  to  others  shall  be  experienced  by
himself  and  his  people.  "He  shall  be
laid  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircum-
cised."  "  Used  up,  Pharaoh  is  now  de-
stroyed by  the  same  power  which  em-
ployed him  before  for  its  own  ends.
He  has  in  the  time  of  the  power  vouch-
safed to  him  proved  himself  unclean
and  uncircunicised,  and  hence  must
share  the  fate  of  the  uncircumcised," —
Hengstenberg.


335


cjup.  xxxiL  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL.


HOMILETICS.

The  Terribleness  of  the  Divine  y£NaBANO&

(Vers.  1-16.)

I.  Provoked  by  the  reckless  abuse  of  power  (ver.  2).  Egypt  is  here
represented  as  a  young  lion,  or  enraged  crocodile  working  havoc  by  land  and
sea  in  sheer  wantonness  and  prodigality  of  strength.  The  needs  and  enjoy-
ments, the  rights  and  privileges,  of  others  are  utterly  disregarded  in  the  reck-
less and  excessive  exercise  of  absolute  power.  Egypt  had  oppressed  the  people
of  God,  and  this  was  not  forgotten.  It  had  already  measured  its  strength
against  the  Asiatic  forces,  and  had  been  checked  in  its  ambitious  projects.  Its
defeat  abroad  tended  to  intensify  its  tyranny  at  home,  until  its  oppression
and  viciousness  became  unbearable.  The  day  of  retribution  was  at  hand.  It
had  roused  the  righteous  anger  of  Heaven,  and  the  fiat  had  gone  forth — "  Shall
I  not  visit  for  these  things  ?  saith  the  Lord ;  shall  not  My  soul  be  avenged  on
such  a  nation  as  this  ?  "  (Jer.  v.  9).

II.  Seen  in  the  utter  ruin  of  a  mighty  nation.     1.  Its  power  to  harm  others

shall  he  crippled  (vers.  3-6.)  In  the  graphic  style  of  Ezekiel,  Egypt  is  repre-
sented as  a  huge  crocodile  caught  in  a  net,  dragged  from  the  waters,  slung  out
upon  the  open  field,  and  left  stranded  in  the  valley,  its  vast  bulk  spreading  on
the  mountain-sides,  the  land  soaked  and  the  torrent-beds  filled  with  the  gushing-
out  of  its  blood,  the  birds  and  beasts  of  prey  gorging  themselves  on  its  distended
carcass.  The  great  tyrant  is  now  powerless  to  oppress,  and  is  in  the  death-grip
of  the  avenger.  2.  Its  glory  is  quenched  (ver.  7,  8).  Tlie  sun  is  veiled  with
clouds  and  the  moon  gives  no  light,  the  stars  and  all  the  shining  lights  of
heaven  become  black,  and  darkness  is  poured  over  the  land.  The  plague  of
darkness  in  a  former  age  (Exod.  x.  21-23),  filling  the  people  with  awe  while  it
lasted,  was  temporary ;  but  the  dense  gloom  that  now  settled  upon  the  nation
meant  the  permanent  extinction  of  its  brilliant  career.  3.  Its  desolation  is  com'
plete  (vers.  11-15).  The  sword  of  the  mighty  will  beat  down  the  proud  pomp
of  Egypt  and  destroy  its  people.  The  cattle  that  browsed  beside  its  rivers
shall  be  swept  away,  so  that  no  foot  of  man  or  hoof  of  beast  shall  trouble  these
waters  more.  The  waters  shall  then  settle  and  grow  clear  and  the  canals  flow
like  oil ;  no  longer  shall  they  descend  violently,  as  the  overflowing  Nile,  on  other
countries,  but  shall  become  still  and  sluggish  in  political  action.  The  land  shall
be  stripped  of  its  abundance — "destitute  of  that  whereof  it  was  full" — and
desolation  shall  reign  supreme.

III.  Fills  surrounding  nations  with  dread  (vers.  9,  10).  The  rehearsal  of
Egypt's  tragic  fate  shall  paralyse  the  people  of  other  lands  with  fear.  Kings
shall  shake  with  terror  and  tremble  continually,  as  if  apprehensive  that  a
similar  punishment  is  impending  over  them.  It  shall  then  be  evident  that
Egypt  had  a  greater  foe  than  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  one  who  could  not  be  insulted
and  ignored  with  impunity.  "  Then  shall  they  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  *'
(ver.  15).  The  desolating  weapon  was  the  sword  of  Babylon ;  but  it  was  bran-
dished by  the  arm  of  the  invisible  Jehovah.  If  men  will  not  seek  to  know
God  in  the  tenderness  of  His  mercy,  they  shall  know  Him  in  the  severity  of
His  judgment.  "Let  all  the  earth  fear  the  Lord  :  let  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
world  stand  in  awe  of  Him.  He  bringeth  the  counsel  of  the  heathen  to  nought ;
He  maketh  the  devices  of  the  people  of  none  effect^  (Pa.  zxxiiL  8, 10).

336


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  OHAP.  xxxn.

IV.  Is  the  occasion  of  national  sorrow.  "  This  is  the  lamentation  that  they
will  raise  ;  the  daughters  of  the  nations  shall  chant  it ;  they  will  sing  this  dirge
for  Egypt  and  for  all  her  multitude  '*  (ver.  16). — Geikie,  London  witnessed  the
other  day  a  remarkable  military  pageant,  when  the  remains  of  Field-Marshal  Lord
Napier  of  Magdala,  the  hero  of  many  a  fierce  battle  fought  for  his  country,  were
borne  in  funeral  procession  to  their  last  resting-place  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral.
The  packed  masses  of  the  people  in  the  streets  silently  and  sorrowfully  saluting
the  coffin  as  it  passed  ;  the  solemn,  melting  music  of  the  Grenadiers  and  Scots
Greys,  the  best  musicians  of  the  British  army,  playing  the  funeral  march  ;  the
long  lines  of  Guards  in  soldierly  array,  and  the  softened  sunshine  occasionally
brightening  the  scene,  made  up  a  wonderfully  imposing  and  impressive  spec-
tacle. In  the  presence  of  royalty  and  the  highest  magnates  of  the  realm,  and
amid  the  tears  of  an  appreciative  people,  the  body  of  the  great  warrior  was
reverently  placed  alongside  the  tombs  of  heroes  who  had  won  distinction  in
many  a  hard-fought  battle  by  land  and  sea.  A  nation  may  well  mourn  the
loss  of  its  brave  defenders;  but  who  can  fathom  the  depths  of  grief  of  a  people
wildly  lamenting  over  national  disaster — the  throne  overturned,  government
disorganised,  homes  wrecked,  the  land  ravaged  by  the  ruthless  destroyer,  and
chaos  everywhere  !

Lessons. — 1.  Divine  vengeance  is  never  inflicted  without  ample  warning,  2.  Is
based  on  the  highest  principles  of  justice  and  equity.  3.  Will  he  a  terrible  awakening
to  the  impenitent  wicked.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.   2-16.    "  With   the  Chaldean  ness  (vers.  7,  8).      4.   Conquered  diffi-

conquest  the  political  ascendancy  of  cullies  the  admiration  and  the  fear  of

Egypt  began  finally   to    decline ;  the  others.
arm  of  its  power  was  for  ever  broken  ;

its  monarch  could  no  more  move  about  Ver.   2.  "  Take  up  a  lamentation."

as  he  pleased  and  trouble  the  nations  ;  "  Ministers  that  would  affect  others

he  was  henceforth  to  reside  in  com-  with   the  things  of  God  must  make

paratively   still   and   peaceful  waters,  it   appear   that   they   are   themselves

liimself  on  every  hand  restrained  and  affected  with  the  miseries  that  sinners

hemmed  in  by  superior  force,  and  all  bring  upon  themselves  by  their  sins,

his  pride  and  glory,  as  the  head  of  It  becomes  us  to  weep  and  tremble  for

empire,  reduced  to  perpetual  desola-  those  that  will  not  weep  and  tremble

tion.     It  is  Egypt's  doom  as  a  kingdom,  for  themselves,  to  try  if  thereby  wo

not  the  mere  condition  of  its  soil  and  may  set  them  weeping,   set  them  a-

surface,  that  the  prophet  throughout  trembling." — M.  Henry.

has  in  view." — Fairbairn.  —  "Like  a  young  lion  and  crocodile  "

— "  for  pride,  fierceness,  and  cruelty.

Vers.   2-10.  Difficulties  and  their  Thou  domineerest  over  sea  and  land,

Conquest.      1.    Difficulties    terrify    the  far   and   wide;   thou   playest   rex." —

weak  and  indolent.     "  Like  a  young  lion  Trapp.

— as  a  whale  hi  the  seas"  (ver.  2).     2.  —  "  Troubledst  the  waters."     "A

Difficulties  are  resolutely  encountered  by  great  deal  of  disquiet  is  often  given  to

the  brave  and  strong.     '*  I  will  spread  the    world   by   the  restless  ambition

My  net  over  thee  "  (ver.  3).     3.  Great  and  implacable  resentments  of  proud

difficulties  are  not  conquered  without  great  princes.      Ahab   is   he   that   troubles

havoc,      (1.)   Their   Imgeness   evident  Israel,  and  not  Elijah.     The  princes

in  their  ruins  (vers.  4-6).     (2.)  Their  and  conquerors  of  this  earth,  who,  like

dazzling  glamour  quenched  in  dark-  Pharaoh,  gain  a  great  name  by  aggres-

T  837


OHAP.  xxxn.


nOMILETW  COMMENTARY ;  EZEKIEL,


sion  and  violence,  are  no  better  in
God's  eyes  than  beasts  which  live  by
making  the  weaker  their  prey,  or
monsters  of  the  deep  which  *  trouble
the  waters  and  foul  the  rivers  *  in  pur-
suit of  their  victims." — Fausset.

Ver.  3.  "A  large,  long,  and  wide  net
drawn  out  to  full  extent,  with  which
both  lions  and  crocodiles  might  be
taken,  and  in  which  this  lion  and
crocodile  should  certainly  be  taken,
for  God,  whose  hand  never  errs,  will
spread  the  net.  In  brief,  war  by  land
and  sea,  by  a  confederacy  of  many
people  against  Hophra,  shall  be  God's
net,  wherein  he  shall  be  taken,  kept
a  prisoner  as  he  was,  and  at  last
strangled." — Fool.

—  "He  will  repay  them  in  their
own  coin.  *A11  they  that  take  the
sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword '
(Matt.  xxvi.  22).  As  they  had  spread
their  net  over  weaker  peoples,  with
a  company  of  many  peoples,  so  God
will  spread  out  His  net  over  them
with  a  company  of  stronger  people,  the
Chaldeans,  who  should  bring  them  up
as  fishes  caught  in  His  net  (Hab.  i.
U-I7y— Fausset,

Vers.  7,  8.  Darkness.  1.  A  symbol  of
destruction  and  mourning.  2.  A  proof
of  the  awfulness  and  completeness  of
the  destruction.  3.  Suggests  how  all
the  forces  of  nature  are  subservient  to
the  purpose  of  an  avenging  Deity.

—  "As  a  torch  is  extinguished.  A
description  of  great  sorrows,  fears,
troubles,  and  perplexities.  Or  it  may
intimate  particularly  the  total  ruin  of
the  whole  kingdom,  in  which  the  best,
greatest,  and  noblest  parts  are :  for
heaven  suppose  the  government,  the
sun  the  king,  the  moon  the  queen,  the
stars  the  princes  and  nobles,  the  bright
lights  the  most  eminent  of  the  subjects
for  wisdom  and  understanding,  and  the
land  the  common  people.  All  shall  be
covered  with  clouds  and  darkness  of
misery  and  sorrow." — Fool,

Ver.  8. 1  will  involve  thee,  thy  house,
thy   people,  and   the   whole   land   in
desolation  and  woe.
338


Ver.    10.    Reasons    for    Fear.      1.

When  conscious  of  personal  sin.  2.
When  the  sword  of  vengeance  is  bran-
dished before  our  eyes.  3.  When  we
witness  the  fall  of  the  proud  and  great.
4.  When  in  trembling  uncertainty  as
to  the  nearness  and  manner  of  our
approaching  fate.

—  **  All  they  who  had  admired
the  grandeur  and  power  of  Egypt
when  the  tidings  of  her  destruc-
tion  should   be    brought,    would    be

*  amazed  and  horribly  afraid.*  The
kings,  whosoever  were  conscious  of
similar  sins  to  those  of  Pharaoh,  would

*  tremble,  every  man  for  his  own  life,
when  the  Lord  should  brandish  His
sword  before  them.*  Those  who  ad-
mire the  pomp  of  worldly  greatness
shall  necessarily  be  astonished  at  its
downfall,  and  shall  tremble  for  them-
selves as  involved  in  the  same  con-
demnation as  the  world  which  they
love.  But  the  fall  of  earthly  things
will  not  take  by  surprise  nor  alarm
the  children  of  God,  whose  portion  is
not  in  this  world,  and  who  know  its
real  emptiness." — Fausset,

Ver.  12.  "Spoil  the  pomp."— "Break
her  strength,  rob  her  treasures,  sack
her  cities,  captivate  her  people,  make
the  kingdom  tributary,  and  so  stain
all  her  glory." — Fool,

Vers.  11-16.  The  Desolation  of  the
Sword.  1.  The  occasion  of  savage
delight  to  the  warlike.  2.  Silences
the  proud  boaster.  3.  Depreciates  the
value  of  human  life.  4.  The  foe  of
commerce  and  national  prosperity.  6.
Is  the  theme  of  bitter  lamentation
among  the  suffering  survivors.

Vers.  11, 12.  "Those  that  delight  in
war  and  are  on  all  occasions  entering
into  contention  may  expect  some  time
or  other  to  be  engaged  with  those  who
may  prove  too  hard  for  them.  Pharaoh
had  been  forward  to  quarrel  with  his
neighbours,  and  to  come  forth  with
his  rivers — his  armies.  God  will  now
give  him  enough  of  it." — M.  Henry.

Ver.  13.  "  There  should  be  so  few
men  left  in  Egypt   that  they  should


HOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  eBMX.  ZXXD.


not,  as  formerly,  disturb  the  waters  by  that  talked  with  them  might  perceive
digging,  swimming,  or  rowing  on  them;  how  much  it  filled  them.  But  God
or  no  more  trouble  the  waters  with  the  can  soon  make  their  country  *  destitute
passing  of  mighty  armies  over  them  to  of  that  whereof  it  is  full.*  It  is,  there-
invade  their  neighbours;  so  few  horses  fore,  our  wisdom  to  be  full  of  treasures
or  cows  that  they  should  not  at  water-  in  heaven." — M.  Henry.
ing  times,  or  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  —  "  Then  shall  they  know  that  I
foul  the  waters  by  running  into  them  am  the  Lord."  "  The  awful  and  de-
and  stamping  or  trampling  in  them ;  structive  visitation  shall  be  sanctified
but  the  waters  should  continue  pure  to  those  that  survive;  it  shall  yield
and  undisturbed." — Pool.  them  important  instruction,  and  they

shall   give   glory   to   My   power   and

Ver.  15.  "  God  can  soon  empty  those  justice,  while  a  sensible  conviction  of

of  this  world's  goods   that  have   the  the  vanity  of  the  world,   and  of  the

greatest  fulness  of  those  things  and  fading   and   perishing    nature   of    all

are  full  of  them  ;  that  enjoy  most,  and  things  in  it,  shall  draw  their  affections

have  their  hearts  set  upon  those  en-  from  it  and  from  all  that  it  contains,

joymeiits.     The  Egyptians  were  full  of  and  induce  them  to  seek  an  acquaint-

their  pleasant   and  plentiful  country  ance  with   Me   as   their  portion  and

and  its  rich  productions.     Every  one  happiness." — Benson,


EOMILETICS.

A  Funeral  Chant  over  the  Graves  of  Fallen  NATioir&

(Vers.  17-32.)        V

In  this  paragraph  Ezekiel,  the  prophet  of  the  captivity,  foresees  the  approach-
ing downfall  of  the  great  monarchies  who  had  oppressed  and  were  then  op-
pressing his  beloved  Israel.  He  sees  them  marching  to  the  grave  in  slow  and
solemn  funeral  pomp,  and  as  if  standing  by  the  huge  sepulchre  into  which  they
disappear,  chanted  over  them  a  sad,  pathetic  dirge  which  rises  here  and  there
into  strains  of  the  wildest  and  weirdest  character,  "The  seers  of  Judah,"
writes  Milman,  **  uttered  their  sublime  funeral  anthems  over  the  greatness  of
each  independent  tribe  or  monarchy  as  it  was  swallowed  up,  first  in  the  empire
of  Assyria,  and  then  Cbaldea.  They  were  like  the  tragic  chorus  of  the  awful
drama  which  was  unfolding  itself  to  the  Eastern  world."  This  funeral  chant  of
Ezekiel's  has  in  it  more  of  sorrow  than  exultation.  The  old-world  kingdoms,
with  all  their  tyranny  and  oppression,  are  not  allowed  to  pass  away  without  a
sigh.  He  is  friendless  indeed  who  does  not  leave  behind  a  solitary  mourner.
Observe —

I.  That  the  grave  brings  the  proudest  nationalities  to  a  common  leveL

Egypt,  with  her  sedate  antiquity  and  stately  pride;  Assyria,  with  her  vast
empire  and  riches ;  Elam,  with  her  strong-armed  bowmen ;  Edom,  with  her
fierce  highlanders;  and  the  princes  and  kinglets  of  the  North — Meshech,  Tubal,
and  the  Zidonians — are  all  buried  in  the  same  earth  over  which  their  mighty
armies  tramped.  The  clash  of  arms,  the  flutter  of  banners,  the  noisy  pomp  of
regal  magnificence,  the  shout  of  triumph,  and  the  groan  of  defeat  are  alike
unheard  and  unheeded.  The  rules  of  etiquette,  the  rights  of  precedence  and
supremacy,  about  which  so  many  bloody  battles  were  fought,  are  now  utterly
meaningless.

II.  That  the  grave  knows  no  distinction  of  persons.    Prince  and  peasant,

339


CHAP.  xxxn.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


the  general  and  the  humblest  soldier,  the  great  in  wisdom,  wealth,  and  power,
lie  side  by  side  with  the  common  multitude ;  rich  and  poor,  circumcised  and
uncircumcised,  are  huddled  together  in  the  same  capacious  sepulchre.  The
Egyptian,  with  his  fastidious  notions  of  cleanliness,  shrank  from  the  contamina-
tion of  the  uncircumcised,  but  the  grave  effectually  cured  all  such  scruples.  The
reflective  Cyrus,  the  great  Persian  conqueror,  saw  how  completely  the  grave
would  strip  him  of  his  imperial  glory  when  he  ordered  this  inscription  to  be
engraven  on  his  tomb — "  0  man  !  whatsoever  thou  art,  and  whencesoever  thou
comest,  I  know  that  thou  wilt  come  to  the  same  condition  in  which  I  now  am.
I  am  Cyrus,  who  brought  the  empire  to  the  Persians :  do  not  envy  me,  I
beseech  thee,  this  little  piece  of  ground  which  covereth  my  body ! "

III.  That  the  grave  reveals  the  vanity  of  national  strife  and  ambition.

Questions  of  boundaries,  official  privilege,  insulted  honour,  or  tarnished  fame
dwindle  into  utter  insignificance.  Great  warriors  have  cherished  to  the  last
the  memory  of  tlieir  victories  and  parted  reluctantly  with  the  trophies  of  their
ambition.  A  king  of  Prussia,  conscious  of  the  near  approach  of  death,  desired
to  see  his  army  defile  before  him  for  the  last  time,  and  his  couch  was  moved  to
a  window  where  by  reflection  in  a  mirror  he  was  able  to  take  a  last  adieu  of  his
troops  as  they  marched  past ;  and  it  is  said  that  Napoleon  Bonaparte  ordered
himself  to  be  seated  on  his  deathbed  and  arrayed  in  military  dress  that  he
might  meet  the  King  of  Terrors  as  he  had  been  accustomed  to  meet  his  mortal
foes.  In  the  grave  all  military  glory  is  for  ever  quenched.  Philip  III.  of  Spain,
who  strove  to  do  his  duty  as  king,  once  said  he  would  rather  lose  his  kingdom
than  willingly  ofi*end  God.  Convinced  of  the  vanity  of  all  imperial  ambitions
in  comparison  with  the  claims  of  religion,  he  broke  forth  with  the  lament —
"  Would  to  God  I  had  never  reigned  !  Oh  that  those  years  I  have  spent  in
my  kingdom  I  had  lived  a  solitary  life  in  the  wilderness  !  Oh  that  I  had  lived
a  life  alone  with  God  !  What  doth  all  my  glory  profit,  but  that  I  have  so  much
the  more  torment  in  my  death  ! "

IV.  That  it  is  but  meagre  comfort  to  the  fallen  that  in  the  grave  they
share  the  same  fate  as  those  who  have  been  as  great  as  they  "  (ver.  31).     Yet

this  is  all  the  comfort  some  will  have  :  it  was  all  that  proud  Egypt  found.  It
is  no  satisfaction  and  but  little  relief  to  the  sufferer  to  know  that  many  others
suffer  with  him.  In  this  verse  there  is  a  clear  indication  of  a  consciousness  after
death.  This  indestructible  consciousness  will  be  the  vehicle  of  future  joy  or
sorrow.

Lessons. — 1.  National  reverses  evoke  sympathy.  2.  The  grave  suggests  many
salutary  reflections.  3.  The  highest  and  best  work  we  do  survives  the  tragedy  of  the
grave.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.    17-32.    "Thus    closes    the  the  two  parties  steadily  kept  in  view  ;

Divine    word    against    Pharaoh    and  the  judgment  that  lights  on  Israel  is

his  kingdom ;   they  go   down  to  the  only  partial  and  temporary,  the  power

land  of  forgetfulness  in  common  with  and  dominion  again  return  to  him  and

all  the  surrounding  heathen  who  stood  settle  in  everlasting  possession,  while

in  a  position  of  rivalry  or  antagonism  the   neighbouring   kingdoms   that   in

to    Israel.      Throughout    the     whole  turn  aspired  to  the  supremacy  fall  to

series  of  the  predictions  we  find  the  rise  no  more.     The  question  virtually

one  grand  point  of  difference  between  discussed  in  all  such  predictions  is  this
340


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  ZXXII.


— ^Who  shall  give  law  to  the  world;
Israel,  or  the  rival  nations  of  heathen-
dom ?      And    the    answer    returned,
though  with  manifold  variety  of  form,
is   perpetually   the   same.     All   other
dominions  are  destined  to  pass  away ;
that  of  Israel  alone  becomes  perma-
nent  and   universal.     This   is   to   be
sought  only  in  Christ,  in  whom  all
that  peculiarly  belonged  to  Israel  con-
centrates itself  and  rises  to  its  proper
perfection.     In   Him,   therefore,  it  is
that  the    pre-eminence    destined    for
Israel  has  its  accomplishment,  and  all
the  external  victories  gained  over  the
surrounding   heathen,  or  the   advan-
tages granted  to  Israel  in  preference
to  them,  were  but  the  sign  and  prelude
of  that  glorious  ascendancy  over  the
whole  earth  which  in  right  is  already
Christ's,  and  in  due  time  shall  also  be
His  in  actual  possession." — Fairhairn.
—  "  The  prophet  in  this  funeral  song
brings    Egypt    into    connection   with
the  congeries  of  nations  on  which  the
Chaldean  judgment   fell.     The  prac-
tical aim  is  expressed  in  the  words  of
the  Psalmist — *  Trust  not  in  oppression
and  fraud  ;  if  riches  increase,  set  not
your  heart  on  them.'      The  prophecy
is  fitted  to  call  forth  a  deep  feeling  of
the  vanity  of  earthly  things ;  to  warn
against   carnal   confidence  in  earthly
power  and  its  abuse  by  violence  and
wrong ;  and,  what  comes  specially  into
account  here,  to  guard  against  envying
those  who  enjoy  such  power  for  the
moment.     Human  nature,  what  is  it]
In  an  hour  it  falls  to  the  ground  I" —
Hengstenberg.

Ver.  18.  "The  Egyptians  affected  to
be  buried  either  in  the  isle  Chemnis
or  in  the  Pyramids.  Their  kings  and
great  ones  thus  would  be  laid  by  them-
selves, but  Ezekiel  provides  them  their
grave  among  common  people — buries
them  where  they  fall.  They  shall  not
have  what  they  account  so  much  of  in
their  funeral." — Pool.

"  Where  they  an  equal  honour  share,
Who  buried  or  unburied  are  ;
Where  Agamemnon  knows  no  more
Than  Irus,  he  condemned  before ;
Where  fair  Achilles  and  Thersites  lie,
Equally  naked,  poor,  and  dry,"


Ver.  19.  Beauty.  1.  A  rare  endow-
ment, whether  national  or  personal
2.  No  modern  type  that  has  not  been
equalled  in  the  past.  3.  No  protection
against  the  ravages  of  time.  4.  Un-
distinguishable  when  the  grave  has
done  its  work,  5.  Its  possession  no
ground  for  vain  boasting.

—  "  *  Art  thou  better  than  others
that  thou  shouldst  not  die  and  be
laid  in  dust  ?  Speak,  Hophra,  if  thou
hast  any  privilege  to  plead,  what  hast
thou  to  say  why  thou  shouldst  not  go
down  to  the  pit  as  a  despised  mor-
tal I '  The  prophet,  hearing  no  plea  of
privilege,  says  sarcastically,  *  Go  down  ;
take  up  thy  lodging,  thy  long,  dark,
dismal  recess,  where  thy  dust  and
bones  shall  never  be  known  by  any
royal  figure.'  " — Pool.

— '*How  little  does  it  signify  whether
a  mummy  be  well  embalmed,  wrapped
round  with  rich  stuff,  and  beautifully
painted  on  the  outside  or  notl  Go
down  into  the  tombs,  examine  the
niches,  and  see  whether  one  dead  car-
cass be  preferable  to  another." — A,
Clarke,

Ver.  20.  "  Make  no  ceremony  more
than  usually  is  made  when  common
soldiers,  slain  in  the  field  where  the
battle  is  fought,  are  dragged  by  scores
into  mighty  pits  and  thrown  into  them
promiscuously,  or,  suppose  any  of  them
unwilling  to  stoop,  draw  them  to  it
against  their  will." — Pool

Vers.  21-32.  The  Grim  Welcome  of
the  Dead.  A  welcome.  1.  To  the  great
majority — "  All  her  multitude."  2.  To
defeat-^'' S\a.m  by  the  sword."  3.  To
humiliation  and  shame — "  They  lie  with
the  uncircumcised,  though  they  caused
terror  in  the  land  of  the  living."  4.
To  whatever  comfort  may  be  found  in
sharing  the  same  fate  as  great  conquerors
— "Pharaoh  shall  see  them  and  be
comforted."

Vers.  22-26.  "  His  graves  are  about
him."     The  Graves  of  our  Kindred.

1.  Recall  many  tender  memories  of
affection,  acts  of  kindness,  and  words
of  counsel  received  from  those  who
sleep  so  peacefully  there.     2.  Arrest

341


OHAP.  XXXUL


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


the  tendency  to  reproach  those  who
are  gone  for  any  injustice  they  may
have  done  to  us  when  living.  3.  Re-
mind us  we  shall  soon  be  called  to
share  their  resting  -  place,  and  how
utterly  useless  all  worldly  gain,  power,
and  reputation  will  be  to  us  there.
4.  While  reverently  bending  over  them
we  should  solemnly  resolve,  by  God's
help,  to  seek  that  glorious  immortality
which  the  grave  is  powerless  to  de-
stroy.

Ver.  23.  "  All  which  caused  terror  **
— "  where  a  terror  to  all  they  would  be
enemies  to,  and  proudly  boasted  of
and  inhumanly  used  their  power,  now
lie  quiet,  their  dust  little  regarded,  less
feared,  and  least  of  all  pitied." — Pool.

Ver.  27.  "With  their  weapons  of
war."  "  It  was  usual  in  former  times
to  put  swords,  shields,  and  other  ar-
mour in  the  graves  of  military  men,  as
they  did  in  the  grave  of  Theseus  and


on  the  bier  of  Alexander  the  Great.
But  the  meaning  of  the  prophet  here
is,  that  those  of  whom  he  speaks
should  be  without  these  usual  martial
solemnities  with  which  people  formerly
honoured  their  dead." — Benson,

Ver.  32.  "  It  is  God  who  speaks,  who
had  punished  former  tyrants,  that  the
world  might  see  His  just  judgments.
They  were  a  terror  to  the  world  by
their  cruelty,  oppression,  and  continued
violence ;  by  their  covetousness,  ambi-
tion, and  pride ;  and  God  had  made
them  a  terror  by  His  just  severities  in
their  punishment."  — Pool,

—  *'  Surely  men  disquiet  themselves
about  a  vain  thing  in  so  keenly  pursu-
ing pleasure,  gain,  fame,  and  power,  at
the  cost  of  their  immortal  souls.  What
will  all  these  objects  of  worldly  men's
pursuit  do  for  them  when  they  are  laid
in  the  grave  ^  Lord,  do  Thou  teach  us
the  blessedness  of  having  Thee  as  our
portion  for  ever  1 " — FausseU


Ezekiel's  Commission  Renewed.    (Chap,  xxziii.)


EXEGETIOAL  NOTES.— Ver.  2.
"  Speak  to  the  children  of  thy  people."

''The  prophet  turns  from  foreign  na-
tions to  Israel  again.  The  early  portion
of  the  chapter  (vers.  2-20)  seems  to  have
been  imparted  to  Ezekiel  on  the  even-
ing previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  news
of  the  downfall  of  Jerusalem  (ver.  22),
and  was  a  preparation  for  the  latter  part
(vers.  23-33)  imparted  after  the  mes-
senger had  come.  This  accounts  for
the  former  part  standing  without  date,
which  was  properly  reserved  for  the
latter  part.  'If  the  people  of  the
land  take  a  man  of  their  coasts  and
set  him  for  their  watchman.'  The
men  were  themselves  to  appoint  the
watchman,  whence,  in  case  they  did
not  give  heed  to  him,  they  withstood
and  strove  against  themselves,  and  so
should  be  more  convicted  of  their  guilt
and  folly." — Lange,

Ver.  3.  "If  when  he  seeth  the
sword  come" — invaders.  An  appro-
priate illustration  at  the  time  of  the

342


invasion  of  Judea  by  Nebuchadnezzar.
— "  He  blow  the  trumpet  " — a  horn,

with  clear  resounding  tone  (Joshua  vi.).

Ver.  4.  "His  blood  shall  be  upon
his  own  head."  "  He  will  be  to
blame  for  his  own  fall.  The  head  is
named  from  the  custom  of  carrying
on  the  head.  Blood  often  stands  for
blood-guilt. " — Hengstenherg.  Accord-
ing to  others,  the  image  is  derived
from  sacrifice,  in  which  the  offerer
transferred  his  guilt  to  his  victim  by
laying  his  hand  on  the  victim's  head
(Lev.  i.  4 ;  xxiv.  14  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  25).

Ver.  5.  "But  he  that  taketh  warning
shall  deliver  his  soul."  The  alone
self-guiltiness  of  the  individual  is  here
made  still  more  manifest.

Ver.  6.  "  He  is  taken  away  in  his
iniquity."  "  Mishap  befalls  no  one
undeserved,  even  if  under  the  circum-
stances he  might  have  been  delivered.
But  the  unfaithful  watchman  is  pun-
ished for  his  neglect." — Hengstenherg.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


CHAP.  xxxnL


Ver.  7.  "  I  have  set  thee  a  watch-
man." The  '*  I "  is  emphatic.  Eze-
kiel's  appointment  to  be  a  watchman
spiritually  is  far  more  solemn,  as  it  is
derived  from  God,  not  from  the  people.
The  lesson  is,  that  the  relation  between
the  prophet  (and  in  general  the  servant
of  God  in  His  kingdom)  and  the  people
is  one  full  of  responsibility.  "  Thou
Shalt  hear  the  word  at  My  mouth  and
warn  them  from  Me."  "  Safety  there-
fore demanded  that  the  prophet  have
free  speech.  That  God  should  have
given  them  a  true  seer  in  their  midst
was  a  sure  proof  of  His  favour,  which
might  well  keep  off  despair.  Jehovah
would  fain  save  the  wicked,  and
threatens  wrath  through  His  prophet
only  that  every  one  may  take  heed
and  reform." — Geikie,

Ver.  11.  "I  have  no  pleasure  in  the
death  of  the  wicked."  To  meet  the
Jews*  cry  of  despair  in  ver.  10  Ezekiel
here  cheers  them  by  the  assurance  that
God  has  no  pleasure  in  their  death,  but
that  they  should  repent  and  live  (2  Peter
iii.  9).  '*  A  yearning  tenderness  mani-
fests itself  here,  notwithstanding  all
their  past  sins;  yet  with  it  a  holiness  that
abates  nothing  of  its  demands  for  the
honour  of  God's  authority." — Fausset.

Ver.  12.  "  The  righteousness  of  the
righteous  shall  not  deliver  him  in
the  day  of  his  transgression."  "  Self-
righteousness,  ever  disposed  to  justify
itself,  had  adopted  among  the  exiles
a  comfortable  theory  that  they  were
punished  for  the  sins  of  their  fore-
fathers rather  than  for  their  own.
Ezekiel  again  exposes  this  deception,
as  he  had  done  before  (chap.  iii.  20 ;
xviii.  24,  26,  27)."— GeiJcie.  **The  heart
that  in  distress  misunderstands  its  God
will  not  tread  the  path  of  repentance,
which  determines  the  return  of  salva-
tion ;  and  man  is  quite  prone  to  uiiti-
gate  his  guilt  and  to  think  that  God
has  dealt  too  hardly  with  him." — Heng-
stenherg.

Ver.  21.  "  In  the  twelfth  year  of  our
captivity,  in  the  tenth  month" — a
year  and  a  half  after  the  capture  of


the  city  (Jer.  xxxix.  2 ;  IL  5,  6),  which
took  place  in  the  eleventh  year  and
fourth  month.  "  The  one  who  escaped
may  have  been  so  long  on  the  road
through  fear  of  entering  the  enemy's
country  "  (Henderson)  ;  or,  the  singular
is  used  for  the  plural  in  a  collective
sense.  "  Naturally  the  reopening  of
the  prophet's  mouth  for  consolation
would  be  deferred  till  the  number  of
the  escaped  remnant  was  complete :
the  removal  of  such  a  large  number
would  easily  have  occupied  seventeen
or  eighteen  months." — Fausset

Ver.  22.  "  The  hand  of  the  Lord
was  upon  me  in  the  evening."  Thus
the  capture  of  Jerusalem  was  known
to  Ezekiel  by  revelation,  before  the
messenger  came.  "  My  mouth  was
opened  and  I  was  no  more  dumb."  He
spake  the  message  from  God  to  the
people  contained  in  vers.  2-20  in  the
evening  before  the  tidings  came.

Ver.  24.  "  Those  wastes  of  the  land
of  Israel."  "  Less  Jerusalem  itself  than
the  other  cities  which  had  been  stripped
of  their  inhabitants  (Jer.  xxxiii.  10,
13),  in  which  those  who  were  with-
out possessions  (Jer.  xxxix.  10)  shared
with  the  returned  fugitives  (Jer.
xl.  12),  having  all  at  once  come  to
great  wealth  of  land  and  were  puffed
up." — Hitzig,  "  That  there  were  such
people  is  proved  by  the  revolt  in  which
Gedaliah,  the  Chaldean  governor,  was
slain." — Hengstenherg.  Compare  also
the  representation  in  Neh.  i  of  the
desolate  condition  of  things,  though
an  interval  of  upwards  of  a  century
had  elapsed.  *' Abraham  was  one,
and  he  inherited  the  land,  but  we  are
many."  "Some  of  the  bands  of  fighting-
men  which  had  escaped  the  Chaldeans,
not  improbably  stood  aloof,  keeping
the  country  disturbed  by  harassing
forays.  But,  like  true  Jews,  even
their  robber  life  was  dignified  by  a
religious  colouring.  Few  though  they
were,  they  fancied  there  was  no  reason
to  despair,  since  the  land  had  been
given  to  Abraham  when  he  was  alone
in  the  midst  of  the  whole  population,  a
much  more  hopeless  position  than  theirs.

343


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OEAP.  ^TTTTf^


Ezekiel,  however,  predicted  a  terrible
end  to  these  visionaries." — Geikie.

Ver.  25.  "Ye  eat  with  the  blood."
"The  eating  of  the  blood  was  for-
bidden in  Gen.  ix.  4  as  the  first  step
to  the  prohibition  of  murder.  In  the
blood  of  animals  was  to  be  seen  a  type
of  the  blood  of  men.  The  prescription
had  a  didactic  end.  It  was  to  call
forth  an  abhorrence  of  shedding  human
blood.  Whosoever  disregarded  this
prohibition  showed,  under  the  Old
Testament,  after  the  law  had  made
the  horror  of  animal  blood  national,
that  the  germ  of  the  murderous  spirit
was  in  him." — Hengstenherg,

Ver.  26.  "Ye  work  abomination."

The  abomination  is  adultery.  The  femi-
nine form  of  the  verb  is  surprising.

Ver.  28.  "That  none  shall  pass
through."  Cleared  of  men,  even  of
passing  travellers.  The  ravage  of  rob-
bers and  wild  beasts  rendered  the
ordinary  roads  unsafe.

Ver.  30.  "The  children  of  thy
people  still  are  talking  against  thee."

Though  going  to  the  prophet  to  hear
the  word  of  the  Lord,  they  criticised,
in  an  unfriendly  spirit,  his  peculiari-
ties of  manner  and  enigmatical  style
(chap.  XX.  49),  making  these  the  ex-
cuse for  their  impenitence.  "By  the
walls  and  in  the  doors  of  the  houses."
In  the  public  haunts  and  privately.


Ver.  31.    "As  My  people."     "So

respectful,  attentive,  and  apparently
earnest  and  willing."  —  Hengstenherg,
Ironically,  those  who  should  be  mine ;
or,  as  if  they  would  be  My  people  and
still  are  not.  "  With  their  mouth  they
show  much  love."  "They  deal  ten-
derly with  their  mouth  —  they  show
ardour ;  affect  in  words  an  ardent  love
to  God  and  His  words,  while  the  real
inclination  of  their  heart  goes  quite
another  way — is  turned  to  Mammon,
the  god  of  the  Jewish  old  man.'* —
Hengstenherg,

Ver,  32.  "Thou  art  unto  them  as
a  very  lovely  song  " — a  song  of  love,
a  lover's  song.  "  They  praise  thy  elo-
quence, but  care  not  for  the  subject  of
it  as  a  real  and  personal  thing,  just  as
many  do  in  the  modern  Church." —
Jerome.  "One  that  hath  a  pleasant
voice  and  can  play  well  on  an  in-
strument.*' "  Amidst  the  national  im-
poverishment they  amuse  themselves
with  the  surpassing  rhetorical  gifts  of
the  new  classic." — Hengstenherg,

Ver.  33.  "  That  a  prophet  hath  been
among  them."  "No  mere  orator.  The
difference  they  discover  in  painful  ex-
perience when  it  is  too  late.  The
threatened  punishment  has  already
overtaken  them.  They  are  already
excluded  from  the  promised  salvation
which  can  be  gained  only  by  true
repentance." — Hengstenherg*


HOMILETICS.

The  Offices  of  the  Civil  and  Spiritual  Watchman  Compared

AND  Contrasted.


(Vers.  1-9.)

Having  sung  in   strains  of  unequalled   sublimity  the  dirge  of  the  great

monarchies,  Ezekiel  returns  with  redoubled  intensity  to  the  duty  of  teaching.
The  enthusiastic  disciple  of  Jeremiah,  he  carries  out  to  their  most  startling
consequences  the  principles  but  dimly  sketched  in  the  creed  of  his  loved  master.
In  this  chapter  he  develops  in  increased  sharpness  of  definition  and  fulness
of  detail  the  doctrine  which  is  the  prominent  feature  of  his  prophetic  mission —
that  of  the  responsibility  of  the  individual  soul  separate  from  the  collective
nation,  separate  from  the  good  or  ill  deserts  of  ancestry.  **  Other  prophets,"
344


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIFL.  chap.  xxxm.


says  Stanley,  "have  more  of  poetical  beauty,  a  deeper  sense  of  Divine  things,  a
tenderer  feeling  of  the  mercies  of  God  for  His  people.  None  teach  so  simply,  and
with  a  simplicity  the  more  remarkable  from  the  elaborate  imagery  out  of  which
it  emerges,  this  great  moral  lesson,  to  us  the  first  of  all  lessons.  On  this  narrow
but  solid  plank  of  the  doctrine  of  human  responsibility  Ezekiel  crosses  the
chasm  which  divided  the  two  parts  of  his  eventful  life.  It  is  almost  the  last
doctrine  which  we  hear  announced  before  his  country  fell.  It  is  the  first  that
meets  us  as  he  recovers  from  the  shock  after  all  is  over."  This  truth  we  shall
find  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  teaching  of  the  present  and  succeeding  para-
graphs of  this  chapter.  In  these  verses  we  have  the  offices  of  the  civil  and  sjpiritual
watchman  compared  and  contrasted —

I.  In  the  manner  of  their  appointment.  1.  The  civil  watchman  is  appointed  by
the  careful  discrimination  of  his  fellow-countrymen.  "The  people  of  the  land  take
a  man  of  their  coasts  and  set  him  for  their  watchman  "  (ver.  2).  It  is  a  mutual
arrangement.  The  rulers  of  the  state  see  the  need  of  guarding  its  interests,
and  after  due  inquiry  select  the  man  who  in  their  judgment  is  best  qualified  to
discharge  the  duties  required,  and  the  man  willingly  accepts  the  post.  It  is
a  human  appointment,  and  the  fount  of  authority  is  human,  though  sanctioned
by  the  aggregate  wisdom  of  the  governing  body.  The  government  may  be  mis-
taken in  the  character  of  the  man  selected.  They  can  only  do  their  best  in
providing  for  the  immediate  exigencies  of  the  state ;  or  they  may  err  in  their
conception  of  the  trust  with  which  they  invest  their  oflBcer.  Human  wisdom  is
at  the  best  imperfect.  2.  The  spiritual  watchman  is  Divinely  appointed.  "  I  have
set  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  house  of  Israel "  (ver.  7).  Here  the  authority  is
supreme  and  infallible.  The  Divine  discernment  is  unerring.  God  never  calls
and  commissions  the  wrong  man,  and  never  appoints  His  servant  to  a  work  that
He  does  not  at  the  same  time  give  him  power  to  do,  however  unwilling  he  may
be  to  accept  the  responsibility.  The  authority  thus  delegated  is  indisputable,
because  backed  by  supreme  power,  and  from  which  there  is  no  appeal.  The
office  of  the  spiritual  watchman  is  superior  to  all  earthly  governments,  and  has
often  to  be  exercised  above  and  in  opposition  to  their  worldly  policy.

II.  In  the  duties  assigned  to  each.  1.  To  exercise  constant  vigilance,  "  When
he  seeth  the  sword  come  upon  the  land  "  (ver.  3).  "  Thou  shalt  hear  the  word
at  My  mouth  "  (ver.  7).  It  is  the  duty  of  each  to  be  ever  in  a  wakeful,  listening
attitude.  The  look-out  on  board  the  ocean-steamer  and  the  advanced  night-
picket  of  a  slumbering  army  has  each  a  responsible  post.  The  safety  of  both
vessel  and  army  depends  upon  their  keenness  of  vision  and  delicacy  of  hearing.
It  is  their  duty  to  detect  the  first  indications  of  danger.  The  duties  of  the  civil
and  spiritual  watchman  are  alike  in  demanding  a  highly  sensitive  alertness  and
heroic  fidelity.  The  excavations  at  Herculaneum,  buried  by  an  eruption  of
Vesuvius  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  revealed  the  figure  of  a
sentinel  who  remained  immovable  at  the  post  of  duty  till  swathed  and  suffo-
cated with  the  molten  lava.  2.  To  give  distinct  and  timely  warning.  "  Blow  the
trumpet  and  warn  the  people  "  (ver.  3).  "  Warn  them  from  Me  "  (ver.  7).  It
is  not  enough  to  keep  a  sharp  look-out.  Every  threatened  movement  of  the
enemy  must  be  faithfully  reported,  and  a  loud,  clear,  earnest  warning  sounded
when  the  slightest  advance  is  made  by  the  attacking  force.  The  watchman
should  be  every  moment  braced  up  to  duty,  and  no  indulgence  permitted  that
will  impair  his  faculties.  The  greater  the  peril,  the  more  urgent  and  unmis-
takable should  be  the  alarm.

IIL  In  the  reality  and  limitation  of  the  responsibility  of  each.     If  the

watchman,  seeing  the  threatened  evil,  neglects  to  warn  the  people,  he  is  respon-

345


OHAP.  xxxra.  BOMILETtC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKISL


fiible  for  the  calamities  they  may  suffer ;  if  he  warns  the  people  and  they  suffer
by  not  giving  heed  to  the  warning,  he  himself  is  clear  of  blame  (vers.  4-6,  8,  9).
Ezekiel,  while  explicit  in  teaching  what  in  his  day  was  the  novel  doctrine
of  personal  responsibility,  is  careful  to  define  its  limits.  Unlimited  responsibi-
lity would  be  intolerable ;  it  would  tend  to  paralyse  rather  than  evoke  effort.
Personal  responsibility  is  ever  limited  by  ability,  opportunity,  and  the  nature
and  scope  of  the  trust  with  which  we  are  invested.  There  is  no  discharge  from
responsibility  but  by  obedience  to  obvious  duty.  The  burden  is  then  transferred
to  those  towards  whom  duty  has  been  faithfully  fulfilled.

Lessons. — 1.  The  true  watchman  is  placed  in  a  position  of  great  honour  and
responsibility.  2.  Should  preserve  all  his  faculties  in  the  highest  possible  state  of
healthy  development  and  exercise.  3.  Is  faithful  in  the  degree  in  which  he  retains  the
consciousness  of  his  Divine  call.

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.    1-9.    Individual    Responsi-  mise  them  pardon  and  peace  without

bility — 1.  Recognised  by  the  directness  penitence  and  faith  ! " — Fausset,
of  the  Divine  revelation.    "  The  word  of

the  Lord  came  unto  me"  (ver.  1).     2.  Ver.  2.  "  Take  a  man  of  their  coasts.

Augmented  by  the  importance  of  the  office  and  set  him  for  their  watchman."    A

in  which  he  is  installed.     **Tlie  people  National  Guardian.     1.  An  important

of  the  land  take  a  man  and  set  him  officer  in   time  of  public  danger.     2.

for  their  watchman.     I  have  set  thee  Is  selected  for  some  special  qualifica-

a  watchman  unto  the  house  of  Israel "  tions  he  possesses  above  other  of  his

(vers.  2,  7).    Z.  Is  limited  to  the  faithful  countrymen.     3.    The    safety    of   the

discharge  of  specific  duties.     To  be  on  country  is  entrusted  to  his  care.     4.

the  alert,  to  raise  tlie  alarm,  to  warn  Should    be    vigilant    and    faithful    in

of  approaching  disaster  (vers.  3-5,  9).  the  discharge  of  duty.     5.  Is  account-

4.  Involves  serious  blame  when   obvious  able    for   his   conduct   to   those   who

duty  is  neglected.     "His  blood   will  I  appoint  him.
require  at  thine  hand"  (vers.  6,  8).  —  "  One  man  may  be  of  public  ser-

—  **The  duty  of  the  spiritual  watch-  vice  to  a  whole  country.  Princes  and
man  is  to  warn  faithfully  the  impeni-  statesmen  are  the  watchmen  of  a  king-
tent  of  their  imminent  danger,  and  of  dom,  that  are  continually  to  employ
the  willingness  of  God  to  receive  them  and,  if  occasion  be,  expose  themselves
graciously  and  save  them  freely  if  they  for  the  public  safety." — M.  Henry.
will  repent.  Whosoever  hears  the  —  "The  calling  to  the  office  of
watchman's  warning  and  yet  takes  no  preacher  is  twofold — one  immediate,
heed  to  it  shall  perish,  and  his  blood  the  other  mediate  ;  the  former  is  from
shall  be  upon  his  own  head.  But  the  God,  the  latter  from  man  (Acts  xxvi.
minister  who  knows  the  danger  that  15,  16;  vi.  5).  No  blind  man,  nor
is  before  sinners,  and  yet  neglects  to  dreamer,  nor  drowsy  sleeper  is  fit  for
sound  the  faithful  note  of  warning,  an  office  that  takes  its  name  from
shall  not  only  be  in  part  the  cause  of  wakefulness." — Lange.
their  ruin,  but  shall  also  bring  upon

his  own  head  an  awful  condemnation.  Vers.    4,    5.    Faithful   Warning —

They  no  doubt  justly  perish  on  account  1.    Should   be   clearly    and   earnestly

of  their  neglect  to  watch  and  pray  con-  uttered.     2.    Secures    the    safety    of

tinually ;  but  he  incurs  at  once  the  guilt  those    who   give   heed   to   it.      3.   Is

of  his  own  and  that  of  their  disobedi-  uttered  in  vain  to  those  who  neglect

ence  to  God.     What  a  heavy  account  it.     4.  Deprives  the  heedless  of  any

they  shall  have  to  render  who  make  ground  of  complaint  for  the  suffering

excuses  for  sin,  flatter  sinners,  and  pro-  he  refused  to  avoid.
346


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL  chap.  xxxiflL


Ver.   6.   Neglect   of   Duty — 1.   In-  meaning  of  the  Divine  Message.     "  Thou

excusable  where  the    duty   is  clearly  shalt  hear  the  word   at  My  moutb."

defined  and  publicly  proclaimed.     2.  3.  Should  he  faithful  in  warning  as  well

An   unmistakable   evidence  of  moral  as  in  instruction.     "  And   warn   them

deterioration.       3.    Always    involves  from  Me — speak  to  warn  the  wicked

calamity  and  suffering  to  somebody.  from  his  way."     4.  Involves  grave  re-

—  "Of  the  watching  which  is  en-  sponsibility.     "That  wicked  man  shall

joined    upon    ourselves    we    are   not  die  in  his  iniquity ;  but  his  blood  will

relieved  by  the  obligation  which  lies  I  require  at  thine  hand."     5.  Retains

upon  the  watchman.     Hence  he  who  the  Divine  approval  only  so  far  as  it  is

is  overtaken  unwarned  does  not  fall  strictly  faithful.     "But  thou  hast  de-

guiltless,    for   his   security   and   care-  livered  thy  soul."

lessness  were  the  occasion  of  his  fall.  — "With  a  spiritual  watchman  there

Contempt  of  danger  is  no  true  courage.  must  be  found  a  spiritual  life,  a  spiri-

Every  one  must  carry  his  soul  as  in  tual  light,  a  spiritual  wakefulness,  and

his   hand.     What   a  mournful  condi-  dutiful  fidelity  in  all  parts  of  his  office.'*

tion  is  it  when  the  Church  does  not  — Starke.

watch,    the   State   does  not    protect,  —  Even  when  the  preacher's  con-

the    house    does    not   admonish  !  " —  science  is  free  from  guilt  in  regard  to

Lange,  the  ungodly  who  perish  in  their  sins,

what  a  sorrow  does  it  occasion  in  the

Vers.    7-9.    The  Ministerial   Call-  life  of  the  preacher  when  he  has  to  see

ing — 1.    Divine  in  its  institution.      "I  the  impenitent  die  in  their  sins  1     "I

have  set  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  would  not  willingly  be  saved,"  said

house  of  Israel."    2.  Is  to  interpret  the  Augustine,  "  without  you,"


HOMILETICS.
The  Unswerving  Equity  of  the  Divine  Governmeh*

(Vers.  10-20.)

I.  Is  joined  with  the  most  tender  solicitations  for  the  hest  welfare  of  men.

1.  Jehovah  has  no  satisfaction  in  the  ruin  of  the  sinner  (vers.  10,  11).  It  is  a  false
conception  of  God  to  regard  Him  as  implacable  and  difficult  to  propitiate.
Such  a  view  is  possible  only  to  the  mind  debased  by  sinful  indulgence  and
hardened  by  unbelief.  Without  man's  solicitation,  and  without  his  daring  to
hope  for  such  favour,  God  offers  him  life  and  salvation,  and  reveals  His  love
in  the  wondrous  plan  which  His  spontaneous  mercy  has  provided  for  the
redemption  of  the  sinning  race.  So  slow  is  man  to  comprehend,  and  so  little
reason  had  he  to  expect  the  possibility  of  such  kindness  being  shown  to  him,
that  Jehovah  solemnly  pledges  the  integrity  of  His  Divine  character  in  assuring
him  of  the  fact — "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord."  He  has  more  pleasure  in  pardon-
ing than  punishing.  2.  Jehovah  condescends  to  plead  with  the  sinner  to  turn  from
his  iniquities  and  accept  life.  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  from  your  evil  ways ;  for  why
will  ye  die  V  (ver.  11).  Amazing  spectacle  !  Incredulous  condescension  !  God
pleading  with  man — the  highest  reason  expostulating  with  human  folly  and
unreason  !  The  monarch  imploring  rebels  to  return  to  their  allegiance  and
the  parent  entreating  the  prodigal  to  reform  may  seem  the  despair  of  baffled
helplessness.  But  not  so  with  our  Heavenly  King  and  Father.  His  con-
descension is  all  the  more  conspicuous  and  significant  because  He  is  so  strong,
so  righteous,  and  so  unselfish  in  His  aim  to  rescue  man  from  his  self-delusion
and  ruin.     A  greater  marvel  still  is,  that  in  the  presence  of  this  Divine  solicitude

347


CHAP.  XXXlU.


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZEKtEL.


man  remains  obdurate  and  indifferent,
fondly-cherished  sin  !


How  deceitful  and  deadly  an  enemy  is


IL  Recognises  the  responsibility  of  the  individual  souL  "  I  will  judge  you
every  man  after  his  ways  "  (ver.  20).  Lite  or  death  depends  on  individual
action.  Israel  is  to  be  treated  no  longer  as  a  collective  nation,  in  the  mass,  but
as  individuals,  each  one  by  himself.  This  doctrine  was  so  novel  and  startling
to  the  Jew,  and  so  opposed  to  his  notion  of  special  privileges  to  be  enjoyed  by
the  aggregate  nation,  irrespective  of  the  moral  condition  of  individuals,  that
the  masters  of  the  Synagogue  hesitated  to  receive  the  Book  of  Ezekiel  into  the
sacred  canon,  and  when  it  was  adopted,  decreed  that  it  should  not  be  read  by
any  Jew  who  was  not  above  thirty  years  of  age.  And  yet  throughout  the
Bible  there  is  no  truth  more  clearly  taught  than  this.  It  is  this  responsibility
that  gives  a  moral  character  to  each  man's  actions,  and  is  the  basis  on  which  he
must  be  ultimately  judged.

III.  Distributes  with  exact  impartiality  reward  and  punishment  according
to  individual  conduct  (vers.  12-16,  18,  19).  The  seeming  righteous  will  not
escape  punishment  if  they  sin  (vers.  12,  13,  18).  The  wicked  will  not  be
denied  reward  if  they  reform  (vers.  12,  14-16, 19).  No  man  can  shelter  himself
under  the  shadow  of  ancestral  piety,  or  under  the  reputation  of  a  blameless  life.
Personal  virtue  can  make  no  atonement  for  a  single  sin.  On  the  other  hand,
the  most  abandoned  need  not  despair.  The  Lord  **pardoneth  and  absolveth
all  those  who  truly  repent  and  unfeignedly  believe  His  holy  gospel."  The  final
decisions  of  the  Divine  government  cannot  be  charged  with  the  least  injustice,
but  will  compel  universal  adoration.

IV.  Is  the  subject  of  querulous  complaint  by  the  wrong-doer.    "  Yet  the

people  say.  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal ;  but,  as  for  them,  their  way  is  not
equal"  (vers.  17,  20).  Wrong-doing  blinds  the  mental  vision,  dulls  and  vitiates
the  moral  sense,  and  incapacitates  the  soul  from  exercising  righteous  judgment.
Ignorance  is  always  obstinately  one-sided.  Reminds  one  of  the  Irish  jury-
man who  had  never  met  eleven  such  obstinate  men  as  his  fellow-jurors;  and  of
the  recruit  who  maintained  he  was  the  only  man  of  his  company  who  was
keeping  step.  The  sinner  is  ready  to  blame  any  one  but  himself,  and  even
dares  to  impugn  the  equity  of  the  great  Judge  of  all  the  earth.  The  reckless
audacity  of  such  a  charge  reveals  his  own  condemnation.

Lessons. — 1.  Divine  justice  and  mercy  are  inseparable,  2.  If  we  embrace  the
principles  of  the  Divine  government  it  becomes  easy  to  do  right  and  difficult  to  do
wrong,     3.  The  destiny  of  every  man  iSy  under  God,  in  his  own  hands*


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  10,  11.  A  yearning  tenderness
here  manifests  itself,  still  seeking,  not-
withstanding all  that  has  taken  place,
the  return  of  those  who  survived  to  the
way  of  peace.  But  with  that  tenderness
what  a  stern  and  unflinching  holiness  I
There  can  be  no  relaxation  or  abate-
ment mentioned  in  respect  to  this,  not
even  amid  the  moanings  of  pain  and
cries  of  distress  which  arose  from  tho

348


people ;  no  return  to  life  possible  but
through  a  return  to  righteousness.

Ver.  10.  Unrepented  Sin — 1.  Pro-
duces a  sullen  disposition.  2.  Fosters
the  mistaken  notion  that  we  are  pun-
ished for  the  sins  of  others  rather  than
for  our  own.  3.  Reflects  upon  the
sincerity  of  the  Divine  promises,  i.
Fills  the  soul  with  despair.


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  ohak  xxxilt.


—  "Thus  ye  speak."  "But  not  towards  his  parents  (Judges  xiv.  9).
well,  whilst  ye  have  hard  thoughts  of  Here,  if  anywhere,  we  may  find  strong
God  and  heavy  thoughts  of  yourselves,  consolation.  God  when  He  swears
as  if  your  sins  were  unpardonable,  and  desires  certainly  to  be  credited.  0
that  ye  were  already  ruined  beyond  happy  we  for  whose  sakes  God  vouch-
relief;  whereas  true  repentance  is  a  safeth  to  swear!  and  0  wretched  we
ready  remedy,  a  plank  after  shipwreck  if  we  believe  not  God,  no,  though  He
that  would  set  you  safe  and  render  you  swear  to  us  ! " — Trapp,

right  again.     This  they  had  been  told  —  "  The  living  God  wills  life,  and

before  (chap,  xviii.),  but  to  little  pur-  also  gives  it  to  those  who  will ;  but

pose.    The  word  was  not  mingled  with  unless  men  also  wish  it,  He  certainly

faith  in  their  hearts,  and  did  therefore  does  not  give." — Lange,

run  through  them  (Heb.  ii.  1)  as  water  —  "Why  will  ye  die?" — "I  have

runs  through  a  riven  vessel." — Trapp.  been  to  you  a  nursing  Father,     Will

—  "  It  is  common  with  those  that  ye  not  love  Me  ?  I  have  opened  a
have  been  hardened  with  presumption,  bleeding  altar,  even  Calvary,  that  the
when  they  were  warned  against  sin,  to  foulest  of  sinners  may  approach.  Why
sink  into  despair  when  they  are  called  will  ye  stay  at  a  distance  in  shame
to  repent,  and  to  conclude  there  is  no  and  sin  1  I  have  borne  and  had
hope  of  life  for  them." — M,  Henry.  patience.     I  have   stretched   out  My

—  "All  in  the  end  feel  sin,  but  they  hands  all  the  day  long  to  a  gainsaying
hate  it  not. — The  way  of  the  uncon-  people.  My  prophets  have  laboured
verted  in  this  respect  is  to  look  rather  and  wept ;  they  aver,  being  filled  with
to  the  temporal  than  to  the  eternal  My  Spirit,  that  their  hearts*  desire  and
life. — To  despair,  instead  of  turning  to  prayer  is,  that  Israel  might  be  saved.
God,  is  but  another  form  of  the  pride  Why  will  you  resist  the  ministry  of
that  is  in  the  human  heart. — Despair  grace  1  I  have  aided  the  ministry  with
is  another  kind  of  impenitence. — How  slow  and  gentle  corrections.  Why
contrasts  touch  one  another! — The  will  you  fight  against  Me?  You  are
godly  also  are  sometimes  on  the  brink  beloved  for  your  fathers'  sake ;  you
of  despair — David,  Ps.  xxxviii.,  and  have  been  to  Me  a  pleasant  vineyard,
Cain,  Gen.  iv.  That  punishment  I  have  planted  you  with  the  choice
should  always  be  heavier  to  us  than  vine  of  Sorek ;  and  what  could  I  have
sin  ! — He  who  would  justify  himself  done  for  My  vineyard  that  I  have  not
would  perhaps  throw  the  blame  even  done?  Why  then  will  ye  prefer  idols
uponGod.— God  always  deals  unfairly  to  Me?  Why  will  you  prefer  shame
with  the  wicked,  as  they  think." —  to  glory,  death  to  eternal  life  ? " —
Lange,  Sutcliffe,

Ver.  11.  The  Pitifulness  of  the  Ver.  13.  "It  was  a  widespread  de-
Divine  Mercy — 1.  Finds  no  delight  in  lusion  among  the  Jews  that  they
punishing.  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  possessed  a  hereditary  righteousness  ;
death  of  the  wicked."  2.  Yearns  for  that  whatever  they  themselves  might
the  recovery  of  those  who  have  abandoned  be,  yet  the  righteousness  of  their  pious
the  way  of  obedience,  **  But  that  the  fathers,  from  Abraham  down,  would
wicked  turn  from  his  way  and  live."  avail  them  ;  and  if  they  experienced
3.  Breaks  forth  in  tenderest  persuasive-  the  contrary  in  their  misfortunes  they
ness.  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  ;  for  why  will  held  themselves  justified  in  murmuring
ye  (lie  ? "  4.  Is  declared  with  the  most  against  God.  The  prophet  teaches,  on
solemn  asseveration.  "  As  1  live,  saith  the  contrary,  that  the  fate  of  every
the  Lord."  generation   is  determined  by  its  own

—  "  This  is  one  of  those  precious  relation  to  God." — Hengstenherg.
places,  those  mellifluous  honeycombs  —  "  Many  eminent  professors  have
which     we    should    go     on    sucking  been  ruined  by  a  proud  conceitedness
towards  heaven,  as  Samson  once  did  of  themselves  and  confidence  in  them-

349


CHAP.  xxxm.


BOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL,


selves.  He  trusts  to  the  merit  of  his
own  righteousness,  and  thinks  he  has
already  made  God  so  much  his  debtor
that  now  he  may  venture  to  commit
iniquity,  for  he  has  righteousness
enough  in  stock  to  make  amends  for
it ;  he  fancies  that,  whatever  evil  deeds
he  may  do  hereafter,  he  can  be  in  no
danger  from  them,  having  so  many
good  deeds  beforehand  to  balance
them.  He  thinks  himself  so  well
established  in  a  course  of  virtue  that
he  may  thrust  himself  into  any  tempta-
tion and  it  cannot  overcome  him,  and
so  by  presuming  on  his  own  sufficiency
he  is  brought  to  commit  iniquity." —
M.  Henry.

—  "Not  that  we  are  evil  by  nature
is  what  finally  condemns  us,  but  that
we  remain  evil  in  spite  of  the  goodness
of  God  which  seeks  our  conversion.** —
Lange.

Vers.  14, 15.  Genuine  Repentance —
1.  Is  not  only  sorrow  for  sin,  but  a
turning  from  it.  2.  A  striving  to  do
the  right.  3.  Shown  in  the  restitution
of  all  wrongfully  acquired  goods.  4.
A  permanent  blessing  only  by  walking
in  harmony  with  the  living  Word.

—  Conversion — "  1.  Of  heart.  2.
Of  conduct.     3.  Of  life." — Lange,

—  "  Penitency  is  almost  as  good  as
innocency." — Trapp,

Ver.  15.  "Robbery  and  violence
would  be  too  gainful  a  trade  if  a  man
might  quit  all  scores  by  repentance
and  detain  all  he  had  gotten  ;  or  if  the
father's  repentance  might  serve  the
turn,  and  the  benefit  of  the  transgres-
sion be  transmitted  as  an  inheritance


to  the  son.  If  the  pledge  remained  it
must  be  restored.  The  retaining  it  is
committing  a  new  iniquity,  and  for-
feits any  benefit  of  the  promise.  If  he
hath  it  not,  nor  is  able  to  procure  it,
his  hearty  repentance  is  enough,  with
reparation  ;  but  to  enjoy  the  spoil  and
yet  to  profess  repentance  is  an  affront
to  Almighty  God,  and  a  greater  sin
than  the  first  act  of  violence,  when  he
did  not  pretend  to  think  of  God,  and
so  did  not  think  of  displeasing  Him.
Whereas  now  he  pretends  to  reconcile
himself  to  God  and  mocks  Him  with
repentance,  while  he  retains  the  fruit
of  his  wickedness.  He  who  is  truly
penitent  restores  what  he  hath  left  to
the  person  who  was  deprived  of  it,  and
pays  the  rest  in  devout  sorrow  for  his
trespass." — Lord  Clarendon,

Vers.  17,  20.  False  Estimates — 1.
Inevitable  when  Divine  things  are
measured  by  a  human  standard.  2.
The  product  of  a  mind  warped  with
error  and  sin.  3.  Eecoil  in  punish-
ment upon  those  who  are  blind  to
their  own  falseness  and  injustice.

Ver.  17.  "  When  men  find  fault  with
the  ways  of  God  as  not  equal,  it  is
because  their  own  ways  are  not  equal.
On  the  other  hand,  God  says,  *  Do  not
My  words  do  good  to  him  that  walketh
uprightly  1  *  (Micah  ii.  7).  God  *  meet-
eth  him  that  worketh  righteousness ;
those  that  remember  God  in  His  ways  '
(Isa.  Ixiv.  5).  The  cause  of  sceptical
cavils  at  the  ways  of  Divine  provi-
dence and  grace  lies  in  the  unbeliever's
faulty  state  of  heart  which  corrupts
the  understanding." — FatASset,


HOMILETIGS.

The  Infatuation  of  Unbeuet.

(Vers.  21-33.)

I.  Blinds  the  soul  to  the  significance  of  passing  events.  1.  The  greatest
calamity  is  not  understood,  "The  city  is  smitten  "  (ver.  21).  No  greater  disaster
could  happen  to  the  Jew.  The  impregnable,  the  invincible  Jerusalem  in  ruins,
the  sacred  Temple  violated  and  destroyed — impossible  !  Yet  the  impossible
had  happened  ;  and  the  people,  stupefied  by  the  greatness  of  the  calamity,  or  by
350


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEt.  obap.  xxxm.


the  inveteracy  of  their  wickedness,  failed  to  grasp  the  meaning.  In  their  unbe-
h'eving  infatuation  tliey  could  not  see  that  the  Divine  guardianship  that  en-
compassed the  city  with  a  shield  that  no  mortal  enemy  could  pierce  had  been
withdrawn,  because  of  their  sins.  2.  The  plainest  evidences  of  faithful  warning  were
ignored.  Ezekiel  predicted  that  he  would  be  silent  for  some  time  on  matters
affecting  Israel  until  news  of  the  downfall  of  Jerusalem  came.  The  prediction
was  exactly  fulfilled,  and  he  once  more  opens  his  mouth  concerning  Israel  (comp.
chap.  xxiv.  27  with  xxxiii.  22) — another  proof  of  the  Divine  sanction  to  the
warnings  of  His  servant ;  yet  this,  like  many  other  similar  evidences,  was  un-
heeded. We  are  infatuated  indeed  when  passing  events  cease  to  interest  us
and  suggest  no  lessons  of  either  warning  or  counsel.

II.  Intensifies  the  practice  of  the  grossest  sins  (vers.  24-26).  1.  Covetous-
ness  (ver.  24).  They  cling  in  a  spirit  of  desperate  covetousness  to  the  land
already  lost,  and  which  now  belonged  to  their  conquerors.  The  savage  greed
with  which  the  scattered  few  held  by  the  land  of  their  forefathers  might  excite
compassion  did  we  not  know  how  hopeless  was  their  task  and  how  utterly
selfish  their  aim.  They  wished  to  keep  the  land  not  to  reform  but  to  indulge
abuses.  2.  Idolatry  (ver.  25).  The  sin  which  had  been  the  occasion  of  all  the
distresses  that  now  afflicted  the  land,  instead  of  being  put  away,  was  carried
on  with  aggravated  enormities.  3.  Tyranny.  **Ye  stand  upon  your  sword"
(ver.  26).  They  do  not  seek  to  rule  on  principles  of  right  and  equity,  but  by
the  tyranny  of  force  and  arms.  It  was  the  wild  anarchy  of  reckless  desperadoes.
The  tyranny  was  all  the  more  cruel  because  of  the  unprotected  and  helpless  con-
dition of  the  few  that  still  remained  in  the  land.  4.  The  worst  form  of  immorality
(ver.  26).  Adultery,  How  deep  was  the  degradation  of  the  chosen  people  of
God  when  they  descended  to  the  worst  practices  of  the  heathen,  and  veiled
them  under  the  sacred  name  of  religion!  Unbelief  is  immorality,  and  abandons
man  to  the  tyranny  of  all  kinds  of  abominations.

III.  Invokes  a  more  terrible  punishment  (vers.  27-29).  Ruin  shall  be  piled
on  ruin ;  the  wastes  shall  be  reduced  to  more  hopeless  wastes ;  desolation  shall
reign  supreme.  By  an  inevitable  retribution,  the  sword  on  which  they  placed
their  chief  dependence  and  with  which  they  had  oppressed  the  weak  shall  be
the  instrument  of  their  own  destruction,  and  the  pestilence  shall  finish  the  work
left  undone  by  the  sword.  The  desolating  ruin  shall  be  so  complete  that  the
fields  and  vineyards,  once  so  peacefully  cultivated  and  so  abundantly  productive,
shall  be  the  haunts  of  wild  beasts  and  the  terrified  inhabitants  become  their
])rey.  Travellers  will  be  careful  to  avoid  the  infested  region:  **  None  shall  pass
through"  (ver.  28).  Terrible  indeed  will  be  the  punishment  that  shall  overtake
the  obstinately  unbelieving.

lY.  Makes  mockery  of  the  most  earnest  utterances  of  the  Divine  message
(vers.  30-32).  1.  There  is  the  show  of  charmed  interest  in  the  messenger.  *'  They
come  unto  thee  as  the  people  cometh  ;  they  sit  before  thee  as  My  people.  With
their  mouth  they  show  much  love.  Thou  art  unto  them  as  a  very  lovely  song
of  one  tliat  hath  a  pleasant  voice  and  can  play  well  on  an  instrument "  (vers.
31,  32).  Their  interest  in  the  preacher  is  superficial,  like  that  of  many  present-
day  hearers.  They  are  pleased  with  a  rich,  musical  voice,  with  oratorical
eloquence,  with  dramatic  posturings,  with  ritualistic  display  and  full  choral
effects  ;  and  that  is  all.  It  is  the  same  kind  of  pleasure  they  have  in  listening
to  a  well-rendered  song,  or  a  solo  on  the  violin  by  an  accomplished  performer.
The  serious  meaning  of  the  message  and  its  application  to  their  practical  life
they  have  no  desire  to  understand.  2.  2'hey  make  sport  of  both  messenger  and
message  in  public  and  private,     "  The  children  of  thy  people  still  are  talking


CHAt.  2ixxiii.  HOMILEflC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKllSt.


against  thee  by  the  walls  and  in  the  doors  of  the  houses,  and  speak  one  to
another,  every  one  to  his  brother,  saying — (with  a  chuckling  contemptuousness
that  reveals  the  hollowness  and  baseness  of  their  hypocritical  concern) — Come,
I  pray  you,  and  hear  what  is  the  word  that  cometh  forth  from  the  Lord  '*
(ver.  30).  An  invitation,  not  to  ponder  the  Divine  message,  but  to  listen  to
their  garbled  version  of  it,  as  they  reproduce  it  with  flippant  sportiveness  and
grotesque  caricature.  It  is  a  sad  evidence  how  completely  unbelief  has  degraded
and  infatuated  the  soul  when  the  message  that  deals  with  its  eternal  interests
ia  made  the  subject  of  fun  and  ridicule.  3.  They  are  too  far  steeped  in  infamy  to
attempt  to  practise  what  they  hear.  '*They  hear  thy  words,  but  they  will  not  do
them  ;  their  heart  goeth  after  their  covetousness  "  (vers.  31,  32).  They  love  sin
more  than  godliness.  To  give  heed  to  the  Divine  message  would  break  in
unpleasantly  on  the  round  of  self-indulgence  with  which  they  are  encircled  as
with  an  iron  band.  They  have  resisted  so  many  appeals  that  the  heart  has
become  as  hard  as  adamant.  "  How  dangerous  it  is,**  wrote  John  Foster,  the
celebrated  essayist,  "  to  defer  those  momentous  reformations  which  conscience
is  solemnly  preaching  to  the  heart !  If  they  are  neglected,  the  diflSculty  and
indisposition  are  increasing  every  month.  The  mind  is  receding  degree  after
degree  from  the  warm  and  hopeful  zone,  till  at  last  it  will  enter  the  arctic  circle,
and  become  fixed  in  relentless  and  eternal  ice."

V.  "Will  one  day  receive  a  rude  and  painful  awakening.  "  When  this  cometh
to  pass  (lo,  it  will  come),  then  shall  they  know  that  a  prophet  hath  been  among
them  **  (ver  33).  The  threatened  judgment  fell  on  Israel,  and,  when  it  was  too
late,  they  saw  the  value  of  the  opportunities  they  had  despised.  Those  who  do
not  know  the  preciousness  of  their  privileges  by  using  them  aright  shall  here-
after be  made  to  know  by  being  deprived  of  those  privileges  for  ever.  It  is
the  wail  of  many  that  they  did  not  know  the  value  of  their  blessings  until  they
were  lost.

Lessons. — 1.  The  lowest  depth  of  unbelief  is  not  reached  without  many  faithful
warnings.  2.  Unbelief  is  subtle  and  deadly  in  its  progress,  3.  The  cure  of  uvJbelief
is  a  merciful  act  of  God.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.    21.    Bad   News — 1.    Always  threatening    and    meets    those    who,

travels  fast.     2.  Its  lesson  should  be  still  giving  themselves  up  to  illusions,

seriously  pondered.     3.  Is  disregarded  thought  that  the  judgment  would  not

only  by  the  infatuated.  inexorably  run  its  course.     But  before

the  seed  of  Divine  hope  could  be  sown,

Ver.  22.   "The  opened  mouth  of  a  the  last  thorns  and   thistles  of  false

servant  of  God  is  his  frankness ;  the  human  hopes,  and  of  the  efforts  that

contrary  is  trimming  and  flattery;  and  grew  out  of  them,  had  to  be  destroyed,

it  is  also  distinguished  from  sarcastic  which  even  now,  although  against  all

witticisms,  evil  speaking,  and  insult.  appearances,  were  convulsively  grasped

The  servants  of  God  should  be  frank  by    those    who   avoided    the   passage

in  speech,  yet  not  like  insolent  fellows  through  the  strait  gate  of  repentance

who  believe  they  may  say  everything  which  is  the  condition  of  participating

because  no  one  can  contradict  them,  in  the  Divine  hope,  and  did  not  wish

at  least  when  in  the  pulpit." — Lather.  to  put  off  the  spotted  garment  of  the

flesh." — Hengstenberg.
Vers.   23-29.   "  The  new  discourse

here  first  takes  np  again  the  former  Vers.    24-29.   The  Inheritance    of
352


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  xxxra.


the    Wicked  —  \,    A    desolate    waste,  fidence  ou  being  children  of  Abraham,

**  They   inhabit   those    wastes   of  the  as  if  that  alone  were  enough  to  secure

land  of  Israel "  (ver.  24).     2.   Yet  held  them  in  all  covenant  blessings,  while

with  a   dogged  pertinacity.     "  We   are  He  charged  them  with  being  in  spirit

many  :  the  land  is  given  us  for  inherit-  children  of  the  devil,  and  consequently

ance  *'  (ver.  24).     3.  The  scene  of  un-  entitled  only  to  look  for  the  portion

restrained  riot  and  wickedness.      "  Ye  of  the  lost  (John  viii.  33-44)." — Fair-

shed   blood :  ye   work   abomination  '*  hairn,

(ver&  25,  26).     4.  Defies  the  most  des-         —  "  Walls,  cities,  go  to  ruin,  but

perate  efforts  to  retain  it.     ''  The  sword,  a  fool  will  still  plant  himself  on  the

devouring  beasts,  the  pestilence,"  are  ruins  (Pro v.  xxvii.  22).       When  the

beyond  their  power  to  vanquish  (ver.  mask  falls  from  the  hypocrite,  then

27).     5.  Is  fi7iaUy  swept  by  the  desolating  will  the  beast  of  prey  which  lay  be-

vengeance  of  outraged  justice.     *'  I  will  hind  become  manifest ;  and  we  shall

lay  the  land  most  desolate — because  of  all  be  made  manifest  before  the  judg-

their  abominations  '*  (vers.  28,  29).  ment-seat  of  Christ :  then  the  masque-

—  "  Such  was  the  infatuation  of  the  rade  will  be  out." — Lange,
escaped  remnant  in  the  now  wasted

lands  of  Judea  that  they  were  even         Ver.   27.    "  The  Divine  vengeance

still  full  of  self-sufficient   confidence,  does  not  need  to  rush  upon  its  victim

Had  this  confidence  been  resting  on  from  behind  in  order  to  lay  hold  of

the  restoration  of  God's  favour  through  him,  nor  does  it  require  to   make  a

their  repentance,  it  would  have  been  long  and  laborious  search  after  him  ;

a  reasonable  confidence ;  but  it  rested  but  where  he  has  fled  to  and  fancies

on  utterly  false  reasonings  as  to  the  himself  hidden,  whether  it  be  in  the

relation  in  which  they  stood  to  Abra-  heights  or  in  the  depths,  there   the

ham.     Abraham,    they   reasoned,    ob-  vengeance  of  God   lies  in   readiness,

tained   from   God  the  inheritance  of  and  has  been  expecting  him  to  come  to

Canaan,  and  we  are  his  children,  and  it.     In  the  end  we  all  come  to  God.

therefore   are   entitled   to  succeed  to  Alas  that  so  few  should  fall  into  His

his  inheritance.    Abraham  was  but  one  arms,   while  so  many  fall   upon  His

when   he  obtained  the  grant  of   the  sword !     If  the  wild  beasts  of  passion

land ;  much  more  shall   we  retain  it  do  not  tear  a  man,  the  pestilence  of

as  our  own  who  are  many.     But  they  his  natural  corruption  will  gradually

utterly  shut  their  eyes  to  the  fact  that  consume  him." — Ibid.
Abraham  pleased  God  in  all  his  ways,

and  was  therefore  called  the  friend  of         Vers.  27-29.  **The  small  remnant  in

God  ;  they,  on  the  contrary,  displeased  Judea  being  so  far  from  righteousness,

God  in  all  their  ways  by   *  working  the  prophet  could  only  speak  to  them

abominations  *    and    '  standing    upon  as  a  minister  of  condemnation.    What

their  sword,'  as  if  might  made  right,"  they  had  to  expect  was  only  judgment

— Fausset,  still  more  severe   and  exterminating

than  what  had  yet  been   appointed.

Ver,    24.     "  Strange     infatuation  !  For  ^em  the  desolations  of  the  land

That  when  the  sign  of  God's  displea-  must  become  still  more  desolate,  and

sure  had  been  so  strikingly  displayed  new  horrors  be  inflicted  by  the  sword,

against  them  for  their  sins,  scattering  the  pestilence,  and  the  wild  beast     All

all  their  vain  confidence  to  the  wind,  must  be  reduced  to  a  howling  wilder-

they  should  still,  without  abandoning  ness,  as  it  really   was,  that  the  new

those  sins,  hope  for  the  peculiar  tokens  hope  for  Israel  might  spring  from  an-

of  the  Divine  favour  !     Yet  in  a  more  other  and  better  root,  and   that  the

subtle  and  refined  form   we  find   the  people  might  know  how  impossible  it

same  flagrant  inconsistence  practiced  was   to  attain   to  blessing  from  God

by  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time  who,  without  first  separating  from  sin," —

in  like  manner,  reckoned    with   con-  Fairbairtk

353


CHAP.  XXXUL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


Ver.  28.  **  Desolate  shall  it  be  at
last  about  every  ungodly  man  ;  for  as
the  heart  is,  so  is  the  life.  First  of  all
sin  desolates,  then  come  desolations
through  death ;  finally,  we  pass  into
the  desolation  of  an  eternity  without
God." — Lange.

Ver.  29.  See  chap  xxx.  19.

—  Those  are  intractable  and  un-
teachable  indeed  that  are  not  made
to  know  their  dependence  upon  God
when  all  their  creature-comforts  fail
them  and  they  are  made  desolate.

Ver.  30-33.  The  Preacher's  Critics

— 1.  Use  every  opportunity  in  public  and
private  to  hold  him  up  to  ridicule.  "  Thy
people  still  are  talking  against  thee
by  the  walls,  and  in  the  doors  of
the  houses  "  (ver.  30).  2.  Are  eager
to  give  their  own  garbled  version  of  his
message.  "  Come,  I  pray  you,  and  hear
what  is  the  word  that  conieth  forth
from  the  Lord  "  (ver.  30).  3.  Observe
the  outward  decorum  of  .worship.  "  They
sit  before  thee  as  My  people,  and  hear
thy  words "  (ver.  31).  4.  Show  a
fondness  for  the  word  which  the  state  of
their  hearts  contradicts.  "  With  their
mouth  they  show  much  love  ;  but  their
heart  goeth  after  their  covetousness "
(ver.  31).  5.  Are  charmed  with  the
music  of  eloquence.  "  Thou  art  unto
them  as  a  very  lovely  song  of  one  that
hath  a  pleasant  voice,  and  can  play  well
on  an  instrument "  (ver.  32).  6.  Listen
not  for  profit,  but  to  pick  up  material  for
scornful  gossip.  "  They  hear  thy  words,
but  they  do  them  not "  (ver.  32).  7.
Only  when  calamity  comes  do  they  learn
the  value  of  what  they  despised.  "  When
this  cometh  to  pass  shall  they  know
that  a  prophet  hath  been  among  them  '*
(ver.  33).

—  "  In  making  use  of  human  agents
to  reveal  His  will  to  men,  the  Lord
teaches  us  to  look  for  no  external  per-
fection. There  may  be  found  all  the
diversities  of  manner  and  nearly  all
the  imperfections  which  distinguish
ordinary  speakers,  for  the  Spirit,  even
in  His  highest  operations,  must  still
leave  free-play  to  native  peculiarities
of  thought  and  utterance.     But  in  re-

35i


gard  to  its  substance  God*s  Word  is
perfect,  and  stands  nobly  apart  from
all  that  is  of  man.  Let  it  ever  be
ours,  therefore,  to  hear  it  with  rever-
ence and  bow  to  its  requirements  with
child-like  submission.  It  is  we  who
must  fall  in  with  its  terms,  not  it  that
must  accommodate  itself  to  ours." —
Fairbairn.

— "  The  Word  of  God  is  a  very  serious
matter.  Let  every  one  take  heed  how
he  hears,  that  he  be  not  a  hearer  only,
but  a  doer.  What  the  prophet  an-
nounces comes  to  pass,  and  if  the  ful-
filment takes  place  the  mere  hearer
will  be  the  loser ;  he  is  overtaken  by
the  threatened  punishments  and  ex-
cluded from  the  promised  blessings.
He  has  not  to  deal  with  an  excellent
orator;  but  behind  the  Son  of  man
stands  the  Lord,  mighty  to  punish  and
to  save." — Hengsteriberg,

Ver.  30.  **  Public  persons  are  a  com-
mon subject  of  discourse.  Every  one
takes  liberty  to  censure  them  at  plea-
sure, and  faithful  ministers  know  not
how  much  ill  is  said  of  them  every
day.  But  God  takes  notice,  not  only
of  what  is  decreed  against  them,  or
sworn  against  them,  or  written  against
them,  or  spoken  with  solemnity  and
deliberation,  but  of  what  is  said  against
them  in  common  talk,  and  He  will
reckon  for  it.  His  prophets  shall
not  always  be  made  the  song  of  the
drunkards." — M.  Henry.

Ver.  31.  **  Merely  to  hear  without
doing  makes  all  preaching  unprofit-
able. Strange  that  sermons  of  rebuke
should  be  more  attractive  than  grace-
sermons.  Men  would  rather  be  smitten
than  caressed.  They  think,  perhaps,
that  in  the  love  there  is  too  much
of  design.  If  one  has  been  struck
by  the  cudgel,  it  is  still  possible  to
preserve  one's  heart  and  head ;  but
love  leaves  nothing  to  one's  self,  it
demands  all — the  whole  man  and  the
whole  life." — Lange.

—  "  Their  heart  is  on  their  half-
penny, we  say ;  neither  can  the  load-
stone of  God's  Word  hale  them  one  jot
from  the  earth.      As  serpents  h»ve


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  XXXIV.


their  bodies  in  the  water,  their  heads
out  of  the  water,  so  here  :  as  those
Gergesites,  they  mind  a  swine-sty  more
than  a  sanctuary." — Trapp.

—  "  With  all  their  loud  mouth-pro-
fessions of  love  to  God  and  His  ordi-
nances, the  love  which  reigns  in  their
heart  is  love  of  self,  of  fame,  pleasure,
and  gain.  Covetousness  is  a  grand
rival  to  the  love  of  God,  so  that  where
the  love  of  Mammon  is,  there  the  love
of  God  is  not." — FausseU


Ver.  32.  "  Mere  habit  as  regards  the
hearing  of  sermons  makes  people  in-
different, and  at  last  stupid.  Pious
sentimentalism  is  spiritual  adultery,
Satan  goes  with  us  into  church.  Edi-
fication and  the  capacity  for  it  are  two
different  things." — Lange,

Ver.  33.  "A  true  prophet  will  al-
ways leave  beind  him  the  impression
of  a  true  prophet."


The  Reproof  of  the  Faxse  Shepherds  and  a  Promise  of  the  Good
AND  True  Shepherd.     (Chap,  xxxiv.)


EXPLANATORY  NOTES.— Ver.
1.  "  Prophesy  against  the  shepherds."

**  The  trouble  which  the  prophet  here
encounters  arises  from  the  loss  of  civil
government.  The  seeming  loss,  he
contends,  is  a  real  gain,  as  the  present
government  was  so  bad." — Hengsten-
berg.  Keil  designates  the  turning
against  the  bad  shepherds  as  a  foil
for  the  ensuing  promise.

Ver.  2.  "Woo  to  the  shepherds."

The  rulers  who  sought  in  their  govern-
ment their  own  selfish  endt,  not  the
good  of  the  people  ruled.  Kliefoth
understands  the  entire  body  of  offi-
cials who  had  committed  to  them  the
leadership  of  the  people.  The  office,
like  that  of  a  shepherd  for  his  flock,  is
to  guard  and  provide  far  his  people.

Ver.  3.  "  Ye  eat  the  fat,  and  clothe
you  with  the  wool."    Refers  to  the

draining  of  the  subjects.  The  rulers
levied  exorbitant  tributes.  "  Ye  kill
them  that  are  fed  " — the  culminating
act  denoting  the  murder  of  the  subjects
in  order  to  seize  on  their  goods.

Ver.  4.  "That  which  was  driven
away."  "  When  Israel  was  not  held
together  in  the  name  of  Jehovah
through  the  theocratic  offices,  the
scattering,  the  self-abandonment  and
surrender  to  the  worldly  powers  was
the  natural  necessary  consequence." —
l/inge.    "  With  force  and  cruelty  have


ye  ruled  them."  As  the  Egyptians
once  did  to  the  Israelites  (Exod.  i.  13,
14) — the  native  shepherds  are  no
better  than  the  heathen  despots  were  in
the  olden  time  (comp.  Lev.  xxv,  43).

Ver.  5.  "Because  there  was  no
shepherd  " — none  worthy  of  the  name,
though  there  were  some  called  shep-
herds (1  Kings  xxii.  17;  Matt.  ix.  36).
"Became  meat  to  the  beasts  of  the
field  " — the  heathen  nations,  the  wild
stock.  They  became  a  prey  to  the
Syrians,  Ammon,  Moab,  and  Assyria.

Ver.  6.  "  My  sheep— My  flock."  The
repeated  and  emphasised  "  My  flock  "
prepares  for  the  resolutions  of  Jehovah
that  follow.  "None  did  search  or
seek  after  them" — rather  seek  or
search.  "The  former  is  the  part  of
the  superior  rulers  to  enquire  after ;
to  search  out  is  the  duty  of  the  subor-
dinate rulers." — Jtmius,

Ver.  10.  "I  am  against  the  shep-
herds, and  require  My  flock  at  their
hand."  God  had  already  begun  to  do
so,  having  punished  Zedekiah  with  the
deprivation  of  eyesight,  after  having
first  caused  his  sons  to  be  killed  and
then  the  other  princes  to  be  slain
(Jer.  lii.  10)." — Fausset,

Ver.  11.  "Behold  I,  even  L"    This

found  its  most  glorious  fulfilment  in
the  appearance  of  Christ,  as  vers.  23,
24  expressly  announce  that  God  will

3^5


CHAP.  XXXI7.  MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


execute  His  pastoral  office  specially  flock,  and  they  shall  be  no  more  a

by  the  Messiah.     Yet,  even  before  the  prey."     "  After  the  restoration   from

appearance  of  Christ  the  pastoral  care  Babylon  the  Jews  were  delivered  in

of  God  was  active  in  the  restoration  some  degree  from  the  oppression,  not

from  the  exile  and  the  other  gracious  only  of  foreigners,  but  also  of  their

gifts  and  benefits,  which,  however,  all  own  great  people,  who  had  oppressed

point  forward  to  the  true  fulfilment  with  bondage  arising  out  of  debts  and

and  call  forth   the   desire   for   it.'* —  mortgages  (Neh.  v.    1-19).     The  full

Hengstenherg,  and  final  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  is

future. " — Fausset.

Ver.    12.   "  The  cloudy  and  dark
day  "—the  dark,  afflictive  time  of  the         Ver.  23.  "  I  will  set  np  one  Shep-

people  of  God,  when  dispersed  by  the  herd  " — *'  the  complex  embodiment  of

heathen.  shepherd  watchfulness,  as  of  all  the

duties   of  the    shepherd   office  —  the

Ver.  14.  "I  will  feed  them— upon  Divine  realisation  of  the  idea  of  all

the   high  mountains   of  Israel  " — in  that  is  involved  generally  in  the  nature

chaps,  xvii.  23,  xx.  40,  the  phrase  is,  of  the  office,  as  service  towards  the

**  the  mountain  of  the  height  of  Israel,"  community  for  the  sake  of  God,  as  sacred

in  the  singular  number.     "  The  reason  service  in  behalf  of  God's  people." —

of  the    differences   is,   there   Ezekiel  Lange.     "  With  the  unity  is  connected

spoke  of  the  central  seat  of  the  king-  the  glory  of  the  king  and  his  kingdom,

dom,  where  the   people  met  for  the  as  the  decline  was  connected  with  the

worship  of  Jehovah,  Mount  Zion ;  here  multiplicity  of  the  shepherds.     With

he  speaks  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  at  thecomiugof  that  great  Shepherd  ceases

large,  all  the  parts  of  which  are  re-  not  only  the  division  of  Israel,  but  also

garded  as  possessing  a  moral  eleva-  the  separation  between  Israel  and  the

tion." — Fausset  he&then."^  Hengstenberg.

Ver.  16.  "I  will  feed  them  with  judg-         Ver,   24.     "My  servant  David  a

ment " — justice  and  equity,  in  contrast  prince  " — "  the  true  David,  the  Mes-

with  the  cruel  rigour  of  the  unfaithful  siah,  in  whom  the  stem  of  David  is  to

rulers.  culminate.      Not    a    resurrection    of

•\T       ^n      T  '  ji  David,  but  a  sending  of  a  David  who

Ver.  17.  "I  judge  between  cattle  has  not  yet  been  present"— Hengsten-

and  cattle."     '*  The  officials  are  with  j^^^^     ^he  fittest  person  to  wield  the

ver.  10  discharged  and  gone :  the  per-  world-sceptre  abused  by  all  the  world-

sons  concerned  can  only  come  into  con-  ^j^gs  (Dan.  ii.  34,  35,  44,  45).
sideration  according  to  their  personal

qualities,  not  according  to  their  official         Ver.  25.  "  I  will  make  a  covenant

rank.     I  judge  between  one  class  of  of  peace  " — "  a  security  against  hostile

citizens  and  another,  so  as  to  award  powers,  of  which  the  '  ceasing  of  evil

what  is  right  to  each." — Lange^  dec.  beasts '  symbolises   the   negative  and

the  *  dwelling  safely  *  the  positive  side.

Ver.  18.  "  Ye  must  foul  the  residue  Through  Christ  the  people  of  God  are

with  your  feet."     Not  content  with  predominant.     The  heathen  world  is

appropriating   to   their   own  use   the  forced  from  the  dominant  place  which

good  of  others,  they,  from  mere  wanton-  it  had  hitherto  taken  and  sinks  to  the

ness,  spoiled  what  they  did  not  use,  servile." — Hengstenberg,  dec,
so  as  to  be  of  no  use  to  the  owners.

Grotiui  explains  the  image  as  referring         Ver.  26.  "Showers  of  blessing."  "The

to  the  usuries   with    which  the   rich  Holy  Spirit's  reviving   influences  are

ground  the  poor  (chap,  xxil  12  ;  Isa.  often  compared  to  a  refreshing  shower

xxiv.  2).  (Isa.  xliv.  3).     The  literal  fulfilment

is,  however,  the  primary  one,  though

Ver.  ^%  "  Therefore  will  I  save  My  the  spiritual  also  is  designed.    In  cor-
356


HOMILETIO  COMMENTART:  EZEKIEL,  ohap.  xxxiv.

respondence    with    the   settled   reign  yield,  through  the  showers  of  blessing

of  righteousness  internally,  all   is  to  (ver.  26).     By  reason  of  this  fertility

be    prosperity    externally,    fertilising  Israel  snail  be  renowned  among  the

showers  (according  to  the  promise  of  heathen  as  the  people  blessed  of  the

the  ancient  covenant,  Lev,  xxvi.   4;  Lord.
Ps.  Ixviii.  9  j   Mai.  iii.  10)  and  pro-
ductive trees  and  lands." — FausseU  Ver.   3L    "And  ye  My  flock  are

men."    "  What  grace  when  the  God  of

Ver.  29.  "I  will  raise  up  for  them  heaven  condescends  to  men  who  are

a  plant  of  renown."    According  to  the  taken  from  the  earth  and  return  to  it !

old  style  of  exposition — Messiah,  the  Ps.   viii. ;    xxxvi.    8)." — Hengstenherg.

Rod,  Branch,  the   Righteous   Branch  "There  is  evidently  an  emphasis  on

(Isa.  xi.  1;  Jer.  xxxiii.  5),  who  shall  men.  Men  are  ye  j  remember  your  place,

obtain   for  them   renown.      Hengsten-  you  are  merely  human ;  but  remember

hergj  Fairbairn,  and  Geikie  translate —  at  the  same  time  that  I  am  your  God  :

"  a  plantation  for  a  name ; "  the  soil  so  that  without  Me  nothing,  but  with

which  is  planted  will  be  famous  for  its  Me  all" — Lange,


EOMILETICS.

A.  Grave  Impeachment  of  Unfaithful  RuLERa

(Vers.  1-10.)

L  They  abused  their  authority  in  ministering  to  their  own  selfish  indulgence
and  personal  aggrandisement.  "  The  shepherds  feed  themselves.  Ye  eat  tlie
fat  and  clothe  you  with  the  wool "  (vers.  2,  3).  The  ruler  is  raised  to  a  lofty
dignity  and  endowed  with  special  resources  in  order  to  watch  over  and  protect
the  interests  of  his  people.  The  wants  and  even  the  luxuries  of  life  are  secured
to  him  that  he  may  be  free  to  devote  his  powers  to  the  general  good.  He  is
keenly  alive  to  any  act  of  treachery  on  the  part  of  his  people ;  but  he  is  none
the  less  treacherous  when  he  abuses  his  high  trust  in  seeking  only  his  own
advantage.     He  has  basely  abdicated  the  highest  functions  of  his  kinghood : —

"  He's  a  king,
A  true,  right  king,  that  dare  do  aught  save  wrong  |
Fears  nothing  naortal  but  to  be  unjust :
Who  is  not  blown  up  with  the  flattering  puffl
Of  spongy  sycophants  ;  who  stands  unmoved^
Despite  the  jostling  of  opinion." — Marston.

II.  They  neglected  the  plainest  duties  of  their  office.  1.  They  made  no
provision  for  the  immediate  wants  of  the  people.  *'  Ye  feed  not  the  flock  "  (ver.  3).
Tiie  first  demand  of  nature  is  food :  where  this  is  denied  to  a  people  the  result
is  riot  or  starvation.  The  ruler  who  is  ignorant  how  to  procure  food  for  his
people  is  incompetent ;  if  he  makes  no  effort  to  do  so  he  is  indolent ;  if  he  is
indifferent  about  it  he  is  cruel.  The  king  should  be  a  father  to  his  people,  pro-
viding for,  watching  over,  and  protecting  them.  2.  They  had  no  sympathy
with  the  afflicted  and  unfortunate.  "  The  diseased  have  ye  not  strengthened,
neither  have  ye  healed  that  which  was  sick,  neither  have  ye  bound  up  that
which  was  broken  "  (ver.  4).  It  is  a  severe  strain  on  the  loyalty  of  a  people
when  their  sufferings  win  no  pity  from  their  selfish  ruler.  It  is  a  blot  on  the
brilliant  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  that  the  brave  seamen  who  defeated  the
Spanish  Armada  were  left  to  rot  in  their  ships  or  die  in  the  streets  of  the  naval
ports  because  there  were  no  hospitals  to  receive  the  wounded.  "  It  would
grieve  any  man's  heart,"  wrote  Lord  Howard,  the  Hi^h  Admiral  of  that  day,  "  to

357


OHAP.  XXXIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


sep-  men  that  have  served  so  valiantly  die  so  miserably."  Modern  hospitals  and
infirmaries  are  the  practical  outcome  of  an  enlightened  Christian  philanthropy.
3.  They  made  no  effort  to  restore  the  disaffected  and  the  wandering,  "  Neither  have
ye  brought  again  that  which  was  driven  away,  neither  have  ye  sought  that
which  was  lost"  (ver.  4).  The  monarch  who  is  indifferent  to  the  emigration
and  social  discontent  of  his  people  helps  to  weaken  the  stability  of  his  kingdom.
Wealth  is  unsafe  in  the  midst  of  rebellious  poverty  : —

**  111  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey,
Where  wealth  accumulates  and  men  decay."

The  formal  declaration  of  William  IL,  Kaiser  of  Germany,  in  favour  of  the
International  Regulation  of  Labour,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  events,  pro-
ceeding direct  from  imperial  authority,  of  modern  times.  The  oppressed  of  one
country  have  enriched  other  countries  to  which  they  fled  in  their  despair.  4.
They  retained  the  name  of  an  office  which  their  conduct  had  robbed  of  all  practical
meaning.  "  Because  there  is  no  shepherd  "  (vers.  5,  8).  They  professed  to  be
shepherds — vigilant,  faithful,  kind ;  but  they  were  unworthy  of  the  name.  They
were  frauds.  The  flock  was  worse  off  than  if  it  had  no  shepherd.  Better  no
shepherd  than  such  shepherds.  An  honourable  man  would  relinquish  an  office
the  duties  of  which  he  was  incompetent  or  unwilling  to  fulfil.

III.  Their  rule  was  one  of  tyranny  and  violence.  "  With  force  and  cruelty
have  ye  ruled  them,  and  they  were  scattered  "  (vers.  4,  5).  It  was  a  cruel  irony
of  the  shepherd-character  to  deal  in  blows  instead  of  food,  and  instead  of  tend-
ing with  care  to  scatter  with  terror :  the  shepherd-garb  disguised  the  fangs  and
savagery  of  the  wolf.  "  It  is  ill  with  the  patient  when  his  physician  is  his  worst
disease."  It  is  the  highest  injustice  when  the  ruler  uses  his  great  power  to
oppress  and  destroy  his  people.

lY.  They  shall  he  divested  of  the  office  they  had  degraded  and  called  to
account  for  their  misdeeds.  "  I  am  against  the  shepherds,  and  will  require  My
flock  at  their  hand,  and  cause  tbem  to  cease  from  feeding  the  flock ;  neither  shall
the  shepherds  feed  themselves  any  more"  (ver.  10).  Tyranny  and  wrong  cannot
last  for  ever ;  the  reckoning-day  comes  on  apace.  In  all  wickedness  there  is
weakness  that  will  soon  or  later  be  fatal  to  its  reign.  It  is  related  of  Lord  Ampt-
hill,  British  Ambassador  to  the  Court  of  Berlin,  that  during  his  mission  in  Rome
he  possessed  a  huge  boa-constrictor,  and  interested  himself  in  watching  its
habits.  One  day  the  monster  escaped  from  the  box  where  he  supposed  it  was
asleep,  quietly  wound  itself  around  his  body,  and  began  gradually  to  tighten  its
folds.  His  position  became  extremely  perilous ;  but  the  consummate  coolness
and  self-possession  which  had  enabled  him  to  win  many  a  diplomatic  triumph
befriended  him  in  this  dangerous  emergency.  He  remembered  there  was  a  bone
in  the  throat  of  the  serpent  which,  if  he  could  find  and  break,  he  would  save
himself.  He  was  aware  that  either  he  or  the  snake  must  perish.  Not  a  moment
must  be  lost  in  hesitation.  He  deliberately  seized  the  head  of  the  serpent,
thrust  his  hand  down  its  throat  and  snapped  the  vital  bone.  The  coils  were
relaxed,  the  victim  fell  at  his  feet,  and  he  was  free.  So  one  day  the  weak  place
in  wrong-doing  is  sure  to  be  smitten  and  it  must  succumb.  Over  the  head  of
every  tyrant  there  hangs  the  sword  of  retributive  justice.

Lessons. — 1.  Treachery  in  government  means  suffering  among  the  people,  2.  A
just  ruler  is  above  the  vice  of  corruption.  3.  The  highest  office  cannot  protect  the
wrong-doer  from  ultimate  exposure  and  disgrace.


358


HO  Ml  LET  10  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  chap,  xzxit.


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,

Vers.  1,  2.  "Corruption  in  the  upper,  done.     It  is  an  old  complaint,  all  seek

the  governing  classes,  those  who  give  their  own,  and  too  many  more  than

the  tone  and  measure  to  society,  carries  their  own." — M.  Henry,
along  with  it  corruption   among  the

whole  people,  and  that  not  merely  for  Ver.  3.  '*Ye  eat  the  fat."  "This  ye
a  time,  but  for  ever. — It  is  a  very  might  do,  if  in  measure,  for  the  work-
honourable  title  to  be  called  a  shep-  man  is  worthy  of  his  wages  (1  Cor.
herd,  but  to  be  so  is  a  heavy  burden,  ix.  7),  but  ye  gorge  yourselves  with
with  much  trouble,  care,  and  labour."  the  best  of  the  best.  If  the  belly  may
— Lange,  be  filled,  the  back  fitted,  that  is  all  you

take  care  for." — Trapp.

Vers.  2-23.    "  The  removal  of  false  —   "Ye    kill    them."      "Contrive

rulers  who  have  ruled  for  their  own  methods  for  a  seeming  legal  course  to

selfish    aggrandisement,    not    for    the  forfeit  first  the  life,  and  next  the  estate

glory  of  God  or  the  real  good  of  their  of  the  well-fed,  rich,  and  wealthy,  and

subjects,  is  to  precede  the  setting-up  then  make  merry  and  feast  as  volup-

of  the  coming  King,  who  is  to  rule  in  tuous,  unfaithful  shepherds  feast  on  the

love  and  righteousness,    Messiah   the  iattest  of  the  sheep  in  their  masters*

Good    Shepherd.      The    Lord    Jesus  fold." — Pool

Christ  provides  for  the  eternal  well-  —  "The  priests  ate  the  tithes,  the

being  of  His  own  flock,  both  the  elect  first-fruits   and  the  ofi'erings  of  the

remnant  of  the  literal  Israel  and  also  people ;  the  princes  received   the  tri-

the   spiritual   Israel,  the  Church,  in-  butes   and   imposts ;    and  instead   of

finitely  better  than  the  best  of  earthly  instructing  and  protecting  them,   the

shepherds  ever  cared   for   his   sheep.  latter   took   away   their  lives  by  the

But  the  false   shepherds  of  Israel  in  cruelties  they  practised  against  them  ;

Ezekiel's  days   cared   only  for   them-  the  former  destroyed  their  souls  by

selves  and  for   their  own    grovelling  the  poison   of  their  doctrine  and  by

aims,  selfish  gain,  and   worldly    pre-  their   bad   example.     The   fat   sheep

eminence,  like  Diotrephes  in  ages  long  point  out   the   rich,    to  whom   these

subsequent  (3  John  9)." — Fausset.  pastors  often  disguised  the  truth  by

a   cruel    condescension   and    complai-

Vers.  2-10.    A  Bad  Shepherd— 1.  sance." — Calmet.
Is  selfish  (ver.  2).  2.  Avaricious  (ver.  3).

3.  Heartless  (ver.  4).    4.  Cruel  (ver.  4^  Vers.  4-6.    The  Disastrous  Effects

5.  A  terror  to  the  flock  (vers.  5,  6).  of  Sin.        1.    Disease    and    sufl'ering

6.  Shall  not  escape  punishment  (vers.  (ver.  4).     2.  Enslavement  and  oppres-
7-10).  sion  (ver.  4).      3.  Estrangement  and

dispersion  (vers.  5,  6).     4.  Abandon-

Ver.  2.  "Good  shepherds  they  should  ment  to  ruin  (ver.  5).
have  been,  but  they  were  naught  (Jer.

xxiii.),  and  naught  would  come  of  them  Ver.  4.   "A  timely  spiritual  refor-

for  their  maladministration.  The  sheep  mation  of  the  state  by  its  rulers  would

will  follow  the  shepherd.     The   com-  have  averted  the  judgments  of   God

mon  people  are  like  a  flock  of  cranes  altogether,  and  even  in  Ezekiel's  time,

— as  the  first  fly,  all  follow." — Trapp.  when  wrath  from    God   had   already

—  "  There  is  a  woe  to  those  who  descended,   faithful  conduct   on   their

are  in  public  trusts,  but  consult  only  part  would  have  been  followed  by  a

their  own  private  interests,   and  are  mitigation  of  this  punishment  and  a

more   inquisitive   about    the   benefice  restoration  of  the  scattered  exiles." —

than  about  the  office,  what  money  is  Fausset,

to  be  got  than  what  good  is  to  be  —  The  obligations  of  the  shepherd-

359


CHAP.  XXXIV.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


office  a  mirror  of   human    wretched-  -  the  flock,  got  into  strange  pastures,

ness.  and  are  perverted  by  erroneous  doc-

—  "  No  person  is  fit  for  the  office  of  trines,  how  to  seek  and  bring  them

a  shepherd  who  does  not  well  under-  back  to  the  fold.     (8.)  Those  among

stand  the  diseases  to  which  sheep  are  whom  the  wolf  has  got  and  scattered

incident  and  the  mode  of  cure.     And  the  flock,  how  to  oppose,   confound,

is  any  man  fit  for  the  pastoral  office,  and  expel  the  wolf.     He  knows  how

to  be  a  shepherd  of  souls,  who  is  not  to   preach,    explain,   and   defend   the

well   acquainted  with   the  disease  of  truth.     He   is   well   acquainted   with

sin  in  all  its  varieties,  and  the  remedy  the  weapons  he  has  to  use,  and  the

for  this  disease  and  the  proper  mode  spirit  in  which  he  has  to  employ  them,

of  administering  it  in  those  various  In  a  word,  the  true  shepherd  gives  up

cases  ?     He  who  does  not  know  Jesus  his  life  to  the  sheep,  in  their  defence,

Christ  as  his  own  Saviour  never  can  and    in   labouring   for    their   welfare,

recommend  Him  to  others.     He  who  And  while  he  is  thus  employed,  it  is

is  not  saved  will  not  save." — A.  Clarke,  the  duty  of  the  flock  to  feed  and  clothe

him,  and  see  that  neither  he  nor  his

Ver.  5.  "  Not  merely  in  the  bodily  family  lack  the  necessaries  and  con-
but    pre-eminently    in    the    spiritual  veniences  of  life." — A,  Clarke,
enemies  of  the  people  of  God  inheres

the  wolf-spirit,  the  devil." — Schmieder,  Vers.  7-10.  The  Divine  Judgment

on  Unfaithful  Ministers — 1.   Is  p-e-

Ver.  6.    The  Qualifications   of  the  ceded  by  a  clearly  detailed  indictmetit  of

True  Shepherd.     "1.  He  knows   the  offences  (ver.  8).     2.  Is  the  expression  of

disease  of  sin   and    its   consequences,  the  righteous  indignation  of  God  against

for  the  Eternal  Spirit,  by  whom  he  is  wrong-doing.     "  I  am  against  the  shep-

called,  has  convinced  him  of  sin,  of  herds  "  (ver.  10.)     3.  Demands  a  strict

righteousness,   and   of  judgment.     2.  account  of  the  trust  so  grossly  violated.

He  knows  well  the  great  remedy  for  **  I  will  require  My  flock  at  their  hand"

this  disease,  the  passion  and  sacrificial  (ver.  10).     4.  Deprives  the  offenders  of

death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     3.  all  their  power  and  emoluments.     "Twill

He  is  skilful  and  knows  how  to  apply  cause  them  to  cease  from  feeding  the

this   remedy.     (1.)  The   healthy   and  flock,  neither  shall  the  shepherds  feed

sound  he  knows  how  to  keep  in  health,  themselves  any  more"  (ver.   10).     6.

and  cause  them  to  grow  in  grace  and  Is  mingled  with  fender  sympatlayfor  those

in  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.     (2.)  who  have  suffered  from  neglect  and  oppres-

Those  in  a  state  of  convalescence  he  sion.     "  I  will  deliver  My  flock  from

knows  how  to  cherish,  feed,  and  care  their  mouth,   that  they  may  not  be

for,  that  they  may  be  brought  into  a  meat  for  them  "  (ver.  10).

state  of  spiritual  soundness.    (3.)  Those  —  "  The  frightful  judgment  which  is

still   under   the  whole  power  of  the  contained  even  in  the  beautiful  name

general  disease,   how  to  reprove,   in-  of  the  Shepherd." — Lange,
struct,  and  awaken.     (4.)  Those  dying

in  a  state  of  spiritual  weakness,  how  Ver.  8.  **God  here  seemeth  to  be

to  find  out  and  remove  the  cause.     (5.)  in  a  great  heat,  in  a  perturbation  of

Those  fallen  into  sin  and  sorely  bruised  spirit,  causing  a  kind  of  impediment

and  broken  in  their  souls  by  that  fall,  in    His   speech — *  As   I   live :   surely

how   to   restore.      (6.)   Those   driven  because  *  —  so    thoroughly     was     He

away  by  temptation  and  cruel  usage,  moved  against  these  lewd  shepherds,

how  to  find  out  and  turn   aside  the  whose  faults  He  rippeth  up  again  to

temptation    and    cruel    usage.      (7.)  make  better  way  to  their  sentence." —

Those     who     have     wandered    from  Trapp,


360


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap,  xxiiv.


EOMILETIGS,

God's  Care  over  His  PEOPUt

(Vers.  11-31.)

The  unfaithful  shepherds,  who  have  occupied  so  prominent  a  place  in  the
prophet's  vision,  now  sink  into  the  background.  They  have  been  arraigned,
and  judgment  passed  upon  them.  They  are  disposed  of.  And  now,  by  one  of
those  skilful  dramatic  changes  so  characteristic  of  the  genius  of  Ezekiel,  the
space  out  of  which  the  delinquents  have  vanished  is  filled  with  the  presence  of
Jehovah,  and,  while  we  gaze,  shade  after  shade  of  the  Divine  character  is
artistically  developed  with  inimitable  delicacy  of  touch,  until  we  are  enraptured
with  a  picture  of  the  unutterable  tenderness  and  majesty  of  the  God  of  Israel.
The  prophecy  is  full  of  consolation  to  the  stricken  nation,  and  is  intended  to  in-
spire hope  in  the  breasts  of  the  disconsolate  exiles.  It  is  a  sublime  and  graphic
description  of  God^s  care  over  His  people f  as  we  shall  see  in  the  following  analysis.

I.  He  will  gather  together  the  dispersed.  1.  He  will  seek  for  them  with
lender  solicitude  (vers.  11-13).  In  contrast  with  the  heartless  rapacity  of  the
rulers,  who  robbed  and  scattered  His  people,  Jehovah  will  show  that  His  concern
for  their  welfare  springs  from  unselfish  though  unrequited  love.  He  seeks  not
His  own  advantage,  but  theirs.  As  the  anxious  shepherd  plods  over  fell  and
moorland,  through  stony  valleys  and  thorny  brakes,  in  search  of  his  wandering
sheep,  so  the  Lord  will  penetrate  into  all  places  where  His  afi'righted  people  have
sought  temporary  shelter  "  in  the  cloudy  and  dark  day."  The  loving  heart  is  reck-
less of  toil  and  undismayed  by  the  most  formidable  difficulties.  2.  He  will  make
ample  provision  for  their  needs  (vers.  14-16).  He  finds  them  famished,  dispirited,
wounded  ;  but  He  **  will  feed  them  in  a  good  pasture,  will  bind  up  that  which
is  broken,  and  strengthen  that  which  is  sick."  Though  His  providence  has  been
abused  and  His  counsel  disregarded,  their  sufi'e rings  move  His  pity  and  their
wants  evoke  His  benevolence.  Even  our  sins  cannot  stem  the  perennial  outflow
of  the  Divine  goodness.  But  how  inveterate  and  aggravated  is  sin  committed
in  the  presence  of  such  unceasing  kindness  !  3.  He  will  provide  for  them  a  place
of  safety,  "There  shall  they  lie  in  a  good  fold  "  (ver.  14).  Defended  from  the
harassing  exactions  of  false  shepherds,  and  from  the  ravages  of  wolfish  enemies,
they  shall  forget  the  weariness  and  fear  of  their  long,  tedious  wanderings  in
the  restfulness  and  security  with  which  they  are  now  enfolded.  It  is  not  enough
for  God  to  seek  and  find  the  lost ;  His  purpose  is  not  accomplished  until  they
are  safely  sheltered  within  the  arms  of  His  omnipotent  love.

II.  He  will  deal  with  them  according  to  individual  merit  (vers.  17-22).

Even  Divine  love  is  strictly  discriminative.  Its  affluence  embraces  all,  but  its
personal  realisation  is  regulated  by  the  moral  condition  of  the  recipient.  Love
that  is  not  governed  by  wisdom  and  justice  loses  strength  and  sanctity.  "I
judge  between  cattle  and  cattle  " — between  men  and  men.  God  has  an  infallible
insight  into  character,  and  marks  shades  of  distinction  imperceptible  to  us.
He  sees  elements  of  good  where  our  purblind  sense  sees  nothing  but  evil,  and
detects  the  presence  of  sin  underneath  the  fairest  show  of  virtue.  He  knows
how  to  encourage  the  weak  and  timid,  and  how  to  restrain  the  strong  and  for-
ward. He  knows  how  to  succour  the  oppressed,  and  to  mete  out  justice  to
the  oppressor.  It  is  better  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  God  than  be  at  the  mercy
of  the  most  impartial  earthly  judge.

361


CHAP.  xxxiT.  HOMILETJC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  EZEKlEU


III.  He  will  provide   for  them   THE   Good   Shepherd.      1.  A  Euler  of

singular  and  peerless  worth.  The  One  Shepherd,  the  Shepherd-King,  as  was
David,  His  antitype  (ver.  23).  Their  many  shepherds  had  been  unfaithful,
avaricious,  heartless,  cruel.  They  had  oppressed  and  scattered  the  flock.  The
One  Good  Shepherd  would  be  beyond  the  reach  of  corruption  or  intimidation.
He  will  rule  in  equity.  He  will  gently  lead  and  bravely  defend  His  people.
He  will  sacrifice  His  life  for  the  sheep.  Others  had  destroyed :  He  will  save.
2.  The  rule  of  the  Good  Shepherd  will  bring  them  into  closer  personal  relationship  to
God.  "  I  the  Lord  will  be  their  God "  (ver.  24).  The  tyranny  of  the  false
shepherds  had  driven  the  people  from  God,  and  fostered  in  their  distracted
minds  doubts  as  to  His  righteousness  and  goodness.  But  under  the  gracious
regimen  of  the  Good  Sliepherd  all  this  will  be  changed.  They  shall  learn  that
the  covenant  promise  is  unrevoked — Jehovah  is  still  their  God.  The  govern-
ment of  the  Divine  Prince  is  not  merely  legal  and  social,  but  intensely  and
supremely  spiritual.  It  is  the  rule  of  God,  for  God,  and  leading  to  God.  Such
rule  may  be  slow  and  gradual  in  its  development,  but  it  is  ever  bringing  us
nearer  to  God,  and  revealing  His  purposes  and  character.

"  God's  plans,  like  lilies  pure  and  white,  unfold ;
We  must  not  tear  the  close,  short  leaves  apart.
Time  will  reveal  the  calyxes  of  gold."

IV.  He  will  endow  them  with  unprecedented  blessings.  1.  Peace  (ver.  25).
2.  Prosperity  (vers.  26,  27).  3.  Safety  (vers.  25,  28).  4.  Imperishable  renown
(ver.  29).     5.  Union  with  the  Divine  (vers.  30,  31).

Lessons. — The  Divine  care.  1.  A  source  of  comfort  to  the  afflicted,  2,  Of  hope
to  the  penitent.     3.  Of  strength  and  hope  to  the  diligent.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,

Vers.  11-31.  "The  description  elude  that  all  the  rest  must  rcceiye  a
throughout  is  of  an  ideal  kind.  The  corresponding  enlargement ;  the  re-
prophet  foretells  simply  the  nature  of  gion,  the  people,  the  inheritance  of
the  coming  future  under  the  form  of  blessing,  must  severally  be  what  the
the  old  landmarks  and  well-known  old  but  represented  and  typified.  What
relations.  The  best  of  the  past  shall  Canaan  would  have  been  with  its
revive  again  ;  more  than  revive,  it  David  restored  again,  and  all  its  cove-
shall  appear  free  from  the  defects  that  nant  blessings  enjoyed  in  richest  pro-
formerly  intermingled  with  it,  clothed  fusion,  such,  in  the  new  and  higher
with  a  perfection  and  completeness  sphere  of  the  Messiah's  Kingdom,  shall
hitherto  unknown.  But  while  the  the  whole  domain  be  over  which  He
substance  should  thus  coincide  in  the  is  the  Lord,  when  this  promise  of  good
new  and  the  old,  it  is  not  obscurely  things  to  come  attains  to  its  full  and
intimated  that  the  shell  would  nia-  final  accomplishment.  We  see  the
terially  differ ;  for  certainly  the  literal  word  beginning  to  take  effect,  even
David  should  not  be  the  Prince  in  before  Messiah  came,  in  the  partial
whom  the  promise  was  to  stand,  but  re- establishment  of  the  Divine  King-
One  unspeakably  greater  than  he.  dom  within  the  ancient  bounds,  and,
When  the  promised  Shepherd  was  as  far  as  was  needed,  for  the  higher
found  to  be  the  glorious  and  mighty  purposes  of  the  Kingdom.  We  see  it
Lord,  to  whom,  as  David  in  the  spirit  advancing  afterwards  towards  its  riper
foresaw,  the  heritage,  not  of  Canaan,  fulfilment,  when  the  great  object  of  the
but  of  all  lands  and  all  nations  be-  prediction  came  and  did  the  part  of
longed,  it  behoved  the  Jews  to  con-  the  Good  Shepherd  by  avenging  for
362


HOMlLETia  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEh.


OSAP.  XXXIT.


ever  the  cause  of  His  elect  and  laying
the  sure  foundation  of  His  everlasting
inheritance.  And  we  see  it  travelling
on  to  its  full  and  destined  realisation
in  every  conquest  made  by  the  truth
of  God  over  tiie  darkness  and  corrup-
tion of  the  world." — Fairbairn.

Vers.  11-16.  The  Divine  solicitude.
Seen  —  1.  In  active  endeavours  to
restore  the  wandering  (vers.  11-13,
16).  2.  In  bountifully  supplying  the
wants  of  the  people  (vers.  13-15).  3.
In  affording  security  and  rest  (vers.
14,  15).  4.  In  the  sympathetic  treat-
ment of  the  terrified  and  afflicted
(ver.  16).

Ver.  11.  "Rather  than  the  work
shall  be  undone,  I  will  do  it  myself,
and  then  it  is  sure  to  be  well  done,
Aristotle  tells  of  a  certain  Persian  who,
being  asked,  *What  did  most  of  all
feed  the  horse  ] '  answered,  '  The  mas-
ter's eye ;  *  and  of  a  certain  African
who,  when  it  was  demanded,  *What
was  the  best  manure  or  soil  for  a  field*?'
answered  *  The  owner's  footsteps ' —
that  is,  his  presence  and  perambula-
tion. Shepherds  should  reside  with
their  flocks ;  the  Arch-shepherd  will
not  fail  to  do  so." — Trapjp.

—  **  Though  magistrates  and  minis-
ters fail  in  doing  their  part  for  the
good  of  the  Church,  God  will  not  fail
in  doing  His,  He  will  take  the  flock
into  His  own  hand  rather  than  the
Church  shall  come  short  of  any  kind-
ness He  has  designed  for  it.  The
under-shepherd  may  prove  careless,
but  the  Chief  Shepherd  neither  slum-
bers nor  sleeps.  They  may  be  false,
but  God  abides  faithful." — M.  Henry.

Ver.  12.  "  When  things  are  at  the
worst  God  himself  will  set  in :  He
reserveth  His  holy  hand  for  a  dead
lift."— rra^;?.

Ver.  13.  "This  prophecy  primarily
respected  their  restoration  from  cap-
tivity in  Babylon,  and  was  in  part  at
least  fulfilled  when  so  many  thousands
of  them  returned  to  their  own  land
under  the  conduct  of  Zerrubabel,  Ezra,


and  others.  It  seems,  however,  to  look
€till  further,  even  to  the  general  re-
storation of  the  whole  Jewish  nation
from  their  present  wide  dispersion
over  the  whole  world,  which  restora-
tion most  of  the  prophets  foretell  shall
be  effected  in  the  latter  days.  But
there  is  no  need  to  confine  this  pro-
mise wholly  to  the  Jews.  When  those
in  any  age  or  nation  that  have  gone
astray  from  God  are  brought  back  by
repentance ;  when  those  that  erred
come  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the
truth;  when  God's  outcasts  are  gath-
ered and  restored,  and  religious  as-
semblies that  were  dispersed  are  again
collected  and  united  upon  the  ceasing
of  persecution ;  and  when  the  Churches
have  rest  and  liberty,  then  this  pre-
diction has  a  true  accomplishment," —
Benson.

Ver.  13.  "  The  Divine  refreshments,
images  of  the  spiritual  here,  of  the
eternal  hereafter." — Lange,

Ver.  15.  "Food  and  rest,  the  two
great  necessities  of  human  life.  Their
rest  will  nourish  them,  and  their  nour-
ishment will  bring  them  new  rest.
Rest — true,  eternal  repose,  is  only  to
be  had  under  the  shepherd-staff  of
Christ." — Lange.

Vers.  16-22.  The  Divine  justice.
1.  Will  punish  the  wanton  abuse  of
prosperity  (ver.  16).  2.  Will  dis-
criminate between  the  rich  and  poor,
the  strong  and  weak,  the  oppre«sor
and  oppressed  (vers.  17-22).  3.  Will
deliver  the  abused  captives  (vers.
21,  22).

Ver.  16.  The  Lord's  inspection  of  the
flock  at  the  same  time  a  call  to  self-
examination.

—  "  The  Lord  feeds  with  judgment,
that  is,  with  befitting  difference,  since
He  dispenses  to  each  what  is  proper
to  him.  He  performs  to  the  weak  no
more  than  is  good  for  them.  The
children  he  feeds  with  milk,  and  de-
fends them.  He  acts  mildly  or  severely,
consoles,  frightens,  blames,  caresses,  as
at  any  time  is  good  for  us.     For  the

S63


OTAP.  MMT.  BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


fearful  He  relaxes  the  reins,  and  those  Shall  ensure  peace,  safety,  prosperity,
who  place  their  confidence  in  Him  He  and  victory  (vers.  25-28).  Shall  be-
draws  to  Himself.  If  some  are  fat  and  come  pre-eminent  in  dignity  and  great-
corrupt  the  weak,  He  takes  from  their  ness  by  what  He  does  for  His  peo})le
strength.  Some  are  proud  of  the  gifts  (vers.  29,  30).  4.  Shall  exalt  His
lent  to  them,  and  despise  the  simpHcity  people  into  a  JDivinely-ennobled  man-
of  others ;  for  these  it  is  good  when  hood  (ver.  31).
they  are  humbled  and  are  deprived  of

their  gifts,  so  that  they  may  obtain  Vers.  23,  24.  "  The  One  Shepherd,

the  salvation  of  Christ.     Tims  He  ac-  according  to  the  promise  in  its  fulfil-

complishes  the  judgment  and  the  sepa-  ment :  1.  His  official  position  through

ration  between  sheep  and  sheep ;  and  all  times.     2.  His  shepherd-service  in

so  each  one  should  be  concerned  about  the  flesh  and  in  the  spirit.     3.    His

himself,  and  not  trouble  himself  re-  personality  in  respect  to  God  and  as

specting   others.      The   separation   is  regards  the  flock." — Lange,
already  going  on  here  in  secret,  but  at

last  it  will   become  manifest  and  be  Ver.  23.  "  Who  indeed  is  the  only

seen  to  issue  in  a  wide  gulf.     A  stern  Shepherd.     Magistrates  and  ministers

judge  is  the   Good    Shepherd.      Not  are  shepherds  ;  but  Christ  is  the  Good

merely  the  unscrupulous  leaders  of  the  Shepherd    (Jno.    x.    11);   the    Great

flock,  but  even  the  sheep  themselves,  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  Souls  (1  Peter

will  be  brought  to  account  by  Him."  ii.  25 ;  Heb.  xiii.  20) ;  the  True  Shep-

— Lange,  herd    above    all   for  skill,   love,   and

power,  above  Jacob,  above  David,  of

Ver.   17.  "  *  I  judge  between  cattle  whom  He  is  descended,  and  by  whose

and  cattle.*     Between  false  and  true  name  He  is  here  called  (Jer.  xxx.  9 ;

professors,  between   them   that   have  Hosea  iii.   5  ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.    24)." —

only  the  form  and  them  that  have  the  Trapp,

power  of  godliness,  between  the  back-  — "Messiah,  the  True  Shepherd,  who

slider  in  heart  and  the  upright  man."  hath  given  Himself  this  name  both  in

' — A,  Clarke.  the  Prophets  and  in  the  Gospel,  and

who   hath   perfectly  fulfilled   all   the

Ver.  18.  "Ye  abuse  God's  mercies,  duties,   the   characters  whereof  have

you  consume  much  upon  yourselves,  been  before  described.     He  is  called

and  ye  spoil  more  on  which  the  poor  David  because  He  sprung  from  David

would  have  been  glad  to  feed.     There  according   to   the    flesh,   because    He

are  some  who  would  rather  give  food  possessed    eminently    and    really   all

to  their  sporting  dogs  than  to  the  poor  those  qualities  which  the  Scriptures

around  them  who  are  ready  to  starve,  give   to   David   as    the    type   of   the

and  would  be  glad  of  the  crumbs  that  Messiah,   and    because    He    was   the

fall  from  the  table  of  those  masters."  person  in  whom  all  the  promises  made

— A,  Clarke.  to  David  were  fulfilled.     Though  this

—  "  Would  our  so-called  men  of  prophecy  was  in  a  great  measure  corn-
culture  also  but  consider  it,  who  only  pleted  when  Christ  by  the  preaching
tread  under  foot  the  pure  doctrine,  or  of  the  Gospel  gathered  into  one  the
trouble  it  by  their  goat-like  gambols."  children  of  God,  among  whom  were
— Lange.  many  of  the  lost  sheep  of  Israel,  yet  it

will  receive  a  further  completion  at  the

Ver.  21.  "The  mischievous  polemic  general   conversion   of   the    Jews." —

in   the  Church.     A  theology  that  is  Calmet.

quarrelsome   and   combative    scatters  —  "  David.    1,  As  to  the  name,  His

the  Churches  in  the  world." — Lange.  beloved  (Matt.  iii.  17).     2.  As  to  His

birth   in   Bethlehem.     3.    As  to   His

Vers,  23-31.    The  Good  Shepherd,  humble  state  and  littleness  (Isa.  liii.  3).

1.  The  Divine  Prince  (ver.   23).     2.  4.  As  to  His  shepherd-service.     6,  Am

364


nOMTLETlC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKJEL.


CHAP,  xxxnr.


to  His  anointing.  6.  As  to  His  de-
votedness :  David  for  the  law,  Christ
for  the  flock.  7.  As  to  His  victories."
— Starke.

—  '*  David,  king  of  Israel,  had  been
dead  upwards  of  400  years,  and  from
that  time  till  now  there  never  was  a
ruler  of  any  kind,  either  in  the  Jewish
Church  or  state,  of  the  name  of  David.
This  then  must  be  some  typical  person,
and  from  the  texts  marked  in  the
margin  we  understand  that  Jesus
Christ  alone  is  meant,  as  both  Old
and  New  Testaments  asjree  in  this.
And  from  this  one  Shepherd  all  Chris-
tian ministers  must  derive  their  autho-
rity to  teach  and  their  grace  to  teach
effectually." — A.  Clarke,  The  ancient
Jews  allowed  that  the  Messiah  was
meant  in  this  place.

Ver.  24.  "  This  is  that  beehive  of
heavenly  honey  we  so  oft  meet  with
in  the  Old  Testament,  which  therefore
the  sectaries  have  so  little  reason  to
reject.'' — Trapp.

Ver.  25.  ***I  will  make  with  them
a  covenant  of  peace  ' — I  will  cut  with
them  the  peace  covenant ;  a  covenant
sacrifice,  procuring  and  establishing
peace  between  God  and  man  ;  and  be-
tween man  and  bis  fellows.  The  cutting
refers  to  the  ancient  mode  of  making
covenants.  The  blood  was  poured  out,
the  animal  was  divided  from  mouth
to  tail,  exactly  in  two,  the  divisions
placed  opposite  to  each  other,  the  con-
tracting parties  entered  into  the  space,
going  in  at  each  end,  and  met  in  the
middle,  and  there  took  the  covenant
:^ath.  He  is  the  Prince  of  Peace,  and
through  Him  come  glory  to  God  in
the  highest,  and  peace  and  good-will
to  men  upon  earth." — A.  Clarke.

—  **  The  evil  beasts  in  the  land —
spiritual  false  guides,  worldly  perse-
cutors, plausible  hypocrites." — Lange.

Ver.  26.  The  Church  a  source  of
blessing.  1.  As  it  is  the  dwelling-place
of  God.  "  My  hill."  2.  As  it  is  enriched
with  a  plenitude  of  Divine  grace,  "  I
will  cause  the  shower  to  come  down
in  his  season :  there  shall  be  showers


of  blessing."  3.  As  it  is  faithful  and
active  in  diffusing  its  God-given  benefits,
"  I  will  make  them  and  the  places
round  about  a  blessing."

—  There  the  Church  is  a  blessing
where  there  is  the  rain  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  Without  this  rain  nothing
grows  in  the  Kingdom  of  God  :  one
cannot  even  say  Jesus  is  Lord  (1
Cor.  xii,  3).

Ver.  28.  Spiritual  boldness.  "  1.
Over  against  the  powers  of  the  world.

2.  Over  against  the  wickedness  of  sin.

3.  Over  against  the  transitoriness  and
uncertainty  of  our  earthly  life.  4.  Over
against  the  solicitude  of  our  own  heart."
— Lange.

Ver.  29.  "  *  I  will  raise  up  a  plant  of
renown  * — a  plantation  to  the  name  :
to  the  name  of  Christ.  The  words
might  be  applied  to  the  Christian
Church ;  but  that  Christ  may  be  called
a  plant  or  plantation  here — as  He  is
elsewhere  called  a  branch  and  a  rod
(Isa.  iv.  2 ;  xi.  1 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  6 ;  xxxv.
15) — is  most  probable.  He  is  the
person  of  name — Jesus;  who  has  a
name  above  every  name,  at  whose
name  every  knee  shall  bow  ;  through
whose  name,  by  faith  in  His  name,  the
diseased  are  healed ;  and  in  whose
name  all  our  prayers  and  supplications
must  be  presented  to  God.  This  is  the
person  of  Name  ! " — Clarke.

—  "  Christ,  the  true  tree  of  life.
Or  the  Church,  planted  and  rooted  in
Christ,  and  much  renowned  all  the
world  over.  Christ  mystical  is  a  vine
covering  the  whole  earth." — Trapp.

—  "  The  Kingdom  of  the  Anointed
a  planting,  inasmuch  as  the  members
of  the  Kingdom  are — 1.  Sown  by  the
Word.  2.  Reared,  fostered  by  the
Holy  Spirit.  3.  Grown  in  time  for
eternity,  to  the  honour  of  God  the
Father. " — Lange.

—  "Hungering  after  righteousness  as
the  means  and  preservative  against  the
eternal  hunger  and  distress  on  account
of  sin ;  hunger  against  hunger,  as  the  way
to  everlasting  satisfaction.*' — Lange,

Vers.  SO,  31.  "  All  these  promises  be-

366


OBAP.  XXXT.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEt.


long  also  to  us,  if  we  be  true  believers  name,  that  which  expresses  its  election
in  Christ.  Then  we  can  say,  *  The  of  grace,  but  man,  which  calls  to  re-
Lord  is  my  Shepherd,  I  shall  not  merabrance  dust  of  the  ground,  sin,
want'  When  we  were  wandering  on  and  death." — Schmieder.
the  mountains  of  error,  Jesus  sought  —  "  This  is  a  chapter  which  both
us  and  brought  us  safely  into  the  fold,  magistrates  and  rulers  of  the  Church
He  feeds  us  in  the  green  pastures  of  ought  to  meditate  upon  very  seriously.
His  ordinances  now.  He  leads  us  in  The  complaints  that  God  here  makes
paths  of  righteousness,  and  makes  us  of  false  shepherds,  and  the  curses  He
to  lie  down  at  rest,  reposing  on  His  denounces  against  them,  show  that  it
love ;  and  will  at  last  bring  us  to  the  is  the  duty  of  pastors,  with  their
heavenly  land  of  promise,  where  we  utmost  diligence,  to  watch  over  the
shall  hunger  no  more  and  thirst  no  sheep  with  which  they  are  entrusted,
more,  and  our  shame  shall  be  turned  and  to  provide  with  care  and  readiness
into  everlasting  glory." — Fausset.  for  all  their  wants,  and  that  if  they

fail   herein   they   must   give  a  severe

Ver.  30.  "  Only  by  the  way  do  the  account  to  God  for  it.     This  too  lays

pilgrims  of  God   doubt ;  not   at   the  an  obligation  upon  princes  and  magis-

beginning,  and  at  the  end  not  at  all.  trates  to  govern  faithfully  and  justly

At  first  they  proceed  in  faith,  at  last  the  people  committed  to  their  trust,

they  shall  see  face  to  face." — Lange,  What  befell  the  Jews,  who  for  the

unfaithfulness  of  their  prophets  and

Ver.  31.   **  Under  the  more  iinme-  magistrates    were    utterly    destroyed,

diate  interpretation  of  the  similitude  shows  that  it  is  the  greatest  misfortune

that  men  are  meant,  there  is  at  the  to  a  nation  to  have  wicked  rulers,  and

same  time  indicated  the  universality  that  all  who  were  concerned  for  the

of  grace  ;  that   not  Israel  alone  but  glory  of  God  and  the  happiness  and

Adam,   humanity,  are  named  as  the  edification  of  the  Church  have  great

flock  ;  and  the  greatness  also  of  the  reason  to  pray  to  God  that  He  would

grace  is  perceptible  in  this,  that  Israel  always  raise  up  to  His  people  faithful

is  not  designated  by  its  honourable  and  good  pastors." — OstervM*


The  Utter  Ruin  of  Idumea.    (Chap,  xxxv.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  2.  Ver.  5.    "A  perpetual  hatred"—

"Mount   Seir" — Idumea,  the  woody  enmity  for  ever,  an  abiding   enmity,

mountain  region  in  the  south  of  that  Edom     perpetuated     the     hereditary

part  of  Palestine  which   lies   to   the  hatred    derived    from    Esau    against

east  of  Jordan  from  the  Dead  Sea  to  Jacob.     "  By  the  force  of  the  sword  "

the    Atlantic    Gulf.      "Seir"    means  — by  the  hands  of  the  sword,  the  sword

shaggy,  alluding  to  its  rugged  hills  and  being  personified  as  a  devourer  whose

forests,   and   originally   to   Esau,   the  hands  were  the  instruments  of  destruc-

ancestor  of  Edom    (Gen.    xxv.    25;  tion.    "  In  the  time  their  iniquity  had

xxvii.  11).  an  end" — its  consummation.  "Oppres-
sion of  brethren  calls  at  once  for  the

Ver.   3.  "I  will   make   thee  most  exercise  of  compassion,  which  is  best

desolate" — literally  desolation  and  deso-  manifested  where  no  one  is  innocent.

lateness.     "  It  is  only  in  their  national  When  guilt  makes   the   end,  ancient

character  of  foes  to  God's  people  that  enmity   should   not   be   let  loose." —

the   Edoraites  are   to  be   utterly  de-  Lange.
Btroyed.     A  remnant  of  Edom,  as  of

the  other  heathen,  is  to  be  called  by  Ver.  6.  "  Sith  thou  hast  not  hated

the  name  of  God  (Amos  ix.  12)." —  blood" — rather  the  affirmative,  Surely

Fausset.  thou  dost  hate  blood.    "  The  preserva-

366


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SZEKIEL,


QEAT.  ZXZV.


tion  of  thy  life  is  what  thou  art  intent
on  securing.  The  thought  of  blood
being  shed  among  thee  is  what  thou
art  putting  far  from  thee  as  the  object
of  aversion;  but  God's  purposes  are
contrary  to  thine,  and  what  thou
hatest  He  will  send — blood  shall  pur-
sue thee/' — Fairbairn.  '*  The  effusion
of  blood,  of  thy  own  blood,  shall  cleave
fast  to  thy  footsteps.  The  murderer
hates  the  blood  which  he  sheds.  If
he  hates  the  man  with  such  an  energy
of  hate  that  he  attempts  his  life,  he
hates  the  blood  in  which  is  the  man's
soul. " — Hengstenherg,


*'  Cut  off  from  it  him  that

There  is  no  going  to  and


Ver.  7.
passeth."

fro — no  traffic.  Hence  the  desolation
of  death.  A  retribution  in  kind,  that
she  should  be  cut  off  herself,  even  as
she  stood  in  the  cross  way  to  cut  off
the  Israelites  who  escaped  (Obad.  14).

Yer.  10.  "Whereas  the  Lord  was
there."  *'It  is  not  said  the  Lord  is
there,  but  was  there.  For  a  moment
He  had  withdrawn  Himself  (chap,
xi.  23) ;  but  that  He  was  there  secures
that  He  will  be  there,  since  He  has
not  yet  definitely  given  up  His  inheri-
tance. Where  God  is  in  the  midst
there  Edom  cannot  possibly  gain  a
footing,  though  He  give  over  His
people  even  for  a  long  time  to  the
foe." — Hengstenherg,


Ver.  11.  "I  will  do  according  to
thine  anger.*'  "  From  the  hating  come
anger  and  envy,  expressing  themselves
not  only  in  word  but  also  in  deed.
Jehovah  acts  according  to  Edom's
doings." — Lange.

Yer.  13.  *' With  your  mouth  ye
have  boasted  against  me."  Edom  im-
plied, if  he  did  not  express  it,  in  his
taunts  against  Israel,  that  God  had
not  sufficient  power  to  protect  His
people.  A  type  of  the  spirit  of  all  the
foes  of  God  and  His  people  (1  Sam.
ii.  3;  Rev.  xiii.  6).

Yer.  14.  "When  the  whole  earth
rejoiceth,  I  will  make  thee  desolate."

"  The  '  whole  earth '  refers  to  Judea
and  the  nations  that  submit  them-
selves to  Judea's  God.  When  these
rejoice,  the  foes  of  God  and  His  people,
represented  by  Edom  as  a  nation,  shall
be  desolate.  Things  shall  be  com-
pletely reversed  :  Israel,  that  now  for
a  time  mourns,  shall  then  rejoice,  and
that  for  ever.  Edom,  that  now  rejoices
over  fallen  Israel,  shall  then,  when
elsewhere  all  is  joy,  mourn,  and  for
ever  (Isa.  Ixv.  17-19;  Matt.  v.  4;
Luke  vi.  25)." — Fausset.

Yer.  15.  "Mount  Seir,  and  all
Idumea,  even  all  of  it" — set  in  con-
trast to  the  inheritance  of  the  house  of
Israel.


EOMILETICS.

The  Enemies  of  Gk)ix

(Yers.  1-15.)

It  sounds  strange  to  hear  again  the  voice  of  denunciation  interposed  in  the
midst  of  prophecies  full  of  consolation  and  hope.  The  doom  of  Edom  has  been
dealt  with  in  chapter  xxv.,  but  it  is  introduced  once  more  in  perfect  harmony
with  the  immediate  design  of  the  prophet,  which  is  to  show  that  the  future
triumph  of  Israel  will  be  assured  by  the  utter  defeat  of  her  bitterest  enemies.
Idumea,  savagely  gloating  over  the  downfall  of  its  hated  rival,  and  eagerly  tak-
ing possession  of  the  desolated  land,  had  an  apparent  superiority  over  Israel.
The  real  advantage  was  still  with  the  i)eople  of  God.  With  them  was  deposited
the  seed  of  Divine  blessing,  the  germ  of  a  glorious  future.  In  Idumea  no  such
germ  existed.  There  was  nothing  there  but  inveterate  hostility  to  Jehovah,
and  no  prospect  but  that  of  ultimate  ruin.     "  While  Israel  rose  in  Christ  to

367


CHAP.  XXXV.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL,


the  supremacy  of  the  world,  El  cm  vanished  from  the  face  of  history — their
memorial  perished,  their  envy  and  cruel  hatred  were  for  ever  buried  among  the
ruins  of  the  nations."  The  Edomites  represent  the  heathen  world  and  all  who
have  rebelled  against  and  opposed  the  truth,  and  in  their  destruction  we  read
the  ultimate  fate  of  the  enemies  of  God  in  all  ages.     Observe —

I.  TtLat  the  enemies  of  God  are  actuated  by  a  spirit  of  malignant  hatred.

"Because  thou  hast  had  a  perpetual  hatred"  (ver.  5).  The  enmity  existing
between  Jacob  and  Esau  from  their  birth  was  fostered  with  increasing  aggrava-
tion by  the  descendants  of  the  latter.  Immediately  after  the  death  of  Isaac,
Esau  settled  in  Edom,  and  conquered  the  rocky  territory  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Mount  Seir.  From  their  mountain  heights,  overlooking  the  southern  border
of  the  Holy  Land,  the  Edomites  watched  with  undisguised  envy  the  growing
j)ower  of  the  favoured  tribes.  Their  hatred  became  more  acrid  and  implacable
in  every  succeeding  generation.  As  the  father  of  Hannibal  caused  his  son,
when  only  nine  years  of  age,  to  swear  at  the  altar  eternal  hatred  to  the  Romans,
so  the  sons  of  Edom  were  pledged  to  maintain  unceasing  hostility  to  Israel.
Time,  which  mollifies  the  fiercest  passions,  only  intensified  the  ever-cherished
malice  of  the  Edomites,  and  they  embraced  every  opportunity  to  make  it  mani-
fest. The  wild  unreasoning  hatred  of  the  Edomites  is  a  type  of  the  malignant
opposition  of  the  enemies  of  God.  This  deplorable  condition  of  mind  is  an
evidence  of  the  demoralising  eflfect  of  sin>  It  is  not  simply  a  dull,  sullen  indif-
ference, but  an  ungovernable,  demoniacal  passion,  horribly  real  in  its  activity.
Goodness  is  hated  because  it  is  good :  God  is  hated  because  He  is  God.

II.  That  the  enemies  of  God  are  infatuated  with  the  fury  of  their  opposi-
tion. 1.  They  exult  over  the  disasters  of  God's  j^eople.  "Thou  didst  rejoice  at  the
inheritance  of  Israel,  because  it  was  desolate  "  (ver.  15).  •  As  Edom  watched  the
advancement  of  Israel  with  envy,  so  it  noted  the  invasion  and  dismemberment
of  the  kingdom  with  chuckling  satisfaction.  When  the  Israelites  were  prostrate
and  groaning  under  the  triumphant  Chaldean  power,  Edom  laughed  at  their
misfortunes.  There  is  a  laughter  that  is  utterly  joyless,  harsh,  metallic,  ringing
with  scorn  and  an  indescribable  contemptuousness.  It  is  the  laughter  of  in-
veterate hatred — an  inhuman  guffaw.  It  is  thus  that  the  enemies  of  God  exult
over  the  temporary  defeat  of  His  people.  2.  They  take  a  savage  delight  in  helping
to  make  those  disasters  more  complete.  "  Thou  hast  shed  the  blood  of  the  children
of  Israel  by  the  force  of  the  sword  in  the  time  of  their  calamity  "  (ver.  5).

/  Edom,  forgetful  of  all  ties  of  kinship,  sent  troops  to  assist  the  Chaldeans  in  the

Vsiege  of  Jerusalem.     More  cruel  than  the  Chaldeans,  they  clamoured  for  the

Aotal  destruction  of  the  city,  and  exclaimed  with  fiendish  gesticulations — "Ease

I  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  foundation  thereof"  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7).     They  eagerly

/took  part  in  plundering  the   city,  they  occupied    the  passes  and  cut  off  the

retreat  of  the  fugitives  who  escaped  the  massacre  at  the  storming,  and  openly

rejoiced  when  the  citizens  were  carried  off  into  slavery,  boasting  loudly  of  their

V  share  in  the  terrible  catastrophe  (Obad.  11-14).     They  were  never  forgotten  for

their  base  and  cruel  treachery.     The  enemies  of  God  not  only  make  sport  of

the  misfortunes  of  His  people,  but  show  their  vindictiveness  in  doing  all  they

can  to  intensify  their  sufferings.     3.   They  seize  with  avaricious  haste  the  possessions

they  help  to  ruin.     "These  two  countries  shall  be  mine,  and  we  will  possess  it"

(ver.  10).     The  Edomites  not  only  re-entered  the  cities  captured  from  them  by

David  when  he  was  settling  the  boundaries  of  the  Hebrew  empire,  but  they

made  inroads  into  Southern  Palestine,  taking  possession  of  the  towns  as  far  as

Hebron.     The  race  of  the  warrior  kings  of  Judah  who  had  kept  them  in  check

was  extinct,  and  the  country  was  too  feeble  to  resist  the  rapacity  of  the  Idu-

means.     The  enemies  of  God  are  ever  eager  to  make  gain  out  of  the  trouble!

368


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xxxv.


they  have  helped  to  create.  4.  They  are  ignorant  of  the  Power  they  rashly  defy,
*'  Whereas  the  Lord  was  there  "  (ver.  10).  What  a  sublime  stroke  of  the  pro-
phetic pen  !  The  sentence  breaks  in  like  a  flash  of  lightning — the  Lord  is  there  !
The  land  is  desolate,  but  not  forsaken  ;  conquered,  but  not  surrendered.  Israel
has  been  carried  away,  but  not  Israel's  God.  The  land  and  the  people  still
belong  to  Him.  This  fact  is  flashed  out  to  rebuke  the  presumption  of  Edom  ;
but  Edom  sees  it  not,  heeds  it  not.  Like  all  the  enemies  of  God,  in  his  blind
infatuation  he  wrestles  with  a  Power  that  ultimately  crushes  him.

III.  That  the  enemies  of  God  will  be  inevitably  destroyed.  1.  Their  destruc-
tion will  he  a  Divine  act.  "  I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  against  thee  "  (ver.  3).
The  Being  they  had  insulted  and  defied  vindicated  His  honour  and  supremacy
by  their  righteous  punishment.  Josephus  informs  us  that,  soon  after  the^'
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  Nebuchadnezzar  turned  his  arms  against  Edom  and
the  adjoining  nations  and  defeated  them  with  great  slaughter.  As  in  the  con-/,
quest  of  Israel,  Nebuchadnezzar  was  the  instrument  of  Jehovah  in  working  out
the  doom  of  Edom.  Jeremiah  (chap,  xlix.),  Ezekiel  (chaps,  xxv.,  xxxv.),  and
Obadiah  describe  in  graphic  language  the  fearful  ravage  of  the  Chaldean  forces.
The  ordinary  raids  of  robber  tribes  might  be  beaten  ofl^,  for  the  Edomites  had
a  reputation  for  warlike  valour;  but  the  Chaldees  were  irresistible,  and  were
accustomed  to  do  their  work  with  desolating  thoroughness.  The  enemies  of
God  are  helpless  when  His  power  is  put  forth  to  chastise.  2.  Their  destruction
will  he  on  account  of  their  inveterate  wickedness.  *'  I  will  do  according  to  thine
anger,  envy,  hatred,  blasphemies,  boasting"  (vers.  11-13,  15).  Their  malignity
towards  God  and  His  chosen  people  was  hereditary,  and  was  nourished  from
generation  to  generation.  Their  impregnable  position  among  the  hills  increased
their  haughtiness ;  they  boasted  of  the  wisdom  of  their  great  men,  and  they
had  all  the  insolence  of  wealth,  their  country  being  situated  in  the  route  of
commerce  from  north  to  south.  They  were  continually  stirring  up  the  jealousies
of  the  tribes,  and  were  always  as  sharp  thorns  in  the  side  of  Israel.  But  their
course  of  wickedness  had  an  end  ;  their  sins  ruined  them.  3.  Their  destru^ction
will  he  hy  the  same  weapon  with  which  they  destroyed  others.  "  Because  thou  hast
shed  blood  by  the  force  of  the  sword "  (vers.  5,  6).  The  law  of  retribution  is
ever  operating  with  surprising  exactitude  and  impartiality.  Edom  had  wrought
incredible  horrors  with  the  sword  and  been  reckless  in  shedding  human  blood.
By  the  sword  shall  he  be  punished,  and  be  surfeited  with  a  very  carnival
of  slaughter  and  bloodshed.  Joab  was  slain  by  the  weapon  with  which  he
murdered  Abner  and  Amasa  years  previously  (1  Kings  ii.  28-34).  Dogs  lapped
the  blood  and  picked  the  bones  of  Jezebel,  as  they  had  done  to  Naboth,  the
victim  of  her  fury,  fifteen  years  before  (2  Kings  ix.  36).  4.  Their  destruction  will
he  complete  and  irrevocahle.  **  I  will  make  thee  most  desolate  "  (vers.  3,  4,  7,  9,
15).  Thirt}  ruined  towns  within  three  days'  journey  of  the  Red  Sea  attest  the
former  greatness  of  Edom.  The  utter  desolation  that  fell  on  the  country  and
on  the  descendants  of  Esau  is  one  of  the  most  impressive  facts  of  history.  They
were  formerly  distinguished  for  wisdom,  now  they  are  sunk  in  the  grossest  folly.
They  regard  the  ruins  around  them  as  the  work  of  spirits.  The  tribes  now
wandering  in  Edom  are  savage  and  treacherous.  Even  the  Arabs  are  afraid  to
enter  the  country,  or  to  conduct  any  party  within  its  borders.  The  desolation  is
irrecoverable,  and  travellers  state  that  the  whole  region  is  avast  expanse  of  sand
drifted  up  from  the  Red  Sea  (Isa.  xxxiv.  6-15 ;  Jer.  xlix.  7-22).  The  enemies
of  God  will  be  smitten  beyond  the  power  of  recovery.  6.  Their  destruction  will
he  a  vindication  of  the  character  of  the  Being  they  madly  oppose,  "  Thou  shalt  know
that  I  am  the  Lord  "  (vers.  4,  9,  11,  12,  15).

Lessons. — 1.  Active  opposition  to  the  good  is  the  offspring  of  isUensified  haired,

2  ▲  969


CHAP.  XXXV.


UOMILETW  OOMMEyTARY:  EZEKIEL.


2.  It  is  utterly  futile  to  oppose  God,     3.  The  Divine  vengeance  may  he  averted  by
timely  suibmissum  and  repentance.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Vers.  1-15.  "  Why,  in  this  connec-
tion, should  Edom  have  alone  been
singled  out  for  destruction  ?  Not  as  if
her  people  only  were  appointed  to  suf-
fer vengeance  at  the  hand  of  God,  but
because,  in  the  bitterness  of  their  spite
and  the  intensity  of  their  hatred  to
the  cause  and  people  of  God,  they
stood  pre-eminent  among  the  nations,
and  so  were  fitly  chosen  as  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  whole.  The  region
where  the  greatest  enmity  reigned  is
the  ideal  territory  where  the  final
recompenses  of  judgment  take  place.
The  Edomite  spirit,  the  carnal,  unbe-
lieving, rebellious  spirit,  is  most  surely
doomed  to  perdition  :  enmity  to  the
cause  and  kingdom  of  Christ  is  marked
out  in  the  councils  of  heaven  for  irre-
trievable ruin.  They  who  are  of  it
cannot  overthrow  the  Church,  but
must  themselves  be  overthrown  and
fall  under  the  stroke  of  vengeance." —
Fairhairn.

Ver.  3.  "  When  punishments  break
in  and  are  already  taking  their  course,
in  this  God,  as  it  were,  stretches  out
His  hand.  Now,  since  His  hand  is
not  shortened  to  help  His  children,  so
also  it  is  not  too  weak  to  punish  His
enemies  (Isa.  lix.  1)." — Starke.

Ver.  4.  "  When  godliness  goes  out
of  cities,  confusion  and  devastation
enter  in.  We  can  never  sufficiently
recognise  that  God  alone  is  eternal." —
Lange,

Vers.  6-7.  Hatred— 1.  One  of  the
fruits  of  sin.  2.  A  prolific  source  of
other  evil  passions.  3.  Is  intensified  in
virulence  the  longer  it  is  cherished.  4.
Prompts  to  deeds  of  cruelty  and  blood-
shed.    5.  Will  be  signally  punished.

—  «  The  fiercest  mutual  hatred  had
for  centuries  thrust  apart  the  brother-
races  of  Jacob  and  Esau.  The  refusal
of  a  passage  through  Mount  Seir  to

370


the  Hebrews  under  Moses,  in  their
march  from  Egypt  nine  hundred  years
before,  had  entailed  the  long  sufferings  of
the  wilderness  life,  and  had  never  been
forgotten.  Under  Joram,  Amaziah,
and  Uzziah  in  succession,  it  had  been
virtually  a  Jewish  province,  till  the
reign  of  the  weak  Ahaz.  The  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem,  however,  had  at
last  given  the  Edomites  a  chance  of
revenge,  and  they  had  indulged  it  to
the  uttermost." — Qeikie,

Ver.  5.  **  Edom  was  of  the  same
stock,  brother  to  Jacob,  and  it  was
sin  to  envy,  but  greater  to  hate,  and
greatest  to  retain  a  perpetual  hatred,
an  hereditary  enmity  from  Esau's
time,  the  father  of  the  Edomites,  till
now  :  near  one  thousand  two  hundred
years  had  the  seed  of  Esau  hated
Jacob's  seed  for  inheriting  the  bless-
ing, which  they  as  little  valued  as  their
father  did  before  them." — Pool.

—  *'  To  afflict  the  afflicted  is  cruel.
This  is  scarcely  of  man,  bad  as  he  is.
He  must  be  possessed  by  the  malignant
spirit  of  the  devil,  when  he  wounds
the  wounded,  exults  over  the  miseries
of  the  afflicted,  and  seeks  opportuni-
ties to  add  affliction  to  those  who  are
already  under  the  rod  of  God." — A.

'  Clarke.

—  "Edom  is  often  in  Scripture  made
the  type  of  the  most  bitter  and  in-
veterate enemies  of  God's  people  in
all  ages.  The  hatred  of  brothers,
when  they  are  at  variance,  is  pro-
verbially rancorous.  Such  was  Esau's
hatred  of  Jacob,  though  the  latter
averted  it  by  soft  words  and  con-
ciliatory acts  ;  and  such  was  the  in-
herited bitterness  of  Esau's  descendants
towards  Israel." — Fausset,

—  "  Where  enmity  leads  to :  it  per-
petuates itself  by  degrees  in  the  heart;
it  is  not  afraid  even  to  use  the  sword :
first  the  malice  of  the  tongue,  and
then  the  violence  of  malice.     There-


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


tStLtif,  ZXXTt


fore,  always  become  reconciled  at  once
and  completely,  that  no  roots  may
remain  in  the  heart  which  may  shoot
up  afterwards. — The  prayer  of  an  im-
placable man  is  certain  not  to  be
heard." — Lange,

Ver.  6.  "Even  blood  shall  pursue
thee/'  *'  As  a  bloodhound.  It  shall,
it  shall ;  believe  me,  it  shall." — Trapp.

—  "The  track  of  blood  behind  so
many  celebrated  figures  in  history,
behind  so  many  so-called  great  ex-
ploits.— Tlie  shedding  of  blood  a  char-
acteristic symptom  of  the  world,  a
mark  of  the  spirit  that  rules  in  the
world,  and  of  the  wickedness  in  which
it  lies." — Lange.

Ver.  7.  "  Trade  and  intercourse  cease
where  God  sends  His  judgments.  The
Lord  destroys  nations  that  delight  in
war." — Lange,

Ver.  9.  *'  Edom's  sin  was  perpetual
hatred,  and  Edom's  punishment  shall
be  perpetual  desolations.  Edomites
would  never  return  into  friendship  with
the  Israelites,  but  still  hate,  molest,
and  waste  them  ;  now,  for  just  recom-
pense, Edom's  cities  shall  be  wasted,
and  never  return  to  their  former  glory."
—Pool

—  "  Sin  is  not  to  become  eternalised ;
therefore  eternal  punishment." — Starch,

Ver.  10.  "  Whereas  the  Lord  was
there."  The  Presence  of  God — L  A
reality  though  unrecognised.  2.  A
comfort  in  the  midst  of  desolation
and  suffering.  3.  The  hope  and  guar-
antee of  deliverance  and  future  pros-
perity. 4.  A  startling  revelation  to
His  enemies.

Vers.  10,  11.  "The  overthrow  and
exile  of  the  Israelites  from  their  land
ought  to  have  moved  Edom  to  self-
examination,  lest  there  should  be  in
herself  sins  found  which  might  provoke
God  to  inflict  similar  judgments.  In-
stead of  this,  she  regarded  Israel's
calamity  as  her  opportunity.  'These
two  countries  shall  be  mine,  and  we
will  possess  it.'  She  forgot,  in  her
wicked  presumption,  that  the  land  of


Israel  was  peculiarly  the  Lord's  posses-
sion and  the  Lord's  earthly  dwelling-
place  ;  therefore,  so  far  was  Edom  from
being  about  to  gain  possession  of
Israel's  inheritance,  that  she  was  about
to  be  deprived  of  her  own,  and  that
for  ever." — Fausset,

Vers.  11-15.  The  Triumph  of  the
Wicked — 1.  Finds  its  joy  in  the  down-
fall of  those  they  hated  (vers.  11,  15).
2.  Is  unreal :  their  conquered  posses-
sions a  desolation  ;  their  boasting
hollow  and  joyless  (vers.  12-15).  3.
Is  soon  changed  to  dejection,  while  all
else  rejoice  (ver.  14).

Vers.  12,  13.  The  Speech  of  the
Wicked — 1.  Blasphemous,  *'  All  thy
blasphemies  which  thou  hast  spoken"
(ver.  12).  2.  Boastful,  "With  youi
mouth  ye  have  boasted  "  (ver.  13).  3.
Copious  in  its  insolent  vocabulary.  ''Ye
have  multiplied  your  words  against
Me "  (ver.  13).  4.  Does  not  escape
Divine  notice,  "  I  have  heard  thee "
(ver.  13).

Ver.  13.  "Worldly  men  think  lightly
of  speaking  vindictive  and  calumnious
words  against  the  people  of  God,  and
of  forming  projects  for  taking  selfish
advantage  of  their  times  of  extremity ;
but  God  regards  such  words  against
His  people  as  spoken  against  Himself.
There  is  not  a  word  that  goeth  out
of  our  lips  which  God  does  not  hear.
How  careful  and  guarded  we  should
be  in  our  words,  especially  in  times
when  our  carnal  passions  and  tempers
are  excited  !  (Prov.  x.  19)." — Fausset.

Ver.  14,  15.  "What  an  entire  re-
versal of  the  present  order  of  things
there  will  be  at  the  second  coming  of
Christ !  The  enemies  of  God,  who  so
often  seem  now  to  triumph,  shall  then
be  cast  down  in  everlasting  sorrow.
The  people  of  God,  Israel  and  the
elect  Church,  who  so  often  now  mourn,
shall  then  rejoice  with  joy  unspeak-
able and  full  of  glory.  Edom,  that
rejoiced  over  fallen  Israel,  shall  then
mourn  over  her  own  irretrievable  fall
while  '  Jerusalem  shall  be  a  rejoicing

371


CfHAP.  xxxvL  EOMILETia  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL,


and  her  people  a  joy/  Let  us  see  Ver.  15.  "  The  Edomites  who
that  we  take  our  portion  now  with  the  thought  of  seizing  on  others'  lands,  lost
people  of  God  in  their  season  of  trial,  their  own.  They  who  covet  all  do  oft
that  so  we  may  have  our  everlasting  lose  all,  yea,  even  the  pleasure  of  that
portion  with  them  in  their  coming  they  possess ;  as  a  greedy  dog  swallow-
blessedness." — Fausset  eth  the  whole  meat  that  is  cast  him,

without  any  pleasure,  as  gaping  still

Ver.    14.     Suffering  —  1.    Aggra-  for  the  next  morsel." — Trapp.
vated   when    all    around   is    gay.     2.  —  "  Thou  tookest  pleasure  in  the

Has  always  in  it  a  depressing  element  ruin  of  My  people  ;  for  this  thy  sin  I

of  loneliness.     3.  Has  special  signifi-  will  ruin  thee,  and  then  do  to  thee  as

cance   when   we    are   conscious   it  is  thou  didst ;  I  will  retaliate  and  rejoice

Divinely  inflicted.  in  thy  ruin  :  thou  helpedst  to  make

—  **  When  the  whole  land  of  Israel  Jerusalem  desolate ;  I  will  make  thee
rejoiceth ;  as  it  is  sometimes  hale  and  so  :  thou  criedst  to  ruin  them  all,  to
well  with  the  Church  when  the  wicked  destroy  all  the  land  ;  all  thy  land
are  in  the  suds.  Judea  was  the  world  shall  be  ruined,  and  by  these  judg-
of  the  world,  as  Athens  was  the  ments  I  will  be  known  to  be  the  Lord."
Epitome    of   Greece,   the   Greece    of  — Fool.

Greece." — Trapp,  —  "  This  whole   chapter  strongly

—  "  When  the  whole  earth  is  in  inculcates  this  maxim — Do  as  thou
peace  and  plenty  and  enjoys  both,  thou  wouldst  be  done  by,  and  what  thou
shalt  want  all ;  and  then  envy  at  the  wouldst  not  have  done  to  thee,  do  not
welfare  of  others  shall  break  thy  heart.  to  others.  And  from  it  we  learn  that
Envy  was  thy  sin,  and  now  what  is  every  man  may,  in  some  sort,  be  said
the  object  of  envy — the  prosperity  of  to  make  his  own  temporal  good  or
others — shall  be  thy  grief." — Pooh  evil ;  for  as  he  does  to  others  God

—  "  No  true  grace  without  justice,  will  take  care  to  do  to  him,  whether
The  theocracy  must  accordingly  pass  it  be  evil  or  good,  weal  or  woe.  Would
through  the  fire  of  affliction  and  be-  you  not  be  slandered  or  backbitten?
come  purified  :  for  the  same  reason.  Then  do  not  slander  or  backbite,
the  heathenism  whose  iniquity  is  full  Wouldst  thou  wish  to  live  in  peace?
must  show  that  it  has  fallen  under  Then  do  not  disturb  the  peace  of
the  Divine  justice.  For  grace  is  not  others.  Be  merciful,  and  thou  shalt
toleration  of  the  bad." — Havernick.  obtain  mercy." — A.  Clarke,

The  Promise  of  Better  Days  for  Israel.    (Chap,  xxxvi.)    /

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.         Ver.  3.   "Made  you  desolate  and

"Ye  mountains  of  Israel** — ^in  con-  swallowed  you  up" — laid  you  waste,

trast  to  Mount  Seir  of  the    previous  and  panted  after  you  on  every  side ;  like

prophecy.     They  are  here  personified  :  wild  beasts  after  their  prey,  implying

Israel's  elevation  is  moral,  not  merely  the   greedy   cupidity  of  Edom   as  to

physical,  as  Edom*s.  Israel's  inheritance.    "  Ye  are  taken  up

in  the  lips  of  talkers  " — literally,  **  Ye

Ver.  2.  "  The  ancient  high  places.**  are  made  to  go  up  on  the  lip  of  the

"  The     perpetual     heights     are     the  tongue,  t.e.,  on  the  lip  of  the  slanderer,

natural  mountains,  as  a  figure  of  the  the  man  of  tongue.     Edom  slandered

unchangeable  grandeur  of  which  Israel  Israel   because   of  the   connection    of

boasted,  because  it  had  the  Eternal  for  the  latter  with  Jehovah,  as  though  He

its  protector,  and  in  Him  the  security  were  unable  to  save  them." — Fatisset
of  its    own    i)erpetuity "   (comp.    Ps.

cxxv.  2). — Hengstenberg,  Ver.  4.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  to

the  mountains,  hills,'*  &c.    The  men-
372


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OHAF.  XXXVI.


tion  of  particulars  is  meant  to  point  to
the  eye  which  observes  all,  the  Divine
care  which  beholds  each  and  all,  over
which  only  a  human  eye  weeps,  or,  on
the  contrary,  rejoices.  The  complete-
ness of  the  renewed  blessedness  of  all
parts  of  the  land  is  implied.

Ver.  5.  "  With  joy  of  heaxt,  despite-
ful minds,  to  cast  it  out  as  a  prey  " —

"  with  gladness  of  heart  and  deadly
scorn,  have  appropriated  My  land  to
desolate  and  plunder  it." — Geikie.

Ver.  7.  "Shall  bear  their  shame"
— shall  bear  their  share  of  contempt
in  turn — a  perpetual  shame,  whereas
the  shame  that  Israel  bore  from  these
heathen  was  only  temporary,

Ver.  8.  "  Shall  shoot  forth  your
branches  and  yield  fruit  to  My  people,
for  they  are  at  hand  to  come  " — "  shall

shoot  out  your  verdure  and  yield  your
fruits  to  My  people  Israel,  for  they
will  soon  come. " —  Geikie,  **  Leaves  and
branches  come  into  view  as  food  for
cattle,  while  the  fruit  is  for  man.  Of
the  seventy  years  Chaldean  servitude
twenty  had  already  elapsed,  so  that
many  of  those  still  living  might  yet
see  the  joyful  day." — Hengstenherg,

Ver.  11.  "Will  do  better  unto  you
than  at  your  beginnings  " — "  better
than  in  your  past.  This  was  fulfilled
when  He  appeared  in  the  Holy  Land
who  could  say  of  Himself,  *  Come  unto
Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy
laden,'  and  who  far  outshone  Solomon
in  all  his  glory." — Hengstenherg.

Ver.  14.  "Thou  shalt  devour  men
no  more,  neither  bereave  thy  nations
any  more."  *'  The  land  of  Israel  had  a
dangerous  position.  It  was  a  land  of
transit,  an  apple  of  discord  for  the
Asiatic  and  African  powers,  and  ex-
posed to  oppression  by  the  surrounding
nations  of  tlie  wilderness,  who  always
went  to  it  for  barter.  On  account  of
this  dangerous  position  it  is  designated,
even  in  Num.  xiii.  32,  as  a  land  that
devours  its  inhabitants.  Precisely
such  a  land  had  God  chosen  for  His


people.  They  should  always  have
occasion  to  look  up  to  Him ;  and  when
they  fell  away  the  rods  were  also  laid
up.  Peaceful  seclusion  would  have
produced  a  stagnant  condition,  the
worst  that  can  befall  the  people  of  God.
It  is  essential  to  the  Church  in  this
world  to  be  militant." — Hengstenherg,

Ver.  19.  "I  scattered  them  among
the  heathen."  "  The  reason  for  their
removal  was  their  sin,  which  God's
holiness  could  not  let  pass  unpunished."
— Fausset,

Ver.  20.  "They  profaned  My  holy
name."  "  The  name  of  My  holiness  is
not  simply  the  holy  name  of  Jehovah,
but  the  name  in  which  His  holiness
is  manifest,  so  that  by  it  man  names
His  holiness,  and  hence  the  Holy  God
Himself." — Lange.

Ver.  21.  "  I  had  pity  for  Mine  holy
name" — "I  felt  pity  for  it.  God's
own  name,  so  dishonoured,  was  the
primary  object  of  His  pitying  concern,
then  His  people  secondarily  through
His  concern  for  it." — Fairhairn.

Ver.  23.  "I  will  sanctify  My  great
name"  —  "*.«.,  My  holiness  as  ex-
pressed in  My  name,  securing  due
weight  to  it,  so  that  it  shall  not  simply
be  named  as  name,  but  evidently  ex-
perienced as  fact.  In  its  being  the
name  of  His  holiness  lies  the  necessity,
when  the  people  who  thus  name  God
do  not  sanctify  it^  but,  on  the  contrary,
only  contribute  everywhere  to  its  pro-
fanation, that  then  Jehovah  should
take  in  hand  the  sanctification  of  His
narae,and  thereby  of  Himself." — Lange.
'*  Shall  be  sanctified  in  you  before  their
eyes  " — "  or  before  your  eyes.  It  must
be  done  first  before  the  eyes  of  the
people  who  by  their  depravity  had
lost  sight  of  God's  real  character  ;  and
then  what  was  seen  by  them  experi-
mentally would  also  be  seen  reflectively
by  the  heathen  who  dwelt  around." —
Fairhairn,

Ver.  25.  *'  Then  will  I  sprinkle
clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall

373


OHAP.  XXXTI.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


be  clean."  "  The  external  restoration
must  be  preceded  by  an  internal  one.
Tlie  change  in  their  condition  must
not  be  superficial,  but  must  be  based
on  a  radical  renewal  of  the  heart." —
Fausset  "  The  immediate  sense  of  the
verse  is :  That  Jehovah  leads  back
Israel  from  exile  into  their  own  land,
and  consecrates  them  there  to  be  a
people,  since  the  punishment,  so  charac-
teristic for  the  sin  that  occasioned  it,
is  shown  to  be  removed  by  the  bring-
ing of  them  again  into  their  own  land,
the  forgiveness  of  sins  thereby  already
proclaimed  at  once  evinces  and  mani-
fests itself  as  purification  of  the  people,
and  the  people  put  from  them  their  old
life,  especially  their  idolatry." — Lange.

Ver.  26.  "  I  will  give  you  a  heart
of  flesh  " — not  carnal  in  opposition  to
spiritual,  but  impressible  and  docile,
fit  for  receiving  the  good  seed.

Ver.  27.  "  I  will  cause  you  to  walk
in  My  statutes."  "  From  the  bestow-
ment  of  the  new  heart  flows  the  altered
position  toward  the  law  of  God." —
Eengstenberg.

Ver.  29.  "I  will  also  save  you  from
all  your  uncleannesses " — ,the  pro-
vince of  Jesus,  according  to  His  name
(Matt.  i.  21).  To  be  specially  exer-
cised in  behalf  of  the  Jews  in  the
latter  days  (Rom.  xi.  26).  "And  I
will  call  for  the  corn  " — "  as  a  master
calls  for  a  servant.  All  the  powers
and  productions  of  nature  are  the
servants  of  Jehovah  (Ps.  cv.  16  ;  Matt,
viii.  8,  9)." — Fausset.

Ver.  31.  ''Then  shaU  ye  remember
your  own  evil  ways  " — "with  shame
and  loathing.  The  unexpected  grace
and  love  of  God  manifested  in  Christ
to  Israel  shall  melt  the  people  into
true  repentance,  which  mere  legal  fear
could  not  (chap.  xvi.  61,  63 ;  Ps.
cxxx.  4 ;  Zech.  xii.  10  •  Jer.  xxxiii.  8,
9y— Fausset.


Ver.  35.  "  This  land  is  become  like
the  garden  of  Eden."  "  We  have  here
the  clear  counterpart  of  the  night-
piece  (Joel  ii.  3).  The  comparison  of
this  fundamental  passage,  according  to
which  the  figure  of  the  land  of  Eden
can  only  signify  a  prosperous  state  in
general,  shows  how  erroneous  it  is  to
find  in  this  passage  the  restoration  of
Canaan  to  a  really  paradisiac  glory,
and  to  charge  those  who  cannot  fiud
this  in  it  with  a  spiritualising  evapora-
tion, " — Eengstenberg*

Ver.  36.  "I  the  Lord  have  spoken
it,  and  I  will  do  it."  "  I,  Jehovah,
whose  name  and  nature  aff'orda  security
that  between  speaking  and  doing  no
gulf  can  be  fixed." — Eengstenberg,

Ver.  37.  "I  will  yet  for  this  be
incLuired  of" — "  so  as  to  grant  it.  On
former  occasions  He  had  refused  to
be  incpiired  of  by  Israel,  because  the
inquirers  were  not  in  a  fit  condition
of  mind  to  receive  a  blessing  (chap,
xiv.  3 ;  XX.  3).  But  hereafter,  as  in
the  restoration  from  Babylon  (Neh.
viii.,  ix. ;  Dan.  ix.  3-23),  God  will
prepare  His  people's  hearts  to  pray
aright  for  the  blessings  which  He  is
about  to  give  (Ps.  cii.  13-17,  20  ;  Zech.
xii.  10-14;  xiii.  1)." — Fausset,

Vers.  37,  38.  "I  will  increase  them
with  men  like  a  flock,  as  the  holy
flock."     "The  passover  was  the  onlyX
one  among  the  festivals  in  which  there  \
was  a   great   accumulation  of  sheep,    \
with  which  the  fulness  of  men  in  re-   '
stored  Israel   is  compared.     But  the
consecrated  sheep  are  meant  here,  not
any  other  gathering  of  sheep,  because    \
the  people  that  is  compared  with  the
sheep  is  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the   /
Lord.     The  fulfilment  is  to  be  sought
in  the  Church  of  Christ  still  more  than
in  the  times  between  the  exile  and
Christ. " — Eengstenberg,


374


MOMILETW  COMMEjSTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap,  xxxfl.


E0MILETIC8.

Hope  for  a  Kuined  Nation.

(Vers.  1-15.)

In  this  chapter  the  prophet  continues  the  theme  with  which  his  whole  soul
was  possessed — the  prospective  revival  and  prosperity  of  Israel.  In  the  darkest
day  of  national  desolation  the  lamp  of  prophecy  glowed  with  a  Divinely  kindled
flame.  The  land  is  smitten  and  helpless ;  but  hope  is  still  left,  though  that  hope
is  enshrined  for  the  time  in  the  breast  of  one  man,  as  in  the  fatal  box  of
Pandora,  from  which  issued  all  the  evils  that  afflict  mankind,  hope  was  still  left
at  the  bottom.  The  keen  spiritual  insight  of  Ezekiel  saw  that,  amid  the  pre-
vailing ruin,  Israel  still  retained  an  interest  in  the  power  and  faithfulness  of  God
which  would  bring  about  her  future  restoration,  while  the  exulting  hopes  of  the
heathen  that  her  downfall  was  permanent  were  doomed  to  disappointment.
Observe —

I.  That  a  ruined  nation  is  an  object  of  Divine  compassion.  1.  He  sees  its
resources  exhausted.  "  They  have  made  you  desolate,  and  swallowed  you  up  on
every  side"  (ver.  3).  The  land  is  denuded  of  its  inhabitants  and  its  wealth.
The  hills  are  there,  but  they  are  no  longer  covered  with  grazing  flocks  and
herds.  The  valleys  are  there,  but  the  diligent  husbandmen  are  gone,  and  the
fields  and  vineyards  degenerate  into  barrenness  or  are  choked  with  the  wild
growths  of  untamed  luxuriousness.  The  cities  crumble  to  ruin  and  are  forsaken.
The  hum  of  commerce  is  hushed,  and  the  animated  scenes  of  a  thriving  popula-
tion are  no  longer  visible.  The  garden  has  become  a  wilderness,  the  ground  a
grave  in  which  the  national  life  lies  buried.  2.  He  sees  its  land  possessed  with
strangers.  *'  Even  the  high  places  are  ours — a  possession  unto  the  residue  of  the
heathen — which  have  appointed  My  land  into  their  possession  with  the  joy  of
all  their  heart,  with  despiteful  minds"  (vers.  2,  3,  5).  The  strangers  had  no
right  to  the  land ;  it  belonged  to  God :  nor  would  they  have  dared  to  seize  it
had  His  people,  to  whom  it  had  been  given  as  a  heritage,  remained  faithful  to
Him.  They  were  marauders,  robbers,  who  pounced  upon  the  land  with  the
avaricious  joy  with  which  the  wreckers  plunder  a  stranded  ship.  It  was  '*  cast
out  for  a  prey."  It  moved  the  compassion  and  indignation  of  Jehovah  to  see
His  heritage  overrun  and  pilfered  by  those  who  fiercely  hated  both  Him  and
His  people.  3.  He  sees  its  ruin  the  sport  and  mockery  of  its  enemies,  "  Aha,  the
places  are  ours — ye  are  taken  up  in  the  lips  of  talkers  and  are  an  infamy  of  the
people — a  prey  and  derision  to  the  heathen  "  (vers.  2,  3,  4).  They  gloat  over
the  misfortunes  of  the  nation  they  hated  and  dreaded.  Israel  had  become  a
byword  and  a  reproach.  The  foulest  slander  was  freely  circulated,  and  her
enemies  chuckled  with  a  hideous  satisfaction  as  they  rolled  the  toothsome
morsel  in  their  mouths.  Every  taunt  would  rankle  like  a  poisoned  barb  as  the
unhappy  Israelite  reflected  it  was  a  just  recompense  for  his  inveterate  folly.
This  state  of  things  was  faithfully  predicted  (Jer.  xxiv.  9),  and  nothing  was
done  to  prevent  it.  The  warning  was  des})ised.  Abandoned  by  God  and  man,
Israel  was  exposed  to  the  pitiless  contempt  of  the  wicked.  And  yet  the  heart
of  Jehovah  yearned  with  compassion  towards  His  afflicted  people.

II.  That  Divine  Power  can  restore  a  ruined  nation  to  prosperity.     1,  He

can  do  it  speedily.     *'  They  are  at  hand  to  come  "  (ver.  8).     Though  there  were
fifty  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity  yet  to  run,  it  was  near  at  hand  in  God's

375


CHAP.  xxxvL  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


determination.  Fifty  year*  is  a  long  period  in  the  life  of  an  individual,  but  it
is  insignificant  in  the  life  of  a  nation.  The  time  is  near  because  it  is  sure  to
come.  Though  Israel  was  far  from  home,  dispersed  in  many  countries,  and
held  in  bondage  by  the  power  of  her  captors,  she  shall  be  brought  again  to  her
own  land.  Time  is  a  trifling  factor  in  the  working  out  of  eternal  purposes ;
and  yet  many  then  living  were  privileged  to  witness  the  promised  restoration.
God  is  slow  to  punish ;  swift  to  bless.  2.  Re  can  do  it  effectually  (vers.  8-15).
The  waste  places  shall  be  tilled  and  sown  (ver.  8),  the  earth  abound  in  fruitful-
ness  (ver.  8),  the  hills  covered  with  flocks  and  herds  (ver.  11),  the  cities  rebuilt
and  crowded  with  inhabitants  (ver.  10),  commerce  expand  with  ever-increasing
activity  (ver.  11),  the  taunt  of  desolation  silenced  (ver.  15),  and  the  land  that
had  cast  out  its  people  to  perish  shall  support  and  cherish  them  on  a  scale  of
unexampled  munificence  (vers.  11-15).  When  a  penitent  nation  returns  to
God  there  is  no  blessing  He  will  withhold :  its  grievances  are  redressed,  its
honour  retrieved,  its  peace  and  prosperity  ensured.

111.  That  the  promise  of  Divine  help  inspires  national  hope.     Israel  was

utterly  prostrate.  There  was  no  country  in  that  neighbourhood  so  desolate
and  forsaken.  The  land  of  plenty  was  cursed  with  emptiness,  and,  like  an  un-
natural mother,  had  cast  out  its  children  to  perish.  Browbeaten,  calumniated,
and  oppressed  by  their  enemies,  the  people  lost  heart  and  sank  into  the  help-
lessness of  despair.  They  had  no  more  hope  of  revival  than  the  salt-encrusted
pine-logs  that  travellers  tell  us  are  strewn  on  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea,
saturated  for  centuries  with  brine.  Left  to  themselves,  there  was  no  possibility
of  recovery.  Bat  they  were  not  to  be  so  completely  abandoned.  Gradually,
and  at  first  faintly,  whispers  of  Divine  help  reached  their  ears.  The  impression
grew  in  distinctness  and  strength  that  the  promise  was  real,  and  at  length  out
of  the  dark  firmament  of  their  miseries  the  bright  star  of  hope  once  more  shone
forth.  They  had  ample  evidence,  from  past  experiences,  that  what  Jehovah
promised  He  would  surely  perform.  The  worst  of  sinners  need  not  despair;
for  him  the  hope  of  salvation  shines,  the  promise  is  still  in  force.  Let  him  but
repent  and  cry  for  help,  and  all  will  yet  be  well.

Learn — 1.  That  there  is  power  in  the  midst  of  apparent  impotency,     2.  That
national  revival  begins  in  the  putting  away  of  national  sins.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-15.   God  and   Nature.     1.  will  abide.     4.  Nature  responds  with

God   never  forgets  His  absolute  pro-  grateful  quickness  to  the  touch  of  the

prietorship  in  nature.      His   are   the  Divine  blessing.     "  Ye  mountains  shall

mountains,   hills,  rivers,   and  valleys,  shoot  forth  your  branches  and  yield

for  He  made  them  (vers.  4-6).    2.  Na-  your  fruit.     I  will  multiply  upon  you

ture  remains  true  to  God  when  man  man  and  beast,  and  will  do  better  unto

is  unfaithful.     Man  may  desolate  but  you  than  at  your  beginnings"  (vers,

cannot  destroy  nature.     The  unchaug-  8-11).     5.    God  will  make  nature  a

ing  continuity  of  its  mountains,  hills,  fruitful   inheritance   to   the   obedient

rivers,  and  valleys  rebukes  his  fickleness  (vers.  12-15).

and  infidelity.     3.  Nature  is  honoured         —  Man  and  Nature.      1.  Man  re-

by  signal   displays  of  Divine  power,  gards   nature    as   an    opportunity   to

"The  mountains  of  Israel"  had  wit-  indulge  a  covetous  spirit.    "The  places

nessed  the  miracles  of  God  on  behalf  are  ours  in  possession "  (ver.  2).     2.

of  His  chosen  people,  and  while  the  Man  abuses  the  resources  of  nature  by

eai'th  stands  their  voiceless  testimony  sinful  extravagance.   "  They  have  made

37$


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XXXVl.


you  desolate,  and  swallowed  you  up  on
every  side"  (ver.  3).  3.  It  is  an  evi-
dence of  great  moral  debasement  when
man  exults  over  the  desolations  of
nature  he  himself  has  made.  "The
enemy  hath  said  against  yoUi  *  Aha !
— Ye  are  taken  up  in  the  lips  of  talkers,
and  are  an  infamy  of  the  people — a
prey  and  derision — with  the  joy  of  all
their  heart,  with  despiteful  minds,  to
cast  it  out  for  a  prey  "  (vers.  2,  3-5).
4.  When  man  violates  nature  he  vio-
lates the  laws  of  God,  and  suffers  ac-
cordingly. "Thou  land  devourest  up
men,  and  hast  bereaved  thy  nations  "
(ver.  13).  6.  When  man  obeys  God,
all  the  resources  of  nature  minister  to
his  enjoyment  (vers.  8-16).

Vers.  1-4.  "The  grand  distinction
between  the  people  of  God  as  Israel,
and  the  people  of  the  world  as  Edom,
is,  whereas  the  latter  are  finally  given
over  to  destruction,  the  former  are
only  chastened  for  a  time,  and  shall
be  finally  and  completely  delivered.
The  people  of  the  world  may  now
seem  exalted  to  a  great  height,  but
their  elevation  is  of  a  carnal  and  mate-
rial kind,  and  is  therefore  transitory.
The  elevation  of  the  Israel  of  God  is
spiritual,  and  therefore  permanent.
Her  hills  are  *the  everlasting  hills'
(Gen.  xlix.  26).  The  Mount  Zion,  as
the  seat  of  God's  earthly  throne,  can-
not be  removed,  but  abideth  for  ever
(Ps.  cxxv.  1).  Therefore  Edom's  shout
of  triumph  over  the  fallen  Israel  shall
be  turned  into  wailing  for  her  own
fall.  She  had  greedily  thought  to  take
possession  of  the  ancient  liigh  places
of  the  people  of  God.  Nay  more,  she
had  turnetl  into  derision  the  promise
of  perpetuity  which  God  had  given  to
His  people,  as  though  that  promise
was  now  proved  to  be  abortive,  and
had  sneered  at  Israel's  connection  with
Jehovah  as  though  He  were  unable
to  save  them." — FausseU

Ver.  2.  "  Many  were  the  enemies  of
God's  people,  but  they  so  conspired
in  one  design,  and  were  so  one  in
their  humours,  enmity,  and  carriage,
that    the    prophet    speaks    of    them


as  one,  and  particularly  of  Edom."—
Pool.

—  "  The  scorn  of  the  world  an  old
experience.  Thus  were  the  prophets
and  Christ  reproached,  and  the  Lord
said  that  men  would  speak  all  manner
of  evil  against  His  disciples  (Matt*
v.  11),  and  Paul,  that  we  should  be  a
spectacle  to  the  world  (1  Cor.  iv.  9)."
— Lange,

Ver.  3.  "Ye  are  taken  up  on  the
lips  of  talkers,  and  are  an  infamy  of
the  people."  Slander.  1.  A  vice  of
great  talkers.  2.  Is  devoid  of  com-
passion for  the  unfortunate.  3.  De-
lights in  exaggeration  and  malicious
innuendoes.  4.  Is  frequently  employed
to  disparage  and  ajfflict  the  people  of
God.

—  "  Ye  are  made  to  ascend  upon  the
lip  of  the  tongue  and  upon  the  evil
fame  of  the  people.  God  takes  it  ex-
treme ill  that  His  people  should  be
traduced  and  defamed,  which  hath
been  their  lot  in  all  ages,  but  He  will
not  fail  to  vindicate  them  and  to
avenge  them." — Trapp,

—  "  God  knows,  sees,  and  hears  the
misery  of  His  children ;  that  must
comfort  them,  therefore  they  cannot
despair.  How  ready  men  often  are
not  only  to  count  up  the  sufferings
of  others,  but  also  in  their  talk  to
exaggerate  still  more." — Starch

Vers.  4-6.  The  Divine  Sympathy
with  Nature.  1.  Because  it  is  His
handiwork  and  reflects  His  character.
2.  Because  it  is  the  dwelling-place  and
training  ground  of  man.  3.  Because
of  the  havoc  wrought  in  it  by  the  fury
of  His  enemies.  4.  Because  it  is  ever
faithful  and  obedient  to  His  laws.

Vers.  6, 7.  Wrong-doing.  1.  Eouses
the  Divine  anger.  2.  Is  doomed  while
it  rejoices  in  its  brief  triumph.  3.
Will  suffer  the  misery  it  inflicts  on
others.  4.  Is  certain  to  be  Divinely
punished.

Ver.  6.  "  To  these  lifeless  creatures
He  directeth  His  speech  to  show  that
every  creature   groaneth  and  waileth

377


OBAP.  XXXVI.  BOMtLETW  COMMENTABY:  MZEKIEL,


for  the  redemption  of  our  bodies.     It  restricted  to  the  weak  but  rising  times

fareth  the  better  also  in  this  life  pre-  of  Zeriibbabel,  Ezra,  and  Nehemiah.

sent,   for  the  elect's  sake,   as   it  was  And  if  the  waste  places  were  rebuilt,

once  cursed   for  man's  sin,  and  hath  why  then,  whole  Palestina,  dost  thou

lain  bedridden,  as  it  were,  ever  since.**  lie  very  much  in  ruins  to  this  day  %

— Trafp,  Consequently   the    gracious    cloud   of

covenant  blessings  only  scattered  its

Ver.    7.    "The   righteous   God,    to  drops  on  Jewish  ages,  and  gave  showers

whom  vengeance  belongs,  will  render  to  the  primitive  church,  reserving  its

shame   for   shame.      Tiiose   that   put  fulness,  or  the  residue  of  the  Spirit,

contempt  and  reproach  on  God's  people  for  the  mountain  of  His  holiness  in

will  sooner   or   later  have  it   turned  the  glory  of  the  latter  day." — Sutcliffe.

upon    themselves;     perhaps    in    this  — "A  certain  fulfilment  of  the  most

world,    either    their   follies    or    their  literal  kind  began  at  an  early  period

calamities,  their  miscarriages  or  their  to  be  given  to  the  prophecy.     People

mischances,  shall  be   their   reproach  ;  of  the  stock  of  Israel  did  again  possess

at  furthest,  in  that  day  when  all  the  the  land  of  their  fathers ;  by  them  the

impenitent   shall   rise   to  shame   and  mountains  of  Israel  were  again  culti-

everlasting  contempt." — M.  Henry,  vated,  and  for  them  the  land  yielded

—  "  They  shall  be  paid  home  in  its  fruit ;  there  again,  as  of  old,  the
their  own  coin,  be  overshot  in  their  seed  of  man  and  of  beast  did  greatly
own  bow,  be  covered  with  their  own  increase  and  multiply,  so  that  the
confusion." — Trapp.  region  was  known  for  ages  as  one  of

the   most   fertile    and    prosperous   in

Vers.  8-15.  The  Fertility  of  Nature.  Asia,  and  that  too  while  the  old  and

1.  A  signal  proof  of  the  Divine  bless-  hereditary   enemies   of  Israel   in   the

ing.      "  Behold  I  am  for  you.      And  neighbourhood  sank  into  comparative

I    will    multiply"    (vers.    8,    9).      2.  insignificance  and  lost   their  original

Evidenced  in  the  abundant  increase  of  place  in  the  scale  of  nations.      Had

fruit,    cattle,   men   and  wealth    (vers.  Israel  but  seen  in  all  this  the  hand  of

8-11).     3.  Should  be  regarded  by  the  God,  and  viewed  the  whole  in  connec-

people  of  God   as  a  special  blessing.  tion  with  His  unchangeable  righteous-

"  Even  My  people  Israel  shall  possess  ness,  there  should  certainly  have  been

thee,  aiid  thou  shalt  be  their  inherit-  nothing  wanting  to  complete  the  corre-

ance "  (ver.    12).      4.   The  more  con-  spondence  between  the  description  of

spicuous  because  of  former  barrenness  the  prophet  and  the  facts  of  history,

and  decay  (vers.  13-15).    5.  A  type  of  But  the  old  relations  of  the  covenant

the  future  prosperity  of  the  people  of  people  with  the  kingdom  of  God  give

God.  way ;  the  outward  Israel  are  no  longer

—  "While  Edom  and  Tyre  rejoiced  distinctively  the  covenant  people — all
in  their  sins  at  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  the  children  of  faith  of  every  land
the  jealousy  of  the  Lord  was  roused  become  the  seed  of  blessing  and  heirs
to  say  that  they  should  return,  and  according  to  the  promise.  And  while
as  Jeremiah  had  said  that  fields  and  it  is  only  under  the  Gospel  dis-
vineyards  should  again  be  sold  in  that  pensation  that  we  can  expect  the
city.  The  promises,  like  clouds  of  re-  perfect  realisation  of  the  promised
freshing  rain,  scatter  their  blessings  good,  we  must  now  no  longer  expect
on  every  age.  They  were  in  one  form  it  after  the  old  form,  or  according  to
or  other  continually  repeated,  and  in  the  simply  literal  interpretation.  The
all  the  glowing  powers  of  Oriental  good  is  too  great  and  expansive  to  be
language.  But  however  justified  the  now  shut  up  within  such  narrow  limits,
prophets  might  be  in  the  use  of  hyper-  for  since  wherever  there  is  a  royal
bole  and  metaphor,  they  could  not  priesthood  offering  up  spiritual  ser-
exceed  the  truth,  which  would  have  vices  to  God,  there  the  incense  and
been  the  case  had  their  promises  been  offerings  of  the  temple  are  perpetuated

378


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  XXXVL


(Mai.  i.  11 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5),  so  wherever
there  are  members  of  Christ  there  also
are  the  mountains  of  Canaan,  there
are  the  people  who  have  the  promise
of  all  things  for  their  portion,  on
whom  descends  the  blessing — life  for
evermore.  Nor  can  the  old  evils  pro-
perly return  again,  for  the  good  is
avowedly  connected  with  nothing  but
a  spiritual  qualification,  and  is  entirely
dissevered  from  a  merely  ancestral
relationship  or  a  political  existence  in
the  world." — Fairbairn,

Yer.  8.  "Thus  shall  the  ruined
churches  bring  fruit,  wine,  and  bread,
that  is,  the  mysteries  of  doctrine  to
the  profit  of  the  people,  that  they  may
no  longer  be  rude  and  ignorant,  but  a
people  taught  of  God.  Therefore  the
spiritual  husbandmen,  vine-dressers,
till  and  sow  diligently.  With  the
plough  of  fear  they  turn  up  the  soil
of  the  heart  in  which  they  sow  the
new  word  of  the  Gospel,  whereby  the
forsaken  churches  become  planted
anew ;  and  these  are  the  mountains
which  the  Lord  addresses." — Heim-
Hoffman,

Vers.  9-11.  "The  Lord  declares  to
the  people  of  Israel,  *  Behold,  I  am
for  you.*  Since  God  is  ultimately  to
be  for  them,  no  power  can  avail  any-
thing that  is  against  tliem.  God  will
*turn  to'  His  people  in  mercy,  and
they  shall  at  the  same  time  turn  to
Him  in  repentance.  The  restoration
to  their  own  land  is  to  be  literal,  and
all  things  and  all  persons  in  the  re-
stored state  of  Israel  are  to  share  in
the  coming  blessedness — *the  moun-
tains, the  hills,  the  rivers,  the  valleys,
the  desolate  wastes,  the  houses,  the
cities,  man  and  beast.'  So  in  the
case  of  the  spiritual  Israel,  the  true
Church  :  she  is  now  a  little  and  de-
spised flock,  but  she  shall  at  last  be  a
multitude  which  no  man  can  num-
ber (Rev.  vii.  9);  whereas  the  anti-
christian  faction,  and  all  the  carnal,
worldly,  and  unbelieving,  who  shall
for  a  time  seem  to  triumph  over  the


Church  of  Christ  (Rev.  xi.  7-11),  shall

perish   awfully   and   everlastingly." —
FausseU

Ver.  9.  "It  is  a  blessing  to  the
earth  to  be  made  serviceable  to  men,
especially  to  good  men  that  will  serve
God  with  cheerfulness  in  the  use  of
those  good  things  which  the  earth
serves  up  to  them." — M.  Henry,

—  "*I  will  turn  unto  you.'  Look
towards  you  with  regard  to  what
has  been  and  is  your  estate,  your
suff^erings,  which  were  less  than  you
deserved,  yet  were  the  greater  because
ye  are  mine.  Your  inhabitants  gave
me  the  back  and  sinned  against  me,
and  I  turned  the  back  on  you  and
regarded  you  not :  then  all  darkness
covered  you,  now  my  face  shall  be
towards  you,  and  you  shall  prosper
and  be  fruitful  to  the  comfort  of  those
that  shall  dwell  in  you  and  plough
and  sow  you," — Pool,

Yer.  10.  "They  are  far  wrong  who^
consider  a  great  increase  of  men  as  a
curse  because  it  gives  rise  to  want  and
distress.  God  can  nourish  many  as
well  as  few,  and  we  should  live
moderately,  avoid  endeavouring  to  sur-
pass others  in  expenditure,  and  seek
for  concord  in  families." — iMther,

Ver.  11.  "God's  kingdom  in  the
world  is  a  growing  kingdom,  and  His
Church,  though  for  a  time  it  may  be
diminished,  shall  recover  itself  and  be
again  replenished." — M.  Henry,

Yer.  12.  "The  promised  good  is
always  to  be  understood  with  the  con-
dition that  men  repent  (Mai.  iii.  7).
The  self-evident  condition  is,  that  they
do  not  fill  up  the  measure  of  their
sins  anew.  There  is  no  charter  of
immunity  against  Ye  would  not.  How
often  is  the  country  or  a  district  made
to  bear  the  blame  when  there  comes
a  pestilence  among  men  or  cattle,  when
it  should  be  known  that  sin  gaining
the  upper  hand  provoked  God's  wrath
thereto." — Langs,


379


cHAf.  XXXVI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIBL.


E0MILETIC8.

8iN  THB  Cause  of  National  Bunf.

(Vers.  16-21.)

Once  more  the  Jews  are  reminded  of  the  reason  for  the  calamities  that
had  overtaken  them :  the  root-cause  was  their  sin.  It  might  seem  strange  to
them  that  they,  of  all  people,  should  be  so  deeply  humiliated ;  but  such  was
the  obstinacy  of  their  rebellion  that  no  other  course  was  open  but  for  Jehovah
to  vindicate  the  cause  of  righteousness  by  unmistakable  marks  of  His  dis-
pleasure. So  far  as  they  were  concerned  they  had  no  reason  to  expect  any-
thing but  a  continuance  of  His  righteous  severity ;  but  a  supreme  regard  for
His  holy  name,  which  had  influenced  Him  in  bringing  about  their  downfall,  is
now  to  operate  in  promoting  their  recovery.  Their  restoration  must  begin  in
the  conviction  and  acknowledgment  of  their  sins.

I.  Sin  is  a  defilement  of  the  national  life  (ver.  17).  It  is  so  because  it  is  a
defilement  of  the  individual  life.  Sin  is  the  polluted  heritage  of  universal
man,  for  all  have  sinned  ;  but  it  is  intensely  individual  and  personal.  Its  taint
permeates  every  power  and  faculty  of  the  man — '*The  whole  head  is  sick  and
the  whole  heart  faint :  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head  there  is  no
soundness  in  it,  but  wounds  and  bruises  and  putrefying  sores."  Its  seat  is
inward,  and  it  is  often  disguised  under  a  fair  and  beautiful  exterior ;  but  attack
it,  and  its  impurities  soon  become  actively  manifest,  as  the  cuttle-fish  surprised  by
an  enemy  emits  an  inky  fluid  that  darkens  and  befouls  the  most  pellucid  waters.
The  nation  is  defiled  because  the  citizen  is  defiled,  and  instead  of  seeking
cleansing  has  stirred  up  the  muddy  sediment  in  himself  and  others.  "  Let  sin
be  your  deepest  sorrow,  your  heaviest  grief,  the  spring  of  many  tears,  the  burden
of  many  sighs,  the  occasion  of  daily  visits  to  the  cross  of  Calvary."

•*  Weep  not  for  broad  lands  lost ;
Weep  not  for  fair  hopes  crossed  |
Weep  not  when  limbs  wax  old ;
^  Weep  not  when  friends  grow  cold  |

Weep  not  that  death  must  part
Thine  and  the  best  loved  heart :

Yet  weep — weep  all  thou  can-
Weep,  weep,  because  thou  art
A  sin-defiled  man."

II.  Sin  Is  a  profanation  of  the  Divine  holiness  (vers.  20,  21).  Sin  is  not
only  a  degradation  to  man,  but  an  injustice  and  injury  towards  God  ;  it  seems
to  drag  Him  to  the  level  of  man,  and  to  rob  Him  of  every  attribute  that  con-
stitutes Him  Divine.  The  conduct  and  attendant  miseries  of  the  Israelites
dishonoured  Jehovah  in  the  siglit  of  the  heathen,  who  naturally  inferred  that  if
this  was  all  He  could  do  for  His  worshippers,  then  He  was  no  better  than  their
own  deities,  and  the  morality  of  His  people  was  in  many  respects  inferior  to
that  of  their  own.  Do  not  think  that  your  iniquities  are  unnoticed,  or  that
you  are  the  only  one  aff'ected  by  them.  The  unbelieving  world  is  watching
you.  The  mere  profession  of  religion  is  a  caricature  and  a  hypocrisy,  and  every
act  of  sin  is  a  defamation  of  the  character  of  the  holy  God.

III.  Sin  is  punished  by  national  ruin  (vers.  18,  19^).     The  Jews  were  driven

out  of  their  own  land  because  of  their  incorrigible  wickedness.     Their  murders,
idolatries,  and  injustice  roused  the  aiiirer  of  God,  and  "according  to  their  way

380


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OBAf.  XXXVL


and  their  doings"  He  adjudged  them  to  punishment.  His  hand  scattered
them,  and  no  power  could  detain  them  in  the  land  when  His  hand  was  against
them,  just  as  no  power  could  have  disturbed  their  security  if  they  had  remained
faithful  to  Him.  The  nation  that  makes  an  enemy  of  God  is  doomed.  The
strongest  fortifications  must  yield,  the  astutest  policy  be  confounded,  commerce
decay,  wealth  give  way  to  poverty,  and  the  proudest  people  be  humbled  to  the
dust.     The  first  step  in  national  ruin  begins  in  moral  wrong.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,


Vers.  16-38.  "  There  are  mountain
regions  lying  within  the  tropics  where
in   the   course   of  a   single    day    the
traveller   finds  every  vegetable   form
peculiar  to  every  line  of  latitude  be-
tween the  equator  and  the  poles,  and
these  all  laid  out  in  regular  arrange-
ment.    Leaving  the  palms  which  cover
the  mountain's  feet,  he  ascends  into
the  regions  of  the  olive ;  from  these
he  rises  to  a  more  temperate  climate,
where  vines  festoon  the  trees,  or  trail
their  limbs  along  the  naked  rock  j  still
ascending,  he  reaches  a  belt  of  oaks
and  chestnuts ;  from  that  he  passes  to
rugged  liei<:hts  shaggy  with  the  hardy
pine  ;  by-and-by   he   enters  a  region
where  trees  are  dwarfed  into  bushes;
rising  above  that  his  foot  presses  a
soft  carpet  of  lowly  mosses,  till  climb-
ing the  rocks  where   only  the  lichen
lives,   he   leaves   all   life  below ;   and
now,  shivering  in  the  cold,  panting  in
the  thin  air  for  breath,  he  stands  on
those  drearj'^  elevations  where  eternal
winter  sits  on  a  throne  of  snow,  and
waving  her  icy  sceptre,  says  to  vegeta-
tion— *  Hitherto  shalfc  thou  come,  and
no   further.'      Like   some    such    lofty
mountain    of   the    tropics    there    are
portions  of  the  Divine  Word  where
in  a  space  of  limited  extent — within
the    short   compass    of  a  chapter,   or
even  part  of  it— the  more  prominent
doctrines  of  salvation  are  brought  into
juxtaposition    and   arranged    side   by
side  almost  in  systematic  order.     This
portion  of  Scripture  presents  an  epitome
or  outline  of  the  Gospel.     Its  details,
with  their  minute  and  varied  beauties,
are  here,  so  to  speak,  in  shade;  but
the  grand  truths  of  redemption  stand
boldly  up,  much  as  we  have  seen  from
sea  the  summits  of  a  mountain  range.


or  the  lofty  headlands  of  a  dim  and
distant  coast.  We  are  aware  that  the
Mosaic  economy,  and  many  of  God's
dealings  with  His  ancient  people,  were
but  the  shadows  of  good  things  to
come ;  and  when  the  things  are  come,
why  look  at  the  shadow  when  you
possess  the  substance  %  However
valued  in  his  absence  the  portrait  of
a  son,  what  mother,  when  her  boy  is
folded  in  her  arms,  and  she  has  his
loved  and  living  face  to  gaze  on,  turns
to  the  cold  picture  ?  What  artist
studies  a  landscape  in  the  grey  dawn
when  he  may  see  it  in  the  blaze  of
day  ?  True.  Yet  such  study  has  its
advantages.  It  not  seldom  happens
that  a  portrait  brings  to  y'l^w  certain
shades  of  expression  which  we  had  not
previously  observed  in  the  face  of  the
veritable  man ;  and  when  some  mag-
nificent form  of  architecture,  or  the
serried  ridges  and  rocky  peaks  of  a
mountain,  have  stood  up  between  us
and  the  lingering  lights  of  day,  we
have  found  that  although  the  minor
beauties  of  fluted  columns  or  frowning
crags  were  lost  in  the  shades  of  even-
ing, yet,  drawn  in  sharp  and  clear
outline  against  a  twilight  sky,  the
effect  of  the  whole  was  even  more
impressive  than  when  eyed  in  the
glare  of  day.  Thus  it  may  be  well
occasionally  to  examine  the  Gospel  in
the  broad  shadows  and  strongly  de-
fined outlines  of  an  old  economy  ;
and  through  God's  government  of  His
ancient  people  to  study  the  motives,  the
nature,  and  ends  of  His  dealings  with
ourselves.  In  this  way  the  passage
before  us  has  peculiar  claims  u])on  our
attention." — Guthrie's  Gospel  in  Ezekiel,

Ver.  16.  "Man's  previous  course  of

381


CHAP.  XXXVI.


BOMtLETIO  VOMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL,


action  is  the  cause  of  God's  subse-
quent course  of  action.  We  shall  have
to  give  account  not  only  because  of
the  evil  which  we  have  done,  but  also
for  the  good  things  which  we  have
had.  The  world  is  perfect  throughout
where  man  does  not  come  in  to  dis-
turb it.  Storms  clear  the  air,  an
observation  which  bears  applicntion  in
regard  to  the  judgments  of  God." —
Lange,

Vers.    16,   17.    "The  word  of  the
Lord  came  unto  me,   saying,   Son   of
man."    The  Human  Side  of  the  Divine
Message.     '*  The   rain    in   its  descent
from   heaven  falls   upon    the   surface
of  our  earth,  percolates  through  the
porous  soil,  and  flowing  along  rocky
fissures  or  veins  of  sand,  is  conveyed
below  ground  to  the  fountain  whence
it  springs.     Now,  although  rising  out
of  the  earth,  that  water  is  not  of  the
earth   earthy.      The   world's    deepest
well  owes  its  treasures  to  the  skies.
So  was  it  with  the  revealed  will  of
God.     It  flowed  along  human  channels,
yet  its  origin  was  more  than  celestial,
it  was  Divine.    Those  waters  at  whose
pure  and  perennial  springs  faith  drinks
and  lives,  while  conveyed  to  man  along
earthly  channels,  have  their  source  far
away — in   the   throne    of  God.      No
doubt   God    could   have    used    other
instrumentality.     He  might  have  com-
missioned  angels  on    His  errands   of
mercy,  and  spoken  at  all  times,  as  He
did  sometimes,  by  seraph  lips.     With
rare  exceptions  His  ambassadors  were
men.     The  patriarchs,   prophets,  and
apostles — those   inspired   missionaries
of    heaven — were    all    sons    of    men.
In  this  arrangement  observe — 1.   The
kindness  of  God  to  man.    Who  has  read
the  story  of  Moses  without  feeling  that
it  was  a  very  great  kindness  both  to
the  infant  and  his  mother  that  he  had
her  bosom  to  lie  on,  and  that  God  in
His   providence  so   arranged    matters
that  the  very  mother  of  the  child  was
hired  to  be  its  nurse.    Who  else  could
be   expected  to  treat   the  outcast  so
lovingly  and  kindly  1      And   I   hold
it  a   singular   kindness  to   man  that
he  is  selected  to  be  the  instrument  of
382


saving  his  fellow-men.  If  that  parent
is  happy  who  has  snatched  a  beloved
child  from  the  flood  or  fire,  and  the
child  saved  and  thus  twice  given  him
becomes  doubly  dear,  what  happiness
in  purity  or  permanence  to  be  com-
pared with  his  who  is  a  labourer  with
God  in  saving  souls !  2.  The  honour
conferred  on  man.  What  dignity  does
this  world  ofi'er,  what  glittering  stars,
what  jewelled  honours  flash  on  her
swelling  breast,  to  be  for  one  moment
compared  with  those  which  they  win
on  earth  and  wear  in  heaven  who  have
turned  souls  from  darkness  to  light 'I
As  yon  planet  worlds  that  roll  above
us  draw  bright  radiance  from  the  sun
around  which  they  move,  so  surely
shall  they  shine  who  spend  and  are
spent  in  Jesus'  service ;  they  shall
share  His  honours  and  shine  in  His
lustre.  It  was  the  prayer  of  Brainerd,
*  Oh  that  I  were  a  flaming  fire  in  the
service  of  my  God  !  *  3.  The  wisdom
of  God.  Mirabeau  said  of  a  man  who
addressed  the  French  Convention  for
the  first  time,  *  That  man  will  yet  act
a  great  part;  he  speaks  as  one  who
believes  every  word  he  says.*  Much
of  pulpit  power  under  God  depends
on  that.  They  make  others  feel  who
feel  themselves.  It  is  true  a  man
may  impart  light  to  others  who  does
not  himself  see  the  light.  It  is  true
that  like  a  concave  speculum  cut  from
a  block  of  ice,  which,  concentrating  the
rays  of  the  sun,  kindles  touchwood  or
explodes  gunpowder,  apreacher  may  set
others  on  fire  when  his  own  heart  is
cold  as  frost.  Yet  commonly  it  happens
that  it  is  what  comes  from  the  heart
of  preachers  that  penetrates  and  aff'ecta
the  hearts  of  hearers.  Like  a  ball  red-
hot  from  the  cannon's  mouth,  he  must
burn  himself  who  would  set  others  on
fire.  If  man  may  not  feel  what  he
preaches,  angels  could  not.  Man  saved
himself  the  more  earnestly  seeks  the
salvation  of  his  perishing  fellow-man.
During  a  heavy  storm  off"  the  coast  of
Spain  a  dismasted  merchantman  was
observed  by  a  British  frigate  drifting
before  the  gale.  Every  eye  and  glass
were  on  her,  and  a  canvas  shelter  on
a  deck  almost  level  with  the  sea  sug-


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP,  xxxn.


gested  the  idea  that  even  yet  there
might  be  life  on  board.  With  all
their  faults  no  men  are  more  alive  to
humanity  than  our  rough  and  harciy
mariners;  and  so  the  order  instantly
sounds  to  put  the  ship  about,  and
presently  a  boat  is  lowered,  and  starts
Avith  instructions  to  bear  down  upon
the  wreck.  Away  after  that  drifting
hulk  go  these  gallant  men  over  the
mountain  swell  of  a  roaring  sea;
they  reach  it,  they  shout,  and  now  a
strange  object  rolls  from  that  canvas
screen  against  the  lee  shroud  of  a
broken  mast.  It  is  hauled  into  the
boat.  It  proves  to  be  the  trunk  of  a
man,  bent  head  and  knees  together,
so  dried  up  and  shrivelled  as  to  be
hardly  felt  within  the  ani])le  clothes —
BO  light  that  a  mere  boy  lifted  it  on
board.  It  is  conveyed  to  the  ship  and
laid  on  the  deck.  In  horror  and  pity
the  crew  gather  around  it.  These
feelings  suddenly  change  into  astonish-
ment. The  object  shows  signs  of  life.
The  seamen  draw  nearer;  it  moves
and  then  mutters — in  a  deep  sepul-
chral voice,  mutters — *  There  is  an-
other man.'  Rescued  himself,  the  first
use  the  saved  one  made  of  speech  was
to  try  to  save  another." — Guthrie,

Ver.  17.  The  Defiler.  "  1.  Sin  a  de-
filement. Look  at  sin,  pluck  off  that
painted  mask  and  turn  upon  her  face
the  lamp  of  God's  Word.  We  start,
for  it  reveals  a  death's  head.  I  stay
not  to  quote  texts  descriptive  of  sin.
It  is  a  debt,  a  burden,  a  thief,  a  sick-
ness, a  leprosy,  a  plague,  a  poison,  a
serpent,  a  sting — everything  that  man
hates  it  is.  Name  me  the  evil  that
springs  not  from  this  root — the  crime
that  lies  not  at  this  door.  Hypocrite
and  dead  professor!  let  us  open  thy
bosom  :  full  of  all  corruption,  how  it
smells  like  a  charnel  house  !  We  are
driven  back  by  the  noisome  stench —
we  hasten  to  close  the  door.  It  is  a
painted,  putrid  sepulchre,  whose  fair
exterior  but  aggravates  the  foulness
witliin.  2.  Tke  nature  of  this  defile-
ment, (a.)  It  is  internal.  Like  snow-
drift, when  it  has  levelled  the  church-
yard  mounds,  and  glistening  in  the


winter  sun,  lies  sa  pure,  white,  fair,
and  beautiful  above  the  dead  that
fester  and  rot  below,  a  plausible  pro-
fession may  wear  the  look  of  innocence
and  conceal  from  human  eyes  the  foul-
est heart-corruption.  The  grass  grows
green  upon  the  sides  of  the  mountain
that  holds  a  volcano  in  its  bowels.
Behind  the  rosy  cheek  and  lustrous
eye  of  beauty  how  often  does  there
lurk  a  deadly  disease,  the  deadliest
disease  of  all.  Like  these  maladies,
sin  has  its  seat  within.  It  is  a  disease
of  the  heart,  and  the  worst  and  dead-
liest of  all  heart-complaints,  (b.)  It  is
universal.  Although  the  hues  of  the
skin  differ,  the  form  of  the  skull  and
the  features  of  the  face  are  cast  in
different  moulds,  the  features,  colour,
and  character  of  the  heart  are  the
same  in  all  men.  In  Adam  all  have
died — have  sinned,  and  therefore  died.
Thus  sin,  like  our  atmosphere,  em-
braces every  region  of  the  world.  Like
death,  it  is  universal.  The  tree  is  dis-
eased not  at  the  top,  but  at  the  root,
and  therefore  no  branch  of  the  human
family  can  possibly  escape  being  af-
fected by  sin.  (c.)  It  is  incurable.
What  moral  effect  had  God's  judg-
ments on  His  ancient  people?  As
always  happens  in  incurable  diseases,
the  patient  grew  worse  instead  of
better.  As  always  happens  when  life
is  gone,  the  dead  become  more  and
more  offensive.  This  internal  and
universal  defilement  is  one  which
neither  sorrows  can  atone  for  nor  suf-
ferings remove.  I  have  seen  the  char-
acters of  the  writing  remain  on  paper
which  the  flames  had  turned  into  a
film  of  buoyant  coal ;  I  have  seen  the
thread  that  had  been  passed  through
the  fire  retain  in  its  cold  grey  ashes
the  twist  which  it  had  got  in  spinning ;
I  have  found  every  shivered  splinter
of  the  flint  as  hard  as  the  unbroken
stone ;  and  let  trials  come  in  provi-
dence sharp  as  the  fire  and  ponderous
as  the  crushing  hammer,  uidess  a
gracious  God  send  along  with  these
something  else  than  these,  bruised,
broken,  bleeding  as  thy  heart  may
be,  its  nature  remains  the  same." —
Guthrie.

383


OSAF.  XXXVI.  BOMILETIO  OOMMENTAMT:  EZEKIEL.


—  Man  Sinning.    "1.  Man  is  fallen,  the  catastrophe  of  the  Deluge.     There

Compare  man  with  any  other  of  the  was  a  truce  of  one  hundred  and  twenty

creatures  of  God,  and  how  directly  we  years  between  the  first  stroke  of  the

come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  is  not,  bell  and  the  first  crash  of  the  thunder.

nor  can  be,  the  creature  he  came  from  Noah  grew  grey  preaching  repentance.

his  Maker's  hands.    Turn  to  the  bloody  The  ark  stood  useless  for  years,  a  hugo

horrors  of  this  battlefield.     The  tram-  laughing  -  stock  for   the  scoffer's  wiu

pled  ground  lies  thick  with  the  mingled  Most  patient  God  !     God  does  pour

brave,  the  air  is  shaken  with  the  most  out  His  fury ;  but  His  indignation  is

horrible    sounds,    every    countenance  the  volcano  that  groans  loud  and  long

expresses    the    passions    of    a   fiend,  before  it  discharges  the  elements  of

Covering    her    eyes,    humanity    flies  destruction  and  pours  its  fiery  lavas

shrieking  from  the  scene  and   leaves  on  the  vineyards  at  its  feet.     2.  The

it  to  rage,  revenge,  and  agony.   Fiercer  truth  of  God  requires  the  punishment  of

than  the  cannon's  flash  flames  of  wrath  sin,    God  has  reiterated  in  a  thousand

shoot  from  brothers'  eyes ;  they  draw,  ways  the  awful   sentence — *  The  soul

they  brandish  their  swords,  they  sheath  that  sinneth  it  shall  die.'     Let  sin  go

them   in   each  other's  bowels ;   every  unpunished  either  in  person  or  substi-

stroke  makes  a  widow,  every  ringing  tute ;  this  saves  the  sinner — no  doubt

volley  scatters  a  hundred  orphans  on  of  that;  but  at  what  price?    You  save

a  homeless  world.    Sooner  would  I  be  the  creature's  life  at  the  expense  of

an  atheist,  and  believe  there  was  no  the  Creator's  honour.     Your   scheme

God,  than  that  a  man  appears  in  this  exalts  man,  but  far  more  than  man  is

scene  as  he  came  from  the  hand  of  a  exalted  is  God  degraded.     By  it  no

Benignant  Divinity.     Man  must  have  man  is  lost ;  but  there  is  a  greater  loss

fallen.     2.  Apart  from   derived  sinful-  — something  more  awful  happens.  The

ness  man  has  personal  sins  to  answer  for.  truth  of  God  is  lost;  and  in  that  loss

You  may  deny  original,  but  can  any  His  crown  is  spoiled  of  its  topmost

man  in  his  senses  deny  actual   sin  1  jewel.   His   kingdom  totters,  and  the

You  may  as  well  deny  your  existence ;  throne  of  the  universe  is  shaken  to  its

it  sticks  to  you  like  your  shadow.     If  foundations.     3.  The  love  of  God  requires

every  thread  of  life's  web  were  yet  to  the  punishment  of  sin.     Love  for  those

weave,  what  man  would  make  the  future  who    have    the    highest   claim    on    a

a  faithful  copy  of  the  past?   Nomanliv-  sovereign's    protection    requires    that

ing  would.     3.   The  guilt  of  these  actual  justice  take  her  course  and  the  guilty

sins  is  man's  own.    We  attempt  in  vain  die.     That  the  community  may  live  in

to  fix  the  blame  on  others — to  lay  the  peace,  that  the  citizen  may  feel  safe

burden  on  any  shoulders  but  our  own.  in  the  bosom  of  his  family,  that  streets

We  talk  of  the  strength,  we  plead  the  may  be   safe   to  walk  on,   that  beds

suddenness  of  temptation  ;    but  how  may  be  safe  to  lie  in,  that  our  country

often    have    we    sinned     designedly,  may  be  fit  to  live  in,  crime  must  be

deliberately,   repeatedly  ?      We   have  punished.      Divine   love   is   no   blind

sinned   when  we  knew  we  were  sin-  '  Divinity,   and  God  being  as  wise  as

ning ;  we  have  repaired  to  scenes  where  tender,  sinners  may  rest  assured  that

we  knew  that  we  were  to    sin.     We  out  of  mere   pity  for  them    He   will

have    done  what    the    heathen  never  neither  sacrifice  the  interests  nor  peril

did,  what  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  never  the  happiness  of  His  people.     4.  Unless

did,  what  Tyre  and  Sidon  never  did —  sin  is  punished  the  language  of  Scripture

we  have  rejected  a   Saviour,  and  in-  appears  extravagant.     Let  me  beseech,

sanely  refused  eternal  life." — Guthrie.  implore  you  to  read  with  tears  and

prayers   those   passages   of   Scripture

Vers.  18,  19.  God's   Punitive  Jus-  that  unveil  the  miseries  of  the  lost.

tice.     "  1.  God  is  slow  to  punish.     No  Blot  not  from  your  minds  what  you

hand  of  clock  goes  so  slow  as  His  hand  cannot  blot  out  of  the  book  of  God.

of  vengeance.     Look,  for  example,  on  The    sufferings    and    miseries    which

384


nOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  XXZTL


await  the  impenitent  and  unbelieving,
God  has  painted  in  most  appalling
colours.  They  are  sucli  that,  to  save
us  from  them,  His  Son  descended  from
these  heavens  and  expired  upon  a  cross.
They  are  such  that  when  Paul  thought
of  the  lost  he  wept  like  a  woman.
The  Gospel  has  in  it  elements  of  terror.
But  it  is  like  our  atmosphere — occa-
sionally riven  by  the  thunder  and
illumined  by  the  fatal  flash,  at  times
the  path  of  the  stealthy  pestilence,
charged  with  elements  of  destruction
and  impregnated  with  the  seeds  of
disease ;  but  how  much  more  a  great
magazine  of  health,  filled  with  the  most
harmonious  sounds,  fragrant  with  the
sweetest  odours,  hung  with  golden
drapery,  the  pathway  of  sunbeams,
the  womb  of  showers,  the  feeder  of
fertilising  streams,  the  parent  of  har-
vests, and  the  fountain  of  all  earth's
life  I  And,  just  as  in  that  atmosphere
which  God  has  wrapped  around  our
globe  there  is  much  more  health  than
sickness,  much  more  food  than  famine,
much  more  life  than  death,  so  in  the
Bible  there  is  much  more  love  than
terror. " — Guthrie.

Ver.  19.  "  The  scattering  power  of
sin  :  in  truth,  it  scatters  the  souls  of
men  into  the  whole  world,  and  that  is
already  their  judgment  which  sinners
have  to  experience." — Lange,

—  "  God  frequently  repeats  that
His  judgments  upon  the  Jews  were  no
more  than  what  their  own  ways  or
doings  obb'ged  Him  to  inflict.  There
was  in  His  dealings  with  them  no
arbitrary  exercise  of  sovereignty,  but
they  were  dealt  witli  according  to  their
own  conduct.  And  thus  God  deals  with
mankind  in  general :  His  actions  in
regard  to  them  are  not  founded  in
an  arbitrary  exercise  of  His  absolute
sovereignty  over  them,  but  in  impar-
tial justice,  wisdom,  and  goodness;
and  He  judges  them  according  to  their
own  ways,  and  not  according  to  the
dictates  of  an  arbitrary  will." — Benson.


Vers.  20,  21.  The  Name  of  God—
1.  Is  the  expression  of  His  immaculate
holiness.  2.  Is  defamed  by  human
sin.  3.  Is  misunderstood  by  those  who
witness  the  sufferings  of  His  people.
4.  Will  vindicate  to  the  universe  its
inviolable  justice  and  righteousness.

Ver.  20.  "  They  did  profanely  sin
against  those  precepts  of  My  law  which
heathens  did  know,  venerate,  and  ob-
serve better  than  the  Jews.  Their
heathen  neighbours  said,  with  taunt
and  cutting  reprimand — *  These  are
the  people  of  the  Lord.*  These  captive
slaves,  that  are  most  forlorn  of  men,
will  have  it  that  their  God  is  the  Lord,
the  mighty  and  the  good  God,  the  true
and  faithful  One  that  gave  them  the
land  out  of  which  they  are  driven.  If
He  be  good  as  they  boast,  how  comes
it  to  pass  that  His  people  are  in  such
ill  state  1  Was  He  weak  and  could
not  keep  them  in  their  own  land,
or  doth  He  falsify  His  word  ]  You
miserable  Jews,  say  what  this  mean-
eth.  But  by  their  impure  life  they
opened  the  mouths  of  the  heathens  to
blaspheme  and  call  the  holiness  of  God
into  question.  When  they  saw  His
people  so  unholy  they  concluded — '  As
is  the  people  so  is  their  God  ;  *  and  this,
as  it  was  a  great  offence  and  scandal
to  the  heathen,  so  it  was  a  great  dis-
honour to  God." — Pool,

—  '*  With  the  sinner  goes  also  his
curse,  his  other  shadow. — Thus  this
chapter  teaches  us  how  the  first  petition
of  the  Lord's  prayer  should  be  under-
stood. The  name  of  the  Lord  is  hal-
lowed as  well  by  the  prosperity  of  the
elect,  which  may  obtain  even  under
the  cross,  as  by  their  purification  from
sin. — A  bad  life  ought  not  to  put  good
doctrine  in  question." — Lange,

Ver.  21.  "  God  His  own  justification
in  this  world. — God  sanctifies  His
name  among  men  by  benefits  as  well
as  by  judgments  and  punishments,"—
Lange,


2B


385


rnAP.  XXXVI.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY :  LZEKIEL.


HOMILETICS.

Spibitfal  Prospertit.

(Vers.  22-38.)

I.  Is  bestowed  as  an  act  of  unmerited  Divine  goodness  (vers.  22-24).
Israel  had  forfeited  all  claim  to  the  Divine  pity ;  they  had  broken  every  clause
in  their  part  of  the  covenant.  No  injustice  would  have  been  done  had  they
been  passed  by  for  ever  and  another  nation  selected  to  carry  out  the  work  in
which  they  had  so  signally  failed.  But  the  Divine  honour  must  be  vindicated.
The  Lord  had  chosen  Israel,  had  wedded  Himself  to  them  in  closest  union  of
both  promise  and  blessing,  had  lavished  upon  them  the  love  of  His  great  heart
and  made  them  distinguished  by  miracles  of  power.  Must  all  this  go  for
nothing?  Amid  the  general  defection  He  did  not  overlook  the  fact  that  a
few  remained  faithful.  And  yet,  not  for  their  sakes,  nor  for  the  sake  of  the
people  who  had  so  cruelly  disappointed  and  wronged  Him,  but  for  His  own
Name*s  sake,  He  resolves  upon  the  vindication  of  His  honour.  That  vindica-
tion had  been  partially  seen  in  the  punishment,  but  is  to  be  more  fully
displayed  in  the  restoration  and  prosperity  of  His  people.  An  old  lesson,
which  the  world  in  all  ages  has  been  so  slow  to  take  in,  is  to  be  again  enforced
— that  spiritual  good  is  superior  to  and  the  only  sound  basis  of  temporal  good.
Our  smallest  mercies  are  undeserved.  How  unfathomable  is  the  goodness
which  continually  surrounds  us  with  spiritual  riches  I

II.  Begins  in  a  thorough  renovation  of  the  moral  nature.  1.  Sin  is  removed
(ver.  25).  There  is  no  possibility  of  the  future  being  better  than  the  present
unless  the  heart  is  cleansed  from  sin.  Man  is  powerless  to  do  this  (Jer.  ii.  22).
It  is  an  act  of  God.  The  ceremonial  cleansing  of  the  Law  was  typical  of  the
spiritual  cleansing  of  the  Gospel.  The  Divine  cleansing  is  thorougli  and  com-
plete— "Ye  shall  be  cleansed  from  all  your  filthiness  and  from  all  your  foul
gods."  2.  A  new  nature  acquired  (ver.  26).  The  old  nature  was  full  of
idolatries ;  the  new  shall  be  clear  of  these.  The  old  nature  was  stubborn,
stolid,  hard  as  stone;  the  new  shall  be  soft,  tender,  impressionable,  receiving
the  Divine  impress  as  the  melted  wax  receives  the  impress  of  the  seal.  The
human  shall  be  suffused,  interpenetrated,  and  transformed  by  the  Divine.  It
is  a  spiritual  miracle.  Man  can  mould  the  intellect  and  modify  the  disposition,
but  God  alone  can  change  and  renew  the  heart.  3.  The  renovation  evidenced  by
practical  obedience  (ver.  27).  In  the  spiritual  world,  as  in  the  physical,  every
effect  must  have  an  adequate  cause,  and  the  effect  must  ever  be  in  harmony
with  the  nature  and  operative  force  of  the  cause.  A  life  of  moral  obedience  is
the  practical  outcome  of  the  influence  of  moral  law  acting  at  the  centre  of
activity.  Physical  law  is  inflexible,  and  must  ever  produce  the  same  class  of
phenomena  with  unvarying  regularity.  Moral  law  is  not  less  unalterable,  but
it  operates  within  the  sphere  of  human  freedom  and  cannot  produce  the  same
cast-iron  sameness  of  results  as  is  done  in  the  unchanging  operations  of  physical
law :  it  respects  the  free,  voluntary  exercise  of  the  human  will.  The  Spirit  of
God  so  operates  upon  all  the  powers  of  the  soul  as  to  make  obedience  to
God's  law  not  only  possible,  but  cheerful,  consistent,  and  acceptable.  Enforced,
mechanically  regulated  obedience  is  unworthy  of  man  and  displeasing  to  God.
The  reality  of  a  spiritually  transformed  nature  is  seen  in  a  constant  endeavour
to  observe  the  Divine  "  statutes  and  judgments  and  do  them."

III.  Is  the  only  condition  in  which  temporal  prosperity  can  be  truly
386


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  SZBKIEL  ohap  xrxn.


appreciated  and  safely  enjoyed  (vers.  28-30,  33-38).  With  the  return  of
Israel  to  spiritual  allegiance  there  is  promised  a  return  of  temporal  prosperity,
and  it  is  more  than  hinted  in  these  verses  that  the  outward  prosperity  should
be  proportioned  to  their  moral  obedience.  Had  they  been  more  faithful,  the
promise  of  national  restoration  would  have  been  more  completely  realised  than
history  as  yet  has  shown  it  to  be.  Temporal  prosperity  to  the  unbelieving
is  not  only  delusive,  but  dangerous.  The  success  achieved  by  diligence  and
virtue  has  become  a  curse  when  the  loss  of  rectitude  has  led  to  its  abuse.  The
founders  of  the  illustrious  family  of  the  Medici  rose  to  affluence  and  power  not
only  by  their  commercial  genius,  but  by  their  philanthropy  and  virtue,  John
de  Medici  being  honoured  by  his  countrymen  with  the  title  of  "the  Father  of
the  Poor;"  and  his  son  Cosmo  has  inscribed  on  his  tomb  the  title  of  "  Father
of  his  country."  But  with  the  decline  of  virtue  in  their  descendants  wealth
and  prestio^e  vanished.  Spiritual  prosperity  is  the  precursor  of  temporal  pros-
perity, "We  never  properly  enjoy  the  good  things  of  this  life  but  as  we  use
them  in  the  fear  and  love  of  God,  the  all-bountiful  Giver.

IV.  Humbles  the  soul  under  a  sense  of  personal  unworthiness  (vers.  31,
32).  'Tis  ever  so.  Nothing  humbles  the  soul  more  than  a  display  of  God's
condescending  goodness.  We  are  ashamed  of  the  sins  committed  against  bene-
ficence so  tender,  so  constant,  so  generous.  We  feel  that  such  mercy  is  utterly
undeserved.  The  goodness  of  God  melts  the  heart  into  penitence,  which  a
misconception  of  severity  has  hardened  into  indifference  or  reckless  bravado
(Rom.  ii.  4,  5).  A  genuine  repentance  is  one  of  the  most  hopeful  symptoms
of  spiritual  prosperity.  The  glory  of  Divine  grace  is  often  seen  to  best  advan-
tage through  the  mist  of  tears.

V.  Is  secured  by  earnest  and  persevering  prayer  (ver.  37).  God  had  pro-
mised prosperity,  and,  apart  from  Israel's  deservings,  had  determined  to  bestow
it,  but  none  the  less  must  it  be  sought  by  prayer  and  supplication.  Whatever
God  has  promised  is  a  legitimate  subject  for  prayer.  Prayer  is  the  language  of
conscious  dependence;  but  how  vast  is  the  scope  of  the  suppliant  which  is
limited  only  by  "  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  !  '*  Those  blessings
are  most  highly  prized,  and  bring  the  greatest  spiritual  enrichment,  which  are
secured  by  earnest  and  agonising  prayer.

Lessons. — 1.  God  has  a  definite  purpose  in  giving  or  withholding  prosperity,
2.  Spiritual  prosperity  is  the  highest  kind  of  prosperity,  3.  The  highest  blessings
are  not  secured  without  importunate  prayer.


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES.

Vers,  22-24.  Tlie  Divine  Imparti-  which  God  sees  in  His  people  that  He

ality — 1.    An   essential   characteristic  has  pity  on  them,  for  if  God  weighed

of  the  Divine  nature.     2.    Exercised  their   merits  there  could  be  nothing

in  the  accurate  distribution  of  punish-  in  them  to  recommend  them  to  His

tiient   and   reward.      3.    Reveals   the  favour;  but  it  is  in  consideration  of

enormity  of  human  ingratitude  and  sin.  His  own  holy  name  and  character  as

4.  Vindicates  the  integrity  of  the  Divine  the  God  of  covenanted  grace,  that  so

nama    5.  Seen  in  the  generous  treat-  He  may  vindicate  its  sanctity  before

ment  of  the  underserving.    6.  A  power-  the  nations  from  the  reproach  brought

ful  motive  to  repentance  and  obedience,  on  it  through  the  sins  and  the  terrible

punishment  of  the  covenant  people.

Ver.  22.  "It  is  not  for  any  merit  Let  us  hence  leam  that  the  honour

387


OHAP.  zxxTL  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


of  His  own  holy  name  is  the   first  name    in    our    destruction.     2.   God

grand  end  of  all   God's  dealings   of  sanctifies  His  name  and  glorifies  Him-

wrath  and  mercy.     Let  us  fall  in  with  self    in    our    redemption.      3.    God's

the   purpose  of  God,  and   make  the  power,  wisdom,  holiness,  justice,  and

honour  of  His  name   our  chief  plea  mercy  glorified  in  redemption.     4.  In

in  our  prayers  for  mercy  and  our  in-  redemption   God   is  glorified    in  the

fluenciiig  motive  in   all  our  acts." —  complete  discomfiture  of  all  His  and

FaiisseL  our  enemies.

—  "God's  Motive  in  Salvation.  1.  "The  effect  of  the  wind  is  visible.
Regard  to  His  own  ^lory.  2.  In  not  the  element  itself.  The  clouds
saving  man  for  His  own  honour  and  scud  across  the  sky,  the  trees  swing
glory  God  exhibits  the  mercy,  holi-  their  arms  wildly  in  the  air,  aerial
ness,  love,  and  other  attributes  of  the  waves  chase  each  other  across  the  corn.
Godhead.  3.  The  doctrine  that  God  and  the  boat,  catching  the  gale  in  her
is  not  moved  to  save  man  by  any  flowing  sheet,  goes  dancing  over  the
merit  or  worth  in  him  is  a  truth  of  billows.  So,  although  in  a  sense  in-
the  highest  importance  to  sinners.  4.  finitely  higher,  the  Invisible  is  visible  ;
It  is  as  important  for  the  saint  as  for  and  in  His  works  we  see  One  who,
the  sinner  to  remember  that  he  is  not  seeing  all,  remains  Himself  unseen-
saved  through  personal  merit,  or  for  God  is  lost,  not  in  darkness,  but  in
his  own  sake.  5.  This  doctrine,  while  light;  a  sun  that  blinds  the  eye  which
it  keeps  the  saint  humble,  will  help  to  is  turned  on  its  burning  disc.  Angels
make  him  holy.  themselves,  unable  to  sustain  His  glory,
"  Here,  no  ornament  to  park  or  gar-  cover  their  faces  with  their  wings  and
den,  stands  a  dwarfed,  stunted,  bark-  use  them,  as  a  man  his  hand,  to  screen
bound  tree.  How  am  I  to  develop  their  eyes  from  the  ineffable  effulgence.
that  stem  into  tall  and  graceful  beauty,  Unbeliever  though  he  was,  the  great
to  clothe  with  blossoms  those  naked  Laplace,  in  one  of  his  last  and  not  least
branches  and  hang  them  till  they  bend  memorable  utterances,  said — *  It  is  the
with  clustered  fruit  t  Change  such  as  little  that  we  know ;  it  is  the  great
that  is  not  to  be  effected  by  surface-  that  remains  unknown.'  On  the  con-
dressing,  or  any  care  bestowed  on  the  secrated  spot,  where  the  cross  of  salva-
upper  soil.  The  remedy  must  go  to  tion  rose  and  the  blood  of  a  Redeemer
the  root.  You  cannot  make  that  tree  fell,  I  find  the  centre  of  a  spiritual
grow  upwards  till  you  break  the  crust  universe.  Here,  in  a  completed  arch,
below,  pulverise  the  hard  subsoil,  and  if  I  may  so  speak,  locked  fast  by  the
give  the  roots  room  and  way  to  strike  key,  all  the  properties  of  divinity  meet ;
deeper  down ;  for  the  deeper  the  root  here,  concentrated  as  in  a  focus,  its
and  the  wider-spread  the  fine  filaments  varied  attributes  blend  and  shine."—
of  its  rootlets,  the  higher  the  tree  lifts  Guthrie.
an  umbrageous  head   to  heaven  and

throws  out  its  hundred  arms  to  catch,  Vers.   25-28.   Heart-Renewal  —  1.

in  dews,  raindrops,  and  sunbeams,  the  The   work  of  the  Divine   Spirit.     2.

blessings   of  the   sky.     The   believer  Accomplished  only  by  being  cleansed

offers    this    analogy    between    grace  from   sin.     3.    A   thorough   and  self-

and  nature,   that,   as  the  tree  grows  conscious   change.     4.    Evidenced    by

best  skyward  that  grows  most  down-  an  outward  and  practical  obedience  to

ward,  the  lower  the  saint  descends  in  the  Divine  law.     5.  Puts  the  soul  in

humility  the  higher  he  rises  in  holi-  its  true  relationship  to  God.
ness.     The  soaring  corresponds  to  the

sinking." — Guthrie's  Gospel  in  Ezehiel.  Ver.   25.    "  The  mention  of  clean

water  to  be  sprinkled  on  the  people  as

Vers.  23,  24.  "  God  Glorified  in  Re-  the  means  of  purification  can  only  be

demption.     1.  God  might  have  vindi-  understood  symbolically ;  it  does  not

Gated  His  honour  and  sanctified  His  refer  to   any   mere   external  rite,  or

383


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL.  chap,  xxxn.


to  any  specific  ordinance  of  the  old  the  question,  *  What  shall  I  do  to  be

covenant,  such  as  the  lustration  cere-  saved?' is  contracted,  compressed,  com-

mony  with  water  and  the  ashes  of  the  prehended   in   Paul's   brief   address —

red  heifer,  or  to  the   ablutions   con-  *  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and

nected   with  the  consecration   of  the  thou  shalt  be  saved.'     As  salvation  is

Levites.     It  is  rather  to  be  viewed  in  the  one  thing  neediul  for  man,  faith  is

reference  to  the  purifications  by  water  the  one  thing  needful  for  salvation." —

collectively,    which    were  all,   in  one  Guthrie.
respect  or  another,  symbolical  of  the

removal  of  impurity  and  the  establish-  Ver.  26.  Man  Converted.  "  1.  It
ment  of  the  worshipper  in  a  sound  and  is  a  great  change — not  a  mere  out-
acceptable  condition.  This  was  no  ward  reformation.  2.  It  is  a  birth,
more  of  a  merely  formal  and  outward  3.  It  is  a  resurrection.  Our  little
character  in  Old  Testament  times  than  child,  watching  with  curious  eye  the
it  is  now,  as  we  may  learn  from  the  apparent  motion  of  objects,  calls  out
whole  tenor  of  this  prophecy.  It  was  in  ecstasy  and  bids  us  see  how  hedge
by  their  moral  pollutions  most  of  all  and  house  are  flying  past  the  carriage,
that  the  people  of  Israel  had  profaned  You  know  it  is  not  these  that  move  ;
God's  name  and  drawn  down  His  dis-  nor  the  fixed  and  firm  shore,  with  its
pleasure  ;  and  the  purification  which  trees  and  fields,  and  boats  at  anchor,
was  to  undo  the  evil  and  again  to  and  harbours  and  headlands,  that  is
sanctify  the  name  of  God  could  be  gliding  by  the  cabin-window.  That  is
nothing  short  of  a  conformity  to  God's  but  an  illusion  of  the  eye  ;  the  motion
own  righteousness,  which  throughout  is  not  in  them  but  us." — Guthrie.
all  ages  is  the  same." — Fairhairn.  —  The  Heart  of  Stone  and  the
—  Man  Justified.  "  1.  God's  people  Heart  of  Flesh.  "  I.  The  heart  of  stone,
are  not  chosen  because  they  are  holy,  1.  Stone  is  cold.     2.  Hard.     3.  Dead,

2.  In  redemption,  the  saved  are  not  II.  The  heart  of  flesh  a  new  heart.  1.
justified  by  themselves,  but  by  God.  By  this  change  the  understanding  and

3.  We  are  not  justified  through  the  judgment  are  enlightened.  2.  The
administration  or  eflBcacy  of  any  out-  temper  and  disposition  are  changed
ward  ordinance.  4.  We  are  justified,  and  sanctified.  3.  In  conversion  man
or  cleansed  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  by  gets  a  warm  heart,  a  soft  heart,  a  living
the  blood  of  Christ.  Tlie  greatest  of  heart.  4.  By  conversion  man  is  en-
all  questions,  *  What  must  I  do  to  be  nobled.  Near  by  a  mass  of  rock  that
saved  ?  *  is  one  which  admits  of  a  had  fallen  from  the  overhan^inor  eras:,
short  and  plain  answer.  Capable  of  a  which  had  some  wild-flowers  growing
wide  expansion,  it  may  yet  be  brought  in  its  fissures  and  on  its  top  the  fox-
within  a  very  narrow  compass.  The  glove  with  its  spikes  of  beautiful  but
river,  which  there  flows  between  dis-  deadly  flowers,  we  once  came  upon  an
tant  wooded  banks  and  yonder  spreads  adder  as  it  lay  in  ribbon-coil,  ba.'-king
itself  out  into  a  lake,  reflecting  on  its  on  the  sunny  ground.  At  our  approach
mirror-face  the  bright  heavens  above  the  reptile  stirred,  uncoiled  itself,  and
and  the  dark  hills  around,  is  here —  raising  its  head,  with  eyes  like  burning
where  its  foaming  waters  flash  past  coals,  it  showed  its  venomous  fangs,
loud  as  thunder  and  quick  as  lightning,  shook  its  cloven  tongue,  hissed,  and
or  creep  sullenly  along  at  the  bottom  gave  sign  of  battle.  Attacked,  it  re-
of  the  deep,  dark  gorge  —  brought  treated,  and  making  for  that  grey
within  narrow  bounds  ;  bounds  so  stone,  wormed  itself  into  a  hole  in  its
narrow  that,  with  nerve  enough,  by  side.  Its  nest  and  home  were  there,
one  brave  leap  from  rock  to  rock  I  And  in  looking  on  that  shattered  rock,
could  clear  its  breadth.  Even  so  all  the  fallen  from  its  primeval  elevation,  with
wide  expanse  of  doctrines  to  be  be-  its  flowery  but  fatal  charms,  the  liome
lieved  and  duties  to  be  done  over  and  nest  of  the  adder,  where  nothiu'^
which  we  might  expatiate  in  reply  to  grew  but  poisoned  beauty  jind  nothing

339


CHAP.  XXXVI.


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


dwelt  but  a  poisoned  brood,  it  seemed
to  us  an  emblem  of  that  heart  which
the  verse  describes  as  a  stone,  which
experience  proves  is  a  habitation  of
devils,  and  which  the  prophet  pro-
nounces to  be  desperately  wicked." —
Guthrie,

—  "  The  heart  of  stone  does  not  bear
bending  according  to  God's  will,  where-
as the  heart  of  flesh  is  soft  and  of  such
a  texture  that  God  can  impress  into  its
understanding  a  living  knowledge,  into
its  will  a  voluntary  obedience,  and  into
the  inclinations  a  holy  order." — Starke.

Ver.  27.  The  New  Life.     "I.  It  is

a  willing  obedience  to  the  law  of  God.
II.  It  is  a  progressive  obedience.  *  I
will  cause  you  to  walk  in  My  statutes.'
Other  images  convey  the  idea  of  pro-
gress, but  this  of  progress  achieved  by
exertion,  progress  the  triumph  of  an
intelligent  mind  and  the  reward  of  a
determined  will.  1.  In  this  image
God's  people  find  comfort  and  en-
couragement. 2.  This  imasre  stimu-
lates  to  exertion.  III.  This  willing
and  progressive  obedience  is  the  sign  and
seal  of  salvation.  IV.  One  of  the  most
powerful  means  to  accomplish  the  duty
of  the  new  life  is  to  cultivate  the  love  of
Christ.  1.  Love  is  the  most  powerful
of  all  motives.  2.  Love  is  a  motive
to  duty  as  pleasant  as  it  is  powerful.
V.  A  powerful  motive  to  duty  lies  in  the
fact  that  by  our  obedience  to  these  statutes
the  verdict  of  judgment  shall  be  settled.
The  last  day  is  God's  Day  of  settle-
ment with  a  world  that  has  had  long
credit.  It  is  the  winding-up  of  this
earth's  bankrupt  estate  and  each  man's
individual  interests.  It  is  the  closing
of  an  open  account  that  has  been
running  on  ever  since  the  fall.  It  is
the  day  when  the  balance  is  struck
and  our  fate  is  heaven  or  hell.  Our
hands  are  now  sowing  seed  for  that
great  harvest." — Guthrie.

—  "I  will  put  My  Spirit,  the  great
principle  of  light,  life,  and  love,  within
you,  to  actuate  the  new  spirit  and
to  influence  the  new  affections  and
passions,  that  the  animal  spirit  may
not  become  brutish,  that  the  mental
powers   become   not   foolish.      I    will

390


put  My  Spirit  within  you,  so  that  as
the  new  spirit  may  influence  the  new
heart,  so  will  My  Spirit  influence  your
new  spirit,  that  each  may  have  a
proper  mover;  and  then  all  will  be
pure,  regular,  harmonious,  when  pas-
sion is  influenced  by  reason  and  reason
by  the  Holy  Gliost.  And  the  cause
shall  be  evidenced  by  the  eff'ects  ;  for
I  will  cause  you  to  walk  in  My  statutes
— not  only  to  believe  and  reverence
My  appointments  relative  to  what  I
command  you  to  perform ;  bui  ye
shall  walk  in  them,  your  conduct  shall
be  regulated  by  them." — A,  Clarke.

—  "First  the  inward  and  then  the
outward  change  is  God's  order,  while
we  men  always  proceed  in  the  reverse
order.  What  good  a  man  does  is  not
his,  but  God's  work  in  him." — Starke.

Ver.  28.  "To  the  heavenly  among
men  there  is  no  lack  even  on  earth ;
to  him  who  has  what  alone  is  worth
having  nothing  shall  be  wanting." —
Lange,

Vers.  29-36.  "Spiritual  blessings
were  largely  comprised  in  their  tem-
poral ones,  as  the  kernel  is  enclosed
in  the  shell.  Hence  Christian  holi-
ness and  all  the  blessings  of  the  new
covenant  are  here  principally  implied.
The  Jews  looked  for  the  bringing-in
of  a  better  hope.  They  had  a  laver
in  which  they  washed ;  but  David  says,
*  I  will  wash  my  hands  in  innocency.'
They  had  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  but
a  better  fountain  was  expected  to  be
opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness.
They  had  circumcision  ;  but  the  true
circumcision  was  that  of  the  heart.
They  had  the  law  written  on  the
tables  of  stone  ;  but  the  Messiah  who
says,  *Thy  law  is  within  Me,'  here
promises  to  write  it  on  the  heart." —
Sutcliffe.

Vers.  29,  30.  The  Productiveness  of
Nature — 1.  A  Divine  gift.  "I  will
multiply  the  fruit  of  the  tree  and  the
increase  of  the  field."  2.  Promptly
responds  to  the  Divine  voice.  "I  will
call  for  the  corn  and  increase  it."  3.
A  guarantee  against  famine.     "I  will


HO  MI  LET IG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL  ohap.  xxxvl


lay  no  famine  upon  you  —  ye  shall  and  deeply  grieve  at  what  you  re-
receive  no  more  reproach  of  famine  joiced  in.  When  swine  ye  wallowed
among  the  heathen."  4.  Is  appreciated  in  mire;  when  made  sheep  you  shall
o'^dy  by  those  who  are  morally  cleansed,  as  much  fear  and  flee  from  it." — Fool.
"I  will  save  you  from  all  your  un-  —  "There  are  some  things  we  can
cleannesses."  hardly  forget — our   sorrows   and  our

pleasures,  as  Esau  ;  some  things  we  can

Ver.  29.   ***I  will  call  for  the  corn.'  hardly  remember — our  faults  and  our

All  necessaries  for  aliment  comprised  friends,  as  Joseph's  butler.    Augustine

in  one,  and  these  brought  to  them  at  was  famous  for  two  of  his  works — his

God's  call,  which  they  will  hear  (Ps.  ^Retractions,' which  are  the  confessions

cv.  16,  40;  Heb.  ii.  21,  22).     Famine  of  his  errors;  and  his  *  Confessions/

is  God's  arrow;  He  shoots  it;  where  which  are  the  retractions  of  his  life."

it  is.   He  layeth   it ;   but   His   people  — Trapp.

shall  neither  have  it  their  misery  nor  —  "In  conversion  man  regains  his

their  reproach  any  more." — Pool.  memory.     Loathing  is  not  a  sign  of

sickness  only,  but  in  matters  spiritual

Ver.  31-36.   "Nothing  so  melts  the  it  is  a  sign  of  convalescence.     Our  life
sinner  into  repentance  as  the  love  and  must  become  sorrow  to  us,  otherwise
grace   of  God,  where  he  could   have  sorrow  will  not  become  life  to  us." —
looked  only  for  wrath  because  of  his  Lange.
sins.     Let  us,  if  we  xiesire  true  repent-
ance, receive  it  as  the  gift  of  God  at  Ver.  32.   "Grace  works  shame,  and
the  foot  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  where  so  much   the   more  as    it  makes  the
we  see  our  sin  forgiven  at  the  cost  of  wilderness  a  paradise,   the   beggar  a
such  an  awful  sacrifice,  flowing  from  king,   and  the  sinner   a  priest.     We
the    gratuitous    love    of   God.      The  boast   of  nothing   in  Christ    and  we
terrors  of  the  law  can  frighten,  but  boast  of  all  things." — Lange.
the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  alone  can

melt  the  heart." — Fausset.  Vers.  33-36.  Moral  Reform— 1.  The

basis  of  temporal  prosperity.     2.  Can

Vers.  31,  32.  Conscious  Sin — 1.  The  be  accomplished  only  by  Divine  power.

result  of  reflection  on  personal   wrong-  3.  An  evidence  to  the   world  of  the

doing.       "  Then    shall    ye    remember  Divine  veracity,
your  evil  ways  and  your  doings  that

were  not  good."     2.  Humbles  the  soul  Ver.  36.  "  *  I  the  Lord  have  spoken

in  profound  self-abasement.     "Ye  shall  it,  and  I  will  do  it.'     The  Security  of

lothe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight  for  the  Believer.     1.  The  text  announces

your  iniquities  and  for  your  abomina-  a  most  important  truth.    2.  This  truth

tions.     Be  ashamed  and  confounded  for  imparts  comfort  to  a  true  Christian,

your  own  ways."     3.  Convinces  the  soul  Through  his  confidence  in  this  truth —

that  all  blessings  have  a  Divine  source.  (1)  he  commits  all  his  earthly  cares

"  Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  this,  saith  to  God ;  (2)  he  is  sustained  amid  the

the  Lord  God."  trials  of  life ;  (3)  he  cheerfully  hopes

and    patiently  waits   for   heaven.     3.

Ver.  31.  "  When  I  have  given  you  Both  nature  and  providence  illustrate

My    Spirit,     renewed     your     hearts,  the  truth  of  the  text.     The  voice  of

brought  you  by  miraculous  mercy  out  every  storm  that,  like  an  angry  child,

of   captivity  in  a   strange   land   unto  weeps   and    cries  itself   to   sleep,   the

liberty  in  your  own,  ye  shall  call  to  voice  of  every  shower  that  has  cleared

mind,   review   and   examine    all  your  up    into    sunshine,    the    hoarse    voice

past  life,  your  ways  opposite  to  God's,  of   ocean   breaking  in   impotent  rage

therefore   both    their   own    by   choice  against  its  ancient  bounds,  the  voice

and   also   evil   in    their    very  nature.  of  the  seasons  as  they  have  marched

Your  mind  shall  abhor  what  you  loved  to   the   music  of   the    spheres   in   un-

391


CHAP.  XXXVI.  EOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


broken  succession  over  the  earth,  the  move  God  to  me,  it  moves  me  to  God.

scream  of  the  satyr  in  Babylon's  empty  If  He   does  not   descend  to  earth  I

halls,  the  fierce  shout  of  the  Bedouin  ascend  to  heaven." — Guthrie.

as  he  hurls  his  spear  and  careers  in  — "For  all  these  blessings,  whether

freedom    over   his    desert   sands,    the  of  sanctification  or  of  millennial  glory,

wail  and  weeping  of  the  wandering  God  will  be  enquired  of  in  prayer;

Jew  over  the  ruins  of   Zion — in   all  for    the    duty    and    the    promise    are

these  I  hear  the  echo  of  this  voice  of  everywhere  connected   in   the   sacred

God — *  I  the  Lord  have  spoken,  and  I  writings.     It  is  remarkable  that  when

will  do  it.'" — Guthrie.  St.  Paul  mentions  holiness  of  heart  at

large,   it  is  generally  with   the   most

Ver.  37,  38.  An  Increasing  Popu-  fervent  supplications  for  its  attain-
lation — 1.  An  evidence  of  national  ment  (Eph.  iii.  14-19;  1  Thess.  v.
prosperity.  2.  A  great  national  re-  23).  This  is  still  the  only  way  for
sponsibility.  3.  Should  be  instructed  men  to  attain  purity  of  heart  and  the
in  the  knowledge  and  worship  of  God.  mind  of  Christ." — Sutcliffe.
4.  An  imposing  spectacle  when  en-
gaged in  the  praise  and  service  of  Ver.  38.  **Thus  shall  men  muUi-
God.  ply    and   fill   the   cities    of  replanted

Judah.     And  the  increase  of  the  num-

Ver.  37.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God."  bers  of  a  people   is  then   honourable

The  Divine  Word — 1.  Emphasised  by  when  they  are  all  dedicated  to  God

frequent  repetition.  This  the  fourteenth  as  a   holy  flock,   to  be   presented   to

time    this  expression    is  used   in  the  Him  as  living  sacrifices.     Crowds  are

present  chapter.     2.    The  foundation  a   lovely    sight    in   God's   temple." —

and    guarantee   of   blessing   to    man.  Benson.

3.  Should  be  devoutly  pondered.  4.  —  "  Such  promises  as  those  con-
Is  infallible  alike  in  promise  and  tained  in  this  chapter  cannot  be  taken
threatening.  in  an  absolute  sense ;   they  must  be

—  " '  I  will  yet  for  this  be  enquired  understood    to    some    extent    condi-

of  by  the  house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for  tionally.     They  reveal  the  kind  pro-

them.'     The  Nature,  Necessity,  and  pensions  of  God  towards  His  people.

Power  of  Prayer.     1.  Nature  herself  what  He  is  disposed  and  ready  to  do

teaches   us   to  pray.      2.    Some  diflS-  towards  them,  rather  than  what  He

culties  connected  with  the  duty.     The  will  for  certain  accomplish  at  any  stage

decrees  of  God  render  prayer  unneces-  or  period  of  their  history.     So  far  the

sary.    From  want  of  faith  prayer  must  Word  contains  an  absolute  element,

be  useless.    3.  Prayer  must  be  earnest,  as  God  certainly  pledges  Himself  to

4.  Prayer  is  powerful.  5.  Prayer  is  make  provision  for  securing,  in  a  larger
confident.  Child  of  God,  pray  on.  By  measure  than  formerly,  a  proper  re-
prayer  thy  hand  can  touch  the  stars,  generation  of  heart  and  conduct  in
thy  arm  stretches  up  to  heaven.  Nor  His  people,  and  also  for  giving  palpable
let  thy  holy  boldness  be  dashed  by  the  proof  of  this  in  their  more  flourishing
thought  that  prayer  has  no  power  to  and  prosperous  condition  generally,
bend  these  skies  and  bring  down  thy  The  goodness  of  God  was  certainly  to
God.  When  I  pull  upon  the  rope  manifest  itself  for  these  ends;  but  it
which  fastens  ray  little  skifl"  to  a  would  do  so  to  the  full  extent  repre-
distant  and  mighty  ship,  this  feeble  sented  only  if  they  continued  in  His
arm  may  not  draw  its  vast  bulk  to  goodness." — Fairhairn.

me,  but  I  draw  myself  to  it,  to  ride  in  —  "  There  is  no  period  of  the  Jewish

safety  under  protection   of  its   guns,  history    from    that    time    until    now

and  in  my  want  enjoy  the  fulness  of  to   which    this    beautiful  chapter  can

its  stores.     And  it  equally  serves  my  be  applied.     It   must   belong   to   the

purpose  and  supplies  my  needs  that,  Gospel  dispensation ;  and  if  the  Jews

although    prayer    were    powerless    to  will  still  refuse,  contradict,  and  blas-

392


nOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XXXTn.


pheme,  let  no  Cbristfan  have  any
fellowship  witli  them  in  their  opposi-
tion to  this  Almighty  Saviour.  Let
none  be  indifferent  to  His  salvation,


let  all  plead  His  promises,  and  let  the
messengers  of  the  Churches  proclaim
to  the  Christian  world  a  free,  a  full,
and  a  present  salvation." — A,  Clarke,


The  Vision  of  the  Dry  Bones  Revivified  a  Symbol  of  the  Death
AND  Resurrection  of  Israel.     (Chap,  xxxvii.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.
"  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  me."

**  Tlie  abrupt  commencement  without
and^  points  out  that  the  fact  here
related  is  extraordinary  and  out  of
connection  with  the  usual  prophetic
activity.  The  hand  of  the  Lord  de-
notes the  overruling  Divine  influence."
— Hengstenberg.  "  The  valley  " — "  the
plain  or  valley  near  Tel  Abib,  familiar
to  Ezekiel  as  the  scene  of  the  vision  of
the  cherubim.  Now,  however,  to  his
horror,  he  found  it  full  of  dry,  wither-
in<(  bones — the  wreck  of  a  vast  host
slain  by  the  sword.  Wandering  over
the  wide  expanse,  the  multitude  of
these  ghastly  relics  of  mortality  and
their  bleached  dryness,  the  very  em-
bodiment of  death,  filled  him  with
awe." — Geikie.

Ver.  3.  "  Can  these  bones  live  ?  "

"  Implying  that,  humanly  speaking,
they  could  not  -,  but  faith  leaves  the
question  of  possibility  to  rest  with
God,  with  whom  nothing  is  impossible
(Deut.  xxxii.  39).  An  image  of  Chris-
tian faith  which  believes  in  the  coming
resurrection  of  the  dead,  in  spite  of  all
appearances  against  it,  because  God
has  said  it  (John  v.  21  ;  Rom.  iv.  17  ;
2  Cor.  i.  9y—Fausset.

Ver.  4.  "  Prophesy  upon  these
bones  " — prophesy  over  them  ;  pro-
claim God's  quickening  word  to  them.

Ver.  6.  "  Ye  shall  know  that  I  am
the  Lord  " — "  by  the  actual  proof  of
My  Divinity  which  I  will  give  in  re-
viving Israel." — Fausset.

Ver.  7.  "  And  as  I  prophesied  there
was  a  noise."  God's  voice  of  power  is
followed  by  a  rustling  caused  by  the


Dones  coming  rustling  up  from  the
surface  of  the  valley." — Lange.

Ver.  8.  **  The  sinews  and  the  flesh
came  upon  them,  and  the  skin  covered
them ;  but  there  was  no  breath  in
them."  "  So  far,  they  were  only  co—
hering  in  order  as  unsightly  skeletons.
The  next  step,  that  of  covering  them
successively  with  sinews,  skin,  and
flesh,  gives  them  beauty ;  but  still  no
breath  of  life  in  them.  This  may
imply  that  Israel  hereafter,  as  at  the
restoration  from  Babylon  was  the
case  in  part,  shall  return  to  Judea
unconverted  at  first  (Zech.  xiii.  8,  9).
Spiritually  a  man  may  assume  all  the
semblances  of  spiritual  life,  yet  have
none,  and  so  be  dead  before  God." —
Fausset.  '* There  is  reference  to  the  first
creation  of  man.  There  also  the  lower
element  comes  first  into  being,  then  the
higher.  The  prophet  is  penetrated
with  the  thought  that  the  real  misery
of  the  people  is  the  moral  ruin.  The
remedy,  therefore,  cannot  stop  at  the
restoration  of  the  civic  state.  The
main  thing  is  a  renewed  outpouring
of  the  Spirit  and  the  restoration  of
union  with  God  thereby  eff'ected,  which
was  originally  accomplished  by  God
breathing  into  man  the  breath  of  life."
— Hengstenberg,

Ver.  9.  "  Prophesy  unto  the  wind  "

— the  spirit  of  life,  or  life-breath.  For
it  is  distinct  from  "  the  four  winds "
from  which  it  is  summoned.  Lange
says  what  is  here  spoken  of  is — the
universal  spirituality  which  pervades
all  creation.  The  Spirit  is  evidently
here  referred  to  under  the  symbol  of
the  wind.  His  influence  is  supreme
and  operates  in  all  parts  of  the  earth.

Ver.  10.  "  So  I  prophesied,  and  the

393


OHAP.  XXXVII.


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL.


breath  came  into  them  ** — such  honour
God  gives  to  the  Divine  word  even  in
the  mouth  of  a  man  :  how  much  more
when  in  the  mouth  of  the  Son  of  God  !
(Jolin  V.  25-29).  Though  this  chapter
does  not  directly  prove  the  resurrection
of  the  dead,  it  does  so  indirectly,  for
it  takes  for  granted  the  future  fact  as
one  recognised  by  believing  Jews,  and
BO  made  the  image  of  their  national
restoration  (Isa.  xxv.  8 ;  xxvi.  10 ;
Dan.  xii.  2  ;  Hosea  vi.  2  ;  xiii.  14).

Ver.    11.    "  Our  bones   axe    dried."

**  We  are  undone  " — Gesenius.  "  Re-
duced to  ourselves  " — Hitzig.  "  It  is
over  \\\\\\  us  " — Delitzsch.  "  We  are
cut  off  for  us.  The  for  us  points  out
how  grievous  the  sad  fact  is  for  those
concerned,  how  painfully  they  were
affected  by  it  " — Hengstenherg.  There
is  nothing  in  us  to  give  hope,  like  a
withered  branch  cut  off  from  a  tree,  or
a  limb  from  the  body.  The  national
state  was  as  hopeless  of  revival  as
inarrowless  bones  of  reanimation.
"  Cut  off,"  separated,  shut  out  from
God's  help.

Ver.  12.  "I  will  open  your  graves"

— the  abodes  of  the  exile,  since  the
Jews  who  were  in  exile  considered
themselves  like  dead  men.

Ver.  14.  "And  shall  put  My  Spirit
in  you,  and  ye  shall  live."     "  The

inspiriting  and  quickening  for  a  home
system  which  is  to  have  permanence,
and  especially  in  the  case  of  a  i)eople
like  Israel,  will  of  necessity  be  spiritual
and  religious  (Isa.  xiv.  1  ;  chap.  xvii.
24  ;  xxii.  14  ;  xxxvi.  36)." — Lange.
"  Wherever  within  the  Christian
Church  a  new  state  of  death  arises,
there  this  prophecy  always  comes  again
into  force,  until  at  the  end  of  days  death
be  fully  overcome." — Hengstenherg.

Ver.  16.  "Take  thee  one  stick" —

alluding  to  Num.  xvii.  2,  the  tribal
rod.  The  union  of  the  two  rods  was
a  prophecy  in  action  of  the  brotherly
union  which  is  to  reunite  the  ten
tribes  and  Judah.  As  their  severance
under  Jeroboam  was  fraught  with  the

394


greatest  evil  to  the  covenant  people,  so
the  first  result  of  both  being  joined  by
the  Spirit  of  life  to  God  is,  they  be-
come joined  together  under  the  one
Covenant  King,  Messiah — David. —
"Write  upon  it.  For  Judah,  and  for
the  children  of  Israel  his  companions  "
— his  associates  ;  i.e..  For  Judah  and,
besides  Benjamin  and  Levi,  those
who  had  joined  themselves  to  him  of
Ephraim,  Manasseh,  Simeon,  Ashur,
Zebulun,  Issachar,  as  having  the
temple  and  lawful  priesthood  in  his
borders  (2  Chron.  xi.  12,  13,  16;  xv.
9;  XXX.  11,  18).  The  latter  became
identified  with  Judah  after  the  carry-
ing away  of  the  ten  tribes,  and  re-
turned with  Judah  from  Babylon,  and
80  shall  be  associated  with  that  tribe  at
the  future  restoration.  "  Then  take
another  stick,  and  write  upon  it,  For
Joseph,  the  stick  of  Ephraim.  and  for
all  the  house  of  Israel  his  companions."
"  Ephraim's  posterity  took  the  lead,
not  only  of  the  other  descendants  of
Joseph,  but  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel.
For  400  years,  during  the  period  of
the  Judges,  with  Manasseh  and  Ben-
jamin, its  dependent  tribes,  it  had
formerly  taken  the  lead  :  Shiloh  was
its  religious  capital,  Shechem  its  civil
capital.  God  had  transferred  the
birthright  from  Reuben,  for  dishonour-
ing his  father's  bed,  to  Joseph,  whose
representative  his  son  Ephraim,  though
younger  than  his  brother  Manasseh,
was  made  by  his  grandfather  Jacob
(Gen.  xlviii.  19  ;  1  Chroh.  v.  1).  From
the  pre-eminence  of  Ephraim,  Israel  is
attached  to  him  as  companions.  The
*all '  in  this  case,  not  in  that  of  Judah,
which  has  attached  as  companions  only
some  of  the  children  of  Israel,  implies
that  the  bulk  of  the  ten  tribes  did  not
return  at  the  restoration  from  Babylon,
but  is  and  shall  continue  distinct  from
Judah  until  the  coming  union  at  the
restoration." — Fausset.

Ver.  19.  "And  they  shall  be  one
in  mine  hand."  "The  interpretation
keeps  firm  hold  of  the  symbolic  action
— the  union  by  and  in  God,  as  opposed
to  the  separation  by  and  in  Ephraim."
— Lange.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OHAP.  XXXVIL


Ver.  22.  "I  will  make  them  one
nation."  The  now  plainly  expressed
si  L^iifi  cation  of  the  stick:  the  oi.e  nation
M'ill  be  one  kingdom.  "And  one  king
shall  be  king  to  them  all."  '*  Not
Zerubbabel,  who  was  not  a  king  either
in  fact  or  name,  and  who  ruled  over
but  a  few  Jews,  and  that  only  for  a
few  years,  whereas  the  king  here  reigns
for  ever.  Messiah  is  meant  (chap.
xxxiv.  23,  24).  The  union  of  Judah
and  Israel  under  King  Messiah  sym-
bolises tlie  union  of  Jews  and  Gentiles
under  Him,  partly  now,  ]ierfectly  here-
after (ver.  24;  John  x.  16)." — Fausset.


Ver.  26.  "I  will  make  a  covenant
of  peace" — better  than  the  old  legal
covenant,  because  an  unchangeable
covenant  of  grace  (chap,  xxxiv.  25  ;  Isa.
Iv.  3  ;  Jer.  xxxii.  40).  Will  guarantee
them  security  from  all  hostile  enemies.
"And  I  will  place  them."  ** God  now
Himself  orders  and  determines  everj'-
thing  concerning  them — sets  them,  in
opposition  to  their  former  fluctuating,
because  self-ordered,  condition." — Fair-
bairn.  "I  will  set  My  sanctuary  in
the  midst  of  them."  The  essence  of
the  sanctuary  is  the  presence  of  God
among  them.


Ver.  23.  "Neither  shall  they  defile  Ver.  28.  *'  The  heathen  shall  know

themselves  with  idols."     "Since  sin,      that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  Israel."

and  especially  idolatry,  had  contributed      "  This  separation  and  preference,  this


to  the  separation  spoken  of,  the  dis-
course turns  to  that.  The  worship  of
idols  is  localised  transgression." — Lange,

Ver.  24.  "  David  My  servant  shall  he
king  over  them."    See  note  on  ver.  22.

Ver.  25.  '•  They  shall  dwell  therein


marking-off  from  the  profane  world,
which  constitutes  the  idea  of  sancti-
fication,  follows  from  this,  that  God's
sanctuary  is  in  Israel,  that  He  dwells
among  them  with  all  the  fulness  of
His  blessings  and  gifts.  The  natural
consequence  of  this  recognition  com-
pelled  by  facts  is,  that  the  heathen

for  ever"  (Isa.  Ix.  21;   Joel  iii.  20;      seek  for  admittance  among  this  people."

Amos  ix.  15).  — Eengstenberg,


EOMILETICS.

The  Resuscitation  of  an  Effete  Nation.

(Vers.  1-14.)

In  this  paragraph  we  have  another  example  of  the  bold  and  startling  imager}^
familiar  to  the  genius  of  Ezekiel,  and  of  his  vivid  insight  into  the  possibilities
of  Divine  power.  To  his  realising  faith,  the  bleached  and  desiccated  skeletons
of  the  valley  are  a  formidable  army  of  living  and  moving  forces.  The  concep-
tion of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  on  so  vast  a  scale  indicates  a  remarkable
advance  in  that  age  of  the  revelation  of  what  God  can  do  for  His  people.
Observe —

I.  That  the  resuscitation  of  an  effete  nation  seems  a  physical  impossi-
bility. 1.  The  nation  is  lifeless  and  ho;peless  (ver.  1,  2).  The  skeletons  are
iiislocated  and  scattered  ;  the  bones  are  very  dry  and  crumbling  into  dust.
Though  not  actually  buried,  they  are  slowly  burying  themselves  in  their  pro-
gressive decay.  The  evidence  of  death  is  complete.  It  is  beyond  the  power
of  any  known  physical  law  to  breathe  the  ghastly  fragments  into  life.  A
nation,  or  an  individual,  so  utterly  defunct  seems  beyond  the  possibiLty  of
recovery.  Saith  the  proverb,  ^^  From  privation  to  possession  there  is  no  return,**
Well  might  Israel  say,  "Our  bones  are  dried,  and  our  hope  is  lost;  we  are
cut  oflf  from  our  parts"  (ver.   11).      2.   Its  resurrection  not  impossible  to  God

395


CHAP,  xxxvn.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL,

(ver.  3).  If  Ezekiel  had  been  asked  the  question  by  any  other  than  Jehovah,
**Can  these  bones  live?"  he  would  have  promptly  answered,  "No;  it  is  im-
possible." It  is  beyond  the  reach  of  human  philosophy  to  put  life  into  dry
bones,  and  it  passes  the  wit  of  human  politics  to  restore  a  captive  and  scattered
nation.  But  the  prophet  had  already  learned  not  to  limit  the  power  of  God,
and  he  reverently  and  falteringly  answered,  "  Lord,  Thou  knowest : "  if  it  can
be  done  and  is  to  be  done,  Thou  alone  must  do  it.  All  things  are  possible  to
God.     His  power  is  limited  only  by  His  will.

II.   That  the  resuscitation  of  an  effete  nation  is  accomplislied  only  by
Divine  power.      1.  By  Divine  power  working  through  authorised  human  agency
(vers.  4-8).     The  prophet  was  directed  to  prophesy  over  the  bones ;  the  terms
of  the  message  were  put  into  his  lips,  and  the  results  of  his  preaching  were
Divinely  indicated  to  him.    He  obeyed  the  Divine  mandate  ;  he  preached  ;  the
silent  valley  rustled  and  rattled  with  the  noise  of  bone  fitting  into  bone,  and
while  he  gazed  there  grew  as  from  the  soil  an  innumerable  mass  of  perfected
human  forms.     But  here  the  limitation  of  human  agenc}'',  even  when  acting
under  Divine  supervision,  is  plainly  indicated.      The  bodies  were  prone  and
lifeless:  ** there  was  no  breath  in  them."     While  startled  and  terrified  at  the
effect  of  his  words,  as  if  an  army  of  Frankensteins  had  been  summoned  from
the  dust,  the  prophet  felt  his  own  utter  helplessness.     He  was  powerless  to  ad-
vance the  development  a  single  step  further.     It  was  an  experience  that  is  often
familiar  to  the  earnest  preacher.     He  may  sway  his  audience  with  his  impas-
sioned eloquence  till  they  are  roused  into  boisterous  enthusiasm  or  dissolved
in  tears  ;  but  there  his  power  ends.     To  create  a  moral  and  spiritual  change  is
beyond  his  province.     It  is  said  that  on  one  occasion,  when  Chrysostom  ^vas
greeted  by  his  congregation  with  a  storm  of  delighted  applause  because  of  his
overwhelming  eloquence,  he  besought  them  with  tears  to  forget  the  preacher
and  look  to  God,  who  alone  can  renew  the  heart  and  reform  the  life.     2.  By  the
direct  inspiration  of  the  Divine  breath  (vers.  9,  10).     Life  is  the  breath  of  God.
Still,  under  Divine  direction,  the  prophet  invokes  the  help  of  the  life-giving
Spirit.     A  mysterious  breath  passes  over  the  prostrate  forms ;  they  move  and
leap  to  their  feet,  "  an  exceeding  great  army."     The  Spirit  that  renews  the  face
of  the  earth,   robing  it  with  velvet  verdure  and  decorating  it  with  nodding
flowers,  can  alone  raise  the  dead  to  life  and  adorn  the  soul  with  spiritual  beauty.
A  lady  who  recently  visited  the  Fijian  Archipelago  writes  : — "  As  I  lived  for
two  years  in  the  midst  of  this  kindly,  courteous  people,  and  marked  the  reverent
devoutness  of  their  lives  and  the  simple  earnestness  of  their  bearing  at  the
never-failing  morning  and  evening  family  worship  and  frequent  church  services,
I  found  it  hard  to  believe  the  facts  related  to  me  by  reliable  eye-witnesses  of
the  appalling  scenes  of  carnage,  fighting,  human  sacrifices,  debasing  idolatry,
and  loathsome  cannibal  feasts  which  five,  ten,  or  fifteen  years  previously  formed
the  incidents  of  daily  life  in  districts  where  now  English  ladies  and  their  chil-
dren may  travel  or  settle  in  perfect  security."     What  had  wrought  this  change?
The  breath  of  the  Divine  Spirit  had  blown  through  those  lovely  islands  and
transformed  the  moral  wastes.

III.  That  the  resuscitation  of  an  effete  nation  is  a  suggestive  revelation  of
the  Divine  character  (vers.  11-14).  1.  That  God  alone  has  absolute  power  over
life  and  death.  It  is  the  vanity  of  man  to  set  too  high  a  value  upon  his  own
works.  He  imagines  he  can  work  out  his  own  regeneration ;  but  when  he
touches  the  mysterious  edge  of  life  and  death  he  is  baffled  and  compelled  to
confess  his  helplessness.  It  is  the  solitary  and  incommunicable  prerogative  of
the  Godhead  to  educe  life  out  of  death.  The  supreme  greatness  of  God  is
evidenced  in  the  exercise  of  His  resurrection  power.  2.  That  the  nations  should
396


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKI^l.  OTA?,  xxxvn.


learn  to  acknowledge  and  adore  the  true  God.     "Ye  shall   know  that  I  am  the

Lord:  that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it  and  performed  it"  (vers.  13,  14).  The
deities  of  the  heathen  could  do  nothing  for  their  votariee,  either  to  prevent

their  ruin  or  to  rescue  them  from  it.  There  is  but  one  living  and  true  God,
and  the  only  hope  of  moral  revival  and  salvation  for  humanity  is  in  Him.
**  Thou  hast  made  us  for  Thyself,"  wrote  Augustine,  "and  our  hearts  can  have
no  rest  until  they  rest  in  Thee."

Lessons. — 1.  The  nation  that  ignores  God  must  perish.     2.  One  nation  is  Divinely

favoured  that  other  nations  may  he  blessed,  3.  God  will  he  glorified  either  in  the  rise
w  fall  of  nations,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-14.  "  Seized  by  the  hand  of  liveV     So  soon   as,  after   addressing
the  Spirit,  Ezekiel  is  borne  aloft.     He  the  bones,  the  prophet  addresses  his
is  carried  away  through  mid-air  and  God,  there  came  from  heaven  a  living,
set  down  in  a  lonely  valley  among  the  life-giving  breath.     It  blows  down  the
hills  of  a  distant  land.    At  some  former  valley,  and  as,  in  passing,  it  kisses  the
period   it  appears  to   have   been    the  icy  lips  of  the  dead,  and  stirs  their  hair
scene  of  a  great  battle.     There  hosts  and  fans  their  cheek,  man  after  man
had  sustained  the  charge  of  hosts,  and  springs  to  his  feet,  until  the  field  which
crowns  perhaps  were  staked  and  won.  Ezekiel    found    covered    with   ghastly
The  peace  of  these  solitudes  had  been  skeletons  is  crowded  with  a   mighty
rudely  broken  by  the  shrieks   of  the  array,  all  armed  for  battle  and  war —
wounded,  the  wild  shouts  of  the  vie-  the  marshalled  host  of  God." — Guthrie.
tors,  the  clash  of  arms,  and  the  savage  —  "  There    can    be   no    reasonable
roar  of  war.     It  was  silent,  calm  now.  doubt  as  to  the  leading  scope  and  pur-
The  storm  was  down  ;  but  the  tempest  pose  of  this  remarkable  vision.     It  is
that  swept  over  it  had  left  it  strewn  intended  to  counteract  the  feeling  of
with  wrecks.     The  dead  had  been  left  despair  which   had   succeeded  to  the
unburied.    They  mouldered  where  they  opposite  one   of   carnal   security  and
fell,  the  skull  rattled  in  the  cloven  hel-  presumptuous  confidence  which  at  an
met,  the  sword  of  the  warrior  lay  rust-  earlier  period  had  wrought  so  disas-
ing  beside  his  skeleton,  and  the  handle  trously  among  the  people.     Now  that
was  still  in  the  relaxed  grasp  of  the  they  were  reduced  to  so  hapless  and
bony  fingers.     On  these  unsepulchred  shattered  a  condition,  the  glowing  de-
corpses  the  birds  of  the  air  had  sum-  lineations  the  prophet  had  been  draw-
mered  and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field  ing   of    a    happy   future    seemed    as
had  wintered.  The  rain  had  washed  and  visionary  to  their  minds  as  formerly
the  sun  had  bleached  the  bones  which  had  appeared  his  dark  forebodings  of
the  ravens  had  picked  bare — they  were  impending  distress   and  ruin.      They
white  and  dry.      In  these  grim  and  felt  as  if  they  had  become  like  bones
ghastly  skeletons  a  doleful  picture  of  dried   and   scattered   at    the    grave's
death  was  spread  out  before  the  pro-  mouth,  and  destitute  of  everything  on
phet.     In  all  the  scene  which  he  sur-  which  they  could  build  any  reasonable
veyed  there  was  neither  sign  nor  sound  prospect  of  restored  felicity.    The  pro-
of life,  but,  it  may  be,  the  croak  of  the  phet  therefore  meets  them  on   their
raven,  the  howl  of  the  famished  wolf,  own  ground.    He  admits  that,  as  corn-
er the  echo  of  his  own  solitary  foot-  pared  with  the  elevated  prospects  he
fall.     Here   Ezekiel    was    standing,    a  had  been  unfolding,  they  were  in  them-
lonely  man,  amid  the  mouldering  dead,  selves  no  better  than  lifeless  skeletons,
when  a  voice  made  him  start.    It  came  but  at  the  same  time  shows  that  even
from  the  skies,  charged  with  the  strange  this  could  raise  no  barrier  against  the
question — *  Son  of  man,  can  these  bones  realisation  of  the  better  future,  since

397


OHAK  XXXVII.


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


they  had  to  do  with  tlie  word  of  Him
who  is  equally  able  to  make  alive  as
to  kill.  And  it  must  have  been  im-
possible for  any  thoughtful  and  pious
Israelite  to  enter  into  the  application
made  of  this  vision  to  the  temporal
resuscitation  of  Israel's  prostrate  con-
dition, without  perceiving  how  it  also
involved,  for  all  true  believers,  the
future  resurrection  of  their  bodies  from
the  power  of  death." — Fairhairn.

—  "  Besides  the  deliverance  of  the
Jews  from  Babylon,  this  vision  is
a  lively  representation  of  a  threefold
resurrection.  1.  Of  the  resurrection  of
souls  from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life
of  righteousness,  to  a  holy,  heavenly,
spiritual,  and  Divine  life  by  the  power
of  Divine  grace  accompanving  the  word
of  Christ  (John  v.  24,  ^25).  2.  The
resurrection  of  the  Gospel  Church,  or
any  part  of  it,  from  an  afflicted  state
to  liberty  and  peace.  3.  The  resurrec-
tion of  the  body  at  the  great  day,
especially  the  bodies  of  believers,  to
life  eternal." — Benson,

Ver.  1-10.  Lessons  from  the  Valley
of  Vision.  "1.  The  text  presents  us  with
a  picture  of  the  spiritual  state  of  our  race
— '  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.'  2.
With  an  illustration  of  the  human  instru-
mentality God  generally  employs  in  the
work  of  quickening  the  dead  in  sin — the
preaching  of  the  Gospel.  3.  With  a
view  of  the  Divine  agency  e7riployed  in
the  work  of  quickening  the  dead  in  tres-
passes and  sins — the  power  of  the  Holy
Spirit." — T.  D.  Anderson,  B.A.

—  The  Secret  of  Successful  Preach
ing  and  True  Revival.  "  1.  The  first
thing  necessary  is  a  Divinely  appointed
sphere.  The  prophet  had  to  speak
his  message  in  a  particular  place.  One
reason  why  men  are  not  successful
to-day  is  because  they  are  not  where
God  designed  them  to  be.  Not
ministers  simply,  but  Christian  men
in  business,  for  secular  professions  are
as  much  in  God's  hands  as  religious
ones.  2.  A  second  requirement  is  con-
tact with  the  misery  to  he  removed.  The
prophet  was  not  commanded  to  stand
a  great  distance  otF  and  proclaim  his


set  him  down  in  the  midst  of  the
valley  and  caused  him  to  pass  by
them  round  about,*  and  thus  he  was
brought  into  close  contact  with  his
work.  We  must  not  say,  *  The  people
must  come  up  to  us ; '  we  must  go
down  to  them,  sympathise  with  them,
identify  ourselves  with  them.  3.  The
next  requirement  is  confidence  in  God
(ver.  3).  4.  A  fourth  requirement  is  an
inspired  message  (vers.  4-6).  We  ought
always  to  listen  for  what  God  says  ;
and  if  the  vision  tarry  we  should
agonise  in  prayer  —  *  Lord,  tell  us
what  to  say  and  how  to  say  it.'  5.
There  must  he  a  willingness  to  declare  the
message  given.  '  So  I  prophesied  as  I
was  commanded.'  6.  When  all  these
requirements  are  met,  the  result  must  he
a  manifestation  of  Divine  power.  We
have,  in  the  mode  in  which  this  power
was  manifested,  the  indication  of  a
true  revival.  It  is  gradual.  There
was  (1.)  an  effect  ])roduced.  *  There
was  a  noise.'  (2.)  The  effect  becan»e
visible.  *  Behold  a  shaking.'  (3.)
The  visible  effect  took  a  particular
form.  *  The  bones  came  together,'
&c.  (4.)  The  Holy  Ghost  came  down
and  life  is  given.  '  The  breath  came
into  them,  and  they  lived  and  stood  up
on  their  feet.'  " — The  Lay  Preacher,

—  Spiritual  Resurrection.  **  1.
The  condition  of  the  world.  (1.)  Spiri-
tually dead — '  Bones.'  (2.)  Hopelessly
so — 'Dry  bones.'  (3.)  Universally  so
— 'A  valley  full.'  2.  The  means  for  its
recovery.  (1.)  A  Divine  ap[)ointment —
preaching.  (2.)  The  claim  of  attention.
(3.)  The  offer  of  salvation.  3.  The
wonderful  result.  (1.)  The  Gospel  is
accompanied  by  Divine  power.  (2.)
The  Spirit  is  essential  to  complete
success.  (3.)  In  the  use  of  the  means
success  is  certain." — Pulpit  Analyst,

Vers.  1,  2.  In  the  Presence  of  Death.
1.  A  humbling  spectacle.  2.  A  solemn
reminder  of  our  own  mortality.  3.  An
occasion  of  sorrow.  4.  We  see  the
superficiality  of  all  things  earthly.  6.
We  are  taught  the  necessity  of  a  moral
and  spiritual  preparedness.  6.  Find
our  true  consolation  in  the  loving  and


message.


*  The    Soirit   of  the  Lord      eternal  God.


398


BOM [ LET W  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XXlVtL


Ver.  1.  **  This  valley  is  found  indeed
everywhere.  In  other  words,  Is  there
not  plenty  of  dead  bones  ?  The  best
thing  is,  that  God  still  cares  even  for
such." — Lange,

Ver.  2.  "  As  Christ  often  improved
His  miracles  by  a  spiritual  turn  of
thought,  so  we  may  improve  this
astonishing  restoration  of  the  Jews  to
illustrate  the  conversion  of  sinners.
Man  in  his  fallen  state  is  dead  in
trespasses  and  sins ;  he  has  lost  the
life  of  God.  He  is  dry  and  parched,
for  in  his  flesh  dwelleth  no  good  thing.
He  has  lain  a  long  time  in  that  most
piteous  situation,  so  that  he  is  not
only  dry,  but  with  man  there  is  no
hope  of  his  conversion.  The  calamity
is  not  solitary  but  universal — *  Behold
there  were  very  many  in  the  open
valley.'  To  raise  and  recover  fallen
man,  ministers  must  not  only  be  im-
pelled with  the  spirit  of  faith  and  love,
but  they  must  mix  among  the  wicked,
as  the  physicians  with  the  sick.  We
may  stay  in  our  closets  learning  our
Master's  wisdom  till  we  neglect  to  do
our  Master's  work.  We  must  mix
among  the  dry  bones,  watch  their
passions,  trace  their  habits,  and  learn
their  evasions  of  conscience  and  of  the
Gospel.  Ministers  must  not  despair,
though  the  cases  may  seem  hopeless."
— Sutcliffe,

Ver.  3.  "  0  Lord,  Thou  knowest."
Human  Perplexity — 1.  Finds  refuge
in  the  Divine  omniscience.  2.  Reve-
rently acknowledges  the  illimitableness
of  the  Divine  power.  3.  Teaches  the
soul  to  render  unquestioning  obedience
to  the  Divine  command.

—  "  The  Russians  in  a  diflScult
question  are  accustomed  to  answer —
*  God  and  our  great  Duke  know  all
this.' " — Trapp.

—  "  Since  God  is  omniscient  and
omnipotent,  the  resurrection  of  the
dead  is  possible;  but  since  He  has
also  promised  it  and  cannot  break  His
word,  it  is  also  certain  (John  v.  25)."
— Starke,

Ver.    4.    "O   ye    dry   bones,   hear


the  word  of  the  Lord."  An  Urgent
Message.  Addressed — \.  To  a,  dt-ad
nationality.  2.  To  a  dead  Church.
3.  To  a  dead  faith.     4.  To  dead  souls,

Ver.  5.  "Neither  need  the  resur-
rection of  the  dead  be  held  a  thing
incredible  concerning  God's  power  and
truth  (Acts  xxvi.  8).  The  keeping
green  of  Noah's  olive-tree  in  the  time
of  the  flood,  the  blossoming  of  Aaron's
dry  rod,  the  flesh  and  sinews  coming
to  these  dry  bones  and  the  breath
entering  into  them,  what  were  they
all  but  so  many  lively  emblems  of  the
resurrection  1 " — Trapp,

Ver.  6.  "  Sinews  tie  the  bones  to-
gether. Flesh  fills  up  the  hollo wnesses,
and  being  full  of  muscles,  helps  motion.
Skin,  as  the  upper  silken  garment,
covers  all  with  a  clear  and  blushing
colour.  Breath  lastly  must  be  added.
All  this  God  declares  He  will  do." —
Pool,

Vers.  7-10.  The  Successful  Preacher
— 1.  Is  Divinely  commissioned.  2.  Is
careful  to  declare  only  the  message
God  reveals  to  Him.  "So  I  pro-
phesied as  I  was  commanded"  (vers.
7,  10).  3.  Recognises  the  necessity  of
prayer  for  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit.
"  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  breath,
and  breathe  upon  these  slain "  (ver.
9).  4.  Is  honoured  in  seeing  the  fruit
of  his  labours.  "  The  breath  came  into
them,  and  they  lived  "  (ver.  10).

—  "Three  degrees  or  processes  have
been  remarked  in  this  mystic  vision.
When  the  prophet  was  commanded  to
prophesy,  to  foretell,  on  the  authority
of  God,  that  there  should  be  a  restora-
tion to  their  own  land — 1.  There  was
a  noise,  which  was  followed  by  a  general
shaking,  during  which  the  bones  be-
came arranged  and  united.  2.  The
flesh  and  skin  came  upon  them,  so
that  the  dry  bones  were  no  longer
seen.  3.  The  spirit  or  soul  came  into
them,  and  they  stood  up  perfectly
vivified.  Perhaps  these  might  be  illus-
trated by  three  periods  of  time  which
marked  the  regeneration  of  the  Jewish
polity: — 1.  The  publication  of  the  edict

399


OHAP.  XXXVII.


HOMILETW  COMMFNTARY:  EZEKIEL.


of  Cyrus  in  behalf  of  the  Jews,  wliich
caused  a  general  shaking  or  stir  among
the  people,  so  that  the  several  families
began  to  approach  each  other  and  pre-
pare for  their  return  to  Judea  (Ezra
i.  2,  3).  But  though  partially  restored,
they  were  obliged  to  discontinue  the
rebuilding  of  the  Temple.  2.  The  edict
published  by  Darius  in  the  second  year
of  his  reign  (Ezra  iv.  23,  24),  which
removed  the  impediments  thrown  in
the  way  of  the  Jews  (Ezra  vi.  6,  7).
3.  The  mission  of  Nehemiah  with
orders  from  Artaxerxes  to  complete
the  building  of  the  Temple  and  the
city  (Neh.  ii.  7).  Then  the  Jews  be-
came a  great  army,  and  found  them-
selves in  sufficient  force  to  defend
themselves  and  city  from  all  their
enemies." — A.  Clarke,

—  "The  vision  secondarily  sets  forth
the  spiritual  resurrection  of  the  people
of  God  now  through  the  regenerating
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  then
hereafter  their  literal  resurrection  also,
through  the  same  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.
11  ;  Phil.  iii.  20).  It  needs  the  same
Almighty  power  to  raise  a  sinner  from
his  natural  state  of  spiritual  death  as
it  does  to  raise  a  corpse  to  life.  To
man  both  alike  are  impossible.  But
faith  believes  in  the  power  and  will
of  God  to  quicken  the  dead  where  to
sense  the  case  would  seem  hopeless.
The  spiritual  resurrection  is  not  in-
Btantaneously  complete,  but  is  pro-
gressive. At  first  there  is  the  outward
and  inward  preparation  for  the  recep-
tion of  the  Spirit  of  life,  and  then  at
last  the  breath  of  life  enters  the  man,
and  he  becomes  truly  born  again  of
the  Spirit.  Let  us  never  be  satisfied
with  the  outward  semblances  of  spiri-
tual life — the  bones,  sinews,  flesh,  and
skin — which  give  the  form  of  beauty
and  life,  but  which  are  not  the  life
itself.  None  but  livinj'  believers  shall
stand  before  the  living  God.  Prayer
is  the  means  whereby  to  obtain  the
breath  of  spiritual  life,  both  for  our-
selves and  for  others  (ver.  9 ;  Sol.  Song
iv.  \^)y—Fausset.

Ver.  7.  "If  the  voice  of  the  Holy
Ghost  is  heard  in  the  heart,  then  there

400


is  a  movement  of  the  heart,  and  blessed
is  he  who  obeys  the  impulse." — Starch.

Ver.  8.  "The  spirit  and  not  the
uniform  is  that  which  truly  unifies,
and  the  consciences  of  men  are  not  to
be  dealt  with  as  the  regimental  tailor
deals  with  soldiers." — Lange.

Yer.  9.  "  When  ministers  succeed  in
promoting  a  law-work  on  the  mind,
always  in  due  time  mixing  comfort
with  terror,  they  must  turn  their  eyes
to  heaven  and  become  advocates  and
intercessors  for  the  promised  Com-
forter. Our  sermons  have  too  much
of  the  didactic;  we  divide,  explain,
and  teach.  We  dwell  on  words  and
truths  already  understood.  But  after
setting  good  things  before  an  audience,
why  may  we  not  assist  piety  in  utter-
ing the  wishes  of  their  hearts  to  obtain
them  ]  The  frequent  prayers  which
St.  Paul  mixes  with  his  discourses  are
the  most  pathetic  and  touching  parts
of  his  writings." — Sntdiffe.

—  "  Vision  of  the  Dry  Bones — a
theme  for  a  missionary  sermon.  1.  A
striking  description  of  ths  religious  state
of  the  heathen  world.  (1.)  The  persons
made  the  subject  of  this  prophetic
vision  are  represented  as  dead.  (2.)
The  number  of  the  dead  forms  another
part  of  the  picture — '  the  valley  was
full  of  bones.'  (3.)  They  were  un-
buried.  The  destructive  effects  of  sin,
the  sad  ravages  of  death,  lay  exposed
and  open  to  the  sun.  (4.)  The  state  of
the  dead — *  the  bones  were  very  dry.*
Under  this  strong  figure  the  hopeless-
ness of  their  condition  is  represented.

2.  The  means  by  which  its  mystical
resurrection  is  to  be  effected.  (1.)  The
ministry  of  the  Word  is  the  grand
means  appointed  by  God  for  the  sal-
vation of  the  world.  (2.)  The  words
may  be  considered  as  an  injunction  on
the  preachers  of  the  Gospel — *  Pro-
phesy unto  these  dry  bones.'  (3.)
The  injunction  'Prophesy'  respects
not  only  ministers,  but  you  also  who
have  a  private  station  in  the  Church.

3.  The  certain  success  which  should  follow
the  application  of  the  appointed  means.
(1.)  Our  confidence  rests  on  the  power


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap,  xxxvii.


of  the  Gospel.     (2  )  Our  confidence  in  corky,  frothy  hope  when  it  seeth  suffi-

the  certain  success  of  the  G-ospel  rests  cient  help,  so  it  sitteth  down  into  a

also  on  experience.     (3.)  Prophecy  con-  faithless,  sullen  discontent  and  despair

firms   the   certainty   of  success." — R.  when  it  can  see  no  second  causes." —

Watson,  Trapp,

Ver.    10.    "  *  An    exceeding    great  —  The  language  of  unbelief  makes

army.'     A  power,  or  army  of  strong,  the  calamity  great,  and  God's  power

courageous,  and  well-ordered  soldiers,  to  help  little.
The    phrase   in   the    Hebrew  is  very

full — a  power,  or  great  host,  very,  very  Vers.  12, 13.  "Though  your  captivity

great.    Thus  they  rise  that  the  prophet  be  as  death,  your  prisons  and  confine-

and  we  might  know  how  safe   they  ments  close  as  the  grave,  yet  I  will

would    be    in    themselves,    and    how  open  those  graves.     I  will  lift  you  out,

terrible  to  their  enemies." — Pool,  lend  you  a  hand  to  bring  you  out  with

life  and  strength.     And  I  will  be  your

Vers.  11-14.  National  Life — 1.  De-  guide,  that  you  may  know  the  way;  be

pendent  on    God   for   its  worth   and  your  support,  that  you  may  be  able  to

permanence.     2.  Sinks  into  decay  and  go  ;  and  your  guard  and  defence  against

oblivion    when    it    ignores    God.      3.  dangers    of  the    wa}^    that   you   may

Indebted  for  its  revival  to  the  good-  certainly  come   into  your  own   land,

ness  and  power  of  God.  When   your  restitution  to  your  own

land  and  your  prosperity  in  it,  when

Ver.  11.  "'Our  hope  is  lost.*  Let  yourgrowth  to  strength  and  power  shall
them  hope  as  hope  can  :  we  have  be  so  miiaculously  effected,  then  you
hanged  up  all  our  hopes  now  that  the  shall  acknowledge  and  publish  the
city  and  Temple  are  destroyed.  Thus  glory  of  My  power,  faithfulness,  good-
carnal  confidence,  as  it  riseth  up  into  a  ness,  and  wisdom." — Fool.


HOMILETIGS.

The  Unity  of  the  Kingdom  of  God.

(Vers.  15-28.)

I.  Promoted  by  the  blending  of  hostile  nationalities  into  a  universal  brother-
hood (vers.  15-22).  We  have  here  another  example  of  the  realism  of  Ezekiel's
method  of  teaching.  By  the  bringing  together  of  two  separate  rods,  or  sceptres,
till  they  appeared  as  one  in  the  hand  of  the  prophet,  he  illustrated  the  approach-
ing union  of  the  rival  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel.  The  misfortunes  of  the
past  had  been  intensified  by  the  rupture  of  the  kingdom  of  David.  Internecine
wars  had  weakened  both  North  and  South  and  left  the  exhausted  tribes  an  easy
prey  to  the  heathen  invaders.  The  removal  of  the  ten  tribes  into  Assyrian
exile  more  than  a  century  and  a  half  before  toned  down  the  bitterness  of
ancient  animosities  in  the  breasts  of  the  two  tribes  still  left  in  the  land  ;  and
when  they,  in  their  turn,  suffered  the  miseries  of  exile,  a  spirit  of  brotherhood
was  awakened  among  all  the  tribes,  and  they  yearned  for  the  time  when  they
should  again  become  a  united  nation.  The  prophets  no  less  than  the  people
looked  forward  to  this  desirable  consummation.  They  saw  that  the  fires  of
affliction  were  already  fusing  the  broken  and  scattered  elements  into  a  strongly
welded  national  unity.  But  in  the  wider  scope  of  the  prophetic  vision,  the
union  of  Israel  and  Judah  was  regarded  as  a  type  of  the  future  union  of  all
nations  in  the  universal  kingdom  of  Messiah.  In  the  march  of  the  centuries
and  the  advancement  of  knowledge  the  nations  are  being  drawn  closer  to  each

2  0  401


CHAP,  xxxvn.  EOMllETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.

other;  war,  hatred,  and  jealousy  will  ultimately  disappear,  and  peace  and  right-
eousness everywhere  prevail : —

•*  O  scenes  surpassing  fable,  and  yet  true,
Scenes  of  accomplished  bliss  1     Which  who  can  SM^
Though  but  in  distant  prospect,  and  not  feel
His  soul  refreshed  with  foretaste  of  the  joy  !
Antipathies  are  none.     In  the  heart
No  passion  touches  a  discordant  string,
But  all  is  harmony  and  love." — Cowper.

II.  Acknowledges  the  supreme  authority  of  the  one  Divine  King.  "  I  will  make
them  one  nation,  and  one  king  shall  be  king  to  them  all.  David  My  servant
shall  be  king  over  them,  and  they  all  shall  have  one  shepherd.  My  servant
David  shall  be  their  prince  lor  ever  "  (vers.  22-25).  It  was  plainly  revealed  that
the  coming  Messiah-King  was  to  be  a  descendant  of  David,  the  Jewish  hero,
and  both  prophets  and  people  expected  that  he  would  restore  the  kingdom  on
the  lines  of  its  ancient  constitution,  for  they  knew  nothing  higher.  The  con-
ception of  a  purely  spiritual  kingdom  was  altogether  beyond  the  range  of  human
thought,  and  was  not  dreamed  of  till  proclaimed  by  the  lips  of  our  Lord.  Even
then  the  idea  was  but  slowly  comprehended  by  the  best-insiructed  Jewish  minds  ;
and  the  rejection  of  the  true  Messiah  by  the  bulk  of  the  Jewish  nation  shows
how  unwilling  or  incapable  they  were  to  take  in  the  sublime  notion.  It  is  only
by  the  light  of  the  New  Testament  that  a  later  age  has  been  able  to  realise
the  far-reaching  significance  of  the  prophetic  vision.  The  true  Israel  is  not  a
political  but  a  spiritual  community,  gathered  out  of  all  nations  under  heaven,
compacted  and  unified  into  a  spiritual  kingdom,  acknowledging  and  serving  one
Divine  Ruler,  who  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.

III.  Established  by  the  Divinely  imparted  righteousness  of  its  subjects  (vers.

23,  24).  Sin  disintegrates  and  scatters,  as  the  chequered  history  of  tlie  Jewish
nation  proves.  But  the  stability  and  permanent  unity  of  the  Messianic  king-
dom will  be  ensured  in  the  fact  that  it  is  built  up  and  established  in  right-
eousness. It  is  composed  of  sanctified  natures  from  which  the  enfeebling  defile-
ment of  iniquity  will  be  cleansed,  and  the  changed  lives  of  its  subjects  will  be
evidenced  in  practical  holiness.  "  They  shall  walk  in  My  judgments,  and  observe
My  statutes  and  do  them."     It  is  : —

**  The  kingdom  of  established  peace,
Which  can  no  more  remove  ;
The  perfect  power  of  godliness,
The  omnipotence  of  love."

IV.  Confirmed  by  a  perpetual  covenant  (vers.  26,  27).     The  terms  of  the

covenant  have  a  Divine  origin  and  sanction — "  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they
shall  be  My  people."  Here  is  the  guarantee  of  its  inviolability.  Had  it  rested
on  political  or  any  human  considerations,  it  would  have  been  insecure.  God  is
ever  faithful  to  His  part  of  the  covenant,  notwithstanding  the  infidelity  and
ingratitude  of  His  people.  It  is,  moreover,  a  covenant  of  peace — the  moral
breach  occasioned  by  sin  is  healed  by  pardon  and  reconciliation  through  the
intervention  of  Messiah,  who  by  His  offered  and  accepted  sacrifice  has  made  it
])ossible  to  subdue  the  inveterate  enmity  of  the  human  heart  and  bring  n)an
into  spiritual  union  with  God.  The  reality  and  perpetuity  of  the  covenant  are
assured  by  the  abiding  presence  of  God  with  His  people.  **  I  will  set  up  My
sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  them  for  evermore."  The  unity  of  the  Divine
kingdom  will  be  maintained  by  incessant  worship  and  the  loftiest  spiritual
fellowship.

V.  Demonstrates  the  Divine  faithfulness  (ver.  28).     Israel  had  sinned  and

402


HO  M I  LET  I C  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  xxxvil


had  defamed  the  reputation  of  Jehovah,  and  in  their  sufferings,  which  rendered
them  a  spectacle  of  wonder  and  a  theme  of  derision,  their  enemies  entertained
false  and  distorted  views  of  the  God  of  Israel  But  in  the  moral  reform  of
Israel  and  the  unmistakable  evidence  of  God's  presence  and  working  amongst
them,  the  heathen  are  compelled  to  own  that  He  is  the  only  true  God,  and
unalterably  faithful  in  word  and  deed.  The  growing  unity  of  the  kingdom  of
righteousness  is  an  ever-present  object-lesson  to  the  universe,  teaching  the
indefectible  faithfulness  of  Jehovah.

Lessons. — 1.  The  unify  of  the  kingdom  of  God  is  founded  in  spiritual  affinity  to
the  Divine.  2.  Is  in  process  of  organisation  wherever  Christ  is  embraced  and  wor-
shipped.    3.  Will  one  day  be  a  grand  reality.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,

Vers.  15-28.  "  The  whole  people  of  of  its  terms  is  too  plain  to  require  any

Israel  had  been  represented  as  partici-  lengthened   proof.      The    most   char-

pating  in  the  regenerating  efficacy  of  acteristic  part  of  the  description — the

the  spirit  of  life  which  was  to  be  given  cementing,    strengthening,    benignant

from  above  ;  and  as  the  direct  result  of  rule    of   David  —  had    not   even    the

this  was  to  unite  them  to  God,  so  its  appearance  of  a  literal   fulfilment  in

secondary  operation  could  not  fail  to  the  post-Babylonish  history  of  Israel ;

be  to  unite  them  in  brotherly  concord  and,  with  so  strong  and  prominent  a

with  each  other.  For  the  true  covenant-  feature  of  an  ideal  sort  as  the  eternal

people  must  form  but  one  body,  as  presidency  of  David,  it  seems  amazing

they   can  only   have  one   Head ;  and  that  any  one  should   expect  it  to  be

hence,  as  the  necessary  shell  for  pre-  realised  after  that  manner  in  the  ages

serving  this   great   truth,    it   was   so  to  come." — Fairbairn.
strictly    enjoined    of    old    that    they

should  have  but  one  Temple,  one  high-  Vers.    15-17.    Joining   the   Sticks.

priest,   one   king,    and    one   common-  **  1.  Learn  the  sad  condition  of  the  people

wealth.       The    breaking-up    of    this  of  Israel  at  the  time  the  propliet  wrote.

united   brotherhood  by  the  revolt  of  (1.)    It  was  contrary   to   natute.     (2.)

the  ten  tribes  under  Jeroboam,  how-  Displeasing  to  God.     (3.)  Disastrous

ever  neediul  at  the  time  as  a  salutary  to  themselves.     2.  Jlie  happy  condition

chastisement  to  the  house  of  David,  is  to  which  the  people  of  Israel  were  about  to

constantly  represented  as  a  sad  dis-  he  restored.     That  of  unity,  harmony,

memberment  of  the  household  of  God,  oneness.     (1.)  Union  is  of  great  im-

and  the  source,  to  a  large  extent,  of  the  portance  to  the  Church  itself.     (2.)  It

more  overwhelming  tide  of  evils  which  is  an  immense  advantage  to  the  sur-

thenceforth  set  in  upon  the  land,  and  rounding  community.     (3.)  It  is  well-

at  last  laid  it  desolate.     As  soon,  there-  pleasing  and  highly  honouring  to  God.

fore,  as  there  might  be  produced  a  re-  3.   The  agency  by  which  this  delightful

vived  and  healthful  condition  among  change   was   to   be   effected.      (1.)   God

the  covenant-people,  there  must  be  a  breathed    into    them    a    principle    of

return  to  brotherly  union,  and  that  in  spiritual  life.     (2.)  He  sent  them  wise

connection  with  the  house  of  David ;  advisers  and  earnest  intercessors.     (3.)

for  to  this  house  had  been  committed  He  visited  them  with  a  sore   trial —

the  right  to  rule  over  the  heritage  of  captivity.     (4.)  He  appointed  them  a

God,  and  to  abide  in  separation  from  common  work — the  rebuilding  of  the

it  was  to  continue  in  rebellion  against  city  and  Temple  of  Jerusalem.     (5.)

Heaven.      That    there    has    been    no  He  makes  His  residence  in  their  midst.

adequate  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  Christ  in  the  midst  of  a  Church  acts

in  what  may  be  called  the  literal  sense  like  ft  magnet  ift  the  midst  of  steel

403


CHAP.  XXXVII.  EOMILETIO  COMMESTARY :  EZEKIEL.


particles :  He  attracts  all  to  Himself."  may  cleave  together,  but  not  incorpo-

— PtUj)it  Analyst  rate  one  into  another." — Trapp,

Ver.  16.  **  A  cleft  stick  is  a  poor         Ver.  20.  "As  the  separation  of  Judah

business  in  itself,  but  if  God  please  to  and  Ephraim  was  the  punishment  of

make  use  of  so  slender  a  thing,  it  may  apostasy,  and  led  to  still  further  evils,

serve  for  a  very  great  purpose ;  as  here  religious   and   political,    so    hereafter,

by  the  uniting  of  two  sorry  sticks  in  when  both  are  one  with  God,  through

the  hands  of  the  prophet  is  prefigured  the  spirit  of  life  uniting  them  to  the

the  uniting  of  Judah  and  Israel,  yea,  one   Covenant- Head,  Messiah-David,

of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  in  the  hand  of  they  shall  be  united  to  one  another  as

the   Lord — that  is,    in   Christ   Jesus,  no  longer  two  but  one  people.     In  re-

who  is  the  hand,  the  right  hand  and  spect  to  the  spiritual  Israel,  the  Church,

the  arm  of  God  the  Father." — Trapp.  nothing  has  more  impeded  the  progress

of  the  Gospel  than  the  mutual  divisions

Ver.  17.  "'Join  them  one  to  another/  of  professing  Christians.     Let  us  pray

Some  would  have  this  done  miracu-  for  the  blessed  time  when  all  Christians

lously  ;  but  I  do  not  think  God  bade  shall  be  one  inwardly  and  outwardly,

the  prophet  work  a  miracle.     Were  it  as  the  Lord  Jesus  prayed  (John  xvii.

so,   God  would  rather  have  said,    'I  21).     Meanwhile,  if  in  non-essentials

will  make  them  one,*  for  He  can  do  we  dififer  for  a  time,  let  us  endeavour

miracles.      It    was    enough   if   glued  at  least  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit

together,  or  but  held  in  his  hand,  so  in  the  bond  of  peace." — Fausset.
that  in  his  hand  they  were  one." —

Pool  Vers.   21-25.    National  Unity— 1.

Conditioned  by  geographical  environment

Vers.  18-20.  The  Unity  of  the  People  "  I  will  gather  them  on  every  side,  and

of  God — 1.  Has  its  basis  in  their  united  make  them  one  nation  in  the  land,

love  of  God.     2.  Strengthened  by  Divinely  upon  the  mountains  of  Israel "  (vers.

ordered  events.      "  I    will   make   them  21,  22).    2.  Confirmed  by  the  suppression

one  stick,  and   they   shall  be  one  in  of  tribal  feuds  and  animosities.     "They

mine  hand"  (ver.  19).      3.  Admits  of  shall  be  no  more  two  nations  "(ver.  22).

great  diversity  of  individual  character.  3.  Cemented  by  good  government,    "  One

Each  tribe  had  its  distinctive  peculi-  king  shall  be  king  to  them  all.     David,

arity.     4.   Shall   be    openly   recognised,  my  servant,  shall  be  king  over  them,

"The  sticks   shall  be  in   thine  hand  and  they  all  shall  have  one  shepherd "

before  their  eyes"  (ver.  20).  (vers.  22,  24).     4.  Has  a  solid  founda-
tion in  practical  piety.     "  Neither  shall

Ver.   19.   "  I  will  once  more  bring  they  defile  themselves  any  more  with

them  all  under  one  King  and   make  idols :    they  shall  walk  in  My  judg-

them  of  one  mind.     Religion  is  the  ments,  and  do  them"  (vers.  23,  24).

only  best  bond  of  affection.    The  very  5.  Secures  permanency  of  national  life.

heathens  honoured  the  primitive  Chris-  "  They  shall  dwell  in  the  land,  they

tians  for  their  unanimity.    As  the  cur-  and  their  children's  children  for  ever  "

tains  of  the  Tabernacle  were  joined  by  (ver.  25).
loops,  so  were  they  by  love ;   and  as

the  stones  of  the  Temple  were  so  closely  Ver.  22.  "  Politically  speaking,  they

cemented  together   that  they  seemed  never  had  a  king  from  that  day  to  this,

to  be  but  one  stone,  so  was  it  among  and  the  grand  junction  and  government

them.     Neither  need  we  wonder,  since  spoken  of  here  must  refer  to  another

Christ's  Church  is  but  one ;  neither  is  time — to  that  in  which  they  shall  be

there  any  such  oneness  or  entireness  brought  into  the  Christian  Church  with

anywhere  as  among  the  saints.    Other  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles,  when  Jesas,

societies  are  but  as  the  clay  in  the  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,

toes  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  image;  tbay  shall  rule  over  them." — A,  Clarke,
404


EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEEIEL,


OHAP.  XXXVII.


Ver.  23.  "  Idolatry  is  a  very  defiling
Bin,  and  the  Jews  in  both  kingdoms
were  exceedingly  addicted  to  it,  perti-
nacious in  it,  to  the  utter  ruin  of  both
kingdoms  ;  but  after  the  return  from
Babylonish  captivity,  we  find  nowhere
that  they  fell  into  idolatry. ** — Pooh

Ver.  24.  "No  Christian  is  a  bad
man,  unless  he  be  a  counterfeit." —
Athenagm'as,

Vers.  26-28.  The  Presence  of  God
with  His  People  —  1.  Guaranteed  by
covenant  relationship.  "I  will  make  a
covenant  of  peace  with  tliem  :  I  will
be  their  God,  aiul  they  shall  be  My
people"  (vers.  26,  27).  2.  An  assur-
ance of  stability  and  increase.  *'  I  will
})lace  them  and  multiply  them"  (ver.
26).  3.  A  motive  for  loftiest  worship.
"I  will  set  My  sanctuary  in  the  midst
of  them  :  My  tabernacle  shall  be  with
them"  (vers.  26,  27).  4.  A  testimony
to  the  Divine  faithfulness,  "The  heathen
shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify
Israel"  (ver.  28).

Ver.  26.  "*It  shall  be  an  everlast-
ing covenant  with  them,'  may  be  fitly
explained  of  the  Gospel,  being  such  a
covenant  as  shall  never  be  abolished
or  give  way  to  any  new  dispensation.
It  is  certain  that  the  ex{)ression,  *  a
covenant  of  peace,*  could  not  at  all
agree  with  the  ancient  covenant;  for
when  was  there  an  age,  half  an  age,
or  twenty  years'  peace  in  Israel  1  Tlie
whole  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  is
nothing  more  than  a  recital  of  wars
and  continual  divisions.  And  if  we
understand  it  of  peace  between  God
and  His  people,  where  shall  we  find
this  people  faitli fully  attached  to  the
Lord  during  one  century  only?  We
have  only  to  open  the  books  of  the
prophets  and  the  other  sacred  records
to  remark  their  infidelities  and  ])er-
petual  rebellions  against  God.  This
expression,  therefore,  can  only  respect
the  new  covenant  whereof  Jesus  Christ,
the  Prince  of  Peace,  is  the  Mediator,
and  who  gives  us  that  true  peace  which
surpasses  all  conceptions." — Benson.


—  "  In  closing  this  section,  we  pre-
sent a  brief  outline  of  the  view  that
has  been  taken  of  the  prophecies
contained  in  the  three  closely  related
chapters,  xxxiv.,  xxxv.,  xxxvii.,  and
which  in  substance  applies  equally  to
many  other  portions  of  the  prophetical
Scriptures.  1.  They  were  originally
given  to  revive  and  animate  the  hearts
of  God's  covenant-people,  by  holding
out  to  them  the  assured  prospect  of  a
reversion  from  the  present  evil,  and
their  still  certain  destination  in  God's
purpose  to  the  highest  and  most
honourable  place  on  the  earth.  2.
It  was  the  duty  of  those  to  whom
such  prophecies  were  delivered  at  once
to  believe  the  word  spoken  to  them,
and  apply  themselves  in  earnest  to  do
what  was  needed  to  secure  its  accom-
plishment. 3.  But  there  being  mani-
festly ideal  features  introduced  into
the  delineation,  clearly  betokens  a
kind  and  degree  of  blessing  which
could  not  have  been  completely  ful-
filled under  the  old  covenant.  4.  The
new  things  thus  to  be  looked  for  in
the  future  could  only  meet  with  their
full  and  adequate  accomplishment  in
Christ,  who  is  certainly  the  David  of
tne  promise.  5.  Therefore,  in  form-
ing one's  conceptions  now  of  the  real
import  of  such  prophecies,  we  must
throw  ourselves  back  upon  the  nar-
rower and  more  imperfect  relations
amid  which  they  were  written,  and
thence  judge  of  what  is  still  to  come.
Those  who  would  find  a  literal  Israel
and  a  non-literal  David,  or  a  literal
restoration  in  Christian  times,  and  a
non-literal  Tal)ernacle  and  ritual  of
worship,  arbitrarily  confound  together
things  dissimilar  and  incongruous,  and
render  certainty  of  interpretation  abso-
lutely impossible.  6.  The  view  thus
given  is  confirmed  by  the  reproduction
of  some  of  these  prophecies  in  the  field
of  the  New  Testament  Church,  set
free,  as  was  expected,  from  the  out-
ward distinctions  and  limits  of  the
Old.  7.  The  common  interpretation
which  understands  Christ  by  David,
and  takes  all  the  rest  literally,  must
inevitably  tend  to  justify  the  Jew  in
his  unbelief." — Fairbairn.

405


CHAP.  XXXVIII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


The  Warlike  Assault  of  Gog,  and  its  Repulse.    (Chap,  xxxviii.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  2.
"  Gog."    **  An  ideal  name  ;  it  is  simply
the  root  of  Magog,  the  only  related
name  known  to  history.     The  whole
prophecy  demands  a  non-literal  inter-
pretation.     The   prophetical   delinea-
tions of  the  Divine  principles  of  govern-
ment   are    thrown    into   the  familiar
forms  of  Old  Testament  relations.    The
final  triumph  of  Messiah's  truth  over
the  most  distant  and  barbarous  nations
is  represented  as  a  literal  conflict  on
a  gigantic  scale,  Israel  being  the  battle-
field, ending  in  the  complete  triumph
of  Israel's  anointed  King,  the  Saviour
of   the    world.      It   is    a   prophetical
parable,  in  which  every  trait  in  the
delineation  is  full  of  important  mean-
ing, only  couched  in  the  language  of
a   symbolical  representation.      While
the  vision  respecting  Gog  and  Magog
in  the  Apocalypse  (chap,  xx.)  may  be
regarded  in  substance  a  reannounce-
ment  of  the   prophecy  before   us,   it
does  not  follow  that  the  prophecy  in
the  Apocalypse  has  exactly  the  same
compass  as  in  Ezekiel.     In  each  case
alike   the   vision    is    appropriated    to
describe    the    final    workings   of   the
world's   evil,   and   its   results  in  con-
nection  with   the   kingdom  of  God ;
only,  the  starting-point  is  placed  farther
in  advance  in  the  one  case  than  in  the
other.     Therefore,  as  found  in  Ezekiel,
it  can  throw  no  light  on  the  chrono-
logical   arrangement    of    the    Apoca-
lypse."— Fairbairn.     *' Chief  prince  of
Meshech  and  Tubal"     "  Eosh,"  trans-
lated chief,  is  taken  as  a  proper  name
by  some,  and  probably  refers  to  the
Russi,  a  people  from  whom  the  modern
Russians  derive  their  name.     Schrader
accepts   Magog  as  equivalent  to  Scy-
thians.     Tubal  =  Tabal,  according  to
him,  bordered  on  Cilicia,  and  seems
to   have    been   what   was    afterwards
Cappadocia.     It  was  famous  for  great
horses.    Meshech  he  regards  as  having
lain  north-east  of  Cappadocia  in  Lower
Armenia.     Magog  was  Gog's  original
kingdom,    though    he    acquired    the
mastery    over    Meshech    and    Tubal,
406


and    so   might   be   called  their  chief

p'ince,

Ver.  3.  "I  am  against  thee,  0  Gog,
the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and
Tubal."  His  high-sounding  titles  are
repeated,  to  imply  the  haughty  self-
confidence  of  the  invader  as  invincible,

Ver.  4.  "I  will  turn  thee  back" —

"  as  a  refractory  wild  beast  which
thinks  to  take  its  own  way,  but  is  bent
by  a  superior  power  to  turn  on  a  course
which  must  end  in  its  destruction.
Satan  shall  be  by  overruling  Provi-
dence permitted  to  deceive  them  to
their  ruin  (Rev.  xx.  7,  8)." — Fausset
**  It  is  significant  that  the  irruption  of
Gog  is  here  and  in  what  follows  re-
ferred to  Jehovah.  He  means  to  march
against  Jehovah,  but  the  latter  has
him  in  tow — he  must  march  whither
He  will  to  his  own  destruction,  as  in
former  times  Pharaoh  did  not  thwart
the  God  of  Israel  when  he  refused  to
let  His  people  go,  but  acted  so  because
Jehovah  Himself  had  hardened  his
heart  to  plunge  him  into  destruction."
— Hengstenherg.  "  And  put  hooks  into
thy  jaws" — rings  in  tliy  jaws;  the
rings  which  are  put  in  the  most
tender  parts  of  intractable  animals  on
which  to  fasten  the  bridle  or  reins
(chaps,  xix.  4,  xxix.  4 ;  2  Kings  xix.
28).  "Horses  and  horsemen"  —  a
decidedly  Scythian  trait,  for  the  rich-
ness in  horses  of  these  hordes,  most
equestrian  tribes,  was  already  known
to  Herodotus.  "  Clothed  with  all  sorts
of  armour" — "clothed  with  splendour,
an  Assyrian  element  introduced  :  thus
tlie  figure  of  Gog  is  enlarged." — Lange.

Ver.  5.  "Persia,  Ethiopia,  and  Libya,*

or  Phut.  "  These  are  in  the  farthest
south  from  Babylon,  where  Ezekiel
lived.  The  Asiatic  Gush  or  Ethiopia
lay  in  Central  and  Northern  Babylon.
Phut  was  the  name,  according  to  Ebers^
of  some  wandering  tribes  of  Arabia.
Sayce  thinks  Pliut  was  the  Somali
country  in  Eastern  Africa." — Geikie.


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XXXTIIL


Ver.  6.  "Gomer"— the  Celtic  Cim-
merians of  Crim-Tartary,  * '  Togarmah  "
— "the  Armenians  of  the  Caucasus,
south  of  Iberia.  A  pictorial  and  mani-
festly symbolical  grouping  of  nations.
There  is  no  impossibility  in  the  con-
.  nection  of  nations  so  distant  from  one
another.  The  anti-Chaldaic  coalition,
which  the  prophet  himself  had  wit-
nessed, actually  extended  from  Ethiopia
to  Persia.  The  impossible  lies  rather
in  this,  that  all  these  nations  are  to
co-operate  at  a  definite  time  against  the
petty  Palestine." — Hengstenherg,  &c.

Ver.  7.  "  Be  thou  prepared."  "Irony.
Prepare  thee  and  all  thine  with  all
needful  accoutrements  for  war,  that  ye
may  perish  together  ! " — Fausset

Ver.  8.  "After  many  days  thou
shalt  be  visited"  (Isa.  xxiv.  22,  xxix.
6).  Gog  meant  to  visit  the  people
of  God,  but  in  reality  he  is  himself
visited.  It  was  God  who  led  him  in
order  to  prepare  him  for  his  downfall.
It  is  very  consolatory  to  the  Church
that  God  not  merely  conquers  its
enemies,  that  even  their  hostile  under-
taking is  under  His  guidance,  that
they  move  not  hand  nor  foot  but  at
His  command.  "  In  the  latter  years  "
— "  at  the  end  of  the  years.  This
indicates  that  the  catastrophe  belongs
to  a  quite  new  order  of  things — the
Messianic  epoch," — Hengstenherg.

Ver.  9.  "Thou  shalt  ascend  and
come  like  a  storm— like  a  cloud  to
cover  the  land."  "  The  cavalry  of  the
Tanjou  frequently  consisted  of  two  or
three  hundred  thousand  men,  formid-
able by  the  matchless  dexterity  with
which  they  managed  their  bows  and
their  horses,  by  their  hardy  patience
in  supporting  the  inclemency  of  the
weather;  unchecked  by  torrents  or  by
precipices,  by  the  deepest  rivers  or  by
the  most  lofty  mountains,  they  spread
themselves  over  the  face  of  the  country
and  overthrew  all  who  opposed  them.'*
— Gibbon,

Ver.  10.  "  Thou  shalt  think  an  evil
thought " — conceive  a  mischievous  pur-


pose, as  to  attacking  God's  people  in
their  defenceless  state.

Ver.  11.  "I  will  go  up  to  the  land
of  unwalled  villages,  to  them  that
dwell  safely."  Tiie  towns  lie  open,
in  fancied  security,  the  prize  of  a
siidden  attack.

Ver  12.  "That  dwell  in  the  midst
of  the  land  " — "  the  navel  of  the  land,
not  physically  but  morally;  a  central
position  for  being  a  blessing  to  the
world.  The  literal  sense,  'navel,'  seems
to  point  to  the  fact  of  its  being  the
moral  centre  of  the  world,  not  to  its
moral  eminence  (chap.  v.  5)." — Fausset,

Ver.  13.  "Sheha  and  Dedan  and
the  merchants  of  Tarshish" — "the
Arabian  nations  Sheba  and  Dedan
as  representatives  of  the  land-trade,
and  Tarshish  of  the  sea-trade.  Repre-
sentatives of  that  portion  of  the  world
who,  though  they  are  not  disposed  to
take  any  active  part  against  the  cause
of  God,  are  well  pleased  to  see  others
do  it.  This  worldly  feeling  makes
them  disrelish  the  truth,  and  they  are
ready  to  cheer  on  those  who  would
make  a  spoil  of  its  defenders." — Fair-
bairn.

Ver.  15.  "All  of  them  riding  upon
horses."  It  is  related  of  the  Scythians
that  they  eat,  drink,  and  sleep  in  the
saddle.

Ver.  16.  "When  I  shall  be  sancti-
fied in  thee,  0  Gog" — when  God  dis-
plays His  incomparable  glory  in  his
punishment.

Ver.  17.  "Art  thou  he  of  whom  I
have  spoken  in  old  time  by  My  ser-
vants the  prophets  of  Israel?"    "  Gog

and  Magog  are  here  identified  with
the  enemies  spoken  of  in  other  pro-
phecies (Num.  xxiv.  17-24;  Isa.  xxvii.
1 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  20,  21 ;  Jer.  xxx.  23,  24 ;
Joel  iii.  2  ;  Micah  v.  5,  6 ;  Isa.  xiv.  12-
14,  lix.  19).  God  is  represented  as
addressing  Gog  at  the  time  of  his
assault ;  therefore  the  old  time  is  the
time  long  prior  when  Ezekiel  uttered

407


OHAP.  xxxvni.  nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


these  prophecies  ;  so  he  also,  as  well  as  tions  come  upon  the  sense  like  a  uni-

Daniel  (xi.)  and  Zechariah  (xiv.),  are  versal  judgment." — Hengstenherg.
included  among  the  prophets  of  Israel

here." — Fausset.  Ver.  21.  "  Every  man's  sword  shall

be  against  his  brother."     One  great

Ver.  18.   "My  fury  shall  come  up  means  by  which  God  sweeps  away  the

in  My  face  " — literally,  into  My  nose  ;  enemies  of  the   king   is  the  internal

in  Hebrew  the   idiomatic   expression  discord,  for   which    He   presents   the

for   anger,  as  men  in  anger   breathe  natural  occasions.     The  community  of

strongly  through  the  nostrils.  hatred    can    scarcely    offer    successful

resistance  to  these  (see  historical  ex-

Ver.  20.  "All  shall  shake  at  My  ample,  2  Chron.  xx.).
presence."    "An  earthquake,  the  figure

of  a  great  annihilating  catastrophe  in  Ver.  22.  "With   pestilence,  blood,

the  human  world,  in  which  all   has  hail,  fire,  and  brimstone."    The  colours

the   feeling  as  if  the  earth  were  dis-  of  the  picture  are  partly  taken  from

solving.     The  catastrophe  affects  only  the  Egyptian  plagues,   and   from  the

the  enemies  of  God's  people ;  but  it  is  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,
so  dreadful  that  the  whole  world  seems

to  come  to  an  end — that  all  that  lives  Ver.  23.  "  Thus  will  I  magnify  My-
on  earth  is  felt  to  be  affected  by  it ;  self."  The  destruction  is  effected  by
every  high  thing  is  cast  to  the  ground  an  intervention  of  Jehovah,  His  fight-
without  discriminating  whether  it  be-  ing  for  His  people,  who  are  small
longs  to  the  enemy  or  not.  All  terrible  compared  to  the  greatness  of  Gog
particular  judgments  in  their  opera-  (ver.  15).

HOMILETIGS.

The  Fierce  Onslaught  of  the  Enemies  of  the  Truth.

(Vers.  1-23.)

The  beautiful  picture  of  tranquil  prosperity  depicted  in  the  close  of  the  last
chapter  would  be  difficult  for  the  captive  Jews  to  realise,  unless  there  was  the
assurance  of  protection  from  hostile  attacks  like  those  which  had  brought  them
to  their  present  deplorable  condition.  What  avails  it,  they  cry,  even  if  we
are  restored  1  The  heathen  power  still  predominates,  and  we  shall  be  crushed
back  again  into  irretrievable  ruin.  The  wild,  savage  races  of  Scythia  had
spread  terror  over  all  Western  Asia  in  the  days  of  Josiah,  and  were  still
remembered  with  drend.  Against  such  desponding  thoughts  the  prophet  here
offers  comfort.  The  heathen  nations  as  a  whole,  in  their  opposition  to  the
kingdom  of  God,  are  represented  under  the  figure  of  a  great  invasion  of  the
Holy  Land  by  the  Scythian  forces.  All  the  battles  which  restored  Israel  has
to  wage  are  united  in  one  great  battle.  He  who  would  lead  his  people  out  of
cnptivity  would  be  their  omnipotent  defender,  the  foe  would  be  triumphantly
vanquished,  and  Israel,  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  finally  delivered  from
all  fear,  would  enter  on  a  period  of  temporal  and  spiritual  ])rosperity.  The
descriptions  of  the  chapter  illustrate  the  fierce  onslaught  of  the  enemies  of  the
Truth.     Observe —

I.  That  the  enemies  of  the  Truth  are  rallied  and  commanded  by  a  leader
of  conspicuous  ability  (vers.  2-7).  Gog,  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal
— an  ideal  character,  one  possessing  great  military  genius,  faculty  for  organisa-
tion, power  to  manoeuvre  vast  armies,  revelling  in  destruction,  and  animated  by
a  mighty  hatred  to  the  good.  Gog's  forces  are  composed  of  diverse  nationalities,
408


no  MI  LET  10  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  chap,  xxxvm.


extending  over  a  wide  area  (vers.  5,  6),  and  [)resent  an  imposing  and  threatening
aspect  (vers.  4,  7).  The  invasion  and  overthrow  of  the  Chaldeans,  the  conflict
of  the  Maccabees  with  Antiochus  E[)iphanes,  the  temporary  successes  and  defeat
of  the  Turks — to  each  of  whicli  historical  events  some  interpreters  would  limit
the  application  of  the  prophecy — were  but  feeble  prototypes  of  a  coming  struggle
with  a  powerful  embodied  Antichrist.  Sin  is  fruitful  in  breeding  formidable
confederacies,  and  never  lacks  a  leader.  The  people  of  God  have  often  to
complain  with  the  Psalmist — **  How  are  they  increased  that  trouble  me  ?  Many
are  tliey  that  rise  up  against  me  "  (Ps.  iii.  1).

II.  That  the  enemies  of  the  Truth  are  fertile  in  plots  to  work  mischief
(vers.  10-12).  "Thou  shalt  think  an  evil  thought"  (ver.  10).  Here  is  a  land
defenceless,  "  dwelling  without  walls,  and  having  neither  bars  nor  gates,"  its
people  inoff'ensive,  quietly  pursuing  their  avocations  in  fancied  security ;  their
" cattle  and  goods"  are  increasing,  and  they  have  no  means  of  off'ering  resistance.
Let  us  pick  a  quarrel  with  them,  and  "take  a  spoil"  (ver.  12).  It  is  true
they  have  done  us  no  harm,  nor  are  likely  to  do  ;  but  what  of  that  %  It  is
enough  that  they  love  the  truth  that  we  hate,  and  will  become  an  easy  prey  to
our  superior  force.  If  we  yield  to  the  suggestions  of  an  evil  heart,  we  trample
down  the  laws  of  justice  and  equity,  and  can  readily  concert  a  plan  of  wholesale
robbery  and  crime.  The  boldest  highwayman  or  cattle-riever  will  not  go  more
directly  to  his  mark  than  we.

III.  That  there  is  a  class  of  persons  ever  ready  to  make  gain  out  of  the
havoc  created  by  the  enemies  of  the  Truth  (ver.  13).  The  eager  merchants  of
Tarshish  are  referred  to  as  young  lions  because  of  their  well-known  ferocity.
There  is  little  room  for  gentleness  and  pity  in  the  breast  of  the  unscrupulous
trader.  Where  the  carrion  lies,  there  the  vultures  gather :  where  there  is  spoil,
the  traders.  Gain  is  often  made  out  of  the  misfortunes  and  sufi'erings  of  others.
Many  who  would  shrink  from  bringing  about  the  ruin  of  others  do  not  hesitate
to  make  all  possible  profit  out  of  the  ruin.  Looters,  "  the  snappers-up  of  uncon-
sidered trifles,"  hang  about  the  skirts  of  every  victorious  army.

IV.  That  the  onslaught  of  the  enemies  of  the  Truth  is  fierce  and  terrible
(vers.  8,  9,  14-17).  The  army  of  Gog  was  to  burst  upon  Israel  like  a  storm-
cloud,  enveloping  and  desolating  the  land.  In  all  ages  the  forces  of  unbelief
have  made  violent  attacks  upon  the  citadel  of  Divine  Truth  ;  and  there  have
been  times  when  it  seemed  as  if  the  foundations  had  been  shaken  and  the  fabric
must  fall  into  hopeless  ruin.  But  when  the  shock  has  spent  itself,  the  strong-
hold has  stood  forth  more  prominent  and  stable  than  before.  The  great  world-
crisis  is  yet  future.  A  time  is  coming  that  will  test  the  faith  of  the  most
stalwart.  Baffled  and  defeated  in  all  previous  attempts,  the  enemies  of  the
Truth  will  gather  up  and  concentrate  all  their  powers,  and  all  that  wily
diplomacy,  vindictive  hatred,  and  intensified  rage  can  do  will  be  combined  in
one  grand,  united,  final  eff'ort.     What  will  be  the  result  ?     Mark —

V.  That  the  most  formidable  onset  of  the  enemies  of  the  Truth  will  be
Divinely  opposed  (vers.  17-23).  1.  The  Divine  anger  will  he  roused  (vers.  17-19).
"  My  fury  shall  come  up  in  My  face  " — in  My  nostrils,  as  men  are  accustomed
to  show  anger  by  a  flushed  countenance  and  dilated  nostrils.  An  anthropo-
morphic representation  :  God  stooping  to  the  use  of  human  methods  of  thought
and  expression.  Injustice  and  cruelty  provoke  the  Divine  wrath ;  He  is  not  an
indifl'erent  spectator  of  the  oppressions  inflicted  upon  His  people.  "  When  the
great  day  of  His  wrath  is  come,  who  shall  be  able  to  stand  ?  "  (Rev.  vi.  17).
2.  The  Divine  power  will  employ  against  the  enemies  of  the  Truth  the  most  destructive
forces — earthquakes,   wars,  pestilence,  stoims  (vers.  19-22).     The  resources  of

409


CHAP.  XXXVTII.


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


the  universe  are  in  the  liands  of  God,  and  He  can  use  tliem  on  the  side  of
righteousness  and  in  the  punishment  of  tyranny  and  wrong.  Heaven  and  earth
are  armed  against  every  evil  work,  and  will  effectually  prevent  its  triumph.
3.  The  Divine  character  will  he  vindicated  in  taking  vengeance  on  the  enemies  of  the  Truth
(ver.  23).  God  will  be  known  and  His  honour  magnified  in  judgment  us  well  as
in  showing  mercy.  The  mightiest  army  is  impotent  before  His  avenging  sword.
The  defence  and  rescue  of  His  people  will  demonstrate  His  power,  His  faithful-
ness, and  His  justice.

Lessons. — 1.  Hatred  of  the  Truth  manifests  itself  in  violent  opposition.  2.  A
time  comes  in  the  life  of  every  man  when  he  must  take  sides  for  or  against  the  Truth,
3.  Evil  is  doomed  to  sniffer  terrible  defeat.  4.  2'he  resources  of  Omnijfotence  are  at
work  in  defence  of  the  Truth,


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Chaps,  xxviii.,  xxix.  '*The  last  con-
flict of  the  world  with  God,  and  the
complete  overthrow  of  the  former.
The  place  occupied  by  this  section
shows  that  it  refers  to  times  subse-
quent to  the  restoration  of  Israel.
Hitherto  the  prophecies  have  been
directed  against  the  more  immediate
neighbours  of  God's  people.  Their
fall  is  to  make  room  for  Israel's
triumph.  But  as  the  Church — the  true
Israel — waxes  stronger  and  stronger,
more  distant  nations  will  come  into
collision  and  must  be  overthrown  be-
fore the  triumph  is  complete.  Hence
the  present  prophecy  is  directed  against
peoples  dwelling  in  the  remote  regions
of  the  North.  From  this  quarter  had
come  the  terrible  invasion  of  the
Scythians,  who  had  possession  of  Asia
twenty-three  years,  and  in  the  course
of  this  time  they  had  certainly  over-
run Syria,  and  had  probably  made
their  ai)pearance  in  the  Holy  Land.
Some  have  thought  that  this  prophecy
is  directed  against  these  Scythians,
foretelling  their  fall,  like  that  of  the
other  invaders  of  the  land  of  Israel.
But  in  this  prophecy  there  is  little
distinctive  of  one  nation.  It  is  a
gathering  together  of  the  enemies  of
Jehovah  to  make  their  last  effort,  and
to  be  overthrown.  The  seer  passes
now  to  the  final  struggle  between  good
and  evil,  and  the  triumphant  establish-
ment of  the  Divine  rule.  It  is  the
same  struggle  which  is  depicted  in  the
Book  of  Revelation  (xx.  7-10),  where

410


St.  John  adopts  words  and  phrases
of  Ezekiel,  indicating  thereby  that  he
is  predicting  the  same  event  which
Ezekiel  had  foretold." — Speaker^ s  Com-
mentary.

Vers.  1-23.  **In  many  passages  of
Scripture  God  forewarns  the  Church
of  a  great  conspiracy,  headed  by  one
person,  about  to  be  made  against  God
and  His  Christ,  as  also  against  both
the  literal  and  the  spiritual  Israel  in
the  last  days.  As  Antiochus  fearfully
desolated  Judea  and  blasphemously
desecrated  the  Temple  of  God,  towards
the  close  of  Old  Testament  times,
so  Antichrist,  here  described  under
the  ideal  name  Gog,  and  his  godless
hosts  under  the  name  Magog,  shall
terribly  oppress  Israel  and  the  Church
of  Christ,  and  arrogate  to  himself
divine  honours,  towards  the  close  of
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  New
Testament  dispensation.  Haughty  and
blasphemous  self-confidence  shall  be
his  })rominent  characteristic.  His  im-
mense hordes  of  formidable  warriors
in  his  train,  seduced  by  Satan  to  their
debtruction,  shall  add  to  his  innate
presumption." — Fausset.

Vers.  1-13.  The  Audacity  of  Evil.

— 1.  Often  embodied  in  a  champion  of
distinguished  genius  (vers.  2,  3).  2.
Succeeds  in  organising  a  formidable
confederacy  (vers.  4-6).  3.  Is  blind
to  the  superiority  of  the  power  with
which  it  has  to  wrestle,  and  is  deaf


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEL


CHAP.  XXXVIII.


to  all  warnings  (vers.  7,  8).  i.  Ap-
parently overwhelming  in  its  attack
(ver.  9).  5.  Stimulated  by  its  own
wicked  devices  (ver.  10).  6.  Wantonly
assaults  the  inoffensive  and  defenceless
(vers.  11,  12).  7.  Is  applauded  by
those  who  hope  to  share  in  the  wreck-
age it  creates  (ver.  13).

Vers.  1-7.  The  Sufferings  of  God's
People.  "1.  After  prophecies  of  grace
and  mercy  come  tidings  of  afflictions
and  judgments  (ver.  2).  2.  The  great
princes  of  the  earth,  being  no  friends
to  the  Church  of  God,  have  God  for
their  enemy  (ver.  3).  3.  The  Lord  at
His  pleasure  can  bring  enemies  and
armies  upon  His  own  people  (ver.  4).
4.  The  Lord  can  easily  bring  men  to
do  His  work  and  service,  whatever  the
difficulty  or  danger  be  (ver.  4).  5.
From  all  quarters  of  the  world  there
are  enemies  ready  to  combine  and  act
with  Gog  and  Antichrist  against  the
Church,  the  Truth,  and  Christ  Him-
self (vers.  5,  6).  6.  The  enemies  of
the  Church  make  great  preparations
against  the  same  (ver.  7).  7.  Princei,
notwithstanding  all  their  preparations,
cannot  secure  themselves,  nor  those
under  their  command  (ver.  7)." — Green-
hill

Ver.  2.  "This  cannot  be  one  single
person,  or  one  only  prince,  though
like  enough  it  points  out  some  one
by  whom  the  troubles  foretold  were
begun ;  yet  the  successors  of  this  one,
whoever  he  was,  are  included  and
designed  by  this  Gog ;  nor  is  he  to  be
limited  to  one  certain  nation  that  he
was  king  of,  nor  yet  confined  to  one
age,  or  to  two  or  three.  Others  think
that  all  the  enemies  of  Israel,  in  all
quarters,  both  open  and  secret  enemies,
are  here  intended,  and  that  the  anti-
Christian  forces  and  combinations  are
what  the  prophet  foretells." — Pool.

Ver.  4.  "  I  will  turn  thee  back,  and
put  My  hook  into  thy  jaws  " — "  I  will
disai)pointall  thy  designs,  and  turn  thee
about  as  easily  as  a  fisherman  masters
a  great  fish,  when  he  has  once  fastened
the  hook  into  its  jaws." — Benson.


—  "I  will  place  rings  in  thy  jaws,"
"Gog  is  represented  as  an  unmanage-
able beast  which  is  compelled  to  follow
its  leader,  and  the  thought  is  thereby
expressed  that  Gog  is  compelled  to
obey  the  power  of  God  against  his
YfiW'—Keil,

Ver.  7.  "  God,  the  prophet,  and  the
Church  deride  this  mighty  preparation,
as  once  the  daughter  of  Zion  laughed
Sennacherib,  that  proud  Assyrian,  to
scorn,  and  the  scoff  is  doubled.  Such
a  mighty  army  will  need  great  maga-
zines and  granaries,  and  good  watches
and  guards,  for  their  marching  in  safety;
therefore,  awaken  thy  diligence,  let
nothing  be  wanting,  for,  0  Gog,  thou
wilt  find  I  am  against  thee,  saith  the
Lord."— Poo/.

Ver.  8.  God  Slow  to  Punish.     "  1.

God  bears  with  the  worst  of  men  a
long  time.  *  After  many  days.*  2.
Though  wicked  men  be  spared  long,
yet  at  last  they  shall  suffer.  *Thou
shalt  be  visited.' " — Greenhill.

—  "  They  shall  dwell  safely."  "This
began  to  be  fulfilled  when,  for  three
hundred  and  eighty  years  after  their
return,  Israel  lived  tolerably  quiet  :
afterwards  Antiochus  vexed  them  and
did  much  damage.  What  remains  of
longer  and  fuller  quiet  and  prosperity
after  the  slaying  of  Gog,  time  will  dis-
cover to  the  people  of  God,  whose  lot
it  will  be  to  stand  up  in  those  days." —
Pool

Ver.  9.  "  This  storm  is  violent,  with
confused,  tumultuous  noises  and  with
devastation,  as  the  word  implies  ;  and
come  as  a  storm — that  is,  as  dark,
as  large,  as  inevitable,  and  which  con-
tinueth  the  violent  waving  storm."  —
Pool

—  The  Adversities  of  the  Church.
"  1.  The  Church  and  people  of  God
are  subject  to  calamities.  The  Church
is  oft  afflicted  and  tossed  with  tempest :
but  here  is  some  comfort  —  storms,
tempests,  and  clouds  last  not  long;  they
cease  after  a  little  time,  and  the  sun
shines  again.  2.  The  goodness  of  God
in  foretelling  the  Church  what  shall
come  upon  it :  storm,  clouds,  perplexity

411


O&AP.  tXXVllI.


BOMlLETtC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


— not  to  discourage  His  people,  but
to  awaken  them  to  })rayer,  holiness  of
life,  and  living  by  faith." — Greenhill,

—  "  In  the  world  we  have  anguish
to  the  end  ;  before  we  expect  it,  a
itorm  arises  and  heaven  and  earth
seem  hid  from  our  eyes.  Our  security
is  peace  with  God  :  Christians  wish
indeed  peace  with  all  men,  but  the
world  keeps  no  peace  with  them.
Such  is  its  turbulence,  that  it  has  no
rest ;  such  its  darkness,  that  it  would
like  to  shut  out  all  light,  even  God
Himself  from  being  our  lamp.  —  If
great  armies  resemble  clouds,  how  soon
can  a  wind  disperse  them  !  (2  Kings
xix.  35)." — Lange.

Vers.  10-13.  God's  Knowledge  of
the  Tactics  of  the  Wicked.     "  1.  God

foreknows  and  determines  things  to
come,  even  those  things  that  seem
most  free  and  contingent,  as  the
thoughts   of  men's   hearts  (ver,   10).

2.  God  doth  not  only  foreknow  but
prediscovers  the  purposes,  counsels,
and  plots  of  His  Church's  enemies,  to
evidence  His  care  thereof  (ver.  10,  11).

3.  The  enemies  of  the  Church  do  watch
and  take  advantage  against  the  Church :
tliey  wait  for  and  seek  occasions  to  ruin
the  same  (vers.  11,  12).  4.  Wicked
ones  will  undertake  great  matters  and
venture  their  lives  to  satisfy  their  lusts
(ver.  12).  5.  The  wicked  confederate
and  combine  together  to  mischief  the
Church  of  God  (ver.  13).  Wicked
men  are  thorns,  and  they  cleave  to-
gether to  scratch  and  vex  the  right-
eous. " — GreenhilL

Ver.  10.  A  Wicked  Brain.  1.  A
willing  ally  of  a  wicked  heart.  2.
Fertile  in  plotting  mischief.  3.  Its
only  conception  of  justice  is  how  it
may  most  cleverly  circumvent  it.  4.
Is  indifferent  to  the  suflferings  its
schemings  may  occasion  others.  5.  Is
often  deluded  by  its  own  smartness.

—  *'  Thus  God  is  a  heart-searciier ;
He  knows  the  evil  purpose  in  the  man
himself." — Starch,

Vers.  12, 13.  **  A  covetous  desire  for
the  possessions  of  the  people  of  God
412


and  envy  at  their  exalted  position  in
the  centre  of  the  world  are  the  motives
by  which  Gog  is  impelled  to  enter
upon  his  predatory  expedition  against
the  people  living  in  the  depth  of"  peace.
This  covetousness  is  so  great,  that  even
the  rich  trading  populations  of  Sabea,
Dedan,  and  Tarsliisii  perceive  it,  and
declare  that  it  is  this  alone  which  has
determined  Gog  to  undertake  his  ex-
pedition. Their  words  give  promi-
nence to  the  obvious  thirst  for  booty
which  characterises  the  multitude  led
by  Gog."— Zei/.

Ver.  12.  "  How  good  it  is  to  possess
the  goods  which  cannot  be  stolen — the
joy  which  no  one  shall  take  from  us  !
— To  the  end  the  world  seeks  only  the
temporal,  the  earthly." — Lange,

Ver.  13.  **The  merchants  of  Tarshish
— the  inhabitants  of  the  sea-coast  west-
ward, and  Magog  north.  Robbers  by
land  on  three  sides,  pirates  by  sea  on
the  fourth,  in  a  confederacy  to  spoil  the
Church  of  God. "—PooZ.

—  "It  is  the  tendency  of  a  gain-
seeking  spirit  to  look  to  no  other
considerations  but  its  own  selfish  and
worldly  interests.  Gain  is  the  godli-
ness of  the  carnal  mind.  Whatever
promotes  directly  or  indirectly  the
acquisition  of  silver,  gold,  cattle,  and
goods  is  the  uppermost  thought;  and
whilst,  perhaps,  the  more  quietly  dis-
posed of  the  worldly  shrink  from
an  active  participation  in  unjust  and
ungodly  invasions,  yet  they  are  well
pleased  at  such  wars  when  seeming  to
be  conducive  to  their  own  gains,  and
will  not  scruple  to  traffic  in  the  un-
hallowed spoils,  at  the  sacrifice  of
conscience  and  the  will  of  God," —
Fausset,

Vers.  14-23.  The  Power  of  Evil— 1.

Is  imposing  in  its  battle-march  (vers.
14-16).  2.  Is  allured  and  limited  by
the  power  it  opposes  (vers.  16,  17).
3.  Excites  the  Divine  wrath  (vers.  18,
19).  4.  The  forces  of  heaven  and
earth  combine  in  its  defeat  (vers.  20-
22).  5.  Its  defeat  a  signal  vindication
of  the  Divine  character  (ver.  23).


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  xxxvnt


Vers.    14-16.   The   Divine   Protec-  —  The    Credibility    of   Prophecy,

tion.     "1.  When  God's  people  are  in  "1.  The   Lord    doth    infallibly  know

Canaan  they  have  safety  (ver.  14).     2.  things  to  come.     2.  The  prophets  de-

Those  who  design  and  attempt  mis-  livered   many  things  which  were  not

chief  against  the  people  of  God  shall  recorded.     3.  Those  whom  God  sends

experimentally  know  that  God  is  their  to  make  known  His  mind  to  men,  He

Protector  and  the  Revenger  of  their  owns,  honours,  and  protects.     4.  It  is

wrongs  (ver.  14).     3.  The  secret  plots  not  an  accidental  or  casual  thing  that

and  deep  designs  of  men   at  length  enemies  do  come  against  the  Church."

break   out  into  action   (ver.   15).     4.  — Greenhill.

The  great  enemies  of  the  Church  have  —  Everything  has  been  told  before  :

many  helpers  and  adherents  fitted  to  they  who  hold  to  the  Word  have  to

further  their  wicked  designs  (ver.  15).  fear  no  surprises.
5.  Though  all  people  and  lands  in  the

world  be  the  Lord's,  yet  some  people  Vers.     18-22.    God's     Proceedings

and  lands  are  His  in  a  more  peculiar  against    His    Enemies.       '*  1.    When

manner  (ver.  16).     6.  God  takes  occa-  wicked  men  are  plotting  and  attempt-

sion,  from  the  attempts  of  the  wicked,  to  ing   the   ruin   of   the   Church,    God's

execute  His  just  judgments  upon  them,  wrath  is  kindled  against  them  (ver.

and  so  to  get  glory  to  His  name  even  18).      2.  When   mischief  is  intended

from  heathens  (ver.  16)." — Greenhill,  against  God's   people.   His   love   and

indignation  are  manifested :   His  love

Ver.  14.   "*  Prophesy  and  say  unto  to  His  people.  His  indignation  towards

Gog.'     Say  it  over  again,  that  it  may  their  enemies  (vers.  18,  19).     3.  The

be    the    better    considered    for    the  judgments  of  God  are  dreadful;  they

streiigthenins:  of  the  hands  and  hearts  affect  all  creatures — the  fishes  of  the

of  My  people." — Trapp.  sea,  the  fowls  of  heaven,  the  beasts

of  the  field,  all  that  creeps  upon  the

Ver.  16.  "Gog  gathers  all  from  all  earth:    all    men   on  the  face  of  the

quarters  to  be  with  him  to  take  the  earth  shall  sliake ;   mountains,  rocks,

spoil ;   God  brings  them  together  to  walls,  shall  fall  (ver.  20).     4.  God  can

do  that  among  them  which  may  make  easily  raise  forces  against  His  and  the

the  heathen  see  and  own   His  hand.  Church's  enemies ;  He  can  do  it  with-

They  do  it  in  proud  contemiit  of  God  out   any  trouble   (vers.    21,   22).      6.

and  His  people;  but  God  doth  it  to  As  God  can  easily  gather  armies  for

glorify  His  own  name  and  to  vindicate  the  good  of  His  Church,  so  He  can  as

His  people." — Pool.  easily  ruin  armies  which  are  against

His  Church :   He  can   mingle  a   per-

Ver.  17.  "*  By  My  servants  the  pro-  verse   spirit   among   them,  so   divide

phets   of  Israel.*     Not   by  prognosti-  them  that  they  shall  execute  one  an-

cators    or    soothsayers,   but    by    true  other  (ver.  21).    6.  God  hath  a  variety

prophets.     Now,  though  they  had  not  of  means  and  ways  whereby  to  destroy

foretold   this  when   Ezekiel  did,   yet  armies  and  punish  enemies  (ver.  22).

when  the  question  shall  be  asked  by  7.  Those  who  join  with  great  ones  in

the  Church,  it  will  be  so  many  hun-  wicked  enterprises  must  look  to  suffer

dreds  of  years  past,  it  may  well  refer  grievous  things  with  them.*' — Greenhill,
to  these  prophets.     Besides,  Dan.  xi. ;

Zech.  xiv. ;  Isa.  xxvi.  20,  21,  xxvii.  1 ;  Ver.  18.  "Fury  is  the  glow  which

Jer.  XXX.  23,  24;  Joel  iii.  1,  15,  16;  bursts  forth  in  the  breathing  of  wrath.

Micah  V.  5,  6,  are  prophets  cited  as  The  wrath  of  God  is  the  holy  jealousy

those  who  spake  of  this  mighty  enemy  with  which  He,  for  the  protection  ot

and  his  coming,  and  from  which  an  His  kingdom — the  kingdom  of  peace

understanding  reader  may  soon  collect  — dashes  down  the  wicked  ;  and  this

that  this  foe  was  intended  as  well  as  wrath    of   eternal    protecting   love   is

Others  in  those  places." — Pod.  fearful." — Schmieder,

413


CRAP.  XXXIX.


nOMlLETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEl.


Vers.  19-23.  "The  visible  creation
takes  part  in  this  great  catastrophe.
A  dreadful  scene  of  confusion  ensues,
and  ruin  bursts  forth  from  every  side
upon  the  head  of  sinners.  In  fierce
bewilderment  they  draw  their  swords
one  upon  another.  All  conceivable
plagues  work  togetlier  for  their  de-
struction, and  so  Jehovah  is  mani-
fested as  the  holy  God." — Hdvernick.

Ver.  20.  "Here  is  a  lofty  strain
indeed,  giving  us  the  description  of
the  tokens  of  God's  presence  against
His  enemies ;  the  effects  of  His  dis-
pleasure against  them  are  seen  in  all
the  creatures,  sensible  that  their  Maker
is  angry,  though  they  know  not  with
whom  or  for  what.  If  to  be  inter-
preted literally,  we  shall  find  some
Scripture  parallels  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  16,  19;
xxix.  6,  6).  But  men,  apprehensive
of  God's  displeasure  and  shaken  with
their  own  guilt,  shall  much  more  shake.
But  I  think  it  is  a  very  elegant  allusive
description   of  those  strange  troubles


and  consternation  of  men*s  minds  at
that  day,  and  so  metaphorically  to  be
understood." — Pool,

Ver.  23.  "  Thus  undeniably  prove
that  I  am  the  mighty,  just,  faithful,
wise,  holy,  and  merciful  God  toward
My  people ;  and  that  I  am  the  great,
just,  and  terrible  One  against  Mine
and  My  Church's  enemies." — Pool.

—  *'  This  end  God  proposeth  to
Himself  in  all  His  works;  and  well
He  may,  since  He  hath  none  higher
than  Himself  to  whom  to  have  respect.
And  let  all  this  that  hath  been  said
comfort  us  against  the  rage  and  good
success,  if  any  such  yet  be,  of  the
anti- Christian  rout,  since  these  are
but — as  was  once  said  of  decaying
Carthage — the  last  sprunts  and  bites
of  dying  wild  beasts." — Trapp.

—  "  The  conclusion  is,  that  the  re-
sult of  everything  is  to  magnify  and
sanctify  God.  We  ought,  therefore,
to  begin  all  our  affairs  with  God," —
Lange,


The  Destruction  of  Gog  and  his  Vast  Armies.    (Chap,  xxxix.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  2.
"I  will  leave  but  the  sixth  part  of
thee  " — I  will  six  thee  ;  i.e.,  afflict  thee
with  six  plagues — pestilence,  blood,
overflowing  rain,  hailstones,  fire,  brim-
stone (chap,  xxxviii.  22).  Or,  draw
thee  back  with  a  hook  of  six  teeth
(chap,  xxxviii.  4) — the  six  teeth  being
those  six  plagues.  Tlie  rendering  in
the  text  supposes  that  the  verb  is
derived  from  the  Hebrew  numeral  six;
but  this  rendering  is  not  recognised  by
the  LXX.  or  the  Vulgate.  The  verb
has  an  Ethiopic  root,  and  the  passage
should  be  rendered — 1  will  lead  thee
along — to  thy  ruin.

Ver.  3.  "  I  will  smite  thy  bow  out
of  thy  left  hand."  The  Scythians
were  renowned  as  archers.  The  left
hand  holds  the  bow,  the  right  bends
it  and  fits  on  the  arrow.  God  will
strike  the  weapons  out  of  his  hand,  so
that  he  shall  be  incapable  of  fighting.
**  Thou  Shalt  fall  upon  the  mountains
414


of  Israel"  The  scene  of  Israel's
preservation  shall  be  that  of  Gog's
destruction.

Ver.  6.  **  I  will  send  a  fire  among
them  that  dwell  in  the  isles."     The

judgment  described  in  chap,  xxxviii.
20  as  universal  is  here  extended  to
the  isles  to  show  that  it  should  fall
not  only  on  Gog  and  his  land,  but  on
those  who  share  his  feelings  of  hatred
and  opposition  to  the  kingdom  of
God,  and  who  had  perhaps  helped
Gog  witli  fleets  and  troops.

Ver.  7.  "I  will  not  let  them  pollute
My  holy  name  " — by  seeming  to  desert
My  people.  He  would  profane  His
name  if  He  were  to  abandon  His  people
continually  to  the  heathen  world.  The
revelation  of  holiness  in  Israel  pre-
cludes further  profanation  of  Jehovah  in
reference  to  Israel  among  the  heathen.

Ver.  8.  "  Behold  it  is  come,  it  is


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OHAP.  XXXIS.


done" — very  expressive,  denoting  the
absolute  certainty  of  the  event.  The
prophet  sets  it  down  as  already  past,
"as  It  is  the  nature  of  faith  to  see  that
which  is  not  as  if  it  already  existed.

Ver.  9.  "  They  shall  burn  them
with  fire  seven  years."  The  weapons
of  the  army  left  on  the  battlefield  shall
be  so  numerous  as  to  supply  fuel  for
the  people  of  the  land  for  seven  years.
Seven  years  is  a  hyperbolical  term  de-
rived from  the  intensive  significancy
of  the  number  in  Hebrew  usage  and
designed  to  express  a  very  long  time.
Seven  was  the  number  connected  with
the  cleansing  after  contact  with  the
dead  (Num.  xix.  11),  and  this  purifi-
cation of  the  land  by  the  clearance  of
the  heathenish  spoils  was  a  holy  work,
and  indicated  how  thorough  would  be
the  judgment  of  God  upon  His  enemies.

Ver.  11.  "I  will  give  unto  Gog  a
place  of  graves."  Gog  meant  to  bury
the  people  of  God  and  appropriate
their  land ;  but  he  is  buried  by  them,
and  receives  only  so  much  of  the  land
as  suffices  for  a  grave.  "  The  valley  of
the  passengers  on  the  east " — referring
to  Its  position  on  the  east  side  of  the
Dead  Sea,  along  which  lay  the  high-
road for  traffic  to  Petra  and  Ezion-
geber.  It  would  thus  be  notoriously
public,  and,  arresting  travellers  in  their
progress,  would  compel  them  to  reflect
on  the  signal  judgment  inflicted  on
the  enemies  of  the  covenant-people.
There  is  also,  as  is  common  in  Hebrew,
a  play  upon  words — there  were  pas-
sengers to  be  buried,  passengers  to  walk
over  their  graves,  passengers  to  bury
them  (ver.  15).  "It  shall  stop  the
noses  of  the  passengers  " — arrest  the
attention  and  impede  the  progress  of
the  passers  by  the  multitude  of  graves
and  the  stiong  odour  of  decay.  Their
graves  would  be  close  to  those  of
their  ancient  prototypes,  Sodom  and
Gomorrah  in  the  Dead  Sea,  both
alike  being  signal  instances  of  God's
judgments.

Ver.  14.  "  Men  of  continual  employ-
ment."    Literally,  men  of  continuance^


men  regularly  appointed  to  this  busi-
ness, to  ex[)ress  the  magnitude  of  the
work  and  the  systematic  way  in  which
it  is  performed.  "  After  the  end  of
seven  months  shall  they  search" — to
see  if  the  work  was  complete.

Ver.  16.  "Thus  shall  they  cleanse
the  land."  According  to  the  Mosaic
law,  a  dead  body  caused  a  pecuiar
defilement  to  all  with  which  it  came  in
contact.  So  that,  as  the  land  of  Israel
represents  fii^uratively  the  Church  of
Christ,  the  purification  of  that  land  is
a  proper  part  of  the  figure  to  indicate
such  a  sanctification  and  cleansing  of
His  Church  as  St.  I'aul  describes  in
Eph.  V.  26,  27.

Ver.  17.  "  Speak  to  every  feathered
fowl  and  every  beast ;  gather  your-
selves to  My  sacrifice."  This  l)old
imagery  is  quite  in  the  style  of  Eze-
kiel's  poetic  genius.  Tiie  invited
guests  are  represented  as  being  filled
not  only  with  the  flesh  of  the  victims
in  general,  but  with  that  of  the  horses
and  the  charioteers.  The  entire  pas-
sage is  strikingly  j)arallel  with  Rev.
xix.  17,  19.  Compare  also  Isa.  xviii,  6,
xxxiv.  6  ;  Zeph.  i.  7  ;  Mark  ix.  49.

Ver.  18.  "  Fatlings  of  Bashan  " —
often  applied  in  the  prophets  to  proud,
despotic,  wanton  enemies  of  God  and
His  people,  Bashan  being  renowned
for  its  fat  meadows.  Fatness  implies
prosperity,  which  often  makes  men
refractory  towards  God  (Deut.  xxxii.
14,  16).

Vers.  22,  23.  "  The  house  of  Israel
shall  know ;  and  the  heathen  shall
know."  The  terrible  judgment  upon
Gog  will  have  this  twofold  effect  as  a
revelation  of  the  glory  of  God — Israel
will  know  that  the  Lord  is,  and  will
continue  to  he,  its  God ;  and  the
heathen  will  know  that  He  gave  Israel
into  their  power  and  thrust  it  out  of
its  own  land,  not  from  weakness,  but
to  punish  it  for  its  faithless  apostasy,

Ver.  25.  "  And  have  mercy  on  the
whole  house  of  Israel."     The  restora-

415


e»Af.  XXXIX.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTART:  EZEKIEL.


tions  of  Israel  heretofore  have  been  had  yet  in  Canaan  their  home  and  in

partial ;  there  must  be  one  yet  future  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem  their  spiritual

that  is  to  be  universal  (Hos.  i.   11 ;  dwelling-place.
Rom.  xi.  26).

Ver.  29.   "I  have  poured  out  My

Ver.  26.  "  After  they  have  borne  Spirit."    Comp.  Joel  ii.  28  ;  Zech.  xii.

their  shame  " — after  tliey  shall  have  10  ;  Acts  ii.  17.     There  St.  Peter  dis-

borne  in  full  the  punishment  of  their  tinctly  appropriates  these  prophecies

sin  :  after  they  have  become  sensible  to  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit

of  their  guilt  and  ashamed  of  it  (chaps,  on    the    day   of   Pentecost,   and    the

XX.  43  ;  xxxvi.  31).  inauguration  of  the  Church  of  Christ

by  that  miraculous  event.      But  this

Ver.  28.  "  And  have  left  none  of  was  the  beginning  of  the  fulfilment  of

them  any  more  there."     After  the  fall  these  verses  of  the  prophets.      They

of  the  Chaldean  monarchy,  access  to  shall   find   their   consummation  when

their  native  land  was  free  to  all  Israel;  time  shall  be  no  more,
and  those  who  voluntarily  remained


HOMILETICS.
The  Signal  Defeat  of  the  Enemies  of  God*s  Peopul

(Vers.  1-29.)

«

In  this  chapter  we  have  a  prophetic  description  of  the  ultimate  fate  of  Gog,
the  ideal  impersonation  of  the  power  of  evil,  and  the  utter  destruction  of  his
vast  armies.  The  embattled  hosts  march  to  the  conflict  with  proud  ostentation
and  confident  ot  victory.  Their  swords  shall  soon  provide  a  banquet  for  the
birds  of  prey  that  hover  over  them,  and  for  the  wild  beasts  whose  hungry
growls  are  heard  around  them,  little  dreaming  that  the  stricken  bodies  of  the
invaders  must  furnish  the  feast.  An  unseen  and  irresistible  power  lures  them
on  to  their  ruin ;  they  are  smitten  with  paralysis,  their  weapons  drop  from  their
hands  and  cover  the  ground  like  corn  newly  cut  with  the  reaper;  they  perish
in  myriads  on  the  mountains  and  the  open  fields,  the  birds  and  beasts  are
summoned  to  gorge  themselves  on  the  human  carrion,  and  the  only  remnants  of
the  once  formidable  warriors  of  Gog  are  found  in  innumerable  graves.  In  this
boldly  conceived  vision  we  have  a  realistic  picture  of  the  final  and  utter  destruc-
tion of  all  the  enemies  of  God's  people.

I.  This  defeat  will  be  an  act  of  Divine  judgment  (vers.  1-7).  The  champions
of  evil  do  not  sufficiently  consider  what  is  involved  in  the  fact  that  God  is
against  them.  Little  do  they  know  about  the  infinite  resources  of  the  power
they  have  to  reckon  with.  They  see  in  the  people  of  God  only  the  apparently
helpless  victims  of  their  hatred  and  fury  :  they  know  not,  nor  do  they  care  to
know,  the  real  character  of  their  Almighty  Defender.  The  silence  of  God  they
mistake  for  indifference;  the  patience  of  God  they  misconstrue  into  weakness;
the  threatenings  of  God  are  meaningless  vauntings,  or  if  they  mean  anything,
they  apply  to  every  one  else  but  themselves  ;  their  attitude  and  spirit  is  a  com-
bination of  blasphemous  and  reckless  defiance.  God  is  slow  to  punish,  full  of
long-suffering  and  mercy,  careful  to  afford  ample  space  for  repentance  ;  and  yet
all  the  time  a  finely  attuned  ear  may  detect  the  Divine  refrain  rising  on  the  air,
already  palpitating  with  the  breath  of  coming  vengeance — "Shall  I  not  visit  for
these  things,  saith  the  Lord  ;  and  shall  not  My  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  nation
as  this  1 "  (Jer.  v.  9,  29 ;  ix.  9).  At  last  the  thunderbolt  crashes  out  of  the
416


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEU  chap,  xxxix.


gathering  clouds,  the  enemies  of  God  are  stricken  with  fear,  their  forces  routed,
and  all  are  involved  in  terrible  and  irrevocable  destruction.

II.  This  defeat  will  be  on  a  scale  of  unexampled  vastness.  This  is  evident —
1.  From  the  number  of  weapons  strewn  on  the  battlefield  (vers.  8-10).  2.
From  the  time  and  space  occupied  in  burying  the  slain  (vers.  11-16).  3.  From
the  greatness  of  the  feast  provided  for  the  birds  and  beasts  of  prey  (vers.  17-22).
Many  of  the  wars  of  history  were  waged  on  a  gigantic  scale,  and  the  wars  of
the  Jews  were  often  attended  with  great  slaughter.  The  two  rival  kingdoms
of  Judah  and  Israel  were  in  perpetual  feud  with  each  other,  and  there  were  few
wars  in  the  history  of  the  world  marked  with  greater  ferocity  and  destruction.
It  is  computed  tliat  in  one  battle  the  number  of  the  slain  amounted  to  no  less
than  500,000  Israelites.  But  the  greatest  battle  of  the  ages  will  not  exceed  in
calamity  and  carnage  the  final  overthrow  of  the  enemies  of  God's  people.  Their
widespread  combinations,  their  vast  hosts  cleverly  marshalled  in  battle  array,
their  compacted  unity,  will  make  their  defeat  the  easier,  the  more  direct  and
complete.  They  will  be  allured  to  gather  into  a  mass,  that  in  a  mass  they
may  perish.

III.  This  defeat  will  make  clear  to  the  nations  the  unchanging  ectuity  of  the
Divine  procedure.  1.  Thai  the  people  of  God,  like  all  other  peoples,  are  punished
because  of  their  iniquities  (vers.  23,  24).  The  Israelites  wilfully  and  stubbornly
trespassed  against  God ;  therefore  He  hid  His  face,  withdrew  His  protection,
and  abandoned  them  to  the  cruelty  of  their  enemies.  They  could  not  com-
plain tliat  they  were  unjustly  or  harshly  treated.  ''According  to  their  un-
cleanness  and  their  transgressions'*  they  were  dealt  with.  They  deserved  all
they  got,  and  when  they  came  to  themselves,  they  would  be  the  first  to
acknowledge  it.  It  was  not  God's  vindictiveness  but  their  own  iniquities  that
plunged  them  into  misery.  He  simply  deals  with  them  as  with  all  other
ojffenders,  of  whatever  nationality.  God  is  the  implacable  foe  of  sin  wherever
and  in  whomsoever  found  (Rom.  ii.  6-11).  He  is  unchangeably  faithful  in
justice,  mercy,  and  truth.  2.  That  all  who  faithfully  respond  to  the  teaching  of
the  Divine  Spirit  shall  eiijoy  the  protection  and  favour  of  God  (vers.  25-29).  While
God  will  punish  evil-doers,  He  does  not  overlook  the  least  symptoms  of  re-
pentance, and  is  eager  to  make  known  His  clemency.  Those  who  have  injured
Him  the  most  are  assured  of  His  mercy.  It  is  said  the  Emperor  Adrian,
meeting  a  man  who  had  insulted  him  before  he  came  to  the  throne,  said  to
him,  "  Approach  ;  you  have  nothing  to  fear ;  I  am  an  emperor."  It  is  God-like
to  be  free  from  resentment.  The  Spirit  is  given  to  convince  of  sin,  to  melt
the  soul  into  contrition,  to  direct  it  to  the  great  source  of  help,  and  to  bring
it  face  to  face  with  God,  where  all  is  light  and  peace  and  safety.  God  hides
His  face  from  the  incorrigible  sinner,  but  reveals  it  to  the  truly  penitent.

Lessons. — 1.  The  most  powerful  combinations  of  the  wicked  are  impotent  when
in  conflict  with  Jehovah.  2.  The  Divine  honour  is  pledged  to  ensure  the  ultimate
triumph  of  righteousness.  3.  Disobedience  to  the  Divine  law  in  individuals  or  in
nations  will  be  visited  with  terrible  punishment.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-29.  "The  present  chapter  Ezekiel  is  not  predicting  the  invasion
proceeds  to  describe  the  defeat  of  evil  of  an  actual  army,  but  the  advance  of
and  the  triumph  of  God  and  His  evil  under  that  figure.  So  he  declares
people.     We  must  bear  in  mind  that      the  overthrow  of  evil  by  the  figure  of

2tp  417


OHAP.  XXXIX.


ROM  I  LET  IC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


a  host  routed  and  slain,  and  the  conse-
quent purification  of  a  land  partially
overrun  and  disturbed.  It  is  the
manner  of  Ezekiel  to  dwell  upon  the
details  of  the  figurative  acts  which  he
])ortrays,  bringing  them  before  the
mind  as  vivid  pictures,  and  employing,
so  to  speak,  the  strongest  colouring.
This  has  led  some  so  to  rest  on  the
picture  as  to  forget  that  it  is  a  figure.
Thus  they  have  searched  history  to
find  out  some  campaign  in  the  land
of  Israel,  some  overthrow  of  invaders,
on  which  to  fix  this  prophecy,  and
have  assigned  localities  to  the  burial-
place,  and  even  thought  to  discover
the  spot  to  which  belongs  the  appella-
tion, Hamon-Gog.  Bat  in  truth  the
details  are  set  forth  in  order  to  carry
out  the  allegory,  and  their  very  ex-
travagance, so  to  speak,  points  out
that  we  have  but  the  shadow  of  a
great  spiritual  reality,  which  man  can
only  faintly  represent  and  feebly  grasp
in  a  figure" — Speaker's  Commentary,

—  "  We  find  in  the  prophecy  the  fol-
lowing important  and  salutary  truths  :
— 1.  While  the  appearance  of  the  new
David  to  take  the  rule  and  presidency
over  God's  heritage  would  have  the
effect  of  setting  His  people  free  from
the  old  troubles  and  dangers  which
had  hitherto  assailed  them,  it  should
be  far  from  securing  them  against  all
future  conflicts  with  evil.  It  would
rather  tend  to  call  up  other  adversaries
and  enlarge  the  field  of  conflict,  so  as
to  make  it  embrace  the  most  distant
and  barbarous  regions  of  the  earth.
For  the  whole  earth  is  Christ's  heri-
tage, and  sooner  or  later  it  must  come
to  an  issue  between  the  adherents  of
His  cause  and  the  children  of  error
and  corruption.  2.  From  the  very
nature  of  the  case,  this  trial  would
fall  to  be  made  on  a  very  large  scale
and  with  most  gigantic  resources,  so
that  all  preceding  contests  should  ap-
pear sriiall  and  vanish  out  of  sight,  in
comparison  of  this  last  great  struggle
in  which  the  world's  destiny  was  to  be
decided  for  gjood  or  evil.  3.  Though
the  odds  in  this  conflict  could  not  but
appear  beforehand  very  great  against
the   people  and  cause  of  Christ,  yet

418


the  result  should  be  certainly  on  their
side,  and  simply  because  with  them  is
the  truth  and  the  might  of  Jehovah.
4.  As  all  originated  in  the  claim  of
Messiah  and  His  truth  to  the  entire
possession  of  the  world,  so  the  whole
is  represented  as  ending  in  the  com-
plete establishment  of  the  claim.  It
is  understood  at  last  that  it  was  His
zeal  for  the  interests  of  righteousness
which  led  Him  to  chastise,  in  former
times.  His  own  professing  people,  and
that  the  same  now  has  induced  Him
to  render  them  triumphant  over  every
form  and  agency  of  evil.  And  now,
all  counter  rule  and  authority  being
put  down,  the  prospect  stretches  out
before  the  Church  of  eternal  peace  and
blessedness  in  what  at  length  become
the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth,
wherein  dwelleth  righteousness." —
Fairhairn,

Vers.  1-7.  God's  Dealings  with  His
Enemies.  "  1.  Those  who  are  enemies
unto  the  Church,  God  is  an  enemy
unto  them.  2.  Wicked  men  may  be
in  great  honour  and  have  great  power.
3.  There  are  seeming  contradictions  in
Holy  Scripture.  God  was  with  Gog
and  against  Gog :  with  him  by  His
providence  to  bring  him  forth  to  mani-
fest his  spleen  and  gall  against  the
land  of  Israel ;  and  against  him  by
His  power  and  justice  to  destroy  him
for  his  cruelty  and  bloodiness.  There
are  many  scriptures  seeming  to  destroy
one  another ;  but  if  rightly  understood
do  sweetly  comply  and  shake  hands
together.  4.  God's  hand  is  in  the
undertakings  of  enemies  against  the
Church.  5.  It  is  in  the  Lord  to  dis-
able and  disappoint  warriors  when
they  are  ready  for  battle.  6.  That  in
the  same  place  where  God  shows  rich
mercy  to  the  godly,  there  He  executes
severe  judgments  upon  the  enemies.
7.  That  armies  and  others  are  exposed
to  public  shame  and  miserable  ends  is
of  God.  8.  What  the  Lord  speaks,
that  shall  certainly  take  place.  9.
When  God  begins  to  visit  the  enemies
of  His  Church,  He  makes  progress
therein.  10.  When  God  shows  mercy
to  His  Church  and  destroys  the  enemies


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OHAF.  XXXIX.


of  it,  He  provides  for  His  own  honour,
sanctifies  His  name,  and  makes  Him-
self to  be  known  distinct  from  all  other
gods. " —  Greenhill.

—  The  Infatuation  of  the  Wicked —

1.  Renders  them  reckless  in  their
attack  upon  a  superior  Power  (ver.  1).

2.  Blinds  them  to  the  fact  that  they
are  being  led  to  destruction  by  the
Power  they  defy  (ver.  2).  3.  Knows
not  the  moment  they  may  be  suddenly
reduced  to  helplessness  (ver.  3).  4.  In-
volves them  in  terrible  and  universal
destruction  (vers.  4-6).  5.  Makes  their
punishment  a  means  of  exalting  the
justice  and  holiness  of  the  Being  they
madly  opposed  (ver.  7).

Vers.  2-5.  "  As  the  land  of  Israel
shall  be  the  scene  of  Gog*s  wicked
attack  on  the  people  of  God,  so  shall
it  be  the  scene  of  the  awful  punish-
ment inflicted  upon  Gog  and  of  the
deliverance  of  Israel.  How  often  God
thus  marks  the  retributive  justice  of
His  dealings  (as  in  the  case  of  Ahab's
and  Jezebel's  obtaining  possession  of
Naboth's  vineyard  through  false  accu-
sation, murder,  and  robbery)  by  visit-
ing the  transgressor  with  judgment  on
the  very  scene  of  his  guilt!  (1  Kings
xxi.  19,  xxii.  38  ;  2  Kings  ix.  21,  25,
26,  ^^y—Fausset.

Ver.  3.  The  Man  of  War— 1.  An

imposing  figure  when  fully  armed  for
battle.  2.  Should  carefully  weigh  the
merits  of  the  cause  he  espouses.  3.
Exposes  his  folly  when  he  proudly
boasts  about  his  individual  prowess.
4.  May  in  a  moment  be  deprived  of
both  strength  and  weapons.
^  —  *'I  will  disarm  thee.  As  Hero-
dotus reports  of  Sennach-erib  and  his
Assyrians  in  Egypt,  that  their  quivers,
bow-strings,  and  targets  were  gnawed
to  pieces  by  mice  and  rats  in  one
night,  so  that  they  were  forced  to  fly
for  their  lives.  And  as  our  chroniclers
tell  us  that  in  the  battle  between
Edward  III.  of  England  and  Philip  of
France  there  fell  such  a  piercing
shower  of  rain  as  dissolved  their
strings  and  made  their  bows  useless."
— Trapp.


Ver  6.  "  Those  who  shall  abet  Gog,
virtually  though  not  actively  joining
him  in  the  invasion,  shall  be  taught
by  bitter  experience  to  know  that
their  fancied  security  in  their  sea-girt
or  sea-washed  and  distant  lands  is  a
self-deceit ;  a  fire  from  the  Lord  shall
consume  them,  so  that  they  shall  know,
to  their  cost,  the  God  of  power,  whom
they  refused  to  know  as  the  God  of
grace  and  love.  Self-confidence  and
careless  living,  under  the  mistaken
notion  of  security,  have  proved  the
ruin  of  millions  of  immortal  souls." —
Fausset.

—  "  The  fire  of  God  upon  sympa-
thies with  evil.  —  The  far-reaching
efi'ect  of  Divine  judgment." — Lange.

Ver.  7.  **  Israel  hereafter  shall,  by
the  special  grace  of  God,  be  kept  from
dishonouring  the  holy  name  of  their
God  by  their  sins  and  the  consequent
judgments  which  made  the  heathen
think  that  Jehovah  was  unable  or
unwilling  to  save  His  people.  How
joyful  is  the  prospect  to  the  people  of
God  that  the  time  is  ere  long  com-
ing when  they  shall  be  placed  under
the  blessed  necessity  of  uninterrupted
obedience  to  God's  will !  Tempta-
tions from  the  flesh,  the  world,  and
Satan,  which  now  harass  them,  shall
then  be  at  an  end.  Sin,  which  is  now
their  greatest  sorrow  because  it  most
dishonours  the  name  of  their  Lord,
shall  be  no  more  ;  and  the  Lord  shall
make  known  His  holy  name  with
such  attractive  power  that  He  will
not  let  them  pollute  it  any  more." —
Fausset,

Ver.  8.  The  Infallible  Certitude  of
the  Divine  Word.  1.  Notwithstanding
that  all  natural  appearances  are  against
it.  2.  Though  its  fulfilment  is  in  the
future.  3.  Notwithstanding  the  most
desperate  opposition.  4.  Confirmed  by
many  notable  examples.  5.  Because
the  Lord  hath  spoken  it.  6.  Should
induce  an  unfaltering  confidence.

—  Fulfilled  Prophecy.  "  1.  There
is  a  certain  time  determined  for  the
destruction  of  the  Church's  enemies,
which  God  looks  upon  as  present  and

419


OHAP.  XXXIX.


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


done.  2.  The  particular  time  is  hidden
from  men  and  known  only  unto  God."
— Greenhill.

Vers.  9,  10.  The  Spoils  of  a  Great
Victory.  **  1.  God  will  give  victories
to  His  Church  and  people  which  seem
incredible.  2.  The  Lord  makes  that
advantageous  to  His  people  which
their  enemies  intended  to  damnify  and
ruin  them  by.  3.  After  the  overthrow
of  Gog  and  Magog,  Anticlirist  and  his
adherents,  the  Church  of  God  shall
have  great  peace.  4.  The  people  of
God  sliall  have  a  day  of  recompense
for  the  wrongs  and  injuries  they  have
sustained." — Greenhill.

—  "  It  may  be  wondered  they  burn
tliese  weapons  which  might  be  of  use
to  them  for  defence  and  safety  ;  but  it
was  done  partly  because  they  were
weapons  of  the  uncircumcised,  partly
because  they  were  anaihematay  as  all
Jericho  was,  but  chiefly  in  testimony
that  God  was  their  safety  and  defence."

—  Mariana  in  his  History  of  Spain
says,  that  after  the  Spaniards  had
given  that  signal  overthrow  to  the
Saracens  in  1212,  they  found  such  a
vast  quantity  of  lances,  javelins,  and
such-like  that  they  served  them  for
four  years  for  fuel.

—  *'  The  fire  of  Christianity  comes
at  last  over  all  the  weapons  of  this
world.  They  then  warn  instead  of
injuring.  If  God  is  our  shield,  then  it
is  seen  what  becomes  of  all  the  shields
of  men,  long  and  short.  Let  not  your-
self be  covered  and  screened  by  the
world.  The  world,  with  its  pomp  and
power,  after  all  exists  only  to  furnish
fuel  for  the  children  of  God.  Thus
the  godly  man  finally  gains  the  upper
hand,  however  long  and  strongly  the
ungodly  have  behaved  proudly." —
Lange.

Vers.  11-16.  The  Burial  of  the
Slain.  "1.  God  disappoints  the  ex-
pectation of  the  wicked  while  living,
yet  sometimes  affords  favour  when
they  are  dead.  2.  After  great  victories
wherein  many  are  slain  people  should,
for  public  good,  be  careful  to  bury
420


the  dead,  though  it  require  time,  be
troublesome  and  chargeable.  3.  By
great  victories  over  enemies  God
honours  His  own  name  and  makes  His
people  to  have  a  name.  4  After  con-
quering there  ought  to  be  cleansing."
— Greenhill.

—  "  Where  Gog  shall  expect  to  find
a  spoil  and  a  possession,  he  shall  only
find  a  grave  ;  and  that  a  grave  near
the  sea  that  entombs  his  ancient  pro-
totypes, the  fire-blasted  cities  of  Sodom
and  Gomorrah — the  Dead  Sea  The
publicity  of  this  place  of  burial  will
arrest  the  attention  of  the  many  that
pass  that  way.  These  shall  recognise
the  ri.i^hteous  judgment  of  the  Lord  in
the  destruction  of  Gog.  How  often
are  the  transgressor's  deeply-laid  plans
broiiglit  to  nothing  in  a  moment,  and
the  mischief  which  he  prepares  for
others  recoils  on  himself !  Those  wiio
have  experienced  great  deliverances
should  be  thorougldy  zealous  in  pro-
moting a  complete  and  radical  reforma-
tion. Every  man  should  render  the
utmost  help  he  can  towards  furthering
the  good  work.  Sin,  the  polluting
thing,  needs  to  be  searched  out  in  its
most  secret  recesses.  Let  not  the
casual  passer-by  think  that  he  is  ex-
empt from  the  duty  of  exerting  him-
self in  word  and  deed  for  the  glory
of  God  and  the  good  of  the  Church,
any  more  than  the  stationary  dweller
in  his  own  home.  All  have  their  place
and  work  to  do  ;  and  it  is  only  by
general  co-operation  that  the  work
of  the  Lord  can  be  most  completely
effected. " — Fausset,

Ver.  11.  The  Fate  of  the  Proud.

1.  A  defeat  where  they  expected  vic-
tory. 2.  Execration  and  disgust  where
they  expected  applause.  3.  Oblivion
where  they  expected  fame.  4.  A  grave
where  they  expected  riches.  5.  It
is  a  testimony  to  the  sacredness  of
the  human  body  that  even  the  proud
and  cruel  are  honoured  with  a  grave.
6.  Justice  leaves  its  dead  victim  at
the  grave's  mouth :  Mercy  tenderly
buries  it.

—  "  Besides  many  other  reasons  for
burying  these  slaughtered  multitudes.


HOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY:  UZh'ntBL  cBap  xxxii.


the  humanity  that  religion  is  full  of  Vers.  17-29.  "The  destruction  of  the

would  guide  the  Jews  to  it,  and  God  enemy,  viewed  as  to  its  results  with

tells  us  that  Gog  shall  have  a  grave  reference  to  the  people  of  God.     The

in  Israel.     He  came  to  take  possession,  purposes  of  the  past  dispensation  shall

and  so  he  shall,  but  not  as  he  purposed  be  made  clear  to  God*s  people  them-

and  hoped,  but  as  God  intended :  Gog  selves  and  to  the  heathen.     All  shall

shall  possess  his  house  of  darkness  in  see   that  the  judgments  which  have

that  land  which  he  invaded  to  make  fallen  upon  the  chosen  race  were  no

a  prey  of.     He  shall  have  one  place  sign  of  any  change  of  purpose  of  the

there — a  grave." — Pool,  Almighty,  but  the  consequence  of  their

—  "  Like  Gog,  many  a  one  finds  a  sins,  and  that,  these  sins  once  aban-

grave  where  he  least  expected  it.     The  doned,  the  favour  of  their  God  will

grave,  a  quiet  answer  to  so  many  loud  return    in    yet    more    abundance."—

questions,   the  echo  to  so  many  and  Speaker's  Commentary,
various  forms  of  '  I  will ! '     Here  the

proudest  and  most  foaming  waves  will  Vers.  17-20.  Evidences  of  Divine

subside.     Masters  cease  at  the  brink  Judgment.    *'  1.  That  all  creatures  are

of  the  grave ;  the  continuation  follows  at  the  command  of  God,  and  ordered

1.&,  rottenness,  horror,  judgment  of  to  do  this  or  that  according  to  His


survivors  on  the  dead,  to  say  nothing  wise  providence  (ver.   17).      2.   That

of  the  judgment  of  God,  who  has  from  God   doth    execute    some    great    and

the  beginning  had  the  same  decision  signal  judgment  when    He  summons

regarding  them." — Lange,  the  creatures  to  eat  the  flesh  and  drink

the  blood  of  the  slain  (vers.  18,  19)

Ver.  13.  "It  shall  be  to  the  house  3.  It  is  matter  of  delight  and  pleasure

of  Israel  a  renown,  a  commendation,  unto  God  to  destroy  the  enemies  of

matter  of  praise,  that  they  did,  like  His  Church  and  people  (ver.  17).     4.

men,   bury  the   dead,   who  otherwise  God  is  impartial  in  His  judicial  dis-

must  have  been  all  dung  on  the  face  pensations ;   He  punisheth    the  great

of  the   earth,   and   the   swelling   hill  delinquents  as  well  as  the  lesser  (vers,

rising  from  their  buried  bones  shall  18,   20).     5.   Great   men    and    vulgar

be  a  monun;ent  to  the  praise  of  Israel's  ones    also    may   be    a    prey    to    the

courtesy.      Or  else  thus,  the  day  of  creatures,  and   lie  without  burial  for

My  being  glorified  shall  be  a  renown  a  season.      6.   God  provides  for   the

to  Israel.     As  it  is  an  honour  to  be  brute  and  dumb  creatures,  and  that

owned  of  God,  so  when  God  shows  He  abundantly  (ver.  17)." — Greenhill,

owneth  such,  He  gives  them  honour  —  A  Strange  Banquet.     1.  If  we

among  all  that  observe  it." — Fool.  consider  the  guests  invited — the  birds

and  beasts  of  prey  (ver.   17).     2.  If

Ver.    15.    The    Sacredness    of  the  we  consider  the  kind  of  food  provided

Human  Body.     1.  It   is  designed  to  — the  flesh  of  princes  and  mighty  men

be  the  temple  of  the  Divine  (1  Cor.  (ver.    18).      3.    If  we    consider    the

vii.  19).     2.  Shall  ultimately  be  raised  horrible  surfeiting  of  the  wild  revellers

from  the  dead  (Rom.  viii.  23;  1  Cor.  (vers.  19,  20).    4.  A  revolting  spectacle

XV.  35).     3.  Should  ensure  it  reverent  of  humbled  pride,
burial.     4.  Not  a   single  bone  to  be

treated  with  indignity.  Ver.  17.  "What  an  end  after  such

a   beginning  1      The    beginning   was,

Ver.  16.  "The  world,  the  city  of  Israel  shall  fall  a  prey  to  Gog;  now

the  dead — Hanionah.    What  a  stillness  the  end  is,  that  Gog  lies  there  a  prey

of  death  after  the  bustle  of  so  many  to   the   very   beasts   of  the   field." —

departing  things  and  departed  men  ! —  Lange,
The  enemies  oT  the  Church  leave  after

their  death  a  shameful  name  behind  Vers.  21-24.  The   Final   Issue  of

them  (Acts  xii.  20-23)." — Lange,  Divine  Punisliment.     "  1.  The   great

421


OttAP.  XXX13L  noMlLEfIC  COMMENTARY:  rJ.EKIEL


end  of  God's  judgments  upon  sinful  2.  There  is  a  day  of  mercy  to  come

men  is  His  glory  (ver.  21).     2.  Dread-  for  the  Jews,  even  all  of  them  (ver.

ful  judgments   upon  the   wicked   are  25).     3.  The   great  things  God   doth

engaging  mercies  unto  the  <:odly  (ver.  for  His  people  are  not  done  for  their

22).     3.  God  doth  withhold   mercies  worth    or   merits,    but   for    His   holy

from  His   people   and  lay  sad   judg-  name's  sake  (ver.  25).     4.  Sin  brings

ments  upon  them  for  their  sins  (ver.  men  to  shame  and  punishment,  which

23).    4.  God  will  convince  His  enemies  they  must  undergo  somewhere  or  other

of  the   true   cause  of  His   executing  (ver.  26).     5.  In  times  of  peace  and

dreadful  judgments  upon   His  people  safety  usually  men  forget  God  and  sin

(ver.  23).     5.  None  have  just  ground  against  Him  (ver.  26).     6.  The  Lord

of   complaint   whatsoever    judgments  by  openly  delivering  His  people  from

are  upon  them,  howsoever  God  deal  an    afflicted   condition    doth    sanctify

by  them  (ver.  24)." — GreenhilL  His  own  name  and  hath  it  sanctified

by  others  (vers.  27,  28).     7.  There  is

Vers.  23-29.  Tlie  Hidden  and  the  a  time  when  the  Jews  shall  not  only
Open  Face  of  God.  1.  That  human  have  mercy,  but  abundant  and  lasting
sin  obscures  the  vision  of  God's  face  mercy  (ver.  29).  Now  they  are  like
(vers.  23,  24).  2.  That  when  God  dead  trees  without  any  sap  in  them  ;
hides  His  face  His  people  are  exposed  but  then  they  will  be  like  trees  well-
to  the  ravages  of  the  enemy  (ver.  23).  rooted,  full  of  sap,  and  in  their  greatest
3.  That  while  God  hides  His  face  His  glory — full  of  branches,  leaves,  blos-
hand  is  employed  in  promoting  the  soms,  fruit,  and  the  sun  shining  upon
interests  of  His  people  (vers.  25,  27,  them  (Rom.  xi.  15)." — GreenhilL
28).     4.  That  when  suffering  humbles

the  soul  into  genuine  repentance  the  Ver.    25.    "This   restoring    captive

face  of  God  reappears.     Repentance  is  Jews  is  mere  mercy.     It  is  very  true

the  soul  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  by   sin    they    deserved    to    be    made

God  (vers.  26,  28).     5.  The  work  of  captives,  and  it  is  as  true  they  never

the  Divine  Spirit  upon  tlie  soul  pre-  did   or   could    deserve   a   deliverance

pares  it  for  the  everlasting  vision  of  from  captivity.     It  was  not  extremity

the  open  face  of  God  (ver.  29;  comp.  of  justice  that  so  punished,  but  it  was

2  Cor.  iii.  18).  the  riches  of  mercy  that  so  pardoned

and  redeemed." — Pool.

Ver.   23.    "The    heathen    thought

meanly   of   the   God   of    Israel,   and  Ver.  27.  "  Sanctified  by  their  accept-

reckoned  they  came  into  captivity  be-  ing    punishment,    repenting    for    sin,

cause  the  people  of  some  greater  god  loathing  their  former  ways  and  them-

had  by  the  power  of  their  god  pre-  selves  Tor  them,  acknowledging  God

vailed  against   Israel's  God  and  His  to   be   holy,  engaging  themselves   in

people;  but  by  this  overthrow  given  covenant   of    perpetual    obedience   to

to  Gog  they  shall  see  it  was  not  im-  God  and  keeping  it ;  by  these  things

potence  in  Israel's  God,  but  iniquity  God    will    be    sanctified    among    the

in  Israel's  people,  that  brought  them  Israelites  and  in  sight  of  the  nations,

into  captivity.     When  God  withdrew  when  they  see  the  furnace  hath  puri-

His    defence,   as    fenceless,    they   fell  fied  them." — PooL
under  the  sword  of  the  enemy,  for  it

is  He  that  subdueth  enemies  and  giveth  Ver.  29.  The  Promise  of  the  Spirit,

victory." — Pool,  1.  The  constant  theme  of  Old  Testa-
ment prophets.     2.  Blessedly  realised

Vers.    25-29.    God's    Goodness    a  in   the  history  of  the  Church  in  all

Motive  for  His  Activity.     "1.  The  ages.     3.  Fulfilled  in  the  remarkable

afflictions    of   God's    people    may   be  advances  of  the  Gospel  in  the  present

long   and   sharp,   yet   they  shall   not  day.     4.  The  guarantee  of  future  uni-

be  always ;   they  shall  have  an  end.  versal  victory.
422


noMtim'ra  comment  art  :  M  eft  ret,  osap.  it.


—  "It  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  as  a  Spirit  of  power  shall  strengthen
which,  when  poured  out,  inclines  the  them  for  every  duty  and  enable  them
heart  to  appreciate  aright  God's  mar-  to  withstand  and  conquer  every  temp-
vellous  grace,  and  so  produces  repent-  tation ;  as  a  Spirit  of  holiness  shall
ance.  The  same  Spirit  in  the  heart  is  cleanse  them  from  sin,  sanctify  their
also  the  earnest  to  assure  the  children  souls,  and  stamp  them  with  Mine
of  God  that  their  now  reconciled  Father  image;  and  as  a  Spirit  of  adoption
will  hide  His  face  from  them  no  more,  and  consolation  shall  inspire  them
May  the  promise  of  the  full  outpouring  with  confidence  and  hope,  and  render
of  the  blessed  Spirit  in  the  latter  days  every  branch  of  obedience  and  every
on  both  Israel  and  the  Church  be  soon  exercise  of  piety  and  virtue  sweet  and
realised;   and  for   this  end   may  the  delightful  to  them." — Benson.

spirit  of  prayer  more  and  more  per-  —  "  The  true  Israel,  the  people  of

vade  all  the  professing  disciples  of  the  the    Spirit.      The   outpouring   of   the

Lord  Jesus ! " — Fausset.  Spirit  of  Jehovah  is  the  end  of  all  the

—  "  Which  as  a  Spirit  of  truth  shall  ways  which  He  has  gone  with  Israel
enlighten  their  minds,  and  make  them  in  anger  and  compassion,  and  the
wise  unto  salvation;  as  a  Spirit  of  grace  consummation  of  Israel  in  the  Chris-
Bhall  regenerate  and  create  them  anew ;  tian  Church," — Lange,


•'The  deliverance  of  the  Hebrews  was  wrought  out  in  a  most  remarkable
manner.  Mattathias,  raising  the  standard  of  patriotism,  called  around  him  the
pious  portion  of  his  countrymen.  His  party  increased  rapidly  till  they  became
a  considerable  army.  He  appointed  his  third  and  bravest  son  Judas  military
commander,  by  whom  the  Syrian  generals  that  were  sent  against  him  were
defeated.  In  battle  after  battle  he  proved  victorious.  Even  the  army  which
Lysias  sent  into  Judea  could  not  stand  before  him.  Though  composed  of  thirty
thousand  foot  and  seven  thousand  cavalry,  and  increased  by  auxiliaries  from  the
provinces,  it  proved  powerless  before  him.  Putting  the  enemy  to  flight,  he
secured  immense  booty.  The  like  success  attended  him  the  following  year,
when  he  defeated  an  array  of  sixty  thousand  men,  made  himself  master  of
several  strong  cities,  and,  retaking  Jerusalem,  purified  the  Temple  and  restored
its  solemn  services.  His  brothers,  Simon  and  Jonathan,  proved  themselves
worthy  successors  of  this  devoted  patriot;  the  independence  of  the  Jews  was
finally  secured,  and  the  royal  dignity  vested  in  the  Asmonaean  family,  in  which
it  continued  till  the  time  of  Herod  the  Great." — Henderson.


The  Vision  op  the  Restored  Temple  and  the  Reinhabited  Land.

(Chaps,  xl.-xlviii.)

This  is  a  development  of  the  promise  contained  in  chapter  xxxvii.  27.  The
subject  of  the  closing  chapters  of  Ezekiel  is  the  restitution  of  the  kingdom  of
God.  This  is  expressed  by  a  vision  in  which  are  disi)layed  not  only  a  rebuilt
Temple,  but  also  by  a  reformed  priesthood,  reorganised  services,  a  restored
monarchy,  a  reapportioned  territory,  a  renewed  people,  and,  as  a  consequence,
the  diffusion  of  fertility  and  plenty  over  the  whole  earth.  The  return  from
Babylon  was  indeed  the  beginning;  of  this  work,  but  only  a  beginning,  intro-
ductory to  the  future  kingdom  of  God,  first  upon  earth,  finally  in  heaven.  The
vision  must  therefore  be  viewed  as  strictly  symbolical,  the  symbols  employed
being  the  Mosaic  ordinances.  These  ordinances  had  indeed  in  themselves  a
hidden  meaning.  The  Tabernacle  in  the  midst  of  the  tents  of  the  tribes,  and
afterwards  the  Temple  in  the  capital  of  the  land  of  inheritance,  was  intended
to  signify  the  dwelling  of  Jehovah  among  His  people  ;  the  priesthood  was  to

423


OttAl*.  It.


MOkiLilTtC  COMMENfAitt:  EZMKlSL


denote  the  mediation  between  God  and  man  ;  the  monarchy  the  sovereignty  of
God,  the  people  the  saints  of  God,  the  territory  their  inheritance.  So  that  the
symbols  here  employed  have  an  essential  propriety ;  yet  they  are  truly  symbols,
and  as  such  they  are  to  be  regarded.'* — Speaker's  Commentary,


The  Ideal  Temple  of  the  Future.    (Chap.  xL)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.
"  In  the  five  and  twentieth  yeax."

The  fiftieth  year  from  the  18th  of
Josiah,  the  year  of  his  memorable
passover  (2  Kings  xxii.  12).  The
jubilee  year  began  with  the  month  of
Tisri,  on  the  tenth  day  of  which  was
the  day  of  atonement.  God  allowed
the  prophet  to  see  the  Temple  and  the
future  freedom  of  Israel  on  the  day  of
jubilee  because  then  servants  became
free,  and  on  the  day  of  atonement
because  then  the  sins  of  Isi-ael  are
forgiven.  "In  the  fourteenth  year
after  the  city  was  smitten,  in  the  self-
same day."  Tiie  desolation  of  the
Temple,  city,  and  commonwealth  is
here  recalled  in  vivid  contrast  to  the
glorious  restoration  that  is  to  be.

Ver.  2.  "  Set  me  upon  a  very  high
mountain  "  —  Moriah,  very  high  as
compared  with  the  plains  of  Babylon,
still  more  so  as  to  its  moral  elevation
(chaps,  xvii.  22  ;  xx.  40). — *'  By  which
was  as  the  frame  of  a  city."  It  is
not  a  city  which  is  seen,  but  a  building
— the  Temple  and  its  courts — like  a
city  in  its  construction,  surrounded  by
massive  walls.

Ver.  3.  "  Behold,  there  was  a  man."

The  Old  Testament  manifestation  of
heavenly  beings  as  men  prepared
men's  minds  for  the  coming  incar-
nation.— "  Like  the  appearance  of
brass."  Brightly  shining  —  resplen-
dent.—" With  a  line  of  flax  "—for
long  measurements  —  measuring  the
ground-plan. — "  And  a  measuring
reed  " — used  in  measuring  houses.  It
marked  the  straightness  of  the  walls.
To  measure  implied  a  separation  to
sacred  purposes.

Vor.  5.  "  By  the  cubit  and  a  hand-
breadth."  Measures  were  mostly  taken
from  the  human  body.     The  greater

424


cubit,  the  length  from  the  elbow  to  the\
end  of  the  middle  finger,  a  little  more  {
than  two  feet ;  exceeding  the  ordinary
cubit,  from  the  elbow  to  the  wrist,  by
a  hand-breadth — ».«.,  twenty-one  inches
in  alL  The  palm  was  the  full  breadth
of  the  hand,  three  and  a  half  inches.
"  The  breadth  of  the  building."  The
boundary  wall.  The  height  and
breadth  of  this  will  are  given,  but  not
the  length,  which  is  determined  here-
after, and  shown  to  enclose  a  square,  a
side  of  which  is  500  cubits.  /

Ver.  6.  "  The  gate  which  looketh
toward  the  east."  This  is  particularly
described,  all  the  other  gate-buildings
being  exactly  like  it.  The  east  gate
was  to  be  especially  sacred,  as  it  was
through  it  the  glory  of  God  had  de-
parted (chap.  xi.  23),  and  through  it
the  glory  was  to  return  (chaps,  xliil
1,  2 ;  xliv.  2,  3).

Ver.  7.  "  And  every  little  chamber
was  " — guard-chambers,  for  the  use  of
the  Levites  who  watched  at  the  Temple
gates,  and  for  depositing  utensils  and
musical  instruments.  In  our  transla-
tion the  words  was  and  were  are  con-
tinually introduced,  but  are  not  in  the
original.  They  would  be  better  away.
The  substantives  depend  upon  the  verb
measured  throughout.

Ver.  9.  "And  the  posts  thereof* — a

projection  like  the  ram's  horn.  Hence
in  arciiitecture  a  column  projecting
from  the  wall  with  its  base,  shaft,  and
capital,  or  it  may  be  the  base  only,  as
in  verses  16,  49.


Ver.    14.    "He
angel

structed    buildin
said  to  make  it.


is    exhibiting


o»


made
a
and


also."  The
newly  con-
therefore   is


"  Narrow  windows  "—closed  with


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XL.


network — the  jambs  sloping  towards
tlie  opening.  The  ancients  had  no
glass,  so  they  had  the  windows  latticed
— narrow  in  the  interior  of  the  walls
and  widening  at  the  exterior.  This
however,  though  common  in  later
styles,  is  not  in  accordance  with  the
architecture,  in  which  all  the  lines  were
straight  and  the  spaces  rectangular.
•*  Likewise  to  the  arches  "  —  the
porches.  The  arch  was  at  this  time
unknown  in  architecture.  The  word
probably  denotes  a  hall  or  colonnade
of  posts,  as  in  verse  14.

Ver.  17.  "A  pavement  made  for
the  court** — tesselated  mosaic.  This
pavement  came  up  to  the  sides  of  the
gate-buildings,  and  was  carried  along
the  sides  of  the  court  parallel  to  the
boundary- wall,  thus  forming  a  border
of  forty-four  cubits  to  the  court,

Ver.   18.    "The  lower  pavement."

The  outer  court  being  lower  than  the
inner,  the  pavement  running  round,  it
was  naturally  called  the  lower  pave-
ment, to  distinguish  it  from  the  pave-
ment of  the  inner  court.

Vers.  20-28.  The  north  and  south
gates  were  of  precisely  the  same  dimen-
sions as  the  eastern  gate.  In  the  case
of  the  two  other  gates  no  mention
is  made  of  a  building  with  thirty
chambers,  such  as  was  found  on  the
east  side.  Only  one  was  needed,  and
it  was  assigned  to  the  east  as  being
the  sacred  quarter,  and  that  most  con-
veniently situated  for  the  officiating
priests.

Ver.  31.  "The  arches  thereof"—

the  porches,  the  columned  hall.  "  And
the  going  up  to  it  had  eight  steps."
From  the  precincts  to  the  outer  court
were  seven  steps,  from  the  outer  to
the  inner  court  eighty  making  together
the  number  of  the  Psalms  (Ps,  cxx.-
cxxxivj,  supposed  by  some  to  have  been
called  rsalms  of  Degrees  because  they
were  sung  by  the  choir  of  Levites  upon
the  steps  (degrees)  of  the  Temple  courts.

Ver.  38.  "  By  the  posts  of  the  gates."


By  the  pillars  which  were  in  front  and
along  the  sides  of  the  gate-building.
Gates  must  here  be  used  for  the  gates
proper,  of  which  there  were  more  than
one  in  the  gate-building.

Ver.    39.    "In    the    porch."      Not

under  the  covered  portico,  which  was
only  ten  cubits  broad,  but  in  the
angles  formed  by  the  porch  and  gate
front.

Ver.  43.  "  And  within  were  hooks  "

—cooking  apparatus  for  cooking  the
flesh  of  the  sacrifices  that  fell  to  the
priests.  The  hooks  were  fastened  in
the  walls  within  the  apartment,  to
hang  the  meat  from,  so  as  to  roast  it.

Ver.  44.  "  The  chambers  of  the
singers."  These  were  Levites  of  par-
ticular families,  those  of  Heman,
Asaph,  and  Merari,  whose  genealogy
is  carefully  traced  up  to  Levi  in  1
Chron.  vi.  31.

Ver.  45.  "  The  keepers  of  the  charge
of  the  house" — the  priests  who  keep
watch  as  guards  of  the  Temple.

Ver.  46.  "  The  keepers  of  the  charge
of  the  altar :  the  sons  of  Zadok."  The
priests  were  all  descended  from  one
or  other  of  the  two  sons  of  Aaron —
Eleazar  and  Ithamar.  David  distri-
buted the  priestly  ofhces  between  the
families  of  Zadok,  the  representative
of  Eleazar,  and  Ahimelech,  the  repre-
sentative of  Ithamar.  The  high-priest-
hood had  for  many  years  been  in  the
line  of  Ithamar,  to  which  Eli  belonged ;
but  Solomon,  removing  Abiathar  from
the  high-priesthood  because  of  the  part
he  took  in  the  rebellion  of  Adonijah,
and  appointing  Zadok,  restored  this
office  to  the  family  of  Eleazar.  The
priests  who  had  charge  of  the  sacrifices
were  distinguished  from  the  rest  of
the  Levitical  priests  as  they  "  which
come  near  to  the  Lord  to  minister  unto
Him."

Ver.  48.  "  The  porch  of  the  house."

The  new  chapter  should  begin  at  this
versCj  as  here  the  seer  passes  fToni  the

4^0


CHAP.  TL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY  :   EZEKIEL.


court  to  the  Temple  itself,  beginning  Ver.  49.  "  By  the  steps  " — ten  steps

with   the   porch.      The   front   of  the  (Ixx.),  as  in  the  later  Temple.    "Pillars

Temple  porch  consisted  of  a  central  by  the  posts  " — literally,  to  the  posts,

opening  with  two  columns  on  either  meaning  that  upon  the  bases  (]^osts)

sida  stood  shafts  {pillars).


EOMILETIGS.

A  Divinely  Inspired  Sbsb.

(Vers.  1-4)

The  concluding  vision  of  the  prophet  is  not  the  least  striking  in  the  magnificent
series.  The  poetical  conception  is  full  of  boldness  and  grandeur,  though  the
details  are  wrought  out  with  prosaic  minuteness  of  literalness.  It  is  quite  in
keeping  with  the  graphic  style  of  this  sublime  prophet  of  the  captivity.  Ezekiel
bursts  upon  the  scene  like  the  storm-cloud  described  in  his  first  prophecy ;  the
progress  of  his  visions  dazzles  us  like  the  revolving  chromatic  lights  in  the  midst  of
the  moving  cloud,  until  the  storm  is  spent,  the  cloud  melts  into  space,  and  so  much
of  the  light  remains  as  reveals  the  splendours  of  a  city,  Temple,  and  common-
wealth illumined  with  the  unfading  glory  of  an  ever-present  God.  He  writes
as  a  Jew  and  a  priest  familiar  from  his  earliest  days  to  the  time  of  his  opening
manhood  with  the  scenes  of  the  Temple-worship  in  his  ever-loved  Jerusalem.
The  materials  of  his  visions  are  drawn  from  the  experience  of  his  youth,  when
impressions  are  clearest  and  most  indelible.  His  conception  of  the  Temple  of
the  future  is  therefore  an  enlargement  of  the  one  he  had  seen  and  known  on
Mount  Moriah  ;  for  the  human  mind  cannot  create  anything  out  of  nothing,  but
can  only  contrast,  combine,  and  expand  from  something  that  already  exists.
And  the  glory  of  future  Messianic  times  will  exceed  that  of  the  present,  as  the
glowing  picture  now  presented  by  the  prophet  transcended  the  scene  of  deplor-
able desolation  that  then  reigned  over  the  land  of  promise.  Like  all  the  other
visions,  the  one  we  are  now  to  consider  was  intended  to  comfort  and  inspirit  the
disconsolate  Jews,  and  to  light  up  the  gloom  of  their  captivity  with  the  well-
founded  hope  of  a  brighter  and  better  day.  The  rarest  blessings — blessings  that
form  a  new  epoch  in  the  outgrowth  of  religious  experience — often  come  to  God's
people  in  the  hour  of  their  most  abject  misery.  We  are  sometimes  humbled
that  we  may  gather  strength  to  bear  more  meekly  the  weight  of  a  loftier
exaltation.     Observe —

I.  That  a  Divinely  Inspired  Seer  retains  the  use  of  his  natural  faculties
in  intensified  clearness.  1.  He  is  conscious  of  a  lofiy  mental  elevation,  "The
hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  me,  brought  me  into  the  land  of  Israel,  and  set  me
upon  a  very  high  mountain  *'  (vers.  1,  2).  Genius  is  something  distinct  from
Divine  inspiration.  Genius  is  a  species  of  inspiration ;  it  generates  its  own
inspiration.  It  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  imposes  on  its  possessor  a  responsibility
for  its  legitimate  use  proportioned  to  its  quality.  Where  ordinary  talent
advances  by  slow  degrees,  genius  soars  on  rapid  wing.  But  Divine  inspira-
tion is  the  mind  of  God  acting  for  the  time  being  on  the  mind  of  man  for  a
special  and  definite  purpose.  Whatever  genius  or  talent  man  possesses,  it  is  raised
by  contact  with  the  Divine  Spirit  and  made  the  vehicle  of  the  Divine  purpose.
The  man  is  still  conscious  that  he  is  himself,  while  he  is  also  conscious  he  is
but  the  instrument,  for  the  time  being,  of  a  superior  power.  2.  He  is  clearly
cognisant  of  matters  of  fact  Ezekiel  is  not  so  far  carried  away  out  of  himself,
or  fascinated  by  the  brilliauce  of  the  visions  of  God,  as  to  overlook  that  it  w^g

426


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  XL.


"in  the  five  and  twentieth  year  of  the  captivity,  in  the  tenth  day  of  the  month,
in  the  fourteenth  year  after  the  city  was  smitten  "  (ver.  1).  Divine  inspiration
does  not  destroy  or  supersede,  but  strengthens  and  clarifies  our  common-sense.
It  allows  room  for  the  free-play  of  individual  peculiarities.  It  preserves  the
truth  communicated  inviolate,  in  its  human  setting.  It  does  not  do  for  man
what  he  can  do  for  himself.  Hence  the  inspired  books  of  the  Bible  bear  the
impress  of  the  writers'  strongly  marked  individuality.

II.  That  the  Divinely  inspired  Seer  is  favoured  with  extraordinary  visions.

1.  He  sees  in  outline  a  magnificent  city -temple.  "The  frame  of  a  city  on  the
south  "  (ver.  2).  Precisely  in  this  direction  would  the  former  city  and  Temple
appear  to  any  one  approaching  them  from  the  north.  He  saw  the  picture  or
model  of  a  temple  as  vast  as  a  city ;  it  is  a  city  for  men  to  dwell  in ;  it  is  a
temple  for  God  to  dwell  in.  To  his  priestly  predilections  the  building  is
all  temple,  occupying  a  space  and  presenting  a  grandeur  of  ritual  exceed-
ing anything  hitherto  known  in  Jewish  history.  The  highest  conception  to
Ezekiel  of  the  future  glory  of  Israel  was  a  great  temple  with  a  perfect  form
of  worship.  The  loftiest  vision  of  the  latest  New  Testament  seer  is  that  of  a
city  in  which  there  is  no  temple,  but  where  God  is  Himself  the  temple  and
the  light  and  glory  of  the  whole  (Rev.  xxi.  22,  23).  "Accustomed  to  cities,
we  raise  a  great  city  of  God  in  our  imaginations  of  the  future,  just  as  in  an
age  or  region  where  cities  were  unknown  we  might  have  pictured  heaven  as
a  garden  like  Eden." — Geikie.  2.  He  is  brought  into  the  presence  of  an  instructor
possessing  rare  endowments.  "  Whose  api)earance  was  like  the  appearance  of
brass" — shining  with  the  lustre  of  superior  gifts:  "with  a  line  of  flax  in  his
hand  and  a  measuring  reed" — instruments  for  conveying  exact  knowledge
(ver.  3).  This  being  is  identified  by  the  New  Testament  seer  as  Christ,  the
sovereign  architect  of  His  own  Church  (Rev.  i.  13-15;  xi.  1).  Such  a  person
might  well  be  introduced  with  an  ecce — "Behold  a  man"  (ver.  3).  All  the
details  of  the  vision  that  followed  were  imparted  by  this  heavenly  messenger,
and  become  intelligible  only  as  he  enhghtens  and  instructs  the  mind  of  the
beholder.  The  inspiration  of  the  Divine  Spirit  brings  the  soul  into  the  im-
mediate presence  of  God  and  lights  up  the  revealed  word  with  a  Divine
meaning.  Then  it  is  that  the  lines  of  right  and  wrong  stand  out  in  clear  and
startling  contrast.

III.  That  a  Divinely  inspired  Seer  is  required  to  exercise  his  best  powers
to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  subjects  revealed  (ver.  4).  Not  only  are
the  outward  and  inward  senses  to  be  on  the  alert,  but  all  are  to  be  earnestly
concentrated  upon  the  devout  study  of  the  truth.  It  is  surprising  how  much
can  be  seen  in  a  subject  that  engages  our  affections.  Love  quickens  and
illumines  all  our  sensibilities.  "  Love  sees  not  with  the  eyes,  but  with  the
mind."  Inspiration  helps  but  does  not  displace  our  natural  faculties.  Mental
and  spiritual  insight  are  gained  by  the  diligent  exercise  of  our  powers  (Heb.
V.  14).  Nature  reveals  its  greatest  secrets  only  to  the  industrious.  The  world
is  full  of  endless  suggestiveness  to  the  wakeful  and  resolute  students

IV.  The  Divinely  inspired  Seer  is  commissioned  to  freely  and  fully  com-
municate his  knowledge  for  the  benefit  of  others.  '^Declare  all  that  thou
seest  to  the  house  of  Israel "  (ver.  4).  We  may  not  tell  all  we  learn  from
others,  but  we  may  safely  declare  all  we  learn  from  God :  there  is  nothing  to
conceal;  nothing  but  what  will  be  the  better  for  telling.  We  have  never
mastered  a  subject  until  we  can  talk  about  it  intelligently  and  forcibly.  What-
ever knowledge  has  been  helpful  to  ourselves  should  be  communicated  for  the
good  of  others.     Knowledge  that  is  not  freely  circulated  is  valueless ;  it  is  so

427


CHAP.  XL.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


much  useless  lumber;  and  the  mind,  like  an  overloaded  boat,  is  in  constant
danger  of  being  swamped.  The  most  highly  gifted  teacher  delights  to  give
of  his  best,  and  is  often  as  modestly  unconscious  that  he  is  doing  so  as  the
loveliest  flower  is  unconscious  of  the  beauty  it  displays  and  the  delicious
perfume  it  scatters.  The  man  who  is  Divinely  inspired  to  see  a  truth  is
irresistibly  impelled  to  make  it  known.

TiESSONS. — 1.  The  grandest  truths  are  Divinely  revealed,  2.  The  revelations  of
God  are  not  appreciated  without  diligent  study,  3.  The  mperior  knowledge  of  the
few  is  intended  for  the  good  of  the  many.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-4.  "  We  observe  so  far  a  that  all  the  most  minute  parts  of  God's

resemblance   between   the  commence-  Word  have  their  purpose  and  aim." —

ment  and  the  close  of  the  book,  that  Fausset.

in  each  alike  the  propliet  is  borne  — "There  is  nothing  in  Holy  Scrip-
away  by  a  Divine  hand  and  placed  ture  that  is  not  useful  and  profitable,
amid  the  visions  of  God.  There  are,  though  at  first  sight  it  may  seem
however,  two  characteristic  differences  otherwise.  Metals  lie  hid  in  hardest
between  the  earlier  and  the  later.  quarries;  wholesome  herbs  are  found
First,  in  respect  to  the  region  where  oft  in  roughest  places,  and  precious
these  ideal  manifestations  of  Divine  stones  in  barren  sands.  Hippocrates
truth  and  glory  were  given — formerly  says  that  in  the  faculty  of  physic
on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  as  if  the  there  is  nothing  small,  nothing  con-
glory  of  Jehovah  had  forsaken  its  old  temptible.  Aristotle  says,  in  all  nature
haunts ;  and  now  on  what  was  em-  nothing  is  so  mean,  vile,  and  abject
phatically  the  mount  of  God,  as  if  He  that  deserves  not  to  be  admired ;  and
were  again  returned  thither  and  had  the  Rabbins  have  a  saying  that  a
already  raised  it  to  a  far  nobler  eleva-  mountain  of  sense  hangs  on  every  apex
tion.  The  substance  of  the  visions,  of  the  Word  of  God." — Trapp.
too,  very  strikingly  differs ;  for,  while  —  Divine  Conmiunications  to  Man.
that  on  the  Chebar  was  fitted  chiefly  "  1.  The  Lord  keeps  an  exact  account  of
to  awaken  thoughts  of  terror  and  the  time  of  His  Church  and  people^ s  suffer-
solemn  awe,  this  was  calculated  to  ing  (ver.  1).  He  is  the  best  and  most
produce  feelings  of  the  liveliest  confi-  punctual  chronologer  of  all  in  heaven
dence  and  the  most  exalted  hopes,  and  earth.  Men  and  angels  may  mis-
The  heavens  seemed  now  cleared  of  take,  misreckon,  but  the  Lord  doth
all  their  stormier  elements  and  were  not,  cannot.  When  we  are  in  misery
radiant  with  the  sunshine  of  the  Divine  we  think  God  forgets  us  (Ps.  Ixxix.  5 ;
favour." — Fairbairn.  Ixxxix.  46) ;  but  He  takes  notice  of

—  "  The  vision  beginning  here  and  every   hour,    day,    month,   and   year,

continued  to  the  end  of  this  book  is  2.  Jf'hen  the  Church  is  low,  in  the  ivorsty

one  impossible  as  yet  to  understand  most  desperate  and  deplorable  condition,

fully,  and  for  the  clear  explanation  of  even  then  the  Lord  hath  a  care  of  His

which  we  must  wait  until  the  event  Church  (ver.  1).     When  the  Church  is

makes  the  whole   plain.      There  are  in  the  wilderness,  under  persecution  in

difficulties  about  a  literal  interpreta-  Egypt  or  Babylon,  the  Lord  is  solici-

tion ;  but  these  may  all  vanish  when  tons  for  it.     3.   The  Church  is  Mount

the  fulfilment  takes  place :  and  there  Zion,    or    Mount    Zion    is  the    Church

is  the  difficulty  about  explaining  the  wherein   God   makes  known    His  mind

Vf  hole  figuratively,  that  thus  the  minute  for  the  comfort  of  His  people  (ver.  2).

and  accurate  details  seem  meaningless  Mountains  are  high,  conspicuous,  and

and  needless,  whereas  faith  assures  us  strong,   and    so    is    the  Church  ^    o^

43$


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CRAP.  XL.


mountains  is  good  air,  so  likewise  is
in  the  Clmrch  \  hills  are  nearer-heaven
than  other  })laces;  they  are  below,
the  Church  is  above  tlie  world.  4.
The  Church  is  well  seated  and  well  ordered.
*  Upon  which  was  the  frame  of  a  city '
(ver.  2).  It  is  seated  upon  a  mountain,
the  mountain  of  God's  decree,  power,
and  truth ;  it  is  well  ordered,  for  it  is
as  the  frame  of  a  city,  where  every-
thing is  in  its  right  place  and  all  fitly
joined  together.  5.  The  Man  Christ,
who  is  sinless  and  glorious,  is  the  chief
builder  and  exact  measurer  of  the  Church
and  things  belonging  to  it  (ver.  4).  The
line  and  reed  are  in  His  hand;  He
measures  all  the  trees  and  stones  used
in  this  building,  the  outward  and  in-
ward courts,  with  all  their  appurte-
nances. He  was  the  son  of  Joseph,  a
carpenter,  and  some  mystery  might  lie
in  that.  6.  The  way  into  Zion  and  unto
the  Father  is  by  Christ  (ver.  3).  He
stands  in  the  gate  of  the  Temple  ready
to  receive  any  that  should  come  and
be  found  fit  for  entrance  :  He  had  His
line  and  reed  in  His  hand  to  measure
them.  None  unmeasured  might  enter.
7.  The  Lord  Jesiis,  when  Divine  things
are  presented  to  us,  would  have  us  attent,
intent,  and  apply  the  whole  heart  unto
them  (ver.  4).  Let  us  mind,  and  mind
to  purpose,  all  things  shown  us  of
Christ ;  let  us  set  our  senses  and
whole  heart  upon  them.  8.  TVhat  the
Lord  Christ  reveals  unto  His  servants,  the
prophets  and  ministers,  they  must  not
reserve  to  themselves,  but  communicate  to
others  for  their  insimction,  edification,
and  comfort,  'Declare  all  that  thou
seest*  (ver.  4).  They  must  not  only
utter  what  they  receive,  but  utter  all
they  receive  (Acts  xx.  27)." — GreenhilL

Ver.  1.  "The  Word  of  God  counts
the  years  and  months  and  days  of  our
distress  to  make  us  understand  that  it
is  not  unknown  to  God  how  long  we
have  borne  the  yoke  of  the  cross  and
^the  oppression  of  tyrants." — Starch.

—  *'  Ezekiel  was  already  five-and-
twenty  years  in  a  foreign  land.  We
must  be  prepared  and  purified  in  many
ways  by  God's  Spirit  before  we  can
rightly  understancl  the  consolations  of


God ;  and  one  grows  in  God  when
one  learns  under  present  sufferings
to  see  more  and  more  of  the  eternal
comfort." — Diedrich.

—  "  The  vision  of  the  Temple  a  tri-
logy of  thoughts.  1.  From  judgment
to  mercy.  2.  From  prison  to  freedom.
3.  From  the  world  to  Christ  and  inta
the  community  of  God." — Lange,

Ver.  2.  The  Visions  of  God  —  1.
Need  a  highly  sensitised  spirituality  to
appreciate.  2.  Are  on  a  scale  of  un-
exampled magnificence.  3.  Have  a
close  connection  with  the  supreme  in-
terests of  humanity.  4.  Are  a  revela-
tion of  His  character  and  purposes.
5.  Should  be  reverently  and  earnestly
contemplated.  6.  Elevate  the  spectator
to  a  lofty  moral  standard.

—  "  To  human  eyes  Canaan  was  lost
for  Israel,  to  human  eyes  Jerusalem
lay  in  the  dust ;  but  the  prophet  sees
it  again  far  more  glorious.  Such  seeing
is  truly  given  by  God  in  the  Spirit.
Land,  city,  and  Temple  had  been  lost
through  the  sins  of  the  people;  yet
Israel  must  remain  and  fulfil  its  eternal
purpose  for  the  glory  of  God.  A  fairer
and  loftier  Jerusalem  and  Temple  must
be  still  in  store  for  Israel,  which  the
prophet  represents  entirely  by  figures
taken  from  the  old  land,  the  old  royal
seat,  and  the  old  Temple.  Yet  he  does
not  merely  make  the  old  be  renewed ;
everything  becomes  quite  diflferent  in
order  to  indicate  that  the  Kingdom  of
God  will  in  its  completion  present  a
quite  diff"erent  figure." — Diedrich,

—  "  The  land  of  Israel  is  the  hiero-
glyph of  the  inheritance  which  God  will
give  to  His  people  from  the  whole  world,
which,  in  contrast  thereto,  is  called  the
sea  or  the  wilderness." — Lange.

—  "This  is  indeed  a  place  to  sit
down  in  and  meditate.  Jerusalem
in  the  old  covenant,  the  Jerusalem
which  is  the  Christian  Church  and
the  Jerusalem  above — what  a  theme
for  contemplation  throughout  time  an<l
eternity ! — Jerusalem  a  Sabbatic  place
in  the  working  days  of  the  world's
history." — Lange,

Ver.  3.  The  Architect  of  the  Divine

439


CHAP.  XL.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEI.


Temple  —  1.  Is  illumined  with  the
lustre  of  His  unique  qualifications.
"  Whose  appearance  was  like  the  ap-
pearance of  brass."  2,  Possesses  the
means  of  constructing  an  exact  and
symmetrical  building.  "  With  a  line  of
flax  in  his  hand  and  a  measuring  reed."

3.  Has  absolute  control  of  the  structure
which  He  rears.  "He stood  in  the  gate."

4.  Is  Himself  an  illustrious  pattern  of
the  glorious  edifice  into  which  man  may
be  morally  built  up  (Eph.  ii.  20-22).

—  "Like  bright  polished  brass  which
strongly  reflected  the  rays  of  light.
Probably  he  had  a  nimbus  or  glory
round  his  head.  This  was  either  an
angel,  or,  as  some  think,  a  personal
appearance  of  our  blessed  Lord." — A,
Clarke,

—  "  With  a  line  in  his  hand  and  a
measuring  reed."  The  Law  of  God —
1.  Is  the  unchanging  standard  of  moral
actions.  2.  Regulates  the  form  and
constitution  of  the  Church.  3.  Is  un-
erringly applied  by  the  hand  of  the
great  Master  Builder  in  every  stage  of
the  Church's  upbuilding.  4.  Is  clearly
defined  in  the  Divinely  inspired  Word.

—  "The  measurements  are  —  1,
Exact,  to  show  that  the  promise  is  not
vague,  but  certain.  2.  Equal,  to  denote
harmony.  3.  Va^st,  to  mark  majesty
and  grandeur.  The  extraordinary
massiveness  of  the  walls  may  have  had
reference  to  the  enormous  structures
raised  at  this  time  by  Nebuchadnezzar,
who  was  not  only  the  greatest  con-
queror but  the  greatest  builder  in  the
world." — Speaker^s  Commentary.

—  "Let  every  man  examine  himself
by  this  measuring-rod  how  far  he  has
advanced." — Gregory.

—  "Christ  is  indeed  the  foundation
and  corner-stone  of  His  Church ;  but
He  is  also  the  Builder,  and  brings  the


building  erected  thereon  always  more
and  more  to  perfection.  The  brass
signifies  holiness  and  purity,  also  life
and  permanent  strength.  Christ  is  the
strong  and  invincible  Hero." — Lange.

—  "  He  stood  in  the  gate."  Else-
where also  Christ  stands  at  the  door
and  calls,  invites  in,  shows  the  way
and  opens  the  entrance  to  the  Temple
and  into  the  inner  sanctury.

Ver.  4.  High  Spiritual  Attainments
— 1.  Not  reached  without  the  diligent
exercise  of  all  our  powers.  2.  The
outward  senses  are  the  gateways  of
spiritual  knowledge.  3.  Only  that
which  affects  the  heart  interests  and
influences  the  whole  man.  4.  Hiijh
spiritual  attainments  the  best  qualifica-
tion for  instructin<^  others.

—  "  This  building  of  EzekiePs  is  not
to  be  understood  of  a  new  material
building,  but,  like  the  chariot  at  the
beginning  and  also  the  building  at  the
end,  is  nothing  else  than  the  Kingdom
of  Christ,  the  holy  Church  of  Christen-
dom here  on  earth  even  to  the  last
day.  But  how  all  the  parts  are  to
be  properly  interpreted  and  placed,
that  we  will  defer  until  we  shall  see
the  whole  building  prepared  and  ready.
Although  it  is  a  myster}'',  it  ought  not
to  remain  a  mystery." — Lange.

—  "  The  threefold  summons  to
attention  intimates  that  a  matter  is
here  treated  of  which  is  of  the  greatest
importance  to  the  community  of  God.
To  this  it  is  essential  that  faith  in
the  indestructibility  of  the  Kingdom  of
God,  and  in  its  resuriection  from  every
death,  live  in  it  in  full  power.  It  is
this  alone  which  is  here  treated  of,
however  dense  may  be  tlie  veil  of
architectural  details  behind  which  it  is
concealed. " — Hengstenberg.


EOMILETIGS,
The  Church  of  God  a  BuiLDiNa


(Vers.  5-49.)

I.  Strongly  guarded.     "  Behold  a  wall  on  the  outside  of  the  house  round
about  "  (ver.  5).     The  first  and  second  Temples  were  surrounded  by  a  massive

430


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xt.


wall.  This  wall  denoted  not  only  the  separation  of  the  Church  from  the  world,
but  also  the  Divine  power  that  protected  the  Church  at  every  point.  The  Lord
is  said  to  be  a  wall  of  fire  and  a  shield  encompassing  and  guarding  His  people
(Zech.  ii.  5  ;  Ps.  v.  12).  Both  the  pre-and-post-exilian  Temples  have  perished ;
but  the  Church  of  God  remains,  and  is  more  firmly  established  than  ever.  The
Lord  is  its  invulnerable  defence,

IL  Accessible  to  every  sincere  inqnirer.  There  are  ample  gates  east,  north,
and  south  (vers.  6-19,  20-23,  24-26,  32-35).  1.  There  are  gates  to  show  that  all
are  welcome.  From  whatever  quarter  they  come,  the  gates  are  invitingly  open.
All  earnest  seekers  after  God,  of  whatever  nationality,  may  find  an  entrance
into  the  Divine  Temple  (Matt.  viii.  11).  2.  There  are  gates,  to  indicate  that  only
those  who  come  by  those  gates  can  be  admitted.  The  Lord  of  the  Temple  has  the
absolute  right  to  formulate  His  own  conditions  of  entrance.  There  is  to  be  a
moral  fitness  in  the  applicant  (Rev.  xxi.  27).  None  who  come  with  a  broken
and  contrite  heart — a  sense  of  self-helplessness  and  need — shall  be  turned  away
(Ps.  xxxiv.  18  ;  John  vi.  37).

IIL  Suffused  with  light.  There  are  windows,  narrow  without,  but  widened
within  to  diffuse  the  light  more  copiously  (ver.  16).  The  little  chambers  had
windows  :  so  little  Churches,  little  saints,  have  their  measure  of  light.  The
Church  of  God  is  the  light  and  instructor  of  the  world  (Matt.  v.  14).  If  that
light  were  quenched,  myriads  would  be  doomed  to  grope  their  aimless  way  in
hopeless  darkness.  The  Church  is  bright  and  clear  only  as  it  is  constantly
bathed  in  the  light  of  God.

IV.  With  ample  proxrlsion  for  acts  of  highest  worship.  1.  There  is  the  altar  of
sacrifice  (vers.  47,  39-43).  The  sacrifices  were  intended  to  point  out  the  desert
of  sin,  the  need  of  repentance  and  expiation,  to  acknowledge  that  the  goods  of
the  off'erer  belonged  to  God,  and  to  be  a  type  and  memorial  of  the  coming
sacrifice  of  Christ  to  be  ofi'ered  once  for  all.  They  were  a  pledge  of  the  sincerity
of  the  worshipper.  There  is  no  true  worship  without  sacrifice.  2.  There  is  the
offering  of  praise.  There  is  a  special  place  in  the  Temple  for  the  singers  (ver.  44).
The  music  was  assigned  to  the  Levites,  and  to  those  Israelites  of  note  whose
daughters  had  married  into  the  priesthood.  But  these  Israelites  were  allowed
to  take  part  only  in  the  instrumental  part  of  the  service ;  the  vocal  part  was
sung  by  the  Levites  only.  Wind  and  stringed  instruments  were  used — trumpets,
pipes  or  hautboys,  viols,  lutes,  harps,  and  cymbals.  Psalms  were  sung  and  were
arranged  according  to  the  character  of  the  service,  on  ordinary  or  special  occasions.
Music  reaches  its  highest  consecration  when  it  is  devoted  to  the  worship  of  God.
Praise  is  the  essence  of  true  worship.  3.  There  is  the  duty  of  prayer  (vers.  45,  46).
Prayers  were  ofi'ered  by  the  priests  at  the  morning  and  evening  services,  and
were  expressed  in  well-known  and  constantly  repeated  forms,  in  some  of  which
prayers  the  people  joined  the  priests.  After  prayers,  they  rehearsed  the  ten
commandments  and  repeated  the  portions  of  the  Law  written  on  their  phylacteries.
The  phylactery  sentences  were  repeated  daily,  the  time  of  the  morning  at  which
this  duty  was  to  begin  being  stated  by  the  Jewish  Rabbis  as  "  from  such  time
as  a  man  can  see  to  distinguish  between  blue  and  green,  even  until  sunrising.**
The  chambers  of  the  priests  were  conveniently  situated  for  their  duties.  It
was  their  privilege  to  come  near  to  the  Lord  to  minister  unto  Him  (ver.  46).
Prayer  brings  the  soul  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God,  and  is  an  essential
element  in  genuine  worship.

V.  With  an  imposing  and  conspicuous  entrance.  "  The  porch  of  the  house  •
(vers.  48,  49).     The  porch  was  an  elevated  building,  rising  higher  than  the

431


OHAP.  XL.


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


Temple  itself,  and  was  approaclied  by  a  flight  of  steps.  It  was  a  prominent  and
imposing  object  as  soon  as  you  entered  the  inner  court,  or  court  of  sacrifice.  It
admitted  to  the  Holy  Place,  and  led  ultimately  to  the  most  Holy  Place.  While
the  porch  seemed  to  invite  the  worshipper  to  enter,  it  also  taught  that  we
are  not  to  rush  into  the  Divine  presence  with  indecent  haste,  but  draw  near
thoughtfully  and  by  slow  and  solemn  stages — passing  first  through  the  outer
court,  then  the  inner,  and  through  the  porch  into  the  house  itself.  Christ  is
the  door  of  the  heavenly  Temple  (John  x.  9 ;  Rev.  iv.  1),  and  through  Him  the
soul  is  conducted  into  the  midst  of  its  imperishable  treasures  and  endless
revelations.

Lessons. — 1.  The  Church  of  God  is  securely  founded  in  unchanging  (ruth,     2.  Is
composed  of  indestructible  material.     3.  Invites  all  men  to  share  in  its  pivUeges,


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.


Ver.  5.  The  Divine  Protection— 1.

Surrounds  the  Church  like  a  wall.  2.
Is  invincible.  3.  Secures  the  ever-
lasting safety  of  the  faithful.  4.
Cannot  be  pleaded  as  an  excuse  for
personal  unfaithfulness.

—  "  The  Churcli  has  a  triple  wall —
1.  God  as  protection.  2.  The  angels
as  guardians.  3.  Believers — in  other
words,  their  prayers." — A.  Lapide.

—  "  The  object  of  the  wall  is  to
draw  the  boundary  between  the  sacred
and  tlie  profane.  This  boundary  had
a  double  meaning.  To  the  community
it  was  a  warning  not  to  draw  near
the  s.mctuary  with  unrenewed  hearts.
With  res{)ect  to  God,  it  guaranteed
that  He  would  eventually  separate
His  people  from  the  world.  Because
the  people  of  God  had  neglected  the
warning  implied  in  the  boundary,  as  a
just  punishment  the  boundary  was  also
in  the  latter  respect  destroyed.  To
the  desecration  as  guilt  succeeded  the
desecration  as  punishment.  In  the
pierced  wall,  the  smitten  city  lay  an
image  of  the  abandonment  of  the  people
of  God  to  the  world.  That  this  re-
lation will  be  altered  again  in  the
future,  that  God  will  ajain  raise  His
reformed  people  to  inde[)endence,  is
figured  by  the  erection  of  the  new
wall,  which  in  this  respect  is  an  em-
bodiment of  God's  help  and  grace  that
are  to  be  imparted  to  the  covenant-
peo[)le  renewed  in  spirit." — Hevgsten-
berg.

—  "  A  measuring-reed  of  s'\^  cubits

433


long  by  the  cubit  and  a  hand-breadth.
The  larger  measure  of  the  sanctuary —

1.  From  the  love  wherewith  God  loves
us.  2.  According  to  the  love  where-
with we  ought  in  return  to  love  God
in  the  brethren." — Oocceius.

Ver.  6.  "And  went  up  the  stairs
thereof."  (See  also  vers.  22,  26,  31,
34,  37,  49).  Progress  in  Divine
Things.  "1.  /F(?  come  to  the  know-
ledge of  spiritual  things  by  degrees  ;  they
are  not  known  at  once,  but  successively.
Temple  mysteries  we  come  unto  by
steps.  Christ  leads  His  people  on  from
one  thing  to  another,  from  faith  to
faith,  from  strength  to  strength.  2.
The  knowledge  of  Divine  things  is  not
attained  without  labour  and  difficulty.
There  are  steps  and  stairs  in  this
Temple,  and  those  that  will  behold  the
glory  and  understand  the  mysteries  of
it  must  go  upward,  first  one  step  and
then  another.  It  is  difficult  to  go  up
steps  and  stairs.  3.  In  Temple  work  we
must  make  progress.  It  is  not  suflScient
to  go  up  a  step  or  two  and  then  stand
still  or  descend  :  we  must  go  forward,
higher,  to  the  top.  Christ  overcame
all  difficulties ;  He  went  up  all  the
stairs,  and  persevering  to  the  end,  was
crowned  (Rev.  iii.  21)." — Greenhill.

—  "  When  believers  enter  they  have
— 1.  A  guide  with  them  into  all  truth.

2.  Without  Him  they  can  do  nothing.

3.  Progress  is  made  toward  full  know-
ledge of  God  and  Christ." — Cocceius.

-r.  *'The  east  gate  ^s  model  and


ItoMrlEtW  COMMENT  A  kr-  Er.FKtnt.


OttAK  tt


pattern  gate  in  its  homiletical  signifi-
cance :  every  sermon  ought  to  lead  to
the  Father  through  Christ/'

—  "  The  Jews  called  the  east  the
fore-part  of  heaven  ;  the  west  the  back-
part  :  by  the  first  they  denote  spiritual
things;  by  the  second  temporal  and
earthly  things.  Those  that  come  into
this  Temple  must  mind  spiritual  things;
they  must  not  let  out  their  hearts  to
the  world  and  worldly  delights— they
are  western  things,  and  there  was  no
door  in  the  west.  They  must  go  up-
wards, not  downwards  ;  keep  within,
not  go  out." — CrreenhilL

—  "  One  must  not  so  thoughtlessly
imagine  that  only  a  single  leap  is
required  to  come  into  heaven,  but
constant  ascent  is  requisite  and  neces-
sary in  order  to  seek  after  the  things
that  are  above."

Ver.  7.  The  Chambers  of  the  Temple

— "  1.  Represent  the  mansions  which
are  in  heaven.  2.  The  entertainment,
rest,  and  comfort  the  saints  enjoy  in  the
Church  under  Christ.  3.  The  several
congregations,  or  churches,  of  Gospel
times,  be  they  little  or  great,  all  which
are  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  as  these
chambers  were  in  this  visional  Temple."
— Greenhill.

—  In  the  Lord's  House  are  many
mansions,  according  to  the  distinction
of  offices  and  gifts :  each  mansion
serves  to  ornament  the  house.

Ver.  8.  "The  porch  reminds  us  of
the  peace  and  repose  connected  with
the  consciousness  ofihe  grace  of  God."
— CEcolampadius,

—  "Truly  they  who  are  preparing
for  the  holy  office  of  the  ministry  are
measured  in  many  ways,  and  they
should  still  further  test  themselves  by
the  measure  of  the  sanctuary." — Starch

Vers.  13-15.  "  Thus  those  who  are
in  this  way  are  walled  around,  covered
and  protected  on  all  sides;  so  that
nothing  can  befall  them  in  Him  who
is  the  Door  and  the  Way,  but  every-
thing leads  forward  to  the  sanctuary
when  we  walk  in  Christ  Jesus." —
Cocceius,


Ver.  16.  The  Lijht  of  the  Church—
1.  Is  borrowed  light  that  comes  through
the  windows  of  its  ordinances.  2.  An
evidence  of  its  joyous  experiences  (Ps.
xcvii.  11).  3.  A  testimony  to  the
world  wrapped  in  moral  darkness.

—  "  By  these  windows  is  signified
the  spiritual  light  which  should  be  in
the  Church  of  Christ.  He  is  called
The  Sun  (Mai.  iv.  2),  A  Great  Light
(Isa.  ix.  2),  and  The  Light  of  the
World  (John  viii.  12).  And  by  those
windows — the  apostles,  prophets,  evan-
gelists, pastors,  and  teachers — He  hath
and  still  doth  let  in  light  into  the
Church.  The  least  churches  and  the
least  saints  shall  not  be  without  win-
dows ;  they  shall  have  light  and  joy,
teaching  and  comfort." — GreenhilL

—  "  In  the  Church  of  God  darkness
has  no  place,  but  the  light  of  truth
and  faith  shines  everywhere;  yea,
believers  themselves  are  a  light  in  the
Lord,  whose  works  shine  before  men.
They  who  walk  in  the  ways  of  the
Lord  have  the  true,  cheerful  and  clear
light ;  while  the  natural  soul  is  a  gate-
way without  windows." — Lange.

Vers.  17-19.  The  Outer  and  Inner
Courts  of  the  Temple.  "  In  the  out-
ward court  the  people  stood ;  and  it
represented  the  nations  outside  the
Church.  The  inward  court  repre-
sented the  Church,  where  the  Word
of  God  enlightens  and  nourishes  us,
and  Christ  is  our  altar  of  perfumes.
The  Holy  of  Holies  represented  heaven;
into  it  the  high  priest  only  entered —
typifying  our  High  Priest,  the  Lord
Jesus,  His  entrance  in  there  alone
by  His  own  power,  to  bring  us  thither.
So  that  the  first  signified  the  state  of
nature  ;  the  second  the  state  of  grace ;
the  third  the  state  of  glory.  Hereby
the  greatness  of  the  Church  in  the
time  of  the  Gospel,  and  especially  in
the  time  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  is
pointed  out.  These  courts  were  of
great  compass,  and  had  gates  looking
to  the  several  parts  of  the  world." —
GreenhilL

Ver.  17.  "Those  who  are  employed
in  God's   House  ought  to  keep  even

B  433


etkp,  tL


tiOkJLETiC  COMMENTARY :  EZ^RtSL


their   feet    clean,    for    holiness    is   the
ornament  of  His  House." — Starch.

Ver.  20.  "By  the  diversity  of  the
gates  you  may  recognise  the  diversity
of  those  who  enter.  As  in  our
cathedrals  every  part  tells  something
to  the  deeper-seeing  connoisseur,  so
this  is  still  more  the  case  in  Ezekiel's
Temple.  Everything  here  is  in  har-
mony and  mutual  correspondence,  like
the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments,
Moses  and  Christ,  the  prophets  and
the  apostles.'* — Lange,

Ver.  24.  When  we  are  in  Temple
work,  we  must  move  according  to  the
mind  of  the  Master  Builder,  and  not
of  our  own  heads.

Ver.  28.  "  The  courts  are  separated,
for  the  covenant  of  Abraham  is  one
thing,  the  covenant  of  Moses  another,
and  the  covenant  of  Christ  still  another.
Yet  they  only  mutually  confirm  one
another.  For  are  not  the  contents  of
the  covenant  the  promises  of  God,  who
graciously  forgives  sin?  One  court,
however,  is  nearer  than  another  to  the
sanctuary.  Walkest  thou  unhindered
in  the  court  of  the  priests,  busied  with
spiritual  sacrifices ;  then  thank  the
Lord,  and  extend  the  hand  to  others
that  by  thy  support  they  may  over-
come difficulties." — (Ecolampadius,

Ver.  31.  "And  the  going  up  to  it
had  eight  steps."  (See  also  vers.  34,
37,  49  ;  comp.  with  vers.  22,  26).  A
Step  Higher — 1.  An  important  quali-
fication for  every  leader  of  religious
thought,  2.  Should  be  the  constant
ambition  of  every  student  of  Scripture
truth.  3.  Should  mark  the  steady  ad-
vance of  individual  spiritual  experience.

Ver.  37.  "  The  people  that  came
thither  were  to  be  holy,  but  the  priests
who  came  into  the  inner  court  were  to
be  more  holy.  They  who  are  nearest
God  should  be  most  holy ;  they  are  to
be  a  step  at  least  above  others." —
GreefihilL

Ver.  38.  "This   signifiea   that   our
434


hearts  may  remain  unclean,  even  when
we  give  our  bodies  to  be  burned  for
the  glory  of  God.  The  constant  morti-
fication of  the  flesh  must  ground  itself
on  Christ,  otherwise  we  will  lose  cour-
age.— The  believing  soul  presents  its
heart,  as  one  sets  a  table,  on  which
Christ  as  sacrifice  is  beheld,  for  faith
lays  hold  of  this  alone." — Lange,

Vers.  39-43.  A  Place  of  Sacrifice
— 1.  May  be  found  everywhere.  2.
Essential  to  acceptable  worship,  3.
A  constant  reminder  of  sin.  4.  Con-
stantly points  to  the  All-efficacious
Sacrifice.

—  It  is  not  to  be  imagined  that
under  the  times  of  Christ  the  Jewish
worship  should  be  revived.  These
expositions  of  tables,  offerings,  and
sacrifices  import  some  other  thing—
the  good  and  plentiful  provision  which
should  be  in  the  Gospel  Church.

—  "  The  return  to  literal  sacrifices
would  seem  to  be  a  return  to  the
beggarly  elements  of  legal  types  after
we  have  got  the  antitype.  We  are
sure,  therefore,  that  the  Temple-sacri-
fices in  restored  Jerusalem,  of  whatever
nature  they  may  be,  will  not  set  aside
the  fixed  principle  that  the  one  sacrifice
of  Christ  is  final  and  complete.  Two
considerations  may  help  to  lessen  the
difficulty.  1.  The  Jews,  as  a  nation,
stand  to  God  in  a  peculiar  relation,
distinct  from  that  of  Christians  of  the
present  elect  Church,  gathered  out  of
Jews  and  Gentiles  indiscriminately.
The  same  principle,  therefore,  of
the  non-existence  of  sacrifice  in  any
form  may  not  hold  good  in  that  dis-
pensation to  be  ushered  in  by  the
advent  of  Messiah  and  His  reign  over
the  restored  Israelite  nation  as  holds
good  in  our  present  Gentile  times.
That  shall  be  the  period  of  public
liturgy,  or  perfect  outward  worship  of
the  great  congregation  on  earth,  as  the
present  time  is  one  of  gathering  out
spiri'tual  worshippers  one  by  one.  Be-
sides Israel's  relation  to  Christ  as  her
spiritual  Saviour,  she  will  then  also
perform  a  perfect  outward  service  of
sacrifice,  prayer,  and  praise,  as  a  nation,
to  her  manifested  Divine  King  reigning


UOMllJSTiO  COMMENTARY:  SZEKTeL


in  the  midst  of  her ;  and  all  nations  of
the  earth  shall  take  a  part  in  that  ser-
vice as  recognising  His  Divine  King-
ship over  them  also.  2.  The  Israelites
shall  probably  also  set  forth,  in  all  its
harmonious  parts,  the  outward  beauty
and  inward  sanctity  of  the  Temple-
service,  which  in  their  palmiest  days
of  old  they  had  never  exhibited  in  its
full  perfection.  The  full  excellence
and  antitypical  perfection  of  all  the
parts  of  the  ancient  Temple-service,
which,  from  ignorance  of  its  hidden
meaning,  seemed  a  cumbersome  yoke
and  unintelligible  to  the  worshipper,
shall  then  be  fully  understood,  and
therefore  shall  become  a  delightful  ser-
vice of  love,  instead  of,  as  formerly,
a  burdensome  task.  Israel's  province
will  be  to  exhibit,  in  the  minutest
details  of  sacrifice,  the  essential  unity
of  the  Law  and  Gospel,  which  now
seem  opposed.  The  ideal  of  the  theo-
cratic Temple  and  its  service  shall  then
first  be  realised." — Fausset,

Ver.  44.  "  These  set  out  the  spiritual
joy  and  songs  which  should  be  in  the
Church  of  Christ  (Isa.  Ixv.  14,  17,  18).
In  this  Jerusalem  will  be  a  holy  priest-
hood to  offer  up  spiritual  praise  (1  Pet.
ii  5).  Conquerors  are  full  of  joy  and
much  in  singing  praises,  especially
spiritual  conquerors." — Greenhill.

—  "A  place  in  the  House  of  God  is
justly  due  to  them  who  sing  the  praise
of  God  in  spiritual  and  heavenly  songs,
which  contribute  so  powerfully  to
spiritual  edification.  In  these  corrupt
days  music  is  used  more  for  sin  and
vanity  than  for  the  praise  of  God,
When  will  it  be  free  from  this  service
to  vanity  ?  He  who  draws  near  to
God  sings  to  Him  also  in  His  heart :
they  sing  best  who  in  the  midst  of
troubles  are  full  of  joy.  They  incite
others  to  sing." — Lange.

—  "  That  the  singers  are  here  so
prominent  is  explained  by  this,  that  in
the  exalted  position  of  the  community
of  God  more  ample  material  was  given
them  for  new  songs,  so  that  the  singing
in  the  worship  of  the  new  Temple  must
play  a  chief  part,  as  indeed  the  multi-
plication of  the  singers  and  musicians


under  David  stood  connected  with  the
advance  which  the  people  of  God  had
then  made.  Even  in  the  times  soon
after  the  return  from  the  exile  singing
revived  in  a  degree  that  had  not  been
since  David." — Hengstenherg.

Vers.  45,  46.  "  By  these  priests  may
be  understood  the  ministers  of  the
Gospel  who  have  charge  of  the  holy
things  and  persons  (1  Tim.  vi.  13,  14 ;
Acts  XX.  28).  Tliey  are  the  watchmen ;
the  charge  of  souls  is  committed  to
them,  and  they  must  be  accountants
for  them  (Heb.  xiii.  17).  So  true
Christians  are  priests  in  this  Temple,
and  some  have  charge  of  the  holy
things  and  persons  therein  (Rev,  v.
10),"— GreenhUl.

Ver.  46.    The  Priestly    Office— 1.

Gains  its  distinction  more  by  moral
fitness  than  sacerdotal  lineage.  2.  A
solemn  responsibility.  3.  Brings  the
ministrant  into  the  immediate  presence
of  God.  4.  Is  the  honoured  privilege
of  the  truly  godly.

—  **  Since  *  sons  of  Zadok '  is  in  our
language  equivalent  to  *  sons  of  right-
eousness,* this  implies  that  only  those
duly  keep  the  charge  who  are  justified
by  faith  and  born  of  God,  whom  Jesus
Christ  has  begotten  and  upholds  by
the  word  of  His  power." — CEcolam-
padius.

Ver.  47.  "  Christ  doeth  all  things  in
His  Church  in  number,  weight,  and
measure.  By  His  Spirit  He  ordereth
the  length,  breadth,  and  depth  of  His
spiritual  House,  and  bestoweth  His
gifts  by  measure  to  each  member
(Rom.  xii. ;  2  Cor.  x. ;  Ephes.  iii.  4)."
— Trapp.

—  **  The  true  Temple  is  the  body
of  Christ  as  He  took  it  out  of  the  grave
on  the  third  day,  for  it  surpasses  all
figures  and  is  pure  life.  The  prophet
here  prophesies  of  it;  but  he  does  so
in  lisping  words,  and  for  the  sake  of
his  contemporaries  his  understanding
of  Christ  in  these  chapters,  where  he
speaks  of  Christ's  Kingdom  and  sanc-
tuary, is  still  in  swaddling-dothea." —
Diedrich.

43^


dHA^.  &Li.


ilOMlLETiC  COMMENTARf:  EZEKTtH.


Vers.  48,  49.  "The  porch  of  the
house."     The  Entrance  to  the  Church.

— 1.  Stands  invitingly  open  to  the
penitent.  2.  Must  be  passed  to  enjoy
the  highest  spiritual  privileges.  3.  Is
broad  enough  to  admit  the  worst  who
are  truly  contrite,  and  narrow  enough
to  exclude  the  incorrigible.  4.  A
joyous  spectacle  to  angels  and  God
when  thronged  with  sincere  in-
quirers.

Ver.  48.  "  It  was  of  the  nature  of
the  porch  to  be  open,  being  an  open
approach  to  a  space  that  is  or  may  be
closed,  which  shelters  from  the  incle-
mency of  the  weather  those  who  must
wait  for  the  opening.  A  door  is  not
mentioned  here,  as  otherwise  generally
in  the  closed  rooms  of  the  Temple.
The  words,  *  three  cubits  on  this  side,
and  three  cubits  on  that,*  indicate  that
an  open  space  was  left  in  the  midst.
In  the  porches  of  the  court,  that
had  a  large  thoroughfare,  the  whole


space  within  must  have  been  open." —
Hengstenberg.

—  Christ  is  a  porch  to  His  people.
Jerome  once  said  that  while  we  are
in  this  life  we  are  in  a  porch-state.
Here  we  have  a  body  of  death,  see  all
things  imperfectly ;  but  when  we  enter
into  the  heavenly  Temple  we  shall  be
free,  and  know  as  we  are  known.

Ver.  49.  "  There  were  pillars,  one
on  this  side  and  another  on  that.**
"  The  proportion  in  height  agrees  with
the  thickness  of  the  corner  pillars,
which  in  the  court  amounts  only  to
two  cubits,  here  to  five.  In  a  building
which  was  consecrated  to  the  Lord  of
heaven,  and  was  to  effect  a  connection
between  heaven  and  earth,  the  most
emphatic  reference  to  heaven  could
not  be  wanting ;  as  far  as  it  was  pos-
sible for  man,  the  head  of  the  building
must  point  to  heaven;  humility,  no
less  than  pride,  has  need  of  a  tower
whose  top  is  in  heaven." — Hengstenberg.


The  Temple  and  its  Ornaments.    (Chap,  xli.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.
"The  temple" — the  holy  place,  the
Temple  proper,  as  distinguished  from
the  porch,  described  in  chap.  xl.  48,  49,
and  from  the  Holy  of  Holies  (1  Kings  vi.
1 7 ;  vii.  50).  "  Which  was  the  breadth
of  the  tabernacle."  WTiich  was  is  not  in
the  original,  and  should  be  omitted.  As
in  the  measurement  of  the  porch  the
angel  had  pointed  to  Solomon's  Temple,
so  here  in  the  edifice  itself  he  points  to
the  old  Tabernacle.  Worship  is  pro-
gressive, and  expresses  itself  in  har-
mony with  the  culture  of  every  age.

Ver.  2.  "The  breadth  twenty  cubits."
The  measurements  are  internal,  the
same  as  in  the  Temple  of  Solomon.

Ver.  3.  "Then  went  he  inward."

Towards  the  Holy  of  Holies.  It  is
significant  that  in  this  case  it  is  not
said  he  brought  me  in,  but  he  went  in^
because  the  Holy  of  Holies  was  not
to  be  entered  even  by  a  priest  like
Ezekiel,  but  only  by  the  high  priest
436


once  a  year.  So  the  angel  enters,  and
announces  the  measurements  to  Ezekiel
whilst  he  stood  in  front  of  the  Temple.
"  The  door  six  cubits,  and  the  breadth
of  the  door  seven  cubits."  The  first
measurement  of  the  door  was  from
post  to  post  six  cubits,  and  the  second
measurement,  the  breadth  of  the  door^
was  the  breadth  of  the  actual  doors
which  shut  off  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and
which  may  have  been  so  hung  that
each  of  the  posts  projected  half  a  cubit
beyond  the  hinge  of  the  door,  which
opened  inwards.

Ver.  4.  "  So  he  measured  the  length
thereof."  The  measurements  of  the
Holy  of  Holies  exactly  correspond  with
those  in  Solomon's  Temple  (1  Kings
vl  20).

Ver.  5.  "The  wall  of  the  house" —

the  outer  wail  of  the  Temple  itselt.
Its  thickness  of  six  cubits  corresponds
with  the  colossal  proportions  of  the
architecture  of  the  East.     "  Every  side


HOMILETW  COMiMMTAnt:  EZEKIEL


odAP.  tit


cham'ber'* — the   singular  used   collec-     was  to  be  held,  as  of  old,  not  sacred,
tively  for   the  plural,  to  denote   the      The  verb  I  saw  governs  the  whole  of


whole  series  of  side  cliambers.

Ver.  6.  "Three,  one  over  another,
and  thirty  in  order."  Literally,  "three,
thirty  times."  That  is,  there  were
three  stories,  and  each  story  was
divided  into  thirty  chambers.  "They
entered  into  the  wall  which  was  of
the  house  for  the  side  cliambers."
The  wall  here  described  is  not  the
wall  of  the  Temj)le,  which  was  six
cubits  (ver.  5),  but  another  wall,  which
was  five  cubits  (ver.  9),  parallel  to  it,
built  for  the  side  chambers,  and  may
be  said  to  be  of  the  house — i.^.,  be-
longing to  it.

Ver.  7.  "There  was  an  enlarging."

This  wall  had  for  the  ground-story  its
full  thickness  of  five  cubits  ;  then  it
was  diminished  one  cubit,  so  as  to
form  a  ledge  whereon  to  rest  the
beams  of  the  floor  of  the  second  story,
and  again  was  further  diminished  one
cubit  for  the  floor  of  the  third  story.
Thus  tliere  was  an  enlarging  of  the
second  story  of  the  chambers  by  one
cubit,  and  of  the  third  story  by  two
cubits  beyond  the  breadth  of  the  cham-
bers on  the  ground-floor.  "  A  winding
about  still  upwards."  The  upper
stories  were  approached  by  winding
stairs,  still  upward  from  one  story  to
another.

Ver.  8.  "Great  cubits."  "Literally,
to  the  extremity  or  root  of  the  hand."
— Henderson.  "To  the  joining  or  point
where  the  foundation  of  one  chamber
ceased  and  another  began." — Fairbairn,
"  To  the  wing  of  the  house." — Buxtorf.
"The  Hebrew  word  signifies  in  the
first  instance  joining^  and  is  probably
used  as  an  architectural  term  to  denote
line  of  junction  between  two  stories,
which  would  be  that  of  the  ceiling  of
the  lower  and  the  floor  of  the  upper
story." — Speakei's  Commentary.

Ver.  9.  "And  that  which  was  left"

— the  passage  between  the  side  cham-
bers and  the  Temple  wall,  implying
that  no  place  was  to  be  left  which


the  eighth  and  ninth  verses.


Vers.  12-17.  In  these  verses  we
have  a  summary  of  the  measurements
and  details  of  buildings  already  men-
tioned. The  buildings  measured  had
been  the  gates  of  the  courts,  the  Temple,
and  the  building  on  the  separate  place.
All  the  overlaying  was  done  by  care-
ful measurement,  accuracy  of  measure
being,  according  to  Hebrew  ideas,  an
ingredient  of  perfection.

Ver.  18.  "Made  with  cherubim  and
palm  trees."  Cherubim  a  symbol  of
Divine  life ;  palm-trees  of  life  in
general.  "Every  cherub  had  two
faces."  Being  in  sculpture  or  carving,
two  faces  only  would  be  visible  to
the  spectator.  The  cherubim  have
each  four  faces  (chap.  i.  10).  They
indicate  that  the  house  is  dedicated
to  the  God  of  the  whole  terrestrial
creation ;  not  to  a  national  god  of
limited  power.

Ver.  19.  "The  face  of  a  man  was
toward  the  palm  trees."  The  faces
of  the  cherub  look  to  the  palms,  to
indicate  that  all  creation,  animate  and
inanimate,  is  a  whole — a  harmonious
work  of  the  creative  power  of  God.

Ver.  21.  "  The  appearance  of  the  one
as  the  appearance  of  the  other."    The

appearance  in  this  vision  was  the  same
as  in  other  visions :  the  appearance  of
the  sanctuary,  or  Holy  of  Holies,  was
similar  to  that  of  the  Temple.  They
differed  only  in  magnitude.

Ver.  22.  "  The  altar  of  wood — the
table  that  is  before  the  Lord."    The

altar  of  incense  (chap.  xliv.  16) :  at  it,
and  not  at  the  table  of  shew-bread,  the
priests  daily  ministered.  Table  and
altar  are  convertible  terms.  It  stood
in  front  of  the  vail,  and  is  therefore
said  to  be  before  the  Lord.  It  is
called  a  table,  as  being  that  at  which
the  Lord  will  take  delight  in  His
people,  as  at  a  feast.  It  is  not  to
be  confounded  with  the  eight  tables

4^7


CTtAP.  XM.


nOMlLETiC  COMMENTARY :  EZERIEL


outside  at  the  north  gate,  which  are
to  be  altars  for  sacrifice  of  the  burnt-
offering  and  sin-offering  (chap.  xl.
49).

Ver.  25.  "And  there  were  thick
planks  upon  the  face  of  the  porch
without."  Ewald  translates  it  leaf-
workf  which  agrees  very  well  with  the


context — "  And  (here  were  leaves  in  wood
on  the  face  of  the  porch  without.**

Ver.  26.  "Palm  trees  on  the  one
side  and   on  the   other  side."     The

porch  and  likewise  the  wings  take  the
character  of  the  subordinate  from  thia,
that  only  palms  are  figured  on  them,
and  not  cherubim  also.


HOMILETICS.
The  Temple  a  Symbol  of  the  Christian  Church.


(Vers.  1-26.)

I.  As  it  is  the  hahitation  of  the  Divine  presence.  "  This  is  the  most  holy
place  "  (ver.  4) ;  so  called  because  in  the  Tabernacle  and  in  Solomon's  Temple
it  was  in  this  place  that  the  Shekinah  dwelt — the  visible  manifestation  of  the
Divine  glory.  It  was  also  called  the  oracle  (1  Kings  vi.  16),  because  from
thence  Jehovah  declared  His  will.  Into  this  sacred  adytum  even  Ezekiel
was  not  admitted.  The  angel  entered  alone.  "Then  went  he  inward  and
measured"  (ver.  3),  and  reported  the  dimensions  to  the  seer,  as  he  stood
awe-struck  at  the  door.  The  hallowed  presence  of  God  is  unapproachable  but
to  the  holiest.  The  Christian  Churcli  to-day  is  the  spiritual  Temple  of  Jehovah,
His  home  and  resting-place;  it  is  filled  with  His  living  presence,  and  that
presence,  growing  more  luminous  and  satisfying,  will  be  the  imperishable  glory
of  the  Church  for  evermore.

II.  As  it  is  a  comhination  of  strength  and  beauty  (Ps.  xcvi.  6).  \.  It  is
constructed  in  harmony  with  well-known  laws  (vers.  1-17).  Its  walls  are  strong
and  massive,  its  buildings  symmetrical,  exact  in  measurement,  every  detail
minutely  developed,  and  the  whole  edifice  constructed  according  to  the  laws
of  proportion.  Everything  about  the  building  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the
great  end  proposed — to  reveal  the  character  of  the  Master  Builder  and  to
foster  and  promote  the  loftiest  worship.  The  indestructible  stability  of  the
structure  is  assured,  as  it  is  built  on  the  incorruptible  laws  of  righteousness  and
love.  The  grandest  fabrics  of  the  world-empire  are  gnawed  and  crunched  by
the  destructive  teeth  of  time.  The  colossal  piles  of  architecture  which  filled
the  soul  of  Ezekiel  with  wonder  and  fear  in  his  Assyrian  captivity  are  now
dust  and  ruins,  monuments  in  their  decay  of  the  unfailing  truth  of  God's  Word
and  significant  studies  of  the  pious  antiquarian ;  but  the  Temple  of  Jehovah
remains,  and  shall  from  age  to  age  endure.  2.  It  is  ornamented  with  artistic
suggestiveness  (vers.  18-20,  25).  Doors,  posts,  pillars,  and  walls  were  chastely
decorated  with  the  figures  of  cherubim  and  palm-trees — symbols  of  life,  life
in  its  manifold  and  highest  forms,  life  traced  upwards  to  its  grand  creative
source.  The  charm  of  all  art  is  in  its  power  to  delineate  life  in  its  endless
manifoldness.  The  painted  canvas  or  chiselled  stone  is  of  no  value  unless  it
contains  those  inimitable  touches  of  genius  that  are  full  of  the  suggestiveness
of  life.  The  joy  of  a  picture  is  in  what  it  suggests  rather  than  in  what  it
portrays;  the  artist  may  see  more  in  a  theme  than  he  has  power  to  represent.
The  dewdrop  that  glitters  on  the  end  of  every  leaf  after  a  shower  is  beautiful
even  to  a  child  ;  but  to  a  Herschel,  who  knows  that  the  lightning  itself  sleeps
within  it,  and  understands  and  feels  all  its  mysterious  connections  with  earth

438


BOM  I  LET  W  COMMENT  AUY:  EZEKIEl.  ohap.  ill

and  sky  and  planets,  it  is  suggestive  of  a  far  deeper  beauty.  The  eye  sees  only
what  it  brings  with  it  the  power  to  see.  The  Temple  of  God  is  a  living
Temple,  quivering  with  the  Divine  life  that  pervades  every  part,  and  to  the
spiritually  cultured  senses  it  teems  with  radiant  forms  of  divinest  beauty.

III.  As  it  makes  ample  provision  for  the  highest  needs  of  the  soul  (ver.  22).

The  altpr  of  incense  is  here  significantly  called  "  the  table  that  is  before  the
Lord."  The  greatest  need  of  the  soul  is  God  ;  but  God  can  be  approached  and
known  only  through  sacrifice.  God  Himself  provides  the  altar  of  sacrifice  and
the  victim  too  (Heb.  ix.  11-14  ;  x.  10-14).  The  Divine  provision  is  a  well-spread
banquet,  over  which  God  Himself  presides.  All  are  invited  to  freely  partake,
and  the  joy  of  the  feast  is  found  in  the  presence  of  God  at  the  table.  The  altar
of  the  heavenly  Temple  is  an  altar  of  incense,  but  it  is  the  incense  of  praise  ;  and
as  the  incense,  daily  rising,  diffused  itself  and  perfumed  the  earthly  Temple,  so
the  sweet  odour  of  praise  and  thanksgivini^^  shall  continually  ascend  before  the
Lord  in  the  celestial  banqueting-house.  There  is  no  sacrifice  too  great  for  us  to
offer  to  Him  who  has  done  and  suffered  so  much  for  us.  In  an  Italian  hospital
was  a  soldier  lying  severely  wounded.  A  lady  visitor  spoke  to  him,  dressed  his
wound,  smoothed  his  pillow,  made  him  all  right  for  the  day,  and  before  leaving
placed  a  bouquet  of  flowers  beside  his  head.  The  grateful  soldier,  with  his  pale
face  and  eyes  full  of  tears,  looked  up  and  said,  "That  is  too  much  kindness."
She  was  a  lady  with  a  true  Italian  heart,  and  looking  back  to  the  soldier  she
quietly  replied,  "  No,  not  too  much  for  one  drop  of  Italian  blood  ! "  And  shall
we  not  freely  own  that  the  consecration  of  all  our  powers  of  body  a»ud  soul  is
not  too  much  to  give  in  return  for  the  shedding  of  our  Emmanuel's  blood  on
our  behalf  1

Lessons. — 1.  The  Temple  of  God  a  spiritual  fabric,     2.  The  everlasting  home  of  the
holy,     3.  Resplendent  with  Divine  glory.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-26.  "  Ezekiel  never  intended  the  Church  of  God,  the  Temple  of  the

that    a    structure    should    be    reared  Holy  Ghost,  as  it  shall  hereafter  be

precisely  according   to  the   plan  and  manifested   on   earth,   shall    be  on  a

measurements  he  furnishes,  otherwise  scale   of  grandeur  such  as  has  never

he  would  have  been  still  more  minute  yet  been  witnessed,  and   its   worship

in    his    delineations.       He    has   given  shall  be  on  a  corresponding  scale  of

enough,  however,  for  his  great  object,  glory,  beauty,  and   blessedness.     Not

wliich  was  chiefly  to  show  that  in  the  till  then  shall  the  Lord  be  worshipped

Divine   purpose  respecting  the  future  visibly  in  the  beauty  of  holiness  by  the

there  was  to  be  a  full  and  every  way  whole  congregation  of  earth,  led  on

complete  reconstruction  of  the  House  by  Israel  as  the  leader  of  the  mighty

of   God,    if  not   in  the   outward   and  choir.      None   of   the   defects   which

material  sense,  yet  in  the  higher  things,  attend  our  present  liturgical  worship

which  that  represented  and  symbolised,  shall  alloy  the  perfection  of  the  public

and  with  the  effect  of  securing  a  far  services  of  God  which  shall  then  be

purer  and  more  elevated  condition  for  rendered    to     Him     through    Christ,

the  covenant-people.     It   is  this   last  There   shall   be   no   divisions.      Now

point  which  throughout  he  seeks  to  the  catholicity  of  the  Church  is  but

render  prominent  by  the  nature  of  his  partially  seen,  though  it  is  a  blessed

descriptions." — Fairbairn.  reality,  and  its  unity  is  hardly  to  be

—  "The  spiritual  lesson  to  be  learned  recognised  at  all,  split  up  as  it  is  into

by  us  from  the  description  here  is,  that  a  hundred  denominations  with  varying

439


cRAf.  xtt.  nOMTlETW  COMMBNTAkY :  EZEKIEl.


confessions  of  faith  and  different  forms  above  all  the  rest  of  his  order.** — M.

of  worship ;  then  all  shall  be  one  in  Henry,

outward  worship,  as  well  as  in  inward  —  "  We  ought  to  go  forward  under

unity  of  the  spirit,  and  the  world  will  God's   guidance   in   the  ways  of  the

in  consequence  be  attracted  to  believe  Lord  from  glory  to  glory,  but  not  to

the  Divine  misson  of  Messiah  (John  go  backward  or  stand  still  except  in

xvii.  21)." — Fansset,  meditation.      The    good    spirit   leads

—  The  Temple  a  Representation  of  men   to   the  Church,   there  to  listen

Christ  and  His  Ohurch.     '*  1.  It  is  a  devoutly  to  the  Word  of  God ;  the

rep'esenfation  of  the  humanity  of  Christ,  evil  spirit  keeps  them  back  from  it.*' —

(1.)  The  Temple  was  holy ;  so  was  Christ  Starke.
(Luke  i.  35 ;  Acts  xiii.   35  ;  1  Pet.  i.

19,  ii.  22  j  Heb.  vii.  26).      (2.)  The  Ver.  3.  "Then  went  he  inward  and

Temple  was  light  and  beautiful  within;  measured."     The  Highest  Truths — 1.

so  was  Christ  (Col.  ii.  3  ;  John  i.  14  ;  Often  a  lonely  quest.     2.  Seen  only  by

Cant.  V.  10 ;  Ps.  xlv.  2).     (3.)  By  the  the   morally  pure.      3.   Fill   the  soul

Temple  they  came  to  know  the  mind  with  profound  awe.    4.  Are  to  be  com-

of  God ;  so  by  Christ  God  is  known  municated  to  others  with  the  utmost

(Heb.  i.  2;  John  xv.  15).     (4.)  The  exactitude.
Temple  was  God's  delight :  there  God

dwelt  and  manifested  His  glory  (chap.  Ver.   4.    "And   he    said    unto   me,

xliii.  4,  5).     So  Christ  (John  i.  14  ;  This  is  the  most  holy  place.*'     The

Matt.  iii.  17 ;  1  Tim.  iii.  15).     2.  It  is  Most  Holy  Place — 1.   Is  where  God

a  representation  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  manifests   His   presence.      2.    Is  not

(1.)  All  things  in  this  Temple  were  now  confined  to  any  one  spot  under

measured;  so  in  the  Church  (Ephes.  ii.  heaven.     3.  What  a  privilege  to  meet

21 ;  Rev.  xi.  1).     (2.)  Christ  was  in  this  with  one  who  can  direct  us   to  the

Temple,  did  all  therein  and  showed  holiest  place !      "  He  said  unto   me,

all  to  the  prophet;  so  in  the  Church  This  is  the  most  holy  place."

(Col.  i.  18 ;  Rev.  ii.  1,  xxi.  3).     (3.)  In  —  "The   most   holy  place   is   set

this  Temple  were  chambers,  galleries,  before  us  as  the  goal,  and  we  under-

and  stories,  one  above  another ;  so  in  stand   thereby   a    heavenly   state    on

the  Church   there   are  several  ranks  earth,  namely,  the  Church  of  the  New

and  degrees  of  ofiBcers  and  members  Testament.    Accordingly,  in  chap,  xliii.

(1  Cor.  xii.  28;  Ephes  iv.  11  ;  1  Tim.  the  entire  circuit  of  the  mountain  is

V.  17,  iii.  8;  1  John  ii.  12,  13).** —  called   most  holy,   from   which  it  is

Greenhill,  evident  that  no  one  is  truly  inside

this  Temple,  or  even  in  its  courts,  who

Ver.  1.  "  If  we  diligently  attend  to  is  devoid  of  the  New  Testament  per-

the  instructions  given  us  in  the  plainer  fection — Heavenly    glory,   or    eternal

parts  of  religion,  and  profit  by  them,  bliss,  is  no  doubt  the  only  complete

we  shall  be  led  further  into  an  acquaint-  Holy  of  Holies,  yet  he  who  has  entered

ance  with  the  mysteries  of  the  King-  the  kingdom  of  grace  has  come  to  a

dom  of  God.     They  that  are  willing  to  glory  which  eye  hath   not   seen   nor

dwell  in  God's  courts  shall  at  length  ear  heard,  neither  hath  entered  into

be  brought  into  His  Temple.     Ezekiel  the  heart  of  man,  to  praise  and  glorify

was  himself  a  priest,  but  by  the  iniquity  God  for  ever." — Lange.
and   calamity  of  the   times   was   cut

short   of   his   birthright    privilege   of  Ver.  5.  *'The  chambers  are  not  all

ministering  in  the  Temple  ;  but  God  of  the   same   size,   but   they   are   al)

makes  up  the  loss  to  him  by  intro-  connected    with    the    sanctuary;    the

ducing  him  into  this  prophetical,  evan-  same  is   the   case  with   the   progress

gelical,  celestial  Temple,  and  employing  and    growth   of  the  members  of  the

liim  to  transmit  a  description  of  it  to  body  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head —

the  Church,  in  which  he  was  dignified  The  saints  of  God  are  also  measured

440


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


GtLk'f.  SU.


round  and  round;  no  heavier  task  is
laid  upon  them,  no  greater  tempta-
tion befalls  them,  than  what  is  their
Father's  will.  That  the  chambers  are
connected  denotes  the  brotherly  rela-
tion in  the  sanctuary  (Ps.  cxxxiii. ;  1
John  iiL). — God  provides  for  His  ser-
vants covert  and  shelter  in  the  world."
— Lange,

Ver.  6.  "There  is  a  threefold  rank
or  order  of  the  members  of  the  Church  ;
there  are  lowermost,  middlemost,  and
uppermost.  These,  as  they  have  their
several  offices  and  gifts  accordingly,  so
they  must  keep  to  their  own  stations,
do  their  own  business,  live  in  love,
and  wait  till  called  into  a  higher
room." — Trapp.

—  "Those  in  the  Church  are  not
all  of  one  rank,  whether  officers  or
others;  some  are  of  the  lower  rank,
some  in  the  middle,  and  some  upper-
most :  there  are  children,  young  men,
and  old  men ;  and  the  higher  any  get,
the  more  enlargement  and  greater
breadth  do  they  see  in  the  things  of
God  and  this  Temple ;  and  notwith-
standing this  difference  among  them,
there  is  a  sweet  harmony  between
them,  and  they  serve  one  another," —
GreenhUl.

—  "That  they  might  have  hold,
but  they  had  not  hold  in  the  wall  of
the  house."  Temple  Workers — 1.
Find  much  of  their  work  lies  outside
the  Temple  itself.  2.  Their  work  gains
its  significance  and  worth  by  being  in
connection  with  the  Temple.  3.  Their
nearness  to  the  Temple  no  guarantee
of  the  permanence  of  their  labour.
4.  Their  sphere  of  work,  like  these
side  chambers  resting  on  a  separate
wall,  may  be  removed  without  affect-
ing the  stability  of  the  Temple.  5.
Should  be  careful  in  all  their  work
to  maintain  the  inviolability  of  the
Temple.

—  "Leaning  upon  God,  upheld  by
Him,  but  not  mixed  up  with  Him  in
our  affairs. — Of  ourselves  we  cannot
stand  a  single  moment." — Lange,

Ver.  7.  StiU  Upward.  "  I.  Slill  up-
ward and  still   larger  is   the  plan  of


Divine  procedure,  1.  The  work  of
creation  was  in  full  harmony  with
this  method.  2.  The  same  in  revela-
tion. 3.  The  same  feature  in  Divine
architecture  in  our  Lord's  history.  4.
Same  in  the  history  of  the  Oliurcii.
IL  The  text  illustrates  the  saint's  ex-
perience. 1.  It  is  so  in  a  man's  views
and  thoughts  of  God.  2.  In  a  saint's
apprehension  of  the  blessings  of  salva-
tion. 3.  In  his  spiritual  growth  4.
So  too  with  his  love.  5.  So  in  aspira-
tion and  communion.  III.  The  text
sets  forth  the  saint's  destiny." — Homiletic
Monthly,

—  "  The  higher  we  build  up  ourr
selves  in  our  most  holy  faith,  the  more
should  our  hearts,  those  living  temples,
be  enlarged.*' — M,  Henry.

—  "  This  might  remind  God's
people  of  heavenly-mindedness  where-
by their  hearts  will  be  enlarged  when
once  got  above  the  world,  as  birds  sing
sweetly  when  aloft  in  the  air." — Trapp.

—  "In  God's  House  we  must  go
upward  by  growth  in  grace,  that  the
mind  may  be  always  the  more  firmly
directed  heavenward. — The  breadth  in
the  top  part. — Christians  ought  not  to
contract  but  to  expand  as  they  grow
older.  Higher  grace  gives  expansion
in  width  and  breadth.  The  narrower
points  of  view  with  which  we  ascend
gradually  disappear. — The  broader
heart  on  the  height  of  the  Christian
life  in  theory  and  practice. — Prayer  an
ascending  stair. — But  let  us  not  for-
get that  which  lies  in  the  middle.  In
the  middle  is  tlie  means,  the  way  of
mediation.*' — Lange,

Ver.  8.  The  secret  of  the  height
depends  on  the  foundation.

Ver.  10.  "  In  the  Church  much  more
room  is  taken  up  by  such  as  are  void
of  the  treasure  of  God's  grace  than  by
better  men,  rich  in  faith  and  heirs  of
the  Kingdom  of  Christ." — Trapp,

Ver.  12.  The  history  of  dogmas  is  in
many  respects  the  off-place  in  Ezekiel's
Temple.


Ver,    16,    "Enlightenment    is  from

411


CHAP.  XLI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  Y:  EZEKIEL,


above  ;    only    thus   do    we   obtain   a  especially  to  humbled  consciences,  but

conception  of  heavenly  things. — Faith  lions  against  enemies."
is  a  window,  and,  as  com  [tared   with

vision,  a  narrow  one. — Tluoiigh  His  Ver.    22.    "  The    table    before   the

wounds  we  see  into  the  heart  of  Christ  Lord."     The   Divine   Generosity — 1.

as  through  a  window." — Lange.  Provides  a  rich  and  varied  feast  for

His  people.     2.  His  presence  at  His

Ver.    17.    "The  Lord   Christ    will  own  table  is  the  choicest  feast.     3.  His

measure   Christians   of   what   height,  table  is  also  an  altar  from  which  the

breadth,    and    depth    they  are ;  their  incense    of    thanksgiving   and   praise

actions,  affections,  and  graces  will  be  rises  acceptably  before  Him.

measured  (Rev.  xi.  1)." — GreenhilL  —  "  The  altar  is  designated  as  the

table  or  board  before  the  Lord  because

Vers.  18-20,  25.  The  Noblest  Pro-  that  which  is  set  on  it — the  incense,

vlnce    of    Art — 1.    To    idealise    the  denoting  the  prayers  of  the  saints  (Ps.

manifold   forms   of  the    highest   life.  cxli.    2 ;    Kev.    v.   8,    viii.   3) — is   re-

2.  Is  consecrated  to  the  holiest  ends  garded   as   spiritual   food    wldch    the

in  the  service  of  God.     3.  Finds  scope  people  present  to  their  heavenly  King,

for  the  most  gifted  genius  in  beautify-  The  altar  appears  as  the  table  of  the

ing  the  Temple  of  God.  Lord   also   in   chap.   xliv.    16.      The

offering  appears  as  the  food  of  God

Ver.  18.   "  Cherubims  are  generally  Mai.  i.  7.     Not  without  cause  is  the

taken  for  the  portrait  of  angels  and  altar  in  1  Kings  vii.  48  compared  with

framed  to  the  beauty  of  young  men  the   table   of  shew-bread  ;  the  bread

with  wings.     Yet  is  the  description  of  laid  on  the  latter  denoted  the  spiritual

tliem  different  in  different  places,  as  in  nourishment  which  the  people  are  to

Ezekiel's  vision  chap,  i.,  Isaiah's  vision  present  to  their  heavenly  King,  which

chap,  vi.,  John's  vision  Rev.  iv.,  and  is  good  works." — Hengstenherg.

in  Solomon's  Temple.     Palm-trees — a  —  "  This  altar  is  at  the  same  time

very   beautiful,   upright   tree   from    a  a  table,  as  Christ  is  to  our  souls  in  the

straight,  well-grown  body,  spreading  its  Holy  Supper."

head  with  large  boughs  and  branches,  —  "  This  altar  of  wood  and  four-

which  were  used  on  occasions  of  joy  square  was  a  type  of  Christ,  in  whom

and  were  emblems  of  victory  (John  xii.  our  prayers  come  before  God  as  in-

13;  Rev.  vii.  9)." — Pool,  cense,  and  He  is  the  propitiation  for

—  "  This  was  to  teach  Christians  our  sins  (1  John  ii.  2  ;  Ex.  xxx.  1 ;  Ps.
who  are  the  temples  of  God.  1.  To  cxli.  2 ;  Rev.  v.  8).  Tiie  largeness  of
live  like  anirels  for  holiness.  2.  To  this  altar  above  that  of  old  shows  that
suffer,  as  palm-trees,  any  pressures  or  the  saints  under  the  Gospel  would  make
pains  for  His  sake  with  invincible  much  more  improvement  of  the  Lord
patience.  By  their  piety  in  their  lives  Jesus  in  prayer,  and  make  use  of  His
and  patience  at  their  death  the  primi-  mediation  and  intercession  by  faith
tive  Christians  won  much  upon  their  in  their  heavenly  sublimated  supplica-
persecutors." — Trapp.  tions,    than   the    saints    of    old    were

ordinarily  wont  to  do." — Trapp.

Ver.  19.  "These  seem  to  represent  —  This  Altar  a  Representation  of

the   angels  who  have  more  than   the  Christ.     ''  1.  Tliough  tne  altar  was  of

wisdom  of  a  man  and  the  courage  of  a  wood,  it  was  shittim  wood — incorrup-

lion  ;  and  in  both  they  have  an   eye  tible ;  so  Christ's  human  nature   was

to  the  palms  of  victory  and  triumph  incorruptible ;   it    saw    no  corruption

which  are  set  before  them,  and  which  (Acts  xiii.  35).     2.  It  was  larger  than

they  are  sure  of  in  all  their  conflicts  that  under  the  Law ;  so  the  worship

with    the    powers    of   darkness." — M.  of  God  in  Christ's  time  should  be  en-

Ilenry,  larged  (Mai.   i.   2).     3.  Sweet  incense

—  "  Teachers    ought    to    be    men,  was   offered    to    God    ou    this    altar.


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY;  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xlh.


Where  the  people   prayed   the  priest  to  frivolity  and  half  to  despondency.

offered  incense  (Luke  i.   9,   10),  and  — The  sanctuary  of  tlie  heart  also  must

when  we  pray  Christ  offers    up   our  be  shut,  and  not  with  one  door  only,

prayers  with  the  incense  and  perfume  Our  treasure  is  incomparable,  and  ought

of  His  merits  (Eev.  viii.  3,  4  ;  Ephes.  to  be  preserved  with  much  watcliful-

V.  2).     4.  On  this  altar  was  incense,  ness  and  strong  exhortation." — Lange.
morning  and  evening ;  it  was  a  per-  —  "  The  Gospel  and  its  ordinances

petual  incense  ;  so  Christ,   our  altar,  — faith,  repentance,  and  baptism — are

offers   up   prayers  perpetually  for  us  the  means  to  salvation  ;  by  them  we

(Heb.  viii.  25).     5.  This  altar  is  the  obtain  entrance  to  the  communion  of

table  before  the  Lord.     There  is  some-  saints,    the    favour   of   God,  and   the

thing  in  this  expression  worthy  con-  kingdom   of  heaven.      Christ   is   the

sideration.      (L)    That    poor,    sinful,  way  and  the  door  (John  xiv.  6  ;  x.  7),

weak,  unworthy  creatures  may  come  because  He  has  given  us  the  means

to  Christ  not  only  as  an  altar  to  have  which  are  the  way  and  door  to  the

their  prayers  presented  to  God,  but  Church  and  unto  life :  these  doors  are  to

as  a  table  to  have  refreshing  to  their  be  open  for  the  sheep  and  to  be  shut

souls  (John  vi.  35,  55  ;  Luke  xxii.  30  ;  against  the  goats.     We  may  also  under-

Rev.   vii.    17,   ii.   7,   17).      (2.)   That  stand  by  these  doors  the  ministers  dis-

the    Lord    Himself   is   delighted   and  pensing  the  Gospel  and  the  ordinances

satisfied  in  and  with  Christ,  as  we  are  thereof;  they  are  to  be  holy,  vigilant,

with  a  table  full  of  dainties,  having  and  zealous  as  the  cherubims,  and  con-

the  choicest  meats  and  drinks  (Matt,  stantly  green,  growing,  and  flourishing

iii.  17  ;  Isa.  xlii.  1).    Christ  is  the  altar,  as  the  palm-trees." — Greenhill.
the  table,  the  sacrifice,  and  the  meat

and  drink  upon  the  same." — Greenhill.  Ver.    26.    "  They    had    palm-trees

wrought  or  engraven  on  both   sides,

Ver.  23.  "  Doors  let  in  and  shut  out ;  implying  that  the  materials  of  Christ's

BO  also  does  the  Church. — Ornament  is  Temple   must    not    be   common,    but

here  combined  with  solemness.     We  beautifully  carved  work.     The  House

have    not    here    the    joyous    worldly  of  Christ  and  everything  in  it  must

beauty    of  Greece,   but   neither  have  be  decorated  with  the  engravings  of

we  the  solemness  dark  as  death  as  in  God's  Spirit  (Ps.  xlv.   13 ;  Rev.  zzL

Egypt,     The  world  opens  its  doors  half  18,  19)." — Greenhill,


The  Chambers  of  the  Priests.    (Chap,  xlii)

EXEGETICAL   NOTES.— Ver.   1.  Ver.  4.  "  And  before  the  chambers

"Into   the   chamber" — to  the  cham-  was  a  walk  of  ten  cubits  breadth

bers;  the  Hebrew  is  a  collective  noun.  inward."       The    word    for  walk  may

"  The  building   towards   the   north."  mean  gangway^  and  there  may  have

The  direction  in  which  the  chambers  been  in  the  middle  of  the  chambers  a

lay.     Place  a  comma  between  building  gangway  leading  inward,  with  stairs

and  toward.  to  the  upper  stories,  ten  cubits  wide,

while   along   the   north   front  of  the

Ver.  2.    **  Before   the   length  of  a  building  there  was  a  kerb  of  one  cubit,

hundred  cubits  was  the  north  door"  as  before  the  guard-chambers  (chap.

— i.e.f  before  the  separate  place,  which  xl.   12V    on   which    kerb    the    north

was  that  length.     The  seer  had  before  doors  (leading  to  the  basement)  opened,

spoken  of  chambers  for  the  officiating  Hengstenherg  calls  the  walk  a  street,
priests  on  the  north  and  south  gates

of  the  inner  court  (chap.  xL  44-46).  Ver.  6.  "  Now  the  upper  chambers

He  now  returns  to  take  a  more  exact  were    shorter."      **  To    be    rendered

view  of  them,  thus  : — And  the  upper  chambers  were

.       443


OHAP.  XLXL


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


shortened,  for  galleries  took  off  from
them  (literally,  did  eat  of  them),  from
the  lower  and  from  the  middlemost
chambers  of  the  building.  The  build-
ing rose  in  terraces,  as  was  usual  in
Babylonian  architecture,  and  so  each
of  the  two  upper  stories  receded
from  the  one  below  it." — Sj>eaker's
Commentary.

Ver.  7.  "  The  wall  that  was  with-
out." The  wall  here  must  be  one
from  north  to  south,  fencing  off  from
the  outer  court  the  passage  along  the
east  side  of  the  chambers,  and  therefore
fifty  cubits  long.

Ver.  8.  "And,  lo,  before  the  Temple."

This  describes  their  position  in  a
general  way ;  more  precisely,  they  lay
over  against  partly  the  separate  place
and  partly  the  Temple  court.

Ver.  9.  "As  one  goeth  into  them
from  the  outer  court."  There  was  an
entrance  at  the  north  of  this  passage
by  which  the  priests  entered  into
the  chambers  and  into  the  Temple
court,

Ver.  10.  "The  chambers  were  in
the    thickness    of   the   wall."      The

verse  should  be  rendered  : — Breadth-
wise was  the  wall  towards  the  east ;
in  front  of  the  separate  place  and  of
the  building  were  the  chambers.

Vers.  11,  12,  assert  that  on  the
south  side  of  the  separate  place  was
a  block  of  chambers  precisely  similar
to  that  on  the  north.

Ver.  13.  "Where  the  priests  shall
,  eat  the  most  holy  things."  In  Lev.
X.  13  it  was  prescribed  that  the  priests
should  eat  of  the  sacrifices  in  the  holy
jjlace.  This  was  originally  before  the
altar  in  the  inner  court — now  separate
chambers  are  assigned,  and  these  be-
come the  holy  place  for  this  purpose.


Only  the  meat-offerings — the  sin  and
guilt  offerings — are  mentioned,  not  the
slain  or  peace  offering,  because  only  in
the  former  were  the  portions  falling  to
the  priests  most  holy,  and  as  such  to
be  consumed  by  the  priests  alone,  in
their  oflficial  function;  whereas  in  the
peace-offerings  the  priestly  portion  was
consumed  by  the  priests  with  their
whole  family,  including  even  the
females  (Lev.  x.  14).

Ver.  14.  "When  the  priests  enter
therein."  Another  purpose  for  which
these  chambers  were  to  be  used  was
for  the  unrobing  of  the  priests.  Only
after  they  have  changed  their  garments
which  they  have  used  in  the  service
of  God  are  they  to  enter  into  inter-
course with  the  people  in  the  outer
court.

Ver.  15.  "Measuring  the  inner
house."  Not  the  Temple,  but  the
Temple  and  its  courts,  all  that  lay
within  the  wall  on  the  outside  of  the
house  (chap.  xl.  5).

Ver.  16.  "He  measured  the  east
side — five  hundred  reeds."  The  vast
extent  is  another  feature  marking  the
ideal  character  of  the  Temple.  It
symbolises  the  great  enlargement  of
the  Kingdom  of  God  in  the  times  of
the  Messiah.

Ver.  20.  "To  make  a  separation."

The  sanctuary  proper  was  the  Most
Holv  Place  as  distinguished  from  the
rest  of  the  Temple ;  but  the  term  was
capable  of  extension,  first  to  the  whole
Temple,  then  to  all  the  ground  that
was  separated  to  holy  as  distinguished
from  profane  or  common  uses.  No
longer  shall  the  wall  of  partition  be  to
separate  the  Jew  and  the  Gentile,  for
Christ  hath  broken  down  the  middle
wall  of  partition  between  us  (Ephes.  ii.
14),  but  to  separate  the  sacred  from
the  profane.


441


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  chaf.  xlii.


HOMILETICS.
Workers  for  Godi  their  Privileges  and  Distinction.

(Vers.  1-20.)

I.  That  workers  for  God  have  ample  provision  for  all  their  needs.     These

chambers  were  intended  for  shelter,  rest,  and  refreshment  for  those  who  waited
on  God  in  worship ;  every  necessary  comfort  and  convenience  was  provided.
The  priests  were  wholly  devoted  to  their  sacred  calling ;  they  renounced  the
world  and  all  its  most  tempting  prizes,  and  gave  themselves  up  body  and  soul
to  a  life-long  consecration  to  the  work  of  the  Temple.  The  law  of  worship
demanded  this  complete  self-renunciation ;  and  at  the  same  time  it  secured  to
the  servant  of  God  everything  that  was  essential  to  his  well-being  and  to  help
him  in  his  hallowed  work.  The  minister  of  the  Divine  Word  must  be  relieved
from  the  fret  and  care  of  worldly  things,  that  he  may  be  free  to  apply  himself
with  a  whole-hearted  abandon  to  the  study  and  interpretation  of  spiritual
things  (1  Tim.  iv.  15).  Let  him  take  care  of  the  sacred  deposit  committed  to
his  trust,  and  God  will  take  care  of  him.  The  faithful  worker  for  God  need
have  no  anxiety  about  the  future :  his  anxiety  should  be  undividedly  centred
on  the  duties  of  the  present  (Luke  x.  7 ;  Phil.  iv.  19).

II.  That  workers  for  God  should  prepare  by  devotions  in  private  for  the
profitable  worship  of  God  in  public.  The  chambers,  though  near  the  Temple,
were  separate  from  it,  were  strictly  private,  placed  in  the  midst  of  stillness  and
retirement  favourable  to  meditation  and  prayer.  The  power  of  the  worker  for
God  in  public  is  acquired  by  diligent  devotion  in  private.  God  is  known  in
the  greatness  and  glory  of  His  character  and  the  wisdom  and  righteousness  of
His  ways  ;  not  in  the  midst  of  noise  and  uproar,  but  in  quietness  and  solitude.
The  thinker  must  isolate  himself  for  the  time  being  from  all  distraction,  and
quietly  and  prayerfully  wait  on  God.  *'  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God  "
(Ps.  xlvi.  10).  Not  in  the  wild  commotion  and  brazen  clangour  of  the  battle-
field, not  in  the  whizzing  hurricane  of  national  strife  and  uproar,  not  in  the
rush  and  worry  of  excessive  worldly  care,  are  the  holy  secrets  of  Divine  things
divulged  to  the  soul,  but  in  the  solitude  of  retirement,  in  the  hush  and  stillness
of  some  meditative  retreat,  where  the  tocsin  of  war  is  never  heard  and  the  peal
of  cannon  and  crash  of  arms  never  penetrate.  Not  that  we  are  to  indulge  in
a  life  of  useless  quietism  and  inactivity.  We  must  ilence  our  meaningless
clamour  and  pause  in  our  demonstrative  activities  in  order  that  God  may
speak  and  may  work  His  purpose  in  us :  then  we  receive  our  commission  and
are  inspired  to  speak  and  work  for  Him.  On  the  quiet  pastoral  slopes  of
Midian,  Moses,  in  stillness  and  awe,  witnessed  the  splendours  of  the  Divine
revelation ;  and  then  went  forth  to  work,  and  his  life  thenceforward  was  a
continuous  scene  of  tireless  and  prodigious  activity  Among  the  rugged  crags
of  Horeb,  Elijah  was  favoured  with  a  fuller  revelation  of  the  Divine  character —
not  in  the  roaring  tempest,  the  crashing  earthquake,  or  the  devouring  fire,  but
in  the  subduing  whisper  of  the  still,  small  voice — and  he  rose  up  to  do  the
will  of  God  with  a  tenderer  and  a  nobler  spirit  than  'he  had  known  before.
In  the  dreary  solitudes  of  Patmos  the  beloved  John  beheld,  in  enraptured
stillness,  visions  of  the  future  history  of  the  Church  as  they  rolled  before  him
in  panoramic  splendour,  and  then  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  writing  and  speak-
ing about  them  for  the  benefit  of  the  ages  to  come.  And  so  the  workers  for
God,  in  the  quietness  and  secrecy  of  the  closet,  receive  the  blessing  of  the  Lord

445


CUAI'.   XLII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


that  they  may  bear  it  forth  to  the  pubUc  sanctuary  and  make  their  fellow-
worshippers  all  the  richer  for  sharing  with  them  the  outpoured  endowments
of  Heaven.

III.  That  workers  for  God  should  be  distinguished  by  superior  sanctity.

1.  The  character  of  their  work  demands  it.  It  is  holy  work ;  it  has  to  do  with
holy  things  (ver.  13).  In  connection  with  the  Temple  of  God  a  clear  and
unmistakable  distinction  is  made  between  things  sacred  and  profane  (ver.  20).
The  law  of  cleansing  observed  in  the  Levitical  ritual  with  such  scrupulous
minuteness  was  intended  to  set  forth  the  absolute  necessity  of  purity  in  all
who  took  part  in  the  ministrations  of  the  Temple  (Isa.  lii.  11).  Only  the  holy
can  comprehend  and  teach  holiness.  To  understand  philosophy  we  must  be
philosophic,  to  appreciate  a  poet  we  must  be  poetical,  and  to  understand  purity
we  must  be  ourselves  pure.  2.  The  success  of  their  work  will  he  influenced  by  it.
It  will  be  seen  in  its  effects  both  upon  themselves  and  upon  others.  How
often  is  the  best  work  for  God  marred  by  the  intrusion  into  it  of  human
imperfection  and  sin !  It  is  said  that  Michael  Angelo  was  once  seen  absorb-
ingly engaged  on  an  important  painting  with  a  lighted  lamp  fastened  across
his  forehead,  so  that  no  shadow  from  himself  might  fall  upon  his  work.  Even
so  ought  we  to  lift  up  the  light  of  a  God-given  holiness  that  no  shadow  of
self  may  darken  and  disfigure  the  work  we  are  doing  for  Him.  Man  is  never
BO  great,  so  luminous,  so  grand,  as  when  he  is  doing  holy  work  with  the  light
and  help  of  the  holy  God.

Lessons. — 1.  To  do  the  best  work  for  God  needs 'prayerful  preparation,  2.  Work
done  for  God  has  its  own  special  rewards,  3.  Personal  holiness  requisite  for  the
highest  kind  of  success  in  work  for  God,


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,


Vers.  1-20.  "  By  these  buildings
connected  with  the  Temple  and  per-
taining to  its  outward  economy  we
should  be  reminded  that  the  Lord
bestows  upon  the  pious  the  other
necessaries  of  life  also.  In  Him  they
find  their  entire  satisfaction  ;  but  they
use  food,  drink,  intercourse  with  men
and  this  world,  as  if  they  did  not  use
all  this.  Thus  to  the  pure  all  things
are  pure  that  they  do  with  pure  and
upright  heart.  The  Word  of  God
makes  us  strong  when  it  is  with  us,
and  blesses  also  outward  thinajs.  The
Lord  has  ordained  that  they  who
preach  the  Gospel  shall  live  of  the
Gospel," — (Ecolampadius.

Ver.  1.  "  As  this  Temple  was  pro-
vided with  many  chambers,  but  each  had
its  own  purpose,  so  believing  Christians
must  be  sanctified  chambers  for  the
glory  of  God — one  for  this  use,  another
for  that  (2  Tim.  ii.  21)."— ^/a7C^,

i46


Ver.  3.  '*The  inner  court.  This
was  a  figure  of  the  Church  invisible,
as  the  outer  court  was  of  the  visible
and  external." — Trapp.

Ver.  4.  The  Social  Instinct — 1.  Leads
to  the  place  where  congenial  company  is
to  be  found.  2.  Delights  in  the  fellow-
ships associated  with  the  House  of  God.
3.  Finds  its  supreme  satisfaction  in
spiritual  communion  with  the  highest.

—  "  Before  the  chambers  was  a
walk  of  ten  cubits — a  way  of  one
cubit."  "There  is  a  broad  way  and
a  narrow  way  ;  a  ten-cubit  way  and  a
one-cubit  way.  The  Church  at  one
time  has  prosperity  and  freedom  ;  it
is  in  *  a  walk  of  ten  cubits ; '  and  the
time  will  come  when  it  shall  have
greater  latitude,  liberty,  and  pros-
perity. At  another  time  the  Church
is  in  straits,  afflictions,  temptations,
and  persecutions:  it  is  in  *a  way  of
one  Q\xhW"-r-QrecnhUk


BOM  I  LET IG  COMMENTARY '  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  XUL


—  "A  way  of  one  cubit."  "  A
narrow  way,  but  such  as  led  into
spacious  walks  of  ten  cubits  breadth
inward.  Strait  is  the  gate  and  nar-
row the  way  that  leadeih  unto  life
eternal  ;  but  they  that  hit  it,  hold
it,  shall  walk  arm-in-arm  with  angels
(Matt.  vii.  U  ;  Zech.  iii.  7).  Through
many  tribulations  we  enter  the  King-
dom ;  but  there  God  will  set  our  feet
in  a  large  room  (Acts  xiv.  22  ;  Ps.
xzxi.  8).  Let  it  be  remembered  that
this  narrow  way  is  but  short ;  it  is  of
but  one  cubit." — Trapp.

—  "  We  are  not  to  spend  all  our  time
between  the  church  and  the  chamber,
though  a  great  deal  of  time  may  be
spent  to  very  good  purpose  in  both ;
but  man  is  made  for  society  and
Christians  for  the  communion  of  saints,
and  we  must  make  conscience  of  the
duties  of  that  communion  and  take
the  comfort  of  its  privileges  and  plea-
sures."— M.  Henry.

Vers.  5,  6.  The  Law  of  Gradation —

1.  Recognised  in  the  various  duties
and  offices  in  the  Church  of  God.  2.
Regulates  the  distribution  of  intel-
lectual and  spiritual  endowments.  3.
Limits  responsibility  to  gifts  and
opportunities.

Ver.  5.  **  While  in  the  previous
chapter  the  breadth  increased  with  the
elevation,  it  here  becomes  narrower.
The  progressive  growth  in  grace  is
a  wider  consciousness  of  Christ,  but
a  constantly  narrowing  self-conscious-
ness (1  Cor.  XV.  9).  So  is  the  service
in  the  gospel,  when  with  increasing
years  our  view  into  eternity  expands
and  similarly  contracts  in  temporal
matters  ;  the  nearer  the  day  of  reckon-
ing is,  our  responsibility  becomes  the
clearer  to  us  and  the  more  clearly  do
we  see  our  many  mistakes  and  dis-
loyalties.— There  are  three  stages  of
life :  youth,  manhood,  and  old  age,
and  the  last  is  the  narrowest  of  all." —
Lange,

Ver.  6.  "  Had  not  pillars."  "  The
strength  of  tliis  Temple  was  not  every-
where alike;  some  parts  had  pillars,


others  had  none,  or  not  equal  to
others.  So  in  the  Church  of  Christ,
some  parts  of  it  have  strong  pillars,
eminent  teachers,  whereas  other  parts
are  wholly  destitute,  or  have  such  as
are  weak." — Greenhill.

Ver.  7.  "  God  is  able  to  set  walls
around  those  who  desire  to  keep  them-
selves pure  from  the  stains  of  the
flesh  and  to  protect  them  in  the  hour
of  trial  and  temptation.  True  be-
lievers are  protected ;  no  one  can
injure  them  (Jolin  x.  27)." — Starke.

—  "  The  wall  of  God's  protection
extends  as  far  as  the  Church,  or  any
part  of  it."

Vers.  8,  9.  Public  and  Private  Wor-
ship —  1.  Mutually  helpful  in  the
culture  of  spiritual  life.  2.  The  use
of  the  one  does  not  supersede  tlie
use  of  the  other.  3.  Public  worship
a  solemn  testimony  and  the  sphere
where  the  most  memorable  blessings
are  realised.  4.  Private  worsliip  an
essential  preparation  for  successful
public  worship.  5.  Public  worship  a
privilege,  to  be  preferred  before  and
above  private  worship.

Vers.  13,  14.  The  Blessing  of  Food
and  Clothing —  1.  Abundantly  pro-
vided for  all  the  creatures  of  God.  2.
Not  sufficiently  appreciated.  3.  Eat-
ing and  drinking  a  holy  refection  to  be
enjoyed  with  a  thankful  heart,  which
should  be  suitably  expressed  before
and  after  partaking.  4.  A  proof  of
the  universality  of  the  Divine  care  and
goodness.

—  '*  If  we  have  to  understand  by
the  priests  those  brought  up  from
childhood  in  the  faith  of  Christ  and
walking  in  this  way,  then  in  these
verses  is  figured  their  fellowship  with
one  another  in  particular,  their  united
inquiry  into  the  Word  and  meditation
thereon,  and  on  the  mystery  of  Christ,
for  growth  of  knowledge  and  increase
of  joy,  so  that  they  are  prepared  and
adorned  in  one  and  the  same  faith,
always  to  return  to  and  worship  at
the  altar,  which  is  Christ. — Glory  and
holiness  in  their  connection  ;  how  this

447


CHAP.  XLII.


no  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL


connection  is  stamped  on  this  Temple
and  its  arrangements  and  purposes,
even  to  the  most  minute  particulars. —
Profane  ministers  profane  the  sanc-
tuary.— We  ought  not  to  approach  the
holy  table  of  the  Lord  with  worldly,
impenitent  hearts." — Lange.

—  Ministerial  Duties  and  Privi-
leges. "1.  The  priests  approached  unto
the  Lord.  In  all  administrations  of
the  Gospel  ministers  approach  near
to  God,  and  in  all  their  approaches
He  looks  to  be  sanctified  by  them.
2.  The  priests  in  God's  service  had
good  accommodation.  Here  is  a  Divine
ordinance  for  ministers'  maintenance.
Whatever  good  things  people  possess,
they  ought  to  communicate  a  part  to
their  teachers  (Gal.  vi.  6 ;  1  Cor.  ix.
13,  14).  3.  Holy  things  are  to  he  laid
in  holy  places.  Holy  hearts  are  fit
places  for  God,  Christ,  the  Spirit,  the
Gospel  and  all  the  ordinances  of  it.
4.  Ministers  ought  to  have  other  frames
of  spirit  in  them  when  they  are  nearer  to
God  in  the  duties  of  His  worship  than  at
other  times  (ver.  14).  Then  they  are
to  put  on  holy  garments,  be  clotlied
with  zeal,  fear,  and  all  holy  affec-
tions. They  are  to  discharge  their
oflSce  with  gravity  and  authority,  that
their  ministry  be  not  despised." —
Greenhill.

Ver.  13.  *'  Ministers  must  eat  as  well
as  other  •  they  are  not  of  the  chameleon
kind — cannot  live  on  air;  and  the
Lord  Christ  hath  ordained  that  they
which  wait  at  the  altar  are  partakers
of  the  altar  (1  Cor.  ix.  13,  14)."—
Trapp.

—  "  The  chambers,  though  private,
are  to  be  near  the  Temple,  which
teaches  us  that  our  communion  with
God  in  our  secret  chambers  is  to  pre-
pare us  for  }>ublic  devotions  in  the
sanctuary,  and  to  enable  us  to  derive
all  the  benefits  from  them  which  God
has  designed.  There  can  be  no  real
worship  in  public  if  there  be  not  also
worship  in  private.  In  the  Temple  of
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Church,  there  are
multitudes  dwelling  by  faith,  and  yet
there  is  room  for  more." — Fausset.

—  "  Those  that  have  public  work

448


to  do  for  God  and  the  souls  of  men
have  need  to  be  much  in  private  to
fit  themselves  for  it.  Ministers  should
spend  much  time  in  their  chambers,
in  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer,
that  their  profiting  may  appear;  and
they  ought  to  be  provided  with  con-
veniences for  this  purpose." — M.  Henry,

Ver.  14.  **  The  clerical  coat  does  not
make  the  clergyman,  yet  it  is  a  defence
and  an  admonition.  The  best  clerical
garment,  and  one  which  we  may  always
put  on  and  wear  everywhere,  is  our
sanctification  in  Christ.  It  is  as  great
a  mistake  to  carry  about  the  clerical
coat  everywhere,  like  a  monk,  as  to
leave  it  at  home  from  unclerical  frivolity
or  worldly-mindedness.  Paul  became
all  things  to  all  men,  but  not  at  the
expense  of  his  ministerial  office." —
Lange.

—  "Ministers  may  not  leave  their
station,  lay  aside  their  holy  calling,  en-
tangle themselves  with  worldly  cares
and  businesses,  but  make  their  ministry
their  business,  giving  themselves  wholly
to  it.  As  in  doing  their  office  they
must  use  all  becoming  gravity  and
authority  as  the  ambassadors  of  Christ,
so  at  other  times  they  must  familiarise
themselves  with  their  people,  becoming
all  things  to  all  men,  in  Paul's  sense,
that  they  may  win  some." — Trapp,

Ver.  15.  "So  wide  and  spacious
will  the  New  Testament  Church  be,
in  distinction  from  the  Old  Testament
Church.  A  greater  than  Solomon  in
all  his  pomp  and  glory  is  here,  for
Jesus  is  the  Light  of  all  nations.  The
true  Church  is  the  collection  of  the
scattered  believers  that  are  in  the
world. — Observe,  only  after  he  had
learned  exactly  the  internal  magnitude
did  the  prophet  learn  the  external.  It
is  labour  in  vain  to  labour  in  investi-
gating nature  until  we  have  first  laid
a  good  foundation  in  godliness.  With-
out this  we  continue  too  much  devoted
to  the  contemplation  of  visible  thini:s
and  make  them  our  idols,  so  that  they
become  a  stumblinc;j-block  and  a  snare
to  ourselves  and  other  inexperienced
people.     But  when  thou  bast  com©  to


SOMIlSTIC  COMMENT  A  ttY:  EZeKIEL  mkt.  ttftt


know  the  inner  meaning  of  spiritual  cannot  be  moved.     3.  It  marks  off  an

things,   and   hast   tasted   the   length,  unmistakable  distinction  between  the  holy

neight,  and  depth  of  the  love  of  God,  and  pvfane.     '*  To  make  a  separation

then   thou   mayest  busy  thyself  with  between  the  sanctuary  and  the  profane

all  visible  things.     Thou  wilt  every-  place "  (ver.  20).

where  pause,  and  contemplating  things  —  "  Thus  every  way  it  exhibits  to

with  the  spiritual  eye,  say,  *  0  Lord  the  eye  of  faith  the  true  ideal  of  that

our  Lord,  how  excellent  is  Thy  name  pure  and  glorious  Temple  which,  resting

in  all  the  earth  !  *  " — Lange,  on  the  foundation  of  the  eternal  Son

and  girt  round  with  all  the  perfections

Vers.  15-20.  The  Messianic  Church,  of  Godhead,  shall  shine  forth  the  best

"  1.  Its  extent  and  latitude.     It  is  in  all  and  noblest  workmanship  of  Heaven."

quarters  of  the  world.     2.  Its  stability  — Fairbairn.
and  firmness.     The   buildings  of  this

Temple  are  four-square — stable,  firm,  Ver.  20.  "  In  Christ  all  has  assumed

and  lasting.     So  the  Church  is  strong  such  a  shape  that  through   Him  the

and  permanent  (Ephes.  ii.  20  ;  Isa.  liv.  sanctuary  now  always  continues  pre-

14  ;  Matt.  xvi.   18).     3.  Its  lustre  and  sent  in  humanity  ;  and  the  true  altar

beauty.     Great  buildings  in  the  form  of  burnt-oflfering,  Golgotha,  is  always

of  a  square  are  beautiful  and  glorious,  before   the   eyes   of   the    Most    Holy

So  the  Church   (Cant.  vi.  4).     4.  Its  Father,  in  order,  for  the  sake  of  the

safety.     This  Temple  had  a  wall  round  sacrifice  thereon  offered,  to  love,  sanc-

about  (ver.  20).     The  wall  of  the  New  tify,  and  protect  us  all." — Diedrich.

Jerusalem  is  great  and  high,  suflficient  —  "  Gold   is   purged   in   the   fire,

to  secure  all  who  are  within  (Rev.  xxi.  shines  in  the  water ;  as,  on  the  other

12).     5.  Its  sanctity.     This  wall  was  to  side,  clay  is  scorched  in  the  fire,  dis-

separate   between  the   sanctuary  and  solved  in  the  water." — Trapp.

the    profane    place    (ver.    20).      The  —  "  The  Jews  accounted  the  whole

Church  is  a  company  called  out  of  and  earth  profane — common  or  unclean —

separate   from   the  world,  who   have  compared  with  Canaan,   and  Canaan

given    up    themselves    to    God    and  common  or  less  holy  than  Jerusalem,

Christ." — Greenhill.  and  every  part  nearer  the  Temple  the

more  holy ;  and  so  here  the  outward

Vers.  16-20.  The  Grandeur  of  the  court  was   enclosed  to  distinguish  it

Divine  Temple.     1.  It  is  of  vast  extent,  by  its  comparative   holiness;  it   was

He  measured   the  east,  north,  south,  more  holy  than  all  without  it." — Pool,

and  west  sides,  each  side  being  500  —  "A    difference    is    to    be    put

reeds  (vers.   16-19) — in  all  a  square  between  common  and  sacred  things,

of  \\  of  a  mile — exceeding  the  limits  between  God's  name  and  other  names,

of  all  ancient  Jerusalem.    This  signifies  between  His  day  and  other  days,  His

the  great  enlargement  of  the  Church  of  Book  and  other  books,  His  institutions

God  in  future  times.     2.  //  t5  immov-  and  other  observances;  and  a  distance

ably  secure,    "  He  measured  by  the  four  to  be  put  between  our  worldly  and

sides."      Its   square   form    betokened  religious  actions,  so  as  still  to  go  about

the  strength  and  solidity  of  the  whole  the   worship   of  God  with  a  solemn

—an  emblem  of  the   kingdom  that  pause." — M,  Hemry,


The  Consecration  of  the  Temple.    (Chap.  xliiL)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.—- Ver.  2.  more  transcendent  as  the  proportioni
"  Behold,  the  glory  of  God."  As  the  of  the  new  exceeded  those  of  the  old.
Shechinah-glory  was  the  peculiar  dis-  The  fact  that  the  Shechinah-glory  was
tinction  of  the  old  Temple,  so  it  was  not  in  the  second  Temple  proves  that
to  be  in  the  new  in  a  degree  as  much      it   cannot    be   that   Temple  which    i^

2;  449


CHAP.  XLItl.


ROMILETW  COMMSNTART:  EZEKIEt.


meant  in  the  prophecy.  "  The  glory
came  by  the  way  of  the  east."    The

same  way  by  which  Jehovah  had  left
the  house  to  destruction  because  it  had
been  polhited  and  profaned  (chap.  xi.
22,  23).  He  now  returns  to  take
possession  of  His  holy  habitation,  pre-
pared and  sanctified  for  His  reception.
"  His  voice  was  like  a  noise  of  many
waters."  The  creature  has  its  voice
only  from  the  Creator,  and  therefore
must  His  voice  sound  above  its  voice,
loud  though  it  be  (Ps.  xciii.  3,  4 ;  Rev.
i.  15).  "The  earth  shined  with  His
glory."  He  who  said,  "Let  there  be
light,"  shines  forth,  when  He  appears
in  the  clearest  light,  as  He  who  dwells
in  inaccessible  li_dit  (1  Tim.  vi.  16 ;
Ps.  1.  2  ;  Kev.  xviii.  1).  By  this  burst
of  light  extending  far  beyond  Israel  is
symbolised  an  enlightenment  of  the
face  of  the  whole  earth — the  entire
region  of  humanity  thus  shown  to
have  been  in  itself  and  hitherto  dark.

Ver.  3.  "  When  I  came  to  destroy
the  city " — i.e.,  to  pronounce  God's
word  for  its  destruction  :  so  completely
did  the  prophets  identify  themselves
jyith  Him  in  whose  name  they  spake.
"  I  fell  upon  my  face."  As  in  chap.  i.
28  the  prophet  fell  down  upon  his  face
before  the  majesty  of  an  angry  God,  so
here  before  that  of  God  appearing  in
His  grace.

Ver.  5.  "The  glory  of  the  Lord
filled  the  house."  So  when  Jehovah
took  ])ossession  of  the  Tabernacle  (Ex.
xl.  34,  35),  and  of  Solomon*s  Temple
(1  Kings  viii.  10,  11).

Ver.  7.    "  And  he  said  unto  me."

"  The  speaker  is  designated  as  a  man
(ver.  6),  and  yet  he  here  s{)eaks  as
God  and  applies  to  himself  that  which
can  belong  only  to  Jehovah.  We
have  thus  without  doubt  the  angel  of
God  before  us,  the  only  one  in  whom
the  opposition  of  God  and  man  is
mediated  and  removed." — Hengstenberg.
"  The  place  of  My  throne."  God  from
the  first  claimed  to  be  their  King
politically  and  religiously,  and  had
resisted  their  wish  to  have  a  human
450


king  as  implying  a  rejection  of  Him  as
the  proper  Head  of  the  State.  The
Messiah-King  shall  realise  the  original
idea  of  the  theocracy,  with  its  at  once
Divine  and  human  King  reigning  in
righteousness  over  a  people  all  right-
eous (Isa.  lii.  1  ;  liv.  13 ;  Ix.  21).

Ver.  7.  "For  ever."  Observe  that
the  words  for  ever  mark  the  distinc-
tion between  the  new  and  the  former

sanctuary.

Ver.  9.  "  Put  away  their  whoredom,
and   the   carcasses  of  their  kings."

"  As  whoredom  designates  idolatry  in
general,  so  what  is  meant  to  be  said
by  the  corpses  of  their  kings  applies
to  the  worship  of  kings,  the  forgotten
subjection  to  Jehovah  under  them,
who,  if  kings,  yet  are  perpetuated  only
as  corpses." — Lange.  Ahaz  brought
in  an  idolatrous  altar  from  Damascus
(2  Kings  xvi.  11),  and  Manasseh  built
altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  (2
Kings  xxi.  4).

Ver  10.  "  That  they  may  be  ashamed
of  their  iniquities."  When  the  holy
significance  of  the  Gospel  is  shown
to  men  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  they
are  ashamed  of  their  sins.  "Let
them  measure  the  pattern."  Devia-
tion from  the  exact  rules  of  the
Mosaic  ordinances  was  connected  with
the  transgression  of  the  people.  So
the  restoration  according  to  the  pattern
of  the  Law  was  symbolical  of  their
return  to  obedience.

Ver.  12.  "The  whole  limit  thereof
shall  be  most  holy."  This  superlative
most  holy  which  had  been  used  exclu-
sively of  the  Holy  of  Holies  was  now
to  characterise  the  entire  building.

Ver.  13.  "These  are  the  measures
of  the  altar" — the  altar  of  burnt
offering,  the  appointed  means  of  access
to  God.  God  is  about  to  instruct  the
seer  as  to  the  sacrifices  of  inauguration
whereby  places,  services,  priests,  and
people  were  to  be  dedicated  anew  to
the  Lord,  as  of  old  under  Solomon
(1  Kings  viii.).


ffOMTLlSTW  COMMENTARY:  BZEKtSl,


OBAP.  XLm.


Ver.  18.  "These  are  the  ordinances
of  the  altar."  "The  consecration  of
the  altar  corresponds  to  tlie  consecra-
tion of  the  people  to  Jehovah,  their
entire  surrender  and  presentation  of
themselves  to  Him.  The  burnt-offer-
ings usher  in  the  class  of  offerings
wliich  obtains  in  the  state  of  grace.
The  justified  man  lives  henceforth  not
to  himself;  the  service  of  the  Lord
which  is  ministered  in  the  Church  is
symbolised  by  this  purpose  of  the
altar  of  burnt-offering ;  hence  there
is  no  acL  of  worship  without  burnt-
offering.  The  self-surrendering  reliance
on  grace  continues  to  be  taken  into
account,  as  in  the  past  so  for  the
future,  and  so  the  burnt-offering  may
be  called  the  perpetual  offering  of  the
Church  of  God." — Lange,

Ver.  24.  "  Shall  cast  salt  upon
them."  "  Salt  was  to  be  cast  on
every  meat-offering  (Lev.  ii.  13).  Here
it  is  added  to  the  burnt-offering  to
express  still  more  the  idea  of  purifica-


tion. In  the  second  Temple  no  sacri-
fice was  complete  without  the  use  of
salt,  and  the  Rabbis  tell  us  that  there
was  a  great  heap  of  salt  close  to  the
altar  always  ready  for  use,  and  that
the  inclined  plane  to  the  altar  was
kept  covered  with  salt." — EdersheirrCs

Ver.  26.  "And  they  shall  conse-
crate themselves" — literally,^//  their
hands;  the  conferring  of  office  upon
persons  in  whose  hand  is  laid  what  they
have  forthwith  to  offer  and  what  they
have  to  handle,  referring  to  Lev.  viii.
27 ;  Ex.  xxix.  24,  25.

Ver.  27.  "And  I  will  accept  you."

After  this  inauguration  the  regular
service  is  resumed,  and  will  be  accept-
able to  God.  Under  the  guidance  of  the
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  we  cannot  fail
to  recognise  in  this  vision  the  symbol
of  the  purification  of  the  Church  of
God  by  the  cleansing  blood  of  Christ,
Victim  and  Priest  (Heb.  viii.,  ix.,  x.).


HOMILETICS,

The  Revelation  of  the  Glory  of  Jehovah.

(Vers.  1-6.)

I.  It  was  a  revelation  possessing  some  remarkable  featnres.     1.  //  was  a

revelation  of  the  Divine  JVord.  "His  voice  was  like  a  noise  of  many  waters"
(ver.  2).  The  dreamy  murmur  of  sumnier  streams  soothes  the  soul  into  peace;
but  the  roar  of  the  ocean-storm  fills  it  with  dread.  So  God  can  speak  to  man
in  a  whisper  that  comforts,  or  in  a  voice  that  alarms  the  soul  with  its  trumpet-
like tones.  The  Word  of  God  is  His  voice ;  it  is  powerful,  and  is  intended  to
be  heard  afar.  In  the  constant  declaration  of  the  Gospel-message  that  voice
is  ever  pealing  in  the  ears  of  the  nations,  and  is  distinctly  heard  above  the  din
of  loudest  opposition.  2.  It  was  a  revelation  of  visible  splendour.  ''The  earth
shined  with  His  glory"  (ver.  2).  The  works  of  God  are  a  revelation  of  His
glorious  character.  He  is  said  to  "clothe  Himself  with  light  as  with  a
garment,"  and  His  works  are  a  garment  jewelled  with  stars,  embroidered
with  constellations,  and  glit<tering  with  the  riches  of  all  worlds,  at  once  hiding
and  revealing  the  Divine  foini.  "His  glory  is  the  fulness  of  the  whole  earth"
(Isa.  vi.  3).  3.  It  was  a  revelation  of  overwhelming  majesty.  "  And  I  fell  upon
my  face  "  (ver.  3),  overpowered  with  the  awful  grandeur  of  the  vision.  The
greatness  of  the  Creator  rises  sublimely  above  His  mightiest  works;  and  a
sight  of  the  peerless  majesty  of  Jehovah  prostrates  the  soul  with  a  humbling
consciousness  of  imperfection  and  sin.

II    It  was  a  revelation  of  the  glory  of  Jehovah  consecrating  His  Temple.

461


CMAt.  XLitt.  BOMlLEftC  COMMENTA  R  Y :  EZkKIEI,


"  The  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house  "  (vers.  4,  5).  So  it  filled  the  ancient
Tabernacle  and  the  Temple  of  Solomon  (Ex.  xl.  34  ;  1  Kings  viii.  10).  No  such
visible  glory  filled  the  second  Temple.  It  is  to  be  seen  again  only  in  the
completed  Temple  of  the  future.  The  manifested  presence  of  God  in  the
believing  soul,  as  in  the  perfected  Church,  is  its  holiest  consecration.  The
glory  of  the  new  Temple  shall  never  fade,  because  the  Divine  presence  will
never  be  withdrawn.

III.  It  was  a  revelation  requiring  spiritual  help  to  see  and  understand.

1.  The  help  of  the  Spirit  is  necessary  to  see  the  visions  of  God.  "  So  the  Spirit  took
me  up,  and  brought  me  into  the  inner  court ;  and,  behold,  tlie  glory  "  (ver.  5).
The  unaided  intellect  is  incapable  of  perceiving  spiritual  realities  ;  they  must  be
Divinely  unfolded  (1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10,  14).  The  Spirit  throws  around  the  soul  a
heavenly-tempered  atmosphere,  through  which  are  sifted  the  glorious  visions  of
God.  2.  The  help  of  the  Spirit  is  necessary  to  interpret  the  Word  of  God.  "  And  I
heard  Him  speaking  to  me  out  of  the  house  '*  (ver.  6).  The  Bible  is  a  closed
book  to  the  unspiritual.  The  literary  student  may  find  pleasure  in  its  history
and  poetry  ;  but  its  inner  meanings  are  a  hidden  secret  until  the  soul  is
anointed  with  the  unction  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  in  the  Temple  that  the  Spirit
delights  to  interpret  to  the  devout  worshipper  the  transcendent  revelations  of
the  Divine  Word.

Lessons. — The  glory  of  Jehovah — 1.  Shines  in  all  His  works,     2.  Should  be
prayerftUly  sought  out.     3.  Is  abundantly  satisfying.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-6.  *'  The  glory  of  the  God  when  He  dwelt  among  them  in  the

of  Israel  must  take  possession  of  the  person  of  His  Incarnate  Son." — Hen-

new  Sanctuary,  as  in  time  past  of  the  derson.

Tabernacle  and  of  Solomon's  Temple.  — "We  have  to  notice  the  essentially

Bub   it  is  in  a  different   form.     The  moral  character  of  all  that  was  here

glory   was   of  old  veiled   in  a  cloud  displayed    in    vision    respecting    the

resting  on  the  mercy-seat  of  the  Ark  future  things  of  God's  Kingdom.     It

between    cherubim   of    carved   wood,  was  not   a   pattern    which   God   was

lifeless  and  motionless,  as  though  the  going  to  carry  out  anyhow  and  accom-

mercy  and  the  power  of  God  were  in  plish  as  by  a  simple  fiat  of  Omnipo-

some  sort  restricted  to  the   material  tence.    It  depended  upon  the  condition

building  and  the  people  to  whom  it  of  the  people,  and  only  if  they  agreed

belonged.     Now  a  personal  and  living  to   put  away  sin    from  among   them

God  enters  the  Sanctuary,  condescend-  and  give  God  the  supreme  place  in

ing  to  occupy  it,  not  merely  as  a  fixed  their  hearts  could  He  manifest  Himself

dwelling-place,  but  as  a  centre   from  toward  them  in  the  manner  described."

whence  His  power  and  mercy  radiate  — Fairbairn.

freely  to  the  utmost  ends  of  the  earth.  —  Divine  Manifestations — 1.    Are

Hence   amidst   the   detailed   prepara-  always  made  at   the  right  time  and

tions  of  the  house  no  mention  is  made  place  (ver.  1).     2.   Are  on  a  scale  of

of  mercy-seat,  so  important  a  part  in  imposing    magnificence   (ver.    2).      3.

the  former  Sanctuary." — Speaker's  Com-  Though  retaining  points  of  similarity,

mentary.  they  are  suited  to  s{)ecial  emergencies

—  **  What    we  are  taught  here   is,  (ver.   3).     4.   Overawe    the  soul   with

that  Jehovah  would  renew  the  mani-  their  grandeur  (ver.  3).     5.  Are  cliiefly

festation  of  His  favour  to  the  covenant-  seen  in  connection  with  the  Sanctuary

people,  which  He  did   pre-eminently  (vers.  4,  5).     6.  Have  a  distinct  (Ugni«

452


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OHAP.  ZLXXL


ficance  for  the  privileged  beholder
(ver.  6).  7.  Are  more  highly  appre-
ciated when  shared  with  a  sympathetic
companion  (ver.  6).

Ver.  1.  "  The  prophet  saw  not  the
glory  of  God  till  he  had  first  seen  the
Mount  measured,  the  Temple  restored.
Men  must  usually  wait  upon  God  in
the  use  of  means  ere  they  see  the  King
in  His  glory.  Men  must  awake  out
of  the  west  of  wickedness  and  stand
up  from  dead  courses  and  companies,
if  Christ,  the  Day -Star  from  on  high,
shall  give  them  light  (Eph.  v.  14;
Luke  ii.  28-32)."— Trap;?.

—  "Open  to  me  the  pearl  gates,  Thou
who  art  the  ornament  of  heaven*s  city,
Li(:ht  from  Light,  chosen  as  the  light
before  the  world  began.  The  entrance
of  the  glory  from  the  east  for  lighting  the
Temple  took  place  when  the  apostles,
on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  were  endued
with  power  from  on  high." — Lange.

Ver.  2.  "  The  glory  of  God  which
shines  in  the  Church  shines  on  the
world.  When  God  appeared  for  David
the  brightness  that  was  before  him
dispersed  the  clouds  (Ps.  xviii.  12)."

—  "All  knowledge,  all  religion,  and
all  arts  and  sciences  have  travelled
according  to  the  course  of  the  sun,
from  east  to  west.  From  that  quarter
the  Divine  glory  at  first  came,  and
thence  the  rays  of  Divine  light  con-
tinue to  diffuse  themselves  over  the
face  of  the  earth.  From  thence  came
the  Bible,  and  through  that  the  new
covenant.  From  thence  came  the  pro-
phets, apostles,  and  first  missionaries
that  brought  the  knowledge  of  God  to
Europe,  to  the  isles  of  the  sea,  and  to
the  west  first,  and  afterwards  to  these
northern  regions." — A.  Clarke.

—  "This  glory  of  the  Lord  seems
to  have  been  intended  as  an  emblem
of  the  light  of  the  Gospel,  which  is  the
glory  of  Christ,  and  which  spread  from
the  eastern  part  of  the  world  into  the
western  ;  and  which  has  been,  and  still
is,  powerful  and  mighty  in  operation  in
saving  mankind  and  enlightening  the
earth  with  abundance  of  knowledge,
holiness,  and  comfort." — Benson,


—  "Where  the  Gospel  is  preached
the  waters  of  life  make  a  noise,  not
only  of  themselves,  but  also  from  the
stones  which  men  cast  in,  and  from
the  rocky  banks  of  worhlly  hearts
which  make  resistance ;  but  the  glory
of  eternity  shines  on  earth.  Tne  loud
noise  of  the  glory  is  the  voice  of  them
who  praise  the  Lord  with  one  heart
and  one  voice,  here  on  earth  as  there
in  heaven  (Rev.  xiv.  1).  Let  us  pray
God  to  enlighten  the  dark  earth  of
our  heart  with  that  holy  light  of  His
glory." — Lange.

—  "And  the  earth  shined  with
His  glory."  "  How  can  it  do  other-
wise when  the  Sun  of  Righteousness
Cometh  in  place  and  irradiateth  both
organ  and  object  1  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  Into
Solomon's  Temple  God  came  in  a  thick
cloud ;  not  so  here.  Light  is  now
more  diff*used  than  ever.  Woe  be  to
those  who  wink,  or  who  seek  straws
to  put  out  their  eyes  withal." — Trapp.

—  "Before  the  coming  of  ChrisD
the  world  was  full  of  heathenish  dark-
ness, and  Canaan  full  of  types,  cere-
monies, and  shadows ;  there  was  little
light  or  lustre  there.  But  when  Christ
came  the  oracles  of  the  heathen  ceased,
the  Jewish  shadows  vanished,  and  the
earth  shined  with  the  glory  of  the
Gospel  (Matt.  iv.  16):*—Greenhill.

Ver.  3.  "  God  appeared  in  the  same
manner  when  He  sent  him  to  speak
words  of  terror,  and  when  He  sent  him
to  speak  words  of  comfort,  for  in  both
God  is  and  will  be  glorified."

—  "  The  knowledge  of  God  never
causes  pride  but  humility,  because  it
at  the  same  time  discovers  the  corrup-
tion of  the  heart.  The  more  modest  a
man  is  and  the  less  he  trusts  to  himself,
the  more  he  is  endowed  with  the  know-
ledge of  God.  The  bowed  down  are
revived  by  the  Lord,  and  led  by  tiie
Spirit  to  the  place  where  the  majesty
of  the  God  of  glory  shines." — Lange.

Ver.  4.  "The  sins  of  impenitent
Israel  caused  the  glory  of  the  Lord  to
go  out  of  His  house,  but  now  tlie
repentance  of  Israel  is  blessed  with
the  return  of  this  glory." — Pool.

453


CHAP.  XLiii.  nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


—  "  What  hinders  this  glory  from  gloiy,   speaks   to    His   people   out   of

filling  also  thy  heart,  provided  it  is  His  Temi)le." — Pool.

not    full  of  other  things,   and    needs  —  "  The   Lord   Christ,  who  is  the

first  to  become  empty,  that  thy  hunger  chief  Architect  in  Temple  work,  stands

and  desire  may,  by  the  breath  of  the  by  His  prophets  and  servants  who  are

Spirit,  seek  and  find  satisfaction  in  its  employed  therein.     When  the  Temple

fulness  1 " — Lange.  was  first  built  many  were  employed

therein,  but  they  were  not  left  to  their

Ver.  5.  Humility — 1.  The  true  atti-  own  wisdom  and  skill.     Solomon  was

tude  of  the  soul  in  the  revealed  presence  principal ;  he  was  present,  counselled,

of  God.      2.   The  result  of  conscious  directed,  and  assisted  ;  therefore  it  is

personal  unworthiness.      3.  Leads  to  said  he  bu.lt  the  house.    So  in  Ezekiel's

exaltation.  Temple,  a  type  of  tlie  Gospel  Temple,

Christ   was    present;    He   counselled,

Ver.  6.  *'I  heard  distinctly,  intelli-  directed,  assisted,   and  stood   by   tl»e

gibly,  so  that  I  am  sure  it  was  no  prophet." — GreenhUL
delusion.     The  Lord,  who  was  in  that


EOMILETIGS,
Holiness  the  Law  of  the  New  Templb.
(Vers.  7-12.)

L  The  Divine  government  is  based  in  holiness  (ver.  7).     The  throne  of

God,  the  symbol  of  regal  and  governmental  authority,  is  firmly  established  in
righteousness.  God  is  holy.  His  throiie  is  holy.  His  law  is  holy,  and  every
single  act  of  His  universal  administration  is  pervaded  and  beautified  by  His
immaculate  holiuess  (Ps.  xlvii.  8).  The  perfected  Temple  will  be  the  ever-
lasting home  and  resting-place  of  Jehovah,  and  holiness  will  be  the  unchanging
law  of  the  house  (Ps.  xciii.  5).

IL  The  transgressions  of  God's  people  against  the  law  of  holiness  was  the
cause  of  their  ruin  (vers.  7,  8).  Nothing  is  more  plainly  revealed  or  more
frequently  and  emphatically  repeated  than  this  truth,  that  the  suff'erings  of
God's  people  were  brought  upon  themselves  by  their  disobedience.  Sin  is  so
deceptive  in  its  lure  and  so  demoralising  in  its  subtle  action,  that  when  itb
inevitable  puniblnnent  comes  the  transgressor  is  surprised  and  aggrieved,  as  if
some  undeserved  injustice  had  been  done  to  him.  It  is  the  nature  of  sin  to
blind  the  soul  to  its  real  enormity.  Sin  cannot  reveal  itself  as  sin  :  it  is  only
as  the  light  of  Divine  holiness  is  flashed  into  it  that  its  terrible  havoc  is
exposed.  Therefore,  in  vindication  of  His  holy  name  and  to  produce  genuine
repentance  in  the  defaulter,  God's  denunciations  of  sin  are  incessant.

HI.  The  blessings  of  the  law  of  holiness  may  be  enjoyed  by  all  who  truly
repent.  1  True  repentance  is  a  hwnbling  consciousness  of  dn  {ver.  10).  The  seer
is  instructed  to  reveal  to  Israel  the  glorious  character  of  the  new  Temple  in
order  to  make  them  ashamed  of  their  iniquities.  A  revelation  of  the  goodness
of  God  in  what  He  provides  for  us,  of  the  purity  of  God  in  what  He  demands,
prostrates  the  soul  in  humiliation  and  sorrow.  A  sense  of  shame  is  the  first
hopeful  sign  towards  moral  reform.  A  teacher  of  the  deaf  and  dumb  once  asked
his  pupils  to  write  down  what  they  thouuht  was  the  most  delightful  emotion.
One  wrote  joy,  another  ho/ie,  another  gratitude,  another  love  ;  but  one  peaceful-
looking  girl,  with  eyes  shining  with  tears,  wrote,  **  Repentance  is  the  most
4.H


HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTA  RY :  EZ  EKIEL.  chap.  xun.


delightful  emotion;**  and  when  asked  wliy,  answered,  "Because  it  is  so  delight-
ful to  be  humbled  before  God  ! "  2.  True  repentance  is  the  putting  away  of  sin
(ver.  9).  Sorrow  for  sin  is  puerile,  weak,  illusive,  unless  accompanied  by  a
sturdy  resolution  to  amend.  Sin  must  not  only  be  grieved  over,  but  forsaken.
Maudlin  tears  reform  nothing.  3.  True  repentance  is  evidenced  by  obedience,
*'  That  they  may  keep  all  the  ordinances  and  do  them  "  (ver.  11).  The  proof
of  irenuiiie  sorrow  is  seen  in  an  honest  endeavour  to  observe  the  laws  over
whose  violation  we  grieve.  It  is  not  enough  to  know  the  right ;  we  must  do  it.
God  reveals  His  laws,  not  that  they  may  be  admired  and  praised,  still  less  trans-
gressed, but  that  they  may  be  observed  and  practised.  Let  sorrow  for  the  past
urge  to  prompt  and  faithful  service.

IV.  The  law  of  holiness  is  all-compreliensive  in  its  operation  (ver.  12).
In  the  old  Temple  only  one  spot  was  accounted  the  Holy  of  Holies  ;  but  in  the
new  Temple  every  part  is  most  holy  :  the  law  applies  with  equal  force  to  each
portion  of  the  consecrated  house.  The  law  of  God*s  Temple  is  the  law  of  the
universe,  and  furnishes  the  standard  by  which  all  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds
will  be  unerringly  estimated.

Lessons. — 1.  Holiness  is  the  law  of  the  highest  life.  2.  Holiness  is  the  glory  of
a  perfect  character.     2.  Holiness  is  the  organ  of  the  grandest  spiritual  visions.

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  7-9.  The  Divine  Ruler — 1.  Is  this   vicinity   was   to   the    Temple    a

enthroned  in  the  midst  of  His  people  pollution    and    defilement." — Speaker^s

(ver.  7).     2.   Cannot   tolerate  a  rival  Commentary.
(ver.  8).     3.   Ensures   the   everlasting

happiness  of  the  obedient  (ver.  9).  Ver.  9.  "  God  now  first  returns  to

the    apostates  ;   but  His  grace  is  de-

Ver.  8.  Spurious  Religion.     1.  lis  in-  signed  to  work  repentance,  and  then

sliiutions  a  poor  imitation  of  the  genuine.  He  will  never  more  depart  from  them."

*'  Setting  their  threshold  by  My  thresh-  — Diedrich.
olds,   and   their  post   by    My    posts."

2.  Gains  no  authority  by  its  proximity  to  Vers.  10-12.  The  Vision  of  Divine
the  genuine.  "The  wall  between  Me  Things — 1.  Humbles  tiie  soul  under
and  them."  3.  Is  an  aggravated  pro-  a  sense  of  ingratitude  and  sin  (ver.  10).
fanation  of  the  genuine.  "  They  have  2.  Stimulates  to  a  more  earnest  and
even  defiled  My  holy  name  by  their  practical  obedience  (ver.  11).  3.  Re-
abominations  that  they  have  com-  veals  the  exalted  sanctity  of  the  Divine
mitted."  4.  Incurs  the  Divine  displea-  law  (ver.  12).
sui'e  and  punisJancnt.  *'  Wherefore  I
have  consumed  tliem  in  Mine  anger."  Vers.   10,    11.    The    New    Temple.

—  "  Tlie  palace  of  Solomon  abutted  "  The  Israelites  of  tlie  Captivity  might

upon  the  southern  side  of  the  embank-  see    the    pattern   when    they   had    re-

ment  of  the  Temple  platform.     Thus  pented  of  their  iniquities;  till  then  it

the  threshold  of  the.  King's  dwelling  was  impossible.    The  idea  of  a  s[)iritual

was  set  by  the  threshold  of  Jehovah,  society  could  not  unfold  itself  to  them

and  their  posts  by  His  posts,  and  there  while  they  were  living  in  a  heartless,

was  but  a  wall  between  Jehovah  and  divided,    self-righteous    state.       They

them.     It    was    not   that   the   act   of  must   be  humbled   before  they   could

building  a  palace  close  to  the  Temple  feel  the  possibility  of  such  a  society;

was   in   itself  profane,  but   when    the  still    more   before   they   could  confess

kings  gave  themselves  up  to  idolatry  it  to  be  real.     The  hindrance  to  the

455


nHAP.  XLHI.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


discernment  of  it  was  not  an  intel-  the  Cross  to  be  the  highest  manifesta-

lectual   one ;    it   was    not    that    they  tion  of  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  ;

wanted  the  intuition  and  the  foresight  who  have  rejoiced  in  that  manifesta-

of  the  prophet;  it  was  wholly  moral.  tion  because  it  is  universal,  and  who

It  was  their  baseness  and  selfishness  have  perceived  that  the  Divine  Unity

which  made  their  eyes  dim  that  they  is  not  a  narrow,  selfish  individuality,

could  not  see,   and  their  ears  heavy  but  the  unity  of  a  Father  with  a  Son

that  they  could  not  hear.     It  was  so  in  one  Spirit." — F,  D,  Maurice.
then ;  it  was  so  in  every  generation

afterwards.  *Kepent,*  said  John  the  Ver.  10.  "  Solomon's  Temple  left  the
Baptist,  *  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  people  in  their  disobedience  and  wor-
is  at  hand.'  The  pittern  of  the  house  ship  of  idols ;  but  this  house  belongs
is  about  to  be  presented  to  you.  The  to  a  higher  order.  He  who  lays  it
spiritual  society,  of  which  your  Temple  to  heart  will  cease  sinning  and  duly
is  the  imperfect  outward  embodiment,  examine  the  Temple  and  its  measure-
is  going  to  be  manifested.  The  Head  ments.  The  shame  ot  the  poor  sinner
of  it  is  among  you,  but  you  cannot  see  finds  in  the  Temple — which  is  Christ —
it,  you  cannot  see  Him.  Repent;  turn  exactly  the  right  measure." — Lange.
round  to  God,  that  He  may  remove  —  "  Nothing  so  effectually  makes
the  film  from  your  eyes  and  enable  men  ashamed  of  their  sins  as  the
you  to  receive  the  revelation  which  revelation  to  them  by  the  Holy  Ghost
He  is  making  to  you.  The  same  of  Christ  crucified  and  Christ  glorified
language  goes  through  the  Gospels.  in  the  hearing  of  the  Word.  The  height,
All  the  blindness  which  is  ascribed  to  depth,  length,  and  breadth  of  the  love
the  Jewish  nation  is  mainly  this,  that  of  Christ  to  His  spiritual  Temple,  the
they  would  not  accept  it  as  the  mani-  elect  Church,  causes  the  believer  to
Testation  of  a  kingdom  for  human  loathe  his  past  course  of  life  and
beings,  of  a  society  grounded  upon  henceforth  desire  to  live  wholly  to
the  name  of  the  Son  of  God  and  the  Christ.  Thus  believers  are  prepared
Son  of  Man ;  that  they  would  have  for  further  discoveries  of  the  blessed
only  a  Jewish  society.  And  that  laws  of  God's  spiritual  house." —
Jewish  society  proved  itself  not  to  be  Fausset

Jewish,  but  a  miserable  collection  of         —  "  1.  When   God   reveals   mercy

sects,  hating  each  other  and  contrary  and  shows  kindness  to  a  sinful  people,

to  all  men,  not  claiming  to  be  children  they  ought  to  be  ashamed  and  repent

of  God,  and  therefore  not  able  to  assert  of  all  their  former  iniquities.     (1.)  As

their   title   as  children  of  Abraham;  acts   of   filthiness.      (2.)    As    acts   of

essentially  inhuman,  and  therefore  ne-  folly.     (3.)  As  acts  of  unkindness  and

cessarily  given  up  to  the  worship  of  ingratitude.      (4.)  As   fearing   a  just

a  false  god — of  Mammon  instead  of  reproof.     (5.)  As  fearing  God's  cause

Jehovah.      Ezekiel   was   to  show  his  and    name    will   suffer   by   them.      2.

countrymen    the    form    of   the   house  Those  who  have  humbled  themselves

when  a  confession  of  their  iniquities  for   their    former   sins   are    fit   to    be

should    enable    them    to    discern   the  spiritual  mathematicians." — Greenhill.
pattern  after  which  it  was  to  be  built.  —  "  And    let    them    measure    the

The  law  must  hold  good  for  all  time  pattern."     "  That  by  a  holy  geometry

to  come.     There  may  be  such  a  house  they  may  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds

yet  built  in  Jerusalem.     But  it  must  take  all  the  dimensions  of  it  and  be

be  built  by  a  people  who  are  capable  transformed  into  the  likeness  of  the

of  giving  the  outward   expression   to  heavenly    pattern.      These    are    those

an    inward    truth    that   is    possessing  holy  and  heavenly  mathematics  which

them ;  who  have  humbled  themselves  none    can    learn    but    those    that   are

in  dust  and  ashes  before  God  for  their  taught   of    God,   and    without   which

selfishness,    their   exclusiveness,   their  none  can  be  Christ's  disciple;  like  as

worship  of  gold;  who  have  confessed  none  might  be  scholar  to  Plato  that
456


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xtm.


had  not  the  grounds  of  geometry." —  The  Church  of  God   is   eminent  and

Trap'p.  conspicuous.     'Upon   the   top  of  the

mountain.*      3.    Tiie    whole    Church

Ver.  11.   **  They  who  repent  of  their  of   God   is  to    be    made    up    of  holy

sins  are  capable  of  knowing  the  Temple  materials.     *  The  whole   limit  thereof

and  Its  arrangements,  while  those  who  round    about.'      4.    The    law    of  this

wantonly  pursue  fleshly  desires  receive  house,  which  is   holiness,  is   specially

not  the  spirit  of  wisdom,  and  are  in-  to  be  observed.     *  Behold,  this  is  the

capable  of  knowing  the  law  of  the  Lord  law  of  the  house.*  '* — Greenhill,

(2  Tim.  ii.  19  ;  1  John  iii.  3)." — Lange.  —  '*The  law  of  the  house — which

—  The  Ordinances  of  the  Temple,  was  pre-eminently  entitled  to  be  called

"1.   That  to  repentant  men,  ashamed  the  law — consisted  in  the  whole  region

of  all  their  evil  doings,  the   ways  of  of  the  Temple-Mount  being  most  holy.

God's  house  are  to  be  made  known  by  Not,  as  hitherto,  was  this  characteristic

the  prophets  and  ministers.     2.  Temple  to  be  confined  to  a  single  apartment

and  Church  work  must  not  be  accord-  of  the  Temple;  it  was  to  embrace  the

ing  to  men's  fancies,  but  according  to  entire  circumference  occupied   by  the

the  mind  of  God  and  that  pattern  He  symbolical  institutions  of  the  kingdom,

gives  forth.     3.  That  the  Temple  and  the  chambers  allotted  to   the  priests,

Church    of    Christ    has    distinct    and  and   even  the  courts  trodden   by  the

peculiar    laws    of    its    own.      4.  The  people,    as    well    as    the    immediate

Church  in   due   time  shall  be  such  a  dwelling-place    of  Jehovah.     So   that

Temple  as  is  represented  by  this  vision.  the    pattern    delineated    is    that  of  a

6.   The  end  of  making  known  the  laws  true    theocracy,   having   God   Himself

and  ways  of  God*s  house  is,  that  they  for  King,  with  the  community  in  all  its

may   be    observed    and   practised.'* —  members  for  true  denizens  of  the  king-

Greenhill.  dom  and  acceptable  ministers  of  right-
eousness before  the  Lord." — Fairhairn.

Ver.  12.  The  Law  of  God's  Church.  —  Let  none  expect  the  protection
"  1.  The  Church  of  God  has  a  good  and  blessings  of  it  that  will  not  sub-
foundation.    *  Upon  the  mountain.*    2.  mit  to  this  law.


HOMILETIGS.

The  Altar  an  Emblem  of  True  Worship.

(Vers.  13-27.)

I.  That  true  worship  must  he  offered  at  the  Divinely  consecrated  shrine

(vers.  13-26).  The  importance  attached  to  the  altar  here  described  is  seen  in
the  minute  particulars  given  concerning  its  measurements  and  structure,  and
the  elaborate  ceremonial  observed  in  its  dedication  to  the  service  of  Jehovah.
It  was  not  like  one  of  the  portable  altars  that  idolatrous  worshippers  were
accustomed  to  carry  about  with  them  in  their  journeys  and  wars,  but  was  a
fixed  shrine  having  a  permanent  place  in  the  Temple,  and  was  the  recognised
medium  of  access  to  God.  Here  the  worship  of  the  Temple  must  be  offered.
The  Jewish  system  being  a  theocracy,  a  visible  representation  of  the  reign  of
God,  Jehovah  was  worshipped  by  them  as  both  God  and  King.  This  twofold
character  was  observable  in  all  the  arrangements  of  the  ancient  cultus.  The
Temple  was  at  once  the  shrine  of  God  and  the  palace  and  throne  of  the  King.
Christ  is  the  Altar  of  the  new  dispensation,  the  Divine  shrine  consecrated  by
suffering  and  death,  through  whom  alone  worship  can  be  offered  to  the  God  of
heaven.  From  any  other  altar  worship  rises  no  higher  than  the  smoke  that
abcends  from  it,  and  its  effect  disappears  as  quickly.


CHAP.  XLin.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY  i  EZEKIETm


II.  That  true  worship  is  a  sacrifice  (ver.  27).  As  soon  as  the  altar  was
duly  consecrated  sacrifices  were  perpetually  offered  upon  it.  "The  burnt-
offering"  was  the  perfect  sacrifice,  because  the  victim  was  wholly  consumed
by  fire  and  sent  up  to  God,  as  it  were,  on  the  wings  of  fire.  It  was  a  memorial
of  God*s  covenant,  and  signified  that  the  offerer  belonged  wholly  to  God,  that
he  dedicated  himself,  soul  and  body,  to  Him,  and  placed  his  life  at  His  disposal.
Every  such  sacrifice  was  a  type  of  the  perfect  offering  made  by  Christ  on  behali
of  the  human  race.  "The  peace-offering"  was  not  an  atoning  sacrifice  to  make
peace  with  God,  but  a  joyful  celebration  of  peace  made  through  the  covenant.
In  this  part  of  the  ritual,  more  than  in  any  other,  we  see  Jehovah  present  in
His  house  inviting  the  worshipper  to  feast  with  Him.  Peace-offerings  were
piesented  either  as  a  thanksgiving,  or  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow,  or  as  a  free-will
offering  of  love  and  joy.  True  worship  is  a  sacrifice,  a  free  offering  up  of  the
W()rship{)er  and  all  he  has  to  God,  and  is  expressed  in  devout  adoration  and
thanksgiving  and  in  joyful  praise.  It  is  the  spontaneous  outburst  of  a  loving
heart,  yearning  to  render  homage  to  the  great  object  of  its  love,  and  finding
its  deepest  satisfaction  in  the  exercise.

III.  That  true  worship  is  acceptable  to  God  (ver.  27).  It  is  acceptable
when  and  as  it  is  offered  in  the  manner  and  spirit  God  has  Himself  prescribed.
It  must  be  offered  through  Christ,  the  true  Priest  and  Altar,  and  with  the  aid
of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Many  of  the  heathen  priests  acknowledged  the  moral
element  in  worship,  as  when  one  counselled,  "Sacrifice  to  the  gods,  not  so
much  clothed  with  purple  garments  as  with  a  pure  heart."  And  another  said,
"God  regards  not  the  multitude  of  the  sacrifices,  but  the  disposition  of  the
sacrificer."  God  must  cease  to  be  Spirit  before  any  service  but  that  which  is
spiritual  can  be  accepted  by  Him.  David  exi)resses  the  blessedness  and  help
received  in  worship  by  men  of  all  ages,  in  that  earnest  invitation,  "0  come,
let  us  worship  and  bow  down  "  (Ps.  xcv.  6,  7).  To  refuse  to  worship  God  is
as  great  a  folly  as  to  deny  His  existence.  He  who  denies  the  being  of  God
is  an  atheist  to  His  essence ;  he  who  denies  His  worship  is  an  atheist  to  His
honour.  The  instinct  of  worship  is  as  universal  as  the  notion  of  a  God,  or  else
idolatry  would  never  have  gained  so  firm  a  footing  in  the  world.  Our  minds
are  a  beam  from  God,  and,  as  the  beams  of  the  sun  when  they  touch  the  earth,
should  reflect  back  upon  God.  We  unsoul  our  souls  when  we  neglect  the
worship  of  God,  and  are  like  flies  that  are  found  oftener  on  dunghills  than
among  flowers.

Lessons. — 1.  Worship  is  absolutely  necessary  for  the  culture  of  the  soul.  2.
Worship  is  acceptable  only  as  it  is  offered  according  to  Divinely  sanctioned  methods,
3.  Idolatry  is  a  false  and  debasing  worship.


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  13-27.  "  Now  that  the  Lord  course  was  the  altar,  at  which  all  gifts

has  taken  possession  of  the  house,  the  and   sacrifices  were   to   be   presented

prophet    goes   on   to   show   how   the  for  the  Divine  favour  and  blessing."

work   of   fellowship   and    communion  — Fairbairn.

with  Him  is  to  proceed  on  the  part  of  —  The  Divinely  Authorised  Altar

the  people.     It  must  begin  anew,  and  — 1.  Is  minutely  described  that  there

of  course  be  conductbd  after  the  old  might  be  no  question  as  to  its  identity

manner,  for  no  other  could  here  come  (vers.  13-17).     2.  Is  solemnly  conse-

into  contemplation.     In  ancient  times  crated   that  there  may  be  no  doubt

the   grand   medium  of  Divine  inter-  as  to  the  necessity  for  its  use  (ver&

458


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


CHAP.  XLITT.


18-26).     3.  Provides  a  way  of  accept-
ance to  every  penitent  seeker  (ver.  27).

Ver.  13.  The  Jews  after  their  return
from  captivity  had  an  altar  long  before
they  had  a  Temple  (Ezra  iii.  3),  but
the  altar  here  spoken  of  is  an  altar  in
the  Temple,  the  mystical  Tem])le,  em-
blematic of  the  Gospel  Church  ;  and
this  altar  is  mystical  too,  for  Christ  is
our  Altar.

—  "No  one  could  go  into  the  Temple
without  passing  by  the  altar,  and  so
no  one  can  go  into  heaven  without
the  sacrifice  of  the  death  of  Christ." —
Starch

Vers.  15-17.  "The  number  twelve
was  symbolical  of  the  twelve  tribes,
four  of  the  earth,  sixteen  is  the  square
of  four,  and  fourteen  the  double  of
seven — the  number  of  the  covenant  as
being  composed  of  three,  the  number
of  God,  an  1  of  four,  the  number  of  the
world.  Thus  we  have  in  the  altar  a
special  instance  of  Hebrew  symbolism.*'
— Sj)eaker*s  Commentary.

Ver.  15.  "*So  the  altar'— Heb.,
the  mount  of  God.  *And  from  the
altar ' — Heb.,  from,  the  lion  of  God.
Perhaps  the  first  was  a  name  given  to
the  altar  when  elevated  to  the  honour
of  God,  and  on  which  the  victims  were
ofiered  to  Him  ;  and  the  second,  the
lion  of  God,  may  mean  the  hearth,
which  might  have  been  thus  called
because  it  devoured  and  consumed
the  burnt-offerings  as  a  lion  does  his
prey." — A.  Clarke.

Ver.  16.  "  Christ,  the  Christian
Altar,  is  complete,  firm,  and  fixed."

— Trapp.

Ver.  17.  "  Toward  the  east."
"These  stairs  were  placed  eastward
that  he  who  went  up  should  have  his
face  to  the  west,  his  back  to  the  east  :
his  face  toward  God,  not  toward  the
rising  sun,  as  they  who  made  the  sun
their  idol."— Poo/.

Ver.   18.    "Thus  God   comes   first


and  gives  grace  ;  His  grace  maKes
ashamed,  chastises,  sanctifies,  recon-
ciles, and  produces  intimate  eternal
fellowship.  This  is  always  God's  way
with  men,  provided  only  we  recognise
it  aright  in  these  days  of  ours  when
now  it  is  set  in  the  most  glorious
light;  Christ  and  the  apostles  have
given  additional  clearness  to  EzekieL"
— Diedrich.

Vers.  18-27.  "Although  the  chief
scope  of  this  vision  be  to  set  out  the
glory  and  greatness  of  the  Church
under  the  Gospel  and  among  the
Gentiles,  yet,  because  the  Jews  at
this  time  being  in  Babylon  were  to
return  to  Jerusalem,  the  Lord  alludes
to  ordinances,  rites,  and  ceremonies
which  were  well  known  among  the
Jews,  holding  out  under  them  the
spiritual  worship  of  the  GospeL" —
Greenhill.

Ver.  24.  The  Best  Efforts  of  Man

— 1.  Are  tainted  with  impurity.  2.
Need  to  be  cleansed  and  made  whole-
some. 3.  Augmented  in  eflacacy  when
salted  with  study,  prayer,  tears,  and
suff'ering.

—  Grace  is  the  salt  with  which  all
our  religious  performances  must  be
seasoned  (Col.  iv.  6).

—  "  True  Christians  are  sacrifices
well  seasoned  :  incorrupt  doctrines
will  make  incorrupt  souls  and  bodies;
the  salt  makes  both  immortal :  men
soundly  salted  with  Gospel  truths
shall  never  perish." — Greenhill.

Ver.  27.  As  to  the  future  sacrificial
service  of  Israel,  we  can  well  aff'ord  to
wait  till  God  by  the  event  shall  clear
up  every  difficulty  ;  and  throughout
eternity  we  shall  adoringly  wonder  at
the  beautiful  variety  and,  at  the  same
time,  perfect  unity  of  the  several  parts
of  the  mighty  scheme  of  redemption
through  the  incarnate  Son  of  God," —
Fausset.

—  "  Those  who  were  in  Christ  be-
fore others  ought  in  this  to  serve  as
priests  to  the  younger  believers."—
Lange,

469


CHAP.  XLI?.  SOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


The  Relation  of  Prince  and  Priests  to  the  Temple.    (Chap,  xliv.)

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.  Ver.  7.  "Strangers."  Here  the  people
"The  gate  of  the  outward  sanctuary"  are  taught  that  unfaithful  priests  un-
— the  court  of  the  priests  as  distin-  circumcised  in  heart  (Acts  vii.  51),
guished  from  the  Temple  itself.  "This  though  of  the  true  lineage,  are  re-
gate  shall  be  shut" — shut  to  the  people,  garded  as  strangers,
but  opened   on   certain   days   for  the

prince  (chap.  xlvi.  1),  he  holding  the  Ver.  8.  "Ye  have  set  keepers" —

place  of  God  in  political  concerns,  as  according  to  your  own   pleasure,  not

the   priests  do  in   spiritual.     Only  a  My  ordinances  (Num.  xvi.  40 ;  1  Kings

prince  of  the  House  of  David  might  xii.  31).
sit  down  in  the  priests'  court.     As  a

mark  of  respect  to  an  Eastern  monarch,  Ver.    10.    "The   Levites  that  are

the  gate  by  which  he  enters  is  thence-  gone  away  far  from  Me."     The  Levites

forth  shut  to  all  other  persons.  as  a  body  had  remained  true  to  the

Temple-service  at  Jerusalem  (2  Chron.

Ver.  3.  "It  is  for  the  prince."     The  xi.  13).     But  individuals  among  them

Rabbis    understood    this    to    be    the  deserted    to    Israel.       These   apostate

Messiah  ;  but  this  cannot  be,  as  He  Levites  shall  bear  their  iniquities  ;  they

would  not  be  likely  to  offer  a  burnt-  shall  not  be  restored  to  their  former

offering  as  the  prince  was  required  to  rank  and  privileges,
do  (chap.  xlvi.   4).     The  prince  must

mean  the  civil  ruler  under  Messiah:  Ver.  11.  "Yet  they  shall  be  mini»-
he  represents  Messiah,  who  entered  ters "  —  servants  performing  menial
heaven,  the  true  Sanctuary,  by  a  way  offices  for  the  ministering  priests —
that  none  other  could.  "  Because  the  acting  as  porters,  helping  in  the
Lord  hath  entered  in  by  it."  "  How  slaughter  of  the  victims,  but  not  as
glorious  must  the  entering  Lord  be  sacrificing  priests.  They  shall  not
when  the  prince  cannot  be  more  be  excluded  from  all  service  in  the
highly  honoured  than  by  a  place  in  Sanctuary,  but  degraded  from  the
the  gate  by  which  He  entered  !" —  functions  of  priests  to  those  of  simple
Hengstenberg.  "  To  eat  bread  before  Levites.  One  may  be  a  believer,  and
the  Lord " — a  custom  connected  with  that,  too,  in  a  distinguished  place,
sacrifices  (Gen.  xxxi.  64  ;  Ex.  xviii.  and  yet  lose  some  special  honour —
12,  xxiv.  11  ;  1  Cor.  x.  18).  Accord-  be  acknowledged  as  pious,  yet  be  ex-
ing  to  the  old  law,  these  feasts  be-  eluded  from  some  dignity.  "  Having
longed  only  to  the  priests  ;  none  of  the  charge  at  the  gates."  Though  stand-
rest  of  the  congregation,  not  even  ing  as  mere  doorkeepers,  it  is  in  the
the  king,  might  partake  of  them  :  the  house  of  God  which  hath  foundations ;
new  system  gives  to  the  prince  a  whereas  they  who  dwell  with  the
privilege  which  he  did  not  before  wicked  dwell  in  but  shifting  tents
possess,  he  standing,  as  the  represen-  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  10).
tative  of  Messiah,  in  a  higher  position

than  the  kings  of  old.  Ver.  15.  "  The  priests,  the  Levites,

the  sons  of  Zadok."    The  priests  of

Ver.   6.    "  The  rebellious  house  of  the  line  of  Ithamar  were  to  be  dis-

IsraeL"     The  sins  of  the  priestliood  charged    from    ministrations    in    the

acted    and    reacted    on    one  another  :  Temple  because  of  their  corruptions,

like  priest,  like  people  ;  and  like  people,  Zadok,  according  to  his  name,  which

like  priest  (Jer.  v.  31  ;    Hos.  iv.  9).  means  righteous,  and  his  line  were  to

God  expostulates  with  His  people  in  succeed,  as  they  did  not  take  part  in  the

the  seat  of  their  former  iniquity  (ver.  general  apostasy  to  the  same  degree

4  ;  chap.  viii.  3).  '1  Kings  ii.  35  ;  1  Chron.  xxiv.  3).     It
460


BOMIIETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XttV.


indicated  a  race  of  faithful  and  devoted
iervants — a  priesthood  serving  God  in
newness  of  spirit,  not  in  the  oldness  of
the  letter,  as  the  people  whom  they
represented  should  also  have  become
true  Israelites,  tliemselves  a  royal
priesthood  offering  up  spiritual  sacri-
fices to  the  Lord.

Ver.  17.  "Clothed  with  linen  gar-
ments." Four  vestments  were  worn
by  the  ordinary  priest  —  the  linen
breeches,  the  coat,  the  girdle,  and  the
bonnet  The  material  of  which  they
were  made  was  linen,  or,  more  accu-
rately, byssus,  the  white  shining  cotton
stuff  of  Egypt.  These  two  qualities
of  the  hyssus  are  specially  marked
as  characteristic,  being  symbolical  of
purity.

Ver.  20.  "  Neither  shall  they  shave
their  heads  " — as  mourners  used  to  do,
and  as  the  Levitical  priests  were  for-
bidden to  do  (Lev.  xxi.  1-5).  The
worshippers  of  the  Egyptian  idols
Serapis  and  Isis  shaved  their  heads —
another  reason  why  the  priests  of
Jehovah  are  not  to  do  so.  "Nor
suffer  their  locks  to  grow  long" — as
the  luxurious,  the  barbarians,  and
soldier  in  warfare  did.

Ver.  21.  "Neither  shall  any  priest
drink  wine" — lest  the  holy  enthusiasm
of  their  devotion  should  be  mistaken
for  inebriation,  as  in  Peter's  case  (Acts
ii.  13,  15,  18).

Ver.  23.  "  And  they  shall  teach  "—
to  spread  out  the  hand,  for  example,


to  point  to  something,  to  teach.  The
priestly  service  is  to  comprehend  wor-
ship and  doctrine,  representation  of
the  people  before  God,  and  representa-
tion of  God  before  the  people — every-
thing with  an  eye  to  sanctification.

Ver.  24.  "They  shall  stand  in
judgment."  There  was  in  the  second
Temple  a  council  of  priests  whose
special  duty  it  was  to  regulate  every-
thing connected  with  the  Sanctuary.

Ver.  28.  "  It  shall  be  unto  them  for
an  inheritance."  The  remains  of  the
sacrifices  were  a  chief  source  of  the
priests'  support.  "  I  am  their  inherit-
ance— possession  " — something  which
one  grasps  and  retains.  Jehovah  is  the
all-sufficing  possession  of  His  servants
(Num.  xviii.  20  ;  Dent,  xviii.  1).

Ver.  30.  "  And  every  oblation  " —

offering,  or  heave-oflfering,  whatever  is
according  to  precept,  or  of  free  will,
lifted  up  for  Jehovah  as  a  consecrated
gilt  to  the  Sanctuary.  "  That  he  may
cause  the  blessing  to  rest  in  thine
house."  The  heaving  and  waving  of
the  offering  involved  the  thought  that
in  consequence  of  such  gifts  to  the
priest  the  blessing  of  God  is  brought
down  on  the  individual  house.

Ver.  31.  "That  priest  shall  not
eat  of  anything  that  is  dead  of  itself,
or  torn."  Tliis  was  defiling  for  any
man  (Lev.  xvii.  15) ;  how  much  more
so  for  the  priests  of  Jehovah !  (Lev,
xxii.  8).  Thus  was  the  idea  of  holi-
ness strictly  enforced.


EOMILETICS.
The  Dignity  of  the  Civil  Eulx&


(Vers.  1-3.)

I.  Arises  from  the  exalted  character  of  His  regal  ftmctlons.  The  king  is
the  human  representative  of  Divine  justice,  both  in  its  administration  and
maintenance;  he  is  God's  vice^^erent  and  deputy.  The  word  that  describes
his  office  indicates  his  power — King,  Komiing,  Able  man.  He  is  the  summary  of
all  that  is  great  and  noble  in  man.  *'  Priest,  teacher,  whatsoever  of  earthly  or
of  spiritual  dignity  we  can  fancy  to  reside  in  a  man  embodies  itself  here,  to

461


CHAP.  XLiv.  HOMILETIC  COMME.VTARY :  EZEKIEL.


command  over  us,  to  furnish  us  with  constant  practical  teaching,  to  tell  us  for
the  da}-  and  hour  what  we  are  to  do."  He  is  a  leader  and  guide  of  men,  and
must  be  Ufted  far  beyond  the  suspicion  of  selfishness  and  partiality.  He  must
rule  in  equity  and  righteousness,  with  an  ear  deaf  to  the  flattery  of  the  rich,
and  a  hand  ever  ready  to  help  the  oppressed  and  {)Oor.  He  must  defend
virtue  among  the  weakest,  and  punish  iniquity  among  the  strongest.  Every
brave  and  honest  endeavour  to  act  the  king  adds  new  lustre  to  the  dignity
of  the  oflSce.  The  king,  like  every  other  true  man,  is  not  above  acting  upon
the  advice —

"  This  above  all :  To  thine  own  self  be  true,
And  it  must  follow,  as  the  light  the  day,
Thou  canst  not  then  be  false  to  any  man."

11.  Distinguished  by  privileged  access  to  the  Divine  Temple  (vers.  1-3).

The  east  gate,  through  which  the  glory  of  the  Lord  entered  the  Temple,  was
to  be  shut,  to  be  a  perpetual  reminder  of  that  signal  honour  paid  to  the  building,
and  to  induce  a  profound  reverence  for  the  Divine  majesty.  But  the  prince
was  permitted  to  enter  the  porch  of  that  gate  to  indicate  that  his  office  brought
him  into  nearer  contact  with  God,  and  to  give  weight  and  authority  to  all  his
royal  proceedings.  It  is  necessary  to  surround  and  support  the  throne  with
the  sanctions  of  Divine  privilege  in  order  to  keep  up  the  king  to  the  loftiest
standard  of  right  and  to  give  force  to  every  act  of  justice  in  the  kingly  ad-
ministration.

ni.  Maintained  by  spiritual  communion  and  fellowship  with  the  Divine
Ruler.  "He  shall  eat  before  the  Lord"  (ver.  3).  Tlie  prince  is  permitted  to
enter  the  porch  of  the  east  gate  that  he  may  worship  God.  It  is  thus  he  is
constantly  reminded  of  his  high  duty  and  receives  moral  strength  to  act  in
harmony  with  the  Divine  standard.  The  higher  we  rise  in  the  social  scale  the
greater  are  our  responsibilities,  and  the  more  need  is  there  to  seek  Divine
help  to  be  faithful  and  true.  The  loftiest  function  of  the  king  is  to  be  the
patron  and  protector  of  religion.  He  must  seek  power  for  his  work  at  the
same  source  to  which  the  humblest  believer  is  invited — in  communion  with
God.  The  soul  finds  its  greatest  blessings  in  intense  fellowship  with  the
highest.  Augustine  once  beautifully  said,  "Thou  may  est  seek  after  honours
and  not  obtain  them;  thou  mayest  labour  after  riches  and  yet  remain  poor;
thou  mayest  doat  on  pleasures  and  have  many  sorrows.  But  our  God,  of  His
supreme  goodness,  says,  *  Whoever  sought  Me  and  found  Me  not  %  Whoever
desired  Me  and  obtained  Me  noti  Whoever  loved  Me  and  missed  Me?  I  am
with  him  that  seeks  Me.  He  hath  Me  already  that  wishes  for  Me  ;  and  he  that
loveth  Me  is  sure  of  My  love.* "  Fellowship  with  God  is  the  secret  of  power  to
govern  righteously  and  to  labour  with  pleasure  and  success.

Lessons. — 1.  The  kingly  office  has  grave  responsibilities,  2.  The  highest  honour
of  the  king  is  to  be  the  faithful  servant  of  God.  3.  The  king  must  seek  Divine  grace
to  fulfil  the  duties  of  his  office.


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Ver.  1~3.  "  The  spiritual  truth  to  ness  (Rom.  i.  4) :   all  we  must  enter

be  learned  here  is,  that  our  Messiah  as  sinners  <5avea  by  grace.     Through

entered  heaven,  the  true   Sanctuary,  Him   alone    believers   eat   before   the

by  a  way  that  none  other  could,  on  Lord  in  the  communion  of  the  Holy

the  ground  of  His  own   perfect  holi-  Supper,    and    shall    hereafter    experi-

462


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKJEL,  chap.  xli7.


mentally  realise  that  scripture, 'Blessed  ness.      Far    now   from   usurping    the

is    he    that   shall   eat    bread    in    the  authority  that  belonged  to  God  and

kingdom  of  God '  (Luke  xiv.   15)."—  abusing  it  to  selfish  ends,  all  authority

Fausset  and  power  in  Israel  should   be  exer-
cised— if  this  Divine   ideal  were   re-

Ver.  1.  "And  it  was  shut."     The  duced  to  practice — in  a  solemn  feeling

Glories  of  Heaven — 1.  Are  Divinely  of  subordination  to  God's  majesty  and

secured.     2.  Are  open  to  all  penitent  with  an  unfeigned  desire  for  His  glory."

seekers.      3.  Are  inaccessible   to  the  — Fairbairn,

unbelieving.  —  The   Kingly  Office— 1.   Enjoys

—  '*  Our  heart  too  should  be  shut  distinguished  privileges.     2.  Involves

to  the  world  and  the  devil  when  once  much   anxious    thought   and   onerous

the  holy  God  has  entered  into  it  and  toil.     3.   Needs  the  help  of  an  earnest,

His  glory  has  swallowed  up  sin  and  practical  piety.

misery  in  us.     Alas !  if  the  door  of  —  "  The  Christian  ruler  ought  to

heaven  should  be  shut ! " — Lange.  be  the  Christian  pattern  of  his  people.

He  is  not  to  preach,  just  as  it  is  not

Ver.  3.  **  What   could   this   import  his  office  to  offer  sacrifice  ;  but  he  is

but  that  the  prince  should  feel  he  now  to  nourish  and  protect  the  Church  and

occupied  a  place  of  peculiar  nearness  avow  its  faith.     He  ought  to  have  a

to   God?      As   God's   vicegerent   and  good   conscience   and  joy  before  the

deputy  among  the  people,  it  became  Lord   because   of  his  princely  office,

him  to  be  the  most  distinguished  re-  which  does  not  merely  consist  in  this,

presentative   in   public   life  of  God's  that  we  live  in  peace  and  quiet  under

holiness ;   to   tread   the  higher  walks  his  sceptre,  but  also  that  the  people

of  spiritual  communion  with  heaven,  may  hear  the  Word  of  God  and  without

and  stand  pre-eminent  in  his  zeal  for  fear  offer  to  Him  the  sacrifices  of  their

the  interests  of  truth  and  righteous-  worship  " — Lange,


H0MILETIG8.

A  Holy  Priesthooix

(Vers.  4-31.)

L  Urged  to  fidelity  by  admonitions  of  former  neglect.     1.  Reminded  of  the

lofty  standard  of  Temple-service  (vers.  4,  5).  Having  seen  the  exalted  position
of  the  prince,  the  prophet  is  shown  the  character  of  the  priesthood  which  is  to
minister  in  the  glorious  Temple.  A  vision  of  the  Divine  glory  filling  the  house
is  again  flashed  u[)on  him,  and  he  is  earnestly  called  upon  to  observe  with
special  care  the  ordinances  and  laws  of  the  priesthood  and  every  minute  detail
of  the  Temple-ritual.  The  supreme  holiness  of  Jehovah  and  the  manifested
splendour  of  His  majesty  demand  a  worship  of  the  highest  and  purest  order.
He  can  be  ministered  unto  acceptably  only  by  a  holy  priesthood.  Tiie  object
of  worship  reacts  upon  the  worshipper ;  and  our  conceptions  of  God  must
necessarily  affect  and  mould  the  character  of  the  worship  we  offer  to  Him.  Our
souls  should  be  continually  straining  after  enlarged  views  of  God,  that  our
worship  may  be  intelligent,  reverent,  and  holy.  2.  The  apostasy  of  priests  and
people  is  a  desecration  of  the  Temple  (vers.  6-10).  Priests  and  people  had  been
unlaithful  to  covenant  engagements  and  rebelled  against  the  Divine  laws.  The
conuption  of  the  one  class  reacted  upon  the  othei',  and  their  conjoint  abomi-
nations polluted  the  holy  Sanctuary.  Tlie  old  adage,  "Like  priest,  like  people,"
is  not  less  true  than  "  Like  people,  like  priest."  The  priesthood  is  bound  by  its
calling  always  to  be  ahead  of  the  people  in  teaching  and  morality.     3.   UnfaitJi-

4C3


CHAP.  XLIT.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


ful  'priests  are  deposed  from  the  highest  service  (vers.  11-14).  The  Levites  who
were  carried  away  with  the  idolatrous  ieii(iency  of  the  times  are  degraded  in
their  status.  Yet  their  punishment  is  mixed  with  mercy.  They  were  not
utterly  excluded  from  the  Temple.  While  they  were  not  allowed  to  take  part
in  the  more  privileged  acts  of  worship,  they  were  permitted  to  perform  inferior
and  menial  duties.  The  goodness  of  God  ever  provides  a  way  of  recovery  for
the  erring  ;  and  the  humblest  place  in  His  Temple  is  a  post  of  honour  thafe
should  be  appreciated  the  more  it  is  undeserved.

II.  Composed  of  those  who  have  been  faithful  in  time  of  trial  (vers.  15,  16).
Amid  the  general  detection  the  descendants  of  Zadok  maintained  tlieir  integrity,
and  they  are  promoted  to  honour  ;  they  become  a  type  of  the  holy  priesthood
which  is  to  occupy  the  highest  place  in  the  newly  constituted  Temple  of  the
future.  Trial  is  the  test  of  character,  and  every  resistance  to  evil  is  a  strengthen-
ing of  the  moral  fibre.  The  men  who  are  to-day  wielding  the  mightiest  influence
for  good  in  Church  and  State  are  those  who,  in  the  midst  of  obscurity  and  mis-
representation, have  remained  true  to  their  conscience  and  their  God.  As  goM
shines  the  brijihter  when  submitted  to  the  fiercest  fire,  so  religious  priiici[>l6
glows  with  a  diviner  lustre  the  more  it  is  tried.  Trial  is  the  pathway  to  honour
and  fame.

III.  Must  observe  the  Divinely  sanctioned  laws  of  purity  (vers.  17-27).
The  minute  directions  iiere  given  concerning  the  vestments  an<l  habits  ot  the
priests  have  a  distinctly  moral  significance.  They  must  wear  linen  garments,
emblems  of  cleanliness  and  [)urity;  they  must  not  shave  their  heads — as  mourners
did — nor  let  their  hair  grow  uncut — as  persons  unfit  for  active  service — nor
drink  wine  when  enga<?ed  in  Temple-service — lest  they  should  be  unfit  for  high
spiritual  emotions — nor  do  anything  which  under  the  outward  restrictions  of  a
symbolic  ritual  betokened  a  want  of  inward  purity.  The  holiness  that  pervades
the  house  of  God  must  pervade  the  hearts  and  lives  of  those  who  are  called  to
minister  in  its  liallowed  services.  The  spirit  in  which  the  holiest  acts  are  done
is  a  sample  and  pattern  of  the  spirit  in  which  every  duty  should  be  done  (Luke
xxii.  19 ;  comp.  Col.  iii.  17).

IV.  Assured  of  adequate  maintenance  (vers.  28-31).  God  takes  care  to
make  ample  provision  for  those  who  work  for  Him.  What  they  may  lack  in
worldly  affluence  He  makes  up  to  them  in  the  satisfying  comfort  of  His
presence  and  in  the  riches  of  His  grace.  Poverty  has  its  temptations  and
anxieties,  but  it  is  powerless  to  harm  the  soul  that  has  its  inheritance  in  God.
Let  body  and  soul  be  wholly  devoted  to  the  service  of  God,  and  He  will  not  fail
to  furnish  all  necessary  supplies  (Ps.  xxxvii.  3).

Lessons. — 1.  Priestly  sins  are  aggravated  because  of  the  privileges  and  opportunities
of  the  priestly  office.  2.  Priestly  duties  demand  the  loftiest  purity.  3.  The  priest  is
a  power  for  good  only  as  he  is  faithful  to  the  Divine  law.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  4-31.  "  All  who  are  engaged  should  be  especially  careful  in  forming
in  the  ministry  should  be  blameless,  connections,  and  prudent  in  the  man-
sound  in  the  faith,  full  of  good  agement  of  their  i  .milies,  observing
works,  exemplary  in  their  lives,  walk-  and  teaching  others  to  keep  the  statutes
ing  humbly  before  God  and  circnm-  of  the  Lord.  They  should  delight  in
spectly  in  the  sight  of  men.  They  every  part  of  their  sacred  service,  yet
464


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  XLIV.


do  all  in  humble  reliance  on  Christ.
Their  wants  should  be  supi)lied,  so
that  they  may  not  be  obliged  to  in-
volve themselves  in  worldly  cares  and
employments  for  a  maintenance." —
Henry  and  Scott.

Vers.  4,  6.  Divine  Revelations — 1.

Should  he  seen  from  different  points  of
view,  "Then  brought  he  me  the  way
of  the  north  gate  before  the  house"
(ver.  4).  2.  Overpower  the  earnest
student  with  their  splendour.  "  I  looked,
and  behold  the  glory  filled  the  house,
and  I  fell  upon  my  face  "  (ver.  4).  3.
Boldly  challenge  the  most  minute  and
careful  investigation.  "Mark  well  all
the  ordinances,  the  entering  in  and
every  going  forth  of  the  sanctuary**
(ver.  5).

Ver.  4.  "God  reveals  His  glory  to
His  servants,  especially  when  He  calls
on  them  to  make  known  His  will  to
His  people  (Acts  xviii.  9;  xxiii.  11).**

Ver.  5.  *' Divine  things  are  not  to
be  drowsily  listened  to  or  drowsily
engaged  in.  In  everything  there  must
be  heart — in  seeing,  in  hearing,  in
doing. — The  goings  in  and  out  of  the
Sanctuary  a  solemn  consideration  for
every  one,  but  especially  for  those  who
keep  the  charge  of  the  Sanctuary,  Avhat-
ever  their  rank  in  the  service." — Lange.

Vers.  6-14.  God's  Treatment  of
Rebels.  1.  Their  sins  are  accurately
recorded — rebellion  (ver.  6),  abomina-
tions (vers.  6,  7),  polluting  the  Sanc-
tuary (ver.  7),  idolatry  (ver.  12),
breaking  of  covenant  (ver.  7),  neglect
of  duty  (ver.  8).  2.  They  are  faith-
fully reproved  (vers.  6-13).  3.  They
are  made  conscious  of  their  evil  doings.
"  They  shall  bear  their  iniquity  "  (vers.
10,  12).  4.  They  suffer  official  degrada-
tion (vers.  11,  14).

Ver.  7.  "The  voice  of  the  people,
the  choice  of  the  people,  is  not  God*s
voice,  God's  choice,  but  frequently
God*s  judgment  to  the  full. — Self-
chosen  Divine  service  is  an  abomina-
to  the  Lord.*' — Lange.


2


Vers.  8,  14.  "Ye  have  not  kept  the
charge.  But  I  will  make  them  keepers
of  the  charge."  The  Divine  Mercy —
1.  Takes  note  of  every  act  of  unfaith-
fulness. 2.  Does  not  fail  to  administer
faithful  reproof.  3.  Does  not  utterly
abandon  the  transgressor.  4.  Is  ever
ready  to  restore  the  penitent.

Ver.  8.  "What  general  can  employ
a  soldier  who  is  everything  else,  but
no  soldier  1 "

Ver.  9.  "  It  is  a  token  of  the  greatest
decline  of  the  Church  when  the  wicked
and  manifest  hypocrites  are  not  only
not  expelled,  but  go  freely  in  and  out,
and  even  have  the  ruling  power," —
Lange.

Ver.  10.  "  Where  there  are  ungodly
teachers  there  is  no  want  of  ungodly
hearers  (Jer.  v.  31).  Degraded  priests
a  mirror  for  pastors.** — Starke.

Ver.  11.  "Even  in  the  performance
of  subordinate  service,  where  one
originally  stood  higher,  the  grace  of
God  may  be  with  us,  provided  we
let  God's  humbling  of  us  issue  in  con-
version of  heart  and  look  upon  the
punishment  as  a  righteous  recompense.
It  is  not  at  all  necessary  that  we
should,  as  the  world  calls  it,  make  a
successful  career  in  the  clerical  pro-
fession."— Lange.

Ver.  12.  "  The  sins  of  the  preacher
in  their  consequences  as  regards  the
life  of  the  community."

Ver.  13.  "How  great  then  was  the
love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  Peter  and
the  rest  of  His  disciples  after  His
resurrection,  as  in  sending  them  that
sweet  message  (Mark  xvi.  7),  so  in
readmitting  them  to  the  work  of  the
ministry  after  so  foul  a  revolt  I  (John
XX.  21-23).  And  doth  He  not  the
very  same  still  for  His  poor  sinful
servants  who  desire  indeed  to  fear
His  name,  but  are  oft  overtaken  in  a
fault  through  infirmity  of  the  flesh  t  *'
— Trapp.

—  "  Let  us  beware  of  losing  precious
O  465


OHAP.  XLIT.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL


opportunities  wherein  we  may  have
the  honour  of  doing  great  things  for
God,  such  as  Mark  lost  in  leaving
Paul  and  Barnabas  in  Pamphylia,  and
in  not  going  forward  to  the  glorious
work  through  love  of  ease  or  fear  of
man ;  and  such  as  the  disciples  lost  in
not  affording  Jesus  at  His  request  the
sympathy  of  their  prayers  and  tears,
through  drowsiness,  in  Gethsemane."
— Fausset.

—  "The  ignominy  of  failure  in
ministerial  life :  personal  access  to
God  is  hindered,  and  the  office  be-
comes a  torment." — Lange.

Vers.  15,  16.  Fidelity  in  God's
Service — 1.  Commendable  in  times
of  general  backsliding.  2.  Attracts
the  Divine  notice  and  approval.  3.
Rewarded  with  special  honour  and
blessing.

—  "1.  The  Lord  takes  notice  of
those  who  serve  in  His  house,  who  are
false  and  who  are  faithful  in  corrupt
and  apostatising  times.  2.  God  takes
pleasure  in  and  honours  those  who
are  faithful  and  constant  in  His  ser-
vice. " — Greenhill.

—  "The  promise  of  a  priesthood  of
the  house  of  Zadok  entirely  corre-
sponded to  the  promise  of  a  shepherd
with  the  name  of  David.  It  is  the
raising  up  of  a  people  who  should  be
themselves  such  a  priesthood,  and  the
sons  of  Zadok  came  into  notice  only
because  in  connection  with  them  there
was  an  historical  ground  for  taking
them  as  representatives  of  a  right-
hearted  spiritual  community.  All  was
to  rise  into  a  new  and  higher  sphere,
first  the  Kingdom  of  God  itself,  and
then  the  people  who  enjoyed  its  dis-
tinctive privileges  and  experienced  its
blessings." — Fairbairn.

Ver.  16.  "The  precepts  according
to  the  law  should  remind  us  that
preachers  particularly  run  within  lists,
as  Paul  writes  of  the  Christians.
What  is  fitting  for  any  one  else  may
yet  be  far  from  seemly  in  a  preacher.
— But  it  is  just  those  who  take  things
easy  that  speak  most  of  their  severe
toil  and  the  heavy  labour  they  have  to
undergo.'' — Lange.
466


Ver.  17.  "  The  reason  is  plain ;  wool
is  more  apt  than  linen  to  contract  dirt
and  breed  insects ;  linen  breeds  none :
besides,  this  is  a  vegetable  and  the
other  an  animal  substance.  It  was
an  ancient  maxim  that  whatever  was
taken  from  a  dead  body  was  im[)ure
in  matters  of  religion,  and  should  not
be  permitted  to  enter  into  the  Temple.
The  Egyptian  priests  always  wore  linen
on  their  bodies  and  shoes  of  mattinG;
or  rushes  on  their  feet.  The  Moham-
medans never  write  the  Koran  upon
vellum  or  skin  of  any  kind,  as  they
would  consider  that  as  a  defilement."
— A.  Clarke.

Vers.  17-24.  "The  various  precepts
respecting  the  purifications  and  the
dress  of  the  priests  strikingly  impress
our  minds  with  the  great  sanctity
which  God  attaches  to  the  ministry.
The  bodies  of  ministers  must  be  pre-
served in  sanctification  and  in  honour.
He  who  does  the  work  and  delivers
the  Word  of  God  must  habitually  live
the  servant  and  friend  of  God.  Nothing
in  his  person,  in  his  food,  in  his  dress,
or  in  his  conduct  must  revolt  the
faithful  asrainst  the  Word  and  oidi-
nances  of  the  Lord.  On  the  contrary,
all  about  the  priest  must  be  inviting
and  calculated  to  recommend  religion
by  a  cloud  of  virtues  and  engaging
qualities.  If  religion  do  not  make
ministers  holy  and  ha})py,  what  hope
can  remain  for  the  people'?  " — Sutcliffe.

Ver.  19.  "He  who  ministers  at  the
Sanctuary  must  never  seem  profane,
nor  a  fop  in  his  attire,  nor  comic  in
his  speech,  nor  a  man  of  the  world  in
his  transactions.  He  may  seem  ridicu-
lous to  the  world,  only  never  conformed
to  the  world." — Lange.

Ver.  20.  "Seemly,  but  not  remark-
able either  in  defect  or  excess. — Men
of  extremes  are  unfit  for  the  holy
ministry,"

Vers.  23,  24.  Ministerial  Duty— 1.
To  point  out  the  clear  distinction  between
the  false  and  the  true.  "Tliey  shall
teach  My  people  the  diflference  between


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OHAP.  ZLT.


the  holy  and  profane,  and  cause  them
to  dii^cern  "  (ver.  23).  2.  To  he  just
and  impartial  in  controversy.  *'Tliey
sliall  judge  according  to  My  judg-
ments" (ver.  24).  3.  To  observe  and
enforce  obedience  to  the  Divine  laws.
"■  They  shall  keep  My  laws  and  statutes
and  hallow  My  Sabbaths  "  (ver.  24).

Ver.  23.  "As  their  life,  so,  above
all,  their  teaching  ought  to  preserve  the
people  from  defilement  and  train  them
to  purity."

Ver.  24.  "  The  obligation  to  hallow
the  Sabbaths  of  the  Lord  is  not  done
away  with  by  the  advent  of  Messiah ;
for  here,  in  a  passage  which,  in  any
fair  interpretation,  can  only  apply  to
Christian  times,  this  obligation  is  ex-
pressly insisted  on." — Fausset.

—  *'  God's  word  is  God's  judgment,
the  righteous  Judge,  right  law  and
upright  judgment. — The  servant  of
God  as  umpire  in  disputes.  He  must
not  be  a  party  man,  but  stands  over
the  parties." — Lange.

Ver.  25.  "They  who  are  the  mes-
sengers, heralds,  and  representatives
of  an  eternal  life  shall  neither  have
their  serenity  disturbed  by  the  death
of  believers,  which  is  no  death,  nor
their  pure  life  defiled  by  the  life  of
the  spiritually  dead,  which  is  no  life.
— We  too  are  allowed  to  wipe  our
eyes,  as  God  wipes  away  every  tear
from  the  eyes  of  His  saints."

Ver.  28.  God  the  Heritage  of  the


Good  —  1.  Ensuring  all  necessary
temporal  good.  2.  Supply Uig  all-
sufiicing  spiritual  blessing.  3.  Cures
all  anxiety  as  to  present  and  future
maintenance.

—  "All  who  have  first  the  Kingdom
of  God  for  their  possession  are  also
truly  priests.  God  feeds  them  wholly
on  what  is  hallowed,  and  he  who  will
have  a  blessing  in  his  house  must
evince  love  to  them." — Diedrich.

Ver.  30.  "  That  he  may  cause  the
blessing  to  rest  in  thine  house."
Ministerial  Maintenance  a  Source  of
Family  Blessing — 1.  As  it  is  liberally
devised.  2.  As  it  is  cheerfully  be-
stowed. 3.  As  it  is  gratefully  appre-
ciated.

—  "  It  is  all  in  all  to  the  comfort  of
any  house  to  have  the  blessing  of  God
upon  it,  and  that  blessing  to  rest  in  it ;
to  dwell  where  we  dwell  and  to  extend
to  those  who  shall  come  after  us.  And
the  way  to  have  the  blessing  of  God
upon  our  estates  is  to  honour  God
with  them,  and  to  give  Him  and  His
ministers,  Him  and  His  poor,  their
share  out  of  them.  God  blesses.  He
surely  blesses  the  habitation  of  those
who  are  thus  just  (Prov.  iii.  33) ;  and
ministers,  by  instructing  and  praying
for  the  families  that  are  kind  to  them,
shouhl  do  their  part  towards  causing
God's  blessing  to  rest  there." — Benson,

Ver.  31.  "In  God's  service  there  is
no  filthy  lucre.  The  Lord  purifies
everything  for  them  who  eat  with
Hi  m. " — Diedrich.


The  Apportionment  of  Territory  Around  the  Temple.    (Chap,  xlv.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.
"  Divide  by  lot " — not  by  casting
lots,  but  by  allotment,  the  several
portions  bein-jr  assigned  according  to
rule.  "  Ye  shall  offer  an  oblation  " —
from  a  Hebrew  root  to  heave  or  raise,
because  when  anything  was  offered
to  God  the  offerer  raised  the  hand.
"Unto  the  Lord  an  holy  portion."
The  Lord's  portion  is  subdivided  into
throe  parts — that  for  the   Sanctuary


(vers.  2,  3),  that  for  the  priests  (ver.
4),  and  that  for  the  Levites  (ver.  5).
This  })rovision  for  the  priests  and
Levites,  out  of  proportion  in  any
actual  arrangement,  is  no  doubt  in-
tended to  symbolise  the  reverence
and  honour  due  to  God  and  expressed
by  liberality  to  His  services  and  His
ministers.  "  The  length  five  and
twenty  thousand  reeds,  and  breadth
ten  thousaftft"     The  English  Version

467


OHAP.   XtV.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


fills  in  the  ellipsis  with  reeds^  accord-
ing to  chap,  xliii.  16.  Cubits  are
mentioned  in  ver.  2,  but  not  here,
implying  that  there  cubits  alone  are
meant.  Taking  each  reed  at  twelve
feet,  the  area  of  the  whole  would  be  a
square  of  sixty  miles  on  each  side.
Tlie  holy  portion  of  the  Lord  com-
prised the  whole  length  and  only  two-
fifths  of  the  breadth.  The  form  of
a  square  indicates  the  settled  stability
of  the  community  and  the  harmony  of
all  classes.

Ver.  5.  "A  possession  for  twenty
chambers  " — -meaning  that  the  Levites,
who  live  in  twenty  out  of  the  thirty
chambers  mentioned  in  chap.  xl.  17,
shall  have  the  portion  of  land  for  a
possession.

Ver.  6.  **  For  the  whole  house  of
Israel."  This  portion  is  to  belong  to
the  whole  people,  not  to  be  subject  to
the  encroachments  made  by  the  later
kings  of  Judah  (Jer.  xxii.  13).

Ver.  7.  "  A  portion  for  the  prince."

"The  prince's  possession  is  to  consist
of  two  halves,  one  on  the  west,  the
other  on  the  east,  of  the  sacred  territory.
The  prince  as  head  of  the  holy  com-
munity stands  in  closest  connection
with  the  Sanctuary ;  his  possession,
therefore,  on  both  sides  must  adjoin
that  which  was  peculiarly  the  Lord's."
— Fairbairn.  The  definiiion  of  the
prince's  territory  was  lo  prevent  the
oppressions  foretold  (1  Sam.  viii.  14),
described  (2  Kings  xxiii.  35),  and
reproved  (Jer.  xxii).

Ver.  10.  "Ye  shall  have  just  bal-
ances." This  fitly  introduces  the
strict  regulation  of  quantities  in  the
prescribed  05*6 rings.

Ver.  11.  "  The  ephah  and  the  bath."

The  ephah  was  in  use  for  dry  measure,
the  bath  for  liquid.  The  homer  seems
to  have  contained  about  75  gallons.
The  homer  was  employed  as  a  stan-
dard, for  in  calculation  the  ephah  and
bath  were  both  after  the  homer,  accord-


ing to  the  standard  of  the  homer,  and
were  to  be  equal  to  each  other

Ver.  1 2.  "  The  shekel  shall  be  twenty
gerahs."  "  The  standard  weights  were
lost  when  the  Chaldeans  destroyed  the
Temple.  The  threefold  enunieration
of  shekels,  twenty,  twenty-five,  fifteen,
probably  refers  to  coins  of  different
value,  representing  respectively  so
many  shekels,  the  three  collectively
making  up  a  maneh.  By  weighing
these  together  against  the  maneh  a  test
was  afforded  whether  they  severally
had  their  proper  weight ;  sixty  shekels
in  all,  containing  one  coin  a  fourth  of
the  whole  (fifteen  shekels),  another  a
third  (twenty  shekels),  another  a  third
and  a  twelfth  (twenty-five  shekels)." —
Menochius,

Ver.  13.  "  This  is  the  oblation  that
ye  shall  offer."  Here  the  oflferings
are  reduced  to  regular  order  and  the
amounts  ordained.  In  later  days  there
were  often  shortcomings  in  these  re-
spects (Mai.  iii.  8).  This  is  obviated
and  regularity  ensured  in  the  new
order  of  things.

Ver.  16.  "All  the  people  shall  give
this  oblation  for  the  prince."    The

people's  gifts  were  to  be  placed  in  the
hands  of  the  prince,  so  as  to  form  a
common  stock  out  of  which  the  prince
was  to  provide  what  was  necessary  for
each  sacrifice.

Ver.  18.  "In  the  first  month,  in
the  first  day  of  the  month."    It  is

probable  that  this  celebration  is  the
first  in  a  series  of  generally  recurring
ordinances,  and  in  this  case  we  have
an  addition  to  the  Mosaic  ritual.

Ver.  26.  "In  the  seventh  month."

This  is  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (Num.
xxix.  12).  Of  the  other  great  festival,
the  Feast  of  Weeks,  no  mention  is  made.
Ordinances  that  are  literal,  though  not
slavishly  bound  to  the  letter  of  the
law,  will  set  forth  the  catholic  and
eternal  verities  of  Messiah's  King-
dom.


468


HO  MI  LET  I G  COMMENT  A  R  Y  :  EZEKIEL,  ch  A.P.  xlv  .


HOMILETICS.

Keuqion  the  True  Basis  of  Equity.

(Vers.  1-25.)

Humanitarianism  professes  to  construct  a  morality  apart  from  religion.  It
is  contended  that  man  has  within  himself  the  norm  or  rule  of  right,  and  by
the  exercise  of  his  own  will-power  he  can  elect  to  do  that  which  he  ought  to
do  and  wliich  it  is  best  to  do,  and  which  is  for  him  the  highest  good.  But
who  is  the  man  referred  to  %  Is  it  the  man  formed  in  God's  image,  who  fell
into  sin,  which  must  necessarily  fetter  all  moral  actions,  and  who  is  redeemed
by  Christ :  or  is  it  the  man,  the  pure  product  of  nature,  working  with  the  dim
light  of  his  own  unaided  reason,  and  ignoring  every  other  god  but  the  one
centred  in  his  own  egoism  1  The  notions  of  equity  in  the  natural  man  must
necessarily  be  crude,  uncertain,  distorted.  Man  needs,  in  order  to  act  up  to  the
highest  level  of  justice,  not  only  a  revelation  of  the  infallible  standard  of  right,
but  the  aid  of  Divine  power  to  rectify  and  strengthen  his  moral  faculties.  We
have  in  this  chapter  an  illustration  of  Religion  as  the  only  true  basis  of  Equity.

I.  Seen  in  the  impartial  distribution  of  land  (vers.  1-8).  Here  all  is  to
be  faiily  and  uncliangeably  allocated  and  according  to  the  unchallen<:eable
principles  of  religious  equity.  The  form  of  a  square  for  the  land  apportioned
to  the  priests,  the  prince,  and  the  people  indicated  the  perfect  harmony  and
satisfaction  existing  among  these  classes.  There  was  no  ground  for  envy,  no
temptation  or  disposition  to  invade  and  appropriate  the  territory  of  another.
Nothing  has  exhibited  the  insatiable  avarice  of  man  more  strikingly  than  his
treatment  of  the  land  question  :  to  gratify  his  greed  for  possession  he  has  not
hesitated  to  practise  duplicity,  fraud,  and  oppression.  The  tendency  has  been
to  accumulate  the  bulk  of  the  land  of  a  nation  in  the  hands  of  the  few,  and
scant  respect  lias  often  been  i)aid  to  the  riglits  of  the  many.  In  the  good
time  coming,  when  religion,  and  not  simply  utility,  shall  be  universally  acknow-
ledged as  the  true  basis  of  equity,  the  rights  of  king  and  people  shall  be  readily
recognised,  and  all  occasion  for  lawless  interference  with  each  other's  posses-
sions will  be  abolished  (ver.  8).

II.  Seen  in  the  accurate  adjustment  and  use  of  weights  and  measures
(vers,  9-13).  I'he  moral  degeneracy  of  the  Jews  vas  apparent  in  their  business
transactions.  They  tampered  with  weights  and  measures,  and  they  weie  fre-
quently charged  with  falsifying  balances  (Amos  viii.  5  ;  Hosea  xii.  7  ;  Micali
vi.  11).  There  was  ample  ground  lor  the  severe  reproof  of  the  prophet  that
their  ways  were  not  equal  (chap,  xxxiii.  17).  Their  trickery  and  over-reachirig
was  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God  (Prov.  xi.  1  ;  xx.  23).  The  law  of
the  land,  however  carefully  framed  and  wisely  administered,  does  not  always
secure  perfect  justice  as  between  man  and  man,  even  when  that  law  is  inter-
preted in  the  light  of  equity.  The  morality  of  Christian  times  does  not  always
reach  the  standard  of  Pagan  honesty.  When  valuable  })resents  were  sent  to
Epaminondas,  the  celebrated  Thebjni  general,  he  used  to  say,  "If  the  thing
you  desire  be  good,  I  will  do  it  without  any  bribe,  even  because  it  is  good ;  if  it
be  not  honest,  I  will  not  do  it  for  all  the  goods  in  the  world."  It  is  dangerous
to  tiifle  with  conscientious  scruples:  it  is  better  to  suffer  abuse  and  misrepre-
sentation, than  to  do  wrong.  The  tender  sensitiveness  of  the  conscience,  like
the  delicate  bloom  of  ripe  fruit,  when  it  is  once  damaged  can  never  be  restored  :
the  heart  sighs  in  vain  for  the  exquisite  experience  of  a  time  of  former  con-

409


UHAP.  XLV.  EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL,


scious  innocence.  It  does  not  pay  to  do  wrong.  A  merchant  one  day,  measur-
ing a  piece  of  clotii  and  finding  it  short,  asked  his  clerk  to  help  him  to  stretch
it  to  the  required  length.  The  young  man  refused  on  conscientious  grounds;
he  lost  his  situation,  but  he  afterwards  rose  into  fame  and  greatness,  and  his
praise  was  in  all  the  churches.  It  does  pay  to  do  right.  Religion  is  the  only
true  basis  of  equitable  dealing  as  between  man  and  man ;  it  teaches  us  to
render  to  each  other  that  which  is  just  and  equal.

III.  Seen  in  regulating  the  ordinances  of  worship  (vers.  14-25).  The  exact
directions  given  in  these  verses  regarding  the  sacriHces  indicate  that  everything
connected  with  Temple-service  must  be  regulated  according  to  the  strictest  laws
of  equity.  Of  all  places,  the  Sanctuary  must  not  be  polluted  or  its  worship
marred  with  mutilated  offerings  and  half-hearted  devotion.  Morality  alone,
mor.  iby  divorced  from  true  religion,  does  not  inspire  worship — it  lacks  motive,
lifting  power.  We  cannot  worship  God  till  we  know  Him,  and  we  never  know
Him  till  we  love  Him  and  the  whole  soul  is  swayed  and  thrilled  with  the
influence  of  that  love.  The  laws  of  ethics  are  but  broken  lights  of  a  higher
truth,  and  the  fragments  have  been  still  more  hopelessly  shattered  and  inextric-
ably confused  by  the  infatuated  attempts  of  men  to  construct  them  into  a
philosophy  of  religion  that  shall  be  independent  of  Divine  sanctions.  Vain
dream  I  It  is  a  repetition  of  the  task  of  Sisyphus,  who  spent  his  time  in  rolling
a  stone  up  a  hill,  which  as  soon  as  it  reached  the  summit  rebounded  again  to
the  plain.  The  equitable  demands  of  Divine  worship  can  alone  be  met  by  the
aid  of  genuine  religion.  The  soul  must  be  made  good  before  it  can  be  just  to
God  or  man.

Lessons. — 1.  The  highest  ideal  of  equity  should  he  expressed  in  just  and  equal
laws.  2.  Religion^  and  not  utilitarianism,  is  the  true  basis  of  equity,  3.  Worship  is
accefptahle  to  God  only  as  it  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  justice  and  equity.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-9.  The  Land  Question — 1.  Hgion,  according  to  the  measure  of  its

Should  recognise  the  Divine  ownership  power  in  the  earth." — M^Farlan.
(ver.  1).  2.  Should  sanction  a  dis-
tribution in  harmony  with  the  rights  Ver.  1.  "A  portion  of  the  land
and  claims  of  all  classes  (vers.  2-8).  was  first  reserved  for  the  Lord.  His
3.  Should  not  allow  unjust  exactions,  Temple  required  an  ample  space  of
or  the  oppression  of  the  weak  by  the  ground  and  His  poor  required  support,
strong  (ver.  8).  4.  By  its  equitable  and  He  ever  lives  their  Guardian  and
settlement  removes  temptations  to  constant  Friend.  If  we  expect  the
robbery  and  wrong  (ver.  9).  Lord's   blessing    we    must   pay   Him

homage  down   to  the   widow's  mite.

Vers.  1-6.  "  The  frequent  occurrence  It  is   well,  therefore,   for  men  when

of  the  number  five  in  these  measure-  they  come  to  their  inheritance  to  con-

ments  is  remarkable,  and  if  we  consider  secrate  their  fortune  by  a  small  offering

that  God  has  fitted  in  the  human  hand  to  Heaven  in  this  way,  as  it  seemed

five  instruments  by  which  man  fashions  the  young  ruler  in  the  Gospel  wished

to  his  will  the  materials  of  the  world —  to  do." — Sutcliffe.

that  these  are  the  measure  of  his  power  —  '*  Those  who  live  from  God's  hand

over  them — we  may  be  instructed  by  are  content   with  His  measure,   even

this  passage  to  believe  that  every  Chris-  when  it  turns  out  small  and  modest. —

tian  Slate  is  bound  to  provide  for  the  It  ought  to  be  our  joy  to  be  near  God,

maintenance  of  pure  and  undefiled  re-  to  be  associated  with  Him." — Starch,

470


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL.  chap.  xlv.


Ver.  3.  "  Tlie  Sanctuary  was  situated  execute  judgment  and  justice,  do  wrong

in  the  centre  of  all ;  so  ought  religion  tonone,  neither  suffer  wrong  to  be  done.

to  be   the    central   point  of  life,  and  4.  Princes  are  not  to  rule  by  prero-

Christ  the  centre  of  true  religion. —  gative  in  an  arbitrary  way,  but  they

Religion,  faith,  Christianity,  ought  not,  themselves  are  tied  to  the  laws  of  God

either  in  the  life  of  nations  or  of  indi-  and  bound  by  them." — Greenhill.
viduals,  to  be  placed  in  a  corner  merely

as  a  tolerated  piece  of  antiquity."  Ver.  9.   **  Self-interest  and  avarice^

that  have  hitherto  wrought  so  perni-

Ver.  4.  "The  Lord's  faithful  priests  ciously,  shall  no  longer  prevail  among

shall  dwell  beside  Him  and   be  with  the  people  of  the   future,   but   rathei

Christ  for  refreshment  and  revival  from  righteousness,  a  spirit  of  willing  sao

the  strife  and  disquiet  of  men  among  rifice." — Hengstenherg,

whom  they  are  scattered." — Lange,  —"How  happy  would  nations  bfr

if  their  princes  ruled  in  justice,  not  for

Ver.   7.    "Royalty    which    watches  self-aggrandisement,  but  for  the  glory

with  a   paternal    eye    for   the   public  of  God  and  as  holding  their  authority

weal   should   be  amply  supported  in  under   Christ ;   and   hov/    happy    th«

return.       The    king    is    the     Lord's  people  so  governed   would  be,  living

minister,  and,   next  to  a  lot  of  land  in    tranquillity,    pio&perity,    and  true

for  the  Lord's  house,  his  support  is  godliness  !" — Faussd,

guaranteed  in  order  and  prior  to  the  —  "  This  is  the  >oioe  of  God  to  all.

provision    for    ministers   of    religion.  the  rulers  of  the  e&rth — *Take  away

His  portion  was  adjacent  to  the  capital  your   exactions,   do   not   oppress   the

because  he  must  reside  contiguous  to  people  ;  they  are  Mine.     Abolish  all

the  court  and  the  bench  of  justice." —  oppressive  taxes.' " — A.  Clarke.
Suicliffe.

—  "  For  princes  to  have  their  do-  Ver.  10.  Jufct  Balances — 1.  Requi-
mains  is  not  unjust,  but  they  should  site  as  between  man's  actions  and  his
not  seek  to  draw  everything  into  these  conscience.  2.  As  between  man  and
domains." — Starke.  man.     3.  As  between  man  and  God.

4.  Will  be  used  in  the  final  judgment.

Ver.   8.    "  To   protect,   but   not  to

fleece. — Governments    ought   to    give  Ver.  13.  "Even  the  small  gifts  of  the

good  heed  to  weights,  measures,  and  poor,  when  given  in  true  love,  ar»  an

coinage,  and  allow  no  inequalities  to  acceptable  offering  (Heb.  y.iii.  16). — It

creep  in. — Knowingly  to  pass  spurious  is  reasonable  that  a  man  set  apart  a

coin  is  intentional  deceit,  and    so  is  considerable  portion  of  his  income  for

the  clipping  of  coins  in  order  to  lessen  the  glory  of  God  and  the  support  of  true

their  weight. — Unjust  gain  does  not  worship. — The    revenue    for   spiritual

profit  the  third  generation.     Lightly  objects  is  most  defrauded." — Lange.
come,  lightly  gone." — Lange.

Vers.  16-25.  A  Qoofl  King— 1.  Is

Vers.9-1 2.  An  Ideal  Commonwealth  interested  in   the  religious  welfare  of

— 1.  Where  God  is  acknowledged  and  his  people  (ver.  16).     2.  Sustains  the

obeyed.     2.    Where   the  ruler  is  just  ministers  of  the  truth  in  their  sacred

and   powerful.     3.    Where  o])i)ression  work  (vers.  17-21).    3.  Makes  generous

and  violence  are  unknown.     4.  Where  provision  for  the  national  worship  of

commerce  is  conducted  on  principles  of  God  (vers.  17,  22-25).

strictest  equity.  —  "These  offerings  would  be  per-

—  "  1.  Princes  and  magistrates  petual  remembrancers  to  the  prince  of
commonly  are  covetous  and  cruel.  2.  the  sacred  character  he  maintained  as
Christianity  does  not  overthrow  but  the  head  of  sueh  a  people,  and  would
establish  magistracy.  3.  The  great  supply  him  by  Divine  enactment  with
thing  required  of  them  is  to  do  justice,  what  was  needed  to  fulfil  this  part  of

471


OBAP.  ZLV.


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


his  office  without  resorting  to  arbitrary
and  oppressive  measures.  Expressed
more  generally,  it  was  a  symbol  of
the  perfect  harmony  and  mutual  co-
operation which  should  exist  in  such
a  holy  communion  in  regard  to  the
public  service  and  glory  of  God ;  with-
out constraint  or  any  sort  of  jarring,
the  several  classes  would  freely  and
faithfully  do  their  parts.  They  were
all  symbolical  of  the  spiritual  and
eternal  truths  of  God's  Kingdom,  and
may  be  variously  adjusted,  as  is  now
done,  in  order  to  make  them  more
distinctly  expressive  of  the  greater
degree  of  holiness  and  purity  that  is
in  future  times  to  distinguish  the
people  and  service  of  God  over  all
that  has  been  in  the  past." — Fair-
bairn.

Ver.  17.  When  Christ  on  the  cross
consecrated  the  new  Temple,  He  can-
celled our  sins.

Vers.  18-25.  **  This  order  of  solemn
services  does  not  follow  exactly  the
order  of  Moses,  of  Solomon,  or  of
Ezra,  who,  on  the  return  from  cap-
tivity, rearranged  the  festivals  on  the
Mosaic  pattern.  Familiar  as  Ezekiel
was  with  every  detail  of  the  Levitical
law,  this  deviation  can  scarcely  have
been  accidental,  and  we  may  herein
recognise  fresh  indications  that  the
whole  vision  is  symbolical,  represen-
tative of  the  times  when,  after  the
oblation  of  the  one  Sacrifice,  recon-
ciliation and  sanctification  were  effected
for  man  througli  the  presence  of  God
dwelling  in  the  midst  of  the  people.**
— Speakers  Commentary.

Ver.  18.  "  At  the  beginning  of  the
new  year  of  grace,  and  with  the  newly
rising  light,  the  Temple  was  again
raised  up  or  opened,  and  the  true
justification  and  sanctification  through
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  recognised  and
proclaimed." — Lange.

—  Let  us  begin  our  years,  our
months,  our  weeks,  and  days  with
self-examination,  repentance,  faith,
prayer,  and  devotedness  to  God,  and
spend  them  in  like  manner.

472


Ver.  20.  "  Sin  as  error  and  seduction,
and  error  and  seduction  as  sin. — We
ought  to  attend  Divine  service  from
beginning  to  end." — Lange.

Ver.  21.  "Every  solemnisation  of
the  Lord's  Supper  a  fulfilled  paschal
solemnity. — But  our  Passover  is  Christ.
— ^It  behoves  us  to  celebrate  the  Feast
of  Tabernacles  in  spirit  and  in  truth
so  much  more  than  the  Jews  the  nearer
we  approach  eternity. — Our  home  is
above,  to  which  we  draw  nearer  every
moment,'* — Lange.

—  "  Hereafter  there  shall  be  a  new
Passover  and  a  new  Feast  of  Taber-
nacles observed  in  Israel,  with  cere-
monies vastly  exceeding  in  glory  those
of  the  same  feasts  under  the  Old  Tes-
tament. The  antitypical,  perfect,  and
eternal  realities  of  Christ's  manifested
Kingdom  shall  be  set  forth  with  obser-
vances which,  though  literal,  are  not
to  be  slavishly  bound  down  to  the
letter  of  the  old  law,  but  which
shall  bring  out  all  the  heretofore
hidden  glories  and  excellences  of  that
law  viewed  in  its  essential  spirit.** —
FausseU


Vers.  22-25.  "The  sin-offering  to  be
sacrificed  first  of  all,  the  sins  of  prince
and  people  being  transferred  to  it  as
the  priest  confessed  them  with  his
hands  on  the  head  of  the  victim,  to
show  their  conviction  that  the  wrath
of  God  must  abide  on  them  till  trans-
ferred to  another  who  should  die  in
their  stead ;  then  came  the  burnt-
offerings,  to  show  that,  being  clear
of  guilt  in  His  sight,  He  would
accept  their  service  and  transfer  if
with  themselves  into  His  heavenly
glory  by  the  Spirit,  as  the  burnt-
offeriuirs  were  by  the  fire  of  the  altar."
—M'Faiian,

Ver.  25.  "By  these  feasts  and  sac-
rifices also  we  are  reminded  of  the
spiritual  joy  the  saints  have  in  their
communion  together  under  the  Gospel
and  spiritual  sacrifices  they  offer  up  to
God  by  Q\\Y\?,U"—GreenhUl


HO  MI  LET  10  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


OHAP.  XLVL


An  Imposing  Spectacle  of  Worship  in  the  Temple.    (Chap,  xlvi.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.
"  The  gate  of  the  inner  court  opened."

The  inner  east  gate  of  the  Temple,
otherwise  shut,  shall  be  opened  on  the
Sabbath  and  new  moon.  This  rule
does  not  interfere  with  chap.  xliv.  1.
There  the  outer  gate  is  expressly  named.
This  also  here  remains  shut,  as  indeed
chap,  xlvii.  2  presupposes  that  it  is
shut  once  for  all;  other-vise  it  would
have  been  opened  for  the  prince." —
Hengsteriberg,

Ver.  2.  "  The  prince  shall  stand  by
the  post  of  the  gate  and  the  priests
prepare  his  burnt-offering."  The  King
of  the  iuture  is  the  Messiah;  the
princedom  shines  in  His  light,  in  the
brightness  of  the  glory  that  entered
through  the  east  gate,  which  in  view
thereof  is  shut  for  ever  toward  the
outside.  A  clear  distinction  is  drawn
between  prince  and  priest,  to  avoid  in-
terference with  each  other's  functions.

Ver.  3.  "The  people  worship  at
the  door  of  this  gate."  The  people
may  not  enter  the  inner  gate  ;  they
worship  at  the  opened  door,  througli
which  they  catch  a  glimpse  of  the
altar  of  burnt-offering,  which  the  prince
sees  better  from  a  nearer  point.  The
upper  pavement  on  either  side  of  the
eastern  gate  provided  room  for  such
worshippers.

Vers.  4,  6.  "  The  burnt-offering  and
the  meat-offering."  These  Sabbath
offerings  are  larger  than  those  of  the
Mosaic  law,  to  imply  that  the  worship
of  God  is  to  be  conducted  by  the
prince  and  people  in  a  more  muni-
ficent spirit  of  self-sacrificing  liberality
than  formerly.  Moses  prescribed  for
the  burnt-oflfering  two  lambs,  and  for
the  meat-otfering  two  tenth  deals  of
flour  mingh'd  with  oil.  "As  he  shall
be  able  to  give  " — literally,  the  gift  of
his  hand.  As  he  shall  be  willing  to
give,  the  amount  being  left  to  the  will
of  the  giver.  The  same  meaning  in  the
slightly  varied  expression  of  verse  7.


Ver.  6.  "  The  new  moon."  No
mention  is  made  here  of  the  blowins:  of
trumpets,  which  was  an  important  part
of  the  New-Moon  Festival  (Num.  x.  10).

Ver.  10.  "  The  prince  in  the  midst
of  them."  Not  isolated  as  at  other
times,  but  joining  the  throng  of  wor-
shippers at  their  head,  after  the  ex-
ample of  David  (Ps.  xlii.  4)  :  the
highest  in  rank  animating  the  devo-
tions of  the  rest  by  his  presence  and
example.

Ver.  12.  ''The  prince  shall  prepare
a  voluntary  burnt-offering. "  ^  o  i  o  n  ly
is  he  to  perform  official  acts  of  worship
on  holy  days  and  feasts,  but  in  volun-
tary oflferings  daily  he  is  to  show  his  in-
dividual zeal,  surpassing  all  his  people
in  liberality,  and  so  setting  them  a
princely  example.

Ver.  13.  "  Thou  shalt  prepare  it
every  morning."  The  eveniuir  sacrifice
is  omitted,  because  the  seer  is  not  enu-
merating the  sacrifices  of  the  law,  but
selecting  a  few  of  them  with  a  parti-
cular object  in  view.

Ver.  16.  "If  the  prince  give  a  gift
unto  his  sons."  The  prince  was  to  be
provided  with  possessions  of  his  own
to  prevent  him  having  recourse  to  ex-
actions from  his  subjects,  and  lest  in
the  course  of  time  he  might  be  tempted
to  such  exactions,  enactments  are  added
to  prevent  the  alienation  of  the  prince's
land.  The  mention  of  the  ])rince'8  sons
is  another  argument  against  Messiah
being  meant  by  the  prince.

Ver.  20.  *'  The  place  where  the
priests  shall  boil  the  trespass  offer-
ing." The  pasclial  lamb  was  to  be
eaten  roasted.  The  flesh  of  the  other
sacrifices  was  to  be  sodden  or  boiled
(Lev.  vi.  28;  1  Sam.  ii.  13  ;  2  Chron.
xxiv.  14).  The  meat-offering  (flour
and  honey)  was  baked  (Lev.  ii.  4).

Ver.  22.  **  There  were  courts  joined."

473


CHAP.  XLVi.  ITOMTir^TIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL.

Smaller  courts  joined  or  attached  to  between  them,  as  the  enactments  of
the  walls  of  the  courts,  at  the  corners  vers.  16-18  were  to  secure  their  re-
ef the  latter.  spective  rights  to  prince  and  people,

AH  this  implies  that  no  longer  are  the

Ver.   24.    "The   places   where   the  common  and  unclean  to  be  confounded

ministers  boil   the    sacrifice    of   the  with  the  sacred  and  divine,  but  that  in

people."     The  careful  provision  made  even  the   least  things,  as  eating  and

to  keep  the  offerings  of  priests  and  drinking,  the  glory  of  God  is  to  be  the

people  separate  was  to  prevent  collision  aim  (1  Cor.  x.  31).


HOMILETICS.

The  True  Worship  of  Jehovah.

(Vers.  1-15.)

I.  Unites  all  classes  in  its  sacred  exercises  (vers.  1-3).  Prince,  priests,  and
people  become  one  in  the  act  of  worship  ;  as  they  are  all  alike  dependent  on  God,
so  they  all  bow  down  before  Him  and  adore  and  praise  His  goodness.  Kank,
wealth,  display,  sink  for  the  time  being  into  insignificance  ;  it  is  simply  a
congregation  of  human  souls,  with  common  wants  and  weaknesses,  craving  help
and  blessing  from  a  common  Father.  The  monarch  is  never  so  great  as  when
he  bends  in  lowly  homage  at  the  feet  of  God.  It  is  a  sublime  sight  to  see  king
and  peasant  kneeling  together  in  prayer  and  adoration.  The  sincere  worship
of  God  is  a  great  power  in  unifying  the  human  race  ;  inequalities  are  forgotten,
asperities  toned  down,  national  peculiarities  are  more  kindly  interi)reted,  and  a
universal  solvent  is  discovered  that  melts  and  blends  the  hearts  of  men  into  a
spiritual  brotherhood.  The  grand  bond  of  union  in  the  future  will  be  evidenced
in  the  unceasing  worship  of  Jehovah.

II.  Demands  generosity  in  giving  proportionate  to  ability  (vers.  4-12).  The
offerings  mentioned  here  are  on  a  scale  of  liberality  exceeding  anything  known
under  the  Mosaic  regimen.  The  prince  set  an  example  in  generous  giving,
which  the  people  cheerfully  imitated.  Our  gifts  to  God*s  cause  should  not  be
more  nor  less  than  our  circumstances  justify.  It  is  a  great  help  in  worship,
and  an  important  feature  of  it,  to  come  to  God's  house  with  a  gift  in  our  hand.
The  more  heartily  we  enter  into  the  spirit  of  worship  the  more  clearly  shall  we
understand  and  practise  the  science  of  proportionate  giving.  A  missionary  was
staying  with  a  wealthy  Christian  philanthropist,  whose  house  was  riclily  orna-
mented with  paintings  and  sculpture,  and  was  eulogising  an  exquisite  marble
statue  of  Silence — the  figure  of  a  boy  with  his  finger  to  his  lips.  They  had
known  each  other  from  boyhood,  and  were  free  and  confidential  in  conversation.
"Do  you  admire  that  statue?"  asked  the  friend  of  the  missionary.  "I  never
saw  anything  in  my  life  equal  to  it  for  grace,"  replied  he.  "  What  do  you
think  I  gave  for  it?*'  "  I  cannot  imagine.*'  "  I  gave  ninety  guineas."  **  And
what  did  you  give  at  the  collection  to-night  ?  "  asked  the  missionary.  **  Oh,  I
gave  five  pounds."  "Five  pounds!"  said  the  missionary.  "Shame  on  you!
Here  you  give  ninety  guineas  for  a  marble  statue  of  Silence  and  five  pounds
towards  sounding  the  Gospel  all  over  the  earth.     That  is  badly  laid  out  money."

III.  Is  to  be  constantly  rendered  (vers.  13-15).  The  burnt-oflfering  was
presented  daily — "every  morning" — and  the  "  meat-oflfering  continually  by  a
perpetual  ordinance  unto  the  Lord."  The  dawn  of  every  day  bhould  be  wel-
comed with  praver  and  praise.     The  day  is  well  begun  when  it  is  begun  with

474


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xtVL

God ;  and  the  religious  character  of  the  day  will  he  decided  hy  tlie  way  in
which  we  spend  its  first  hour.  It  is  said  that  the  spider  mends  its  broken
web  every  morning,  and  always  begius  in  the  middle.  So  we  before  entering
on  our  daily  calling  should  be  careful  to  repair  the  broken  webs  of  our  lives,
beginning  each  morning  with  the  heart.  There  is  a  flower  called  the  Gummy
Cystus,  which  blooms  every  morning,  unfolding  a  large,  beautiful,  snow-white
flower.  By  its  example  this  flower  invites  the  soul  every  morning  to  unfold
the  blossom  of  a  holy  and  fervent  devotion.  Work  is  worship,  and  the  life  of
each  day  should  be  one  glad  psalm  (Ps.  Iv.  17).

Lessons. — 1.  Temple-work  is  worship,     2.  Worship  promotes  the  fdlowshijf  oj
hearts,     3.  The  soul  reaches  its  highest  good  in  the  worship  of  God,


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-5.  Sabbath   Privileges — 1.  always  obliged  to  attend  the  public

Kest  from  anxious  toil   (ver.    1).     2.  worship  of  God,  as  well  as  the  priest,

An  open  Sanctuary  (ver.  1).     3.  An  to  show  that  the  civil  and  ecclesias-

opportuiiity  for  all  classes  to  worshi[)  tical  States  were  both  under  the  same

God  (vers.  2,  3).     4.  Should  be  char-  government  of  the  Lord,  and  that  no

acterised  by  generous  offerings  (vers,  one  was  capable  of  being   prince  or

4,  5).  priest  who  did  not  acknowledge  God

in  all  his  ways.     Ungodly  priests  and

Vers.  1,  2.  Royalty  and  Worship,  profligate  magistrates  are  a  curse  to
"  1.  Princes  must  not  enter  into  the  any  land." — A.  Clarke,
inner  court,  and  may  not  change  any-  —  **  The   gate   shall   not   be   shut
thing  in  the  worship  of  God.    2.  They  until  the  evening.     The  gate  is  open
are  to  countenance  and  maintain  the  till  the  evening ;  be  ready  therefore,
worship  of  God.     3.  They  must  wor-  When  the  Bridegroom  has  once  gone
ship  the   Lord    publicly  on   Sabbath-  in,  the  gate  is  shut  and  fools  excluded
days  and  on  special  occasions  as  well  (Matt,  xxv.)." — Trapp,
as  other  people.     4.  They  must  not  im-
pede the  worship  of  God." — Greenhill.  Ver.  3.  In  the  old  covenant  it  is

said  "before  the  Lord;"  in  the  new

Ver.  1.  "  Work  does  not  hinder  covenant  "  in  the  Lord."
holiness,  but  furthers  it — 1.  By  pre-
venting temptation.  2.  By  nourishing  Vers.  4-15.  "  The  offerings  here  pre-
experience  of  God's  bounty  and  pro-  scribed  are  generally  in  excess  of  those
vidence.  3.  By  filling  the  heart  with  enjoined  by  the  law,  to  note  the  greater
objects  of  heavenly  thought.  4.  By  devotion  and  magnificence  under  the
stirring  up  to  prayer  and  praise  for  new  state  of  things.  Still,  as  of  old,
each  day's  mercies." — Trapp.  there  was  a  certain  liberty  left  to  give

—  "  There  is  a  time  for  prayer  and  in  such  proportion  as  the  will  might

a  time  for  work.     On  work-days  we  prompt  or  the  ability  permit,  and  the

are  not  to   rest  as  on    the   Sabbath,  seer  contemplates  in  his  vision  of  better

He  who  does  not  work  ought  not  to  times   a   willing    king   and   a   people

eat,  whatever  his  pretences  are.     The  ready  to   give  of  their  substance  to

door  to  the  Father,  the  source  of  all  the  utmost  of  their  means." — Speaket's

grace,    opens   itself   to   us   when   the  Commentary,
gracious    light    of   the    love   of   God

again   shines  forth,  as  it   often  does  Ver.  4.  "The  Lord's  day  is  a  day

after  great  darkness." — Lange.  in  which  especially  liberal  gifts  to  the

Lord's  cause  are  the  appropriate  accom-

Ver.  2.  "The  chief  magistrate  was  paniments  of  the  worship  of  the  Sanc-

475


CBAt».  ILVL


ffOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


tuary,  attesting  tliat  we  do  not  desire
to  offer  to  our  best  Benefactor  a  service
which  costs  us  nothing  (2  Sam.  xxiv.
24).  If  the  Israelite  was  not  to  appear
before  the  Lord  at  the  Passover  empty
(Ex.  xxiii.  15),  much  less  ought  the
Christian,  who  enjoys  such  vastly
superior  privileges,  to  offer  grudging
and  stinted  gifts." — Fausset.

Vers.  8-10.  Eeligious  Decorum — 1.

Should  be  rigidly  observed  by  king
and  people.  2.  Regulates  the  manner
of  entering  and  leaving  the  Sanctuary,
3.  An  aid  in  the  public  worship  of
God.

Ver.  8.  "  The  influence  of  love  shall
extend  into  the  whole  world  from  the
south  to  the  north,  so  that  they  from
the  north  and  from  the  south  shall  go
to  meet  one  another,  in  order  to  receive
and  embrace  one  another  as  brethren.
— No  one  should  go  out  of  the  church
as  he  came  into  it;  he  should  always
take  home  with  him  something  for
his  edification  (Eccles.  iv.  17;  Acts
xvL  14)." — Lange.

Vers.  9-15.  *' A  beautiful  picture  of
a  religious  people  ;  the  highest  in  rank
freely  mingling  with  the  mass  of  wor-
shippers, and  inspiriting  their  devo-
tions by  the  elevating  influence  of  his
presence  and  example.  But  to  show
that  his  worship  was  not  merely  to  be
of  a  public  and  official  nature,  that  it
should  spring  from  a  heart  truly  alive  to
Divine  things,  the  prophet  passes  from
those  holiday  services  to  the  voluntary
offerings,  which  the  prince  was  also  to
present  to  the  Lord.  The  proper  head
of  a  religious  people,  he  was  to  surpass
them  all  in  the  multitude  and  variety
of  his  acts  of  homage  and  adoration."
— Fairbairn,

Ver.  9.  "1.  The  Lord  expects  not
only  prince  and  priests  to  worship
Him  in  a  public  way,  but  the  people
also.  2.  The  way  of  God's  servants
is  a  straight  and  right-forth  way.  3.
The  shortness  of  man's  life  is  here


re})resented  :  he  enters  the  world,  goe»
on  a  little  way,  and  then  goes  out  of  it
again." — Ch'eenhill.

—  "  1.  Teaches  us  not  to  turn  our
backs  upon  the  holy  ordinances.  2.
To  make  straight  paths  for  our  feet,
and  be  making  daily  progress  towards
perfection.  3.  That  our  memories  are
frail,  and  here  we  shall  meet  with
many  things  that  will  withdraw  us
from  thinking  upon  God.  4.  That
our  life  is  but  short — a  passage  from
one  gate  to  another.  One  being  asked,
*Wliat  is  life'?*  made  an  answer
answerless,  for  he  presently  went  his
way." — Trapp.

Ver.  10.  The  Divine  Leader — 1.  Is

ever  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  2.
Guides  to  the  best  spheres  of  religious
and  secular  work.  3.  Superintends
and  overrules  all  the  changes  of  human
life.  4.  Guarantees  all  needed  help
in  the  Church  and  in  the  world.

—  "Prince  and  peasant  stand  on
the  same  level  in  worshipping  before
God,  who  is  no  respecter  of  persons;
yet  those  in  exalted  positions,  as
princes  and  nobles,  exercise  a  power-
ful influence  over  men,  and  may  accord-
ingly be  the  instruments  of  great  good
when  they  set  a  godly  example  before
those  beneath  them." — Fausset.

Vers.  13-15.  Morning  Prayer.  1.  A
duty  we  owe  to  God.  2.  Decides  the
character  of  the  day's  experience.  3.
Essential  to  religious  growth.  4.
Should  be  offered  in  an  earnest  and
thankful  spirit.

Ver.  15.  "Grace  makes  the  heart
free,  and  so  also  willing.  As  God's
grace  is  new  every  morning,  so  also
ought  our  devotion  to  Him  to  be  re-
hewed  every  morning.  Our  whole  life
should  be  a  sacrifice  from  morning  to
night,  and  next  morning  again.  Since
Christ's  appearance  the  night  has  dis-
appeared and  the  day  has  come ;  there
are  now  only  morning  sacriflces.**—
Lange.


476


BOMlLETtC  COMMI'JNTAHY:  EZEKIEL


CHAP.  XXVL


HOMILETIOS.

Justice  and  Generosity.

(Vers.  16-18.)

I.  That  property  rights  are  founded  in  universal  justice.  "  The  earth  is  tlie
Lord's,  and  the  tuliiess  ihert'of,"  and  it  is  He  wlio  gives  power  to  get  wealth.
Property  acquired  by  industry,  merit,  and  by  just  regard  to  the  rights  of
otliers  is  secured  by  recognised  law.  Yet  the  law  knows  nothing  of  absolute
ownership :  man  has  but  a  life-interest  in  his  possessions,  for  we  brought
nothing  into  this  world,  and  we  can  carry  nothing  out.  The  law  which  pro-
tects property  also  limits  the  exercise  of  the  owner's  power  over  it.

II.  That  ample  possessions  afford  opportunity  for  acts  of  corresponding
generosity.  Property  has  its  duties  as  well  as  its  rights.  Great  wealth  means
great  responsibility;  it  furnishes  increased  facilities  for  doing  good.  Few  men
give  in  proportion  to  their  means.  Liberality  is  n)easured  not  by  what  a  man
gives,  but  by  what  he  has  left.  It  is  degrading  to  spend  one's  life  in  getting
and  securing  what  we  get;  the  soul  is  shrivelled  into  a  miserly  selfishness.
Giving  expands  our  human  sympatliies  and  widens  a  man's  outlook.  There  is
a  pleasure  in  accumulating,  but  there  is  a  nobler  pleasure  in  giving.  Gonsalvo,
the  great  Spanish  captain,  used  to  say,  "Never  stint  your  hand.  There  is  no
way  of  enjoying  one's  property  like  giving  it  away;"  and  he  acted  up  to  his
own  precept.

IIL  That  it  is  neither  justice  nor  generosity  to  give  away  what  helongs
to  another  (vers.  16-18).  The  prince  was  amply  provided  for  that  he  might
be  generous  both  to  his  family  and  his  servants  ;  but  he  was  prohibited  from
indulging  generosity  by  seizing  the  possessions  of  others.  Some  are  generous
enough  with  what  belongs  to  others.  It  is  mistaken  generosity  ;  it  is  fraud
and  robbery.  Justice  demands  that  a  man  must  be  generous  only  with  what
is  his  own.  The  prince  gains  power  and  affection,  not  by  violating  but  by
guarding  the  rights  of  his  subjects.  Property  is  sweetened  and  seasoned  by
acts  of  judicious  liberality.

Lessons. — 1.  Property  is  a  sacred  trust,  for  which  we  are  accountable  to  God,
2.  Property  acquired  by  oppression  is  unsafe.  3.  We  must  be  just  before  we  can  bi
generous.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,


Vers.  16-18.  The  Duty  of  the
Wealthy — 1.  To  provide  for  their
own  family  (ver.  16).  2.  To  be  liberal
towards    their  dependents    (ver.    17).

3.  To  respect  the  laws  by  which  their
possessions  are  governed  (vers.  16,  17).

4.  To  avoid  oppression  and  protect  the
rights  of  others  (ver.  18).

—  "  It  is  an  exhibition,  by  an  indi-
fidual  trait,  of  the  pure  righteousness


and  settled  order  which  should  pervade
the  Kingdom  of  God  when  set  up  in
its  new  and  more  perfect  form.  Every-
thing should  now  be  ruled  by  the
principles  of  eternal  rectitude,  and  no
license  given,  no  occasion  even,  or
pretext  afforded  for  the  usurpations
o  f  ty  ra  n  n  i  ca  1  >•  i  o  1  e  n  ce. " — Fairbairn.

Ver.  17.  **  As  Alexander  the  Great,

477


mxT.  xLVi.  nOMIlETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


wlio,  going  to  subdue  a  great  part  of  jects  to  enrich  their  servants  and  para-

the  habitable  world,  gave  away  to  his  sites." — Trapp.

servants  almost  all  he  had,  and  when  —  **  How  blessed   shall  that  state

one  of  his  ojfficers  asked  what  he  would  be  wherein  alike  tlie  temptation  from

leave  for  himself,  he  answered,  'Hope.***  without  and  the  inclination  from  with-

— Trapp.  in  to  do  wrong  shall  no  longer  have

—  "  He  who  is  profuse  in  giving  is  place  !      This    is    the    model    towards

easily  compelled  to  take  from  others  which  we  ouglit  to  aspire;  and  in  this

what  belongs  to  them." — Hengstenherg.  respect  this  picture  of  the  future  Israel

may  serve  as   the  ideal   according  to

Ver.  18.   "Ill  accidents  attend  such  which,  in  the  spirit  if  not  in  the  letter,

princes  as  affecting  to  be  absolute  in  our  State  politics  should  be  framed."^-

power,  will  be  too  resohite  in  will  or  Fausset,
dissolute  in  life,  oppressing  their  sub-

EOMILETICS.
The  Moral  Significance  of  Daily  Foou

(Vers.  19-24.)

I.  That  the  supply  of  daily  food  is  a  constant  evidence  of  the  Divine  care.

There  is  not  a  sinsjle  meal  for  wliich  we  are  not  indebted  to  the  Divine  thouorht-
fulness  and  blessing.  God  smiles  upon  the  soil,  and  it  teems  with  plenty  for
man  and  beaf^t.  The  wants  of  the  tiniest  insect,  the  most  solitary  bird,  are
not  overlooked.  Famine  is  man's  handiwork — the  result  of  sin,  of  indolence,
or  lack  of  foresight,  and  is  sometimes  a  punishment  for  his  lavish  extravagance
and  wrong-doing.  God  is  the  munificent  benefactor  and  food-provider  for  His
countless  offspring  (Ps.  cxlv.  16).

II.  That  all  the  possible  needs  of  man  are  satisfied  in  connection  with
Divine  worship.  Tlie  priests  who  ministei-ed  before  the  Lord  and  the  people
w^ho  worshipped  were  fed  with  the  saciifices  they  offered  (vers.  20-25).
Workeis  for  God  are  promised  an  unfailing  supply  of  physical  food  (Ps.  xxxvii,
3).  Their  work  is  not  to  suffer  by  undue  anxiety  concerning  temporal  things.
He  who  provides  for  the  higher  needs  of  man  will  not  neglect  the  lower:  the
greater  includes  the  lesser  (Matt.  vi.  33).

III.  That  every  meal  should  be  enjoyed  in  a  spirit  of  devout  thankfulness.
Every  meal  should  he  a  miniature  sacrament.  We  should  remember  that  God
always  sits  down  at  the  table  with  His  children  ;  His  presence  makes  every
meal  a  joyous  feast.  Eating  and  drinking  cannot  degenerate  into  sensual  excess
when  we  remember  the  Provider  of  the  feast  is  ])resent.  We  can  make  no
adequate  return  for  His  goodness,  but  we  can  and  must  be  thankful.  A  thank-
ful heart  glorifies  God  (1  Tim.  iv.  4  ;  1  Cor.  x.  31  ;  Phil.  iv.  6).

Lessons. — 1.  The  law  of  supply  and  demand  is  Divinely  regulated.  2.  There  is
no  lack  to  those  who  serve  God.  3.  The  prayer  is  Divinely  taught — "  Give  us  this  day
our  daily  bread."

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES,

Ver.  19.  "  In  the  Kingdom  of  God,  the  full  sense  of  the  expression,  every-
as  in  the  kingdom  of  nature,  and  in      thing    has    its   own   place.     Only   the

478


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


OHAP.  XLVn.


things  of  men  are  in  disorder  because
they  are  sinners,  and  sin  is  disorder  in
every  respect." — Lange.

Ver.  20.  '*  Ministers  should  indite
good  matters  in  their  hearts  for  the
use  of  the  people,  and  then  their
tongues  shall  be  as  the  pen  of  a  ready
writer.  They  shall  not  feed  their
hearers  with  crude  and  undi Guested
stuff,  but  such  as  is  well  boiled  and
baked  with  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
kindled  on  the  hearth  of  their  own
hearts,  that  from  the  heart  they  may
speak  to  the  heart." — Trapp,

—  "  To  cook  is  to  bring  to  a  proper
condition,  so  that  the  food  tastes  well
and  is  agreeable ;  so  ought  also  the
truth  to  be  prepared. — Is  not  homi-
letics  a  kind  of  sacred  cookery  % " —
Lange,


Ver.  24.  Spiritual  Food— 1.  Should
be  studiously  prepared  by  the  faithful
minister.  2.  Should  be  partaken  of
by  tiie  minister  himself.  3.  Should
be  provided  for  the  worship  of  the
Sanctuary.  4.  Is  essential  in  nourish-
ing and  strengthening  the  soul.

—  "In  God's  Church  there  shall
always  be  provision  both  for  His
ministers  and  people.  Those  who
have  but  from  hand  to  mouth  have
their  bread  hot,  as  it  were,  from
God's  hand,  which   is  best  of  all." —


—  "  Thus  in  one  part  of  the  house
was  food  for  the  body,  and  in  another
food  for  the  soul.  In  this  view  heaven
shall  greatly  exceed  earth,  for  there
we  shall  not  need  tlie  bread  that  per-
isheth.  He  that  eateth  of  the  tree  of
life  shall  live  for  ever." — Sutdiffe,


The  Vision  op  the  Holy  Waters  Issuing  from  the  Temple.

(Chap,  xlvil)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.
**The  house  eastward."  The  house  is
the  Temple  itself;  the  waters  issued
from  beneath  the  south-east  corner  and
flowed  along  the  south  of  the  porch
which  projected  into  the  inner  court,

Ver.  2.  "  There  ran  out  waters  on
the  right  side."  "The  waters  flow  east-
ward—  towards  the  Kedron,  thence
towards  the  Jordan,  and  so  along  the
Ghor  to  the  Dead  Sea.  The  main
point  in  the  picture  is  the  rapid  aug-
mentation from  a  petty  stream  into  a
mighty  river,  not  by  the  influx  of  side-
streams,  but  by  its  own  self-supply
from  the  sacred  miraculous  source  in
the  Temple." — Henderson.

Ver.  3.  "To  the  ankles."  This  may
coincide  with  the  step  gained  in  the
ba]>tisni  of  Cornelius  (Acts  x.)  and
the  opening  of  the  Church  to  the
Gentiles.

Ver.  4.  "  To  the  knees— loins."  The
mission  of  St  Paul  and  Barnabas  (Acts
xiii.  1-4)  is  another  marked  epoch  in


the  Church's  history  ;  and  the  time
of  St  Paul's  martyrdom  denotes  an
increase  in  the  Gentile  Church,  which
corresponds  with  the  waters  reaching
to  the  loins.

Ver.    5.    "  Waters    to    swim  in."

"  When  under  Constantine  the  Roman
Empire  had  become  Christian,  the
Church  may  be  contemplated  as  the
full  river,  to  flow  on  throughout  time
to  the  final  completion  of  Isaiah's  pro-
phecy, xi.  9." — Speaker's  Commentary.

Ver.  7.  "  Very  many  trees."  Trees
were  the  natural  consequence  of  abund-
ance of  water  (Ps.  i.  3  ;  Rev.  xxii.  2).
The  luxuriant  fertility  of  the  ground
on  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea  under
the  fresh  springs  of  Engedi  well  illus-
trate this.

Ver.  8.  "Into  the  sea,  the  waters
shall  be  healed."  The  Dead  Sea,
coveiing  the  guilty  cities,  Sodom  and
Gomorrah.  In  its  bituminous  waters
no  vegetable  or  animal  life  is  said  to
be  found.     But  now  death  is  to  give

479


OHAP.  XLVIL


HOMILETIC  COMBIENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


place  to  life  in  Judea  and  tlirougliout
the  world,  as  symbolised  by  the  heal-
ing of  these  death-pervaded  waters
(John  iv.  14;  Rev.  xxii.  2,  3).

Ver.  9.  "  Whithersoever  the  rivers
shall  come."  Heb.,  "  the  two  rivers."
This  new  river  is  to  come  into  the
Dead  Sea  through  the  same  plain  as
the  Jordan.  The  Jordan  always  flowed,
but  now,  when  another  river  comes  in
and  two  rivers  flow  into  the  sea,  the
waters  shall  be  healed.  Hengstenherg
interprets  the  two  rivers  as  meaning
strong  river.

Ver.  10.  "From  Engedi  unto  En-
eglaim."  Engedi,  now  Ain-Jidy,  west
of  the  Dead  Sea,  David's  place  of
refuge.  En-eglaira,  on  the  confines  of
Moab,  near  where  the  Jordan  enters
the  Dead  Sea.  These  limits  comprise
between  them  the  whole  Dead  Sea.
*'  Their  fish  shall  be  according  to  their
kinds."  "Jerome  quotes  an  ancient
theory  that  there  are  153  kinds  of
fishes,  all  of  which  were  taken  by  the
apostles  (John  xxi.  11),  and  not  one
remained  uncaptured,  signifying  that
both  the  noble  and  base-born,  the  rich
and  the  poor,  and  every  class,  are  being
drawn  out  of  the  sea  of  the  world  to
salvation." — Fausset,

Ver.  11.  "  Not  be  healed ;  given
to  salt."  "  Those  districts  in  which
the  salt-deposits  proper  were  formerly
found  shall  henceforth  be  waste  places.
The  thought  is  this — Only  those  who
bar  themselves  against  the  gracious
stream  of  Divine  love  and  are  unwill-
ing to  regain  health  are  henceforth
to  be  given  over  to  the  curse,  continu-
ing to  exist  as  monuments  thereof." —
Hdvernick.  What  is  given  to  salt  is
entirely  forfeited  to  death.

Ver.  12.  *' Shall  grow  all  trees  for
meat " — trees  of  life-giving  and  life-
restoring  virtue  shall  bloom,  similar  in
properties  to  and  exceeding  in  number
the  tree  of  life  in  Eden  (Rev.  ii.  7 ;
xxii.  2,  14).  "  Whose  leaf  shall  not
fade  " — expressing  not  only  the  un-
failing character  of  the  heavenly  medi-
cine of  the  tree  of  life,  but  also  that

480


the  graces  of  the  believer,  which  are  the
leaves,  and  his  deeds,  which  are  the
fruits  that  flow  from  those  graces,  are
immortal  (Ps.  i.  3  ;  Jer.  xvii.  8  ;  Matt.
X.  42  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  58).

Ver.  13.  "  This  shall  he  the  border."
Substantially  the  same  as  Num.  xxxiv.;
there  the  description  begins  with  the
south,  here  with  the  north.  "Joseph
shall  have  two  portions" — according
to  the  original  promise  of  Jacob  to
Joseph  (Gen.  xlviii.  5,  22  ;  Joshua
xiv.  4.)  Joseph's  sons  were  given  the
birthright  forfeited  by  Reuben,  the
first-born  (1  Chron.  v.  5).  The  special
mention  of  Joseph's  portions  was  to
express  that  the  twelve  portions  were
to  be  exclusive  of  Levi's  land,  which
was  to  be  provided  out  of  the  oblation.

Ver.  14.  "One  as  well  as  another."

Ezekiel  is  speaking  of  tribes,  not  in-
dividuals. Each  tribe  is  to  have  an
equal  breadth  of  land  assigned  to  it.

Ver.  15.  "The  way  of  Hethlon  to
Zedad" — on  the  north  boundary  of
Canaan.  Names  of  places  in  the
actual  northern  border  are  given,  not
to  mark  exact  geographical  position,
but  to  show  that  the  original  promise
will  be  fulfilled.

Ver.  16.  "Hamath"— at  the  foot
of  Mount  Hermon,  on  the  Orontes.
"Berothah" — probably  the  same  as
Berothai,  a  city  in  Syria  conquered
by  David  (2  Sam.  viii.  8).  "Hazar-
hatticon*' — the  middle  Hazar,  to  distin-
guish it  from  Hazar-enan.  "Hauran"
—  Auranitis,  a  tract  in  Syria,  south
of  Damascus.

Ver.  18.  "Unto  the  east  sea" —

the  Dead  Sea.

Ver.  19.  "From  Tamar" — a  village
near  the  southern  end  of  the  Dead
Sea.  "To  Kadesh" — on  the  borders
of  the  Wilderness  of  Sin,  where  the
children  of  Israel  strove  with  Moses.
"The  river  to  the  great  sea."  Lite-
rallv.  "riverward  to  the  great  sea."  By
the  river  is  meant  a  torrent-stream


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap,  xltil

entering  the  Mediterranean  near  Ebi-  of  the  land.     Not  only  the  Israelites

nocolura,  now  El  Arish.     This  is  the  by  descent,  but  those  who  join  them-

river   of  Egypt   mentioned   in   Num.  selves  to  Israel  by  allegiance  to  the

xxxiv.  5.  true  God,  shall  have  a  right  of  inherit-
ance.     The   difference  which  existed

Ver.    22.    "And  to  the   strangers  under  the  old  covenant  between  Jew

that   sojourn   among   you."     Here  is  and  Gentile  is  now  at  last  done  away

quite  a  new  feature  in  the  distribution  (Rom.  x.  12;  GaL  iii.  28;  Col.  iii.  11).

HOMILETICS,

The  River  of  the  Water  of  Ism,

(Vers.  1-12.)

I.  Has  Its  source  in  the  Temple  of  God  (ver.  1,  2).     Not  from  the  Temple

as  such,  but  from  the  presence  and  activity  of  Him  whose  glory  filled  the
Temple.  All  the  spiritual  blessings  that  now  enrich  the  world  appear  to  issue
from  the  Church  of  God,  and  so  they  do ;  but  not  from  the  Church  as  an
organisation,  but  from  Him  who  gives  life,  form,  and  stability  to  the  organisa-
tion itself.  This  important  fact  is  liable  to  be  overlooked.  Ezekiel  had  gone
round  the  Temple  repeatedly,  prospecting,  measuring,  admiring,  until  his  soul
was  filled  with  amazement  at  its  colossal  proportions  and  gorgeous  ritual ;  but
not  till  it  was  specially  revealed  to  him  did  he  see  the  waters  issuing  from
under  the  threshold  of  the  house,  and  became  aware  of  their  mysterious  and
Divine  source.  So  we  are  apt  to  be  so  absorbed  in  contemplating  the  outward
structure  and  vast  movements  of  the  Church  as  to  lose  sight  for  the  time  of
the  Divine  power  that  gives  vitality  and  meaning  to  the  whole.  It  is  a  blessed
moment  for  us  when  we  are  brought  by  the  Spirit  to  **  the  door  of  the  house  '*
and  shown  the  secret  of  all  this  mighty  energy.  It  is  our  wisdom  frequently
to  wait  in  meditation  and  prayer  at  the  threshold  of  God's  house,  the  fountain-
head  of  all  blessing,  until  our  souls  are  penetrated  with  the  thought  that  the
excellency  of  the  power  in  Temple-work  is  not  of  man,  but  of  God.  Then  we
can  say  with  David,  "  All  my  springs  are  in  Thee  "  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7).

II.  Widens  and  deepens  in  its  progressive  outflow  (vers.  3-5).     Beginning

as  a  small  rill  of  water  at  the  Temple  threshold,  the  river,  within  a  little  more
than  a  mile's  space,  rapidly  widens  and  deepens  so  as  to  be  unfordable,  and
this  not  by  the  aid  of  contributary  streams,  but  from  itself.  Here  we  see  the
miraculous  character  of  the  river  and  its  evident  ideal  teaching,  as  a  stream
rising  at  the  top  of  a  mountain,  feeding  itself  and  so  quickly  augmenting,
is  at  variance  with  all  known  natural  laws.  It  is  a  type  of  the  River  of  the
Water  of  Life,  flowing  in  Gospel  channels,  and  spreading  and  deepening  among
the  nations  of  the  earth.  Wiiat  a  suggestive  study  to  trace  the  course  of  this
river  in  its  steady  advances  through  the  world !  In  many  places  the  wilder-
ness has  been  transformed  into  a  garden  of  Eden.  Our  knowledge  of  Divine
truth,  like  the  waters  of  the  Sanctuary,  is  shallow  at  first,  but  should  grow  in
depth  and  preciousness  with  the  years.  So  in  our  experience  of  spiritual
things :  there  should  be  constant  progress  from  grace  to  grace.

III.  Imparts  fertility  and  blessing  wherever  it  flows  (vers.  8-12).  This
mystic  river  produced  extraordinary  effects.  Wherever  it  circulated  vegetation
was  quickened,  trees  remarkable  for  fruitfulness  and  medicinal  properties
sprang  up  on  its  banks,  and  the  bituminous  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea,  cured  of

3h  481


OHAP.  XLvn.  MOM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


their  deadly  poison,  swarmed  with  fish.  Barrenness  gives  place  to  fertility
and  abnndance,  and  the  river-course  is  a  scene  of  animation  and  increasing
activity.  So  the  Gospel — the  River  of  the  Water  of  Life — brings  life,  health,
beauty,  and  fruitfulness  wherever  it  comes.  Dead  souls  are  quickened  into
life,  diseased  souls  healed,  feeble  souls  strengthened,  and  the  spiritual  life  of
believers  is  made  more  intense  and  productive.  Like  the  fabled  goddess  whose
pathway  was  beautified  with  flowers  which  sprang  up  wherever  she  set  her
feet,  so  the  course  of  the  Gospel  river  may  be  distinctly  traced  by  the  flowers
and  fruits  of  grace  that  adorn  and  enrich  its  banks.

Lessons. — \.  Christ  is  the  source  and  His  Word  the  channel  of  soul-refreshing
life.  2.  Wherever  the  Gospel  spreads  it  produces  life  and  fruitfulness,  3.  Tru6
religion  is  progressivCy  and  flourishes  best  by  disseminatiny  itself.


The  Vision  of  the  Waters.

(Ver.  9.)

We  take  the  holy  waters  to  be  the  emblems  of  the  Gospel — that  wondrous
scheme  of  mercy,  perfected  by  the  atonement  of  Christ,  made  vital  by  the
everlasting  Spirit  and  adapted  to  the  salvation  of  the  world.

I.  The  source  of  the  holy  waters.     While  through  the  Temple  come  to  us

the  tidings  of  our  peace,  the  blessing  itself  does  not  originate  there,  but  is
conveyed  to  it  from  a  source  invisible  and  afar.  In  God's  great  provision  for
the  restoration  of  the  fallen  race  there  are  both  instrumental  and  eflScient
agencies.  He  has  appointed  means,  and  a  Divine  and  perpetual  resident  to
infuse  those  means  with  life.  They  who  love  the  river  of  the  Temple  are  tiie
likeliest,  walking  on  its  banks,  to  find  its  source  issuing  from  the  throne.
While  we  thus  appreciate  the  uses  of  the  Temple  as  an  instrumentality  of
blessing,  and  rejoice  in  the  waters  as  tliey  flow,  we  must  remember  always
that  they  issue  from  the  foundation  of  the  house  and  have  their  springs  in
the  everlasting  hills ;  in  other  words,  that  God  is  the  one  source  of  life.
Though  the  Saviour  has  ascended  up  on  high,  He  has  shed  forth  His  Spirit.
That  Spirit  lives  on  earth,  the  perpetuator  of  the  Gospel  impression,  the
inspirer  of  all  thought  that  is  holy,  the  great  and  living  agent  in  the  con-
version of  mankind.  Men  say  the  truth  is  power,  but  it  is  not,  alone.  It  is
feeble  as  the  pliant  osier  or  the  bruised  reed  against  the  malignant  enmity  of
evil.  But  let  the  Spirit  animate  it,  and  it  shall  overcome  all  hostility,  and  be
brave  and  mighty  to  prevail.

II.  The  progress  of  the  holy  waters.     You  observe  that  in  the  context  the

progress  of  these  waters  is  said  to  have  been  gradual  and  constant.  The
prophet  saw  them  first  reaching  to  the  ankles,  then  to  the  knees,  then  to  the
loins,  and  then  they  became  a  river  too  deep  to  be  forded,  even  a  river  to  swim
in.  There  was  no  ceasing  in  the  flow,  there  was  no  ebbing  of  the  waters  ;  they
flowed  gradually  and  constantly  in  the  ever-deepening  stream.  And  this  is
only  a  description  of  the  progress  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Small  and  feeble  in
its  beginnings — those  trembling  but  earnest  fishermen,  its  earliest  preachers —
witli  wealth  and  rank  and  patronage  and  power  all  arrayed  against  its  progress
— with  Csesars  conspiring  to  strangle  it,  and  armies  marched  out  against  its
fiigitive  sons — how  marvellous  was  its  triumph  !  And  though  after  the  esta-
blishment of  Christianity  there  was  a  seeming  eclipse  of  faith,  and  corruptions
blemished  the  comeliness  of  the  bride  of  Christ,  the  gradual  progress  among

482


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EZEKIEL.  OHAP.  XLTlt


the  nations  did  not  cease.  One  after  another  they  received  her  teachings  and
submitted  to  her  sway.  Insensibly  she  moulded  tiie  institutions  of  society  and
stamped  upon  them  her  own  image.  Sanguinary  codes  were  relaxed  ;  unholy
traflRc  terminated  ;  cruelty  had  her  arm  paralysed  and  her  sword  blunted ;
fraud  and  lust  and  drunkenness  became  no  longer  things  of  glorying,  but  of
shame  ;  there  was  a  gradual  uplifting  in  the  moral  health,  as  if  there  flowed
around  the  people  the  bracing  air-waves  of  a  purer  atmospliere  ;  and  men
wondered  whence  the  liealing  came.  The  river  had  done  it  all  :  flowing  on,
now  through  the  darkling  brake,  and  now  over  the  open  plain  ;  now  fertilising
the  swards  upon  its  banks  ;  now  rejoicing  in  the  depth  of  its  own  channel —
imperceptible  almost  in  the  increasing  volume  of  its  waters  to  those  who  con-
tinually beheld  it,  and  yet,  to  those  that  gazed  only  at  intervals,  seemed  to  have
both  widened  and  deepened  every  day.  And  it  is  rolling  on  still.  Perliaps
there  never  was  an  age  of  such  quickened  religious  activity  as  the  one  in  which
we  are  privileged  to  live.  There  are  two  thoughts  suggested  by  this  gradual
and  constant  progress  of  the  Gospel.  The  first  encourages  our  faith  ;  the  second
reminds  us  of  our  responsibility.  If  we  believe,  with  all  the  firmness  of  a
settled  conviction,  that  the  Gospel  is  of  God,  we  may  rest  in  the  assurance
that  it  must  and  will  prevail  ;  and  this  hearty  faith  in  its  triumphant  destiny
will  save  us  from  the  extremes  of  feeling — from  undue  elation  in  seasons  of
unusual  promise,  and  from  unusual  depression  in  seasons  of  peculiar  languor.
The  other  thought  addresses  itself  solemnly  to  ourselves.  It  is  quite  impossible
for  us  to  live  in  times  like  ours,  when  not  only  the  ordinary  religious  privileges
exist  and  are  enjoyed,  but  when  there  is  so  much  of  special  unction  with  the
Word,  and  such  large  and  manifest  workings  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  without  entail-
ing an  added  amount  of  responsibility.  Beware  of  attributing  the  Holy  Spirit's
work  to  evil  agency.  That  is  marvellously  like  the  sin  that  has  no  forgiveness.
Beware  of  setting  yourselves  in  an  attitude  of  resistance  to  good  influences.
The  waters  wear  the  stones,  but  do  not  change  their  nature.  Bewnre  of  delay-
ing yourselves  into  hardness  of  heart.  The  waters  petrify  sometimes,  and  there
are  some  moral  petrifactions,  alas  !  which  cannot  be  broken  even  by  the  hammer
of  the  Word.

III.  The  efficacy  of  the  holy  waters.  How  complete  and  how  effectual  the
healing  !  "  Everything  shall  live  whither  the  river  cometh."  And  this  is  true  of
the  Gospel.  Not  only  can  it  reach  every  man,  but  each  part  of  every  man.  Life
for  the  understanding,  that  it  may  no  longer  be  smitten  by  error — life  for  the
imagination,  that  its  strange  fires  may  be  quenched  and  a  purer  flame  be  kindled
in  their  stead — life  for  the  memory,  that  it  may  no  longer  be  haunted  l)y  the
wraiths  of  ghostly  sins — life  for  the  affections,  that  they  may  revel  in  a  pure
attachment  which  is  not  idolatry,  ever  increasing  and  yet  ever  satisfied — life
for  the  whole  nature,  that  it  may  not  be  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins — life  tor  the
destiny,  that  it  may  not  even  be  sullied  by  the  shadow  of  death,  but  exult  in  an
ever-brightening  inheritance  through  an  eternal  day.  It  shall  flow  into  the
desert,  and  love  to  God  shall  be  implanted  where  was  formerly  enmity,  and  the
whole  nature  shall  be  turned  about  to  serve  Him.  It  shall  flow  into  the  sea^
and  though  the  proud  waves  shall  resist  its  entrance,  it  shall  overcome  viieir
frantic  waters  and  heal  them  of  their  plague.  Some  of  you  have  seen,  as  I
have,  a  very  fine  illustration  of  this,  so  far  as  earthly  things  can  illustrate
heavenly  in  nature's  bounteous  kingdom.  I  stood  last  summer  at  the  point  of
confluence,  near  the  fair  city  of  Geneva,  where  two  great  rivers  meet  but  do
not  mingle.  Here  the  Rhone,  "  the  arrowy  Khone,"  rapid  and  beautiful,  pours
on,  its  waters  of  that  heavenly  blue  which  it  is  almost  worth  a  pilgrimage  to  see  ;
there  the  Arve,  turbid  and  muddy,  partly  from  the  glaciers  from  which  it  is  so
largely  fed,  and  partly  from  the  clayey  soil  which  it  upheaves  in  its  impetuous

483


CHAP.  XLVit  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


path,  brawls  hoarsely  in  its  passionate  course ;  and  for  a  long  distance  beyond
the  point  of  junction  they  roll  side  by  side  with  no  barrier  between  them  but
their  own  innate  repulsions,  each  making  now  and  then  an  encroachment  upon
the  other,  but  beaten  back  again  into  its  own  domain.  Like  mighty  rival  forces
of  good  and  evil  do  they  seem,  and  for  a  long  time  the  issue  is  doubtful.  But
far  down  the  long  valley,  if  you  look  again,  you  find  that  the  frantic  Arve  is
mastered,  and  the  Rhone  has  coloured  the  entire  surface  of  the  stream  with  its
own  emblematic  and  beautiful  blue.  I  thought,  as  I  gazed  upon  it,  that  it
symbolised  the  long-protracted  conflict  between  truth  and  error ;  but  in  medi-
tating upon  the  flowing  of  these  healing  waters,  and  reading  that  they  shall
flow  into  the  sea  and  heal  it,  tlie  vision  of  the  scene  rose  up  before  me,  fresh
and  vivid  as  the  facts  of  yesterday." — W,  Morley  PunshoUf  D.D.


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-12.  **  The  eff*ect  of  the  gladness.  Instead  of  spending  itself,
establishment  of  the  mountain  of  the  like  the  streams  of  nature,  as  it  ad-
house  of  the  Lord  on  the  top  of  moun-  vances  through  the  moral  deserts  of
tains,  or  of  Chiistianity  generally,  is  a  the  world,  it  multiplies  and  grows,
great  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Si)irit  until  corruption  is  changed  into  in-
signified  by  these  waters.  As  tliey  corruption,  mortality  is  swallowed  up
were  not  to  be  seen  before  the  i  suj  of  of  life,  and  the  earth,  which  God  had
the  man  with  the  measuring-line,  tliey  cursed  for  man's  sin,  is  transformed
are  to  accompany  the  preaching  of  the  into  the  inlu*ritance  of  the  saints  in
Word  by  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and  light." — Fairbairn.
the  operations  of  the  Spirit  shall  be-
come the  more  admirable  and  profound  Vers.  1-5.  "  Eztkiel's  Temple,  with
as  they  proceed  in  their  spread  over  its  ritual,  ministers,  and  congregation,
all  the  world,  as  is  signified  by  their  symbolises  the  presence  of  Jehovah  in
increasing  depth.  By  them  shall  the  themidstof  a  loyal  people.  The  waters
evil  influences  of  the  world  be  healed  are  the  blessings  which  flow  from  this
and  everlasting  life  conveyed  to  all  source  to  animate  and  refresh  all  the
that  will  receive  them.  Still,  some  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  The  deepen-
shall  harden  even  then  under  its  in-  ing  of  the  waters  in  their  course  shows
fluence,  and  become  more  rank  and  the  continual  deepening  of  spiritual  life
nauseous  in  sin  than  before,  as  is  andmultiplicationof  spiritual  blessings
signified  by  the  unhealed  bays.*' —  in  the  growth  of  the  Kingdom  of  God."
M^ Parian.  — Speaker's  Commentary.

—  "  Issuing  as  this  stream  does  from  —  "  In  the  Kingdom  of  God  things

the  threshold  of  the  Temple,  from  the  proceed  from  little  to  great :  in  the

very  foot  of  the  throne  of  God,  it  must  kingdoms    of   the    world   often   from

be,  like  all  the  special  manifestations  of  great  to  little.     Satan  begins  his  things

God  to  His  Church,  itself  of  a  spiritual  with  lofty  impetuosity,  but  finally  they

nature,  and  only  in  its  efi'ects  productive  end  in  nothing  and  everything  comes

of  outward  material  good.     It  is  the  to  disgrace." — Hafenreffer.
efflux  of  that  infinite  fulness  of  life

and  blessing  which  is  treasured  up  in  Ver.  1,  2.  The  Progress  of  Truth.

His  spiritual  Temple,  and  continually  "  1.  As  it  is  Christ  who  makes  known

pours  itself  forth  as  the  operations  of  the  things  of  the  Temple,  so  He  makes

His  grace  proceed  among  men.     It  is  known   some   at   one   time,    some   at

emphatically  a  river  of  life.     Wherever  another.     2.  The  waters  of  the  Gospel,

it  is  experienced,   the  barren  soil  of  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit,  flow

nature  fructifies,  the  dead  live  again,  from  Zion.     3.  These  spiritual  waters,

the  soul  is  replenished  with  joy  and  although  they  flow  from  Zion,  Christ
484


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XLVn.


is  the  fountain  and  original  of  them.
4.  Sanctuary  waters  are  not  common
but  choice  mercies ;  they  are  right-
side  mercies,  south-side  blessings," —
Greenhill.

Ver.  1.  The  Gradualness  of  Divine
Revelation — 1.  Accoiiiiiio(iated  to  our
imperfect  faculties.  2.  Suited  to  our
varying  circumstances.  3.  Educative
in  its  process.  4.  Enables  us  more
clearly  to  grasp  the  meaning  and
grandeur  of  the  truths  unfolded.

Vers.  3-9.  "  The  Atheistic  Idea.  It
is  afifirmed  that  Ciiristianity  is  waning
because  of  the  advancement  of  science.
The  business  of  the  scientist  is  with
matter.  There  is  something  back  of
matter  —  a  force  beneatli  life.  No
painter,  there  is  no  jjicture  :  no  God,
there  is  no  nature.  What  doctrine
has  science  demolished  ?  1.  Has  science
done  away  with  the  Incarnation  ?  The
scientist  knows  that  the  sum  of  the
history  of  nature  is  made  up  by  the
entrances  at  epochs  of  higher  types  of
being.  Are  not  all  these  appearances
pro])hecies  of  the  grand  entrance  of
the  Higher  Being  1  2.  Has  science  done
avmy  with  the  Atonement  ?  The  law
everywhere  manifest  is  the  depend-
ence of  one  creature  on  another.  3.
Has  science  done  away  with  sin  1  Sin
is  as  much  a  fact,  a  phenomenon  of
human  life,  as  the  circulation  of  the
blood.  4.  Where  is  Christianity  wan-
ing ?  In  Germany  ?  Compare  this
century  with  the  last.  A  short  time
ago  thousands  of  students  flocked  to  the
great  universities  to  hear  the  doctrines
of  Fichte,  Hegel,  Kant,  and  the  Ration-
alists of  Tubingen.  Now  scarcely  a
class  of  twenty  can  be  collected  for
that  purpose.  In  France  1  Compare
this  century  with  the  times  when  a
deluije  of  blood  followed  the  bias-
phemies  of  Rousseau,  D'Alembert,
Diderot,  and  Voltaire.  In  England  ?
Comi)are  the  Britain  of  to-day  with
the  Britain  of  yesterday,  when  Chubb,
Hume,  and  Bolingbroke  could  sneer
at  the  story  of  the  Cross — when  the
clergy  were  immoral.  In  America  1
Compare  it  with   the  time  when  the


students  in  our  colleges  called  them-
selves by  the  names  of  leading  French
atheists.  Where  will  you  find  such  a
college  to-day  ?  5.  What  is  the  motive-
power  of  science?  Compare  the  ages  of
faith  and  the  ages  of  scepticism  and
see  the  results.  How  high  has  science
lifted  the  shadows  that  rest  on  the
human  heart?  It  is  only  this  blessed
religion,  this  radiance  from  the  throne
of  God,  that  can  lighten  the  gloom." —
Homiletic  Monthly.

Vers.  3-5.  The  Temple-River  emble-
matic of  Religion  in  the  different
stages  of  Human  Life.     1.  Childhood,

'*  Tiie  waters  were  to  the  ankles "
(ver.  3).  Religion  may  be  shallow
and  yet  genuine.  2.  Youth.  "The
waters  were  to  the  knees"  (ver.  4).
Still  exposed  to  much  of  the  world
and  its  attractions,  yet  standing  in
the  truth.  3.  Manhood.  "  The  waters
were  to  the  loins "  (ver.  4).  In  the
midway  of  life's  struL^gle,  but  deepen-
ing in  piety.  4.  Old  age.  "Waters
to  swim  in,  a  river  that  could  not  be
passed  over "  (ver.  5).  A  more  pro-
longed and  profound  study  of  the
truth  revealing  its  unfathomable  vast-
ness  and  prompting  the  strongest
veteran-swimmer  to  exclaim,  "Oh,  the
depth  of  the  riches  I "  (Rom.  xi.  33).

—  "  Holy  Scripture  and  its  revela-
tions also  resemble  these  sacred  waters,
in  that  whosoever  searches  into  them
will  find  some  parts  intelligible  to  all
who  sincerely  desire  to  know  them.
Other  parts  require  a  deeper  investi-
gation ;  others  a  deeper  still ;  and  others
are  beyond  our  depth,  and  in  respect
to  these,  we  can  only  adore  the  infini-
tude of  God's  unsearchable  wisdom,
and  humbly  wait  for  His  own  time  of
revealing  their  now  hidden  meatiing.
The  growth  of  grace  in  the  individual
soul,  similarly,  is  a  progressive  work,
bei^inninf]:  with  but  a  small  stream
from  the  fountain-head,  but  sure  to  go
on  increasing  until  it  is  expanded  into
the  boundless  and  unfathomable  river
of  heavenly  pleasures  (Ps.  xxxvi.  8)."
— Fausset.

—  "This  vision  may  be  applied — 1.
To  the  gradual  discoveries  of  the  plan  of

V  4Jr5


WOMILETiO  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIXL.


OBAP.  nviL


taJvation.  (1.)  In  the  patriarchal  ages.
(2.)  In  the  givin2^  of  the  Law.  (3.)  In
the  ministry  of  Jolin  the  Baptist.  (4.)
In  the  full  manifestation  of  Christ  by
the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  To  the  growth  of
a  believer  in  the  grace  and  knowledge  of
God.  (1.)  The  seed  of  the  Kingdom.
(2.)  The  blade  from  that  seed.  (3.)
The  ear  ont  of  that  blade.  (4.)  The
full  corn  in  that  ear.  3.  To  the  dis-
coveries a  penitent  believer  receives  of  the
mercy  of  God  in  his  salvation.  (1.)  A
little  child,  born  of  God,  he  begins  to
taste  and  feed  on  the  heavenly  food.
(2.)  He  grows  up  and  increases  in
stature  and  strength,  and  becomes  a
young  man.  (3.)  He  becomes  matured
in  the  Divine  life,  and  has  his  spiritual
senses  exercised  so  as  to  become  a
father  in  Christ.  4.  To  the  progress  of
Christianity.  (1.)  A  few  poor  fisher-
men. (2.)  Afterwards  many  Jews.
(3.)  Then  the  Gentiles  of  Asia  Minor
and  Greece.  (4.)  The  continent  and
isles  of  Europe.  (5.)  Now  spreading
through  Africa,  Asia,  and  America,
at  present  these  waters  are  no  longer
a  river,  but  an  immense  sea ;  and
the  Gospel-fishers  are  daily  bringing
multitudes  of  souls  to  God." — A,
Clarke.

—  The  Spread  of  the  Gospel.  "  1.
Christ  is  the  architect  and  measurer
of  all  things  belonging  to  His  Church.
2.  The  motion  of  Sanctuary  waters  is
not  accidental,  but  according  to  Divine
appointment.  3.  The  doctrine  of  the
Gospel  is  never  rightly  understood
unless  taught  by  Christ.  4.  The  doc-
trine of  the  Gospel,  the  conversion  of
sinners,  and  the  graces  of  the  Spirit
proceed  gradually.  5.  The  Gospel  has
depths  and  mysteries  no  human  under-
standing can  comprehend.  6.  Sanc-
tuary waters  afford  comfort  to  the
saints  in  their  deepest  distresses." —
Greenhill.

Ver.  6.  "  There  was  no  such  natural
course  of  waters  in  the  place,  nor  is  it
imaginable  that  in  three  miles  or  there-
abouts the  waters  should  so  rise ;  but
it  is  emblematical,  hath  a  deep  mys-
terious meaning,  and  includes  spiritual
things  and  their  wonderful  growth
486


from  small  beginnings,  and  these  from
the  Temple." — Pool.

—  *'This  marks  the  rich  and  over-
flowing grace  which  God  designs  to
shed  down  on  the  earth  in  the  Gospel
age  and  in  the  glory  of  the  latter  day  ;
and  it  apprises  believers  that  they
should  not  remain  in  a  loitering  state,
trampling  the  shallow  waters  of  grace,
but  go  on  to  a  deeper  baptism  of  the
Spirit  till  they  can  swim  in  the  abound-
ing streams." — Sufcliffe.

—  "Representing  the  fathondess
depth  of  tlie  Scriptures,  which  is  such
that  we  may  well  do  by  it  as  the
Romans  did  by  a  lake,  the  depth
whereof  they  could  not  sound,  and
dedicated  it  to  Victory:  also  the  abund-
ance of  spiritual  graces  in  the  Church,
the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth  all
knowledge,  and  the  over- abounding
goodness  of  God.  Speaking  of  this
subject,  Chrysostom  said  :  *I  am  like  a
man  digging  in  a  deep  spring  ;  I  stand
here,  and  the  water  rises  upon  me ;  I
stand  there,  and  still  the  water  rises
upon  me.  It  is  indeed  a  sea  that  has
neither  bank  nor  bottom.* " — Trapp.

Ver.  6.  "Hast  thou  seen  thisl"  A
Suggestive  Question — 1.  As  asked  by
the  well-informed.  He  knows  more
than  I  do,  or  why  the  question  ?  2.
As  addressed  to  the  anxious  inquirer.
This  may  meet  my  case.  3.  As  ad-
dressed to  the  thoughtless  and  indifferent.
There  is  a  world  of  knowledge  hitherto
closed  to  him.  4.  Indicates  there  is
mu/^h  we  miss  for  want  of  a  keener  in-
sight into  truth.

Vers.  7-10.  Fishers  in  Gospel  Waters.
"  1.  Tlie  waters  of  tlie  Gospel  have
their  own  course.  2.  That,  people
without  the  Gospel  are  like  the  Dead
Sea  (ver.  8).  3.  The  waters  of  the
Sanctuary  have  curing  and  quickening
virtue  (vers.  8,  9).  4.  Tlie  preachers
of  the  Gospel  are  fishers  (ver.  10).  5.
These  Gospel-fishers  catch  fish  of  all
sorts  (ver.  10).*' — Greenhill.

Vers.  8,  11.  The  Power  of  the
Gospel — 1  Seen  in  its  penetrating  the
most  unlikely  places.     "The  desert—


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,


OHAp.  zlyh


the  Dead  Sea  **  (ver.  8).  2.  Efficacious
in  giving  life  and  healing  to  all
who  accept  it.  "The  waters  shall  be
healed"  (ver.  8).  3.  Inefficacious
where  it  is  resisted  and  rejected.
"The  miry  places  and  marshes  shall
be  given  to  salt"  (ver.  11).

Ver.  8.  "  God's  Sanctuary  a  well-
spring  of  life  for  the  Dead  Sea  of  the
world  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7).  God's  thoughts
of  peace  over  the  abysses  of  the  world's
wretchedness.  In  other  cases  a  clear
and  wholesome  stream  which  flows
into  a  muddy  and  putrid  lake  be-
comes corrupt :  it  is  otherwise  with
the  Gospel,  which  brings  recovery  and
health  to  the  earthly-minded  heart.
It  is  a  power  of  God,  but  man  will  not
let  the  power  work." — Lange,

Ver.  11.  "Those  whom  the  Gospel
waters  of  life  do  not  reach,  through
their  own  indolence  and  carnality,
shall  be  given  over  to  everlasting
barrenness;  nor  can  any  more  awful
punishment  be  imagined  than  that
the  sinner  should  be  given  up  to  the
unrestricted  and  everlastiiio^  workinors
of  his  own  sin,  bitterness,  and  filthi-
ness." — Fatisset.

—  The  Hebrew  language  often  ex-
presses irremediable  barrenness  and
unprofitableness  by  being  given  up  to
salt,  salt  being  equivalent  to  barren-
ness in  that  language.  When  Abime-
lech  destroyed  yhechem  he  sowed  the
ground  whereon  it  stood  with  salt,  to
denote  that  it  should  never  be  culti-
vated or  inhabited  again  (Judges  ix.
45).

—  "Unsound,  rotten  parts,  neither
sea  nor  yet  sound  ground,  an  emblem
of  hypocrites.  Low  land,  sopped  with
the  overflowings  of  unhealthful  waters,
neither  fit  to  breed  fish  as  the  sea,  nor
bear  trees  as  the  land." — Pool.

Vers.  9-12.  Spiritual  Influence — 1.
Vitalises  all  it  touches  (ver.  9).  2.
Tiie  active  principle  of  fertility  and
plenty  (vers.  9,  10,  12).  3.  Cannot
be  resisted  without  disaster  (ver.  11).
4.  Is  ever  flowing  from  the  Divine
Temple.     "  Because  they  issued  out  of


the  sanctuary  "  (ver.  1 2).  5.  Is  both
the  food  and  medicine  of  the  souL
"The  fruit  shall  be  for  meat,  and  the
leaf  for  medicine  "  (ver.  12).

Ver.  10.  "The  ministers  of  the
Church  are  compared  to  fishers  be-
cause of  the  contempt  with  which
they  are  regarded  by  the  rich  and
powerful  of  this  world;  because  of
their  labour  by  day  and  night,  in  heat
and  cold ;  because  of  the  truitlessness
of  their  labour  at  times — 'We  have
caught  nothing;'  because  of  the  dan-
gers they  incur  in  stormy  weather;
because  of  their  confidence,  which,  as
in  the  case  of  the  husbandman,  must
rest  on  God ;  because  of  the  various
kinds  of  implements  they  use.  They
rescue  souls  from  the  abyss." — Starch.

Vers.  11,  12.  Moral  Barrenness  and
Fruitfulness.  "  1.  Those  places  and
persons  to  which  the  waters  of  the
Sanctuary  come,  or  coming  do  not
heal,  are  designed  to  barrenness  and
destruction  (ver.  11).  2.  True  Chris-
tians are  fruitful  (ver.  12).  3.  The
cause  of  fruitfulness  is  the  doctrine
and  grace  of  the  G<)s])el  (ver.  12).  4.
The  holy  examples  of  true  saints  are
medicinal  (ver.  12)." — GreenhUL

Ver.  12.  Never-ending  Spring.  "The
text  a  promise  and  picture  of  a  never-
fading  spring.  Goodness  and  spiritual
beauty  are  eternal.  1.  The  everlast-
ing youthfulness  of  a  Christly  souL
2.  The  everlasting  fruitfulness  of  a
Christly  souL  3.  The  explanation  of
the  glorious  phenomenon  is  in  this —
*  Because  their  waters  issued  out  of  the
sanctuary,*  A  sacred  place,  a  pure
sanctuary,  a  holy  fountain  where  the
soul  may  cleanse  itself  from  the  dust
and  stains  of  the  world.  Fruit  for  meat
and  leaves  for  medicine.  A  healthy
inner  life  ensures  a  fruitful  outer  life,
A  Christly  soul  is  always  young  and
beautiful." — Homiletic  Monthly.

—  "The  blessed  growth  close  by
the  river  of  life.  Evergreen  leaves,
yet  not  leaves  merely,  but  also  fruit  I
Thus  it  is  with  life  from  God's  Sanc-
tuary."— Lange.

487


CHAP.  XLVIL  MOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  Y:  EZEKIEL,


HOMILETIGS.

The  Inheritance  of  the  Goon,

(Vers.  13-23.)

I.  Is  secured  by  Divine  promise  (ver.  14).     That  promise  wag  declared  and

ratified  in  the  most  solemn  manner — "Concerning  the  which  I  lifted  up  Mine
hand."  Though  the  inheritance  is  not  in  possession,  and  all  appearances  are
against  the  realisation  of  the  promise,  yet  it  is  enough  that  the  promise  is
made.  Israel  is  kingless  and  portionless,  bereft  of  Temple  and  all  its  im-
posing ceremonials,  fretting  in  slavery  and  sorrow,  moaning  in  poverty  and
ruin,  and  with  no  prospect  of  immediate  deliverance,  yet  the  inheritance  is
sure,  for  God  hath  promised.  The  Divine  Word  is  more  valid  than  the  best-
authenticated  lesral  document.

o

II.  Is  explicitly  defined  (vers.  15-20).  To  show  that  it  is  no  baseless  hope,
no  Utopian  dream,  but  a  substantial,  blessed  reality.  Its  boundaries  are  clearly
described  and  exactly  measured  to  show  that  every  inch  of  its  frontiers  is
guarded  with  the  presence  and  power  of  Jehovah,  and  to  inspire  an  unwavering
assurance  of  its  realisation  and  enjoyment.  The  Lord  deals  in  neither  false
measures  nor  false  promises.

III.  Is  enjoyed  by  the  obedient  irrespective  of  nationality  (vers.  21-23).
The  distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile  is  abolished.  The  inheritance  is
made  free  for  all  nations.  Whoever  fears  God  and  works  righteousness  unites
himself  to  the  true  Israel,  the  perfect  Church  of  the  Messiah,  shall  enjoy  the
same  privileges  as  the  faithful  and  obedient  descendants  of  Abraham.  Tribes,
classes,  nations,  are  absorbed  and  lost  in  the  spiritual  unity  of  an  imperishable
brotherhood.     Christ  is  all  and  in  all.

Lessons. — 1.  The  Divine  promise  never  fails.  2.  The  faithful  servants  of  Jehovah
have  a  rich  inheritance  here  and  hereafter,  3  National  strifes  and  jealousies  will  he
unknown  in  the  heavenly  Kingdom,

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  13-23.  "A  people  settled  in  —  The  Heritage  of  the  Faithful.

the    inheritance  of  their  God  is  the  "  1.  Here   we   have  the    great  extent

proper  result  of  the  re-establishment  of  the  Church  under  Christ.     2.  The

of  the  covenant  and  the  renewal  of  state  of  Christians  in  the  Church  and

their  souls  after  its  principles  of  right-  all  their  spiritual  blessings  are  of  free

eousness.     There  is   no    more   reason  grace.     3.  The  one  and  same  inherit-

for  understanding  this  portion  accord-  ance    belongs    to    the    believing   Jew

ing   to    the    letter   than    those   which  and  Gentile." — Greenhill.
went  before.     The  whole  vision  is  of

a  piece — a  pictorial  representation  of  Vers.  13,  14.  The  Divine  Faithful-
the  future  things  of  God's  Kingdom  ness  — '' 1.  Is  not  iin[)aireil  by  the
under  the  image  of  the  past,  yet  so  lap-e  of  time,  or  by  the  fickleness  of
altered  and  adjusted  as  to  indicate  the  man.  2.  Is  solemnly  declared.  'Con-
vast  superiority  of  what  was  to  come  cerning  which  I  lifted  up  mine  hand.'
compared  with  what  hitherto  had  3.  Seen  in  the  kindness  shown  to
been." — Fairhairn.  succeeding  generations.  *  To  give  unto
4»6


nOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


CHAP,  XLVm.


your  fathers :  this  land  sliall  fall  unto
you  for  inheritance."  4.  Sliculd  elicit  an
exclusive  and  unwavering  confidence.

Ver,  13.  "  Who  can  define  the  boun-
daries of  the  Church,  especially  in  the
last  days?  But  as  here  the  boundaries
of  (Janaan  are  defined,  so  the  boundaries
of  the  Church  are  faith  and  life  in  the
Scriptures  of  the  apostles  and  prophets,
which  accordingly  no  one  is  to  overpass
(Gal.  vi.  16).  God  gives  to  His  children
very  differently;  from  him  to  whom  a
double  portion  has  been  given  a  corre-
sponding return  is  required." — Starch

Vers.  22,  23.  The  Impartiality  of
God — 1.  Seen  in  His  equitable  treat-


ment of  the  faithful  in  all  ages  and
nations.  2.  Is  continually  promoting
the  spiritual  unity  of  the  human  race.
3.  Will  be  terribly  evident  in  Hia
punishment  of  the  finally  impenitent.

Ver.  22.  "  It  is  not  birth,  but  the
new  birth,  that  makes  men  children  of
God.  Here  under  earthly  figures  the
Jerusalem  that  is  above  with  her  chil-
dren is  typified,  and  the  calling  of  the
Gentiles  from  east  and  west  and  the
utmost  bounds  of  the  earth  is  described.
God  here  opens  to  all  the  holy  gates
of  His  Church,  and  i)rescribes  to  the
Church  herself  the  commandment  of
meekness,  love,  and  brotherly  kind-
ness."— Lange,


The  Ideal  Allotment  of  the  Holy  Land.    (Chap,  xlviii.)


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  —  The
order  of  the  original  occupation  of
the  Holy  Land  by  the  tribes  under
Joshua  is  partly,  but  only  partly,
followed.  It  is  a  new  order  of  things,
and  its  ideal  character  is  evinced,  as
elsewhere,  by  exact  and  equal  mea-
surements. From  north  to  south
seven  tribes  succeed  each  other — Dan,
Asher,  Naphtali,  Manasseh,  Ephraim,
Keiihen,  Jiidah,  each  occupying  the
full  breadth  of  the  land  from  east  to
west.  Then  comes  a  portion  separated
as  an  offering  to  the  Lord,  into  (1)  a
northern  portion  for  the  Levites;  (2)
a  central  portion  for  the  priests  and
the  Temple  ;  (3)  a  southern  portion
for  the  city  and  those  who  serve  it.
These  three  form  a  square  which  does
not  occupy  the  whole  breadth  of  the
land,  but  is  flanked  on  either  side,
east  and  west,  by  portions  assigned  to
tlie  prince.  Then  follow,  south  of  the
city,  five  portions  for  the  five  remaining
tribes  —  Benjamin,  Simeon,  Issachar,
Z«'bulun,  and  Gad — similar  to  those
assigned  to  the  seven.  Tims  the
Levites,  the  Temj)le,  and  city  are
guarded  by  Judah  and  Benjamin,
the  two  tribes  who  had  through-
out preserved  their  allegiance  to  the
true  sovereignty  of  Jehovah,  and  thus
the    plan   expresses   the    presence   of


Jehovah  among  His  people,  summed
up  in  the  name  of  the  city  with  which
Ezekiel's  prophecy  closes,  "  The  Lord
is  there." — Speaker^ s  Commentary.

Ver.  1.  "A  portion  for  Dan."  Lite-
rally, Dan  one.  The  same  is  rej^eated
for  each  tribe,  the  usual  mode  in
Hebrew  of  exi)ressing  distribution  and
imjdying  equality  in  the  portions.  Dan,
as  morally  semi-heathen,  has  the  least
honourable  place  in  the  extreme  north.

Ver.  2.  "Asher."  No  one  of  note
in  this  tribe  is  mentioned  in  the  Old
Testament.  The  prophetess  Anna
belonged  to  it  (Luke  ii.  36).

Ver.  4,  "  A  portion  for  Manasseh."

The  intercourse  and  unity  between  the
two  and  a  half  tribes  east  of  the  Jordan
and  the  nine  and  a  half  west  of  it
had  been  kept  up  by  the  splitting  of
Manasseh,  causing  the  visits  of  kinsmen
one  to  the  other  from  both  sides  of  the
Jordan.  There  shall  be  no  need  for
this  in  the  new  order  of  things.

Ver.  5.  "A  portion  for  Ephraim."

This  tribe,  with  its  two  dependent
tribes,  Manasseh  and  Benjamin,  for
upwards  of  400  years  under  the  judges
held  the  pre-eminence.

469


CHAP.  XLVIII.


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,


Ver.  6.  "  A  portion  for  Reuben  " —

doomed  formerly  for  incest  and  in-
stability not  to  excel  (Gen.  xlix.  4).
No  distinguished  prophet,  priest,  or
king  came  from  this  tribe.  To  it
belonged  the  mutinous  Dathan  and
Abiram.  A  pastoral  and  Bedouin
character  marked  it  and  Gad  (Judges
V.  16).

Ver.  15.  **The  five  thousand  that
are  left."  riie  remainder  of  the  great
square  of  25,000  reeds  from  north  to
south.  "A  profane  place  for  the
city  "  —  not  strictly  sacred  as  the
sacerdotal  portions,  but  applied  to
secular  or  common  uses  :  so  chap.
xlii.  20.

Ver.  19.  "Out  of  all  the  tribes  of
Israel."  Formerly  the  citizens  of
Jerusalem  were  out  of  the  tribes  of
Benjamin  and  Judah.  Now  all  the
tribes  are  to  have  an  equal  part  in  it,
to  avoid  jealousies  (2  Sam.  xix.  43).

Ver.  23.  **  Benjamin  shall  have  a
portion."  This  tribe  alone  with  Judah
had  been  throujihout  loyal  to  the  house
of  David,  so  its  prowess  at  the  night
of  the  national  history  was  celebrated
as  well  as  in  the  morning.

Ver.  24.  ^'Simeon  a  portion."  Simeon


was  omitted  in  the  blessing  of  Moses
(Deut.  xxxiii.),  perhaps  because  of  the
Simeonite  prince  who  at  Baalpeor  led
the  Israelites  in  their  idolatries  with
Midian  (Num.  xxv.  14).

Ver.  25.  *'  Issachar  a  portion  " — its

ancient  portion  had  been  on  the  plain
of  Esdraelon.  Compared  (Gen.  xlix.
14)  to  "  a  strong  ass  crouching  between
two  burdens " — tribute  and  tillage  ;
never  meddling  with  wars  except  in
self-defence.

Ver.  31.  *'  The  gates  of  the  city."

The  twelves  gates  bear  the  names  of
the  twelve  tribes,  to  imply  that  all  are
regarded  as  having  an  interest  in  it.

Ver.  35.  "  The  Lord  is  there."    "  The

name  of  the  city  shall  be  no  longer
Jerusalem — The    vision   of  peace — but
Adonai-shama — The  Loi'd  is  there — be-
cause Jehovah  will  never  again  with-
draw from  it  as  He   once   withdrew,
but   will    hold  it   as    His    everlasting
possession." — Jerome.      Not   that   the
city  will  be  so  called  in  mere  name,
but  that  the  reality  will  be  best  ex
pressed  by  this  descriptive  title  (Jer
iii.  17,  xxxiii.  16 ;  Zech.  ii.  10 ;  Rev
xxi.  3,  xxii.  3).     A  prophetic  vision
fulfilled  in  Emmanuel,  God  with  uSy  who
tabernacled  among  men  (John  i  14).


EOMILETICS.


The  Earthly  Canaan  a  Type  of  the  Heavenly.

(Vers.  1-35.)

In  this  closing  chapter  we  have  a  condensed  summary  of  the  magnificent
vision  described  in  the  previous  chapters  with  such  fulness  and  exactitude.
Reviewing  the  gradual  development  of  the  j)rophecy,  Ezekiel  catches  up  its  chief
features  and  groups  them  in  a  pictorial  form  calculated  to  arrest  the  attention
and  keep  alive  the  hope  of  God's  people  through  the  dreary  years  that  followed.
The  lost  land  is  restored  and  repeopled ;  from  the  ruins  of  the  old  Jerusalem
rises  a  city  exceeding  in  vastness  and  splendour  the  colossal  buildings  of  anti-
quity ;  tlie  Temple  like  a  guardian  angel  occupies  a  lofty,  central  position,  round
which  the  current  of  city  life  and  worship  is  continually  circling,  and  from  that
Temple,  like  rays  of  golden  light,  the  glory  of  the  Divine  presence  is  spread
throughout  the  holy  and  happy  land.  The  prophetic  description  suggests  the
Earthly  Canaan  as  a  type  of  the  Heavenly,
490


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL.  OBAP.  TLTUL

I.  In  the  significant  position  occupied  by  the  Temple  of  Jehovah.  "  The
Sanctuary  in  the  midst"  (vers.  8,  10,  21).  To  the  pious  Jew  the  Temple  was
the  glory  of  Palestine,  the  all-prominent,  central  object,  towards  which  his  gaze
was  ever  directed,  and  wherever  he  prayed  his  face  was  reverently  turned  towards
the  holy  place.  In  the  midst  of  the  heavenly  Canaan  the  Temple  stands  con-
spicuous. Worship  is  the  delightful  employment  of  the  glorified,  and  the  very
essence  of  their  individual  bliss  (Rev.  v.  15).

II.  In  the  spectacle  it  presents  of  a  united  spiritual  brotherhood  (ver.  29).
The  land  was  divided  in  equal  portions  among  the  tribes,  and  a  holy  oblation
apportioned  for  the  Temple,  priests,  Levites,  prince,  and  people  (vers.  9-22).
Tliere  was  no  ground,  nor  was  there  any  disposition,  to  indulge  in  the  envyings
and  jealousies  that  had  vexed  aud  torn  asunder  the  different  tribes.

"  Antipathies  are  none.     In  the  heart
No  passion  touches  a  discordant  string,
But  all  is  harmony  and  love."

The  charm  of  heaven  is  its  inviolable  unity.  Each  heart  is  bound  together  by
the  cord  of  love,  and  the  union  is  cemented  and  strengthened  by  the  worship
and  service  in  which  all  have  a  common  interest.  The  unifying  power  is  ever
present  in  the  object  of  their  constant  praise.  There  the  prayer  of  Jesus  has  its
most  sublime  realisation  (John  xvii.  21-23).

III.  In  the  honourable  position  assigned  to  those  who  have  been  conspicuous
for  fidelity.  The  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  who  remained  faithful  to
Jehovah  wlien  all  the  rest  were  renegade,  have  a  place  of  honour  in  close
proximity  to  the  holiest — Judah  on  the  north  and  Benjamin  on  the  south  of
the  portion  of  land  specially  dedicated  to  the  Lord  (vers.  7,  23).  The  priests,
the  sons  of  Zadok,  who  had  kept  the  charge  while  the  Levites  went  astray,  are
also  generously  remembered  in  the  new  order  of  things  (ver.  11).  Man  loses
nothing  by  making  a  resolute  stand  for  truth  and  righteousness.  He  may  sink
in  the  estimation  of  the  temporising  and  may  suffer  for  his  principles  ;  but  it  is
more  disastrous  to  sink  in  his  own  estimation,  and  still  more  in  the  estimation
of  God  :  that  would  be  to  entail  sufferinii;  from  which  there  is  no  relief.  The
faithful  champion  for  the  truth  shall  have  victory  in  this  life  and  distinguished
reward  in  the  next  (Rev.  iii.  12  ;  vii.  14-17).

IV.  In  being  presided  over  by  the  manifested  glory  of  the  Divine  Presenca

"The  Lord  is  there  "  (ver.  35).  To  the  true  Israelite  the  Temple  of  the  earthly
Canaan  was  a  synonym  for  the  Divine  presence  :  there  He  dwelt,  there  He
revealed  His  glory  from  between  the  cherubim,  and  thence  He  declared  His
law  and  governed  His  people.  The  light,  the  glory,  the  joy  of  heaven  is  the
presence  of  the  Divine  King  robed  in  peerless  majesty  and  ever  displaying  the
endless  manifoldness  of  His  matchless  character.  Its  beauty,  its  splendour,  its
order,  its  purity,  its  ecstasy,  are  all  summed  up  in  the  exulting  fact — "  The  Lord
is  there  /  "

Lessons. — 1.  We  learn  that  things  earthly  are  the  patterns  of  the  heavenly.  2.  In
our  darkest  experiences  we  are  cheered  with  the  brightest  visions  of  the  future.  3.  2'he
supreme  glory  of  heaven  is  a  sight  of  the  unveiled  presence  of  Jehovah,


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES.

Vers.  1-7.  "The  places  of  more  or      regulated  by  the  degree  of  faithfulness
less  honour  assigned  to  each  tribe  are      to   the  Lord   and  His   ordinances  by

491


CTTAP.  XLVm.


EOMILETTC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


which  the  tribes  severally  were  char-
acterised. Thus  Judah  and  Benjamin,
the  tribes  which  adhered  longest  to
the  ordinances  of  the  Temple  and  to
the  house  of  David  when  the  rest
apostatised,  shall  hold  the  most  hon-
ourable positions.  Dan,  on  the  con-
trary, is  to  have  the  least  honourable
place  at  the  extreme  north,  as  having
been  so  early  as  the  times  of  the  Judges
in  a  great  degreee  demoralised  and
heathenised.  So  in  respect  to  the
degrees  of  glory  which  await  all  the
saints  in  the  coming  Kingdom  of  God,
the  measure  of  honour  will  be  regulated
by  the  measure  of  faithfulness.  Herein
believers  have  the  strongest  incentive
not  merely  to  work,  but  to  abound
in  the  work  of  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  xv.
b%y—Fausset

Vers.  8,  10,  21.  "The  Sanctuary
in  the  midst."  The  Centrality  of  the
Church  of  God — 1.  A  special  mark  of
the  Divine  honour  and  affection.  2.
Indicates  its  supreme  importance  to  the
universe.  3.  The  choicest  blessings
emanate  from  and  converge  towards
it.  4.  It  is  the  seat  of  Divine  authority
and  power.

Ver.  8.  "  Thy  heart  is  in  thy  midst ;
take  heed  to  whom  it  belongs  :  is  it  a
temple  of  God  in  which  His  Spirit
dwells,  or  is  it  a  habitation  of  unclean
spirits  ?  God  has  an  eternal  right  to
the  centre  of  man.  God  is  the  centre
of  the  spirit-world,  and  in  Him  every-
thing lives  and  moves." — Lange.

Vers.  10-14.  God's  care  for  His
Servants.  1.  They  shall  have  ample
provision  for  all  their  needs  (ver.  10).
2.  He  will  specially  reward  those  who
have  been  faithful  to  Him  in  times  of
trial  (vers.  11,  12).  3.  Their  posses-
sions shall  be  permanent  and  secure
(ver.  14).

Ver.  11.  "To  err  with  the  erring
excuses  no  one  ;  the  way  is  broad,  not
for  us  to  walk  on  it,  but  to  call  atten-
tion to  the  narrow  path  of  life." — Starch,

Ver.  13.  "The  priests  had  their  lot
492


near  the  Sanctuary,  and  the  Levitei
had  theirs  in  the  centre  of  the  tribes,
that  they  might  be  ready  for  the  ser-
vice of  God  and  for  the  instruction  of
the  people.  Hence  the  Lord,  having
made  the  priests  His  first  care,  expects
that  they  should  make  the  souls  of  the
people  their  sole  concern." — Sutcliffe.

Vers.  15-20,  30-35.  A  Happy
City — 1.  Occupying  a  spacious  area.
2.  Commanding  vast  temporal  re-
sources. 3.  Enjoying  unexceptionable
religious  privileges.  4.  Inhabited  by
a  devout  and  contented  people.  5.
Providing  ample  facilities  for  ingress
and  egress.  6.  A  model  of  order,  good
government,  unity,  and  peace.

Vers.  15-20.  "The  city  was  ample
and  glorious,  being  about  nine  miles
from  gate  to  gate  and  thirty-six  miles
in  circumference.  The  unbelief  of  the
Jews  in  our  Lord's  time  was  fostered
by  a  literal  interpretation  of  the  pro-
phecies which,  under  splendid  figures
taken  from  earthly  scenes,  shadowed
forth  that  superior  and  spiritual  empire
which  He  came  to  establish,  and  their
carnal  hopes  and  prospects  of  temporal
dominion  and  glory  led  to  the  rejection
of  the  true  Messiah.  Nor  is  it  much
less  delusive  to  expect  a  literal  fulfil-
ment of  the  predictions  we  have  been
contemplating,  which  would  in  effect
be  going  back  to  that  shadowy  dis-
pensation which  the  Gospel  is  intended
to  supersede,  instead  of  advancing  to
that  brighter  and  more  spiritual  glory
to  be  revealed  in  the  latter  day,  and
would,  instead  of  converting  Jews  to
Christianity,  bring  back  the  Christian
Church  to  a  state  of  Judaism.'* — SiU-
cliffe.

Ver.  18.  "  Behold  here  the  great
goodness  of  God,  who  thinks  of  even
the  labourers  in  the  city  and  cares  for
them.  But  every  Christian  ought  to
to  be  an  upright  labourer,  as  every
stone,  wherever  it  is  placed,  belongs
to  the  building  and  contributes  to  its
erection." — Lange.

Ver.  19.  Holy  Citizena     "  1.  The


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.


CHAP.  XT.vtn.


citizens  are  holy  men,  not  common,
profane  men :  Israelites,  not  Gibeonites.
2.  They  are  men  chosen  not  out  of
one,  but  out  of  every  tribe.  3.  They
are  to  be  serviceable — to  improve  their
talents  for  the  good  of  the  city." —
Greenhill.

Ver.  20.  **  All  our  dealings  must  be
square,  or  else  we  are  not  of  the  holy
portion,  of  the  New  Jerusalem." —
Trapp.

Vers.  23-34.  "As  in  the  great
family  of  man  not  one  face  answers
precisely  to  another,  but  each  is  dis-
tinguished by  some  peculiarity,  so  it  is
amongst  the  children  of  God  :  there-
fore, though  the  sons  of  Israel  were  so
many,  they  had  all  their  distinguishing
names,  to  which  doubtless  the  searcher
of  their  hearts  and  the  orderer  of  their
lives  saw  something  corresponding  in
their  character  and  history.  Here  also
we  see  that,  whatever  our  place  may  be,
it  is  ordered  for  us  by  God,  as  the  lots
of  the  tribes  in  the  earth  ;  that,  how-
ever we  may  enter  into  the  kingdom
of  heaven,  the  peculiarity  of  our  char-
acter shall  be  regarded  there,  seeing
the  names  of  its  gates  are  not  one  but
many  ;  that,  whatever  the  history  of
our  preparation  for  it  be,  suitable
character  of  glory  is  provided  for  us
there,  since  its  gates  open  upon  every
quarter  of  the  earth." — M^Farlan.

Ver.  23.  "  Let  every  man  be  content
with  the  portion  of  temporal  goods
which  he  possesses,  for  the  Lord  has
apportioned  it  (Matt.  xx.  14)." — Lange.

Vers.  30-35.  The  City  of  God— 1.
Is  well  and  strongly  founded.  2.  Is
comely  and  beautiful.  3.  Has  access
to  it  from  all  parts.  4.  Its  happiness
from  the  Lord's  inhabiting  it.

—  "  The  names  of  the  twelve  tribes
are  to  be  severally  connected  with  the
twelve  gates  of  the  city,  for  all  alike
shall  have  an  interest  in  it  in  their
respective  places  and  situations.  So
the  very  humblest  believer  has  his  due
place  appointed  to  him  in  the  heavenly
citv.     That  shall  be  a  blessed  change


from  the  present  scene  of  disorder  and
confusion  to  a  world  wherein  all  be-
neath God,  from  the  highest  to  the
lowest,  know  and  keep  their  y)lace  in
the  most  perfect  harmony,  love,  and
blessedness." — Fausset.

Ver.  35.  "  The  glory  and  joy  of
heaven  shall  not  be  so  much  the  ab-
sence of  all  present  woes  and  the  pre-
sence of  all  the  other  good  things
which  God  shall  bestow,  as  it  shall
consist  in  this  :  the  Lord  Himself  shall
be  there  as  the  everlasting  portion,  joy,
and  light  of  His  people." — Fausset.

—  "That  such  scenes  should  have
been  described  with  such  assured  confi-
dence and  at  a  time  so  deeply  over-
spread with  gloom,  was  indeed  an
ennobling  triumph  of  faith  over  sight.
It  gave  a  most  illustrious  proof  of  the
height  in  s])iritnal  discernment  and
far-seeing  insight  into  the  purposes  of
Heaven,  which  is  sometimes  imparted
in  the  hour  of  greatest  need,  especially
to  the  more  select  instruments  of  the
Spirit's  working.  Here  the  heart  of
faith  is  taught  never  to  despair,  even
in  the  darkest  seasons.  And  when  it
is  seen  how  much  of  the  scheme  de-
lineated in  the  prophetic  vision  has
already  been  accomplished,  should  not
believers  feel  encouraged  to  look  and
strive  for  its  complete  realisation?" —
Fairhairn.

—  "  Here  endeth  this  remarkable
vision,  which,  though  greatly  mystified
by  many  of  the  attempts  to  ex|)Iain  it,
stands  forth  to  view  on  the  sacred
page  as  a  noble  specimen  of  Divine
Wisdom,  admirably  calculated  to  in-
spire the  captive  exiles  in  Babylonia
with  the  cheering  hope  of  their  re-
settlement in  their  own  land  and  the
restoration  of  their  beloved  metropolis
and  Temple.  In  contemplating  it,  the
trulyspiritually-minded  Christian,  with
his  thoughts  raised  above  all  earthly
localities,  will  not  perplex  himself
with  subtle  and  trifling  inquiries,  but
grasp  the  grand  ideas  which  the  vision
suggests,  and  anticipate  for  himself  in
a  future  world  a  realisation  of  what
was  only  dimly  shadowed  forth  by  that
which  is  here  described  " — Hevderson.

493


cflAP.  XLViii.  irOMTLETIC  COMMENT  A  RY .  EZEKIEL


EOMILETICS.
Jehovah-Shammah  :  the  City  of  the  Divine  Presence,

(Ver.  35.)

I.  An  abode  of  impregnable  safety.  "  The  Lord  is  there."  He  will  be
always  tliere,  never  to  desert  it  as  He  did  the  earthly  Temple  because  of  the
sins  of  His  people.  It  is  sustained  and  defended  at  every  point  by  His  in-
vincible power.  The  enemy  assails  in  vain  ;  no  weapon  can  pierce  the  invul-
nerable defence.  Evil  cannot  invade  its  holy  precincts.  Its  inhabitants  are  for
ever  freed  from  the  struggles  and  warfare  with  sin  with  which  their  earthly
life  has  been  harassed.  The  Divine  Ruler  governs  with  irresistible  and  loving
authority,  and  the  order  and  peace  of  the  city  remain  for  ever  unbroken.

II.  An  abode  of  unfading  beauty  and  splendour.  *'  The  Lord  is  there."  The
city  shines  with  the  reflected  glory  of  His  matchless  perfections,  and  every  part
of  the  edifice  is  moulded  into  indescribable  beauty  and  ti[)ped  with  splendour.
Perfection  is  the  highest  beauty.  The  Lord  beautifies  everything  He  touches.
There  is  not  a  flower  tliat  blooms,  a  bird  that  flies,  or  a  star  that  glitters  but
is  adorned  in  every  part  of  its  wondrous  structure  with  the  reflected  beauty
of  the  Divine  Artist.  What,  then,  must  be  the  inimitable  beauty  of  the  soul
which,  created  in  the  Divine  image,  redeemed  and  transfij^ured  by  Divine  love,
is  now  admitted  a  citizen  of  the  heavenly  commonwealth,  to  bask  for  ever  in
the  glory  of  the  Divine  presence  ]

III.  An  abode  of  endlessly  satisfying  joy.  "The  Lord  is  there."  In  His
presence  is  fulness  of  joy  (Ps.  xvi.  11).  Tlie  withdrawal  of  that  presence  is
the  soul's  acutest  misery,  and  is  a  catastrophe  to  be  constantly  deprecated
(Ps.  li.  11).  The  joy  of  earth  is  mingled  with  disappointment  and  distress;
but  in  the  city  of  the  Divine  presence  no  sorrow  wrings  the  heart  with
anguish  or  brims  the  eyes  with  tears.  The  soul  is  satisfied  for  ever  with  the
raptures  of  the  ever-blessed  God.

"  Let  earth  repent,  and  hell  despair,
This  City  has  a  sure  defence  :
Her  name  is  called  '  The  Lord  is  there,*

And  who  has  power  to  drive  Him  thence  I " — Cowpetm

Reflected  Rays  from  the  Best  Literary  Lights  on  the  Significance

OF  Ezekiel\s  Temple.

"The  whole  wondrous  vision  is  only  the  picture  of  a  condition  of  surpassing
glory,  expressed  in  imagery  peculiar  to  the  prophet.  No  one  thinks  of  taking
the  almost  parallel  visions  of  St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse  as  literal  descriptions.
We  do  not  expect  to  see  the  holy  city,  the  New  Jerusalem,  actually  coming
down  from  God,  out  of  heaven,  nor  that  it  will  be  literally  four-square,  with
walls  and  gates  like  an  ancient  town,  nor  that  the  walls  will  be  over  200
feet  high,  or  the  city  itself  1600  miles  square,  or  that  its  buildings  and  spires
will  rise  1500  miles  into  the  air  ;  and  yet  it  must  be  done,  if  the  description  is
to  be  understood  otherwiRe  than  figuratively.  To  Ezekiel  and  St.  John  alike,
the  only  aim  was  to  convey  the  highest  conception  of  magnificence  as  each
imagined  it  most  vividly  presented.  Living  in  the  age  of  Rome  and  great
provincial   cities,  St.  John  thinks  of  a  New  Jerusalem  such  as  he  describes,

494


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKlEt,  cjbap.  xLtlii.


imhued  with  a  strongly  Jewish  and  priestly  bias,  Ezekiel  sees  a  glorious
Temple  rise  before  him,  and  all  the  details  of  a  re-establishment  of  the
Theocracy  in  Palestine,  with  transcendent  splendour.  To  the  mind  of  St.
John,  the  Temple  had  ceased  to  be  a  central  religious  thought;  in  that  of
Ezekiel,  the  priest,  it  was  supreme.  In  both,  the  inspired  writer  is  left  free  to
express  the  surpassing  glory  of  the  Messianic  age  in  the  only  way  possible  to
his  modes  of  thought  and  the  ideas  of  his  age." — Geikie^s  Hours  with  the  BihU.

"It  was  probably  a  Jubilee  year  when  this  vision  was  seen.  The  Temple
and  city  were  in  ruins,  but  God  was  pleased  in  this  way  to  revive  the  hopes
of  His  people.

*'Grotius  and  others  have  conceived  that  Ezekiel  was  simply  guided  to  leave
behind  patterns  on  the  basis  of  which  the  Temple  should  in  after-days  be
rebuilt  and  its  services  restored.  But  an  examination  of  the  vision  will  show
the  insufficiency  of  this  explanation.  Not  only  was  this  plan  never  carried
out,  but  it  was,  as  Ezekiel  must  have  known,  incapable  of  execution.  The
physical  features  of  the  land  would  not  admit  of  the  separation  of  precincts  a
mile  square,  surrounded  by  a  territory  sixteen  miles  by  forty-eight.  The  river,
though  connected  with  the  stream  brought  by  conduit-pipes  into  the  actual
Temple,  soon  passes  into  a  condition  wholly  ideal,  and  the  equal  apportionment
of  the  land  to  each  of  the  twelve  tribes  is  compatible  neither  with  history  nor
geography.  That  the  Temple  and  its  services  were  symbolical  of  the  Sacrifice
nnd  of  the  Priesthood  of  Christ  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  sufficiently  proves.
Tlie  assemblage  of  the  Christian  Church  around  Christ  as  the  central  object  of
worship  was  that  of  which  the  assemblage  of  the  people  around  the  Temple
was  the  type  and  representative ;  and  it  is  more  simple  to  understand  the  vision
as  portraying  immediately  the  Clmrch  of  Christ,  than  to  refer  to  such  a  partial
fulfilment  as  would  give  to  the  details  an  unreality  discouraging  to  such  as
were  looking  to  an  actual  rebuilding.  But  as  the  Jews  already  knew  some-
thing of  the  typical  character  of  the  Temple  services,  this  vision  was  intended
to  teacli  them  more,  and  the  very  impossibility  of  realising  its  form  was  to
draw  them  to  the  substance,  and  to  give  them  prospects  looking  beyond  any
material  reconstruction,  just  as  Haggai  consoled  them  for  their  disappointment
at  the  erection  of  the  second  Temple  by  promises  of  spiritual  glory.

"  Others  have  looked  upon  the  vision  as  purely  allegorical,  and  disregarding
its  symbolical  character,  have  interpreted  it  according  to  mere  fancy.  But
many  of  the  details  had  an  actual  existence  in  the  original  Temple,  and  some
were  exactly  repeated,  as  though  they  were  essential  and  not  accidental.

"If  we  are  surprised  at  the  minuteness  of  the  details,  we  must  remember
that  it  is  of  the  essence  of  a  vision  that  the  seer  has  before  liim  every  line,  as
in  a  carefully  drawn  picture.  In  verbal  illustration  much  is  left  undescribed,
and  the  figures  employed  are  often  not  carried  out;  but  in  a  vision  the  seer  at
least  has  all  before  him,  and  it  is  the  manner  of  Ezekiel  to  describe  all  he
sees,  and  so  to  put  his  reader  in  the  same  position  as  himself.  This  may
account  for  the  insertion  of  details  unimportant  in  themselves ;  but  the  num-
bers and  figures  em[>loyed  are  not  without  their  meaning.  iJahr  has,  in  an
elaborate  treatise,  shown  that  among  the  Eastern  nations  numbers  and  figures
have  ever  had  a  highly  symbolical  character,  and  has  applied  such  symbolism
to  the  details  of  the  Tabernacle  and  of  the  Temple.  Without  entering  into
particulars,  we  may  remark  that  tin;  symbolical  numbers  of  the  Temple  of
Solomon  were  repeated  in  the  vision  of  Ezekiel,  which  reproduces  with  scrupu-
lous accuracy  the  leading  dimensions  of  the  most  holy  part  of  the  edifice,  and,
♦iven  where  there  are  variations,  employs  constantly  the  same  fundamental
uumbers  and  figures.  Among  the  Hebrews  the  perfect  figure  was  the  square
cr  the  cube,  and  harmony  was  thought  to  bo  attained  by  exact  equality,  or

495


CHAP.  xtrm.  BOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


by  the  repetition  of  like  dimensions.  Thus  in  the  ideal  Temple,  as  in  the
real,  we  find  the  fundamental  measure  of  100  cubits  square,  which  is  main-
tained in  the  Temple-court  and  in  the  court  of  sacrifice.

**The  vision  is  intended  to  (depict  tlie  perpetual  worship  of  the  God  of  heaven
in  the  Kingdom  of  Christ.  To  the  mind  of  an  Israelite  the  proper  figure  to
represent  this  would  be  the  Temple  and  its  services,  with  people,  priest,  and
prince  each  doing  their  fitting  part.

"  In  other  parts  of  this  book  Ezekiel  points  forward  to  the  spiritual  teaching
of  the  Gospel ;  here  to  a  people  mourning  over  a  ruined  Temple,  scattered
priesthood,  and  a  captive  king,  the  seer  sets  forth  in  visions  that  which  the
last  of  tlie  prophets  foretold  in  words  (Mai.  i.  11).  This  will  also  account  for
the  absence  of  all  mention  of  the  high  priest  and  his  office.  In  the  old  dis-
pensation the  chief  function  of  the  high  priest  was  the  performance  of  the  great
act  which  typified  the  atonement  wrought  by  the  sacrifice  and  death  of  Christ
for  the  sins  of  the  world.  This  atone  nent  was  effected  once  for  all  u[)on  the
Cross,  and  in  the  new  dispensation  Christ  appears  in  the  midst  of  His  people
as  their  Prince  and  Head,  leading  and  presenting  their  prayers  and  praises
day  by  day  to  His  Father  in  heaven.

"  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  vision  represents  the  coming  dispensation  as  a
kingdom,  and  in  this  respect  has  especial  reference  to  the  rule  of  Messiah,
foretold  under  the  name  of  David.  We  find  that  Solomon  took  a  special  part
in  the  Temple-services  as  king,  and  here  there  are  new  and  remarkable  pro-
visions for  the  prince ;  and  thus  is  brought  forth,  as  a  leading  feature  in  the
vision,  the  figure  of  a  king  reigning  in  righteousness,  the  representative  of
Jehovah  upon  earth." — S^eakefs  Commentary.

"  The  description  of  the  Temple  does  not  correspond  with  the  plan  of  the
Tabernacle,  or  that  of  the  first  Temple.  These  were  real  buildings,  and  were
erected  according  to  the  patterns  shown  by  God  Himself  to  Moses  and  to
David ;  but  this  is  an  ideal  communicated,  not  to  a  leader  or  king  in  order
to  be  actually  carried  out,  but  to  a  seer,  who  wrote  down  his  vision  for  the
consolation  of  the  captives  of  Babylon.  It  cannot  even  have  been  meant  that
this  ideal  structure  should  have  been  built  by  the  Jews  after  the  return  from
captivity,  or  at  any  subsequent  period.  The  dimensions  of  the  Temple,  as
given  in  the  vision,  are  greater  than  the  entire  ancient  city  of  Jerusalem.
The  dimensions  assigned  to  the  city  are  as  great  as  the  whole  of  Palestine
between  the  Jordan  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  could  not  be  placed  on
a  square  centring  at  Mount  Zion  without  covering  part  of  that  sea.  Plainly
the  Temple  is  ideal,  and  so  is  the  city.  The  vision  was  given  to  keep  before
the  minds  of  the  exiles  the  duty  of  rebuilding  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple  on
their  restoration  to  their  own  land.  The  stupendous  scale  of  the  vision  was,
we  presume,  intended  to  project  the  thoughts  of  devout  readers  into  far-distant
times — not  the  times  of  the  present  Church  of  God,  but  those  of  the  future
glory  and  blessing  on  the  earth,  centring  at  Zion  and  Jerusalem,  when  the
Lord  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth,  and  the  Holy  City  shall  be  named
Jehovah-Shammah,  *  The  Lord  is  there.' " — Donald  Fraser,  D,D,

"  That  there  be  things  hard  to  be  understood  in  the  Sacred  Scriptures  these
nine  last  chapters,  as  well  as  the  beginning  of  Ezekiel,  do  abundantly  testify  ;
and  such  difficult  things  are  in  these  last  that  they  have  made  many  men  of  the
greatest  parts  to  tremble  at  the  thought  of  interpreting  them.  The  Rabbins
say  that  the  first  of  Ezekiel  and  these  last  chapters  are  inexplicable  secrets,
and  understood  by  none,  and  therefore  forbid  their  disciples  to  read  them ;
adding,  when  Elias  sliall  come  he  will  explain  all  things.  Jerome,  that  great
light  in  his  time,  professes  his  trepidation  hereat,  that  he  did  knock  at  a  closed

496


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL  chap.  XLVm.


door.  Gregory  the  Great,  when  he  went  about  this  work,  said,  *  We  pursue  a
midnight  journey.'  Maldonate  aflBrms  that  this  last  prophecy  of  Ezekiel  is  so
difficult  and  dark  that  it  appears  scarcely  possible  to  be  understood.  CEcolam-
padius  tells  us  that  in  chapter  xlii.  there  is  the  grand  difficulty  which  ancient
expositors  understood  not ;  and  he  brings  in  Rabbi  Solomon,  who  wrote  upon
the  whole  Talmud,  saying  that  he  thinks  there  is  not  anything  extant  which
aids  the  understanding  of  it ;  and  professes  that  neither  by  his  own  study,  aid
of  ministers,  nor  by  his  own  reading,  he  attained  any  help  in  understanding  the
meaning  of  this  building,  but  only  what  he  had  from  heaven  :  and  of  himself  he
saith,  chap,  xlv.,  *  In  this  passage,  above  all  others,  I  feel  the  weakness  of  my
own  understanding,  yet  silently  I  adore  its  mysteries.  It  is  good  to  tremble
at  the  Word  of  God,  both  what  we  understand  and  what  we  understand  not ;  for
all  is  of  equal  authority,  and  to  him  that  trembles  thereat  the  Lord  looketh,
and  will  let  in  light.  The  vision  is  dark,  but  God  dwells  in  darkness ;  the
Temple  and  city  are  dark,  but  Jehovah-Shammah,  *  The  Lord  is  there,'  whom
we  most  humbly  desire  to  let  out  some  beams  of  light,  whereby  we  may  come
to  understand  something  of  the  incredible  sweetness  of  these  dark  and  deep
things.

"This  vision,  therefore,  points  out  the  introduction  of  a  better  hope,  viz.,  the
Church  of  Christ  under  the  GospeL  A.  Lapide  tells  us  that  many  Eabbins  and
Jews  refer  this  Temple  and  city  to  the  Messiah,  expecting  that  He  should  build
them  ;  and  because  this  third  Temple  and  new  city  are  not  yet  built  tliey  think
tbe  Messiah  is  not  yet  come.  That  which  the  vision  doth  chiefly  hold  out  unto
us  is,  the  building  of  the  Christian  Temple,  with  the  worship  thereof,  under
Jewish  expressions  which  began  to  be  accomplished  in  the  apostles' days.  And
that  the  spiritual  Temple,  consisting  of  believing  Jews  and  Gentiles,  is  chiefly
intended  we  may  see  from  that  correspondency  between  Ezekiel  and  John  in
his  Gospel  and  Revelation." — GreenhilL

"  The  import  of  the  vision  in  the  main  is  this  :  that  God  would  in  due  time
accomplish  the  restoration  of  His  exiled  people  to  the  land  of  their  fathers,
effect  the  reconstruction  of  their  ruined  Temple  and  reorganisation  of  its
religious  services,  and  bless  them  with  manifest  tokens  of  His  favour.  At  the
time  it  was  granted,  the  Hebrews  were  in  a  state  of  the  lowest  depression  in
Babylon.

"  Fourteen  years  had  elapsed  since  the  destruction  of  their  sacred  edifice,
and  nothing  could  have  been  better  calculated  to  revive  their  drooping  hopes,
reinvigorate  their  confidence  in  their  Covenant-God,  and  encourage  them  to
return  to  Palestine  when  the  hour  of  their  liberation  should  arrive,  than  the
brilliant  prospect  of  the  restoration  of  their  civil  and  religious  privileges,  which
the  prophet  here  holds  out  to  their  view.

"  Let  now  any  reader  of  ordinary  intelligence  turn  up  the  description  of  the
vision,  and  let  him  be  asked  what  is  the  impression  which  it  naturally  makes
U})on  him,  and  whicii  he  finds  it  impossible  to  dismiss  from  his  mind,  and  he
will  candidly  own  that  it  is  that  of  a  literal  Temple.  With  respect  to  the
waters,  chap,  xlvii.,  it  is  altogether  different.  Here  there  was  nothing  left  for
the  Jews  to  do  in  bringing  about  the  realisation  of  the  vision.  Having  left  the
Temple,  the  seat  of  the  Divine  residence,  and  the  source  whence  blessings  were
to  flow  to  the  restored  Hebrew  nation,  the  prophet  is  carried  in  vision  south-
wards into  the  regions  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  had  been  noted  for  everything
that  was  forbidden  and  noxious  in  its  aspect — the  very  embodiment  of  barrenness
and  desolation.  These  were  now  to  be  converted  into  fertility  and  beauty.  As
in  the  previous  condition  they  were  strikingly  symbolical  of  the  spiritually
unproductive  and  abhorrent  character  of  idolatrous  Israel,  so  they  were  now  to
serve  as  images  of  the  renewed  state  of  things  when  God  should  bring  back  Hif


OHAP.  XLVUI.  HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.


people,  and,  according  to  His  promises,  bless  them  by  couferring  upon  them
abundantly  the  rich  tokens  of  His  regard.  By  the  copious  effusions  of  the
influences  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  He  would  restore  His  Church  to  spiritual  life,  and
lender  ^er  instrumental  in  diffusing  blessings  to  the  world  around.

"The  only  apparently  plausible  objection  that  can  be  taken  to  the  literal
interpretation  of  the  Temple  is  founded  on  the  dimensions  assigned  to  it.
It  remains,  however,  to  be  settled  whether  reeds  be  the  measure  intended,
and  whether  the  language  be  not  susceptible  of  another  construction.  Nor  is
there  any  inconsistency  in  interpreting  one  part  of  the  vision  literally  and  the
other  symbolically.  The  cases  are  perfectly  different.  In  the  one  a  literal
Temple  was  required  to  meet  the  circumstances  of  the  exiled  Hebrews ;  in  the
other,  though  outwardly  restored,  the  Temple  and  Temple-worship  would  still
have  left  them  in  a  state  of  spiritual  destitution,  if  they  had  not  received  the
blessing  from  on  high.  The  rich  and  abundant  communication  of  this  blessing
we  conceive  to  be  beautifully  set  forth  under  the  image  of  a  river  issuing  forth
from  the  Divine  presence  in  the  new  Temple,  and,  increasing  as  it  flows  in
tlie  direction  of  the  Dead  Sea,  spreading  life  and  fertility  wherever  it  comes."
— E,  Render soUy  D.D,

"If  any  one  will  take  up  the  full  circuit  of  the  wall  that  encompassed  the
holy  ground,  according  to  our  English  measure  it  will  amount  to  half  a  mile
and  about  one  hundred  and  sixty-six  yards.  And  whosoever,  likewise,  will
measure  the  square  of  Ezekiel  (chap.  xlii.  20),  he  will  find  it  six  times  as  large
as  this  (chap.  xL  5),  the  whole  amounting  to  three  miles  and  a  half  and  about
one  hundred  and  forty  yards — a  compass  incomparably  larger  than  Mount
Moriah  divers  times  over;  and  by  this  very  thing  is  shown  that  that  is
spiritually  and  mystically  to  be  understood.

"  The  description  of  the  Temple  and  city  that  he  hath  given  in  the  end  of  his
book,  as  it  was  a  prediction  of  some  good  to  come,  so  was  that  prediction  true,
thus  far  according  to  the  very  letter — namely,  that  there  should  be  a  Temple
and  a  city  newly  built ;  and  so  it  was  a  promise  and  a  comfort  to  the  people  then
in  captivity  of  their  restoring  again  to  their  own  land,  and  their  enjoying
Jerusalem  and  the  Temple  again  as  they  had  done  in  former  time  before  their
removing  and  captivating  out  of  their  own  country.  But  as  for  a  literal
respondency  of  that  city  and  Temple  to  all  the  particulars  of  his  description,
it  is  so  far  from  it  that  his  temple  is  delineated  larger  than  all  the  earthly
Jerusalem,  larger  than  all  the  land  of  Canaan.  And,  thereby,  the  scope  of
the  Holy  Ghost  in  that  ichnography  (ground-plot)  is  clearly  held  out  to  be,
to  signify  the  great  enlarging  of  the  spiritual  Jerusalem  and  Temple,  the  Church
under  the  Gospel,  and  the  spiritual  beauty  and  glory  of  it,  as  well  as  to  certify
cai)tived  Israel  of  hopes  of  an  earthly  city  and  Temple  to  be  rebuilt ;  which
came  to  pass  upon  their  return  under  Cyrus." — lAgJitfoot,

"  The  general  scope  of  the  vision  may  be  twofold.  1.  To  assure  the  captives
that  they  should  not  only  return  to  their  own  land  and  be  settled  there,  which
had  been  often  promised  in  the  foregoing  chapters,  but  that  they  should  have,
and  therefore  ought  to  be  encouraged  to  build,  another  Temple,  which  God
would  own,  and  where  He  would  meet  and  bless  them ;  that  the  ordinances  of
their  worship  should  be  revived,  and  the  sacred  priesthood  should  there  attend ;
and  though  they  should  not  have  a  king  to  live  in  such  splendour  as  formerly,
yet  they  should  have  a  prince  or  ruler  that  should  countenance  the  Word  of
God  among  them,  and  should  himself  be  an  example  of  a  diligent  attendance
upon  it ;  and  that  prince,  priests,  and  people  should  have  a  very  comfortable
settlement  in  their  own  land.  2.  To  direct  them  to  look  further  than  all  this,
and  to  expect  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  who  had  before  been  prophesied  of
^98


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  XLVin.

under  the  name  of  David  (the  man  that  projected  the  building  of  tlie  first
Temi)le),  and  who  should  set  up  a  spiritual  Temple,  even  the  Gospel  Church,
the  glory  of  which  should  far  exceed  that  of  Solomon's  Temple,  and  which
should  continue  to  the  end  of  tirno.  And  the  Gospel  Temple,  erected  by
Christ  and  His  apostles,  was  so  closely  connected  with  the  second  material
Temple,  and  was  erected  so  carefully  just  at  the  time  when  that  Temple  fell
into  decay,  being  designed  to  receive  its  glories  when  it  resigned  them,  that  it
was  proper  enough  that  they  should  both  be  referred  to  in  one  and  the  same
vision;  which  vision,  under  the  type  and  figure  of  a  Temple  and  altar,  priests
and  sacrifices,  foreshowed  the  spiritual  worship  that  should  be  performed  in
Gospel  times,  and  that  worship  perfected  at  last  in  the  kingdom  of  glory,  in
which,  doubtless,  these  visions  will  have  their  full  accom))lishment ;  if  not,  as
some  think,  in  a  glorious  and  happy  state  of  the  Gospel  Church  to  take  place
on  earth  in  latter  days." — Benson,

"It  is  a  great  thought  which  presents  itself  unadorned  to  our  view  in  tl  i
prophetico-symbolic  Temple:  God  henceforth  dwells  in  perfect  peace,  revealing
Himself  in  the  unbounded  fulness  of  His  glory,  making  Himself  known  in  the
living  Word  of  progressive,  saving,  and  sanctifying  redemption.  Everything  is
placed  upon  the  ample  circuit  of  the  Temple,  whose  extended  court  receives
all  people,  and  through  whose  high  and  open  gates  the  King  of  Glory  is  to  enter
in  (Ps.  xxiv.  7-9),  and  then  upon  the  order  and  harmony  of  the  Divine
habitations,  the  well-proportioned  building  (chap.  xlii.  10)  ;  and  the  revela-
tions of  the  holiest  are  stored  up  in  the  pure  deep  water  of  His  Word,  which
in  life-giving  streams  issues  from  the  Temple.  The  stone  tables  of  the  Law  are
consumed,  and  the  fresh  and  free  fountain  of  eternal  truth  streams  forth  from
the  Temple  of  the  Spirit,  quickening  and  vivifying  in  land  and  sea,  awakening
by  its  creative  and  fructifying  power  a  new  and  mighty  race  on  earth.  And
thus  hast  thou,  much-misjudged  yet  lofty  seer,  in  the  unconscious  depth  of  thy
mysteriously  flowing  language,  set  up  upon  the  great  undistinguishing,  well-
proportioned,  and  beautifully  compacted  building  a  type  of  the  simple  yet  lofty
Temple  of  Christ,  from  which  flows  the  spiritual  fountain  of  life." — Umbreit,

"  The  ideal  Temple  exhibits,  not  the  precise  literal  outline,  but  the  essential
character  of  the  worship  of  Messiah  as  it  shall  be  when  He  shall  exercise  sway
in  Jerusalem  among  His  own  people,  the  Jews,  and  thence  to  the  ends  of  the
earth.  A  Temple  with  sacrifices  now  would  be  a  denial  of  the  all-sufficiency  of
the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  He  who  sacrificed  before,  confessed  the  Messiah;  He
who  should  sacrifice  now  would  solemnly  deny  Him.  These  difficulties,  how-
ever, may  be  all  seeming,  not  real.  Faith  accepts  God's  Word  as  it  is,  waits  for
the  event,  sure  that  it  will  clear  up  all  such  difficulties.  Perhaps,  as  some  think,
the  beau-ideal  of  a  sacred  commonwealth  is  given  according  to  the  then-existing
pattern  of  Temple-services,  which  would  be  the  imagery  most  familiar  to  the
prophet.  The  minute  particularising  of  details  is  in  accordance  with  Ezekiel's
style,  even  in  describing  purely  ideal  scenes.  The  old  Temple  embodied,  in
visible  forms  and  rites,  spiritual  truths  affecting  the  people,  even  when  absent
from  it.  So  this  ideal  Temple  is  made,  in  the  absence  ot  the  outward  Temple,
to  serve  by  description  the  same  purpose  of  symbolical  instruction  as  the  old
literal  Temple  did  by  forms  and  acts.  As  in  the  beginning  God  promised  to  be
a  Sanctuary  to  the  captives  at  the  Chebar,  so  now  at  the  close  is  promised  a
complete  restoration  and  realisation  of  the  theocratic  worship  and  polity  under
Messiah,  in  its  noblest  ideal  (Jer.  xxxi.  38-40).  Israel's  })rovince  may  here-
after be  to  show  the  essential  identity,  even  in  the  minute  details  of  the  Temple-
sacnnces,  between  the  Law  and  Gospel  (Kom.  x.  4,  8).  The  ideal  of  the
theocratic  Temple  will  then  first  be  realised." — FausseU

49»


CJiAK  iLVlII.


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL.


acconling  to  Jerome,  mnnv  of  til  #^""^"y  agjeed ;  and  the  opinion  whiit
ported  by  tl,e  rationilS^exLsi  ors  Iffr.'r'''"''^',''"'^  '^'""^  has  beerS
Ezekiel  describes  the  TemnirofTln         ^' ''^'''"P'^ ''^<^'-'''"'s-''ameIy  thS
model  (or  the  rebuilding  oT     after  theT.r       iT'^  ^^  NebuchadnS  at
has  not  found  much  favour,  i na  muc    as    '  I"//  ""  l'^'  ^""^  'he  captfyity!^
It  .s  exposed,  it  is  upset  by  theTc    t'Tnn      T''''°'''''^°y««"^
make  anything  of  the\iescridoVo   th    sn,"t  ^i^  T  '*'  '7^°'''^'  »»-«     o
of  the  Temple,  but  they  are  Tlso  unal  le  to^e^nll   t   "'"*'  '^°'"  ">«  threshold
from  the  city  of  Jerusalem  •  as  it  wn„M  "?'*'"  'he  separation  of  the  Temi.le
patriot,  apart  from  Diving  revelation    in  ?7'  ''"''  ""'""'^  '«  any  Jew   h
claims  such  important  prerogatives To'rT      •''  '"  f  P^^^' "ke  Ezekiel,  who
relation  to  the  Temple    to  remni!  fl,  ^,  ^  ^''iT  °^  'he  family  of  David  in
Beat  of  the  royal  l.ouL  if  D.vTd    ^nd  om"'?  ?f  J«^^«h  from  /ount  Z^„Z
city  of  Jerusalem.     But  even  if  Z\  -l  "',*•  '"'""^«  a"-*  territory  of  the

It.  viz.,  that  the  whole  wlfonlr.n^  ^''t-''"' ^'^'^>  ^nd  the  one  rTJedt^o
desires  of  better  things  beYoTcdnrf"T'.  "*"'""«,  '"°^«  'han  ideal  hopes  and
t.on  of  the  destroyed  Vmpleind^tSlni"''  '"''"'  '"  "'«  f"'-e '^Itori^
the  Divme  origin  of  prophecy  and  the  M»  '''^.•=<"""'^"'^^'°'"«>  "'ho  acknowled<.e
very  widely  from  on'e  another  ^FthreSn^rto  it''"'''"'  '^'  ^'''''^'  ^^^
to  be  interpreted  ;  some  declarinc^  h!1       i  "^®  question  how  the  v Lion  is

the  literal  explanation  as  other      ffaJoTofTf  T'  "'  '^'"'^'^^y  '"  f'^yol"  o{
v.ew.  which  they  regard  as  theVnlytTrLf  and  S^^l  ZX^'^"^

return"ofthe7eople!"t'heT?m,t7hou7d^,lveT'^'''  l'"^1'"«  '°  '^hich,  on  the
tion  by  Divine  authority.  Bu  tt  s  oninrn  f  /*  u"''''  "*  ^""^ing  specifica.
with  an  architect  but  with  a  prophet^  w.H.  ^"'"S*'^  ^at  we  have  hereto  do  no^
hands  but  the  hearts,  which  he  h»!  f  ,    "®  ^^°^^  department  is  not  the

produce  a  single  analogy  ihet^lfeufrT  "'  '""'  T**  ^P«-     I'  -"-
intruded  into  the  department     ffeXt,n£°»l°r^'' '^^ '''«  P'°Ph«^
other  organs  were  provided.     EspSy   '  |  tt  Tk  "^  """^f  *''"  "'-^  ""^t
the  time  after  the  destruction  WrTot/li      ,-^'u  P'^P.^^''''^  «f  Ezekiel  of
In  particular,  the  adjoining  prophecv  con  J'=     '''i^"  ^"^  "  hortatory  character.
ex,.ect  that  here  also  much^w^ntkL  to  mere ^  ^^^  7^  ^"S°S  ^'^'"^«  »«  t*^
exc  lu.led  If  we  ascribe  a  leWsla  ive  imLt^  Tl  P'"'""^'  description,  which  U
obvious  impossibility  of  erect  nl?  l^f^       °  ""^  f."*"""-     To  this  is  added  the
These  suffice  only  tVgivrSaf  I      f "' '''''"'^'"= '» '''^  ^P^^ifi-'ations  gUn
almost  nothing  of  matiil^o  whic    so "^r"""-  •  ^/  ^'''  '^  P-^^»'"r
tion  of  Solomon's  Temple.     As  T  ut    t^.      '^^^•'  ''"^"'^'^  '"  'he  descrip.
mere  measures  and  distances  iwlfeice  those  wC',rvn%^^^  confined  to  the
taken  to  give  literal  plans  of  kekiel's  TeZl.  ^  '    I*  ^'"t'P"'^"^'  have  under-
from  their  own  fancy.     Lanh   fn  ,1?    J,V^  ^^''^  •>**»  "hliged  to  draw  much
fest  that  no  reference  is  m"  i   't  'e  ekieT  T"f  1'"'!'^"''  Temple,  it  is  man'
be  sought  in  any  doubt  of  the  Diy^T^ I'J     Pj '^    ."^'."'^  ^'"'""'  "^  'his  cannot
admitted  into  the  canon,  it  can  oilv  he  f      f  ?^«".«1'  ^hose  prophecies  were
prophecy  somethinc.  else  tLnlK-,^-       '^°'""'  '"  'h»«.  'hat  men  saw  in  this
city  and  the  rernAl:::StZT:f':fT-     The  .restoration  oft
power  and  in.lestructibilitv  of  tWl  ¥     \      ^  ^}^  ''™  conviction  of  the  livino
the  Temple,  according  to  a  view  ptya^'i^fr  "   ^'"^'/'j'^  ^•'""''°'  "^  '-hich  w«
ment.     And  as  the  prophecy  rS,\^'u=  'h«  "'.''ole  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa-
that  within  the  Kingdo^  ^fVod  iffe  sh^ll'"^  "'  ^'f  ^"'«''"«"''  ''  guarantees
old  covenant  cannot %o  down  wifl     .  a"se  out  of  every  death-that  th«

Bcngstmberg.  ^    ''*'"^"  ""'h""'  "smg  again  gloriously  in  the  new  »-!


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  ohap.  XLvm.

"  What  is  this  Temple  1  The  first  obvious  suggestion  is,  that  Ezekiel  was
looking  forward  to  the  times  of  Ezra ;  that  this  Temple  is  an  anticipation  of  that
of  which  Zerubbabel  brought  forth  the  headstone.  But  the  building  which
rises  before  the  eyes  of  the  seer  covers  an  area  which  the  second  Temple  never
can  have  occupied.  In  EzekiePs  vision  there  is  a  distinct  allusion  to  that
appearance  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  which  belonged,  the  Jews  say,  exclusively
to  the  elder  building.  Christian  writers  have  availed  themselves  of  these
circumstances  to  decide  peremptorily  that  the  vision  is  of  a  spiritual,  not  an
earthly  Temple.  The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  such  an  opinion  are  very  great.
Accurate  admeasurements  in  feet  and  cubits  seem  as  if  they  must  relate  to  a
visible,  not  to  an  invisible  fabric.  There  are  still  two  possible  opinions.  One
is  popular  among  many  of  our  countrymen.  It  is,  that  a  Temple  exactly
answering  to  Ezekiel's  description  will  appear  hereafter  in  Jerusalem.  The
other,  that  Ezekiel  carried  with  him  into  Chaldea  the  habits,  the  prejudices,  and
formality  of  the  priestly  order  to  which  he  belonged.  Therefore,  though  he
had  high  moral  purposes  and  divine  instincts,  he  could  not  but  regard  the
reappearance  of  a  Temple  like  that  which  Nebuzaradan  had  destroyed,  only
more  magnificent,  as  the  consummation  of  an  Israelite's  dreams  and  hopes.

"  But  where  did  the  prophet  get  these  measures  1  To  what  did  they  corre-
spond? There  cannot  be  the  slightest  doubt,  I  conceive,  that  the  general  form
and  construction  of  the  building,  the  different  parts  of  which  it  was  to  consist,
the  cherubim  and  palm-trees  which  were  to  adorn  it,  were  suggested  to  him  by
that  which  he  had  actually  seen.  If  he  taught  that  the  future  was  to  be  unlike
the  past,  that  there  was  no  common  root  out  of  which  they  both  grew,  he  would
be  faithless  to  his  vocation,  he  would  be  forgetting  the  permanent  and  eternal
Being.  Solomon's  Temple  had  been  Ezekiel's  primer  or  first  lesson-book.  I  have
anticipated  what  I  have  to  say  to  those  who  maintain  that  Ezekiel  is  giving  us  the
pattern  of  a  Temple  made  of  living  stones,  not  of  stones  hewn  out  of  an  earthly
quarry.  By  a  spiritual  Temple  they  do  not,  I  trust,  mean  an  unsubstantial
Temple,  one  built  of  clouds  and  mists,  one  erected  by  the  eye  which  sees  it.
They  believe,  doubtless,  the  spiritual  temple  to  be  a  spiritual  society,  possessing
a  real  unity  inhabited  by  the  Divine  Presence  resting  on  the  Divine  Name,
Well,  I  do  not  doubt  that  Ezekiel  saw  more  or  less  clearly  the  pattern  in
earthly  forms.  But  we  must  remember,  first,  not  to  confound  the  pattern  with
the  earthly  forms  which  set  it  forth ;  secondly,  we  must  assure  ourselves  that
whatever  is  spiritual  and  substantial  will  seek  to  find  some  expression  for  itself,
to  make  the  things  of  earth  into  mirrors  which  may  reflect  at  least  a  portion  of
its  glory.  In  chap.  xlvi.  8  we  have  announced  a  great  moral  and  political  law
which  was  a  necessary  and  natural  corollary  from  the  doctrine  that  the  Temple
was  to  be  the  building  which  denoted  the  restoration  of  the  national  society.
This  is  a  law  which  those  who  merely  talk  of  a  spiritual  Temple  without  be-
lieving that  that  Temple  is  to  make  its  influence  felt  in  this  world  would  never
dream  of  promulgating.  This  is  a  law  which  it  was  most  strictly  in  the  function
of  a  Jewish  prophet  to  assert,  not  as  proceeding  from  him,  not  even  as  proceed-
ing from  Moses,  but  as  coming  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord." — F,  D.  Maurice,

"  The  views  entertained  upon  the  vision  generally  may  be  ranged  under  four
classes.  I,  The  historico-literal,  which  takes  all  as  a  prosaio  description  of  what
had  existed  in  the  times  immediately  before  the  captivity,  in  connection  with
Solomon's  Temple.  II.  The  historico-ideal.  According  to  it  the  pattern  exhibited
to  Ezekiel  differed  materially  from  anything  that  previously  existed,  and  pre-
sented for  the  first  time  what  should  have  been  after  the  return  from  the
captivity,  though  from  the  remissness  and  corruption  of  the  people  it  never
was  properly  realised.  IIL  The  Jewish  carnal  view.  It  is  the  opinion  of  some
Jewish  writers  that  the  description  of  Ezekiel  was  actually  followed  by  the

501


CHAP.  XLVin.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL.

children  of  the  captivity  as  far  as  their  circumstances  would  allow,  and  that
Herod,  when  he  renovated  and  enlarged  it,  copied  after  the  same  pattern.  But
as  this  was  necessarily  done  in  an  imperfect  manner,  it  waits  to  be  properly
accomplished  by  the  Messiah,  who,  when  He  appears,  shall  cause  the  Temple
to  be  reared  precisely  as  here  described.  IV.  The  Christian' spiritual  or  typical
view,  according  to  which  the  whole  representation  was  not  intended  to  find
either  in  Jewish  or  Christian  times  an  express  and  formal  realisation,  but  was
a  grand  complicated  symbol  of  the  good  which  God  had  in  reserve  for  His
Church,  especially  under  the  coming  dispensation  of  the  Gospel.  There  are
several  considerations  to  be  kept  in  view  in  the  interpretation  of  the  vision.
1.  That  the  description  purports  to  be  a  vision — a  scheme  of  things  exhibited
to  the  mental  eye  of  the  prophet  in  the  visions  of  God.  This  alone  marks  it  to
be  of  an  ideal  character.  2.  That  this  is  confirmed  by  the  substance  of  it,  as
there  is  much  that  seems  obviously  designed  to  force  on  us  the  conviction  of
its  ideal  character.  There  are  things  in  the  description  which,  taken  literally,
are  in  the  highest  degree  improbable,  and  even  involve  natural  impossibilities.
3.  That  some  may  be  disposed  to  imagine  that,  as  they  expect  certain  physical
changes  to  be  efi^ected  upon  the  land  before  the  prophecy  can  be  carried  into
fulfilment,  these  may  be  adjusted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  admit  of  the  prophet's
measurements  being  literally  applied.  It  is  impossible,  however,  to  admit  such
a  supposition.  4  That  the  vision,  as  it  must,  if  understood  literally,  imply
the  ultimate  restoration  of  the  ceremonials  of  Judaism,  so  it  inevitably  places
the  prophet  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament.
5.  Til  at,  holding  the  description  to  be  conclusively  of  an  ideal  character,  we
aflfirm  that  the  idealism  is  precisely  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which  appeared  in
some  of  the  earlier  visions — visions  that  must  necessarily  have  already  passed
into  fulfilment,  and  which  therefore  may  justly  be  regarded  as  furnishing  a  key
to  the  right  understanding  of  the  one  before  us.  6.  That,  looking  to  the  manifold
and  minute  particulars  given  in  the  description,  some  may  be  disposed  to  think
it  highly  improbable  that  anything  short  of  an  exact  and  literal  fulfilment
should  have  been  intended.  7.  That  it  may  be  asked  whether  the  feeling
against  a  spiritual  understanding  of  the  vision  and  a  demand  for  outward
scenes  and  objects  literally  corresponding  to  it  does  not  spring  to  a  large
extent  from  false  notions  regarding  the  ancient  Temple  and  its  ministrations
and  ordinances  of  worship,  as  if  these  possessed  an  independent  value  apart
from  the  spiritual  truths  they  symbolically  expressed  1  On  the  contrary,  the
Temple,  with  all  that  belonged  to  it,  was  an  embodied  representation  of  Divine
realities.  8.  That  in  the  interpretation  of  the  vision  we  must  keep  carefully
in  mind  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  given,  and  look  at  it,  not  as  from  a
New  but  as  from  an  Old  Testament  point  of  view.  We  must  throw  ourselves
back  as  far  as  possible  into  the  position  of  the  prophet  himself.  He  speaks
chiefly  of  Gospel  times,  but  as  one  still  dwelling  under  the  veil  and  uttering
the  language  of  legal  times." — Patrick  Fairbaim,  D.D,


INDEX.


Aotivitt,  God  in  haman,  116

Adaptedness  of  Qod's  messages,  dO

Adultery,  spiritual,  280

Adversities  of  the  Church,  the,  411

Afflicted,  God  the  sanctuary  of  the,  129

Agent  of  Divine  vengeance,  the,  328

Altar  a  representation  of  Christ,  t)ie,  442

an  emblem  of  true  worship,  the,  457

— —  the  Divinely  authorised,  458

Apostasy,  Israel's,  166 ;  the  punishment  of,  170

Appeal  of  religion  to  the  feehngs,  the,  127

Architect  of  the  Divine  Temple,  the,  429

Art,  the  noblest  province  of,  442

Aspects  of  God's  government  over  men,  68

•^—  under  v^hich  God  oommunicatea  with
men,  134

Athei^ic  idea,  the,  485

Attainments,  high  spiritual,  430

Audacity  of  evil,  the,  410

Bad  news,  352

Bad  shepherd,  a,  359

Balances,  just,  471

Banquet,  a  strange,  421

Barrenness  and  fruitfulness,  moral,  487

Beauty,  341

Believer,  the  security  of  the,  391

Best  efforts  of  man,  the,  459

Blasphemy,  234

Blessing,  the  Church  a  source  of,  365

Blessing  of  food  and  clothing,  the,  447

Boldness,  spiritual,  365

Bones,  vision  of  the  dry,  400

Brain,  ft  wicked,  412

Building,  the  Church  of  God  a,  430

Burial  of  the  slain,  the,  420

Call  to  repentance,  an  earnest,  208

Canaan,  the  earthly,  a  type  of  the  hearenly,  490

Care  over  His  people,  (jod's,  361

Catalogue  of  Jerusalem's  sins,  the,  267

Chambers  of  imagery,  94

of  the  Temple,  the,  433

Christ,  a  Tree  prepared  by  God,  189

Christian  Church,  Temple  a  symbol  of  the,
438

Christians,  the  real  security  of,  167

Church  a  source  of  blessing,  the,  365 ;  the  ad-
versities of  the,  411;  of  God  a  building,
the,  430 ;  the  entrance  to  the,  436 ;  the
Messianic,  449 ;  the  law  of  God's,  457 ;  of
God,  the  centrality  of  the,  492

Citizens,  holy,  492

City,  a  happy,  492 ;  of  God,  the,  493 ;  of  the
Divine  Presence,  the,  494

Commission,  requisites  for  executing  the,  24

Commonwealth,  an  ideal,  471

Conclusions  as  to  sin,  65

Conditions  of  spiritual  knowledge,  62

Confederacies,  unholy,  325

Consideration,  201

Conscious  sin,  391

Conversion,  350  ;  Israel's,  248

Converted,  man,  389

Corruption  of  true  worship,  92

of  the  nation,  the,  274

Creation's  materials  instructing  men,  60

Credibility  of  prophecy,  the,  413

Clitics,  the  preacher's,  354

Darkness,  3^38

Dead,  the  grim  welcome  of  the,  341

Death,  333  ;  in  the  presence  of,  398  ;  a  vision  of
sudden,  123 ;  of  Ezekiel's  wife,  Jerusalem's
destruction  typified  by,  300

Decorum,  religious,  476

Defeat  of  the  enemies  of  God's  people,  416


Defeated,  the  moan  of  the,

Defiler,  the,  383

Deliverance,  the  mark  of,  106

Delusiveness  of  idolatry,  326

Departing  God,  a,  131

Designation  of  the  prophet,  general  oonditiona

of  the,  7 ;  preliminary  steps  to  the,  9
Desolations  of  the  sword,  the,  338
Difficulties  and  their  conquest,  337
Dignity  of  the  civil  ruler,  the,  461
Divine  communications  to  man,  426

dispensations,  the  mixed  character  of,  240

faithfulness,  the,  488

impartiality,  the,  387

generosity,  the,  442

government,  the  unswerving  equity  of,  347

justice,  the,  363

judgment  on  unfaithful  ministers,  860

Leader,  the,  476

manifestations,  452

mercy,  the,  465

tlie  pitifulness  of  the,  349

message,  the  human  side  of  the,  882

protection,  the,  413

revelations,  466

Ruler,  the,  455

solicitude,  363

sympathy  with  nature,  the,  877

Temple,  the  grandeur  of  the,  449

things,  progress  in,  432

the  vision  of,  455


vengeance,  the  agent  of,  328
—  the  terribleness  of  the,  336
Word,  the,  392

the  infallible  certitude  of  the,  419


Divinely  authorised  altar,  the,  458

inspired  seer,  a,  426

Duty  accepted  for  reasons,  26 ;  neglect  of,  347 ;

ministerial,  466  ;  of  the  wealthy,  the,  477
Egypt  humbled,  319
Elders  before  Ezekiel,  the,  218
Election,  Israel's,  224
Emotional  worship,  97
Empire,  the  river  the  natural  source  of,  332
End  of  man's  existence,  the,  155
Enemies  of  God,  the,  367

of  the  truth,  fierce  onslaught  of  the,  408

God's  proceedings  against  His,  413

of  God's  people,  signal  defeat  of  the,  416

God's  dealings  with  His,  418

Entrance  to  the  Church,  the,  436

Equity  of  the  Divine  government,  the,  847

religion  the  basis  of  true,  469

of  God's  government,  the,  203

Error  preached,  143

Estiinates,  false,  350

Evidences  of  Divine  judgment,  421

Evil,  the  audacity  of,  410;  the  power  of,  412;

increase  of,  83
Ezekiel's  Temple,  reflected  rays  from  the  best

literary  lights  on  the  significance  of,  494
Face  of  God,  the  hidden  and  the  open,  422
Faithful  warning,  346 ;  the  heritage  of  the,  488
Faithfulness,  the  Divine,  488

in  stewardship,  110

Fallen  greatness,  332

False  estimates,  350

Family    blessing,    ministerial    maintenanee   A

source  of,  467
Fate  of  the  proud,  the,  420
Fear,  reasons  for,  338

Features  of  Divine  di8ci])linary  government,  108
Feelings,  appeal  of  religion  to  the,  127
Feet  and  wings,  118

503


INDEl.


Fertility  of  nature,  the,  378

Fidelity  in  God's  service,  466

Final  issue  of  Divine  X)unishnnent,  the,  421

Final  judgments  upon  Jerusalem,  297

Fishers  in  Gospel  waters,  486

Food,  spiritual,  479

the  moral  significance  of  daily,  478

and  dothing,  the  blessing  of,  447

Freedom  ftcm  future  evils,  misleading  hopes  of,

140
Fulfilled  prophwy,  419
Funeral  chaut  o/er  the  graves  of  fallen  nations,

339
Generositv,  the  Divine,  442

justice  and,  477

Genuine  repentance,  350

Glories  of  lieaven,  the,  463

Glory  of  Messiah's  Kingdom,  the,  188

God  a  hedge  about  His  people,  276

a  departing,  131

and  Nature,  376

glorified  in  redemption,  388

revealed  in  judgment,  325

the  enemies  of,  367

the  presence  of,  371

the  name  of,  385

the  hidden  and  the  open  face  of,  422

— —  the  visions  of,  429

the  law  of,  430

the  heritage  of  the  good,  467

the  impartiality  of,  489

the  city  of,  493

the  judiciary  administration  of,  66

in  human  activity,  116

the  sanctuary  of  the  afflicted,  129

hiding  Himself  from  Israel,  238

slow  to  punish,  411

God's  action  against  iniquities,  46 ;  affecting  His

sei-vants,  48

call  to  service  a  trust,  36

care  over  His  people,  361

for  His  servants,  492

comfort  in  punishment  achieved,  57

dealings  with  His  enemies,  418

-  disclosure  of  sin,  90

goodness  a  motive  for  His  activity,  422

'         government  over  men,  some  aspects  of,  68

judgments  on  Israel  justified,  173

knowledge  of  the  tactics  of  the  wicked,  412

messages,  the  adaptedness  of,  30

motive  in  salvation,  388

— —  name,  226

people,  the  sufferings  of,  411

proceedings  against  His  enemies,  413

purpose  of  mercy  towards  Israel,  177

punitive  justice,  384

sword  of  vengeance  against  Jerusalem,  250

treatment  of  rebels,  465

ways  made  known,  87

Good,  the  inheritance  of  the,  488

Shepherd,  the,  364 ;  king,  a,  471

Gospel,  the  spread  of  the,  486 ;  the  power  of

the,  486  ;  waters,  fishers  in,  486
Government  of  God,  the,  19

the  unswerving  equity  of  the  Divine,  347

features  of  Divine  disciplinary,  103

the  equity  of  God's,  203

Gradation,  the  law  of,  447

Gradualness  of  Divine  revelation,  the,  485

Graves  of  fallen  nations,  a  funeral  chant  over

the,  339
Graves  of  our  kindred,  the,  341
Greatness,  the  perils  of,  332
Greatness,  fallen,  332
Grim  welcome  of  the  dead,  the,  341
Guardian,  a  national,  346
Happy  citv,  a,  492
Hatred,  370

604


Heart-renewal,  383

of  stone  and  heart  of  flesh,  the,  389

Heathen  nations,  the  prophecies  against,  304

Heaven,  the  gloiies  of,  463

Heritage  of  the  good,  God  the,  467

— —  of  the  faithful,  the,  488

High  spiritual  attainments,  430

Highest  truths,  the,  440

Holiness  the  law  of  the  new  Temple,  454

Holy  place,  the  most,  440 ;  priesthood,  a,  463',

citizens,  492
Hope  for  a  ruined  nation,  375
Horrors  of  war,  the,  324
Human  body,  the  eacredness  of  the,  421
life,  the  Temple-river  emblematic  of  ff©»

ligion  in  the  different  stages  of,  485
Human  perplexity,  399

side  of  the  Divine  message,  the,  382

Humility,  454

Hypocritical  inquirers  after  God,  145

Idea,  the  atheistic,  485

Idolatry  in  the  heart,  146  ;  vengeance  on,  824;

the  delusiveness  of,  325
Imagery,  chambers  of,  94
Impeachment  of  unfaithful  rulers,  357
Impartiality,  the  Divine,  387  ;  of  God,  the,  489
Individual  responsibility,  346
Individuality  of  the  soul,  the,  194
Infallible  certitude  of  the  Divine  "Word,  the,  419
Infatuation  of  the  wicked,  the,  419
— —  of  unbelief,  350
Influence,  spiritual,  487
Inheritance  of  the  wicked,  the,  352

of  the  good,  the,  488

Iniquities,  God's  action  against,  46

affecting  His  people,  God's  action  against,  48

Inquirers  after  God,  hypocritical,  145

of  false  prophets,  the,  148

Israel.  God's  purpose  of  mercy  towards,  177
Israel  s  apostasy,  166

conversion,  243

election,  224

fallen  royalty,  lamentation  over,  212

Jehovah,  the  opposition  of,  328

the  revelation  of  the  glory  of,  451

the  true  worship  of,  474

Jehovah  -  Shammah  :  the    city  of   the  Divine

Presence,  494
Jerusalem,  the  punishment  of,  287
Jerusalem's  destruction,  the  prophecy  of,  247

typified  by  the  death  of  Ezekiel's  wife,  300

fall  and  rising,  260

sins,  the  catalogue  of,  267

Joining  the  sticks,  403
Judah,  the  sin  of,  284

and  Samaria,  sins  and  punishment  of,  291

Judgment,  God  revealed  in,  325

evidence  of  Divine,  421

the  last  warning  of,  294

Tyre  threatened  with,  306

Judgments  of  God  upon  nations,  the,  152

upon  Israel  justified,  God's,  173

Judiciary  administration  of  God,  the,  66
Just  balances,  471
Justice  and  generosity,  477

the  Divine,  363

God's  punitive,  384

Justified,  man,  389

Kindred,  the  graves  of  our,  341

King,  a  good,  471

of  Tyre,  the,  313

Kingdom  of  God,  the  unity  of  the,  401

of  Judah,  lamentation  for  the,  215

Kingly  office,  the,  463

Knowledge,  conditions  of  spiritual,  62

Lament,  a  pathetic,  324

Lamentation  over  Israel's  fallen  royalty,  212

for  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  215


llfDSl.


Lfuid  question,  the,  470

Last  warning  of  judgment,  the,  294

Law  of  God,  the,  430

— —  of  gradation,  the,  447

of  God's  Church,  the,  457

— —  of  the  unrighteous  and  righteoui  ton.  tLs.

200
Laws  forjudging  moral  conduct,  S9
Leader,  the  Divine,  476
Lies,  refuges  of,  122
Life,  the  new,  390

national,  401

-—  the  river  of  the  Water  of,  481

■  weak  points  in  human,  77

'—  unestimated  influences  on  human,  113
Lessons  of  suflfering,  the,  327

from  the  Valley  of  Vision,  398

Han  converted,  389

— —  and  Nature,  ^6

'——  Divine  communications  to,  428

justified,  389

of  war,  the,  419

——  sinning,  384

■  the  best  efforts  of,  459

Man's  destiny,  how  brought  about,  76

existence,  the  end  of,  155

Manifestations,  Divine,  452
Men,  some  aspects  under  which  God  communi-
cates with,  134
Men's  evasion  of  the  Divine  interference,  137
Mercy,  the  pitifulness  of  the  Divine,  349

the  Divine,  465

Message,  an  urgent,  399

Messiah's  Kingdom,  the  glory  of,  188

Messianic  Church,  the,  449

Ministers,  the  Divine  judgmentonunfaithful,  860

Ministerial  calling,  the,  347

duties  and  privileges,  448

duty,  466

^—  maintenance  a  source  of  family  blessing,  467

Misleading  hopes  of  freedom,  140

Mixed  character  of  Divine  dispensations,  the,  240

Moan  of  the  defeated,  the,  328

Monarch  humbled,  a  proud,  326

Moral  barrenness  and  fruitfulness,  487

— —  conduct,  laws  for  judging,  39

— —  corruption  in  the  Church,  159

'         reform,  391

significance  of  daily  food,  478

Morality,  religion  and,  98

Morning  prayer,  476

Mourning  for  other  men's  sins,  105

Namb  of  God,  the,  385

Nation,  the  corruption  of  the,  274

— —  the  overthrow  of  a  grea^  322

— —  hope  for  a  ruined,  375

■  the  resuscitation  of  an  effete,  395
National  unity,  328,404

—^  greatness  no  guarantee  of  permanence,  830

■  guardian,  a,  346

■  ruin,  sin  the  cause  of,  380
life,  401

Nations,  the  interdependence  of,  332

■  a  funeral  chant  over  the  graves  of  fallen,  839
— —  the  judgment  of  God  upon,  152

Nature,  God  and,  376

■  man  and,  376

— —  the  Divine  sympathy  with,  377

the  fertility  of,  378

— —  the  productiveness  of,  890
Neglect  of  duty,  347
Never-ending  spring,  487
New  life,  the,  390
News,  bad,  352
Noah,  Daniel  and  Job,  153
Office,  the  priestly,  435 ;  the  kingly,  463
Offices  of  civil  and   spiritual  watchmen   com-
pared and  contrasted,  344


Onslaught  of  the  enemies  of  the  truth,  408

Opposition  of  Jehovah,  the,  328

Oppression,  199

Order,  the  perfect,  117

Ordinances  of  the  Temple,  the,  457

Overthrow  of  a  great  nation,  the,  322

Pabables,  teaching  by,  183

People  of  God,  the  unity  of  the,  404

Perfect  order,  the,  117

Perils  of  greatness,  the,  332

Permanence,  national  greatness  no  guarantM

of,  330
Perplexity,  human,  399
Picture  of  righteousness,  a,  197
Pitifulness  of  the  Divine  mercy,  the,  849
Place  of  sacrifice,  a,  434

the  most  holy,  440

Population,  an  increasing,  392
Postulates  for  an  effective  watchman,  88
Power  of  evil,  the,  412

of  the  Gospel,  the,  486

of  the  Word  of  God,  the,  64

Prayer,  the  nature,  necessity,  and  power  of,  888

morning,  476

Prayers,  unsatisfied,  108
Preacher,  the  successful,  399
Preacher's  critics,  the,  354
Preaching,  the  secret  of  successful,  898
Presence,  returning  from  the,  131

of  God,  the,  371

■■  with  His  people,  the,  405

the  withdrawal  of  the  Lord's,  80

Priesthood,  a  holy,  463
Priestly  oflfice,  the,  435
Productiveness  of  nature,  the,  390
Progress  in  Divine  things,  432

of  truth,  the,  484

Promise  of  the  Spirit,  the,  422

Promised  blessing,  244

Prophecy  of  Jerusalem's  destructioB,  347

the  credibility  of,  413

fulfilled,  419

Prophecies  against  heathen  nations,  804
Prophets,  the  inquirers  of  false,  148
Prosperity,  spiritual,  386
Protection,  the  Divine,  413,  432
Proud,  the  fate  of  the,  420

monarch  humbled,  a,  326

Punish,  God  slow  to,  411

Punishment,  the  final  issue  of  the  Divine,  4SI

—  achieved,  God's  comfort  in,  67

of  apostasy,  the  170

of  Jerusalem,  the,  287

Question,  a  suggestive,  486

Reasons  for  fear,  338

Rebels,  God's  treatment  of,  465

Redemption,  God  glorified  in,  388

Reflected  rays  from  the  best  literary  light*  OQ

the  significance  of  Ezekiel's  Temple,  494
Reform,  moral,  391
Refuges  of  lies  broken  up,  122
Religion,  spurious,  455

the  basis  of  true  equity,  469

and  morality,  98

Religious  decorum,  476

sensibility,  the  sources  of,  14

movements,  women  In,  142

Repentance,  genuine,  350

not  efficacious,  204

an  earnest  call  to,  208

Requisites  for  executing  the  commission,  M
Responsibility,  individual,  346
Restraints  in  serving  the  Lord,  41
Resurrection,  spiritual,  398
Resuscitation  of  an  effete  nation,  the,  396
Returning  from  the  Presence,  181
Revelation,  the  gradualness  of  the  Divine,  486
of  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  the,  451

K  605


INDEX.


Bevelations,  Divine,  465
Reviling  Qod's  people,  263
Kevival,  the  secret  of  true,  398
Bigbteousness,  a  picture  of,  197
Biver  of  the  Water  of  Life,  the,  481
Biver  the  natural  source  of  empire,  the,  332
Boyalty  and  worship,  475
Buler,  the  Divine,  455

the  dignity  of  the  civil,  461

Bulers,  impeachment  of  unfaithful,  357

Sabbath  privileges,  475

Sacred  terrible  sword-song,  the,  253

Sacredness  of  the  human  body,  the,  421

Sacrifice,  a  place  of,  434

Salvation  is  of  the  Lord,  162

God's  motive  in,  388

Samaria,  the  sin  of,  291,  282

Secret  of  successful  preaching,  the,  898

Security  of  the  believer,  the,  391

of  Christians,  the  real,  157

Seer,  a  Divinely  inspired,  426
Sensibility,  the  sources  of  religions,  14
Sensitiveness  to  spiritual  evil,  49
Servants,  Grod's  care  for  His,  492
Service,  fidelity  in  God's,  466
Serving  the  Lord,  restraints  in,  41
Shepherd,  a  bad,  359

the  good,  364

the  qualifications  of  the  true,  860

Sin,  unrepented,  348

the  disastrous  effects  of,  859

'■        the  cause  of  national  ruin,  380

'         conscious,  391

— —  some  conclusions  as  to,  65

— —  trouble  on  trouble  for,  71

■         God's  disclosure  of,  90

— —  of  the  first  generation  of  Israel,  229

— —  of  the  second  generation  of  Israel,  282

of  Judah,  the,  284

Sinning,  man,  3H4

Sins,  mourning  for  other  men's,  106

Slain,  the  burial  of  the,  420

Slander,  377

Smelting- furnace,  a  threefold,  271

Social  instinct,  the,  446

Solicitude,  the  Divine,  363

Soul,  the  individuality  of  the,  194

Sour  grapes,  192

Speech  of  the  wicked,  the,  371

Spirit,  the  promise  of  the,  422

Spiritual  boldness,  365 ;  prosperity,  386 ;   re

surrection,  398;  food,  479;  influence,  487;

evil,  sensitiveness  to,  49 ;  adultery,  280
Spoils  of  a  great  victory,  the,  420
Spread  of  the  Gospel,  the,  486
Spring,  never-ending,  487
Spurious  religion,  455
Step  higher,  a,  434
Stewardship,  faithfulness  in,  110
Sticks,  joining  the,  403
Still  upward,  441
Strange  banquet,  a,  421
Successful  preacher,  the,  399
Suffering,  372

the  lessons  of,  327

Sufferings  of  God's  people,  the,  411

Suggestive  question,  a,  486

Summary  of  the  sins  and  punishment  of  Jndah

and  Samaria,  291
Sword,  the  desolations  of  the,  338
Tkaohino  by  parables,  188
Temple,  the  architect  of  the  Divine,  429

■  the  chambers  of  the,  433
— — •  a  lymbol  of  the  Christian  Ohurch,  the,  488

506


Temple,  a  representation  of  Christ  and  Hia
Church,  the,  440

the  grandeur  of  the  Divine,  449

holiness  the  law  of  the  new,  454

^—  the  new,  455

the  ordinances  of  the,  457

Temple-river   emblematic   of    religion  in  the

different  stages  of  human  life,  the,  485
Temple-workers,  441

Time  of  God's  communication  to  be  noted,  136
Trials,  254

Triumph  of  the  wicked,  the,  371
Trouble  on  trouble  for  sin,  71
True  shepherd,  the  qualifications  of  the,  360
Truth,  the  onslaught  of  the  enemies  of  the,  408

the  progress  of,  484

Truths,  the  highest,  440

Tyre  threatened  with  judgment,  306

the  king  of,  313

Tyre's  greatness  and  downfall,  308
Unbelief,  the  infatuation  of,  350
Unestimated  influences  on  human  life,  118
Unholy  confederacies,  325
Unity,  national,  328,  404

of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  the,  401

■         of  the  people  of  God,  the,  404

Unsatisfied  prayers,  108

Unrepented  sin,  348

Unrighteous  and  righteous  son,  the  law  of,  200

Upward,  still,  441

Urgent  message,  an,  399

Vain  worship,  89

Valley  of  Vision,  lessons  from  the,  398

Vengeance  on  idolatry,  324

— —  the  agent  of  Divine,  328

the  terribleness  of  the  Divine,  336

against  Jerusalem,  God's  sword  of,  250

Victory,  the  spoils  of  a  great,  420

Vision  of  the  dry  bones,  400

of  Divine  things,  the,  455

of  the  waters,  the,  482

of  sudden  death,  a,  123

Visions  of  God,  the,  429

Wab,  the  horrors  of,  324 ;  the  man  of,  419

Warning,  faithful,  346

of  judgment,  the  last,  294

Watchman,  postulates  for  an  effective,  38

Watchmen,  the  civil  and  spiritual,  344

Waters,  the  vision  of  the,  482

Weak  points  in  human  life,  77

Wealth  unserviceable,  83

Wealthy,  the  duty  of  the,  477

Where  much  is  given,  much  required,  66

Wicked  brain,  a,  412

the  inheritance  of  the,  352

—  the  triumph  of  the,  371
the  speech  of  the,  371

God's  knowledge  of  the  tactios  of  the,  412

— —  the  infatuation  of  the,  419

Wilful  worship,  98

Wings,  feet  and,  118

Withdrawal  of  the  Lord's  Presence,  the,  80

Women  in  religious  movements,  142

Word,  the  Divine,  392

of  God,  the  power  of  the,  64

Workers  for  (}od  :  their  privileges  and  distino*
tion,  445

Temple,  441

Worship,  vain,  89 ;  corruption  of  true,  92 ;  emo-
tional, 97 ;  public  and  private,  447 ;  royalty
and,  475 ;  the  altar  an  emblem  of  true^  457  *
of  Jehovah,  the  true,  474

Wrong-doing,  377

ZiDON,  the  prophecy  against^  816


3  1197  00435  0374


DATE  DUE
